==PAGE:1==
Morten Lykke Hilligsøe (s114898)
Generic Force Control of Flexible
Robots in Production Processes
Master Thesis, June 2017
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
MORTEN LYKKE HILLIGSØE (S114898)
Generic Force Control of Flexible
Robots in Production Processes
Master Thesis, June 2017
Supervisors:
Søren Hansen, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
Anders Billesø Beck, Flexible Industrial Robots Section Leader at DTI
Martin Mølbach Olsen, Flexible Industrial Robots specialist at DTI
DTU - Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby - 2017
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Generic Force Control of Flexible Robots in Production Processes
This report was prepared by:
Morten Lykke Hilligsøe (s114898)
Advisors:
Søren Hansen, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
Anders Billesø Beck, Flexible Industrial Robots Section Leader at DTI
Martin Mølbach Olsen, Flexible Industrial Robots specialist at DTI
DTU Electrical Engineering
Electronics
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 349
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 45 25 25 25
studieadministration@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
January 2017- June 2017
ECTS:
30
Education:
MSc
Field:
Electrical Engineering
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for graduation
in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
©Morten L. Hilligsøe, 2017
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
The continuous increase of labour costs, as well as modern requirements for quality and documentation, drives
manufacturing companies toward higher degrees of automation than ever before. However, introduction of
robot cells into new productions and processes, places new requirements on ﬂexibility, costs, and functionality
to accommodate both smaller productions and more complicated work.
A shift from the traditional robotic position control scheme to a solution that incorporates force-torque control,
can result in added functionality, improved quality and increased ﬂexibility. Several robot manufacturers are
increasing their focus on added force-torque support, but many of the options available are neither simple
nor intuitive to use, and are most often bound to speciﬁc hardware.
The aim of this thesis has been to design and implement a generic force-torque toolbox for the Danish
Technological Institutes (DTI) original robot programming and operation platform, which focuses on
ﬂexible and intuitive robot programming. Through analysis of common production operations, along with a
decomposition of the traditional position control scheme, a use-case generic force-torque control framework
was designed. By utilizing the modular properties of Robot Operating System (ROS), a hardware independent
solution was then implemented and tested with multiple robots and sensors.
Performance of the resulting FT toolbox was documented, along with the effects of various controller
conﬁgurations and hardware limitations. Additionally, the solution was employed to solve a relevant use-case
for DTI. The prospect of applying the results and software of this thesis into future industrial applications
are promising, and the work and features necessary to do so has been discussed.
i
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Forord
Den fortsatte stigning i lønomkostning, samt moderne krav om kvalitet og documentation, driver produk-
tionsvirksomheder mod stadigt højere grad af automation. Men introduktionen af robotter i nye produktioner
og processer, sætter nye krav til robotternes ﬂeksibilitet, omkostninger og funktionalitet, for at imødekomme
både mindre produktioner og mere komplicerede opgaver.
Et skift fra traditionel positionsstyring til en løsning der inkorporer kraftstyring, kan bringe øget funktionalitet,
kvalitet og ﬂeksibilitet. Adskillige robot producenter øger for tiden deres fokus på supportering af kraftstyring,
men mange af de tilgængelige produkter er hverken simple eller intuitive, og er ofte låst til speciﬁk hardware.
Målet med dette speciale har været at designe og implementere et generisk kraftstyringsværktøj som kan
implementeres i Teknologisk Instituts (DTI) originale robot programmerings- og operatør platform, der
fokuserer på ﬂeksibel og intuitiv programmering. Gennem analyse af typiske industrielle produktions
operationer, samt en dekomposition af det traditionelle positionsstyring, er en generisk tilgang til kraftstyring
blevet designet. Ved at udnytte de modulærer egenskaber tilgængelige i Robot Operating System (ROS)
platformen, er en hardware uafhængig løsning blevet implementeret for ﬂere forskellige robotter og kraft
sensorer.
Præstationsevnen for det resulterende kraftstyringsværktøj er blevet testet og dokumenteret, ligesom effek-
terne af forskellige regulator konﬁgurationer og hardware begrænsninger er blevet det. Ydermere er den
udviklede løsning blevet anvendt til at automatisere en relevant opgave for DTI. Mulighederne for at anvende
afhandlingens resultater og den udviklede software i fremtidige industrielle applikationer er lovende, og det
nødvendige arbejde for at gøre dette er blevet diskuteret.
iii
==PAGE:10==
Table of Contents
Abstract
i
Forord
iii
Table of Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Industrial Robots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Force-Torque Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Robot CoWorker
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Problem Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Analysis
9
2.1
Force-Torque Control in Production Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Currently available Force-Torque solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Generic Force-Torque Control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.1
Hardware Compatibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.2
Use-case Applicability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.3
Devised solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4
Controller Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Implementation
23
3.1
Hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
UR Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3
ABB Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4
Generic Robot CoWorker Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4.1
Sensor Communicator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4.2
Force-Torque Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.4.3
Move Controller
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4
Test and Veriﬁcation
39
4.1
Performance Quantiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1.1
Reference conﬁguration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
iv
==PAGE:11==
Table of Contents
4.1.2
Effects of controller setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.1.3
Effects of hardware setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.2
Implemented Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5
Discussion
57
5.1
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.3
Prospects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6
Conclusion
61
Bibliography
63
v
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The work of this thesis has been done in collaboration with the Danish Technological Institutes (DTI) Center
for Robot Technology. DTI is a leading research and technology company founded 1906, with it’s main
purpose being development, implementation and education on research and technology based knowledge, for
the greater beneﬁt of danish industry. At the current time, the institute employs more than 1000 specialists,
operating in 69 different laboratories. Among these laboratories is the Center for Robot Technology, which
focuses within 4 main areas:
• Industry
• Flexible Industrial Robots
• Sensors and Process
• Service Robotics
DTIs Flexible Industrial Robots team has developed a generic robot programming platform called Robot
CoWorker (RCW), designed to make industrial robot programming simple and ﬂexible, by offering an
intuitive block-programming environment, that is uniform across all support hardware conﬁgurations, e.g.
different industrial robots. It is of great interest to the team, toimplement a Force-Torque (FT) control
toolbox into the existing RCW platform, which preserves the platforms current hardware ﬂexibility. DTI
has previously automated various industrial processes using FT technology [1], but these have been solved
by developing individual code for each project, matching the speciﬁc robot, sensor and process. A generic
FT toolbox will extend the application area of the RCW platform, by introducing a simpliﬁed approach to
automatise advanced production processes that require FT sensor technology and control algorithms.
1.1
Industrial Robots
The term robot is commonly deﬁned as programmable machines capable of interacting with its environment
through the use of sensors and actuators. While this term span anything from from self-driving cars to
high-precision surgical robots, the speciﬁc category of industrial robots is commonly referring to the robotic
arm, which in combination with attached tools and sensors, are utilized to automate a wide variety of
industrial process. The most common conﬁguration for modern robotic arms is a 6 degrees of freedom
(DOF) conﬁguration, inspired by the human arm with 3 DOF in the upper arm (Base, Shoulder and Elbow)
and 3 DOF in the wrist. 6 DOF is the minimal implementation necessary to achieve all possible position and
orientation conﬁgurations, resulting in a robot capable of solving any motion task, solely limited by its range
1
==PAGE:14==
1. INTRODUCTION
of motion, precision, maximum velocity and load capacity [2]. Movements can be made in either Cartesian
space (moveL) or joint space (moveJ)
Industrial robots are typically combined with an end-effector tool (e.g. a vacuum gripper suction cup or
a welding gun) which together with the rest of the required peripherals deﬁnes the robot workcell. A
workcell will often perform a single task (e.g. loading & unloading of production equipment, component
assembly, component welding or packaging), before the component is moved on to the a new station. Such
implementations with a 1-to-1 ratio of robots to manufacturing tasks, require large production numbers of a
completely identical product to be economically feasible. The automotive industry has historically had a
major role in robotic automation.
However as the cost of labour continuously increases, more and more industries are looking for ways to
automate their production. This includes small and medium sized manufacturers, that doesn’t necessarily
have a large scale production, and therefore require solutions that are cheaper, easier to implement and
ﬂexible enough to be economically feasible. Recent years have therefore seen a shift in the focus of robot
manufactures toward making ﬂexible robotic solutions [3] [4] [5]. The focus on ﬂexibility has resulted in
added features & functionality for interfacing with external software and hardware, as well as simpliﬁed
robot programming & development of new programming environments that makes it faster and cheaper to
program industrial robots [6], [7].
Figure 1.1: ABB RobotStudio allows the user to do both online and ofﬂine programming of
ABB robots, as well as simulating complete robotic work cells. The result can be visually
inspected both during robot operation and before implementing changes to the physical robot.
[8]
Collaborative robots are another result of the continued effort to automate processes that would otherwise
not be possible to automate. By implementing collaborative robots, humans can work side by side with the
robots, to assist during critical procedures that a robot would not be able to perform, or ensure a continuous
ﬂow of input and output components. As a bonus, the safety peripherals required in traditional robot
workcells such as fencing and laser scanners can be avoided, thereby saving money and space.
Finally, an increased availability and support of external sensors such as vision systems and FT sensors
allow for the localization and handling of non-uniform objects, or as well as in-situ data analysis and quality
2
==PAGE:15==
1.2. Force-Torque Control
assurance. By implementing closed-loop control with external sensors, it’s also possible to achieve increased
levels of performance and precision.
1.2
Force-Torque Control
Industrial robots are most often programmed by specifying a set of waypoints that deﬁne the tool center
point (TCP) trajectory and orientation. By activating the mounted tool or external equipment in between
waypoints, the robot can interact with its surroundings, and perform desired tasks. The robot controller will
typically be responsible for generating a smooth motion between waypoints, and this traditional control
scheme has plenty of advantages:
• It’s simple for robot operators and programmers to understand.
• Parameters such as velocity and acceleration are intuitive to conﬁgure.
• If the robot is calibrated correctly, position control is precise enough for most tasks and even for ofﬂine
programming.
• It’s easy to ensure smooth motion with low jerk.
• Motions can be predetermined and validated to ensure safety for the robot, the product and other
production equipment.
This is why simple position control is so widespread through industrial automation.
However, positional control does not sense the surrounding environment, and it is therefore required that
he target objects always have a uniform shape, position and orientation. This is especially problematic for
high-precision tasks, or tasks with high levels of variance. Furthermore it is not possible to detect if anything
goes wrong during the process. If variance in the work space is to be accounted for, additional sensors are
required. For non-contact sensing, vision systems are commonly used, but for direct contact sensing, FT
sensors are required.
A FT sensor is a combination of a force gauge that can measure an applied force during push and pull
operations, and a torque meter which can measure torque during rotational operations. In robotic applications
its common to refer the term FT sensor to multi-axis FT sensors that can measure force in all 3 geometric
axes (x, y, and z), as well as torque around all 3 axes. The screw representation of the combined forces
and torques is also known as the wrench. By installing a FT sensor between the robot wrist and tool, it’s
possible to measure the effort applied from the tool to the environment. The information can then be used to
ensure that the applied force or torque doesn’t exceed a safety limit, or to follow a reference wrench value by
creating a feedback loop. Implementing such feedback control along one or more axes, will make the robot
react and adjust to external forces, which is often described as making the axes compliant.
Several technologies can be used to estimate the forces and torques acting on a robotic arm, but there’s a
clear distinction between internal and external sensing. Many modern robots are capable estimating the
forces acting on the end-effector from the joint servo currents. At optimal operation of DC motors, the motor
current is proportionally linear to the applied torque, and from the individual joint torques it is possible to
calculate the resulting forces and torques acting on the robot TCP. External sensing requires a separate FT
sensor to be mounted between the robot and the tool. External sensors work by detecting the minor elastic
deformations caused to the sensor housing when forces act on the tool. The housing on such sensors are
typically designed as 2 separate parts, which are linked through narrow beams where the deformations are
concentrated and can be measured.
3
==PAGE:16==
1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 1.2: Cross section of an ATI FT sensor. Strain-gauges are visible on the sensing beams,
where they measure the elastic deformations occurring when forces and torques are applied
between the top and bottom of the sensor [9].
While positional control can be viewed as a robot equivalent to the human hand-coordination ability, FT
sensing can be related to the sense of touch. FT control can be achieved by implementing a controller that
regulates the robot position according to the measured forces and torques, just as a human would adjust
the grip or position of their hand and ﬁngers, based on the sensed pressure. Although this resembles to the
human senses makes it easy to imagine how FT control can help robots with advanced, delicate or dynamic
work, FT control is still not commonly utilized in the industry, and as opposed to position control, there is
no industry standard on how to implement FT control in a generic way. The possible uses for FT control
includes polishing, assembly, QA, etc. and are examined further in section 2.1.
1.3
Robot CoWorker
The RCW platform is developed by DTIs Flexible Industrial Robots team in an effort to create a generic
robot programming environment that is both ﬂexible and simple to use. RCW runs on an external PC
(running Ubuntu 14.04), and is based on the Robot Operating System (ROS). ROS is deﬁned as an open-
source, meta-operating system for robot environments, providing hardware abstraction, low-level device
control, implementation of commonly-used functionality, message-passing between processes, and package
management, as well as tools and libraries for obtaining, building, writing, and running code [10]. In recent
years ROS has become an academic standard when working with advanced robotic systems, and many robot
manufacturers are starting to support ROS by releasing robot drivers.
Through a graphical user interface (GUI) on the RCW PC, the robot operator can create and run block
programs for the robot, as shown in ﬁgures 1.4 and 1.3. When running a program, RCW communicates with
the robot through an ethernet connection, typically by transmitting small single-action commands or scripts
to the robot, while a continuous ﬂow of status and position information is received in return. This allows the
user to continously follow the current status of the robot as well as the progression of the program process.
RCW provides the user with a simple block-structured programming language consisting of primitives,
skills and processes. Primitives are indivisible robot commands, such as MoveL, SetDigitalOutput or Wait.
Skills are combinations of primitives or other skills and can be anything from commonly used actions, e.g.
Pick-Up-Object to subroutines of a speciﬁc robot cell. Processes are deﬁned as the entire program of a
robot cell, but are otherwise identical to skills. A knowledge database is dynamically updated to keep track
of available skills and primitives in accordance with the robotic cell conﬁguration. This ensures that only
4
==PAGE:17==
1.3. Robot CoWorker
Figure 1.3: The run view of the RCW platform. The planned actions are listed in the center
column, and will be highlighted in green during execution.
Figure 1.4: The edit view of the RCW platform. Primitives and skills can be dragged and
dropped from the left menu to the program listed in the right column. Primitives and skills
can then be individually conﬁgured to suit the purpose.
skills applicable to the current robot (and external hardware) are available in the GUI. RCW identiﬁes and
connects with primitives through ROS topics and ROS services, which then executes by either performing a
local action or communicating a command to the robot.
Figure 1.5 illustrates the underlying architecture of RCW, which utilizes both the modularity and inter-
process communication properties of ROS to create an easily extendable platform. Speciﬁc robot controller
modules (e.g. abb_executor and ur_executor) have been developed by DTI to communicate and control
the robots. These modules implement the communication protocols used to receive the robot status and
position, as well as transferring the scripts of the RCW primitives. The work of this thesis will implement
changes to the RCW robot executor modules to allow for control loops, and add a new ft_executor module
that implements the FT control primitives.
5
==PAGE:18==
1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 1.5: Architectural overview of the RCW platform. Each of the platform modules are
implemented as a ROS node and communicates with the rest of the system through ROS
services and topics. By organizing the platform into separate layers, communication between
nodes remain structured, even when new modules are added.
1.4
Problem Deﬁnition
The thesis problem deﬁnition is deﬁned as:
Study how a generic FT control framework can be implemented as a block-structured program-
ming language, and examine how this is best implemented into the existing Robot CoWorker
platform, for use in industrial processes. The solution is to be implemented for multiple in-
dustrial robots and FT sensors, and shall enable the user to solve several problems commonly
faced during industrial process automation. The developed FT control system shall be capable
of tracking a target force at a precision of ±1 N, and be capable of adapting to changes in
the tracked surface. The performance of the controller should therefore be documented for
various use-cases and for its dependency on hardware conﬁguration. Finally, the usability of the
developed FT framework shall be veriﬁed by solving a relevant use-case.
The thesis scope is naturally limited by the available equipment, and by the hardware limitations of this
equipment. Furthermore the solution will not include the development of new hardware, or physical
modiﬁcations to the existing hardware equipment, as well as conﬁgurations that might void any warranty.
The solution will consists of software (scripts, programs, modiﬁcations and conﬁgurations) implemented
6
==PAGE:19==
1.4. Problem Deﬁnition
with readily available FT sensors into the RCW platform, in a manner that will allow the user to easily utilize
FT control.
7
==PAGE:20==
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2
Analysis
To solve the problem deﬁnition stated in section 1.4, the current and prospective applications of FT control
in production processes are examined, as well as the currently available FT related hardware and software
solutions. Using these results, an in depth analysis of how FT control can best be implemented into the
block-structured programming environment of the RCW is carried out.
2.1
Force-Torque Control in Production Processes
FT control is of interest in numerous robotic processes and are already being utilized in several applications,
especially direct-contact and high-precision applications such as polishing and assembly, where the ability to
measure and regulate the applied force, can make the difference between a good and a poor result. Processes
in which FT control may be advantageous includes:
• Bin-picking: FT measurements can be used to determine if the picked object is stuck between other
objects and in which direction the overlap is originating from.
• Polishing: An FT sensor is often required to get a uniform result, by ensuring a constant polishing
pressure. For dynamically shaped objects it is also possible automatically detect the shape and follow
the surface or contour.
• Screwing: In traditional position control, screwing requires ﬁne tuning for the TCP to properly follow
the screw/bolt as it is screwed into place. Additionally, if the screw/bolt is misaligned, it might get
stuck or damage the thread. With and FT sensor, the robot can follow and align the screw without the
need for ﬁne-tuning, and possible damage can be avoided by limiting the applied torque or aborting
the action.
• Assembly: The Peg-In-Hole problem is a task of great relevance in assembly processes and can be
very difﬁcult to solve using traditional position control. FT control makes it easy to identify the hole
position and properly align the peg. For many assembly problems it is easier to rotate the object into
place, and in such cases an FT control scheme will greatly simplify the action, by allowing a constant
force to be applied while rotating the object into place. A proper pressure also assures that components
are mounted ﬁrmly in place.
• Measurements: FT sensors can be used to detect the location of surfaces or edges. This can be used to
measure the dimensions of an object, or detect whether an object is positioned correctly.
9
==PAGE:22==
2. ANALYSIS
• Quality Assurance: Many errors can be detected during production by implementing a FT sensor
in robot applications. Measurable parameters include dimensions, weight, and springiness.As an
example, car manufacturers already use FT sensors to ensure proper cushioning in car seats.
• Manual Robot control: Using FT sensing It’s possible to implement kinesthetic teaching or joystick
control for easy robot programming and operation.
FT control can also improve robustness in automated processes without the need for complicated program-
ming, by allowing deviations and tolerances on the handled objects. Furthermore, implementing a FT control
scheme can expand the tasks of a robotic cell, to include QA data gathering during production.
Figure 2.1: A polishing job performed using traditional position control and FT control.
Implementation of FT control can increase quality and consistency in production processes
[11].
In recent years, FT sensors have dropped in price, as several new manufacturers have entered the market.
Meanwhile, modern robot controllers allow for communication with external equipment over a variety of
interfaces, which enables the robot to communicate either directly with a FT sensor or with an external
computer connected to a FT sensor. A technical requirement that is unfortunately still no ensured in modern
robots, is the feature of real-time motion control, either internally or using an external controller. Real-time
control is a necessity for the robot to be able to respond to the sensor output fast enough to create a proper
control loop.
Typical industrial automation requirements such as safety, repeatability and robustness are also major
concerns when dealing with sensing automation technologies, as the measurements and resulting actions
cannot be predetermined and veriﬁed. If the measured forces or torques are erroneous, the robot may end up
damaging itself as well as nearby equipment. Typically it is not possible to achieve complete redundancy to
assure that measurements are always correct, but effort must at least be made to ensure that the robot stops if
connections are lost, or measurements are outside a speciﬁed safety limit. As stated previously, robustness
can often be improved when adding FT sensing control, as the robot will be able to detect errors, or react
and regulate its movements in compliance with the object of interest, thereby adjusting for variances in the
production.
Even with the added advantages of FT control, the technology is still rarely implemented in industrial
automation applications. This can partly be credited to the added implementation costs, but the situation is
also credited to the lack of complete integrated FT solutions targeted towards the industrial market. The
challenges and requirements to bringing FT into more production environments are considered to include:
10
==PAGE:23==
2.2. Currently available Force-Torque solutions
• High stability and up-time is a requirement for any industrial process, but this can be more difﬁcult to
assure when dealing with with dynamic responses.
• Ensuring safety is a considerable aspect. Even though industrial robot cells are shielded (unless the
cell is classiﬁed as collaborative), damage may still be inﬂicted on production equipment or the robot
itself.
• Precision and repeatability are often critical parameters in position controlled applications and the
same is the case for FT controlled applications. FT control can provide greater precision by adjusting
to deviations of irregular objects, but if the sensor or control is not stable and responsive enough, the
result may not meet the requirements.
• The mindset required when solving automation tasks using FT control is quite different from that of
traditional positional control. A focus on easy and simple FT programming may therefore make a
great difference in whether this technology is implemented or not.
• Integration into existing automation applications is a must, as FT control will often only be suitable
for a subset of the tasks required of the robot cell.
2.2
Currently available Force-Torque solutions
Several robot manufacturers and FT sensor producers have software available that enables the user to utilize
the FT functions of the given hardware. To develop a use-case generic FT control framework, these solutions
are examined in order to gather inspiration on how such a framework can be constructed, and to examine the
the strengths and weaknesses of the currently available solutions.
UR Force Mode
The Force mode available on all UR robots utilizes the internal FT sensing capabilities of
the robots. Two separate functions starts and stops the force mode. When activating force mode, parameters
allow the user to separately set each axis in compliance mode. While in compliance mode, all subsequent
move commands will disregard these axes and instead implement a control algorithm to achieve a target
force for each compliant axis. The non-compliant axes will move as usual. For compliant axes, a target
wrench and a speed limit is speciﬁed, along with a reference frame. For applications that requires dynamic
force constants, the force mode function can be continuously called in a separate thread. Once force mode is
ended, every move command goes back to normal functionality. Four different force modes are available:
• Simple: Only the z-axis of the speciﬁed reference frame is compliant.
• Frame: All six axes can be freely speciﬁed as compliant or non-compliant.
• Point: The reference frame is oriented as the direction between the current TCP and a constant world
position.
• Motion: The x-axis of the task frame will be the projection of the TCP movement direction onto the
plane spanned by the x- and y-axis of the selected feature. The y-axis will be perpendicular to the
robot arm’s motion, and in the x-y plane of the selected feature.
The UR Force mode makes use of the the default motion commands, which makes it relatively simple for
operators to implement FT control, without having to learn a completely new system, and the implementation
of 4 different force modes makes it possible to perform quite complex force control, without increasing
the complexity too much. The lack of higher level functions does however require the operator to have a
preconceived idea of how the target action can be attained, and neither the settings nor the graphical menu
are considered intuitive, i.e. the effect of the limit property switches between a positional deviance limit and
11
==PAGE:24==
2. ANALYSIS
Figure 2.2: Force Mode is implemented as a graphical wizard on the teach pendant of UR
robots. The mode is selectable in the top right corner, and will change the GUI to match the
required input.
a speed limit, depending on the compliance setting of the speciﬁed axis. For the more advanced users, there
are no way of adjusting the controller gains in order to optimize the controller dynamics.
The internal FT sensing capabilities are stated to have a precision of ±10 N and ±5 Nm, which isn’t enough
to achieve high-precision FT control. However a recent update to the robot controller software implements a
Real-Time Data Exchange (RTDE) interface, allowing for external FT measurements to replace the internally
measured values.
Kuka LBR iiwa Impedance Mode
The impedance mode of the Kuka LBR iiwa robot emulates a damp-
ened spring system, where the force and acceleration of the robot TCP, are functions of the displacement
from the target trajectory as well as the current velocity. After activating impedance mode, move commands
will be subjected to this spring system controller in speciﬁed axes. A Kuka LBR iiwa robot was not available
for examination during the writing of this thesis, but information gathered from DTI employees, recounts the
Kuka LBR iiwa Impedance Mode as a feature that is easily implemented to solve assembly tasks, which
otherwise would have been difﬁcult to resolve using traditional position control. Being limited to an emulated
spring system does however limit the possible applications.
ABB SoftMove
SoftMove commands are similar to the impedance mode spring system simulation,
however they are executed by calling speciﬁc SoftMove commands instead of activating an impedance mode.
SoftMove is available for purchase as an optional software option to several modern ABB robots. The
option was not installed on the ABB robot available for examination during the writing of this thesis, but the
documentation has been examined.
12
==PAGE:25==
2.2. Currently available Force-Torque solutions
ABB FT
ABB provides a FT control option available for purchase as an optional hardware option. The
option requires an ATI FT sensor, which connects to the robot controller through a voltage measurement board
installed on the ABB IRC5 robot controller. The option is however not available to the more compact IRC5C
robot controller that was available for examination during the writing of this thesis. The documentation was
also not available, although it would have been very interesting to get an understanding of what is possible
with this framework, and how it has been implemented.
Robotiq
The Robotiq FT sensor comes with a UR Caps module that installs communication drivers and
an operator menu on the UR teach pendant. The menu enables the operator to use the external FT sensor in
freedrive mode, with the added functionality of enabling only translational freedrive. A few UR scripts are
available as usage examples, but the UR Caps does not provide any new commands or wizards to aid with
the implementation into industrial applications. A ROS stack is also provided for communication with a PC.
ArtiMinds RPS
ArtiMinds offers generic block-style robot programming framework for both online and
ofﬂine programming. The solution focuses on intuitive high-level programming, by including advanced
task-speciﬁc functions as conﬁgurable templates. The +Force package extends ArtiMinds RPS to include FT
control, documented to work with UR robots in combination with both ATI and Robotiq FT sensors. The
+Force package includes commands and templates ranging from a low-level Move Linear Force command
and proceeding up to higher level templates such as a Spiral Search With Contact. The ArtiMinds RPS
software is in many ways similar to the approach of RCW, and it would have been beneﬁcial to perform
a deeper analysis of the solution, but only an old beta version of the software was available to DTI. The
information presented on this product is primarily gathered from documentation available online and from
DTI employees.
Figure 2.3: The ArtiMinds +Force Robot Programming Suite, which provides both online and
ofﬂine generic robot programming, including FT control [12].
iTaSC
The iTaSC (instantaneous Task Speciﬁcation using Constraints) project provides a constraint based
control framework in multiple concurrent reference frames that supports both equalities and inequalities
13
==PAGE:26==
2. ANALYSIS
[13] [14]. This extends the possible use-cases of FT (as well as velocity) control, but also complicates the
process. A software framework is available which implements the iTaSC framwork through an Orocos-ROS-
integration that allow for hard-realtime robot control. The complexity of using iTaSC as well as integrating
it into the RCW platform does however undermine the possible beneﬁts.
2.3
Generic Force-Torque Control
Development of a generic FT control platform for use in industrial automation consists of 2 separate issues:
• Creating a software platform that works with a multitude of hardware conﬁgurations.
• Creating a framework which enables the user to intuitively solve a wide variety of industrial automation
processes, without the need for advanced programming.
To gain an overview of how best to solve these issues, the topics of generic hardware compatibility and
generic use-case applicability have been analyzed in depth.
2.3.1
Hardware Compatibility
To ensure hardware compatibility across multiple manufacturers of industrial robots and FT sensors (and
combinations), splitting the system into separate modules is essential. By modularizing the code, it can be
ensured, that implementing new drivers wont require changes to existing code. ROS was developed with
modularity as a key component, such that code can easily be reused in new tasks, settings and conﬁgurations,
without having to rewrite anything. The RCW platform was built on ROS for exactly this reason, which is
why the code is already split into modules such as robot executors (e.g. ur_executor, abb_executor), sensor
drivers (i.e. vision), path planning, GUI and knowledge base. The FT control platform developed in this
thesis can be divided into 3 modules: Sensor communication, FT controller and robot motion control. An
analysis on how to implement these modules are given in section 2.4.
FT control requires real-time motion control of the robot in order to react to the input, and the greatest issue
with generic hardware compatibility is the lack of a standardized real-time control protocol for different
industrial robots. UR robots has the servoJ command for real-time positional control, and although this
doesn’t directly allow for external control, target position data can easily be transmitted from an external
controller, such as is done in [15]. The ABB robot examined in this project does not posses a similar motion
control command, which limits the motion control to slow movements using the default moveJ command
(see section 3.1), and such real-time guidance control is in general uncommon for industrial robots. ABB
has however recently released an external guidance control option available for purchase. This option was
however not available for testing and implementation during this thesis. The lack of real-time speed or
positional control in industrial robots is therefore considered the limiting factor in development of a hardware
generic FT control solution. Even when real-time control is available, system latency may prove too much
for actual implementation.
Other factors that should be taken into account, includes: safety, connectivity and frequency compatibility.
Safety is of the utmost concern in industrial applications, so loss of connection between any modules must
result in immediate stop of motion. It is therefore important to implement connection loss-, latency threshold-
and controller fault-detection in a way that will inhibit further movement, independently of the current
hardware setup and conﬁguration. Connectivity is always and issue when trying to create a widely applicable
product, especially within industrial automation where a multitude of different communication protocols
14
==PAGE:27==
2.3. Generic Force-Torque Control
are commonly used. No perfectly generic solution exists for this issue, but most FT sensors and industrial
robots will be able to connect with a PC, so using a PC as a common communication channel should provide
the most generic option. Not only will the robot and sensor operational frequencies limit the possible
performance of the setup, but variations in operational frequency between sensor and robot, may also result
in incompatible hardware combinations. An external computer can again provide a solution, as modern PC’s
are great at multi-threading, even between asynchronous applications. Of course the soft-real-time nature of
modern operating systems should be taken into account when implementing a robotic control circuit on an
external PC.
Another obstacle relating to a hardware generic FT solution is the issue of point-of-contact (POC) trans-
formations. An end-effector tool will typically be mounted after the FT sensor, and FT measurements will
depend highly on the tool geometry and POC. FT sensor are traditionally quite rigid, which means that tool
point wrench transformations can be estimated using the linear transformation given by:
Wtool =


1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
dz
−dy
1
0
0
−dz
0
dx
0
1
0
dy
−dx
0
0
0
1




Fx
Fy
Fz
Tx
Ty
Tz


with Wtool, d, F and T being the tool wrench, tool-point displacements, measured forces and measured
torques respectively. FT sensors are never completely rigid, and the Optoforce sensor used in this thesis
is a strong example of a non-rigid sensor, however the above approximation will still ﬁt better than if no
transformation is used, which is exempliﬁed by ATI’s (leading manufacturer of FT sensors) use of this trans-
formation in [16]. A rotational transformation should also be applied if the tool bends. More sophisticated
tool conﬁgurations include center of gravity compensation and angular momentum compensation, which
will both interfere with measurements as the tool orientation changes. This thesis will not look further into
these aspects of robotic FT control.
Finally, it should be taken into consideration that the system should be easily reconﬁgurable. While hardware
conﬁgurations will typically only be conﬁgured at installation time, it should still be possible to reconﬁgure
without having to recompile code. The POC conﬁguration can on the other hand change during operation i.e.
if an object is picked up.
2.3.2
Use-case Applicability
The software developed in this thesis must provide an intuitive user experience, while being capable of
solving a wide array of FT related processes. This combination of ﬂexibility and simplicity is difﬁcult to
achieve, and while traditional position control essentially consists of the same move command across all
robotic platforms, there seems yet to be any resolve on a FT control approach across platforms. Universal
Robots went with their Force mode which modiﬁes all future motion commands to abide by the speciﬁed
compliance, ABB utilizes the SoftMove commands as substitutes to the traditional move commands while
also introducing the FT option for more advance FT tasks, and KUKA implemented Impedance mode to
simulate a spring system. Common to these solutions are that you need to do actual coding to execute more
advanced procedures. ArtiMind attempts to solve this through template based block programming, and the
iTASC project provides a constraint based control framework.
On the basis of these existing solutions, a new and improved FT framework for use in industrial automation
must extend the applicable use-cases, while simultaneously allowing for implementation in an intuitive and
15
==PAGE:28==
2. ANALYSIS
user friendly block programming environment. To accomplish this feat, a list of desired application processes
are analyzed and broken down into simpler tasks which will later constitute the RCW skill blocks, while
the RCW primitives used to deﬁne these skills, will draw on inspiration from the simplicity of traditional
position control.
The applications of interest to FT control were mentioned in section 2.1. More speciﬁcally, the solution
developed will be targeted at simple variations of:
• Object handling: Packing, machine loading, alignment and bin picking.
• Assembly: Peg-in-hole, screwing, alignment and pushing, sliding & pivoting components into place.
• Post-processing: Polishing, drilling and deburring.
• Quality control: Weighing, position & size measuring and force-response testing.
Object handling is basically the process of picking up an object, moving it to a speciﬁed position, and
releasing it again. During this process, a move-until-force command would be applicable to grab objects of
variable height or size, or to detect whether an object is present, by reading the position after the command
is ﬁnished. It’s also possible to align objects by making the the rotational axes compliant and pushing the
object against a surface with a known orientation.
In assembly tasks, applying a speciﬁed force (in a speciﬁed direction) is an essential skill to include, as
objects will often have to "click" together. An extension of the apply-force skill is sliding or pivoting a
component into its place while applying a constant force in a perpendicular direction. These slide-with-force
and pivot-with-force skills requires that movement control and force control can be combined into a single
concurrent action. Screwing screws, bolts or components in, are tasks which are difﬁcult to solve with
traditional position control, as the threading leaves little room for positional error. By applying a constant
force along the screwing axis, the correct depth position will always be kept, and it will furthermore be
possible to detect if a bolt did not enter the threading correctly, as this will result in increased torque. By
utilizing the FT sensor for continuous error detection, quality can be ensured and component damage can be
avoided.
Drilling is much like screwing, where a mounted end-effector tool has to apply a constant force against
a surface, until a certain movement distance is met. Other post-processing tasks such as polishing and
deburring requires surface or contour tracking while applying a constant force and moving at constant
speed, although nonlinear objects may require the force and movement direction to change dynamically. An
example is a contour tracker capable of tracking arbitrarily shaped objects, by adjusting force and movement
directions to be respectively parallel and perpendicular to the currently measured force.
For quality control tasks weighing is an obvious skill, as the measured downward force will be directly
related to the weight attached to the FT sensor. Locating the precise position and dimensions of objects can
be accomplished by seeking the object surface from multiple directions. Finally, force-response tests of e.g.
tactile buttons or seat cushions can be accomplished by continuously measuring the reactive force of the
object during movement, compression or stretching.
Comparing these tasks results in the following set of skills being necessary to automate a majority of the
industrial processes described previously:
• Apply a constant force and torque.
• Move until a speciﬁed force or torque limit is reached.
• Move linearly while applying a constant force or torque.
16
==PAGE:29==
2.3. Generic Force-Torque Control
• Move along the surface or contour of an unknown non-linear object.
• Measure the force and torque currently applied to the robot tool in all dimensions.
Furthermore the following features should be included in the framework:
• Safety stops based on external signals, time, position and force limits.
• Assertions based on previously received safety stops.
• Arbitrary reference frame.
• Continuous status logging.
• Point-of-contact transformations.
• FT sensor taring.
• Independent controller gains for translational and rotational axes.
2.3.3
Devised solution
But how are these skills and features best implemented into the RCW block programming environment,
while simultaneously keeping the module ﬂexible, and intuitive to use? An apparent solution is to implement
each function as a RCW primitive, with enough conﬁguration options to make it ﬂexible. However the
functions listed are regarded as quite high-level skills, and implementing solely high-level skills will often
leave the system unusable for a lot of the situations that were not taken into consideration during system
development. In comparison, traditional position control requires just a single move command, e.g. MoveL,
to be operational. But move commands can be further decomposed into a speed command, such as SpeedL,
in combination with a target stop position.
In practice, speed commands are avoided as they wont allow for proper path-planning, consequently resulting
in a non-smooth motion proﬁle. However speed commands have the advantage that the end position doesn’t
have to be known beforehand, which is essential in a FT control system that has to continuously react to the
surroundings and where the target robot state might not be speciﬁed by a predetermined position.
Such a speed command can be extended to allow for FT control, by making it conﬁgurable whether each
axis should be operated by a speed controller (setting a target velocity) or a FT controller (setting a target
wrench). From this resulting SpeedLWithForce command it is possible to fabricate the skills listed above.
The stop criteria of the SpeedLWithForce should be selectable as either a target position, wrench, duration or
external signal, and preferably also combinations of these. The signal responsible for ending the operation
should then be returned as an output to allow for proper error handling in case of unexpected events.
Figure 2.4 presents a hierarchical overview of the primitives, basic skills and possible task speciﬁc skills,
resulting from his approach. The basic skills can be implemented from SpeedLWithForce as follows:
• MoveUntilForce: The user inputs a desired direction and velocity of the movement. No FT control is
required for the operation, so the wrench will be 0 for all axis. However a limiting force or torque
value that ends the movement must be speciﬁed.
• ApplyForce: The user inputs a desired direction in combination with a target force or torque. Velocity
will be 0 for all other axes. Stop limits can be time, distance or an external signal.
• MoveWithForce: Velocity or wrench must be speciﬁed for each individual axis according to the
compliance requirements, while a target position marks the end of the movement. A version of this
command more similar to the traditional MoveL command, can be implemented by calculating the
axis-speciﬁc velocities from the desired target position and tool speed.
17
==PAGE:30==
2. ANALYSIS
Figure 2.4: Hierarchical overview of FT functions, with low-level functions at the top, and high-level functions at the bottom. High-level functions can be
created from the SpeedLForce function, by partially deﬁning compliance, velocity, wrench and stop limits, while leaving other parameters to be deﬁned by the
user. A direction parameter can be used to automatically assign a target speed, force and stop values to the correct axis. This is thought to make the functions
more intuitive, as the number of conﬁguration parameters can be greatly reduced.
18
==PAGE:31==
2.4. Controller Structure
The idea is to include basic low-level functions as well as task speciﬁc skills that will have limited usability,
but will be simpler to conﬁgure and more intuitive to use. Dynamic force operations that requires continuously
updated velocity or wrench values, can be accomplished by implementing the SpeedLWithForce command in
a loop, from which these parameters are updated between each iteration. However, as the RCW does not
support such high-speed loops in its block-programming, such functions would either have to be implemented
as separate primitives, or major changes to the RCW would be required. Dynamic functions will typically
be required in more advanced operations such as constant speed surface tracking of non-linear objects or
impedance mode.
2.4
Controller Structure
The generic FT control framework designed in this project, can be distinguished into 3 separate functions: a
sensor driver which communicates with the FT sensor, a FT controller that calculates the desired velocity
for each axis based on the measured data and desired action. A robot movement controller that makes the
robot move. As none of the industrial robots examined in this project allow for external motion control by
default, the movement controller will always need to be implemented on the robot itself. The sensor driver
and FT controller can however be implemented on the external RCW PC which is connected to the robot.
The following paragraphs asses advantages and disadvantages for each possible implementation strategy:
FT Sensor Driver and FT Controller are implemented directly on the robot:
FT control requires
only a few calculations to operate effectively (as opposed to e.g. vision systems), and most modern robot
controllers allow advanced on-board scripting languages and includes a variety of external communication
interfaces, making it possible to implement both FT sensor driver and FT controller directly on the robot.
This solution will also result in the smallest possible sensor data delay, as the robot and FT sensor will be
communicating directly with each other. A smaller sensor delay equals faster response time and thereby
better performance, but the effect may be limited by the robot move control frequency. Furthermore, a
robot controller is typically designed to perform a single task as robust and stable as possible, whereas an
external PC will have a multitude of other tasks running in parallel with the control loop, which may affect
the stability of the FT control software.
However, as each robot manufacturer has their own scripting language, this implementation strategy requires
that all the designed sensor drivers and FT control algorithms are developed for each robot type. If several
FT control algorithms are to be implemented, or if a multitude of robots, sensors and connection schemes
are to be supported, this solution may prove too much work to be practically feasible for a generic solution.
Figure 2.5: Controller structure with FT Sensor Driver and FT Controller implemented directly
on the robot.
FT Sensor Driver is implemented on the RCW PC and FT Controller is implemented on the robot:
In this solution, the RCW PC is used to communicate with the FT sensor and then transmit the received
19
==PAGE:32==
2. ANALYSIS
data to the FT controller implemented on the robot. This reduces the number of required sensor drivers to
one per sensor (and per communication interface) instead of having to develop separate drivers for each
robot-sensor combination. The solution will of course add some latency to the control loop, but this added
delay will typically be quite small compared to the relatively low control and movement frequency possible
on common industrial robots. And as mentioned previously, the addition of an external computer may lower
the stability and robustness of the control system.
Figure 2.6: Controller structure with FT Sensor Driver implemented on the RCW PC and FT
Controller implemented on the robot.
Both FT Sensor Driver and FT Controller are implemented on the RCW PC:
In this implementation
strategy, both the FT sensor driver and FT controller are implemented on the external RCW PC, which then
transmits the resulting positional changes to a simple listener-executor script on the robot. The beneﬁts
of using this strategy, is that both driver and controller code is independent on the robot, thereby greatly
reducing the amount of work required to support a multitude of sensors, robots and control algorithms. Only
a simple move-listener is to be implemented for each robot model. This reduction in code also results in less
maintenance and debugging work, which might even make up for the added hardware complexity, in terms
of stability and robustness.
Figure 2.7: Controller structure with both FT Sensor Driver and FT Controller implemented
on the RCW PC.
Of these three implementation strategies, the ﬁrst was initially applied to easily verify that FT control with
a desirable performance, can indeed be achieved with a combination of the sensors and industrial robots
available. After successfully implementing simple FT control loops and sensor drivers directly on the UR
and ABB robots, a more comprehensive solution using the third implementation strategy was developed.
These implementations are presented in chapter 3.
2.5
Summary
FT control can improve performance in numerous industrial tasks including bin-picking, screwing and
assembly, while adding new features in measurements and quality assurance tasks. However properties
such as robustness, safety, precision, ease of use and implementation must be considered and reﬁned before
solutions can be implemented in practice.
20
==PAGE:33==
2.5. Summary
Few generic FT control solutions are available on the market, as many are limited to speciﬁc hardware, and
many of the available solutions also require a reasonable knowledge of programming to be efﬁciently used.
The ArtiMinds RPS +Force platform seem to be the only available solution that solves the task of simple and
intuitive generic FT control.
The greatest obstacle for implementation of generic high-performance FT control, is the lacking support for
real-time external control of industrial robots, which is essential for a solution that reacts to the surrounding
environment. Other requirements and features such as code modularity, safety, connectivity, frequency
compatibility and reconﬁgurability needs to be assessed when aiming for a hardware generic solution.
A block-style FT control framework capable of solving a wide array of industrial processes, was developed
by analyzing the processes and the traditional position control commands. The result was a single low-level
SpeedLWithForce command, which can be conﬁgured for both motion, compliancy and stop-limits. By
creating partially conﬁgured variations of this function, more intuitive higher-level functions can be created.
The designed framework is therefor ﬂexible, yet simple to implement, as very little code is required in the
FT control module.
The advantages and disadvantages of three different implementation strategies were discussed, and for a
solution supporting multiple hardware conﬁgurations, implementing sensor communication and FT control
algorithms on a separate PC will allow for code reuseability, regardless of the robot model.
21
==PAGE:34==
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3
Implementation
The generic FT framework described throughout section 2.3 was implemented on both an ABB IRB 1200
robot, as well as a UR5 robot from Universal Robots, in combination with both an Optoforce and a Robotiq
FT sensor. The following chapter details the equipment used for the implementation, before proceeding with
a detailed description of the developed modules.
Sections 3.2 and 3.3 describe the initial solutions in which the sensor communication and FT control loop
are both executed directly on the robots, while section 3.4 describes the ﬁnal generic FT control solution
implemented on the RCW PC. All code, scripts and programs described in the chapter are included in the
appendix.
3.1
Hardware
The work of this thesis was performed on several UR5 robots from Universal Robots, run by both the CB2
and CB3 controller versions, and an IRB 1200 robot from ABB operated from an IRC5 controller. The 6
DOF FT sensors utilized, consists of a Robotiq FT 150 sensor and an Optoforce HEX-70-XE-200N sensor.
This section will provide a short introduction of the speciﬁcations ans features of these industrial robots and
FT sensors.
Universal Robots UR5
UR specializes in collaborative robots that are easy to use and program, and with
a fast payback rate. Robots are available in 3 kg, 5 kg and 10 kg versions (see table 3.1 for more specs). The
work of this thesis was done on UR5 robots, primarily using the newest CB3 controller.
UR robots come with a teach pendant used for programming and operation. Additional relevant features
include a built-in FT mode (see section 2.2), ROS drivers and Real-Time programming over TCP socket. UR
robots operate in a 125 Hz control cycle and are programmed using the URScript programming language
which is based on the python syntax, as documented in [17]. It is possible develop extensions for the UR
system, known as UR Caps.
UR robots have two 10 Hz interfaces and a real-time 125 Hz interface, all of which broadcasts the current
robot state and receives URScript commands through TCP sockets. External control of UR robots can be
done by sending individual commands to the robot in real-time, or by encapsulating multiple commands in a
program deﬁnition and transferring the entire program. For real-time movement control, UR robots have
a servoJ movement command, which is intended for use when a new target position is available at every
control loop cycle. The servoJ command smoothens the trajectory by implementing a look-ahead time. The
23
==PAGE:36==
3. IMPLEMENTATION
Figure 3.1: Universal Robots UR5 robot arm and teach pendant.
UR3 robot arm
UR5 robot arm
UR10 robot arm
Working radius
500 mm
850 mm
1300 mm
Payload
3 kg
5 kg
10 kg
Accuracy
0.1 mm
0.1 mm
0.1 mm
Weight
11 kg
18.4 kg
28.9 kg
Footprint
128 mm
149 mm
190 mm
Axis
6 axis
6 axis
6 axis
Table 3.1: Speciﬁcations for Universal Robots robot arms [18].
minimum look-ahead time for the CB3 controller is 30 ms, while the older CB2 controller has a predeﬁned
value of 100 ms.
For the internal FT sensing capabilities, forces and torques are calculated based on servo currents, and the
precision is therefor quite limited. UR speciﬁes a ±10 N precision, which is sufﬁcient for most collaborative
tasks as well as object detection, but too poor for precision FT control tasks. Recent versions of the CB3
controller software has opened up for FT sensor manufacturers to override the internal FT values through a
Real-Time Data Exchange (RTDE) interface.
The existing RCW ur_executor module continuously reads status and position messages through both the
primary 10 Hz and the real-time 125 Hz interfaces. To execute RCW primitive commands on the robot, a UR
script is transmitted to the robot via the real-time interface). To let RCW know that a program is completed,
each program transferred by RCW to the UR robot is terminated with section that sends a message back
to the RCW server through a custom TCP socket connection. This functionality is implemented as the
sendScriptWithCallback function of the ur_executor package.
ABB IRB 1200
The ABB group is a large manufacturer of industrial technology and solutions. Their
industrial robots range from small 3 kg payload and all the way to 800 kg payloads robots and includes
SCARA, delta conﬁguration and collaborative robots. The work of this thesis was done on an IRB 1200-5/0.9
robot with an IRC5 Compact controller. The hardware speciﬁcations of this robot is presented in table 3.2.
The ABB robot controller is primarily programmed using ABBs RobotStudio software, which allow for
both ofﬂine and online programming, as well as visual simulation, debugging and conﬁguration of ABB
24
==PAGE:37==
3.1. Hardware
Figure 3.2: ABB IRB 1200 robot arm and teach pendant.
IRB 1200-7/0.7
IRB 1200-5/0.9
Working radius
703 mm
901 mm
Payload
7 kg
5 kg
Accuracy
0.02 mm
0.02 mm
Weight
54 kg
52 kg
Footprint
210 mm
210 mm
Axis
6 axis
6 axis
Table 3.2: Speciﬁcations for ABB IRB 1200 robot arms [19].
robots. The proprietary programming language is called RAPID, and the base documentation consists of
an application manual describing the Controller software IRC5 [20] and the 3 technical reference manuals
describing an Overview [21], the Kernel [22] and the Instructions, Functions and Data types [23], which
makes it a rather comprehensive task to get accustomed with the system. Fundamental functions and data
types are available, as well as many robot speciﬁc functions, data types and data structures. The controller
supports TCP socket communication and can run multiple tasks (threads) in parallel, but only the main task
can control robot movements. Variables deﬁned with the keyword Persistent can be used to share values
between tasks.The IRC5 controller allow for arbitrary reference frames and tool transformation deﬁnitions.
Several additional features are available for purchase as software and hardware options, including SoftMove,
Externally Guided Motion (EGM) and Force Control. With the SoftMove option enabled, robot movements
can emulate a spring system, resulting in movements that can deviate from the planned path, but will apply a
force proportional to the deviation distance. SoftMove does not require an external FT sensor. The Externally
Guided Motion option is a recent release and allow for real-time external motion control. The Force option
allow for FT control using ATI FT sensors, this option is however not available on the IRC5 Compact
controller used in this thesis work. The work of this thesis was done without access to any of these options.
25
==PAGE:38==
3. IMPLEMENTATION
A major obstacle in working with the ABB robot, was that without the EGM option it is not designed for
real-time motion control. The robot controller pre-calculate movement commands for an unspeciﬁed time
period, even if they depend on a variable inputs. This results in high latency and irregular movements. The
situation is also documented by [24], which propose a PID controller to calculate the optimal tool speed
parameter to achieve a robust and responsive movement during real-time motion control. The implementation
of such a PID controller is however not described. Instead, good results were obtained using ﬁne zoning (no
trajectory smoothing) and a high tool speed (> 200 mm/s), which is also documented to yield the lowest
possible latency by [24]. However, ﬁne zoning and a constant tool speed greatly limits the maximum velocity
before the robot starts to exhibit movement instability, presumably caused by movements continuously
stopping and starting.
As the ABB IRC5 controller only supports online programming through RobotStudio (and from the teach
pendant), the existing RCW abb_executor generates RAPID code scripts and uploads these to the robot
controller through a FTP connection. This function is implemented as the sendRapidProgram function of
the abb_executor package. A permanent main program is then used to dynamically load and execute the
uploaded programs. Joint states and program status messages are continuously transmitted back to RCW
through TCP sockets, by 2 separate background tasks installed on the robot.
Robotiq FT 150
The Robotiq FT sensor measures forces and torques arising from elastic axis deformation
through capacitive sensing. The capacitive sensing technique is said to have multiple advantages compared
to traditional strain gauge FT sensors, including stronger signals and noise immunity, as well as extended
operating conditions. The sensor communicates through RS-485 but comes with a USB converter and
includes drivers in the form of a UR Caps, Windows and Linux software, as well as a ROS Industrial driver.
The sensor features a sampling rate of 100 Hz. The remaining specs of the sensor are presented in table 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Robotiq 6-axis FT sensor. The Robotiq sensor utilizes a capacitive sensing
technology to measure the applied forces and torques.
Optoforce HEX-70-XE-200N
Optoforce FT sensors work by measuring optical reﬂections, a technique
that is quite new in FT sensing equipment. The technique requires larger deformations than e.g. strain-
gauge or capacitive sensing, so a rubber membrane connects the top and bottom of the sensor, allowing for
large deformations in response to applied forces. The large deformations can be both advantageous and
disadvantageous depending on the application. If high tool stiffness is required, then the Optoforce sensor
might not be a good solution, however the larger deformations makes it easier for the robot to apply and keep
a constant target force. The sensor communicates through CAN, but comes with a controller which allow
for both USB and TCP/UDP communication and also has an integrated webserver for real-time monitoring
and conﬁguration. Also included is a UR driver script, Windows & Linux software, as well as C code for
26
==PAGE:39==
3.1. Hardware
communication through ethernet sockets. The sensor features a maximum sampling rate of 1000 Hz at a
sub-newton resolution. The specs of the sensor are presented in table 3.3.
Figure 3.4: Optoforce 6-axis FT sensor. The Optoforce sensor utilizes an optical sensing
technology to measure the applied forces and torques. A rubber membrane allows for sensable
deformations between the top and bottom part of the sensor.
Robotiq FT 150
Optoforce HEX-70-XE-200
Axis
Fx, Fy, Fz
Tx, Ty, Tz
Fx, Fy
Fz
Tx, Ty
Tz
Nominal Capacity
±150 N
±15 Nm
±200 N
±200 N
±10 Nm
±6.5 Nm
Resolution
-
-
±133 mN
±22 mN
±1 mNm
±0.65 mNm
FS Accuracy
-
-
2 %
2 %
2 %
2 %
Overload
500 %
500 %
200 %
200 %
200 %
200 %
Deformation
-
-
±1.7 mm
±0.3 mm
±2.5 °
±5 °
Noise
0.5 N
15 mNm
-
-
-
-
Sampling rate
100 Hz
1000 Hz
Table 3.3: Comparison of the Robotiq and Optoforce FT sensor speciﬁcations.
27
==PAGE:40==
3. IMPLEMENTATION
3.2
UR Implementation
In the FT control methods initially created, both sensor communication and FT control loop are implemented
directly on the UR robot. The code is included in appendix 1 and 3 but is lacking an overall structure, as
well as functionality.
Initially, the code was developed directly on the robot, but experience showed that it was easier to develop
reusable UR scripts on an external computer, and then transfer the scripts to the robot using a python module
(appendix 1). To communicate with the robot through python, a modiﬁed version of a script developed at
DTU by Mikkel Bjerregard, Eugene Stassen and Walter Tizzano in 2012, was used. The UR scripts where
later implemented in the RCW ur_executor module, from where they ccould be executed as primitives
through the RCW user interface (appendix 3, src/UrResources.cpp).
Multiple scripts were created and examined in order to successfully acquire FT data from the various sources.
For FT control using internal FT sensing, UR provides the function get_current_tcp_force which returns the
current wrench at the TCP. The force_mode can be used to initialize the built-in FT controller as described
previous in section 2.2.
For communication with the Robotiq sensor, a UR Caps must ﬁrst be installed. The Robotiq sensor connects
to the robot through USB, and the installed UR Caps broadcasts the measurements to a local socket. The
measurements can then be retrieved using the socket_open command for 127.0.0.1 on port 63351. Data will
be incoming at a constant rate of 100 Hz, and corresponds directly with the measured wrenches. The data is
therefore read using the socket_read_ascii_ﬂoat command and the returned read-size is asserted to be at
least 6 ﬂoats long, before the measurements are copied into a ﬁnal FT array.
The Optoforce sensor is connected through ethernet, and communication is again achieved through a socket
connection. Data from the Optoforce sensor is however transmitted as raw integer values, and must be
converted before yielding the actual wrenches. Calibrated scaling factors for this conversion are stored
directly on the sensor, and can be requested by transmitting an 8-byte data sequence to the sensor. Optoforce
provides an example UR script to retrieve and convert data from the sensor. The script utilizes threading,
and also ensures that the robot program stops if the sensor connection is lost. The script can also rotate the
measured forces and torques if a mounting angle is speciﬁed.
To control the robot motions, the ServoJ command was utilized. Motion control through the SpeedL
command was also attempted, but resulted in irregular movements. Such irregular movements are not
documented by [15], and the reason for this outcome was not determined. According to the documentation
[17], the ServoJ command is speciﬁcally designed for motion control where the target position is updated at
every loop iteration (125 Hz), and this implementation resulted in a smooth motion. A standard proportional
(and later PI) gain control loop was implemented, by updating the target position at each control loop
iteration, according to a calculated positional difference:
∆P = Kp · (Wt −Wa)
(3.1)
with ∆P being the positional difference, Kp being the proportional gain, and Wt & Wa being the target
and currently measured wrench. The positional difference was added to the current position through either
the pose_add command for base reference frame, or the pose_trans command for TCP reference frame.
Finally the robot joint angles (required to run the ServoJ command) was retrieved using the get_inverse_kin
command.
In this initial FT control implementation, the generic framework designed in section 2.3.2 was not utilized,
and mainly higher-level functions were developed, such as ApplyForce, MoveUntilForce SpiralSearch,
28
==PAGE:41==
3.3. ABB Implementation
Figure 3.5: Overview of how FT control was implemented directly on a UR robot. The only
task of the RCW PC is to transmit the RAPID script to the robot when the user executes the
primitive.
FollowContour and ImpedanceMode. The last 3 of these functions requires either dynamic velocity or force,
and would therefore not be possible to implement directly from the SpeedLWithForce primitive.
The FollowContour function works by adjusting the direction of the target force, to always equal the currently
measured force direction, and simultaneously adjusting the velocity to be perpendicular to this direction.
Additional logic was implemented to trace back the robot movements, in case the measured force got so
low that no target direction was attainable. The result was an application which readily traced any contour,
without any prior knowledge of the shape and size. The ImpedanceMode function calculates the robot
movements in accordance with a damped spring system, where the initial TCP position deﬁnes the spring
system at rest.
3.3
ABB Implementation
The robot controller doesn’t provide any internal FT sensing capabilities unless the SoftMove option is
installed, and the Robotiq sensor isn’t supported on the robot, since no RS485 interface is available on
the robot, and no USB driver is available either. The robot does however implement features for socket
connections, so a communication driver for the Optoforce sensor was developed as a RAPID module. The
driver was created by translating the example code from UR script into RAPID, and adjusting for the
differences in socket connectivity and threading.
As mentioned in section 3.1, the robot is not designed for real-time motion control (at least not without the
Externally Guided Motion option). The predicament is documented further in [24], which also supports the
personal ﬁndings that a minimum of latency is achievable by conﬁguring the blend zone to ﬁne (no blend)
and the TCP speed to +200 mm/s. According to [24] the latency will still be +300 ms, but the results may
differ as the measurements were performed on a different ABB robot. By using these settings in a positional
movement control loop, a smooth motion can be achieved for slow movements. If the target velocity is too
high, motions will become jagged and irregular, presumably due to the ﬁne zoning argument, which actually
tells the robot to stop between each iteration of movement.
The resulting solution, is a motion control loop where small positional differences are added to the current
target position, using the Offset command for base reference, and RelTool for TCP reference frame. The
29
==PAGE:42==
3. IMPLEMENTATION
MoveJ command is then executed with the new target position, and with a velocity argument of 200 mm/s
and a zone argument of ﬁne. An optional time argument is also available in the MoveJ command, but this
yields an irregular result. The outcome therefore lacks a consistent execution time, which means that the
controller does not necessarily operate at a constant frequency rate. The developed controller is however
veriﬁed to be stable enough to be used in basic FT control.
An FT controller is implemented in the same manner as for the UR controller, and two FT control functions
were implemented, a MoveFromForce (translational freedrive) function and a MoveWithForce (SpeedL-
WithForce) function. The MoveWithForce also features stop limits as described in section 2.3, for position,
distance, time and wrench values. These functions were then implemented as RCW primitives, by creating
new functions in the abb_executor module, which transfers the developed FT controller RAPID code to the
robot. The sensor communication code is permanently installed as a background task on the robot. Stop
limits are deﬁned as a Record (data structure), and includes both target values, and booleans to determine
which parameters should be checked.
Figure 3.6: Overview of how FT control was implemented directly on an ABB robot. The
only task of the RCW PC is to transmit the RAPID script to the robot when the user executes
the primitive.
After implementing the code as RCW primitives, it was discovered that the outgoing socket connection to
the Optoforce sensor would disable the incoming socket connections from RCW on the robot controller.
As deﬁned in the RAPID components page of [20], this happened because any incoming connections
should be accepted before creating outgoing connections. The Optoforce sensor connection was therefore
reprogrammed to wait for the incoming RCW connections to be established, before a connection to the
sensor is created. Status checks and methods were implemented to properly close the outgoing sensor
connection if any of the RCW connections were lost. This ensures that a new incoming connection can be
created, before once again connecting to the sensor.
Such operational differences are to be expected between different hardware conﬁgurations, and the work
required to translate and adapt sensor drivers and FT controller to each robot controller system, will most
likely be proportional to the number of possible hardware conﬁgurations. A hardware generic solution, that
supports many different robots and sensors, will therefore require a large amount of work to develop and to
maintain properly. This situation is avoided when implementing the sensor communication and FT controller
on the external RCW PC, as each driver and component will only have to be developed once.
30
==PAGE:43==
3.4. Generic Robot CoWorker Implementation
3.4
Generic Robot CoWorker Implementation
In this implementation, sensor communication and FT control is executed from the RCW PC. The imple-
mented code is split into the 3 modules:
• A Sensor Communicator module that continuously reads data from the FT sensor.
• A FT Controller module that calculates the robot movements according to data received fron the
Sensor Communicator and the conﬁguration of the SpeedLWithForce primitive.
• A Move Controller module that receives position adjustments calculated by the FT Controller and
transmits them to the robot, where the movements are executed in real-time.
The Sensor Communicator and FT Controller modules are both implemented in the RCW ft_executor
package, while the Move Controller is implemented in the speciﬁc robot executor packages (abb_executor
or ur_executor). All code is included in appendix 3.
3.4.1
Sensor Communicator
The Sensor Communicator is implemented as a class object instantiation (FTSensor), which upon initial-
ization, will connect to the physical sensor through the speciﬁed interface and communication protocol. A
separate thread will also be started, which requests and reads measurement data from the sensor at a speciﬁed
sampling frequency. Measurements are adjusted according to a speciﬁed mounting angle as well as sensor
bias values, before being stored in public variables. A zeroing function is available to update the sensor bias
values.
Because the Sensor Communicator and FT Controller modules are both launched from the same ft_executor
node, an object pointer can be passed to the FT Controller module, which is then able to read the measured
wrenches as public variables of the Sensor Communicator object. FT data is also published to a ROS topic
for logging purposes. In future versions it might be advantageous to further separate the 2 modules by
utilizing the ROS topic for inter module communication as well. In this way, each module can have a
separate node, and the need for threading is removed.
Figure 3.7: Overview of how the sensor communication module was implemented. An abstract
FTSensorConnection class acts as an interface for the actual sensor driver implementations.
This ensures that new sensor drivers can easily be added to the module.
The FTSensor object includes another FTSensorConnection object, performing the actual communication
with the sensor. The FTSensorConnection object is implemented as an abstract class (interface), which can
31
==PAGE:44==
3. IMPLEMENTATION
then be initialized according to the speciﬁc sensor and connection interface. The base interface declares
the pure virtual functions connect and read. The sensor speciﬁc extensions then implement the required
functions. By implementing the sensor connection in this way, only the initialization code has to deal with
multiple sensor and connection options. The sensor type, communication interface, address and sampling
frequency are written in the launch ﬁle as ROS parameters, and then read in the main function of the node,
before being used to launch the Sensor Communicator module with an interface instantiation that matches
the speciﬁed conﬁguration. By implementing the module in this way, sensor conﬁguration can be adjusted
without the need to recompile the program.
Sensor communication code has been developed for the OptoForce sensor connected through a TCP socket
connection and for the Robotiq sensor connected through USB. The code for both of these implementations,
was developed by modifying the driver/example code provided by the manufacturer. Modiﬁcations were
necessary in order to match the connect and read methods of the FTSensorConnection class.
In the Optoforce implementation, the connect method connects to the sensor through a TCP socket connection
to the speciﬁed sensor address, and subsequently requests calibration data from the sensor. The read function
requests measurement data from the sensor, and uses the previously requested calibration data to transform
the raw integer values into forces and torques.
The Robotiq driver code is implemented as a state machine, and the connect method makes 3 calls the
rq_sensor_state function in order to locate and connect to the correct device port (dev/ttyUSB), and start a
data stream. The read method calls functions to listen for data on the stream and subsequently return any
acquired data. The Robotiq sensor always streams sampled data at 100 Hz, and access to the device port
requires the application to be launched with sudo privileges.
3.4.2
Force-Torque Controller
Functionality of the FT Controller module is based on the analysis presented in section 2.3.2. The module
implements the two RCW primitives SpeedLWithForce and Zero, which are advertised to the RCW knowledge
base. Once the SpeedLWithForce primitive is called from the RCW interface, the module will begin its
operation by:
1. Calling the StartMoveController method of the Move Controller module.
2. Initializing control and robot state variables.
3. Start a FT control loop.
4. Actuating the robot through the Move Controller module.
The control loop runs until one of the speciﬁed stop-limits are met. As mentioned in the previous section,
sensor data as acquired through a pointer to the FTSensor object. The sample time of the updated FT values
is compared to the current time. If the time gap is too large, something must have gone wrong with the
sensor connection, and the control loop is ended in order to avoid damage.
The control loop calculates the speed for all translational and orientational axes of the robot, in the same
manner as described for the previous implementations. If an axis is compliant, the speed is based on the
difference between the target and actual wrench. If the axis is not compliant, the speed is deﬁned as a
constant by the operator. A PI controller is implemented as:
∆P = Kp · (Wt −Wa) + Ki · I
(3.2)
32
==PAGE:45==
3.4. Generic Robot CoWorker Implementation
Figure 3.8: Overview of how FT control was implemented through the RCW PC for a UR robot. Both sensor and FT controller are implemented in the
ft_executor node on the RCW PC. The move controller is implemented in the ur_executor node of the RCW PC. The startMoveController function transmits a
UR Script to the robot which then receive and execute move commands.
33
==PAGE:46==
3. IMPLEMENTATION
Figure 3.9: Overview of how FT control was implemented through the RCW PC for a ABB robot. Both sensor and FT controller are implemented in the
ft_executor node on the RCW PC. The move controller is implemented in the abb_executor node of the RCW PC and as a background task on the robot. The
startMoveController callback function transmits a RAPID script to the robot, which can then execute move commands received by the move controller task.
34
==PAGE:47==
3.4. Generic Robot CoWorker Implementation
With I being the discrete integral of (Wt −Wa) but clamped at ±5 Ns, in order to avoid large integrator
build-up i.e. when starting from a non-contact point. P control can be achieved by setting Ki = 0, and both
base and TCP reference frames can be speciﬁed.
The ROS TransformListener class [25] is implemented to enable easy reference frame transformations,
by keeping a history (conﬁgured to 60 seconds) of all available reference frames. This makes it easy to
transform both force vectors and position data between base and TCP reference frames. Unfortunately, tests
revealed that the TransformListener class is unstable, often resulting in the control loop ending prematurely.
The FT Controller module implements a state class to keep track of the time duration since starting the
primitive, as well as the robot position, distance and measured forces. At each control iteration, these state
variables are compared with the speciﬁed stop-limit values, consisting of:
• Maximum duration
• Minimum and maximum position along each of the X-, Y- and Z-axes
• Minimum and maximum distance travelled along each of the X-, Y- and Z-axes
• Maximum Euclidean distance travelled.
• Minimum and maximum forces along each of the X-, Y- and Z-axes
• Minimum and maximum torques along each of the X-, Y- and Z-axes
• Maximum Euclidean force
If any of the state variables are outside the speciﬁed limits, a stop message is sent to the move controller, and
the primitive execution is ended. The FT Controller also publishes the current state variables to a ROS topic,
to enable easy tracking, logging and debugging.
3.4.3
Move Controller
When running a robot with FT control, the robot must be able to react in real-time to the FT sensor
measurements. The original RCW scheme of transmitting a new script to the robot for each movement
is therefore not an option, as this would be far to slow. For many industrial robots which don’t allow
external motion control, the best strategy will usually be to transfer a single program to the robot, and
then use this program to receive and execute incoming movement messages over a socket connection. The
Move Controller module therefore advertise 2 services: startMoveController which initializes the Move
controller by programming the robot to receive and execute movement messages, and move which sends out
a movement message to the programmed robot.
To avoid delays between movement (and thereby optimize performance), robot message receiving and
movement execution are implemented to run in parallel threads on the robot, such that a new movement
command is always available immediately after the previous one has completed. Mechanisms are also
implemented such that only the most recent movement message will be executed, which ensures that the
robot will only react to the newest FT measurements. Furthermore, each incoming message will only be
executed once, thereby ensuring that the robot stops moving in case the connection between the PC and
robot is lost.
35
==PAGE:48==
3. IMPLEMENTATION
UR Implementation
The UR implementation of the Move Controller module was inspired by the opti-
mized UR ROS driver created in [15], but modiﬁed to ﬁt into the RCW platform. The procedure of the UR
Move Controller on the RCW PC is:
1. Initialise a socket and begin listening for incoming connections.
2. When the startMoveController service is called, transmit the move controller UR script to the robot
through the default sendScriptWithCallback method of the ur_executor package.
3. Accept the incoming socket connection established by the uploaded robot script.
4. Send move commands through the socket connection until a stop request is received from the FT
Controller module.
5. Send stop command to the robot.
The sendScriptWithCallback is called from a separate thread, since this method will wait for a socket callback
signal from the robot, to indicate that the script has ﬁnished running, and will therefore halt the rest of the
program while waiting.
The UR script uploaded to the robot consists of a main servoing loop, and a separate socket thread for
receiving movement messages. The move messages in the UR implementation consists of 6 4-byte integers
describing the position differentials for the 3 translational and 3 orientational axes, and an extra 4-byte
integer specifying the script to perform one of three actions:
• 0: End program
• 1: Move relative to TCP in TCP frame
• 2: Move relative to TCP in Base frame
The 6 movement values are transmitted as scaled integers, so when the robot receives a move message these
are converted to ﬂoats and scaled back down. The new target joint angles are then calculated by adding
the received values to the current target position, either by pose_add (base frame) or pose_trans (TCP
frame), and subsequently calling the get_inverse_kin command. Meanwhile the main thread calls the ServoJ
command every 8 ms (125 Hz) with the most recently calculated joint positions.
In the original optimized ROS driver created in [15], the socket receiving loop was implemented as the
main loop, while the servoing loop was implemented in a separate thread. This implementation did however
yield loop rates signiﬁcantly below the speciﬁed 125 Hz. But by switching the tasks of the main loop
and background thread, a constant loop rate of 125 Hz was achieved. The reason behind this behaviour is
unknown, but could relate to the underlying thread prioritization algorithm.
ABB implementation
In the ABB implementation of the Move Controller, the socket receiver loop is
implemented as a separate task on the robot, and will therefore continuously try to connect to RCW, even
before the move controller client script is uploaded to the robot. The procedure of the ABB Move Controller
is therefore to:
1. Initialize a socket and begin listening for incoming connections.
2. Accept the incoming socket connection established by the robot Move Server task.
3. When the startMoveController service is called, transmit the move controller RAPID script to the
robot through a modiﬁed version of the sendRapidProgram method of the abb_executor package.
36
==PAGE:49==
3.5. Summary
4. Send move commands through the socket connection until a stop request is received from the FT
Controller module.
5. Send stop command to the robot.
The sendRapidProgram method which uploads RAPID script to the robot, was modiﬁed to allow for variables
in the script.
The move messages sent to the robot includes the same information as for the UR implementation, but
they are structured according to the ROS-industrial simple_message protocol [26], with the BODY DATA
consisting of a 4-byte command variable and six 4-byte movement variables transmitted as ﬂoats. The
movement values are shared with the uploaded main program by use of persistent variables. The uploaded
main program consists of a loop that continuously adds incoming movement messages to the current target
position, before executing the MoveJ command to move the robot. This is the same loop as implemented
previously in section 3.3, and the same limitations on movement speed and reaction time are present.
3.5
Summary
The robots and sensors employed in this thesis was examined in order get a better understanding of properties,
features and limits of each component:
• The UR robot is designed with an easy-to-use interface, and programming is done through a python
inspired script language, featuring threading and socket communication. The ServoJ command is
tailored for the purpose of real-time motion control, although it still has a small latency in the form of
a look-ahead time. The robot also features internal FT sensing capabilities.
• The ABB robot is a more traditional industrial robot. The RAPID scripting language doesn’t resemble
any common programming languages, but does allow for socket communication and background
tasks. The robot isn’t designed for real-time motion control (at least not without the Externally Guided
Motion option), but low-velocity motion control was achieved by use of ﬁne zoning and a tool speed
of +200 mm/s.
• The Robotiq sensor is limited to 100 Hz sampling and the USB connectivity limits its compatibility
with other equipment.
• The Optoforce sensor allow for fast sampling at 1000 Hz, socket communication over ethernet and
has a ﬂexible body.
Initial validation that FT control was possible on these robots, was achieved by implementing both sensor
communication and FT controller directly on the robots, which allowed for easy testing of robot functionality
and capabilities. Subsequently the developed functions were successfully implemented as primitives in
RCW. For the UR implementation, dynamic force functions such as contour tracking and impedance mode
was achieved, while the ABB implementation utilized the generic FT control framework designed in section
2.3.2.
In the end, sensor communication and FT controller were implemented in RCW to create a hardware generic
solution where sensor drivers, FT control and robot drivers are separated from each other. This solution
also implements the generic FT control framework designed in section 2.3.2, but also allows for easy
reconﬁguration and implementation of new sensor drivers due to the functionality of ROS. Robot speciﬁc
Move Controller modules were implemented in RCW and on the robots, in order to transmit and execute the
positional changes calculated by the FT controller module.
37
==PAGE:50==
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 4
Test and Veriﬁcation
To verify the developed FT control solution, the performance of the system was documented through a series
of tests and measurements, and subsequently the system was used in an industrial process of assembling
battery cells into a plastic container.
4.1
Performance Quantiﬁcation
The potential of FT control in industrial processes, is highly reliant on the achievable performance. Per-
formance of the developed control solution is therefore evaluated when implemented and conﬁgured with
a Universal Robots UR5(CB3) robot and an Optoforce FT sensor. In addition to the speciﬁc controller
performance, numerous variations in controller conﬁguration and hardware setup are examined, in order to
document how the solution is affected by these parameters. The key performance indicators includes latency,
overshoot, settling time and steady-state stability, which are examined through time-series recordings of
force and position during various step functions. Key system parameters includes controller type, gain, target
force, speed, sampling frequency, axis and robot & sensor hardware.
All tests were performed by running a SpeedLWithForce primitive from the RCW platform, while recording
wrench and position data from ROS topics by using the rosbag function of ROS. Unless otherwise speciﬁed,
tests were run from a contact-free starting point, from which the compliant axis would seek toward a wooden
surface (see ﬁgure 4.1) in an attempt to achieve a target force.
4.1.1
Reference conﬁguration
The examined reference system consisted of the following conﬁguration:
• UR5 robot with CB3 controller.
• Optoforce HEX-70-XE-200 FT sensor conﬁgured with sampling rate of 1000 Hz and ﬁltering rate of
150 Hz.
• Control loop frequency of 400 Hz.
• Proportional gain control with Kp = 0.00004.
• Compliant Y-axis with target force F(y) = 10 N.
Figures 4.3 and 4.4 presents the measured Y-axis force and position as a function of time, during 2 test
run executions. As the robot tool makes contact with the surface, the measured force rapidly increases.
39
==PAGE:52==
4. TEST AND VERIFICATION
Figure 4.1: Test setup. A 3D printed tool (see section 4.2) with a diameter of 70 mm, is
mounted after the Optoforce FT sesnor. The SpeedLWithForce primitive is executed from a
contact-free position, with a target force of 10 N against a wooden surface.
Figure 4.2: Overview of the test setup as seen from above.
The resulting force makes a short overshoot of 4.6 N, before the controller manages to reverse the robot
movement and settle at the 10 N target force. The two test runs differ once steady-state is reached, as test 1
starts to oscillate, while test 2 remains completely still. Table 4.1 presents the key parameter values of these
tests. A similar test where the robot starts in direct contact with the wooden surface (F(y) = 0 N), was also
carried out, but resulted in similar dynamics.
Overshoot [N]
Overshoot [mm]
Settling time [s]
SS force [N]
SS Stdev [N]
Test 1
4.46
0.12
0.15
10.0
0.68
Test 2
4.66
0.12
0.14
10.0
0.056
Mean
4.62
0.12
0.15
10.0
0.42
Table 4.1: Key controller performance indicators, measured during force step function. The
tests behave identical to begin with, but during steady-state test 1 starts to oscillate, while test
2 is completely still. The mean values are calculated from 6 test runs.
40
==PAGE:53==
4.1. Performance Quantiﬁcation
Figure 4.3: Measured forces as a function of time during force step function. A short overshoot
of 4.6 N is observed, before settling after ~0.15 s. At steady-state the measured force will
often start oscillating with an amplitude of ±1 N.
Figure 4.4: Measured position as a function of time during force step function. At steady-state
the position will often start oscillating with an amplitude of ±40 µm.
41
==PAGE:54==
4. TEST AND VERIFICATION
Figure 4.4 shows that the distance from initial touch (T=0 s) to the target force is met, is only 0.25 mm. Since
the force/distance gradient of a hard material is so steep, perfect target tracking is extremely difﬁcult with
the typical industrial robots used in this thesis, since deviations in position by just a few micrometers can
result in relatively large deviations from the target force. If the target force isn’t matched precisely, it can be
hard for the robot to adjust the position with total accuracy, which is considered as the main reason for the
±1 N oscillations present at steady-state. These oscillations are present in many of the test runs performed
(for both this and other conﬁgurations), and it should be noted, that the resulting positional deviations of ±40
µm are smaller than the speciﬁed accuracy of the UR5 robot.
In the test executions where the robot managed to avoid steady state oscillation, this presumably happens
because the target force was reached exceptionally well. A measure of the controllers tracking stability,
such as the force standard deviation at steady-state, is therefore highly reliant on whether such oscillations
occur or not. The steady-state standard deviation without oscillations is just 0.056 N, as opposed to the 0.68
N when calculated from the oscillating test run execution. Even with these oscillations, the system does
manage to stay within the ±1 N tracking objective stated in the problem deﬁnition of this thesis.
The oscillations during steady-state, also makes it difﬁcult to determine an exact settling time of the controlled
system, since relatively large deviations from the target force will continue to occur. In the following tests,
settling times have therefore been measured as the duration from initial rise, until the initial dynamics have
settled into a force value within 1 N of the target force, while ignoring subsequent steady-state oscillations.
This yields an average settling time of 0.15 s for the reference system.
Latency
Settling time will vary between different tasks, and may be optimized by adjusting controller
conﬁguration. The system does however possess a latency that is related to the hardware, and therefore
cannot be eliminated. To get insights on this latency, a MoveUntilForce test was performed, in which the
SpeedLWithForce primitive was conﬁgured with a stop-limit of 10 N. The latency was then extracted as the
time duration from when the threshold is exceeded, until the robot motion is stopped. A sample execution of
this experiment is presented in ﬁgures 4.5 and 4.6.
From 4 runs, the average reaction time was 33.5 ms, resulting in a 0.1 mm added travel distance. This is in
accordance with the the 30 ms look-ahead time of the UR script ServoJ command. The look-ahead time is
considered to be the primary source of time-delay in the system, with computation time, network transfer
and sensing delays making much smaller contributions. The UR robot is also limited to the 125 Hz loop
cycle, so even though the FT controller is asynchronously transmitting movement messages at 400 Hz from
the RCW PC, the robot delay until execution can still be up to 8 ms.
Target force
The magnitude of the target force may have considerable effects on the tracking precision of
the system. Figure 4.7 and table 4.2 compares target forces of 2 N, 10 N and 40 N. The controller is seen to
perform well at both lower and higher forces. Although the 40 N test results in quite a large overshoot of
16.3 N, this corresponds to just 40.7 % and is therefore on par with the previously examined 10 N target
force. If this added overshoot is to be avoided, a speed limit can be implemented on the controller, such that
large target forces won’t result in proportionally faster movements during the non-contact phase. Such a
speed limit will of course also result in a further increased settling time. The 40 N target force also results in
smaller steady-state oscillations than at 10 N, but didn’t achieve perfect tracking in any of the 3 performed
test runs, yielding a steady-state standard deviation of 0.38 N. The 2 N test gives rise to small high-frequency
oscillations during steady-state, which may be a result of a steep and nonlinear force/distance gradient
42
==PAGE:55==
4.1. Performance Quantiﬁcation
Figure 4.5: Measured forces as a function of time during force step function. The controller
stops as soon as +10 N is sensed (green line).
Figure 4.6: Measured position as a function of time during force step function. The robot
requires some time before it has stopped moving forward (red line).
43
==PAGE:56==
4. TEST AND VERIFICATION
when smaller forces are applied. The high-frequency oscillations are not a constant phenomenon, but comes
and goes during steady-state.
Target Force[N]
Overshoot [%]
Overshoot [N]
Settling time [s]
SS Stdev [N]
2
68.0
1.4
0.20
0.40
10
46.2
4.6
0.15
0.42
40
40.7
16.3
0.49
0.38
Table 4.2: Measured controller performance during force step function for multiple target
forces. The 2 N and 40 N values are each averaged from 3 test runs.
Figure 4.7: Measured forces as a function of time during force step function for multiple target
forces. The effects of reduced sensor sampling on the system dynamics is clearly visible.
Obstacle avoidance
Surface tracking can be a useful feature in several industrial applications, but it
requires a controller capable of handling disturbances in the tracked surface. To document the controller
performance in such a scenario, a test was created in which the controller moves along a linear surface, until
a 5 mm step change in the surface occurs. The speciﬁed controller performance in such a scenario will
depend on 2 external parameters: the movement velocity and the tool diameter. The controller will never be
able to overcome a step which is greater than the tool radius, as the applied force will be perpendicular to the
force controlled axis. Tests were performed for multiple speeds, with a tool diameter of 70 mm. A high
controller gain is required to quickly adapt to such a disturbance, but the unavoidable latency of the system
limits how fast the controller can react.
Figures 4.9 and 4.10 presents the results of such a test for multiple speeds, and as expected, greater speed
results in greater overshoots. A tracking error is present until the tool has completely passed the surface
disturbance, and settling times will therefore not yield representative performance indicators, as these are
related more to the surface speed than the controller.
44
==PAGE:57==
4.1. Performance Quantiﬁcation
Figure 4.8: Overview of the obstacle avoidance test setup as seen from above.
Velocity(x) [mm/s]
Overshoot [N]
Settling time [s]
2.62
2.76
3.58
5.26
4.32
2.62
10.53
7.87
1.40
Table 4.3: Measured controller performance during tracking of stepped surface for multiple
speeds. Presented values are averages of at least 3 test runs.
Compliant axis
Many FT sensors behave quite differently in the Z-axis compared to the X- and Y-axes.
This includes the Optoforce sensor used in this thesis, for which the X/Y-axis deformation is 1.7mm, whereas
the Z-axis deformation is only 0.3mm. This creates a much steeper force/distance gradient as well as
added noise, as can be seen from ﬁgure 4.11. In combination with the positional data presented in ﬁgure
4.12, it can be shown that even though the position only varies about 50% extra, the measured force will
vary about 400% more in the Z-axis than in the X- or Y-axis. When dealing with FT control in the Z-axis,
the proportional gain should therefore be lowered to a more suitable value. Since the measured force never
really settles, the settling time is unavailable for the Z-axis.
Compliant axis
Overshoot [N]
Settling time [s]
SS Stdev [N]
Y
4.66
0.15
0.42
Z
6.70
-
2.01
Table 4.4: Measured controller performance during force step function for Z- and Y-axes.
Presented values are averages of at least 3 test runs.
4.1.2
Effects of controller setup
The test results presented in the previous section were all performed with the same controller conﬁguration.
By making adjustments to the controller conﬁguration, the dynamics can be optimized for a speciﬁc task,
and changes to the proportional gain as well as implementation of a PI controller have therefore been tested
and documented.
Controller gain
The performance of any control scheme is highly dependent on the controller conﬁgu-
ration. A proper proportional gain should be chosen to optimize overshoot, settling time and stability. A
selection of Kp values in the range of 0.00001 to 0.00008 have therefore been evaluated with the results
presented in ﬁgure 4.13 and table 4.5.
45
==PAGE:58==
4. TEST AND VERIFICATION
Figure 4.9: Measured forces as a function of time during tracking of stepped surface for
multiple speeds.
Figure 4.10: Measured position as a function of time during tracking of stepped surface for
multiple speeds.
46
==PAGE:59==
4.1. Performance Quantiﬁcation
Figure 4.11: Measured forces as a function of time during force step function for Z- and
Y-axes. The increased sensitivity of the Z-axis results in measurements with much greater
variations.
Figure 4.12: Robot position as a function of time during force step function for Z- and Y-axes.
47
==PAGE:60==
4. TEST AND VERIFICATION
The results show that all values reach a steady-state at the target force of 10 N, but with disturbance
oscillations of approximately ±1 N. It is worth noting, that some test runs resulted in a steady-state without
disturbances, but this seemed to depend more on chance than controller conﬁguration. The effect of Kp is
evident, higher values lead to greater overshoot, although lowering the gain below 0.00002 doesn’t seem to
make a great difference. The settling time is optimal at Kp = 0.00004, as the higher gain resulted in multiple
oscillations before settling, while the lower values took much longer to return from the overshoot. If the gain
is increased further, the system will start becoming unstable.
Kp
Overshoot [N]
Settling time [s]
SS Stdev [N]
0.00001
2.30
0.67
0.87
0.00002
2.18
0.46
0.79
0.00004
4.62
0.16
0.42
0.00008
12.19
0.27
0.30
Table 4.5: Measured controller performance during force step function for multiple propor-
tional controller gain values. Presented values are averages of at least 3 test runs.
Figure 4.13: Measured forces as a function of time during force step function for multiple
proportional controller gain values. The effects of controller gain on overshoot and settling
time are clearly visible.
Controller type
By implementing more advanced controller types, new levels of performance can be
achieved, but for industrial processes the simple P, PI and PID controllers are typically the preferred choice,
mainly due to their simplicity, and ﬂexibility. As the system posses a pure integrator (velocity →position),
no tracking error will show for constant surfaces, but as was observed in the previous obstacle avoidance test,
the tested P controller won’t achieve error-free tracking for a varying surface. To accommodate this issue,
the controller can be upgraded to include an integrator (PI), making error-free tracking of linearly changing
surfaces possible.
A new obstacle avoidance test was performed at a surface speed of S(x) = 5.26 mm/s for multiple PI
controllers. As seen from ﬁgure 4.14 and table 4.6, the introduction of an integrator allow the controller
48
==PAGE:61==
4.1. Performance Quantiﬁcation
to return to the target force considerably faster than without it, even before the tool has passed the surface
step change. The PI controller does however result in a small undershoot of about 1 N, toward the end of
the motion, but as the target steady-state tracking error is ±1 N anyway, this isn’t considered a problem.
Overshoots are also sligthly reduced. For many tasks, upgrading to a properly conﬁgured PI controller can
therefore contribute positively to the controller performance.
Controller parameters
Overshoot [N]
Settling time [s]
Kp = 4e-05
4.39
2.72
Kp = 4e-05, Ki = 2e-05
4.34
1.66
Kp = 4e-05, Ki = 4e-05
4.26
0.77
Kp = 4e-05, Ki = 5e-05
3.89
0.38
Table 4.6: Measured controller performance during force step function for P and PI controllers.
Presented values are averages of at least 3 test runs. Note that settling times does not take into
account, that a few peaking measurements are subsequently below 9 N, as these measurements
are considered a result of noisy signals.
Figure 4.14: Measured forces as a function of time during force step function for P and PI
controllers.
4.1.3
Effects of hardware setup
To examine the effects of different hardware combinations, performance evaluations were conducted for
multiple robots and sensors, as well as multiple sensor conﬁgurations.
Sensor sampling & ﬁltering
The Optoforce FT sensor allows conﬁgurable sampling and ﬁltering rates of
up to 1000 Hz, which can be used to optimize the control performance, and also to evaluate the dependency
on various sensor characteristics. Figure 4.15 and table 4.7 presents the results, from which it can be
observed that lowering sampling and ﬁltering rates to 100Hz/15Hz leads to a slightly cleaner signal, but
lowers performance in terms of overshoot, settling time, and steady state stability, whereas the higher
49
==PAGE:62==
4. TEST AND VERIFICATION
sampling and ﬁltering rates of 1000 Hz/150 Hz and 1000 Hz/500 Hz have almost identical responses. The
higher ﬁltering rate leads to fewer oscillations, but this may as well just be a coincidence. It can therefore be
concluded that the sensor should have a sampling frequency great enough to support the FT and Motion
control loops, but a sampling frequency much higher than these rates will not provide additional performance.
Sampling & ﬁltering
Overshoot [N]
Settling time [s]
SS Stdev [N]
100 Hz / 15 Hz
7.82
0.40
0.63
1000 Hz / 150 Hz
4.62
0.16
0.42
1000 Hz / 500 Hz
4.60
0.14
0.20
Table 4.7: Measured controller performance during force step function for multiple sensor
sampling and ﬁltering rates. Presented values are averages of at least 3 test runs.
Figure 4.15: Measured forces as a function of time during force step function for multiple
sensor sampling and ﬁltering rates. The effects of reduced sensor sampling on the system
dynamics is clearly visible.
Robots and sensors
As previously stated, the hardware will often limit the achievable performance when
implementing FT control into industrial robots. Figure 4.16 presents performance measurements for a
number of different hardware conﬁgurations, and it is clear that the dynamics of the system differs greatly
between conﬁgurations.
The switch from the Optoforce sensor to the Robotiq sensor is seen to produce results similar to the decreased
sampling and ﬁltering rates presented earlier, with increased overshoot, and added oscillations before settling.
The proportional gain had to be lowered when using the Robotiq sensor, as the system would otherwise
only achieve marginal stability, and even then, the controller resulted in steady-state oscillations of +2 N in
magnitude. The Robotiq sensor also seem to expose additional noise in the measurements.
Switching to the older CB2 controller of the UR5 robot results in slower movements, generating completely
new dynamics, resembling the decreased Kp value presented previously. It is unknown why the CB2
controller delivers such different dynamics, as the main difference between these setups should be an added
50
==PAGE:63==
4.2. Implemented Application
lookahead time of the ServoJ command. The same effect was observed when implementing the ROS
driver developed in [15] on the CB3 controller, but was solved by switching the servoJ command from
the background thread to the main loop. If changes have been made to the underlying thread prioritization
algorithm between the two controller versions, then switching the tasks back may improve loop rates.
Finally, the ABB robot delivers an underdamped system, due to the very limited controller speed. Kp of the
ABB system is set to 0.005, yielding an initial speed about 5.5 times slower than that of the UR5(CB3) robot
at Kp = 0.00004. If the gain is increased much further, unsteady and irregular motions will start to show.
The system does not show the same oscillations as with the UR robots.
Conﬁguration
Overshoot [N]
Settling time [s]
UR5(CB3) Optoforce, Kp = 0.00004
4.62
0.16
0.42
UR5(CB3) Robotiq, Kp = 0.00004
6.27
-
1.30
UR5(CB2) Optoforce, Kp = 0.00004
2.60
0.58
0.59
IRB1200 Optoforce, Kp = 0.00004
0.28
0.47
0.06
Table 4.8: Measured controller performance during force step function for various hardware
conﬁgurations. Presented values are averages of at least 3 test runs.
Figure 4.16: Measured forces as a function of time during force step function for various
hardware conﬁgurations. The effects of hardware conﬁgurations are apparent in the changed
dynamics.
4.2
Implemented Application
The developed FT control framework was further validated and evaluated by implementing it on an automated
assembly process which DTI is currently integrating for an external manufacturer. The process requires
battery packs to be assembled by placing individual battery cells into a plastic container tray, see ﬁgure
4.17. The tasks is made complex by the tight ﬁt between the battery cells and the container, as well as minor
irregularities on the batteries or displacements of the plastic tray. The task therefore consists of aligning the
end of the battery exactly with the tray, before inserting the battery, while possibly aligning the battery cells
51
==PAGE:64==
4. TEST AND VERIFICATION
during insertion. To perform this task, an end-effector tool capable of holding and releasing battery cells was
designed and 3D-printed. The tool works by channeling a pressure or vacuum inside a short tube where the
battery cell ﬁts. During but during testing, battery cells were simply held in place by frictional forces, and
were never released.
Figure 4.17: A tool conﬁguration consisting of UR5 robot -> Optoforce FT sensor -> 3D-
printed battery suction cup -> battery. Using this conﬁguration, batteries can easily be inserted
into a tight ﬁtting container, without the need for precise alignment and calibration.
Several strategies are available to complete such a task:
Hole search:
The robot approaches the container with the battery from a straight angle, followed by
applying a constant force while searching (i.e. spiral-search) for a correct alignment. Once a resulting
force is no longer measured, the alignment is met. Depending on the assembly conﬁguration, it might also
be possible to extract information on the required search direction, since a torque will be applied to the
battery when it is partially above the hole of insertion. The downside to this approach, is that the objects to
be assembled may be damaged during the search if they are not frictionless, i.e. the battery cells have an
open-ended foil at the bottom that might end up being ripped.
Compliant plane:
If the container is approached from the z-axis, then x- and y-axes can be made compliant
such that the object will automatically align during insertion. In general this requires that either the container
or the object of insertion have non-planer edges that may be used to guide the object. The larger the chamfer,
the less precise the initial insertion point has to be.
Pivot into place:
In this method, the cylindrical shaped battery cell is approached to the assembly hole
at an angle. If necessary, the battery cell can then be partially inserted into the container hole by moving
either in downward (or partially downward) direction until a force is met. The battery cell is then pivoted
into place by reorienting around the angled axis, while keeping the battery cell in contact with the container
wall by applying a constant force. Compliancy can be utilized to ensure alignment in both planer axes.
52
==PAGE:65==
4.2. Implemented Application
Figure 4.18: Hole search strategy. A search pattern is executed until a reactive force is no
longer detected.
Figure 4.19: Compliant plane strategy. Non-planer edges of either the object or container are
used to guide the insertion through the use of compliant axes.
The Pivot into place method was successfully implemented on both the ABB and UR robots. The signiﬁcance
of these results, lies in the simplicity of implementing a ﬂexible and robust solution for a task that would
normally be rather substantial and require precise calibration. The program consisted of the following
commands:
1. MoveL: Move to an initial position above the target insertion point.
2. Zero: Tare the FT sensor.
3. SpeedLWithForce: Make sure the battery is in contact with the container, by moving downward until
a contact force is sensed. (optional)
4. SpeedLWithForce: Pivot around the end of the battery, while keeping a small constant force between
the container and the battery cell, and 0 N force in the other planer axis to align the battery through
compliancy. Stop when a horizontal position is reached.
5. SpeedLWithForce: Insert the battery cell by moving downward until a contact force is sensed.
In addition to the small size of the program, the RCW process script was completely interchangeable between
the two robots, as only the controller constants and initial position had to be adjusted to the given setup. On
53
==PAGE:66==
4. TEST AND VERIFICATION
Figure 4.20: Pivot into place strategy. Compliance and a constant contact force is utilized
while pivoting the battery cell into position.
Figure 4.21: The battery placement program as implemented in RCW.
both setups, the method provided great ﬂexibility as the container could be moved several millimeters from
the originally calibrated position and the controller would still manage to correctly insert the battery cell.
The compliant plane method was also implemented on the UR robot, but this strategy resulted in less
ﬂexibility of the initial position, most likely due to the container having straight edges and the battery
cells only haveing sub-millimeter edge-roundings. The RCW script required for this strategy was however
extremely simple, as only a single SpeedLWithForce command was required.
4.3
Summary
Performance testing and documentation was performed for a reference system and controller conﬁguration
consisting of a UR5 robot with the newest CB3 controller and an Optoforce FT sensor. Force tracking
precision was veriﬁed to be within the 1 N target, wile presenting a reasonable overshoot. Furthermore, the
controller was able to adapt to a step-change while tracking a surface. Effects of the force magnitude and
compliant axis were also examined, in order to document the limits and possible use-cases of the system.
The effects of the controller conﬁguration were examined, and the proportional gain is shown to greatly
inﬂuence both settling time and overshoot. Introduction of PI control was also examined in order to achieve
54
==PAGE:67==
4.3. Summary
error-free tracking of a linearly changing surface, and the integral gain was shown to improve settling time
in such a scenario. No solution was found that could resolve the oscillations present at steady-state.
The effects of both sensors and robots were also examined. An Optoforce sensor conﬁgured with a sampling
rate of 100 Hz or the Robotiq sensor yielded a considerably poorer performance than the system conﬁgured
with an Optoforce sensor at 1000 Hz sampling rate. Great differences were also observed between different
robots models, where a UR robot with the old CB2 controller, exhibited completely different dynamics than
the reference setup, and the ABB robot could only achieve controller speeds of less than a 5th of the UR
system.
Finally, a simple assembly task was solved using the developed FT control framework. Multiple approaches
to solve the task of placing batteries into a tight ﬁtting plastic tray, were presented and evaluated. A method
that applies a small contact force between the battery cell and the plastic tray, while performing a pivoting
motion, was implemented. The method resulted in a simple RCW program with just a few commands and
requiring almost no calibration, but was nonetheless capable of correctly inserting the battery, even with a
position offset of several millimeters. In addition, the program was capable of executing the skill on both the
UR and ABB robots, by only changing the initial position and controller gain.
55
==PAGE:68==
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 5
Discussion
The idea of integrating FT sensing with industrial robots is not new, but creating a hardware generic FT
control framework, that implements into a block-style programming environment, has only been possible
due to recent advances in industrial robots and sensor technology. The objective of this thesis was to
design a use-case generic FT framework, implement it into DTIs existing RCW platform, and document it’s
performance. The following chapter presents the ﬁndings, challenges and future prospects of the reported
solution, in regards to this objective.
5.1
Results
The generic FT control framework designed and implemented in this thesis, demonstrates a new approach
to robot programming of FT controlled tasks with a user-friendly block environment. By implementing
the SpeedLWithForce primitive as a singular base function, the resulting solution is simple and requires
a minimum of code to work. By pairing the primitive with a multitude of stop-limits, the framework
enables execution of advanced FT control functionality as well as the creation of high-level task speciﬁc
skills, thereby catering to both experienced robot application programmers and robot operators without
prior knowledge in programming. The stop-limit system also adds new possibilities for safety, in terms of
force and motion restriction, which can be of great beneﬁt when executing dynamic motions. Although
the framework still lacks functionality for the creating of dynamic FT functions, the designed solution is
regarded to offer a wider applicability than any other solutions currently on the market.
While the strategy of implementing both sensor driver and controller on an external PC might not seem
optimal in typical industrial contexts, the solution is veriﬁed to work, and ROS has proven to be a great
platform for implementing such a middleman controller. The genericness provided by this structure has
greatly reduced the amount of code required for implementing multiple hardware conﬁgurations, if compared
with a solution where each sensor driver would have to be implemented on the robot itself. The result is a
signiﬁcant reduction of the amount of work required for implementation, as well as increased simplicity of
the solution, while achieving a solution that easily extends with new hardware. With additional work, this
solution will furthermore be able to take advantage of the additional functionality of ROS, i.e. path-planning
with work-space restrictions, to further enhance performance and safe.
The challenges of implementing this solution includes the severely limited external and real-time control
capabilities provided by typical industrial robots such as the ABB IRB 1200, which will without a doubt
continue to limit the implementation of generic FT control schemes, until the manufacturers start opening up
for real-time motion control, and preferably also external motion control. Performance measurements show
57
==PAGE:70==
5. DISCUSSION
that a minimum of 33.5 ms latency is currently achievable on the UR5(CB3)-Optoforce conﬁguration, with
other conﬁgurations yielding lesser responsiveness. A tracking precision of ±1 N was attained, but further
precision seems to be limited by the robot position resolution.
5.2
Future work
The solution developed and implemented during this thesis, requires additional work before it can be used in
proper industrial processes, and to expand its usability and appeal. In the current implementation, sensor
communication is too unstable, as the connection will sometimes be lost. When this happens, the application
stops the robot motion, and requires a restart to once again connect to the sensor. As mentioned in section
3.4, the ROS TransformListener is also unstable, and will also require a restart of the application when
something goes wrong. Solutions must therefore be found to optimize the stability of the system, such that
it will have no problem to run continuously. Another requested feature, is to conform the response of the
movement controller for each robot, as the current implementation requires the user to ﬁnd suitable gains for
each hardware setup. Such conformity is not easy to achieve, but improvements to the current system is
deﬁnitely possible. Individual axis gains may also be of interest, since the XY- and Z-axis behaves different
for both forces and torques.
Support for additional robots and sensors as well as additional high-level skills are also considered obvious
candidates for the future development of this robotic FT platform. Especially a point-to-point MoveWithForce
skill, which automatically calculates axis velocities and positional stop-limits, based on the start and end
pose. Implementing a movement skill with blends or smooth acceleration would also be of interest, but this
is not possible with the current SpeedLWithForce primitive, as the motions will be dynamic.
Other useful features include:
• Improvements to the primitive and skill GUIs. A dynamic GUI that only presents the user with relevant
conﬁguration options could make the framework much more user-friendly and intuitive.
• Output signals on the SpeedLWithForce primitive which outputs the ﬁnal state values as well as an
indication of which state parameter triggered the stop-limit. Such an output will allow subsequent
logic statements to assert that the primitive has executed as desired.
• Point-of-contact modelling to adjust for tool displacement from the sensor point of measurement.
• Inertia compensation to adjust for changing gravitational forces during reorientation, as well as
conservation of angular momentum for rotational tools such as polishing machines.
• Speed limitations on individual axes to allow for large target forces without requiring steep accelera-
tions during contact transitions, i.e. when making initial contact with a surface.
• Continuous data logging during skill execution, which can be useful for documentation and QA
purposes.
5.3
Prospects
If the basic requirements of speed, stability, ease of implementation and price are all met, the prospects of
implementing the presented FT control framework into ordinary automation tasks could yield additional
precision, easier programming, improved safety, continuous QA control and even allow for automation of
tasks that would otherwise not have been possible to solve with traditional industrial robots.
58
==PAGE:71==
5.3. Prospects
The prospect of implementing FT control into ordinary automation tasks is already on the rise as more and
more manufacturers implement FT sensing capabilities into their robots. This development is not only driven
by performance and feature requirements, but also from a safety perspective, where collaborative robots
are a prime example. Collaborative robots require FT sensing capabilities in order to detect and react to
anomalies in their work tasks. Furthermore, high precision external FT sensors has seen a steep reduction in
price over recent years, resulting in increased economic feasibility for many processes that was previously
limited to traditional position control, or external QA control.
59
==PAGE:72==
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
The objective of designing a use-case and hardware generic FT toolbox for DTI’s RCW, was achieved
through careful analysis of the targeted industrial applications, as well as the properties and features required
for implementation into real-life industrial applications, such as simplicity, safety and robustness.
The block-programming environment of the RCW makes programming simple and intuitive, but requires the
block primitives to be thoroughly thought out, such that they are applicable in a wide array of situations,
without making them overly complicated. This was achieved by implementing a low-level SpeedLWithForce
command. By implementing this command as a FT controlled loop in combination with user-selected stop
parameters such as distance, wrench and time, it is possible to extend the block into higher-level skills such
as MoveUntilForce, ApplyForce and MoveWithForce, and further into simple task speciﬁc templates such
as FindSurface, FollowSurface and PivotWithForce. Although lacking a method of creating dynamic FT
operations, the solution succeeds as a simple, intuitive and ﬂexible way of integrating FT control into robot
programming for a wide variety of industrial applications.
The lack of real-time motion control of the robots was deemed a major obstacle from the beginning. Sensor
communication and FT control algorithms were therefore initially implemented directly on a Universal
Robots UR5 and an ABB IRC 1200 robot, which allowed for easy veriﬁcation that FT control was indeed
possible. Afterwards, sensor communication and FT control modules was implemented on the external
RCW PC, as this allow for much greater hardware conﬁguration ﬂexibility, that doesn’t require unique code
for each conﬁguration. A move controller module and accompanying robot script was developed for each
robot, in order to transmit and execute motion commands. Threading was utilized to achieve asynchronous
operation between each module.
Finally, the performance of the developed solution was tested and documented, while examining the effect
of controller conﬁguration parameters and hardware. The result was a UR5(CB3)-Optoforce system capable
of tracking a target force within ±1 N and with an average steady-state standard deviation of 0.42 N at 10 N
target force in the XY plane, seemingly limited by the robot performance. Additionally, the developed FT
toolbox was employed in a use-case currently relevant to DTI, where battery cells are to be assembled in a
plastic container. The toolbox was easily applied to solve the task, while allowing for positional tolerances
not possible with traditional position control. Furthermore the task script was transferred between robots
without the need for reprogramming.
Although the solution implemented in chapter 3 is capable of solving many industrial automation tasks
that can beneﬁt from FT control, several features designed in chapter 2 are still lacking, including point-of-
contact transformation, stop-parameter output and proper data logging options. Further work is required to
implement these features, as well as achieving a solution that is stable and safe enough for implementation
61
==PAGE:74==
6. CONCLUSION
in an industrial environment. Work should additionally be spent on adding more high-level skills, as well
as making the SpeedLWithForce conﬁguration GUI more simple and intuitive. If work is continued on the
developed solution, the prospect of utilizing this generic FT control approach in industrial applications,
seems very promising.
62
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1]
Bjørn Godske. Ny robot klarer krævende poleringsopgaver. https://ing.dk/artikel/ny-robot-klarer-
kraevende-poleringsopgaver-192137, 2017.
[2]
Mark W. Spong, Seth. Hutchinson, and M. (Mathukumalli) Vidyasagar. Robot modeling and control.
John Wiley & Sons, 2006.
[3]
G. Michalos, S. Makris, N. Papakostas, D. Mourtzis, and G. Chryssolouris. Automotive assembly
technologies review: challenges and outlook for a ﬂexible and adaptive approach. CIRP Journal of
Manufacturing Science and Technology, 2(2):81–91, 1 2010.
[4]
Heping Chen, George Zhang, Jianjun Wang, William Eakins, and Thomas Fuhlbrigge. Flexible
assembly automation using industrial robots. In 2008 IEEE International Conference on Technologies
for Practical Robot Applications, pages 46–51. IEEE, 11 2008.
[5]
Nikolaos Papakostas, George Michalos, Sotiris Makris, Dimitris Zouzias, and George Chryssolouris.
Industrial applications with cooperating robots for the ﬂexible assembly. International Journal of
Computer Integrated Manufacturing, 24(7):650–660, 7 2011.
[6]
Zengxi Pan, Joseph Polden, Nathan Larkin, Stephen Van Duin, and John Norrish. Recent progress
on programming methods for industrial robots. Robotics and Computer-Integrated Manufacturing,
28(2):87–94, 4 2012.
[7]
A. Ferrolho. Flexible software for industrial robots. 2009 Second International Conference on Robot
Communication and Coordination, 2009.
[8]
ABB Robotics. RobotStudio. http://new.abb.com/products/robotics/robotstudio, 2017.
[9]
ATI
Industrial
Automation.
Multi-Axis
Force
/
Torque
Sensors.
http://www.ati-
ia.com/products/ft/sensors.aspx, 2017.
[10] ROS.org. ROS introduction. http://wiki.ros.org/ROS/Introduction, 2017.
[11] ABB Robotics. Integrated Force Control - Robotic real-time tactile feedback - Fully integrated force
control technology. Technical report, ABB, 2014.
[12] ArtiMinds. ARTIMINDS +FORCE. https://www.artiminds.com/?page_id=2255, 2017.
[13] Joris De Schutter, T De Laet, J Rutgeerts, W Decré, R Smits, E Aertbeliën, K Claes, and H Bruyninckx.
Constraint-based task speciﬁcation and estimation for sensor-based robot systems in the presence of
geometric uncertainty. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 26(5):433–455, 2007.
63
==PAGE:76==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[14] Orocos.org. iTaSC wiki. http://www.orocos.org/wiki/orocos/itasc-wiki.
[15] Thomas Timm. Optimizing the Universal Robots ROS driver. Technical report, Technical University
of Denmark, 2015.
[16] ATI Industrial Automation.
DAQ FT Manual Calculations.zip (1.0.3).
http://www.ati-
ia.com/Products/ft/software/daq_software.aspx.
[17] Universal Robots. The URScript Programming Language Version 3.4.1. Technical report, Universal
Robots, 2017.
[18] Universal Robots. Help me choose. https://www.universal-robots.com/products/help-me-choose/,
2017.
[19] ABB Robotics. IRB 1200 Datasheet. https://library.e.abb.com/public/0e659d86647642ffbb772ce4c3cc1e6a/ROB0275_0517.pdf,
2017.
[20] ABB Robotics. Application manual Controller software IRC5.
[21] ABB Robotics. Technical reference manual RAPID overview. 3hac050947 edition.
[22] ABB Robotics. Technical reference manual RAPID Kernel. 3hac050946 edition.
[23] ABB Robotics. Technical reference manual RAPID Instructions, Functions and Data types. 3hac050917
edition.
[24] Mohsen Moradi Dalvand and Saeid Nahavandi. Teleoperation of ABB industrial robots. Industrial
Robot: An International Journal, 41(3):286–295, 5 2014.
[25] ROS.org. Using Published Transforms. http://wiki.ros.org/tf/Overview/Using%20Published%20Transforms,
2017.
[26] ROS.org. simple_message. http://wiki.ros.org/simple_message, 2017.
64
