==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
M. Sc. Thesis  
Master of Environmental Engineering  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Arsenic contamination in Gazna, India: Sources, 
regional distribution and processes affecting arsenic 
mobilization to groundwater 
 
 
Anna-Ricarda Schittich  
s151239 
 
 
 
Kongens Lyngby, June 2017  
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Environment 
Department of Water Resources 
Technical University of Denmar 
Miljoevej 
Building 113 
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark 
Phone +45 4525 1600 
info@env.dtu.dk 
www.compute.dtu.dk   
 
 
==PAGE:3==
Preface 
 
I 
 Preface 
 
This Master Thesis was written in the Environmental Department of the Technical University of 
Denmark (DTU) and in collaboration with the Danish NGO UBU. The work has been carried out 
from the 23rd of January to the 29th of June 2017. Fieldwork was carried out in Gazna, West 
Bengal, India in April 2017.  
 
The supervisors of this project were Ursula McKnight (Assistant Professor at DTU Environment) 
and Henrik Bregnhøj (Curriculum Committee of the Master of International Health at KU and 
member of the UBU Board) 
  
 
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgement 
 
II 
 Acknowledgement 
 
I am very grateful to the many outstanding people I met at DTU, UBU and in India, who 
supported and encouraged me during my work and contributed to this Thesis. 
 
My greatest gratitude goes to my supervisors Ursula McKnight and Henrik Bregnhøj for their 
trust, wise guidance and inspiration throughout the entire project. I would like to particularly 
thank them for their constant attention and advices despite the inconvenience of distance 
work.  
 
I am very grateful to Harshad Kulkarni, who shared his knowledge and experience and was 
always available to answer questions.   
 
I would also like to thank Urban Wünsch for sharing his time and expertise knowledge about 
Fluorescence Spectroscopy and who helped to develop the PARAFAC model.  
 
Moreover, I would like to thank the lab technicians from DTU, in specific Sinh Hy Nguyen who 
guided the work in the laboratory and equipped me with useful tools for the fieldwork in India.  
 
A very special thanks goes to all the people I met in Inia. Many people in Gazna contributed to 
this project. I am especially grateful to Arka, who welcomed me in India and to Sujit, the project 
leader of KTT who supported the work in Gazna. I am very grateful for Dampy Roy and Basudev 
Biswas who were great colleagues during the fieldwork and very helpful translators. I am 
especially thankful to the family Bose who hosted me in their house during the stay in Gazna 
and to all the very friendly inhabitants of Gazna who made the stay in the village a great 
experience.  
 
Ricarda Schittich 
Kopenhagen, June 2017 
 
==PAGE:5==
Abstract 
 
III 
Abstract 
 
High concentrations of arsenic up to 470 μg/L have been found in the secondary, shallow 
aquifer in the village of Gazna in West Bengal, India during the last years. It has been suggested, 
that As in this area is mainly released from iron oxides under reducing conditions which are 
induced by microbial oxidation of organic materials. However, the prediction of As 
contamination for implementing an efficient mitigation strategy and for drilling safe wells is still 
challenging as As release and mobility are controlled by multiple geochemical and hydrological 
parameters. The secondary, shallow aquifer underlying the village is split into several sub-
aquifers which are separated by local clay layers. The spatial variability of As concentrations in 
the shallow aquifer is high, which makes it challenging to ensure the supply of clean water. The 
use of water, from hand pumped tube wells (TWs) is intense and widely spread in the village. 
The water is used for domestic consumption and irrigation purposes. Recently, humic 
components, i.e. humic and fulvic acids, have been proposed to particularly trigger As 
mobilization. In addition, phosphate has been identified as a strong competitor for As sorption 
sites and high phosphate concentrations could therefore contribute to significant release of As 
into groundwater through desorption. In particular, the village is located in a rural area 
dominated by agriculture which is known for potentially releasing large quantities of phosphate 
into the groundwater. 
 
The main focus of this project is to investigate the relationship between As concentration and 
dissolved organic matter (DOM). As a secondary objective, this study analyses the relationship 
between arsenic occurrence and agricultural activity, particularly under the aspect of 
competition between arsenic and phosphate to sorb to iron oxides under reducing conditions.  
 
The local NGO KTT and the Danish NGO UBU have worked on awareness and measuring 
campaigns in Gazna village since 2004. For this study, additional fieldwork was carried out in 
the village during April 2017 in cooperation with the two NGOs in an area of approximately 
2km2. 81 As measurements were carried out in the field using a portable Palintest arsenator. 
The measurements were carried out for 44 households TWs and 26 irrigation TWs which are 
distributed throughout the shallowest three sub-aquifers as well as in 10 deep public TWs, 
reaching into the deeper main aquifer. Already existing and new data was used to create 
preliminary maps of the As distribution for the first three sub-aquifers based on inverse 
distance weighting interpolation. For 50 out of the 81 newly measured TWs water samples 
were taken to the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) for further laboratory analysis and 
the As concentrations measured with the arsenator were compared to more precise 
measurements obtained with inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS). 
 
The laboratory analysis included the measurement of total dissolved arsenic, phosphor, iron 
and manganese with ICP-MS. Moreover, non volatile organic carbon (NVOC) was measured 
with a TOC analyser. For the qualitative characterisation of DOM, fluorescence spectroscopy 
was carried out with the HORIBA Aqualog. The results of the fluorescence spectroscopy were 
used to calculate the fluorescence index (FI), the freshness index (β:α) and the humification 
index (HIX) of the DOM. Furthermore, a parallel factor (PARAFAC) model was developed with 
the drEEM toolbox in Matlab to qualitatively characterize the DOM.  
 
Concentrations of total dissolved arsenic ranged from <1μg/L to 480μg/L in the shallow aquifer. 
The preliminary distribution maps showed similar contamination levels with a different 
==PAGE:6==
Abstract 
 
IV 
distribution pattern in the shallowest three sub-aquifers. No relation between agriculture and 
arsenic concentration could be seen from the maps. In the deep aquifer, all TWs showed 
arsenic concentrations below 10 μg/L. The arsenator turned out to be a good screening tool to 
distinguish if a TWs delivers safe drinking water.  
 
The fluorescence properties indicated a tendency of high microbial activity throughout all 
depth levels (FI). For the shallow aquifer, highly contaminated arsenic TWs showed a slight 
tendency to contain more decomposed (β:α) and more humified (HIX) DOM than TWs with a 
low contamination level. However, this tendency should be verified by statistical tests. The 
PARAFAC model identified the presence of four organic components in the groundwater. Three 
components were defined as humic-like terrestrial derived, one component showed protein-
like characteristics. A slight tendency for humic-like compounds to be related to high arsenic 
concentrations was observed for the shallow aquifer. 
 
Significant differences in geochemical conditions were observed between the shallow and the 
deep aquifer. Higher concentrations of phosphor ([0.06 ; 13.51] mg/L), iron ([0.06 ; 13.51] 
mg/L) and manganese ([0.09 ; 0.88] mg/L) were found in the shallow aquifer with regards to 
the primary aquifer. This suggests that reductive chemical reactions leading to the release of 
As (i.e. reductive dissolution and/or desorption) in groundwater are taking place in the 
secondary aquifer. No significant differences in phosphor concentrations were found between 
the domestic and irrigation wells. However, appreciable differences were observed among 
agricultural fields. One field with low As concentrations (<50 μg/L) also showed relatively low 
phosphor concentrations (mean: 94; [77 ; 693] μg/L). In another agricultural field, high As 
concentrations (> 50 μg/L) and relatively high phosphor concentrations (mean: 593; [65 ; 
957] μg/L) were found. This implies that phosphate derived from agricultural activity might 
significantly enhance As desorption. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
Abstract 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Content  
 
PREFACE ........................................................................................................................................... I 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT ..................................................................................................................... II 
ABSTRACT ...................................................................................................................................... III 
1. INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................................ 1 
2. CASE STUDY................................................................................................................................. 3 
2.1. CHARACTERIZATION OF THE WESTERN BENGAL BASIN .............................................................................. 4 
2.2. CHARACTERIZATION OF THE DISTRICT NORTH 24 PARGANAS AND THE VILLAGE GAZNA .................................. 5 
3. ARSENIC IN GROUNDWATER (SOURCES & MOBILIZATION) ..................................................................... 8 
3.1. NATURAL SOURCES OF ARSENIC ............................................................................................................ 8 
3.2. PROCESSES AFFECTING THE ARSENIC MOBILIZATION TO GROUNDWATER IN THE BENGAL BASIN ....................... 9 
4. METHODOLOGY .......................................................................................................................... 12 
4.1. FIELDWORK AND CREATION OF PRELIMINARY MAPS ................................................................................ 12 
4.2. THE FUNCTIONALITY OF THE ARSENATOR .............................................................................................. 16 
4.3. LABORATORY MEASUREMENTS ........................................................................................................... 17 
5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION ............................................................................................................ 21 
5.1. ARSENIC MEASUREMENTS – COMPARISON BETWEEN THE ARSENATOR AND THE ICP-MS ............................. 21 
5.2. ARSENIC DISTRIBUTION ..................................................................................................................... 26 
5.3. ARSENIC MOBILIZATION – LABORATORY ANALYSIS ................................................................................. 36 
6. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK .................................................................................................. 52 
BIBLIOGRAPHY .............................................................................................................................. 55 
APPENDIX A – FIELDWORK ............................................................................................................ 58 
APPENDIX B – LABORATORY MEASUREMENTS .............................................................................. 60 
==PAGE:8==
1. Introduction  
DTU Environment 
 
1 
 
1. Introduction 
 
West Bengal is one of the most densely populated Indian states, being dominated by rural areas 
where the supply of safe drinking water is a severe challenge (Chaudhuri & Roy 2016). Since 
the 1970’s a wide range of programs were initiated in order to improve the rural drinking water 
infrastructure in India. The installation of several million hand-pumped tube wells in West 
Bengal since the 1980’s turned groundwater into the main source for drinking water (Naidu et 
al. 2006). Groundwater is considered to be a safer drinking water source than surface water, 
which is often contaminated with microbial pathogens (Fendorf & Michael 2010). However, 
during the last decades many groundwater aquifers serving as a drinking water resource in 
West Bengal have been found to be severely contaminated with arsenic (Naidu et al. 2006).  
 
The metalloid arsenic (As) occurs naturally in a large amount of minerals (Smedley & Kinniburgh 
2002). In water soluble As is mainly present in its inorganic form which is acutely toxic (WHO 
2010). The daily intake of As contaminated water and the consumption of food irrigated with, 
or prepared in As contaminated water can lead to chronic As poisoning as for instance skin 
lesions and skin cancer (WHO 2010). Hence, the mitigation of As in drinking water is a crucial 
task. The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends a threshold of 10 μg/L of As for 
drinking water (WHO 2011). However, for developing countries with high levels of As 
contamination it is often advised to keep the old WHO standard of 50 μg/L (Smith & Smith 
2004). This is also the applied standard for India (Standard 2012). However, recent studies 
reported concentrations greatly exceeding this guideline in many parts of West Bengal. 
Moreover, rice and vegetables which are the main food components in this area are often 
irrigated with highly As contaminated groundwater which might lead to As accumulation in 
food (Roychowdhury et al. 2002).  
 
The release and mobility of As in groundwater is complex and highly dependent on the 
geochemical environment of the considered area (Smedley & Kinniburgh 2002). The study area 
belongs to the geological formation of the Bengal Basin and the basin configuration provides 
organic-rich alluvial sediments formed during the Holocene age (11ka bp - present). It is 
assumed that the degradation of organic materials (OM) in the sediments of the Basin is the 
predominant mechanism triggering As release in this area (Nickson et al. 2000). The 
degradation of OM in the sediments are leading to reducing conditions in the aquifer which 
might enhance dissolution from As-bearing minerals. Additionally, humic components, i.e. 
humic and fulvic acids, have recently been proposed to particularly trigger As mobilization 
(Mladenov et al. 2015). Sorption competition might also play a role for As release (Smedley & 
Appelo 2006). In particular, phosphate (PO4) has been identified as one competitor for sorption 
sites. Its similarity in the chemical structure with As gives PO4 the same sorption affinity onto 
iron oxides. Phosphate can be derived from the decay of natural organic material and might 
additionally enter the groundwater due to extensive use of fertilizers in agricultural areas 
(Smedley & Appelo 2006). According to this release mechanisms two research questions have 
been formulated for the purpose of this case study. 
 
 
 
 
1. Is there a relation between As mobilization and OM in the groundwater?  
==PAGE:9==
1. Introduction  
DTU Environment 
 
2 
 
a. Do humic quinones (like fulvic acid) play a role in the mobilization of As? 
(qualitative analysis) 
b. Is the concentration of NVOC linked to the As concentration?  
(quantitative analysis) 
 
2. Is As mobilization linked to land use, in specific agriculture. 
In order to characterize dissolved organic matter (DOM) quantitatively fluorescence 
spectroscopy was carried out. Fluorescence properties were calculated and a parallel factor 
(PARAFC) model was implemented similar to Kulkarni et al. (2017). The second research 
question focuses mainly on the aspect of competition between As and phosphate to sorb to 
iron oxides under reducing conditions. Fieldwork for the project was carried out in the village 
Gazna, West Bengal in April 2017 in cooperation with the local NGO KTT and the Danish NGO 
UBU.  
The following report presents the case study in Chapter 2. This includes the general geological 
characterization of the Western Bengal Basin and the description of the aquifer structure 
underlying the study area. In Chapter 3 As release is discussed theoretically with the main focus 
on reducing conditions and the role of DOM. The methodology in Chapter 4 includes among 
others the description of the fieldwork and theoretical information about PARAFAC modelling. 
Results of the case study are presented and discussed in Chapter 5.   
 
 
==PAGE:10==
2. Case Study  
DTU Environment 
 
3 
 
2. Case Study  
 
The study area is located in the state West Bengal in India (Figure ). Those parts of West Bengal 
located in the geological formation of the Bengal Basin, are referred to as Western Bengal Basin 
(Figure ). Collection of field data was carried out in the village Gazna, in April 2017. The village 
is located in the district North 24 Parganas, only 10 km away from the boarder to Bangladesh 
in a rural area dominated by agriculture. 
 
Figure 2.1: Left: West Bengal and the Western Bengal Basin; Right: Western Bengal Basin and the study area 
The following chapter provides a brief overview of the general geological configuration of the 
Western Bengal Basin, the sediment composition in the relevant area and the aquifer system 
underlying West Bengal. Besides that, the groundwater system of the village Gazna is 
characterized in more detail. The groundwater extraction system used in the village is also 
described.   
 
 
==PAGE:11==
2. Case Study  
DTU Environment 
 
4 
 
 
2.1. Characterization of the Western Bengal Basin   
 
The Bengal Basin is a peripheral foreland basin (Mukherjee et al. 2009) which is located 
between the eastern Himalayas and the Bay of Bengal at the juncture of three interacting 
plates, the Indian, Burmese and Tibetan (Eurasian) plate (Alam et al. 2003). Consequently, the 
Basin was formed by continent-continent collision (i.e. the subduction of the Indian plate below 
the Tibetan and Burmese plates; Mukherjee et al. 2009). The present basin configuration 
includes a large fluvio-deltaic sedimentary system, the Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna system 
(GBM system) (Alam et al. 2003). This delta system was established during the later part of the 
Pliocene (5mio bp – 3mio bp) and during the Pleistocene epoch (3mio bp - 12ka bp) (Alam et 
al. 2003). However, the growth of the river delta is still an on-going process which is strongly 
affected by the on-going formation of the Himalayan mountains (Alam et al. 2003). The 
sediments transported in the GBM river system accumulate in the basin and are dispersed in 
the Bay of Bengal; according to Mukherjee et al. (2009), approximately 1060mio tons of 
sediment are passed to the Bay of Bengal each year. The complex and ongoing fill-history of 
the basin leads to the formation of relatively young Holocene (11ka bp - present) sediments, 
referred to as the Holocene lowlands. Within this lowlands, the so-called GBM flood and delta 
plain covers more than 105km2 of both Bangladesh and West Bengal (Mukherjee et al. 2009). 
Also the study area is located in the region of the GBM flood and delta plain.  
 
The Holocene sediments of the GBM flood and delta plain can be characterized as loosely 
compacted, moist and organic-rich alluvial sediments (Mukherjee et al. 2009).The landforms 
and sedimentary environment of the GBM delta (Ganges Delta) and the Holocene lowlands 
were analysed in detail by Umitsu (1987; 1993). For the analysis of the GBM delta, more than 
300 columnar sections of boreholes were collected (Umitsu 1993). The vertical sequence of the 
Holocene formations of the GBM flood plain was characterized as a sequence of five units of 
gravel and sand which are separated by their difference in grain size. Moreover, the presence 
of fragments of clay, silt, peat and other organic materials was reported. It is assumed, that the 
peaty materials in the Holocene formation have been deposited in mangrove swamps which 
developed in the prograding delta over time (Umitsu 1987). According to Umitsu (1993), the 
lowest sequence of the Holocene, organic rich, formations lies about 70m below surface. Below 
the Holocene formations older Pliocene and Pleistocene sediments occur with a different 
sediment composition.  
 
Beyond the sediment composition, the aquifer structure underlying the Bengal Basin is also 
relevant for the case study. Mukherjee et al. (2007) carried out modelling of the lithology in 
order to analyse the aquifer structure in West Bengal on a regional scale for the four districts 
Murshidabad, Nadia, North 24 Parganas and South 24 Parganas, for a total area of 21 000 km2. 
The analysis of the aquifer structure was based on lithologic data which was collected from 143 
lithologs of drinking-water, irrigation and observation wells. The results were presented as 
hydrostratigraphic units. It was found that the aquifer structure is dominated by a major single-
aquifer system, which is mostly unconfined or semiconfined except for the southernmost part 
(Figure 1.2). This main aquifer is referred to as the Sonar Bangla (Golden Bengal) aquifer. Its 
thickness varies from approximately 80m in the north to 150m in the east and more than 200m 
in the south. Towards the south, the Sonar Bangla aquifer is divided into multiple layers by 
discontinuous intermediate depth aquitards which are referred to as the Ichamati-Bhagirathi-
Hoogly aquitards and have an individual lateral extend of a few kilometres. The Ichamati-
==PAGE:12==
2. Case Study  
DTU Environment 
 
5 
 
Bhagirathi-Hoogly aquitards start to occur in the middle of the district North 24 Parganas and 
extend and thicken towards the south. Moreover, the Sonar Bangla aquifer is underlain by a 
thick, extensive, basal clay layer, the Murshidabad aquitard. Its surface varies but is assumed 
to be at least 300m deep. The Murshidabad aquitard marks a definite division between the 
Sonar Bangla aquifer and any other aquifer present below approximately 300m below mean 
sea level (MSL). Except for the very south, the main aquifer shows similar chemistry throughout 
which supports the theory of one hydrostratigraphic unit. The isolated, deeper aquifers are 
differentiable from the main aquifer on the basis of groundwater chemistry 
 
 
Figure 1.2: Aquifer system of the Wetsern Bengal Basin Mukherjee et al. (2007) 
A similar aquifer structure is described by Rajmohan & Prathapar (2013) in a report reviewing 
the hydrogeology of the Eastern Ganges Basin. This work consisted in the analysis of data 
collected among various sources such as the Central Ground Water Board, India and the British 
Geological Survey. For West Bengal, three aquifers were defined of which the upper most 
aquifer lies within a depth of 100 meter below ground level (mbgl), the middle aquifer lies 
within a depth of 120-160mbgl and the deepest aquifer is reported to occur at a depth of 
approximately 200-250mbgl. Similar to Mukherjee et al. (2007) it was reported, that confined 
and unconfined aquifers are seperated by clay layers whereby their thickness increases towards 
the south from approximately 2 to 30 m. 
 
2.2. Characterization of the district North 24 Parganas and the village 
Gazna   
 
2.2.1. Aquifer structure  
 
There is a low number of studies specifically referring to the district North 24 Parganas. 
Information about the aquifer structure in North 24 Parganas was obtained from a publication 
on the Indian Water Portal (Talukdar et al. 2009). Three main aquifer systems have been 
identified. Each of these systems are composed of one or more leaky confined sub-aquifers, 
separated by thin clay layers. Because of this heterogeneous aquifer structure, specific 
lithological information for the study area itself (i.e. Gazna village) was needed. However, 
documented borehole logs were not available at the time of the present study. Thus, interviews 
with local drillers were carried out in the field.  
==PAGE:13==
2. Case Study  
DTU Environment 
 
6 
 
 
Figure 2.4 presents the various geological layers that were described by the local drillers. The 
Figure is a simple sketch based on the drillers experience and therefore not matching with 
common understandings and presentations of sedimentary systems. However, it is useful to 
estimate the aquifer structure in the study area. Similar to the findings of Talukdar et al. (2009) 
and Rajmohan & Prathapar (2013) the drillers also stated the existence of three main aquifers. 
According to the drillers, the secondary aquifer, here referred to as the shallow aquifer, is split 
into six sub-aquifers (see Figure 2.4). It was reported that this structure is valid for an area of 
approximately 10km2  including Gazna and the neighbouring villages and that a significantly 
different structure of the shallow aquifer occurs beyond that area. The present study focuses 
on the shallowest three sub-aquifers located in the intervals [10; 17], [19 ; 24] and [24 ; 32] 
mbgl respectively (see Figure 2.4). In this report, they are referred to as the first, second and 
third sub-aquifer for simplicity. Moreover, groundwater from deep tube well reaching the main 
aquifer, here referred to as the deep aquifer will be analysed. The deep tube wells reach a 
depth of approximately 200m.  
 
 
 
Figure 2.4 Local lithology in Gazna village (first main aquifer), based on the information of local drillers. The 
depth information refers to meter below ground level.  
 
2.2.2. Types and use of tube wells in Gazna village 
 
Approximately 3000 people live in Gazna village in an area of about 3km2. Each family owns at 
least one tube well (TW). Therefore, there is a very high density of TWs in the village. Drinking 
water is obtained from shallow, private or from deeper public TWs. Moreover, during the dry 
season (September-May) the agricultural fields are irrigated with groundwater from irrigation 
==PAGE:14==
2. Case Study  
DTU Environment 
 
7 
 
TWs. It can therefore be distinguished between three different types of TWs most of which are 
hand pumped. The TWs reach different depth levels.  
 
The most common type of wells are household TWs (private TWs). In general, each household 
owns at least one TW. 748 household TWs have been registered and the As concentration has 
been measured in 266 of these wells. Depending on its quality, the water is used for washing, 
cooking and drinking purposes. Most household TWs reach the first or second sub-aquifer 
(Figure 2.4).  
 
In Gazna village approximately 20 deep public TWs are installed and well distributed along the 
main roads of the village. They are accessible for everyone and mainly used for drinking 
purposes. The deep TWs are all located between 180 and 220 meter below the ground. 
According to the NGO, the deep TWs have very low As concentrations and are a safe source for 
drinking water.  
  
Irrigation TWs extract water from the second sub-aquifer. As mentioned above the irrigation 
TWs are only used during the dry season (September-May). During the monsoon period (June-
August) the fields are flooded. Information on the amount of irrigation TWs was not available 
at the time of the study although their As concentration was not measured before. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:15==
3. Arsenic in groundwater (Sources & Mobilization)  
DTU Environment 
 
8 
 
3. Arsenic in groundwater (Sources & Mobilization) 
 
As occurrence in groundwater depends on the source bearing the As as well as the release and 
transport mechanisms. These mechanisms result from a complex interplay between 
hydrogeological and geochemical conditions. In this section, a brief overview on the natural 
sources of As and the main release mechanisms are presented. The focus is on the mobilization 
process in aquifers with reducing conditions since those aquifers play a dominant role for 
contaminated sites in West Bengal (McArthur et al. 2001a; McArthur et al. 2004; Nickson et al. 
2000). Moreover, the role of DOM for As mobilization under reducing conditions is discussed.  
 
3.1. Natural sources of arsenic  
 
As-bearing sulfide minerals, as for instance arsenopyrite, are a common source for elevated As 
concentration in groundwater worldwide. Under reducing conditions and at low temperature, 
As tends to be incorporated in the crystalline structure of the sulphide minerals as a substitute 
of sulphur when the formation of the mineral occurs (Smedley & Kinniburgh 2002).  
 
Moreover, iron oxides such as ferrihydrite, lepidocrocite and goethite are well-known sources 
and sinks for As (McArthur et al. 2004). As can be a part of the crystalline structure of the iron 
oxides or be sorbed to them. The affinity of As for the iron oxides is strong and decreasing with 
increasing crystalline structure of the iron oxides (Smedley & Kinniburgh 2002).  
 
Datta & Subramanian (1997) found average As concentrations of 2,0 mg/kg, 2,8 mg/kg and 3,5 
mg/kg in the sediments of the river Ganges, Brhamaputra and Meghna respectively. Originating 
from minerals, the As occurrence in sediment and soil is dependent on their respective mineral 
composition. Mc Arthur et al. (2001; 2004) and Nickson et al. (2000) analyzed the mechanisms 
of As release to groundwater in Bangladesh and West Bengal. They reported the presence of 
diagenetic iron sulfides like pyrite in the aquifers of the Bengal Basin and in West Bengal 
(McArthur et al. 2004; McArthur et al. 2001). However, it was pointed out, that under the 
present chemical conditions pyrite serves as a sink and not a source for As in groundwater in 
the considered area (Nickson et al. 2000; McArthur et al. 2001b). According to Mc Arthur et al. 
(2001;2004) and Nickson et al. (2000), the main source for As release to groundwater in 
Bangladesh and West Bengal are As-rich iron(III) oxide-hydroxides (FeOOH). It is assumed that 
the As-rich iron hydroxides exist as a dispersed phase (for example as a coating) on sedimentary 
grains (Nickson et al. 2000). In particular, in the district North 24 Parganas it is thought that the 
source for such arsenoferous subsurface sediments is the Rajmahal-Chotongapur Plateau, from 
which the As  containing sediments are carried into the delta by the Himalayan rivers. According 
to Mukherjee & Fryar (2008) who studied the groundwater chemistry in the As affected 
Western Bengal Basin, the groundwater is highly to moderately supersaturated with respect to 
FeOOHs like magnetite, hematite, goethite, lepidocrocite and maghemite.  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:16==
3. Arsenic in groundwater (Sources & Mobilization)  
DTU Environment 
 
9 
 
3.2. Processes affecting the arsenic mobilization to groundwater in the 
Bengal Basin  
 
3.2.1. Arsenic chemistry in groundwater  
 
In groundwater, As is mainly present in its inorganic form as arsenite (As(III)) and arsenate (As 
(V)) which have the oxidation states +3 and +5 respectively (Smedley & Appelo 2006). Inorganic 
arsenic is an oxyanion-forming element and the main factors controlling its speciation in water 
are the redox potential (Eh) and the pH; this is visualised in Figure 3.1. Under oxidising 
conditions As is mostly found as arsenate oxyanions H2As(V)O4
-  and HAs(V)O4
2- depending on 
the pH, while in reducing conditions the uncharched arsenite species H3AsO3
0 dominates for a 
wider range of pH values (Smedley & Appelo 2006). As is distinctive in being relatively mobile, 
compared to other oxyanion-forming elements, under reducing conditions (Smedley & 
Kinniburgh 2002). 
 
 
Figure 3.1: Redox diagram for arsenic from (Smedley & Kinniburgh 2002)  
 
3.2.2.  Arsenic release under reducing conditions  
 
In groundwater, multiple processes lead to As release. Aquifers, like the ones present in the 
Bengal Basin show a high concentrations of dissolved As in the water but an average As content 
in the sediment (Smedley & Kinniburgh 2002).  
Reducing conditions are often detected in young unconsolidated aquifers, like the ones in the 
Western Bengal Basin, where sands, silts and clays are deposited as alluvial and deltaic 
sediments (Smedley & Kinniburgh 2002). The reducing conditions mainly occur in aquifers with 
low groundwater flow and a high content of OM. The oxidation of the OM leads to the rapid 
consumption of dissolved oxygen (DO) and consequently to reducing conditions. Under such 
conditions, dissolution of Fe- or Manganese Mn- oxides leading to As release is likely (Smedley 
& Kinniburgh 2002). The sources of OM are still a matter of debate. Some authors have argued 
==PAGE:17==
3. Arsenic in groundwater (Sources & Mobilization)  
DTU Environment 
 
10 
 
that OM is naturally contained and released from peat disposals or sediments. Other studies 
have proposed anthropogenic input as the main source of OM (Smedley & Kinniburgh 2002).  
 
As release from iron oxides due to reductive dissolution coupled to the microbial oxidation of 
OM is pointed out by McArthur et al. (2001) and Nickson et al. (2000). During the process the 
oxide is dissolved which also leads to the release of the incorporated As. Furthermore, carbonic 
acid (H2CO3) is involved in the reaction and  bicarbonate (HCO3
- ) is produced. The reaction is 
shown in Equation 3.1. OM is represented in its simplest form CH2O (Nickson et al. 2000). 
 
4FeOOH+ CH2O+7 H2CO3→4Fe2++8HCO3
- +6H2O 
 
Equation 3.1: Reduction of iron-oxyhydroxide driven by the microbial oxidation of organic carbon 
 
Besides the As release through mineral dissolution, desorption of As can also be enhanced 
under reductive conditions. Reduction of As(V) to As(III) can lead to an increase in mobility as 
As(III) is less strongly adsorbed onto the mineral oxide surfaces. This process might be further 
catalysed by microbial activities. Moreover, As desorption can be induced due to elements with 
a similar structure as arsenic (competitor elements). (Smedley & Appelo 2006) 
 
Phosphate derived from the decay of natural OM is often present in relatively high 
concentrations (up to 1 mg/l) under reducing conditions (Smedley & Appelo 2006). Due to its 
high concentration phosphate might compete with As for sorption sites onto the iron oxide 
surface. Phosphate is a primary competitor for As (III). For example, Van Geen et al. (2008) 
documented a relationship between dissolved As concentrations in reducing groundwater and 
the phosphate-mobilizable As content in the aquifer sediment for a set of samples from 
Bangladesh. In rural areas where agriculture is dominant, the influence of phosphate on As 
mobilization might be enhanced due to the extensive use of fertilizers with a high phosphate 
concentration. Acharyya et al. (2000) suggested the displacement of As anions sorbed to 
aquifer mineral grains by competitive exchange of phosphate available from fertilizers of 
surface soils in the Bengal Basin.  
 
3.2.3. The role of DOM for arsenic mobilization under reducing conditions 
 
Dissolved organic matter (DOM) in aquatic environments is a complex heterogeneous mixture 
resulting from the breakdown of higher plant and microbial OM (Cory et al. 2010). As explained 
above, labile organic matter is considered as the main driver for microbial reductive dissolution 
processes of oxides which evoke the mobilization of arsenic. Also Neidhardt et al. (2014) who 
discussed the effect of OM on Fe, Mn and As release in the central area of the Bengal Delta 
Plain in shallow aquifers suggested microbial oxidation of OM as driving force for As release. 
However, according to Mladenov et al. (2015) As mobilization processes are more complex. It 
was pointed out, that humic DOM (i.e. humic or fulvic acids), might have an additional influence 
on As mobilization (Mladenov et al. 2015). This is illustrated in Figure 3.2. 
 
==PAGE:18==
3. Arsenic in groundwater (Sources & Mobilization)  
DTU Environment 
 
11 
 
 
Figure 3.2: Mladenov et al. (2015): The potential influence of humic DOM on arsenic mobilization under reducive 
conditions from  
According to Mladenov et al. (2015) humic DOM has the potential to influence As release in 
three ways. The first mechanism is electron shuttling. Quinone1 moieties of dissolved and solid-
phase humic substances are able to shuttle electrons and thus accelerate microbial reduction 
of iron. Beyond that, humic DOM can influence As mobility due to competitive sorption with 
As. Furthermore, humic substances, Fe and As can form aqueous complexes keeping As in 
solution under reducing conditions.  
 
The influence of humic DOM on As mobilization was studied by Mladenov et al. (2015) by 
characterization of the optical properties of water samples from the Bengal Basin. It was found 
that older As contaminated groundwater showed a higher content of fulvic soil derived acids 
than younger groundwater having higher labile DOM fractions. Kulkarni (2016) experimentally 
evaluated the electron shuttling ability of fulvic acids derived from reducing Holocene aquifers 
of Bangladesh and found that fulvic acids derived from highly As contaminated sites showed a 
higher ability to serve as electron shuttles.  
 
 
 
 
                                                      
1 Quinones are oxidized derivatives of aromatic compounds (National Center for Biotechnology Information n.d.) 
==PAGE:19==
4. Methodology  
DTU Environment 
 
12 
 
4. Methodology  
 
4.1.  Fieldwork and creation of preliminary maps  
 
The field work was carried out between the 3rd of April and the 23rd of April 2017 in the northern 
half of the village Gazna. For this area, data of total dissolved As concentration was already 
existing for 266 household TWs; the data was georeferenced, and in most cases the depth level 
of the TW was also available. In preparation for the fieldwork, the already existing data was 
used to create preliminary distribution maps in ArcGIS 10.3 based on interpolation. The aim 
was to obtain a better overview of the very heterogeneous As distribution. The conceptual 
model shown in Figure 4.1 visualizes the mapping approach. It can be seen that the maps were 
created for different depth levels and well types. 
 
 
Figure 4.1 Conceptual model for the analysation of the arsenic distribution with ArcGIS. The data is analysed for 
the different depth levels, which are identified by their aquifer or sub-aquifer name, and for the different tube 
well types HWT (household TW), ITW (irrigation TW) and public TW.  
 
The preliminary maps were created based on inverse distance weighting (IDW). The IDW 
interpolation determines areas of unknown As concentrations based on a linearly weighted 
combination of a set of points with a known concentration. The weight is a function of inverse 
distance, i.e. the influence of a known point decrease with distance to the unknown cell value 
(esri 2016). IDW is a good technique for sparse data sets. With the help of IDW interpolation 
the As contamination level could be estimated for unknown areas based on punctual, known 
TW measurements. The preliminary distribution maps were a curtail tool for the fieldwork. 
Therefore, the maps showing the As distribution for the first three sub-aquifers are presented 
here in Figure 4.2. The data points on which the interpolation is based are also visualized in the 
maps (Figure 4.2). The data is presented in ArcGIS 10.3 with the global coordinate system 
WGS_1984. 
==PAGE:20==
4. Methodology  
DTU Environment 
 
13 
 
 
Figure 4.2: Preliminary distribution maps showing the arsenic distribution in the first (a), second (b) and third (c) 
sub-aquifer based on inverse distance weighting  
Having an overview of the As distribution, additional As measurements were taken in the field 
with a portable field device, the Palintest Arsenator (see Chapter 4.2). The purpose of taking 
new measurements was to extend the data set and to verify the initial distribution maps by 
checking the predicted concentrations in several areas. A total of 81 measurements was carried 
out; including 44 household TWs, 26 irrigation TWs and 10 deep public TWs. The 
measurements were carried out with the help of two technical workers from the NGO mainly 
==PAGE:21==
4. Methodology  
DTU Environment 
 
14 
 
during the first two weeks of the field work. The location of newly measured TWs was 
determined with a Garmin eTrex30 GPS tool which is assumed to have a preciseness of 3-5m. 
Information about the depth level of each TW was received based on conversations with the 
TW owners. After the implementation of the new data into ArcGIS 10.3, the initial distribution 
maps were modified and changes between the initial and modified distribution maps were 
analysed. This comparison is presented in the result and discussion part in Chapter 5.2.  
 
Furthermore, out of the 81 newly measured TWs, 50 locations were chosen for which samples 
for laboratory analysis in Denmark were collected. The locations of interest were chosen based 
on the distribution maps. Samples were collected for different depth levels and different TW 
types. Moreover, it was tried to collect the samples in areas with different contamination levels. 
The samples were sorted as samples with low (<50 μg/L.) and high (>50 μg/L.) As 
contamination. The final sampling plan is presented in Table 4.1. Figure 4.3 visualizes the 
sampling locations in relation to the estimated As distribution.  
 
Table 4.1: Sampling plan and classification of samples, based on arsenic conc. measured with the ICP-MS 
 
 
==PAGE:22==
4. Methodology  
DTU Environment 
 
15 
 
 
Figure 4.3: Sampling plan for the first (a), second (b) and  third (c) sub-aquifer and for the deep aquifer (d) 
The samples taken from the 50 locations (Figure 4.3) were collected during the last week of the 
filed work between the 19th and the 23rd of April to reduce the time until proper storage at DTU 
was possible. After collection, all samples were stored in a refrigerator. Due to unstable 
electricity supply, the refrigerator did not always have a constant temperature. During 
transportation from India to Denmark, the samples were cooled with cooling elements. 
Approximately 7 to 10 days passed between the collection of the samples and the proper 
storage at DTU where the samples were stored at 4 °C in the dark. The samples were analysed 
for total dissolved As, phosphor, iron, manganese and NVOC. Measurements of fluorescence 
spectroscopy were also carried out. 
 
==PAGE:23==
4. Methodology  
DTU Environment 
 
16 
 
4.2. The functionality of the arsenator 
 
During the field work, concentrations of total inorganic As were measured with a Palintest 
digital arsenator from Wagtech. The arsenator is a portable field device and delivers an 
immediate estimation of the level of As contamination.  
 
In order to measure the As concentrations with the arsenator, approximately 50ml of the water 
sample were given into a graduated flask and two reagents were added. The first reagent is 
sulfamic acid (NH2SO3H) in its solid form which is added as a powder. After that a sodium 
borohydrite (NaBH4) tablet was added as well (Palintest 2017). The reaction of sulfamic acid 
and sodium borohydrite leads to the production of nascent hydrogen which is a strong reducer 
and reduces inorganic As, present as As(V) and As(III) in the water, directly to volatile arsine. 
After adding the sodium borohydrite tablet the reaction started and the flask had to be closed 
immediately with a tight lid, called the tri-filter arsenic trap. The nascent hydrogen carries the 
arsine up to the detection filter. The detection filter is impregnated with colourless mercuric 
bromide (HgBr2). Arsine reacts with mercuric bromide according to Equation 4.1 which is known 
as the Gutzeit method (Kosmos 1998). The reaction product is yellow.  
 
AsH3+ HgBr2→ H2As-HgBr+HBr 
 
Equation 4.1: Reaction of arsine with mercuric bromide 
 
Besides the detection filter, there are two more filters in the tri-filter arsenic trap. One of them 
captures hydrogen sulphides which are a by-product of the reaction if sulphides are present in 
the water sample. The third filter captures the excess arsine that is not captured by the 
detection filter.  
 
The measurement with the arsenator lasted approximately 20 min, after this the filter paper of 
the detection filter was removed. Due to the Gutzeit reaction, it showed a yellow colour if As 
was present in the water sample. The darker the colour, the higher the concentration. A scaled 
colour chart was used for a first estimation of the As concentration. 
 
Moreover, the detection filter paper was inserted into the digital device, the Palintest DigiPAsS 
which provides a more precise result for its detection range between 2μg/L and 100μg/L. The 
detection is based on a digital spectrophotometer (Palintest 2017). For the case, that the 
concentration was above the detection limit (displayed as +100μg/L), the water sample had to 
be diluted in order to obtain a result with the digital device. Samples above the detection range 
were diluted 10 times with a dilution tube. Distilled water or bottled drinking water was used 
for the dilution.  
 
For the case study, three arsenators were available to carry out measurements simultaneously. 
Before usage, their functionality was tested with a range of standard solutions. Between the 
measurements the measurement flasks were rinsed with distilled water or bottled drinking 
water.  
 
For the 50 water samples that were collected for laboratory analysis, the concentration of As 
was additionally measured with ICP-MS (see below). The more precise ICP-MS method was 
used to estimate the accuracy of the arsenator. The recovery of the arsenator was calculated 
==PAGE:24==
4. Methodology  
DTU Environment 
 
17 
 
according to Equation 4.2. Moreover, the absolute difference between the results obtained by 
the arsenator and the ICP-MS was calculated.  
 
Recovery Arsenator=  total dissolved AsArsenator  
total dissolved AsICP-MS
 x 100  
 
Equation 4.2: Recovery of the arsenator compared to the ICP-MS 
 
4.3. Laboratory measurements  
 
4.3.1. Total dissolved arsenic, phosphor, iron and manganese 
 
The samples for the measurement of total dissolved As, phosphor (P), iron (Fe) and manganese 
(Mn) were filtered through a 0,45μm  plastic filter for particulates removal, filled into 20ml 
bottles and acidified with nitric acid (HNO3) to pH < 2. Total dissolved As and P were measured 
with inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) ca. 15 days after collection by a 
lab technician. Total dissolved Fe and Mn were measured with inductively coupled plasma 
optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) ca. five weeks after collection by a lab technician. 
 
4.3.2. Quantitative and qualitative DOM characterization  
 
a) 
Quantitative analysis  
 
For the quantitative analysis of DOM non volatile organic carbon (NVOC) was measured. The 
samples were filtered through a 0,45 μm  plastic filter for particulates removal, filled into 45ml 
bottles and acidified with nitric acid (HNO3) to pH < 2. The concentration of NVOC was 
measured ca. 12 days after collection with a total organic carbon analyser (TOC analyser) by a 
lab technician. 
 
b) 
Qualitative characterization of DOM  
 
A sub-fraction of DOM, emits fluorescence when excited with ultraviolet light (Murphy et al. 
2013). This property was used to qualitatively characterize DOM using fluorescence 
spectroscopy. The results were used to calculate fluorescence properties. Moreover, the 
excitation emission matrices (EEMs) obtained from the fluorescence spectroscopy were 
analysed by parallel factor analysis (PARAFAC) with the drEEM toolbox in Matlab. The PARAFAC 
model was created together with a phD student from DTU.  
 
c) 
5.4.2.1 Measuring of fluorescence properties and data correction 
The samples for the fluorescence spectroscopy were not acidified since the acid might cause 
quenching of fluorescence properties. The samples were filtered through a 0,2μm filter and the 
fluorescence spectroscopy was carried out three weeks after the sample collection during two 
days. 
 
During the fluorescence spectroscopy the water sample is excited with light of a certain 
wavelength spectrum. Depending on the chemical composition of the DOM, a certain part of 
==PAGE:25==
4. Methodology  
DTU Environment 
 
18 
 
the light is absorbed and emitted at a higher wavelength. The florescence emission spectrum 
of each sample is measured for each excitation wavelength. The results are three dimensional 
emission excitation matrixes (EEMs) (Gilmore & Cohen 2013). The EEM spectra were measured 
using a Jobin Aqualog Fluorometer with a clean quartz cuvette of 0,01m path length. On each 
measurement day, the machine was turned on 20 minutes before measuring to allow the lamp 
to heat up. Furthermore, the cuvette was checked for contamination and each day a sealed 
cuvette containing ultra pure water was run as a blank and to obtain the so called Raman scan. 
The excitation range was set from 240nm to 600nm with an increment size of 3nm. The 
emission was measured between 240nm and 600nm with an increment size of 3.28nm 
(instrument specific increment size). The integration time, which indicates the time of 
excitation, was in general set to 3s and reduced to 1s if the initial integration time delivered 
fluorescence signals above the detection limit of the instrument.  
 
After the measurement, the raw data was treated in Matlab. The measurements were blank 
subtracted and corrected in order to obtain comparable data (Stedmon & Bro 2008). 
Quantitative correction was carried out to correct the signal intensity. The intensity of the 
fluorescence signal is dependant of the instrument (Murphy et al. 2013). The Raman signal 
from ultra pure water was used to Raman normalisation the samples and to present the signal 
in the common Raman unit (R.U.) (Lawaetz, Anders Juul and STEDMON 2009). Moreover, the 
samples had to be corrected for the inner filter effect. The inner filter effect result from 
absorption of the incoming excitation and emission light (Stedmon & Bro 2008). The inner-filter 
effect was corrected with a function of the drEEM toolbox that uses the sample’s absorbance 
spectrum to calculate correction factors in order to correct the inner-filter effect (Murphy et 
al. 2013).   
 
d) 
Calculation of Fluorescence Parameters  
Based on the corrected spectral data, several parameters were calculated in order to obtain 
qualitative information about the DOM. The fluorescence index (FI), the freshness index (:), 
and the humification index (HIX) were calculated in Matlab.  
 
The fluorescence index (FI) provides information about the source of DOM (McKnight et al. 
2001). It was calculated as the ratio of emission intensities at 470nm and 520nm at an 
excitation wavelength of 370nm (Kulkarni et al. 2016). 
 
The freshness index β:α provides information about the decomposition stage of the DOM 
(Fellman et al. 2010). This index was calculated as the ratio of emission intensity at 380nm and 
the maximum intensity between 420nm-435nm at an excitation wavelength of 310nm (Kulkarni 
et al. 2016). 
 
The humification index (HIX) indicates the degree of DOM humification (Kulkarni et al. 2016). It 
was calculated as the ratio of emission intensities at the peak area from 435nm-480nm and the 
peak area from 300nm-345nm at an excitation wavelength of 254nm. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:26==
4. Methodology  
DTU Environment 
 
19 
 
e) 
 PARAFAC model  
A PARAFAC model decomposes the total fluorescence signal of each sample into the underlying 
individual fluorescent phenomena (Stedmon & Bro 2008). This provided a better insight into 
the chemical composition of the analysed DOM.  
 
In a PARAFAC model, the total fluorescence signal provided as an EEM is decomposed for each 
sample (i) at each measured emission (j) and excitation wavelength (k) into several components 
(Murphy et al. 2013). The EEMs are decomposed by PARAFAC into a set of trilinear terms and 
residuals according to Equation 4.3. 
 
Xijk= ∑aifbjfckf+ eijk
F
f=1
 
where i=1,…,I; j=1,…,J; k=1,…,K 
 
Equation 4.3: Decomposition of a EEM into trilinear terms and residuals (Murphy et al. 2013) 
 
As shown in Equation 4.3 the fluorescence signal at sample i, emission j and excitation k (data 
point 𝑋𝑖𝑗𝑘) is the sum of several components f and the residual array (𝑒𝑖𝑗𝑘). The components f 
have a direct chemical interpretation for a valid model. For each sample, each component f is 
the product of an individual sample scores (𝑎𝑖𝑓), emission loadings (𝑏𝑗𝑓) and excitation loadings 
(𝑐𝑘𝑓). The scores are a direct indicator of the concentration of component f in sample i. The 
emission and excitation loadings are scaled estimates of the emission and excitation spectrum 
of component f. (Murphy et al. 2013) 
 
The task during the modelling process was to find a representative number of components and 
to validated the PRAFAC model. Before starting the modelling process, the effects of the Raman 
and Rayleigh scatter had to be removed. This scatter peaks are caused by other effects than 
fluorescence and hinder the PARAFAC modelling (Stedmon & Bro 2008). The scatter peaks were 
removed by exciting the affected data (Murphy et al. 2013). Moreover, outliers were removed 
and a dataset of 49 samples was used to develop the model. A four component model was 
identified. In order to determine if the correct number of components was fitted the residuals 
were analysed. In a valid model the residuals should only contain random errors (Murphy et al. 
2013). Moreover, the model was validated with split half analysis. That means, that it was 
possible to produce identical models from independent subsamples of the dataset (Murphy et 
al. 2013). 
 
In order to characterize the four obtained components, they were compared to components 
published on the openFluor database (Murphy et al. 2017). The data base returns a similarity 
score which indicates the quality of the match for two components.  
 
Due to the comparison it could be determined if the model components show for instance 
humic-like or protein-like characteristics. However, it is not possible to identify the specific 
chemical composition for unknown DOM samples (Murphy et al. 2013). Therefore, it was not 
possible to convert fluorescence intensities into concentrations. Instead, for each component 
the maximum fluorescence intensity (Fmax) in each sample was calculated with a function of 
the drEEm toolbox. Fmax was returned in the unit R.U. For the model interpretation, the 
==PAGE:27==
4. Methodology  
DTU Environment 
 
20 
 
relative contribution of each component (%Ci) to the total fluorescence was calculated for each 
sample according to Equation 4.4. (Murphy et al. 2013) 
 
%Ci= ( Fmaxi
∑Fmaxi
4
i
) x 100 
 
where i=1,…,4, for a four component model  
 
Equation 4.4: Relative contribution of each component to the total fluorescence from (Murphy et al. 2013) 
 
Similar to Kulkarni et al. (2016) the humic:protein index and the terr:microb index was 
calculated for each sample (Equation 4.5, Equation 4.6).  
 
humic:protein= ∑Fmax-humic-like components 
∑Fmax-protein-like components  
 
Equation 4.5: Humic:protein index (Kulkarni et al. 2016) 
 
terr:microb= ∑Fmax-terrestrial-derived components 
∑Fmax-microbial –derived components  
 
Equation 4.6: Terr:microb index (Kulkarni et al. 2016) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:28==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
21 
 
5.  Results and Discussion 
 
During the fieldwork, 81 arsenic measurements were carried out. A table indicating for each 
TW the, type, owner, coordinates, depth and concentration of total As (measured with the 
arsenator) is provided in Table 1 in Appendix A.  
 
For 50 out of the 81 measurements, water samples were taken to Denmark for further 
laboratory analysis. Table 2, Table 3 and Table 4 in Appendix B show the results of the 
laboratory measurements for each of the 50 samples.  
 
5.1. Arsenic measurements – Comparison between the arsenator and 
the ICP-MS 
 
The reliability of the arsenator is discussed in this section. The results obtained with the 
arsenator were compared with the more accurate ICP-MS measurements. Distinct comparison 
is presented for the samples within the detection range of the arsenator and samples outside 
the detection range.  
 
5.1.1. Measurements inside the detection range of the arsenator  
 
Table 6.1 provides a comparison between the As concentration measured with the arsenator 
and the ICP-MS respectively for the samples that lie within the detection range of the arsenator 
[2μg/L - 100μg/L]. The recovery of the arsenator and the absolute difference between the 
arsenator and the ICP-MS results is given. In total, 31% of the samples show a recovery between 
90% and 110%. Moreover, 58% of the samples show an absolute difference below 10μg/L. 
 
Table 6.1: Comparison between the Arsenator and the ICP-MS Method for samples within the detection range of 
the arsenator [2 μg/L - 100 μg/L]  
 
Sample Nr.  Depth level/  TW Type  Arsenator  
ICP-Ms 
Recovery 
Abs. Difference 
  
Sub-aquifer 
  
conc. [µg/l]  conc. [µg/l]  
[%] 
  Arsenator - ICP-MS 
1 
1 
household 
30 
25 
118 
5 
2 
1 
household 
40 
40 
100 
0 
3 
1 
household 
42 
57 
73 
15 
4 
1 
household 
52 
81 
64 
29 
5 
1 
household 
92 
116 
79 
24 
6 
2 
irrigation  
20 
18 
113 
2 
7 
2 
irrigation 
21 
20 
107 
1 
8 
2 
irrigation 
22 
110 
20 
88 
9 
2 
household 
23 
22 
104 
1 
10 
2 
irrigation 
24 
28 
85 
4 
11 
2 
irrigation 
28 
13 
221 
15 
12 
2 
household 
36 
34 
106 
2 
13 
2 
household 
38 
30 
127 
8 
14 
2 
household 
43 
61 
70 
18 
15 
2 
household 
47 
80 
59 
33 
==PAGE:29==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
22 
 
16 
3 
household 
15 
17 
90 
2 
17 
3 
household 
21 
19 
110 
2 
18 
3 
household 
30 
30 
99 
0 
19 
3 
household 
53 
58 
92 
5 
20 
3 
household 
69 
112 
62 
43 
21 
3 
household 
74 
93 
79 
19 
22 
3 
household 
79 
105 
75 
26 
23 
3 
household 
92 
100 
92 
8 
24 
3 
household 
98 
119 
82 
21 
25 
deep  
public 
5 
0 
2283 
5 
26 
deep  
public 
7 
0 
2745 
7 
 
Figure 6.1 shows the correlation between the concentration of total dissolved As measured 
with ICP-MS (x-axis) and the arsenator (y-axis). The diagonal line indicates the 1:1 ratio line; 
90% and 110% recovery are indicated as well. All values below the 1:1 ratio line indicate an 
underestimation of the arsenator compared to the ICP-MS; the values above the line indicate 
an overestimation of the arsenator. The horizontal line at 50μg/L visualizes the limit for As in 
drinking water for India. The figure shows that, for lower concentration ranges the arsenator 
results are more precise and tend to overestimate. For higher concentration ranges, the 
arsenator underestimates the As concentrations. One extreme outlier was detected for which 
the arsenator gave a concentration of 22μg/L while a result of 110μg/L was obtained using ICP-
MS (sample nr. 8 in Table 6.1). This was interpreted as a measurement mistake (see Figure 6.1). 
Moreover, three critical samples were detected for which the arsenator indicated values below 
the limit of 50μg/L while these samples were above the limit according to the ICP-MS. For these 
samples the arsenator delivered values of 42μg/L, 43μg/L and 47μg/L while the ICP-MS 
delivered results of 57μg/L, 61μg/L and 80μg/L respectively (sample 3, 14 and 15 in Table 6.1).  
 
 
Figure 6.1: Comparison between the arsenator and the ICP-MS method for the detection range of the arsenator 
[2 μg/L - 100 μg/L] 
 
 
==PAGE:30==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
23 
 
5.1.2. Measurements outside the detection range of the arsenator   
 
Table 6.2 provides a comparison between the As concentrations that were measured with the 
arsenator and the ICP-MS respectively and that lie above the detection range of the arsenator 
(>100μg/L). These samples were measured with the arsenator by diluting the original sample 
by factor 10. For 47% of the samples a recovery between 90% and 110% was obtained. For 13% 
of the samples the absolute difference is below 10μg/L. It should be mentioned that 40% of the 
samples showed an absolute difference of more than 100μg/L. This high values are caused by 
the dilution which causes the initial discrepancies of the arsenator to increase by factor 10. 
 
Table 6.2: Comparison between the Arsenator and the ICP-MS Method for samples above the detection range of 
the arsenator (above 100 μg/L)  
 
Sample Nr 
Depth level/ 
TW Type 
Arsenator  
ICP-Ms 
Recovery  
Abs. Difference 
  
Sub-aquifer 
  
conc. [µg/l]  conc. [µg/l]  
[%] 
  Arsenator - ICP-MS 
1 
1 
household  
140 
155 
91 
15 
2 
1 
household 
140 
178 
79 
38 
3 
1 
household  
370 
174 
212 
196 
4 
1 
household 
380 
418 
91 
38 
5 
2 
household  
220 
202 
109 
18 
6 
2 
household 
240 
250 
96 
10 
7 
2 
irrigation 
240 
290 
83 
50 
8 
2 
irrigation 
240 
221 
108 
19 
9 
2 
household 
250 
256 
98 
6 
10 
2 
household  
260 
267 
97 
7 
11 
2 
household 
270 
372 
73 
102 
12 
2 
irrigation 
290 
68 
428 
222 
13 
2 
irrigation 
290 
159 
182 
131 
14 
2 
irrigation 
340 
177 
192 
163 
15 
3 
household 
190 
376 
50 
186 
 
 
Figure 6.2 shows the correlation between the concentrations of total dissolved As measured 
with the ICP-MS (x-axis) and the arsenator (y-axis) for the diluted samples. The ICP-MS results 
are divided by the dilution factor (10) and the direct measurements of the diluted samples are 
shown for the arsenator values. A similar pattern as in Figure 6.1 can be detected. The arsenator 
tends to overestimate for lower concentration ranges and to underestimates for higher 
concentration ranges. 
 
==PAGE:31==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
24 
 
 
Figure 6.2: Comparison between the arsenator and the ICP-MS method for diluted samples by factor 10 
 
Table 6.3 shows the comparison between arsenator and ICP-MS for all samples with a 
concentration below the detection range of the arsenator (<2μg/L). Only for one sample (nr. 4 
in Table 6.3), the arsenator gave a wrong indication. It has to be noted that for this study, the 
method detection limit (MDL) of the ICP-MS was 1μg/L; thus for 6 of the samples, the ICP-MS 
was also below the MDL.  
 
 
==PAGE:32==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
25 
 
 
 
Table 6.3: Comparison between the Arsenator and the ICP-MS Method for samples below the detection range of 
the arsenator (below 2μg/L)  
 
Sample  Depth level/ 
TW Type 
Arsenator  
ICP-MS 
 Nr. 
Sub-aquifer 
  
conc. [µg/l]  conc. [µg/l]  
1 
1 
household   
< 2 
1,359 
2 
deep  
public  
< 2 
<1 
3 
deep  
public  
< 2 
<1 
4 
deep  
public  
< 2 
3,808 
5 
deep  
public  
< 2 
<1 
6 
deep  
public  
< 2 
<1 
7 
deep  
public  
< 2 
<1 
8 
deep  
public  
< 2 
<1 
9 
deep  
public  
< 2 
<1 
 
5.1.3. Discussion of the reliability of the arsenator  
 
The results presented above show that in more than half of the cases, the arsenator delivered 
results that differ more than 10% from the ICP-MS. Therefore, it is concluded that in most of 
the cases, the arsenator did not estimate concentrations accurately enough for further analysis. 
However, the main purpose of the arsenator is to detect whether a water source is below the 
limit of 50μg/L or above. In this context, misleading results were obtained for only 3 TWs. The 
arsenator delivered a correct classification for 94% of the measurements. This leads to the 
conclusion that the arsenator is satisfying as a screening tool. It was in most cases possible to 
distinguish between safe and unsafe water sources. In the context of this study, the arsenator 
was a helpful tool in order to gain an overview of the distribution of safe and contaminated 
TWs. Based on that, TWs for further laboratory analysis could be select.  
 
Besides the fact that the arsenator itself is a less accurate tool than the ICP-MS, it is important 
to note that there are additional locational factors which could influence the results. Factors 
include, for example, that distilled water for cleaning and dilution purposes was limited. 
Measurement errors could also have been introduced when diluting the samples prior to 
measurements. Moreover, initial discrepancies of the arsenator compared to the ICP-MS 
increase for the diluted samples by factor 10. This explains very high values for the absolute 
difference in this cases.  
 
For the following analyses and discussions, the total dissolved As concentration measured with 
the ICP-MS will be used. Moreover, it is important to mention, that no quantification of As(III) 
and As(V) was carried out. To achieve this task, specific filtering prior to sampling to isolate As 
speciation would have necessary. 
 
 
==PAGE:33==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
26 
 
 
5.2. Arsenic Distribution  
 
5.2.1. Preliminary distribution maps  
 
Maps were created from the interpolation of already existing data. These maps were used to 
gain an overview of the As concentration in the study area and to determine sampling locations 
of interest. After the field work, the 81 newly obtained measurements were used to modify the 
initial maps. The initial and modified maps are compared below. Their sensitivity and reliability 
as preliminary distribution maps is discussed.  
 
Table 6.4 lists the data available for the initial and the modified (total) maps. Figures 6.3, 6.4 
and 6.5 present the initial and modified distribution maps for the first, second and third sub-
aquifer respectively. The deep aquifer is not As contaminated and it is visualized in Figure 6.6.  
 
Table 6.4: Data available for initial and modified interpolation maps 
 
 
 
For the first sub-aquifer, the available data increased by 14%. The initial and modified map 
show a very similar distribution pattern (Figure 6.3). Only one obvious change, or shift in 
concentration pattern, can be recognized, which is indicated by square 1 in the modified map. 
In this square, the contamination level decreases compared to the initial distribution pattern 
due to a new measurement in this area.  
 
For the second sub-aquifer the available data increased by 80%. 21 and 31 samples were 
collected for household and irrigation TWs respectively. Consequently, the modified 
distribution map changed significantly with respect to the initial map (Figure 6.4). The changes 
are mainly due to the measurement of irrigation TWs in agricultural fields where initially no 
data was available (see especially squares 1 and 2 in the modified map). For example, all the 
irrigation TWs identified in square 2 show As concentrations below 50 μg/L; this lead to a 
significant decrease of the contamination level in this area. Additional data collected for the 
household TWs led only to small changes in the distribution pattern in several locations (see 
squares 3 and 4).  
 
Depth Level/ 
TW Type
Version
Data Points
As conc. range  Mean As conc.  
Sub-Aquifer 
 [Nr]
[μg/L]
[μg/L] 
1
household 
initial 
94
[00,0 - 460,0]
113,0
1
household 
new 
13
 [01,4 - 417,8] 
110,3
1
household 
total 
107
[00,0 - 460,0]
112,7
2
household 
initial
65
[10,0 - 470,0]
122,4
2
household 
new
21
[11,0 - 327,3]
105,5
2
irrigation
new
31
[08,0 - 480,0]
130,2
2
hh. & irr.
total
117
[08,0 - 480,0]
121,4
3
household
initial 
9
[30,0 - 380,0] 
104,6
3
household
new
10
[16,6 - 376,3]
102,9
3
household
total
19
[16,6 - 380,0]
103,7
deep 
public
initial 
 na
 na
 na
deep 
public
new
10
[00,1 - 3,800]
0,6
deep 
public
total
10
[00,1 - 3,800]
0,6
==PAGE:34==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
27 
 
For the third sub-aquifer, the amount of data is limited due to the relatively small amount of 
household TWs reaching this depth level. The initial distribution map is based on only 9 data 
points. Hence, the area covered by the interpolation map is limited. An additional 10 
measurements were carried out, doubling the data available for the modified map. The 
modified map therefore shows an extension of the initial map. However, the initial distribution 
pattern does not change significantly (Figure 6.5).  
 
It is important to note, that the mean As concentrations, as well as the range of As 
concentrations are similar for all sub-aquifers and for the initial and total (modified) data. None 
of the three sub-aquifers shows a significantly higher or lower contamination level compared 
to the others. For each of the sub-aquifers the As concentration is very heterogeneous and 
ranges from very low to very high concentrations of total dissolved As (see Table 6.4).  
 
For the deep aquifer, no initial data was available. Figure 6.6 is based on 10 new measurements, 
which all show As concentrations below the WHO guideline of 10 μg/L. Furthermore, nearly all 
wells show a concentration below 2 μg/L. Only for one TW a value of 3,8 μg/L was obtained, 
leading to an area with a slightly higher As concentration (square 1).  
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
28 
 
  
1 
==PAGE:36==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
29 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.4: Initial (left) and modified (right) distribution map of the second sub-aquifer 
Figure 6.3: Initial (left) and modified (right) distribution map of the first sub-aquifer 
1 
2 
3 
4 
==PAGE:37==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
30 
 
 
==PAGE:38==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
31 
 
 
Figure 6.5: initial (left) and modified (right) distribution map of the third sub-aquifer 
==PAGE:39==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.6: distribution map of the deep aquifer  
1 
==PAGE:40==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
33 
 
The preliminary distribution maps are based on interpolation by inverse distance weighting. 
The estimated As concentration at any unknown point is therefore only dependent on the 
concentration and distance to the known neighbor points. It is important to note that this 
simple relationship may not be reflective of a realistic scenario. As shown above, the 
distribution of the As concertation is very heterogeneous; low concentrations can occur at 
distances very close to a high concentration, probably due to complex geochemical conditions. 
Interpolation based purely on distance is therefore a strong simplification. Consequently, in 
some areas, the distribution maps are very sensitive to the addition of new data (e.g. figure 6.4, 
square 2). Models exist which can take geological and chemical parameters into account; for 
example, Rodríguez-lado et al. (2013) and Gaus et al. (2003) developed statistical maps to 
predict the arsenic contamination for China and Bangladesh, respectively, using the disjunctive 
kriging method and considering geochemical conditions. However, these models are very 
complex and developed for a much larger scale. For the presented study area, no geochemical 
information was available. For the purpose of the study, the simple interpolation maps turned 
out to be a sufficient and helpful tool. 
 
The reliability of the initial preliminary maps was tested during the fieldwork by checking the 
predicted concentrations in several areas. Based on this tests, it is assumed, that for the first 
and the second sub-aquifer, the maps served as a satisfying tool to distinguish contamination 
levels in a certain location. This was especially useful in the case of this study since information 
and equipment for the fieldwork were very limited. Furthermore, the preliminary maps might 
be useful for the NGO and the local population for planning purposes and to immediately 
estimate areas of concern without carrying out a measurement. Regarding the density of the 
TWs in the study area, sampling all TWs is not a likely scenario. The amount of TWs reaching 
the third sub-aquifer was too small to test the reliability of the respective distribution map.  
 
Important information obtained from the maps is the fact that the range of arsenic 
concentration is similar for all sub-aquifers. Within each sub-aquifer, areas of low and high 
contamination exist. This information is relevant for further analysis. As explained in Chapter 2, 
the three sub-aquifers are assumed to be all located in the first shallow aquifer, and to be 
separated by clay layers that may have an extension of up to a few kilometers (Mukherjee et 
al. 2009). Therefore, it is very likely that all three sub-aquifers are hydraulically interconnected. 
This could be further analyzed by checking vertical alignments of areas with the same 
contamination level throughout the different depth levels. Moreover, it should also be 
mentioned, that the depth level of each TW was only determined by communication with the 
well owner, since no other estimation tools were available. Consequently, the risk for a wrong 
depth classification is high. 
 
 
5.2.2. Classification of the 50 samples used for laboratory analysis  
 
In total, 50 sampling locations were chosen from among the additional measurement data 
(collected and analysed in April 2017 using the Arsenator) for further laboratory analysis. The 
50 samples were initially classified as either low or highly contaminated, referring to 
concentrations lower or higher than 50μg/L. The distribution and classification of the 50 
samples according to ICP-MS measurements are presented in Table 6.5 and Figure 6.7.  
 
==PAGE:41==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
34 
 
For the first and the third sub-aquifer (figure 6.7a and 6.7c), only household TWs were available. 
In both cases, 7 out of 10 measurements revealed a high contamination. These highly 
contaminated TWs were spread out over the entire study area, however, and thus not 
accumulated into one specific location. For the second sub-aquifer (Figure 6.7b), 10 household 
TWs and 10 irrigation TWs were measured. It can be seen that the 4 low contaminated 
irrigation TWs are located in one agricultural field, while the 6 highly contamination irrigation 
TWs are located in another agricultural field. Note that the definition “> 50 μg/L” includes a 
wide range, which is different for each set of samples (see captions of figure 6.7).  
 
Figure 6.3d) presents the results for the deep aquifer, which shows a very low arsenic 
contamination. The concentrations for the public TWs of this aquifer are all below the WHO 
guideline of 10 μg/L.  
 
 
Table 6.5: classification of samples, based on arsenic concentration measured with the ICP-MS 
 
 
 
Depth	Level/
TW	Type		
samples	
Sub-Aquifer
(amount)	
<50	[µg/L]	(low)
>50	[µg/L]	(high)
1
household	
10
3
7
2
household	
10
3
7
2
irrigation	
10
4
6
3
household	
10
3
7
<10	[µg/L]	(low)
deep	
public
10
10
0
Amount	of	samples	with	low/high	As	contamination
==PAGE:42==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
35 
 
 
 
Figure 6.7: visualization of samples with a high and low arsenic concentration for a) the first sub-aquifer: low, 
household: [1,4 μg/L – 39,9 μg/L]; high, household: [116,1 μg/L – 417,8  μg/L] b) second sub-aquifer: low, 
household: [22,2 μg/L – 34,1 μg/L] and  high, household [201,7 μg/L – 372,3 μg/L],  low, irrigation: [12,7 μg/L – 
28,2μg/L] and  high, irrigation [67,8 μg/L – 290,2μg/L] c) third sub-aquifer: low, household [16,6 μg/L – 30,16 μg/L], 
and high, household [57,8 μg/L – 376,3 μg/L] d) deep aquifer: public TWs [0,1 μg/L- 3,8 μg/L].  
==PAGE:43==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
36 
 
5.3. Arsenic mobilization – Laboratory Analysis 
 
Table 6.6 provides an overview for the results of the laboratory measurements and 
calculations. In addition to total dissolved As, total dissolved phosphor (P), iron (Fe) and 
manganese (Mn) were measured. These parameters are listed under the section water 
chemistry (Table 6.6) and will be discussed in Chapter 6.3.1. The main focus is on the analysis 
of phosphor. This has the purpose to analyze if arsenic release is linked to land use, in specific 
agriculture (research question 2). Chapter 6.3.2 deals with the characterization of DOM. This 
has the purpose to analyze if there is a relation between As mobilization and OM in the 
groundwater (research question 1). The quantitative analysis of DOM deals with the analysis of 
NVOC. For the qualitative DOM characterization, fluorescence properties and the results of the 
PARAFAC model are presented.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:44==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
37 
 
 
Table 6.6: Overview for the results of the laboratory analysis  
 
 
 
==PAGE:45==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
38 
 
 
 
5.3.1. Water Chemistry: Phosphor, Iron and Manganese 
 
a) 
Phosphor 
Like arsenic, P has two oxidation states (i.e. +3 and +5) and can form several ionic species in 
groundwater depending on the geochemical conditions (Appelo & Postma 2005). However, due 
to the partial measurements in this case, it can only be speculated about the speciation of P. 
One way to estimate the P speciation would be to measure pH and redox potential (pe) in the 
field and to search the corresponding specie on a redox diagram. To know precisely about the 
speciation of P, major and minor elements should be measured in the sample in order to run a 
batch calculation in the software PHREEQC which is able to perform geochemical calculations. 
However, based on previous studies performed in the same area, it could be assumed in this 
context, that total dissolved P is mainly present as phosphate in groundwater (Acharyya et al. 
2000). For the household TWs of the first, second and third sub-aquifer, average dissolved P 
concentrations of 483,99 μg/L ([18,91μg/L - 1247,90 μg/L]), 566,36 μg/L [96,30 μg/L - 891,80 
μg/L] and 797,63 μg/L ([154,44 μg/L - 1158,48 μg/L]) were obtained respectively (Table 6.6). 
These values are consistent with the literature. For example, Smedley & Appelo (2006) reported 
that phosphate in aquifers with reducing conditions can be relatively high and exceed 
concentrations of 1000 μg/L. The concentration of dissolved P in the deep aquifer is remarkably 
lower, with an average concentration of 30,07 μg/L ([19,58 μg/L - 38,47 μg/L]).  
 
 
Figure 6.8: Correlation between total dissolved arsenic and total dissolved phosphor in the shallow aquifer  
 
Figure 6.8 shows the correlation between total dissolved As and total dissolved P for all 
household TWs of the shallow aquifer. The TWs of the different sub-aquifers are indicated by 
different symbols. The linear trend line refers to all TWs of the shallow aquifer. The correlation 
factor of 0,08 is very low; no correlation can be observed. 
 
R²	=	0,08425
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Total	dissolved	P	[µg/L]
Total	dissolved	As	[µg/L]
Sub_Aquifer	1
Sub-Aquifer	2	
Sub-Aquifer	3
Linear		(Shallow	Aquifer)
==PAGE:46==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
39 
 
It was mentioned in Chapter 3 that As mobilization can potentially occur due to competition 
with phosphate (Smedley & Appelo 2006; Van Geen et al. 2008). For the shallow aquifer, the 
mean concentration of total dissolved P is relatively high. Consequently, phosphate-driven As 
mobilization might be possible. To investigate this hypothesis further, it would be important to 
analyze the As in the aquifer sediment that may be available for phosphate-mobilization (Van 
Geen et al. 2008). For example, Van Geen et al. (2008) measured the fraction of As in the solid 
phase that is extractable in a 1M phosphate solution and correlated this fraction with the 
dissolved As found in the groundwater. Moreover, it would be necessary to determine the 
fraction of As(III) since phosphate is a competitor for this fraction. 
 
Moreover, Smedly (2006) pointed out, that the extensive use of phosphate containing 
fertilizers can even increase the phosphate concentrations in aquifers with reducing conditions. 
In our case, the study area is dominated by agriculture and according to the local agricultural 
cooperative, the use of phosphate containing fertilizers is common. To analyze if there is a 
relationship between As release and agriculture, it is therefore important to investigate the 
irrigation TWs in relation to phosphate more specifically.  
 
In contrast to the theory discussed above, it was found that the irrigation TWs in the second 
sub-aquifer have a lower average concentration of total dissolved phosphor, than the 
household TWs of this sub-aquifer (see Table 6.6). Nevertheless, a stronger correlation 
between total dissolved As and total dissolved P was obtained for the irrigation TWs (Figure 
6.9) than for the household TWs of the shallow aquifer. The linear trend line indicates a weak 
correlation with a correlation factor of 0,4 (Figure 6.9). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.9: Correlation between total dissolved arsenic and total dissolved phosphor for the irrigation TWs of the 
second sub-aquifer  
Figure 6.9 shows that all the irrigation TWs with a low As concentration have a concentration 
of total P lower than 200 μg/L. The high contaminated arsenic TWs on the other hand tend to 
==PAGE:47==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
40 
 
also have a higher phosphor concentration, except for one sample. Notably, all the high As 
contaminated TWs are located in one agricultural field, while the TWs with a low contamination 
are located in another agricultural field (Figure 6.7b). This suggests that As mobilization might 
be due to the presence of phosphate, likely through desorption processes. 
However, it is questionable, whether P measured in the samples of the irrigation TWs can be 
linked to fertilizers. All the irrigation TWs are placed in the second sub-aquifer which is located 
approximately 19m to 25m below the ground and separated from the surface by a clay layer of 
approximately 2m. Moreover, the distribution of As and P in the household TWs (i.e. not 
located in the agricultural fields) of the second sub-aquifer show a similar pattern as the 
irrigation TWs (compare Figure 6.8 and Figure 6.9). Therefore, the phosphor might occur 
naturally. However, as mentioned above, the different sub-aquifers might be interconnected 
and phosphate could, as wells, be transported with the groundwater flow. In this case fertilizers 
might be able to reach other parts of the aquifer. There is no knowledge about groundwater 
flow in this area and it is therefore challenging to predict the subsequent distribution of 
phosphate derived from fertilizers in the aquifer system.  
 
b) 
Iron and Manganese 
High concentrations of total dissolved iron were found in the shallow groundwater. 
Concentrations of mean total dissolved iron were found to be 3756,68 μg/L ([94,22μg/L - 
10993,15μg/L]), 5347,81 μg/L ([233,39μg/L - 13511,50μg/L]) and 4651,51 μg/L ([1985,96μg/L 
- 9144,04μg/L]) for the household TWs of the first, the second and the third sub-aquifer, 
respectively. These findings are consistent with other studies in the Bengal Basin (McArthur et 
al. 2004; Kulkarni et al. 2016; Mladenov et al. 2010). Kulkarni et al. (2017) found concentrations 
up to 13,6 mg/L for a study site approximately 100km away from this study site. The 
concentrations of total dissolved Mn are by one order of magnitude lower than the Fe 
concentrations (Table 6.6). For both, Fe and Mn the concentrations in the deep, As free aquifer 
are remarkably lower than the concentrations in the As contaminated shallow aquifer (Table 
6.6).  
 
Figure 6.10 shows the correlation between total dissolved As and total dissolved iron in the 
shallow aquifer. The linear trend line is shown for the entire shallow aquifer; no correlation can 
be obtained.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:48==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
41 
 
 
Figure 6.10: Correlation between total dissolved arsenic and total dissolved iron in the shallow aquifer 
 
According to the literature (Nickson et al. 2000; Mukherjee 2006) As mobilization in the Bengal 
Basin is assumed to be driven by reducive dissolution of oxides, mainly iron oxides. However, 
in a lot of studies no obvious correlation between iron and As can be detected. The cycle of 
iron in groundwater is complex. If As is released from iron oxides, the iron might for example 
be removed from solution by binding to other compounds (McArthur et al. 2001b). Even 
though Nickson et al. (2000) and Mukherjee (2006) support the theory of As release from iron 
oxides, they only found weak correlations between iron and As. Also in the report of Gauthier 
(2004), who carried out field work in the same study area, no correlation between iron and As 
was detected.  
 
Overall, the deep aquifer, which shows very low As concentrations, also shows significantly 
lower concentrations of total dissolved P, Fe and Mn compared to the shallow aquifer. The 
deep aquifer is separated from the shallow aquifer by a thick clay layer. The observation of the 
different geochemical conditions suggests that the deep aquifer might not be connected to the 
shallow aquifer. Due to the high values of As, P and Fe in the shallow aquifer, it can be suggested 
that reductive chemical reactions leading to the release of As (i.e. reductive dissolution or 
desorption) in groundwater are taking place in the shallow aquifer.  
 
 
5.3.2. DOM characterization  
a) 
Quantitative DOM characterization  
NVOC was measured to represent DOM in the groundwater samples quantitatively. A stable 
concentration of NVOC was obtained throughout all depth levels and for the shallow and the 
deep aquifer (Table 6.6). For the shallow aquifer the NVOC concentration has an absolute range 
from 0,64mg/L to 2,89mg/L. For the deep aquifer the amount of NVOC tends to be slightly 
higher; it ranges from 1,05mg/L to 3,39 mg/L. This values are lower than the DOC 
concentrations measured by Kulkarni et al. (2017) who measured DOC concentrations ranging 
from 1,25mg/L to 6,76mg/L for the Holocene shallow aquifer on a study site in West Bengal. 
Also Mladenov et al. (2010) measured DOC concentrations ranging in average between 
2,26mg/L and 4,84mg/L for TWs of a depth  between  8m and 52m, in Araihazar, Bangladesh.   
 
R²	=	0,04363
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
16000
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Total	dissolved	Fe	[µg/L]
Total	dissolved	As	[µg/L]
Sub_Aquifer	1
Sub-Aquifer	2	
Sub-Aquifer	3
Linear		(Shallow	Aquifer)
==PAGE:49==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
42 
 
 
 
Figure 6.11: Correlation between NVOC and total dissolved arsenic in the shallow aquifer  
Figure 6.11 shows the relation between NVOC and total dissolved arsenic for the shallow and 
the deep aquifer. The figure presents NVOC concentrations that vary in a relatively small range 
and seem independent of the concentration of total dissolved As.   
 
The measured NVOC concentrations are lower than values presented in related studies, and 
seem moreover to be stable throughout all depth levels; no correlation to total dissolved 
arsenic concentrations could be detected. Subsequently, it is necessary to qualitatively 
characterize the dissolved organic material in order to further analyze the potential role of 
DOM for arsenic mobilization.  
 
5.3.3. Qualitative DOM characterization 
 
a) 
Fluorescence Properties 
Fluorescence properties were calculated based on the spectral properties of the groundwater 
samples. The calculated parameters deliver qualitative information about the source, freshness 
and humification stage of DOM as discussed in more detail below.  
 
The fluorescence index (FI) provides information about the source of DOM (McKnight et al. 
2001). The calculated FI values are presented in Table 6.6. All FI values are relatively constant 
and centered (low standard deviation) throughout all depth levels; an absolute range from 1,66 
to 1,86 was obtained. Therefore, no significant difference was detected between the FI values 
of the shallow and the deep aquifer and between the TWs with high and low arsenic 
contamination. Kulkarni et al. (2017) obtained similar results for a study dealing with low and 
highly arsenic contaminated groundwater in West Bengal. According to Kulkarni et al. (2017), 
the obtained values are at the high end of the typical FI range (1,2 – 1,8). This reflects a high 
amount of microbial activity. A lower FI index (~1,4) is related to terrestrial derived DOM, while 
a higher FI (~1,9) is related to microbial derived DOM (Cory & Mcknight 2005).  
 
==PAGE:50==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
43 
 
The freshness index β:α provides information about the decomposition stage of the DOM. β 
represents more recently derived DOM while α represents more decomposed DOM (Fellman 
et al. 2010). Within the shallow aquifer, mean values of 1,04 ([0,81-1,26]) and 0,87 ([0,75-1,15]) 
were obtained for low and highly arsenic contaminated TWs, respectively. This might indicate 
that a higher arsenic concentration is related to more decomposed DOM. However, the 
difference between the two data sets is very small. In order to verify this difference statistical 
testing could be carried out similar to Kulkarni et al. (2017). Kulkarni et al. (2017) obtained mean 
β:α values of 0,99 ([0.66-1.09]) and 0,77 ([0.68-0.96]) for low and highly contaminated TWs 
respectively. Based on a non-parametric Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon-Test the statistical 
difference between the two datasets was verified and it could therefore be concluded that a 
high arsenic concentration is related to more decomposed DOM. Such a statistical test was not 
carried out for this project. The deep aquifer shows a mean β:α index of 0,96 ([0,92-1,03]).  
 
The humification index (HIX) indicates the degree of DOM humification, higher values present 
a higher degree of humification (Kulkarni et al. 2016). For shallow TWs  mean HIX values of 3,01 
([1,27 - 5,40]) and 5,29 ([2,37 - 7,92]) were obtained for low and highly contaminated TWs, 
respectively. The correlation between total dissolved arsenic and HIX is visualized in figure 6.12.  
 
Figure 6.12 shows a weak correlation between total dissolved arsenic and HIX for the shallow 
aquifer. The linear correlation factor is 0,28 and a slight tendency for highly contaminated TWs 
to have a higher HIX can be observed. This tendency might indicate a link between high arsenic 
concentration and more humified DOM. A similar link was observed by Kulkarni et al. (2017). 
Different to Kulkarni et al. (2017), in the case presented here the results were not statistically 
verified. Beyond that, figure 6.12 shows that a different pattern occurs for the deep aquifer. 
The HIX values for the deep, arsenic free, aquifer are relatively high compared to the HIX indices 
of TWs with low arsenic concentration in the shallow aquifer.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:51==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
44 
 
 
Figure 6.12: Correlation between total dissolved arsenic and HIX for the shallow and the deep aquifer 
 
To sum up, the fluorescence properties indicated a tendency of high microbial activity 
throughout all depth levels (FI). For the shallow aquifer, highly contaminated arsenic TWs 
showed a slight tendency to contain more decomposed (β:α) and more humified (HIX) DOM 
than TWs with a low contamination level. However, this statement should be statistically 
verified. The results and trends observed for the shallow aquifer fit well with the findings of 
Kulkarni et al. (2017) who characterized dissolved organic matter in the groundwater in regions 
with high (Holocene aquifer) and low (Pleistocene aquifer) arsenic concentrations on a study 
site approximately 100km away from the presented site. The TWs analyzed by Kulkarni et al. 
(2017) reach a depth between 6m and 45m this is in accordance with the shallow TWs analyzed 
here which are located between 10m and 33m below the ground. Beyond that, the results 
observed for the deep, arsenic free aquifer, do not fit with the trends observed for the shallow 
aquifer. The deep aquifer is separated by the shallow aquifer by a thick clay layer. Therefore, 
different geochemical conditions might apply. For the deep aquifer, similar studies for 
comparison were not available.   
 
 
b) 
PARAFAC components  
A PARAFAC model decomposes the total fluorescence signal of each sample into the underlying 
individual fluorescent phenomena by identifying certain components (Stedmon & Bro 2008). 
In this case, the PARAFAC model identified four components (C1, C2, C3 and C4), their spectral 
excitation and emission curves are presented in figure 6.13. For each component the range 
(wavelength [nm]) for which the according compound absorbs light (excitation curve) and emits 
light is presented. The spectral units (loadings) are a model intern measure and are unit less. 
Figure 6.14 presents the loadings of the four components as Excitation-Emission-Matrices 
(EEMs). 
 
==PAGE:52==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
45 
 
 
Figure 6.13: Emission excitation curves showing the loadings of the four components identified by the PARAFAC 
model  
Figure 6.14: EEM spectra showing the loadings of the four components identified by the PARAFAC model 
 
==PAGE:53==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
46 
 
In order to characterize the four components, they were compared to similar chemical 
components presented in other studies. Table 6.7 presents the properties and similarity scores 
of such similar components. The main focus was to compare with Kulkarni et al. (2017) who 
carried out a very similar groundwater study in the same region. Good matches were obtained 
between the first three components of Kulkarni et al. (2017) and the first three components 
presented here; with similarity scores of 0,97, 0,99 and 0,94, respectively. Consequently, C1 
and C2 are considered to be humic-like, terrestrial compounds whereby C2 shows similarities 
with components found in agricultural runoff. C3 on the other hand is characterized as a 
protein-like component, similar to tyrosine and tryptophan. For C4, similarities were obtained 
with component 3 of  Stedmon et al. (2011) and component 2 of Cawley et al. (2012), in both 
cases the similarity score is 0,98. According to those references, C4 can be considered as a 
terrestrial humic-like acid. The matches for all four model components are visualized in figure 
6.15.  
 
Table 6.7: Comparison between PARAFAC components from this study and similar components identified in 
other studies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.15: Emission excitation curves of PARAFAC components from this study and similar 
components identified in other studies 
==PAGE:54==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
47 
 
Three humic-like acids were detected in the groundwater of the study area; they occur in the 
different water samples (i.e. samples of different depth levels or As concentration) with 
different intensities. In order to analyze, if there is a link between humic-like acids and highly 
contaminated TWs it is important to further analyze this relation. However, the PARAFAC 
interpretation for DOM is not completely clear (Murphy et al. 2013). If the precise identity of a 
PARAFAC component is unknown, it is not possible to convert fluorescence intensities into 
concentration (Murphy et al. 2013) which makes the interpretation difficult. It is also important 
to note, that metals might cause quenching effects, which can influence the fluorescence 
intensity.  For example, ferric iron absorbs strongly in the UV-range at neutral and low pH 
(Mladenov et al. 2010). High iron concentrations in the water might therefore influence the 
fluorescence intensities, which can complicate the comparison between the different samples. 
This might be a problem since the samples of the shallow aquifer show very high iron 
concentrations in contrast to the deep aquifer. Moreover, it has to be noted that different 
samples contain a different total amount of DOM (here NVOC). For the interpretation of the 
results, the relative contribution (%C1, %C2, %C3, %C4) and the ratio between the components 
was considered as advised by Murphy et al. (2013) . Moreover, the humic:protein ratio was 
taken into account (Kulkarni et al. 2016).  
 
The intensity of humic-like components in each sample was analyzed. The relative contribution 
values are presented in table 6.6. In the shallow aquifer, the relative contribution of the humic-
like acids (%C1, %C2, %C4) is higher for highly contaminated samples than for samples with a 
low arsenic contamination. The opposite is the case for the protein like component C3. A very 
week positive correlation was obtained between each %C1, %C2, %C4 and the concentration 
of total dissolved arsenic (figure 6.16a),b),d)). A week negative correlation was obtained 
between %C3 and total dissolved arsenic (figure 6.16c)). Moreover, the humic:protein ratio was 
determined. For the shallow aquifer it shows an average of 2,47 ([0,98 - 4,77]) and 4,34 ([1,65 
- 11,20]) for low and highly contaminated TWs respectively, and is consequently by a factor of 
1,8 higher for the highly contaminated TWs. Similar results were obtained by (Kulkarni et al. 
2016). This trend supports the theory that humic compounds are related to arsenic 
mobilization. The deep aquifer does not fit into this pattern since a humic:protein value of 3,25 
([2,77 - 3,99]) was obtained.  
 
 
==PAGE:55==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
48 
 
 
Figure 6.16: Correlation between total dissolved arsenic and the relative contribution factor %C1 (a), %C2 (b), %C3 
(c) and %C4 (d), for the sallow and the deep aquifer 
 
 
Figure 6.17: Correlation between total dissolved arsenic and humic:protein ratio for the sallow and the deep 
aquifer 
 
 
 
==PAGE:56==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
49 
 
 
Furthermore, the relationships between the different components were analyzed. It is 
interesting to see, that the three humic-acids (C1, C2 ,C4) are all strongly correlated while this 
is not the case for the protein-like component (C3). The correlation between C1 and C2 is 
visualized in figure 6.18, figure 6.19 shows the correlation between C1 and C3.  
 
 
 
Figure: 6.18: Correlation between component 1 and component 2 for all samples  
 
 
Figure: 6.19: Correlation between component 1 and component 3 for all samples  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:57==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
50 
 
It was furthermore observed, that the ratio of the protein-like acid C3 to all the other humic-
like components (C1, C2 and C4) decreases with an increasing arsenic concentration in the 
shallow aquifer. This is visualized in figure 6.20 for the ratio C3:C2. Lower ratios of C3:C2 for 
samples with a higher arsenic concentration might indicate that component 2 is present in a 
higher proportion than C3. However, this interpretation has to be considered carefully, since 
the intensities of the components are not directly linked to concentrations.  
  
 
 
 
 
Figure: 6.20: Correlation between total dissolved arsenic and the ratio between component 3 and component 2 
(C3.C2) for the shallow and the deep aquifer  
 
To sum up, the PARAFAC model identified four components, which are present in all of the 
water samples with different intensities. Three of this components were characterized as 
humic-like, terrestrial (C1,C2,C4), this three components are strongly correlated. One 
component was characterized as protein-like, microbial derived (C3). Based on the %C values, 
the humic:prtein ratio and the ratio C3:C2 a slight tendency for humic-like compounds to be 
related to high arsenic concentrations was observed for the shallow aquifer. The deep aquifer 
did not fit into this pattern.  
 
Moreover,  model uncertainties have to be taken into account. PARAFAC is a statistical model 
and it is up to the user, to identify physically reasonable components with respect to the 
chemical phenomenon being studied (Stedmon & Bro 2008). Moreover, a reasonable number 
of components has to be determined. Especially for this task, a low number of samples can be 
a limiting factor. A small data set can make the model validation with the split half analysis 
difficult since the split half analysis aims to create identical models from independent 
subsamples of the dataset. Large datasets are therefore preferable. Stedmon & Bro (2008) 
mentioned that it is of advantage to have a dataset of more than 100 samples. For this projects 
49 samples were used to create the model. This might be a limiting factor. It is for example 
possible, that more components with different chemical characteristics are present in the 
==PAGE:58==
5. Results and Discussion  
DTU Environment 
 
51 
 
groundwater. However, a model with more than four components could not be validated due 
to the relatively small dataset.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:59==
6. Conclusion and Future Work  
DTU Environment 
 
52 
 
 
6. Conclusion and Future Work 
 
The scope of this project was to assess sources, distribution and processes affecting arsenic 
mobilization to groundwater for the village Gazna in West Bengal, India. For the purpose of the 
assessment fieldwork was carried out in the village in April 2017. Arsenic concentrations were 
measured in the field with an arsenator and compared to more accurate measurements with 
ICP-MS. Moreover, preliminary maps were created based on interpolation to gain an overview 
of the As distribution in the village. In order to analyse processes affecting the As mobilization, 
samples were taken to Denmark for laboratory analysis. One aim was to investigate if there is 
a link between As concentration and agriculture. This was mainly under the aspect of 
competition between arsenic and phosphate to sorb to iron oxides under reducing conditions. 
The main focus was on investigating whether there is a quantitative or qualitative link between 
As mobilization and DOM.  
 
The arsenator served as a good screening tool for classifying if TWs deliver safe drinking water. 
In 94% of the cases the arsenator delivered a correct classification. However, for the further 
analyses more accurate As measurements based on ICP-MS were used. The distribution maps 
showed similar As concentrations for the first three shallow sub-aquifers. For each of the sub-
aquifers the As concentration is very heterogeneous and ranges from very low to very high 
concentrations of total dissolved As. It is likely that all three sub-aquifers are hydraulically 
interconnected. This could be further analyzed by checking vertical alignments of areas with 
the same contamination level throughout the different depth levels.  
 
The laboratory analysis delivered high values of iron in the shallow aquifer and significantly 
different geochemical conditions in the deep aquifer. This suggests, that As mobilization from 
arseniferrous iron oxides is likely in the study area. Also dissolution of As due to competition 
with phosphate is likely. For example, appreciable differences were observed for As and 
phosphate concentrations among two agricultural fields. One field with low As concentrations 
(<50 μg/L) also showed relatively low phosphor concentrations. In another agricultural field, 
high As concentrations (> 50 μg/L) and relatively high phosphor concentrations were found. 
However, it is questionable, whether P measured in the samples of the irrigation TWs can be 
linked to fertilizers. The irrigation TWs are all located in the second sub-aquifer which is 
separated from the surface by a clay layer. Even if the sub-aquifers of the shallow aquifer are 
interconnected, no information about the groundwater flow is available. Consequently, the 
distribution of phosphate potentially derived from fertilizers in the aquifer system is unknown.  
 
No quantitative relationship between As concertation in the groundwater and DOM was found. 
The qualitative analysis of DOM based on fluorescence properties suggested, that high 
contaminated arsenic TWs might be linked to more decomposed (β:α) and more humified (HIX) 
DOM than TWs with a low contamination level in the shallow aquifer. However, it would be 
good to statistically verify this statement. The PARAFAC model identified four components, of 
which three were characterized as humic-like, terrestrial. One component was characterized 
as protein-like, microbial derived. A slight tendency for humic-like components to be related to 
high arsenic concentrations was observed for the shallow aquifer. The deep aquifer did not fit 
into this pattern. Moreover, the dataset used to create this model was relatively small. The 
==PAGE:60==
6. Conclusion and Future Work  
DTU Environment 
 
53 
 
collection of a bigger dataset was in this case not possible. However, new methods are currently 
developed which allow a more detailed analysis of spectral properties also for smaller datasets.    
 
A next important step for further field work in this area would be to analyze ground water flow 
in order to obtain information about the distribution of geochemical species in the aquifer 
system. This could further include the anlysis of surface water samples and interactions 
between groundwater and surface water. Being located in a delta, the study area is surrounded 
by rivers and flooding occurs during monsoon. Therefore, DOM driving As release in 
groundwater, might enter the aquifer system through connection with surface water sources. 
Even if humic – like components present in the water and potentially linked to As mobilization 
were characterized as terrestrial derived, a high microbial activity was detected as well (FI). This 
supports the theory, that microbial oxidation of OM evokes reducing conditions in the aquifer. 
This OM might enter the groundwater system through interactions with surface water.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:61==
6. Conclusion and Future Work  
DTU Environment 
 
54 
 
 
==PAGE:62==
6. Conclusion and Future Work 
 
DTU Environment 
 
 
55 
 
 Bibliography 
 
Acharyya, S.K. et al., 2000. Arsenic toxicity of groundwater in parts of the Bengal basin in India 
and Bangladesh: The role of Quaternary stratigraphy and Holocene sea-level fluctuation. 
Environmental Geology, 39(10), pp.1127–1137. 
Alam, M. et al., 2003. An overview of the sedimentary geology of the Bengal Basin in relation 
to the regional tectonic framework and basin-fill history. Sedimentary Geology, 155(3–4), 
pp.179–208. 
Appelo, C.A.J. & Postma, D., 2005. Geochemistry, Groundwater and Pollution second edi., 
Amsterdam: A.A. Balkema Publishers. 
Cawley, K.M. et al., 2012. Characterising the sources and fate of dissolved organic matter in 
Shark Bay, Australia: A preliminary study using optical properties and stable carbon 
isotopes. Marine and Freshwater Research, 63(11), pp.1098–1107. 
Chaudhuri, S. & Roy, M., 2016. Overview of Rural Water Supply Sector in West Bengal, India: 
Challenges and Concerns. International Journal of Innovative Research in Science, 
Engineering and Technology, 5(6), pp.9768–9777. 
Cory, R.M. et al., 2010. Effect of instrument-specific response on the analysis of fulvic acid 
fluorescence spectra. Limnology and Oceanography: Methods, 8(2), pp.67–78. 
Cory, R.M. & Mcknight, D.M., 2005. Fluorescence Spectroscopy Reveals Ubiquitous Presence 
of Oxidized and Reduced Quinones in Dissolved Organic Matter. Environmental Science & 
Technology, 39(21), pp.8142–8149. 
Datta, D.K. & Subramanian, V., 1997. Texture and mineralogy of sediments from the Ganges-
Brahmaputra-Meghna river system in the Bengal Basin , Bangladesh and their 
environmental implications. Environmental Geology, 30, pp.181–188. 
esri, 2016. How IDW works. Available at: https://pro.arcgis.com/en/pro-app/tool-
reference/3d-analyst/how-idw-works.htm [Accessed May 1, 2017]. 
Fellman, J.B., Hood, E. & Spencer, R.G.M., 2010. Fluorescence spectroscopy opens new 
windows into dissolved organic matter dynamics in freshwater ecosystems: A review. 
Limnology and Oceanography, 55(6), pp.2452–2462. 
Fendorf, S. & Michael, H.A., 2010. Spatial and Temporal Variations of Groundwater Arsenic in 
South and Southeast Asia. Science, 328(May). 
Gaus, I. et al., 2003. Geostatistical analysis of arsenic concentration in groundwater in 
Bangladesh using disjunctive kriging. Environmental Geology, 44(8), pp.939–948. 
Gauthier, J., 2004. Arsenic Contamination in North 24- Parganas: Mapping and Capacity 
Building, 
Van Geen, A. et al., 2008. Flushing History as a Hydrogeological Control on the Regional 
Distribution of Arsenic in Shallow Groundwater of the Bengal Basin. Environmental 
Science and Technology, 42(7), pp.2283–2288. 
Gilmore, A.M. & Cohen, S.M., 2013. Analysis of the Chromophoric Dissolved Organic Matter in 
Water by EEMs with HOBIBA-Jobin Yvon Fluorescence Instrument called “Aqualog” 
Adam. Readout English Edition, 41(Nov. 2013), pp.19–24. 
Kosmos, W., 1998. The evaluation of the arsenator. Available at: 
http://users.physics.harvard.edu/~wilson/arsenic/conferences/arsenic_project_paper2-
3.html [Accessed June 15, 2017]. 
Kulkarni, H. V. et al., 2016. Contrasting dissolved organic matter quality in groundwater in 
Holocene and Pleistocene aquifers and implications for influencing arsenic mobility. 
Applied Geochemistry, 77, pp.194–205. 
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography 
 
 
DTU Environment 
 
56 
 
Kulkarni, H.V., 2016. Biogeochemical Interactions of Natural Organic Matter With Arsenic in. 
Kansas State University. 
Lawaetz, Anders Juul and STEDMON, C.A., 2009. Fluorescence Intensity Calibration Using the 
Raman Scatter Peak of Water. , 63(8), pp.936–940. 
McArthur, J.M. et al., 2001a. Arsenic in groundwater: Testing pollution mechanisms for 
sedimentary aquifers in Bangladesh. WATER RESOURCES RESEARCH, 37(1), pp.109–117. 
McArthur, J.M. et al., 2001b. Arsenic in groundwater: Testing pollution mechanisms for 
sedimentary aquifers in Bangladesh. , 37(1), pp.109–117. 
McArthur, J.M. et al., 2004. Natural organic matter in sedimentary basins and its relation to 
arsenic in anoxic ground water: The example of West Bengal and its worldwide 
implications. Applied Geochemistry, 19(8), pp.1255–1293. 
McKnight, D.M. et al., 2001. Spectrofluorometric characterization of dissolved organic matter 
for indication of precursor organic material and aromaticity. Limnology and 
Oceanography, 46(1), pp.38–48. 
Mladenov, N. et al., 2015. Dissolved Organic Matter Quality in a Shallow Aquifer of 
Bangladesh: Implications for Arsenic Mobility. Environmental Science and Technology, 
49(18), pp.10815–10824. 
Mladenov, N. et al., 2010. Dissolved Organic Matter Sources and Consequences for Iron and 
Arsenic Mobilization in Bangladesh Aquifers. Environmental Science & Technology, 
44(May 2016), pp.123–128. 
Mukherjee, A., 2006. Deeper groundwater flow and chemistry in the arsenic affected western 
Bengal basin, West Bengal, India. University of Kentucky. Available at: 
http://uknowledge.uky.edu/gradschool_diss/368/. 
Mukherjee, A. & Fryar, A.E., 2008. Deeper groundwater chemistry and geochemical modeling 
of the arsenic affected western Bengal basin, West Bengal, India. Applied Geochemistry, 
23(4), pp.863–894. 
Mukherjee, A., Fryar, A.E. & Howell, P.D., 2007a. Regional hydrostratigraphy and groundwater 
flow modeling in the arsenic-affected areas of the western Bengal basin, West Bengal, 
India. Hydrogeology Journal, (7). 
Mukherjee, A., Fryar, A.E. & Howell, P.D., 2007b. Regional hydrostratigraphy and groundwater 
flow modeling in the arsenic-affected areas of the western Bengal basin, West Bengal, 
India. Hydrogeology Journal, 15(7), pp.1397–1418. 
Mukherjee, A., Fryar, A.E. & Thomas, W.A., 2009. Geologic, geomorphic and hydrologic 
framework and evolution of the Bengal basin, India and Bangladesh. Journal of Asian 
Earth Sciences, 34(3), pp.227–244. 
Murphy, K.R. et al., 2013. Fluorescence spectroscopy and multi-way techniques. PARAFAC. 
Analytical Methods, 5(23), pp.6557–6882. 
Murphy, K.R., Stedmon, C.A. & Bro, R., 2017. OpenFluor. 
Naidu, R. et al., 2006. Managing Arsenic in the Environment From Soil to Human Health, 
Collingwood Victoria: CSIRO Publishing. 
National Center for Biotechnology Information, PubChem Compound Database. Available at: 
https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/p-benzoquinone#section=Top [Accessed 
June 28, 2017]. 
Neidhardt, H. et al., 2014. Organic carbon induced mobilization of iron and manganese in a 
West Bengal aquifer and the muted response of groundwater arsenic concentrations. 
Chemical Geology, 367, pp.51–62. Available at: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chemgeo.2013.12.021. 
Nickson, R.T. et al., 2000. Mechanism of arsenic release to groundwater, Bangladesh and 
==PAGE:64==
Bibliography 
 
 
DTU Environment 
 
57 
 
West Bengal. Applied Geochemistry, 15, pp.403–413. 
Palintest, 2017. Digital Arsenic Test Kit. Available at: 
https://www.palintest.com/en/products/digital-arsenic-test-kit [Accessed May 15, 
2017]. 
Rajmohan, N. & Prathapar, S.A., 2013. Hydrogeology of the Eastern Ganges Basin: An 
Overview, Colombo. 
Rodríguez-lado, L. et al., 2013. Groundwater Arsenic Contamination: Throughout China. , 
341(August), pp.866–869. 
Roychowdhury, T. et al., 2002. Survey of arsenic in food composites from an arsenic-affected 
area of West Bengal , India. , 40, pp.1611–1621. 
Smedley, P.L. & Appelo, T., 2006. Sources and distribution of arsenic in groundwater and 
aquifers. In Arsenic in Groundwater - A World Problem. Netherlands National Committee 
of the IAH, pp. 4–32. 
Smedley, P.L. & Kinniburgh, D.G., 2002. A review on the sources, behavior and distribution of 
arsenic in natural waters. Applied Geochemistry, 17, pp.517–568. 
Smith, A.H. & Smith, M.M.H., 2004. Arsenic drinking water regulations in developing countries 
with extensive exposure. Toxicology, 198, pp.39–44. 
Standard, I., 2012. Indian Standards Drinking Water Specifications IS 10500:2012, New Delhi. 
Available at: http://cgwb.gov.in/Documents/WQ-standards.pdf. 
Stedmon, C.A. et al., 2011. A potential approach for monitoring drinking water quality from 
groundwater systems using organic matter fluorescence as an early warning for 
contamination events. Water Research, 45(18), pp.6030–6038. Available at: h. 
Stedmon, C. a. & Bro, R., 2008. OCEANOGRAPHY : METHODS Characterizing dissolved organic 
matter fluorescence with paral- lel factor analysis : a tutorial. Environmental Research, 
6(3798), pp.572–579. Available at: http://wap.aslo.org/lomethods/free/2008/0572.pdf. 
Talukdar, T., Ghosh, A.K. & Srivastava, K.K., 2009. Arsenic in Ground Water of North 24 
Parganas District, West Bengal. Bhujal News Quaterly Journal, (April-Sept). 
Umitsu, M., 1987. Late Quaternary Sedimentary Environment and Landform Evolution in the 
Bengal Lowland. Geographical Review of Japan, 60(2), pp.164–178. 
Umitsu, M., 1993. Late Quaternary Sedimentary Environments and Landforms in the Ganges 
Delta. Sedimentary Geology, 83(3–4), pp.177–186. 
WHO, 2010. Exposure to Arsenic: A Major Public Health Concern, Geneva. Available at: 
http://www.who.int/ipcs/features/arsenic.pdf?ua=1. 
WHO, 2011. Guidelines for Drinking-water Quality 4th ed., Geneva. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:65==
Appendix A – Fieldwork 
 
 
DTU Environment 
 
58 
 
 
 Appendix A – Fieldwork 
 
A.1: Measurements with the arsenator carried out between the 3rd and 23rd of April in Gazna 
village.  
 
Table 1: As measurement with the arsenator  
 
Idex  
TW Owner 
Well Type 
GIS name  
Long. 
Lat.  
Depth 
[ft] 
Depth 
[m]  
As conc. 
[µg/l ] 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
1 
Pagol Ghorami 
irrigation  
SUTGAZSAL001 
08848733 
2254534 
80 
26.25 
93 
2 
Babulal 
irrigation  
SUTGAZSAL002 
08848753 
2254531 
80 
26.25 
75 
3 
Ashoke Biswas 
irrigation  
SUTGAZSAL004 
08848697 
2254534 
80 
26.25 
79 
4 
Sukhedev Bala 
irrigation  
SUTGAZSAL005 
08848682 
2254513 
70 
22.97 
99 
5 
Kartik Malik 
irrigation  
SUTGAZSAL006 
08848642 
2254501 
80 
26.25 
240 
6 
Paneanan Biswas 
irrigation  
SUTGAZSAL007 
08848615 
2254503 
80 
26.25 
190 
7 
Kuti Bala 
irrigation  
SUTGAZSAL008 
08848598 
2254512 
80 
26.25 
200 
8 
Jagadis Bala 
irrigation  
SUTGAZSAL009 
08848596 
2254531 
80 
26.25 
340 
9 
Kalipada Mondal 
irrigation  
SUTGAZSAL010 
08848517 
2254508 
80 
26.25 
250 
10 
Ashok Gosh  
irrigation  
SUTGAZSAL011 
08848536 
2254501 
80 
26.25 
100 
11 
Sujit Gosh  
irrigation  
SUTGAZSAL012 
08848537 
2254473 
80 
26.25 
290 
12 
Mongla Biswas 
irrigation  
SUTGAZSAL013 
08848481 
2254500 
80 
26.25 
81 
13 
Sanjoy Chakrobor 
irrigation  
SUTGAZSAL014 
08848469 
2254493 
80 
26.25 
210 
14 
Kutti Bala  
irrigation  
SUTGAZSAL015 
08848501 
2254539 
60 
19.69 
290 
15 
Pagal Ghorami  
irrigation  
SUTGAZSAL016 
08848457 
2254510 
60 
19.69 
220 
16 
Siradul Mondel  
irrigation  
SUTGAZSAL017 
08848356 
2254453 
60 
19.69 
220 
17 
Moni Gosh  
irrigation  
SUTGAZSAL019 
08848398 
2254461 
60 
19.69 
240 
18 
Moloy Gosh  
irrigation  
SUTGAZSAL020 
08848433 
2254474 
60 
19.69 
160 
19 
Jagabandhu Roy 
irrigation  
SUTGAZSAL021 
08848419 
2254486 
60 
19.69 
86 
20 
Babu 
irrigation  
SUTGAZSAL022 
08848316 
2254510 
70 
22.97 
43 
21 
Haripada Roy 
irrigation  
SUTTEGSAL023 
08848226 
2254420 
90 
29.53 
210 
22 
Arabidu Biswas  
irrigation  
SUTGAZSAL024 
08848132 
2254476 
70 
22.97 
480 
23 
Goutom Gosh 1 
irrigation  
SUTGAZDTW25 
08848544 
2254232 
52 
17.06 
28 
24 
Bijoy Mondal  
irrigation  
SUTGAZDTW26 
08848505 
2254172 
60 
19.69 
110 
25 
Nirmal Mondal 
irrigation  
SUTGAZSAL28 
08848595 
2254214 
70 
22.97 
51 
26 
Goutom Gosh 2 
irrigation  
SUTGAZSAL30a 
08848567 
2254255 
60 
19.69 
19 
27 
Nirmal Mondal 
irrigation  
SUTGAZSAL30b 
08848555 
2254294 
100 
32.81 
19 
28 
Poresh Gosh 
irrigation  
SUTGAZDTW31 
08848639 
2254309 
80 
26.25 
8 
29 
Tapak Gosh  
irrigation  
SUTGAZDTW32 
08848660 
2254303 
70 
22.97 
21 
30 
Biloy Mondal  
irrigation  
SUTGAZDTW33 
08848703 
2254300 
70 
22.97 
46 
31 
Manik Gosh  
irrigation  
SUTGAZDTW34 
08848711 
2254320 
70 
22.97 
22 
32 
Amirul Mondal  
irrigation  
SUTGAZDTW35 
08848610 
2254288 
80 
26.25 
24 
33 
Riajul Hug 
irrigation  
SUTGAZDTW37 
08848401 
2254280 
60 
19.69 
79 
34 
Kartik Gosh  
irrigation  
SUTGAZDTW38 
08848374 
2254199 
60 
19.69 
90 
37 
Sankar Haldar 
household 
SUTGAZRTB07 
08848483 
2254012 
75 
24.61 
38 
38 
Dipak Halder 
household 
SUTGAZRTB08 
08848487 
2254001 
72 
23.62 
44 
39 
Samru Halder 
household 
SUTGAZRTB09 
08848477 
2253989 
70 
22.97 
83 
==PAGE:66==
Appendix A – Fieldwork 
 
 
DTU Environment 
 
59 
 
40 
Suman Pong 
household 
SUTGAZRTB10 
08848437 
2253958 
100 
32.81 
79 
41 
Nirmala Ghosh  
household 
SUTGAZRTB11 
08848419 
2254076 
70 
22.97 
47 
42 
Mukunda Dutta 
household 
SUTGAZRTB12 
08848472 
2254029 
70 
22.97 
63 
43 
Naragan Dutta  
household 
SUTGAZRTB13 
08848466 
2254014 
50 
16.40 
40 
44 
Madhab Dutta 
household 
SUTGAZRTB14 
08848466 
2254025 
70 
22.97 
21 
45 
Milon Mondal  
household 
SUTGAZRTB15 
08848565 
2254168 
100 
32.81 
69 
47 
Samal Mondal  
household 
SUTGAZRTB17 
08848714 
2254246 
65 
21.33 
29 
48 
Sankar Mondal  
household 
SUTGAZRTB18 
08848713 
2254260 
60 
19.69 
11 
49 
Bhaskar Bose 
household 
SUTGAZRTB19 
08848287 
2254299 
100 
32.81 
190 
50 
Bishnupada Sankar  
household 
SUTGAZRTB20 
08848392 
2254297 
50 
16.40 
30 
51 
Jibaneh Biswas 
household 
SUTGAZRTB21 
08848428 
2254287 
75 
24.61 
43 
52 
Samir 
Royehowdhury 
household 
SUTGAZRTB23 
08848450 
2254349 
72 
23.62 
240 
53 
Jitenehranath Bala 
household 
SUTGAZRTB24 
08848495 
2254365 
32 
10.50 
42 
54 
Jitenehranath Bala 
household 
SUTGAZRTB25 
08848505 
2254376 
350 
114.83 
89 
55 
Goutom Gosh  
household 
SUTGAZRTB26 
08848487 
2254263 
50 
16.40 
0 
56 
Ashok Biswas  
household 
SUTGAZRTB27 
08848451 
2254098 
90 
29.53 
21 
57 
Chandra Saker Paul  
household 
SUTGAZRTB28 
08848571 
2254168 
60 
19.69 
38 
58 
Ranju Halder 
household 
SUTGAZRTB29 
08848589 
2254176 
70 
22.97 
36 
59 
Subash Bapani  
household 
SUTGAZRTB30 
08848590 
2254150 
75 
24.61 
220 
60 
Mommotho Biswas 
household 
SUTGAZRTB31 
08848639 
2254595 
220 
72.18 
94 
61 
Samin Biswas 
household 
SUTGAZRTB32 
08848520 
2254729 
50 
16.40 
140 
62 
Sukchad Mondel  
household 
SUTGAZRTB33 
08848466 
2254727 
60 
19.69 
270 
63 
Kishon Roy  
household 
SUTGAZRTB34 
08848414 
2254696 
50 
16.40 
85 
64 
Promatho Dhali  
household 
SUTGAZRTB35 
08848668 
2254588 
70 
22.97 
75 
65 
Kakali Biswas 
household 
SUTGAZRTB36 
08848540 
2254698 
60 
19.69 
260 
66 
Basanti Gosh  
household 
SUTGAZRTB37 
08848360 
2254326 
50 
16.40 
370 
67 
Santosh Dey Bi 
household 
SUTGAZRTB38 
08848340 
2254271 
70 
22.97 
80 
68 
Shurandu Gosh  
household 
SUTGAZRTB39 
08848334 
2254276 
70 
22.97 
150 
69 
Utam Acharia 
household 
SUTGAZRTB40 
08848793 
2254326 
50 
16.40 
140 
70 
Koushik Biswas 
household 
SUTGAZRTB41 
08848767 
2254510 
92 
30.18 
92 
71 
Harim Roy 
household 
SUTGAZRTB42 
08848754 
2254484 
50 
16.40 
52 
72 
Khogen Bain  
household 
SUTGAZRTB44 
08848959 
2254501 
70 
22.97 
91 
73 
Nandita Gain  
household 
SUTGAZRTB45 
08848944 
2254468 
95 
31.17 
74 
74 
Monoranjan Gain 
household 
SUTGAZRTB46 
08848913 
2254450 
80 
26.25 
69 
75 
Prodip Gain 
household 
SUTGAZRTB47 
08848952 
2254474 
50 
16.40 
92 
76 
Kamal Paul  
household 
SUTGAZRTB48 
08848407 
2254948 
85 
27.89 
70 
77 
Kamal Paul  
household 
SUTGAZRTB49 
08848398 
2254952 
50 
16.40 
99 
78 
Tapos Roy  
household 
SUTGAZRTB50 
08848311 
2254006 
75 
24.61 
250 
79 
Tapon Babary 
household 
SUTGAZRTB52 
08848706 
2254345 
100 
32.81 
15 
80 
Promatho Halder 
household 
SUTGAZRTB53 
08848658 
2254239 
123 
40.35 
29 
81 
Amirul Mondel 
household 
SUTGAZRTB54 
08848434 
2254174 
90 
29.53 
30 
83 
Gautom Saha 
household 
SUTGAZRTB56 
08848353 
2254031 
90 
29.53 
53 
84 
na 
public 
SUTGAZDTB001 
08848520 
2254733 
600 
196.85 
below 2 
85 
na 
public 
SUTGAZDTB003 
08848679 
2254592 
600 
196.85 
below 2 
86 
na 
public 
SUTGAZDTB004 
08848940 
2254462 
550 
180.45 
below 2 
87 
na 
public 
SUTGAZDTB005 
08848766 
2254299 
650 
213.25 
below 2 
88 
na 
public 
SUTGAZDTB006 
08848527 
2254062 
620 
203.41 
7 
89 
na 
public 
SUTGAZDTB007 
08848392 
2254987 
600 
196.85 
below 2 
90 
na 
public 
SUTGAZDTB008 
08848338 
2254987 
570 
187.01 
below 2 
==PAGE:67==
Appendix B – Laboratory Measurements 
 
 
DTU Environment 
 
60 
 
91 
na 
public 
SUTGAZDTB009 
08848399 
2254310 
600 
196.85 
5 
92 
na 
public 
SUTGAZDTB010 
08848348 
2254823 
600 
196.85 
below 2 
93 
na 
public 
SUTTEGDTB010 
08848277 
2254330 
600 
196.85 
below 2 
 
 
 Appendix B – Laboratory Measurements  
 
A.1: Measurements with the ICP-MS (total dissolved As and P) carried out on the 5th of April 
at DTU.  
 
Table 2: Measurement results for total dissolved As and P 
 
  
  
31  P  [ No Gas ]  
75  As  [ He ]  
Instrument DL (µg/l)    
  
0.60 
  
0.06 
  
Method DL (µg/l) 
  
13.00 
  
1.00 
  
Sample name 
Lab. 
no 
Conc. [ 
(µg/l)  
Conc. 
RSD 
Conc. [ 
(µg/l)  
Conc. 
RSD 
  
1 
116.6 
1.02 
25.34 
2.07 
  
2 
744.0 
0.56 
57.32 
1.47 
  
3 
185.6 
0.79 
81.07 
0.72 
  
4 
1247.90 
0.25 
39.87 
3.81 
  
5 
18.91 
3.39 
1.359 
8.65 
  
6 
537.2 
0.72 
417.8 
0.61 
  
7 
124.6 
0.60 
154.6 
1.54 
  
8 
889.5 
0.74 
177.8 
1.73 
  
9 
685.3 
0.92 
116.1 
1.14 
  
10 
290.2 
0.92 
174.3 
1.13 
  
11 
154.7 
1.14 
61.03 
0.12 
  
12 
425.2 
0.93 
80.12 
1.52 
  
13 
891.8 
0.20 
29.93 
1.30 
  
14 
788.7 
0.39 
34.09 
2.89 
  
15 
96.30 
1.00 
22.22 
2.67 
  
16 
537.2 
0.93 
250.2 
0.83 
  
17 
612.5 
0.53 
201.7 
1.17 
  
18 
735.6 
0.38 
372.3 
1.38 
  
19 
716.7 
0.91 
266.8 
0.50 
  
20 
704.8 
0.62 
256.3 
0.39 
  
21 
77.00 
0.73 
12.66 
3.59 
  
22 
131.1 
0.29 
28.22 
2.24 
  
23 
142.8 
0.87 
19.66 
1.30 
  
24 
26.90 
1.60 
17.76 
3.26 
  
25 
692.5 
0.15 
109.6 
2.27 
  
26 
780.9 
0.26 
290.2 
0.07 
  
27 
956.9 
0.74 
177.4 
1.15 
  
28 
394.9 
1.39 
67.79 
2.39 
  
29 
669.7 
0.20 
159.3 
0.52 
==PAGE:68==
Appendix B – Laboratory Measurements 
 
 
DTU Environment 
 
61 
 
  
30 
65.33 
2.93 
221.3 
0.44 
  
31 
1158 
1.35 
105.0 
1.07 
  
32 
737.1 
0.52 
111.8 
0.87 
  
33 
887.7 
0.82 
30.16 
1.33 
  
34 
619.5 
0.54 
19.11 
3.54 
  
35 
609.1 
0.88 
93.28 
0.73 
  
36 
982.3 
0.18 
57.80 
2.08 
  
37 
1045 
0.19 
119.2 
1.55 
  
38 
154.4 
1.03 
16.61 
1.64 
  
39 
760.7 
0.74 
100.2 
1.05 
  
40 
1022 
0.62 
376.3 
1.31 
  
41 
35.97 
1.14 
0,752<MDL 
3.90 
  
42 
20.90 
2.26 
0,106<MDL 
56.71 
  
43 
24.22 
2.13 
3.808 
1.64 
  
44 
35.22 
2.37 
0,114<MDL 
38.49 
  
45 
19.58 
1.40 
0,219<MDL 
13.07 
  
46 
37.06 
1.56 
0,135<MDL 
15.75 
  
47 
25.10 
1.17 
0,204<MDL 
31.12 
  
48 
38.47 
0.43 
0,255<MDL 
36.32 
  
49 
32.27 
1.59 
0,106<MDL 
65.62 
  
50 
31.87 
0.78 
0,134<MDL 
27.07 
  
51 
15.25 
3.30 
16.44 
3.94 
 
 
A.2: Measurements with the ICP-OES (total dissolved Fe and Mn) carried out on the 31st of 
April at DTU.  
 
Table 3: Measurement results for total dissolved Fe and Mn 
 
  
  
Fe 
259.939 
(µg/L) 
Fe 
259.939 
(%RSD) 
Mn 
293.305 
(µg/L) 
Mn 
293.305 
(%RSD) 
Instrument DL (µg/l)    
  
0.10 
 
0.11 
  
Method DL (µg/l) 
  
0.287 
  
0.098 
  
Sample name 
Lab. no 
Conc. [ 
(µg/l)  
Conc. 
RSD 
Conc. [ 
(µg/l)  
Conc. 
RSD 
  
1 
94.2 
0.2% 
209.4 
0.2% 
  
2 
10993.1 
0.6% 
735.6 
0.3% 
  
3 
2513.0 
1.4% 
385.7 
0.9% 
  
4 
4228.1 
1.3% 
347.2 
0.6% 
  
5 
219.2 
0.9% 
138.0 
0.4% 
  
6 
1800.7 
0.7% 
882.6 
0.3% 
  
7 
217.4 
1.2% 
566.8 
1.0% 
  
8 
10035.4 
1.5% 
276.9 
0.3% 
  
9 
5366.3 
1.3% 
175.8 
0.1% 
  
10 
2099.3 
0.6% 
381.1 
0.3% 
  
11 
1722.5 
1.2% 
219.4 
0.2% 
  
12 
10415.7 
1.1% 
526.5 
0.2% 
==PAGE:69==
Appendix B – Laboratory Measurements 
 
 
DTU Environment 
 
62 
 
  
13 
2300.7 
1.1% 
383.2 
0.4% 
  
14 
5575.5 
1.6% 
190.6 
0.7% 
  
15 
233.4 
0.6% 
202.7 
0.8% 
  
16 
6744.0 
0.4% 
799.9 
1.1% 
  
17 
3447.9 
1.2% 
464.9 
0.2% 
  
18 
7634.6 
1.0% 
436.0 
0.3% 
  
19 
13511.5 
1.4% 
507.2 
0.3% 
  
20 
1892.3 
0.8% 
832.3 
0.7% 
  
21 
719.6 
1.0% 
167.0 
0.5% 
  
22 
951.4 
1.4% 
224.8 
1.3% 
  
23 
1148.6 
0.5% 
194.2 
1.1% 
  
24 
2795.1 
0.3% 
286.3 
1.1% 
  
25 
2212.4 
2.3% 
376.8 
0.6% 
  
26 
3372.7 
1.3% 
334.6 
0.7% 
  
27 
7083.6 
0.6% 
582.1 
1.2% 
  
28 
62.5 
0.9% 
341.8 
0.4% 
  
29 
4226.9 
1.2% 
594.2 
0.2% 
  
30 
250.5 
3.6% 
151.9 
1.1% 
  
31 
5430.2 
0.5% 
240.2 
1.0% 
  
32 
2612.8 
1.0% 
425.1 
0.3% 
  
33 
9144.0 
1.0% 
281.9 
1.0% 
  
34 
4701.0 
0.7% 
272.2 
1.3% 
  
35 
2554.4 
1.6% 
92.3 
0.6% 
  
36 
6619.9 
1.0% 
323.4 
0.8% 
  
37 
4787.1 
0.4% 
366.4 
0.3% 
  
38 
1986.0 
1.6% 
281.7 
0.3% 
  
39 
4476.5 
0.1% 
307.5 
0.3% 
  
40 
4203.4 
0.4% 
250.9 
1.0% 
  
41 
769.6 
1.2% 
89.2 
1.0% 
  
42 
956.3 
1.6% 
87.6 
0.6% 
  
43 
209.0 
0.3% 
85.8 
0.7% 
  
44 
441.0 
0.6% 
74.1 
1.4% 
  
45 
418.4 
0.3% 
72.2 
0.5% 
  
46 
637.6 
0.5% 
73.8 
0.3% 
  
47 
463.2 
0.7% 
60.0 
0.8% 
  
48 
585.1 
0.6% 
64.6 
1.5% 
  
49 
701.8 
1.1% 
96.7 
0.5% 
  
50 
665.8 
0.6% 
74.1 
0.3% 
  
51 
1876.8 
1.2% 
184.5 
0.9% 
1000 µg/L 
52 
975.0 
0.8% 
971.2 
0.7% 
2000 µg/L 
53 
1938.4 
0.7% 
1934.0 
1.2% 
 
 
 
 
A.3: Measurements with the TOC analyser (NVOC) carried out on the 3rd of April at DTU.  
==PAGE:70==
Appendix B – Laboratory Measurements 
 
 
DTU Environment 
 
63 
 
 
Table 4: Measurement results for NVOC 
 
  
  
NVOC 
Method DL (mg/l) 
  
0.070   
Sample name 
Sample no 
(lab) 
Conc. [ mg/L ] 
%RSD 
  
1 
1.192 
0.774 
  
2 
1.030 
0.463 
  
3 
1.846 
1.345 
  
4 
2.277 
1.076 
  
5 
1.726 
1.162 
  
6 
1.987 
0.416 
  
7 
1.663 
1.320 
  
8 
0.866 
0.331 
  
9 
1.650 
0.270 
  
10 
2.671 
1.323 
  
11 
1.455 
0.241 
  
12 
2.347 
0.841 
  
13 
2.175 
1.039 
  
14 
0.883 
0.216 
  
15 
1.163 
0.328 
  
16 
2.155 
1.477 
  
17 
2.628 
0.388 
  
18 
0.798 
1.037 
  
19 
1.863 
0.085 
  
20 
1.632 
1.345 
  
21 
1.769 
0.252 
  
22 
1.060 
1.351 
  
23 
0.640 
0.646 
  
24 
2.347 
1.031 
  
25 
2.125 
1.153 
  
26 
1.237 
0.026 
  
27 
2.321 
0.315 
  
28 
1.834 
0.191 
  
29 
1.046 
0.457 
  
30 
1.641 
0.310 
  
31 
1.644 
0.794 
  
32 
1.622 
0.137 
  
33 
0.919 
0.866 
  
34 
0.809 
1.376 
  
35 
2.893 
0.880 
  
36 
1.931 
1.599 
  
37 
1.766 
0.306 
  
38 
2.079 
0.092 
  
39 
1.008 
1.200 
  
40 
1.957 
0.455 
  
41 
1.252 
1.575 
==PAGE:71==
Appendix B – Laboratory Measurements 
 
 
DTU Environment 
 
64 
 
  
42 
2.001 
0.398 
  
43 
1.051 
1.150 
  
44 
1.081 
0.854 
  
45 
3.386 
0.714 
  
46 
1.654 
0.481 
  
47 
2.640 
1.217 
  
48 
1.914 
1.064 
 
