==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master of Science in Engieering Thesis
Evaluation of mobility in
mobile networks
Trond Eivind Valvik
supervised by
Henrik Christiansen
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Mobile Network Operations
2
2.1
Mobile Network Architecture and Entities
. . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1.1
GSM Core Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1.2
GSM Radio Access Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
GSM Radio Air Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
GSM Channels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Mobility Management and Call Control . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.1
Cell (Re-)Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.2
Timing advance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5
UMTS frequency overlap with GSM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.6
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Radio Frequency
20
3.1
Transceiver architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Transceiver designs and challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.1
Receiver performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.2
Mixer implementations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3
Distortion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Testing mobile network mobility
30
4.1
Railway systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.1.1
ETCS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.1.2
GSM-R
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Intermodulation distortion investigation
. . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Test setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3.1
Physical equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3.2
Simulation script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
1
==PAGE:3==
5
Measurement and simulation results
55
5.1
Baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.2
Direct intermodulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6
Conclusion
65
A Code
67
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
A testbed for evaluating mobile network- and mobile phone performance in
mobility situations has been developed and is presented. Using equipment
from Rohde & Schwarz, the ability to replicate network conﬁgurations and
radio conditons measured from live networks has been achieved. Using the
testbed to investigate whether UMTS UARFCN 3038 and UMTS UARFCN
2973 produce enough intermodulation distortion in GSM-R ARFCN 957 to
inhibit equipment experiencing those conditions from operating correctly re-
sulted in evidence that suggest they do.
==PAGE:5==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Mobile networks are becoming increasingly dense and there are a lot of diﬀe-
rent technologies that operate within the same frequency bands at the same
time. While there are regulatory eﬀorts made to ensure co-existence of many
diﬀerent mobile communication technologies in the same frequency band, the
multitude of diﬀerent channels available in a band and the possible combina-
tions that can be deployed in terms of channels and technologies used in live
networks is very large. Furthermore, the amount of diﬀerent devices that can
be used both to deploy networks (e.g. basestations), but also operate within
them (e.g. phones) makes it very hard to predict what will work well and
what will not work quite as well, before actually deploying them. The best
thing to do before deploying anything new is to test it, and this holds for
both software as well as hardware. Operators with a conﬁgurable test bed
available to them can conﬁgure it to mimic their own network, and by using
drive-tests and spectrum analyzer, replicate live radio conditions in an area
before introducing new equipment into their networks.
In the following, a description of the theory behind GSM networks and
mobility within them is presented, as well as a brief overview of some possible
radio frequency issues that can occur in transceivers. An overview of what it
takes to set up a testbed to look for these issues, as well as a presentation of a
script set up to use test equipment to look for these issues is then presented,
before ﬁnally the results from using the tesbed is presented.
1
==PAGE:6==
Chapter 2
Mobile Network Operations
Mobile networks are designed to maximize both coverage and capacity, and
to do so, it can be beneﬁcial to consider them to have two diﬀerent functional
groups: the radio access network and core network (also referred to as the
Base Station Subsystem (BSS) and Network Subsystem (NSS), respectively
[17]), both of which impact coverage and capacity. While there are diﬀerences
in how these work and are constructed in the diﬀerent generations of mobile
technology (GSM operates diﬀerently from UMTS, which itself is diﬀerent
from LTE), they all have this functional split.
2.1
Mobile Network Architecture and Enti-
ties
2.1.1
GSM Core Network
In GSM, the core network is made up of several entities, where the Mobile
Switching Center (MSC) can be considered to be the most important one,
as this entity handles the Call Control Protocol and Mobility Management,
enabling subscribers to call and have calls directed to them. The Call Control
Protocol MSCs run are responsible for registering Mobile Stations (MS) to
the network, set up calls between subscribers, and forward SMS between
subscribers[17]. In addition, as users are able to move to diﬀerent locations
(compared to subscribers with ﬁxed-line telephones), the network needs to
both be able to keep track of where the subscribers are and authenticate
subscribers so that they can be reached should a call be coming through to
them, both tasks of which the MSC perform.
Keeping track of where subscribers are located in the entire network of an
2
==PAGE:7==
operator (as well as what services they have access to) is done in a database
named the Home Location Register (HLR). The HLR holds records for every
subscriber in a network that detail the services they are allowed to use or not
(e.g. SMS service or call forwarding). While the HLR holds a record for every
subscriber of a given operator, all the MSCs of an operator have their own
database where copies of records from a HLR of each subscriber currently
served by that MSC is held, and this database is called the Visitor Location
Register (VLR). The VLR is used to reduce the amount of signaling to the
HLR, and is typically implemented as a software component of an MSC [17].
2.1.2
GSM Radio Access Network
For communication to be possible, there has to exist a medium with which
messages can be transferred over to reach the other destination in a conver-
sation, and devices that receive and transmit the messages. For GSM, the
medium Mobile Stations (MS) use to communicate with the network, which
is represented by Base Transceiver Stations (BTS), is wireless radio frequen-
cies. BTSs can, depending on transmission power levels (of both BTS and
MS), radio frequency conditions and antenna design, provide varying degrees
of coverage, where the coverage area of BTSs typically have radii from 100s
of meters to 3-4 km [17].
There are a number of radio frequency channels available to operators
that are reserved for use by regulatory bodies. Initially GSM was speciﬁed
to operate in the 900 MHz radio frequency band, speciﬁcally between 935
MHz and 960 MHz in the downlink direction, and between 890 MHz to 915
MHz in the uplink direction. Due to both growing popularity in GSMs in-
fancy and already occupied spectrum in other countries, the original 900 MHz
band reserved for GSM was expanded (E-GSM 900, adding 9.8 MHz more to
the 900 MHz band) and more frequency bands were added (1800 MHz). In
Europe, the predominantly deployed bands are the 900 MHz and 1800 MHz
bands, whereas in North America, the 850 MHz and 1900 MHz bands have
been reserved for GSM use. These frequency bands are divided into chan-
nels that can be used, and GSM uses channels with a bandwidth of 200 kHz
each. The channels and their corresponding frequencies in both uplink and
downlink directions are enumerated into Absolute Radio Frequency Channel
Numbers (ARFCNs), and translation between ARFCNs and frequencies can
be found by simple calculations, as seen in Equation 2.1. As the spacing
between the uplink frequency and downlink frequency is 45 MHz for these
3
==PAGE:8==
two bands, ﬁnding the downlink channels is done by adding 45 MHz to the
starting frequency, which means that for e.g. ARFCN 2, the uplink frequency
is 890.4 MHz and the downlink frequency is 935.4 MHz [17, 3].
ARFCNGSM =
{
890MHz + 0.2MHz · n
0 ≤n ≤124,
890MHz + 0.2MHz · (n −1024)
955 ≤n ≤1023 (2.1)
The GSM standard has since its inception further been expanded for use
in other frequency bands and for other purposes, such as railway networks
(denoted GSM-R), where additional functionalities related to railway opera-
tion and use have been added (e.g. Voice Group Call Service (VGCS) which
enable walkie-talkie functionality). In addition to enhancing the GSM stan-
dard with new features, an additional set of frequencies (i.e. ARFCNs) have
been reserved for use with GSM-R networks, speciﬁcally ARFCNs from 955
and up to and including 974 (921.2 MHz to 925 MHz), which amounts to a
bandwidth of 4 MHz that is only available for GSM-R networks [17].
Basestation Controller
In GSM, there are multiple entities that make up the core network and
the radio air interface network. In between the two sections, responsible for
managing a number of BTSs and connect them to the MSC, is the basestation
controller (BSC), which schedules and assign resources to MSs, whether the
request originates from the MS itself or from an MSC. For MSs to send an
SMS, establish a call, or use data, they ﬁrst have to request a channel, which
is handeled by the BSC. The BSC checks whether an SDCCH is available,
and if it is, activates it in the BTS and sends an assignment message on the
AGCH, which include the number of the assigned SDCCH. Subsequently, the
MS can send DTAP 1 messages to the MSC. An illustration of the messages
and steps is available in Figure 2.1.
In the other direction, where a MS is about to receive a SMS or a call, the
BSC is ﬁrst notiﬁed by the MSC that the MS is about to be contacted. The
message from the MSC to BSC contains IMSI, TMSI and location area ID
(which indicate where the MS is located). With the IMSI and location area
ID, the BSC can look up which BTS(s) need to send a paging request on the
1Direct Transfer Application Part messages: SS-7 protocol extension for GSM used to
facilitate transpartent communication between MS and MSC
4
==PAGE:9==
Figure 2.1: Signalling to send SMS from MS
PCH, as it has a database of subscribers (the VLR) in an area. Following the
reception of the paging message, the MS engages in the same behaviour as
when it is the origin of a call or SMS; it requests resources from the BSC with
the RACH. Calls require a TCH (voice channel) to be assigned to the MS, and
this request is initated by the MSC, both for mobile-originated and mobile-
terminated calls, and the BSC is again involved. Following establishment
and information exchange via SDCCH, the MSC instruct the BSC to set
up a TCH. If there are resources available in the cell, the BSC enable the
TCH in the BTS and inform the MS via the established SDCCH that it
can switch to the TCH and FACCH. The MS then uses the FACCH (i.e.
enable the stealing bits to send a message) to send a message to the BTS,
which serves the purpose of informing it that it has switched, and upon
receiving an acknowledgement, also knows that the signal can be decoded by
the BTS. TCH assignment is completed by the MS informing the BSC about
the switchover, which in turn informs the MSC.
Beyond setup and teardown of connections, the BSC is also responsible
for managing connections and ensuring, if possible, that ongoing calls are
continued should the subscriber move out of the coverage area of the cell the
call was established in. Subscribers on calls in e.g. trains or cars expect their
calls to be continued, even if they are far away from where the call started,
and the process BSCs engage in to facilitate this is called handovers, where
calls are moved from BTS to BTS for the duration of the call. In order to
move a call to the most suitable cell (i.e. where the received signal in the
MS from the BTS is best), the BSC require signal quality measurements in
5
==PAGE:10==
both the uplink and downlink direction. Uplink signal quality measurements
are performed by the BTS and reported to the BSC, and indicate an MSs
ability to successfully send messages to the BTS. Downlink signal quality
measurements between MS and BTS are reported by the MS, which conti-
nually measure the received signal quality and report it to the BSC via the
SACCH. In addition, the signal quality of neighbouring cells is also reported
to the BSC. Speciﬁcally, the BSC inform the MS about what frequencies
neighbouring cells operate on via the SACCH during a call, and the MS then
measure these and report back to the BSC over the SACCH. All of this in-
formation is in turn used to evaluate whether a handover is required or not
[17].Should a handover be necessary, a TCH is activated in the target cell,
and the MS informed by the BSC in the originating cell that a handover is
about to take place via the FACCH. In the handover message, the ARFCN
and timeslot of the new TCH is given, and the MS can begin to tune itself
to the target BTS. This is done by adjusting the transmitting and receiving
frequency, synchronizing to the cell if necessary and sending four consecutive
bursts with handover access messages in them, where the ﬁfth contains a Set
Asynchronous Balanced Mode (SABM), which, when acknowledged by the
target BTS, indicate that the signal can be received. As the SABM message
is sent, the BTS informs the BSC that it is ready to forward the call to
the MS, upon which the BSC redirects the voice channel to the target cell.
The handover is completely ﬁnished when the BSC releases the TCH from
the originating cell and inform the MSC that the handover is successfully
performed [17].
The information about signal quality can also be used to reduce interfe-
rence within a cell, and the BSC is responsible for adjusting the transmission
power of all air interface connections. A MS close to a BTS does not need
to send a signal with a lot of power for the BTS to correctly receive it, and
as such reducing the power it sends with can improve the radio frequency
conditions for MS further away from the BTS. The measurements the BTS
perform are reported back to the BSC, and this in turn send power control
messages to the BTS that it forwards to MSs over the SACCH, and repeats
it once in a user data multiframe frame (i.e. every 26th GSM TDMA frame).
There are diﬀerences between the 900 MHz and 1800 MHz bands when it
comes to what power levels the MS can be instructed to transmit at. The
900 MHz band has an upper limit of 2 W for mobile devices, corresponding
to Power Control Level (PCL) 5, and the 1800 MHz band has an upper limit
of 1 W, corresponding to PCL 0. PCL levels for GSM900 range from 0 to
19, where the output power diﬀer by 2 dB per step, starting with 39 dBm
in PCL0-2, and ending at 5 dBm in PCL19 [3]. BTSs can also have their
6
==PAGE:11==
power output adjusted by the BSC, and again signal quality measurements
are used to inform the decision to adjust it, however, only downlink carriers
not broadcasting common channels (e.g. BCCH) can be adjusted, so as to
not impact cell measurements from MSs in neighbouring cells [17].
2.2
GSM Radio Air Interface
Since two signals of the same frequency interference with each other, there
are a limited amount of frequencies available, and operators need to provide
contiguos coverage, the available resources are sectioned into smaller sections
with multiple access techniques. When operators deploy GSM BTSs, their
ﬁrst priority is to conﬁgure the BTS to not use a ARFCN that a neighbouring
BTS uses, so that there should not be any interference between the two. The
concept is illustrated in Figure 2.2.
GSM uses the multiple access technologies Frequency Division Multiple
Access (FDMA) and Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) to section the
available resources.
FDMA enable multiple users to simultaneously com-
municate with a BTS by dividing the total amount of bandwidth available
into smaller channels (i.e. ARFCNs for GSM). TDMA further channelize
a frequency channel into frames which have a set duration and a number
of timeslots that can be allocated to subscribers, and in GSM these frames
last 4.615 ms. There are eight timeslots in each GSM TDMA frame, and a
timeslot lasts 577 µs ( 4615ms
8
= 577µs), illustrated in Figure 2.3.
The amount of subscribers a single BTS can support thus depend on the
amount of ARFCNs it is conﬁgured with. A BTS with three transceivers
(i.e. a sectorized setup) has, in each cell, a total of 24 timeslots available for
use. As two timeslots are typically dedicated to signalling, 22 timeslots are
available for use by subscribers, which results in a total of 66 timeslots being
available for the entire BTS [17].
Individual GSM TDMA timeslots are constructed in a speciﬁc way, with
tails, a training sequence surrounded by "stealing bits", user data and guard
time, as illustrated in Figure 2.4. The tails have a known bit pattern and
are there for receivers to correctly identify where a burst (i.e.
when the
transceiver is active) begin and end. Guard time takes into account that
signals destined to subscribers further away from the BTS take a longer time
to travel there than to those subscribers who are closer by, and having guard
times where no data is sent prevents overlap between these. The duration
of the guard time is very short, as the network controls the timing advance
(transmission oﬀset to take into account moving subscribers, making sure
7
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.2: GSM cell structure and frequency re-use [17]
their bursts don’t overlap with other subscribers). Further increasing the
robustness of the bursts, the training sequence, as with the tails, contains
a ﬁxed bit pattern, and is there to alleviate interference issues from e.g.
reﬂection. Comparing the received signal with the training sequence informs
the receiver about the signal conditions, and enables adaptation of the analog
ﬁlter parameters, resulting in better ability to recreate the original signal [17].
User data is carried in two sections split by the training sequence, and each
ﬁeld can carry 57 bits each, which means every burst can contain 114 user
data bits. Should there be a need for urgent signaling information to be
sent, the stealing bits surrounding the training sequence can be enabled,
which indicate that there is signaling information contained in the user data
bursts, which results in the user data sent in that burst being lost.
8
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.3: GSM TDMA Frame [17]
Figure 2.4: GSM Burst[17]
2.3
GSM Channels
In order to organize transmission of signaling and user data to and from
subscribers, the resources available (i.e. timeslots) are arranged into logical
channels. For instance, the two ﬁrst timeslots on the ﬁrst carrier frequency of
a cell are normally used for common logical signaling channels, and the remai-
ning ones are used for user data. These two timeslots in a single GSM TDMA
frame are not enough to provide for all the required signaling messages, and
as such 51 GSM TDMA frames are arranged into a single multiframe, and
the signalling channels are scheduled to occupy the ﬁrst two timeslots over
these. User data timeslots are organized in a smaller multiframe, comprised
of 26 GSM TDMA frames[17, 2].
There are two kinds of logical channels; dedicated and common channels.
Dedicatad channels carry data for a single recipient, and common channels
carry data destined to multiple receivers. In Table 2.1 and Table 2.2, a non-
exhaustive list of both dedicated and common GSM channels are shown,
along with a description of them.
The 25th timeslot in a multiframe is used by MSs to measure the signal
strength of nearby neighbouring cells that operate on other frequencies, fee-
ding information about whether a handover is appropriate or not into the
base station controller (BSC). Beyond using a single carrier frequency for
each channel, GSM systems are also able to use frequency hopping, where
the carrier frequency is changed between every timeslot during a transmis-
sion. The beneﬁt is an increase in robustness of the signal against interference
9
==PAGE:14==
Name
Purpose
Traﬃc Channel (TCH)
User data channel for voice or circuit-
switched data channels with datarate
of 14.4 kbps.
Fast Associated Control Channel
(FACHH)
Occupies the same timeslot as TCHs,
and is used to send urgent signalling
messages. Enables the stealing bits in a
burst, which render any user data use-
less.
Slow Associated Control Channel
(SACCH)
Used in the uplink direction to report
signal quality measurements of serving
cell and neighbouring cells to network.
The reports are in turn used for power
control regulation and handover decisi-
ons, as well as timing advance control.
Standalone
Dedicated
Control
Channel (SDCCH)
Signaling channel used during call es-
tablishment prior to TCH assignment.
Also used to send location updates and
sending and receiving SMS.
Table 2.1: Dedicated channels used in GSM assigned to a single user [17, 2].
from other cells, as only one timeslot instead of all of them can be aﬀected
by interference with frequency hopping enabled. It is possible to use up to 64
diﬀerent frequencies per base station, which is helpful in areas where there
are a lot of base stations deployed. MSs are informed of frequency hopping
use during setup of signaling links, where the frequencies used and the pat-
tern they are changed in is delivered. The only carrier that may not be a part
of a frequency hopping scheme are the SCH, FCCH and BCCH channels, as
they are vital to the process MSs use when looking for neighbouring cells
[17].
2.4
Mobility Management and Call Control
In order to uniquely identify subscribers, they all have an internationally uni-
que number associated with them, called the International Mobile Subscri-
ber Identity (IMSI), which is stored in both the HLR and the subscriber’s
subscriber identity module (SIM) card. IMSIs are made up of three parts,
resulting in a number of length up to 15 digits. The ﬁrst three digits of the
IMSI is the Mobile Country Code (MCC), identifying the homecountry of
10
==PAGE:15==
Name
Purpose
Synchronization
Channel
(SCH)
Used for network- and cell searches.
Frequency
Correction
Channel (FCCH)
Used to detect the beginning of a multiframe,
and tune transceivers.
Broadcast Common Control
Channel (BCCH)
Primary channel for information about the
network that every MS that is not engaging
in a call or is in idle mode is monitoring. In-
formation broadcast include MCC and MNC
of the cell, cell identiﬁcation information,
such as cell-ID and location area code (LAC),
and frequency information about neighbou-
ring cells, reducing the amount of frequencies
scanned by MS.
Paging Channel (PCH)
Used to notify subscribers of incoming SMS
or calls. Paging messages are sent to the lo-
cation area the subscriber is in, meaning all
cells with the LAC broadcast the message.
Random
Access
Channel
(RACH)
Uplink common channel used by MS to re-
quest a channel for communication with the
network.
Access
Grant
Channel
(AGCH)
Used to respond to channel requests in the
RACH. Responses carry information about
whether a SDCCH or (rarely) a TCH is assig-
ned, and which in the multiframe structure
it is.
Table 2.2: Common channels used in GSM [17]
the subscriber (e.g. 238 for Denmark [9]). The next two or three digits is the
Mobile Network Code (MNC), which identiﬁes the operator the subscriber
is subscribed to (e.g. 01 for TDC [6]), and the rest of the digits make up
the Mobile Subscriber Identiﬁcation Number (MSIN), which identiﬁes the
subscriber in the network. Since IMSIs are internationally unique and stored
in both the SIM and the HLR of the subscribers operator, subscribers are
able to, if their subscription plan allows it, use the radio resources of another
operator, so long as there exist a roaming agreement between the two opera-
tors. The IMSI is sent from the SIM of the subscriber to the visiting MSC,
where the MCC and MNC part of the IMSI is analyzed, and subsequently a
record from the home HLR of the subscriber is requested [17].
11
==PAGE:16==
The phone number of a subscriber is diﬀerent from the IMSI, but is also
made up of an up to 15 digit length number, and is called the Mobile Subscri-
ber Integrated Services Digital Network Number (MSISDN). Like the IMSI,
the MSISDN is also made up of three diﬀerent parts, where the ﬁrst part
of MSISDNs identifty the home country of the phone number (e.g. +45 for
Denmark), and has a length of one to three digits. The second part, the Nati-
onal Destination Code (NDC) identiﬁes an operator, and the ﬁnal part is the
subscriber number (SN), that identiﬁes the subscriber. With mobile number
portability (MNP), there is no longer necessarily a correlation between the
NDC and the operator the subscriber is subscribed to, as subscribers are
free to move their number from operator to operator. A beneﬁt of having
two seperate numbers for a subscriber in the IMSI and MSISDN is that a
subscriber can have multiple phone numbers (MSISDNs) associated with a
single IMSI[17].
2.4.1
Cell (Re-)Selection
In order to locate users when there are incoming calls or SMSs for them,
the network needs to know their location. As previously mentioned, this is
helped by the HLR and VLR which track which location area the subscribers
were last seen in. In order to reduce the amount of signaling required from
MSs reporting which cell they are in, a number of cells are grouped into
location areas, so that MSs only report when they move into a new location
area, as illustrated in Figure 2.5. The downside of this is that all other cells
in a location area but the one the subscriber is in sends out a paging message
when calls or SMS are incoming. MSs know which cell they are connected
to through the cell ID value and location area they are in from reading the
Location Area Code (LAC) contained in the BCCH.
The ﬁrst thing a MS does after being turned on or after moving into the
coverage area of a cell is to register with the network of its operator. It does
so by scanning for any RF channels it can ﬁnd in the frequency band(s) it can
operate in (e.g. GSM900 and DCS1800) for cells of its operator that oﬀers the
best signal quality (this is cell selection), as measured by the received signal
strength indication (RSSI) value, over at least 5 samples per RF channel
over 3-5 seconds(RLA_C)[4].
Typical RSSI values are between -60 dBm
and -100 dBm, where -60 dBm is a very strong signal and indicate the user
is very close to the cell. Following registration, the MS enters idle mode,
where it, among other things, begin monitoring neighbouring cells and their
RSSI values to decide whether or not to stay in the current cell, or move
to another cell with more favorable conditions. Camping on a cell in idle
12
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.5: Cells in diﬀerent location areas
mode is done for three reasons: (1) receive system information from the
network, (2) accessing control channels of the cell to initiate e.g. calls and
(3) receive calls, since the network then knows which area the MS is in and
can successfully page it.
From the BCCH of the cell it initially camped
on, the MS receives a list of ARFCNs neighbouring cells (BCCH Allocation
list(BA list) or Neighbouring Cell List) of the same operator have, reducing
the search space. After camping on the ﬁrst cell and entering idle mode, the
MS begins keeping a running 5 second average of received signal strength
from the neighbouring cells. Idle mode is one of the two states a GSM MS
can be in, the other being dedicated mode, where it is engaged in an active
connection with a BTS (e.g. during a call). Should a neighbouring cell have a
better RSSI by an amount set by the operator and be in another location area
(i.e. have a diﬀerent Location Area Code(LAC) broadcast in its BCCH), a
location area update procedure is initiated (this is cell reselection) by the MS.
Following establishment of a signaling connection in the new cell, a location
update request is sent to the MSC from the MS in a DTAP message[17, 1, 4].
If there are two cells with similar radio conditions, both of them alternating
between being the most suitable cell, the MS could start ping-ponging back
and forth between the two cells were it not for the cell reselection hysteresis
parameter (CRH). The result of going back and forth would be an increase
in the amount of singalling in the two cells, and paging messages could be
13
==PAGE:18==
lost. The CRH parameter is a threshold value that the path loss criterion
(C1[1]) must be exceeded by to initiate cell reselection, and it may hold an
individial value per cell (0-14 dB in steps of 2)[4].
Cell reselections are only performed if the path loss criterion and rese-
lection criterion are fulﬁlled. The path loss criterion is the parameter used
by MS to determine if a cell is suitable to camp on, and is comprised of four
parameters[1]:
• (Averaged) Received signal level (RLA_C[dBm])
• Minimum signal strength received by the BTS from the MS (broadcast
as system information) (RXLEV_ACCESS_MIN[dBm])
• Maximum power the MS may use when initially accessing the network
(broadcast as system information) (MS_TXPWR_MAX_CCH[dBm])
• Maximum power of the MS (P[dBm])
The formula used to ﬁnd the path loss criterion is found in [4] and repe-
ated in Equation 2.2.
Path Loss Criterion (C1) = A −Max(B, 0)
(2.2)
where
A = RLA_C −RXLEV_ACCESS_MIN
(2.3)
and
B = MS_TXPWR_MAX_CCH + POWER_OFFSET - P
(2.4)
is expanded into Equation 2.5.
Path Loss Criterion (C1) = (RLA_C −RXLEV_ACCESS_MIN))
−Max(MS_TXPWR_MAX_CCH + POWER_OFFSET - P, 0)
(2.5)
The Power Oﬀset only has an eﬀect for class 3 MSs operating in the 1800
MHz band, and is zero (0) in all other cases [4]. The path loss criterion does
not take interference directly into account, and as such an additional test is
performed by the MS when determining its ability to communicate with the
14
==PAGE:19==
network. The test is the MSs ability to decode received signalling blocks in
the paging channel[1].
Beyond the path loss criterion, which is used both when ﬁrst selecting a
cell and when performing cell reselections, there is also an additional optional
cell reselection parameter (C2 [1]) taken into account, which is used to either
encourage or discourage MSs to move to that particular cell (e.g. when a
cell is experiencing congestion, changing the C2 parameter to discourage
more MSs to camp on it can help alleviate the issue). The three parameters
inﬂuencing the ﬁnal C2 value are (1) the cell reselection oﬀset (0 dB - 126
dB), which can be either positive or negative, (2) the penalty time (20s -
620s), which primary purpose is to prevent fast moving MSs from selecting
that cell (e.g. small cells), and (3) the temporary oﬀset, which is the amount
of negative oﬀset set during the penalty time in dB (0 dB - 60 dB) [1, 4].
There are two formulas for ﬁnding C2, depending on the value of the
penalty time.
When the penalty time is set to its maximum value (620
seconds, i.e. binary "11111"), the formula is as seen in Equation 2.6.
Cell Reselection Parameter (C2) = C1 −CELL_RESELECT_OFFSET
(2.6)
Otherwise C2 is found by Equation 2.7
Cell Reselection Parameter (C2) = C1 + CELL_RESELECT_OFFSET
−TEMPORARY_OFFSET · H(PENALTY_TIME - T)
(2.7)
If C2 values are not used (i.e. broadcast on the BCCH), the values used
are set so that C2 = C1[4].
During operation, the MS has to, at least every 5 seconds, calculate and
evaluate both C1 and C2. In case C1 has a value below 0 during this period,
it is a sign the path loss is too high for continued operation. If the C2 value
of a neighbouring cell is higher than in the serving cell, that neighbouring
cell is a better cell. However, if the neighbouring cell has a diﬀerent LAC
than the serving cell, or the C2 value is measured higher again 15 seconds
after a cell reselection, the C2 value has to, respectively, exceed the CRH
value (broadcast in the BCCH) of the serving cell for at least 5 seconds, or
exceed the serving cell C2 value by 5 dB for 5 seconds [4]. This means that in
eﬀect, a cell reselection procedure can be started 5 seconds after conditions
indicate a cell reselection is preferrable, unless a previous cell reselection was
15
==PAGE:20==
performed 15 seconds ago, or after up to 10 seconds, if the new cell is in a
diﬀerent location area.
The coverage deployed has to be suﬃcient for radios to be able to engage
in successful cell reselections as they are moving around, which mean that
at least two cells can provide signal strong enough in an overlapping area as
illustrated in Figure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: Cell reselection
The red dots in Figure 2.6 indicate the minimum signal strength a MS
can receive, and in the area between the two red dots are signal levels where
cell reselections should occur.
Hitting the right balance of cell reselection parameters is then very im-
portant for continued operation for MSs moving around. Setting a too high
CRH value in an area might make MSs lose their network connectivity when
they move between location areas, rather than perform cell reselections.
2.4.2
Timing advance
Another possible source of interference occurs when subscribers move to or
from a BTS, where the burst sent at some distance from the cell overlaps
with other bursts due to the speed radio waves propagate, as illustrated in
Figure 2.7.
This time shift of bursts are counteracted by a timing advance value,
where the BSC instruct the MS to delay burst transmissions based on dis-
16
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.7: Timing advance
tance from the BTS. There are 64 timing advance steps, where each step
indicate a distance away from the BTS by 550 m, and the correct timing ad-
vance value is found during channel request messages on the RACH. As the
MS does not know its distance from the BTS, a small burst with large guard
times is sent to the BTS when it uses the RACH to request a channel, where
the delay is measured and a message forwarding the channel request along
with the required timing advance value is sent to the BSC. When the MS
receives the assignment message on the AGCH, the timing advance value is
also included, and the MS adjusts accordingly for subsequent communication
on the SDCCH. While the connection is active, the timing advance value is
monitored by the BTS and reported to the BSC, which updates the timing
advance value to the MS on the SACCH [17].
2.5
UMTS frequency overlap with GSM
With an increased demand by users for data heavy applications on mobile
devices (e.g. video services such as Netﬂix and YouTube), the deployment of
radio access technologies (RATs) such as UMTS and LTE that enable higher
data rates per Hz of spectrum has increased. As the amount of usable wire-
less spectrum is limited, some of the frequency bands available for use in the
17
==PAGE:22==
new RATs overlap with GSMs. In UMTS the ARFCNs have diﬀerent num-
bers and are called UARFCNS, but the operating bands of these UARFCNs
overlap with GSM in two cases; Operating Band III (3) specify UMTS opera-
tion with downlink frequencies 1805 MHz to 1880 MHz, and Operating Band
VIII(8) use downlink frequencies 925 MHz to 960 MHz (i.e. the entirety of
E-GSM900). The gap to the uplink frequencies is 95 MHz and 45 MHz, and
the UARFCNs range from 1162 to 1513 and 2937 to 3088, respectively. With
UMTS channels being 5 MHz wide around their center frequency, the avai-
lable channels for GSM that are not impacted by interference from UMTS is
further diminished, as illustrated in Figure 2.8.
Figure 2.8: 900MHz GSM and UMTS band use.
2.6
Summary
Mobile networks are functionally sectioned into a core and an access net-
work part, where each part have diﬀerent responsibilities and equipment in
place for the network and its user to be able to use it. By using radio fre-
quency signals to facilitate communication between basestations and users
in a wireless medium (which is one of the most desirable features of mobile
18
==PAGE:23==
networks - wireless communication), there are multiple issues inherent to this
communication form that have to be accounted for and combatted, such as
interference. As a consequence of spectrum re-farming and re-appropriation,
other technologies apart from GSM are now able to operate in the same fre-
quency band, which might introduce problems when using GSM, speciﬁcally
for equipment that is only able to communicate with GSM. Ensuring users
are able to move within a coverage area and still be reachable or able to
continue a call, is one of the things that make mobile networks mobile, and
there are procedures in place to ensure that this happens, such as cell (re-)
selections and handovers, depending on what state the MS is in.
19
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 3
Radio Frequency
In order to communicate wirelessly, a radio frequency signal must be gene-
rated, transmitted through air by the sending device, and ﬁnally be received
and interpreted at the receiving device. The components that facilitate wire-
less communication, often referred to as a radio frequency system, are made
up of ﬁve major components detailed in Table 3.1 [10].
Component
Purpose
Transmitter
Transforms information to be sent and both
generates and amplify a RF signal with it.
Transmit- and receive
antenna
Sends and receives all RF signal power to/-
from the transmission medium.
Transmission channel
The medium with which the RF signals move
through to get from a sender to a receiver
(in wireless systems the medium is air). Du-
ring propagation through the medium, the
RF signal loses strength.
Receiver
Reads the RF signal from the antenna, ex-
tracts the information from it, and forwards
it for further processing.
Table 3.1: RF System components. [10].
A phone is a two-way RF system, as illustrated in Figure 3.1, and can
communicate with a basestation in both directions at the same time through
the same antenna, as the transmitter and receiver can operate independently
of each other (in which case it is called a transceiver).
There are multiple design constraints related to the frequency spectrum
used when designing an RF system. The size of the antenna is related to the
20
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.1: Two-way RF system [10]
frequency the system is operating at: the lower the frequencies, the bigger the
antenna required, and vice versa. However, as the frequency increases, the
loss of power increases, as well as Doppler fading, restricting both the range
the signals can reach and still be successfully interpreted, and the speed a
device can travel with.
Furthermore, the amount of power that goes into transmitting a signal
directly inﬂuence the distance with which the signal can be received, thus
playing into the range an RF system is operable. An ideal mobile network
would have basestations that transmit their signals at a power level that
does not interfere with signals in neighbouring cells, while at the same time
provide a signal with enough power to reach the users at the intended edge
of the coverage area. Realistically any deployed mobile network has to be
designed for operation in a multitude of environments that can impact RF
signal quality, where topography, available deployment sites and building
material are but a few among the factors to be taken into account, and that
does not cover transient environmental eﬀects such as rainfall.
As the spectrum mobile networks are operated in is licensed, and the
amount of spectrum available is limited (only a subset of all GSM ARFCNs
are typically available to an operator), the most common interference issues
stem from inter- and intra-cell interference. Inter-cell interference (ICI), or
co-channel interference, is a result of neighbouring cells using the same fre-
quency channels (i.e. the same ARFCNs in GSM), and can be combatted
by ensuring cells operating with the same channels are not spatially close to
each other. Intra-cell interference is an issue with multi-user transmission
systems, where e.g.
multi-path propagation of signals and power leakage
between adjacent channels cause interference[10].
21
==PAGE:26==
3.1
Transceiver architecture
Whether a mobile phone or a wiﬁ-enabled laptop, both rely on wireless com-
munication for connectivity, and all wireless communication devices in turn
rely on transceivers, which are the devices that essentially turn bits into
electromagnetic waves when transmitting information, and the reverse when
receiving information. In the following, a description of the components re-
sponsible for handling RF in phones will be presented.
The RF section in a mobile phone principally consist of two blocks, that
in turn are made up of one or more chips. There is the RF chip, responsible
for preparing a signal to either be sent or received (i.e. translating between
electromagnetic waves and bits), and there is the block consisting of band
pass ﬁlters, power ampliﬁers and antenna. A simple illustration is presented
in Figure 3.2, where the signal path is indicated by the arrows between the
components.
Figure 3.2: RF Section of a mobile phone.
22
==PAGE:27==
The ﬁrst step after arriving at an antenna for a received radio signal is
to go through a Tx-Rx path separation block, which separate Tx and Rx
frequencies, as a single antenna is typically used for both. The second step
is to go through a ﬁlter, speciﬁcally a band pass ﬁlter, that reject frequencies
received that are outside of the desired range (e.g. everything above 960 MHz
and below 920 MHz for GSM receivers, as illustrated in Figure 3.3) so that
only signals in the ARFCN frequency is processed in the following steps.
Figure 3.3: Received by antenna and passed onto bandpass ﬁlter
Following ﬁltering, the signal is passed through a low noise ampliﬁer
(LNA), which is used to amplify the RF signal received. Since signal strength
is drastically reduced when traversing a distance, and especially in a wireless
medium, the received signal has to be boosted to make it easier to process.
Free-space path loss (dB) = 20log10(4πdf
c
) = 20log10(d) + 20log10(f) + 32.45
(3.1)
Using the free-space path loss equation (presented in Equation 3.1, where
d and f are measured in km and MHz respectively), a signal with central
frequency in the 900 MHz band (e.g. GSM ARFCN 0, which use central
frequency 935 MHz in the downlink direction) and a distance between ba-
sestation and mobile station of 1 km, the received signal would, in the best
case, be 91.86 dB weaker, hence the need for ampliﬁcation following ﬁlte-
ring. In reality, there are multiple eﬀects that can impact the signal, making
the free-space path loss model a best-case indicator. Using the COST231 or
Okumura-Hata path loss models instead should provide a better path loss
prediction. This signal path loss in conjunction with the receiver sensitivity
23
==PAGE:28==
value of a given device indicate the maximum distance a cell can provide
coverage. The receiver sensitivity in a device denote the smallest power a
RF signal can have and still be interpreted by following reception [10]. In
GSM, the reference sensitivity level for normal BTS and MS are -104 dBm
and -102 dBm, respectively[3]. Due to the power diﬀerences between the
output power of a BTS ((a BTS operating in the 900 MHz band and having
a power class 1 classiﬁcation can output 320 W - <640 W) and a MS (900
MHz band, power class 2, 8 W (39 dBm))[3], the limiting factor is often the
ability of the BTS to receive signals from the MS.
After ampliﬁctaion, the resulting RF signal is downconverted to a lower
frequency, which makes it easier to process by the baseband unit, as the
sampling rate can be much lower compared to the signal as received (as per
Nyquist’s sampling theorem stating that the sampling frequency must be at
least twice that of the sampled signal). Downconversion is performed by using
a local oscillator (LO) and mixer unit pair, where the mixer multiplies the
signal from the antenna with the LO, which returns the sum and diﬀerence
frequency. By tuning the local oscillator it is thus possible to get to the
baseband signal frequency. Following the mixer step, the received signal is
sent through an additional ﬁlter to get the frequency of the desired channel,
and then ﬁnally it is passet to an analog-to-digital converter, which is the ﬁnal
step before the baseband unit takes over. The baseband unit (also known
as the application unit) controls every device in the phone (i.e.
camera,
microphone, speaker, etc.), and processes all digital information (e.g. channel
coding, interleaving, decoding, etc.) [5].
3.2
Transceiver designs and challenges
There are multiple ways to combine the individual components for a full
transceiver design, with diﬀerent performance characteristics and trade-oﬀs
as a result. The two primary architecture designs used for transceivers are
(super) heterodyne- and direct conversion architectures, where DCAs has
been the most prevalent design in mobile phones since 2008[8]. When UMTS
enabled phones were being designed, heterodyne architectures oﬀered the
best time to market while optimizing RF performance, but came with high
power use and poor cost eﬃciency. The diﬀerence between the two archi-
tectures is the use of intermediate frequencies in up- and down conversion
of RF signals, where DCAs have none, and up/down convert the baseband
signal directly, whereas heterodyne transceivers have one or more interme-
diate stages where the signal goes through more mixers before it is passed
along in the receiver chain. The transceiver illustrated in Figure 3.2 is most
24
==PAGE:29==
similar to a direct-conversion architecture, as there are no intermediate steps
between the LNA and the ADC. The beneﬁt of moving to DCA designs
for phone manufacturers was a reduction of both cost and Printed Circuit
Board (PCB) size by removing intermediate frequency (IF) ﬁlters from the
heterodyne architectures [8]. Given the many components in play to make a
RF transceiver, each with their own design parameters and limitations, and
the increasingly complex and crowded RF environment, there are multiple
things that can impact the RF performance of a device. With transceiver
designs where the antenna is used for both reception and transmission, and
signals from both are located in the RF circuit (as seen in Figure 3.2, it
is important that transmission signals do not interfere with and are leaked
into the reception chain. Signals from the transmission part are much more
powerful after they have passed the power ampliﬁer compared to received
signals, which makes the isolation properties of the Tx-Rx path separation
block very important. If the signal that is going to be transmitted leaks into
the receiver chain, which it can do, as the signal can pass the bandpass ﬁlters,
the transceiver can essentially interfere with itself[8].
3.2.1
Receiver performance
A receiver that is unable to interpret a desired signal from noise is no receiver
at all. Thus, the most important characteristic of a receiver are its sensitivity
and selectivity values. Selectivity is the ability to detect a weak signal from
interference, and sensitivity is, as mentioned above, the lowest signal strength
a receiver is able to correctly detect [5]. A phones ability to detect the signal
from the basestation it is camping on, even when that basestation is distant,
or in a dense radio environment, can be the diﬀerence between being able to
make calls or not.
It is also on the edges of a basestations coverage area, where the received
signal strength of the basestation it is camped on is low, as illustrated in
Figure 3.4, that a phones ability to diﬀerentiate between signals in diﬀerent
channels with higher signal strengths become important. For co-located sig-
nals, if the BTS power ampliﬁers were perfectly linar, their output spectrum
would be rectangular, the path loss would be identical, and the resulting
signals strength received would be the same for them all. Since this is not
the case, inability to handle such adjacent channel interference may lead to
dead zones, and this interference is strongest on cell edges [8].
25
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.4: Inter-operator adjacent channel interference [8]
3.2.2
Mixer implementations
An ideal mixer and LO pair would be perfectly linear in its operation, and
output a copy of the input signal without additional components or noise
in the resulting signal. However, mixers are non-linear, and as such their
output signal is distorted to some extent. Furthermore, LOs can be non-
ideal or degrade over time, impacting further processing of the signal in the
chain by outputting a signal. The performance of the mixer is, among other
parameters, dependent on intermodulation distortion, DC oﬀset, conversion
loss and isolation [5].
As a result of mixer distorion, the receiver sensitivity can be limited
when powerful interfering signals pass through the bandpass ﬁlter, severely
impacting the ability to interpret the signal received (e.g. when receiving
E-GSM900 and UMTS Operating Band VIII(8)).[5].
3.3
Distortion
Electronic wireless communication systems can produce both distortion and
noise products, leading to e.g. adjacent channel interference (ACI) and white
noise from thermal energy. ACI is where a transmitter is sending a signal into
a channel it is not supposed to (e.g. where some of the signal from ARFCN
26
==PAGE:31==
960 leak into ARFCN 961), causing interference, and can be a result of e.g.
poor ﬁltering and tuning [18]. As presented above, transceivers are made up
of a lot of components (illustrated in Figure 3.2), and they are the device
in a communication device capable of introducing distortion when receiving
or preparing to transmit a signal. Frequency distortion is a result of driving
RF ampliﬁers to their frequency limits, and is produced when the amplitude
of particular frequencies is changed diﬀerently from other frequencies [18].
Amplitude distortion is a result of RF ampliﬁers being either incorrectly
biased or overloaded, causing the transistor to either be saturated or cut
oﬀ, creating harmonics or intermodulation distortion products, which can
interfere in adjacent channels and increase the bit error rate (BER) of the
system [18].
Intermodulation distortion (IMD) products occur as a result of nonlinea-
rities in linear ampliﬁers, or in a nonlinear mixer’s output, and are produced
when two or more frequencies mix in any nonlinear device, creating many
diﬀernt sum and diﬀerence signal combinations of the original frequencies.
There are multiple degrees of intermodulation distortion products that can
be produced, where the resulting frequencies follow the formula as given in
Equation 3.2, where the sum of m and n values is the order of the intermo-
dulation product [18].
±m · f1 ± n · f2
(3.2)
The most damaging IMD products are third-order intermodulation pro-
ducts [10, 5], and they are so because the resulting signals can fall into
the transceivers bandpass ﬁlter, interfering with the desired signal. The re-
sulting frequencies third-order intermodulation products have is given by
Equation 3.3.
2f1 + f2
2f1 −f2
2f2 + f1
2f2 −f1
(3.3)
As an example, using e.g. the center frequencies of UARFCN 3038 (947.6
MHz) and UARFCN 2973 (934.6 MHz), the second-order products, which
follow f1 + f2 and f1 −f2, the resulting frequencies are 1882.2 MHz and 13.0
MHz, both of which are outside of bandpass ﬁlters of that band, as well as
GSM900 bands. The third-order product frequencies for the same channels
are 2829.8 MHz, 960.6 MHz, 2816.8 MHz and 921.6 MHz. Both third-order
product frequencies in the 900 MHz range are outside of the operating range
27
==PAGE:32==
of the band (UMTS Operating Band VIII(8)) and are distinct from the two
original frequencies, but one of the third-order products (921.6 MHz) is the
same frequency as in GSM-R ARFCN 957, and can thus interfere with GSM-
R receivers tuned to that channel.
Second- and third-order intermodulation products and their occurence
in the spectrum are plotted in Figure 3.5, where the orange bars are two
input frequencies in e.g. a mixer or ampliﬁer, the green bars are third-order
products that are produced, and the blue bars are second-order products.
Figure 3.5: Intermodulation distortion products and how they appear in
spectrum
If a GSM-R receiver operating in an enviornment as the one presented
above has connectivity issues, a likely cause of them is intermodulation pro-
ducts. Ruling it out as the cause requires testing, and having a repeatable
setup for this is the best way to isolate any other issues.
3.4
Summary
Transceivers convert back and forth between electromagnetic signals and bits.
The signals move through an antenna and a large array of components, before
they are either radiated towards their destination through air, or turned into
voice calls by an analogue-to-digital converter. This process is not without
issues, and both the transmission part and receiving part of a transceiver
can impact both each other, but also the signal they operate on, through
their components. One of resulting eﬀects from component non-linearities is
intermodulation distortion, which can occur in mixers and ampliﬁers, which
28
==PAGE:33==
is an eﬀect that can create spurious emissions, resulting in interference and
e.g. a decreased ability to decode information from desired signals.
29
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 4
Testing mobile network
mobility
In a multi-RAT environment with multiple operators, there is a possiblity
that the diﬀerent systems interfere with each other, due to e.g. adjacent
channel interference or intermodulataion distortion from the combination of
signals used in an area, or simply the amount of users occupying an area.
A consequence of interference might be that mobility features, such as cell
re-selections and handovers in certain radio environments are not successful,
because of e.g. incorrect decoding of the desired signal due to interfering
signals. Since the physical deployment of basestations can often not be made
in the most ideal locations, but have to take topography, existing site de-
ployments, and buildings and their adverse RF properties into account, two
diﬀerent geographical areas with otherwise identical basestation conﬁgurati-
ons in terms of channel conﬁgurations might have very diﬀerent experienced
radio properties. For instance, the eﬀective coverage area of a basestation
in an urban environment might be much smaller than in a rural environ-
ment, and in a dense radio environment with many diﬀernet technologies, a
weak signal in a channel that in terms of signal strength is higher than the
sensitivity of receiving devices might still be corrupted by intermodulation
distortion in that channel from other signals.
In the event users of an operator in an area experience connectivity issues,
steps must be taken to identify the underlying problem, and as a result of
the investigation, a remedy to rectify the issue must be found and applied.
Whether it is a commercially deployed network, or a GSM-R network, if even
a single radio brand has issues connecting to, camping on, or moving to a
basestation in the network, ﬁguring out why this issue is present is important,
as the impact can be severe, and there can be multiple explanations for its
occurence. With e.g. GSM networks, a misconﬁguration of a basestation in
30
==PAGE:35==
an area may have two physically, spatially diﬀerent basestations using the
same ARFCNs too close to each other, leading to co-channel interference
and connectivity issues in that area.In most cases, the best solutions are the
ones that can be carried out independently of external entities, e.g. relying
on another operator to ﬁx an issue might be of no interest to that other
operator, if that operator is currently following regulations. For operators
that have an issue with connectivity from interference, there are a few options
available to solve them themselves, where the eﬀectiveness of them relies on
the underlying cause of the issue.
In case of intermodulation distortion,
an option is to re-conﬁgure the channel(s) of the basestation experiencing
issues, and the surrounding ones if necessary so that co-channel interference
is not introduced.
Re-conﬁguring channels relies on the operator having
enough channels available to them so that the re-conﬁguration can take place.
Another option is installing additional ﬁlters on the receivers in the network,
so that the intermodulating frequencies are much weaker in the receiver and
will not cause issues.
This option is, however, only realistically available
to operators of GSM-R networks, as they have a vastly reduced amount of
diﬀerent radios connecting to their networks [15].
In the case of train cab radios, if they have trouble camping on a ba-
sestation at all, or moving to a neighbouring cell when the signal quality
environment suggest such a move is best, yet it still doesn’t perform cell
reselection, train safety may be impacted. As train cab radios (and any ot-
her GSM radio) move in and out of the coverage area of the basestations
deployed in the network, the radio should perform cell reselection to the
next basestation that has a stronger signal, and the expectation is that the
stronger signal comes from the basestation that is closest to the radio, as
described in subsection 2.4.1. GSM-R networks have to provide coverage
along the entire railway tracks where the signalling system is used, and as
such it is reasonable to expect that most basestations serving GSM-R are de-
ployed close to the railway tracks themselves so as to provide the best radio
frequency conditions possible.
However, since railway tracks are laid in urban, suburban and rural
areas, there are many diﬀerent radio frequency conditions the network has
to operate in, and a train move into and out of while moving. With the
ever-increasing use of and need for spectrum by every mobile operator, and
re-farming and re-use of existing spectrum allocations for use with other
technologies, the signals sent on diﬀerent frequencies with diﬀerent technolo-
gies are constantly changing, making an increasingly dense radio frequency
environment even denser. Areas and equipment combinations that previ-
ously presented no connectivity issues may in the future encounter problems
31
==PAGE:36==
as changes are made to the radio environment. An illustration of how the
radio environment may be in an urban area with a dense mobile network
deployment is presented in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Multi-RAT radio environment
4.1
Railway systems
Railway operators are responsible for moving trains safely on the tracks,
from station to station, between junctions and crossings. To achieve this,
an interlocking system is in use, which ensures that when a train moves
from one track to another, it moves onto the track leading to its destination,
and that it is safe to do so. In Europe, the signaling system used is the
European Rail Traﬃc Management System (ERTMS), which uses GSM-R
as the underlying communication platform for signaling and voice calls. By
using GSM-R, the communication system is susceptible to, and faces, the
same issues commercially deployed GSM networks face, both with regards to
planning and operation. Making sure all parts of the train tracks are covered
32
==PAGE:37==
by a signal, and that there is enough capacity deployed is the ﬁrst priority
when deploying any mobile network, and second is handling any issues that
appear with regards to connectivity issues (e.g. interference).
4.1.1
ETCS
In order to ensure safe operation of trains in transit, there has to be a system
in place so that e.g. two trains are not occupying the same track when mo-
ving in opposing directions. In Europe, this system is called the European
Rail Traﬃc Management System (ERTMS), and the two main components
are: European Train Control System (ETCS) and GSM-R, where ERTMS
facilitates interoperability between trains in Europe and GSM-R is the com-
munication layer.
ETCS aims to remedy the lack of standardization in the area of
signalling and train control systems (. . . ). ETCS is in fact an
automatic train Protection system, based on cab signalling and
spot and/or continuous track to train data transmission. It ensu-
res trains operate safely at all times in providing safe movement
authority directly to the driver through the cab display and in
continuously monitoring the driver’s actions [16].
ETCS is a train control system designed to replace incompatible safety
systems in Europe with an interoperable one, enabling trains to cross borders
and operate safely in multiple countries. There are four ETCS levels based
on what equipment is installed and what information can be transmitted to a
train. Level 2, which is used in Denmark [7], indicate that ETCS equipment
is installed along the tracks and transmission of ETCS data is continuous,
bi-directional and carried by GSM-R. Traﬃc control information (e.g. route
and track speed) and signal aspects are given to a driver in his cab, making
many of the trackside signals redundant. Train location is reported by the
train itself, and additional measurements of position are reported by sensors
in the tracks.
4.1.2
GSM-R
As previously mentioned, GSM-R is an extention to GSM, where modiﬁcati-
ons are made to make GSM-R suitable for use in railways. GSM-R networks
thus have the same network entities in both the core and access sections, and
can use the same channels and enable the same functionalities with regard
to managing mobility of MSs connected to the network. To reduce poten-
tial interference issues, and not have to compete with commercial networks,
33
==PAGE:38==
GSM-R networks hava a dedicated 4 MHz radio frequency band availalbe
in the 900 MHz frequency band, allocated below what commercial networks
have available to them. Speciﬁcally, ARFCNs 955 to 974 (921 MHz to 925
MHz) are reserved for GSM-R use, providing 19 channels for use.
Since ETCS level 2 trains rely on a GSM-R signal, there has to be a
GSM-R network deployed providing coverage for the train along the tracks it
travels by, as illustrated in Figure 4.2, and the deployed cells have to provide
enough capacity for the trains to be able to get access to the network.
Figure 4.2: Idealised GSM-R Train Network and coverage illustration
4.2
Intermodulation distortion investigation
For GSM-R, which has a dedicated 4 MHz of spectrum available to itself,
direct interference from overlapping use by other technologies of spectrum
should not occur, and since the GSM-R spectrum license is typically operated
by a single operator within a country, co-channel interference should not
be an issue inside a country (borders would require cooperation to avoid
frequency reuse between two operators on the border). There are however
still eﬀects and phenomenon related to wireless communication systems and
their components that can create signals that distort or interfere with GSM-R
signals, such as intermodulation distortion.
The user experience of a user in a radio environment suﬀering from in-
terference issues is typically, depending on the severity of the interference, a
34
==PAGE:39==
poor one. Signs of interference issues to a user are e.g. trouble connecting to
the network, inability to establish calls, or not successfully reselecting cells
when moving between cells, and in the case of GSM-R and its use, this can
have dire consequences.
A candidate issue to investigate that can have adverse eﬀects on the
ability of MSs to operate correctly is intermodulation distortion eﬀects, and
within the European Union Agency for Railways and the International Union
of Railways, intermodulation and interference issues are well known to cause
issues [15, 21], and the response from them is to both advocate for closer
cooperation with operators of commercial networks, and, as a technical so-
lution, installing external ﬁlters for their radios and speciﬁying GSM-R ope-
rators to only use the dedicated 4 MHz available to them for their channels.
With denser mobile networks, more frequencies used, and more technologies
using those frequencies, the possibility that some combinations of frequen-
cies produce intermodulation distortion products is higher.
Furthermore,
with the possible consequences for a ETCS level 2 train using GSM-R and
the dedicated 4 MHz band reserved for GSM-R, investigating whether some
deployed combinations of frequencies produce issues for a GSM-R radio is
of interest. Calculating third-order intermodulation products in all UMTS
Operating Band VIII(8) show that there are multiple combinations that have
third-order products in GSM-Rs frequency band (i.e. ARFCNs 955 to 975).
As the amount of possible frequency combinations are so high, looking
at deployed frequencies narrows the search space for ﬁnding troublesome
combinations. By using a spectrum analyzer and an antenna, anyone can
ﬁnd out what frequencies are used in an area and surmise what technologies
are deployed there. Fortunately this has been done in [7], where UARFCNs
3041, 2997, 2972 and 2951 were found to be used by deployed commercial
networks, and ARFCNs 955, 957, 961 and 964 were found to be deployed
in the GSM-R frequency band. In addition, several GSM channels in the
P-GSM frequency band were also found, indicating that the radio frequency
space is already densely populated.
An image of the spectrum from the
measurements is found in Figure 4.3, and a list of channels found is given in
Table 4.1.
Using a script (speciﬁcally the one given in Listing 1) to output third-
order intermodulation products from the UMTS channels measured provides
the output as seen in Listing 2, and it is apparent that the diﬀerence products
from third-order intermodulation products (Equation 3.3) can fall within
E-GSM frequencies.
Whether they cause issues for some devices can be
tested, and if they do cause issues, testing whether a ﬁlter, or if changing the
ARFCNs used alleviate the issue can be conﬁrmed.
35
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.3: Spectrum measurements from [7]
4.3
Test setup
In order to conﬁrm or deny the existence of issues such as intermodulation
distortion, employing simulations and lab setups can help speed up the time
it takes to ﬁnd the underlying cause for the issues to occur. Using real-world
measurements and experiences as the starting point for further investigation,
replicating the live mobile network and the conditions where the issues occur
in a lab setup can be achieved with great accuracy and the right equipment.
Once everything is set up, multiple tests can be set to run automatically, and
measurements and results can be gathered and used to see if there is a trend,
or an issue detected.
36
==PAGE:41==
GSM-R ARFCN
Commercial
GSM
ARFCN
955
38
957
43
961
36
965
49
UMTS UARFCN
82
2951
84
2972
87
2997
89
3041
90
92
101
Table 4.1: List of measured GSM, GSM-R and UMTS channels
In the following a description of the equipment used, the conﬁgurations
set, and how conditions have been repliacted to test any GSM MS for trouble
with mobility, and speciﬁcally intermodulation distortion issues, is presented.
4.3.1
Physical equipment
Rohde & Schwarz Universal Radio Communication Testers (CMUs) can be
used during development of and testing of communication devices to verify
they operate according to speciﬁcations for introduction in the techologies
they are to be used with. The CMU200 series can be equipped with a mul-
titude of hardware modules for generation of diﬀerent technologies signals,
such as GSM, UMTS, CDMA, Bluetooth, and WiFi. Using CMU200s equip-
ped with GSM modules for the E-GSM 900, GSM-R 900, GSM-1800 bands,
and UMTS, any phone connected to them can be tested to ensure they e.g.
do not send too much power into a burst, or that they can perform handovers
inside of and between bands and technologies. There are in short a lot of
possible scenarios available to test a device under with a CMU, most of which
are described in the operating manual [19, 20], and a CMU can be conﬁgured
to have the same settings as a live network. For mobility testing, of interest
is the possibility to set which ARFCNs the BCCH and TCH channels to use,
what power they are to be output with, what their neighbouring channels
are, what the cell ID is, and what network it belongs to (with MNC and
MCC codes as conﬁgurables).
In order for any tests to be performed and any measurements to be made,
37
==PAGE:42==
1
def imd3(first, second):
2
'''Calculate third-order intermodulation distortion products
3
from two frequencies.'''
4
return [round(2 * first + second, 1), round(2 * first - second, 1),
5
round(2 * second + first, 1), round(2 * second - first, 1)]
6
7
8
def uarfcn_freq(uarfcn):
9
'''Calculate downlink center frequency from UARFCNs.'''
10
return uarfcn / 5 + 340
11
12
13
UMTS = [3041, 2997, 2972, 2951]
14
15
for items in UMTS:
16
for things in UMTS:
17
if items == things:
18
pass
19
else:
20
print("{} and {} can produce these 3rd order IMDs: {}".format(
21
items, things, imd3(uarfcn_freq(items),uarfcn_freq(things))))
Listing 1: Python script to get third-order intermodulation products from
UARFCNs
the CMU(s) have to be conﬁgured, and the CMU200s allow both manual ope-
ration through the buttons and knobs of the device, and remote operation,
by sending commands based on SCPI syntax (standard Commands for Pro-
grammable Instruments) to it through an interface (e.g. IEEE-488/GPIB).
The speciﬁcs of the conﬁgurations setup with remote operation depend on
the tests that are to be performed, but there are some commonalities that are
required to be set up when using remote operation, which will be presented
in section 4.3.2. Using GPIB interfaces on CMU200s, a number of CMUs
can be daisy chained and connected to a computer through a GPIB-to-USB
interface, as illustrated in Figure 4.4, where the full test setup is shown.
To communicate through the GPIB-to-USB interface, a National Instru-
ments GPIB-USB-HI [12] can be used, which allow for up to 14 instruments
to be connected. Along with the device comes a library for VISA (Virtual
Instrument Software Architecture), which is a standard for conﬁguring and
accessing instrumentation hardware, such as CMUs, through a number of
interfaces, where GPIB is one of them [14]. The National Instruments VISA
library can be wrapped for use with any programming language able to call
functions in a shared library, such as C, C# and Python, where the script
presented in section 4.3.2 and Appendix A has used Python 3 with the Py-
38
==PAGE:43==
3041 and 2997 can produce these 3rd order IMDs: [2835.8, 957.0, 2827.0, 930.6]
3041 and 2972 can produce these 3rd order IMDs: [2830.8, 962.0, 2817.0, 920.6]
3041 and 2951 can produce these 3rd order IMDs: [2826.6, 966.2, 2808.6, 912.2]
2997 and 2972 can produce these 3rd order IMDs: [2813.2, 944.4, 2808.2, 929.4]
2997 and 2951 can produce these 3rd order IMDs: [2809.0, 948.6, 2799.8, 921.0]
2972 and 2951 can produce these 3rd order IMDs: [2799.0, 938.6, 2794.8, 926.0]
2951 and 2997 can produce these 3rd order IMDs: [2799.8, 921.0, 2809.0, 948.6]
Listing 2: Output from Listing 1
thon library PyVISA [14].
A test setup using CMUs from Rohde & Schwarz enable setting up a
varied mobile network radio environment, where every CMU set up is able
to replicate the state of a single basestation from a real, deployed radio
environment. The CMUs support both wired and wireless setups from their
RF input/output ports for the devices under test. For more control over the
quality of the link and properties of the signals, a wired setup is preferred,
where the antenna port of the device under test is connected to the RF ouput
port of the CMU. It takes a lot more eﬀort to have the same radio conditions
using wireless connections.
Testing for ability to perform cell reselections between diﬀerent chan-
nels in a varied radio environment requires the device under test to be able
to receive the signals from multiple CMUs at the same time. This can be
accomplished by using signal splitters [11], which unfortunately aﬀect the
signal strength received in the device under test, thus requiring the output
signals from the CMUs to be increased so as to oﬀset this. According to the
data sheet for the splitter used, a 725 MHz - 1050 MHz splitter from Micro-
Circuits, [11], the total loss in the splitter itself for the frequencies speciﬁed is
about 6 dB, and the loss per cable used (coaxial cables with SMA connectors)
is about 0.2 dB. Using the combination of a spectrum analyzer, Samsung Ga-
laxy SIII with the application Network Cell Info Lite [13], a CMU and two
splitters, this amount of loss was conﬁrmed, as seen in section 4.3.1, and ta-
ken into account when conﬁguring RF output/input ports in the CMUs. An
illustration showing how equipment is interconnected with two splitters and
the cables going between them is available in Figure 4.5. This layout enables
for testing devices with up to four diﬀerent signals being received by the de-
vice under test simultaneously, while also being able to look at the spectrum
and its behavior while testing is under way, as a spectrum analyzer is con-
nected as well. The setup can be modiﬁed to include more source signals by
adding another splitter to the path, as well as more signal generators.
During development of the testbed, a number of other devices outside
of the CMUs and splitters have been used as well. Due to lack of availabi-
39
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.4: Layout of how the test setup is connected for remote operation
lity of CMU200s with UMTS modules, a Rohde & Schwarz Wideband Radio
Communication Tester (CMW500) has been used as a second UMTS signal
source. The CMW500 a newer edition of the CMU200, and the two models
share a lot of similarities with regards to what they can provide. A big dif-
ference between them is that CMW500s has an updated graphical interface,
and it has done away with GPIB ports for remote operation. While it is
still possible to control a CMW500 remotely, using USB or Ethernet with
TCP/IP, it has not been done in the script.Another device used during de-
velopment is a Rohde & Schwarz FSC 6 Spectrum Analyzer, which has been
used to measure the power level of the signals reaching the device under test.
A complete list of the equipment used is found in Table 4.2.
An image of the test setup is available in Figure 4.6, where a Samsung
40
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.5: Test setup diagram enabling various test setups
Galaxy S3 LTE Phone is connected and a GSM-R radio is connected, which
was used for development and testing of the test setup. This physical test
setup conﬁguration enable testing of scenarios where 1-3 900 MHz GSM
signals and 1-2 UMTS 900 MHz signals are received in a device at the same
time.
Cable and splitter path loss
Since cables and splitters are used to connect CMUs to devices, ﬁguring out
how much signal loss there is on the path between the two is important, so
that the RF input/output port of the CMUs can be conﬁgured to take the
loss into account, making the relationship between conﬁgured output signal
strength to the received signal strength in the device under test to be 1 to 1.
A summary of the loss observed in a Samsung Galaxy SIII LTE phone with
cell measurement software [13], with two splitters and three cables between
the phone and CMU for GSM and UMTS is available in Figure 4.7. It can
41
==PAGE:46==
Equipment
Purpose
Rohde & Schwarz Universal
Radio Communication Tes-
ter (CMU 200)[19, 20]
Create GSM and UMTS signals
Rohde & Schwarz Wide-
band Radio Communication
Tester (CMW 500)
Create UMTS signal
Mini-Circuits
Splitter
ZB4PD1-930W-S+ [11]
Split/combine signals 4:1 in the fre-
quency range 725-1025 MHz
National Instruments GPIB
to USB converter
Enable remote operation of CMUs
through USB-GPIB (IEEE488) inter-
face
Rohde & Schwarz FSC 6
Spectrum Analyzer: 9 kHz
- 6 GHz
Used during development to check sig-
nal strength of signals
Rohde & Schwarz SIM Card
Used to enable radios to connect to the
GSM signal from CMUs
Siemens
SVR400
GSM-R
Cab Radio
Terminal used to test GSM-R operation
Samsung Galaxy SIII(S3)
LTE
Mobile phone used during testbed de-
velopment
Table 4.2: Equipment used and what it was used for
be seen that there is a diﬀerence of about 11-15 dBm from the conﬁgured
output signal strength to the received signal strength for outputs -50 dBm,
-68 dBm and -90 dBm when the CMU is conﬁgured with GSM signals. With
UMTS signals of the same signal strength, the diﬀerence varies more, but
upwards of 20 dBm diﬀerences are seen.
Using the Rohde & Schwarz FSC 6 Spectrum Analyzer with the RF
input/output port conﬁgured with +14 dB for GSM signals and +26 dB
for UMTS signals and a two splitter setup, the conﬁgured output signal
strength is found to be equal to the measured signal strength in the spectrum
analyzer, as seen in Figure 4.8, and this has been considered the authorative
measurement and subsequently been used.
From the measurement results it is apparent that signal loss in the test se-
tup is dependent on how many splitters and cables the signal travels through
before it is received in an end-device, as well as the technology used, as there
is a diﬀerence between GSM and UMTS.
42
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.6: Photo of the test setup with a GSM-R radio (left) and develop-
ment test setup with Samsung Galxy S3 LTE phone (right)
4.3.2
Simulation script
With the test setup physically set up and signal loss taken into account,
the next step is to conﬁgure the equipment so that it is in tune with the
environment it is going to test, i.e.
set it up to replicate the measured
environment.
For cell reselections, the assumption is that as a user moves, the sig-
nal strength of one cell decreases, while a neighbouring cells signal strength
increases. During this movement, at some point, when the cell reselection
procedure (as described in subsection 2.4.1) determines the MS should camp
on a new cell, it does so. With the intent of investigating whether a GSM-R
receiver suﬀer from intermodulation distortion or not, by gauging its abi-
lity to perform cell reselections with multiple signals present, the following
script has been written. An illustration of the real-world scenario is given in
Figure 4.9, where all cells operate in the 900 MHz band.
In order to conﬁgure the environment to test a devices ability to success-
fully perform cell reselections, the ﬁrst thing to do is to establish connections
to the CMU so that they can be fed conﬁguration parameters and be operated
upon.
In the interest of development speed and a focus on veriﬁcation of results,
developing a GUI to conﬁgure the test setup with parameters has not been
completed. In the complete edition as seen in Appendix A, test variables
have to be set in the script, and it oﬀers text output to help identify where
in the script the current operation is taking place, and what the results are.
43
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.7: Phone reception level with CMU GSM (top) and CMU UMTS
(bottom) signal strength output -30 dBm, -50 dBm, -68 dBm and -80 dBm
and 2 splitters between the connection between CMU and phone.
In the following, snippets of code from the complete script in Appendix A,
edited for brevity and to only show functions and what the expected results
are, will be presented.
CMU Setup
As mentioned in subsection 4.3.1, there are common settings that must be
set for remote operation. First of all, for remote operation, the controlling
computer has to establish a connection to the CMU(s), second the inputs and
outputs to be used (i.e. where devices under test receive and transmit signals
to/from) must be conﬁgured, and ﬁnally, network speciﬁc settings have to
be set. For GSM networks this include which frequency band to operate in
(e.g. 900 MHz or 1800 MHz) and which ARFCN is to be broadcasted in the
BCCH, and what power level the signal is to be transmitted at. With these
things in place, further conﬁgurations can be made to perform tests.
In order for Python 3 to use the VISA library [14], the library has to be
imported, which is done ﬁrst. In order to set up multiple CMUs and assign
them to variables, the CMUs available through the GPIB-USB converter is
set to a variable (RM), and a function was implemented to make it easier to
set up multiple CMUs. In the function, all CMUs are reset to their factory
defaults, so that any conﬁgurations made in manual mode are not impacting
the results, the output display to show result of commands is enabled, and a
44
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.8: Corrected spectrum analyzer measurements of GSM and UMTS
signals through two splitters. GSM ARFCNs 957 and 980, as well as UMTS
UARFCNs 2973 and 3038 are the channels here. GSM BCCH power level
is set to -60 dBm in both. UMTS UARFCN 2973 power level is set to -60
dBm, whereas 3038 is set to -80 dBm.
GPIB address of the GSM900 signalling module is set.
After the base module of the CMU is set up, the GSM900 signalling mo-
dule can be conﬁgured with common network parameters and what physical
ports of the CMU the signal is to be sent on, as well as the loss correction
in those ports. This has also been put into a function, as the procedure
is to be performed on all CMUs in the test setup.Again the ﬁrst step is to
reset the module. Next the ports and their attenuation is set, and then the
MNC and MCC of the network is conﬁgured. As a test sim from Rohde &
Schwarz is used, these are set to the default value. A default phone for calls
is set up next, and then a phones capabilities is set to be requested when
it performs location updates. The signalling channels used is then set up,
and the FACCH is used as it enables early assignment. In conjunction with
using the FACCH, the speed of power control is also set to fast, as it uses
45
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.9: Real world illustration of test run
the FACCH for it.
Finally, an initial Location Area and Cell ID is set, and a phone is reque-
sted to always perform a location update after it is switched on, as well as
deliver enhanced measurement reports.
In order to improve the setup procedure, making the entire setup more
automated would be the next step to take.
Conﬁguration options
With all CMUs set up with a baseline of functionality, the next step is to con-
ﬁgure the individual CMUs for tests, and some helper functions have been set
up here. Speciﬁcally, functions to set up the broadcast channelListing 5, ad-
justing the power of that channel, changing location area and cell IDListing 6,
as well as setting up neighbour cells.
Conﬁguring the BCCH channel as in Listing 5 equals setting the ARFCN
of the cell, and the function that sets it up requires a power level, a channel
number, a location area number and a cell ID number. The signal strength
set here is the one that is sent out through the RF input/output port (RF2),
which is why the loss adjustment was made earlier so that there is a 1-to-1
match here between the received and sent signal, as already discussed. The
traﬃc channel is set to be ARFCNBCCH + 1, and with a constant signal
46
==PAGE:51==
1
import visa
2
3
RM = visa.ResourceManager()
4
5
def cmu_base_setup(cmubasemodule, cmuname):
6
cmubasemodule.write('syst:res:curr')
7
cmubasemodule.write('*cls')
8
cmubasemodule.write('trac:rem:mode:disp on')
9
cmubasemodule.write('SYST:REM:ADDR:SEC 2,"GSM900MS_Sig"')
10
11
CMUBASE1 = RM.open_resource('GPIB0::1::0::INSTR')
12
cmu_base_setup(CMUBASE1, str("CMUBase1"))
Listing 3: Connecting to and conﬁguring CMUs for remote operation and to
see output while tests run
strength of -60 dBm, so it should be available, and it uses the same output
port as conﬁgured initially.
During testing, it was found that the device under test could have issues
synchronizing with the BCCH during intial setup, and so a function to turn
oﬀthe signal from that CMU, change the location area and cell ID of the
cell it was supposed to connect to, then wait for a minute, was found to be a
working solution to force MSs to synchronize, as it forced the MS to perform
a location update.
With these helper functions in place, using them and setting up tests was
possible.
Test logic
In order to judge whether a cell reselection has been successful or not between
diﬀerent test conﬁgurations, the test has to be repeatable and have the same
starting conditions before beginning. The test procedure as set up in Appen-
dix A has been used to test the ability of the Siemens SVR400 to perform cell
reselections between two GSM-R signals with simulated movement while two
UMTS signals are present. The starting conditions for all tests is that the
UMTS signals are on from the beginning as the only signals present (where
a UMTS enabled CMU200 is conﬁgurable in the script, and a CMW500 is
conﬁgured manually), and the radio is turned on and in an operational state.
As soon as the test script is run, all CMUs are conﬁgured as described above,
and a single or a number (conﬁgurable) amount of ARFCNs is set to run a
cell reselection test for a conﬁgurable amount of times. As will be seen in
the next chapter, most tests have run 10 times, i.e. the same two GSM-R
47
==PAGE:52==
1
def cmu_gsm_setup(cmugsmmodule, lac, cid):
2
cmugsmmodule.write("syst:res:curr")
3
# Input ports and their attenuation.
4
cmugsmmodule.write('inp:stat RF2')
5
cmugsmmodule.write('outp:stat RF2')
6
cmugsmmodule.write('sens:corr:loss:inp2 0.0')
7
cmugsmmodule.write('sens:corr:loss:outp2 14.0')
8
# Network parameters
9
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:iden:mnc:dig TWO')
10
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:iden:mnc 01')
11
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:iden:mcc 001')
12
# Signalling parameters for phone
13
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:smod:imsi:mnc 001;mcc 01;msin "0123456063"')
14
# Request report of capabilities during e.g. location udpate.
15
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:req:imsi on')
16
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:req:imei on')
17
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:req:auth on')
18
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:req:hand on')
19
# Singalling channels used.
20
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:smod:sch facc')
# Control channel used
21
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:smod:pch fast')
# Power control channel
22
# Location Area and CellID
23
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:iden:lac ' + lac)
24
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:iden:cid ' + cid)
25
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:smod:loc alw')
# Always loc. upd. when MS on
26
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:emr on')
# Enable enh. measurement report
27
28
CMUGSM1 = RM.open_resource('GPIB0::1::2::INSTR')
29
cmu_cmu_gsm_setup(CMUGSM1, 10, 10)
Listing 4: Conﬁguration of CMU GSM900 function with network options
ARFCNs have been tested under the same conditions 10 times, to see if there
are any issues presenting themselves. In Listing 7, the code used to run the
cell reselection test is presented.
The test function takes as input which CMU it should start in, which
CMU it should end in after cell reselection, and what ARFCNs these have.
The function returns the signal strength in both the originating and target
cell when a cell reselection took place, or one of two failure condition values.
The ﬁrst step in the test is to conﬁgure the GSM900 signal the radio is going
to start in, which is called the serving cell, or in this case, the origin cell.
Once this is set, a minute goes by before the BCCH is turned on, so that the
device under test is in the mode where it searches for a cell to camp on. When
the BCCH is on, the neighbouring channel, i.e. the target cell/basestation,
is set to be its neighbour. Once this is conﬁgured, the device under test is
48
==PAGE:53==
1
def set_bcch_channel(cmugsmmodule, lev, chan, lac, cid):
2
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:bss:cch:mode batc')
# BCCH and TCH channel on
3
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:bss:cch:chan ' + chan)
# ARFCN 0-124 | 955-1023
4
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:bss:cch:lev -' + lev)
# -11 - -138 dBm
5
# Location Areas
6
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:iden:lac ' + lac)
7
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:iden:cid ' + cid)
8
# TCH:
9
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:bss:chan ' + str(int(chan) + 1))
10
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:bss:tch:lev:utim -60')
# Set TCH channel strength
Listing 5: Function to set broadcast channel and traﬃc channel with an
initial conﬁguration
1
def set_la_cid(cmugsmmodule, lac, cid):
2
cmugsmmodule.write("proc:sign:act soff")
3
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:iden:lac ' + lac)
# Make input parameter
4
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:iden:cid ' + cid)
# Make input parameter
5
time.sleep(60)
6
cmugsmmodule.write("proc:sign:act son")
Listing 6: Function to change location area and cell ID
able to camp on the origin cell, and a helper function is used to perform
this operation. If the device under test is able to achieve a synchronized
state with the CMU, the cell reselection part of the test is performed. If it,
however, fails to synchronize with the CMU, it indicates it has issues with
the radio conditions it is operating in, and a default value is stored.Assuming
the device under test achieved synchronization, the next step is to set up the
conﬁguration of the target cell, and in the target cell set the origin cell as a
neighbour, and then turn that BCCH on. The target cell is conﬁgured with
a diﬀerent location area and cell ID from the originating one, so as to force
the device to perform location area updates, which sets it in a synchronized
state with the target CMU.In order to simulate movement of the device under
test, the signal strength of the two BCCHs is continually adjusted from their
starting signal strengths. For all tests performed and presented later, the
rate of change has been +- 1 dBm every 2 seconds. The signal strengths are
changed until either the device under tests achieves synchronized state with
the target cell, or the signal of the originating cell drops below -110 dBm (i.e.
under the reference sensitivity as speciﬁed by 3GPP[3]), or the target cell has
a signal strength stronger than -60 dBm, by which point a cell reselection
49
==PAGE:54==
should have taken place.If the device under test successfully reselects onto
the target cell, the signal strength with which it did so is noted, and the
signals are turned oﬀ, and another iteration of the test is run. If it fails to
perform cell reselection, a defualt failure value is returned.
In Listing 8, the helper function used to obtain the ﬁrst synchronization
before cell reselection tests begin is shown.
The helper function used during testing to get the intial synchronization
is in principle very similar to the test function itself, as it continuously polls
the CMU to see if it has reached the synchronized state (i.e. device is cam-
ping) and changes settings during its runtime. It starts by waiting for a
minute, giving the device under test time to synchronize to the BCCH of the
originating cell. If this fails, it starts a long process of giving the device time
to synchronize. Three attempts are made in total, where each attempt gives
the device two minutes (120 seconds) time to achieve synchronized state. For
each time the attempt fails, the location area and cell ID is changed, and the
time it waits between attempts is increasing with the amount of attempts,
so the ﬁrst time a minute is waited, the second time two minutes are waited,
and the third and ﬁnal time, three minutes go by before it starts polling the
CMU again. In testing, this procedure has shown to be eﬀective at obtaining
the synchronized state.
A simpliﬁed ﬂowchart showing the important steps in a single testrun is
shown in Figure 4.10.
Results
The results (i.e. signal strength measured when cell reselection occurs or not)
are saved to a JSON ﬁle, where a ﬁle for each of the target cells signal strength
and originating cells signal strength is saved, along with what ARFCNs the
cell reselection has been tested with.
Improvements
As it stands, the script works as intended, and it can identify issues with cell
reselection between GSM-R cells with UMTS signals present. It could use
a couple more passes to clean up some of the code, and some quality of life
improvements could be made, but with a focus on obtaining results, there
has not been enough time to do so. Some functions could be changed, and
some of their input parameters could be removed, which could overall make
it more readable and easier to follow.
50
==PAGE:55==
4.4
Summary
As mobile networks and their environments are becoming increasingly dense,
with both multiple technologies deployed, as well as more antennas broad-
casting diﬀerent signals, the likelihood that a frequency combination that
produce intermodulation distortion products is deployed is increasing. Even
if operators are keeping their networks within regulatory limits, intermodu-
lation distortion procuts can still be produced and cause issues. Having a
testbed to investigate whether a communication issue is due to intermodu-
lation issues or not enables operator to apply ﬁxes. Whether the ﬁxes are
applicable by themselves, and even realistic, or not depend on the underlying
issue and the technology mix an operator has to support.
51
==PAGE:56==
1
def move_two_wcdma(cmuorigin, cmutarget, origchan, tarchan):
2
set_bcch_channel(cmuorigin, 60, origchan, 10, 10)
3
time.sleep(60)
4
cmuorigin.write('proc:sign:act son')
5
set_neighbour(cmuorigin, 1, tarchan)
6
in_sync = get_sync(cmuorigin, origchan)
7
if in_sync is True:
8
time.sleep(60)
9
set_bcch_channel(cmutarget, 60, tarchan, 20, 20)
10
set_neighbour(cmutarget, 1, origchan)
11
cmutarget.write('proc:sign:act son')
12
target_state = cmutarget.query("sens:sign:stat?")
13
origin_state = cmuorigin.query("sens:sign:stat?")
14
start_str_orig = 60
15
start_str_target = 90
16
while (target_state != "SYNC\n" and origin_state == "SYNC\n" and
17
(start_str_orig <= 110 and start_str_target >= 60)):
18
time.sleep(2)
19
target_state = cmutarget.query("sens:sign:stat?")
20
origin_state = cmuorigin.query("sens:sign:stat?")
21
cmuorigin.write('conf:bss:cch:lev -' + str(start_str_orig))
22
cmutarget.write('conf:bss:cch:lev -' + str(start_str_target))
23
start_str_orig += 1
24
start_str_target -= 1
25
if (target_state == "SYNC\n" and start_str_orig <= 109 and
26
start_str_target >= 60):
27
time.sleep(10)
28
cmuorigin.write('proc:sign:act soff')
29
cmutarget.write('proc:sign:act soff')
30
return (-start_str_orig, -start_str_target)
31
elif (target_state != "SYNC\n" and start_str_orig <= 109 and
32
start_str_target >= 61):
33
pass
34
elif origin_state != "SYNC\n":
35
else:
36
cmuorigin.write('proc:sign:act soff')
37
cmutarget.write('proc:sign:act soff')
38
return (-10, -10)
# value suggesting reselection failed
39
else:
40
cmuorigin.write('proc:sign:act soff')
41
cmutarget.write('proc:sign:act soff')
42
return (5, 5) # value indicating inital sync failed
Listing 7: Function for testing cell reselection
52
==PAGE:57==
1
def get_sync(cmugsmmodule, bcch):
2
bcch = str(bcch)
3
in_sync = False
4
time.sleep(60)
5
state = cmugsmmodule.query('sens:sign:stat?')
6
if state == "SYNC\n":
7
in_sync = True
8
return in_sync
9
else:
10
adjust_bcch_power(cmugsmmodule, str(60))
11
attempt = 0
12
max_attempts = 3
13
run = 0
14
max_runs = 12
15
lacid = 11
16
while max_attempts != attempt and state != "SYNC\n":
17
while state != "SYNC\n" and max_runs != run:
18
time.sleep(10)
19
state = cmugsmmodule.query('sens:sign:stat?')
20
run += 1
21
if state == "SYNC\n":
22
in_sync = True
23
return in_sync
24
if state != "SYNC\n" and max_attempts != attempt:
25
run = 0
26
set_la_cid(cmugsmmodule, lacid, lacid)
27
if attempt == 0:
28
time.sleep(60)
29
else:
30
time.sleep(60 * attempt)
31
attempt += 1
32
lacid += 1
33
elif state == "SYNC\n":
34
in_sync = True
35
return in_sync
36
else:
37
in_sync = False
38
return in_sync
39
return in_sync
Listing 8: Helper function used to get the device under test to enter syn-
chronzied state with the CMU, which indicate that it is camping
53
==PAGE:58==
Figure 4.10: Flowchart of test steps
54
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 5
Measurement and simulation
results
As has been discussed, intermodulation distortion products and interference
can have adverse eﬀects on the ability of a receiver to correctly interpret a
desired signal, and the problems with this can increase as the receiver moves
into denser radio environments, which is the direction mobile networks are
moving in.
Having a test setup available that can replicate live network
conﬁgurations and live radio environments, to ﬁnd and identify solutions to
problems, would be a beneﬁt for any operator of a mobile network. As test
setups allow for running repeated tests, certainty about having identiﬁed an
issue can be increased, and identifying solutions that work can be found with
increased certainty.
In the following, test results from the test bed and script described in
chapter 4 can be found, which all are conﬁgured to run the real world scenario
illustrated in Figure 5.1.
5.1
Baseline
Running the test bed and script without any potential interferring signals,
just having an originating and target cell, to some extent verﬁy the test setup
and its correct operation. Doing exactly this was done where the target GSM-
R cell was operating with ARFCN 957, and the originating ARFCNs were
956, 958, 961, 962 and 969, for ten testruns.
The results show that for the most part, cell reselections work without any
interferers. The result where it shows that during test number 3 the modem
could not get to synchronized state is peculiar, but might be a small issue
with the script. Of note is that the diﬀerence in signal strength between the
55
==PAGE:60==
Figure 5.1: Real world illustration of test run
originating and target cell is around 25 dB when the cell reselection occured.
This is in line with theory, and suggest the cell reselection hysteresis value
set in the CMUs is around the max level (14 dB) (setting it manually has
not been successful).
5.2
Direct intermodulation
With baseline measurements in place, investigating potentially problematic
radio enviroments can be done. In a multi-RAT environment with E-GSM,
GSM-R and UMTS, there are certain combinations of channel frequencies
that can potentially produce intermodulation products. As presented pre-
viously, UARFCN3038 and UARFCN2973 can potentially have a resulting
intermodulation product in GSM-R ARFCN957, making the conﬁguration
interesting to test. Conﬁguring the two UMTS signals available in the test se-
tup to occupy the two UARFCNs with a signal strength of -60 dBm, and set-
ting the test setup to perform cell reselections from ARFCN 957 to ARFCN
960 could show issues. Speciﬁcally, obtaining the initial synchronization can
be an issue for ARFCN957. The starting signal strengths in the originating
56
==PAGE:61==
Figure 5.2: Baseline test results with no interferrers.
and target cells was set to -60 dBm and -90 dBm, respectively.
As seen in Figure 5.3, the radio is able to, for a while, perform cell
reselections, and then after some time it stops being able to obtain syn-
chronization with the originating cell (value is 5 dBm, which is the value
indicating initial synchronization issues). Whether this is because of inter-
modulation distortion products interfering, or some other eﬀect, can not
be conﬁrmed from just this one measurement. Testing the scenario where
GSM-R ARFCN 957 is the target cell, rather than the orignating cell, might
indicate whether it is the only channel with the problem, or not. The results
with GSM-R ARFCN 956 and 958 as originating cells are given in Figure 5.4
and Figure 5.5, and show the same issue, where also neighbouring channels
of GSM-R 957 have issues obtaining inital synchronization.
The question arises if all GSM-R channels have the same issue in the
57
==PAGE:62==
Figure 5.3: Testing cell reselection from ARFCN 957 to ARFCN 960 with
UMTS UARFCN 3038 and UARFCN 2973 at -60 dBm
presence of UARFCN 3038 and UARFCN 2973. A test was run with GSM-
R ARFCNs 965 as the originating cell, and ARFCN 970 as the target cell.
As can be seen in Figure 5.6, no issues were found in this case, suggesting
there is something about the combination of UARFCN 3038 and 2973 at
high power levels that is a problem.
Since the three received signals during initial synchronization are all at
-60 dBm, a possible explanation could be that the components in the receiver
are power saturated, i.e. the signals they receive drive the components to
the maximum of their operating range. To test for this, the conﬁguration
was changed to use other UARFCN frequencies, and see if the same pro-
blem occured. In Figure 5.7, the results from a testrun with UARFCN 3060
and UARFCN 2973, which do not have a GSM-R ARFCN as a third-order
intermodulation product, show that the same issue does not occur.
58
==PAGE:63==
Figure 5.4: Testing cell reselection from ARFCN 956 to ARFCN 957 with
UMTS UARFCN 3060 and UARFCN 2973 at -60 dBm
Furthermore, in another run, UARFCN 3060 and UARFCN 3056 were
tested, and these do not have GSM-R intermodulation products either, and
they showed the same results, as seen in Figure 5.8.
With other UARFCNs in the 900 MHz band without intermodulation
products in GSM-R, the evidence suggest there is an intermodulation issue
present when UARFCN 3038 and UARFCN 2973 are deployed in the same
area. If the received signal power from the two UMTS signals is lower, the
intermdoulation products should also have lower power, and might not be
as destructive. A wide range of target GSM-R ARFCNs were tested with
ARFCN 957 as the originating cell with UARFCNs 3038 and 2973 at -70
dBm. The results shown in Figure 5.9 indicate that the power level does
play an important part in the eﬀect of intermodulation distortion products.
59
==PAGE:64==
Figure 5.5: Testing cell reselection from ARFCN 958 to ARFCN 957 with
UMTS UARFCN 3060 and UARFCN 2973 at -60 dBm
5.3
Summary
The evidence from multiple test runs and conﬁgurations point towards there
being an issue with GSM-R ARFCN 957 in the presence of UMTS UARFCN
3038 and UARFCN 2973, when the UMTS channels power levels are relati-
vely high (-60 dBm). The next step could be to install a ﬁlter on the Siemens
SVR400 radio and see if it still show the same issues with more test runs.
60
==PAGE:65==
Figure 5.6: Testing cell reselection from ARFCN 965 to ARFCN 970 with
UMTS UARFCN 3060 and UARFCN 2973 at -60 dBm
61
==PAGE:66==
Figure 5.7: Testing cell reselection from ARFCN 957 to ARFCN 960 with
UMTS UARFCN 3060 and UARFCN 2973 at -60 dBm
62
==PAGE:67==
Figure 5.8: Testing cell reselection from ARFCN 957 to ARFCN 960 with
UMTS UARFCN 3060 and UARFCN 3056 at -60 dBm
63
==PAGE:68==
Figure 5.9: Testing cell reselection from GSM-R ARFCN 957 to GSM-R
ARFCNs 956, 958, 961, 962 and 969 with UMTS UARFCNs 3038 and 2973
at -70 dBm
64
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
All wireless communication systems share some of the same fundamental is-
sues when it comes to transmitting and receiving signals. Mobile networks
are no diﬀerent, and they are rapidly becoming ever more complex, and the
spectrum they operate in is squeezed as much as possbile in order to deli-
ver service to users at the data rates they require. Frequency allocations
that were once reserved by a single mobile communication technology is now
being re-farmed and re-purposed for use with other mobile communication
technologies, such as UMTS and recently LTE. These new technologies are
often vastly diﬀerent from the now old GSM technologies, and the signals
emitted by these new technologies into a frequency band that is co-habited
by multiple communication technologies might produce unintended results,
and issues in the legacy equipment. A key component of mobile networks
is the users mobility, and ensuring this works in the face of changing radio
environments is of utmost importance for an operator. Missing calls or ex-
periencing inability to connect to the network is unacceptable for users of
it, and can have severe consequences, depending on the use case for the net-
work. ETCS level 2 trains rely on GSM signals to operate, and while GSM-R
network operators have a dedicated frequency band available to them, there
might still be signal combinations that pose a problem to the operation of
those networks.
In multi-RAT environments, the multitude of possible signal combina-
tions is almost endless. As a consequence, the components in transceivers,
speciﬁcally non-linear ones such as ampliﬁers and mixers, might experience
a signal mix previously unseen. This in turn might in unforunate scenarios
create intermodulation distortion products, or other noise or distortion pro-
ducts, which can ultimately render them unable to communicate in certain
areas or enviornments. Should such an issue occur, having a tesbed that
65
==PAGE:70==
can replicate the radio conditions where the issue occurs, and test devices
to be operated under such conditions, might lead to a swift implementation
of a ﬁx for the issue. Whether that potential ﬁx requires external help for
another operator, or can be done by an operator itself, depends on what the
underlying cause is and the options available for implementing a ﬁx.
In this thesis a tesbed has been developed and presented for use for tes-
ting mobility in mobile networks. The testbed has been used for testing of
intermodulation distortion products between two UMTS signals (UARFCN
3038 and UARFCN 2937) and a GSM-R signal (ARFCN 957).
The re-
sults from multiple test runs with multiple conﬁgurations show that there
are certain scenarios that strongly indicate that intermodulation distortion
products are created that impact a Siemens SVR400 cab radio modem used
for GSM-R operation. From somewhat limted testing, it appears that the
issue is avoidable by changing GSM-R ARFCNs in any area that would be
aﬀected. With availability of an external ﬁlter and more testing with it, it
could be conﬁrmed applying it to that model radio would solve the apparent
intermodulation distortion issues.
66
==PAGE:71==
Appendix A
Code
Script used to set up, conﬁgure and run tests for cell reselection tests. The
functions move_one and move_two still contain a lot of old code and should
be modiﬁed before they are used.
1
'''Idle mode cell reselection test. '''
2
import time
3
import json
4
import collections
5
import visa
6
7
# visa.log_to_screen()
8
9
RM = visa.ResourceManager()
10
print(RM.list_resources())
11
12
13
def cmu_base_setup(cmubasemodule, cmuname):
14
'''Set base parameters for the CMU in base mode.'''
15
print("Connecting to CMU:")
16
cmubasemodule.write('syst:res:curr')
17
cmubasemodule.write('*cls')
18
cmubasemodule.write('trac:rem:mode:disp on')
19
# Input external reference clock might be necessary to set up.
20
cmubasemodule.write('SYST:REM:ADDR:SEC 1,"RF_NSig"')
21
cmubasemodule.write('SYST:REM:ADDR:SEC 2,"GSM900MS_Sig"')
22
cmubasemodule.write('SYST:REM:ADDR:SEC 3,"GSM900MS_NSig"')
23
cmubasemodule.write('SYST:REM:ADDR:SEC 4,"GSM1800MS_Sig"')
24
cmubasemodule.write('SYST:REM:ADDR:SEC 5,"GSM1800MS_NSig"')
25
cmubasemodule.write('SYST:REM:ADDR:SEC 6,"GSM1900MS_Sig"')
26
cmubasemodule.write('SYST:REM:ADDR:SEC 7,"GSM1900MS_NSig"')
27
print("{cmuname} is set up".format(cmuname=cmuname))
28
29
30
def wcdma_setup(cmuwcdmabase, uarfcndl, uarfcnul, dlpower):
67
==PAGE:72==
31
'''Configure UMTS/WCDMA signal remotely '''
32
uarfcndl = str(uarfcndl)
33
uarfcnul = str(uarfcnul)
34
dlpower = str(dlpower)
35
cmuwcdmabase.write('syst:res:curr')
36
cmuwcdmabase.write('*cls')
37
cmuwcdmabase.write('trac:rem:mode:disp on')
38
cmuwcdmabase.write('syst:rem:addr:sec 2,"WCDMA19UEFDD_Sig"')
39
# Set default values
40
cmuwcdma = RM.open_resource('GPIB0::5::2::INSTR')
41
cmuwcdma.write('inp:stat RF2')
42
cmuwcdma.write('outp:stat RF2')
43
cmuwcdma.write('sens:corr:loss:inp2 0.0')
44
cmuwcdma.write('sens:corr:loss:outp2 26.0')
45
cmuwcdma.write("def:netw on")
46
cmuwcdma.write("conf:netw:iden:mcc 001")
47
cmuwcdma.write("conf:netw:iden:mnc:dig TWO")
48
cmuwcdma.write("conf:netw:iden:mnc 05")
49
cmuwcdma.write('def:netw:rac on')
50
cmuwcdma.write("def:netw:req on")
51
cmuwcdma.write("def:lev on")
52
# Set DL/UL Band and Channels as well as DL power
53
cmuwcdma.write("conf:netw:oban ob8")
# Band 8, 900 MHz
54
cmuwcdma.write("conf:bss:chan " + uarfcndl)
# DL channel
55
cmuwcdma.write("conf:ues:chan " + uarfcnul)
# UL channel
56
cmuwcdma.write("conf:bss:opow -" + dlpower)
# DL Power (dBm)
57
cmuwcdma.write("proc:sign:act son")
# Turn signal on
58
59
60
CMUBASE1 = RM.open_resource('GPIB0::1::0::INSTR')
61
CMUBASE2 = RM.open_resource('GPIB0::2::0::INSTR')
62
CMUBASE3 = RM.open_resource('GPIB0::3::0::INSTR')
63
# CMUBASE4 = RM.open_resource('GPIB0::4::0::INSTR')
64
CMUWCDMA = RM.open_resource("GPIB0::5::0::INSTR")
65
66
CMUBASES = [CMUBASE1, CMUBASE2, CMUBASE3]
67
68
cmu_base_setup(CMUBASE1, str("CMUBase1"))
69
cmu_base_setup(CMUBASE2, str("CMUBase2"))
70
cmu_base_setup(CMUBASE3, str("CMUBase3"))
71
wcdma_setup(CMUWCDMA, 2973, 2748, 60)
72
73
74
def cmu_gsm_setup(cmugsmmodule, lac, cid):
75
'''Set inout/output ports and network settings.
76
Receives which CMU is to be set up, and what location area and cell ID the
77
CMU is to assume.
78
'''
79
lac = str(lac)
80
cid = str(cid)
81
# Input ports and their attenuation.
68
==PAGE:73==
82
cmugsmmodule.write("syst:res:curr")
83
cmugsmmodule.write('inp:stat RF2')
84
cmugsmmodule.write('outp:stat RF2')
85
cmugsmmodule.write('sens:corr:loss:inp2 0.0')
86
cmugsmmodule.write('sens:corr:loss:outp2 14.0')
87
# Network parameters
88
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:iden:mnc:dig TWO')
89
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:iden:mnc 01')
90
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:iden:mcc 001')
91
# Signalling parameters for phone
92
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:smod:imsi:mnc 001;mcc 01;msin "0123456063"')
93
# Request report of capabilities during e.g. location udpate.
94
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:req:imsi on')
95
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:req:imei on')
96
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:req:auth on')
97
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:req:hand on')
98
# Singalling channels used.
99
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:smod:sch facc')
# Control channel used
100
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:smod:pch fast')
# Power control channel
101
# Location Area and CellID
102
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:iden:lac ' + lac)
103
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:iden:cid ' + cid)
104
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:smod:loc alw')
# Always loc. upd. when MS on
105
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:emr on')
# Enable enh. measurement report
106
107
108
CMUGSM1 = RM.open_resource('GPIB0::1::2::INSTR')
109
CMUGSM2 = RM.open_resource('GPIB0::2::2::INSTR')
110
CMUGSM3 = RM.open_resource('GPIB0::3::2::INSTR')
111
# CMUGSM4 = RM.open_resource('GPIB0::4::2::INSTR')
112
CMUGSMS = [CMUGSM1, CMUGSM2, CMUGSM3]
113
114
print("Setting up GSM...")
115
116
cmu_gsm_setup(CMUGSM1, 10, 10)
117
cmu_gsm_setup(CMUGSM2, 20, 20)
118
cmu_gsm_setup(CMUGSM3, 30, 30)
119
120
121
def set_bcch_channel(cmugsmmodule, lev, chan, lac, cid):
122
'''Set Broadcast Channel number, level,
123
location area and cellid for a specific CMU.'''
124
lev = str(lev)
125
chan = str(chan)
126
lac = str(lac)
127
cid = str(cid)
128
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:bss:cch:mode batc')
# BCCH and TCH channel on
129
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:bss:cch:chan ' + chan)
# ARFCN 0-124 | 955-1023
130
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:bss:cch:lev -' + lev)
# -11 - -138 dBm
131
# Location Areas
132
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:iden:lac ' + lac)
69
==PAGE:74==
133
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:iden:cid ' + cid)
134
# TCH:
135
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:bss:chan ' + str(int(chan) + 1))
136
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:bss:tch:lev:utim -60')
# Set TCH channel strength
137
138
139
def adjust_bcch_power(cmugsmmodule, lev):
140
'''Change Broadcast Channel power level.'''
141
lev = str(lev)
142
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:bss:cch:lev -' + lev)
143
144
145
def set_la_cid(cmugsmmodule, lac, cid):
146
'''Update location area and cellid of a CMU.'''
147
lac = str(lac)
148
cid = str(cid)
149
# Location Areas
150
cmugsmmodule.write("proc:sign:act soff")
151
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:iden:lac ' + lac)
# Make input parameter
152
cmugsmmodule.write('conf:netw:iden:cid ' + cid)
# Make input parameter
153
time.sleep(60)
154
cmugsmmodule.write("proc:sign:act son")
155
156
157
def get_sync(cmugsmmodule, bcch):
158
''' Set output power to -60 dBm and wait for 2 minutes for the
159
phone to enter sync.'''
160
bcch = str(bcch)
161
in_sync = False
162
time.sleep(60)
163
state = cmugsmmodule.query('sens:sign:stat?')
164
if state == "SYNC\n":
165
in_sync = True
166
return in_sync
167
else:
168
adjust_bcch_power(cmugsmmodule, str(60))
169
attempt = 0
170
max_attempts = 3
171
run = 0
172
max_runs = 12
173
lacid = 11
174
print("Beginnig sync attempts.")
175
while max_attempts != attempt and state != "SYNC\n":
176
while state != "SYNC\n" and max_runs != run:
177
# Where sync checks are performed.
178
print("Sync attempt in ARFCN{}: Run #: {}/{}. Attempt #: {}/{}"
179
.format(bcch, run, max_runs, attempt, max_attempts))
180
time.sleep(10)
181
state = cmugsmmodule.query('sens:sign:stat?')
182
run += 1
183
if state == "SYNC\n":
70
==PAGE:75==
184
print("Sync achieved during run {} and attempt {}"
185
.format(run, attempt))
186
in_sync = True
187
return in_sync
188
if state != "SYNC\n" and max_attempts != attempt:
189
# Where sync runs are reset and cell reconfigured
190
print("Sync not achieved. Turning BCCH off, changing location"
191
" area and cell-ID and re-trying in 60 seconds")
192
run = 0
193
set_la_cid(cmugsmmodule, lacid, lacid)
194
if attempt == 0:
195
time.sleep(60)
196
else:
197
time.sleep(60 * attempt)
198
attempt += 1
199
lacid += 1
200
elif state == "SYNC\n":
201
print("Sync achieved during run {} and attempt {}"
202
.format(run, attempt))
203
in_sync = True
204
return in_sync
205
else:
206
print("Failed to acheive sync after {} attempts."
207
.format(attempt))
208
in_sync = False
209
return in_sync
210
return in_sync
211
212
213
def set_neighbour(cmugsmmodule, gsmnr, neighbourchannel):
214
'''Set the neighbouring list for a CMU.'''
215
gsmnr = str(gsmnr)
216
neighbourchannel = str(neighbourchannel)
217
cmugsmmodule.write("conf:netw:ncel:gsm" + gsmnr + " on," +
218
neighbourchannel + ",00")
219
220
221
one_result = []
222
223
224
def move_one(cmuorigin, cmutarget):
225
'''Move device under test from an origin cmu to a target cmu.
226
CMUs have differnt location areas and cell IDs, and share the same BSIC.'''
227
set_bcch_channel(cmuorigin, 50, 980, 10, 10)
228
print("BCCH on in 60 seconds")
229
time.sleep(0)
230
print("Enabling BCCH")
231
cmuorigin.write('proc:sign:act son')
232
set_neighbour(cmuorigin, 1, 990)
233
get_sync(cmuorigin, 980)
# Get to synchronized state before starting the test
234
set_bcch_channel(cmutarget, 50, 990, 20, 20)
71
==PAGE:76==
235
set_neighbour(cmutarget, 1, 980)
236
cmutarget.write('proc:sign:act son')
237
target_state = cmutarget.query("sens:sign:stat?")
238
runs = 300
239
start_str = 40
240
print("Attempting to move while two signals are lit.")
241
while target_state != "SYNC\n" and runs != 0 and start_str <= 110:
242
print("Moving at signal strength: {sigstr}".format(sigstr=start_str))
243
time.sleep(1)
244
target_state = cmutarget.query("sens:sign:stat?")
245
cmuorigin.write('conf:bss:cch:lev -' + str(start_str))
# Decrease sigstr
246
start_str += 1
247
runs -= 1
248
if target_state == "SYNC\n" and start_str <= 109:
249
print("Signal quality when MS moved was: {start_str}"
250
.format(start_str=start_str))
251
one_result.append(start_str)
252
cmuorigin.write("conf:netw:ncel:gsm2 off,990,20")
253
cmutarget.write("conf:netw:ncel:gsm2 off,980,10")
254
cmuorigin.write('proc:sign:act soff')
255
cmutarget.write('proc:sign:act soff')
256
elif target_state != "SYNC\n" and start_str <= 109:
257
pass
258
else:
259
print("Failed to acheive SYNC at -{start_str} dBm :("
260
.format(start_str=start_str))
261
one_result.append(-10)
262
print("Turning singals off.")
263
cmuorigin.write('proc:sign:act soff')
264
cmutarget.write('proc:sign:act soff')
265
266
267
def move_two(cmuorigin, cmutarget, cmunoise, origchan, tarchan,
268
noisechan, noisestr):
269
'''Move device under test from an origin cmu to a target cmu.
270
CMUs have differnt location areas and cell IDs, and share the same BSIC.
271
Channel numbers can be set.'''
272
set_bcch_channel(cmuorigin, 50, origchan, 10, 10)
273
print("BCCH on in 60 seconds")
274
time.sleep(60)
275
cmuorigin.write('proc:sign:act son')
276
print("BCCH On")
277
set_neighbour(cmuorigin, 1, tarchan)
278
get_sync(cmuorigin, origchan)
# Get to synchronized state before starting the test
279
set_bcch_channel(cmutarget, 50, tarchan, 20, 20)
280
set_neighbour(cmutarget, 1, origchan)
281
set_bcch_channel(cmunoise, noisestr, noisechan, 30, 30)
282
cmutarget.write('proc:sign:act son')
283
cmunoise.write('proc:sign:act son')
284
target_state = cmutarget.query("sens:sign:stat?")
285
origin_state = cmuorigin.query("sens:sign:stat?")
72
==PAGE:77==
286
runs = 300
287
start_str = 60
288
print("Attempting to move while two signals are lit.")
289
while target_state != "SYNC\n" and runs != 0 and start_str <= 110:
290
print("Moving at signal strength: {sigstr}".format(sigstr=start_str))
291
time.sleep(2)
292
origin_state = cmuorigin.query("sens:sign:stat?")
293
target_state = cmutarget.query("sens:sign:stat?")
294
cmuorigin.write('conf:bss:cch:lev -' + str(start_str))
295
start_str += 1
296
runs -= 1
297
if target_state == "SYNC\n" and start_str <= 109:
298
print("Signal quality when MS moved was: {start_str}"
299
.format(start_str=start_str))
300
time.sleep(10)
# See if CID moves too, according to phone app.
301
two_results.append(start_str)
302
cmuorigin.write("conf:netw:ncel:gsm2 off," + str(tarchan) + ",20")
303
cmutarget.write("conf:netw:ncel:gsm2 off," + str(origchan) + ",10")
304
cmuorigin.write('proc:sign:act soff')
305
cmutarget.write('proc:sign:act soff')
306
cmunoise.write('proc:sign:act soff')
307
elif target_state != "SYNC\n" and start_str <= 109:
308
# print("Passing")
309
pass
310
else:
311
print("Failed to acheive SYNC at -{start_str} dBm :("
312
.format(start_str=start_str))
313
two_results.append(-10)
314
print("Turning singals off.")
315
cmuorigin.write('proc:sign:act soff')
316
cmutarget.write('proc:sign:act soff')
317
cmunoise.write('proc:sign:act soff')
318
319
320
def move_two_wcdma(cmuorigin, cmutarget, origchan, tarchan):
321
'''Move device under test from an origin cmu to a target cmu.
322
CMUs have differnt location areas and cell IDs, and share the same BSIC.
323
Channel numbers can be set.'''
324
set_bcch_channel(cmuorigin, 60, origchan, 10, 10)
325
print("ARFCN {} BCCH on in 60 seconds.".format(origchan))
326
time.sleep(60)
327
cmuorigin.write('proc:sign:act son')
328
print("ARFCN {} BCCH On.".format(origchan))
329
set_neighbour(cmuorigin, 1, tarchan)
330
# Get to synchronized state before starting the test)
331
print("Running get_sync...")
332
in_sync = get_sync(cmuorigin, origchan)
333
print("Sync state after get_sync is {}. Continuing with movements."
334
.format(in_sync))
335
if in_sync is True:
336
print("\nContinuing with cell reselection test")
73
==PAGE:78==
337
time.sleep(60)
338
set_bcch_channel(cmutarget, 60, tarchan, 20, 20)
339
set_neighbour(cmutarget, 1, origchan)
340
cmutarget.write('proc:sign:act son')
341
target_state = cmutarget.query("sens:sign:stat?")
342
origin_state = cmuorigin.query("sens:sign:stat?")
343
start_str_orig = 60
344
start_str_target = 90
345
print("Attempting to move from {} to {}.".format(origchan, tarchan))
346
while (target_state != "SYNC\n" and origin_state == "SYNC\n" and
347
(start_str_orig <= 110 and start_str_target >= 60)):
348
print("Origin: -{} dBm, Target: -{} dBm"
349
.format(start_str_orig, start_str_target))
350
time.sleep(2)
351
target_state = cmutarget.query("sens:sign:stat?")
352
origin_state = cmuorigin.query("sens:sign:stat?")
353
cmuorigin.write('conf:bss:cch:lev -' + str(start_str_orig))
354
cmutarget.write('conf:bss:cch:lev -' + str(start_str_target))
355
start_str_orig += 1
356
start_str_target -= 1
357
if (target_state == "SYNC\n" and start_str_orig <= 109 and
358
start_str_target >= 60):
359
print("Cell reselection signal quality:\nOrigin: -{} dBm,"
360
" Target: -{} dBm"
361
.format(start_str_orig, start_str_target))
362
time.sleep(10)
363
cmuorigin.write('proc:sign:act soff')
364
cmutarget.write('proc:sign:act soff')
365
return (-start_str_orig, -start_str_target)
366
elif (target_state != "SYNC\n" and start_str_orig <= 109 and
367
start_str_target >= 61):
368
pass
369
elif origin_state != "SYNC\n":
370
print("Lost SYNC with origin/serving cell.")
371
else:
372
print("Failed to acheive SYNC at -{} dBm
or -{} dBm:("
373
.format(start_str_orig, start_str_target))
374
print("Turning singals off.")
375
cmuorigin.write('proc:sign:act soff')
376
cmutarget.write('proc:sign:act soff')
377
return (-10, -10)
# -10 is a value suggesting sync failed
378
else:
379
print("\nUnable to set DUT in Sync with CMU.")
380
print("in_sync is {}".format(in_sync))
381
cmuorigin.write('proc:sign:act soff')
382
cmutarget.write('proc:sign:act soff')
383
return (5, 5)
384
385
386
def testrun_one(runs):
387
'''DOCSTRING'''
74
==PAGE:79==
388
longrun = runs
389
while longrun != 0:
390
print("Run #: {}".format(longrun))
391
move_one(CMUGSM1, CMUGSM2)
392
print("1/4")
393
move_one(CMUGSM2, CMUGSM3)
394
print("2/4")
395
# move_one(CMUGSM3, CMUGSM4)
396
print("3/4")
397
# move_one(CMUGSM4, CMUGSM1)
398
print("4/4")
399
longrun -= 1
400
401
402
testrun_one(0)
403
404
405
PROBLEMFREQS = [956, 957, 958, 961, 962, 973]
406
MNDAY1 = [957]
407
# MNDAY2 = [956, 957, 958, 961, 962, 969]
408
MNDAY2 = [960]
409
410
ORIGIN_RESULTS = collections.defaultdict(list)
411
TARGET_RESULTS = collections.defaultdict(list)
412
413
414
def testrun_two(runs):
415
'''DOCSTRING'''
416
longrun = 0
417
while longrun != runs:
418
for firsts in MNDAY1:
419
for seconds in MNDAY2:
420
if firsts == seconds:
421
print("{} and {} is the same BCCH. Skipping this test."
422
.format(firsts, seconds))
423
else:
424
print("Moving from BCCH: {} to BCCH {}"
425
.format(firsts, seconds))
426
key = ''.join((str(firsts), ' to ' + str(seconds)))
427
result = move_two_wcdma(CMUGSM1, CMUGSM2, firsts, seconds)
428
ORIGIN_RESULTS[key].append(result[0])
429
TARGET_RESULTS[key].append(result[1])
430
if longrun == runs:
431
print("Testrun complete!")
432
else:
433
print("Testrun #: {}/{}".format(longrun, runs))
434
longrun += 1
435
436
437
testrun_two(10)
438
75
==PAGE:80==
439
440
def close_cmu(cmumodule):
441
''' Close down CMU functions used.'''
442
cmumodule.close()
443
444
445
def close_gsm(cmugsmmodule):
446
'''Close CMUGSM functions.'''
447
cmugsmmodule.write('proc:sign:act soff')
448
cmugsmmodule.close()
449
450
451
print(one_result)
452
453
print("Dumping data into files")
454
ENDTIME = time.strftime("%Y%m%d-%H%M%S")
455
with open("./testresults/oneres" + ENDTIME + ".txt", 'w+') as resultsfile:
456
for items in one_result:
457
resultsfile.write("{}\n".format(items))
458
459
with open("./testresults/origin" + ENDTIME + ".json", "w+") as jsonorigfile:
460
json.dump(ORIGIN_RESULTS, jsonorigfile)
461
462
with open("./testresults/target" + ENDTIME + ".json", "w+") as jsontargetfile:
463
json.dump(TARGET_RESULTS, jsontargetfile)
464
465
print("\n\n\n\n\nShutting down...")
466
467
468
def shutdown():
469
'''Close everything down.'''
470
cmuwcdma.close()
471
CMUWCDMA.close()
472
for items in CMUGSMS:
473
close_gsm(items)
474
for items in CMUBASES:
475
close_cmu(items)
76
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
[1]
3GPP. 3GPP TS 23 022: Functions related to Mobile Station (MS) in
idle mode and group receive mode. Aug. 1999.
[2]
3GPP. 3GPP TS 45 002: GSM/EDGE Multiplexing and multiple access
on the radio path. Dec. 2016.
[3]
3GPP. 3GPP TS 45 005: GSM/EDGE Radio transmission and recep-
tion. Dec. 2016.
[4]
3GPP. 3GPP TS 45 008: GSM/EDGE Radio subsystem link control.
Dec. 2016.
[5]
Sajal Kumar Das. Mobile Handset Design. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,
2013. isbn: 9780470824672. doi: 10.1002/9780470824696.
[6]
Erhvervsstyrelsen. Ændringsliste MNC-koder i Danmark. 2015.
[7]
Line Pyndt Hansen. “GSM-R Experiments and Field Trials”. In: (2016).
[8]
H. Holma and A. Toskala. WCDMA for UMTS - HSPA evolution and
LTE. John Wiley and Sons, 2007. isbn: 9780470319338.
[9]
ITU-T. ITU Operational Bullettin No. 1116. 2017.
[10]
Dr. Ariel Luzzatto and Prof. Motti Haridim. Wireless Transceiver De-
sign: Mastering the Design of Modern Wireless Equipment and Sys-
tems, 2nd Edition. John Wiley & Sons, Nov. 2016. isbn: 9781118937402.
[11]
Mini-Circuits. Power Splitter-Combiner Data Sheet ZB4PD1-930W+.
2016.
[12]
National Instruments GPIB Instrument Control Device. http://www.
ni.com/da-dk/shop/select/gpib-instrument-control-device?
modelId=120494.
[13]
Network Cell Info Lite. https://play.google.com/store/apps/
details?id=com.wilysis.cellinfolite&hl=en.
[14]
PyVISA. PyVISA. 2016.
77
==PAGE:82==
[15]
European Union Agency for Railways. GSM-R and Interferences: Ma-
naging Co-Existence. May 2016.
[16]
International Union of Railways. ECTS. Feb. 2017.
[17]
Martin Sauter. From GSM to LTE-Advanced: An Introduction to Mo-
bile Networks and Mobile Broadband. Wiley, 2014. isbn: 1118861957,
1118861930, 1118861949.
[18]
Cotter W. Sayre. Complete Wireless Design, 2nd edition. McGraw Hill,
2008. isbn: 9780071544528.
[19]
Rohde & Schwarz. CMU 200 GSM-MS Operating Manual.
[20]
Rohde & Schwarz. CMU 200 WCDMA Operating Manual.
[21]
UIC. GSM-R Filter requirements. Nov. 2015.
78
