==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Voltage Support from Wind Power Plants
to Hybrid AC/DC Grid
Dominik Ivo Döring
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 348
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3800
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
www.elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This work investigates if and how wind power plans can support the voltage control in
a hybrid AC/DC grid, using the voltage source converter technology. In the past, large
central conventional generating units were supplying reactive power to pure alternating
current grids.
In this way, they were controlling the voltage level of the network.
However, due to the increased use of wind power and the rising number of high-voltage
direct current interconnections, as well as a reduction of conventional power plants, the
voltage control of the power system needs to be renewed.
In this thesis the current research about voltage control methods is reviewed. It gets
clear that a hierarchical voltage control method, using an optimal power flow for an
optimized operation, is a possibility to meet the challenge of the changing power system.
A further literature review shows the up-to-date research about optimal power flows for
hybrid grids. After a deeper study of these topics and the general theory of voltage
control, a model was developed.
This OPF algorithm is was used to determine the
optimal voltage profile and reactive power dispatch of a hybrid AC/DC grid over a
period of 24 hours. The results show, that even with changing grid conditions, the tool
was able to optimize the system performance. Comparing the outcome with and without
the voltage support of wind power plants and voltage source converters of high-voltage
direct current connections, it gets cleat that these devices are a valuable reactive power
resource. They are able to replace the conventional power plants regarding the voltage
control and reactive power support of a mixed AC/DC system.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Electrical Engineering (DTU
Elektro) at Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for
acquiring a M.Sc. degree in Wind Energy. The thesis was conducted during the spring
semester of 2017 and it corresponds to 30 ECTS points. It has been carried out under
the supervision of Shaojun Huang, Haoran Zhao and Qiuwei Wu from DTU Elektro.
Kongens Lyngby, July 1, 2017
Dominik Ivo Döring
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Contents
v
Nomenclature
viii
List of Figures
ix
List of Tables
xi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Power System is changing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
How to maintain the Voltage Level? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Coordinated VC and AC/DC OPF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Objective of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Voltage Control in Power Systems
7
2.1
Purpose of Voltage Control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Basics of Voltage Control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Voltage Control Equipment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Power System Voltage Control with the Hierarchical Model . . . . . . . .
20
2.5
OPF for Voltage Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Optimal Power Flow for Voltage Control
29
3.1
Modeling of the AC grid and Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
The HVDC Extension
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.3
Time Series Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4
Results and Discussion
43
4.1
AC Grid Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2
Hybrid Grid Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.3
Time Series Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5
Conclusion
57
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
A MATLAB code
59
Bibliography
91
==PAGE:9==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
DFIG
Doubly Fed Induction Generator
EHV
Extra high voltage
HV
High voltage
HV AC
High voltage alternating current
HV DC
High voltage direct current
IGBT
Insulated-gate bipolar transistor
MT −HV DC
Multi-terminal high voltage direct current
NLTC
No-load tap change transformer
OHL
Over head line
OLTC
On-load tap change transformer
OPF
Optimal power flow
PCC
Point of common coupling
PoC
Point of connection
PWM
Pulse width modulation
SCC
Short-circuit capacity
SCIG
Squirrel-cage induction generator
SE
State Estimation
SIL
Surge impedance loading
STATCOM
Static compensator
SV C
Static var compensator
SV R
Secondary voltage regulation
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
TV R
Tertiary voltage regulation
V C
Voltage control
V SC
Voltage source converter
WPP
Wind power plant
WRIG
Wound rotor induction generator
WTG
Wind turbine generator
Symbols
δ
Voltage angle
BAC
AC Susceptance matrix
E
DC voltage vector
GAC
AC Conductance matrix
GDC
DC Conductance matrix
IDC
DC current vector
PD
Active power demand vector
PG
Active power generation vector
Pinj
Active power injection vector
QD
Reactive power demand vector
QG
Reactive power generation vector
Qinj
Reactive power injection vector
SD
Apparent power demand vector
Ybus
Bus admittance matrix
alpha
Hellmann exponent
PN
Nominal power
PF = cos(ϕ)
Power factor
Sbase
Base apparent power
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
1.1
Energinet.dk’s expectations for changes in electricity production capacity in
Denmark during 2016-2040 [1] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
German Network Development Plan for the transmission grid, scenario B
2024. Blue: AC, Green: DC, Red: not decided [3] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1
Ideal shape of instantaneous voltage in green and an example for magnitude
and frequency deviation in red . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Example for a residential load profile over 24 hours . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
PV-curves for a X = 100 Ωtransmission line. Sending end voltage is fixed
at 100 kV. A load with varying angles Φ is attached to the receiving end . .
10
2.4
Capability Curve of a Synchronous Generator [21] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Configuration of the DFIG of a type 3 WTG [23] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.7
Configuration of a type 4 WTG with full-scale converter [23] . . . . . . . . .
16
2.8
Typical reactive power capability of a type 3 WTG [25] . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.9
Measured capability Curve of a Enercon E-82 WTG with STATCOM option.
Y-axis: active power output, X-axis: reactive power output [24]
. . . . . . .
17
2.10 Basic requirement upon the network-side supply of reactive power from generating
units to the network (Variant 1) [26]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.11 Requirements for reactive power supply in relation to active power output[27] 19
2.12 Operating range of the VSC of a HVDC transmission line [2] . . . . . . . . .
20
2.13 Concept of the Hierarchical Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Sketch of the AC grid
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.6
Sketch of the hybrid AC/DC grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.7
Wind speed at 135m height . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.8
Power Curve of the WTGs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.9
Active power output of all WTGs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.10 Active power Demand of the System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.1
Sketch of the AC grid
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2
Comparison of the voltage profiles for the basic AC grid without var support
of the WPPs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.3
Comparison of the reactive rower generation and remand for the basic AC
grid without var support of the WPPs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.4
Optimized voltage profile for the AC grid with var support from the WPPs
using a flat start. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
==PAGE:12==
x
List of Figures
4.5
Optimized reactive power generation for the AC grid with var support from
the WPPs using a flat start. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.8
Sketch of the hybrid AC/DC grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.9
Comparison of the voltage profiles in four different cases for the hybrid
AC/DC grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.10 Comparison of the reactive power injections in four different cases for the
hybrid AC/DC grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.12 Demand and wind power production over 24 hours
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.13 AC bus voltages over time without var support from VSCs and WPPs
. . .
53
4.14 AC bus voltages over time with full var support from VSCs and WPPs . . .
54
4.15 Total active power system losses over 24 hours . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
==PAGE:13==
List of Tables
2.5
Overview of Reactive Power Control Devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1
AC Grid Generation and Load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3
Apparent Power Flow Limits
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.4
AC/DC Grid Generation and Load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.5
Converter loss parameter [14] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.6
Comparison of the active power losses for the basic AC grid without var
support
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.7
Loss comparison AC Grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.11 Line Losses in the hybrid AC/DC Grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
==PAGE:14==
xii
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
The Power System is changing
Due to the climate target to reduce the CO2 emissions, many countries decided to
replace their fossil fuel based energy production to a more sustainable one. The most
important renewable energy source, together with hydro and solar power, is wind energy.
The amount of wind power plants has strongly increased during the last years. Figure
1.1 shows that this trend will continue in the next years. Depicted are the predicted
changes in the electricity production capacity in Denmark. Energinet.dk, the danish
transmission system operator, expects a gradual replacement of the conventional central
and decentral power plants with wind and solar power. Wind power plants will hold the
lion’s share of the production capacity in this scenario. This will further decrease the
amount of large synchronous generators connected to the grid. A similar development
is also going on in many other countries, for example in Germany. Here an additional
factor will have significant influences on the power system. The German government
decided to shut down all nuclear power plants, which will further decrease the number
of large central generation units.
Figure 1.1: Energinet.dk’s expectations for changes in electricity production capacity in
Denmark during 2016-2040 [1]
==PAGE:16==
2
1 Introduction
This causes another main change in the existing power grid. Wind power plants are
usually placed far away from demand centers. This is due to their space requirements
and the need for good wind conditions. Depending on this distance it can be very lossy
and cost-intensive to transmit the bulk power to the loads. In case of offshore wind farms
the problem gets even more significant because of the required cable connection. The
maximum length of sea cables using the AC technology is limited by reason of physical
restrictions.
A solution to this is high voltage direct current, HVDC, transmission. One advantage is,
that losses in a HVDC cable can be significant lower. A reason for this is, that there are
ideally no reactive currents causing additional joule losses. Another benefit is that they
need less conductors compared to a three-phase AC line. This reduces the rights-of-way
and material investments. However the cost for the converter stations are significant
higher for HVDC transmission. This means that for short distances HVAC lines are
more favorable and for longer ranges a HVDC connections are preferable. As a rule of
thumb the break-even distance for over head lines is 500 km and for sea cables 40 km.
[2]
The HVDC technology makes it possible to economically transfer large amounts of power
over long distances. It also allows the construction of offshore wind farms on sites which
are more remote from the coast. An example for HVDC connections in the transmission
grid can be found in the German Network Development Plan. Figure 1.2 shows one
possible scenario for the year 2024. New north-south interconnections are needed to
transmit the bulk power from offshore wind farms to the load centers in the south.
Figure 1.2: German Network Development Plan for the transmission grid, scenario B
2024. Blue: AC, Green: DC, Red: not decided [3]
The power system in the future will consists of many small renewable generation units
==PAGE:17==
1.2 How to maintain the Voltage Level?
3
and large offshore wind power plants. In contrast to the fossil fueled conventional power
plants, they will be dispersed and in greater distance to the load centers. Furthermore
the today’s predominant AC transmission system will transform into a hybrid grid using
both HVAC and HVDC technology.
1.2
How to maintain the Voltage Level?
A good system wide voltage level is important to guarantee a save operation. It should
be within a certain band width at all grid buses and at all times. On one hand too high
voltages would cause isolation failures and thereby short circuits. On the other hand
very low voltages could lead to a voltage collapse (see section 2.1). Also the economical
aspect needs to be considered. Lower voltages induce more current while transferring
the same amount of power. This higher currents causes higher Joule losses.
In HV systems the voltage magnitudes at the buses are manly influenced by reactive
power. For example inductive loads absorb var which decreases the voltage. A shunt
capacitor on the contrary injects var by what the voltage level increases. This shows
that reactive power plays an important role to maintain a proper system voltage. The
main suppliers for this ancillary service are the generating units of conventional power
plants [4]. By over or under exciting of their synchronous generators, reactive power
can be injected into or absorbed from the system. However, as explained above, in the
future there will be less and less of these central facilities.
The question is now, how to keep the system’s ability to maintain its voltage level
in a hybrid HV AC/DC grid with high wind power penetration and less conventional
power plants?
1.3
Coordinated VC and AC/DC OPF
Modern wind turbine generators have the capability to control their reactive power
output. Also HVDC connections, which use voltage source converters to rectify and
invert the current, have this ability. Other var sources, for example SVCs or STATCOMs
are able to influence their terminal voltage as well.
The task of conventional power plants as a main reactive power supplier can be taken
over by these devices. The difference is that they are decentralized and dispersed all
over the power system or far away from the load centers. However voltage control is a
local problem, since it is inefficient to transfer reactive power over long distances [4]. To
operate the system efficiently with this variety of devices, it needs to be managed in a
smart way.
Different approaches to solve this task where studied during the last years. In [5] the
concept of a multi-agent system is used to coordinate reactive power reserves in an
economic and secure way. The idea is that their controllers try to manage their voltage
itself.
If their var capacity is not sufficient, they request support from neighbours.
==PAGE:18==
4
1 Introduction
Another method to organize var sources is the hierarchical structure. It is for example
used in Italy as a coordinated automatic VC, described in [6] and [7]. Here the reactive
power management is subdivided into three levels from the local bus over sub-areas with
a strong electrical coupling to the whole national power grid. This approach is promising
so that other countries such as South Africa [8] consider to inherit it. This approaches
has many advantages compared with the classical manual var dispatch, which will be
discussed in chapter 2. A variation of this technology is implemented in China [9]. The
enormous speed with that the power system is growing makes it necessary to have a
flexible control system. It’s var coordination is using an adaptive zone-division to keep
up with the rapid changes in the power grid structure.
To operate this VC method in the most efficient and save way, an optimal voltage
profile and reactive power dispatch forecast is needed.
An optimal power flow can
provide this data, based on the current state estimation of the grid as described in
[6].
Different studies are performed on this topic.
In [10] a minimum active power
loss and a maximum loadability OPF approach are used with a combined tertiary and
secondary voltage regulation to obtain the set-points for the generators.
To adapt
to special conditions like an extreme high penetration of wind power, [11] combines
an autonomous voltage controller on wind farm level with an overall control center
to coordinate the reactive power support from the wind power plants.
This control
structure uses a security-constrained OPF to counteract the strong fluctuations of wind
power production to avoid cascading faults. This was a problem in the recent years
in the northern part of china, where large amounts of wind power are installed. [12]
investigates on how close the pre-determined schedule for the system voltages is from
the actual optimum.
It evaluates which gains an optimal power flow based voltage
schedule could bring. Furthermore the actual measured voltages are compared with the
set-points to test the efficiency of the method.
However, to fulfill the requirements of the future grid, the OPF needs to consider the
characteristics of a hybrid HV-AC/DC network. To do so, it is necessary to implement
the HVDC lines into the power flow calculation. This is done in [13], where a model of
a DC connection is implemented into the Newton-Raphson power flow. The converters
are modeled as rectifier and inverter, where the relation between the AC and DC voltage
is considered. The next step is done in [14]. Here a complete MT-HVDC network using
VSCs is combined with an AC grid to a hybrid system. A power flow is executed in
MATPOWER, a MATLAB package for power flow problems, to validate the AC/DC
model. In [15] a Newton-Raphson power flow based OPF for HV-AC/DC systems is
implemented. The use VSCs has the advantage, that they can control their active and
reactive power output separately. This benefit is also integrated in the model so that
two control loops for voltage magnitude and phase angle can be simulated.
Other studies use a hybrid grid OPF to investigate on how large amounts of wind
power can be transmitted to the main grid with high efficiency.
[16] uses an OPF
and two different control strategies for the DC voltage in a hybrid MT-HVDC and
AC network to minimize the transmission losses. To solve the optimization problem the
Primal-Dual Interior Point algorithm in MATPOWER is used. In [17] a similar approach
is applied, where the OPF problem is solved by the MATLAB function fmincon, using
==PAGE:19==
1.4 Objective of the Thesis
5
the Interior Point algorithm. The results are validated with the optimization program
GAMS. Furthermore the sensitivity against wind speed changes is analyzed.
The experiences from these investigations can be used to find a method to analyze if
wind power plants can support the voltage in a hybrid AC/DC power system.
1.4
Objective of the Thesis
The aim of this work is to develop a tool which can be used to optimally control the
voltage in a hybrid AC/DC system with wind power plants as an additional reactive
power source. It will be used to answer the question on how far a hybrid grid with
less conventional generators and more wind power is able to maintain the voltage for an
economical operation. This tool will be based on a hierarchical coordinated, system-wide
VC method. An optimal power flow for mixed AC/DC grids will be utilized to calculate
the best voltage set-points and reactive power outputs of the conventional power plants,
the wind power plants and the voltage source converters of HVDC lines. The objective
of the optimization will be the the minimization of the transmission losses in the grid.
To do so, the MATLAB optimization function fmincon will be used. Analyzed will be
the steady state behavior of a pure AC system with and without the voltage support
of the wind power plants. In a next step an AC transmission line will be replaced by a
HVDC connection. Here the influence of the VSC in one time step will be investigated.
In the last part, the characteristics of the system regarding changing wind and load
conditions during 24 hours will be tested.
1.5
Outline
The report is structured as follows. In chapter 2: Voltage Control in Power Systems
an exploration through the purpose and basics of voltage control will be carried out.
Different sources of reactive power and their properties will be analyzed.
A special
attention will be turned on WTGs and VSCs as var suppliers. Next, the characteristics
of the hierarchical model for VC will be presented. Furthermore, the optimization related
part of VC, the OPF and its properties will be elaborated.
Thereafter, in chapter 3: Optimal Power Flow for Voltage Control the method of the
optimization algorithm will be presented. It will be developed in three steps. Firstly, the
design of a basic AC grid model and the corresponding OPF is described. Secondly, this
model is extended by a HVDC connection to simulate a hybrid AC/DC transmission
grid. In a last step the implementation of the time series analysis will be depicted.
Chapter 4: Results and Discussion will show the outcome of the simulations and discuss
them. It is sub-divided into the analysis of the one time step AC and AC/DC grid
simulations and the time series simulation for different wind speeds.
==PAGE:20==
6
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2
Voltage Control in Power
Systems
2.1
Purpose of Voltage Control
The power system is built to generate power and transmit it to the costumer. Here
the main aspects are, that the energy supply is reliable, economical and that the power
has a certain quality. This means that the amount and duration of outages should be
as small as possible. Also the price for the energy should be low and constant. The
TSO of a country usually defines the criteria of power quality.
As an indicator for
it, the instantaneous voltage can be used. The green line in figure 2.1 shows an ideal
instantaneous voltage. It should have a sinusoidal shape and the frequency should be
close to the defined value. A deviation of the frequency is shown by the dotted red line.
Furthermore its amplitude must be close to the nominal value to guarantee a stable grid
operation. The example shows a too low peak voltage.
In high voltage systems, the control of frequency can be separated from the voltage
regulation. This is due to the fact that the voltage magnitude is strongly dependent on
var injections and is only slightly influenced by active power flows. [18] In the following
the focus will be on VC, where the term voltage is referred to the RMS-value of the peak
voltage.
Figure 2.1: Ideal shape of instantaneous voltage in green and an example for magnitude
and frequency deviation in red
==PAGE:22==
8
2 Voltage Control in Power Systems
When the voltage exceeds its upper boundary, the risk of an insulation failure rises.
This could lead to a short circuit and damage equipment or worse to a danger to life.
The other undesirable case is if the voltage level goes below its limit. The current needs
to increase if the same amount of power is to be transferred. However a bigger current
causes a higher voltage drop and more heating losses. This drop means a lower voltage
level in the end of a line, which again causes higher currents. This effect can amplify
itself and could lead to a voltage collapse, if the load increases or a fault occurs. [19]
Low currents at high voltages are also desirable because it leads to a low line loading.
This is a method to utilize the existing grid more efficient.
The grid conditions are continuously changing. This has several reasons. First of all,
the demand is changing according to the behavior of private customers and the needs of
the industry and the public sector. An example shows figure 2.2, where a typical load
profile over 24 hours in a normal household can be seen. In this example the consumption
in the morning and the evening is high. But in the afternoon and at night, the demand
reduces to a low value. There are also changes in load over the year. The reason for
this could be a different demand for heating or cooling and differing behaviors during
the seasons.
Figure 2.2: Example for a residential load profile over 24 hours
Another cause for fluctuations is, that the grid topology can change. For example
transmission lines are taken out of service for maintenance. A short circuit could occur
which let the line breakers to separate a faulty area. Or generators are taken from the
grid or reconnected, following the needs of the market. This alters the power flow in the
system, which usually leads to different losses.
Furthermore the generation is continuously varying. Fluctuations in solar radiation and
wind speeds let the power output of renewable energy power plants incessantly alter.
These system dynamics cause the voltage profile to change permanently. A sound voltage
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Basics of Voltage Control
9
control is needed to counteract these variations. For safety reasons it is necessary to
have a sufficient var margin, in case contingencies threaten the stability. Furthermore
the economy of the grid strongly depends on well tuned voltage profiles and efficient
management of reactive power flows. On one hand, keeping the voltage close to the
upper security limit will decrease the heating losses. On the other hand, reducing the
reactive power flows to a minimum releases the transmission lines and increases their
capacity for active power transfer.
2.2
Basics of Voltage Control
2.2.1
Reactive Power and Transmission Grid Characteristics
The reactive power demand of an electric power system is a combination of var consumption
of the loads and of the grid itself.
A load can be inductive or capacitive.
In the
former case it consumes reactive power from the system. In the latter case vars are
injected into the bus at which the load is connected. However in power grids the loads
are predominantly inductive [20]. As an example a load can have a power factor of
cos(Φ) = 0.95 lagging. Here lagging indicates that the current lags the voltage, which
is caused by an inductive consumer. In case of a capacitive load the current is leading
the voltage.
The transmission grid is a complex structure with a large variety of resistive, inductive
and capacitive elements. Its reactive power demand depends on the composition of these
elements. Furthermore the load level and the location of power injection and absorption
plays a significant role. The most important grid components besides generators and
loads are transformers, OHLs and cables. Due to their large coils, the behavior of a
transformer is always inductive. This means they consume reactive power. Lines on
the contrary act as var source or sink depending on their loading.
If one thinks of
the π −model of a transmission line, it consists of shunt capacitors as well as series
inductance and resistance. The var demand of the shunt part depends mainly on the
applied voltage level, which is disregarding of small deviations constant. However the
reactive power consumption of the series component increases with higher currents or
power flow (which is the same for transformers). If the load current of an OHL or cable is
lower than the surge impedance loading SIL, the capacitive effects prevails and reactive
power will be injected into the system. However if the SIL is exceeded, the var demand
of the series reactance is higher than the supply of the shunt capacitance. [4]. Due to
the spacing between the conductors of OHLs, their capacitive effects are little and the
SIL is low. In contrast to that, cables have a high SIL and their thermal limits are
usually lower [20].
From this it follows that the grid has a passive influence on the reactive power and the
voltage level. Transformers consume vars, OHLs produce or demand it depending on
their loading and cables usually work as a source of reactive power.
==PAGE:24==
10
2 Voltage Control in Power Systems
The connection between voltage and reactive power will be explained with the
following example.
Figure 2.3 shows PV-curves for a transmission line with a line
reactance of X = 100 Ωand a fixed sending end voltage of ES = 100 kV . Depicted is the
relationship between the receiving end voltage ER and the receiving end active power
PR. Each blue curve stands for a different load angle Φ at the receiving end, where the
load is connected. Assuming that PR = 30 MW one can easily see the influence of the
load angle or PF. If it is lagging, i.e. Φ is positive, ER is approximately 80 kV. If reactive
power is injected into the load bus to decrease the load angle, the receiving end voltage
increases. If the load angle falls below 0°, which corresponds to a leading PF, it is even
possible to rise ER over the sending end voltage.
Figure 2.3: PV-curves for a X = 100 Ωtransmission line. Sending end voltage is fixed
at 100 kV. A load with varying angles Φ is attached to the receiving end
To transfer reactive power, a voltage drop is needed.
This is illustrated by the
equation for the reactive power at the sending end QS and at the receiving end QR of a
transmission line, taken from [20]. VS and VR stand for the sending and receiving end
voltage, X for the line reactance and θ for the voltage angle difference between the two
buses:
QS = V 2
S −VSVRcos(θ)
X
(2.1)
QR = VSVRcos(θ) −V 2
R
X
(2.2)
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Basics of Voltage Control
11
The sending end voltage has a quadratic influence of QS. The same relation lies
between the receiving end voltage and QR. Assuming that the voltage angle difference
is are around 0, where the cosine has a flat slope, this angle has a low impact on the var
flow. Furthermore long lines have a higher reactance compared to short conductors of
the same kind. This leads to the fact, that to transfer reactive power over long distances,
a high voltage drop would be needed. This is for obvious reasons undesirable and makes
reactive power supply to a local problem.
2.2.2
Fundamental Voltage Control methods
The bus voltage levels of the system depend on the active controlled nodes.
The
synchronous generators of large central power plants can operate as a var source and
inject reactive power into their bus.
This is done by overexciting of their armature
windings.
It is also possible, that they act as var sink and absorb reactive power.
Under-excited armature windings have this effect on the synchronous machines. Figure
2.4 shows the capability curve of a synchronous machine. Since it depicts a generator,
only the first and fourth quadrant are of interest, where the active power output is
positive. It shows that the maximum apparent power is restricted by the field heating
and the armature heating limit. Thus the maximum reactive power output depends on
the active power loading of the generator. [21]
Figure 2.4: Capability Curve of a Synchronous Generator [21]
==PAGE:26==
12
2 Voltage Control in Power Systems
The control of the excitement is done by the AVR of the generators. They regulate
their armature voltage, following a defined set-point.This primary voltage regulation
PVR of the generator is used to control the voltage of the bus, the generator is connected
to.
[20] These buses lead the voltage profile, while the other nodes are following
depending on the characteristics of the power grid. As explained above, all the elements
like OHLs, cables or transformers have a passive influence on the active and reactive
power flow. This and the consumption of the loads determine the remaining bus voltage
levels.
The system operator has, besides setting the desired value of the AVRs, several other
possibilities to influence the voltage profile. The simplest one is to change the admittance
matrix of the grid to control the power flow. This can be done by adding series capacitors
in transmission lines as line flow compensation [4]. Also shunt reactors and capacitors
are used to compensate reactive power flows, caused by OHLs, cables or loads. These
measures are passive and usually considered in the planing phase of a grid.
Active
procedures are f.ex. activating and deactivating of switchable shunt capacitors/reactors
or by varying the tap-position of tap changing transformers.
Additional to the discrete measures, there a couple of different continuous var sources,
which can be connected to buses. They can support the VC by compensating reactive
power losses or even control the voltage of the bus they are connected to. By injecting
or absorbing the reactive power locally, the inefficient and problematic var transfer can
thus be avoided.
2.3
Voltage Control Equipment
In this section the different types of reactive power sources and compensating devices will
be explained. First a general overview for commonly used apparatus is given. Afterwards
the possibilities of WTGs as var resources are presented. Furthermore it is explained
how the VSCs of HVDC lines can support the VC of a grid.
2.3.1
General
Reactive power control devices can be organized in different categories as shown in table
2.5. Discontinuous apparatus can generate and absorb var, or change its admittance, in
fixed portions or steps. On the contrary, continuous resources can change their output
uninterrupted or alter the admittance matrix of the grid stepless.
Another classification determines the kind of influence, the devices have on the reactive
power in the system. Some of them play a passive role, because they can change the
reactive power flow by adjusting the admittance matrix.
The others govern the var
balance of a system bus by injecting or absorbing reactive power.
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Voltage Control Equipment
13
Table 2.5: Overview of Reactive Power Control Devices
change of
admittance matrix
reactive power
injection/absorption
at bus
discontinuous
- series capacitor
- NLTC
- OLTC
- shunt capacitor/reactor
- switchable shunt capacitor/reactor
continuous
- IPRT
- PST
- sync. generator
- sync. compensator
- SVC
- STATCOM
- UPFC
In the following the common voltage control devices will shortly be described. An
explanation for the synchronous generator can be found in section 2.2.2 and is listed
here only for the sake of completeness:
• Sync. Generator
• Sync. compensator:
Synchronous compensators (also called sync. condenser or capacitor) work similar
to synchronous generators regarding reactive power supply.
However they run
without being connected to a prime mover, thus have no active power output. [20]
They consume a small amount of active power to compensate their losses.
• NLTC and OLTC:
Due to a stepwise change in their transformation ratio, tap changing transformers
can influence the voltage level at their terminals and furthermore the reactive
power flow through them. No-load tap changing transformers (NLTCs) are used
to balance seasonal differences or to keep the system flexible against expansions
and load growth. As their name says they need to be taken out of service for a
tap change. However on-load tap changing transformers (OLTCs) can be switched
in operation and are used to influence the voltage profile in shorter time steps,
f.ex.
fluctuations over a few hours or minutes.
They can be triggered either
automatically or manually.
If the voltage level of a whole area needs to be
regulated, all connected tap change transformers should be coordinated controlled.
[4]
• IPRT:
In-phase regulating transformer, also called booster, can change the voltage amplitude
of a line. Their advantage is that they to not shift the phase of the voltage. [20]
==PAGE:28==
14
2 Voltage Control in Power Systems
• PST:
The so called phase shifting transformers are, as their name indicate, able to shift
the phase while they change the voltage amplitude. [20]
• fixed/switchable shunt reactor:
They are needed for long transmission lines, mostly in the EHV grid. If these lines
are only lightly loaded, the Ferranti effect can rise the line end voltage to a critical
value. To avoid an exceeding of voltage limits, they are used as compensating
devices. Under heavy load condition they sometimes need to be disconnected. [4]
• fixed/switchable shunt capacitor:
In distribution systems, they are manly used to compensate loads and to regulate
the voltage level of feeders. However in the transmission system their main purpose
is to counteract for the reactive power losses in lines and transformers. They are
a very cheap way to provide reactive power. However regarding voltage control,
they have besides their discontinuous behavior a disadvantage. Their var output
increases quadratic with the applied voltage. That means that they act inversely
proportional to the needs of the bus to maintain the voltage level. [4]
• series capacitor:
If a capacitor is connected in series to a transmission line, it reduces its line
reactance. In this way the I2X losses are reduced and the line loadability for
active power increased. They are furthermore self-regulating because their var
output increases with the line loading. However they have several disadvantages.
For example the organization of line protection gets more difficult. [4]
The following equipment are examples for Flexible AC Transmission Systems or
FACTS. Per definition they are static and power electronic based devices. Its purpose is
to increase the controllability and to extend the line flow capability of AC transmission
systems. [22]
• SVC:
Static var compensators are a continuous source and/or sink for reactive power.
They are shunt-connected and have no moving parts like a sync. compensator.
Their tasks are for example the balancing of temporary voltage peaks or to increase
the stability of the system. [4] They are a combination of fixed and mechanically or
electrically (thyristor) switchable reactors and capacitors, managed by a controller.
[20]
• STATCOM:
Static compensators have like SVCs no moving parts. However, they use power
electronics to manipulate the voltage and the current with a PWM. They can
provide and absorb reactive power and are managed by a controller.
In this
way they are able to regulate the voltage of a bus, following a set-point. Their
characteristic is like that of a synchronous generator. But since they have no inertia
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Voltage Control Equipment
15
they have a faster response. This gives them the ability to counteract transients
and dynamic disturbances to improve transient stability or damp oscillations. [20]
• UPFC:
A unified power flow controller is a combination of a shunt connected STATCOM
and a static synchronous series compensator. Their main task is, that they can
be operated as ideal phase shifter.
However they can also control the voltage
magnitude and phase. [20]
2.3.2
Wind Turbines as Reactive Power Source
There are four general types of wind turbine technologies. Their behavior regarding
voltage control is very different and will be explained in the following.
Type 1 WTGs operate with a fixed rotor speed. A SCIG is directly connected to
the grid to transform the torque of the rotor into electrical energy. This concept is a
simple and robust solution, however it has one significant disadvantage regarding VC.
The generator consumes a large amount of reactive power. An incremental switchable
capacitor bank is used to correct the PF at the terminals.
WTGs of the type 2 are similar to the type 1 regarding the reactive power behavior.
The optimal rotational speed depends on the wind speed. The type 2 machines use a
WRIG with variable resistors in the field winding. This gives them a certain degree of
rotor speed controllability to optimize the efficiency. However since both types are not
able to control their reactive power, they are not suitable for VC. [23]
This is different for the types 3 and 4, which are the preferred technologies for regulating
power system voltages [24].
The concept type 3 WTGs use, is called Doubly Fed
Induction Generator (DFIG). As shown in figure 2.6 the rotor of a WRIG is controlled
by two VSCs, which are coupled back-to-back. The rating of the converter system is
around one third of the rated power of the generator. This allows the machine to have a
wide range of rotor speeds. Another advantage of this concept is that active and reactive
power output can be controlled separately. The generator side VSC manipulates the
frequency and magnitude of the rotor voltage, which changes the var output of the stator.
[25]
==PAGE:30==
16
2 Voltage Control in Power Systems
Figure 2.6: Configuration of the DFIG of a type 3 WTG [23]
Figure 2.7 shows the configuration of a type 4 WTG. Here the generator is connected
through a full-scale converter system to the grid. This frequency decoupling makes it
possible to run the generator at any rotational speed, which in the most cases redundantizes
the gear box. The converter needs to have a size of the rated power of the generator plus
the desired reactive power capacity. [23] This makes the technology expensive, however
it enables the type 4 to have an even better VC capability as the DFIG turbines.
Figure 2.7: Configuration of a type 4 WTG with full-scale converter [23]
A typical capability curve of a DFIG in steady state is depicted in figure 2.8. It
should be noticed, that an underexcited operation can deliver more inductive reactive
power than capacitive reactive power in overexcited mode. An important fact for VC
is, that the WTG can deliver or absorb vars even when there is no active power output.
[25] But the maximum reactive power output is reduced at high active power generation.
This is because the limits of the converter currents.
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Voltage Control Equipment
17
Figure 2.8: Typical reactive power capability of a type 3 WTG [25]
This dependency on the generated active power is a disadvantage. To overcome this
problem some manufacturer offer options with additional equipment. The capability
curve of a type 4 WTG with integrated STATCOM is shown in figure 2.9. This turbines
are called FACTS WTGs.
Here the reactive power output is independent from the
active power generation. Thus the turbines can provide full voltage support at all times.
Another advantage is the arbitrary extendable var range, which can be adapted to the
needs of a certain project.
Figure 2.9: Measured capability Curve of a Enercon E-82 WTG with STATCOM option.
Y-axis: active power output, X-axis: reactive power output [24]
If many WTGs are connected through a collector system to a wind power plant,
they can be connected directly to the transmission grid. This is usually the case for
==PAGE:32==
18
2 Voltage Control in Power Systems
offshore or large onshore wind farms. Here the collective of turbines has to fulfill certain
requirements at the point of common coupling PCC or point of connection PoC.
Figure 2.10: Basic requirement upon the network-side supply of reactive power from
generating units to the network (Variant 1) [26]
An example is given by the German TransmissionCode2007 in figure 2.10. It shows a
possible requirement regarding the reactive power versus voltage level at the PoC, which
needs to be fulfilled by the generating units. The considered operating point is where
the active power output is equal to the rated power. The generating units must be able
to go through the whole range several times in a minute. [26]
Another example from the Danish technical regulation 3.2.5, published by Energinet.dk
is depicted in figure 2.11. It is valid for WPPs with a rated active power capacity above
25 MW. The power plant need to be able to provide reactive power depending on the
active power output within the grey area. [27]
The regulations in both countries ask for three different types of control functions. The
first is called Q control, where a specific reactive power set-point is defined at the PoC.
Power factor control provides a certain PF which needs to be maintained. The last
control variant specifies a voltage band in which the PoC voltage must be. [26] [27]
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Voltage Control Equipment
19
Figure 2.11:
Requirements for reactive power supply in relation to active power
output[27]
To fulfill this requirements, WPP have different options. The reactive power injected
or absorbed at the PoC can have different sources and sinks. First of all the turbines
itself deliver a big portion of the demanded vars, as explained above. Furthermore there
are fixed and switchable reactors. They are used to compensate the capacitive effects
of the sea AC cable (if present). If this cable-reactor combination is managed wisely, it
can contribute to the VC. Another important part are the OLTCs which can be used
to control the voltage of the WPP. Additionally, connected at the PoC, FACTS can be
used. They have a continuous and fast reactive power response. [25] Their var range can
if needed be extended by switchable capacitor banks. If the WPP is connected through
a HVDC connection, it is, due to the direct current network, decoupled in terms of
reactive power. How their grid side VSC can be used for VC will be explained in the
next section.
2.3.3
Reactive Power Support from HVDC Lines
There are two available technologies for HVDC line converters. The classical line-commutated
current source converter, CSC, using thyristor valves, and the self-commutated voltage
source converter, VSC, using IGBTs.
The former one needs a synchronous voltage
source to operate, and consumes reactive power. The latter one on the contrary can
==PAGE:34==
20
2 Voltage Control in Power Systems
provide a fast and independent control of active and reactive power. Furthermore the
var output at each terminal can be set independent of DC voltage. Figure 2.12 shows
the operating range of the VSCs of a HVDC transmission line. They can work in all four
quadrants. This means that while they control the amount and direction of active power
flow, they can inject or absorb reactive power into or from the AC grid. This behavior
has huge advantages, since they can support the voltage level and thus stabilize the grid.
[2] Comparable AC OHLs and cables would just consume or inject vars depending on
their load. Summarized the VSC of HVDC lines can be used as additional controllable
reactive power source/sink.
Figure 2.12: Operating range of the VSC of a HVDC transmission line [2]
2.4
Power System Voltage Control with the
Hierarchical Model
Traditionally the voltage control of a power system was predominantly manual. It was
done by setting the voltage set-points of the large power plants. The voltage profile was
following the main generators, depending on the loads and the properties of the grid. To
keep the system’s stability the grid components where overdimensioned [28]. In this way
the transfer limit utilization was low, so that a sufficient safety margin for fluctuations
and contingencies was given. However this method is obviously expensive.
The main possibilities to influence the reactive power in the system where the manual
switching of capacitors and reactors as well as OLTCs.
If one considers the speed,
changes happen in consumption or renewable energy generation, a manual operation
seems quite slow and suboptimal. Also the reactive power flow in a system is sensible
==PAGE:35==
2.4 Power System Voltage Control with the Hierarchical Model
21
against changes [20]. In case of dangerous situations like faults or overloading, a regulation
by hand could be even risky.
Besides the good opportunities to integrate WPP and HVDC lines into the power
system’s VC, there are several advantages by using a hierarchical model.
Some are
mention in [20], where this coordinated, automatic, wide area voltage control is suggested:
• Less fluctuation of predefined voltage profile
• enlarged var reserves in emergency situations for a better system security
• less reactive power flow for more active power capacity
• lower risk of voltage instability and collapse
• active loss minimization thanks to reduced reactive currents
• the var sources can be better utilized
• ancillary services better controllable and measurable (market opportunities)
The concept of the hierarchical model is shown in figure 2.13. It is organized in
three levels of system voltage regulation. An outer loop is taking a picture of the steady
state with a State Estimation, SE. These information are handed to an OPF, which
determines the optimum set-points. They are again forwarded to the highest level of
VC.
The three levels are overlapping and closed control loops. They are decoupled through
the speed of their dynamics. The primary level is the fastest one. The time constants
of the controls are longer at the secondary level. Finally the last one is also the slowest
loop. Furthermore they are separated spatially. From the control of the local bus at the
lowest to the complete system at the tertiary level.[6]
==PAGE:36==
22
2 Voltage Control in Power Systems
Figure 2.13: Concept of the Hierarchical Model
The primary level is also called primary voltage regulation, PVR. It controls the
local bus voltages of synchronous generators and other var sources. The reactive power
injection is managed by a closed control loop to keep the voltage at the defined value.
These set-points are received from the secondary voltage regulation, SVR. Since it is the
fastest control, its time constants are usually less than one second. [18] An example of
PVR is the AVR of a power plant.
==PAGE:37==
2.4 Power System Voltage Control with the Hierarchical Model
23
As explained before VC is a local problem. Therefore reactive power needs to be
coordinated decentralized in a region. This is done at the secondary level or secondary
voltage regulation. A control area is defined as strongly electrically coupled.
The strength of a bus is proportional to the short-circuit capacity, SCC. The SCC
is defined as the maximum apparent power that can flow from the node into a zero
impedance fault at balanced 3-phase conditions. A strong bus has a high ability to
maintain its voltage. As an example the voltage at a Node with an infinite SCC would
not change under all conditions. A strong electrical coupling means, that if the voltage
changes at one bus, the voltage at the buses coupled to it would follow with only small
deviations.
This will say that the strongest bus in a strongly coupled area can represent the voltage
situations of the area.
These buses are called pilot bus.
[20] The task of the SVR
is to maintain the voltages at the pilot buses. The reference values are received from
the tertiary level. This is done by setting the PVR set-points and by controlling the
tap-positions of the OLTCs. The time constants of this control level is within 10 to 100
seconds. [18]
The idea of the tertiary voltage regulation is to maintain the system-wide voltage
profile at the optimum level. While controlling the reference values of the pilot nodes in
the SVR zones, it coordinates the inter-area efficiency. Furthermore capacitor banks are
switched on and off on a daily basis. The time constant for the control loop is around 5
to 60 minutes. With TVR the voltage stability and var margins can be maximized and
transmission losses reduced. [18] This is done by decreasing the tie-line var flows between
the regions and by a reduced area boundary voltage difference. The best possible voltage
profile is obtained by adapting the pilot node voltages to a forecast plan from an OPF. [6]
To adapt the optimum reference values to the actual grid conditions, the system
operating states and measurements are processed by a SE and forwarded to an OPF
algorithm. It uses the real grid topology, the active and reactive power demand at the
loads, the scheduled power production at conventional power plants and the generation of
the renewable sources. As outcome the optimal set-points for voltage level and reactive
power production are provided to the TVR. [6] An optimal solution would be a real
time OPF. However the SE, which is delivered in minimal 5 minute intervals is not fast
enough compared to the control dynamics [20].
==PAGE:38==
24
2 Voltage Control in Power Systems
2.5
OPF for Voltage Control
An optimal power flow uses the conventional power flow methods to optimize a defined
problem. This can be the minimization of generating cost or the maximization of security
margins. However in many cases the minimization of the transmission system’s losses
is of interest. This optimization can be used to find the best reference values for the
voltage profile of a system. As input the OPF needs, as explained in the previous section,
the up-to-date system operation status and the newest measurements.
An ordinary
power flow could find an arbitrary but valid solution with these values, i.e. the voltage
magnitudes and angles of each bus as well as the missing active and reactive power
injections. An OPF on the contrary uses a solver method to find the best solution, which
satisfies the defined problem. Furthermore it is possible to add the system constraints
like line flow or generator limits.
In this section, the basics of a power flow are briefly repeated. Furthermore, the OPF and
how it can be used for finding optimal reactive power generation schedule and voltage
profile as reference will be described.
2.5.1
Power Flow Basics
A power flow calculation is used to get a complete picture of the situation in the
considered grid. This is needed for the planing of extensions or changes in the network.
For example it can be checked if devices stay within their limits, how high the loadings
and voltages are, or what happens if a fault occurs.
There are several inputs needed to perform the calculation.
First the current grid
needs to be represented in form of a bus admittance matrix Ybus. Here AC lines are
implemented as π−models, DC lines as resistors and transformers as series impedances.
Also the demand SD and the power factor PF = cos(ϕ) at the load buses need to be
known. The scheduled power generation is represented in the vector PG. However the
generation at the slack bus is a variable. It needs to balance the losses and the difference
between load and scheduled generation. Thus it will be calculated with the power flow.
The goal is to find voltage magnitudes |V | and angels δ of all buses.
This are the
information needed to show the state of the system. That is why they are also called
state variables.
There are in general three types of buses. The first one is called slack bus. Here voltage
magnitude |V | and angle δ need to be fixed, because the active and reactive power
injections Pinj and Qinj are unknown. They are defined in [29] as follows:
Pinj = PG −PD
(2.3)
and
Qinj = QG −QD
(2.4)
where PG and QG are the active and reactive power generation and PD and QD are
the demand at the bus, obtained from SD and the PF. At the second type of buses,
==PAGE:39==
2.5 OPF for Voltage Control
25
generators are connected and usually called PV buses. They are assumed to be voltage
controlled. With the scheduled active power and the voltage set-point, two quantities
are known. The missing ones are Qinj and the voltage angle. The third category is called
load or PQ bus. Pinj and Qinj are known from the load demand. This considerations
make clear that there are four relevant quantities for each bus: |V |, δ, Pinj and Qinj.
[29] As explained, two of them are known for each bus. The others can obtained using
a set of non-linear equations. They are based on the Conservation of Energy at a node
and called power flow equations [4]:
Pinj,i = PG,i −PD,i = |Vi|
n
∑
j=1
|Vj|(Gijcos(δij) + Bijsin(δij))
(2.5)
and
Qinj,i = QG,i −QD,i = |Vi|
n
∑
j=1
|Vj|(Gijsin(δij) −Bijcos(δij))
(2.6)
where i is the considered bus and n the number of buses in the system. G is the
conductance matrix and B the susceptance matrix.
These two power equations need to be solved for each bus. Since they are non-linear,
this is usually done with iterative algorithms like Newton-Raphson or the Gauss-Seidel
methods. The methods are explained in common literature like [30]. As a solution the
outputs are a vector with the voltage magnitudes and a vector with the voltage angles.
These state variables can be used to calculate all other quantities in the system, f.ex.
the generation at the slack bus, power system losses or line flows. The values can now
be checked against the limits to see if there are any violations.
2.5.2
OPF for Voltage Control
Optimization are used to find the best possible value for a given problem. It is either
about to minimize or to maximize this variable, depending on the objective of the task.
The objective function defines the desired outcome of the problem. There are one or
more parameters which influence this outcome. Furthermore there is at least one of
these variables, which can be controlled. They are called decision variables and are
the only way to influence the value of the objective function. The involved variables
can be restricted by equality and inequality constraints, which form the field of feasible
solutions. The goal is to find the combination of decision variables, which let the value
of the objective function be minimal or maximal. Also all variables need to be kept
within the feasible area.
With the defined decision variables, the objective function and the constraints, a solver
algorithm can calculate the best solution. They systematically vary the input values and
check if the solution gets better or not. If the variations stay within a defined tolerance
(stopping criterion), the problem is solved.
The choice of the solver depends on the properties of the optimization problem and
==PAGE:40==
26
2 Voltage Control in Power Systems
restrictions like calculation speed. Another criterion for the choice is the chance of local
maxima/minima. It can happen that the deviations fulfill the stopping criterion without
finding the global extreme point. When the solver is stucked in a local maximum/minimum,
it stops without finding the best solution. A possible way to overcome this problem is
described in the next chapter.
An optimal power flow is an optimization applied on a power flow. There are three
main parts which needs to be considered. First of all, an objective function needs to be
defined, depending on the desired solution. The power flow equations 2.5 and 2.6 are
the main equality constraints. Furthermore there are several restriction which needs to
be considered as inequality constraints. [29]
There are several possibilities for an objective function. Some of them are named in [17]:
• Minimizing of the generating cost, where the cost function of all generators needs
to be known.
• Maximizing the reactive power margin, when a safety buffer in critical situations
is needed.
• Minimizing the voltage deviation, when the voltage profile is to be kept at a defined
pattern.
Another important optimization problem is the minimization of the transmission
losses. In a system with a high penetration of renewable energy sources the fuel cost
of power plants are less important. Here it makes sense to reduce the losses for an
economical operation. The objective function can be written as:
[MIN]z =
p
∑
j=1
(Pg,j −Pd,j)
(2.7)
[17]
where p is the number of buses. The sum of the difference of active power generation
and demand at each bus is to minimize. This corresponds to an optimization of the
transmission losses.
The restrictions which are given by grid codes or physical circumstances are implemented
with the inequality constrains. Important ones are f.ex. generator active and reactive
power limits, line flow limits or the power limits of VSCs.
In an OPF the voltage magnitudes and angles at all buses except from the slack bus
are usually unlocked [29]. This means that all buses are treated as PQ buses, which is
in contrast to a normal power flow calculation. It makes it possible for the optimization
algorithm to find the best voltage profile. Thus the reactive power dispatch is optimized.
Furthermore the best tap position of OLTC transformers can be determined [4]. These
are in case of VC the decision variable, because reactive power output from the var
==PAGE:41==
2.5 OPF for Voltage Control
27
devices and the tap changer positions are the variables which can be controlled to
influence the system state and thus the value of the objective function.
==PAGE:42==
28
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 3
Optimal Power Flow for
Voltage Control
This chapter is about the method used to find the optimum voltage profile and reactive
power dispatch. The optimum power flow for the hybrid HVDC grid is developed in
three steps. First, the algorithm is applied on a pure AC grid to test its properties. In a
second section this grid is extended with a HVDC line, connecting a WPP to the main
AC grid. Furthermore, the tool is modified to optimize not only one time step, but also
whole time series. Therefore a wind speed measurement and a standard load profile for
one day is used as an input.
3.1
Modeling of the AC grid and Optimization
3.1.1
AC grid modeling
The AC system is represented in a single-line diagram, shown in figure 3.2. As simplification
the per-unit system is used with a base value of Sbase = 100MV A.
The network
consists of an 8-bus transmission system. The distribution systems are represented as
lumped loads. They are connected together with the generators to 4 MV buses. Step-up
transformers are connecting them to the 4 HV buses of the actual transmission network.
The transmission lines are represented using the π −model and the transformer as series
equivalent reactances. Line impedances, shunt susceptances and transformer reactances
can be found in figure 3.2. Information about loads and generation is presented in table
3.1.
Table 3.1: AC Grid Generation and Load
Type
Symbol
Bus
PG in
MW
PG,min in
MW
PG,max in
MW
QG in
Mvar
QG,min in
Mvar
QG,max in
Mvar
Conv. Generator
G1
1
PG1
0
1530
QG1
-720
1440
Conv. Generator
G2
4
100
0
1020
QG2
-240
480
Wind Power Plant
WPP1
4
150
0
150
QWPP1
-100
100
Wind Power Plant
WPP2
6
150
0
150
QWPP1
-150
150
Wind Power Plant
WPP3
8
225
0
225
QWPP1
-150
150
Load
L1
1
-285
-
-
-93.67
-
-
Load
L2
4
-380
-
-
-124.90
-
-
Load
L3
6
-285
-
-
-93.67
-
-
==PAGE:44==
30
3 Optimal Power Flow for Voltage Control
There are two conventional generators, supplying the system with active and reactive
power. G1 is the reference machine at the slack bus 1. The other generator G2 is located
at bus 4 and serves as additional active and reactive power source. There are three
WPPs, each representing large onshore or offshore wind farms. The WTGs are lumped
together and modeled as a generator. Their reactive power capability depend on the
scenario, described in the next chapter. The grid has 3 load centers, located at bus 1, 4
and 6. Their power factor is assumed to be fixed at cos(ϕ) = 0.95 ind..
3.1.2
The Optimization Algorithm
The algorithm used in this work is based on that one developed in [17]. It is programmed
in MATLAB and consists of three parts, the grid data and the solver in the main program,
the objective function and a function containing the equality and inequality constraints.
The main part starts with the definition of the grid model and the base value. Here
the active and reactive loads at each bus are assigned to the two demand vectors PD
and QD. The line and transformer series impedances are transformed into admittances.
Furthermore, the shunt susceptances of the lines are specified. Next the admittance
matrix Ybus is formed as explained in f.ex. [30]. Of this, the real part is taken for the
AC conductance matrix GAC and the imaginary part for the susceptance matrix BAC.
In the second half of the main part, the optimization function is initialized and called. For
this algorithm the solver function fmincon is used. Its principle of operation is explained
in section 3.1.3. First the state variables, i.e. the vector for the voltage magnitudes |V |
and angles δ, are initialized. This is the starting point of the optimization. It has a
certain significance, which is explained in the next section. Then the boundaries for the
state variables are defined. The lower and upper value for the slack bus is V = 1p.u. and
δ = 0°. This is done to fix this variables as reference. The other voltages magnitudes
are limited by ±10%, as defined in the German TransmissionCode2007 [26]. The angles
also needs to be limited to not to jeopardize the system’s stability. Here a value of
δ = 30° is chosen. Thereafter the two other parts, the objective and constraint function,
are assigned to two variables. Also solver options are set in a variable, which will be
explained in 3.1.3. This three variables, together with the initial values and the upper
and lower boundaries are handed to the function call of fmincon.
The output of this function is a vector with the optimized state variables and the final
value of the objective function, which is in this case the total system losses. The state
vector can then used to calculate all the system information, which are of interest.
However many of them are already determined in the constraints function to check
the limits of lines, transformers and generators.
The most important output is the
decision variable vector QG. It is the scheduled reactive power dispatch, which is used
as set-point for the TVR to obtain the optimal voltage profile.
The data, which is
interesting for the system analysis is plotted as can be seen in the chapter Results and
discussion.
==PAGE:45==
3.1 Modeling of the AC grid and Optimization
31
Figure 3.2: Sketch of the AC grid
==PAGE:46==
32
3 Optimal Power Flow for Voltage Control
The second part of the algorithm is the objective function, which is itself programmed
in a MATLAB function. As in [17] it minimizes the total transmission losses by reducing
the difference between the sum of the active power generation vector PG and the demand
vector PD. The latter one comes as fixed input from the main function. The active
power generation of G2 and the three WPPs are defined in this MATLAB function
directly and are also fixed. The only flexible part is the active power generation of the
slack bus generator PG1. It is the sum of the active power injection Pinj1 and demand
PD1 at bus one.
PG1 = Pinj1 + PD1
(3.1)
Since the demand is given, only the power injection needs to be determined. This
can be done by applying the power flow equation 2.5 for active power.
Pinj1 = V1 · (V1 · (GAC,1,1 · cos(δ1 −δ1) + BAC,1,1 · sin(δ1 −δ1))
(3.2)
+V2 · (GAC,1,2 · cos(δ1 −δ2) + BAC,1,2 · sin(δ1 −δ2)))
In this equation, the conductances and susceptances are taken from Ybus. However
the voltage magnitudes V1 and V2 as well as the voltage angels δ1 and δ2 are variables,
which will be chosen by the solver fmincon. They are optimized to fulfill the objective
of minimizing the transmission losses Ploss in:
[MIN]Ploss =
p
∑
j=1
(Pg,j −Pd,j)
(3.3)
But these and the other state variables also need to satisfy the system requirements.
They are defined in the last part of the algorithm as equality and inequality constraints.
fmincon hands the state variables to this function. By inserting them into the power
flow equations 2.5 and 2.6, the active and reactive power injection Pinj and Qinj at each
bus are calculated. Only Pinj1 is already obtained in the objective function. Next the
decision variable vector QG is determined by adding the demand to the reactive power
injection at each bus. This corresponds to the total var demand of the system, including
line and transformer losses.
QG = Qinj + QD
(3.4)
Now the two equality constraints 2.3 and 2.4 can be established. For the solver they
need to be in the form of ceq(x) = 0 as described in [31]. To do so two equations are
rearranged:
0 = PG −PD −Pinj
(3.5)
and
0 = QG −QD −Qinj
(3.6)
==PAGE:47==
3.1 Modeling of the AC grid and Optimization
33
For the inequality constraints, the active and reactive power generator limits from
table 3.1 are implemented. Depending on the study case, the var limits for the WPP are
as in the table, or for the case of no reactive power support, set to zero. Furthermore,
the apparent power flows in each line are calculated, using the state variables and the
admittance matrix. This is done using common power flow equations as explained in
f.ex. [29]. The apparent power flow limits for the transformers and transmission lines
are shown in table 3.3.
Table 3.3: Apparent Power Flow Limits
From
To
Smax
[MVA]
1
2
1800
2
3
448
2
5
498
3
4
1200
3
5
498
5
6
448
5
7
1200
7
8
600
In a last step the inequality constraints are defined in the form c(x) ≤0 as demanded
by fmincon in [31]. Here the lower and upper boundary for the active generation of
the slack machine G1 and the lower and upper boundaries regarding the var limits
of all power plants are defined. Furthermore the capability limits form table 3.3 are
implemented.
3.1.3
The solver fmincon
The MATLAB function fmincon can be used to find the minimum of a constrained and
multivariable problem. Furthermore, it is a nonlinear programming solver [31], which is
needed since a hybrid AC/DC power system has non-linear constraints [17].
As input it uses, as described above, the objective function whose value is to minimize.
Furthermore a set of arguments (in this case state variables) need to be initialized and
handed to fmincon. Also lower and upper boundaries need to be defined. The solver tries
to find a combination of these variables within the limits, which gives the minimum value
of the objective function. Furthermore possible equality and inequality constraints need
to be met. Boundaries and constraints define the field of possible solutions. There are
several options which can be chosen. For example a tolerance on how strong constraints
are allowed to violated or the number of iterations the solver should maximal do before
it stops.[31] By default it uses the Interior-Point method to find the solution.
This
algorithm is explained in [32].
A common problem of solvers is, that they usually find local optima.
In case of a
minimization, they search in their starting environment until they find a minimum, i.e.
==PAGE:48==
34
3 Optimal Power Flow for Voltage Control
the lowest point in a valley of the objective function. These valleys are also called basins
of attraction. It is usually uncertain, that the basin, where the optimization started
contains the global minimum. a possibility to overcome this problem is to use different
starting point, which in this works means different initial values for the state variables.
[33] An attempt is demonstrated in the results and discussion chapter.
3.2
The HVDC Extension
In the next step, the AC system is extended by a HVDC interconnection, using two
VSCs. As shown in figure 3.6, the AC line between bus 5 and 7 is replaced by the
direct current line, the converters and two DC buses. The resistance of the line is also
mentioned in the sketch. The input values regarding generation and load are listed in
table 3.4.
Table 3.4: AC/DC Grid Generation and Load
Type
Symbol
Bus
P in
MW
Pmin in
MW
Pmax in
MW
Q in
Mvar
Qmin in
Mvar
Qmax in
Mvar
Conv. Generator
G1
1
PG1
0
1530
QG1
-720
1440
Conv. Generator
G2
4
100
0
1020
QG2
-240
480
Wind Power Plant
WPP1
4
300
0
300
QWPP1
-100
100
Wind Power Plant
WPP2
6
300
0
300
QWPP1
-150
150
Wind Power Plant
WPP3
8
450
0
450
QWPP1
-150
150
Load
L1
1
-475
-
-
-156.12
-
-
Load
L2
4
-475
-
-
-156.12
-
-
Load
L3
6
-380
-
-
-124.90
-
-
For the algorithm, there were some changes done to implement the DC technology.
In the main code the HVDC line data are implemented in the DC conductance matrix
GDC, following the same rules as in case of the AC admittance matrix. The two DC
voltages E1 at bus 9 and E2 at bus 10 are included in the state variable vector. As
upper and lower limit the same tolerance of ±10% as for the DC lines were chosen. It
is assumed, that the maximum DC voltage, the VSC could generate, is exceeding this
limits.
The only changes made in the objective function is the higher wind power production.
Together with the new load, shown in table 3.4, the grid is now subjected to heavier
conditions to test the algorithm for this different situation.
There are several changes necessary in the constraints function. First of all, the power
flow equations for bus 5 and 7 were changed, since they are not directly connected to each
other any more. Next the DC current vector IDC is calculated by multiplying the DC
voltage vector E with the DC conductance matrix GDC. An element wise multiplication
of this current with E leads to the power injected into the dc system by the VSCs. [17]
For the equality constraints they need to be implemented in a vector at the position of
==PAGE:49==
3.2 The HVDC Extension
35
the AC buses, the converters are connected to. In this way the active power transmission
to the AC side can be modeled.
PDC =


0
0
0
0
PDC,1
0
PDC,2
0


Depending on the study case, the vector of the var injection of the VSCs needs to
be modified. If the var support is not desired, the values are set to zero. In case of
full support at both ends of the HVDC line, position 5 and 7 are equal to the injection
calculated with the reactive power flow equations as shown in the following:
QV SC =


0
0
0
0
Qinj,5
0
Qinj,7
0


As in [14] the converter is modeled as a second-order polynomial function, representing
its active power losses.
They depend on specific parameters for the rectifying and
inverting operation mode. They are shown in table 3.5.
PlossV SC,i = a + b · IV SC,i + c · I2
V SC,i
(3.7)
==PAGE:50==
36
3 Optimal Power Flow for Voltage Control
Table 3.5: Converter loss parameter [14]
Converter
mode
a
b
c
rectifier
11.033 · 10−3
3.464 · 10−3
5.40 · 10−3
inverter
11.033 · 10−3
3.464 · 10−3
7.67 · 10−3
The loss also depends on the current flowing through the converter. Its conjugate is
calculated as follows:
I∗
V SC,i =
√
P 2
V SC,i + Q2
V SC,i
Vi
(3.8)
Here QV SC,i is the reactive power injection of the ith converter. PV SC,i at the rectifier
is the active power injection at bus 7 Pinj,7 and at the inverter it is the DC power PDC,1
injected by the DC grid into the converter.
This values are chosen, since they are
including the losses itself.
Summarizing, this means that the losses of the VSC depend on the active power they
convert, the reactive power they inject into the AC grid and the voltage magnitude at
the connected AC bus.
In a last step the equality constraints are extended as described in [17], rearranged
as desired of fmincon.
0 = PG −PD −Pinj + PV SC,loss
(3.9)
0 = QV SC + QG −QD −Qinj
(3.10)
The inequalities stay the same. However the power flow in the DC line is calculated
by multiplying the voltage drop over the line with the line resistance and the DC voltage
at bus 9. The maximum power flow of the line is 570 MW.
==PAGE:51==
3.2 The HVDC Extension
37
Figure 3.6: Sketch of the hybrid AC/DC grid
==PAGE:52==
38
3 Optimal Power Flow for Voltage Control
3.3
Time Series Simulation
In the last extension of the program the algorithm is modified so it can handle whole time
series. Until now only a one momentary picture of the system was optimized. However as
described in the previous chapter, the grid conditions are continuously changing. Lines
are taken out of service for maintenance, generators are turned on and coupled to the
grid or loads get disconnected to avoid critical situations. This changes in the topology
happen only several times per day or even more rarely. But more important for the
voltage control of the system is the fluctuating power generation of renewable energy
source like wind power, and the continuously alternating demand from the load centers.
To simulate this dynamic behavior of the grid, and how the optimization deals with it,
two time series are implemented. A real wind speed measurement is used to model the
changes in wind power production. Furthermore a standard load profile for households
is implemented to show a realistic consumption behavior at the demand side. Both data
sets are in 15 minute steps over 24 hours, which could be a normal interval of a state
estimation as input for the OPF.
The wind speed measurement for a day in April is taken from [34]. It needs to be
modified in several steps to obtain the active power output for one WTG. This can then
be multiplied by the number of turbines in the WPP to get its power production. The
measurement was taken in a high of 10 meters over ground. To account for the wind
shear and to get the wind speeds in hub height of the turbines, Hellamnn’s power law
was used 3.11. The hub high is assumed to be 135 meters, and the Hellmann exponent
to be α = 0.14, which corresponds to an open, flat landscape. [35]
v135 = v10 ·
(h2
h1
)α
= v10 ·
(135m
10m
)0.14
(3.11)
The outcome of this modification is depicted in figure 3.7. The wind speeds lay
within a band of circa v = 5m/s to v = 13m/s. Figure 3.8 shows the power curve of
a WTG with a nominal power of PN = 3.05MW. To obtain the output of a turbine
corresponding to the wind speed, this two data set were handed to the MATLAB function
interp1. It executes a one dimensional linear interpolation of the power curve and uses
it as a look-up table. The outcome is the desired active power generation of one WTG
over the 24-hour-period.
==PAGE:53==
3.3 Time Series Simulation
39
0
5
10
15
20
Time in hours
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Wind Speed in 135 Meters Height in m/s
Figure 3.7: Wind speed at 135m height
0
5
10
15
20
25
Wind Speed in m/s
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
WTG Active Power Output in MW
Figure 3.8: Power Curve of the WTGs
In this part of the program the following configuration of WTGs were used. WPP1
==PAGE:54==
40
3 Optimal Power Flow for Voltage Control
and WPP2 consist of 50 machines with PN = 3.05MW. WPP3 uses the same type of
wind turbines, however its number of WTGs amounts to 150 to simulate a large power
plant connected through the HVDC line. In total there are 200 turbines in the system.
The previous calculated power output of on generator is multiplied by this amount to
get the overall wind power generation of the system. Figure 3.9 shows this graph over
24 hours.
0
5
10
15
20
Time in hours
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Active Power Generation of all WTG in MW
Figure 3.9: Active power output of all WTGs
The power output of the renewable energy source is strongly fluctuating. The low
wind speed in the morning hours generate around 100 MW. However around noon and
late evening it reaches power injections of circa 750 MW.
The second time series, which is used to simulate a system closer to reality, is the
load curve in figure 3.10. It is a standard load distribution for normal households in the
Spring and Autumn season, published by the German Association of Energy and Water
Industries BDEW (former VDEW) in [36]. It is up-scaled to simulated a reasonable load
for the considered system. The range goes from a low consumption around more than
300MW during the night up to circa 1300MW in the evening. There are 3 peaks, in the
morning, at lunch time and at around 20 o’clock. Depicted is the active power demand
==PAGE:55==
3.3 Time Series Simulation
41
of the system. The reactive power consumed by the loads is in relation to this by a PF
of cos(ϕ) = 0.95 ind. as in the previous parts.
0
5
10
15
20
Time in hours
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Active Power Demand in MW
Figure 3.10: Active power Demand of the System
The adjustments in the code are primarily in the main part. The constraint function
stays unchanged.
In the MATLAB function were the objective is defined, only the
definition of the wind power production is removed. Instead 3 global variables feed the
generation vector PG with the information about the turbine output from the main
function. Here the time series are modified as explained above. The main change is now,
that the function call for fmincon is done in a for-loop. It is repeated for every time
step of the wind power production and consumption curve, i.e. every 15 minutes over
24 hours. This makes it possible to feed the solver in every iteration with the current
load and generation situation of the network.
The outputs are now a vector with the optimized total system losses for every 15 minutes.
Furthermore the state variables are stored in a matrix for all time steps. This data can
be processed as in the other sections and plotted.
==PAGE:56==
42
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 4
Results and Discussion
The results are presented in the order, the work was developed.
First a basic pure
AC grid is analyzed in steady state. Its fundamental behavior is investigated, were the
influence of the WPPs on the grids VC performance is brought into focus. The second
part of the chapter examines one time step of a hybrid AC/DC grid, also including
WTGs. The effect of both, WPPs and VSCs on the VC and active power losses are
evaluated. In the third part the influence of fluctuations in the wind power production
on the power system performance are analyzed. To do so, a wind data series over 24
hours is used as input for the WPPs in the hybrid grid.
4.1
AC Grid Simulations
For the AC grid, several cases are studied. As reference a conventional power flow is
conducted, using the Newton-Raphson method. Then the optimal power flow is applied
on the same grid. In both cases the only reactive power support comes from the two
conventional generators. In a next step, the WPPs are used as additional var sources to
improve the system performance and to reduce the overall losses. To demonstrate the
problem of local minima, different starting points are used. In a last case, the voltage
magnitude of one bus in the system is forced to the upper limit to check the results of
the optimization. The AC grid is shown again to recall the situation in the system.
Figure 4.1: Sketch of the AC grid
==PAGE:58==
44
4 Results and Discussion
In this first scenario the WTGs are not contributing to the reactive power supply of
the grid. This means that the only var sources are located at the slack bus 1 and at the
PV bus 4. The load at bus 3 has no direct var supply. It should also be kept in mind,
that the energy from WPP 3 needs to be transmitted over a long distance to the loads.
This causes an extra need for reactive power in the transmission lines.
For the reference base case, the voltages at the slack and PV buses are fixed at a set-point
of V = 1 p.u. To find the optimum values, the voltage at bus 4 is released in the OPF.
Figure 4.2 shows the voltage profiles as an outcome of the two simulations. In case of
the conventional power flow the voltages at bus 1 and 4 are as expected at V = 1 p.u.
As explained in chapter 2, the remaining voltages of the grid follow the controlled buses.
Their magnitudes depend on the passive influence of the grid as well as the generation
and load situation. In figure 4.2a one can see that the voltages at bus 2 and 3 are close to
the reference of the controlled nodes since they are electrically strong coupled. However
buses 5 to 8 are far away from reactive power support which let their voltages decrease
significantly, close to the lower limit of V = 0.9 p.u. This is due to the reactive power
consumption at the load bus 6 and the var demand of the lines and transformers, caused
by the active and reactive power transmission.
(a) Newton-Raphson power flow
(b) Optimal Power Flow
Figure 4.2: Comparison of the voltage profiles for the basic AC grid without var support
of the WPPs
The OPF determined a significant higher set-point for the PV bus 4. This provokes
all uncontrolled buses to increase their voltage level considerably. The origin of this
boost is an optimized reactive power dispatch, which can be seen in the comparison
figure 4.3. The var injection at the slack bus is slightly reduced and the support at the
PV is clearly higher.
==PAGE:59==
4.1 AC Grid Simulations
45
(a) Newton-Raphson power flow
(b) Optimal Power Flow
Figure 4.3: Comparison of the reactive rower generation and remand for the basic AC
grid without var support of the WPPs
This changes in the var dispatch, followed by an optimized voltage profile, influence
the active power losses of the system, shown in table 4.6. The new grid situation cause
higher losses in the two lines, which connect the PV bus with the rest of the system.
However the losses in the other lines are reduced. This leads to a total reduction in
Joule losses of ca. ∆P = 0.41MW which corresponds to 3.86% of the reference losses.
The transformers are modeled as series reactance without resistance. Therefore they do
not cause any active power losses in table 4.6.
Figure 4.4: Optimized voltage profile for the AC grid with var support from the WPPs
using a flat start.
==PAGE:60==
46
4 Results and Discussion
In the third case the WPPs are included as reactive power sources. The turbines at
bus 4 contribute to the VC capability of the conventional generator. However at bus 6
and 8 it is now possible to actively influence the voltage level of the grid by injecting or
absorbing vars. This results in the profile shown in figure 4.4. The voltages magnitudes
are significant higher at buses 5 to 6 compared to the case without var support from
the WTGs. Instead of being close to the lower limit, they tend now to the upper limit.
Especially the level at bus 8 is now the highest. The reason for this new profile can be
seen in figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Optimized reactive power generation for the AC grid with var support from
the WPPs using a flat start.
Reactive power generations, which where before only injected at bus 1 and 4 are
now distributed to all nodes with connected power plants. On one hand, this makes it
possible to serve the var demand of the load at bus 6 locally. On the other hand, the
reactive power consumption of the lines and transformers in the lower part of the grid
can be covered without a long transmission from the central power stations.
This has two advantages. Firstly the transfer capacity of the lines is increased for active
power.
Secondly the heating losses are significantly lower due to the lower reactive
currents. This can be seen in table 4.6. All line losses are smaller compared to the base
case and to the OPF without WPP var support. This leads to a total loss reduction of
ca. ∆P = 3.54MW which corresponds to 33.33% of the base case losses.
==PAGE:61==
4.1 AC Grid Simulations
47
Table 4.6: Comparison of the active power losses for the basic AC grid without var
support
From Bus
To Bus
NR
Line Losses
no var support
in MW
OPF
Line Losses
no var support
in MW
OPF
Line Losses
with var support
in MW
1
2
0.00
0.00
0.00
2
3
0.47
0.70
0.45
2
5
0.79
0.33
0.13
3
4
0.00
0.00
0.00
3
5
1.54
1.90
0.65
5
6
0.00
0.00
0.00
5
7
7.83
7.29
5.86
7
8
0.00
0.00
0.00
Total Active Power
Losses in MW
10.62
10.21
7.08
As described in chapter 3 the solver of the optimization is only searching for local
minima. To get closer to the best solution, different starting values were chosen for the
OPF. The slack bus voltage remains fixed at V = 1.0 p.u. Table 4.7 shows the total
active power losses of all cases. The scenario with reactive power support from WPPs
is split into three OPF runs. The first is initiated with a flat start, i.e. all voltages are
1.0 p.u. A second run starts with all magnitudes at the upper limit, since it is expected
to have lower losses with higher voltages. The third one has rising voltages from the first
to the last bus in the system as starting point. The results show, that the flat start is
not leading to global optimum. The other two runs lead to an improved result. However
it is only slightly better than that of the flat start.
Table 4.7: Loss comparison AC Grid
Case
Starting Point Voltage Magnitudes
in per unit
Total Active
Power Losses
in MW
base case NR
1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
10.623
no
var support
support from WPPs
1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
10.2116
with
var support
from WPPs
1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
7.0826
1.00 1.10 1.10 1.10 1.10 1.10 1.10 1.10
7.0817
1.00 1.04 1.05 1.06 1.07 1.08 1.09 1.10
7.0817
bus 8 forced
to V=1.1pu
1.00 1.04 1.05 1.06 1.07 1.08 1.09 1.10
7.0902
==PAGE:62==
48
4 Results and Discussion
A last study case was added, because it was expected that the voltage or another
variable reaches its threshold. By forcing the system to the limit, it is tested if a better
solution can be obtained. Because the voltage of bus 8 is the highest in the profile of
figure 4.4, it is fixed at its highest possible value of V = 1.1 p.u.. The total active power
losses in table 4.7 show, that a higher voltage at bus 8 is not causing better results. The
reason for this could be, that the var flow needed to increase the voltage cause losses
itself. The OPF probably found a solution, where the loss reduction through higher
voltages and an increased loss due to higher reactive currents is equilibrated.
4.2
Hybrid Grid Simulations
To analyze the behavior of a hybrid AC/DC network, a HVDC transmission line is
implemented to connect the WPP at bus 8 and its step-up transformer to the main
AC grid at bus 5. A recall of the network sketch is shown in figure 4.8. Here not only
the WTGs, but also the VSCs of the HVDC line can contribute to the VC. How they
influence the grid performance is investigated in four different cases.
Figure 4.8: Sketch of the hybrid AC/DC grid
In a first situation, the only reactive power supply of the main grid comes from
the two conventional generators G1 and G2 at bus 1 and 4. However the HVDC line
decouples the reactive power flow to bus 7 and 8. The AC grid is now split into a main
grid and the wind farm grid of WPP3 with its transformer. This means the central
power plants cannot control the voltage at bus 7 and 8 anymore. This task is taken over
by the VSC at bus 7. In the second case, the influence of the other VSC at bus 5 on
the voltage level is studied. Case 3 analyzes the VC abilities of the WPPs in the Hybrid
grid. Both VSCs inject no reactive power. In the last instance number 4, both WPPs
and VSCs are used to support the grid to optimize the voltage.
==PAGE:63==
4.2 Hybrid Grid Simulations
49
(a) No var support
(b) Var support from VSCs
(c) Var support from WPPs
(d) Var support from VSCs and WPPs
Figure 4.9: Comparison of the voltage profiles in four different cases for the hybrid
AC/DC grid
In figure 4.9 the voltage profiles of the four study cases are compared. For the first
case in sub-figure 4.9a the voltages at bus 3 and 4 as well as 5 and 6 are noticeable.
The slack bus 1 is fixed to V = 1.0 p.u. and cannot provide the necessary potential
difference for a sufficient var transfer to the load at bus 6. To do so, the voltage at bus
4 is almost reaching the limit of V = 1.1 p.u. Since there is no reactive power source
in the lower area of the grid, and var needs to be imported, the voltage at bus 5 and
6 is very low. In the cases in figure 4.9b and 4.9c the voltage sink at bus 5 and 6 can
almost be compensated by the VSC and the WPP2 respectively. The generator G2 can
keep its voltage at a lower value, optimized for the new situation. The last case with the
support of VSC and WPP shows the best result with high voltage levels for a low-loss
wind power transmission to the upper load centers.
The voltage level at the wind farm AC grid can be kept at the upper limit, since only
the step-up transformer is causing a demand for reactive power. This means no long var
transmission is necessary. It can be supplied locally by the VSC in case 1 and 2, by the
==PAGE:64==
50
4 Results and Discussion
WTGs in case 3 and by both for case four. Depending on which device is injecting the
reactive power, the voltage at bus 7 or 8 is slightly higher or nearly balanced in the last
case.
The voltage in the DC link is controlled by the VSC at the wind farm and kept to the
maximum for bus 10. The lower voltage at bus 9 is due to the voltage drop over the line
resistance, depending on the amount of transferred power.
(a) No var support
(b) Var support from VSCs
(c) Var support from WPPs
(d) Var support from VSCs and WPPs
Figure 4.10: Comparison of the reactive power injections in four different cases for the
hybrid AC/DC grid
The voltage profile is again shaped by the reactive power injections at the particular
buses. The the optimum reactive power schedule for the four cases is shown in figure
4.10. As discusses before, the lion share of var supply is done by G2 in case 1 (figure
4.10a). In the second and third instant, reactive is injected by the WPPs and VSCs
respectively. This reduces the effort of the generator at bus 4 significantly. Thanks to
this local supply, less var and voltage differences are demanded for long distance reactive
power transmission. In figure 4.10d the reactive power contribution of the conventional
==PAGE:65==
4.2 Hybrid Grid Simulations
51
power plant can be lowered even further by a shared local supply of WPPs and VSCs.
They satisfy the reactive power losses of the local lines and the transformer together.
The WTGs at bus 6 deliver the bigger share, since it causes less losses to supply the var
demand of the load directly.
For the small wind farm AC grid it is noticeable, that in case 4 the var injection is
basically balanced between the WPP and the VSC.
Table 4.11: Line Losses in the hybrid AC/DC Grid
Line Losses in MW
From Bus
To Bus
No var
support
VSC var
support
WPP var
support
VSC + WPP
var support
1
2
0
0
0
0
2
3
1.08
0.86
0.78
0.74
2
5
4.59
4.44
4.55
4.72
3
4
0
0
0
0
3
5
3.58
2.19
2.05
1.95
5
6
0
0
0
0
5
9
16.94
16.60
15.27
14.96
7
8
0
0
0
0
7
10
11.61
11.61
11.62
11.57
9
10
6.35
6.35
6.36
6.36
Total Active Power
Losses in MW
44.15
42.06
40.62
40.31
Table 4.11 shows the active power losses for the 4 cases. As expected, the local
distributed var injections, which lead to a better voltage profile, cause reduced system
losses. The support of the VSCs can decrease the system losses by more than 2 MW.
In the third case, almost 3.5 MW are saved. The combined VC interaction of the VSCs
and the WPPs have the best effect on the system and reduce the losses compared to
case 1 by ca. 8.7%. Taking a closer look to the individual results, it is obvious that
the main improvement comes from line 35 and from the grid-side VSC, which inverts
the DC to AC current. The first point is clear, since the line is transferring significant
less reactive power from bus 3 to bus 5. However the converter losses where expected
to increase due to the reactive power output. The losses in the converter depend i.a. on
the current [17]. A higher var output increases this current. But it also increases the
voltage on the AC side, which itself depends on the properties of the grid. This higher
voltage decreases the current and thus the losses of the converter.
==PAGE:66==
52
4 Results and Discussion
4.3
Time Series Simulations
In this section the behavior of the optimization algorithm over time is analyzed. The
system is subjected to a time period of 24 hours. Both the influence of a varying load
and the fluctuations of wind power production are investigated. It is assumed that the
State Estimation provides a picture of the demand and renewable energy injection in
15-minute-steps.
This means that the OPF also runs every quarter of an hour and
determines the best voltage profile and optimal reactive power dispatch schedule.
0
5
10
15
20
Time in hours
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Active Power in MW
Generation of all WTGs
System Load
Figure 4.12: Demand and wind power production over 24 hours
Figure 4.12 compares the total active power demand of the system loads with the
wind power production over one day. The red lines shows the system load. As explained
in chapter 3 a standard load profile for households in the transition period between
winter and summer is used. The blue line shows the generation of all WTGs, using a
wind measurement of a April day.
Interesting for the system condition is on one hand the difference between the two graphs.
The discrepancy is covered by a constant output of G2 and G1 at the slack bus. On
the other hand, the total amount of consumption and production is relevant.
Both
factors have an influence on the line and transformer loading. Thus the reactive power
==PAGE:67==
4.3 Time Series Simulations
53
demand of the transmission system is changing with every time step. Furthermore the
var consumption of the load depends on the active power demand by a power factor of
PF = 0.95 ind.
For the time series simulations only the two extreme cases, no var support from WPPs
and the VSC at bus 5 and full support, are compared. Figure 4.13 shows the development
of the AC bus voltages over time, when the VC is taken over by the conventional power
plants and the VSC at bus 7 for the WPP grid.
0
5
10
15
20
Time in hours
0.9
0.95
1
1.05
1.1
Voltage at AC buses
Bus1
Bus2
Bus3
Bus4
Bus5
Bus6
Bus7
Bus8
Figure 4.13: AC bus voltages over time without var support from VSCs and WPPs
Particularly striking is, that there are four pairs of bus voltages, which follow each
other. The buses connected through a transformer are electrical strongly coupled. This
causes the similar behavior of their voltage magnitudes. Bus one has as slack bus a
constant value of 1.1 p.u. and bus 2 is thus close to this level. Bus 7 in the wind farm
grid is kept by the VSC at the upper limit, followed by it’s coupled bus 8.
The remaining four buses are strongly influenced by the varying grid conditions. The
bus couple 3/4 with G2 as var sources stay around V = 1p.u. in the first 5 hours. This
is due to the low var demand of the load. Furthermore the wind power production is low
which causes a low var demand from power transmission. With increasing load between
5 and 10 hours, also the voltage needs to be increased slowly. However with the rising
==PAGE:68==
54
4 Results and Discussion
amount of wind power in the system, the voltage magnitude climbs up strongly. This
indicates a high influence of the wind energy transmission on the var consumption.
The voltage magnitudes at bus 5 and 6 has no direct VC in this case and are significant
lower than at generator 2. They are strongly influenced by changes in load. An increase
in reactive power demand causes a drop of the voltages as can be seen clearly between
5 and 7 hours. Between 8 and 11 o’clock, the load is nearly constant. However the
generation of wind energy is increasing significantly. The voltages are rising because
reactive power is injected at bus 4 but also because active power is supplied locally and
the var demand due to transmission decreases.
0
5
10
15
20
Time in hours
0.9
0.95
1
1.05
1.1
Voltage at AC buses
Bus1
Bus2
Bus3
Bus4
Bus5
Bus6
Bus7
Bus8
Figure 4.14: AC bus voltages over time with full var support from VSCs and WPPs
In the second scenario a full reactive power support from the WPPs and the HVDC
connection is given. Figure 4.14 shows the corresponding voltage profile over time. The
voltages at buses 3/4 are now lower since less reactive power needs to be transmitted
south. The magnitudes at buses 5/6 are even higher and can kept at an optimum with
low losses. The influences of the var demand of the loads is now very small, as can be
seen between 5 and 7 hours, where the red line in figure 4.12 has its largest growth.
This is because the loads can be served locally, which needs no additional reactive power
transmission. The pattern of the voltage magnitudes at buses 3 to 6 is now similar to
==PAGE:69==
4.3 Time Series Simulations
55
the wind power production. That means that the main var consumption of the network
is caused by the transmission of active power from the WPPs to the loads centers.
0
5
10
15
20
Time in hours
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Total System Losses in MW
No var support
With var support
Figure 4.15: Total active power system losses over 24 hours
Figure 4.15 compares the active power losses of the hybrid system for the to examined
study cases. It can be seen that both, the power demand of the loads and the transmission
of the wind power, have a strong influence. Rising consumption increases active and
reactive currents in the lines to serve the demand. This itself causes a higher var demand
of lines and transformers. Furthermore the power from a higher wind energy generation
needs to be transferred to the load center, which also amplifies the losses.
The diagram shows that for low loads and little wind power transfer the losses for both
cases are nearly the same. This can especially be observed in the first 6 hours of the
time span. However if the losses increase, also the difference between the two scenarios
gets bigger. The red curve, presenting the case with reactive power support of WPPs
and VSCs, is particularly lower, when the system is highly loaded. This behavior has
not only the advantage of lower overall losses. It furthermore reduces especially the
peak losses. This means, that the whole system could be designed smaller. Thus a
smaller maximum rated power of the generation and capacity of f.ex. lines, cables and
transformers is necessary.
==PAGE:70==
56
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
The question asked in this thesis is how to maintain the voltage level in a hybrid AC/DC
system, with less central generation units and an increasing amount of wind power plants.
First, the up-to-date research on voltage control in power systems was reviewed. This
led to the idea of using the hierarchical method for a coordinated voltage control in
a grid with many WPPs and VSCs as possible reactive power source replacement for
conventional power plants. An OPF is necessary to find the economically optimal voltage
set-points and var dispatch schedule for this method. Further, a review of the current
research in OPFs for hybrid AC/DC networks including WTGs was carried out. The
plan was then to use an optimal power flow tool to investigate whether it is possible
to control the voltage of a hybrid system with a high penetration of wind power and
a reduced amount of conventional power plants. Furthermore, it should be tested how
good the performance would be, compared with a scenario where the voltage support
possibilities of WPPs and VSCs were not used.
Next, an investigation of the basic concepts and the purpose of voltage control was
conducted. Also the available methods and devices to influence the voltage were studied.
Building up on this, the characteristics of WTGs and VSCs regarding reactive power
support were analyzed. Next, the principles of the hierarchical model were studied in
order to understand how the OPF could be implemented. After a deeper understanding
of power flows and their optimization, the OPF tool for a hybrid system was developed.
In a last step the simulation results of the algorithm were analyzed and discussed.
Firstly, the performance of the optimization for a pure AC grid was successfully assessed
against a conventional load flow. Thereafter, the influences of the WPPs on the overall
voltage control of the system where checked with a positive outcome. To investigate
the performance of the tool in a hybrid AC/DC grid and to determine the var support
capabilities of VSCs, a HVDC line was implemented into the network. Here the results
showed once again a significant improvement of the system performance, when WPPs
and VSCs support the voltage control. To test the tool under changing system conditions,
a time-series analysis was conducted, varying wind power production and load demand.
The analysis of the losses over this time period showed again the significant improvement
in the system performance brought about by the support of the WPPs and VSCs to
voltage control.
Summing up, the question asked in the thesis was answered satisfyingly: Wind power
plants are able to support the voltage in a hybrid AC/DC grid. The suggested method
and the developed tool can be used to optimize the system’s economical performance
regarding transmission losses.
==PAGE:72==
58
==PAGE:73==
APPENDIX A
MATLAB code
A.0.1
AC OPF
1 %% Main program for AC-OPF
2 clc
3 close all
4
5 global Gac Bac Sbase Pd Qd Yac Qg comp Vcplx Pg PgLB PgUB QgLB QgUB
6
7 %% Grid data
8
9 Sbase = 100;
% Base value in MVA
10 Sd1 = 300;
11 Sd4 = 400;
12 Sd6 = 300;
13 Phi = acos(0.95);
% Load angle
14
15 % Active power demand in per unit
16
17 Pd1 = Sd1*cos(Phi)/Sbase;
18 Pd2 = 0;
19 Pd3 = 0;
20 Pd4 = Sd4*cos(Phi)/Sbase;
21 Pd5 = 0;
22 Pd6 = Sd6*cos(Phi)/Sbase;
23 Pd7 = 0;
24 Pd8 = 0;
25 Pd
= [Pd1 Pd2 Pd3 Pd4 Pd5 Pd6 Pd7 Pd8]';
26
27 % Reactive power demand in per unit
28
29 Qd1 = Sd1*sin(Phi)/Sbase;
30 Qd2 = 0;
31 Qd3 = 0;
32 Qd4 = Sd4*sin(Phi)/Sbase;
33 Qd5 = 0;
34 Qd6 = Sd6*sin(Phi)/Sbase;
35 Qd7 = 0;
36 Qd8 = 0;
37 Qd
= [Qd1 Qd2 Qd3 Qd4 Qd5 Qd6 Qd7 Qd8]';
38
39 % AC Grid
40 % Line and transformer impedance in per unit
41
42 z12 =
0.007i;
==PAGE:74==
60
A MATLAB code
43 z23 = 0.013 + 0.097i;
44 z25 = 0.012 + 0.086i;
45 z34 =
0.010i;
46 z35 = 0.012 + 0.086i;
47 z56 =
0.010i;
48 z57 = 0.013 + 0.097i;
49 z78 =
0.020i;
50
51 % Mutual admittance in per unit
52 y12 = 1/z12;
53 y23 = 1/z23;
54 y25 = 1/z25;
55 y34 = 1/z34;
56 y35 = 1/z35;
57 y56 = 1/z56;
58 y57 = 1/z57;
59 y78 = 1/z78;
60
61 % Half of shunt susceptance in per unit
62 b23 = 0.065i/2;
63 b25 = 0.129i/2;
64 b35 = 0.129i/2;
65 b57 = 0.065i/2;
66
67 % Self-addmitance in per unit
68 y11 = y12;
69 y22 = y12+y23+b23+y25+b25;
70 y33 = y34+y23+b23+y35+b35;
71 y44 = y34;
72 y55 = y56+y25+b25+y35+b35+y57+b57;
73 y66 = y56;
74 y77 = y78+y57+b57;
75 y88 = y78;
76
77 % AC admittance matrix
78 Yac
= [y11
-y12
0
0
0
0
0
0;
79
-y12
y22
-y23
0
-y25
0
0
0;
80
0
-y23
y33
-y34
-y35
0
0
0;
81
0
0
-y34
y44
0
0
0
0;
82
0
-y25
-y35
0
y55
-y56
-y57
0;
83
0
0
0
0
-y56
y66
0
0;
84
0
0
0
0
-y57
0
y77
-y78;
85
0
0
0
0
0
0
-y78
y88];
86
87 % AC conductance matrix
88 Gac = real(Yac);
89
90 % AC susceptance matrix
91 Bac = imag(Yac);
92
93 %% Optimization
94 % Arguments
==PAGE:75==
A MATLAB code
61
95 % Initial values
96 %V0
= [1.0 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.1]';
% AC bus voltage magnitudes in pu
97 %V0
= [1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0]';
% AC bus voltage magnitudes in pu
98 V0
= [1.0 1.04 1.05 1.06 1.07 1.08 1.09 1.1]';
% AC bus voltage magnitudes in pu
99 del0 = [0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0]';
% AC bus voltage angles in rad
100 x0 =[V0;del0];
101
102 % Lower boundaries for arguments
103 LB_V
= [1.0 0.9
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.9]';
104 LB_del
= [0
-0.5236 -0.5236 -0.5236 -0.5236 -0.5236 -0.5236 -0.5236]';
105 LB = [LB_V; LB_del];
106
107 % Upper boundaries for arguments
108 UB_V
= [1.0 1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1]';
109 UB_del
= [0
0.5236
0.5236
0.5236
0.5236
0.5236
0.5236 0.5236]';
110 UB = [UB_V; UB_del];
111
112 % Objective function call
113 ObjFcn
= @AC_Object;
114 %constraints function call
115 ConsFcn = @AC_Constraints;
116 % Solver fmincon
117 options = optimoptions(@fmincon ,'MaxFunctionEvaluations',3000000,'MaxIterations',1000
118 [xMin,f] = fmincon(ObjFcn,x0,[],[],[],[],LB,UB,ConsFcn ,options);
119
120 %% Result output
121 % AC bus voltage magnitudes in pu and angles in degree
122 V_mag = xMin(1:8);
123 delta = xMin(9:16)*180/pi;
124 V_min = LB_V;
125 V_max = UB_V;
126 del_min = LB_del*180/pi;
127 del_max = UB_del*180/pi;
128
129 disp(' Bus
Vmin
Vmax
Voltage
del min
del max
delta');
130 for m = 1:length(V_mag)
131
fprintf('%3g', m); fprintf('
%8.2f', V_min(m)); fprintf('
%8.2f', V_max(m))
132
fprintf('
%8.4f', V_mag(m)); fprintf('
%8.2f', del_min(m));...
133
fprintf('
%8.2f', del_max(m));
fprintf('
%8.2f', delta(m)); fprintf('\n')
134 end
135
136 bus = 1:1:8;
137 colors = {[0 0.6 0], [0 0.6 0], [0 0.6 0], [0 0.6 0], [0 0.6 0], [0 0.6 0], [0 0.6 0]
138 figure('Name','AC Voltage Profile')
139 coloredbarV( V_mag, bus, colors);
140 xlabel('Bus')
141 ylabel('Voltage Magnitude in p.u.')
142
143 figure('Name','AC Voltage Angle');
144 bar(1:8, delta, 0.3)
145 map = [0 0.6 0.5];
146 colormap(map)
==PAGE:76==
62
A MATLAB code
147 xlabel('Bus')
148 ylabel('Voltage Angle Delta in degree')
149 ylim([-35 35]);
150 hold on
151 plot(xlim ,[30 30], 'color', [1 0 0],'LineWidth',1.5,'LineStyle','--')
152 plot(xlim ,[-30 -30], 'color', [1 0 0],'LineWidth',1.5,'LineStyle','--')
153 grid on
154
155 % Power generation and demand
156 Pgmin = [PgLB; 0; 0; 0; 0; 0; 0; 0];
157 Pgmax = [PgUB; 0; 0; 660; 0; 150; 0; 225];
158
disp(' Bus
Pdem
Pgen
Pg min
Pg max');
159 for m = 1:length(Pd)
160
fprintf('%3g', m); fprintf('
%8.0f', Pd(m)*Sbase); fprintf('
%8.1f', Pg(m)*Sbase
161
fprintf('
%8.0f', Pgmin(m)); fprintf('
%8.0f', Pgmax(m)); fprintf('\n');
162 end
163
164 % bus = 1:1:8;
165 % colors = {[0 0.6 0], [0 0.6 0], [0 0.6 0], [0 0.6 0], [0 0.6 0], [0 0.6 0], [0 0.6 0], [
166 % figure('Name','AC Active Power Generation');
167 % coloredbarP( Pg*Sbase, bus, colors);
168 %
169 % bus = 1:1:8;
170 % colors = {[0.8 0 0], [0.8 0 0], [0.8 0 0], [0.8 0 0], [0.8 0 0], [0.8 0 0], [0.8 0 0], [
171 % figure('Name','AC Active Power Demand');
172 % coloredbarP( -Pd*Sbase, bus, colors);
173
174 figure('Name','AC Active Power');
175 bar(1:8, [Pg*Sbase -Pd*Sbase])
176 map = [0 0.6 0; 0.8 0 0];
177 colormap(map)
178 xlabel('Bus')
179 ylabel('Active Power in MW')
180 legend('Generation','Demand');
181 ylim([-500 500]);
182 grid on
183
184
185 disp(' Bus
Qdem
Qgen
Qg min
Qg max');
186 for m = 1:length(Qd)
187
fprintf('%3g', m); fprintf('
%8.2f', Qd(m)*Sbase); fprintf('
%8.2f', Qg(m)*Sbase
188
fprintf('
%8.0f', QgLB(m)); fprintf('
%8.0f', QgUB(m)); fprintf('\n');
189 end
190
191 % bus = 1:1:8;
192 % colors = {[0 0.6 0.6], [0 0.6 0.6], [0 0.6 0.6], [0 0.6 0.6], [0 0.6 0.6], [0 0.6 0.6],
193 % figure('Name','AC Reactive Power Generation')
194 % coloredbarQ( Qg*Sbase, bus, colors);
195 %
196 % bus = 1:1:8;
197 % colors = {[1.0 0.4 0], [1.0 0.4 0], [1.0 0.4 0], [1.0 0.4 0], [1.0 0.4 0], [1.0 0.4 0],
198 % figure('Name','AC Reactive Power Demand')
==PAGE:77==
A MATLAB code
63
199 % coloredbarQ( -Qd*Sbase, bus, colors);
200
201 figure('Name','AC Reactive Power');
202 bar(1:8, [Qg*Sbase -Qd*Sbase])
203 map = [0 0.6 0.6; 1.0 0.4 0];
204 colormap(map)
205 xlabel('Bus')
206 ylabel('Reactive Power in MW')
207 legend('Generation','Demand');
208 ylim([-500 500]);
209 grid on
210
211
212 % Total active power system losses in MW
213 Ploss_out = f*Sbase
214
215 % Active power losses on each line in MW
216 Ploss12 = abs((Vcplx(1)-Vcplx(2))*y12)ˆ2*real(z12);
217 Ploss23 = abs((Vcplx(2)-Vcplx(3))*y23)ˆ2*real(z23);
218 Ploss25 = abs((Vcplx(2)-Vcplx(5))*y25)ˆ2*real(z25);
219 Ploss34 = abs((Vcplx(3)-Vcplx(4))*y34)ˆ2*real(z34);
220 Ploss35 = abs((Vcplx(3)-Vcplx(5))*y35)ˆ2*real(z35);
221 Ploss56 = abs((Vcplx(5)-Vcplx(6))*y56)ˆ2*real(z56);
222 Ploss57 = abs((Vcplx(5)-Vcplx(7))*y57)ˆ2*real(z57);
223 Ploss78 = abs((Vcplx(7)-Vcplx(8))*y78)ˆ2*real(z78);
224
225 % Total active power system losses in MW(summation of line losses to check)
226 Ploss = [Ploss12 Ploss23 Ploss25 Ploss34 Ploss35 Ploss56 Ploss57 Ploss78]'*Sbase;
227
228
229 fr = [1 2 2 3 3 5 5 7]';
230 to = [2 3 5 4 5 6 7 8]';
231 LinFlow = [fr to round(comp(:,1),0) round(comp(:,2),2) round(comp(:,3),2) round(comp(
232 Titl = {'From', 'To', 'Smax', 'S', 'P', 'Q', 'From', 'To', 'S', 'P', 'Q', 'Ploss'};
233 unit = {'','','[MVA]','[MVA]','[MW]','[Mvar]','','','[MVA]','[MW]','[Mvar]','[MW]',};
234 xlswrite('C:\Users\s151870\Google Drive\0 Master Thesis\MATLAB\Results.xlsx',Titl,1,'
235 xlswrite('C:\Users\s151870\Google Drive\0 Master Thesis\MATLAB\Results.xlsx',unit,1,'
236 xlswrite('C:\Users\s151870\Google Drive\0 Master Thesis\MATLAB\Results.xlsx',LinFlow ,
237
238
239
240 frto = [12 23 25 34 35 56 57 78]';
241 disp('
FrTo
Smax
S
P
Q
Sback
Pback
Qba
242 for m = 1:length(comp)
243
fprintf('
%8.0f', frto(m)); fprintf('
%8.0f', comp(m,:)); fprintf('
%8.2f'
244 end
245
246 %save('ACAidForced.mat')
mcode/AC_main.m
1 function f = AC_Object(x)
==PAGE:78==
64
A MATLAB code
2
3 global Gac Bac Pd Pg Sbase
4
5 %% Assigning of input values to argument variables
6 % AC Bus Voltage Magnitudes
7 V1 = x(1);
8 V2 = x(2);
9 % AC Bus Voltage angels
10 d1 = x(9);
11 d2 = x(10);
12
13 % Active power injection at bus 1
14 Pinj1 = V1*(V1*(Gac(1,1)*cos(d1-d1)+Bac(1,1)*sin(d1-d1))...
15
+V2*(Gac(1,2)*cos(d1-d2)+Bac(1,2)*sin(d1-d2)));
16
17 % Active power generation at conventional power plants in pu
18 Pg2 = 100/Sbase;
19
20
21 % Active power production in wind farms in pu (number of turbines*Pwtg)
22 WF1 = 50*3/Sbase;
23 WF2 = 50*3/Sbase;
24 WF3 = 75*3/Sbase;
25
26 % Active power generatrion vector in pu
27 Pg = [Pinj1+Pd(1) 0 0 Pg2+WF1 0 WF2 0 WF3]';
28
29 % Total active power generation in pu
30 Pg_tot = sum(Pg);
31
32 % Total active power demand in pu
33 Pd_tot = sum(Pd);
34
35 % Total active power system losses in pu
36 Ploss = Pg_tot -Pd_tot;
37 f = Ploss;
38
39 end
mcode/AC_Object.m
1 function [c,ceq] = AC_Constraints(x)
2
3 global Gac Bac Yac Pd Qd Pg Sbase Qg comp Vcplx PgLB PgUB QgLB QgUB
4
5 %% Assigning of input values to argument variables
6 % AC Bus Voltage Magnitudes in pu
7 V1 = x(1);
8 V2 = x(2);
9 V3 = x(3);
10 V4 = x(4);
11 V5 = x(5);
==PAGE:79==
A MATLAB code
65
12 V6 = x(6);
13 V7 = x(7);
14 V8 = x(8);
15
16 % AC Bus Voltage angels in rad
17 d1 = x(9);
18 d2 = x(10);
19 d3 = x(11);
20 d4 = x(12);
21 d5 = x(13);
22 d6 = x(14);
23 d7 = x(15);
24 d8 = x(16);
25
26 % Complex AC Bus Voltages in reactangular form
27 V_1 = pol2rect(V1,d1);
28 V_2 = pol2rect(V2,d2);
29 V_3 = pol2rect(V3,d3);
30 V_4 = pol2rect(V4,d4);
31 V_5 = pol2rect(V5,d5);
32 V_6 = pol2rect(V6,d6);
33 V_7 = pol2rect(V7,d7);
34 V_8 = pol2rect(V8,d8);
35
36 Vcplx = [V_1 V_2 V_3 V_4 V_5 V_6 V_7 V_8]';
37
38 %% Determining the variables for the equality constraints
39 % Active Power injections at each AC bus
40 Pinj1 = V1*(V1*(Gac(1,1)*cos(d1-d1)+Bac(1,1)*sin(d1-d1))...
41
+V2*(Gac(1,2)*cos(d1-d2)+Bac(1,2)*sin(d1-d2)));
42 Pinj2 = V2*(V2*(Gac(2,2)*cos(d2-d2)+Bac(2,2)*sin(d2-d2))...
43
+V1*(Gac(2,1)*cos(d2-d1)+Bac(2,1)*sin(d2-d1))...
44
+V3*(Gac(2,3)*cos(d2-d3)+Bac(2,3)*sin(d2-d3))...
45
+V5*(Gac(2,5)*cos(d2-d5)+Bac(2,5)*sin(d2-d5)));
46 Pinj3 = V3*(V3*(Gac(3,3)*cos(d3-d3)+Bac(3,3)*sin(d3-d3))...
47
+V2*(Gac(3,2)*cos(d3-d2)+Bac(3,2)*sin(d3-d2))...
48
+V4*(Gac(3,4)*cos(d3-d4)+Bac(3,4)*sin(d3-d4))...
49
+V5*(Gac(3,5)*cos(d3-d5)+Bac(3,5)*sin(d3-d5)));
50 Pinj4 = V4*(V4*(Gac(4,4)*cos(d4-d4)+Bac(4,4)*sin(d4-d4))...
51
+V3*(Gac(4,3)*cos(d4-d3)+Bac(4,3)*sin(d4-d3)));
52 Pinj5 = V5*(V5*(Gac(5,5)*cos(d5-d5)+Bac(5,5)*sin(d5-d5))...
53
+V2*(Gac(5,2)*cos(d5-d2)+Bac(5,2)*sin(d5-d2))...
54
+V3*(Gac(5,3)*cos(d5-d3)+Bac(5,3)*sin(d5-d3))...
55
+V6*(Gac(5,6)*cos(d5-d6)+Bac(5,6)*sin(d5-d6))...
56
+V7*(Gac(5,7)*cos(d5-d7)+Bac(5,7)*sin(d5-d7)));
57 Pinj6 = V6*(V6*(Gac(6,6)*cos(d6-d6)+Bac(6,6)*sin(d6-d6))...
58
+V5*(Gac(6,5)*cos(d6-d5)+Bac(6,5)*sin(d6-d5)));
59 Pinj7 = V7*(V7*(Gac(7,7)*cos(d7-d7)+Bac(7,7)*sin(d7-d7))...
60
+V5*(Gac(7,5)*cos(d7-d5)+Bac(7,5)*sin(d7-d5))...
61
+V8*(Gac(7,8)*cos(d7-d8)+Bac(7,8)*sin(d7-d8)));
62 Pinj8 = V8*(V8*(Gac(8,8)*cos(d8-d8)+Bac(8,8)*sin(d8-d8))...
63
+V7*(Gac(8,7)*cos(d8-d7)+Bac(8,7)*sin(d8-d7)));
==PAGE:80==
66
A MATLAB code
64
65 Pinj = [Pg(1)-Pd(1) Pinj2 Pinj3 Pinj4 Pinj5 Pinj6 Pinj7 Pinj8]';
66
67 % Reactive Power injections at each AC bus
68 Qinj1 = V1*(V1*(Gac(1,1)*sin(d1-d1)-Bac(1,1)*cos(d1-d1))...
69
+V2*(Gac(1,2)*sin(d1-d2)-Bac(1,2)*cos(d1-d2)));
70 Qinj2 = V2*(V2*(Gac(2,2)*sin(d2-d2)-Bac(2,2)*cos(d2-d2))...
71
+V1*(Gac(2,1)*sin(d2-d1)-Bac(2,1)*cos(d2-d1))...
72
+V3*(Gac(2,3)*sin(d2-d3)-Bac(2,3)*cos(d2-d3))...
73
+V5*(Gac(2,5)*sin(d2-d5)-Bac(2,5)*cos(d2-d5)));
74 Qinj3 = V3*(V3*(Gac(3,3)*sin(d3-d3)-Bac(3,3)*cos(d3-d3))...
75
+V2*(Gac(3,2)*sin(d3-d2)-Bac(3,2)*cos(d3-d2))...
76
+V4*(Gac(3,4)*sin(d3-d4)-Bac(3,4)*cos(d3-d4))...
77
+V5*(Gac(3,5)*sin(d3-d5)-Bac(3,5)*cos(d3-d5)));
78 Qinj4 = V4*(V4*(Gac(4,4)*sin(d4-d4)-Bac(4,4)*cos(d4-d4))...
79
+V3*(Gac(4,3)*sin(d4-d3)-Bac(4,3)*cos(d4-d3)));
80 Qinj5 = V5*(V5*(Gac(5,5)*sin(d5-d5)-Bac(5,5)*cos(d5-d5))...
81
+V2*(Gac(5,2)*sin(d5-d2)-Bac(5,2)*cos(d5-d2))...
82
+V3*(Gac(5,3)*sin(d5-d3)-Bac(5,3)*cos(d5-d3))...
83
+V6*(Gac(5,6)*sin(d5-d6)-Bac(5,6)*cos(d5-d6))...
84
+V7*(Gac(5,7)*sin(d5-d7)-Bac(5,7)*cos(d5-d7)));
85 Qinj6 = V6*(V6*(Gac(6,6)*sin(d6-d6)-Bac(6,6)*cos(d6-d6))...
86
+V5*(Gac(6,5)*sin(d6-d5)-Bac(6,5)*cos(d6-d5)));
87 Qinj7 = V7*(V7*(Gac(7,7)*sin(d7-d7)-Bac(7,7)*cos(d7-d7))...
88
+V5*(Gac(7,5)*sin(d7-d5)-Bac(7,5)*cos(d7-d5))...
89
+V8*(Gac(7,8)*sin(d7-d8)-Bac(7,8)*cos(d7-d8)));
90 Qinj8 = V8*(V8*(Gac(8,8)*sin(d8-d8)-Bac(8,8)*cos(d8-d8))...
91
+V7*(Gac(8,7)*sin(d8-d7)-Bac(8,7)*cos(d8-d7)));
92
93 Qinj = [Qinj1 Qinj2 Qinj3 Qinj4 Qinj5 Qinj6 Qinj7 Qinj8]';
94
95 % Reactive power generation
96 Qg = [Qinj1+Qd(1) 0
0 Qinj4+Qd(4) 0 Qinj6+Qd(6) 0 Qinj8]';
97 Qg_out = Qg*Sbase;
98
99 %% Equality contraints
100 ceq = [Pg-Pd-Pinj;
101
Qg-Qd-Qinj
102
];
103
104 %% Determining the variables for the inequality constraints
105 % Active power generation at slack bus and generator limits
106 Pg1 = (Pinj1+Pd(1))*Sbase;
107 PgLB = 0;
108 PgUB = 1530;
109
110 % Reactive power generation and generator limits
111 QgLB = [-720 0 0 -340 0 -150 0 -150]';
112 QgUB = [1440 0 0
580 0
150 0
150]';
113 % QgLB = [-720
0
0
-240
0
0
0
0]';
114 % QgUB = [1440
0
0
480
0
0
0
0]';
115
==PAGE:81==
A MATLAB code
67
116 % Line power flows
117 S12 = V_1*conj(-(V_1-V_2)*Yac(1,2)); % Y(m,n) = -y(m,n)..
118 S23 = V_2*conj(-(V_2-V_3)*Yac(2,3));
119 S25 = V_2*conj(-(V_2-V_5)*Yac(2,5));
120 S34 = V_3*conj(-(V_3-V_4)*Yac(3,4));
121 S35 = V_3*conj(-(V_3-V_5)*Yac(3,5));
122 S56 = V_5*conj(-(V_5-V_6)*Yac(5,6));
123 S57 = V_5*conj(-(V_5-V_7)*Yac(5,7));
124 S78 = V_7*conj(-(V_7-V_8)*Yac(7,8));
125 S21 = V_2*conj(-(V_2-V_1)*Yac(2,1));
126 S32 = V_3*conj(-(V_3-V_2)*Yac(3,2));
127 S52 = V_5*conj(-(V_5-V_2)*Yac(5,2));
128 S43 = V_4*conj(-(V_4-V_3)*Yac(4,3));
129 S53 = V_5*conj(-(V_5-V_3)*Yac(5,3));
130 S65 = V_6*conj(-(V_6-V_5)*Yac(6,5));
131 S75 = V_7*conj(-(V_7-V_5)*Yac(7,5));
132 S87 = V_8*conj(-(V_8-V_7)*Yac(8,7));
133
134 S = [S12 S23 S25 S34 S35 S56 S57 S78 S21 S32 S52 S43 S53 S65 S75 S87]';
135 Sflow = abs(S)*Sbase;
136
137 % Calculating line flow maximums
138 Imax23 = 2036; %Ampere
139 Imax25 = 2262;
140 Imax35 = 2262;
141 Imax57 = 2036;
142 Vn = 220000; %Nominal line voltage in V
143 SMax = [1800 Imax23*Vn/1e6 Imax25*Vn/1e6 1200 Imax35*Vn/1e6 Imax57*Vn/1e6 1200 600]';
144 SflowMax = [SMax; SMax];
145 comp = [SMax Sflow(1:8) real(S(1:8))*Sbase imag(S(1:8))*Sbase Sflow(9:16) real(S(9:16
146
147 %% Inequality contraints
148 c = [PgLB-Pg1;
149
Pg1-PgUB;
150
QgLB-Qg_out;
151
Qg_out-QgUB;
152
Sflow-SflowMax
153
];
154
155 end
mcode/AC_Constraints.m
1 % Polar to Rectangular Conversion
2 % [RECT] = RECT2POL(RHO, THETA)
3 % RECT - Complex matrix or number, RECT = A + jB, A = Real, B = Imaginary
4 % RHO - Magnitude
5 % THETA - Angle in radians
6
7 function rect = pol2rect(rho,theta)
8 rect = rho.*cos(theta) + 1i*rho.*sin(theta);
==PAGE:82==
68
A MATLAB code
mcode/pol2rect.m
1 function h = coloredbarV( x, labels, colors, varargin )
2 %Coloredbar - create a bar chart with passed in colours
3 %
x - vector of values for bar heights
4 %
labels - vector of strings for bar labels
5 %
colors - vector of color specs for bar colours
6 %
... - additional value argument paris for bar chart
7 %
8 % Returns: handle to bar object
9 %
10
if(˜isvector(x))
11
error('coloredbar currently only accepts single series\n');
12
end
13
for ii = length(x):-1:1
14
h = bar(x(1:ii), 0.4, 'FaceColor', colors{ii});
15
hold on;
16
end
17
18
axis([0.5 10.5 0.8 1.2])
19
hold on
20
grid on
21
plot(xlim ,[1.1 1.1], 'color', [1 0 0],'LineWidth',1.8,'LineStyle','--')
22
plot(xlim ,[0.9 0.9], 'color', [1 0 0],'LineWidth',1.8,'LineStyle','--')
23
set(gca, 'xticklabel', labels);
24
25
for ii = 1:2:size(varargin , 2)
26
set(h, varargin{ii}, varargin{ii+1});
27
end
28
29 end
mcode/coloredbarV.m
A.0.1.1
AC/DC OPF
1 %% Main program for AC/DC-OPF
2 clc
3 close all
4
5 global Gac Bac Sbase Pd Qd Yac Gdc Qvsc Qg comp Vcplx Pg PgLB PgUB QgLB QgUB Ploss9 Ploss1
6
7 %% Grid data
8
9 Sbase = 100;
% Base value in MVA
10 Sd1 = 500;
11 Sd4 = 500;
==PAGE:83==
A MATLAB code
69
12 Sd6 = 400;
13 Phi = acos(0.95);
% Load angle
14
15 % Active power demand in per unit
16
17 Pd1 = Sd1*cos(Phi)/Sbase;
18 Pd2 = 0;
19 Pd3 = 0;
20 Pd4 = Sd4*cos(Phi)/Sbase;
21 Pd5 = 0;
22 Pd6 = Sd6*cos(Phi)/Sbase;
23 Pd7 = 0;
24 Pd8 = 0;
25 Pd
= [Pd1 Pd2 Pd3 Pd4 Pd5 Pd6 Pd7 Pd8]';
26
27 % Reactive power demand in per unit
28
29 Qd1 = Sd1*sin(Phi)/Sbase;
30 Qd2 = 0;
31 Qd3 = 0;
32 Qd4 = Sd4*sin(Phi)/Sbase;
33 Qd5 = 0;
34 Qd6 = Sd6*sin(Phi)/Sbase;
35 Qd7 = 0;
36 Qd8 = 0;
37 Qd
= [Qd1 Qd2 Qd3 Qd4 Qd5 Qd6 Qd7 Qd8]';
38
39 % AC Grid
40 % Line and transformer impedance in per unit
41
42 z12 =
0.007i;
43 z23 = 0.013 + 0.097i;
44 z25 = 0.012 + 0.086i;
45 z34 =
0.010i;
46 z35 = 0.012 + 0.086i;
47 z56 =
0.010i;
48 z78 =
0.020i;
49
50 % Mutual admittance in per unit
51 y12 = 1/z12;
52 y23 = 1/z23;
53 y25 = 1/z25;
54 y34 = 1/z34;
55 y35 = 1/z35;
56 y56 = 1/z56;
57 y78 = 1/z78;
58
59 % Half of shunt susceptance in per unit
60 b23 = 0.065i/2;
61 b25 = 0.129i/2;
62 b35 = 0.129i/2;
63
==PAGE:84==
70
A MATLAB code
64 % Self-addmitance in per unit
65 y11 = y12;
66 y22 = y12+y23+b23+y25+b25;
67 y33 = y34+y23+b23+y35+b35;
68 y44 = y34;
69 y55 = y56+y25+b25+y35+b35;
70 y66 = y56;
71 y77 = y78;
72 y88 = y78;
73
74 % AC admittance matrix
75 Yac
= [y11
-y12
0
0
0
0
0
0;
76
-y12
y22
-y23
0
-y25
0
0
0;
77
0
-y23
y33
-y34
-y35
0
0
0;
78
0
0
-y34
y44
0
0
0
0;
79
0
-y25
-y35
0
y55
-y56
0
0;
80
0
0
0
0
-y56
y66
0
0;
81
0
0
0
0
0
0
y77
-y78;
82
0
0
0
0
0
0
-y78
y88];
83
84 % AC conductance matrix
85 Gac = real(Yac);
86
87 % AC susceptance matrix
88 Bac = imag(Yac);
89
90 %% DC Grid
91 R12 = 0.004;
% DC line resistance in pu
92 Gdc12 = 1/R12;
% DC line conductance in pu
93
94 % DC conductance matrix
95 Gdc = [ Gdc12
-Gdc12;
96
-Gdc12
Gdc12];
97
98 %% Optimization
99 % Arguments
100 % Initial values
101 V0
= [1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0]';
% AC bus voltage magnitudes in pu
102 del0 = [0
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0]';
% AC bus voltage angles in rad
103 E0 = [0.99 1.01]';
104 x0 =[V0;del0;E0];
105
106 % Lower boundaries for arguments
107 LB_V
= [1.0
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.9]';
108 LB_del
= [0
-0.5236 -0.5236 -0.5236 -0.5236 -0.5236 -0.5236
0
]';
109 LB_E = [0.9 0.9]';
110 LB = [LB_V; LB_del; LB_E];
111
112 % Upper boundaries for arguments
113 UB_V
= [1.0 1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1]';
114 UB_del
= [0
0.5236
0.5236
0.5236
0.5236
0.5236
0.5236
0
]';
115 UB_E = [1.1 1.1]';
==PAGE:85==
A MATLAB code
71
116 UB = [UB_V; UB_del; UB_E];
117
118 % Objective function call
119 ObjFcn
= @ACDC_Object;
120 %constraints function call
121 ConsFcn = @ACDC_Constraints;
122 % Solver fmincon
123 options = optimoptions(@fmincon ,'MaxFunctionEvaluations',3000000,'MaxIterations',1000
124 [xMin,f] = fmincon(ObjFcn ,x0,[],[],[],[],LB,UB,ConsFcn ,options);
125
126 %% Result output
127 % Bus voltage magnitudes in pu and angles in degree
128 E = xMin(17:18);
129 V_mag = [xMin(1:8); E];
130 delta = [xMin(9:16)*180/pi; 0; 0];
131 V_out = [V_mag delta];
132 V_min = [LB_V; LB_E];
133 V_max = [UB_V; UB_E];
134 del_min = [LB_del*180/pi; 0; 0];
135 del_max = [UB_del*180/pi; 0; 0];
136
137 disp(' Bus
Vmin
Vmax
Voltage
del min
del max
delta');
138 for m = 1:length(V_mag)
139
fprintf('%3g', m); fprintf('
%8.2f', V_min(m)); fprintf('
%8.2f', V_max(m))
140
fprintf('
%8.4f', V_mag(m)); fprintf('
%8.2f', del_min(m));...
141
fprintf('
%8.2f', del_max(m));
fprintf('
%8.2f', delta(m)); fprintf('\n')
142 end
143
144 bus = 1:1:10;
145 colors = {[0 0.6 0], [0 0.6 0], [0 0.6 0], [0 0.6 0], [0 0.6 0], [0 0.6 0], [0 0.6 0]
146 figure('Name','ACDC Voltage Profile')
147 coloredbarV( V_mag, bus, colors);
148 xlabel('Bus')
149 ylabel('Voltage Magnitude in p.u.')
150
151 figure('Name','AC Voltage Angle');
152 bar(1:10, delta, 0.3)
153 map = [0 0.6 0.5];
154 colormap(map)
155 xlabel('Bus')
156 ylabel('Voltage Angle Delta in degree')
157 ylim([-35 35]);
158 hold on
159 plot(xlim ,[30 30], 'color', [1 0 0],'LineWidth',1.5,'LineStyle','--')
160 plot(xlim ,[-30 -30], 'color', [1 0 0],'LineWidth',1.5,'LineStyle','--')
161 grid on
162
163 % Power generation and demand
164 Pgmin = [PgLB; 0; 0; 0; 0; 0; 0; 0];
165 Pgmax = [PgUB; 0; 0; 998; 0; 754; 0; 244];
166
disp(' Bus
Pdem
Pgen
Pg min
Pg max');
167 for m = 1:length(Pd)
==PAGE:86==
72
A MATLAB code
168
fprintf('%3g', m); fprintf('
%8.0f', Pd(m)*Sbase); fprintf('
%8.1f', Pg(m)*Sbase
169
fprintf('
%8.0f', Pgmin(m)); fprintf('
%8.0f', Pgmax(m)); fprintf('\n');
170 end
171
172 % bus = 1:1:8;
173 % colors = {[0 0.6 0], [0 0.6 0], [0 0.6 0], [0 0.6 0], [0 0.6 0], [0 0.6 0], [0 0.6 0], [
174 % figure('Name','ACDC Active Power Generation');
175 % coloredbarP( Pg*Sbase, bus, colors);
176 %
177 % bus = 1:1:8;
178 % colors = {[0.8 0 0], [0.8 0 0], [0.8 0 0], [0.8 0 0], [0.8 0 0], [0.8 0 0], [0.8 0 0], [
179 % figure('Name','ACDC Active Power Demand');
180 % coloredbarP( -Pd*Sbase, bus, colors);
181
182 figure('Name','AC Active Power');
183 bar(1:8, [Pg*Sbase -Pd*Sbase])
184 map = [0 0.6 0; 0.8 0 0];
185 colormap(map)
186 xlabel('Bus')
187 ylabel('Active Power in MW')
188 legend('Generation','Demand');
189 ylim([-500 500]);
190 grid on
191
192 disp(' Bus
Qdem
Qgen
Qg min
Qg max
Qvsc');
193 for m = 1:length(Qd)
194
fprintf('%3g', m); fprintf('
%8.2f', Qd(m)*Sbase); fprintf('
%8.2f', Qg(m)*Sbase
195
fprintf('
%8.0f', QgLB(m)); fprintf('
%8.0f', QgUB(m));...
196
fprintf('
%8.2f', Qvsc(m)*Sbase); fprintf('\n');
197 end
198
199 Qgen = Qg+Qvsc;
200 % bus = 1:1:8;
201 % colors = {[0 0.6 0.6], [0 0.6 0.6], [0 0.6 0.6], [0 0.6 0.6], [0 0.6 0.6], [0 0.6 0.6],
202 % figure('Name','ACDC Reactive Power Generation')
203 % coloredbarQ( Qgen*Sbase, bus, colors);
204 %
205 % bus = 1:1:8;
206 % colors = {[1.0 0.4 0], [1.0 0.4 0], [1.0 0.4 0], [1.0 0.4 0], [1.0 0.4 0], [1.0 0.4 0],
207 % figure('Name','ACDC Reactive Power Demand')
208 % coloredbarQ( -Qd*Sbase, bus, colors);
209
210 figure('Name','AC Reactive Power');
211 bar(1:8, [Qgen*Sbase -Qd*Sbase])
212 map = [0 0.6 0.6; 1.0 0.4 0];
213 colormap(map)
214 xlabel('Bus')
215 ylabel('Reactive Power in MW')
216 legend('Generation','Demand');
217 ylim([-500 500]);
218 grid on
219
==PAGE:87==
A MATLAB code
73
220 % Active power losses on each line in MW
221 Ploss12 = abs((Vcplx(1)-Vcplx(2))*y12)ˆ2*real(z12);
222 Ploss23 = abs((Vcplx(2)-Vcplx(3))*y23)ˆ2*real(z23);
223 Ploss25 = abs((Vcplx(2)-Vcplx(5))*y25)ˆ2*real(z25);
224 Ploss34 = abs((Vcplx(3)-Vcplx(4))*y34)ˆ2*real(z34);
225 Ploss35 = abs((Vcplx(3)-Vcplx(5))*y35)ˆ2*real(z35);
226 Ploss56 = abs((Vcplx(5)-Vcplx(6))*y56)ˆ2*real(z56);
227 Ploss78 = abs((Vcplx(7)-Vcplx(8))*y78)ˆ2*real(z78);
228 Ploss910 = abs((E(1)-E(2))*Gdc12)ˆ2*R12;
229
230 % Total active power system losses in MW(summation of line losses to check)
231 Ploss = [Ploss12 Ploss23 Ploss25 Ploss34 Ploss35 Ploss56 Ploss78 Ploss910]'*Sbase;
232
233 fr = [1 2 2 3 3 5 7 9]';
234 to = [2 3 5 4 5 6 8 10]';
235 LinFlow = [fr to round(comp(:,1),0) round(comp(:,2),2) round(comp(:,3),2) round(comp(
236 Titl = {'From', 'To', 'Smax', 'S', 'P', 'Q', 'From', 'To', 'S', 'P', 'Q', 'Ploss'};
237 unit = {'','','[MVA]','[MVA]','[MW]','[Mvar]','','','[MVA]','[MW]','[Mvar]','[MW]',};
238 % xlswrite('C:\Users\s151870\Google Drive\0 Master Thesis\MATLAB\Results.xlsx',Titl,2
239 % xlswrite('C:\Users\s151870\Google Drive\0 Master Thesis\MATLAB\Results.xlsx',unit,2
240 % xlswrite('C:\Users\s151870\Google Drive\0 Master Thesis\MATLAB\Results.xlsx',LinFlo
241 xlswrite('C:\Users\Dominik\Google Drive\0 Master Thesis\MATLAB\Results.xlsx',Titl,2,'
242 xlswrite('C:\Users\Dominik\Google Drive\0 Master Thesis\MATLAB\Results.xlsx',unit,2,'
243 xlswrite('C:\Users\Dominik\Google Drive\0 Master Thesis\MATLAB\Results.xlsx',LinFlow ,
244
245 % Total active power system losses in MW
246 Ploss_out = f*Sbase;
247 Total = {'Total Losses'};
248 xlswrite('C:\Users\Dominik\Google Drive\0 Master Thesis\MATLAB\Results.xlsx',Total ,2,
249 xlswrite('C:\Users\Dominik\Google Drive\0 Master Thesis\MATLAB\Results.xlsx',Ploss_ou
250
251 % Converter losses
252 VSC9=Ploss9*Sbase;
253 VSC10=Ploss10*Sbase;
254 VSCloss = [VSC9 VSC10];
255 Converter = {'VSC9', 'VSC10'};
256 xlswrite('C:\Users\Dominik\Google Drive\0 Master Thesis\MATLAB\Results.xlsx',Converte
257 xlswrite('C:\Users\Dominik\Google Drive\0 Master Thesis\MATLAB\Results.xlsx',VSCloss ,
258
259 frto = [12 23 25 34 35 56 78 910]';
260 disp('
FrTo
Smax
S
P
Q
Sback
Pback
Qba
261 for m = 1:length(comp)
262
fprintf('
%8.0f', frto(m)); fprintf('
%8.0f', comp(m,:)); fprintf('
%8.2f'
263 end
264
265
266 %save('ACDCAid.mat')
mcode/ACDC_main.m
1 function f = ACDC_Object(x)
2
==PAGE:88==
74
A MATLAB code
3 global Gac Bac Pd Pg Sbase
4
5 %% Assigning of input values to argument variables
6 % AC Bus Voltage Magnitudes
7 V1 = x(1);
8 V2 = x(2);
9 % AC Bus Voltage angels
10 d1 = x(9);
11 d2 = x(10);
12
13 % Active power injection at bus 1
14 Pinj1 = V1*(V1*(Gac(1,1)*cos(d1-d1)+Bac(1,1)*sin(d1-d1))...
15
+V2*(Gac(1,2)*cos(d1-d2)+Bac(1,2)*sin(d1-d2)));
16
17 % Active power generation at conventional power plants in pu
18 Pg2 = 100/Sbase;
19
20
21 % Active power production in wind farms in pu (number of turbines*Pwtg)
22 WF1 = 100*3/Sbase;
23 WF2 = 100*3/Sbase;
24 WF3 = 150*3/Sbase;
25
26 % Active power generatrion vector in pu
27 Pg = [Pinj1+Pd(1) 0 0 Pg2+WF1 0 WF2 0 WF3]';
28
29 % Total active power generation in pu
30 Pg_tot = sum(Pg);
31
32 % Total active power demand in pu
33 Pd_tot = sum(Pd);
34
35 % Total active power system losses in pu
36 Ploss = Pg_tot -Pd_tot;
37 f = Ploss;
38
39 end
mcode/ACDC_Object.m
1 function [c,ceq] = ACDC_Constraints(x)
2
3 global Gac Bac Yac Gdc Pd Qd Pg Sbase Qvsc Qg comp Vcplx PgLB PgUB QgLB QgUB Ploss9 Ploss1
4
5 %% Assigning of input values to argument variables
6 % AC Bus Voltage Magnitudes in pu
7 V1 = x(1);
8 V2 = x(2);
9 V3 = x(3);
10 V4 = x(4);
11 V5 = x(5);
12 V6 = x(6);
==PAGE:89==
A MATLAB code
75
13 V7 = x(7);
14 V8 = x(8);
15
16 % AC Bus Voltage angels in rad
17 d1 = x(9);
18 d2 = x(10);
19 d3 = x(11);
20 d4 = x(12);
21 d5 = x(13);
22 d6 = x(14);
23 d7 = x(15);
24 d8 = x(16);
25
26 % Complex AC Bus Voltages in reactangular form
27 V_1 = pol2rect(V1,d1);
28 V_2 = pol2rect(V2,d2);
29 V_3 = pol2rect(V3,d3);
30 V_4 = pol2rect(V4,d4);
31 V_5 = pol2rect(V5,d5);
32 V_6 = pol2rect(V6,d6);
33 V_7 = pol2rect(V7,d7);
34 V_8 = pol2rect(V8,d8);
35
36 Vcplx = [V_1 V_2 V_3 V_4 V_5 V_6 V_7 V_8]';
37
38 % DC Bus Voltage Magnitudes in pu
39 E9 = x(17);
40 E10 = x(18);
41 E = [E9 E10]';
42
43
44 %% Determining the variables for the equality constraints
45 % Active Power injections at each AC bus
46 Pinj1 = V1*(V1*(Gac(1,1)*cos(d1-d1)+Bac(1,1)*sin(d1-d1))...
47
+V2*(Gac(1,2)*cos(d1-d2)+Bac(1,2)*sin(d1-d2)));
48 Pinj2 = V2*(V2*(Gac(2,2)*cos(d2-d2)+Bac(2,2)*sin(d2-d2))...
49
+V1*(Gac(2,1)*cos(d2-d1)+Bac(2,1)*sin(d2-d1))...
50
+V3*(Gac(2,3)*cos(d2-d3)+Bac(2,3)*sin(d2-d3))...
51
+V5*(Gac(2,5)*cos(d2-d5)+Bac(2,5)*sin(d2-d5)));
52 Pinj3 = V3*(V3*(Gac(3,3)*cos(d3-d3)+Bac(3,3)*sin(d3-d3))...
53
+V2*(Gac(3,2)*cos(d3-d2)+Bac(3,2)*sin(d3-d2))...
54
+V4*(Gac(3,4)*cos(d3-d4)+Bac(3,4)*sin(d3-d4))...
55
+V5*(Gac(3,5)*cos(d3-d5)+Bac(3,5)*sin(d3-d5)));
56 Pinj4 = V4*(V4*(Gac(4,4)*cos(d4-d4)+Bac(4,4)*sin(d4-d4))...
57
+V3*(Gac(4,3)*cos(d4-d3)+Bac(4,3)*sin(d4-d3)));
58 Pinj5 = V5*(V5*(Gac(5,5)*cos(d5-d5)+Bac(5,5)*sin(d5-d5))...
59
+V2*(Gac(5,2)*cos(d5-d2)+Bac(5,2)*sin(d5-d2))...
60
+V3*(Gac(5,3)*cos(d5-d3)+Bac(5,3)*sin(d5-d3))...
61
+V6*(Gac(5,6)*cos(d5-d6)+Bac(5,6)*sin(d5-d6)));
62 Pinj6 = V6*(V6*(Gac(6,6)*cos(d6-d6)+Bac(6,6)*sin(d6-d6))...
63
+V5*(Gac(6,5)*cos(d6-d5)+Bac(6,5)*sin(d6-d5)));
64 Pinj7 = V7*(V7*(Gac(7,7)*cos(d7-d7)+Bac(7,7)*sin(d7-d7))...
==PAGE:90==
76
A MATLAB code
65
+V8*(Gac(7,8)*cos(d7-d8)+Bac(7,8)*sin(d7-d8)));
66 Pinj8 = V8*(V8*(Gac(8,8)*cos(d8-d8)+Bac(8,8)*sin(d8-d8))...
67
+V7*(Gac(8,7)*cos(d8-d7)+Bac(8,7)*sin(d8-d7)));
68
69 Pinj = [Pg(1)-Pd(1) Pinj2 Pinj3 Pinj4 Pinj5 Pinj6 Pinj7 Pinj8]';
70
71 % Reactive Power injections at each AC bus
72 Qinj1 = V1*(V1*(Gac(1,1)*sin(d1-d1)-Bac(1,1)*cos(d1-d1))...
73
+V2*(Gac(1,2)*sin(d1-d2)-Bac(1,2)*cos(d1-d2)));
74 Qinj2 = V2*(V2*(Gac(2,2)*sin(d2-d2)-Bac(2,2)*cos(d2-d2))...
75
+V1*(Gac(2,1)*sin(d2-d1)-Bac(2,1)*cos(d2-d1))...
76
+V3*(Gac(2,3)*sin(d2-d3)-Bac(2,3)*cos(d2-d3))...
77
+V5*(Gac(2,5)*sin(d2-d5)-Bac(2,5)*cos(d2-d5)));
78 Qinj3 = V3*(V3*(Gac(3,3)*sin(d3-d3)-Bac(3,3)*cos(d3-d3))...
79
+V2*(Gac(3,2)*sin(d3-d2)-Bac(3,2)*cos(d3-d2))...
80
+V4*(Gac(3,4)*sin(d3-d4)-Bac(3,4)*cos(d3-d4))...
81
+V5*(Gac(3,5)*sin(d3-d5)-Bac(3,5)*cos(d3-d5)));
82 Qinj4 = V4*(V4*(Gac(4,4)*sin(d4-d4)-Bac(4,4)*cos(d4-d4))...
83
+V3*(Gac(4,3)*sin(d4-d3)-Bac(4,3)*cos(d4-d3)));
84 Qinj5 = V5*(V5*(Gac(5,5)*sin(d5-d5)-Bac(5,5)*cos(d5-d5))...
85
+V2*(Gac(5,2)*sin(d5-d2)-Bac(5,2)*cos(d5-d2))...
86
+V3*(Gac(5,3)*sin(d5-d3)-Bac(5,3)*cos(d5-d3))...
87
+V6*(Gac(5,6)*sin(d5-d6)-Bac(5,6)*cos(d5-d6)));
88 Qinj6 = V6*(V6*(Gac(6,6)*sin(d6-d6)-Bac(6,6)*cos(d6-d6))...
89
+V5*(Gac(6,5)*sin(d6-d5)-Bac(6,5)*cos(d6-d5)));
90 Qinj7 = V7*(V7*(Gac(7,7)*sin(d7-d7)-Bac(7,7)*cos(d7-d7))...
91
+V8*(Gac(7,8)*sin(d7-d8)-Bac(7,8)*cos(d7-d8)));
92 Qinj8 = V8*(V8*(Gac(8,8)*sin(d8-d8)-Bac(8,8)*cos(d8-d8))...
93
+V7*(Gac(8,7)*sin(d8-d7)-Bac(8,7)*cos(d8-d7)));
94
95 Qinj = [Qinj1 Qinj2 Qinj3 Qinj4 Qinj5 Qinj6 Qinj7 Qinj8]';
96
97 % Reactive power generation
98 Qg = [Qinj1+Qd(1) 0
0 Qinj4+Qd(4) 0 Qinj6+Qd(6) 0 Qinj8]';
99 Qg_out = Qg*Sbase;
100
101 % Calculating DC currents and DC power
102 I = Gdc*E;
103 Pdc = E.*I;
104
105 % Power entering the DC system through the converters
106 PDC =
[0 0 0 0 Pdc(1) 0 Pdc(2) 0]';
107
108 % Reactive power injection by the VSC
109 Qvsc = [0 0 0 0 Qinj5 0 Qinj7 0]';
110 %Qvsc = [0 0 0 0 0 0 Qinj7 0]';
111 %Qvsc = [0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0]';
112
113 %% Converter model
114 % Converter loss parameter
115 a = 11.033e-3; b = 3.464e-3; c_r = 5.4e-3; c_i = 7.67e-3;
116
==PAGE:91==
A MATLAB code
77
117 % Inverter losses
118 Ivsc_conj9 = (sqrt(Pdc(1)ˆ2+Qvsc(5)ˆ2))/V5;
119 Ivsc9 = conj(Ivsc_conj9);
120 Ploss9 = a + b*Ivsc9 + c_i*Ivsc9ˆ2;
121
122 % Rectifier losses
123 Ivsc_conj10 = (sqrt(Pinj7ˆ2+Qvsc(7)ˆ2))/V7;
124 Ivsc10 = conj(Ivsc_conj10);
125 Ploss10 = a + b*Ivsc10 + c_r*Ivsc10ˆ2;
126 Ploss = [0 0 0 0 -Ploss9 0 -Ploss10 0]';
127
128 %% Equality contraints
129 ceq = [Pg-Pd-Pinj-PDC+Ploss;
130
Qvsc+Qg-Qd-Qinj
131
];
132
133 %% Determining the variables for the inequality constraints
134 % Active power generation at slack bus and generator limits
135 Pg1 = (Pinj1+Pd(1))*Sbase;
136 PgLB = 0;
137 PgUB = 1530;
138
139 % Reactive power generation and generator limits
140 QgLB = [-720 0 0 -340 0 -150 0 -150]';
141 QgUB = [1440 0 0
580 0
150 0
150]';
142 % QgLB = [-720 0 0 -240 0
0
0
0]';
143 % QgUB = [1440 0 0
480 0
0
0
0]';
144
145 % Line power flows
146 % Half of shunt susceptance in per unit
147 b23 = 0.065i/2;
148 b25 = 0.129i/2;
149 b35 = 0.129i/2;
150
151 S12 = V_1*conj(-(V_1-V_2)*Yac(1,2)); % Y(m,n) = -y(m,n)..
152 S23 = V_2*conj(-(V_2-V_3)*Yac(2,3))+V_2ˆ2*2*b23;
153 S25 = V_2*conj(-(V_2-V_5)*Yac(2,5))+V_2ˆ2*2*b25;
154 S34 = V_3*conj(-(V_3-V_4)*Yac(3,4));
155 S35 = V_3*conj(-(V_3-V_5)*Yac(3,5))+V_3ˆ2*2*b35;
156 S56 = V_5*conj(-(V_5-V_6)*Yac(5,6));
157 S78 = V_7*conj(-(V_7-V_8)*Yac(7,8));
158 P910 = Gdc(1)*(E9-E10)*E9;
159 S21 = V_2*conj(-(V_2-V_1)*Yac(2,1));
160 S32 = V_3*conj(-(V_3-V_2)*Yac(3,2))+V_3ˆ2*2*b23;
161 S52 = V_5*conj(-(V_5-V_2)*Yac(5,2))+V_5ˆ2*2*b25;
162 S43 = V_4*conj(-(V_4-V_3)*Yac(4,3));
163 S53 = V_5*conj(-(V_5-V_3)*Yac(5,3))+V_5ˆ2*2*b35;
164 S65 = V_6*conj(-(V_6-V_5)*Yac(6,5));
165 S87 = V_8*conj(-(V_8-V_7)*Yac(8,7));
166 P109 = Gdc(1)*(E10-E9)*E10;
167
168 S = [S12 S23 S25 S34 S35 S56 S78 P910 S21 S32 S52 S43 S53 S65 S87 P109]';
==PAGE:92==
78
A MATLAB code
169 Sflow = abs(S)*Sbase;
170
171 % Calculating line flow maximums
172 Imax23 = 2036; %Ampere
173 Imax25 = 2262;
174 Imax35 = 2262;
175 Vn = 220000; %Nominal line voltage in V
176 ImaxDC = 1500;
177 VnDC = 380000;
178
179 SMax = [1800 Imax23*Vn/1e6 Imax25*Vn/1e6 1200 Imax35*Vn/1e6 1200 600 ImaxDC*VnDC/1e6]';
180 SflowMax = [SMax; SMax];
181 comp = [SMax Sflow(1:8) real(S(1:8))*Sbase imag(S(1:8))*Sbase Sflow(9:16) real(S(9:16))*Sb
182
183 %% Inequality contraints
184 c = [PgLB-Pg1;
185
%Pg1-PgUB;
186
QgLB-Qg_out;
187
Qg_out -QgUB;
188
%Sflow-SflowMax
189
];
190
191 end
mcode/ACDC_Constraints.m
1 % Polar to Rectangular Conversion
2 % [RECT] = RECT2POL(RHO, THETA)
3 % RECT - Complex matrix or number, RECT = A + jB, A = Real, B = Imaginary
4 % RHO - Magnitude
5 % THETA - Angle in radians
6
7 function rect = pol2rect(rho,theta)
8 rect = rho.*cos(theta) + 1i*rho.*sin(theta);
mcode/pol2rect.m
1 function h = coloredbarV( x, labels, colors, varargin )
2 %Coloredbar - create a bar chart with passed in colours
3 %
x - vector of values for bar heights
4 %
labels - vector of strings for bar labels
5 %
colors - vector of color specs for bar colours
6 %
... - additional value argument paris for bar chart
7 %
8 % Returns: handle to bar object
9 %
10
if(˜isvector(x))
11
error('coloredbar currently only accepts single series\n');
12
end
13
for ii = length(x):-1:1
==PAGE:93==
A MATLAB code
79
14
h = bar(x(1:ii), 0.4, 'FaceColor', colors{ii});
15
hold on;
16
end
17
18
axis([0.5 10.5 0.8 1.2])
19
hold on
20
grid on
21
plot(xlim ,[1.1 1.1], 'color', [1 0 0],'LineWidth',1.8,'LineStyle','--')
22
plot(xlim ,[0.9 0.9], 'color', [1 0 0],'LineWidth',1.8,'LineStyle','--')
23
set(gca, 'xticklabel', labels);
24
25
for ii = 1:2:size(varargin , 2)
26
set(h, varargin{ii}, varargin{ii+1});
27
end
28
29 end
mcode/coloredbarV.m
A.0.1.2
Time-series OPF
1 %% Main program for AC/DC-OPF
2 clc
3 close all
4
5
6 global Gac Bac Sbase Pd Qd Yac Gdc WF1 WF2 WF3
7
8 %% Grid data
9
10 Sbase = 100;
% Base value in MVA
11
12 % AC Grid
13 % Line and transformer impedance in per unit
14 z12 =
0.007i;
15 z23 = 0.013 + 0.097i;
16 z25 = 0.012 + 0.086i;
17 z34 =
0.010i;
18 z35 = 0.012 + 0.086i;
19 z56 =
0.010i;
20 z78 =
0.020i;
21
22 % Mutual admittance in per unit
23 y12 = 1/z12;
24 y23 = 1/z23;
25 y25 = 1/z25;
26 y34 = 1/z34;
27 y35 = 1/z35;
28 y56 = 1/z56;
29 y78 = 1/z78;
==PAGE:94==
80
A MATLAB code
30
31 % Half of shunt susceptance in per unit
32 b23 = 0.065i/2;
33 b25 = 0.129i/2;
34 b35 = 0.129i/2;
35
36 % Self-addmitance in per unit
37 y11 = y12;
38 y22 = y12+y23+b23+y25+b25;
39 y33 = y34+y23+b23+y35+b35;
40 y44 = y34;
41 y55 = y56+y25+b25+y35+b35;
42 y66 = y56;
43 y77 = y78;
44 y88 = y78;
45
46 % AC admittance matrix
47 Yac
= [y11
-y12
0
0
0
0
0
0;
48
-y12
y22
-y23
0
-y25
0
0
0;
49
0
-y23
y33
-y34
-y35
0
0
0;
50
0
0
-y34
y44
0
0
0
0;
51
0
-y25
-y35
0
y55
-y56
0
0;
52
0
0
0
0
-y56
y66
0
0;
53
0
0
0
0
0
0
y77
-y78;
54
0
0
0
0
0
0
-y78
y88];
55
56 % AC conductance matrix
57 Gac = real(Yac);
58
59 % AC susceptance matrix
60 Bac = imag(Yac);
61
62 %% DC Grid
63 R12 = 0.004;
% DC line resistance in pu
64 Gdc12 = 1/R12;
% DC line conductance in pu
65
66 % DC conductance matrix
67 Gdc = [ Gdc12
-Gdc12;
68
-Gdc12
Gdc12];
69
70 %% Optimization
71 % Arguments
72 % Initial values
73 V0
= [1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0]';
74 del0 = [0
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0]';
75 E0 = [0.99 1.01]';
76 x0 =[V0;del0;E0];
77
78 % Lower boundaries for arguments
79 LB_V
= [1.0
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.9]';
80 LB_del
= [0
-0.5236 -0.5236 -0.5236 -0.5236 -0.5236 -0.5236
0
]';
81 LB_E = [0.9 0.9]';
==PAGE:95==
A MATLAB code
81
82 LB = [LB_V; LB_del; LB_E];
83
84 % Upper boundaries for arguments
85 UB_V
= [1.0 1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1]';
86 UB_del
= [0
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.9 0]';
87 UB_E = [1.1 1.1]';
88 UB = [UB_V; UB_del; UB_E];
89
90 % Time Series data
91 [num1,txt1,raw1] = xlsread('WindSpeed 4.1.2017.xlsx','v135');
% Wind sp
92 [num2,txt2,raw2] = xlsread('WindSpeed 4.1.2017.xlsx','power curve E101');
% Power c
93
94 % 24h inm 15min time steps
95 time = num1(:,1);
96
97 % Wind speed time series in 135m height
98 v135 = num1(:,2);
99
100 % Normalized load profile
101 LP = num1(:,3);
102
103 % Wind speed power curve
104 v_curve = num2(:,1);
105
106 % Active power output power curve
107 P_curve = num2(:,2);
108
109 % Power output time series using power curve, wind speed and linear interpolation/loo
110 Pwtg = interp1(v_curve , P_curve , v135);
111
112 % Total active power loss time series
113 Ploss = zeros(1,length(Pwtg));
114
115 % Success flag of optimization for each time step (1 = ok, 0 = fail)
116 success = zeros(1,length(Pwtg));
117
118 % State variables
119 StateVar = zeros(18,length(Pwtg));
120
121
122
123
124 for i = 1:length(Pwtg)
125
% Wind power production
126
WF1 = 50*Pwtg(i)/Sbase;
127
WF2 = 50*Pwtg(i)/Sbase;
128
WF3 = 150*Pwtg(i)/Sbase;
129
130
% Load
131
Sd1 = 500*LP(i);
132
Sd4 = 500*LP(i);
133
Sd6 = 400*LP(i);
==PAGE:96==
82
A MATLAB code
134
Phi = acos(0.95);
% Load angle
135
136
% Active power demand in per unit
137
Pd1 = Sd1*cos(Phi)/Sbase;
138
Pd2 = 0;
139
Pd3 = 0;
140
Pd4 = Sd4*cos(Phi)/Sbase;
141
Pd5 = 0;
142
Pd6 = Sd6*cos(Phi)/Sbase;
143
Pd7 = 0;
144
Pd8 = 0;
145
Pd
= [Pd1 Pd2 Pd3 Pd4 Pd5 Pd6 Pd7 Pd8]';
146
147
% Reactive power demand in per unit
148
Qd1 = Sd1*sin(Phi)/Sbase;
149
Qd2 = 0;
150
Qd3 = 0;
151
Qd4 = Sd4*sin(Phi)/Sbase;
152
Qd5 = 0;
153
Qd6 = Sd6*sin(Phi)/Sbase;
154
Qd7 = 0;
155
Qd8 = 0;
156
Qd
= [Qd1 Qd2 Qd3 Qd4 Qd5 Qd6 Qd7 Qd8]';
157
158
% Objective function call
159
ObjFcn
= @Time_Object;
160
%constraints function call
161
ConsFcn = @Time_Constraints;
162
% Solver fmincon
163
options = optimoptions(@fmincon ,'MaxFunctionEvaluations',300000,'MaxIterations',100000
164
[xMin,f,exitflag] = fmincon(ObjFcn ,x0,[],[],[],[],LB,UB,ConsFcn ,options);
165
Ploss(i) = f;
166
success(i) = exitflag;
167
StateVar(:,i) =xMin;
168 end
169
170 %% Result output
171 % Success vs. Power output of turbine
172 Success = [Pwtg,success'];
173
174 % Number of successful optimized time steps
175 nos = nnz(success);
176
177 % Plot power curve
178 % figure('Name','Power Curve Enercon E-101')
179 % plot(v_curve(1:26),P_curve(1:26),'color',[0 0.6 0],'LineWidth',1.5)
180 % xlabel('Wind Speed in m/s')
181 % ylabel('WTG Active Power Output in MW')
182 % grid on
183 %
184 % Plot wind speed over 24h
185 figure('Name','Wind Speed over 24h')
==PAGE:97==
A MATLAB code
83
186 plot(time/60,v135,'color',[0 0.2 1],'LineWidth',0.5)
187 axis([0 24 0 16])
188 xlabel('Time in hours')
189 ylabel('Wind Speed in 135 Meters Height in m/s')
190 grid on
191
192 % Plot Load over 24h
193 figure('Name','Load')
194 plot(time/60,LP*1400*cos(Phi),'color',[0.8 0 0],'LineWidth',1)
195 axis([0 24 0 1700])
196 xlabel('Time in hours')
197 ylabel('Active Power Demand in MW')
198 grid on
199
200 % Plot active power generation of 250 WTG over 24h
201 figure('Name','Active Power Generation of all WTG')
202 plot(time/60,Pwtg*250,'color',[0 0.6 0],'LineWidth',0.5)
203 axis([0 24 0 800])
204 xlabel('Time in hours')
205 ylabel('Active Power Generation of all WTG in MW')
206 grid on
207
208 data = [Pwtg*250 LP*1400*cos(Phi)];
209
210 figure('Name','Active Power WTG and Demand')
211 plot(time/60,data)
212 axis([0 24 0 1400])
213 xlabel('Time in hours')
214 ylabel('Active Power in MW')
215 grid on
216 legend('Generation of all WTGs', 'System Load','Location','northwest');
217
218
219 % Plot system active power losses over 24h
220 figure('Name','System Active Power Losses')
221 plot(time/60,Ploss*Sbase,'color',[0.8 0 0],'LineWidth',0.5)
222 axis([0 24 0 50])
223 xlabel('Time in hours')
224 ylabel('Total Active Power Losses in MW')
225 grid on
226
227
228 % Voltages AC
229 figure('Name','AC Voltages')
230 N = 8;
231 Voltage = StateVar(1:8,:);
232 hold on
233 for j=1:N
234
plot(time/60, Voltage(j,:),'LineWidth',1.2)
235 end
236 hold off
237 axis([0 24 0.87 1.13])
==PAGE:98==
84
A MATLAB code
238 xlabel('Time in hours')
239 ylabel('Voltage at AC buses')
240
241 str = cellstr( num2str((1:N)','Bus%d') );
242 lgd = legend(str);
243 lgd.Location = 'southwest';
244
245 % Voltages DC
246 figure('Name','DC Voltages')
247 N = 2;
248 VoltageDC = StateVar(17:18,:);
249 hold on
250 for j=1:N
251
plot(time/60, VoltageDC(j,:))
252 end
253 hold off
254 axis([0 24 1 1.13])
255 xlabel('Time in hours')
256 ylabel('Voltage at DC buses')
257
258 str = cellstr( num2str((9:10)','Bus%d') );
259 lgd = legend(str);
260 lgd.Location = 'southeast';
261
262 %save('ACDCtimeSeriesFull.mat')
263 figure('Name','Loss comparsion')
264 [num3,txt3,raw3] = xlsread('C:\Users\Dominik\Google Drive\0 Master Thesis\MATLAB\23.06.07
265 %loss comparsion
266 N = 2;
267 Losses = num3*Sbase;
268 hold on
269 for j=1:N
270
plot(time/60, Losses(j,:),'LineWidth',0.9)
271 end
272 hold off
273 axis([0 24 0 50])
274 xlabel('Time in hours')
275 ylabel('Total System Losses in MW')
276 legend('No var support', 'With var support','Location','northwest');
277 grid on
mcode/Time_main.m
1 function f = Time_Object(x)
2
3 global Gac Bac Pd Pg Sbase WF1 WF2 WF3
4
5 %% Assigning of input values to argument variables
6 % AC Bus Voltage Magnitudes
7 V1 = x(1);
8 V2 = x(2);
9 % AC Bus Voltage angels
==PAGE:99==
A MATLAB code
85
10 d1 = x(9);
11 d2 = x(10);
12
13 % Active power injection at bus 1
14 Pinj1 = V1*(V1*(Gac(1,1)*cos(d1-d1)+Bac(1,1)*sin(d1-d1))...
15
+V2*(Gac(1,2)*cos(d1-d2)+Bac(1,2)*sin(d1-d2)));
16
17 % Active power generation at conventional power plants in pu
18 Pg2 = 100/Sbase;
19
20
21 % Active power generatrion vector in pu
22 Pg = [Pinj1+Pd(1) 0 0 Pg2+WF1 0 WF2 0 WF3]';
23
24 % Total active power generation in pu
25 Pg_tot = sum(Pg);
26
27 % Total active power demand in pu
28 Pd_tot = sum(Pd);
29
30 % Total active power system losses in pu
31 Ploss = Pg_tot -Pd_tot;
32 f = Ploss;
33
34 end
mcode/Time_Object.m
1 function [c,ceq] = Time_Constraints(x)
2
3 global Gac Bac Yac Gdc Pd Qd Pg Sbase Qvsc Qg comp Vcplx PgLB PgUB QgLB QgUB
4
5 %% Assigning of input values to argument variables
6 % AC Bus Voltage Magnitudes in pu
7 V1 = x(1);
8 V2 = x(2);
9 V3 = x(3);
10 V4 = x(4);
11 V5 = x(5);
12 V6 = x(6);
13 V7 = x(7);
14 V8 = x(8);
15
16 % AC Bus Voltage angels in rad
17 d1 = x(9);
18 d2 = x(10);
19 d3 = x(11);
20 d4 = x(12);
21 d5 = x(13);
22 d6 = x(14);
23 d7 = x(15);
24 d8 = x(16);
==PAGE:100==
86
A MATLAB code
25
26 % Complex AC Bus Voltages in reactangular form
27 V_1 = pol2rect(V1,d1);
28 V_2 = pol2rect(V2,d2);
29 V_3 = pol2rect(V3,d3);
30 V_4 = pol2rect(V4,d4);
31 V_5 = pol2rect(V5,d5);
32 V_6 = pol2rect(V6,d6);
33 V_7 = pol2rect(V7,d7);
34 V_8 = pol2rect(V8,d8);
35
36 Vcplx = [V_1 V_2 V_3 V_4 V_5 V_6 V_7 V_8]';
37
38 % DC Bus Voltage Magnitudes
39
40 E9 = x(17);
41 E10 = x(18);
42 E = [E9 E10]';
43
44 %% Determining the variables for the equality constraints
45 % Active Power injections at each AC bus
46 Pinj1 = V1*(V1*(Gac(1,1)*cos(d1-d1)+Bac(1,1)*sin(d1-d1))...
47
+V2*(Gac(1,2)*cos(d1-d2)+Bac(1,2)*sin(d1-d2)));
48 Pinj2 = V2*(V2*(Gac(2,2)*cos(d2-d2)+Bac(2,2)*sin(d2-d2))...
49
+V1*(Gac(2,1)*cos(d2-d1)+Bac(2,1)*sin(d2-d1))...
50
+V3*(Gac(2,3)*cos(d2-d3)+Bac(2,3)*sin(d2-d3))...
51
+V5*(Gac(2,5)*cos(d2-d5)+Bac(2,5)*sin(d2-d5)));
52 Pinj3 = V3*(V3*(Gac(3,3)*cos(d3-d3)+Bac(3,3)*sin(d3-d3))...
53
+V2*(Gac(3,2)*cos(d3-d2)+Bac(3,2)*sin(d3-d2))...
54
+V4*(Gac(3,4)*cos(d3-d4)+Bac(3,4)*sin(d3-d4))...
55
+V5*(Gac(3,5)*cos(d3-d5)+Bac(3,5)*sin(d3-d5)));
56 Pinj4 = V4*(V4*(Gac(4,4)*cos(d4-d4)+Bac(4,4)*sin(d4-d4))...
57
+V3*(Gac(4,3)*cos(d4-d3)+Bac(4,3)*sin(d4-d3)));
58 Pinj5 = V5*(V5*(Gac(5,5)*cos(d5-d5)+Bac(5,5)*sin(d5-d5))...
59
+V2*(Gac(5,2)*cos(d5-d2)+Bac(5,2)*sin(d5-d2))...
60
+V3*(Gac(5,3)*cos(d5-d3)+Bac(5,3)*sin(d5-d3))...
61
+V6*(Gac(5,6)*cos(d5-d6)+Bac(5,6)*sin(d5-d6)));
62 Pinj6 = V6*(V6*(Gac(6,6)*cos(d6-d6)+Bac(6,6)*sin(d6-d6))...
63
+V5*(Gac(6,5)*cos(d6-d5)+Bac(6,5)*sin(d6-d5)));
64 Pinj7 = V7*(V7*(Gac(7,7)*cos(d7-d7)+Bac(7,7)*sin(d7-d7))...
65
+V8*(Gac(7,8)*cos(d7-d8)+Bac(7,8)*sin(d7-d8)));
66 Pinj8 = V8*(V8*(Gac(8,8)*cos(d8-d8)+Bac(8,8)*sin(d8-d8))...
67
+V7*(Gac(8,7)*cos(d8-d7)+Bac(8,7)*sin(d8-d7)));
68
69 Pinj = [Pg(1)-Pd(1) Pinj2 Pinj3 Pinj4 Pinj5 Pinj6 Pinj7 Pinj8]';
70
71 % Reactive Power injections at each AC bus
72 Qinj1 = V1*(V1*(Gac(1,1)*sin(d1-d1)-Bac(1,1)*cos(d1-d1))...
73
+V2*(Gac(1,2)*sin(d1-d2)-Bac(1,2)*cos(d1-d2)));
74 Qinj2 = V2*(V2*(Gac(2,2)*sin(d2-d2)-Bac(2,2)*cos(d2-d2))...
75
+V1*(Gac(2,1)*sin(d2-d1)-Bac(2,1)*cos(d2-d1))...
76
+V3*(Gac(2,3)*sin(d2-d3)-Bac(2,3)*cos(d2-d3))...
==PAGE:101==
A MATLAB code
87
77
+V5*(Gac(2,5)*sin(d2-d5)-Bac(2,5)*cos(d2-d5)));
78 Qinj3 = V3*(V3*(Gac(3,3)*sin(d3-d3)-Bac(3,3)*cos(d3-d3))...
79
+V2*(Gac(3,2)*sin(d3-d2)-Bac(3,2)*cos(d3-d2))...
80
+V4*(Gac(3,4)*sin(d3-d4)-Bac(3,4)*cos(d3-d4))...
81
+V5*(Gac(3,5)*sin(d3-d5)-Bac(3,5)*cos(d3-d5)));
82 Qinj4 = V4*(V4*(Gac(4,4)*sin(d4-d4)-Bac(4,4)*cos(d4-d4))...
83
+V3*(Gac(4,3)*sin(d4-d3)-Bac(4,3)*cos(d4-d3)));
84 Qinj5 = V5*(V5*(Gac(5,5)*sin(d5-d5)-Bac(5,5)*cos(d5-d5))...
85
+V2*(Gac(5,2)*sin(d5-d2)-Bac(5,2)*cos(d5-d2))...
86
+V3*(Gac(5,3)*sin(d5-d3)-Bac(5,3)*cos(d5-d3))...
87
+V6*(Gac(5,6)*sin(d5-d6)-Bac(5,6)*cos(d5-d6)));
88 Qinj6 = V6*(V6*(Gac(6,6)*sin(d6-d6)-Bac(6,6)*cos(d6-d6))...
89
+V5*(Gac(6,5)*sin(d6-d5)-Bac(6,5)*cos(d6-d5)));
90 Qinj7 = V7*(V7*(Gac(7,7)*sin(d7-d7)-Bac(7,7)*cos(d7-d7))...
91
+V8*(Gac(7,8)*sin(d7-d8)-Bac(7,8)*cos(d7-d8)));
92 Qinj8 = V8*(V8*(Gac(8,8)*sin(d8-d8)-Bac(8,8)*cos(d8-d8))...
93
+V7*(Gac(8,7)*sin(d8-d7)-Bac(8,7)*cos(d8-d7)));
94
95 Qinj = [Qinj1 Qinj2 Qinj3 Qinj4 Qinj5 Qinj6 Qinj7 Qinj8]';
96
97 % Reactive power generation
98 Qg = [Qinj1+Qd(1) 0
0 Qinj4+Qd(4) 0 Qinj6+Qd(6) 0 Qinj8]';
99 Qg_out = Qg*Sbase;
100
101 % Calculating DC currents and DC power
102 I = Gdc*E;
103 Pdc = E.*I;
104
105 % Power entering the DC system through the converters
106 PDC =
[0 0 0 0 Pdc(1) 0 Pdc(2) 0]';
107
108 % Reactive power injection by the VSC
109 Qvsc = [0 0 0 0 Qinj5 0 Qinj7 0]';
110 %Qvsc = [0 0 0 0 0 0 Qinj7 0]';
111 %Qvsc = [0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0]';
112
113 %% Converter model
114 % Converter loss parameter
115 a = 11.033e-3; b = 3.464e-3; c_r = 5.4e-3; c_i = 7.67e-3;
116
117 % Inverter losses
118 Ivsc_conj9 = (sqrt(Pdc(1)ˆ2+Qvsc(5)ˆ2))/V5;
119 Ivsc9 = conj(Ivsc_conj9);
120 Ploss9 = a + b*Ivsc9 + c_i*Ivsc9ˆ2;
121
122 % Rectifier losses
123 Ivsc_conj10 = (sqrt(Pinj7ˆ2+Qvsc(7)ˆ2))/V7;
124 Ivsc10 = conj(Ivsc_conj10);
125 Ploss10 = a + b*Ivsc10 + c_r*Ivsc10ˆ2;
126 Ploss = [0 0 0 0 -Ploss9 0 -Ploss10 0]';
127
128
==PAGE:102==
88
A MATLAB code
129 %% Equality contraints
130 ceq = [Pg-Pd-Pinj-PDC+Ploss;
131
Qvsc+Qg-Qd-Qinj
132
];
133
134 %% Determining the variables for the inequality constraints
135 % Active power generation at slack bus and generator limits
136 Pg1 = (Pinj1+Pd(1))*Sbase;
137 PgLB = 0;
138 PgUB = 1530;
139
140 % Reactive power generation and generator limits
141 QgLB = [-720 0 0 -340 0 -100 0 -300]';
142 QgUB = [1440 0 0
520 0
100 0
300]';
143 %QgLB = [-720 0 0 -240 0
0
0
0]';
144 %QgUB = [1440 0 0
420 0
0
0
0]';
145
146 % Line power flows
147 % Half of shunt susceptance in per unit
148 b23 = 0.065i/2;
149 b25 = 0.129i/2;
150 b35 = 0.129i/2;
151
152 S12 = V_1*conj(-(V_1-V_2)*Yac(1,2)); % Y(m,n) = -y(m,n)..
153 S23 = V_2*conj(-(V_2-V_3)*Yac(2,3))+V_2ˆ2*2*b23;
154 S25 = V_2*conj(-(V_2-V_5)*Yac(2,5))+V_2ˆ2*2*b25;
155 S34 = V_3*conj(-(V_3-V_4)*Yac(3,4));
156 S35 = V_3*conj(-(V_3-V_5)*Yac(3,5))+V_3ˆ2*2*b35;
157 S56 = V_5*conj(-(V_5-V_6)*Yac(5,6));
158 S78 = V_7*conj(-(V_7-V_8)*Yac(7,8));
159 P910 = Gdc(1)*(E9-E10)*E9;
160 S21 = V_2*conj(-(V_2-V_1)*Yac(2,1));
161 S32 = V_3*conj(-(V_3-V_2)*Yac(3,2))+V_3ˆ2*2*b23;
162 S52 = V_5*conj(-(V_5-V_2)*Yac(5,2))+V_5ˆ2*2*b25;
163 S43 = V_4*conj(-(V_4-V_3)*Yac(4,3));
164 S53 = V_5*conj(-(V_5-V_3)*Yac(5,3))+V_5ˆ2*2*b35;
165 S65 = V_6*conj(-(V_6-V_5)*Yac(6,5));
166 S87 = V_8*conj(-(V_8-V_7)*Yac(8,7));
167 P109 = Gdc(1)*(E10-E9)*E10;
168
169 S = [S12 S23 S25 S34 S35 S56 S78 P910 S21 S32 S52 S43 S53 S65 S87 P109]';
170 Sflow = abs(S)*Sbase;
171
172 % Calculating line flow maximums
173 Imax23 = 2036; %Ampere
174 Imax25 = 2262;
175 Imax35 = 2262;
176 Vn = 220000; %Nominal line voltage in V
177 ImaxDC = 1500;
178 VnDC = 380000;
179
180 SMax = [1800 Imax23*Vn/1e6 Imax25*Vn/1e6 1200 Imax35*Vn/1e6 1200 600 ImaxDC*VnDC/1e6]';
==PAGE:103==
A MATLAB code
89
181 SflowMax = [SMax; SMax];
182 comp = [SMax Sflow(1:8) real(S(1:8))*Sbase imag(S(1:8))*Sbase Sflow(9:16) real(S(9:16
183
184 %% Inequality contraints
185 c = [PgLB-Pg1;
186
Pg1-PgUB;
187
QgLB-Qg_out;
188
Qg_out-QgUB;
189
%Sflow-SflowMax
190
];
191
192 end
mcode/Time_Constraints.m
1 % Polar to Rectangular Conversion
2 % [RECT] = RECT2POL(RHO, THETA)
3 % RECT - Complex matrix or number, RECT = A + jB, A = Real, B = Imaginary
4 % RHO - Magnitude
5 % THETA - Angle in radians
6
7 function rect = pol2rect(rho,theta)
8 rect = rho.*cos(theta) + 1i*rho.*sin(theta);
mcode/pol2rect.m
1 function h = coloredbarV( x, labels, colors, varargin )
2 %Coloredbar - create a bar chart with passed in colours
3 %
x - vector of values for bar heights
4 %
labels - vector of strings for bar labels
5 %
colors - vector of color specs for bar colours
6 %
... - additional value argument paris for bar chart
7 %
8 % Returns: handle to bar object
9 %
10
if(˜isvector(x))
11
error('coloredbar currently only accepts single series\n');
12
end
13
for ii = length(x):-1:1
14
h = bar(x(1:ii), 0.4, 'FaceColor', colors{ii});
15
hold on;
16
end
17
18
axis([0.5 10.5 0.8 1.2])
19
hold on
20
grid on
21
plot(xlim ,[1.1 1.1], 'color', [1 0 0],'LineWidth',1.8,'LineStyle','--')
22
plot(xlim ,[0.9 0.9], 'color', [1 0 0],'LineWidth',1.8,'LineStyle','--')
23
set(gca, 'xticklabel', labels);
24
==PAGE:104==
90
A MATLAB code
25
for ii = 1:2:size(varargin , 2)
26
set(h, varargin{ii}, varargin{ii+1});
27
end
28
29 end
mcode/coloredbarV.m
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
[1]
Energienet.dk. Electricity security of supply report 2016. Technical report. Fredericia,
2016.
[2]
Michael P. Bahrman and Brian K. Johnson. “The ABCs of HVDC transmission
technologies”. In: IEEE Power and Energy Magazine 5.2 (2007), pages 32–44.
[3]
Bundesnetzagentur. Netzentwicklungsplan Strom 2024 -Szenario B 2024-. 2015.
url: https://www.netzausbau.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/DE/Publikationen/
Poster_NEP24.pdf?__blob=publicationFile.
[4]
Prabha Kundur. Power System Stability and Control. Edited by Mark G. Lauby
Neal J. Balu. First Edit. New York: McGraw-Hill, Inc., 1994.
[5]
Dinh Thuc Duong et al. “A scheme for coordinated secondary voltage control for
systems with multiple VAr reserves”. In: 2015 IEEE Power and Energy Society
Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Conference, ISGT 2015 (2015).
[6]
Sandro Corsi et al. “The coordinated automatic voltage control of the Italian
transmission grid - Part I: Reasons of the choice and overview of the consolidated
hierarchical system”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 19.4 (2004), pages 1723–1732.
[7]
Sandro Corsi et al. “The coordinated automatic voltage control of the Italian
transmission grid - Part II: Control apparatuses and field performance of the
consolidated hierarchical system”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 19.4
(2004), pages 1733–1741.
[8]
Sandro Corsi, Franco De Villiers, and Riaz Vajeth. “Secondary voltage regulation
applied to the South Africa transmission grid”. In: IEEE PES General Meeting,
PES 2010 (2010), pages 1–8.
[9]
Hongbin Sun et al. “An adaptive zone-division-based automatic voltage control
system with applications in China”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems
28.2 (2013), pages 1816–1828.
[10]
Bo Hu, CA Cañizares, and M Liu. “Secondary and Tertiary Voltage Regulation
based on optimal power flows”. In: Bulk Power System Dynamics and … (2010).
url: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs_all.jsp?arnumber=5563306.
[11]
Qinglai Guo et al. “Hierarchical automatic voltage control for integration of large-scale
wind power: Design and implementation”. In: Electric Power Systems Research 120
(2015), pages 234–241. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.epsr.2014.02.012.
==PAGE:106==
92
Bibliography
[12]
Shih Min Hsu et al. “Voltage control optimization to improve transmission efficiency
under near real-time conditions”. In: IEEE Power and Energy Society General
Meeting (2013), pages 3–7.
[13]
A Panosyan and B R Oswald. “Modified Newton-Raphson Load Flow Analysis for
Integrated AC/DC Power Systems”. In: Upec 2004: 39th International Universitities
Power Engineering Conference 1-3.Conference Proceedings (2005), pages 1223–1227.
[14]
Jef Beerten, Stijn Cole, and Ronnie Belmans. “Generalized Steady-State VSC
MTDC Model for Sequential AC/DC Power Flow Algorithms”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Power Systems 27.2 (May 2012), pages 821–829. url: http://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/document/6123184/.
[15]
Alejandro Pizano-Martinez et al. “Modeling of VSC-based HVDC systems for a
Newton-Raphson OPF algorithm”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 22.4
(2007), pages 1794–1803.
[16]
Jun Cao et al. “Minimization of transmission loss in meshed AC/DC grids with
VSC-MTDC networks”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 28.3 (2013),
pages 3047–3055.
[17]
M Aragüés et al. “Optimal power flow tool for mixed high-voltage alternating
current and high-voltage direct current systems for grid integration of large wind
power plants”. In: IET renewable power generation 9.8 (November 2015), page 876.
url: http://digital-library.theiet.org/content/journals/10.1049/iet-
rpg.2015.0028%20http://hdl.handle.net/2117/83230.
[18]
M. Russo G. Fusco. Adaptive Voltage Control in Power Systems. 2006.
[19]
Kaspar Knorr et al. “Kombikraftwerk 2 Abschlussbericht”. In: (2014). url: http:
//www.kombikraftwerk.de/fileadmin/Kombikraftwerk_2/Abschlussbericht/
Abschlussbericht_Kombikraftwerk2_aug14.pdf.
[20]
Sandro Corsi. Voltage Control and Protection in Electrical Power Systems. 2015.
[21]
Stephen D. Umans A. E. Fitzgerald Charles Kingsley Jr. Electric Machinery. 2003.
[22]
“Proposed terms and definitions for flexible AC transmission system (FACTS)”.
In: IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery 12.4 (1997), pages 1848–1853. url:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/634216/.
[23]
E.H. Camm et al. “Characteristics of wind turbine generators for wind power
plants”. In: 2009 IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting. IEEE, July
2009, pages 1–5. url: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/5275330/.
[24]
Thomas Ackermann et al. Wind Power in Power Systems. 2012.
[25]
M Wilch et al. “Reactive Power Generation by DFIG Based Wind Farms with AC
Grid Connection”. In: Power Tech, 2007 IEEE Lausanne (2007), pages 626–632.
[26]
Holger (E.ON Netz GmbH) Berndt et al. TransmissionCode 2007. Network and
System Rules of the German Transmission System Operators. Technical report.
Verband der Netzbetreiber VDN e.V. beim VDEW, 2007. url: www.vdn-berlin.
de.
==PAGE:107==
Bibliography
93
[27]
Energienet.dk. Technical regulation 3.2.5 for wind power plants with a power output
above 11 kW. Technical report. 2015, pages 1–74.
[28]
Mats Larsson. “Coordinated Voltage Control in Electric Power Systems”. PhD thesis.
Lund University, 2000, pages 1–203. url: http://www.iea.lth.se.
[29]
Allen J. Wood, Bruce F. Wollenberg, and Gerald B. Sheblé. Power Generation,
Operation, and Control. 2014.
[30]
J. Duncan Glover, Mulukutla S. Sarma, and Thomas J. Overbye. Power System
Analysis and Design. 2012.
[31]
MathWorks. fmincon MATLAB Documentation. 2006. url: https://se.mathworks.
com/help/optim/ug/fmincon.html (visited on June 30, 2017).
[32]
MathWorks. Constrained Nonlinear Optimization Algorithms MATLAB Documentation.
url: https://se.mathworks.com/help/optim/ug/constrained-nonlinear-
optimization-algorithms.html#brnpd5f (visited on June 30, 2017).
[33]
MathWorks. Local vs. Global Optima MATLAB Documentation. url: https://
se.mathworks.com/help/optim/ug/local-vs-global-optima.html (visited on
June 30, 2017).
[34]
Hochschule für Technik und Wirtschaft Berlin. Wind speeds 2017-04-18. 2017. url:
http://wetter.htw-berlin.de/Download (visited on June 20, 2017).
[35]
Volker Quaschning. Regenerative Energiesysteme, Technologie Berechnung Simulation.
7. Editon. Hanser Verlag Munic, 2011.
[36]
Verband der Elektrizitätswirtschaft e. V. VDEW. VDEW-Lastprofile. 2002. url:
http://www.gipsprojekt.de/featureGips/Gips;jsessionid=C122ED95F9D68D832F1E473F
SessionMandant=sw_unna&Anwendung=EnWGKnotenAnzeigen&PrimaryId=133029&
Mandantkuerzel=sw_unna&Navigation=J (visited on June 20, 2017).
==PAGE:108==
