==PAGE:1==
Constructions for ecient MDS
diusion layers
Nikolaos Tatsis
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
Matrices are widely used in Block Cipher Diusion layers, usually chosen for of-
fering maximal branch numbers, and allowing lightweight hardware implemen-
tations through their low XOR Count. When implemented in software however,
is XOR Count the only metric?
This project will utilize the parallelism provided by modern SIMD vector in-
structions to evaluate metrics, by implementing dierent algorithmic approaches.
Timing their executions will hopefully provide some insight into the eect of the
immense complexity of modern architectures and software tools on the expected
outcome of an algorithm.
A further focus will be the construction of matrices with interesting proper-
ties over large extension elds, which can apply in recent white-box cipher
designs[BIT16]. This involves implementing a 1979 paper[Mac71], and the trans-
lation from mathematical paper to working implementation will involve many
coding challenges.
Both having an evaluation of matrix diusion software implementation ap-
proaches and another method for nding matrices can ultimately help with
the design of more ecient block ciphers.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fullment of the requirements
for acquiring an M.Sc.
in Engineering, under the supervision and advice of
Professor Elmar Wolfgang Tischhauser.
The thesis deals with certain aspects of using vector-matrix multiplication for
diusion in block ciphers. When exploring these mathematical properties and
procedures, a full implementation in dierent environments helps with both
understanding and insight. This approach pushed me towards this topic.
Lyngby, 23-June-2017
Nikolaos Tatsis
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Preface
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Organization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Tools Used
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Block Ciphers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Substitution - Permutation Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Finite Fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.6
Diusion Eciency Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.6.1
Hamming Weight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.6.2
XOR Count . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.7
Signicant Matrix Classes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.7.1
Maximum Distance Separable Matrices
. . . . . . . . . .
8
1.7.2
Circulant Matrices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.7.3
Involutory Matrices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.7.4
Orthogonal Matrices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
SIMD Implementation Metrics
11
2.1
SIMD Instructions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
XOR Count Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
C Implementation Choices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
SIMD Multiplication Implementations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4.1
Shue Multiplication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4.2
Times-Two Multiplication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4.3
XOR Multiplication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.5
Data Arrangement Implementations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
==PAGE:8==
vi
CONTENTS
2.5.1
Direct Arrangement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5.2
Byte-slice Arrangement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.5.3
Bit-slice Arrangement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.6
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Finding COMDS Matrices
23
3.1
Process overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.1
Key concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.2
Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.1
Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3
Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Conclusion
31
4.1
Ethics and Sustainability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
A SIMD Implementation
33
B COMDS search
35
Bibliography
39
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The security of symmetric cryptographic primitives such as block ciphers, hash
functions, and authenticated encryption schemes is based on the combination
of nonlinear S-boxes and linear diusion layers as basic building locks. Optimal
diusion layers require maximal branch numbers, as outlined by the creators
of AES [DR13].
This can also be achieved using nite eld matrices based
on maximum distance separable (MDS) linear codes, which are often relatively
computationally expensive.
Over the last two decades, many constructions for such MDS diusion layers
have been proposed, often with a particular focus on lightweight implementation
characteristics in hardware [SKOP15] [BKL16]. A popular metric for a matrix is
the XOR-count, dened as the number of required XOR operations to multiply
it with a random (column) vector in the same eld. This chapter was written
to help the reader understand these concepts, and consequently the work shown
in the next chapters.
The next chapter aims at analyzing the implementation of MDS diusion in
software, and the applicability of hardware metrics on software approaches.
SIMD instructions have been used to create implementations for similar matrix
diusion algorithms [AFK14], but were not focused on their extensibility for
higher elds, or their evaluation for dierent matrices.
==PAGE:10==
2
Introduction
Another problem we plan to deal with is the construction of ecient MDS diu-
sion layers over large extension elds, which has applications in recent white-box
cipher designs [BIT16], and gives itself another tool towards cipher design.
1.1
Organization
The thesis consists of three chapters: This chapter introduces the key concepts
and mathematical tools needed to understand the project.
In chapter 2 an
attempt is made to evaluate the performance of vector-matrix multiplication
over a Finite Field using Single Instruction, Multiple Data (SIMD) instructions
on modern processors. In the next chapter 3 we present an implementation of
an algorithm designed to nd Circulant Orthogonal Maximum Distance Sepa-
rable (COMDS) matrices over a Finite Field. Finally, a brief Conclusion 4 is
presented, outlining the results and possible directions for future work.
1.2
Tools Used
The C code of this project, provided in the folder code/c/ of [Tat17], was
compiled with GCC [Sta01], Versions Ubuntu 5.4.0-6ubuntu1 16.04.4 and
Ubuntu 5.2.1-22ubuntu2.
The SIMD multiplication implementations 2.4 were created using the SSE4 (and
earlier) instruction set [Geo07], utilizing 128-bit XMM registers.
The Sage - Python code of this project,provided in the folder code/sage/ of
[Tat17], was created and executed using the SageMath [Dev17] system, Version
7.5.1. In this implementation, tools from the NumPy [WCV11] (Version 1.11.1)
library were utilized, and Matplotlib [Hun07] (Version 1.5.1) was used to create
the gures in this document.
The code was developed on a machine running Ubuntu 16.04.2 LTS with the
4.4.0-81-generic kernel, using an Intel Pentium 2117U CPU @1.80GHz in
the Ivy Bridge micro-architecture. This machine had the Ubuntu 5.4.0-6ubuntu1 16.04.4
version of GCC.
Additional benchmarking was executed on the DTU Compute skylake.imm.
dtu.dk device, running Ubuntu 15.10 with the 4.2.3-040203-generic kernel,
using an Intel Core i7-6700 CPU @3.40GHz in the Skylake micro-architecture.
==PAGE:11==
1.3 Block Ciphers
3
The Ubuntu 5.4.0-6ubuntu1 16.04.4 version of GCC was installed on this de-
vice.
1.3
Block Ciphers
Block ciphers are the prevalent encryption scheme used for symmetric cryptog-
raphy today. A block cipher uses a number of invertible mathematical opera-
tions to encrypt a predened block of data of xed size. The provided block of
data (referred to as clear-text) is converted into a equally sized block of data
(cipher-text) using another secret block of data (key). The same key can be
used to decrypt the data, giving it the "symmetric" title, and the operations
used are designed to make it almost impossible to extract the clear-text from
the cipher-text.
Two properties were introduced by Claude Shannon for the design of a secure
cipher, confusion and diusion [Sha45]. A cipher with the confusion property
has each bit in the produced cipher-text depend on multiple parts of key, giving
the key a highly improbable chance to be guessed. Diusion on the other hand
refers to the high interdependence between every bit of the clear-text and the
cipher-text, such that if a bit is changed (ipped) in the input block, on average
half of the bits in the output block will be consequently changed.
1.4
Substitution - Permutation Network
A Substitution - Permutation Network (SPN) [KD79] is an encryption scheme,
that has been widely adopted in the design of block ciphers.
Examples of
this include AES [DR13], 3-Way [DGV93], SHARK [RDP+96], and PRESENT
[BKL+07].
A block cipher using this scheme accepts a block of data of xed length (depen-
dent on the cipher), and applies a number of rounds of Substitution functions
(S-Boxes) and Permutation functions (P-Boxes), in order to encrypt it. A xed
length secret key is the other input of the cipher, usually expanded into round
keys, which in turn are applied on every round of the block cipher. In order to
decrypt, all the functions used are reversible, and the encrypted data has the
inverse functions applied in reverse order.
The S-Box substitutes small blocks of the input data with other blocks of the
same size. The size of this small block is usually 4-8 bits, as the entire mapping
==PAGE:12==
4
Introduction
needs to stored; An n-bit S-Box requires at least 2n ∗n bits to store.
This
substitution function is injective, with every small input block corresponding
to exactly one output block to allow inversion, and both domain and image of
this function are all possible small blocks of that size. During encryption (or
decryption), the entire input block is divided into these smaller blocks, and the
S-Box function is individually applied to each.
A good S-Box needs to create the avalanche eect [WT86], where small changes
to the input result in big changes in the output. More clearly, if one of the input
bits is ipped in any possible small block input, the S-Box output would have
about half of its bits ipped.
The P-Box applies a permutation or bit-shuing to the entire input block,
aiming to diuse the eect of the multiple individual S-Box applications across
the entire block. As such, a good P-Box requires the output of each S-Box to
aect as many S-Box inputs in the next round as possible.
This encryption process satises the properties of confusion and diusion: A bit
changed in the initial block of input is expanded to multiple bits in the S-Box
output, and then communicated to input bits of multiple S-Boxes.These two
functions, the S-Box and P-Box are applied in alternating order for a number of
rounds, and, as the rounds progress, the avalanche eect appears, and tiny input
modications are diused throughout the block. The secret key modies the
output of each round (usually by XOR-ing the round key, as the XOR function
is its own inverse), "confusing" the nal cipher-text output in a pseudo-random
fashion.
In this project, we will be focusing on a prevalent technique used in the im-
plementation of P-Boxes, matrix - vector multiplication in nite elds. This is
not necessarily the complete P-Box design: For example in AES the diusion
is achieved through the combination of the MixColumns operation (matrix -
vector multiplication) and the ShiftRows operation (cyclical shifts).
1.5
Finite Fields
Most arithmetic operations presented henceforth will operations in extensions
of the binary nite eld, since their elements can be directly represented in com-
puter memory. A nite eld, or Galois eld, is a nite set of elements with the
operations of multiplication, addition, subtraction and division being dened,
and a number of properties apply: For both addition and multiplication asso-
ciativity and commutativity apply, as well as the existence of identity elements
==PAGE:13==
1.6 Diusion Eciency Metrics
5
and inverses (except for the multiplicative inverse of zero). Multiplication is
also distributive over addition.
A Finite eld will be denoted as GF(q), where q is either a prime number q = p,
or a positive power of a prime, q = pr, with the eld having q elements. The
elements of a prime eld are the natural numbers modulo p.
This modulus
operation applies on all operations in the eld, for example in GF(7): (6 + 3)
(mod 7) = 9 (mod 7) = 2. In the latter case of q = pr, we have a (prime)
extension eld. A similar modulus operation constricts operations in case of
overow, with the eld dened by an irreducible polynomial irr(x) of degree r
and coecients in GF(p). The elements are isomorphic to, and represented as,
the polynomials in GF(p)[X] (mod irr(x)). Therefore there are again q = pr
elements in the eld, represented as polynomials of degree up to r −1 with
coecients in GF(p).
As aforementioned, we will be focusing on binary extension elds, i.e.: GF(2r)/irr(x).
To represent elements in these elds, we will be using dierent representations,
in a similar fashion to [SKOP15]. The polynomial representation of elements (or
the modulus) has binary coecients, so they can be also be shown as binary or
hexadecimal strings. For example in GF(24), the element x3+x+1 is equivalent
to (1011)2 and 0xb. Addition in these elds is equivalent to the binary XOR op-
eration, and multiplication is equivalent to a left logical shift, possibly followed
by an XOR with the modulus. As an example, in GF(24)/0x13: (1011)2·(0010)2
(mod (10011)2) = (10110)2 (mod (10011)2) = (10110)2 ⊕(10011)2 = (0101)2.
The choice of the eld dimension r is usually the size of the S-Box input and
output, or "small blocks" in 1.4. As such, larger elds are not usually considered,
due to the same S-Box implementation size limitations.
1.6
Diusion Eciency Metrics
This project focuses on using matrix - vector multiplication over a nite eld as
part of the P-Box diusion in an SPN. This method allows the use of well-studied
mathematical terminology and techniques, in order to achieve the highest possi-
ble diusion. The input block can be easily represented as a number of elements
in GF(2r), and then divided into vectors. Multiplying these vectors with a pre-
dened matrix will yield another vector, with all input elements potentially
aecting all output elements. These matrices are chosen to be invertible in the
chosen eld, to allow for reversibility. If a vector v is multiplied with matrix M
to produce the diused vector v′, then multiplying v′ with M −1 will yield the
original vector v.
==PAGE:14==
6
Introduction
The choice of the matrix depends on two factors, once a eld has been chosen:
First, a matrix needs to achieve high diusion, as described in 1.4, which is
further analyzed in 1.7.1. Secondly, since matrix-vector multiplication is a non-
trivial operation with high complexity [CW82], the elements forming the matrix
need to be carefully chosen. This section describes two commonly used metrics,
Hamming Weight and XOR Count.
1.6.1
Hamming Weight
Hamming Weight is a simple metric to approximate the complexity of a hard-
ware implementation of a matrix - vector multiplication. It was used in the
design of AES [DR13] to choose the matrix used in the MixColumns operation.
The metric was rst introduced as a tool in error-correction codes:
Definition 1.1 [MS77, Denition on p.8] The Hamming Weight of a vector
x = (x1, x2, . . . , xn) is the number of non-zero xi, and is denoted as wt(x).
This metric can be easily applied on elements of binary extension elds, repre-
sented as strings containing their binary coecients. It can also be expanded
to cover a matrix, as the sum of Hamming Weights of all its entries:
Definition 1.2 Assume the following n × n matrix M, with elements in
GF(2r):
M =


γ11
γ12
γ13
. . .
γ1n
γ21
γ22
γ23
. . .
γ2n
...
...
...
...
...
γn1
γn2
γn3
. . .
γnn


The Hamming Weight of M will be wt(M) = Pn
j=1(Pn
i=1 wt(γij)).
1.6.2
XOR Count
The XOR count is one of the most commonly used metrics for the computational
eciency of a matrix - vector multiplication. Hardware implementations of block
ciphers intend to minimize the number of gates required, and the XOR count is
directly correlated to that number of gates, or equivalently, the area required for
that implementation [KPPY14]. It was also shown in [KPPY14] that the XOR
Count metric is a more accurate metric than Hamming Weight, as elements
==PAGE:15==
1.6 Diusion Eciency Metrics
7
with higher Hamming Weight can have a very low XOR count. It has also been
shown in [SKOP15] that the choice of the eld dening irreducible polynomial
is important in nding good matrices with a low XOR count.
Definition 1.3 Assume that a specic element a in the eld GF(2r) is mul-
tiplied with another random element b. The XOR Count for a is the number of
bitwise XOR operations required for that multiplication, is independent of the
choice of b, and will be denoted here as XORCount(a).
An easy example to illustrate this concept is the times two multiplication (a =
2). Let the eld be GF(28)/0x11b, and b = (b0, b1, b2, b3, b4, b5, b6, b7)2 is the
random element to be multiplied, where bi is the ith most signicant bit of b.
To multiply, we shift all the bits by one to the left, (b0, b1, b2, b3, b4, b5, b6, b7, 0)2,
which can result in an overow if b0 is one. Therefore we XOR the modulus
expressed in the most signicant bit of b, Ox11b = (b0, 0, 0, 0, b0, b0, 0, b0, b0)2, to
obtain the nal result, (b1, b2, b3, b4 ⊕b0, b5 ⊕b0, b6, b7 ⊕b0, b0)2. The XOR count
for a = 2 in this eld, the Rjindael MixColumns eld, is XORCount(2) = 3.
The XOR count metric can be extended to vector - matrix multiplications,
representing the overall number of XOR operations required to multiply an
n × n matrix with an arbitrary vector, over GF(2r). The following formula is
derived from the one given in [KPPY14].
Assume the following n × n matrix M, with elements in GF(2r):
M =


γ11
γ12
γ13
. . .
γ1n
γ21
γ22
γ23
. . .
γ2n
...
...
...
...
...
γn1
γn2
γn3
. . .
γnn


For each row j, the XOR count equals Pn
i=1 XORCount(γij) + (n⋆
j −1) · r,
where n⋆
j is the number of non-zero elements in the jth row. The second part
of the equation, (n⋆−1) · r is derived from the matrix - vector multiplication
algorithm, since the non-zero elements of the row have to be XORed together
after being multiplied, and each element contains r bits.
Definition 1.4 The XOR count for an n × n matrix M, with elements in
GF(2r) is XORCount(M) = Pn
j=1(Pn
i=1 XORCount(γij) + (n⋆
j −1) · r).
When symmetric block ciphers utilize matrices for diusion, the XOR Count
for the matrix is only part of the consideration. Since these ciphers need to im-
plement both encryption and decryption, the XOR Count of the inverse matrix
M −1 is also important.
==PAGE:16==
8
Introduction
1.7
Signicant Matrix Classes
For the purpose of using matrix - vector multiplication to achieve diusion, sev-
eral classes of matrices have been studied. These classes oer properties that
facilitate lightweight hardware and software implementations of the multiplica-
tion, and/or a better rate of diusion.
1.7.1
Maximum Distance Separable Matrices
The concept of Maximum Distance Separable, (MDS), matrices is introduced
from error correction codes, and the equivalent MDS codes. To explain this
concept, rst we introduce the following denition of branch numbers:
Definition 1.5 [SKOP15, Denition 3] Assume an n × n matrix M over
GF(2r), and a vector v, of length n and elements in GF(2r).
We denote
wtM(v) = wt(v) + wt(v · M), or the Hamming Weight (element-wise, instead of
bitwise) of the vector v plus the Hamming Weight of the vector multiplied by
the matrix M. The minimum wtM(v) amongst all possible non-zero vectors of
length n is the branch number of the matrix, or br(M) = minv̸=0(wtM(v)) =
minv̸=0(wt(v) + wt(v · M)).
The branch number leads to the denition of an MDS matrix, or:
Definition 1.6 [SKOP15, Denition 3] An n × n matrix M over GF(2r) is
MDS if br(M) = n + 1.
n + 1 is the highest possible branch number for a matrix, as it is then the non-
identity part of the generator matrix of an MDS linear code that meets the
Singleton Bound. [SKOP15, Denition 4].
Using an MDS matrix for diusion closely relates to the design goal of a P-
Box1.4, for the output of an S-Box (or input vector element here) to aect as
many S-Box inputs as possible (or output vector elements). If the number of
GF(2r) elements in the data block undergoing diusion is larger than the matrix
dimension n, then additional steps are necessary (like the ShiftRows operation
in AES).
Since MDS matrices achieve optimal diusion, they are widely used in ciphers,
like in AES [DR13], SHARK [RDP+96], ANUBIS [RB00], KHAZAD [BR00], or
in hash functions, like WHIRLPOOL [BR11].
==PAGE:17==
1.7 Signicant Matrix Classes
9
In order to check a matrix for the MDS property there are easier ways than
iterating through all vectors:
Proposition 1.7 [MS77, Theorem 8 on p.321] [SKOP15, Proposition 2]
An n × n matrix M is MDS if and only if every square sub-matrix of M is
nonsingular( has a non-zero determinant, or, equivalently, is invertible)
Checking all the minors, or determinants of square sub-matrices, of an n × n
matrix M matrix to be non-zero is a computationally expensive process. There
are
 n
k

choices of k rows (or columns) to remove from a matrix, and therefore
 n
k
2 k × k square sub-matrices. So checking the matrix for the MDS property
involves calculating (at most) Qn
k=0
 n
k
2 determinants.
1.7.2
Circulant Matrices
Definition 1.8 An n×n matrix C is circulant when each row is its preceding
row, but rotated one element to the right:
C =


γ0
γn−1
γn−2
. . .
γ1
γ1
γ0
γn−1
. . .
γ2
γ2
γ1
γ0
. . .
γ3
...
...
...
...
...
γn−1
γn−2
γn−3
. . .
γ0


Circulant matrices are commonly used for diusion, such as in the AES block
cipher [DR13], and the WHIRLPOOL hash function [BR11]. This is because an
n × n circulant matrix can have at most n dierent element multiplications to
be implemented, either in software or in hardware. Searching for matrices that
oer better diusion is also easier, as the XOR count is equal for each row of
the matrix, allowing for faster evaluation.
1.7.3
Involutory Matrices
Definition 1.9 An n × n matrix M is Involutory if it is equal to its inverse,
or M = M −1 ↔M 2 = I, with I the identity matrix.
==PAGE:18==
10
Introduction
By using am involutory matrix for diusion, a cipher can use the exact same
hardware or software implementation for the diusion layer of encryption and de-
cryption. This is a very promising design property. Multiple ciphers use involu-
tory matrices, like ANUBIS [RB00], KHAZAD [BR00] and PRINCE [BCG+12].
1.7.4
Orthogonal Matrices
Definition 1.10 An n × n matrix M is Orthogonal if its inverse is equal to
its transpose, or M = M T ↔M · M −1 = I.
An orthogonal matrix, just like an involutory matrix, also has the same XOR
count as its inverse, allowing both encryption with a cipher utilizing them be
of equal performance to its decryption.
Since the inverse matrix shares the
same matrix entries, encryption and decryption can potentially share parts of
the implementation. Thus, there is research done in using them for diusion
[ZWS17].
However, due to the prevalence of involutory matrices and the existence of
ecient construction methods to produce low XOR count matrices [SKOP15],
orthogonal matrices are not widely adopted in ciphers.
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
SIMD Implementation
Metrics
As mentioned in 1.6.2, the space eciency of hardware implementations of
vector-matrix multiplication is highly correlated to its XOR Count. When do-
ing a software implementation however, it is not as simple. Modern processors
execute instructions in a mostly linear fashion, and XOR operations would only
take a part of the multiplication process, as all data processed must rst be
loaded from memory into registers. Processors also support technologies like
pipelining, where dierent parts of the processor can execute parts of previous
or upcoming instructions, allowing instructions to execute in under a processor
cycle. During compilation, there are a number of optimizations that can be ap-
plied, in an attempt to rearrange the instructions required for a specic result
in a way that will use the most out of such technologies.
In this chapter, we will look at multiple data arrangements, implementation
techniques and possible optimizations, to evaluate software implementations of
vector-matrix multiplication and their scaling based on the choice of matrix.
A key design decision for a secure implementation is creating code that is resis-
tant to timing attacks. A timing attack 1 involves measuring the time taken for
a large number of similar operations to execute in order to extract information
1Example of a timing attack: [WHS12]
==PAGE:20==
12
SIMD Implementation Metrics
about the clear-text or key, using statistical analysis. In order to prevent them,
a software implementation needs to execute in the same amount of processor
cycles independently from the contents of the clear-text (or cipher-text during
decryption) and key. This means that we need to avoid branching, or using
conditional statements in the implementation.
Another decision is the choice of eld and matrix. For this we chose the 4 × 4
involutory MDS matrix used in the ANUBIS [RB00] cipher, denoted as ANU-
BISH here, and a 4 × 4 involutory MDS matrix found by [SKOP15], denoted as
OTHERH here.
ANUBISH =


0x01
0x02
0x04
0x06
0x02
0x01
0x06
0x04
0x04
0x06
0x01
0x02
0x06
0x04
0x02
0x01


OTHERH =


0x01
0x02
0xb0
0xb2
0x02
0x01
0xb2
0xb0
0xb0
0xb2
0x01
0x02
0xb2
0xb0
0x02
0x01


The main choice of eld is GF(28)/0x11d for ANUBISH, and GF(28)/0x165 for
OTHERH. In these elds, XORCount(ANUBISH) = 184, and XORCount(OTHERH)
= 160. ANUBISH is also used over GF(216)/0x1002d, where XORCount(ANUBISH)
= 320.
2.1
SIMD Instructions
We will be using Single Instruction, Multiple Data SIM instructions for these
implementations. As the name suggests, this is a method to parallelize process-
ing on the instruction level, with the operation dened by a single instruction
being applied on multiple variables, contained within a larger register. This
technology was introduced to personal computers with Intel's MMX instruction
set [PW96], equipping Pentium processors with 8 64-bit registers. The number
of concurrent operations depends on the "packing", or the logical division of
that 64-bit register into smaller integers: A single instruction can be applied to
two 32-bit integers, four 16-bit integers, or eight 8-bit integers.
The amount of data that can be processed in any way in a processor instruction
is limited by the size of the registers used. Thus, the SIMD instructions were
==PAGE:21==
2.2 XOR Count Implementation
13
gradually expanded from 64-bit MMX registers to 128-bit XMM registers, 256-
bit YMM registers, and 512-bit ZMM registers. The available operations were
also expanded, as well as the packing formats and treatment of the variables as
integers or oating-point values.
For this project we chose to use 128-bit XMM registers, due to hardware con-
straints on the development machine 1.2, and the higher number of dierent
operations compared to larger register instruction sets. An implementation us-
ing larger registers would certainly almost double performance. Compiling the
same code on a later architecture also improves instruction cycle performance,
due to hardware optimizations and the availability of more registers.
2.2
XOR Count Implementation
This project is largely based on the concept of XOR count, and an implemen-
tation was required for generating vector-matrix multiplication code in bit-slice
arrangement 2.5.3, as well as for the COMDS search in the next chapter 3.2.
This was done in the SageMath [Dev17] system, in the le sage/xorcount.sage
of [Tat17].
The XOR count metric applies to any element a in GF(2r)/mod 1.6.2. A mul-
tiplication by a can be decomposed into a number of multiplications by two
(bit-wise left shifts followed by reduction, or XORing in the modulo mod), and
nally XORing together all multiplications by two. We wish to also calculate
which bits are XORed to produce a bit in the multiplication output, so this
process was fully implemented.
For example, let us use multiplication of a random element b by a = x3+x+1 =
0xb = (1011)2 in GF(24)/x4 + x + 1 = (10011)2. The following table shows the
4 shift and reduction operations required to nd the output bits:
Factor10
Factor2
Shift
Reduction
1
(0001)2
(0, b0, b1, b2, b3)2
(b0, b1, b2, b3)2
2
(0010)2
(b0, b1, b2, b3, 0)2
(b1, b2, b0 ⊕b3, b0)2
4
(0100)2
(b1, b2, b3 ⊕b0, b0, 0)2
(b2, b0 ⊕b3, b0 ⊕b1, b1)2
8
(1000)2
(b2, b0 ⊕b3, b0 ⊕b1, b1, 0)2
(b0 ⊕b3, b0 ⊕b1, b1 ⊕b2, b2)2
As a = (1011)2, we need to XOR together the reduction result of rows 4, 2
and 1 to get the bits composing each output bit.
(b0, b1, b2, b3)2 · (1011)2 =
==PAGE:22==
14
SIMD Implementation Metrics
(b0, b1, b2, b3)2 ⊕(b1, b2, b0 ⊕b3, b0)2 ⊕(b0 ⊕b3, b0 ⊕b1, b1 ⊕b2, b2)2 = (b0 ⊕b0 ⊕
b1 ⊕b3, b0 ⊕b1 ⊕b1 ⊕b2, b0 ⊕b1 ⊕b2 ⊕b2 ⊕b3, b0 ⊕b2 ⊕b3)2 = (b1 ⊕b3, b0 ⊕
b2, b0 ⊕b1 ⊕b3, b0 ⊕b2 ⊕b3)2. This is done using Python sets containing the bit
indices, and the symmetric dierence operation combines these sets. From this
form, the XOR Count is trivial to calculate, as the number of indices in each
set minus one, all summed up: XORCount(a) = 6.
For smaller elds, all elements can have their XOR count calculated serially.
Larger elds would take an exponentially longer time, so a custom class, delay_dict,
containing a Python dict is used; whenever an XOR count is accessed by the
__getitem__ method, it is calculated and stored for future reference.
Any linear operation in the eld can be expressed in a similar bit-wise fashion:
Every element a ̸= 0 in GF(2r)/mod has a multiplicative inverse a−1, which
can be similarly multiplied with a random element b. Similarly b can be mul-
tiplied with a ratio, b · (c/a) = b · c · a−1). To nd this multiplicative inverse,
the sets describing the multiplication are expressed as an r × r binary matrix.
Multiplying an element expressed as a vector by that matrix creates exactly
the same result as multiplying the two elements within the eld. By inversing
this matrix and converting back to a list of sets, we obtain the bits required for
a multiplication by an inverse. To multiply by a ratio, or any combination of
factors, we express each bit index within each set of one factor as the set of bit
indices of the other. Thus, a multiplication by a ratio is again expressed as a list
of sets containing the random element indices to XOR, and the XOR Count of
that ratio is calculated in exactly the same way. Ratios are considered in 2.4.2
and 2.5.3.
In order to test the correctness of the XOR count implementation, the method
assert_XORcount_GF256_correct generates XOR counts for selected modulos
in GF(28) and compares them to the XOR Count provided in [SKOP15, Table
12].
2.3
C Implementation Choices
When attempting to create ecient C code, a consideration is how to organize
the code into functions. On the one hand, function calls can create additional
instructions upon compilation, inducing some overhead. On the other hand,
placing all the code in a single function will signicantly reduce readability as
many parts will be repeated, and make code reuse and debugging harder. When
using functions for better organization, another issue is handling function input
and output. An easy strategy is passing array pointers as function arguments, to
==PAGE:23==
2.3 C Implementation Choices
15
be used for both input and output. Whether this strategy results in additional
overhead needed to be evaluated however.
The overwhelming source of optimization is the GCC compiler itself, through
the use of the - O3 ag. This optimization can however result in the compiler
removing important parts of the code as "dead code", as the compiler can
detect when the data produced by the benchmarked operations is not output
in any way. To avoid this, the function use_m128i_variable was created, that
conditionally prints the contents of the variable. This function is not dened as
inline, making it harder for the compiler to detect that the printing conditional
ag is set to zero during static analysis.
In order to nd out which organization strategy compiles into more ecient code,
two were considered and implemented: The rst is exclusively using static inline
functions in the benchmarked portions of the code2, with input and output done
through array pointers. This results in more readable code, but its eciency
needed to be checked, mainly for the handling of input and output arrays. The
other approach was using macro functions, that would be expanded by the gcc
preprocessor before the application of optimizations. These are harder to read,
implement and debug, but are popular for ecient implementations.
Code developed for mathematical operations is hard to assess for correctness,
as more fringe cases are possible. Towards this end all implemented methods
oer an input-output interface in raw byte format through mult_io.c. The
test_c_mult SageMath method was also developed, available in the le sage/
ffmulttest.sage. This method executes mult_io with random vectors, and
checks its output against the same multiplication in SageMath. This does not
guarantee correctness, as errors might exist in the SageMath implementation,
and all possible vectors and matrices would need to be tested.
To benchmark the code we will use __rdtsc() function that compiles into the
rdtsc instruction, that returns the number of processor clock cycles since the
last reset. When code is executed on a modern operating system, there are a
multitude of unpredictable delays, like context switches and page faults. To
mitigate, the benchmarked operation is repeated in a loop for a large number of
repetitions. By getting the processor cycle count before and after that loop, and
dividing by the number of repetitions, we can have a more accurate measurement
of the benchmarked operation. The overhead from the loop itself should be equal
for all operations, allowing a more fair comparison.
2Asserted to be as fast as the macro approach, https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/
Inline.html
==PAGE:24==
16
SIMD Implementation Metrics
2.4
SIMD Multiplication Implementations
A vector-matrix multiplication can be executed with dierent multiplication al-
gorithms, and three dierent algorithms were considered, with their applicability
dependent on the choice of data arrangement 2.5.
2.4.1
Shue Multiplication
This is a method that utilizes the capabilities of the pshufb instruction. This
instruction takes as input an XMM register a to act upon and an XMM mask
register b, and outputs an XMM register c. Each of the 16 bytes ci in c is a
byte from a, chosen by the index formed by the 4 least signicant bits in bi.
Essentially, ∀i ∈[0, 15], ci = abi. The purpose of this instruction is to reorder
the bytes of a, with the capability of repetition, omission, and zeroing if the
most signicant bit of ci is set.
This method can also be used as a table lookup, and therefore multiplication in
binary extension eld[PGM13]. GF(24) has 16 elements, so the multiplication
result of every element by a factor k can be put in order into a, or ai = i·k. If 16
GF(24) elements are supplied into b, then ci = abi = bi · k. This method can be
extended to larger binary extension elds with multiple shue calls. In GF(28),
we need two shue calls to multiply 16 elements, the rst indexed by the 4 least
signicant bits of every element, and the second indexed by the 4 most signicant
bits. XORing the two shue results together yields the multiplication result,
due to the distributivity property. In GF(216) elements can be divided into
four 4-bit portions, but two bytes are needed to represent one element, so we
would require 8 shue multiplications to multiply 16 elements. The number of
required shues can be reduced for smaller factors.
In general, by using the 128-bit register version of shue, in GF(28n) we can
multiply 16 eld elements using (up to) 2∗n2 shue calls. However, in order to
utilize shues to their full capacity and multiply 16 elements for n > 1, we need
additional instructions to arrange the element parts in their correct positions,
as well as to rearrange partial multiplication results to be able to XOR them
into the nal multiplication results. It is also important to avoid setting the
most signicant bit of the mask to one, as it will zero that byte's output.
==PAGE:25==
2.4 SIMD Multiplication Implementations
17
2.4.2
Times-Two Multiplication
This multiplication method is essentially the same algorithm as the one de-
scribed in 2.2. By shifting the bits of an element left by one, and XORing the
modulo, with its ones set to the shift overow bit, we obtain the element times
two. By doing this shift up to the position of most signicant nonzero bit of
the factor, and XORing together all results where the factor bit is one, we have
the multiplication result. Thus in GF(28n), to multiply 16/n elements by k we
need ⌊log_2(k)⌋SHIFTs, and ⌊log_2(k)⌋+ wt(k) XORs.
2.4.3
XOR Multiplication
The XOR multiplication is the direct analog of hardware multiplication using
XORs. This is only possible in a bit-slice arrangement 2.5.3. In this arrange-
ment, we have an input register for every bit position i in the element, containing
the ith bit of every element. The same applies to output registers. To multi-
ply, each output register is produced by XORing specied input registers, as
described in 2.2. The XORs required match the XORCount of the factor, and
with XMM registers, 128 elements can be multiplied by kwith XORCount(k)
XOR operations.
Since the number of available registers, the average cycle count of the XMM
XOR instruction, and the compiler instruction rearrangement optimization all
aect the performance of this algorithm, a few alternatives were tested.
The rst approach is allowing the compiler to optimize as best as it can, by just
writing the required XORs. The second approach is using ratios 2.2: For ex-
ample, in ANUBISH over we have the factors (0x01, 0x02, 0x04, 0x06), with re-
spective XOR Counts (0, 3, 6, 13) over GF(28)/0x11d. We can choose to instead
multiply the data in place by (1, 2, 2, 6/4), which have XOR Counts (0, 3, 3, 11),
before XORing the results to the output. This discrepancy in XOR Count is
caused by the calculation of factors having common intermediate XOR results,
which are repeated in the simple approach. The correct choice of ratios can
eliminate some common intermediates.
The third approach was to pre-calculate all common intermediates, in an at-
tempt to use the least XOR operations possible. This was done in in the Sage-
Math method generate_bitslice_xormult_code within the sage/ffmulttest.
sage le. To nd them, we rst calculate the set of input bits that need to
XORed to produce each output bit. Then all possible input bit pairs are cal-
culated for each set, and the most common pair is replaced by a tmp variable.
==PAGE:26==
18
SIMD Implementation Metrics
This process is repeated until no more common pairs can be found, at which
point the code is output.
2.5
Data Arrangement Implementations
As we are multiplying GF(2r) vectors with a 4×4 matrix, the vectors will have 4
elements, or be 4r-bits long. A 128-bit register can contain 4 vectors for GF(28),
and 2 vectors for GF(216). An assumption is made that these vectors are by
default represented as a sequence of bytes, containing the binary representations
of its elements. We assume large amounts of data need to be processed, and
are concurrently available. Dierent multiplication algorithms 2.4 require the
data to be arranged in dierent formats before they can be applied. Therefore a
vector-matrix multiplication involves rearranging the input data to the proper
format, applying a multiplication algorithm, and then arranging it back to the
default representation.
2.5.1
Direct Arrangement
A direct arrangement refers to directly using the data in the default arrange-
ment, with no need to reorganize. The shue multiplication method applies
well here, if we are using the registers and instruction to their full capacity.
Times-two also applies, but was not considered due to performance.
Only ANUBISH was implemented, since shue multiplication complexity de-
pendence on the matrix entries is low in GF(28). It is constant, as long as each
row is a permutation of every other row, and has the same amount of ones.
Both a GF(28) version with 4 input vectors and a GF(216) version with 2 input
vectors are provided, as well as their macro versions. For the GF(216) version,
multiplication is done with 6 shues instead of 8, as the low absolute values of
the entries render certain shues obsolete.
First the input vector is multiplied with the required amount of shue calls,
then the result is rearranged with another shue so that it lines up with the
correct output vector according to the matrix, before XORing it to the output
variable. This required shuing masks and multiplication arrays to be prepared,
done in SageMath.
==PAGE:27==
2.5 Data Arrangement Implementations
19
Figure 2.1: Default to Byte-Slice Arrangement, each box represents a byte
2.5.2
Byte-slice Arrangement
In a byte-slice arrangement2.1 for GF(28) elements, 4 128-bit variables con-
taining 16 vectors are accepted as input, and rearranged so that the rst input
variable contains the rst byte of every vector, the second contains each second
byte, and so on. This arrangement allows for shue multiplication, as we are
dealing with bytes, and also allows for times-two multiplication, by applying
the same operation on all 16 bytes at once. Both multiplication algorithms were
implemented for both the ANUBISH and OTHERH matrices, to showcase the
shue multiplication relative independence from the matrix, and the scaling of
the times-two multiplication.
Rearranging the input data will impose some overhead. First, a shue is applied
on each input variable that contains 4 input vectors, so that all rst bytes
appear rst, then the second bytes, and so on. Then a process similar to the
_MM_TRANSPOSE4_PS macro in the Intel Intrinsics Guide is applied. This is a
matrix transposition, when treating the four 128-bit variables as a 4 × 4 matrix
with 32 bit elements. Applying these two operations in the reverse order returns
the byte-slice into the default arrangement.
Once in the byte-slice arrangement, we can easily implement the vector-matrix
multiplication: each input vector can be seen as a vector entry, so we multiply
that entry with each matrix entry in the corresponding row, and XOR the result
to the output vector entry of the corresponding column.
2.5.3
Bit-slice Arrangement
The bit-slice arrangement is similar to the byte-slice, but for bits. Thus, in a
bit-slice arrangement for GF(28) elements, 32 128-bit variables containing 128
vectors are accepted as input, and rearranged so that the rst input variable con-
tains the rst bit of the rst byte of every vector, and so on. This arrangement
only allows for XOR multiplication.
The arrangement is a very costly operation; each input variable contains 128
==PAGE:28==
20
SIMD Implementation Metrics
bits, of which only 1 is in its correct position, 3 need to move to other positions,
and 124 need to be moved into the other variables, 4 per. First, the variables
have the byte-slice arrangement applied to them into 8 consecutive groups of
4. They are then rearranged (a free operation), so that the rst group only
contains the rst four bits, the second contains bits 5-8, and so on.
The next step utilizes the sse_trans_slice function from [mis], that rearranges
the bits in a 128-bit variable, so that the rst two bytes contain all the rst bits
of every byte, the third and fourth bytes contain all the second bits of every
byte, and so on. This function is applied on every input variable.
Now, each of the 128-bit variables, contains 8 16-bit values. A transpose function
is again applied on each function, treating each group as an 8 × 8 matrix of
16 −bit values. After another rearrangement, the bit-slice is complete. To turn
the bit-slice arrangement back into the default one, the operations are applied
in reverse order.
Four implementations were created using the ANUBISH matrix: First, two
hand-coded versions using ratios, both in inline and macro fashion. Two other
versions were automatically generated, the simple direct XOR sum for each
output variable (also done for OTHERH), and one with all intermediates stored
in temporary variables.
2.6
Results
Benchmarks were ran on both the Skylake and Ivy Bridge machines 1.2, over
50,000,000 iterations for each implementation. The benchmark output is shown
in Appendix A. These timings seem to be consistent enough to allow comparison.
The results consistently show very small discrepancies between the macro and
inline implementations, with inline usually outperforming. This suggests that
inline functions are preferable, due to the additional ease of readability and
debugging.
As expected, byte-slice shue implementations perform equally in respect to the
matrix used. In the times-two implementations however, the lower values of the
entries in ANUBISH allow it to dramatically outperform OTHERH. Times-two
also signicantly outperforms shue for ANUBISH on Skylake.
The direct implementations using shue seem to perform equally in Ivy Bridge
and Skylake. In the byte-slice implementations Skylake begins to slightly out-
==PAGE:29==
2.6 Results
21
perform, and continues so in the bit-slice versions. This is expected, as explained
in 2.1. It is however worse than the byte-slice arrangement, and would only ap-
ply for small amounts of data.
Byte-slice arrangement (and its reverse) seems to require about 10-13 cycles,
while bit-slice arrangement requires 850-925 cycles. While these are signicant
overheads, especially for bit-slice, they need to occur only once in a block cipher,
assuming all other operations can be implemented in this arrangement. If a
block-cipher has a large number of rounds, the parallelization provided by SIMD
instructions makes diusion a much less costly operation.
An important note is the comparison of the three XOR multiplication schemes,
which can be seen in 2.1. The XOR count as dened in the C code is provided,
as well as the number of XOR instructions in the compiled assembly code. The
ratio implementation is the worst for both machines, as it both not fully opti-
mized for intermediates, and does not allow the compiler to properly optimize
it. The intermediates one requires the most variables, but cannot be further
optimized by the compiler in respect to the XOR count. This extra variable
requirement forces the compiler to load from memory more often, and makes it
second in performance. The simple XOR sum performs best on both machines.
Therefore, optimization is best left to the compiler. The table also shows that
OTHERH performed better than ANUBISH, while having a better XOR Count
and a worse Hamming Weight. This further supports that XOR multiplication
in this arrangement scales according to XOR Count.
Table 2.1: XOR Multiplication Optimization Comparison
Method
Matrix
XORCount-Code
XORCount-Compiled
Skylake C/Vec
IvyBridge C/Vec
Ratios
ANUBISH
156
143
0.68
0.73
Intermediates
ANUBISH
122
122
0.58
0.71
Simple XOR
ANUBISH
184
157
0.49
0.67
Simple XOR
OTHERH
160
141
0.46
0.66
==PAGE:30==
22
SIMD Implementation Metrics
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3
Finding COMDS Matrices
This chapter will describe the process of implementing a method described in
F. J. MacWilliams' 1971 mathematics paper, "Orthogonal Circulant Matrices
over Finite Fields,and How to Find Them" [Mac71] in the SageMath [Dev17]
system. The paper provides a computationally ecient way for nding orthog-
onal circulant matrices in a nite eld, which is then further rened to nd
MDS matrices with the least XOR count amongst them. First we will describe
the algorithm used, then the implementation process and choices, and nally
provide some interesting results.
3.1
Process overview
The paper looks at three dierent cases for nding n × n circulant matrices in
GF(q): The rst case is for q = 2 and n odd, the second extends it to q prime
and n co-prime to q (not sharing any factors other than 1), and the third is for
n = sq. Since we wish to use a binary extension eld (q = 2r) for easy binary
representation and operations, and it has been shown that no 2d × 2d COMDS
matrices exist [GR14], we cannot use the third case to nd 2d ×2d matrices that
oer perfect diusion. We will instead focus on the second case, which has been
shown to also apply on extension elds [JBG94].
==PAGE:32==
24
Finding COMDS Matrices
3.1.1
Key concepts
The paper rst introduces an alternative representation, or isomorphism, of
circulant matrices as polynomials.
A circulant square n × n matrix C over
GF(q),
C =


γ0
γ1
γ2
. . .
γn−1
γn−1
γ0
γ1
. . .
γn−2
γn−2
γn−1
γ0
. . .
γn−3
...
...
...
...
...
γ1
γ2
γ3
. . .
γ0


is fully dened by its rst line, or
C = circ(γ0, γ1, γ2, . . . , γn−1).
This more clearly shows that there are qn such circulant matrices. The isomor-
phism introduced is between the space of all such matrices and the Polynomial
Ring Rn = GF(q)[x]/(xn −1). This ring contains all polynomials of degree up
to n and coecients in q, and therefore has qn polynomials. The main dierence
between a ring and a eld (explained in 1.5) is that the division operation and
multiplicative inverses are not (fully) dened in a ring.
The corresponding polynomial to the matrix C is
c(x) = γ0 + γ1x + γ2x2 + · · · + γn−1xn−1
or
c(x) = Pn−1
i=0 (γixi)
As we are searching for orthogonal matrices, we need to also dene CT in this
ring:
c(x)T = γ0 + γn−1x + γn−2x2 + · · · + γ1xn−1
or
c(x)T = Pn−1
i=0 (γn−ixi) (where γn = γ0)
This isomorphism allows for all operations between circulant matrices, and we
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Process overview
25
will be using that fact for orthogonal matrices:
C · CT = E ⇔c(x) · c(x)T = 1 (mod xn −1)
We will therefore call a polynomial c(x) orthogonal if c(x)·c(x)T = 1 (mod xn−
1).
Another key concept are ideals. The following is a simplied denition of two-
sided ideals, as multiplication is commutative in Rn = GF(q)[x]/(xn −1).
Definition 3.1 For a ring R and some (dening) element α ∈R, an ideal A
is a subset of R, such that ∀β ∈R, α · β ∈A.
An easy way to understand an ideal (as used here) is to think of it as the subset
of Rn containing all multiples of the dening element.
3.1.2
Algorithm
The rst step of the algorithm is decomposing xn −1 into its irreducible poly-
nomial factors, xn −1 = Qk
i=0(fi(x)).
If fi(x) = Pw
i=0(αixi) is an irre-
ducible factor, then f ⋆
i (x) = Pw
i=0(αw−ixi/α0) is also an irreducible factor.
If fi(x) = f ⋆
i (x), we will call that an unpaired factor, and if fi(x) ̸= f ⋆
i (x) we
will call them a pair of factors, for easy reference. x −1 is always one of the
unpaired factors, and so is x + 1, if q is odd and n is ever. We denote di as the
degree of fi(x), and di is even for unpaired factors, except for x −1 and x + 1.
Since n and q are chosen to be co-prime, xn −1 has no multiple zeroes, or no
factor appears more than once.
For each factor fi(x) we form the ideal Ai or Afi(x) using the polynomial (xn −
1)/fi(x) as its dening element. As with factors, ideals are either paired or
unpaired, and Ai will contain qdi polynomials, including the zero polynomial.
To iterate through all polynomials of Ai, we iterate lexicographically through all
polynomials e(x) of up to degree di, and e(x)·(xn−1)/fi(x) is the corresponding
polynomial within the ideal.
Each ideal also contains a multiplicative unit Ei(x), such that ∀β(x) ∈Ai, Ei(x)β(x) =
β(x). It is also the only polynomial within the ideal to be its own square, which
is the test we perform to nd it while iterating through all polynomials of the
ideal. For paired ideals, fi(x), fj(x) = f ⋆
i (x) , we have that Ei(x) = Ej(x)T .
In order to nd the orthogonal polynomials, a key point is that no o(x) ∈
==PAGE:34==
26
Finding COMDS Matrices
Ai, i ∈[0, k] exists, such that o(x) orthogonal[Mac71, Lemma 1.7].
Instead,
for a polynomial o(x) ∈Rn to be orthogonal, it needs to be a sum of specic
polynomials, one from each ideal. We will denote these ideal members as oi(x)
for ease of reference:
o(x) ∈Rn orthogonal ⇔o(x) = Pk
i=0(oi(x)) ∀oi(x) ∈Ai
The denition of oi(x) diers between unpaired and paired ideals: For the un-
paired ideal Ai, oi(x)oi(x)T = Ei(x). For the paired ideals Ai, Aj, ∀oi(x) ∈
Ai∃oj(x) ∈Aj such that oi(x)oj(x)T = Ei(x).
In order to nd all orthogonal polynomials in Rn, we need to rst nd all oi(x).
In an unpaired ideal Ai, there are qdi/2 + 1 such elements. To nd them, we
search through all polynomials ci(x) ∈Ai, checking for each if ci(x)ci(x)T =
Ei(x). The ideals formed by x −1 and x + 1 are special: Ax−1 contains 1 oi(x)
for q even, and 2 oi(x) for q odd, while Ax+1 contains 2 oi(x) if x + 1 is a factor
of xn −1 (q odd and n even). This is the source of the factors 1,2 and 4 in
[JBG94, Theorem 1].
In the pair of ideals Ai, Aj, every polynomial of one has a corresponding polyno-
mial in the other such that oi(x)oj(x)T = Ei(x), except for the zero polynomial.
Paired ideals therefore have qdi −1 = qdj −1 pairs of oi(x),oj(x). To nd all
pairs, for every polynomial oi(x) ∈Ai its corresponding oj(x) needs to be found
amongst qdj −1 elements in Aj.
After nding all oi(x), all combinations of choices of oi(x) from all Ai form all
the circulant orthogonal matrices. By checking them for the MDS property, we
can nally nd all COMDS matrices amongst them.
3.2
Implementation
The algorithm outlined above was implemented in the SageMath [Dev17] system,
in the le sage/comds.sage of [Tat17]. SageMath was chosen as it oers native
support for nite elds and their elements, polynomials and polynomial rings,
matrices with any type of coecients, as well as the full capabilities of the
Python language.
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Implementation
27
3.2.1
Optimization
We wish to nd the MDS matrix of least XOR count amongst them, and since
nding the XOR Count is faster than checking for the MDS property1.7.1, we
can optimize the search: The XOR Count of a circulant matrix can be derived
from the coecients of its polynomial representation, and the MDS property
needs to be only checked if a matrix. This signicantly reduces the time needed
for the search, compared to checking all matrices for the MDS property.
During this search, there are signicant bottlenecks, or operations that scale
exponentially with the eld degree. The three main problems identied were
the search for the multiplicative inverses, Ei(x), nding the oi(x) in an unpaired
ideal, and nding the corresponding oj(x) to a specied oi(x) in a pair of ideals.
The rst implementation step to address these bottlenecks is moving the search
for the oi(x) polynomials from pre-computation, to concurrent with the search.
This is done mainly by implementing Python generators for the two types
of search.
This however does not work by itself:
If the obvious choice of
itertools.product to create all combinations is used, while it does not store
intermediaries, it will convert the iterables provided into arrays. Thus providing
itertools.product generators negates most of their usefulness. To amend this,
the custom implementation of cache_gen_product was created inspired by a
Stack Overow answer [sh], that does not store intermediaries, uses generators
properly, and also stores elements that have already been generated.
In order to nd the multiplicative inverses, an optimization was found, using
the echelon_form method of matrices in SageMath. By converting the dening
polynomial of an ideal Ai into its matrix form, converting that matrix into
its echelon form, and then converting back to a polynomial, we can somehow
directly nd Ei(x). This optimization seems to always work for 5 × 5 matrices
in GF(22b), but does not work in most combinations of n and q.
Another optimization was developed based on the capability of SageMath to
solve systems of linear equations, as the solve_right method of matrices. This
optimization helps nd the corresponding element oj(x) in paired ideals in a
much more computationally ecient manner, in solve_AXeqB_circ. By trans-
forming the chosen oi(x), Ei(x), and a variable polynomial g(x) into their corre-
sponding matrices Oi, Ei and G, we can attempt to solve the system of equations
Oi · G = Ei. Since all matrices are circulant, G and Ei can be expressed as vec-
tors without losing any accuracy, as the matrix representation will only result in
repeating the linear equations generated by the rst row. solving Oi·G = Ei for
G does not yield a single solution as Oi is not invertible [Mac71, Proof of The-
orem 1.1]. The provided result, when multiplied with the kernel of the matrix
==PAGE:36==
28
Finding COMDS Matrices
will yield all results, which is a similar search space as the naive approach.
However, the rst solution of SageMat is somehow a polynomial that, when
multiplied by the dening element of the ideal Aj, yields oj(x). This optimiza-
tion seems to always work for 5 × 5 matrices in GF(22b), but does not work in
most combinations of n and q.
When searching for COMDS matrices in a large eld, memory is also an issue.
The oi(x) need to be stored to avoid recomputing them, which is done through
the cache_gen_product method. The same method is used to iterate through
polynomial elements up to a specied degree, in many places, using the helper
method gen_poly_ring_elements.
The memory consumption optimizations
are still not free of bugs, and the search will consume inordinate amounts of
memory for large elds.
3.3
Findings
The implementation, provided in the find_COMDS_matrices method, has been
tested against a number of combinations of n and q, and seems to work. In
this section we will mainly focus on 5 × 5 matrices over GF(2r), as a recent
development in white-box cryptography [BIT16] utilizes such a matrix, and can
provide some comparison. It is important to note however that the matrices
used for diusion in the aforementioned paper were chosen to have low Hamming
Weights instead of low XOR count. Results of the search can be seen in 3.1.
Despite the size dierence, these MDS matrices do not perform as well as the
ones found for even sized matrices, by techniques like the one in [SKOP15].
However, that technique does not apply to odd sized matrices, and should a
cipher design require odd sized matrices, this implementation might be helpful.
Table 3.1: Best 5 × 5 COMDS matrices found over GF(2r)
Field
XORC.
Matrix
Search
GF(24)/0x13
150
circ(0x4, 0x5, 0x2, 0x1, 0x3)
Exhaustive
GF(26)/0x6d
300
circ(0x1, 0x3, 0xc, 0x4, 0xb)
Exhaustive
GF(28)/0x10eb
390
circ(0xa6, 0x29, 0x3, 0x1, 0x8c)
Exhaustive
GF(212)/0x1002d
990
circ(0x8, 0xf5c, 0x86f, 0x10, 0x72a)
Incomplete
GF(216)/0x1002d
2110
circ(0x6386, 0x8086, 0x1488, 0x730f, 0x8486)
Incomplete
GF(220)/0x1006f3
3580
circ(0x9e337, 0xa0ea4, 0xf2a73, 0x1e34f, 0xd24ae)
Incomplete
GF(224)/0x14d
5540
circ(0x904d, 0xc49454, 0x7c9eb9, 0x6cd91a, 0xd443bb)
Incomplete
The gures in Appendix B show the minimum XOR count compared to XOR
count standard deviation in an exhaustive search over all irreducible modulos.
While inconclusive, it does seem that by choosing a eld with a higher standard
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Findings
29
deviation of XOR counts, one is more likely to nd lower XOR count MDS
matrices. This argument was rst presented in [SKOP15].
==PAGE:38==
30
Finding COMDS Matrices
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4
Conclusion
This project mainly focused on implementing vector-matrix multiplication with
SIMD instructions, and the COMDS search algorithm. For the former, multiple
implementations were compared. When choosing a software implementation, the
choice of eld and matrix determine the optimal choice: For matrices with large
coecients, shue multiplication in byte-slice arrangement would perform best,
as it is mostly independent of the matrix XOR count and Hamming Weight. For
matrices chosen due to their low XOR count, a bit-slice arrangement mimicking
the hardware XOR multiplication scheme would be optimal, with full compiler
optimization. Matrices in larger elds with low Hamming Weight and absolute
value coecients can also benet from times-two multiplication.
The COMDS search algorithm was also successfully implemented and shown to
produce results. While the matrices found are not useful in most current cipher
designs, it would be helpful in a cipher design using odd matrices, or operating
in a non-binary extension eld.
4.1
Ethics and Sustainability
As is the case with all scientic research, it is important to consider any ethical
implications. This project provides tools and some insight for designing crypto-
==PAGE:40==
32
Conclusion
graphic tools. Cryptography allows private communication between individuals,
and secure storage for sensitive material. However it can also be used to hide
criminal activity, and circumvent law enforcement surveillance.
This project also researches some eciency aspects, which can aect sustain-
ability, if they aect future research. More ecient algorithms can help slightly
reduce power consumption, once widely adopted.
4.2
Future Work
The SIMD implementation comparison is in no way a complete study. While
it oers a number of implemented techniques for multiplication and data ar-
rangement, they can be applied to more matrices of dierent sizes and over
larger elds. Executing the same benchmarks on more devices and compilers
can provide insight into the best choice for specic devices.
The implementations also only operate on XMM registers, and would be much
faster if larger registers were used.
The bit-slice arrangement algorithm can
also most probably be further optimized, especially as time progresses and more
SIMD operations are designed and become available.
For the COMDS search, the main current challenges are calculating multiplica-
tive inverses, and nding the oi(x) in paired and unpaired ideals. The opti-
mizations provided do not have a clear mathematical basis, and could help with
these problems if properly studied. Optimizing the implementation for lower
memory consumption would also be beneciary, as well as a partial or full im-
plementation in a faster non-interpreted language.
Since higher standard deviation seems to indicate the presence of lower XOR
count MDS matrices, this could help with the choice of modulo for larger elds.
The current implementation does not have a way of ordering the search so that
lower XOR count matrices are considered rst. If a computationally ecient
ordering can be developed, the search algorithm would operate much faster.
==PAGE:41==
Appendix A
SIMD Implementation
Listing A.1: Skylake SIMD Cycle Test Output
. / mult \ _cycle \ _test
50000000
4
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
s h u f f l e ,
Anubis ,
i n l i n e ,
d i r e c t :
1 3 . 1 7
CAvg ,
3 . 2 9
C/Vec
4
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
s h u f f l e ,
Anubis ,
macro ,
d i r e c t :
1 2 . 6 8
CAvg ,
3 . 1 7
C/Vec
2
v e c t o r s ,
GF( 2 ^ 1 6 ) ,
s h u f f l e ,
Anubis ,
i n l i n e ,
d i r e c t :
2 5 . 8 9
CAvg ,
1 2 . 9 5
C/Vec
2
v e c t o r s ,
GF( 2 ^ 1 6 ) ,
s h u f f l e ,
Anubis ,
macro ,
d i r e c t :
2 7 . 6 4
CAvg ,
1 3 . 8 2
C/Vec
16
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
s h u f f l e ,
Anubis ,
i n l i n e ,
b y t e s l i c e d :
2 4 . 7 6
CAvg ,
1 . 5 5
C/Vec
16
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
s h u f f l e ,
OtherH ,
i n l i n e ,
b y t e s l i c e d :
2 4 . 7 6
CAvg ,
1 . 5 5
C/Vec
16
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
s h u f f l e ,
Anubis ,
i n l i n e ,
w/
l o a d i n g :
5 0 . 7 1
CAvg ,
3 . 1 7
C/Vec
16
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
s h u f f l e ,
OtherH ,
i n l i n e ,
w/
l o a d i n g :
5 0 . 7 2
CAvg ,
3 . 1 7
C/Vec
16
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
x2
,
Anubis ,
i n l i n e ,
b y t e s l i c e d :
2 1 . 0 0
CAvg ,
1 . 3 1
C/Vec
16
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
x2
,
OtherH ,
i n l i n e ,
b y t e s l i c e d :
7 4 . 8 1
CAvg ,
4 . 6 8
C/Vec
16
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
x2
,
Anubis ,
i n l i n e ,
w/
l o a d i n g :
4 9 . 2 4
CAvg ,
3 . 0 8
C/Vec
16
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
x2
,
OtherH ,
i n l i n e ,
w/
l o a d i n g :
9 5 . 6 7
CAvg ,
5 . 9 8
C/Vec
128
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
XOR
,
OtherH ,
optCmp ,
b i t s l i c e d :
5 9 . 1 0
CAvg ,
0 . 4 6
C/Vec
128
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
XOR
,
Anubis ,
optCmp ,
b i t s l i c e d :
6 2 . 6 6
CAvg ,
0 . 4 9
C/Vec
128
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
XOR
,
Anubis ,
optTmp ,
b i t s l i c e d :
7 4 . 4 0
CAvg ,
0 . 5 8
C/Vec
128
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
XOR
,
Anubis ,
Ratio ,
b i t s l i c e d :
8 6 . 7 9
CAvg ,
0 . 6 8
C/Vec
128
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
XOR
,
Anubis ,
Rmacro ,
b i t s l i c e d :
8 4 . 4 2
CAvg ,
0 . 6 6
C/Vec
128
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
XOR
,
Anubis ,
i n l i n e ,
w/
l o a d i n g :
1 7 7 1 . 1 4
CAvg ,
1 3 . 8 4
C/Vec
Listing A.2: Ivy Bridge SIMD Cycle Test Output
. / mult \ _cycle \ _test
50000000
4
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
s h u f f l e ,
Anubis ,
i n l i n e ,
d i r e c t :
1 2 . 3 5
CAvg ,
3 . 0 9
C/Vec
4
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
s h u f f l e ,
Anubis ,
macro ,
d i r e c t :
1 2 . 0 3
CAvg ,
3 . 0 1
C/Vec
2
v e c t o r s ,
GF( 2 ^ 1 6 ) ,
s h u f f l e ,
Anubis ,
i n l i n e ,
d i r e c t :
2 5 . 9 8
CAvg ,
1 2 . 9 9
C/Vec
2
v e c t o r s ,
GF( 2 ^ 1 6 ) ,
s h u f f l e ,
Anubis ,
macro ,
d i r e c t :
2 5 . 5 0
CAvg ,
1 2 . 7 5
C/Vec
16
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
s h u f f l e ,
Anubis ,
i n l i n e ,
b y t e s l i c e d :
2 6 . 8 4
CAvg ,
1 . 6 8
C/Vec
16
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
s h u f f l e ,
OtherH ,
i n l i n e ,
b y t e s l i c e d :
2 6 . 8 8
CAvg ,
1 . 6 8
C/Vec
16
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
s h u f f l e ,
Anubis ,
i n l i n e ,
w/
l o a d i n g :
4 5 . 8 6
CAvg ,
2 . 8 7
C/Vec
16
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
s h u f f l e ,
OtherH ,
i n l i n e ,
w/
l o a d i n g :
4 8 . 3 2
CAvg ,
3 . 0 2
C/Vec
16
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
x2
,
Anubis ,
i n l i n e ,
b y t e s l i c e d :
2 6 . 2 0
CAvg ,
1 . 6 4
C/Vec
16
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
x2
,
OtherH ,
i n l i n e ,
b y t e s l i c e d :
9 1 . 4 1
CAvg ,
5 . 7 1
C/Vec
16
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
x2
,
Anubis ,
i n l i n e ,
w/
l o a d i n g :
4 2 . 1 0
CAvg ,
2 . 6 3
C/Vec
16
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
x2
,
OtherH ,
i n l i n e ,
w/
l o a d i n g :
1 0 8 . 4 9
CAvg ,
6 . 7 8
C/Vec
128
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
XOR
,
OtherH ,
optCmp ,
b i t s l i c e d :
8 4 . 5 4
CAvg ,
0 . 6 6
C/Vec
128
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
XOR
,
Anubis ,
optCmp ,
b i t s l i c e d :
8 6 . 0 9
CAvg ,
0 . 6 7
C/Vec
128
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
XOR
,
Anubis ,
optTmp ,
b i t s l i c e d :
9 0 . 9 9
CAvg ,
0 . 7 1
C/Vec
128
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
XOR
,
Anubis ,
Ratio ,
b i t s l i c e d :
9 2 . 8 1
CAvg ,
0 . 7 3
C/Vec
==PAGE:42==
34
SIMD Implementation
128
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
XOR
,
Anubis ,
Rmacro ,
b i t s l i c e d :
9 6 . 6 0
CAvg ,
0 . 7 5
C/Vec
128
v e c t o r s ,
GF(2^8)
,
XOR
,
Anubis ,
i n l i n e ,
w/
l o a d i n g :
1 9 3 9 . 2 3
CAvg ,
1 5 . 1 5
C/ Vecs
==PAGE:43==
Appendix B
COMDS search
==PAGE:44==
36
COMDS search
Figure B.1: Min XORCount 5 × 5 COMDS matrix in GF(24), all Modulos.
145
150
155
160
165
170
175
180
185
Min XORCount COMDS in Field
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.0
Field XORCount Standard Deviation
==PAGE:45==
37
Figure B.2: Min XORCount 5 × 5 COMDS matrix in GF(26), all Modulos.
280
300
320
340
360
380
400
420
Min XORCount COMDS in Field
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
Field XORCount Standard Deviation
==PAGE:46==
38
COMDS search
Figure B.3: Min XORCount 5 × 5 COMDS matrix in GF(28), all Modulos.
380
400
420
440
460
480
500
520
540
Min XORCount COMDS in Field
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
Field XORCount Standard Deviation
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
[AFK14]
Daniel Augot, Pierre-Alain Fouque, and Pierre Karpman. Diusion
matrices from algebraic-geometry codes with ecient simd imple-
mentation. In International Workshop on Selected Areas in Cryptog-
raphy, pages 243260. Springer, 2014.
[BCG+12] Julia Borgho, Anne Canteaut, Tim Güneysu, Elif Bilge Kavun,
Miroslav Knezevic, Lars R Knudsen, Gregor Leander, Ventzislav
Nikov, Christof Paar, Christian Rechberger, et al.
Princea low-
latency block cipher for pervasive computing applications. In In-
ternational Conference on the Theory and Application of Cryptology
and Information Security, pages 208225. Springer, 2012.
[BIT16]
Andrey Bogdanov, Takanori Isobe, and Elmar Tischhauser. Towards
practical whitebox cryptography: Optimizing eciency and space
hardness. In Advances in CryptologyASIACRYPT 2016: 22nd In-
ternational Conference on the Theory and Application of Cryptol-
ogy and Information Security, Hanoi, Vietnam, December 4-8, 2016,
Proceedings, Part I 22, pages 126158. Springer, 2016.
[BKL+07] Andrey Bogdanov, Lars R Knudsen, Gregor Leander, Christof Paar,
Axel Poschmann, Matthew JB Robshaw, Yannick Seurin, and Char-
lotte Vikkelsoe. Present: An ultra-lightweight block cipher. In Inter-
national Workshop on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Sys-
tems, pages 450466. Springer, 2007.
[BKL16]
Christof Beierle, Thorsten Kranz, and Gregor Leander. Lightweight
multiplication in gf (2 n) with applications to mds matrices. In
Annual Cryptology Conference, pages 625653. Springer, 2016.
==PAGE:48==
40
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[BR00]
PSLM Barreto and Vincent Rijmen. The khazad legacy-level block
cipher. Primitive submitted to NESSIE, 97, 2000.
[BR11]
Paulo SLM Barreto and Vincent Rijmen. Whirlpool. In Encyclopedia
of Cryptography and Security, pages 13841385. Springer, 2011.
[CW82]
Don Coppersmith and Shmuel Winograd. On the asymptotic com-
plexity of matrix multiplication.
SIAM Journal on Computing,
11(3):472492, 1982.
[Dev17]
The Sage Developers.
SageMath, the Sage Mathematics Software
System (Version 7.5.1), 2017. http://www.sagemath.org.
[DGV93]
Joan Daemen, René Govaerts, and Joos Vandewalle. A new approach
to block cipher design. In International Workshop on Fast Software
Encryption, pages 1832. Springer, 1993.
[DR13]
Joan Daemen and Vincent Rijmen. The design of Rijndael: AES-the
advanced encryption standard. Springer Science & Business Media,
2013.
[Geo07]
Varghese George. 45nm next generation intel R⃝coreTM microarchi-
tecture (penryn). In Hot Chips 19 Symposium (HCS), 2007 IEEE,
pages 112. IEEE, 2007.
[GR14]
Kishan Chand Gupta and Indranil Ghosh Ray. On constructions of
circulant mds matrices for lightweight cryptography. In International
Conference on Information Security Practice and Experience, pages
564576. Springer, 2014.
[Hun07]
J. D. Hunter. Matplotlib: A 2d graphics environment. Computing
In Science & Engineering, 9(3):9095, 2007.
[JBG94]
Dieter Jungnickel, Thomas Beth, and Willi Geiselmann. A note on
orthogonal circulant matrices over nite elds. Archiv der Mathe-
matik, 62(2):126133, 1994.
[KD79]
John B. Kam and George I. Davida.
Structured design of
substitution-permutation encryption networks. IEEE Trans. Com-
puters, 28(10):747753, 1979.
[KPPY14] Khoongming Khoo, Thomas Peyrin, Axel Y Poschmann, and Huihui
Yap. Foam: searching for hardware-optimal spn structures and com-
ponents with a fair comparison. In International Workshop on Cryp-
tographic Hardware and Embedded Systems, pages 433450. Springer,
2014.
==PAGE:49==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
41
[Mac71]
FJ MacWilliams. Orthogonal circulant matrices over nite elds,
and how to nd them. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series A,
10(1):117, 1971.
[mis]
mischasan.
What
is
sse
!@
good
for?
transposing
a
bit matrix.
https://mischasan.wordpress.com/2011/07/24/
what-is-sse-good-for-transposing-a-bit-matrix/. Accessed:
2017-06-20.
[MS77]
Florence Jessie MacWilliams and Neil James Alexander Sloane. The
theory of error-correcting codes. Elsevier, 1977.
[PGM13]
James S Plank, Kevin M Greenan, and Ethan L Miller. A complete
treatment of software implementations of nite eld arithmetic for
erasure coding applications.
University of Tennessee, Tech. Rep.
UT-CS-13-717, October, 2013.
[PW96]
Alex Peleg and Uri Weiser. Mmx technology extension to the intel
architecture. IEEE micro, 16(4):4250, 1996.
[RB00]
V Rijmen and PSLM Barreto. The anubis block cipher. Submission
to NESSIE, 2000.
[RDP+96] Vincent Rijmen, Joan Daemen, Bart Preneel, Antoon Bosselaers,
and Erik De Win. The cipher shark. In Fast Software Encryption,
pages 99111. Springer, 1996.
[sh]
summentier (https://stackoverow.com/users/479266).
Answer to
"how code a function similar to itertools.product in python
2.5".
URL (accessed 2017-06-22): https://stackoverflow.com/
revisions/12605800/1.
[Sha45]
C Shannon. A mathematical theory of cryptography (no. 20878).
new jersey: Bell labs, 1945.
[SKOP15] Siang Meng Sim,
Khoongming Khoo,
Frédérique Oggier,
and
Thomas Peyrin.
Lightweight mds involution matrices.
In Inter-
national Workshop on Fast Software Encryption, pages 471493.
Springer, 2015.
[Sta01]
Richard Stallman. Using and porting the gnu compiler collection. In
MIT Articial Intelligence Laboratory. Citeseer, 2001.
[Tat17]
N. Tatsis. Code for "constructions for ecient mds diusion layers".
https://github.com/trabladorr/thesis/, 2017.
[WCV11]
Stéfan van der Walt, S Chris Colbert, and Gael Varoquaux. The
numpy array: a structure for ecient numerical computation. Com-
puting in Science & Engineering, 13(2):2230, 2011.
==PAGE:50==
42
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[WHS12]
Michael Weiÿ, Benedikt Heinz, and Frederic Stumpf. A cache timing
attack on aes in virtualization environments. In International Con-
ference on Financial Cryptography and Data Security, pages 314
328. Springer, 2012.
[WT86]
AF Webster and Staord E Tavares. On the design of s-boxes. In Ad-
vances in Cryptology-CRYPTO'85: Proceedings, page 523. Springer,
1986.
[ZWS17]
Lijing Zhou, Licheng Wang, and Yiru Sun.
On the ecient con-
struction of lightweight orthogonal mds matrices. IACR Cryptology
ePrint Archive, 2017:371, 2017.
