==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Improved Construction and Facility Man-
agement using Mixed Reality
Bjørn Hasager Vinther (s152423)
Peter Scheel Nielsen (s152424)
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Enterprises in the construction industry lose a lot of money because the information
used during construction is not easy to access and understand by the construction
workers, which significantly increases the risk of errors and delays.
This master’s thesis examines if mixed reality (MR) can be used to make infor-
mation easier to access and understand. We implemented a working, in-door mobile
application, named HoloApp, that uses MR to align a virtual model of a building
directly inside the corresponding physical building, thus enabling HoloApp to render
the virtual model as a part of the building. This thesis covers the main problems iden-
tified during the development of HoloApp, along with the potential solutions to each
problem, and the implementation of the solutions used by HoloApp. We learned that
the main challenge of developing an MR application for construction is maintaining
an accurate alignment between the virtual model and the building. The current MR
devices are prone to drift, which causes the alignment between the virtual model and
physical building to become inaccurate.
HoloApp was developed iteratively based on continuous feedback from construc-
tion workers. The final version of HoloApp was tested in terms of ease of use, accuracy,
and understanding of spatial data, and it was compared to an existing application
used in construction.
Overall HoloApp is both easy to use and understandable. The results show that
people are both faster and more accurate when using HoloApp compared to an ex-
isting construction application. We found that only two rendering techniques signifi-
cantly improved the understanding of the spatial data: Simple shading and rendering
occlusion.
However, in terms of accuracy HoloApp was not sufficiently robust to
become usable in the construction industry, and further research should be put into
improving the accuracy.
The future of MR in construction is promising due to its ease of use, and HoloApp
shows a great potential. It is likely that MR will become the next standard for viewing
virtual models of the building during construction.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a Master of Science in Digital Media Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, June 23, 2017
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
We would like to express our gratitude to our supervisors, Jakob Andreas Bærentzen
and Niels Jørgen Christensen, for guidance and feedback during the project.
We would like to thank Dalux for letting us use their system for accessing data, and
for providing us with resources and expertise throughout the whole project. Among
the Dalux employees, we would like to give a special thanks to Bent Dalgaard, Lean
Fuglsang, Henrik Münther, and Bryan Karlqvist. Bent Dalgaard introduced us to
the topic, and guided us throughout the whole project.
Lean Fuglsang designed
and implemented the algorithm used for calculating alignment corrections. Henrik
Münther assisted us in accessing data from Dalux’ system. Bryan Karlqvist provided
us with insight into the construction industry.
Finally, we would like to thank Kasper Haack from Airteam and Allan Clausen
from Region Midtjylland for testing and providing feedback to the prototypes.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Glossary
Abreviations
BI
Building information
BIM
Building information modelling
FM
Facility management
VR
Virtual reality
AR
Augmented reality
MR
Mixed reality
HMD
Head-mounted device
HHD
Hand-held device
ICP
Iterative closest point
NFC
Near field communication
SS
Surface snapping
Phab
Lenovo’s Phab 2 Pro
AO
Ambient occlussion
FOV
Field of view
MRT
Multiple render targets
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Glossary
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Building information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Virtual realities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4
Goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Related work
11
2.1
Mixed reality in architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Mixed reality in construction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Challenges and limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Methods and Technologies
15
3.1
Managing data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Aligning the virtual model to the physical world
. . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Rendering methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Platform
47
4.1
System architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2
Device . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.3
External systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5
Implementation
53
5.1
Managing building information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.2
Alignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.3
Rendering methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
6
Results
71
6.1
Prototypes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6.2
Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
7
Discussion
87
7.1
Design and Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
8
Conclusion
93
9
Future work
95
A
HoloService code
97
B
HoloApp code
117
C
Shader code
129
D
Test data
139
D.1 Raw test results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
139
D.2 Feedback
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
150
E
Images
153
E.1
Screenshots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
154
Bibliography
161
Links
163
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The problem statement for this thesis is the following:
Problem statement
Enterprises waste resources and man-hours because their building information
is not easy to access and understand for the construction workers. It hinders
the construction workers from working efficiently, which causes the enterprises
to become less competitive as the construction takes more time and costs more
money.
Erhvervs- og Byggestyrelsen estimates that in Denmark in 2007/2008,
the costs caused by errors and delays adds up to 8.8B DKK, 8% of the
total construction costs [1].
This number tends to increase each year as
constructions become larger and more complex.
This project will examine if mixed reality can be utilized to create a solution
that improves the accessibility and understanding of the building information.
The solution will be implemented as a mobile application that uses mixed
reality to align and visualize the virtual model directly as a part of the con-
struction site. It will give the construction workers a much better perception
of the virtual model in relation to the physical world, thus, reducing the risk of
errors and delays, and make it easier to identify mistakes early in the process.
This will help the enterprise to stay on schedule, and construct buildings in
correlation with the design.
The rest of this chapter will provide a brief introduction to building information,
mixed reality, and describe the motivation and goal of the thesis in details.
1.1
Building information
Buildings entails complex tasks both during construction and maintenance. For the
most part, these tasks require multiple people to collaborate and share information,
and it is crucial that they can effectively share and access this information, referred
to as building information (BI). The BI is stored in a centralized place, and contains
every relevant piece of information about the building: Everything from the raw
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
structure of the building to the position of all the individual parts, such as power
sockets, lights, doors, etc.
BI can be divided into two categories: Spatial data and metadata. The spatial
data includes any information regarding where objects are placed in 3D space and
how they look. The metadata is additional information about an object or a type of
objects, e.g., manufacturer information, installation date, material properties, etc.
A building has roughly two phases during its life time: A construction phase and
a facility management (FM) phase.
The construction phase spans from the beginning of the construction until the
building is constructed, after which all the BI is transferred to the owner of the build-
ing. The owner of the building usually hires a construction enterprise to construct the
building. The enterprise consists of multiple people from different professions, and
sometimes different companies, who works together to construct the whole building.
Such people includes construction workers, quality inspectors, architects, etc. We will
refer to these people as users. During construction the spatial data from the BI is
very important as it specifies how and where the different objects should be installed.
It is critical that the users can easily access this information, and update it with the
changes they make, since future tasks may depend on it.
The FM phase begins once the construction phase is over. A building is in this
phase most of its life time, and it is the most expensive phase for the owner. During
FM, the owner of the building hires people or install systems to maintain the build-
ing and keep it operational, e.g., cleaning ladies, caretakers, smoke alarms, security
systems, etc. During this phase, it is mostly the metadata that is interesting, and it
needs to be easily accessible for the operation to run smoothly. During FM, the users
may include a wide range of people, such as electricians, cleaning ladies, janitors, etc.
Managing BI is a complex, but necessary task for the enterprises. Having BI easily
accessible enables the users to work efficiently and stay on schedule. 10 years ago,
BI was typically written on paper and archived in folders or boxes at an office. The
spatial data was stored in building drawings and the metadata in appendices. It was
up to the individual enterprises to maintain order in the documents, and sort them to
make it easier to find the needed BI. The main issue with this method is that it is not
easy to search through thousands of documents, and the files can only be accessed
by one person at a time. This makes it very hard to access the needed information
and, in worst case, impossible to find. Accessing BI becomes exponentially harder
as the project size increases. Every time a user has to access information, it has to
remove the physical file from the archive, and there is a risk that the file gets lost in
the process. Additionally, the harder the BI is to access and store, the less likely it
is to get properly updated after the job is done.
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Building information
3
Figure 1.1: Two construction workers using building drawings printed on paper[2].
Over the last two decades, as computers have become more powerful and accessible,
it has become the norm to store the BI digitally, instead of physically on paper. All
the BI is stored in a building information modelling (BIM) model, which contains all
the BI and a virtual 3D model. The main benefit for storing the BI digitally, is that
it enables the users to easily search for a specific piece of BI. Additionally, computers
makes it easier to maintain and find the relevant BI for large projects, and enables
multiple users to access the data from anywhere at the same time. It has also given
the users the opportunity to see the spatial information in virtual 3D models, instead
of only 2D building drawings.
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
Figure 1.2: Two construction workers using a tablet to access BI on the construction
site[3].
1.2
Virtual realities
The concept of virtual realities have been around for many years, and it was originally
designed to bring the virtual world closer to people. We will differentiate between
two types virtual realities: Virtual reality (VR) and mixed reality (MR), also known
as augmented reality (AR).
Virtual reality
The goal of VR is to bring the user inside the virtual world. VR accomplishes this
by tracking the user’s movement, and updating the virtual world to reflect the move-
ments. It makes it appear as if the user is moving around inside the virtual world.
VR devices are typically designed as head-mounted displays that encapsulates the
users view completely, so the user can only see the virtual world, and nothing from
the physical world. It completely immerses the user inside the virtual world, but
at the same time also restricts the user’s vision in the physical world. Due to this
limitation, VR applications are usually restricted to little movement as the user is
effectively blind.
The first VR prototype[4] dates all the way back to 1838, but VR has within the
recent years matured, and especially gained popularity in the video game industry as
it enables the player to get fully immersed into the game. VR is especially useful for
computer games and training simulations.
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Virtual realities
5
Figure 1.3: A user playing a racing game using VR. The user wears the VR device as
a pair of goggles, and uses a steering wheel as controller for the game[5] (left). The
user perceives the game as if it is in a real car[6] (right).
In relation to construction, VR is mostly used by architectural companies to better
visualize buildings to customers and other stakeholders. It enables the user to walk
and look around inside the virtual model of the building, and get a better experience
of the building. Examples includes TruVision[7] and IrisVR[8].
Using VR directly on a building site is currently not possible as it violates the
executive order on the use of work equipment.1
Mixed reality
Opposite to VR, MR tries to bring the virtual world to the user, instead of the
other way around. MR anchors and visualizes virtual objects in the physical world.
MR works by creating a virtual representation of the physical environment. This
representation is referred to as a reality model. When the virtual elements need to
interact with the physical world, the calculations are performed on the reality model.
Examples of such interactions could be placing virtual elements on top of physical
objects, or making physical objects occlude the virtual elements. Most modern MR
devices can automatically generate a reality model. They typically use one, or both,
of the methods listed below.
• Image based method - An image based method uses feature detection algo-
rithms to detect features in the image taken by the camera. This method has
almost no range limit and is, therefore, very suitable for out-door applications.
The method, however, does not perform well under bad lighting conditions or
during sudden movements of the camera. In order to work, the method also
needs an image that contains some distinct features.
1§5 Work equipment used for the performance of a piece of work shall be suitable or adapted
therefor, so that it may be used by workers without impairment to their safety or health[9].
==PAGE:18==
6
1 Introduction
• Depth based method - A depth based method uses depth sensors to generate
a point cloud2. It uses algorithms to approximate a mesh based on the point
cloud. A depth based method usually only have range of 10m, so it best suited
for small-scale environments. The depth sensors can also have trouble detecting
glossy surfaces such as windows.
Like VR, MR also has to track the position and orientation of the device. Wang[10]
has provided a good overview of the different techniques used for tracking. MR devices
are currently not sufficiently accurate when it comes to tracking. Due to inaccuracies,
the device may register movement that does not correlate with the actual movement
of the device. This is called drifting, and it is a common problem for MR devices. The
result of drifting is that the virtual model will be misaligned with the physical world,
so the application needs to implement algorithms that can correct the misalignment.
MR devices comes in many different types, both static and mobile. For this project
two types of devices are interesting: Hand-held devices (HHD), and head-mounted
devices (HMD). HHDs, such as mobile phones, are well known to the users, and very
practical.
HMDs are less practical, but are more accurate, and also frees up the
hands of the user. Unlike VR devices, the MR devices still enables the user to see the
physical world while using the device. Figure 1.4 and 1.5 shows an example of MR
used on a HHD and a HMD, respectively.
Figure 1.4: Example of a HHD that uses MR to give the user additional information
about nearby shops[11].
2A point cloud is a large collection of points in 3D space. Each point correspond to a surface
point on the scanned objects, in this case the physical environment. Certain algorithms can be used
to approximate a spatial mesh from a point cloud.
==PAGE:19==
1.3 Motivation
7
Figure 1.5: Example of a HMD that enables the user to see the world of the digital
game, Minecraft, as a part of the living room[12].
MR is closely related to AR, and does not have a single, clear definition, so it
can be hard to differentiate the two terms. Milgram[13] defines MR as the whole
spectrum of variations of the physical- and virtual world, as illustrated in figure 1.6.
Wang and Schnabel[14] argues that Milgram’s classification of MR is not sufficient,
and extends Milgram’s two types of MR into seven types of MR. Other sources[15,
16] use the term AR for partially physical- and partially virtual environments where
virtual objects cannot interact with physical objects, and MR where they can interact.
Figure 1.6: Milgram’s defines MR as the whole spectrum of variations between the
physical- and virtual world[13].
Because the distinction between MR and AR is quite vague, we will treat them as
the same throughout this report, and call it MR, as it is the term used by the device
manufactures.
1.3
Motivation
Enterprises run tight schedules on their constructions, as construction costs are often
proportional with construction time. This makes the whole construction phase very
==PAGE:20==
8
1 Introduction
sensitive to delays and errors, because a delay can start a chain reaction of delays
throughout the whole construction phase. This is a common thing during construc-
tion, which also results in the majority of constructions to cost more than initially
estimated.
A report[1] from Erhvervs- og Byggestyrelsen in Denmark estimates that in 2007
/ 2008 the costs related to errors and delays made up 8% of the total construction
costs for new constructions, a total of 8.8B DKK. The same numbers for 2002 / 2003
were estimated to be 6%, a total of 3.9B DKK. The numbers from the report are
based on only 20 cases, so they should only be seen as rough estimates and not facts.
However, the report shows a clear tendency that constructions have a large amount
of costs related to errors and delays. Since construction projects tends to become
larger and more complex, the problem is expected to increase as a result.
There is a need for a solution that makes the whole construction process more
transparent, so it is easier for the user to understand the virtual model in relation to
the physical world. Thereby, it reduces the risk of errors being made, and makes it
easier to identify the errors early in the process. The solution should also be as easy
to use as possible, so it supports the user in its daily tasks, rather than hindering it.
This will enable the user to work efficiently and stay on schedule.
During FM, it is also useful to have a solution that makes BI more transparent, so
it becomes easier for the user to get metadata for a specific element, or find a specific
element in the building, e.g., a specific pipe segment inside a wall.
Even with the current digital solutions there are still room for improvement. The
digital solution still visualize the spatial data on a 2D display, which requires the user
to cognitively transform the data as it would look in the physical world. This is not
a very intuitive way of visualizing spatial data, and it requires more attention from
user to perceive the data. Forcing the user to cognitively transform the spatial data
will also increase the risk of misunderstandings, errors, and confusion.
MR is technology specifically designed to bring the physical- and the virtual world
together. A solution that utilizes MR could potentially visualize the virtual model
directly inside the corresponding building. By visualizing the virtual model directly as
a part of the physical building, it becomes much easier for the user to understand the
virtual model in relation to the physical world, and vice versa. Ideally, the solution
should display the virtual elements as if they were physical ones. However, it is not
desirable that the virtual elements appear completely photorealistic, as the user needs
to be able to differentiate the virtual elements from the physical ones.
Once a robust and accurate platform for visualizing the virtual models on-site has
been implemented, it opens up a new world of possibilities. The platform can integrate
lots of new features, such as task management, in-door navigation, communication
and error reporting, etc. As the relation between the virtual model and the physical
world becomes more transparent, it also becomes easier to keep the virtual model
in correlation with the physical building. Potentially, the solution could become the
primary tool for the construction workers.
==PAGE:21==
1.4 Goal
9
1.4
Goal
This project will focus on designing a solution for the construction phase. FM has a
lot of potential, but we believe that MR can best be put to use during the construc-
tion phase because the spatial data is used extensively.
The goal of this project is to implement an application, named HoloApp, for a
mobile MR device that enables the users to see the virtual model inside the building.
We will achieve it by using cloud computing to access the virtual model of the building,
use MR to align it with the physical building, and render it as a part of the building
in real-time. The project will also identify techniques for rendering spatial data in a
more intuitive way, and implement the techniques as custom shaders.
The project has been made in collaboration with Dalux. Dalux is an IT company
that develops software solutions for the construction industry. Dalux manages BIM
models for more than 8,000 buildings located in multiple countries, so we will use
Dalux’ systems to access BI from real construction projects. This will be described
in more detail in Chapter 4. HoloApp will be developed using the game engine Unity
because it is well suited for creating applications for mobile platforms. Unity will also
be described in further details in Chapter 4.
The success of the project will be based on the following three factors:
• Ease of use - The user should be able to access BI from anywhere at any time
with a short loading time. The design should strive towards having minimal
user interaction.
• Accuracy - The alignment between the virtual model and the physical world
should be accurate both initially and while the user moves around.
• Understanding - HoloApp should render the spatial data in an intuitive way
for the user. HoloApp should strive towards displaying data visually, rather
than explicit using text.
HoloApp will be developed iteratively and tested by three people who deals with
construction on a daily basis: Two ventilation fitters working for Airteam3 and a
person responsible for the information- and communication technologies of Region
Midtjylland.
3Airteam is Denmark’s leading company within ventilation solutions.
==PAGE:22==
10
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2
Related work
MR in relation to construction is a research area that has gained attention over the
last decade. The technology has matured, and people start to see the benefits of
visualizing virtual building models as a part of the physical world. The applications
from the research varies in both scope and implementation. In this section, we will
only discuss mobile applications that can render the virtual models on-site.
We
will categorize the applications as either architectural applications or constructional
applications.
2.1
Mixed reality in architecture
MR applications in relation to architecture has gained the most attention in com-
parison to construction.
The applications mainly focus on visualizing large-scale
architectural models directly on-site, in order to give the user a better experience of
the building. It can help enterprises to get accurate inputs from the end-user before
the construction has even begun, which can reduce the costs related to design errors.
To name a few of the applications, Klinker et al. [17] developed an application
that could augment pre-recorded video sequences with large-scale architectural mod-
els. The augmentation itself is performed real-time by using GPS and optical tracking
to track the position of the device, and superimpose the virtual model on the video
sequence. Similarly, Woodward and Hakkarainen [18] used GPS and optical tracking
to implement a system that could render photorealistic models on-site.
They im-
plemented the solution using cloud computing to relieve the mobile device from the
computational hard operations, which enables the solution to maintain a good perfor-
mance even for complex models. Feiner et al. [19] designed an application, using an
optical HMD and a HHD, that presents the user with context-specific information of
the site. For tracking, they use a GPS and the build-in magnetometer of the HMD.
2.2
Mixed reality in construction
Developing an application for construction is a bit more complicated because the
alignment between the virtual model and the physical world has to be more accurate in
order to be useful. The accuracy of the MR devices’ tracking is currently insufficient,
so algorithms needs to be implemented in order to correct any misalignments caused
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Related work
by inaccuracies in the tracking. This is probably also the reason why there is only a
few MR applications for construction.
M. Golparvar-Fard et al. [20] uses images of the construction site to construct
large-scale 3D models for different phases of the construction that can be used to
visualize the different phases of the construction. UMAR-GPS-ROVER [21] is an
application developed to make construction planning easier.
It visualizes virtual
models of heavy construction tools on the construction site, and enables the users
to move the models in real-time, in order to figure out the best way to plan the
construction. To our knowledge, there are currently no applications that can visualize
the virtual model of a building directly inside the building.
Dalux is currently working on integrating MR into their existing mobile appli-
cation named Field. It will utilize their existing 3D engine combined with Google
Tango tracking and movement. The actual development started towards the end of
this project.
2.3
Challenges and limitations
The challenges and limitations depend on the type of MR application. For instance,
large-scale out-door applications, or small in-door applications. However, there is
a handful of reoccurring challenges for most of the MR applications. This section
summaries the challenges identified by Wang et al. [10, 22] and Krevelen [23].
2.3.1
Tracking the device
The greatest challenge of MR applications is to accurately track the position and ori-
entation of the device. For large-scale outdoor applications, GPS and optical tracking
are ideal because they are the most accurate, and they both have a very long range.
However, the GPS is not accurate enough inside a building, so for in-door applica-
tions, other methods have to be used for tracking the position of the device. Wang et
al. [22] suggests implementing a hybrid tracking system that uses multiple different
methods to create a more robust and accurate system.
2.3.2
Managing domain knowledge
Managing domain knowledge is a complex task. The BIM models can contain a signif-
icant amount of information, and it is necessary to simplify data in order to maintain
a good performance during real-time rendering. One solution is to do the calculations
on simplified data. Another solution is to use cloud computing to outsource computa-
tional hard operations to an external server like Woodward and Hakkarainen [18] did.
Furthermore, Wang et al. mention the importance of not overloading the user with
too much information. They argue that MR applications should have an intelligent
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Challenges and limitations
13
domain information extraction mechanism, so the user will only be presented with
the data relevant for the task at hand.
2.3.3
Preparation of the reality model
Generating a good reality model for a dynamic environment such as a construction site
is a big challenge, and it becomes even more complicated for environments unknown
to the system. Wang et al. argue that there are two different approaches to generating
the reality model: Generating it from the physical world, or generating it from the
virtual model. Using the physical world to generate the reality model enables the
system to detect details that would not be stored in the virtual models, but the
procedure is more complex, and the reality model usually also becomes more complex.
Using the virtual model instead is much faster, and produces a simpler reality model.
However, the virtual model is seldom identical to the physical world, so the reality
model can become inaccurate as a result. Wang et al. argue that the accuracy should
be prioritized over complexity.
2.3.4
Other issues
Other less reoccurring problems are listed below:
• Safety – The MR application should ideally make the construction site a safer
place to be, but the MR device can easily end up taking the user’s attention,
and, in case of HMDs, also limit the user’s vision. In order for the application
to be safe to use, it is crucial that the application does not overload the user
with information, but instead is as simple as possible. Additionally, the user
interface should be reworked since the traditional way of controlling using mouse
and keyboard does not work well with HMDs. Implementing a control scheme
that makes use of kinematic gestures and vocal commands could be one way to
design a more intuitive way of interacting with a HMD.
• Environmental conditions – If the application is expected to be used on a
construction site, the environmental conditions have to taken into account, such
as weather conditions, lighting conditions, ambient noise level, etc. Lighting
conditions have a big impact on the accuracy of the tracking of the MR device,
and can in extreme cases make the device unable to track at all. Optical HMDs
also have issues rendering clearly under bright lighting conditions, such as during
a sunny day. Similarly, the ambient voice level has a big impact on the device
ability to understand vocal commands.
• Social acceptance – One common problem for new technologies is that they
can have hard time becoming socially accepted. New technologies usually re-
quire people to change their daily work flow, and not all people find this easy.
It is important that the new technology is easy to use, and that the MR device
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Related work
is practical for the user to bring to work. HHDs are practical, as they can fit
in the user’s pocket, and are already used on most construction sites. HMDs
are less practical, as they take up more space, and requires the user to learn
new control schemes. HMDs can also be unpleasant to wear for long periods of
time.
• Occlusion – In order to make virtual objects appear as a part of the physical
world, they have to behave like so. For instance, virtual elements should occlude
physical ones, and vice versa. If not, it becomes hard for the user to understand
the position of elements, and there is a risk that the user misinterprets the
renderings of the application.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3
Methods and
Technologies
It is a complex task to implement HoloApp so that it is both accurate and user-
friendly, and multiple technical challenges have to be solved in order to for HoloApp
to work. We have divided the challenges into the three categories below:
1. Managing data
2. Aligning the virtual model to the physical world
3. Rendering of the virtual model
In this chapter, we will describe the challenges of each category above, and for
each challenge give an overview of the potential solutions, and select one or more of
the solutions to be implemented as a part of HoloApp. This chapter will not go into
detail with the specific MR devices, this will instead be covered in Chapter 4. For
now, we assume that the MR device has access to the most common sensors of mobile
MR devices.
3.1
Managing data
Dalux’ systems will take care of most of the challenges related to managing the large
amount of BI, but the solution still have to transform the data into a format more
suitable for HoloApp. For instance, Unity expects the spatial data in specific format.
Furthermore, the time it takes to transfer data is proportional to the data size, so
accessing a large amount of data from the BIM models can easily lead to long loading
times, or might not be feasible at all. This is of course not desirable, as it increases
the overhead of using HoloApp, and it is important to design a solution that limits
the amount of data transferred from the BIM model to HoloApp.
In this section we will address the two challenges:
• How can the amount of irrelevant data that gets transferred be reduced?
==PAGE:28==
16
3 Methods and Technologies
• How can the data be structured in order to optimize the data size?
3.1.1
Reducing amount of irrelevant data transferred
A first step towards reducing the amount of data being transferred is to only transfer
data that is relevant to the user. Most often only a small fraction of the data is
relevant to the user, so it is important to filter out irrelevant data. But how do we
determine which data is relevant to the user?
Solution 1 - Make the user manually search through data
An obvious solution is to make the user search and filter through data like most
current applications.
This enables the user to be in full control of what data is
displayed, but, on the other hand, also increases the overhead of using HoloApp.
Pros
• The user is in full control of what data is displayed
Cons
• More user interaction required
Solution 2 - Download only data for elements within the proximity of the user
The user is often only interested in data for nearby elements. Airteam stated that
they would normally only need to see elements within a 10m radius, however for
large projects, such as the Royal Arena1, they need elements in a radius of up to 40m.
HoloApp could calculate the user’s position in the building, and only download BI
for elements within a fixed radius of the user. This is most likely the data the user
needs, and it would reduce the amount of data transferred significantly. Of course, it
has the drawback that the user is only able to get data for nearby elements.
Pros
• Mostly relevant data will be downloaded
• No additional user interaction required
Cons
• The user can only get data for nearby elements
• The HoloApp needs to know the user’s position in the building
1Royal Arena is Denmark’s largest arena for sport and entertainment events. It has room for
16,000 people.
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Managing data
17
Comparison
We believe solution 2 is best suited for HoloApp because it solves the problem for most
situations without increasing the overhead of using HoloApp. The user’s position has
to be calculated during alignment, so it does not add any additional complexity to
the solution.
3.1.2
Optimize data structure
Without optimizing the data structure of the spatial data, the solution will end up
transferring a lot of duplicate data, which will result in a longer transfer time. In
this section we will identify structures that can be used to reduce the data size. We
will assume the spatial data consists of triangle meshes, where each vertex only has a
position. We will refer to the position of a vertex as the vertex. Of course, the spatial
data can contain much more information, but to keep the explanation simple, we
will ignore that information. In addition, Unity stores mesh data as a list of unique
vertices and a list of indices.
Technique 1 - Use indexing
The first obvious optimization is to transfer the data in the same format as Unity
expects it – using indexing. Instead of duplicating the vertex every time it is used in
a triangle, one could instead store all unique vertices in a list, and for every triangle,
store three indices to the corresponding vertices in the list. A single vertex takes up
three times as much disc space as one index, so if the vertex is used in two triangles
or more, the size will be reduced. The vertices are likely used in multiple triangles.
This technique is especially useful for storing normals because most faces have the
same normal. For one virtual model, we calculated that approximately 50% of the
vertices were unique, and only 10% of the normals were unique.
Pros
• Simple and fast technique
• Removes all duplicated vertex information
Cons
Technique 2 - Store data in byte arrays
The data format for messages send between services is typically either XML or JSON.
These formats are human-readable, but, as a result, also takes up more disc space.
For large data sizes, the extra disc space becomes critical, so it is necessary to send the
data in a compact non-human-readable format. This technique requires the data to
==PAGE:30==
18
3 Methods and Technologies
be encoded and decoded, which adds a small overhead, but it is insignificant compared
to the time spent transferring the data.
Pros
• Data requires less disc space
Cons
• Data needs to be encoded and decoded.
Technique 3 - Reduce precision
The model data is stored in high precision values, which causes the data to takes
up a lot of disc space. As an example, let us assume that a building has a size of
(200 x 200 x 200 m). The model space coordinates has bounds that ranges from
-100 to 100 if its center is in the origin. The data is transferred as floating-points,
which ranges between −3.4 × 1038 to 3.4 × 1038, so the bounds of the building only
cover a tiny fraction of this range. Instead, the data could be transferred as fixed-
points, which ranged from -32,768 to 32,767. A short requires half the disc space of a
float. To avoid losing precision, each short should be mapped to the bounds, so that
the minimum and maximum value of the short gets mapped to the corresponding
minimum and maximum value of bounds of the model data, in our example -100 and
100, respectively.
One issue with this technique is that the precision of the data is inversely propor-
tional with the size of the bounds, so if the bounds are very large, the data will lose
precision. However, for a building with bounds of (200 x 200 x 200 m) the precision
will be approximately 1.5 mm, and most buildings will have even smaller bounds.
Pros
• Data requires less disc space
Cons
• Data can lose precision if the bounds gets very large
Technique 4 - Structure as a triangle strip
Triangle stripping, described both by Byung-Uck et al. [24] and Bærentzen et al. [25],
is a common technique used in computer graphics to reduce the amount of data send
to the GPU during rendering. Triangle stripping can be used to reduce the amount
of data transferred from the server. It is complex to effectively encode a mesh into a
triangle strip, and Unity does not support triangle strips, so in Unity the data would
have to be transformed into a format using indexing.
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Aligning the virtual model to the physical world
19
Pros
• Data requires less disc space
Cons
• Unity does not support triangle stripping
• Complex to implement
Comparison
Technique 1 and 2 are both fairly easy to implement and should give a significant size
reduction, so we will implement both of them. Technique 3 is a bit more complex
to implement, but it should also reduce the data size without losing a significant
amount of precision. Technique 4 is more complex compared to the other techniques.
As a result, we chose to implement technique 1, 2, and 3 because we believe that the
techniques are sufficient for this project.
3.2
Aligning the virtual model to the physical world
Having an accurate alignment between the virtual model and the physical world is
important since it limits how accurate the user can perform its tasks. If the virtual
model is not in proper alignment, all the virtual elements will be rendered in wrong
locations.
As mentioned in section 1.2, mobile MR devices are prone to drift. It is, therefore,
necessary to implement algorithms that correct errors caused by this drifting in order
to maintain a correct alignment.
This section will look into the following challenges:
• How can HoloApp calculate an initial alignment?
• How can HoloApp maintain an accurate alignment?
3.2.1
Calculating the initial alignment
Aligning the virtual model to the physical world is a challenge because the spatial
data is specified in different coordinate system. The coordinate systems include model
space, world space, and device space.
In order to render the spatial data from the BIM model correctly, all the spatial
data need to be expressed in the same coordinate system. It is required to trans-
form from one coordinate system to another, for instance using points or translation
matrices.
Once this information is obtained, it is trivial to transform the spatial
==PAGE:32==
20
3 Methods and Technologies
data. In other words, the problem comes down to obtaining the information needed
to calculate a transformation between the two coordinate systems.
Solution 1 - Alignment using reference points
One solution is to have two points, referred to as reference points, in the BIM model,
and make the user manually input the positions of these points on the device. This
solution was used by Olson et al.[26] when developing their AR application for visual-
izing architectural models in an out-door environment. The solution is fairly simple,
very fast, and gives an accurate alignment. The main downside is that the user can
only align near the reference points, and it requires additional user interaction.
Pros
• Achieves an accurate alignment
• Is fairly simple to implement
• Computationally very simple and fast
Cons
• Requires manual input from user
• Requires BIM model to have two reference points
• Alignment can only take place near reference points
Solution 2 - Alignment using building drawings
It can easily become a cumbersome task for the user to navigate through the building
drawing in order to mark their position, especially for large buildings as they can
contain more than a thousand rooms, some of which can look similar. An improve-
ment could be to utilize room numbers, and make the HoloApp listen for vocal inputs.
The user could then tell the system the room number, which is an unique number
for each room. Of course, this could also be entered as a text input, but it is more
cumbersome for the user to do.
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Aligning the virtual model to the physical world
21
Pros
• Fairly accurate position
• Alignment can be done from anywhere
• Users are experienced in navigating building drawings
Cons
• Requires the user to manually find its position in building drawing
• Requires HoloApp to access the building drawings
• Very complex to implement
Solution 3 - Alignment using GPS
Another potential solution is to use the GPS to determine the position of the user.
The GPS determines the user’s position in world space, so the BIM model would
also need sufficient information to make a conversion between model space and world
space. The solution would also need to use the gyroscope and compass to determine
the orientation. It would enable the system to align from anywhere with no user
interaction needed at all.
However, Woodward and Hakkarainen [18] experienced
that the GPS was not sufficiently accurate for their out-door MR application, and
the GPS is expected to be less accurate for in-door environments.
Pros
• No user input required
• Alignment can be done from anywhere
Cons
• Inaccurate for in-door environments
Solution 4 - Alignment using ICP
Iterative closest point (ICP) is an algorithm created by Besl and McKay [27]. The
purpose of ICP is to align two similar 3D meshes with each other. For this project,
ICP can be used to align the mesh of the reality model with the mesh of the virtual
model. It can be computational heavy to use ICP to align two meshes, however, by
giving the algorithm a initial start guess of the alignment it can align the meshes much
faster. ICP only compares the spatial data of the meshes, so it cannot differentiate
between identical looking rooms. This means that ICP could align the reality model
with a wrong room because some of the rooms look alike. It is not uncommon that
buildings have identical rooms.
==PAGE:34==
22
3 Methods and Technologies
Pros
• No user input required
• Alignment can be done from anywhere
Cons
• Computational heavy
• Requires an initial guess of the users position and orientation
• Complex to implement
• Inaccurate if multiple rooms in the model looks alike
Solution 5 - Alignment using near field communication
Near field communication (NFC), as described by Sharma et al. [28], is a technology
that enables devices to communicate over small distances, typically less than 10 cm. It
is, among other, a technology used for contact-free payment methods such as modern
credit cards.
A building could contain a number of stationary devices, each containing a pre-
computed alignment for its position. However, for this project it is not feasible to
have the devices installed. The solution also shares the same problem as solution 1,
where the user can only align from one place in the building.
Pros
• Minimal user interaction
• Very accurate
Cons
• The building needs devices installed
• Can only align near devices
Comparison
Solution 1 is easy to implement and quite precise, but, on the other hand, not very
user friendly since the user can only align at a specific location. It is suitable for
early iterations of HoloApp, but should eventually be replaced by a better solution.
Solution 2 is more user friendly, but also harder to implement. The main difficulty
is navigating the building drawings, as they can be very complex. Solution 3 and 4
are both ideal solutions, as they require no user interaction at all, and can be used to
align from anywhere. However, we do not think either of the two are feasible. The
GPS is too inaccurate, especially inside a building. ICP is too computational heavy
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Aligning the virtual model to the physical world
23
for large buildings, and is best if given an estimated start position and rotation, which
would require another alignment solution anyway. Solution 5 is interesting, but not
feasible for this project. For this project solution 1 and 2 are feasible. Solution 2
would be the most ideal of these solutions, but is too complex to fit the scope of this
project. Instead we will implement solution 1 as a naive solution.
3.2.2
Maintain alignment
Another challenge is maintaining the correct alignment once the virtual model has
been aligned initially. This is relevant for two situations: Drifting of the device and
errors in the initial alignment. To overcome the challenge, an algorithm has to be
implemented to recognize areas in the reality model, and readjust the virtual model
to fit the position of the device.
Also, the initial alignment is seldom perfect, and marking positions on a touch
display is subject to inaccuracies, which can result in inaccuracies in the initial align-
ment. Since the alignment is calculated at a specific position, any small errors in the
rotation will become significant far from this position.
Solution 1 - Re-align using initial alignment method
The simplest solution is to align the virtual model again using the original alignment
method. This, however, only makes sense for alignment methods that can be aligned
from anywhere.
This solution will not correct the inaccuracies of the initial alignment, so the initial
alignment has to be accurate for the solution to work well. Furthermore, it can easily
become disruptive for the user to go through the alignment process every time the
device starts drifting. The solution adds a lot of overhead to using HoloApp if the
device easily begins drifting.
Pros
• Adds no additional complexity
Cons
• Does not correct errors from the initial alignment
• Requires additional user input every time it has to realign
Solution 2 - ICP
As mentioned in Section 3.2.1, ICP can be used to continuously fine-tune the align-
ment between the virtual model and the reality model. ICP requires a start guess to
work well, which HoloApp already calculates during the initial alignment and tracks
while moving.
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Methods and Technologies
Ideally, the virtual model and the physical building looks completely identical, but
this is rarely the case. The virtual model may look different from the physical site
for various reasons, e.g., due to construction mess, or the virtual model containing
objects that have not been constructed or installed yet. We will refer to any deviations
between the virtual model and physical building as spatial noise. The ICP algorithm
does not handle spatial noise well, and it can easily cause the ICP algorithm to
either find an incorrect alignment, especially for a dynamic environment such as a
construction site.
Pros
• Requires no user interaction
Cons
• Does not handle spatial noise well
• Virtual model should be in correlation with physical building
• Computational heavy
• Complex to implement
Solution 3 - Surface snapping
An alternative to ICP is Surface Snapping (SS). SS uses four inputs to calculate a
correction to the alignment: The point cloud from the MR device, the room model
for the building, and the estimated position an rotation of the device in the point
cloud and room model, respectively. SS works in two steps: First it locates the major
surfaces in the point cloud, and then it calculates a rotation and translation that
makes the closest surface in the room model snap to the surface identified in the first
step.
SS is quite robust because the first step discards all the spatial noise, and it is
also very fast because the calculations are performed on simplified data. SS assumes
that the surfaces are flat, so the algorithm does not work for curved surfaces.
Pros
• Requires minimal user interaction
• Handles spatial noise well
• Algorithm is computational light and fast
Cons
• Complex to implement
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Rendering methods
25
Comparison
The project will make use of solution 3. Solution 2 does work well with the spatial
noise commonly found on construction sites. It is better to use solution 3 since it
is both faster and more robust. However, implementing SS is a complex task, so we
will not implement it as a part of this project. Instead, Dalux will implement it as
an external service which HoloApp can use.
3.3
Rendering methods
To optimize the user experience, and make the solution more efficient to use, the
spatial data from the virtual model needs to be rendered in a way, that is intuitive to
the user. By doing so, the overhead of using HoloApp will be reduced, and the user
can perform its tasks more efficiently. The main motivation for using MR, is the new
possibilities for rendering the spatial data as a part of the physical world because it is
important that the user can easily understand the position and orientation of virtual
elements in relation the physical world.
Due to both safety and usability, we aim towards designing HoloApp so that
it requires the least possible attention from the user to use. It is important that
HoloApp does not overload the user with information.
One challenge in computer graphics is to visualize 3D objects on a 2D screen
while preserving a sense of depth in the scene. J.E. Swan et al.[29] tested the depth
perception in VR and MR applications for HMDs. They found that the HMDs made
it harder for users to accurately perceive the depth. Furthermore, the tests showed
that it was harder for the users to perceive the depth of elements that were rendered
while being occluded.
There is a balance between rendering photorealistic or not. Rendering the virtual
model more photorealistic will make it easier for the user to understand, however, it
can sometimes be useful to render elements in way non-photorealistic way in order to
convey additional information about the element. For traditional computer graphics,
the whole scene is virtual, but in the case of this project the rendering has to take
the physical world into account as well. This adds a new layer of complexity since
HoloApp has to create a virtual representation of the physical world.
This section will address the following challenges:
• How should HoloApp render occluded elements?
• How can HoloApp determine which elements are occluded?
• How should HoloApp visualize the alignment?
• Which render techniques should be used to visualize how elements are positioned
relative to each other?
==PAGE:38==
26
3 Methods and Technologies
• How should HoloApp display metadata for elements?
We will use a simple room for the purpose of explaining and visualizing render
techniques, see Figure 3.1 and 3.2. We will refer to this room as the test room.
Figure 3.1: Building drawing of the test room as seen from above.
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Rendering methods
27
Figure 3.2: Photo of the test room
3.3.1
Rendering occlusion
Per default, MR applications renders all virtual elements on top of the physical en-
vironment independently of the depth of the objects. Regions of the virtual model
that are occluded by the physical environment are referred to as occluded regions.
Rendering the occluded regions in a distinct way is an effective way of making virtual
elements appear as a part of the the physical world, but which way should HoloApp
render the occluded regions to maximize understanding?
Technique 1 - Render as an overlay
Rendering occluded regions like the unoccluded regions is the easiest solution to
implement because the occluded regions do not have to be calculated. The solution
is not very intuitive to the user, as all virtual elements will be rendered as an overlay
on top of the camera input, which will make them appear floating in front of the
environment like an overlay, see Figure 3.3.
==PAGE:40==
28
3 Methods and Technologies
Pros
• Does not need to calculate the occluded regions
Cons
• Elements appear floating in the foreground, which makes it hard for
the user to understand their position
• The view of HoloApp can easily become cluttered and confusing
Figure 3.3: Illustration of the test scene where everything is rendered even if the
object is occluded. Notice how everything appears floating in front of the walls. The
red and blue pipes are underneath the floor.
Technique 2 - Hide occluded regions
Like in the physical world, HoloApp could hide the occluded regions, and only render
the visible regions, see Figure 3.4. It would follow the rules of perspective2, and make
it easier to understand for the user. However, a lot of information is hidden, which
could otherwise be useful to the user.
2Objects in the foreground appear on top of objects in the background.
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Rendering methods
29
Pros
• Rendering is more realistic, which is easier to understand for the user
Cons
• A lot of potentially useful data is hidden
Figure 3.4: Illustration of the test scene where only the unoccluded regions are ren-
dered.
Technique 3 - Tone down the colors of occluded regions
Instead of completely hiding the occluded regions, the HoloApp could instead fade
out the occluded regions as illustrated in Figure 3.5. By making it clear where the
elements intersect the wall it becomes easier to understand the position of the element
relative to the environment.
One problem is that the colors can have a meaning, defined as a color code. Color
codes indicate certain properties about an element. For instance, hot water pipes
and cold water pipes may have each their own color code. Changing the color of an
element also changes the color code or makes it hard to recognize the color code. This
can lead to confusion and misinterpretation of the data.
==PAGE:42==
30
3 Methods and Technologies
Pros
• No information gets discarded
Cons
• Elements lose their color code.
Figure 3.5: Illustration of the test scene where the occluded regions are rendered
darker and more transparent.
Technique 4 - Render occluded regions with a pattern
An alternative to technique 3 is to keep the color of elements, but instead render it as
a pattern as shown in Figure 3.6. This way the elements will keep their original color
codes, but it is still clear to see whether an object is occluded or not. A pattern can
be hard to make look nice for all possible geometries, and as a result it can become
harder for the user to understand the geometry of the occluded regions.
Pros
• No information gets discarded
• Original color codes are kept
Cons
• Can become harder to understand the geometry of the occluded regions
==PAGE:43==
3.3 Rendering methods
31
Figure 3.6: Illustration of the test scene where the occluded regions are rendered
using a striped pattern.
Comparison
We asked our testers and they argued that each technique has its use cases. If the user
needs to get a sense of how the room will look when all elements have been installed,
it makes most sense to use technique 2, because it gives the best representation of
how the objects will actually look in the physical world. If the user needs to get an
overview of an installation, it is more useful to use technique 4, as it shows all the
elements while still enabling the user to determine if an area is occluded or not.
Once the occluded regions are calculated, it should be fairly easy to implement
all four techniques, so we chose to implement all the technique, and make it possible
for the user to select the rendering technique inside HoloApp.
3.3.2
Calculating occluded regions
Generally, calculation of the occluded regions can be done by generating a depth
texture based on the reality model, and use it to compare the depth when rendering
the virtual model. If the depth of a point in the virtual model is greater than that
of the reality model, the point is occluded, otherwise it is visible. The virtual model
is stored in the BIM model, so the problem comes down to generating the reality
model. As mentioned in Chapter 2, Wang [10] suggests two possible techniques for
generating a reality model: generating it based on the physical world, or generating
it based on the virtual model. He also argues that one should opt for simple models
rather than very complex models with a lot of detail. Small details add little to no
==PAGE:44==
32
3 Methods and Technologies
visible improvements, and just decreases the performance since more spatial data has
to be processed.
Solution 1 - Physically based reality model
Ideally, the physical environment should determine if a region of the virtual model is
occluded or not. Most MR devices can automatically generate a reality model based
on the physical environment. This reality model can be used to perform depth tests
in order to determine if a region is occluded or not. However, the reality model is
only an approximation, and it contains a lot of spatial noise, especially for dynamic
environments. As a result, the occluded regions can become very crude and end up
looking wrong.
The solution depends a lot on the precision of the reality model
generated by the MR device, which can currently deviate up to a couple of cm.
Additionally, some MR devices can only generate a reality model for the environment
within a range of approximately 10 m, which would make it impossible to calculate
the occluded regions outside this range.
Pros
• Performs the calculations based on the physical world, which achieves
the ideal result.
Cons
• The reality model contains a lot of spatial noise.
• The calculations are limited by the range of the MR device, which is
currently around 10m.
• Computational complex to generate the reality model
Solution 2 - Virtually based reality model
Alternatively, the reality model can be calculated based on the virtual model as it is
a representation of how the environment should ideally look. It is often only large
surfaces, such as walls, that are useful for the calculations. It could be predefined in
the virtual model, which elements should be used for the occlusion calculations, and
which ones should not. A problem is that a large surface can still contain a lot of
small details that are not desirable in the calculations, such as skirting profiles on the
wall. It is not possible to remove such details without modifying the mesh.
The walls, ceilings, and floors all have a thickness in the virtual model, so they are
expressed as a box consisting of six faces. The calculations only need the face pointing
towards the room, so only 1/6 of the data is effectively used, and the remaining five
faces will result in redundant calculations which will decrease performance.
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Rendering methods
33
Pros
• The calculations are not limited by a range
• There is no spatial noise
Cons
• The majority of the spatial data is not useful and will result in redun-
dant calculations.
• Requires that the virtual model contains information about which ele-
ments should be included in the model.
• Deviations between the virtual model and the physical building will
result in an incorrect occlusion.
Solution 3 - Simplified reality model
Instead of using the spatial data from the virtual model as in solution 2, we could
instead generate a very crude representation of the rooms, called a room model,
containing only the faces for the walls, floor and ceiling. In this case, a simple room
can be expressed as a box with all faces pointing towards its center of the room. The
room model can be generated from the dimensions of the room stored in the BIM
model. The room model is very simple and only contains faces that are relevant for
the occlusion. As a result, the performance is very good.
An obvious downside with this solution is that the occlusion is only calculated for
the walls, ceilings, and floors, and not other large virtual elements.
Pros
• The calculations are not limited by a range
• There is no spatial noise
• The solution has a very good performance
Cons
• Only the walls, floors, and ceilings will cause occlusion
• Requires the BIM model to contain information about the dimensions
of the rooms.
• Deviations between the virtual model and the physical building will
result in an incorrect occlusion.
==PAGE:46==
34
3 Methods and Technologies
Comparison
Solution 3 is by far the least performance heavy solution of the three, but also has
the least details in occluded regions. Due to the limited resources available on the
MR device, it is important to have a good performance of HoloApp. Furthermore,
we do not believe that solution 1 and 2 will be able to give a consistently accurate
result. When the MR technology matures, solution 1 can be a very good solution,
but for now we chose to use solution 3 instead.
3.3.3
Visualizing the alignment
The alignment is not always completely accurate due to drifting on the MR device
and inaccuracies in the initial alignment. In order for the user to trust HoloApp, it
is necessary to visualize the alignment, so the user can validate the precision of the
alignment and realign if needed.
The easiest way to validate if the alignment is correct, is by looking at the walls, so
we will render the room model mentioned in section 3.3.2. But how should HoloApp
render the room model in order to clearly visualize the alignment?
Solution 1 - Render solidly
One obvious solution is to render the room model with a solid, semi-transparent
material as seen in Figure 3.7. This will make the walls very apparent, but can also
easily clutter the view for the user.
It is easy to implement since it can just be
rendered like the unoccluded elements.
Pros
• Can be rendered as existing elements and, thus, requires no custom
shaders
Cons
• Can easily clutter the view
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Rendering methods
35
Figure 3.7: Illustration of the test room where the walls are rendered with a solid
material.
In the left image the alignment is correct, and in the right image it is
incorrect.
Solution 2 - Render using wireframe
the user will typically look at edges of the walls in order to validate if the alignment
is correct, so it makes sense to only visualize the edges as seen in Figure 3.8. In
computer graphics, wireframe rendering is a common technique to do just that. By
doing so, the screen will become less cluttered compared to solution 1.
The wireframe technique is very good for visualizing meshes, but it renders all
the edges of the triangles in the mesh, not just the edges of the walls. This results in
diagonal lines across the walls, which are not desirable.
Pros
• Renders only the edges of the mesh
• Can be done in a single render pass
Cons
• Diagonal lines in the mesh clutter the view
==PAGE:48==
36
3 Methods and Technologies
Figure 3.8: Illustration of the test room where the walls are rendered using wireframe.
In the left image the alignment is correct, and in the right image it is incorrect.
Solution 3 - Render using outline
Instead of rendering all edges in the mesh, one could render the edges only between
triangles with different normals as illustrated in Figure 3.9. These must be the edges
of the wall. It is a bit more computational heavy as it has to know the normal of
other triangles.
Pros
• Only edges of the walls are rendered
Cons
• More computationally expensive
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Rendering methods
37
Figure 3.9: Illustration of the test room where the walls are rendered using an outline.
In the left image the alignment is correct, and in the right image it is incorrect.
Comparison
It is important to keep the view as simple as possible, so we opt for the simplest
solution. Of the three solutions, solution 3 is the best solution because it only ren-
ders what is strictly needed in order for the user to validate the correctness of the
alignment.
3.3.4
Visualizing elements relative to each other
In computer graphics, a lot of methods have been developed to make objects appear
as 3D. This section will describe different rendering techniques that can be used to
make the spatial data easier to understand.
Technique 1 - Fade out elements far from the user
Elements in the background is seldom interesting, so they should not catch the atten-
tion of the user. By fading out elements based on their distance from the user, the
view becomes less cluttered and it is easier for the user to differentiate object nearby
elements from far away elements.
The elements will also fade in and out more smoothly instead of popping in and
out, which is more pleasing to look at.
==PAGE:50==
38
3 Methods and Technologies
Pros
• Elements will fade in and out more smoothly
• Elements in the background will catch less attention
Cons
Figure 3.10: The test room rendered without ambient occlusion (left) and with am-
bient occlusion (right).
Technique 2 - Shading based on normals
Shading the elements is important in order visualize the geometry of an element.
Shading the surfaces based solely on the normals is very fast as it does not require
any lighting calculations. However, with this method it is not possible to calculate
shadows, which can cause surfaces to appear completely lit even though they would
normally be in shadow.
Pros
• Makes it easier to understand the geometry of an element
• Very fast
Cons
• Does not support shadows from other elements
• Does not support multiple lights
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Rendering methods
39
Technique 3 - Shading based on virtual lights
Scenes in computer graphics usually contains one or more lights that will be used
to light up the scene. This technique allows us to have multiple different lights of
different type, e.g., directional lights or point lights, and will enable HoloApp to
render shadows according to the lights. It is, however, computational more expensive
to perform these calculations. It would also require the virtual lights to be placed in
the model, either manually, or by the system in order to achieve shading and shadows
matching the physical world.
Pros
• Makes it easier to understand the geometry of an element
• Supports shadows
• Supports different types of lights, such as points lights and spot lights.
Cons
• Computational harder
• Requires virtual lights to be placed in the model.
Technique 4 - Shading based on physical lights
Instead of placing virtual lights at arbitrary locations in the scene, one could instead
estimate the physical lighting from the camera input, and place the virtual lights
accordingly. This is a very complex task, but it would enable the virtual elements
to be lit similarly to the objects in the physical world. It would make them interact
with the physical lighting and make them appear more as a part of the physical room.
It would help the user get a better perception of the geometry.
Pros
• Shading will imitate the shading of physical objects and look more
realistic
• Can calculate shadows
• Supports different types of lights, such as points lights and spot lights.
Cons
• Very complex to implement
• Computational hard
==PAGE:52==
40
3 Methods and Technologies
Technique 5 - Render shadows
Shadows helps anchoring elements to the scene, and they are excellent at visualizing
the depth of a scene, see Figure 3.11. The downside is that the performance decreases
as HoloApp would have to do additional calculations and it would also require more
memory.
Pros
• Gives a better perception of depth in the scene and makes it easier for
the user to determine the position of elements
Cons
• Rendering requires additional memory
• Rendering becomes slower
Figure 3.11: The test room rendered without shadows (left) and with shadows (right).
Technique 6 - Render ambient occlusion
Ambient occlusion (AO) is a global rendering technique that estimates the ambient
intensity for all surface points. As a result, notches in surfaces will appear darker
because less ambient light will reach the surface points. It also helps determine if
elements intersect surfaces as illustrated in Figure 3.12.
==PAGE:53==
3.3 Rendering methods
41
Pros
• A subtle yet effective technique
• Makes it easier for the user to determine the depth of elements
Cons
• The technique requires additional memory
• The technique is computational heavy
Figure 3.12: The test room rendered without AO (left) and with AO (right).
Technique 7 - Render intersection lines
An alternative to ambient occlusion is to use a more direct visualization of intersection
by rendering a outline where elements intersects. It is less discrete than ambient
occlusion, but also much easier to implement and less computational heavy.
==PAGE:54==
42
3 Methods and Technologies
Pros
• Makes it easier for the user to determine if elements intersects and,
thus, determine their depth
• The technique is simple to implement and is fast
Cons
• Clutters the view more compared to AO
Figure 3.13: The test room rendered with a pattern and intersection lines.
Technique 8 - Outline elements with a distinct color
Since objects will be rendered on top of the camera input, HoloApp should make sure
that the elements are easily distinguishable from the background, otherwise it will
become hard for the user to see the elements. The technique can be seen in Figure
3.14. Using a distinct color for outline of the elements would solve the problem of
elements blending in with the background, however, it would also increase the view
complexity.
Pros
• Makes elements easier distinguishable from the background.
Cons
• Makes rendering more complex
• Makes view more complex
==PAGE:55==
3.3 Rendering methods
43
Figure 3.14: The test room rendered with a distinct outline.
Comparison
Technique 1 is very easy to implement in Unity, and makes it easier for the user to
perceive the depth of objects. We will implement this technique due to its simplicity.
It will also help reduce the view complexity.
For shading, we chose to use technique 2 as it is the simplest, and we believe it
will work sufficiently fine in most situations. Lighting calculations easily becomes
computationally heavy, especially on a mobile device with limited resources, and
technique 3 and 4 does not add enough value to the perception of the spatial data to
make up for the performance loss and complexity.
Rendering shadows will both decrease the performance of HoloApp, and increase
the view complexity slightly. Shadows can also make it harder to determine a color
code of a material. Even though shadows help the user understand the position of
the elements, we have decided not to implement shadows.
AO is a subtle effect that can make the spatial data easier to understand, but it
is also computationally expensive. We will try to implement AO to see if it is feasible
on a mobile MR device. Alternatively, we will also implement technique 7 as it gives
a much better performance compared to AO.
Technique 8 is an interesting and valuable technique to make sure the elements
are easy to see. However, it is rarely the case that the elements blend in with the
background, and rendering all elements with an distinct outline will decrease the
performance and increase the view complexity.
3.3.5
Displaying metadata
The metadata makes up the majority of the BI, so displaying all metadata will quickly
overload the user with information. An element can easily have more than 50 different
properties, and it is usually only handful of them that are interesting to the user. As
==PAGE:56==
44
3 Methods and Technologies
mentioned in Chapter 2, Wang[10] suggests implementing an automatic and intelli-
gent domain information extraction mechanisms in order to present with only useful
information. He argues that the system should be able to always present the most
critical and relevant information in the context of the user. For this project, the visu-
alization of the metadata is secondary to the visualization of spatial data, so HoloApp
will only support metadata in form of properties for elements. Once HoloApp sup-
ports some of the metadata, it should be fairly easy to extend it to support all the
metadata.
Solution 1 - Quick access list
One solution is to enable the user to add the properties to a quick access list, which
could be displayed when an element is selected. The solution will enable the user to
make certain properties easier to access, but it requires the user to manually add the
properties to the quick access. The solution also works best if it is the same properties
that are frequently accessed by the user.
The list could either be stored locally on the device or in the BIM model. Storing it
in the BIM model would enable the system to remember the quick access list across
devices, and the system will filter the metadata before transferring it to HoloApp
which will result in shorter transfer times. If each user gets a personal device, it would
make more sense to store it locally on the device as it would reduce the complexity
of the system. The solution should be fairly easy to implement.
Pros
• Makes it easier to access certain properties
• Adds little to no extra complexity to the HoloApp
Cons
• Requires the user to manually add properties to quick access
• Does not work well if a large number of properties needs to be easy to
access
• A lot of metadata will be transferred but not used
Solution 2 - Integrate as part of the rendering
Instead of displaying the metadata in a separate menu the metadata could be inte-
grated as a part of the rendering. The elements could have icons indicating certain
properties or states of the element. Properties could show up automatically if a user
looks at an element for an extended amount of time.
The main benefit of this solution is that the user will be able to access a lot of
metadata without any direct interaction, such as touch input. The drawback is that
it will increase the view complexity, so it is important that the system only displays
==PAGE:57==
3.3 Rendering methods
45
relevant properties to avoid overloading the user. It is a hard task to integrate the
metadata well with the rendering, and it can easily end up making the renderings
very complex.
Pros
• User can access properties without having to interact with the app
Cons
• Increases view complexity
• Very complex to implement well
Comparison
Solution 2 is the ideal solution as it uses a more practical and intuitive interaction.
Because visualization of the metadata is a secondary goal, it is not feasible to imple-
ment solution 2 as it is too complex for the scope of this project. Instead, we will
implement solution 1 as a naive solution. It is much easier to implement compared
to solution 2, and should be sufficient for an early prototype of the system.
==PAGE:58==
46
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 4
Platform
In order to implement and test the solutions described in the previous chapter, the
project first needs a platform for accessing the BI. This chapter will describe the
overall architecture of the platform, along with any external tools and services used
by HoloApp.
4.1
System architecture
Like Woodward and Hakkarainen’s application [18], the system uses a client-server
architecture to relief HoloApp from most of the operations, and perform these oper-
ations on an external server instead. A mobile device has a limited computational
power compared to an average desktop computer, and it is, therefore, suitable to
perform most of the computations on an external server, instead of on the mobile
device. This will reduce the power consumption of HoloApp, which is important if
the mobile device is to be used throughout the whole day.
Figure 4.1: Overall architecture for the project. The HoloApp and the HoloService is
implemented as a part of this project, whereas Dalux’s system and the AlignerService
are implemented by Dalux.
The system will not use a single service, but make use of several different services,
most of which are external services developed by Dalux, see Figure 4.1. However,
HoloApp will only interact with two services, referred to as the HoloService and
AlignerService. HoloService is responsible for accessing the BI, and restructuring the
==PAGE:60==
48
4 Platform
data in a format suitable for HoloApp. It does not access the BIM models directly,
but instead gets the BI through Dalux’ services. AlignerService is responsible for
calculating corrections to the alignment based on the data provided by HoloApp.
AlignerService does not depend on any external services.
HoloApp is responsible
for rendering the virtual model, providing data for AlignerService and applying the
corrections calculated, and handling user inputs.
Only HoloApp and HoloService are implemented as a part of this project, and all
other services, including AlignerService, are implemented by Dalux. HoloApp is im-
plemented in Unity using C# and Cg, and HoloService is a web service implemented
using C#. Both HoloService and AlignerService are REST services, and communi-
cates with HoloApp using JSON messages.
4.2
Device
For this project we used a preassembled device because we did not have the time and
expertise to assemble our own MR device. There are currently only two preassembled
mobile MR devices available on the market: Microsoft’s Hololens, and Lenovo’s Phab
2 Pro (Phab).
Hololens
Microsoft’s Hololens is a HMD that the user wears like a pair of glasses. It renders
the virtual objects as holograms on the glasses using a holographic lens, and can
automatically generate a reality model, which can be used in its applications. The
Hololens is currently only available for developers.
The Hololens contains four sensors that it uses to understand the environment:
An ambient light sensor, a depth Camera, a video Camera, and a microphone. It
continuously uses the input from the depth- and image sensors to generate the reality
model.
Initially, the reality model is very rough, but over time it becomes more
accurate. The Hololens does not include a GPS.
Hololens has a robust tracking system, we experienced that it mostly only drifts
when the user moves around extensively.
Figure 4.2: Microsoft’s Hololens
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Device
49
Phab
The Phab is a HHD manufactured by Lenovo.
It uses Google’s new technology,
Tango, which is used on the Android platform.
Currently, the Phab is the only
Tango compatible device released, but another hardware manufacturer, ASUS, has
announced their first Tango device, the Asus ZenFone AR.
Tango combines three core functionalities: Area learning, motion tracking, and
depth perception. All three combined enables a Tango device to perceive its surround-
ings, and render virtual objects as if they were a part of the physical world.
Tango’s motion tracking system uses visual odometry in combination with its
other sensors: Accelerometer, compass, and gyroscope. Visual odometry is a method
for determining the movement of the device based on features on the image input.
It uses images from the Camera to detect any changes to the features and estimate
the movement. For example, an object will appear large if you stand close to it, and
small if you stand far from it. Similarly, the faces of an object will become skewed,
depending on the perspective. This difference in object’s appearance can be used to
calculate the movement of the device. The combination of using images and the other
sensors is called visual inertial odometry.
Depth Perception uses a 3D depth Camera to create a point cloud used to generate
the reality model.
Compared to Hololens, the Phab is more likely to drift. We experienced that it
drifts slightly for every movement of the user. Additionally, looking at plain surfaces
from a short distance can cause the Phab to drift a lot because the motion tracking
system cannot recognize any features from the Camera image.
Figure 4.3: Lenovo’s Phab
We will develop HoloApp for the Phab. Even though the Hololens is less prone
to drift, the Phab is more practical for the user to bring to work. Furthermore, the
users has to wear safety helmets, and it is currently not possible to wear the Hololens
while wearing a helmet.
==PAGE:62==
50
4 Platform
4.3
External systems
The platform will make use of multiple external systems in order to make HoloApp
work.
Dalux services
A BIM model can contain files in a large number of different formats. Dalux’ services
are responsible for managing all the files in the BIM model, and expose an interface
for other applications to access the BI easily. Dalux already have a large database of
BIM models which can be used to remotely access the BI from these BIM models.
The BIM models consists of elements, where each element represents an object or
a part of an object, e.g., a specific wall, a power socket, a pipe segment, etc. Each
element consists of spatial data and metadata. The spatial data includes an unique
element ID and a triangle mesh containing three vertex attributes: positions, normals,
and colors. The element ID can be used to access all meta data regarding the element.
Alignment service
The AlignerService is developed by Dalux for this project. It calculates alignment
correction using the algorithm described in Section 3.2.2.
Dalux’ 3D BIM Viewer
Dalux has a application which enables the user to navigate the 3D models and set
up filters, see Figure E.1 and E.2 in Appendix E. A filter defines which elements are
visible, and enables HoloApp to only download the spatial data for a subset of the
elements in a building. The filters will among others be used to let the user define
which elements will be visible in HoloApp by defining a filter called model. It will
also be used to define the reference points used for alignment. Each reference point
has its own filter called ref1 and ref2, respectively.
Unity
Unity is a free game engine that allows developers to create games and applications
for most of the common platforms, such as Windows, Android, iOS, etc. Unity auto-
matically handles most of the tasks regarding registration of user inputs, rendering
spatial data, and building the assets into an application, which enables the developer
to focus on developing the application. In Unity, a Scene consists of multiple different
objects called Game Objects. Unity allows developers to define the behaviour of the
Game Objects by attaching C# scripts to the Game Objects. Similarly, the developer
can define how objects are rendered through shader scripts. Unity uses Cameras to
render the view, and a Scene can contain multiple Cameras. Each Camera can render
==PAGE:63==
4.3 External systems
51
objects in specific style described by the shaders attached to the objects. A Camera
can either render the image to the final view or to a Render Texture. Render Textures
are similar to normal 2D textures except that the Cameras can render their output
image to the Render Textures, thus updating them every frame. Other Cameras can
then read the pixels of the Render Texture like a normal 2D texture. Render Textures
are typically used to render custom special effects that require multiple render passes.
Throughout the rest of this thesis, Render Textures will be referred to as textures.
Google has developed a software development kit specifically for integrating Tango
into Unity, and make it easier to develop applications for Tango devices in Unity.
4.3.1
Shaders
Unity shaders are written in Cg, wrapped in ShaderLab, and later cross-compiled
into OpenGL, OpenGLES, Vulkan or Metal, based on the targeted platform.
Unity support multiple types of shaders, but the two most common are vertex/frag-
ment shaders and surface shaders. For this project, we will write our shaders as ver-
tex/fragment shaders. Listing 4.1 shows the structure of a shader. The shader can
contain any number of custom properties which can be accessed and modified from
the C# scripts at run-time. Each shader can contain multiple subshaders, which, in
turn, can contain multiple passes. The passes are written in Cg/HLSL and contain
the logic of the shader. Further information can be found in Unity’s documentation
[30].
Cameras can also render elements using another shader than the one used by the
element’s material. This is done using Replacement Shaders. Replacement Shaders
simply tells a Camera to render all elements using a specific shader.
1 Shader "MyShader" {
2
Properties {
3
// All properties are defined here
4
_MyTexture ("My Texture", 2D) = "white" { }
5
_MyNumber ("My Number", Float) = 10.0
6
}
7
SubShader {
8
Pass
9
{
10
// Shader code
11
}
12
Pass
13
{
14
// Shader code
15
}
16
}
17
SubShader {
18
...
19
}
20 }
Listing 4.1: Exmaple structure of a Unity shader
==PAGE:64==
52
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 5
Implementation
This chapter describes the implementation of the solutions to the challenges described
in chapter 3, as well as other relevant parts for implementation of HoloApp. The
screenshots from HoloApp can be seen in Appendix E.
5.1
Managing building information
This section describes the implementation of the solutions and techniques described
in Section 3.1.
Figure 5.1: The red color indicates the part of the system that contains the imple-
mentation described in Section 5.1.
5.1.1
Access model data from Dalux
The spatial data for the model is stored in a object called OptimizedModel. The
structure of the object can be seen in Figure 5.2. The object contains three unique
list, one for vertices, one for normals, and one for materials, shared between all the
elements. Note that the vertices and normals are stored as byte strings to reduce the
data size. Each element has a list of meshes which contains indices to the unique lists
of the model. An element can have multiple colors, so the element contains a mesh
for each color. Unity restricts meshes to a maximum of 65,536 vertices. The elements
from the BIM models can, however, contain any number of vertices, so the service
==PAGE:66==
54
5 Implementation
checks if a mesh exceeds the maximum vertex count, and if so, splits the mesh into
multiple meshes.
Figure 5.2: Class diagram of the OptimizedModel class.
Converting the spatial data from Dalux’ structure into a structure suitable for
HoloApp was a big task because the two structures was very dissimilar. The follow-
ing description of Dalux’ structure has been simplified in order to make it easier to
understand, and, therefore, it will not cover small technical details. The spatial data
from Dalux is stored as triangle meshes. It consists of a list of unique vertices, each
with a position, a normal, and an element ID, and a list of triangles, each having three
indices to the corresponding vertices in the vertex list. Dalux’ structure consists of
nodes that each contains a part of the spatial data. A node contains the bounds of
its spatial data, a material, and three buffers – one for the positions and normals, one
for the element IDs, and one for the indices of the triangles.
Listing 5.1 contains the pseudo-code for extracting the spatial data, see Listing
A.1 in Appendix A for the complete source code.
1 public Model GetModel(buildingID, filter, bounds)
2 {
3
GET data nodes from Dalux
4
5
FOR each node
6
Skip nodes containing no visible elements
7
8
// Get data for visible elements
9
Store the triangles of all the visible elements
10
Store all the vertices used by the triangles
11
12
// Discard triangles outside bounds
13
Remove all triangles where all vertices are outside the bounds
14
15
// Store data used for the visible triangles
16
Store all unique vertex positions used in visible triangles
17
Store all unique vertex normals used in visible triangles
==PAGE:67==
5.1 Managing building information
55
18
Recalculate indices of the triangles to point to the lists of unique
vertices and normals
19
20
// create the model
21
Add the visible triangles to their corresponding elements
22
Set the material of the element
23
Add all elements to the model
24
ENDFOR
25
26
27
RETURN model
28 }
Listing 5.1: Pseudo-code for extracting spatial data from Dalux
Optimizations
Our structure for the spatial data contains the three optimizations identified in Sec-
tion 3.1.2: Indexing, precision reduction, and storing data in byte arrays.
Indexing the data required an extra iteration over the data as seen in the pseudo-
code in Listing 5.1, and the source code can be seen in Listing A.2 in Appendix A.
First, the algorithms determines which triangles are visible, then it creates a new list
of the unique vertices used by the visible triangles, and, finally, it updates the indices
of the triangles to point to the new list of unique vertices. This is done for both the
vertex positions and normals.
The pseudo-code for changing the precision of the spatial data can be seen in
Listing 5.2. The method first gets the unoptimized model data using the method
shown in Listing 5.1, and then calculates the bounding box for the data and use it to
convert the floats into shorts as described in Section 3.1.
1 public OptimizedModel OptimizeModel(model)
2 {
3
Calculate bounds for the model
4
Convert positions from floats to shorts
5
Convert normals from floats to shorts
6
return an optimized model containing the converted positions and normals
7 }
Listing 5.2: Pseudo-code for optimizing the precision of the spatial data.
5.1.2
Generating room models
The Dalux system uses the building drawings in the BIM model to generate a 2D
mapping of the floors. HoloService can access this data, and use it to generate the
room model described in Section 3.3.2. The structure of the RoomModel object can
==PAGE:68==
56
5 Implementation
be seen in Figure 5.3. The RoomModel contains a list of RoomMesh objects, and
a list of normals for all rooms because most walls will have same normals. These
RoomMesh objects contains vertices, wall ids and indices for constructing the mesh
of the room.
Figure 5.3: Class diagram of the RoomModel class.
Once the mapping of the floors has been transformed into world space, it is used to
generate a 3D mesh for each room. The algorithm uses two steps: First it calculates
the placement of the walls, and then it generates a 3D mesh for each room. Listing
5.3 contains the pseudo-code for the algorithm, see Listing A.3 in Appendix A for the
complete code. Rooms are not always enclosed by walls, but can also be open. All
walls have a thickness, so in the floor plan two rooms separated by a wall will not
be directly connected. This means that edges that are used by exactly one triangle
are walls, see Figure 5.4. Figure 5.5 and 5.6 shows a room model generated from a
building drawing using the algorithm.
1 public RoomModel GenerateRoomModel(height, floorplan)
2 {
3
GET room data from Dalux
4
Create room model
5
Calculate the placement of walls
6
7
FOR each room
8
// Generate a room-mesh
9
Create a room-mesh
10
Add floor to room-mesh
11
Generate and Add ceiling to room-mesh
12
Generate and Add walls to room-mesh
13
14
Add mesh to room model
15
ENDFOR
16
17
RETURN roomModel
18 }
Listing 5.3: Pseudo-code for generating the room model.
==PAGE:69==
5.1 Managing building information
57
Figure 5.4: The left image shows an example of the mapping of the floors, and the
right image shows which edges that should be walls. The red edges indicates edges
that are not walls.
Figure 5.5: Building drawing of DTU building 324 (left), and the corresponding room
model generated by the algorithm seen from above (right). The black lines displays
the triangle mesh, and the orange lines indicates the generated walls.
==PAGE:70==
58
5 Implementation
Figure 5.6: The generated room model seen in 3D.
5.1.3
Network communication
Exceptions can occur during any of the service requests, e.g., HoloApp may try to
access a building the user do not have access to. In order to inform HoloApp about any
exceptions, the responses from HoloService gets wrapped in an object with additional
information about the request, such as an error message if the service request fails.
This enables HoloApp to display error messages, and avoid getting into a faulty state,
or crashing all together. The code for wrapping HoloService responses can be seen in
Listing A.4 and A.5 in Appendix A.
HoloApp uses the WWW class provided by Unity to send and receive requests
and responses from HoloService, respectively. The WWW class handles the requests
asynchronously by using coroutines. The code for HoloApp can be seen in Listing
A.6 in Appendix A.
Some characters have a special meaning and should be avoided in the JSON
messages because they can cause the message to be misinterpreted by the network
protocol. JSON messages that does not contain such characters are referred to as
being URL-friendly. We had an issue early in the project where a specific user were
unable to log in using HoloApp. After a week of debugging, it turned out that it was
due to one of the messages not being URL-friendly.
==PAGE:71==
5.1 Managing building information
59
5.1.4
Managing and loading data in HoloApp
Initially, when the user opens a building, HoloApp downloads the reference points
from HoloService. Once the user has aligned, HoloApp downloads a chunk of data
from HoloService defined by a bounding box as described in Section 5.1.1. These data
chunks are cached to avoid downloading the same data multiple times. As shown in
Figure 5.7, the ChunkCatalog manages all the ChunkLink objects. Each ChunkLink
represents a cached data chunk, and contains its physical path of cached file and the
position of the data chunk in model space. HoloApp can use the position to check
if it contains the cached version of a given data chunk before it tries to download it.
The RoomModel object described in 5.1.2 is downloaded each time the alignment is
completed because its data size is insignificant.
Figure 5.7: Class diagram of the ChunkCatalog class.
Once the data chunk is downloaded, HoloApp loads the model data and starts
unpacking it. The unpacked data consists of three lists that are shared among all the
elements. With all data unpacked, HoloApp creates a single Game Object that acts
as a parent for all the elements as seen in Figure 5.8. This way, only the a single
Game Object has to be rotated and translated in order to align the whole model.
Each element is stored as a Game Object that contains a number of children – one
for each mesh. The element ID is stored as an UV-coordinate for each vertex. It
is used by the shader to highlight selected elements. For performance reasons, the
color is stored as vertex colors, instead of creating a material for each color. By using
vertex colors, we can render all elements in a single render pass, instead of one render
pass per material. The management of the model data can be seen in Listing B.1 in
Appendix B.
==PAGE:72==
60
5 Implementation
Figure 5.8: Game Object structure of the data chunk once loaded in Unity. The left
image shows a class diagram of the structure, and the right image shows the structure
seen in Unity.
5.1.5
Retrieving and displaying metadata
Each of the meshes has a Mesh Collider that Unity’s uses for detecting the element
during ray casting. When the user taps the screen, HoloApp uses ray casting to detect
which element was tapped. If an element was tapped, HoloApp will download the
metadata for the element, and highlight the element. The technique for highlighting
the element will be described in Section 5.3. The metadata consists of two lists, one
list contains names for the property, the other contains all the corresponding values,
see Figure E.13 and E.14 in Appendix E. For displaying the data, a pop-up with two
views are presented to the user: Show favorites and Show all. Both views are displayed
in a two columns list view, and the Show all has toggles for adding properties to the
Show favorites view. The names of the properties in favorites are stored locally on
the device as a string separated by ’|’. The list of favorite properties is shared shared
across all elements.
5.2
Alignment
The alignment of the virtual model to the physical world must be accurate in order for
HoloApp to be useful. This section describes the implementation solutions identified
in Section 3.2. Figure 5.9 shows the part of the system the implementation will affect.
==PAGE:73==
5.2 Alignment
61
Figure 5.9: The red color indicates the part of the system that contains the imple-
mentation described in Section 5.2.
As described in Section 3.2, the initial alignment is done using reference points.
The reference points in the virtual model will be referred to as R1 and R2, and
corresponding points marked by the user will be referred to as P1 and P2. To align
the virtual model, the user first marks P1 and then P2 in HoloApp. Once both P1
and P2 are marked, HoloApp can calculate a translation and rotation from the four
points. The translation is the vector −−−→
R1P1, and the rotation is the angle between
vector −−−→
R1R2 and the vector −−−→
P1P2. Initially, we encountered some problems because
we used Unity’s own method Vector3.Angle() to calculate the angle between two
vectors, but it returned an unsigned angle, and we needed a signed angle. Eventually,
we ended up calculating the angle ourselves because Unity’s method resulted in a lot
of border-cases where the alignment did not work properly. The code snippet can be
seen in Listing B.2 in Appendix B. Tango is excellent at determining the up direction,
therefore the rotation is only necessary to calculate around the y-axis.
The accuracy of the alignment will depend on how accurately the user marks P1
and P2. However, small inaccuracies within 10 cm will be corrected by AlignerService,
so the initial alignment does not have to be perfectly accurate.
5.2.1
Maintain alignment
As described in Section 4.2, the Phab is very prone to drift. The drifting quickly
causes the initial alignment to be incorrect, which results in the virtual model being
misaligned with the physical world. For HoloApp to be usable, it is crucial that it
applies alignment corrections continuously in order for the alignment to stay accurate.
HoloApp uses AlignerService as described in Section 4.3 to calculate the alignment
corrections. The structure of the input used by AlignerService can be seen in Figure
5.10. The input contains the point cloud provided by the Phab, the spatial data of
the room model, the position and forward direction of the camera, and the current
translation and rotation of the model. The point cloud contains between 8,000 and
20,000 points, so both the point cloud and the spatial data of the room model are
sent as byte strings. The AlignerData is an object used by AlignerService to store
==PAGE:74==
62
5 Implementation
internal information and providing HoloApp with info messages. Since the points
from the point cloud are in world space and the room model is in object space,
one of the two has to converted to the other. Because there are more point in the
point cloud compared to vertices in the room model, we chose to convert the spatial
data of the room model to world space as it is computationally less expensive. The
transformation can be seen in Listing B.3 in Appendix B.
Figure 5.10: Class diagram of the AlignerInput class.
The response from the AlignerService, as seen in Figure 5.11, contains the position
provided as input and the position calculated by SS, along with additional information
used by AlignerService internally. After the initial alignment, the AlignerService has
an initial setup which requires the user to look a two walls and the floor to correct the
initial alignment. During the initial setup, the AlignerService corrects the alignment
more roughly in order to reach an approximate alignment quickly. Once the setup is
done, AlignerService switches over to continuous correction, and does smaller, more
fine-tuned corrections in order to get a more accurate alignment. The corrections
are applied by translating the model object by the vector between original position
of the camera and the calculated position of the camera.
Similarly, the model is
rotated around the y-axis by the angle between the original forward vector of the
camera and the calculated forward vector of the camera. The whole process of calling
AlignerService and applying its corrections takes less than 100 ms, thus enabling it
to be done continuously.
Figure 5.11: Class diagram of the AlignerResult class.
5.3
Rendering methods
Rendering the virtual model in an intuitive way is critical for making the spatial data
understandable. This section describes the implementation of the different rendering
methods described in Section 3.3. As shown in Figure 5.12 the implementation will
==PAGE:75==
5.3 Rendering methods
63
only affect HoloApp. The complete code for the shaders can be found in Appendix
C.
Throughout the rest of this chapter we will refer to a Camera as Camx and tex-
tures as Texx, so a Camera named Occ will be referred to as CamOcc and a texture
called Depth will be referred to as TexDepth.
Figure 5.12: The red color indicates the part of the system that contains the imple-
mentation described in Section 5.3.
5.3.1
Calculating occlusion
Unity’s graphics-pipeline automatically discards occluded triangles. However, in our
case, HoloApp still needs to render the occluded triangles, so it it is necessary to
write a custom shader that can perform the depth test without discarding occluded
triangles.
Figure 5.13: Overview of the rendering flow. The white boxes are Cameras, the yellow
boxes are textures, and the blue box is the final output. The arrows indicates the
input and output of each Camera.
As described in Section 3.3, HoloApp should use the room model to calculate the
occluded regions of the virtual model. As seen in Figure 5.13, it is implemented using
two cameras, CamOcc and CamFinal, and a texture TexDepth. CamOcc renders the
depth and normal ID’s of the room model onto TexDepth using a Replacement Shader,
and CamFinal uses TexDepth as an input and compares the depth of current fragment
with the corresponding depth stored in TexDepth. The normal ID in the TexDepth is
==PAGE:76==
64
5 Implementation
used by the outline and will be further described in Section 5.3.3. The code used to
calculated the occlusion can be seen in Listing C.1 and C.2 in Appendix C.
Even though the Replacement Shader used by CamOcc is fairly simple, it proved
to be more difficult to implement than anticipated. Some of Unity’s shader functions
did not work according to Unity’s documentation, and a lot of platform-specific details
caused the renderings to look different on the Phab compared to the Unity Editor.
Unity has a very limited support and documentation for shaders and, as a result, we
ended up using a lot of time and effort identifying and fixing platform-specific bugs
in the shaders. Furthermore, it turned out that the Tango SDK dynamically changed
the field of view (FOV) of CamFinal when the Tango SDK was used in AR mode.
This caused CamOcc and CamFinal to have different FOVs, which caused CamFinal to
look up the wrong depth value in TexDepth during the depth check. This meant that
everything would work correctly until AR mode was enabled, in which case, occlusion
would be slightly wrong. To make matters worse, everything worked correctly in the
Unity Editor, and we were not able to debug on the Phab, so it was very hard to
solve the bug.
5.3.2
Rendering the elements
There are three modes that the users can choose from: Overlay, occluded or pattern.
As shown in Listing 5.4, CamFinal used the depth and the selected rendering method
when rendering the elements. Overlay is the simplest solution, and it doesn’t require
the depth texture from the walls, as it simply renders the objects on top of the camera
input. Occluded uses the depth texture to only draw objects or part of objects that
are in front of the room mesh. The pattern render method is a combination of two
where the visible regions are drawn opaque, and the occluded regions is drawn using
a striped pattern, see Figure 5.14. The colors are received from the BIM model, and
stored as vertex colors in the mesh. There are no lights in the scene, but instead the
the shading of the color is calculated from the triangle’s normal, and a fixed diffuse
factor, a fixed ambient factor, and a fixed light direction set as shader properties.
1 GET room model depth from the texture
2
3 IF current fragment is occluded THEN
4
IF pattern method is used THEN
5
render pattern
6
ENDIF
7
IF occlusion method is used THEN
8
render nothing
9
ENDIF
10 ENDIF
11
12 render normally
Listing 5.4: Pseudo-code for doing the depth test during occlusion
==PAGE:77==
5.3 Rendering methods
65
Figure 5.14: The three rendering methods (left to right): Overlay, occluded, and
pattern.
The intersection lines were implemented by looking at the difference between the
depth of the room model and the depth of the fragment. If the difference was below a
certain threshold and the fragment was not occluded, then the fragment was rendered
as an intersection line.
Fading out elements was implemented by lowering the alpha value based on the
depth of the fragment.
Highlighting selected elements was done by defining property containing the ele-
ment ID of the selected element. The same element ID was stored as an UV-coordinate
for every vertex, so if the element ID of the given vertex was identical to that of the
property, then the color was changed to a predefined highlight color. By doing it this
way, we did not have to change any data for the meshes, but could instead update a
single property in the shader.
5.3.3
Rendering the room model
As mentioned before, TexDepth also contains an ID for the normal, stored in the green-
channel of the texture. This is used when rendering the room model with an outline,
but for the outline method we only need to know if the normals are identical, not
the actual value of the normal. For get a better performance, we chose to recalculate
the normal into an unique ID. By doing this, CamFinal only have to write one value
to TexDepth instead of three, which freed up memory. The normal ID was used to
==PAGE:78==
66
5 Implementation
determine whether the normal of the neighbor pixels were different from that of the
current pixel, and if so, draw the pixel with the outline color.
Looking only at the normals worked for most of the cases, but, as seen in Figure
5.15, discontinuities in the depth also has to be taking into account. However, this
was fairly simple to implement since the depth was already stored in TexDepth.
The pseudo-code can be seen in listing 5.5. The depth of the texture is also used
to check whether a shared wall is at nearly the same depth in the depth texture. It
is potentially a lot of texture look ups for each fragment, so the function is returning
whenever one of the occurrences is found. The code used to rendering the room model
can be found Listing C.4 in Appendix C.
1 GET depth and normalID for the current pixel
2
3 FOR every neighboring pixel
4
GET depth and normalID for neighbor pixel
5
6
IF normals are different THEN
7
render outline
8
ELSE
9
IF if difference between depths exceeds threshold THEN
10
render outline
11
ENDIF
12
ENDIF
13
dont render outline
14 ENDFOR
Listing 5.5: Pseudo-code for rendering outline
Figure 5.15: Outline without testing depth (left) and Outline where the depth is
tested (right).
==PAGE:79==
5.3 Rendering methods
67
5.3.4
Ambient occlusion
Unity already has a screen-space AO image effect that is simply to use, but it does
not work for transparent surfaces such as our room model.
Hence, we needed to
implement a custom shader for the AO. For the project we chose to implement the
screen-space AO method used in the Alcemy engine [31] which is further described
by Bærentzen et al. [25].
Figure 5.16: Overview of the rendering flow with AO included. The white boxes are
Cameras, the yellow boxes are textures, and the blue box is the final output. The
arrows indicates the input and output of each Camera. The red line indicates the
part of the flow related to the AO implementation covered in this section.
The full rendering flow of HoloApp with AO included can be seen in Figure 5.16,
and it clearly shows the additional complexity introduces by the implementation of
AO. The AO implementation requires three additional textures: One for the clip-
space positions of the scene, TexGeo, one for the actual eye-space normals of the
scene, TexNorm, and one for the intensity of the AO, TexAO.
Instead of using two Cameras to render the positions and normals of the scene –
one for each texture, we used a single camera, CamMRT, that renders the scene using
a Replacement Shader along with Multiple Render Targets (MRT). MRT enables
a camera to render an output to multiple textures, thus avoid having to using an
excessive render pass. In Unity, MRT for a camera are set up in a C# script. The
Camera object has a method for setting a depth buffer and an array of textures as its
render target. Listing 5.6 shows how MRT are managed in the Replacement Shader
used by CamMRT. Here a struct, called FragmentOutput, is specified as the output.
It has two targets instead of the standard SV_Target, and it uses two SV_Target0
and SV_Target1 which corresponds to the two render buffers in the RenderBuffer
array. Each of these are defined as colors, and can be rendered to in the fragment
shader.
==PAGE:80==
68
5 Implementation
1 // MRT shader requires a custom output, instead of a single color
2 struct FragmentOutput
3 {
4
float4 dest0 : SV_Target0;
5
float4 dest1 : SV_Target1;
6 };
7
8 ...
9
10 FragmentOutput frag(v2f i): SV_Target
11 {
12
FragmentOutput output;
13
14
output.dest0 = i.position;
15
output.dest1 = i.nor;
16
17
return output;
18 }
Listing 5.6: Code snippet from the replacement MRT.shader
The AO is calculated by CamAO and outputted as a grayscale texture, TexAO,
storing the ambient intensity for every pixel. The result is then used by CamFinal
to add AO to the final result as illustrated in Figure 5.17.
AO calculations are
done per-pixel, and because the Phab has a large native resolution of 1440 x 2560,
the calculations becomes computational heavy.
Instead, the effect uses a smaller
resolution of 360 x 640 to improve the performance.
The AO is calculated using the geometry and normal textures drawn by the MRT,
and sampling random points, called disc points, around the current fragment in order
to calculate the average ambient intensity of the fragment. The ambient intensity is
stored in a texture as seen in figure 5.17. The pseudo-code for the AO calculation can
be seen in Listing 5.7. This calculation is performed for every fragment of CamAO.
1 GET the normal and the position for the current pixel
2
3 FOR every neighboring pixel
4
GET the normal and the position for the neighboring pixel
5
6
FOR every random disc point
7
GET clip-space position of disc point
8
calculate AO intensity of the disc point
9
ENDFOR
10
Calculate average AO intensity of all disc points
11 ENDFOR
Listing 5.7: Pseudo-code for rendering AO
The performance of the AO implementation was too slow as the implementation
was too computationally demanding, resulting in the AO effect lagging a few frames
behind all the time. Therefore, the AO implementation was not included in the final
implementation, but intersection lines was used instead.
==PAGE:81==
5.3 Rendering methods
69
Figure 5.17: Image of the effect result of our AO. The base image without AO (left),
The calculated intensity of the AO stored in TexAO (bottom), and the base image
without AO (right)
==PAGE:82==
70
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 6
Results
6.1
Prototypes
The project was developed in five iterations, each resulting in a functional prototype
of HoloApp. The prototypes were planned in two weeks intervals, and tested by the
testers from Airteam and Region Midjylland. All the testers deals with construction
on a daily basis, so we believe they were a good representation of our user segment.
We would have loved to receive more feedback, but due to errors in HoloApp and
a busy schedules for the testers, it was not always possible to get comprehensive
feedback for each prototype.
This section will give a brief description of each prototype and the issues identified
by ourselves or the testers. The complete feedback from the testers can be seen in
Section D.2 in Appendix D.
Prototype #1
In Prototype #1 the user was able to log in, select a Dalux Field project, align the
virtual model, and get it rendered as an overlay. The virtual model was downloaded
within a bounding box, but without optimizations to the data structure. Alignment
was implemented using reference points and filters were set up in Dalux’ 3D BIM
Viewer, but alignment corrections were not yet implemented.
As the user moved
around HoloApp was capable of downloading new chunks of data for the user’s new
location.
Prototype #1 enabled us to identify several border cases where the app needed
improvement, e.g., one tester was unable to log in due to the authentication token
not being URL-friendly. The testers mentioned that they seldom move around while
performing their tasks, so we decided to discard the functionality of downloading and
updating the virtual model as the user moves around due to the complexity it brought
to HoloApp.
Prototype #2
Prototype #2 contained two additional rendering methods: Occluded, and show oc-
cluded regions with a distinct color. The rendering methods were chosen based on
feedback from the testers. HoloApp calculated occluded regions based on the room
model. The HoloService included functionality for generating the room models and
==PAGE:84==
72
6 Results
optimizing the data structure of the spatial data. The room models were rendered
using a shaded-wireframe technique, where the shaded area was rendered using a
semi-transparent color.
Again, Prototype #2 helped us identify border cases where HoloApp needed im-
provement. The testers requested that the room model was rendered more transpar-
ent. We decided to make it possible for the user to change the opacity of the room
model in HoloApp, rather than hard-coding it. We added a slider to HoloApp that
the user could use to adjust the opacity of the room model.
Prototype #3
Prototype #3 supported simple metadata in form of viewing properties. The meta-
data system was designed based on feedback from the testers. The shader was modi-
fied to display selected elements with a distinct color.
One of the testers changed project to a new building, which showed several errors
with the spatial data of HoloApp, one being that some projects had extremely large
coordinates for the spatial data, and as a result, looked wrong on HoloApp due to
precision errors.
Prototype #4
Prototype #4 rendered the room model using an outline, instead of using a shaded-
wireframe. Otherwise, it mostly contained bug fixes, and was generally more stable
compared to Prototype #3. Issues with the alignment calculations were also fixed.
One of the testers were unable to provide feedback because HoloApp did not work
for the building he was testing it in. The other testers did not provide any feedback.
Prototype #5
In Prototype #5, we implemented the alignment correction algorithm and intersection
lines. We also implemented AO, but the performance of HoloApp became very slow.
Therefore, this was not included in the prototype.
We identified that HoloApp did not work for one of the testers because some of
the rooms spanned multiple levels, and Dalux’ system did not properly support it. It
implied that the rooms spanning multiple levels were extracted as multiple room –
one per level.
6.2
Tests
The following tests were performed on Prototype #5 of HoloApp.
The testers of
the following tests were both people with and without experience in construction,
but none of them had experience with HoloApp. HoloApp should ideally not require
==PAGE:85==
6.2 Tests
73
construction experience to use, which is the reason why we chose to test it on both
people with and without construction experience.
6.2.1
Data transfer test
This test was performed to investigate the effect of optimizations on the transferred
data. The test shows the difference in speed and data size with and without the
data structure optimizations described in section 5.1.1. In this test, a complex vir-
tual model was downloaded within a (40m x 6m x 40m) bounding box, containing
approximately 400,000 triangles. The test was performed on a Wi-Fi with a speed of
approximately 35 Mbit/s.
As seen in Figure 6.1, the test data used 25.2 mb and took on average 93.18 seconds
to transfer and load, while the same data went down to 14.2 mb and 65.77 seconds.
The optimizations meant transferring times became approximately 30% shorter, and
the data size 40% smaller. The service time did not become significantly worse with a
small average increase of less than 1%. It is also clear to see that the majority of the
time is spend while downloading the data, even after the optimizations were applied.
Due to the smaller size of the data, loading was also reduced on the client from 5.74
seconds to 3.54 seconds, approximately 38% faster.
Figure 6.1: Diagram displaying time distributions of transferring data from HoloSer-
vice to HoloApp. The data consists of 14 entries which can be seen in Table D.1 in
Appendix D.
==PAGE:86==
74
6 Results
6.2.2
Initial alignment test
This test was performed to determine the accuracy of the initial alignment using
reference points. The test was done in the test room by ourselves. In the test we sat
up a virtual model containing three elements, and marked the correct locations of the
elements in the test room. We then aligned the virtual model inside the room, and
marked the positions of the elements according to HoloApp. Any misalignments would
cause HoloApp to display the elements at incorrect positions. Finally, we measured
the distance between the correct positions of each element, and the corresponding
position marked using HoloApp.
The test was performed several times using different pairs of reference points, see
Figure 6.2 and 6.3. In order to eliminate any errors caused by drifting, the device was
kept completely still after the initial alignment. One person would do the alignment,
while another person marked the elements’ positions according to HoloApp.
Figure 6.2: Test setup to measure initial alignment. One person is managing HoloApp
while the other person is marking the elements’ positions with stickers on the wall.
The four orange stickers indicates the reference points used in the test.
==PAGE:87==
6.2 Tests
75
Figure 6.3: Close-up photo of the markings of one of the elements after three of the
tests. The green sticker marks the correct position of the elements, and the pink
stickers marks the element’s position according to HoloApp. One pink sticker was
placed for each test, hence the three pink stickers.
Figure 6.4: Diagram displaying the accuracy of the initial alignment.
The data
consists of 15 entries which can be seen in Table D.2 in Appendix D.
The results in Figure 6.4 shows the average alignment offset for each of the tests.
The distance varied quite a bit, with a maximum offset of 6.33 cm and minimum
at 0.67 cm, but overall it was reasonably accurate, with an average offset of 4.06cm
among all the test.
==PAGE:88==
76
6 Results
6.2.3
Alignment correction test
This test was performed with the same setup as described in section 6.2.2. The test
was done in three steps: first we aligned HoloApp, then we moved around, and finally
we placed the three pink stickers according HoloApp. The test was performed with
three degrees of movement: minimal movement, movement within the same room,
and movement between multiple rooms.
The results in Figure 6.5 shows that the results became much better when using
alignment correction. If the virtual model got too misaligned, the alignment correc-
tion was not always able to correct the errors. This explains why some of the subtests
with correction enabled while moving between rooms varied so much in the offset. The
alignment correction was capable of keeping the accuracy within 5cm when the user
stayed within the same room, but it proved difficult to keep the accuracy high when
the user moved between rooms.
Figure 6.5: Diagram displaying the accuracy of the alignment with and without
alignment correction enabled. The data consists of 30 entries which can be seen in
Table D.3 and D.4 in Appendix D.
The correction improved the alignment significantly, reducing the average offset 9
times for minimal movement from 8.43 cm to 0.9 cm, 18 times for movement in same
room from 40.20 cm to 2.3 cm and 3 times for movement between rooms from 53.3
cm to 19.0 cm.
==PAGE:89==
6.2 Tests
77
6.2.4
Rendering alignment test
This test was implemented as a WebGL application using Unity, and hosted on a
website to make it easier to share the test to testers. The WebGL application uses
the same shaders as HoloApp.
The test was designed to validate the user’s understanding of potential misalign-
ment in the scene by rendering the room model using an outline.
The user was
presented with four different images of the same scene, but with a different alignment
on each image, see Figure 6.6. The order of the four images were randomized between
each subtest, with one correct answer and three wrong answers, picked from a list
of six to eight wrong images. The first subtest was used to make the tester familiar
with the test, and the result was not saved. For each of the following subtest, the
time was tracked, along with information about which rendering technique was used,
and whether the answer was correct or not. The result was automatically send and
stored on the HoloService, once the answer was submitted.
Figure 6.6: The WebGL application of the rendering alignment subtest with a scene
that renders the outline. The check boxes indicate which image the tester has selected
to be the correct one.
The test results shown in Figure 6.7 show that the outline made it easier for the
tester to validate if the alignment was correct or not. Without the outline, the testers
tended to use more time, unlike when the outline was rendered. The testers were
mostly able to answer correctly for subtests without outline, with 90% of the answers
being correct. Additionally, all the testers answered correctly when the outline was
rendered.
==PAGE:90==
78
6 Results
In addition, Figure 6.8 shows that the testers spend a long time on the first scenes
without outline, but later on improves and becomes roughly as fast as with outline.
Overall, the scenes with outline were on average identified 30% faster than the ones
without outline.
Figure 6.7: Diagram displaying the correct answers and time spend for all of the
rendering alignment tests. The data contains 64 entries which can be seen in Table
D.5 in Appendix D.
Figure 6.8: Diagram displaying the average time spent per scene of the rendering
alignment test. The scenes are in the same order as they appear in the test (left to
right). The data contains 64 entries which can be seen in Table D.5 in Appendix D.
==PAGE:91==
6.2 Tests
79
6.2.5
Rendering techniques test
This test uses the same WebGL application as the previous test, but it consists of a
scene specifically designed to test the different rendering techniques of HoloApp. In
this test, the user is presented with three views of the test room: A rendered image
of the target scene, a front-view of the scene, and a top-view of the scene, see Figure
6.9. The user’s task is to drag the elements in the front-view and top-view to match
the image of the target scene. Each test slightly randomizes the translations and
rotations of the virtual elements of the target scene, and selects a random rendering
technique for rendering the target scene image.
Similar to the previous test, the first subtest is used to make the tester familiar
with the controls, thus data is not tracked. For the rest of the subtests the distance
between the each element and its target element was tracked. The results from the
test are three floats for each element, representing the difference between the element
in the target image and the positioned element in x, y and z in camera space. The
results are in camera space in order to track the tester’s depth perception.
Figure 6.9: The WebGL application of the rendering techniques test. The application
contains three views: An image of the target scene (left), a front-view of the scene (top-
right), and a top-view of the scene (bottom-right). The tester can select an element
and use the arrows to move the element. In this figure, the tester has selected the
yellow pipe in the top-view.
Implementing the WebGL application for this test was both hard and time con-
suming, and, as a result, the controls of the test ended up being a bit hard to use.
Despite the sub-optimal conditions, the testers were able to complete the test with a
==PAGE:92==
80
6 Results
reasonable accuracy.
The results shown in Figure 6.10 are represented as an average absolute difference
in cm for x,y and z axis. It shows that users are better at positioning the elements
with our rendering solutions. The results also show that the testers were worse at
placing the elements when rendering the elements as an overlay alone. Figure 6.11
show that there is a tendency that the testers have a harder time positioning elements
that are rendered using overlay. The average of the overlay techniques was 316.22 cm,
for the stripes techniques 192.09 cm and occluded techniques 155.89 cm. The best
technique was using occlusion only at an average total offset at 112.87 cm, and the
worst was overlay without AO and intersection lines at 372.68 cm, 70% less accurate.
Figure 6.10: Diagram displaying the average accuracy for each combination of a ren-
dering methods (overlay, pattern, and occluded) and technique (AO and intersection
lines). The data consists of 45 entries which can be seen in Table D.8 in Appendix
D.
==PAGE:93==
6.2 Tests
81
Figure 6.11: Diagram displaying the average accuracy when placing the four element
for each combination of a rendering methods (overlay, pattern, and occluded) and
technique (AO and intersection lines). The data consists of 45 entries which can be
seen in Table D.8 in Appendix D.
6.2.6
HoloApp comparison test
Finally, HoloApp was tested as a complete solution in comparison to Field. Field
is a mobile application that is developed by Dalux, and is used in the construction
industry. It enables the user to view buildings in 3D, but unlike HoloApp, it does not
use MR.
There were two parts of this test: Control and placement. During control the
tester should validate if six sticker notes were placed in the right location according
to the virtual model, and during the placement the tester should locate a pair of
elements inside a wall. The test took place in the test room as seen in Figure 6.12.
The orange sticker notes mark six arbitrary points on the walls, referred to as surface
points.
For this test, two different models was created that contained an element on
each surface points. For each model, three randomly selected elements were offset
respectively 5cm, 10cm, and 20cm in a random direction along the wall. Each model
also contained two elements located at arbitrary points inside one of the walls. The
two models were designed in Autodesk Revit1 and each uploaded as a separate project
in Dalux’ system, so both apps could access the data.
1”In Denmark, Autodesk Revit is the most common 3D modelling program used in the construc-
tion industry.” – Bryan Karlqvist.
==PAGE:94==
82
6 Results
Figure 6.12: The test scene of HoloApp comparison test. The image shows one of the
reference points (pink sticker), five of the six surface points (orange sticky notes), and
the location of the two occluded elements identified by the tester (blue sticky notes)
The results from the test can be seen in Figure 6.13, 6.14, 6.15, and 6.16. Figure
6.13, 6.14, and 6.16 shows that the testers were more accurate with HoloApp com-
pared to Field, both during control and placement, and that the time to perform the
test was slightly shorter when using HoloApp, reducing the average time for the whole
test from 185 seconds to 156 seconds, a reduction of 17.87%. Figure 6.15 shows that
the tester were better at control using HoloApp, however, for both apps the testers
had difficulties controlling the element with an offset of only 5cm. The testers were
better at the control test, with 86% correct in HoloApp and 50% in Field. Placement
had an average offset of 10.6 cm using Field, and 4.4 cm using HoloApp, improving
accuracy with 58%. Using Field, the most accurate entry is 3.4 cm and least accurate
is 17.5 cm, using HoloApp the most accurate is 2.6 cm, and least accurate is 6.0 cm.
Testers with high experience improved the use of Field in the control test from 44%
inaccuracy to 30% inaccuracy, and only 6% for the placement test from 10.93 cm
inaccuracy to 10.30 cm. Using HoloApp, the testers were generally much more accu-
rate, with only 8% inaccuracy for low experienced and 10% for high experienced in
the control test. The same can be said for the placement test, low experienced testers
were 4.08 cm inaccurate and high experienced were 4.85 cm inaccurate, showing high
experienced testers were 17% less accurate.
==PAGE:95==
6.2 Tests
83
Figure 6.13: Diagram displaying the testers’ performance when using Field during the
comparison test. The diagram shows the time it took to perform the test, percentage
of incorrect answers during control, and error distance during placement. The dia-
gram is based on the 11 entries for Field which can be seen in Table D.9 in Appendix
D.
Figure 6.14: Diagram displaying the testers’ performance when using HoloApp dur-
ing the comparison test. The diagram shows the time it took to perform the test,
percentage of incorrect answers during control, and error distance during placement.
The diagram is based on the 11 entries for HoloApp which can be seen in Table D.9
in Appendix D.
==PAGE:96==
84
6 Results
Figure 6.15: Diagram displaying the percentage of correct answers using Field and
HoloApp during control in the comparison test. The data consists of 22 entries which
can be seen in Table D.9 in Appendix D.
Figure 6.16: Diagram displaying the time used for alignment, control, and placement,
respectively.
The dashes line displays the average total time for both Field and
HoloApp. The data consists of 22 entries which can be seen in Table D.9 in Appendix
D.
==PAGE:97==
6.2 Tests
85
Figure 6.17: Diagram showing the average percentage of correct answers during con-
trol, and the average accuracy during placement of the two applications in the com-
parison test.
==PAGE:98==
86
==PAGE:99==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
In this chapter, we first discuss the design choices and the results of this project.
7.1
Design and Results
We only had time to perform a limited number of tests on a small group of testers,
and, therefore, the results are statistically insignificant. In order to prove whether
or not HoloApp is better than existing applications, it has to be tested more thor-
oughly. This means that the tests should have a greater variety of subtests, and the
tests should be performed on a larger group of testers. However, the results from
this project can be used as a guideline for which aspects one should focus on, when
designing and testing a similar application.
One of the most challenging parts of developing HoloApp was the fact that neither
of us had any experience with construction, and that we did not know the use cases
of an application used in construction. Developing HoloApp iteratively, and getting
feedback from people with experience in construction was essential to the success of
this project. It enabled us to design the system based on feature request and the use
cases described by the testers. Furthermore, it also helped us identify obscure cases
where HoloApp did not work properly – cases that would have otherwise been very
hard to identify. We would have loved to have even more testers, so we could have
received more comprehensive feedback and a greater insight in the potential use cases.
The performance of HoloApp was good after optimizations were implemented.
Initially, HoloApp had long transferring time, sometimes up to a couple of minutes,
but we managed to reduce it significantly by using caching, bounding boxes, and data
structure optimizations to reduce the amount of data being transferred. In the end,
we experienced that HoloApp was able to access the data in less than 15 seconds
for a project of an average size. The results from the transferring test show that
the optimizations improved the transfer speed by 30%. Hence, optimizing the data
structure is important in order to keep a short transfer time. If we had the time, it
could have been interesting to further test the impact of the bounding box on the
transfer times, and testing the transfer times for projects of varying sizes.
Using cloud computing to perform most of the calculation on external servers had
a good performance, even when large amounts of data had to be transferred between
==PAGE:100==
88
7 Discussion
the HoloApp and the service. Packing and unpacking the data introduced some over-
head, but it was insignificant compared to the reduction of the download time. Unity
set restrictions on the format of the spatial data, and Dalux structured their data
quite differently. As a result, Dalux’ optimizations to their data became more of
a hindrance than a help because we had to do a lot of workarounds to change the
format. However, we managed to overcome this task, and implement a system that
worked well.
The initial alignment test shows that using reference points to align is a fairly
accurate method with an average accuracy of 4.06 cm. If we had more time, it would
have been interesting to test how accurate our alignment method was for calculating
the position and rotation, respectively. Furthermore, we only tested the accuracy
of the alignment method, and not the usability for common use cases. Such a test
would most likely show that changing position with the HoloApp is too cumbersome
because the reference points have to be updated as well. Had we implemented the
initial alignment using building drawing, it would have been easier for the user to
change position because the method can be used to align anywhere in the building.
We learned that in order for HoloApp to stay accurate, a method is needed for
continuously correcting the alignment. Therefore, the initial alignment does not have
to be very accurate, as the correction method would correct any small errors anyways.
Maintaining an accurate alignment was the most challenging part of the project,
but the algorithm used by the AlignerService proved very effective. The results from
alignment correction test show that the algorithm has an accuracy of 0.9cm, 2.3cm,
and 19.0cm for minimal movement, movement within the same room, and movement
between rooms, respectively. Compared to the results without correction, it became
respectively 9, 18, and 3 times more accurate. We experienced that if SS is able to
detect and snap the virtual model to the correct wall, it works very well. Otherwise, it
is not able to correct the alignment, such that it becomes sufficiently accurate, which
is the case for some of the test results. It would have been useful to test how often
and under what conditions SS tends to fail. Like for the initial alignment, it would
be useful to test how well SS handles both positional errors and rotational errors.
Overall, we believe that SS was the right choice among the potential solution to
the problem, and that it shows great potential even though there is still room for
improvements.
The rendering alignment test worked well, and the results proved that the outline
makes it easier for the user to determine whether the alignment is correct or not.
The testers spent most of the time on the first subtest without outline, but became
increasingly better, and ended using the same amount of time as for the subtests
with outline. The results of the subtests that used outline were generally more stable.
Even though the test had different objects for each subtest, all the subtests used the
same scene, which might mean that the testers memorized the scene. The subtest
should instead have used a different scene. The subtests that used outline were on
average answered 30% faster than similar subtests without outline. Testers were able
==PAGE:101==
7.1 Design and Results
89
to identify the correct answer on all subtests with the outline rendered, but approxi-
mately 10% of the subtests without outline were answered incorrectly. Therefore, the
inclusion of an outline seems to be the best solution.
MR enables the user to move around and see the objects from different perspec-
tives which is very helpful for the understanding, and we observed that almost all of
the testers took advantage of this when viewing the virtual elements. Therefore, in
comparison to traditional applications displayed on a 2D display, the need for clear
rendering techniques is less important when using MR.
The rendering techniques test was not precise, so it can be hard to say much about
the results of the test. However, of all the rendering techniques we implemented, we
believe only two of them provides a significant improvement to the understanding
of the spatial data in MR applications: Shading and occlusion. Shading helps the
user understand the geometry of an object. In our project, we used a simple shading
technique based on the normals, and it worked well for visualizing the geometry in an
understandable way. Occlusion helps the user understand how the virtual elements
are placed in relation to the physical environment. We observed that the user mainly
used the relation between the virtual elements and the physical objects, in our case
the intersection between the elements and the walls, to determine the positions of
the element. The results show that the best rendering technique is using occlusion
without AO and intersection lines, and using overlay as rendering method generally
gave worse results. Compared to the occlusion, the testers were 70% less accurate
when using overlay without AO and intersection lines – the only case with no visual
indication of the intersection between the virtual element and the physical objects.
The tendencies from the results pair well with our observations, and the best technique
was the one closest to the real world presentation.
AO was definitely not worth implementing, as it was too computational heavy for
the HoloApp, and did not improve the understanding of the spatial data significantly.
Rendering intersection lines is a better alternative because it has a much better per-
formance, however, it still did not improve the understanding significantly.
Compared to Field, HoloApp has a bigger initial overhead because it has to be
aligned before it can be used. However, the comparison test proved the whole align-
ment was only 17.87% slower than using Field. The feedback from the testers also
indicated that it was easier to get the right orientation while using HoloApp. The
control part of the test showed HoloApp as an improvement over Field, with an av-
erage of 38% incorrect answers for Field and 10% for HoloApp. Besides being more
accurate, HoloApp was also 16% faster to use than Field for this part of the test. It
shows that MR makes the user perceive the spatial data both faster and more accu-
rately. When comparing HoloApp to Field in the placement test, HoloApp performed
best in the test. The results shows that HoloApp was more accurate and that the
testers were 30 % faster when using HoloApp.
Sadly, the comparison test was not very representative for a real use case. Instead
of making the tester perform the Field subtest using the 3D model, they should in-
==PAGE:102==
90
7 Discussion
stead have had a building drawing with measurements. This is how control is done
during real construction, so it would have been much more representative test. If
the testers had to perform HoloApp subtest without help from other when doing the
placement, drifting could have had a greater impact on the results. Furthermore, the
test results and feedback showed that testers without experience in construction were
still able to understand and use HoloApp.
We did not manage to get feedback or test our implementation of metadata. How-
ever, the design of the solution is based on our prototype testers’ use cases, and we
believe the solution is a useful tool for their use cases. Retrieving and displaying
metadata did not require much implementation to reach a working state. Although
it works effectively, it does not use any of the capabilities provided by MR, and is
restricted to one pop-up at the time. By doing this, the user was restricted to only
view metadata for a single element at the time. Instead of using a single full-screen
pop-up, we could instead have anchored metadata to elements’ positions in the phys-
ical world. This way the user would be able to see metadata for multiple elements at
a time and avoid having to click through an extensive number of pop-ups.
The current implementation for generating the room model works well for most
cases, but it has some limitations, namely that it assumes that all walls are vertical,
the floors and ceilings are horizontal, and that room does not span multiple levels.
The latter is a limitation in Dalux’ system, and, therefore, also become a limitation in
the HoloApp. However, the issue should be manageable to solve within a reasonable
time frame.
HoloApp does currently not work for rooms that spans multiple levels or rooms
with walls that are not flat or not vertical. Both issue are caused by limitations by the
Dalux system’s current way of loading the files from the BIM model. Once they are
fixed in Dalux’ system, we believe that it should be fairly simple to adjust HoloApp
to support the changes.
7.1.1
Ease of use
Because HoloApp only gets spatial data for the elements near the aligned position,
and that it only can align near the reference points, the user can currently only see
spatial data near the reference points. Therefore, changing location requires that
reference points gets updated as well. This is a critical limitation of the solution we
chose, but it could be solved by using an initial alignment method that can be used
from anywhere in the building. We believe performing the initial alignment using
building drawings would be a much better solution in terms of ease of use for the
user. For this project, we still think it was a smart choice to use reference points
because it was easier to implement, and it enabled us to get a working prototype
much faster. However, we suggest implementing an location independent alignment
method for a professional application.
==PAGE:103==
7.1 Design and Results
91
SS proved to be an intuitive way to correct the alignment since the users only had
to look at the surface they wanted the virtual model to snap to. Currently, SS is only
able to snap to one surface at a time, so making it able to snap to multiple surfaces
at a time would be a nice improvement. The user easily ends up using the majority
of the time looking at the different surfaces in order to achieve an optimal alignment.
If the initial alignment method is changed, and SS is improved to be able to snap
to multiple surfaces at a time, we believe that HoloApp will become a much more
user-friendly application compared to its current state. HoloApp is fairly fast to use,
and the optimizations makes it feasible to use on-site.
7.1.2
Accuracy
While the initial alignment is simple, it is not necessarily easy to get completely
accurate as seen from the results of the initial alignment test. However, it did not
have to be perfectly accurate because SS removed most of the inaccuracies from the
alignment.
Maintaining an accurate alignment continuously is critical for HoloApp to be
useful for the users. The Phab is the very first Tango-enabled MR device available
to the consumer, but in its current state, it drifts a lot. Furthermore, the Phab has
some clear criteria that have to be met while using it, and the lighting conditions also
have a big influence the accuracy of the tracking. However, as new devices come to
the market, and Google improves the tracking, the Tango platform will most likely
improve. Currently, HoloApp needs a robust method for correcting misalignments
caused by the drifting of Phab.
Even though SS does a good job maintaining an accurate alignment, it is not
always able to do so. As a result, the system is not sufficiently robust, so it constantly
drifts when the user moves around.
Based on the feedback from testers, moving
between rooms is, however, not a common use case. Therefore, it is not critical that
HoloApp cannot maintain a high accuracy when moving between rooms.
SS shows great potential, even though there is still room for improvements. With
further improvement to SS and the MR technology, we believe it is feasible to develop
a sufficiently accurate application for construction.
7.1.3
Understanding
It proved to be important for HoloApp to have a render technique for visualizing
the alignment, so that the user can validate if the alignment is accurate. Outline
improved the ability to validate the alignment in an effective way, but it works as a
solution for a problem that hopefully is temporary.
Even though HoloApp only included a few fairly simple rendering techniques, we
still believe the it was very intuitive. MR in itself makes spatial data much easier to
understand because it enables the user to move around in the building and see the
virtual objects from different perspectives. Due to this, it is less important that MR
==PAGE:104==
92
7 Discussion
applications includes advanced rendering techniques to improve the understanding of
the spatial data. We learned that with occlusion and simple shading the spatial data
is already very intuitive. Further research should be put into designing intuitive way
of rendering non-spatial data, such as metadata, as a part of the virtual elements in
the building. HoloApp is currently lacking in this area, but it should be explored in
order to utilize the full potential of MR.
==PAGE:105==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
Overall, the project covered in this thesis was a success. We managed to implement a
mobile application, named HoloApp, as a working application for a mobile MR device,
and it can be used to visualize the virtual model directly inside the corresponding
building. We were not able to perform our tests on a large number of people, so the
results are not statistically significant. However, they show a tendency that HoloApp
is more efficient than Field.
In terms of ease of use, HoloApp is fairly good. Changing position in the building
is cumbersome because the reference points has to be updated too. However, once
the reference points are set up, HoloApp is easy to use and requires little interaction.
If HoloApp is used under the right conditions, and the user does not move around
extensively, the accuracy is within 3 cm. Otherwise, the accuracy can vary up to 50
cm.
HoloApp is generally very understandable to use, even for people without experi-
ence in construction. Furthermore, people were both faster and more accurate when
using HoloApp compared to Field, regardless of experience.
For this study, we can conclude that most important part of implementation of
HoloApp, was maintaining a high accuracy. This required a custom algorithm that
could correct any errors caused by drifting. Furthermore, we saw a tendency that
only simple shading and occlusion significantly improved the understanding of the
spatial data.
With a few modifications, HoloApp would be ready for use in the construction
industry. It shows great potential, and we believe that with the current MR devices it
is feasible to develop a sufficiently accurate application that is better than the existing
solutions. A few years from now, MR applications could likely become the standard
solution for viewing BI in construction. It could help enterprises avoid errors and
getting delayed, thus saving them millions of DKK.
==PAGE:106==
94
==PAGE:107==
CHAPTER 9
Future work
There are many opportunities for using MR in construction, both in form of new
features and entirely new ideas. The alignment is a part of MR which could improve,
and also the most critical part for applications used in construction. The primary
focus should be to develop an accurate alignment method. Once this is achieved,
the usability could be improved by using a location independent methods such as
utilizing building drawings. From there, it could be interesting to investigate if a
fully automatic alignment method is feasible. The overall quality of the the tracking
of the MR devices is expected to become better over time. With tracking improved,
reintroducing the continuous downloading of chunk could also be a great feature to
add, since the user would be less restricted and possibly be able to move around
more. Alternatively, an offline download feature would improve the use since internet
connection would not be needed.
Preparations for using the system is not streamlined, especially setting up the
model filter to show the data. Instead, using all the data and detecting walls that
exists in the physical world, in order to remove them in the virtual world, would make
it much easier to get started and remove that part of the preparations. Setting up
filters could become an optional feature to customize the virtual model.
Attaching and viewing additional meta data, such as documents and tasks, di-
rectly onto the elements in the models could streamline the process whole process of
accessing the data. The system could also work as a reporting platform for communi-
cation between people on the construction site and the people designing and updating
the BIM models to reach a better correlation BIM and actual construction.
Doing measurements is another use case for MR. There are already Tango appli-
cations that can do this by placing two or more markers in the physical world, but
using the information from the BIM, measurements for virtual elements would be a
possibility and a very useful feature when constructing buildings and especially for
installations.
iOS on iPhone is a huge platform, and at the World-Wide Developer Conference
[32] Apple announced their AR implementation, called ARKit. This platform provides
very similar functionalities as the Tango platform, although Apple is not using any
3D depth scanner to achieve the tracking. Apple plans to release it for iPhone 6S
or newer, for iPad 2017, and for iPad Pros. With the number of devices already out
and compatible with ARKit, the platform will most likely become the biggest AR
platform as soon as it releases, and it will be a huge market to explore.
==PAGE:108==
96
9 Future work
A completely separate idea is to use MR for mapping of existing buildings. Geom-
etry scanners are already being used to map buildings, but MR devices could make
the process easier, and especially finding and registering changes between the virtual
model and the physical world, which could be useful both during construction and
FM.
==PAGE:109==
Bibliography
[1]
Lars Markan Reenberg, Kristian Buur, and Thomas Westergaard-Kabelmann.
Måling af svigt, fejl og mangler i dansk byggeri. Technical report. Erhvervs- og
Byggestyrelsen, 2010.
[10]
Xiangyu Wang. “Augmented Reality in Architecture and Design: Potentials and
Challenges for Application”. In: international journal of architectural computing
7.2 (2009).
[13]
Paul Milgram et al. Augmented Reality: A class of displays on the reality-
virtuality continuum. ATR Communication Systems Research Laboratories, 1994.
[14]
Xiangyu Wang and Marc Aurel Schnabel. Mixed Reality in Architecture, Design
and Construction. 2009.
[17]
G. Klinker, D. Stricker, and D. Reiners. “Augmented Reality for exterior con-
struction applications”. In: Fundamentals of Wearable Computers and Aug-
mented Reality (2001).
[18]
Charles Woodward and Mika Hakkarainen. “Mobile Mixed Reality System for
Architectural and Construction Site Visualization”. In: Augmented Reality -
Some Emerging Application Areas. 2011. Chapter 6.
[19]
Steven Feiner, Blair MacIntyre, and Tobias Höllerer. “A Touring Machine: Pro-
totyping 3D Mobile Augmented Reality Systems for Exploring the Urban En-
vironment”. In: Personal Technologies 1.4 (1997), pages 208–217.
[20]
Mani Golparvar-Fard, Feniosky Peña-Mora, and Silvio Savarese. “D4AR – A 4-
Dimensional Augmented Reality Model for Automating Construction Progress
Monitoring Data Collection, Processing and Communication”. In: Journal of
Information Technology in Construction 14 (2009).
[21]
Amir H. Behzadan and Vineet R. Kamat. Visualization of Construction Graph-
ics in Outdoor Augmented Reality. University of Michigan, Department of Civil
and Environmental Engineering, 2005.
[22]
Hung-Lin Chi, Shih-Chung Jessy Kang, and Xiangyu Wang. “Research trends
and opportunities of augmented reality applications in architecture, engineering,
and construction”. In: Automation in Construction 33 (2013), pages 116–122.
[23]
D.W.F. van Krevelen. Augmented Reality: Technologies, Applications, and Lim-
itations. Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Department of Computer Science, 2007.
==PAGE:110==
162
Bibliography
[24]
Byung-Uck Kim et al. “A Simple and Efficient Triangle Strip Filtering Algo-
rithm”. In: Journal of Information Science and Engineering 21 (2005), pages 1277–
1288.
[25]
J. Andreas Bærentzen et al. Hands on Real-Time Graphics.
[26]
T.D. Olsson et al. “User evaluation of mobile augmented reality in architectural
planning”. In: eWork and eBusiness in Architecture, Engineering and Construc-
tion (2012), pages 733–740.
[27]
Paul J. Besl and Neil D. McKay. “A method for Registration of 3-D Shapes”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Maschine Intelligence 14.2 (1992).
[28]
Vibhor Sharma, Preeti Gusain, and Prashant Kumar. “Near Field Communi-
cation”. In: Conference on Advances in Communication and Control Systems
(2013).
[29]
J. Edward Swan II et al. “Egocentric Depth Judgments in Optical, See-Through
Augmented Reality”. In: IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics 13.3 (2007), pages 429–442.
[31]
Morgan McGuire et al. “The alchemy screen-space ambient obscurance algo-
rithm”. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGGRAPH Symposium on High Perfor-
mance Graphics (2011), pages 25–32.
[33]
B.Thomas, W. Piekarski, and B. Gunther. “Using Augmented Reality to visual-
ize architecture designs in an outdoor environment”. In: DCNET1999 - Design
Computing on the Net (1999).
[34]
Mehdi Mekni and André Lemieux. “Augmented Reality: Applications, Chal-
lenges and Future Trends”. In: 2014.
[35]
Javier Irizarry et al. “InfoSPOT: A mobile Augmented Reality method for ac-
cessing building information through a situation awareness approach”. In: Au-
tomation in Construction 33 (2013), pages 11–23.
[36]
Chan-Sik Park et al. “A framework for proactive construction defect manage-
ment using BIM, augmented reality and ontology-based data collection tem-
plate”. In: Automation in Construction 33 (2013), pages 61–71.
==PAGE:111==
Links
[2]
Masin Project. Construction Management. [Online; accessed 06-July-2017]. 2015.
url: http://www.masinproject.com/construction-management-test/.
[3]
42Gears Mobility Systems. History Of Virtual Reality. [Online; accessed 06-July-
2017]. 2017. url: https://42gears.com/construction-industry/.
[4]
Virtual Reality Society. History Of Virtual Reality. [Online; accessed 06-July-
2017]. 2017. url: https://www.vrs.org.uk/virtual- reality/history.
html.
[5]
Mikkel Jacobsen. En time med PlayStation VR. [Online; accessed 06-July-2017].
2016. url: http://komputer.dk/it-og-samfund/ny-teknologi/en-time-
med-playstation-vr.
[6]
Jens Mogensen. Driveclub VR. [Online; accessed 06-July-2017]. 2016. url: https:
//www.geekculture.dk/arkiver/21943.
[7]
TruVision. Virtual Reality for Architecture. [Online; accessed 06-July-2017].
2017. url: http://truvisionvr.com/.
[8]
IrisVR. Instant Virtual Reality for the Building Industry. [Online; accessed 06-
July-2017]. 2016. url: https://irisvr.com/.
[9]
Arbejdstilsynet. Executive Order on the Use of Work Equipment. [Online; ac-
cessed 06-July-2017]. 1992. url: http://engelsk.arbejdstilsynet.dk/en/
regulations/executive-orders/1109-anvendelse-af-tekn-hjaelpemidler.
[11]
Yoni Heisler. iPhone 8 said to feature exciting next-gen Augmented Reality tech.
[Online; accessed 06-July-2017]. 2017. url: http://bgr.com/2017/02/13/
iphone-8-specs-augmented-reality-features/.
[12]
Sam Sharp. Why Did Microsoft Buy Minecraft? For HoloLens. [Online; accessed
06-July-2017]. 2015. url: http://www.xboxoneuk.com/xbox-one/news/why-
did-microsoft-buy-minecraft-for-hololens/.
[15]
Thomas DeMichele. What is Mixed Reality? [Online; accessed 06-July-2017].
2016. url: http://factmyth.com/what-is-mixed-reality/.
[16]
Foundry. VR? AR? MR? Sorry, I’m confused. [Online; accessed 06-July-2017].
2016. url: https://www.foundry.com/industries/virtual-reality/vr-
mr-ar-confused.
==PAGE:112==
164
Links
[30]
Unity. Shader Reference. [Online; accessed 06-July-2017]. 2017. url: https:
//docs.unity3d.com/Manual/SL-Reference.html.
[32]
Apple. iOS 11 brings powerful new features to iPhone and iPad this fall. [Online;
accessed 06-July-2017]. 2017. url: https://www.apple.com/newsroom/2017/
06/ios-11-brings-new-features-to-iphone-and-ipad-this-fall/.
[37]
Martin Kearn. Introduction to REST and .net Web API. [Online; accessed 06-
July-2017]. 2015. url: https://blogs.msdn.microsoft.com/martinkearn/
2015/01/05/introduction-to-rest-and-net-web-api/.
[38]
Microsoft. Data Types (C# vs. Java). [Online; accessed 06-July-2017]. 2015.
url: https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ms228360(v=vs.90)
.aspx.
