==PAGE:1==
 
Master’s Thesis 
 
Work System and Business Model Design 
for 360º Video Production 
 
Andrés Salazar Ruiz Velasco 
 
Supervisor: Karen Murdock 
 
 
June - 19 - 2017 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
Table of Contents 
 
Abstract
3 
Acknowledgments
4 
List of Figures
5 
List of Abbreviations
6 
1 Introduction
7 
1.1 Virtual Reality and 360º Video
7 
1.2 Work System
8 
1.3 Business Model
9 
1.4 Problem statement
10 
2 Theoretical Framework
12 
2.1 Work Systems
12 
3 Methodology and Research Design
15 
3.1 Work systems
15 
3.2 Business Model
16 
4 Technology and 360º Video
19 
4.1 360º Video Technology Challenges
20 
4.2 Absolute Zero VR
21 
5 Work System Design
23 
5.1 Current work practices in similar systems
23 
5.2 Work System Boundaries
23 
5.3 Work System Analysis
24 
5.4 Work System Challenges
27 
5.5 Work System Recommendations
31 
5.6 Redesigned Work System
33 
6 Business Model Design
37 
6.1 Initial Business Model
37 
6.2 Business Model Canvas
41 
6.3 Experiments to Test the Business Model
41 
6.4 Experiment Results
44 
6.5 Experiments Interpretation
49 
6.6 Redesigned Business Model
52 
1 
==PAGE:3==
6.7 Redesigned Business Model Canvas
58 
6.8 Go To Market Strategy
58 
7 Work System Review
63 
7.1 Changes to the Works System
63 
8 Justifications
64 
8.1 Work System Redesign Justifications
64 
8.2 Business Model Redesign Justifications
65 
9 Discussion
68 
9.1 Work System
68 
9.2 Business model
69 
9.3 Risk
71 
10 Conclusion
73 
References
74 
Appendix
76 
A.1 End Users Survey
76 
A.2 360º Video Producers Interview Template
78 
A.3 AZVR 360º Camera Specifications
79 
 
 
 
 
2 
==PAGE:4==
I.
Abstract 
The following thesis came from the opportunity of collaborating with a Danish virtual reality 
startup (Absolute Zero VR). The startup’s main business is the development and production of a 
360º video camera, and thus they have a need for a video producer to provide feedback for the 
development of the camera. The author’s previous work experience was in video production and 
thus an agreement was made to collaborate, and build together a 360º video production 
company. 
The first step in the process was the desk research into the market and current work practices in 
the industry. From this research, it was evident that the production company would need a 
newly designed work system and its own business model. 
Then a decision was made to follow Steven Alter’s work system method and his process of how 
to analyze an existing work system, find it’s problems and redesign the work system. For the 
business model design, the business model generation from Alexander Osterwalder & Yves 
Pigneur was followed, with insights from David J. Teece, Chesbrough, and Rosenbloom to help 
with the inclusion of innovation and new technologies into the business model. 
To design a new work system, a series of interviews and observations were made of a similar 
organization (Immerse) then it’s work system was analyzed and its challenges determined. The 
solutions to this challenges were then formed into a new work system for the production 
company. 
Then the business model was designed, the method followed was to create an original business 
model based on an initial research and the author’s assumptions. These assumptions were then 
tested with potential clients and the results of the experiments helped to confirm or disprove the 
previous assumptions and make the necessary changes to the business model. 
The biggest learnings from the experiments were around the customer segments and about the 
maturity of the Danish market. 
The production company has now a new business model and a new work system, and even 
though the financial situation is still complicated, there is an interest from clients and a 
promising future for the virtual reality medium. 
 
 
 
 
3 
==PAGE:5==
II.
Acknowledgments 
I would like to thank Professor Karen Murdock for her expert advice throughout this project, as 
well as Hannes Becker and the Absolute Zero VR team for their wonderful collaboration in the 
project. Thanks to Immerse, FlexFlights, Mads Bruun, Kaspar Astrup Schröder and Roskilde 
Festival for their help with the research. This project would have been impossible without the 
support of CONACYT and the Government of Mexico. And Finally thanks to Fernando 
Suarezserna for his writing advice and Alicia Gonzalez for her emotional support. 
 
4 
==PAGE:6==
III.
List of Figures 
Figure 1: ​VR Headset (pg. 7) 
Figure 2: ​360º video multi-camera rig diagram (pg. 8) 
Figure 3: ​The work system framework (pg. 12) 
Figure 4: ​The business model canvas (pg. 17) 
Figure 5: ​AZVR Camera (pg. 22) 
Figure 6: ​Detailed Workflow (pg. 23) 
Figure 7: ​Work system boundaries (pg. 24) 
Figure 8: ​Standard Video Shoot Diagram (pg. 28) 
Figure 9: ​360º Video Shoot Diagram (pg. 29) 
Figure 10: ​Redesigned Work System (pg. 33) 
Figure 11:​ Recommended placement for microphones (pg. 34) 
Figure 12: ​A microphone hidden from the camera’s field of view (pg. 35) 
Figure 13:​ Initial Business Model Canvas (pg. 41) 
Figure 14: ​Camera test exterior and interior of a plane (pg. 48) 
Figure 15: ​Camera test exterior and interior of a property (pg. 49) 
Figure 16: ​Redesigned business model canvas (pg. 58) 
Figure 17: ​Break Even Point (pg. 61) 
Figure 18: ​Break Even Point First Year (pg. 62) 
Figure 19: ​Revised work system (pg. 63) 
Figure 20: ​Event livestreaming survey result (pg. 66) 
Figure 21: ​Information flow and the transformation stages (pg. 68) 
Figure 22: ​Teece’s elements of a business model design (pg. 69) 
Figure 23: ​Elements of the business model design (pg. 70) 
Figure 24: ​Business Model Strategic Analysis Filter (pg. 71) 
 
 
5 
==PAGE:7==
IV.
List of Abbreviations 
VR
Virtual Reality 
HMD
Head Mounted Display 
AZVR Absolute Zero VR 
 
 
6 
==PAGE:8==
1 Introduction 
1.1 Virtual Reality and 360º Video 
With the popularity of virtual reality (VR) rising as a new medium in the past few years, the 
demand is also rising for the film and video production industries to produce 360º content to be 
consumed in VR. 
 
Although there are many definitions of the concept in academic literature, for the purpose of this 
thesis VR is understood as the simulation of a realistic three-dimensional environment, 
generated by a computer with a combination of software and hardware, which closely 
resembles reality.  This simulated environment is displayed to the viewer through the use of a 
1
headset that is strapped to the viewer's head and is equipped with motion tracking technology, 
allowing the viewer to look all around a scene (see figure 1). 
 
 
                                                          (figure 1: VR Headset ) 
2
 
 
360º video, works in a similar manner to VR with the exception that it is not a simulation, it is 
real footage made with a series of video recordings that take in every direction at the same time, 
1 "virtual reality". Collins English Dictionary - Complete & Unabridged 10th Edition. HarperCollins 
Publishers. 31 Jan. 2017. <Dictionary.com http://www.dictionary.com/browse/virtual--reality>. 
2 Samsung Electronics CO LTD,. "DISPLAY METHOD AND ELECTRONIC DEVICE". 2016: FIG 5C Print. 
7 
==PAGE:9==
using omnidirectional cameras or a rig composed of many cameras (see figure 2). The video 
recordings are stitched together, (with the use of software) to form a video sphere, that the 
viewer can observe with a VR head-mounted display (HMD) by moving its point of view around 
it. 
 
 
(figure 2: 360º video multi-camera rig diagram) 
 
VR is still in an early stage of technological development and even earlier in terms of business 
development but is showing great potential. Goldman Sachs estimates $80bn in revenue by 
2025  and assumes that as technology improves the medium will gain more popularity, 
3
especially around the areas of advertising, events, entertainment and real estate. 
1.2 Work System 
The VR market is in demand for content and to properly satisfy this demand a VR production 
company needs to follow a work system that considers all of the challenges in this new medium. 
 
Alter  defines the work system as a system in which human participants and/or machines 
4
perform work using information, technology, and other resources to produce products and/or 
services for internal or external customers. In the case of standard video production, the work 
system receives an input (idea/story) and by the use of human resources and technology, 
records and edits the product to finally deliver a finished product in the form of a video or film. 
 
A 360º video production follows the same high-level steps but since the camera is filming in all 
directions at once questions about how to complete these steps emerge: what to do with lighting 
3 Goldman Sachs,. ​Virtual & Augmented Reality: Understanding The Race For The Next Computing 
Platform​. 2016. Web. 21 Feb. 2017. Profiles In Innovation. 
4 Alter, Steven. <> Work System Method : Connecting People, Processes, and IT for Business Results. 
Work System Press, 2006. Print. 
8 
==PAGE:10==
and blocking? How to record sound? Where is the director situated? How is the stage 
designed?  
 
So far the most common approach has been to modify a traditional video production team to 
produce 360º video, without modifying the overall structure of the work system. This thesis will 
analyze existing workflows to identify its strengths and weaknesses and to use them in the 
design of an optimized workflow for 360º video production in an effort to monetize the process in 
an economically competitive way. 
1.3 Business Model 
Osterwalder  describes a business model as the way an organization creates, delivers and 
5
captures value while Teece  defines a business model as the description of the design or 
6
architecture of the value creation, delivery, and capture mechanisms a business employs. In 
other words, the business model explains how the organization will make money and it does this 
by describing its core business areas such as customer segments, value propositions, 
channels, customer relationships, revenue streams, key resources, key activities, key 
partnerships and cost structure. 
When talking about business models most authors talk about creating value, thus it’s important 
to define the term, Chesbrough and Rosenbloom  describe value as an economic concept, that 
7
is defined by what a buyer will pay for a product or service. 
 
Another aspect of business models that is necessary to consider is that they are highly 
situational, and their design process must be iterative, meaning that the business model is 
never finished, and it is optimal to keep revisiting and editing it as the circumstances 
surrounding the business change. 
 
Some aspects of the business model will look similar in both the business models of standard 
and 360º video production organizations, but the key is to find the aspects that can be optimized 
to create value for the stakeholders and by capitalizing on these areas where doing things in an 
original way will bring better results. 
 
In this specific case it is relevant to note that the business model will be designed around an 
innovation, and thus is important to understand how is the value that this innovation creating 
best captured. Teece says that every new product development should be coupled with the 
5 Osterwalder, Alexander., Yves. Pigneur, and Tim. Clark. Business Model Generation : Wiley, 2010. 
Print. 
6 Teece, David J. “Business Models, Business Strategy and Innovation.” Long Range Planning 43.2-3 
(2010): 172–194. Web. 
7 Chesbrough, H, and RS Rosenbloom. “The Role of the Business Model in Capturing Value from 
Innovation: Evidence from Xerox Corporation's Technology Spin-off Companies.” Industrial and Corporate 
Change 11.3 (2002): 529–555. Print. 
9 
==PAGE:11==
development of a business model in order to define how will it go to the market and what are the 
strategies to capture its value.  
1.4 Problem statement 
It has been proven that advances in technology require businesses to re-evaluate their business 
models, Teece  explains that without a well-developed business model, innovators will fail to 
8
either deliver or to capture value from their innovations.  
 
Teece  explains how companies have changed the way they make money from the industrial 
9
era due to the effects of new technologies on their sectors. The effect of a 360º camera on the 
video and film industry provides such a technological advantage because it brings a whole new 
medium to the industry, and thus requires the design of a new business model. 
 
Chesbrough and Rosenbloom  explain that to be successful a business model needs to create 
10
a heuristic logic that connects technical potential with the realization of economic value. They 
talk about how an innovation can be successful by employing a familiar business model but 
mention that in some cases the familiar business model will not fit the circumstances of the 
technological or market opportunities.  
 
The ideal 360º video production organization should follow a work system specifically designed 
for this context and use a business model that has been designed to fit its necessities, in order 
to help the organization in generating the most value possible. 
 
Unfortunately, the majority of 360º video production organizations are opting for recycling the 
old work systems and business models that are already in use in standard video production 
companies. This is in part due to the fact that most 360º video productions are being done by 
standard video production companies which after purchasing or renting a 360º video camera 
decided to add this medium to their offered services. Resulting in lower quality products and 
confusion in the industry about which are the best practices for producing a 360º video. 
 
This negligence from the current market leaders provides an opportunity to new startup 
companies. Innovating on a business model has many advantages for a new business and 
there are multiple examples from companies that managed success in competitive markets by 
coming up with innovative business models that their competitors couldn’t easily imitate due to 
their existing business models or current relationships. Netflix is a good example, they joined 
8 Teece, David J. “Business Models, Business Strategy and Innovation.” Long Range Planning 43.2-3 
(2010): 172–194. Web. 
9  Teece, David J. “Business Models, Business Strategy and Innovation.” Long Range Planning 43.2-3 
(2010): 172–194. Web. 
10 Chesbrough, H, and RS Rosenbloom. “The Role of the Business Model in Capturing Value from 
Innovation: Evidence from Xerox Corporation's Technology Spin-off Companies.” Industrial and Corporate 
Change 11.3 (2002): 529–555. Print. 
10 
==PAGE:12==
the video rental market which was dominated by Blockbuster but offered renters the possibility 
of skipping the commute to the rental store and delivered movies straight to their customer 
houses. Blockbuster tried but couldn’t copy their business model because of the huge amount of 
physical rent houses it already possessed. Dell computers is another example of a new player 
in a competitive market who decided to evade the retailers and offer their products directly to 
customers for a lower price, a strategy that the dominant players couldn’t copy straight away 
due to their agreements with the retailers. In the same way, a new business model can propel a 
small video production startup into a success. 
In a medium that is fast growing and generating so much attention, VR is expected to have 171 
million users by 2018 , it is important to focus on the organizations that are producing the 
11
content. 
 
By creating an organization from the ground up, following the concepts of work system and 
business model design and with a focus on collaboration with the technology developers, a 360º 
video production organization will be able to capture the most value. 
 
 
 
11 "Active Virtual Reality Users Worldwide 2014-2018 | Statistic". Statista. N.p., 2017. Web. 31 Jan. 2017. 
11 
==PAGE:13==
2 Theoretical Framework 
2.1 Work Systems 
Work systems appear all over business organizations, every single action from obtaining clients, 
to hiring new employees, require it’s very own work system. The business organization being 
analyzed is a 360º video producing agency and the work system in question is related to the 
production of video, from idea to the final cut of the video. Is important to set the boundaries of 
the work system in order to properly focus on the system of interest and not waste resources on 
adjacent systems that are currently working properly. 
The decision to focus on the video production work system is related to the introduction of the 
360º camera as a new tool for video production, which affects the video production work system 
the most. 
 
The work system method is the tool that will be used to understand, analyze and improve the 
work system. Is important to follow the steps in order and don’t try to improve a system without 
properly understanding it first, to do this a work system framework (see figure 3) must be 
developed, this will help to identify the basic elements of the system in order to understand them 
and then evaluate them. The framework will help with describing the system and identifying the 
problems in the system as well as opportunities to improve it.  
 
 
           (figure 3: The work system framework) 
 
12 
==PAGE:14==
The work system framework  divides the system into its core elements and groups some of this 
12
elements together to show how they collaborate, inside of its predefined system boundaries. 
The first grouped block consists of the participants, the information, the technology and the 
business processes, the second group is the product and services that the first group is 
creating, the third group is the customers who are consuming this products and services and the 
fourth group is composed of the environment, the infrastructure and the strategies this group 
affects the actions of the first three groups. 
 
The participants are defined as the people that perform any kind of work inside of the work 
system being studied. The information is any kind of information that the participants use in 
order to perform their work. And the technologies refers to any kind of tools or techniques that 
the participants use when working. The business processes are the combination of the work the 
participants do with the information and technologies that result in a product or service. 
 
In the 360º video production example, the participants are the client and the video producing 
team, the information is the client’s proposal, script and storyboard they follow and the 
technology is the camera and other tools used. Their business processes are the steps they 
take to come from a request from the client to a final video. 
 
The products and services are the outputs of the work system and they can be in the form of a 
physical product, information or any type of service.  
 
The customers are the people or organizations that consume or benefit from the products and 
services that the work system is creating, they can be internal or external to the business 
organization. 
 
The environment is where the work system stands in terms of culture, organization type, market 
competition and government regulations. The infrastructure refers to the resources the 
organization possesses and are available to the work system even if they are shared with other 
work systems. The strategy refers to both the organization’s and the work system’s and it 
explains how and why the work system operates in a certain form. 
 
System Ergonomics 
The application of system technics on ergonomic problems is called system ergonomics , 
13
whenever there is an interaction between a person and a machine to complete a task, system 
ergonomics can be used to find improvements to these interactions. 
12 Alter, S., and Steven Alter. “The Work System Method.” (2015): n. pag. Web. 
13 Bubb, Heiner. "System Ergonomics As An Approach To Improve Human Reliability". Nuclear 
Engineering and Design 110.2 (1988): 233-245. Web. 
13 
==PAGE:15==
According to Czaja and Nair , a system is an aggregation of elements organized in some 
14
structure to accomplish system goals and objectives. Czaja and Nair also talk about the 
characteristics that all systems have, which are: interaction of elements, structure, purpose, and 
goals and inputs and outputs. 
Systems also are defined by its boundaries, which separate the internal from the external 
elements of the system. All the internal elements interact with and affect each other to complete 
the system goal. The inputs and outputs are the characteristics that make the elements interact 
and communicate.  
According to Meister  systems exist inside an environment, and this environment has an impact 
15
on the whole system, it can be either physical or social. 
 
All systems share the following components: 
1.
Elements 
2.
Conversion processes 
3.
Inputs or resources 
4.
Outputs 
5.
An environment 
6.
Purpose and function 
7.
Attributes 
8.
Components and programs 
9.
Management, agents, and decision makers 
10. Structure 
These components must be considered whenever studying or designing a system.  
 
Wilson  explains that systems ergonomics examines, accounts for and enhances the design of 
16
a system, and people’s interactions with it, rather than concentrating on an individual part of it. 
 
 
 
 
 
14 Czaja, Sara J., and Sankaran N. Nair. “Human Factors Engineering and Systems Design.” Handbook of 
Human Factors and Ergonomics: Fourth Edition (2012): 38–56. Web. 
15 ​ALLUISI, EA. “CONCEPTUAL ASPECTS OF HUMAN-FACTORS - MEISTER,D.” Contemporary 
Psychology 36.4 (1991): 300–301. Print. 
16 ​Wilson, John R. “Fundamentals of Systems Ergonomics/Human Factors.” Applied Ergonomics 
45.1 (2014): 5–13. Web. 
14 
==PAGE:16==
3 Methodology and Research Design 
3.1 Work systems 
The steps that will be taken to analyze and redesign the work system are the following, first 
research will be done to help define the work system and the problem that is to be solved, then 
an analysis of each of the work system elements to find where changes can be made to solve 
the problem, once the possible changes have been identified redesign the system in a way that 
it solves the problem without causing any new ones. 
 
Research 
There were two types of research done, the first was desk research into the available literature 
from 360º video producers who have taken their time to express how are they dealing with their 
productions and also the challenges that they are encountering. This content was found on a lot 
of different channels it ranged from published papers, to blog posts, to interviews done for radio 
or internet podcasts. The authors of this information also varied from 360º video producers to 
camera manufacturers to amateurs or hobbyists who are involved in the medium. 
The second type research consisted on two semistructured, qualitative interviews done with two 
producers at a 360º production company, Immerse.  
 
Immerse  
Immerse is a video production company based in Copenhagen, Denmark. Since 2013 they have 
been working in the production of standard video and since 2016 they started to produce 360º 
video professionally for several different clients. 
 
Christian Søes and Martin Lund-Nielsen Interviews 
Christian and Martin are the owners of Immerse and are both video producers, they agreed to 
be interviewed for this thesis. The intention of the interviews was to understand their work 
system and find where the challenges lie in their organization. 
 
Both interviews were semistructured and qualitative and they consisted of open questions 
related to their organization structure and to their work practices. After a complete picture of the 
organization and the workflow was created, the questions then focused on the challenges they 
have when producing a 360º video. 
 
Analysis 
The first step in the work system analysis is to define the work system boundaries, this will aid 
the analysis by only focusing on the elements inside of this boundaries. To do this is important 
to define the input of the system, the tasks that the system performs and the output that it 
generates. 
15 
==PAGE:17==
 
To help define the work system a work system snapshot  will be used, the snapshot is a single 
17
page document that describes the customers, products and services, and participants of the 
work system. It also lists the business processes as no more than ten steps in total and gives a 
brief indication of the most important information and technologies in the work system. 
 
The work system snapshot will help define the work system, from there on the problems and 
opportunities must be identified and changes to it proposed and applied. To properly identify the 
problems and propose changes to solve them, the principles of system ergonomics will be 
applied to the work system. 
 
Challenges Identification 
With the help of the research and the analysis, the work system challenges will become evident. 
All the challenges will be recorded and categorized to get a better picture of what are the 
causes of this challenges and to properly recommend a way to solve them. 
 
Work System Recommendations 
The recommendations will address the challenges, taking into consideration that the changes 
recommended won’t create problems on any of the other elements of the work system. Once 
the recommendations are created the work system should be able to perform better and the 
challenges should not be an obstacle anymore.  
3.2 Business Model 
Once the work system is finished and all of its challenges are properly resolved, the business 
organization is ready to start producing 360º videos but in order to be successful, an 
organization needs to generate a profit and to generate a profit a business model is necessary. 
 
Initial Research 
In order to design an effective business model, information on customers, competitors and 
suppliers is required. This means that the first task is to research the business area and obtain 
as much information as possible. The research will focus on the consumer's needs as well as 
how are the competitors satisfying or not these needs. But will also need to provide insights into 
the market size, which partners and channels will be needed, what will the cost be and which 
are the revenue streams.  
 
Initial Business Model Design 
Once the research is done the business model will be designed into its first draft. Even though 
the design is just a first draft and changes will be made, the business model elements have to 
17 Steven Alter. "The Work System Method for Understanding Information Systems and Information 
Systems Research" (2002) 
16 
==PAGE:18==
be in sync with each other and make sense together. To aid with the design of the business 
model Osterwalder’s business model canvas (see figure 4) will be used. 
 
 
(figure 4: The business model canvas) 
 
Experiments 
Once the first draft of the business model is designed experiments to prove its validity will be 
designed and conducted. The results of this experiments will represent learnings into what is 
working and what is not in the current business model. 
The experiments need to test the information that the initial research provided, in order to this 
the experiments need to tap into potential clients of the organization. In order to do this a series 
of surveys will be designed and sent to relevant individuals and organizations to gather 
quantitative data from their feedback. While also interviews will be conducted to gather 
qualitative data from potential clients. 
 
Experiment Interpretation 
The data received from the experiments will be interpreted and compared to the data on the 
initial business model, this way the assumptions previously made will be either confirmed or 
corrected. 
 
 
 
 
17 
==PAGE:19==
Final Business Model 
With the confirmed data the new business model will be designed, now taking into consideration 
both research and experiments. The new business model design will also be aided by the work 
system developed and the technology knowledge acquired. 
 
 
 
18 
==PAGE:20==
4 Technology and 360º Video 
 
Since the launch of the Oculus Rift virtual reality headset in August 2012 , there has been an 
18
explosion of innovation and development on the VR and 360º video field, but it wasn’t until 
March 2015 when Youtube introduced 360º video to its 1 billion monthly active users , followed 
19
by Facebook in September of the same year (1.79 billion monthly active users) , that everyone 
20
with access to an internet-connected desktop or mobile device could now consume 360º video 
content. 
 
VR and 360º have very different production processes but they are consumed in a very similar 
manner, with the use of a virtual reality headset or with the use of a dedicated 360º video player 
on a desktop or mobile device. They are also similar in the immersiveness that they provide, this 
quality of allowing the user to be surrounded by a scene on all sides and effectively transporting 
the viewer to a different place separates them from other types of media, and gives the medium 
the nickname of the “ultimate empathy machine” . 
21
 
Live events, video entertainment, and real estate are some of the industries that are already 
starting to show signs that 360º video will be a big part of them. Real estate being the quickest 
at it with companies like Sotheby’s already showing luxury homes to potential buyers through 
VR headsets . Live events are not far behind using the technology to provide viewers at home 
22
the experience of watching their favorite sport as if they were present at the stadium, as an 
example FOX broadcasted 360º video highlights of the Super Bowl LI in real time . As for the 
23
video entertainment industry, there are many examples of companies in the industry 
experimenting with the new medium and providing additional VR experiences to their current 
content, a good example is the New York Times which since the 1st of November 2016 
introduced daily stories presented in 360º video format on their website . 
24
 
Teece uses the example of how the transport industry has evolved due to technological 
innovations. Starting with the horse, then the railroad, the auto and even the airplane, all of 
18 Kumparak, Greg. "A Brief History Of Oculus". TechCrunch. N.p., 2017. Web. 31 Jan. 2017. 
19 "A New Way To See And Share Your World With 360-Degree Video". ​YouTube Creator Blog​. N.p., 
2017. Web. 31 Jan. 2017. 
20 "Introducing 360 Video On Facebook | Facebook Newsroom". ​Newsroom.fb.com​. N.p., 2017. Web. 31 
Jan. 2017. 
21 Milk, Chris. "Transcript Of "How Virtual Reality Can Create The Ultimate Empathy Machine"". Ted.com. 
N.p., 2017. Web. 31 Jan. 2017. 
22 Gaudiosi, John. "Sotheby's Real Estate Agents Are Using VR To Sell Homes In LA And NYC". 
Fortune.com​. N.p., 2015. Web. 21 Feb. 2017. 
23 Barry, Ashley. "You Can Watch The Super Bowl In VR, Here's How". ​USA TODAY​. N.p., 2017. Web. 21 
Feb. 2017. 
24 Lichterman, Joseph. "The New York Times Is Launching A Daily 360-Degree Video Series". ​Nieman 
Lab​. N.p., 2016. Web. 21 Feb. 2017. 
19 
==PAGE:21==
these technologies have disrupted the previous one and in some cases even replaced them. A 
similar trend can be observed in the entertainment industry where the theater, radio, cinema, 
television and internet-based streaming have all started as a new technology and thanks to 
good business models disrupted the entertainment medium to establish themselves as the new 
market leaders. VR is in its early stages and it still needs to overcome a few technological 
developments to make it as convenient to use as the current mediums but once it is ready it will 
need the aid of carefully designed work systems and business models to position itself as the 
dominant medium in the market. 
4.1 360º Video Technology Challenges 
As with any other emerging technology, for 360º video to be a success there are a few 
challenges that the technology still needs to overcome.  
 
Synchronization 
Because most of the camera solutions for recording in 360º rely on using several cameras 
recording at the same time, synchronization becomes a critical issue, there are a few solutions 
in the market that aim to resolve this problem, but even having the footage from one camera 
one frame ahead or behind creates a heavier workflow during the stitching process.  
 
Stabilization 
Stabilization has always been a challenge when recording any type of video, a regular practice 
on standard video is to crop the video in post-production in order to stabilize it. This solution is 
not available for 360º video as you need to cover the whole videosphere. And additionally shaky 
footage is even more perceivable when observed on a head mounted display and it induces 
discomfort for the viewer. So stabilization is currently a big issue in 360º video and one that 
needs to be solved especially for working with a moving camera. 
 
Audio 
One of the most attractive qualities of 360º video is the possibility it has to transport the viewer 
to a different place, this is the concept that Roth  defines as presence, being in the story world. 
25
In order to provide this experience to the viewer, audio is very important, and it needs to be 
convincing. There are currently a lot of advances into this in the form of binaural audio, which 
allows the audio engineers to add positional information to each sound, this results in a more 
immersive experience for the viewer as now the audio is also changing depending on where the 
user is looking at. However, this technology needs to be better distributed and become 
embedded in 360º cameras. 
 
25 Roth, Christian et al. “The Experience of Interactive Storytelling: Comparing " Fahrenheit’ with 
‘Façade.’” Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence 
and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 6972 (2011): 13–21. Web. 
20 
==PAGE:22==
Stitching 
Stitching is another aspect of 360º video that is seeing a lot of development but it is far from 
perfect. As with audio, it needs to get to a better quality and be more widely available in order to 
provide the viewers with a better experience. Because an error in stitching is very distracting 
when a viewer is using a head mounted display and it can lead to a viewer missing important 
information from the video.  
 
Consumption 
Finally, consumption is the last challenge that 360º video has, right now the video can be 
consumed in 3 different ways: On a computer screen through a video player where the viewer 
can drag around with his mouse on the video and observe the different angles of the video. On 
a mobile device, where the user can move the mobile device around to observe the different 
angles of the video. And on a head mounted display, where the viewer moves his/her head 
around to view the different angles of the video. Being the last option is the one that provides 
the best experience for the user, followed by the mobile device.  
The challenge is that a head mounted display is still a very expensive device ($600 USD) and 
needs an expensive PC to be able to use it, so the number of viewers who can experience a 
360º video properly is still very low.  
Additionally, 360º videos contain a large amount of data and thus end up being large files(+200 
MB per minute), which provides a challenge for streaming this media. 
4.2 Absolute Zero VR 
Absolute Zero VR (AZVR) is an early stage technology startup founded on 2016 and based in 
Copenhagen Denmark, AZVR is currently in the development stage of a 360º professional video 
camera.  
 
The collaboration with them is mutually beneficial as they offer the access to a working 
prototype of the AZVR 360º video camera, and they get in return feedback from tests and 
recordings that help them for constantly improving their product. 
 
The goal of AZVR is to produce a video camera that will give it’s users the possibility to capture 
the best footage possible while also providing them with good user experience, in order to 
achieve this goal it is essential that the prototypes are used in real life contexts that exactly 
replicate the way users of the final product will end up using it. 
 
The collaboration goal is to use Absolute Zero’s technology as a base for a new organization, a 
360º video production company, that will benefit both from working in close quarters with 
Absolute Zero’s technology developments and also by getting clients who are currently inquiring 
for 360º video productions. 
 
21 
==PAGE:23==
AZVR 360º Camera 
AZVR’s 360º camera consists of 12 lenses, with 8 of them arranged around the horizon and 2 
for the space under the camera and the last 2 for the space on top of the camera. 
Thanks to the large amount of lenses the camera can output (after stitch) a videosphere of high 
quality (8K). Another advantage of the camera is it’s long battery life, with up to 2.5 hours of 
non-stop recording.  
The current camera (see figure 5) is in a prototype stage and thus not completely reliable and 
missing some features. See Appendix A.3 for a detailed list of specifications. 
 
(figure 5: AZVR Camera) 
 
 
 
 
 
22 
==PAGE:24==
5 Work System Design 
5.1 Current work practices in similar systems 
In order to properly design a work system for 360º video production, a research was conducted 
into similar systems and how are they working towards accomplishing similar tasks. 
 
The following figure shows a detailed workflow from Input (the client’s request) to the output (the 
final rendering of the finished product). It is divided into 4 stages (Proposal development, 
pre-production, production, and post-production), each stage with its own input, processes, and 
outputs. 
 
 
(Figure 6: Detailed Workflow) 
5.2 Work System Boundaries 
Immerse as all other 360º video production companies studied, have several work systems in 
their organization, these different work systems focus on varied aspects from hiring new 
employees to obtaining new clients. But these work systems are not as critically affected by the 
inclusion of a new technology as the production system is. The production system is where the 
research revealed the most problems and obstacles and that is why the system boundary was 
set around it. 
This system is referred to as the Production System, it takes the client’s request as an input, 
processes this request and outputs a finalized 360º video (see figure 7). 
 
23 
==PAGE:25==
 
(Figure 7: Work system boundaries) 
 
The production system is the most integral part of the whole production company, because of its 
task of producing the 360º videos which are the main service that this company offers to its 
clients. It is of course affected by the other work systems in the company, by the input it 
receives and by the surroundings of the organization. 
5.3 Work System Analysis 
Work System Snapshot 
After analyzing the detailed workflow and the different aspects of Immerse, the following system 
snapshot was developed, to help with understanding the components of the work system. 
 
Immerse - 360º Video Production Company - Video Production  
 
Customers 
Products & Services 
Immerse Clients 
360º video production 
 
Work Practices (Major Activities or Processes) 
1.
Client requests a video 
2.
Producer designs video production proposal with time and price 
3.
Producer sends proposal to client 
4.
Client accepts proposal 
24 
==PAGE:26==
5.
Pre-production team prepares script and storyboard 
6.
Production team films the needed scenes 
7.
Post-production team stitches and edits the video 
8.
Client reviews the first edit of the video and provides feedback 
9.
Editor makes changes based on the feedback 
10. Editor renders the final cut of the video 
 
Participants 
Information 
Technologies 
Client 
Producer 
Pre-production team 
Production team 
Post-production team 
Video Proposal 
Script 
Storyboard 
Shooting Schedule 
 
Camera 
Computer 
Editing software. (Adobe 
Premiere, After effects) 
Stitching software. (Autopano 
Video) 
Audio Recording Equipment 
Lighting Equipment 
 
Processes and Activities 
On the case of Immerse and the other studied 360º video productions, the processes and 
activities they realize are all relevant to the production of a video. The process is started with the 
input which comes in the form of a video request from a client, which is processed by a 
producer into a proposal for the client which should include a description of the video, duration 
fo the project and price. The client then decides to accept the proposal or ask for changes. 
Once the proposal is accepted the pre-production team starts working, preparing a script, 
storyboards, scouting locations, defining crew, cast, and equipment needed for the production 
and creating the production schedule. Once everything is ready the production starts following 
the instructions from the production schedule the production team records all the required 
scenes, in both video and audio. Finally, the recorded data is passed on to the post-production 
team who is responsible for stitching the video together, editing, sound mixing, color correcting 
and exporting in the format previously accorded with the client. 
 
Participants 
Client: Is the one who initiates the process, making a request for a video and also acts as a 
decision maker, he/she needs to accept both the video proposal and the final video. 
Producer: Oversees the whole process, has the personal contact with the client and is in charge 
of the communication and coordination of all the teams on the work system. He/she is in charge 
that everything is done correctly. 
Pre-production Team: The production teams sizes vary greatly depending on the production 
size, but their tasks are the same, the pre-production team needs a writer for the script, a 
storyboard artist for the storyboard, a casting director to choose the actors, and producers to 
choose the crew, equipment, locations and create the shot list and schedule. 
25 
==PAGE:27==
Production Team: The production team will depend on the choices made by the preproduction 
team but will most commonly need a director, camera operator, actors, sound engineer and 
different assistants. 
Post-Production Team: Again depending on the type of project and decisions made on 
pre-production the post-production team needs a video stitcher, an editor, and a sound mixer. 
 
Information 
Video proposal: Is the first information element created by the producer and that serves as a 
guide for the whole project and as a contract with the client. 
Script: Created during pre-production is the dialogue and story guide that the director and actors 
use to film the video. 
Storyboard: Created in pre-production is the visual guide, that helps the director film the scenes 
correctly. 
Shooting Schedule: Also created during pre-production is based on the script and is followed by 
the whole production and post-production team to know when to perform their tasks. 
 
Technologies 
Computers: Computers are used all over the process, with different software programs for the 
different tasks. 
●
Word Processing: Producer uses it to create the video proposal. 
●
Script Writing Software: Used by the pre-production team, to create the script. 
●
Storyboarding Software: Used by the pre-production team, to create the storyboard 
●
Schedule Software: Used by the pre-production team, to create the shooting schedule 
●
Stitching Software: Used by the post-production team to stitch all the footage into a 
videosphere. 
●
Editing Software: Used by the post-production team to edit the stitched video into a film. 
●
Sound Mixing Software: Used by the post-production team to edit and sync the audio 
with the video. 
Camera: Used by the production team to record the footage. 
Audio Recording Equipment: Including microphones and audio recorders, used by the 
production team to record the audio. 
Lighting Equipment: Used by the production team to light the actors and the scene, to recreate 
the requirements of the storyboard. 
 
Product/Services 
The main product is the finished 360º video which is the final output of the whole process, 
however, the work system also produces the video proposal, which is also delivered to the client 
to help him take the decision of ordering the video. 
 
 
 
26 
==PAGE:28==
Customers 
The customers of the system are individuals and organizations that hire the video production 
company to obtain a 360º video. The purpose of this is usually for marketing reasons to use as 
a commercial for their own business or organization. However, the customers may also want the 
video to use as their own product to further sell to their own clients. 
 
Environment 
The environment around the work system is one of novelty, where everything is new and thus it 
prompts too much experimentation. The environment is not very competitive with just a few 
other organizations also trying to figure out if it would turn out into something productive. The 
technical aspect of the environment is one of constant development which is promising for the 
organization but at the same time brings some uncertainty about which tools to trust or which 
work practices to adopt, because with the constant change those tools and work practices can 
quickly become obsolete. 
 
Infrastructure 
The work system is supported by the video production company infrastructure which provides 
resources that the system needs to operate for example the acquisition of clients, which the 
work system need to get their initial input, and the access to financial resources that the system 
needs to finance their budgets. 
 
Strategies 
The strategy being used by the organization is one of experimenting and testing, the 
organization is experimenting on the viability of the production of 360º videos as a profitable 
business, and this strategy is also inherited by the video production work system in the style of 
operation in which they are still experimenting with different tools and workflows to find which 
produces the best results.  
5.4 Work System Challenges 
As most of the studied organizations including Immerse come from a standard video production 
background, it is not a surprise that the majority of their challenges are directly related to the 
inclusion of the 360º video camera. 
 
Processes and Activities Challenges 
Pre-Production Challenges 
The pre-production phase of a video production is perceived as very similar in both standard 
and 360º video and does not seem to impose very serious challenges. There are only a few 
aspects that are currently being considered as different, for example, location scouting, the 
27 
==PAGE:29==
process in which the locations for the shooting are decided now has a greater importance, 
because it now needs to work on all angles. 
But due to the planning nature of the pre-production stage, it is here where a lot of the 
production and post-production challenges can be prevented. And because of this perceived 
similarity to standard video the organization is overlooking a lot of the important aspects and is 
deciding to pass on the challenges to later stages in the process. 
 
Equipment 
Choosing the right equipment is a critical aspect of pre-production, that can affect the rest of the 
production if it is not done correctly. The challenge in this area is due to the current state of the 
technology around 360º cameras. A lot of experimenting is being done by the 360º video 
producers in order to find the right equipment for creating videos. Immerse, has been producing 
360º videos for over a year and they have already used 3 different setups for their 360º cameras 
and are still looking into experimenting with different configurations. When video production tool 
as basic as the camera is a matter of experimentation and confusion this provides a great 
challenge into the whole task. 
  
Production Challenges 
The production stage is perhaps the one where most of the challenges appear because it’s the 
one that distances itself the furthest from standard video productions. A lot of currently used 
methods for video production are no longer effective. 
 
360º Scenes 
A standard video production set is a very crowded space, with a lot of crew members and a lot 
of equipment, traditionally all of the crew and equipment just needs to be placed behind the 
camera's point of view (see figure 8). 
 
 
(Figure 8: Standard Video Shoot Diagram) 
28 
==PAGE:30==
 
 
A 360º shoot, on the other hand, does not have this space behind the camera. As expressed by 
Vosmeer and Schouten  the 360° point of view implies several other difficulties for the 
26
producer. As the camera records the world in 360°, everything around the system will be seen 
(see figure 9). This is the source of the main challenges around 360º video production during 
the production stage. There is no space for hiding any equipment so workarounds need to be 
designed for the use of lighting and sound recording. 
The Director and the rest of the crew can no longer be present during the filming of a scene, 
making it even more complicated to get the right material. Even the tripod is sometimes an 
obstacle to the shoot, as the legs of it can be seen on the bottom of the scene. 
 
 
(Figure 9: 360º Video Shoot Diagram) 
 
Camera Movement 
Camera movement is another aspect of producing 360º video that is resulting challenging to the 
current producers in the medium. Director Andy Cochrane  explains that when you are moving 
27
the camera on a 360º video, you are actually moving the viewer around, and this can cause 
discomfort for the audience, so it’s important to be careful when dealing with camera movement. 
 
Post-Production Challenges 
Originally post-production posed a greater challenge to 360º video productions because all of 
the available tools were developed for working with standard video, but post-production tools 
26 Vosmeer, Mirjam, and Ben Schouten. “Creating Video Content for Oculus Rift Scriptwriting for 360 
Degrees-Interactive Video Productions.” Lecture Notes in Computer Science 9353 (2015): 556–559. Web. 
27 Cochrane, Andy. Explaining The Basics Of VR. 2017. radio. 
29 
==PAGE:31==
(software) are seeing a lot of development and currently, solutions now exist for stitching and 
editing 360º video. 
 
Data Management 
The first challenge of post production is managing all of the data recorded by the 360º camera, 
this is an aspect that as previously mentioned depends on the decision, during pre-production, 
of which camera or cameras configuration to use. 360 camera rigs range from using 18 
individual cameras to 2. Nevertheless, if the production was using a 2 camera rig during 
production, it is going to output the double of the data as a standard video production, thus 
producing a challenge of how to organize, work with and backup this data. 
 
Stitching 
While the development in stitching software is getting better, it is still a challenge for the current 
360º video producers as the stitching process needs to be perfect for the final video to be fully 
enjoyable by an audience, and getting to this point is still considered long and hard work. 
 
Editing 
Editing is also done with the use of software solutions, Adobe Premiere Pro and After Effects 
being the preferred tool by professionals. The challenges in editing come also with the size of 
the medium as it is hard for an editor to visualize the whole video sphere at the same time and 
thus making his job harder to complete.  
Another issue with editing comes from the novelty of the medium when observing a 360º video 
most of the viewers are doing it for the first time, this generates a curiosity on wanting to 
observe every scene from every possible angle. This causes a challenge to the editor as he 
needs to accommodate for this and give the audience enough time to contemplate the full video 
sphere, while this is not complicated on a technical level, it can result in a challenge when 
working on a piece that requires a faster pace, so faster cuts in between scenes would result in 
the audience not being able to observe the whole scene and thus get a feeling that they might 
have missed something. However, once audiences get used to the medium this challenge 
should be no longer a problem to editors. 
 
Participants Challenges 
The participants challenge observed comes in the production stage, when filming, because as a 
video production is usually assisted by a big quantity of specialists and crew members, that 
when changing into a 360º production all become a new challenge as now there is a need to 
hide everyone from the camera's view. So the challenge with the participants during production 
is to find the balance between having enough participants without creating additional obstacles 
to the shoot. 
 
 
 
30 
==PAGE:32==
Technology Challenges 
Technology challenges are also only critical during production, where the 360º camera chosen 
might not be performing adequately, Immerse expressed having problems with stabilization and 
synchronization.  
Another technology challenge is recording audio, as the existing technologies for recording 
audio would appear on the 360º video recording, they now become an obstacle and another 
thing that needs to be hidden from the camera view. 
Lighting equipment presents the same challenge as audio recording equipment but on a larger 
scale, lights tend to be bigger and bulkier and for shooting in studio settings are indispensable. 
 
Strategies Challenges 
As there might not be a challenge with the strategy currently being used by the work system, is 
the implementation of the strategy that is acting as an obstacle for the whole organization to 
grow, by focusing on experimenting the work system is risking the future of the company.  
5.5 Work System Recommendations 
After looking at the complete work system from input to output and understanding the 
processes, participants, information and technologies used. And finding where the challenges 
most commonly appear, it is now time to recommend changes into the actual process that will 
help the work system overcome its challenges. 
 
Strategy Recommendation 
While it is important for a work system to try out different tools and different workflows, in order 
to reduce problems on the whole system the work system strategy needs to change. The 
constant testing of new technology is creating a chaos on the organization that acts as a 
challenge during the whole process of production. This chaos is also supported by the current 
environment around the organization, where every week the organization is bombarded with 
news of a new technology available. 
According to Edwards and Jensen , the organization must work on establishing order, by 
28
reducing the insecurity, in this case, the insecurity is coming from the environment and is being 
adopted by the organization as a strategy. The team must find the stable and unstable areas, 
after two years of working in this field, they need to know what is causing the most instability 
and then, respond by changing the situation from chaos to complexity. This means that the work 
system needs to stop and evaluate their activities and processes, choose which have performed 
the best and keep working in that way. This does not mean that they should stop innovating, it 
just means that the organization should grow and improve their work practices steadily instead 
of starting from zero each time a new technology is introduced in their surroundings. 
 
28 Edwards, Kasper, and Per Langaa Jensen. “Design of Systems for Productivity and Well Being.” 
Applied Ergonomics 45.1 (2014): 26–32. Web. 
31 
==PAGE:33==
A Focus on Pre-production Information 
Once the strategy has been restated, the organization needs to focus on its processes and 
activities, because it is here where most of the other work system challenges are being 
initialized and correcting the root issues, should be a priority as it will be easier to fix the later 
issues that this challenge was causing. 
 
Because of the variational nature of the inputs, it is in the pre-production stage where the work 
system participants need to work the hardest in order to ensure that the next stages of the 
process will flow without challenges. As observed from the research, pre-production importance 
is being dismissed because of it’s perceived similarity to pre-production on standard video. And 
this is causing a lot of struggles during the production and post-production stages.  
The recommendation is to develop a pre-production workflow that differs from that of standard 
video. Especially when developing the information that the pre-production process is outputting. 
 
The Script 
The script is the first step in the pre-production process, which makes it the most critical one if 
the script is wrong everything else will be wrong because the script is used by the production 
team as a guide they follow to make their work. If the guide is wrong everything built upon it will 
be harder and probably incorrect. 
it is important for writers to think of the script differently when writing for a 360º video, it can be a 
challenge especially for writers coming from a standard video background, but the writer needs 
to think about every single angle for all of the scenes. 
Also, the writers have to understand the limitations of the medium, and thus avoiding giving 
instructions for the production to try things that the organization is already aware it won’t work. 
By working this way the work system can already avoid production challenges like the issues 
with camera movement. 
 
The Storyboard 
The storyboard is the second most important information piece developed by the pre-production 
participants, and as with the script, it is critical that it is well produced so that it prevents 
mistakes during production. 
The storyboard is used in a standard video production to plan every single scene, and include 
information on camera angles, actor positions, and set design. When translated into a 360º 
video production it is essential that the storyboard accounts for the whole video sphere, 
because when on production the production team will need to know what to do with all of the 
angles and the more information on the storyboard the better the production team will be able to 
perform. 
 
Crew and Equipment 
As seen on the challenges the crew and equipment needed for production represents a huge 
challenge, especially when it comes to hiding it from the camera. That is why the 
recommendation comes in the pre-production stage, it is here where all the decisions regarding 
32 
==PAGE:34==
what crew and equipment would be used in production need to be taken. It is a common 
practice from standard video production to always have extra crew and equipment handy in 
case something changes. For 360º this needs to change as for every piece of equipment 
brought and crew member a place to hide is needed, so it is important to keep the crew and 
equipment used to a minimum. 
 
Feedback Channel 
Most of the information on the work system is currently flowing in one direction, it is created by 
the pre-production team and the used by the production and post-production teams. The 
pre-production team then gets to see the final output of the system but rarely knows of any 
challenges the other teams went through to complete it. 
A recommendation for this issue is to provide a feedback channel from the production and 
post-production teams, to the pre-production team. Where after every completed video a list of 
the problems encountered during their processes is sent to the pre-production team, so they are 
constantly learning what works and what can’t be done in 360º and avoid having the same 
problems on the next production. 
This feedback channel will help in the creation of better scripts, storyboards, and decisions of 
crew and equipment. Without being a burden to the production and post-production teams. 
5.6 Redesigned Work System 
The redesigned work system consists of the combination of the studied work systems, plus the 
inclusion of the recommendations (see figure 10) 
 
 
33 
==PAGE:35==
(Figure 10: 360º Redesigned Work System) 
 
The main recommendation was a shift in strategy from the current experimentation into a more 
focused growth, in order to create this growth the feedback channel was recommended. 
Previously information was only traveling forward in the organization, with the addition of the 
feedback channel the whole organization will start to learn what works and what doesn’t in the 
later stages of the video production process and this will help prevent the obstacles that the 
organizations are currently experiencing. 
There is also an increased importance into the processes of the pre-production stage because 
is the stage that is currently being overlooked the most, creating a lot of uncertainty and 
problems during the production and post-production stages. By increasing the importance given 
to the pre-production processes the information passed forward to the production team will allow 
them to perform better and stop worrying about overcoming obstacles, instead concentrating on 
their tasks. 
 
Production Recommendations 
As 360º video production is a medium that is in constant change it becomes challenging to 
provide practical recommendations that will stay relevant over time. However, from the 
information gathered from the research, a few recommendations into how to deal with the most 
noted challenges of production can be given. 
 
360º Scenes recommendations 
The main issue during production is the placement of the required equipment to create a 
professional video production. 
 
Audio recommendations 
 
 
34 
==PAGE:36==
(Figure 11: Recommended placement for microphones) 
 
Audio is perhaps the second most important aspect that needs to be done professionally to 
successfully create a sense of immersion for the viewer. In the majority of scenarios, there are 
two audio sources that are important to record, the dialogue from the actors (talent) and the 
ambient sound from the place where the recording is being made. As mentioned before the 
challenge with 360º video production is that the microphones must be hidden from the view of 
the camera. The first type of audio (dialogue) has been a challenge for a long time in regular 
video productions, and it is commonly solved with the use of lavalier microphones, these are 
small wireless microphones that can be hidden in the actor's clothing as close as possible to the 
actor’s mouth. 
 
Recording the ambient sound poses a new challenge. The recommendation is to use an 
ambisonic microphone, this is a new type of microphone that not only records sound but also 
the information of where the sound is coming from, this can be later used in post-production to 
help create a more immersive experience for the viewer by having the right sounds coming from 
the right directions. And due to the arrangement of the lenses on most 360º cameras, there is 
the possibility to attach a microphone to the top part of the camera and if it is placed close 
enough it will remain hidden from the lenses field of view (see figure 12), and thus it won’t 
appear on the final scene. 
 
(Figure 12: A microphone hidden from the camera’s field of view) 
 
 
 
35 
==PAGE:37==
Lighting recommendations 
As with audio, the process of lighting a scene requires extra equipment that needs to be hidden 
from the view of the camera. But the lighting equipment can’t be as easily hidden, because of its 
larger size, in the case of lighting the recommendations are as follows: 
Whenever possible use natural light (the sun), this is also a common practice in standard video, 
the sun is a great source of light and it will help the production look professional without the use 
of external lighting devices. 
If shooting indoors, try changing the already present light fixtures with proper video lights, this 
will provide better lighting to the scene while hiding the lighting equipment in plain sight. 
And finally if extra light is extremely necessary, the post-production team needs to rotoscope the 
lights out of the scene, this is a lengthy process but if done correctly can allow a production to 
use extra lights when shooting a scene. 
 
Directing and Crew Recommendations 
Having a director and a crew is still necessary to create a professional video, but as with the 
rest of the equipment they to need to be hidden from the camera view, here is where location 
scouting and a strict shooting schedule during pre-production becomes quite important. The 
recommendation is to always keep the crew to it’s minimum necessary and when doing the 
location scouting to consider a hiding place for everyone in each scene. 
 
 
 
36 
==PAGE:38==
6 Business Model Design 
6.1 Initial Business Model 
Customer Segments 
The customers that the organization needs to target are those who will benefit the most from the 
services provided. In order to better serve each customer better, it is important to group them 
into segments that represent better the needs each of them has. 
 
Advertising 
The advertising industry has always been a customer of video productions and with 360º video 
is looking to be a similar relationship. Even on these early days of 360º video, there are brands 
that are already experimenting with the creation of 360º advertising videos. 
 
Events 
The one big advantage of 360º video is the ability to transport the user and immerse him/her in 
a different place, this relates very well to events, as it gives their clients an opportunity to 
observe the event without actually having to travel to the place of the event, so opening the 
doors to a larger audience for their events.  
 
Entertainment 
The entertainment industry is also embracing the 360º video, with music videos, short films, and 
movie trailers are all starting to produce 360º media. It still feels like the industry is 
experimenting with this new form of video, but it is still a good customer segment to target. 
 
Real Estate 
The real estate industry is perhaps the industry with the biggest embrace of VR technology as it 
provides them the opportunity to showcase properties remotely to potential buyers. For the 360º 
video production organization, the real estate industry shows an opportunity to offer a different 
service, as they are more interested in virtual tours of their properties than 360º videos. 
 
Value Proposition 
Production of high quality cinematic 360º videos which are co-created with every customer. 
 
Channels 
Indirect 
The company website and social media accounts, with an emphasis on video centered social 
media sites (E.g. Youtube and Vimeo), will be used to raise awareness about the company 
services.  
37 
==PAGE:39==
Other clients published videos will also provide additional indirect communication about the 
company's value proposition to other potential customers. 
 
Direct 
A sales team will be working to obtain new clients, contacting potential customers directly and 
pitching them the companies services. 
Once a client has been acquired the contact will be transferred to a video producer who’ll be the 
project manager and will have personal contact with the client at all stages of the project. 
 
Partner 
Absolute Zero VR (AZVR) is the partner company developing the VR camera that the 
organization is using, currently, AZVR is receiving regular requests for video productions, which 
they will channel into the video production organization.  
 
Customer Relationships 
Customer Acquisition 
Because of the nature of the service offered each customer would need a different solution and 
this requires that even from the process of acquiring customers this is done in a personal 
manner with a member of the sales team contacting the potential customers. This part of the 
relationship will be to communicate what the company can do for the customer. 
 
Customer Relationship 
Once a customer has been acquired the relationship will change slightly it will still be personal 
but with a co-creation approach, the ideas for the video will come originally from the customer 
and with the help of the video producer they will come up with the final concept for the project. 
Through the production process, the video producer will keep the client updated on the progress 
of the project. 
 
Revenue Streams 
The business model will feature a transaction revenue, where the client pays the agreed price 
for the service of the video production. The price will vary on every project, as it will depend on 
the schedule and budget defined by the video producer and accepted by the client. Time is one 
of the most relevant variables as the producing costs will be billed at a daily rate. But any extra 
material need for the production of the video such as costumes or props will add to the price of 
the production. 
 
There are two rates that the organization will charge, for pre and post-production the price will 
be of 2,000 DKK per day and per person working on the project and for the production team the 
price will be of 8,000 DKK per day, this price includes the video producers work plus the basic 
equipment needed for recording (360º camera). Any additional resources either human or 
material would be added into the project budget. 
38 
==PAGE:40==
 
Key Resources 
Physical 
The AZVR 360º Camera is the most important physical resource that the company has access 
to via its key partner. Computers with stitching and editing software is the second most 
important physical resource which the company already possess, but will need to purchase 
additional ones to grow the organization. Production equipment like tripods, audio recording 
gear, lighting gear, etc. It’s an important physical resource but can be rented on a project basis, 
to comply with the requirements of each project. 
 
Human 
The video producers is the most important human resource as they’ll be the creative force of 
each project and also keep the communication with the rest of the production team and with the 
client, they need to be knowledgeable in all aspects of the production. The video editors are 
also an important human resource to capture as the company is dealing with an emerging 
technology there are not many professional editors in the 360º video field. The sales team is the 
third key human resource as their task of acquiring clients will maintain the revenue stream. 
 
Intellectual 
Customer contracts where the organization agrees with a customer on the development of a 
project will be important intellectual resources as well as employee contracts for everyone in the 
organization. 
 
Key Activities 
Customers Acquisition 
Acquiring customers is to be the first key activity to tackle, in order to acquire customers the 
creation of the sales teams is part of this activity as this team will be in charge of coming up with 
the customers. 
 
Quality Production 
Once a customer is acquired is of high importance that quality is assured on all stages of the 
production process, from the initial meeting with the customer and all through pre-production, 
production, and post-production. To assure that the delivered product is always of the highest 
quality. This will help to maintain the current customers but also to attract new ones, from 
persons who observe the previous customers videos. 
 
Key Partnerships 
Absolute Zero is the main partnership and it is also the organization’s advantage over the 
competition. By having this partnership with a technology startup developing a 360º camera, the 
organization will have early and exclusive access to any new developments on the technology 
side. An additional benefit of this partnership is in the customer acquisition as Absolute Zero has 
39 
==PAGE:41==
received several requests for the production of 360º videos, from clients that are now being 
channeled into the video production organization. 
 
Cost Structure 
Value-driven 
The cost structure will be value driven because the organization will concentrate on providing 
quality value for the clients and every project will be highly personalized. The costs will need to 
be kept to the lowest possible especially at the beginning but they should never interfere with 
the quality of the end product. 
 
Fixed Costs 
Team salaries: The team will be formed by a business developer and a video producer. With the 
plan to grow once the organization starts acquiring clients and earning revenue. 
 
Business Developer: 20,000 DKK monthly 
Video Producer: 20,000 DKK monthly 
 
Rent for two desks on a coworking space: 1000 DKK monthly 
 
Software subscriptions: To create the videos there are several software packages needed, most 
of these software are paid for in a monthly subscription. 
Adobe Creative Cloud: 462.50 DKK monthly 
 
One Time Costs 
The stitching software used is sold as a one time purchase. 
Autopano Video Pro 2: 4,161 DKK 
Autopano Giga 4: 1,386 DKK 
 
Variable Costs 
Each project will be personalized for the needs of each client this means that most of the costs 
will be variable. These variable costs can be divided into two, human resources and material 
resources. 
 
Whenever a project requires additional human resources this will be obtained by outsourcing 
the work to professionals and freelancers. For example, if a project needs to have actors, the 
video producer will be in charge of finding the right actors and add their costs into the project 
budget. 
 
The other variable cost comes in the form of materials for the video production, again these 
materials will be very project dependent and their costs will always be incorporated into the 
project budget. An example of a material resource could be costumes or props that a project 
might require.  
40 
==PAGE:42==
6.2 Business Model Canvas 
 
(Figure 13: Initial Business Model Canvas) 
6.3 Experiments to Test the Business Model 
The initial business model was created based on the information researched and personal 
assumptions, in order to validate that information a series of experiments need to be designed 
and conducted. The results of the experiments will bring evidence that the value proposition and 
overall business model is true, or it will invalidate it and bring new knowledge that will help to 
create a better business model. 
 
Interviews 
Interviews are useful to obtain qualitative and detailed information, it allows for a more personal 
connection with the interviewee and the ability to dig deeper on certain topics that come from 
the prepared questions. 
 
 
41 
==PAGE:43==
Potential Clients 
Interviewing potential clients will help to validate several aspects of the business model. First of 
all, it will validate the customer segments, interviewing potential clients in different segments 
and inquiring about their interest in the service offered, will provide the evidence to which of this 
segments is actually worth targeting. 
The second thing to test with potential clients is the value proposition, is the service something 
they need? These interviews should help to validate the value proposition but also to find out if 
the potential clients have any other needs that the organization could solve and thus creating a 
new value proposition. 
The revenue streams is the third thing to validate, are the clients willing to pay for this service? 
And how much? To find the correct values for pricing is important to understand the value that 
customers are ready to pay for the service. 
Additionally, channels and customer relationships can also be tested via interviews with 
potential clients, making sure that the customers targeted agree with the plans made for 
communicating with them. 
 
Participants 
In order to properly test the customer segments a potential client from each segment was 
selected to be interviewed. 
 
Advertisement 
Flexflight is a danish airline, based at the Copenhagen-Roskilde Airport. They own a fleet of 5 
aircraft and offer charter flights. They contacted Absolute Zero about the possibility of recording 
their jets interiors to show their own customers a look inside of the planes. This provided the 
opportunity to test the advertisement customer segment, as well as the customer relationship, 
revenue stream, and the overall value proposition. 
 
Events 
Roskilde Festival is a Danish music festival that happens once a year south of the city of 
Roskilde, it is one of the largest music festivals in Europe hosting around 130,000 festival goers 
each year. Roskilde Festival is an interesting event that provides a good case for testing the 
events customer segment, as they have shown interest in 360º video productions in the past. 
 
Entertainment 
Kaspar Astrup Schröder is a film director and co-founder of Good Company Pictures a 
documentary film production company based in Copenhagen. Documentary films are a perfect 
match for 360º video because of the need for empathy that is where the 360 medium excels. An 
interview with Kaspar will help to test the assumptions about the entertainment customer 
segment. 
 
Real Estate 
Mads Bruun is a real estate agent who started his own agency RealMæglerne Mads Bruun in 
2015, located in North Zealand, he specializes in housing and has properties of all sizes. An 
42 
==PAGE:44==
interview with Mads would help to test the real estate customer segment, which looks to be one 
of the most promising ones. 
 
360º Video Production Companies 
Interviews with video production companies will help to get insights into the more operational 
side of the business model. Especially into the key activities and key resources, looking into 
how similar organizations are going through the same activities and what resources they are 
using, can provide validation to the initial business model or insight into a new way of doing 
things. 
Other video production companies can also provide insight into the customer segments and 
revenue streams as they have already been dealing with trying to sell similar services. It is 
important to look for different types of participants when looking at the 360º video production 
companies, to get data from different angles. 
 
Participants 
Immerse is a video production company specializing in 360º videos and virtual reality for the 
web and social media. They are based in Copenhagen and have agreed on being interviewed to 
help with the work system and business model design. Their insights will help to validate some 
of the assumptions on the original business model. 
 
Studio B Films is a San Francisco based video production company specializing in corporate, 
marketing, training, events and web videos. They have recently started to offer the production of 
360º videos to their clients. An interview with them will help to understand how a larger 
organization who has worked with standard video for 20 years is working with 360º videos. 
 
Viewmo360 is a German company specializing in the creation of virtual tours for real estate, 
hotels, and restaurants. They also offer video production but their main business is in the 
creation of virtual tours. An interview with them can help to test the value proposition and 
determine if offering virtual tours could be an addition to it. 
 
Surveys 
Surveys are a useful tool to gather quantitative data, this can be very helpful when trying to 
provide evidence that the value proposition is valid. In our case surveys will be used for 
gathering information about the general public opinions on 360º videos. Most of the customers 
of the organization will use the videos to engage with their own audiences and customers, thus 
is important to understand what is the general audience opinions on 360º videos. 
 
Questions 
The survey questions (see appendix A.1) were designed for the general public, and they 
covered different areas around 360º videos. The survey started by asking personal details in 
order to understand the demographics of the individuals answering. Then it asked about their 
43 
==PAGE:45==
general opinions around 360º videos, then about the potential of 360º videos in real estate, 
events, and entertainment. 
Technology Testing 
Both the interviews with FlexFlight and Mads Brun (real estate agent) included the utilization of 
Absolute Zero’s VR camera to provide test material to both of these potential clients. This 
provided the organization the opportunity to test the camera technology provided by AZVR and 
by doing so test the importance of AZVR as a key partner. 
6.4 Experiment Results 
Interview Results 
 
Potential Clients 
Advertisement 
Flexflight is a client referred to the video production company from AZVR, validating one aspect 
of AZVR as a key partner. The interview was conducted on the 5th of April 2017 at the Roskilde 
Airport where the Flexflight office is located. 
The original intention of the meeting was to discuss the possibility of creating a virtual reality 
tour of their private jets for advertising purposes. But during the interview, it was uncovered that 
the client had a different need. The video production company can fulfill this need and 
incorporate it into a new customer segment. 
The need uncovered during the interview was for the production of virtual reality educational 
material, Flexflight needs to train its pilots and stewards on the details of their particular jets. To 
properly train pilots they need to do it onboard of the plane which results in high costs as it 
means that the plane can’t be rented by their clients. 
This results in a business opportunity for the video production company, to create training 
material for the Flexflight jets which the pilots and stewards can view on a VR headset and be 
trained without the need of being on the jet. 
 
Events 
The interview with Roskilde Festival was conducted on the 13th of April 2017 at the AZVR office 
in Copenhagen. 
During the interview, the Roskilde Festival representative expressed his experience with 360º 
video, as they had the experience from their latest festival in which a team of filmmakers 
recorded it with a 360º camera and later produced a 10 minute 360º film experience that 
premiered at the CPH:DOX film festival . Even though Roskilde Festival had a very pleasant 
29
experience working with 360º video, they had no budget to properly hire a production company 
to create a new 360º experience for this upcoming festival. But suggested that the film could still 
be produced if the production company could find a brand to sponsor it and pay for the 
production of it.  
29  "Inter:Active & VR:Cinema". CPH:DOX. N.p., 2017. Web. 11 May 2017. 
44 
==PAGE:46==
This part of the interview provided a new insight to the event category as customer segment, 
generally, events don’t have the budget to hire a production company and are not as interested 
in having a 360º video weeks after the event has already passed. But there is still the 
opportunity to use the scenario an event provides and sell the production to an interested brand 
as advertisement content. 
During the second part of the interview, the representative from Roskilde Festival expressed an 
interest for a live transmission the festival in 360º. This would allow anyone to experience the 
festival in real time without having to physically be at Roskilde. Unfortunately, the AZVR 360º 
video camera is not able to create a live transmission, so the video production company wasn’t 
able to offer this service to the Roskilde Festival. 
The second part of the interview provided insight into the type of service that an event is more 
interested in and into the disadvantages of having AZVR as a key partner. 
 
Entertainment 
The interview with Kaspar Astrup Schröder was rescheduled a couple of times but it finally 
happened on the 5th of May of 2017, at the AZVR office in Copenhagen. 
This interview was perhaps the most solid in terms of invalidating a customer segment 
assumption. During the interview, Kaspar showed interest in the future of the 360º video 
medium, but he expressed clearly that he could not see it’s potential commercially in the 
entertainment industry. He backed up his thoughts with the fact that to properly experience a 
360º film the viewer needs to use expensive hardware that is not accessible to the average 
moviegoer.  
The interview helped to invalidate entertainment as a customer segment and to focus on the 
other segments which contain more interested clients. However, as the technology of head 
mounted displays advances it will become more accessible to everyone opening up the market 
for the production of entertainment content in 360º. 
 
Real Estate 
The interview with Mads Bruun was conducted on the 27th of April 2017 at his office on 
Charlottenlund and at one of the properties that he is selling also located in Charlottenlund. The 
intention of this interview was to determine how important a customer segment the real estate 
market could be for the 360º video production company. The process of finding this out started 
since the first contact via telephone with Mads, in which he expressed interest in creating a 360º 
tour of a property he was releasing into the market soon, with the intention of using this tour as 
a marketing tool to help him sell the house. During the interview he showed interest in the 
possibility of creating a VR tour where his clients could walk through the apartment freely. 
This type of VR tour differs from a regular 360º video. Instead of video, it uses 360º photos of 
the spaces in the house which are linked together with the use of a software. Even though this 
is not the main service offered by the production company, it is a service that the production 
company can create using the same human resources and technology that it has available. 
A deal was struck with Mads, and the production company agreed to produce a VR tour of the 
property that he will evaluate and test with his clients. If the VR tour is useful for Mads it will 
45 
==PAGE:47==
mean that the production company can add a different service to offer and one that could 
provide a better business potential than the 360º video production. 
 
Video Production Companies 
The interviews with the three production companies were centered into the types of clients that 
each one of them has had in the past and how they see the market potential for 360º video 
productions. 
 
The first production company interviewed was Immerse, this was the only interview done in 
person and it was performed at their office in Copenhagen. The main insight learned from this 
interview was into Immerse business model, as they are a young company without much 
technical expertise they focus mainly on producing content for their client’s social media outlets. 
The advantage of targeting this type of content is that it demands less quality from the final 
video and thus is less expensive to produce.  
 
The second production company interviewed was Studio B Films, this interview was done 
through a Skype video call. The conversation with Studio B Films centered around their 
experience working with large video productions for big companies like Facebook or Adobe. 
They expressed a concern for 360º video in terms of advertisement, as their experience so far 
has been that clients are only experimenting with the medium and it looks like they are not 
having the best results because so far none of their clients for 360º video productions has 
inquired for a second video. They also expressed a concern about the competition in the 
market, stating that there are a lot of producing companies and not many clients looking for 360º 
video productions. 
 
The third and last interview was made with Felix Schickel of Viewmo360, this interview was also 
performed via a Skype video call. He expressed that the customer segments where they are 
having the most clients from are real estate, hotels/restaurants, and events.  
This interview went also into detail on their pricing strategies, he expressed that they have been 
more successful when offering the video production service in the form of packages. They offer 
four different packages at four different prices. They start with a basic package consisting of one 
360º video scene of maximum 5 minutes for 358.00 EUR and go up as the number of scenes 
increase. This way their clients can quickly estimate the price for a production. 
 
Survey Results 
The survey was answered by 81 participants, 52.5% of the respondents were male, ranging 
from the ages of 17 to 67 years old with the mode being 28 years old. The participants were 
from a great variety of places with Denmark and Mexico being the most common ones and had 
many different professions. 
 
The first part of the survey tried to understand how users are currently consuming 360º videos 
and the survey showed that 55.6% of the participants do it through their mobile devices and only 
46 
==PAGE:48==
4.9% use a VR Headset. For the video platforms where people are watching 360º videos from 
Facebook came in as the most popular with 55.7% followed by youtube with 36.7%. And the 
type of videos that the participants enjoy experiencing the most are travel, documentary, music 
and events. With travel being the most popular of them all with 83.8% of participants expressing 
that they enjoy them. 
 
The second part of the survey asked the participants about their experience with real estate, 
81.5% of the participants expressed that they are generally not satisfied with only the pictures 
on real estate websites. 54.3% have never taken a VR tour of a real estate property and 31.3% 
believe it will be helpful to a real estate buyer to take a VR tour of the property and 58.8% 
believe it will be very helpful. 
 
The third part of the survey asked about the participant’s experiences with events on VR, with 
75.3% of the participants expressing that they would like to relieve an event through 360º video 
and 90.1% expressing that they would like to live an event that they were not able to attend for 
any reason. The most popular type of event that the participants wanted to experience was 
Concerts with 70.9% followed by another type of live performances (Theatre, musicals, etc…) 
and sports. 70.4% of the participants have never experienced an event on VR. 
 
The last part of the survey talked about what type entertainment in general participants want to 
experience. With documentaries being the most popular with 79.2% followed by movies. When 
asked about watching advertised content on VR the participants gave very varied answers with 
the majority being neutral about it. 
 
Technology Testing Results 
Is important to note that AZVR is an early stage startup and the camera which was tested is still 
in a prototype stage. 
The camera was tested in two different settings, the first one was conducted on the Roskilde 
Airport, inside and around a private jet. While the exterior recording of the plane came out 
perfectly good, the interior of the plane shows some mistakes, especially in the roof area of the 
plane and needs additional work (see figure 14). 
47 
==PAGE:49==
 
 
(Figure 14: Camera test exterior and interior of a plane.) 
 
The second test was made at the property recorded at Charlottenlund for the real estate agent, 
this test was more in depth as the property had 12 different areas that needed to be recorded to 
complete a full tour of the property. The results from this test were similar to the test with the 
plane the camera performed better in open spaces and struggled in tight areas (see figure 15). 
48 
==PAGE:50==
 
 
(Figure 15: Camera test exterior and interior of a property.) 
 
6.5 Experiments Interpretation 
After completing the experiments and analyzing the results conclusions can be made about 
which assumptions work and which don’t and with this information a new business model can 
be designed which will better represent how the company can create value. 
 
 
49 
==PAGE:51==
Interviews Interpretation 
The first set of interviews were done with potential clients and served to test mainly the 
customer segments but also the value proposition, customer relationships, revenue streams and 
key activities. The second set of interviews were done with other 360º video producers and 
tested the validity of the key activities and revenue streams but also helped to validate customer 
segments and key activities. 
 
From the interviews, it was shown that the advertising and entertainment segments are the two 
most competed at the moment and they are being treated as experiments by the clients, which 
is not beneficial for generating a steady income as must of the clients are only one time clients. 
 
The events segment showed a lot of potential but it’s currently demanding a more complex 
service than what the production company is offering, so in order to satisfy the events clients the 
production company would need to revise also their key activities and resources. 
 
The real estate segment also showed a lot of interest, and similar to the events segment it 
requires the production company to change its key activities but in an easier way technically. 
 
From the experiments a new customer segment emerged which shows potential, it is the 
educational segment, this refers to producing educational content for technical jobs that are 
expensive to teach on site. This segment was derived from the interview with Flexflight a private 
flights company that needs training for pilots and stewards but it can be expanded to other 
areas such as training for works on offshore oil rigs or even medical students. 
 
The customer relationships were validated through the interviews as all the potential clients 
were very keen on collaborating closely with the production company to create the VR 
experiences that they require. 
 
The interviews showed that the revenue stream needs to be rethought as the production 
company is working with a new medium made possible by a technological innovation and as 
clients are still testing how important this medium will be they are not ready to spend a lot of 
resources on 360º video productions. 
 
The value proposition and key activities were greatly affected by the test results as the customer 
segments change and the more relevant customer segments require a different value 
proposition and different key activities to accomplish this. The two customer segments which 
showed greater interest (real estate and educational) require a higher level of interaction than 
what is given from a regular 360º video. This means that the key activities must change to 
accomplish this and the value proposed by the organization must also change to reflect it. 
 
 
 
50 
==PAGE:52==
Surveys Interpretation 
The surveys helped to look at how end users are currently interacting with the 360º medium, the 
content that they are so far enjoying and what they want to experience next. 
The answers to the surveys combined with the qualitative data gotten from the interviews 
helped to test the assumptions made, especially about the customer segments and key 
activities. 
The biggest realizations from the survey is the confirmation that the majority of the users are 
experiencing 360º videos on mobile devices and very few use a VR headset which is the 
optimal way of consuming the produced content. Additionally to this, the majority of the users 
are getting their 360º content from Facebook. These two realizations show that the content 
which is getting the most views is of lower quality and shorter in length as it is usually the case 
on videos shared through social media. This is very important for the production company as its 
original value proposition was to create high-quality 360º videos.  
The survey also showed that travel videos are the most popular among the participants, this 
although still needs to be further tested could mean a new customer segment could be derived 
from producing 360º travel videos for travel agencies or other companies interested. 
 
The survey helped to validate the importance of virtual reality for the real estate customer 
segment as the majority of the participants expressed a dissatisfaction with the real estate 
websites where they can only see some pictures of the property, and even though less than the 
half of the participants have actually taken a virtual tour of a property the majority believes it 
would be helpful for a buyer to take a virtual tour. 
 
The events segment was also validated by the survey with most of the participants wanting to 
relive an event and even more of them wanting to experience an event they were not able to 
attend. This in combination with the interview with Roskilde Festival confirms the interest in 
producing 360º content of events but requires the video production company to improve on the 
technology currently available as the live streaming of the events becomes very important. 
 
The entertainment segment received very diverse answers with documentaries being the most 
popular form of entertainment the participants want to experience. But as shown by the way that 
the participants are experiencing the content the entertainment content still needs to be short in 
length and shared on social media. 
 
Technology Test Interpretation 
The technology tests produced a serious issue with the AZVR camera, the camera greatly 
struggles when used on interiors with reduced space. This creates an even bigger issue when 
combined with the results of the other experiments that show a bigger market opportunity in the 
production of real estate tours and educational material. Because this two use cases will often 
require the camera to record in tight spaces. These tests show that the partnership with AZVR is 
not as important as initially stated. 
51 
==PAGE:53==
6.6 Redesigned Business Model 
Value Proposition 
After the experiments, the value proposition needs to change from “Production of high quality 
cinematic 360º videos which are co-created with every customer.” It now needs to reflect what 
the clients are showing interest in and is not currently being flooded with competition. This is 
interactive experiences in the form of VR tours and VR educational content. The new value 
proposition is as follows, “Production of high-quality VR experiences which are co-created with 
every customer”. 
 
Customer Segments  
This was the business model area which was tested the most during the experiments and it 
helped to disqualify some of the assumptions previously made. 
 
Due to the lack of interest from clients and the amount of competition in this two segments, 
advertisement and entertainment are now not the priority of the production company. 
 
Events is also a segment that won’t be considered because of the technical requirements of 
achieving a high-quality live-stream of an event. This is an area that the organization can look 
into once it is made some profit, as it would require a larger investment to properly accomplish. 
 
Real estate is the only area that the experiments helped to validate, the real estate client 
showed great interest in the creation of a virtual reality tour. Even though this tour is technically 
not a 360º video, it is possible to create utilizing the same resources available to the production 
company. 
 
Educational content, this last customer segment was derived from one of the interviews and it is 
a form of hybrid between a virtual reality tour and a video. This segment is quite promising as it 
can help companies in other industries to save a lot of resources in training their employees. 
 
Customer Relationship 
As mentioned before the customer relationship will be maintained as previously planned, even 
with the changes to customer segments and value proposition. The relationships with clients will 
still need to be of a co-creation nature as they will need to provide a lot of information for the 
creation of the virtual experiences and a lot of feedback until the experience is ready. 
 
Channels 
As with the customer relationships, the channels are not heavily affected by the results of the 
experiments. The main channel will still be direct contact with potential clients and the website 
and social media accounts of the organization will serve as the indirect channels. 
52 
==PAGE:54==
Revenue Streams 
The revenue stream was tested in the experiments and it showed a lack of innovation, the 
organization was expecting a transactional revenue from the clients but lacked to see that the 
service offered was not guaranteeing the customer the value promised. Unfortunately, this is 
always the case when working with innovative technology and thus the revenue stream should 
also be innovative. 
To assure the customers that they will benefit from the production of a VR experience the 
revenue stream must be tested further. There are two options which look promising, the first is 
to follow a subscription-based model, where the client pays a monthly amount in exchange for 
the production of virtual experiences, online hosting of the experiences and any technical 
support needed. This model will allow the organization to charge a lower initial price so 
incentivizing the client to make a purchase and also provide the organization with a steady 
monthly revenue. 
The second option is more in line with the real estate segment and it could work on an 
agreement that virtual tours are created for certain properties and once those properties are 
sold the production company gets a share of the revenue. 
 
Revenue Stream Second Test 
To test the two types of revenue streams previously defined a conversation was conducted with 
the real estate agent Mads Bruun, in which both revenue streams were discussed. Mads 
expressed a preference for the first revenue stream (Subscription based). This helped to 
validate this revenue stream and discard the second option (sharing the revenue). 
This revenue stream also makes sense for the production company as it represents a steady 
flow of income. 
 
New Revenue Stream Detailed 
Although validated by a potential customer the revenue stream must accommodate other types 
of customers thus it should offer different packages at different price ranges. The following 
prices were devised by a combination of researching the current market prices and from the 
conversations and interviews with potential clients. 
 
●
Social Media Offer - 500 DKK One time payment. 
○
One 360º picture for use in social media profiles 
 
●
Basic Offer - 900 DKK Monthly 
○
Virtual experience with max 5 scenarios 
○
Includes Hosting 
○
Easy integration to the client’s website 
○
Mobile Version 
○
Head Mounted Display Version 
 
●
Medium Offer - 1400 DKK Monthly 
53 
==PAGE:55==
○
Virtual experience with max 10 scenarios 
○
Includes Hosting 
○
Easy integration to the client’s website 
○
Mobile Version 
○
Head Mounted Display Version 
 
●
Professional Offer - 2000 DKK Monthly 
○
Virtual experience with unlimited scenarios 
○
Includes Hosting 
○
Easy integration to the client’s website 
○
Mobile Version 
○
Head Mounted Display Version 
 
Key Resources 
With the results from the technology tests and the change in customer segments the key 
resources also need to change slightly. 
 
Physical 
Initially, it was assumed that the AZVR 360º camera would be the most important physical 
resource, this was then tested and the results show that that assumption is no longer true. This 
means that the production company could work in a more efficient manner using a different 360º 
camera. To choose this camera the organization will still need to make additional research into 
the available options and subsequent tests. 
Computers with stitching and editing software will still be an important resource with the addition 
of the virtual tour making software. 
Production equipment (tripods, audio recorders, lighting, etc.) will still remain relevant but will 
only be rented when it is needed for the production. 
 
Human 
The position of the video producer will still be the most important. Even with the changes, the 
organization will need a creative individual with management skills to communicate with the 
client and the production team. This individual would need to understand the whole production 
process. Video editors are still important but a new human resource is needed, virtual tour 
designers, these are individuals with the skills to create virtual tours. 
The Sales team is still very relevant as they are needed to acquire the clients. 
Intellectual 
The intellectual resources will remain unchanged, customer contracts and employee contracts 
will still be important resources.  
 
 
 
54 
==PAGE:56==
Key Partnerships 
Absolute Zero VR 
The key partnership with AZVR was defined by two assumptions, the first looked at the potential 
for AZVR to channel clients into the production company. The second one looked at the 
collaboration between the production company and AZVR in which they allowed the company to 
use their 360º camera and the production company gave them feedback on how to improve 
their product. 
After the tests, the first assumption was validated as the two most serious clients were 
channeled from AZVR into the production company, but the second assumption was disproved 
as the AZVR 360º camera proved to underperform and thus becoming an obstacle for the 
production company to properly deliver quality content to their clients. 
While the production company would benefit from acquiring customers through AZVR it is 
unlikely that AZVR would accept to continue with a partnership if the production company stops 
using their 360º camera, and since the production company can’t perform while utilizing the 
AZVR camera this key partnership is no longer important. 
 
Present4D 
Present4D is a company based in Berlin, they developed a software for creating VR-Tours 
specifically geared toward real estate scenarios. Their software is still in a beta stage and they 
are currently in need of testing partners. This is helpful to the production company as they 
agreed to provide the production company with a free license to their software, in exchange for 
feedback on the usage experience. 
 
Customers 
With the changes made to the revenue streams, the customers can now be treated as key 
partners. Having them treated as key partners will also aid the co-creation process for the 
production of the VR experiences. 
 
Key Activities 
Customers Acquisition 
Acquiring customers has to remain the most important key activity, during the experiments 
contact was made with some potential clients. These potential clients need to be followed 
through and transformed into paying customers. 
Creating the sales team is also of high importance as they will be in charge of acquiring new 
clients. 
 
Quality Production 
Producing quality experiences still remains a greatly important activity, as this will be the most 
important tool to maintaining current clients and acquiring new ones. 
 
 
55 
==PAGE:57==
Cost Structure 
The cost structure will not change drastically with the changes to the rest of the business model. 
 
Value-driven 
The cost structure will remain value driven, the organization will provide quality value for the 
clients and every project will be highly personalized. And the costs will need to remain as low as 
possible. 
 
Fixed Costs 
Team salaries: The team will remain the same a business developer and a video producer. With 
the plan to grow once the organization starts acquiring clients and earning revenue. 
 
Business Developer: 20,000 DKK monthly 
Video Producer: 20,000 DKK monthly 
 
Rent for two desks at a coworking space: 1000 DKK monthly 
 
Software subscriptions: 
Adobe Creative Cloud: 462.50 DKK monthly 
 
One Time Costs 
The stitching software used is sold as a one time purchase. 
Autopano Video Pro 2: 4,161 DKK 
Autopano Giga 4: 1,386 DKK 
 
Hosting Costs 
Hosting costs will depend on the amount of data the production company is hosting, but due to 
the change in revenue stream the and the fact that the production company will host the VR 
experiences of the clients the hosting cost will increase simultaneously as the clients increase. 
A professional VR experience with 14 scenarios weights 0.6 GB, the price for hosting it is 0.10 
DKK a month.  
 
Variable Costs 
Projects will still be personalized for the needs of each client, meaning that the production costs 
will be variable. These variable costs can be divided into two, human resources and material 
resources. 
 
Whenever a project requires additional human resources this will be obtained by outsourcing 
the work to professionals and freelancers. For example, if a project needs to have actors, the 
video producer will be in charge of finding the right actors and add their costs into the project 
budget. 
 
56 
==PAGE:58==
The other variable cost comes in the form of materials for the video production, again these 
materials will be very project dependent and their costs will always be incorporated into the 
project budget. An example of a material resource could be costumes or props that a project 
might require. 
 
Cost Example 
To generate an example of what the total production price for a VR experience could amount to, 
let’s observe the potential project of producing Educational Content for FlexFlight. The project 
will consist of creating a training scenario for a pilot who is new to the plane in the scenario. 
 
Resources needed: 
 
Human Resources 
Time 
Cost per day 
Total 
Video 
Producer/Camera 
Operator 
4 days 
2,000 DKK 
8,000 DKK 
Video Stitcher/Editor 
2 days 
1,000 DKK 
2,000 DKK 
VR Experience 
Designer 
2 days 
1,000 DKK 
2,000 DKK 
Voice Actor 
1 day 
500 DKK 
500 DKK 
 
 
Physical Resources 
Time 
Cost per day 
Total 
360º Camera 
Half day 
3000 DKK 
1500 DKK 
Tripod 
Half day 
Included 
0 DKK 
Lights 
Half day 
500 DKK 
250 DKK 
Sound Recorder 
Half day 
500 DKK 
250 DKK 
  
Total Production Cost = 14,550 DKK 
 
57 
==PAGE:59==
6.7 Redesigned Business Model Canvas
 
(Figure 16: Redesigned business model canvas.) 
6.8 Go To Market Strategy 
After redesigning the business model, a go to market strategy can now be defined, taking into 
consideration all the learnings from the experiments. Now there is a defined market segment 
and a few potential customers that are already in conversation with the organization to become 
regular customers. The go to market strategy will help to define the steps that the organization 
needs to take next to capitalize on all the research conducted and be able to gain a profit. 
 
Action Plan 
The action plan will refer to the activities the organization has to take in order to turn the 
potential customers into proper paying customers. 
Currently, the organization is in constant conversation with two potential clients, Flexflights and 
Mads Bruun. These two are now considered the organization priority as customers. 
58 
==PAGE:60==
The next step which is also currently in process is on shaping the product to the customer’s 
needs, the process has been very productive with good feedback from both customers. 
When the product is ready to be sold the next step will be to make the sale, this step shouldn’t 
be too complicated as the organization has already discussed the price of the product with the 
clients and once the product is accepted the sale will be concluded. The prices are currently 
designed with the first two clients in mind and what they value the product, this number should 
be able to change if additional information from new customers is received. 
After the first sales to the current customers the organization needs to focus on client 
acquisition, this will be the main task and it will be aided with the example products developed 
for the first clients. This is the most critical step in the action plan because in order to survive the 
organization needs to acquire a significant amount of clients. 
Once the organization is profitable, the expansion into different customer segments will begin 
with events and entertainment being the two most interesting segments that require an 
investment from the organization. 
 
Team 
In order to be successful, the production company needs to rely on its talent, there are two main 
positions in the organization that need to be filled in order for it to perform correctly. 
 
VR Producer 
The VR producer needs to be knowledgeable in all aspects of the VR experience creation, this 
individual needs to be able to produce a VR experience following the work system from client’s 
input to the final VR Experience delivered to the client. The VR Producer will need to be 
responsible for the whole production at first and as the organization grows he’ll be in charge of 
managing other producers and specialists in different areas of the production. 
 
Business Developer 
This team member is as important as the VR Producer because without clients there is nothing 
to produce. The business developer needs to be able to sell the product (VR Experiences) to 
customers in the target market. He needs to understand the product and possess the ability to 
communicate the product virtues to the customers. This individual will initially be in charge of 
every customer but as the organization grows additional business developers and sales 
employees will be needed. 
 
Goals 
The goals for the organization are very tangible. In short term, the organization needs to acquire 
the two clients currently in process, the organization needs to listen to the the current 
customer’s feedback and design a product that fulfills all of the customer needs. 
On a medium term, the organization needs to acquire additional and preferably recurring 
customers to maintain a steady flow of revenue. 
59 
==PAGE:61==
And on a long term, the organization needs to keep innovating and investing in the virtual reality 
technology, this will allow the organization to grow and acquire clients on different customer 
segments. 
 
Limitations 
Even though the organization has a clear path forward and an optimistic future there are several 
limitations that need to be addressed. The following limitations are current obstacles that the 
organization faces and that it needs to overcome. 
 
Market 
As with any new technology development, the market takes some time to adapt to it. The 
organization is currently active in a market that still needs to accept the technological innovation 
and fully appreciate the product’s virtues. This represents a limitation in the number of 
customers that the organization will be able to acquire at an early stage as it will only be early 
adopters and customers who have already seen a value in working with virtual reality products. 
 
Technology 
In a similar fashion to the market, the fact that the organization is working with innovative 
technology means that many of the tools used to produce the VR experiences are also under 
development. This represents a limitation as the organization needs to work with tools that are 
not fully developed and can cause setbacks during the production stage. 
 
Resources 
The organization is currently being bootstrapped and even though it’s operational costs are not 
very high it is very dependent on the concretization of the first two sales and the fast acquisition 
of additional customers to survive. The resources limitation also affects the possibility of the 
organization to hire additional personnel and to invest in the technology needed to pursue 
different customer segments. 
 
Financial Viability 
In order to understand how can the organization survive, the financial viability must be 
presented. For this, a break even analysis will be used, in which the organization's expenses will 
be analyzed against the predicted revenue. This will give the break even point, that will show 
when the organization will start to make a profit. 
 
Break Even Analysis 
To analyze the organizations break even point, the costs need to be analyzed first: 
The fixed costs include employees salaries, office space rent and software subscriptions. This 
all together comes to a total amount of 41462 DKK monthly cost. 
 
Then the variable costs need to be analyzed, this costs will change from project to project, the 
include transportation costs, extra materials for the production and hosting. The variable costs 
60 
==PAGE:62==
for a professional sample project can be in average around 1500 DKK per produced project. As 
the company receives revenue for the experience on a monthly basis the variable costs can be 
divided by the year of hosting. The monthly variable cost is then 125 DKK a month. 
 
Now that all costs have been accounted for the revenue needs to be analyzed, the price of a 
professional project is at 2000 DKK monthly rate. So the organization will receive 2000 DKK a 
month per project produced. 
 
The formula to calculate the break even point is Fixed Costs / (Price - Variable Costs) 
In this case 41,462/(2000 - 125), this comes to 22.11 professional VR experiences produced. 
This means that in order for the production company to produce a profit it needs to sell and 
produce more than 22 professional VR experiences. 
 
The production company currently has the capacity to produce 4 tours a month, considering that 
the sale of the 2 current tours is concreted in June 2017 the organization would break even by 
December 2017. (see figure 17). 
 
(Figure 17: Break Even Point.) 
 
However the above graphic is way too optimistic, and it considers that the organization will be 
acquiring also 4 new professional projects a month, taking into consideration the current market 
this seems highly improbable. A more realistic approach would be to consider that the business 
developer would manage to acquire 1 professional project a month and 2 medium or basic 
projects a month as well. In this more realistic view, the organization will take almost a year in 
order to see any profit (see figure 18) 
61 
==PAGE:63==
 
(Figure 18: Break Even Point First Year.) 
 
Unfortunately, this would mean that the organization would need to invest 436,995 DKK in the 
first year in order to survive. The production company does not have the resources to invest in 
the amount needed to survive, so in this case, the production company will need to be treated 
as a side job for both the video producer and the business developer, this will further slow the 
growth of the company. 
 
 
 
 
62 
==PAGE:64==
7 Work System Review 
7.1 Changes to the Works System 
After the experiments and the redesign of the business model, the work system needs to be 
revised to accommodate for the business model changes that affect the work system. 
 
Value Proposition Change 
The main change to the business model that affects the work system is the new value 
proposition. The focus of the production company has changed from the production of videos to 
the production of VR experiences, this represents a change in the post-production stage of the 
work system. The post-production becomes more important and the creation of the VR tour is 
now the last step of the process. 
This change also changes the ultimate output of the work system from a video to a VR 
experience. As well as it adds an additional technology to the process, the Present4D software.  
 
 
(Figure 19: Revised work system.) 
 
 
 
 
63 
==PAGE:65==
8 Justifications 
8.1 Work System Redesign Justifications 
When justifying a work system redesign it's important to remember that a work system performs 
dynamically and a change into an area of the work system will affect the rest of the areas.  
In this case, the changes are in the areas of information, technology, process, and strategy. And 
while the recommendations and changes to the work system do affect the rest of the system, it 
is in an expected way and the effect is a positive one. 
 
Information Justification 
According to Alter  information within a work system needs to be provided where it will affect 
30
action and needs to be protected from inappropriate use. In the original work system information 
moved only in one direction (forward). The research and experiments showed a need for 
information to travel backward through the process to aid with organizational learning. This 
change to the work system follows Alter’s views as the information is now provided to the stage 
in the process where it can affect the action needed. 
 
Technology Justification 
Technology in a work system must be cost effective and reduce the effort of the participants.  
31
The change to the work system follows this two principles as the new technology introduced is 
the use of the software Present4D. By having a partnership with Present4D they allow the 
production company to use their software freely making it cost effective. The software is also 
easy to use reducing the effort of the participants in the system. 
The change in technology of using a different 360º camera will elevate the cost, but the benefits 
of effort reduction will be enough to compensate for the increase in cost. 
 
Process Justification 
Processes in work systems must perform efficiently, control problems at their source and be 
able to monitor the quality of both inputs and outputs.  
32
The changes implemented into the work system processes allow it to perform with higher 
efficiency by creating a greater focus on the pre-production stage the whole process performs 
with a greater efficiency as must mistakes and obstacles can be prevented. 
With the inclusion of the feedback channel the problems are identified and the information is 
brought to the stage in the process where the problem was originated so that it can be dealt with 
30 Alter, Steven. The Work System Method. 1st ed. Larkspur, CA: Work System Press, 2006. Print. 
31 Alter, Steven. The Work System Method. 1st ed. Larkspur, CA: Work System Press, 2006. Print. 
32 Alter, Steven. The Work System Method. 1st ed. Larkspur, CA: Work System Press, 2006. Print. 
 
64 
==PAGE:66==
at its source. The feedback channel also allows the opportunity to provide quality data about the 
inputs and outputs at different stages of the process. 
 
Strategy Justification 
A work system strategy must always match the organization’s strategy.  This was not the case 
33
on the original work system and it was identified as a challenge, the work system strategy dealt 
primarily with finding out which technology would create the best outputs, while the 
organization’s strategy was centered around growing and generating value. These two 
strategies were in contradiction and thus the change of strategy was recommended. 
By changing the work system strategy and aligning it with the organization’s one the work 
system can now move into the value generating direction. 
8.2 Business Model Redesign Justifications 
The business model saw a great amount of change, all of the changes were a direct response 
to the results of the experiments performed. The areas that saw the most changes were the 
customer segment, the revenue stream, the key partners and the value proposition. 
 
Customer Segments Justification 
The original customer segments were determined by researching the current market and 
following the advice of what the experts (Goldman Sachs) are predicting in terms of global 
market growth for the next years. And although this research and predictions are very valid the 
experiments helped to better represent the reality of the local (Danish) market at the present 
time. 
The original customer segments included: Advertising, entertainment, events and real estate. 
Out of these four only real estate remained valid and educational (training) content was added. 
Out of the original four advertising is the segment that shows the biggest doubts going forward 
with feedback from the potential customer (Flexflight), competitors (Studio b films) and even end 
users (survey) showing that clients in this segment are not ready to adopt the 360º medium. 
The entertainment customer segment is still at a very early stage in terms of end users, with 
(expensive) head mounted displays being the best way to experience a 360º entertainment 
piece. Clients in this segment as expressed by filmmaker Kaspar Astrup are not very interested 
in producing content for the current (small) audience. This segment should be however kept in 
the future plans of the organization as when the technology of HMD advances and they become 
cheaper this audience is expected to grow. 
Events, on the other hand, has a more promising future, with both clients (Roskilde Festival) 
and the end users (see figure 20) showing a lot of interest in experiencing events on virtual 
reality in real time. Unfortunately, the production company does not possess the technology or 
the knowledge to transmit events in real time, and at the moment this would represent a too 
large investment for the company.  
33  Alter, Steven. The Work System Method. 1st ed. Larkspur, CA: Work System Press, 2006. Print. 
 
65 
==PAGE:67==
 
(Figure 20: Event livestreaming survey result.) 
 
Is important to keep the event customer segment in the future development plans, and invest in 
the needed technology once the organization starts to generate a profit. 
Real estate is the only customer segment that was validated by the experiments with positive 
feedback from the three sources: potential client (Mads Bruun), competition (Viewmo360) and 
the end users. The real estate customer segment is currently being tested further, with the 
creation of a demo version of a walkthrough virtual tour of a house. This demo is now being 
tested with two different potential clients, Mads Bruun and with the real estate agency Danbolig. 
The first feedback from Danbolig has been received and some changes to the demo are 
currently in process. Both clients are showing interest in the product. 
 
Revenue Streams Justification 
Osterwalder  asks, for what value is each Customer Segment truly willing to pay? With the 
34
customer segments defined the next question was finding the value that the customers were 
willing to pay. This revenue stream was changed from a one fixed transaction priced to a 
recurring revenue with the subscription-based model.  
The new revenue stream also accommodates for various types of customers, starting with small 
businesses that only want a single 360º picture for their social media profiles and going up in 
price with three different offers for three different types of customers. 
The old revenue stream was disproved by the experiments and although the new revenue 
stream was not tested so thoroughly, it was validated by one of the potential customers. 
 
Key Partners Justification 
Key partners is another area that saw meaningful change after the experiments, the two main 
changes were the removal of AZVR as a key partner and the addition of Present4D.  
34 Osterwalder, Alexander, and Yves Pigneur. Business Model Generation. 1st ed. New York, NY: John 
Wiley & Sons, 2013. Print. 
66 
==PAGE:68==
According to Osterwalder , companies create alliances to optimize their business models, 
35
reduce risk, or acquire resources. In this case, AZVR was providing the producing company with 
a resource, the 360º camera, but the results of the technology testing experiments resulted in a 
need for a camera that performs better. It is important to note that AZVR is in the process of 
developing such camera, but as the production company wants to become profitable in a short 
term, the partnership with AZVR can’t be justified at the moment. 
On the other hand, the partnership with Present4D works in a similar manner as they provide 
the organization with free access to their software solution for creating VR walkthroughs. As 
was done with AZVR this technology needs to be further tested to properly assess if the 
partnership is as important as it currently looks. 
The customers remain a part of the key partners, due to both the changes in the revenue 
stream and the type of customer relationship. 
 
Value Proposition Justification 
A value proposition must solve a customer problem or need  and that is why the experiments 
36
helped to change the value proposition to one that more accurately solves this customer needs. 
The results of the experiments showed that our potential customers didn’t have a need for 360º 
videos but a need for Virtual Reality experiences. This was confirmed by two of our potential 
clients asking for two different types of VR experiences, Flexflight inquiring about a training 
solution for its employees and the customers in real estate asking for virtual tours of their 
properties. 
VR experiences for educational and training purposes are one of the rise according to Betsy 
Morris of The Wall Street Journal  VR is being used for training in many industries for many 
37
different jobs including crane operators, athletes, bankers and even brain surgeons. This 
supports the results of the experiment showing that there is a current need in the market for the 
production of VR educational and training materials. 
 
 
35 Osterwalder, Alexander, and Yves Pigneur. Business Model Generation. 1st ed. New York, NY: John 
Wiley & Sons, 2013. Print. 
36 Osterwalder, Alexander, and Yves Pigneur. Business Model Generation. 1st ed. New York, NY: John 
Wiley & Sons, 2013. Print. 
37 Morris, Betsy. "Virtual Reality Finally Catches On With Businesses". WSJ. N.p., 2017. Web. 7 June 
2017. 
67 
==PAGE:69==
9 Discussion 
9.1 Work System 
The process of analyzing and designing the work system was based on the work system 
method developed by Steven Alter. The method follows the process of first describing the 
system being studied, identifying the problems and opportunities, and finally describing the 
possible changes.  
Even though Alter’s method is designed for the redesign of existing work systems, the method 
was adapted and used for the design of a new work system. Using a similar organization as a 
basis for the analysis the production company then adopted the changes proposed to the 
original work system as it’s own. The biggest change from the work system analyzed to the new 
work system was in terms of information and strategy. 
 
As previously noted the biggest change to the work system was in the way the information flows 
and how it is utilized.  
Alter  explains how data, which includes facts, images or sounds and may or may not be 
38
useful. Needs to be transformed into information, which processes data and is now appropriate 
for a particular use. And then further transformed into knowledge, which is a combination of 
instincts, ideas, rules, and procedures that guide actions and decisions. 
 
 
(Figure 21: Information flow and the transformation stages.) 
 
The information on the production company’s work system needs to follow the same path in 
order to be useful. Especially the newly implemented feedback channel. The data collected 
needs to be formatted, filtered and summarized, thus transforming it into information before it is 
38 Alter, Steven. The Work System Method. Larkspur, CA: Work System Press, 2006. Print. 
68 
==PAGE:70==
passed on. And once the information reaches its destination it needs to be interpreted, a 
decision about it needs to be made and acted upon. Following this rules, the organization will 
ensure the creation of knowledge as the actions performed based on the information will show 
positive results. 
9.2 Business model 
Teece’s  model for business model design relates closely to the process taken to design the 
39
production organization business model. 
 
(Figure 22: Teece’s elements of a business model design.) 
 
It starts with the selection of technologies that will be embedded in the product, in this case, the 
technology used is virtual reality and the product is a personalized experience. 
The second step is to determine how the product will benefit the customer, this was discovered 
thanks to the experiments. The biggest benefit that customers saw on the product was the 
possibility of cutting on their own costs by using a virtual reality experience. In the case of the 
real estate agent, he can save on his own costs by showing his clients the properties virtually 
instead of having to travel to the properties, which consumes his time and resources. And in the 
case of the private jet company, they can cut costs in the training of their employees with the 
use of a virtual training instead of training on board of a plane that could be flying and 
generating profit for the company. 
39 Teece, David J. "Business Models, Business Strategy And Innovation". Long Range Planning 43.2-3 
(2010): 172-194. Web. 
69 
==PAGE:71==
The third step is to identify the market segments to target, this was also done with the use of the 
experiments. Thanks to the experiments the two most accessible and market ready segments 
were selected. 
The fourth step is to confirm that the customer segment can provide a revenue stream. This has 
been the toughest aspect to confirm, the fact that the product is based on a technological 
innovation seems to create a confusion for the customers who have been unable to decide on 
what they are willing to pay for the product. 
The fifth and sixth steps relate to the creation of value capturing mechanisms. In this case, this 
mechanisms actually helped with the confirmation of the available revenue, by creating a 
recurring payment model, where the full payment for the creation of the VR experience was 
divided into a year. This mechanism provided the client with an easier way of paying for the 
product and by doing so confirmed the price that the client agreed to pay. The organization will 
also be using the products created as marketing tools, to help sell additional VR experiences 
and acquire new clients. 
 
 
(Figure 23: Elements of the business model design.) 
 
Teece  also explains that a business model must be sustainable and in order to assure the 
40
sustainability he suggests the use of a strategic analysis filter(see figure 24). This filter shows 
the steps need to create a business model that will not only be successful but will continue to be 
with the pass of time. 
 
40 Teece, David J. "Business Models, Business Strategy And Innovation". Long Range Planning 43.2-3 
(2010): 172-194. Web. 
70 
==PAGE:72==
 
(Figure 24: Business Model Strategic Analysis Filter.) 
 
The process used to design the production company’s business model generally follows 
Teece’s steps but differs on the creation of individual value propositions for each market 
segment. Instead of developing a different value proposition for each segment the organization 
has a broad value proposition and customizes each product to the customer needs. This way 
the value capturing mechanisms also stay the same for every market segment. 
The last step of the strategic analysis filter talks about implementing “isolating mechanisms” 
these help to stop the competition from copying the business model. In this area, the production 
company has an advantage as it is working with a new technology, and even though this same 
fact has been a disadvantage on other aspects, the risk of adopting a new technology early on 
keeps the company in a zone where not many competitors enter. Another mechanism that the 
production company is implementing is the strategy to keep investing in innovation in order to 
go after different market segments. When this happens the organization will need to retake the 
strategic filter and create a new value proposition for the different markets as they are in need of 
different products. 
9.3 Risk 
The production company will also have risks, there are many types of risks that businesses 
have but the production company will have the higher risk factor on the following three types of 
risk, strategic risks, financial risks and operational risks. 
 
Strategic Risks 
The strategic risks  are the risks related to operating in an specific industry in a specific time 
41
frame. In this case, the strategic risks are quite high because the industry in which the 
41 Jolly, Adam. Managing Business Risk. London: Kogan Page, 2003. Print. 
71 
==PAGE:73==
production company is operating is not fully ready to embrace the product offered. This 
translates into a high risk as the industry could end up rejecting the product. 
 
Financial Risks 
Financial risks refer to the risks that can develop from the financial structures in the 
organization. This is probably the highest risk that the production company will have as it was 
observed in the financial viability section. As the company will need a high amount of capital to 
survive for the first year, this raises the risk significantly as the company will be operating on 
losses for a long time, any additional obstacles that it encounters will be harder to overcome. 
 
Operational Risks 
Operational risks are the risks the production company will have in terms of operations and 
administration. At the moment the production company does not show signs of having issues 
with operations or administration, but there is a risk especially associated with the growth that 
the company needs to have in order to become successful. Once the production company starts 
growing, the operational risks will also grow as there will be more work in the terms of 
administration and the possibility of producing more errors. 
 
 
 
72 
==PAGE:74==
10 Conclusion 
The goal of this master’s thesis was an ambitious one, designing a work system and a business 
model from the ground up is a good challenge. But in addition to this, the work system and 
business model were designed for a new medium which involved working with emerging 
technology in a fast changing environment. 
The original problem observed was in the way that current 360º video production companies 
were struggling to find the correct work system and business model to generate real value. The 
majority of these companies recurred to old work systems and business models used in 
traditional video production and tried to reuse them for the 360º medium. 
With this in mind, the process of designing an original and dedicated work system and business 
model started. This two were done separately but their results affected one another. 
The first thing that done was research, after that and with the help of the knowledge obtained 
the current work system was drafted with the help of Immerse a company currently working with 
producing 360º videos. This work system was analyzed and its challenges were found, this 
helped to create the recommendations that built the newly designed work system. 
Then came the business model, which went through a similar process. First the research, then 
the original business model, designed with the assumptions gathered from the research. These 
assumptions were then tested in a series of experiments, which included interviews with 
potential customers, a survey for end users and testing the technology used. The experiment 
results helped to properly shape the business model and to designed more accurately to the 
environment in which the production company is situated. 
And finally, the changes to the business model affected slightly the design of the work system 
which needed to be reviewed. 
The whole process provided great insight into the opportunity in the Danish market for a VR 
startup and into the importance of testing business assumptions. The difference seen from the 
first business model to the final one tell a lot about the kind of information one can gather from 
basic research vs the real knowledge one gets from experimental research. 
It’s also important to express that this process should be a continuous one, in order to maintain 
the organization relevant to its customers, the organization should always keep testing its 
assumptions and innovating on its work system and business models. 
 
 
 
 
73 
==PAGE:75==
References 
"virtual reality". Collins English Dictionary - Complete & Unabridged 10th Edition. HarperCollins 
Publishers. 31 Jan. 2017. <Dictionary.com http://www.dictionary.com/browse/virtual--reality>. 
Samsung Electronics CO LTD,. "DISPLAY METHOD AND ELECTRONIC DEVICE". 2016: FIG 
5C Print. 
Goldman Sachs,. ​Virtual & Augmented Reality: Understanding The Race For The Next 
Computing Platform​. 2016. Web. 21 Feb. 2017. Profiles In Innovation. 
Alter, Steven. <> Work System Method : Connecting People, Processes, and IT for Business 
Results. Work System Press, 2006. Print. 
Osterwalder, Alexander., Yves. Pigneur, and Tim. Clark. Business Model Generation : Wiley, 
2010. Print. 
Teece, David J. “Business Models, Business Strategy and Innovation.” Long Range Planning 
43.2-3 (2010): 172–194. Web. 
Chesbrough, H, and RS Rosenbloom. “The Role of the Business Model in Capturing Value from 
Innovation: Evidence from Xerox Corporation's Technology Spin-off Companies.” Industrial and 
Corporate Change 11.3 (2002): 529–555. Print. 
"Active Virtual Reality Users Worldwide 2014-2018 | Statistic". Statista. N.p., 2017. Web. 31 
Jan. 2017. 
Alter, S., and Steven Alter. “The Work System Method.” (2015): n. pag. Web. 
Bubb, Heiner. "System Ergonomics As An Approach To Improve Human Reliability". Nuclear 
Engineering and Design 110.2 (1988): 233-245. Web. 
Czaja, Sara J., and Sankaran N. Nair. “Human Factors Engineering and Systems Design.” 
Handbook of Human Factors and Ergonomics: Fourth Edition (2012): 38–56. Web. 
ALLUISI, EA. “CONCEPTUAL ASPECTS OF HUMAN-FACTORS - MEISTER,D.” Contemporary 
Psychology 36.4 (1991): 300–301. Print. 
Wilson, John R. “Fundamentals of Systems Ergonomics/Human Factors.” Applied Ergonomics 
45.1 (2014): 5–13. Web. 
Steven Alter. "The Work System Method for Understanding Information Systems and 
Information Systems Research" (2002) 
Kumparak, Greg. "A Brief History Of Oculus". TechCrunch. N.p., 2017. Web. 31 Jan. 2017. 
 "A New Way To See And Share Your World With 360-Degree Video". ​YouTube Creator Blog​. 
N.p., 2017. Web. 31 Jan. 2017. 
"Introducing 360 Video On Facebook | Facebook Newsroom". ​Newsroom.fb.com​. N.p., 2017. 
Web. 31 Jan. 2017. 
Milk, Chris. "Transcript Of "How Virtual Reality Can Create The Ultimate Empathy Machine"". 
Ted.com. N.p., 2017. Web. 31 Jan. 2017. 
Gaudiosi, John. "Sotheby's Real Estate Agents Are Using VR To Sell Homes In LA And NYC". 
Fortune.com​. N.p., 2015. Web. 21 Feb. 2017. 
Barry, Ashley. "You Can Watch The Super Bowl In VR, Here's How". ​USA TODAY​. N.p., 2017. 
Web. 21 Feb. 2017. 
74 
==PAGE:76==
Lichterman, Joseph. "The New York Times Is Launching A Daily 360-Degree Video Series". 
Nieman Lab​. N.p., 2016. Web. 21 Feb. 2017. 
Roth, Christian et al. “The Experience of Interactive Storytelling: Comparing " Fahrenheit’ with 
‘Façade.’” Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial 
Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 6972 (2011): 13–21. Web. 
Vosmeer, Mirjam, and Ben Schouten. “Creating Video Content for Oculus Rift Scriptwriting for 
360 Degrees-Interactive Video Productions.” Lecture Notes in Computer Science 9353 (2015): 
556–559. Web. 
Cochrane, Andy. Explaining The Basics Of VR. 2017. radio. 
Edwards, Kasper, and Per Langaa Jensen. “Design of Systems for Productivity and Well Being.” 
Applied Ergonomics 45.1 (2014): 26–32. Web. 
"Inter:Active & VR:Cinema". CPH:DOX. N.p., 2017. Web. 11 May 2017. 
 Alter, Steven. The Work System Method. 1st ed. Larkspur, CA: Work System Press, 2006. 
Print. 
Osterwalder, Alexander, and Yves Pigneur. Business Model Generation. 1st ed. New York, NY: 
John Wiley & Sons, 2013. Print. 
Morris, Betsy. "Virtual Reality Finally Catches On With Businesses". WSJ. N.p., 2017. Web. 7 
June 2017. 
Jolly, Adam. Managing Business Risk. London: Kogan Page, 2003. Print. 
 
 
 
 
75 
==PAGE:77==
Appendix 
A.1 End Users Survey 
360º videos 
This survey is part of the research for my master’s thesis project, about designing a business 
model for 360º video production. And thus is important to understand the opinions of the 
persons experiencing this videos. 
 
Tell me a bit about yourself 
 
What's your gender? 
Male 52.5% 
Female 47.5% 
 
What's your age? 
Mean 31.5 
Median 28 
Mode 28 
 
Where do you live? 
Top 3: Denmark, Mexico  and USA 
 
And what do you do? 
Many different careers. 
 
Let's talk 360º videos 
 
How do you usually watch 360º videos? 
Mobile Device 55.6%  
Laptop or PC 25.9% 
Mobile Headset 7% 
Google Cardboard 6.2% 
VR Headset (HMD) 4.9% 
 
Where do you primarily watch 360º videos? 
Facebook 55.7% 
Youtube 36.7% 
Other 7.6% 
 
Which type of video do you enjoy the most in 360º? (Check all that apply) 
76 
==PAGE:78==
Travel 83.8% 
Documentary 36.3% 
Music 32.5% 
Events 22.5% 
Gaming 13.8% 
Advertisement 10% 
Horror 10% 
 
Real Estate 
I believe real estate shows great potential for the 360º medium, what do you think? Imagine you 
are looking for a new house or apartment. 
 
Do you think the pictures on real estate websites are generally enough? 
No 81.5% 
Yes 18.5% 
 
Have you ever taken a virtual tour of a real estate property? 
No 54.3% 
Yes 45.7% 
 
How helpful do you think a virtual tour is for you the potential property buyer? (1 Not helpful at 
all - 5 very helpful) 
5 58.8% 
4 31.3% 
3 6.3% 
2 3.8% 
1 0% 
 
Events 
 
Would you like to relive an event through a 360º video? 
Yes 75.3% 
No 24.7% 
 
Would you like to experience an event that you are not able to attend through a 360º video? 
Yes 90.1% 
No 9.9% 
 
Which types of events would interest you the most to experience on 360º? (Check all that apply) 
Music (concerts, festivals, etc) 70.9% 
Live Performances (theatre, musicals, etc) 62% 
Sports 41.8% 
Conferences 29.1% 
77 
==PAGE:79==
 
Have you experienced any type of event on 360º video? 
No 70.4% 
Yes 29.6% 
 
Entertainment 
 
What type of entertainment would you like to see in 360º? (Check all that apply) 
Documentaries 79.6% 
Movies 50.6% 
Tv Series 27.3% 
News Reports 27.3% 
Reality shows 15.6% 
 
How would it be to watch advertisement from your favourite brands on 360º? (1 Horrible - 5 
Awesome) 
3 23.8% 
4 22.5% 
1 21.3% 
2 16.3% 
5 16.3% 
 
That's It! Thanks for the help. 
A.2 360º Video Producers Interview Template 
1.
Walk me through your process. 
1.
Pre-production 
2.
Production 
1.
Framing 
2.
Distance to the camera 
3.
Lighting 
4.
Recording Audio 
5.
Directing 
3.
post-production 
1.
Pacing of edit 
4.
distribution 
1.
Size of the end file 
 
Who are your customers? 
 
What product/services do you provide? 
 
78 
==PAGE:80==
What human resources do you use? 
 
What information do you need? 
 
What technology do you use? 
 
A.3 AZVR 360º Camera Specifications 
VIDEO  
Resolution 7680 x 3840 (28 MP)  
Frames Per Second 30  
Format MP4  
Bit Rate Up to 18 Mbps  
Color Depth 10 bit  
Wide Dynamic Range Yes  
 
PHOTO  
Resolution 8910 x 4550 (39 MP)  
Format JPEG  
Time Lapse Photo Intervals 0.5s - infinity 
 
AUDIO  
Format AAC, 12 channels  
Codec AAC  
Hertz 32 kHz 
 
BATTERY 
Recording Runtime 2.5 hours  
Standby Runtime 10 hours  
Time Lapse Runtime 4 hours  
Charging External power supply 
 
MEMORY  
Storage 12 SD cards (internal)  
Size 384 GB  
Data Transfer USB 
 
CAMERA HARDWARE 
Lenses 12  
Sensor Rolling shutter  
Field Of View 360° x 180°  
Sensor Size 1/3”  
79 
==PAGE:81==
Pixel Size 2.2 µm  
Microphones 12  
Dimensions 15 cm diameter, 20 cm length  
Weight 1.2 kg  
Mount 1/4-20 UNC (top & bottom)  
Housing SLS  
Color Black  
Peripheral Interfaces USB 2.0  
Memory Interface SD cards  
LEDs 2  
Battery 10Ah 
80 
