==PAGE:1==
Water ﬂow at the nanoscale
A study of water ﬂow in nanotubes
Master’s thesis by
Supervisor
Anders Christian Riis-Jensen
Tomas Bohr
Technical University of Denmark
Technical University of Denmark
July 2nd, 2017
==PAGE:2==
II
Abstract
Fludic systems at all length scales have always played a large role in our community.
It is not so many years since we began considering microﬂuidics, where many technological
applications are already used. It is therefore no surprise that nanoﬂuidics is now an emerging
ﬁeld. As we go down in length scale, we begin to see phenomena that are not intuitive to us,
and these phenomena possibly hide many technological applications. It is therefore of major
importance to understand how ﬂuids behave as we go down to the nanoscale.
It turns out that one very interesting system to study, is the water ﬂow through nanotubes.
Earlier DFT calculations [16] show that the when comparing the friction coeﬃcient of water on
a sheet of graphene and on a sheet of boron-nitride, one gets a friction coeﬃcient that is 3 times
lower on graphene. This points, not just to a geometry dependence of the friction coeﬃcient, but
also a dependence on the exact solid material. Recent experiments of water ﬂow through carbon
nanotubes and boron-nitride nanotubes [1] - [4], also show a much lower friction coeﬃcient inside
carbon nanotubes than in boron-nitride nanotubes. Here it is also found that for radii smaller
than about 40 nm, the friction coeﬃcient in carbon nanotubes becomes radius dependent. It is
suggested that this is due to the electronic properties of carbon nanotubes.
Using a tight-binding model we here show that, any radius dependency in the electronic
properties of carbon nanotubes are to be found in the electronic density of states. We show that
when the ﬁnite temperature of the system is taken into account, a radius dependency is only
seen for radii below about 18 nm. This means that the radius dependency seen experimentally
cannot be subscribed to this eﬀect. When determining the friction coeﬃcient inside nanotubes,
this cannot be done by direct measurement. This is therefore done indirectly, by measuring
the ﬂow ﬁeld around the nanotube, and mapping this back to the friction coeﬃcient inside the
nanotube.
In this method, the nanotube is assumed to be seen as an inﬁnitely small point
force, where the ﬂow ﬁeld around this is called the Landau-Squire jet. In this study, we show
that when higher order terms in this expansion are considered, taking the exact geometry of
the nanotube into account, this does not change the ﬂow ﬁeld at the length scales at which the
actual measurements are done. It conversely only aﬀects the ﬂow ﬁeld within about 1 µm for
the systems considered in [1]. We also show that the slip condition put on the outside of the
nanotube, does not aﬀect the far-ﬁeld velocity ﬁeld.
==PAGE:3==
III
Resume
Fluidsystemer p˚a alle længdeskalaer har altid spillet en stor rolle i vores samfund. Det
er ikke s˚a mange ˚ar siden, at vi begyndte at betragte mikroﬂuidik systestemer, som har mange
teknologiske anvendelser. Det er derfor ingen overraskelse, at nanoﬂuidik lige nu er et omr˚ade
p˚a vej frem. N˚ar vi g˚ar ned i længdeskala, ser vi fænomener som ikke er intuitive for os, og disse
fænomener gemmer muligvis p˚a teknologiske anvendelser. Det er derfor af stor betydning, at
forst˚a hvordan ﬂuider opfører sig, n˚ar vi g˚ar ned p˚a nanoskala.
Det viser sig, at ´et meget interessant system, er vandﬂow gennem kulstofnanorør. Tidligere
tæthedsfunktionalberegninger [16], viser at n˚ar man sammenligner friktionskoeﬃcienten mellem
vand og en plan overﬂade af enten grafen eller bohr-nitrid, f˚ar man en friktionskoeﬃcient der er
3 gange lavere p˚a grafen. Dette tyder p˚a, ikke bare en geometri afhængighed af friktionskoeﬃ-
cienten, men ogs˚a en afhængighed af det eksakte materiale. Nylige eksperimenter af vandﬂow
gennem kulstofnanorør og bohr-nitrid nanorør [1], viser ogs˚a en meget laver friktionskoeﬃcient
inden i kulstofnanorør end i bohr-nitrid nanorør, og her ses ogs˚a en radiusafhængig friktionsko-
eﬃcient inden i carbon nanorør for radier under ca. 30 nm. Det foresl˚as det nævnte studie, at
dette er pga. de elektroniske egenskaber af kulstofnanorør.
Ved brug af en tight-binding model, viser vi her at en radiusafhængighed i de elektroniske
egenskaber af kulstøfnanorør vil være i den elektroniske density of states. Vi viser at n˚ar den
endelige temperatur af systemet taget i betragtning, ses en radiusafhængighed kun for radier
under omkring 18 nm, og at den radiusafhængighed der ses eksperimentielt ikke kan beskrives
af denne eﬀekt. N˚ar friktionskoeﬃcienten inden i nanorørerne skal bestemmes, kan dette ikke
gøres med en direkte m˚aling. Istedet gøres dette ved en indirekte m˚aling, ved at m˚ale ﬂow feltet
rundt om nanorører, og regne tilbage til hvilken friktionskoeﬃcient inden i nanorøret dette svarer
til. Ved denne metode, betragtes nanorøret som en undeligt lille punkt kraft, hvor ﬂow feltet
omkring denne kaldes en Landau-Squire jet. I dette studie viser vi, at n˚ar højere ordens led i
denne ekspansion tages med, hvor den eksakte geometri kan beskrives a nanorøret, ændrer det
ikke ﬂow feltet p˚a de længdeskalaer hvor ﬂow feltet bliver m˚alt i de faktiske eksperimenter, men
ændrer kun ﬂow feltet indenfor omkring 1 µm for systemerne betragtet i [1]. Vi viser ogs˚a at
slip betingelsen sat p˚a ydersiden af nanorøret, ikke p˚avirker ﬂow feltet langt fra nanorøret.
==PAGE:4==
IV
Preface
This thesis studies the liquid-solid interaction inside carbon and boron-nitride nanotubes,
together with the ﬂow ﬁeld around a point force. The work was done at the Department of
Physics at Technical University of Denmark from the 2nd of January 2017 to the 2nd of July
2017. The supervisor of this thesis was Professor Tomas Bohr.
I would like to thank everyone in the FLUIDS section at DTU Physics, which I have been
working in throughout my 6 months of work with this thesis. I will give a special thanks to my
supervisor Professor Tomas Bohr. Tomas has been an excellent supervisor, and have dedicated
a lot of his own time to my project. He has been great at supporting me when things were
going great, but more importantly he has really helped when things did not make sense, or were
incomprehensible. We have had many great discussions, and I believe we both have achieved a
far greater understanding of the physics behind the problem with each others help. It has been
a huge pleasure to work together with you Tomas. I will also give a very special thanks to Julia
D¨olger, with whom I have had the pleasure sharing oﬃce with. Despite of both of our projects
being frustrating at times, we have always been good at keeping the mood high together, with
a lot of laughing and talking about how annoying our supervisors can be (look away Tomas).
I have truly enjoyed the time with you the last 6 months. Lastly I would like to thank Mark
Kamper Svendsen, for a lot of useful discussions about the project and physics in general, and
to both Julia and Mark for proof reading this thesis.
Anders Christian Riis-Jensen
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Physics
July 2nd, 2017
==PAGE:5==
Contents
V
Contents
1
Introduction and Motivation
1
1.1
Fluid ﬂow in nanotubes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Outline of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Continuum physics at the nanoscale and the continuum limit
5
3
Flow in nanotubes
10
3.1
Introduction to nanotubes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
Earlier experimental results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
The Landau jet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Non-equilibrium statistics and linear-response theory
16
4.1
What is friction? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2
The Einstein relation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.3
The ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.4
Relation between the ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem and the slip length . . . . .
23
5
Earlier simulation results
26
5.1
Slip length from equilibrium and non-equilibrium simulations . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6
Inﬂuence of electronic structure and screening
30
6.1
Earlier simulation of electronic structure of a graphene sheet and boron-nitride
sheet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.1.1
Hatree energy and Hatree-Fock energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.1.2
Results from the water-solid interaction using Density Functional Theory
33
7
Modelling electronic screening
36
7.1
van der Waals interactions and classical screening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
7.2
Quantum mechanical screening and the Lindhard function . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
7.3
Geometry of nanotubes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.4
Tight-binding model for carbon nanotubes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.5
Evaluating the density of states for carbon nanotubes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
8
Flow ﬁeld around a point force
51
8.1
Volumetric and momentum ﬂux for the Landau solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
8.2
Beyond the Landau Jet
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
8.3
Finding an expression for F2(θ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
8.4
Momentum ﬂux in the second order expansion approximation . . . . . . . . . . .
55
8.5
Analytical solutions for F2(θ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
8.6
Analytical solutions for F2(θ) in the Stokes limit
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
8.7
Streamlines for the second order expansion in the Stokes limit . . . . . . . . . . .
61
==PAGE:6==
Contents
VI
8.8
On the subject of boundary conditions and length scales of the problem . . . . .
62
8.9
Higher order expansion theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
8.10 Streamlines and boundary conditions for the multipole expansion . . . . . . . . .
65
9
COMSOL simulation of the ﬂow ﬁeld around a nanotube in a water reservoir 70
9.1
Geometry and mesh
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
9.2
Poiseuille ﬂow and the Landau jet
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
9.3
Eﬀect of slip on outer nanotube wall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
9.4
Comparison with analytical result from Lamb expansion . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
10 Conclusion and outlook
78
11 Appendix A
80
12 Appendix B
82
13 Appendix C
83
14 Appendix D
84
15 Appendix E
88
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction and Motivation
1.1
Fluid ﬂow in nanotubes
Fluid mechanics has always been very important to mankind. We are surrounded by ﬂuids
in our every day life, and have always been. Our everyday experience of ﬂuids, is however not
universal at all length scales. As we go down in length scale to the micro- and even nanometer
scale, our intuition of ﬂuids from the macroscale cease to exist. Its behaviour at these length
scales oﬀers many puzzling physical phenomena, and when we explore the physics of ﬂuids at
these length scales, many technological uses appear. For some years, microﬂuidics has been
an emerging topic. The study of microﬂuidics has for instance led to the technological use of
controlling micro particles in water reservoirs, which have many uses in biotechnology. And
recently scientists have taken the eﬀort to reach, new fantastic uses in our society to a whole
new level, namely to the nanoscale. In recent years the study of nanoﬂuidics have become a
huge topic. Examples of this is the mixing of ﬂuids, that is much faster at lower length scales.
Another incredible example is seen in ﬁgure 1.
Figure 1: Example of carbon nanotubes used on lab-on-a-chip for water desilination. The sub-2 nm
carbon nanotubes ﬁlters ions from the water, as conventional water desilination membranes, but allow
a much faster water transport through the tubes. The image is taken from [37].
Here carbon nanotubes are used as membranes for water desalination. Desalination of
water is something we have done for many years, and involves both physical ﬁltering through a
sieve and chemical ﬁltering by neutralizing speciﬁc chemicals. In this study [37] it is found that
a set of aligned sub-2 nm carbon nanotubes can eﬀectively work as a water membrane, since it
does not allow larger molecules than water molecules, to enter through the membrane, simply
due to the small nanotube radius. Also hydroxyl groups are placed on the nanotube opening, to
electrostatically reject ions. That it is actually possible to align such small tubes in an ordered
way, is a fantastic engineering achievement. Other examples of such an application can be seen
in [34] and [35]. This idea of water desalination using small membranes is not new, however this
approach has previously been limited by the small amount of water that can ﬂow through such
small tubes. It turns out that, water transport through carbon nanotubes is extremely fast due
to a vanishing friction coeﬃcient between water and the nanotube wall. This therefore serves as
excellent water desalination membranes.
The investigation of this eﬀect, was ﬁrst done experimentally in 2005 by Majumder et al
[2], who found an enormous slip length inside a 3.5 nm carbon nanotube (this result later turned
out to be questionable). The result was followed up by Holt et al (2006) [3] and Whitby et al
(2008) [4], who also ﬁnd a very large slip length for water ﬂow through carbon nanotubes. A
more systematic study was made in 2016 by Bocquet et al [1], where it was shown that the slip
length is radius dependent for carbon nanotubes for radii below about 40 nm. This can be seen
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction and Motivation
2
in ﬁgure 2. This study also showed that no such eﬀect was found in boron-nitride nanotubes,
pointing to a speciﬁc curvature dependent carbon-water interaction eﬀect.
Figure 2: Experimental data from the Bocquet 2016 [1], where the experimentally measured radius
dependent slip length for carbon nanotubes are shown. This is relative to no such eﬀect seen for boron-
nitride nanotubes. This ﬁgure is taken from the article [1].
The oddness of this result is further underlined by, the failed ability of simulation result of
such systems to reproduce this eﬀect [14] and [15]. To study this, we ﬁrst need to fully understand
how a term as friction comes about. We are very aware of what friction means from our everyday
experience, and our understanding of Newtonian mechanics. However it turns out when we are
talking about the friction of a system, which is an ensemble of particles, this gets diﬃcult to
fully grasp. In the fantastic work originally done by Kubo in formulating some of the laws of
statistical mechanics, some of the derivations are unfortunately not very transparent. A large
eﬀort in this study, have therefore been dedicated to understand and explain in a pedagogical
way, the laws of statistical mechanics we here will need. Also the ﬁeld of quantum mechanical
many-body physics, shows up as an important area, and a detailed review of this ﬁelds methods
is also given.
To study this apparent radius dependency of slip length, speciﬁcally related to only carbon
nanotubes, it is hypothesized by [1] that this eﬀect is due to the electronic properties of carbon
nanotubes. This is because carbon nanotubes and boron-nitride nanotubes are very similar in
geometry and lattice structure, while having very diﬀerent electronic properties. In this study,
we therefore investigate how such a radius dependency can come about related to the electronic
properties of carbon nanotubes. The second part of the thesis, is about the actual determination
of the slip length inside nanotubes. The measurement of the slip length inside nanotubes cannot
be performed by a direct measurement.
The slip length is therefore measured indirectly by
considering the ﬂow ﬁeld around the nanotube. We here review the method used by [1] to study
this, and both analytically and numerically study how well this approximation works.
This
thesis can therefore be seen, as a study of the phenomenon seen in ﬁgure 2, that the slip length
is radius dependent in carbon nanotubes, and we will on our way see to which parts of physics
this will take us.
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction and Motivation
3
1.2
Outline of the thesis
The goal of this thesis, is to describe water ﬂow inside and around nanotubes. We will
especially be interested in, seeing if we can subscribe the radius dependent slip length found
experimentally [1] - [4] in carbon nanotubes, to the metallic properties of carbon nanotubes.
After that we will describe the ﬂow ﬁeld around a nanotube, where a pressure driven ﬂow is
applied through the nanotube. For many purposes this can be considered as a point force. We
will here be interested in seeing how both the close-ﬁeld and far-ﬁeld velocity ﬁeld changes, when
the ﬁnite dimension of the nanotube is taken into account.
The outline of the thesis is as follows:
Chapter 2: Continuum physics at the nanoscale and the continuum limit
We here give an introduction to ﬂuid mechanics in general, and discuss why one have to be careful
with familiar terms such as velocity ﬁelds and density ﬁelds at the nanoscale. This section also
introduces the very important parameter for this thesis: the slip length.
Chapter 3: Flow in nanotubes
Here we describe the earlier experimental work that has been done on water ﬂow in nanotubes.
The radius dependent slip length found here for carbon nanotubes is the bedrock of this thesis,
and the phenomenon we will look into.
Chapter 4: Non-equilibrium statistics and linear-response theory
It turns out, to properly understand the water ﬂow at the nanoscale, we need to have a better
understanding of the term friction, than our usual Newtonian understanding from our daily life.
In this chapter we therefore seek to understand, how friction is understood from a statistical
mechanics point of view.
Chapter 5: Earlier simulation results
In this chapter we describe the work in the literature, where the water ﬂow through nanotubes
are considered, and compare the computed slip lengths to the experimentally measured slip
lengths from chapter 3. The large mismatch between theory and experiment motivates our next
chapters.
Chapter 6: Inﬂuence of electronic structure and screening
We here discuss how to take the electronic structure of carbon nanotubes into account, when
we model the ﬂow through carbon nanotubes. To understand this, we ﬁrst need to study the
general method for solving many-body problems quantum mechanically. We discuss an earlier
study, where the interaction between water and a graphene and boron-nitride sheet is modelled
by DFT calculations. We take this as our motivation for looking analytically at the screened
interaction in carbon nanotubes, which potentially can predict the radius dependency of the slip
length.
Chapter 7: Modelling electronic screening We now proceed by ﬁrst introducing a tight-
binding model for carbon nanotubes, and use this model to study how the water-wall interaction
is altered when we take the electronic structure of the nanotube into account. It turns out that
any radius dependency has to be in the electronic density of state.
Chapter 8: Flow ﬁeld around a point force
After our study of the electronic properties of nanotubes has come to an end, we proceed to
describe the velocity ﬁeld outside the nanotube. This is interesting since, in the experiments the
slip length is measured indirectly using the measured ﬂow ﬁeld around the nanotube, where it is
assumed the nanotube can be viewed as a point force. We analytically look at how this changes,
when a more detailed description of the actual system is made.
Chapter 9: COMSOL simulation of the ﬂow ﬁeld around a nanotube in a water
reservoir
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction and Motivation
4
We ﬁnally make a numerical investigation of the actual nanotube system using COMSOL. This
enables us to compare this to the analytical work, and see how well the point force approximation
works at diﬀerent length scales. We also study how the far-ﬁeld velocity ﬁeld depends on the
slip conditions put on the outside of the nanotube.
==PAGE:11==
2
Continuum physics at the nanoscale and the continuum limit
5
2
Continuum physics at the nanoscale and the continuum
limit
Our everyday notion of ﬂuids, is the idea of a well-behaved continuum that can take any
shape we force it to. Even though any liquid of course consists of many molecules bound together
by van der Waals interactions, when we are holding a splash of water in our hands (try actually
to do this), we do not see this, since the length scale of our hands is about 108 times larger
than the interatomic distance. When we say that we look at a liquid as a continuum, we are
actually saying a lot more than just that. It means that the deﬁning parameters of the liquid,
such as the velocity of the liquid, does not refer to the velocity of individual particles, but is an
averaged parameter of a ﬁnite sub-volume of the whole liquid (all particles in the liquid), and
we therefore have to do with a velocity ﬁeld opposed to just a velocity. In the same way for
instance the density of the liquid, is the density averaged at the length scale we are looking at,
and is therefore also a density ﬁeld, as its size depends on where in the liquid we are looking.
We will return to this discussion, about how to deﬁne parameters such as velocity and density
later, when looking at liquids at a smaller length scale.
Describing the dynamics of a ﬂuid, we usually do this by the Navier-Stokes equation
ρ(r, t)[∂t + (v(r, t) · ∇)]v(r, t) = −∇P(r, t) + η∇2v(r, t) + βη∇(∇· v) + fext(r, t),
(2.1)
where ρ(r, t) is the density ﬁeld, v(r, t) is the velocity ﬁeld, P(r, t) is the pressure ﬁeld, η is
the viscosity, β is an compressibility factor, and fext(r, t) are any external forces that might be
present, and we have explicitly written the space and time dependence of all ﬁelds.
No exact general solution has been found for the Navier-Stokes equation. One must there-
fore consider a particular geometry and/or system to ﬁnd analytical solutions.
One set of
solutions we will be interested in, in this study, is solutions to the so-called Stokes equation. To
get an idea of the qualitative behaviour of the ﬂuid, one deﬁnes the so-called Reynolds number
Re = LV ρ
η
,
(2.2)
where L is the characteristic length scale of the ﬂow and V is a characteristic velocity. When
we are considering ﬂows at either small length scales or low ﬂuid velocities (or both), so that is
if Re << 1 we are in the low Reynolds number limit. In this limit eqn. (2.1) can be simpliﬁed
somewhat, ﬁrst of all assuming no time-dependence of any ﬁelds, and second saying the space
and time derivatives deﬁne a characteristic length (L) and time (T) scale: ∇→1
L and ∂t →1
T ,
the ratio between the viscous and the non-linear term becomes:
ρv · ∇v
η∇2v
→ρv2L2
ηvL
= ρvL
η ,
(2.3)
which is exactly the Reynolds number. So the Reynolds number gives the relative size of the
viscous term compared to the non-linear term. Evidently, for Re << 1 and for an incompressible
ﬂuid (∇· v = 0) we can neglect the advective term, to obtain the Stokes equation:
0 = −∇P(r) + η∇2v(r).
(2.4)
Notice especially, that the advective term on the left hand side is gone, leaving a much simpler
equation to be solved. Eqn. (2.4) has known analytical solutions. For now we will just consider
the simplest example of a planar Couette ﬂow - a sheet of water conﬁned between two slabs. The
lower slab is held still, while the upper slab is moved in the x-direction at a constant velocity,
as shown in ﬁgure 3.
==PAGE:12==
2
Continuum physics at the nanoscale and the continuum limit
6
Figure 3: Illustration of a Couette ﬂow. The lower
slab is held still, while the upper slab is moved to
the right with velocity vslab.
The two slabs are
separated by a distance h, and the velocity proﬁle
is shown in blue, for a no-slip assumption on the
boundaries.
Figure 4: Illustration of the deﬁtion of the slip
velocity vslip and the slip length b.
When solving eq. (2.4) for the geometry shown in ﬁgure 3, one must introduce a set of
boundary conditions. The question is now: what value does the velocity ﬁeld take exactly at the
boundary i.e. exactly at the slab-water interface? There is no way we can know or guess that.
A ﬁrst guess would be to assume, that the ﬂuid is not moving relative to the slab, just at the
wall. This is known as the no-slip boundary condition. For the case of a planar Couette ﬂow as
shown in the ﬁgure above the no-slip boundary condition would read: v(0) = 0 and v(h) = vslab,
leading to the linear velocity proﬁle shown. This is the usual no-slip boundary condition, and
it turns out to be a proper estimate in most cases. Even though this might not be completely
true, the large scale of the systems we are usually considering (and in this context even µm
scales can be considered ”large”), makes a nanometer slip length (see the deﬁnition of the slip
length below) small compared to the characteristic length scale of the system. However, in some
particular cases the no-slip boundary condition, does not give a satisfactory description of the
ﬂuid just at the boundary. Here the very ﬁrst layer of liquid in contact with the solid wall, do
have a ﬁnite velocity, which we here will denote as the slip velocity vs. One can deﬁne the so
called slip length b, as deﬁned in ﬁgure 4
vs = b ∂zv(z)|wall,
(2.5)
where z denotes a particular direction normal to the solid wall. For the case of a cylindrical
Poiseuille ﬂow (a pressure-driven ﬂow in a cylindrical tube), as we consider in this study, the
velocity proﬁle takes the two following expressions, depending on whether one assumes the no-slip
(left) or slip (right) boundary condition (the derivations are shown in appendix A and appendix
B):
vx(r) = ∆P
4Lη
 R2 −r2
,
vx(r) = ∆P
4ηL

1 + 2 b
R

R2 −r2

,
(2.6)
where ∆P is the diﬀerential applied pressure over the tube, L is the tube length, R is the
radius of the tube, r is the radial coordinate in cylindrical coordinates, and b is the slip length.
If b << R as is usually the case, the diﬀerence becomes negligible, since the two expressions
are equal in this limit. However, if this is not the case the exact nature of the slip boundary
condition is of major importance. If we deﬁne the volumetric ﬂow rate as: Q = πR2¯v, where ¯v
is the average ﬂow velocity, then the velocity ﬁelds can be re-written as
vx(r) = 2¯v
R2
1
4 b
R + 1

1 + 2 b
R

R2 −r2

=
2¯v
4 b
R + 1

1 + 2b
R −r2
R2

.
(2.7)
==PAGE:13==
2
Continuum physics at the nanoscale and the continuum limit
7
Figure 5: Illustrative ﬁgure showing the ensemble of a molecular dynamics simulation, of a pressure-
driven ﬂow of water conﬁned between two slabs of graphene. The ﬁgure is taken from [14].
It is in this context that another standard way of describing ﬂuids comes to mind, the Molecular
Dynamics simulations (MD simulations). The idea behind MD simulations is to consider the
ﬂuid as a collection of individual particles instead of a set of ﬁelds. The position of each individ-
ual particle is initially deﬁned in a certain geometry, for instance a ﬂat or cylindrical geometry
as above. A driving force is then deﬁned, for instance the moving slab in the Couette ﬂow or
the pressure gradient in the Poiseuille ﬂow. Deﬁning which forces act on the particles, Newton’s
equations are then solved numerically for each particle, and after a certain time step deﬁned in
the simulation (usually ps), a new position and velocity are then deﬁned for each particle. In
this way, the behaviour of the whole ﬂuid can be described by the behaviour of each individual
particle. Computer power puts limits on the size of the system that can be simulated (the num-
ber of particles included in the simulation) and on the total period over which the simulation
is run. An example of the ensemble of a MD simulation of a Poiseuille ﬂow is given in ﬁgure
5. Here water molecules are conﬁned between two slabs of graphene. In a later section, there
will be a more detailed discussion about how to make such simulations. Challenges arise when
dealing with deﬁning the pressure and holding the temperature constant, but we will not discuss
that for now.
As we zoom in on the splash of water you are holding in your hand (yes, I am expecting
you are still holding this in your hand, and will for the remainder of this chapter), we ﬁrst start
seeing the eﬀect of surface tension, giving (for us) weird eﬀects such as the meniscus for water
at the free surface in a cylindrical tube, and when we zoom in even more and get down to the
atomic length scale, our whole notion of a ”ﬂuid” changes completely. From a classical ﬂuid
mechanics point of view, the low Reynolds ﬂow in a cylindrical tube is governed by eqns. (2.6)
depending on the exact boundary condition to be used. However, as we go down to the scale
of a few nanometers, and consider a ﬂuid ﬂow through a small tube, terms as velocity ﬁeld and
density ﬁeld become vague at best (to be shown later). As mentioned above, in deﬁning the
terms velocity and density needed for the continuum description, we need to go to the particle
picture and average over individual particles in a certain volume. When doing this, one needs
to carefully consider how large a volume one should consider.
Consider a large container ﬁlled with water, where we want to describe the velocity and density
ﬁelds. As mentioned, to do this we need to deﬁne a sub-volume of the whole container (here a
cubed box with side length w) in which we average over all individual particles. Due to thermal
ﬂuctuations and the mean ﬂow of the ﬂuid (if present), the number of particles in this box will
not be constant, but for now assume that the average number of particles in the box is N. The
question is; how big this chosen box should be? If the box is chosen too small, the ﬂuctuations in
==PAGE:14==
2
Continuum physics at the nanoscale and the continuum limit
8
the number of particles in the box will be too high, such that the deﬁned density or velocity ﬁeld
will change a lot in time due to ﬂuctuations. Chosen too large, we will not see local perturbations
in the ﬁelds that might be present due to a physical or geometric reason. From basic statistics
it is well-known, that the standard deviation of the number of particles in the box is given by
√
N, and the relative change in the number of particles in the box will therefore be given by
√
N
N . Knowing that the interparticle distance in water is about 0.3 nm at room temperature
and standard pressure, the volume of the box is V = w3 = (0.3)3N = (0.3)3 
N
√
N
2
. Therefore
depending on the relative uncertainty accepted, table 1 gives the needed side length of the box
to achieve this. This also eﬀectively sets the length scale at which deﬁnitions of a velocity and
density ﬁeld exceeds to have a proper deﬁnition.
Relative uncertainty
√
N
N
0.001
0.01
0.05
0.1
0.2
Side length of box w
30 nm
6.5 nm
2.2 nm
1.4 nm
0.9 nm
Table 1: The calculated side length of the box, that is needed to have a certain relative uncertainty in
the number of particles.
As we go to the nanometer scale, we are therefore on the verge of the continuum description
being valid. This again raises the question of what actually happens at the water-solid interface.
In discussing the slip/no-slip condition above, we argued that in the no-slip boundary condition,
it was the very ﬁrst layer of the ﬂuid that must assume the same velocity as the boundary.
However, considering individual particles the total velocity has two components, complicating
the deﬁnition of the boundary condition. Looking at a single particle, the ﬁrst part of its total
velocity will be given by, the velocity we considered above in the continuum picture - the ﬂow
velocity of the whole ﬂuid vflow. The second components of its total velocity is the Brownian
velocity vbrown, due to a ﬁnite temperature of the system. The reason why this is consistent
with the continuum limit above, is because the average of the Brownian velocity is zero, so when
averaging we just get the ﬂow velocity. The thermal velocity of a water molecule can simply
be estimated by equating the thermal energy at a certain temperature with the kinetic energy:
kbT = 1
2mv2. Using the mass of one water molecule: mwater = 3 · 10−26 kg, one get that at
room temperature, the thermal velocity of a water molecule is 530 m/s. This is several orders of
magnitude larger than the collective velocity of the whole ﬂuid in the system considered in this
project.
Another interesting question can be raised, going to the particle picture at the nanometer
scale. Both evident from the Couette ﬂow with a no-slip boundary condition in ﬁgure 3, and
from both Poiseuille velocity proﬁles in eqn. (2.6), that even though we assume a slip boundary
condition, the velocity proﬁle is highly altered if the slip length is of the same characteristic
size as the system. The slip length is set by some interaction, with the solid wall where this
interaction has yet to be deﬁned. Each individual particle in the ﬂuid will feel the Van der Waals
interaction with all other particles in the ﬂuid, which is what is the origin of the viscous eﬀects in
the ﬂuid in the continuum picture. However at the atomic scale, a single ﬂuid particle just next
to the solid wall will also feel the van der Waals interaction with each atom of the lattice which
constitutes the solid wall. Travelling along a certain direction relative to the solid wall, the ﬂuid
particle will therefore see a periodic potential from the solid wall. It must be this interaction
that determines the boundary condition in the continuum picture. The exact reason why this
periodic potential slows down the water molecules is somehow cumbersome. In plasma physics a
well-known phenomenon called Landau damping, describes the eﬀect of how electrons are either
accelerated or decelerated by waves in the plasma. Imagine an electron travelling at a certain
velocity ve−, and a wave propagating throughout the plasma at a velocity vwave. As the wave
and electron passes each other, energy will either be transferred from the wave to the electron
if vwave > ve−or from the electron to the wave if vwave < ve−. A rough picture of this is
that, qualitative the diﬀerential speed between the electron and wave will not be the same when
the electron goes ”uphill” verses ”downhill”, as it sees the wave so the wave either pushes the
==PAGE:15==
2
Continuum physics at the nanoscale and the continuum limit
9
electron, or the electron pushes the wave. However, in the case of a ﬂuid particle moving across
the periodic potential from the solid wall, the particle is accelerated as much as it is decelerated
when we average over the whole system. The, normally so familiar, term of friction therefore
becomes diﬃcult to comprehend in this case, and this is one thing we will look at in this study.
==PAGE:16==
3
Flow in nanotubes
10
3
Flow in nanotubes
3.1
Introduction to nanotubes
What is intuitively easiest to imagine and idealize? A ﬂat single-atomically thin layer of
carbon atoms, or a single-atomically thin layer of carbon atoms rolled into a cylindrical shape?
From a technological point of view, both seem rather diﬃcult to fabricate, however the ﬁrst is
certainly the geometry that seems easiest to grasp. It is therefore amazing that the cylindrical
shaped sheet of carbon atoms was discovered by Ijima 13 years before its ﬂat counterpart was
discovered by Novoselov.
The single-atomically thin layer of carbon atoms is what is today
well-known as graphene, while the cylindrical shape is known as carbon nanotubes (CNTs). The
lattice structure of both graphene and CNT is a hexagonal lattice. To really get a sense of the
geometry of a CNT, one can take a piece of paper (which in this thought experiment corresponds
to the graphene sheet), and fold it into a cylindrical shape. Now take a pencil and draw straight
lines along the shortest side of the paper (from side to side). If you try to fold it again, it is easy
to notice that the paper can be folded in many diﬀerent ways - if you connect each corner of the
paper, the lines are perpendicular to the axis around which it is folded. However, if one folds the
paper such that it is twisted, the lines will now not be perpendicular to the axis of rotation. To
get a picture of this one can take a quick look at ﬁgures 14 and 14. We will not go into details
about the actual fabrication of CNTs, but the exact fabrication is nothing like folding a graphene
sheet. It turns out (as we will show later), that the metallic properties of CNTs depends on what
is called the chirality, which is a description of how the CNT is twisted. Just like our piece of
paper. We will return to the deﬁnition of this term later, but it is fascinating that the metallic
properties of CNTs can to some extent be understood from a simple paper-pencil analogue.
We will in general refer to two kinds of nanotubes (NTs): CNTs and Boron-nitride nan-
otubes (BNNTs). BNNTs have the same lattice structure as CNTs just with every second atom
being boron/nitride, and can visually in all ways be compared to CNTs. Talking about NTs,
we in general diﬀer between two terms: single-walled nanotubes (SWNT) and multi-walled nan-
otubes (MWNT). SWNTs are what we considered above, where one sheet of graphene were
rolled to make a cylindrical shaped CNT with one well-deﬁned radius. A MWNT is then simply
multiple layers of CNT enclosing each other with diﬀerent radii, with a interlayer distance of
about the same as the carbon-carbon distance in the hexagonal lattice.
Sitting with a NT in your hand, some might wonder (and some already have): is there
any room for water inside the NT? As long as the diameter is above ∼0.5 nm, the answer is
yes! And if one can put water inside the NT, then it should also be possible to apply diﬀerent
pressure on either side of the NT, and therefore drive the water through the NT, right? It is
indeed, and these experiments is what we will discuss in the next section.
3.2
Earlier experimental results
To understand the phenomenon we want to study in this thesis, we ﬁrst need to understand
the work that have done experimentally on this subject.
In this section we will review the
experiments in the literature, that are done on the subject of liquid ﬂows through NTs. It is
remarkable that this in itself can be done, since when you think about it, we are pushing water
molecules which we cannot see, though a cylindrical tube we also cannot see. However, what
might be even more remarkable is what is seen when this experiment is done. It turns out,
that the slip length as discussed above is heavily dependent on the radius of the CNT, and for
relatively small CNTs, the slip length exceeds the radius by more than an order of magnitude.
This eﬀect is not just due to a changing cross sectional area, but an intrinsic radius dependent
boundary eﬀect. Earlier experimental studies of this are described in [2], where a measured slip
length of 54 µm is measured for a 7 nm diameter CNT (the reason for the extremely measured
slip length ins this study compared to the other studies is unknown), in [3] where the slip length
is measured to be between 140 nm and 1400 nm for CNTs with a diameters between 1.3 and 2
==PAGE:17==
3
Flow in nanotubes
11
nm, and ﬁnally in [4] where the slip length is 35 ± 3 nm for a 44 nm diameter CNT. All of these
observations are for water. A more recent study [1] made a more systematic study of the radius
dependence of the slip length, both for water ﬂows in CNTs and BNNTs. The results from this
study is shown in ﬁgure 7 taken from the original paper (Bocquet et al 2016 [1]). The combined
data points for all the above mentioned studies are shown in ﬁgure 6.
Figure 6: Experimental data for the slip length
for carbon nanotubes and boron-nitride nanotubes
as a function of radius for the studies in [1] (green
and blue), [2] (yellow), [3] (red), and [4] (purple).
All data points are for carbon nanotubes except
the two blue data points, where it is also explicitly
denoted.
Figure 7: Original presentation of the experimen-
tal data in [1]. Notice; this ﬁgure is taken from the
article [1]. This is same ﬁgure shown in the intro-
duction, but is printed here again for convenience.
[7] Gives a comprehensive overview of diﬀerent experimental results for measured slip
lengths for diﬀerent liquids on diﬀerents ﬂat surfaces. The earlier studies [2] and [4] also con-
ducted measurements on diﬀerent organic ﬂuids. All experimental results are presented in table
2.
-
Radius of NT [nm]
Water
Decane
Ethanol
Hexane
Slip length [nm] CNT [2]
3.5
53,728
3,448
28,124
9,500
Slip length [nm] CNT [3]
0.6 - 1
140 to 1400
Slip length [nm] CNT [4]
22
35 ± 3
41 ± 2
29 ± 2
Slip length [nm] CNT [1]
50
17
Slip length [nm] CNT [1]
38
35
Slip length [nm] CNT [1]
33
45
Slip length [nm] CNT [1]
17
235
Slip length [nm] CNT [1]
15
300
Slip length [nm] BNNT [1]
23
< 5
Slip length [nm] BNNT [1]
26
< 5
Table 2: All experimental results from [1], [2], [3], and [4] for water, decane, ethanol, and hexane.
For water there seems to be a clear trend that a lower CNT radius leads to a higher slip
length, while no slip length is observed for BNNT. For the organic liquids, there are too few
data points that any trends can be found, but for [4] it seem to ﬁt with approximately the size
of the water experiments.
==PAGE:18==
3
Flow in nanotubes
12
The experiment conducted in [1], is a setup where a multi-walled CNT/BNNT is attached
to a glass nanocapillary (we will use ”nanotube” in this section for both CNT and BNNT since
the experiments were carried out in the same way for both types of nanotubes, and the word
”radius” will in this section refer to the inner radius of the NT). The NT is extracted from a
cloud of NTs with a tungsten tip (ﬁgure 8 a) and is then attached to the glass nanocapillary
(ﬁgure 8 b).
Figure 8: Figure a: one nanotube is extracted from a cloud of nanotube using a wolfram tip. Figure
b: The nanotube is then inserted in and attached to a glass nanocapillary. Both pictures are taken from
[1].
The NT connects two water reservoirs: 1) the glass nanocapillary and 2) a large water
reservoir sealed by glass plates held at constant pressure. An overpressure is then applied at the
glass nanocapillary end, so there is a ﬂow into the second water reservoir where the resulting
velocity proﬁle is tracked by tracer particles (see ﬁgure 9). The connection between the NT and
glass nanocapillary is sealed such that water can only ﬂow in the inner most NT of the MWNT.
It has been shown and widely used that water can penetrate through a single layer of carbon
atoms. For now we will stay with the assumption, that there is no diﬀusion of water through
the inner most layer of carbon atoms, which should be a ﬁne assumption since the NT layers are
as closely packed as energetically possible. The exact inner radius of the NT was determined
in two independent ways. First, with a small KCL solution, it was shown that the conductance
of the NT is radius-dependent and the radius can therefore be determined by doing several
experiments, by applying a diﬀerential voltage over the NT and measure the resulting current.
It should be mentioned that all electrodes were grounded during the slip length measurements,
and the slip length was independent of the KCL solution, at dilute solutions at those used here
(of the order of 10−2 −10−3 M). Additionally the radius was also visually determined using
either SEM or STEM, and conﬁrmed the values from conductance measurements.
3.3
The Landau jet
Ideally the slip length would be determined from a direct measurement of the ﬂow rate,
out of the NT. This is however only possible if the radius of the NT is larger than 300 nm [1].
As mentioned the slip length is instead determined from the assumption, that the resulting ﬂow
out of the NT resembles that of a Landau jet, as seen in ﬁgure 9. In this section we will review
the Landau solution to the Navier-Stokes equation, and see that the resulting streamlines ﬁts
very well with the experimentally measured tracer particles in ﬁgure 9.
The Landau jet is an exact solution to the Navier-Stokes equation, and the low Reynolds
solution of this is called the Stokeslet. Both approximations are valid as long as the volume (so
that would be that of the second water reservoir here) is held constant, and that the ﬂow is
==PAGE:19==
3
Flow in nanotubes
13
Figure 9: Example of the Landau-Squire velocity ﬁeld, as determined from tracer particles. The white
tip at the left is the glass nanocapillary and the nanotube sits at the very tip of this. The given example
is for a carbon nanotube with a radius of 33 nm, and a diﬀerential pressure of ∆P = 1.7 bar. The
picture is taken from the original paper [1].
induced by a point force. The momentum transfer from the water coming out of the NT into
the water in reservoir 2 acts as a point force. The Reynolds number cannot be determined from
the usual equation Re = LV η
ρ , since there are no characteristic length scale in the case of a point
force. Instead we use the product of the dynamic and kinematic viscosity as a measure of the
characteristic force of the system: ReF = ηµ = 10−9 N (notice this is strictly not a Reynolds
number, since the Reynolds number is dimensionless). This should be compared to the size of
the point force in the experiment. This varies depending on the applied pressure diﬀerence,
however the biggest point force is about 8 · 10−12 N, which is much lower than 10−9 N, so the
low Reynolds number approximation is valid in this case.
The Landau jet (or sometimes denoted Landau-Squire jet), is a solution to the Navier-
Stokes equation for the ﬂow ﬁeld around a point force. It is found assuming the velocity ﬁeld is
inversely proportional to the radial coordinate (in polar coordinates), and it is found to be an
exact analytical solution under this assumption. In the experiment the NT is viewed as a point
force, which is why the Landau jet is used as a model. However, this has one shortcoming. In
the Landau jet, the volume is assumed to be constant, i.e. that corresponds to a pure point
force, without any ﬂow coming out of it. This is strictly not the case in the experiment at hand.
First we will study the well-known Landau solution. In section 8 we will look at how the solution
changes when higher order terms are added, corresponding to a ﬁnite ﬂow rate coming out of
the point force. This will tell us, how well the Landau jet works as an approximation to model
the experiment, but for now we will consider the work done in the experiment at hand.
Assuming spherical polar coordinates around the point force, which is located at the origin
and pointing along the positive z axis, we ﬁrst of all assume that that the ﬂow ﬁeld can be viewed
as an axially symmetric ﬂow with no azimuthal component. That means that the φ component
of the velocity ﬁeld is zero: vφ = 0. The remaining velocity components will in general depend
on both r and θ: vr(r, θ) and vθ(r, θ). We now look for solutions that go as one over r, that is
we assume that the r dependence of the vr and vθ components can explicitly be taken out:
vr(r, θ) = F1(θ)
r
,
vθ(r, θ) = f1(θ)
r
,
(3.1)
where F1(θ) and f1(θ) are unknown functions of only θ. From the time-invariant Navier-Stokes
==PAGE:20==
3
Flow in nanotubes
14
equation for in-compressible ﬂuids:
(v · ∇)v = −1
ρ∇P + ν∇2v
(3.2)
we see that if we look for solutions where the velocity goes as 1
r, then this forces the pressure to
go as
1
r2 . We therefore assume the pressure ﬁeld to take the form:
P = g1(θ)
r2
.
(3.3)
We shall not go thoroughly through the derivation of the Landau solution to this problem, since
this solution is well-known from for instance Landau [21] and Squire [22], we mere brieﬂy mention
the fundamental steps (this is because we will use the exact same approach later on for the more
complicated case, where we have higher order terms in the velocity ﬁelds, and where we will go
thoroughly through the derivation). The ﬁrst important step is that the vr and vθ components
are related through the continuity equation:
1
r2 ∂r(ρr2vr) +
1
r sin θ∂θ(ρvθ sin θ) +
1
r sin θ∂φ(ρvφ) = 0
1
r2 ∂r(rF1) +
1
r sin θ∂θ
f1 sin θ
r

= 0
F1 = −(f ′
1 + f1 cot θ).
(3.4)
So once we know f1 we can determine F1. The second step is to write out the r and θ component
of the momentum equations, and simplify these using the continuity equation. From this f1 can
immediately be found, and F1 follows from the relation above. Landau and Squire both show
that we have for the velocity ﬁelds:
F1(θ) = 2ν

A2 −1
(cos θ −A)2 −1

,
f1(θ) =
2ν sin θ
cos θ −A,
(3.5)
and for the pressure ﬁeld:
g1(θ) = 4ν2 1 −A cos θ
(cos θ −A)2
(3.6)
where we have a constant A > 1. For a given ﬂow the streamlines are determined by:
dr
dθ = r vr
vθ
↔dr
dθ = rF1(θ)
f1(θ) ↔1
r dr = F1(θ)
f1(θ) dθ
(3.7)
Writing out the functions, integrating both sides and taking the exponential function give
r = constA −cos θ
2ν sin2 θ ,
(3.8)
with an arbitrary constant. To visualize the streamlines see ﬁgure 10, where the streamlines are
shown for A = 2 (blue) and A = 1000 (orange) respectively (note the constant has been set to
1, and the axis are in arbitrary units), and the point force is at (x,y) = (0,0) pointing to the
right. Large values for A correspond to small values for the point force (to be shown later), and
therefore correspond to the Stokes limit. We see that for large A the streamlines are dragged
towards the point force much earlier than for the advective case (small A), and the diﬀerence is
most notable for θ = π
2 .
This is known as the Landau-Squire solution to the point force problem. We now want a
relation for the point force. In the Stokes approximation we expect this to be a linear function
of the viscosity, and since we know the real source of the point force is a momentum ﬂux coming
==PAGE:21==
3
Flow in nanotubes
15
Figure 10: Plot of the streamlines in eqn. (3.8), for A = 2 (blue) and A = 1000 (orange). The point
force is at (x, y) = (0, 0). Notice the similarity with the experimental measured ﬂow in ﬁgure 9
out of the NT, it must also be a function of the NT radius R and the mean ﬂow velocity inside
the NT: vnt. On dimensional grounds there exist only one relation that satisﬁes these conditions
FP = αηRvnt,
(3.9)
where α is an unknown geometry dependent constant. This assumption is the bedrock of the
calculation of the slip lengths in [1]. In the experiment they ﬁnd the point force FP corresponding
to an experimentally measured ﬂow.
This can be done utilizing that we know the velocity
decreases as 1
r. Then a Comsol simulation is set up, where the exact geometry is solved (both
with a NT with a certain radius and the geometry of the glass nanocapillary) to ﬁnd α. It
is found that α does not depend on the slip length assumed inside the NT but has a small
dependency on the exact geometry (and is of the order 1). α therefore have to be calculated for
each for each experiment. At last the same simulation (now with known α) is run for various
slip lengths b and is ﬁtted such that, the calculated point force FP matches the experimentally
measured point force. This is the origin of the data points in ﬁgure 7.
==PAGE:22==
4
Non-equilibrium statistics and linear-response theory
16
4
Non-equilibrium statistics and linear-response theory
4.1
What is friction?
In the very ﬁrst section about continuum physics at the nanoscale, we asked what actually
slows down a water molecule when it moves in a periodic potential.
In our very ﬁrst year
of studies, we learn that from a classical Newtonian point of view, friction is a macroscopic
quantity that describes how an object reacts when its surface is in contact with another surface.
We usually denote these interactions dynamic or static depending on whether the two objects
move relative to each other, and we usually denote the friction force by a normal force times
some coeﬃcient. But this still does not tell us what friction is. From an everyday point of view,
friction is what makes us able to walk, makes us able to sit down, and even what makes this
very study possible to be written on a computer. Some might even say, friction is what makes
you late for work. But what is it? Does it have something to do with electrostatic interactions?
Does it has something to do with surface structure and roughness? From a microscopic point
of view, these are usually the physical parameters we associate with friction, to determine the
so-called coeﬃcient of friction, we need to ﬁnd the friction force. However, when we are looking
at a single water molecule, as we do here, deﬁnitions such as a normal force and some friction
coeﬃcient do not have a well-deﬁned meaning. We therefore have to look at it in a completely
other way, than what we are used to. As we go to the microscopic level, to properly describe
friction we need not to consider individual particles or molecules. But how groups or ensembles
of molecules behave. To really understand friction at the microscopic level we have to take a
journey through statistical mechanics and probability distributions.
In this section we will, ﬁrst asses what is known as the Einstein relation. This relates
the diﬀusion of a Brownian particle to the temperature of the system and the friction. This
is the ﬁrst hint at a deeper relation, between the friction and temperature, and we will use
this as motivation to give a thorough derivation of what is known as the ﬂuctuation-dissipation
theorem. This exactly gives the change of a certain physical parameter of the system, given the
perturbation in equilibrium. This relation is the main goal of this chapter, since it gives us the
necessary arsenal to fully understand, how the friction of water inside a NT can be understood
and modelled.
4.2
The Einstein relation
As discussed above when describing the velocity of a liquid, we split it into two parts.
One part of the velocity ﬁeld is driven by the external driving potential, for instance a pressure
gradient, which we will denote vflow. And one part is coming from the Brownian motion of each
single particle in the liquid, vbrown, so the total velocity of a single particle is
vtot = vflow + vbrown,
(4.1)
where the average velocity is the ﬂow velocity due to the external driving force: ⟨vtot⟩= vflow,
since ⟨vbrown⟩= 0. Now imagine a liquid in an arbitrarily shaped tube with concentration f(x)
where x is a position coordinate. From Fick’s law [5] we know that there will be a diﬀusion
current coming from any inhomogeneities in the concentration: Jdiff(x) = −D ∂f(x)
∂x , where D is
a diﬀusion constant that is yet to be determined. If the system is driven by an external potential
V , there will also be a drift velocity given by vd(x) = −1
ξ
∂V (x)
∂x , where ξ is the friction coeﬃcient
experienced by a particle in the system coming from its surroundings. This leads to a total ﬂow
current of
J(x) = −D∂f(x)
∂x
−1
ξ
∂V (x)
∂x
f(x).
(4.2)
Since the drift ﬂow, will set up an imbalance in the concentration, in equilibrium this must be
opposed by the diﬀusion, so the total current in equilibrium must be zero leading to the balance
==PAGE:23==
4
Non-equilibrium statistics and linear-response theory
17
equation
D∂f(x)
∂x
= −1
ξ
∂V (x)
∂x
f(x).
(4.3)
Now remember that the diﬀusion coeﬃcient D expresses the random (Brownian) motion due
to a ﬁnite temperature of the system, and is controlled by the parameter kbT, where T is the
temperature of the system. It is therefore natural to expect the concentration ﬁeld to depend
exponentially on the energy scales of the system: f(x) ∼exp

−V (x)
kbT

. Inserting gives
−D∂V (x)
∂x
1
kbT f(x) = −1
ξ
∂V (x)
∂x
f(x),
(4.4)
which simpliﬁes to
D = kbT
ξ .
(4.5)
This result is known as the Einstein relation. It is at ﬁrst a rather surprising result, as it relates
the Brownian diﬀusion coeﬃcient of the system (independent of any external perturbations), to
the friction coeﬃcient in the system subject to an external perturbation. This is the ﬁrst hint
at a connection between the thermal ﬂuctuations of the system at equilibrium and the response
of the system subject to an external perturbation. Later we will now show, what is called the
ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem, which exactly gives this relation.
To give an alternative expression for the diﬀusion constant, we will now consider a Langevin
equation, for a Brownian particle of the form:
m∂2x
∂t2 = −ξ ∂x
∂t −∂V (x)
∂x
+ R(t),
(4.6)
where R(t) is the random force, due to the collisions of all particles in the system, and the cause
of the Brownian motion. Kubo now assumes a harmonic dependence on the external potential.
This will of course of not true for all time-dependent potentials, so the implicit assumption here
is that the external potential only vary at a time-scale, where it can be written as a Fourier
series. This gives a frequency dependent friction coeﬃcient in general. The form we will show
here are equal in the limit ω →0, which corresponds to assume: (i) the friction coeﬃcient is
constant over a time interval much longer than other time-scales of the system. This is the ﬁrst
assumption we will make in the following derivation of the ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem.
To proceed we will also assume that (ii) the random force R(t) is independent of the
external potential, and (iii) that the random force has a Gaussian form. (iii) implies that the
average of R(t) is zero:
⟨R(t)⟩= 0.
(4.7)
The brackets denote the thermal average. Note this is a necessary condition. Otherwise the
average velocity of a particle, not subject to an external potential, will not be zero. From eqn.
(4.6), we see by setting R(t) = V (x) = 0, that the characteristic time, of the slowing of a particle
due to friction is
τv = m
ξ .
(4.8)
Usually, both this velocity-damping time-scale and the time-scale for the Brownian motion is
much lower than the general time-scale of usual ﬂuid systems. Therefore we can in principle ne-
glect the second time derivative in eqn. (4.6). We also assume that the random force correlation
==PAGE:24==
4
Non-equilibrium statistics and linear-response theory
18
function has an immediate response, compared to the rest of the system. The auto-correlation
function is then given by
⟨R(t1)R(t2)⟩= Mδ(t1 −t2),
(4.9)
so that the correlation between the random force at times t1 and t2 is simply given by a delta
function, where M is some unknown constant that give the amplitude of the response. We now
only need to determine the coeﬃcient M. To do this we have to utilize assumption (ii) that we
can describe the random force independently of the external potential V (x). Physically this is
just ﬁne, since the size (response) of the thermal oscillations is independent of whether we have
turned on an external potential or not. The Langevin equation (eqn. (4.6)) therefore takes the
form:
m∂2x
∂t2 = −ξ ∂x
∂t + R(t).
(4.10)
Writing this in terms of the velocity instead v(t) = ∂x
∂t , the above equation becomes a simple ﬁrst
order diﬀerential equation that can be solved. The trick is now to make the following thought:
since M is a normalization constant, and we made no assumptions on the times t1 and t2 it has
to be true for all combinations of t1 and t2. As shown in appendix C, the general solution for
v(t) will involve an integration over another time t′. If we evaluate the time correlation function
of the velocity with itself, we can merely solve it for two diﬀerent times, and speciﬁcally ﬁt these
to be: t′ = t1 and t′ = t2. In appendix C it is shown, by using the relation eqn. (4.9), that this
yields
⟨v(t)v(t)⟩= M
2mξ .
(4.11)
In equilibrium we expect this to equal the thermal energy, so that is the expectation value of
the kinetic energy is simply the thermal energy:
m⟨v(t)v(t)⟩= kbT
(4.12)
from which we get
M = 2ξkbT.
(4.13)
Putting this back into the correlation function expression for the random force eqn. (4.9) we get
⟨R(t1)R(t2)⟩= 2ξkbTδ(t1 −t2).
(4.14)
Now for time-scales where we can neglect the second time-derivative, the random force is simply
the velocity times the friction coeﬃcient: R(t) ≃v(t)ξ. Inserting this and integrating over t1
gives
Z ∞
0
dt1⟨v(t1)v(t2)⟩= kbT
ξ
= D,
(4.15)
which gives the diﬀusion coeﬃcient in terms of the correlation function of the velocity. We will
use this expression later. The cautious reader will have noticed, a slight inconsistency in the
discussions about the diﬀusion coeﬃcients. The diﬀusion coeﬃcients appearing in eqns. (4.5)
and (4.15), are in general two diﬀerent diﬀusion coeﬃcients: the one in eqn. (4.5) is usually
denoted the collective diﬀusion coeﬃcient and describes the collective diﬀusion of particles in a
ﬂuid, usually due to density gradients in the ﬂuid. This is normally denoted Dc. The coeﬃcient
appearing in eqn. (4.15) is the self-diﬀusion coeﬃcient and describes the diﬀusion of a single
Brownian particle in a homogeneous ﬂuid, and is normally denoted Ds. This is also stressed by
==PAGE:25==
4
Non-equilibrium statistics and linear-response theory
19
the fact, we had to introduce an inhomogeneity in the derivation of Dc in Fick’s law. In the
remaining of this thesis we will use D, which will always refer to the self-diﬀusion coeﬃcient.
For dilute solutions, the two coincides [18], which is also what we found above.
To get the
correct diﬀusion coeﬃcient for concentrated ﬂuids, one would have to add an extra term in
the derivations, describing the interparticle repulsion, and it is in this limit the two diﬀusion
coeﬃcients not will be the same, however this is not relevant for our purpose, since we are only
interested in the self-diﬀusion constant in eqn. (4.15). The derivation from Fick’s law, merely
shows it can be obtained in a physically more understandable manner, and to show the reader
one have to be careful, since there exist more than one diﬀusion coeﬃcient.
4.3
The ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem
Now we will derive the ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem classically from the Liouville equa-
tion containing ρ, which is the distribution function for the statistical ensemble i.e. it is the
probability of ﬁnding the system in a certain state (while in quantum mechanics ρ is viewed as
a density matrix). This is the main relation we are looking for, since it turns out this holds the
key, to properly understand the friction of water inside NTs. This derivation can be seen as an
elaborate explanation of the derivation originally given by Kubo.
Classically the distribution function ρ is governed by the equation of motion
∂ρ(t)
∂t
= Lρ(t),
(4.16)
where L is the Liouville operator that gives the time evolution of the system, and is deﬁned by:
L = −
X
i
∂H(q, p)
∂pi
∂
∂qi
−∂H(q, p)
∂qi
∂
∂pi

.
(4.17)
Here H is the total Hamiltonian of the system, and pi and qi are the momentum and position of
particle i. They are sometimes denoted the generalized coordinates. We will here assume the fact
that the Hamiltonian is a function of these, to be implicit and not write it out in the notation. ρ
contains all the information about the position and momentum of all particles. Notice that ρ is
the classical brother to the quantum mechanical density operator ˆρ. To proceed we now assume
that the system can be described by a ground state Hamiltonian H0 and a small perturbing part
Hext: H(t) = H0 + Hext(t), where the time-dependence is only on the external perturbing part.
Therefore we also say that the distribution function has some equilibrium distribution ρe and a
perturbing part that is time-dependent: ρ(t) = ρe + ∆ρ(t). Similarly the Liouville operator can
be split as: L = L0 +Lext. We now note that if we use the Liouville operator on the distribution
function ρ(t) from the deﬁnition (4.17) it can be written as
Lρ(t) = (H(t), ρ(t)),
(4.18)
where the brackets and the comma denote the Poisson brackets deﬁned as:
(A, B) =
X
i
 ∂A
∂pi
∂B
∂qi
−∂A
∂qi
∂B
∂pi

.
(4.19)
Similar relations hold true for L0 and Lext. Eqn. (4.16) can now be written as
∂ρ(t)
∂t
= ∂∆ρ(t)
∂t
= (H, ρ(t)) = ([H0 −Hext(t)] , [ρe + ∆ρ(t)]).
(4.20)
This gives in total four Poisson brackets: The one with the ground state Hamiltonian with the
equilibrium distribution is zero: (H0, ρe) = 0, and the Poisson bracket with the external part of
the Hamiltonian with the time-dependent change of the distribution function is a (small) second
order term which we will neglect: (Hext(t), ∆ρ(t)) ≃0. This leaves us with
∂∆ρ(t)
∂t
= (H0, ∆ρ(t)) −(Hext(t), ρe).
(4.21)
==PAGE:26==
4
Non-equilibrium statistics and linear-response theory
20
Using eqn. (4.18) this can be rewritten as
∂∆ρ(t)
∂t
= L0∆ρ(t) −(Hext(t), ρe).
(4.22)
This is a standard linear diﬀerential equation that can be solved to get
∆ρ(t) =
Z t
−∞
dt′eL0(t−t′)(Hext(t′), ρe),
(4.23)
where it is assumed that the perturbation is turned on at t′ = −∞.
This determines how
the probability of ﬁnding the system in a certain state changes with time, due to the external
perturbation.
When we boil down all of physics to its very roots, we always know what we are talking
about. As Feynman once said: ”I’m not interested in the arbitrary force case in N dimensions.
I’m interested in the gravitation force in 3 dimensions”, and that very well describes physics.
We are always very aware of the exact situation at hand - we have a certain physical parameter,
that might be very visible like the velocity of some object, might be felt like a magnetic ﬁeld, or
might be completely incomprehensible like the spin of an atomic particle. In either case, since
everything is made up of matter, we need to know where everything is, if its moving (and if in
which direction), and many other characteristics. This is exactly the information that is kept
hidden in ρ. If we denote the physical parameter we want to describe by B, it is therefore no
surprise that B is related to ρ. Particularly, in the equilibrium situation this is given by the
phase-space integration:
Be =
Z
dp
Z
dqB(p, q)ρe
(4.24)
where the integration is over all momenta and positions. For the sake of simplicity imagine we
are interested in the ﬂying speed of a bumblebee, that is ﬂying at a steady velocity (you can
almost hear the bumblebee thinking ”I’m ﬂying in equilibrium”). Now a harsh dust wind is
hitting the bumblebee head-on, and this surely slows down the bumblebee. The dust wind can
here be considered to be a perturbation, and the bumblebees speed is now time-dependent, while
it slows down to a new equilibrium state. Under the inﬂuence of the perturbation the value B(t)
is given by
B(t) =
Z
dp
Z
dqB(p, q)ρ(t).
(4.25)
The diﬀerence in the value of B between equilibrium and after the perturbation is turned on, is
therefore given by
∆B(t) = B(t) −Be =
Z
dp
Z
dqB(p, q)∆ρ(t).
(4.26)
Eqn. (4.26) gives the response of the physical parameter B to the external perturbation Hext(t).
Inserting ∆ρ(t) yields:
∆B(t) =
Z t
−∞
dt′
Z
dp
Z
dqB(p, q)eL0(t−t′)(Hext(t′), ρe).
(4.27)
Now care needs to be taken since eL0(t−t′) is an operator (deﬁned by its series expansion as an
inﬁnite sum), so the order at which we write each parameter is not in general interchangeable,
that is each parameter does not necessarily commute. To move on we will use a small trick. If
we consider the expression: f(x)e
d
dx g(x), where f and g are functions, this can be expanded as:
Z h
f(x)e
d
dx g(x)
i
dx =
Z 
f(x)

1 + d
dx + 1
2
d2
dx2 + ...

g(x)

dx =
Z 
f(x)g(x) + f(x) d
dxg(x) + ...

dx,
==PAGE:27==
4
Non-equilibrium statistics and linear-response theory
21
(4.28)
while if we instead consider:
Z h
g(x)e
−d
dx f(x)
i
dx =
Z 
g(x)

1 −d
dx + 1
2
d2
dx2 + ...

f(x)

dx =
Z 
g(x)f(x) −g(x) d
dxf(x) + ...

dx,
(4.29)
where all odd terms are negative and all even terms are positive. However by integration by
parts, we can interchange g(x) and f(x) in all terms, where all odd terms get an additional
change of sign. The relation can therefore be written as
Z h
g(x)e
−d
dx f(x)
i
dx =
Z 
g(x)f(x) + f(x) d
dxg(x) + ...

dx =
Z h
f(x)e
d
dx g(x)
i
dx. (4.30)
We therefore see that, by changing the sign of the Liouville operator in eqn. (4.27) we can have
the Liouville operator work on B(p, q) instead of the Poisson bracket:
∆B(t) =
Z t
−∞
dt′
Z
dp
Z
dq

e−L0(t−t′)B(p, q)

(Hext(t′), ρe).
(4.31)
We now deﬁne the time evolution of B(p, q) as
B(t −t′; p, q) ≡e−L0(t−t′)B(p, q).
(4.32)
Just as in quantum mechanics where the trace is invariant under cyclic permutation of matrices,
we will utilize the same trick here for the phase-space integration (which is the classical analogue
to the trace in quantum mechanics) to rewrite (4.31) as
∆B(t) =
Z t
−∞
dt′
Z
dp
Z
dqρe(B(t −t′; p, q), Hext(t′)).
(4.33)
Finally we remind ourself that the phase-space integration over the distribution function times
some physical quantity F is deﬁned as the thermodynamic ensemble average: ⟨G(t)⟩≡
R
dp
R
dqρeF(t),
to obtain the ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem:
⟨∆B(t)⟩=
Z t
−∞
dt′⟨(B(t −t′; p, q), Hext(t′))⟩eq,
(4.34)
where eq denotes the equilibrium conﬁguration. This result states that the expectation value of
the deviation (∆B(t)) of the physical quantity B from its equilibrium value at a certain time
t, due to an external perturbation Hext(t′) is given by its equilibrium ensemble average. Or in
everyday words returning to the poor bumblebee, then it turns out that to know how the velocity
of the bumblebee changes when it is hit by the wind, depends on what velocity it had before the
wind hit, and then some parameter the describes how strong the wind is. Even though it took
some time to get there, this is a somehow very intuitive relation.
However, we can actually do even better than this. To give a relation where ∆B(t) can
be determined directly only from equilibrium parameters, we take a step back and rewrite eqn.
(4.23) as
∆ρ(t) =
Z t
−∞
dt′eL0(t−t′)Lextρe.
(4.35)
Now the equilibrium distribution is given by the standard known expression:
ρe =
e−βH0
R
dp
R
dqe−βH0 ,
(4.36)
==PAGE:28==
4
Non-equilibrium statistics and linear-response theory
22
where β = 1/kbT. From this a straightforward calculation shows, that the Liouville operator
working on this part (from the deﬁnition of the Liouville operator, and by using the inner product
rule) gives
Lextρe = −βρeLextH0.
(4.37)
Similarly to the deﬁnition of the total Liouville operator above eqn. (4.17), Lext is deﬁned as
Lext = −
X
i
∂Hext
∂pi
∂
∂qi
−∂Hext
∂qi
∂
∂pi

.
(4.38)
To proceed we need to deﬁne the form of the external part of the Hamiltonian. We deﬁne the
general Linear response form:
Hext(t) = −K(t)A,
(4.39)
where K(t) is some external parameter, and A is its conjugate variable. From this we see that
−LextH0 can be written as
−LextH0 =
X
i
∂Hext
∂pi
∂H0
∂qi
−∂Hext
∂qi
∂H0
∂pi

= −
X
i
K(t)
 ∂A
∂pi
∂H0
∂qi
−∂A
∂qi
∂H0
∂pi

= K(t)L0A.
(4.40)
Since the Liouville operator governs the time-evolution (we know this from the equation
of motion for ρ(t) eqn. (4.16)) of some variable, we deﬁne the time-derivative of the conjugate
variable A as: L0A = ˙A, so our ﬁnal expression for Lextρe becomes
(Hext(t′), ρe) = Lextρe = −βρeK(t) ˙A.
(4.41)
Inserting this expression into eqn. (4.23) and following the exact same steps that led to eqn.
(4.34) we end up with the expression:
⟨∆B(t)⟩= −β
Z t
−∞
dt′K(t′)⟨B(t −t′; p, q) ˙A(0)⟩eq.
(4.42)
This is the typical known Green-Kubo expression from linear response theory, and is another form
of the ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem. It is a remarkable theorem that states the expectation
value of the change of some dynamical quantity B(t; p, q) due to some external perturbation (so
that is in non-equilibrium) , is given by the thermodynamic ensemble average in equilibrium. All
the information about the response of the system is therefore ”hidden” in the thermal ﬂuctuations
that enters through β = 1/kbT. Again Mr. Bumblebee want to have a last say. This shows that,
apparently we need to say a little more about where the bumblebee is. Since the temperature
enters, it is not the same if he is ﬂying around freezing on Antarctica or ﬂying around in
his bathrobe in southern Spain (it might be diﬃcult to stretch the analogue this far, but it
still underlines that it is still physically very interesting that the temperature enters in the
response of a system). This is also a suitable place to discuss one of the very ﬁrst questions
we asked: what is friction? From the equipartition theorem we know that, saying a system is
in thermal equilibrium, is another way of saying that its energy is equally distributed among
all its degrees of freedom. If a system is not in equilibrium, means that this is not fulﬁlled.
The systems tendency to dissipate energy into other degrees of freedom, such that its energy is
equally distributed among all degrees of freedom is what friction is: a systems tendency to move
from non-equilibrium to equilibrium. The essence of the ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem is then
that, this is closely related to the thermal ﬂuctuations taking place.
Note that the diﬀerence between expression (4.34) and (4.42) is that the ﬁrst contains the
thermal average of the Poisson bracket (which can be an exhausting quantity to compute), while
the second is directly the ensemble average of the dynamical quantity B times the time-derivative
of the conjugate variable to the external parameter K(t).
==PAGE:29==
4
Non-equilibrium statistics and linear-response theory
23
4.4
Relation between the ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem and the slip
length
Now that we understand where the term friction comes from, we want to use this to our
concrete study. We now want to know, how we can calculate the friction of water moving through
a cylindrical tube, and from there calculate the slip length. As discussed earlier the standard
approach of describing the ﬂow through a tube, is by ﬁnding the velocity proﬁle from the Navier-
Stokes equation, which in our case reduces to the Stokes equation. Once one has the velocity
proﬁle inside the tube, one can integrate this over the cross-sectional area to get the volumetric
ﬂow rate. In appendix A this is shown to take the following form, in the case of a low Reynolds
number pressure-driven ﬂow in a circular pipe
Q =
8ηL
πR4  1 + 4 b
R
∆P,
(4.43)
where R is the radius of the tube, L is the length of the tube, b is the slip length, and ∆P is the
applied pressure diﬀerence. The factor in front of the applied pressure is denoted the hydraulic
resistance Rhyd, and is a measure of the resistance the ﬂow experiences.
A high hydraulic
resistance means a high diﬀerential pressure is needed, to get a certain volumetric ﬂow rate.
The problem is just how to determine the slip length, as discussed in the ﬁrst section. The slip
velocity is here given by
vs = vx(r = R) = ∆P
2ηLRb.
(4.44)
The system we consider here, is a perturbed system, where the perturbation is the applied
pressure diﬀerence between the two ends of the NT. To determine the slip length, we should
consider a parameter that we can determine either analytically or numerically.
Let us now
consider the whole ﬂuid in the NT as one object moving through the NT. In this case we can
consider the tangential part of the total (friction) force between the ﬂuid object and the solid.
This can be evaluated by taking the Poiseuille velocity proﬁle with a slip boundary condition
eqn. (2.6), and evaluating it at the solid wall:
Flw = −Sη ∂vx(r)
∂r
|r=R = −Svs
η
b ,
(4.45)
where S is the total inner area of the NT and eqn. (2.5) has been used. Now deﬁning the ratio
λ ≡η
b , this becomes:
Flw = −Svsλ.
(4.46)
As mentioned, in this expression Flw is considered to be the total friction force acting on the
whole ﬂuid, so the whole ﬂuid is viewed as one object moving through the NT. Therefore λ can
be regarded as the total friction coeﬃcient for the whole ﬂuid. From this expression the liquid-
wall friction coeﬃcient, and therefore the slip length, can be evaluated through MD simulations,
since the friction force and the slip velocity can be determined. This will be explained below
and in the next section in further detail.
We now want to determine the liquid-wall friction coeﬃcient and the slip length using the
Green-Kubo relation. The motivation for this is that, if we succeed we computationally only
need to consider an equilibrium system. To do this we will consider a system of a ﬂuid conﬁned
between two walls. In this geometry x is a coordinate tangential to the wall, and z is a coordinate
perpendicular to the wall pointing in the direction from the one wall to the other. Taking the
mindset from the Green-Kubo method, we need to deﬁne an external perturbing Hamiltonian.
Following the method of [19] and originally by [20], we consider a situation where all N water
molecules are subject to a Hamiltonian of the form:
H(r, t) = φ(r, t) +
N
X
i=1
p2
i
2mi
+ ri · pi∇v Θ(t −t′).
(4.47)
==PAGE:30==
4
Non-equilibrium statistics and linear-response theory
24
This is known as the DOLL Hamiltonian. The ﬁrst term is the potential energy due to the
intermolecular interactions of all molecules, the second term is the thermal energy of the i’th
particle, and the last term (which involves the gradient of the velocity and the Heavi-side step
function, so the perturbation is turned on at t = t′), is there to model the eﬀect of an external
perturbation. This could for instance be a moving wall or a pressure diﬀerence. This Hamiltonian
has been found to produce velocity proﬁles, that mimic those of a boundary driven ﬂow (we
will not go into the derivation of this, since this is heavily based on trial and error computer
simulations [23]). In most simulations the gradient of the velocity ﬁeld is described by the so-
called strain rate: ∇v = ˙γ, that is a linear velocity proﬁle close to the wall. In one dimension
this gives us the external perturbation as
Hext = ˙γ
N
X
i=1
zipi,x.
(4.48)
We imagine a system of a liquid conﬁned between two walls with ˆz being the vector orthogonal
to the two walls plane, and ˆx is parallel to the walls and along the ﬂow direction. zi denote the z
position of water molecule i. In this context the strain rate is the external parameter: K(t) = ˙γ,
so A becomes
A = −∂Hext
∂˙γ
= −
N
X
i=1
zipi,x,
(4.49)
and we readily see by direct calculation that the time derivative is
˙A = −
N
X
i=1
pi,z
m pi,x + ziFi,x

,
(4.50)
where m is the mass of a water molecule and Fi,x is the single particle liquid-wall friction force,
since this comes from the time change of the single particle momentum. We now specialize to the
physical quantity we want to determine, by setting B(t) = Flw(t), where Flw(t) as above is the
total friction force acting on the whole liquid viewed as one mass. In this case the Green-Kubo
relation becomes:
⟨∆Flw(t)⟩= β
Z t
−∞
dt′ ˙γ
*
Flw(t −t′)
" N
X
i=1
pi,z
m pi,x + ziFi,x

(0)
#+
eq
.
(4.51)
For a nicer notation we will from now denote:
hPN
i=1
  pi,z
m pi,x + ziFi,x
i
≡Wxz. This expression
can now be rewritten as:
⟨∆Flw(t)⟩= β ˙γ
Z t
−∞
dt′ ⟨Flw(t −t′)Wxz(0)⟩eq
R t
−∞dt′ ⟨Flw(t −t′)Flw(0)⟩eq
R t
−∞dt′ ⟨Flw(t −t′)Flw(0)⟩eq
.
(4.52)
The claim made by [19] in the original derivation is now that the slip velocity is given by
vs = ˙γzwall,
(4.53)
where
zwall =
R t
−∞dt′ ⟨Flw(t −t′)Wxz(0)⟩eq
R t
−∞dt′ ⟨Flw(t −t′)Flw(0)⟩eq
(4.54)
has units of length, so that this is the liquid-solid interface where the velocity proﬁle should
be evaluated, in order to give the slip velocity.
The general expression for the slip velocity
is the well-known expression eqn. (2.5), however the deﬁnition of zwall as the position of the
==PAGE:31==
4
Non-equilibrium statistics and linear-response theory
25
liquid-solid interface is an issue raised by [24], where the validity of this claim is discussed. For
the author of this thesis it is unclear where this deﬁnition comes from, in view of the original
derivation by [19], however no proof can be given for this claim to be wrong. In fact, to check
the validity of this expression one, would have to assume the relation to be correct, and then
after a simulation have been run, put in the obtained expression for Flw and Wxz and evaluate
zwall to see if it physically is a realistic value for the speciﬁc system at hand.
For the sake of the earlier work we will take it to be correct, but reminding the reader
that the validity of this equation is in general up to discussion. Inserting this we obtain the
expression:
⟨∆Flw(t)⟩= βvs
Z t
−∞
dt′ ⟨Flw(t −t′)Flw(0)⟩eq .
(4.55)
Comparing to the phenomenological form, eqn.
(4.46) (which is also true in an equilibrium
setting), we can calculate the total liquid-solid friction coeﬃcient, from the total friction force
as
λ = β
S
Z t
−∞
dt′ ⟨Flw(t −t′)Flw(0)⟩eq .
(4.56)
Since the correlation function goes to zero as t →∞, we can in principle take the upper
limit in the integral to be inﬁnity. Here we really see the remarkable result eqn. (4.42) is. The
solid-liquid friction coeﬃcient, that is present when the system is subject to an external driving
force, can be computed by looking at the thermal ﬂuctuations in equilibrium, i.e. when there
is no external perturbation. The correctness of this result (eqn. (4.56)) is up to debate in the
literature. For now we will assume it to be correct, to describe the simulations done earlier in
the literature to determine the slip length theoretically.
Looking at the units the hydraulic resistance has units: [Rhyd] =
kg
m4s, while the solid-liquid
friction coeﬃcient has units:[λ] =
kg
m2s. This suggests a relation R ∼
1
S∗λ, where S∗has units of
area. Looking at eqn. (4.43) and taking the limit: 4b >> R, so that is 4 times the slip length is
much larger than the radius of the tube, which is actually also the case for the smallest CNTs
in ﬁgure 6 one get:
Q = 2ηL
πR3b∆P = 2L
πR3 λ∆P,
4b >> R.
(4.57)
In this limit we can see that λ qualitatively has the same meaning as Rhyd - it gives a measure of
the resistance in the tube, for the total volumetric ﬂow as we would also expect (if we not assume
4b >> R one can still insert λ into eqn. (4.43)), but for the qualitative physical understanding
we will consider this limit, since the relation is seen more directly). The geometric factor S∗
expected above is found to be: S∗= πR3
2L . This factor would change for other geometries. The
reason why this is interesting is that, in the end to test all theories one must go to the lab and
conduct a set of measurements to hold up against the predictions by the model. The ﬂow rate Q
and the diﬀerential pressure ∆P are parameters that in principal can be directly measured. If we
want to predict the ﬂow rate for a given diﬀerential pressure using eqn. ((4.43)) we have the slip
length as an unknown, which we have no way of determining apart from guessing. However using
eqn. (4.57) the slip length is no longer present, instead we need to determine the solid-liquid
friction coeﬃcient λ which can be done using eqn. (4.56). In the next section we will discuss
the various attempts that have earlier been done, trying to determine λ for water ﬂow in CNTs
using MD simulations.
==PAGE:32==
5
Earlier simulation results
26
5
Earlier simulation results
In chapter 3 we went through the work done experimentally, on determining the slip length
inside NTs. To understand why these results are so dazzling, we need to compare this to the
theoretical work that has been done on this subject. In this section we will consider the earlier
work that is done, to determine the slip length numerically from MD simulations. In practice this
is done in two ways: One from non-equilibrium simulations using eqns. (4.46) and in equilibrium
simulations using eqn. (4.56) together with eqn. (4.46).
5.1
Slip length from equilibrium and non-equilibrium simulations
As mentioned in the previous section the validity of eqn. (4.56) to describe the liquid-solid
interface friction correctly is in question. For the sake of describing the previous theoretical work
on the liquid-solid friction coeﬃcient and slip length inside nanotubes, we will in this section
assume the relation to be valid.
The name for such simulations we are about to describe is Molecular dynamics simulations
(MD simulations). As explained earlier; in the beginning position, mass, and velocity are deﬁned
for all particles to be simulated. Interactions (forces acting between particles) are then deﬁned,
and Newton’s equations of motion are solved numerically for all particles, for a chosen time-
step. This is done repeatedly for a total predetermined simulation time. In this section we
will describe the simulational setup and results in the two key articles for the simulation of
the friction coeﬃcient and slip length for water ﬂow in CNT [14] and [15]. These take on two
diﬀerent approaches as will be explained below. Common for both situations is that for a decided
radius and length, carbon atoms are placed in a hexagonal lattice in a cylindrical geometry such
that they geometrically constitute a CNT. The CNT is ﬁlled with water molecules in the same
manner as in ﬁgure 5, so that the position and orientation of all water molecules is deﬁned in some
random manner (keeping a certain density). Now the water-water interaction and water-carbon
interaction needs to be speciﬁed. For the water-water interaction several ”water packages” exist.
They are normally denoted either TIP*P (where * is some number) or SPC or SPC/E. We will
not go deep into the programming, but the physical diﬀerence between these water models is
the assumed contact angle (notice the contact angle is not present in the case of water conﬁned
in a tube, since no air is present), the oxygen-hydrogen bonding length, the assumed charge of
each hydrogen and oxygen atom and therefore also the dipole moment, and whether the angle
between the hydrogen bonds is assumed to be constant or ﬂexible as in the SPC model where
this angle can change a bit due to an external potential. We will not dig into the very small
diﬀerences between these models since this is not the focus of this project, and since it is shown
in the earlier studies that the resulting friction coeﬃcient is almost independent of the assumed
water model. For the water-carbon interaction a Lennard-Jones potential is assumed:
ULJ = 4ϵ
σ
r
12
−
σ
r
6
.
(5.1)
where ϵ is a measure of the strength of the interaction and σ is a measure of the distance between
the water and carbon. In fact it can easily be seen that the equilibrium distance is:
requi = 21/6σ.
(5.2)
This interaction is only assumed between the oxygen and carbon atoms, since the hydrogen-
carbon interaction is negligible compared to this. The exact values for ϵ and σ vary only little
for the studies considered. The systems considered here for MD simulations are often referred
to NVT systems, because the number of particles, the volume, and the average ensemble tem-
perature are held constant.
According to the ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem we just derived, the friction coeﬃcient can
be determined both from an equilibrium perspective, and from a non-equilibrium perspective.
==PAGE:33==
5
Earlier simulation results
27
In [14] the simulation is both done for an equilibrium and a non-equilibrium system. We will
therefore split the explanation into those two situations.
Equilibrium systems For equilibrium systems no external force is applied. The system
consisting of the CNT and water molecules and their interactions described above, are left in an
equilibrium state. A certain total simulation time and time steps are deﬁned. The correlation
function of the tangential liquid-solid friction force, deﬁned as the derivative of the liquid-solid
interaction potential is evaluated. This needs to be done for all particles for which the Lennard-
Jones potential is non-negligible, which is limited to a few water layers from the wall.
The
liquid-solid friction coeﬃcient is then evaluated according to eqn. (4.56). Two things needs to
be considered here. First of all the thermal average needs to be taken before the integral is
performed, for λ to take a ﬁnite value as discussed in [19]. Second, since the value of λ is zero
for t = 0, and then takes on diﬀerent values throughout the simulation, the value for λ needs
to be taken for the time interval where λ is almost constant for a period of time which is much
larger than the characteristic time of the system. This then determines the liquid-solid friction
coeﬃcient, from which the slip length can be determined from eqn. (4.46) (right).
Non-equilibrium systems For the non-equilibrium system an external force needs to be
applied - in this case a pressure gradient. This is exactly what we modelled deﬁned as the strain
rate in the DOLL Hamiltonian derivation above, for the expressions for the friction coeﬃcient
λ. One way to do this, would be to deﬁne a long CNT with an inlet and outlet, and then
deﬁne a pressure diﬀerence between inlet and outlet. This however, would require a relatively
longer tube, since the friction coeﬃcient needs to be evaluated on a part of the tube, where
the behaviour of the system is not a aﬀected by the boundary eﬀects at inlet and outlet. This
put restrictions on the minimum length of the tube, and therefore on the number of particles in
the MD simulations, which eventually gives a longer computation time. Instead of this another
method, without inlet and outlet and therefore no pressure diﬀerence between the two ends of
the tube is deﬁned. Instead, a constant acceleration along the tube axes is deﬁned for all oxygen
and hydrogen atoms. The idea is that this mimics that of a constant pressure diﬀerence between
the two ends of the tube. The liquid-solid friction force is then computed again in the same
manner as in the equilibrium system, and the friction coeﬃcient is determined from eqn. (4.46),
and the slip length from the equation just above eqn. (4.46).
In the work it is shown that the diﬀerence in the obtained value for λ using the two
approaches are negligible. Unfortunately (probably due to the large computation time for larger
systems), only CNTs with radius up to 10 nm were simulated. It was in general found that the
friction coeﬃcient is decreasing for lower radii as expected from ﬁgures 6 and 7. To compare
with the experimental data, here 3 results for the slip length in this simulation are reported.
b(R = 1 nm) ≃500 nm
b(R =3 nm) ≃125 nm
b(R =10 nm) ≃80 nm
So that is the slip length for a given CNT radius. The result for CNT with a radius of 1 nm
is seen to be quite close the experimental value obtained by [3] in ﬁgure 6 (taken the error bars
into account). However as the radius increases the slip length becomes way to small compared
to experimental data (by as much as almost a factor of 5 for R = 10 nm, if a ﬁt is made to the
data points in the ﬁgure). The radius dependence of the slip length is in this study explained
by geometrical reasoning. Imagine a volume of water placed on top of a planar graphene sheet.
The water will here see a periodic potential in all directions, with potential wells of ﬁnite sizes.
As the graphene sheet is rolled around the water, to form a CNT the depth of the potential
well will then decrease, since the potential is stretched in the circumferential direction. This is
unfortunately the simulation result in the literature closest to the experimental data. The reason
for this huge diﬀerence between theoretical calculations and experimental data, is the topic of
the remainder of this project after this section.
Before continuing we will make one brief comment on this approach. By mimicking the
==PAGE:34==
5
Earlier simulation results
28
pressure diﬀerence by a constant acceleration, where as mentioned the acceleration is related
to the strain rate discussed in the previous section, such that for instance the slip velocity is
given by vs = ˙γzwall. A (physically) unrealistically high value of the acceleration (and therefore
corresponding strain rate) is used, such that the total computation time of the system can be
kept low. This is because the build-up time before a steady ﬂow has been achieved is lower for
a higher acceleration. A fair question would now be: does the measured system parameters (for
instance the measured slip length) depend on the chosen strain rate? This is studied in [25]
where it is found that the the measured slip length of the ﬂow of a Newtonian ﬂuid past a solid
interface, is independent of the applied strain rate, up to a critical strain rate: ˙γc ∼1027 1
s, after
which the slip length depends exponentially on the strain rate. This value is far above the used
strain rate in standard MD-simulations, and is therefore not to worry about.
Another key simulation is [15] where the system constitutes a CNT ﬁlled with water with
a pressure diﬀerence between the two ends.
As explained above this increases the number
of particles in the system, which in case increases the computation time. It is therefore not
surprising that the CNTs considered in this case, have smaller radii than in the previous study.
In this study, the question about the equilibrium water density inside the CNT. Therefore, ﬁrst
an equilibrium system was deﬁned (i.e. no external pressure gradient or external acceleration),
and an open-ended CNT was connected to two large water reservoirs at both ends maintained
at a constant water density of 103 kg/m3, and an equilibrium water density inside the CNT
was found (depending on the radius of the CNT). This water density for each CNT was then
used in the following simulations for each CNT. The pressure gradient is modelled by placing
a membrane at end of the CNT. Due to thermal ﬂuctuations the water molecules will have a
random velocity at each time, and zero net ﬂow velocity when the ﬂuid is viewed as a whole.
The membrane (located at what is imagined as the high pressure side) let particles pass freely in
the other direction of the nanotube, however water molecules passing towards the high pressure
side have a certain probability of being reﬂected. This then sets up a net ﬂow towards what is
imagined to be the low pressure side. Note that no external pressure diﬀerence is deﬁned in this
setup, but the eﬀect of a diﬀerential pressure is mimicked by the membrane.
Here a Poiseuille velocity proﬁle is assumed, with a slip boundary condition eqn. (2.6).
The viscosity to be used can be found by considering the form of the friction coeﬃcient in the
Stokes drag:
ξ = 6πaη,
(5.3)
where a is the particle radius. Using eqn. (4.5) this can be rewritten as:
η =
kbT
6πaD,
(5.4)
where the diﬀusion constant D has been evaluated from the Green-Kubo formula for the diﬀusion
coeﬃcient eqn. (4.15). The slip velocity can then be determined from the velocity proﬁle by
evaluating this at r = R and the slip length can be found from eqn. (2.5). Again we will present
some of the simulation results for comparison:
b(R =0.83 nm) ≃110 nm
b(R =1.5 nm) ≃45 nm
b(R =2 nm) ≃35 nm
b(R =2.5 nm) ≃30 nm
All data points for the two simulation studies are summarized in ﬁgure 11 together with
the experimental data from ﬁgure 6.
Considering the huge eﬀort that has been given in these studies, these results are far
below both the experimental results in ﬁgure 6. Clearly something is wrong (even within the
simulation studies). When considering that the MD simulations method is widely used for other
systems aswell, this is a very dazzling result. All interactions seem to be accounted for and even
==PAGE:35==
5
Earlier simulation results
29
Figure 11: Experimental data for the slip length for carbon nanotubes and boron-nitride nanotubes
as a function of radius. These data points are the same as those in ﬁgure 6. The dark purple circular
dots are the simulation results obtained above.
equilibrium and non-equilibrium simulations match within each study. This huge discrepancy,
for multiple theoretical studies compared with multiple experimental studies is what motivates
the topic of the next section where we will look more into the water-solid interaction.
==PAGE:36==
6
Inﬂuence of electronic structure and screening
30
6
Inﬂuence of electronic structure and screening
The approach described in the preceding section, determining the slip length from the fric-
tion coeﬃcient determined at equilibrium, has one great shortage. As described, the water-water
interaction is modelled by a Lennard-Jones potential, which is probably a good approximation
(dependent on the exact chosen water package). The interaction between the very ﬁrst few layers
of water and the carbon atoms is also modelled by a Lennard-Jones potential. At ﬁrst this is a
ﬁne approximation for a ﬂat sheet of graphene, where ϵ and σ in the Lennard-Jones potential
are well-deﬁned. However as one considers a CNT, to describe the water-carbon interaction, it
is necessary to consider how the electronic structure of the CNT changes with radius and would
therefore possibly vary ϵ and σ. BNNTs have a well-deﬁned band gap independent of radius
and chirality. However, for CNTs the electronic properties are greatly dependent on radius and
chirality (to be shown later) - they can either be metallic with free electrons in the conducting
shell or semi-conducting. As we will see even in the semi-conducting case the band gap energy is
of the same size as thermal ﬂuctuations: kbT ≃25 meV, so that in both cases electrons will be
present in the conducting shell and therefore delocalized from the carbon atoms. It is therefore
obvious that to correctly model the water-carbon interaction we need to take the exact electronic
structure into account. In this section we will ﬁrst review the, standard theory used for quantum
mechanical many-body problems. This is not an easy topic at all, and a thorough explanation
is given, in case the reader is not familiar with this. This will enable us to understand, the work
done in simulating water ﬂow on surfaces, where the liquid-wall interaction energy is calculated
quantum mechanically.
Taking the perspective of a single water molecule, it will feel a periodic potential from the
hexagonal carbon structure of the CNT as it ﬂows over the surface, i.e. a corrugated energy
landscape. This energy landscape is what is described by the Lennard-Jones potential above.
When electrons are present in the conducting shell, these will tend to screen the (dipole) potential
from the water molecules. This is a well-known phenomenon from solid state physics. Taking
a metal surface and applying a perturbation, for instance an electron or a dipole potential, the
conducting electrons will move such that they counteract the perturbing potential. This is the
eﬀect called screening. The eﬀect of this will be to lower the corrugation of the energy landscape
seen by a water molecule, and therefore in turn lower the friction coeﬃcient. This is an eﬀect
that is not accounted for in both the equilibrium and non-equilibrium simulation described in
the preceding section, and is what we now will look at.
6.1
Earlier simulation of electronic structure of a graphene sheet and
boron-nitride sheet
Modelling the water-carbon interaction for water inside CNTs, taking the electronic struc-
ture into account has not been done earlier, since this computationally is an exhausting task.
The closest we get is modelling the water-carbon interaction for water on top of a graphene
sheet, which is what is done in [16], by directly calculating the electronic structure of graphene
by density functional theory (DFT). Before we can understand how this is done, and more im-
portantly how to interpret the result, we need to understand how one calculates the electronic
structure of a many-body problem.
6.1.1
Hatree energy and Hatree-Fock energy
So far everything we have done, has been purely classical calculations.
Now, going to
calculating the electronic structure and properties of a material a classical approach is insuﬃcient
at best (if it even makes sense). Instead what we have to do, is to solve the Schr¨odinger equation
for the system to ﬁnd the eigenenergies of the system. This faces us with two problems: 1)
deﬁning the Hamiltonian of the system, and 2) deﬁning the wave function(s) for the Hamiltonian
to act on. Imagining that we have a crystal consisting of nuclei and electrons, we have to take
==PAGE:37==
6
Inﬂuence of electronic structure and screening
31
all interactions into account when deﬁning the Hamiltonian. That is in this case
ˆH =
X
i
p2
n,i
2mn
+ 1
2
X
i̸=j
zizje2
|Ri −Rj| +
X
i
p2
e,i
2me
+ 1
2
X
i̸=j
e2
|ri −rj| −
X
i
zie2
|r −Ri|,
(6.1)
where Pn is the nuclei momentum, mn is the nuclei mass, Pe is the electron momentum, me is
the electron mass, e is the electronic charge, zk is the charge of nuclei k, and |Ri −Rj| are the
nuclei-nuclei distances, |ri −rj| are the electron-electron distances, and |r−Rj| are the electron-
nuclei distances, and the sums run over all nuclei/electrons. The ﬁrst term is the kinetic energy
of all nuclei, the second term is the nuclei-nuclei electrostatic interaction (where the factor 1
2
accounts for double counting), the third term is the electron kinetic energy, the fourth term
is the electron-electron electrostatic interaction (where the factor 1
2 again accounts for double
counting), and the ﬁfth term is the electron-nuclei electrostatic interaction. Computationally
this is an insuperable task. For the MD simulations discussed earlier the problem is basically
the same, numerically solving the interactions between all particles. However before the number
of particles were at most some thousand particles, while for a metal the number of conducting
electrons to be simulated is several orders of magnitude larger than this. It is therefore not
realistic to solve the Schr¨odinger equation directly using eqn. (6.1) as the Hamiltonian. The
Schr¨odinger equation we want to solve reads:
ˆHΨ(riσi) = EΨ(riσi)
(6.2)
where ˆH is given above and Ψ(riσi) is the wave function for the whole system i.e. it is a function
of the position and spin of all particles in the system. The ﬁrst attempt to solve this equation
is called the Hatree method.
The ﬁrst approximations we will make are that the nuclei are
ﬁxed in position, and their kinetic energy therefore evidently is zero. If all nuclei are ﬁxed in
position, this also means that the nuclei-nuclei distance (the nominator in the second term in
the Hamiltonian) is constant. The nuclei-nuclei interaction therefore becomes a constant which
we can take out of the Hamiltonian while solving the problem, and simply add this energy to
our ﬁnal result. The Hatree Hamiltonian therefore becomes:
ˆHe =
X
i
p2
e,i
2me
+ 1
2
X
i̸=j
e2
|ri −rj| −
X
i
zie2
|r −Ri|.
(6.3)
For the wave function, we now only need to describe the electronic part of the wave function,
since we treat the nuclei as ﬁxed atoms. We also make the very rough assumption that the total
electron wave function in the ground state is simply given by the product of all single-electron
wave functions:
Ψ0(r1σ1, r2σ2, ..., rNσN) = ψ(r1σ1)ψ(r2σ2)...ψ(rNσN).
(6.4)
For N electrons. The Schr¨odinger equation now becomes
ˆHeΨ0 = E0Ψ0,
(6.5)
where E0 is the ground state energy. This equation is still computationally very demanding to
solve, since we still need to sum the interactions between lots of electrons. We therefore assume
that instead of evaluating the interaction between all electrons, we approximate the potential
felt by one electron due to its interactions with all other electrons by an averaged parameter. We
namely assume that a single electron only responds to the electronic charge density ρ(r) given
by
ρ(r) = −e
occupied
X
i
ψ∗
i (r)ψi(r).
(6.6)
==PAGE:38==
6
Inﬂuence of electronic structure and screening
32
So that sums over the probability distribution function of all occupied electron states.
The
Coulomb interaction replacing the second term in eqn. (6.3) is
Vcoul(r) = e2
Z
occupied
X
i
ψ∗
i (r)
1
|r′ −r|ψi(r)dr,
(6.7)
as one would expect. The Hatree Hamiltonian therefore takes its ﬁnal form:
ˆHe =
X
i
p2
e,i
2me
+ e
Z
ρ(r)
|r′ −r|dr −
X
i
zie2
|r −Ri|,
(6.8)
or in a more neat form:
ˆHe = Vkin + Vcoul(r) + Ve−n(r),
(6.9)
with obvious deﬁnitions. Note that since Vcoul(r) also depends on the wave function, the resulting
Schr¨odinger equation here has to be solved in a self-consistent manner. The Hatree method can
therefore be thought of as a form of a mean-ﬁeld theory. Note that the wave function deﬁned
in eqn.
(6.4) is not antisymmetric in general, and that it assumes there are no correlation
between the position and spin of each electron which is not the case in general. It also does not
take the Pauli exclusion principle into account, so it does not put restrictions on the number of
electrons that can occupy the same quantum state. This is a very crude model and is not used
for determination of the ground state energy, however we need to understand this before we can
construct a more precise model.
We will now build on this to describe the more precise model, namely the Hatree-Fock
model. The ﬁrst thing this accounts for, is ﬁxing the symmetry of the wave function. One smart
way to do this was found by Slater in 1929, and it consists of writing the total wave function in
a determinant form. Writing eqn. (6.4) in the following form:
Ψ0(r1σ1, r2σ2, ..., rNσN) =
1
√
N!

ψ1(r1σ1)
ψ1(r2σ2)
· · ·
ψ1(rNσN)
ψ2(r1σ1)
ψ2(r2σ2)
· · ·
ψ2(rNσN)
...
...
...
...
ψN(r1σ1)
ψN(r2σ2)
· · ·
ψN(rNσN).

(6.10)
It is seen by direct calculation that the total wave function is antisymmetric for interchanging
two columns, i.e. the total wave function only changes its sign. Assuming this form of the
ground state wave function therefore ensures it to be antisymmetric as it should for electrons
(since electrons are fermions). The question is now what single-electron wave functions to use in
eqn. (6.10). In the Hatree-Fock approximation this is determined using variational calculus. As
mentioned above, since the Hamiltonian itself is a function of the single electron wave functions,
this problem needs to be solved self-consistently. The method is therefore to minimize the ground
state energy E0 by varying the wave functions using variational calculus. We will not go into
detail with the mathematical derivation here, however when we require the wave function to be
antisymmetric (eqn. (6.10)) it turns out that for indistinguishable particles (which electrons are
of course), there is an extra energy term coming from exchanging two electrons with the same
spin (this eﬀect is zero for exchanging electrons with opposite spin, where we by ”exchange” mean
exchanging the position vector of the two electrons wave functions). Physically it corresponds to
two electrons exchanging position in a certain system, to lower the energy of the whole system.
It can therefore be seen as a stabilizing eﬀect, and will always lower the expectation value for
the energy of the system. The physical reason for this is as follows: The total wave function
for electrons must be antisymmetric, and is the product of the spatial part of the wave function
times the spin part of the wave function: Ψ(r, σ) = ψ(r)φ(σ). If the spins for two electrons are
parallel, their spin wave function is symmetric leaving the spatial wave function antisymmetric,
meaning that their spatial distribution in space is not symmetric under exchange of position.
==PAGE:39==
6
Inﬂuence of electronic structure and screening
33
This can change the electrostatic interactions, and can possibly lower the total energy of the
system. The Hatree-Fock Hamiltonian there takes the form
ˆHhf = Vkin + Vcoul(r) + Ve−n(r) + VX,
(6.11)
and the full Schr¨odinger equation in the Hatree-Fock approximation becomes
ˆHhfΨ0(r1σ1, r2σ2, ..., rNσN) = E0Ψ0(r1σ1, r2σ2, ..., rNσN),
(6.12)
with Ψ0 given by the Slater determinant above. The Hartree-Fock approximation is much more
precise compared to the Hatree approximation, since we make sure the total electronic wave
function is antisymmetric and we account for the exchange coupling energy.
The Hatree-Fock approximation is the fundamental building block of correctly determining
the ground state energy of a certain system. On top of this several so-called post-Hatree-Fock
methods can be included in the model to account for more and more eﬀects, and get a more
precise result for the energy. Optimally we would solve the relativistic Schr¨odinger equation
directly, but this is of course not possible, so the whole problem is about getting as close to
this result as possible, while still maintaining a realistic computation time for the calculation.
The diﬀerence between the ground state energy obtained from the Hatree-Fock approximation
and the exact solution to the non-relativistic Schr¨odinger equation is denoted as the correlation
energy. This physical eﬀect describes how one electron reacts to the exact position of all other
electrons, and one can therefore think of it as a measure of how big an error we make when we
assume that the single electrons only respond to the total electronic charge density.
6.1.2
Results from the water-solid interaction using Density Functional Theory
Finally after all of our hard eﬀort understanding the theory used to solve many-body
problems, we can get the reward.
This is to understand how the ﬂow simulations changes,
when the liquid-wall interaction is modelled quantum mechanically. For the study in [16] the
theoretical approach is, as you might have guessed, based on the theory presented above. The
focus of this study is to determine the friction coeﬃcient on a graphene sheet compared to the
friction coeﬃcient on a boron-nitride sheet. This might sound like a trivial task compared to the
studies above (where a more complicated geometry was considered), however the diﬀerence is
that for this study a simple Lennard-Jones potential is simply not assumed. Instead the water-
solid interaction is computed by directly determining the electronic structure of the sheet in
the way described in the previous section. The electronic structure is determined using (DFT).
The basis of DFT is to use the Hatree-Fock Hamiltonian to determine the ground state energy,
where care needs to be taken about how to evaluate the last two terms in eqn. (6.11). The
electron-nuclei interaction is what from the electron perspective can be regarded as an external
potential. In DFT this term is evaluated using the Hohenberg-Kohn theorem which states that,
any external potential is given by a functional on the ground state density
Vext(r) = F[n(r)],
(6.13)
where F is a functional to be determined. All information about the electron-nuclei interaction
can therefore be directly obtained from the electron density function, which we determined above
from the single-electron wave functions. The exchange-correlation energy can be evaluated using
diﬀerent approximations, however since this is not the focus of this study we will not dig into
that, but merely state that satisfactory approximations can be made. One can therefore say
that the ”DFT Hamiltonian” takes the form:
Hhf = Vkin + Vcoul(r) + F[n(r)] + VXC.
(6.14)
For the study considered here the aim is to ﬁnd the corrugation of the energy landscape
felt by a water molecule. The claim is then that the friction coeﬃcient scales as
λ ∼V 2
int →b ∼
1
V 2
int
,
(6.15)
==PAGE:40==
6
Inﬂuence of electronic structure and screening
34
where Vint is the water-solid interaction energy. This relation can be seen directly from eqn.
(4.56), since the liquid-wall friction force in (4.56) is simply the derivative of the liquid-wall
interaction potential.
The general method of this study is then two-fold.
First the friction
coeﬃcient is directly determined using ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD). In general this is
the same MD simulation as in the previous two studies, however as mentioned the interaction
energy is now determined directly from the electronic structure (therefore the name ab initio).
In this approach it is stated that the wave functions are determined in the Born-Oppenheimer
approximation, i.e. that the electron wave function can be determined independent of the nuclei
wave function. This is also what we implicitly assumed in the Hatree-Fock approximation in
eqn. (6.4), namely that the electron and nuclei wave functions are decoupled.
The friction coeﬃcient λ, can then be evaluated in the same equilibrium conﬁguration as
the simulation in [14] using eqn. (4.56), using AIMD simulations with the water-wall interaction
determined by the electronic structure just described. Eventually it is found the the friction
coeﬃcient on a boron-nitride sheet is about 3 times larger than that of a graphene sheet for
water. The original plot from the [16] is seen in ﬁgure 12. Here it is clear, that the corrugated
energy is far greater for the boron-nitride sheet, than for the graphene sheet.
Figure 12: Plot of the corrugation of the energy landscape as seen by a water molecule travelling over
a ﬂat graphene sheet (a) and a ﬂat boron-nitride sheet (b). At the right is the deﬁnition of the top and
center position. The picture is taken from [16].
In the second approach it is shown where the relative contributions to the total interaction
energy comes from, in terms of the DFT Hamiltonian. To do this the interaction energy is split
into 3 parts:
Eint = Evdw
int + Elc
int + EX+Es+T
int
,
(6.16)
here Evdw
int
is the van der Waals dispersion part of the interaction between the water molecules
and the sheet (in the next section we will have a through discussion about the van der Waals
interaction), Elc
int is the correlation energy, and EX+Es+T
int
is the sum of the exchange energy (X),
the (remaining) electrostatic part of the Hatree energy (Es), and the single particle kinetic energy
(T). As mentioned above we will not go into the discussion of the approximations that can be
made, to determine the exchange and correlation energies, but only brieﬂy mention that suitable
models such as LDA can be used. We therefore see that the energies can be directly compared
==PAGE:41==
6
Inﬂuence of electronic structure and screening
35
to the Hatree-Fock Hamiltonian, eqn. (6.11), where the exchange potential is given by EX
int, the
kinetic part by ET
int, and the Coulomb and electron-nuclei interaction is given by the EEs
int, where
the van der Waals dispersion has been taken out explicitly. Furthermore the correlation energy
is also determined, which is not accounted for in the Hatree-Fock approximation. To determine
the corrugation of the energy landscape, i.e. how the water-solid interaction energy changes as
a water molecule moves across the solid sheet, the interaction energy deﬁned as the diﬀerence
between the largest and lowest energy in the energy landscape. The energy diﬀerence between
these two points is then evaluated for all 3 terms in eqn. (6.16). It is easy to see from ﬁgure
12 that the corrugation of the energy landscape is higher for boron-nitride than for graphene.
But what is far more interesting is to see that in both cases, the biggest contribution to the
corrugation of the interaction energy comes from the term EX+Es+T
int
. So that is the van der
Waals dispersion and correlation energy does not change much throughout the layer. Instead
the corrugation of the interaction energy (and therefore what ultimately leads to a friction
coeﬃcient), comes from a mix of the exchange energy, the electrostatic interaction (without the
van der Waals dispersion) and the kinetic energy term. In the next section we will discuss how
to understand this result.
==PAGE:42==
7
Modelling electronic screening
36
7
Modelling electronic screening
It is now time to see if we in some manner, can determine how much the screening eﬀect
matters in CNTs, and speciﬁcally to see if this can explain the curvature dependent slip length
seen experimentally.
Since a full DFT calculation is not the focus of this work, we will see
how far we can get with an analytical description, since such an approach is not known in the
literature to this author. Here we will as in the earlier MD simulation studies [14] and [15] assume
the interaction to have the form of electrostatic van der Waals interactions (or also denoted a
Lennard-Jones potential, with the nuclei-nuclei repulsion term included). First we will discuss
the origin of the van der Waals attraction, so we know exactly how the water-wall interaction
comes about. Then we will study together, how the quantum mechanical screening diﬀer from
the classical perspective. At last we will go into a tight-binding model of CNTs, from which we
have the possibility to determine what turns out to be the relevant parameters to consider in
determining the screening eﬀect.
7.1
van der Waals interactions and classical screening
To be able to understand how screening could aﬀect the friction coeﬃcient of a liquid over
a surface, we need to ﬁrst understand what the origin of the solid-liquid interaction actually is.
In all earlier MD studies [14] and [15], a standard Lennard-Jones potential were assumed, which
has the form eqn. (5.1), however why does it have that exact form? Looking at two charged
atoms or molecules, we naturally know that they either reject or attract each other through
the Coulomb interaction. However dealing with neutral molecules (as is the case here), no such
Coulomb interaction is taking place.
The interaction between neutral molecules can in general be described by dipole-dipole
interactions [26].
The dipole-dipole interaction has three parts.
The ﬁrst is the interaction
between two permanent dipoles called the Keesom interaction. It is well-known that there is an
electric ﬁeld around a permanent dipole coming from the dipole moment. Two nearby permanent
dipoles will therefore see each others electric ﬁeld and interact. The second part is the interaction
between a permanent dipole and a corresponding induced dipole in another molecule. If a non-
polar molecule approaches a permanent dipole, the electric ﬁeld from the permanent dipole will
induce a dipole moment in the non-polar molecule, which strength depends on the polarizability
of the non-polar molecule. This eﬀect is known as Debye interaction. The third and last part
is coming from what is called induced dipole-induced dipole interaction, and is as one might
has guessed an interaction between two induced dipoles. The reason for this eﬀect can be a
little harder to grasp, since it is at ﬁrst not intuitive that two neutral and non-polar molecules
should interact. However, when we describe molecules as being non-polar, it is because their
total dipole moment averaged over time is zero. Looking at the electron cloud of a molecule,
we know that this will have random ﬂuctuations in time. This means that at any given instant
in time, any molecule will have a ﬁnite dipole moment (which then averaged over time gives
zero for non-polar molecules). This means that even for two non-polar molecules there will at
any given instant of time be a ﬁnite interaction, called the London dispersion interaction. All 3
interactions scales as
1
r6 where r is the distance between the two molecules. This is the origin
of the
1
r6 term in eqn. (5.1).
The London dispersion interaction is the part that was evaluated explicitly in the study
[16] in table ??, which was found to be small when looking at the corrugated energy.
The
main contribution found in [16], is therefore found to come from exchange interactions, Keesom
interactions, and Debye interactions. However since the CNT or BNNT itself does not contain
any permanent dipoles, no Keesom interactions can be present, and the main contributor to
the corrugated energy therefore reduces to the Debye interactions and exchange interactions.
So this means, again assuming the interaction is purely of van der Waals character, that the
main interaction that is taking place, is the exchange interaction and the interaction between
the permanent dipole moment of water with the corresponding induced dipole moment at the
==PAGE:43==
7
Modelling electronic screening
37
nuclei sites in the solid wall.
The remaining part of the Lennard-Jones potential namely the
1
r12 term has a more odd
explanation. This term is to describe the nuclei-nuclei repulsion, however the exact reason for
the speciﬁc power of −12, has no direct explanation. In fact the only condition of this term is
that the power has to be lower than −6, to give a stable minimum and the power −12 is chosen
for historic reasons.
From a classical point of view we would not see the Debye interaction in this system. In
the classical approach, we would see a permanent dipole over a metal. Here the electrons would
distribute them selves on the surface of the metal such that the electric ﬁeld from the dipole
moment would be completely screened out - it would not be possible to detect the presence of
the water dipole moment if you were standing inside the metal (in this case the CNT). Therefore
there would be no induced dipoles and the Debye interaction would not be present.
7.2
Quantum mechanical screening and the Lindhard function
When we talked about how external potentials are screened inside a metal classically, we
said that the free electrons inside the metal, distribute them selves in such a manner, that they
exactly cancel the external potential, so that the total potential is constant throughout the
metal. In this we implicitly assume that we have inﬁnitely many electrons, and we put no limit
on their spatial distribution - but what if this is not the case? What if we only have a ﬁnite
number of electrons, and (in quantum mechanical terms) no more than two electrons can occupy
the same quantum state, since they are subject to Pauli’s exclusion principle? If this is the case,
the free electrons cannot necessarily completely cancel the external potential, and its eﬀect on
the total potential inside the metal is not simple.
In general known from classical electrodynamics, the dielectric response of a dielectric due
to some external perturbation, is given by the expression: φtot = ϵ−1φext, as discussed above.
Classically the dielectric function ϵ is a constant, however this is only true for a material which
is both homogeneous, isotropic, and invariant in time. This means that in general ϵ will be a
tensor (due to possible anisotropy in the system), that depends on both position (due to possible
inhomogeneities in the system), and time, together with possible non-local eﬀects in both time
and space. The correct relation between the total potential and the external potential is therefore
given by
φtot(r, t) =
Z
dr′
Z
dt′ ϵ
−1(rt, r′t′)φext(r′, t′).
(7.1)
For simplicity we will drop the double-bar notation denoting the tensor quantity of the dielectric
function, but reminding the reader that it should be a tensor in the anisotropic case.
If we now return to the case at hand, namely water ﬂow through NTs, the NTs them self
are periodic along the ﬂow direction, if we neglect boundary eﬀects due to the ﬁnite length of
the NTs, however this will have only a minor eﬀect on the total ﬂow. In this case it is possible
to Fourier transform eqn. (7.1) to q space. This is easily done since a convolution in real space
is simply given by a product in Fourier space. The Fourier transform of eqn. (7.1) is therefore
given by
φtot(q, ω) = ϵ−1(q, ω)φext(q, ω).
(7.2)
This gives the correct total potential inside the dielectric, due to an external potential. The
question is now how to determine the dielectric function. This is in general in the linear-response
approximation given by the longitudinal dielectric function which has the form:
ϵ(q, w) = 1 +
2e2
ϵ0q2V
X
ij
|⟨ψj|eiq·r|ψi⟩|2
Ej −Ei −ℏω −iη [f(Ei) −f(Ej)].
(7.3)
==PAGE:44==
7
Modelling electronic screening
38
(We will not go through the derivation of this equation here, and also not the simpliﬁcation
later, but refer to the derivation in [27] since the result is very well-known and widely used in
solid state physics, and instead focus on what the physical meaning of these relations is). Here
e is the elementary charge, Ek is the energy of state k, ψk is the wave function for state k,
f(Ek) is the Fermi-function evaluated at energy Ek, and the sum runs over all possible quantum
states of the system, and it is normalized to the volume of the system. η is a small parameter
that ensures convergence. Qualitatively this can be understood as, when an external potential is
applied, the electron cannot move freely (as in the classical case), but have to occupy a certain
quantum state. Intuitively how good a certain dielectric or metal is at screening an external
potential should be related to the number of free electrons, and how ”freely” these electrons can
move (and in fact the derivation of ϵ is based on the conductivity of the material). How freely
the electrons can move is determined with what probability they can jump to other quantum
states. They do this with a probability that is given by the norm of the overlap between the
wave function of the two states, times the diﬀerence in the occupation of the two states. This is
exactly the essence of Fermi’s golden rule.
For the present case, when we have a water molecule moving just across the surface of a
NT, the characteristic time scale for this is given by some material length scale over the water
molecule velocity: τwater ∼
a
vwater , where the lattice constant has been chosen as characteristic
length scale.
Comparing this to the characteristic time for the electrons, this is given by 1
over the plasma frequency: τe ∼
1
ωp , ωp =
q
nee2
ϵ0me , where ne is the electron density and me is
the electron mass. It is easy to convince yourself that τe << τwater. Looking at the dielectric
function (7.3), we can therefore neglect the frequency dependence. In fact in the free electron
approximation and with no frequency dependence it can be shown that [27] eqn. (7.3) simpliﬁes
to
ϵ(q)L = 1 + k2
T F
q2 F
 q
2kF

,
(7.4)
where
F (q) = 1
2 + (2kF )2 −q2
4q(2kF )
ln
2kF + q
2kF −q

.
(7.5)
This expression is known as the Lindhard function for the dielectric function. Here
kF = 1
ℏ
√
2meϵF ,
(7.6)
is the Fermi vector and
k2
T F =
e2
4πϵ0
n(ϵF ),
(7.7)
is the Thomas-Fermi vector, which sets the characteristic screening length inside the metal.
n(ϵF ) is the density-of-states per unit volume. This theory is the well-known theory normally
used to describe how a given metal responds, when we insert a perturbation inside the metal.
For the present problem, the water molecule is however not inside the metal, but is separated
from it by a ﬁnite distance. This is not a straightforward task to solve, and later we will discuss
how to deal with this. For now, to get a feeling for how this works, we will look at the well-known
example of screening of a single electron embedded in a metal.
The bare potential from an electron is given by the usual Coulomb potential
φc(r) = −
e2
4πϵ0r,
(7.8)
which is to be considered as the external potential. We now need this in q-space, so taking the
Fourier transform of this we obtain
F(φc(r)) =
Z
φc(r) eiq·r d3q =
Z 2π
0
dφ
Z π
0
dθ
Z ∞
0
dr φc(r)q2 sin θ eiqr cos θ.
(7.9)
==PAGE:45==
7
Modelling electronic screening
39
The φ integration is straightforward and gives a factor of 2π. We now explicitly consider the θ
integral:
Z π
0
dθ sin θ eiqr cos θ = eiqr −e−iqr
iqr
= 2
qr sin qr.
(7.10)
The Fourier transform therefore becomes
φc(q) = F(φc(r)) = 4π
q
Z ∞
0
dr φc(r)r sin qr.
(7.11)
The cautious reader have already seen that this integral diverges.
What is done instead is,
instead of considering the function: φc(r) we consider the function: limλ→0 φc(r)e−λr. If we did
not take the limit λ →0, this would correspond to the Yukawa potential, with damping length
λ. Instead inserting this we obtain
φc(q) = 4π
q lim
λ→0
Z ∞
0
dr φc(r)r e−λr sin qr = −lim
λ→0
4π
q
e2
4πϵ0
q
λ2 + q2 = −e2
ϵ0
1
q2 .
(7.12)
The total potential in the metal is then given by
φtot(q, ω) = −ϵ−1(q, ω)e2
ϵ0
1
q2 .
(7.13)
To get the this in real space, we Fourier transform both sides:
φtot(r, ω) = −e2
ϵ0
Z
d3q ϵ−1(q, ω) 1
q2 eiq·r.
(7.14)
To proceed we must specify ϵ(q, ω). To get a simple analytic expression, we make the easiest
approximation, namely the Thomas-Fermi limit of the Lindhard function. This is the case when
we are considering small wave lengths of q, i.e. q << 2kF , and no frequency dependence. In this
case F(q) in eqn. (7.5) can easily be shown to be almost 1, so the dielectric function becomes
ϵ(q) = 1 + k2
T F
q2 ,
(7.15)
so we have
φtot(r, ω) = −e2
ϵ0
Z
d3q
1
q2 + k2
T F
eiq·r = −e2
4πϵ0
e−rkT F .
(7.16)
Finally we arrive at the desired result. This exactly underlines the diﬀerence between the clas-
sical understanding of metallic screening and the (real) quantum mechanical screening. In the
classic case, we would without hesitation say that the potential everywhere in the metal would
be constant. This is because in the classical description of this problem, we would carve out a
small volume of the metal, where we put the electron. Since we can make the volume of the
carved out space inﬁnitely small, one would not see a screening length. However, in reality the
potential in the metal is damped over a ﬁnite length of order kT F . When we are more than a
couple of kT F away from the electron there is no diﬀerence between the classical and quantum
mechanical description since both become constant, however within a few kT F from the electron
the diﬀerence is evident.
If we now turn to the problem at hand in this study, this becomes a lot more complicated,
as we discussed in the beginning, and this is mainly due to two issues. The ﬁrst is, we assume that
the water-carbon (or in general liquid-wall) interaction can be described by a simple Lennard-
Jones interaction as done in earlier MD work. Second, in the screening theory just presented we
==PAGE:46==
7
Modelling electronic screening
40
calculated the total (screened) potential inside the metal/dielectric (in this case the NT) due to
a perturbation (the electron that we put inside the metal). But, what we are after here is not
the total potential seen by the NT, but instead the total screened potential seen by the water
molecule, which is actually located outside the metal. The question we need to ask is therefore
instead: How is the interaction potential between the water molecule and the carbon atoms
together with their localized electrons, inﬂuenced by the NTs capability to screen the potential
from the water molecule itself, which is located outside the metal?
It is not obvious how to properly model this eﬀect at ﬁrst hand. One approximation could
be to model the water molecule to be in a (large) cavity in the metal. In this approximation,
we would say there is a ﬁnite distance between the water molecule and the metal lwm, and this
puts a characteristic qwm =
1
lwm . When computing the dielectric function we would then only
consider q < qwm so there would be a natural cut-oﬀ. This is an approximation, since the metal
here is not spherical but a plane, and it turns out it will not be necessary to do this calculation.
We will see why in the next section.
It is not straightforward at all, how to physically imagine this situation.
One way of
thinking about the physics behind the problem could be the following: Looking at the explanation
of the van der Waals interaction given in the previous section together with the result in [16]
and in table ?? we saw that the dominant part of the corrugation of the energy land scape came
from the exchange interaction and the Debye interaction, which is the interaction between the
permanent dipole moment of the water molecules and the corresponding induced dipole moment
in the wall/solid. Since the eﬀect of screening would be to lower the electric ﬁeld seen from the
water dipole moment inside the NT wall, this would in turn reduce the induced dipole moment in
the wall and lower the total Debye interaction. This would eventually lower the total interaction
by a factor of ϵ.
A problem we run into is, at some point in a calculation we would need the Lennard-Jones
potential in q-space. For the case of the bare Coulomb interaction we saw its Fourier transform
diverged in the upper limit of the integration, and we could ﬁx this by adding the exponential
decreasing term, and taking the limit λ →0.
For the case of the Lennard-Jones potential
the Fourier integral diverges in the lower limit of the integral, and this problem does not have a
quick ﬁx. The Lennard-Jones potential does simply not have a well-deﬁned expression in q-space.
Instead we could use eqn. (7.1) and the ﬁnding the Lindhard function in real space. However,
this would put sever limitations on the dielectric functions that we could use since; 1) it need
to have a well-deﬁned Fourier transform, and 2) we have to be able to solve the integral in eqn.
(7.1). In any case, the relevant parameter that determines the screening is the density-of-state
(as can be seen from eqns. (7.5) - (7.7)), so we will start our analysis by looking at that.
7.3
Geometry of nanotubes
While BNNTs have a well-deﬁned bandgap of about 5 eV, that have a negligible dependence
on radius and chirality [11], the case is not so simple for CNTs. The electrical properties of CNTs
are determined by the chirality vector i.e. the radius and chirality. This section will therefore
mostly be devoted to determining the density-of-states of CNTs. We remind the reader of our
earlier qualitative description of NTs which has a hexagonal lattice with carbon atoms at each
corner. Then imagine folding the graphene sheet into a cylindrical shape as seen in ﬁgure 14
(this is however not how they are made). For a BNNT one can have a similar picture, however
just with every second atom being boron and every second atom being nitride.
The mathematical description of the lattice of graphene is seen in ﬁgure 14. One deﬁnes
the two lattice vectors a1 and a2, as deﬁned in ﬁgure 14. The inter-carbon distance for graphene
is acc = 1.42 ˚A, the lattice parameter is a =
√
3acc = 2.46 ˚A, and the basis vectors are therefore
given by: a1 =
 √
3
2 ; 1
2

a and a2 =
 √
3
2 ; −1
2

a. The same description is used for CNTs for
R ≥2 nm, since curvature eﬀects are negligible down to this radius [8].
==PAGE:47==
7
Modelling electronic screening
41
Figure 13: Illustrative picture of a (6,4) (chiral)
carbon nanotube. The picture is taken from [8].
Figure 14: Illustration of the lattice vectors a1
and a2 deﬁned in the hexagonal lattice. The chiral
vector connecting the points A and B in this exam-
ple corresponds to the chiral vector Ch = 6a1 +4a2
seen in ﬁgure .
As depicted in ﬁgure 14 one deﬁnes the so-called chiral vector Ch = na1 + ma2 ≡(n, m).
This chiral vector connects the points A and B. If we continue the qualitative picture above,
of folding the graphene sheet into a CNT, we describe both the diameter of the resulting CNT
together with how much it is twisted, by the chiral vector. One imagines we roll the graphene
sheet along the chiral vector, and therefore connects the points A and B. In the example in ﬁgure
14 we have (n, m) = (6, 4). Looking at ﬁgure 14 the length of the chiral vector can be calculated
according to the law of cosine:
|Ch| = a
p
n2 + m2 −2nm cos γ = a
p
n2 + m2 + nm,
(7.17)
where γ is the inner angle at the corner opposite to Ch. The last relation can be seen from the
fact that if we evaluate the dot-product: a1 · a2 = |a1||a2| cos θ = a2 cos θ, where cos θ = −cos γ,
and from the deﬁnition of a1 and a2 we also get: a1 · a2 = a2
2 . This give the above relation.
Since this is also the circumference, the diameter of the tube, can then be calculated from the
chiral vector as
dnt = |Ch|
π
= a
π
p
n2 + m2 + nm.
(7.18)
For a sheet of graphene, at each corner of the hexagon (called Dirac points), the DOS is zero
while it also has a band gap of 0 eV. This is why graphene sometimes is called a zero-gap
semiconductor. DOS is formally deﬁned as the number of states pr. energy interval, so that is
for a given energy E the DOS is deﬁned as:
D(E) = 2
X
n
δ(E −ϵn)
(7.19)
Where ϵn are all the energy levels of the system Hamiltonian and the factor of 2 is due to spin.
The total number of states in a given energy interval ∆E = Eα −Eβ is then given by
N = 2
Z Eβ
Eα
D(E)dE = 2
X
n
Z Eβ
Eα
δ(E −ϵn)dE.
(7.20)
For graphene at the Dirac points we therefore have D(EF ) = 0, where EF refers to the energy
at the Fermi surface. Considering a carbon atom in the graphene sheet, it has four valence
==PAGE:48==
7
Modelling electronic screening
42
orbitals: the 2s, 2px, 2py and 2pz orbitals. If we take z to be the direction perpendicular to
the graphene sheet in ﬁgure 14, the 3 orbitals 2s, 2px, and 2py combine to make the σ and
σ∗bonds, so that is the in-plane orbitals responsible for the carbon-carbon binding, while pz
is the π and π∗orbitals perpendicular to the sheet. For plane graphene there is no overlap of
the σ and π orbitals, and we therefore have no hybridization (in mathematical terms one would
say the wave functions for the orbitals are internally orthorgonal). Talking about NTs, we in
general diﬀer between two terms: single-walled nanotubes (SWNT) and multi-walled nanotubes
(MWNT). SWNTs are what we considered above, where one sheet of graphene were rolled to
make cylindrical shaped CNT with one well-deﬁned radius. A MWNT is then simply multiple
layers of CNT enclosing each other with diﬀerent radii, with a interlayer distance of about the
same as acc.
The π orbitals are those responsible for the interlayer interaction for MWNT,
or for a SWNT the interaction of any medium that might be present either outside or inside
the nanotube. For CNTs the electronic properties are completely determined by the π orbitals
since the energy associated with the σ bonding is several orders of magnitude higher than those
associated with the π bonding [8]. On the other hand, it is the σ bonds that determines the
elastic properties of the CNT.
For some radii and combinations of indices (n, m) CNTs are a semi-conducting with a
well-deﬁned band gap, while for other radii they are metallic with a well-deﬁned DOS at the
Fermi level. Two examples are seen in ﬁgure 15.
Figure 15: Two plots of the bandstructure and the density of states ρ(E). The Fermi level is located at
E = 0, and the energy scale is in units of the hopping element γ0 = t. Left: Example of a (9,0) zig-zag
carbon nanotube that is metallic with a ﬁnite density of states at the Fermi level. Right: Example of
a (10,0) zig-zag carbon nanotube that is semi-conducting with a ﬁnite band gap. The plots are taken
from [8].
One can derive this using a tight-binding model, where the so-called π-approximation is
invoked. Here it is assumed that there is no overlap between the 2s, 2px, and 2py orbitals and
the 2pz orbitals. This is a reasonable approximation for radii larger than about 2 nm [8], which
is what we are looking at in this study. We divide CNTs in general into 3 classes, dependent on
their chirality. If n = m the resulting CNTs is called an armchair CNT and is always metallic.
If (n, m) = (n, 0) i.e. m = 0, the CNT is called a zig-zag CNT, and metallic if n/3 is an inte-
ger. For all other combinations of n and m, the CNT is called chiral, and is semi-conducting if
n −m = 3l where l is an integer number, and it is metallic in all other cases (we will discuss
and show this below). Figure 15 shows how sensitive the electrical properties are to just minor
changes in the chirality.
==PAGE:49==
7
Modelling electronic screening
43
7.4
Tight-binding model for carbon nanotubes
As already mentioned, there is no overlap between the σ and σ∗(2s, 2px, and 2py orbitals)
and the π and π∗(2pz) orbitals.
We can therefore treat the 2pz orbitals, which are those
responsible for the electronic properties, independently. This is also the assumption in the tight-
binding model, where we assume that the wave function Ψ of the 2pz orbitals can be described
independently. For the case of graphene, with a hexagonal lattice, there are 2 atoms pr. unit
cell (which we here denote atom A and B), so the wave function must therefore have the form:
Ψ(k, r) = cA(k)ψz
A(k, r) + cB(k)ψz
B(k, r).
(7.21)
Because the lattice can be seen as periodically repeating, the wave functions ψz
A(k, r) and
ψz
B(k, r) can be determined by Blochs theorem:
ψz
A(k, r) =
X
j
eik·Rjφz
A(r −rA −Rj)
(7.22)
ψz
B(k, r) =
X
j
eik·Rjφz
A(r −rB −Rj),
(7.23)
where rA and rB are the positions of atom A and B respectively, and Rj is the vector translating
to the atom on site j, where the sum over j runs over all sites. In the tight-binding model the
Hamiltonian is given by [13]
ˆH = −t
X
(i,j),σ
a†
i,σbj,σ + h.c. −t′ X
(i,j),σ
a†
i,σaj,σ + b†
i,σbj,σ + h.c.
(7.24)
Here t and t′ are hopping elements (where t′ is about one order of magnitude smaller than t), a†
i,σ
(ai,σ) creates (annihilates) an electron at nearest-neighbour site i with spin σ, and equivalently
for b†
i,σ (bi,σ) on the next nearest-neighbour site i.
Therefore the t term describes nearest-
neighbour sites interactions, while the t′ term describes next nearest-neighbour interactions.
This also gives an intuitive reason why we have t >> t′. The problem is now reduced to solving
the Schr¨odinger equation:
ˆHΨ(k, r) = EkΨ(k, r).
(7.25)
If we only consider nearest neighbour interactions, so we neglect the t′ part of the Hamiltonian,
the eigenenergies are given by the Hamiltonian describing the A and B lattice point interactions
ˆHAB. Every atom have 3 nearest neighbours, and since ⟨ψz
A| ˆH|ψz
B⟩= t for nearest-neighbours
the interaction between the 3 nearest-neighbours is given by: ˆHAB = −(1 + e−ik·a1 + e−ik·a2)t.
The expectation value of the energy is then given by: E = ±
q
ˆHAB ˆH∗
AB. By direct calculation
(this is straightforward using Euler’s formula) we get the dispersion relation:
E±(k) = ±t
p
3 + 2 cos(k · a1) + 2 cos(k · a2) + 2 cos[k · (a2 −a1)].
(7.26)
In the case of a CNT (where the above calculation does not change for the radii we are looking
at - see the discussion below), we will have periodic boundary conditions in the circumferential
direction: Ψ(k, r + Ch) = eik·ChΨ(k, r) = Ψ(k, r).
We now want to know: if we know the indices (n, m) for a certain CNT, can we then know
if it is metallic or semi-conducting? The answer turns out to be yes. If we consider ﬁgure 16,
this shows one hexagon structure, here the center point is denoted the Γ point while each Dirac
point is denoted a K point. When we fold the graphene sheet into a CNT, this put restrictions
on the allowed electronic states, in fact, the only allowed electronic states are those that fulﬁl
the requirement:
k · Ch = 2πl,
(7.27)
==PAGE:50==
7
Modelling electronic screening
44
Figure 16: a) Illustration of one hexagon structure. The center point is called the Γ point, while all
6 Dirac points are denoted K. We have the deﬁnition of the basis k1 and k2. The parallel lines are an
example for the allowed electronic k states for a given set of indices (n, m). b) A zoom in on one Dirac
point. Here the parallel lines are still shown, and our deﬁnition of the parallel (k||) and perpendicular
(k⊥) wave vectors are shown. For instance the stippled line to the point δk could be an example of a
small perturbation away from the Dirac point. The ﬁgures are modiﬁed ﬁgures taken from [12].
where l is an integer. It is obvious that the allowed chiral vectors in the circumference direction
are quantized, and this therefore put a quantized restriction on the allowed k vectors. This can
qualitatively be illustrated as, the only allowed electronic states are those formed by the set of
parallel lines in ﬁgure 16. Each of these lines corresponds to a l above, and this way of seeing it
is called the zone-folding approximation. We will throughout the following discussion stay close
to this picture, since it gives a illustrative good understanding. If the CNT is to be metallic,
one of these lines have to cross a Dirac point (a K point). In terms of the unit vectors k1 and
k2, the vector to a K point is for instance given by: K = 1
3(k1 −k2), so the condition for the
CNT to be metallic is
K · Ch = 2π
3 (n −m).
(7.28)
This means that the restriction in eqn. (7.27), have to hit one these Dirac points (for the CNT to
be metallic), and we therefore see that this is only true if n −m = 3l. So that is, for n −m = 3l
the CNT is metallic, otherwise it is semi-conducting, with a band gap qualitatively given by the
perpendicular distance from the K point to the ﬁrst line. This veriﬁes our statement above that
all armchair CNTs always are metallic and zig-zag CNTs are metallic if n is dividable with 3.
A smart trick is now to look at the behaviour of the dispersion relation, in the vicinity of
the Fermi surface (the Dirac or K points). The mathematical calculation will bring us no physics
of interest, so we will spare the reader for this, however the method is as follows: we say we put
ourself at a small distance away from the K point:
k = K + δk,
(7.29)
where |δk|2 = δk2
⊥+ δk2
||.
Here δk⊥and δk|| are the k vectors perpendicular and parallel
respectively to the allowed k lines, and are deﬁned in ﬁgure 16. Taking K as above we can for
==PAGE:51==
7
Modelling electronic screening
45
instance get
k = (δk⊥, 4π
3a + δk||).
(7.30)
Inserting this in the dispersion relation above eqn. (7.26), one can after a longer calculation
show that this can be simpliﬁed to
E±(δk) = ±
√
3
2 at|δk|.
(7.31)
Here t = 2.9 eV is the hopping element for the nearest-neighbour π orbitals. Here we see that
for metallic CNTs, where a k line is crossing a Dirac point, we will have |δk| = 0 giving no band
gap, while for semi-metallic CNTs |δk| will be ﬁnite, and a band gap opens up. In fact it can be
shown [38], the the band gap (for all semi-conducting CNTs) to a good approximation is given
by:
∆Eg =
2πat
√
3|Ch|.
(7.32)
We will not proof this relation, since we will not use it in this study. We only want the reader to
remember that, for semi-conducting CNTs the band gap is inversely proportional to the radius
since |Ch| = πdct = 2πR.
We now focus on determining the DOS. Taking the deﬁnition of DOS eqn. (7.19), this can
be written as:
2
X
n
δ(E −ϵn) = 2
X
n
Z
δ(k −kn)
|∂E(k)/∂k|,
(7.33)
where we are considering the DOS along the allowed k lines in ﬁgure 16, and we have showed
above that, near the Fermi surface the dispersion relation is given by E(k) =
√
3
2 at|δk|. The
above relation can be seen from the known property of the delta function: given a function
f(x) with roots xi one have the relation δ[f(x)] = P
i
δ(x−xi)
f ′(xi) . The next step in the derivation
is to split |δk| into a parallel and perpendicular part as above, corresponding to the parallel
and perpendicular direction to the allowed electronic lines in ﬁgure 16. We will not go through
the mathematical steps of the remaining derivation (since this brings us nothing interesting),
but merely discuss the physics.
We notice that while δk|| is continuous, δk⊥can only take
on discrete values corresponding to each allowed k line. Since the CNTs are continuous along
k|| the dispersion relation must be equipotential planes along this direction, and the energy
dependence of the DOS must be along δk⊥. In our calculation we have to sum of all k lines in
the perpendicular direction. This also means that |δk| can be approximated by δk⊥, which can
be found by simply projecting |δk| onto the chiral vector: δk⊥= |δk ·
Ch
|Ch||. Finally assembling
all the pieces, the DOS of CNTs can be written as [12]:
D(E) = 2
√
3acc
πt|Ch|
∞
X
E⊥=−∞
|E|
p
E2 −E2
⊥
,
(7.34)
where we sum over all k lines. Here E⊥is the energy steps in the perpendicular direction, and is
given by E⊥=
√
3
2 atδk⊥, and the sum runs over all the allowed k (parallel) lines. To elaborate
completely: this is actually a sum over l, since E⊥is a function of δk⊥which from the dot
product can be written as a function of l, n, and m. This is also how the exact chirality of the
CNT comes into play. Note that when we have E = E⊥in eqn. (7.34) the DOS diverges. These
points are called van Hove points, and is not something that has our interest in this study, but it
is those that can be seen as the spikes in ﬁgure 15, and they occur where the dispersion relation
==PAGE:52==
7
Modelling electronic screening
46
is ﬂat. At the Fermi surface we only have the E⊥= 0 contribution, so this is simply given by
(for the metallic CNTs):
D(EF ) = 2
√
3acc
πt|Ch| .
(7.35)
Wee see the DOS at the Fermi-surface is therefore also inversely proportional to the radius
of the CNT. These expressions are obtained for SWCNTs. For MWCNTs the chirality, and
therefore the electrical properties, of each layer is independent of each other, however it should
be mentioned that the DOS and band gap energy can be calculated for each layer independently,
since ground state DFT calculations shows that the electronic wave function corresponding to
each layer does not overlap [9].
For a CNT radius under about 1 nm, these results a slightly altered. This is mainly due
to 3 eﬀects, namely that the basis vectors a1 and a2 are no longer of equal length, the hopping
element t changes because the 2pz orbitals are no longer strictly perpendicular to the sheet, and
a non-negligible hybridization between the π and σ bonds.
7.5
Evaluating the density of states for carbon nanotubes
Looking at eqns. (7.5) - (7.7)) it would seem our job is done, since we have obtained the
DOS at the Fermi surface. However, such a calculation would not give the correct picture, and
the reason is as follows. If we look at the energy scales of importance, it is interesting to see that
the band gap energy (for the radii involved in this study) is of the same order of magnitude as
kbT ≃25 meV, which again of the same size as the corrugated energy determined by [16] from
ab initio calculations for water on a graphene sheet.
The parameter we therefore instead should look at, is an integrated DOS around the Fermi
surface, since it will not only be the electrons at the Fermi surface, but also excited electrons
around the Fermi surface that can contribute to the screening. In fact, since the band gap for a
semi-conducting CNT and kbT are of the same size, even semi-conducting CNTs will be metallic
to a large extent. What we now do is we integrate eqn. (7.34) from ±kbT around the Fermi
surface:
Z kbT
−kbT
ρ(E)dE = 2
√
3acc
πt|Ch|
∞
X
E⊥=−∞
Z kbT
−kbT
|E(k)|
p
E(k)2 −E2
⊥
dE.
(7.36)
(The chosen value of ±kbT can seem a bit random, since we might aswell have chosen for instance
±2kbT, or more accurately a Gaussian distribution. However, this would only aﬀect the exact
size of the integrated DOS, and if a Gaussian distribution were chosen, we would just see smaller
ﬂuctuations in the value, however this turns out not to be a problem with this simple approach).
This parameter should give a correct estimate of how good a certain CNT is at screening, both
for metallic and semi-conducting CNTs. We are now faced with the problem that for all the
earlier experimental studies in ﬁgures 6 and 7, does not know the anything about the chirality
of the CNTs used in the experiments. To make an analysis that still properly describes the
problem at hand, we do the following.
For each experimental data point in the study [1] in ﬁgure 7, the NT has a certain radius,
with an uncertainty of ± 1 nm (for all data points). For a certain radius, not knowing the
chirality, there is an enormous number of combinations of chiral indices (n, m), that could give
that radius according to eqn. (7.18). What we do is, since there is no particular diﬀerence
between say a 10 nm chiral metallic CNT and a 10 nm armchair metallic CNT (which was
tested by direct computation and can be seen below), we specialize our analysis to armchair
CNTs (for which n = m and are always metallic) and zigzag CNTs (for which m = 0 and are
metallic if m
3 is an integer number). We focus on the experimental data points R = [15, 17, 33, 50]
==PAGE:53==
7
Modelling electronic screening
47
nm. For each data point we compute the integrated DOS for 5 combinations of (n, m) indices,
which give a radius closest to the 4 chosen data points. For instance for R = 15 nm we compute
the integrated DOS for n = m = 219, n = m = 220, n = m = 221, n = m = 222, and
n = m = 223, which gives radii ranging from 14.85 - 15.12 nm. This is done to see how sensitive
the integrated DOS is to minor changes in the chirality indices. For both metallic armchair and
zigzag CNTs the diﬀerences for these computed values are seen to be negligible (the results are
summarized in tables 3 - 6 in appendix E). For the semi-conducting zigzag CNTs the diﬀerences
are a little larger, but still not of major importance. This was done for all 4 data points for both
armchair and zigzag CNTs. Examples of the DOS plotted are seen in ﬁgures 17 and 18.
Figure 17: Density of states for R = 33 nm armchair carbon nanotube, showing the minor diﬀerences
in DOS for 1-step changes in chiral indices. The x axis spans 4 kbT, and the red area shows the interval
over which density of states is integrated.
Notice that this clearly shows the metallic/semi-conducting dependence on single steps in
chiral indices (n, m). Then for each of the four data points the integrated DOS was computed
within the errorbars of the actual experiment, which is ± 1 nm for all data points.
That
means, for instance for the R = 15 nm experiment the integrated DOS is computed for R =
[14, 14.5, 15.5, 16] nm, to see how sensitive the integrated DOS is within this range. Also in this
case for both metallic and semi-conducting armchair and zigzag CNTs the diﬀerence is found to
be negligible, with the diﬀerences seemed to be stochastically distributed.
Then in the end the integrated DOS is determined for the interval from R = 5 −50 nm
in steps of 5 nm, to cover a larger range. All these computed values are shown in tables 3 -
6 in appendix E. The overall dependence of the integrated DOS on the CNT radius, for both
metallic and semi-conducting CNTs can be seen by plotting all data in tables 3 - 6.
If we start looking at the semi-conducting CNTs we see that, for radii between about 20-50
nm it stays constant, with deviations due to the exact structure in the DOS as discussed above,
but it stays within an almost constant value for the mentioned radius range. This also means
that above about 20 nm alle CNTs can be considered to be metallic to a large extent on the
energy scale we are looking at here. Below about 10 nm, the integrated DOS for semi-conducting
CNTs decreases rapidly to zero. This is due to the fact that the band gap depends on (radius)−1.
That means that when we get below a certain radius, the band gap is simply larger than kbT
==PAGE:54==
7
Modelling electronic screening
48
Figure 18: Density of states for R = 15 nm zig-zag carbon nanotube, showing the minor diﬀerences in
density of states for 1-step changes in chiral indices. Notice that the two left ﬁgures are metallic while
the two right ﬁgures are semi-conducting. The x axis spans 4 kbT, and the red area shows the interval
over which density of states is integrated.
Figure 19: Plot of the data in tables 3 - 6 in appendix E. Semi-conducting zigzag carbon nanotubes
are denoted by blue ﬁlled dots, metallic zigzag carbon nanotubes are denoted by red ﬁlled dots, and
metallic armchair carbon nanotubes are denoted by red circles.
and the integration gives zero, as we would expect. This can for example be seen in ﬁgure 20.
For the metallic CNTs the integrated DOS stays constant over a radius range of about
20-50 nm, where it assumes the same value as its semi-conducting counterpart There might be
a small minimum around 20 nm. If this is a coincidence due to the uncertainty or a physical
reason is unaccounted for.. This is also to be expected since for relatively large radii the band
==PAGE:55==
7
Modelling electronic screening
49
Figure 20: Density of states for R = [20, 10, 5] nm zigzag carbon nanotubes, to illustrate how the 1
over radius dependence of the band gap results in zero integrated density of states for low radii. The x
axis spans 4 kbT, and the red area shows the interval over which Density of states is integrated.
gap becomes so small, there eﬀectively is no diﬀerence between metallic and semi-conducting
CNTs - or said in another way: for high radii all CNTs are metallic. Below about 18 nm, the
integrated DOS increases exponentially. This is very interesting, since this is exactly such an
eﬀect we are looking for. However, looking more at this results it has two short comings to
describe the eﬀect seen experimentally. 1) even though the slip length depends on
1
V 2
int , where
Vint is the interaction energy, the relative increase in integrated DOS is simply not high enough
compared to the experimental values in ﬁgure 7. 2) If this were in fact the eﬀect, given the
radius dependent slip length we should see this for both metallic and semi-conducting CNTs
which we do not. In fact we see the exact opposite behaviour for semi-conducting CNTs (unless
we have the very unlikely case that all experimental data points in ﬁgure 6 are metallic CNTs).
In conclusion to the diﬀerence between metallic and semi-conducting CNTs, we can say that: For
R ≳15 nm there is not diﬀerence between metallic and semi-conducting CNTs, for 10 ≲R ≲15
nm, we have a transition region where we begin to see the diﬀerence, and for R ≲10 nm the
diﬀerence is considerable. This now also underlines why we omitted the calculation of the correct
dielectric function, for q < qwm in the previous section, since we have here isolated the exact
radius dependent parameter.
If we now consider ﬁgures 21 and 22 the comparison becomes more clear. For the left
ﬁgure, if we only plot the data for CNTs from Bocquet (2016) [1], it clearly seems that the
increase in DOS for metallic CNTs happens for too small radii.
However, if we include all
other experimental results, and we fully trust the data point provided by Whitby (2008) [4],
this actually suggest that the increase in slip length is not a smooth exponential function, but
a sudden increase that happens around 20 nm. This is very close to the point where we see an
increase in DOS. However, the fact the we see a decrease in DOS for semi-conducting CNTs,
entails that we ﬁnd it unlikely that the increase in slip length is due to electronic screening eﬀect
(unless all experimental data points for all studies are made with metallic CNTs, which we is
unlikely and we have no proof for). We also again stress that the relative increase in DOS for
metallic CNTs, is much smaller than the relative increase in slip length. It is though striking
how close (taking all data points into account) the two trends are.
==PAGE:56==
7
Modelling electronic screening
50
Figure 21: A part of the numerical values for the
integrated DOS from ﬁgure 19, together with the
experimental data from Bocquet 2016 [1] for CNTs
(see ﬁgure 7). The black squares belong to the left
axis, while the red and blue dots belong to the right
axis. The green dotted line is the ﬁt from Bocquet
[1].
Figure 22:
Same as ﬁgure 21 but with all ex-
perimental data points from ﬁgure 6. Notice how
the data point by Whitby (2008) breaks the ten-
dency suggested by Bocquet (the green dotted line
in ﬁgure 21). This suggests a more explosive slope
around 20 nm.
It is important to be careful with what it is we have shown here. We have not shown that
the dielectric and/or metallic properties of a certain material can change the friction coeﬃcient,
and therefore also the slip length, between the material and water. However, what we have
shown here is, that this is most likely not the case for the experiment at hand, since any metallic
screening eﬀects (related to the DOS) for CNTs does not vary within the radii considered in
mentioned experiment.
That there might be a diﬀerence between the friction coeﬃcients of
BNNT and CNT do to metallic properties cannot be ruled out, in fact the ab initio calculations
made by [16] suggests that this could very well be the case. However for this study it seem
fair to conclude that the very strong radius dependence on the slip length of water inside CNTs
seen in ﬁgures 6 and 7 cannot be subscribed to the diﬀerence in the metallic properties of CNTs
and BNNTs. This was otherwise the hypothesis given by the original article [1]. This suggests
the eﬀect we see must therefore be of diﬀerent origin. What we will do next is therefore to dig
into the method used by [1] to determine the slip length. As describe in the beginning of this
thesis, the slip length cannot be measured directly, so approximations have to be invoked. We
will therefore in the next section dig into this method/approximation, and see if we can say
something about how well this is.
The result in ﬁgure 19 give one an immediate idea. If CNTs could be fabricated with a
speciﬁc radius (to a certain uncertainty) and the chirality could be determined, without damaging
or in any other way induce inhomogeneities in the CNT, the metallic eﬀects on the slip length
could be directly tested, by setting up the same experiment as in [1], and running this experiment
with both metallic and semi-conducting CNTs for radii running from about 5 nm to 20 nm. If
the metallic properties have any inﬂuence, one should see a major deviation in the slip length
for the semi-conducting CNTs compared to the metallic CNTs.
==PAGE:57==
8
Flow ﬁeld around a point force
51
8
Flow ﬁeld around a point force
8.1
Volumetric and momentum ﬂux for the Landau solution
We will now return to the ﬂuid problem in the beginning of this work, dealing with the
ﬂow ﬁeld around a point force. In section 3 we considered the ﬂow ﬁeld around a point force,
as an approximation to determine the ﬂow in the experiment in [1]. In the last chapter we got
the very interesting result, that we cannot subscribe to the hypothesis in [1], that the radius
dependent slip length for CNTs is due to the metallic properties of CNTs. We will therefore
now make an analysis of the Landau jet as a model to describe the ﬂow ﬁeld out of a NT. We
will especially consider how well this model works, taken the actual geometry of the NT into
account (and not just take it as an inﬁnitely small tube as in the Landau jet), and see if we
in any way can use this to determine the volumetric ﬂow rate Q. This could potentially give a
more precise way, to calculate the slip length inside the NTs. We remind the reader, in spherical
polar coordinates, we assumed that the velocity ﬁeld could be written as
vr(r, θ) = F1(θ)
r
,
vθ(r, θ) = f1(θ)
r
,
(8.1)
where F1(θ) and f1(θ) are unknown functions of only θ. While for the pressure
P = g1(θ)
r2
,
(8.2)
and we showed that these functions take the form
F1(θ) = 2ν

A2 −1
(cos θ −A)2 −1

,
f1(θ) =
2ν sin θ
cos θ −A,
(8.3)
and for the pressure ﬁeld.
g1(θ) = 4ν2 1 −A cos θ
(cos θ −A)2 .
(8.4)
We will now study this ﬂow in much further detail. We will ﬁrst consider two interesting artefacts
of this solution. Imagine we put a sphere around the point force, that completely encloses it
(see for instances ﬁgure 23). What is the total volumetric ﬂux Q through that sphere? The
volumetric ﬂow through the surface of the sphere, must be given by the radial component of the
velocity:
Q =
Z π
0
vr(R, θ)2πR2 sin θ dθ = 2πR2
Z π
0
F1(θ)
R
sin θ dθ = 4πRν
Z π
0

A2 −1
(cos θ −A)2 −1

sin θ dθ = 0.
(8.5)
However, the integral exactly equals zero for A > 1. Assuming the water to be incompressible
we do not necessarily have to specify this to a sphere, but can use any surface that encloses the
point force. We are therefore left with the result, that for this ﬂow the total volumetric ﬂow
through any surface that encloses the point force is zero.
Now, instead of considering the volumetric ﬂow through the surface, we will turn our
attention to the momentum ﬂow k across the surface. The total transfer of momentum across
any surface, will (in contrast to the transfer of mass) have three components. There is a transfer
of momentum due to the particles that move across the surface, and this contribution is given
by the velocity components (similar to determining Q above). However, there is also a term
coming from pressure forces across the surface and viscous (stress) forces. The two last terms
are in general given by the stress tensor [28]:
σij = −Pδij + η
 ∂vi
∂xj
+ ∂vj
∂xi

.
(8.6)
==PAGE:58==
8
Flow ﬁeld around a point force
52
We need this in polar coordinates, and speciﬁcally we only need those two terms that changes
the momentum in the r direction, namely σrr and σrθ. In polar coordinates they are simply
given by
σrr = −P + 2η∂rvr,
(8.7)
σrθ = η

r∂r(vθ/r) + 1
r ∂θvr

.
(8.8)
The total momentum ﬂux through the surface is given by
ki =
Z X
j
(ρvivj −σij)njdS,
(8.9)
where the integral is over the whole surface S, that encloses the point force. In polar coordinates,
we are as mentioned only interested in the momentum ﬂux in the r direction. We know that the
total momentum ﬂux points along the symmetry axis in polar spherical coordinates. The total
momentum ﬂux is in this case given by
kz = 2πr2
Z π
0
[(ρvrvr −σrr) cos θ + (ρvrvθ −σrθ) sin θ ] sin θdθ,
(8.10)
where we just use kz for the momentum ﬂux, to remind our selves that the momentum goes in
the symmetry direction. We ﬁrst consider the last two terms: ρvrvθ −σrθ. By direct calculation
we get (from now on we will omit the notation that F1 and f1 are dependent on θ but take that
to be implicit):
ρvrvθ −σrθ = ρF1f1
r2
−η
r2 (−2f1 + F ′
1)
= 4ρν2
r2

A2 −1
(cos θ −A)2 −1

2 sin θ
cos θ −A +
2 sin θ
cos θ −A −(A2 −1)2 sin θ
(cos θ −A)3

= 4ρν2
r2
(A2 −1)2 sin θ
(cos θ −A)3 −
2 sin θ
cos θ −A +
2 sin θ
cos θ −A −(A2 −1)2 sin θ
(cos θ −A)3

= 0.
(8.11)
We are therefore only left with:
kz = 2πr2
Z π
0
(ρvrvr −σrr) cos θdθ = 2πr2
Z π
0
1
r2 (ρF 2
1 + g1 + 2ηF1) cos θ sin θdθ. (8.12)
Notice that the r dependence drops out! The rest can be determined by direct calculation again
kz = 2πρν2
Z π
0
"
4

A2 −1
(cos θ −A)2 −1
2
+ 16
 1 −A cos θ
(cos θ −A)2

+ 4

A2 −1
(cos θ −A)2 −1
#
cos θ sin θdθ
= 8πρν2
Z π
0
"
A2 −1
(cos θ −A)2
2
−3
A2 −1
(cos θ −A)2 + 4
 1 −A cos θ
(cos θ −A)2
#
cos θ sin θdθ.
(8.13)
Each integral can be evaluated analytically.
One obtains the well-known solution found by
Landau [21] for the total momentum ﬂux:
kz = 16πρν2A

1 +
4
3(A2 −1) −A
2 ln A + 1
A −1

.
(8.14)
Notice as already observed that the total momentum ﬂux through a sphere that encloses the
point force is independent of the radius of the sphere. In this equation it is also evident why we
must have A > 1.
==PAGE:59==
8
Flow ﬁeld around a point force
53
8.2
Beyond the Landau Jet
To go beyond this, we take our stand point in the original work by Landau and Lifshitz
[21]. As we have discussed above, it is here stated that the Landau solution is correct for a
point force, and that the total volumetric ﬂux through an enclosing sphere is zero. This is also
what we found above. However, we now stick to the following quote from Landau and Lifshitz:
”If the ﬁnite dimensions of the tube mouth are taken into account, the solution becomes the ﬁrst
term in an expansion in powers of the ratio of these dimensions to the distance r from the mouth
of the tube. This is why, if we calculate from the above solution the total mass ﬂux through a
closed surface surrounding the origin, the result is zero. A non-zero total mass ﬂux is obtained
when further terms in the above-mentioned expansion are considered”. In other words, a ﬁnite
Q can be found if we include higher order terms in eqns. (8.1) and (8.2). Such an approach was
ﬁrst considered by Rumer in 1952 [29] (and is also referenced in Landau and Lifshitz). This is
the path we will now follow, since this possibly has the potential to answer our problem about
relating Q to the exact geometry and ﬂow ﬁeld, and second this is the ﬁrst step towards better
understanding the ﬂow ﬁeld close to the NT, since we expect the higher order terms to dominate
here, compared to the ﬁrst order terms. We now go to second order in the velocity ﬁelds to
obtain:
vr(r, θ) = F1(θ)
r
+ F2(θ)
r2
,
vθ(r, θ) = f1(θ)
r
+ f2(θ)
r2
,
(8.15)
and for the pressure
P = g1(θ)
r2
+ g2(θ)
r3
.
(8.16)
Our aim is to determine the 6 functions F1, F2, f1, f2, g1, and g2. We therefore in principal need
6 equations to determine these functions, however we already know f1 and F1 from the Landau
solution. The mathematical derivation of these functions is rather involved, and for the sake of
keeping our heads to the physics, we will spare the reader for the full derivation here, but refer
to appendix D for a thorough derivation. The main step is to consider the continuity equation
and the Navier-Stokes equation in spherical polar coordinates. They are respectively given by:
1
r2 ∂r(ρr2vr) +
1
r sin θ∂θ(ρvθ sin θ) +
1
r sin θ∂φ(ρvφ) = 0.
(8.17)
The r component of the Navier-Stokes equation, without the φ dependence for instance has the
general form:
vr∂rvr + vθ
r ∂θvr −v2
θ
r = −1
ρ∂rP + ν

∂r
 1
r2 ∂r(r2vr)

+
1
r2 sin θ∂θ (sin θ∂θvr) −
2
r2 sin θ∂θ(vθ sin θ)

.
(8.18)
A similar equation exist for the θ component. By inserting the velocity ﬁelds above, one gets a
lot of terms, that all have some r dependence. It turns out the relevant terms to consider scales
as
1
r2 ,
1
r3 , and
1
r4 , and we throw away all higher order terms in r. One then collects all terms in
each equation that scale with r in the same manner. Doing this, gives us a set of equations:
f1F ′
1 −F 2
1 −f 2
1 = 2g1 + ν(F ′′
1 + F ′
1 cot θ)
(8.19)
f1F ′
2 + f2F ′
1 −3F1F2 −2f1f2 = 3g2 + ν(F ′′
2 + F ′
2 cot θ)
(8.20)
f1f ′
1 = −g′
1 + νF ′
1
(8.21)
==PAGE:60==
8
Flow ﬁeld around a point force
54
−F1f2 + f1f ′
2 + f ′
1f2 = −g′
2 + ν(2f2 + 2F ′
2)
(8.22)
F1f1 cot θ + f ′
1 = 0
(8.23)
f ′
2 + f2 cot θ = 0.
(8.24)
These 6 equations gives us our set of equations, which describe the system for this second order
expansion. Here it is important to notice, that while the Landau solution in eqns. (8.3) is an
exact solution to the problem, the solution we have obtained here is only approximate, since we
have thrown away terms of order
1
r5 .
8.3
Finding an expression for F2(θ)
We now search to ﬁnd expressions for f2 and F2. To do this we consider eqn. (8.24). It is
here easy to see that the solution for f2 to this equation is:
f2 =
c1
sin θ
(8.25)
where c1 is a constant. We conclude this can only be true for all θ if f2 = 0. If we integrate eqn.
(8.22) we get:
Z
2νF ′
2 −g′
2dθ = 0 ↔g2 = 2νF2 −1
3νC,
(8.26)
where C is an integration constant (which has been chosen speciﬁcally in terms of ν
3). From the
Landau solution to this problem we know f1 and F1. We now substitute the expressions for g2,
F1, and f1 with f2 = 0 into eqn. (8.20), and simplify to get:
F ′′
2 + F ′
2

cot θ +
2 sin θ
A −cos θ

+ 6F2
A2 −1
(cos θ −A)2 = C.
(8.27)
F2 is determined by this second order inhomogeneous diﬀerential equation with variable coeﬃ-
cients. Since A > 1 it diverges at θ = nπ, where n ∈{0, 1, 2, ...}. Before analysing this equation,
we will see if we can relate the constant C to the volumetric ﬂux. We multiply each term by
sin θ(A −cos θ)2 and integrate over θ:
Z π
0
F ′′
2 (sin θ (A −cos θ)2) + F ′
2

cot θ +
2 sin θ
A −cos θ

(sin θ (A −cos θ)2)+
6F2
A2 −1
(cos θ −A)2 (sin θ (A −cos θ)2)dθ =
Z π
0
C(sin θ (A −cos θ)2)dθ
(8.28)
Z π
0
F ′′
2 (sin θ (A −cos θ)2) + F ′
2

cos θ (A −cos θ)2 + 2 sin2 θ(A −cos θ)

+ 6F2 sin θ (A2 −1)dθ =
Z π
0
C(sin θ (A −cos θ)2)dθ.
(8.29)
We now integrate the ﬁrst term by integration by parts:
Z π
0
F ′′
2 (sin θ (A−cos θ)2)dθ =

F ′
2 sin θ (A −cos θ)2π
0 −
Z π
0
F ′
2(sin θ (A−cos θ)2)′dθ. (8.30)
==PAGE:61==
8
Flow ﬁeld around a point force
55
The ﬁrst term on the right hand side is zero since sin(0) = sin(π) = 0. The second term can be
evolved as
−
Z π
0
F ′
2(sin θ (A−cos θ)2)′dθ = −
Z π
0
F ′
2 cos θ(A−cos θ)2−2F ′
2 sin2 θ (A−cos θ)dθ. (8.31)
Notice that this exactly cancels the 3rd and 4th term in eqn. (8.29), which therefore takes the
form:
Z π
0
6F2 sin θ (A2 −1)dθ =
Z π
0
C(sin θ (A −cos θ)2)dθ = C
6A2 + 2
3

,
(8.32)
from which C is given by
C = 9(A2 −1)
3A2 + 1
Z π
0
F2(θ) sin θdθ =
9(A2 −1)
2π(3A2 + 1)Q,
(8.33)
where
Q = 2π
Z π
0
F2(θ) sin θdθ.
(8.34)
We can now see the point of our lengthy calculation, namely to relate the volumetric ﬂux through
a sphere (or some other geometry) enclosing the point force (or in our case the NT) to the velocity
ﬁeld around the point force. This result has the form we were looking for: Q given as a function
of the velocity ﬁeld, however it is important to stop and think about this result. For the Landau
solution we remember this was the solution to a point force problem. This is therefore just a
point force alone in space (and could mimic that of a swimming organism for instance). Here it
is evident that we must have Q = 0 as we got. In our case however, if we really demand to have a
sphere that completely encloses what we are looking at, we must still have Q = 0 if we integrate
over the whole sphere. Otherwise this would correspond to we somewhere in our volume have a
magical sink or source appearing, and this is very non-physical. Since it is an enclosing sphere,
the ﬂow that goes out through the surface of the sphere in the external part to the tube, must
exactly equal the ﬂow that ﬂows inside the tube by the deﬁnition of the direction of the normal
vectors (see ﬁgure 23). Otherwise the continuity equation is violated. Evidently, the total Q
through the surface must be zero if the ﬂuid is incompressible. This point is not noticed by
either Landau or Rumer (on the contrary), and we here question that claim. It therefore seem
that it is not possible to ﬁnd a relation between Q and the ﬂow ﬁeld, by this method of going
to higher orders in the velocity ﬁeld. Notice that this immediately gives us that F2(θ) must be
an antisymmetric function around π
2 from eqn. (8.34) or internally orthogonal to sin θ and this
again gives C = 0. Throughout the remaining of this study, we will when necessary keep C, so
we can discuss its physical inﬂuence, as to whether or not it should be zero.
8.4
Momentum ﬂux in the second order expansion approximation
With the result we just got, that our expression for Q changed a lot with the additional
higher order terms included, it will be interesting to see how the momentum integral diﬀers
compared to the Landau solution. It turns out, that this method provides additional restrictions
on F2. We will therefore now look at the momentum ﬂux again, with the addition of the F2
term in vr. As before the momentum ﬂux is given by
kz = 2πr2
Z π
0
[(ρvrvr −σrr) cos θ + (ρvrvθ −σrθ) sin θ ] sin θdθ.
(8.35)
However, now it is not necessarily the case that the last two terms vanish as before. In fact we
get:
ρvrvθ −σrθ = ρ
F1
r + F2
r2
 f1
r −η

−2f1
r2 + F ′
1
r2 + F ′
2
r3

.
(8.36)
==PAGE:62==
8
Flow ﬁeld around a point force
56
Figure 23: A simple sketch of the nanotube geometry. The red, blue, and green lines are examples of
curves along which we can perform the Q integral. The arrows give the direction of the normal vectors.
From this one can argue that the Q integral must be zero, since inside the NT the ﬂuid ﬂows opposite
to the normal vector giving C = 0.
As shown above, all terms not containing F2 vanish, which leaves us with
ρvrvθ −σrθ = ρf1F2
1
r3 −ηF ′
2
1
r3 .
(8.37)
The ﬁrst two terms give:
ρvrvr −σrr = ρ
F 2
1
r2 + F 2
2
r4 + 2F1F2
r3

+ g1
r2 + g2
r3 + η
2F1
r2 + 4F2
r3

.
(8.38)
When we insert this in eqn. (8.35) all terms that do not include F2 (or its derivative) give the
Landau solution in eqn. (8.14), which we will denote L(A). We therefore get
kz = L(A) + 2πr2
Z π
0

ρF 2
2
r4 + 2ρF1F2
r3
+ 4η F2
r3 + g2
r3

cos θ sin θ +

ρf1F2
r3
−η F ′
2
r3

sin2 θdθ
= L(A) + 2π
r2
Z π
0
ρF 2
2 sin θ cos θdθ
+ 2π
r
Z π
0
(2ρF1F2 + 4ηF2 + (2ηF2 −νC/3)) sin θ cos θ + (ρf1F2 −ηF ′
2) sin2 θdθ.
(8.39)
If we now take C = 0 where F2 becomes antisymmetric this can be somewhat simpliﬁed:
kz = L(A) + 2π
r
Z π
0
(2ρF1F2 + 6ηF2) sin θ cos θ + (ρf1F2 −ηF ′
2) sin2 θdθ,
(8.40)
where nothing can be said about the remaining terms, since f1 and F1 are neither symmetric or
antisymmetric for arbitrary A. This expression is now r dependent and this needs a comment.
First of all, notice that at along distances from the tube, the momentum integral equals that of
the Landau solution. The reason why the Landau solution was and should be independent of r
is, because the Landau solution is an exact solution to the Stokes equation with a point force:
κδ(r) = −∇P(r) + η∇2v(r).
(8.41)
==PAGE:63==
8
Flow ﬁeld around a point force
57
Here κ is a constant. When we enclose this with a circle and determine the momentum ﬂux,
this should be independent of the radius of the circle, since we should not be able to determine
where the point force is located. An r dependence can only come about, if we have more forces
distributed throughout the volume. Even though the second order expression we are considering
now, is not an exact solution to eqn. (8.41), an r dependence would still correspond to the case
where we have additional (external) forces acting throughout the liquid. Since this is not the
case, we conclude that the resulting integral must be zero, and this puts the extra restriction on
F2:
Z π
0
(2ρF1F2 + 6ηF2) sin θ cos θ + (ρf1F2 −ηF ′
2) sin2 θdθ = 0
(8.42)
In the Stokes limit, as we will see later, we can show that the r dependent term is actually zero
in this limit.
From Batchelor [36] we recognize that the formulation of the momentum integral, is nothing
more than an integral form of the Navier-Stokes equation for time-independent ﬂows. This can
be seen by integrating the Navier-Stokes equation, and invoking Gauss divergence theorem. For
instance by following the red or green lines in ﬁgure 23, the momentum integral does enclose
the point force. In the Landau solution this would for instance (for the red line) give that eqn.
(8.14) equal the point force. Following the blue line, we do not include the point force and one
could here formulate a momentum equation without the point force term. This is a method for
actually relating diﬀerent terms in such an expression.
8.5
Analytical solutions for F2(θ)
The time has now come to see, if we can actually determine F2 analytically. In this section
we will keep C ̸= 0 to follow the analytical work done by Rumer. One can then put C = 0
in the end, to see how the solution changes. It is by no means an easy job to obtain a full
well-behaved analytical solution to eqn. (8.27) for F2. To show why we start out by making
the substitutions: z = cos θ and F2(θ) = CH(z), such that: sin θ =
√
1 −z2 and cot θ =
z
√
1−z2 .
Now, since ∂z
∂θ = −sin θ = −
√
1 −z2, we have the change of variable implies that:
F ′
2(θ) = −
p
1 −z2CH′(z),
F ′′
2 (θ) = (1 −z2)CH′′(z) −zCH(z).
(8.43)
Inserting this into eqn. (8.27) we get
CH′′(z)(1 −z2) −2
 
z
√
1 −z2 +
√
1 −z2
A −z
!
CH′(z)
p
1 −z2 + 6(A2 −1)
(A −z)2 CH(z) = C
H′′(z) −2

z
1 −z2 +
1
A −z

H′(z) +
6(A2 −1)
(A −z)2(1 −z2)H(z) =
1
1 −z2 .
(8.44)
Notice that this equation diverges for z = ±1. The full solution to such a diﬀerential equation
is in general of the form:
H(z) = b1h1(z) + b2h2(z) + hpar(z),
(8.45)
where b1 and b2 are constants, h1(z) and h2(z) are solutions to the homogeneous equation, and
hpar(z) is a particular solution to the inhomogeneous equation. In 1952 Rumer [29] showed that
one solution to the homogeneous equation is given by
h1(z) = 1 −3(A2 −1)
(A −z)2 + 2(A2 −1)2
A(A −z)3 ,
(8.46)
which can be conﬁrmed by direct insertion. In the last part of appendix D we show how the
second homogeneous solution can be found from the Wronskian. If the reader is familiar with
==PAGE:64==
8
Flow ﬁeld around a point force
58
the Wronskian one can simply skip this derivation. If a solution to the homogeneous equation
is known, a particular solution to the inhomogeneous equation can be found from [30]
hpar(z) = h1(z)
Z z
m1
1
h2
1(z′)W(z′)
Z z′
m2
h1(z′′)W(z′′)u(z′′)dz′′dz′,
(8.47)
where u(z) is the right hand side of the inhomogeneous equation. Lower limits of the integral m1
and m2 do not aﬀect solution, however can be chosen to avoid any singularities in the expression.
In fact, if we calculate the Wronskian in this case we get
W(z) = e−2
R
z
1−z2 +
1
A−z dz = (1 −z2)(A −z)2,
(8.48)
and since u(z) =
1
1−z2 , the expression simpliﬁes to
hpar(z) = h1(z)
Z z
m1
1
h2
1(z′)(1 −(z′)2)(A −z′)2
Z z′
m2
h1(z′′)(A −z′′)2dz′′dz′.
(8.49)
This solution diverges when z′ = ±1, which in principle can be avoided by proper choice of the
lower limits of the integral. But, problems arise since h2(z) has roots, which have a non-trivial
dependence on A, so this solution diverges at diﬀerent z dependent on the chosen A. To obtain a
full analytical solution to either eqn. (8.27) or eqn. (8.44), one would have to guess a particular
solution to the inhomogeneous equation that does not diverge, which is not an easy task. Note
that if take C = 0 the equation becomes a homogeneous equation, and eqn. (8.46) is the full
solution for F2.
8.6
Analytical solutions for F2(θ) in the Stokes limit
We will now continue our journey by considering the Stokes limit of eqn. (8.27), which
corresponds to taking the limit A →∞. This is interesting since in the experiment at hand, with
ﬂows out of NTs we are exactly in the Stokes limit. We are once again faced with the question if
we should put C = 0, since the claim as opposed to Landau and Rumer is, that it should be. In
this section we will keep a ﬁnite C, to see if we put any restrictions on the problem that forces
C to be zero, and we will do this in in the Stokes limit. We will ﬁnd out that, this will also give
us an exact expression for F2 in the Stokes limit. Taking A →∞in eqn. (8.27) we get
F ′′
2 + cot θF ′
2 + 6F2 = C.
(8.50)
The awake reader will immediately rise his or her hand and shout ”this looks exactly like Leg-
endre’s equation” - and in that case the reader would be right. The general form of Legendre’s
equation is
F ′′
l + cot θF ′
l + l(l + 1)Fl = 0,
(8.51)
so we immediately recognise the solution to the homogeneous equation to be the second Legendre
polynomial: P2(θ) = 1
2(3 cos θ + 1), and since the right hand side does not depend on θ the full
solution must be
F2 = BP2 + C
6 ,
(8.52)
where B is an arbitrary constant. If we manage to determine B and C we have the solution to
this problem in the Stokes limit. In order to try to determine B and C, we take a step back and
write A = 1
ϵ and expand eqn. (8.27) in terms of the small parameter ϵ to second order in ϵ:
F ′′
2 +

cot θ + 2ϵ sin θ(1 + ϵ cos θ + ϵ2 cos2 θ)

F ′
2+6(1−ϵ2)(1+2ϵ cos θ+3ϵ2 cos2 θ)F2 = 3
2π (1−ϵ2)(1−ϵ2/3)Q.
==PAGE:65==
8
Flow ﬁeld around a point force
59
(8.53)
Only keeping terms up to second order in ϵ we get
F ′′
2 +

cot θ + 2ϵ sin θ(1 + ϵ cos θ + ϵ2 cos2 θ)

F ′
2+

6 + 12ϵ cos θ + (18 cos2 θ −6)ϵ2
F2 = 3
2π

1 −4
3ϵ2

Q.
(8.54)
If we also expand F2 in powers of ϵ as: F2 = R0 + ϵR1 + ϵ2R2, we can consider terms in zeroth,
ﬁrst, and second order in ϵ independently. To keep our heads to the physics, the derivation is
showed in appendix D. Here we make this expansion, considering all terms in each order of ϵ. It
here turns out that no restriction can be put on B and C. This is also quite reasonable because,
if we could put restrictions on B and C the ﬂow ﬁeld would be uniquely determined, and no
freedom would be left to inﬂuence the ﬂow by the exact geometry. To summarize, we know that
the solution to eqn. (8.50) has the form
F2 = BP2 + C
6 ,
(8.55)
where we possibly have C = 0. We found that no restrictions could be given on B, by expanding
F2 as: F2 = R0 + ϵR1 + ϵ2R2, but found that each Ri goes as a sum of Legendre polynomials. B
would in general probably both depend on Q and A. We can guess its A dependence by expanding
Rumer’s solution (eqn. (8.46)) to the homogeneous equation around the small parameter z
A << 1
to get
h1(z) = 1 −3(A2 −1)
(A −z)2 + 2(A2 −1)2
A(A −z)3 ≃1
A2 (1 + 3z2),
(8.56)
where we see that this corresponds to B ∼
1
A2 .
The expansion: F2 = R0 + ϵR1 + ϵ2R2, which consist of many terms with Legendre poly-
nomials as we have shown, only the constant term C0 in R0 and C2 in R2 are non-zero in
the Q integral, and no higher order terms in ϵ can contribute since our expansion of C does
not have higher terms in ϵ than to second order. This means that our restriction above that
Q = 0 →C = 0 cannot put the same restrictions on any other coeﬃcients for a higher order
expansion. This tells us something interesting. Since B (and no other coeﬃcients in a higher
order expansion) has no inﬂuence on the Q integral, there exist many (possibly inﬁnitely many)
velocity proﬁles around the point force for a given Q, so that is specifying the volume ﬂux Q can
mathematically correspond to a whole set of diﬀerent streamlines around the point force, and
therefore puts no restrictions B. What we instead would need is a physical and/or geometric
explanation for what B is the correct (physical) B to choose in the solution. The reason why
this is a very important result is, to improve the method used in the experiment in [1], to in a
better way measure the slip length inside NTs, one way could be to determine Q. However, if
C = 0 this shows that no easy relation between the ﬂow ﬁeld and Q can be found from a higher
order expansion of the velocity ﬁeld.
We will now consider the total momentum ﬂux kz in eqn. (8.39), to see what form this
takes in the Stokes limit. First we will consider the Landau solution L(A) for large A. We have
for this the expression:
L(A) = 16πρν2A

1 +
4
3(A2 −1) −A
2 ln A + 1
A −1

.
(8.57)
We now expand the second and third term in powers of
1
A2 = x2 and 1
A = x respectively:
4
3(A2 −1) = 4
3x2  1 + x2
= 4
3x2 = 4
3
1
A2
(8.58)
==PAGE:66==
8
Flow ﬁeld around a point force
60
ln A + 1
A −1 = ln(1 + x) −ln(1 −x) = 2x + 2
3x3 = 2
A + 2
3
1
A3 .
(8.59)
To third order in x. Inserting gives the Stokes limit of the Landau solution:
Ls(A) = 16πρν2 1
A.
(8.60)
Instead of directly inserting F2 in eqn.
(8.40) we will use the orthogonal properties of the
Legendre polynomials. We know that the product sin θ cos θ is anti-symmetric around π
2 and
sin2 θ is symmetric around
π
2 .
This means that since sin2 θ is symmetric while P ′
2 is anti-
symmetric, this product vanishes, and P2 and sin θ cos θ are internally orthogonal. In total this
means that only terms involving the product with f1 or F1 survive:
kz = Ls(A) + 2π
r
Z π
0
2ρF1F2 sin θ cos θ + ρf1F2 sin2 θdθ.
(8.61)
To further simplify this we expand F1 for large A:
F1 = 2ν

A2 −1
(cos θ −A)2 −1

= 2ν

1 −1
A2
 
1 + 2cos θ
A

−1

= 4ν cos θ
A
,
A >> 1,
(8.62)
so we see that F1 is anti-symmetric around π
2 for large A, while for f1 we get
f1 =
2ν sin θ
cos θ −A = −2ν sin θ
A
,
A >> 1,
(8.63)
which is symmetric around π
2 . F1 being anti-symmetric and f1 being symmetric means that
both two terms left are actually symmetric and do not vanish. However since both have a factor
of
1
A and F2 ∼
1
A2 gives us, strictly taking the limit A →∞means that both terms go to zero
compared to Ls(A):
kz = Ls(A),
A >> 1,
(8.64)
so we see that in the Stokes limit we just obtain the Landau solution, and the momentum integral
becomes independent of r.
We will now do a little trick. If we consider the distance from the streamlines from the
Landau solution to the symmetry axis, then from eqn. (3.8) this is given by:
s = r sin θ = constA −cos θ
2ν sin2 θ .
(8.65)
We now ask: for which angle θ0 are the streamlines closest to the symmetry axis? This is simply
found by taking ∂θs(θ) = 0 and gives
cos θ0 = 1
A.
(8.66)
If we now calculate the volumetric ﬂux through a part of a sphere, that has center at the point
of the point force, and spans from θ = 0 to θ = θ0 with radius R, then this gives:
Q = 2πR2
Z θ0
0
vr(θ)dθ = −4πνRcos2 θ0 −1
A −cos θ0
.
(8.67)
Now taking the Stokes limit A >> 1 this becomes (Here we also have 1 >> cos2 θ0):
Q = 4πνR
A
.
(8.68)
==PAGE:67==
8
Flow ﬁeld around a point force
61
Combining this with Q = πR2¯v and kz = Ls(A) for A >> 1, it is easy to show that this takes
the form:
kz = 4πηR¯v.
(8.69)
This is exactly of the same form as eqn. (3.9) used by [1], just with α = 4π. It is very instructive
to see, that such a relation can be found with other methods than on dimensional grounds. The
oﬀ-set in α compared to α ≃1 determined by [1] using COMSOL simulations, can be attributed
to the error we make by using the Landau solution so close to the NT, and to exact form of the
NT, which we have not taken into account here.
8.7
Streamlines for the second order expansion in the Stokes limit
Even though we cannot determine B, we can still consider how streamlines change when
we vary this. For pedagogical reasons we will in this section also keep a ﬁnite C. In the end,
it turns out it will be easy to see, which streamlines qualitatively corresponds to C = 0, and it
is therefore very instructive to see which eﬀect a ﬁnite C would have on the streamlines. The
streamlines for the Landau solution is shown in ﬁgure 10. We will now plot the corresponding
streamlines for the
1
r2 term in the velocity ﬁelds in eqn. (8.15) in the Stokes limit, where F2
is given by eqn. (8.55). Since we are only interested in the qualitative behaviour we will put
ν = ρ = 1, and then vary B relative to C.
Using the same approach above, i.e.
dr
dθ = r vr
vθ , one obtains the general result for the
streamlines:
r = constA −cos θ
2ν sin2 θ + A −cos θ
2ν sin2 θ
Z θ
0
F2(θ′) sin θ′dθ′.
(8.70)
In the Stokes limit where we have determined F2 the integral can be evaluated:
r = constA −cos θ
2ν sin2 θ + A −cos θ
2ν sin2 θ
1
2B(cos θ −cos3 θ) + 1
6C(1 −cos θ)

.
(8.71)
The ﬁrst term are the streamlines from the Landau solution, while the two last terms are from
the second order terms. Notice one can just put C = 0 in this expression. So compared to the
case before, where we only had F1 and f1 the streamlines are now modiﬁed by a factor containing
B and C. If we look at
F2(θ = 0) = B + C
6
F2

θ = π
2

= −B
2 + C
6 ,
(8.72)
we see that there are 4 limiting cases. First of all the streamlines can of course only point along
the radial vector. If we have B > 0 the streamlines will always point away from the point force,
both in front of and behind it (θ = 0) while at θ = π
2 , the streamlines will point inwards for
B > C
3 and outwards otherwise. If B < 0 the streamlines will point inwards if |B| > C
6 and
outwards otherwise at θ = 0, while at θ = π
2 it again is |B| > C
3 that determines if it point
inwards/outwards. For some values of B and C there therefore must be a transition region
(where the streamlines go from pointing inwards to outwards). To illustrate this we look at
ﬁgure 24. This is at ﬁrst maybe not what we would expect the streamlines for F2 to look like, if
they are taken to be a correcting term due to the fact, that there is a ﬁnite ﬂux coming out of
the NTs, but on the other hand we have not speciﬁed the geometry - in other words: this might
aswell mimic the streamlines of a sphere where the ﬂux is coming in or out in all directions! For
the case of C = 0 the sign of B completely determines the direction of the ﬂow in front of the
NT, while for θ = π
2 this just alters the restriction on B a bit. From a physical point of view, it
is therefore diﬃcult to conclude anything about C from the streamlines.
==PAGE:68==
8
Flow ﬁeld around a point force
62
Figure 24:
Plot of the streamlines for F2.
Upper left: B =
C
4 , upper right: B =
C
2 , lower left:
B = −C
7 , and lower right: B = −C
5 , to illustrate the limiting cases of eqn. (8.72).
8.8
On the subject of boundary conditions and length scales of the
problem
If we try naively to determine B from the geometry, this immediately points to two inter-
esting questions. What we need to proceed is to say something about the geometry. Just at the
edge of the NT the velocity must be the slip velocity vs, and this must equal the θ component
of the velocity ﬁeld at the tip, while the r component must be zero. Thus, if we evaluate these
component at this point we get:
vr

r = R, θ = π
2

= 0 →B = 2
3C = 0
vr(r = θ, θ = π
2 ) = vs →A = 2ν
vsR.
(8.73)
==PAGE:69==
8
Flow ﬁeld around a point force
63
Since this gives B = 0 for C = 0, this hints at something is wrong. Two possibilities are hintet
in the title of this section, and one is the simple geometry used here. We only forced the velocity
ﬁeld to take a certain value in two points, while they in principle should be correct along two
straight lines (the NT walls). This is not necessarily an easy task to fulﬁll, as we will show in the
next section. The second problem, takes its roots in a discussion of the length scale of the whole
system. The inclusion of F2 and f2 in eqns. (8.15) are considered to be small perturbations
compared to the zero order terms F1 and f1. At distances far away from the NT we expect the
Landau solution, but as one gets closer and closer to the NT the higher order terms will come
into play. This is intuitively understandable from the fact that, as we get close the the NT (or
tube) we start to see the exact geometry, of what was just a point force far away. And the exact
geometry is exactly what the higher order terms are to model. What we can do is, we can ask
the question: for what length scale are the two terms of equal size in the Stokes limit? This
characteristic length scale is given by (with C = 0)
L = F2
F1
= A BP2
4ν cos θ.
(8.74)
This means that in the Stokes limit, taking the limit A →∞, F2 dominates over F1 corresponding
to a negligible point force, however for a ﬁnite (but large) A it depends on how large A and B
are. Based on the fact that even higher order terms might come into play close to the NT, and
the fact that the streamlines found for the second order terms, does not qualitatively look like
what one would expect close to the NT, it makes sense to see if we can include even higher order
terms in our expansion. This is the subject of the next section.
8.9
Higher order expansion theory
The appearance of Legendre polynomials in the solution in the Stokes limit, suggests that
the solution can be obtained through the method of spherical harmonic functions. The general
time-invariant Stokes equation reads:
∇2v = 1
η ∇P,
(8.75)
where P is the pressure.
Notice that this is strictly the low Reynolds number limit, and is
therefore the limit A →∞. Taking the divergence on both sides we get
∇2P = 0,
(8.76)
which is the Laplace equation, and has the well-known general solution in spherical coordinates
(with no φ dependence):
P =
∞
X
n=0
vnrnPn(cos θ) + wn
1
rn+1 Pn(cos θ),
(8.77)
where vn and wn are constants and Pn(cos θ) is the n’th Legendre polynomial. Since in our case
the pressure must be zero (or the ambient pressure) at inﬁnity we must have vn = 0 for all n.
Inserting this into the Stokes equation, this becomes very complicated to solve for v. However
a solution was found by Lamb [31]. We get for no φ dependence:
v =
∞
X
n=−∞
∇

cnrnPn(cos θ) + dn
1
rn+1 Pn

+
n + 3
2η(n + 1)(2n + 3)r2∇

vnrnPn(cos θ) + wn
1
rn+1 Pn(cos θ)

−
n
η(n + 1)(2n + 3)r

vnrnPn(cos θ) + wn
1
rn+1 Pn(cos θ)

.
(8.78)
==PAGE:70==
8
Flow ﬁeld around a point force
64
Here cn and dn are constants, and in spherical polar coordinates r = rˆer, the ﬁrst term is the
solution to the homogeneous equation, and the two last terms are a particular solution to the
inhomogeneous equation.
We here write out the solution, where we only keep terms that are a decreasing function
of r (we are modelling the velocity ﬁeld, so all terms that are constant or an increasing function
of distance are non-physical) (notice we have made the substitution: n →−n −1):
v =
∞
X
n=0
∇

dn
1
rn+1 Pn

−
∞
X
n=1
n −2
2ηn(2n −1)r2∇

wn
1
rn+1 Pn(cos θ)

+
n + 1
ηn(2n −1)r

wn
1
rn+1 Pn(cos θ)

.
(8.79)
Note the small error in both Kim and Seppo [32] and Happel and Brenner [33]. Here the ﬁrst
sum starts at n = 1 however, in that case we would be missing a term that goes as
1
r2 , and
exactly this term turns out to be of major importance. However, for ﬂows where there is no sink
or source of particles, their solution it correct, but it is not a general solution to the problem.
To be clear, let us just stress what the diﬀerence is to the case above. Above we expanded the
velocity ﬁeld to second order in 1
r, and made no assumptions on A (and therefore the Reynolds
number) until the end where we found a low Reynolds number solution to this problem. Now,
we start from the Stokes equation and everything we do is therefore in the low Reynolds number
limit, and in the expansion for v we can in principle go to inﬁnite order in 1
r if we wish.
To continue we write out the r and θ components of eqn. (8.79). First we consider the r
component:
vr =
∞
X
n=0
∂r

dn
1
rn+1 Pn

−
∞
X
n=1
n −2
2ηn(2n −1)r2∂r

wn
1
rn+1 Pn

+
n + 1
ηn(2n −1)r

wn
1
rn+1 Pn

.
(8.80)
We will go to order
1
r4 , and it turns out to get all terms to this power, we need to evaluate the
sum up to n = 4. Writing out the sum and collecting all terms of same power in 1
r we get:
vr = 1
r
w1
η P1

+ 1
r2

−d0P0 −w2
2η P2

+ 1
r3

−2d1P1 −6w3
15η P3

+ 1
r4

−3d2P2 −5w4
14η P4

.
(8.81)
If we did not include the n = 0 term in ﬁrst sum above, we would not have the −d0P0. Notice if
we demand C = 0 (from the previous section) this corresponds to d0 = 0. In the previous section
we found that, in the Stokes limit of eqn. (8.27) the solution for vr was vr = F1
r + F2
r2 , where F1
could be written as cos θ (P1) in the Stokes limit (eqn. (8.62)), and F2 could be written as P2
plus a constant (eqn. (8.55)). This is exactly the same we get here, where the 1
r term goes as
P1 and the
1
r2 term goes as P2 plus a constant (P0). Looking at the θ component things get a
little more tricky:
vθ =
∞
X
n=0
1
r ∂θ

dn
1
rn+1 Pn

−
∞
X
n=1
n −2
2ηn(2n −1)r2 1
r ∂θ

wn
1
rn+1 Pn

.
(8.82)
The reason why, is because here all Legendre polynomials are a function of cos θ, so this ex-
pression involves the derivative of these with respect to θ.
We can make the substitution:
∂θ = −sin θ∂ξ, to evaluate the expression (where ξ = cos θ such that: ∂ξ =
∂
∂cos θ). To evaluate
the derivatives of the Legendre polynomials we use the general trick that
∂ξPn(ξ) = nPn−1(ξ) + ξ∂ξPn−1(ξ).
(8.83)
==PAGE:71==
8
Flow ﬁeld around a point force
65
We need the following derivatives in our expansion:
∂ξP0 = 0
∂ξP1 = 1
∂ξP2 = 3P1
∂ξP3 = 3P2 + 2ξP1 + ξ2
∂ξP4 = 4P3 + ξ(3P2 + 2ξP1 + ξ2).
(8.84)
We now have all the ingredients to ﬁnd vθ. Again we go to n = 4, and collecting all terms of
same power in 1
r we get
vθ = 1
r

−w1
2η sin θ

+ 1
r3

−d1 sin θ −w3 sin θ
30η

3P2 + 3 cos2 θ

+ 1
r4

3d2 sin θP1 −w4 sin θ
28η

5P3 + 7
2 cos3 θ)

.
(8.85)
Two interesting aspects are to be considered from this. Considering eqns. (8.81) and (8.85), let
us start comparing the two 1
r terms. To this order we have
vr = w1
η
cos θ
r
,
vθ = −w1
2η
sin θ
r
.
(8.86)
This is exactly the form of the Stokeslet, which is the solution to the Stokes equation assuming
velocity ﬁeld that are inversely proportional to r. From the continuity equation it is easy to see,
that this must have this form, since assuming vr ∼α
r cos θ and vθ ∼β
r sin θ we get:
1
r2 ∂r(r2vr) +
1
r sin θ∂θ(vθ sin θ) = 0.
(8.87)
By insertion we get:
α 1
r2 cos θ + β
1
r sin θ (2 sin θ cos θ) = 0.
(8.88)
This immediately gives the relation α = −2β, which conﬁrms our above calculation and ﬁts
the Stokeslet. The other important fact to notice is the absence of a
1
r2 term in vθ. This what
also what we got above in eqn. (8.15), where we found f2 = 0. However the result above is
much more general, since we found f2 = 0 before we took the limit A →∞, meaning for all
spherical symmetric ﬂows vθ cannot have a
1
r2 in the θ component for all Reynolds numbers.
This calculation now, merely conﬁrms that this is of course all also the case for low Reynolds
numbers, as it should.
8.10
Streamlines and boundary conditions for the multipole expansion
When we take the expansion for the velocity ﬁeld eqn. (8.78) we can as mentioned go to
inﬁnite order. However for now we will just consider the expansion eqns. (8.81) and (8.85) to
third order in 1
r, we have 5 unspeciﬁed parameters: w1, w2, w3, d0, and d1. We know that d0
is somehow related to the volumetric ﬂux, since if we evaluate Q as the spherical integral over
vr this is the only term that is non-zero. But all these constants have to be determined by the
geometry of the system. We will return to this, but ﬁrst let us look at how the streamlines look
qualitatively. The 1
r term is exactly like the Landau solution and the
1
r2 term looks exactly
like our earlier work in ﬁgure 24. However to get a positive Q we can see that we must have
d0 < 0. For the
1
r3 term the parameters to look at are d1 and w3. In ﬁgure 25 we investigate the
streamlines. As can be seen, we keep d1 = −1. The reason is as can be seen in the upper left
picture, we need d1 to be negative to get streamlines that somehow imitate what we could expect
==PAGE:72==
8
Flow ﬁeld around a point force
66
Figure 25: Streamlines corresponding to the
1
r3 terms from eqns. (8.81) and (8.85). For all plots we
have η = 1. Upper left: d1 = −1 and w3 = −1. Upper right: d1 = −1 and w3 = −10. Lower left:
d1 = −1 and w3 = 10. Lower right: d1 = −1 and w3 = −100.
for a ﬂow from a NT. Actually the behaviour in the upper left picture, is a component of the total
velocity ﬁeld around the NT one could expect intuitively. If we go the the limit |d1| >> |w3| we
see no qualitative change to this picture. If we vary w3 from −1 to −10, 10, and −100 we get the
3 other streamline pictures, where there is no diﬀerence for ±w3 for w3 >> d1 (expect for the
sign of streamlines for each ”pole”). Notice that this in a way looks like a multipole expansion.
Physically this does not makes sense for the ﬂow around a NT, so this suggest we must have
d1 > w3. For the
1
r4 terms consider ﬁgure 26. As we go to higher orders, it becomes increasingly
diﬃcult to intuitively guess how the streamlines are supposed to look. In ﬁgure 26, we therefore
just consider some examples of combinations of d2 and w4. One thing we can conclude however,
for the ﬂow to be coming out of the NT it seems we must have d2 < 0 as seen from the two
upper pictures. Another thing we can conclude is that for |w4| >> |d1| we again recover what
could be a term from a multipole expansion, while the streamlines for d2 = ±1 and w4 = ±10
==PAGE:73==
8
Flow ﬁeld around a point force
67
Figure 26: Streamlines corresponding to the
1
r4 terms from eqns. (8.81) and (8.85). For all plots we
have η = 1. Upper left: d2 = 1 and w4 = −1. Upper right: d2 = −1 and w4 = −1. Lower left: d2 = −1
and w4 = −10. Lower right: d2 = −1 and w4 = −100.
looks very strange. We therefore again get the hint that we should have w4 < d2.
Now, consider ﬁgure 27. This is a simple illustration, where we have zoomed all the way in
on the tip of the NT, showing both the NT inner and outer walls (black lines), the water in the
middle and the spherical polar coordinate system (red coordinate system). One way now could
be to go to a certain order in the expansion (in spherical polar coordinates), and transform this
into cylindrical coordinates. This would give us one way to determine the unknown coeﬃcients
up to a certain order, by specifying the boundary conditions for our ﬂow. We cannot transform
the full solution (all terms to inﬁnite order), since we cannot be sure the coordinates are separable
in the new coordinate system. To obtain the full solution in cylindrical coordinates, we would
have to guess the full solution to the Stokes equation in cylindrical coordinates (the same way
Lamb guessed the solution to the Stokes equation in spherical polar coordinates). This is highly
non-trivial, and not a task we will deal with here.
==PAGE:74==
8
Flow ﬁeld around a point force
68
Figure 27: Illustration of the coordinate system used for describing the ﬂow ﬁeld outside the nanotubes.
The black solid lines are the inner and outer boundary of the nanotubes. The blue ﬁlled are is the water
ﬂow inside the nanotubes and the grey ﬁlled areas are between the inner and outer wall of the nanotubes.
R and d denotes the inner radius and wall thickness of the nanotubes respectively. The red coordinate
system is the polar spherical coordinate system, while the blue is the cylindrical coordinate system.
Note the ﬁgure is not to scale, since generally the nanotubes will have d >> R.
First of all we will rewrite the velocity ﬁeld into cylindrical coordinates (the blue coordinate
system), since it is much easier to express the boundary conditions in this coordinate system.
Now we have the velocity ﬁeld written in the general form: v = vr(r, θ)ˆez + vθ(r, θ)ˆeθ. That
means we have to project the r and θ unit vectors onto the unit vectors in the (s, z) basis together
with vr and vθ, where some of both vr and vθ will be projected onto both ˆes and ˆez. In total
the whole transformation takes the form:
v = [vr (ˆer · ˆes) + vθ (ˆeθ · ˆes)] ˆes + [vr (ˆer · ˆez) + vθ (ˆeθ · ˆez)] ˆez,
(8.89)
such that we have:
vs = vr (ˆer · ˆes) + vθ (ˆeθ · ˆes)
(8.90)
vθ = vr (ˆer · ˆez) + vθ (ˆeθ · ˆez) .
(8.91)
To carry out this calculation is a tedious however straightforward calculation, so it is probably
the best for everyone’s health that we spare this derivation here.
The result is the lengthy
expression:
vs =
z
(s2 + z2)3/2

−w1s
2η −
d1s
s2 + z2 −
w3
30η(s2 + z2)

−
5sz
√
s2 + z2 + 3s
2

+
s
(s2 + z2)3/2
w1z
2η −
2d1s
s2 + z2 +
w3
5η(s2 + z2)

5z3
s2 + z2 −3z

−d0 + w2
4η

3z2
s2 + z2 −1

(8.92)
vz = −
s
(s2 + z2)3/2

−w1s
2η −
d1s
s2 + z2 −
w3
30η(s2 + z2)

−
5sz
√
s2 + z2 + 3s
2

+
z
(s2 + z2)3/2
w1z
2η −
2d1s
s2 + z2 +
w3
5η(s2 + z2)

5z3
s2 + z2 −3z

−d0 + w2
4η

3z2
s2 + z2 −1

.
(8.93)
Note that if we make the deﬁnitions
q(s, z) =
1
(s2 + z2)3/2

−w1s
2η −
d1s
s2 + z2 −
w3
30η(s2 + z2)

−
5sz
√
s2 + z2 + 3s
2

,
(8.94)
==PAGE:75==
8
Flow ﬁeld around a point force
69
u(s, z) =
1
(s2 + z2)3/2
w1z
2η −
2d1s
s2 + z2 +
w3
5η(s2 + z2)

5z3
s2 + z2 −3z

−d0 + w2
4η

3z2
s2 + z2 −1

,
(8.95)
this can be written in the simple matrix form:
vs
vz

=
 u(s, z)
q(s, z)
−q(s, z)
u(s, z)

·
s
z

.
(8.96)
To deﬁne constraints on the unknown parameters we again consult ﬁgure 27. It is obvious that
vs must be zero on the NT walls, and that vz must assume the slip velocity at the inner wall
(which we in this section will denote vsi). However it raises the interesting question about what
the tangential velocity is at the outer wall? The quick answer would be that we just use the
no-slip boundary condition on the outer wall, however as we have seen with CNTs where we
had great slip velocities inside the CNTs it is by no means essential what boundary condition to
apply at the outside of CNTs. Therefore denoting the (possible) slip velocity on the outer wall
vso we have the four boundary conditions:
vs(R, z)|z<0 = 0
vz(R, z)|z<0 = vsi
vs(R + d, z)|z<0 = 0
vz(R + d, z)|z<0 = vso.
(8.97)
The fact that we do not know what is happening at the outer surface of the NTs is of course a
diﬃculty. Also the fact that these boundary conditions have to be fulﬁlled, not just for a given z
but for all negative z makes this a rather complicated problem to solve. That we now have come
to a stop analytically, this is an argument to continue by looking at the problem from a numerical
point of view. Many interesting correlations can be investigated numerically, for instance one
could make a thorough analysis of how the ﬂow ﬁeld changes with the slip conditions in eqn.
(8.97) around diﬀerent geometries. To keep our head to the current problem we will speciﬁcally
investigate how the slip conditions matter for a chosen experiment in [1], and connect this to
the Lamb expansion to higher orders we made above.
==PAGE:76==
9
COMSOL simulation of the ﬂow ﬁeld around a nanotube in a water reservoir
70
9
COMSOL simulation of the ﬂow ﬁeld around a nanotube
in a water reservoir
The motivation of this chapter is divided in two. One is that in the previous chapter we
found that, to continue our analytical approach to the problem, we need to solve the boundary
value problem stated by eqns (8.97). It could therefore be interesting to see how the velocity
ﬁeld depends on this boundary condition. As mentioned in chapter 3, in the experiment in [1],
the determination of the slip lengths involves a COMSOL modelling of the system, where the
slip length on the inside of the NT is varied, until a ﬁt with experiments is found for some
parameters in the outer reservoir. In this study, the boundary condition on the outside of the
NT is (for all simulations) a no-slip condition. No justiﬁcation for this assumption is given.
It would therefore be interesting to imitate such a COMSOL simulation, to see the eﬀect of a
ﬁnite slip length on the outside wall of the NT, on the far-ﬁeld velocity ﬁeld. The second is, in
ﬁgures 25 and 26 (and also for the
1
r2 terms), we found that many streamlines can be realized
depending on how one chooses the coeﬃcients in the Lamb expansion in eqns. (8.81 and 8.85).
We will therefore in the end of the chapter numerically investigate, how these higher order terms
qualitatively should look like. This will also give us, at what length scales the Landau solution
is a good approximation to the point force problem.
In this section we will therefore set up a COMSOL simulation, to investigate the depen-
dence of the velocity ﬁeld on the boundary condition set on the outside of the NT. We here
solve the geometry using COMSOL build-in set of equations for laminar ﬂows.
This solves
the time-independent Navier-Stokes equation, the continuity equation, and the incompressibility
condition on a deﬁned geometry.
9.1
Geometry and mesh
The geometry we will consider is sketched in ﬁgure 28. The chosen length scales of the
box and the NT (Lnt = 68µm, Lbox = 200µm, and wbox = 200µm) are chosen to be of the same
size as the COMSOL simulation in [1]. It is therefore a model of an inﬁnitely long tube into a
reservoir. Speciﬁcally we will model the NT from the experiment in [1], with a radius of 17 nm
and slip length of 235 nm, meaning we have R = 17 nm. In this section we will also take the
determined α for this exact NT by [1]. We do not model the nanocapillary here, however since
the opening angle of the nanocapillary is only about 5 degrees, and it is shown in [1], that α is
only weakly dependent on small perturbations to the geometry, we will take this approximation
to be good.
As deﬁned in ﬁgure 28, 3 of the 4 box walls are modelled as actual walls with a no-slip
condition, while the last wall is an outlet. We put no boundary condition on this outlet, but it
let the water have the possibility to ﬂow across this surface. This is to imitate the actual outlet
in the experiment. An inlet is put at the very beginning of the NT, where we deﬁne an average
ﬂow speed. This average ﬂow speed is determined from the point force in the actual experiment,
found from the α discussed above. This relation is seen in eqn. (3.9). If more time were given,
a more accurate simulation taking the small change in geometry due to the nanocapillary into
account. Additionally one could make the momentum integral from the previous chapter, and
in this way ﬁnd what average inlet ﬂow speed, correspond to a certain point force. This would
be another approximation to ﬁnd the point force, but is much more time-consuming since one
would here have to run several simulations with diﬀerent inlet velocities until a match is found.
However, in future studies it could be interesting to do this simulation, and verify one gets the
same results we will obtain here.
The COMSOL solver uses the Finite Element Method. This means that the set of equations
is solved on a discrete number of points. One therefore ﬁrst needs to deﬁne the so-called mesh,
on which the system is solved. We will use the build-in function that this is an axis symmetric
==PAGE:77==
9
COMSOL simulation of the ﬂow ﬁeld around a nanotube in a water reservoir
71
Figure 28: An illustration of the domain on which we make the COMSOL analysis. Notice especially
the deﬁnition of the inner and outer wall of the nanotube. The purple line gives the axis of symmetry
(so on the actual simulation we only see the right side of this ﬁgure). Notice the relative size of the
nanotube and the box is not to scale. The nanotube radius is 17 nm, while wbox is 200 µm.
ﬂow. This means that we only need to deﬁne one half of the whole geometry in ﬁgure 28 around
the symmetry axis. We want the ﬁnest mesh at the very tip of the NT, where we expect the
gradients in velocity and pressure ﬁelds to be highest, and the mesh can be more rough at large
distance from the NT tip. The mesh close to the tip can be seen in ﬁgure 29.
Figure 29: Left: A close-up of the tip of the nanotube. The white part is the nanotube wall, the
deﬁnition of the inner and outer wall is shown. The inner part of the nanotube is the area with the
square mesh and the point 68 µm on the y-axis cooresponds to the nanotube tip. This close-up spans
0.08 x 0.08 µm. Right: A wider close-up of the nanotube. Notice how the mesh gets more rough further
away from the nanotube tip. This close-up spans 0.7 x 0.7 µm. The nanotube radius is 17 nm.
Before we continue, one thing is important to discuss. The mesh deﬁned in ﬁgure 29 is not
unique - we could have deﬁned a lot of other meshes with diﬀerence shape and density of mesh
points. One therefore needs to show, that the solution is independent of the chosen mesh, where
==PAGE:78==
9
COMSOL simulation of the ﬂow ﬁeld around a nanotube in a water reservoir
72
the gradients are largest. This was done by, evaluating the magnitude of the computed velocity
along two lines. On line went from the center of the NT tip and 50 nm in the vertical direction.
The other also started at the center of the NT tip, and went 0.3 µm in the horizontal direction.
The velocity proﬁles along both lines were computed varying both the quality of the mesh in
the outside reservoir and the quality of the mesh inside the NT. When we both increased and
decreased the mesh quality (relative to the one in ﬁgure 29) the computed velocity proﬁles did
not change.
When discussing the ﬂow ﬁeld around the NT, we have all the time described the far-ﬁeld
velocity proﬁle as the form of those seen in ﬁgures 9 and 10. However, keep in mind that the
actual experiment is done in a box as seen in ﬁgure 28. If we look at the velocity ﬁeld at much
larger distances, namely distances of the order of the box size, we see something diﬀerent as seen
in ﬁgure 30.
Figure 30: 80 x 100 µm cut-out of the whole box. Close to the nanotube tip we recognize the Landau
jet, while further away we see the forced rotation of the whole ﬂuid, due to the the hard box walls.
Here we have zoomed out so the plot covers about 80 x 100 µm. The NT tip is located at
the position (0, 68 µm). We see that for this example when we are about 20-30 µm from the
NT tip, we recognize the Landau jet, however because we have solid walls at 3 sides of the box,
the whole ﬂuid of course has to rotate in some manner. Admitted, we do not get much physics
out of this small detail, but it is a beautiful plot.
9.2
Poiseuille ﬂow and the Landau jet
Before we investigate the inﬂuence of the slip on the outer NT wall, we ﬁrst check that
we get the well-known Poiseuille ﬂow inside the NT and the Landau jet outside the NT. To do
this we investigate the case where we have no-slip on both the inner NT wall (bi = 0) and the
outer NT wall (bo = 0). In ﬁgure 31 we see that we get the expect form of the Poiseuille proﬁle
inside the tube as expected, and in ﬁgure 32 we see that on µm scale we get the Landau jet
proﬁle. Notice in these plots the colormap denotes the magnitude of the velocity (some colobars
are logarithmic but this is denoted in the ﬁgure text), the black lines are streamlines, and the
==PAGE:79==
9
COMSOL simulation of the ﬂow ﬁeld around a nanotube in a water reservoir
73
read arrows show the direction of the ﬂow. Notice especially the small wake going downwards,
close to the outer NT wall in ﬁgure 32, where we have the no-slip condition.
Figure 31: Left: The ﬂow inside and close to the nanotube tip. The colormap gives the magnitude
of the velocity ﬁeld. a no-slip condition is put on both the inner and outer walls. Right: The same
plot as on the left, but with a logarithmic colorbar to more clearly show the velocity proﬁle outside the
nanotube. Notice that, for all colorplots in this section, when there are large regions with uniform dark
red color, this does not mean there is a uniform velocity. It simply means that the velocity is at least
the top value in the colorbar.
Figure 32: The ﬂow ﬁeld around the nanotube tip. The colormap gives the magnitude of the velocity,
the black lines are streamlines, and the red arrows show the direction of the ﬂow. Notice this ﬂow looks
just like the Landau jet in ﬁgure 9 (the experimentally measured ﬂow ﬁeld), where it is also seen the
velocity ﬁeld smaller behind the jet than in front.
==PAGE:80==
9
COMSOL simulation of the ﬂow ﬁeld around a nanotube in a water reservoir
74
9.3
Eﬀect of slip on outer nanotube wall
We now get to the main motivation of this chapter, namely to study the dependence of
the velocity ﬁeld around the NT on the boundary condition put on the outer NT wall. To do
this, we plot the magnitude of the velocity along a line. This line starts at the center of the NT,
10 nm in front of the tip (at the point (68.009 µm, 9 nm)), and goes in the horizontal direction
(along the θ = π
2 direction) and out to a distance of 10 µm from the NT tip (to the point (68.009
µm, 10 µm)). See for instance ﬁgure 32 for the scaling. This is a long distance, and the velocity
will change several orders of magnitude on this length scale. However, if we plot this on a log-log
plot, we are able to see small features as is seen in ﬁgure 33.
Figure 33: The magnitude of the velocity along the in text mentioned line as a function of length. The
5 plots are for bo = 0 nm (blue), bo = 5 nm (green), bo = 15 nm (red), bo = 20 nm (cyan), and bo = 235
nm (purple).
For all simulations the slip length on the inner NT wall is bi = 235 nm, and the slip length
on the outer wall is takes the values bo = [0, 5, 15, 20, 235] nm. These 5 simulations corresponds
to the 5 plots in ﬁgure 33. Notice we have marked the two positions walli (the intersection
with the inner wall, if a line parallel to the inner wall is continued into the reservoir) and wallo
(same as the inner wall, just for the outer wall) on the right graph, where we can expect to
see a diﬀerence due to the local geometry of the NT. In fact, we especially see the diﬀerence
at wallo, where the drop in velocity for the no-slip case is much larger, than even for a small
slip length. What we are really after is, how the far-ﬁeld velocity is aﬀected - especially in the
right most region, since it is at these length scales the velocity proﬁle in experiments can be
measured, using tracer particles, as seen in ﬁgure 9. In this region we see only a minor diﬀerence
when we go from bo = 0 nm to bo = 20 nm (only a few percent diﬀerence), and is something
that would be undetectable in an actual experiment. For a very high outer slip length one does
however see a diﬀerence, even in the far-ﬁeld. However, since in the experiment, most of the
outer part is actually the glass nanocapillary, so we expect this to be a very rough surface with
a very small slip length. It therefore seem fair to conclude, that the implicit assumption made
==PAGE:81==
9
COMSOL simulation of the ﬂow ﬁeld around a nanotube in a water reservoir
75
in [1], that bo does not aﬀect the far-ﬁeld velocity ﬁeld seem to a fair assumption. From an
intuitive point of view this also makes sense. This is because, when we change the slip length
inside the NT comparable to the radius, this is a huge increase compared to the characteristic
length scale inside the NT, which is of order of the radius (17 nm). However, when we make
the same change in slip length on the outside of the NT, here the characteristic length scale is
of order of the length of the NT or maybe even the length scale of the box, which both are >>
235 nm. Therefore it makes sense that, this change in bo only have a small aﬀect on the far-ﬁeld
velocity ﬁeld.
9.4
Comparison with analytical result from Lamb expansion
We now move on to see if we can say something about the higher order terms, in the
expansion given by Lamb in eqns. (8.81 and 8.85). As we showed in ﬁgures 25 and 26 (and
also for the
1
r2 terms), many diﬀerent ﬂow ﬁeld can be realized depending on the value of the
constants in the expansion. What we will do here, is for the geometry considered in the above
section, see if we can get a hint at how the higher order terms actually qualitatively look like.
Throughout this whole section we will have bi = 235 nm and bo = 0 nm, since we argued that
in any case bo should be small, and for small bo the diﬀerence is very small except for a very
localized region around the NT wall. To do this, we ﬁrst plot the velocity ﬁeld and streamlines
for the Landau solution (the ﬁrst order term in the expansion) on the geometry considered. This
is shown in ﬁgure 34. Here we do not take the geometry into account, but is merely a replot of
what we have shown earlier for instance in ﬁgure 10, but now with the magnitude of the velocity
ﬁeld shown by the colorbar.
Figure 34: Left: The analytical expression for the Landau jet plotted on top of the nanotube geometry
in COMSOL. Right: Same as left, but on a larger length scale.
We see that this ﬂow is symmetric around the horizontal axis as it should. The point force
used for this velocity ﬁeld is determined from the average ﬂow velocity, applied at the inlet in the
simulation in the previous section. This correlation can be found from eqn. (3.9). As discussed
above this should be a valid approximation, since we use the exact α from [1] for this NT, and
even though we neglect the nanocapillary this will only give a minor diﬀerence to the actual
geometry, and it is shown α almost stays constant for diﬀerent geometries. What is next done
is, the velocity ﬁeld from the Landau solution (ﬁgure 34) is subtracted from the full COMSOL
solution from the previous section (ﬁgure 32). This should leave us with the velocity ﬁeld of
only the
1
r2 ,
1
r3 , ..., and above terms in the Lamb expansion. The resulting velocity ﬁeld from
this is seen in ﬁgure 35 (left).
==PAGE:82==
9
COMSOL simulation of the ﬂow ﬁeld around a nanotube in a water reservoir
76
Figure 35: Left: The diﬀerence between the full COMSOL solution, and the analytical expression for
the Landau jet. That is, this is ﬁgure 34 substracted from ﬁgure 32. This will therefore give us an
approximation to the higher order terms in the Lamb solution. Right: An example of the higher order
terms for the Lamb expression with: d1 = −1, d2 = −0.05, w2 = −1, w3 = −7, and w4 = −0.1, all other
coeﬃcients are set to zero which are those corresponding to the ﬁrst order terms. Here the coeﬃcients
for the
1
r2 ,
1
r3 , and
1
r4 terms are ﬁtted to imitate that of the left ﬁgure. The green region shows where
they qualitatively ﬁt, while the red region are where there is a qualitative diﬀerence.
Here we see that the diﬀerence is quite large close to the tip of the NT, which is also what
we expect, since the Landau solution should not be valid so close to the point force. Close to the
NT we see two regions. One is just at the front of the NT, where there is an almost spherical
bulge, and radially away from this the diﬀerence goes to zero. This diﬀerence in just in front of
the NT tip, is simply the evidence that in this region the higher order terms dominates over the
Landau solution. In other words, in the far-ﬁeld the full COMSOL simulation converges towards
the Landau solution as we expect. Just at the side of the outer NT wall, we see this elliptically
shaped region that goes downwards, where the diﬀerence is also quite large. While the Landau
solution is symmetric around the horizontal axis, we see that from the exact symmetry in ﬁgure
32, that the part below the NT tip (so that is below 68 µm), the region is somehow screened by
the ﬁnite extent of the NT wall. The diﬀerence seen in ﬁgure 35 in this region, is therefore most
likely ascribed to the actual geometry.
If this is the higher order terms in the Lamb expansion we see here, then we should be able
to qualitative get the streamlines by ﬁtting the coeﬃcients in the Lamb expression. If we put:
d1 = −1, d2 = −0.05, w2 = −1, w3 = −7, and w4 = −0.1, and all other coeﬃcients are set
to zero which are those corresponding to the ﬁrst order terms, we get the streamlines shown in
ﬁgure 35 (right). For the green shaded region, this is seen to ﬁt really well with the diﬀerence
plot in ﬁgure 35 (left), while for the red shaded region the two plots do not agree. This supports
our idea, that the large diﬀerence is more do to the exact geometry of the system instead of the
higher order terms being large, or it is a sign that we need even higher order terms to model
this eﬀect.
Our results in this section conﬁrms two very important aspects.
It conﬁrms that the
inherent assumption made by [1] (and not checked by the same study), that the slip condition
put on the outside of the NT, does not inﬂuence the far-ﬁeld velocity ﬁeld. Second, we show
that the Landau jet assumed in [1], to eventually determine the slip length inside the NT, is
a valid approximation for r ≳1µm, while lower distance r higher order terms in the Lamb
expression are non-negligible (which is also not showed in the original study). This also means,
that for future experiments, if the experimental methods are improved to measure velocity ﬁelds
==PAGE:83==
9
COMSOL simulation of the ﬂow ﬁeld around a nanotube in a water reservoir
77
at shorter length scales, one need to be careful about just using the Landau jet as a model at all
length scales. Figure 35 underlines that even the Lamb expansion fails (to
1
r4 order) to correctly
describe the ﬂow ﬁeld at large angles θ. These are all observations that are important to consider,
when designing future experiments and models. This also emphasize the great results that can
be achieved, when a thorough analytical understand, is combined with numerical work, since we
would not be able to get to this result without both point of views.
==PAGE:84==
10
Conclusion and outlook
78
10
Conclusion and outlook
The analysis of water ﬂow through nanotubes is of major importance, since the experi-
mental results points toward a so far unknown eﬀect in carbon nanotubes. Here it was in the
literature shown experimentally that the slip length is radius dependent for radii below about 40
nm for CNTs, while no such radius dependence was found for BNNTs. Since CNTs and BNNTs
are similar in both geometry and lattice structure, it was pointed to the electronic properties of
CNTs to be the reason for discrepancy.
In this work we showed that, looking at the electronic properties of CNTs, such a diﬀerence
between CNTs and BNNTs would have to found in the electronic DOS, if we assumed the water-
wall interaction to be of van der Waals form. Taking the DOS at the Fermi level this is radius
dependent for large radii, however when we took the ﬁnite temperature of the system into
account, we found that the DOS was constant independent of both radius and chirality for
R ≳18 nm, while for smaller radii the interaction potential would fall of for metallic CNTs,
while increasing for semi-conducting CNTs. We concluded that this could not account for radius
dependent slip length found in experiments, so that this work cannot support the claim that the
eﬀect seen experimentally is due to the metallic properties of CNTs.
In the second part, we studied the ﬂow ﬁeld around a NT. Here we found that, contrary
to the statement by Landau and Rumer, no easy relation between the volumetric ﬂow rate out
of the NT and the velocity ﬁeld around the NT could be found, by expanding the velocity ﬁeld
in terms of the radial coordinate. This is unfortunate, since this would greatly enhance our
capability to correctly measure the slip length inside the NTs. Great analytical work was done,
to expand the work done by Rumer on the second order expansion of the velocity ﬁeld. We here
saw how one can put additional restrictions on F2, we questioned the validity of the claim that
Q can be found by this method, and we found an exact solution for F2 in the Stokes limit. To
the knowledge of this author, none of this have previously been shown in the literature. We
also found two important results by taken the actual geometry of the NT into account. First we
found that, the assumption made in the experimental work [1], that the slip condition put on the
outside of the NT, does not inﬂuence the far-ﬁeld velocity ﬁeld, where the actual measurements
are done. Second, it was shown that the assumption also made in [1], that in the far-ﬁeld the NT
can be considered as a point force, and only the 1
r terms have to be considered in the expansion
in the velocity ﬁelds have to be considered. Here we found that higher order terms are negligible
for r ≳1µm. Both of these results conﬁrms the method used to correctly determine the slip
length inside the NTs. The apparent radius dependent slip length seen for CNTs, is therefore
still an open question, that needs to be answered.
To further support the theoretical result in this thesis, that the electronic properties of
CNTs cannot account for the radius dependent slip length, one could make a full DFT calculation
taking the exact geometry of a CNT, and then vary the radius and chirality to imitate the
experimental results. However, this is computationally an enormous task due to the large size
of the systems that would need to be considered. Instead, a similar experiment as [1] could
be made, where we now speciﬁcally choose CNTs with radii ranging from 5-20 nm. The CNT
should be designed such that we start with a MWCNT with an outer radius corresponding to,
the desired inner radius. The CNT is then covered in a stabilizing material, and all inner CNT
walls are burned of by applying an electrical current. In this way we end up with a SWCNT
with a large radius. After the ﬂuidic experiment, the chirality can then be determined by a
simple electrical resistance measurement. We do this with both a metallic and semi-conducting
CNT, and one should then be able to see in the slip length the eﬀect of DOS. This is one way
to experimentally check, if the electronic properties have any inﬂuence on the slip length.
Since the above experiment should in principal be do-able, it is a very diﬃcult experiment to do.
Another way to check this, could be to have two atomically smooth metal surfaces, with a ﬂuid
in between. If the upper metal plate is then dragged relative to the lower one, a Couette ﬂow
is set up, and one can then measure the force the lower plate feels. By varying the plates, with
==PAGE:85==
10
Conclusion and outlook
79
metals with other electronic properties this could also be one way to determine the dependence
of slip length on the electronic properties of the wall. However, in this experiment one would
not be able to see the eﬀect of curvature in CNTs.
==PAGE:86==
11
Appendix A
80
11
Appendix A
Imagine an arbitrarily shaped channel with constant cross section, which is translational
invariant in the x direction. The x direction is in the direction that is orthogonal to the surface
with constant cross section, and is the direction along which we assume the ﬂuid to ﬂow. Then
let y and z constitute the standard right handed coordinate system. The channel has length
L, and we consider the starting situation with no diﬀerential pressure between the two ends:
P(0) = P(L) = P0 i.e. the water is not moving relative to the channel, and the net force on
the water is zero. We now adiabatically turn on a diﬀerential pressure P(0) = P0 + ∆P, such
that there will be a ﬂow of water in the positive x-direction. Immediately after the diﬀerential
pressure is applied, the system is not in equilibrium, since there is a net force in the x-direction.
We will not consider this state of the system, but a discussion of the starting and stopping of
Couette and Poiseuille ﬂow can be found in [5]. After some ﬁnite time, the ﬂow has relaxed to
an equilibrium state, so it has (depending on the exact geometry) a well-deﬁned velocity proﬁle
inside of the channel that is invariant in time.
To determine the velocity proﬁle inside of the channel we start out by considering the
incompressible Navier-Stokes equation:
ρ[∂t + (v(r, t) · ∇)]v(r, t) = −∇P + η∇2v(r, t) + fext,
(11.1)
where ρ is the density of water, η is the dynamic viscosity, v(r, t) is the velocity, and fext are
any external forces there might be present. This can however for the system in consideration
be greatly simpliﬁed.
First of all we notice that there are no external forces acting on the
ﬂuid (the gravitational force is cancelled by the hydrodynamic pressure), and the velocity ﬂow
is not time-dependent in equilibrium. Furthermore we know that the velocity ﬁeld only has a
x-component, and that this can only depend on the y and z coordinate due to the ﬂow being
translational invariant in the x-direction. The second term on the left-hand side must therefore
be zero, since when acting with the nabla operator on the velocity ﬁeld, we will get terms of the
form ∂xvx(y, z), ∂yvy(y, z), and ∂zvz(y, z), but since vx(y, z) has no x-dependence and vy(y, z)
and vz(y, z) are both zero this whole term is zero. Eqn. (11.1) therefore reduces to:
∂xP(x) = η

∂2
x + ∂2
y

vx(y, z).
(11.2)
Now on the left-hand side we only have a dependence on the x-coordinate, while on the right-
hand side we only have a dependence on the y and z coordinates. The solution is therefore found
be equating both sides with a constant C as it is done in [5]. However a more intuitive approach
is to, look at the change in pressure from x = 0 to x = L: P(L) −P(0) = −∆P, and this
change happens over a length L, so ∂xP(x) = −∆P
L , and eqn. (11.2) becomes
−∆P
L
= η

∂2
x + ∂2
y

vx(y, z),
(11.3)
for the ﬂow within the channel. For the ﬂow just at the solid wall of the channel, the ﬂuid
velocity must be zero do to the no-slip boundary condition:
vx(y, z)wall = 0.
(11.4)
Eqns. (11.2) and (11.4) together completely determines the velocity proﬁle for a given geometry.
We will now focus our attention on the geometry interesting for this study, namely a
circular tube in the (y, z) plane, with radius R, where the ﬂow is along the x-direction. The
easiest way to obtain this is by going back to eqn. (11.2) and equating both sides with the
constant −C:
∂xP(x) = −C,
η[∂2
x + ∂2
y]vx(y, z) = −C.
(11.5)
==PAGE:87==
11
Appendix A
81
The last equation can be expressed in cylindrical coordinates (see for instance [6]):
∂xP(x) = −C,
η 1
r
d
dr

rdvx(r)
dr

= −C.
(11.6)
By integration the solutions can be seen take the form:
P(x) = P0 −Cx,
vx(r) = −C
4η r2 + A logr + B,
(11.7)
where P0 is the pressure at x = 0, and A and B are constants to be determined by the boundary
conditions. At the center of the channel (r = 0) the velocity must be ﬁnite, so we see that we
must have A = 0. Further at the wall (r = R) the velocity must also be zero due to the no-slip
boundary condition. This gives B =
CR2
4η :
P(x) = P0 −Cx,
vx(r) = C
4η
 R2 −r2
.
(11.8)
The coeﬃcient C can now be found from the condition P(L) = P0 + ∆P yielding: C =
∆P
L ,
so we ﬁnally, in cartesian coordinates, obtain the velocity and pressure proﬁle inside the circular
tube:
P(x) = P0 −∆P
L x,
vx(y, z) = ∆P
4Lη
 R2 −y2 −z2
,
(11.9)
so that is a parabolic shape. The volumetric ﬂow rate can now be found by integrating the
velocity over the cross-sectional area:
Q =
Z 2π
0
Z R
0
∆P
4Lη
 R2 −r2
drdθ = πR4
8ηL ∆P.
(11.10)
It is interesting to see, that even though the cross-sectional area only scales with the R2, the
ﬂow rate scales with the R4, while the average ﬂow velocity scales with R2: vx,ave =
Q
πR2 ∼R2.
==PAGE:88==
12
Appendix B
82
12
Appendix B
We will now again consider the above Poiseuille ﬂow in a circular geometry, and compute
the velocity proﬁle and ﬂow rate assuming a slip condition on the wall. The whole formalism
developed for the no-slip case above is the same, until eqn. (11.9), where instead of the radius
R2, that was determined from the no-slip boundary condition, we now for the slip case have an
eﬀective radius Reff, that has to be determined from the slip boundary condition (called the
Navier boundary condition):
vx(R) = −b∂rvx(R).
(12.1)
Eqn. (11.9) with R = Reff becomes:
vx(r) = C
4η
 R2
eff −r2
,
(12.2)
and invoking the slip Navier boundary condition, this becomes:
−b∂rvx(R) = ∆P
4ηL(R2
eff −R2).
(12.3)
By inserting ∂rvx(R) = −∆P
2ηLR, we get
b ∆P
2ηLR = ∆P
4ηL(R2
eff −R2).
(12.4)
Isolating Reff:
Reff = R
r
1 + 2 b
R,
(12.5)
which is now inserted into eqn. (12.2), to obtain the velocity proﬁle for a cylindrical tube in the
case of a ﬁnite slip at the boundary:
vx(r) = ∆P
4ηL

1 + 2 b
R

R2 −r2

.
(12.6)
The volumetric ﬂow rate can now be found by integrating the velocity proﬁle over the cross-
sectional area as above, from which we get
Q =
π
8ηL∆P
 R4 + 4bR3
.
(12.7)
Both eqns. (12.6) and (12.7) are seen to take the form of eqns. (11.9) and (11.10) in the limit
b →0 as they should.
==PAGE:89==
13
Appendix C
83
13
Appendix C
Rewriting eqn. (4.10) from the main text in terms of the velocity v(t) = ∂x
∂t , we get:
m∂v
∂t = −ξv(t) + R(t).
(13.1)
The solution of this standard diﬀerential equation, can be found in any standard math book:
v(t) = 1
m
Z t
−∞
R(t1)e
R t1
t
ξ
m dt′dt1 = 1
m
Z t
−∞
R(t1)e−(t−t1) ξ
m dt1.
(13.2)
We want to ﬁnd the time correlation between the random force R(t). To do that we start out
by calculating the time correlation of the velocity v(t):
⟨v(t)v(t)⟩=
1
m2
Z t
−∞
Z t
−∞
e−(t−t1) m
ξ e−(t−t2) m
ξ R(t1)R(t2)

.
(13.3)
Since all parameters are constant with respect to the thermal average, we only need to take the
thermal average of the random force:
⟨v(t)v(t)⟩=
1
m2
Z t
−∞
Z t
−∞
e−(t−t1) m
ξ e−(t−t2) m
ξ ⟨R(t1)R(t2)⟩dt1dt2,
(13.4)
but from eqn. (4.9) this is exactly M times the delta function:
⟨v(t)v(t)⟩=
1
m2
Z t
−∞
Z t
−∞
e−(t−t1) m
ξ e−(t−t2) m
ξ Mδ(t1−t2)dt1dt2 = M
m2
Z t
−∞
e−(t−t1) m
ξ e−(t−t1) m
ξ dt1.
(13.5)
This last integral can now easily be solve:
⟨v(t)v(t)⟩= A
m2
Z t
−∞
e−2(t−t1) m
ξ dt1 = M
2mξ .
(13.6)
==PAGE:90==
14
Appendix D
84
14
Appendix D
Derivation of eqns. (8.19) - (8.24)
We will now go through (in general) the same approach used to derive the relations for F1
and f1 for the more complicated case where we have included the higher order terms (F2 and
f2). To start our analysis of this system, we insert the velocity components into the continuity
equation in spherical coordinates to obtain (assuming constant density and no time-dependence
of any ﬁelds):
1
r2 ∂r(ρr2vr) +
1
r sin θ∂θ(ρvθ sin θ) +
1
r sin θ∂φ(ρvφ) = 0
1
r2 ∂r(rF1 + F2) +
1
r sin θ∂θ
f1 sin θ
r
+ f2 sin θ
r2

= 0.
(14.1)
Collecting terms of same power in r we get
1
r2 (F1 + f1 cot θ + f ′
1) + 1
r3 (f2 cot θ + f ′
2) = 0.
(14.2)
We will return to this equation later. The second step is to consider the r and θ of the Navier-
Stokes equation. The r component of the Navier-Stokes equation, without the φ dependence has
the general form:
vr∂rvr + vθ
r ∂θvr −v2
θ
r = −1
ρ∂rP + ν

∂r
 1
r2 ∂r(r2vr)

+
1
r2 sin θ∂θ (sin θ∂θvr) −
2
r2 sin θ∂θ(vθ sin θ)

vr∂rvr + vθ
r ∂θvr −v2
θ
r = −1
ρ∂rP + ν

∂r
 1
r2 ∂r(r2vr)

+ 1
r2 ∂2
θvr + cot θ
r2
∂θvr −2 cot θ
r2
vθ −2
r2 ∂θvθ

.
(14.3)
Inserting the velocity components we get:
F1
r + F2
r2

∂r
F1
r + F2
r2

+
f1
r2 + f2
r3

∂θ
F1
r + F2
r2

−1
r
f1
r + f2
r2
2
= −∂r
g1
r2 + g2
r3

+ ν

∂r
 1
r2 ∂r(rF1)

+ 1
r2 ∂2
θ
F1
r + F2
r

+cot θ
r2
∂θ
F1
r + F2
r

−2 cot θ
r2
f1
r + f2
r

−2
r2 ∂θ
f1
r + f2
r

.
(14.4)
Again collecting terms of same power in r at both sides we get:
1
r3
 −F 2
1 + F ′
1f1 −f 2
1

+ 1
r4 (−3F1F2 + F ′
2f1 + f2F ′
1 −2f1f2) + 1
r5
 −2F 2
2 + F ′
2f2 −f 2
2

(14.5)
= 1
r3 (2g1 + ν(−2F1 + F ′′
1 + F ′
1 cot θ −2f1 cot θ −2f ′
1))
(14.6)
+ 1
r4 (3g2 + ν(F ′′
2 + F ′
2 cot θ −2f2 cot θ −2f ′
2)) .
(14.7)
From the continuity eq. (14.2) we have that F1 + f1 cot θ + f ′
1 = 0 and f2 cot θ + f ′
2, so the
1
r3
and
1
r4 terms on the right hand side simpliﬁes:
1
r3
 −F 2
1 + F ′
1f1 −f 2
1

+ 1
r4 (−3F1F2 + F ′
2f1 + f2F ′
1 −2f1f2) + 1
r5
 −2F 2
2 + F ′
2f2 −f 2
2

= 1
r3 (2g1 + ν(F ′′
1 + F ′
1 cot θ)) + 1
r4 (3g2 + ν(F ′′
2 + F ′
2 cot θ)) .
(14.8)
==PAGE:91==
14
Appendix D
85
The
1
r3 and
1
r4 terms give us two equations:
f1F ′
1 −F 2
1 −f 2
1 = 2g1 + ν(F ′′
1 + F ′
1 cot θ)
(14.9)
f1F ′
2 + f2F ′
1 −3F1F2 −2f1f2 = 3g2 + ν(F ′′
2 + F ′
2 cot θ) .
(14.10)
The θ component of the Navier-Stokes equation reads:
vr∂rvθ + 1
r vθ∂θvθ + vrvθ
r
= −1
ρr∂θP + ν
 1
r2 ∂r
 r2∂rvθ

+ 1
r2 ∂θ

1
sin θ∂θ(vθ sin θ)

+ 2
r2 ∂θvr

.
(14.11)
Inserting the velocity components we obtain:
F1
r + F2
r2

∂r
f1
r + f2
r2

+ 1
r
f1
r + f2
r2

∂θ
f1
r + f2
r2

+ 1
r
F1
r + F2
r2
 f1
r + f2
r2

= −1
r ∂θ
g1
r2 + g2
r3

+ ν
 1
r2 ∂r

−2f2
r

+ 1
r2 ∂θ

1
sin θ∂θ sin θ
f1
r + f2
r2

+ 2
r2 ∂θ
F1
r + F2
r2

.
(14.12)
Notice that the left hand side greatly simpliﬁes due to a lot of identical terms with opposite sign.
Collecting terms of same power in r:
1
r3 (f1f ′
1) + 1
r4 (−F1f2 + f1f ′
2 + f ′
1f2) + 1
r5 (f2f ′
2 −F2f2)
= 1
r3 (−g′
1 + ν(f ′′
1 + 2F ′
1 −f1 + f ′
1 cot θ −f1 cot2 θ))
+ 1
r4 (−g′
2 + ν(2f2 + f ′′
2 + 2F ′
2 −f2 + f ′
2 cot θ −f2 cot2 θ)).
(14.13)
From eqn. (14.2) we know that f1 cot θ = −F1 −f ′
1 and f2 cot θ = −f ′
2. We can use this
to simplify the cot2 terms. To proceed we take the derivative of the
1
r2 term in the continuity
equation (14.2):
∂θ(F1 + f1 cot θ + f ′
1) = f ′′
1 + F ′
1 −f1 + F1 cot θ + 2f ′
1 cot θ = 0,
(14.14)
and of the
1
r3 term:
∂θ(f2 cot θ + f ′
2) = f ′′
2 + 2f ′
2 cot θ + f2 = 0.
(14.15)
We can use these two expression to simplify the
1
r3 term and the
1
r4 term on the right hand side
above. We get:
1
r3 f1f ′
1 + 1
r4 (−F1f2 + f1f ′
2 + f ′
1f2) + 1
r5 (f2f ′
2 −F2f2)
= 1
r3 (−g′
1 + νF ′
1) + 1
r4 (−g′
2 + ν(2f2 + 2F ′
2)).
(14.16)
The
1
r3 and
1
r4 terms gives us two equations:
f1f ′
1 = −g′
1 + νF ′
1
(14.17)
−F1f2 + f1f ′
2 + f ′
1f2 = −g′
2 + ν(2f2 + 2F ′
2) .
(14.18)
==PAGE:92==
14
Appendix D
86
Together with the
1
r2 and
1
r3 terms in the continuity equation eqn. (14.2):
F1f1 cot θ + f ′
1 = 0
(14.19)
f ′
2 + f2 cot θ = 0 .
(14.20)
The 6 boxed equations gives us our set of equations. Here it is important to notice, that while
the Landau solution in eqns. (8.3) is an exact solution to the problem, the solution we have
obtained here is only approximate, since we have thrown away terms of order
1
r5 .
Wronskian for an inhomogeneous diﬀerential equation
The second homogeneous solution to eqn. (8.44) can be obtained through their Wronskian,
which is deﬁned to be
W(z) = h1(z)h′
2(z) −h′
1(z)h2(z),
(14.21)
and we therefore have
W ′(z) = h1(z)h′′
2(z) −h′′
1(z)h2(z).
(14.22)
In this example we consider a diﬀerential equation of the general form (for the homogeneous
solution)
h′′(z) + a(z)h′(z) + b(z)h(z) = 0.
(14.23)
Inserting: h′′
1(z) = a(z)h′
1(z) + b(z)h1(z) and h′′
2(z) = a(z)h′
2(z) + b(z)h2(z), we get
W ′(z) = ah1(z)h′
2(z) −ah′
1(z)h2(z) = aW(z).
(14.24)
We therefore see that the Wronskian must be of the form
W(z) = e
R
a(z′)dz′.
(14.25)
If we know one solution to the homogeneous equation, the second solution can therefore in
principle be obtained from
e
R
a(z′)dz′ = h1(z)h′
2(z) −h′
1(z)h2(z),
(14.26)
where we in our case have: a(z) = −2

z
1−z2 +
1
A−z

.
Proof of the freedom of B and C
We here determine each order in ϵ from eqn. (8.54). The ﬁrst order in ϵ gives
R′′
1 + cot θ R′
1 + 6R1 = −2 sin θR′
0 −12 cos θ R0.
(14.27)
We know that R0 = B0P2 + C0
6 so by insertion the right hand side can be rewritten:
R′′
1 + cot θ R′
1 + 6R1 = −2 sin θ(−3 sin θ cos θ)B0 −12 cos θ (1
2B0(3 cos2 θ −1) + C0)
= 6B0 cos θ (1 −cos2 θ) −12 cos θ (3
2B0 cos2 θ −1
2B0 + C0)
= −1
2(48B0 cos3 θ −24(B0 −C0) cos θ).
(14.28)
==PAGE:93==
14
Appendix D
87
We see that the right hand side has the form of the two Legendre polynomials: P1 = cos θ and
P3 = 1
2(5 cos3 θ −3 cos θ), while the left hand side again has the form of the Legendre equation.
Our hope is that since we have the Legendre equation for P2 on the left hand side and a sum of
Legendre polynomials on the right hand side, this puts restrictions on B and C that enable us
to determine them. If we deﬁne
L2 = d2
dθ2 + cot θ d
dθ + 6
(14.29)
as an operator, and say that the right hand side can be written as a sum: αP3 + βP1, the above
can be written as
L2R1 = α1P3 + β1P1.
(14.30)
It now seems reasonable to make the ansatz: R1 = P
l alPl, we now just need to determine the
allowed al’s. Adding and subtracting l(l + 1) on the left hand side, and inserting our guess for
R1 we get:
[L2 + l(l + 1) −l(l + 1)]
X
l
alPl = α1P3 + β1P1
X
l
 d2
dθ2 + cot θ d
dθ + l(l + 1) + 6 −l(l + 1)

alPl = α1P3 + β1P1
X
l
[6 −l(l + 1)]alPl = α1P3 + β1P1.
(14.31)
The only way for this to be true is if l = 1 ∨3, giving
a1 = β1
4 ,
a3 = −α1
6 ,
R1 = β1
4 P1 −α1
6 P3.
(14.32)
Even though we now know the form of R1, this unfortunately puts no restrictions on B and C,
since we can choose α1 and β1 as we like. We will not gain much insight looking at second order
in ϵ, except a short comment on the volumetric ﬂux Q. Evaluating the second order in ϵ we get
the relation
R′′
2 +cot θ R′
2 +6R2 = −2 sin θ R′
1 −12 cos θ R1 −2 sin θ cos θ R′
0 −(18 cos2 θ −6)R0 −2
π Q,
(14.33)
where we will denote: −2
πQ = C2. Again one could in principle insert our relations for R0 =
B0P2 + C0
6 and R1 = β
4 P1 −α
6 P3, however instead of making this exhaustive calculation, one
would quickly realize that the ﬁnal expression will have terms of cos θ, cos2 θ, cos3 θ, and cos4 θ,
and some constant terms related to α, β, B0, C0, and C2, and the right hand side must therefore
be a sum of P1, P2, P3, and P4 (P4 contains cos4 θ) plus a constant related to C2, and by making
a similar analysis as that for R1 we would get a relation of the form
R2 = α2P4 + β2P3 + γ2P2 + σ2P1 + C2.
(14.34)
==PAGE:94==
15
Appendix E
88
15
Appendix E
n
m
R [nm]
Integrated DOS [1/eV]
Metallic or semi-conducting
219
219
14.85
1.45
M
220
220
14.92
1.44
M
221
221
14.99
1.43
M
222
222
15.05
1.43
M
223
223
15.12
1.42
M
249
249
16.89
1.27
M
250
250
16.95
1.27
M
251
251
17.02
1.26
M
252
252
17.09
1.26
M
253
253
17.16
1.25
M
484
484
32.82
1.49
M
485
485
32.89
1.49
M
486
486
32.96
1.49
M
487
487
33.03
1.49
M
488
488
33.09
1.50
M
735
735
49.84
1.29
M
736
736
49.91
1.34
M
737
737
49.98
1.27
M
738
738
50.05
1.29
M
739
739
50.11
1.32
M
206
206
13.97
1.54
M
214
214
14.51
1.48
M
229
229
15.52
1.38
M
236
236
16.00
1.34
M
236
236
16.00
1.34
M
243
243
16.48
1.30
M
258
258
17.49
1.23
M
265
265
17.97
1.20
M
472
472
32.01
1.49
M
479
479
32.48
1.49
M
494
494
33.49
1.48
M
501
501
33.87
1.48
M
723
723
49.03
1.18
M
730
730
49.50
1.19
M
745
745
50.52
1.36
M
752
752
50.99
1.36
M
Table 3: List if integrated DOS for speciﬁc (n,m) indices together with radius. Armchair CNTs.
==PAGE:95==
15
Appendix E
89
n
m
R [nm]
Integrated DOS [1/eV]
Metallic or semi-conducting
74
74
5.02
4.28
M
89
89
6.03
3.55
M
103
103
6.98
3.07
M
118
118
8.00
2.68
M
133
133
9.01
2.38
M
148
148
10.04
2.14
M
295
295
20.00
1.07
M
369
369
25.02
1.11
M
590
590
40.01
1.36
M
664
664
45.03
1.25
M
Table 4: Continuation of table on previous page.
==PAGE:96==
15
Appendix E
90
n
m
R [nm]
Integrated DOS [1/eV]
Metallic or semi-conducting
381
0
14.92
1.44
M
382
0
14.96
1.19
S
383
0
14.99
1.19
S
384
0
15.03
1.43
M
385
0
15.07
1.17
S
432
0
16.91
1.27
M
433
0
16.95
1.40
S
434
0
16.99
1.77
S
435
0
17.03
1.26
M
436
0
17.07
1.39
S
841
0
32.92
1.19
S
842
0
32.97
1.20
S
843
0
33.01
1.56
M
844
0
33.04
1.22
S
845
0
33.08
1.29
S
1276
0
49.96
1.38
S
1277
0
49.99
1.42
S
1278
0
50.04
1.30
M
1279
0
50.08
1.38
S
1280
0
50.11
1.41
S
358
0
14.02
1.24
S
370
0
14.49
1.23
S
396
0
15.50
1.39
M
408
0
15.97
1.34
M
408
0
15.97
1.34
M
422
0
16.52
1.19
S
447
0
17.50
1.23
M
459
0
17.97
1.20
M
818
0
32.03
1.21
S
830
0
32.49
1.22
S
856
0
33.51
1.35
S
868
0
33.98
1.59
S
1252
0
49.02
1.38
S
1265
0
49.53
1.40
S
1290
0
50.51
1.32
M
1303
0
51.02
1.37
S
Table 5: List if integrated DOS for speciﬁc (n,m) indices together with radius. Zigzag CNTs.
==PAGE:97==
15
Appendix E
91
n
m
R [nm]
Integrated DOS [1/eV]
Metallic or semi-conducting
128
0
5.01
0
S
129
0
5.05
4.25
M
153
0
5.99
3.59
M
154
0
6.03
0
S
179
0
7.01
0
S
180
0
7.04
3.05
M
204
0
7.99
2.69
M
205
0
8.03
0
S
230
0
9.01
0.93
S
231
0
9.04
2.37
M
255
0
9.98
2.15
M
256
0
10.02
1.19
S
510
0
19.97
1.08
M
511
0
20.01
1.57
S
638
0
24.98
1.44
S
639
0
25.02
1.13
M
1022
0
40.01
1.42
S
1023
0
40.05
1.28
M
1149
0
44.99
1.36
M
1150
0
45.02
1.31
S
Table 6: Continuation of table on previous page.
==PAGE:98==
References
92
References
[1] Secchi, E., Marbach, S., Migu´es, A., Stein, D., Siria, A., & Bocquet, L. Massive radius-
dependent ﬂow slippage in carbon nanotubes. Nature 537, 210-213 (2016)
[2] Majumder, M., Chopra, N., Andrews, R. & Hinds, B. J. Nanoscale hydrodynamics: enhanced
ﬂow in carbon nanotubes. Nature 438, 44 (2005); erratum 438, 930 (2005)
[3] Holt, J. K. et al. Fast mass transport through sub-2-nanometer carbon nanotubes. Science
312, 1034–1037 (2006)
[4] Whitby, M., Cagnon, L., Thanou, M. & Quirke, N. Enhanced ﬂuid ﬂow through nanoscale
carbon pipes. Nano Lett. 8, 2632–2637 (2008)
[5] Bruus, H. (2008) Theoretical Microﬂuidics, Oxford University Press (New York)
[6] Lautrup, B. (2011) Physics of Continuous Mattter, Taylor & Francis Group (New York)
[7] Lauga, E., Brenner, M., & Stone, H. (2007) Springer handbook of experimental ﬂuid me-
chanics, Chap. 19. 1219-1240: Microﬂuidics: the no-slip boundary condition, Springer Berlin
Heidelberg (Berlin)
[8] Charlier, J-C. et al. Electronic and transport properties of nanotube, Reviews of Modern
Physics, 79, 677-726, (2007)
[9] Toman´ek, D. et al. Electronic structure of single-wall, multiwall, and ﬁlled carbon nanotubes,
Physical Review B, 55, 20, 13980-13988, (1997)
[10] Laird, E. A et al. Quantum transport in carbon nanotubes, Reviews of Modern Physics, 87,
3, 703-764, (2015)
[11] Cohen, M. L., Zettl, A. The physics of boron nitride nanotubes, Physics Today, 63, 34-38,
(2010)
[12] Mintmire, J, W., White, C, T., Universal Density of States for Carbon Nanotubes, Physical
Review Letters, 81, 12, 2506-2509, (1998)
[13] Castro Neto, A. H. et al. The electronic properties of graphene, Reviews of Modern Physics,
81, 109-162, (2009)
[14] Falk, K., Bocquet, L., et al. Molecular Origin of Fast Water Transport in Carbon Nanotube
Membranes: Superlubricity versus Curvature Dependent Friction, Nano lett. 10, 4067-4073,
(2010)
[15] Thomas, J., A. and McGaughey, J., H., Reassessing Fast Water Transport Through Carbon
Nanotubes, Nano lett. 8, 9, 2788-2793, (2008)
[16] Tocci, G., Joly, L., and Michaelides, A. Friction of Water on Graphene and Hexagonal
Boron Nitride from Ab Initio Methods: Very Diﬀerent Slippage Despite Very Similar Interface
Structures, Nano lett. 14, 6872-6877, (2014)
[17] Kubo, R., The ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem, Rep. Prog. Phys. 29 255, (1966)
[18] Doi, M. (2013) Soft Matter Physics, Oxford University Press (New York)
[19] Bocquet, L. and Barrat, J-L., Hydrodynamic boundary conditions, correlation functions,
and Kubo relations for conﬁned ﬂuids, Physycal Review E, 49, 4, 3079-3091, (1994)
[20] Hoover, W., G., Computational Statistical Mechanics, Elsevier, Amsterdam 1991
==PAGE:99==
References
93
[21] Landau, L., D. and Lifshitz, E., M. (1987) second edition, Fluid Mechanics, Course of
Theoretical Physics, Volume 6, Elsevier
[22] Squire, H. B. 1951 The Round Laminar Jet. Q. J. Mech. Appl. Math. 4, 321–329.
[23] Todd, B., D. and Daivis, P., J. (2017), Nonequilibrium Molecular Dynamics: Theory, Al-
gorithms and Applications, University Printing House, Cambridge
[24] Petravic, J. and Harrowell, P. On the equilibrium calculation of the friction coeﬃcient for
liquid slip against a wall, J. Chem. Phys. 127, 174706, (2007)
[25] Thompson, P., A. and Troian, S., M. A general boundary condition for liquid ﬂow at solid
surfaces, Nature, 389, 360-362, (1997)
[26] Israelachvili, J., N. (2011), Intermolecular and Surface Forces, Elsevir
[27] Grosso, G. and Parravicini, G. (2013), Solid State Physics, Academic Press
[28] Lautrup, B. (2011) second edition, Physics of Continuous Matter, Taylor and Francis Group
[29] Rumer, Y., B., Prikladnaya matematika i mekhanika 16, 255, (1952) (in Russian)
[30] Christensen, O. (2012), Diﬀerentialligninger og uendelige rækker, DTU Matematik
[31] Lamb, H. (1993) sixth edition, Hydrodynamics, Cambridge University Press
[32] Kim, S. and Seppo, J., K. (2005), Microhydrodynamics, Principles and Selected Applica-
tions, Dover Publiations, Mineola, New York
[33] Happel, J. and Brenner, H. (1983), Low Reynolds number hydrodynamics, Matinus Nijhoﬀ
Publishers, The Hague
[34] Abraham, J. et al. Tunable sieving of ions using graphene oxide membranes, Nature Nan-
otechnology 12, 546–550 (2017)
[35] The Graphene Council Newsletter January 2017, Water Desalination Using Graphene,
HTML: http://www.thegraphenecouncil.org/?page=Desalination
[36] Batchelor, G., K. (2000), An Introduction to Fluid Dynamics, Cambridge University Press
[37] Fornasiero, f., et al. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0710437105
[38] Mintmire, J., W. et al, J. Phys. Chem. Solids 54, 1835 (1993)
