==PAGE:1==
Bootstrapping training data for rare disease
information retrieval
DTU Compute
Samuel. G. Schelde s113041
2 / 6 / 2017
primary supervisor - Ole Winther, co-supervisor - Dan Tito
Svenstrup, external co-supervisor - Jonas Meinertz Hansen
==PAGE:2==
Bootstrapping training data for rare disease information retrieval
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby,
Denmark Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
Chapter 0
1
==PAGE:3==
1 Summary (Danish)
Dette project har handlet om at ﬁnde en metode til at udvide et data korpus der
indeholder information omkring sjældne sygdomme, for ﬁrmaet FindZebra.
Der ﬁndes en masse data omkring disse sygsomme frit tilgængelige p˚a internetet,
de eneste forhindringer for at f˚a adgang til denne information er at ﬁnde den og
sorterer i den. Det er hvad dette projekt prøver at opn˚a. Metoden der er brugt
til at ﬁnde information omkring disse sygdomme omhandler at bruge en annonym
søgemasking, i dette tilfælde bruges søgemaskinen duckduckgo.com. Herfra kan man
samle relevante urls fra det emne man ønsker, det er her sjældne sygdoms synonymer
eftersom de returnerede urls indeholder information om de respektive sygdomme.
N˚ar man udfører et search p˚a duckduckgo.com f˚ar man s˚a en række urls tilbage med
information. Efter denne procedure kan man begynde at scrappe HTML data fra
url’erne, Det der er interessant for dette projekt er alt text / paragraﬀer data der
ﬁndes p˚a disse HTML sider.
Det tager dog en stor mængde tid at udføre s˚a web scrapping p˚a s˚a mange urls som
der bliveer arbejdet med i dette project, derfor blev der lavet en række optimeringer
for at f˚a en rimelig køre tid. En af ulemperne ved at sample sin information fra mere
eller mindre ukendte urls som her, er at man opn˚ar en masse “skralde“ data. Alts˚a
data der ikke er ønsket i data korpuset. Der var derfor brug for en metode til at
udsortere skralde dataen, til det form˚al bruges der en text classiﬁcations algoritme
/ computer lærings model til at gendkende mønstre i dataen, derved udsortere den
uønskede data.
Dette skridt fjerner det meste af den uønskede data og efterlader os med et resultat
der best˚ar af et data korpus med meget lidt skrald og information fra over hele
internet.
2
==PAGE:4==
2 Summary (English)
This project has been about ﬁnding a method for expanding a data corpus containing
information about various rare diseases for the company FindZebra.
A lot of information on these diseases is freely obtainable on the internet, the only
barrier to getting it is to ﬁnd it and sort it, this is what this project aims to do.
The method used to ﬁnd the disease information available is to use an unbiased /
non-tracking search engine, in this case duckduckgo.com. You can collect relevant
urls on various subjects, here rare disease synonyms are interesting to us since the
urls they result in should contain information on said diseases. A search for one of
the disease synonyms is simply made and you get a number of urls back, hopefully
containing information on the disease. After this procedure you can then move on
to scrape information from these urls. The information that is interesting is more
speciﬁcally the text / paragraphs available on the pages loaded from the urls.
The process of scrapping a huge amount of web pages like this is notably time
consuming and a number of optimization’s has to be made. One of the problems
of obtaining information this way is that it contains a lot of “garbage“ information
aka. information that is unwanted in the data corpus. A way of sorting away the
garbage information is therefore needed. Training a text classiﬁcation algorithm
or computer learning method to recognize patterns and to discard the unwanted
information, this step weeds out a large part of the unwanted information.
The end result is a fairly clean data corpus with information from all around the
net on all the various disease.
3
==PAGE:5==
3 Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis deals with Bootstrapping training data for rare disease information re-
trieval
The thesis consists of 42 pages including appendix and biblography.
Lyngby, 02-June-2017
Samuel. G. Schelde
4
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Summary (Danish)
2
2
Summary (English)
3
3
Preface
4
4
Introduction
6
5
Preliminary
7
6
Method
8
6.1
Data retrieval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
6.2
Database management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
6.3
Text extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
6.4
Text classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
7
Theory
13
7.1
Multi-threading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
7.2
Machine Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
7.2.1
Naive-bayes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
7.2.2
SGD Classiﬁer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
7.2.3
Passive aggressive classiﬁer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
7.2.4
Perceptron
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
7.3
SOLR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
8
Implementation
19
8.1
Code structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
8.2
Data retrieval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
8.2.1
multi-threading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
8.3
Database implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
8.4
Text classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
9
Results
30
9.1
HTML content extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
9.2
Text classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
9.3
Data corpus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
10 Future work
37
11 Conclusion
39
A Appendix
41
5
==PAGE:7==
4 Introduction
The problem that this project deals with is that there is a lot of information available
on the internet about various rare diseases and it would be useful to maintain a
database of this information, to search through it and present it in a readable manner
for people / users who might have an interest in it. I have therefore for the last
5 months been working on a project called bootstrapping training data for
rare disease retrieval for the company FindZebra whom develops and maintains
a search engine specialized in ﬁnding rare diseases.
The FindZebra search tool is powered by open source search engine such as SOLR
and uses a large corpus of disease descriptions to optimize its searches.
This project involves expanding that data corpus to further increase the search
accuracy of FindZebra. Said in other words FindZebra search tool is more precise
in its searches the more data it has to work with, because more data usually means
a higher chance of ﬁnding what you’re looking for.
The method which will be used to achieve this is web scrapping, database manage-
ment and text classiﬁcation.
To ﬁnd relevant information about the diﬀerent rare diseases I have been provided
with access to a database containing names/synonyms and cui’s (id’s) of the rele-
vant diseases. I will also utilize an ”anonymous” search engine called duckduckgo
with the disease synonyms to ﬁnd relevant web pages to scrape. This however is not
enough to extract data in itself
The problem with just scrapping relevant web pages is that the output is cluttered
with information that is of no relevancy to the actual disease that you want to
extract information about. That is where text classiﬁcation can be useful to classify
paragraphs as either useful or ”garbage” which could be advertisements, contact
information or credentials etc.
In the end I will compare my resulting data corpus to FindZebras data corpus.
6
==PAGE:8==
5 Preliminary
When I went to work with this project I had limited knowledge of certain subjects
I knew would be of use.
I will therefore discuss several of them in this paper.
These subjects include but are not limited to web scrapping, databases and text
classiﬁcation, these three are the most important to the project and I consider these
subjects vital to the understanding how the project was implemented.
One of the requirements of doing this project for FindZebra was that it needed to be
coded in python, since this is the language used for their own tools. When I started
working on the project, I had a very little knowledge of python coding and had to
pick it up while implementing. I will not discuss the workings of Python since I
will assume that the reader has a certain coding knowledge already I will however
discuss certain code snippets where this knowledge is required.
All code from the project can be found in below git link.
https://github.com/snoogyball/Bootstrapping-training-data-for-rare-diseaseinformation-
retrieval
7
==PAGE:9==
6 Method
In this section i will discuss my methods for achieving the overall goal of the re-
port and the reasoning behind those methods. This section will be divided into
subsections which i found important enough to discuss in their own chapter.
6.1
Data retrieval
The basic idea behind this project is that there is a lot of information available on
the internet on rare diseases. All this information can be used by FindZebras search
tool which uses the search engine solr. It can use this information to optimize its
searches. To ﬁnd this information we have to know where to look, the theory is
that we can utilize a search engine to search for synonyms of these rare diseases to
retrieve urls which we can extract data from.
This is in fact the backbone of collecting data in the project. A site called duck-
duckgo is used to search for each disease and in return we get a large number urls
for each disease synonyms, many of these urls may be on other subjects or may
be in other languages but that’s okay for now, this problem will be addressed later
on.
The data we want from each of these urls are just the raw HTML content of the
web page returned when looking the url up. The raw HTML content is basically
everything you would see if you loaded the page in a browser. We are of course not
interested in all of this, but the data is stored for later processing in a local database
(see next chapter).
The reasoning behind using duckduckgo is that in order to get a completely impartial
search results on each of the disease synonyms, an anonymous search is needed and
duckduckgo provides that. What that means is that we need a search that does not
track your previous search history and alters the search results to ﬁt into what it
predicts you are looking for. Search engines like google or bing tracks your search
history and gives you search results based on them. This could if not accounted
8
==PAGE:10==
Bootstrapping training data for rare disease information retrieval
for result in searches that are not directly connected to the actual subject that
are searched on. since duckduckgo as previously mentioned does not do this, it is
therefore a very good ﬁt for the project.
The ﬁrst attempt with duckduckgo was to use their API to retrieve urls. Unfortu-
nately their API was not available for what they call quick searches (normal searches)
at the moment of implementation and writing, so urls could not be retrieved this
way.
A normal search or quick search as they call it should yield a result similar to do-
ing a search on their own web page. So instead of using their API a work around
where a regular request to their web page was performed was used. From there on a
regular expression can be used to extract links from the HTML page resulting from
the request. This method is in ways similar to visiting their web page and looking
at the actual links from a normal search. The only drawback is that each link is
yielded four times so only each fourth link is needed.
Figure 6.1: Visualizing URL extraction
Before simplifying the procedure the method that was tested for url retrieval was a
lot more comprehensive. The idea was to use duckduckgo for url retrieval just like
the current implementation but then afterwards collecting all the diﬀerent domains
found in the searches instead of just the urls.
A web web crawler or often called spider would then be used to crawl through all the
domains found, looking for synonyms of disease stop words on each page storing the
ones that had references, this method was ditched after a while as the implication
Chapter 6
9
==PAGE:11==
Bootstrapping training data for rare disease information retrieval
on the time it would take to scrape all urls was immense and it would later be clear
that the simple method of just scrapping the urls from a search was enough in the
end.
The idea behind this method of extraction was to thoroughly search for all available
data on any domain that could have relevant information, the theory behind it was
that if a web page had information about one rare disease it was likely to contain
information on other rare disease, it would therefore be beneﬁcial to scrape the
entire domain.
The problem as mentioned before was the time implications, some of the domains
found via duckduckgo such as wikipedia are massive and since the scrapping of
HTML data was already the limiting factor it simply did not make sense to make
it such more of a time factor compared to the gains.
This method might have had some merit, if a way of severely limiting the branching
factor of the spider via a heuristic maybe, could be implemented without damaging
the information collecting which was the foremost reason behind the idea.
To actually request the data from the urls a python module called urllib.request was
used. This module allows the user to access servers content as if doing it by browser.
It was chosen because of its relatively ease of use, sometimes though servers will not
allow what they can see is a program trying to access their content.
This can be for a number of reasons such as them having an access API or simply
because they do not wish for a bot to have access. It is in any case an hindrance
for the purpose of this project and it did mean that fair number of websites denied
access for the project program. You can however fake the use of a web browser which
will allow access to a larger percentile of the denied web pages but there will still
be a number of web pages that cannot be accessed for various reason. The results
from the web scrapping can be found under the results section where you can see
the exact percentile of pages that denied access.
The request of the HTML content is as mentioned above the biggest time consumer
and thus the limiting factor of running the program. When the program sends a
request to a server it will wait up to several seconds for a response from said server.
When you got upwards of hundred of thousands requests to send it can quickly
become impossible to do without optimization’s or precautions.
This part of the program is therefore ran manually in smaller more manageable
batches that still take a couple of hours each to complete. A couple of optimizations
most importantly running the request module of the code in a multi-threaded envi-
ronment is taken to speed it up considerable (Read multi-threading section). I chose
to multi-thread it instead of for example running the program on multiple PCs at a
time, partly because it was the easiest approach since i only have one PC available
and also since the database for this project is local to said PC.
Chapter 6
10
==PAGE:12==
Bootstrapping training data for rare disease information retrieval
6.2
Database management
A database is used to store all the data that is retrieved under the web scrapping.
There is a couple of reasons to use a database over other forms of data management.
Most importantly databases are optimized to store large amount of data eﬃciently,
in a manner where it is easy to extract certain wanted data. Databases can be
easily ported to other PC’s / environments which makes it easy to export your
data. Databases can furthermore be accessed by multiple people at the same time,
indexing, saving and deleting is also very easy tasks to perform.
One of the downsides of using a database is that you have to have it running while
your application is running, furthermore insight into how to construct a database
schema, how to set the database up and how to access it afterwards is required.
To create a database I have made use of tools called MySQL and MySQL Workbench
for database management.
MySQL is used to start and run a database on the
required machine. MySQL Workbench is a visual tool for database management,
schema creation and administration. MySQL was chosen because it is a free solution
that can scale pretty well with lots of data. While in this project that might not be
that relevant it could be in the future, it was also chosen because it is the solution
that FindZebra uses.
I have chosen to set up a local database because of the following reasons; logging of
data is faster on a local database since latency is non existent, no need for internet
access to access the database, since I am the only user connecting to it within this
project this is perfectly viable, lastly a local database is fast to set up. If the project
where to be taken further this database should be migrated to a server based location
so other people / services could access it.
6.3
Text extraction
At this point in the process there is a database of raw HTML content sorted by the
disease id of the disease that was used to search for the HTML data, to sort the
useful information from the not so useful information we ﬁrst have to extract actual
text from the HTML content, this can be done with regular languages and involves
taking all data encapsulated by special HTML tags from the HTML content.
To do this a library called beautifulsoup is applied and combined with regex. With
this method all actual text can be extracted from the HTML content. This text
is not enough however, there is a lot of information that is completely irrelevant
for the project. This is because the web pages we have scrapped is in no manner
Chapter 6
11
==PAGE:13==
Bootstrapping training data for rare disease information retrieval
actually set up for easy data retrieval. Often they are cluttered with advertisement,
information or in some cases nothing at all in other cases the information needed is
hidden beyond other URLs in which case the web page is not of much use.
6.4
Text classiﬁcation
The next step is therefore to identify and remove the information that is not useful.
For this purpose a text classiﬁer algorithm is used. A text classiﬁer is usually a
machine learning algorithm set up to work with text. The classiﬁcation algorithm
is trained with a basic smaller set of texts along with the notion of which class each
text belong. In this case only two diﬀerent texts exist ones that have value to the
search engine and the ones that contain no information of value.
A text classiﬁcation algorithm was chosen to sort the data because they are relatively
cheap in performance and they will often be really accurate if they are provided
the right amount of training data. Such machine learning algorithms have already
proven their worth in several diﬀerent software ﬁelds like spam ﬁlters, document
classiﬁcation etc. [1]
There are several diﬀerent types of text identiﬁers available. Several of them have
been tried and their performance have been compared against each other, this will
be discussed further in the results section where individual performance metrics of
the diﬀerent classiﬁers can be found. In the end though the factor which has the
biggest impact on the performance of these algorithms are the training sets.
FindZebra has beforehand gathered their disease information by using custom ﬁtted
data extractors, meaning that each data extractor was ﬁtted to gather data from a
single web page. This has the upside that the data you get back doesn’t need to
be sorted. This method also limits the amount of information that you can extract
on the other hand, as you are limited to a few web pages. These web pages for
example wikipedia can be really big and provide tons of information but there is
still a lot of information that is missed on smaller lesser known web pages. Using a
text classiﬁer can circumvent the need for using custom data extractors by looking
at each paragraph of data individually and then classify it as useful or not. With
this method it is therefore possible to extract more data than beforehand and do it
faster as there is no need to write custom extactors any more.
Chapter 6
12
==PAGE:14==
7 Theory
In this chapter I will discuss some of the theory behind the methods used in the
project.
7.1
Multi-threading
Multi-threading is used for optimizing the process of requesting HTML data from
urls scrapped from various domains. Multi-threading in general can be complicated
for non-linear / non-deterministic processes.
In this project however it is a linear problem we’re dealing with, so that makes
multi-threading a relatively straight forward process if you know what your doing.
The idea behind multi-threading is as the name suggest to run multiple threads
within a program instead of just a single thread. This creates an environment were
the computer running the program can utilize more than one thread to do calcu-
lations in parallel. A thread usual exists as a part of a process. The beneﬁts of
multi-threading a program is ﬁrst and foremost performance. If a problem con-
sists of a vector of calculations, you can look at the problem somewhat like a GPU
(Graphics Processing Unit) solves rendering problems, A GPU is so fast at rendering
because it can calculate every pixel in parallel.
The idea behind multi-threading problems are the same. You usually have a vector
of problems needing to be processed with an end goal in mind.
In front-end applications multi-threading can increase the responsiveness of the pro-
gram by removing heavy calculations from the main thread.
Multi-threading a program also allows the CPU to make better use of its cores to run
a program and delivers (as mentioned above) a greater performance boost. One of
the drawbacks behind multi-threading is that everything needs to be synchronized.
In this project this is not a big issue since the program can just start x amount of
threads and wait for all threads to ﬁnish their calculations, in other programs where
threads run independently this can be a wider issue.
Threads also needs to make mutually exclusive operations to prevent two threads ac-
cessing and modifying data simultaneously. Most programming languages have built
in data-structures that satisﬁes this requirement often making use of semaphores,
13
==PAGE:15==
Bootstrapping training data for rare disease information retrieval
semaphores are a type of data type that controls access to other data by ﬂagging it.
[2]
7.2
Machine Learning
Machine learning is used for classifying text, this section will discuss how the diﬀerent
text classifying methods that are tested works and the theory behind them. Reason
for using a text classifying method can be found in the previous section about
methodology. I will in this chapter put a bigger emphasis on explaining how the
naive-bayes model works since this was the model that seemingly performed the best
when fed enough training data (see results chapter).
All machine learning in this project will be supervised since we have a known input
that we want the algorithm to learn from, and later use that for classifying further
data. All results from the tests of these machine learning algorithms can be found
under the results section.
7.2.1
Naive-bayes
The naive-bayes model is the ﬁrst one that was tested, Very roughly explained this
model calculates the probability of each feature being present in a certain class and
then again the probability of data belonging to a certain class when predicting.
Before you can do any training on the data you have to convert the data into a
readable form for the classiﬁcation model, this is called feature extraction in this
case we will use a feature extraction model called bag of words, this model works
with data in the form of text / strings in all sizes. As the name implies the extraction
takes all the occurrences of words in the given text and counts them, the end result
is a feature vector the length of the amount of unique words in the text, this process
is done because the data that is needed to be classiﬁed needs to be in a readable
format for the classifying algorithms to read. [3]
Chapter 7
14
==PAGE:16==
Bootstrapping training data for rare disease information retrieval
However the number of each unique words in larger texts would be heavily inﬂated
compared to smaller texts, simply because there would more of them. We there-
fore go from occurrences to frequencies, this is done by dividing the number of
occurrences of a word by the total number of words in a text. The end result is a
normalized feature vector that we can use to train the classiﬁcation model with. So
to sum the feature extraction method up we can represent each paragraph / docu-
ment as a vector of a normalized word count, in the end the naive bayes algorithm
takes this feature model and indexes it according to what class each word is found
belonging to.
The limitations of the bag of words model is that it will disregard multi-word ex-
pressions, misspellings and word synonyms. this is because it views each word as
a unique standalone word, this can be rectiﬁed by for example viewing every word
as a pair of two and then do the necessary calculations to match which in the end
would result in a much larger vocabulary. Another approach could be to counter
misspellings looking at each word as a list of characters and calculate the likeness
of two words instead of the very binary method of needing two words to be exactly
equal.
This method could be supporting the already set up model, as the rate of mis-
spellings should be rather low it should have a limited impact but it still might be
worth looking at.
The naive bayes method works on an assumption of conditional independence mean-
ing that it assumes that all words makes sense in a standalone scenario, this might
not be true in the real world but it works well under these circumstances. When the
algorithm is ﬁtting the features that are extracted for it, it calculates the probability
that each word belongs to a certain class, in the terms of this paper it would either
be the class of valid or not-valid, so 1 or 0. When you want to know what class a
text belongs to, the calculation below is used to calculate the probability that the
Chapter 7
15
==PAGE:17==
Bootstrapping training data for rare disease information retrieval
text belongs to each of the trained classes.
P(text|class) = P(class)
Qlength(text)
i=1
P(ai = Wk|class)
The calculation basically states that the probability that a text belongs to a class
is the probability that each word in the text belongs to that class multiplied. This
version of naive bayes is actually called multinomial naive bayes and is the default
choice for text classiﬁcation. [4]
7.2.2
SGD Classiﬁer
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) is a logistic regression model, this means in
practical terms that it will try ﬁtting data provided to it into its model and then
later try to predict in which class of the model new data is located (see ﬁgure 7.1).
It does this by approximating a minimum or maximum by iterating over the ﬁtting
data. [5]
One of the advantages in SGD lies in its eﬃciency in contrast to a normal gradi-
ent descent method, The run time of ﬁtting an SGD classiﬁer is basically scaling
linearly.
Figure 7.1: Picture taken from http://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/sgd.html
SGD ﬁts the training data iterating over each training point and ﬁtting its approx-
imation to the data
w := w −η∇Qi(w). [5]
Chapter 7
16
==PAGE:18==
Bootstrapping training data for rare disease information retrieval
The algorithm will perform the above calculations from all of the training data before
doing a adjustment to its approximation, it will do this n times until a suitable
approximation has been reached, n is a number set before running. [6] [7]
The algorithm of gradient descent itself attempts to minimize a function given by
a set of parameters in this case these parameters are our training data and the
function equals linear regression.
This approach can be a bit time consuming as gradient descent will iterate over
every data point to make an adjustment were as stochastic gradient descent will
gradually do adjustments as it iterates over the data set, as of now this does not
have a big impact on the run-time performance in this project, this is because the
training data set is rather limited in size, for it to have a noticeable performance
boost a data set containing several times the one had at the moment.[8]
7.2.3
Passive aggressive classiﬁer
The passive aggressive classiﬁer is a linear gradient classiﬁer, that means that it
tries to ﬁt a linear function based on the training set given.
The classiﬁer takes the dot product of our feature vector representation and after-
wards tries to predict if a text is valid or non-valid again via the dot product of a
extracted feature vector of the text.
It is called a passive aggressive classiﬁer because it will stop approximating its
weights when a certain percentile of the of the training data is predicted correctly
(passive), and likewise update the weights when data is not correctly predicted.
[9]
ℓ(w; (x, y)) =
(
0
y(w · x) ≥1
1 - y(w · x)
otherwise
The above function is taken from an article called Online Passive-Aggressive Algo-
rithms [10]. It states that the passive aggressive algorithm will continuously adjust
the weight vector w, in our case the feature vector if it does not predict the correct
result. The loss (ℓ) determines to which degree the prediction was wrong and the
algorithm will adjust w accordingly. If the function determines the prediction to
have a margin above 1 it will result in no loss or no adjustment of w.[10]
Chapter 7
17
==PAGE:19==
Bootstrapping training data for rare disease information retrieval
7.2.4
Perceptron
The perceptron is a linear classiﬁer algorithm which utilizes supervised learning
and a set of weights based on a feature vector to classify data as either valid or
non-valid.
The perceptron works by taking an input x dotted with the weight vector (feature
vector) w and a bias b. If the result is above 0 it predicts that the input x is valid,
if it is not it predicts that the input x is non-valid. [11]
f(x) =
(
1
if w · x > 0
0
otherwise
7.3
SOLR
Why is it interesting to describe SOLR in this project?
FindZebra utilizes SOLR as a search engine to return results quickly and in accor-
dance with the search. It is therefore in a way essential to this project as the ﬁnal
product (the data corpus) is what SOLR is going to be searching through. So while
SOLR is not directly used in the project it is still a component and will be used
for assessment of the data corpus to ﬁnd out if there has been an improvement in
not only volume of data but also quality. As the quality of the searches are bound
the become better if you have more data, these two concepts should have a certain
connectivity.
SOLR is very basically put a search engine, you index a set of data and then query
SOLR to return a new set of data according to a search.
SOLR works by feeding it relevant information meaning adding texts to the Solr
index (the inverted index) this information is the list of words that occurs in the
text and their frequency. Its called a reverse index because instead of using the text
as a look up it is instead indexed by the words in the text.
If you want to search through your data corpus you do a search for a in the case
of this project disease or a disease synonym and Solr will look up all texts with the
deﬁned words in them. You can also get other information about the texts returned
like search score and term frequency. Search score will be used speciﬁcally in this
project to compare the FindZebra corpus with the one created here. [12]
Chapter 7
18
==PAGE:20==
8 Implementation
In this chapter I will discuss how diﬀerent aspects of the project was implemented
in practice.
8.1
Code structure
In this section the structure of the code will be discussed. I will iterate over the
diﬀerent choices and classes implemented. The implementation itself is divided into
two main structures that each have their own task, these structures are run as
separate programs mostly because of the time they each consume.
The reason for separating these two parts of the code is that running the code took
such a long time that it was more practical to run them each on their own. In
addition to this as mentioned before the code is ran in batches.
This is mostly because it is easier to manage but also because there was performance
issues with the machine that was running the code, in that there was noticeable
slowdowns presumably because of lack of available ram since the amount of data
maintained got quite high in the end, it was upwards towards 100000+ raw HTML
pages, before batching it.
The ﬁrst part of the code is the one responsible for collecting urls from disease
synonym searches, then scrapping HTML content from those urls and saving them
to the database.
main.py is the ﬁle responsible for running every part of the code in this section. It
depends on a couple of other python ﬁles. As can be seen below in ﬁgure 8.1 the
structure of the code.
dbsupport.py contains methods for queries for saving data to the local database, this
ﬁle uses the module pymysql which enables interaction with an MySQL database
and is used after fetching HTML data from various URLs to save it. ddgsupport.py
which contains methods for fetching urls based on a search from duckduckgo, it does
this by scrapping a normal search duckduckgo page for links and then returning those
19
==PAGE:21==
Bootstrapping training data for rare disease information retrieval
Figure 8.1: Code structure part 1
links in a list form. disease utils.py contains methods for communicating with the
UMLS server, this is used to get necessary information from the FindZebra database,
this includes disease synonyms and disease cui (disease ids).
url request.py which contains methods for scrapping several urls in parallel. The
ﬂowchart in ﬁgure 8.2, illustrates a basic model of the code ﬂow.
The second part of the code processes the data retrieved by the ﬁrst part, here
the actual text is extracted from the HTML content, classiﬁed and saved to the
database.
The main ﬁle here is called text classiﬁer and depends upon dbsupport.py, sgd classiﬁer.py
and disease utils.py.
The structure of this part can be found visualized in ﬁgure 8.3 and the ﬂowchart in
ﬁgure 8.4
Chapter 8
20
==PAGE:22==
Bootstrapping training data for rare disease information retrieval
Figure 8.2: Flow chart part 1
Figure 8.3: Code structure part 2
sgd classiﬁer is a class that via the sklearn module sets up an easy method for
classifying a list of data into the two categories non-valid or valid.
Chapter 8
21
==PAGE:23==
Bootstrapping training data for rare disease information retrieval
Figure 8.4: Flow chart part 2
Chapter 8
22
==PAGE:24==
Bootstrapping training data for rare disease information retrieval
8.2
Data retrieval
Before we can collect data on the diﬀerent rare diseases we need to actually retrieve
the disease synonyms from the UMLS database, this database is as previously men-
tioned a FindZebra maintained list of all relevant disease synonyms.
Access to this database has been provided during the project duration in order to
retrieve the needed information.
In order to access this information a module called pymysql is used, this module
provides access to perform queries on mysql servers. Thereby retrieving or altering
information on the servers, this module is used several times in the project to estab-
lish a connection to the FindZebra database and the project local database to save
and load data.
When the disease synonyms has been retrieved the next step is to ﬁnd urls con-
nected to the relevant diseases. This is where duckduckgo can be used to perform
anonymous searches, meaning that our previous searches will not be tracked, so it
is in other words doing an unbiased search.
To do this search a library called urllib is utilized for the url retrieval as mentioned
in a previous chapter, urllib is a high-level interface for retrieval of data across the
internet. The speciﬁc module of urllib that we use for this is called the request mod-
ule. The request module as the name suggest contains methods for data acquisition.
When this module is used a response object is returned which can then be cast to
HTML, which is what we want in this situation.
The HTML ﬁle object is what you would see visualized when you open duck-
duckgo.com in a browser and perform a normal search. Links can now easily be
extracted from the HTML object as mentioned in a previous chapter.
This kind of ”search” is performed on all disease synonyms that we extracted from
the FindZebra server, meaning that we now have a list of urls for each disease
synonym.
To extract the HTML data of each of the retrieved urls, urllib library is used again.
The only problem is that this is needed once for every URL we have extracted, it
can take a massive amount of time, because a responses is needed from each of the
servers that we want to extract HTML data from. The ﬁrst test that was made with
this system in place took 6 hours approximately to search trough 350 synonyms,
these 350 synonyms yielded 10000 HTML pages extracted.
With this speed it would not be feasible to search through the entire UMLS database
Chapter 8
23
==PAGE:25==
Bootstrapping training data for rare disease information retrieval
since it would approximately take 12000 / 40 * 6 = 1800 hours , it should be noted
that this is a very rough estimate but it does give a vague picture of the time frame
that it would take, the calculations assumes that there is 12000 cui’s and 40 cui’s
(equals aprox 350 synonyms) were searched through.
8.2.1
multi-threading
The limiting factor of this search is waiting for servers to respond to the requests, a
very obvious optimization that could be made here is to run the searches in parallel,
also called multi-threading the process. In python there is two modules that can be
used for multi-threading a process, multiprocessing and threading. With threading
you can start a method within a thread after which you can wait for all threads to
join up, meaning waiting for all the threads to ﬁnish and join together into a single
thread again.
Figure 8.5: Multi-threading code
When more than one thread is utilized and you have to collect all the resulting data
in the end, you cannot use a regular data structure. The data structure you use needs
to be thread safe, a thread safe data structure can only be accessed by one thread at
a time to prevent data corruption where two threads attempt to save their data in
the same memory slot at the same time. The library multiprocessing provides such a
data structure multiprocessing.Queue(). This works just like a regular queue but it is
thread safe and therefore what we need to use in a multi-thread environment.
When multi-threading the process you can wait for responses of several hundred
requests at the same time, the limiting factor on how many threads that can be
ran at the same time, is how many threads the machine that runs the program can
run. In the test run in this project a thread would be run for each url found for
all the synonyms for a disease at a time. Since each disease has a diﬀerent amount
of synonyms and not all synonyms returned the same number of URLs the amount
of threads ran at the same time would be between 200 - 500 threads, so there is a
pretty big variance in the amount of threads run at a speciﬁc time.
The time it takes to run this process will assuming that all threads can run in
Chapter 8
24
==PAGE:26==
Bootstrapping training data for rare disease information retrieval
parallel, be O(max search time) meaning that the whole process will always take as
long as the thread taking the longest time to get a response. In accordance with this
there could be some merit to limiting the amount of time each thread can wait for a
response and then just nullify that particular search to speed up the process. This
could yield some information, but it could also very well be worth it for the run time
savings alone. If a thread is taking 4x the time of the other threads for example,
that thread would delay the whole thread batch by 4 times the normal run time.
The process is still a lot better than the previous run time of O(sum(searches)) that
single threading yielded though.
The new process with multi-threading takes in comparison to the old single threaded
process approximately 20 minutes for the same amount of synonym searches that
took 6 hours before, that is a speed up of 18 times. It should however be noted
that this is an approximation since the actual run time varies greatly depending on
how many threads is running and the thread that takes the longest time to collect a
response, the new process takes approximately 12000 / 40 * 0.33 = 99 hours, which
is a much more manageable run time.
8.3
Database implementation
When a response has been collected and put in a list by every thread it is saved
to a local database, via the pymysql library.
The saving of data to the database
Figure 8.6: Pymysql connection to database
is done with a database cursor which is used to send queries, one query with an
insert command is being used for every URL that has been scrapped. In the end
the queries are committed to the database and saved to it. The query structure can
be found below.
Chapter 8
25
==PAGE:27==
Bootstrapping training data for rare disease information retrieval
INSERT INTO diseaseref (cui id, name, url, domain, rank, raw content)
VALUES (%s, %s, %s, %s, %s, %s)
This query is inserted into the database via the cursor along with a set of parameters.
The Database itself contains two tables, diseaseref as seen above and diseaseref clean.
Diseaseref is used to store the raw html content scrapped from the disease synonym
URLs, along with this the url domain, url, name of the synonym and its cui id is
saved.
The primary key of this table is an auto incrementing int called id, the id is used
for indexing purposes.
Diseaseref clean is used for storing the results of classifying text as either valid or
non-valid, In this project only text deemed valid is of any interest, therefore we only
save those to this table. The other texts are discarded. Along with the text, its url
and diseaseref id is saved.
The tables themselves are created in MySQL Workbench as previously mentioned. In
this program you can create schema’s and then apply them to the wanted database.
Besides from this you can issue SQL queries on the databases which is useful when
doing testing.
There was some problems with saving the raw HTML content as some of the content
could get quite big, saving it to the table returned an error because it was too big
for the type that had been used. As a solution to this the raw content is now a
LongText type which can hold 4,294,967,295 characters which should be more than
enough. There were also was some miniscule problems with some of the content
being the wrong format, the database was set to use the format utf-8, this problem
was only relevant in a very small percentage of the content so that content got
discarded.
Figure 8.7: MySQL Workbench table creation view
Chapter 8
26
==PAGE:28==
Bootstrapping training data for rare disease information retrieval
8.4
Text classiﬁcation
Before any text classiﬁcation can be done on the gathered data, the ﬁrst issue that
needs to be solved is extraction of actual paragraphs from the raw HTML content.
The interesting parts of the HTML content will often be small pieces of it, Most of
the content is useless however.
First the HTML content is retrieved from the database, for this purpose we use the
database iterator described in earlier sections. The query that is used is.
select distinct * from diseaseref
This will fetch us a list of all data from the table diseaseref that we are interested
in. Afterwards the data is taken and converted into a beautifulsoup module object,
beautifulsoup is a module that takes the text and converts it to a parse tree low
level wise. High level it is a module for modifying / searching strings. Because of
how HTML text is build up we can simply search for all sections encapsulated with
the tag ’p’ for paragraph in our beautifulsoup object and isolate it.
The end result is a list with all paragraphs from the content, some of these will
be more or less empty as it is far from all web pages that are useful as mentioned
earlier. This is the list we wish to perform text classiﬁcation on.
Before any classiﬁcation can be done on the list a classiﬁer needs to be ﬁtted. As
mentioned in previous section a SGDClassiﬁer is used in this project, this is because
it had the best classiﬁcation prediction rate out of all the classiﬁers tested.
The SGD classiﬁer attempts to ﬁt a logistic regression to a training data set, after
which it can predict in which class another set of data belongs.
But to perform the ﬁtting of training data, actual training data is needed, for this
purpose 600 paragraphs where gathered and classiﬁed to be either valid (1) or non
valid (0) manually. This way of classifying a training paragraph is needed in order
for the classiﬁer to be able to identify which group the paragraph belongs to. While
gathering the data it was classiﬁed based on a few guidelines.
1. No cutoﬀlinking to other sites
2. No contact information
3. No bullet point formats / lists
4. Must contain information about the disease
It should be noted that I do not have any background in rare diseases, so my
knowledge of what is useful information about a disease is limited. This means that
the data gathered is based on my understanding about what is useful and what is
not. I do however wish to note that I feel pretty conﬁdent that far the largest part
Chapter 8
27
==PAGE:29==
Bootstrapping training data for rare disease information retrieval
Figure 8.8: Code snippet from CSV loading
of the training data is correctly grouped.
And in the matter of testing the validity of the classiﬁers it should be good enough
as both training data and test data is collected using the same guidelines so they
are following the same rules and should thereby not be aﬀected by whether the data
is “correct“ or not.
100 of the 600 gathered paragraphs is used as training data, was this a commercial
implementation a higher number of test paragraphs would most likely be needed.
But as a indicator of a classiﬁers correctness this number is suﬃcient, this is also
due to time constraints as it does take a long time to gather data by hand.
The collected training/test data was written down in an excel ark and exported to
a .csv ﬁle, this made the process of loading it in python easy, as python has it own
csv module built-in see ﬁgure 8.8.
The actual ﬁtting and testing of the SGDClassiﬁer was done with a python module
called SKLearn. SKLearn is a module that has a number of classes for performing
machine learning and other types of data processing. In text classiﬁcation there
was a number of methods to choose from, all of these methods are described in the
theory section. The SGDClassiﬁer is implemented using SKLearns pipeline method
see ﬁgure 8.9.
Figure 8.9: Code snippet from SGD ﬁtting
The pipeline method aims to collect several steps of the training data ﬁtting into a
couple of steps, you specify a method of feature extraction, a method of normaliza-
tion and then a method of classiﬁcation.
Most of these steps involves extracting features from the data set, one of the disad-
vantages of using the pipeline is that it is harder to customize the parameters of the
classiﬁers, I did ﬁnd that the default setting where adequate though.
Chapter 8
28
==PAGE:30==
Bootstrapping training data for rare disease information retrieval
When the ﬁtting is done you can go on to actually predict the test data and com-
pare it to the values that are known. This is all for testing the SGDclassiﬁer and
similar tests are done with the rest of the classiﬁers. The testing is done by taking
the test data set and running it through the individual classiﬁers, thereby getting a
returned array of the predictions for each data entry in the set. You can then divide
the number of correct predictions measured against the known values, to the total
number of predictions.
This method will yield the prediction rate in percentages, see ﬁgure 8.9 bottom.
To use the classiﬁers to predict the data scrapped in the ﬁnal implementation. A
class called SGDClassiﬁer is used, here a SGDClassiﬁer is trained
init
where you
pass the training data and its known classiﬁcation vector see 8.10.
Figure 8.10: Code snippet from the SGD Classiﬁer class
We then have a classiﬁer able to classify paragraphs which was extracted from the
raw HTML earlier. The last step is to iterate over all the raw HTML content extract
the paragraphs identify their class with the classiﬁer and then send the data to the
database in the table diseaseref clean. We only have use for the data that is classiﬁed
as disease information the rest is marked as useless and discarded.
Chapter 8
29
==PAGE:31==
9 Results
This section will display and discuss the most important results from the project.
The results will be divided into the sub sections of the parts of the project they
where taken from.
9.1
HTML content extraction
Because of the wide variety of diﬀerent web pages that is scrapped throughout the
project, a small subsection of these web pages denies the program access to their
content.
There is also a problem with formatting, a percentile of the content that is extracted
have an unreadable format that would mean something that is not written in utf-8
encoding, which is the format that the local server is set to.
The later is far less common that requests being denied though. The following is
taken from a sample of 50 synonym searches consisting of an average of 350 web
page scrappings each. In this test there is a request success rate of.
91.81% = 91%
The percentage of web pages that do not respond is as can be seen above relatively
low. This percentage is low enough that it would not be worth it to look into im-
proving this it within the scope of this project. But if you where to continue with
the project it might be viable considering the extra thousands of pages you can
scrape out as a beneﬁt.
9.2
Text classiﬁcation
To test the diﬀerent text classiﬁcation methods 600 paragraphs have been collected
into a csv ﬁle as previously mentioned 100 of these are test data, while 500 of them
are for training purposes. That was the initial thought, diﬀerent distributions of
these numbers have been tested as well.
30
==PAGE:32==
Bootstrapping training data for rare disease information retrieval
All of the tests can be found in the table below, the table is divided into type of
classiﬁer and amount of paragraphs used for ﬁtting the model vs the amount being
used for testing and displays the correct prediction percentage for each.
classiﬁer
550/50
500/100
400/200
300/300
200/400
100/500
MultinomialNB
0,9019
0,8316
0,8009
0,8338
0,8379
0,6866
SGD
0,8823
0,8514
0,8208
0,8106
0,8004
0,7804
PAC
0,8823
0,8514
0,8308
0,8006
0,8229
0,7504
Perceptron
0,8627
0,7821
0,7910
0,8106
0,7905
0,7684
As can be seen in the table there is a clear trend in the data that all classiﬁers
gets more accurate as you ﬁt more data in them, especially the naive bayes (Multi-
nomialNB) method. There is no clear roof or peak in the prediction rate of these
classiﬁers, it is therefore relatively safe to say that ﬁtting more data would make the
classiﬁers more accurate as we have not yet reached over ﬁtting.
Over ﬁtting happens when too much data is ﬁtted into a model and it will begin to
see speciﬁc patterns in the data that is of no relevancy in the big picture.
If this project where to continue I would devote a lot more time to collecting ﬁtting
data, not only for ﬁtting but also for testing as the amount of test data in this project
is of minimal size. This can be seen in the little ﬂuctuations of the prediction rate
in the table.
For example the multinomialNB method get better as you ﬁt less
data from 400/200 and up until 100/500 where it suddenly dips quite a bit in its
prediction rate, this is due to the test data being small enough to have variance that
can be seen in the percentages.
As you can see in ﬁgure 9.1 the naive bayes (MultinomailNB) actually reaches the
highest prediction rate of all of the classiﬁers. The reason for using the SGDClassiﬁer
in the end, was that at the point that NB is better than SGD the amount of test
paragraphs were too small to verify this claim. Figure 9.1 does however suggest
that naive bayes may very well be a better text classiﬁers in this case, the diﬀerence
is very small in terms of percentages though. With more data this is something
deﬁnitely worth investigating a lot more. But for the purpose of showing that the
method works it should be suﬃcient.
Looking at some of the false validated texts there is a lot of unique words among
them. The reason that the classiﬁers in most cases see these unique small worded
texts as being valid are most likely that a valid text in the training data contained the
same words, while none of the non-valid text contained those words. The classiﬁers
therefore recognize the word as valid. In this case there is two approaches that could
be used to solve this particular validation problem.
Chapter 9
31
==PAGE:33==
Bootstrapping training data for rare disease information retrieval
Figure 9.1: Comparison of diﬀerent classiﬁers
Since most of these cases are actually only single / couple of words texts you could
put a length restriction on the text to weed out texts that are of a particular size
or smaller. The limit could be set from something like the smallest text from the
training data halved (example) to make sure that no valid text accidentally gets
thrown away. This approach would work because we know that texts that small
cannot contain any valuable information about a disease simply because of its length.
Another approach would be to simply increase the training data set like mentioned
above. This would increase the likely hood of such words occurring in both the valid
and non-valid training data. This is not foolproof though and should probably be
combined with above method. A length restriction on the text would also increase
the likeness that a text is classiﬁed correctly by the simple fact that a longer worded
text has a higher chance of being classiﬁed correctly simple because of the higher
amount of words to classify by.
The data set was also tested against the current FindZebra solr database.
The
theory behind this was to get an idea if the corpus was indeed expanded. If the
theory was correct this method of testing would have a lower prediction rate.
The test consisted of the following procedure, if solr returned the correct cui of the
disease belonging to the text that was searched for originally within ten results. Ten
being an arbitrary number which was chosen because if a result is returned within
the ﬁrst ten it is very likely to be relevant. Solr would most likely already contain
the information.
The result was that this method of validating a text had a prediction rate of 63.25%.
Which is in turn pretty low compared to the other classiﬁers. This test was not meant
Chapter 9
32
==PAGE:34==
Bootstrapping training data for rare disease information retrieval
to conﬁrm solr as a viable way of classifying data but instead look at the amount of
new data in the data corpus. If solr had a higher prediction rate one would assume
that the new data corpus wasn’t actually new but was mostly contained within the
old FindZebra data corpus. So this test panned out as expected.
9.3
Data corpus
The program was set to run for approximately 12 hours in which it processed 380
cui (disease id) it was all in all far more time consuming that ﬁrst assumed, even
with the optimization’s made. But within the scope of this project these scrapings
should be enough. I could furthermore not allocate more run time on the computer
which was used, because of limited resources (only one computer available). I do
believe however that with a computer containing a more powerful CPU, this run
time could be sped up signiﬁcantly as the limiting factor should be the number of
threads the computer is able to run in parallel. This is mostly also because the PC
which ran the program have limited hardware.
The results from the scrapings was approximately 98899 = 100000 pages of con-
tent. Out of these pages 1856238 text paragraphs were extracted. That means that
averaged 18.56 paragraphs extracted from each HTML page. A lot of these pages
are smaller paragraphs of one or two lines each that in most cases will be picked up
by the classiﬁer.
Out of the extracted paragraphs
573333 where classiﬁed as valid
and stored in the database, that means that only 30.88% of the paragraphs where
valid and stored.
This very much supports the previous statement that a lot of found paragraphs
were non-valid because of the nature of most HTML pages having lots of little non
important paragraphs scattered throughout the page.
573333 paragraphs is still a signiﬁcant number, it means an average extraction of
valid paragraph rate of 5.79 paragraphs per page scrapped, it should be said however
that this number may contain a lot of duplicates.
Solr has a couple of metrics that can be used to measure the outcome of a search
or the data corpus itself vs another. I will use the rank, recall values and the mean
reciprical rank (mrr) to do these comparisons. These three metrics should create an
fairly accurate depiction of the project corpus vs the FindZebra corpus.
To do these comparisons on the corpus against FindZebras current corpus, solr has
some metrics on how to measure the eﬀectiveness of a search and there is a list
Chapter 9
33
==PAGE:35==
Bootstrapping training data for rare disease information retrieval
of questions for each cui that you can search in the solr database to measure the
quality of the corpus information. It works by observing if the cui associated with
the question search turns up within n number of the results, by doing this with
the FindZebra corpus and the project corpus you can then compare the amount of
questions that were below n rankings to get a general idea about the quality of the
corpus.
Figure 9.2: Comparision of rank scores between FZ and project
The questions that were asked are taken from a doctors dilemma subset of questions,
ﬁrst created by American College of Physicians (ACP) [13]. They have the format of
a short description of each disease. When you en query solr about these questions it
should ideally return the cui associated with the particular disease that is connected
to the question.
It should be noted that only questions for the cuis that are in the project data corpus
is actually included, because other questions obviously will not return any results
from the project corpus.
In ﬁg 9.2 you can see the results of the comparision between FindZebras and the
project corpus in solr. For every n a recall is calculated, the recall value is the
number of questions ranking below n in percentages that is why there is a steady
increase in the recall value as more and more questions ranks below n as n increases.
The data behind the table can be found under appendix A.1.
Figure 9.3 shows the results of the question searches. It is sorted by answers, the
Chapter 9
34
==PAGE:36==
Bootstrapping training data for rare disease information retrieval
Figure 9.3: Question rank scoring
individual answers are not important in this context though. What you can see in
this graph however is that some of the questions in particular have a wide variance
between FindZebra and the project ranking for example hypoglycemia and hypothy-
roidism in which there is a diﬀerence of 12 and 6 respectively between the project
and FindZebra ranking, there is a couple of these wide variance questions.
This explains why the FindZebra graph in ﬁg 9.3 has a more natural curve while the
project graph is more linear, it is because the outliers only shows up with a higher
value of n which also shows when the two graphs almost catches up at a value of n
= 15.
It could be worth looking into why these exact questions are returning a lower rank
than the others and try to reinforce the training data for the text classiﬁers to deal
better with these outliers. It could also be that solr has problems with these exact
questions because because of various reasons etc.
You can see in Figure 9.2 that the FindZebra and the project recall values lie close
to one another throughout the whole test. This indicates that the quality of the two
corpuses are pretty similar although the project recall values are a bit below. This
could very well be rectiﬁed with improvements to the text classiﬁcation methods.
While the ﬁgure 9.2 gives a general overview of how far down the search results you
have to go to ﬁnd the correct answer generally.
A more deﬁnite method of comparing the two corpuses is the mean reciprocal rank
(mrr). This is the average of
1
rank or more accurately.
Chapter 9
35
==PAGE:37==
Bootstrapping training data for rare disease information retrieval
mmr =
1
Questions
PQuestions
n=1
1
rank
The mrr adds up to
FZ mmr
project mmr
0,6933
0,6309
The mmr describes the average of the multiplicative inverse of the rank of the ﬁrst
correct answer. In this case the ﬁrst rank containing the correct cui for the disease
that was searched with. this means that a mmr of 1 is the ideal and depicts perfect
answers every time and likewise an mmr of
1
Lowest rank depicts the lowest possible
correctness of the searches, assuming that the search returns a correct answer every
time no matter how low the rank is.
The diﬀerence between the FZ mmr and the project mmr is only 0.0624.
It is
therefore fair to say as mentioned earlier that the two corpuses scores lie very close.
This means in practical terms that the quality of the data is fairly similar as is also
depicted in ﬁg 9.3.
Chapter 9
36
==PAGE:38==
10 Future work
This project if given more time and resources could be developed in a number of
ways to improve various aspects of it. In this chapter I will discuss diﬀerent ways
you could make improvements to it in the future.
The ﬁrst concern that would be needed to be looked at is to do more research about
the viability of the text classiﬁcation that is used in the project. While the current
results very much indicate that the text classiﬁers are indeed viable, a much larger
data set would be much preferable to train the algorithms with.
A larger training data set would also give a much better insight into which of the
classiﬁcation algorithms that could yield the best prediction rate. At the moment
the data points towards the naive bayes implementation but the training set is too
small to tell with certainty.
A larger training set would furthermore and mainly also increase the prediction rate
as a whole for all the classiﬁers. Looking into how large a training set is needed to
tell when the classiﬁers have hit an upper limit in predication rate gains from the
larger training data set, could also yield a big improvement in the prediction rate.
These improvements would overall result in not a bigger corpus, but a much higher
quality of data in the corpus overall.
A small thing that could be worth researching is cutting texts out because of its
size, more valid texts will always be above a certain length and smaller texts will
in some cases be validated because they contain words described as ”positive” in
the feature vector used for training the text classiﬁer (see chapter 5.2). This should
in theory be less and less common as the training data set grows in size because
the vocabulary of the feature vector will grow. It would still happen in fringe cases
though, so it would be worth looking into, especially since working with such a large
data set is bound to make some fringe cases appear.
It might not be viable but it could also be interesting to look into using the manual
data scrapping that FindZebra utilizes today as a method of gathering training
data for a text classiﬁer. If done in this manner you could gather a large amount
of training data on each disease which would greatly increase the prediction rate of
the text classiﬁers and at the same time save a huge amount of time on gathering
data, this method would actually mainly be about saving time on gathering training
37
==PAGE:39==
Bootstrapping training data for rare disease information retrieval
data.
The second improvement that could be made to the program is the process of scrap-
ping data in the ﬁrst place. This is the most time consuming part of the whole
process and there is a few things that could be done to improve it.
First of all this is a program that would be suitable for running autonomously on a
server for a couple of days, gathering data for all cui’s is a huge task that would net
in several million texts/documents for the corpus.
A second immediate / connected improvement that could be made would be improv-
ing the hardware of the machine used to run the program, the PC that was used
for this project is rather limited in its processing power, at the moment of writing
the limiting factor was the amount of threads that could be run in parallel as each
thread is usually waiting for a response on their request. When / if this stopped
becoming the limiter you could imagine that the internet connection would be next
in line to limit the performance.
Besides from this smaller optimization’s could be made to the program if you went
over it line for line.
You could also make a point of moving the program from a single machine to several
machines, this could (relatively) easily be done since the program is very modular
in its structure. It is very possible to make it search only withing a range of the
available disease synonyms.
Another change that would be needed is to move from a local server to an online
server. A local server was used in this project because as mentioned before it is a
convenient way of simulating an online server when only a single person is working
on the project.
Chapter 10
38
==PAGE:40==
11 Conclusion
The project was a success in that it showed that this method of gathering data for
a corpus certainly can work in contrast to writing manually scrappers for individual
web pages.
The urls scrapped from duckduckgo, nets a lot of web pages in the end, and I think
that this method is a better procedure in comparison to the ﬁrst method tried out,
which involved scrapping entire domains instead of single urls. Scrapping entire
domains might have extracted more data, but it would also be a huge time sink
compared to the current method which atleast has a somewhat reasonable run time
on a bigger scale.
When ﬁrst trying to scrape the urls from duckduckgo it took a huge amount of time,
that was before it was multi-threaded. At the moment only a margin of the cuis
available on the UMLS server from FindZebra was searched. Due to multi-threading
the process, the limiting factor of the run-time is the machine that the program runs
on. If a more powerful machine were introduced you could imagine that the limiter
would be the internet connection on said machine instead.
But as it is now all of the threads are idling for responses for their requests. The
run time of this program certainly disqualiﬁes it for being used as an online (real-
time) updater of the data corpus. Instead it could be used to update a corpus on a
“regular“ basis meaning every couple of months maybe. It could also be beneﬁcial
to move the service to a server that could run it autonomously without interference
and perhaps with hardware more specialized in threading operations.
Out of the diﬀerent types of text classiﬁcation algorithms that were tested naive
bayes ended up with the best prediction percentage, this was not the algorithm
used for classiﬁcation in the end though. This was because the test results favoring
naive bayes was dividing the training and test set into 550 and 50 paragraphs which
was a bit too unreliable with such a small test set.
If this method of extracting data about rare disease where to be proceeded with, a
more thorough investigation of these text classiﬁcation methods would have to be
made, a training set of 600 texts are not nearly enough, if not only to just improve
the precision of the algorithm which did not yet seem like it had hit a upper limit
on the amount of training data that could improve the prediction rate. It would
39
==PAGE:41==
Bootstrapping training data for rare disease information retrieval
also provide a clearer picture of which algorithms performs the best.
It should be said however that the current implementation does give a very good
indication of these algorithms being able to be used with great eﬀect to classify
the texts that is fed to them. Even with the limited data set that were gathered,
a prediction percentage of +80% is a pretty solid result, which could easily be
improved with more data again.
The comparison with the FindZebra corpus showed that both corpuses have its ﬂaws
but are very close in terms of quality, and if you relaxed a bit on the demand for a
high search rank, the recall percentages gets pretty high upwards of 95%. The mmr
for both corpuses further conﬁrmed this claim that they have a similar document
quality.
In the end a fairly big corpus were gathered from 380 cuis 573333 texts were validated
by the text classiﬁer, this is a huge number but many of these text could be duplicate
texts or negative-true, it is still a signiﬁcant numer though. If the tests made with
the text classiﬁers were indeed correct (and they should be) the corpus should be
valid as is also conﬁrmed by the mmr and recall comparisons.
So to sum it up the project was a fair success in that it achieved the goal that was
set for it in the beginning, and it did it in a rather successful manner, the only
downside of this procedure is that it requires a moderately large amount of training
data and that it requires a rather powerful host to run it over a reasonable period
of time.
Chapter
40
==PAGE:42==
A Appendix
A.1
Recall question data
n
Project
FZ
1
0,5
0,5909
2
0,6590
0,6818
3
0,7272
0,7045
4
0,7272
0,7954
5
0,75
0,8181
6
0,7727
0,8636
7
0,7954
0,8863
8
0,8181
0,9318
9
0,8409
0,9545
10
0,8636
0,9545
11
0,8863
0,9545
12
0,9090
0,9772
13
0,9090
0,9772
14
0,9545
0,9772
15
0,9545
0,9772
41
==PAGE:43==
Bibliography
[1] scikit-learn
developers,
“Text
classiﬁcation.”
[Online].
Available:
http:
//scikit-learn.org/stable/tutorial/text analytics/working with text data.html
[2] Wikipedia, “Multi-threading.” [Online]. Available: https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Thread (computing)#Multithreading
[3] scikit-learn developers,
“Feature extraction.” [Online]. Available:
http:
//scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/feature extraction.html
[4] ——,
“Naive bayes.” [Online]. Available:
http://scikit-learn.org/stable/
modules/naive bayes.html
[5] Wikipedia, “Sgd classiﬁer [4].” [Online]. Available: https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Stochastic gradient descent
[6] scikit-learn developers, “Sgd classiﬁer.” [Online]. Available: http://scikit-learn.
org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.linear model.SGDClassiﬁer.html
[7] ——, “Sgd classiﬁer [2].” [Online]. Available: http://scikit-learn.org/stable/
modules/sgd.html
[8] M. Nedrich, “Sgd classiﬁer [3].” [Online]. Available: https://spin.atomicobject.
com/2014/06/24/gradient-descent-linear-regression/
[9] T. G. D. Victoria Keiser, “Online passive-aggressive algorithms,” p. 2, un-
known.
[10] J. K. S. S.-S. Y. S. Koby Crammer, Ofer Dekel, “Evaluating online text classi-
ﬁcation algorithms for email prediction in tasktracer,” pp. 552–553, 3/06.
[11] Wikipedia, “Perceptron.” [Online]. Available: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Perceptron
[12] Apache, “Solr documentation.” [Online]. Available: http://lucene.apache.org/
solr/resources.html
[13] H. L. J. Dan Svenstrup and O. Winther, “Rare disease diagnosis: A review
of web search, social media and large-scale data-mining approaches,” pp. 7–8,
2015.
42
