==PAGE:1==
Attitudes and behavior with regard to
Drunk Driving
Master thesis
Author: Laura Petranca (s151261)
Supervisor: Mette Møller
Co-supervisor: Laila Marianne Martinussen
Technical University of Denmark,
June 2017.
==PAGE:2==
Master of Science in Engineering
Industrial Engineering and Management
Attitudes and behavior with regard to Drunk Driving
Master thesis
Author: Laura Petranca (s151261)
Supervisor: Mette Møller
Co-supervisor: Laila Marianne Martinussen
s151261@student.dtu.dk
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Management Engineering
DTU Management Engineering
Produktionstorvet
Building 426
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
DENMARK
Tel. +45 4525 4800
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Management Engineering at
the Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring a
Master degree in Industrial Engineering and Management.
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark, June 23, 2017
Laura Petranca
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Many interventions have been introduced to solve the problem of drunk driving in
Denmark, so that the topic is now highly stigmatized among the Danish society.
However, drunk driving remains one of the main causes of road accidents in the coun-
try, especially among young drivers. This contradiction may exist because people’s
unconscious predisposition toward drunk driving (implicit attitudes) does not match
what they consciously say about it (explicit attitudes). Despite both attitudes have
inﬂuence on the behaviour, interventions are mostly targeting explicit attitudes and
leave implicit attitudes untouched.
This Master Thesis attempts to change implicit attitudes through the use of the Ap-
proach/Avoidance task (AAT) on a sample of young university students. Participants
have to complete one of the three diﬀerent AAT tasks: one should make their implicit
attitudes more positive toward drunk driving (pro-drunk driving), one should make
thier implicit attitudes more negative toward drunk driving (anti- drunk driving) and
one that should not aﬀect implicit attitudes. The Go/No-go association task (GNAT)
is used to measure implicit attitudes and an online Questionnaire is used measure
explicit attitudes.
Results show that initial implicit and explicit attitudes are both against drunk driving,
meaning that, in this case, there is no inconsistency between implicit and explicit
attitudes among the participants. However, the AAT turns out to be able to make
implicit attitudes more anti-drunk driving.
It is hoped that this study will demonstrate that the application of the AAT to change
implicit attitudes could be valuable in new road safety interventions.
Keywords: Drunk driving, implicit attitudes, explicit attitudes, AAT.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Senior Researcher Dr. Mette Møller and co-
supervisor Researcher Dr. Laila Marianne Martinussen for guiding me and giving me
constructive feedback to complete this Master Thesis. I am grateful for the opportunity
to work in this project and, day after day, I developed a genuine interest for this topic.
Last but not least, I want to thank my family for continuously motivating me and
Quentin for his technical support.
DTU Management, 2017
Laura
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
List of Figures
ix
List of Tables
x
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Drunk driving as a major road safety issue . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
A critical category: alcohol and young drivers . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Trends, interventions and factors of inﬂuence
. . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Need for further solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Attitudes and behavior in drunk driving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.6
Purpose of this Master Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Methods
7
2.1
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Design and procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
Pre-test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1.1
Implicit attitudes toward drunk driving . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1.2
The GNAT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.1.3
Explicit attitudes toward drunk driving . . . . . . .
12
2.2.2
Post-test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.2.1
Attitude change task
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.2.2
The AAT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.2.3
Attitudes toward drunk driving after the AAT . . .
15
2.2.2.4
Addictional AAT for participants of Group 1 . . . .
15
3
Analysis
17
3.1
The GNAT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.1
Cleaning the GNAT data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.2
Pre-GNAT analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.3
Dependent t-test analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
3.1.4
Parametric ANOVA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Explicit attitudes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.1
Explicit data: recoding and analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.2
Wilcoxon test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Results
21
4.1
Implicit attitudes results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.1.1
Pre-test GNAT results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.1.2
Dependent t-test results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.1.3
ANOVA results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Explicit attitudes results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.1
Wilcoxon test results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Discussion
29
5.1
Implicit and explicit attitudes of participants
. . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Change in implicit attitudes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.3
Change in explicit attitudes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.4
Relationship between implicit and explicit attitudes . . . . . . . . .
31
5.5
Attitudes and behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.6
Implications of the study for the future of road safety . . . . . . . .
32
5.7
Limitations of the study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6
Conclusion
33
A Stimuli used in the GNAT
35
B Example of raw data collected by INQUISIT software
37
B.1
GNAT data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
B.2
Questionnaire data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
C SPSS syntax for implicit attitudes data analysis
39
D SPSS syntax for explicit attitudes data recoding
47
Bibliography
49
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
1.1
Number of drunk driving convictions (red) and drunk driving accidents
(blue) in Denmark from 1980 to 2016 [10] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1
Design of the experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
How participants answer Go/No-go in each trial
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Matrix stimulus-response for the dangerous (farligt)-good(godt) couple.
Arrows show the reference that participants have to consider depending on
the nature of the stimulus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Example of assessment of explicit attitudes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
One participants performing the AAT with a computer and a joystick .
13
2.6
Eﬀect of pushing/pulling the joystick on the pictures in the screen . . .
14
3.1
How the new variables were computed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
A.1 Example of drunk driving picture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
A.2 Example of not drunk driving picture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
B.1
Raw data of the GNAT recorded by INQUISIT . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
B.2
Raw data of the online Questionnaire recorded by INQUISIT . . . . . .
37
==PAGE:12==
List of Tables
1.1
Consumption of alcohol in Denmark [14] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1
Structure of the GNAT test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1
GNAT data cleaning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
D-prime of the pre- and post- GNAT data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.1
Mean values (in the pre-test) for DD is good, NO DD is good, DD is bad,
NO DD is bad
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Paired samples test for DD is good for the three diﬀerent Groups . . . .
22
4.3
Paired samples test for DD is bad for the three diﬀerent Groups
. . . .
22
4.4
Mean values for DD is good for the three diﬀerent Groups . . . . . . . .
23
4.5
Mean values for DD is bad for the three diﬀerent Groups
. . . . . . . .
23
4.6
ANOVA results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.7
Mean values for explicit attitudes in the pre- and the post- test for the
three Groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.8
Comparison between explicit attitudes and neutral value (zero) for Group
1 (Wilcoxon test) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.9
Comparison between explicit attitudes and neutral value (zero) for Group
2 (Wilcoxon test) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.10 Comparison between explicit attitudes and neutral value (zero) for Group
3 (Wilcoxon test) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Drunk driving as a major road safety issue
Drunk driving is a subject of particular concern in road safety. It is estimated to be a
factor of contribution for 25% of all the fatal crashes in the European Union which
corresponds to a total of approximately 10 000 accidents per year [1]. In Denmark,
this percentage lowers to 20% [2].
Driving under the eﬀects of alcohol expose to two main threats: higher probabilities
to be involved in road accidents and, at the same time, higher chances of experiencing
more severe crashes [3]. In fact, studies show that drunk driving aﬀects driving
performances in many diﬀerent ways. Subjects show lack of judgment, self-control,
gross motor skills and are not able to accomplish complex tasks required while driving
[4]. Furthermore, drunk drivers constitute a threat not only for their safety but also
for their passengers and the other road users. This increases the magnitude of the
problem.
Drunk driving is not only a health problem but also an economical issue: every year
it is the source of many direct expenses concerning health care, police and emergency
services, damage of propriety but also indirect expenses regarding physiological cares
and lives’ loss [5]. Based on details of more than 40,000 injuries resulting from road
accidents in 2011, drunk driving cost the Danish society 2 billion kroner in one year [2].
1.2
A critical category: alcohol and young drivers
It is widely known that young male drivers are over represented in car accidents
related to alcohol consumption [6]. Drivers between 18 and 24 years old in normal
conditions are four times more likely to get involved in an accident than drivers aged
35-44; at a blood alcohol level (BAL) between 0.05 % and 0.08 % this possibility raises
to 10 times more [7]. This places drunk driving crashes among the most common
causes of death for people aged 18-24 [8].
There are many diﬀerent reasons for the discrepancy between young and old drivers
in drunk driving. The ﬁrst reason is physiological: young bodies are not accustomed
to alcohol and therefore young people’s tolerance for alcohol is lower [9]. The second
reason is that young drivers are not accustomed to driving, which is a "new" task that
requires more eﬀorts and focus for them than for experienced drivers. This means
that even at relatively low BAL young people are not able to keep constant vigilance
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
required while driving [9]. The third reason is connected to social inhibition: after
having consumed even small quantities of alcohol, social inhibition is reduced and one
begins to act and feel more emotional. While this is the case of people of all ages,
self-control mechanisms are less developed in younger people, which is probably why
alcohol has a stronger motivational and emotional impact on them. Thus, under the
inﬂuence of alcohol, young drivers may get more euphoric and impulsive, and exhibit
a more risk-taking behavior than older drivers [9].
1.3
Trends, interventions and factors of inﬂuence
Statistics show a decreasing trend in the number of convictions for drunk driving; also
drunk driving accidents have reached historical low values. This result was obtained
thanks to many interventions that, during the years, impacted on society’s behavior
in this ﬁeld [10].
Among the most eﬃcient interventions, there is the introduction of regulations to
formally limit the amount of alcohol used while driving. In Denmark, the ﬁrst law
regulating drivers’ alcohol consumption was issued in 1976 and set the maximum BAL
to 0.08%. The introduction of a per se law enabled a public and large scale attack on
drunk driving through the use of many awareness campaigns and this brought society
to publicly condemn this behavior [11].
This ﬁrst intervention was successful in terms of reduction of the number of accidents
caused by drunk driving in Denmark and set ﬁxed basis for drunk driving convictions
[12]. Before this law, the only basis for a formal drunk driving accuse was based on
the driver’s behavior, which can be highly ambiguous.
In 1998 a new regulation, which is the current active Danish law, set the limit per-
centage to 0.05% BAL. The introduction of the new threshold was anticipated by
a political and public debate and was supported by a massive help of awareness
campaigns. This change was also accompanied by increased police breath controls.
The decision of lowering the BAL increased the number of convictions for drunk
driving (Figure 1.1). At the same time, as shown by Bernhoft and Behrendorﬀ[13],
it decreased the amount of units that drivers would allow themselves to drink in a
2h period before driving. However, the number of accidents caused by drunk driving
remained stable, as it is possible to see in Figure 1.1. On the contrary, the number of
fatal accidents caused by drunk driving compared to all fatal accidents increased for
the age group 18-24 [13], the critical group previously detailed.
At the same time, other regulations, although not directly targeted for drunk driving,
caused a decreasing trend in the number of accidents recorded:
• The introduction of speed limits and mandatory seat belts reduced the number
of road accidents and the severity of the injuries [12].
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Trends, interventions and factors of inﬂuence
3
Figure 1.1: Number of drunk driving convictions (red) and drunk driving accidents
(blue) in Denmark from 1980 to 2016 [10].
• The introduction of new and modern technologies improved infrastructures like
better roads or road signs and introduced innovations applied in modern and
safer interior and exterior car design [2].
• The change in the trend of alcohol consumption. More awareness regarding
damages and long-term eﬀects related to alcohol abuse, decreased the assumption
of alcohol starting from 2008 in Denmark (Figure 1.1) [14].
Table 1.1: Consumption of alcohol in Denmark [14].
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
1.4
Need for further solutions
Despite all the interventions against drunk driving are going in the right direction, this
problem still exists and causes a high number of death on the roads. Even nowadays
numerous people engage in this dangerous behavior: around 1 out of 1000 drivers in
Denmark was formally accused of drunk driving in the last year [10]. This also means
that the number of real and unreported drunk drivers could be higher [10],[15].
Therefore, it is relevant to investigate more in the ﬁeld and provide additional knowl-
edge to be able to tackle the rest of the problem.
1.5
Attitudes and behavior in drunk driving
In Denmark drunk driving is a socially stigmatized topic [16], however 1 out of 5
of the road accidents in the country is caused by this problem [10]. This shows a
considerable gap between how society explicitly refers to drunk driving in interviews
or questionnaires and the statistical data about the number of convictions for drinking
under the eﬀects of alcohol. There is a clear inconsistency between what society says
and how it behaves.
The cause of this inconsistency may be that behavior is not always under conscious
control. Behavior is guided by attitudes, that are people’s disposition toward a certain
topic, in this case drunk driving. Attitudes can be explicit: how people consciously
talk about drunk driving, and implicit: how people unconsciously feel about drunk
driving [17].
Drunk driving interventions always try to change attitudes in order to change behavior.
However, current interventions focus only on explicit attitudes. Explicit attitudes can
be biased by drivers’ motivation to present themselves in a socially acceptable way
[18] which can, then, diﬀer from their implicit attitudes [17]. This may be the reason
why attitude change campaigns have a very limited eﬀect [19].
1.6
Purpose of this Master Thesis
This Master Thesis is part of an ongoing research project named "Slow On the Bottle
- Enjoy the road (SOBER)". The research topic and the design of the experiment
are the same as for this project. Data collection, analysis, results and discussions
presented in this report are speciﬁcally dedicated to this Master Thesis.
The study is based on an experiment aiming at 1) measuring explicit attitudes,
self-reported behavior and implicit attitudes of participants and 2) attempting to
change participants’ implicit attitudes through the use of a behavioral task, the
Approach/Avoidance task (AAT).
Explicit attitudes and self-reported behavior will be measured through a Questionnaire.
Unconscious attitudes are not accessible through conscious introspection so implicit
attitudes will be measured through another technique named the Go/No-go association
task (GNAT).
==PAGE:17==
1.6 Purpose of this Master Thesis
5
The main hypothesis behind this study is that this experiment will serve to explain
why in Denmark there are still alcohol related accidents even if the majority of the
society claims to be against drink driving. The measurement of implicit attitudes,
explicit attitudes and self-reported driving behavior will also be useful to provide more
knowledge about the relation between them in the ﬁeld of drunk driving. Strengthening
the knowledge in this ﬁeld is essential to ﬁnd new drunk driving interventions that hit
the right target.
Finally the experiment will deﬁne if the AAT can aﬀect implicit attitudes of participants
in the context of drunk driving. In this case, il could be suggested as future measure
of intervention in road safety.
==PAGE:18==
6
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Methods
This chapter will present the participants and the design of the experiment.
The discussion, then, follows through the use of the AAT and the methods used to
collect implicit and explicit attitudes data.
2.1
Participants
The sample selected for this study is composed of 72 Danish male drivers (minimum
type B driving license) aged between 18 and 24 years.
Participants were recruited from Technical University of Denmark (DTU) campus and
through social networks like Facebook and LinkedIn. Almost all participants were
students at DTU and had completed at least the secondary education.
Because the participants were Danish native speakers, the language used in the whole
experiment was Danish.
Participants received a gift card of the value of 200 DKK as reward for their partici-
pation.
2.2
Design and procedure
The study uses a design made of a pre- and a post- test (Figure 2.1). Participants
recruited were asked to take part in the two-steps. However, 72 participants completed
only the pre-test, while 46 participants completed both pre-test and post-test.
1. Pre-test, meant to measure their initial attitudes toward drunk driving. Implicit
attitudes were measured through the Go/No-go Association Task (GNAT) and
explicit attitudes are measured through an online Questionnaire.
The duration of the test was about 20 minutes.
2. Post-test, were participants had to complete the behavioral training through the
AAT. The AAT was followed by the measurement of the ﬁnal attitudes (implicit
attitudes through the GNAT and explicit attitudes through the Questionnaire)
of participants toward drunk driving.
The duration of the post-test was about 30 minutes.
2.2.1
Pre-test
The pre-test consisted of a web-based test aimed at measuring the initial explicit and
implicit attitudes of participants (see Figure 2.1). For this reason, participants were
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Methods
Figure 2.1: Design of the experiment.
provided with a link to access the test on-line from their personal workstations.
The software used for the collection of the data was Inquisit Millisecond [20].
2.2.1.1
Implicit attitudes toward drunk driving
The Go/No-go Association task (GNAT) was used to measure the implicit attitudes
toward drunk driving (see Figure 2.1). This approach has already been successfully ap-
plied before in order to investigate implicit attitudes towards safe and risky driving [21].
Introduction to the experiment - In this experiment, participants were asked to recog-
nize (as fast as possible) if diﬀerent stimuli (displayed on a screen) belonged to either
the target category or the target attribute simultaneously suggested by the test.
The target category displayed in this test was dangerous/not dangerous, while the
target attribute displayed in this test was good/bad. Stimuli could be pictures of
drunk driving situations/not drunk driving situations or good/bad words (for more
information, see Appendix A).
GNAT-Implicit attitudes - The experiment measures the automatic mental connections
of participants between drunk driving (target category) and good (target attribute)
and between drunk driving and bad [22]. As stated from Nosek and Banaji’s study
(2001), participants ought to be able to discriminate a signal from a noise easier when
the target category and the target attribute displayed are positively associated in the
participant’s mind.
Under the assumption that drunk driving is considered a negative concept:
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Design and procedure
9
• Participants would easily identify that pictures of drunk driving situations belong
to the target category "dangerous" if “dangerous” is paired with “bad” .
• Participants would not easily identify that pictures of drunk driving situations
belong to the target category "dangerous" if “dangerous” is paired with “good”.
The diﬀerence in accuracy between these two conditions, Drunk Driving(DD)-Good
and Drunk Driving (DD)-Bad, represents the measure of implicit attitude (called
sensitivity). This measure is not subjected to bias and is not aﬀected by subject’s
response strategy (e.g. need to answer is a socially acceptable way) because the
task has to be completed with such a high speed that the answer can be considered
automatic [22].
2.2.1.2
The GNAT
In the GNAT, participants were required to recognize in short time if particular stimuli
were related to a target displayed on the computer screen. For the term "stimulus" it
is meant a picture or a word, while for the term "target" it is meant a target category
-either dangerous or not dangerous- or a target attribute -either good or bad-.
The test was composed of four diﬀerent blocks with a target category and a target
attribute paired as following:
• Dangerous (in Danish,farligt) - Good (godt) which tested the condition "drunk
driving is good" (DD-GOOD)
• Dangerous (farligt) - Bad (dårlig) which tested the condition "drunk driving is
bad" (DD-BAD)
• Not dangerous (ufarligt) - Good (godt) which tested the condition "not drunk
driving is good" (NODD-GOOD)
• Not dangerous (ufarligt) - Bad (dårlig) which tested the condition "not drunk
driving is bad" (NODD-BAD)
Test execution - During the test, a couple of the above categories was displayed on
top of the screen (the target category on the left and the target attribute on the right
side) while diﬀerent stimuli, either pictures or words, were shown one after the other
at the center of the screen.
Participants were instructed to react to stimuli in diﬀerent ways. In particular, picture
stimuli were related to the target category and word stimuli were related to the target
attribute.
If the stimulus was a picture and belonged to the target category displayed on the top
left side of the screen, the participant was instructed to press the space bar button as
fast as possible (answer Go). If it did not belong to the target category, nothing had
to be done (No-Go answer).
If the stimulus was a word and belonged to the target attribute displayed on the top
right side of the screen, the participant was instructed to press the space bar button
as fast as possible. If it did not belong to the target attribute, nothing had to be done.
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Methods
This process is schematized in Figure 2.2.
In case of a correct answer a green “O” was displayed, while in case of a wrong answer,
the feedback consisted of a red “X”. A new stimulus was shown after the partic-
ipant hit the space bar or, in case of no answer, when the predetermined time was over.
Figure 2.2: How participants answer Go/No-go in each trial.
Figure 2.3: Matrix stimulus-response for the dangerous (farligt)-good(godt) couple.
Arrows show the reference that participants have to consider depending
on the nature of the stimulus.
Structure - The GNAT was composed of 12 drunk driving pictures and 8 non drunk
driving (safe) pictures (see Appendix A). It had 12 good and 12 bad words.
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Design and procedure
11
The test was composed of 12 blocks in total. The ﬁrst 4 blocks were made of practice
trials to make the participants comfortable with the test. These blocks required the
categorization of stimuli respect a single reference. Here participants had, in turn,
20 trials with "dangerous" as only reference, 20 trials with "not dangerous" as only
reference, 15 trials with "good" as only reference and 15 trials with "bad" as only
reference.
Blocks 4 to 8 were test blocks where participants were required to categorize stimuli
in relation to a couple reference made of a target category and a target attribute
(dangerous-bad, dangerous-good, not dangerous-bad, not dangerous-good). The in-
terval of time between two stimuli was of 750 ms. Block 8 to 12 were designed in an
identical way as blocks 4-8 but with an interval of time between two stimuli of 600ms.
Blocks were composed of a total of 78 trials: the ﬁrst 1 to 19 trials are learning trials
(not meant to be used to get results, but only to make the participants used to the
test) while the next 19- 78 are test trials.
Blocks 1-4
Blocks 4-8
Blocks 8-12
Type of block
Learning
Testing, 700ms speed
Testing, 600 ms speed
References
Single
DD
Couple
DD-Good
Couple
DD-Good
reference
NODD
reference
DD-Bad
reference
DD-Bad
Good
NODD-Good
NODD-Bad
Bad
NODD-Bad
NODD-Good
Number
20 DD/NODD
78 trials per block
78 trials per block
of trials
15 Good/Bad
Learning trials
All
Trials 1-19
Trials 1-19
Table 2.1: Structure of the GNAT test.
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Methods
2.2.1.3
Explicit attitudes toward drunk driving
The measurement of explicit attitudes has the purpose to evaluate attitudes that are
consciously accessible. The aim of this measure is to deﬁne how participants perceive
and describe their attitudes toward drunk driving. At this purpose, participants were
required to complete an online Questionnaire.
The Questionnaire was given after the GNAT to minimize carry-over eﬀects because
implicit attitudes are less subject to the inﬂuence of conscious engagement [23].
For the purpose of this thesis only some elements from "Risk-taking attitudes and
risky driving behaviour" from Iversen(2004) [24] were used as the measure of explicit
attitude and behavioral intention of the participants. This choice was due to time
limitation. The statements considered were the followings:
• I would never drive after drinking alcohol
"Jeg ville aldrig køre efter at have drukket alkohol" :
1) strongly agree 2) agree 3) neither agree nor disagree 4) disagree 5) strongly
disagree)
1) "meget ofte" 2) "ofte" 3) "af og til" 4) "sjældent" 5) "aldrig";
• I would never ride with someone I knew has been drinking alcohol
"Jeg ville aldrig køre med nogen, jeg vidste, havde drukket alkohol":
1) strongly agree 2) agree 3) neither agree nor disagree 4) disagree 5) strongly
disagree)
1) "meget ofte" 2) "ofte" 3) "af og til" 4) "sjældent" 5) "aldrig";
• Drive after you have been drinking more than one glass of beer or wine
"Kører efter du har drukket mere end ét glas øl eller vin":
1) very often 2) often 3) sometimes 4) seldom 5) never)
1) "meget enig" 2) "enig" 3) "hverken eller" 4) "uenig" 5) "meget uenig";
• Drive the morning after drinking, uncertain that the alcohol is out of your body
"Kører morgenen efter du har drukket, usikker på om alkoholen er ude af din
krop":
1) very often 2) often 3) sometimes 4) seldom 5) never)
1) "meget enig" 2) "enig" 3) "hverken eller" 4) "uenig" 5) "meget uenig";
Figure 2.4: Example of assessment of explicit attitudes.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Design and procedure
13
2.2.2
Post-test
After the pre-test, participants were required to schedule a meeting and attend a
post-test in a controlled environment (Figure 2.5) .The test was submitted at least
one week or more after the pre-test to avoid that residual memory of the pre-test
would aﬀect it.
Figure 2.5: One participants performing the AAT with a computer and a joystick.
2.2.2.1
Attitude change task
The attitude change experiment was the core of this project. The method used for the
changing attitudes was the behavioral training task the Approach/Avoidance Task
(AAT). The approach has been successfully applied to change implicit attitudes in
other contexts such as math, race prejudice and alcohol consumption ([25], [26], [27],
[28], [29], [30]).
In the AAT, participants were instructed to pull or push a joystick in response to
certain categories of pictures (pull for landscape format pictures and push for portrait
pictures).
2.2.2.2
The AAT
This behavioral training was executed in a controlled environment, with an equipment
composed of a joystick to follow particular instructions displayed on a computer
screen: the procedure required the participant to react to particular stimuli presented
on the computer screen by pulling or pushing a joystick, according to determinate
instructions. The action of pulling the joystick creates a feeling of approaching and
the action of pulling it creates a feeling of avoiding. In addition, pulling the joystick
increased the size of the picture and ampliﬁes the sense of approach, while the action
of pushing it decreased its size and ampliﬁes the sense of avoidance [30] (see Figure 2.6).
Text execution - Participants were exposed to pictures related to sober driving (non
alcoholic driving scenarios) and drunk driving (drunk driving scenarios), but also to
distractors (such as pictures of animals or athletes).
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Methods
Figure 2.6: Eﬀect of pushing/pulling the joystick on the pictures in the screen.
The AAT used in the study consisted of a brief assessment AAT and a training AAT.
The assessment AAT was composed of 20 practice trials where participants learned
to push or pull the joystick in response to diﬀerent picture formats -landscape or
portrait-. This was to hide the fact that they were trained to become more positive or
more negative toward drunk driving.
The training AAT was made of 80 test trials. The number of push and pull trials was
equally distributed (50% push and 50% pull).
There were three diﬀerent attitudes changing conditions, and participants were ran-
domly assigned to one of each groups:
• Group 1: approach-DD (number of participants = 20).AAT aimed at aﬀecting
positively their attitudes toward drunk driving. This means that, after the
experiment execution, it was expected the participants to be more favorable to
drunk driving.
90% of the alcohol pictures came in pull-format and 10% in the push-format,
with reversed contingencies for soft drinks.
• Group 2: avoid-DD (number of participants = 17). AAT aimed at aﬀecting
negatively their attitudes toward drunk driving. This means that, after the
experiment execution, it was expected the participants to be more unfavorable
to drunk driving.
90% of the alcohol pictures came in the push-format and 10% in the pull-format,
with reversed contingencies for soft drinks.
• Group 3: this was the control condition (number of participants = 9) , aimed at
not aﬀecting their attitudes toward drunk driving.
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Design and procedure
15
Regarding Group 1 and Group 2, participants were instructed to pull the joystick
when the displayed picture was a landscape and to push it when was a portrait. In
case of a mistake in the task execution, a red rectangle with a writing “forkert” (wrong)
was displayed.
Participants of Group 3 received a diﬀerent task than Group 1 and Group 2. They
were instructed to move the joystick to the left if the displayed picture was a landscape
and to the right in case it was a portrait.
2.2.2.3
Attitudes toward drunk driving after the AAT
The behavioral training with the AAT was followed by the collection of the ﬁnal data
of the attitudes toward drunk driving (implicit and explicit) of the participants : at
this purpose, participants had to complete the GNAT again (post-GNAT) and the
explicit Questionnaire. In fact, an additional a posteriori measurement of implicit and
explicit attitudes was required to compare these ﬁnal data with the initial attitudes
in order to check if the AAT aﬀected them.
2.2.2.4
Addictional AAT for participants of Group 1
After the ﬁnal measurement of implicit and explicit attitudes, it was necessary to
provide participants of Group 1 with an additional AAT round to negatively aﬀect
their attitudes toward drunk driving. In fact, under the assumption that the changing
attitudes test was able to positively inﬂuence participants toward drunk driving, it
was necessary to provide them with an additional reverse attitudes test in order to
ensure that no residual inﬂuence of the AAT would aﬀect them later on.
==PAGE:28==
16
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3
Analysis
This chapter will detail the operations needed to cleanse the raw data and the analysis
needed to test the hypothesis of the study.
The statistical tool used for the analysis was SPSS version 21 [31].
3.1
The GNAT
The GNAT method recorded for every participant the answer (Go/No-go) given for
each trial and each block (for more details, see appendix B). From these raw data it
was is possible to get measures of implicit attitudes.
For this task, a code was run in SPSS (syntax code in appendix C) [22] .
3.1.1
Cleaning the GNAT data
The ﬁrst step of data analysis involved data cleaning. Data cleaning had the purpose
to remove data that have been collected but were not used any further (following the
recommendation of Nosek and Banaji [22]).
The 4 initial blocks (that are learning blocks) were excluded from the recordings
(ﬁgure 3.1). Also the learning trials 1-19 of blocks 4-12 were deleted. Only trials 19 to
78 of blocks 4-12 were part of the test.
Table 3.1: GNAT data cleaning.
After data cleaning, the sum of hits, misses, false alarms and correct rejections were
computed for each of the 4 conditions and the two speeds (Figure 3.1), considering:
• Hits = number of trials with a "Go" answer, to which the participant responded
"Go";
==PAGE:30==
18
3 Analysis
• False alarms = number of trials with a "No-Go" answer, to which the participant
responded "Go";
• Misses = number of trials with a "Go" answer, to which the participant responded
"No-Go";
• Correct rejections = number of trials with a "No-Go" answer, to which the
participant responded "No-Go";
Figure 3.1: How the new variables were computed.
This operation created 32 variables in total.
These variables were used in order to exclude participants obtaining a perfect score or
only making mistakes. In fact, such scenarios imply necessarily some data-acquisition
errors during the experiment.
D-prime - Implicit attitudes are indicators of the strength of association between
drunk driving-good and drunk driving-bad. The strength of association is represented
by the degree to which items belonging to the target category and attribute could be
discriminated from distractor items that did not belong to these concepts [22].
The value which represents the quantitative measure of this ability is the sensitivity
index, d-prime [22]. D-prime is deﬁned as the inverse of the normal distribution
z(H)-z(F), where H is the hit rate and F is the false alarm rate [22].
Hit rate was computed as the sum of hits at 750ms of speed and hits at 600ms of
speed divided by the total number of trials for two blocks (78 trials x 2 speeds = 156).
The calculation of the false alarm rate followed the same structure as the hit rate.
D-prime was computed individually for every category. The output of this calculation
was made of 8 values of d-prime for each participant: 4 for the pre-GNAT data (one
for each category) and 4 for the post-GNAT data (one for each category). The ﬁnal
data sheet was, then, composed of a comprehensive wide format where each line was
dedicated to a diﬀerent participant and had a total of 8 variables (Figure 3.2).
3.1.2
Pre-GNAT analysis
The GNAT test was based on the theory that participants would be more sensitive to
distinguish a target from a distractor if the target category and the target attribute
==PAGE:31==
3.1 The GNAT
19
Table 3.2: D-prime of the pre- and post- GNAT data.
used by the test were automatically associated in their minds [22].
Initial hypothesis - Since studies proved that the general community perceives drunk
driving in a negative way and relate it to dangerous situations [32], it was expected
to ﬁnd high values of d-prime (higher sensitivity) in the category DD-BAD and low
d-prime values for the category DD-GOOD.
An initial analysis of the mean values of the pre-GNAT d-prime was, then, performed
to test the initial implicit attitudes of the participants.
3.1.3
Dependent t-test analysis
A t-test was performed to compare d-prime values of the pre-GNAT with d-prime
values of the post-GNAT. Its purpose was to test if there was a change between the
two set of data (dependent variables): one set was recorded before and one after the
treatment, which in the present study was the AAT (independent variable).
Initial hypothesis - Because diﬀerent treatments were given to diﬀerent groups and
diﬀerent outcomes were expected, the test run independently for the three groups.
According to the project’s assumptions, Group 1 was expected to show more positive
DD implicit attitudes while Group 2 more negative DD implicit attitudes. Group 3
was not supposed to show any change (control group).
==PAGE:32==
20
3 Analysis
3.1.4
Parametric ANOVA
The analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to test if there was a signiﬁcant diﬀerence
in the d-prime post-GNAT values among the three groups. In particular, the aim of
this test was to determine whether implicit attitudes of the three groups diﬀer from
each other after the AAT.
3.2
Explicit attitudes
3.2.1
Explicit data: recoding and analysis
Explicit data were recoded in order to be applicable for statistical analysis (syntax in
Appendix D).
At this purpose, data were recoded in line with Iversen and Rudmo’s study "Attitudes
towards traﬃc safety, driving behavior and accident involvement among the Norwegian
public" [33]:
• The value -1 corresponded to strong positive answers to the given statements
(often/strongly agree).
• The value 1 corresponded to strong negative answers to the given statements
(never/strongly disagree);
• The value 0 corresponded to neutral answers to the given statements (neutral
condition);
In this way it was easy to test through SPSS if attitudes were positive or negative
(values diﬀerent from 0) with the use of a Wilcoxon test.
3.2.2
Wilcoxon test
The four diﬀerent explicit statements of the online Questionnaire were compared to
see if participants get more positive or more negative explicit attitudes toward drunk
driving. This was done through a Wilcoxon test that checked if the explicit attitudes of
participants were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero before and after the test (previously
deﬁned as the neutral value).
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4
Results
4.1
Implicit attitudes results
4.1.1
Pre-test GNAT results
Participants scored higher d-prime in the categories DD-BAD and NOT DD-GOOD
than in the categories DD-GOOD and NOT DD-BAD (see Table 4.1). This means
that initial implicit data record anti-drunk driving attitudes.
This result is in line with the assumption that participants with negative implicit
attitudes toward drunk driving have high d-prime values (high sensitivity) for the
block DD-BAD and low d-prime values (low sensitivity) for the block DD-GOOD.
Since NO DD is good and NO DD is bad are noise categories, they will not be
considered further.
Table 4.1: Mean values (in the pre-test) for DD is good, NO DD is good, DD is bad,
NO DD is bad.
4.1.2
Dependent t-test results
From the analysis of the paired samples tests for Group 1 (where participants received
stimuli to develop more positive attitudes toward drunk driving), Group 2 (where
participants received stimuli to develop more negative attitudes toward drunk driving)
and Group 3 (control condition), it can be seen that only Group 2 and Group 3
signiﬁcantly changed their implicit attitudes (p > 0.05) (see Table 4.2, 4.3). In these
cases, the AAT impacted on the implicit attitudes, thus the data before and after the
task were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from each other.
In Group 1 the results were not signiﬁcant. For this group, data pre- and post- test
did not signiﬁcantly change (see Table 4.2, 4.3).
==PAGE:34==
22
4 Results
The direction of the change (positive or negative) was obtained through the analysis
of the mean values before and after the AAT (see Table 4.4, 4.5).
Participants of Group 2 were positively inﬂuenced by the test. They showed to have
developed stronger negative attitudes toward drunk driving, as they were supposed to
because they were in the group that pushed away drunk driving pictures. Participants
of Group 3 showed the same trend.
Table 4.2: Paired samples test for DD is good for the three diﬀerent Groups.
Table 4.3: Paired samples test for DD is bad for the three diﬀerent Groups.
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Implicit attitudes results
23
Table 4.4: Mean values for DD is good for the three diﬀerent Groups.
Table 4.5: Mean values for DD is bad for the three diﬀerent Groups.
==PAGE:36==
24
4 Results
4.1.3
ANOVA results
Results of the comparison of only the post-GNAT mean values among the three groups
showed a non signiﬁcant result. This means that there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence
among implicit attitudes of groups which received diﬀerent AAT treatments, when
only looking at the post-test data (see Table 4.6).
Table 4.6: ANOVA results.
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Explicit attitudes results
25
4.2
Explicit attitudes results
4.2.1
Wilcoxon test results
From the analysis of the Wilcoxon test it was possible to see if participants’ explicit
attitudes were more negative/positive toward drunk driving and if they changed after
the AAT task.
In general, in the pre-test the mean values of the answers were higher than 0 for
Question 1 and 2 and lower than 0 for Question 3 and 4. In Questions 1 and 2, values
higher than 0 corresponded to more “strongly agree” answers while, in Questions 3
and 4, values lower than 0 corresponded to “never” answers. This means that the data
recorded regarding explicit attitudes toward drunk driving and behavioral intentions
were negative (anti- drunk driving)(Table 4.7).
Table 4.7: Mean values for explicit attitudes in the pre- and the post- test for the
three Groups.
After the AAT test explicit attitudes in the four conditions are:
• Question 1: I would never drive after drinking alcohol, "Jeg ville aldrig køre
efter at have drukket alkohol".
Group 1: Results show that the mean value increases from the pre-test to the
post-test (Figure 4.7). The Wilcoxon test shows that in the pre-GNAT values
are not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent than 0, while in the post-GNAT they are (p > 0.05)
(Figure 4.8). This means that explicit attitudes changed in a more negative
direction toward drunk driving.
Group 2: The mean value decreases from the pre-test to the post-test (Figure
4.7). Values are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent than 0 in the pre-test and not signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent than 0 in the post-test (p > 0.05)(Figure 4.9). Explicit attitudes become
slightly less anti-drunk driving. Since the number of subjects in this case is
little (n = 9), it may be that with more participants explicit attitudes for this
==PAGE:38==
26
4 Results
question may become more anti-drunk driving.
Group 3: The mean value increases after the AAT task (Figure 4.7). However,
data are not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent than 0 (p > 0.05) (Figure 4.10), so no eﬀect
of the test is perceived.
• Question 2: I would never ride with someone I knew has been drinking alcohol,
"Jeg ville aldrig køre med nogen, jeg vidste, havde drukket alkohol".
Group 1: In this question, as in question 1, the mean value increases after
the AAT (Figure 4.7). Both the pre-GNAT and the post-GNAT values are
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent than 0 (p > 0.05) (Figure 4.8). In this case, there is a
predominant negative attitude before and after the AAT.
Group 2: The mean value slightly increases (Figure 4.7). Pre-GNAT values are
not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent than 0 while post-GNAT they are (p > 0.05) (Figure
4.9). The AAT task slightly inﬂuenced participants against drunk-driving.
Group 3: The mean value increases (Figure 4.7) but values are not signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent than 0 in both pre- and post- GNAT (p > 0.05)(Figure 4.10). No
signiﬁcant change is visible.
• Question 3: Drive after you have been drinking more than one glass of beer or
wine, "Kører efter du har drukket mere end ét glas øl eller vin".
Group 1: Mean values are stable (Figure 4.7) and always signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
than 0 (p > 0.05) (Figure 4.8). General positive attitudes toward drunk driving
are recorded.
Group 2: The mean value increases (Figure 4.7). Values are always signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent than 0 (p > 0.05) (Figure 4.9). This means that attitudes against
drunk-driving are recorded before and after the AAT task.
Group 3: The mean value increases (Figure 4.7). Values are not signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent than 0 in the pre-GNAT while they are in the post-GNAT (p > 0.05)
(Figure 4.10). Attitudes toward drunk driving become more negative.
• Question 4: Drive the morning after drinking, uncertain that the alcohol is out
of your body, "Kører morgenen efter du har drukket, usikker på om alkoholen er
ude af din krop".
Group 1: The mean value increases (Figure 4.7). Values are always signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent than 0 (p > 0.05) (Figure 4.8). More anti-drunk driving attitudes are
recorded.
Group 2: The same path as in group 1 is recorded (Figure 4.7, 4.9).
Group 3: The mean value increases also in this case (Figure 4.7). Values are
not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent than 0 before nor after the AAT (p > 0.05) (Figure
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Explicit attitudes results
27
4.10). No signiﬁcant change is recorded.
Table 4.8: Comparison between explicit attitudes and neutral value (zero) for Group
1 (Wilcoxon test).
Table 4.9: Comparison between explicit attitudes and neutral value (zero) for Group
2 (Wilcoxon test).
Table 4.10: Comparison between explicit attitudes and neutral value (zero) for Group
3 (Wilcoxon test).
==PAGE:40==
28
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
The main purpose of this study was to test the AAT as a possible behavioral training
to change implicit attitudes in the ﬁeld of drunk driving.
The study aimed at
increasing the knowledge in the relation between explicit attitudes, implicit attitudes
and behavior.
This chapter will discuss, though the use of the available literature in the ﬁeld, if
results match the hypothesis of the experiment.
5.1
Implicit and explicit attitudes of participants
This study reveals no inconsistency between implicit and explicit attitudes toward
drunk driving in the participants. In fact, results show negative explicit attitudes
(participants unconsciously stated that drunk driving is bad in the Questionnaire) and
negative implicit attitudes (participants automatically connected drunk driving with
bad in the GNAT).
This result, however, is related to a narrow group, thus not representative of the entire
population. Participants are university students and are supposed to have received
school education in this matter: for this reason they should be more aware of the
risks related to driving under the eﬀect of alcohol and, perhaps, more rational in their
choices. In addition, participants live in the Copenhagen area that, thanks to good
public transports, provide a valid alternative to drunk driving. This aspect plays an
important role from a practical point of view, especially if compared to rural areas of
the country.
5.2
Change in implicit attitudes
One of the main goal of the present study was to examine whether it is possible to
aﬀect implicit attitudes of drivers in the context of drunk driving through the use of
the AAT.
In the experiment, participants were divided in 3 groups and 3 diﬀerent AAT were
given to each group to inﬂuence implicit attitudes in diﬀerent ways: in Group 1 the
task was designed to make participants more favorable toward drunk driving, in Group
2 the task was designed to make participants more unfavorable toward drunk driving
and in Group 3 the task was supposed not to aﬀect their implicit attitudes. According
==PAGE:42==
30
5 Discussion
to the initial hypothesis, the AAT was also not supposed to inﬂuence explicit attitudes.
The ﬁnal output of the experiment gave mixed results. Some results were in accor-
dance to the initial hypothesis of the study: the AAT was able to make participants’
implicit attitudes more anti-drunk driving. Other results were not in accordance with
the initial hypothesis: the AAT was not eﬀective in making implicit attitudes more
pro-drunk driving.
A possible explanation of this result can be that participants’ initial implicit attitudes
are so strongly negative toward drunk driving that the AAT is too weak to change
them into positive (or at least less negative) ones.
This result is in line with a previous study from Wiers (2011) that attempted to change
implicit attitudes toward alcohol consumption on heavy drinkers; also Wiers (2011)
proved that the AAT could aﬀect implicit attitudes when participants were instructed
to avoid alcohol pictures (more negative attitudes toward alcohol consumption), even
if the study was conducted on heavy drinkers (their initial attitudes were probably
positive toward alcohol consumption) [30].
However, in this study, initial attitudes toward drunk driving were negative. For
this reason, it would be relevant for future researches to repeat the experiment on
participants that had been convicted for drunk driving (they will probably have less
negative attitudes toward drunk driving) and to see if the results are similar.
Participants of Group 3 belonged to the control condition. The post-GNAT data were
then supposed to show no change in comparison to the pre-GNAT data. However, it
looks like participants perceived pushing the joystick on the left and on the right side
as an avoiding task. This seems plausible because the hand/ﬁnger movement going
from one side to the other may indicate "no". In fact, results show that the control
group have more anti-drunk driving attitudes after the AAT task. This output has,
however, to be read with care because the sample of participants belonging to this
group is very small (n=9), so further analysis with a bigger sample are necessary to
conﬁrm the present results.
5.3
Change in explicit attitudes
From the analysis of the explicit attitudes data before and after the AAT, participants
show a change also in their explicit attitudes: they become even more negative toward
drunk driving. This result was not expected. However, an explanation for this may
be that during the test participants became more conscious about their anti-drunk
driving attitudes. This condition may have been triggered by the exposition of pictures
and statements about drunk-driving that aﬀected explicit attitudes in a more sociable
desirable way, much like for example priming methods [34], [35]. Priming brings
some information in memory more salient by activating a concept with other related
concepts. Seeing pictures of both safe driving and drunk driving might have activated
the participant’s anti-drunk driving attitudes to a stronger degree in the post test.
This condition is interesting especially when taking into consideration Group 1, where
the AAT was aimed at aﬀecting implicit attitudes in a pro-drunk driving way. Also
==PAGE:43==
5.4 Relationship between implicit and explicit attitudes
31
in this case, the ﬁnal outcome show more negative explicit attitudes, even though
this is a change in complete opposite direction than the AAT’s purpose. This was
made possible because implicit and explicit attitudes are simultaneously formed and
changed by diﬀerent processes and rely on diﬀerent kind of information [36]. In this
case, the behavioral training of the AAT was not able to aﬀect implicit attitudes.
However, the stimuli connected to drunk driving were able to aﬀect implicit memory
through the priming eﬀect.
5.4
Relationship between implicit and explicit attitudes
Previous studies showed that implicit and explicit measures involve diﬀerent processes
and are not generally expected to be highly correlated [37], [17], [38]. This dissociation
between implicit attitudes and self-reported attitudes may likely be observed especially
for socially sensitive issues (as in the case of drunk driving) [39], [40]. In this experiment,
however, the measure of attitudes shows an alignment between implicit and explicit
attitudes. A reason for that may be that the participants consider drunk driving a
highly important problem. In fact, Karpinski (2005) proved that as the importance
of the attitude object increases, the strength of the correlation between implicit and
explicit attitude also increases [41].
5.5
Attitudes and behavior
In this study behavioral data are based on self-reported behavioral intentions: in
the Questionnaire participants were asked to provide information on how they would
behave in certain situations (if they would drive under the eﬀect of alcohol or not) [24].
These questions were used to analyze explicit attitudes and are also an indicator of
the behavioral intention of the participants. In this case, the analysis of the answers
before and after the AAT show that participants were more negative toward drunk
driving after the AAT task. However, it is unknown if these data are representative of
the real behavior of the participants.
A possible explanation of the correlation between attitudes and behavior can be drawn
from Fazio’s Motivation and Opportunity as Determinants model (MODE). This
model suggests that if people have the opportunity and motivation to recollect and
consider their attitudes, then their behavior will be guided by conscious attitudes
(non spontaneous); in situations where people are unable to consider their attitudes,
their behavior may be guided by implicit attitudes (spontaneous decisions) [42], [39].
Finally, self-reported answers can be biased in many ways: participants might prefer
to answer in a socially acceptable way or they might forget their past actions. For this
reason it might not be possible to rely on self-reported answers as accurate measures
of behavior.
==PAGE:44==
32
5 Discussion
5.6
Implications of the study for the future of road safety
Results show that motor stimuli can inﬂuence implicit attitudes in the context of
drunk driving. The behavioral training task AAT can be used to make participants
more anti-drunk driving. This knowledge suggests that implicit attitudes can be
integrated in future road safety interventions.
An idea for a future use of the AAT in accidents prevention can be implementing
computer or phone games based on the AAT model. For example, there already
exist a mouse version of the AAT [20], and further research can investigate on the
possibility to set up the AAT on phone screens (based on the approaching/avoiding
movements of the ﬁnger). This application could be useful for the mass distribution of
the AAT because users would develop more negative attitudes toward drunk driving
while playing. However, further research is necessary to investigate more on how the
eﬀect of the AAT would inﬂuence the behavior (e.g. if the AAT has a short or long
term eﬀect).
Results also show that participants’ implicit and explicit attitudes in relation to drunk
driving are both negative. This ﬁnding is not in line with the initial hypothesis
of a possible inconsistency between implicit attitudes and explicit attitudes (anti-
drunk driving explicit attitudes and pro-drunk driving implicit attitudes had been
hypothesized at the beginning of the study).
From the output of the experiment it is not possible to deﬁne drunk driving in young
drivers as an issue connected to contrasting attitudes. The problem, perhaps, may be
related to other aspects like the inﬂuence of alcohol that lower their risk of perception
or social pressure [9]. However, it is not possible to consider this result as a general
aﬃrmation because the experiment was conducted on a narrow sample. Therefore
results cannot be generalized to the whole population.
5.7
Limitations of the study
Some limitations of the study should be mentioned.
First, the experiment was run on a small number of participants. 72 initial participants
were recruited, but only 46 completed both the pre-test and post-test. Furthermore,
since participants were divided in 3 groups, the ﬁnal data collected come from 17
participants for group 1, 20 participants for group 2 and only 9 participants for group 3.
For this reason, further investigation on the topic with a bigger sample of participants
is recommended.
Another important aspect to take into consideration is that all the data analyzed are
collected from laboratory experiments and from tools (GNAT, Questionnaire) that can
only partially approximate the reality. Therefore, results are not directly comparable
with how participants would behave in a real situation, considering also the presence
of other factors like the inﬂuence of alcohol or external pressures.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
The purpose of this study was to increase the knowledge in the relationship between
implicit attitudes, explicit attitudes and behavior in order to investigate on the
inconsistency between attitudes and behavior within drunk driving in Denmark
(stigmatized behavior but still present in the society). The initial hypothesis explained
that this inconsistency could be based on the lack of interventions on implicit attitudes,
although they also inﬂuence the behaviour.
The study was based on an experiment which tested the possibility to change the
implicit attitudes of young drivers through the use of a behavioral task, the AAT.
Results show that the AAT can be used to make drivers more negative toward drunk
driving. For this reason, it could be interesting to introduce the AAT in new drunk
driving campaigns.
However, from the results on the sample analyzed, it appears no inconsistency between
implicit and explicit attitudes. Participants, which were young university students,
showed negative explicit and implicit attitudes, but also demonstrated an against-
drunk driving behavior in their self-reported answers.
Further researches should be conducted on diﬀerent samples of participants (e.g.
drivers that were previously convicted for drunk driving, with a "pro"-drunk driving
behavior) to investigate a potential generalization of the results of this thesis. Other
studies should also focus more on the eﬀect of the AAT on the behavior in this
context.
==PAGE:46==
34
==PAGE:47==
APPENDIX A
Stimuli used in the GNAT
Figure A.1: Example of drunk driving picture.
Figure A.2: Example of not drunk driving picture.
Good words. Joy (Glæde), Glad (Glad), Cheerful (Munter), Friendly (Venlig), Pleasant
(Behagelig), Lovely (Dejlig), Cozy (Hyggeligt), Pleasure (Fornøjelse), Smile (Smiler),
Laugh (Grine).
Bad words. Nasty (Ækel), Hate (Had), Evilness (Ondskab), Anxiety (Angst), Tragic
(Tragisk), Painful (Smertefulde), Beastly (Væmmelig), Sickening (Kvalmende), Sad
(Sød), Distaster (Katastrofe), Brutal (Brutal), Evil (Onde), Terrible (Forfærdeligt).
==PAGE:48==
36
==PAGE:49==
APPENDIX B
Example of raw data collected by
INQUISIT software
B.1
GNAT data
Figure B.1: Raw data of the GNAT recorded by INQUISIT.
B.2
Questionnaire data
Figure B.2: Raw data of the online Questionnaire recorded by INQUISIT.
==PAGE:50==
38
==PAGE:51==
APPENDIX C
SPSS syntax for implicit attitudes
data analysis
1
∗∗∗DATA CLEANING.
2
3
∗∗∗this command select the ﬁle.
4
5
GET FILE = "\tyrili.lokal\Proﬁler\Kampen\MIJU\Desktop\PostSamlet.sav".
6
7
∗∗∗this command sort the cases by participant number (a new participant start only when the data of the
former participants are completed).
8
9
SORT CASES BY subj (A).
10
11
∗∗∗This command removes the blocks 1−4 (learning blocks).
12
13
SELECT IF(block > 4).
14
15
EXECUTE.
16
17
∗∗∗This command removes every trial 1−19 (learning trials).
18
19
SELECT IF((trial >= 19) AND (trial <= 78)).
20
21
EXECUTE.
22
23
∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗.
24
25
∗∗∗DEFINES HITS, MISSES, FALSE−ALARMS, CORRECT REJECTIONS
26
∗∗∗57 (space bar is the button number 57) means Go, 0 means No−go
27
28
29
∗∗∗This command says that 4 means that the participant did not respond when stimulus was present.
30
31
if (response = 0) and (corr = 1) corrrej = 4.
32
33
∗∗∗This command says that 3 means that the participant did not respond when the stimulus was not present.
34
35
if (response = 0) and (corr = 0) miss = 3.
36
37
∗∗∗This command says that 2 means that the participant responded when stimulus was not present.
38
39
if (response = 57) and (corr = 0) falsalr = 2.
40
41
∗∗∗This command says that 1 means that the participant responded when stimulus was present.
42
43
if (response = 57) and (corr = 1) hit = 1.
44
45
46
∗∗∗This command save these data with a new signal detection tag.
47
48
SAVE OUTFILE = "\\tyrili.lokal\Proﬁler\Kampen\MIJU\Desktop\gnatdemo.sav".
49
50
51
∗∗∗This command update the ﬁle again.
==PAGE:52==
40
C SPSS syntax for implicit attitudes data analysis
52
53
GET FILE = "\\tyrili.lokal\Proﬁler\Kampen\MIJU\Desktop\gnatdemo.sav".
54
55
56
∗∗∗This command sum the hits,misses,false alarms and correct rejections for each of the following category.
57
∗∗∗bg = bugs−good = drunk driving is good.
58
∗∗∗fg = fruit−good = not drunk driving is good (noise).
59
∗∗∗bb = bugs_bad = drunk driving is bad.
60
∗∗∗fb = fruit−bad = not drunk driving is bad (noise).
61
62
SELECT IF (code = "DDisGOOD_750").
63
64
AGGREGATE
65
/OUTFILE=∗.
66
/BREAK=subj
67
/bg75hit = SUM(hit)
68
/bg75fal = SUM(falsalr)
69
/bg75mis = SUM(miss)
70
/bg75cor = SUM(corrrej)
71
72
SORT CASES BY subj (A).
73
74
SAVE OUTFILE = "\\tyrili.lokal\Proﬁler\Kampen\MIJU\Desktop\bg75.sav".
75
76
77
GET FILE = "\\tyrili.lokal\Proﬁler\Kampen\MIJU\Desktop\gnatdemo.sav".
78
79
SELECT IF (code = "NODDisGOOD_750").
80
81
AGGREGATE
82
/OUTFILE=∗.
83
/BREAK=subj
84
/fg75hit = SUM(hit)
85
/fg75fal = SUM(falsalr)
86
/fg75mis = SUM(miss)
87
/fg75cor = SUM(corrrej).
88
89
SORT CASES BY subj (A).
90
91
SAVE OUTFILE = "\\tyrili.lokal\Proﬁler\Kampen\MIJU\Desktop\fg75.sav".
92
93
94
GET FILE = "\\tyrili.lokal\Proﬁler\Kampen\MIJU\Desktop\gnatdemo.sav".
95
96
SELECT IF (code = "DDisBAD_750").
97
98
AGGREGATE
99
/OUTFILE=∗.
100
/BREAK=subj
101
/bb75hit = SUM(hit)
102
/bb75fal = SUM(falsalr)
103
/bb75mis = SUM(miss)
104
/bb75cor = SUM(corrrej).
105
106
SORT CASES BY subj (A).
107
108
SAVE OUTFILE = "\\tyrili.lokal\Proﬁler\Kampen\MIJU\Desktop\bb75.sav".
109
110
111
GET FILE = "\\tyrili.lokal\Proﬁler\Kampen\MIJU\Desktop\gnatdemo.sav".
112
113
SELECT IF (code = "NODDisBAD_750").
114
115
AGGREGATE
116
/OUTFILE=∗.
117
/BREAK=subj
118
/fb75hit = SUM(hit)
119
/fb75fal = SUM(falsalr)
==PAGE:53==
C SPSS syntax for implicit attitudes data analysis
41
120
/fb75mis = SUM(miss)
121
/fb75cor = SUM(corrrej).
122
123
SORT CASES BY subj (A).
124
125
SAVE OUTFILE = "\\tyrili.lokal\Proﬁler\Kampen\MIJU\Desktop\fb75.sav".
126
127
128
GET FILE = "\\tyrili.lokal\Proﬁler\Kampen\MIJU\Desktop\gnatdemo.sav".
129
130
SELECT IF (code = "DDisGOOD_600").
131
132
AGGREGATE
133
/OUTFILE=∗.
134
/BREAK=subj
135
/bg60hit = SUM(hit)
136
/bg60fal = SUM(falsalr)
137
/bg60mis = SUM(miss)
138
/bg60cor = SUM(corrrej).
139
140
SORT CASES BY subj (A).
141
142
SAVE OUTFILE = "\\tyrili.lokal\Proﬁler\Kampen\MIJU\Desktop\bg60.sav".
143
144
145
GET FILE = "\\tyrili.lokal\Proﬁler\Kampen\MIJU\Desktop\gnatdemo.sav".
146
147
SELECT IF (code = "NODDisGOOD_600").
148
149
AGGREGATE
150
/OUTFILE=∗.
151
/BREAK=subj
152
/fg60hit = SUM(hit)
153
/fg60fal = SUM(falsalr)
154
/fg60mis = SUM(miss)
155
/fg60cor = SUM(corrrej).
156
157
SORT CASES BY subj (A).
158
159
SAVE OUTFILE = "\\tyrili.lokal\Proﬁler\Kampen\MIJU\Desktop\fg60.sav".
160
161
162
GET FILE = "\\tyrili.lokal\Proﬁler\Kampen\MIJU\Desktop\gnatdemo.sav".
163
164
SELECT IF (code = "DDisBAD_600").
165
166
AGGREGATE
167
/OUTFILE=∗.
168
/BREAK=subj
169
/bb60hit = SUM(hit)
170
/bb60fal = SUM(falsalr)
171
/bb60mis = SUM(miss)
172
/bb60cor = SUM(corrrej).
173
174
SORT CASES BY subj (A).
175
176
SAVE OUTFILE = "\\tyrili.lokal\Proﬁler\Kampen\MIJU\Desktop\bb60.sav".
177
178
179
GET FILE = "\\tyrili.lokal\Proﬁler\Kampen\MIJU\Desktop\gnatdemo.sav".
180
181
SELECT IF (code = "NODDisBAD_600").
182
183
AGGREGATE
184
/OUTFILE=∗.
185
/BREAK=subj
186
/fb60hit = SUM(hit)
187
/fb60fal = SUM(falsalr)
==PAGE:54==
42
C SPSS syntax for implicit attitudes data analysis
188
/fb60mis = SUM(miss)
189
/fb60cor = SUM(corrrej).
190
191
SORT CASES BY subj (A).
192
193
SAVE OUTFILE = "\\tyrili.lokal\Proﬁler\Kampen\MIJU\Desktop\fb60.sav".
194
195
196
∗∗∗This command put together the respective ﬁles.
197
198
MATCH FILES
199
/FILE= "\\tyrili.lokal\Proﬁler\Kampen\MIJU\Desktop\bg75.sav".
200
/FILE= "\\tyrili.lokal\Proﬁler\Kampen\MIJU\Desktop\fg75.sav".
201
/FILE= "\\tyrili.lokal\Proﬁler\Kampen\MIJU\Desktop\bb75.sav".
202
/FILE= "\\tyrili.lokal\Proﬁler\Kampen\MIJU\Desktop\fb75.sav".
203
/FILE= "\\tyrili.lokal\Proﬁler\Kampen\MIJU\Desktop\bg60.sav".
204
/FILE= "\\tyrili.lokal\Proﬁler\Kampen\MIJU\Desktop\fg60.sav".
205
/FILE= "\\tyrili.lokal\Proﬁler\Kampen\MIJU\Desktop\bb60.sav".
206
/FILE= "\\tyrili.lokal\Proﬁler\Kampen\MIJU\Desktop\fb60.sav".
207
/BY subj.
208
209
EXECUTE.
210
211
212
213
∗∗∗This command record system missing values to 0.
214
215
RECODE bg75hit bg75fal bg75mis bg75cor fg75hit fg75fal fg75mis fg75cor
216
bb75hit bb75fal bb75mis bb75cor fb75hit fb75fal fb75mis fb75cor
217
bg60hit bg60fal bg60mis bg60cor fg60hit fg60fal fg60mis fg60cor
218
bb60hit bb60fal bb60mis bb60cor fb60hit fb60fal fb60mis fb60cor (SYSMIS=0).
219
220
EXECUTE.
221
222
∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗.
223
224
∗∗∗Now we have a comprehensive wide format (one line per participant) with all the values of hits, misses,
false alarms, correct rejections for each category for a total of 64 variables.
225
226
SAVE OUTFILE = "\\tyrili.lokal\Proﬁler\Kampen\MIJU\Desktop\POSTgnatdata.sav".
227
228
∗∗∗This command corrects perfect score and 0 score, since it is not possible to completely complete/mistake
every trial.
229
230
RECODE bg75hit bg75fal bg75mis bg75cor fg75hit fg75fal fg75mis fg75cor
231
bb75hit bb75fal bb75mis bb75cor fb75hit fb75fal fb75mis fb75cor
232
bg60hit bg60fal bg60mis bg60cor fg60hit fg60fal fg60mis fg60cor
233
bb60hit bb60fal bb60mis bb60cor fb60hit fb60fal fb60mis fb60cor (78=77.09) (0=.91).
234
235
EXECUTE.
236
237
238
∗∗∗This command design a new variable that is the proportion of hits/false alarms on the number of trials.
239
240
COMPUTE pbg75hit=bg75hit/78.
241
242
COMPUTE pbg75fal=bg75fal/78.
243
244
COMPUTE pfg75hit=fg75hit/78.
245
246
COMPUTE pfg75fal=fg75fal/78.
247
248
COMPUTE pbb75hit=bb75hit/78.
249
250
COMPUTE pbb75fal=bb75fal/78.
251
252
COMPUTE pfb75hit=fb75hit/78.
253
==PAGE:55==
C SPSS syntax for implicit attitudes data analysis
43
254
COMPUTE pfb75fal=fb75fal/78.
255
256
257
COMPUTE pbg60hit=bg60hit/78.
258
259
COMPUTE pbg60fal=bg60fal/78.
260
261
COMPUTE pfg60hit=fg60hit/78.
262
263
COMPUTE pfg60fal=fg60fal/78.
264
265
COMPUTE pbb60hit=bb60hit/78.
266
267
COMPUTE pbb60fal=bb60fal/78.
268
269
COMPUTE pfb60hit=fb60hit/78.
270
271
COMPUTE pfb60fal=fb60fal/78.
272
273
274
275
∗∗∗This command compute the inverse standard normal distribution for hits and false alarms for every block.
276
277
COMPUTE bhbg75 = PROBIT (bg75hit/78).
278
279
COMPUTE bhfg75 = PROBIT (fg75hit/78).
280
281
COMPUTE bhbb75 = PROBIT (bb75hit/78).
282
283
COMPUTE bhfb75 = PROBIT (fb75hit/78).
284
285
286
COMPUTE bhbg60 = PROBIT (bg60hit/78).
287
288
COMPUTE bhfg60 = PROBIT (fg60hit/78).
289
290
COMPUTE bhbb60 = PROBIT (bb60hit/78).
291
292
COMPUTE bhfb60 = PROBIT (fb60hit/78).
293
294
295
COMPUTE bfbg75 = PROBIT (bg75fal/78).
296
297
COMPUTE bﬀg75 = PROBIT (fg75fal/78).
298
299
COMPUTE bfbb75 = PROBIT (bb75fal/78).
300
301
COMPUTE bﬀb75 = PROBIT (fb75fal/78).
302
303
304
COMPUTE bfbg60 = PROBIT (bg60fal/78).
305
306
COMPUTE bﬀg60 = PROBIT (fg60fal/78).
307
308
COMPUTE bfbb60 = PROBIT (bb60fal/78).
309
310
COMPUTE bﬀb60 = PROBIT (fb60fal/78).
311
312
313
∗∗∗This command compute the d−prime. ∗It corresponds to the diﬀerence of the inverse standard normal
distribution of hits and false alarms for each group (bg,fb,bb,gb).
314
315
COMPUTE dbg75=bhbg75−bfbg75.
316
317
COMPUTE dfg75=bhfg75−bﬀg75.
318
319
COMPUTE dbb75=bhbb75−bfbb75.
320
==PAGE:56==
44
C SPSS syntax for implicit attitudes data analysis
321
COMPUTE dfb75=bhfb75−bﬀb75.
322
323
324
COMPUTE dbg60=bhbg60−bfbg60.
325
326
COMPUTE dfg60=bhfg60−bﬀg60.
327
328
COMPUTE dbb60=bhbb60−bfbb60.
329
330
COMPUTE dfb60=bhfb60−bﬀb60.
331
332
333
∗∗∗This command merges the values in outcome from the two speeds (750ms and 600ms). ∗It compute the
inverse standard normal deviation of hit|750ms + hits|600ms / 156 (=78trials x2).
334
335
COMPUTE bhbg = PROBIT ((bg75hit+bg60hit)/156).
336
337
COMPUTE bhfg = PROBIT ((fg75hit+fg60hit)/156).
338
339
COMPUTE bhbb = PROBIT ((bb75hit+bb60hit)/156).
340
341
COMPUTE bhfb = PROBIT ((fb75hit+fb60hit)/156).
342
343
344
COMPUTE bfbg = PROBIT ((bg75fal+bg60fal)/156).
345
346
COMPUTE bﬀg = PROBIT ((fg75fal+fg60fal)/156).
347
348
COMPUTE bfbb = PROBIT ((bb75fal+bb60fal)/156).
349
350
COMPUTE bﬀb = PROBIT ((fb75fal+fb60fal)/156).
351
352
353
∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗.
354
355
∗∗∗This command compute the d−prime which will be used further. ∗It is deﬁned as the diﬀerence of the
inverse standard normal deviation of the hits and false alarms computed above.
356
357
COMPUTE dDDisGOOD=bhbg−bfbg.
358
359
COMPUTE dNODDisGOOD=bhfg−bﬀg.
360
361
COMPUTE dDDisBAD=bhbb−bfbb.
362
363
COMPUTE dNODDisBAD=bhfb−bﬀb.
364
365
∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗.
366
367
368
∗∗∗This command compute the value of the bias, deﬁned as 1−x. x= hit|750ms + hits|600ms / 156.
369
370
COMPUTE bzDDisGOOD = PROBIT ((1−(bg75fal+bg60fal)/156)).
371
372
COMPUTE bzNODDisGOOD = PROBIT ((1−(fg75fal+fg60fal)/156)).
373
374
COMPUTE bzDDisBAD = PROBIT ((1−(bb75fal+bb60fal)/156)).
375
376
COMPUTE bzNODDisBAD = PROBIT ((1−(fb75fal+fb60fal)/156)).
377
378
379
COMPUTE bDDisGOOD = PDF.NORMAL ((bzDDisGOOD−dDDisGOOD),0,1) / PDF.NORMAL (bzDDisGOOD,0,1).
380
381
COMPUTE bNODDisGOOD = PDF.NORMAL ((bzNODDisGOOD−dNODDisGOOD),0,1) / PDF.NORMAL (
bzNODDisGOOD,0,1).
382
383
COMPUTE bDDisBAD = PDF.NORMAL ((bzDDisBAD−dDDisBAD),0,1) / PDF.NORMAL (bzDDisBAD,0,1).
384
==PAGE:57==
C SPSS syntax for implicit attitudes data analysis
45
385
COMPUTE bNODDisBAD = PDF.NORMAL ((bzNODDisBAD−dNODDisBAD),0,1) / PDF.NORMAL (bzNODDisBAD
,0,1).
386
exe.
387
388
∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗.
389
390
∗∗∗This is the data analysis. ∗This operation has to be performed for the pre and the post GNAT.
391
392
DESCRIPTIVES
393
VARIABLES=dNODDisGOOD dNODDisBAD dDDisGOOD dDDisBAD
394
/STATISTICS=MEAN STDDEV MIN MAX .
395
396
∗GLM.
397
dNODDisGOOD dNODDisBAD dDDisGOOD dDDisBAD
398
/WSFACTOR = category 2 Polynomial valence 2 Polynomial
399
/METHOD = SSTYPE(3)
400
/CRITERIA = ALPHA(.05)
401
/WSDESIGN = category valence category∗.valence .
==PAGE:58==
46
==PAGE:59==
APPENDIX D
SPSS syntax for explicit attitudes
data recoding
1
2
∗This command creates new variables for the four question. ∗It assign to the values 1,2 −> 1 to 4,5 −> −1
and to 3 −> 0.
3
4
recode
5
JegVilleAldriSelv
6
JegVilleAldriSittePaa
7
AldriEtterMerEnEttGlass
8
KoereDagenEfter
9
POSTJegVilleAldriSelv
10
POSTJegVilleAldriSittePaa
11
POSTAldriEtterMerEnEttGlass
12
POSTKoereDagenEfter
13
(1,2=1)(4,5=−1)(3=0)
14
into
15
JegVilleAldriSelv_bin
16
JegVilleAldriSittePaa_bin
17
AldriEtterMerEnEttGlass_bin
18
KoereDagenEfter_bin
19
POSTJegVilleAldriSelv_bin
20
POSTJegVilleAldriSittePaa_bin
21
POSTAldriEtterMerEnEttGlass_bin
22
POSTKoereDagenEfter_bin
23
.
24
exe.
25
26
sort cases by AAT_groups
27
.
28
split ﬁle by AAT_groups
29
.
30
FREQUENCIES
31
JegVilleAldriSelv_bin
32
POSTJegVilleAldriSelv_bin
33
JegVilleAldriSittePaa_bin
34
POSTJegVilleAldriSittePaa_bin
35
AldriEtterMerEnEttGlass_bin
36
POSTAldriEtterMerEnEttGlass_bin
37
KoereDagenEfter_bin
38
POSTKoereDagenEfter_bin
39
.
==PAGE:60==
48
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
European Commission. (2006). Alcohol-related harm in europe-key data, [Online].
Available: https://ec.europa.eu/health/archive/ph_determinants/life_
style/alcohol/documents/alcohol_factsheet_en.pdf (visited on May 8,
2017) (cited on page 1).
[2]
The Danish Road Safety Commission National Action Plan 2013-2020, Every ac-
cident is one too many - a shared responsibility. Danish Road Safety Commission,
2013 (cited on pages 1, 3).
[3]
T. L. Traynor, “The impact of driver alcohol use on crash severity: A crash
speciﬁc analysis”, Transportation research part E: logistics and transportation
review, volume 41, number 5, pages 421–437, 2005 (cited on page 1).
[4]
E. J. Ogden and H. Moskowitz, “Eﬀects of alcohol and other drugs on driver
performance”, Traﬃc injury prevention, volume 5, number 3, pages 185–198,
2004 (cited on page 1).
[5]
Sundhedsstyrelsen (National Board of Health), Alkoholstatistik 2015 - nationale
data: Sundhedsstyrelsen og statens serum institut. Statens Serum Institut, 2015
(cited on page 1).
[6]
A. S. Hansen and C. Jensen, “Risiko i traﬁkken 2007-2010”, Technical University
of Denmark, Transport, Tech. Rep., 2012 (cited on page 1).
[7]
I. Behrensdorﬀ, I. Bernhoft, and J. Christensen, “Spiritus kørsel i danmark, hvem
hvormeget hvornår [impaired driving in denmark, a roadside investigation]”,
The Traﬃc Safety Board, Copenhagen, Denmark, 1989 (cited on page 1).
[8]
European Commission. (2015). Interim evaluation of the policy orientations on
road safety 2011-2020, [Online]. Available: https://ec.europa.eu/transport/
sites / transport / files / facts - fundings / evaluations / doc / interim -
road-safety-evaluation-report-final8june15.pdf (visited on Jun. 18,
2017) (cited on page 1).
[9]
European Conference of Minister of Transports, Young drivers-the road to safety.
OECD, 2006 (cited on pages 1, 2, 32).
[10]
Statistics Denmark. (2017). Decisions by sex, age, type of decision, type of oﬀence
and time, [Online]. Available: http://www.statistikbanken.dk/STRAF40
(visited on May 8, 2017) (cited on pages 2–4).
[11]
R. B. Voas and J. H. Lacey, “Drunk driving enforcement, adjudication, and
sanctions in the united states”, Drinking and driving: Advances in Research and
Prevention Edited by R. Jean Wilson, Robert and Mann, 1990 (cited on page 2).
==PAGE:62==
50
Bibliography
[12]
P. Greibe, “Road accidents in denmark”, IATSS research, volume 24, number 1,
pages 78–80, 2000 (cited on page 2).
[13]
I. M. Bernhoft and I. Behrensdorﬀ, “Eﬀect of lowering the alcohol limit in
denmark”, Accident Analysis & Prevention, volume 35, number 4, pages 515–
525, 2003 (cited on page 2).
[14]
World Health Organization. (2014). Denmark, [Online]. Available: http://
www.who.int/substance_abuse/publications/global_alcohol_report/
profiles/dnk.pdf (visited on Jun. 21, 2017) (cited on page 3).
[15]
Det Økologiske Råd. (2014). Traﬁktypen - bil, [Online]. Available: http://www.
trafiktypen.dk/bil (visited on May 9, 2017) (cited on page 4).
[16]
TrygFonden. (2011). Traﬁksikkerhed ifolge danskerne-5 paradokser om sprit og
fart i traﬃken, [Online]. Available: https://www.mm.dk/report/trafiksikkerhed-
ifolge-danskerne/?download=1&attr=30998 (visited on Jun. 19, 2017) (cited
on page 4).
[17]
A. G. Greenwald and M. R. Banaji, “Implicit social cognition: Attitudes, self-
esteem, and stereotypes.”, Psychological review, volume 102, number 1, page 4,
1995 (cited on pages 4, 31).
[18]
I. Krumpal, “Determinants of social desirability bias in sensitive surveys: A
literature review”, Quality & Quantity, volume 47, number 4, pages 2025–2047,
2013 (cited on page 4).
[19]
P. Ulleberg and T. Rundmo, “Personality, attitudes and risk perception as
predictors of risky driving behaviour among young drivers”, Safety science,
volume 41, number 5, pages 427–443, 2003 (cited on page 4).
[20]
Draine, SC, “Inquisit. 5.0”, ed: Seattle, WA: Millisecond Software, LLC, 2016
(cited on pages 8, 32).
[21]
L. M. Martinussen, M. J. Sømhovd, M. Møller, and F. Siebler, “A go/no-
go approach to uncovering implicit attitudes towards safe and risky driving”,
Transportation Research Part F: Traﬃc Psychology and Behaviour, volume 30,
pages 74–83, 2015 (cited on page 8).
[22]
B. A. Nosek and M. R. Banaji, “The go/no-go association task”, Social cognition,
volume 19, number 6, pages 625–666, 2001 (cited on pages 8, 9, 17–19).
[23]
B. Egloﬀand S. C. Schmukle, “Predictive validity of an implicit association test
for assessing anxiety.”, Journal of personality and social psychology, volume 83,
number 6, page 1441, 2002 (cited on page 12).
[24]
H. Iversen, “Risk-taking attitudes and risky driving behaviour”, Transporta-
tion Research Part F: Traﬃc Psychology and Behaviour, volume 7, number 3,
pages 135–150, 2004 (cited on pages 12, 31).
[25]
K. Kawakami, J. F. Dovidio, J. Moll, S. Hermsen, and A. Russin, “Just say no
(to stereotyping): Eﬀects of training in the negation of stereotypic associations
on stereotype activation.”, Journal of personality and social psychology, volume
78, number 5, page 871, 2000 (cited on page 13).
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
51
[26]
K. Kawakami, J. F. Dovidio, and S. Van Kamp, “The impact of counterstereo-
typic training and related correction processes on the application of stereotypes”,
Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, volume 10, number 2, pages 139–156,
2007 (cited on page 13).
[27]
K. Kawakami, C. E. Phills, J. R. Steele, and J. F. Dovidio, “(close) distance
makes the heart grow fonder: Improving implicit racial attitudes and interracial
interactions through approach behaviors.”, Journal of personality and social
psychology, volume 92, number 6, page 957, 2007 (cited on page 13).
[28]
K. Kawakami, J. R. Steele, C. Cifa, C. E. Phills, and J. F. Dovidio, “Approaching
math increases math= me and math= pleasant”, Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, volume 44, number 3, pages 818–825, 2008 (cited on page 13).
[29]
R. W. Wiers, M. Rinck, R. Kordts, K. Houben, and F. Strack, “Retraining auto-
matic action-tendencies to approach alcohol in hazardous drinkers”, Addiction,
volume 105, number 2, pages 279–287, 2010 (cited on page 13).
[30]
R. W. Wiers, C. Eberl, M. Rinck, E. S. Becker, and J. Lindenmeyer, “Retraining
automatic action tendencies changes alcoholic patients’ approach bias for alcohol
and improves treatment outcome”, Psychological science, volume 22, number 4,
pages 490–497, 2011 (cited on pages 13, 30).
[31]
M. J. Norušis, Spss/pc+ for the ibm pc/xt/at. Spss, 2016, volume 1 (cited on
page 17).
[32]
S. Baum, “Drink driving as a social problem: Comparing the attitudes and
knowledge of drink driving oﬀenders and the general community”, Accident
analysis & prevention, volume 32, number 5, pages 689–694, 2000 (cited on
page 19).
[33]
H. Iversen and T. Rundmo, “Attitudes towards traﬃc safety, driving behaviour
and accident involvement among the norwegian public”, Ergonomics, volume 47,
number 5, pages 555–572, 2004 (cited on page 20).
[34]
J. A. Bargh, “What have we been priming all these years? on the development,
mechanisms, and ecology of nonconscious social behavior”, European journal of
social psychology, volume 36, number 2, pages 147–168, 2006 (cited on page 30).
[35]
A. Dijksterhuis and J. A. Bargh, “The perception-behavior expressway: Auto-
matic eﬀects of social perception on social behavior”, Advances in experimental
social psychology, volume 33, pages 1–40, 2001 (cited on page 30).
[36]
R. J. Rydell, A. R. McConnell, D. M. Mackie, and L. M. Strain, “Of two minds:
Forming and changing valence-inconsistent implicit and explicit attitudes”,
Psychological Science, volume 17, number 11, pages 954–958, 2006 (cited on
page 31).
[37]
T. D. Wilson, S. Lindsey, and T. Y. Schooler, “A model of dual attitudes.”,
Psychological review, volume 107, number 1, page 101, 2000 (cited on page 31).
[38]
J. F. Dovidio, K. Kawakami, C. Johnson, B. Johnson, and A. Howard, “On the
nature of prejudice: Automatic and controlled processes”, Journal of experimental
social psychology, volume 33, number 5, pages 510–540, 1997 (cited on page 31).
==PAGE:64==
52
Bibliography
[39]
R. H. Fazio, “Multiple processes by which attitudes guide behavior: The mode
model as an integrative framework”, Advances in experimental social psychology,
volume 23, pages 75–109, 1990 (cited on page 31).
[40]
J. F. Dovidio, “New technologies”, Questions about questions: Inquiries into the
cognitive bases of surveys, page 204, 1992 (cited on page 31).
[41]
A. Karpinski, R. B. Steinman, and J. L. Hilton, “Attitude importance as a
moderator of the relationship between implicit and explicit attitude measures”,
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, volume 31, number 7, pages 949–962,
2005 (cited on page 31).
[42]
R. H. Fazio, “How do attitudes guide behavior?”, 1986 (cited on page 31).
