==PAGE:1==
==PAGE:2==
Front page pictures upper left and right: APX ﬁlling facility during construc-
tion by (Mads Frederik Architecture Photography - Novo Nordisk APX , 2017),
lower left and right: Conceptual illustrations of APX from the outside and from
the inside by NNE
==PAGE:3==
Title:
Site speciﬁc environmental assessment of construction
and operation of pharmaceutical production plants
Danish title:
Stedspeciﬁk miljøvurdering af konstruktion og drift af
farmaceutiske produktionsanlæg
Project type:
Master Thesis
Field of study
Architectural Engineering - Energy and sustainability
Credits:
30 ECTS points
Language:
English
Project period:
23.01.2017 - 23.06.2017
Auther:
Jacob Bjerregaard-Svendsen
University:
Technical University of Denmark
Division of Quantitative Sustainability Assessment
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Academic supervisor:
Morten Birkved
Associate Professor
Division of Quantitative Sustainability Assessment
Birk@dtu.dk
Industry supervisor:
NNE A/S
Att. Jacob Vester
Nybrovej 80
2820 Gentofte
==PAGE:4==
d
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis of 30 ECTS points is produced by Jacob Bjerregaard-Svendsen in
the spring semester of 2017 at the Technical University of Denmark. The thesis
is completed to fulﬁl the requirements for acquiring the degree of Master of
Science in Engineering (Architectural Engineering).
The thesis is written in
collaboration with the Division of Quantitative Sustainability Assessment with
associate professor Morten Birkved as counsellor. Furthermore, NNE A/S with
Jacob Vester has served as outside counsellor and provided all technical data
for the present thesis.
The thesis deals with site speciﬁc environmental assessments of pharmaceu-
tical production plants as the selection of locations might have signiﬁcantly dif-
ferent environmental impacts depending on resource availability and production
at the respective site.
The thesis consists of a comprehensive life cycle assessment (LCA) of the
materials used in the construction of the respective production facility, as well
as the energy usage in its operation stage.
Lyngby, 23-June-2017
Jacob Bjerregaard-Svendsen
==PAGE:6==
ii
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
The development of the environmental mindset through the past decades has
increased the focus on buildings and their energy consumption as well as sus-
tainable production. In the pharmaceutical sector, sustainable production can
be diﬃcult as a large energy consumption is often required to maintain a high
level of standard in the production environment.
The present thesis evaluates a case study of a new Novo Nordisk insulin ﬁll-
ing facility and compares, through an LCA, the environmental impact from the
newly constructed building’s life cycle with the environmental impact from its
large energy consumption. Furthermore, the production is theoretically placed
in ﬁve countries around the world to assess how much the local climates aﬀect
the energy consumption and if the impact from product distribution is signif-
icant. Lastly, the respective calculated energy consumptions are investigated
in relation to the country’s energy grid mix and provide diﬀerentiated environ-
mental impacts for the ﬁve countries investigated.
The results of the LCA show that 1) the environmental impact from energy
consumption far exceeds that of the building’s life cycle, 2) local climate con-
ditions aﬀect the total energy consumption by up to 20% in the investigated
countries, 3) distribution does not induce large impact to the product system if
it is distributed by water, 4) a signiﬁcant reduction in environmental impact is
found in countries with a high degree of renewable energy in their national grid
mixes.
In the pursuit of sustainable production, companies with energy intensive
productions can substantially decrease their environmental impact by choosing
to produce in countries with a high level of renewable energy in their grid mix.
This study can then serve as a decision variable for companies when selecting a
==PAGE:8==
iv
location to place a new production facility. In this process other factors also play
a part, primarily economic considerations can make the environmental aspect
secondary.
However, in line with the current development in environmental
awareness the results of this thesis could get a larger role in time.
==PAGE:9==
Abstract (Danish)
I forbindelse med udviklingen af den miljømæssige tankegang de sidste årtier er
et øget fokus kommet på bygninger og deres energiforbrug samt bæredygtig pro-
duktion. Bæredygtig produktion i den farmaceutiske sektor kan være vanskelig,
da der ofte kræves et stort energiforbrug for at vedligeholde en høj standard i
produktionsmiljøet.
I denne afhandling undersøges et casestudie af en nyt Novo Nordisk insulin
fyldefabrik og ved hjælp af livscyklusvurdering sammenlignes miljøpåvirknin-
gen fra den nyopførte bygning med miljøpåvirkningen fra det store energifor-
brug. Derudover ﬂyttes produktionen rundt til fem lande rundt i verden for,
at vurdere hvor meget det lokale klima påvirker det samlede energiforbrug og
om distributionen af produktet udgør en betydelig miljøpåvirkning. Slutteligt
undersøges det beregnede energiforbrug i forhold til det respektive lands en-
ergimix og giver diﬀerentierede miljøpåvirkninger for the fem undersøgte lande
hver især.
Resultaterne fra livscyklusvurderingen viser, at 1) den miljømæssige påvirkn-
ing fra energiforbruget overgår langt påvirkningen fra bygningen alene, 2) de
lokale klima påvirker det totale energiforbrug med op til 20%, 3) distribution
tilføjer ikke nogen stor miljøpåvirkning til produktsystemet så længe distribu-
tionen sker med skib og 4) i lande med en stor andel af vedvarende energi i deres
nationale grid mix opnås en markant reduktion af den miljømæssige påvirkning.
I stræben efter bæredygtig produktion kan virksomheder med energiintensive
produktioner væsentligt formindske deres miljøpåvirkning ved vælge at produc-
ere i lande med høje andele af vedvarende energi. Resultaterne fra denne under-
søgelse kan dermed bruges som beslutningsvariabel for virksomheder når de væl-
==PAGE:10==
vi
ger hvor en ny produktionsfacilitet skal placeres. Ander faktorer spiller også en
rolle i denne proces, hvor specielt økonomiske overvejelser kan gøre de miljømæs-
sige perspektiver sekundære. Dog kan resultaterne fra denne afhandling få en
større rolle med tiden, da bæredygtighed og den miljømæssige tankegang får
større og større påvirkning.
==PAGE:11==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank everyone around me for being supportive and active lis-
teners during the process of this thesis. Furthermore, a special thank you is
directed to my supervisor Morten Birkved and co-supervisor Jacob Vester who
have played a central role in the project as input-givers and guides. Addition-
ally, NNE A/S have provided me with technical information on the case study
as well as an oﬃce space along with great colleagues and coﬀee, of which i am
truly grateful. Lastly, Bettina and Nanja of Novo Nordisk gets a big thank you
for being helpful and interested during the project and providing input from the
producing company’s point of view.
==PAGE:12==
viii
==PAGE:13==
List of Figures
3.1
The four phases of the LCA framework. Figure based on DE/EN
14040 and adapted in (Rasmussen, 2012). . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Illustration of the division of the life cycle of the building accord-
ing to (ISO 15643-2:2010, 2010).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.1
Overview of the new building 25B next to another Novo Nordisk
facility 25A. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2
Estimated energy consumption for each process divided into heating-
and electrical energy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3
Illustration conditional- and process energy consumption at the
ﬁve diﬀerent locations divided on electrical-, heating- and total
energy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.4
Composition of the Danish electricity mix in year 2008 and 2015.
26
4.5
Illustration of the ﬂows in the product stage.
. . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.6
Illustration of the ﬂows in the construction stage. . . . . . . . . .
28
4.7
Illustration of the ﬂows in the operation stage.
. . . . . . . . . .
29
4.8
Illustration of the ﬂows in the end-of-life stage. . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.9
Screenshot of the structure of the modelled LCI in OpenLCA. . .
30
==PAGE:14==
x
LIST OF FIGURES
5.1
Relative environmental impacts from building materials in the
big ﬁve impact categories. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Impact of one year- and 30 years of energy consumption relative
to the impact from the building’s life cycle at midpoint. . . . . .
37
5.3
Impact of one year- and 30 years of energy consumption relative
to the impact from the building’s life cycle at endpoint.
. . . . .
38
5.4
Single score impact of 30 years of energy consumption and the
building’s life cycle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.5
Relative impacts and relative normalised impact at midpoint from
two methodologies: ReCiPe and ILCD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.6
Relative impact and relative normalised impact at endpoint from
two methodologies: ReCiPe and ILCD. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.7
Impact from energy use in the big ﬁve impact categories for the
ﬁve countries. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.8
Relative single score impact for the ﬁve countries. . . . . . . . . .
41
5.9
Impact from energy consumption and building’s life cycle relative
to USA, both after one year and after 30 years. . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.10 Diﬀerence in total impact including the building’s life cycle, one
year of energy consumption and distribution by air or water rel-
ative to the supplied market (USA).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.11 Impact from heating by biomass in the big ﬁve impact categories
relative to the case scenario. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.12 Relative variation of single score impact when heating source is
changed from natural gas to biomass. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.1
Sensitivity analysis of use of steel in the modelling of the building:
+- 10% steel mass. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.2
Environmental impact of energy consumption and the building’s
life cycle with and without maintenance over time. . . . . . . . .
49
6.3
Relative single score impact for the ﬁve countries. . . . . . . . . .
53
==PAGE:15==
xi
6.4
Correlation between variances of impacts of climate change and
single score results. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
==PAGE:16==
xii
==PAGE:17==
List of Tables
4.1
Table of the most used building materials in Novo Nordisk build-
ing 25B (approximate amounts).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Energy for baseload calculated from overall energy use and HVAC
energy use in a Danish context. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
Total HVAC energy consumption based on the respective countries. 19
4.4
Distrubution parameters for all ﬁve countries. . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.5
Indication of quality of data used in the LCI. . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.6
Parameters for the construction, production and distribution in
the respective countries, diﬀerences and similarities.
. . . . . . .
24
4.7
Impact categories for the two methodologies at both midpoint
and endpoint. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.1
Environmental single score impact relative to USA. . . . . . . . .
42
==PAGE:18==
xiv
==PAGE:19==
Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
iii
Abstract (Danish)
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Background
1
1.1
The environmental mindset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Pharmaceutical production
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Introduction
5
2.1
Production facilities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Aim of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Theory
7
3.1
The basics of an LCA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Sustainability of construction work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2.1
Simpliﬁcations in LCA modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
LCA in the pharmaceutical industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
National electricity grids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Method
13
4.1
Part I – Environmental impact from the building vs. impact from
energy consumption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.1.1
Building materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.1.2
Energy consumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2
Part II - Site-speciﬁc environmental impact . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2.1
Production energy and conditioning energy . . . . . . . .
18
4.2.2
Subscenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
LCA methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3.1
Goal and scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3.2
Life cycle inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
==PAGE:20==
xvi
CONTENTS
4.3.3
Key assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3.4
Life cycle impact assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5
Results
35
5.1
Part I – Environmental impact from the building vs. impact from
energy consumption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.1.1
Environmental impact from the building . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.1.2
The building’s life cycle vs. its energy consumption . . . .
37
5.1.3
Result veriﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Part II - Site speciﬁc environmental impact . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2.1
Production energy and conditioning energy . . . . . . . .
40
5.2.2
Site-speciﬁc environmental impact
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.3
Subscenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.3.1
Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.3.2
Heating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6
Discussion
45
6.1
Part I – Environmental impact from the building vs. impact from
energy consumption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.1.1
Environmental impact from the building . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.1.2
The building’s life cycle vs. its energy consumption . . . .
47
6.1.3
Result veriﬁcation by diﬀerent LCIA methodologies
. . .
49
6.2
Part II - Site speciﬁc environmental impact . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.2.1
Site speciﬁc environmental impact
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.2.2
Single score impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.3
Subscenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.3.1
Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.3.2
Heating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.4
Result application and perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.4.1
Novo Nordisk and renewable energy
. . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.4.2
Further perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7
Conclusion
61
References
63
Appendix
67
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 1
Background
1.1
The environmental mindset
"My administration is putting an end to the war on coal and have clean coal,
really clean coal." So said the new president of the United States of America
earlier this year as he repealed some of the previous president’s regulation on
climate change (Remarks by President Trump at Signing of Executive Order to
Create Energy Independence, 2017).
The environmental road that is laid out for the world’s largest economy re-
garding environment now looks as black as the coal that is providing most of
it power (World’s largest economies, 2017). Where environmental concerns are
slowly but steadily becoming an increasing part of the mindset of both individ-
uals, smaller and larger companies as well as policy makers and governments,
USA now takes a step back in pursuit of domestic jobs in the power industry,
more speciﬁcally in coal and shale gas production (Remarks by President Trump
at Signing of Executive Order to Create Energy Independence, 2017).
These steps might or might not produce jobs for the American workers, but
most certainly will increase the environmental footprint of energy production
and thus the production industry, as there is no such thing as clean coal (Can
Coal Ever Be Clean?, 2017).
==PAGE:22==
2
Background
The development towards a more sustainable future, in the rest of the world,
has been a long time coming, but through the past decades a strong focus
has been put on the unsustainable fossil based energy consumption around the
world. However, the fact that economic growth increases the energy consump-
tion (Commonwealth Development Corporation Group, 2016), challenges the
wish to reduce the use of fossil fuels as no renewable alternatives is existing in
a scale today that can replace it completely.
In spite of this massive challenge, eﬀorts are being made on a global basis.
In 2015, in Paris, the COP21 agreement was signed by most countries around
the world representing a large percentage of the total greenhouse gas emissions
and marked an important landmark in the pursuit to reduce the global warming
(UNFCCC, 2015). The agreement sets limits on how much CO2 is emitted into
the atmosphere and was backed by an unprecedented number of nations that
are now committed to this common goal: A sustainable future.
This tendency is propagating down into the society as leading companies
are now striving to be a part of this evolution and might even proﬁt from it
(Bæredygtighed vil ændre vores livsstil – hvor er vi på vej hen?, 2017). This
means that the environmental focus is sharpened through the industries. One
way of optimizing the environmental proﬁle of a company is with the help of the
holistic approach of life cycle assessments (LCA) that can pinpoint hotspots in
e.g. productions, products, services and processes. If these hotspots are found,
the stakeholder might be able to reduce the environmental impact where the
eﬀect is largest.
Beside comprehensive LCA studies, smaller eﬀorts should not be disregarded
as the cumulative eﬀect of these too can signiﬁcantly reduce the environmental
impact. It is all a matter of mindset; if the environmental aspect is considered
as a natural part of any process, product, activity or service, the potential for
environmental impact reduction is great. As guidance for the organisations that
strive to act sensible in this matter, the ISO standard 14001 - Environmental
management systems has been developed. The standard contains requirements
that guides companies to achieve the goals that are set within the environ-
mental framework by e.g. handling waste properly, fully utilising resources and
preventing degradation of the ecosystems and the biodiversity (Dansk Standard,
1996).
1.2
Pharmaceutical production
Parts of the production sector have always had a very large energy consumption
due to the nature of the energy intensive products they produce and sell. An
==PAGE:23==
1.2 Pharmaceutical production
3
environmental focus might therefore not reduce the cumulative impact of the
product signiﬁcantly. Resource utilisation and waste handling are, of course, im-
portant issues, and should be treated like that, but usually it does not compare
with the environmental impact from the large energy consumption.
In pharmaceutical production, the high standard of the medical product and
very strict regulations require the production to be very energy intensive. The
environment in which the product is formulated, handled and ﬁnished needs
to be thoroughly controlled and be processed under certain conditions to avoid
contamination of any sort. Solutions to this are high air change rates, humid-
iﬁcation/dehumidiﬁcation, clean steam production and distilled water (WFI -
Water For Injection) to name a few.
Furthermore, due to these production
conditions and the complexity of the formulated chemicals and molecules the
majority of the environmental impact is directly or indirectly caused by the
energy consumption (de Jonge, 2003; Conceptión, Curzons, Constable, & Cun-
ningham, 2004; Mata et al., 2012; Ponder & Overcash, 2010; Wernet, Conradt,
Isenring, Jiménez-González, & Hungerbühler, 2010).
==PAGE:24==
4
Background
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 2
Introduction
2.1
Production facilities
When companies build big production facilities around the world, large amounts
of time and money are invested before the facility is actually built and even
before the site and the country is selected. The planning of a project of this kind
usually requires a thorough investigation of the market, country and site as many
factors play a role regarding the new production facility. Despite this extensive
research, an aspect that needs more attention, considering the environmental
mindset, is the relative environmental impact a large production facility has at
diﬀerent locations. When a site is selected local requirements and legislation
usually assure that other environmental aspects such as water, waste, etc. are
handled in a reasonable way. But a parameter may not be considered enough
in these situations is the relative environmental impact of the new facility and
production i.e. how big is the impact from the production facility in one site
relative to another. This parameter can potentially be used as a decision variable
to choose the site with lowest environmental impact.
It is important to state that the goal of this thesis is not to measure how
much a certain production plant impacts the environment and benchmark it
with other facilities.
Instead, this thesis aims to broaden the perspective of
site selection and add a deeper environmental understanding by performing a
comprehensive two-piece life cycle assessment. Firstly, the environmental impact
==PAGE:26==
6
Introduction
from a case study of a new Novo Nordisk diabetes ﬁnished products (DFP)
facility in Denmark is investigated and compared to the impact of its estimated
energy consumption i.e. the building envelope and equipment are compared to
the energy required to operate a facility in order to comply with the regulations
the production is subjected to. Secondly, as the large energy consumption is
expected to be determining to the overall environmental impact, the production
facility is hypothetically moved around the world to ﬁve diﬀerent countries to
investigate the environmental impact from energy grids based on varying degrees
of renewable energy sources. As the case study building is a Novo Nordisk DFP
facility in Denmark it is compared to the other countries where Novo Nordisk
have DFP facilities already.
The ﬁve countries are Brazil, China, Denmark,
France and USA.
Pharmaceutical production is interesting to investigate as the large consump-
tion of energy (for e.g. large ventilation requirements and steam production)
and use of potential hazardous chemicals in the production and formulation can
have a signiﬁcant negative impact on the environment (formulation ingredients
are not a part of the present thesis). In contrast to the environmental impact
from this, the impact comes with the beneﬁt of potentially saving lives, extend-
ing lives, improve the quality of life for many people and generally improve one
of the pillars of sustainability; the social aspect. This makes the large environ-
mental impact acceptable. But even though this is the case, companies usually
have goals of improving their environmental impact anyway as the environmen-
tal mindset has propagated through society.
2.2
Aim of the project
The aim of this project is to provide a decision variable when planning new phar-
maceutical production facilities around the world. When dealing with LCAs of
pharmaceutical production a main issue is the diﬃculty of producing reliable life
cycle inventories (LCI) because of conﬁdentiality of the products and "recipes"
(Conceptión et al., 2004; Raju, Singh, Sarkar, & Singla, 2016). So, in this inves-
tigation this part is excluded and therefore, the scope only takes the building
envelope and building systems and utilities into account as well as the energy
required to run the facility.
As the production location changes, the baseline energy consumption is ﬁxed
when comparing the same production type, but has varying environmental im-
pact due to shifting site-dependent energy grid compositions, climate variances
as well as distribution scenarios that is also included in this investigation.
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3
Theory
This investigation is based on a comprehensive LCA of the construction and
operation of a new pharmaceutical ﬁlling facility. The theory on how an LCA is
conducted and aspects of applied LCA in the pharmaceutical sector is described
throughout this chapter
3.1
The basics of an LCA
In environmental impact assessments, the LCA approach has been through a
development the past decades and is now a strong tool for scientists as well as
stakeholders in diﬀerent industries to compare and communicate the message of
environmental friendliness. Earlier the concept of "being green" was very vague
but with LCA it is now possible to quantify environmental impact over the full
lifetime of a product, service or process and compare it with others that serve
the same function.
An LCA is now a standardised process and through the ISO standards 14040-
14044 a stakeholder is able to produce an assessment step by step.
Several
handbooks have also been developed to assist the user through the process, one
of which is the ILCD handbook (International Reference Life Cycle Data System
handbook) by the Joint Research Centre of the European commission.
==PAGE:28==
8
Theory
The general principles of an LCA are as follows according to (ISO 14040:2008,
2008):
• The holistic perspective that makes sure that all environmental impact
throughout a products life are accounted for, from raw material to disposal,
and ensures that burden shifting does not happen when optimizing on a
certain phase in the life cycle.
• The fundamentals of sustainability are the three pillars; economic sustain-
ability, social sustainability and environmental sustainability. Based on
this, something can only be deemed truly sustainable if all three aspects
are accounted for and abided. An LCA only takes the environmental
aspects and impacts into account and leaves the other two pillars out
of the scope.
• The result of an LCA is not an absolute or an answer to how sustainable
something is.
It is instead a relative indication of the impacts to the
environment for a certain functional unit. This way product systems
with the same functional unit can be directly compared and their relative
impacts can be assessed.
• The approach of an LCA is an iterative process.
• LCA’s often include a huge amount of data and will quickly become
opaque. Transparency through the assessment is therefore a key aspect
to ensure that the results can be reported correctly.
• By considering eﬀects on both the environment, human health and re-
sources and all aspects in these categories underlines the comprehen-
siveness of the approach. Because of this the hotspots and beneﬁts can
be identiﬁed across several indicators.
• An LCA is primarily based on natural science, but in cases where this
is not possible, value based choices are used as the best alternative.
Beside these general principles, the assessment itself is based on a framework
of four phases that through iteration constantly interchanges as the phases are
reviewed and updated as the assessment is carried out; goal and scope deﬁ-
nition, inventory analysis, impact assessment and interpretation (JRC,
2010). This is illustrated in the ﬁgure 3.1.
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Sustainability of construction work
9
Figure 3.1: The four phases of the LCA framework. Figure based on DE/EN 14040 and
adapted in (Rasmussen, 2012).
3.2
Sustainability of construction work
Only recently, within the last two decades, life cycle assessments of buildings
have been doable due to suﬃcient tools and databases on the speciﬁc sector. De-
spite this, environmental assessments of buildings were not performed in an ex-
tended degree due to the diﬀerent characteristics of a building’s product system.
The complexity of a building LCA compared to LCA’s on other industrial prod-
ucts is not so diﬀerent, but some aspects do deviate from the conventional LCA
e.g. the lifetime of the building is much longer than other products, buildings
themselves are rather unique and it is made from a wide variety of components
and materials (Petersen, 2001).
In September 2010 the ﬁrst European standard framework for building life
cycle assessment was published, CEN/TC 350 - Sustainability of construction
==PAGE:30==
10
Theory
works. The standards describe the framework for all three pillars of sustainabil-
ity i.e. economic- social- and environmental sustainability. Furthermore, they
address the calculation method of the respective sustainability’s performance.
However, only parts of the framework will be relevant for this investigation as
the environmental performance is the only pillar of sustainability quantiﬁed and
assessed in the present thesis.
Within this framework the life cycle of the building is divided into life cycle
stages that are categorised by letters and numbers. The letters correspond to
the stages and the numbers are subdivisions of the stages. The framework for
building assessment is illustrated in ﬁgure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Illustration of the division of the life cycle of the building according to (ISO
15643-2:2010, 2010).
3.2.1
Simpliﬁcations in LCA modelling
As with many other LCA studies the data collection part induces the most uncer-
tainties in the investigation. The complex nature of an LCA and the possibility
of obtaining unreliable data easily sets barriers for completing a trustworthy as-
sessment, but on the other hand, excluding parts of the dataset for simpliﬁcation
or avoidance of unreliable data also increase the uncertainty of the results.
(Malmqvist et al., 2011) presents possible simpliﬁcations for LCAs without
harming the credibility and accuracy:
• Focus on larger building elements
• Simplify the life cycle inventory (LCI) by focusing on important substances
• Select only a few impact categories
• Increase the use of CAD tools to acquisition data
==PAGE:31==
3.3 LCA in the pharmaceutical industry
11
In an LCA of a building the larger elements would primarily be the structural
system, the external wall and weather barrier and the foundation, whereas the
ﬂooring, tapestry etc. inside might be left out of the assessment unless they
contain substances that could have a signiﬁcant impact on the assessment. This
can, however, be diﬃcult to assess before the actual LCA is conducted.
By selecting only a few impact categories the result might be simpliﬁed for
future communication, but there is also the risk of leaving out important results
in the end. Regarding building assessments, the DGNB certiﬁcation scheme
have selected ﬁve environmental impact categories that cover a wide spectrum
of impacts. These are popularly called the big ﬁve and are: Global warming
potential - kg CO2 equivalent, Ozone depletion potential - kg R11 equivalent,
Photochemical ozone creation potential - kg ethene equivalent, Acidiﬁca-
tion potential - kg SO2 equivalent, Eutroﬁcation potential - PO4 equivalent.
3.3
LCA in the pharmaceutical industry
Life cycle assessments in the pharmaceutical industry are traditionally diﬃcult
to obtain and produce simply due to the complexity of the product, the many
chemical substance inputs and outputs and the time-consuming process that
LCA is. Beside this, public LCA databases does not include the very speciﬁc
ingredients used in the productions due to the low production volumes as well as
the conﬁdentiality which are highly present in the industry. Lastly, the positive
impacts from the medicines are diﬃcult to take into consideration when per-
forming the assessment, and a pure environmental view might provide a wrong
image regarding the overall sustainability (de Jonge, 2003).
In addition to the diﬃculties of determining the environmental impact of phar-
maceutical products based on the ingredients, the energy input in the production
of the pharmaceutical product is relatively large and are usually dominating the
impact (de Jonge, 2003; Conceptión et al., 2004; Mata et al., 2012; Ponder &
Overcash, 2010; Wernet et al., 2010). Certain strict requirements dictate the
conditions of the production environment. These are logically in place to assure
that the products keep the high level of standard that is required when a prod-
uct is ether ingested or even more so when it is injected. Some of the measures
that enables the high level of standard are clean steam, water for injection and
high air change rates which all require massive systems and all consume large
amounts of energy.
A good example of this is the case study for this investigation (the new Novo
Nordisk DFP in Hillerød). The factory will cover a ﬂoor area of approximately
30,000 m2, but the actual ﬁlling process happens within an area of only approx-
==PAGE:32==
12
Theory
imately 100 m2. All the surrounding area is ﬁlled with support equipment that
ensures the correct conditions for production, areas with storage and shipping
facilities as well as other support functions.
3.4
National electricity grids
The geographical location plays an important role for the composition of the
energy grid. Mountains creates the opportunity to exploit hydro power, coal
mines provide cheap and easy accessible energy, long coastlines give the oppor-
tunity to erect oﬀshore wind farms, political agendas clears paths for nuclear
power production and so on.
The sources of the electrical energy are therefore varying around the world.
Furthermore, political goals of more sustainable grid compositions are also dic-
tating the evolution of the grid. Some countries have a green political agenda
and tries to promote sustainable alternatives by tax cutting and providing ben-
eﬁts for sustainable alternatives. As an example, Denmark have a long tradition
of supporting the wind turbine industry which is why half of the electrical en-
ergy today comes from wind energy. Other countries, like China and USA, have
not had the same focus, and coal and gas are the most dominant sources of
electrical energy.
The energy proﬁles of the ﬁve countries investigated in the present thesis
is very diﬀerentiated and a list of their dominating source of electrical energy
is found below (International Energy Agency statistics, 2017). The full energy
compositions of the respective countries can be found in Appendix A - Electricity
grid composition.
• Brazil - Hydro power
• China - Coal
• Denmark - Wind
• France - Nuclear power
• USA - Coal and gas
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 4
Method
I have chosen to approach this investigation as a two-piece investigation. In
the ﬁrst part I will use a case study as a reference to examine whether the
environmental impact of building materials is larger than the environmental
impact from the energy consumption during operation. In the second part I will
theoretically place the case study building in ﬁve countries around the world to
study the diﬀerences in environmental impact from energy consumption based
on diﬀerent energy grid mixes and heating fuels.
The base scenario that is investigated is a supply of insulin to the American
market and transpaciﬁc or transatlantic distribution is therefore included for the
countries other than USA. The results of energy consumption for production and
the environmental construction cost and lifetime of the building is calculated
with the ReCiPe impact methodology at both midpoint, endpoint and single
score.
Lastly two subscenarios are investigated that consider an alternative
distribution and an alternative source of heating energy.
==PAGE:34==
14
Method
4.1
Part I – Environmental impact from the build-
ing vs. impact from energy consumption
This section includes information on the ﬁrst part of the investigation i.e. build-
ing materials and estimated energy consumption for the case study. The LCA
modelling is described in section 4.3.
The environmental impact from the building life cycle is divided into two
shares and compared. The operational energy as one share and the rest of the
buildings life cycle as the other. This is done to investigate which material of
the building impacts the most as well as the relation of impact between the
building and its energy consumption.
The building I am using as case study is a new pharmaceutical ﬁlling facility
in Hillerød, DK, that is currently under construction and is set to be ﬁnished
in 2019. The factory called 25B or APX is a Novo Nordisk DFP factory and
measures approximately 10,300 m2 including oﬃce support functions as well as
clean utility capacity such as cooling, WFI production and ventilation. In pop-
ular terms the facility is called a ﬁlling facility as it primarily ﬁlls the ﬁnished
formulated insulin into vials and cartridges for distribution. The main building
is in three stories; a utility basement, a production ﬂoor and a ventilation/oﬃce
ﬂoor. A connected adjacent building will accommodate most of the support-
ing functions. This support building is also in three stories and is connected
perpendicular in the end of the main production building.
Figure 4.1: Overview of the new building 25B next to another Novo Nordisk facility 25A.
The building is structurally primarily made of armed concrete (columns, foun-
dation, ground deck and parts of the roof) and steel (columns, ﬂoor decks and
the roof). The outer wall is mostly curtain wall elements with full glass façades
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Part I – Environmental impact from the building vs. impact from
energy consumption
15
and some places with stone tiles as outer weather barrier. The inside layout of
the building is strictly conﬁdential as the processes of pharmaceutical produc-
tion are usually patented and protected to maintain the company’s edge over
the competitors in the industry.
As a part of the building project planning and -design, the assumed energy
consumption has been estimated and calculated through several iterations as the
design phase got increasingly detailed. This information and knowledge have
been available through my collaboration with NNE that has been the consulting
partner for Novo Nordisk on the building project.
Beside the assumed energy consumption, I have got detailed information on
most of the building through construction plans and 3D models also provided
by NNE. This made me able to construct a bill of materials for the LCI of the
LCA.
4.1.1
Building materials
The technical drawings of the building I was provided with made it possible for
me to produce a somewhat detailed LCI prior to the assessment. The drawing
material itself is classiﬁed by Novo Nordisk and cannot be disclosed to the public,
but based on those drawings and the 3D model I have extracted the quantities
of- and types of materials used in the building project. An aggregated list of the
most used materials is found in table 4.1. A more detailed view of the inventory
can be found in Appendix B - Building materials in model.
Table 4.1: Table of the most used building materials in Novo Nordisk building 25B (approx-
imate amounts).
Accumulated
building materials
Density
[kg/m3]
Volume
[m3]
Mass
[t]
Relative mass
[%]
Concrete
2,300
11,500
27,300
77.6
Steel
7,800
520
4,200
11.9
Gravel
1,300
1,950
2,600
7.3
Screed
1,900
185
367
1.0
Insulation
40-60
6,610
246
0.7
Window glass
2,500
70
178
0.5
Bricks
1,500
82
124
0.4
Rooﬁng asphalt
960
90
91
0.3
Epoxy coating
1,100
61
68
0.2
Plastic foil
1,000
23
24
0.1
Copper
8,960
2
17
0.0
These building materials are extracted from a 3D model using the AutoCAD
==PAGE:36==
16
Method
software Navisworks. The software combines several digital drawings from each
contractor and updates their individual changes continuously to check for colli-
sions in space management. I used the software to extract quantities of building
materials. As an example, it was diﬃcult and inaccurate to evaluate the con-
crete volume via technical 2D drawings that I also had access to, but with the
software tool I could eﬀectively calculate the volume of concrete in each build-
ing part.
This approach required that the building information was present
and updated in the software, which was not the case for all materials. For e.g.
structural steel the data was not suﬃciently documented in the 3D model and
calculation of this resource was instead performed manually based on building
sections and details from the technical 2D drawings. The extracted building
information was transferred into an Excel spreadsheet for handling.
The 3D model mainly consisted of information on the structural building shell
(concrete, steel, insulation etc.) together with the utility routings (ventilation
ducts, sprinkler system, cooling and heating). What was not included, was the
production equipment (ﬁlling machines, WFI utility, compressors and cooling
machines) which in turn is also classiﬁed information. Even though these com-
ponents are essential for the factory and its purpose it is not included in this
investigation as data was not available for me. This induces a slight inaccuracy
when performing the LCI, but the components that are included, corresponds
to estimated more than 99% of the total mass of building.
Following is a short list of excluded components due to lack of data:
• Production equipment (WFI production, Filling machines etc.)
• Cooling machines and cooling towers
• Paint and ﬁnishes inside the facility (excluding epoxy coating of the ﬂoors,
this was estimated based on ﬂoor area)
• Non-structural light internal walls
4.1.2
Energy consumption
The process of estimating and calculating the assumed energy consumption of
a new factory is highly iterative. It depends on several factors dependent on
the design and function of the facility.
At NNE this iterative process have
followed the design of the building and ended up with a result that I use in my
investigation. The estimate is calculated based on what equipment, with certain
electricity consumptions, are going to be installed in the facility. Furthermore,
calculation on how much cooling is needed during the production process and
how much compressed air, heat, steam etc. is needed is included as well.
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Part II - Site-speciﬁc environmental impact
17
This estimate might be slightly diﬀerent from the actual energy consumption
as the latest estimate is based on the building when it was in the design phase ba-
sic design. This means that through the detailed design phase and construction
phase the equipment might have changed leading to a diﬀerent actual energy
consumption. Despite this, the most recent estimate of the energy consumption
available for me, and this investigation, is from basic design which is reasonably
accurate for the study.
The results of the estimation were then divided into electrical energy and
heating energy as the sources of these energies have diﬀerent environmental
proﬁles.
Heating energy comes from district heating, natural gas boilers or
other burners whereas cooling energy comes from the electricity grid powered
by coal, gas or renewables. The estimate can be seen in ﬁgure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Estimated energy consumption for each process divided into heating- and elec-
trical energy.
4.2
Part II - Site-speciﬁc environmental impact
This section includes information on the second part of the investigation i.e.
the theoretical placement of the production facility and the adaptation of the
energy consumption. The LCA modelling is described in section 4.3.
==PAGE:38==
18
Method
When the ratio of environmental impact between the buildings life cycle and
it’s operation is established it is interesting to investigate how diﬀerent the
building environmentally performs in other contexts such as varying climate
conditions and diﬀerent energy grid mixes. This is done by theoretically placing
the building in other countries and adjusting the needs for conditioning accord-
ing to the local context i.e. ventilation, heating, cooling, dehumidiﬁcation and
humidiﬁcation.
4.2.1
Production energy and conditioning energy
In order to calculate the energy needs for both production and conditioning in
the ﬁve countries, I have used an Excel tool developed by NNE. The tool for the
conditioning energy calculation is based on an Novo Nordisk guideline Energy
Eﬃcient HVAC Design (Kristensen & Valstorp, 2009) that speciﬁcally indicate
the energy consumption for heating/cooling/humidiﬁcation/dehumidiﬁcation at
varying temperatures and humidity levels in the respective countries. This en-
ergy consumption is indicated as both electrical energy and heating energy for
the selected country.
In order to project the energy consumption into other contexts the production
baseload of energy needs to be identiﬁed. From the calculated estimate of total
yearly energy consumption of APX, the baseload is found by subtracting the
calculated conditional energy in a Danish context. In table 4.2 the energy use
in Denmark is illustrated divided on heating, cooling, baseload and total.
Table 4.2: Energy for baseload calculated from overall energy use and HVAC energy use in
a Danish context.
Yearly energy
consumption
Energy
heating
/hum.
[GJ]
Electricity
cooling
/dehum.
[GJ]
Production
baseload
[GJ]
Total
energy use
[GJ]
Electricity
2,470
31,500
Natural gas
22,500
30,000
Total
86,460
The identiﬁed EBaseload is ﬁxed in all locations as the production does not
change, this is the energy required for the pharmaceutical ﬁlling facility to op-
erate and produce. The EEl and EHeat however, are both climate dependent
as the amount of heating, cooling and (de)humidiﬁcation requirements changes
with the conditions outside. These two parameters are calculated by the NNE
tool for the ﬁve countries. ET otal then changes as the energy for conditioning is
varying around for the respective sites. The equation illustrates how the total
energy consumption for the respective countries is calculated.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Part II - Site-speciﬁc environmental impact
19
ET otal = EBaseload + EEl + EHeat
This calculation shows that the energy consumption is highly aﬀected by the
location according to 4.3. The total energy consumption varies by up to 16,000
GJ per year which corresponds to approximately 20% diﬀerence between the
least consuming production site and the most consuming. This fact, in addition
to the variations of the energy grid mixes in the respective countries, makes the
environmental impact unquestionable dependent on the location. Furthermore,
the environmental impact from distribution is included in the study and is reliant
to the distance to the supplied market which varies with the production location.
Table 4.3: Total HVAC energy consumption based on the respective countries.
Yearly HVAC
energy consumption
Total energy use
[GJ]
Brazil
90,580
China
96,930
Denmark
86,460
France
80,410
USA
88,210
As the case building is a Novo Nordisk DFP facility, the countries represented
in this investigation corresponds with the locations of the other Novo Nordisk
DFP facilities. They are located in Montes Claros - Brazil, Tianjin - China,
Hillerød, Kalundborg and Bagsværd - Denmark, Chartes - France and Clayton
- USA.
Figure 4.3: Illustration conditional- and process energy consumption at the ﬁve diﬀerent
locations divided on electrical-, heating- and total energy.
==PAGE:40==
20
Method
4.2.2
Subscenarios
In addition to the base scenario two secondary subscenarios are modelled to
investigate the impact from choice of distribution and heating source.
4.2.2.1
Distribution
The distribution of the product, induce an impact to the environment that needs
to be taken into account. As the location of the production is a parameter, the
transport to the supplied market and the magnitude of the impact varies.
The distribution is calculated as follows: The produced insulin is transported
by lorry from the existing Novo Nordisk DFP facility in the respective country to
the largest commercial harbour in the area and transported by ship to the largest
harbour on either the west- or east coast of USA. The internal distribution in
USA is excluded in this scenario. The capacity, i.e. volume of production, of
the new facility is not disclosed to the public and will therefore not be a part of
the assessment, however, a reasonable assumption of production of 500 tons of
insulin and packaging is used for the distribution. In table 4.4 an overview of
the distances of the distribution is shown.
Table 4.4: Distrubution parameters for all ﬁve countries.
Brazil
China
Denmark
France
USA
Volume
[kg]
500,000
500,000
500,000
500,000
500,000
Lorry
[km]
850
0
40
200
0
Ship
[km]
10000
11700
10000
8500
0
As a secondary part of the investigating the impact from the distribution,
the diﬀerence between transport by water and by air is compared. The ship
transport process is replaced by a ﬂight transport process and the same distances
are assumed to be ﬁtting.
4.2.2.2
Scenario heating
An aspect that is simpliﬁed and not taken into consideration in the modelling of
the base scenario is the varying sources of heating energy that exist. The base
scenario is modelled based on heating by burning of natural gas, but in reality,
this might not be the case as district heating, burning of biomass etc. could
==PAGE:41==
4.3 LCA methodology
21
also be the source or a combination of them. In order to assess the importance
and sensitivity of the heating source choice, burning of biomass was additionally
modelled as a secondary subscenario and the results compared.
4.3
LCA methodology
For this investigation, I have primarily used two platforms to assist me in the
performance of the two-piece investigation: Microsoft Oﬃce Excel (spreadsheet
for data handling and calculation) and the LCA modelling tool OpenLCA (Free
open-source software by GreenDelta with the student-licenced EcoInvent 3.1
database attached).
The EcoInvent database is the most comprehensive international LCI database
with more than 12,800 LCI datasets in a variety of areas and is maintained by
the Swiss founded, not-for-proﬁt EcoInvent organisation (Why ecoinvent, 2017).
By having access to this resource, made me able to model the environmental im-
pact from the building itself and the energy use around the world as accurately
as possible.
4.3.1
Goal and scope
In a globalised world where outsourcing of production from the industrialised
part of the world to newly industrialised parts of the world might beneﬁt both
parties economically, could on the other hand take a toll on the environment
(Herrmann & Hauschild, 2009). The goal of this investigation is therefore to
provide an environmental decision variable when dealing with site selection and
design of a new production facility.
The analysis does not seek to score the present case study on a level of en-
vironmentally friendliness, but instead use the case study as an indication of
pharmaceutical production facilities impact on the environment relative to its
energy consumption and additionally, compare the impact in diﬀerent countries.
This result could then be a part of an objective assessment of where to place
the production.
4.3.1.1
Function and functional unit
The primary function of the case study building is to ﬁll vials and cartridges
with insulin under sterile conditions. This requires certain processes and a large
==PAGE:42==
22
Method
energy consumption which is included in the assessment. The energy consump-
tion of the building is based on how much energy is required in order for the
machines in the facility to run constantly. This is because the conditions for
production have to remain the same always and also because the facility pro-
duces almost always throughout the year. The ingredients and earlier product
stages in the insulin production process is not included as they take place in
other factories and under diﬀerent conditions that the case study building does
not support. The building does however, include oﬃce support areas for the
processes taking place on this speciﬁc site.
Functional unit:
• A 10,300 m2 building with 30,000 m2 ﬂoor space that provides certain
speciﬁc conditions in order to ﬁll insulin in vials and cartridges with a
heat and electricity consumption of approximately 87,000 GJ a year in a
time perspective of 30 years of supplying the American market.
4.3.1.2
Data quality
In an LCA, a large amount of data is required for the life cycle inventory. Data on
most processes and products can be found in databases like EcoInvent. In these
databases, the processes are usually region speciﬁc averages or world averages,
but country speciﬁc processes do exist e.g. Swiss processes that are some of the
best developed.
In some cases, EPD’s (Environmental Product Declaration)
are developed that very speciﬁcally document the environmental impact related
to that speciﬁc process or product regarding both technological, temporal and
geographical representativeness. In the present thesis, I have based the LCI
of the building primarily on processes with world averages from the EcoInvent
database.
This is because the scope of the investigation is fairly crude and
that world average processes are acceptable for both temporal and technological
representativeness in Denmark. This also makes it directly applicable to let the
result from the building materials be used in the other ﬁve contexts. The Energy
production is on the other hand based on more site-speciﬁc processes. This is
because the diﬀerences in energy mixes are much more diverse from region to
region and country to country.
Additionally, the source of the input data is also important. The accuracy of
the modelled volumes and masses can aﬀect the result if they are not correct.
Like the EPD’s that speciﬁcally indicate how a certain product impact the
environment, the amount/volume/mass of the product is equally as important.
According to table 4.5 I have assigned scores to the input of the LCA model. A
full overview of the LCI and the data source quality is found in Appendix B -
Building materials in model
==PAGE:43==
4.3 LCA methodology
23
Table 4.5: Indication of quality of data used in the LCI.
Data origin
Data quality category
- As built
1
- From 3D model
2
- Measured and calculated according
to technical drawings and details
3
- Data from similar process or technology
4
- Estimate
5
4.3.1.3
Modelling simpliﬁcations
As mentioned in the theory section 3.2.1 on page 10, some key simpliﬁcations
can be done without aﬀecting the accuracy of the result. The LCA model in
the present thesis does therefore not include all products and materials of the
new facility. Focus has been put on the larger and heavier elements which is
primarily the structural system and building envelope. Minor parts have been
kept out of the assessment, for simpliﬁcation, but parts have also been excluded
due to a lack of data in the speciﬁc category e.g. production equipment.
Another point to reduce the complexity of the assessment without aﬀecting
the results is to choose fewer impact categories. So in order to bring down the
complexity of the results and reduce the data density, the results are presented
in the big ﬁve impact categories as mentioned earlier.
4.3.1.4
Base scenario
For the assessment, I have chosen to model a single base scenario where insulin
is produced in ﬁve diﬀerent locations and delivered to the American market in
order to assess and compare the production in a range of countries. For each
country, the environmental impact from material use, construction, demolition
and end-of-life of the production facility is the same. The energy use during
production, on the other hand, is dependent on the climate at the respective
location. This means that the environmental impact from energy consumption
is both dependent on the amount of energy consumed, but also on the energy
grid at the respective location. Lastly, the distribution is diﬀerent from location
to location which means that a varying distribution impact is added to the
respective results. In short the base scenario includes the construction of the
building, the energy for operation and distribution to the American market.
Beside the modelling of this scenario, two subscenarios are investigated. The
ﬁrst is regarding distribution. An alternative to ship transportation is modelled
==PAGE:44==
24
Method
Table 4.6: Parameters for the construction, production and distribution in the respective
countries, diﬀerences and similarities.
Brazil
China
Denmark
France
USA
A1-A3
Raw material
Building
materials
Same
Same
Same
Same
Same
A4-A5
Construction
Construction
energy
Same
Same
Same
Same
Same
B1-B5
Use
Electrical
energy [GJ]
42848
40888
33958
34458
38822
Heating
energy [GJ]
47734
56039
52503
45948
49390
Total
energy [GJ]
90583
96928
86462
80407
88214
C1-C4
End-of-life
Demolition
energy
Same
Same
Same
Same
Same
MRF
Same
Same
Same
Same
Same
Distribution
Lorry [km]
850
0
40
200
0
Ship [km]
10000
11700
10000
8500
0
to examine the diﬀerences in environmental impact by changing the way of
distribution; distribution by aeroplane. The second subscenario is considering a
diﬀerent way of providing heating energy instead of burning natural gas; burning
of biomass for heating.
In addition to the scenario presented in ﬁg 4.6, I have chosen to do the impact
assessment with two diﬀerent Impact assessment methodologies. This is in order
to primarily validate the result, but also to investigate the diﬀerences in impact
they might demonstrate.
4.3.2
Life cycle inventory
The following section includes a more detailed run-down of the background data
and how the LCA model was structured and modelled in the OpenLCA software.
==PAGE:45==
4.3 LCA methodology
25
4.3.2.1
Building data
The background data for this assessment comprises of information on the build-
ing components and their composition, the amount/mass/volume/area and its
diﬀerent physical properties. In Appendix B - Building materials in model, the
full list of building materials and the input data to the model as well as the
respective process in the EcoInvent database. Furthermore, the quality of the
data is indicated according to the categories in table 4.5.
As I did not have access to a full bill of materials or tender documents of the
project, primarily due to the classiﬁed character of the factory, I do not have
any data in category 1.
As a part of keeping the complexity low, I have not acquired detailed ten-
der documents for the APX building project to produce a full bill of materials.
This means that there is no data in the model based in category 1. Instead the
largest part of the data originates from the data extractions of the 3D model
and reasonable assumptions of the material properties which is coupled with
generic processes from the EcoInvent database. This makes the sensitivity anal-
ysis critical to conduct in order to assess what diﬀerence an mass/volume/area
increase or decrease of a certain process means for the overall environmental
impact. This analysis can be found in Appendix C - Sensitivity analysis, and
will be discussed later.
4.3.2.2
Energy grid modelling
In order to be able to compare both the environmental impact from the build-
ing and the energy consumption and the impact from energy consumption in
diﬀerent locations the B6 component, according to the CEN/TC 350 frame-
work, operational energy use is modelled separately. This also makes me able to
parameterise the varying consumption in the diﬀerent countries with diﬀerent
electricity grid mixes and heating source origins.
In the EcoInvent database, processes with each country’s energy grid compo-
sition is represented. These processes provide an accurate illustration on how
the grids were composed at the time when the information was collected and
stored in the database. This, however, poses an issue as the information is al-
most a decade old. The processes are dated in 2008 and does not correspond
to the composition of the electricity grid today as a signiﬁcant change have
happened in some countries. In Appendix A - Energy grid composition, the
electricity grid compositions of 2008 (from the EcoInvent database (EcoInvent
3.3 database search, 2017)) and 2015 (from the International Energy Agency
==PAGE:46==
26
Method
(IEA) (International Energy Agency statistics, 2017)) are illustrated. This in-
dicate that especially Denmark have experienced a signiﬁcant sustainable de-
velopment in the electricity grid. The fraction of wind power and biomass have
increased by a factor of 2 and 3 respectively. This means that the fraction of fos-
sil fuels like coal and gas is reduced substantially during this time as illustrated
in ﬁgure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Composition of the Danish electricity mix in year 2008 and 2015.
The process in OpenLCA is thus modiﬁed and updated with the most recent
information on energy grids for each country according to the IEA data. The
environmental impact from energy consumption over time is then based on 2015
data and does not take the predictions of future energy scenarios of cleaner
energy production into account.
Even though this modelling will induce an
inaccuracy to the results, the modelling of future scenarios is complex and hold
uncertainties. This inaccuracy is considered and discussed in the analysis of the
results.
4.3.2.3
LCI Modelling
The largest part of the LCI data input is in the A section of the CEN/TC
framework according to ﬁgure 3.2 on page 10, and primarily in the product
stage. The chosen processes in the EcoInvent database usually includes both
raw materials, transport and manufacturing, A1, A2 and A3 respectively, as
they are listed as ﬁnished products and not only raw materials as example. This
saves some assumptions, uncertainties and a lot of work in the data collection
part of the LCA. In ﬁgure 4.5 an illustration of the ﬂows into the product stage
of the LCA is shown.
==PAGE:47==
4.3 LCA methodology
27
Beside the materials going into the construction there is always some con-
struction waste which needs to be taken into account as well. This wastage has
been considered by adding certain percentages to the diﬀerent ﬂows in product
stage according to (Kellenberger & Althaus, 2009) from (Binz, Erb, & Lehmann,
2000)
Figure 4.5: Illustration of the ﬂows in the product stage.
Where the LCI of the product stage was based on data extraction of 3D models
and drawings, the construction stage is a bit more complex. First of all the
distance the materials have to travel can diﬀer very much from construction site
to construction site and is also dependent on the chosen supplier of the building
component. In this case study where tender documents and precise product
description is unavailable, the construction stage input is based on literature
on the subject. The transport distances are based on (Kellenberger & Althaus,
2009) from (Binz et al., 2000) and combined with the full material list A1-A3
provides the input for the transport component A4 as mass and distance. Both
the transport assumptions and the waste cutting assumptions mentioned earlier
==PAGE:48==
28
Method
can be seen in the full LCI list in Appendix B - Building materials in model.
The construction process A5 is based on (Hong, Ji, Jang, & Park, 2013) which
provides an energy consumption for construction of a case study building. This
project was approximately twice the size of the present case study and the input
is therefore corrected by the number of m2.
In ﬁgure 4.6 the ﬂows of construction and transport of the materials to the
construction site is illustrated.
Figure 4.6: Illustration of the ﬂows in the construction stage.
Regarding the input of the use stage, I have chosen to exclude parts of
this stage due to the scope of the investigation and diﬃculties in prediction of
the use of the building. The B1, use component, is entirely excluded as the
building only consumes water and energy while it provides the conditions for
the ﬁlling operation to be conducted inside. The material inputs for formulation
and ﬁlling is therefore not a part of the investigation. As for the components
B2-B5, maintenance, repair, replacement and refurbishment, it is unlikely that
these can be completely ignored within the time scope of this investigation of
30 years. In other factories within the Novo Nordisk branch it is common that
there is a couple of weeks each year where the production is stopped to conduct
maintenance work. Nonetheless, I have not included this part due to a lack
of knowledge on the frequency and type of maintenance-, repair- etc. work in
newly constructed pharmaceutical factories. Beside this, it is also very likely
that these components will not have a signiﬁcant impact relative to the large
impact from the massive amount of concrete and steel in the product stage.
Lastly, even though it is modelled separately, the B6 and B7 components in the
use stage is included as the certain conditions of the ﬁlling operation is obtained
with steam and heat production as well as cooling and (de)humidiﬁcation i.e.
energy use and water use. These ﬂows are illustrated in ﬁgure 4.7.
When the building has served its purpose after an unknown number of years
it reaches its end-of-life stage where it is torn down, transported to material
recovery facilities (MRF) and processed or disposed at landﬁlls, C1-C4 respec-
tively. By unknown, I mean that the life time of a pharmaceutical production
facility is incredibly diﬃcult to predict as well as this estimate would probably
be beyond the investigated time period of the study. But the demolition and
==PAGE:49==
4.3 LCA methodology
29
Figure 4.7: Illustration of the ﬂows in the operation stage.
the crediting of recycled potential are still included in the investigation. The
consumed energy for the demolition of the facility is estimated to be half of
what it takes to erect it. The processes for the processing of the waste is found
in the EcoInvent database and they include the transport to the MRF as well
as the disposal. In ﬁgure 4.8 the ﬂows of the end-of-life stage are shown.
Figure 4.8: Illustration of the ﬂows in the end-of-life stage.
Lastly the D module contains the beneﬁts of the buildings life cycle. After
the MRF the materials are ready to replace virgin materials in other life cycles.
This serves as a negative impact in the current assessment and for the beneﬁt of
the total environmental impact. The beneﬁts are modelled as negative material
==PAGE:50==
30
Method
ﬂows and the corresponding negative impact are added to the sum of impact
from the LCA serving to somewhat reduce the total impact of the building. A
combined illustration of all the ﬂows of the LCI can be found in Appendix B -
Building materials in model.
The OpenLCA software lets the user structure the work any way possible with
a folder system much like the folder system of PCs, but to keep track of the work
I kept the structure of the model according to CEN/TC 350. The modelled
structure is therefore much like the system described above according to the
diﬀerent stages and modules. An example of the ﬂow structure in the model is
illustrated in ﬁgure 4.9. Every component in the illustration is expandable and
holds several other components or processes, the three expanded components
exempliﬁes the overall ﬂow structure in the model.
Figure 4.9: Screenshot of the structure of the modelled LCI in OpenLCA.
4.3.3
Key assumptions
During the investigation, some challenges regarding data collection have ap-
peared and the solutions to them are described in this section.
4.3.3.1
Industrial equipment
As the study has its base in an industry where a large part of the equipment
and processes have not yet been categorised and included in databases, I have
not been able to model some equipment systems properly as e.g. the ventilation
equipment. One example of a ventilation unit does exist in the database, but it
is not representable for the case study as the industrial ventilation systems are
==PAGE:51==
4.3 LCA methodology
31
so far out of proportion relative to the database ventilation unit. Instead, I have
assessed the ventilation system by materials only. In other cases, the equipment
systems are not modelled at all due to a lack of data due to conﬁdentiality.
4.3.3.2
Large building elements
As mentioned in the theory section 3 in order to simplify the assessment it can
be beneﬁcial for the LCA to only include the large building elements without
reducing the accuracy of the study.
This approach has been a part of this
investigation, both intentionally in order to reduce the complexity, but also
due to lack of speciﬁc data. The data, which have not been available for me
in the present thesis, have primarily been details on production equipment,
internal walls, detailed ﬁnishing and speciﬁc energy consumption. The inﬂuence
of these simpliﬁcations have been assessed through a sensitivity analysis where
an addition of steel for production equipment and an addition of other materials
are assessed. The sensitivity analysis can be found in Appendix C - Sensitivity
analysis.
4.3.3.3
Recycling
At the end-of-life stage most of the materials are recycled. In the model recycling
processes that include transport to MRF and energy for the treatment and ﬁnal
disposal are used. After the treatment at the MRF, a percentage of the waste
can be included in new product systems which beneﬁts the current investigation
by reducing the total environmental impact.
4.3.3.4
Energy data
The energy data used in the modelling is based on a modiﬁed database process
with 2015 data. Future energy consumption is also based on this process which
means that the future energy grid composition is not taken into consideration
in the modelling. However, such predictions hold many uncertainties as well as
leaving them out does.
==PAGE:52==
32
Method
4.3.4
Life cycle impact assessment
For the life cycle impact assessment (LCIA) I have chosen two methodologies to
assess whether the results from one method can be validated by the other. The
two methodologies are:
• ReCiPe 2008 v1.11
• ILCD impact assessment method
The characterisation factors of the impact assessments are implemented in
the OpenLCA software and provide the environmental impacts in the categories
indicated in table 4.7. This list include the big ﬁve impact categories that are
used in the present thesis.
Some of the impact categories are directly comparable across methodologies
after normalisation e.g. global warming potential, ozone depletion, marine eu-
trophication, as they are expressed in the same substance equivalent.
==PAGE:53==
4.3 LCA methodology
33
Table 4.7: Impact categories for the two methodologies at both midpoint and endpoint.
Recipe methodology
ILCD methodology
Impact category
Unit
Impact category
Unit
Midpoint
Climate change
kg CO2 eq
Climate change
kg CO2 eq
Ozone depletion
kg CFC-11 eq
Ozone depletion
kg CFC-11 eq
Terrestrial
acidication
kg SO2 eq
Particulate matter
kg PM2.5 eq
Freshwater
eutrophication
kg P eq
Photochemical
ozone formation
kg NMVOC eq
Marine
eutrophication
kg N eq
Acidiﬁcation
mol H+ eq
Human toxicity
kg 1,4-DB eq
Terrestrial
eutrophication
mol N eq
Photochemical
oxidant formation
kg NMVOC
Freshwater
eutrophication
kg P eq
Particulate matter
formation
kg PM10 eq
Marine
eutrophication
kg N eq
Terrestrial
ecotoxicity
kg 1,4-DB eq
Land use
kg C deﬁcit
Freshwater
ecotoxicity
kg 1,4-DB eq
Resource depletion
water
m3 water eq
Marine ecotoxicity
kg 1,4-DB eq
Mineral, fossil and
renewable resource
depletion
kg Sb eq
Ionising radiation
kg U235 eq
Human toxicity
cancer
CTUh
Agricultural land
occupation
m2a
Human toxicity
non-cancer
CTUh
Urban land
occupation
m2a
Freshwater
ecotoxicity
CTUe
Natural land
transformation
m2
Ionising
radiations
kBq U235 eq
Water depletion
m3
Metal depletion
kg Fe eq
Fossil depletion
kg oil eq
Endpoint
Ecosystems
species.yr
Ecosystems
species.yr
Human health
DALY
Human health
DALY
Resources
$
Resources
$
==PAGE:54==
34
Method
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 5
Results
In this chapter the results of the two-pieced investigation are presented. The
chapter is accordingly divided into two parts to correspond to the approach
of the study as stated in the previous chapter 4. method. Firstly, the results
from Part I, including the comparison of the environmental impact of building
materials and energy consumption is presented. As a part of this, the results
from the ReCiPe methodology are veriﬁed by results of the ILCD methodology
at both midpoint and endpoint.
Secondly, the results from part II of the investigation is presented.
This
includes the site dependent energy consumption as well as the respective impacts
in the diﬀerent countries. Furthermore, two subscenarios of distribution and
heating is presented.
==PAGE:56==
36
Results
5.1
Part I – Environmental impact from the build-
ing vs. impact from energy consumption
Part I compares the environmental impact from the material use and the energy
consumption. The energy consumption is calculated earlier and illustrated in
ﬁgure 4.2 on page 17. Before the comparison is done, the building materials are
investigated in order to determine the primary contributors to the environmental
impact.
5.1.1
Environmental impact from the building
Based on the LCI of the building, the environmental impact, from all the
CEN/TC 350 stages excluding energy use, is illustrated in ﬁgure 5.1.
This
indicates how much the diﬀerent categories of materials impact relative to the
others in the respective impact category.
Figure 5.1: Relative environmental impacts from building materials in the big ﬁve impact
categories.
As previously illustrated in table 4.1 on page 15 the concrete and steel in
the building represent almost 90% of the total mass of the materials in the
construction. This also impacts the results. The concrete and steel part of the
building correspond to a very large part of the total impact and varies little
between the impact categories.
Even though concrete is, by far, the most used material in the construction
relative to mass, it is not the most impacting material category. Steel is, on
the other hand, about seven times less used, relative to mass, but is clearly the
==PAGE:57==
5.1 Part I – Environmental impact from the building vs. impact from
energy consumption
37
most impacting material in the construction. In addition to this the windows
with aluminium frames and glass panes impact as much as the concrete does
even though, by weight, is it a lot less used.
The negative impacts in the impact categories are primarily due to the recy-
cling of the large amounts of steel and concrete in the end-of-life phase of the
building. The end-of-life scenario is constructed so that a certain amount of
material is beneﬁting a new product system and replaces virgin material after a
recycling process. As steel and concrete both are easy to reuse, as scrap metal
and concrete gravel, the large use of these materials also induces a relatively
large negative material ﬂow which improves the overall impact of the building
which is shown as negative impact.
5.1.2
The building’s life cycle vs. its energy consumption
With the environmental impact from the building materials and the energy con-
sumption known, the comparison of environmental impacts is straightforward.
Figure 5.2: Impact of one year- and 30 years of energy consumption relative to the impact
from the building’s life cycle at midpoint.
In ﬁgure 5.2 the results are shown for both one year of production energy and
30 years of production energy relative to the building material’s environmental
impact. The results in all impact categories indicate the same thing: The build-
ing materials are dominating the ﬁrst year of the building’s lifetime, but within
the ﬁrst two years, the continuous impact from the energy consumption take
over the dominance, and after 30 years of production the environmental impact
from the energy consumption is in a scale that almost make the impact from
the building materials neglectable. As an example, the climate change potential
==PAGE:58==
38
Results
from the building materials is in a scale of 1:20 compared with the energy con-
sumption. The same pattern of dominance is illustrated in the endpoint impact
categories as of ﬁgure 5.3.
Figure 5.3: Impact of one year- and 30 years of energy consumption relative to the impact
from the building’s life cycle at endpoint.
At endpoint, the midpoint impacts are aggregated into three indicators: ef-
fects on ecosystems, -human health and resource scarcity. The result shows
the same pattern as the midpoint scores; the building is impacting the environ-
ment the most and within two years, the impact from energy consumption is
larger.
At endpoint the impact score can be normalised and weighed in order to
produce one single impact score. This procedure further simpliﬁes the result
and is illustrated in ﬁgure 5.4.
Figure 5.4: Single score impact of 30 years of energy consumption and the building’s life
cycle.
From this result the relation between the two environmental impacts is clear.
After the building is constructed and 30 years of energy consumption, the impact
from the building materials and -construction is approximately 6% of the total
impact. This corresponds to the energy consumption impacting as much as the
building every 22 months.
==PAGE:59==
5.1 Part I – Environmental impact from the building vs. impact from
energy consumption
39
5.1.3
Result veriﬁcation
In order to verify the results from the ReCiPe methodology, they are compared
with results of another methodology, the ILCD. This way the environmental
impact can be compared and if the methodologies indicate the same results, the
results can be estimated to be accurate. In ﬁgure 5.5 the direct result and the
normalised result are illustrated relative to each other.
Figure 5.5: Relative impacts and relative normalised impact at midpoint from two method-
ologies: ReCiPe and ILCD
The direct results are very close to a 50/50 distribution through all impact
categories which means that the two methodologies calculate the same result
based on two diﬀerent approaches. However, after normalisation, the results
deviate from one another in some categories others keep the 50/50 distribution.
At endpoint, the distribution is nearly 50/50 for eﬀects on ecosystems and
60/40 human health, but the last category, resource scarcity, stands out as the
ILCD impact is close to 0/100 compared to ReCiPe. This result is shown in
ﬁgure 5.6 and is analysed in the discussion.
Figure 5.6: Relative impact and relative normalised impact at endpoint from two method-
ologies: ReCiPe and ILCD.
==PAGE:60==
40
Results
5.2
Part II - Site speciﬁc environmental impact
Part II includes a comparison of the energy consumption in the relevant coun-
tries based on the energy use on conditioning as well as on the production pro-
cesses. This variance and the fact that each country have signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
energy grid mixes creates an interesting basis for comparison of the respective
environmental impacts in the ﬁve countries.
5.2.1
Production energy and conditioning energy
Previously the production baseload was found based on the calculated energy
consumption under Danish conditions. Additionally, the conditioning loads of
the other countries were found. The energy for conditioning and the baseload
energy for process, for both electrical- and heating energy, is illustrated in ﬁgure
4.3 on page 19. The full results of energy consumption in all ﬁve countries is
found in Appendix D - Energy consumption.
The result shows a variance of several thousand GJ each year depending on
the speciﬁc country the production is in. A production in China requires most
energy and opposite especially France have low heating and cooling demand
which leads to a considerable diﬀerence of 16,000 GJ relative to China or 20%.
5.2.2
Site-speciﬁc environmental impact
The result of environmental impact from energy consumption is illustrated in
the big ﬁve impact categories. The illustrated impact is energy consumption for
one year of production and is shown in ﬁgure 5.7.
China and USA are highest scorers in most categories, whereas, in the other
end of the scale, Brazil and France are the lowest scorers in most categories.
China has the highest impact in climate change, photochemical oxidant forma-
tion and terrestrial acidiﬁcation. USA has the highest impact in ozone depletion
and freshwater eutrophication.
If the scope is broadened beyond these impact categories China and USA is
not the only high scorers. France has a large impact in the ionising radiation
category, Brazil has a high impact in the Natural land formation category and
Denmark Marine eutrophication. Impacts in all the ReCiPe categories can be
found in the Appendix E - ReCiPe midpoint impacts.
==PAGE:61==
5.2 Part II - Site speciﬁc environmental impact
41
Figure 5.7: Impact from energy use in the big ﬁve impact categories for the ﬁve countries.
In ﬁgure 5.8 this result is aggregated into a single score result.
Here the
tendency is the same as at midpoint: China and USA are impacting the envi-
ronment the most and Brazil and France the least.
Figure 5.8: Relative single score impact for the ﬁve countries.
The single score results unambiguously indicate in which country the produc-
tion is the most advantageous regarding the environment. China and USA is
impacting the most and Brazil and France is impacting less.
In 5.9 the impact from the building and the energy is summed and compared
relative to the impact in USA where the production would be local as the sup-
plied market is the American. The results are shown for both after one year
and 30 years of energy consumption.
Production in China seems to be impacting the environment the most, but
the small diﬀerence between USA and China makes it hard to distinguish those
two from each other due to inaccuracies and uncertainties. After one year of
production it is e.g. 30% less damaging to the environment to produce in Brazil
and after 30 years of production it is 60% less damaging to the environment
to produce in Brazil rather than China or USA. This magnitude of diﬀerence
==PAGE:62==
42
Results
Figure 5.9: Impact from energy consumption and building’s life cycle relative to USA, both
after one year and after 30 years.
indicates that there is a genuine environmental advantage to produce in e.g.
Brazil rather than USA or China. In table 5.1 the relation between USA and
the other countries is shown.
Table 5.1: Environmental single score impact relative to USA.
Relative impact
after one year
Relative impact
after 30 years
Brazil
77%
45%
China
104%
109%
Denmark
85%
64%
France
74%
38%
USA
100%
100%
5.3
Subscenarios
Results of the two subscenarios are presented in this section: Distribution by
ship or by aeroplane and heating by a renewable source (biomass) rather than
natural gas.
5.3.1
Distribution
In this investigation, the distribution to the American market is also taken into
consideration. Basically, there are two ways to distribute the product; either by
aeroplane or by ship. The base scenario that is being investigated through this
thesis includes distribution to the large American market. Distribution distances
etc. are presented in table 4.4 on page 20 and the results are illustrated in 5.10
for both air and sea transportation.
==PAGE:63==
5.3 Subscenarios
43
Figure 5.10: Diﬀerence in total impact including the building’s life cycle, one year of energy
consumption and distribution by air or water relative to the supplied market
(USA).
Distribution by air is in some cases impacting as much as the yearly energy
consumption and the distribution by sea is impacting next to nothing relative
to the total impact. USA has no distribution impacts as the scenario is based
on distribution to the American market. Brazil and France can distribute by air
to USA and still impact less than producing locally in USA where long distance
distribution is avoided. Denmark can produce and distribute by ship and impact
less than local production in USA. Production in China is impacting more or
equally as much as USA and is only considerable if distribution is done by ship.
5.3.2
Heating
The base scenario that has been investigated in the present thesis is heating by
natural gas. An alternative to this is the more sustainable solution of burning
biomass to meet the heating demands.
This environmental improvement is
illustrated in ﬁgure 5.11 and 5.12.
The results in the big ﬁve impact categories show an environmental impact
reduction for Denmark, France and USA in all ﬁve categories.
The use of
biomass reduces the impact dramatically in some impact categories and only
little in others, e.g. ozone depletion where a 40-70% reduction is indicated and
freshwater eutrophication where only France is noticeably reduced.
The results also show that Brazil and China does not follow the same pattern
as the others when the heating fuel is changed.
In Ozone depletion, where
the other countries are signiﬁcantly reduced, Brazil and China are signiﬁcantly
increased and in climate change the results only decrease slightly whereas the
==PAGE:64==
44
Results
Figure 5.11: Impact from heating by biomass in the big ﬁve impact categories relative to
the case scenario.
other countries do so more substantially. For the single score result the score for
these two countries does not change and even increases slightly. This discrepancy
could be caused by simpliﬁcation in the modelling as Brazil and China’s biomass
is based on a world average EcoInvent process.
Broadening the scope beyond these ﬁve categories a large increase is present
for the land occupation impact categories. Otherwise a decrease or a status quo
is shown for rest of the ReCiPe impact categories. An illustration of this can be
found in Appendix F - Heating scenario.
Figure 5.12: Relative variation of single score impact when heating source is changed from
natural gas to biomass.
By changing to biomass as heating source, a change of varying size is observed
for all locations. Relative to the respective total impact of the countries, the
reduction for e.g. Brazil is -6% and 49% for France.
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 6
Discussion
The discussion chapter is based on the two-pieced life cycle assessment carried
out through the present thesis plus an assessment of two subscenarios.
The
ﬁrst part analyses the impact from the building materials and the construc-
tion as well as the relation between the environmental impact from the building
and the environmental impact from the energy consumption during produc-
tion. Additionally, the importance of choosing impact assessment methodology
is discussed.
The second part puts this relation, in a Danish context, into a larger perspec-
tive as the building is theoretically placed in other contexts i.e. a Brazilian-, a
Chinese-, a French- and an American context. Furthermore, the developments
of energy grids are deliberated.
Additionally, the results of environmental impact from two subscenarios are
discussed in the context of the previous results. The two subscenarios are al-
ternative distribution and alternative heating source. Lastly, the application of
the results and other perspectives are discussed.
==PAGE:66==
46
Discussion
6.1
Part I – Environmental impact from the build-
ing vs. impact from energy consumption
The environmental impact from the building and the energy consumption are
presented in part I of chapter 5, section 5.1.
These results are commented,
clariﬁed and put into perspective throughout this section.
6.1.1
Environmental impact from the building
The impact from the full life cycle of the building, excluding the energy use,
as of ﬁgure 5.1 on page 36, that illustrate which parts of the building that are
contributing the most to each impact category. From this result, concrete and
steel, which constitute 90% of the total building mass, accounts for more than
half of the impact in every impact category.
The rest of the building mass
(windows, insulation, transport of materials and epoxy coating) accounts for
10-25% of the impacts.
Lastly, the recycling and beneﬁts for other product
systems, account for up to -40% of the impact. This means that, in total, some
impact categories are reduced quite substantially as the two most used building
materials (concrete and steel) are recycled and reused in new product systems.
A ﬁnding in the results of the impact of the building, is the relation between
the impact of the two most used materials in the building.
Concrete, that
by weight is used seven times more than steel, impacts less than steel does in
every impact category. Beside steel, the windows also seem to impact relatively
much as both glass and the aluminium frame also are produced via energy
consuming processes. The results show that the metals in this building are the
most impacting building materials environmentally speaking.
6.1.1.1
Simpliﬁed building modelling
In the present investigation, a simpliﬁed approach to the building materials was
chosen. This was partly due to lack of speciﬁc data, but also an active choice
to reduce the size and complexity of the LCI in the comprehensive LCA study.
The results from the building’s life cycle, excluding energy use, suggest that the
chosen approach could have been too simpliﬁed and further details might have
impacted the results if they were included. 90% of the buildings mass (concrete
and steel) does not make up 90% of the impact results. In most of the impact
categories these two account for at least 60% of the impact and even less if their
recycling potential is subtracted. This pattern of impacts from concrete and
steel, as well as the relation between the two, is also illustrated in another large
==PAGE:67==
6.1 Part I – Environmental impact from the building vs. impact from
energy consumption
47
building LCA investigation (F. Rasmussen, 2012). The mentioned study also
point to the fact that other materials in the building have a signiﬁcant impact
relative to their mass e.g. in the present investigation windows, by mass, only
constitute a small percentage of the building, but account for about 10% in most
impact categories.
Another aspect of the simpliﬁed approach to the modelling of the building,
is the exclusion of the entire use phase, apart from the energy use which also
is modelled as its own.
B1-B5 of the CEN/TC 350 framework includes the
maintenance, repairs, replacements and refurbishment. These parts are entirely
excluded in the base scenario, but primarily due to the diﬃculties of such as-
sessments on the subject. An assumption that a new building does not need
extensive repairs back the decision up, but in a facility, such as the case study,
where a high level of standard is required in all aspects, interior repairs and
maintenance must happen on a more regular basis than in other buildings. This
means that there is a potential for an increased environmental impact from
materials such as ﬂooring, interior walls, ceiling, utilities and production equip-
ment.
The inﬂuence of the exclusion of interior walls, ﬁnishes and production equip-
ment is unclear, but through a sensitivity analysis the inﬂuence of adding build-
ing materials to the product system can be assessed. This analysis is only done
on materials already in the building and indicates how much a 10% change im-
pacts the overall result of the building life cycle. Steel, concrete and insulation
are assessed and the sensitivity of the use of steel is the highest: A 10% vari-
ation leads to a change in the overall impact of 6-10% in the big ﬁve impact
categories as illustrated in ﬁgure 6.1. This means that the addition of the pro-
duction equipment (primarily made from steel) to the model, would increase
the impact from the building somewhat. The added environmental impact from
all the excluded building materials might then increase the buildings life cycle
overall impact by a few percent, but in relation to the impact from energy use
this increase would still be insigniﬁcant over time.
6.1.2
The building’s life cycle vs. its energy consumption
When comparing the environmental impact from the yearly energy consumption
and the impact from the building’s life cycle, ﬁve impact categories are chosen to
provide a better overview of the results at midpoint. Nonetheless, at midpoint,
endpoint and single score, all the results indicate the same thing: The impact
from the building is dominating the impact categories during the ﬁrst years.
But following the continuous energy consumption the impact from energy usage
starts to dominate the results after 22 months. As time goes on, the impact
==PAGE:68==
48
Discussion
Figure 6.1: Sensitivity analysis of use of steel in the modelling of the building: +- 10% steel
mass.
from energy consumption increases in a large rate over time as illustrated in
ﬁgure 6.2.
As mentioned earlier it is not realistic that the production facility does not
undergo any form of maintenance or repair during its lifetime. In ﬁgure 6.2 a
scenario of the building’s life cycle is presented with maintenance along with
the modelled life cycle of the building and the impact from energy use. The
added maintenance is assumed to be 1% of the impact of the building each year.
This might even be a relative high percentage as per (F. Rasmussen, 2012) the
maintenance only account for maximum 10% or 20% of the impact in a short
or long lifetime perspective (50 and 100 years) i.e. a yearly impact addition
of 0.2%.
Letting maintenance add 1% each year could then seem excessive,
but might be realistic as the mentioned study is of an oﬃce building and the
present investigation is of a production facility that presumably requires more
maintenance.
If the internal building materials and production equipment are also included
in the assessment, the building’s impact could increase by some percent as men-
tioned. This would then cause the building to dominate the results for a longer
period; the 22 months might increase to 24 months. But even with the total
impact from the building’s life cycle, the energy consumption remains the most
dominating impact in the environment over time. In ﬁgure 6.2 the green line
represents a 10% increase in the building’s impact from inclusion of all building
materials as well as 1% maintenance addition each year.
Despite the addition of impacts from maintenance and interior building mate-
rials, the relation between the impact from energy consumption and the impact
from the building’s life cycle only changes slightly. The impact from the en-
==PAGE:69==
6.1 Part I – Environmental impact from the building vs. impact from
energy consumption
49
Figure 6.2: Environmental impact of energy consumption and the building’s life cycle with
and without maintenance over time.
ergy consumption is undoubtedly far greater in size than the impact from the
building over time, which makes the exclusion of maintenance and interior in
the base scenario acceptable.
6.1.2.1
Site speciﬁc data in the building model
As a part of the LCA methodology the most speciﬁc data should always be used
in the assessment. This means that in order to reach the most accurate result,
speciﬁc material processes for the case building should be used. Nonetheless,
for this investigation the building’s environmental impact is based on generic
processes and world averages from the EcoInvent database.
The assessment
could have been more precise as country- or region speciﬁc building material
processes do exist, but the choice to disregard them and use the world average,
makes the results directly applicable in all the investigated countries without
adaptation. Furthermore, the fact that the impact from the energy consumption
is far greater over time makes that level of detail neglectable.
6.1.3
Result veriﬁcation by diﬀerent LCIA methodologies
The direct results of the big ﬁve impact categories in ﬁgure 5.5 on page 39 seem
to provide almost exactly the same results. This tendency corresponds to other
work that compare the two LCIA methods like (Owsianiak, Laurent, Bjørn,
& Hauschild, 2014). They conclude that the two impact methodologies might
==PAGE:70==
50
Discussion
provide similar results, but that it is probably because only a few processes drive
the total impact. This is exactly the case here. Steel, concrete and windows are
the main contributors to the buildings environmental impact. Furthermore, the
study also concludes that normalisation is an extra potential source of diﬀerence.
When the results are normalised they are divided by a certain factor that
makes the result expressed in a region-speciﬁc person equivalent (how much one
person impact the environment for a year in that region). This factor changes as
population and technology changes over time. Another factor that could have
induced extra diﬀerence in the results is that, the normalisation sets, used in this
calculation, are based on diﬀerent years despite they are the most representative
sets available.
Beside this, the calculation methods i.e. characterisation factors used in the
two methodologies are objectively diﬀerent. They are based on various scien-
tiﬁc studies and not necessarily the same even though they calculate the same
thing. From the illustration on ﬁgure 5.5 on page 39 the climate change, the
ozone depletion, and the acidiﬁcation categories provide similar results after nor-
malisation and Photochemical oxidant formation is also somewhat alike. The
eutrophication category is the only one of the big ﬁve that really stands out and
this might be due to the fact that the eutrophication potential is divided into
several categories: Freshwater, marine and terrestrial. Each is calculated and
expressed in diﬀerent nutrient equivalents and only freshwater eutrophication is
directly comparable between the impact methodologies. The total eutrophica-
tion potential of the two methodologies could prove to be relatively similar if
these impacts were aggregated and compared.
At endpoint, the ILCD method has almost no impact in the resource category.
This is because the ILCD method does not take resource depletion into account
whereas ReCiPe does (Acero, Rodríguez, & Ciroth, 2014). Furthermore, a nor-
malisation set for the ILCD endpoint method is yet to be produced and along
with the discrepancy in the inclusion of environmental impacts, a comparison
of the results at endpoint is very questionable.
The ReCiPe methodology, that is used throughout the investigation, is thus
more or less validated by the IlCD methodology.
The two methods present
results that are very similar at midpoint, but when they are normalised this
tendency somewhat changes, though only signiﬁcantly for the eutrophication
potential. As for the other categories, the results are so similar that the dis-
crepancy could fall under uncertainties.
==PAGE:71==
6.2 Part II - Site speciﬁc environmental impact
51
6.2
Part II - Site speciﬁc environmental impact
Where the site speciﬁcity matters less for the impact of the building in this
comparison, the site speciﬁcity for the energy consumption matters greatly.
The diﬀerent energy grid compositions have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the impact at
the respective location. In Part II the environmental impact of the site-speciﬁc
energy consumption is discussed and analysed.
6.2.1
Site speciﬁc environmental impact
Pharmaceutical production requires speciﬁc conditions to maintain the high
level of standard for a sterile environment where the pharmaceutical product
is made which leads to a large energy consumption. The location, at which a
production facility is placed, seems to have a signiﬁcant impact on the total use
of energy each year. Energy for conditioning is dependent on factors outside of
the manufacturing facility. These factors change with the seasons over the course
of a year and the energy required to keep the speciﬁc conditions inside varies
as shown in table 4.6 on page 24. The total energy use for the ﬁve locations
investigated vary by up to 16,000 GJ each year or 20%.
This alone, could serve as a decision variable when considering establishing a
new pharmaceutical production facility, but another factor, that has a consider-
able eﬀect on this result, is the source of energy at the respective location i.e the
energy grid. With this factor taken into consideration, Brazil and USA, that is
calculated to have approximately the same yearly energy consumption, have a
widely diﬀerent impact on the environment. The Brazilian impact is about one
third of the American after 30 years as illustrated in ﬁgure 5.8 on page 41.
6.2.1.1
Energy grids
The modelled energy grids are based on 2015 data and are probably not rep-
resentative further into the future. The sustainable development in Denmark
(from 2008 to 2015) shown in ﬁgure 4.4 on page 26 and in Appendix A - En-
ergy grid composition, illustrates the use of fossil fuels decrease in line with the
current wave of environmental awareness. The same tendency is not clear for
the other countries, but, on the other hand, in countries like Brazil and France
which is primarily supplied with renewable energy (hydro and nuclear energy),
this transformation is not as needed. In contrast, USA and China have a large
and urgent challenge in front of them before mitigation of climate change can
be achieved.
==PAGE:72==
52
Discussion
Looking into the future developments, China has realized that the environ-
mental issues related to sustainability of resource use and mitigating climate
change need to be addressed (Executive Summary of China’s Actions on the
Implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 2017). Their
government are now actively transforming and innovating the energy sector seek-
ing to reduce the emissions of CO2. China have along with 147 other nations
ratiﬁed the Paris agreement that seeks to reduce the impact of climate change.
This means that during the following years, the large dominance of coal as the
source of electricity in the Chinese energy grid is expected to be reduced.
In contrast, the immediate future for America does not seem to hold a sig-
niﬁcant sustainable development even though they experienced a reduction of
coal as source of electricity between 2008-2015.
In the start of 2017 a new
agenda for the American energy policy was introduced with the change of pres-
idency. The new administration wants to create jobs within domestic energy
production, with a strong focus on expanding the coal and shale gas produc-
tion. Furthermore, it was recently announced that USA would not abide to
the Paris Agreement that seek to reduce the climate change (Trump vil trække
USA ud af klimaaftale, 2017). This could easily lead to a shift in the results
from this investigation. If China reduces the consumption of coal as anticipated,
their environmental impact from energy production will decrease accordingly. If
USA then proceeds to increase the coal and gas production, their impact from
energy production will increase. This would then leave USA as the single most
impacting country in an investigation similar to the present thesis. Further into
the future this setback will probably be temporary and sustainable develop-
ment will become a part of American policy as well. Even now, cities and states
around the country have pledged to uphold the Paris agreement even though
the country formally withdraws from it and joins the only two countries that
are completely out of the agreement, Syria and Nicaragua (Map Shows Growing
U.S. ’Climate Rebellion’ Against Trump, 2017).
For each individual country or region, it can be assumed that a sustainable
development will take place during the next decades. Even though that these
developments are challenged by e.g. current domestic politics, the current shift
in environmental awareness will eventually drive the sustainable changes in the
energy production.
This development will then inﬂuence the results of this
investigation. The relative diﬀerence of impacts between the countries of the
study will decrease as renewable energy becomes a larger part of the respective
grid composition.
How the grids actually develop can be predicted in an inﬁnite number of
ways, but their starting point i.e. the current grid composition, is known. This
means that the modelled results are relatively accurate during the ﬁrst period
of time.
Then, as time goes by, the model gets more and more inaccurate.
==PAGE:73==
6.2 Part II - Site speciﬁc environmental impact
53
Nevertheless, the relations between the environmental impacts, as illustrated in
ﬁgure 6.3, are established from the start and gets increasingly diﬃcult to change
over time despite the fact that the respective energy grid is developing towards
a more sustainable composition. The results from this investigation might then
be inaccurate over a longer period of time, but still provide a solid indication
on the relation of the environmental impacts the countries in between.
Figure 6.3: Relative single score impact for the ﬁve countries.
6.2.2
Single score impact
The main result of this investigation is expressed in single score results of the
impacts from energy consumption and the building in ﬁve diﬀerent countries.
By aggregating all impacts into one single environmental impact score eases
the communication of the results, but in the same process there is a risk of
oversimplifying the results. From the single score the actual impacts on the
environment cannot be deduced. In the process of simplifying the results, from
actual environmental impact to substance equivalents to damage pathways to
endpoint impacts to normalised impact that is ﬁnally weighed according to
a consensus of what impact matters the most, the uncertainty continuously
increases.
At each step the environmental impact is multiplied by a factor
and aggregated with other impacts, mixing the results into an opaque blend of
environmental impacts.
Going back to the actual environmental impacts, the global warming poten-
tial, measured in CO2 equivalence is a well-tested impact category with low
uncertainty (JRC, 2010). As climate change is drawing attention because of the
enormous amount of CO2 emission each year, the factor has become a measure
of sustainability. To only look at one impact category to assess whether some-
thing is sustainable can seem odd, but it is actually a good indicator for the
relative environmental impact.
==PAGE:74==
54
Discussion
In regards to buildings, this investigation along with (F. Rasmussen, 2012)
and (F. N. Rasmussen & Birgisdottir, 2015), illustrates that metals have a very
signiﬁcant role when it comes to the environmental impact. As metal manu-
facturing is a very energy intensive process and accounts for the majority of
the environmental impact, emission of CO2 gets closely connected to the total
environmental impact. Previous work also show that this relationship is not
only present in metal production, but also that the CO2 equivalent environ-
mental impact is closely related to most ReCiPe impact categories along with
single score, with exception of toxicity and eutrophication indicators: (Kalbar,
Birkved, Karmakar, Nygaard, & Hauschild, 2017).
"Particularly, signiﬁcant
correlation is observed between CFP (carbon footprint) and the ReCiPe end-
points as well as the ReCiPe single score." This correlation is illustrated in
ﬁgure 6.4.
Figure 6.4: Correlation between variances of impacts of climate change and single score
results.
This means that even though the single score results accumulate uncertainty
through the calculation process, the ReCiPe single score correlates well with
the global warming potential that has a low level of uncertainty. The relation
between the investigated countries in the single score result and in the CO2
equivalent are roughly the same and the result can be assumed to be reliable.
Even though the CO2 equivalent serves well as proxy for the relation between
the impacts of the countries in this case study, the climate change impact cate-
gory becomes unsuitable as an overall performance indicator for more complex
product systems (Kalbar et al., 2017).
==PAGE:75==
6.3 Subscenarios
55
6.2.2.1
Nuclear- and hydro power
According to the results of this investigation Brazil and France are presumably
the least environmentally impacting countries to produce in. This in primarily
due to the small percentage of fossil fuels in their electricity grid composition.
The two countries are based on approximately 65-75% hydro power and nuclear
power respectively. These energy sources might not emit large amounts of CO2,
but they are aﬀecting the environment in other ways.
Hydro power requires large reservoirs of water and damming. In Brazil, the
large Amazon rainforest provides lots of rivers that are exploited and some of
the largest dams in the world are here. But there is a catch with this energy re-
source. The large dams hold back immense amounts of water that occupies large
land areas which in turn destroys the rainforest and forcibly remove indigenous
population and animals.
Nuclear power seems to be a good way of producing energy as relatively small
amount of fuel provide huge amounts of energy. But there is also a catch with
this resource. Even though only small amounts of fuel is used, the waste from it
is radioactive and highly toxic and needs to be handled and stored for more than
100,000 years before it loses its toxicity. In addition to this, if something unfore-
seen happens the potential energy in the fuel and the radioactive characteristics
hold the ingredients for catastrophe.
These two technologies do produce an environmental impact in the modelled
result of the investigation. In Natural land transformation and Ionising radia-
tion categories Brazil and France score much higher than the other countries,
but these categories do not weigh as much in the assessment. If this is fair can
be discussed, but as things are now climate change has a very concrete and
urgent eﬀect on the whole world that needs to be addressed - and this leads to
renewable resources like the two is much preferred.
6.3
Subscenarios
As a secondary part of the investigation two subscenarios were modelled and
studied: the impact from the distribution and the eﬀect of changing heating
source.
==PAGE:76==
56
Discussion
6.3.1
Distribution
The results clearly show that environmental impact from distribution by water
is nowhere near the impact from air transport leading to ship distribution being
absolutely preferred. As USA is the market that is supplied in the base scenario,
the results in ﬁgure 5.10 on page 43 indicate that production could take place
in Brazil and France, and even be distributed by aeroplane, and still impact the
environment less than local production in USA does. Production in Denmark
is also impacting less, but only if distribution is done by water.
Environmentally speaking local production does not seem to be favoured
which stands in contrast to traditional belief of local production equals sus-
tainable production (Born & Purcell, 2006). In the current case study a relative
low volume of product is shipped each year which means that the impact from
distribution is relatively low. Nonetheless, distribution by aeroplane is so im-
pacting that this scenario is never preferred environmentally wise. The pattern
of the impact from the distribution subscenario corresponds well with results
from other LCAs on pharmaceutical products (de Jonge, 2003; Conceptión et
al., 2004). Either the distribution accounts for a large part of the impact, when
distribution is done by aeroplane, or it matters little when distribution is done
by ship and lorries.
Distribution by aeroplane might still be preferred by the producer as it is
much faster. This means that products with shorter expiration dates probably
will be shipped this way to ensure fast delivery to the customer even though it
means a signiﬁcantly increase in the environmental impact.
6.3.2
Heating
The second subscenario is heating by biomass instead of by natural gas. The
results of this investigation show an improvement of environmental impact for
some of the countries. In contrast, the impact for Brazil and China increases
slightly. This result might be somewhat misleading as the chosen process for
biomass in these two countries is a world average as no country or region spe-
ciﬁc process exists in the database. For Denmark and France, the process is
based on an European average and for USA a Canadian process is chosen. The
region-speciﬁc (European and Canadian) processes show an overall decrease in
single score when changing from fossil fuel to biomass whereas the average world
process modelled for Brazil and China indicate a slight increase.
As illustrated in 5.11 on page 44 Brazil and China are noticeable as the
impact in ozone depletion and photochemical oxidant formation increase and
==PAGE:77==
6.4 Result application and perspectives
57
for the rest the impact decreases.
This could again be due to the fact the
representativeness of the chosen process is not correct. Beside the illustrated
big ﬁve impact categories, where the impact primarily decrease, other impact
categories increase by changing heating fuel source, especially regarding land
occupation.
But when focusing on the big ﬁve impact categories or single
score a tendency is clearly indicated - by changing from natural gas to biomass
an improvement is achieved.
6.4
Result application and perspectives
As the increased environmental attention plays a larger role for politicians, envi-
ronmental management as well as organisations’ sustainability branding (Kumar
& Christodoulopoulou, 2014), decisions of site selection for production should
be inﬂuenced by the results of this investigation. From these results, it is quite
clear that a signiﬁcant improvement of the environmental impact of a product
can be achieved by considering where a production is located. Not only does the
amount of energy for conditioning, due to the outside climate, change substan-
tially depending on the geographical location, the source of the energy plays an
even more important role. This means that, as attention on sustainable produc-
tion increases, access to renewable energy sources becomes a key parameter for
the producing companies as well as the cities, regions or countries that beneﬁt
from the jobs, products and tax revenue that comes with it.
In addition to the environmental attention, other factors, especially econom-
ical, will usually weigh heavier in a decision of production site selection. Mar-
ket presence, economic feasibility and legislation are probably the key drivers
whereas environmentally friendly production is secondary. With this said, some
companies do strive to reduce the environmental impact of their production. As
this investigation is based on a case study of a Novo Nordisk production facility
their eﬀorts to achieve a reduction in environmental impact are described in the
following.
6.4.1
Novo Nordisk and renewable energy
Novo Nordisk has the vision that the electricity consumption from their pro-
duction sites around the world will be totally based on renewable sources in
2020 (Novo Nordisk, 2016). Because of this, a large part of the production is
already partly or fully based on certiﬁcates of renewable energy production and
collaborates with energy providers to expand existing renewable energy sources.
As of late 2015 it was announced by Novo Nordisk that its production sites
==PAGE:78==
58
Discussion
in Denmark, Brazil and Japan all are powered by renewable energy and that
the production site in Tianjin, China will be soon. Remaining sites in the US,
France, Russia, Algeria and Iran will follow along and by 2020 all electricity
supplied to Novo Nordisk production will be coming from renewable sources
(Novo Nordisk, 2015).
As Novo Nordisk’s ambition for 2020 comes true and all of their production
facilities are supplied by renewable electricity the results from this investiga-
tion will signiﬁcantly change. The large diﬀerence between the environmental
impact from the building’s life cycle and the impact from the energy consump-
tion will diminish. However, in a larger perspective the use of renewable energy
certiﬁcates can be questioned whether or not the societal environmental impact
is reduced and if it serves as a driver for further development of the renewable
energy production.
Subjectively, the use of certiﬁcates of renewable energy is a recognised and ex-
cellent way of communicating that the organisation’s production is sustainable.
Objectively, it can be discussed if this makes a diﬀerence for society as non-
renewable electricity is still being produced to supply the cumulative demand
for energy in a larger scale and the companies only "greenwash" their energy
consumption. In order for the respective organisation to truly claim that they
only use renewable energy, they have to produce the energy themselves or ac-
tively support the expansion of renewable energy as the case of Novo Nordisk
did when DONG expanded the oﬀshore wind farm Horns rev 2 (Climate ac-
tions, 2017). But certiﬁcates or not, this can be discussed and it is beyond the
scope of this thesis.
Beyond the discussion of renewable energy production, the results of this
investigation are still applicable for the Novo Nordisk, or other pharmaceutical
production companies.
The fact that the climate outside of the production
facility has a clear eﬀect on the total energy consumption and combined with
the diversity of energy grid compositions, the producing company should realise
that more attention should be paid in this matter. Production location have a
very large inﬂuence on the total environmental impact of the production.
6.4.2
Further perspectives
One thing is how companies themselves decide where to place their production,
another thing is politics. In both cases the results of this thesis can be used by
both. Politicians can actively use the results of this and similar investigations.
As the environmental mindset starts to matter more and more, the production
companies will be attracted to locations and countries where opportunities for
sustainable production are available. Countries that lack behind the current
==PAGE:79==
6.4 Result application and perspectives
59
environmental evolution might ﬁnd it harder to attract the sustainability driven
organisations and miss out on the opportunity for them to establish a produc-
tion there, especially as the distribution seems to matter little, at least in an
environmental perspective.
So when the new American president claims "My action today is latest in steps
to grow American jobs" (Remarks by President Trump at Signing of Executive
Order to Create Energy Independence, 2017) as he tries to revitalise the coal
industry, it could prove to do the opposite as sustainable production will get
increasingly hard in USA and companies could choose to simply produce in
other countries to easily reduce their environmental impact.
==PAGE:80==
60
Discussion
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
In this two-pieced investigation a case study building of a pharmaceutical pro-
duction company was analysed. The ﬁrst part included a comparison of the
building’s environmental impact relative to the impact from the massive energy
consumption characteristic to pharmaceutical production. The second part the-
oretically placed the case study in four other contexts to assess the change in
energy consumption and the variation of environmental impact in the respective
locations. As all studied scenario included distribution to USA, environmental
impact from this was included as well.
As the environmental impact from the building’s life cycle is compared with
the energy consumption during operation in a Danish context a clear result is
presented: In the ﬁve investigated midpoint categories of the ReCiPe LCIA, as
well as at endpoint and in single score, the building’s impact is greater within the
ﬁrst ∼20 months after which the impact from energy consumption dominates.
At single score, the result indicates that the energy consumption’s impact be-
comes greater than the building’s after 22 months. If maintenance, production
equipment and internal building materials are included this result shifts a little.
The 22 months from the single score result could increase to 24 months. In
other words, the energy consumption impacts the environment as much as the
full life cycle of the building every two years and after 30 years the impact from
energy consumption corresponds to 15-20 times more than the building which
makes the impact from the building less interesting in an impact optimisation.
==PAGE:82==
62
Conclusion
The results of the ReCiPe methodology were veriﬁed by the ILCD method-
ology that provided very similar results at midpoint. After normalisation, this
tendency shifted a little and most in the eutrophication category. This discrep-
ancy in the result was due to the increasing amount uncertainty and a variation
in the normalisation sets.
Through a theoretical placement of the case study in ﬁve countries around
the world and using a Novo Nordisk guideline on how to calculate the esti-
mated energy consumption, a signiﬁcant variation in energy consumption was
found between the locations. The diﬀerence from the highest consumer of en-
ergy (China) to the lowest (France) was 16,000 GJ or 20%.
As the varying
energy consumptions are combined with the speciﬁc composition of the electric-
ity grid in the respective countries a clear indication on which country is most
environmental friendly becomes visible.
As the investigated scenario is based on supplying the American market with
insulin, the distribution from the production site to USA showed that distribu-
tion by ship have a relatively very little impact whereas distribution by aeroplane
is very signiﬁcant. Distribution by air impacts as much as the total yearly en-
ergy consumption does in some cases. This distribution form might though be
used regardless due to expiration of the product.
Primarily fossil based electricity grids in China and USA impact 3 times as
much as Brazil and France that are based on renewable sources: hydro and
nuclear power. This distribution of results will probably change as the envi-
ronmental awareness continues to grow and renewable sources become greater
parts of the respective energy grids. Even though present politics, especially in
USA, is currently disrupting this tendency, the change ought to happen even-
tually. As this shift happens over time the relative diﬀerence in the results will
decrease, but from a current point of view the relations between the impacts
will not change within the immediate future.
The results of this thesis then provide stakeholders like Novo Nordisk with
an accurate assessment of sustainable production locations at a country speciﬁc
scale. Despite this, other circumstances play a large part in site selection. Eco-
nomic factors are probably the biggest driver in this and environmental concerns
can quickly become secondary. But in a world where environmental awareness
is growing the results of this thesis can serve as a clear decision variable.
==PAGE:83==
References
Acero, A., Rodríguez, C., & Ciroth, A. (2014). Lcia methods–impact assessment
methods in life cycle assessment and their impact categories. GreenDelta
GmbH, Berlin, Germany, 23.
Binz, A., Erb, M., & Lehmann, G. (2000). Ökologische nachhaltigkeit im woh-
nungsbau: eine bewertung von erneuerungsstrategien. EMPA.
Born, B., & Purcell, M. (2006). Avoiding the local trap: Scale and food systems
in planning research. Journal of planning education and research, 26(2),
195–207.
Bæredygtighed vil ændre vores livsstil – hvor er vi på vej hen?
(2017, Febru-
ary 22). Retrieved from http://csr.dk/b%C3%A6redygtighed-vil-%C3%
A6ndre-vores-livsstil-%E2%80%93-hvor-er-vi-p%C3%A5-vej-hen
Can coal ever be clean?
(2017, May 30).
Retrieved from http://ngm
.nationalgeographic.com/2014/04/coal/nijhuis-text
Climate
actions.
(2017,
June
13).
Retrieved
from
http://www
.novonordisk.com/sustainability/actions/Environment-Climate/
Greenhouse-gasses.html
Commonwealth Development Corporation Group. (2016). What are the links
between power, economic growth and job creation? CDC Group.
Conceptión, J.-G., Curzons, A. D., Constable, D. J., & Cunningham, V. L.
(2004). Cradle-to-gate life cycle inventory and assessment of pharmaceu-
==PAGE:84==
64
References
tical compounds. The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment,
9(2), 114–121.
Dansk Standard. (1996). Ds/en iso 14001. miljøledelsessystemer. kravbeskriv-
else med råd om anvendelse – environmental management systems, re-
quirements with guidance for use. København, Dansk Standard.
de Jonge, A. M.
(2003).
Limited lcas of pharmaceutical products: merits
and limitations of an environmental management tool. Corporate Social
Responsibility and Environmental Management, 10(2), 78–90.
Ds-en 14040, environmental management - life cycle assessment - principles
and framework (Vol. 2008; Standard). (2008, November). Copenhagen,
DK: European Committee for Standardization.
Ecoinvent 3.3 database search.
(2017, June 05).
Retrieved from https://
ecoquery.ecoinvent.org/Search/Index
Executive summary of china’s actions on the implementation of the 2030 agenda
for sustainable development. (2017, June 09). Retrieved from https://
sustainabledevelopment.un.org/hlpf/2016/china
Herrmann, I. T., & Hauschild, M. Z. (2009). Eﬀects of globalisation on carbon
footprints of products. CIRP Annals-Manufacturing Technology, 58(1),
13–16.
Hong, T., Ji, C., Jang, M., & Park, H. (2013). Assessment model for energy
consumption and greenhouse gas emissions during building construction.
Journal of Management in Engineering, 30(2), 226–235.
International energy agency statistics. (2017, June 3). Retrieved from https://
www.iea.org/statistics/
JRC, E. C. (2010). International reference lice cycle data system (ilcd). Hand-
book – general guide for life cycle assessment – detailed guidance. Euro-
pean Commission–Joint Research Centre–Institute for Environment and
Sustainability, 1st ed. EUR, EUR 24708 EN .
Kalbar, P. P., Birkved, M., Karmakar, S., Nygaard, S. E., & Hauschild, M.
(2017). Can carbon footprint serve as proxy of the environmental burden
from urban consumption patterns? Ecological Indicators, 74, 109–118.
Kellenberger, D., & Althaus, H.-J. (2009). Relevance of simpliﬁcations in lca of
building components. Building and Environment, 44(4), 818–825.
==PAGE:85==
References
65
Kristensen, L. M., & Valstorp, P. (2009). Supporting guidence - energy eﬃcient
hvac design. Novo Nordisk.
Kumar, V., & Christodoulopoulou, A. (2014). Sustainability and branding: An
integrated perspective. Industrial Marketing Management, 43(1), 6–15.
Mads frederik architecture photography - novo nordisk apx. (2017, June 21). Re-
trieved from https://madsfrederik.myportfolio.com/novo-nordisk
-apx
Malmqvist, T., Glaumann, M., Scarpellini, S., Zabalza, I., Aranda, A., Llera,
E., & Díaz, S.
(2011).
Life cycle assessment in buildings: The enslic
simpliﬁed method and guidelines. Energy, 36(4), 1900–1907.
Map shows growing u.s. ’climate rebellion’ against trump. (2017, June 13). Re-
trieved from http://news.nationalgeographic.com/2017/06/states
-cities-usa-climate-policy-environment/
Mata, T. M., Martins, A. A., Neto, B., Martins, M. L., Romualdo, S., & Costa,
C. (2012). Lca tool for sustainability evaluations in the pharmaceutical
industry. Chem. Eng. Trans., 26.
Novo Nordisk. (2015). Press release, all novo nordisk production plants to run
on renewable power in 2020.
Novo Nordisk. (2016). Annual report 2016. Novo Nordisk, Bagsværd.
Owsianiak, M., Laurent, A., Bjørn, A., & Hauschild, M. Z. (2014). Impact
2002+, recipe 2008 and ilcd’s recommended practice for characterization
modelling in life cycle impact assessment: a case study-based comparison.
The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 19(5), 1007–1021.
Petersen, E. H. (2001). Energi-og miljøanalyse af tre udvalgte bygninger. SBI
forlag.
Ponder, C., & Overcash, M. (2010). Cradle-to-gate life cycle inventory of van-
comycin hydrochloride. Science of the total environment, 408(6), 1331–
1337.
Raju, G., Singh, H., Sarkar, P., & Singla, E. (2016). A framework for evaluation
of environmental sustainability in pharmaceutical industry. In Cad/cam,
robotics and factories of the future (pp. 797–806). Springer.
Rasmussen, F.
(2012).
Certiﬁcation of sustainable buildings in a life cycle
==PAGE:86==
66
References
assessment perspective (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). M. Sc. thesis
Environmental Engineering, Technical University of Denmark.
Rasmussen, F. N., & Birgisdottir, H.
(2015).
Livscyklusvurdering af større
bygningsrenoveringer: Miljømæssige konsekvenser belyst via casestudier
(Tech. Rep.). SBI forlag.
Remarks by president trump at signing of executive order to create en-
ergy independence.
(2017,
May 30).
Retrieved from https://
www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2017/03/28/remarks
-president-trump-signing-executive-order-create-energy
Trump vil trække usa ud af klimaaftale.
(2017,
June 09).
Retrieved
from http://www.dr.dk/nyheder/udland/trump-vil-traekke-usa-ud
-af-klimaaftale
UNFCCC, V. (2015). Adoption of the paris agreement. Proposal by the President
(Draft Decision), United Nations Oﬃce, Geneva (Switzerland), 32.
Wernet, G., Conradt, S., Isenring, H. P., Jiménez-González, C., & Hungerbühler,
K.
(2010).
Life cycle assessment of ﬁne chemical production: a case
study of pharmaceutical synthesis. The International Journal of Life Cycle
Assessment, 15(3), 294–303.
Why ecoinvent. (2017, May 09). Retrieved from http://www.ecoinvent.org/
database/buy-a-licence/why-ecoinvent/why-ecoinvent.html
World’s largest economies. (2017, May 30). Retrieved from http://money.cnn
.com/news/economy/world_economies_gdp/
==PAGE:87==
Appendix
==PAGE:88==
68
Appendix
Appendix A
==PAGE:89==
Energy grid composition
EcoInvent 2008 data
International Energy Agency 2015 data
coal
50%
natural gas
20%
oil
3%
wind
21%
biomass
6%
Energy grid distribution DK
coal
4%
natural gas
4%
oil
1%
wind
1%
biomass
1%
hydro
12%
nuclear
77%
Energy grid distribution FR
coal
77%
natural gas
1%
oil
1%
hydro
19%
nuclear
2%
Energy grid distribution CN
coal
47%
natural gas
24%
wind
1%
biomass
1%
hydro
6%
nuclear
21%
Energy grid distribution USA
coal
1%
natural gas
7%
oil
4%
biomass
6%
hydro
79%
nuclear
3%
Energy grid distributopn BR
coal
25%
natural gas
6%
oil
1%
wind
49%
biomass
17%
solar
2%
Energy grid distribution DK
coal
2% natural gas
4%
wind
4%
hydro
10%
nuclear
78%
Energy grid distribution FR
coal
72%
natural gas
2%
oil
1%
wind
3% 
hydro
18%
nuclear
3%
Energy grid distribution CN
coal
34%
natural gas
32%
wind
5%
biomass
2%
hydro
6%
nuclear
19%
solar
1%
Energy grid distribution USA
coal
5%
natural gas
13%
oil
6%
biomass
8%
hydro
63%
nuclear
3%
Energy grid distributopn BR
==PAGE:90==
70
Appendix
Appendix B
==PAGE:91==
Building materials in the model
Building category
Material
Material mass
[kg]
Share of 
building 
mass
Ecoinvent process
Construction 
waste 
percentage
[%]
Transport distance
- from supplier to 
site
[km]
Data 
quality
External walls
Facade material - bricks
124.228,20
        
0,35% market for brick shale - GLO
2%
76
3
Concrete
4.236.072,86
     
12,03% market for concrete, 30-32MPa - GLO
3%
32
2
Reinforcing steel
435.158,59
        
1,24% market for reinforcing steel - GLO
4%
131
5
Plastic foil
4.411,05
             
0,01%
market for polyethylene, 
high density, granulate - GLO
5%
131
5
Insulation
42.837,60
           
0,12%
market for rock wool,
packed - GLO
3%
124
2
Openings - doors
0,00%
market for door, outer,
wood-aluminium - GLO
3
Windows - alu frame
0,00%
market for window frame,
aluminium, U=1.6 W/m2K - GLO
3
Windows - glass
158.847,75
        
0,45%
market for solar glass,
low-iron - GLO
1%
188
3
Steel (cooling yard)
33.257,90
           
0,09%
market for hot rolling,
steel - GLO
4%
188
3
Foundation
Gravel
2.585.700,00
     
7,34%
market for gravel,
crushed - GLO
2%
30
3
Concrete
17.688.069,80
   
50,22%
market for concrete,
30-32MPa - GLO
3%
32
2
Reinforcing steel
1.817.040,38
   
5,16% market for reinforcing steel - GLO
4%
131
5
Rigid insulation
80.340,00
           
0,23% market for polystyrene foam slab - GLO
3%
109
3
Plastic foil
10.237,50
           
0,03%
market for polyethylene,
high density, granulate - GLO
5%
131
5
==PAGE:92==
Building materials in the model
Screed
367.479,00
        
1,04%
market for cement cast plaster floor - 
GLO
5%
48
5
Epoxy coating
67.540,00
           
0,19%
market for epoxy resin,
liquid - GLO
5
Roof
Concrete
831.500,05
        
2,36%
market for concrete,
30-32MPa - GLO
3%
32
2
Reinforcing stell
85.417,41
         
0,24% market for reinforcing steel - GLO
4%
131
5
Insulation
91.714,88
           
0,26%
market for rock wool,
packed - GLO
3%
124
3
Plastic foil
9.444,02
             
0,03%
market for polyethylene,
high density, granulate - GLO
5%
131
5
Roof asphalt
90.662,54
           
0,26%
market for bitumen adhesive 
compound,
hot - GLO
5%
131
5
Skylights - alu frame
0,00%
market for window frame,
aluminium, U=1.6 W/m2K - GLO
3
Skylights - window glass
19.071,96
           
0,05%
market for solar glass,
low-iron - GLO
1%
188
3
Structural steel
189.590,75
        
0,54%
market for hot rolling,
steel - GLO
4%
188
2
Structural system
Structural steel
184.039,52
      
0,52% market for hot rolling, steel - GLO
4%
188
2
Floor decks
Concrete
4.548.290,48
     
12,91%
market for concrete,
30-32MPa - GLO
3%
32
2
Reinforcement steel
467.231,73
      
1,33% market for reinforcing steel - GLO
4%
131
5
Structural steel
564.647,47
        
1,60%
market for hot rolling,
steel - GLO
4%
188
2
Ventilation/utilities
Sprinkler system - 
insulation
121,38
                
0,00%
market for rock wool,
packed - GLO
5%
131
2
Sprinkler system - steel 
pipes
32.115,41
           
0,09%
market for drawing of pipe,
steel - GLO
4%
188
2
==PAGE:93==
Building materials in the model
AHU- polythylene filter
13.923,00
           
0,04%
market for polyethylene terephthalate,
granulate, bottle grade - GLO
5%
131
3
AHU- heating
/cooling coil (cupper 
pipes)
16.614,00
           
0,05% market for copper - GLO
3
AHU - insulation
9.279,27
             
0,03%
market for rock wool,
packed - GLO
3%
124
2
AHU - casing (steel)
121.801,68
        
0,35%
market for steel,
low-alloyed, hot rolled - GLO
4%
188
3
AHU - ventilation duscts
207.631,11
        
0,59%
market for steel, 
low-alloyed, hot rolled - GLO
4%
188
2
AHU - ventilation 
insulation
20.251,04
           
0,06%
market for rock wool,
packed - GLO
3%
124
2
Water utilities - 
insulation
2.398,62
             
0,01%
market for rock wool,
packed - GLO
3%
124
2
Water utilities - PE 
pipes
835,17
                
0,00%
market for steel,
low-alloyed, hot rolled - GLO
5%
131
2
Water utilities - PVC 
pipes
3.266,20
             
0,01%
market for polyvinylchloride,
bulk polymerised - GLO
2
Water utilities - steel 
pipes
59.314,94
           
0,17% market for chromium steel pipe - GLO
4%
188
2
35.220.383,25
 
100,00%
==PAGE:94==
Building materials in the model
Construction and transport
Material mass
[kg]
Energy required
[kWh]
Ecoinvent process
Distance
[km]
Transport load
[tkm]
Data quality
Construction energy
303.959,12
          
diesel, burned in building machine - GLO
4
Demolition energy
151.979,56
            
diesel, burned in building machine - GLO
5
Dirt mass
49.680.000,00
      
market for transport,
freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO6 - GLO
2
99.360,00
           
5
Concrete
26.508.673,00
      
market for transport,
freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO6 - GLO
32
848.277,54
         
2
Steel
4.035.814,32
        
market for transport,
freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO6 - GLO
131
528.691,68
         
2/5
Bricks
122.310,00
           
market for transport,
freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO6 - GLO
76
9.295,56
             
3
Plastic foil
22.945,30
             
market for transport,
freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO6 - GLO
131
3.005,83
             
5
Insulation
239.748,03
           
market for transport,
freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO6 - GLO
124
29.728,76
           
2/3
Gravel
2.535.000,00
        
market for transport,
freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO6 - GLO
30
76.050,00
           
5
Screed
349.980,00
           
market for transport,
freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO6 - GLO
48
16.799,04
           
5
Roofing asphalt
86.345,28
             
market for transport,
freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO6 - GLO
131
11.311,23
           
5
Window glass
176.158,13
           
market for transport,
freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO6 - GLO
188
33.117,73
           
3
==PAGE:95==
Building materials in the model
End-of-life
Waste at sorting plant
Material mass
[kg]
Ecoinvent process
Data quality
Brick wate
124.228,20
         
3
Concrete waste
27.303.933,19
      
2
copper waste
16.614,00
             
3
Plastic wate
28.154,17
             
5
Steel waste
4.197.246,90
        
2
Window glass waste
176.158,13
           
3
Benefits
Embodoied 
energy
Concrete gravel 
23.857.805,70
    
5
Copper
14.952,60
           
5
Steel
972.674,09
           
5
Plastics (All)
28.154,17
           
266.828,17
          
4
market for gravel, crushed - GLO
Copper production, primary - RoW
market for reinforcing steel - GLO
treatment of waste polystyrene, municipal incineration - RoW
treatment of waste brick, sorting plant - CH
treatment of waste reinforced concrete, sorting plant - CH
treatment of used cable - GLO
treatment of waste plastic, mixture, municipal incineration - RoW
treatment of waste reinforcement steel, sorting plant - CH
treatment of waste glass sheet, sorting plant - CH
==PAGE:96==
76
Appendix
Appendix C
==PAGE:97==
Sensitivity analysis
90%
95%
100%
105%
110%
Climate Change
Freshwater
eutrophication
Ozone depletion
Photochemical
oxidant formation
Terrestrial
acidification
Sensitivity concrete
Pharma building
Concrete +10%
Concrete -10%
90%
95%
100%
105%
110%
Climate Change
Freshwater
eutrophication
Ozone depletion
Photochemical
oxidant formation
Terrestrial
acidification
Sensitivity Insulation
Pharma building
Insulation +10%
Insulation -10%
90%
95%
100%
105%
110%
Climate Change
Freshwater
eutrophication
Ozone depletion
Photochemical
oxidant formation
Terrestrial
acidification
Sensitivity steel
Pharma building
Steel +10%
Steel -10%
==PAGE:98==
78
Appendix
Appendix D
==PAGE:99==
79
Table 1: Energy consumption for conditioning in the ﬁve countries
Yearly energy
consumption
Overall
energy use
[GJ]
Energy
heating/hum.
/dehum.
[GJ]
Energy
cooling
[GJ]
Production
baseload
[GJ]
Total
energy use
[GJ]
Brazil
Electricity
42848,5
11356,3
31492,2
Natural gas
47734,7
17730,5
30004,2
Total
90583
China
Electricity
40888,7
9396,5
31492,2
Natural gas
56039,5
26035,2
30004,2
Total
96928
Denmark
Electricity
33958,3
2466,1
31492,2
Natural gas
52503,8
22499,5
30004,2
Total
86462
France
Electricity
34458,8
2966,6
31492,2
Natural gas
45948,7
15944,4
30004,2
Total
80407
USA
Electricity
38822,8
7330,6
31492,2
Natural gas
49390,7
19386,5
30004,2
Total
88214
==PAGE:100==
80
Appendix
Appendix E
==PAGE:101==
ReCiPe midpoint impacts
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
ReCiPe midpoint - Relative energy footprint in the five countries
Brazil
China
Denmark
France
USA
==PAGE:102==
82
Appendix
Appendix F
==PAGE:103==
Heating scenario
0%
50%
100%
150%
200%
Heating scenario - Relative variation of impact when heating source is changed
Brazil
China
Denmark
France
USA
==PAGE:104==
Technical University of Denmark
Division of Quantitative Sustainability Assessment
Bygningsstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45254800
braa@man.dtu.dk
www.man.dtu.dk/english
