==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Experimental demonstration of DPTS
QKD protocol
M.Sc. in Telecommunication
Beatrice Da Lio (s151527)
Supervisors:
Postdoc Davide Bacco
Professor Karsten Rottwitt
Professor Andrea Galtarossa
Kongens Lyngby, June 2017
==PAGE:2==
DTU Fotonik
Department of Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Telephone: +45 4525 6352
www.fotonik.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Nowadays, thanks to the exponential growth in telecommunications, people are con-
nected and exchange information on a daily basis.
The requirements for privacy,
confidentiality and security are hence of central importance, and classical cryptogra-
phy offers some solutions. However, the methods proposed only provide the users
with partial security that is threatened by technological breakthroughs.
A more robust solution to the problem is provided by quantum cryptography,
which proposes Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) algorithms to enable uncondition-
ally secure key exchange between two users. The keys can then be used to encrypt and
decrypt the messages, which can be safely exchanged without fearing an eavesdropper
attack on the communication.
QKD principles are based on quantum physics laws. The fundamental concept can
be summarized as follows: any measurement of a quantum system changes the system
itself. Thus, security lies in the possibility the users have to monitor perturbations of
the quantum system to discover the presence of an attacker.
In this context, this thesis proposes the experimental implementation of a novel
QKD protocol for fiber-based applications, called Differential Phase Time Shifting
(DPTS). We here demonstrate its feasibility and its performance in terms of error
rates and achievable Secret Key generation rates.
With off-the-shelf components for optical communications and the use of free-
running Single Photon Detectors (SPDs), we were able to reach 170 km of trans-
mission link measuring quite large values of Secret Key generation rates for various
channel lengths. We also co-propagated a classical synchronization signal in the same
fiber link up to 90 km distance, where we still produced a secret key rate of 10 Kb/s.
Finally, we focused on the optimization of the system stability: the results obtained
outperformed the previous experiments, showing a significant performance stability
for over 30 minutes of continuous data acquisition.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master’s thesis by the title “Experimental demonstration of DPTS QKD pro-
tocol” was prepared at the department of Photonics Engineering at the Technical
University of Denmark (DTU) in fulfilment of the requirements for acquiring a Mas-
ter of Science degree in Telecommunication. It also fulfils the requirements of the
T.I.M.E. Double Degree program, to acquire a Master of Science degree in Telecom-
munication Engineering at Università degli Studi di Paodva (Unipd).
This work was performed in the time span from January 23rd, 2017 to June 23rd,
2017, under the supervision of Postdoc Davide Bacco and Prof. Karsten Rottwitt
from DTU, and Prof. Andrea Galtarossa from Unipd.
Kongens Lyngby, June 23, 2017
Beatrice Da Lio (s151527)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Foremost, I would like to sincerely thank my supervisor Postdoc Davide Bacco, who
introduced me to quantum mechanics and quantum key distribution and proposed
me to begin this path in the first place.
I find his enthusiasm towards this field
stimulating and inspiring, and I can say that he succeeded in making me love the
beauty of it all.
I also want to thank my co-supervisor, Prof. Karsten Rottwitt, for his encour-
agement, his questions and his comments, and Prof. Leif Oxenløwe, the leader of
the SPOC group, for helping me and for giving me the possibility of doing such an
interesting work.
Besides my advisors from DTU, I’d like to thank my Italian supervisor, Prof.
Andrea Galtarossa, that was always very helpful and supportive, giving me practical
advices and insightful feedback.
A special thanks goes to my closest friends, with whom I spent almost all my days
at DTU Fotonik and who were always there to cheer me up during tough days as well
as to celebrate any good news. Without them, this period would not have been the
same.
Finally, I want to thank my family, for always supporting me and giving me the
chance of doing what I like the most.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acronyms
APD
Avalanche PhotoDiode
BS
Beam Splitter
BSA
Beam Splitting Attack
CC
Classical Channel
COW
Coherent One-Way
CV
Continuous Variable
CW
Continuous Wave
DLI
Delay Line Interferometer
DPR
Distributed Phase Reference
DPS
Differential Phase Shift
DPTS
Differential Phase Time Shifting
DV
Discrete Variable
EB
Entaglement Based
FPGA
Field Programmable Gate Arrays
FWHM
Full Width Half Maximum
HD-QKD
High Dimensional-Quantum Key Distribution
IM
Intensity Modulator
IR
Intercept-Resend
MDI
Measurement Device Independent
NRZ
Non Return to Zero
P&M
Prepare and Measure
PIE
Photon Information Efficiency
PM
Phase Modulator
==PAGE:10==
viii
Acronyms
PNS
Photon Number Splitting
PRBS
Pseudo-Random Bit Sequence
QBER
Quantum Bit Error Rate
QC
Quantum Channel
QKD
Quantum Key Distribution
QM
Quantum Mechanics
SMF
Single Mode Fiber
SNR
Signal to Noise Ratio
SNSPD
Superconductive Nanowire Single Photon Detector
SPD
Single Photon Detector
TT
Time Tagger
VOA
Variable Optical Attenuator
WCP
Weak Coherent Pulse
WDM
Wavelength Division Multiplexing
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Acronyms
vii
Contents
ix
Introduction
1
1
Classical cryptography
3
1.1
Asymmetrical cryptosytems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Symmetrical cryptosystems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Principles of Quantum Mechanics
9
2.1
Kets, bras and operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Matrix representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
Quantum theory of measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4
Heisenberg uncertainty relation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.5
Qubits, multiple qubits states and entanglement . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.5.1
The no-cloning theorem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Quantum cryptography
27
3.1
QKD and unconditional security
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.1.1
The BB84 protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.1.2
Error rates in the BB84 protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.2
QKD protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.2.1
Discrete Variables protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.2.2
Continuous Variables protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.2.3
Distributed Phase Reference protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4
Experimental tools
51
4.1
Alice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
4.1.1
The electrical control module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.1.2
The laser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.1.3
The intensity and phase modulators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.1.4
Variable optical attenuators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.2
Bob . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.2.1
The free-space interferometer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.2.2
The single photon detectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
4.2.3
The time tagger and the control module
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5
Results
69
5.1
Preliminary tests: the DPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
5.2
DPTS implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
5.2.1
Electrical synchronization signal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
5.2.2
Multiplexing of the optical synchronization signal . . . . . . . .
76
5.3
Optimization of the system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
5.4
Example: message encryption and decryption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
6
Conclusions
83
Bibliography
87
==PAGE:13==
Introduction
The need for secure communications has always been of central importance to mankind.
Privacy and confidentiality are the main goals of cryptography, an ancient subject
that has evolved to the present from a first naive way to hide the content of a message,
to a proper scientific field based on mathematics and algorithms. Indeed, the aim
of cryptography is to make a message between two authorized users unintelligible to
any third party.
Nowadays, with the exponential growth of digital, fast and long-distance commu-
nication that is available to everyone, security has become a requirement [1]. Classical
cryptography algorithms mainly offer computational security [2], but are threatened
on one side by the potential of quantum computers [3], and on the other side by
the very fast growth of the computational power of classical computers [1]. Larger,
or even unconditional [4], security can be offered by other classical algorithms that
however require the two users to share the same secret key.
Quantum cryptography holds the answer to the problem of secure key distribution
between users: basing its principles on quantum physics laws, it provides uncondition-
ally secure protocols that are resistant against the attacks of a possible eavesdropper,
providing the two authorized users with a shared secret key [5]. Roughly speaking,
the fundamental concept is that in Quantum Mechanics (QM) any measurement per-
turbs the observed system. An attacker can therefore be detected by the two users
by monitoring eventual perturbations on the Quantum Channel (QC), where the
quantum signal is exchanged [2].
Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) was born in 1984 when Bennet and Brassard
proposed a protocol where bits, or qubits to be more precise, were encoded in non-
orthogonal states of the polarization of single photons [6]. From this first proposal,
many other followed, and QKD quickly became a productive scientific field both from
the theoretical and experimental point of view [5]. These two different approaches ac-
tually cooperate: it is from experimental groups that a new category of QKD protocols
arose which is nowadays very attractive thanks to its relative simple requirements in
terms of setup. This family of protocols is called Distributed Phase Reference (DPR),
and two examples are the Differential Phase Shift (DPS) [7] and the Coherent One-
Way (COW) [8] schemes. Both are conceived for fiber-based applications, and require
a source of Weak Coherent Pulses (WCPs) to be modulated in the phase domain, for
the former, or in the time domain, for the latter.
In the last years, great efforts were made towards implementations of systems to
==PAGE:14==
2
Contents
achieve higher secret key generation rates and longer distances. For example, in [9]
a secure key generation rate of 21 Kb/s is reached with the COW scheme at 25 km
distance, whereas in [10] transmission was achieved upt to 307 km, again with the
COW protocol, and in [11] with the technique of Measurement Device Independent
(MDI) a secret key could be extracted at 404 km distance.
Another interesting
direction is represented by the effort of integrating quantum communication systems
on chips: in [12] the whole transmitter was integrated in one chip and another chip
was used to implement the receiver (except for the Single Photon Detectors (SPDs)),
reaching a complete system integration.
Even though commercial QKD systems are available today, the performance
achieved with the implementation of various protocols is still significantly bounded
by the maximum achievable distance, the limited generation rates of secret keys and
the tolerable bit error rates. In this context, it seems natural to move towards higher
modulation schemes, in an analogous way to what has been done in classical telecom-
munication systems. Indeed, protocols that make use of higher degrees of modulations,
that are usually called High Dimensional-Quantum Key Distribution (HD-QKD) pro-
tocols, exhibit larger Photon Information Efficiency (PIE), which is measured as the
number of extractable key bits over the number of photons received [13]. Further-
more, it was proved that these protocols perform better in terms of tolerable error
rates [14]. A first idea was proposed in [15], suggesting a version of the BB84 using
two mutually unbiased basis each with four possible states. Some recent practical ex-
amples use spatial division multiplexing in fiber-links such as orthogonal propagating
light modes [16, 17] or using multi-core fibers [18].
An new interesting HD-QKD protocol was devised in [19]: it is called Differential
Phase Time Shifting (DPTS) and it is part of the DPR family. The scheme used to
modulate WCPs is a mixture of time modulation, as in the COW protocol, and phase
modulation, as in the DPS protocol. It was shown that, when compared to the DPS
and the COW protocols in a realistic scenario that accounts for devices imperfections,
the DPTS can reach significantly higher secret key rates.
This thesis proposes the experimental implementation of the DPTS protocol, and
it is structured as follows. In chapter 1 we are going to introduce the tasks and the
issues of classical cryptography, describing the two classes into which protocols can
be divided and giving some examples. Chapter 2 will introduce the principles of QM
that we need to understand and explain quantum cryptography. Then, in chapter 3
we will outline the structure of a QKD protocol, defining the concept of unconditional
security and giving some examples of protocols and attacks, and finally focusing the
attention on the DPTS protocol compared with the DPS and COW schemes.
In
chapter 4 we will describe the setup physically implemented, illustrating the purpose
and characteristics of each component, and in chapter 5 we will show and comment
the results obtained in terms of the performance of the system. Finally, in chapter 6
we will summarize the obtained results and discuss the future directions we can take.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER1
Classical cryptography
Cryptography is the art of analyzing how to change a message exchanged between two
users in order to make it unintelligible to any unauthorized third party. In other words,
it studies how to have a secure communication [2].
Together with cryptoanalysis,
which deals with the techniques to break codes, it is part of the scientific field called
cryptology.
In cryptography, the two authorized users are called Alice and Bob, Alice being the
sender of the message and Bob the receiver, and the eventual unauthorized attacker,
also referred to as the eavesdropper, is called Eve. To be able to reach the goal of
security, the original message is combined with additional information, called the
key, in order to obtain what is called a cryptogram. The cryptogram should not be
understandable by anyone, in the sense that it should not carry any information by
itself, hence requiring some (other) additional information to go back to the original
message. The process that uses the message and the key to obtain a cryptogram is
called encryption, while decryption describes the opposite operation of deducing the
message starting from a cryptogram and a key. The specific algorithms are also called
cryptosystems or ciphers [2]. As we will explain in the following sections, the keys
used by the two users to encode and decode the message are not necessarily the same,
and in most cases the cryptogram is just extremely difficult, but not impossible, to
understand.
Historically, many methods to encode messages were invented and used and all of
them were cracked sooner or later. This happened mainly because security was based
on the secrecy of the method itself. A solution to this problem was theoretically given
by Kerckhoffs [20], when he stated that one of the principles of a cryptosystem is to
not require secrecy about it: in other words, the security of the algorithm must not
depend on whether the unauthorized parties knows the method used or not, but only
on the availability of the key used. With the development of new communication
systems, starting with the invention of the telegraph in the 1830s, it became easier
and easier for people to communicate and the need for confidentiality grew. This led
to a first boost in cryptography, which continued in the 1900s for military reasons
during the two world wars [1]. In 1917 Vernam proposed a cryptosystem that in
principle cannot be broken, because to encrypt and decrypt any message a random
secret key of the same length is needed [4]. Moreover, any key, that must be shared by
Alice and Bob, can only be used once. This peculiarity gave it the name of One-Time
Pad. With the following development of information theory, in 1949 Shannon was
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Classical cryptography
able to demonstrate that this protocol is optimal in the sense that it does not exist a
secure method that uses a shorter key [21]. The drawback is that Alice and Bob need
to share a very long and secret key for every message they want to send, which means
they also need a secure method to exchange the keys, and this is the reason why
with the advancements of electronic communications, other schemes were preferred
for which security was only guaranteed by the experience that some problems are
computationally hard to solve [5]. It was only more recently that quantum physics
was proposed as a solution for cryptography: it was shown that quantum cryptography
can provide security to the key distribution process needed in the One-Time Pad
algorithm, and its security is based on fundamental laws of physics [6].
In this introductory chapter we are going to describe the two classes in which algo-
rithms for classical cryptography1 are divided, called asymmetrical and symmetrical
cryptosystems. The discriminating factor between the two families is whether or not
the key used by Alice is different from the one used by Bob.
1.1
Asymmetrical cryptosytems
In cryptography we call asymmetrical those cryptosystems in which the key used to
enrypt the message is different from the key used to decrypt it. These protocols are
also referred to as public-key cryptosystems, since the key used to encrypt a message
is public whereas the key used for decryption is private. The basic idea was conceived
in 1976 [22] and the first implementation called RSA2 was developed in 1978 [23].
The proposed scheme was the following:
• Bob chooses a private key and from it he computes the public key;
• Bob publicly announces the encrypting key that anyone wanting to communi-
cate with him should use;
• Alice encrypts with a known algorithm the message she wants to send to Bob
with the public key;
• When Bob receives an encrypted message, he decrypts it with his private key,
which he always keeps secret.
The only way to decrypt a message is by knowing the private key, therefore the
security of this procedure lies in the fact that the way used by Bob to compute the
public key from the private key has to be “difficult” to invert, i.e. from the public
key it is “hard” to compute Bob’s private key. What we mean by difficult and hard
can be explained by means of the computational complexity theory and the analysis
of algorithms [22]. Any problem that can be solved by an algorithm in a time that,
in the worst case scenario, is bounded by a polynomial function of the input length
1as opposed to quantum cryptography.
2from the names of its authors R. Rivest, A. Shamir and L. Adleman.
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Symmetrical cryptosystems
5
is said to belong to the complexity class P and this problem is defined easy to solve.
However, some problems do not belong to this class, since such an algorithm to solve
them does not exist or has not been found yet. Among these, there are problems for
which, once a solution is found, it can be verified in a polynomial scaling time [3];
these problems are said to be part of the NP complexity class and to be hard to
solve.
Because they are NP hard, we say that asymmetrical cypstosystems offer
computational security. We must highlight that this difficulty in solving problems is
strictly linked to the current available techniques, and that there is no proof that with
future theoretical and/or practical advancements what seemed to be an NP problem
is actually solvable in polynomial time. In fact, the whole NP class might one day
resolve into the P class [24].
In the specific RSA implementation, the private and public key are, respectively,
two very large prime numbers and their product [23]. The factorization into prime
numbers of integers is known to be an NP problem: in this sense the algorithm is
secure, since an eventual attacker is not able to efficiently find the prime factors (a part
of Bob’s private key) of the integer that was made public (a part of Bob’s public key).
However, in 1994 Shor discovered an algorithm for fast and efficient factorization into
prime numbers of large integers that could be carried out in a polynomial time by a
quantum computer [3]. Even though we are still far from the realization of practical
quantum computers that could be used to carry out computational tasks like this, the
existence of this algorithm generated doubts about the non-existence of a polynomial
algorithm for classical computers [2].
Nevertheless, even without considering the threats posed by quantum computers,
the computational power of classical computers is increasing very fast, rising the limit
of what is considered a “large enough” number to be factorized: even if the complexity
is of course still not polynomial, the factorization of a number of, for example, 125
digits was supposed to take 40×1015 years with the technology available in 1977, while
in 1999 it was shown that numbers of 155 digits could be factorized using a network
of computers in a reasonable time [1]. This example clearly shows that asymmetrical
cryptosystems are possibly threatened by technological breakthroughs, and attention
has therefore shifted towards methods that can guarantee an unconditional, or at
least higher, level of security as symmetrical cryptosystems do. In these systems, as
we shall see in chapter 3, quantum cryptography plays an important role.
1.2
Symmetrical cryptosystems
As previously mentioned, a symmetrical cryptosystem requires Alice and Bob to share
a secret key, which will be used both for encryption and for decryption. Because of
this, symmetrical protocols are also referred to as secret-key cryptosystems. The One-
Time Pad sketched before constitutes an example of this class of protocols [4]. We
can describe in a more precise way how it works, taking into consideration that the
==PAGE:18==
6
1 Classical cryptography
message to be exchanged is digital, i.e. formed by bits3:
• Alice has a message m1 she wants to send to Bob in a secure way. This message
is made of l bits. She encrypts m1 using a secret key k of the same length l
to obtain the scrambled text c1 whose bits are the result of the modulo 2 sum
between the bits of the message and the bits of the key: c1 = m1 ⊕k;
• Alice sends to Bob the encrypted text c1;
• Bob decrypts the received message c1 using the same secret key k used by Alice.
In fact if he applies once more to every bit of c1 the modulo 2 operation with each
corresponding bit of k he obtains the original message c1 ⊕k = m1 ⊕k ⊕k = m1.
This algorithm security was proven by Shannon in [21], and the basic motivation lies
in the fact that, given that the key k is random, the resulting scrambled text c1 will
be random as well and will not carry information. Moreover, the key is used only
once and then it is discarded.
This prevents Eve from obtaining any “combined”
information from subsequent encrypted messages [2]. In fact, if the same key k were
used for messages m1 and m2 to obtain c1 and c2 respectively, Eve could sum the
two scrambled text and obtain: c1 ⊕c2 = m1 ⊕k ⊕m2 ⊕k = m1 ⊕m2 (as the modulo
2 operation is commutative).
On the other hand, the need for a key of the same length of the message and the
need to change this key for any new message, means that a complex and expensive
procedure is required for Alice and Bob to share it [2]. This is the reason why One-
Time Pad is only used for critical applications, while shorter keys are used daily
by symmetrical cryptosystems in routine applications. Examples are the DES4, the
IDEA5 and the AES6. The problem is that they are only computationally secure, even
if they offer a higher degree of security when compared to asymmetrical algorithms
having the same key lengths [2].
Anyway, symmetrical cryptosystems are very fast since they can be easily im-
plemented in hardware. Nowadays, for practical applications where computational
security is considered to be good enough, hybrid systems are used. These exploit on
one side the great efficiency of asymmetric algorithms to distribute keys that will be
used on the other side by symmetric systems, thus avoiding the characteristic of the
former protocols of being slow at encoding and decoding and at the same time the
inefficiency at distributing the keys of the latter class [2].
Nonetheless, it makes sense to search for unconditional security in cryptography.
As we already explained, One-Time Pad results in being as secure as the method
used for distributing the secret keys between the users. It is in this situation that
quantum cryptography has a fundamental role, i.e.
as a method unconditionally
3binary digit, the fundamental unit in information and computation theories, which can take
either the value 0 or 1 [24].
4Data Encryption Standard.
5International Data Encryption Algorithm.
6Advanced Encryption Standard.
==PAGE:19==
1.2 Symmetrical cryptosystems
7
secure to exchange information that is based on laws of quantum physics and not on
the possible “difficulty” that state of the art technologies encounter solving a specific
problem. Since the information exchanged between Alice and Bob on a quantum
system is known to be secure only after it was transmitted (this concept will be
clarified in chapter 3), it makes sense for the users not to directly exchange secret
messages but to instead exchange the keys and later only use those that are verified
to be secure. This is the reason why this field is called Quantum Key Distribution
(QKD): it constitutes a way to distribute secret keys that can be then used in the
One-Time Pad algorithm and in symmetrical classical cryptography generally.
In this chapter we introduced the field of cryptography and we presented the most
important cryptosystems used nowadays in classical secure communication. We high-
lighted the main characteristics and the drawbacks of the two classes of protocols, the
asymmetrical and the symmetrical systems, and we stated that a solution for secret
key distribution is given by quantum cryptography, which can assure unconditional
security when used together with the One-Time Pad algorithm.
In the following chapter, we are going to give the basic knowledge on the physics
theory of Quantum Mechanics (QM) that will be needed to understand the content
of chapter 3, where we will introduce quantum cryptography and give an overview on
QKD.
==PAGE:20==
8
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER2
Principles of Quantum
Mechanics
The purpose of this chapter is to introduce the mathematical foundations of Quantum
Mechanics (QM), and to illustrate some fundamental concepts of that will be needed
to understand this thesis. The content of this chapter is mainly derived from [25]
and [24].
2.1
Kets, bras and operators
QM is a theory of Physics describing the behaviour of Nature on the small scale of
atomic and sub-atomic particles. In this introductory section, we propose some of
the most important definitions, axioms and theorems in QM.
Postulate 2.1. In QM a physical state is represented by a vector in a complex
vector space of, generally, infinite dimension. This vector space, called Hilbert space,
represents therefore a closed physical system, i.e. a system that has no interaction
with other systems.
Following Dirac’s notation, we call this vector state ket and we write it as ∣α⟩. In
QM, the following axiom about kets is accepted:
Postulate 2.2. A ket describing a physical state contains all the information about
the physical state it represents.
Since a ket is an element of a Hilbert space, it inherits all the vector spaces properties.
For instance, two kets can be added and the result is still a ket:
∣α⟩+ ∣β⟩= ∣γ⟩.
(2.1)
A second property regards the multiplication with a number. A ket can be multiplied,
either from left or right without difference, by a complex number c, and the result is
again a ket:
∣α⟩c = c∣α⟩.
(2.2)
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Principles of Quantum Mechanics
If c = 0 the result is the null ket. We can ask ourselves whether two kets that differ
only by a multiplication factor describe different states or not, and the answer is given
by the following axiom:
Postulate 2.3. In QM, the ket ∣α⟩and the ket c∣α⟩represent the same physical
state, meaning that the direction of the vector contains the whole information about
the state.
Continuing with the similarity to a vector space, it is possible to define functions
acting on kets, which give as a result other kets. In QM these functions are called
operators, or observables when they represent a measurable characteristic of the space,
and in the following we will provide definitions and describe some of their useful
properties.
Definition 2.1. One observable, i.e. a measurable characteristic of a physical system,
is represented by an operator A in the vector space.
Any operator, and therefore any observable, acts on a ket from the left, and the result
is again a ket:
A ⋅(∣α⟩) = A∣α⟩.
(2.3)
Generally, A∣α⟩cannot be represented by the multiplication of the ket ∣α⟩by a
constant.
However, there are some kets for which this happens; they are called
eigenkets of the operator A, and they are usually written as:
∣a′⟩,∣a′′⟩,... ⇒A∣a′⟩= a′ ∣a′⟩,A∣a′′⟩= a′′ ∣a′′⟩,...
(2.4)
where a′,a′′,... are, in general, complex numbers. Therefore, an operator acting on
one of his eigenket produces the same ket times a multiplication factor. These factors
{a′,a′′,...} are called eigenvalues. The physical state represented by an eigenket is
called eigenstate of the observable.
When we are considering a vector space that is N-dimensional, the N eigenstates
of an observable A form an orthonormal basis for the space, as will be demonstrated
in theorem 2.1.
Thus, any physical state in this space, e.g.
the ket ∣α⟩, can be
decomposed into a linear combination of the basis kets:
∣α⟩= ∑
a′ ca′ ∣a′⟩,
(2.5)
where the coefficients ca′ are complex numbers.
We now continue our discussion introducing the bra space, which is the dual of
the ket space. Another QM postulate define the relationship between a ket and a bra.
Postulate 2.4. For every ket ∣α⟩in the ket space there exists one and only one bra
⟨α∣in the dual bra space.
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Kets, bras and operators
11
This dual relation can be expressed as follows:
∣α⟩↔⟨α∣.
(2.6)
To a basis in the ket space corresponds a basis in bra space:
{∣a′⟩,∣a′′⟩,...} ↔{⟨a′∣,⟨a′′∣,...}.
(2.7)
Similarly to what happens in the ket space, a sum of two bras is still a bra. Moreover,
if we are considering the sum of dual kets and bras the results in the corresponding
spaces are still dual:
∣α⟩+ ∣β⟩= ∣γ⟩↔⟨α∣+ ⟨β∣= ⟨γ∣.
(2.8)
Concerning the multiplication by a number, the dual relationship is assumed to be
the following.
Postulate 2.5. The dual bra of c∣α⟩is c∗⟨α∣, where c∗is the complex conjugate of
c.
More generally:
cα ∣α⟩+ cβ ∣β⟩↔c∗
α ⟨α∣+ c∗
β ⟨β∣.
(2.9)
Since kets and bras belong to a Hilbert space, and Hilbert spaces possess the
operation of inner product, we can now define the inner product between two states
whose result is a generally complex number.
Definition 2.2. In a vector space, the inner product between two states is the product
of a bra, from the left, with a ket, from the right.
Thanks to this definition, we can write the inner product as follows:
(⟨β∣) ⋅(∣α⟩) = ⟨β∣α⟩.
(2.10)
Concerning the inner product between states, we can introduce two important
axioms of QM.
Postulate 2.6. The dual of the inner product of ⟨β∣with ∣α⟩corresponds to the inner
product of ⟨α∣with ∣β⟩.
In other words:
⟨β∣α⟩= ⟨α∣β⟩∗,
(2.11)
which means ⟨α∣β⟩is the complex conjugate of ⟨β∣α⟩. From this property, we can
deduce ⟨α∣α⟩must be real. The second postulate states that:
Postulate 2.7. The inner product of a bra with its dual ket is always non-negative.
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Principles of Quantum Mechanics
This can be expressed as:
⟨α∣α⟩≥0,
(2.12)
where the equality stands only if ∣α⟩is the null ket. This statement is the equivalent
of assuming a positive metric of the vector space, and it will more importantly be
pertinent with the probabilistic interpretation of measurements that will be discussed
in section 2.3.
Following with the discussion on the properties of the inner product, we can give
the definition of orthogonal states.
Definition 2.3. We say that the kets ∣α⟩and ∣β⟩are orthogonal if their inner product
is zero.
This is shown by the following relation:
⟨α∣β⟩= 0,
(2.13)
and from equation (2.11) we can deduce that also ⟨β∣α⟩= 0, meaning that the orthog-
onality relationship is independent of the order in which the states are considered.
Given a ket which is not a null ket, we can examine the normalized ket ∣ˆα⟩:
∣ˆα⟩= ⎛
⎝
1
√
⟨α∣α⟩
⎞
⎠∣α⟩,
(2.14)
which has the property ⟨ˆα∣ˆα⟩= 1. Generally,
√
⟨α∣α⟩represents the norm of ∣α⟩. Since,
as stated by postulate 2.3, the same physical state can be represented by ∣α⟩and c∣α⟩
we assume from now on that a physical state is described by a normalized ket.
Let us now go back to the description of operators to introduce some of their
general properties. In general, an operator X acts on a ket from the left X ⋅(∣α⟩) =
X ∣α⟩and the result is still a ket. Two operators X and Y are said to be equal if:
X ∣α⟩= Y ∣α⟩,
(2.15)
for every ket ∣α⟩in the space considered.
An operator X is called null operator if:
X ∣α⟩= 0,
(2.16)
for every ket ∣α⟩in the space considered.
Operators can be added, and the sum is commutative and associative:
X + Y = Y + X,
(X + Y ) + Z = X + (Y + Z).
(2.17)
We will consider only linear operators, which means:
X(cα ∣α⟩+ cβ ∣β⟩) = cαX ∣α⟩+ cβX ∣β⟩.
(2.18)
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Kets, bras and operators
13
An operator X acts on a bra from the right, (⟨α∣) ⋅X = ⟨α∣X, and the result is
still a bra. In general, the bra ⟨α∣X is not the dual of the ket X ∣α⟩. Therefore we
define X† such that:
X ∣α⟩↔⟨α∣X†.
(2.19)
Definition 2.4. The operator X† as described by equation (2.19) is called hermitian
adjoint, or simply adjoint, of X.
We say that an operator X is hermitian when it is equal to its adjoint:
X = X†.
(2.20)
Two operators X and Y can be multiplied; multiplication is non commutative but
it is associative:
XY ≠Y X,
X(Y Z) = (XY )Z = XY Z.
(2.21)
Therefore:
X(Y ∣α⟩) = (XY )∣α⟩= XY ∣α⟩,
(⟨α∣X)Y = ⟨α∣(XY ) = ⟨α∣XY.
(2.22)
Finally, we can prove that:
XY ↔Y †X†,
(2.23)
since XY ∣α⟩= X(Y ∣α⟩) ↔(⟨α∣Y †)X† = ⟨α∣Y †X†.
We can now give a definition for the outer product, an operation in a Hilbert space
between states that gives rise to an operator.
Definition 2.5. The outer product of two states is given by the multiplication in the
order of a ket, say ∣α⟩, with a bra, say ⟨β∣; the result is an operator.
The previous definition is expressed by:
(∣α⟩) ⋅(⟨β∣) = ∣α⟩⟨β∣.
(2.24)
So far, we have introduced what we will call “legal” 1 multiplications and we
have discussed their properties. In the following axiom, we present the more general
associative property of multiplication.
Postulate 2.8. The associative axiom of multiplication says that when dealing with
“legal” multiplications of kets, bras and operators the associative property of multipli-
cation holds.
1“legal” multiplications are the ones discussed so far: ⟨β∣α⟩,X ∣α⟩,⟨α∣X and XY .
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Principles of Quantum Mechanics
This implies the following:
(∣β⟩⟨α∣)∣γ⟩= ∣β⟩(⟨α∣γ⟩).
(2.25)
The first term of equation (2.25) shows the product of the outer product ∣β⟩⟨α∣with
the ket ∣γ⟩, while the second term represents the product of the ket ∣β⟩with the
number ⟨α∣γ⟩. Since the result of the second term is a ket, the outer product of the
first term must be considered as an operator acting on the following ket, ∣γ⟩, which
rotates it in the direction of ∣β⟩.
Moreover, the multiplication axiom makes us possible to prove that the adjoint of
an operator X = ∣β⟩⟨α∣is X† = ∣α⟩⟨β∣:
X ∣γ⟩= (∣β⟩⟨α∣)∣γ⟩= ∣β⟩⟨α∣γ⟩↔⟨γ∣α⟩⟨β∣= ⟨γ∣(∣α⟩⟨β∣) = ⟨γ∣X†.
(2.26)
The last important result of the multiplication axiom we will show is the following:
⟨α∣(X ∣β⟩) = (⟨α∣X)∣β⟩= ⟨α∣X ∣β⟩.
(2.27)
From which we deduce:
⟨α∣X ∣β⟩= ⟨α∣(X ∣β⟩)
= {(⟨β∣X†)∣α⟩}
∗
= ⟨β∣X† ∣α⟩∗.
(2.28)
Therefore, for a hermitian operator we have ⟨α∣X ∣β⟩= ⟨β∣X ∣α⟩∗.
At this point, we can introduce unitary operators and what they describe in QM.
Definition 2.6. An operator U is said to be unitary if: UU † = 1 = U †U, i.e.
if
U −1 = U † which means that taking the inverse of the operator we obtain its adjoint.
Unitary operators have an important role in QM, as defined in the following axiom.
Postulate 2.9. Unitary operators describe the evolution in time of a closed quantum
system.
In fact, a unitary operator U acting on a state ∣ψ0⟩at time t0 will take it to the state
∣ψ1⟩at time t1. The fact that an evolution in time is described by a unitary operator
means that when we apply U ∣ψ0⟩= ∣ψ1⟩we require that this is also possible in the bra
space, i.e. ⟨ψ0∣U † = ⟨ψ1∣; therefore we must have ⟨ψ1∣ψ1⟩= ⟨ψ0∣U †U ∣ψ0⟩= 1, which
means that U † = U −1.
Finally, we want to present a state space where the elements represents multiple
sub-systems. This is mathematically described through the tensor product. Thus, if
our composite system is made of n sub-systems, numbered from 1 to n, where ∣ψi⟩is
a ket belonging to the i-th sub-system, then a ket belonging to the overall system is
the product ∣ψ⟩:
∣ψ⟩= ∣ψ1⟩⊗∣ψ2⟩⊗... ⊗∣ψn⟩.
(2.29)
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Matrix representation
15
Regarding the vector space generated by the tensor product operation, since it is still
a Hilbert space, it is possible to define the inner product between two of its elements,
say ∣ψ⟩= ∣ψ1⟩⊗∣ψ2⟩and ∣ϕ⟩= ∣ϕ1⟩⊗∣ϕ2⟩, as follows:
⟨ϕ∣ψ⟩= (⟨ϕ1∣⊗⟨ϕ2∣)(∣ψ1⟩⊗∣ψ2⟩) = ⟨ϕ1∣ψ1⟩⟨ϕ2∣ψ2⟩,
(2.30)
and from this we can derive by extension the inner product of a vector space generated
by a chain of consecutive tensor products.
We have so far talked about kets, bras and operators in a general way, without
describing how they can be represented as elements in a vector space. In the following
section, we are going to present such a description, as we will find it very useful for
our purposes in the rest of thesis.
2.2
Matrix representation
In QM hermitian operators are usually observables, i.e.
they represent a measur-
able characteristic of a quantum state. Thus, we start our discussion considering a
hermitian operator A in order to define some of its properties.
Theorem 2.1. The eigenvalues of a hermitian operator A are real, and the eigenkets
corresponding to different eigenvalues are orthogonal.
To prove this, we start from equations (2.4), (2.19) and (2.20):
A∣a′⟩= a′ ∣a′⟩,
⟨a′′∣A = ⟨a′′∣a′′∗,
(2.31)
where a′ and a′′ are eigenvalues of A. Let us now multiply both terms of the first
equation in (2.31) by ⟨a′′∣and both terms of the second equation in (2.31) by ∣a′⟩. If
we then subtract what we obtained we have:
(a′ −a′′∗)⟨a′′∣a′⟩= 0.
(2.32)
There are two possibilities: either a′ = a′′ or a′ ≠a′′. In the first case:
⟨a′∣a′⟩≠0 ⇒a′ = a′∗,
(2.33)
which means a′ is real (being ∣a′⟩a non null ket). In the second case:
(a′ −a′′∗) ≠0 ⇒⟨a′′∣a′⟩= 0,
(2.34)
which means the two eigenkets are orthogonal.
As we consider only normalized kets, the eigenkets form an orthonormal set with
which we can decompose every arbitrary ket in the considered space. In other words,
we can write:
∣α⟩= ∑
a′ ca′ ∣a′⟩,
(2.35)
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Principles of Quantum Mechanics
and this means that the eigenkets are an orthonormal basis of the ket space. To find
out the coefficients ca′, we can multiply both terms of equation (2.35) by the eigenbra
⟨a′′∣. Then we obtain:
⟨a′′∣α⟩= ∑
a′ ca′ ⟨a′′∣a′⟩= ca′′,
(2.36)
where the last equality stands from the fact that the only inner product different
from zero inside the sum in equation (2.36) is ⟨a′′∣a′′⟩= 1 since the eigenkets are
orthonormal. Thus, we can rewrite equation (2.35) as follows:
∣α⟩= ∑
a′ ∣a′⟩⟨a′∣α⟩.
(2.37)
By the multiplication axiom, we can interpret the second term in (2.37) as the product
of the number ⟨a′∣α⟩with the ket ∣a′⟩or alternatively as the product of the operator
∣a′⟩⟨a′∣by the ket ∣α⟩. This means that the operator ∣a′⟩⟨a′∣projects the ket ∣α⟩into
the direction of ∣a′⟩, and thus it is called the projection operator. Moreover, it also
means that:
∑
a′ ∣a′⟩⟨a′∣= 1,
(2.38)
where the right-hand term 1 is to be intended as the identity operator. In a multipli-
cation of kets, bras and operator (where all multiplications are “legal”), the identity
operator can be multiplied at any point. For example:
⟨α∣α⟩= ⟨α∣(∑
a′ ∣a′⟩⟨a′∣)∣α⟩= ∑
a′ ⟨α∣a′⟩⟨α∣a′⟩= ∑
a′ ∣⟨α∣a′⟩∣
2 = ∑
a′ ∣ca′∣2 = 1,
(2.39)
assuming ∣α⟩is normalized. Equation (2.39) shows us that if we take the sum of the
modulus squared of all the coefficients of any ket 2 the result is 1. As we will show
in section 2.3, this will be of great importance in the probabilistic interpretation of
measurements, as it assures that the all the possible outputs probabilities sum to 1.
Now that we have specified the basis of kets, which we will call {a(1),a(2),...}, we
can write an operator X as a square matrix in this basis as follows:
X = ∑
a(j)
∑
a(i)
∣a(j)⟩⟨a(j)∣X ∣a(i)⟩⟨a(i)∣,
(2.40)
where we used the identity operator twice. The factors ⟨a(j)∣X ∣a(i)⟩are numbers,
and they are N 2 with N the dimension of the ket space. Thus we can write X as the
following matrix:
X =
⎡⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
⟨a(1)∣X ∣a(1)⟩
⟨a(1)∣X ∣a(2)⟩
...
⟨a(2)∣X ∣a(1)⟩
⟨a(2)∣X ∣a(2)⟩
...
⋮
⋮
⋱
⎤⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
.
(2.41)
2by dualism, this also holds for bras.
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Quantum theory of measurements
17
Notice that, if B is a hermitian operator it follows:
⟨a′′∣B ∣a′⟩= ⟨a′∣B† ∣a′′⟩
∗= ⟨a′∣B ∣a′′⟩
∗,
(2.42)
meaning that the adjoint is now substituted by the transpose complex conjugate.
Hence, we observe that the resulting representation of an observable A is simplified
when using its eigenkets as a basis. From equation (2.40), we notice that:
⟨a(j)∣A∣a(i)⟩= ⟨a(j)∣(a(i) ∣a(i)⟩) = ⟨a(j)∣a(i)⟩a(i),
(2.43)
which is, as discussed, different from zero only when ∣a(j)⟩= ∣a(i)⟩.
This means
that the observable A is diagonal when written in the basis of its eigenkets, and the
elements in the diagonal are its eigenvalues (in the order).
At this point, we inspect the kets and bras matrix representation too. The relation
∣β⟩= X ∣α⟩can be rewritten as (inserting the identity operator):
⟨a(i)∣β⟩= ⟨a(i)∣X ∣α⟩= ∑
a(j)
⟨a(i)∣X ∣a(j)⟩⟨a(j)∣α⟩,
(2.44)
which can be seen as the multiplication of a matrix by a column vector to obtain the
elements of another column vector, when these are written as:
∣β⟩=
⎡⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
⟨a(1)∣β⟩
⟨a(2)∣β⟩
⋮
⎤⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
,
∣α⟩=
⎡⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
⟨a(1)∣α⟩
⟨a(2)∣α⟩
⋮
⎤⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
.
(2.45)
In the same way, we can define bra vectors as follows:
⟨α∣= [⟨α∣a(1)⟩
⟨α∣a(2)⟩
...]
= [⟨a(1)∣α⟩
∗
⟨a(2)∣α⟩
∗
...],
(2.46)
which is a row vector.
Therefore, the inner product can be thought as the multiplication of a row vec-
tor by a column vector (which results in a number), and the outer product as the
multiplication of a column vector by a row vector (resulting in a matrix).
In the following section we will use the tools of QM we described so far to define
what a measurement of a quantum state is, and how it affects the quantum state
itself.
2.3
Quantum theory of measurements
Now that we have introduced the mathematical foundations on which QM is built
upon, we can discuss what it means to take a measurement on a physical state. Before
measuring, the system is generally in the following state:
∣α⟩= ∑
a′ ca′ ∣a′⟩= ∑
a′ ∣a′⟩⟨a′∣α⟩,
(2.47)
==PAGE:30==
18
2 Principles of Quantum Mechanics
which is a linear combination of the eigenstates of the observable. After a measure is
taken, the system collapses into one of the eigenstates, e.g. ∣a′⟩, and the corresponding
eigenvector is the result of the measurement:
∣α⟩
A measurement
ÐÐÐÐÐÐÐÐ→∣a′⟩.
(2.48)
Thus a measure of the state usually changes the state itself. The only exception is
when the physical state is already an eigenstate of the measured observable:
∣a′⟩
A measurement
ÐÐÐÐÐÐÐÐ→∣a′⟩,
(2.49)
and the result is certain. These statements also mean that, once a general state ∣α⟩
is measured and collapses into an eigenstate of the observable, e.g. ∣a′⟩, if measured
again the only possible result is still the same eigenstate.
We can now introduce the axiom of QM regarding the probabilistic interpretation
of eigenvalues.
Postulate 2.10. Given the state in equation (2.47), it is not possible to predict in
which eigenstate it will collapse after the measurement; however, for a normalized
state ∣α⟩, the probability of obtaining the eigenstate ∣a′⟩is given by ∣⟨a′∣α⟩∣2 = ∣ca′∣2.
The probabilistic interpretation of ∣⟨a′∣α⟩∣2 is one of the most important postulates
in QM: it cannot be proved, but we can see that it holds for particular cases. If the
state to measure is ∣α⟩= ∣a′⟩, we can see that the probability of obtaining as a result
of the measure ∣a′⟩is equal to 1, and the probability of obtaining any other eigenstate
is 0, because of the orthogonality of eigenstates.
To empirically determine the probabilities of all eigenstates of a general physical
state ∣α⟩in the form given by equation (2.47), we need to repeat the same measure-
ment on a set of physical states all prepared in the same way, i.e. all states can be
described by the same formula expressed in equation (2.47). Such a set is called a
pure set.
We can now introduce the concept of expected value of an observable given a state.
Definition 2.7. The expected value of an observable A with respect to a given state
∣α⟩is ⟨A⟩α = ⟨α∣A∣α⟩.
In fact, the expected value as determined in definition 2.7 can be rewritten as follows:
⟨A⟩α = ∑
a′′ ∑
a′ ⟨α∣a′′⟩⟨a′′∣A∣a′⟩⟨a′∣α⟩
= ∑
a′ a′ ∣⟨a′∣α⟩∣
2 ,
(2.50)
where the last term is the sum over all possible results a′ of the measure times the
probability of measuring this value ∣⟨a′∣α⟩∣2.
In this section, we gave a definition of quantum measurement and we illustrated its
probabilistic interpretation. However, there is still an open question, which regards
==PAGE:31==
2.4 Heisenberg uncertainty relation
19
consecutive measurements of the same state using different observables. The following
section will firstly introduce the concepts of compatible and incompatible observables,
and lastly prove and explain the meaning of the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
2.4
Heisenberg uncertainty relation
First of all, we introduce two new operations between observables. The first is the
commutator, which is defined as follows:
[A,B] = AB −BA,
(2.51)
and the second is the anti-commutator:
{A,B} = AB + BA.
(2.52)
Two observables A and B are said to be compatible if they commute, e.g. if [A,B] = 0,
and incompatible otherwise.
Let us consider the case of two compatible observables. Assuming the basis of
the vector space is made by the eigenkets {∣a′⟩} of A, we want to define how the
observable B is described. To do this, we have to introduce the notion of degenerate
eigenkets:
Definition 2.8. Two or more independent eigenkets of A that have the same eigen-
value are said to be degenerate.
We remember that we proved the orthogonality of eigenkets only in a non-degenerate
case; however, in QM when an observables has degenerate eigenvalues, there usually
is another observable in the same space with non-degenerate eigenkets which we can
use as a basis and to distinguish the degenerate eigenkets of the first observable.
Theorem 2.2. Let A and B be two compatible observables. If the autokets of A
are not degenerate, then the observable B described in the basis of autokets of A is
diagonal, i.e. the elements ⟨a′′∣B ∣a′⟩= 0 if a′′ ≠a′.
The proof starts from the definition of commutable observables:
⟨a′′∣[A,B]∣a′⟩= ⟨a′′∣AB ∣a′⟩−⟨a′′∣BA∣a′⟩
= ∑
a′′′ ⟨a′′∣A∣a′′′⟩⟨a′′′∣B ∣a′⟩−∑
a′′′ ⟨a′′∣B ∣a′′′⟩⟨a′′′∣A∣a′⟩
= a′′ ⟨a′′∣B ∣a′⟩−a′ ⟨a′′∣B ∣a′⟩
= (a′′ −a′)⟨a′′∣B ∣a′⟩= 0
.
(2.53)
This implies that, if a′′ ≠a′ then ⟨a′′∣B ∣a′⟩= 0, which proves the theorem.
Therefore, A and B can be described by diagonal matrices in the same basis,
and thus the eigenkets of A are also eigenkets of B, and we can call them ∣a′,b′⟩to
==PAGE:32==
20
2 Principles of Quantum Mechanics
highlight this property. However, they have generally different eigenvalues. In fact
we can write:
B ∣a′⟩= ∑
a′′ ∣a′′⟩⟨a′′∣B ∣a′′⟩⟨a′′∣a′⟩= (⟨a′∣B ∣a′⟩)∣a′⟩,
(2.54)
which means the eigenvalue of the observable B for the eigenket ∣a′⟩is ⟨a′∣B ∣a′⟩.
Even though this definition was given in the case of non degenerate eigenvalues, it
still holds for the degenerate case.
Considering the case of A and B measurements, when the two observables are
compatible we have:
∣α⟩
A measurement
ÐÐÐÐÐÐÐÐ→∣a′,b′⟩
B measurement
ÐÐÐÐÐÐÐÐ→∣a′,b′⟩
A measurement
ÐÐÐÐÐÐÐÐ→∣a′,b′⟩,
(2.55)
where the second A measurement gives a′, the same result of the first A measurement,
with certainty, meaning that the B measurement does not destroy the precedent
information given by the first A measurement.
On the other hand, when we consider the case of incompatible observables, the
first thing to say is that they don’t have a complete set of simultaneous eigenkets
∣a′,b′⟩. To prove this let’s instead assume they do:
AB ∣a′,b′⟩= Ab′ ∣a′,b′⟩= a′b′ ∣a′,b′⟩
BA∣a′,b′⟩= Ba′ ∣a′,b′⟩= b′a′ ∣a′,b′⟩,
(2.56)
and therefore AB = BA breaking the assumption of being incompatible observables.
Therefore in this case, if we consider consecutive A-B-A measurements as before,
we do not necessarily obtain the same result of the first A measurement with the
second A measurement; in fact, the B measurement projects the obtained eigenstate
of A into a different basis (made by the eigenstates of B) and selects an eigenstate of
B as result, which in turn can generally be described again as a linear combination
of the eigenstates of A. Mathematically we can say that:
∣a′⟩= ∑
b′ cb′ ∣b′⟩
∣b′⟩= ∑
a′ ca′ ∣a′⟩,
(2.57)
for any eigenket ∣a′⟩of A and ∣b′⟩of B. This leads to:
∣α⟩= ∑
a′′ da′′ ∣a′′⟩
A
ÐÐÐÐÐÐ→
w.p. ∣da′′∣2 ∣a′′⟩
B
ÐÐÐÐÐ→
w.p. ∣cb′∣2 ∣b′⟩
A
ÐÐÐÐÐ→
w.p. ∣ca′∣2 ∣a′⟩.
(2.58)
We can now introduce the following operator:
∆A = A −⟨A⟩,
(2.59)
==PAGE:33==
2.4 Heisenberg uncertainty relation
21
where the expectation is taken on the considered physical state, and let us define as
dispersion (∆A)2. The standard deviation for the observable A is given by:
⟨(∆A)2⟩= ⟨A2 −2A⟨A⟩+ ⟨A⟩2⟩= ⟨A2⟩−⟨A⟩2 .
(2.60)
Finally, we can present the Heisenberg uncertainty relation for two observables A and
B:
⟨(∆A)2⟩⟨(∆B)2⟩≥1
4 ∣⟨[A,B]⟩∣2 .
(2.61)
To prove inequality (2.61), we need to first prove the Scharwz inequality:
⟨α∣α⟩⟨β∣β⟩≥∣⟨α∣β⟩∣2 .
(2.62)
To prove it, we notice that if we call ∣γ⟩= ∣α⟩+ λ∣β⟩, since ⟨γ∣γ⟩≥0, we have:
(⟨α∣+ λ∗⟨β∣)(∣α⟩+ λ∣β⟩) ≥0
⟨α∣α⟩+ λ⟨α∣β⟩+ λ∗⟨β∣α⟩+ ∣λ∣2 ⟨β∣β⟩≥0,
(2.63)
and this holds for every λ ∈C. Thus if we substitute λ = −⟨β∣α⟩/⟨β∣β⟩in the second
equation in (2.63) we obtain exactly the Schwarz inequality in equation (2.62). We
now substitute the following into equation (2.62):
∣α⟩→∆A∣⋅⟩
∣β⟩→∆B ∣⋅⟩,
(2.64)
where ∣⋅⟩means that the following derivations holds for every ket. We thus obtain:
⟨⋅∣(∆A)2 ∣⋅⟩⟨⋅∣(∆B)2 ∣⋅⟩≥∣⟨⋅∣(∆A∆B)∣⋅⟩∣2
⟨(∆A)2⟩⟨(∆B)2⟩≥∣⟨(∆A∆B)⟩∣2 .
(2.65)
We can further notice that:
∆A∆B = 1
2 [∆A,∆B] + 1
2 {∆A,∆B} = 1
2 [A,B] + 1
2 {∆A,∆B},
(2.66)
in which the commutator is hermitian and the anti-commutator is anti-hermitian.
From theorem 2.1, we can easily demonstrate that the expectation of a hermitian
operator is a real number, while in a similar way the expectation of an anti-hermitian
operator is a pure imaginary number. Therefore inequality (2.65) becomes:
⟨(∆A)2⟩⟨(∆B)2⟩≥1
4 ∣⟨[A,B]⟩∣2 + 1
4 ∣⟨{∆A,∆B}⟩∣2 .
(2.67)
Finally, if we remove the expectation of the anti-commutator from equation (2.67),
the inequality still holds and we clearly obtain the Heisenberg uncertainty principle
shown in equation (2.61).
==PAGE:34==
22
2 Principles of Quantum Mechanics
What the Heisenberg uncertainty principle states is that, for two observables A
and B that are not compatible, [A,B] ≠0 and therefore it is not possible to measure
them simultaneously with arbitrary precision. On the contrary, this is possible when
the two observables commute.
Until this point, we have presented QM from a general perspective. In the fol-
lowing section, we will introduce the qubit, which essentially is a two-dimensional
quantum state that carries information, and we will present the no-cloning theorem,
which is one of the pillars where the field of quantum cryptography is built on.
2.5
Qubits, multiple qubits states and
entanglement
As well as the bit is the main building block in the fields of classical computation and
information, the quantum bit, or qubit for short, is the analogous concept in quantum
computation and information. To describe what it is meant by qubit, we are going
to follow the mathematical representation presented in the previous sections.
A qubit has a state, which can be ∣0⟩or ∣1⟩(similarly to the possible 0 and 1 states
of the classical bit) but can also be in the superposition of the two. Therefore, using
Dirac’s notation, we can describe the state of a general qubit as follows:
∣ψ⟩= α ∣0⟩+ β ∣1⟩,
(2.68)
where the ket ∣ψ⟩represents the state of the qubit and α and β are complex numbers
representing the coefficients of ∣0⟩and ∣1⟩. We notice that the description given by
equation (2.68), is similar to the description of a general state expressed as a linear
combination of basis vectors as given in equation (2.5). Thanks to this analogy, we
can see that the two states ∣0⟩and ∣1⟩form an orthonormal basis.
It also shows
that, generally, we cannot measure a qubit without making it collapse into one of
the two ∣0⟩or ∣1⟩states, which happens with probability ∣α∣2 or ∣β∣2 respectively.
We also remember that ∣α∣2 + ∣β∣2 = 1 as shown by equation (2.39), and that the
only way we can infer some information on the coefficients α and β is to repeat the
same measurements on a pure set of ∣ψ⟩states in order to derive the probabilities of
measuring either a ∣0⟩or a ∣1⟩state.
Since ∣α∣2 + ∣β∣2 = 1, we can write ∣ψ⟩with the following alternative expression:
∣ψ⟩= eiγ(cos θ
2 ∣0⟩+ eiϕ sin θ
2 ∣1⟩),
(2.69)
with γ, θ and ϕ real numbers. Since only the relative phase between the coefficients
of ∣0⟩and ∣1⟩has physical meaning, i.e. the factor eiγ has no observable effect, we
can discard it and write:
∣ψ⟩= cos θ
2 ∣0⟩+ eiϕ sin θ
2 ∣1⟩.
(2.70)
==PAGE:35==
2.5 Qubits, multiple qubits states and entanglement
23
0〉

1〉

ψ〉
ϕ
θ
Figure 2.1: The Bloch sphere and the representation of a qubit. Each pair of poles
correspond to mutually orthogonal eigenstates, here the north and the south pole are
highlighted. The angle θ contains the information on the probability to find the state
in either one or the other eigenstate, while the angle ϕ represents the phase difference
between the two eigenstates.
Equation (2.70) describes the space of points on a sphere surface, the Bloch sphere.
This is a useful representation of all the qubit possible states, where the north pole is
usually taken as ∣0⟩and the south pole as ∣1⟩. The Bloch sphere, and the corresponding
representation of the qubit states ∣0⟩, ∣1⟩and a general ∣ψ⟩are shown in figure 2.1.
Now that we have defined what a qubit is, we can discuss the way in which
multiple qubits are represented. For simplicity, let us consider the case of two qubits.
As mentioned at the end of section 2.1, the tensor product is the operation that
describes a state obtained from multiple sub-states. Therefore, a set of two qubits,
say ∣ψ1⟩and ∣ψ2⟩, can be mathematically written as follows:
∣ψ1⟩⊗∣ψ1⟩= ∣ψ1ψ2⟩,
(2.71)
where the last term describes the operation for short. In the case of two classical bits,
each can take either the value 0 or the value 1, and therefore the two bits together
can be in one of the four possibilities: 00, 01, 10 or 11. Analogously, a basis of the
Hilbert space of a two qubit system is: ∣00⟩, ∣01⟩, ∣10⟩and ∣11⟩. Hence, a two qubit
state can be expressed as:
∣ψ1ψ2⟩= α00 ∣00⟩+ α01 ∣01⟩+ α10 ∣10⟩+ α11 ∣11⟩,
(2.72)
where the coefficients αxy are generally complex numbers. When measuring both
qubits, the two qubits state collapses into one of the basis states, say ∣xy⟩, with
corresponding probability ∣αxy∣2, meaning that as well as in the case of a single
==PAGE:36==
24
2 Principles of Quantum Mechanics
qubit state, the sum of the squared absolute values of the coefficients must sum to 1.
However, it is also possible to just measure one qubit. For instance, if we measured
the first qubit and we obtained 0 as result, which would happen with probability
∣α00∣2 + ∣α01∣2, the resulting quantum state would be:
∣ψ′⟩= α00 ∣00⟩+ α01 ∣01⟩
√
∣α00∣2 + ∣α01∣2 ,
(2.73)
where the denominator is needed for normalization.
Important two qubits states are the Bell’s states, also called EPR states:
∣β00⟩= ∣00⟩+ ∣11⟩
√
2
∣β01⟩= ∣01⟩+ ∣10⟩
√
2
∣β10⟩= ∣00⟩−∣11⟩
√
2
∣β11⟩= ∣01⟩−∣10⟩
√
2
.
(2.74)
The name of these states is due to Bell who was the first to highlight their peculiar
properties, while the EPR name comes from the fact that these states break the
assumption on the non-validity of QM that was made by Einsten, Podolsky and
Rosen. The characteristic of these states is that, as soon as one qubit is measured
also the value of the second one is determined. As an example, let us assume we have
the state ∣β00⟩: if we measure the first qubit, we will obtain a 0 with probability 1/2,
which will leave the whole state in the form ∣00⟩, or we obtain a 1 with probability
1/2 leaving the state in the form ∣11⟩. This means that a measurement of the second
qubit gives as a result the same value of the measurement of the first qubit, i.e.
the two qubits values are correlated. In principle, this instantaneous correlation is
always valid, even when the two qubits are spatially separated: this property is called
entanglement 3.
2.5.1
The no-cloning theorem
After this brief introduction on qubits and multiple qubits states, we can introduce
a theorem that is of fundamental importance for the purposes of this thesis. The
central question is whether it is possible to copy the information held by an unknown
qubit or not. In classical communication and cryptography as explained in chapter 1,
it is taken for granted that it is always possible to make a copy of any kind of digital
3extensive literature is available that studies the properties of entanglement of Bell’s like states,
we cite here [24], the original paper of the EPR paradox [26] and Bell’s analysis of these states
characteristics [27].
==PAGE:37==
2.5 Qubits, multiple qubits states and entanglement
25
information, carried by bits, even when the information itself is not known. It turns
out that in QM this is not possible in general, as explained by the following no-cloning
theorem.
Let’s assume we have a quantum cloning machine with two slots: slot A for the
unknown qubit, ∣ψ⟩, and slot B where there is a state ∣s⟩into which we want to
copy ∣ψ⟩. The evolution of this copying machine is therefore described with a unitary
operator as follows:
U(∣ψ⟩⊗∣s⟩) = ∣ψ⟩⊗∣ψ⟩.
(2.75)
Let’s then suppose this copying machine works for the qubit ∣ψ⟩as well as for the
qubit ∣ϕ⟩. We therefore have:
U(∣ψ⟩⊗∣s⟩) = ∣ψ⟩⊗∣ψ⟩
U(∣ϕ⟩⊗∣s⟩) = ∣ϕ⟩⊗∣ϕ⟩.
(2.76)
If we consider the inner product of the two expressions, we obtain:
(⟨ϕ∣⊗⟨s∣)U †U(∣ψ⟩⊗∣s⟩) = (⟨ϕ∣⊗⟨ϕ∣)(∣ψ⟩⊗∣ψ⟩)
⟨ϕ∣ψ⟩⟨s∣s⟩= ⟨ϕ∣ψ⟩⟨ϕ∣ψ⟩
⟨ϕ∣ψ⟩= ⟨ϕ∣ψ⟩2 ,
(2.77)
where we used the fact that U is a unitary operator and ⟨s∣s⟩= 1. The only two
solutions of equation (2.77) are ⟨ϕ∣ψ⟩= 1 and ⟨ϕ∣ψ⟩= 0. The former is true only
if ∣ψ⟩= ∣ϕ⟩, i.e. we are considering the same state, while the latter is true only for
orthogonal states. In other words, this cloning machine only works for states that are
orthogonal to one another, and a more general cloning machine does not appear to
be possible.
In this chapter, we introduced the mathematical model of QM, with some of the
most important axioms, definitions and theorems. We then discussed the probabilis-
tic interpretation of measurements and the fact that each time a measurement is
taken on a state, the state itself is changed (unless very few cases, i.e. when the
state is an eigenstate of the observable). We continued our presentation showing and
demonstrating the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, according to which two charac-
teristics of the same state cannot in general be measured together with an arbitrary
degree of precision, unless the two corresponding observable are compatible. We fi-
nally concluded the discussion introducing the notion of a qubit, including a visual
representation for it, of multiple qubits states and entanglement, and demonstrating
the no-cloning theorem for non-orthogonal states, which will be together with the the-
ory of measurements one of the building blocks of Quantum Key Distribution (QKD),
as will be explained in the next chapter.
==PAGE:38==
26
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER3
Quantum
cryptography
The term quantum cryptography generally refers to any secrecy problem that can be
solved with the help of Quantum Mechanics (QM) [5]. Wiesner in the early 1970s
proposed the idea of quantum money [28], which was in this sense the first suggestion
of solving a practical problem of confidentiality using the quantum mechanical prop-
erties of Nature. After this preliminary idea, other applications were presented that
could be solved with QM [5], with the most promising being secret key distribution
for symmetrical cryptosystems, hence the name Quantum Key Distribution (QKD).
The concept of QKD was firstly introduced by Bennet and Brassard in 1984 [6], where
they also devised the first protocol, called BB84 from their initials and the year the
article was published.
In this chapter, we will discuss the concept of QKD, starting from the notion of
unconditional security and then illustrating the BB84 as an introductory example.
After this, we will propose the structure of a generic QKD protocol and, finally, we
will introduce the three families into which QKD can be divided from the point of
view of the modulation format.
3.1
QKD and unconditional security
Let’s begin the discussion on QKD by introducing its purpose and generic settings.
Two legitimate users, a transmitter usually called Alice and a receiver usually called
Bob, want to exchange some secret information. As explained in chapter 1, a secure
way to do that is to encrypt the message with a secret key that is only shared by
the two users, using the One-Time Pad algorithm. After encryption, the message
can only be read by decrypting it with the same secret key, and therefore it can
be sent through a non-secure channel. Even if there is a third malevolent user who
“listens” to the channel, usually called Eve, the message cannot be understood since
the eavesdropper does not possess the secret key used by Alice. Hence, the problem
shifts to the distribution of the keys for which we need a secure channel, and a
Quantum Channel (QC) implementing a QKD algorithm appears to be the solution.
==PAGE:40==
28
3 Quantum cryptography
But what makes communication on a QC secure against eavesdropping?
The
foundations are set by the uncertainty principle in QM. In classical cryptography it
is implied that digital communications can be monitored or copied without affecting
the communication process itself.
On the contrary, we know from the no-cloning
theorem in chapter 2 that when the information is encoded on quantum states that
are non-orthogonal, quantum physics laws make it impossible to copy these quantum
states and therefore to copy the information they are carrying. Moreover, we know
that a measure of these states is not possible without affecting the states in a way
that introduces errors. This is stated by the quantum theory of measurement: when
we measure an observable, the possible outputs are the orthonormal eigenstates of
the observable, and therefore in order to have a deterministic measure of one of the
states we will for sure have a non-deterministic result for another.
These considerations lead us to the conclusion that we can use non-orthogonal
quantum states to create a secure QC between two users that want to share some
secret information, Alice and Bob. The exchanged information is therefore protected
against the attacks of Eve, who in principle cannot neither copy nor measure the
states without introducing errors detectable by the legitimate users. Moreover, the
fact that security can be based on very fundamental principles of physics suggests that
unconditional security might be possible [5]. With unconditional security we mean
that it is possible to guarantee security even when the computational power and the
abilities of Eve have no restrictions, except from what physical laws forbid. How-
ever, unconditional security does not stand for absolute security, which is something
unachievable [5]. In fact, when we talk about guaranteeing security we mean that
either the two legitimate partners are able to create a secret key, or they abort the
protocol and try again from the beginning. Furthermore, we always take the following
requirements as granted, since any violation of these results into the impossibility of
any secure communication [5]:
• Eve has not access to Alice’s preparation and encoding devices, nor to Bob’s
detecting devices, which means she cannot know the key Alice is sending nor
the users’ choices of settings;
• Both Alice and Bob trust the random number generator they use to decide the
state to send and the measurement to do respectively;
• The classical channel is authenticated with unconditionally secure protocols,
meaning that Eve cannot fool the users into being their legitimate correspon-
dent;
• And, let us highlight this once more, Eve’s capabilities are restricted (only) by
the laws of physics.
Summing up, to learn something about the communication that is taking place in
the QC, Eve has no other means than to interact with the quantum system. Since
Alice is using randomly chosen non-orthogonal states, the presence and the interven-
tion of Eve necessarily modify the state on average, introducing errors which can be
==PAGE:41==
3.1 QKD and unconditional security
29
observed by Alice and Bob. The fundamental point in this discussion is that we can
derive a quantitative bound on the information that has leaked to Eve by observing
the perturbations in the QC. Indeed, we can give a formal definition of security [5]:
Definition 3.1. The security of a key can be parametrized by its deviation ϵ from a
perfect key, and we say that the key is ϵ-secure.
A perfect key is a list of symbols that Alice and Bob share in a perfectly correlated
way and about which Eve has no information, and in principle any possible list is
equally probable a priori. Note that we are not specifying the quantity that has to
be bounded by ϵ, which once chosen gives a more complete definition of security.
An important property that security must satisfy is composability. When an ϵ-
secure key is used for an ϵ′-secure application, composability assures that the whole
process is at least (ϵ + ϵ′)-secure [5].
Now that basic notions on security have been presented, in the next section we will
describe the BB84 scheme, which is the first QKD protocol, starting from an example
of realization of non-orthogonal quantum states as it was shown in the original article
by Bennet and Brassard [6].
3.1.1
The BB84 protocol
The way in which Bennet and Brassard suggest to implement non-orthogonal quantum
states in their protocol is by using the polarization of single photons [6]. In fact,
concerning the polarization of a classical beam of light, we know that it can be
described with a two-dimensional vector in a two-dimensional complex space so that
varying the elements of this vector we can obtain either a linear, a circular or a
more general elliptical polarization. Analogously, we can describe the polarization
state of single photons with a two-dimensional ket in a two-dimensional vector space.
However, we know that when measuring we can only obtain as a result one of the
eigenstates of the observable in which we are measuring, and then the measured state
collapses into it.
Hence, we can describe any photon state of polarization once chosen a two vector
orthonormal basis.
Let’s choose the vertical polarization as the first basis vector
and the horizontal polarization as the second and let’s write them using the Dirac’s
notation:
∣↕⟩= [1
0]
∣↔⟩= [0
1],
(3.1)
and we call it the + basis.
It is now clear that, to describe the two diagonal polarizations, i.e.
the ones
obtained when rotating of ±45○the horizontal polarization, we will write:
∣⤡⟩=
⎡⎢⎢⎢⎣
1
√
2
1
√
2
⎤⎥⎥⎥⎦
∣⤢⟩=
⎡⎢⎢⎢⎣
1
√
2
−1
√
2
⎤⎥⎥⎥⎦
.
(3.2)
==PAGE:42==
30
3 Quantum cryptography
0
∣↕⟩
1
∣↔⟩
0
∣⤡⟩
1
∣⤢⟩
Table 3.1: Bit values assignment to two maximally conjugate basis in the BB84 QKD
protocol.
We can use these two polarizations as an alternative basis for the system, and we
will call this the × basis. We can observe that both vectors of the × basis has equal
projection on each vector of the + basis, i.e.:
∣⟨⤡∣↕⟩∣2 = 1
2
∣⟨⤡∣↔⟩∣2 = 1
2,
(3.3)
and similarly for ∣⤢⟩. The same happens if we consider the projections of the vectors
of the + basis onto the vectors of the × basis. Two different basis of the same space
that have this characteristic are called mutually unbiased basis.
In practice, this
means that if a vertical or horizontal polarized photon is measured using the × basis
the outcome of the measurement will be completely random1, and analogously if a
+45○or a −45○polarized photon is measured in the + basis.
For the sake of completeness, a photon can also be left or right circularly polarized,
and these two polarizations can be expressed in the + basis as follows:
∣↺⟩=
⎡⎢⎢⎢⎣
1
√
2
j 1
√
2
⎤⎥⎥⎥⎦
∣↻⟩=
⎡⎢⎢⎢⎣
1
√
2
−j 1
√
2
⎤⎥⎥⎥⎦
.
(3.4)
Again, we can note that this third polarization couple is orthonormal and therefore
can be taken as another basis of the same space, which we can call the ◯basis. It is
straightforward to see that the ◯basis is mutually unbiased with the + basis, but it
is mutually unbiased with the × basis too, since:
∣⟨⤡∣↺⟩∣2 = ∣1
2 + j 1
2∣
2
= 1
2
∣⟨⤡∣↻⟩∣2 = ∣1
2 −j 1
2∣
2
= 1
2.
(3.5)
The BB84 protocol takes advantage of the characteristics of two maximally con-
jugate basis of photons polarization, i.e. the + and the × basis. We can arbitrarily
assign bit values to the couples of vectors in each basis, as shown in table 3.1.
We can now specifically describe each step of the protocol:
• Alice randomly decides a bit sequence of length l to send to Bob;
1we recall that the probability of observing a certain eigenstate when measuring any quantum
state is given by the squared absolute value of the inner product between the state and the eigenstate
(see postulate 2.10).
==PAGE:43==
3.1 QKD and unconditional security
31
• She also decides a basis sequence of the same length l, randomly and indepen-
dently from the bit values in the bit sequence just chosen;
• She encodes the first bit values in the first basis she chose, following table 3.1,
and then she repeats the process for all l bits in all corresponding basis;
• She can now send the polarized photons through the quantum channel to Bob;
• Bob randomly and independently from Alice’s choices chooses a sequence of
basis. For every new photon he receives, he is going to measure it (and decide
for a 0 or a 1 bit following table 3.1) in a different basis following its random
basis sequence.
At this point, Alice and Bob have two generally different strings of bits, which
we will call Raw Keys. The reason why the Raw Keys are different is because Bob
does not know Alice’s choices of polarization: when he guesses the correct basis he
measures the correct bit in a deterministic way, but, as the two basis are maximally
conjugate, when he chooses the wrong basis he will get a completely random result.
This first part of the protocol is shown in table 3.2.
The next steps require a Classical Channel (CC) in order for Alice and Bob to
agree on which bits were received by Bob in the correct basis. The protocol works as
follows:
• Bob sends through a CC the time-positions and the corresponding used basis for
the bits he received. Note that he does not say the result of the measurements,
which would disclose to Eve all the information;
• Alice checks which of Bob measurements were done in the correct basis, sends
this information through the CC, and creates a bit sequence of only those bits
correctly2 received by Bob;
• Bob can therefore discard all the bits he knows were measured in the wrong
basis and create a bit sequence with the others.
Alice and Bob now ideally share the same bit sequence, which we will call Sifted
Key. These last protocol steps constitute what is called the sifting phase, and they
are also shown in table 3.2.
We say that Alice’s and Bob’s Sifted Keys are “ideally” equal because the quantum
channel can in principle add errors, i.e. the polarization state of the photons can
degrade during transmission, and because of the possible presence of Eve trying to
intercept some information, which again is highly probable to add errors. To correct
the sifted key, classical error correction techniques can be used, but it should be
remembered that Eve has undisturbed access to the classical channel, and Alice and
Bob should be careful not to leak too much information to Eve.
2observe that, when we say that Bob correctly received a bit, we mean that he used the right
basis to measure the polarization.
==PAGE:44==
32
3 Quantum cryptography
Alice random bit sequence
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
Alice random basis sequence
+
+
×
×
×
×
+
+
×
+
+
+
Alice polarized photon sequence ∣↔⟩∣↕⟩∣⤡⟩∣⤢⟩∣⤡⟩∣⤢⟩∣↔⟩∣↕⟩∣⤡⟩
∣↕⟩
∣↔⟩∣↕⟩
Bob random basis sequence
+
×
+
+
+
+
×
×
×
+
+
+
Bob raw key
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
Correct Bob measurements
OK
OK OK OK
Shared sifted key
1
0
0
1
Table 3.2: Example of the implementation of the BB84 protocol. The first 5 rows of
the table describe the protocol steps taking place in the QC, while the last two rows
are those requiring a communication over the CC, i.e. representing sifting process.
After the error correction part, Alice and Bob for sure share the same bit sequence,
which we will call Corrected Key, and upon this they can implement some other
algorithm to further decrease the eventual information available to Eve. This last
part is called privacy amplification, and at the end Alice and Bob finally share the
Secure Key they will use to encode and decode the message the want to share.
The error correction and the privacy amplification parts of QKD will be discussed
and explained in section 3.2, where we will give a more structured description of a
generic QKD protocol. However, instead of going directly to this part, in the next
section we will introduce the concept of Quantum Bit Error Rate (QBER), giving as
an example what it is expected in the case of the BB84 protocol.
3.1.2
Error rates in the BB84 protocol
We can start by analyzing what are the errors present in Bob’s Raw Key in the
absence of Eve and in the case of an ideal channel, i.e. a channel that only presents
losses and does not change a quantum state [2]. As shown in table 3.2, Bob does not
receive all of the polarized photons sent by Alice: the missing ones are those that get
lost in the channel. For what concerns the photons that actually arrive to Bob, two
things may happen [2]:
• Bob measures the incoming photon in the correct basis. Since Bob’s choice of
the basis is random, this happens with probability P(Bobok) = 1/2;
• Bob measures the incoming photon with the wrong basis. Again, the choice of
the basis is random, hence this also happens with probability P(Bobwrong) =
1/2.
To compute the QBER, which is the probability of receiving a wrong bit with respect
to those sent by Alice (a 1 instead of a 0 or vice versa), we can use the following
formula (where E is the event of making errors):
QBER = P(E) = P(E ∩Bobok) + P(E ∩Bobwrong)
= P(E∣Bobok)P(Bobok) + P(E∣Bobwrong)P(Bobwrong),
(3.6)
==PAGE:45==
3.1 QKD and unconditional security
33
where we introduced the conditional probabilities of receiving an erroneous bit given
Bob’s choice of basis. Since we assumed that the channel does not introduce changes
in the quantum states, we know that P(E∣Bobok) = 0 because a measurement in the
correct basis will always give the correct result. On the other hand, we know that a
measurement in the wrong basis will result in a non-deterministic value, and since we
are considering mutually unbiased basis it will be completely random. Therefore, we
have P(E∣Bobwrong) = 1/2. If we substitute the computed probabilities into equation
(3.6) we obtain:
QBER = 0 ⋅1
2 + 1
2 ⋅1
2 = 1
4,
(3.7)
which means that, in average, Bob’s row key will have 25% of the bits different from
those sent by Alice. We want to highlight here that this is an intrinsic error rate due
to the protocol, since we assumed and error-free channel and no eavesdropping.
Even if this rate is very high, Alice and Bob know that errors happen because of
no-matching basis choices [2]. Thus, with the use of a CC3 they can exchange the
information required to identify which photons were received by Bob and which of
the received photons were measured with the correct basis and discard all the others
in order to obtain the Sifted Key, as explained in the previous section and shown in
table 3.2. This also means that the Sifted Key will be approximately 50% shorter
than the Raw Key, since P(Bobok) = 1/2, and that in this ideal case the bits in Alice’s
and in Bob’s Sifted Key are perfectly correlated, since P(E∣Bobok) = 0.
We can now examine the QBER in the presence of Eve. Let us define what are
the options available to her [2]:
• She can intercept a qubit during its transmission in the QC. However, the result
of this action is simply that Bob does not receive the photon Eve intercepted,
and that precise photon she has will not be part of the final key, since the
protocol is such that Alice discards the bits corresponding to photons Bob did
not receive. Thus, by just intercepting qubits, the only thing Eve can achieve
is to lower the communication rate, eventually to zero, but Alice and Bob will
not be fooled into thinking they have a secure key;
• The other option Eve has is to intercept, measure and send a “copy” of the
photon coming from Alice back to Bob. This attack is called Intercept-Resend
(IR). The whole point is that Eve, as Bob, has no knowledge of the basis chosen
by Alice, so she will correctly guess the basis half of the times, P(Eveok) = 1/2.
When she chooses the right basis, she will be able to correctly copy the photon,
and Bob will receive the same quantum state Alice prepared.
In the other
half of the cases, i.e. when she makes a wrong measurement with probability
P(Evewrong) = 1/2, she will get a result in the wrong basis and therefore the
copied photon she will send to Bob will be randomly wrong, again because the
two basis are mutually unbiased.
3which, we want to remember, can be public but must be authenticated.
==PAGE:46==
34
3 Quantum cryptography
Summarizing, for Eve it makes more sense to use the IR attack. Assuming she
decides to act during all the communication, she will have a correct knowledge of
approximately 50% of the bits composing the Sifted Key and at the same time she
will in average introduce an error in 25% of them (half of the remaining). This is
shown by the following equation:
QBERSK = P(E ∩Bobok∣Eveok)P(Eveok) + P(E ∩Bobok∣Evewrong)P(Evewrong)
= 0 ⋅1
2 + 1
2 ⋅1
2 = 1
4.
(3.8)
It is important to stress that this error is on the Sifted Key, i.e. it is a remaining
error on something that should ideally be error-free [2], as also stated by the symbol
QBERSK in equation (3.8). During the error correction part, Alice and Bob will
therefore deduct that Eve was present. However, if Eve adopts this strategy only on
a part of the exchanged bits, e.g. 10%, she will have a smaller knowledge on the key
of approximately 5% but she will introduce only 2.5% of errors. In a more realistic
scenario, i.e. one in which the channel is both lossy and noisy, this error rate might
not be enough for the users to deduce the presence of Eve. In the next section, we
will give a structured description of QKD protocols that will show how Alice and Bob
can face these kind of problems.
3.2
QKD protocols
In this section we are going to describe how a QKD protocol is structured, following
the scheme proposed in figure 3.1. As briefly mentioned before, Alice and Bob need
to be linked by two types of channel: a QC and a CC. An eavesdropper, Eve, can
listen to the exchange of information between Alice and Bob on the CC without being
noticed; however, the CC is supposed to be authenticated, so that Eve cannot actively
interfere by changing the messages. On the other hand, if she interferes in any way
or simply tries to listen to the communication that is taking place on the QC she is
very likely to introduce errors that Alice and Bob can detect.
Firstly, let us introduce a classification of QKD protocols from the point of view
of the source: Prepare and Measure (P&M) and Entaglement Based (EB). In P&M
schemes, Alice actively chooses the bits (or more generally, symbols) to send, she
encodes them in the proper quantum states, and sends them to Bob. On the other
side of the channel, Bob measures the incoming quantum states, in order to decode
the bits (symbols) Alice sent, and he also estimates Eve’s information. On the other
hand, EB schemes rely on the correlations present between entangled quantum states,
thus the source can either be a third party positioned halfway in the channel who
sends one entangled component per user, or more practically the source could still
be Alice, if she keeps one of the states of the entangled pair and sends the other to
Bob. In these two schemes, the arguments for security are slightly different. Both are
==PAGE:47==
3.2 QKD protocols
35
ALICE
BOB
CLASSICAL CHANNEL
SIFTING
ERROR 
CORRECTION
PRIVACY 
AMPLIFICATION
PRIVACY 
AMPLIFICATION
ERROR 
CORRECTION
SIFTING
QUBIT 
EXCHANGE
QUBIT 
EXCHANGE
EVE
RAW
KEY
RAW
KEY
SIFTED
KEY
SIFTED
KEY
SECURE KEY
SECURE KEY
PASSIVE
EAVESDROPPING
ACTIVE
EAVESDROPPING
QUANTUM CHANNEL
CORRECTED
KEY
CORRECTED
KEY
Figure 3.1: General structure of a QKD protocol. Alice, the transmitter, and Bob,
the receiver, are linked by a QC, which they use to exchange qubits and produce a
Raw Key, and by a CC, which they use to correct and further insure the security of
the final Secure Key. Eve can actively interfere in the QC, and only passively listen
to the CC.
based on the fact that a measurement always perturbs the system, but while in P&M
protocols this is linked to the no-cloning theorem, in EB protocols the focus is on the
introduction of non-correlation among entangled states. It has been proved that any
P&M scheme can be directly translated into an EB scheme: this is of fundamental
importance from the point of view of security proofs, as a security demonstration of
an EB protocol assures security also for the correspondent P&M protocol, and equally
with inverted roles [5].
QUBIT EXCHANGE
We can begin our analysis from the bottom of figure 3.1, where the key creation
process actually starts. The QC is the one involved in this part. We can observe that
it is a one-way channel: this reflects the intrinsic roles Alice and Bob have in P&M
schemes. Anyway, this one-way depiction of the QC shown in figure 3.1 is valid for
EB protocols too: it is straightforward to understand why in the case Alice is the
source of entangled states. The case in which the source is positioned in the middle
of the QC can be considered one-way in the sense that there is no information going
back and forth from Alice to Bob or vice versa [5].
==PAGE:48==
36
3 Quantum cryptography
SIFTING
As outlined in section 3.1, at the end of the qubit exchange process, Bob has a list
of bits that is called Raw Key, which differs from Alice’s Raw Key. The next step is
called sifting, as shown in figure 3.1. In this part of the protocol, Alice and Bob use
the CC to discard all those bits in their Raw Keys that were measured by Bob in the
wrong way (e.g. with the wrong basis in the BB84) or that were not received at all
due to losses. Usually, Bob sends to Alice the time positions in which he was able to
measure something and the basis he used in each of these cases, but he does not tell
what the result of the measurement was. Then, Alice compares the basis used by Bob
with those she used to encode the bits, discards all the bits except those “correctly”
received by Bob, and sends to Bob this information so that he can do the same. At
the end of this process, Alice and Bob ideally have perfectly correlated lists of bits
called Sifted Keys. However, due to noise and a possible intervention of Eve in the
QC during the qubit exchange phase, the two Sifted Keys will generally have some
uncorrelated bits, which we will call errors [5].
ERROR CORRECTION
Proceeding with the steps shown in figure 3.1, after the sifting phase Alice and Bob
have to correct the remaining errors between their two Sifted Keys. To do this, they
use the CC with classical algorithms of error correction, from the more simple parity
checks to more sophisticated procedures such as the CASCADE protocol. After error
correction, the lengths of Alice and Bob’s keys are reduced. In fact, as proved by
Shannon, from a list of non-perfectly correlated symbols we can extract a list of
perfectly correlated symbols that is a fraction of the previous bounded by the mutual
information between the two. The mutual information between Alice’s and Bob’s
keys IAB can be expressed as:
IAB = h(A) + h(B) −h(AB) = h(A) −h(A∣B),
(3.9)
where h(⋅) is the entropy of the probability distribution. Equation (3.9) is easy to
explain when we recall the meaning of the entropy as a measure of uncertainty. In
fact, to correct all the errors, Alice and Bob must reveal to each other an amount of
information at least as large as the uncertainty they have on their keys. It should
be observed that this is a theoretical bound, and that error correction algorithms
actually shorten the lengths of the keys by a larger fraction [5].
The output of this phase is a perfectly correlated pair of keys called Corrected Keys.
However, Eve might still have some information about them, which she gained during
the previous steps. Alice and Bob must therefore implement some sort of algorithm
to destroy Eve’s knowledge, and this is what is called privacy amplification [5].
==PAGE:49==
3.2 QKD protocols
37
PRIVACY AMPLIFICATION
The perfectly correlated keys obtained with the error correction phase must then be
further decreased in length, and since the aim is to reduce to zero Eve’s knowledge of
the key, the fraction to be removed is bounded by the information she has. Mathe-
matically this can be expressed as min(IEA,IEB), where IEA (similarly IEB) is Eve’s
information on Alice’s (Bob’s) key. The fact that we take the minimum of the two
quantities is because, before the error correction part, Eve’s knowledge about the two
keys might have been different, and we assume Alice and Bob used as a reference key
the one for which Eve had less information4 [5].
The output of this final phase is thus a Secret Key shared by Alice and Bob, on
which Eve has no information. From a Sifted Key of a certain length, the fraction
of the extractable Secret Key with the error correction and privacy amplification
protocols we just discussed is:
r = IAB −min(IEA,IEB).
(3.10)
A procedure of this sort is also called classical one-way post-processing, because it
can be implemented with one-way communication. The choice of who will be the
sender is then based on which of the two partners has a less correlated key with Eve.
Even if most of the error correction algorithms use two-way communication, we can
still fit them into the one-way post-processing assuming we give Eve all the error’s
positions [5]. Other forms of post-processing are possible, but we will not discuss
them here since they are not relevant for the purposes of this thesis.
EVE’S ATTACKS
We illustrate here the types of attacks Eve can make on a QC. These can be divided
into three main families: indivdual, collective and coherent attacks [5].
The individual attacks are the most constrained ones, where Eve treats indepen-
dently and with the same strategy every quantum state going from Alice to Bob.
She is also bounded to do the measurements right after the interaction with the uan-
tum states [5]. An example of these attacks is the IR, explained for the BB84 in
section 3.1.2.
The collective attacks are similar to the individual attacks with the difference
that Eve can postpone the measurement until any later time which she finds more
convenient. To do this, she needs a quantum memory to store the states. Since she
waits for the sifting and the error correction part, she gain further information on
the states and hence she can make a more powerful measurement, which is generally
be a collective measurement [5]. We can bound her information on Alice’s key using
the Holevo function, which bounds a QC capacity and thus generalizes the classical
4in other words, the two users decide to correct Alice’s key when IEB < IEA, or on the contrary
Bob’s key if IEA < IEB.
==PAGE:50==
38
3 Quantum cryptography
mutual information concept [5]. An example is the Beam Splitting Attack (BSA),
where Eve takes advantage of the channel losses t in the following way: at the begin-
ning of the channel, she simulates the losses by blocking part of the transmission and
letting the remaining go towards Bob through a lossless channel she creates. In this
way, Bob’s expected quantum states are the same (in the sense that they are affected
by the same losses) and this means that the BSA induces no errors. Anyway, the
information obtained by Eve is bounded by the Holevo function [29].
Another attack that has the property of being zero-error is the Photon Number
Splitting (PNS) attack. This can be implemented by Eve if the states Alice is sending
can be made of more than one photon (this is the case for example of the QKD
implementations using Weak Coherent Pulses (WCPs)). If this is the case, Eve can
count the number of photons and if they are more than one, she can keep one and
send the other to Bob. Eve can also act in such a way that at Bob’s side, the statistics
of the photon number distribution are preserved, but only when Alice uses always the
same value for the states intensity. From this, the idea of decoy states method was
born, which makes the use of different intensities states to detect the PNS attack [5].
Finally, coherent attacks are Eve’s most general strategies and include various
possible variations. Nevertheless, bounds for unconditional security have been found,
and in these cases the bounds resulted to be the same as those for collective attacks [5].
After this overview on the structure of QKD protocols, we can now divide them
into three big families from the point of view of the modulation and detection shemes
used [5].
These families are called Discrete Variable (DV) protocols, Continuous
Variable (CV) protocols and Distributed Phase Reference (DPR) protocols, and we
are going to describe their differences and characteristics in the following section.
3.2.1
Discrete Variables protocols
DV schemes were the first to be envisaged, as the BB84, the E91 and the B92 are
part of this group. The main advantage is that, when no errors are present, Alice
and Bob directly share a Secret Key. The most frequently used degrees of freedom in
DV protocols are photon polarization for a free-space channel while a phase coding
is preferred in fiber-based implementations. The detection schemes of DV protocols
involve the use of single photon counting techniques and post selection of discrete
events, those in which detection actually happened [5].
As we described the BB84 in section 3.1.1, we can now briefly outline the idea
behind the E91 and the B92 protocols. The E91 protocol was independently devised
by Ekert in 1991 [30], who was the first to understand the potential of entangled
particles for QKD using the generalized Bell inequality as a test for eavesdropping.
The original idea was to have and EPR source of singlet states of the type:
∣ψ⟩= 1
√
2
(∣↑,↓⟩+ ∣↓,↑⟩),
(3.11)
==PAGE:51==
3.2 QKD protocols
39
where ∣↑⟩represents a spin- 1
2 up particle and similarly ∣↓⟩a spin- 1
2 down particle. The
source is supposed to send one particle to Alice and the other to Bob. When they
receive them, they choose, independently from one another, a polarization axis out of
their three possibilities in which measure the particle. When they use the same, they
get completely un-correlated results and they use these to construct a key. They then
can publicly share the outcomes obtained in those cases when they used different axis,
and from the correlations of their results they can check whether Bell’s inequality are
violated, as expected (which means the communication was secure) or not5. However,
we can also consider the E91 as a modified version of the BB84 protocol. Actually,
Bennet, Brassard and Mermin highlighted in the similarities of the two protocols and
proposed a simplified version of the E91 that does not need the Bell’s inequality check,
which is nowadays known as the BBM protocol [31] and the true EB counterpart of
the P&M BB84. Here, we are going to describe the BBM protocol version that uses
entangled polarized photons. Hence, the source of quantum states is an entangled
photon-pair source, which sends one qubit of the pair towards Alice an the other
towards Bob. The two qubits are assumed to be emitted in a maximally entangled
state, such as:
∣ψ⟩= 1
√
2
(∣↕,↕⟩+ ∣↔,↔⟩).
(3.12)
Alice and Bob both measure the received qubit in the + or alternatively in the × basis
in a random way. When they happen to use the same basis (in approximately half
of the measurements) they are assured to get the same outcome, and the resulting
bits are used to construct the Sifted Key. In this protocol then, errors in the Sifted
Key are a consequence of the presence of Eve, as well as noise, in the same way it
happened in the BB84 [2].
Yet another version of the BB84 is the B92 protocol, formulated by Bennet in
1992 [32]. With this scheme it is shown by the first time that security can be achieved
by only using two non-orthogonal quantum states, instead of the four discussed in the
BB84. To clarify the protocol we give the following example [24]6: Alice modulates
its random bit sequence with the encoding scheme that a 0 bit corresponds to a ∣↕⟩
polarized photon, and a 1 bit to a ∣⤡⟩polarized photon, as shown in table 3.3. Bob
randomly decides in which basis to measure any incoming photon and if he measures
a ∣⤢⟩he interprets the quantum state as a 0 bit, whereas if he measures a ∣↔⟩he
interprets it as a 1 bit. The former case can only happen when Alice sends ∣↕⟩and
Bob chooses the × basis: in fact, if Alice sends ∣⤡⟩, Bob measurement in the × basis
can only give as a result ∣⤡⟩. A similar reasoning applies to the latter case of a 1
bit. Therefore, conclusive measurements by Bob lead to the construction of the Sifted
Key, that once again needs to be corrected from the errors introduced by Eve and
the noise.
5a complete explanation on how the protocol work and how Bell’s theorem provide security can
be found in Ekert’s paper [30] as well as in the review article by Gisin et al. [2].
6the implementation suggested in [32] was actually based on differential phase encoding of a dim
pulse, carrying in average less than one photon, with a bright one.
==PAGE:52==
40
3 Quantum cryptography
bit
Alice
Bob
0
∣↕⟩
∣⤢⟩
1
∣⤡⟩
∣↔⟩
Table 3.3: Alice and Bob’s encoding and decoding choices in the photon polarization
version of the B92 protocol.
For the sake of completeness, before moving to the discussion of CV coding
schemes, we can name other important protocols that are part of this group, such
as the BBM, which is the EB equivalent protocol of the P&M BB84 [31]; or the
six-state protocol, a version of the BB84 in which three mutually unbiased basis are
used (e.g. in the polarization implementation the +, × and ◯basis are used) [33]; or
the SARG04, in which the bits are not encoded in the actual state but in the basis
choice [34].
3.2.2
Continuous Variables protocols
The rationale behind CV protocols lies in the observation that the photon-counting
techniques needed at Bob’s side in DV schemes have low quantum efficiency, high
dark count rates and large dead times. To overcome these issues, homodyne7 detec-
tion was proposed. CV coding owes its name exactly from this new measurement
scheme deployed at receiver side, which uses homodyne detection with standard p-i-n
photodiodes8 that allows to measure real amplitudes.
The first CV coding was proposed in [38]. The author firstly shows an imple-
mentation with coherent multiphoton states (see figure 3.2a): these states, randomly
modulated by Alice in the amplitude and in the phase quadrature, are received with
homodyne detection by Bob, who can only detect one quadrature at a time. This im-
plementation however, is proved to be vulnerable to an attack where Eve can extract
enough light to obtain information on both quadratures, without altering too much
the remaining beam of light she lets go towards Bob. In the same paper, a solution
to this problem is found in the use of squeezed states (see figure 3.2b): Alice impress
amplitude quadrature modulation on two squeezed beams, one is then shifted to the
phase quadrature, and the two are combined with a BS into two mixed beams that are
sent to Bob each with a local oscillator. Phase coherence between the two beams is
destroyed by adding to one of them a random phase shift varying in time. Therefore,
Bob can detect only one of the two initial squeezed beams, and he randomly decides
which one. Eve is in the same situation as Bob, but she does not know which will
7with homodyne detection we refer to the technique in which the received signal is interfered at
a Beam Splitter (BS) with a local oscillator that has the same frequency, and the difference among
the two outputs gives information on a quadrature component of the initial signal [35].
8a p-i-n photodiode is a photodetector made of a p-n junction with a layer of undoped semicon-
ductor material in between, that produces an electric current proportional to the optical incident
power [35].
==PAGE:53==
3.2 QKD protocols
41
p in
xin
x
∆
p
(a) Example of a coherent state rep-
resentation [36].
x /2
in
x
2pin
∆/2
2∆
)
p
(b) Example of a squeezed state rep-
resentation [36].
Figure 3.2: Representation of two different quantum states in a phase space. The
axes represents the p and x quadratures, which we call phase and amplitude. Any
quantum state is depicted as a point, whose coordinates are the mean values of the
state quadrature components, which corresponds to the real and imaginary parts of
the complex amplitude of a single mode classical field. The error box surrounding
the point depicts the fluctuations of the quadratures around their mean values: for
a coherent state this is a circle, meaning that the uncertainty ∆is the same in every
direction, while for a squeezed state it is an ellipse of the same area, meaning that
the uncertainty in the direction of the smaller axis is reduced while along the other
axis is enhanced [37].
be Bob’s choice, hence by measuring she will introduce detectable errors. Moreover,
the fact that Alice is using squeezed states, prevents Eve from gaining information by
splitting the incoming beam, as she could do with coherent states. It is important to
notice that a scheme like this is highly dependent on the Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR):
Alice would want to increase the SNR in order to compensate for channel losses, but
on the other hand Eve could take advantage of this by staying closer to her. This
means that the advantages gained with the use of squeezed states are significant only
when the signal power is not too large. Thus, losses and noise are a highly limiting
factor on the implementation of CV protocols.
Other early proposals were made in [37], with a CV protocol version of the BB84
implemented with squeezed states, and in [39], where the protocol was based on corre-
lations between the phase and amplitude quadratures of two separated fields, which
makes it part of the EB schemes. These kind of protocols are called CV schemes
with discrete modulation. Simultaneously, another sub-group of CV protocols was
developed that implemented continuous modulation, i.e. the Gaussian modulation,
the first of which was proposed in [40]. This is considered as the proper CV counter-
part of the BB84, since the two quadrature components of a squeezed state of light
are modulated through a Gaussian distribution and Bob measures with homodyne
==PAGE:54==
42
3 Quantum cryptography
detection one of the two quadratures. Other versions of this protocol were devised,
for example in [41] the states of light considered were coherent, or in [42] the proposed
protocol used coherent states measured with heterodyne9 detection instead of homo-
dyne, or again in [36] Alice sends squeezed states and Bob receives using heterodyne
detection.
In the next paragraph we will introduce DPR protocols, of central relevance for
this thesis work, and we will also compare the performance of three protocols in terms
of Secret Key generation rate.
3.2.3
Distributed Phase Reference protocols
While DV and CV protocols were conceived theoretically, DPR schemes were devel-
oped as more practical QKD implementations by experiments.
The main charac-
teristics of this set of protocols is that the QC is monitored by checking the phase
coherence of subsequent pulses, peculiarity that gives the name to the class of proto-
cols. For what concerns the modulation, DPR schemes are similar to DV protocols:
the key is coded through realizations of bits (discrete variable) and, in the absence of
errors, Alice and Bob directly have a perfect pair of correlated keys. An interesting
peculiarity of these protocols is that they can detect the PNS attack, and this is
because security is based on the coherence between consecutive pulses [5].
In the following we are going to describe three DPR protocols, the Differential
Phase Shift (DPS), in which the the qubits are encoded in the phase difference between
consecutive pulses, the Coherent One-Way (COW), in which information is modulated
in the time position of a pulse, and the Differential Phase Time Shifting (DPTS),
which uses both the phase difference and the time encoding schemes.
DIFFERENTIAL PHASE SHIFT
DPS was firstly proposed in [7] as a new promising QKD scheme designed for fiber
transmission thanks to its higher key creation rate if compared to the fiber implemen-
tation of DV protocols as the BB84.
Figure 3.3 shows the setup designed in [7]: a photon is emitted by a single photon
source at Alice side and it is divided into three equally probable paths, a, b and c in
the figure, by two consecutive BSs. The time delay between paths a and b, and paths
b and c is the same and it is defined as T. The three paths are then recombined and a
Phase Modulator (PM) randomly changes the phase by 0 or π of each possible output
pulse. At receiver side, Bob uses a Delay Line Interferometer (DLI), obtained with
two balanced BSs and a path delay of T. The two possible outputs are connected
to two Single Photon Detectors (SPDs), called DET1 and DET2 in figure 3.3. The
figure also shows the four possible time instances at which a photon can be detected:
9heterodyne detection is a technique similar to the homodyne, except that the local oscillator is
at a different frequency than the signal, and thus it does not need to be locked to it [35].
==PAGE:55==
3.2 QKD protocols
43
c
BS/SW
BS/SW
BS
BS
π)
b
Alice
DET2
T
Bob
a
b
c
T
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
50:50
50:50
Single
Photon
Source
DET1
Figure 3.3: Setup of the DPS protocol as proposed in [7]. At Alice side a photon,
emitted by a single photon source, is split into three equally probable pulses which
are randomly phase modulated and sent to Bob. Bob detects the phase difference
among these three pulses with a balanced interferometer.
• If it is counted in (i), it means that the initial photon passed through path a at
Alice’s and through the short path at Bob’s;
• A count in (ii) can happen in two cases, either the photon passed path a and
the long path at Bob’s or path b and the short path at Bob’s;
• Similarly for a count in (iii), which happens either for a photon through path b
in Alice and the long path at Bob’s or through path c and the short path;
• Finally, a count in (iv) means that the initial photon passed through path c at
Alice’s and the long path at Bob’s.
In QM this means that there are two amplitude probability distributions that are
interfering at (ii) and (iii) time instances, and according to the phase difference they
have one of the two SPDs clicks10. On the other hand, at time instances (i) and (iv)
there is no interference of amplitude probabilities, therefore the SPD that clicks is
random, meaning that a count recorded by Bob in one of these two positions does
not carry information.
The steps that make Alice and Bob agree on a Secret Key are the following:
• When Bob gets a click in the (ii) or the (iii) time positions, he records which
SPD clicked and at which time;
• Bob tells Alice, through a CC, in which time instances he got a click, but does
not say in which detector;
• Alice, knowing the phase modulation she applied, deduces which of Bob’s de-
tectors clicked.
10we can arbitrarily assume that DET1 clicks for 0 phase difference and DET2 for ±π phase
difference.
==PAGE:56==
44
3 Quantum cryptography
D0
Alice
Laser
PM
"
#
#
"
"
#
Bob
D1
Figure 3.4: Setup of the DPS protocol as proposed in [5]. Alice’s output is a sequence
of coherent states with same amplitude and phase 0 or π.
To detect the phase
difference between two consecutive coherent states Bob uses a DLI whose two outputs
are connected to two SPDs, called D0 and D1.
The information on the phase difference Alice and Bob share can then be directly
translated into a 0 or a 1 bit to become part of the Sifted Key, and then error
correction and privacy amplification can be done as usual.
This protocol can maybe be understood in an easier way if we consider the expla-
nation given in [5] and shown in figure 3.4. What Alice does is to prepare a sequence
of k coherent states all with the same intensity √µ and apply to each of them a phase
shift ϕk:
...∣√µejϕk−1⟩∣√µejϕk⟩∣√µejϕk+1⟩...
(3.13)
where each ϕk can be either 0 or π. The method she uses to prepare the coherent state
is by having a source of WCPs which are then modulated with a PM. The parameter
µ represents therefore the mean photon number per pulse. Bob’s setup consists, as
in the version given by [7], of a DLI in which the long arm has a time delay T with
respect to the short arm, in order for two consecutive pulses to interfere. Thanks to
this representation, we can express the qubit encoding in the following way:
∣0k⟩= ∣±√µ⟩2k−1 ∣±√µ⟩2k
∣1k⟩= ∣±√µ⟩2k−1 ∣∓√µ⟩2k ,
(3.14)
again, the qubit value assignment to the phase difference is arbitrary.
Intuitively, security lies in the fact that Eve to obtain information on the bit values
breaks the coherence in the line with the direct result of introducing errors that will
increase the QBER between Alice and Bob. This can also be seen from the fact that
the states ∣0k⟩and ∣1k⟩are not orthogonal. A proof that DPS is secure against the
PNS attack was given in [43], while in it was proven in [44] that DPS satisfies the
necessary condition for security of non-commuting measurements (see section 2.4 on
Heisenberg uncertainty principle). As concerns collective attacks an upper bound for
security was derived in [29].
==PAGE:57==
3.2 QKD protocols
45
tB
DB
DM1
DM2
1 t
! B
Alice
Bob
Laser
IM
Figure 3.5: Setup of the COW protocol as proposed in [8]. Alice’s output is a sequence
of coherent states with same positive intensity or vacuum states. The code is given
by the time position of non-vacuum states, and it is recorder by Bob with probability
tB with a single SPD called DB. A sequence of two consecutive non-vacuum states
is used to check the coherence on the QC, hence with probability 1−tB light goes
through the DLI at Bob side and the two SPDs called DM1 and DM2.
COHERENT ONE-WAY
The COW protocol was proposed in [45] and in [8] as a fast and simple solution
for QKD, thanks to the easy detection scheme required at Bob side. The idea is
to encode information on the time position of subsequent coherent quantum states,
meaning that Bob simply has to measure the time of arrival he detected.
More formally we can imagine that Alice’s output consists of pairs of coherent
states in which one of them is the vacuum state and the other has intensity √µ.
Then we can write:
∣0k⟩= ∣√µ⟩2k−1 ∣vac⟩2k
∣1k⟩= ∣vac⟩2k−1 ∣√µ⟩2k ,
(3.15)
where ∣vac⟩represents the vacuum state. Once again the qubit encoding is arbitrary.
Figure 3.5 shows the setup proposed in [8]. Here the coherent states are obtained
with a source of WCPs and then an Intensity Modulator (IM) either lets the pulse go
through unaffected or completely blocks it to obtain the vacuum state. At receiver
side, since Bob only has to record the time of arrival of a pulse, the detection simply
requires an SPD.
As in the DPS protocol, security is checked by looking at the coherence of the
QC. Therefore, Alice produces decoy sequences in a small fraction with respect to
the actual sequences that encode information. A decoy sequence is made by a pair
of non-empty pulses (two non-vacuum coherent states) and can be mathematically
described as ∣√µ⟩2k−1 ∣√µ⟩2k. Coherence between two non-empty pulses, i.e. within
a decoy sequence and across the 1-0 qubit separation, is checked by Bob with a DLI
where the delay corresponds to the repetition rate of the pulses.
Summarizing, Alice sends to Bob three kind of sequences, two encoding the qubits,
more frequently, and the decoy sequence. Bob unevenly splits the incoming pulses
==PAGE:58==
46
3 Quantum cryptography
into a data line, with transmission coefficient tB, where he just detects the time of
arrival of the pulse, and a monitoring line where he checks the coherence of the QC.
The following steps to construct a Secret Key are:
• Bob tells Alice on a CC for which sequences he recorded a pulse in DB, without
telling her whether the pulse was in the first or in the second time instance;
• Alice replies with the time instances Bob has to discard because were random
clicks of the SPD due to a decoy sequence;
• Alice and Bob estimates Eve’s information on the key by analyzing the clicks
on the monitoring line. If it results the QC was sufficiently secure, they run the
error correction and privacy amplification protocols.
Concerning the security analysis, upper-bounds against collective attacks have
been derived in [29], and it has been proved in [46] that COW protocol satisfies the
condition of non-commuting measurements, necessary for unconditional security. A
final bound, for finite-key security, was found in [10].
DIFFERENTIAL PHASE TIME SHIFTING
The DPTS QKD protocol, the one experimentally tested in this thesis, was proposed
in [19] as the first two-dimensional11 DPR scheme that uses both the phase difference
and the time coding to modulate WCPs, so as to combine the modulation strategies
of both DPS and COW. The quaternary alphabet produced by Alice is shown in
figure 3.6 and it consists of the four following symbols:
∣0⟩= ∣±α⟩∣vac⟩∣±α⟩∣vac⟩
∣2⟩= ∣vac⟩∣±α⟩∣vac⟩∣±α⟩
∣1⟩= ∣±α⟩∣vac⟩∣∓α⟩∣vac⟩
∣3⟩= ∣vac⟩∣±α⟩∣vac⟩∣∓α⟩,
(3.16)
where the state ∣vac⟩is the vacuum state, i.e. a blocked pulse, and the state ∣±α⟩
is a coherent quantum state with intensity α, i.e. a non-empty pulse. In order for
Alice to be able to send these states, she needs a WCP source at some repetition
rate ν, a PM that works at half the speed and modulates the phase as 0 or π of a
couple of consecutive pulses, which we will call sub-block, and an IM, which she uses
to suppress one pulse per sub-block so that the time coding is achieved. Hence, the
obtained pulse sequence has an average repetition rate of ν/2.
Since the protocol uses both the phase and the time encoding, it follows that Bob
must be able to read both dimensions. To measure the phase difference, he needs a
DLI, as in the DPS protocol, which he uses to interfere the pulses from subsequent
sub-blocks. Therefore, the delay between the two arms should be T = 2/ν. The two
outputs of the interferometer are connected to two SPDs, and one will click for 0
11two-dimensional is referred to the alphabet of symbols that are encoded with the modulation
chosen, i.e. four symbols each encoding two bits of information. For example we could have: ∣0⟩→00,
∣1⟩→01, ∣2⟩→10 and ∣3⟩→11.
==PAGE:59==
3.2 QKD protocols
47
Figure 3.6: Setup of the DPTS protocol as proposed in [19]. Alice’s setup consists
of a WCP source, a PM and an IM, in order to construct the four symbols of her
alphabet, also shown. At Bob side, a DLI is used to infer the phase difference, while
the time coding is simply detected looking at the time of arrival of the received pulse.
phase difference (D2 in figure 3.6) while the other for ±π (D1 in figure 3.6). Finally,
similarly to the COW protocol, Bob has to distinguish between two possible time of
arrivals in both detectors (te and tl in figure 3.6). In this way, he knows which symbol
was sent by Alice, and for every click he acquires the knowledge of two bits.
We can now highlight that every sub-block participates to the coding of up to two
symbols, similarly to what happens to each pulse in the DPS protocol. The reason
why sub-blocks do not always code for two symbols is that when Alice changes the
time coding, i.e. from symbols ∣0⟩or ∣1⟩to ∣2⟩or ∣3⟩or vice versa, among the two
limiting sub-blocks there is no interference in the DLI, because the pulses are not
separated by the correct time delay. We call the separation between two different
time encoded symbols a transition sequence. In order to minimize the number of
transition sequences, which naturally results in a lower efficiency in terms of bits
coded per pulse sent, the concept of blocks is introduced [19]. All symbols transmitted
in every block must have the same time coding, meaning that within a block there can
only be either symbols ∣0⟩and ∣1⟩or ∣2⟩and ∣3⟩. In this way, the transition sequences
are only present between subsequent blocks that have different time coding. Each
block consists of N pulses (counting empty and non-empty positions), and in order
for it to encode at least one symbol we require Nmin = 4.
Thus the length of a
block is randomly chosen in the set {4,6,8,⋯Nmax} and the time coding within the
block is also randomly chosen. The random length of blocks is needed so that Bob
and Eve do not know where the time coding changes and this is fundamental to not
leak information to Eve. In fact if blocks had a fixed length, Eve would know which
sub-blocks share the same time coding.
Figure 3.7 shows a practical example of the DPTS protocol, from Alice’s encoding
to Bob’s detection and the creation of the Sifted Key.
As well as other DPR protocol, also in DPTS the security lies in the coherence
among pulses: for Eve to be able to grasp some information on the key she has to, at
some point, break the coherence between subsequent pulses. This directly translates
into a higher QBER experienced by Alice and Bob, thanks to the similarities of the
==PAGE:60==
48
3 Quantum cryptography
Alice encoding
Random sequence
Detecon
Bob decoding
Sied Key
Subslot   #
D1
0
D2
me
0
0
-
x
x
x
phase
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
0
0
0
-
0
x
x
-
Quantum states
0
0
Figure 3.7: Example of the DPTS protocol, when Bob makes no errors in the detec-
tion [19]. Alice’s list of symbol is shown in the first row and the second row illustrates
the train of WCPs generated (assuming the time axis is such that the first sent sym-
bol is on the right). The vertical red lines represents the blocks separation. The third
rows shows the clicks Bob collects in detectors D1 and D2 and their relative time of
arrivals. Some symbols are not detected: we recall that the mean photon number per
pulse is lower than one and that we also have channel losses. The fourth row just
numbers the sub-blocks, representing the synchronization between Alice and Bob. In
the fifth row, Bob translates his detection events in the corresponding symbols (as-
suming D1 reads a phase difference of 0 and D2 of π) and this constitutes is Raw
Key. In the final row, the output of the sifting procedure is shown: Bob deleted those
symbols due to transition sequences to obtain the Sifted Key.
protocol with the DPS scheme. If Eve knew the starting position of blocks, she could
decide to break coherence in those time instances in order not to be detected, hence
the random block size is useful to prevent her from acting like this. Moreover, to
further preclude Eve’s chances, Alice sends decoy sequences with a low probability.
In this protocol a decoy sequence is, similarly to COW, made of four subsequent
non-empty pulses: this allows Bob to also check coherence within a sub-block. A
preliminary security analysis of DPTS is carried out in [19], following the arguments
used to derive upper-bounds for DPS and COW in [29].
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON
The interest for DPTS is mainly due to its higher achievable Secret Key rate in
realistic scenarios when compared to other protocols, as DPS and COW [19]. With
realistic scenarios we mean those where physical limitations of the equipment are
taken into consideration, as for example the detectors dead time (see section 4.2.2),
which considerably limits the the maximum data rate accepted by the receiver. Since
DPTS exploits a two-dimensional modulation format, every click at receiver side
is translated into (approximately) twice the information than a click codes in one-
dimensional protocols.
This advantage of DPTS on DPS and COW is shown in
figure 3.8. The expressions used to obtain the three protocols rates are given in [19]
and we are now going to quickly explain them.
==PAGE:61==
3.2 QKD protocols
49
For what concerns the COW protocol, the bound used for the secret key rate
R(COW )
sk
is the following:
R(COW )
sk
= fd(R + 2pd(1 −R))(1 −h(Q(COW )) −χ(COW )
AE
),
(3.17)
where fd represents the fraction of actual modulated sequences carrying information,
those of the type ∣α⟩∣vac⟩or ∣vac⟩∣α⟩over all the sent sequences, i.e. including the
decoy sequences of the type ∣α⟩∣α⟩. R represents the detection rate of pulses actually
sent by Alice (and it takes into account the mean photon number per pulse, the losses
of the channel and the detectors efficiency), pd is the dark count probability of the
detectors, and therefore the factor (R + 2pd(1 −R)) represents the total detection
rate at Bob’s side, which considers both the clicks due to really transmitted pulses
and the clicks coming from the dark counts in the two time-slots. The factor (1 −
h(Q(COW )) −χ(COW )
AE
) represents the fraction of Sifted Key that is kept after the
error correction and the privacy amplification procedures. In fact, we can see that
(1−h(Q(COW ))) = IAB, with Q(COW ) being the QBER and h(⋅) the Shannon entropy,
and χ(COW )
AE
is the Holevo bound for min(IAE,IBE) that was found in [29].
Similarly, for the DPS scheme we have:
R(DP S)
sk
= (2R + 2pd(1 −2R))(1 −h(Q(DP S)) −χ(DP S)
AE
).
(3.18)
The differences with (3.17) are that, as in the DPS protocol there are no decoy se-
quences, all received clicks actually counts in the Secret Key determination. Moreover,
the rate is doubled as there are no ∣vac⟩states sent by Alice, and this is the reason
why a 2R factor is present instead of the single R we find in the COW Secret Key
rate. Again, Q(DP S) is the QBER experienced, (1 −h(Q(DP S))) = IAB and χ(DP S)
AE
is the Holevo bound for the information leaked to Eve computed in [29] and partially
derived in section 5.1.
Finally, the Secret Key rate of the DPTS protocol is:
R(DP T S)
sk
= 2fRB(1 −h(A∣B) −χDP T S
AE
).
(3.19)
Here, the factor 2 derives from the fact the the alphabet used has 4 symbols, and each
codes for 2 bits. With f we take into account both the fraction of non-decoy sequences
and the fact that also transition sequences among blocks do not carry information.
The total detection rate is RB = R + 4pd(1 −R), where the 4 comes from the fact
that we can have dark counts in both detectors in two time-slots (see figure 3.6). The
derivations of h(A∣B) and χ(DP T S)
AE
can be found in [19] and partially in section 5.2,
and have similar meanings of the corresponding terms in (3.17) and (3.18).
It is important to highlight that the QBER for the DPTS is actually computed
on the symbols: whenever a received symbol is wrong, we count this as if its two
corresponding bits are discarded. Actually, if the error correction is made on the bits
(and not on the symbols), the real QBER will have a lower value. Let us show this
through an example: if we assume Bob detected symbol ∣1⟩(which corresponds to the
==PAGE:62==
50
3 Quantum cryptography
Figure 3.8: Achievable Secret Key rates of DPTS, blue, DPS, black, and COW, red,
in a realistic scenario [19]. The mean photon number µ for the three protocols are
different, as they are chosen to optimize the rate. Here, some reasonable values are
considered for the detectors dead time, td = 2 µs, dark count probability, pd = 2×10−8,
and efficiency, ηd = 0.1 (for definitions of these parameters, see section 4.2.2).
bits 01) when Alice had actually sent symbol ∣0⟩(corresponding to the bits 00), with
our analysis we count this as an error on the symbol, which then results in 2 erroneous
bits in equation (3.19). However if the error correction is made on the corresponding
bit string, we will only have one erroneous bit. Even if this is just an example that
is dependent on the relationship among symbols and pairs of bits, the result is the
same for any symbol-bits encoding possibility chosen. Therefore, since this happens
for two erroneous symbols out of three possibilities, the QBER computed directly on
a Sifted Key made of bits should be a little lower than the one we are estimating,
which would result into a higher achievable Secret Key rate.
In this chapter we gave an overview on QKD protocols, explaining both the general
structure and some specific protocols, and also illustrated the basic ideas behind
security.
In the following chapters we are going to firstly introduce the experimental setup
used in the implementation of the DPTS protocol, and secondly we are going to show
and discuss the results obtained in terms of QBER and Secret Key generation rate
for varying channel length.
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER4
Experimental tools
In this chapter we are going to illustrate the experimental setup used to implement
the Differential Phase Time Shifting (DPTS) protocol. An overview of the complete
system is shown in figure 4.1.
As we explained in section 3.2.3, the DPTS scheme is implemented with a train
of Weak Coherent Pulses (WCPs) that are modulated both in the time and in the
phase domains. This is what constitutes the Quantum Channel (QC). To realize it,
we used a Continuous Wave (CW) laser at 1550 nm, from which we carved the pulses
using an Intensity Modulator (IM) and we impressed on them the required phase
shift using a Phase Modulator (PM). The electrical signals driving the modulators
are generated by a Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGA), that constitutes Alice’s
control module. The obtained sequence is then attenuated to the quantum regime
using a Variable Optical Attenuator (VOA). This QC is sent through the fiber link
towards Bob.
At receiver side, Bob uses a Delay Line Interferometer (DLI) to discern the phase
modulation, and then the two outputs can be received by the two respective Single
Photon Detectors (SPDs). Moreover, Bob needs to be synchronized with Alice, so
that he can discriminate between the two possible time positions of the pulses.
Synchronization is also needed for the following sifting procedure, when he tells
Alice in which sub-blocks he was able to measure and she replies saying which of
those measurements were caused by transition and decoy sequences. Hence, a syn-
chronization signal, generated by the FPGA board, is sent from Alice to Bob: this
can be done either electrically or optically. In the latter case, we modulated another
CW laser, at 1610 nm, and we multiplexed this Classical Channel (CC) into the same
fiber link where the QC is propagating. Bob has then to demultiplex the two signals,
and this task can be accomplished using a Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM)
filter. A narrow pass-band tunable filter centered around 1550 nm is then used to
remove the noise leaked from the CC into the QC. The CC can then be received using
a simple Avalanche PhotoDiode (APD)1.
The electrical signals coming from the two SPDs and the synchronization are
finally sent to the Time Tagger (TT) unit, which is part to Bob’s control, to be
analyzed.
1an APD is a photodiode with a higher responsivity when compared to p-i-n photodiode, due
to the presence of a gain region inserted in the p-n junction that provides multiplication of the
electron-hole pairs generated in the i-region [35].
==PAGE:64==
52
4 Experimental tools
  Alice
control
Time tagger
SPD
  Bob
control
Delay line
interferometer
SPD
Tunable filter
APD
Quantum Channel
LASER
1550 nm
IM 
1.19 GHz
PM 
595 MHz
Alice
COUPLER
FPGA
Power Meter
Synchronization 
Channel
VOA
Bob
Classical Channel
LASER
1610 nm
IM 
0.142 MHz
WDM
IM
1.68 ns 
150 ps
CUSTOM PATTERN
PM
PRBS 12
0
IM
7 us 
10 ns
SYNCHRONIZATION
1610 nm
1550 nm
SMF
C BAND
L BAND
COUPLER
1.68 ns 
1.68 ns 
Figure 4.1: Schematic representation of the setup used to implement the DPTS pro-
tocol. Alice, on the top, and Bob, on the bottom, are connected with a fiber channel
that can span different lengths. The QC consists of WCPs, created by Alice with
the pink blocks and the VOA. The synchronization signal can either be electrical or
optical, in which case it is modulated by Alice using the green blocks and constitutes
a CC multiplexed and sent in the same fiber. In the case of co-propagating signals,
Bob uses a WDM filter to separate them: the CC is then received with an APD, while
the QC is received with a DLI followed by two SPDs.
In the next sections, we are going to describe Alice and Bob’s equipment in details,
following the natural direction of the communication flow.
4.1
Alice
Alice’s tasks are the following:
• she has to prepare the WCPs such that they are modulated both in the time
domain and in the phase domain, which she will send to Bob;
• She has to produce a synchronization signal for Bob so that he can successfully
time tag the received photons.
The way in which she implements these two functions is by using an FPGA to create
the electrical signals needed to carve the pulses from a CW laser and to modulate
their phase and to generate the electrical synchronization signal. We are now going
to give some specifics of the FPGA we used and describe its output signals.
4.1.1
The electrical control module
The FPGA is part of Alice’s control and it is needed to generate the electrical driving
signals of the modulators (see section 4.1.3) and the electrical synchronization signal.
==PAGE:65==
4.1 Alice
53
Figure 4.2: The FPGA, an ALTERA Stratix V GX board, used by Alice for the
generation of the electrical signals [47].
Specifically, we used an ALTERA STRATIX V GX board, shown in figure 4.2. All
its features can be found in [47]. We used a reference clock of 625 MHz to reach a
final clock frequency of 12.5 GHz, which is the maximum achievable with this board.
It is crucial to take into account the internal clock frequency of the board, since it
determines the width of the narrowest pulse that can be generated. In this sense, we
were able to reach a Full Width Half Maximum (FWHM)2 of approximately 100 ps
for the electrical pulse shown in figure 4.3a.
The FPGA’s output signals are three: an amplitude pattern (figures 4.3a and 4.3b),
a phase pattern (figure 4.3c) and a synchronization signal. All three of them have a
peak to peak voltage of approximately Vpp ≈440 mV. Because of the higher value of
the modulators’ Vπ (see section 4.1.3), we used two electrical amplifiers to amplify
the signals driving the Lithium Niobate (LiNbO3) modulators: one on the amplitude
pattern signal and the other acting on the phase pattern signal (see figure 4.4). The
former is a linear amplifier with 26 dB small signal gain and 12 GHz of bandwidth [48].
The latter is a linear amplifier with 26 dB small signal gain (inverting), with possibil-
ity of gain control, saturation output power of 22 dBm and 40 GHz bandwidth [49].
AMPLITUDE PATTERN
The amplitude pattern is needed to carve the pulses from the CW laser; hence it will
be used as the driving signal for the IM. Since the DPTS protocol has a temporal
2the FWHM is defined as the temporal width of a pulse taking as starting and ending time
instances those in which the pulse has half of its peak power.
==PAGE:66==
54
4 Experimental tools
(a) Pulse shape of the electri-
cal amplitude pattern show-
ing 100 ps FWHM.
(b) Part of the amplitude
pattern signal showing three
consecutive pulses.
(c) Part of the phase pattern
signal.
Figure 4.3: Electrical signals generated by the FPGA.
coding3, the amplitude pattern takes this into account. We created a custom pattern
ad hoc, such that the resulting average block size4 is approximately 6 pulses. Moreover,
the pattern has the same temporal length of the phase pattern. This means that, the
signal Alice is sending is periodically repeating itself. The repetition frequency chosen
is ν ≈1.2 GHz, so that the average pulse rate is ν/2 ≈595 MHz. An example of the
amplitude pattern is shown in figure 4.3b.
It is worth mentioning that we started our analysis of the system by implementing
the Differential Phase Shift (DPS) protocol, as will be discussed in section 5.1. The
amplitude pattern generated by the FPGA in these first trials was a train of pulses
with repetition rate νDP S ≈595 MHz, with same FWHM, peak-to-peak output voltage
and amplification requirements.
Lastly, in a final experiment, we tried to optimize the performance of the system
by using two cascaded IMs for pulse carving: as it will be explained in section 5.3,
this is done to reach a higher extinction ratio and lowering the noise. In this case, we
split the same amplitude pattern signal for the DPTS in two, amplified both using
analogous amplifiers and then used them as driving signals for two IMs. The second
signal had to be delayed of the same delay the optical waveform suffered from going
from the first IM to the second, and we achieved this by inserting an electrical delay
line before amplification of the second signal, as shown in figure 4.4c.
3referring to the fact that in a sub-block of two possible pulses only one is actually sent while
the other is blocked.
4the definition of blocks for the DPTS protocol is given in section 3.2.3, for short we require that
the temporal coding within a block is the same.
==PAGE:67==
4.1 Alice
55
(a) Electrical amplifier for
the
amplitude
pattern,
a
complete datasheet can be
found in [48].
(b) Electrical amplifier for
the phase pattern, a com-
plete datasheet can be found
in [49].
(c) Electrical delay line fol-
lowed by an electrical ampli-
fier for the amplitude pat-
tern driving the second IM.
Figure 4.4: Electrical amplifiers and delay line acting on the modulators driving
signal.
PHASE PATTERN
The phase pattern generated by the FPGA is shown in figure 4.3c and it consists of
a Non Return to Zero (NRZ) signal5 representing a Pseudo-Random Bit Sequence
(PRBS) sequence. We used a PRBS-7 sequence for test purposes, while a PRBS-
12 was chosen for the actual experiments. A bit-slot has duration T = 2/ν ≈1.68
ns, meaning that the same phase is impressed within the whole sub-block duration,
disregarding of the actual pulse position (i.e. whether the first or the second pulse
blocked). In the preliminary DPS experiments, the same phase pattern was used since
T = 1/νDP S = 2/ν, i.e. the bit-slot duration actually coincides with the pulse-slot.
PRBSs are sequences of bits generated recursively, for example with a shift register,
and hence are periodic [50]. However, they have properties similar to those a purely
random bit sequence exhibits, and the longer the sequence the closer the similarities.
We say that a PRBS is a PRBS-r when its period is of L = 2r −1 bits, therefore a
PRBS-7 has a period of 127 bits and a PRBS-12 of 4095 bits. The most peculiar
features of a PRBS-r are the following:
• every possible combination of r bits is present, except from the all 0s bit se-
quence;
• in a period, the number of 1s is 2r−1 while the number of 0s is 2r−1 −1.
5a NRZ signal is a signal that represents a 0 bit with low voltage and a 1 bit with high voltage
for the whole bit duration, without “returning to the zero value” at the end of the bit-slot.
==PAGE:68==
56
4 Experimental tools
To generate a PRBS-r, a shift register with r positions and a sum modulo 2 operation
between the registers content is enough6. The initial content of the registers is called
generator sequence, and can be any r sequence of bits except from the all 0s sequence.
SYNCHRONIZATION SIGNAL
The third output of the FPGA is the synchronization signal. The FPGA emits a pulse
every time the PRBS starts again: in other words, the synchronization is a pulsed
signal with repetition frequency νsync = 1/(LT). Since in the experiments we used
a PRBS-12, the actual repetition rate of the synchronization signal was νsync ≈145
MHz.
The reason for which we could not use longer PRBSs for the phase pattern is be-
cause at receiver side a high precision in the time domain was required, and therefore
the synchronization signal had to be fast. With some tests on the error rates, we
found that a good choice in our system is to have a νsync value larger than 100-120
MHz, which led us to a PRBS-127
The basic configuration is that Alice sends directly to Bob’s TT the electrical
synchronization signal. However, in section 5.2.2 we will show some results obtained
with an alternative configuration based on the multiplexing of a synchronization op-
tical signal on the same fiber where we also send the WCPs. In this latter case, the
electrical synchronization is used as driving signal for another IM to carve optical
pulses out of a CW laser at a different wavelength than the one used for the QC.
In the following, we are going to describe the optical components used by Alice,
i.e. the laser, the modulators and finally the attenuators needed to go to the quantum
regime.
4.1.2
The laser
The optical source used to create the train of WCPs is a CW laser. In the specific, we
used a COBRITE-DX1 laser in the telecommunication c-band8 at 1550 nm, shown
in figure 4.5. Its main characteristics are the very narrow linewidth9 of less than 100
MHz, and the fact that the emitted light beam wavelength can be tuned with a fine
tune step size of 1 MHz [51]. This last features makes it perfect for our purposes: in
fact, at receiver side Bob has to use an interferometer and to have perfect alignment
we tune the light wavelength. The output power can range from 6 to 16 dBm, and
we set it at the maximum value, in order to have a better modulation of the optical
signal before going to the quantum regime.
6a list of these recursive equations for various r values is given in [50].
7a PRBS-13 would have a repetition rate of approximately 73 MHz, a too small value.
8the c-band covers the wavelengths ranging from 1530 to 1565 nm.
9the optical linewidth of a laser is a measure of its spectral coherence.
==PAGE:69==
4.1 Alice
57
Figure 4.5: Laser used by Alice to realize the train of WCPs [51].
The laser used to create the optical synchronization signal for the experiment
described in section 5.2.2 is an analogous COBRITE laser emitting in the telecom-
munication l-band10 at 1610 nm.
4.1.3
The intensity and phase modulators
The IM and the PM used to carve pulses and to modulate them in the time and phase
domains take advantage of the electro-optic effect of the Lithium Niobate crystal [35].
The crystal is used as a waveguide for the light and its refractive index can be changed
by applying voltage across it. Changes in the refractive index of a waveguide where
light is propagating translate into light phase shifts, hence a PM can be produced by
applying an electric field to such a crystal. Amplitude modulation is instead obtained
through a Mach-Zender interferometric structure11 made of Lithium Niobate, where
the voltage can be applied in one of the two arms. When no voltage is applied, the
light has the same delay in both arms and hence constructive interference happens
at the output. With increasing voltage, the delay in one arm becomes different from
the one in the other arm, and when the two light beams recombine the interference
is no longer fully constructive, leading to a reduced transmitted intensity. Complete
disruptive interference can be achieved imposing a π phase shift on one arm, which
translate into no transmitted light. For both IMs and PMs, the voltage required to
obtain a π phase shift is called Vπ.
Lithium Niobate is a uniaxial medium, i.e. its refractive index is not the same
in every direction: nx = ny = no and nz = ne. Moreover, its response to an external
applied electric field is not uniform and depends on the relative orientation of the
crystal and the electric field. Given a crystal, the external electric field should be
applied in a specific direction which happens to be the ˆz direction. Furthermore, to
exploit the electro-optic effect at its maximum, light should propagate along direction
10the l-band covers the wavelengths ranging from 1565 to 1625 nm.
11a Mach-Zender interferometer consists of a structure splitting the light into two possible paths
(also called arms) of equal length, after which the light is recombined.
==PAGE:70==
58
4 Experimental tools
ˆx and be polarized along direction ˆz. In fact, the refractive index change induced by
the ˆz directed external electric field is much stronger in the ˆz direction than in the ˆy
direction. We can express this with the following equations:
n′
y = no −1
2n3
or13Ez
n′
z = ne −1
2n3
er33Ez,
(4.1)
where Ez is the electric field applied in the ˆz direction, n′
y and n′
z are the refractive
indexes obtained in the ˆy and ˆz direction respectively, and r13 and r33 are coefficients
representing the effects of the external field on the refractive index.
For Lithium
Niobate we have r33 ≫r13.
Therefore, assuming a lightwave ˆx-propagating and ˆz-polarized of wavelength λ
in a crystal of length l and height e, the imposed phase shift ∆ϕ is:
∆ϕ = 2π
λ (ne −n′
z)l = π
λn3
er33Ezl.
(4.2)
We can then express it as a function of the applied voltage V = Eze and obtain:
∆ϕ = π
λn3
er33V l
e.
(4.3)
From this we can compute the voltage Vπ required for a π phase shift:
Vπ =
λ
n3er33
e
l ,
(4.4)
and we can describe the phase shift as:
∆ϕ = π V
Vπ
.
(4.5)
Concerning the IM, if the Mach-Zender interferometer is balanced, the output
optical power will be of the type:
Pout = Pin cos2 (π V
2Vπ
).
(4.6)
From this equation we can see that, applying a voltage of the type V = Vbias + V (t),
where V (t) is a pulsed signal with Vmax −Vmin = Vπ and Vbias is the bias voltage used
to have Pout(Vbias + Vmin) ≈Pout,min and Pout(Vbias + Vmax) ≈Pout,max, we can span
the maximum extinction ratio12 of the modulator.
The actual devices used by Alice are: an IM by iXblue shown in figure 4.6a, with
typically 2.7 dB of insertion loss13, Vπ = 5.5 V and extinction ratio of er = 22 dB [52];
12the extinction ratio is computed as the maximum output power over the minimum.
13the insertion loss is the loss experienced by the optical signal at the output of the device.
==PAGE:71==
4.1 Alice
59
and a PM by Sumitomo Osaka Cement shown in figure 4.6b, with less than 5 dB
of insertion loss and Vπ = 6 V14. The optical pulse carved by the IM is shown in
figure 4.7, exhibiting a FWHM of approximately 200 ps. To guarantee that the light
enters the modulators with the correct polarization, a polarization controller, shown
in figure 4.8, is put at the input of each of the two modulators. Moreover, we had to
ensure that the phase modulation was correctly aligned with the pulse train, in the
sense that each starting point of phase bit-slot had to be aligned with the beginning
of each sub-block in the pulse train. To provide this, we put an optical delay line,
shown in figure 4.9, in between the two modulators, so that we could adjust the
relative timing between the two modulations.
In the experiment where the synchronization was modulated into an optical signal,
the IM used to create the CC is by Sumitomo Osaka Cement, as shown in figure 4.6c,
and it exhibits an insertion loss of less than 6 dB and a Vπ = 5.5 V [53]. Lastly, in the
final experiment, the IM is substituted with two cascaded IMs by Corning, shown in
figure 4.6d. The first is for modulations up to 20 Gb/s, while the second can go up
to 40 Gb/s, both of them have Vπ = 5.5 V, and in the cascaded configuration they
offer an extinction ratio of approximately 50 dB14.
Concerning the IMs, the extinction ratio parameters that we just listed are referred
to the ideal case of a driving signal exactly spanning Vπ. However, with the available
electrical amplifiers we could not reach the required Vπ value in the amplitude pattern
peak-to-peak voltage.
Therefore, in all our experiments, the actual pulse carving
extinction ratio was lower.
A final comment regards the IMs bias voltage Vbias. This had to be strictly tuned
so that to blocked pulses corresponded the minimum possible optical output power.
Moreover, Lithium Niobate response to the applied voltage slightly drifts on time,
and since the system is working in the quantum regime, these drifts translate into a
deterioration in time of the pulse carving which leads to higher error rates. Hence,
to counteract this effect, we used as bias sources power supplies as stable in time as
possible and that could be actively fine tuned during the experiments.
4.1.4
Variable optical attenuators
The last step Alice has to do is to attenuate the train of pulses to the quantum regime.
In other words, she has to attenuate the power of the optical signal such that the
mean photon number per pulse is less than one. For the DPTS protocol, it was found
that the optimal number is around µ = 0.26 photons per pulse [19].
The relationship between the average output power Pout and the mean photon
number per pulse is the following:
µ = Pout
Epf ,
(4.7)
14these parameters were measured and catalogued in the department of DTU Fotonik.
==PAGE:72==
60
4 Experimental tools
(a) IM used to carve the pulses from the CW
laser [52]. The cables carrying the bias and
the amplitude pattern electrical signal (al-
ready amplified) are visible on the bottom.
(b) PM used to impress the phase modula-
tion on the optical pulses. The amplifier for
the electrical phase pattern signal is also vis-
ible, together with the cables for its power
supply, the gain control and the electrical
driving signal.
(c) The IM [53] used to create the optical
synchronization signal.
(d) The two cascaded IMs used in the final
experiments to have a larger extinction ratio
on the pulse carving.
Figure 4.6: Modulators used by Alice to create the QC and the CC.
==PAGE:73==
4.1 Alice
61
Figure 4.7: Optical pulse carved by the IM. The obtained FWHM is of approximately
200 ps.
Figure 4.8:
Example of a polarization
controller: by moving the three paddles
the stress induced birefringence on the
fiber wrapped around the spools changes
the polarization state of the light.
Figure 4.9: Optical delay line: the length
of the free-space path can be tuned to
change the delay of the light beam.
==PAGE:74==
62
4 Experimental tools
Figure 4.10: The two black boxes are the two cascaded VOAs used by Alice to
attenuate the optical signal down to -77 dBm.
where Ep = hc/λ is the photon energy, h ≈6.626 × 10−34 Js is the Planck constant,
c ≈2.998 × 108 m/s is the speed of light in vacuum, λ = 1550 nm is the optical signal
wavelength, and f is the frequency of the pulses which for the DPTS is the average
pulse frequency f = ν/2 ≈595 MHz. With these values, it can be seen that µ = 0.26
can be reached with an output power of approximately Pout ≈20 pW corresponding
to Pout = −77 dBm.
To reach this value, Alice uses two cascaded VOAs, shown in figure 4.10. It is
important that this value remains stable e does not drift, so we included in the setup
a 10 dB Beam Splitter (BS): such a BS is unbalanced, and divides the incoming light
into two outputs that differs of approximately 10 dB in the respective output powers.
Therefore, we put a sensitive power meter on the most powerful output to monitor the
power on the other output, calibrated on the power difference. This second output is
finally the QC, and Alice sends it towards Bob through a fiber-link.
Finally, to multiplex the synchronization optical signal into the same fiber where
the QC is sent, a simple balanced coupler is used, with an insertion loss of approxi-
mately 3 dB.
At this point, Alice generated and modulated a train of WCPs which she sends to
Bob through a fiber link. To realize the link we used spans of 10 and 40 km of LEAF
Single Mode Fiber (SMF) [54]. The channel lengths used in the experiments are 10
km, 50 km, 90 km, 130 km, 170 km and 210 km. We measured the overall channel
loss for each of these link distances and we obtained 3 dB, 11.5 dB, 20 dB, 28.5 dB,
37 dB and 45.5 dB of losses respectively, obtaining an average attenuation value of
0.22 dB/km.
In the next section, we are going to describe Bob’s setup configuration, consisting
of a DLI, two SPDs and the TT for the electrical control part.
==PAGE:75==
4.2 Bob
63
4.2
Bob
Bob’s tasks consists of:
• receiving the train of WCPs, which means he has to discriminate between 0 or
π phase difference and he has to be able to understand the time of arrival of a
pulse within its sub-block;
• receiving the synchronization signal and use it as a time reference;
• do the sifting15 and evaluate the errors between his and Alice’s Sifted Keys.
In the next paragraph we briefly explain how we separated the QC from the optical
synchronization signal in the experiment explained in section 5.2.2. Afterwards we
will move to the actual quantum receiving part and error evaluation.
OPTICAL SYNCHRONIZATION
As discussed, the synchronization can either be an electrical signal or an optical signal
multiplexed with the QC. In the former case, the signal is directly sent to the TT,
while in the latter, Bob needs to use a WDM filter to separate it from the QC. The
actual filter used is shown in figure 4.11 and it features very low insertion loss values
of less than 1 dB in both outputs which cover the bandwidths of 1500-1564 nm for
the c-band and 1570-1610 nm for the l-band [55]. Thereafter, Bob can use an APD
to receive the optical CC. The one actually used is shown in figure 4.13 and is from
ThorLabs [56]. The output of the APD is the converted electrical signal, which will
be sent to the TT. In this configuration, we found that the QC after demultiplexing
had still some leakage power coming from the CC. Hence, we used a second filter with
a narrow 3dB-bandwidth of 0.8 nm and a large extinction ratio of 80 dB to further
clean the quantum signal, at the cost of 6 dB of insertion loss16. Once the QC is
separated, Bob can send it to the DLI to infer the phase modulation.
4.2.1
The free-space interferometer
The basic DLI structure at Bob side is shown in figure 4.14. The input light beam,
which is composed of a train of WCPs with average repetition rate ν/2, is divided
in two by a first BS, called BS1 in figure 4.14. Ideally, the BS is independent of the
light polarization and transmits half of the electromagnetic field while reflecting the
other half. Then, the two obtained light beams take two different paths, which differ
in length such that the time delay is T = ν/2. This means that when a pulse from
the light beam on the short path arrives at the second BS, called BS2 in figure 4.14,
15we recall that the sifting in the DPTS protocol corresponds to discards the clicks that are due
to decoy and transition sequences, while in the DPS every click counted by Bob contribute to the
Sifted Key, since there are no decoy sequences.
16these parameters were measured and catalogued in the department of DTU Fotonik.
==PAGE:76==
64
4 Experimental tools
Figure 4.11: The WDM fil-
ter used by Bob to demul-
tiplex the two signals [55].
The input fiber is the black
one, carrying both the c-
band and the l-band. The
two outputs are the two
white fibers:
on the left
the one carrying the l-
band and on the right the
one for the c-band.
Figure 4.12:
The narrow
pass-band filter used by
Bob to further reduce the
leakage of the CC on the
demultiplexed QC.
Figure 4.13: The InGaAs
APD by ThorLabs used
by Bob to receive the op-
tical synchronization sig-
nal [56].
it interferes with its preceding pulse, coming from the long path. On the long path,
two mirrors are present, called MIRROR1 and MIRROR2 in the figure 4.14, which
are needed to redirect the light beam towards the second BS; these ideally reflects all
the electromagnetic field, which thus does not suffer any losses.
Mathematically, we can express the two outputs optical power as a function of
the input electric field Ain(t) = √Pinejϕin(t) [35]:
P1(t) = 1
4 ∣Ain(t) + Ain(t −T)∣2
P2(t) = 1
4 ∣Ain(t) −Ain(t −T)∣2 .
(4.8)
Since Ain(t −T) = √Pinejϕin(t−T ) represents the pulse that was sent by Alice before
the one represented by Ain(t), we know that the two phases are either equal or differ
of a π shift. Hence we can write:
P1(t) = 1
2Pin (1 + cos(∆ϕ))
P2(t) = 1
2Pin (1 −cos(∆ϕ)),
(4.9)
where ∆ϕ = ϕ(t) −ϕ(t −T) is the phase difference of two consecutive pulses and can
either be 0 or π. Equations (4.9) show that with a 0 phase difference we have fully
constructive interference on the first output and disruptive interference on the second,
whereas with π phase shift the opposite happens.
==PAGE:77==
4.2 Bob
65
BS1
BS2
MIRROR1
MIRROR2
INPUT
OUTPUT1
OUTPUT2
Figure 4.14: Scheme of a DLI. The input
is divided into two by a first BS. The two
obtained light beams take different paths
that have different lengths.
The delay
introduced in the long arm is T = ν/2.
With a second BS the two are recombined
and when the phase difference is 0 there
is fully constructive interference in one
output while for π phase difference the
constructive interference is on the other
output.
Figure 4.15:
Picture of the free-space
DLI implemented at Bob side. The only
difference with the scheme shown in fig-
ure 4.14 is the presence of a free-space
attenuator in the short arm, to balance
the power of the two light beams at the
second BS. The input fiber is shown on
the bottom, while the two outputs are
on the top and on the left margin of the
picture.
In practice, the fully constructive and disruptive result is hard to obtain: at the
input of the second BS the two light beams should have exactly the same power
and a perfect phase shift of 0 or π. The last condition requires a perfect difference
in the length of the two arms of the DLI. This problem can be solved either by
perfectly tuning the length of the long arm of the DLI, or by fine tuning the CW
laser wavelength. We used this second approach, since adjusting the long arm of the
interferometer could easily dis-align it while for changing the emitted wavelength we
simply used the laser computer interface.
Our physical implementation of the DLI is the free-space interferometer shown in
figure 4.15. The practical differences with the ideal model are the following:
• the couplings between fiber and free-space at the input and in the opposite
direction at the two outputs are lossy;
• the two BSs are not completely polarization independent;
• the mirrors are also slightly lossy;
• the alignment is not perfect.
==PAGE:78==
66
4 Experimental tools
Figure 4.16: Monitored visibility of the DLI for a period of approximately 10 minutes,
and average visibility of 97%. The experimental points were taken using a train of
WCPs that were not modulated in phase domain meaning that the phase difference
among consecutive pulses is 0. The detection was made in a back to back configuration
and with a very low mean photon number per pulse, so that the detectors were not
in a saturation regime.
We solved the problem of the polarization dependence by inserting a polarization
controller just before the input of the DLI. The overall insertion loss, including the
losses due to the polarization controller, was measured to be around LBOB = 8 dB.
Moreover, because of the not-perfect alignment of the light beam on the first BS
and because of the presence of the two lossy mirrors on the long arm, the two light
beams at the input of the second BS had different powers. This problem was solved
by inserting in the short arm a free-space attenuator, visible in figure 4.15. Also the
second BS was not perfectly aligned with the two output couplers, leading to a small
difference, of less than 1 dB, in the two output powers measured when one of the
two paths is blocked. Finally, we monitored the overall visibility17 and we obtained
a value of V = 97% quite stable in time as shown in figure 4.16.
4.2.2
The single photon detectors
The two outputs of the DLI are directed to the two SPDs. These are the ID230 NIR
Photon Detector from ID Quantique [57] shown in figure 4.17, which are free-running
detectors based on InGaAs/InP avalanche photodiode to provide fast avalanche quench-
ing.
17the visibility is expressed by V = (Pmax−Pmin)/(Pmax+Pmin), where Pmax is the output power
in the constructive interference output and Pmin the output power in the disruptive interference
output.
==PAGE:79==
4.2 Bob
67
Figure 4.17: The ID Quantique ID230
SPD used by Bob to detect single pho-
tons [57].
Figure 4.18: The ID Quantique ID801
TT used by Bob to collect the detectors
clicks and the synchronization signal.
The main characteristics of SPDs are the efficiency, the dead time, the dark count
rate and the jitter. The efficiency ηd determines how many of the optical incoming
photons can be actually detected. The ID230 offers the possibility to set the efficiency
in a range that goes from 0 to 25%. It is important to note that the higher the
efficiency, the higher the dark count rate and the required dead time. We decided for
ηd = 20%. The dead time td represents the amount of time that the detector is “turned
off” after a detection event: this is needed to avoid the effect called afterpulse for which
the electron-hole pairs generated by a real photon detection determine more than a
detection event. Therefore, the longer the dead time, the smaller the afterpulse effect.
However, since during the dead time the detector is off, this parameter determines
the maximum detection rate of the system. These detectors offer the possibility to
establish the dead time from a value of 1 µs up to 100 µs, and we chose to use
td = 20 µs as a compromise. In this sense, the maximum detection rate of our system
becomes 50 MHz. With these settings choices, we define the dark count rate rdc,
which is the rate of false detection events in the sense that they are not caused by
an actual incoming photon. In other words, it represents the detector noise level. To
measure it, one can simply measure the number of detection events while the system
is off, e.g. when Alice is not sending photons. In our system, we have an average dark
count rate of rdc = 100 Hz. The final critical parameter to take into consideration is
the jitter. The jitter is the random time-error by which the detector is affected when
measuring an event; our two SPDs exhibit a slightly different value for the average
jitter, one of approximately 290 ps and the other 330 ps.
4.2.3
The time tagger and the control module
The electrical signals produced by the SPDs and the synchronization are collected by
the TT unit, which is then connected to the computer constituting Bob’s control part.
==PAGE:80==
68
4 Experimental tools
The TT we used is the ID801 Time Controller shown in figure 4.18 by ID Quantique18.
Its most important characteristic is the time resolution, which is of approximately 81
ps.
Through the computer interface, we can have access to all the detection events of
the SPDs and their relative time tags as well as the time instances the synchroniza-
tion pulses are detected. The data is then collected and analyzed with a MATLAB
program that we have developed ad hoc that computes the Quantum Bit Error Rate
(QBER). Basically, since we know the sequence that Alice is sending and we know
that it is continuously repeating itself with a frequency that corresponds to the syn-
chronization frequency, we relate each detection event from both detectors to its
previous synchronization event. Then we compute the difference between the two
time instances, and combining this information with the knowledge of which detector
fired we create Bob’s Sifted Key. Finally, we compare the entries in Bob’s Sifted Key
with the values in Alice’s Sifted Key19 and we compute the error rates. This is done
real-time: the MATLAB program gets a total of 50 thousands detection events per
time, including the synchronization events, analyzes them and displays the QBER as
well as an histogram of the detectors’ clicks over a sub-block period that shows the
two pulse shapes. We used this to monitor the alignment, and to correct possible
drifts, of the synchronization in relation to the QC.
In this chapter we described the experimental tools used to implement the DPTS
protocol. The results of the experiments will be shown and discussed in the next
chapter.
18the device is exactly the same of the one by QuTools with datasheet available at [58].
19Alice’s Sifted Key is made of those symbols from her Raw Key corresponding to time instances
in which Bob had a detection.
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER5
Results
In this chapter we are going to present the results of the experiments carried out
with the tools shown in chapter 4. Firstly (section 5.1), some preliminary test on the
system were performed by implementing the Differential Phase Shift (DPS) protocol
with a pulse repetition rate of νDP S ≈595 MHz. These tests allowed us to check the
system performance when only phase modulation was used by Alice, i.e. the system
was physically the same but conceptually easier.
Afterwards (section 5.2), we moved to the implementation of the Differential Phase
Time Shifting (DPTS) protocol with a repetition frequency of ν ≈1.2 GHz. The
behaviour of the system was studied both in the case where the Quantum Channel
(QC) was the only signal propagating into the fiber link (section 5.2.1), and in the
case where a synchronization optical signal constituting a Classical Channel (CC)
was multiplexed together with the QC into the same fiber (section 5.2.2).
Finally (section 5.3), we optimized the system performance and stability in time
thanks to a larger extinction ratio among coherent and vacuum states (non-blocked
and blocked pulses).
As a conclusion (section 5.4), we are going to give an example of how the generated
Secret Keys can be used.
5.1
Preliminary tests: the DPS
We decided to start with the analysis of the performance of a simpler system, one
in which we implemented the DPS protocol. The amplitude pattern produced by
the Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGA) is a train of pulses of repetition rate
νDP S ≈595 MHz. This is used by Alice to carve an analogous train of optical pulses,
which are then phase modulated and attenuated down to µ = 0.26 photons/pulse, in
order to obtain Weak Coherent Pulses (WCPs). We chose these values because our
purpose is to characterize the setup for the following implementation of the DPTS
protocol, but here only the phase modulation is applied disregarding the time coding.
The two figures of merit used are the Quantum Bit Error Rate (QBER) and the
Secret Key generation rate Rsk.
Experimentally, Bob evaluates the QBER by counting the number of bits that are
different in his Sifted Key with respect to Alice’s Sifted Key over the total number
of bits he received. The values obtained for different channel lengths are shown as
points and respective error bars in figure 5.1. The points represents the average values
==PAGE:82==
70
5 Results
obtained out of subsequent measurements in time, while the error bars display the
standard deviation exhibited by the results: the smaller the error bars, the more
stable the system.
In figure 5.1 we also plot with a continuous curve the simulated QBERs values,
obtained as follows. We firstly have to compute the probability of detection of the
photons sent by Alice R:
R = 1
2 [1 −e(−µηBOBt)],
(5.1)
where µ = 0.26 photons/pulse, ηBOB = ηdLBOB represents Bob’s efficiency expressed
by the detector efficiency ηd = 20% and Bob’s setup insertion losses of 8 dB LBOB =
100.8 ≈0.15, and t represents the channel losses for varying distances.
Therefore,
the average photon number per pulse after transmission and detection is represented
by the factor (µηBOBt). Equation (5.1) derives from the fact that the probability
distribution of having n photons in a pulse can be described by a Poissonian distri-
bution. Since the Single Photon Detectors (SPDs) fire whenever there is at least one
photon, the probability of detection coincides with the probability of having at least
one photon in a received pulse.
Furthermore, the overall detection probability at Bob’s side also depends on the
dark count detection probability pd = rdctw, where rdc = 100 Hz is the dark count rate
and tw = 400 ps is the acquisition window used in post-processing centered around
the pulse maximum1. Thus Bob’s total detection probability is RB,DP S:
RB,DP S = R + 2pd(1 −R).
(5.2)
Bob’s error detection probability consists of those clicks that are due to the dark
counts in the wrong detector and to the errors done by Delay Line Interferometer
(DLI). The error probability of the interferometer is defined by (1 −V )/2, where
V = 97% is its visibility. Hence the error probability is:
Rerrors = R1 −V
2
+ pd(1 −R).
(5.3)
Thus, the expression for the QBER is the following:
QBERDP S = Rerrors
RB,DP S
.
(5.4)
Finally, the dead time td = 20 µs should also be taken into account as it reduces
the maximum detection rate of the system. Since every time the detectors click they
are turned off for a time period of td, equation (5.2) rescales as follows:
Rmax,DP S = ⎛
⎝
1
1
νDP SRB,DP S + td
⎞
⎠/νDP S.
(5.5)
1to reduce the QBER, Bob discards all the detection events that happened at time instances
outside the time window tw.
==PAGE:83==
5.1 Preliminary tests: the DPS
71
Figure 5.1:
QBER for the DPS, with
µ = 0.26 photons/pulse. The points are
obtained in the experiments for differ-
ent channel lengths, whereas the contin-
uous curve shows the simulation values
obtained with equation (5.4) and where
an intrinsic error of 0.5% was added to
take into account unmodeled errors.
Figure 5.2: Secret Key generation rate
for the DPS, with µ = 0.26 photon-
s/pulse. The experimental points are ob-
tained evaluating equation (5.6) with the
values of the corresponding experimental
QBERs, while for the continuous curve
we used the simulated QBER.
If we multiply equation (5.5) by the repetition rate νDP S, we obtain the Raw Key
rate at Bob’s side.
Equation (5.4) is used to simulate the QBER curve shown in figure 5.1. Actually,
an intrinsic error of 0.5% was added, to take into account for those system’s imper-
fection that the theoretical evaluation does not consider, such as the the polarization
dependence of the interferometer.
Figure 5.1 shows a rather good match of the experimental points with the theo-
retical curve, except for the first trial at 10 km of channel length. The reason why at
this short distance the system exhibits a higher QBER value is because the SPDs are
saturating. In other words, the incoming rate of photons is larger than the maximum
rate accepted by the SPDs, defined by the dead time to be 50 MHz, because the chan-
nel losses are little; this means that a lot of errors are introduced by the detectors’
afterpulse effect. At 170 km distance, the variability in the measurements becomes
quite large, as shown by the magnitude of the error bar: this is explained by the fact
that for this channel length the system was significantly more unstable than it was
for shorter distances.
Concerning the computation of the Secret Key rate, we recall equation (3.18) from
section 3.2.3, re-writing it using the symbols just introduced:
R(DP S)
sk
= νDP SRmax,DP S(1 −h(QBERDP S) −χ(DP S)
AE
),
(5.6)
where h(⋅) is the entropy function.
==PAGE:84==
72
5 Results
The term χ(DP S)
AE
is the Holevo Bound for Eve’s information on Alice’s Key when
considering collective Beam Splitting Attacks (BSAs) [29]. In these attacks, we as-
sume Eve’s states have intensity αE = α
√
1 −t =
√
µ(1 −t) where t are the channel
losses. Defining the term γE = e−∣αE∣2 = e−µ(1−t) we can express the Holevo bound as
follows2:
χ(DP S)
AE
= 2h(1 −γ2
E
2
) −h(1 −γ4
E
2
).
(5.7)
Evaluating equation (5.6) with the experimental values of the QBER and the
values for Rmax just computed, we obtained the experimental Secret Key rate genera-
tion values shown with point markers in figure 5.2. Similarly, to obtain the simulated
curve we used the theoretical QBER computed with equation (5.4).
The agreement of the experimental points with the simulated curve is good and
shows that even at 170 km of distance we are able to generate more than 4×102 bit/s
of secure Secret Key.
These preliminary tests on the system demonstrate that the phase modulation
and detection processes are stable enough and produce the expected results in terms
of QBER and Secret Key generation rate.
5.2
DPTS implementation
We now discuss the results obtained when the DPTS protocol was implemented, with
repetition frequency ν = 1.2 GHz and µ = 0.26 photons/pulse.
Once again, the
performance of the system is evaluated by comparison of the experimental QBER
and Secret Key generation rate with the simulated theoretical curves.
In section 5.2.1, we will describe the results obtained in the case where only the
QC is sent through the fiber link, and the synchronization signal is sent electrically to
Bob. Then, in section 5.2.2 we will discuss the experiment in which we multiplexed a
CC, carrying the optical synchronization signal, with the QC into the same fiber link.
Before this, let us firstly analyze the the procedure and the theoretical equations used
to evaluate the QBER and the Secret Key generation rate, which are the same for
both experiments.
Concerning the QBER, in the DPTS protocol we can divide it into two possible
types of error: the first is the error in the time domain, while the second is in the
phase domain. Before evaluating the actual error rates, Bob discards the events that
were caused by a decoy sequence and those that happened in a transition sequence
among blocks3.
To evaluate the time error, Bob considers all the detection events from both
detectors and, disregarding the phase information, he just counts those that happened
in a slot corresponding to a pulse that was blocked by Alice. The number of erroneous
2equation (5.7) is derived and discussed in [29].
3the concepts of decoy and transition sequences are given in the theoretical analysis of the DPTS
protocol in section 3.2.3.
==PAGE:85==
5.2 DPTS implementation
73
clicks over the total number of detection events produces what we define the QBER
in the time domain.
To compute the phase error, Bob counts how many clicks, among those that
happened with the right timing, fired in the wrong detector and divides this by the
number of total detection events. This is what we define the QBER in the phase
domain.
The overall QBER is then obtained by summing the two error rates just computed.
With this analysis, we obtained the experimental QBER points shown in red (for the
case when only the QC propagating in the fiber) and in orange (for the case when
QC and CC co-propagating) in figure 5.3.
The simulated curve shown in figure 5.3 is obtained with a theoretical analysis of
the causes of the two types of errors (as done in [19]). As explained in section 3.2.3,
in the DPTS scheme Alice sends 4 types of symbols, which we called ∣0⟩, ∣1⟩, ∣2⟩
and ∣3⟩. When Bob receives a click, depending on the time of arrival and on which
detector clicks, he translates it into one of the 4 possible symbols. Assuming Bob
detected symbol ∣0⟩, we define the probability that Alice actually sent symbol ∣0⟩as
1 −e(1)
r , whereas we call e(2)
r
the probability she sent symbol ∣1⟩, e(3)
r
the probability
that she sent symbol ∣2⟩and e(4)
r
the probability she sent symbol ∣3⟩. Note that all
these probabilities must sum to 1, and therefore e(1)
r
= e(2)
r
+ e(3)
r
+ e(4)
r .
Let us now analyze the case where Alice sent ∣1⟩and Bob received ∣0⟩: the two
symbols have the same time encoding but different phase encoding, meaning that the
wrong detector fired at the right time. This could be caused by two events: either
an error while evaluating the pulses phase shift in the DLI, or a dark count event (in
the case the photon was absorbed by channel losses). Therefore, we can write:
e(2)
r
= R 1−V
2
+ pd(1 −R)
RB,DP T S
,
(5.8)
where R has the same meaning discussed in the previous section and it is expressed
by equation (5.1). RB,DP T S is the overall detection rate in the DPTS case and it is
expressed by RB,DP T S = R + 4pd(1 −R), where the factor 4 can be explained by the
fact that a dark count event can happen in both detectors in two time-slots.
We now analyze the case where Alice sent ∣2⟩and Bob received ∣0⟩: since the two
symbols have different time coding, this can only happen if the actual sent pulse is
absorbed by channel losses and a dark count event happens. The same considerations
can be made for the last case, when Alice sent the symbol ∣3⟩and Bob received ∣0⟩.
Therefore we can express both e(3)
r
and e(4)
r
as follows:
e(3)
r
= e(4)
r
= pd(1 −R)
RB,DP T S
.
(5.9)
We derived these probabilities assuming Bob detected ∣0⟩, however the results
would be the same for any other symbol. Therefore, we can say that e(2)
r
represents
==PAGE:86==
74
5 Results
the QBER in the phase domain, e(3)
r
+ e(4)
r
represents the QBER in the time domain,
and e(1)
r
= e(2)
r
+ e(3)
r
+ e(4)
r
is the overall QBER:
QBERDP T S = e(1)
r
= R 1−V
2
+ 3pd(1 −R)
RB,DP T S
.
(5.10)
For sake of precision, analogously to the DPS case in the previous section, also
here it is important to take into consideration that the maximum detection rate is
reduced by the dead time td. Thus, we actually acted in a similar way, by re-scaling
the detection probability with td and obtaining a Rmax factor for the DPTS as follows:
Rmax = ⎛
⎝
1
1
ν
2 RB,DP T S + td
⎞
⎠/ν.
(5.11)
On the other hand, in the DPTS experiments there is a difference with the DPS
case which is the time window used in the post processing that defines the dark count
probability pd. Since the DPTS has a repetition frequency twice as fast as the one of
the DPS, we decided to use a time window of tw = 200 ps for the detection process.
An example of the measured pulses shape in a sub-block period and the corresponding
window used to temporally filter the detection events are shown in figure 5.5.
The theoretical curve obtained by simulation, using equation (5.10), is shown in
figure 5.3. An intrinsic error is added in this case consisting of a 0.5% on the phase
error, the same value found for the DPS in the preliminary tests, and a 1.5% on the
time error. The latter, is the error due to the fact that when Alice should be sending
∣vac⟩states, she actually lets some light pass through; in other words, this error comes
from a not perfect pulse carving process because of a finite value of the extinction
ratio of the Intensity Modulator (IM) modulator.
To compute the Secure Key generation rate, we recall equation (3.19) from sec-
tion 3.2.3:
R(DP T S)
sk
= 2f ν
2RB,DP T S (1 −h(QBERDP T S) −χDP T S
AE
),
(5.12)
where the factor 2 comes from the fact that we are using a two-dimensional modula-
tion format, and f = pdecoy(N −1)/N is a pre-factor that takes into account only the
fraction of detections events that are not due to decoy sequences, and it also consid-
ers that the transition sequences do not carry information. In our implementation,
pdecoy = 0.9 meaning that the decoy sequences occupy 10% of the transmission time,
N = 6 is the average block length and the factor (N −1)/N indicates the average
fraction of detection that are not caused by a transition sequence. We can then ex-
press the entropy h(QBERDP T S) as a function of the error probabilities e(i)
r
with
i = 1,2,3,4 as follows:
h(QBERDP T S) = −(1 −e(1)
r )log4 (1 −e(1)
r ) −
4
∑
i=2
e(i)
r log4 (e(i)
r ).
(5.13)
==PAGE:87==
5.2 DPTS implementation
75
Hence, to compute the values of the Secure Key generation rate obtained in the
experiments, we substitute the values of the measured QBER in the time and in the
phase domains.
As concerns the Holevo bound χ(DP T S)
AE
for Eve’s information on Alice’s key in
the case of BSAs, the derivations are done in a similar way as to the case of the
DPS shown in the previous sections [19]. Again, the factor γE is used to express the
overlap of the quantum states, and the expression of the bound is as follows:
χ(0)
AE = −(1 + γ2
E)2 + (2γE)2
8
log4 [(1 + γ2
E)2 + (2γE)2
8
] −3(1 −γ2
E)2
8
log4 [(1 −γ2
E)2
8
]
−1 −γ4
E
2
log4 [1 −γ4
E
8
] + 1 −γ4
E
2
log4 [1 −γ4
E
2
] + (1 −1 −γ4
E
2
)log4 [1 −1 −γ4
E
2
].
(5.14)
Actually, on top of this attack bounded by χ(0)
AE, Eve can try to establish part
of the information shared by Alice and Bob, i.e. by only measuring the temporal
position of the neighbouring pulses, and this attack is bounded by [19]:
χ(1)
AE = 1
2 [1 −h(pE)][−(1 + 3γ2
E
4
)log4 (1 + 3γ2
E
4
) −3(1 −γ2
E
4
)log4 (1 −γ2
E
4
)
+(1 −γ2
E
2
)log4 (1 −γ2
E
2
) + (1 −1 −γ2
E
2
)log4 (1 −1 −γ2
E
2
)],
(5.15)
where pE = (N −2)/(N −1) is the probability Eve can make a conclusive measure-
ment in this second type of attack, which corresponds to the probability that the
neighbouring pulses have the same time coding (i.e. they are not from a different
block).
Thus, the complete expression for the bound on Eve’s information on the Key is
as follows:
χ(DP T S)
AE
= χ(0)
AE + (1 −χ(0)
AE)χ(1)
AE.
(5.16)
The results of evaluating equation (5.12) with the experimental QBER values are
shown as blue points (for the experiments when only the QC is sent through the fiber
link) and as light blue crosses (for the experiments when the CC was multiplexed with
the QC into the fiber) in figure 5.4. Similarly, to compute the simulated curve shown
in figure 5.4 we substituted the theoretical error probabilities in equation (5.12).
5.2.1
Electrical synchronization signal
We now discuss the results obtained in the first set of experiments, when the synchro-
nization signal was electrically sent to Bob.
Figure 5.3 shows in red the experimental points of the measured QBER for various
channel lengths and compares it with the theoretical curve obtained by simulation,
==PAGE:88==
76
5 Results
using equation (5.10).
From this figure we can notice that the system seems to
be more affected by noise and appears to be less stable than in the case of the
DPS implementation. The experimental values obtained for the QBER are larger
than what is expected, shown by the difference of the experimental points with the
simulated continuous curve. We attribute this to the fact that the considered intrinsic
error of 2% is not enough for this specific system implementation, and the errors are
due to setup imperfection that were not foreseen. We identified these to be the noise
floor level coming from the laser: during the pulse carving process, Alice should be
able to block all the light coming from the Continuous Wave (CW) laser except for
those time instances in which she sends pulses. However, the extinction ratio of the
IM used is not enough. The result is that Alice can send photons also outside the
pulse shape and possibly in the wrong time slots with a significant larger probability
than what we initially expected. We will show in the final section of this chapter how
the system performance can be optimized and that imperfect pulse carving is indeed
responsible for the increased QBER.
A different comment is on the large value the QBER takes at 10 km distance:
similarly to what happened with the DPS, the incoming photon rate at the detectors
after 10 km is larger than their maximum detection rate of 50 MHz, which implies
that the detectors are working in a saturation regime and suffer from the afterpulse
effect which causes the rise in the QBER.
Nevertheless, the overall system performance is not to undervalue, and this is
shown by the blue points representing the achieved Secret Key generation rates in
figure 5.4. Even though the error rates are large, we are still able to generate Secure
Keys at a rate larger than 10 Kb/s up to 90 km distance, of approximately 5 Kb/s
at 130 km distance, and at 170 km we reach approximately 1 Kb/s.
5.2.2
Multiplexing of the optical synchronization signal
We now illustrate the results obtained when the electrical synchronization signal
produced by the FPGA is modulated into an optical classical signal to create what
we called a CC. This is then multiplexed together with the QC in the same fiber link.
At receiver side, we used a first filter to de-multiplex the two channels and a second
filter to further reduce the leakage of the CC on the QC. The synchronization signal
is received using a simple Avalanche PhotoDiode (APD), and the obtained electrical
signal is sent to the TT. We implemented this experiment for two channel lengths:
10 km and 90 km distance. We could not reach greater distances because the losses
in the CC were so high as to irreversibly degrade the optical Signal to Noise Ratio
(SNR)4.
The interest in this experiment comes from the fact that it gets the implementation
of a DPTS Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) system closer to what could be a
4the optical power in the CC at the fiber link input was carefully tuned to approximately -27
dBm, a value for which at detector side the two filters were able to suppress almost all leakage effects
on the QC.
==PAGE:89==
5.2 DPTS implementation
77
Figure 5.3: QBER for the DPTS, with
µ = 0.26 photons/pulse. The red points
are obtained in the experiments when
only the QC is sent into the fiber,
whereas the orange crosses represent the
measured QBERs when the CC is multi-
plexed in the same fiber link. The con-
tinuous curve plots the theoretical value
obtained with equation (5.10), where an
intrinsic error of 2% was added to ac-
count for unmodeled polarization, jitter
and noise errors.
Figure 5.4: Secret Key generation rate
for the DPTS, with µ = 0.26 photon-
s/pulse.
The experimental blue points
are obtained with equation (5.6) using
the values of the corresponding QBERs
when only the QC is sent through the
fiber, while the light blue crosses are ob-
tained using the QBERs when the CC is
multiplexed into the fiber. The continu-
ous curve is obtained with the simulated
QBER values.
realistic implementation.
The analysis of the system was carried out in the same way as in the previous
experiment: the measured QBERs are then shown as orange crosses in figure 5.3, and
the Secret Key generation rates computed from the respective QBER values using
equation (5.12), are shown as light blue crosses in figure 5.4.
What we expected was a higher QBER and a corresponding lower Secret Key
generation rate, due to two main reasons:
• the losses we added in the QC with the two filtering steps;
• The lower precision of the synchronization due to the degradation of the optical
signal while propagating in the fiber.
The obtained results at 90 km distance confirmed our expectation: the measured
QBER increased from a value of approximately 6% to almost 10%, leading to a lower
Secret Key generation rate. Nevertheless, we are still able to generate more than 10
Kb/s of secure key.
At 10 km distance, the QBER in this configuration and the one measured when
only the QC was present in the fiber link are approximately the same. This is once
==PAGE:90==
78
5 Results
(a) Detection events from the first SPD.
(b) Detection events from the second SPD.
Figure 5.5: Histograms of the detection events in the two detectors over a sub-block
period, approximately of duration 1.68 ns, taken after 50 km of channel length. The
bins width is of 82 ps and corresponds to the resolution of the Time Tagger (TT).
The two pulse shapes in each histogram are produced by the time modulation, and
the dark grey vertical lines defines the boundaries of the two time windows, each of
duration 200 ps. The pulse shape is larger than the 200 ps Full Width Half Maximum
(FWHM) of the optical pulse shown figure 4.7 because of the temporal broadening
due to the fiber and a synchronization signal which is not perfect, but the main
broadening effect comes from the detectors jitter. The noise level is also high, and
this is due to imperfections in the pulse carving process.
more explained by the relative short distance of the channel, which means that the
system is working very close to the detectors’ saturation regime. This leads to the
same large error rate obtained in the previous experiment.
5.3
Optimization of the system
In this section, we discuss the motivations and show the results of the final experiment.
Even though the system we have described so far performs reasonably well and we are
able to successfully achieve high Secret Key generation rates up to 170 km distance,
the large error bars shown in figure 5.3 and the fact that the measured error rates are
higher than expected reveal that the system is not perfectly stable and suggest the
possibility for optimization.
We focused our attention on the time error rate of the system, since the larger
values of the QBER were mainly due to a time error rate of around 3 or 4%, instead
of the expected 1.5-2%5. We then noticed that the pulses shape exhibited a high floor
5recalling that we assumed an intrinsic error on the QBER in the time domain of 1.5% and that
the dark count probability is quite low
==PAGE:91==
5.3 Optimization of the system
79
(a) Detection events from the first SPD for
the optimized system case.
(b) Detection events from the second SPD
for the optimized system case.
Figure 5.6: Histograms of the detection events in the two detectors over a sub-block
period, approximately of duration 1.68 ns, taken after 50 km of channel length in
the experiments where two cascaded IMs are used for pulse carving. The bins width
is of 82 ps and corresponds to the resolution of the TT. The two pulse shapes in
each histogram are produced by the time modulation, and the dark grey vertical
lines defines the boundaries of the two time windows, each of duration 200 ps. When
compared to figure 5.5, we can notice a lower number of counts outside the pulse
shapes and a higher number of counts inside the pulse shapes.
Figure 5.7: QBER for the DPTS, with
µ = 0.26 photons/pulse and two cascaded
IMs. The red points are the values mea-
sured in the experiments, and the contin-
uous curve is the simulation computed
with equation (5.10), where an intrinsic
error of 2% was added to take into ac-
count polarization, jitter and noise er-
rors.
Figure 5.8: Secret Key generation rate
for the DPTS, with µ = 0.26 photon-
s/pulse and two cascaded IMs. The ex-
perimental blue points are obtained with
equation (5.6) inserting the values of the
corresponding QBERs, and the continu-
ous curve is obtained using the simulated
QBER.
==PAGE:92==
80
5 Results
Figure 5.9: Measured QBER of the optimized system implementing the DPTS pro-
tocol with two cascaded IMs for pulse carving and time modulation. The data ac-
quisition was carried out for more than 30 minutes and the system performances are
stable during the overall interval.
value: in the example shown in figure 5.5 we have a considerable number of detections
also in between the two pulses. As discussed, we identified the source of this noise to
be light from the laser source not perfectly blocked in the pulse carving process. In
other words, the extinction ratio we reached was not good enough.
The solution we found for this issue was to use two cascaded IMs for the pulse
carving, and we used this technique to optimize the system when only the QC was
propagated in the fiber link. The pulse shapes that we obtained in this case are shown
in figure 5.6. Even if at first glance it may seems that the difference with the pulses
shown in figure 5.5 is not significant, we highlight how the number of counted events
in between the two pulses is reduced and correspondingly the number of detected
events inside the pulse shape is higher. This happens because, to check the average
mean photon number per pulse, we monitor the average power in the QC: when we
lower the noise level, we increase the number of photons that are sent with the correct
timing.
We run the experiment for various channel lengths and the results are shown in
figure 5.7 and figure 5.8. The analysis of the results is carried out using the same
equations as in the previous experiments, equation (5.10) for the QBER and equation
(5.12) for the Secret Key rate generation. As can be seen, the error rates experienced
by the system are now modelled very well by the theoretical curve (which is the same
shown in figure 5.4) showing a great enhancement of the system behaviour. Moreover,
the error bars on the QBER are quite small also at 170 km distance, and we were able
to measure incoming photons also at 210 km with a significant lower QBER than in
the previous experiments (where it reached a value of 35% and was not even shown).
The overall considerable improvement was due, as expected, to a lower error rate in
the time domain that reached an average of approximately 1.75% for distances up to
==PAGE:93==
5.4 Example: message encryption and decryption
81
130 km, and was around 2.5% at 170 km. These positive results in the QBER are
mirrored on the other side by the higher and more stable secure key rates achieved.
Concerning stability, figure 5.9 shows the time evolution over more than 30 minutes
of operation of this optimized system at a channel length of 50 km. As can be seen,
the measured QBER is around an average value of 4.17% and the variability is also
quite small in magnitude.
5.4
Example: message encryption and
decryption
To conclude our discussion, an example of how the obtained Secret Keys can be used
is shown in figure 5.10: it illustrates the encryption-decryption process, of a picture
of Nyhavn (in Copenhagen, Denmark), using the unconditionally secure One-Time
Pad algorithm with an underlying QKD protocol.
Figure 5.10a shows the picture Alice wants to send to Bob, and figure 5.10b shows
how the same picture appears after encoding: this is the message Alice will send
through the CC. Eve will not be able to understand it unless she possesses the key
used by Alice, since it carries no information. Figures 5.10c and 5.10d show the picture
that Bob obtains after decryption with a key affected by 4% of errors, in the former,
and by using the correct key, in the latter. The communication is unconditionally
secure if to exchange the keys Alice and Bob use a QKD protocol, such as the DPTS.
Summarizing, in this chapter we illustrated the results of three experiments on
the QKD DPTS protocol: a first one where the QC was sent alone in the fiber
link, a second one where a CC carrying the synchronization signal was multiplexed
together with the train of WCPs and a third one in which the system performance
was optimized by using an improved method for pulse carving. Some preliminary
tests are also shown, in which we basically realized the DPS protocol with the same
parameters that were used in the following DPTS implementations.
==PAGE:94==
82
5 Results
(a) Picture of Nyhavn Alice wants to send
to Bob with a secure communication.
(b) The same picture after encoding with a
random key (generated for example with the
DPTS protocol), using the One-Time Pad
algorithm.
(c) Picture decoded by Bob, using a key with
4% of erroneous bits (e.g. a Sifted Key not
yet corrected).
(d) Picture decoded by Bob with the Secret
Key key (e.g. obtained correcting the Sifted
Key).
Figure 5.10: Picture of Nyhavn in Copenhagen, Denmark, through the process of
encryption and decryption of the One-Time Pad algorithm using shared keys created
with a QKD protocol such as the DPTS.
==PAGE:95==
CHAPTER6
Conclusions
This thesis goal was the implementation of a Quantum Key Distribution (QKD)
complete system, from transmitter to receiver, to experimentally demonstrate the
Differential Phase Time Shifting (DPTS) scheme [19].
The DPTS is part of the Distributed Phase Reference (DPR) protocols, envisaged
for fiber-based links and the use of Weak Coherent Pulses (WCPs) as quantum signal.
In the DPTS, the pulses of mean photon number per pulse µ < 1 are modulated by
Alice, the transmitter, both in the time and in the phase domain, making the DPTS
the first High Dimensional-Quantum Key Distribution (HD-QKD) protocol belonging
to the DPR group. This two-dimensional modulation scheme works as follows:
• Alice has a train of WCPs at a certain repetition frequency ν;
• She impresses a phase modulation on pairs of WCPs, called sub-blocks, which
means that the phase encoding works at half the speed ν/2;
• She blocks one pulse per sub-block.
• She sends the obtained WCPs train through the fiber link towards Bob;
• Bob receives the pulses and with a Delay Line Interferometer (DLI) to discrim-
inate the phase difference between consecutive pulses;
• He receives the photons at the two outputs of the DLI with two Single Photon
Detector (SPD) and he records the time of arrival of the pulses.
Thereafter, the sifting procedure consists in Bob telling Alice in which sub-blocks he
had a detection event, and Alice replies by saying which of Bob’s detection events
was caused by a decoy sequence or by a transition sequence. The former is a sequence
where no pulse is blocked by Alice, and it is needed to enhance security. The latter
happens at the boundaries of blocks: a block is defined as a sequence of symbols
with the same time coding and when Alice goes from one block to another that has a
different time coding, at Bob side there is no interference and the possible clicks are
random.
This protocol is actually a fusion of the Differential Phase Shift (DPS) [43] and the
Coherent One-Way (COW) [8] protocols. These are DPR schemes where we modulate
only the phase, for the former, and the time, for the latter, of a train of WCPs.
==PAGE:96==
84
6 Conclusions
It was theoretically shown in [19] that the performance of the DPTS in terms of
achievable Secret Key rate in realistic scenarios surpasses those obtained with the
other two DPR protocols.
The experimental setup actually realized during this thesis work was illustrated
in chapter 4. It mainly consists of a Continuous Wave (CW) laser at 1550 nm, from
which Alice carves the pulses with an Intensity Modulator (IM). Then, she impress
a phase shift of 0 or π using a Phase Modulator (PM), attenuates the pulses to the
quantum regime to reach the desired µ = 0.26 photons/pulse and sends the obtained
Quantum Channel (QC) to Bob through the fiber link. Alice’s electrical control part
consists of a Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGA) that outputs the amplitude
pattern, the phase pattern and a synchronization signal.
At receiver side, Bob receives the train of WCPs with a free-space DLI and directs
the two outputs to two SPDs. A Time Tagger (TT) unit then collects the detection
events and the synchronization signal and sends them to a computer, where the data
is analyzed with an ad hoc MATLAB program we wrote.
The synchronization signal can either be sent electrically to Bob, or it can be
modulated into an optical signal to constitute the Classical Channel (CC). In this case,
the CC, which is at 1610 nm, is multiplexed with the QC so that they co-propagate in
the same fiber link. Bob has then to use a Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM)
filter to separate the two channels. Moreover, he puts a second very narrow pass-band
filter on the QC to further reduce the leakage power from the CC.
The experiments that we carried out are:
• implementation of the simpler DPS protocol as a preliminary test to check the
system performance;
• Realization of the DPTS scheme up to 170 km when only the QC was prop-
agating in the fiber, and up to 90 km when the CC was multiplexed into the
fiber;
• Optimization of the performance with a more sophisticated pulse carving pro-
cess (based on two cascaded IMs) to lower the error rates in the time domain.
The discussion of the results is proposed in chapter 5. We briefly recall here that
the figure of merits used are the Quantum Bit Error Rate (QBER) and the Secret Key
generation rate. The experimental measured values are compared with the simulated
curves that show the expected results.
The preliminary tests confirmed us that the system was working, and that the
error rates (which are only on the phase domain, since we are implementing the DPS)
can be modelled adding an intrinsic error of 0.5% to the simulation curve. A general
observation that is valid for all experiments, is that at 10 km distance, the detectors
are saturating and this leads to a higher QBER due to the afterpulse effect.
The first implementation of the DPTS reveals that the system is not very stable
in time and that the QBER values are a bit larger than expected (since they are
==PAGE:97==
6 Conclusions
85
higher than the simulated values with an intrinsic error of 2%). We are however able
to extract a Secret Key even at 170 km distance.
The second implementation required the co-propagating CC. We expected in this
case a deterioration of the QBER for the higher insertion losses due to the filters
in the QC and for the possible degradation of the optical synchronization signal.
Indeed, the obtain QBER at 90 km distance is higher than in the case of an electrical
synchronization signal. Nevertheless, we are still able to extract a Secret Key rate
larger than 10 Kb/s.
Finally, we focused on the optimization of the system (when only the QC was sent
into the fiber link). We substituted the IM used for pulse carving with two cascaded
IMs to exploit a larger extinction ratio value. With this new element in the system,
we were able to optimize the overall performance both in terms of measured QBER
and of exctractable Secret Key rate. Moreover, the stability of the system was greatly
improved: we show a very stable behaviour at 50 km distance, where the measured
QBER varies very little around its average value of approximately 4.17%.
A further future improvement that can be made is to integrate our free-space DLI
on a chip. This would reduce the insertion losses at Bob’s side, allowing for detection
of pulses and key creation at longer distance.
Higher stability in time is another
peculiarity in favour of a chip integrated interferometer.
A very interesting experimental future work is to make a comparison of the mea-
sured data obtained when implementing the DPTS with the realizations of the DPS
and the COW schemes, to experimentally demonstrate that the DPTS allows for
higher Secret Key rates.
Finally, there is a possibility of collaboration with Bristol University to implement
a fully integrated DPTS system and to use the Superconductive Nanowire Single
Photon Detectors (SNSPDs) that they have available. The combination of these two
features, would allow the system to reach significantly high Secret Key rates and quite
long channel distances.
==PAGE:98==
86
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
[1]
Miloslav Dušek, Norbert Lütkenhaus, and Martin Hendrych. “Quantum cryp-
tography”. In: Progress in Optics 49 (2006), pages 381–454.
[2]
Nicolas Gisin et al. “Quantum cryptography”. In: Rev. Mod. Phys. 74 (1 March
2002), pages 145–195. doi: 10.1103/RevModPhys.74.145.
[3]
P. W. Shor. “Algorithms for quantum computation: discrete logarithms and
factoring”. In: Proceedings 35th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
Science (1994), pages 124–134. doi: 10.1109/SFCS.1994.365700.
[4]
G. S. Vernam. “Cipher Printing Telegraph Systems: For Secret Wire and Radio
Telegraphic Communications”. In: Transactions of the American Institute of
Electrical Engineers 45 (1926), pages 295–301. doi: 10.1109/T-AIEE.1926.
5061224.
[5]
Valerio Scarani et al. “The security of practical quantum key distribution”.
In: Reviews of Modern Physics 81.3 (2009), pages 1301–1350. doi: 10.1103/
RevModPhys.81.1301.
[6]
Charles H. Bennett and Gilles Brassard. “Quantum Cryptography: Public Key
Distribution, and Coin-Tossing”. In: Proc. 1984 IEEE International Conference
on Computers, Systems, and Signal Processing (1984), pages 175–179. doi: 10.
1016/j.tcs.2011.08.039.
[7]
Kyo Inoue, Edo Waks, and Yoshihisa Yamamoto. “Differential phase shift quan-
tum key distribution”. In: Physical Review Letters 89.3 (2002), pages 379021–
379023. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.89.037902.
[8]
Damien Stucki et al. “Fast and simple one-way quantum key distribution”. In:
Applied Physics Letters 87.19 (2005), pages 1–3. doi: 10.1063/1.2126792.
[9]
Nino Walenta et al. “A fast and versatile quantum key distribution system
with hardware key distillation and wavelength multiplexing”. In: New Journal
of Physics 16.1 (2014), page 013047.
[10]
Boris Korzh et al. “Provably Secure and Practical Quantum Key Distribution
over 307 km of Optical Fibre”. In: 1 (2014). doi: 10.1038/nphoton.2014.327.
[11]
Hua-Lei Yin et al. “Measurement-device-independent quantum key distribu-
tion over a 404 km optical fiber”. In: Physical Review Letters 117.19 (2016),
page 190501.
==PAGE:100==
88
Bibliography
[12]
Philip Sibson et al. “Chip-based quantum key distribution”. In: Nature Com-
munications 8 (2017), page 13984.
[13]
Tian Zhong et al. “Photon-efficient quantum key distribution using time–energy
entanglement with high-dimensional encoding”. In: New Journal of Physics 17.2
(2015), page 022002.
[14]
Nicolas J. Cerf et al. “Security of quantum key distribution using d-level sys-
tems”. In: Physical Review Letters 88.12 (2002), page 127902.
[15]
H. Bechmann-Pasquinucci and Wolfgang Tittel. “Quantum cryptography using
larger alphabets”. In: Physical Review A 61.6 (2000), page 062308.
[16]
Mohammad Mirhosseini et al. “High-dimensional quantum cryptography with
twisted light”. In: New Journal of Physics 17.3 (2015), page 033033.
[17]
Mhlambululi Mafu et al. “Higher-dimensional orbital-angular-momentum-based
quantum key distribution with mutually unbiased bases”. In: Physical Review
A 88.3 (2013), page 032305.
[18]
Yunhong Ding et al. “High-dimensional quantum key distribution based on
multicore fiber using silicon photonic integrated circuits”. In: npj Quantum In-
formation (2017). doi: 10.1038/s41534-017-0026-2.
[19]
Davide Bacco et al. “Two-dimensional distributed-phase-reference protocol for
quantum key distribution”. In: Nature Publishing Group (2016), pages 1–7. doi:
10.1038/srep36756.
[20]
Auguste Kerckhoffs. La cryptographie militaire, ou, Des chiffres usités en temps
de guerre: avec un nouveau procédé de déchiffrement applicable aux systèmes à
double clef. Librairie militaire de L. Baudoin, 1883.
[21]
Claude E. Shannon. “Communication theory of secrecy systems”. In: Bell Labs
Technical Journal 28.4 (1949), pages 656–715.
[22]
Whitfield Diffie and Martin E. Hellman. “New Directions in Cryptography”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 22.6 (1976), pages 644–654. doi:
10.1109/TIT.1976.1055638.
[23]
R. L. Rivest, A. Shamir, and L. Adleman. “A method for obtaining digital
signatures and public-key cryptosystems”. In: Communications of the ACM 21.2
(1978), pages 120–126. doi: 10.1145/359340.359342.
[24]
Michael A. Nielsen and Isaac L. Chuang. “Quantum Computation and Quantum
Information”. In: Contemporary Physics 52.6 (2000), page 410. doi: 10.1119/
1.1463744.
[25]
Jun John Sakurai. Modern Quantum Mechanics. Edited by San Fu Tuan. Red-
wood City, CA: Addison-Wesley, 1985.
[26]
Albert Einstein, Boris Podolsky, and Nathan Rosen. “Can quantum-mechanical
description of physical reality be considered complete?” In: Physical review 47.10
(1935), page 777.
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
89
[27]
John S. Bell. On the einstein podolsky rosen paradox. 1964.
[28]
Stephen Wiesner. “Conjugate coding”. In: ACM Sigact News 15.1 (1983), pages 78–
88.
[29]
Cyril Branciard, Nicolas Gisin, and Valerio Scarani. “Upper bounds for the
security of two distributed-phase reference protocols of quantum cryptography”.
In: New Journal of Physics 10.1 (2008), pages 013–031. url: http://stacks.
iop.org/1367-2630/10/i=1/a=013031.
[30]
Artur K. Ekert. “Quantum cryptography based on Bellâs theorem”. In: Physical
Review Letters 67.6 (1991), pages 661–663. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.67.
661.
[31]
Charles H. Bennett, Gilles Brassard, and N. David Mermin. “Quantum cryptog-
raphy without Bell’s theorem”. In: Physical Review Letters 68.5 (1992), pages 557–
559. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.68.557.
[32]
Charles H. Bennett. “Quantum cryptography using any two nonorthogonal
states”. In: Physical Review Letters 68.21 (1992), pages 3121–3124. doi: 10.
1103/PhysRevLett.68.3121.
[33]
D. Bruß and C. Macchiavello. “Optimal Eavesdropping in Cryptography with
Three-Dimensional Quantum States”. In: Physical Review Letters 88.12 (2002),
page 127901. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.88.127901.
[34]
Valerio Scarani et al. “Quantum cryptography protocols robust against photon
number splitting attacks for weak laser pulses implementations”. In: 1.2 (2002),
pages 1–4. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.92.057901.
[35]
P. Agrawal Govind. “Fiber-optic communication systems”. In: John Wiley, New
York (2002).
[36]
Raul Garcia-Patron Sanchez. “Quantum Information with Optical Continuous
Variables : from Bell Tests to Key Distributions”. In: (2007), pages 1–266.
[37]
M. Hillery. “Quantum cryptography with squeezed states”. In: Physical Review
A 61.2 (2000), pages 22308–22309. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.61.022309.
[38]
T. C. Ralph. “Continuous variable quantum cryptography”. In: 1 (1999). doi:
10.1103/PhysRevA.61.010303.
[39]
M. D. Reid. “Quantum cryptography with a predetermined key, using continuous-
variable Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen correlations”. In: Physical Review A - Atomic,
Molecular, and Optical Physics 62.6 (2000), pages 062308–062301. doi: 10.
1103/PhysRevA.62.062308.
[40]
N. J. Cerf, M. Lévy, and G. van Assche. “Quantum key distribution of {G}aussian
keys with squeezed states”. In: Phys./ Rev. A 62.August (2000), page 42311. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevA.63.052311.
[41]
Frédéric Grosshans and Philippe Grangier. “Continuous variable quantum cryp-
tography using coherent states”. In: (2001). doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.88.
057902.
==PAGE:102==
90
Bibliography
[42]
Christian Weedbrook et al. “Quantum cryptography without switching”. In:
Physical Review Letters 93.17 (2004), pages 1–4. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.
93.170504.
[43]
Kyo Inoue and Toshimori Honjo. “Robustness of differential-phase-shift quan-
tum key distribution against photon-number-splitting attack”. In: Phys. Rev. A
71 (4 April 2005), page 042305. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.71.042305.
[44]
Adriana Marais, Thomas Konrad, and Francesco Petruccione. “A necessary con-
dition for the security of differential-phase-shift quantum key distribution”. In:
Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical 43.30 (2010), page 305302.
doi: 10.1088/1751-8113/43/30/305302.
[45]
Nicolas Gisin et al. “Towards practical and fast Quantum Cryptography”. In:
0100.2 (2004). doi: 10.1364/OE.19.010632.
[46]
Mhlambululi Mafu, Adriana Marais, and Francesco Petruccione. “A Necessary
Condition for the Security of Coherent-One-Way Quantum Key Distribution
Protocol”. In: Applied Mathematics & Information Sciences 8.6 (2014), page 2769.
[47]
ALTERA, Stratix V GX. https://www.altera.com/content/dam/altera-
www/global/en_US/pdfs/literature/manual/rm_svgx_si_dev_board.pdf.
Accessed: 2017-06-17.
[48]
Picosecond Pulse Labs, Model 5865 12.5 Gbs driver amplifier. http://www.
woojoohitech.com/pages/pdf/5865-SPEC-4040085.pdf. Accessed: 2017-06-
17.
[49]
SHF Communication Technologies AG, SHF 806E modulator driver. https:
//www.shf.de/wp-content/uploads/datasheets/datasheet_shf_806e.pdf.
Accessed: 2017-06-17.
[50]
Nevio Benvenuto and Giovanni Cherubini. Algorithms for communications sys-
tems and their applications. John Wiley & Sons, 2002.
[51]
ID PHOTONICS, CoBrite-DX1 laser. http : / / www . id - photonics . com /
images/stories/PDF/Data_sheet_CBDX1-x-x-xx.pdf. Accessed: 2017-06-17.
[52]
iXblue, Photline Intensity Modulator. https://photonics.ixblue.com/files/
files/pdf/Modulators/MX-LN_SERIES.pdf. Accessed: 2017-06-17.
[53]
Sumitomo Osaka Cement, T-MXH 1.5-10 ADC Intensity Modulator. http:
//www.lightwavestore.com/product_datasheet/OSC- MOD- 10Gb- 019C_
pdf1.pdf. Accessed: 2017-06-17.
[54]
CORNING, LEAF Optical Fiber. https://www.corning.com/media/worldwide/
coc/documents/Fiber/LEAF%20optical%20fiber.pdf. Accessed: 2017-06-17.
[55]
OPNETI, C/L BAND FILTER WDM. http://www.opneti.com/ProductList.
asp?SortID=5. Accessed: 2017-06-17.
[56]
ThorLabs, InGaAs APD. https://www.thorlabs.com/newgrouppage9.cfm?
objectgroup_id=4047. Accessed: 2017-06-17.
==PAGE:103==
Bibliography
91
[57]
ID Quantique, ID230 NIR Photon Detector. http://marketing.idquantique.
com/acton/attachment/11868/f-0101/1/-/-/-/-/ID230%20Datasheet.
pdf. Accessed: 2017-06-17.
[58]
QuTools, quTau plus time tagger. http://www.qutools.com/qutau-plus/.
Accessed: 2017-06-17.
==PAGE:104==
