==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Significance of higher order encod-
ing for the virtual reproduction of
concert halls
An assessment of Ambisonic microphone
for sound field reproduction
GUIRAUD Pierre (s151366)
Supervisors:
Efren Fernandez Grande
Marton Marschall
Jonas Brunskog
Yann Jurkiewicz
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
Acoustic Technology
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 352
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone (+45) 45 25 39 49
http://www.act.elektro.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Three dimensional (3D) sound field reproduction methods developed over the past years
are being more commonly used in research due to their increased availability. Among
those techniques Higher Order Ambisonics (HOA) is a well established method that rely
on the decomposition of the sound pressure in spherical harmonics. Ambisonic recording
can be made using a compact microphone array usually including four microphones or
with larger spherical arrays having a higher number of microphones. If compact mi-
crophone arrays allow encoding of the sound field up to the first spherical harmonics,
larger spherical arrays allows the encoding of higher orders depending on the number
of microphones used. This encoded signal is then decoded in order to be played back
through an spherical array of loudspeakers reproducing the measured sound field in the
center of this array.
Recently, compact microphone array for ambisonic reproduction have become more
widely available. They are being advertised as being able to accurately record the sound
field and its spatial information despite its low spherical harmonic encoding order. It
can however be argued that higher spherical harmonics are needed in order to reach the
desired quality of reproduction. This question holds true without even considering the
decoding and playback system for the reproduction. It is of even more importance when
it comes to the reproduction of concert halls sound fields where the spatial information
is a key factor of a good reproduction.
In the present study an attempt on quantifying the relevance of the higher order mea-
sured with different spherical arrays for the spatial reproduction of concert halls is made.
This study focuses on the recording and encoding part of the HOA and investigates the
importance of the choice of the recording device for concert halls. This investigation is
made through the analysis of the ambisonics coefficients obtained after encoding in both
frequency and time domain.
The measurements were made using spherical arrays with 64 and 52 microphones and
occurred in the Danish Royal Conservatory. Anechoic chamber measurement and simu-
lations were also performed for reference purposes.
This thesis will prove that, even if the maximum encoding order is of importance for the
accurate reproduction of the sound pressure, lower order spherical harmonics still holds
an significant part of the spatial information. Besides, the choice of the recording device
is of equal importance if the recordings are made for auralisation purposes.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Electrical Engineering at the
Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master
degree in Engineering Acoustics.
This Master thesis was done in the Acoustic Technology department in partnership with
the company Kahle Acoustics.
Kongens Lyngby, June 24, 2017
GUIRAUD Pierre (s151366)
Supervisors:
Efren Fernandez Grande
Marton Marschall
Jonas Brunskog
Yann Jurkiewicz
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank first my main supervisor Dr.Efren Fernandez Grande for always
taking the time to answer my questions and helping me along the way both morally and
technically. I would also like to thank Dr.Marton Marschall, Dr.Jonas Brunskog and
M.Antoine Richard for their support, help and advice for this thesis.
Thanks also to M.Yann Jurkiewicz for helping define this project and for granting me the
opportunity to help Kahle Acoustics with its measurements at the Orchestre National
de Lille. This was a great personal and professional experience.
Many thanks to my family for allowing me to study what I wished in Denmark and to
support me in my projects.
Lastly thanks to my friends for cheering me up in the ups and downs of the thesis.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
List of Symbols and
Abbreviations
3D
three dimensional
HOA
Higher Order Ambisonic
WFS
Wave Field Synthesis
IR
Impulse Response
DRC
Danish Royal Conservatory
HATS
Head And Torso Simulator
AVIL
Audio Visual Immersion Lab
HRTF
Head Related Transfer Function
STFT
Short Time Fourier transform
ITD
Interaural Time Difference
ILD
Interaural Level Difference
p
Sound pressure (Pa)
u
Particle velocity (m.s−1)
ρ
Density (kg.m−3)
c
Speed of sound (m.s−1)
a
Radius of the sphere (m)
k
Wave number (rad.m−1)
Ω
Direction of the investigated point (microphone, loudspeaker...) in spherical coordinates
Y m
n
Spherical harmonics functions of order n and degree m
P m
n
Legendre polynomial of order n and degree m
h(2)
n
Hankel function of the second kind and of order n
B
Ambisonic coefficients matrix
bm
n
Ambisonic coefficient of order n and degree m
W
Radial function matrix
wn
radial function of order n
δ
Regularisation factor for natural field HOA processing
S
Output signal matrix
D
Decoding matrix
==PAGE:10==
viii
List of Symbols and Abbreviations
M
number of microphones
L
number of loudspeakers
N
number of order
F
number of sampled frequencies
T
number of sampled time frames
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
List of Symbols and Abbreviations
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory and Background
3
2.1
The Wave Equation in Spherical Domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Spherical Array of Microphones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Sound Field Reproduction with Higher Order Ambisonics (HOA)
. . . .
8
3
Processing validation through anechoic measurements and simulations 17
3.1
Processing overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Encoding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4
Decoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Measurements in concert halls and analysis
37
4.1
Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5
Conclusion
57
A Measurement procedure at the Danish Royal Conservatory
59
A.1 Equipment list
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
A.2 Measurement log at the DRC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
B Extra analysis plots
66
B.1 Plane wave simulation and measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
B.2 DRC measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
C Psychoacoustic parameters
77
C.1 Head Related Transfer Function (HRTF) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
C.2 Interaural Time and Level Differences (ITD and ILD) . . . . . . . . . . .
78
Bibliography
81
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Higher Order Ambisonics (HOA) is a 3D sound field reproduction method [16] [4]. It
is based on the spherical harmonic decomposition of the sound pressure and aims at
reproducing a recorded sound field by reproducing the sound pressure truncated up to
a certain spherical harmonic order through a spherical array of loudspeakers [14]. Due
to spatial discretisation, the maximum encoded harmonic order is dependent on the
number of microphones used during the recording process. Ambisonic recording can
be made using spherical arrays of microphones or compact array with only four micro-
phones. Those compact arrays also called ambisonic microphones have become more
available and are advertised as being able to accurately record the sound field and its
spatial information [2]. It could be argued that the truncation of the decomposed pres-
sure into only the first spherical harmonics is not enough to record accurately the spatial
information of the sound field. This is of even greater importance when ambisonic is
used for auralisation purposes and specially for concert halls where spatial information
is a determinant factor of an accurate reproduction.
But to what extent do the higher orders mode are significant for the virtual reproduction
of concert halls and the reproduction of its spatial information?
HOA is a sound field reproduction technique which processing makes a very sharp dis-
tinction between the recording/encoding of the data and the decoding/playback. Each
of those ambisonics steps has its own limitations and challenges and can be considered
totally independently. This thesis will focus on the capture and encoding of the spatial
information. The limitations of the recording devices and the importance of higher or-
der encoding will be investigated through the analysis of the ambisonic coefficients in
frequency and time domain.
In chapter 2 the theoretical knowledge and background needed to understand this
thesis is presented [7]. Chapter 3 focuses on explaining the ambisonic processing that is
followed for the analysis of this project. This processing is then validated through the
measurement and the analysis of a plane wave in the anechoic chamber [13]. Chapter 4
then describes the measurements in the concert halls and analyses the ambisonic coeffi-
cients obtained from those datas [5] [1]. The limitations of the results and the potential
future work to improve this project is also highlighted.
==PAGE:14==
2
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Theory and Background
In order to fully understand the thought process of this project a theoretical background
of acoustics must be presented. This chapter will explain all the theoretical knowledge
needed to understand the presented results of this project. First the general wave equa-
tion will be solved in the spherical domain and its solution will then be adapted to
real life measurements. Based on this general results the whole theory of Higher Order
Ambisonics being the focus of this project will be described and explained.
In the following chapter a standard writing of parameters will be used where simple
scalar parameters will be normally written like p, a vector will be in bold u and a matrix
will be bold and overlined A.
2.1
The Wave Equation in Spherical Domain
2.1.1
Wave equation
In order to describe the acoustic wave motion in a fluid a few basic laws have to be
established.
The first law describe the mass conservation of the system and can be
written as
∇.(ρtotu) + ∂ρtot
∂t
= 0,
(2.1)
where u is the particle velocity vector (m.s−1) and ρtot = ρ0 + ρ′ is the total density
of the medium (kg.m−3) with ρ0 is the equilibrium density and ρ′ the time varying
perturbation.
The second law describes the conservation of momentum and can be written as
∇ptot + ρtot
du
dt = 0,
(2.2)
where ptot = p0 + p′ is the total sound pressure of the medium (Pa) with p0 the static
pressure and p′ the time varying perturbation, with du
dt =
∂u
∂t+(u.∇)u.
The last fundamental law used to derive the wave equation is based on the fact that
sound is an almost total adiabatic phenomenon which means that there is no flow of
heat. This can be transcribed as
∂ptot
∂ρtot

ρ0
= c2,
(2.3)
==PAGE:16==
4
2 Theory and Background
with c being the speed of sound (m.s−1) in the medium.
Using the three presented equations the linearised wave equation can be expressed in
term of the sound pressure p′, the speed of sound c and the Laplacian operator ∆= ∇2
∆p′ −1
c2
∂2p′
∂t2 = 0.
(2.4)
When considering the simple case of a wave driven at one specific frequency at any
given position the sound pressure can be written as a time varying complex function of
the form
ˆp = Aejwt = |A|ejωt−φ,
(2.5)
with ω = 2πf being the angular speed (rad.s−1) dependant on the frequency f (Hz)
and A a complex number of phase φ.
The wave equation in 2.4 can now be simplified to the so called Helmholtz equation
∂2ˆp
∂x2 + k2ˆp = 0,
(2.6)
where k = ω/c is the wavenumber (rad.s−1).
More details on those calculation can be found in [9].
2.1.2
Spherical Coordinates Solution
It can be noted that the Helmholtz equation is deduced without any assumption on the
coordinate system used. The system of interest for this project is the spherical one and is
based on three variables: distance r in meters, azimuth angle φ in radian between [0 2π]
and inclination angle θ in radian between [0 π]. Those parameters allows the description
of any point in space as it can be seen in figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Spherical coordinate system with φ the azimuth and θ the inclination.
==PAGE:17==
2.1 The Wave Equation in Spherical Domain
5
In this spherical system the equation 2.6 becomes
∂2ˆp
∂r2 + 2
r
∂ˆp
∂r + 1
r2
∂2ˆp
∂θ2 +
1
r2 tan θ
∂ˆp
∂θ +
1
r2 sin2 θ
∂2ˆp
∂φ2 + k2ˆp = 0.
(2.7)
Using the common technique of the separation of variables to solve this differential
equation the sound pressure can now be written as
ˆp(r, θ, φ, t) = pr(r)pθ(θ)pφ(φ)eiwt.
(2.8)
The solution for the two angle functions can be simplified into a single function that
is called spherical harmonics defined as
Y m
n (Ω) = Y m
n (θ, φ) =
v
u
u
t2n + 1
4π
(n −|m|)!
(n + |m|)!P |m|
n (cos θ)e−jmφ,
(2.9)
with P |m|
n
being the associated Legendre function of degree n and order |m|
P |m|
n (x) = (−1)|m|(1 −x2)|m|/2 d|m|
dx|m|Pn(x).
(2.10)
Pn(x) is the Legendre polynomial of degree n and order 0 as seen in figure 2.2 [14]. The
absolute values are necessary since for (n, m) ∈N, |m| < n has to be respected since the
Legendre functions are not defined for negative orders.
The radial function of equation 2.8 can be solved using the Hankel function of the
second kind and degree n
h(2)
n (kr) = jn(kr) −jηn(kr),
(2.11)
with jn and ηn being respectively the Bessel function of the first and second kind as seen
on figure 2.3.
Figure 2.2: Legendre polynomial function for degree n = 0 : 4.
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Theory and Background
Figure 2.3: Spherical Bessel function of the first and second order for degree n = 0 : 4.
The general solution can then be written (the temporal parameter will be purpose-
fully omitted for now on to improve readability)
p1(r, θ, φ) =
∞
∑
n=0
n
∑
m=−n
Am
n h(2)
n (kr)Y m
n (θ, φ),
(2.12)
with Am
n being complex constants.
When considering infinitely small spherical source the pressure will go to −∞for kr →0
due to the Bessel function of the second order as seen on 2.3. In order to prevent this
to happen another solution is derived
p2(r, θ, φ) =
∞
∑
n=0
n
∑
m=−n
Bm
n jn(kr)Y m
n (θ, φ).
(2.13)
At last it is important to note that the complex coefficients Am
n or Bm
n can be calcu-
lated by using the fact that the spherical harmonic functions form an orthonormal basis
for any function defined on a sphere. This is formulated as
∫
Ω∈S2 Y m′
n′ (Ω)[Y m
n (Ω)]∗= δn′
n δm′
m .
(2.14)
This property of the spherical harmonics is the basis for ambisonics. The spherical har-
monics for the first few orders n and all their degrees m can be seen in figure 2.4 in 3D.
Figure 2.4: Theoretical visual representation of the spherical modes.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Spherical Array of Microphones
7
2.2
Spherical Array of Microphones
Due to the use of a solid finite sized spherical array for the recordings, the solution of
the Helmholtz equation has to be adapted and the scattering due to the sphere has to
be taken into account.
2.2.1
Scattering correction
The local sound pressure can be written as
ptot = pincident + pscattered,
(2.15)
thanks to the superposition principle.
The incident field is the one present in the absence of object and so can be assimilated
to the ”through going” field from sources outside the radius of the sphere. It can then
be written like equation 2.13. The scattered field, on the other hand, will be created by
the recording sphere. Since the sphere has a finite size, kr will be limited by its size and
so the Bessel function of the second kind will never go toward −∞. This leads to the
scattered pressure being written as in equation 2.12. The total sound field will then be
of the form
ptot(r, θ, φ) =
∞
∑
n=0
n
∑
m=−n
[Am
n h(2)
n (kr) + Bm
n jn(kr)]Y m
n (θ, φ).
(2.16)
The coefficients Am
n and Bm
n can be determined making use of the orthogonality of the
spherical harmonics and the boundary condition stating that the radial velocity equal
zero at the surface of the sphere. This leads the total pressure to be written as
ptot(r, Ω) =
∞
∑
n=0
n
∑
m=−n
j(ka)2[jn(kr)h′(2)
n (ka)−j′
n(ka)h(2)
n (kr)]Y m
n (Ω)
∫
Ω∈S2 ptot(a, Ω)Y m
n (Ω)∗dΩ,
(2.17)
with a being the radius of the rigid sphere (m).
From equation 2.17 if we consider a point source at r0 = (r0, θ0, φ0) = (r0, Ω0),
looking at the pressure at the surface of the sphere and using the Wronskian relationship
[7]
jn(x)h′
n(x) −j′
n(x)hn(x) = 1
x2,
(2.18)
the total pressure on the sphere can be expressed as
ptot(a, Ωm) = −jρcQ
a2
∞
∑
n=0
n
∑
m=−n
h(2)
n (kr0)
h′(2)
n (ka)
Y m
n (Ωm)Y m
n (Ω0)∗.
(2.19)
If a plane wave is considered instead of a point source this equation becomes
ptot(a, Ωm) = 4πA
(ka)2
∞
∑
n=0
n
∑
m=−n
(−j)n+1
h′(2)
n (ka)
Y m
n (Ωm)Y m
n (Ω0)∗.
(2.20)
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Theory and Background
In the rest of this report the sources are supposed to be far away enough from the
recording sphere and so plane waves will be assumed and equation 2.20 will be used.
However, it has to be noted that equation 2.20 is for a single plane wave. In order to
account for plane waves coming from all directions 2.20 has to be integrated over a whole
sphere. If a finite number of plane waves is considered then it can be rewritten
ptot(a, Ωm) =
L
∑
l=1
4πAl
(ka)2
∞
∑
n=0
n
∑
m=−n
(−j)n+1
h′(2)
n (ka)
Y m
n (Ωm)Y m
n (Ωl)∗.
(2.21)
2.3
Sound Field Reproduction with Higher
Order Ambisonics (HOA)
Spatial sound rendering can either be done using binaural reproduction techniques
through headphones or by using spatial encoding-decoding techniques through a loud-
speaker based system. When it comes to 3D sound field rendering the two main methods
used are Wave Field Synthesis (WFS) and Higher Order Ambisonics (HOA) [16].
The WFS method is based on Rayleigh’s first integral equation and Huygens principle.
It aims at reproducing the wave front curvature of sound waves generated by primary
sources measured with a microphone array using a similar loudspeaker array which would
be used as secondary source as seen on figure 2.5. The microphone array usually encloses
either the source or the desired listening position depending on what is desired to be
achieved. This requires a large array for accurate reconstruction and so might not be the
more convenient way to measure a large sound field. Using an adapted loudspeaker array,
the WFS method will reconstruct the wave front accurately in the desired direction but
will have strong artifacts behind the loudspeaker array.
The HOA method is based on the identification of the spherical harmonics of the
sound field in one position and reproducing them in a specifically designed room. The
recording part requires a microphone array of finite size and so is more convenient than
the WFS setup. Figure 2.6(a) shows a commonly used ambisonic microphone using 4
microphones [2]. Other recording devices for HOA are usually spherical arrays of micro-
phones as it will be shown in part 3.2. The playback is possible using a spherical array
of loudspeakers that will aim at reproducing the measured sound field at the center of
this array. Accurate reproduction of the sound field only happens in the center of the
array and artifact are present outside this area [8]. An example of such room can be
seen in figure 2.6(b) with the Audio Visual Immersion Lab (AVIL) room of DTU. In
this anechoic room an array of 64 loudspeakers is used for ambisonic reproductions.
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Sound Field Reproduction with Higher Order Ambisonics (HOA)
9
Figure 2.5: Holophonic sound field reproduction schema for WFS.
As it was explained, WFS and HOA each have their advantages either in term of
measurement setup or in the reproduction method. The choice of the method will depend
on the aim of one’s project.
The goal of this thesis being to assess for the relevance of higher order mode for sound
field reproduction the HOA method will now be explained in more details.
(a) Tetramic
(b) AVIL room
Figure 2.6: Sound field reproduction tools needed for HOA.
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Theory and Background
2.3.1
Encoding
It has been proven that the pressure on the sphere of a rigid spherical array of micro-
phones used in HOA measurements can be expressed as a sum of spherical harmonics
Y m
n
p(a, Ω) =
∞
∑
n=0
n
∑
m=−n
bm
n wn(ka)Y m
n (Ω),
(2.22)
thanks to the orthonormal base that they form.
When considering a measurement with a spherical array and a finite number of
microphones M, a finite number of spherical harmonic can be measured. The maximum
order N that can be recorded has to respect (N + 1)2 ≤M. Equation 2.22 can then be
expressed in matrix form as
P[M×F] = Y[M×(N+1)2]diag(Wn)[(N+1)2×(N+1)2]B[(N+1)2×F],
(2.23)
with F being the investigated frequencies relative to ka.
It can be seen that only the radial components vector Wn contains the frequency infor-
mation. Based on equation 2.21 it can be written as
Wn(ka) =
(
−jn+1
(ka)2h′(2)
n (ka)
)
.
(2.24)
Wn can be seen in figure 2.7(a). B has then to be defined for each frequency even though
the spherical harmonics defined as in equation 2.9 for each microphone position (Ω) are
frequency independent.
The maximum order of encoding N will be dependant on the number of microphones
used during the recording process. In practice their relationship can be associated to
one microphone per order, per degree as N = floor(
√
M −1). As a result if M is not
a multiple of (N + 1)2 then the spherical harmonic matrix Y[M×(N+1)2] will not be a
square matrix.
The objective of the HOA is to retrieve the B matrix being the spherical harmonic
coefficients also called the ambisonic coefficients. In order to do that a simple least-
square solution can be implemented using Moore–Penrose pseudoinverse (symbol †) in
order to inverse equation 2.23.
The columns of Y being linearly independent since
the spherical harmonics form an orthonormal basis the pseudo inverse of Y can be
written pinv(Y) = Y
† = (Y
HY )−1Y
H with H being the Hermitian transpose also called
conjugate transpose (Y
H = Y
∗t). The encoding of the pressure can then be written
B[(N+1)2×F] = diag(EQn)
−1
[(N+1)2×(N+1)2]Y
†
[(N+1)2×M]P[M×F].
(2.25)
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Sound Field Reproduction with Higher Order Ambisonics (HOA)
11
(a) W
(b) 1/W
(c) HP
(d) EQ
Figure 2.7: Radial functions for the first few spherical orders.
It has be noted that a regularisation parameter noted EQn shown in figure 2.7(d)
is used instead of just the inverse of Wn. EQn corresponds to Wn after being filtered
with a high pass filter. This filtering of the radial components has been implemented in
order to damp the noisy low frequency components of the higher orders resulting from
the least-square resolution of the system. It can be seen in figure 2.7(b) that when the
ambisonic coefficients are trying to be retrieved if the simple inverse of Wn is used, the
low frequency components of the higher orders are amplified preventing the effective
retrieval of the ambisonic coefficients.
Thus, filtering is required with EQn defined as
EQn(ka) = HPn(ka)
1
W(ka) =
Wn(ka)∗
|Wn(ka)|2 + λ2,
(2.26)
with
HPn(ka) =
|Wn(ka)|2
|Wn(ka)|2 + λ2,
(2.27)
being the high pass filter seen in figure 2.7(c) and λ being the regularisation parameter
depending on the total number of microphones M and the maximum microphone noise
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Theory and Background
amplification amic
λ =
1−√
1−1/σ2
1+√
1−1/σ2,
(2.28)
with
σ =
√
M10
amic
20 .
(2.29)
From this filtering some conclusions can be drawn as what to expect from the mea-
surements. Looking at figure 2.7(d) it is expected that higher orders will contain more
high frequency components especially in the bandwidth in which the signal is boosted.
It is worth noticing that the center frequency of this ”band pass look alike” is dependent
on ka, leading to think that the size of the sphere will influence the high frequency limit
of the recordings. The smaller the sphere, the higher the density of microphone will be
and more measured energy will be expected in higher frequency [13].
2.3.2
Decoding
Once the encoding process is done an approximation of the first few spherical order of
the sound field is obtained. This matrix B is called the ambisonic signal. The goal is
now from this ambisonic signal to reproduce the measured sound field through an array
of loudspeakers.
Assuming an array of L number of loudspeakers and S the desired output signals.
The decoding process consist of finding the decoding matrix D so that
S[L×F] = D[L×(N+1)2]B[(N+1)2×F].
(2.30)
Many decoding process can be considered but this project focuses on the re-encoding
principle. Other techniques like Near Field Compensated Ambisonic (NFC-HOA) or
including psychoacoustic parameters will not be investigated [3].
The aim of the re-encoding principle is to acoustically recompose the ambisonic signal
B at the centre of the array. The loudspeakers are assumed to be far away enough from
the listener standing in the center of the array to allow their signal to be encoded as
plane waves. As such the reproduced ambisonic signal eB has to verify
eB[L×(N+1)2] = C[(N+1)2×L]S[L×F],
(2.31)
with C being the spherical harmonics like Y in 2.9 but with Ωbeing each loudspeaker
position.
In order to have B = eB then
D[L×(N+1)2] = C
†
[(N+1)2×L]
(2.32)
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Sound Field Reproduction with Higher Order Ambisonics (HOA)
13
with pinv(C) = C
† = C
H(CC
H)−1 this time. Not unlike in the encoding process, the
main limitation in the decoding is the number of loudspeakers L. A specific order of
reproduction (N + 1)2 needs at least an equivalent number of loudspeaker to be repro-
duced accurately. An over-determination of the problem will arise when (N + 1)2 < L.
One advantage of the decoding matrix of this re-encoding principle is that it is fre-
quency independent. This allows the decoding process to be made either in frequency
or directly in time domain. A simple inverse Fourier transform on the ambisonic signal
B can be made beforehand allowing, in some cases, to reduce the computational time of
the decoding if the impulse response is long. Typically, this can happen with the long
reverberation time of concert halls. Otherwise the inverse Fourier has to be made to the
output signal S in order to allow the playback through the loudspeakers.
It is also worth mentioning that the accurate reproduction area is getting smaller as
higher frequencies are computed. More information can be found in [4].
2.3.3
Optimisation
Poor sound localisation can arise from playback with an array of loudspeakers. This can
be seen with large directivity in the main lobes or more importantly with the appearance
of secondary lobes.
In order to avoid this, a simple solution would be to add more loudspeakers for the
decoding. However this solution is not practical and would still be dependent on the
maximum encoding order of the recording. Nevertheless, some simple optimisers can be
constructed to improve the sound localisation in the decoding process. This optimisation
involves a weighting in the ambisonic signal B by order dependent gains gm before or
during the decoding. The weighting can be implemented as
f
D
optimised
[L×(N+1)2] = D[L×(N+1)2]diag(gm)[(N+1)2×(N+1)2], .
(2.33)
The most wildly used optimisers are either the Re-max weighting or the in-phase
one. The first one aims at concentrating the energy contribution towards the expected
direction reducing in the process the secondary lobes, when the second one completely
removes secondary lobes but enlarge the main lobe quite significantly. This can be seen
in figure 2.8.
It is important to remember that those optimisers aim to improve sound localisation for
non-ideal conditions and so will alter the accuracy of the pressure reconstruction.
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Theory and Background
Figure 2.8: Directivity plot of order N = 0 to 4 for equivalent microphones for three
kind of decoding [13].
2.3.3.1
Re-max
The Re-max optimisation gains are derived from the roots of the Legendre polynomial
function. The initial gain g0 that will help weight all the other coefficients as seen on
equation 2.36 can either be defined for amplitude (2.35) or energy preservation (2.36)
purposes.
g0 =
1,
amplitude preservation
(2.34)
g0 =
√
L/Eg′m,
energy conservation
(2.35)
gm =
g′
mg0
with
g′
0 = 1.
(2.36)
It depends on the reduced energy defined as
EN
{gm} =
N
∑
m=0
(2m + 1)g2
m.
(2.37)
From this the coefficient g′
m can now be defined as







g′
m = Pm(rE)
m > 1
g′
1 = rE
highest root of PN+1
m = 1
g′
0 = 1
m = 0,
(2.38)
with Pm being the Legendre function of order m.
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Sound Field Reproduction with Higher Order Ambisonics (HOA)
15
2.3.3.2
In Phase
In order to create the in-phase optimiser the principle is to minimise the gain of the
loudspeakers as their direction stray further from the one of the virtual source up until
it goes to zero in the opposite direction.
Using equation 2.36 the in-phase optimiser is created using



g′
m =
N!(N+1)!
(N+m+1)!(M−m)!
rE =
N
N+1
(2.39)
and
g0 =
√
L(2N + 1)
N + 1
.
(2.40)
More information on the creation of the optimiser can be found in [10].
The purpose and use of those optimisations differ according to the desired goal. In
this project both optimisers are implemented but the Re-max is selected due to its
sharper directivity pattern, useful for the reproduction of higher order spherical harmon-
ics. This choice will be justify also in part 3.4.1.
==PAGE:28==
16
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3
Processing validation
through anechoic
measurements and
simulations
3.1
Processing overview
Based on the theory previously explained a method is designed to investigate the re-
search question. This method is followed during the whole project and can be seen as a
block diagram in figure 3.1.
The first part of the project is dedicated to measurements in both anechoic chamber,
for reference purposes, and in concert halls, for the desired analysis. This is shown in
3.1(a) and explained in more details in section 3.2.
The second and most important part is the implementation of the Higher Order
Ambisonic processing. Both the encoding and the decoding methods can be seen in figure
3.1(b). The two branches make the difference between the Fourier transform using the
total signal and a Short Time Fourier Transform (STFT) using the Fourier transform in
different time windows across the signal. If the Fourier transform using the total signal
is mostly being used in this report it is important to understand that due to the size of
the signal, some plots require a lower frequency resolution for Matlab to compute and
so a windowing of the time signal is used through the STFT. The two smaller branches
inside each branch refers to the decoding process used being independant of frequency
as explained in section 2.3.2. The resulting output from those sub branches are strictly
equivalent but the distinction is needed for the analysis.
It shall also be noted that the red dotted arrow corresponds to the moment in the
processing (after the encoding and before the decoding) in which the analysis will focus.
The spherical harmonic coefficients are calculated at every time sample and so their
behaviour can be observed. See part 4.2.
Lastly, if a subjective analysis or just a playback of the processed signal is needed,
the signal, which is a matrix of impulse response for each loudspeakers of the playback
==PAGE:30==
18
3 Processing validation through anechoic measurements and simulations
system, can be convoluted with anechoic recording. Those signals are then played back
through the loudspeaker array and a listener in the center of the array will be able to
feel that the music is being played just like in the concert hall/the place where the mea-
surements occurred. This can be seen in figure 3.1(c).
(a) measurement method
(b) ambisonic processing
(c) analysis and playback
Figure 3.1: Block diagram of the method used: from data acquisition, to processing,
and to playback.
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Measurements
19
3.2
Measurements
3.2.1
Equipment
The full list of equipment used as well as the logbook of the measurement sessions can
be found in Appendix A. Only the recording and playback devices will be described here.
Using DTU equipment, 4 recording devices were tested in the anechoic chamber
before the measurements in the Danish Royal Conservatory (DRC). These include two
spherical arrays of different size having 64 and 52 microphones (leading to different
order ambisonic encoding), a free field microphone for level reference and a Head And
Torso Simulator (HATS) for objective perceptual sound field comparison before and after
ambisonic processing. Those devices can be seen in figure 3.2.
The position of the microphones on each spherical arrays can be seen in figure 3.3(a)
and 3.3(b). As a reference the loudspeakers position in the AVIL room can also be seen
in figure 3.3(c).
(a) DRC dodecahedron
(b) DRC free field micro-
phone
(c) DRC HATS
(d) DRC spherical array mi-
crophones
Figure 3.2: Playback and recording devices used at the DRC.
==PAGE:32==
20
3 Processing validation through anechoic measurements and simulations
(a) 52 microphones sphere
(b) 64 microphones sphere
(c) AVIL loudspeaker setup
Figure 3.3: Microphones/loudspeakers numbers and positions for the recording
spheres/AVIL room.
3.2.2
Anechoic Chamber Measurements and sweep
generation
The anechoic chamber measurements were done in order to prepare for the DRC mea-
surements. The setup as seen in figure 3.4 consisted of a loudspeaker at a certain distance
of any recording device in order to simulate, having no reflections from the walls, a plane
wave in a free field. The loudspeaker was sending a sweep of 10s from 20 to 22kHz.
The frequency increased logarithmically with time as seen in figure 3.5(a). This sweep
is then deconvolved in order to obtain the impulse response for each microphones with
an expected spectrum going from 20 to 22kHz as seen in figure 3.5(c) and 3.5(d).
The equipment was then tested, calibrated and some practical issues arose and were
addressed. One of those issues was that if the sent sweep was from 20 to 22kHz with a
sampling frequency of 44.1kHz the maximum recording sampling frequency of the front
end was of 16kHz which is not high enough for auralisation purposes. An extra frontend
was then added to the one used so far in order to rise the recorded sampling frequency
up to 32kHz.
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Measurements
21
Figure 3.4: Experimental setup in the anechoic chamber.
Another problem was the non perfect reproduction of the sweep by the dodecahedron.
As seen in figure 3.5(b) and 3.5(d) the recorded sweep does not have equal amplitude
at all frequencies. Apart from the physical limitations of the loudspeaker (low/high fre-
quency limits) another problem was addressed: its non omnidirectionality. The position
of the loudspeaker affecting the directivity pattern of the send sweep at high frequency.
In order to compensate for this problem a pre-equalisation filter was designed for the
input sweep. This filter was designed based on the averaged spectrum of 9 recordings
of the non equalised sweep with a free field microphone where for each recording the
loudspeaker had been turned by 40 degrees. Even if a perfect sweep response was not
obtained a significant improvement was made.
(a) perfect sent sweep
(b) imperfect recorded sweep
(c) recorded impulse response from sweep
(d) spectrum of the impulse response
Figure 3.5: Signal sent and recorded in sweep and impulse response form.
==PAGE:34==
22
3 Processing validation through anechoic measurements and simulations
3.3
Encoding
A plane wave has been measured in the anechoic chamber and the impulse response for
each microphones on the spherical array has been extracted. The goal is now to use the
ambisonic process to be able to play back this plane wave through the loudspeaker array
in the AVIL room.
3.3.1
Spherical harmonics simulation
HOA is based on the decomposition of the sound field into spherical harmonics as seen
in equation 2.23. Before starting to obtain the spherical harmonic coefficients B as in
equation 2.25 the computation of the spherical harmonic has to be verified.
The theoretical directivity shape of the first few orders and of all their degrees can
be seen in figure 3.6(a). Based on equation 2.9 the spherical harmonics are simulated.
The plotted shape in figure 3.6(b), 3.6(c) and 3.6(d) concur with the theory allowing the
encoding to continue.
(a) theoretical
(b) simulated order 1 degree 0
(c) simulated order 2 degree 0
(d) simulated order 2 degree 2
Figure 3.6: Theoretical and simulated spherical harmonics directivity shape.
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Encoding
23
3.3.2
Inside field
Based on equation 2.24 the radial function is simulated and using equation 2.25 and
2.26 the spherical harmonic coefficients are found up to the order N depending on the
the number of microphones M on the sphere. In the anechoic chamber with the sphere
with M = 64, N = 7.
Using those coefficients and equation 2.22 truncated up to the order N it is possible
to reproduce the pressure field inside the sphere either for different frequencies or for
different time t. This allows a verification of the processing since a plane wave should
be observed.
In the following graphs the sphere of 64 microphones is used and its radius is of 9.75cm.
Each plane xy, xz and yz is investigated and the numbers at the edges of the plots
correspond to the microphone number of the sphere in this direction.
3.3.2.1
Frequency domain
In order to validate the frequency resolution of the sphere a simulation is made as a
reference. The 64 microphones spherical array is simulated and a monopole is placed in
the far field in the direction of the microphone number 3, as in the measurements.
The pressure inside the sphere induced solely by the monopole is called the theoretical
field.
The pressure on the simulated microphone positions of the sphere are used to obtain the
simulated spherical harmonic coefficients. Those coefficients are then used to reproduced
the pressure field inside this simulation, this is called the simulated field.
The spherical harmonic coefficients obtained from the measurement are used to recreate
the inside field of the sphere in the anechoic chamber. This is called the measured field.
Since the spectrum of the impulse response starts to fall around 7000Hz due to the
low recording sampling frequency as seen in figure 3.5(d) it is not relevant to compare
measurements and simulation for higher frequencies. It can also be noted that the am-
plitude of the simulation is not defined according to the amplitude of the measurement
and so only the comparison of the pattern is of interest.
Figure 3.7, 3.8 and 3.9 show the theoretical, simulated and measured pressured field in
three planes inside the recording sphere. It can be seen that the theoretical and simulated
sound field are exactly the same at 100 and 2000Hz but start to differ at 4000Hz. The
nodes and anti-nodes of pressure are still distinguishable but an amplitude modulation
occurs closer to the center. This proves that the ambisonic encoding is working but that
it does have some limitations at high frequencies according to the size of the array and
the number of microphones. This limitation can be related to the filters used for the
radial components shown in figure 2.7(d) and the high frequency limit of the spherical
array depending on M and a.
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Processing validation through anechoic measurements and simulations
Comparing the simulated field with the measured one at 100 and 2000Hz, it is
seen that the measurement does capture a plane wave since the front waves are clearly
distinguishable.
The differences between simulated and measured can be attributed
to the non-perfect reproduction of the direction of the plane. In the simulation the
plane wave is coming exactly from the direction of the microphones number 3 in the
theoretical and simulated field.
In practice however, if it was this said microphone
facing the loudspeaker they were not perfectly aligned leading to those discrepancies.
At 4000Hz the accurate distinction of the nodes of pressure gets harder in the measured
field. Since the size of the sphere and the number of microphones are the same in the
simulation and in the measurement the difference lies within the construction of the
radial components.
In the simulation since the pressure is directly measured at the
microphones positions the sphere is considered transparent and no scattering from the
sphere has to be taken into account. From equation 2.13 the radial components for an
open sphere are simply written
Wn(ka) = jnjn(ka),
(3.1)
whereas it is written as in equation 2.24 in the measured case to take the diffraction
into account. This diffraction being present mostly at high frequencies will affect the
reproduced inside field and will lead to those differences. The noise presence in the mea-
surement can also affect the results. Yet, the signal to noise ratio being high at those
frequencies since those are anechoic conditions (figure 3.5(d)), it is a fair assumption to
say that the differences are due to the scattering implementation in the reproduction.
According to the comparison of the inside field at one frequency between measured
and simulated the encoding processing seems to allow a good reproduction of the sound
field. Some high frequencies limitations appeared during the simulation leading to be-
lieve that the size of the measurement sphere and more exactly the density of micro-
phones has its importance for the accuracy of the measured coefficient used for the
reproduction. Those limitations are coherent with the theory of the HOA encoding.
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Encoding
25
(a) theoretical
(b) simulated
(c) measured
Figure 3.7: Pressure field inside the recording sphere at f = 100Hz.
==PAGE:38==
26
3 Processing validation through anechoic measurements and simulations
(a) theoretical
(b) simulated
(c) measured
Figure 3.8: Pressure field inside the recording sphere at f = 2000Hz.
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Encoding
27
(a) theoretical
(b) simulated
(c) measured
Figure 3.9: Pressure field inside the recording sphere at f = 4000Hz.
==PAGE:40==
28
3 Processing validation through anechoic measurements and simulations
3.3.2.2
Time domain
The reproduction of the inside field in the frequency domain leads to believe in the ob-
servation of the plane wave but in order to be certain of it the sound field inside the
sphere will now be investigated in time domain.
The following figures show a bigger spherical radius than the one of the sphere only. This
allows for a better detection of the direction of arrival but due to the construction of
the encoding including the scattering of the sphere the reproduction is not accurate out-
side the effective radius of the measurement sphere. The time samples t1, t2 and t3 are
spaced by 0.2ms. Finally, due to the size of the time signal those plots are constructed
using the STFT encoding of the signal leading to a smaller frequency resolution but
allowing the temporal plotting. The spectrogram of the STFT used in shown in 3.10(a)
and is using a time window B = fs/4 = 4096 samples = 0.0929 s and a skip window of
S = B/4 = 1024 samples = 0.0232 s. This size of window allows the whole time signal
to be captured in a single frame. The resulting spectrograms for anechoic measurements
with two different direction of arrival can be seen in figure 3.10.
Figure 3.11 shows the incoming plane wave coming from the direction of the micro-
phone number 3. The area in which the reproduction is accurate (the radius of the
sphere) can be seen clearly in 3.11(b). The direction of arrival is coherent with the
expected one but in order to fully validate that the reproduction planes match the real
ones the sphere was rotated so that the wave is now coming from the direction of the
microphone 48.
The microphone 48 being almost at x = 0 and z = 0 it can be expected that
the plane wave is parallel to the xz plane and so cannot be seen. This is confirmed
by figures 3.12. It can be noted that the anechoic measurement signals were not yet
recorded automatically (unlike for the concert halls) and so the start of the impulse
response is not consistent between both measurements. Explaining the difference in the
start of the impulse response in figure 3.10.
(a) M1
(b) M48
Figure 3.10: Spectrogram used for the time reconstruction with waves coming from
the direction of the microphone 3 and 48.
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Encoding
29
(a) t1
(b) t2
(c) t3
Figure 3.11: Pressure field inside the recording sphere at different time t. The wave is
coming from the direction of the microphone 3.
==PAGE:42==
30
3 Processing validation through anechoic measurements and simulations
(a) t1
(b) t2
(c) t3
Figure 3.12: Pressure field inside the recording sphere at different time t. The wave is
coming from the direction of the microphone 48.
==PAGE:43==
3.4 Decoding
31
By looking at the inside field in both the frequency and the temporal domain the
recording of the plane wave is observed as expected. This allows also for the validation
of the ambisonic encoding provided that its limitations are understood.
3.4
Decoding
3.4.1
Optimiser simulation
Now that the encoding is implemented the decoding can be investigated. As explained
in part 2.3.3 the decoding process can be optimised by weighting the ambisonic signal
and improving the directivity lobes of the harmonics as seen in figure 2.8. Based on the
equations found in part 2.3.3 the optimisers are implemented.
Figure 3.13 compares the pressure on a reproduction sphere for a single plane wave
without optimiser and with Re-max or in-phase optimiser implemented. This simulation
shows that without optimiser (figure 3.13(a)) the decoding process creates a lot of side
lobes that do not correspond to the direction of the plane wave. Those side lobes are
attenuated using the Re-max optimiser and disappear completely with the in-phase
optimisation. This would lead to recommend the in-phase optimiser in order to get
totally rid of those side lobes.
(a) no optimiser
(b) Re-max optimiser
(c) in-phase optimiser
Figure 3.13: Comparison of the decoding with and without an optimiser in a single
plane wave case in dB scale.
==PAGE:44==
32
3 Processing validation through anechoic measurements and simulations
(a) no optimiser
(b) Re-max optimiser
(c) in-phase optimiser
Figure 3.14: Comparison of the decoding with and without an optimiser in a case with
two close plane waves in dB scale.
Figure 3.14 compares the pressure on a reproduction sphere with two plane waves
coming from similar direction without optimiser and with Re-max or in-phase optimiser
implemented. This simulation shows that even if the in-phase optimiser is the most effi-
cient to get rid of the side lobes, as this is to be expected from its theoretical directivity
pattern seen in figure 2.8, the two waves are merged together making the distinction
between the two unclear. On the other hand the Re-max optimiser reduces the side
lobes while still allowing a clear distinction between the two waves.
For those reasons the Re-max optimiser is chosen and is used in the following decoding.
3.4.2
Reproduced plane
3.4.2.1
Reproduced field in time domain
Based on equation 2.30 with the decoding matrix defined in equation 2.32 the signals
for the reproduction of the plane wave through the loudspeaker array of the AVIL room
are obtained. In order to validate the decoding process the signals should allow the
reproduction of the plane wave as seen in part 3.3.2.2.
Using the decoded signal for each loudspeaker and using the plane wave assumption
a simulation of the reproduced sound field inside the loudspeaker array is possible. The
plane and the time frame t1, t2 and t3 are the same as in 3.3.2.2. Only the signals for
==PAGE:45==
3.4 Decoding
33
the AVIL loudspeaker setup are used in this simulation.
Figure 3.15 compared to 3.11 allows the validation of the reproduction of the travel-
ing plane wave. It can also be seen that the plane wave is mostly accurate in the very
center of the array which concurs with the theory and the plane wave signal assumption
of the loudspeakers [11]. This leads to a fixed position of the listener if the HOA has
any auralisation purposes. This area gets smaller as higher frequencies are reproduced
as mentioned in part 2.3.2.
3.4.2.2
Pressure on the decoded sphere
Ideally the reproduction sphere after decoding should at least contain as many loud-
speakers as the number of spherical harmonics you can record ((N + 1)2). More or less
loudspeakers will result in an over-determined or under-determined inverse problem lead-
ing to bad reproduction. Some solutions exist like the use of compress sensing but those
will not be investigated [11] [17]. The repartition of the pressure at a time t through
the loudspeaker array is investigated on a full sphere with infinitely many loudspeaker
and on the AVIL system in order to verify the direction of arrival and the change of
intensity through time for each loudspeakers. The time frames t1, t2 and t3 are the same
as previously.
Figure 3.17 is yet another way to verify the direction of arrival of the plane waves
(microphone number 3) and to find the associate loudspeaker (number 35). The reparti-
tion of the pressure through time is also observed. Figure 3.17(a) displays some shapes
having a high pressure where they should not be anything since the signal is just being
sent. This can be attributed to the over determined problem due to the infinitely many
loudspeakers array.
One can observe that the direction of arrival of the wave from the loudspeakers depends
solely from the chosen repartition of the loudspeaker. As a result many ambisonic im-
plementation are using rotational matrices to change the direction of arrival of specific
source. This will not be investigated here but it is worth mentioning as a common use
of HOA decoding.
==PAGE:46==
34
3 Processing validation through anechoic measurements and simulations
(a) plane xy
(b) plane xz
(c) plane yz
Figure 3.15: Pressure field inside the AVIL system at t1 in the three planes. The wave
is coming from the direction of the microphone 3.
==PAGE:47==
3.4 Decoding
35
(a) t1
(b) t2
(c) t3
Figure 3.16: Pressure field inside the AVIL system at different time t in the plane xy.
The wave is coming from the direction of the microphone 3.
==PAGE:48==
36
3 Processing validation through anechoic measurements and simulations
(a) full sphere at t1
(b) AVIL setup at t1
(c) full sphere at t2
(d) AVIL setup at t2
(e) full sphere at t3
(f) AVIL setup at t3
Figure 3.17: Pressure on the reproduction setup in dB. Either a full sphere with in-
finitely many loudspeaker (left) or on the AVIL setup (right) at different
time t. The numbers on the full sphere represent the number of the micro-
phone for the 64 microphones spherical array and the ones on the AVIL
setup represent the associate loudspeaker number. The wave is coming
from the direction of the microphone 3.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4
Measurements in concert
halls and analysis
4.1
Measurements
4.1.1
Danish Royal Conservatory (DRC) Measurements
The measurements at the DRC were made using the same setup principle as in the
anechoic chamber. Those measurements were conform to the ISO standard [12]. Each
measurement were using a 20 to 22kHz sweep of 15s and each of them were averaged
three times.
Two positions were chosen for auralisation purposes and three extra positions for
comparison purposes (respectively R1, R2 and R3, R4, R5 on figure 4.1). For the au-
ralisation positions five positions of loudspeakers were recorded in order to map all the
stage (L1 to L5 on figure 4.1). Only the center position on the stage for the loudspeaker
(L3) was used for the extra recording positions.
The two auralisation positions were situated at the conductor position and on the first
balcony as seen on figure 4.2(a) and 4.2(b). Both spherical arrays, the HATS and the
free field mic were used at those positions. The extra recording positions were situated
on the parterre as seen on figure 4.2(c) and only the spherical arrays were used for the
cases. It can be noted that the conductor position is off centered since the piano was in
the center of the stage during the recordings. This non symmetrical position has to be
remembered for the following analysis.
The recording position were noted according to the seat and row they were on and the
loudspeaker positions were written down for future use as seen on figure 4.2(d). Their
position can be triangularised thanks to their relative position to the exit doors behind
the stage found in the logbook in Appendix A.
==PAGE:50==
38
4 Measurements in concert halls and analysis
Figure 4.1: Mapping of the recording and playback positions at the DRC.
(a) DRC conductor position
(b) DRC balcony position
(c) DRC extra recording positions
(d) DRC loudspeaker position
Figure 4.2: Recording and playback position at the DRC.
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Measurements
39
4.1.2
Orchestre National de Lille (ONL) Measurements
The measurements at the ONL followed a similar pattern as the ones in the DRC.
Those measurements were performed for Kahle Acoustics with equipment provided by
Dr.Brian Katz. The goal was to map the acoustic of the concert hall and the ambisonic
microphones measures (tetramic and Sennheiser ambisonic microphone) were not the
focus of the measurements. A non equalised sweep from 10 to 22kHz was send with
a sampling frequency of 48kHz.
It is to be noted that due to the small size of the
dodecahedrons their omnidirectionality is greater at high frequencies and slightly poorer
at low frequencies than the one of the dodecahedron used in Copenhagen. The low
frequency limitation is however still below the range of interest and the greater high
frequency limit allowed to bypass the equalisation of the sweep.
Due to the higher number of recording and playback equipment the whole half of
the concert hall was mapped in only one day. The mapping pattern can be seen on
figure 4.3 and 4.4 where each red square corresponds to one set of measurements using
all the equipment available. More information can be found about the equipment used
in appendix A.
Those measurements were a good personal experience and allowed a validation of the
relevance of the measurement procedure used in the DRC. However, due to the differ-
ences in microphones, loudspeakers, sweep used... the measured impulse responses will
not be compared to the DRC measurements and will be left as extra data.
Figure 4.3: Map of the ONL.
==PAGE:52==
40
4 Measurements in concert halls and analysis
(a) ONL loudspeakers position
(b) ONL recording positions
Figure 4.4: ONL pictures of the positions of the dodecahedrons and the microphones.
4.2
Analysis
4.2.1
Plane wave simulation and measurements
In order to answer the research question the ambisonic coefficients are investigated. The
coefficients B[(N+1)2xF] taken right after the encoding are either investigated as it, in
the frequency domain, or in the time domain, as shown with the dotted red arrow in
figure 3.1. In order to observe the energy in each order, the energy in each degree of the
order are normalised and averaged over the number of degrees in this order following
the equations
b′
n =
1
2 ∗n + 1
v
u
u
t
n
∑
m=−n
|bm
n |2.
(4.1)
In the following figures this normalisation is made at each order whether the time
or frequency domain is investigated.
In the frequency domain for the anechoic and
DRC measurements the plots are truncated at half the sampling frequency of respec-
tively 8kHz and 16kHz. Lastly it has to be noted that each plot are normalised by
the maximum energy recorded max(∑
n bn) across time or frequency. This allows for
a more accurate comparison between the different measures.
This is mostly needed
for comparison between the recording spheres since, if the level of the recording might
change between two measures due to the distance with the loudspeaker, the different
microphone calibration of the two spheres lead to different levels. A normalisation it
then needed for the comparison.
4.2.1.1
The simulation validation
As seen in section 3.3 the anechoic measurements recorded a plane wave as expected.
This is confirmed by a simulation of a plane wave arriving at an imaginary recording
sphere. The same simulation is modified in order to analyse the energy in the ambisonic
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Analysis
41
coefficients after encoding. The only difference between the simulated sphere and the
real one lays in the diffraction of the rigid/real one; this difference has been taken into
account in the simulation. Otherwise the encoding process stayed the same.
(a) measurement in time domain
(b) measurement in frequency domain
(c) Dirac impulse simulation in time domain
(d) Dirac impulse simulation in frequency do-
main
(e) IR simulation in time domain
(f) IR simulation in frequency domain
Figure 4.5: B coefficients in time (left) and frequency domain (right) with a plane
wave coming from the microphone 1 of the sphere with 64 microphones for
measurements and simulations.
==PAGE:54==
42
4 Measurements in concert halls and analysis
Two simulations have been performed: one using a Dirac impulse response as the
source generator and one using a measured impulse response with the free field micro-
phone in the anechoic room. The original measured coefficients and the simulated ones
having the incoming wave coming from the same direction (microphone 1) can be seen in
figure 4.5. In the time domain plots it can be seen that the start of the impulse response
can clearly be determined and its fast decay can be observed mostly for the impulse
response (IR) simulation and for the measurements. The Dirac impulse as expected
has no decay of its own. The start of each coming wave is not the same across the
plots since, as explained before, the measurements in the anechoic chamber were done
manually and the simulations were created from scratch leading to a different time start.
These differences will not be addressed anymore since it does not change the results.
In the measurement figure 4.5(a) the energy gets lower as the order increase in the
time domain. This pattern can be partially explained by the degree normalisation since
the higher the order the bigger the normalisation is. This pattern is reproduced by the
IR simulation in figure 4.5(e). However, by using a Dirac impulse in figure 4.5(c), there
seemed to be a rise in energy in the higher order. This can be explained by looking in
the frequency domain.
Based on what has been explained in 2.3.1, it can be expected that higher modes
contain more high frequency energy. Since the IR simulation is based on a real mea-
surement with a low high frequency limit, its higher order will have the same amount of
energy as in the measurements. However due to the nature of the Dirac impulse having
a flat response in the frequency domain it will contain more high frequency energy and
this will have an impact in the time domain. This unrealistic impulse also leads to the
frequency ripples seen in figure 4.5(d). This figure however allows the validation of the
assumptions made in part 2.3.1 with 2.7(d) in which each order is defined with a high
frequency limit depending on the size of the sphere and the number of microphones.
This confirms as well the low frequency limit dependent on the filter used (figure 2.7(c))
and again the size of the sphere for higher orders.
The measurement and the IR simulation have a less obvious but still discernible
pattern where the higher frequency energy resides in the higher orders. In figure 4.5(b)
it seems that the measured energy resides mostly in the first 3 orders. This can be
explained with the limitation of the dodecahedron used and its better radiation at lower
frequencies.
4.2.1.2
The directivity dependence
The goal of the normalisation over all the degrees is to try and get results that are
independent on the direction of arrival of the signal. If this hypothesis should be proved
to be true, plane wave simulations should lead to the same results no matter the origin.
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Analysis
43
(a) IR coming from M1 in time domain
(b) IR coming from M1 in frequency domain
(c) IR coming from M48 in time domain
(d) IR coming from M48 in frequency domain
(e) IR coming from M21 in time domain
(f) IR coming from M21 in frequency domain
Figure 4.6: B coefficients in time (left) and frequency domain (right) simulated with
an impulse response coming from different directions of the sphere with 64
microphones.
Figure 4.6 displays simulation results with the IR coming from the microphone 1,
48 and 21. Both microphones 1 and 48 are situated in the xy plane of the sphere and
are separated by 163 degrees. The results that they display are very similar and only
differ in the high frequency component of the different orders where there are some minor
changes. The time domain results are, as a consequence, not discernible from each other.
On the other hand, when the signal is coming from the M21 direction which has an
angle of incidence coming from above the sphere (55 degrees in polar angle), the energy
==PAGE:56==
44
4 Measurements in concert halls and analysis
repartition in time domain differs from before. Those same changes can also be found
in the frequency domain where it is even easier to see it: decrease of the orders 1, 5 and
7 and increase of the order 2, 3, 4 and 6. This is explained by the directivity pattern of
each order. Even if the energy is normalised in each order by each degrees, their sharp
directivity pattern leads to a different energy repartition depending on the direction of
arrival of the wave. For instance, if the sound is coming exactly from the direction of
one of the side lobe of a higher order harmonic then a rise of energy can be expected
in this order. Those sharp directivity pattern will be highly prone to small changes in
the coming direction of the wave. This also explains the non-perfectly similar results
between the simulated IR coming from M1 and M48, even though they are situated on
the same xy plane.
Across the simulations the lower orders are the most stable ones and the order 0
is always the same. This makes sense since the order 0 stands for the omnidirectional
pattern and higher orders have more sharper directivity patterns as explained before.
It is then not possible to distinguish without a doubt a plane wave just by looking
at the ambisonic coefficients. If the pattern stays the same the levels are changing and
this change increases with the number of orders investigated. It is also a fair assumption
to say that other changes might occur depending on the calibration of the microphones
and on the loudspeaker used for the measurements.
Similar results can be observed with the measurement in the anechoic chamber with the
signal coming from M1 or M48 in Appendix B.1 figure B.1.
4.2.1.3
The spherical array comparison
Due to the non-availability of the 52 microphones sphere during the measurement period
in the anechoic chamber it is not possible to compare measurements between those two
spheres in the plane wave case. Nonetheless, having proved the reliability of the simula-
tion, IR simulations are performed to compare both spheres whose results are shown in
figure 4.7. The microphone 19 in the sphere with 52 mics is situated in the xy plane of
the sphere just like the mic 1 for the 64mics sphere. This allows for similar simulation
conditions.
Looking at the time domain, if the pattern of decreasing energy with higher order
seem to hold true for the 52 mics sphere, there also seems to be more energy in the lower
orders. This can be seen in the sharper decrease of energy between the order 1 and 2
in figure 4.7(c). This observation has to be kept in check in regards to the number of
order encoded. In fact, due to the normalisation with the maximum energy recorded
max(∑
n bn) it is expected to see a global rise in energy when a lower number of order is
encoded; here 6 compared to 7. The energy of the seventh order is ”transferred” to the
other orders.
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Analysis
45
Now looking at the frequency domain, differences in energy across orders can be
found. A rise in energy in the first and fifth order for the 52 mics sphere as opposed
to a decrease in the second and the third can be found. Those changes are difficult to
interpret but might also be due to the normalisation with a lower encoded order.
Another major difference lies in the high frequency limit in the orders. With the
64 mics sphere in figure 4.7(b) it is seen that the peak in the orders 6 and 7 are both
around 2kHz when for the 52 mics in figure 4.7(d) the peak at the order 6 is around
4kHz. This highest frequency resolution with the 52 mics array compared to the 64 one
seems counter intuitive since the number of microphones is lower in the former case. It
can however be explained by the radius of the 52 mics sphere being smaller than the 64
mics one allowing for a higher microphone density and so a highest frequency limit.
Furthermore, another explanation lies in figure 2.7(d) where the radial filters for each
order are displayed as a function of ka. It shows that higher frequency resolution can be
achieved through a higher number of microphones, and so a higher encoding order, or by
having a smaller sphere (smaller a) and so, a higher density of microphones. Those com-
bined results are a validation of what has been explained previously: that the density of
microphones is more important than just the reproduction order for high frequencies.
It also leads to believe that the low to mid frequency reproduction of the signal would
be better reproduced using the 64 mics sphere since a lot of order will convey its informa-
tion. Consequently the reproduction of the 52 mics sphere should be less accurate in the
mid frequencies but will allow a higher frequency resolution. The question will now be
whether or not the difference in the ”accuracy” of the reproduction in the mid frequency
range will be perceived by an average listener. This question can not be answered here
and will require further investigation involving listening tests in order to be verified.
==PAGE:58==
46
4 Measurements in concert halls and analysis
(a) IR coming from M1 in time domain at the 64
mics sphere
(b) IR coming from M1 in frequency domain at
the 64 mics sphere
(c) IR coming from M19 in time domain at the
52 mics sphere
(d) IR coming from M19 in frequency domain at
the 52 mics sphere
Figure 4.7: B coefficients in time (left) and frequency domain (right) simulated with
an impulse response coming from a similar direction in the xy plane of
both spheres; with 64 (top) and 52 microphones (bottom).
4.2.1.4
The encoding order influence
In order to try the robustness and the viability of the encoding process the encoding
order of the coefficients is reduced to verify the consistency of the results. In figure 4.8
the IR simulation is plotted with the maximum encoding order and with an encoding
truncation at the order 4.
Apart from the global rise in energy due to the normalisation with a lower number
of orders, most specifically visible in the time domain, no significant differences can be
seen between the full and truncated encoded coefficients. The encoding is stable mean-
ing that the ambisonic coefficients levels are only dependent on the recording.
Similar results can be found in annexe B.1 with the anechoic measurements, the IR
simulation with the 52 mic sphere and the Dirac impulse simulation in figure B.2, B.3
and B.4 respectively.
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Analysis
47
(a) IR in time domain fully encoded
(b) IR in frequency domain fully encoded
(c) IR in time domain with truncated encoding
(d) IR in frequency domain with truncated en-
coding
Figure 4.8: B coefficients in time (left) and frequency domain (right) simulated with
an IR coming from M1 of the sphere with 64 microphones. Signal encoded
with the maximum order of 7 (top) or truncated at the order 4 (bottom).
If this stability of the encoding would be expected, by proving it it allows for a more
critical look at the differences in the energy repartition of the lower order coefficients
between the 52 and 64 mics spheres. Their differences laying solely in their recording
and not in their encoding. Having proved that inconsistent energy repartition can be
expected with increasing orders due to the complexity of the directivity patterns, since
both spheres are supposed to record the same signal the differences in the lower order
and more specifically the order 0 should not be noticeable. Even more so in the order
0 which is not affected by the higher frequency limitation due to the radial functions
filtering.
==PAGE:60==
48
4 Measurements in concert halls and analysis
4.2.2
DRC measurement
4.2.2.1
DRC ambisonic coefficients
The measurements done in the DRC have been processed the same way as with the
anechoic ones. The coefficients for all the signal generation and reception positions in
time and frequency domain can be found in Appendix B.2 with a zoom on the first
150ms of the IR for the time domain plots.
The analysis will focus on the ambisonic coefficients measured with the loudspeaker
at the center of the stage (L3) since it allows the use of the extra recording positions
R3, R4 and R5. In fact, if the other loudspeaker positions are needed for auralisation
purposes (separation of each instruments according to their position in the harmony),
when only the encoding part is investigated more interesting results can be found with
the change of the reception positions. The measurements with different loudspeaker
positions can still be found in Appendix B.2 but the differences being less prominent
than the reception position it is harder to draw meaningful conclusions from it.
The ambisonic coefficients in time domain for the loudspeaker at the center of the
stage (L3) can be seen in figure 4.10. It can be seen that most of the energy is found
in the order 0 specially for the late part of the reflections. This, however, has to be put
into perspective with the overall energy level being low compared to the direct or early
field.
Regarding the differences between the 64 and 52 mics spheres, similar conclusions as
with the plane wave can be drawn. The main difference still being the high frequency
limit being higher with the 52 mics sphere as it can be seen in figure B.5 to B.10.
If only those plots are considered, looking at the DRC measurements only allows to
distinguish the many reflections from the DRC hall compared to the anechoic measure-
ments. For instance in figure 4.9 a zoom in the first 150ms of the IR of the balcony
position (R2) has been made and the direct field can be distinguish clearly from the
early reflections by looking at the drop of energy 0.02ms after the start of the IR. This
separation is harder to make in the conductor position (R1) since it is closer to the
source than the balcony position. The usefulness of this observation has to be put into
perspective since this kind of distinction can be achieved by looking only at the IR of a
free field microphone in time domain.
Another information that can be inferred from those plots is the density of reflection
the recording position will receive. In the case of R5 the recording device was situated
at the center of the hall and was facing the loudspeaker also in the center of the stage.
This symmetrical case leads to expect higher energy from the side reflections since they
should arrive from both sides of the sphere and at the same time due to the symmetry
of the hall. This assumption seems seconded by the higher density of peaks in 4.10(i)
and 4.10(j) at R5 compared to the other positions.
However, measurement at R5 seem to have been corrupted by noise leading to question
the relevance of the data. This higher noise floor could be explained by the closer prox-
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Analysis
49
imity of R5 to the recording front end which cooling device is noisy. Otherwise this
could be due to a ”man made” mistake during the recording that went unnoticed due
to the fact that this was the last recording and the DRC had to be closed afterward.
This noise is only present with the 64 mics sphere making the conclusions still relevant
thanks to the 52 mics sphere.
(a) full IR of 1.5s with 64 mics
(b) zoom on direct and early reflections of 0.15s
with 64 mics
(c) full IR of 1.5s with 52 mics
(d) zoom on direct and early reflections of 0.15s
with 52 mics
Figure 4.9: B coefficients in time domain measured at the balcony position at the DRC
with the 64 (top) and 52 (bottom) mics spheres at L3 with the full impulse
response of 1.5s (left) or with a zoom on the direct and early reflections of
0.15s (right).
==PAGE:62==
50
4 Measurements in concert halls and analysis
(a) conductor with 64 mics
(b) conductor with 52 mics
(c) balcony with 64 mics
(d) balcony with 52 mics
(e) R3 with 64 mics
(f) R3 with 52 mics
(g) R4 with 64 mics
(h) R4 with 52 mics
(i) R5 with 64 mics
(j) R5 with 52 mics
Figure 4.10: B coefficients in time domain measured at the all positions at the DRC
with the 64 (left) and 52 (right) mics spheres at L3 with the full impulse
response of 1.5s.
==PAGE:63==
4.2 Analysis
51
4.2.2.2
DRC modified early lateral energy fraction (LF )
By only investigating the ambisonic coefficients it is not possible to assess for the quality
of the reproduction of the HOA method for concert halls. An objective parameter has
to be defined to compare the quality of the reproduction at different encoding order and
with the two spheres.
Ongoing research tries to correlate subjective perception with the quality of a con-
cert hall acoustic. Two objective measures are considered relevant to source broadening
and spatial impression for concert halls, the early lateral energy fraction (LF) and the
interaural cross-correlation [1]. Some researches also theorised that spatial impression
should be formally divided into two components where the apparent source width is
associated with the early lateral reflections and listener envelopment with late lateral
reflections [5].
Regarding concert halls, LF is the most widely used parameter allowing an objective
quantification of the spatial impression. It is related to the proportion of early sound
energy arriving from the side of the listener. This parameter is then being investigated
regarding ambisonic reproduction.
LF is usually measured using a figure of eight and an omnidirectional microphone.
The figure of eight mic is presented side way from the direction of arrival of the source
in order that the direct sound will not be measured, only the reflections coming from
the side.
The energy measured is then normalised with the energy recorded by the
omnidirectional mic as
LF
=
∫80ms
5ms p2
8(t)dt
∫80ms
0ms p2
0(t)dt
(4.2)
=
∫80ms
5ms p2
0(t)cos(φ)dt
∫80ms
0ms p2
0(t)dt
,
(4.3)
with p8 and p0 being respectively the pressure measured by the figure of eight and omni-
directional microphones [1]. This parameter can also be measured using spherical array
and first spherical order decomposition or with the estimated figure of eight equation
4.3 [6].
In order to estimate how the reproduced pressure conveys the early lateral energy
fraction parameter, LF is adapted to our case. Equation 4.3 is modified as
LFmod,5/80
=
∫80ms
5ms
∫
S(p̃(t, ΩM)cos(θ))2dSdt
∫80ms
0ms
∫
S p̃2(t, Ω)dSdt
(4.4)
≈
75e−3S ∑80ms
5ms
∑
M(p̃(t, ΩM)cos(θ))2
80e−3S
∑80ms
0ms
∑
M p̃2(t, ΩM)
,
(4.5)
where p̃ is either the pressure recorded on the sphere’s microphones (pmeas) or the pres-
sure reconstructed using ambisonic encoding reconstruction up to the order N (pN). In
==PAGE:64==
52
4 Measurements in concert halls and analysis
the following figures the choice of p̃ for the nominator and denominator is sometime
different. The corresponding p̃ for each figures can be seen in 4.12(a).
The results of LFmod,5/80 for both spheres at different encoding orders can be seen
at 4.11. First, it can be seen that the LFmod,5/80 of the reproduced pressure pN (dashed
curves) are close to the measured one (plain curves) for all positions and for both spheres.
Some discrepancies can be found for some orders depending on the position and can be
attributed to the scattering created by the sphere not present in the reproduced pN but
present in the measured pmeas. Scattering is mostly present at high frequencies and so
would be expected to be seen only for high reproducing order N. This being not the case,
the reproduced LFmod,5/80 being overall close the measured one, it can be concluded that
LFmod,5/80 contains most of its information in the low frequencies and so in the lower
orders. This would lead to a good spatial reconstruction even with lower order recording.
However good spatial reconstruction does not mean accurate reproduction of the
sound pressure. When pN is used in the nominator of equation 4.5 and pmeas as denom-
inator/reference (dashed-dotted curves), LFmod,5/80 starts at a lower level and tend to
reach the LFmod,5/80 value of the measured pressure. This is explained by the reproduc-
tion of the pressure being more accurate with higher encoding order.
Furthermore, it can be observed that LFmod,5/80 with the 52 mics sphere tends to
reach more quickly the measured LFmod,5/80. This can be explained by the radius of
the sphere being smaller than the 64 mics sphere.
The smaller radius will lead to
radial functions including more high frequencies and so the accurate reproduction of the
pressure can be described with less orders.
Lastly, it can be seen that the level of the results are way lower than expected. In a
diffuse field the expected LF is 0.33 and results from the literature in concert halls have
result of the order of 10−1 and not 10−3 [5]. If such low results can be expected from
the anechoic chamber condition (figure 4.11(a)) since only the incoming plane wave is
recorded and no side reflections are measured, higher values would be expected for the
DRC. The reason for those differences is attributed to the high reverberation time of
the DRC. In fact the goal of the integration between 5 and 80ms is to distinguish the
direct sound from the early reflections. However, with a long reverberation time it can
be interesting to adapt the integration time.
Based on equation 4.5 with the end of the direct sound being defined at 20ms and
the end of the early reflections being chosen at 320ms, in order to keep the same length
ratio as before, the parameter LFmod,20/320 is defined.
LFmod,20/320 can be seen in figure 4.12. If the patterns are the same as in figure
4.11 the levels are closer of the expected ones. Then despite those higher values for
LFmod,20/320 it can not be analysed as a proper LF due to the modification that occurred.
The just noticeable difference for LF of 0.05 can not be used in this analysis for this
==PAGE:65==
4.2 Analysis
53
very same reason. As a consequence only the shape of the curves can be analysed and
the difference in values between the two spheres will not be addressed in depth.
Looking at figure 4.12 it can be seen that the pattern of LFmod,20/320 are similar
as with LFmod,5/20 in figure 4.11. When the reproduced pressure is compared to the
measured one, LFmod,20/320 rise with the order of reconstruction to reach the value of
the measure pressure. This is expected in the sense that, the higher the encoding order,
the closer to the measured pressure the reconstructed one will be and so will tend to
the value of the measure LFmod,20/320. The fact that this behaviour is not reproduced by
the LFmod,20/320 when using the reconstructed pressure as its own reference proves that
the perception of LFmod,20/320 will be the same after encoding even though the pressure
is truncated. Furthermore, knowing that LFmod,20/320 is consistent across the encoding
order still lead to believe that a lower order encoding will capture the perceptual spatial
impression of the room. Those are the same conclusion as with LFmod,20/320, the main
difference being the levels.
As previously mentioned it is not possible to assess for how the level differences
between the LFmod,20/320 of the two spheres are perceived. Still, it can be interesting to
notice that if the measured LFmod,20/320 are very similar for the positions R3, R4 and R5
in both spheres, bigger differences can be found with the conductor (figure 4.12(b)) and
balcony position (figure 4.12(c)). Those level differences between the spheres could be
explained by the distance from the source being the smallest at the conductor position
and the longest at the balcony. This leads to a probable change in ratio between direct
and early field in the higher frequency components, components in which lies the biggest
recording differences in those two spheres as proven before.
At last, it is seen that the measured LFmod,20/320 with the 52 mic sphere always
has a higher value than the 64 one. This might be explained by the higher recording
frequency limit of the sphere allowing to record more lateral energy from the higher
frequencies. This lack of high frequencies could also be an explanation for the low levels
of the LFmod,20/320 and LFmod,5/20.
==PAGE:66==
54
4 Measurements in concert halls and analysis
(a) anechoic chamber
(b) DRC, conductor
(c) DRC, balcony
(d) DRC, R3
(e) DRC, R4
(f) DRC, R5
Figure 4.11: Modified LFmod,5/80 using 5ms for the direct field and 80ms for the early
reflections at every position of the DRC with the sound coming from L3.
==PAGE:67==
4.2 Analysis
55
(a) LFmod legend
(b) DRC, conductor
(c) DRC, balcony
(d) DRC, R3
(e) DRC, R4
(f) DRC, R5
Figure 4.12: Modified LFmod,20/320 using 20ms for the direct field and 320ms for the
early reflections at every position of the DRC with the sound coming
from L3.
==PAGE:68==
56
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
Ambisonic recordings in a concert hall using spherical arrays were performed and the
obtained ambisonic coefficients were analysed. The goal was to assess for the accuracy
of the recording of spatial information using different spherical arrays with different
encoding orders and to propose a better understanding of the limitation of ambisonic
recording.
It was shown that, due to the many different ways in which the ambisonic coeffi-
cients can be processed, it is challenging to define how much of the spatial information
is effectively recorded. The differences in the recording position provide different chal-
lenges due to the differences in direct energy, early reflections... etc. Furthermore, the
higher the encoding order is, the more sensitive the recordings are to the position of the
recording device due to the sharp directivity pattern of the higher orders.
If recording higher orders would improve the reproduced direction of arrival of the
source, by looking at the ratio of energy between the lateral energy from the early
reflection and the energy of the full signal in all directions (modified lateral energy
fraction LF), it seems that this ratio is preserved in the encoding process for all encoding
orders. This would lead to believe that the apparent source width that conveys a part
of the spatial information is preserved with ambisonic encoding across all orders and
that devices with a lower number of microphones, and so lower encoding order, will still
convey this information.
By looking at the repartition of the energy of the modes across time it seems that
most of the energy for late reflections are situated toward the lower order mode. This
would tend to justify the significance of the lower order mode over the higher ones for
the reproduction of concert hall sound field having a long reverberation time.
Another important phenomenon to take into account for the choice of the recording
device is the compromise between the number and the density of microphones of the
spherical array. The higher the number of microphones, the higher the encoding order
possible and so the high frequency limit. However a dense mesh of microphones will
also rise the high frequency limit in a more efficient way than by raising the order. This
can be obtained by using a sphere with a smaller radius since it will create a denser
grid and will influence the radial function consequently; they will allow higher frequency
recording with lower orders.
This conclusion for microphones arrays has to be considered for ambisonic recordings if
an accurate reproduction of higher frequencies is desired. This depends on the purpose
of the recording; for instance, this is needed for auralisation reproduction.
==PAGE:70==
58
5 Conclusion
Further work can still be considered to assess for the relevance of higher order
modes in the recording of spatial information. Recordings of an ambisonic microphone
(tetramic...etc) having only 4 microphones (order 1) could be used to be compared with
the ones of the spherical arrays. Another step could be to do subjective listening of those
recordings after decoding with a spherical loudspeaker array similar as the one in the
Audio Visual Immersion Lab (AVIL). This however has to be kept in check regarding the
limitations of the decoding itself which involves different assumptions that will define
the decoding matrix leading to different accuracy of the reconstructed field (optimiser,
compressed sensing, near field compensation...). Recording made with a HATS in the
reproduced field of the AVIL room could also be compared with the measures made in
the DRC using psychoacoustic parameters like Interaural Level and Time Differences
(ILT and ITD, see Appendix C) to assess for objective perceptual differences.
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX A
Measurement procedure
at the Danish Royal
Conservatory
A.1
Equipment list
Equipment used in the anechoic chamber measurements (figure A.1):
1. Loudspeaker setup (L)
a) Dodecahedron with stand
b) Amplifier
c) Cable
2. Signal generator
a) External Computer
b) External sound card (focusrite) and usb cable
c) Double jack cable
3. Spherical array setup (S)
a) 64 microphones spherical array with stand
b) Split box
c) Front end with cable and its computer with pulse recorder
4. Dummy head setup (H)
a) HATS without ear canal
b) Nova amplifier with power cable
c) Two long BNC connectors cables
5. Tetramic (T)
==PAGE:72==
60
A Measurement procedure at the Danish Royal Conservatory
6. Free field microphone with stand
7. Noise canceling headset
8. Laser pointer
A planar array was also used in the anechoic chamber but then dismissed for the DRC
measures due to a lack of time and practical interest.
(a)
(b)
Figure A.1: Full equipment used in the anechoic chamber tests.
The equipment used in the DRC was the same as in the anechoic chamber except
that the external sound card focusrite was replace with a fireface having more input-
s/outputs and the front end was doubled to have a rise in recording sampling frequency.
Figure A.2: Mapping of the recording and playback positions at the DRC.
==PAGE:73==
A.1 Equipment list
61
The equipment used in the ONL was provided by Brian Katz and consisted in four
small dodecahedron (figure A.3(b)), microphone calibrator (figure A.3(a)), six CMC6-
MK6 condenser microphones, one omnidirectional microphone, on figure of 8 microphone,
one dummy head, one tetramic (figure A.3(c)), one Sennheiser ambisonic microphone
(figure A.3(d)), their corresponding amplificators and a fireface soundcard (figure A.4).
(a) ONL microphone calibrators
(b) DRC dodecahedron
(c) ONL recording devices
(d) ONL sennheiser ambisonic microphone
Figure A.3: Equipment used in the ONL recordings.
(a) ONL microphone amplification and sound-
card
(b) ONL tetramic amplification
Figure A.4: ONL pictures of the amplificators and soundcard.
==PAGE:74==
62
A Measurement procedure at the Danish Royal Conservatory
A.2
Measurement log at the DRC
28-03
Set up of the equipment from 4pm to 5:30 5:30 test the spherical array to see if it works
The sphere is responding and cables are long enough. Will not reach the second balcony
though.
22.2 degree C and 45% humidity
dodecahedron at -16dB like in the anechoic chamber
fs sweep = 44100; sampling frequency based on the wav file, 48000 otherwise
f1 = 20; min freq of the sweep
f2 = 22000; max freq of the sweep
T = 15; T sec signal
First measurement, sphere on the balcony row 3 seat 4
dodecahedron horns L5
recording 9 through 12 (did it 4 times instead of 3)
dodecahedron position L3
13 to 15
L4
16 to 18
L1
19 to 21
L2
22 to 24
FF mic on the balcony row 3 seat 4 via Matlab
HATS on the balcony row 3 seat 4 via Matlab.
Channel 1-2 ears left-right
29-03
Temperature 23.5 degree, 46% humidity
Height of the 52 mic sphere 1.138m.
Height of the 64 mic sphere 1.126m.
Position conductor, 15 measurements for the ff mic at 1.296m high then with L3 we
move the mic to ”simulate” a tetramic kind of. For this tetramic the positions are 2cm
below, beside and in front of the original position of ff conductor L3 1/2/3. The original
height is on paper
NB: my mistake, the position down is actually the center of the simTetra, ff conductor
L3 1/2/3 is actually more up position and own is center. Aka, front and side are the
front and side of down.
Dummy head now, the dummy head is on the chair and the chin is at the position of
==PAGE:75==
A.2 Measurement log at the DRC
63
the ff mic.
Yesterday the HATS was in a seat and the sphere/ff were slightly above due to physical
limitations (see pictures).
Spherical 64 now. The immediate surrounding have been cleared so no major undesired
reflections.
Mic 1 facing the center of the stage (mid back, L3 more or less)
L5
recording 25 through 27
L3
28 to 30
L4
31 to 33
L1
34 to 36
L2
37 to 40 (39 noisy, corrupted)
Ok now the Spherical 52 mic array. Have to check the mic positions.
Mic 19 facing the center of the stage (mid back, L3 more or less)
L2 (very weird resonance, more than usual in the recordings, ”couac”)
recording 41 through 44 (extra due to the couac)
L5
45 to 47
L3
48 to 50
L4
51 to 53
L1
54 to 56
Still the sphere 52 but now in R3S4 like yesterday. the 19 facing the scene.
L1
recording 57 through 59
L2
60 to 62
L5
63 to 65
L3
66 to 68
L4
69 to 71
Triangulation of the loudspeaker position (left/right door distance).
L1 10,469/15,122
==PAGE:76==
64
A Measurement procedure at the Danish Royal Conservatory
L2 15,452/9,485
L3 9,137/8,929
L4 6,532/10,695
L5 10,925/6,340
NB: regarding eight the loudspeaker stand is 1.287m high (taken like the distances, from
the junction stand loudspeaker.
The main stage as a step of 15.4cm (L4 & L5)
L3 is slightly higher, 8.6cm.
2.25m high for the reference door knobs.
28.5cm high for the conductor stand.
98.3 cm for the scene height.
15 cm Height pf steps in the audience (start after row 4, i.e. row5=row4+15cm, and
row4=row3)
Height of 1st balcony: 60cm to the third row, 87cm to the rail, 3.60m to the top stair
below
Some extra positions with the spherical arrays with L3.
Starting with the 52 one with 19 facing the center of the stage.
Row 6 seat 30.
72 to 74
Row 9 seat 18
75 to 77
Row 7 seat 2(centered, in front of the loudspeaker)
78 to 80
With the 64 one with 1 facing the center of the stage (not perfect sometimes due to
physical limitations).
Row 7 seat 2
81 to 83
Row 9 seat 18
84 to 86
Row 6 seat 30
87 to 89
Now one sweep at each position with the ff mic to check the levels.
Last measurement with 24.0 degree C and 42% humidity.
Packing up at 1:30pm
NB: every time some kind of box resonance at LF (500Hz?)
The ff mic has been place vertically due to a mistake in the beginning that then been
kept for coherence.
Shouldn’t be too bad since mainly HF
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX B
Extra analysis plots
==PAGE:78==
66
B Extra analysis plots
B.1
Plane wave simulation and
measurements
(a) IR coming from M1 in time domain
(b) IR coming from M1 in frequency domain
(c) IR coming from M48 in time domain
(d) IR coming from M48 in frequency domain
(e) IR coming from M3 in time domain
(f) IR coming from M3 in frequency domain
Figure B.1: B coefficients in time (left) and frequency domain (right) measured with
an impulse response coming from different directions of the sphere with 64
microphones. Microphone 1 (top) and 3 (bottom) are very close together
and should have similar results.
==PAGE:79==
B.1 Plane wave simulation and measurements
67
(a) IR in time domain fully encoded
(b) IR in frequency domain fully encoded
(c) IR in time domain with truncated encoding
(d) IR in frequency domain with truncated en-
coding
Figure B.2: B coefficients in time (left) and frequency domain (right) measured with
an impulse response of the sphere with 64 microphones encoding with the
maximum order of 7 (top) or truncated at the order 4 (bottom).
==PAGE:80==
68
B Extra analysis plots
(a) IR in time domain fully encoded
(b) IR in frequency domain fully encoded
(c) IR in time domain with truncated encoding
(d) IR in frequency domain with truncated en-
coding
Figure B.3: B coefficients in time (left) and frequency domain (right) simulated with
an IR coming from M1 of the sphere with 52 microphones. Signal encoded
with the maximum order of 7 (top) or truncated at the order 4 (bottom).
==PAGE:81==
B.2 DRC measurement
69
(a) Dirac impulse in time domain fully encoded
(b) Dirac impulse in frequency domain fully en-
coded
(c) Dirac impulse in time domain with truncated
encoding
(d) Dirac impulse in frequency domain with trun-
cated encoding
Figure B.4: B coefficients in time (left) and frequency domain (right) simulated with a
Dirac impulse coming from M1 of the sphere with 64 microphones. Signal
encoded with the maximum order of 7 (top) or truncated at the order 4
(bottom).
B.2
DRC measurement
==PAGE:82==
70
B Extra analysis plots
(a) sweep coming from L1 in time
domain
(b) sweep coming from L1 in fre-
quency domain
(c) sweep coming from L2 in time
domain
(d) sweep coming from L2 in fre-
quency domain
(e) sweep coming from L3 in time
domain
(f) sweep coming from L3 in fre-
quency domain
(g) sweep coming from L4 in time
domain
(h) sweep coming from L4 in fre-
quency domain
(i) sweep coming from L5 in time
domain
(j) sweep coming from L5 in fre-
quency domain
Figure B.5: B coefficients in time (left) and frequency domain (right) measured at
the conductor position at the DRC with the 64 mics sphere at all the
loudspeaker positions.
==PAGE:83==
B.2 DRC measurement
71
(a) sweep coming from L1 in time
domain
(b) sweep coming from L1 in fre-
quency domain
(c) sweep coming from L2 in time
domain
(d) sweep coming from L2 in fre-
quency domain
(e) sweep coming from L3 in time
domain
(f) sweep coming from L3 in fre-
quency domain
(g) sweep coming from L4 in time
domain
(h) sweep coming from L4 in fre-
quency domain
(i) sweep coming from L5 in time
domain
(j) sweep coming from L5 in fre-
quency domain
Figure B.6: B coefficients in time (left) and frequency domain (right) measured at
the conductor position at the DRC with the 52 mics sphere at all the
loudspeaker positions.
==PAGE:84==
72
B Extra analysis plots
(a) sweep coming from L1 in time
domain
(b) sweep coming from L1 in fre-
quency domain
(c) sweep coming from L2 in time
domain
(d) sweep coming from L2 in fre-
quency domain
(e) sweep coming from L3 in time
domain
(f) sweep coming from L3 in fre-
quency domain
(g) sweep coming from L4 in time
domain
(h) sweep coming from L4 in fre-
quency domain
(i) sweep coming from L5 in time
domain
(j) sweep coming from L5 in fre-
quency domain
Figure B.7: B coefficients in time (left) and frequency domain (right) measured at the
balcony position at the DRC with the 64 mics sphere at all the loudspeaker
positions.
==PAGE:85==
B.2 DRC measurement
73
(a) sweep coming from L1 in time
domain
(b) sweep coming from L1 in fre-
quency domain
(c) sweep coming from L2 in time
domain
(d) sweep coming from L2 in fre-
quency domain
(e) sweep coming from L3 in time
domain
(f) sweep coming from L3 in fre-
quency domain
(g) sweep coming from L4 in time
domain
(h) sweep coming from L4 in fre-
quency domain
(i) sweep coming from L5 in time
domain
(j) sweep coming from L5 in fre-
quency domain
Figure B.8: B coefficients in time (left) and frequency domain (right) measured at the
balcony position at the DRC with the 52 mics sphere at all the loudspeaker
positions.
==PAGE:86==
74
B Extra analysis plots
(a) sweep coming at R3 in time domain
(b) sweep coming at R3 in frequency domain
(c) sweep coming at R4 in time domain
(d) sweep coming at R4 in frequency domain
(e) sweep coming at R5 in time domain
(f) sweep coming at R5 in frequency domain
Figure B.9: B coefficients in time (left) and frequency domain (right) measured at the
extra positions at the DRC with the 64 mics sphere with the loudspeaker
at L3.
==PAGE:87==
B.2 DRC measurement
75
(a) sweep coming at R3 in time domain
(b) sweep coming at R3 in frequency domain
(c) sweep coming at R4 in time domain
(d) sweep coming at R4 in frequency domain
(e) sweep coming at R5 in time domain
(f) sweep coming at R5 in frequency domain
Figure B.10: B coefficients in time (left) and frequency domain (right) measured at the
extra positions at the DRC with the 52 mics sphere with the loudspeaker
at L3.
==PAGE:88==
76
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX C
Psychoacoustic
parameters
As extra work for this project an objective validation of the reproduce sound field can
be made. In order to do that psychoacoustic parameters will be used, more specifically
the interaural time and level difference.
C.1
Head Related Transfer Function (HRTF)
Figure C.1: Typical Head And Torso Simulator (dummy head) used to reproduce the
Head Related Transfer function.
As mentioned in 2.3 binaural recording spatial sound rendering method done by using
and head and torso simulator (HATS) also called dummy head as seen on C.1 made to
simulate the head related transfer function (HRTF) of an human in order to reproduce
as accurately as possible the perceived acoustical cues allowing the spatial localisation
of sound. This recording method is meant for headphone listening and does not take
into account the movement of the head without implementation of any head tracking
device.
==PAGE:90==
78
C Psychoacoustic parameters
C.2
Interaural Time and Level Differences (ITD
and ILD)
An accurate simulation of the HRTF leads to an accurate measure of the acoustical
cues used for spatial localisation. Those cues are called the interaural time and level
difference.
Since the microphones are placed inside the ears of the dummy head it can be easy to
understand the need to have a dummy head that reproduce accurately an HRTF.
Figure C.2: Example of the distance difference between the ears.
The ITD is explained by the difference it takes for sound to reach one ear or the other
depending on the position of the source. As seen on figure C.2 the distance difference can
be calculated and so is its time difference. This cue is mainly used for low frequencies
(below 1.5kHz).
Figure C.3: Example of the head shadow.
The ILD is explained by the difference in loudness the sound produces in each ears.
This is due to the diffraction caused by the head leading to an ”head shadow” zone as
seen on figure C.3. This diffraction caused by the head is mainly true for high frequencies
==PAGE:91==
C.2 Interaural Time and Level Differences (ITD and ILD)
79
(above 1.5kHz) and so the ITD and ILD are both needed to have an accurate spatial
localisation.
More information on spatial localisation can be found in [15].
==PAGE:92==
80
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
[1]
M. BARRON. “MEASURED EARLY LATERAL ENERGY FRACTIONS IN
CONCERT HALLS AND OPERA HOUSES”. In: Journal of Sound and Vibra-
tion (2000). issn: 0022460X. doi: 10.1006/jsvi.1999.2686.
[2]
Core Sound TetraMic. http://www.core-sound.com/TetraMic/1.php.
[3]
Jérôme Daniel. “Spatial Sound Encoding Including Near Field Effect : Introducing
Distance Coding Filters and a Viable , New Ambisonic Format”. In: (2003).
[4]
Jérôme Daniel, Rozenn Nicol, and Sébastien Moreau. “Further Investigations of
High Order Ambisonics and Wavefield Synthesis for Holophonic Sound Imaging”.
In: (2003).
[5]
David A Dick and Michelle C Vigeant. “A COMPARISON OF LATE LATERAL
ENERGY (GLL) AND LATERAL ENERGY FRACTION (LF) MEASUREMENTS
USING A SPHERICAL MICROPHONE ARRAY AND CONVENTIONAL METH-
ODS”. In: (2014), pages 3–5.
[6]
David A. Dick and Michelle C. Vigeant. “A comparison of measured room acoustics
metrics using a spherical microphone array and conventional methods”. In: Applied
Acoustics (2016). issn: 1872910X. doi: 10.1016/j.apacoust.2016.01.008.
[7]
Efren Fernandez-Grande. “Sound field reconstruction using a spherical microphone
arraya); Sound field reconstruction using a spherical microphone arraya)”. In: ().
doi: 10.1121/1.4943545.
[8]
Matthias Frank, Franz Zotter, and Alois Sontacchi. “Producing 3D Audio in Am-
bisonics”. In: ().
[9]
Finn Jacobsen and Peter Møller Juhl. FUNDAMENTALS OF GENERAL LIN-
EAR ACOUSTICS. Edited by Wiley. 2013. isbn: 9781118346419.
[10]
Jérôme DANIEL. “Représentation de champs acoustiques, application à la trans-
mission et à la reproduction de scènes sonores complexes dans un contexte multi-
média”. PhD thesis. Université Paris 6, 2001.
[11]
Vaios Kostakis. “Spherical Array Processing for Sound Field Rendering”. In: ().
[12]
“Measurement of room acoustic parameters”. In: International Standard ISO 3382
(2009).
[13]
Sébastien Moreau, Jérôme Daniel, and Stéphanie Bertet. “3D Sound Field Record-
ing with Higher Order Ambisonics – Objective Measurements and Validation of a
4 th Order Spherical Microphone”. In: (2006).
==PAGE:94==
82
Bibliography
[14]
M A Poletti. “Three-Dimensional Surround Sound Systems Based on Spherical
Harmonics”. In: ().
[15]
Torben Poulsen. “Acoustic Communication Hearing and Speech”. In: (2008).
[16]
Sascha Spors et al. Spatial sound with loudspeakers and its perception: A review of
the current state. 2013. doi: 10.1109/JPROC.2013.2264784.
[17]
Andrew Wabnitz et al. “TIME DOMAIN RECONSTRUCTION OF SPATIAL
SOUND FIELDS USING COMPRESSED SENSING”. In: ().
