==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Use of BIM on French construction sites
To facilitate the installation of walls and components
Emmanuelle Camus (s151370)
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej
Building 118
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 1700
byg@byg.dtu.dk
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
BIM is increasingly used in building projects, but mainly during the design phase
whereas it is trusted that benefits can be derived from other stages of a building’s
life cycle. This Thesis was written in collaboration with Bouygues Bâtiment Grand
Ouest, one of the major construction company in France, and aims at investigating
profitable uses of BIM on its construction sites, especially regarding the installation
of walls and components. A literature review was undertaken to have an overview of
the uses of BIM on construction sites and the associated challenges, and interviews
were conducted with actors working with Bouygues Bâtiment Grand Ouest to have
a more practical point of view. It was then decided to analyze one innovation tested
by the company which has potential to answer the problem statement. Smart Cast
uses 3D coordination to produce permanent formwork panels for slabs, which are cut,
printed and drilled so that the installation of walls and components can be facilitated
and fastened, without having to use any plan. On the construction site where Smart
Cast was tested, 2.32 h/m2 were saved, the overall financial balance sheet was positive
and the workers were satisfied and considered the product user-friendly. Besides, it
helped the general construction company to strengthen its 3D coordination processes
and anticipation, which it trusted to be the greatest benefit.
In addition to the
analysis, the personal contribution to this Thesis consists in suggestions to improve
this innovation. They include the development of an Information Delivery Manual
to have better-coordinated processes, some proposals to check dimensions to improve
reliability of positioning, and investigations on the delivery of more information using
Smart Cast panels.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master’s Thesis was prepared at the department of Civil Engineering at the Tech-
nical University of Denmark, in collaboration with Bouygues Bâtiment Grand Ouest,
in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master of Science in Architectural
Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, June 23, 2017
Emmanuelle Camus (s151370)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to thank my former teacher and supervisor Mr.
Jan Karlshøj from Danmarks Tekniske Universitet and my company supervisor Mr.
Franck Quevillon from Bouygues Bâtiment Grand Ouest, who took the time to answer
all my questions, gave me advice and enabled me to meet a lot of actors from the
French building industry. I would also like to thank Mrs. Anne Michel, the Technical
Director from Bouygues Bâtiment Grand Ouest, who made this collaboration possible,
as well as all the employees from the BIM unit in Bouygues Bâtiment Grand Ouest,
who helped me with technical questions, always with a smile.
All the persons I
interviewed were very helpful for the drawing up of this report as well.
My friends from Danmarks Tekniske Universitet showed great support and brought
new perspectives to this Thesis through various discussions regarding our respective
findings. Last but not least, I would like to thank my parents who have helped and
supported me over the course of my studies and until the end of my Master’s degree.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Building Information Modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.2
The French context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.1.3
Collaboration with Bouygues Bâtiment Grand Ouest . . . . . .
6
1.2
The Thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.2.1
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.2.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.2.3
Scope of studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Methodology
11
2.1
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Interviews and meetings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Analysis of a solution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Personal proposals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Analysis
15
3.1
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.1
BIM opportunities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.2
Practical uses of BIM on construction sites
. . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.3
BIM challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Interviews and Meetings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.1
Meeting with BIM actors from Bouygues Construction . . . . .
21
3.2.2
Interview of the developers of a collaborative BIM platform . .
27
3.2.3
Interview of two architects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.4
Interview with the developer of Ramby Outdoor and Ramby Plan 29
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
3.2.5
Interview of a drywall worker working in collaboration with BY-
BAT GO
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2.6
Interview of a sub-contractor who performs 3D laser scans . . .
32
3.2.7
Interviews of users ans sales representatives of Robotic Total
Stations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2.8
Interview of an engineer in research and development at BYBAT
GO
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2.9
Interview of a site supervisor and site workers from BYBAT GO 37
3.3
Analysis of Smart Cast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.3.1
Description of the product . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.3.2
Impacts on Modeling, prior to production . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.3.3
Impacts on Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.3.4
Impacts on Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.3.5
Impacts on Building Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.3.6
Impacts on Fire Safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.3.7
Impacts on Insulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.3.8
Impacts on Acoustics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.3.9
Impacts on Installation of partition walls
. . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.3.10 Impacts on Painting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.3.11 Impacts on other fields on site
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.3.12 Impacts on Delivery and Logistics on site . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.3.13 Impacts on Safety
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.3.14 Impacts on Maintenance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.3.15 Impacts on the Environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.3.16 Financial impacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.3.17 About materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
3.3.18 Other observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
3.3.19 Response to Bouygues’ objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4
Personal Proposals
55
4.1
To make an Information Delivery Manual . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.1.1
Process Diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.1.2
Exchange Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.1.3
Model View Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.2
To check positioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.2.1
To check manually before positioning components B . . . . . .
64
4.2.2
To check positioning before casting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
4.2.3
To check automatically
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
4.3
To deliver more information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
4.3.1
RFID systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
4.3.2
QR Codes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
4.3.3
Augmented reality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
5
Discussion
75
==PAGE:11==
Contents
ix
5.1
Summary of the findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
5.1.1
On the use of BIM on Bouygues’ French construction sites . . .
75
5.1.2
On the use of Smart Cast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
5.2
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
6
Conclusion
79
A
Concrete slabs construction process (French)
81
B
Smart Cast - Description of the product [French]
89
Bibliography
101
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Context
1.1.1
Building Information Modeling
Building Information Modeling (BIM) is defined as a digital representation of physical
and functional characteristics of a facility [Bui14].
Figure 1.1: BIM use throughout the building’s life cycle [Bim17].
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
It is an integrated method which aims at digitizing and supporting a design and
construction life cycle process that is of high quality, efficient, safe and in compliance
with sustainable development. It produces a BIM model which is a data-rich, object-
oriented, intelligent and parametric, from which views and data can be extracted and
analyzed to generate information that can be used to make decisions and to improve
the process of delivering the facility [Ame05]. It is also used to enhance collaboration
between trade bodies by federating models. BIM is meant to be utilized throughout
the building’s life cycle, starting from the first idea, continuing during use and facility
management after the construction project has concluded and even to demolition or
renovation [COB12], see Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.2: BIM: A model based working method [Kar15].
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Context
3
As shown in Figure 1.2, Building Information Modeling is also a model based
working method, which enables, for example:
• Design visualization and analysis of construction feasibility.
• Enhancement of quality-assurance and data exchange and making the design
process more effective.
• Utilization of building project data during use and facility management activi-
ties.
• Energy, environment and life cycle analyses for the purpose of comparing solu-
tions, design and objectives of facility management follow-up.
• Provision of support to the investment decisions by comparing the functionality,
scope and costs of the solutions [Kar15][COB12].
Even though BIM is meant to be utilized throughout the building’s life cycle, BIM
is today used mostly in the design phase, as shows the curve 4 on MacLeamy curve
in Figure 1.3. Therefore, there are development opportunities with regard to the use
of BIM in other life cycle stages and in particular the construction phase on which
this Thesis focuses.
Figure 1.3: MacLeamy curve showing the effort induced on all the stages from the
preliminary design to operation. French stages acronyms are clarified
in Table 1.1. Curve 1 shows the ability to impact cost and performance,
curve 2 the cost of design changes, curve 3 the traditional, drafting-
centric workflow, and curve 4 the BIM workflow.
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
1.1.2
The French context
In January 2015, the Digital Transition Plan for Buildings (or ”Plan de Transition
Numérique dans le Bâtiment” in French) was launched by the French government
as a mean to stimulate the building industry in France. It aims at accelerating the
deployment of digital tools in the building sector, with three objectives:
• To experiment, to capitalize, to convince and to make people want to appropri-
ate digital technology into everyday life when building;
• To enable skill improvement of building professionals in digital technology and
the development of tools adapted to all construction sites, by broadening their
use and by paying particular attention to BIM solutions;
• To develop a trusted digital ecosystem by encouraging work on standardization
and thus enabling interoperability of tools and computer programs [gov17].
To this end, BIM will start to be mandatory on public procurement in France
from 2017 [Mar16].
Many technological advances in the building sector and especially in BIM come
from the United States of America, the United Kingdom or Scandinavia, and France
is willing to participate in those technological advances too. Standardization work
is in its early stages since it has not been agreed yet to use any standards, such
as COBIM - Common BIM Requirements 2012 - in Scandinavia, or ICT (Informa-
tion and Communication Technology) specifications. However digital technology and
BIM is increasingly experimented. Indeed, the rate of general contractors using BIM
increased from 35 % to 50 % these last months [Med17].
Large, French building companies also have the particularity to gather construc-
tion and engineering - instead of outsourcing it - as shown in Figure 1.4, and sometimes
maintenance for one to three decades. Site workers from such companies handle con-
struction of structure, and sometimes building services and woodwork, other workers
being outsourced. Such companies are called ”general companies”. This means that
the high fragmentation in the building industry, partly responsible for the stagnation
of productivity according to the Danish company Anlægsteknikforeningen [For07], is
less important in such companies.
All in all, France has potential to develop the building industry, and means to do
it using digital tools and BIM in this particular context are still to figure out.
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Context
5
Acronym
Meaning
APS
”Avant Projet Sommaire”. Studies on the overall volume, general
external appearance, considered construction principles, overall
planning of execution and a first estimation of construction costs.
APD
”Avant Projet Définitif”. Studies on all surfaces, global dimensions,
detailed external appearance, definitive construction principles,
materials, definitive estimation of construction costs.
PRO
”PROjet”. Studies on all elements which are going to be built, with
which materials and how they are going to be built. This includes
structural and mechanical elements. The construction costs is
detailed by field and the projected schedule is detailed as well.
EXE
”EXEcution”. Development of all documentation needed by the
workers to build.
DOE
”Dossier des Ouvrages Exécutés”. Final implementation
documentation, with elements as-built and their associated technical
data sheets for maintenance.
Table 1.1: Explanation of acronyms used in Figure 1.3, from the French law ”loi
MOP” [pub13].
Figure 1.4: Composition of a French general company.
==PAGE:18==
6
1 Introduction
1.1.3
Collaboration with Bouygues Bâtiment Grand Ouest
A view from the inside of the industry appears relevant to understand better the chal-
lenges faced by the companies and how to overcome them. It was chosen to collab-
orate with Bouygues Bâtiment Grand Ouest, or BYBAT GO, a regional subsidiary
of Bouygues Construction in the West of France as shown in Figure 1.5, because
Bouygues Construction is one of the major construction companies in France and is
therefore quite representative of the progress of BIM in France. Bouygues Construc-
tion and its regional subsidiaries such as BYBAT GO are ”general companies”, which
enables this Thesis to be placed in the specific context described in the previous
subsection.
Figure 1.5: Map of Bouygues Construction’s subsidiaries in France, Belgium, Spain
and Switzerland. BYBAT GO’s region is shown in green..
Bouygues Construction started to use BIM in 2009, mainly in the design and con-
struction methods phases, and its interest to use the potential of BIM throughout the
whole building’s life cycle is growing. In particular, Bouygues Construction recently
expressed the wish to develop the use of BIM during the construction phase, with the
following objectives:
==PAGE:19==
1.1 Context
7
• To organize better the construction site;
• To predict difficulties;
• To ensure reliable delivery times;
• To have a safe and user-friendly construction site [Con14].
According to Bouygues Construction, the keys to reach these objectives are:
• To ensure a digital continuity throughout the whole building process;
• To develop tools until they are fully functional;
• To train all their employees and ensure their adaptation.
The regional subsidiary BYBAT GO mostly builds residential buildings or facilities
with a concrete, cast-in-site, structure. Prefabricated elements such as slabs or walls
are used sometimes. For example, prefabricated walls are used for stairwells or lift
shafts, but these uses will be considered negligible in this Thesis in front of the use
of cast-in-site elements.
==PAGE:20==
8
1 Introduction
The BIM unit
My company supervisor is the responsible of the BIM unit within the technical
direction of BYBAT GO, Mr. Franck Quevillon. The BIM unit aims at developing
projects in collaboration with architects, engineers and economists, from conception
to the production of the final implementation documentation and the final imple-
mentation BIM model, which includes objects as-built and their technical data sheet
used for operation and maintenance. This BIM unit is responsible for coordination
of architecture and engineering. As this unit is part of the construction company, it
is aware of the suppliers. Consequently, they are able to replace generic objects from
the architectural model by objects that are to be used on-site, in order to produce im-
plementation plans, purchase orders and as-built models. The BIM unit interactions
are shown in Figure 1.6.
Figure 1.6: BIM unit interactions at BYBAT GO.
BIM collaboration level reached is now level 2 according to Figure 1.7 which is
inspired from UK’s definition being ”a managed 3D environment held in separate
discipline ’BIM’ tools with data attached” [LLP12][Con14]. In practice, every actor
works on a local copy of a central BIM model so that changes made to a local file can
be synchronized with the central file and can be seen by everyone once synchronized.
==PAGE:21==
1.1 Context
9
The BIM manager within the BIM unit is responsible for coordination, performs
collision controls and gives feedback. He also develops BIM conventions or charters,
including modeling rules, file names or project base points, to ensure an efficient
collaboration among all actors working with BIM. The aim is to reach collaboration
level 3 within the following years, meaning, inter alia, that everyone will be able to
work on the same BIM model in real time. Data from models will then be used to
perform 4D construction sequencing and/or 5D cost information.
Figure 1.7: BIM collaboration levels in France, translated from French [Pig16].
The use of BIM on construction sites at BYBAT GO today is mainly the extraction
from the BIM models of drawings and data used by the workers. Research is going
on about how to use more benefits from BIM during the construction phase and this
Thesis is a part of it.
==PAGE:22==
10
1 Introduction
1.2
The Thesis
1.2.1
Problem statement
The following problem statement forms the basis of this report:
How to facilitate the installation of walls and components on a building using BIM?
1.2.2
Objectives
Four objectives are outlined for this report:
• To investigate what are the applications of BIM on Bouygues’ French construc-
tion sites today;
• To identify what are the limitations and possible improvements of BIM use on
these construction sites;
• To analyze one innovation;
• To propose suggestions for further improvements of this innovation regarding
the use of BIM.
1.2.3
Scope of studies
Regarding the time frame during which this report was written, it was not possible
to analyze deeply all the areas of improvement of BIM use during the construction
phase investigated by BYBAT GO. Various applications of BIM were described, but
it was chosen to analyze one innovation in particular, called Smart Cast, which aims
at facilitating the installation of building services components, as well as partition
walls. Besides, even though considerations from various countries were taken into
account, applications of BIM were mostly considered from a French point of view,
where processes and issues may differ from other countries. In particular, standards
of modeling have not yet been defined, which causes issues of interoperability that
may have been solved elsewhere. Furthermore, applications that are described were
tested by Bouygues Bâtiment Grand Ouest, a company who mostly builds residential
buildings or facilities with a concrete, cast-in-site, structure. This means that other
solutions may be relevant for other types of construction, but are not necessarily
described in this report.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2
Methodology
Figure 2.1: Overall Methodology of the Thesis.
2.1
Literature review
A literature review was first conducted in order to establish the use of BIM on today’s
construction sites and the challenges associated. Sources are mostly academic but
also include personal notes from conferences. This review has a broader, more global
geographical scope - mostly Europe and the United States of America - so that more
areas of improvements can be suggested later in the Thesis.
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Methodology
2.2
Interviews and meetings
In order to get a view on the use of BIM on Bouygues’ French construction sites as well
as during the other building processes involved, and to develop suggestions of new uses
of BIM on those construction sites, several interviews and meetings were conducted
with actors from the French construction industry working with Bouygues. There is
a distinction made between interviews, during which one person was asked questions,
and meetings during which several persons were invited to discuss a subject. It seems
relevant to conduct interviews in view of the fact that research and experimentation
regarding BIM in France are communicated mostly among the companies which carry
out such research, in order to keep a competitive edge.
The list of persons met include:
• BIM managers;
• Modelers;
• Architects;
• Engineers;
• Construction site supervisors;
• Site workers;
• Suppliers of Robotic Total Stations and 3D scanners;
• Developers of applications related to BIM.
These interviews and meetings were made possible thanks to the collaboration
with Bouygues Bâtiment Grand Ouest, who provided contact details.
These interviews and meetings have three objectives, according to the objectives
of the Thesis mentioned in the Introduction:
• To establish how BIM is used at BYBAT GO;
• To identify if this is compatible with a use on construction sites;
• To diagnose current issues and future improvements.
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Analysis of a solution
13
2.3
Analysis of a solution
Among all the innovations discovered during the interview phase, it was decided to
focus on Smart Cast, a solution which uses permanent formwork panels for concrete
slabs which are pre-cut, pre-printed and pre-drilled to facilitate the positioning of
partition walls and building services components.
Literature review shows that a
lot of innovation in the field of BIM concern automation or robots, but that there
are limitations regarding interoperability, positioning in space, processing of large
amounts of data, and the financial aspect of those technologies. This is why it was
chosen to focus on Smart Cast, a solution which is technologically and financially
usable now but still new enough to be analyzed and improved.
Moreover, this innovation has been tested by BYBAT GO during the time this
Thesis was written, which made the analysis fit into the Thesis time frame. It is also
considered engaging to aim attention at an innovation which have impacts on many
fields, thus bringing a holistic approach. Besides, no mention of a similar product
was found in literature, which brings originality to the report.
In this report, ”Smart Cast panels” refer to formwork panels only while ”Smart
Cast” refers to the complete solution which includes coordination, the use of pan-
els and the positioning of components thanks to the panels. ”Smart Cast” is also
the name of the start-up who develops the solution, the logo of which is shown in
Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Smart Cast Logo.
The objectives of this analysis are:
• To identify how the use of Smart Cast affects building processes, from concep-
tion to construction;
• To identify limitations of this innovation;
• To figure out how Smart Cast answers to the objectives given by Bouygues
Construction on the development of BIM during the construction phase, which
are listed under subsection 1.1.3.
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Methodology
To achieve these objectives, several interviews were conducted with the leader of
the start-up Smart Cast, as well as with the employees from BYBAT GO involved
with the use of this product, meaning BIM modelers, construction site supervisors
and site workers. As it is a new solution, BYBAT GO has started to test it recently
and there was only one construction site where it was tested long enough for the
analysis to fit in the time frame of this Thesis. Moreover, Smart Cast is also tested
by other companies but they did not wish to share lots of information since they are
still in a test phase. Therefore, practical information was only retrieved from this
construction site, a residential building in the region of Normandy in the north-west
of France.
2.4
Personal proposals
Lastly, from the limitations that are identified in the Analysis chapter, personal sug-
gestions are made to improve this innovation. Proposals are held toward the use of
BIM, in order to remain within this Thesis framework. Inspiration is taken from the
literature review, as well as the interviews and meetings.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3
Analysis
This chapter aims at establishing how BIM is used on today’s construction sites and
the challenges associated. The literature review intends to give an overview of the
research going on about the uses of BIM on construction sites in general, while the
interviews present current uses of BIM on French Bouygues’ construction sites. A
deeper analysis of the solution Smart Cast is also conducted to evaluate its efficiency.
3.1
Literature review
3.1.1
BIM opportunities
According to the SmartMarket Report from McGraw Hill Construction who surveyed
thousands of companies in North America, two-thirds of BIM users see positive return
on investment on their overall investment in BIM and ninety-three percent of BIM
users believe in the potential of BIM to gain more value. Apart from saving money and
time, visualization together with better understanding and better collaboration are
the top rated benefits of using BIM throughout the whole building’s life cycle [Gud09].
As stated in the Common BIM Requirements 2012 used in Scandinavia, BIM can be
used on construction sites for visualization and supervision of work, quantity take-offs
and procurement, but also for construction schedules, status information, site area
modeling and to improve safety thanks to better planning [COB12].
Indeed, construction companies can use BIM models to provide far more informa-
tion than the traditional hard copy documents. Take-offs for cost estimating can be
quickly obtained with schedules, and time can be integrated in BIM models to pro-
duce work plannings. Architectural design details can be converted to construction
shop drawings and prefabrication instructions for sub-assemblies such as ventilation
ducts, pipes, and so on. Overall, design can be made with a shorter amount of time
and less time spent on documentation, since they can be made out of the same aggre-
gate model and automated. Furthermore, clash detection can be performed before
construction which leads to fewer errors on-site. The fact that all documents come
from the same model also brings standardization and lowers errors of interpretation.
Given the amount of time and money wasted because of poor understanding between
parties, and especially between the designers and the constructors, BIM can be highly
cost-effective for constructors and clients [Ahm11].
==PAGE:28==
16
3 Analysis
3.1.2
Practical uses of BIM on construction sites
The use of BIM among site workers has not been studied much so far, which is why
collaborating with a construction company seems relevant in this Thesis to find out
how current practices may be improved. However, some case studies and technological
advances give development paths.
Visualization
A case study in Norway for example shows that site workers find opportunities
for 3D visualization useful and that BIM models are appraised for handling complex
elements more efficiently. Collaboration between site workers has also been found to
be improved by the use of BIM kiosks, because they use BIM with direct contact with
each others, and can discuss in front of the kiosk while using it for better visualization
[Mou16].
Some applications are developed to enable the visualization of various formats,
through an intuitive interface that can be used on mobile devices such as tablets or
smartphones [Lar12]. These applications can also help for supervision of work and the
other uses cited in COBIM. They have different features and levels of development.
Advantages and disadvantages of such BIM platforms are studied as they are released
on the market [Fer13]. Bouygues Construction tested three of them so far, which is
described in the Interviews and Meetings section.
Virtual and augmented reality are also development paths for visualization. For
instance, the Danish company Ramboll uses animations and virtual reality to help
future users to make decisions on the interior design, with a simulation of various
furnishing scenarios [Mou12b]. This use may be applied to the construction phase to
facilitate decision-making and improve safety on-site.
Safety
Safety on-site can indeed be improved by the use of BIM, because a 3D visualiza-
tion enables to understand better the placement of equipment such as cranes than on
2D plans. Clash detection and collapse analysis can also be performed with a BIM
model, before construction starts. From a 4D BIM model, it is also possible to re-
trieve easily quantities of equipment needed as construction goes, in order to ensure
that all the safety equipment is delivered and positioned on-site at the right time.
Moreover, real time safety planning can be produced by combining safety models and
construction plannings. BIM therefore provides opportunities to improve safety on
construction sites, but the associated programs, tools and working methods are still
in a development phase [Pre12].
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Literature review
17
Data sharing
BIM includes an aggregate model which can contain almost all information needed
for construction. Having one unique source is an asset to make sure that there is not
contradictory data to be shared.
As BIM is also a collaboration process, it asks for efficient data sharing. Con-
struction managers and workers still spend a significant amount of time on non-value
adding activities, like transcribing records, and in value-adding but yet time consum-
ing activities like gathering project data, assessing production rates, communicating
with project participants and tracking project quality [Fer13]. Projects to automate
data collection and notifications to the people involved are also developed to save
time and efforts, and therefore improve collaboration [Dul15]. For example, data can
be collected by taking automatically pictures or 3D scans [Sav09]. The idea is then
to compare the collected data and what was planned, for example a 3D scan or a 3D
representation made out of photographs, and a 4D BIM model. When a difference
between the two is detected, people who need to take action can then be notified in
order to solve detected issues.
If notifying can be easy with e-mails, data is not meant to be only sent but also
stored, in order to keep track of processes and documents which are useful throughout
various stages of a project’s life cycle. Where to collect data is currently studied, in
order to provide storage spaces which can be large enough and easily shared to the
people involved, while keeping data security to make sure confidentiality is respected
when it needs to be [Lar12] [Cam17].
Positioning and Monitoring
Another consideration about using BIM on construction sites is to develop more
efficient ways of building for the workers and not only for the managers.
Which
seems to stand out in literature is the use of Robotic Total Stations and 3D scanners.
A Robotic Total Station is a theodolite with an Electronic Distance Measurement.
As long as the station can see three or more preferably four points, materialized by
prisms or self-adhesive marks, it can locate itself and associate its position on-site to
coordinates on the BIM model. These points are often positioned by a surveyor to
ensure more precision. One worker can use it alone to position points with a pole,
linked to the station with a tablet that uses Bluetooth or WIFI connection. The
station can also point a position with a laser [dEr16]. Robotic total stations can
thus be used to position elements, such as foundations, walls, pockets in walls, MEP
(Mechanical, Electrical and Plumbing) systems, and so on, as long as the BIM model
provides enough points to position those elements. Furthermore, it can be used to
check positions of elements by comparing the coordinates given by the pole and the
coordinates on the BIM model. Robotic total stations are thus found to help to find
discrepancies in a short time, for example offsets between the position of a drywall
on-site and on the model [Fag12]. Errors which can be detected early in the process
of construction are then easier and cheaper to correct.
==PAGE:30==
18
3 Analysis
3D scanners can also be used for checking, as they can take pictures and cre-
ate point clouds [Nic15]. These point clouds can be then compared with the BIM
model and a software can be used to detect clashes when the tolerance of execution,
around 1 cm in France, is not respected. Prototypes of robotic 3D Scanners that can
move around the site and take 3D scans automatically are currently developed in the
aeronautic industry [Geo17]. Currently, augmented reality is used in the aeronautic
industry to facilitate the monitoring of construction. Users can for example superpose
a section of a plane and its 3D model on a tablet, to check if all elements are in the
right place, if none is missing and if there are not additional elements [Cam12].
In the building industry, the use of augmented reality faces some challenges, such
as poor quality pictures due to the weather or poor indoor lighting, objects or people
moving, and poor accuracy - from centimeters to meters - of GPS position that
mobile devices use [Dol14] [Lim14]. The use of marks placed on-site, such as QR-
codes or Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) chips, can help mobile devices to
locate themselves, but they can be moved or damaged during construction. What is
more, as RFID uses radio frequency, interference with other frequencies may affect
the transfer of data. Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) are also considered to collect
data, but due to their dependence to WIFI network, gaps of data collection caused
by low battery, and their sensitivity to weather conditions, data collected by WSN is
considered unreliable for now [Azh14].
The use of Robotic Total Stations or 3D scanners can also help generating an
as-built BIM model.
Indeed, on-site coordinates can be saved by a station when
positioning a point or when checking them after positioning, and be imported into a
BIM model to update it [Fag12]. Point clouds from 3D scanners can also be imported
into a BIM model for updating [Xia16] [Tho16]. This process however requires a lot of
human intervention, since scanned objects are too similar in the construction industry
to be recognized automatically [Bos12]. Initiatives are also taken to use augmented
reality to monitor site activities, by taking pictures with cameras or mobile devices
such as tablets or smartphones, and by using an image-matching system which can
find out differences between images and the BIM model.
These systems also need to take into account temporary works, so that clashes
are not unnecessarily detected.
Cost of security, bad weather, lack of communication or shortage of skilled labour
can create additional costs up to 10 percent of the total project price.
The use
of robots for some building processes may be a solution to increase the financial
profitability of the construction sites. Flying robots or drones are for instance able
to carry materials of several tens of kilos and to place them on site with a precision
of centimeters [Lat16]. They may in the future become more precise and adapt to
weather conditions.
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Literature review
19
3.1.3
BIM challenges
Factors limiting BIM application in construction projects regard technology, cost,
management, personnel and legislation [She15].
Management and Personnel
Not all the actors of a building project, meaning architects, engineers, but also
craftsmen and site workers, are using BIM yet in the world and especially in France
[N15] and still use a CAD (Computer Aided Design) approach. To give an example,
formwork plans used on Bouygues’ construction sites are still mostly traditional, 2D
plans, which are not extracted from the BIM model but produced by structural
engineers.
BIM models generation from 2D CAD drawings and 3D scans are to be devel-
oped. For example, tools can generate a 3D model from a 2D drawing by recognizing
lines and knowing heights [Cam17]. Such tools are not retaining too much attention,
whereas most of the already existing projects are designed through CAD approaches
and could benefit from BIM integration. Various capture technologies are also devel-
oped, but an ideal capture technology is not yet achieved, which makes the combined
usage of different technologies preferable, in order to combine their strengths and
overcome their limitations [Mah15].
Besides, some details of the building can be agreed on late in the process, when
the building is already partially built.
If there are not tools to integrate as-built
elements, then BIM models are not complete and cannot be used properly after the
construction phase, including maintenance and decommissioning [Mea09].
Site operations also call for additional modeling, for example for site installation
and for temporary work. This implies that site managers need to access the modeling
environment to be able to add such elements and foresee conflicts [Bar15]. Processes
need to be developed to include these additional site modeling requirements and
changes that occur during the construction phase, and not keeping modeling for
designers. Implementing BIM therefore requires efforts to overcome the resistance to
change, to train all actors to make them understand the potential of BIM, and to
adapt the processes [Kag11].
Costs
According to an American survey, the two most mentioned barriers to BIM imple-
mentation are the lack of skilled personnel and the cost or lack of company investment
[MSC11]. This can be explained by the fact that software and tools related to BIM
are quite expensive, which can be an obstacle to the development of BIM [dEr16].
However, even if economical benefits of using BIM are admitted by most companies
[Gud09] [Lon], the benefits are difficult to localize and to quantify. Such attempts of
doing so are going on, such as the project ØG-DDB in Denmark which performed four
case studies. The essential, general trends in these case studies can be summarized as
follows: one can gradually move from document to model-based working with gains,
there are generally good experiences with ICT implementation, small steps can be
==PAGE:32==
20
3 Analysis
taken without high costs, reusing data provide gains, investment in ICT and BIM
allows gains and benefits to all, gains are often greater at the project level than at
the enterprise level, and winnings are located at several levels (direct, indirect and
induced) [Mou12a]. These kind of studies might help companies to overcome their
reluctance.
Technology
3D models can be several gigaoctets heavy, which is often too heavy to be read on
computers that are used on construction sites, which have often less processing power
than computers used by architects and engineers. The size of point clouds generated
by 3D scanners that need to be processed is also substantial. As many point clouds
need to be generated for one project to capture all the faces and angles, the data
which needs to be processed often reaches several gigaoctets as well, and computers
are not powerful enough in all companies to process them quickly [Geo17]. Besides,
BIM file formats are various, including RVT from Revit, DWG from Autocad, PLN
from ArchiCAD, VWX from Vectorworks, and so on.
Since these programs have
different modeling features, information can be lost when exporting to another file
format. To improve interoperability between software applications is considered by
many companies to be the first way to improve value of BIM [Gud09] [Cam17]. The
IFC format developed by buildingSMART and standards attempt to solve this issue
of interoperability between software. However, some problems still arise today [Lar12].
For instances, it appears that certain types of families are not coded in the IFC tables
of buildingSMART and that objects need to be coded from similar families in order
to be converted without loss of information [Tur09]. Interoperability is therefore not
completely achieved yet.
Legals and confidentiality
More than the issues of interoperability, companies face barriers of legal nature
and confidentiality. First, legalization is not the same in all countries. For instance,
BIM standards have not been set in France and are more developed in the USA, in
UK or in Nordic countries. This can cause differences between models and difficulties
to share models and knowledge between countries, even within the same company.
Moreover, in case of sensible projects, companies are not necessarily willing to share
data on clouds, and prefer to work only with local files to preserve confidentiality.
Data security and the possibility to manage access rights is therefore necessary to
benefit from the potential of collaboration brought by BIM.
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Interviews and Meetings
21
3.2
Interviews and Meetings
3.2.1
Meeting with BIM actors from Bouygues Construction
This meeting took place on the 9th of February, 2017, and aimed at discussing the
digitalisation of construction sites within Bouygues’ companies through feedback on
BIM tools used so far on construction sites. Those tools were tested once, each on a
different construction site.
BIM tool: Dalux Field
Dalux Field is a 2D and 3D viewer of BIM models made for construction and de-
veloped by Dalux, consisting in former students from Danmarks Tekniske Universitet.
Dalux creates a lighter version of BIM models with the format IFC, RVT or DWG to
enable a fluent visualization of objects and their properties on mobile devices. They
stream video and keep models at the server, as shown in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Process of cloud service from Dalux [Lar12].
The viewer includes the possibility to access objects’ properties and to hide ob-
jects, for instance a wall or a suspended ceiling to see the pipes behind, as shown in
Figure 3.2. It is also possible to make crop sections, to filter views by object category
(walls, doors, and so on), and it will be possible soon to take measurements as well.
Besides, it is possible to add registrations. The construction site supervisor can thus
monitor the progress of construction and take note of errors in execution, on a 2D
or 3D view of the model. Reports of registrations including photos and views can be
produced and uploaded to the cloud. Registrations can then be followed and be up-
dated. For instance, their status can be set to ”in progress”, ”refused” or ”approved”.
==PAGE:34==
22
3 Analysis
Such tools have been used for some years with 2D plans, and are already seen as a
way to enhance productivity, since reports of errors are produced faster. The advan-
tage of reading BIM models and not only DWG of PDF plans is that properties of
objects can be read - for instance materials or colours of walls - and checked more
easily, and that the height of an issue can be precised. The BIM model is uploaded
in a cloud and can be updated. This tool can be used with an offline mode, and
the registrations are synchronized in the cloud as soon as an Internet connection is
available. Dalux seems to be a satisfactory tool to use on construction sites regarding
Bouygues’ experience, in terms of ease of use and use of BIM. In particular, the con-
struction site supervisor appreciated to be able to see the 3D model and the position
of the camera in the 2D plan simultaneously, as shown in Figure 3.2 because it was
easy to understand. It was also appreciated that Dalux Field can work on iOS and
Android environments. What is more, Dalux was described as the most satisfactory
tool in terms of model compression, meaning that the model is light enough to be
read smoothly on a mobile device without degrading the quality too much, and more
importantly while keeping all important information. 3D and properties visualization
does help for the understanding of singular errors according to the site supervisor who
tested it.
However, companies are used to receive reports of errors by e-mail, and therefore
did not make the effort of downloading the reports from the cloud. A change of habits
is therefore required to use this tool at its full potential.
Figure 3.2: Dalux Field showing simultaneously a 2D plan and a 3D view as well
as objects properties.
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Interviews and Meetings
23
BIM tool: BIMView
BIMView is a similar application developed by AriCAD and Bouygues, which can
work on Surface Pro 4 tablets and enables 3D visualization of BIM models and adding
of registration, like Dalux Field. It is also made to facilitate the ordering of concrete,
and the realization of daily work schedule with a visualization of what needs to be
cast with a different color for each day, as shown in Figure 3.3. This application also
seems satisfactory, except that the visualization was less fluent than on Dalux Field.
However, it only works on a Windows environment, which is not currently the most
used one on tablets. AriCAD and Bouygues wish to develop the possibility to import
temporary equipment such as brackets.
(a) Ordering of concrete
(b) Daily work schedule
Figure 3.3: Two applications of BIMView.
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Analysis
BIM tool: GoodBIM
GoodBIM is a third application developed by Resolving and tested for the vi-
sualization of models and monitoring of construction. An application developed by
Resolving for 2D plans was originally used by Bouygues and worked fine, but the
BIM version of it is not yet a mature tool. For instance, it is not yet able to read
heavy or multiple files, to switch from 2D to 3D or vice-versa. Moreover, information
is lost when exporting report files or annotated models. For example, annotations
which were not written in Arial font were not visible.
BIM tool: KBIM
KBIM is a BIM kiosk which is currently developed by Bouygues, to enable an user-
friendly visualization on construction sites, and is shown in Figure 3.4. In particular,
the kiosk is waterproof and the visualization screen in meant to be large enough to be
watched simultaneously by several members. This kiosk is meant to be used mainly
for morning meetings, to make sure every worker is aware of the agenda of the day,
and of the safety measures.
Figure 3.4: A KBIM Prototype developed by Bouygues.
According to site workers, better visualization means a better understanding, but
today their computers are not powerful enough to read well BIM models, even with
viewers such as Navisworks. Furthermore, as they are not used to 3D models, they do
not know necessarily know how to use associated software. To make sure the workers
will want to use BIM models on a screen rather than 2D drawings, software used to
visualize the model also needs to be user-friendly. It means that it should be intuitive
to navigate into the model, and that the navigation should be smooth, with not many
waiting times which often lead to a reject of the new technology. Site workers also
expressed their need to be able to make crop sections and to measure distances.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Interviews and Meetings
25
BIM tool: Revizto
Revizto is a viewer which can work offline and is meant to be used together with
the KBIM. Objects and their properties are accessible via the viewer, and tests are
performed to add a property that links to the associated execution plans. This system
is already used in the final BIM model used for maintenance, where links for technical
data sheets are included in the properties. However, it has been shown that Revit
of similar 3D modeling software are too heavy to run on the computers used on-site,
and that workers do not necessarily know how to use them. This is why a viewer with
a lighter model and a simpler use is more appropriate on a construction site, as long
as it enables to link objects and their associated execution plans. This tool appears
to work fine, it is for instance possible to make crop sections and to measure between
plans or objects, as shown in Figure 3.5.
(a) A crop section
(b) A measurement
Figure 3.5: Possible actions on the viewer Revizto.
Models viewed on-site are often so-called methods models, with elements that are
going to be built on-site, such as shear walls or slabs, without finishes, but with the
machinery involved, such as cranes, shore towers or wall brackets. These enable to
prepare the logistics on-site. They were traditionally made in 2D, but BIM models are
an improvement as they can help for better visualization, but also better logistics with
the implementation of time in the models, to visualize all of the equipment needed
on-site as the construction goes. Preparation of construction can also be made easier
thanks to BIM, such as automatic modeling tools which place the right number of
shore towers below slabs. These methods models would be really useful to visualize
on-site, but issues appeared with Revizto, because it does not recognize worksets,
which are used by Bouygues’ engineers to separate a model by construction phases,
depending on when elements are going to be built.
Models and viewers should thus share a similar classification to be able to filter
elements.
==PAGE:38==
26
3 Analysis
Lessons learned
This meeting was an opportunity to define which qualities a BIM tool should have
on construction sites. To be user-friendly is a first asset: tools should be easy of use,
and in particular resistant to outdoor conditions. Most visualization tools have today
a touchscreen interface which is quite intuitive, but they should work with gloves as
well, since site workers do wear gloves for safety reasons. Viewers should be simple
and intuitive to use, with only the necessary features, so that it can be well accepted
by site workers.
Workers also with to add annotations, make crop sections, take
measurements or hide elements. Some attempts to use existing viewers on computers
failed because the models were too heavy and the computers on-site were not powerful
enough compared to the ones used by engineers. What is more, most workers are not
familiar with modeling software and the associated commands. The use of colors
to identify groups of elements such as concrete walls, metallic structure, and so on,
seems to be appreciated by the workers for better understanding. Hatched patterns
should also be available for colorblind people. According to Bouygues, tools should
have an offline mode to be used anywhere in the site, even in remote places and
underground levels. Indeed, even though Internet networks are covering more and
more locations, some remote places are not well covered and there is not necessarily
a budget allocated for fast Internet connections, especially for small projects.
There is a need to figure out how the models are modified and ”lightened” by these
tools, for instance how is the quality degraded, which elements are kept or not. This
needs to be known so that the buildings are modelled accordingly, knowing which
elements will be used or not on construction sites. Besides, editors of such tools use
construction companies to make tests, meaning that tools are not necessarily up and
running when tested. This is an issue in view of the fact that workers tend to give up
the use of BIM if tools do not work effectively. This means that as long as the tools
are not perfected, they should be tested mostly by volunteers who are aware of the
difficulties they may encounter.
A wish for the future is for tools to be able to recognize the geometry on-site and
compare it directly to the 3D model.
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Interviews and Meetings
27
3.2.2
Interview of the developers of a collaborative BIM platform
This interview was conducted on the 31st of January, 2017 with a company who is
developing an open and collaborative BIM platform.
BIM use
The platform they develop is meant for the sharing of BIM objects including
documentation and project files, through public and private clouds. This company
also helps companies who design objects, regarding classifications and standards for
example. This platform is meant to support 3D model files from Revit, ArchiCAD or
SketchUp, and to be used as a database. When uploading a 3D model to the cloud,
properties from the model can be saved in a database on the platform, and the file
can be re-opened in another software that can use the properties from this database.
It is also possible to choose which properties to include if one does not wish the model
to be too heavy for example. A viewer is also included in the platform so that 3D
models can be visualized on any computer.
Relation to construction sites
This platform can be used to overcome issues of interoperability since the same
database and visualization are accessible for everyone even if they do not use the same
modeling software. This can be a possibility for better data sharing and visualization
for the people on construction sites.
Issues and suggestions
An Internet connection is needed, which is not available yet on all construction
sites, especially in underground levels. Even though the viewer seems intuitive, it
does not enable the user to measure distances or to make crop sections for example.
Since objects from suppliers are available in the platform too, this platform can
also be used by construction site supervisors to choose the right components to replace
generic objects on BIM models. Realistic 3D models can then be used as show models
together with virtual reality to replace show rooms, so that decisions can be taken or
selections can be validated, without actually having to build anything.
Other platforms of this type seem to develop, as several stands were presenting
similar products during the BIM World Conference which took place in Paris on the
29th and 30th of March, 2017.
==PAGE:40==
28
3 Analysis
3.2.3
Interview of two architects
This interview was conducted on the 2nd of February, 2017, with two architects who
work with BYBAT GO. The context of the interview was a meeting between them
and the BIM manager from BYBAT GO, in order to establish the BIM strategy for
the conception of a design-build contract with a social landlord. The aim of this
interview was not to ask very specific questions but rather to have an overview of
the use of BIM during the design phase of a project, since those BIM models will be
re-used in the construction phase.
BIM use
The present landlord is one of the main social landlord in the region of Normandy,
and the most demanding in terms of BIM model quality. In addition to a BIM model,
usually merging an architectural model and a MEP model, a virtual tour and a final,
as-built, BIM model with technical data sheets attached, are also required.
The
architectural BIM model is modeled by the architects, advised by the BIM unit in
BYBAT GO. The MEP model and the final BIM model are then modeled by the
BIM unit.
Relation to construction sites
These processes do not concern directly the construction sites, but this highlights
the fact that models should be modeled with a view of how it is going to be used
afterwards. For instance, a facade wall can be modeled as one wall on an architectural
model. However, when building it, several shear walls are cast, level by level and even
piece by piece when they are large. This means that models to be used on site need
to be adapted, and more generally that communication and collaboration is essential
throughout the whole building process.
Issues and suggestions
An issue noted was the fact that the architects have only modelled in Allplan so
far, and BYBAT GO is mainly working on Revit. Only one third of the architects
who work for BYBAT GO do work with Revit, the others modelling in ArchiCAD
or Allplan. Seeing that information is lost when exporting to IFC, this means that
the engineers from BYBAT GO will not get complete models when they will open
them on Revit. This is even more true since the IFC format asked by the landlord
is IFC 2x3, whereas IFC 4 is more recent and preferred by BYBAT GO. Another
issue is that architects often model with only geometry in mind, and not necessarily
properties or processes of construction. Besides, some architects tend to add BIM
objects from suppliers in the design phase because they look prettier, but they are
often too heavy. What is more, suppliers are not chosen at this stage and the objects
will have to be modified later anyway. The BIM unit at BYBAT GO is thus currently
working on guidelines to give to the architects so that their models can be reused
easily during the study phases. These guidelines include the fact that level of detail
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Interviews and Meetings
29
should be kept low as long as final dimensions, components and their suppliers are
not decided. Lastly, architects and BYBAT GO need to share documents efficiently
to achieve a satisfactory collaboration. Sharing of documents was thus suggested to
be done through BIM 360 from Autodesk.
3.2.4
Interview with the developer of Ramby Outdoor and
Ramby Plan
This meeting took place on the 15th of February, 2017, with the BIM Manager in
Bouygues Bâtiment Ile de France - a regional subsidiary of Bouygues Construction
in the region of Paris, and developer of the applications Ramby Outdoor and Ramby
Plan.
BIM use
Ramby Outdoor and Ramby plan are two applications which use augmented reality
to show buildings.
Ramby Outdoor enables the user to insert a 3D model, either in FBX or OBJ
format, in a 360° photo of the site. It is then possible to go back on-site and visualize
the future building through a tablet. An example of what can be seen on the tablet
is shown in Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: Augmented reality using Ramby Outdoor.
==PAGE:42==
30
3 Analysis
The advantage is that the building is integrated in the environment, compared
to usual 3D models that mostly include rough volumes for the surroundings. Clients
who used it were apparently able to visualize better their future building than on
plans, since they do not all have experience in architecture. These tools can therefore
be used as commercial assets towards clients. What is more, the price is fixed per
project. This means that, except the time of work to insert a model in a 360° view
(from one hour to one day depending on the experience of the modeler and the
complexity of the project) it does not cost more to update the model in the views to
show another version of a project, or to update the pictures around the model in case
the surroundings change.
Ramby Plan enables the user to visualize on a mobile device the 3D version of a
2D plan, as shown in Figure 3.7. The plan is generated from a BIM model and a QR
code is also printed on the plan, in order to enable the mobile device to display the
associated BIM model. This is a tool made for users to visualize better a building,
since it can be difficult for some people to have a view of a building from a 2D plan,
or to understand some particular details.
Figure 3.7: Augmented reality using Ramby Plan.
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Interviews and Meetings
31
Relation to construction sites
These applications can be used on construction sites for global visualization. As
long as one of these applications is used commercially for a project, it is not more
expensive to use it on construction sites, considering that one tablet is available for
use on-site.
Issues and suggestions
Even though these viewers are quite intuitive, it is not possible to make crop
sections for example or take measurements, which does not match with Bouygues’
requirements of a viewer tool mentioned above. These applications seem more suited
for a commercial use, which they are designed for. However, the enthusiasm shown
by the clients suggests that augmented reality can be a way to bring 3D models to
construction sites that lots of people find enjoyable. Indeed, motivation of the workers
to use new tools is crucial for their integration in building processes.
Another application is currently developed by the same team and aims at using
augmented reality in a finished building to display components hidden by walls or
suspended ceilings to help Facilities Management.
3.2.5
Interview of a drywall worker working in collaboration with
BYBAT GO
This interview was conducted on the 20th of March, 2017, with a drywall worker
and sub-contractor of BYBAT GO, who recently started to ask for the BIM models
produced by the BIM unit in BYBAT GO. The objective of this interview was to
determine why and how he uses the BIM model.
BIM use
The drywall worker uses the BIM model to extract measurement of walls thanks
to the schedules and to check their conformity regarding the requirements of the
manufacturer. A cost estimation can also be easily performed, as well as purchase
orders.
Relation to construction sites
Such uses of BIM models is to be used by more sub-contractors as the use of BIM
is increasing. Purchase orders can be produced faster, which leads to faster delivery
on-site. Quantities given are also more precise using BIM models, which will help
site worker to have the correct amount of materials. Finally, it can lead to less waste,
since precise quantities are known in advance and that drywall can be cut directly to
the correct size.
==PAGE:44==
32
3 Analysis
3.2.6
Interview of a sub-contractor who performs 3D laser scans
This interview was conducted on the 21st of March, 2017, with a sub-contractor who
performs 3D laser scans for BYBAT GO as well as for other companies. The objective
was to have an overview of the use of 3D laser scanners in France.
BIM use
3D laser scans are performed today by building companies mainly to retrieve data
from existing buildings for rehabilitation projects.
Point clouds are then used to
generate drawings or BIM models.
They can be imported directly in a modeling
software to help modeling by following the points. Some software can also be used
to recognize simple geometries from point clouds, such as planes. Crop sections from
point clouds are also a good way to help modeling, for instance level heights can be
retrieved from those crop sections.
Relation to construction sites
According to the sub-contractor, there is still little use of 3D scanners in France
to check the execution of work, except for buildings with a very challenging structure.
There is also little use of 3D scanners to make as-built models. Even when asked
by the clients, as-built models are often models which are updated with the installed
components, but the position of walls are not updated for example.
This could
however be an asset for building companies, to prove their clients that they are in
accordance with their requirements. It seems that there is not yet an automatic way
to update models from the generated point clouds, but clash detection can help detect
elements that are not built within the tolerance of execution compared to the BIM
model, so that the modeler can update those elements accordingly.
Issues and suggestions
Points clouds generated are around 30Mo per scan, and around twenty of them
are necessary to scan a classic, several levels high, residential building. Given the size
of data to be processed, it often takes a while for nowadays’ computers. As his clients
are not necessarily familiar to BIM and the technology of 3D scanning, they do not
communicate efficiently enough about how the scans are going to be used (to make
a BIM model, to produce 2D drawings such as facade plans, or to make a rendering
for communication for instance). This results in the fact that parameters used in the
scanners are not necessarily the most relevant ones. Indeed, there is a compromise to
find between quality of the point clouds (given by, inter alia, accuracy of the points
and their precision) and the time necessary to scan, the quality needed not being the
same depending on the further uses of the scans. As many studies have put it forward,
there is a need to educate professionals about BIM and the technologies involved, so
that appropriate tools can be better used.
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Interviews and Meetings
33
3.2.7
Interviews of users ans sales representatives of Robotic Total
Stations
An interview was conducted on the 3rd of February, 2017, with a construction site
supervisor from BYBAT GO, who used himself a Robotic Total Station, from Vendor
A to test the implementation of foundations. A second interview was conducted on
the 3rd of February, 2017, with a structural engineer from BYBAT GO, who used a
Robotic Total Station from Vendor B to test the implementation of structural walls.
A meeting took place on the 21st of February, 2017, with a sales representative from
Vendor B. Three tests were then performed in March and June to test the products:
one test for each vendor in March, to test the use of a 2D model, and a test in June
with Vendor A who released a new version able to read directly BIM models in IFC
format.
BIM use
Models are exported to the Robotic Total Station in order to implement points
from the model on site. Robotic Total Stations are theodolites which consist in a
fixed station and a pole with a prism, connected with the station with an optical
connection. Robotics concern the optical connection: the station is able to follow
automatically the pole’s prism. A Robotic Total Station from Vendor A is shown in
Figure 3.8. A mobile device is attached to the pole, can read models and inform the
worker of the position of the pole, and in particular how far it is from a particular
point or line from the model. In March, only 2D files could be read by the stations,
meaning that the points implemented were on the same level, and that the advantage
of BIM was mainly in the fact that plans came from a unique model, thus having less
chance of errors. In June, it was tested to read a BIM model in IFC format, so that
points could be positioned in 3D, objects could be selected instead of lines and views
could be filtered by object types. All tests indicated a precise positioning, meaning
less than 1 cm to be within the range of French tolerances of execution. This is true
when the station is positioned thanks to survey points, which are very precise because
positioned on-site by a professional surveyor. This means that these survey points
should be included in the BIM model, which is often the case at Bouygues.
Relation to construction sites
This application targets directly the construction site, with a faster and more
precise way of positioning elements, such as walls and holes in the slabs when using
2D models. With a 3D model, it is possible to position corners of manikins used for
pockets in formwork before casting concrete walls. It is possible to choose any point
from the plan and to create some if needed. For instance, it is possible to create points
every meter on a wall, which can be useful to implement a curved wall. Robotic Total
Stations can also be used to monitor construction works by comparing the position
of a point on-site and on the model, to increase reliability.
==PAGE:46==
34
3 Analysis
Issues and suggestions
Not a lot of robots are yet available for rent or purchase, but this will improve
in the following years. Models need to be available on time and workers need to be
notified if changes are made to the plans. The use of a Robotic Total Station for
the installation of foundations and the positioning of walls on the ground floor seem
to be easy to implement in Bouygues’ processes. However, its use for the complete
installation of walls, including pockets, can be more challenging, as explained in
Figure 3.9, Figure 3.10 and Figure 3.11 next page.
The first use can be sufficient when building housing facilities, which have many
shear walls with not many pockets. However foundations are not always included in
Bouygues’ BIM models yet, but drawn separately by structural engineers. This second
use is more relevant when building functional facilities such as hospitals, because they
do not have many shear walls but a lot of pockets, and positioning manikins can be
very useful.
Figure 3.8: A Robotic Total Station from Vendor A.
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Interviews and Meetings
35
Figure 3.9: Effective way of using a Robotic Total Station, on a flat terrain: the
station is positioned thanks to four survey points and there is always
an optical connection between the station and the pole.
Figure 3.10: When walls are installed, the optical connection between the station
and the pole can be lost.
Figure 3.11: The station can be re-positioned but there is usually a lost in precision
since it becomes difficult to position the station thanks to all of the
survey points.
==PAGE:48==
36
3 Analysis
3.2.8
Interview of an engineer in research and development at
BYBAT GO
This interview was conducted on the 17h of March, 2017, with an engineer in research
and development at BYBAT GO. The objective was to know if research projects
regarded BIM use on construction sites.
BIM use
One research project using BIM currently going on with Bouygues, the University
of Nantes and other companies is Batiprint3D, which aims at 3D printing a one-
storey building in 1:1 scale. More precisely, it prints in 3D formwork made of fast
setting, polyurethane foam, and then concrete between two layers of foam, as shown
in Figure 3.12. These two layers remain, in order to ensure thermal and acoustic
insulation of the building. Tho robot which prints uses a BIM model and a tracker
laser. Research is going on about concrete properties and if they stay the same when
being 3D printed, among other things. Tests start in June 2017 which is too late in
the time frame of this Thesis to be developed further.
Figure 3.12: An example of 3D printed wall with Batiprint [Bat17].
Relation to construction sites
This process directly aims at modifying the processes on the construction sites,
by automating the installation of walls. For now, it has been considered to use such
3D printing for emergency construction projects when fast and cheap construction is
needed.
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Interviews and Meetings
37
3.2.9
Interview of a site supervisor and site workers from BYBAT GO
This interview was conducted on the 8th of February, 2017, with a site supervisor and
site workers from BYBAT GO, who started to use Smart Cast on the construction
site of a residential building in the northwest of France.
BIM use
Smart Cast is a solution which is developed by a French start-up from the region
of Nantes, and is meant to facilitate the work of site workers.
Smart Cast uses
permanent formwork panels which are printed on the two faces with building services
components which are meant to be inside the slab and partition walls, as shown in the
synthesis plan in Figure 3.13. Printed lines act as instructions for the workers. Panels
are also pre-cut to fit the structure, and pre-drilled for the pipes and cables to pass
through, as it can be seen on Figure 3.14. BIM is here used to facilitate construction
processes and to develop coordination and collaboration, since Smart Cast needs a
reliable combination of architectural, structural, and MEP models.
It is presented as a product which can save time for several workers:
• Plumbers and electricians, as they do not need to draw on the panels before
installing building services components before casting. They can also save time
after casting since panels are pre-drilled to the right size of pipes and cables.
With a conventional method, large tubes containing pipes and cables are placed
on formwork panels, so that pipes do not get stuck in concrete, and space around
pipes has to be filled afterwards. With Smart Cast, pipes and cables can directly
go through the formwork panels and no time is used to fill holes.
• Masons, as they do not need to oil the panels before casting. Since these panels
are meant to stay in place and not removed, this task is no longer needed.
• Drywall workers during the installation of partition walls. Indeed, position of
the partition walls are drawn on the sub-face as shown in Figure 3.14(b).
• Electricians again, since electrical components to be placed and their respective
height are also drawn on the sub-face, as shown in Figure 3.14(b).
• Painters, as they should only apply a coat between the panels instead of on all
the sub-face as with a conventional method. Indeed, it is possible to paint right
away on the panels.
Relation to construction sites
The use of BIM is in this case directly applicable on the construction sites, as it
modifies and facilitates the construction processes for the site workers.
This solution is going to be further investigated in this Thesis.
==PAGE:50==
38
3 Analysis
Figure 3.13: Smart Cast synthesis plan for one apartment. Here, concrete walls
are traced in black, partition walls in light blue, doors in light green,
plumbing components in dark blue and electrical components in red.
==PAGE:51==
3.2 Interviews and Meetings
39
(a) Top face before casting
(b) Sub face after casting. The symbols of electrical components and their respective
heights are indicated.
Figure 3.14: Photos taken on BYBAT GO’s construction site which uses Smart
Cast.
==PAGE:52==
40
3 Analysis
3.3
Analysis of Smart Cast
3.3.1
Description of the product
Smart Cast uses permanent formwork panels for concrete slabs. In France at BYBAT
GO, concrete slabs are cast according to the process illustrated in Appendix A. Smart
Cast panels are meant to replace conventional, plywood panels (identified by ”peau
coffrante” and ”contreplaqué de fond de coffrage” in Appendix A), except they remain
in place instead of being removed.
A patent was registered by Smart Cast for the panels regarding their composition
and shape. The patent involves mainly their reaction to concrete, to ensure that
they stay fixed to the concrete once concrete is dry after casting and that it does
not affect the structure of buildings. This is mainly achieved thanks to the materials
used and to the conical cavities on the top-face which induce a suction effect with the
concrete. This is further explained in Appendix B. All the cutting, printing, drilling
and organization processes can still be developed further, since it depends highly on
their clients’ needs.
Smart Cast was described mainly as a multidisciplinary product which can fa-
cilitate the installation of building services components and partition walls. This is
achieved thanks to printed lines which show the position of such elements, and pre-
drilled holes to enable ducts, pipes or cables to pass through. This section aims at
investigating all the impacts the use of Smart Cast implies.
3.3.2
Impacts on Modeling, prior to production
A process diagram in Figure 4.1 and Figure 4.2 under subsection 4.1 shows the pro-
cesses induced by the use of Smart Cast, from the time the architectural, structural
and MEP models are given to the BIM unit and until the installation of components
is complete.
The BIM unit is responsible for 3D coordination of the models and for the produc-
tion of DWG drawings which merge architectural, structural and MEP floor plans.
These DWG plans today show walls, doors, as well as plumbing and electrical ele-
ments. As panels are printed in 2D, 2D models from the architect or the engineers
can still be used, but the coordination is more efficient with BIM models. Indeed,
issues can be detected more easily in 3D thanks to a better visualization and BIM
models offer the possibility to perform a clash detection. Moreover, as BIM models
are object-oriented, the BIM unit can easily replace objects given by the engineers
by objects that are going to be placed on-site, as they know the suppliers. This is
essential to enable the factory to print elements and drill to the correct size. This
need for coordination means that a change in organization has to be performed, so
that a coordination team can check the superposition of those models and make the
necessary changes in time. Even though more time is used to coordinate those mod-
els, it can be beneficial to the project to have a coordination prior to construction, to
==PAGE:53==
3.3 Analysis of Smart Cast
41
avoid execution errors which cost money and time, especially when discovered late.
On the other hand, the BIM unit do not have to produce execution plans for building
services and partition walls. All in all, according to the BIM unit of BYBAT GO,
there is not noticeable extra time needed compared to a conventional method for the
modelers. This is true when coordination is relatively simple, for example with resi-
dential buildings which follow some standards. By contrast, facility buildings have a
lot of building services components and are technically more complex, so coordination
will take more time, which is however not quantified yet.
Besides, for now, three weeks are needed between the time the BIM unit gives the
DWG plans to the factory, and the time the panels are delivered to the construction
site. This means that it needs to be agreed among the stakeholders that no changes
are to be asked during this three-weeks period. According to BYBAT GO, Smart
Cast can be used easily on residential buildings, as they follow some standards, but it
is more difficult to use on facilities for example, as clients often ask for changes late in
the process. However, as it will be developed under subsection 4.1, this three-weeks
period can be reduced to enable this product to be used for facility buildings as well.
Another point to take into consideration is the level of detail. Indeed, the factory
had to modify the plans given by BYBAT GO, among other things because building
services objects were too detailed, as shown in Figure 3.15(a), which did not give
a readable result once printed on the panels. As shown in Figure 3.15(b), lines are
printed with spaced points, and details are not relevant to add. Level of detail of
walls is easy to change to low in the Revit interface to have only the exterior lines,
but level of detail of components depend on how objects are modeled. For instance,
the object in Figure 3.15(a) is displayed the same whatever which level of detail is
chosen. This means that some objects may need upstream modifications, so that the
only lines displayed on the plans given to the factory are the lines that are useful to
position components on-site.
There is therefore a need to define some modeling requirements, which will be
developed under subsection 4.1.
(a) Example of a detailed ob-
ject used by the modelers
(b) Example of printed lines
on Smart Cast panels
Figure 3.15: Level of detail of objects needs to be low.
==PAGE:54==
42
3 Analysis
3.3.3
Impacts on Architecture
The designed shape of a building is not to be affected by the use of Smart Cast since
it can be used with curved walls and non-horizontal ceilings, according to the leader
of the start-up.
Architects are involved in the production of panels insofar as they need to produce
the final architectural model early enough so that all the following tasks can proceed,
in order to enable the panels to be delivered on time.
Another impact on architecture is that, as panels are meant to stay in place after
casting, this means that the thickness on the panels - 6 mm, 8 mm, 10 mm or 12 mm
depending on the slab according to the producers - is lost in terms of ceiling height.
This has to be taken into account in case of strict regulations when suspended ceilings
are not used. In case suspended ceilings are to be placed, this also has to be taken
into account, to ensure that all building services elements will have enough space.
3.3.4
Impacts on Structure
Structural elements also need to be coordinated with architectural elements, so that
the panels can be cut according to the cast concrete.
As reinforcement is placed
on top of those panels, it can be interesting to print information on reinforcement
as well. BYBAT GO is now testing Smart Cast on a residential building which is
quite standard, so information regarding the whole reinforcement may not be relevant.
What is more, it can become difficult to read if too much information is printed on
the panels. However, some particularities in the reinforcement may be pertinent to
add. On a technical point of view, Smart Cast is able to print in Black, Red, Blue,
Green and Yellow, so adding information is possible as long as each field is represented
with a distinct color. This asks for more work for the BIM unit who needs to add
information on the DWG drawings.
Even though Smart Cast does fasten some processes, the whole structure is built
within the same amount of time, according to the construction site supervisor. Indeed,
concrete cannot be cast faster - around 60 m2/day - due to the fact that casting slabs
is highly dependant on the casting of walls, which is not fastened by the use of Smart
Cast.
==PAGE:55==
3.3 Analysis of Smart Cast
43
3.3.5
Impacts on Building Services
Smart Cast panels are now printed with plumbing and electrical components. Gas
network elements can also be included but have to be printed in another color.
On a practical point of view and according to site workers who used it for the first
time, it was easy to adapt to this new way of working and they do see the gain of time.
In particular, they appreciate the fact that they do not need to draw on the panels
anymore. However, as panels are meant to stay in place, they cannot drill them to fix
building services components. Is those components are not correctly fixed, they may
move due to the traffic of workers and because of the weight of concrete when casting.
During the tests, workers fixed those elements with wires or plastic hose clamps, as
shown in Figure 3.16(a) and Figure 3.16(b).
(a) Fixation with wires
(b) Fixation with hose clamps
Figure 3.16: Current fixation of building services components.
Even though components did stay in place, they find it is not an optimal solution.
If another solution was to be find, it would reduce the time of positioning. Despite
this issue of fixation, precision reached was very satisfactory, around 1 cm according
to the site supervisor, which matches with French regulations regarding tolerances of
execution.
Another issue is when a primary beam - in red on Figure 3.17 - on the structure
used to support the panels and the slab before the concrete is dry, is positioned just
under a hole in a panel. In this case, it is not possible to pass the pipes or cables
through the panel and the workers have to pull the cables once the concrete is dry
and not before casting. This issue does not appear when a secondary beam - in green
on Figure 3.17 - is positioned under a hole, because secondary beams can be moved
a little if necessary. However, this issue is not related to the product Smart Cast and
also occurs with a conventional method. It just means that the advantage of having
pre-drilled panels is lost in some cases. Hopefully, according to the site supervisor,
this issue did not happen a lot.
==PAGE:56==
44
3 Analysis
Figure 3.17: Primary beams - in red - and secondary beams - in green - supporting
Smart Cast panels and the future slab.
After casting, a gain of time was observed on the construction site according to
the site supervisor, thanks to the fact the holes for cables were the right size and did
not need to be filled afterwards.
This system was tested by BYBAT GO only on a residential building, where all
the pipes and components are embedded in the concrete slabs. It is also possible to
use this system with pipes going under the slab, for example in facilities building.
According to the leader of Smart Cast, ”In this case, we can print on the sub-face
where the ducts and cables should be placed, as well as the layout of suspended ceiling
tiles.
However, there is a lost of some of the ”ready-to-paint” added value of the
product, so it needs to be investigated whether it is still economically profitable.”.
Indeed, since pipes are placed according to the printed lines, it means that the panels
can not be painted. This also means that the use of Smart Cast when pipes, ducts
or cables are placed under the slab, only seems relevant when there are suspended
ceilings to hide the printed lines afterwards, and not when the pipes are exposed.
==PAGE:57==
3.3 Analysis of Smart Cast
45
3.3.6
Impacts on Fire Safety
According to the classification of reaction to fire performance, in accordance to NF
EN 13501-1: 2013, the product has been classified A1 for its reaction to fire behavior,
meaning it is incombustible. Moreover, it does not produce smoke of flaming droplets
and particles. This classification is valid when the panels are used for sub-slab cov-
ering, without substrate of fixation. This classification can be found in Appendix B.
The fact that panels are incombustible can also be seen as an extra protection from
fire for rooms.
Since Smart Cast can be used to position plumbing and electrical components, it
can also be used to position fire safety components, such as sprinkler systems. This
was not developed by Smart Cast because sprinkler systems are not often used in
France. As mentioned under subsection 3.3.4, it is possible to add information as
long as each field is represented with a distinct color.
3.3.7
Impacts on Insulation
The U value of those panels is 0.178 W·m−1·K−1, which means they have strong
insulating characteristics. However, they are not thick enough to act as insulation.
3.3.8
Impacts on Acoustics
As the panels are directly fixed to the slab, there is no mass-spring system. The
panels do have acoustic insulation characteristics, but they are considered negligible
compared to the characteristics of the slab which is much thicker: the panels only
represent from 2 to 8 % of the overall thickness. Consequently, the acoustics of the
slab are not affected by the panels, and the determination of acoustic characteristics
with the panels is the same than with the slab alone, as written in Appendix B.
3.3.9
Impacts on Installation of partition walls
The main change for drywall workers is that they do not need to follow plans nor
measure anything and that they can use the lines on the sub-face to position partition
walls. Installation itself stays the same. Time gained was not considered significant
enough by the construction site supervisor. Prefabrication of elements together with
this new method was investigated, but it did not seem relevant. Indeed, prefabricated
elements are not that common in France, and drywall workers already use BIM models
to purchase partition walls with the right dimensions, as it was mentioned in the
previous section. What is more, as concrete is cast in-site and that variations to the
original model may appear, it is considered that the position of partition walls may
have to be adjusted. Besides, this process was only tested on residential buildings,
the height of which is around 2.5 meters. The process of positioning partition walls
with lines to follow on a ceiling may therefore not be relevant when ceilings are placed
much higher.
==PAGE:58==
46
3 Analysis
3.3.10
Impacts on Painting
According to Appendix B, painting can be performed directly on the panels with a
spray gun or a paint roller, after applying a coat between them. It is supposed to gain
time because with a conventional method, painters have to apply a coat everywhere
on the sub-face of the slab. Figure 3.18 shows what the ceiling looks like after the
joints are applied, on the left, and after paint is applied, on the right.
Figure 3.18: Ceiling appearance using Smart Cast.
The gain of time is observed when the panels are strictly horizontal. This means
that the supporting equipment has to be strictly horizontal too.
(a) No seal was used
(b) Tape was used under raining con-
ditions
Figure 3.19: Unsatisfactory intersections of panels on the sub-face.
==PAGE:59==
3.3 Analysis of Smart Cast
47
Even so, on the construction site where BYBAT GO tested this product, it hap-
pened that panels were not completely horizontal because laitance of concrete inserted
between the panels and lifted them, as shown in Figure 3.19. This happened because
no seal or a bad one was used between the panels before casting concrete. The site
workers tried different ways to solve this issue, as it can be seen in Table 3.1.
Seal added
Result
Tape
Satisfactory solution in case of good weather, but not when it is
raining, as shown in Figure 3.19(b)
Silicone
Unsatisfactory because the silicone does not hold on the panels
and residues have to be removed
Plaster bands
Satisfactory even under raining conditions, as shown in Fig-
ure 3.20 but costs an extra 50€ per apartment - around 50 m2
Table 3.1: Investigated solutions to solve the rain issue.
(a) Plaster bands
(b) Clean intersection of panels
Figure 3.20: Best solution found to solve the issue.
3.3.11
Impacts on other fields on site
For now, other fields such as the installation of floor finishes, windows, kitchen and
other components, are not impacted by this new process. However, Smart Cast is
seen as an opportunity to provide information to the workers involved, which will be
developed in section 4.3.
==PAGE:60==
48
3 Analysis
3.3.12
Impacts on Delivery and Logistics on site
According to the site supervisor, this product does not add supplementary constraints
regarding deliveries, as all the panels were delivered on time on the site. To make sure
delivery times will continue to be respected even with a development of production,
Smart Cast wishes to build factories able to cut, drill and print panels in several
places so that construction sites would be at a maximum distance of 150 km. Now,
the objective is to cover all France, but they could expand to other countries.
There are studies currently conducted by the start-up about a mobile solution for
drilling and printing which can be brought to the construction site in order to fasten
to process. These studies are confidential and are thus not going to be developed in
this Thesis.
The panels used are 28kg heavy, which means that it is not very easy to change
the position of one panel once some others are placed around. However, the fact
that panels are printed makes it easy to check if they are well placed with each other,
because a discontinuity in the lines is easy to notice. What is more, panels are packed
by apartment and placed next to the corresponding apartment, and a synthesis plan
like the one in Figure 3.13 is joined to the package to avoid errors. There is a wish
from BYBAT GO to adapt this concept of delivery per area for building services
components. Since all of them are modeled and that the 3D coordination ensures
the accuracy of the models, schedules can be extracted so that the exact amount of
components is purchased and delivered to the desired zone.
3.3.13
Impacts on Safety
The density of Smart Cast panels is of 1100 kg/m3, making the weight of one standard
panel equal to 28 kg, which is very similar to the weight of conventional plywood
panels. Moreover, this weight is inferior to the maximum weight a worker can carry
in France, which is of 55 kg. Therefore, there are not additional safety measures to
take regarding the use of these panels for workers. Safety can also be improved by
the 3D coordination, since anticipation leads to a safer construction site.
For inhabitants, it does not seem that there are safety issues either, since the
product was categorized as A+, meaning the best category, regarding the emission of
harmful substances like Volatile Organic Compounds (VOC) into indoor air.
3.3.14
Impacts on Maintenance
According to Appendix B, there is not a need for extra maintenance compared to
the conventional maintenance needed for painting, or to maintain suspended ceiling.
In case of rehabilitation, the processes are not impacted except if the products used
are not compatible with the materials of the panels. In case of large water damages,
joints between panels need to be scraped until the chamfers are visible. Then, the
panels can be let to dry, and new joints can be applied, as well as new layers of paint.
==PAGE:61==
3.3 Analysis of Smart Cast
49
3.3.15
Impacts on the Environment
The fact that formwork panels are printed with all the needed information means that
paper copies are not needed or at least less needed, which reduces the production of
paper and has a positive impact on the environment. Indeed, paper copies may still
be used for checking, but one copy per field may be enough and the format size can
be smaller than A0 copies usually used on-site.
Now, panels are cut, printed and drilled in Nantes in the West of France and need
to be transported to the construction site. Having these processes moved closer to
the construction sites would reduce transportation and the carbon footprint of those
panels.
Regarding the end of life of the panels, they are meant to be sorted and sent to
a landfill site. In France, there are three categories of landfill sites: 1st category for
hazardous waste, 2nd category for non-hazardous, non-inert waste, and 3rd category
for inert waste. For now, Smart Cast panels are not considered inert because they
contain sulphate. However, the panels may be sent to 3rd category landfill sites in
some regions which allow products with sulphate because their soil is naturally rich in
sulphate, such as the region around Paris. Compared to conventional wooden panels,
Smart Cast panels have probably more negative impacts on the environment, since
wooden panels can be reused as firewood.
To have an overview of all the impacts on the environment, including the im-
pacts of production, transport and disposal, a deeper analysis such as a Life Cycle
Assessment should be performed, which does not fit within the time frame of this
Thesis.
3.3.16
Financial impacts
A financial analysis was performed on the construction site in Normandy where Smart
Cast was tested by BYBAT GO. The building is a residential building with four floors
of 1932 m2 - including the ground floor, with only cast-in-site concrete. It is composed
of 39 apartments per floor, and their surface is of 50 m2 in average. Table 3.2 gives
the prices or hours worked per m2, and Table 3.3 gives an example or money spent on
an entire floor, where numbers are averages of upper floor prices. Numbers may differ
slightly when calculating prices in Table 3.3 from Table 3.2 since these last numbers
are rounded.
The total gain is of 0.34 €/m2, and 2.32 h/m2. This gain does not seem large
enough to assess that money can me made out of the use of Smart Cast, especially
now that the product is still in a test phase and that unexpected issues may still
occur. On top of that, this financial synthesis does not take into account the possible
extra time used for coordination because it was considered negligible by the BIM
unit for this project, but it may not be the case for other projects.
If financial
gains are not established, it can be considered that there is at least a return on
investment. Indeed, even on a construction site where it was used for the first time,
==PAGE:62==
50
3 Analysis
the overall gain is positive and should increase as the workers get more used to it and
that potential issues are solved. Besides, the use of Smart Cast is seen by BYBAT
GO as a commercial argument towards the client, since it brings anticipation to the
construction, as well as innovation.
Conventional
Smart Cast
Purchase of panels
2.22 €/m2
13.80 €/m2
Sealing gaskets between panels before casting
1.01 €/m2
Positioning of plumbing components (28€/h)
0.46 h/m2
0.34 h/m2
Less materials used with Smart Cast
- 0.61 €/m2
Positioning of electrical components (30€/h)
0.34 h/m2
0.22 h/m2
Casting of concrete (30€/h)
0.7 h/m2
0.66 h/m2
Finishes after casting (30€/h)
0.08 h/m2
0.04 h/m2
Treatment of joints on the sub-face
1.75 €/m2
0.79 €/m2
Coat before painting
2 h/m2
Table 3.2: Financial synthesis per m2 on the use of Smart Cast.
Conventional
Smart Cast
Gain
Purchase of panels
4,292 €
26,664 €
- 22,372 €
Sealing gaskets between panels be-
fore casting
0 €
1,950 €
- 1,950 €
Positioning of plumbing components
25,116 €
18,564 €
6,552 €
Less materials used with Smart Cast
1,170 €
Positioning of electrical components
19,890 €
12,870 €
7,020 €
Casting of concrete
40,950 €
38,610 €
2,340 €
Finishes after casting
4,680 €
2,340 €
2,340 €
Treatment of joints on the sub-face
3,381 €
1,521 €
1,860 €
Coat before painting
3,864 €
0
3,864 €
TOTAL
824 €
Table 3.3: Financial synthesis for a 1932 m2 floor on the use of Smart Cast.
==PAGE:63==
3.3 Analysis of Smart Cast
51
3.3.17
About materials
According to Appendix B, materials used for the panels are magnesium oxide (MgO),
magnesium chloride (MgCl2), wood sawdust, woven glass fibre fabric and perlite.
This document was written in 2015 and since then, magnesium chloride was replaced
by magnesium sulphate (MgSO4), which is not an oxidizer and is much less hygro-
scopic [SQB16].
This answers to some concerns which were expressed about the use of MgO in
a building. For instance, Denmark experienced issues with magnesium oxide boards
used in ventilated facades and from winter 2014/15, damages such as significant
moisture, boards leaking salty water, corrosion of fittings and anchors and mould
growth were observed [DC17]. It was found that the damages were caused by the
fact that MgO-boards absorb moisture from outside air in periods with high outdoor
humidity (90-100 % relative humidity) and form water drops on the surfaces, which
leads to the listed damages [Rod16]. This level of humidity is not supposed to be
reached inside a building, since the recommended indoor humidity in France ranges
between 40 and 65 % relative humidity. Furthermore, regarding humidity, the use of
MgO panels for permanent, indoor formwork such as Smart Cast panels is not more
problematic than the use of MgO board for drywall, which is recognized reliable and
widely used in Australia [DC17]. However, even if the risk is low, one should keep in
mind that damages may occur in a building with humidity issues, for example if the
ventilation system is defective.
Furthermore, the document published by dincel and associates [DC17] refers to
wall formwork techniques which are not used in France. In particular, there are no
joiners used to cast walls or slabs, such as shown in Figure 3.21. Instead, concrete or
plastic blocks are used, with a height of 35 mm. There is therefore a larger coating
around reinforcement bars, which leads to a better prevention from corrosion.
Figure 3.21: Corrosion issues on MgO permanent formwork boards [DC17].
==PAGE:64==
52
3 Analysis
3.3.18
Other observations
This product has been tested by the producers in seismic zones from 1 to 4, meaning
from very weak to moderate seismic zones, which are the zones found in mainland
France. This means that this product may not be relevant in stronger seismic zones,
where the panels may fall. What is more, this product has been tested for a short
amount of time as the first panels were produced in November 2015. It would then
be interesting to check if the properties of the panels are not affected after a longer
period of time, for example 50 years which is the expected lifetime of new buildings
in France.
This product can also be used with prefabricated concrete slabs, but it has been
tested by BYBAT GO only with entirely cast-in-site slabs.
It was observed by BYBAT GO’s workers that the panels chamfers, which are
useful to enable the panels to be sealed with each other, have a satisfactory shock
resistance.
Some cracks appeared between panels during previous tests made by another
company, but Smart Cast has since improved its panels to avoid this issue. However,
the coat recommended by Smart Cast should be used between panels to make sure
cracks will not appear.
Even though panels are cut in the factory to match the shapes of structural
elements, some panels had to be re-cut on-site due to variations.
However, this
represented only 5 percent of the panels.
On a previous test made by another company, some printed elements disappeared
due to the traffic of people on the panels.
Since then, Smart Cast improved its
printing processes and the test conducted by BYBAT GO did not show this issue.
Panels were tested by Bouygues Construction in the North and in the South of
France, and did not appear to suffer from the different weather conditions, apart from
the rain issue discussed in section 3.3.10. However this issue regarded the interstices
between chamfers and not the panels themselves which are covered with a plastic
layer to avoid damages.
==PAGE:65==
3.3 Analysis of Smart Cast
53
3.3.19
Response to Bouygues’ objectives
As stated in the Introduction, the objectives expressed by Bouygues regarding the
development of BIM during the construction phase, are the following:
To organize better the construction site
The use of Smart Cast seems to have a positive impact on logistics. Moreover,
the fact that components and pipes are already traced on the boards enables a clear
view for the site workers on which elements have to be positioned. This can be seen
as a visualization tool, which can lead to a better understanding of the tasks and a
more efficient work.
To predict difficulties
Difficulties regarding coordination between architecture, structure, plumbing and
electricity can be predicted thanks to the 3D coordination performed by the BIM
unit before the production of panels. The construction site supervisor who tested
Smart Cast in BYBAT GO was satisfied of the product mainly because issues of
coordination did not occur thanks to the use of Smart Cast. Difficulties regarding
primary beams under holes, as explained under subsection 3.3.5 can also be predicted
by superimposing the Smart Cast plans and the construction methods model which
shows all the beams supporting the future slab. However, according to construction
site supervisors, the difficulties would stay even if predicted, because the primary
beams cannot be moved for structural reasons.
To ensure reliable delivery times
Delivery times of the panels did not seem to be an issue. Besides, the fact that
3D coordination has to be performed before to use Smart Cast means that purchase
orders may be more reliable and that there is less risk of having components missing.
To have a safe and user-friendly construction site
The fact that tasks to perform can be better understood and that difficulties
can be predicted can make the construction site safer. Smart Cast also seems to be
user-friendly, since workers could use it intuitively.
All in all, Smart Cast appears to be a way to reach Bouygues’ objectives, especially
regarding the prediction of difficulties.
According to Bougyues Construction, the keys to reach these objectives are: to en-
sure a digital continuity throughout the whole building process; to develop tools until
they are fully functional, ant to train all their employees and ensure their adaptation.
These keys may apply to this case, since Smart Cast panels are used on-site and
manufactured thanks to digital models, which creates another link between conception
and construction. There is also a need to develop modeling processes to make the use
of Smart Cast more efficient, as it will be developed under subsection 4.1.
==PAGE:66==
54
3 Analysis
This chapter showed that various benefits can be obtained from the use of BIM
on construction sites, and in particular facilitation of the installation of walls and
components. It also highlighted that most of the associated tools are not fully devel-
oped yet, which prevents companies to take full advantage of opportunities brought
by BIM. Smart Cast is a product which seems generally satisfactory with regard this
Thesis’ problem statement, but possible improvements will be investigated in the next
chapter.
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 4
Personal Proposals
This chapter aims at proposing improvements to Smart Cast, taking inspiration from
what was observed in the previous chapter.
4.1
To make an Information Delivery Manual
An interview with the leader of Smart Cast was conducted on the 25th April, 2017.
One of the question concerned the time needed for the company to manufacture and
deliver the panels once the plans are sent. This time is of three weeks today, and
there was a wish to know whether this time could be reduced. Indeed, a reduced time
means an opportunity to bring later changes, and to adapt this product to facility
buildings, which are today thought not to be adapted due to late changes asked by
the clients. Moreover, facility buildings have often more complicated building services
installations than residential buildings which follow some standards, and the use of
Smart Cast can be useful.
According to the leader of Smart Cast, ”At the moment, the most penalizing and
the most unpredictable task in terms of time spent is the modification of the plans.
If the digital model is complete and set with a dedicated Smart Cast layer allowing
to make a 2D export in compliance with the specifications, then this time shall be
considerably reduced.” The printing time is of 1h30 per apartment - around 50 m2 -
and cannot be reduced for now.
Today, plans from AutoCAD or BIM models from Revit for architecture and
building services are merged by the BIM unit who checks for errors, and the plans
are then sent to the company Smart Cast. This company then modifies the plans
so that they can be printed correctly. For instance, objects with too many details,
as in Figure 3.15(a) are simplified so that only lines which are useful to position
elements are kept. There is a wish from Smart Cast and Bouygues that plans sent
to Smart Cast respect some requirements, to reduce or even remove the modification
task performed by Smart Cast and to use BIM more efficiently.
An Information Delivery Manual, consisting of a process diagram and exchange
requirements, seems therefore relevant to have better-coordinated and more accurate
information with fewer errors combined with the resulting productivity improvements.
An Information Delivery Manual was thus developed, in accordance with the IDM
Method Guide [bui14].
==PAGE:68==
56
4 Personal Proposals
4.1.1
Process Diagram
To begin with, the process diagram in Figure 4.1 and Figure 4.2 shows the processes
and the associated information exchanges that clarify when to send and receive infor-
mation. This diagram is drawn in Building Process Modeling Notation (BPMN).
Figure 4.1: Process Diagram of Smart Cast - 1/2.
==PAGE:69==
4.1 To make an Information Delivery Manual
57
Figure 4.2: Process Diagram of Smart Cast - 2/2. CSS refers to the Construction
Site Supervisor from Bouygues Bâtiment Grand Ouest. Components A
refer to components placed into the future cast slab, and components
B refers to components placed after the slab is cast.
The gateways show who is responsible of controlling the different phases. The first
gateway is here to indicate that the BIM unit performs clash detection but is allowed
to change elements on the plans only if the client, the architect and the engineers
agree. The current three-week period mentioned previously is represented by the two
tasks in the Smart Cast lane.
==PAGE:70==
58
4 Personal Proposals
4.1.2
Exchange Requirements
To enable the BIM unit to deliver a better input to Smart Cast, the exchange require-
ments regarding the DWG files sent by the BIM unit to Smart Cast were defined with
Smart Cast and the BIM unit. The exchange requirements define the set of relevant
information, specified on the basis of the process diagram. The following exchange
requirement broadly follows the template given in the IDM Method Guide.
Project Stage
0
Portfolio requirements
1
Conception of need
2
Outline feasibility
3
Substantive feasibility
4
Outline conceptual design
5
Full conceptual design
6
Coordinated design and procurement
7
Production information
√
8
Construction
9
Operation and maintenance
10
Disposal
Overview
Scope
The scope of this exchange requirement is to enable the exchange of information about
the elements which will be printed on the Smart Cast panels.
General Description
This exchange requirement describes how the DWG plans sent to Smart Cast by the
BIM unit should be modeled.
Information Description
Information required concerning the DWG plans includes:
• Objects (wall, components, ...) that should be included;
• Level of detail of the objects;
• AutoCAD layer in which the objects should be included;
• Labels which should appear.
==PAGE:71==
4.1 To make an Information Delivery Manual
59
Information Requirements
Preconditions
A 3D coordination should have been performed between the architectural, structural
and mechanical models beforehand by the BIM unit to check for errors.
Select Objects
Physical objects are the actual elements and products that are to appear on the panels,
either as printed lines or holes. Objects which should be included are: walls, ducts,
holes for vertical pipes, horizontal plumbing pipes, electrical components, doors, sus-
pended ceilings. Gas networks elements can also be included. Cupboards or closets
should not be included. Libraries of components and symbols have to be agreed by
Smart Cast.
Level of detail of the objects
Walls
Only the outer contour
Ducts
Only the outer contour
Holes for vertical pipes
Only the outer contour of the holes (and not the
diameter of the pipes which pass through)
Horizontal plumbing pipes
Only the center line of their first and last 15 cm
Plumbing components
The outer contour, the circled label and the two
axes. For instance, connexion boxes for toilets
should be modeled as in Figure 4.3
Electrical components
Only the symbol
Doors
Jambs of the door, and an array which shows the
opening side of a door, next to one of the jambs and
within the contours of the associated wall
Suspended ceilings
Only the outer contour
Figure 4.3: Simplification of a component.
==PAGE:72==
60
4 Personal Proposals
AutoCAD Layers
Walls
”SMARTCAST-TRACING-BLACK”
Ducts
”SMARTCAST-TRACING-BLACK”
Holes for vertical pipes
”SMARTCAST-DRILLING”
Plumbing pipes and components
Pipes and components relating to cold water
supply and heating return under
”SMARTCAST-TRACING-BLUE-SUP-R”,
and pipes and components relating to hot
water supply and heating water supply under
”SMARTCAST-TRACING-BLUE-SUP-S”
Electrical components
”SMARTCAST-TRACING-RED-SUP”
Doors
”SMARTCAST-TRACING-BLACK”
Suspended ceilings
”SMARTCAST-TRACING-BLACK-INF”
Others
”SMARTCAST-TRACING-COLOR-SUP”
Objects’ labels
Walls
None
Ducts
None
Holes for vertical pipes
If needed, label with TXT font, height of 10 cm,
under ”SMARTCAST-TRACING-BLACK-SUP”
Horizontal plumbing pipes
None
Plumbing components
Two or three letters (ex. WC for toilets), in TXT
font and a height between 6 cm and 10 cm, under
”SMARTCAST-TRACING-BLUE-SUP”
Electrical components
Height of components if placed in a wall, under
”SMARTCAST-TRACING-RED-SUP”
Doors
None
Suspended ceilings
None
Others
If needed, label with TXT font, height of 10 cm,
under ”SMARTCAST-TRACING-COLOR-SUP”
Labels should be written with simple lines and not double lines, as shown in
Figure 4.3.
==PAGE:73==
4.1 To make an Information Delivery Manual
61
4.1.3
Model View Definition
A Model View Definition (MVD) is usually included in an Information Delivery Man-
ual. It is a subset of a larger IFC data model, and defines the logical structure with
rules for data to be handled, sorted, and stored. Here, the data model is used to
generate 2D plans which are going to be exchanged, meaning that the data model
itself is not exchanged. Moreover, the structure of the data exchanged in the DWG
plans is already outlined in the Exchange Requirements. This is why an MVD does
not seem relevant in this case.
This suggested Information Delivery Manual was validated by the company BY-
BAT GO who starts to use it on upcoming construction projects. In particular, the
modelers used this IDM to update their templates on the modeling software, in order
to produce proper plans faster.
==PAGE:74==
62
4 Personal Proposals
4.2
To check positioning
In France, tolerances regarding cast-in site concrete are as follows:
Dimension
Tolerance ∆- Absolute Value
The greatest value between h/300 and 15 mm
The greatest value between t/30 and 15 mm
The greatest value between l/600 and 20 mm
Table 4.1: Tolerances for cast-in-site concrete in France.
==PAGE:75==
4.2 To check positioning
63
Some rooms have strict regulations regarding dimensions, and especially rooms
which are accessible to persons with reduced mobility (PMR in French). What is
more, those rooms are inspected once the construction is finished, and the building
company is asked to move walls if dimensions are not respected, which costs time and
money. Tolerance in those inspections is around 1 cm.
When the BIM unit checks for dimensions, they take into account a tolerance
of execution of 1 cm. Indeed, all the sanitary components and ”free zones” around
are modeled with an extra centimeter around. For instance, as shown in Figure 4.4,
toilets are modeled with a ”free zone” - in green - on one side, and lines in orange
show this tolerance of one centimeter around.
Figure 4.4: Model of a toilet for persons with reduced mobility, with tolerance of
execution.
However, if a shear wall is displaced of 14 mm, which is within the range of
tolerance values, and that panels are placed against it and then against each other -
as it is done now, this can reduce the dimension of a room, which may not comply
with the regulations. With a conventional method, checking of positioning on-site
is performed using printed plans, as the construction goes, and follows a Quality
Assurance Plan which defines upstream which dimensions are critical. With Smart
Cast, the risk is to count only on the panels and to set aside this checking.
There is therefore a need to figure out how checking can continue being
performed while using Smart Cast.
==PAGE:76==
64
4 Personal Proposals
4.2.1
To check manually before positioning components B
The first suggestion is to check manually before positioning components after the slab
is cast - called components B in Figure 4.2, and especially partition walls. Indeed, the
positioning of partition walls is crucial to respect room dimensions. On the opposite,
components A such as plumbing or ventilation components which are embedded in
the slab can accept more tolerance, especially when using flexible pipes.
It is possible to continue to refer to execution plans and proceed as if Smart Cast
panels were not used, but this would waste the resources brought by Smart Cast. The
first suggestion is therefore to indicate dimensions which are crucial to respect, by
printing them on the sub-face of the Smart Cast panels.
Those dimensions can be either ”functional dimensions”, which are crucial to
respect the functionality of a room. For instance if there is a bathtub in a bathroom,
the room length or width needs to be strictly larger than the length of the bathtub.
Otherwise, the functionality of the room is not respected.
Dimensions to indicate can also be ”blocked dimensions”, which regard regulations,
for instance regulations regarding persons with reduced mobility as it was mentioned
previously, or regarding the minimal surface of a room. For example, in France, the
surface of a bedroom needs to be strictly greater than 9 m2 by law, otherwise it
cannot be rented. Figure 4.5 shows a room with blocked dimensions and what should
be printed on Smart Cast panels.
These dimensions can be added by the BIM unit. On a technical point of view,
there is no difficulty since those dimensions are already indicated by the BIM unit
on execution plans given to the workers on the construction sites where Smart Cast
was not used. The use of Smart Cast represents time savings in this matter since
indicating those dimensions is time-consuming according to the BIM unit of BYBAT
GO. These time savings are thus lost but time and money can then be saved during
construction by improving the respect of dimensions.
On the construction site, workers can then only look on the ceiling the dimensions
to check before attaching the partition walls.
To make sure that the dimensions
are readable in case lots of lines are already printed on the sub-face, they must be
indicated with a different color. To look on the ceiling does not represent an extra
effort since the lines indicating the position of the walls are also on the ceiling, and
it keeps the advantage of not having many paper plans to print and look at.
Workers can check these dimensions as they are used to, for example with a laser
telemeter, which many workers already use on Bouygues’ construction sites.
This way of doing means that lines printed on Smart Cast are there to guide the
workers but that their critical eye and adaptation is still needed.
==PAGE:77==
4.2 To check positioning
65
(a) Model of a bedroom accessible for persons with re-
duced mobility.
Length and width are blocked dimen-
sions regarding regulations: the bed must have a zone
free of all components, including door clearance, and the
door must be 9 cm away from the wall so that the door
can open to 90°
(b) Corresponding ceiling plan, with Smart Cast panels
in green and critical dimensions in red
Figure 4.5: 3D views of offices.
==PAGE:78==
66
4 Personal Proposals
4.2.2
To check positioning before casting
The second suggestion is to check the position of the panels before casting, in order
to keep Smart Cast’s benefits of having printed lined indicating the right position of
elements. As it was mentioned in 3.3.12, it is not very easy to change the position of
one panel once some others are placed around, so checking should be performed for
each panel, or for the first panels from which the others are placed.
The dimensions mentioned in the previous subsection can be printed on the surface
so that dimensions can be checked as the panels are placed, for example by the
construction site supervisor. As mentioned in the previous subsection, to make sure
that the dimensions are readable, they have to be indicated with a different color.
Dimensions can then be checked manually with a laser telemeter.
Another solution is to use measuring equipment such as Robotic Total Stations
or GPS measuring equipment.
Robotic total stations were mentioned in the Analysis chapter, as a way to position
or check points on-site, from a geographically positioned 2D or 3D model. As BIM
models from the BIM unit are usually geographically positioned, this does not mean
extra work from the modelers. However, to use a Robotic Total Station means an
extra budget to buy or rent it, and it only makes sense if it is already used for other
purposes on the construction site. All the more so as checking the position from
the BIM model requires the shear walls to be positioned right as well, which can be
achieved by using Robotic Total Stations before casting those walls. As mentioned
in the Analysis chapter, there can be difficulties to use Robotic Total Stations once
shear walls or temporary equipment are placed between the pole and the station, since
a direct, optical connection is needed between the two. Robotic Total Stations can
be very effective regarding time savings and precision when the station is positioned
thanks to at least three survey points, which can be the case to position foundation
elements or shear walls on the ground floor, but not that much when the station has
to be positioned in diverse places - for instance when elements prevent the optical
connection. This is illustrated in Figure 3.9, Figure 3.10 and Figure 3.11. In this
case, other, relative points such as wall corners can be used but they are less reliable
than survey points. Indeed, according to commercials from a Robotic Total Station
supplier interviewed at the BIM World conference in Paris in March 2017, there is an
unsatisfactory lost in precision.
To counter this issue, it is investigated to use GPS positioning equipment, as GPS
does not require any optical connection. A company from Normandy called MBDD
Solutions develops an equipment similar to Robotic Total Stations using GPS instead
of optics. It was originally developed for an agricultural use but they investigate
whether it is adaptable for construction purposes. This equipment also uses a station
and a pole: the station is geographically positioned using satellites and the pole is
relatively positioned thanks to algorithms and an Internet connection with the station.
When tested by BYBAT GO in May 2017, the precision reached in 2D was between
5 mm and 1 cm, and around 2 cm in height, when there were at least four satellites
==PAGE:79==
4.2 To check positioning
67
which can be seen by the station. This can be easily achieved if the station is placed
outdoor with not many buildings or trees to hide the sky. The advantage to use
this equipment is that it can be used even if there are elements between the station
and the pole. As it is quite similar to Robotic Total Stations, it does not require a
big adaptation from the workers. However the precision in height is not satisfactory
enough. This kind of equipment can thus be used in 2D on a construction site for
control purposes, as long as it is not used indoor but outdoor and that an Internet
connection is available.
4.2.3
To check automatically
It is then investigated whether it is possible to check positioning automatically or at
least without having to measure anything.
The use of 3D scanners to compare the scans and the model and perform a clash
detection is technologically feasible [Fag12]. However, according to commercials from
a 3D scanner supplier interviewed at the BIM World, this is still quite time-consuming.
Therefore, the time needed in addition to the price of the machine may not be finan-
cially attractive. Moreover, it requires shear walls to be strictly positioned to make
sure that functional and blocked dimensions are respected, which is difficult to achieve
with cast-in site concrete. On the other hand, it may be interesting with prefabri-
cated structural elements. To use 3D scanners also requires to move the station from
place to place as the panels are positioned. The French aeronautic industry, which
uses 3D scanners to check the position of components or if there are not missing or
additional elements, is currently developing a robot capable of taking 3D scans reg-
ularly and following a path in the room around plane parts. The advantage is that
it is automatic, but also that it can reach small or narrow spaces which are difficult
to reach for humans [Geo17]. This kind of robot may be adaptable to the construc-
tion industry, which would enable to monitor the progress of construction, including
Smart Cast elements.
Another suggestion inspired from the aeronautic industry is the use of laser projec-
tors, which are used to position pieces before processing them, as shown in Figure 4.6.
The idea is that it can project elements on the ground or on the ceiling. It can be
standard components such as bathtubs in bathrooms or ”free zones” used to comply
with regulations concerning persons with reduced mobility, to check that they fill in
the room before attaching the physical component. It can also be the inner contour of
the room, but that removes the interest of having partition walls contours printed on
the sub-face of Smart Cast panels. Laser projectors used in the aeronautic industry
can read 3D models made in modeling software such as CATIA or Solidworks, but
they are not yet developed for BIM models made in Revit or ArchiCAD. The com-
pany Gabarit Laser is therefore currently investigating on adapting laser projectors
to the construction industry. This appears to be technologically feasible, but some
difficulties are on the way so they currently investigate whether those difficulties can
==PAGE:80==
68
4 Personal Proposals
be overcome with an affordable solution. Difficulties include:
• In the aeronautic industry, projectors are not meant to move as in the con-
struction industry, so the positioning of projectors while keeping precision is
complicated;
• Projectors have a projection angle of 80°. In a room the height of which is 2.3
m, this means a projection area of 11.7 m2, which may not be enough to cover
entire rooms.
The answer from the company has not been communicated during the time this
Thesis was written.
Figure 4.6: An example of laser projector used in the aeronautic industry [Las17].
Among all the suggested ways to check positioning of panels or components, only
the first one seems to be technologically usable now. It is also considered relevant
by BYBAT GO, especially in buildings which have a lot of functional and blocked
dimensions to respect. If more time had been allocated to this study, it should have
been checked whether the reliability of positioning is effective when using a checking
method, while making sure that checking will not be too time-consuming in order to
keep having financial benefits.
==PAGE:81==
4.3 To deliver more information
69
4.3
To deliver more information
The attractive feature of Smart Cast is to add information on formwork panels. As
it is used now, it prints elements that are drawn on BIM models. But BIM models
are more than drawings, it is also a database. For instance, in BIM models produced
by BYBAT GO, parameters are added to rooms, like floor of wall finishes, furniture,
and so on. They are not necessarily drawn, but information is still present in the
BIM models, and the idea is to deliver this information thanks to the panels. This
decreases the needs for plans for everyone in the construction phase. Moreover, in-
formation can be added to help with sequencing of construction operations, or with
operation and maintenance. Indeed, the order of operations can be precised, with
text or pictures from models, so that all components are positioned in the right order.
Information about operation and maintenance can be the position of a component
and its associated data sheet. Information can be added as the construction goes,
starting with information needed to build, and then to operate the building. This
leads to a better organized and safer construction site.
It is suggested to use RFID chips or QR codes, so that the same chip or code
can be used even when more information is added. The synthesis of pros and cons of
using these two systems is given in Table 4.2.
4.3.1
RFID systems
RFID or Radio Frequency Identification enables to write, store and read information
on electronic chips integrated to a product.
A RFID system consists in a RFID
chip and a reader. RFID systems are considered because they can be integrated into
the panels, which was confirmed by the leader of Smart Cast. The fact that it is not
printed means that information is available even once the panels are painted, meaning
for the furnishing and maintenance phases as well. However, it is an extra cost - from
cents to some euros per chip, compared to 13.80 €/m2 for the Smart Cast panels -
which needs to be justified by the added-value of added information. This may not
be the case in residential buildings which are quite standard and easy to operate.
However, in facility buildings such as hospitals or industry buildings, maintenance
can be needed daily, and information can be useful. For instance, having quickly the
position of a valve without having to remove suspended ceiling elements can be an
asset. Moreover, some RFID chips can have a range of some meters, which can be
convenient in a building with high ceilings. However, there are limitations of using
RFID chips. For instance, not all mobile devices can read them yet, and parameters
have to be set on each chip, which can be quite time consuming if not automated.
What is more, as stated in the literature review, RFID uses radio frequency, and
interference with other frequencies may affect the transfer of data.
==PAGE:82==
70
4 Personal Proposals
4.3.2
QR Codes
QR codes are also considered because they can be printed easily on the sub-face -
which was confirmed by the leader of Smart Cast - and therefore does not require
any extra cost, except the time spent to generate those codes. Moreover, they can
be easily read with any tablet or smartphone, as long as they are large enough. For
instance, it was tested to read a QR code with a smartphone on the ceiling of a room
the height of which was 2.5 m. To be well read, the QR code had to have a surface
around 500 mm x 500 mm. QR codes often link to Internet pages, but it is also
possible to show some text, pictures, or even a PDF file, which can be useful if there
is no satisfactory Internet connection on the construction site. Moreover, PDF files
can be easily read and commented on mobile devices by using common applications
such as Acrobat Reader, which is why it is thought to be one of the best choices.
However, these codes will be covered by paint, meaning that it can be used only
during the construction phase before the ceiling paint is applied. This includes the
installation of internal woodwork like doors and closets, and laying ceramic tiles for
floors and walls, usually in bathrooms and kitchens. There can be an exception to
that in technical rooms where paint is not necessarily needed. The QR code can then
be usefully used to give information about maintenance and operation. In this case,
one has to make sure that the code will be readable even after all components are
positioned - not to be hidden by pipes for example -, and that the code will not be
damaged.
The generation of QR codes is thought to take one day for a residential building
of 30 apartments by the BIM unit of BYBAT GO. This time includes:
• The time to generate PDF files from schedules in the modeling software. This
can be done by exporting a schedule to Excel and then to PDF. If a special
layout is expected, Excel functions can be developed to generate a table with
a layout from a simple table from Revit. This was done by BYBAT GO to
generate purchase orders for windows;
• The time to generate QR codes from PDF files through a generator which can
for example be found on the Internet;
• The time to name all the QR codes, which are image files, according to the
room they belong to so that they are easy to use;
• The time to place the codes on the model. On Revit, this can be done by doing
Insert > Image. Codes can then be set to the wanted dimension.
The codes can then be exported together with the plans to DWG files sent to
Smart Cast to be printed on the formwork panels.
One example of generated code and the attached PDF from a BIM model of a
typical room in a retirement home modeled at BYBAT GO is shown in Figure 4.7.
The PDF file gives the finishes and internal woodwork of the room, as well as a plan
showing building services components in the bedroom and in the bathroom.
==PAGE:83==
4.3 To deliver more information
71
(a) QR code.
This code
is now deactivated because
the website it was generated
from asked for a subscription
(b) PDF file shown by the QR code
Figure 4.7: Use of a QR code with Smart Cast.
==PAGE:84==
72
4 Personal Proposals
More details about the process and optimization of making those QR codes are
not further developed since the proposal regards the inclusion of codes on Smart Cast
panels and not the development of QR codes generation.
Table 4.2 below gives an overview of pros and cons using QR codes and RFID
chips.
RFID Systems
+ Readable after painting, meaning information available dur-
ing construction and operation phases
+ Long range
- Costly
- Not readable by all mobile devices
- Can suffer from interference
More suited to complex facility buildings
QR Codes
+ Cheap
+ Readable by all mobile devices with a dedicated application
- Not readable after painting or if components are in front
- The size has to be adjusted to the ceiling height
Can be used on any type of building during the con-
struction phase before painting, and also during opera-
tion phases in non-painted technical rooms
Table 4.2: Synthesis of pros and cons of using RFID systems or QR codes.
==PAGE:85==
4.3 To deliver more information
73
4.3.3
Augmented reality
Another idea on how to use Smart Cast panels to display more information than
printed lines is to use augmented reality. The idea comes from the fact that there are
applications such as Ramby Plan, mentioned in subsection 3.2.4, which can superim-
pose a 3D model and a 2D plan on a tablet thanks to QR codes. Since plans - or at
least the outer contours of partition walls - are printed on the sub-face of Smart Cast
Panels, and that QR codes can be printed as well, it should be possible to apply the
principle of Ramby plan to Smart Cast panels.
The benefit of using augmented reality is once again a better visualization, for
workers or clients. Indeed, they would be able to visualize the inside of the future
building even when the only walls in place are the structural ones, as shown in Fig-
ure 4.8. Moreover, it was mentioned in subsection 3.2.4 that clients are quite attracted
virtual or augmented reality insofar as they provide an understandable visualization
as well as a playful approach.
Figure 4.8: Illustration of augmented reality used with Smart Cast.
==PAGE:86==
74
4 Personal Proposals
Similar applications, which are meant to display a 3D model superimposed on
the construction site, are currently developed and were presented to the BIM World
Conference which took place in Paris in March 2017 [Cam17].
However, most of
them are not perfected and suffer from offsets between existing elements and their
3D version. This is due to the fact that such applications use GPS positioning, and
that, as mentioned in 4.2.2, precision decreases when the receptor is indoor because
of poorer reception of satellites signals. Such issue however does not concern the
suggested application which does not require any GPS positioning.
Like QR codes, the use of augmented reality can be used only during the construc-
tion phase before the ceilings are painted since this application uses printed lines on
Smart Cast panels. As clients often wish to follow the construction of their building,
this can also be a way to bring a commercial asset to Smart Cast.
To this end, the developer of Ramby Plan was interviewed in order to find out
whether it is possible to do so. It appears that the principle is applicable, but that the
camera of the mobile device should always see lines from the panels not to loose track.
This application should therefore be used only if enough lines are visible, which may
not be the case if only the outer contour of partition walls are printed, especially in
large rooms.
Even though BYBAT GO has recognized the potential of QR Codes, RFID chips
and augmented reality to deliver more information, they are not meant to be used soon
on the next construction projects as visualization tools are not yet fully developed
and only start to be used on construction sites. They may however be used in the
future when mobile devices and visualization tools will be integrated to a greater
extent in construction processes.
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
5.1
Summary of the findings
5.1.1
On the use of BIM on Bouygues’ French construction sites
• The use of BIM on French construction sites is today limited to the extraction
of plans or quantities but many tools are tested.
• Tools tested include BIM viewers, data sharing platforms, augmented reality,
3D scanners, Robotic Total Stations, 3D printing.
• There is a need for user-friendly BIM tools for them to be accepted by the
workers. This includes simplicity, intuitiveness and the possibility to be used
under outdoor conditions by workers who wear protective equipment.
• BIM tools should account for an Internet connection is not always available on
construction sites.
• 3D visualization provides better understanding for most actors: clients, design-
ers and workers.
• 3D viewers should enable a smooth visualization without degrading too much
the quality of the model and should overcome issues of interoperability. Crop
sections and measurements are frequently asked features asked by site workers
on viewers.
• BIM models should be designed with a view of their use on construction sites:
which elements and parameters to show, the use of colors, and so on.
• Virtual reality or augmented reality provide an immersive and playful approach
and are in this way appreciated by users.
• Links between BIM models and reality, through 3D scanners, photos, control
of coordinates, robots and so on is technologically possible but still challenged
by the quantity of data to handle and geographical positioning.
==PAGE:88==
76
5 Discussion
5.1.2
On the use of Smart Cast
• Smart Cast is a multidisciplinary product which modifies the way of doing of
site workers but seems to be well accepted on-site.
• According to site workers, some improvements still have to be found regarding
fixation of building services components on the panels before casting concrete
for the slab.
• Lines printed on the sub-face of Smart Cast panels are less relevant when ceilings
are high or when building services components are placed under.
• Smart Cast does not seem to have any negative impact on architectural possibili-
ties, structure, fire safety, insulation, acoustics, logistics, safety, or maintenance.
• Smart Cast panels are meant to end their life in a landfill and do not offer
incineration or recycling possibilities for now.
• On the construction site where Smart Cast was tested, 2.32 h/m2 were saved
and the overall financial balance sheet was positive.
• To be used judiciously, the use of Smart Cast requires modeling processes to
be adapted. In particular, a 3D coordination is more than relevant and brings
benefits in terms of prediction of difficulties. BIM models are therefore more
appropriate, even though Smart Cast can be used with CAD models.
• Printed lines on panels increase reliability of positioning but checking is trusted
to be necessary.
• Smart Cast panels offer various possibilities of displaying information to the
workers and operators.
5.2
Discussion
Firstly, it has to be kept in mind that Smart Cast was tested by BYBAT GO only on
one residential building, and what refers to the use of Smart Cast on facility buildings
are mainly assumptions. Even though the use of Smart Cast appears satisfactory to
the site workers and more generally to BYBAT GO, not enough tests were conducted
to ensure the accuracy of the previously cited findings.
The benefits of Smart Cast appear to be more about the advantages of having a
3D coordination prior to construction than about direct financial benefits. Indeed,
direct financial benefits from the time saved on the installation of components are
not yet surely established, even though money should not be lost using this product.
==PAGE:89==
5.2 Discussion
77
However, indirect financial benefits should come from an early 3D coordination which
enables the workers and supervisors to predict difficulties regarding technical issues
and safety, and to find solutions earlier, with less costs.
If 3D coordination is the major advantage of Smart Cast, it can be asked whether
the same benefits could be retrieved without using any panel. As explained in sub-
section 3.3.2, the fact that printed lines will serve as guides to the worker implies
that 3D coordination is crucial. This means that the use of Smart Cast somehow
forces the users to implement such a 3D coordination. Therefore, this is a way to
develop the use of BIM in companies by having a practical motivation to do so, and
to make sure that time is saved to perform an adequate coordination. This is seen
as positive since motivation is crucial for companies to invest in BIM. Besides, more
and more clients are asking for BIM but not necessarily for specific processes. For
instance, some clients only wish to have a 3D model at the end, without asking for
specific parameters. As a consequence, if companies only follow this kind of clients’
wishes, coordination processes may not be well developed. For instance, 3D models
may look okay on the whole but issues may still be there, and coordination tools used
when using Smart Cast, such as clash detection, can help solving them, which will be
beneficial to following building processes. Indeed, as the MacLeamy curve shows (see
Figure 1.3), the use of BIM does ask extra effort before construction compared to a
traditional workflow, but is beneficial regarding the whole process thanks to better
coordination, which is one of the top rated benefits of BIM [Gud09], even if they are
difficult to quantify. The use of Smart Cast is therefore in line with this approach and
can be a good way to make companies benefit more from BIM. All in all, companies
who take the time to develop adequate coordination processes may not see a lot of
benefits from Smart Cast, but companies who need an extra motivation may.
Panels themselves are not necessary to perform a fruitful coordination, but they
do offer possibilities regarding visualization, which is also one of the top rated ben-
efits of BIM [Gud09] and can bring indirect financial benefits. Today are printed
partition walls, doors and building services components, but suspended ceiling tiles,
particular structural elements or dimensions can be printed as well. They also offer
the possibility to adapt to technology by including RFID chips or QR codes, which
are more and more used in other industries and starts to appear in the construction
industry.
Since visualization and consequently understanding is improved, one worker can
install components from various fields, for example plumbing and electricity, according
to construction site supervisors from BYBAT GO. This is true when one construction
company handles various fields, which is the case for general companies in France.
Workers can thus become multi-skilled, which can be beneficial to the workers and
to the company who employs them. Indeed, multi-skilled workers can have a more
diversified, more stimulating work and learn from a field in which they were not
employed at the beginning. For the company, multi-skilled workers are profitable
insofar as time cannot be wasted when one worker is missing for example, since other
==PAGE:90==
78
5 Discussion
workers are versatile. They are also beneficial because less workers may be needed in
total, which is this time not so favorable to the workers since less jobs may be offered.
This Thesis’ problem statement is how to facilitate the installation of walls and
components using BIM. To facilitate the installation can have several meanings, and
the ones considered are: to make the instructions clearer, to decrease difficulty of
practical processes, and to improve reliability of positioning.
Smart Cast helps to achieve the first meaning, since it uses 3D coordination and,
to a greater extent BIM, to facilitate the installation of components by bringing better
visualization to site workers. Coordination brought by BIM also helps to agree on
one unique version of what is going to be built for every worker: what is printed on
the Smart Cast panels. This facilitates the installation of components insofar as no
time is wasted to figure out which plan prevails.
Regarding the second meaning, since Smart Cast panels are pre-cut and pre-drilled
to the right dimensions, they prevent workers from executing tasks which do not bring
value to the building, such as filling holes around pipes after the slab is cast. Smart
Cast therefore helps to facilitate the installation of components on a more practical
point of view as well, but this is due to the panels and not to BIM directly. Practical
processes could also be facilitated by more automation, but Smart Cast does not seem
to help much in this matter. Indeed, if Smart Cast is used in cast-in-site structures,
components have to adapt to possible variations, which is not very compatible with
prefabrication. However, when structural elements are prefabricated, the 3D coordi-
nation performed thanks to Smart Cast could be used to prefabricate other elements
such as partition walls. Industrialization of construction could therefore increase.
Lastly, regarding the third meaning, the reliability of positioning is improved by
Smart Cast to some extent. As it was developed in section 4.2, in theory printed lines
are meant to show the exact location of elements thanks to a 3D coordination, but
checking is considered still necessary in view of the fact that cast-in-site structures
have some tolerances of execution. However, even if a checking method has not been
yet tested by BYBAT GO, it was observed that the non-compliance is reduced thanks
to Smart Cast and that the quality of the delivered building was increased. This is
due to clearer instructions but also because site workers have the opportunity to focus
more on the connections between components rather than on their positioning. This
results in less after sale services.
All in all, Smart Cast does bring answers to this Thesis’ problem statement.
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
This Thesis aims at investigating the installation of walls and components on a build-
ing using BIM, by analyzing current uses of BIM on construction sites on Bouygues’
construction sites in France and evaluating if those uses are efficient. The uses of BIM
identified here concern construction sites of residential and facility buildings, with a
cast-in-site concrete structure.
Applications of BIM on Bouygues’ French construction sites today mostly consist
in the extraction of data from BIM models, faster than an extraction from CAD
models since BIM models contain a database about object properties. Such extraction
is also more reliable, since data for all actors is extracted from the same aggregate
model.
Other applications of BIM are currently tested in France.
They include
BIM viewers capable of monitoring the execution of construction and of notifying
the people who need to take action, and BIM viewers associated with BIM kiosks
which contribute to a better visualization and communication among site workers.
Visualization of models is also developed through augmented reality and virtual reality
which provide an immersive and playful experience to workers or clients. These tools
are appreciated by site workers, even though improvements are still to be made to
make them more user-friendly and interoperable. How to make data accessible by
site workers is also a challenge since large amounts of data need to be accessed on
construction sites which do not necessarily have an Internet connection.
If visualization brought by BIM is considered helpful to facilitate the installation
of components on a construction site insofar as instructions are made clearer, it is
not the only use of BIM. Indeed, Robotic Total Stations are also used to position
precisely elements thanks to the geo-referencing of BIM models. Such stations can be
used to position any element in a 3D coordinate system, but they are today efficient
mostly on flat surfaces to position in 2D. Such optical equipment, as well as 3D
scanners, can also be used to check the position of elements by comparing results and
BIM models, which can be performed with clash detection tools. Measured positions
on-site can then be sent back to the BIM model to produce an as-built model, used
for maintenance and operation of a building, or to produce a baseline model for
renovation projects. These uses are still limited today by the processing time of data
but offer new possibilities regarding reliable installation and monitoring of elements
on construction sites. Research is also going on about 3D printing walls, which would
completely change working methods.
==PAGE:92==
80
6 Conclusion
It was chosen to focus in this Thesis on another innovation which is trusted to
bring answers to this Thesis’ problem statement, called Smart Cast and developed by
a French start-up. Smart Cast uses 3D coordination to produce permanent formwork
panels for slabs, which are cut, printed and drilled so that the installation of walls and
components can be facilitated and fastened, without having to use any plan. On the
construction site on which Smart Cast was tested, 2.32 h/m2 were saved, the overall
financial balance sheet was positive and the workers were satisfied and considered
the product user-friendly. Besides, it helped the general construction company to
strengthen its 3D coordination processes, which it trusted to be the greatest benefit
since it improved anticipation and decreased errors on the construction site. These
benefits are however difficult to quantify. Some limitations were also found, such as
the fixation of building services components which could be improved, or the end
of life of panels on landfills which is not so environmentally friendly. The results
are specific to a particular construction site handled by one French company but are
encouraging with regard to the development of the use of BIM on Bouygues’ French
construction sites.
Suggestions to improve this product include the development of an Information
Delivery Manual, consisting of a process diagram and exchange requirements, in order
to have better-coordinated and more accurate information with fewer errors combined
with the resulting productivity improvements, and in particular the reduction of
delivery time by the company Smart Cast.
In addition, proposals were made to
improve reliability of positioning by checking dimensions which are crucial to respect
to comply with regulations or with the functionality of rooms. Lastly, the personal
contribution in this report includes investigations on the delivery of more information
using Smart Cast panels, through QR codes, RFID chips and augmented reality. The
Information Delivery Manual, one of the checking method and the use of QR codes
are usable now, but the other suggestions would ask for more tests.
To conclude, to use BIM to facilitate the installation of walls and components on
a building is possible through various tools including Smart Cast, but most of them
are still at the development stage. This study could be pursued by additional tests
of the cited tools and suggested improvements on a larger geographical scope and on
more types of buildings, in order to consolidate and generalize the presented findings.
==PAGE:93==
APPENDIX A
Concrete slabs
construction process
(French)
==PAGE:94==
cote à calculer l
Contreplaqué ep 15
30 maxi
peau coffrante
30 maxi
Poutrelle principale
SABLIERE
espacement des
tours-échelle
tour-echelle MILLS 160x 120
cote à calculer : L
espacement des poutres principales
50 mini
50 mini
50 mini
Vue en perspective : principe d'étaiement avec tour échelle
Pour les cotes à calculer :
=> voir plan d'étaiement
méthodes
160
120
10
MODES OPERATOIRES STANDARDS ENTREPRISE


1
Date:
Page:
Date: 31/01/11
Page:
/ 6
310
B
MOSE

CAHIER MOSE BYEFE
BYEFE
B
31/01/2011
Méthodes
Ce document est la propriété intellectuelle de BYEFE, toute reproduction est interdite sans accord écrit.
==PAGE:95==
H
e
h
ETAPE 1 :
- Mise en place des tours
- Mise en place des garde-corps en rive du plancher à couler depuis
la Passerelle Individuelle Roulante (P.I.R.).
- Mise en place du 1er lit de poutrelles
(ou poutrelles principales).
- Prolonger l'étaiement sur 1.5 trame
supplémentaire afin de mettre en place
les aciers de chapeau.
- Plateforme de travail :
planchons métalliques à
fournir avec les tours ou PIR
- Vérification de l'aplomb de la
poutrelle et leur niveaux
Attention : ne pas oublier d'incorporer des tubes
aciers supports de garde-corps dans les éléments
de structure tels que poutres ou voiles, pour
assurer la sécurité collective future en phase de
réalisation des planchers .
Tube acier
pour garde-corps.
Etais de séchage en
milieu de travée.
potelets + GC ht 1.00m
ZONE PLANCHER TRADI A REALISER
EQUIPER UNE TRAME ET DEMI
SUPPLEMENTAIRE
ETAPE 2 :
MODES OPERATOIRES STANDARDS ENTREPRISE


2
Date:
Page:
Date: 31/01/11
Page:
/ 6
310
B
MOSE

CAHIER MOSE BYEFE
BYEFE
B
31/01/2011
Méthodes
Ce document est la propriété intellectuelle de BYEFE, toute reproduction est interdite sans accord écrit.
==PAGE:96==
ETAPE 3 :
- Mise en place du 2ème lit de poutrelles
(ou poutrelles secondaires de répartition).
ETAPE 4 :
- Mise en place du contreplaqué pour fond de coffrage de la dalle.
1) Le contreplaqué de fond de coffrage mis en place
sert de plateforme de circulation pour les plaques
suivantes.
2) Conservation des garde-corps de la dalle déjà
réalisée jusqu'à fermeture complète de la surface
de contreplaqué.
Etais de séchage en
milieu de travée.
Mise en place des poutrelles
secondaires entre tours avec une
P.I.R ou depuis le plancher de
travail à l'intérieur de la tour.
ZONE PLANCHER TRADI A REALISER
EQUIPER UNE TRAME ET DEMI
SUPPLEMENTAIRE
ZONE PLANCHER TRADI A REALISER
EQUIPER UNE TRAME ET DEMI
SUPPLEMENTAIRE
Poutrelles type H10
MODES OPERATOIRES STANDARDS ENTREPRISE


3
Date:
Page:
Date: 31/01/11
Page:
/ 6
310
B
MOSE

CAHIER MOSE BYEFE
BYEFE
B
31/01/2011
Méthodes
Ce document est la propriété intellectuelle de BYEFE, toute reproduction est interdite sans accord écrit.
==PAGE:97==
- Mise en place des aciers.
- Réalisation de la dalle béton.
ETAPE 6.1 :
- Décoffrage de la dalle :
1) Etaiement des plaques de C.P. (voir plan d'étaiement de séchage)
2) Décintrage des tours par trames de poutrelles primaires.
3) Enlèvement des primaires intermédiaires
(les poutrelles secondaires ne doivent avoir que 2 appuis).
Etais de séchage en
milieu de travée.
Etais de séchage en
milieu de travée.
Double bastaings
pour réaliser
l'arrêt de plancher
et laisser
dépasser les aciers
de châpeau.
 Eviter les surcharges de béton
Etaiement des plaques de C.P
 S'assurer de la
résistance de la dalle
avant décoffrage.
ZONE PLANCHER TRADI A REALISER
EQUIPER UNE TRAME ET DEMI
SUPPLEMENTAIRE
ZONE PLANCHER TRADI A REALISER
TRAME EQUIPEE
A CONSERVER ET A COMPLETER
ETAPE 5 :
Ne pas décoffrer sans
l'autorisation du chef
de chantier
Mise en place de la
sécurité avant décoffrage
(trémies) cf. Standard
BYEFE Sécurité collective
MODES OPERATOIRES STANDARDS ENTREPRISE


4
Date:
Page:
Date: 31/01/11
Page:
/ 6
310
B
MOSE

CAHIER MOSE BYEFE
BYEFE
B
31/01/2011
Méthodes
Ce document est la propriété intellectuelle de BYEFE, toute reproduction est interdite sans accord écrit.
==PAGE:98==
ETAPE 6.2 :
- Décoffrage de la dalle.
4) Enlèvement des poutrelles secondaires.
5) Enlèvement des poutrelles primaires.
6) Retrait des tours-échelles.
7) Les plaques de C.P restent étayées.
Etais de séchage en
milieu de travée.
8) Dépose des étais plaque par plaque de C.P à
l'aide d'une girafe à plafond placo.
9) Dépose des plaques à l'aide d'une P.I.R.
10)Mise en place de l'étaiement de séchage des
planchers au fur et à mesure de l'enlèvement.
(voir plan d'étaiement de séchage)
Etais de séchage en
milieu de travée.
Le plancher reste en
séchage quand on retire
les plaques de CP
ZONE PLANCHER TRADI A REALISER
 TRAME EQUIPEE
A CONSERVER ET COMPLETER
S'assurer de la
résistance de la dalle
avant décoffrage.
ETAPE 6.3 :
MODES OPERATOIRES STANDARDS ENTREPRISE


5
Date:
Page:
Date: 31/01/11
Page:
/ 6
310
B
MOSE

CAHIER MOSE BYEFE
BYEFE
B
31/01/2011
Méthodes
Ce document est la propriété intellectuelle de BYEFE, toute reproduction est interdite sans accord écrit.
==PAGE:99==
Principe de ré-étaiement :
(pour bâtiment type habitat)
Etais de séchage conservés sur
2 niveaux sous plancher coulé pour :
- des planchers ép. 18 à 20 cm, de
portée 5 à 6 m.
- des charges sur plancher à
250 kg/m2.
- un cycle de réalisation du niveau
- en 8 jours.
MODES OPERATOIRES STANDARDS ENTREPRISE


6
Date:
Page:
Date: 31/01/11
Page:
/ 6
310
B
MOSE

CAHIER MOSE BYEFE
BYEFE
B
31/01/2011
Méthodes
Ce document est la propriété intellectuelle de BYEFE, toute reproduction est interdite sans accord écrit.
==PAGE:100==
88
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX B
Smart Cast -
Description of the
product [French]
==PAGE:102==
PROCEDE SMART CAST
Demande d'ATEX de Cas A
1
Description du procédé
1.1
Principe Généralités
Désignation commerciale
 
  : 
SMART CAST
Fabricant
 
  : 
SMART CAST SASU
2 rue Alfred Kastler - CS80666
44306 Nantes Cedex 3
Matière première
 
  : 
Désignation commerciale : MgCO
Adresse provisoire de l’usine de transformation
 
  :
(pour la phase de R&D)
ICAM site de Nantes
35 rue du Champs de manœuvre
44470 Carquefou
1.1.1
Expérimentation sur chantier
Chantier de la Eco Village des Noés à Val-de-Reuil
Adresse :   2 route des lacs, 27100 Val-de-Reuil
Construction  de  98  logements  individuels  et
collectifs. Le produit SMART CAST a été mis en
place  sur  le  plancher  haut  R+1  du  bâtiment
collectif N°2. La surface d'expérimentation est de
173m².
Entreprise de mise en oeuvre : 
Bouygues Construction Grand Ouest
398 Rue Gay Lussac – ZI de Netreville
27018 EVREUX
Date de mise en œuvre : 05/01/2015
Date de mise en peinture : Avril 2015
Date de livraison : Novembre 2015
Maitre d’œuvre : 
Atelier Philippe MADEC
34 Boulevard Bonne nouvelle 
75010 Paris
Maitre d’ouvrage :
SILOGE
6 Boulevard Chambaudoin BP942
27009 Evreux Cedex
1.1.2
Production
Capacité de production du site : 1 800 000m2 par
ans
1.2
Domaine d’emploi et limite d’emploi
Type d’ouvrages concernés :
Le  produit  Smart  Cast  est  employé  pour  la
fabrication des dalles de compression en béton
armé. Il est particulièrement indiqué lorsque la
sous-face de la dalle béton reste apparente et sert
de support de finition pour la mise en peinture.
2 domaines d’applications possibles :
- Panneau de coffrage perdu des planchers
en béton coulés en place. 
-  Fond  de  coffrage  perdu  des  prédalles
fabriqué en usine ou sur un banc de préfabrication
foraine.
Types de bâtiments
 
  :
–
Bâtiments  d’habitations  collective  et
individuelles.
–
ERP
Type de locaux
 
  :
- EA, EB, EB+, EC
- locaux individuels et collectifs.
Zonage sismique
 
  : 
- Zones 1 à 4
1.3
Description du produit
SMART CAST est un panneau de coffrage perdu
servant de finition prêt à peindre des plafonds.
Il  est  employé  en  remplacement  des
contreplaqués  bakélisés  ou  autres  panneaux
coffrants  réutilisables  pour  la  fabrication  des
dalles de compression en béton armé.
==PAGE:103==
1.3.1
Définition  des  matériaux  entrant  dans  la
composition du procédé
1.3.1.1 Le parement
Désignation commerciale
 
  : MgCO
Matériaux constitutifs
 
  : 
Oxyde de magnésium (MgO) – 43%
Carbonate de magnésium (MgCO3) – 31%
Perlite 14%
Sciure de bois 9%
Fibre de verre tissée : 4%.
PH : 9 (basique)
Dimensions
 
  des panneaux : 1220mm x 2440mm
Tolérance de +/- 0,2mm en longueur et largeur
Finition des chants
 
  : 
Les 4 arêtes de la face lisse sont chanfreinées. Les
chanfreins forment un angle de 30°  (voir coupes
paragraphe 1.4)
Épaisseurs des panneaux
 
  :
 4 épaisseurs possibles : 6 mm -  8 mm - 10 mm -
12mm
L’épaisseur est définie selon l’épaisseur de la dalle
et  la  portée  entre  poutrelles  du  système
d’étaiement (voir abaques rubrique 1.3.3)
Surfaces
 
  :
La face caractérisée par une finition rugueuse est
positionnée vers le haut.
La  face  caractérisée  par  une  finition  lisse  est
placée vers le bas. 
Référence aux normes existantes
 
  :
Propriétés coffrantes :
- Action sur les structures en béton : Eurocode 1-
6 : NF EN 1991-1-6
- Exécution des ouvrages en béton : DTU 21 - NF P
18 201 et NF EN 13670
- Poutrelles industrialisées pour l'étaiement et le
coffrage : NF 93.322
- Calcul des système d’étaiement : EN 12 812
Revêtement prêt à peindre :
- DTU Peinture 59.1
–
Essai d’adhérence quadrillage : NF EN ISO
2409
–
Propriétés mécaniques :
- Essais de traction : NF EN ISO 527-4 
- Essais de flexion 3points : NF EN ISO 14125
- Essais de flexion 4 points : NF EN ISO 14125
- Essais cisaillement : NF EN ISO 14130
- Essais poinçonnement : NF P 94-078 
Propriétés physiques :
 - Porosité : NF P18-459
- Capillarité : NF EN 772-11 Août 2011
- Chaleur de combustion: NF EN ISO 1716
- Incombustibilité : NF EN ISO 118
1.3.1.2 Matériaux de jointoiement
Le  procédé  SMART  CAST  emploie  2  types
d’enduits : 
1) Enduit sans bande
 
  :
- Enduit de garnissage souple de marque SMART
CAST pour les jonctions de plaques chanfreinées.
L’enduit souple à forte adhérence SMART CAST
est formulé et fabriqué en marque blanche par
l’entreprise Toupret basée à Corbeil Essonne :
Adresse de l’usine : 24 rue du 14 juillet, 91813
Corbeil Essonnes Cedex
Contact : Laurent Mohr – 0607418052
Nature composition :
Enduit de rebouchage en pâte souple
Sulfate de calcium, carbonate de calcium, résine en
émulsion et divers adjuvants.
Application intérieure
Norme applicable : NFT 36-005/ EN 16566 
Permet de reboucher et de traiter les trous et les
fissures jusqu'à 1 cm.
Sans remontée de plastifiants
Souple après séchage
Épaisseur de charge : jusqu'à 10mm
Caractéristiques
 
  :
Température de stockage : 0°C
Viscosité (BV 1000/30 rpm) : 300000 MPas.
Densité : 1,3.
pH : 6.
Conditions d'utilisation
 
  :
Prêt à l'emploi.
EPI : Gants/Masque respiratoire FFP2 
Temps de séchage (entre 2 couches) : 12h 
==PAGE:104==
Temps de séchage (sec au toucher) :4h 
Temps pour recouvrement : 24h
Température d’application : minimum +5°C 
Taux d’hygrométrie maximal à 80%.
L’Enduit ne peut pas être appliqué sur des fonds
surchauffés ni sur des fonds humides.
Référence aux normes existantes
 
  :
NF DTU 25.41 et DTU 25.42
Norme NF EN 13963.
Test Adhérence enduit : ISO 4618
Collage Bandes à joints : Méthode CSTB selon NF
443 – Révérenciel technique RT08 - CSTBat
Plaques planes en fibres-ciment - Spécifications du
produit  et  méthodes  d'essai :  NF  EN  12467
Novembre 2012
2) Enduit avec bande papier
 
  :
- Enduit à bande certifié conforme à la norme NF
EN 13963, pour le traitement des cueillies :
 - dalles/murs banchés
-  dalle/cloisons distributive
-  dalle/doublage de mur
L’enduit à bande est associé à une bande papier de
50mm de largeur conforme à la norme NF EN
13963. (Type Placoplatre ou équivalent)``
Nature composition
 
  :
Enduit à bandes en poudre

Conforme au DTU 25.41 et DTU 25.42. NF
EN 13963.
Carbonate de calcium, résine, et divers adjuvants.
Caractéristiques
 
  :

Adhérence de la bande : > 1000 g.

Fissuration : Pas de fissures jusqu’à 5 mm
d’épaisseur.

Réaction au feu : A1.
Conditions d'utilisation
 
  :

Temps de prise : 8 heures.
Référence aux normes existantes
 
  : 
- NF DTU 25.41 plâtrerie
- Test Adhérence enduit : ISO 4618
- Produits de jointement de plaques de plâtre : NF
EN 13963.
- Collage Bandes à joints : Méthode CSTB selon NF
443
-NF DTU 59.1 peinture
1.3.1.3 Information environnementale et sanitaire
Fiche  de  donnée  sécurité  (FDS)  enduit  SMART
CAST à transmettre.
Fiche  de  déclaration  environnementale  et
sanitaire en cours d’élaboration.
1.3.2
Description de la fabrication :
1.3.2.1 Fabrication du parement :
Sous produits
 
  :
Sous-produit 1 : oxyde de magnésium (MgO)
Extraction minière de la périclase (minerai)
Concassage et broyage de la périclase.
Sous-produit 2 : Chlorure de magnésium : MgCl2
Précipitation  de  granulats  d’oxyde  de
magnésium dans un bain de saumure d’eau de
mer.
Sous-produit 3 : Sciures de bois
Approvisionnement  des  déchets  de  scieries  et
menuiseries industrielles.
Sous- produit 4 : Tissus de fibre de verre 
Grammage : 250 g/m2
Fabrication industrielle spécialisée
Conditionnés en rouleaux de 1300mm de largeur
Sous-produit 5 : Perlite
Dans l’usine de fabrication Yurui (Chine):
Pesée des matières premières
Mélange des matières premières
Convoyeur par vis sans fin
Chargement des moules en ABS
Nettoyage des moules en ABS
Coulage continu de la mixture de fond (faible
granulométrie)
Application continue du tissu de verre inférieur
==PAGE:105==
Coulage  continu  de  la  mixture  courante
(granulométrie courante)
Application continue du tissu de verre supérieur
Coulage continu de la mixture de surface (faible
granulométrie)
Formage/profilage continu dans des rouleaux 
Découpe automatique des longueurs
Transfert des produits semi-fini
Séchage à température et hygrométrie maitrisés
Démoulage des panneaux
Découpe aux dimensions exactes
Conditionnement sur palettes bois.
Les panneaux sont acheminés par containers de
20  pieds  par  voie  maritime  vers  le  site  de
transformation.
Les  panneaux  sont  palettisés  par  lots  de  1,5
tonnes  et  stockés  au  sec  dans  l’usine  de
transformation. 
Dans l’usine SMART CAST (France)
Usinage des cavités
Usinage des chants
Collage  d’une  étiquette  d’identification
indiquant : Nom du client - Adresse de livraison
et marquage émissions dans l’air.
Palettisation  des  panneaux  par  palettes  de  2
tonnes maxi. 
Filmage des palettes
Collage  d’une  étiquette  d’identification
indiquant : Nom du client - Adresse de livraison
et marquage émissions dans l’air.
Contrôles qualité
 
  :
Contrôle  du  site  d’extraction  matières  premières
(Smart Cast) :
Périodicité : biennale
Formalisation : Fiche  de contrôle par points en
Annexe 8 (non joint à ce dossier).
Contrôle en usine des plaques brutes (Smart Cast) : 
Périodicité : Semestriel
Formalisation : Fiche  de contrôle par points en
Annexe 9 (non joint à ce dossier).
Contrôle  à  réception  des  plaques  brutes  (Smart
Cast) :
Périodicité : 1 par container.
Formalisation : fiche de réception en Annexe 10
(non joint à ce dossier).
Contrôle  par  le  responsable  de  la  ligne  de
production (Smart Cast) :
Périodicité : 1 par palette
Formalisation : fiche de contrôle en Annexe  11
(non joint à ce dossier).
Contrôle par le chef de chantier (poseur) :
Périodicité : 1 par zone de coffrage coulée
Formalisation :  fiche  de  contrôle  en  Annexe  12
(non joint à ce dossier).
Les informations récoltées dans chaque fiche de
contrôle  sont  enregistrées  sur  une  base
informatique permettant d’identifier des actions
correctives à  l’échelle macroscopique.
1.3.3
Dimensionnement  et  conception  des
ouvrages : 
1.3.3.1 Etaiement :
Les panneaux sont mis en place sur le chantier sur
un
 
dispositif
 
d’étaiement
 
dimensionné
conformément aux normes en vigueurs (EN 12
812, Eurocode 1-6) et dont la portée maximale
entre  poutrelles  est  adaptée  aux  exigences
définies dans l’annexe 6. 
Le  système  d ‘étaiement  doit  être  conforme  a
toute les normes et réglementation en vigueur.
Les  calculs  de  dimensionnement  et  les  limites
d’usage  (hauteur  sous  plafond,  distance  entre
poutrelles raidisseurs).
Des joints de fractionnement doivent être prévu
dans  les  mêmes  proportions  que  pour  les
structures en béton. 
L’épaisseur des plaques de coffrage SMART CAST
peut être ajustée en adéquation avec un système
d’étaiement. Voir abaque en annexe 6.
Annexe 6 : Dimensionnement de l’épaisseur
Nota :  Des  étais  de  séchage  sont  maintenus
pendant  28  jours  minimum  selon  la  règle  de
l’Eurocode 1.6 relatif aux structures béton.
==PAGE:106==
1.3.3.2 Liaison avec la dalle en béton
Après  démontage  du  système  d’étaiement,  les
panneaux  de  coffrage  sont  maintenus  fixés  en
sous-face de la dalle béton au moyen de cavités de
forme  conique  tronqué  formant  une  contre
dépouille.
Les cavités servent de liaison indémontable avec
le béton durci inclus dans celles-ci.
Référence aux normes existantes
 
  :
Essais cisaillement : NF EN ISO 14130
Nombre de cavités : 24 /panneau
Répartition des cavités
 
  :
-  Espacement  de  452  mm  dans  le  sens  de  la
longueur des plaques
- Espacement de 353,3 mm dans le sens de la
largeur
- Distance de 70mm à l’axe des bords de la plaque
Croquis 10 : vue de dessus- plan coté
Géométrie des cavités
 
  :
Profondeur :5mm
Diamètre en surface : 40mm
angle : 20°
Figure 4 : plan coté des cavités
Voir plan coté en annexe 7
Figure 5 : coupe transversale sur cavité conique
tronquée.
1.3.3.3 Traitement  invisible  des  jonctions  de
plaques
Les plaques SMART CAST peuvent être jointoyées
28 jours après le coulage pour former une liaison
invisible entre les plaques.
Le jointoiement est également conditionné à la
mise hors d’eau, hors d’air du bâtiment.
Les supports doivent être propres et secs.
Le jointoiement des panneaux à bords chanfreinés
est réalisé par garnissage de la réservation formée
par  les  deux  chanfreins  placés  l’un  à  coté  de
l’autre puis finition en une seconde passe distincte
avec l’enduit adapté de la marque SMART CAST. 
La durée minimale entre les deux passes est de
12h.
1.3.3.4 Traitement des cueillies
Les cueillies sont traitées par une bande papier et
un enduit à bandes appliqué en 3 passes selon les
préconisations de la méthode CSTB selon NF 443.
1.3.4
Description de la mise en œuvre.
Les panneaux SMART CAST sont conditionnés par
palettes de 2440 x 1220mm. 
La masse d’une palette est limitée à 1,5 tonnes.
Ils sont superposés à plat sur une palette en bois
de dimensions 2400x1200mm.
Le dessus de la palette est protégé de l’humidité
par une feuille de plastique extrudé.
L’ensemble est filmé avec du film étirable sur ses
4 cotés.
Les panneaux de coffrage SMART CAST sont livrés
par semi bâchés ou camion-plateau.
1.3.4.1 Mise en œuvre en dalle pleine coulée en
place :
Lot gros-oeuvre
Les palettes sont chargée et déchargées par grue,
par chariot éleveur, ou engin manuscopique.
Le  stockage  peut  être  réalisé  par  palettes
superposées si la hauteur maximale n’excède pas
1,5m.
==PAGE:107==
Le stockage sur le système d’étaiement est limité à
la charge admise par le fabricant.
Les palettes filmées peuvent être exposées aux
intempéries.  Les  palettes  ouvertes  doivent  être
couvertes avec un film plastique ou mises à l’abri.
Les panneaux doivent toujours être déplacés sur
palettes au plus près de la zone à coffrer.
Vérifications préalables à la pose des panneaux :

Contrôle de l’altimétrie des étais
du système d’étaiement. Tolérance inférieure à
L/500.  (L  étant  la  distance  entre  2  étais
successifs.)

Contrôle  de  l’espacement  entre
poutrelles. Celui –ci doit être en adéquation avec
l’épaisseur de matériau choisi (selon l’abaque en
Annexe 6).

Les zones périphériques doivent
présenter une poutrelle à moins de 3 cm de la
limite de zone coffrée.

Un premier panneau est positionné dans un
angle  de  la  zone  à  coffrer  (orientation
indifférente). La face lisse est orientée vers le
bas.

Les plaques suivantes sont mises en place
dans le même sens d’orientation que la première.
Elles  doivent  être  positionnées  de  manière  à
emboîter les tenons et mortaises présents sur les
chants  des  plaques.  Ceux-ci  permettent  de
compenser les éventuelles désaffleures entre les
panneaux posés sur le système  d’étaiement. Les
panneaux doivent être calés l’un contre l’autre
sans jeu.

Les  dernières  plaques  sont  coupées  à  la
géométrie  du  bâtiment  à  l’aide  d’une  scie
circulaire avec lame carbure ou sur fraiseuse à
commande numérique.

Pose d’un joint élastomère sur la périphérie
de la zone à coffrer afin d’assurer l’étanchéité de
la zone de coffrage appliquer un joint élastomère
sur les jonction de panneaux afin de prévenir
d’éventuelles coulures entre les plaques.

Mise en place de cales à béton de 3cm de
hauteur minimum.

Mise  en  place  de  la  nappe  d’aciers
inférieure

Mise en place des réseaux incorporés en
dalle. Les panneaux peuvent être percés pour
passer des gaines vers le niveau inférieur. Les
réservations traversantes de dalles peuvent être
pré-percées à condition de prévoir un coffrage
de rive.

Coulage du béton 

Suppression  des  éventuelles  coulures  de
béton présentes sur les panneaux et les murs à
l’aide d’un grattoir dès le lendemain du coulage.

Décoffrage (après temps de séchage stipulé
par  le fabriquant  du béton)  et  mise  en place
simultanée d’étais de séchage selon la répartition
requise par le bureau d’étude. compétent.

Délai de séchage de 28 jours minimum dont
mise hors d’eau, hors d’air pendant 1 semaine
minimum.
Lot plâtrerie

Application  de  l’enduit  de  rebouchage
Smart Cast sur les jonctions de panneaux afin de
garnir les réservations créées par les chanfreins.
(séchage 24h)

Collage  des  bandes  papier  de  cueillies
(Temps  de  séchage  selon  préconisations  du
fournisseur d’enduit à bande)

Application d’une passe de finition sur les
jonctions  de  panneaux  à  l’enduit  de  finition
Smart Cast.

Redoublement  des  cueillies  à  l’enduit  à
bandes.
Application d’une passe de finition sur les cueillies
avec  enduit  à  bande  sur  la  largeur  définitive
comme défini dans la Méthode CSTB selon NF 443.

Séchage selon préconisations du fabriquant

Ponçage au grain moyen (120) avec  une
ponceuse à plafond à disque large.
Lot peinture

Mise en peinture selon DTU 59.1 (pistolet
ou rouleau).
Nota :
Le traitement des cueillies est réalisé selon le DTU
25.41  avec le matériel prescrit par le fabricant des
cloisons distributives. 
Les plafonds peuvent également recevoir tout autre
revêtement de finition collé ou suspendu ou être
maintenues à l’état brut.
Dans le cas d’une finition gouttelette, le lot peinture
pourra intervenir après l’opération de rebouchage
avec l’enduit Smart Cast. L’application de l’enduit
de  finition  n’est  pas  nécessaire  sauf  pour  les
==PAGE:108==
cueillies qui doivent être traitées avec bande papier
+ enduit à bande en 2 passes minimum.
1.3.4.2 Pour les prédalles:

Les  conditions  de  transport  et  de
manutentions sont identiques.

Les conditions de pose sont identiques au
procédé  de  fabrication  en  dalle  pleine  à  la
différence que les panneaux de coffrage SMART
CAST  sont  placés  sur  le  marbre  du  banc  de
préfabrication. (en usine ou sur chantier) en lieu
est place du système d’étaiement. Lorsque les
panneaux sont placés sur un marbre, la portée
entre poutrelle est considérée comme nulle. Le
choix peux se porter sur les panneaux de 6mm
d’épaisseur.

Les délais de séchages sont identiques.

Les  conditions  de  rejointoiement  et  de
finition sont identiques.

Mise en peinture selon DTU 59.1 (pistolet
ou rouleau).
1.3.5
Entretien
Les  panneaux  Smart  Cast  ne  nécessitent  pas
d’entretien courant. Les précautions d’entretiens
courant sont propres au revêtement de finition
employé (peinture, papier peint, faux plafond)
En  cas  de  rénovation  des  plafonds,  tous  les
procédés  de  rebouchage,   d’enduisage,  de
ravoirage  et  de  remise  en  peinture  sont
compatibles  avec  le  procédé  SMARTCAST  sauf
contre-indication  du  fabricant  du  produit  de
rénovation.  Pour  la  préparation  du  support
respecter  les  spécifications  techniques  du
fabricant du produit de rénovation.
En cas de dégâts des eaux important, gratter les
joints  jusqu’a  retrouver  des  chanfreins  entre
plaques, laisser sécher jusqu’a obtenir des entre
plaques  et  appliquer  de  nouveau  l’enduit  de
rebouchage, et l’enduit de finition
1.4
Figures :  
Figure  4  :  Panneaux  de  coffrage  SMART  CAST
placés sur un système d’étaiement avant coulage de
la dalle en béton.
Figure 5 : Face supérieure (rugueuse).
Figure 6 : Face inférieure (lisse)
Figure 7 : Coupe sur chants.
(1) Plots de fixation conique tronquée.
(2) tenon
(3) mortaise
(4) Chanfrein 30°
==PAGE:109==
Figure 10 : Détail jonction cloison/plafond.
Figure 11 : Détail jonction mur porteur/plafond 
Figure 8: coupe sur dalle de compression coulée en
place
Figure 9 : coupe sur dalle réalisée par le procédé
des prédalles.
1.5
Commercialisation du procédé
Les  panneaux  de  coffrage  SMART  CAST  sont
commercialisés en direct aux utilisateurs ou par
des  réseaux  de  négoces  en  matériaux  de
construction.
Dans le second cas, les agences des réseaux de
distribution  constituent  leurs  propres  stocks
permettant de satisfaire les commandes dans un
délai court.
1.6
Assistance technique
Les panneaux SMART CAST peuvent être posés
par toute entreprise disposant d’une qualification
en maçonnerie et béton armé courant.
2
Justifications techniques
2.1
Satisfaction  aux  lois  et  règlements  en
vigueur  et  autres  qualités  d’aptitude  à
l’emploi.
2.1.1
Propriétés mécanique
2.1.1.1 Contraintes structurelles :
La structure porteuse est la dalle de compression
en béton collaborante avec le panneau de coffrage
SMART CAST. 
Les panneaux SMART CAST n’ont pas d’impact sur
les  propriétés  structurelles  du  bâtiment  et
n’interviennent  pas  dans  le  calcul  de
dimensionnement des planchers.
Seule la masse propre des panneaux est prise en
compte en supplément dans le calcul de charge du
plancher. 
Après  la  prise  du  béton,  les  panneaux  sont
maintenus en suspension en sous-face de la dalle
et supportent leur propre masse.
2.1.1.2 Charges en flexion/traction
Les panneaux sont dimensionnés de manière à
être compatible avec 3 variables dépendantes du
type d’ouvrage et du matériel d’étaiement utilisé :
==PAGE:110==
- Epaisseur de dalle 
12 à 18cm
18 à 23cm
23 à 28cm
28 à 33cm
- Portée entre poutrelles secondaires:
0 à 3cm (normes NF E 85-014 et NF X 35-109)
3 à 10cm
10 à 17cm
17 à 24 cm
24 à 31 cm
Epaisseur de plaques
 
  :
6mm
8cm
10cm
12mm
Par  ailleurs,  les  charges  de  construction  sont
définies dans l’Eurocode 1.6 :
Charge du béton frais : Qcf : variable
Charge personnel Qca : 1,5/m2
Poids du coffrage Qcc : 0,08 à 0,15 KN/m2
Flèche maximale admissible : flèche = L/400
Tableau  d’après  CTBA  NF  RI68/00/056  selon
norme NF P - 93 – 322
Protocole flexion 3 points
 
  : annexe 1 , 3
 
  .2
Protocole flexion 4 points
 
  : annexe 1, 3.3
Résultat flexion 3 points
 
  : Annexe1, paragraphe 4.2
Résultat flexion 4 points
 
  : Annexe 1, paragraphe 4.3
Rapport d’Essais traction
 
  :
Protocole
 
  : Annexe 1, paragraphe 3.1
Résultats
 
  : Annexe 1, paragraphe 4
 
  .1
L’épaisseur des plaques a été calculée sur la base
des  résultats  d’essai  de  flexion  4  points  en
fonction de deux critères :
1) La  flèche  admissible  (fmax=X/500)  ainsi
que  la  contrainte  maximum  admissible
pour  chaque  épaisseur.  (coefficient  de
sécurité de 2)
2) La limite élastique du matériau ne doit pas
être  atteinte.  (Avec  un  coefficient  de
sécurité de 2)
Annexe 6
 
  : Feuille de calcul de dimensionnement
Portée
 
(cm)/
épaisseur dalle (mm)
120  à
180
180  à
230
230  à
280
280  à
330
0 à 30mm
6
6
8
8
30 à 100mm
8
8
8
10
100 à 170mm
8
10
10
10*
170 à 240mm
10
10*
10*
10*
240 à 310mm
10*
10*
X
X
* Dans les cas de figure avec (*) un raidisseur secondaire doit être
placé au droit des jonctions longitudinales des plaques afin que
celles ci ne travaillent pas en porte-à-faux.
2.1.1.3 Charges en compression :
Charge concentrée d’un étais de séchage : 
Surface  d’application  de  la  charge :  120mm  x
120mm. 
EN 1195 et annexe A de la norme NF EN 12871
Surcharge : 1,5KN/m2
Poids du coffrage 0,1KN/m2
Rapport d'Essais compression
 
  :
Protocole
 
  : Annexe 1, paragraphe 3.5
Résultats
 
  : Annexe 1, paragraphe 4.5
2.1.1.4 Charges de cisaillement
Rapport d’essais de cisaillement 
Les cavités qui améliorent la collaboration avec le
béton  sont  dimensionnées  en  analysant  les
résultats d’essais de cisaillement.
En effet, les contraintes axiales sont négligeables
(seule le poids de la plaque est supporté) comparé
à l’effort de cisaillement  (radiale) qui peut être
généré lors de la phase de retrait du béton.
Rapport d’essai cisaillement
Protocole
 
  : annexe 1, paragraphe 3.4
Résultats
 
  : Annexe 1 , paragraphe 4.4
Après analyse des résultats, on peut conclure sur
l’intérêt d’usiner des queues d’aronde, la charge
maximale  en  cisaillement  est  3  fois  supérieure
lorsqu’il y a présence de queue d’aronde. 
==PAGE:111==
2.1.2
Propriétés physiques
2.1.2.1 Masse des plaques :
Épaisseur
Masse/m2
6
18,5
8
23,7
10
30,9
A  titre  de  comparaison les  plaques  de
contreplaqué backélisé de 15mm pèsent 29,4kg 
Annexe 1, paragraphe 3.6 et 4.6
 
  : détermination de
la densité.
 Pour chacune des épaisseurs, les panneaux de
2440x1220 mm ne dépassent pas une masse de
50 kg, conformément à la réglementation sur les
limitations  de  charges  à  manutentionner
manuellement sur le chantier.
2.1.2.2 Porosité et capillarité
Annexe 1, paragraphe 3.7 et 4.7
 
  : détermination de
la porosité.
Annexe 1, paragraphe 3.8 et 4.8
 
  : détermination de
la capillarité.
La porosité moyenne relevée du matériau est de
22%.  
Le coefficient d'adsorption d'eau par capillarité C
est calculé d'après l'eau adsorbée entre 1 et 24
heures, sur la base d'une régression linéaire. Le
résultat trouvé est cohérent et se rapproche du
résultat d’un calcaire tendre.
On obtient C = 34 kg/m².t^(1/2)
Les essais de porosité et de capillarité montrent
que  le matériau est capable d’absorption d’eau
jusqu'à 22% de son volume (théorique).
Cette propriété physique favorise l’adhérence de
du béton, de la peinture et de l’enduit.
2.1.2.3 Adhérence peinture
Annexe 1
 
  : paragraphe 3.9 et 4.9
 
  : Protocoles et
résultats d'essai adhérence peinture selon méthode
du quadrillage normalisé.
2.1.2.4 Adhérence peinture
Les résultats des tests adhérence enduit selon le
référenciel technique RT08 CSTBat  seront fournis
ultérieurement  et  feront  l'objet  d'un  additif  au
présent dossier.
2.1.2.5 Composés chimiques:
Annexe 3 : test ATG ET DRX
Annexe 4
 
  : PRESENCE DES COV
Le résultat d’analyse montre que la teneur en COV
du matériau est très faible. Cela s’explique par la
composition minérale à 94%.
Seuls  les  Trichlorobenzène  1,2,3  et  1,2,4  sont
décelés  en  quantité  mesurables  mais  très  en
dessous des limites réglementaires.
2.1.3
Performances acoustiques : 
L’influence  des  panneaux  SMART  CAST  sur  les
performances acoustiques de l’ensemble dalle de
compression/panneau n’est pas pris en compte.
Justification :  Les  deux  matériaux  sont
collaborant : Il n’y a pas d’effet masse/ressort ou
autre phénomène ondulatoire. Il n’y a donc pas de
dégradation des performances.
L’isolement  acoustique  des  panneaux  SMART
CAST soumis aux bruits aérien existe mais il est
négligeable  par rapport à la performance d’une
dalle béton pleine. (2 à 8% de l’épaisseur globale)
On  considère  que  le  calcul  de  performance
acoustique  est identique  à celui de  la dalle  en
béton seule.
Aucune contrainte réglementaire de performance
acoustique  n’est  identifiée  dans  le  cadre  de
l’application du procédé SMART CAST.
2.1.4
Performances thermiques :
Conductivité thermique : 0,178  W·m-1·K-1
Les panneaux de coffrage SMART CAST ont un
pouvoir  isolant  élevé.  Cependant,  l’épaisseur
==PAGE:112==
réduite des panneaux ne les destine pas à isoler
les bâtiments.
Annexe  5
 
  :  Protocole  et  résultat  d’analyse
conductivité thermique.
La résistance thermique du matériau associé à sa
réaction au feu classée A1 en fait un matériau
réfractaire au feu.
Cette propriété permet de protéger la structure en
béton de la chaleur lors d’un incendie et retardent
la  dégradation  irréversible  des  propriétés
mécaniques de la structure en béton.
(Phénomène d’éclatement)
(Non quantifié dans l’avis technique.)
2.1.5
Réaction au feu :
Les panneaux de type MgCO sont classés A1. 
Annexe 2
 
  : Procès-Verbal d’essai de réaction au feu
du CREPIM – classement A1
Le matériau est totalement incombustible. Il est
donc conforme à la réglementation en vigueur en
matière de revêtement de plafond pour tout type
de bâtiments et de locaux.
2.1.6
Isolement acoustique
La  plaque  de  coffrage  SMART  CAST  n’a  pas
d’influence sur les performances acoustiques de
l’ensemble dalle de compression/plaque :
Le calcul de performance acoustique est identique
à celui de la dalle en béton seule.
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
[Ahm11]
L. H. Forbes; S. M. Ahmed. Modern Construction - Lean Project Delivery
and Integrated Practices. Taylor and Francis Group. 2011.
[Ame05]
Associated General Contractors of America. The Contractors Guide to
BIM, 1st ed. 2005.
[Azh14]
Z. Riaz; M. Arslan; S. Azhar. CoSMoS: A BIM and wireless sensor based
integrated solution for worker safety in confined spaces. Automation in
Construction, 45(8), pp. 96-106. 2014.
[Bar15]
H. J. Bargstädt. Challenges of BIM for Construction Site Operations.
Procedia Engineering 117 ( 2015 ) 52 – 59. 2015.
[Bat17]
Batriprint3D. Dossier Technique - Présentation du procédé d’impression
3D robotisé utilisé pour le démonstrateur à l’échelle 1 du chantier ”Batiprint3D”
rue du croissant à Nantes. February 2017. url: http://www.marche-
public.fr/Marches-publics/Definitions/Entrees/ (visited on May 12,
2017).
[Bim17]
Bimaxes. 2017. url: http://www.bimaxes.com/services.php (visited
on February 28, 2017).
[Bos12]
F. Bosché. Plane-based registration of construction laser scans with 3D/4D
building models. Advances Engineering Informatics, 26, pp. 90-102. 2012.
[Bui14]
National Institute of Building Sciences. National BIM Standard - United
States Version 2. 2014. url: http://www.nationalbimstandard.org/
(visited on October 16, 2014).
[bui14]
buildingSMART. IDM Method Guide - S102 instructions. March 2014.
[Cam12]
E. Camus. Personal visit of the Airbus Industry in Saint-Nazaire, France.
2012.
[Cam17]
E. Camus. Personal participation to the BIM World Conference, Paris,
France. March 2017.
[COB12]
COBIM. Common BIM Requirements 2012, Version 1.0. COBIM project
parties. March 2012.
[Con14]
Bouygues Construction. Construire avant de construire : la révolution de
la maquette numérique. Direction de la Communication. March 2014.
==PAGE:114==
102
Bibliography
[DC17]
Dincel and associates - Consulting Engineers. Non-compliant products
Concrete cancer of concrete walls having permanent formwork with fibre
cement sheets and magnesium oxide boards. 2017.
[dEr16]
H. d’Erceville. Les stations totales tracent en un temps record. June 2016.
[Dol14]
S. Meza; Z. Turk; M. Dolnec. Component based engineering of a mobile
BIM-based augmented reality system. Automation in Construction, 42(1),
pp. 1-12. 2014.
[Dul15]
H. S. Omar; M. F. Dulaimi. Using BIM to automate construction site
activities. WIT Transactions on The Built Environment, Vol 149. 2015.
[Fag12]
J. Kang; A. Ganapathi; J. Lee; V. Faghihi. BIM to field: Robotic total
station and BIM for quality control. eWork and eBuisness in Architecture,
Engineering and Construction. 2012.
[Fer13]
R. P. Lopes Fernandes. Advantages and Disavantages of BIM Platforms
on Construction Site. Faculdade de Engenharia da Universidade do Porto.
June 2013.
[For07]
Polyteknisk Forlag. Anlægsteknikforeningen i Danmark, Anlægsteknik 2:
Styring af byggeprocessen. 2nd Edition. 2007.
[Geo17]
Hexagon Geosystems. Conférence Utilisateurs 3D Leica Geosystems. March
2017.
[gov17]
French government. Plan de Transition Numérique dans le Bâtiment.
March 2017. url: http://www.batiment-numerique.fr/PTNB/presentation.
htm (visited on May 11, 2017).
[Gud09]
N. Young; S. Jones; H. M. Bernstein; J. Gudgel. THE BUSINESS VALUE
OF BIM - Getting Building Information Modeling to the Bottom Line.
McGraw-Hill Construction, 2009. isbn: 9781934926260.
[Kag11]
Y. Arayici; S. Coates; L. J. Koskela; M. Kagioglou. BIM adoption and
implementation for architectural practices. Structural Survey. April 2011.
doi: 10.1108/02630801111118377.
[Kar15]
F. Vestergaard; J. Karlshøj. Introduction to BIM. Lecture from Course
11034 Advanced Building Information Modeling at Danmarks Tekniske
Universitet. 2015.
[Lar12]
B. D. Larsen. Accessing large 3D BIMs from mobile devices. eWork and
eBuisness in Architecture, Engineering and Construction - Gudnason and
Scherer (Eds). 2012.
[Las17]
Gabarit Laser. Systèmes de projection laser 2D et 3D pour l’industrie.
2017. url: http://www.gabarit-laser.com/ (visited on May 18, 2017).
[Lat16]
S. Goessens; C. Mueller; P. Latteur. Vers une « Robonumérisation » de
la construction ? 34èmes Rencontres de l’AUGC, Université de Liège,
Belgique, 25 au 27 mai 2016. 2016.
==PAGE:115==
Bibliography
103
[Lim14]
O. S. Kwon; C. S. Park; C. R. Lim. A defect management system for
reinforced concrete work utilizing BIM, image-matching and augmented
reality. Automation in Construction, 46(9), pp. 74-81. 2014.
[LLP12]
Pinsent Masons LLP. Building Information Modelling. April 2012. url:
https://www.out-law.com/en/topics/projects--construction/
projects-and-procurement/building-information-modelling/ (vis-
ited on May 3, 2017).
[Lon]
H. Tang; T. Long. Application of BIM in Construction and Analysis of
Obstacles. url: https://www.scientific.net/AMM.368- 370.1851
(visited on March 30, 2017).
[Mah15]
H. Barki1; F. Fadli; A. Shaat; P. Boguslawski; L. Mahdjoubi. BIM models
generation from 2D CAD drawings and 3D scans: an analysis of challenges
and opportunities for AEC practitioners. WIT Transactions on The Built
Environment, Vol 149. 2015. doi: 10.2495/BIM150311.
[Mar16]
A. Martin. En 2017, le BIM sera obligatoire dans les marchés publics.
March 2016. url: http://www.francemarches.com/blog/2016/bim-
obligatoire-marches-publics/ (visited on February 14, 2017).
[Mea09]
P. Meadati. BIM Extension into Later Stages of Project Life Cycle. South-
ern Polytechnic State University, Marietta, Georgia. 2009. doi: 10.1.1.
543.2104.
[Med17]
Mediaconstruct. Les spécificités françaises de la politique du BIM, au
regard de l’Europe. March 2017. url: http://www.mediaconstruct.fr/
sinformer/blog-du-bim/post/5397 (visited on May 11, 2017).
[Mou12a]
F. Vestergaard; J. Karlshøj; P. Haunch; J. Lambrecht; J. Mouritsen. Mea-
suring the economic benefits of Digital Construction (building digitization).
2012. url: http://www.bim.byg.dtu.dk/news/2012/04/maaling-af-
oekonomiske-gevinster-ved-det-digitale-byggeri--byggeriets-
digitalisering-?id=73d14d55-7c2f-4386-a6aa-697dfbdd5d11 (vis-
ited on March 3, 2017).
[Mou12b]
F. Vestergaard; J. Karlshøj; P. Haunch; J. Lambrecht; J. Mouritsen. Mea-
suring the economic benefits of Digital Construction - Case02:BIM at
major engineering consultant. 2012.
[Mou16]
K. Bråthen; A. Moum. Bridging the gap: bringing BIM to construction
workers. Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management, Vol.
23 Iss 6 pp. 751-764. 2016. doi: 10.1108/ECAM-01-2016-0008.
[MSC11]
Kihong Ku DDES; Mojtaba Taiebat M.SC. BIM Experiences and Expecta-
tions: The Constructors’ Perspective. International Journal of Construc-
tion Education and Research. August 2011. doi: 10.1080/15578771.
2010.544155. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15578771.2010.
544155 (visited on March 2, 2017).
==PAGE:116==
104
Bibliography
[N15]
G N. BIM : où en est la France ? July 2015. url: http://www.batiactu.
com/edito/principaux-resultats-de-l-enquete-41722.php (visited
on February 14, 2017).
[Nic15]
J. Nicolas. Trimble veut apporter le BIM sur les chantiers. July 2015. url:
http://www.lemoniteur.fr/article/trimble-veut-apporter-le-
bim-sur-les-chantiers-29051546 (visited on February 8, 2017).
[Pig16]
G. Pignon. 3 axes pour une migration réussie vers le BIM. January 2016.
url: https://www.hexabim.com/blog/3-axes-pour-une-migration-
reussie-vers-le-bim (visited on May 11, 2017).
[Pre12]
S. M. Khoshnava; A. Ahankoob; R. Rostami; C. Preece. Application of
BIM in Construction Safety. 2012.
[pub13]
Formation aux marchés publics. Définitions. 2013. url: http://www.
marche-public.fr/Marches-publics/Definitions/Entrees/ (visited
on May 12, 2017).
[Rod16]
K. Kielsgaard Hansen; T. Bunch-Nielsen; B. Grelk; C. Rode. Magnesium-
oxide boards cause moisture damage inside facades in new Danish build-
ings. International RILEM Conference on Materials, Systems and Struc-
tures in Civil Engineering - Conference segment on Moisture in Materials
and Structures, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark. Au-
gust 2016.
[Sav09]
M. Golparvar-Fard; F. Pena-Mora; S. Savarese. A 4-dimensional aug-
mented reality model for automating construction progress monitoring
data collection, processing and communication. June 2009. url: http:
//www.itcon.org/2009/13 (visited on May 30, 2017).
[She15]
C. Sun; S. Jiang; M. J. Skibniewski; Q. Man; L. Shen. A literature review
of the factors limiting the application of BIM in the construction industry.
Technological and Economic Development of Economy. 2015. doi: 10 .
3846/20294913.2015.1087071.
[SQB16]
SQBOARD. The Next Generation of the Original Magnesium Oxide (MgO)
Board. 2016. url: http://www.sqboard.net/mho-board-products (vis-
ited on May 29, 2017).
[Tho16]
C. P. H. Thomson. From Point Cloud to Building Information Model
- Capturing and Processing Survey Data Towards Automation for High
Quality 3D Models to Aid a BIM Process. 2016.
[Tur09]
M. Vozzola; G. Cangialosi; M. Lo Turco. BIM use in the construction
process. Politecnico di Torino, I Faculty of Engineering. 2009.
[Xia16]
J. Zhanga; Y. Longa; S. Lva; Y. Xianga. BIM-enabled Modular and Indus-
trialized Construction in China. Procedia Engineering 145 ( 2016 ) 1456
– 1461. 2016.
