==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master thesis
Uniﬁed Schedule- and Frequency-based
Public Transport Assignment
Morten Eltved
s113750
Supervisors
Otto Anker Nielsen
Thomas Kjær Rasmussen
Rasmus Dyhr Frederiksen
Kongens Lyngby
June 23rd 2017
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management Engineering
Title page
English title
Uniﬁed Schedule- and Frequency-based Public Transport Assignment
Danish title
Integreret modellering af frekvens- og køreplansbaserede rutevalg i kollektiv transport
Name (student number)
Morten Eltved (s113750)
Supervisors
Otto Anker Nielsen, Professor, DTU Management Engineering
Thomas Kjær Rasmussen, Assistant professor, DTU Management Engineering
Rasmus Dyhr Frederiksen, MSc, Rapidis Aps
ECTS
30
Start date
23.01.2017
Handed in
23.06.2017
Learning Objectives
• Find and use appropriate literature to describe multimodal assignment models
• Understand, describe and discuss the main ways to model multimodal public
transport assignment
• Discuss advantages and dis-advantages for schedule- and frequency-based public
transport assignment models
• Develop one or several test examples that include relevant features of modeling
multimodal public transport assignment
• Develop heuristics and algorithms which can generate appropriate choice sets for
public transport assignment in a uniﬁed schedule- and frequency-based model
• Propose solutions to solving an assignment in a network with both frequency- and
schedule-based timetables
• Apply the developed heuristics and algorithms to test examples and real life
scenarios
• Evaluate, interpret and discuss the results and provide recommendations for large
scale applications
i
==PAGE:3==
DTU Management Engineering
Preface and acknowledgement
This thesis is part of the fulﬁllment of the requirements to obtain the degree of Master
of Science in Transport and Logistics at the Management Engineering Department at
the Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
The thesis is the ﬁnal part of my ﬁve and a half years as a student at DTU and has
given me the opportunity to research in more depth the area of transport models and in
particular route choice models. The work has led to many interesting discussions with
diﬀerent people and I hope that some of the ideas in this thesis can in some way can be
used in the future modeling of public transport assignment.
I want to thank my three supervisors for taking their time to help me in the preparation
of this thesis. I want to thank Otto Anker Nielsen for introducing me to the topic
and for his never ending list of ideas and ways to go even further in the research. I
want to thank Thomas Kjær Rasmussen for encouraging me at critical times during the
thesis and helping me to understand the complexity of assignment models. Lastly I
want to thank Rasmus Dyhr Frederiksen for the many hours spent at the whiteboard at
Rapidis introducing me to the current models in public transport assignment, but also
for bringing ideas to the table for aspects of future public transport models. I also want
to thank the employees at Rapidis for having me at their oﬃce during the preparation
of this thesis. It has been a great environment with room for both professional and non
academic discussions.
My studies wouldn’t have been the same without the many projects and discussions I
have had with my two very good friends Martin Goodman Nielsen and Steﬀen Bank.
They are also thanked for providing comments to this thesis at the ﬁnal stage and
for discussions during the preparation of the thesis. I also wouldn’t have got to this
stage without the support from my family, with whom I have spend many days without
thinking about the diﬃculties in preparing this thesis.
Lastly, I want to thank my girlfriend Clara Jessop for putting up with me during the
preparation of the thesis and for correcting the report at the ﬁnal stage.
Morten Eltved, Kongens Lyngby, June 2017
ii
==PAGE:4==
DTU Management Engineering
Abstract
This thesis describes a framework for modeling public transport assignment in networks
where a mix of schedule- and frequency-based lines are in place. The main idea for
creating a uniﬁed model is to more realistically describe passengers route choice in
networks where both types are present. Such a network is for example found in the
greater Copenhagen area, where some A-buses and the Metro only run with a published
headway at diﬀerent times of the day, while for example the S-trains and local buses
run with a published timetable. Even though the passengers today have more and more
options to get real time information on next departure and updates during their trip,
there are still passengers who won’t consult the timetables if they know that a system is
running with a high frequency, which is why a combined model could achieve a better
ﬁt on passengers route choice when the network includes both high and low frequency
services.
The basis of a joint model is a description of four possible transfer types. The transfer
between two schedule-based services is deterministic, while the transfer between two
frequency-based services and from a schedule- to frequency-based service is given by a
probability distribution describing the headways on a line. The fourth possible transfer
type is from a frequency-based service to a schedule-based service, where there is a
probability to catch the schedule-based service and for this an associated transfer time.
When dealing with frequency-based services there is a need to describe the headway of
the line by a probability distribution. In the literature either exponential, gamma or
erlang distributions have been used in the frequency-based models. But in this thesis
regular headways are assumed, and as the mentioned distributions do not have an
upper bound they are not appropriate to describe regular headways. Instead a binomial
distribution is found to match criteria on being bounded at zero and for an upper bound.
This distribution is discrete which ﬁts nicely for the supply which is given in discrete
time units and the distribution can be convoluted which will proof useful in the work of
choice set generation.
To generate paths an old idea of event dominance is used, but by allowing non-optimal
paths within a threshold a choice set including diﬀerent alternatives is generated. An
assumption is made that passengers only consider paths which are always within the given
threshold. This result in some paths being discarded because it cannot be guaranteed
that the passenger can arrive within the threshold. The threshold at each stop is deﬁned
by paths which are 100% feasible because a path with only 10% probability of being
feasible should not exclude more certain alternatives.
After generating a proper choice set, diﬀerent possible discrete choice models are
discussed. As a basis the multinomial logit model is considered, but the nature of paths
with a probability of being realized makes it diﬃcult to describe the paths as simple
paths. Therefore, a recursive structure is discussed which can represent passengers
choice at stops. However, the recursive structure proves diﬃcult to implement, and for
the examples used in the analysis a MNL model is applied.
iii
==PAGE:5==
DTU Management Engineering
Two diﬀerent real life networks are created to see whether the developed framework
gives behavioral meaning and result in a plausible distribution of ﬂow across alternatives.
The ﬁrst example is a trip from DTU to Copenhagen Airport, where the results show
that the choice set is very dependent on the desired departure time and route choice
parameters. In the second example from DTU to Brønshøj, the algorithm generates
many reasonable paths. The sensitivity analysis shows small changes when lines are
changed from schedule-based to frequency-based services. Finally the last example using
frequency aggregation shows good results, and shows that it is important to further
consider how passengers choose between diﬀerent lines along the trip.
The ﬁndings in this thesis provide a base for further development of a uniﬁed model,
even though the choice set generation in its current form might not be possible to
use in a large scale model. The framework could possibly solve smaller networks with
the current implementation, but for further use an appropriate data structure and the
handling of frequency-based services in the choice set generation should be investigated
further.
iv
==PAGE:6==
DTU Management Engineering
Abstract (Danish)
Dette speciale omhandler en integreret model for modellering af kollektiv rutevalg i et
netværk med b˚ade frekvens- og køreplansbaserede linjer. Hovedform˚alet med rapporten
er at beskrive passagerernes rutevalg i et kombineret netværk mere præcist. Et eksempel
p˚a et kombineret netværk kan ﬁndes i Storkøbenhavn, hvor A-busser og metroen kører
køjfrekvent og uden en publiceret køreplan med speciﬁkke afgangstidspunkter, mens
lokalbusser og S-tog kører med en køreplan hvor alle afgangsminuttal er publiceret
til passsagererne.
Selvom passagerer i dag har mulighed for at sl˚a deres rejse op
vha. interaktive rejseplanlæggere, vil der stadig være passagerer som ikke konsulterer
køreplaner, fordi de blot antager en gennemsnitlig forsinkelse i et højfrekvent netværk.
Grundstenen i arbejdet med en integreret model er en beskrivelse af ﬁre typer af skift
mellem de to typer af linjer. Ventetiden ved skift mellem to køreplanlagte linjer er
deterministisk, da modellen ikke inkluderer forsinkelser. Mellem to frekvensbaserede
linjer og fra en køreplanlagt linje til en frekvensbaseret linje er der en ventetid der følger
en sandsynlighedsfordeling som beskriver frekvensen p˚a den frekvensbaserede linje. Den
sidste mulighed er et skift mellem en frekvensbaseret service til en køreplanlagt, og i
dette tilfælde er der en sandsynlighed for at n˚a afgangen p˚a den køreplanlagte linje og
en dertilhørende ventetid.
For at beskrive tiden mellem to afgange p˚a en frekvensbaseret linje, skal der benyttes
en sandsynlighedsfordeling. I literaturen er der primært benyttet gamma-, exponential-
og erlangfordelinger, men disse kan ikke beskrive et netværk uden forsinkelser, da de
har en lang hale i sansynlighedsfordelingen. Derfor benyttes en binomialfordeling, som
er begrænset i begge ender af fordelingen. Denne fordeling har ogs˚a den egenskab, at
summen af to fordelinger giver en ny binomialfordeling, hvilket er en vigtig egenskab
hvis rejser med ﬂere frekvensbaserede linjer skal beskrives.
For at generere et passende valgsæt benyttes der en algoritme som tillader ikke optimale
ruter at fortsætte i søgningen. Dette bygger p˚a et tidligere udviklet koncept kaldet
”event dominance” og i stedet for kun at lade optimale events eksistere ved hvert stop,
s˚a bliver der sat en grænseværdi i forhold til det bedste event ved et stop. P˚a denne
m˚ade bliver der genereret ﬂere forskellige ruter fra start- til slutpunkt. Grænseværdien
baseres kun p˚a 100% sandsynlige events, dvs. at hvis et skift fra en frekvensbaseret
linje til en køreplansbaseret linje ikke kan ske med 100% sikkerhed indg˚ar den ikke i
deﬁnitionen af grænseværdien, men f˚ar stadig lov at fortsætte i søgningen.
Efter at have genereret et fornuftigt valgsæt benyttes diskrete valgmodeller til at fordele
traﬁkken ud p˚a de forskellige alternativer. For at repræsentere passagerernes valg bedst
muligt, s˚a foresl˚aes der ogs˚a en rekursiv model, hvor det er muligt for passagererne
at genoverveje deres valg ved forskellige stop. Dette viser sig dog at være svært at
implementere, og derfor benyttes en standard logit model i de beregnede eksempler.
Den opstillede model testes p˚a to forskellige eksempler. Det første er en rejse fra DTU
til Københavns lufthavn, og resultaterne fra dette eksempel viser, at modellen genererer
korrekte resultater, men at den ogs˚a er meget sensitiv overfor det valgte planlagte
v
==PAGE:7==
DTU Management Engineering
afgangstidspunkt. Det andet eksempel fra DTU til Brønshøj viser, at modellen kan
generere mange rimelige ruter. En følsomhedsanalyse hvor nogle linjer er ændret til
frkvensbaserede linjer viser, at fordelingen p˚a alternativer ikke skifter meget, men ogs˚a
at det kan betyde en udelukkelse af rimelige alternativer og deraf følgende ændring i
fordelingen mellem alternativer. En anden følsomhedsanalyse hvor overlappende linjer
frekvensaggregeres viser, at fordelingen mellem alternativer ikke rykker sig voldsomt,
hvilket indikerer at der kunne være fordele ved at aggregere overlappende linjer.
Resultaterne af dette speciale kan danne grobund for fremtidige overvejelser omkring en
integreret modellering af frekvens- og køreplanlgte linjer. Valgsætgenereringen kan danne
et godt valgsæt, men er ikke nødvendigvis særlig eﬀektiv i forhold til implementering
med dertilhørende datastrukturer. Modellen, som den st˚ar nu, kan formentlig løse
mindre netværk, men det kræver yderligere undersøgelser for at h˚andteringen af skift
mellem frevens- og køreplanlagte linjer kan beskrives s˚a adfærdsmæssigt korrekt som
muligt.
vi
==PAGE:8==
DTU Management Engineering
Table of Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Why is a uniﬁed model relevant?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.1
Modeling the real world more realistically
. . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.2
Making more reliable forecasts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.1.3
Making it easier to model future scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2
Scope of work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
Reading guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Literature review
9
2.1
Model types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.1
Frequency-based models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.2
Schedule-based models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.3
Comparisons of models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Choice set generation techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.1
Deterministic techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.2
Stochastic techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.3
Path searches in schedule-based networks . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Choice models in public transport assignment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.1
Choice models in use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.2
Nested formulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.3.3
Restricted formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3
Methodology
18
3.1
Description of headway for frequency-based services . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.1
Distributions used in the literature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.2
Distribution describing regular headway
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Transfer types in a mixed network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Level of service for the four cases in comparable scenarios . . . . . . . .
28
3.3.1
Parameters and utility function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3.2
Description of scenario and results for each case . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3.3
Comparison of the four cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.4
Choice set generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.4.1
Choice set generation using the event dominance principle
. . .
34
3.4.2
Implementation of slack
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
3.4.3
Handling frequency-based services in the algorithm
. . . . . . .
39
3.4.4
Uniqueness of routes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.4.5
Frequency aggregation in a mixed network . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.5
Choice model application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.5.1
Multinomial Logit application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.5.2
Recursive logit application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.5.3
Comparisons of the two models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
3.6
Description of required input and network data
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
vii
==PAGE:9==
DTU Management Engineering
3.6.1
Creation of direct arcs between stop pairs
. . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.7
Summary of proposed framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4
Analysis and Results
51
4.1
DTU to Copenhagen Airport (CPH)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.1.1
Results including all alternatives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.1.2
Desired departure time 7:30 AM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.1.3
Desired departure time 7:35 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.1.4
Test of higher preference for S-train and regional train
. . . . .
56
4.1.5
Example of how local slack discard paths within the slack bound
58
4.2
DTU to Brønshøj . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.2.1
Results on existing timetable
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.2.2
5C, 150S and 350S as frequency-based services . . . . . . . . . .
65
4.2.3
Frequency aggregation of the network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
5
Discussion
70
5.1
Discussion of results and developed framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.1.1
Is local slack behaviorally realistic? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.1.2
Handling frequency-based services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
5.1.3
The distribution of headway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
5.1.4
Behavioral realism of frequency aggregation
. . . . . . . . . . .
72
5.2
Possible extensions to the model and future work
. . . . . . . . . . . .
73
5.2.1
Including delays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
5.2.2
Including in vehicle congestion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
5.2.3
Estimating passengers preferences in a uniﬁed network
. . . . .
75
5.2.4
Modeling low frequent systems as frequency-based systems . . .
75
5.3
Recommendations for large scale modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
5.3.1
Inclusion of multiple departure times . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
5.3.2
Handling a uniﬁed model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
5.3.3
Possible structure of model for large scale modeling . . . . . . . . 77
6
Conclusion
79
A Appendix
84
A.1 Snippets of timetables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
A.2 Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
A.3 Matlab Code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
A.4 Cost calculation for recursive logit example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
A.5 List of input tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
A.6 Input and results for example from DTU to Brønshøj . . . . . . . . . .
98
A.7 List of ﬁgures and tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
viii
==PAGE:10==
DTU Management Engineering
Frequently used terms
Word
Meaning
All-or nothing
assignment
Assignment of all traﬃc in a zone-pair to a single path
Attractive line
set
A set of possible lines at a stop that the passenger consider to take
Candidate
Describes a possible run on a schedule-based line which can be
reached with a probability
Centroid
The node where a trip starts and end
Choice set
The alternatives that a passenger can choose from
Convolution
The sum of two or more independent probability distributions
Dynamic
Describes the time dimension in public route choice
Event
dominance
A shortest path algorithm for schedule-based models
Frequency
Number of runs pr. time interval (usually pr. hour)
Frequency-based
A service running with a given frequency, but with unknown
departure time for each run
Headway
Time between two runs (typically in minutes)
Hidden waiting
time
Waiting time at origin before going to the ﬁrst stop
Hyperpath
A path which consists of several choices at each stop, where the
passenger takes the ﬁrst arriving service in an attractive line set
Node
A representation of stop or a centroid
OD Matrix
A matrix describing the number of trips between each origin and
destination pair
Recursive logit
A dynamic discrete choice model, that assigns traﬃc though
sequential link choices
Route
Interchangeable to a path
RUM
Random Utility Models that are used to describe passengers
probability to choose a speciﬁc alternative
Schedule-based
A service with runs on speciﬁc times
Service
A general description of public transport lines
Simulation
Primarily regarding choice set generation, where more iterations
are used to ﬁnd diﬀerent paths
Shortest path
The shortest path is the path through a network that minimizes
the total cost given a set of parameters
Static
Describes that the model has no time dimension
Stop sequence
An ordered sequence of stops visited on a path
Transfer
A change between two public transport lines
Transfer time
Time between arrival to a stop and departure from the stop
Wait time
Waiting at the stop for a service to depart
ix
==PAGE:11==
DTU Management Engineering
1
Introduction
This thesis concerns the ideas and methods for creating a uniﬁed schedule- and frequency-
based public transport assignment model. The aim of the thesis is to develop, test and
discuss possible methodologies to make a joint model, which can capture the passengers
behavior in a mixed network in the best way.
Public transport assignment models are the last part of the 4-stage model as shown in
ﬁgure 1 (McNally, 2007). The route choice model assign the trips in the generated origin-
destination matrix to routes connecting origin and destination. The three other stages
of the 4-stage model are trip generation, trip distribution and mode choice. Naturally
this thesis only consists of the route choice of travelers who choose public transport as
their mode. The 4-stage model can include feedbacks to the trip distribution and mode
choice models which can change the number of passengers in a public transport system.
The route choice part typically involves an iterative process, where the network ﬂows
are calibrated, so that a certain equilibrium state is found.
Figure 1: Overview of the 4-stage model after McNally (2007)
In the era of public transport assignment models there have been two main ways of
modeling the supply of public transport oﬀered in the network (Liu et al., 2010). The
supply side started as being described with frequencies, meaning that the passenger
would assume that a line would run with a given headway but without knowing the
exact timetables. This allowed the path searches to be done in a static model with no
time dimension. Later the models developed into schedule-based models where each run
on a line is included with the times when it passes diﬀerent stops on the route. The
schedule-based models allowed the modeler to better represent coordination between
lines and thereby describing the passengers route choice in a more detailed way.
In some of the commercial models today there is a choice between using a frequency-
or schedule-based model, but no model can model both types at the same time, see
i.e. Hildebrand and H¨ortin (2014) for a description of two main commercial models
(Emme and Visum). In Denmark the National Transport Model has been developed
over the past seven years and includes a schedule-based public transport assignment
model where the frequency-based lines are included as schedule-based lines.
1
==PAGE:12==
DTU Management Engineering
1.1
Why is a uniﬁed model relevant?
This thesis attempts to incorporate both frequency- and schedule-based services in a
uniﬁed model to better represent the supply and also to make it easier to model future
scenarios. As mentioned in Gentile and Noekel (2016, Chapter 6) there is currently
no framework to include these two diﬀerent ways of representing the supply. They
propose to make a decision on whether the network is better described with schedules
or frequencies and choose the best option. They say that no simple way of making a
combined model is available, proposing that one should assume truncated waiting time
distributions for schedule-based services. But this is an assumption which requires many
assumptions on what the truncated distribution should be and for which services the
passenger behavior should be treated as schedule-based behavior. Another proposal
in Gentile and Noekel (2016, Chapter 6) is to rely on a schedule-based network and
incorporate passenger cost functions for frequency-based lines, while still keeping a
completely schedule-based network. This is a possible solution for modeling the current
system, but when changing systems it requires the modeler to take decisions on the
exact departure times of the line which might have an eﬀect on the transfer times to
corresponding lines.
There are three main purposes for considering a uniﬁed model:
• Modeling the existing situation more realistically
• Creating more reliable forecasts
• Simplifying modeling of future scenarios
The three purposes are outlined in the following subsections.
1.1.1
Modeling the real world more realistically
Using the Copenhagen network as an example, this is an example of a mixed network
with both frequency- and schedule-based services. The Copenhagen network includes
three main sub modes within public transport modes; buses, S-trains and Metro. The
diﬀerent submodes are brieﬂy described here, to get an understanding of the complexity
of the network.
Buses
The buses in the Copenhagen area have for most lines a published timetable with
departures given in discrete minutes (Movia, 2017b). At the time of this thesis, only
three bus lines are published as frequency-based services (3A, 8A and 9A). These are all
part of the A-bus network where all lines run with a frequency of 3-8 minutes during
peak hours (red lines in ﬁgure 3). The headway of the three mentioned frequency-based
lines during peak hours are respectively 6-8 minutes, 5-8 minutes and 7-8 minutes. It is
important to note, that some of the other A-lines run with a higher frequency but with
a published timetable including all runs, see example in ﬁgure 2 and more examples in
appendix A.1. The reason for this is unknown, but could be because of reliability issues
on the three mentioned lines. The other lines in the network are local buses, the two
express concepts S- and E-buses, and ﬁnally the newly introduced C-line 5C which is
meant as a Bus Rapid Transit System (Movia, 2017a).
2
==PAGE:13==
DTU Management Engineering
(A) Timetable for line 3A
Frequency-based
(B) Timetable for line 6A
Schedule-based
Figure 2: Example of a frequency- and schedule-based bus line
Figure 3: Bus lines in Copenhagen (Movia, 2017b)
A-buses - Local buses - S-buses - E-buses - Cityline (5C)
3
==PAGE:14==
DTU Management Engineering
S-train network
The backbone of the public transport in the radial corridors are the S-trains covering
most of the capital region. The S-trains mostly run with a published schedule-based
timetable and a frequency of six trains pr. hour and equal headway (DSB, 2017)1. One
line on the S-train network runs frequency-based namely the F-line from Hellerup to Ny
Ellebjerg (see timetable in appendix A.1). The line runs with a frequency of 12 trains
an hour and has published the driving times between the starting station and to all
other stations on the line. But other than this, the passenger is not informed of the
exact departure times on the diﬀerent stations.
Figure 4: S-train lines (DSB, 2016a)
All lines 10 minutes headway except Bx (20 minutes) and F (5 minutes)
Metro network
The last major public transport mode in the Copenhagen region is the Metro. The
Metro runs every 2-4 minutes on all stations during peak hours (Metro, 2017). There
is no published timetable, only the headway is published. Even during oﬀ-peak hours
there are no published timetables and the headway is up to 20 minutes.
1The line Bx runs with a frequency of three trains pr. hour
4
==PAGE:15==
DTU Management Engineering
Figure 5: Metro lines (Metro, 2017)
Both lines run with 4 minutes headway
When having described all the published timetables it is important to note, that
passengers in many cases do not necessarily only consult the published timetables.
Interactive travel planners such as Rejseplanen and Google Maps deliver trip proposals
based on the network. For example Rejseplanen have around 300 million queries every
year (Rejseplanen, 2017a). The interactive travel planners use data on each speciﬁc
departure, and therefore work on a schedule-based network2. A search on Rejseplanen
for a travel plan for a trip using frequency-based services also gives the passenger an
exact departure and arrival time. The example is from Rantzausgade in Nørrebro to
Copenhagen Airport using the lines 8A and M2, which are both frequency-based services.
The travel plan, as shown in ﬁgure 6, describes speciﬁc departures on both lines which
result in a speciﬁc arrival time at the airport. If the lines were coded as frequency-based
services the arrival time would possibly be indicated by an arrival time interval instead
of an exact arrival time.
Even though the interactive travel planners provide exact schedules, it can be argued
that travelers who take high frequency services make their route decisions based on an
expected arrival time and not based on the actual schedules. Eltved (2017) performed a
study on arrival time distributions for ﬁrst waiting time in public transport in Copenhagen
and one of the ﬁndings in this was, that with low headways of 5 minutes and below
the passengers tended to arrive randomly. This could indicate that passengers do not
consult the actual departure time but rather act like in a frequency-based system where
passengers are assumed to not consult the timetable, but rather calculate an expected
arrival time instead of an exact arrival time. This is also the case when including delays,
where passengers need to take possible delays into account. The delays are not a part of
this study, but could be a future research topic for an integrated assignment model.
2This is based on extraction of Google Transit Feed Speciﬁcation (GTFS) data from Rejseplanen
(2017b) made available by Rapidis APS
5
==PAGE:16==
DTU Management Engineering
Figure 6: Example of travel plan from trip with frequency-based services using Rejseplanen
1.1.2
Making more reliable forecasts
The second reason for considering a uniﬁed model is to make more reliable forecasts.
Modeling the future is always subject to uncertainty about what the network supply will
be in a given year. Taking an example in the Copenhagen network, the bus line 150S
which runs in the corridor from Kokkedal via DTU to Nørreport is today a schedule-based
service in the published timetable (see appendix A.1 for a snippet of the timetable).
The bus runs with a headway of ﬁve minutes in the morning peak hour but with a given
schedule that is available to the passengers. In the future it is known that 150S will
also run with a headway of ﬁve minutes, but it is not known if the actual departure
times will be the same. To get a more reliable forecast it is suggested to change the
high frequency services to frequency-based lines and thereby not having to deal with
coordination of diﬀerent connecting lines.
1.1.3
Making it easier to model future scenarios
On top of the more reliable forecasts it could also be an advantage to have frequency-
based lines in diﬀerent scenarios for the future. The introduction of a new line in a
network requires many assumptions on which lines the new line should coordinate with.
Lets say, that the bus company wants to make a forecasting scenario where some buses
6
==PAGE:17==
DTU Management Engineering
that corresponds to 150S have a higher frequency than today. This could result in some
waiting times at transfers being longer (or shorter) because the arrival time at a given
stop is changed. If the line 150S and the lines being changed were instead described as
a frequency-based service, the waiting time at transfers would only change according to
the service which is transferred to and would therefore be a more average consideration
of the future scenario without a possible loss of good connections.
1.2
Scope of work
The work with public transport assignment involves many diﬀerent aspects. There exists
diﬀerent model types and solutions, and to limit the scope of this thesis some limitations
of the study were initially set up.
First of all this work only comprises of one OD-relation with one speciﬁc departure time.
In a large scale model there would be several thousands or even millions of OD-relations
and as the supply changes throughout the day in a scehdule-based model, there can be
many launches depending on the granularity of launches3.
Secondly this thesis only considers uncongested assignment - both in terms of in-vehicle
congestion and delays of services. This means that frequency-based lines are assumed to
have regular headways and schedule-based services run on their published times. This
assumption excludes the step of equilibration as mentioned in the four stage model and
it will be discussed further in section 2.3.
A third assumption is that schedule-based services only run in discrete minutes. This is
true for all published timetables in Denmark and also the case if a journey plan is made
on for example Rejseplanen.
A fourth limitation of this research is, that the solution which should be proposed should
be an analytical solution and should not be based on any form of simulation. In many
previous studies simulation of passengers preferences and/or the cost of a speciﬁc run
were simulated to get a proper choice set (see for example Nielsen (2000) or Anderson
et al. (2014)), but simulation in large scale models is time consuming and generates a
stochastic output.
Finally the work on this thesis should aim to ﬁt in a framework where a choice set
generation phase leads to a proper choice set, which can be used in a discrete choice
model that should distribute the ﬂow across the diﬀerent alternatives.
3This is only the case for schedule-based models as they include a time dimension while frequency-
based models are run on a static network with no time dimension
7
==PAGE:18==
DTU Management Engineering
1.3
Reading guide
The report consists of ﬁve main sections other than this introduction section. In section
2 a review of the main ideas of public transport assignment are presented. In section 3
the framework and methodology for a uniﬁed assignment model is shown together with
small examples with pros and cons of diﬀerent model options. The diﬀerent options in
terms of shortest path searches, choice set generation and distribution of ﬂow are also
discussed. In section 4 an analysis of the proposed framework is conducted using two
examples and the results for the two examples are presented. Section 5 is a discussion
of the results and possible extensions to the model. It also provides recommendations
for a uniﬁed model in large scale applications. Finally section 6 concludes the work.
8
==PAGE:19==
DTU Management Engineering
2
Literature review
The literature review considers diﬀerent aspects of public transport assignment. First
the frequency-based and schedule-based approach are described considering what are
their main features and their advantages and disadvantages. Then diﬀerent choice set
generation techniques are described including their applicability to public transport
assignment. Lastly diﬀerent choice models for distributing the ﬂow across diﬀerent
alternatives are described.
2.1
Model types
Modeling public transport has typically been divided into two main model types -
frequency-based and schedule-based models. The frequency-based models are the oldest
models and describe the public transport lines according to their frequency, meaning
the number of departures in a given time period. This way of describing the lines is
more general than the more recently developed schedule-based models where each run
on a line is modeled. The two model types are described below including a comparison
of the two model types.
2.1.1
Frequency-based models
Frequency-based models were the ﬁrst models developed and they are based on the
assumption that passengers do not know the exact departure times on each run on a line.
The passengers plan their trip according to the routes in the network and their travel
times and service frequencies. Diﬀerent assumptions of the regularity of the services
and whether passengers can obtain knowledge along a trip can lead to diﬀerent types of
frequency-based models (N¨okel and Wekeck, 2007).
The choice set generation in frequency-based models is based on searches in static
networks with no time dimension. It typically includes access/egress, boarding and
alighting arcs as well as the in vehicle arcs. Frequency-based models make use of
hyperarcs and hyperpaths. Hyperarcs are a combination of outgoing lines that the
passenger considers at the stop, while the hyperpaths include diﬀerent hyperarcs in a
tree-structure. This means that the hyperpaths are not simple paths giving the passenger
one option but can include multiple options because the passenger might have a choice
between diﬀerent lines at a given stop (Gentile and Noekel, 2016, Chapter 6).
The passengers in frequency-based models adopt a strategy on how to travel through the
network (Spiess and Florian, 1989). Depending on the assumptions of the model, the
passenger can change their predetermined route on the way, if they get more information
at stops. A very important part of the frequency-based model is the notion af the
attractive line set. The attractive line set deﬁnes the possible lines to take from a given
stop and the passenger is usually assumed to take the ﬁrst arriving line in the attractive
line set (N¨okel and Wekeck, 2007). Given the attractive line set for each node the
model usually works recursively back from the destination to the origin and for each
node assigns shares among the lines in the attractive line set. The shares can only
be calculated when all the succeeding arcs have been calculated. The shares between
9
==PAGE:20==
DTU Management Engineering
the lines depend on; the choice of headway distribution, the possibility of sequential
observations and decisions by the passengers on the route and lastly, on whether the
passengers take into account the time waited at a stop for a given line (N¨okel and
Wekeck, 2007).
2.1.2
Schedule-based models
Schedule-based models are more detailed than frequency-based models by describing
each run on a line explicitly. In this way passengers route choice is based on actual
waiting times at transfers and the arrival time is known by the passenger (if no delays
are included). The schedule-based models typically make use of a diachronic graph,
see ﬁgure 7, which represents both spatial and temporal nodes and arcs allowing for
fast computation of shortest path in the network (Nielsen and Frederiksen, 2006). The
idea in the diachronic graph is, that all movements in time and space have their own
arc. This allows the representation of for example waiting in a stop as an arc. It also
includes arcs for boarding and alighting of runs, which makes it easy to introduce for
example transfer penalties.
Figure 7: Example of diachronic graph from Nuzzolo et al. (2001)
10
==PAGE:21==
DTU Management Engineering
The representation of runs is well suited for more in-frequent systems. This is because
it is possible to model the actual waiting time, without making assumptions on how
the lines are coordinated. The coordination is given by the timetable, which is also
what the passenger observes when planning his/her route. Current improvements in
passenger information is also better reﬂected with the use of schedule-based models,
as trip planners provide suggestions of which run on a line to take as shown in section
1.1.1.
The introduction of schedule-based models also allows the demand to be split across
diﬀerent time periods and to have diﬀerent desired departure times. This is especially
reasonable to consider if the demand information is very detailed and if the frequencies
of the supply vary during the day.
2.1.3
Comparisons of models
The two model types can be used to model public transport assignment, but the choice of
which one to use relies heavily on assumptions on how much information passengers have
on departures. If a system is high frequency or very unreliable it would be appropriate
to model a system as frequency-based because the passengers would not make decisions
on which speciﬁc run to take. But in a reliable system with published timetables with
speciﬁc departure times the passenger can consult web based travel planners and take
the departure that suits them best (Gentile and Noekel, 2016).
The two model types can also be used for future scenarios. In future scenarios the
modeler might not have knowledge or time to code complete timetables that coordinate
diﬀerent lines, but can instead rely on frequency-based modeling and just having each
line described with a frequency. Cascetta and Coppola (2016) compared the diﬀerence
in using a frequency-based model vs. a schedule-based model for a strategic planning
scenario for high speed rail.
They found that a frequency-based model tended to
overestimate the modal share of train services, as the cost of taking the train was lower
than in schedule-based assignment. But they also found that it varied according to the
assumption of passenger arrivals and how the timetable in the schedule-based was made.
As mentioned in section 1 there exists no literature on a uniﬁed model that includes
both schedule- and frequency-based services in one model. In (Gentile and Noekel, 2016,
Chapter 6) they have however made a proposal on how to model a mixed network. They
propose to include schedule-based lines into a frequency-based network by setting a
maximum waiting time lower than half headway for lines which have a schedule-based
behavior. However, they mainly focus on the waiting time for the ﬁrst service in the
trip. Another idea of (Gentile and Noekel, 2016, Chapter 6) is to introduce diﬀerent
costs for arcs belonging respectively to frequency- and schedule-based lines. They use a
diachronic graph to introduce the two arc types, but they assume that frequency-based
services have actual departures in the diachronic graph, which in reality is true because
the operator assigns vehicles to speciﬁc runs on a line, but the passenger does not know
the speciﬁc departure time. This is the reason that this study tries to make a combined
model, where the frequency-based lines do not have an actual schedule that can be
11
==PAGE:22==
DTU Management Engineering
inserted in a graph, but rather have the frequency-based services as arcs that can move
in time according to the passengers arrival at a given stop.
2.2
Choice set generation techniques
As mentioned in section 1.2 one of the assumptions for this thesis, is to construct a
choice set explicitly which can be used in the choice modeling phase. In ﬁgure 8 an
overview of diﬀerent choice set generation techniques is shown (for a large comparison
please see Prato (2009)). For the use in public transport assignment all of the shown
techniques could be useful.
Figure 8: Overview of choice set generation techniques after Rasmussen (2010)
2.2.1
Deterministic techniques
In the K-shortest paths techniques the aim is to ﬁnd diﬀerent routes without simulation
and to do this in a way, where the already found paths are assigned extra costs or
eliminated in order to ﬁnd the k-1 best paths. These techniques require multiple shortest
path searches, but will generate diﬀerent routes. The problem of using the link penalty
and link elimination approaches is that it is hard to ﬁnd a consistent way to ﬁnd out
which link to eliminate and whether that link should be re-inserted in later iterations
in the search. Using link penalty also requires the modeler to deﬁne which link(s) to
penalize.
As an alternative to the repeated shortest path searches there exists a branch and bound
approach. The constrained enumeration within branch and bound builds on an idea
that all alternatives fulﬁlling the constraints should be enumerated (see i.e. Gentile and
Noekel (2016, Section 6.3.5). The enumeration is basically following a set of criteria at
each diversion point. The result is a tree as the one shown in ﬁgure 9.
In Gentile and Noekel (2016, Section 6.3.5) a few rules of thumb of which criteria to
use are mentioned. First of all connecting departures shall depart after the arrival.
Moreover, the number of transfers and fares could be considered. They also work with
an impedance cost which is a cost build up by combination of travel time, number
of transfers and fares. This is similar to utility but more simple, which they argue is
suﬃcient for the choice set generation. The tolerance allows non optimal paths to be
included and depending on how much slack there is included more or less paths can be
generated.
12
==PAGE:23==
DTU Management Engineering
Figure 9: Example of branch and bound technique (Friedrich et al., 2001)
2.2.2
Stochastic techniques
The stochastic techniques also build on repeated shortest path searches, but the diﬀerence
from the deterministic techniques is, that there in each iteration is drawn new values for
either the cost of each run or for the passengers preferences (singly stochastic) or both
(doubly stochastic). Nielsen (2000), Rasmussen (2010) and Anderson et al. (2014) all
make use of stochastic choice set generation techniques and ﬁnd that good choice sets
can be generated using a stochastic technique. The problem with stochastic choice set
generation is, that it requires many iterations and that the choice set is not the same if
the model is run twice. Therefore they will not be discussed further in this report.
2.2.3
Path searches in schedule-based networks
There exists diﬀerent algorithms to ﬁnd the shortest path in a time expanded network.
One major diﬀerence in shortest path algorithms is whether they use a full expanded
network or dynamically fold out the network. The algorithms that use a fully expanded
network include the Dijkstra (Dijkstra, 1959) and A⋆algorithm which was used in a
time dependent network in Zhao et al. (2008). The main diﬀerence between the two
algorithms is, that the A⋆narrows the search in a spatial dimension, which means that
the investigated area is much smaller than for the Dijkstra algorithm (Zhao et al., 2008).
One the algorithms which dynamically unfolds the network during the search is the
event dominance algorithm developed by Florian (1999) and also described in Florian
(2004). This dynamic unfolding was developed at the time when the available memory
in computers was a problem for large models and the dynamic unfolding allowed only
smaller part of the network to be stored in the memory. Nielsen and Frederiksen (2006)
tried to use both fully expanded graphs and dynamically unfolded graphs and showed
that the calculation time was higher for the dynamic unfolding.
13
==PAGE:24==
DTU Management Engineering
However, when dealing with a network with both frequency- and schedule-based services
it would be useful, if the frequency-based services could be generated according to the
arrivals at a given node, which will be shown in section 3.4.
2.3
Choice models in public transport assignment
This subsection brieﬂy describes how choice models can be used to distribute ﬂows
across diﬀerent alternatives. First a brief note on the reasons for distributing ﬂow across
multiple alternatives is mentioned followed by a description of diﬀerent models that
have been used in the literature.
When dealing with an uncongested public transport network the passengers are not
aﬀected by other users route choice or delays of vehicles in diﬀerent runs. As such, there
is not strictly speaking an equilibrium state in the network, as the passengers do not
revisit their route choice based on other users choices. However, a short introduction to
the equilibrium states developed by Wardrop (1952) and Daganzo and Sheﬃ(1977) is
brieﬂy revised below, as some parts of it ground the basis of a distribution of ﬂow over
diﬀerent paths.
In description of equilibrium conditions in assignment models there exists diﬀerent views.
Wardrop (1952) deﬁned one possible equilibrium condition:
”The journey times on all routes actually used are equal, and less than those
which would be experienced by a single vehicle on any unused route.”
This deﬁnition is called the User Equilibrium (UE) as all users try to minimize their
travel costs. This implies that all passengers between origin and destination at a given
departure time would use the shortest path (minimize utility). Daganzo and Sheﬃ
(1977) generalized the deﬁnition by Wardrop, and it is rephrased in the book by Sheﬃ
(1985):
”Equilibrium will be reached when no traveler believes that his travel
time can be improved by unilaterally changing routes.”
This deﬁnition is called the Stochastic User Equilibrium (SUE) as the users try to
minimize their perceived costs. This is usually done by using Random Utility Models
which includes a deterministic part and an error term. Such models are used to describe
the distribution between alternatives. Nielsen (2000) gives four reasons as to why public
transport assignment should follow a stochastic route choice:
1. Passengers do not have full knowledge of the network, and therefore only choose
according to perceived utilities.
2. Travel times along diﬀerent routes may vary from day-to-day.
3. Diﬀerent routes are taken for the sake of variation.
4. Diﬀerent persons may have diﬀerent preferences.
Coming back to the uncongested assignment in this thesis, the point on varying travel
times from day to day is not relevant to this work. The point on passengers not having
full knowledge of the network is still relevant, as passengers do not know the exact
14
==PAGE:25==
DTU Management Engineering
departure times of the frequency-based lines. However, in these days of inteligent
transport systems and travel planners, the passengers probably have a good knowledge
of the alternative paths in the network. But passengers do however have diﬀerent
preferences for diﬀerent transit types and choose diﬀerent routes in the network. This is
also backed up by the work by Nuzzolo and Comi (2016) where they try to encompass
individual utility functions for each individual in an individual travel planner. They
argue that the information available to passengers about the network today leads to
more individual route choice, where generic utility functions are not enough to give
suggestions to passengers.
So when the choice set has been generated, a Random Utility Model (RUM) should be
used to distribute the ﬂow over the diﬀerent alternatives. In the following subsection
diﬀerent RUM-based models are discussed in terms of their use in the literature and
how they can ﬁt into a uniﬁed model.
2.3.1
Choice models in use
When a choice set has been generated the decision of which choice models to choose
comes into play. The choice models shown below all rely on utility which is modeled as
a random variable to reﬂect the uncertainty in the passengers decision. The utility is
described with a deterministic part and an error term, and the utility that each decision
maker n associates to a choice in a choice set Cn is given as:
Ukn = Vkn + ϵkn
(1)
where Vkn is the deterministic part of the utility and the error term ϵkn describes the
random part that is unexplained. The index k describes the alternative, which in terms
of route choice is typically a route. The terms in the deterministic utility are typically:
• Hidden wait time
• Access/egress time from home to stop
• In vehicle time for diﬀerent sub modes
• Walking time between stops
• Waiting time at stops
• Transfer penalty
The diﬀerent terms are described further in section 3.3.1.
In the early works on traﬃc assignment model a logit-based approach was taken (Dial,
1971). The choice probability of route k by traveler n is given by equation 2.
Pkn =
exp(Vkn)
P
j∈Cn exp(Vjn)
(2)
The logit model assumes independence between alternatives which is a strong assumption
in route choice because many routes share the same links. Take a look at the small
example in ﬁgure 10 which is a classic example in car assignment modeling. In public
15
==PAGE:26==
DTU Management Engineering
transport assignment, not all routes will be available at all desired departure times, but
assume that the travel time on route 1 is comparable to the ones on route 2 and 3 and no
transfer penalty at stop T. The passenger will probably consider route 2 and 3 as similar
routes and will just, when arriving at stop T, take the ﬁrst departing service of route
2 or 3. But in a logit model the two alternatives will be seen as separate alternatives
which might not be how the passenger experience the choice set. However, the MNL
model is easy to estimate and has been the background for many further developments.
Route 2 and 3
Route 3
Route 2
Route 1
O
D
T
Figure 10: Example of a three link network
Given the problems with the logit model Ben-Akiva and Bierlaire (1999) described a
new logit model which tries to take care of the overlap. This model is called path-size
logit and has on top of the deterministic utility a correction factor (path-size attribute).
The probability to choose a given path is then given as:
P(k|Cn) =
exp(µ(Vkn + ln(Skn)))
P
j∈Cn exp(µ(Vjn + ln(Sjn)))
(3)
where Skn is deﬁned as:
Skn =
X
a∈τk
la
Lk
1
P
j∈Cn δaj
L⋆
Cn
Lj
(4)
where τi is the set of links in path k, la and Lk are the length of link a and path k. δaj
is an indicator function for whether link a is on path j and is one if it is and 0 otherwise.
L⋆
Cn is the length of the shortest path in Cn.
The formulation of the path-size logit was reformulated in a slightly diﬀerent way in
Bovy et al. (2008). Here a path-size correction logit was proposed, and the path-size
correction factor was given as:
PSCkn = −
X
a∈τk
(La
Lk
X
h∈Cn
δah)
(5)
where La is the length of link a, Lk is the length of route k, τk is the set of links in
route k and δah is an indicator function for whether route h uses link a. The choice
16
==PAGE:27==
DTU Management Engineering
probability is then given by a closed form logit type and the probability of choosing
route k is given as:
Pkn =
exp(P
m βivt,mivtmkn + P
c βt,ctckn + P
q βpen,qpenqkn + βPSCPSCk)
P
h∈Cn exp(P
m βivt,mivtmhn + P
c βt,ctchn + P
q βpen,qpenqhn + βPSCPSCh)
(6)
, where ivtmkn are in vehicle times for the sub mode m, tckn deﬁne the other time
components such as access/egress, waiting time and transfer time, penqkn deﬁne the
transfer penalties, PSCkn is the speciﬁed path size correction factor and the β’s are
estimated parameters. The path size correction logit was used in Anderson et al. (2014)
with good results on a schedule-based network. Here they even introduced a mixed
formulation allowing heterogeneity across passengers preferences.
2.3.2
Nested formulations
All the above mentioned models deﬁne paths as simple paths from origin to destination
and control the correlation between paths using diﬀerent terms in the utility speciﬁcation.
However, there are also other models which potentially could be used to distribute ﬂow
across alternatives. One of these is the nested logit model which assumes, that the
alternatives can be divided into diﬀerent nests. This structure is hard to handle, because
it includes assumptions on which paths to group into the diﬀerent nests. But the use
of nests might not be impossible to use in public transport assignment. Fosgerau et al.
(2013) developed a recursive logit model for car assignment, which recursively from the
destination and back to the origin looks at each node and calculates the probability
of using any of the outgoing links. This is in someway the same notion as a strategy,
where the passenger takes a decision given the state/stop he/she is in. The recursive
logit model was extended in Mai et al. (2015) where the authors incorporate the overlap
problem by using a nested structure on which links are part of diﬀerent paths.
2.3.3
Restricted formulation
One of recently proposed route choice models is the Restricted Stochastic User Equi-
librium with Threshold (RSUET) (Rasmussen et al., 2017). The RSUET notion is to
model route choice according to random utility theory while in a consistent way reﬂect
that travelers only consider routes within a certain threshold to the minimum cost
alternative. The idea is to limit the choice set, so only alternatives that are within a
threshold compared to the shortest path are included. This addresses a major deﬁciency
of other typically applied choice models, namely that all possible alternatives should be
included in the choice set. But it is in no way possible to enumerate all alternatives in
large networks, which lead to the idea to include a threshold of the slack compared to
the shortest path. It is important to note, that the RSUET was originally developed
for car assignment where congestion plays a larger role in travelers route choice than
for public transport assignment. But in an uncongested assignment, as assumed in this
thesis, the idea of limiting the choice set by using a threshold will also be used as seen
in section 3.4.
17
==PAGE:28==
DTU Management Engineering
3
Methodology
This section introduces the overall assignment framework for a uniﬁed assignment
model with schedule- and frequency-based services. Firstly, a brief overview of the
overall framework for the assignment is introduced. This is followed by a discussion
and justiﬁcation for the chosen headway distribution for the frequency-based services.
After this a description of transfers between frequency- and schedule-based services
and vice versa is made. The assignment parameters are then introduced and used to
calculate the costs for a comparable scenario with diﬀerent combinations of schedule- and
frequency-based services. This is followed by a description of the choice set generation
idea for a uniﬁed model including examples of the challenges of dealing with both
schedule- and frequency-based services. A short description of possible discrete choice
models that could be applied is made and the section concludes with a description of
the network needed for the assignment and the relevant tables.
As it was described in the literature review there exist many diﬀerent model types and
the combinations of diﬀerent parts of a model give a large number of possible frameworks.
The chosen methodology for this model belongs to the model types which explicitly
enumerates all the possible paths that can be included in the choice set and then applies
a discrete choice model to distribute the ﬂow across the alternatives in the choice set.
Overall the model can be described by the following terms:
• Explicit enumeration of possible paths - not arc-based with sequential choices
• Application of choice models using Random Utility Models - not deterministic
with all-or-nothing assignment
• Dynamic model including the time dimension - not a static model with no time
dimension
• Analytical model with same results every time it is used - not using simulation
where each model run can yield a diﬀerent result
• No capacity constraints for vehicles - not including eﬀects as fail-to-sit probability,
in-vehicle crowding or fail-to-board probabilities
• No delays in the network - no irregularities for vehicles
The two last points highlight the limitations of this thesis described in section 1.2. The
model should also be an analytic model that creates the same output each time it is
applied to the same input. The model also needs to, in some way, include the time
dimension. Some car assignment models are dynamic, or at least pseudo dynamic, with
varying travel times during the day. This part is implicitly taken care of in public
transport assignment, as the travel times are diﬀerent for peak hours vs. non-peak hours.
But the main diﬀerence between car assignment and public transport assignment is,
that some links in the network are only available at discrete times during the day i.e.
when the bus or train departs. This makes public transport assignment quite diﬀerent
to car assignment, as passengers can (and have to) wait in nodes until the link becomes
available i.e. a service departs. This part will become more clear in the following
descriptions of the model.
18
==PAGE:29==
DTU Management Engineering
3.1
Description of headway for frequency-based services
One of the main assumptions and background for a typical frequency-based model is
the distribution of headway for the lines in the network. As frequency-based lines are
included in this model there is a need to ﬁnd a good distribution to describe the headway
for these lines.
The description of headway for frequency-based services is very important, as it describes
how long the passenger will wait before boarding a service. This inﬂuences the level of
service for the passenger and is therefore crucial to describe in the best possible way.
However, the aim of this thesis is not to estimate the headway based on data analysis,
but rather to ﬁnd a suitable distribution, which can be used in a uniﬁed model. First a
description of the most frequently used distributions in the literature is described. But
as it will be shown these distributions do not ﬁt well into a network with no delays and
therefore two other distributions are discussed.
3.1.1
Distributions used in the literature
In the literature the exponential distribution has been commonly used to describe the
headway in frequency-based models (see i.e Chriqui and Robillard (1975) and Schm¨ocker
et al. (2013)). Li et al. (2015) estimated headway distributions for buses based on real life
data and found that the exponential distribution did not describe the headway as good
as for example gamma or Erlang distributions. The reason that these distributions give a
good ﬁt is because of the phenomenon known as bus bunching (Gentile and Noekel, 2016,
Chapter 2). Bus bunching occurs when a bus is delayed and the number of passengers
that board are increasing because the headway to the bus in front has increased. This
means that the headway to the bus behind is decreased and this phenomenon is called
bus bunching. This results in passengers observing irregular headways and thereby
waiting times.
The gamma, Poisson and exponential distributions could all possibly describe the waiting
time as they are bounded at zero. In this way it is ensured, that no negative waiting
times will occur. Buses and trains in the real world run in continuous time, but in public
transport assignment the time is often discretized into minutes, as schedules for public
transport are only published in whole minutes in the public timetable (see i.e. Movia
(2017b)).
In ﬁgure 11 the cumulative distribution functions for all three distributions are shown
for an average of 2 and 5 minutes. These numbers should indicate half of the headway
as an average waiting time, as suggested to be the case in many models (Gentile and
Noekel, 2016, Chapter 6). All of the distributions have long tails, and this does not ﬁt
well with the assumption of the model, that all headways are regular. Having either of
the candidate distributions would result in having a probability to wait more than one
headway length. Taking for example the Poisson distribution with an average waiting
time of 2 minutes (headway of 4 minutes), results in having 5% probability of waiting
more than 4 minutes. This is not realistic in a model that assumes regular headways.
19
==PAGE:30==
DTU Management Engineering
0
5
10
15
Waiting time
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
prob
CDF of gamma, poisson and exponential distributions
Gamma(2,1)
Gamma(5,1)
Poisson(2)
Poisson(5)
Exponential(2)
Exponential(5)
Figure 11: Cummulative density function for selected distribution types
Before jumping to distributions that ﬁt in a model with no delays one important aspect
of a uniﬁed model must be discussed. As it will be shown in the next subsection (3.2),
there is a need to ﬁnd a distribution where the sum (convolution) of two (and many)
independent distributions with diﬀerent means lead to a new distribution of closed
form. For an exponential distribution the sum of two distributions is only convoluting
if the mean is the same for both distributions. But for both the poisson and gamma
distributions two distributions with diﬀerent means (shapes) will result in the same
distribution with the sum of the parameters describing headway, as described in the
equations below:
n
X
i=1
Poisson(λi) ∼Poisson(
n
X
i=1
λi)
λi > 0
(7)
n
X
i=1
Gamma(αi, β) ∼Gamma(
n
X
i=1
αi, β)
αi > 0, β > 0
(8)
For a model which includes vehicle delays these distributions could possibly be used,
but as this model will not include delays there is a need to ﬁnd a bounded distribution
which can be convoluted.
20
==PAGE:31==
DTU Management Engineering
3.1.2
Distribution describing regular headway
There is one obvious distribution for regular headways - the discrete uniform distribution.
The discrete uniform distribution takes in two parameters - minimum and maximum
U(a, b) where both must be integers. In the discrete uniform distribution all outcomes
are equally likely, which is the same assumption as for regular headways.
The convolution of two discrete uniform distributions with diﬀerent means becomes
a trapezoidal distribution, as shown below with the convolution of two distribution
for a headway of 3 and 5 minutes. The trapezoidal distribution can be described in a
closed form, which makes it suitable to describe the combined waiting time if taking
two frequency-based services after each other.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Waiting time
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
Probability
Convolution of two discrete uniform distributions with max 5 and 3
Figure 12: PDF of convolution of two uniform discrete distributions with diﬀerent means
However, the convolution of more than two independent discrete uniform distributions
does not convolute to a new distribution with closed form. In ﬁgure 13 and 14 the
convolution of three and four discrete uniform distributions is seen. As it can be seen
from the ﬁgures the probability distributions tend to move towards a normal distribution
with bounds, which would also be the intuition following the central limit theorem, which
states that the sum of many common distributions lead to a normal distribution4. But
for the cases of convolutions of more than two discrete uniform distributions there exists
no closed form and the probabilities for each outcome must be enumerated algorithmic.
The problem with convolutions of multiple discrete uniform distributions led to an
investigation of whether there exists any distribution which followed the criteria below:
• Bounded on a ﬁnite interval from zero to a maximum value
• Can be convoluted with diﬀerent means (multiple distributions can be summed)
• Either continuous or discrete
Such a distribution exists in the binomial distribution. The Binomial distribution is a
discrete distribution that can be convoluted if it has the same probability of success.
4For a description of the central limit theorem see (Fischer, 2011)
21
==PAGE:32==
DTU Management Engineering
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Waiting time
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
Probability
Convolution of three discrete uniform distributions with max 5,3 and 4
Figure 13: Convolution of three uniform discrete distributions
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Waiting time
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
Probability
Convolution of four discrete uniform distributions with max 5,3,4 and 2
Figure 14: Convolution of four uniform discrete distributions
The distribution takes two inputs:
• n ∈N0 - a non-negative number which originally describes number of trials, but
can also describe headway
• p ∈[0, 1] - describes success probability and determines the mean of the distribution
The Binomial distribution is notated as follows:
Bino(N, p)
(9)
The mean of the distribution is given as N ∗p. In terms of no knowledge about the
headway it can be assumed that the parameter p should be 0.5, as this gives a mean
waiting time of half the headway. This value will be assumed in this report.
The distribution can be convoluted if the distribution have the same parameter p. This
22
==PAGE:33==
DTU Management Engineering
means that:
Bino(N1, p) + Bino(N2, p) = Bino(N1 + N2, p)
(10)
or more generally:
n
X
i=1
Bino(Ni, p) ∼Bino(
n
X
i=1
ni, p)
0 < p < 1
ni = 1, 2, ...
(11)
The pdf of the distribution is given as:
Pr(X = k) = (n
k )pk(1 −p)n−k
(12)
The cdf of the distribution is given as:
Pr(X ≤k) =
k
X
i=0
(n
i )pi(1 −p)n−i
(13)
In ﬁgure 15 the probability density functions for three binomial distributions with
diﬀerent means can be seen. It can be seen that the distribution is indeed ﬁnite and can
describe that a passenger can not wait more than one headway. But when it comes to
the statement of uniform headways this distribution violates the statement. However,
because it fulﬁlls the criteria mentioned, it is chosen to represent headway in the rest of
this report.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Waiting time
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
prob
PDF of binomial distributions
Binomial(4,0.5)
Binomial(10,0.5)
Binomial(14,0.5)
Figure 15: Probability density function for three binomial distributions
23
==PAGE:34==
DTU Management Engineering
3.2
Transfer types in a mixed network
Having established and argued for the choice of headway distribution this subsection
discusses the diﬀerent types of transfers in a mixed network. The introduction of both
schedule- and frequency-based services in one assignment model requires handling some
special cases when transferring between the two service types. There are four diﬀerent
types of transfers which are shown in table 1. The four diﬀerent transfer types are
described in more detail in the following including examples of the cases.
Table 1: Waiting times for transfers between schedule- and frequency-based services
Transfer
from/to
A) SB line
B) FB line
A) SB line
The transfer
time is
deterministic
(Case 1)
Transfer time
from statistical
distribution
(Case 2)
B) FB line
Probability to
catch next
service and for
this an
associated
transfer time
(Case 3)
Transfer time
follow statistical
distribution
(Case 4)
Case 1: Transfer between two schedule-based services
As the model is assumed to be regular with no delays, the case of a transfer between
two schedule-based services is deterministic and given by the arrival and departure time
at a stop. The following condition must be true, if the transfer is possible:
tarr ≤tdep
(14)
The transfer time (TT) is then given as:
TT = tdep −tarr
(15)
where t deﬁnes the time in minutes. An example of a transfer between two schedule-based
lines is given in ﬁgure 16. Line one has a driving time of 10 minutes and departs at
minutes 0. It then arrives at stop 1 at minute 10 and there is then a waiting time of
5 minutes until departure with line 2 at minute 15. The driving time of line 2 is also
10 minutes and arrival at the destination is therefore at minute 25. All cases of these
transfers are easy to solve, as they are deterministic.
24
==PAGE:35==
DTU Management Engineering
0
10
15
25
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Origin
Stop 1
Destination
Time
Schedule- to Schedule-based Transfer
Line 1
Line 2
Figure 16: Example of transfer from a schedule-based to a schedule-based service
Case 2: Transfer from schedule-based to frequency-based services
When transferring from a schedule-based to a frequency-based line, the waiting time at
the transfer is only dependent on the headway distribution. When the passenger arrives
at the stop, he has no information on when the frequency-based service leaves, and it
must therefore be decided by the headway distribution.
The expected arrival time at the destination can be described by the driving times and
the waiting time a stop 1.
Arrdest = 10 + Bino(5, 0.5) + 10
(16)
The expected arrival time would therefore be at minute 22.5 (10 + 5 ∗0.5 + 10).
10
20
15
25
5
5
0
Origin
Stop 1
Destination
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Time
Schedule- to Frequency-based Transfer
FB (5)
SB Line
Figure 17: Example of transfer from a schedule-based to a frequency-based service
25
==PAGE:36==
DTU Management Engineering
Case 3: Transfer from frequency-based to schedule-based services
When transferring from a frequency-based service to a schedule-based service the arrival
time at the transfer stop is given by a probability distribution. This results in an
uncertainty of whether a given run of line 2 can be reached. In the example in ﬁgure 18
the ﬁrst line is a frequency-based line with a headway of 5 minutes. The connecting line
has a run departing at minute 12 and minute 22 (headway of 10 minutes). As the ﬁrst
run departs before the maximum arrival time to stop 1, there is only a given probability
to catch the ﬁrst run. This probability to catch the ﬁrst run is 0.5 as shown in the
following equation:
ProbSB1 = Pr(X ≤2) =
2
X
i=0
(5
i )0.5i(1 −0.5)5−i = 0.5
(17)
The probability to catch the second run is 1, as all of the probability distribution is
below minute 22. So if the ﬁrst run is not caught, then the rest of the probability is to
catch the second run. The expected arrival time at the destination is then at minute 27
as follows by the following equation:
Arrdest = 0.5 ∗22 + 0.5 ∗32 = 27
(18)
0
10
5
5
12
22
22
32
Origin
Stop 1
Destination
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Time
Frequency- to Schedule-based Transfer
FB (5)
SB 1
SB 2
Figure 18: Example of transfer from a frequency-based to a schedule-based service
Case 4: Transfer between two frequency-based services
When transferring between two frequency-based services there are two headway distri-
butions in place. First the distribution for the ﬁrst line and then for the second line.
This is where the convolution of two probability distributions come into place.
Looking at the example in ﬁgure 19 there are two frequency-based lines which both
have a driving time of 10 minutes. The ﬁrst line has a distribution of 4 minutes and the
second line a distribution of 5 minutes. To describe the expected arrival time to the
26
==PAGE:37==
DTU Management Engineering
destination the sum of the two independent headway distributions needs to be included.
In the equation below the arrival at the destination is described.
Arrdest = 10 + 10 + Bino((4 + 5), 0.5)
(19)
The expected arrival time at the destination is minute 24.5 (10 + 10 + 9 ∗0.5).
4
4
0
10
25
19
9
34
9
Origin
Stop 1
Destination
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Time
Frequency- to Frequency-based Transfer
FB (4)
FB (5)
Figure 19: Example of transfer from a frequency-based to a frequency-based service
Example of trip with two frequency-based and one schedule-based service
The convolution of probability distributions comes especially into play, when a trip
consists of two frequency-based services which connects to a schedule-based service.
When this is the case, it is important to be able to describe the probability to catch the
schedule-based service, and this is only possible, if it is only one distribution describing
the probability to catch a service. In the example in ﬁgure 20 an example with two
frequency-based services with respectively a headway of four and ﬁve minutes are
connecting to a schedule-based service with a headway of 8 minutes. To describe the
probability to catch the ﬁrst candidate on the schedule-based line the two headways for
the frequency-based services are summed. The probability is then calculated to be 50%
using equation 20 below.
ProbSB1 = Pr(X ≤4) =
4
X
i=0
(9
i )0.5i(1 −0.5)9−i = 0.5
(20)
If the ﬁrst candidate is not reached, the passenger is guaranteed to reach the second
candidate. The expected arrival time at the destination is then at minute 25 (21 ∗0.5 +
29 ∗0.5).
27
==PAGE:38==
DTU Management Engineering
4
4
17
8
13
9
9
22
17
21
25
29
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Cost
Distance
Example of Need for Convolution
FB (4)
FB (5)
SB 1
SB 2
Origin
Stop 1
Stop 2
Desnaon
Figure 20: Example of trip with two frequency-based services connecting to a schedule-based service
3.3
Level of service for the four cases in comparable scenarios
After the description of the diﬀerent cases of transfer types, this section tries to compare
the level of service (LOS) in a comparable scenario with the four mentioned cases. First
the parameters used in the calculation of costs for the diﬀerent scenario are shown and
then a small example is used to illustrate the diﬀerences in representing the supply as
schedule- or frequency-based.
3.3.1
Parameters and utility function
Many studies have shown, that passengers do not weight the diﬀerent time components
in a trip in the same way (see i.e. Anderson (2013, Section 6.17) for an overview of
estimated model parameters in the literature). For the purpose of this thesis, the weights
used in the Danish National Transport Model will be applied. In table 2 the route
choice parameters that are currently in use in the model are shown. It is important
to note, that the route choice parameters in the National Transport Model are only
used for an all-or-nothing assignment, and therefore do not necessarily ﬁt into a discrete
choice model. However, the parameters for leisure travel are not very diﬀerent from
the parameters estimated in Anderson et al. (2014, Table 5), where they estimate a
PSC-Logit model. As this thesis will not include the PSC-factor in the results, it is
considered that the parameters in table 2 will be suﬃcient to prove the ideas behind a
uniﬁed model.
The parameters in table 2 show, that riding in Metro and S-train is preferred compared
to riding on bus and train. Riding in a train is preferred compared to bus. From
the other parameters it is seen, that one minute of hidden waiting time in the zone is
comparable to around two minutes of waiting time at a stop. Waiting time is therefore
preferred compared to walking between stops and access/egress from home to stop and
vice versa. The only component of the utility function that is not time dependent is the
transfer penalty which is equivalent to around 4-5 minutes of in-vehicle time depending
on the type of service.
28
==PAGE:39==
DTU Management Engineering
When looking at the diﬀerences between the two trip purposes, the two parameters that
diﬀers most are hidden waiting time and transfer penalty. For the hidden waiting time
the higher parameter for leisure trips could be explained by the fact that many leisure
trips have a set starting time at the destination, and therefore would rather take a longer
journey, that then minimizes the hidden waiting time at the destination. Moreover, the
passengers on leisure trips have a higher preference for not transferring than commuters.
Table 2: Route choice parameters (weights) from LTM
Type
Symbol
Commute
Leisure
Leisure/Commute
In-vehicle train
βIV T,t
0.53
0.18
34%
In-vehicle S-train
βIV T,s
0.43
0.15
34%
In-vehicle bus
βIV T,b
0.56
0.19
34%
In-vehicle metro
βIV T,m
0.42
0.14
34%
Hidden wait (Zone wait)
βHW
0.28
0.12
42%
Connector time
βCon
0.64
0.21
33%
Wait time
βWait
0.58
0.20
35%
Walking time
βWalk
0.63
0.21
33%
Transfer penalty
βTP
2.15
1.05
49%
Given the parameters in table 2 the total utility of a route consists of the terms shown
in equation 21:
Vkn =
X
m
βIV T,mIV Tm + βHWHiddenWaitT + βConConT
(21)
+βWalkWalkT + βWaitWaitT + βTPTransfers
where m deﬁnes the four submodes and ConT deﬁnes connector time (access/egress).
For the examples and results that are included in this report the cost of a route is
calculated using the parameters for leisure.
3.3.2
Description of scenario and results for each case
The scenario, as described in ﬁgure 21, is very simple. The trip goes from origin (O) to
destination (D) and goes via the transfer node T. Both lines are buses and go respectively
from O to T and T to D. Both buses run with a headway of 6 minutes and both have a
travel time of 10 minutes. It is assumed that no walking time at the transfer is needed.
It is also assumed, that the passenger wants to wait at the origin if the departure is
known (schedule-based), and hence having a hidden waiting time instead of waiting at
the stop.
Figure 21: Small example with 3 stops
29
==PAGE:40==
DTU Management Engineering
Case 1: Schedule- to schedule-based services
When transferring between two schedule-based buses the travel time is deterministic
and therefore relying on how the planners have planned the coordination. Figure 22
shows four diﬀerent examples of how coordination of services aﬀect the level of service.
In ﬁgure 22A the ﬁrst line departs at minute ﬁve and there is a transfer time of 5 minutes
to the connecting service, which is the worst possible coordination of the two lines and
results in an arrival time in minute 30. In ﬁgure 22B the buses are better coordinated
and there is no transfer time or hidden wait time which gives an arrival time at minute
20. There is therefore a much better LOS as the planners has ensured a good connection
between the two lines. The ﬁrst line is also well coordinated with the desired departure
time, which makes this trip the best possible.
Another example of a trip where the two lines are schedule-based is the scenario shown
in ﬁgure 22C. Here the hidden waiting time is 3 minutes and the transfer time in stop
T is 3 minutes which gives an arrival time in minute 26. In the example in ﬁgure 22D
the lines are perfectly coordinated with each other, but there is a hidden wait time of 3
minutes.
5
15
20
30
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Origin
Stop T
Destination
Time
Schedule- to Schedule-based Transfer - Example 1
Line 1
Line 2
(A) Example of the worst coordination
0
10 10
20
0
5
10
15
20
25
Origin
Stop T
Destination
Time
Schedule- to Schedule-based Transfer - Example 2
Line 1
Line 2
(B) Example of good coordination
3
13
16
26
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Origin
Stop T
Destination
Time
Schedule- to Schedule-based Transfer - Example 3
Line 1
Line 2
(C) Example of long hidden wait time
2
12
12
22
0
5
10
15
20
25
Origin
Stop T
Destination
Time
Schedule- to Schedule-based Transfer - Example 4
Line 1
Line 2
(D) Example of perfect coordination
Figure 22: Examples of schedule- to schedule-based transfers
In table 3 the cost of each of the four schedule- to schedule-based service scenarios is
shown. The costs are naturally diﬀerent, as they depend on the desired departure time
and the coordination between the two lines. The best scenario is example 2 which has
the best possible outcome with a cost of 4.85, while example 1 has a cost of 6.43 because
of the bad coordination with desired departure time and transfer time.
30
==PAGE:41==
DTU Management Engineering
Table 3: Level of service for the four schedule- to schedule-based examples
Example
Hidden
wait time
Wait
time
In veh.
time
Arrival
time
Cost
1
5
5
20
30
6.43
2
0
0
20
20
4.85
3
3
3
20
26
5.80
4
2
0
20
22
5.08
Case 2: Schedule- to frequency-based service
In ﬁgure 23A an example of a schedule- to frequency-based service is shown. There is 3
minutes of hidden waiting time at the origin, and the mean waiting time at stop T is 3
minutes. This gives an expected arrival time at the destination in minute 26.
Another example of a schedule- to frequency-based transfer is shown in ﬁgure 23A. There
is no hidden waiting time, and the expected arrival time at the destination is minute 23.
19
29
13
23
6
6
3
13
Origin
Stop T
Destination
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Time
Schedule- to Frequency-based Transfer - Example 1
Line 2
Line 1
(A) Example of long hidden wait time
10
20
16
26
6
6
0
Origin
Stop T
Destination
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Time
Schedule- to Frequency-based Transfer - Example 2
Line 2
Line 1
(B) Example of no hidden wait time
Figure 23: Examples of schedule- to frequency-based transfers
In table 4 the LOS of each of the 2 schedule- to frequency-based service scenarios is
shown. The diﬀerence in the cost between the two examples is only dependent on the
hidden wait time at the origin.
Table 4: Level of service for the two schedule- to frequency-based examples
Example
Hidden
wait time
Wait
time
In veh.
time
Arrival
time
Cost
1
3
3
20
26
5.80
2
0
3
20
23
5.45
Case 3: Frequency to schedule-based service
In the case of a frequency- to schedule-based service transfer, there is an average waiting
time at the origin of 3 minutes, while the transfer time depends on the oﬀset of the
corresponding line. In ﬁgure 24A one example is shown, where there is a total of two
minutes waiting time for the ﬁrst candidate, which can be reached with a probability
31
==PAGE:42==
DTU Management Engineering
of 34% and the second candidate can be reached with 100% probability. The expected
arrival time is then at minute 26 (22 ∗0.34 + 0.66 ∗28).
As another example the ﬁrst candidate of line 2 could depart at minute 15, giving a total
waiting time at origin and stop T of 5 minutes. The probability to catch the service is
98%. The second candidate can be reached with 100% probability with a total waiting
time of 11 minutes. The expected arrival time is at minute 25 (25 ∗0.98 + 31 ∗0.02).
0
10
6
6
6
16
12
22
18
28
Origin
Stop T
Destination
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Time
Frequency- to Schedule-based Transfer - Example 1
Line 1
Line 2 (1)
Line 2 (2)
(A) Low probability to catch ﬁrst candidate
0
10
6
6
6
16
15
25
21
31
Origin
Stop T
Destination
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Time
Frequency- to Schedule-based Transfer - Example 2
Line 1
Line 2 (1)
Line 2 (2)
(B) High probability to catch ﬁrst candidate
Figure 24: Examples of frequency- to schedule-based transfers
The results of the two examples are seen in table 5. The costs of the two scenarios
are not very diﬀerent from each other, as the higher probability of catching the ﬁrst
candidate in the second scenario more than levels out the probability to arrive early
with the ﬁrst scenario. It is notable that the cost for the two scenarios are higher than
the scenarios for case 2. This is because the waiting time at the origin is described with
the waiting time parameter, because the passenger needs to be at the stop to have the
probability to catch the service.
Table 5: Level of service for the two frequency- to schedule-based examples
Example
Hidden
wait time
Wait
time
In veh.
time
Arrival
time
Cost
Prob
1 - ﬁrst candidate
0
2
20
22
5.25
34%
1 - second candidate
0
8
20
28
6.45
66%
1 - total
0
6
20
26
6.04
100%
2 - ﬁrst candidate
0
5
20
25
5.85
98%
2 - second candidate
0
11
20
31
7.05
2%
2 - total
0
5
20
25
5.87
100%
Case 4: Frequency- to frequency-based service
In the frequency- to frequency-based service example, there is only one possible solution,
as the waiting time at the origin is given by a distribution and so is the waiting time at
stop T. This means that the arrival time at the destination is given as the in-vehicle
times plus the convolution of the two waiting time distributions. The expected arrival
32
==PAGE:43==
DTU Management Engineering
time is at minute 26 (20 + (6 + 6) ∗0.5). The average total waiting time is then 6
minutes.
6
6
6
0
16
10
20
22
12
32
12
Origin
Stop 1
Destination
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Time
Frequency- to Frequency-based Transfer
Line 1
Line 2
Figure 25: Example with frequency- to frequency-based transfer
The expected cost of the frequency- to frequency-based example is given in table 6. The
expected cost is higher than for most of the other scenarios because the waiting time at
the origin is at the high waiting time cost, and because the average waiting time at stop
T is 3 minutes.
Table 6: Level of service for the frequency- to frequency-based example
Example
Hidden
wait time
Wait
time
In veh.
time
Arrival
time
Cost
1
0
6
20
26
6.05
3.3.3
Comparison of the four cases
In table 7 the results for each of the 9 examples are summarized. As it can be seen the
cost is quite diﬀerent from the best scenario with a cost of 4.85 to the highest cost of
6.43. It is not surprising, that the diﬀerent scenarios result in diﬀerent levels of service,
as it is really dependent on how the lines are coordinated. One important result is the
fact, that the frequency- to frequency-based scenario give a higher cost than comparable
scenarios. This is primarily because all waiting time is considered with the high waiting
time parameter, because the passenger can’t wait at the origin, but must wait at the
stop. It is also important to note, that the scenarios with frequency- to schedule-based
transfers lead to a high cost, because there is either a low probability to catch the ﬁrst
candidate giving a low cost and then have to wait a long time for the second candidate
or there is a high probability to catch the ﬁrst candidate but to a high cost.
So these examples with relatively short travel times show that the scenarios with
frequency-based services lead to more average costs and higher than comparable scenarios
with schedule-based services. With the assumptions of the waiting times for frequency-
based services, there can never be very short waiting times. So a situation with well
coordinated lines can not be represented with frequency-based services.
33
==PAGE:44==
DTU Management Engineering
Table 7: Level of service for the diﬀerent cases and examples
Case
Example
Hidden
wait time
Wait
time
In veh.
time
Arrival
time
Cost
SB to SB
1
5
5
20
30
6.43
SB to SB
2
0
0
20
20
4.85
SB to SB
3
3
3
20
26
5.80
SB to SB
4
2
0
20
22
5.08
SB to FB
1
3
3
20
26
5.80
SB to FB
2
0
3
20
23
5.45
FB to SB
1
0
6
20
26
6.04
FB to SB
2
0
5
20
25
5.87
FB to FB
1
0
6
20
26
6.05
3.4
Choice set generation
As the use of a choice model requires each choice set to have more than one possible
alternative, the algorithm to ﬁnd possible paths must be able to ﬁnd more than one
alternative. In section 2.2 diﬀerent choice set generation techniques were described and
of the mentioned techniques only the deterministic ones are relevant for this study, as
the model should not include any simulation.
So assuming the use of a deterministic technique leaves three possible candidates - link
elimination, link penalty and branch & bound. The link elimination and link penalty
techniques require multiple shortest path searches and require decisions on which link
to eliminate in each search or how to penalize used links.
The use of the link elimination technique arises a problem of ”cutting” a network.
Consider for example the danish intercity train network where the only connection
between Jutland and Sealand is the link across the great belt (Korsør to Nyborg). If
this link was eliminated in an iteration, there would be no opportunity to generate a
reasonable route between Sealand and Jutland. There could be generated routes via
Rødby and Germany if this part was included in the model, but this would not be
reasonable routes to include in a choice set. So the link elimination technique is not
chosen. The link penalty technique is also not considered further due to lack of which
links to penalize in each iteration and because the idea described below seems more
attractive.
3.4.1
Choice set generation using the event dominance principle
In previous studies by Friedrich et al. (2001) and Hoogendoorn-Lanser et al. (2014) they
used Branch & Bound techniques to generate a choice set in a schedule-based network.
They incorporated diﬀerent behavioral constraints to limit the choice set and generate
realistic alternatives. In Hoogendoorn-Lanser et al. (2014) they developed diﬀerent
criteria that should be fulﬁlled by a feasible route. If one criterion was not met, the
route could not be included in the choice set. Obvious criteria was departure after
34
==PAGE:45==
DTU Management Engineering
arrival time at a node, and that routes should not include circles. After this criteria on
time, space and money were used to prune out non-reasonable alternatives.
The idea of using diﬀerent rules is the idea to the following algorithm to generate
a proper choice set in a mixed network with schedule- and frequency-based services.
The idea is to build upon the event dominance principle in Florian (1999; 2004) with
introduction of a relaxation of the event dominance considering a threshold for including
non-optimal paths.
The event dominance algorithm is, in its original implementation, used to ﬁnd the
shortest path in a schedule-based network. It ﬁnds only the best path in terms of cost
of a route, however, with a slight modiﬁcation more routes can be found if there is
not a strict event dominance at each node. The original event dominance algorithm is
described in algorithm 1
while an event at end node has not been checked do
Find cheapest event in heap, which has not been checked
for all possible event types going from the node considered do
Check if event can be inserted based on criteria on both time and cost compared
to the events already at the tonode;
if can be inserted then
Insert event
Check if any event already existing event is dominated and remove
dominated events
end
end
Algorithm 1: Overall idea of the shortest path search using event dominance
In algorithm 2 the full algorithm is described as it was implemented in Emme2 (Florian,
1999). The main part of the algorithm is the check for whether events are dominated.
An event (E2) is considered dominated if any earlier event (E1) fulﬁlls the following
statement:
E1TotalCost + (E2EndTime −E1EndTime) ∗βWait) ≤E2TotalCost
(22)
The possible events are all the movements in the network. The movements in the
network can be described with the following events:
• Access or egress network on connectors
• Ride on line (schedule- or frequency-based)
• Transfer between stops
• Waiting at stop (handled implicitly)
• Transfer penalty (cost handled implicitly)
All events in the event list are either access/egress, riding in an vehicle or transferring
between stops. The waiting time at a stop is computational a part of the riding arcs,
where the waiting time is assigned to the arc in the dynamic search by looking at the
end time of the previous event. The transfer penalty is also a part of the riding arcs
35
==PAGE:46==
DTU Management Engineering
and is applied when the previous event was a transfer or a ride with another line5. The
total cost of an event is the cost of the previous event plus the cost of the event.
It is important to note, that the dominance is always only on events ending at the
same node. The event dominance criterion ensures that if it is cheaper to arrive with
the earlier event (E1) and waiting until the arrival time of E2 then the later event is
not considered further. This domination rule can be seen by the ﬁgures below. In the
example there are ﬁve existing events at the node (A-E) and two possible new events
(X and Y). The purple area deﬁnes the area where new events are dominated and the
sloped punctured line deﬁnes the cost for waiting after arriving with an event.
As it is seen in ﬁgure 26A the event X is dominated by event B and C, as it is more
attractive to arrive with event B or C and wait until the time of arrival with event X.
The other new event Y is not dominated by any of the existing events as it has the
lowest cost of all events. So event Y should be inserted to the list of non-dominated
events at the node. It is then checked whether any of the existing events are dominated
by event Y. This is the case for event D and E, which are both dominated by the new
event, and they are therefore removed from the heap.
(A) Check for new events X and Y
(B) After deletion of events
Figure 26: Original implementation of event dominance (Florian, 1999)
The algorithm shown below uses the event dominance principle as shown in the ﬁgures
above. Ec describes the event in the heap which is considered when checking for new
events, and Ep are the potential events following Ec. Eh are events already in the heap.
The implementation below only allows optimal paths to exist, as dominated events will
be removed from the heap.
5Transferring directly from a previous riding arc is possible if two lines share the same stopping
point and thereby the same stop in the model
36
==PAGE:47==
DTU Management Engineering
while an event at the end node has not been checked do
Find cheapest event in heap which has not been checked (Ec)
for all possible events (Ep) do
if Ep.FromNode == Ec.ToNode AND Ep.StartTime ≥Ec.EndTime then
dominated = 0;
for all Events in the heap (Eh) do
if Ep.ToNode == Eh.ToNode AND
Eh.EndTime ≤Ep.EndTime AND
Eh.TotalCost + (Ep.EndTime - Eh.EndTime) * βWait) ≤Ep.TotalCost
then
dominated = 1;
end
if dominated == 0 then
Insert Ep into event heap
for all events in the event heap (Eh) do
if Ep.ToNode == Eh.ToNode AND
Ep.EndTime ≤Eh.EndTime AND
(Ep.TotalCost + (Eh.EndTime - Ep.EndTime) * βWait) ≤
E2.TotalCost then
Remove Eh from event heap;
end
end
Set Ec.checked = 1;
end
Algorithm 2: Strict shortest path implementation using event dominance
3.4.2
Implementation of slack
The above implementation of event dominance does not lead to diﬀerent paths in the
network but will only ﬁnd the optimal path. However, if some slack compared to the
best event at a node is implemented in the checks for dominance, this could potentially
result in multiple paths being generated.
The implementation of a relaxation of the event dominance should rely on the travel cost
given as utility similar to the impedance cost described in Friedrich et al. (2001). In for
example Hoogendoorn-Lanser et al. (2014) they restrict the possible paths in terms of
separate constraints on the number of transfers or travel time, but as the parameters of
the utility function are a trade oﬀbetween the diﬀerent components compared to each
other, it would make more sense to cut-oﬀunattractive paths in terms of the weighted
utility measure.
The relaxation is proposed to be implemented as a slack of the best event (in terms of
cost) at the same node. In equation 3.4.2 below the proposed criteria is seen. For an
event E1 taking place before event E2, the event E2 is dominated if the statement is
true. The slack parameter is a given percentage ≥0%, and should represent a behavior,
that passengers consider alternatives that are for example 20% percent worse in terms
of cost compared to the optimal path to a given stop. This creates a threshold, so that
37
==PAGE:48==
DTU Management Engineering
non-reasonable paths are not included in the choice set.
(Eh.TotalCost + Eh.TotalCost ∗βslack) ≤Ep.TotalCost
(23)
However, this criterion alone does not guarantee the optimal solution. Therefore it is
proposed to have both the original event dominance rule and the slack parameter in
place. If a new event is not dominated by both the criteria, the event should be included
in the heap. This is shown in the equation below and a new event is only dominated if
both statements are true.
Eh.TotalCost + (Eh.EndTime −Ep.EndTime) ∗βWait) ≤Ep.TotalCost
(24)
(Eh.TotalCost + Eh.TotalCost ∗βslack) ≤Ep.TotalCost
(25)
The cost criteria could in principle be applied to all other events at the stop, but as
the other criteria only considers later events, this is also chosen for the relaxation. The
principle is shown in ﬁgure 27A where event X would then not be dominated, while
event E would still be dominated, as it has a higher cost than event Y plus the slack.
The events left in the heap after the domination using the slack is seen in ﬁgure 27B.
The updated algorithm is similar to algorithm 2 with the inclusion of the extra criterion.
In the implemented algorithm there has also been included a criteria so that paths can
not use the same stop twice, and this excludes possible cycles in the paths. The full
algorithm is shown in appendix A.2.
(A) Introduction of slack
(B) Remaining events when using slack
Figure 27: Event dominance but including slack to allow non optimal events
Introducing the slack on later arriving events naturally leads to a question on what
the threshold for non optimal paths should be. It has not been possible to ﬁnd any
literature for public transport assignment on how large such a threshold should be in
order to have a reasonable choice set. But for car assignment the work of Rasmussen
et al. (2017) showed that non optimal paths were for 95% of all observations less than
38
==PAGE:49==
DTU Management Engineering
20% higher than the minimum cost path. Even though there is no evidence of whether
the same ratio is valid for public transport assignment, the 20% slack will be used in
the analysis made in section 4.
3.4.3
Handling frequency-based services in the algorithm
The original algorithm of event dominance was developed for schedule-based services
only, but for the use in this framework there is a need to include the frequency-based
services. As there is a distribution for the arrival at the node, it must be considered how
to include these in the event dominance. First a description of the inclusion of arrivals
of frequency-based services is made and this is followed by a discussion of how to deal
with case 3, where transfers to schedule-based services lead to a probability to catch the
ﬁrst candidate.
Inclusion of frequency-based services
The choice set generation should be based on the behavior of the passenger. If the
passenger can go on a route using schedule-based services there is an exact arrival time
at the destination. But if the passenger uses a route with frequency-based services, the
passenger can only calculate an expected arrival time. To compare the two events at the
destination, an exact cost for the frequency-based arrival must be used. A small example
is shown in table 8 and ﬁgure 28. The ﬁrst possible arrival time for the frequency-based
service is at 07:50 with a cost of 4.5 and the latest arrival is at 07:55 at cost 5.5. Assuming
a slack of 20% the frequency-based event would dominate the schedule-based event if the
ﬁrst possible arrival time was used (4.6 ∗1.2 < 6). But given that there is a probability
distribution for the frequency-based arrival, the more correct comparison would be
between the expected arrival time of the frequency-based arrival and the schedule-based
arrival. Recall, that the mean of the probability distribution for a binomial distribution
is given as n ∗p, so the expected cost for the frequency-based arrival would be 5.1
(4.6 + (5.6 −4.6) ∗0.5). When this cost is compared to the schedule-based event, the
schedule-based arrival is not dominated as 5.1 ∗1.2 > 6. This implementation of the
excepted arrival time for frequency-based events is used in the implemented algorithm.
Table 8: Example of comparison of frequency- and schedule-based events
Route
Type
Arrival
Cost
1
Frequency-based
07:50-07:55
[4.6-5.6]
2
Schedule-based
08:00
6
O
D
Route 1 - Arr. 07:50-07:55
Route 2 - Arr. 08:00
Figure 28: Small example for event dominance between frequency- and schedule-based arrivals
39
==PAGE:50==
DTU Management Engineering
Inclusion of events with less than 100% probability
The case with events which can not be reached with 100% certainty gives rise to problems
of guaranteeing, that a path is always feasible i.e. there is a 100% probability to leave a
stop if the stop is part of a path in the choice set. To discuss this problem the example
in ﬁgure 29 is used. The situation described in the ﬁgure is a network which include
three lines. The ﬁrst line is a frequency-based line and from stop T two diﬀerent lines
can be boarded. It is assumed that line 2 and 3 follow diﬀerent paths from stop T to the
destination. The problem in this example is which events and thereby alternatives can
be included in the choice set. This is dependent on which events deﬁne the threshold
that all events should be below. In these examples the time dimension is for simplicity
excluded and the only criteria is therefore the threshold deﬁned by the slack.
9
15
21
11
18
0
5
10
15
20
25
Cost
Distance
Example 1 - Which Events are Defining Threshold
FB (4)
Line 2
Line 3
Origin
Stop T
Desnaon
Figure 29: Example 1 - which events should deﬁne the threshold
Line 2 and 3 follow diﬀerent paths to destination
If the threshold was deﬁned by the ﬁrst candidate on line 2, it would result in discarding
the second candidate of line 2 but keeping the alternative of line 3. This would result in
a choice set, where the alternative on line 2 is only possible with a probability of 69%.
But it is not possible to include alternatives which are not 100% certain in a choice
set, because the passenger can’t choose whether he reaches the ﬁrst alternative - this
is only given by the arrival time probability for the ﬁrst line. So in this case the only
alternative for the passenger would be to take line 3, because the alternative of line 2 is
not within the threshold with 100% probability. If the cost of line 3 had been higher at
the destination, the use of the ﬁrst candidate for the threshold would have resulted in
no feasible paths to the destination.
To overcome this problem it is proposed, that the events which should deﬁne the
threshold should only be events with a 100% probability. In the example this would
result in a cost of 18 as the lowest possible cost at the destination with 100% certainty.
In this example both candidates of line 2 are below the threshold of 21.6, and the choice
of taking line 2 would therefore be included with a cost of 16.8 assuming there is a 70%
to reach the ﬁrst candidate (15 ∗0.70 + 21 ∗0.30). This shows that the alternative with
line 2 should be included, as the expected cost of this alternative is lower than the cost
of the alternative with line 3.
40
==PAGE:51==
DTU Management Engineering
The behavioral justiﬁcation for only using the certain events would be, that passengers
are risk averse and will only consider alternatives which are always within the threshold
of the best alternative. Another slightly changed example is shown in ﬁgure 30. The
second candidate of line 2 would in this example be discarded because it has a 20%
higher cost than the cost of line 3 (18 ∗1.2 < 24). In this case the only alternative left
would be going on line 3, even though the expected cost of taking line 2 would be 17.7
(15 ∗0.7 + 24 ∗0.3).
10
15
24
11
18
0
5
10
15
20
25
Cost
Distance
Example 2 - Which Events are Defining Threshold
FB (4)
Line 2
Line 3
Origin
Stop T
Desnaon
Figure 30: Example 2 - which events should deﬁne the threshold
Line 2 and 3 follow diﬀerent paths to destination
It is important to note, that events that follow an event which is not 100% certain are
also not deﬁning any threshold at later stops, which ensures that the threshold is always
only deﬁned of certain paths.
When the paths within the threshold have arrived at the destination, it is important,
that paths using diﬀerent diﬀerent candidates when transferring from a frequency-based
to a schedule-based line are collected as one alternative, so that the probability of the
choice is 100%. This is done on line level, so that an alternative is a choice of the same
lines. It is important to note, that there might be some paths arriving to the destination
with a given probability, that might not have a second candidate that arrives with 100%
certainty. This is the case in ﬁgure 30 where the ﬁrst candidate on line 2 would arrive
to the destination, but the second candidate was not within the threshold. In this case
the path is discarded, as the passenger is not guaranteed to arrive within the threshold.
3.4.4
Uniqueness of routes
When using the developed algorithm with slack included, it is possible to get more
routes that overlaps in diﬀerent ways. There are several ways to limit the choice set
when considering overlap between routes. There is both spatial overlap and time overlap
that can be considered.
One way would be to only have the best route on line level, meaning that if two routes
consist of the exact same lines and stopping patterns, then only the best route should
be in the choice set. Another similar way would be to only have one route for each stop
sequence meaning a 100% spatial overlap. For example this could be, that there are two
41
==PAGE:52==
DTU Management Engineering
lines between stop 1 and 2, so on line level there should be two routes, but if only the
stop sequence is considered, then there should be only 1 route.
In this work only the best alternative of 100% overlapping routes is considered. It
is important to note, that for schedule-based services only the ﬁrst available run is
considered to be inserted, unless it is a transfer from a frequency-based services where
all runs are considered until 100% probability is reached. Further research should
test diﬀerent options of excluding overlapping routes, but another way of dealing with
overlapping routes is frequency aggregation which is described below.
3.4.5
Frequency aggregation in a mixed network
The red-blue bus problem is a very common problem within public transport assignment
and is in some way linked to the problem of overlapping routes. The problem has been
discussed several times in for example Chriqui and Robillard (1975) and Nielsen (2000).
The problem faced is, that passengers may not perceive lines as diﬀerent, if they serve
the same sections and stops. Nielsen (2000) used a frequency-based model and discussed
that aggregation for terminal pairs should only happen if the lines are of the same
sub-mode and have similar travel times. This seems to be a reasonable consideration, as
passengers would only consider two lines as one, if they were similar in terms of travel
time but also had the same parameter for in vehicle time which is primarily the case if
they are of same sub mode. As an example of a non-suitable frequency-aggregation, one
could take a trip from Nørreport to Copenhagen Airport, where there are two realistic
alternatives - either taking the Metro with a driving time of 16 minutes or the regional
train which takes 19 minutes. From the passengers point of view there are both a
diﬀerence in driving time and sub-mode, but also the Metro is frequency-based whereas
the regional train runs with a given schedule.
If two lines were of the same sub mode and served the same stops but where respectively
schedule- and frequency-based it would be diﬃcult to make a consistent frequency
aggregations. Take an example of the case with a schedule- and frequency-based service
serving the same terminals as shown in ﬁgure 31. Here a frequency-based service runs
with a headway of 7 minutes, while a schedule-based service also runs with a headway of
7 minutes. The driving time of both lines are 10 minutes. We assume that both lines are
of the same sub-mode, for example bus. The blue colors indicate for each interval one
departure of the frequency-based line. The departure within each interval is unknown.
This means, that it is not known whether the lines are coordinated or not. It could be,
that the frequency-based line departs in minute 1, 8, 15, 22, 29, in which case the lines
are perfectly coordinated and the passenger would perceive the frequency as the sum of
departures. But it could also be, that the frequency-based line departs on the minutes
as the schedule-based line, in which case, the passenger would not have any waiting
time reduction.
42
==PAGE:53==
DTU Management Engineering
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Stop 1
Stop 2
Time
Distance
Frequency-based
Schedule-based
Figure 31: Example of coordination of schedule- and frequency-based services with same headways
The example with equal headways might not be so relevant, as lines with the same
headway would in a real life situation mostly be of the same type (either frequency- or
schedule-based). In the case of diﬀerent headways, there would, in some periods, be a
coordination between the lines and in some periods there would not. An example of this
is shown in ﬁgure 32, where the frequency-based line has a headway of 7 minutes, while
the schedule-based line has a headway of 10 minutes. This means that the passenger
would only experience a higher frequency in certain periods, while at other times the
departures on each line would be close to each other. In this case it might not be
reasonable to aggregate the lines and the modeler could instead keep them separate.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Stop 1
Stop 2
Time
Distance
Frequency-based
Schedule-based
Figure 32: Example of coordination of schedule- and frequency-based services with diﬀerent headways
The problem of uneven headways and thereby coordination in some intervals only, is
also present for schedule-based services with diﬀerent headways. As it will be shown in
the analysis in section 4.2.3 there are situations in which frequency aggregation makes
sense. Especially when the services are high frequency and with similar travel times, it
makes sense for the passenger to consider them as one option. The diﬀerence between
aggregating frequency-based lines compared to schedule-based lines is, that it is possible
to analyse the coordination between lines, which makes it easier to justify whether they
should be aggregated or not.
43
==PAGE:54==
DTU Management Engineering
In this report frequency aggregation is considered without considering coordination
between lines, but only considering the travel times and frequencies. To make the
frequency aggregation in a consistent way, some rules need to be set up. As the network
consists of direct arcs between all stop pairs on a line, the frequency aggregation will
also be on the direct arc level (direct arcs will be described in section 3.6). In equation
26 and 27 below, one of the statements need to be true to aggregate two lines. The ﬁrst
criteria is a relative criteria measuring the relative travel time between the two lines
which must be less than or equal to 15% diﬀerent. The other criteria is an absolute
criterion stating that if the absolute diﬀerence in travel time is less than or equal to two
minutes then the lines should be aggregated.
max(TTLine1, TTLine2)
min(TTLine1, TTLine2) ≤1.15
(26)
|TTLine1 −TTLine2| ≤2
(27)
, where TT is the travel time between the stops. If one of the rules applies, then the
lines are frequency aggregated using the following rules.
TT =
&FLine1 ∗TTLine1 + FLine2 ∗TTLine2
FLine1 + FLine2
'
(28)
H =
FLine1 + FLine2
60

(29)
, where F describes the number of departures pr. hour and H is the calculated headway
in minutes. The reason that the nearest integer is not used for the headway or travel
time instead of the ceiling of the number, is because it would overestimate the headway
and travel time if it was rounded down. It would give a low headway and also indicate
that lines are perfectly coordinated, which is normally not the case. The frequency of
the line is based on number of departures in one hour.
As a demonstration of the rules an example can be seen in ﬁgure 33. Here two lines
serve stop A, B and C, but with one line having a faster and more frequent service. As
the travel times are similar and with an absolute diﬀerence of maximum two minutes,
all direct links can be aggregated. This is shown in the bottom of the ﬁgure, where
the travel time from A to B is now 13 minutes with a frequency of 25 departures pr.
hour giving a headway of 3 minutes. When the direct arcs are frequency aggregated
they are transformed to a frequency-based arc instead of schedule-based arcs. If a strict
schedule-based network had been used, the frequency aggregated lines would need a
pseudo schedule to be included in the model.
44
==PAGE:55==
DTU Management Engineering
Figure 33: Frequency aggregation example
Top: original network - Bottom: aggregated network
3.5
Choice model application
This subsection describes two possible approaches for a choice model. The approaches
are the standard MNL and a recusive logit approach where the choice at each node is
decided by a MNL. The approaches will be described using the example below, where
ﬁve lines are included. A frequency-based line is running with a ﬁve minute headway to
stop A where the passenger can board either line 2 or 3. Line 2 is a direct service to the
destination, while the boarding of line 3 requires the passenger to change to either line
4 or 5 at stop B. It is assumed that the probability of catching the ﬁrst candidate of
line 3 is 50%.
O
A
B
D
Line 1
Line 2
Line 3
Line 4
Line 5
Figure 34: Network example for choice model application
5
5
30
17
24
23
32
26
34
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Cost
Distance
Example for Choice Model Application
Line 1 FB(5)
Line 2
Line 3
Line 4
Line 5
Origin
Stop A
Stop B
Desnaon
Figure 35: Cost graph of example for choice model application
45
==PAGE:56==
DTU Management Engineering
3.5.1
Multinomial Logit application
In the MNL model all alternatives are grouped on line level. This give three possible
paths from stop 1; take line 2 directly, take line 3 and transfer to line 4 or take line 3
and transfer to line 5. With the probability of catching the ﬁrst candidate on line 3
on 50% both paths using line 3 must be grouped. With this grouping the alternatives
can be seen in table 9. The results show that path 2 which uses line 1, 3 and 4 has by
far the highest probability and that the alternative using line 2 is not very attractive.
Given the choice probabilities and the cost of each alternative the overall cost of going
from origin to destination is 27.85 (30 ∗0.07 + 27.5 ∗0.86 + 30 ∗0.07).
Table 9: Results of MNL application
Path
Path sequence
Cost 1.
cand.
Cost 2.
cand.
Cost
Prob
1
Line 1 →2
30
-
30
7%
2
Line 1 →3 →4
23
32
27.5
86%
3
Line 1 →3 →5
26
34
30
7%
3.5.2
Recursive logit application
The idea in the MNL is to group the diﬀerent candidates into ”simple paths”, which
might not be so behaviorally realistic because passengers can reconsider their route
choice depending on if they reach the ﬁrst or second candidate on a line. The recursive
logit model as described in section 2.3 tries to distribute the ﬂow on the diﬀerent paths
considering for every node the expected cost to the destination. In the example in ﬁgure
34 the passenger have a choice at stop A between taking line 2 or 3 and at stop B whether
to take line 4 and 5. But the choice between line 4 and 5 will be diﬀerent depending on
whether the ﬁrst or second candidate of line 3 is reached. The recursive algorithm works
from destination and back to the origin and when there is a choice between two or more
lines a MNL is applied to distribute the ﬂow between the alternatives leaving that node.
In the example the two ﬁrst diversion points when looking from the destination and
back is the choice between line 4 and 5 for each of the two arrivals with line 3. The
choice is diﬀerent depending on which candidate of line 3 the passenger reaches, but as
it can be seen in table 10 the highest probability is for both cases to take line 4.
Table 10: Split between line 4 and 5 for the two candidates of line 3
Candidate
Line
Cost to
destination
Prob
First
Line 4
23
95%
Line 5
26
5%
Second
Line 4
32
88%
Line 5
34
12%
46
==PAGE:57==
DTU Management Engineering
The next choice that the passenger can take is whether to take line 2 or 3 at stop B. It is
important to note, that the passenger can not choose between the two candidates of line
3, but the probability for reaching the ﬁrst or second candidate is entirely dependent
on the arrival of line 1 at stop A. So the expected cost of taking line 3 must ﬁrst
be calculated. The expected costs of the two candidates of line 3 given the choice
probabilities of line 4 and 5 in table 10 are calculated below:
First = 23 ∗95% + 26 ∗5% = 23.1
(30)
Second = 32 ∗88% + 34 ∗12% = 32.2
(31)
The expected cost of selecting line 3 is then 27.7 (23.1 ∗0.5 + 32.2 ∗0.5). The passenger
then has the choice between line 2 and 3 and the choice probabilities are shown in table
11. With these probabilities the overall cost of going from origin to destination using
recursive logit becomes 27.89 when multiplying the probability and cost on arcs going
to the destination. The calculation of this cost can be found in appendix A.4.
Table 11: Split between line 2 and 3 given expected costs to destination
Line
Expected cost to
destination
Prob
Line 2
30.0
9%
Line 3
27.7
91%
3.5.3
Comparisons of the two models
When comparing the two overall overall costs there is a very small diﬀerence of only
0.04 between the cost using MNL on 27.85 and the cost using recursive logit on 27.89.
But the choice probabilities of each line are a little diﬀerent when comparing the two
model types. In ﬁgure 36 the ﬂow distribution across the diﬀerent lines can be seen.
The distribution of ﬂow is not much diﬀerent, but the distribution for i.e. line 4 is lower
using recursive logit while more ﬂow uses line 5 when using recursive logit.
O
A
B
D
100%
100%
93%
7%
86%
7%
8%
9%
91%
83%
Line 1
Line 2
Line 4
Line 5
Line 3
MNL
RL
Figure 36: Choice probabilities of the diﬀerent lines - MNL - Recursive logit
The results show that there is not much diﬀerence between the two model types, but it
is important to note that there could potentially be other examples, where the diﬀerence
would be higher. For the use in this report, the MNL model will be used since it
represents complete paths, which was one of the aims for this thesis to produce.
47
==PAGE:58==
DTU Management Engineering
3.6
Description of required input and network data
This subsection gives a brief overview of the required inputs to the developed assignment
model. First an example of a network is shown followed by a description of the required
input tables.
The network shown in ﬁgure 37 is an example of a network coded in the similar way as
the examples used in the following section. The networks are coded in ArcGIS. The
network is built up with a zonal structure, which has a centroid that is connected to
one or more stops through a connector. The stops indicate a speciﬁc stopping point and
not a stop group. In case of more stopping points at an intersection, there is one stop in
the network pr. stopping point and the passengers transfer from one stop to another
using the transfer links. The line elements are not line speciﬁc, but are used to visualize
the passenger volumes for the diﬀerent examples.
Figure 37: Example Network for Public Transport Assignment
The data inputs for the timetable and network consists of several tables, where some of
them are generated from the physical network described above and other from manually
coded timetables. A set of parameter P describe the route choice parameters and the
desired departure time along with the start and end node. The timetables are described
for both the schedule- S and frequency-based F lines with line identiﬁcation and the
travel times between the diﬀerent stops. The tables describing transfer links T, nodes
N and connectors C are all input coming from the physical model. The last two tables
including lines L and service types ST include information used for the diﬀerent lines
in the network. A full list of the included variables in each set is found in appendix A.5.
48
==PAGE:59==
DTU Management Engineering
3.6.1
Creation of direct arcs between stop pairs
When running the initial tests on the large test example, a problem with the description
of the network as a graph was discovered. The network is only described by one node
pr. stop, meaning that all events arrive at the same node. In a diachronic graph which
is usually used when modeling schedule-based networks, there is, for each stop; a wait
node, arrival node and a departure node. This means, that all events at a node are
compared with events of the same type (arrivals, waiting/transfer and departures).
The problem of describing the lines as an edge from previous stop the next stop is, that
events which have not yet got a transfer penalty is compared to events who have already
received a transfer penalty. Consider the small example in ﬁgure 38. The travel times
are shown on arcs and it is assumed, that there is no waiting time in the nodes.
O
A
B
D
Line 1 (10 mins)
Line 2 (15 mins)
Line 3
5 mins
5 mins
Figure 38: Small example which is used to describe the need for direct arcs
Line 1 - Line 2 - Line 3
The cost of reaching stop B by respectively line 1+3 and line 2 is given in table 12. The
cost for path 2 using line 2 to stop B is 2.85, because the cost is only the travel time
cost. For path 1 the cost is 3.9, because the transfer penalty at stop A has been added.
However, the cost at the destination is the same for the two paths, because the transfer
penalty for path 2 is added at the boarding at stop B. If event dominance was made on
the network, a slack of 37% was needed to keep both paths in the heap, even though
the paths end up with the same cost.
Table 12: Small example of usage of direct arcs
Path
Path sequence
Cost to stop B
Cost to destination
1
Line 1 →3
10 + 5 ∗0.19 + 1.08 = 3.90
3.9 + 5 ∗0.19 = 4.85
2
Line 2
15 ∗0.19 = 2.85
2.85 + 5 ∗0.19 + 1.08 = 4.85
Because of this problem, all lines are, instead of being described with sequences from
previous stop to next stop, described with direct connections as shown in ﬁgure 39.
When having direct arcs between stop pairs the two paths would be compared at stop B
AND destination D. The direct arc from stop A to stop D would ensure that the paths
are being compared when both paths have received the transfer penalty, which would
also be the correct way to compare the paths, as path two also requires a transfer.
49
==PAGE:60==
DTU Management Engineering
Using this method results in having more arcs in the graph, but it ensures that events
arriving at the same stop are all the end of an in vehicle ride, a transfer from another
stop or the end of a connector. In this way, the use of separate nodes for waiting,
boarding and alighting is unnecessary.
Figure 39: Example of direct arcs between all stop pairs
3.7
Summary of proposed framework
This subsection quickly summarizes the proposed framework that has been discussed
in this section. First of all the binomial distribution is chosen as the distribution of
headways. This is done to describe that a passenger can not wait more than one headway
and because distributions can be convoluted. The diﬀerent transfer types have been
described and the scenario tested has shown, that introducing frequency-based lines
generally give a higher cost. The higher cost can lead to lower choice probabilities, and
this will be analysed in the next section.
The use of event dominance including slack has been chosen to generate an appropriate
choice set. This threshold based algorithm allow non optimal events to be inserted
and thereby having multiple paths to the destination. It has been chosen, that only
100% certain events can deﬁne the threshold. If a path can not be reached within the
threshold with 100% probability, it will not be included in the choice set. It is important
to note, that the cost of frequency-based events at the insertion is based on the average
cost of the event. There can therefore be situations where a path that arrives to the
destination in a frequency-based service will have some probability of not reaching the
destination within the threshold, but these paths are kept in the choice set if the average
cost of the path is below the threshold.
The applied choice model will be the MNL model, because the use of recursive logit is
diﬃcult to compute. The scope of having a path-based model also ﬁts better with the
MNL and it is therefore chosen. The choice of direct arcs between all stop pairs on a
line is chosen to avoid having multiple nodes in the graph per stop. A methodology has
been developed to frequency aggregate lines which will be tested in the next section.
Overall the model that will be used in the next section can be described by:
• Run event dominance algorithm with slack
• Group paths which use the exact same lines and are split because there is less
than 100% probability to reach a schedule-based service
• If some paths have 100% overlap only include the best alternative
• Apply the multinomial logit model and ﬁnd the distribution of ﬂow on alternatives
50
==PAGE:61==
DTU Management Engineering
4
Analysis and Results
In this section two real life examples are used to evaluate the framework developed in
section 3. The test examples are trips from DTU to respectively Copenhagen Airport and
Brønshøj in Copenhagen. The two test networks are created with diﬀerent complexity
and considering diﬀerent aspects which are interesting to investigate.
The selection of the test examples were based on the following criteria:
• Change between SB and FB lines and vice versa
• Competition between FB and SB corridors
• Possibility to frequency aggregate of some lines
The two test examples are described in more detail in their respective subsection. In all
of the results shown below the paths have been generated with the attached code in
appendix A.3. All results follow the framework that was summarized in section 3.7.
4.1
DTU to Copenhagen Airport (CPH)
If a passenger wants to go from DTU to Copenhagen Airport there are a few reasonable
paths, but many possible paths. For this example it is chosen to only consider two main
corridors between DTU and Nørreport Station and two corridors from Nørreport to
CPH. In ﬁgure 40 the overall lines and routes from DTU to CPH are shown. From
DTU there is a choice between taking the bus straight to Nørreport or to take the
bus to Lyngby and then take the S-train to Nørreport. The pure travel time (without
considering transfer penalties, walking or waiting time) is between for both alternatives
between 26 and 29 minutes. From Nørreport there is a choice between taking the Metro
or the Regional train to CPH. The Metro takes 15 minutes while the regional train takes
19 minutes.
The example has been simpliﬁed in order to make it easier to interpret the results. Firstly,
the bus lines 150S and 15E have been aggregated, as they are very similar in terms of
driving time (26 and 29 minutes respectively). 150S has a frequency of 12 departures
pr. hour while 15E has 5 departures an hour. Using the frequency aggregation method
from section 3.4.5 gives a travel time of 28 minutes and a headway of 4 minutes.
It was also chosen to simplify the choice of going to Lyngby Station from DTU. In the
real network there are three lines from DTU to Lyngby Station in the morning peak
hours (180, 190 and 300S). 190 was excluded from the example as it has a signiﬁcantly
higher which have a signiﬁcant higher travel time from DTU to Lyngby Station. The
combined frequency of 300S and 180 is 16 departures an hour which gives a headway of
four minutes and the travel time is set to 9 minutes.
51
==PAGE:62==
DTU Management Engineering
Figure 40: Included lines in example from DTU to CPH
4.1.1
Results including all alternatives
Before describing the results from the algorithm and developed framework, a short
example of what the results would be if all possibilities were in the choice set is discussed.
7.30 AM is chosen as desired departure time, and the algorithm is run with a slack of
100% to get all alternatives into the choice set.
Six paths are found, whereof two alternatives are removed as they overlap6. The only
path which includes a transfer from a frequency-based service to a schedule-based service
is from 150S/15E to the regional train. The regional train which connects to 150S/15E
departs at 8:09 AM, and with an earliest possible arrival for 150S/15E to Nørreport at
7:58 AM and a transfer time of 4 minutes, the previous departure of the regional train is
not possible to reach. On the other hand the latest arrival time to Nørreport is at 8:02
6These were routes with line E instead of line B
52
==PAGE:63==
DTU Management Engineering
AM and with the transfer time of 4 minutes, the passenger can with 100% probability
reach the 8:09 departure on the regional train.
In table 13 and ﬁgure 41 the results of the assignment are shown. The main alternative
with a probability of 77% is, as one would expect, the path taking 150S/15E and
transferring to the Metro which arrives to the airport at 8:21. The other alternatives
arrive to the destination between 8:28 and 8:38 and with a higher cost than the shortest
path. The least attractive alternative is the alternative going via Lyngby Station and
connecting to the regional train.
Figure 41: Flow distribution from DTU to CPH if all choices are included
Departure 7.30 AM
Table 13: Route share for all possible paths with departure 7:30 AM
Path sequence
Arrival Time
Cost
Probability
150S/15E →Metro
08:21
10.12
77%
300S/180 →B →Metro
08:31
12.09
11%
150S/15E →Regional train
08:28
12.05
11%
300S/180 →B →Regional train
08:38
14.01
2%
53
==PAGE:64==
DTU Management Engineering
The next subsections present the results of using the proposed framework and testing
diﬀerent scenarios. These results should in some way be compared to the full results
shown above, as this would be the most probable distribution of ﬂow, as it includes all
alternatives that passengers could consider.
4.1.2
Desired departure time 7:30 AM
The ﬁrst example is again using a desired departure time at 7:30 AM. For this case,
only three alternatives are generated, which fulﬁll the the bound on being 20% worse
than the shortest path. The three alternatives are the alternatives using 150S/15E and
respectively the Metro and regional train, while the third alternative is to go via Lyngby
Station and taking the Metro from Nørreport. The costs of these paths are the same
as the paths found in 13 and the split between the three paths can be seen in table 14.
The results could have also been generated from table 13, where it is possible to see
that the path via Lyngby Station and taking the regional train is more than 20% more
costly than the shortest path. As the only alternative which is excluded only had 2%
probability the change in ﬂows are therefore not considerable.
Figure 42: Flow distribution from DTU to CPH for a slack of 20% with departure 7.30 AM
54
==PAGE:65==
DTU Management Engineering
Table 14: Route share for paths with maximum 20% higher cost - departure 7:30 AM
Path sequence
Arrival time
Cost
Probability
150S/15E →Metro
08:21
10.12
78%
150S/15E →Regional train
08:28
12.05
11%
300S/180 →B →Metro
08:31
12.09
11%
4.1.3
Desired departure time 7:35
As a test of robustness the departure time was shifted ﬁve minutes to 7:35 to see whether
this made a diﬀerence. In this case, the passenger is not guaranteed to reach the
connection from 150S/15E to the regional train, and the choice set is therefore slightly
diﬀerent. In table 15 the generated paths for a desired departure time at 7:35 AM is
seen. The path with 150S/15E and the regional train only include the ﬁrst candidate of
the regional train. This is because the earliest arrival time to the platform where the
regional train departs is at 8:07 and the regional train departs at 8:09. With a headway
of 4 minutes the probability Pr(X≤2) is therefore 69%. If the ﬁrst connection is not
reached, the passenger would have to wait 10 minutes until the next departure of the
regional train. That would result in a cost of 13.057 which is above the threshold deﬁned
by the cost of the shortest path at 10.12.
Table 15: Generated paths with departure time 7:35 AM
Path sequence
Arrival Time
Cost
Success
prob
150S/15E →Metro
08:26
10.12
100%
300S/180 →B →Metro
08:31
11.17
100%
150S/15E →Regional train
08:28
11.05
69%
As paths which can not be realized within the threshold with 100% probability can not
be included in the choice set, there are only two paths that are included in the choice set
for a departure time at 7:35 AM. This results in a route share of 74% taking 150S/15E
and the Metro and 26% going via Lyngby Station and then taking the Metro. This
example shows, that the choice set has a great impact on the ﬂow distribution, and
in this case it might not be a reasonable choice set, because some passengers would
probably consider taking the regional train if they had a strong preference for the train.
Table 16: Route share for paths with maximum 20% higher cost - departure 7:35 AM
Path sequence
Arrival Time
Cost
Probability
150S/15E →Metro
08:26
10.12
74%
300S/180 →B →Metro
08:31
11.17
26%
710 minutes extra waiting time with the parameter 0.2 for waiting time on top of the cost of 11.05
for the ﬁrst candidate
55
==PAGE:66==
DTU Management Engineering
Figure 43: Flow distribution from DTU to CPH for a slack of 20%
Departure 7.35 AM
4.1.4
Test of higher preference for S-train and regional train
As a sensitivity test of the importance of the parameters in the utility function, a test
was performed where the cost of using S-train and regional train were 25% lower than
the standard parameters and using a slack of 30%. This results in the paths shown in
table 17, where path 3 consists of the two candidates shown in the bottom of the table.
The change to a higher preference for train results in all paths being generated. However,
the alternative of using 150S/15E →regional train is only included in the choice set
because of the threshold of 30%, as the cost of the second candidate is 20.4% higher than
the shortest path. When comparing the ﬂow of this example with the previous example
with standard parameters and 20% slack, the biggest diﬀerence is between Nørreport
and CPH where 30% of the ﬂow now uses the regional train. There is also 14% more
probability to use the S-train instead of using 150S/15E. These results show, that the
56
==PAGE:67==
DTU Management Engineering
algorithm can work with diﬀerent parameters and that the results are depending on the
threshold deﬁned by the modeler.
Figure 44: Flow distribution from DTU to CPH for a slack of 30%
Train and S-train parameter 25% lower - Departure 7.35 AM
57
==PAGE:68==
DTU Management Engineering
Table 17: Results with higher preference for train and slack of 30% - departure 7.35 AM
Path
Path sequence
Arrival Time
Cost
Prob
1
150S/15E →Metro
08:26
10.12
40%
2
300S/180 →B →Metro
08:31
10.44
29%
3
150S/15E →Regional train
08:31
10.81
20%
4
300S/180 →B →Regional train
08:38
11.50
10%
Path sequence
Arrival Time
Cost
Success
prob
3-1
150S/15E →Regional train
08:28
10.19
69%
3-2
150S/15E →Regional train
08:38
12.19
31%
4.1.5
Example of how local slack discard paths within the slack bound
The results shown above show that the model works and can ﬁnd the correct paths
given the conditions in the algorithm. However, dealing with local slack can also have
the downside, that paths which might not be more than 20% worse than the shortest
path are cut oﬀin the middle of a search. The following example shows, that the local
thresholds lead to a limited choice set.
The example is a desired departure time at 7:43, where the path via Lyngby Station
arrives 5 minutes later to the Metro platform at Nørreport Station than the shortest
path with 150S/15E. At this node, the cost of the path via Lyngby Station is 22% higher
than the lowest cost, and this event is therefore not inserted into the event heap. But
as the cost of going on the Metro is the same for the two alternatives, the full cost of
the alternative via Lyngby Station is only 14% higher than the path using 150S/15E at
the destination.
With the conditions in the algorithm the only alternative at this departure time would
be to take 150S/15E and the Metro. It can be discussed whether this is a behavioral
realistic choice set, when alternatives, which are only 14% worse at the destination, are
not included. This speciﬁc problem will be further considered in the discussion (section
5.1).
Table 18: Routes to CPH via Nørreport Metro platform with departure at 7:43 AM from DTU
Path sequence
Arrival
Time
Metro
platform
Cost to
Metro
plat-
form
Ratio
to best
alterna-
tive
Arrival
Time
CPH
Cost
to
CPH
Ratio
to best
alterna-
tive
150S/15E →Metro
08:17
6.56
100%
8:34
10.12
100%
300S/180 →B →Metro
08:24
8.01
122%
8:41
11.57
114%
58
==PAGE:69==
DTU Management Engineering
4.2
DTU to Brønshøj
The example of DTU to CPH was quite simple and included few lines. A larger example
including more lines is therefore used to test diﬀerent aspects of the proposed framework.
The example originates from the work of Nielsen (2000). Here Nielsen uses a case from
Lyngby to Brønshøj as a test example in a stochastic public transport assignment. This
relation is interesting, as there are more than two reasonable routes from origin to
destination and no direct connections. The example is slightly modiﬁed, so the origin is
at DTU instead of Lyngby. In ﬁgure 45 an overview of the model area is shown.
Figure 45: Overview of model area for the example from DTU to Brønshøj
There are 21 lines in the network with 19 schedule-based lines and 2 frequency-based
lines. An overview of the lines and their respective headway can be found in appendix
A.6. The network is coded as the lines are presented in the public available timetables in
May 2017 (Movia, 2017b, DSB, 2016b). The transfer times between stops are based on
59
==PAGE:70==
DTU Management Engineering
data from Rejseplanen which was made available by Rapidis APS. However, for Lyngby
Station and Nørreport Station the transfer times between all stops in the stop groups
were set to 4 minutes.
In ﬁgure 46 the diﬀerent lines are seen along with an indication on whether they are
schedule- or frequency-based. Many possible trips without frequency-based services
can be made, but there is also an opportunity to generate alternatives which include
transfers from schedule- to frequency-based services and vice versa. In the network
there are corridors which are served by multiple lines, but no corridors with an overlap
between schedule- and frequency-based services.
Figure 46: Overview with lines and line types
Looking at the map there are no direct services between DTU and Brønshøj and from
the map no obvious shortest path can be identiﬁed. Five main paths can be identiﬁed
in the network, which seem reasonable when just looking at the map:
60
==PAGE:71==
DTU Management Engineering
• DTU →Herlev →Brønshøj
• DTU →Gladsaxe →Husum Torv →Brønshøj
• DTU →Gladsaxe →Bellahøj →Brønshøj
• DTU →Tuborgvej →Hulg˚ards Plads →Brønshøj
• DTU →Ryparken St. →Nørrebro St. →Brønshøj
In ﬁgure 47 and 48 examples of travel suggestions from Rejseplanen and Google Maps
are shown. The travel plans show multiple diﬀerent alternatives including the mentioned
paths in the list above. They take around 45 and up to 59 minutes including walking
and all routes have either one or two transfers. This shows, that there are many equally
good alternatives, which makes this example a good test of the proposed framework.
Figure 47: Travel suggestions from Rejseplanen for a trip at 7.30 AM from DTU to Brønshøj
61
==PAGE:72==
DTU Management Engineering
Figure 48: Travel suggestions from Google Maps for a trip at 7.30 AM from DTU to Brønshøj
4.2.1
Results on existing timetable
In table 19 and ﬁgure 49 the route shares for a desired departure time at 7.30 AM are
shown. The main alternative is to take 300S to Herlev and transfer to 5C which gives
an arrival time at 8:19 AM. The two lines are perfectly coordinated in Herlev, where the
passenger has no waiting time when transferring. There are paths which arrive earlier
(8:15), but because these paths require two transfers, they are less attractive than the
path via Herlev. The choice set consists of many diﬀerent alternatives including the
alternative of going to Lyngby Station and via Hellerup to Nørrebro and from then to
Brønshøj which include three transfers. However, because the in vehicle time parameter
for S-train is around 20% lower than the parameter for bus, the path is still attractive.
Almost all possible paths are included in the choice set, which proves that the algorithm
works and that a slack of 20% is, in this case, enough to generate the alternatives that a
passenger would usually consider.
62
==PAGE:73==
DTU Management Engineering
Table 19: Route share for paths with maximum 20% higher cost - departure 7:30 AM in the existing
network (∗indicates paths which are grouped by two candidate paths)
Path sequence
Arrival Time
Cost
Probability
300S →5C
08:19
10.50
23%
150S →21 →5C
08:15
10.65
20%
150S →F →350S∗
08:15
10.71
19%
30E →250S →5C
08:19
11.15
12%
180 →B →F →350S∗
08:15
11.44
9%
150S →8A →5C∗
08:21
11.85
6%
30E →200S →350S
08:23
11.96
5%
15E →350S
08:30
12.17
4%
Weighted average
08:18
10.97
100%
Figure 49: Results of assignment on existing network - departure at 7.30 AM
63
==PAGE:74==
DTU Management Engineering
It is important to note, that the paths shown in the table are paths which include
the same lines and not for example a combination of paths where the passenger has
multiple options. This situation is best described by an example with the results on the
existing network. One of the paths in the choice set is to take line 15E to Ryparken
and change to the F line to Nørrebro Station and then take line 350S to Brønshøj. This
path dominates the path where the passenger would take line 5C instead of 350S, but
an interesting investigation would be to see what would be the eﬀect if the passenger
could choose any of the two lines.
The expected arrival time to the bus stop at Nørrebro Station is in the interval from
8:05-8:10. In the results, there are ﬁve candidates which all have this predecessor. These
candidates are either taking line 5C or 350S to Brønshøj. In table 20 the paths that
were identiﬁed in the choice set generation are shown (option 1 & 2), while the third
option is a combination where the passenger takes either 5C or 350S instead of only
considering one of the options.
Table 20: Route share for paths with maximum 20% higher cost in existing network
Departure 7:30 AM - ∗indicate paths which is grouped of two candidate paths
Option
Path sequence
Departure
Nørrebro
Arrival
Time
Destination
Cost
Probability
1
15E →F →5C
08:09
08:19
11.07
100%
1-1
15E →F →5C
08:05
08:15
10.27
3%
1-2
15E →F →5C
08:09
08:19
11.07
94%
1-3
15E →F →5C
08:13
08:23
11.87
3%
2
15E →F →350S
08:09
08:17
10.79
100%
2-1
15E →F →350S
08:07
08:15
10.29
50%
2-2
15E →F →350S
08:12
08:20
11.29
50%
3
15E →F →5C/350S
08:08
08:17
10.69
100%
3-1
15E →F →5C
08:05
08:15
10.06
3%
3-2
15E →F →350S
08:07
08:15
10.08
47%
3-3
15E →F →5C
08:09
08:19
10.86
47%
3-4
15E →F →350S
08:12
08:20
11.08
3%
The two ﬁrst options require, that the passenger has already predetermined which line
to take from Nørrebro Station. But in this case it would, from a behavioral perspective,
be more realistic to consider both line 5C and 350S when arriving at Nørrebro, because
the travel time diﬀerence from Nørrebro Station to Brønshøj Torv is only two minutes.
Taking this into consideration the third option in the table describes the choice of
boarding either 5C or 350S depending on the arrival time to Nørrebro Station. As it is
seen from the example the expected arrival time is not diﬀerent from only considering
taking line 350S, but the cost of this option is lower because the candidates on 350S
64
==PAGE:75==
DTU Management Engineering
are supplemented with candidates on line 5C. This analysis is not surprising, but shows
that it is diﬃcult to model the behavior of the passengers, when the network is not
strictly schedule-based.
4.2.2
5C, 150S and 350S as frequency-based services
An important aspect of the creation of a uniﬁed model is to see whether the cost of
routes change if some lines are changed from schedule- to frequency-based lines. An
example where the lines 5C, 150S and 350S are changed to frequency-based services is
therefore created. The three lines run with a headway of respectively 4, 5 and 5 minutes,
which makes them the most high frequency services in the network8. In the timetable
these three lines are changed to frequency-based services which result in a new choice
set with diﬀerent route shares than for the assignment on the existing network.
Figure 50: Overview of new network with 5C, 150S and 350S as frequency-based services
8As well as line 180 and the F line, but these are kept as schedule-based services
65
==PAGE:76==
DTU Management Engineering
Figure 50 shows the new network including respectively schedule- and frequency-based
corridors and corridors where both schedule- and frequency-based services operate. In
contrast to the original network it is now possible to have paths with only frequency-
based services in the choice set and the passenger do not have any option to arrive to
Brønshøj using a schedule-based service.
The assignment on the new network leads to slightly diﬀerent paths in terms of the line
level and one new path has replaced the path including line 21 as seen in table 21. The
new path is going via Herlev Station to Husum Station and includes a long transfer
to Husum Torv and then ﬁnishing the trip on 5C. The reason that the path including
line 21 is not included, is because the probability of catching the ﬁrst candidate on line
21 from line 150S is 97% and the second candidate is not within the threshold, which
means that this alternative is excluded. The shares between the paths are quite similar
to the assignment in the existing network with the probability from the alternative
with line 21 spread across the other alternatives. The arrival times are in general a few
minutes later than in the existing network and the costs are similarly a tiny bit higher.
The higher costs are primarily the result of some well coordinated transfers not being as
good as it were with schedule-based services.
Table 21: Route share for paths with maximum 20% higher cost and departure at 7:30 AM
5C, 150S and 350S as frequency-based services
Path sequence
Arrival Time
Cost
Probability
30E →5C
08:22
10.65
27%
15E →F →350S
08:18
10.89
22%
30E →250S →5C
08:20
11.35
14%
15E →8A →5C
08:21
11.62
10%
180 →B →F →350S
08:17
11.66
10%
30E →200S →5C
08:22
11.77
9%
30E →C →5C
08:26
12.49
4%
15E →350S
08:33
12.67
4%
Weighted average
08:20
11.25
100%
In ﬁgure 51 the diﬀerence in terms of ﬂow from the assignment on the existing network
and the assignment on the network with more frequency-based lines can be seen (A ﬁgure
including absolute ﬂows can be found in appendix A.6). The most notable diﬀerence is
the big diﬀerence for the corridor with line 21. With the path using line C from Herlev
to Husum, there is also more ﬂow following the paths going via Herlev. From this result
it could indicate, that the ﬂow changes quite a lot when lines are changed from schedule-
to frequency-based services, but it is important to note, that the change is primarily
concerned with the exclusion of the alternative using line 21.
66
==PAGE:77==
DTU Management Engineering
Figure 51: Diﬀerence of ﬂow between assignment on existing network and assignment on new
network with 5C, 150S and 350S as frequency-based services
Positive numbers indicate more ﬂow in new scenario
4.2.3
Frequency aggregation of the network
As mentioned in the results for the existing network, there are a few corridors where the
passenger can make use of two lines between two stops. One way to solve the problem
with passengers considering multiple lines is to frequency aggregate the lines according
to the methodology described in section 3.4.5. This gives a possibility to test a scenario
where overlapping schedule-based lines are aggregated into frequency-based services.
In the existing network there are a few sections which could be aggregated. First of all
the corridor with 5C and 350S is an obvious corridor for aggregation. In both directions
between Nørrebros runddel and Husum Torv these lines can be frequency aggregated
as either the absolute diﬀerence is less than or equal to two minutes of the relative
diﬀerence is lower than 15%. The combined headway becomes 3 minutes as the combined
67
==PAGE:78==
DTU Management Engineering
frequency is 27 departures pr. hour. At Herlev the bus stops for the two lines are placed
quite far from each other, and it would therefore not be realistic to aggregate departures
from these stops9. For the departures from Nørreport Station with 5C and 350S the
diﬀerence in driving time to Brønshøj is larger than the threshold and the lines are
therefore not aggregated between Nørreport and Brønshøj. Another section that can be
frequency aggregated is the corridor from DTU to Nørreport where 15E and 150S run.
The relative diﬀerence in driving time is never more than 15% and they are therefore
aggregated with a combined headway of 4 minutes.
Resulting ﬂow after frequency aggregation
Table 22 shows the resulting paths and the shares between them for the frequency
aggregated network. The alternative with 300S and 5C is the most attractive alternative
as it is the case in the existing network. The cost for the path is the same for the two
examples, but the other paths in the frequency aggregated network have higher costs
and the choice probability is therefore higher in this example. Moreover, the alternative
via Nørreport is not included in the choice set for the frequency aggregated network
because it has a cost which is 20.5% higher than the best alternative and is therefore
just outside the threshold.
Table 22: Route share for paths with maximum 20% higher cost - departure 7:30 in the frequency
aggregated network
Path sequence
Arrival Time
Cost
Probability
300S →5C
08:19
10.50
29%
150S →21 - 5C/350S
08:16
10.95
18%
150S/15E →F →5C/350S
08:17
11.15
15%
30E →250S →5C/350S
08:19
11.25
14%
150S/15E →8A →5C/350S
08:19
11.69
9%
180 →B →F →5C/350S
08:18
11.84
8%
30E →200S →350S
08:22
11.86
7%
Weighted average
08:18
11.09
100%
Figure 52 shows the diﬀerence in ﬂow from the assignment on the existing network to
the assignment on the frequency aggregated network. The higher probability of going
via Herlev result in more ﬂow going via 300S and 30E, while less ﬂow go via the highway
into Copenhagen. Overall the ﬂows are not very diﬀerent from the original ﬂows, but
the higher costs for alternatives going via the highway gives a slight change in the ﬂow
distribution. This result indicate that it might be a good opportunity to frequency
aggregate and this is also discussed in the discussion below along with discussions of
other aspects of the results in this section.
9The stops are placed on diﬀerent sides of the ring road O3
68
==PAGE:79==
DTU Management Engineering
Figure 52: Diﬀerence of ﬂow between assignment on existing network and assignment with frequency
aggregation - positive indicates more ﬂow in new scenario
69
==PAGE:80==
DTU Management Engineering
5
Discussion
The analysis and results in the previous section show that there is a possibility to
model a mixed network, but that choice sets and resulting ﬂows are depending on
the assumptions made. This section discusses diﬀerent aspects of the proposed model
and the results from the previous section. This is followed by a discussion of possible
extensions to the model and future research ideas. Finally recommendations for large
scale modeling are provided including a possible framework for large scale modeling.
5.1
Discussion of results and developed framework
The results in section 4 showed that it was possible to generate a reasonable choice set
and apply a discrete choice model on the choice set. However, the analysis and results
also showed, that for example the local slack takes away some reasonable alternatives.
Therefore diﬀerent aspects of the results are discussed below.
5.1.1
Is local slack behaviorally realistic?
In the developed framework the choice sets were limited by the local slack at each stop.
This implementation can, as shown in section 4.1.5, lead to a discarding of paths, which
at the destination would be within the threshold. One way that this problem could be
overcome could be to instead introduce a global slack. The idea of global slack would
be to ﬁrst ﬁnd the shortest path and from this deﬁne the maximum possible cost of
any events. For each node all events would be evaluated against the global threshold
limit. In ﬁgure 53 the diﬀerence in global and local slack is shown. The consequence
of introducing a global slack would be, that the search tree would be very wide in the
beginning of the search and as the search approaches the destination the tree would be
cut because many events would be above the global threshold.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Origin
Stop 1
Stop 2
Destination
Cost
Stops
Difference in Global and Local Slack
Local
Global
Figure 53: Diﬀerence in global vs. local slack
The global slack was tested on the large network and the test showed that a large
amount of events were generated and needed to be checked, but didn’t lead to many new
paths to be included in the choice set. For large networks it would also result in some
70
==PAGE:81==
DTU Management Engineering
paths being generated which would have large detours in the beginning of a journey,
which is not very realistic. On the other hand, the local slack leads to fewer alternatives
in the beginning of a journey, but can lead to detours at the end of a long journey. Take
an example of a trip from inside Copenhagen to Jutland. Most people would go with
the shortest path to Copenhagen Central, which would be ensured by the local slack.
But when arriving to Jutland (for example Fredericia) many diﬀerent paths would be
generated because the cost would be high and therefore creating a larger local threshold.
This problem is mainly present for longer trips, but it is a problem which should be
handled in future choice set generation algorithms. One possible approach, which has
not been tested or considered further, could be to use a variant of the A∗algorithm
where the local slack percentage could be related to how far the node was from the
destination.
5.1.2
Handling frequency-based services
The integration of schedule- and frequency-based services introduces a challenge of
how to handle paths which are not 100% certain. In high frequency networks it makes
behavioral sense to only include paths which would always be within the threshold.
However, the use of only 100% certain paths as deﬁnition of the threshold involves a risk
which is most easily described by an example. Take a trip from for example Nørrebro to
Jutland, where the desired departure time results in a 30% probability to reach the ﬁrst
IC-Lyn (fastest train to Jutland). The next possible departure towards Jutland departs
20 minutes after and can be reached with 100% probability, but is a slower IC-train.
The slack bound for stops in Jutland will therefore only be depending on the arrival of
the IC-train. It will therefore be possible for the path using the IC-Lyn train to evolve
using many detours and still be within the threshold. This problem does not have any
simple solutions. One way to handle it would be to ﬁrst conduct a search where each
new event must be possible with 100% certainty i.e. only considering the ﬁrst departure
on schedule-based services which can be reached with 100% probability. Following this,
the paths (stop sequences) that were identiﬁed could be investigated to see if there were
any earlier opportunities.
This solution would still require a path to be limited to the same lines. But it could
be, that from one node there was a good connection which could be reached with 40%
probability and if this connection was not reached the passenger could take another
line with 100% probability. This problem is very relevant as some options in public
transport are only possible to take at some speciﬁc times (departure time) and if a
departure on a line is not made, the passenger has the possibility to go via another
path and not necessarily wait for the next departure on the same line. This behavior
from the passengers require to possibly deﬁne the paths in a diﬀerent way, so that the
passenger don’t need to have 100% probability to catch a line if another line from that
stop can be reached with 100% probability. This behavior could indicate the need for
some kind of recursive algorithm, where the passenger at each diversion point evaluate
the possible paths given the state/time at a given stop.
71
==PAGE:82==
DTU Management Engineering
5.1.3
The distribution of headway
One of the goals of this study was to ﬁnd a suitable description for the headway of
frequency-based services given the criteria that it should be bounded in both ends
and can be convoluted. The choice of the binomial distribution was made because
it fulﬁlled the criteria of being bounded in both ends and could be convoluted when
having multiple transfers between frequency-based services with diﬀerent headways.
However, the assumption of regular headway is violated with the use of the binomial
distribution. The choice of not using a discrete uniform distribution was made to ensure
that an analytical solution could be found, which requires that the convolutions can
be described in a closed form or that possibilities for all outcomes can be enumerated.
As it was shown in section 3.1 the convolution of two discrete uniform distributions
creates a trapezoidal distribution which can be described in a closed form. But for the
convolution of 3 or more distributions the probabilities would have to be enumerated
for all combinations.
This enumeration is quite simple for combinations of three distributions and can be
done during the search or before the search. But it might not be necessary to enumerate
all combinations, because trips using public transport usually only consist of one or two
legs. Eltved (2017) analysed smart card data and found that 93% of all trips in the
Capital Region only included two legs. Around 6% of the trips included 3 legs and the
rest included 4 or more legs. If the trip consists of 4 legs it can include some trips with
three frequency-based services followed by a schedule-based service, but this would be
highly rare for shorter trips and trips within the same region. This means that using a
uniform distribution could probably be included in future tests of the model.
5.1.4
Behavioral realism of frequency aggregation
In the example on frequency aggregation it was argued, that the aggregation could be
explained behaviorally. Frequency aggregation and behavior is in some way linked to
the ﬁndings in Anderson et al. (2014) where they found, that passengers are more likely
to take a path if there are other paths sharing the same links. This was described by
the negative path size correction factor which led to higher probability of selecting a
route with more overlap. The idea in frequency aggregation is that passengers considers
the diﬀerent lines as one, if they are similar. The aggregation leads to a better service
between the stops because the headway is lower. The higher probability for overlapping
alternatives can be seen as the explanation of the same behavioral tendency - if there
are more options the service becomes better which results in a higher choice probability.
The observation of higher choice probability could also indicate, that passengers in some
way look more generally at the network and choose paths with high coverage in terms
of diﬀerent options. However, frequency aggregation is not straightforward and more
research should be made into how passengers perceive the overlap between diﬀerent
lines.
72
==PAGE:83==
DTU Management Engineering
5.2
Possible extensions to the model and future work
Public transport assignment modeling is not only concerned with passengers preference
for diﬀerent submodes and transfers, but also preferences of delays and in vehicle
congestion. If a model should predict the passenger ﬂows as precise as possible, these
preferences should also be included in an assignment model. This subsection describes
possible extensions to the model and ideas for future work starting with the inclusion of
delays.
5.2.1
Including delays
One of the more unrealistic assumptions of this thesis has been the assumption of
100% reliable services. In reality this is not the case for any public transport system
in Denmark. For example the S-trains operate around 98% of their trains within 2:30
minutes of the published time leaving 2% of the trains more delayed than 2:30 minutes
(DSB, 2017). For buses the study by Li et al. (2015) showed that they are also not
100% reliable, which is also the case in Copenhagen. The headways for frequency-based
services are, as discussed in section 3.1, usually described by an exponential or gamma
distribution. These distributions are used because they describe the delays of services
and especially the phenomenon of bus bunching. It has not been possible to ﬁnd any
literature describing the delays for buses in the Copenhagen area, but if a uniﬁed model
should be precise, there would be a need to ﬁnd the empirical delay distributions for
the included lines.
The inclusion of delays in the developed framework, where all paths must with 100%
certainty arrive within a threshold of 20%, would lead to some paths which include
transfers from frequency- to schedule-based services being less likely to be included
compared to a model with regular headways. The tails of the distributions would give
some probability of arriving much later compared to a model with bounded distributions
(i.e.
regular headways).
If either a gamma or exponential distribution was used,
assumptions could be made, that paths with only 95% certainty should be within the
threshold. It would then have the disadvantage, that it is not ensured that all paths
that will constitute 100% probability to catch a line at a given stop would be included.
But these paths could potentially be generated in a later search after having established
that the 95% path did arrive at the destination. However, this could potentially lead to
many extra searches in a large network.
When including delays in the network this should naturally also aﬀect the schedule-based
lines. The investigation of empirical delay distributions would possibly tell that the delay
distributions should be diﬀerent for schedule- and frequency-based services. Introducing
delays for schedule-based services would lead to a diﬀerent transfer pattern between
schedule-based services. If a schedule-based service can be delayed the transfer time
between two schedule-based services will no longer be deterministic. There will instead
be a probability to reach the service and an associated transfer time. If the ﬁrst service
is not reached then the second candidate of the line should be considered just as the
case of a transfer from a frequency-based service to a schedule-based service in a regular
73
==PAGE:84==
DTU Management Engineering
network. An updated table for the transfer types is shown below and is only changed for
schedule-based transfers, because the other types already includes a probabilistic part.
Table 23: Waiting times for the four transfer types when including delays
Transfer
from/to
A) SB line
B) FB line
A) SB line
Probability to
catch the next
service and an
associated
transfer time
Transfer time
from statistical
distribution
B) FB line
Probability to
catch next
service and an
associated
transfer time
Transfer time
follow statistical
distribution
5.2.2
Including in vehicle congestion
Another assumption of this thesis is the exclusion of in vehicle congestion and fail to sit
probabilities. The in-vehicle congestion in Denmark has not been described by much
literature, however, Traﬁkstyrelsen (2012) made a brief note on the topic and described
that some lines in the morning peak are in lack of seats. The in vehicle congestion or
fail to sit probabilities have been shown to have an eﬀect on passengers route choice
(see i.e. Nielsen (2000) and for an overview Fu et al. (2012)). This eﬀect stems from the
inconvenience of not being able to sit or having many passengers around you and this
implies a disutility for the passenger. The good thing about the developed model being
based on paths is that the in vehicle congestion could easily be implemented as a part
of the utility speciﬁcation, as all the paths are saved and can be easily updated. The
challenge in a uniﬁed model is however, that frequency-based services are not represented
by an explicit run, which makes it harder to set a value on the in vehicle congestion for
these services. Schm¨ocker et al. (2011) described a frequency-based model that takes in
fail to sit probabilities by distinguishing between passengers already in the train/bus
and boarding passengers. But the in vehicle congestion in frequency-based models is
still based on an average over a given time period and not for explicit runs. This could
lead to a bias when having a uniﬁed model where some explicit runs on schedule-based
services could be very congested while following runs might not be congested.
The in vehicle congestion is not only an inconvienience. It can also result in a failure
to board a service due to overcrowding. This is especially the case if bus bunching
occurs and passengers over a long time period try to catch the same delayed service. In
the note from Traﬁkstyrelsen (2012) they describe that passengers using the Metro in
peak hours are not always able to board the ﬁrst arriving service on the section from
Nørreport to Kgs. Nytorv due to overcrowding. In a schedule-based network it is easy
74
==PAGE:85==
DTU Management Engineering
to describe the maximum capacity for each run, but for frequency-based models it is
harder to make a maximum capacity as it must be calculated for a time period. The
implementation of failure to board probability would be easiest if an iteration scheme
was used to constantly update the probability until some convergence criteria was met.
But the problem with having to deal with frequency-based services which must be
aggregated into some time periods must be dealt with and makes it troublesome to
include fail to board probabilities and in vehicle congestion.
5.2.3
Estimating passengers preferences in a uniﬁed network
A key aspect for future work would be to estimate passengers preferences in a mixed
network. First of all the parameters used in this thesis have originally only been used for
an all-or-nothing assignment and is therefore not 100% reﬂecting passengers trade oﬀof
the diﬀerent time components. To see whether a uniﬁed model can describe assignment
on real life instances, speciﬁc parameters that ﬁt the model must be included. Firstly, an
investigation should be conducted to see how passengers include include the uncertainty
of frequency-based lines into their travel decisions. This preference data could then be
used to see which routes passengers used compared to other routes in the network.
Another important point is to investigate the correct deﬁnition for the slack parameter
to generate an appropriate choice set that represents the alternatives that the passenger
consider. This is not as straightforward as for car assignment, because some routes are
only available in discrete times, which could potentially lead to routes which are much
worse than the shortest path at a given desired departure time. But it is crucial for a
model using a discrete choice model to have a behaviorally realistic choice and therefore
this should be a key part of future research.
5.2.4
Modeling low frequent systems as frequency-based systems
This thesis has only dealt with high frequency frequency-based services. Another scope
of a uniﬁed model could be to have low frequency schedule-based services incorporated
as frequency-based services. In this way there wouldn’t be any need to adjust these
lines, if there were major changes in for example the intercity train timetable.
The main part in this problem is, that the feeder buses to the intercity trains are usually
coordinated with the arrival and departures of the trains. If a large change in the
intercity timetable is made, then all connecting buses should be adjusted accordingly.
However, this process is manual and requires, that the modeler adjusts each connecting
bus, which then leads to connections with other buses being missed. So it would require
a large amount of work to recode all the timetables.
The situation of large changes in timetables is not something that happens every year.
But if for example the major danish train operator DSB wants to evaluate three diﬀerent
timetable proposal for the future, the evaluation would not be correct unless the buses
were adjusted to the new timetable. The problem in regards to modeling these low-
frequent services as frequencies is, that it is hard to know whether a bus and a train
are in reality coordinated if they are modeled as frequency-based lines. It could also be,
75
==PAGE:86==
DTU Management Engineering
that only every second train on a line is coordinated with a speciﬁc feeder bus, meaning
that if the bus was frequency-based the passenger could have two possible options in the
choice set, because the frequency-based line could be reached from both train runs. The
idea of modeling low frequency systems as frequency-based services could help to model
future scenarios, but it also requires much attention before it can be made consistently.
5.3
Recommendations for large scale modeling
The modeling carried out as part of this thesis has been based on implementation
in Matlab and hand calculated examples. There is naturally a large gap to having a
complete model that can handle all the discussed problems and to create a running
model. This subsection will provide recommendations for large scale modeling and what
to be aware of in this regard.
First of all large scale modeling must rely on an eﬃcient data structure and for example
pointer programming which can handle the data structures in an eﬃcient way. Pointer
programming can hold diﬀerent structures which allow for faster computation and makes
it easier to call methods and functions compared to Matlab. Matlab can to some extent
be used as a pointer programming language, but it is not as well deﬁned as for example
C#. The following discussions will not discuss implementation in diﬀerent software
products, but the reader is just reminded, that there is large performance improvements
to achieve, if the algorithms are implemented eﬃciently and the underlying data structure
is optimized.
5.3.1
Inclusion of multiple departure times
This thesis only consider one desired departure time, and it has been assumed throughout
the thesis, the passenger can only depart at this given time. However, in reality the
passenger can depart earlier or later, if that can result in a better utility. There are
naturally bounds for when a trip has to either depart (going home from work for example)
or arrive (typically trips to work or other time dependent activities)10. The problem is
primarily concerning overlap of diﬀerent paths. One example could be whether to take
the IC-train or wait until the IC-Lyn. In many cases in the danish network, these paths
will be 100% overlapping in the space dimension, but a passenger might actually be
choosing between these two alternatives, which requires both alternatives to be in the
choice set. So the criteria of spatial overlapping might not be so relevant for large scale
modeling and diﬀerent criteria such as uniqueness on line level should be investigated in
future research.
Another point in regards to the uniqueness of routes is how to handle the probability
of reaching a speciﬁc run. As it was shown in section 3.3 the probability of reaching
the ﬁrst and second candidate of a line has a large eﬀect on the expected cost of a
path. Naturally, if a passenger for example could depart earlier and be more certain
to make reach the ﬁrst candidate, it would be preferable to do so in many cases. But
10See for example Thorhauge et al. (2015) for an in depth description of the departure time choice
problem
76
==PAGE:87==
DTU Management Engineering
when dealing with diﬀerent departure times and diﬀerent possibilities for alternatives
at each departure time, there must be done further research into deﬁning what is the
best departure time, and how it is reﬂected compared to other alternatives in the choice
set. One way to do this could be to brute force all possible departure times, but this
requires many searches and depending on the computational eﬃciency it might require
a more analytic solution to ﬁnd the best departure time for a given path.
5.3.2
Handling a uniﬁed model
As it was shown in this report, it is certainly not trivial to handle the diﬀerent combina-
tions of transfers in a mixed network. The purpose of a large scale model is primarily to
test diﬀerent scenarios and evaluate the performance of the transport system. As it has
been discussed earlier, a uniﬁed model could make forecasts more reliable and make it
easier to model diﬀerent scenarios when including frequency-based services. In this way
the modeler does not need to make decision on speciﬁc departure times for each run
and thereby implying the speciﬁc transfer times between services.
But the inclusion of frequency-based lines is not straightforward and might require
longer computation time, because the incorporation of frequency-based services into a
mixed model requires some sort of a dynamic graph. As it was shown in Nielsen and
Frederiksen (2006) the dynamic unfolding of a graph is computationally not as eﬃcient
as building the graph in a pre-processing phase. Also the introduction of choice sets
and not just an all-or-nothing assignment requires longer computation time than just
ﬁnding the shortest path.
The frequency-based services are today included in the National Transport Model as
schedule-based services. This is not a problem for high frequency services with headways
down to 2-3 minutes, but for headways of 6-7 minutes the choice of the ﬁrst departure
time (oﬀset) of a line can lead to diﬀerent transfer times for corresponding services.
Instead of deﬁning the actual departure times for the frequency-based lines another
solution could be to run an optimization model to shift the departure times of the
frequency-based lines to give the best possible transfer times. This would, however,
probably not be behaviorally realistic as the passenger will most likely not observe the
lines as schedule-based lines and can not in reality observe the good coordination found
by the optimization model. This is why it is recommended to keep working on solutions
which do not predeﬁne the exact departure times of frequency-based services.
5.3.3
Possible structure of model for large scale modeling
In a large network there are several million OD-relations to solve when including
launches at diﬀerent time periods. Even though there is a possibility to run the proposed
algorithm for choice set generation, it might be too time consuming when having millions
of searches to make. One way of solving this could be to make an initial search in a
completely frequency aggregated frequency-based network, where diﬀerent paths and
the sequence of visited stops could be enumerated either using constrained enumeration
or by using the proposed algorithm with slack. These stop sequences could then be used
in a time expanded network, and for each desired departure time a search for each stop
77
==PAGE:88==
DTU Management Engineering
sequence could be made to deﬁne what the cost of that path would be for the desired
departure time. In this way the search for paths at a given time would be very fast and
provide a choice set with diﬀerent alternatives which could also include frequency-based
services. An example of how a framework could look like is shown below.
1. Frequency aggregate all stop pairs within a timeperiod
2. Find stop sequences for all OD relations in the timeperiod given some slack
3. For each OD relation AND each stop sequence AND launch ﬁnd the best path
using the stop sequence, by also including probability to reach schedule-based
services
4. Store all paths for each launch and check whether some paths are only relevant at
some given launch time compared to hidden wait time vs. launch earlier or later
5. For the choice set for each launch distribute ﬂow across choices using a RUM-based
model
6. Calculate level of service
7. If including congestion make ﬂow averaging and check for convergence
Else stop
8. If not converged go to step 3 (or step 2 if the ﬂow averaging made large changes)
Else stop
78
==PAGE:89==
DTU Management Engineering
6
Conclusion
This thesis has provided a possible framework for a uniﬁed model including both schedule-
and frequency-based services. The literature review showed that a combined model has
only been described once. However, the diﬀerence from the description in the literature
and the proposed framework in this thesis is, that they build on a diachronic graph with
all runs explicitly included, while this work tries to model the passengers choice and
therefore don’t have pre-generated departure times for the frequency-based services.
The description of the diﬀerent transfer types revealed that the inclusion of frequency-
based services result in higher costs for similar scenarios because the waiting time for
frequency-based services can never be considered as hidden waiting time. It also showed
that a scenario with frequency-based services can never be as good as a scenario with
well coordinated schedule-based lines. The introduction of frequency-based services
will always lead to a more average transfer time compared to trips with schedule-based
services where the transfer time can be both low or high depending on the coordination.
The choice set generation proved to be diﬃcult to solve in a behaviorally realistic way
when including frequency-based services. The assumption that passengers only choosing
paths which are guaranteed to be within a certain threshold describes a risk averse
attitude, which is not described in any literature or estimation of any model. The use
of only 100% certain events for the threshold can lead to paths which can take large
detours while still being within the threshold.
The choice of a MNL model as choice model described the ﬂow across diﬀerent alter-
natives, but did not capture correlation and overlap between the alternatives. In the
examples shown in this work a path could constitute of several candidate paths which
imitates that passengers only consider simple paths using the same lines. However, the
idea of using a recursive model to distribute the ﬂow could potentially lead to a more
realistic choice model, because it would imitate that passengers can reevaluate their
route choice in case the ﬁrst candidate of a line is not reached.
The results showed that the algorithm was able to generate multiple routes and that
it was possible to identify the unique paths to be included in the choice set. The
local slack discarded some feasible paths, which would be below the threshold at the
destination. But the local slack gives the reasonable eﬀect, that passengers do not
consider detours in the start of a trip. The results also showed that a change of some
lines from schedule- to frequency-based services led to a diﬀerent ﬂow and that the
assumption that passengers only consider a route if it is always below the threshold can
exclude some reasonable alternatives from the choice set. The example of frequency
aggregation provided reasonable results and was able to represent the behavior that
passengers in some corridors can choose between diﬀerent lines.
The discussion introduced diﬀerent extensions, whereof the part on delays is especially
interesting, as the route choice could change depending on the diﬀerent delay distributions
for each service type. Finally recommendations for large scale modeling were provided
including an idea for a possible framework for large scale modeling.
79
==PAGE:90==
DTU Management Engineering
References
Anderson, M. K. (2013), Behavioural Models for Route Choice of Passengers in Multi-
modal Public Transport Networks PhD Thesis, PhD thesis, Technical University of
Denmark.
Anderson, M. K., Nielsen, O. A. and Prato, C. G. (2014), ‘Multimodal route choice
models of public transport passengers in the Greater Copenhagen Area’, EURO
Journal on Transportation and Logistics pp. 1–25.
Ben-Akiva, M. and Bierlaire, M. (1999), Discrete Choice Methods and Their Application
to Short Term Travel Decisions, in R. Hall, ed., ‘Handbook of Transportation Science’,
Kluwer, chapter 2, pp. 5–34.
Bovy, P., Bekhor, S. and Prato, C. (2008), ‘The Factor of Revisited Path Size: Alternative
Derivation’, Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research
Board 2076(2076), 132–140.
Cascetta, E. and Coppola, P. (2016), ‘Assessment of schedule-based and frequency-based
assignment models for strategic and operational planning of high-speed rail services’,
Transportation Research Part A 84, 93–108.
Chriqui, C. and Robillard, P. (1975), ‘Common Bus Lines’, Transportation Science
9(2), 115–121.
Daganzo, C. F. and Sheﬃ, Y. (1977), ‘On Stochastic Models of Traﬃc Assignment.’,
Transportation Science 11(3), 253–274.
Dial, R. B. (1971), ‘A Probabilistic Multipath Traﬃc Assignment Model Which Obviates
Path Enumeration’, Transportation Research 5, 83–111.
Dijkstra, E. W. (1959), ‘A Note on Two Problems in Connexion with Graphs’, Numerische
Mathematik 1 pp. 269–271.
DSB (2016a), ‘Line diagram S-trains’.
URL: http://www.dsb.dk/globalassets/pdf/traﬁkinformation/s17 linjekort dagtimer.pdf
DSB (2016b), S-tog Timetable 2017, Technical report.
DSB (2017), ‘S-togs punktlighed’.
URL: https://www.dsb.dk/om-dsb/virksomheden/rettidighed/s-togs-rettidighed/
Eltved, M. (2017), ‘Using Smart Card Data to Estimate First Waiting Time in Public
Transport’, Unpublished .
Fischer, H. (2011), A History of the Central Limit Theorem, Springer.
Florian, M. (1999), Deterministic Time Table Transit Assignment, in ‘First Asian
EMME/2 Users Group Meeting’, Shanghai, p. 15.
80
==PAGE:91==
DTU Management Engineering
Florian, M. (2004), Finding Shortest Time-dependent Paths in Schedule-based Transit
Networks: A Label Setting Algorithm, in N. Wilson and A. Nuzzolo, eds, ‘Schedule-
Based Dynamic Transit Modeling: theory and applications’, Kluwer Academic Pub-
lishers, pp. 43–52.
Fosgerau, M., Frejinger, E. and Karlstrom, A. (2013), ‘A link based network route choice
model with unrestricted choice set’, Transportation Research Part B: Methodological
56, 70–80.
Friedrich, M., Hofsaess, I. and Wekeck, S. (2001), ‘Timetable-Based Transit Assignment
Using Branch and Bound Techniques’, Transportation Research Record 1752, 100–107.
Fu, Q., Liu, R. and Hess, S. (2012), ‘A review on transit assignment modelling approaches
to congested networks: a new perspective’, Procedia -Social and Behavioral Sciences
54, 1145–1155.
Gentile, G. and Noekel, K. (2016), Modelling Public Transport Passenger Flows in the
Era of Intelligent Transport Systems, Vol. 1, Springer.
Hildebrand, C. and H¨ortin, S. (2014), A comparative study between Emme and Visum
with respect to public transport assignment, PhD thesis, Link¨opings University.
Hoogendoorn-Lanser, S., Bovy, P. and Van Nes, R. (2014), ‘Application of Constrained
Enumeration Approach to Multimodal Choice Set Generation’, Transportation Re-
search Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board pp. 50–57.
Li, Q., Chen, P. and Nie, Y. (2015), ‘Finding optimal hyperpaths in large transit
networks with realistic headway distributions’, European Journal of Operational
Research 240, 98–108.
Liu, Y., Bunker, J., Ferreira, L. and Ttrv, F. (2010), ‘Transit Users’ Route-Choice
Modelling in Transit Assignment: A Review’, Transport Reviews 30(6), 753–769.
Mai, T., Fosgerau, M. and Frejinger, E. (2015), ‘A nested recursive logit model for route
choice analysis’, Transportation Research Part B 75, 100–112.
McNally, M. G. (2007), The Four Step Model, in D. Henscher and K. J. Button, eds,
‘Handbook of Transport Modeling’, 2 edn, Pergamon, chapter 3.
Metro (2017), ‘Timetable for the Metro in Copenhagen’.
URL: http://www.m.dk/#!/om+metroen/rejseinformation/koereplan
Movia (2017a), ‘Movia - Mere plads og renere miljø n˚ar 5A bliver til 5C’.
URL: https://www.moviatraﬁk.dk/presse/presse-og-nyheder/mere-plads-og-renere-
miljoe-naar-5a-bliver-til-5c
Movia (2017b), Samlet buskøreplan for Movia, Technical report, København.
Nielsen, O. A. (2000), ‘A stochastic transit assignment model considering diﬀerences in
passengers utility functions’, Transportation Research Part B 34, 377–402.
81
==PAGE:92==
DTU Management Engineering
Nielsen, O. A. and Frederiksen, R. D. (2006), ‘Optimisation of timetable-based, stochastic
transit assignment models based on MSA’, Annals of Operations Research 144(1), 263–
285.
N¨okel, K. and Wekeck, S. (2007), ‘Choice Models in Frequency-based Transit Assignment’.
Nuzzolo, A. and Comi, A. (2016), ‘Individual utility-based path suggestions in transit
trip planners’, IET Intelligent Transport Systems 10(4), 219–226.
Nuzzolo, A., Russo, F. and Crisalli, U. (2001), ‘A Doubly Dynamic Schedule-based
Assignment Model for Transit Networks’, Transportation Science 35(3), 268–285.
URL: http://pubsonline.informs.org
Prato, C. G. (2009), ‘Route choice modeling: past, present and future research directions’,
J. Choice Modelling 2(1), 65–100.
Rasmussen, T. K. (2010), Rutevalg i kollektiv transport i Hovedstadsomr˚adet - generering
og kvalitetsanalyser af valgsæt, Technical report, Technical Universiy of Denmark.
Rasmussen, T. K., Nielsen, O. A., Watling, D. P. and Prato, C. G. (2017), ‘The
restricted stochastic user equilibrium with threshold model: Large-scale application
and parameter testing’, European Journal of Transport and Infrastructure Research
EJTIR 17(1), 1–24.
Rejseplanen (2017a), ‘Rejseplanen i tal’.
URL: http://info.rejseplanen.dk/hjaelp/om rejseplanen/mere om rejseplanen/
Rejseplanen (2017b), ‘Rejseplanens API – Rejseplanen A/S’.
URL: https://help.rejseplanen.dk/hc/da/articles/214174465-Rejseplanens-API
Schm¨ocker, J. D., Fonzone, A., Shimamoto, H., Kurauchi, F. and Bell, M. G. H. (2011),
‘Frequency-based transit assignment considering seat capacities’, Transportation Re-
search Part B: Methodological 45(2), 392–408.
Schm¨ocker, J.-D., Shimamoto, H. and Kurauchi, F. (2013), ‘Generation and calibration
of transit hyperpaths’, Transportation Research Part C 36, 406–418.
Sheﬃ, Y. (1985), Urban transportation networks.
Spiess, H. and Florian, M. (1989), ‘Optimal Strategies: A New Assignment Model for
Transit Networks’, Transportation Research Part B 23B(2), 83–102.
Thorhauge, M., Rich, J. and Cherchi, E. (2015), Departure time choice: Modelling
individual preferences, intention and constraints, PhD thesis, Technical University of
Denmark.
Traﬁkstyrelsen (2012), Kapacitet og trængsel i den kollektive traﬁk i hovedstadsomr˚adet,
Technical report.
82
==PAGE:93==
DTU Management Engineering
Wardrop, J. G. (1952), ‘Some Theoretical Aspects of Road Traﬃc Research’, Proceedings
of Institution of Civil Engineers, Part II pp. 325–378.
Zhao, L., Ohshima, T. and Nagamochi, H. (2008), ‘A* Algorithm for the time-dependent
shortest path problem’.
83
==PAGE:94==
DTU Management Engineering
A
Appendix
A.1
Snippets of timetables
Snippet of timetable for line 8A
Figure 54: Example of timetable for bus line 8A taken from Movia (2017b)
84
==PAGE:95==
DTU Management Engineering
Snippet of timetable for line 150S
Figure 55: Example of timetable for bus line 150S taken from Movia (2017b)
85
==PAGE:96==
DTU Management Engineering
Snippet of timetable for the F line
Figure 56: The published timetable for the F line taken from DSB (2016b)
Snippet of timetable for the Metro
Figure 57: The published timetable for the Metro taken from Metro (2017)
86
==PAGE:97==
DTU Management Engineering
A.2
Algorithms
Algorithm with slack
while an event at the end node has not been checked do
Find cheapest event in heap which has not been checked (Ec) for all possible
events (Ep) do
if Ep.FromNode == Ec.ToNode AND Ep.StartTime ≥Ec.EndTime AND
stop has not been visited previously on same path then
dominated = 0;
for all Events in the heap (Eh) do
if Ep.ToNode == Eh.ToNode AND
Eh.EndTime ≤Ep.EndTime AND
Eh.TotalCost + (Ep.EndTime - Eh.EndTime) * wWait) ≤
Ep.TotalCost AND
(Eh.TotalCost + Eh.TotalCost * βslack) ≤Ep.TotalCost
then
dominated = 1;
end
if dominated == 0 then
Insert Ep into event heap
for all events in the event heap (Eh) do
if Ep.ToNode == Eh.ToNode AND
Ep.EndTime ≤Eh.EndTime AND
(Ep.TotalCost + (Eh.EndTime - Ep.EndTime) * βWait) ≤
E2.TotalCost AND
(Ep.TotalCost + Ep.TotalCost * βslack) ≤Eh.TotalCost
then
Remove Eh from event heap;
end
end
Set Ec.checked = 1;
end
Algorithm 3: Event dominance implementation with slack
87
==PAGE:98==
DTU Management Engineering
A.3
Matlab Code
Main script
1 %% Import data
2
c l c ;
3
c l e a r ;
4
startProgram = t i c ;
5
6
f p r i n t f ( ’ Starting
program\n ’ ) ;
7
f p r i n t f ( ’ Loading data from Excel−sheets \n ’ ) ;
8
9
Scenario = 1;
10
11 % Load
a l l
data needed
12
LoadData
13
14
f p r i n t f ( ’ Loading time
%f
( sec ) \n ’ , toc ( startProgram ) ) ;
15
16 %% Print
d e s c r i p t i o n
of
network
17
PrintDescriptionOfNetwork
18
19 %% Creating
runs
fo r
each
schedule
20
CreateScheduleRuns
21
f p r i n t f ( ’ Running time
u n t i l
a f t e r
run
creation : %f
( sec )\n ’ , toc (
startProgram ) ) ;
22
23 %% Information on start ,
end ,
time and parameters
24
25 % Start node ,
end node and
s t a r t i n g
time
26
startNode = 1;
27
endNode = 10;
28
startTime = 455;
29
parameterSetting = 1;
30
pDist = P. WaitHeadway( parameterSetting ) ;
31
32 % Parameters
except
in
v e h i c l e
parameters
33
walkW = P.WalkW( parameterSetting ) ;
34
waitW = P.WaitW( parameterSetting ) ;
35
conW = P.ConW( parameterSetting ) ;
36
zoneWaitW = P. ZoneWaitW( parameterSetting ) ;
37
transferPW = P. TransferP ( parameterSetting ) ;
38
waitHeadway = P. WaitHeadway( parameterSetting ) ;
39
slack = P. Slack ( parameterSetting ) ;
40
slackWait = P. SlackWait ( parameterSetting ) ;
41
42
43 %% Find
shortest
path using
event dominance
44
startEventDominance = t i c ;
45
f p r i n t f ( ’ \ nStarting
shortest
path
search
with event dominance\n ’ ) ;
46
f p r i n t f ( ’ Searching from node %d to node %d at time %d\n ’ , startNode ,
endNode , startTime ) ;
47
48 % Event dominance algorithm
88
==PAGE:99==
DTU Management Engineering
49
50
endNodeChecked = 0;
51
E( 1 , : ) = {1 ,{ ’ Start ’ } ,{ ’ Start ’ } ,0 , startNode , startNode , startTime , startTime
,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,1 ,{ startNode } ,1};
52
CheckEvent = E( 1 , : ) ;
53
NewEvent = CheckEvent ;
54
SecondBestEvents = CheckEvent ( [ ] , : ) ;
55
56
eventsCreated = 1; % Start
event
already
created
57
58
while sum(E. Checked ) < height (E) % Search
as
long
as
there
are ” unchecked
” events
59
% Find the new fromnode to check
60
minCost = i n f ;
61
rowToBeChecked = i n f ;
62
f o r n=1: height (E)
63
i f E. Checked (n) == 0
64
i f E. TotalCost (n) < minCost
65
minCost = E. TotalCost (n) ;
66
rowToBeChecked = n ;
67
end
68
end
69
end
70
CheckEvent = E(rowToBeChecked , : ) ;
71
E. Checked ( rowToBeChecked ) = 1;
72
f p r i n t f ( ’FromNode to be checked : %d with time %d and cost %d \n ’ ,
CheckEvent . ToNode(1) , round ( CheckEvent . EndTime(1) ,0) , round (
CheckEvent . TotalCost (1) ,0) ) ;
73
74
% I f
the new fromnode
i s
equal
to
the
destination ,
then
f i n i s h
75
i f
CheckEvent . ToNode(1) == endNode
76
endNodeChecked = 1;
77
end
78
79
% Check connectors
80
f o r
c=1: height (C)
81
i f C. FromNode( c ) == CheckEvent . ToNode(1) && ismember (C. ToNode( c ) ,
CheckEvent . VisitedNodes {1})==0
82
newEventToNode = C. ToNode( c ) ;
83
newEventFromNode = C. FromNode( c ) ;
84
newEventTime = CheckEvent . EndTime(1) + C. TravelTime ( c ) ;
85
newEventCost = CheckEvent . TotalCost (1) + C. TravelTime ( c )∗conW
;
86
CheckForDominance
87
% I f
the
connector
i s
not dominated ,
i n s e r t
connector
into
heap
88
i f
dominated == 0
89
eventsCreated = eventsCreated + 1;
90
NewEvent ( 1 , : ) = { eventsCreated ,{ ’ Connector ’ } ,{ ’ Connector ’
} , CheckEvent . Id (1) ,C. FromNode( c ) ,C. ToNode( c ) ,
CheckEvent . EndTime(1) , newEventTime ,0 ,0 ,C. TravelTime ( c )
∗conW, newEventCost ,0 , CheckEvent . Headway (1) , CheckEvent .
Percent (1) ,{[ CheckEvent . VisitedNodes {1} ,C. ToNode( c ) ]} ,
89
==PAGE:100==
DTU Management Engineering
CheckEvent . Dominance (1) };
91
RemoveDominatedEvents
92
E = [E; NewEvent ] ;
93
f p r i n t f ( ’Added :
Connector from node %d to node %d at time
%d \n ’ ,C. FromNode( c ) ,C. ToNode( c ) , round ( CheckEvent .
EndTime(1) ) ) ;
94
end
95
end
96
end
97
98
% Check schedule−based
s e r v i c e s
99
numberOfDeparturesToFind = 4;
100
f o r
s =1: height (S)
101
i f
S . FromNode( s )==CheckEvent . ToNode(1) && ismember (S . ToNode( s ) ,
CheckEvent . VisitedNodes {1})==0
102
f u l l P e r c e n t = 0;
103
k = 1;
104
r = find ( strcmp (R. Line , S . Line ( s ) ) & R. StartTime >= (
CheckEvent . EndTime(1)−(CheckEvent . Headway (1) /2) ) & R.
FromNode==S . FromNode( s ) & R. ToNode==S . ToNode( s ) ,
numberOfDeparturesToFind ) ;
105
while
f u l l P e r c e n t < 1
106
newEventToNode = R. ToNode( r (k) ) ;
107
newEventFromNode = R. FromNode( r (k) ) ;
108
newEventTime = R. EndTime( r (k) ) ;
109
i f
strcmp ( CheckEvent . Line (1) ,R. Line ( r (k) ) )˜=1 && strcmp (
CheckEvent . Line (1) , ’ Connector ’ )˜=1
110
TP = 1;
111
e l s e
112
TP = 0;
113
end
114
i f
strcmp ( CheckEvent . Line (1) , ’ Connector ’ )==0
115
waitOrZoneWait = waitW ;
116
e l s e
117
waitOrZoneWait = zoneWaitW ;
118
end
119
newEventCost = CheckEvent . TotalCost (1) + (R. StartTime ( r (k
) )−CheckEvent . EndTime(1) ) ∗waitOrZoneWait + R.
TravelTime ( r (k) ) ∗inVehicle . Weight (R. ServiceType ( r (k) ) )
+ TP ∗transferPW ;
120
CheckForDominance
121
% I f
run
i s
not dominated ,
i n s e r t
run
into
heap
122
i f
dominated == 0
123
i f
CheckEvent . Headway (1) > 0
124
newPercent = cdf ( ’ Binomial ’ ,(R. StartTime ( r (k) )−(
CheckEvent . EndTime(1)−CheckEvent . Headway (1) /2)
) , CheckEvent . Headway (1) , pDist )−f u l l P e r c e n t ;
125
i f
cdf ( ’ Binomial ’ ,(R. StartTime ( r (k) )−(CheckEvent .
EndTime(1)−CheckEvent . Headway (1) /2) ) ,
CheckEvent . Headway (1) , pDist ) < 1
126
ScheduleDominance = 0;
127
e l s e
128
ScheduleDominance = CheckEvent . Dominance (1) ;
90
==PAGE:101==
DTU Management Engineering
129
end
130
f p r i n t f ( ’New percent %d f or %d with headway %d \n
’ , newPercent , (R. StartTime ( r (k) )−(CheckEvent .
EndTime(1)−CheckEvent . Headway (1) /2) ) ,
CheckEvent . Headway (1) ) ;
131
f u l l P e r c e n t = newPercent+f u l l P e r c e n t ;
132
e l s e
133
newPercent = 1;
134
f u l l P e r c e n t = 1;
135
ScheduleDominance = CheckEvent . Dominance (1) ;
136
end
137
eventsCreated = eventsCreated + 1;
138
NewEvent ( 1 , : ) = { eventsCreated ,{ ’ In
v e h i c l e ’ } ,R. Line (
r (k) ) , CheckEvent . Id (1) ,R. FromNode( r (k) ) ,R. ToNode( r
(k) ) ,R. StartTime ( r (k) ) , newEventTime ,TP,R. StartTime
( r (k) )−CheckEvent . EndTime(1) ,R. TravelTime ( r (k) )∗
inVehicle . Weight (R. ServiceType ( r (k) ) ) + TP ∗
transferPW , newEventCost ,0 ,0 , CheckEvent . Percent (1) ∗
newPercent , { [ CheckEvent . VisitedNodes {1} ,R. ToNode( r
(k) ) ]} , ScheduleDominance
139
};
140
RemoveDominatedEvents
141
E = [E; NewEvent ] ;
142
f p r i n t f ( ’Added : Run from node %d to node %d with
l i n e
%s
at time %d \n ’ ,R. FromNode( r (k) ) ,R. ToNode( r (k) )
,R. Line{ r (k) } ,R. StartTime ( r (k) ) ) ;
143
e l s e
144
f u l l P e r c e n t = 1;
145
end
146
k = k + 1;
147
end
148
149
e l s e
150
% Not from same stop
151
end
152
end
153
154
155
% Check frequency−based
s e r v i c e s
156
f o r
f =1: height (F)
157
i f F. FromNode( f ) == CheckEvent . ToNode(1) && ismember (F. ToNode( f ) ,
CheckEvent . VisitedNodes {1})==0
158
newEventToNode = F. ToNode( f ) ;
159
newEventFromNode = F. FromNode( f ) ;
160
i f
strcmp ( CheckEvent . Line (1) ,F. Line ( f ) )˜=1 && strcmp (
CheckEvent . Line (1) , ’ Connector ’ )˜=1
161
TP = 1;
162
e l s e
163
TP = 0;
164
end
165
i f
strcmp ( CheckEvent . Line (1) ,F. Line ( f ) )==1
166
waitOrNot = 0;
167
e l s e
91
==PAGE:102==
DTU Management Engineering
168
waitOrNot = 1;
169
end
170
newEventTime = CheckEvent . EndTime(1) + F. Headway( f ) ∗
waitHeadway ∗waitOrNot + F. TravelTime ( f ) ;
171
newEventCost = CheckEvent . TotalCost (1) + (F. Headway( f ) ∗
waitHeadway ∗waitOrNot ) ∗waitW + F. TravelTime ( f ) ∗inVehicle
. Weight (F. ServiceType ( f ) ) + TP ∗transferPW ;
172
CheckForDominance
173
% I f
run
i s
not dominated ,
i n s e r t
run
into
heap
174
i f
dominated == 0
175
eventsCreated = eventsCreated + 1;
176
NewEvent ( 1 , : ) = { eventsCreated ,{ ’ In
v e h i c l e ’ } ,F. Line ( f ) ,
CheckEvent . Id (1) ,F. FromNode( f ) ,F. ToNode( f ) , CheckEvent .
EndTime(1)+F. Headway( f ) ∗waitHeadway , newEventTime ,TP,F.
Headway( f ) ∗waitHeadway∗waitOrNot ,F. TravelTime ( f ) ∗
inVehicle . Weight (F. ServiceType ( f ) ) + TP ∗transferPW ,
newEventCost ,0 , CheckEvent . Headway (1)+F. Headway( f )∗
waitOrNot , CheckEvent . Percent (1) ,{[ CheckEvent .
VisitedNodes {1} ,F. ToNode( f ) ]} , CheckEvent . Dominance (1)
};
177
RemoveDominatedEvents
178
E = [E; NewEvent ] ;
179
f p r i n t f ( ’Added : Run from node %d to node %d with
l i n e %s
at time %d \n ’ ,F. FromNode( f ) ,F. ToNode( f ) ,F. Line{ f } ,
round ( CheckEvent . EndTime(1)+F. Headway( f )∗waitHeadway∗
waitOrNot ) ) ;
180
end
181
end
182
end
183
184
% Check Transfers
185
f o r
t =1: height (T)
186
i f
(T. FromNode( t ) == CheckEvent . ToNode(1) && ismember (T. ToNode( t )
, CheckEvent . VisitedNodes {1})==0) && strcmp ( CheckEvent . Type{1} ,
’ Transfer ’ )==0 | |
(T. ToNode( t ) == CheckEvent . ToNode(1) &&
ismember (T. FromNode( t ) , CheckEvent . VisitedNodes {1})==0) &&
strcmp ( CheckEvent . Type{1} , ’ Transfer ’ )==0
187
i f T. FromNode( t ) == CheckEvent . ToNode(1)
188
newEventToNode = T. ToNode( t ) ;
189
newEventFromNode = T. FromNode( t ) ;
190
e l s e
191
newEventToNode = T. FromNode( t ) ;
192
newEventFromNode = T. ToNode( t ) ;
193
end
194
newEventTime = CheckEvent . EndTime(1) + T. TravelTime ( t ) ;
195
newEventCost = CheckEvent . TotalCost (1) + T. TravelTime ( t )∗
walkW ;
196
CheckForDominance
197
% I f
the
t r a n s f e r
l i n k
i s
not dominated ,
i n s e r t
t r a n s f e r
into
heap
198
i f
dominated == 0
199
eventsCreated = eventsCreated + 1;
200
i f T. FromNode( t ) == CheckEvent . ToNode(1)
92
==PAGE:103==
DTU Management Engineering
201
NewEvent ( 1 , : ) = { eventsCreated ,{ ’ Transfer ’ } ,{ ’
Transfer ’ } , CheckEvent . Id (1) ,T. FromNode( t ) ,T. ToNode
( t ) , CheckEvent . EndTime(1) ,newEventTime ,0 ,0 ,T.
TravelTime ( t ) ∗walkW, newEventCost ,0 , CheckEvent .
Headway (1) , CheckEvent . Percent (1) ,{[ CheckEvent .
VisitedNodes {1} ,T. ToNode( t ) ]} , CheckEvent . Dominance
(1) };
202
RemoveDominatedEvents
203
E = [E; NewEvent ] ;
204
f p r i n t f ( ’Added :
Transfer from node %d to node %d at
time %d \n ’ ,T. FromNode( t ) ,T. ToNode( t ) , round (
CheckEvent . EndTime(1) ,0) )
205
e l s e
206
NewEvent ( 1 , : ) = { eventsCreated ,{ ’ Transfer ’ } ,{ ’
Transfer ’ } , CheckEvent . Id (1) ,T. ToNode( t ) ,T. FromNode
( t ) , CheckEvent . EndTime(1) ,newEventTime ,0 ,0 ,T.
TravelTime ( t ) ∗walkW, newEventCost ,0 , CheckEvent .
Headway (1) , CheckEvent . Percent (1) ,{[ CheckEvent .
VisitedNodes {1} ,T. FromNode( t ) ]} , CheckEvent .
Dominance (1) };
207
RemoveDominatedEvents
208
E = [E; NewEvent ] ;
209
f p r i n t f ( ’Added :
Transfer from node %d to node %d at
time %d \n ’ ,T. ToNode( t ) ,T. FromNode( t ) , round (
CheckEvent . EndTime(1) ,0) ) ;
210
end
211
end
212
end
213
end
214
end
215
216
eventDominanceTime = toc ( startEventDominance ) ;
217
f p r i n t f ( ’Run time
f or
event dominance : %f
( sec )\n ’ , eventDominanceTime ) ;
218
programTime = toc ( startProgram ) ;
219
f p r i n t f ( ’ Total run time : %f
( sec ) \n ’ , programTime ) ;
220
221 %% Print
shortest
path
222
PrintShortestPath
93
==PAGE:104==
DTU Management Engineering
Check for dominance
1
dominated = 0;
2
f o r
i =1: height (E)
3
i f
newEventToNode == E. ToNode( i )
4
i f E. Dominance ( i ) == 1
5
i f E. EndTime( i ) <= newEventTime
6
i f
round (E. TotalCost ( i ) ∗slack , 4 )
<= round ( newEventCost
, 4 ) && round (E. TotalCost ( i ) ∗slackWait + (newEventTime−
E. EndTime( i ) ) ∗waitW , 4 )
<= round ( newEventCost , 4 )
7
dominated = 1;
8
end
9
end
10
end
11
end
12
end
Remove dominated events
1 %% This
s c r i p t
searches
through
a l l
events
currently
in
the heap ,
and
d e l e t e s
dominated events
2
3
eventsToRemove = [ ] ;
4
slackWait = 1;
5
6
f o r
against =1: height (E)
7
i f
NewEvent . ToNode(1) == E. ToNode( against )
8
i f E. Dominance ( against ) == 1
9
i f
NewEvent . EndTime(1) <= E. EndTime( against )
10
i f
round (NewEvent . TotalCost (1) ∗slack , 4 ) <= round (E.
TotalCost ( against ) ,4) && round (NewEvent . TotalCost (1) ∗
slackWait+(E. EndTime( against )−NewEvent . EndTime(1) ) ∗
waitW , 4 ) <= round (E. TotalCost ( against ) ,4)
11
f p r i n t f ( ’ Deleted :
Event from node %d to node %d with
l i n e %s
departing
at %d and
a r r i v i n g
at %d \n ’ ,E.
FromNode( against ) ,E. ToNode( against ) ,E. Line{ against
} ,E. StartTime ( against ) ,NewEvent . EndTime(1) ) ;
12
eventsToRemove = [ eventsToRemove , against ] ;
13
end
14
end
15
end
16
end
17
end
18
19
E( eventsToRemove , : ) = [ ] ;
94
==PAGE:105==
DTU Management Engineering
A.4
Cost calculation for recursive logit example
Table 24: Results for recursive logit example
Branch
Prob
to
reach
Stop 1
Stop 2
Prob
Final ﬂow
to
destination
Cost*ﬂow
Line 4 - ﬁrst candidate
23
95%
43%
9.97
Line 5 - ﬁrst candidate
26
5%
2%
0.56
Line 4 - second candidate
32
88%
40%
12.82
Line 5 - second candidate
34
12%
5%
1.84
Line 2
100%
30
9%
9%
2.70
Line 3 - ﬁrst candidate
50%
23
91%
Line 3 - second candidate
50%
32
Total
100%
27.89
95
==PAGE:106==
DTU Management Engineering
A.5
List of input tables
• P a set of parameters for the diﬀerent parts of a trip
– βivmode In vehicle time depending on mode
∗Modes are Metro (m), Train (t), S-train (s) and Bus (b)
– βtr Transfer time
– βwalk Walking time
– βwait Waiting time
– βtp Transfer penalty
– βcon Access/egress time
– βslack slack on generalized cost
– dst desired departure time
– startnode starting node
– endnode end node
• S set of schedule-based runs between each stop
– Id
– Line
– FromNode
– ToNode
– Travel Time
– First Departure Time
– Last Departure Time
– Headway (minutes between departures)
– Length
• F set of frequency-based services between each stop
– Id
– Line
– Service Type
– FromNode
– ToNode
– Travel Time
– Headway
• T Transfer links
– Id
– FromNode
– ToNode
– Travel Time
• C Connectors
– Id
– FromNode
– ToNode
– Travel Time
• N Nodes including centroids
– Id
96
==PAGE:107==
DTU Management Engineering
– Name
• ST Service types
– Id
– Service Type
• L Lines
– Id
– Name
– Service Type
– FB or SB
97
==PAGE:108==
DTU Management Engineering
A.6
Input and results for example from DTU to Brønshøj
Overview of included lines
Table 25: Overview of lines included in the example
Lines
ServiceType
FB/SB
Headway
300S
1
SB
12
30E
1
SB
10
180
1
SB
5
150S
1
SB
5
15E
1
SB
10
184
1
SB
20
161
1
SB
30
350S
1
SB
5
5C
1
SB
4
B
2
SB
10
E
2
SB
10
F
2
FB
5
A
2
SB
10
Bx
2
SB
20
21
1
SB
10
8A
1
FB
6
C
2
SB
10
H
2
SB
20
250S
1
SB
10
200S
1
SB
10
166
1
SB
20
98
==PAGE:109==
DTU Management Engineering
Absolute ﬂow for scenario with some lines frequency-based
Figure 58: Flow distribution of scenario with more lines frequency-based
99
==PAGE:110==
DTU Management Engineering
Absolute ﬂow for scenario with frequency aggregation
Figure 59: Flow distribution of scenario with frequency aggregation
100
==PAGE:111==
DTU Management Engineering
A.7
List of ﬁgures and tables
List of Figures
1
Overview of the 4-stage model after McNally (2007) . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Example of a frequency- and schedule-based bus line
. . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Bus lines in Copenhagen (Movia, 2017b) A-buses - Local buses - S-buses
- E-buses - Cityline (5C) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
4
S-train lines (DSB, 2016a) All lines 10 minutes headway except Bx (20
minutes) and F (5 minutes)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
5
Metro lines (Metro, 2017) Both lines run with 4 minutes headway . . .
5
6
Example of travel plan from trip with frequency-based services using
Rejseplanen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
7
Example of diachronic graph from Nuzzolo et al. (2001) . . . . . . . . .
10
8
Overview of choice set generation techniques after Rasmussen (2010)
.
12
9
Example of branch and bound technique (Friedrich et al., 2001)
. . . .
13
10
Example of a three link network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
11
Cummulative density function for selected distribution types . . . . . .
20
12
PDF of convolution of two uniform discrete distributions with diﬀerent
means
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
13
Convolution of three uniform discrete distributions
. . . . . . . . . . .
22
14
Convolution of four uniform discrete distributions . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
15
Probability density function for three binomial distributions
. . . . . .
23
16
Example of transfer from a schedule-based to a schedule-based service .
25
17
Example of transfer from a schedule-based to a frequency-based service
25
18
Example of transfer from a frequency-based to a schedule-based service
26
19
Example of transfer from a frequency-based to a frequency-based service
27
20
Example of trip with two frequency-based services connecting to a
schedule-based service
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
21
Small example with 3 stops
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
22
Examples of schedule- to schedule-based transfers . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
23
Examples of schedule- to frequency-based transfers
. . . . . . . . . . . .
31
24
Examples of frequency- to schedule-based transfers
. . . . . . . . . . .
32
25
Example with frequency- to frequency-based transfer
. . . . . . . . . .
33
26
Original implementation of event dominance (Florian, 1999)
. . . . . .
36
27
Event dominance but including slack to allow non optimal events
. . .
38
28
Small example for event dominance between frequency- and schedule-
based arrivals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
29
Example 1 - which events should deﬁne the threshold Line 2 and 3 follow
diﬀerent paths to destination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
30
Example 2 - which events should deﬁne the threshold Line 2 and 3 follow
diﬀerent paths to destination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
31
Example of coordination of schedule- and frequency-based services with
same headways
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
101
==PAGE:112==
DTU Management Engineering
32
Example of coordination of schedule- and frequency-based services with
diﬀerent headways
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
33
Frequency aggregation example Top: original network - Bottom: aggre-
gated network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
34
Network example for choice model application . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
35
Cost graph of example for choice model application . . . . . . . . . . .
45
36
Choice probabilities of the diﬀerent lines - MNL - Recursive logit . . . . . 47
37
Example Network for Public Transport Assignment . . . . . . . . . . .
48
38
Small example which is used to describe the need for direct arcs Line 1 -
Line 2 - Line 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
39
Example of direct arcs between all stop pairs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
40
Included lines in example from DTU to CPH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
41
Flow distribution from DTU to CPH if all choices are included Departure
7.30 AM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
42
Flow distribution from DTU to CPH for a slack of 20% with departure
7.30 AM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
43
Flow distribution from DTU to CPH for a slack of 20% Departure 7.35 AM 56
44
Flow distribution from DTU to CPH for a slack of 30% Train and S-train
parameter 25% lower - Departure 7.35 AM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
45
Overview of model area for the example from DTU to Brønshøj
. . . .
59
46
Overview with lines and line types
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
47
Travel suggestions from Rejseplanen for a trip at 7.30 AM from DTU to
Brønshøj . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
48
Travel suggestions from Google Maps for a trip at 7.30 AM from DTU to
Brønshøj . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
49
Results of assignment on existing network - departure at 7.30 AM . . .
63
50
Overview of new network with 5C, 150S and 350S as frequency-based
services
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
51
Diﬀerence of ﬂow between assignment on existing network and assignment
on new network with 5C, 150S and 350S as frequency-based services
Positive numbers indicate more ﬂow in new scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
52
Diﬀerence of ﬂow between assignment on existing network and assignment
with frequency aggregation - positive indicates more ﬂow in new scenario
69
53
Diﬀerence in global vs. local slack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
54
Example of timetable for bus line 8A taken from Movia (2017b)
. . . .
84
55
Example of timetable for bus line 150S taken from Movia (2017b)
. . .
85
56
The published timetable for the F line taken from DSB (2016b)
. . . .
86
57
The published timetable for the Metro taken from Metro (2017) . . . .
86
58
Flow distribution of scenario with more lines frequency-based . . . . . .
99
59
Flow distribution of scenario with frequency aggregation
. . . . . . . .
100
102
==PAGE:113==
DTU Management Engineering
List of Tables
1
Waiting times for transfers between schedule- and frequency-based services 24
2
Route choice parameters (weights) from LTM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3
Level of service for the four schedule- to schedule-based examples
. . . .
31
4
Level of service for the two schedule- to frequency-based examples . . . .
31
5
Level of service for the two frequency- to schedule-based examples . . .
32
6
Level of service for the frequency- to frequency-based example . . . . .
33
7
Level of service for the diﬀerent cases and examples . . . . . . . . . . .
34
8
Example of comparison of frequency- and schedule-based events . . . .
39
9
Results of MNL application
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
10
Split between line 4 and 5 for the two candidates of line 3 . . . . . . . .
46
11
Split between line 2 and 3 given expected costs to destination
. . . . . . 47
12
Small example of usage of direct arcs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
13
Route share for all possible paths with departure 7:30 AM
. . . . . . .
53
14
Route share for paths with maximum 20% higher cost - departure 7:30 AM 55
15
Generated paths with departure time 7:35 AM . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
16
Route share for paths with maximum 20% higher cost - departure 7:35 AM 55
17
Results with higher preference for train and slack of 30% - departure 7.35
AM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
18
Routes to CPH via Nørreport Metro platform with departure at 7:43 AM
from DTU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
19
Route share for paths with maximum 20% higher cost - departure 7:30
AM in the existing network (∗indicates paths which are grouped by two
candidate paths)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
20
Route share for paths with maximum 20% higher cost in existing network
Departure 7:30 AM - ∗indicate paths which is grouped of two candidate
paths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
21
Route share for paths with maximum 20% higher cost and departure at
7:30 AM 5C, 150S and 350S as frequency-based services . . . . . . . . .
66
22
Route share for paths with maximum 20% higher cost - departure 7:30
in the frequency aggregated network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
23
Waiting times for the four transfer types when including delays
. . . .
74
24
Results for recursive logit example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
25
Overview of lines included in the example
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
103
