==PAGE:1==
 
Introduction of new working and 
communication processes for integrated 
collaboration in the Danish AEC Industry 
 
Master Thesis 
Eline Termøhlen Mikkelsen s112903 
June 9th 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Supervisor: Flemming Vestergaard 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
ii 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
iii 
Preface 
This project is a Master Thesis, written by Eline Termøhlen Mikkelsen carried 
out in the period from January 9th to June 9th 2017. The Thesis is the final part of 
a master’s degree in Architectural Engineering at the department for Civil 
Engineering, at Technical University of Denmark (DTU), and accounts for 30 
ECTS points. 
 
This Thesis is written based on interviews and literature, as well as knowledge 
acquired from courses and projects, as well as work experience.  
 
The Thesis is written to enlighten professionals and non-professionals in and 
around the Danish AEC industry, of the current situation of the implementation 
and use of digital tools and processes. It informs the reader of the transition the 
Danish AEC industry has undergone to come to where the industry is today, and 
through analysis, provides a suggested strategy for how to move forward.  
 
The vision for this Thesis is to grasp the complexity of what initiatives exist in 
the industry today regarding the implementation of digital tools and processes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Signature & Date 
 
 
Eline Termøhlen Mikkelsen, June 9th 2017 
==PAGE:4==
 
iv
Acknowledgement 
I would like to thank Jørgen Emborg from COWI, Peter Hyttel from CF Møller and 
Stefan Snyder Larsen from Byggeri København, for taking the time to answer my 
questions, and share their expertise within the field of study.  
 
An extended thank you, to Peter Bo Olsen for not only answering my questions 
and sharing his expertise, but also taking the time to give me feedback and 
guidance on the Thesis along the way.  
 
I would also like to thank my thesis supervisor, Flemming Vestergaard. He has 
been a part of my studies from the beginning of my very first semester, and has 
been a big contributor to me choosing to go ‘the BIM way’. The close relation we 
have come to form over the years has provided me with trust in him, and our 
collaboration, which was a great asset to bring to a thesis project. Therefore I 
would like to thank him for his guidance, advice and help with this Thesis.  
 
I would also like to thank, Mikkel Mikkelsen, COWI, for being my partner for 
discussion, and for giving me feedback throughout the Thesis.  
 
Lastly, I would like to thank everyone who has supported me in the process.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
v
Abstract 
The digital development affects the AEC industry, providing new tools, 
integrated work methods, and methods for communicating and sharing 
information to an industry, where each project is unique, and where multi-
disciplinary collaboration is a daily factor. The Danish AEC industry is a unique 
business regarding traditions, government mandated regulations, and standards 
developed and provided by private and public organizations and initiatives. This 
Thesis researches the efforts made in the past decades, with the intention of 
enabling the implementation of digitalization, in the Danish AEC industry. 
Interviews with industry professionals enlighten the reader on the perception of 
the implementation in industry organizations and companies, and contribute to 
analysis. The complexity of an implementation of digital tools and processes in 
the industry is exposed, to articulate the difficulties the industry has met. The 
Thesis delivers a vision for the industry to have as a goal for the implementation 
of digitalization, and a strategy at Industry, Project and Company Level, for how 
to achieve the goal.  
 
==PAGE:6==
 
vi
Resumé 
Den digitale udvikling påvirker byggeindustrien, da den giver nye værktøjer, 
integrerede arbejds- og samarbejdsmetoder samt metoder til kommunikation og 
informations deling i en industri, hvor hvert projekt er unikt, og hvor tværfagligt 
samarbejde er en daglig faktor. Den danske byggeindustri er en branche der med 
traditioner, statslige regulativer og standarder udviklet og leveret af private og 
offentlige organisationer og initiativer gør sig unik. Denne afhandling undersøger 
indsatsen i de sidste årtier, med formålet at avancere implementering af 
digitalisering i den danske AEC-industri i fremtiden. Interviews med branchefolk 
oplyser læseren om opfattelsen af implementeringen i industriorganisationer og 
virksomheder og bidrager til den overordnede analyse. Kompleksiteten i en 
implementering af digitale værktøjer og processer i byggebranchen italesættes 
her, for at afdække de vanskeligheder industrien har mødt. Afhandlingen leverer 
en vision som mål for implementering af digitalisering og en strategi på industri, 
projekt og virksomhedsniveau for at nå målet. 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
1 
Table of Content 
1 | INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................ 3 
Hypothesis ............................................................................................................................................................ 4 
Problem Statement ........................................................................................................................................... 5 
Reading Guide ..................................................................................................................................................... 6 
Method .................................................................................................................................................................... 7 
2 | KNOWLEDGE BASE ................................................................................................... 15 
Terminology ....................................................................................................................................................... 15 
Implementation of Digitalization .............................................................................................................. 21 
Paradigm Change ............................................................................................................................................. 31 
Communication ................................................................................................................................................. 32 
3 | AS IS ............................................................................................................................... 39 
Technical Issues ................................................................................................................................................ 40 
Industry Issues .................................................................................................................................................. 41 
Organizational Issues ..................................................................................................................................... 57 
Judicial Issues .................................................................................................................................................... 61 
Social Issues ....................................................................................................................................................... 64 
4 | TO BE ............................................................................................................................. 71 
Vision ..................................................................................................................................................................... 71 
Strategy ................................................................................................................................................................ 73 
Sub-Conclusion ................................................................................................................................................. 81 
5 | DISCUSSION ................................................................................................................. 83 
6 | CONCLUSION ............................................................................................................... 89 
BIBLIOGRAPHY ................................................................................................................ 91 
FIGURES ............................................................................................................................. 95 
‘The Noun Project’ Credits ........................................................................................................................... 96 
TABLES ............................................................................................................................... 96 
APPENDIX .......................................................................................................................... 97 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
1 | INTRODUCTION 
 
3 
1 | INTRODUCTION 
Digitalization in the Architecture, Engineer and Construction (AEC) Industry, has 
been a main point on the agenda for the past few decades. This is a pressure 
caused by the increasing use and development of Information Communication 
Technology (ICT), and pressure from other industries embracing digitally based 
methods to increase productivity. Digitalization is a countermovement on 
traditional paper-based work methods in the industry, as it challenges the way 
we consider construction projects.  
 
The AEC design-construction process creates the worlds fixed physical wealth, 
such as homes, offices, schools, power plants, and fixed systems of our lives 
(Kunz & Fischer, 2012). The digital development is growing with record speed, 
and the digital possibilities in the AEC industry is unfolding. Many construction 
projects use digital building models, which make it easier to develop and adapt 
projects in the early stages. The digital development hold enormous potential for 
the industry (Bygherreforeningen, 2017a).  
 
Everyone speaks of a holistic multi-disciplinary collaboration in the early stages 
of a building project. New technologies and digitalized information bring to light 
possibilities for new methods of communication and information sharing 
between the different actors in the industry, but also creates new demands on 
the partners in collaboration.  
 
Digitalization in the AEC industry is a complex, wide-ranged subject that has 
been deeply researched by a number of competent people in the industry, both 
at supplier, designer, client, and university level. This Thesis identifies and 
addresses some of the overlying issues that prevail, and attempt to provide an 
overview and add some simplicity to the matter. The Thesis analyses history of 
digitalization in the Danish AEC industry, and through interviews, provide 
insight to the experienced effect of the implementation in companies and 
organizations in the industry ‘As Is’.  The Thesis then defines a common vision 
for the industry, and a strategy based on the analysis of how to reach that vision 
‘To Be’.  
 
 
==PAGE:10==
Master Thesis 
 
4 
Hypothesis 
This section postulates that the transition to a more digital AEC industry is 
inevitable, that it is not a question of ‘if’, but ‘when’. Every aspect of the human 
world today is getting increasingly more digital. New methods of communicating, 
interacting, collaborating, shopping, working are emerging in society. Whether 
people think transition is for the better, arguably, there is no avoiding it and 
should be embraced.  Digitalization in the AEC industry should not be seen as an 
extra measure, but as an integrated part of work methods to manage, design and 
produce the information, that is already required and existing on projects, in a 
more productive manner.  
 
Defined by the Business Dictionary, ‘’Digitalization is the integration of digital 
technologies into everyday life by the digitization of everything that can be 
digitized’’ (Business Dictionary, n.d.). Digitization is then characterized as the 
conversion of analog information in any form, to a digital form with suitable 
electronic devices, to allow information to be processed, stored and transmitted 
through digital circuits, equipment and networks.  
 
Digitalization in the AEC industry is an inevitable result of several factors, 
including pressure from other industries that are utilizing the vastly developing 
technologies, to automate design and production, and thereby increasing 
productivity e.g. the car industry. The international AEC industry is also applying 
pressure, in requiring the use of digital tools and processes on international 
projects, thereby excluding companies less knowledgeable from integrated 
building projects, both nationally and internationally.   
 
Patrick MacLeamy says that ‘‘BIM is the first truly global digital construction 
technology and will soon be deployed in every country in the world. It is a ‘game 
changer’ and we need to recognize that it is here to stay – but in common with all 
innovation this presents both risk and opportunity’’ (Malleson & Watson, 2016). 
Digitalization and the use of digital tools and processes in the Danish AEC 
industry, was identified as an inescapable topic in the early years of the 21st 
century, as the government had industry professionals research known issues in 
the industry (Rasmussen et al., 2001).  
 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
1 | INTRODUCTION 
 
5 
Problem Statement 
The following problem statement is the main question the Thesis answers.  
 
What is done in the Danish AEC Industry to aid the implementation of new digital 
working and communication processes for integrated collaboration in companies 
and on projects, and what needs to change to enable acceleration in the 
implementation?  
 
By responding to the three secondary questions below, the response to the 
overall problem statement is formed.  
 
- 
What is done in the industry in terms of regulations and initiatives to 
enhance the implementation of digital tools and processes?  
- 
How have the Danish companies experienced the initiatives and the 
government involvement in regard to the implementation of digital tools 
and processes?  
- 
How do we move forward with the implementation? Should the industry 
have a common vision regarding digital collaboration? If so, what issues 
are standing in the way of reaching that vision? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
Master Thesis 
 
6 
Reading Guide 
This section gives a short guide to how the Thesis is structured, and how 
illustrations, abbreviations and references are used.  
 
Illustrations and figures are cross-referenced in the text. Illustrations that are 
inspired from literature have the text in the caption ‘inspired by source’, and 
illustrations that are taken directly from another author have the text ‘from 
source’.  
 
It is stated in the Thesis from where the source for analysis or conclusion comes, 
and references are used when appropriate and needed (last name, year). 
Information coming from interviews is followed by the name of the informant 
e.g. (Peter Bo Olsen).  
 
All quotes from Danish interviews or literature are translated into English by the 
author, and are followed by the reference to the literature (Last name, year), or 
by the name of the person e.g. (Peter Bo Olsen).  
 
The Thesis follows the structure shown in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1 Structure of the Thesis 
 
 
 
==PAGE:13==
1 | INTRODUCTION 
 
7 
Method 
This chapter elaborates on the method incorporated to choose, collect and 
process empiricism, to answer the problem statement of this Thesis. The chapter 
delivers a short walkthrough of the qualitative interviews and observations 
(Bryman, 2012). In order to validate the authors’ credentials, this chapter 
provides a small summary of the authors experience acquired in the industry.  
Data Triangulation 
Data triangulation is used to verify the collected empiricism for the Thesis. Data 
triangulation, as a method for analysis, uses multiple sources of research within 
the same project. The triangulation in this Thesis is used to cross-verify data 
from interviews, theory, and observations. An extensive literature study and 
multiple interviews are conducted, along with empiricism collected from 
observations (Bryman, 2012). 
 
Figure 2 Data Triangulation Method 
Previously acquired knowledge from courses and working in the industry 
creates a basis of interpreting the information gathered from literature, 
interviews and observations. A pre-acquired understanding of the industry, the 
technologies and the processes creates a basis for the Thesis and the analysis of 
the empiricism meaning that the author’s recognition of reality is used to decide 
how individual parts of the collected empiricism can be used in the larger aspect 
of the Thesis questions.  
==PAGE:14==
Master Thesis 
 
8 
Author Credentials 
I started studying at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in September 
2011, and am now finishing my masters’ degree within Architectural 
Engineering at DTU. The degree consists of a three-year bachelor, and a two-year 
master. As a part of the bachelor degree I spent the fifth semester in Australia at 
the University of New South Wales (UNSW), taking courses within architectural 
engineering and project management. As a part of the master degree, I attended 
a course at Stanford University in California, USA. The course was called AEC 
Global Teamwork Challenge, where teams were combined with students from 
different disciplines, countries and backgrounds, and had to collaborate across 
time zones using digital tools, to design a university building. On the final 
semester of my master’s degree, I took courses at Aalborg University (AAU), 
within management and informatics in the built environment.  
 
Alongside studying, I have worked for COWI for six years and NIRAS for a year, 
to obtain relevant real-life knowledge within the field of AEC. I have also worked 
as a teaching assistant in BIM-courses alongside my thesis advisor Flemming 
Vestergaard.  
 
 
Figure 3 Map of universities and jobs 
Literature Study 
The literature study was executed through the study of books, articles, papers, 
webpages, and other literature available in the industry, shown in the 
bibliography.  
==PAGE:15==
1 | INTRODUCTION 
 
9 
Firstly, an extensive search on all previous material from course material and 
projects throughout the studies was executed, and all material that could be of 
relevance was saved, and read through at a later stage. 
 
Secondly, an online search was done by entering key words such as BIM, 
digitalization, VDC, implementation, integrated project, ICT, ICT regulations, 
regulation 118 and 119, amongst many others, into library databases including 
DTU Find It (Technical University of Denmark, n.d.).  
 
Third, when literature seemingly relevant to this Thesis was found, it was 
skimmed through to determine relevance and level of usefulness and validity. If 
the literature was determined to be of value, the entire article, book, thesis, etc., 
was read, whilst taking notes.  
 
Lastly, advice on literature from supervisor and informants was accepted and 
appreciated throughout the Thesis.  
Observations 
As a part of the Thesis, the author participated in two industry events, to stay 
updated on what current topics subsist in the Danish AEC industry. The two 
events were a VDC conference at MT Højgaard and a BuildingSMART1 network 
meeting at Molio2.  
 
At the VDC conference, participants attended from all areas and disciplines. A 
selection of presenters was represented by frontrunners within the disciplines 
research and education, Owner, Contractor, Supplier and Technical Developer. 
All presenters gave a presentation on what issues, initiatives and solutions they 
were working with within their organization and company. After the 
presentations, the presenters were included in a debate, where key topics and 
questions were discussed.   
 
The BuildingSMART network meeting at Molio was a presentation of the 
Tønsberg hospital project in Norway, where they are using advanced digital tools 
and processes to manage the project (Tønsbergprosjektet, n.d.). After the 
                                                        
1 BuildingSMART is an open neutral international collaboration on the 
development and use of open standards for BIM.  
2 Molio is an independent, nonprofit organization and is independent of private 
interests (Molio, 2017).  
==PAGE:16==
Master Thesis 
 
10
presentation there was an open discussion about the methods and tools applied 
on the project, and their experiences collected so far.  
 
On top of this, this Thesis draws perspectives to own observations from working 
in the industry, as well as observations gained through studies. Having been in 
four different university environments, in three different countries through the 
years, has given insight to different perspectives and approaches to digitalization 
in the AEC industry, and has been the source of a wide literature search.  
Interviews 
In order to get different perspectives, several interviews are conducted with 
actors from different disciplines and companies, with varying roles within the 
Danish AEC industry.  
 
Interviews are executed as qualitative and semi-structured (Bryman, 2012), 
meaning it is research and information based on words and opinions rather than 
statistics. The interviews are based on interview guides developed to cover the 
problem area, allowing the informant to supply the interviewer with additional 
information (Kvale & Brinkmann, 2009). Semi-structured interviews allow for 
changing the order and content of the questions, if it seems it will provide the 
Thesis with the best data.  Data is gathered through an iterative process, where 
theoretical assumptions and knowledge are modified into open questions, to be 
answered by the informant. Qualitative interviews are also a method to attain 
information about what the informant experiences through their perspective 
(Kvale & Brinkmann, 2009). This method makes it possible to have predefined 
questions, meanwhile allowing the interviewer to ask more in depth, or other 
questions, should it be necessary throughout the interview.  
Informants 
The people chosen for the interviews are professionals from the Danish AEC 
industry, within different discipline areas mentioned below:  
 
- 
Architecture  
- 
Engineering 
- 
Public Building Owner 
- 
Contractor 
 
 
 
==PAGE:17==
1 | INTRODUCTION 
 
11
Much of the data and information gathered from the interviews, have an 
undefined level of subjectivity to them, the validity of the data is however still 
acceptable, as it presents different opinions in the industry. The validity behind 
the choice of company with the associated informants, is also confirmed with the 
theory of Bent Flyvbjerg (Flyvbjerg, 2010). The one black swan falsifies the 
theory that all swans are white, in that if one of the leading professionals within 
the field is under the impression of something, chances are that other people 
share that belief. In this case, each discipline is represented by a company that 
can either be defined as one of the leading within digitalization in the industry, 
or as a company that is greatly subject to and affected by it. This validates the 
hypothesis, as others could share the experiences they have. The informants and 
their current company and function are listed in Table 1.  
 
Table 1 List of informants 
 
 
The informants have been chosen for their professional background and 
involvement in the Danish AEC industry, which makes them eligible to have 
relevant answers and data for the Thesis. Another reasoning behind the choice of 
companies and informants is to cover a large range of the value chain in the 
Danish AEC industry, from design to construction and operation.  
 
 
==PAGE:18==
Master Thesis 
 
12
Interview questions 
For the purpose of making the interviews structured, as well as comparable 
across disciplines, the interview guide in Appendix A is followed for all 
interviews.  
The interview was categorized within three overall themes:  
 
Question 1-13 
Implementation and use of BIM, VDC and ICT in the 
company or organization 
 
Question 14-19 
The experienced impact on the industry of the initiatives 
and regulations by the state 
 
Question 20-29 
The future perspective of the implementation 
 
These three overall themes are important, as it shows how representations from 
four different disciplines in the industry, view the advancement of the 
implementation with the initiatives made throughout the years. It also gives 
insight to how key representatives of the industry has experienced the 
transition. The questions provide insight into the situation ‘As Is’ today, and 
what the informants predict, or hope, the situation is ‘To Be’. The interview 
topics and questions are developed on the background of the author’s pre-
acquired knowledge on the AEC industry, as well as findings in preliminary 
literature studies.  
Data processing  
The interviews are recorded on an iPhone, and transferred to a computer for 
filing afterwards. The interviews are then transcribed, word for word. The 
interviews are used as empiricism to answer the problem statement. Empiricism 
is used to underline points made in the analysis and suggested strategies. The 
author holds both the recordings and the transcriptions in filing. This method for 
data processing was chosen as to keep interview related errors at a minimum 
(Bryman, 2012).   
Delimitation 
The topic of this Thesis is a largely researched and discussed complex topic, 
which is subject to varying opinions and experiences. It has therefore been 
essential to define focus and limitations for what this Thesis will not analyze, e.g. 
technology, management strategies, and thorough analysis of potentials.  
 
==PAGE:19==
1 | INTRODUCTION 
 
13
This Thesis is an further extension and development of the Bachelor Thesis 
‘Implementation of BIM in Danish Companies’ (Mikkelsen, 2014), which gave an 
overall analysis and strategy of  the implementation of BIM in Danish companies.  
This Thesis, goes deeper in the analysis of where the industry, and four 
companies as cases, is today in the use of digital tools and processes. It focuses 
on the government involvement with organizations and initiatives to enhance 
implementation, and give a status of the situation June 2017, ‘As Is’. The Thesis 
then provides a vision to work towards, and provide a strategy for how to 
achieve the vision ‘To Be’.  
 
As the topic is very complex, it is highlighted throughout the Thesis, where the 
focus is chosen. There are many possible issues, but this Thesis analyzes selected 
issues deemed relevant in this context.  
 
 
==PAGE:20==
Master Thesis 
 
14
 
 
==PAGE:21==
2 | KNOWLEDGE BASE 
 
15
2 | KNOWLEDGE BASE 
Terminology 
This Thesis contains many domain specific terms and abbreviations, e.g. VDC, 
BIM, CAD, IPD, 3D, 4D, IFC, ICT, etc. An extensive list is found in Figure 4. 
 
Figure 4 List of terms and abbreviations  
 
ABBREVIATIONS
DEFINITION
AAU
Aalborg University
ABB
AutoCAD Users in the Building Sector
AEC
Architect, Engineer, Construction
AIA
American Institute of Architects
AIACC
American Institute of Architects
BAM
Building Assembly Modeling
BCF
BIM Collaboration Format
BIM
Building Information Modeling
bips
building, informationtechnology, productivity and collaboration
BOOM
Building Owner Operation Model
BPS
The Building Sectors Planning System 
CAD
Computer Aided Design
CCS
Cuneco Classification System
CEN
The European Committee for Standardization
CIFE
Center for Integrated Facility Engineering
CUNECO
Center for Productivity
Danske ARK
Danish Association for Architectural Firms 
DBK
Danish Building Classification 
DDB
Digital Construction
DI
Confederation for Danish Industry 
DS
Danish Standard
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
FM
Facility Management
FRI
Danish Association for Consulting Engineers 
GSA
General Services Administration
IBB
IT Users in the Building Sector
ICT
Information Communication Tehnology
IFC
Industry Foundation Classes
IPD
Integrated Project Delivery
ISO
International Organizatin for Standardization
LOI
Level of Information
PM
Project Management
PPP
Public Private Partnership
SfB
Cooperation Committee for Construction Affairs
UNSW
University of New south wales
VDC
Virtual Design Reality 
==PAGE:22==
Master Thesis 
 
16
There is a difference between the terms, some are design methods, others 
coordination-, collaboration-, integration-methods. They do not replace each 
other, but represent elements of the overall idea. There is also a difference 
between the terms, and the use in the Danish context. The following section 
elaborates on some of the commonly heard terms and abbreviations when 
discussing digital tools and processes, and describes the distinction in the Danish 
context. The confusion around the terms will be analyzed further in the analysis 
of the issues. This Thesis primarily uses the wording ‘digital tools and processes’ 
instead of BIM and VDC, unless otherwise is stated.  
 
BIM & VDC 
Decades ago, Building Information Modeling (BIM) was the new buzzword in the 
industry, and brought forth model-based working methods (Eastman, Teicholz, 
Sacks, & Liston, 2011). When speaking of BIM, there is a variety of what the 
abbreviation and terms stand for. It is a minefield, where professionals in the 
industry all have their own definition of BIM. The analysis demonstrates how the 
four different informants all have different definitions. For the purpose of 
consistency, this Thesis uses the definition from the BIM Handbook, by Eastman 
et al., which states that ‘’Building Information Modeling (BIM) offers a novel 
approach to design, construction and facility management in which a digital 
representation of the building process is used to facilitate the exchange and 
interoperability of information in a digital format’’ (Eastman et al., 2011). 
 
Torben Biilmann says ‘‘the building industry is notoriously known as low 
productive. It is an industry imprinted with mistrust, where cost overruns, delays 
and defects have been taken for granted’’ (Biilmann, 2015). BIM has proposed 
many solutions to the issue of low productivity in the industry by promising 
greater sharing and reuse of information, automated drawing and visualization 
production, automated quantity takeoffs, collision control, easy simulation, 
analysis and facility management systems. In other words, it was introduced to 
increase productivity, improve quality, and decrease errors and wasted time on 
building projects. BIM provides a platform for coherent and comprehensive 
compilation of all information related to a project (Mikkelsen, 2014).  
 
Patrick MacLeamy did not believe the term BIM covered the full potential over a 
buildings lifecycle; he therefore developed the term BIM-BAM-BOOM (Arch 
Daily, 2012). To address the potential of this new working method, the acronym 
==PAGE:23==
2 | KNOWLEDGE BASE 
 
17
covers the three stages of a buildings lifecycle. According to MacLeamy, it starts 
with Building Information Modeling (BIM), where the architect and the 
engineers use 3D modeling to investigate design options and test building 
performance. The model is then handed over to the contractor, who streamlines 
the process with Building Assembly Modeling (BAM), where the contractor has 
the opportunity to decrease construction cost and time by doing quantity takeoff, 
collision control and simulating the construction. When the contractor is 
finished, the project is turned back to the owner, and the model becomes a 
Building Owner Operator Model (BOOM). A BOOM model is developed to manage 
the building and its performance through its entire lifecycle.  
 
Researchers at Stanford University believes that a ‘’broader set of considerations 
gives rise to a second term, Virtual Design and Construction (VDC)’’ (“VDC,” n.d.). 
VDC was introduced in 2001 as a part of the mission and methods for the Center 
of Integrated Facility Engineering (CIFE) at Stanford University. VDC is defined 
by Martin Fischer and John Kunz as ‘’the use of integrated multi-disciplinary 
performance models of design-construction projects to support explicit and public 
objectives’’ (Kunz & Fischer, 2012).  VDC models are virtual models showing 
computer-based descriptions of the project. Martin Fischer and John Kunz state 
that a VDC project emphasizes those aspects of the project that can be designed 
and managed, i.e. the product, the organization that will define, design, construct, 
and operate the product, and the process the organization teams will follow. The 
VDC models are multi-disciplinary, representing Architect, Engineer, Contractor 
and Owner of the projects, and are logically integrated to allow all project 
participants to access shared data.  
 
VDC is introduced by MT Højgaard to take a project from 2D to 6D (MT Højgaard, 
n.d.-a), while others like Exigo call it BIM and apply 7D (Exigo, n.d.). There is a 
consensus in the industry of what 2D, 3D, 4D, and 5D is, adding time and cost to 
the three dimensional model. Now 6D and 7D are added dimensions, including 
facility management (FM) and sustainability. However, the dimension gives a 
misguided image of the applications of the object-based information model, that 
each dimension cannot be accomplished without the preceding. Figure 5 shows 
how the different applications of an object-based model do not have to be 
applied in any specific order, or at a specific time in a project.  
 
==PAGE:24==
Master Thesis 
 
18
 
Figure 5 Applications of BIM 
The VDC supporters sees BIM as a modeling tool, and VDC as a process tool that 
must be incorporated and embraced into the project from the early stages, if it is 
to increase productivity. Martin Fischer and John Kunz defines BIM as the focus 
on building elements of the VDC model, which they see as useful, but limiting, as 
management issues involve building, organization and process interactions. 
They believe BIM, today, is enabling many AEC professionals to improve 
performance, but that even when using best practice BIM processes, projects 
normally model, visualize or analyze the organization and process accurately 
and effectively, and methods to manage and communicate multidisciplinary 
information and processes remain ad-hoc (Kunz & Fischer, 2012). This again, is 
depending on the definition the industry or individual companies have on BIM.  
IPD 
Integrated Project Delivery (IPD) was identified in the second edition of the BIM 
handbook, as a ‘’relatively new procurement process that is gaining popularity as 
the use of BIM expands’’ (Eastman et al., 2011). The American Institute of 
Architects (AIACC) state that IPD is ‘’a project delivery method that integrates 
people, systems, business structures and practices into a process that 
collaboratively harnesses the talents and insight of all participants to reduce waste 
and optimize efficiency through all phases of design, fabrication and construction’’ 
(AIACC, 2014). In an IPD project, effective communication and collaboration is 
prevailing between all parties on the project. IPD is not digitalization in itself, but 
an approach that is enabled by digital methods, and will be enhanced by 
digitalization.  
The key concept is that the project team collaborates; using the most prominent 
collaboration tools to ensure the project meets requirements on time and 
budget. IPD is build around teams, and early involvement of key actors is a core 
==PAGE:25==
2 | KNOWLEDGE BASE 
 
19
concept (Fischer, Ashcraft, Reed, & Khanzode, 2017). What also distinguishes 
IPD from traditional working methods and projects is that alliances between 
companies often are created with contractual ground. Essentially, a group of 
individual organizations, and the involved actors that embrace a common set of 
values and goals, and act as if they were one company (Fischer et al., 2017). This 
changes the fragmentation often seen on projects, in terms of design process, 
responsibility, risk and money.  
The AIACC has a minimum list of elements an IPD project must contain (AIACC, 
2014): 
 
- 
Continuous involvement of owner and key designers and builders from 
early design through project completion,  
- 
Business interests aligned through shared risk/reward, including 
financial gain at risk that is dependent upon project outcomes, 
- 
Joint project control by owner and key designer and builder, 
- 
A multi-party agreement or equal interlocking agreements, 
- 
Limited liability among owner and key designers and builders. 
 
IPD differs from other methods, as the project delivery method ensures all 
benefits for innovation and efficiency return to all project parties, and not 
individual teams. All parties agree to the business terms, and to share financial 
savings.  An IPD organization is said to include all individual team members for 
the companies involved. The mission and responsibilities for the project 
organization are committed to ‘best for project’ decision making, which is 
supported by the business interests, through a shared risk and reward. The 
primary purpose of IPD and virtual organizations is collaboration.  It is a team 
culture of joint decision-making, where all members of the team are individually 
accountable for contributing alternatives to design and construction issues. IPD 
is about optimizing the whole, not the parts. IPD incentivizes minimization of 
waste (AIACC, 2014). Traditional approaches to project delivery and contracts 
are designed to maintain distance between project members, to isolate them 
from each other and profitability is determined unrelated to project outcome 
(Fischer et al., 2017).  
 
Figure 6 shows the essential principles of an IPD project highlighting the 
elements crucial for successful integrated project work. Many of the essentials 
seen in the figure, will later in the analysis be defined as current issues for 
successful implementation of digitalization in the Danish AEC industry.   
==PAGE:26==
Master Thesis 
 
20
 
 
Figure 6 Essential Principles of IPD, from (AIACC, 2014). 
Typical tools to maximize results in IPD projects are building information 
models, prefabrication, and manufacturing of larger integrated units, process 
improvement metrics and LEAN design and construction techniques.  
 
IPD differs from the institutional program Public, Private Partnership (PPP) and 
Partnering (Bygningsstyrelsen, 2015); organizational forms of collaborating on 
projects, previously incorporated in the Danish AEC Industry, in that it is not 
based on the traditional splits of responsibilities and tasks between the project 
participants. Partnering is a contracting method, where risk and opportunities 
are defined as common goals, where all parties are committed and accountable 
within the agreements for the entire project. Partnering in Denmark has 
predominantly been based on preliminary and detailed designs, not involving 
the full suite of competences that IPD does. IPD is therefore a more integrated 
collaborative approach than Partnering. IPD recommends early involvement, but 
does not make it a requirement; nevertheless it requires a well-planned 
contractual set-up that cannot only be based on the traditional contract forms3 
that exist in the Danish AEC industry.  
 
 
                                                        
3 ABR89, AB92, ABT93. 
==PAGE:27==
2 | KNOWLEDGE BASE 
 
21
ICT 
Information Communication Technology (ICT) is ‘’an umbrella term used to 
encompass all rapidly emerging, evolving and converging computer, software, 
networking, telecommunications, Internet, programming and information systems 
technologies’’ (College of Communication and Information, 2017).  
 
ICT specification is a Danish term used to describe deliverables, with a digital 
model, as the turning point for the main activities representing the design. The 
Danish AEC Industry consists of a combination of public and private owned 
companies within all disciplines existing in the industry. All public, municipal 
and regional projects are subject to the Danish ICT Regulations4, which is a 
government-controlled regulation that is concerned with the use of ICT on 
building projects.  
 
Implementation of Digitalization 
The above-mentioned terms are implemented in the Danish AEC industry using 
legislation, standards, contracts, manuals, etc. The implementation and general 
considerations of digital tools and processes, is difficult and not yet complete. 
Many barriers and issues stand in the way of successful implementation in the 
Danish AEC industry and more specifically, in the Danish companies and 
organizations. Research suggests that the productivity in the building sector, at 
national and international level, does not follow the development that exists in 
other industries (Biilmann, 2015). Many factors in the AEC industry, complicates 
a direct comparison between other industries and the AEC industry. The unique 
arrangement of parties on each project, working and coordinating across multi-
disciplinary projects (Whyte & Ewenstein, 2007), and the fact that each project is 
unique in organization, function and need. Furthermore, the way projects are 
divided into disciplines and phases make it a comprehensive and complex body, 
making each project is a unique production.  
Adding to the complexity of projects, is the changing constellation of actors from 
project to project (Vestergaard, et al. 2012). Similarly the Danish AEC industry is 
unique by working with pre-defined procurement and tender regulations. 
However, the uniqueness of the AEC industry should not be a hindering for the 
use of digital tools and processes. Other industries are finding a way to 
incorporate technology into their productions, as a means to increase 
productivity.  
                                                        
4 Currently subject to regulation 118 and 199. 
==PAGE:28==
Master Thesis 
 
22
 
There is currently a high level of waste, and not enough value for money. 
Measuring productivity in the AEC industry is difficult (Produktivitetskomiteen, 
2013), and as a result, it is difficult to identify exactly, where productivity is low. 
Maybe the industry has good productivity rates within individual trades or 
disciplines, but due to massive loss of effort, waste of time and resources, the 
overall productivity is measured as low.  
 
The Danish AEC industry is an intelligent body, with great prospect for 
international influence on organizations and projects. What differentiates the 
Danish AEC industry from international AEC industries is that it is constrained 
by a web of common practices, description of services, general conditions for 
contractors, ICT regulations and specifications, etc., which has a predefined role 
and responsibility for all parties on a project.  
 
This chapter provides a historic walkthrough of the initiatives in Denmark 
working to enhance the implementation and use of digital tools and processes in 
Danish companies. The chapter then gives a short introduction to the 
implementation of digitalization in the four cases with information from the 
interviews, and lastly gives a brief introduction to the international development 
in implementation.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:29==
2 | KNOWLEDGE BASE 
 
23
Implementation in the Danish AEC Industry 
Many initiatives are made in Denmark in order to comply with the developing 
technologies, and the demands for an increase in productivity. Figure 7 shows a 
timeline overview over the historic events presented below. 
 
 
Figure 7 Timeline showing history of implementation in the Danish AEC Industry, inspired by 
(Larsen, 2014) 
From 1974-2003, The Building sectors Planning System (BPS) existed, as a 
common ground for collaboration around design, construction and operation, 
and later in their existence took the first steps towards a common structure of 
data in the building sector (Larsen, 2014).  
 
In 1988 CAD got a breakthrough in the building industry, and the union of 
AutoCAD users in the building sector (ABB), was founded. In 1996, ABB became 
IT Users in the Building Sector (IBB), as 3D and object-based technologies came 
on the market (Larsen, 2014). 
 
In 1998 the government enforced a political action plan within the built 
environment, with the goal to enhance productivity and quality in the built 
environment (Bolig- og Byministeriet, 1998). The action plan analyzes a number 
of prioritized focus areas that were sought solved within a short period of time.  
The initiatives work towards a more modern, digital way of working and 
collaborating on construction projects. The initiatives included education of 
Owners in the industry allowing them to acquire a greater understanding of the 
different elements in a construction project. The action plan also states that focus 
on the use of information technology is a vital tool for working more efficiently 
and decrease wasted time on projects.  
 
==PAGE:30==
Master Thesis 
 
24
In 2000 Peter Hauch questioned the fragmentation in the industry, and 
suggested that the enhanced focus and use of ICT could help the industry obtain 
a higher level of digital infrastructure and create a higher level for handling 
communication, information and collaboration between actors (Hauch, Nielsen, 
Brauer, & Jørgensen, 2001). The fragmentation of the industry is also well-
known in the U.S., where the processes are fragmented, costing money, and 
causing a decline in the construction process, compared to ‘sister’ engineering 
fields that are dramatically increasing their productivity (Kunz & Fischer, 2012).  
 
In 2003 BPS and IBB joined forces, and bips 5 is created as a non-profit 
membership union of professionals, within all trades in the industry. Bips was 
formed to develop standards and specifications to aid the industry with 
increasing efficiency of design- and construction processes through all stages of a 
buildings life cycle. BuildingSMART started as an independent organization in 
Denmark in 1998, but became a part of bips in 2009 (“BuildingSMART Nordic,” 
n.d.).  
 
The reports6 on digitalization in the AEC industry mentioned above, amongst 
others, were the basis of the political decision, that digitalization would aid the 
industry towards an increased productivity. The Danish government initiated 
the project Digital Construction (DDB), which ran from 2003-2007. DDB was the 
government’s way of creating a basis plan for how digitalization in the AEC 
industry could progress and be implemented. DDB resulted in the first ICT 
specific Owner Regulations in 2007 being published (BEK 1365), and stated 
requirements on the use of digital tools and processes on all government and 
public-financed projects (Erhvers- og Byggestyrelsen, 2006). The ICT regulations 
are further analyzed in chapter 3, ‘As Is’. Bedst I Byggeriet (BIB), (in English: Best 
in the Building Sector), was an initiative launched as a part of DDB, where 
several cases in the industry was to collect experiences from actual cases, and 
evaluate on the use. Danish Building Classification (DBK) was the second 
suggestion of a classification system in Denmark and was developed as a part of 
DDB in the period 2003-2006 (bips, 2014). 
 
 
                                                        
5 Building, information technology, productivity and collaboration. 
6 (Hauch et al., 2001), (Bolig- og Byministeriet, 1998), (Rasmussen et al., 2001), 
(By- og Boligministeriet & Erhvervsfremmestyrelsen, 2000) 
==PAGE:31==
2 | KNOWLEDGE BASE 
 
25
The Implementation Network for DDB is a union consisting of central 
organizations in the Danish AEC Industry. From 2008-2010 the Implementation 
Network executed the project ‘New Knowledge to the Building Trade’ (NKBT) 
with the purpose of creating more practical knowledge about DDB, by testing it 
on actual construction projects.  
 
From 2009-2012, the project ‘Measuring Financial Benefits From Digital 
Construction’ (ØG-DDB) ran, with the goal to execute four case studies describing 
and evaluating the effects of the implementation of digital model-based work 
methods and tools in the Danish AEC industry, as subject to the ICT regulations 
(Vestergaard et al., 2012). 
 
From 2010-2014 Center for Productivity in Construction (CUNECO) was created 
as a development project with the role to develop, test and implement common 
standards for enhanced exchange of data (CUNECO, n.d.). It was referred to in the 
industry as Digital Construction 2 (DDB2). CUNECO was initially run under the 
management from an association with bips, and a partnership with other sectors 
within the industry. CUNECO’s four main areas of focus are Classification, 
Property Data, Level of Information and Measurement rules. They work to create 
standards to ease the exchange of data and models. CUNECO was assigned to 
develop CUNECO Classification System (CCS), which is to replace SfB and DBK as 
Danish classification systems. SfB was a Swedish classification system used for 
years. The first two editions of the ICT regulations made requirements to the use 
of Danish Building Classification (DBK) (bips, 2014). 
 
In 2012 Danish Owners association responds to the second ICT regulation (BEK 
1381) from 2010, in an industry hearing session (Bygherreforeningen, 2012), 
which leads to the third and current version of the ICT regulation, BEK118/119 
published in 2013. In the hearing response they suggest aiding competence 
development amongst Owners and operation and maintenance Owners, as well 
as aiding them in developing strategies and action plans.  
 
In 2016 bips and Byggecentrum joins forces and becomes Molio7. Molio delivers 
products and tools to enhance development and digitalization, as well as 
improves efficiency in the built environment. Molio is taking over the role as 
BuildingSMART network in Denmark, meaning they will coordinate all 
                                                        
7 Molio comes from the Latin word Molior, meaning to erect or construct, which 
they believe symbolize the AEC industry. 
==PAGE:32==
Master Thesis 
 
26
BuildingSMART activities, seeing how BuildingSMART is not an independent 
organization in Denmark. Molio will continue with the BuildingSMART action 
plan relevant from 2014, with the goal to strengthen BuildingSMART by 
integrating with Molio, and participate in the international development, and 
organize and conduct network activities.  
Implementation in Danish Companies & Organization (the four cases) 
This chapter gives a short introduction to the four cases regarding the 
implementation of digital tools and processes, as a result of the interviews.  
Use of ICT 
All four cases are using the ICT agreements on projects both subject to and not 
subject to the ICT regulations. They do it because they see the benefits it applies 
to the project, and they view it as a standard working method. Jørgen Emborg, 
Peter Hyttel and Peter Bo Olsen state that their companies have specialized the 
standard ICT contracts, both internally and on projects, to accommodate the 
specific needs. Peter Bo Olsen and Jørgen Emborg state that they use ICT 
paradigm principles where law requires it, and where it makes sense. ‘’It is not a 
religion, we do it because it makes sense’’ (Peter Bo Olsen). The projects referred 
to where ICT paradigm principles did not make sense, were smaller projects, 
where a 2D basis material was present, or where the scope did not make it 
relevant to work in 3D. MT Højgaard has created an internal standard ICT 
paradigm, which is developed on the basis of bips’ ICT paradigm; consequently 
people do not have to learn something new. They have refined it, so it leans more 
towards what they want from collaboration (Peter Bo Olsen).  
 
Peter Hyttel agrees, and says that CF Møller ‘‘sees it as a standard work method’’ 
(Peter Hyttel). They believe it is a question of separating the services from the 
specifications, and have therefore taken the bips ICT specifications, and 
transformed it to their own, fitting on just a single A4 page for the sake of 
simplicity (Peter Hyttel).  
 
Stefan Larsen also sees the benefits of working with standardized ICT 
agreements, which is why Byggeri København is ‘’trying to get a standard ICT 
agreement finished, in order to standardize the workflow’’ (Stefan Larsen). 
Use of BIM & VDC  
The three companies and Byggeri København all use elements of BIM or VDC (or 
both) on most projects.  
==PAGE:33==
2 | KNOWLEDGE BASE 
 
27
 
There is still a differentiation in how, and to what degree the digital tools and 
processes are used in the four cases. The different disciplines have different roles 
in the project, and follow different needs and uses for the information on 
projects. MT Højgaard, COWI and CF Møller all use 3D in the design phase on 
almost all projects, with the exception of few projects where it is deemed 
unnecessary. This could be, for instance, in a case where old 2D drawings are 
present in the project. This is a question of available resources, and predicted 
benefits.  
 
COWI has defined a minimum level of BIM, to where all projects must be 
executed. The minimum level is where a 3D model is produced, and collision 
control and other associated tasks, must be done from the model. COWI do not 
want to work parallel in 3D on some projects, and then with 2D on others. Even if 
the client does not require the use of advanced digital tools and processes, they 
determine what degree of digitalization will benefit them. The issue of analyzing 
the level of digital tools and processes used in COWI is that it is a large company 
with differing strategies across business units and regions. That means it is not 
the full overview that is given in this Thesis. This Thesis reflects mostly the 
implementation in COWI DK. Jørgen Emborg says that within some areas they 
are using BIM on 95% of projects, and on other areas it is less. COWI Norway is 
further along, and uses BIM on more projects, and across projects and 
disciplines.  
 
CF Møller uses some level of BIM on all projects, but as a minimum they are using 
3D design management. The plan is for all deliverables to be the same.  They are 
working on specifying standard services, on the basis of the description of 
services by bips.  
 
Byggeri København are requiring the use of BIM, but are working on a new 
agreement where they are requesting specific deliverables, without making 
specific requests to the process.  
 
MT Højgaard started using BIM around 2009, and 90% of their projects now 
have BIM in them. They are using VDC on 25-30% of their projects, which 
complies with the company strategy supported by the board of directors.  
 
==PAGE:34==
Master Thesis 
 
28
It is different from the organization and the companies, if they have a strategy or 
not. MT Højgaard has been successful with creating a strategy, and a 3-year plan, 
back in 2014 (Peter Bo Olsen). The strategy was created with the goal to be the 
most production promoting company in the industry. The strategy consists of 
overall goals as a frame, with ongoing reports to the board of directors. They are 
in the center of the production of buildings, and are therefore depending on 
others, which means they need their collaborators to similarly utilize digital 
tools and processes in order for them to feel the real increase in efficiency. The 
management is supportive in this strategy, and one goal is to be ‘best in class 
VDC’, aiming to be the best on a global level. This is also why they are sharing 
experiences and knowledge with the rest of the industry using research, 
whitepapers and PhD projects. MT Højgaard has through the past three years 
embraced the paradigm change, and the necessary revolutions associated with it, 
and invested in a general competence lift, in connection to the strategy.  
 
CF Møller recently created a strategy, which is mostly detailed regarding 
software and hardware and safety and risks involved. The strategy also includes 
control of contracts, and delivery of documentation for deliverables. Byggeri 
København is working on a similar strategy. They are working on a development 
group, with management support, which is to develop a strategy for the 
company. Their strategy will provide some overall goals that have to be 
supported by digital actions. 
 
COWI is working on a strategy for a more digital workflow, and management and 
money have been allocated to create a BIM vision, strategy and action plans. The 
plans are detailed with quarterly goals, with a responsible party. Funding has 
been allocated at business unit level, however it is not certain how the money 
will be spent. Jørgen Emborg states that it will be invested in both technical 
aspects, and in education of employees.  
Implementation in the International AEC Industry 
Analyzing the Danish AEC industry, it is important to include the development 
occurring in the international AEC industry, as context for the Danish 
development. The international development is important, as it has the 
opportunity for faster and larger scale implementation and further development 
with larger projects and industry players, thus creating landscape pressure for 
Danish companies with international offices and projects. It is also important as 
the international movement affects the Danish AEC industry, because 
==PAGE:35==
2 | KNOWLEDGE BASE 
 
29
digitalization enables cross-border information exchange and development, in all 
stages of a construction project. This will affect the competition between 
international construction markets, and enhance cross-border procurement, 
bringing the international industry to Denmark.  
 
Martin Hooper discusses the push-pull strategy the UK is applying to their four-
year strategy, to implement BIM in the AEC industry. Push (top-down) is when 
the government client mandates BIM at a certain level within a time frame, 
giving the industry time to understand requirements and up skill accordingly. 
Pull (bottom-up) is when they let the industry decide how to deliver, whilst 
receiving support in the form of applicable standards, guidelines and protocols. 
This allows them to move forward in a consistent way, without distorting the 
market (Hooper, 2015). The ICT regulations, is the Danish government client 
mandate on BIM, and is a way to push the industry through the digital 
implementation. Although Denmark was one of the first countries to mandate 
BIM on state projects, the international industries are overtaking in the 
development. ‘’Internationally, for instance Germany and the US, are much better 
at asking the difficult questions early. ‘What are we solving, and how do we do it?’ 
It creates focus on the process from the start’’ (Bygherreforeningen, 2017a). 
 
The map in Figure 8 illustrates the countries that have government mandates on 
BIM use on construction projects.  
 
 
Figure 8 Overview over countries that mandate BIM use, inspired by (Hooper, 2015). 
==PAGE:36==
Master Thesis 
 
30
In 2005 Norway’s public-sector property organization, Statsbygg, mandated BIM, 
IFC and open standards. Finland and Denmark both mandated BIM use on 
public-sector projects in 2007. General Services Administration (GSA) demanded 
the same in the US. In 2008 American Institute of Architects (AIA) released the 
E2020 BIM protocol exhibit, a contract support document, and the first 
successful trials of IPD projects are reported. Australia releases its national 
strategy for the focused promotion and adoption of BIM in 2010. In 2011 the UK 
Government Construction Strategy looked ahead and required collaborative BIM 
by 2016. In 2013 Sweden’s Government client organizations collaborated to 
formulate BIM demands.  
 
As a neighbor country, Norway is further in the implementation than Denmark. 
Statsbygg’s aim is that their work with research and development must 
contribute to the development of the companies, but also to the industry in 
general. The goal for Statsbygg is to be a role model for the Norwegian AEC 
industry, and a frontrunner for innovation in the AEC Industry. They aim to look 
into the future, and prepare the industry to be dressed for future challenges. 
Norway has created a strategy at industry plan from Statsbygg. The wording of 
the strategy is as follows (“Statsbygg,” n.d.): 
- 
Statsbygg must develop building and property industry. We must be 
modern and effective and be a frontrunner with simplification and 
digitalization.  
- 
Our employees must follow best practices and must secure good quality 
and efficiency.  
 
Martin Hooper discusses the status of countries in terms of BIM Guidelines 
(Hooper, 2015).  The countries known to be frontrunners in the industry in 
terms of adopting digital tools and processes are Denmark, Sweden, Norway, 
Finland, England, USA and Australia. He then discusses Denmark and Finland as 
the only countries that have developed national BIM guidelines. Australia has 
created a BIM vision through their National BIM guidelines, and the US has 
several guidelines for BIM. Singapore was first to launch CORENET e-submission, 
which is a collaborative digital tool for planning applications. GSA has developed 
national 3D-4D-BIM programs.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:37==
2 | KNOWLEDGE BASE 
 
31
Important international drivers are BuildingSMART, European Committee for 
Standardization (CEN) and the International Standardization Organization (ISO).  
BuildingSMART is the worldwide international organization responsible for the 
IFC open format, which has worked towards solving one of the largest issues 
when speaking of adopting digital tools and processes in the industry; 
interoperability (Hooper, 2015). BuildingSMART have been implemented in the 
Nordic countries. In Norway BuildingSMART is an independent organization, 
however, Sweden, Finland and Denmark is a part of BuildingSMART Nordic, and 
is not independent organizations.  
 
CEN is an association that brings together national standardization bodies from 
34 European countries (E. C. for Standardization, 2017). CEN provides a platform 
for the development of European standards and other technical documents, and 
support standardization activities in relation to ICT. ISO is an independent, non-
governmental international organization that brings together professionals to 
share knowledge and ‘’develop voluntary, consensus-based, market relevant 
international standards that support innovation and provide solutions to global 
challenges’’ (I. O. for Standardization, n.d.). ISO has a membership with 163 
national standards bodies.  
Paradigm Change 
A result digitalization has on the AEC industry, is a shift from the traditional 
analog, document-based working methods, to working through digital object-
oriented modeling. New technologies bring forth new possibilities and methods 
for solving tasks, as well as new methods for communicating, information 
sharing and collaboration. It also gives way to new design methods, and new 
ways of thinking building projects. However BIM and VDC will not in itself, solve 
the issues that exist in the industry. It is a matter changing the paradigm, the 
processes and peoples mindset, to equip the technology and the processes with 
the correct information (Biilmann, 2015). 
 
A report written as a part of Digital Construction, describe how digitalization as a 
technology contribute to solving the issue of low productivity (Vestergaard8 et 
al., 2012). The report mentions two digitalization waves in the AEC industry. The 
first wave is Computer Aided Design (CAD), where primarily internal processes 
were optimized. However external collaboration was not supported and 
                                                        
8 The report is an extension of Digital Construction in order to measure the 
effect.  
==PAGE:38==
Master Thesis 
 
32
optimized. The second wave in the industry introduced Building Information 
Modeling (BIM). BIM and VDC are not merely new technologies, but a paradigm 
change, where it is not possible to reap the benefits, without implementing the 
associated processes. ‘’BIM is not a thing or a type of software, but a human 
activity, that ultimately involved broad process changes’’ (Eastman et al., 2011). It 
can therefore be postulated that the AEC industry is to experience a third 
digitalization wave, requiring a paradigm change, where internal and external 
processes are predefined, and allows for collaboration and integrated project 
flows. The Chief Financial Officer at Alm. Brand9 is identifying the new digital 
wave as a regime change from analog to digital (Bram, 2017). 
 
Trends in big data, automated design, artificial intelligence, virtual reality, value 
chain etc., evolves, and the paradigm change can be anticipated where the 
implementation of digitalization shifts from a matter of technical solutions and 
methods, to a general new approach to construction projects. This new 
digitalization wave brings opportunities of information that is collated, 
processed and shared in new ways, calling for innovative ways of working. 
Procurement processes and flows will be challenged to be more on market, 
based on demands.  
Communication 
Implementing digital tools and processes in an organization is a very complex 
and extensive process, which requires dedication from all management steps, 
and all-encompassing communication. This chapter describes communication 
theory, and the application and use in the analysis in this Thesis. The theory is 
chosen to support the analysis, as many of the issues that arise in the industry 
regarding 
implementation 
of 
digital 
tools 
and 
processes, 
concern 
communication. With paradigm changes, the need for communication is vast, as 
it is a matter of communicating why the changes must occur, and what the 
incentives are.  
 
Morreale, Spitzberg and Barge say that ‘’communication is the process of 
managing messages and media for the purpose of creating meaning’’ (Morreale, 
Spitzberg, & Barge, 2007). Communication on building projects is also very 
important as both written and verbal communication can have a large impact on 
the project. Especially when speaking of implementing new tools and processes, 
the need for communication becomes increasingly important. Regarding the 
                                                        
9 The Alm. Brand A/S is a Danish Financial services group.  
==PAGE:39==
2 | KNOWLEDGE BASE 
 
33
implementation of digitalization in the industry, communication is exchanged in 
all levels of the industry, and the analysis of the communication up until this 
point, is important to suggest if anything should be changed moving forward. 
‘’Understanding communication holistically requires examining the past, looking to 
the future, and focusing on the situation itself’’ (Morreale et al., 2007).   
In the AEC industry now, communication between actors and organizations try 
to condensate the communication into information that defines design and 
procurement of a product. But when does communication turn into 
documentation. Communication is the sharing of information, but the issue is 
that the actors have to agree when discussion turn into decision, and when 
communication turn into agreed upon, valid information. Efficiency in 
communication itself is not an issue, but the postulation that communication 
produces information is true, then there is a possible value gain in the process of 
changing the vast amount of communication involved into information, in an 
efficient way.  
There are many aspects of communication theory. This chapter presents four 
different models from Human Communication: Motivation, Knowledge and Skills, 
which depict communication processes relevant for this Thesis: (1) 
Communication as information transfer, (2) communication as shared meaning, 
(3) communication as persuasion, and (4) communication as community. These 
four models are chosen, as they are valuable when analyzing if any of the four 
communication models are evident in the issues of analysis.  
 
In the case of missing information on a project, the information is procured 
autonomously, or with new requests or demands. The more deficiencies in 
communication and exchange, the more questions and obscurities will arise. This 
raises questions of risk, responsibility with processing new information, and 
creates extra work and a prolonging of the process. This makes the work more 
unproductive, 
adding 
to 
the 
challenges 
and 
limitations 
of 
one-way 
communication. ‘’Designers and builders coordinate directly during design, thus 
preventing the misunderstandings and poorly informed design decisions that 
typically create delays during construction Secondly, by fostering an environment 
in which the team collaborates well, questions get answered in the speed of a 
conversation instead of a paper trail that starts with an RFI and ends with a 
change order, typically taking weeks to process’’ (AIACC, 2014).  
 
==PAGE:40==
Master Thesis 
 
34
Communication as information transfer is shown in Figure 9, also called a linear 
model of communication, adopts one-way communication. The definition of the 
following terms, apply for the other communication models in this chapter. The 
sender and or the source, sends a message through a channel. The source or 
sender in human communication, a person, is the producer of the message. The 
message then goes through a channel, which is the medium through which the 
message is sent. The channel can be written, e.g. a letter, oral as in verbal 
communication, non-verbal as in shared looks and body language, or mediated in 
emails or videoconferencing. The person or group of people receiving the 
message is the receiver. The effect is what the receiver does with the message. 
The messages might be interrupted or altered by noise, which is interference, 
distracting the communication.  
 
Figure 9 Information Transfer Model of Communication, from (Morreale et al., 2007). 
The information transfer model of communication, suggest a communication 
situation, which correspond to the previous analog methods of working on 
construction projects, where information was exchanged in a paper-based 
manner, only allowing for one-way communication. This model is useful in 
situations where it is necessary for one person, to communicate with many 
people at once e.g. the government.  
==PAGE:41==
2 | KNOWLEDGE BASE 
 
35
 
Figure 10 The Interactive Model of Communication, from (Morreale et al., 2007). 
The interactive model of communication shown in Figure 10, deals with two-way 
communication, and is therefore closer to the digital ways of working. This 
model views communication as sharing meaning, and has a feedback loop to the 
linear model from above, and therefore views both sender and receiver as 
communicator in a circular process. It is however important to notice that the 
sender and receiver take turns acting as sender and receiver.  
 
Figure 11 shows the transactional model of communication, which differs from 
the interactive model, as it views people as simultaneously acting as senders and 
receivers of messages. This model states, that even when a person is listening, 
the person is still communication through non-verbal communication. It differs, 
as it accounts of field of meaning, which can be anything from experience, values, 
beliefs and ideas. The overlap is the shared field of meaning; the areas where 
people disagree, and the communication processes people can use to create a 
larger field of shared meaning.  
 
==PAGE:42==
Master Thesis 
 
36
 
Figure 11 The Transactional Model of Communication, from (Morreale et al., 2007). 
 
Communication as community is a model, created by the power of 
communication itself, as to allow social groups to cultivate through 
communication. A social group, or community, is together in the same physical, 
mental or virtual space to interact and pursue a common goal. In this context, 
communities could be the government, the organizations, the disciplines, unions 
and so forth. A group of people could also be a group of frontrunners, fighting for 
digitalization, or contrasting, people opposing digitalization.  Figure 12 shows 
how communication permeates the environment and creates communities. This 
type of communication is about coordinating action, to achieve a common goal.  
 
Figure 12 Communication as Community, from (Morreale et al., 2007). 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:43==
2 | KNOWLEDGE BASE 
 
37
Morreale, Spitzberg and Barge have a self-assessment scheme, where a person 
can rate a communication situation based on motivation, knowledge and skill. 
Figure 13 could be a possible evaluation scheme in terms of evaluating how 
implementation is communicated and received in companies.  
 
Figure 13 Communication self-assessment rated on Motivation, Knowledge and Skill, from (Morreale 
et al., 2007). 
Communication is important in many aspects, when implementing new methods 
in all constellations of actors or with individual people. The actors, or group of 
actors in this Thesis, is the society, the AEC industry, projects, companies, and 
with the individual people shown in Figure 14. It is important to communicate 
on a project, not only to ensure coordination, but also collaboration. 
Communication is also imperative in regards to exchanging information, creating 
common understanding and project objectives. On a larger scale, implementing 
ICT in a sector compels communicating a clear understanding of the tools, the 
benefits, the potentials, and realistic goals and milestones for the sector.  
 
 
Figure 14 Illustration of all the levels there should be measured effects in a different order, inspired 
by (Vestergaard et al., 2012). 
==PAGE:44==
Master Thesis 
 
38
 
 
==PAGE:45==
3 | AS IS 
 
39
3 | AS IS 
Digitalization has been on the agenda for decades, and many different initiatives 
are engaged in order to implement the use of digital tools and processes in the 
AEC industry. The Danish AEC industry, as other countries, has not yet fully 
embraced digitalization, and skepticism is still detected, even in those fighting 
the digital battle. The attention digitalization has been receiving, does not equal 
the perceived change. Jørgen Emborg states that ‘’it was an advantage for 
everyone to do BIM, yet it didn’t happen. It is a heavy industry to change’’ (Jørgen 
Emborg). Since the introduction, and later the initial implementation of the new 
tools and working methods, many issues have emerged with both inhibitors and 
enablers, hindering a completely successful implementation. 
 
The common denominator for the issues is the complexity they enfold. The 
complexity of selected issues is analyzed in this Thesis, in an attempt to pinpoint 
where the largest inhibitors and enablers for implementation occur. Figure 15 
shows the analyzed issues for the implementation of digitalization and achieving 
digital homogeneity in the AEC industry, that have come to light in the research 
of literature, observations and interviews study.  
 
Figure 15 Issues and enablers from research 
==PAGE:46==
Master Thesis 
 
40
Technical Issues 
This Thesis will not focus on the technical issues with the implementation of 
digital tools and processes. Ironically, this Thesis postulates that the digital tools 
are not the main reason why the industry is not completely digital at this point. 
Technology cannot solve the issues alone, it requires a paradigm change, and 
that requires a new way of thinking. This Thesis therefore primarily looks at the 
process and ‘softer’ issues that arise around digitalization.  
 
Technology is an issue, but it is important to look at the socio-technical aspects, 
when speaking of the implementation of digitalization. It is not assured the tools 
will be further developed, if there is no demand for it. The digital tools and 
methods are available, but cannot be a driver for the development, as the tools 
advance based on demand. The tools are developed, but without a close 
collaboration with the users, software developers might develop software with 
wrong uses, or have limitations or defects implemented, too difficult to remove 
later on. 
 
It can be argued that the technical approach, and the understanding of digital 
methods as implementation of technology, is one of the major barriers. 
Throughout the past decades, focus has been on technology protocols, and on 
technician’s nerdish development of large incomprehensive systems of 
classification, protocols and ICT standards. This may have left the majority of 
designing and construction community and business skeptic and on the outside, 
preferring to keep working in traditional ‘safe’ ways.  
 
All actors can use the information BIM models and the processes contain, as long 
as it is the information other parties need. Technology on its own will not change 
previous problems in the industry, regarding low productivity, efficiency and 
wasted time and money, the parties involved carry a large part of the 
responsibility, in order to reach the level of change needed, and the good results 
(Biilmann, 2015).  
 
Singh, Gu and Wang suggest that the industry can be stuck in ‘status quo’ loop, as 
indicated in Figure 16. The lack of knowledge and awareness about BIM can 
result in a lack of confidence and motivation to adopt BIM-based collaboration. 
Conversely, as a result of the inhibition to adopt and use BIM, the level of 
knowledge about BIM remains low (Singh, Gu, & Wang, 2011). 
==PAGE:47==
3 | AS IS 
 
41
 
Figure 16 Status-quo loop inhibiting technology adoption and enhancement, from (Singh et al., 2011) 
The hypothesis that lack of knowledge can hinder, or give an incorrect focus, is 
supported by Peter Hyttel’s statement, that ‘’the management glasses put on by 
the government has hindered an innovative development of IT’’ (Peter Hyttel). 
Jørgen Emborg identifies technology as a challenge, but admits that the largest 
challenge they are facing now is the adaption and use of the technology.  
 
The prerequisite of this Thesis stands that the technology will deliver the 
methods and tools, and will offer solutions beyond the needs the industry can 
conceive. The risks associated with working integrated and in joint models, will 
not be analyzed here, but will be mentioned in the chapter regarding judicial 
issues.  
Industry Issues 
This chapter analyzes chosen issues in the Danish AEC industry that act as a 
barrier toward the implementation of digitalization. The chapter analyzes 
government regulations, standards, views of responsibility, classification, 
information control and the need for evaluation.  
Government Regulations 
This section goes through the ICT regulations, and analyzes the influence on the 
implementation of digitalization. The chapter analyzes the use and perception of 
the ICT regulations in the four cases, including their evolvement over the three 
versions, if they have benefited, and if they should be further developed.  
 
The regulations are set in place as the main element of the government initiative 
Digital Construction, defining and regulating the content in 2007, to aid the 
implementation of digitalization in the AEC industry (Bygningsstyrelsen, 2016). 
Research showed that the industry needed to embrace digitalization and 
==PAGE:48==
Master Thesis 
 
42
implement a more digital infrastructure (Hauch et al., 2001), which resulted in 
the ICT regulations, requiring the use of object-based models and open formats, 
outlining the intention of how consulting and construction companies should 
work digitally.  The regulations determine who is subject to the requirements 
and on which type of projects. Companies that want to bid on government, 
municipal, general or regional construction projects over the limit stated in the 
requirements, but abide by the regulations. The requirements and the associated 
guidelines are regulated, developed and defined by the government. The 
following areas are what the Danish Building Association believes the ICT 
Regulation include requirements within (Bygningsstyrelsen, 2016):  
 
- 
ICT Coordination 
- 
Managing digital construction items 
- 
Digital communication and project web  
- 
Use of digital, object-oriented building models in connection with project 
competitions, project planning and execution 
- 
Digital bids and offers, including bids with quantities 
- 
Digital delivery upon delivery of the construction project 
- 
Digital defect information 
 
Table 2 shows an overview of the difference in the three regulations 1365, 1381 
and 118/119. Regulation 118 and 119 are very similar, with exception of 119 
refer to social constructions, whereas 118 refer to state, regional and public 
projects.  
==PAGE:49==
3 | AS IS 
 
43
Table 2 Overview of ICT regulations, from (MT Højgaard, 2014) 
 
 
The table shows, that the current regulation has a lot more focus on digital tools 
and processes compared to the previous versions. Furthermore, the previous 
requirements regarding the use of DBK classification, has been removed. 
 
Regulation 1365 & 1381 
The ICT regulation from 2007, BEK 1366 started the digital journey, requiring 
the use of ICT on projects in the public building sector. In 2007 and 2008, two 
additions to 1365 were implemented. BEK 1524 stated the requirements of 
standardization and quantity description take effect from January 2009 
(Transport og Bygningsministeriet, 2007). In 2008 additional changes were 
made, BEK 253, and the projects with a cost of more than 20 million DKK is now 
subject to the regulations, and not projects more than 40 billion DKK (Transport 
og Bygningsministeriet, 2007). At this stage technology issues were experienced, 
and the tools were not fully developed for the optimal use, therefore the tools 
were used, but ‘BIM’10 was not used (Jørgen Emborg).  
 
In 2010 the second edition of the Danish ICT regulations are published 
(BEK1381), where further requirements are set for the use of object-based 
                                                        
10 ‘BIM’ is here referred to as a building information model and the associated 
processes.   
==PAGE:50==
Master Thesis 
 
44
models and IFC format for delivery and exchange of information (Transport og 
Bygningsministeriet, 2010). Regulation 1381 was an improvement from the 
previous, however no radical changes in the regulation made a difference that 
was experienced in the companies (Peter Bo Olsen). In COWI, they now started 
to develop internal processes, and BIM was used internally, but not across 
companies (Jørgen Emborg), Jørgen Emborg refers to this as ‘’Lonely BIM’’.  
 
Only government projects at a price over 20 million DKK were subject to BEK 
1365 and BEK 1281, which means that not many projects were essentially 
affected by the regulations. This also had the effect that it did not result in a 
paradigm change, but rather a matter of adapting the projects subject to the 
regulations (Peter Bo Olsen).  
 
These two regulations had some unclear requirements, which left room for 
interpretation or loopholes. Requirement 4a in 1381 state that the owner has to 
evaluate whether the use of a building model can contribute to architectural 
solutions, and if so, the owner has to make demands to the use of the model 
(Transport og Bygningsministeriet, 2010). The question is, if the public Owners 
had the knowledge to make this determination in 2010. An example of a 
requirement leaving room for a minimum solution that does not fall within the 
category of a BIM or VDC project, is the demand that Owners should make 
demands on the model content, the information level and how the models are 
used for simulation, visualization etc. The demand states that as a minimum, the 
model is to include geometry of the building shapes. In this regulation, the 
demands for the use of Industry Foundation Classes (IFC)11 is made, however, it 
states that if other formats are used instead, this should be specified.  
Regulation 118/119 
In 2013 the third and current edition of the ICT regulations (BEK 118/119) is 
published (Transport og Bygningsministeriet, 2013). The two most significant 
changes is the increased focus on ICT and BIM, and that state, regional and 
municipal projects is now subject to the Danish ICT Regulations. This regulation 
differs from the previous, in that it separated the services from the specifications 
(Peter Hyttel). This regulation now applied to a broader scale of projects, and the 
way things were done had to be radically changed, and where the paradigm 
change started to occur (Peter Bo Olsen).  All the informants agree that the 
development of the regulation was for the better, as the regulation started 
                                                        
11 Neutral open standard that is used independent of it system and platform.  
==PAGE:51==
3 | AS IS 
 
45
including standards on projects, and less specific requirements to the use of e.g. 
classification. The standards were now mature enough to start exploring across 
companies and projects (Jørgen Emborg). 
 
The current regulation12 is a further development of BEK 1381 from 2010, with 
input from an industry hearing session in 2012. It was clear at this hearing that 
the opinions were divided. Some participants found the regulations to be 
constraining in the individual company or project’s ability to freely choose 
application and method, and that the use of IFC was equal to additional work. 
Other participants saw the benefit of making the entire industry subject to the 
same regulations and standardizations, as it gave a structured application of BIM, 
which resulted in higher productivity. Participants from this group even 
requested more standardization to exploit the full potential. The current 
regulations has provided the Owner with more tools, to set a functional 
framework for the usage of ICT on building projects, through an increased focus 
on ICT and digital collaboration (Bygherreforeningen, 2012).   
 
Below are chosen examples of the content of the regulations analyzed for 
evaluation.  
The second requirement in the BEK 118 state that the owner is allowed not to 
fulfill one or more of the requirements, if the expenses do not commensurate the 
gains. This is a critical point, as it has always, and still is today, difficult to 
measure the gains of a digital project. The proven effects and benefits is 
something that is requested by all informants for this Thesis. This regulation 
requires the use of IFC for delivery of models with no exceptions, which is a good 
demand to have, as it allows for interoperability on projects.   
 
Requirement 8, states that demands must be made so that tender material can be 
used digitally to a relevant extend. This is very vague, as it could merely be the 
exchange of files in a digital project web, or some other use that does not include 
the uses that are in BIM and VDC. As mentioned previously, the regulation has 
removed requirements on use of specific classification system; this is a positive 
change from the previous, as it allows for freedom of method on the projects.  
 
The ICT regulations have had both undesirable and affirmative outcomes and 
reactions; these are further analyzed below.  
                                                        
12 Regulation 118 and 119 
==PAGE:52==
Master Thesis 
 
46
Undesirable & Affirmative outcomes of regulations 
One of the issues in the industry is that the requirements are seen as an extra 
cost, and not as a helpful tool. The fact that the requirements are based on the 
size of the project decreased the amount of projects that were subject to the 
regulations for many years. It was not until the current edition of the regulation 
that it applied to such a large scale of projects, that the companies had to make 
internal changes in the companies. It also signals that the government viewed it 
as an extra cost. 
 
The participants of the BIM survey (bips, 2015) requested further development 
of standardization of the requirements, and a better connection between the 
models and the descriptions. Requests that can also be accomplished by further 
specifications by the government, or the Owners association, is a common object 
library with standardized objects, and more usable objects from the material 
suppliers. Results from the BIM survey show that requirements and demands is 
an important driver for the companies in a BIM implementation. It can be 
postulated that if the demands from the government were higher and more 
precise, more companies would be forced to implement BIM at a higher level, 
and therefore the efficiency would rise.  
 
Research by MT Højgaard shows that projects executed as subject to the ICT 
regulations from 2013, has had a far better and more effective collaboration 
through the use of BIM. For this reason, MTH believes the regulations promote 
collaboration, compared to projects that are not subject to the regulations or that 
have been subject to the previous regulations. ‘’Standardization through 
governmental legislation is not an organizational constraint, but actually an 
industry opportunity to align interfaces between trade disciplines and drive 
productivity together’’ (MT Højgaard, 2014).  
 
MT Højgaard highlights that projects not subject to ICT regulations, has a greater 
tendency to be projected with 2D drawings, and that the material does not hold 
the same quality as material projected in 3D. Furthermore, it is important to the 
contractors that models are well structured and following standards, to allow for 
useful information in later processes of the project. 3D models are modeled as to 
enable usage in the further stages of the building lifecycle. They also conclude 
that the ICT regulations have influence on the standard of material received by 
other parties on a project, and whether or not this can be used directly in further 
development (MT Højgaard, 2014). MT Højgaard has concluded ‘’that a solid 
==PAGE:53==
3 | AS IS 
 
47
regulatory frame for BIM leads to increased productivity gains’’ (MT Højgaard, 
2014). Investing in implementation of ICT on projects also proved beneficial in 
the ØG-DDB report (Vestergaard et al., 2012). 
 
Both Jørgen Emborg and Stefan Larsen agree that government administered ICT 
regulations worked, by creating a focus around the use of digital tools and 
processes that was not present in the industry prior to DDB and the ICT 
regulations. Whether the informants are satisfied or not with the regulations, 
they believe that the regulations have provided the industry with a path. The 
regulations have also aided the implementation, in that it has kept the skeptics 
on board (Stefan Larsen). Stefan Larsen believes the regulations have made a 
change, and does not believe there is a basis to discontinue the regulations, as 
they do not demand more than what is possible to comply with. Peter Bo Olsen 
states that ‘’The Danish ICT regulation is actually pretty cool, as it provides some 
overall instructions on how to collaborate, more than provided commands on how 
to use specific standards’’ (Peter Bo Olsen). 
 
Jørgen Emborg does not have entirely positive views on the ICT regulations, and 
what has come of it. However, COWI has made it a virtue to keep a positive spin 
on it, and to use it and assumes its effectiveness, until otherwise has been proven 
(Jørgen Emborg). They have implemented a lot of the ICT regulations, and have 
created internal processes around the existing agreements and specification, 
instead of creating their own from scratch. Peter Bo Olsen highlights the missing 
collection of knowledge and experiences between the different editions of the 
regulation, and the initiatives set in place to support the regulations. He believes 
the industry could have benefited more from previously acquired learning (Peter 
Bo Olsen).  
 
64% of the participants in the BIM survey believe that the ICT regulation should 
be further developed with more extensive requirements to BIM and 
digitalization. The survey does not believe that this opinion is shared by the 
majority of the industry, but merely reflects the wishes of the frontrunners 
within BIM and digitalization. The survey has proven that the more BIM is used, 
the more you gain from the BIM process. This supports the hypothesis that there 
should not be a minimum price on what projects are subject to the ICT 
regulations. The companies in the survey, which had implemented BIM, 
experience a higher gain from the processes than the companies that had not 
(bips, 2015).  
==PAGE:54==
Master Thesis 
 
48
 
There are mixed signals when discussing the regulations, on the one hand, actors 
believe that stricter requirements would have aided the implementation, on the 
other hand, they request a higher level for standardization in the regulations, as 
to allow for freedom of method and process. It is a question of whether or not a 
new edition to the ICT regulations is beneficial at this point in time, with the 
status of the industry. The question is what a new edition should contain; in 
order to apply something new that is beneficial to the implementation in the 
industry. If the ICT regulation was filled with requirements, it would probably 
speed up the implementation a great deal, as the industry was forced to move in 
the same direction; the push model. However, this would not be received 
without frustration from the actors in the industry, as all informants clearly state 
that they are not looking to be told how to work, but merely what to deliver. It 
could however include requirements to some of the new tools available, and 
include requirements to the newly obtained focus on sustainability and energy, 
using digital tools. All informants agree that the focus and content of the 
regulations should be on product, not process. 
 
The government regulations are a one-way communication, ordaining specific 
rules to projects. The sender is the government, and the source is the regulation. 
The message is that they are attempting to get all actors to utilize digital 
methods on projects. The receiver, the project participants, has to sort through 
the noise of their own opinion of the ICT regulations, and decode the 
requirements in the regulations in order to achieve the wanted effect.  
Standards & Standardization 
Working digitally and object-based allows project participants to access 
information automatically if the information is present in a digital format. It is 
however dependent on increasing standardization and coordination of models, 
processes and concepts (Hooper, 2015). It is a barrier and an issue, if the 
necessary standards are not set in place, as it can hinder digital, possibly 
automatic, exchange of information. All informants’ identify missing standards in 
the industry as a point of critique, and a hindering for successful implementation, 
they are however not specifying what standards they are missing. Martin Hooper 
has created a clear distinction of what standards are referred to in his analysis in 
his PhD project. He divides in into standards for process, standards for concepts 
and standards for data models. 
 
==PAGE:55==
3 | AS IS 
 
49
The information must be available in a format readable by the receiver. The 
format must be suited for the processes the information is needed for, which 
means that the metadata must be standardized regarding units, classification 
etc., and must be available on a common platform for exchange. This requires a 
contract determining risk, responsibility and ownership of the different 
information, which requires a long row of agreements between parties on a 
project. The more contracts and agreements are standardized, nationally and 
internationally, the more flexible and less resource demanding, i.e. smoothly, the 
project can run. 
 
The Danish ICT paradigm is the best there is. However, keeping it in Danish 
deprives the world of the experiences and developed work (Peter Bo Olsen). 
According to Peter Bo Olsen, the biggest mistakes made in Denmark, by e.g. bips 
and CUNECO, is that all standards and material, is developed in Danish.  
 
The Danish AEC industry has standards developed by bips, Danish Standard (DS) 
etc., which have developed common practices, and guidelines to be followed 
when designing a building. Most of which have been in the industry for many 
years, and have become common practice for engineers to use in daily life. Bips 
description tool is a de facto standard for the descriptions associated with the 
built environment. The descriptions have a structure that ensures the sender and 
the receiver know where the specifications are, and ensure a shared field of 
meaning. The participants of the BIM survey in 2014 say they use a high level of 
bips standards, primarily the description tools, and immediately after that, the 
ICT specifications. However the participants of the same survey, are requesting a 
higher level of standardization of ‘‘the BIM process, workflow and procedures’’ 
(bips, 2015). All informants’ respective companies, state that they, to some 
degree, have taken the standard documents created by e.g. bips, and further 
developed it, as they believed it was not sufficient in its current version.  
 
There are shortcomings in the international AEC Industry regarding 
standardization, and especially the implementation standards, both in software 
and also in the processes and methods applied in the companies. Therefore, 
there is a strong need for contributions to be made to create standards for 
object-oriented information exchange on projects and in companies, throughout 
the design, construction and operation processes (Hooper, 2015).  
 
==PAGE:56==
Master Thesis 
 
50
DS represent the large international standardization programs; ISO and CEN. 
Bips and Molio are under pressure, as there are political forces that see the 
benefits in standardization across EU borders, as to ease the trade (Peter Bo 
Olsen). Jørgen Emborg agrees that Denmark has not had enough focus on 
BuildingSMART, ISO and CEN, and the development they are doing. He states that 
‘’it is as if we looked at the international standards and said: we can do that better’’ 
(Jørgen Emborg). 
 
Standards and standardization of work methods and use of tools ensure the 
shared field of meaning is large, thereby warranting the message received, is 
almost identical to the message sent, eliminating noise. A discussion to be raised 
in the AEC industry is how standards can be developed, to allow agile 
development, but at the same time, secure standards that considers associated 
delineation of responsibility and risk.  
Responsibility of Change 
There is a big dilemma in the industry, regarding responsibility to ensure that a 
project is executed digitally. It was observed at the VDC conference at MT 
Højgaard, that there were obvious disagreements between the Owners and the 
other disciplines, concerning who has the responsibility to request or deliver. It 
seemed the consultants expected the Owners to start making specific 
requirements to the use of digital tools and processes on projects, and the 
Owners expected the consultants to deliver the best product possible, using ‘of 
course’ the best processes available. The Owner (Stefan Larsen) did not want to 
start making requirements on specific processes and work method, but merely 
wanted to request a product. The consultants (Peter Hyttel and Jørgen Emborg) 
and the contractor (Peter Bo Olsen) on the other hand, were asking for a higher 
level of knowledge and understanding of the requirements from the Owners.  
 
The debate is whether the owner should be requesting, and paying for a digital 
process, or if he should merely request a deliverable of a specific product, and 
leave it to the consultants (and expect them) to utilize the most effective tools 
and processes to lead them to the best product. Interesting enough, the 
interviews prove that Owners do not want to ‘restrain’ and make specific 
requirements to the consultants on the process, but just want to require a 
specific output (Stefan Larsen), as well as consultants do not wish to be 
constrained on a process, but request a higher level of understanding of the 
process.  
==PAGE:57==
3 | AS IS 
 
51
 
This debate was also reflected in the interviews, where Jørgen Emborg state that 
ultimately it could be beneficial if ‘the man with the stick’ ordained and made the 
choices, however this can quickly result in a dictation of the processes, that 
neither the owners, the consultants nor contractors are interested in. The 
building sector is such a complex sixe, and someone has to be the frontrunner in 
the start of the next step of the implementation of digital tools and processes. 
Both Peter Hyttel and Jørgen Emborg agree that the time for the government has 
passed, and that it is time for the industry to carry the weight. The 
acknowledgement by the informants that embracing ICT standards under the 
government mandated regulation has improved efficiency, suggests it must be 
the initiators of the project that determines the standards. However, an opposing 
argument could that the industry suppliers know what adds value and supports 
the actual needs. 
Classification 
Classification in the Danish context has been an issue for two reasons. The first is 
the importance of classification as the ‘’need to put the right information in the 
right place’’ (Hooper, 2015), particularly in BIM and VDC context, where the 
information is used for applications such as quantity take off. The 
standardization of classification is important to control information in a project 
(Hooper, 2015). The other issue, in the Danish context, it that analysis proved the 
development of CCS, to have gained too much attention compared to the actual 
outcome.   
 
Jørgen Emborg believes that classification has been allowed to receive more 
focus than what good was. It should have been recognized that classification is 
important, but perhaps not the most important thing (Jørgen Emborg). Jørgen 
raises the question of whether BIM7A13 or Digital Convergence14 could have 
made the same, if not more changes and implementations in the industry, as they 
do not have the same political ballast as bips, Molio etc. has. Peter Hyttel and 
Peter Bo Olsen, agree that BIM7A was a successfully developed classification 
scheme. Stefan Larsen agrees, and state that CCS is merely a classification system 
                                                        
13 BIM7A is a voluntary collaboration between 7 architect companies in 
Denmark, who develop common BIM tools, methods and processes (BIM7AA, 
n.d.) 
14 Digital Convergence is a collaboration between 6 large actors in the Danish 
AEC industry, with the goal to find value with IT in the industry (Digital 
Konvergens, n.d.). 
==PAGE:58==
Master Thesis 
 
52
alongside others stating that ‘’perhaps it contains elements that are useful for 
detailed specifications, but I have never experienced the ‘clean’ CCS in use for deep 
detailing’’ (Stefan Larsen). He does not believe CUNECO was successful to bring 
something new to the table, but simply a new way to do, what was already being 
done. 
 
Jørgen Emborg believes too much money is spent on DBK and CCS, considering 
the outcome. He believes the ambitions were too high, and that the organizations 
and the government, were bad at communicating and implementing the new 
classification systems. He raises the question of whether or not classification has 
been allowed to take up too much space in the industry in the digital 
development, when considering that it is merely a fraction of everything that 
digital tools and processes is. The overall focus has been theoretical, and is 
missing elements in the practical detail of what it means to the individual actor 
on the projects and in the companies (Jørgen Emborg).  
 
Classification, as standardization, ensures a shared field of meaning, which 
diminishes the room for interpretation, and ensures a common language for 
communication across projects and companies in the industry. The discussion of 
whether the exponential growth of big data and artificial intelligence, could 
eradicate the need for classification is interesting. The suppliers of information 
and product will deliver the information in any format, and the technology will 
most like be able to interpret, sort and process this information in to relevant 
parts of a model.  
Information Control 
There is an increasing level of complexity in construction, which equals an 
increasing 
level 
of 
information 
and 
actors 
involved 
on 
a 
project 
(Bygherreforeningen, 2017a). The amount of information on a construction 
project is increasing along with new materials, new methods of building, and 
new design methods. This increasing amount of information requires higher 
levels of control. The requirements differ and increase, and the design and the 
production are more complex than they used to be. This causes an increased 
needed focus on management of the project, process and people, as well as a 
method to control and validate the intensified amount of information. It is 
becoming progressively harder to grasp the project as a whole, using old one-
way, 2D methods, which requires a need for new methods for information 
sharing and communication. It is increasingly more important to have a shared 
==PAGE:59==
3 | AS IS 
 
53
field of meaning, It becomes a question of ‘show, don’t tell’. As it is in the industry 
right now, the information is fragmented across disciplines, companies and 
projects; it is a source of miscommunication and is also a hindering for the full 
utilization and optimization of using digital processes and tools.  
 
The industry is working with a lot of data and information. This is an important 
notion to make, as the complexity of the information is increasing, as the amount 
of data on projects increases, i.e. big data. Figure 17 shows how the data and 
information is fragmented in the industry ‘As Is’, and how it is essential to 
accumulate the data to create knowledge on projects, and in general in the 
industry. Each puzzle piece symbolizes a piece of data on a project. When this 
data is analyzed and collected, it becomes information. The puzzle illustrates that 
pieces of information is collected; however the puzzle is not finished. This shows 
how the information is fragmented in the industry. Enough information is 
available, to see what the picture shows, but it does not provide the full 
aggregated information.  
 
 
Figure 17 Illustration of how data can become information, without necessarily becoming 
knowledge. 
‘’The coordination of complex project systems is perhaps the most popular 
application of BIM at this time. It is an ideal process to develop collaboration 
techniques and a commitment protocol among team members’’ (Bryde, Broquetas, 
& Volm, 2013). Collecting and controlling large amounts of information, calls for 
a well-coordinated, structured project. However coordination does not equal 
==PAGE:60==
Master Thesis 
 
54
collaboration. A project can be well-coordinated, and completely planned, 
without cross-disciplinary collaboration occurring.  
 
Another issue in the industry is the level of information 15  (LOI). It is a 
phenomenon that cannot be dictated merely by a single company, as when 
collaborating across disciplines and companies on projects, the different parties 
are reliant on the other parties’ level of expertise and information on the project. 
As it is now, the level of detail delivered, and the level of tools used, is often 
determined on the lowest common denominator.  
 
Evaluation 
There have been many hypotheses throughout the years that have laid ground 
for the initiatives and the organizations. The reports and the projects are started 
based on a hypothesis that something could be better, cheaper, faster. But what 
is missing is the follow-up (Peter Bo Olsen). The Owners are requesting proof of 
where the benefits end up, and whether it is merely the contractors that reap the 
benefits (Stefan Larsen). Several attempts to measure the effect and benefits of 
the implementation of digital tools and processes are made over the years in the 
Danish AEC Industry. BIB and ØG-DDB are mentioned in this Thesis, as case 
studies and reports, executed in order to measure the effect, but they have 
evidently not been convincing enough, as the informants are still requesting 
proof. This could be a matter of communicating the evidence of benefits, or 
merely the existence of the cases.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                        
15 Also referred to as Level of development (LOD).  
==PAGE:61==
3 | AS IS 
 
55
To evaluate the new tools and processes, a framework for evaluating IT 
innovation could be used. Figure 18 is a possible method evaluation, and includes 
the steps necessary to track evaluation.  
 
 
Figure 18 The IT benefits measurement process inspired by (Andresen et al., 2000) 
BIM handbook states that it is important to ‘’use initial results to educate and 
guide continued adoption of BIM software and additional staff training. Keep 
senior management apprised of progress, problems, insight and so forth’’ 
(Eastman et al., 2011). The framework as a whole allows construction 
organizations to assess ways in which IT innovation can benefit a construction 
business by improving efficiency, effectiveness and performance. Efficiency is 
financially measurable and is represented by money. Effectiveness is measurable 
but not in monetary terms. It is represented by improved operations. 
Performance is not directly measurable in quantifiable terms but is judged 
qualitatively on the basis of the impact of a successful implementation in 
influencing long-term business performance and market share. It is common for 
companies to have follow up through ATR16 however Jørgen Emborg emphasizes 
that this is a follow up in time and money, not in process, experience and result. 
It is a management tool for allocating resources. 
Sub-conclusion 
Initiatives employed in the industry were efforts to solve specific issues, 
however the informants do not view the outcome and product of these initiatives 
merely as positive. In general, the government involvement has been ‘under 
played’, and not too note-worthy according to the informants. Although it has not 
created the wanted result, the informants agree that the government 
involvement played a large part creating focus and initiated development of 
digitalization in the Danish AEC industry, that was not as prominent before 
                                                        
16 Activity, Time and Ressources 
==PAGE:62==
Master Thesis 
 
56
government involvement. Jørgen Emborg believes the state was a catalyst for the 
industry to start taking responsibility. He states that ‘best in practice’ could have 
aided the implementation. The message in the industry has been too broad, 
instead of a very focused message that clearly communicated what the essentials 
for a successful implementation was. There has been a large sense of theoretical 
focus, and the sense of where the individual people in the industry were, and 
what they were to use, was lost. According to Peter Bo, the big problem with all 
of the state initiatives is that no one measured the benefits and the payoffs. So 
how are ‘we’ to convince the industry of the benefits of digitalization?  
 
The informants believe bips, DDB and CUNECO, have not performed according to 
expectations, from the amount of energy and resources that were spent. Jørgen 
Emborg, having been a part of bips, believes it has a lot of good initiatives, but 
the communication to the industry regarding the reasoning and use behind the 
initiatives have been poor. Bips was missing a practical approach to the 
digitalization implementation in the industry, and remained theoretical, which is 
one of the reasons it has not had the wanted outcome. Peter Bo Olsen and Peter 
Hyttel agree that DDB might as well not have been there, whereas Stefan Larsen 
and Jørgen Emborg, though not satisfied with the outcome, agree that it has been 
a part of speeding up the process. ‘’I don’t know if it had the correct focus, but it 
has been a part of something’’ (Stefan Larsen). Development of CCS classification, 
has received too much attention, the communication with the industry 
professionals on what the needs are, was missing. There is a general need for 
more and ongoing development of standardization in the industry. 
 
An issue needing attention, is the miscommunication between the actors in the 
industry, of who is responsible for demanding, and delivering, what. As the 
volume of information increases, the need to control the information, increases, 
and this requires collaboration and communication between the actors.  
 
Evaluation is essential in learning, and Peter Bo Olsen is requesting a standard 
for where to ‘put’ evaluation from projects, processes and initiatives. Some 
effects are abstract, and are the softer issues, so this could be evaluated using the 
communication evaluation scheme in Figure 13 where communication can be 
assessed on projects, and overall in the company.   
==PAGE:63==
3 | AS IS 
 
57
Organizational Issues 
Implementing digital tools and processes in an organization is a big deal, as it is a 
paradigm change that brings with it, an increased need for focus on 
communication. Issues like proper management, clearly defined roles and 
processes and prerequisites are essential.  
Management 
Though this Thesis will not go in detail with management strategies and models, 
it will emphasize the importance of management support and involvement when 
speaking of a paradigm change. Bryde et al., states that BIM ‘’has a holistic nature, 
which includes not only software that allows the geometrical modeling and the 
input of information but also project management (PM)-related tools and 
processes’’ (Bryde et al., 2013). Digital tools and processes is an investment in 
knowledge, technology, software, and further education of employees both in 
tools and the general understanding behind. Niels B. Christiansen, the current 
director of Danfoss, suggests that companies should not undermine the size of 
the transformation, and it is therefore vital that top management is not only 
involved, but act as frontrunners, taking control (Godske, 2017).   
 
It is a challenge if the management does not have the required focus and 
understanding that things must be done differently (Jørgen Emborg). It would 
aid the industry if the digitalization acquired a management anchoring within 
the companies so the industry did not depend on individual passionate people 
(Jørgen Emborg).  It is difficult as a passionate employee, to communicate the 
benefits of larger changes to management, if they do not have a shared field of 
meaning in terms of digitalization. It is important to think the tools into the 
processes, and see how the two compliment each other, and this is where VDC 
and IPD enter the picture, as they look at the overall approach at business and 
project level, and redefine the way projects are run. There is a need for 
management to embrace the new risks and opportunities the digital solutions 
provide, in order to be able to navigate in the new landscape and make decisions. 
This increases the need for a competence lift, and perhaps a redefinition of 
management roles.  In the industry now, there is focus on process and project 
management, but Building Owner Association suggest an increased focus on 
design management, would comply with the futures’ consulting deliverables 
(Bygherreforeningen, 2017a).  
==PAGE:64==
Master Thesis 
 
58
Employee Competences & Changing Roles 
In continuation of the previous section, there is a major issue regarding 
competences in the organizations. It is essential to further educate the 
employees of an organization to comply with the changing role and tasks that 
follow new working methods and tools. ‘’There must be integration between 
parties and the systems, which necessitate a common ground of values, concept of 
tools and definitions for a building project. It is also vital that the companies 
accomplish an upgrade of competences in its business areas through an ICT 
strategy’’ (Mikkelsen, 2014). Jørgen Emborg and Peter Bo Olsen agree that there 
is no need for a uniform competence lift in an organization, however for the 
entire bottom-line to be lifted. MT Højgaard has educated all employees to the 
level needed, some as BIM coordinators, some as ICT managers, and some has 
acquired skills within the technology and processes (Peter Bo Olsen). He states 
that there is no need for all employees to be super-users; as long as they are 
competent to the level needed in their role in the organization and on projects. 
This general competence lift, is a good investment, and a good way not to spent 
money and time educating people to be super-user in software they do not use in 
their daily tasks.  
 
Figure 19 shows how it is essential to increase the competence level of the entire 
company, to a certain level. All three companies and Byggeri København, state 
that they have a minimum solution they apply on all projects, that means it is 
essential for them to have a minimum level of competence. If they are running 
projects, at a minimum level, with project participants at a lower level that will 
bring down the project. It is unfortunately often the case, that the standards for 
digital solutions on projects are defined after the common denominator.   
==PAGE:65==
3 | AS IS 
 
59
 
Figure 19 Bottom line graph showing how there is a need for a complete competence upgrade 
The roles as we know them on projects, change as tasks and services are 
allocated differently due to the new working methods and advanced technology. 
It is not only important to clearly communicate to the employees in an 
organization that everybody still has a role, that might be re-defined, and what 
that role is. Participants in all phases must be conversant with the skillset 
needed to utilize digital methods. In particular, the initial phases of project 
development needed in order to enhance the digitalization of information in 
order to get full information transfer to the following phases, thus avoiding 
waste of effort.  
 
An issue with implementing digital tools and processes in an organization, 
without realizing the seriousness and level of paradigm change, can result in an 
implementation without having the necessary prerequisites in place. There are a 
large number of prerequisites that must be in place in order for an 
implementation to be successful. Things like, software, hardware, competences, 
standards, classification, competences, are merely some of them (Vestergaard et 
al., 2012). Figure 20 highlights the importance of having met the prerequisites of 
an implementation. The graph in the blue area shows the expected rate of change 
when initially implementing new tools and processes, however the prerequisites 
are above the graph, meaning they are not in place for the adoption of the new 
methods, and the change is considered and experienced as unsuccessful. The 
graph in the green area illustrates the actual rate of change, which is developing 
slower but steady, with all prerequisites met prior to the change.  
 
==PAGE:66==
Master Thesis 
 
60
 
Figure 20 Graph showing how the prerequisites define the rate of change. 
 
Sub-conclusion 
There are many organizational issues that stand in the way of a successful 
implementation. It is important that the implementation gets a management 
anchoring throughout the industry and in the companies, instead of it being a 
development run by passionate people in the industry.  
It is important to have management focus on what the objectives are, and an 
understanding that this is a paradigm change, and they must have focus on the 
changes that will have to occur.  
 
Although the management strategies are not analyzed in detail in this Thesis, it is 
important to have a management strategy that allows for flexible ongoing 
development. The increasing development of technology must be seen in 
conjunction with new project and process management frameworks, such as IPD, 
which increases the need for a closer collaboration and more effective 
communication.  It is important for the management to clearly communicate the 
new roles to the employees, and to ensure that all employees are further 
educated, as to allow their competences to match the expectations for the role on 
projects.  
 
==PAGE:67==
3 | AS IS 
 
61
Judicial Issues 
Digital tools and processes introduce new tools and ways of collaborating on 
projects across disciplines and companies. A factor complicating digitalization is 
rationalization 
benefits 
are 
possible 
by 
introducing 
multi-disciplinary 
collaboration. Exploiting the potential of digital tools and processes on projects, 
meets several judicial challenges before resulting in effective multi-disciplinary 
collaboration. To mention a few, there are the changing roles of key parties and 
contractual relations, and the new collaborative processes. Another large 
inhibitor in adopting digital tools and processes in practice in companies, is the 
clarity of roles, responsibilities and distribution of benefit (Singh et al., 2011). 
Lack of history and experience, conflicting goals and varied roles and 
responsibilities inhibit adoption of groupware technologies (Singh et al., 2011). 
 
The Danish AEC industry is said to be a unique constellation in the existing 
procurement and tender bidding procedures. Also the description of services, 
agreements, rules for payment between the important organizations; FRI17, 
Danske ARK18, Dansk Byggeri19, Dansk Industri20 (DI) etc., make the Danish AEC 
Industry a unique constellation. The ways projects are bid to the industry is old 
fashioned and does not allow for new uses of the tools (Bygherreforeningen, 
2017a). 
Description of Services 
The description of services created by FRI and Danske ARK as a description of 
consultancy services generally used in consultancy agreements as part of the 
contract and scope specifications. It will in a generic way define certain 
descriptions of the different areas of responsibility between the parties and 
specifies legal responsibilities. The Building Association believes the description 
of services blur the picture of the consultant’s deliverables (Bygherreforeningen, 
2017a). Peter Hyttel underlines the importance of a clear definition and 
separation between what are deliverables and what are specifications.  
 
The consultants can have a difficult time assessing the extent of a task, and 
where they need to get involved, as the Owners tender can give undesirable 
commitments for the solution of the task. However, the development in the 
                                                        
17 Danish Association for Consulting Engineers (FRI, n.d.) 
18 Danish Association for Architectural Firms (Danske ARK, n.d.) 
19 Danish Construction Association (Dansk Byggeri, n.d.) 
20 Confederation for Danish Industry (Dansk Industry, n.d.) 
==PAGE:68==
Master Thesis 
 
62
construction industry with several special deliverables and products, has made it 
more difficult to describe and solve the consulting task, that is not implemented 
in the project until later in the process (Bygherreforeningen, 2017a). Jørgen 
Emborg believes that attention is needed on contracts and description of 
services, in the different types of tender.  
Phase Model  
The traditional phase model is an example of an issue in the traditional ways of 
working on projects, as it is expected of the industry to use completely new tools 
and ways of working, without actually changing the way we work. ‘’The overall 
problem with the phase model, is that it is keeping us in ‘them and us’’’ (Peter Bo 
Olsen). The traditional phase model can be an issue, as individuals often change 
between the phases, which can result in loss of knowledge and repetitive 
activities. Figure 21 shows a consideration of the four stages, inception, design 
and procurement, construction and operation. Different individuals are often 
involved in the different phases, leading to massive losses of knowledge and 
value.  
 
 
Figure 21 Rough sketch of traditional phase model 
Peter Bo Olsen believes that we will be seeing new ways of doing things over the 
next two-three years. And he is hoping that public and private building owners 
will follow suit. Stefan Larsen and Byggeri København are trying to change the 
phase model, by bidding out a tender won by a constellation of companies within 
the different disciplines, that are to do the majority of the projects for the owner 
organization over the next four years. This corresponds to the IPD process, 
where issues of risk, responsibility and money are shared across the 
collaborative partners. He believes it is a good investment to be the guinea pig, as 
he knows people have had success doing this internationally.   
 
There has been an increasing need for early financial security in many owner 
organizations. This affects the phase model, as you will require a full committed 
pricing before next step is taken. In turn this means that the complete project 
needs to be developed by owner and consultants, before it is presented to the 
market, and through that, employing the competences and knowledge of the 
suppliers and contractors. There is a tendency in the industry, due to the 
complexity of construction development in all phases, for owners to sell the risk 
==PAGE:69==
3 | AS IS 
 
63
to others. This relates to cost time and quality risks. As it is now, the consultant 
services are put out to tender at a time in the design process, where the project 
objectives are seldom settled. At this stage in the project, the possibilities are 
often times tested, and the services in this stage can depend on the needs for the 
process (Bygherreforeningen, 2017a), more so than that of the project. 
 
Changing this becomes a question of responsibility and risk. Who has the 
responsibility for what, and at which stage, and who carries the risk. Peter Hyttel 
and Jørgen Emborg do not believe that the phase model is the problem for the 
insufficient implementation, but Stefan Larsen believes that it is always healthy 
to look critically at things that are working, to see if it can be improved.  
Risk and Responsibility 
The question of responsibility relates to process, prices, quality, operations and 
management, defects and losses. Multi-party collaboration contracts need at 
least to allow, and ideally to incentivize, data sharing, which may require 
strategic change in partnering arrangements (Kunz & Fischer, 2012). 
Procurement regulations dictate that you cannot import product specific 
information before the product is procured, thus leaving the BIM modeling at a 
certain level of development in the process.   
 
When having contracted risks, it renders participants in a situation where they 
cannot collaborate or interfere with other participants’ tasks, as they will attract 
responsibility and through responsibility you may take over risk of cost or 
defect. The building owner association underlines the importance of a 
collaboration form that promotes the possibility for all stakeholders to engage in 
dialog regarding all possible solutions. To have a good collaboration, it is 
necessary to map all stakeholders’ objectives and incentives. This enables the 
possibility of creating common objectives for the project stakeholders to work 
parallel towards the same goal (Bygherreforeningen, 2017a). It is important to 
develop a collaboration and contractual ground that support the involvement of 
as many competences from all disciplines at the same time.   
Sub-conclusion 
There is a need to further develop the Description of Services, to accommodate 
for the changing constellations of actors and role definitions on projects. As the 
collaboration changes deliverables ‘As Is’, it is necessary to redevelop the 
standards, to ensure a shared field of meaning for all parties in the AEC industry.  
 
==PAGE:70==
Master Thesis 
 
64
The industry will need to redefine the traditional phase model, and address the 
issues in loss of value in the interfaces between the phases.  
Social Issues 
The ‘softer issues’ create an immense challenge in the implementation of digital 
tools and processes in the Danish companies in the building sector (Jørgen 
Emborg). The social issues are difficult to define, and especially measure, they 
are however at least as important to include in analysis. This chapter analyzes 
traditions regarding personal and professional traditions, as well as traditions 
within education that hinder successful implementation of digital tools and 
processes.  
Traditions & Culture 
The Danish AEC Industry is known to be a culture of many traditions and roles, 
pre-defined throughout the years and difficult to change. Traditions, work 
methods and roles are imprinted in ‘us’ as industry professionals. It is now 
evident that the paradigm change and the innovative technologies provide a 
need for changing roles, where services need to be executed by others than what 
the tradition dictates. Culture and behavior patterns in the industry suggest a 
sense of comfort, reliability and security.  This applies a personal and social 
feeling of anxiety, when new methods are applied in an environment of high 
complexity, because they cannot rely on ‘default knowledge’. It is an industry 
based on personal, professional and procedural traditions that are so 
incorporated under the skin of the actors and the business culture, making it 
difficult to change. The personal tradition is important, each discipline having 
their own feeling and opinion about their trade.  
 
The Danish AEC industry is known as fragmented and ‘silo-minded’, where each 
actor focuses on own profit. Digital tools and processes, enfolds the possibilities 
to create a better framework for collaboration between all actors in the entire 
lifecycle of a project and the building.  
 
==PAGE:71==
3 | AS IS 
 
65
 
Figure 22 The conceptual diagram representing an AEC project team and the typical organizational 
boundaries. 
Figure 22 shows how the actors in a project are all part of something together, 
however the larger part of their interests lies with the company. Their primary 
focus lies with the company or organization, and their responsibility is to their 
boss, rather than the project director. Also the traditions in the culture of design 
must be reevaluated, and a more holistic approach is needed. ‘’Focus for the BIM 
development in the past 20-30 years, has been on producing design models. Focus 
should be changed to produce as-built models, that are applicable directly on the 
building site’’ (bips, 2015). 
 
Personal tradition challenges the willingness of the actors in the industry to 
participate in the change. The issue with willingness and the encounter with the 
personal tradition is a combination of lack of competence and knowledge, which 
prevents actors to surrender to the new ways of working, some even working 
against. ‘’Many people - including the Owners – do not dare to say out loud, that 
they don’t understand, what BIM is all about’’ (bips, 2015). Architects claim digital 
work methods take away their freedom in sketching with pen and paper, and 
constrain their creativity, and engineers claim they cannot detail installations in 
buildings because of elements that render detailed models useless. Stefan Larsen 
identifies openness as a large inhibitor for collaboration between actors in the 
Danish AEC industry.  
Traditions in Education 
This section includes a short analysis of the educational system, and the 
traditions it includes, that inhibit the digital implementation in the companies.  
The society is educating students to provide them with a set of skill, which 
prepare them to become a part of the industry upon graduation. This means that 
the educational institutes hold a responsibility to educate the students to fit the 
market, once they enter it. It is seldom that students and education is mentioned 
in the analyses of BIM and VDC, however, they are a new generation raised in a 
==PAGE:72==
Master Thesis 
 
66
digital world, and therefore should be included in the future plans for the 
industry.  
 
The educational institutions have a responsibility to stay up to date, and 
continuously update curriculum and learning objectives to correspond to the 
development that exist in the industry. Having studied at different universities, it 
is clear that there is a differentiation in the focus between the universities. At 
Stanford University, they go ‘all in’ on digital collaboration and communication 
methods, and explore all new software solutions possible, in order to test what 
might work. They let the students test the beta, or finished versions on projects, 
and have a close working relationship with the software developers, so they, 
together, can ensure the best possible development of the systems. 
 
In an article in Politiken, futurologist Jannick B. Pedersen and Lene Andersen, 
suggests that education is one of the vital areas to make changes, if the industries 
are to embrace the future of technology. They believe education will no longer be 
something one takes – but it will become a process, where it is necessary to 
continue to educate oneself on the development of technology (Bølling-
Ladegaard, 2017). MT Højgaard is currently using PhD students as catalysts to 
analyze material and research, to determine new possibilities in the industry. 
Peter Bo Olsen believes students in the educational institutes could be a catalyst 
between the organizations and institutes, if they were used for internships and 
programs, and had to make status report. That could be an efficient, low cost 
method for the industry to get an overview of the status in the industry.  
Skepticism 
Skepticism is one of the biggest challenges the implementation faces in the future 
(Stefan Larsen). There is still a high level of skepticism detected, even in the 
people fighting the ‘digital fight’ in the industry. Peter Hyttel, who has been 
engaged in the transition from the start, raises the question of whether 
digitalization rises to the promises, still wondering if it is all worth it. This is very 
interesting, as it reflects skepticism with a frontrunner, underlining the 
understandable confusion, with the people less knowledgeable. The monstrosity 
of the digital development has scared people, and several people have had a 
difficult time determining what they should do.  
 
There are many actors in the industry, who are affected by the evolvement of 
digital tools and processes either positively or negatively. It is evident that the 
==PAGE:73==
3 | AS IS 
 
67
digital development is dividing the waters illustrated in Figure 23. On one side, 
the actors are exploring the ever-changing possibilities and the future use and 
development of the technologies and the processes. This could be software 
developers, researchers and individual frontrunners with curiosity and trust in 
the possibility of the new working methods. These participants feel 
disenfranchised from design-construction process because it is arcane and 
complex, and complain over paper-based and inflexible processes (Kunz & 
Fischer, 2012). The other side holds the actors that are unwillingly affected, and 
are more skeptical about the transition into a more digital AEC industry; these 
are often times the designers.  
 
Figure 23 Digitalization, like Moses, dividing the 'waters'. 
Confusion 
Some of the skepticism can be said to arise from the confusion that exists in the 
industry. Niels B. Christiansen, identifies the issue of the confusion, and says that 
it is important to make the abstract terms, concrete and simple to understand 
(Godske, 2017). As mentioned earlier in the Thesis, there are many 
abbreviations known in the industry, BIM, VDC, ICT, IFC, IPD, etc. There is a 
general consensus between the informants that there is a high degree of noise 
caused by the missing consensus and differing definitions, and applications of 
terms and abbreviations in the industry and companies and on projects. 
Confusion also exists on what BIM and VDC actually is and what effect it can give 
all levels in the industry. 77% of participants in a BIM survey executed by bips, 
agree that there is not a common understanding of what BIM is in the Danish 
AEC Industry (bips, 2015).  
 
Peter Bo states that MT Højgaard will be calling ‘it’ VDC from now on to 
differentiate between BIM and VDC, and then use BIM for what they see it as, the 
==PAGE:74==
Master Thesis 
 
68
BIM model. ‘’VDC is the businesswise overall approach to the collaboration, 
whereas BIM is the models used in a VDC process’’ (Peter Bo Olsen). 
 
Stefan Larsen and Peter Hyttel have concurrent definitions on the term VDC, that 
it is a process with a product, requiring input in the form of a BIM model. Stefan 
Larsen says ‘’VDC is the contractors BIM. BIM is a prerequisite for VDC’’ (Stefan 
Larsen). Peter Hyttel also agrees with Jørgen Emborg in that there could be an 
equal sign between VDC and BIM, and that VDC does not solve the fundamental 
problems of collaboration, ‘‘in principle there is no difference’’ (Peter Hyttel).  
 
Jørgen Emborg believes that VDC is just ‘’old wine in new bottles’’, and that there 
is an equal sign between BIM and VDC. He also believes that the word BIM has 
been destroyed, as it can now be everything, and nothing. He believes that 
consultants started the ‘BIM journey’, and that VDC is the contractors starting, or 
joining, the digital transition. The differences of opinion, and definitions in this 
paragraph, is a barrier in itself.  
 
All informants agree that measured effects and prove of benefits is missing in the 
industry. It is very difficult to measure the potential payoff and benefit that can 
be harvested from a successful digital construction project. Initiatives such as 
BIB, ØG-DDB, and the project under the Implementation Network are made to 
measure the benefits, but the fact that all building projects are unique, including 
many other factors, make it difficult to compare projects executed with or 
without digital tools and processes.  
 
Trust 
A topic that quickly became a central issue, at the final debate at the VDC 
conference, was trust. Trust in the technology, but mostly; trust in each other as 
actors in the industry. Trust in that ‘the others’ new what they were doing, and 
trust in that the ways we know how to work, had to be disrupted to give way to 
new more efficient working methods. Martin Fischer et al. identifies trust as it 
fundamental element of collaboration (Fischer et al., 2017). 
 
There are also issues with trust regarding scope, where the question of who 
solves what tasks, and undertakes different elements of work in close 
collaborations. As mentioned previously, the roles are changing, and the 
consultant might do tasks, besides their scope, because it is easier for them to do 
==PAGE:75==
3 | AS IS 
 
69
it. But the question then becomes, who takes responsibility for the design in 
terms of quality, cost, and risk of defect. The question of ownership and 
intellectual capital, which owns the information that, may be product specific, or 
developed by individual companies. And who owns the design and the 
responsibility of the model(s), do the actors trust others not to take credit for or 
be recognized for, ideas coming from others. These are all questions, raised at 
the VDC conference that must be solved either through contractual basis, or 
through increased communication. Applying the IPD strategy could solve it, as 
they work with the ‘best for project’ strategy.  
 
The Building Owner Association mentions a different type of mistrust. They 
experience that tasks are solved after best ability, and not the best solution, 
because the consultants might not have the capabilities in-house, and if deemed 
too expensive to sent it to a sub-consultant. However, this is not the best solution 
for the building project, and the owners often miss an acknowledgement with 
the consultants, of whether or not they hold the competences for the specific task 
(Bygherreforeningen, 2017a). The Building Owner Association has created a list 
of typical design defects, which include defects in tender material where models 
are not delivered in IFC format or to the agreed level of detail, that the material is 
not coordinated between disciplines (Bygherreforeningen, 2016).  
 
Another issue of trust, also adding to the mentioned confusion in a previous 
chapter, is that companies and organizations claim they work fully BIM or VDC 
supported, when actually only using elements of the methodology on selected 
projects. Both Peter Bo Olsen and Jørgen Emborg addressed this issue, in a 
previous chapter, acknowledging that they apply the new working methods on 
the projects where ‘it makes sense’. This adds a trust issue, of whether to believe 
the ‘nice speeches’ and the written material, saying they ‘use BIM’. 
Sub-conclusions 
The implementation of digitalization has been established in this Thesis to be a 
paradigm change, and with such a change, it is important to include the people 
subject to the change. There are several social issues met in the industry and the 
organizations mentioned here is, challenged traditions, skeptics that must be 
overturned, and a great level of trust and confusion as to what the word BIM, 
VDC mean. Peter Hyttel says it is ‘’difficult to relate to, what you have to relate to’’ 
(Peter Hyttel), which identifies one of the larger social issues. He believes it is 
about management commitment and engagement in the entire AEC industry.  
==PAGE:76==
Master Thesis 
 
70
 
Whether the informants believe it should be called BIM, VDC or IPD, they all 
agree that the differentiation is causing noise in the industry, therefore a clear 
definition and examples of application of both would be beneficial, so its not just 
a lot of three-letter abbreviations that are difficult to discern from the other. Also 
examples of the benefits of integration and standards would help convince actors 
to follow the third digital wave.  
 
People are told to use BIM – but are maybe not properly introduced to it. Which 
means they are confused as to what it is, and how to use ‘this new thing’. More 
focus needs to be on explaining new processes, and how it can aid people in their 
daily life. That is why it is important to eliminate the confusion that exists 
around the terms and abbreviations, and the use of the different terms.  
It might be better to get a general, smaller understanding of the tools and 
processes, and then start from the bottom, than to ‘wow’ people with everything 
that it can do. But instead show them how the small things can aid them in their 
daily work, and then either slowly introduce new tools and processes, or let 
them explore it themselves.  
 
It has to be clearly communicated to each employee what they need to focus on 
in terms of competences and processes within digital tools and processes, in the 
role that they have. Definition of roles must be clear from the top, down to each 
individual employee and must include the tasks they have.  
 
Educational institutes need to communicate with the organizations, and 
continuously update curriculum, to ensure they educate the professionals 
equipped to enter the industry.  
 
==PAGE:77==
4 | TO BE 
 
71
4 | TO BE 
This chapter provides a suggested vision for the industry, followed by the 
succeeding chapter providing the strategy of how to achieve this goal and 
accomplish the vision.  
Vision  
The implementation has halted, as the Danish AEC industry has sent a broad 
message, without targeting a specific goal with the implementation (Jørgen 
Emborg). The industry has worked in parallel, uncoordinated streams of 
development. The actors in the organizations have defined different strategies, 
not aiming at the same vision. BuildingSMART alliance provides a strategy in the 
BIM Execution Planning Guide, stating the first factor that must be clear, is a goal 
and a vision (Messner et al., 2011).  When doing so, it is important to include all 
levels, this being the AEC industry, project, company and employee level. It is 
important that the individual employees can see themselves in a vision, and the 
strategy leading them to the vision, as to ensure they are ‘on board’. Making a 
new implementation, it is important for management as well as employees in 
management steps, to understand the reasoning and the intention behind the 
changes.  
 
The analysis has proven there is high levels of confusion as to what digitalization 
includes, and as Peter Hyttel says ‘’it is difficult to relate to, what you have to 
relate to’’ (Peter Hyttel). It is therefore important for the Danish AEC industry, to 
have a common vision, which can be understood, and accepted, through all 
levels, from society to the core where the individual employees are. The industry 
should have a goal for which elements of the digital development they want to 
include, and make sure to clarify for what they are aiming. The same accounts for 
the companies.  Figure 24 illustrates the different companies, some hitting the 
target and some not. However, if the individual company is not aiming for the 
middle then the individual employee needs to understand that, and aim for what 
is expected. ‘’It is difficult to hit a target, you cannot see’’ (Stefan Larsen).  
 
 
==PAGE:78==
Master Thesis 
 
72
 
Figure 24 Aiming at a target vision 
The vision suggested for the industry by Martin Fischer is ‘’every work hour 
builds the right product safely and productively’’ (Martin Fischer), which was said 
at the VDC conference at MT Højgaard. This vision is in one way, very abstract, 
yet in another, it is straight to the point on what the AEC industry is about. The 
vision does not bother with issues such as conflicting interests or contractual 
issues, but states that every single hour spent on a building project, should be 
working towards the right product, in a safe manner and productively. The vision 
is supported by BuildingSMART Sweden’s objective to ‘’build right from the 
beginning’’ (“BuildingSMART Nordic,” n.d.). The vision from IPD is to ‘’optimize 
the whole’’, which is more of an objective than it is an actual vision (AIACC, 
2014). The visions are imprecise, and the professionals in the industry, might 
already believe they are living up to the vision.  
 
The vision for this Thesis is ‘’every hour spent must create clear value to the 
project, allowing the right competences to productively contribute to the right 
processes, supporting the confidence in management teams, that the decisions 
made, always support the whole value proposition’’.  
 
This vision addresses the main issues from the analysis, as it addresses the social 
aspects of the employee seeing and understanding the value of the work they are 
contributing to the whole project, and that their competences are matched with 
the role best suited for them. The vision concerns with reciprocal trust, 
management always make decisions based on what value it brings to the 
industry, project or company.   
 
==PAGE:79==
4 | TO BE 
 
73
Strategy 
This chapter provides a suggested strategy at AEC Industry, Project and 
Company level, to a successful implementation of digital technology, supporting 
enhancement of productivity.  
 
Digitalization in the AEC industry, brings with it new tools and methods, that can 
seem foreign when they are not introduced properly to the people, and can 
therefore be viewed in a negative manner. ‘If the new technology and methods 
cannot do what I normally do, then I cannot use it’. It is important to see new 
technology, as not only the solution to old issues, but also bringing new 
opportunities, and to view the implementation of new technologies and methods, 
as a process, where everything is not easy the first time, but has to be solved step 
by step, as the industry gains more competences and matures on the background 
of more insight. It requires openness from the actors, to fulfill processes a 
different way than the adapted analogue one, and thereby new competences. 
 
The initiative to make the transition has to come from the top (Godske, 2017), as 
that is where the major decisions are made, and from where the money comes. 
Digitalization strategies must explain that to fully embrace the challenges and 
opportunities in digital working, the understanding that the project development 
is digital must exist, through idea inception, defining concepts, developing 
design, communicating decisions and capturing and maintain data throughout 
construction and operation. Such strategies must be comprehensive, clear, and 
stretch beyond the individual organization and the individual stakeholders 
interest. The individual strategy as well as the shared strategies must cater for 
control of risk, and opportunity to optimize commercial interests.  
 
The following sections, provides strategy for how the Danish AEC Industry, 
projects and the Danish companies should undertake the future transitions ‘To 
Be’, to comply with the issues addressed in the analysis ‘As Is’. The strategy for 
the industry is addressed as overall areas, which must be further developed. The 
project and company strategy is addressed as suggested steps to be followed for 
a successful use of new methods of integrated collaboration and communication.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:80==
Master Thesis 
 
74
Danish AEC Industry Strategy  
The following are the areas the Danish AEC industry needs to address. 
Bottom Up Implementation 
Until now, the industry has attempted with a push (top-down) method of 
implementing digitalization. The government has created regulations and the 
initiatives for classification and standards have been government initiated or 
financially supported. The informants agree that the government involvement 
has generated increased focus around digital tools and processes, but that there 
should not be either a new DDB or new ICT regulations. ‘’Bips and co. has peaked’’ 
(Peter Bo Olsen), and there is no political ground to increase the regulations in 
Denmark. The government has not been a driver, but has merely created 
attention (Jørgen Emborg).  Figure 25 shows two doors the industry can choose 
between. They can choose to either push (top-down), or pull (bottom-up), which 
determines the path that taken moving forward. The informants agree that it is 
time for a bottom-up approach, where standards and ‘best in practice’ should 
drive the implementation. It is time for the actors in the AEC industry to take 
responsibility for the change. Simple standards are missing in the industry, 
which could enlighten users of simple working methods to achieve beneficial 
results.  
 
Figure 25 Push-Pull doors illustrating the previous method, and what should happen in the future. 
Further need for Standardization 
All the informants agree that the development will be more controlled by 
international development in the future, and agree that Denmark and the Danish 
AEC industry should follow the international development. Peter Hyttel and 
Peter Bo Olsen believes the work CEN is doing, is worth following closely, and 
that when the development of standards is finished, it will merely be a question 
of fine-adjustments, and that would create a strategic indicator for Danish 
==PAGE:81==
4 | TO BE 
 
75
companies. It needs to be possible to be different, within the same framework as 
EU (Peter Hyttel).  
This way, it creates a framework and a standardized work method, without 
constricting the companies and taking away their freedom of method, but 
allowing the industry to move in the same direction. Peter Bo Olsen believes that 
BuildingSMART is one to watch. ‘’They have moved from being a constellation of 
nerds, to having a profound business strategy, for how they will sit on the building 
industry globally’’ (Peter Bo Olsen). He believes they are bringing something to 
the table; no other national organization is capable of. He believes that Denmark 
should increase collaboration with BuildingSMART regarding the tools, and CEN 
regarding collaboration forms. Working with internationally developed 
standards would simplify working on international projects across companies, 
countries and software.  
 
Molio needs to enter the implementation on two fronts; they should take the lead 
for on-going development of competences in the industry, and offer and develop 
up-to-date courses for actors within all disciplines, and roles. This would support 
the industry in the bottom-up approach, by not regulating, but providing a 
suitable framework.  
And they need to take charge, and be leaders in maneuver in the complexity of 
literature and information, in order to ensure the Industry moves forward, 
together. It is an easy gain for the industry, to clearly communicate 
understanding of definitions, terms and vocabulary, in order to ensure that the 
industry moves together in the same direction.  
Digital Platform 
For my Bachelor Thesis in 2014 I presented ‘The BIM House’ as shown in Figure 
26. The BIM house was the, then main elements, identified as needed for the 
implementation of BIM. The idea was that the implementation of BIM should be 
thought of as a house. Each element of the house is necessary for the structure of 
the house to hold.   
==PAGE:82==
Master Thesis 
 
76
 
Figure 26 The 'BIM House' 
 
Figure 27 Disassembled ‘BIM house’ 
However, the advancing technology and the analysis in this Thesis indicate that it 
is time to upset the way we think, and look at the AEC industry with fresh eyes. 
Figure 27 shows the disassembled BIM house as the analysis indicates that a full 
implementation of digitalization requires new ways of working, and it is 
necessary to break down the BIM house. Figure 28 visualizes a common working 
platform, where the actors in the industry are standing on a platform made up of 
management, the processes, vision, strategy and competences in organizations 
or projects. Technology is lying across as a single layer of the platform, 
stabilizing the structure. Pillars of agreements, regulations and standards 
support the platform.  
 
Figure 28 Digital Platform 
This new way of working, and thinking within an industry and organization, 
equip the actors to have the right tools, to utilize their competences within the 
organization, and on projects across organizations and countries.  
 
==PAGE:83==
4 | TO BE 
 
77
Collaboration with Educational Institutes 
There is a demand for a contribution to coordinate experience in the industry. As 
mentioned in the analysis, there is a need for collecting experience, however, it is 
a task that is time consuming, and therefore costs money. The industry should 
allocate money to provide a strategy at industry level, and provide a plan with 
objectives for why it should be done. One of the major contributors in developing 
ICT standards and regulations has been the governmental bodies and public 
owners, by initiating and developing regulations as described above. The need 
has now come for the same governmental bodies to coordinate efforts and work 
closely with the educational sector, to enhance the sharing of knowledge, and 
ensure strategies are defined as to cater for the current need for regulation, and 
allow for the future developments determined on trends, and the evidence from 
the new practice proving value. The educational sector could prove to be an 
effective vehicle for compiling and sharing knowledge in the industry as Stanford 
University is doing (Stanford University, n.d.). This would require more direct, 
hands on, collaboration between the private bodies of the industry, as well as a 
more direct and controlling role in the collaboration with the governmental 
organizations and initiatives.  
 
The industry needs to increase collaboration with the educational institutes. It is 
vital that a the professors and the managers planning the curriculum in the 
institutes, have a sense of what the companies are demanding in the specific 
industry. This applies for any industry, but here specifically for the AEC industry. 
 
Programs should be made in order to use students to evaluate the process of 
implementation in the industry. If all interns, or student helpers, had to evaluate 
the company and the projects, and report back to the universities or schools, it 
would be a relatively cheap way for the industry to evaluate and collect and 
coordinate experiences. Companies could also increase their use of PhD students, 
as e.g. MT Højgaard is doing, to research topics (MT Højgaard, n.d.-b). Lastly, any 
industry organizations and initiatives to enhance digitalization should 
incorporate participants from educational institutes in their research and 
execution of initiatives or research.  
 
 
==PAGE:84==
Master Thesis 
 
78
Project Strategy 
Martin Fischer and John Kunz have several suggestions for implementation of 
VDC in their paper ‘Virtual Design and Construction: Themes, Case Studies and 
Implementation Suggestions’ (Kunz & Fischer, 2012). The below points are 
selected suggestions for implementation, that in this Thesis is believed to be 
applicable to the implementation of any new integration, collaboration and 
communication working methods.  
 
- 
All relevant stakeholders and actors should be invited to a project kick-off 
meeting. All stakeholders and actors including the owner should have 
representatives. At this meeting the objectives for the product, the 
organization and the vocabulary for the project should be defined.  
- 
It is important that the relevant stakeholders are chosen and 
clearly defined early in the project, as to allow for transparency, 
and for other actors and stakeholders to know who to 
communicate with.  
- 
Hold project kick-off, major reviews, weekly and daily design and 
construction meetings in a room with a digital platform. The agenda for 
the meeting should be planned based on the description, analysis and 
evaluation of product, organization and process issues.  
- 
Use the available technology to optimize the steps of the project. E.g. 4D 
animation should be used to optimize the construction plan, involving all 
stakeholders to look for and understand possible constraints to the 
construction process due to interferences. Identifying and using 
technology for optimization, will detect errors early, and reduce wasted 
time and money.  
- 
Create and publicly share  
- 
Weekly commitment reports including names of stakeholders 
- 
Risk reports 
- 
Realistic project objectives, which must be reviewed at each 
project meeting. There must be a clear distinction between value 
and cost-based objectives.  
- 
Assessment of the capability and maturity of the project, based on 
competences available to control and utilize digital tools and 
processes chosen for the project.   
- 
Reporting throughout the project, forces solutions from issues in 
the issues manager.  
==PAGE:85==
4 | TO BE 
 
79
- 
Each project should set, track and manage against a small (2-3) set of 
explicit objectives of each type.  
- 
Controllable factors, including modeling and analysis strategy, process 
objectives to measure one or two additional factors.  
- 
Measureable process performance parameters, such as schedule 
conformance and response latency.  
- 
Measureable project outcome objectives, such as safety, schedule, cost 
and functional quality as assessed by post occupancy evaluation.  
 
Following these steps, with or without contractual grounds such as IPD, enable 
the project, and the project participants to utilize the collaborative and 
communicative benefits that come from working integrated using digital tools. 
This strategy, however emphasize the benefits of working on a fully 
implemented IPD project, with a common contractual ground for the entire 
project, allowing the project participants to remove the issue of responsibility 
and risk from the table, and focusing on the ‘whole project’.  
 
Company & Employee Strategy 
Many different management strategies are available to control larger 
implementations; change management, agile planning, expectation management, 
process and project management, and business project reengineering, are just a 
few. The choice of management strategy is of course vital for the outcome, 
however this Thesis will not propose a specific management strategy, though it 
suggests implementing some type of agile planning, to accommodate for the 
ongoing development of tools and working methods.  
 
Figure 29. Strategic Levels 
 
==PAGE:86==
Master Thesis 
 
80
This strategy will divide the steps into three levels within the company, Strategic 
level, with the top level management, Tactical level with general level 
management, and Operation level, in this Thesis used as the employees.  
Strategic Level 
Top-level management has to:  
- 
Create a vision and strategy for the company, resembling the vision in the 
industry. 
- 
Identify the values in digitalizing the company processes. 
- 
Allocate money for a general competence lift and ongoing education of 
employees, as well as the general development within the company. 
- 
Create public company vocabulary, with associated role descriptions and 
competences to create a shared field of meaning.  
- 
Increase focus on new contractual ways of collaborating such as IPD.  
- 
Be visible, supportive and transparent in the transition to new integrated 
working methods.   
- 
Employ the digital platform (Figure 28) in the company, as a prerequisite 
for working.  
- 
Evaluate communication using the communication self-assessment 
scheme in Figure 13. 
Tactical Level  
General-level management has to:  
- 
Support knowledge sharing, allocating time for employees to develop 
their skills.  
- 
Make an organizational chart with employees ‘digital resume’, stating 
skills of tools and processes as to allow others to seek help within the 
organization. 
- 
Take time to listen employees who are skeptical, so everyone feels they 
are heard in the transition. 
- 
Create company standards from industry standards, as to allow for 
communication on projects across companies to be smoother.  
- 
Support collaboration with universities and students as interns, assistants 
and PhD projects. 
- 
Create motivation for the employees. 
 
 
==PAGE:87==
4 | TO BE 
 
81
Operational Level 
Employees at other levels have to:  
- 
Keep a positive attitude toward the transition, and understand that 
everyone is a part of the change.  
- 
Stay enlightened on the topic, and possible attend industry network 
meetings. 
- 
Seek courses or other events that can lift the competence level.  
- 
Ask frontrunners in the company questions, when they emerge.  
- 
Engage in evaluations from top- and general-level management with 
truthful responses.  
- 
Remember that it is a process, and that Rome was not built in one day. 
 
Sub-Conclusion 
These three strategies can be applied across the levels, as suggestion for how to 
comply with the issues that currently inhibit a successful implementation of 
digital technology supporting enhancement of productivity and integrated 
working methods and communication.  
==PAGE:88==
Master Thesis 
 
82
 
 
==PAGE:89==
5 | DISCUSSION 
 
83
5 | DISCUSSION 
This chapter discusses content from the analysis, the vision and the strategy, as 
well as overall reflections on the Thesis.  
Productivity 
This Thesis mentions low productivity in the AEC industry. Martin Fischer also 
points to the issue of productivity in his vision ‘‘every work hour builds the right 
product, safely and productively’’ (Martin Fischer). This Thesis mentions the 
difficulty of measuring productivity in the AEC industry. Construction projects 
hold several stages, from design to operation and maintenance, and the question 
remains in which stage the productivity is measured. Is the low productivity in 
the production of materials and supplies, is it in the montage and construction or 
is it wasted time in the planning phase? Maybe productivity has been measured 
in the wrong stage of the lifecycle of the project. Maybe the individual activity 
and process is highly productive, but the loss of value between actors and 
processes is where the value is lost, resulting in a total low productivity 
(Forsman, Bystedt, & Öhman, 2011). It is possible that each defined activity, has 
a high productivity, but compared to square meters of complete constructions, 
the productivity might be low compared to other industries. Maybe it is not due 
to productivity being measured in the wrong places, but because the expenses 
are in one place, and the benefits in another. This could mean that productivity 
must be seen and measured for the project as a whole, which is supported by IPD 
projects. IPD could eventually be a precondition to utilize the full scope of digital 
opportunities. The information compilation will be so fast, that traditional 
phases and organizational interface approaches will no longer work, and the loss 
of value and time will dictate IPD approaches and methods. 
Advancing Technology 
I have postulated in this Thesis, that technology is not the main issue. Other 
digitally based industries form development on demand, and is driven by the 
business. The AEC industry must take a second look at the overall business 
models and the possibilities for value.  
 
Even if focus on technology is ignored for a while in the industry, technology will 
follow. The analogy of the self-driving car, ‘we’ thought was years and years 
away from reality, is now a prospect in the next few years. It is difficult to predict 
how fast the technology and the industry develops. BIM can now be used for 
visualization, information integration and automation, and VDC is the business 
approach (Bygherreforeningen, 2017). Is BIM then the glue that binds the 
==PAGE:90==
Master Thesis 
 
84
integrated processes together between actors? Will we, in the future, design our 
own houses online, by clicking a few boxes, through parametric design? We are 
already designing kitchens today in IKEA, where all the information necessary is 
to determine how many cupboards, the floor area and what colors you want your 
kitchen to have can be selected (IKEA, n.d.). Houses are assembled as reused 
containers, prefabricated modules, and are even being 3D printed. The 
construction industry might no longer be what we know it as.  
 
It is impossible to know what will happen in the future, but the industry can 
predict the future based on trends. Technology creates challenges for the value 
chain, and the connections and interfaces in the AEC industry as of now, and ‘we’ 
can only guess what will happen. Technology will most likely both challenge, and 
create opportunities in the future, by providing solutions to the issues. We do not 
know how we will see ourselves in the future, but the analysis highlights some of 
the elements important to get under control in order to prepare for what may 
come, such as management, competences, standards, framework, development, 
etc.  
 
This Thesis has not gone in detail with technology, which means Open Formats 
have not been analyzed. However, formats such as BIM Collaboration Format 
(BCF), Open BIM, IFC, are standards that allow for the exchange of information 
across different platforms. These are examples of technology that enable 
communication and information sharing on projects and in companies, across 
software, trade and role on the project.  
Socio-technical approach 
When implementing new processes and changes to existing working procedures 
and methods, it is not enough to merely study how the technology and the social 
groups change separately, it is important to explore the relationship of the two, 
as the objects and the organizational groups are often linked in joint activity. It is 
important to consider the role material elements have in influencing the 
organization and the existing management practices. Research states that insight 
in socio-technical networks, can offer studies of innovation in construction 
management. Socio-technical studies suggest that the non-human actors (in this 
regard 
ICT 
regulations, 
contracts, 
services 
specifications, 
standards, 
classifications etc.) should be studied with the human actors (architects, 
engineers, suppliers, owners, facility managers, etc.), as it is important to 
understand how human and non-human systems interact (Olesen, Jensen, & 
==PAGE:91==
5 | DISCUSSION 
 
85
Lauritsen, n.d.). The interface that exists between the social and technological 
aspects of processes need to be considered and studied.   
Disruption 
A new trendy buzzword in the industry is disruption. Christensen et al., 
describes disruption as ‘’a process whereby a smaller company with fewer 
resources is able to successfully challenge established incumbent business’’ 
(Christensen, Raynor, & McDonald, 2015). Christensen exemplifies that new 
technology creates disorder in an existing order. Henrik Føhns says that 
technology is capable of handling larger and more complex tasks, with greater 
speed, which challenges existing companies that have to adapt, move or fire 
employees whose function is no longer needed (Føhns, 2016).  
 
There are two ways of looking at disruption; a company can choose to disrupt, 
when disruption is predicted based on trends and innovative technologies, or to 
act and react upon disruption and determine how to move forward. Whether the 
industry should lean on the trendy word, used in many industries and even by 
politicians (Føhns, 2016) in Denmark, changes are necessary, in order to follow 
innovation of technological possibilities.  
Social Aspects 
It is important to get people to see the possibilities instead of the limitations, 
which require an open mindset. The AEC industry, the companies and the 
educational institutes, must support and feed open mindsets. It is important to 
convince people that digital tools and processes are helping utilities. At the VDC 
conference at MT Højgaard, there was a discussion eighty percent of the work in 
the AEC industry being automated, and twenty percent remaining manual. This 
caused a lot of disturbance at the conference, as people saw their trade 
challenged by technology. It is therefore even more imperative that the AEC 
industry and the companies communicate that roles will change with technology, 
but that the roles with not vanish.  
It can be discussed whether the confusion is not merely from the numerous 
terms and abbreviations that exist, but also lies in the word Digital. When it is 
called e.g. digital delivery, it sounds like something completely different than 
just, delivery. It is important to see that digital methods merely enable 
compilation and process information. Peter Hinssen talks about when digital 
becomes the ‘New Normal’. He states that the more the adjective ‘digital’ is used, 
the more antiquated it sounds (Hinssen, 2011). The importance here is not to 
remove the word, digitalization or digital, but to highlight what is important, that 
==PAGE:92==
Master Thesis 
 
86
is the processes and the integration in projects and companies. Digitalization is, 
in its essence, a format with possibilities, but the word digitalization is being 
abused.  The human resistance can be seen as a lack of understanding and trust, 
that the information shared and stored is accessible as a 2D drawing.  
The Future of Education 
An article in the newspaper Politiken (Bølling-Ladegaard, 2017) discusses the 
future of technology, and how the robots are about to take over the industry, and 
how everybody must learn to work with artificial intelligence. It gives the 
scenario of being in the year 2030, where reality is no longer as we know it 
today, and claims that we must start educating thereafter. They support the 
strategy in this Thesis, that education is an important area that must not be 
overlooked, and perhaps even receive an increased focus in the future years. 
‘’The future brings with it big technological changes. We will see digital technology 
and artificial intelligence become a part of everything. As the greatest matter of 
course’’ (Bølling-Ladegaard, 2017).  The article predicts that manual jobs will 
disappear as we know them, and that we need to learn how to collaborate using 
new digital systems, and work creatively with the machines.  
 
The educational institutes are under pressure, as digitalization becomes more 
advanced. In the future we might not even attend just one university, but select 
courses, to individually form our education. Physical spaces for group work, and 
social gatherings is necessary, although the need for universities might not be 
the same (Universitets- og Bygningsstyrelsen, 2009). 
 
The article also suggests that it might not be necessary to have the same function 
in the society throughout ones entire working carrier (Bølling-Ladegaard, 2017), 
but that the 70-year-old director, can become a caretaker in a kindergarten or 
serve coffee at the local diner. The futurologists suggest that education should be 
continuous throughout our lives, or we will not keep up with the development 
around the society. This is already evident, as older employees in the AEC 
industry are missing ICT competences and experience with updated processes.  
Evaluation & Knowledge Sharing 
A general need for evaluation and knowledge sharing is acknowledged as an 
enabler for development in AEC industry. Knowledge sharing could beneficial in 
the industry, as the industry could enhance the use of technology in a more rapid 
manner, learning what to do and what not to do, from other project and 
organizations. Technology supports this type of knowledge sharing, through big 
==PAGE:93==
5 | DISCUSSION 
 
87
data. This could be as an external forum, where an external party came on the 
project to evaluate the benefits, the losses and the social experiences. It could 
then be developed as industry tools, where it is possible to parametrically 
choose and compare projects and have easy access to knowledge learned from 
previous projects. This would allow the AEC industry to work together as a unity, 
and not make everyone make the same mistakes. History shows that the industry 
has not been good at evaluating and knowledge sharing. This is part due to the 
form of media, drawings, and text is not good for knowledge sharing, whereas 
digital information is easier to share across companies and projects.   
Certification 
It can be discussed whether a certification method or scheme could aid the 
implementation. This would allow the owners to choose companies certified 
within the use of digital tools and processes, and take the issue of trust out of the 
equation. It would also add pressure on all companies, to increase the 
progression of the implementation. A certification scheme could be like DGNB 
where individual people are certified, to allow them to give buildings DGNB 
certifications, or at a company level. There is a political tendency to confine 
details in regulations and to insert this into certifications. A problem with 
certification is that it can easily lock down development to a defined set of skills 
and methods. Certification standards can struggle to keep up with development 
in methods.  
Reflection 
It was interesting in the interviews, to see how four people, replied differently to 
the same questions. It clearly underlines the different points of view from the 
different disciplines, and how the issues are experienced differently. It raises the 
question of whether the interviews should have been based on different 
interview guides in order to accommodate for the different backgrounds of the 
interview people. It was also interesting, to see how the people’s backgrounds in 
the industry affected their answers, and added a sense of personal feeling to the 
answers. Peter Bo Olsen, Jørgen Emborg and Peter Hyttel, have been in the 
industry a lot longer than Stefan Larsen, and have engaged in initiatives and 
organizations throughout their professional carrier. It can be discussed whether 
it makes them biased toward some of the questions. It seemed as though some of 
the informants, had old, built-up personal judgments and positions on some of 
the outputs.  
 
==PAGE:94==
Master Thesis 
 
88
Same as the informants, it was difficult for me not to include my personal biased 
knowledge towards the analyzed initiatives, companies and informants, from 
prior experience in the industry. I have crossed paths with three of the four 
informants previously in my career, either in work or educational aspect, and the 
fourth, Stefan Larsen, I got acquainted with through the director of Byggeri 
København, who was one of the presenters at the VDC conference. This 
knowledge and inescapable pre-judgments, created noise I had to look past in 
the communication in the interview and the writing process.  
 
Doing this Thesis has developed my ideas about the complexity of the industry, 
and the difficulties of working with such an abstract subject. Starting the 
analysis, continued to open different areas of analysis and research, and made it 
clear that it was important to delimitate, as well as to choose which direction to 
go in. Every barrier detected is connected to another, and it was difficult to 
collect all the pieces. The amount of information that exists on the topic is 
enormous, and it was necessary to eliminate some of the literature read, in order 
to stay on topic. It is also very difficult to know if the literature is the most recent 
published, as there is such a fragmentation between which organization 
publishes what research, and when. Up until the very last day of writing, new 
literature on the topic came to the surface, and it was necessary to choose. The 
complexity of the area is so comprehensive, that this Thesis merely touches the 
tip of the iceberg.  
 
Figure 30 Thesis as the tip of the iceberg 
==PAGE:95==
6 | CONCLUSION 
 
89
6 | CONCLUSION 
The implementation of digital tools and processes in the Danish AEC industry 
has been a long journey, which has not been as rapid and successful as what 
could have been expected. It is a complex implementation, which requires 
changes on many levels in the industry. The government involvement has 
increased focus on the inevitability of implementation, however initiatives, such 
as CUNECO, have not successfully enhanced the implementation.  
 
Though the ICT regulations have changed for the better, there is not a demand 
for a fourth regulation in the industry, as it does not in full provide a practical 
framework. The government’s involvement has peaked, and it is time for the 
industry to carry the weight. 
 
The future for the Danish AEC industry is to look at internationally developed 
standardization. It is time for collaboration to function nationally, as well as 
internationally. The Danish AEC industry needs to develop a national mindset, 
that is open to the development of international standards, as well as ensuring 
that the collaboration and judicial framework is in place to ensure risk and 
responsibility is accounted for, and will not be an inhibitor.  
 
There is massive research on the inevitability of digitalization, so it is time to face 
the facts, and focus on the possibilities it brings. It is also important to 
communicate, that it is all right to be confused, and then for the industry to 
provide an answer to the confusion. It is important to address the issues, as to 
accommodate for the solutions to appear. Changes in ways of working are 
inevitable, and the industry will transition into the digital world. It is important 
to embrace the uncertainty and accept that the future tools and methods will be 
unknown but certainly will come. 
 
It is extremely important for the industry, and for management in companies, to 
account for the cultural differences that exist in the interfaces between 
disciplines and companies, and focus on getting the employees on board.  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:96==
Master Thesis 
 
90
The proposed vision for the industry is advised used, to give the industry 
professionals a goal. The vision ‘’every hour spent must create clear value to the 
project, allowing the right competences to productively contribute to the right 
processes, supporting the teams confidence in management, that the decisions 
made, always support the whole value proposition’’, addresses the issues analyzed, 
as a solution. 
 
The three strategies envisaged for respectively the AEC industry, the projects 
and the companies, support achieving the vision. The strategy accommodates for 
the issues mentioned in this Thesis, and is aware that other issues must be 
addressed for a completely successful implementation.  
 
One thing is certain; ‘we’, the actors in the AEC industry, cannot expect the 
industry to change, if we continue to do things the same way and expect the 
solutions to be provided by others. Although the implementation has not 
progressed as comprehensively as could be hoped, it is not too late to stop, look 
at what is done so far, and evaluate how to move forward in the best possible 
manner. It is important to trust that the transition has just started, and that there 
are still years of change in front of us. Denmark has a lot to be proud of in the 
AEC industry, both regarding what has been built, and the traditions we come 
from regarding processes and what has been developed so far to aid 
implementation of digitalization.  
 
 
==PAGE:97==
 
 
91
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
AIACC. (2014). Integrated Project Delivery: An Updated Working Definition. AIA 
California 
Council, 
Sacramento, 
CA, 
3, 
1–18. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.aiacc.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/AIACC_IPD.pdf 
Andresen, J., Baldwin, A., Betts, M., Carter, C., Hamilton, A., Stokes, E., & Thorpe, T. 
(2000). A framework for measuring it innovation benefits. Electronic Journal 
of Information Technology in Construction, 5(March), 57–72. 
Arch Daily. (2012). The Future of the Building Industry: BIM BAM BOOM. 
Retrieved March 13, 2017, from http://www.archdaily.com/262008/the-
future-of-the-building-industry-bim-bam-boom 
Biilmann, T. (2015). Det er nu vi bygger fremtiden (1. Edition). Valby: Libris 
Digimental A/S. 
BIM7AA. (n.d.). BIM7AA. 
bips. 
(2014). 
DBK-klassifikation. 
Retrieved 
May 
26, 
2017, 
from 
http://bips.dk/værktøjsemne/dbk-klassifikation#0 
bips. 
(2015). 
BIM 
Survey 
2014, 
26. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://bips.dk/files/news_files/bim_survey_2014_r0.pdf 
Bolig- og Byministeriet. (1998). Byggepolitisk handlingsplan 98. 
Bølling-Ladegaard, A. (2017, May 25). Fremtidens seks typer - som vi skal 
uddanne os til hele livet. Politiken, p. 4. 
Bram, J. (2017, June 2). Vi ved ikke, hvad vi møder om to år. Men vi skal være klar 
til det. Ingeniøren. 
Bryde, D., Broquetas, M., & Volm, J. M. (2013). The project benefits of building 
information modelling (BIM). International Journal of Project Management, 
31(7), 971–980. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijproman.2012.12.001 
Bryman, A. (2012). Social Research Methods (4th ed.). Oxford. 
BuildingSMART 
Nordic. 
(n.d.). 
Retrieved 
May 
10, 
2017, 
from 
http://www.buildingsmartnordic.org/Organisation/denmark 
Business Dictionary. (n.d.). Business Dictionary. 
By- og Boligministeriet, & Erhvervsfremmestyrelsen. (2000). Byggeriets fremtid 
- Fra tradition til innovation, 194. 
Bygherreforeningen. (2012). Høringssvar. 
Bygherreforeningen. 
(2016). 
Typiske 
projekteringssvigt. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://bygst.dk/viden-om/offentligt-byggeri/typiske-projekteringssvigt/ 
Bygherreforeningen. (2017a). Byggeriets veje til fremtidens rådgivningsydelser. 
Bygherreforeningen. (2017b). Smart drift med dynamiske data. 
==PAGE:98==
Master Thesis 
 
92
Bygningsstyrelsen. (2015). Partnering. Retrieved May 29, 2017, from 
https://www.bygst.dk/viden-om/samarbejds-og-
organisationsformer/statsbyggeri/partnering/ 
Bygningsstyrelsen. (2016). The ICT Regulation. Retrieved March 12, 2017, from 
http://www.bygst.dk/english/about-us/ 
Christensen, C. M., Raynor, M. E., & McDonald, R. (2015). What Is Disruptive 
Innovation?, (December). 
College of Communication and Information. (2017). Information Communicatin 
Technology. 
CUNECO. (n.d.). CUNECO. 
Dansk Byggeri. (n.d.). About the Danish Construction Association. Retrieved June 
6, 2017, from https://www.danskbyggeri.dk/english 
Dansk 
Industry. 
(n.d.). 
About 
DI. 
Retrieved 
June 
6, 
2017, 
from 
http://di.dk/English/AboutDI/Pages/confederation.aspx 
Danske ARK. (n.d.). Danish Association of Architectural Firms. Retrieved June 6, 
2017, 
from 
https://www.danskeark.dk/content/danish-association-
architectural-firms 
Digital Konvergens. (n.d.). Digital Konvergens. 
Eastman, C., Teicholz, P., Sacks, R., & Liston, K. (2011). BIM Handbook: A guide to 
Building Information Modeling for Owners, Managers, Designers, Engineers 
and Contractors. Wiley Publishing. 
Erhvers- og Byggestyrelsen. (2006). BEK nr. 1365, (1365), 1–5. 
Exigo. 
(n.d.). 
Introduktion 
til 
BIM. 
Retrieved 
April 
8, 
2017, 
from 
http://exigo.dk/for-bygherrerikt-bygherreradgivning/hvad-er-bim/ 
Fischer, M., Ashcraft, H., Reed, D., & Khanzode, A. (2017). Integrated Project 
Delivery. Wiley Publishing. 
Flyvbjerg, B. (2010). Fem misforståelser om casestudiet. In Kvalitative metoder 
(pp. 463–487). Hans Reitzels Forlag. 
Føhns, H. (2016). Hvad betyder det mærkelige ord disruption. 
Forsman, S., Bystedt, A., & Öhman, M. (2011). Interaction in the construction 
process — System effects for a joinery-products supplier. Lean Construction 
Journal, 1–18. 
FRI. (n.d.). About FRI. Retrieved June 6, 2017, from http://www.frinet.dk/english 
Godske, B. (2017, June 2). Digitalisér - heller nu end senere. Ingeniøren. 
Hauch, P., Nielsen, M. L., Brauer, J., & Jørgensen, E. K. (2001). It i byggeriets 
fremtid. Erhvervsfremme styrelsen. 
Hinssen, P. (2011). The New Normal. Across Technlogy. 
Hooper, M. (2015). BIM Anatomy II - Standardisation needs & support systems. 
==PAGE:99==
 
 
93
Lund University. 
IKEA. (n.d.). Hvad kan vi hjælpe dig med? Retrieved June 5, 2017, from 
http://www.ikea.com/dk/da/catalog/categories/departments/kitchen/pla
nning_/?ICID=iba%7Cdk%7Ckitchendept%7C201702241327243943_8 
Kunz, J., & Fischer, M. (2012). Virtual Design and Construction: Themes, Case 
Studies 
and 
Implementation 
Suggestions. 
CIFE 
Working 
Paper, 
97(Version14), 
50. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.stanford.edu/group/CIFE/online.publications/WP097.pdf 
Kvale, S., & Brinkmann, S. (2009). Interview - introduktion til et håndværk. Hans 
Reitzels Forlag. 
Larsen, A. (2014). 2014 Bips rolle i digitaliseringen. Aalborg University. 
Malleson, A., & Watson, D. (2016). International BIM Report 2016 Views from the 
countries Survey 2015. Nbs. 
Messner, J., Anumba, C., Dubler, C., Goodman, S., Kasprzak, C., Kreider, R., … Zikic, 
N. (2011). BIM Project Execution Planning Guide - Version 2.1. 
buildingSMART 
Alliance, 
1–135. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107415324.004 
Mikkelsen, E. T. (2014). Implementation of BIM in Danish Companies. Technical 
University of Denmark. 
Molio. (2017). About Molio. Retrieved May 26, 2017, from https://molio.dk/site-
footer/about-us/ 
Morreale, S. P., Spitzberg, B. H., & Barge, J. K. (2007). Human Communication: 
Motivation, Knowledge and Skills. Holly J. Allen. 
MT Højgaard. (n.d.-a). MT Højgaaard. Retrieved May 12, 2017, from 
http://mth.dk/ 
MT Højgaard. (n.d.-b). VDC- og BIM Publikationer. Retrieved June 5, 2017, from 
http://mth.dk/Processer/Virtual-Design-Construction/Bim-og-VDC-
publikationer.aspx 
MT Højgaard. (2014). Value drivers in the Danish national ICT regulations. 
Olesen, F., Jensen, C. B., & Lauritsen, P. (n.d.). Introduktion ti lSTS - science, 
technology, society. Hans Reitzels Forlag. 
Produktivitetskomiteen. (2013). Danmarks Produktivitet - hvor er problemerne? 
København K. 
Rasmussen, J., Hauch, P., Ottosen, P. S., Nybo, E., Karlshøj, J., Overgaard, K., … 
Olsen, I. S. (2001). Det Digitale Byggeri - rapport fra en arbejdsgrupe. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://bips.dk/files/det-digitale-byggeri_rapport-fra-
arbejdsgruppe_2001.pdf 
Singh, V., Gu, N., & Wang, X. (2011). A theoretical framework of a BIM-based 
==PAGE:100==
Master Thesis 
 
94
multi-disciplinary collaboration platform. Automation in Construction, 20(2), 
134–144. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2010.09.011 
Standardization, E. C. for. (2017). Who are We. 
Standardization, I. O. for. (n.d.). About ISO. Retrieved May 31, 2017, from 
https://www.iso.org/about-us.html 
Stanford University. (n.d.). CIFE - Center for Integrated Facility Engineering. 
Retrieved June 5, 2017, from https://cife.stanford.edu/ 
Statsbygg. (n.d.). Retrieved May 11, 2017, from http://www.statsbygg.no/Om-
Statsbygg/Mal-og-strategi/Strategiske-mal/ 
Technical University of Denmark. (n.d.). DTU Find It. Retrieved May 28, 2017, 
from https://findit.dtu.dk/ 
Tønsbergprosjektet. (n.d.). Tønsbergprosjektet. Retrieved May 30, 2017, from 
http://tonsbergprosjektet.no/ 
Transport 
og 
Bygningsministeriet. 
(2007). 
BEK 
nr. 
1524, 
(1), 
1–5. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13398-014-0173-7.2 
Transport 
og 
Bygningsministeriet. 
BEK 
nr. 
1381, 
2010 
§ 
(2010). 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13398-014-0173-7.2 
Transport og Bygningsministeriet. BEK nr. 118, 2013 § (2013). 
Universitets- 
og 
Bygningsstyrelsen. 
(2009). 
CAMPUS 
AND 
STUDY 
ENVIRONMENT physical framework for universities of the future, 257. 
VDC. 
(n.d.). 
Retrieved 
May 
12, 
2017, 
from 
https://vdcscorecard.stanford.edu/introduction-vdc 
Vestergaard, F., Karlshøj, J., Hauch, P., Lambrecht, J., & Mouritsen, J. (2012). ØG-
DDB Teknisk Rapport Afrapportering af projektet: Måling af økonomiske 
gevinster ved Det Digitale Byggeri. DTU Byg Rapport SR 12-06. 
Whyte, J. K., & Ewenstein, B. (2007). Editorial: Visual practices and the built 
environment. 
Building 
Research 
& 
Information, 
35(1), 
3–5. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/09613210600906056 
 
 
==PAGE:101==
 
 
95
FIGURES 
FIGURE 1 STRUCTURE OF THE THESIS 
6 
FIGURE 2 DATA TRIANGULATION METHOD 
7 
FIGURE 3 MAP OF UNIVERSITIES AND JOBS 
8 
FIGURE 4 LIST OF TERMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 
15 
FIGURE 5 APPLICATIONS OF BIM 
18 
FIGURE 6 ESSENTIAL PRINCIPLES OF IPD, FROM (AIACC, 2014). 
20 
FIGURE 7 TIMELINE SHOWING HISTORY OF IMPLEMENTATION IN THE DANISH AEC INDUSTRY, 
INSPIRED BY (LARSEN, 2014) 
23 
FIGURE 8 OVERVIEW OVER COUNTRIES THAT MANDATE BIM USE, INSPIRED BY (HOOPER, 
2015). 
29 
FIGURE 9 INFORMATION TRANSFER MODEL OF COMMUNICATION, FROM (MORREALE ET AL., 
2007). 
34 
FIGURE 10 THE INTERACTIVE MODEL OF COMMUNICATION, FROM (MORREALE ET AL., 2007).
 
35 
FIGURE 11 THE TRANSACTIONAL MODEL OF COMMUNICATION, FROM (MORREALE ET AL., 
2007). 
36 
FIGURE 12 COMMUNICATION AS COMMUNITY, FROM (MORREALE ET AL., 2007). 
36 
FIGURE 13 COMMUNICATION SELF-ASSESSMENT RATED ON MOTIVATION, KNOWLEDGE AND 
SKILL, FROM (MORREALE ET AL., 2007). 
37 
FIGURE 14 ILLUSTRATION OF ALL THE LEVELS THERE SHOULD BE MEASURED EFFECTS IN A 
DIFFERENT ORDER, INSPIRED BY (VESTERGAARD ET AL., 2012). 
37 
FIGURE 15 ISSUES AND ENABLERS FROM RESEARCH 
39 
FIGURE 16 STATUS-QUO LOOP INHIBITING TECHNOLOGY ADOPTION AND ENHANCEMENT, 
FROM (SINGH ET AL., 2011) 
41 
FIGURE 17 ILLUSTRATION OF HOW DATA CAN BECOME INFORMATION, WITHOUT 
NECESSARILY BECOMING KNOWLEDGE. 
53 
FIGURE 18 THE IT BENEFITS MEASUREMENT PROCESS INSPIRED BY (ANDRESEN ET AL., 
2000) 
55 
FIGURE 19 BOTTOM LINE GRAPH SHOWING HOW THERE IS A NEED FOR A COMPLETE 
COMPETENCE UPGRADE 
59 
FIGURE 20 GRAPH SHOWING HOW THE PREREQUISITES DEFINE THE RATE OF CHANGE. 
60 
FIGURE 21 ROUGH SKETCH OF TRADITIONAL PHASE MODEL 
62 
FIGURE 22 THE CONCEPTUAL DIAGRAM REPRESENTING AN AEC PROJECT TEAM AND THE 
TYPICAL ORGANIZATIONAL BOUNDARIES. 
65 
FIGURE 23 DIGITALIZATION, LIKE MOSES, DIVIDING THE 'WATERS'. 
67 
FIGURE 24 AIMING AT A TARGET VISION 
72 
FIGURE 25 PUSH-PULL DOORS ILLUSTRATING THE PREVIOUS METHOD, AND WHAT SHOULD 
HAPPEN IN THE FUTURE. 
74 
FIGURE 26 THE 'BIM HOUSE' 
76 
FIGURE 27 DISASSEMBLED ‘BIM HOUSE’ 
76 
FIGURE 28 DIGITAL PLATFORM 
76 
FIGURE 29. STRATEGIC LEVELS 
79 
FIGURE 30 THESIS AS THE TIP OF THE ICEBERG 
88 
 
 
 
==PAGE:102==
Master Thesis 
 
96
‘The Noun Project’ Credits 
- 
Michael Weibel 
- 
Pablo Bravo 
- 
Davo Sime 
- 
Aya Sofya 
- 
Ted Grajeda 
TABLES 
TABLE 1 LIST OF INFORMANTS 
11 
TABLE 2 OVERVIEW OF ICT REGULATIONS, FROM (MT HØJGAARD, 2014) 
43 
 
==PAGE:103==
 
 
97
APPENDIX 
Appendix A – Interview Guide 
Interview questions used for the interviews with Peter Hyttel, Peter Bo Olsen, 
Stefan Snyder Larsen and Jørgen Emborg.  
 
Interview til kandidat speciale 
 
Dette spørgeskema er den del af et kandidatspeciale fra DTU, og indeholder 
spørgsmål fokuseret på tre overordnede temaer:  
 
Digitalisering I egen virksomhed 
Digitalisering fra staten 
 
Digitalisering I fremtiden 
 
 
1. Navn 
 
 
2. Titel 
 
 
3. Nuværende Firma 
 
 
4. Funktion i firmaet 
 
 
5. Historie i Branchen  
(Virksomheder, foreninger, bestyrelser, medlemsskaber) 
 
 
6. Bruger jeres virksomhed BIM/VDC?  
(Hvad ser du forskellen på BIM og VDC som?) 
 
 
7. I hvilket omfang benytter i CAD og BIM?   
(Hvor stor en %-del af projekterne arbejder modelbaseret og i hvor stort 
omfang?) 
 
 
8. I hvilken grad benytter I IKT bekendtgørelsen og specifikationer? 
==PAGE:104==
Master Thesis 
 
98
bl.a. IKT-specifikationerne fra bips/Molio?  
 
 
9. Benytter I IKT på projekter der ikke er underlagt IKT 
bekendtgørelsen?  
- hvorfor/hvorfor ikke? 
 
 
10. 
Hvordan har jeres virksomhed ændret metoder og processer i 
forbindelse med indførelsen og ændringerne på IKT 
bekendtgørelsen fra hhv.  
2007:  
 
2010:  
 
2013:  
 
11. 
Har I en strategiplan i Jeres virksomhed mod en digitalisering 
af projektarbejdet og modelbaserede arbejdsmetoder? 
Hvornår er denne strategi plan fra?  
 
 
12. 
Hvor detaljeret er strategiplanen? 
en hensigtserklæring eller opsætning af detaljerede mål. 
 
 
13. 
Er der sat ressourcer af til denne strategi, 
efteruddannelsesaktiviteter, ansættelsesstrategi, innovationspulje 
med egen økonomi osv. 
 
 
14. 
Hvordan ser du statens indflydelse har været på 
implementeringen af digitalisering i den danske bygge industri?  
 
 
15. 
Fra dit/jeres synspunkt, er statslige krav så nødvendige? 
Hvordan enten støtter eller hæmmer de implementeringen og 
udviklingen?  
 
 
16. 
Hvis ikke der er krav fra staten, hvem kan så koordinere og 
sætte krav om standarder og metoder til branchen?  
==PAGE:105==
 
 
99
 
 
17. 
DDB var i sin tid et initiativ fra regeringen for at fremme 
digitalisering, hvordan havde det set ud hvis DDB ikke var blevet 
gennemført?  
 
 
 
18. 
Foreningen bips har varetaget mange af opgaverne i 
forbindelse med DDB, implementeringsnetværket og senest 
Cuneco. Hvordan mener du bips varetaget denne opgave?  
bestemte opgaver eller initiativer du har synspunkter på?  
 
 
 
19. 
I hvor stort omfang mener du at Cuneco har levet op til dine 
forventninger? 
 
 
20. 
Hvad kan man forvente i fremtiden vedr. fælles bestræbelser 
på digitalisering?  
Kommer der et nyt DDB? Nye organisationer/initiativer? 
 
 
21. 
Er flere krav til byggeriet og arbejdsmetoderne i projekter og 
mellem parterne løsningen?  
 
 
22. 
Skal der kigges på fasemodellen og måden byggeriet er 
organiseret på, ydelsesbeskrivelser m.m.?  
 
 
23. 
Hvis man forestiller sig at der er 3 modeller for fremtiden – 
hvilken tror du mest på? eller forestiller du dig en helt 4. model?  
 
a) fortsætte med bygherrekravene fra staten (måske endda 
forhøje mængden og indføre løbende opdateringer) 
b) lad ansvaret overgå alene til Molio? 
c) decentral udvikling. Hvert firma påtager sig selv ansvaret for 
benyttelsen af digitale værktøjer og processer og hvilke 
standardiseringer osv. de vil benytte. Statslige krav kun på 
begrænsede områder.  
 
==PAGE:106==
Master Thesis 
 
100
 
24. 
Hvad kunne hjælpe din/jeres disciplin og virksomhed i brugen 
af modelbaserede processer og digitale værktøjer (BIM/VDC)? 
 
 
25. 
Hvad mener du ville hjælpe branchen på vej?  
Hvor mener du der skal sættes ind for at fremme digitaliseringen af byggeriet?  
 
 
26. 
Hvor ligger den største udfordring?  
 
 
27. 
Mener du at udviklingen styres af nationale tiltag eller 
internationalt? 
Ift. Standarder, processer, templates mm. 
 
 
28. 
Mener du at Danmark er unik, i forhold til at skulle kunne 
implementere og benytte internationale standarder?  
 
 
29. 
Hvad mangler af initiativer i forhold til dine synspunkter: 
a. På virksomhedsniveau 
b. På brancheniveau 
c. På samfundsniveau. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:107==
 
 
101
Appendix B – Sheet with terms and abbreviations 
  
  
 
ABBREVIATIONS
DEFINITION
AAU
Aalborg University
ABB
AutoCAD Users in the Building Sector
AEC
Architect, Engineer, Construction
AIA
American Institute of Architects
AIACC
American Institute of Architects
BAM
Building Assembly Modeling
BCF
BIM Collaboration Format
BIM
Building Information Modeling
bips
building, informationtechnology, productivity and collaboration
BOOM
Building Owner Operation Model
BPS
The Building Sectors Planning System 
CAD
Computer Aided Design
CCS
Cuneco Classification System
CEN
The European Committee for Standardization
CIFE
Center for Integrated Facility Engineering
CUNECO
Center for Productivity
Danske ARK
Danish Association for Architectural Firms 
DBK
Danish Building Classification 
DDB
Digital Construction
DI
Confederation for Danish Industry 
DS
Danish Standard
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
FM
Facility Management
FRI
Danish Association for Consulting Engineers 
GSA
General Services Administration
IBB
IT Users in the Building Sector
ICT
Information Communication Tehnology
IFC
Industry Foundation Classes
IPD
Integrated Project Delivery
ISO
International Organizatin for Standardization
LOI
Level of Information
PM
Project Management
PPP
Public Private Partnership
SfB
Cooperation Committee for Construction Affairs
UNSW
University of New south wales
VDC
Virtual Design Reality 
