==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Control strategies for mechanical 
ventilation in low‐energy residences
Authors:
Ambra Guglietti
Martina Pesavento
Supervisor:
Jakub Kolarik
Co‐supervisor:
Daria Zukowska‐Tejsen
June, 2nd 2017
==PAGE:2==
i
==PAGE:3==
Title
Control strategies for mechanical ventilation
in low-energy residences
Authors
Ambra Guglietti
Martina Pesavento
Supervisors
Associate Professor Jakub Kolarik
Assistent Professor Daria Zukowska-Tejsen
Department of Civil Engineering - DTU Byg
Technical University of Denmark
Kils Noppels All´e, Bld. 402
2800 Kogens Lyngby
Denmark
Msc program
Sustainable energy (Energy savings)
Department of Civil Engineering - DTU Byg
Technical University of Denmark
Kils Noppels All´e, Bld. 402
2800 Kogens Lyngby
Denmark
Date of submission
June 2nd, 2017
Cover Image
c⃝2015 HKU New College
ii
==PAGE:4==
iii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
The present Master’s Thesis, titled ”Control strategies for mechanical ventilation in low-
energy residences”, was the result of ﬁve months of work in the Department of Civil
Engineering (DTU Byg) of the Technical University of Denmark. The project started on
January 2nd ending on June 2nd.
This project represents 30 ECTS for each author, for a total of 60 ECTS and it was
conducted under the supervision of Associate Professor Jakub Kolarik and co-supervision
of Assistant Professor Daria Zukowska-Tejsen.
Lyngby, June 2017.
Ambra Guglietti
Martina Pesavento
iv
==PAGE:6==
v
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgments
Almost two years ago, we decided to mess up our lives and embark on a journey to
Denmark. We cannot say that it has been easy to leave all our certainties and jump into
the unknown. The language, very easy to learn, the weather, very sunny and warm, and
the food, always very tasty, welcomed us since the day we stepped into this country.
Nonetheless, what we have found here is priceless.
Thank you to our supervisors Jakub and Daria to have guided the last steps of our
academic experience. It has been motivating and inspiring to work an entire year with
you.
Jakub, thank you for the continuous encouragements and for being available for
every single question, doubt, issue or breakdown that we have had. Daria, thank you for
the support and your precious advice.
Thank you to all the experts we have met during these ﬁve, exhausting months. First
of all, thank you Jelle, for helping us with a constructive, and intense, 9-hour meeting.
Thank you Henrik and Niels, from the Building Research Institute, for sharing your deep
knowledge with us. Finally, thank you to all the consultants and producers who took the
time to answer our questions.
Thank you to all our old and new friends for being patient and understanding, even
though we have not been very social lately. Thank you to our ﬂatmates for cleaning,
cooking and supporting us every day and just for being there when we needed to talk.
Thank you to Lucile for the model and the explanations and to Stefania for helping
us with the graphics.
Thank you Emanuele for being the best ”housewife” that every woman desires, for
vi
==PAGE:8==
being patient and for cheering me up. Last but not least, thank you for the model and
your help.
Thank you Patrick for driving me back from Albertslund, for indulging my craziness
everyday and simply for being there every time I need you. Not less important, thank you
for raising the right doubts in the right moment.
Ultime ma non meno importanti, grazie alle nostre famiglie per l’inﬁnito supporto, per
averci dato la possibilit`a di essere qui e per il calore quotidiano che riceviamo a distanza.
Nonostante sia stato diﬃcile per tutti, lasciarci andare ci ha fatto trovare la nostra strada.
Semplicemente, grazie.
vii
==PAGE:9==
Abstract
Over the last decades, the occupants of the more and more airtight buildings have started
to report health problems associated to the permanence in the building. Enhanced indoor
climate conditions can be achieved through the use of mechanical ventilation, but at the
expenses of increased energy use for HVAC systems. Demand-controlled ventilation (DCV)
is a possible solution to obtain energy savings, but the reduced airﬂows can potentially
facilitate the build-up of harmful compounds.
In this project, the performances of di↵erent control strategies for mechanical venti-
lation in low-energy residences are assessed, by using the simulation tool IDA ICE. The
possibility to decrease the ventilation rate to 0.1 l/s per m2 during non occupancy is inves-
tigated, testing the ability of the di↵erent strategies to dilute harmful indoor contaminants,
such as VOC and particularly formaldehyde and benzene.
The results show that the use of DCV with a central RH control sensor reduces the
primary energy use of about 35% compared to the CAV strategy, while improving the
IAQ. The current minimum ventilation rate of 0.3 l/s per m2 results adequate to dilute
VOC for most of the strategies studied. Reducing the minimum ventilation rate to 0.1 l/s
per m2 for 6 to 10 hours results in 12% to 18% energy savings for VAV systems. The VAV
strategies resulted suitable to control TVOC and benzene, but there are still uncertainties
about the dilution of formaldehyde in the short-term.
It was observed that one hour
of boost in the airﬂows is necessary to constrain the formaldehyde concentration below
the exposure limit value (ELV). According to formaldehyde emission models for di↵erent
sources, it is expected that all VAV systems are able to control the formaldehyde after 30
days from the installation of the products.
viii
==PAGE:10==
ix
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Preface
iv
Acknowledgements
vi
Abstract
viii
Contents
xii
Nomenclature
xiv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
About IEA-EBC Annex 68
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Background
7
2.1
Mechanical ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
Balanced mechanical ventilation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.2
Heat recovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.3
Demand-controlled ventilation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.4
Centralised and decentralised ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2
Energy and IAQ regulations for Danish buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
x
==PAGE:12==
2.3
Market analysis on ventilation systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4
E↵ect of indoor air pollution on human health
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.5
Indoor air pollutants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.5.1
Non-viable particles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.5.2
Bio-contaminants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.5.3
Gaseous Pollutants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Method
33
3.1
IDA ICE model description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.1.1
Internal gains and moisture production
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.2
Ventilation strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.2.1
Airﬂow rates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.2.2
Indicators for IAQ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.3
Innovative ventilation strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4
Results
55
4.1
Ventilation strategies investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.1.1
Standard strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.1.2
Advanced strategies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.1.3
Energy use
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
4.1.4
Ranking of the ventilation strategies for the control of IAQ . . . . .
68
4.2
Innovative ventilation strategies investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
4.2.1
Harmful contaminants build-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
xi
==PAGE:13==
4.2.2
Energy use
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
4.2.3
Evaluation of contaminants build-up on long-term
. . . . . . . . . .
87
5
Discussion
89
5.1
Ventilation strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
5.2
Innovative ventilation strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
5.3
IDA ICE simulation tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
5.3.1
The choice of the tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
5.3.2
IDA ICE vs Reality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
5.4
Barriers to the implementation of mechanical ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . 108
6
Conclusions
111
7
Future work
115
Bibliography
117
Appendices
127
A
Building materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
B
Overheating hours and solutions applied . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
C
Occupancy schedule
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130
D
Internal gains and moisture production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134
E
IDA ICE macro . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137
F
Indicators calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
G
VOC emissions calculation and implementation in IDA ICE . . . . . . . . . 143
xii
==PAGE:14==
xiii
==PAGE:15==
Nomenclature
⌧n
Nominal time constant
a1
Constant deﬁned for each material
a2
Constant deﬁned for each material
ai
Constant coeﬃcient deﬁned in time ti
c
Pollutant concentration
C(t)
Concentration value at the instant t
c0
Initial concentration (at t=0)
Ci(t)
CO2 concentration
CL
CO2 limit value
E
Energy use
Emax Maximum energy use
Emin
Minimum energy use
Ex
Exposure
Expi
Exposure of one person in a room i
ExpL,i Exposure limit value
g
Solar gain
Ig
Index of global performance
IEnergy Additional energy use index
xiv
==PAGE:16==
Iexp
Exposure to CO2 index
Imax
exp
Maximum exposure index
Imin
exp
Minimum exposure index
IIAQ
IAQ improvement index
LT
Light trasmittance
m
Emission rate
Mt
MET multiplier at time t
METt MET value associated to the activity level at time t
n
Number of air change per hour
Oi(t)
Occupancy time fraction in the room i at time t
Ot
Occupancy schedule at time t
q
Supply airﬂow
S
Emission rate in time t
T
Period of time
t
Istant of time
tp
Constant value of time
U
Thermal trasmittance
V
Room volume
xv
==PAGE:17==
List of Abbreviations
AgBB
German Committee for Health-related Evaluation of Building Product
(Ausschuss zur gesundheitlichen Bewertung von Bauprodukten)
AHU
Air Handling Unit
BBR
Swedish National Board of Housing, Building and Planning
BR15
Danish Building Regulation 2015
BR20
Danish Building Regulation 2020
CAV
Constant Air Volume
CO2
Carbon Dioxide
CV
Centralised Ventilation
DCV
Demand-controlled Ventilation
DV
Decentralised Ventilation
EPBD
Energy Performance of Building Directive
ELV
Exposure Limit Value
FID
Flame-Ionisation Detector
GC
Gas Chromatography
GPO
U.S. Government Publishing Oﬃce
HR
Heat Recovery
HVAC
Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning
IAQ
Indoor Air Quality
xvi
==PAGE:18==
IARC
International Agency for Research on Cancer
IEA-EBC
International Energy Agency - Energy in Buildings and Communities Pro-
gramme
NOx
Nitrogen Oxides
NO
Nitric Oxide
NO2
Nitrogen Dioxide
O3
Ozone
PID
Photo-Ionisation Detector
PM
Particulate Matter
RH
Relative Humidity
SBS
Sick Building Syndrome
SFP
Speciﬁc Fan Power
SO2
Sulfur Dioxide
SVOC
Semi-Volatile Organic Compounds
T
Temperature
TVOC
Total Volatile Organic Compounds
VAV
Variable Air Volume
VOC
Volatile Organic Compounds
VVOC
Very Volatile Organic Compounds
WHO
World Health Organization
xvii
==PAGE:19==
xviii
==PAGE:20==
xix
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In the last decades, it has been registered worldwide a progressive increase in the energy
demand with consequent environmental impacts due to both energy production and con-
sumption [1]. In particular, since the building sector is responsible of up to 40% of the
energy use in EU [2], energy saving measures need to be applied. The Energy Performance
of Buildings Directive (EPBD), subscribed by the 28 EU members and Norway, requires all
new buildings to be nearly-zero energy buildings by 2020 [1]. Moreover, country-speciﬁc
plans should be implemented to realise eﬃcient renovation on existing buildings [3].
Among all the building services, the HVAC (heating ventilation and air conditioning)
system accounts for a considerable fraction of the energy consumption, up to 50% of the
overall building consumption [4, 5]. Therefore, the system needs to be accurately designed
in order to avoid any unwanted energy wastage, which is mainly connected to the high
pressure losses of its components (i.e. fans, ducts, ﬁlters, dampers, etc.) [1].
Restrictions and requirements for energy savings are therefore applied in EU coun-
tries, both on newly built residencies and during renovation stages. However, despite the
beneﬁts on the energy consumption, the adopted energy saving measures, such as pro-
viding minimum necessary ventilation rates, can cause negative e↵ects on the Indoor Air
Quality (IAQ), potentially a↵ecting the occupant’s health [1, 2]. In fact, a poor indoor
climate decreases the productivity of the occupants, and, even more seriously, can a↵ect at
many levels the human health, provoking harmful pathologies, from respiratory illnesses
1
==PAGE:22==
to cancer [2, 6, 7].
The inhabitants of the more and more energy-eﬃcient and airtight buildings, have
started to report with increasingly frequency since the 1970s health problems associated
with the permanence in the building, such as headaches, fatigue, respiratory diﬃculties
and skin irritation [8]. This phenomenon was named Sick Building Syndrome (SBS), and
is one of the most common problems related to the indoor environment that clinicians face
[8]. Particularly, it is deduced that the symptoms are directly related to the sick building
when they are conﬁrmed by more than 20% of the occupants and usually disappear once
the occupants leave the building [6]. Many symptoms are just bothersome, but others
can be more serious, carcinogens or fatal in the short-term [6]. Paints, carpets, ﬂooring,
cleaning products or speciﬁc activities, as cooking, were found to be the major sources of
air contaminants such as allergens, VOC, particulates, bacteria, ozone, etc [8, 9]. Both in
oﬃce and residential buildings, where sensitive categories of occupants live, from children
to elder people, major attention is needed when designing the HVAC system, to avoid
unwanted harmful consequences and assure a good comfort to the occupants.
Demand-controlled ventilation (DCV) is deﬁned as a well-established solution to achieve
good indoor air quality and save energy, ventilating according to the needs [10]. VAV sys-
tems are already dominant in non-residential buildings, but are not yet popular in dwellings
[11]. A common sensor implemented in DCV systems is based on CO2 concentration. How-
ever, a CO2 sensor is developed to react to sensory pollution loads, connected to human
bio-e✏uents, but it is not able to detect building-related pollutants, such as VOC [10].
Consequently the airﬂow rate may be inadequate when the building is not occupied and no
bio-e✏uents are produced. Indeed, although human bio-e✏uents normally decay during
non-occupied hours, other types of contaminants tend to build up when the airﬂow rates
are at their minimum levels. This could expose the inhabitants to poor indoor climate
when they get back home.
The IEA-EBC (International Energy Agency – Energy in Buildings and Communities
Programme) launched a project called IEA-EBC Annex 68, Indoor Air Quality Design
and Control in Low Energy Residential Buildings [12] with the aim of deﬁning the most
energy eﬃcient ventilation strategies able to provide high level of IAQ and user comfort.
2
==PAGE:23==
This Master Thesis is directly related to the Annex 68 - Subtask 4, in which strategies
for ventilation in residential buildings are investigated.
In the IEA-EBC Annex 68 - Subtask 1 [13], the 20 top pollutants, found to have the
highest average concentration in low-energy residences, were listed. In particular, CO2 and
VOC were positioned in the top of the list. Among the indoor contaminants, formaldehyde
and benzene are found to be the most prevalent and most harmful for health, according
to a classiﬁcation of 25 target pollutants made by the French IAQ Observatory [14].
This Master Thesis is directly related to the Annex 68 - Subtask 4, in which strategies
for ventilation in residential buildings are investigated.
The eﬃciency of the ventilation strategies is assessed in terms of both energy use
and IAQ. Based on the ﬁndings of Subtask 1, TVOC and particularly formaldehyde and
benzene, are used as indicators of the indoor climate conditions, in addition to the more
classical carbon dioxide. Moreover, the possibility to decrease the ventilation rate during
non occupancy was investigated, testing the ability of the di↵erent strategies to dilute
VOC.
3
==PAGE:24==
1.1
About IEA-EBC Annex 68
The aim of the IEA-EBC Annex 68 is to provide a scientiﬁc basis that can be used in both
design and operation of buildings [12].
The project is divided into 5 Subtasks (Figure 1.1): Subtask 1 is based on the deﬁni-
tion of the IAQ metric to establish and compare the performance of low-energy buildings;
while Subtask 2 concerns the pollutant loads in residential buildings, in relation to heat,
air and moisture transfer. Subtask 3 is based on modelling-review, gap-analysis and cat-
egorisation to help designers and building managers in achieving IAQ. Subtask 4 aims to
deﬁne strategies for design and control of buildings. The last one, Subtask 5, is conducted
through ﬁeld measurements and case studies based on the design and control optimisation
[12, 13].
Figure 1.1: Overview of the Subtasks of the Annex 68 [12].
Subtask 4 uses the models and databases created in Subtasks 1, 2 and 3 and the
deductions obtained in Subtask 5 from on-site measurements to suggest design and control
strategies for ventilation providing high IAQ in low-energy residences. The aim of the
subtask is to develop a guidebook deﬁning design and operation of the ventilation strategies
which guarantee both high energy performances and IAQ. To do so, di↵erent types of
ventilation strategies (e.g. centralised and decentralised ventilation), as well as air supply
modes (e.g. constant and variable airﬂows) are tested into various building types [12].
4
==PAGE:25==
1.2
Objectives
The hypothesis behind the project is that the use of demand-controlled ventilation in
residential buildings can reduce the energy use, while still providing equal or improved IAQ
compared to the ventilation systems operated as constant air volume (CAV) systems. The
objective of this thesis is to propose and evaluate innovative ventilation strategies which
could provide an ideal balance between energy use and indoor air quality in low-energy
residences.
The study begins with a literature review aimed at deﬁning which design
strategies are currently applied for ventilation in Danish dwellings. The performances of
demand-controlled ventilation systems are assessed and compared to those of the strategies
with constant air volume (CAV). Innovative solutions are ﬁnally suggested as attempt of
further decreasing the energy demand for ventilation. In parallel, the eﬃciency of the
ventilation systems is weighted on their ability of diluting indoor harmful pollutants (VOC,
benzene and formaldehyde), which could build-up when the airﬂows are lowered at their
minimum levels. The project focuses on multi-family buildings. The analysis are made
through a sequential series of simulations.
The main outcomes of this Master Thesis will be:
• a ranking of DCV and CAV strategies to deﬁne the most performing ventilation
systems in terms of trade-o↵between IAQ and energy use;
• further evaluations of the performances of DCV systems in diluting indoor harmful
contaminants;
• an investigation of the IAQ in terms of TVOC, formaldehyde and benzene when
additional energy savings measures are undertaken.
5
==PAGE:26==
1.3
Thesis outline
The current work is divided into chapters, whose contents detailed here.
Chapter 1 introduces the project and the framework, as well as the motivations be-
hind this study. The main objectives of the project are also presented and an outline is
delineated.
Chapter 2 describes the background in which this study ﬁnds place. Through a litera-
ture review, the main ventilation strategies used in dwellings are presented, with an insight
on the actual state-of-the-art, including regulations in Denmark and a market analysis.
Volatile organic compounds (VOC) are also introduced with reference to the indoor air
guidelines suggested for human exposure.
Chapter 3 presents the method used in this project, where the model created in the
simulation software and the ventilation strategies studied are described. The indicators
used to report the results are explained and the method used to investigate the VOC
concentration is deﬁned.
Chapter 4 compiles the results obtained from the ventilation strategies assessment,
as well as, the ones derived from the VOC investigation. Description and preliminary
explanations are also provided.
Chapter 5 recalls the assumptions needed in this project, provides comments on the
results and gives cause for reﬂection about the best strategies and what should be further
implemented.
Chapter 6 summarizes the main conclusions of the work with respect to the trade-o↵
between energy use and indoor air quality. Further recommendations are also listed.
Chapter 7 suggests the most interesting future works that can give continuity to this
project and validate the results.
6
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 2
Background
The practise of ventilating buildings can be executed through di↵erent ventilation strate-
gies. Each type of ventilation is based on a di↵erent way of exchanging the air, depending
on the forces employed [15]. The most common ventilation types in Denmark are based
on natural, mechanical or hybrid ventilation. With natural ventilation are indicated all
the air exchanges driven by wind or buoyancy e↵ects. Mechanical ventilation involves
the use of a fan to help air circulation. Hybrid ventilation, whose most common type is
represented by the mechanical exhaust only [15], exploits at the same time the buoyancy
e↵ects and the fan power.
2.1
Mechanical ventilation
Hybrid ventilation, as well as natural ventilation, rely partially or totally on air leaks
through the building envelope and are thus strictly dependent on the building site. Sea-
sonal variations in the weather conditions can lead to poor indoor air quality during sum-
mer, due to increased temperatures and relative humidity levels. During winter, excessive
airﬂows into the building can cause drafts and high heating demand. To have an higher
degree of control on the indoor air quality mechanical ventilation is often installed. The
use of fans in extraction and supply allows to manege the airﬂows in the zones indepen-
dently on the outdoor conditions. This guarantees an adequate comfort to the occupants
7
==PAGE:28==
throughout the year. However, an accurate design of the ventilation is necessary to con-
strain the heat losses for inﬁltration and intended ventilation, which can account for up
to half of the total thermal losses in sealed buildings [16]. Possible solutions to achieve
energy savings in the building sector, without compromising the IAQ, are the use of heat
recovery and demand-controlled ventilation.
2.1.1
Balanced mechanical ventilation
A common control strategy used in most of the mechanical ventilation systems regards the
balancing of the airﬂows between supply and return. The system is provided by two main
fans, one connected to the outdoor, to supply fresh air to the building, and one responsible
of extracting the exhaust indoor air from the wet zones (Figure 2.1). Supply and return
airﬂows are distributed evenly to have mass balance in the ducts, so introducing fresh
air into the building at the same rate as the exhaust air is expelled to the outdoor. As
consequence, the system does not create pressure di↵erences between the interior of the
building and the outside air.
Figure 2.1: Schematic representation of the balanced ventilation system [17].
8
==PAGE:29==
In practice, the balancing of the airﬂows is obtained with the use of an air handling unit.
The air handler treats the air and circulates it through the duct system. Fresh air enters
the house and is supplied to the dry spaces (living room and bedrooms), whereas return
ducts are connected to the wet spaces (i.e. bathrooms, utility room and kitchen), to extract
the stale air, which is then expelled to the outdoor. A separate duct can be connected
to the kitchen hood, which can be manually activated when necessary. Advantages and
disadvantages of airﬂow balancing are listed in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1: Balanced Ventilation: advantages and disadvantages [18].
Balanced ventilation
Advantages
Disadvantages
Good in each climatic zone
High cost of installation and operation
Guarantees high heat recovery potential
High installation complexity
Can increase heating and cooling consumption
2.1.2
Heat recovery
In most rigid climates, an air-to-air heat recovery device is usually integrated in the AHU
system, to exploit the heat contained in the exhaust air, before it is expelled to the outdoor
(Figure 2.2). By doing so, the energy present in this outgoing ﬂow is transferred to the
supply air, warming it up. The heat recovery ventilation system represents an energy-
eﬃcient solution to improve the indoor climate and the eﬃciency of the HVAC system,
with a consequent reduction in the energy consumption related to the air conditioning.
The commonly used air-to-air energy recovery devices may be split into two main
categories, namely regenerative and recuperative heat exchangers [19]. Rotary heat ex-
changer and ﬂat-plate heat exchangers, belong to one of these categories, respectively,
depending on the type of transport mechanism they use [20]. The former consists in a
circular heat exchanger, that by rotating transfers the heat between the airstreams. In the
plate heat exchanger thermal energy is exchanged between the airstreams in cross-ﬂow,
through metal panels. An additional distinction between the two heat exchangers is that
recuperators recover only sensible heat (dry), while regenerators transfer both heat and
9
==PAGE:30==
moisture.
Figure 2.2: Schematic representation of a ventilation system with heat recovery [21].
In cold climates, an issue is related to the condensation of air on the exchange surface, if
the exhaust is cooled below the saturation temperature [20]. In Denmark, according to the
2013 Danish design reference year [22], the average relative humidity is 86% throughout the
heating season (September 16th - May 15th) and therefore the airﬂow is nearly saturated
with moisture. Consequently, when highly eﬃcient rotary heat exchangers are used at low
temperatures, their drying capacity - seen as the di↵erence in moisture content between
the nearly saturated outdoor air and the saturated exhaust air [20] - is very limited and
the risk of cooling the exhaust air below the dew point temperature seems likely. Problems
could also incur when the inlet temperature drops below 0◦C, since frost could block the
airﬂow through the heat exchanger [20]. Since excess indoor humidity can cause health
issues (e.g. mould growth) and structural issues, it is important to characterise the impact
10
==PAGE:31==
of the ventilation system on the indoor humidity, especially when a rotary heat exchanger
is installed, to ensure adequate comfort to the inhabitants. For this reason, in residential
buildings plate heat exchanger are used [23]. Advantages and disadvantages related to the
use of heat recovery are summarised in Table 2.2.
Table 2.2: Ventilation system with HR: advantages and disadvantages [11].
Heat recovery ventilation
Advantages
Disadvantages
Reduced heating and cooling consumption
High cost of installation and operation
Can be installed in walls, windows or
in the central unit
Not cost-e↵ective in moderate climate
Convenient where winter and summer
are extreme
Freeze and frost protection are required
in cold climates
2.1.3
Demand-controlled ventilation
The main purpose of the ventilation systems is to remove indoor pollutants, ensuring a
good air quality level and thermal comfort in the environment, in order to preserve the
occupants’ well being and their productivity [11].
The ventilation systems can be operated as constant air volume (CAV) or variable air
volume (VAV) systems. The former is based on the constant supply of the same amount of
air all the time. It represents the most simple mechanical ventilation system for designing
and operation, but it overuses energy because it supplies a great amount of fresh air
independently on presence of occupants and level of pollution. On the contrary, the VAV
system provides a variable airﬂow which varies according to the pollution level and the
number of occupants present in the room in each moment [11].
The VAV system was already known in the 70’s but it was not very common, because
of the high costs of installation and the lack of accuracy of the sensors [7]. Nowadays, with
new technologies available, the VAV system became more cost-e↵ective and thus increased
its popularity. Although it became the dominant system in non-residential buildings, the
demand for VAV continued to be scarce in dwellings [7]. However, since demand-controlled
ventilation (DCV) is preferable in buildings with unpredictable occupancy [10], it started
11
==PAGE:32==
to be considered as a valuable solution to control the build-up of indoor pollutants in
residential buildings. Here, high variations in the occupancy levels are expected along
the day and thus the use of DCV systems could provide substantial energy savings if the
ventilation is decreased during non-occupied periods [7].
The most common types of control variables used for demand-controlled ventilation in
dwellings are listed in the following paragraphs.
Relative humidity (RH) is deﬁned as the ratio between the water vapour present in the
air at the given temperature and the water vapour present, at the same temperature, in
the saturated air [15]. The control system based on relative humidity is commonly used in
the wet spaces of the house (kitchen, bathrooms, toilets and utility rooms) from where the
exhaust air is extracted. The relative humidity level detected is dependent on temperature
and on the variations in the moisture content in the zone due to absorption and desorption
by building materials. Consequently, sensors on RH do not provide accurate information
about the occupancy level in the building [11]. The content of RH present in the extract
air gives an indication about the ventilation rate that needs to be provided to the rooms.
In [2], it is assessed that the relative humidity should not exceed 70% to avoid mould risks,
so maximum airﬂows should be maintained until the RH level detected in the room drops
below 65%.
CO2-based control is a good indicator of human presence, since it evaluates the CO2
production and the activities that take place in the building. The use of this sensor is
suggested in case of high occupancy levels, or unpredictable variations in the occupancy
along the day [11, 15]. The CO2 sensor can be directly connected to the trickle ventilators
to control the supply airﬂow rate in each room. When the CO2 concentration increases
above the setpoint, the opening of the vent is increased to guarantee the required airﬂow
rate to the occupants. Vice versa, the opening is decreased if the CO2 concentration is
below the set limit [2]. The drawback associated with the use of the CO2 control is that it
is not able to control any other pollutant generated in the room, so it should be associated
with other types of sensors (e.g. on relative humidity) [15].
Alternatively demand-controlled ventilation can be driven by an occupancy sensor or
12
==PAGE:33==
by time control. The former reduces the airﬂow rate after a certain time that occupancy
is not recorded in the room [2]. It is stated in [15] that it is recommended to use the
occupancy sensor when the number of occupants is stable along the day.
When the
occupants’ schedule is known, time control can be used to adjust the ventilation rate
through the use of a simple clock. Finally, manual control gives the possibility to the
occupants to variate manually the ventilation rate. This type of control is often used in
kitchen hoods [15].
Advanced control strategies could be associated to the use of a combination of the
previous sensors. Each single sensor is connected to a speciﬁc component in the ventilation
system, to control simultaneously, for example, CO2 and RH. In this case, the trickle
ventilators are driven by the measured CO2 concentration, whereas the exhaust ventilators
and the vent holes work in connection to the relative humidity detected [2].
The performances of demand-controlled ventilation systems has been analysed in many
studies [7, 11, 15], on the base of IAQ level and energy saving potential. Energy savings are
often recorder when DCV is used, and no adverse e↵ects on moisture levels or air quality
are usually observed [15, 24]. However, the entity of the estimated savings depends on
the calculation method (e.g.
simulations or measurements) and on additional factors
[15]. Among those, the type of sensor installed, the setpoint of the control variable and
the system design are critical [15].
Laverge et al.
considered in [2] di↵erent control
strategies, such as CO2 concentration, relative humidity, occupancy detection and all the
above controlled together. Three of the four controls directly interact with one system
component, while the fourth works with all the components simultaneously. The results
showed that the use of a mechanical exhaust ventilation system with VAV control achieves
considerable energy saving potentials, calculated to be in the range 25-60% depending on
the type of sensor installed. Nielsen et al. discussed the performances of a DCV system
with control on CO2 and moisture content in comparison to a CAV system [24]. The results
show that, by reducing the airﬂow to a minimum level, the heat losses from ventilation are
reduced by 23%, with a corresponding energy saving potential of 35% on the electricity
used for the fans. Pavlovas investigated the energy savings potential achievable with DCV
applied on exhaust mechanical ventilation system in a Swedish multi-family building [25].
Three di↵erent types of control systems are investigated (on CO2, relative humidity and
13
==PAGE:34==
occupancy). The reduction in the annual energy demand for ventilation corresponded to
more than 50% with CO2 and RH controls and about 20% with occupancy control.
2.1.4
Centralised and decentralised ventilation
Many studies have analysed and compared the performance of decentralised ventilation
(DV) systems to conventional centralised ventilation (CV) [19, 26, 27]. Advantages and
disadvantages of both systems are listed in Table 2.3. The typical centralised ventilation
system has long supply and exhaust ducts, usually installed on ﬂoors or suspended ceil-
ings [26]. The need of mechanical equipment and duct space requires to have di↵erent
height between ceilings and ﬂoors and thus big construction volumes in the building [26].
Centralised ventilation is often preferred by the building owner when the apartments are
aimed to be rented, to facilitate maintenance operations on the system.
Table 2.3: Centralised and decentralised ventilation: advantages and disadvantages [28].
Advantages
Disadvantages
CV
Cheaper in large installations
Higher energy consumption
No need for user control
Individual VAV becomes expensive
Easy monitoring
Same supply temperature for all apartments
Known technology
DV
Cheaper in small installations
Expensive and bulky
Demand-controlled
Cooling and heating coil are installed in the house
Decentralised payment of electricity
Increased energy consumption for the automation
Lower fan energy consumption (SFP)
Two types of decentralised ventilation systems are found in the literature, namely
apartment-based or room-based DV systems.
Apartment-based DV systems are equipped with a compact air handling unit (AHU)
which can be placed above the suspended ceiling close to an external wall [29]. The use of
DV minimises duct size and length and thus the space required for technical equipment
[26]. Decentralised ventilation has also a positive e↵ects in terms of energy performances
[26, 28]. According to Novoselac and Srebric [28], the fan energy consumption is about 75%
lower with the use of DV system that with CV systems. The reduced installation time and
14
==PAGE:35==
the simpler designing makes decentralised ventilation suitable for both new constructions
and renovation of existing buildings [30].
Single-room ventilation units is a more innovative type of DV, whose numerous ad-
vantages are listed by Manz et al. [27]. DV does not require any ducting, hence further
reducing the associated pressure losses. Additionally, it allows quick removal of pollutants
from a source-room, before they mix with the air in the other rooms [27]. Decentralised
ventilation provides simple installation, low fan power and optimal adjustment to local
needs [19]. On the other hand, being installed on the fa¸cade, the in-going air can trans-
port odors and waste gases present in the ambient air more easily than a centralised unit
installed on the roof of the building [27]. The use of room-based decentralised ventilation
allows to match a speciﬁc type of heat recovery to the needs of an individual room. Smith
concluded in [19] that the rotary unit are suitable for dry rooms (bedrooms and living
room), whereas the regenerative are the most appropriate for wet spaces (kitchen and
bathrooms).
A drawback to the use of the decentralised ventilation is the increase of noise in the
zone. Manz et al. (1998) measured sound pressure level and sound reduction associated
with room-based ventilation units. It resulted that the indoor pressure levels of the in-
vestigated units were exceeding comfort limits [27]. However, Smith believes that sound
pressure and sound reduction were diﬃcult to model in the early-stage of development,
and that it would be more accurate to deﬁne them in relationship with other criteria
(e.g. fan power, static pressure, air velocity) instead of setting limits to sound pressure
levels [19]. His conclusion was that, due to the low pressure drop and fan power, the fan
noise would also be reduced. Additionally, limiting the air velocities would have a positive
contribution on the noise from fans and airﬂow.
2.2
Energy and IAQ regulations for Danish buildings
The Danish Building Regulation 2015, BR15 [31], contains standards and rules for building
construction in Denmark, for both oﬃce and residential buildings. The standard DS/EN
15251 [32] includes recommendations on the indoor environmental input parameters useful
15
==PAGE:36==
when designing and evaluating the energy performance of buildings with respect to IAQ,
thermal environment, acoustics and lighting.
In Table 2.4 the BR15 requirements for mechanical ventilation systems installed in
multi-family buildings are listed and compared to the stricter values of the building class
2020. In dwellings, the energy framework, namely the maximum allowed energy use, is
calculated as sum of the primary energy demand of the building for heating, ventilation,
cooling and domestic hot water. When mechanical ventilation is used, the system must be
equipped with heat recovery (HR) - recirculation is not an alternative to HR -, with a dry
temperature eﬃciency which increased from 80% in BR15 to 85% in BR20. The Building
Code deﬁnes also the maximum speciﬁc fan power (SFP) for air movement, speciﬁcally
the total power use per m3 of air moved.
Table 2.4: Requirements for mechanical ventilation and air leakage in Danish dwellings.
Comparison
between the years 2015 and 2020 [31].
Unit
BR15
BR20
Energy framework
kWh/m2 a
30 + 1,000/A
20
Max SFP value for multi-family buildings
J/m3
1,500
1,200
Heat recovery eﬃciency
-
80 %
85 %
Air leakage (test pressure 50 Pa)
l/s per m2 a
<1
<0.5
am2 of heated ﬂoor area
The Danish building Code also deﬁnes the minimum airﬂows required in the zones
(Table 2.5). In Danish dwellings it is not allowed to reduce the fresh air supply below
0.3 l/s per m2 of heated ﬂoor area, not even during non-occupied hours. Extractor hoods
with adjustable mechanical extraction must be provided to the kitchens. In kitchens and
bathrooms it must be possible to increase the extraction to at least 20 l/s and 15 l/s,
respectively.
16
==PAGE:37==
Table 2.5: Ventilation requirements for domestic buildings in Denmark [31].
Unit
BR15
Whole building ventilation rate
l/s per m2 a
Min. 0.3 (supply)
Living room and bedroom
l/s per m2 a
Min. 0.3 (supply)
Kitchen
l/s
20 (exhaust)
Bathroom
l/s
15 (exhaust)
Toilet
l/s
10 (exhaust)
am2 of heated ﬂoor area
The standard DS/EN 15251 lists recommended input values for energy calculations,
which di↵erentiate depending on the category of indoor environment that wants to be
achieved (Table 2.6).
Table 2.6: Description of the categories used in DS/EN 15251, with explanation of the applicability [32].
Category
Expectation level
Explaination
I
High
Spaces occupied by very sensitive and fragile persons
II
Normal
For new buildings and renovations
III
Moderate
For existing buildings
IV
Outside the criteria
Acceptable only for a limited part of the year
The design criteria used for the energy calculations, according to category II, are
listed in Table 2.7, and indicate the recommended values of temperature ranges over
summer and winter and the maximum indoor CO2 concentration. In case humidiﬁcation
or dehumidiﬁcation processes are used, the standard also recommends design values of
relative humidity.
Table 2.7: Design criteria for energy calculations for category II [32].
Design criteria
Temperature range for heating
20-25 ◦C
Temperature range for cooling
23-26 ◦C
Max. CO2 concentration
500 ppm above outdoor
Design RH for dehumidiﬁcation
60%
Design RH for humidiﬁcation
25%
17
==PAGE:38==
2.3
Market analysis on ventilation systems
The scope of the market analysis was to estimate which are the most frequently installed
mechanical ventilation systems in multi-family buildings and to understand where the
market is moving towards. Producers and consultants were contacted by Vanek [33], who
was working on a parallel study on DCV. The answers to the anonymous questionnaire
were used to make an evaluation of the current market.
Fourteen producers and consultants operating in the Danish market (7 producers and
7 consultants) were asked to answer questions focusing on design practice for residential
ventilation in Denmark. Among the producers 3 big-size companies (more than 250 em-
ployees), 3 small-size companies (less than 50 employees) and 1 medium-size company
answered the survey. Among the consulting companies, 2 big-size companies, 4 small-size
companies and 1 medium-size company answered the survey. The answers were found to
slightly di↵er among consultants and producers.
The most popular systems among the producers’ and consultants’ costumers are shown
in Figures 2.3a and 2.3b, respectively. According to the producers, the ventilation sys-
tem with balanced ventilation and heat recovery predominates over the other strategies,
whereas consultants show a less pronounced propensity towards natural ventilation, bal-
anced ventilation with heat recovery and other systems.
(a) According to producers
(b) According to consultants
Figure 2.3: Most popular ventilation strategies according to producers or consultants.
In terms of airﬂow control, the opinions of both producers and consultants converge.
Variable air volume (VAV) controls are preferred (with 71% and 87% of the votes for pro-
18
==PAGE:39==
ducers and consultants, respectively) to the constant air volume (CAV) controls. More-
over, decentralised ventilation (DV) predominates over the centralised (CV) ventilation
according to both producers and consultants (71% DV and 29% CV for producers, 64%
DV and 36% CV for consultants).
Indistinct conclusions can be drawn from the answers regarding the control options
(Figures 2.4a and 2.4b). Systems controlled only by sensors appear not to be very popular,
but the options with manual control or possible manual adjustments seem to be favourite
according to the point of view of both producers and consultants.
(a) According to producers
(b) According to consultants
Figure 2.4: Most popular control options according to producers and consultants.
Finally, producers and consumers were asked to rank the sensor types according to
their use. Only six consultants and ﬁve producers answered the question, so consequently
in Figure 2.5 the sensor considered the most popular receives a maximum of 5 or 6 points,
in case the answers come from the producers or the consultants, respectively. The control
sensor on relative humidity is certainly the preferred type according to both producers
and consultants. To follow, stepwise sensors are the second most popular type according
to consultants, whereas relative humidity and temperature sensors are suggested by the
producers.
19
==PAGE:40==
Figure 2.5: Most popular type of sensors according to producers or consultants.
In parallel, the online catalogues of ten Danish companies 1, which o↵er solutions for
residential ventilation, were scrutinised. In most of the catalogues the choice between cen-
tralised and decentralised ventilation is discussed, with a speciﬁc inclination to the more
ﬂexible and energy eﬃcient decentralised units. It is proposed the installation of decen-
tralised ventilation units with heat recovery in each dwelling. This solution is becoming
popular also in apartments, since it gives the opportunity to each resident to control the
ventilation according to their personal needs. The use of a AHU unit in each apartment
contributes in reducing the energy use associated with the ventilation system. Indeed, the
heat losses are reduced due to the installation of shorter ducts with minimised channel di-
mensions. The air handling unit is generally equipped with an heat exchanger, which can
provide up to 91% dry eﬃciency [30], and build-in sensor controlling the relative humidity
or CO2 levels in the exhaust duct.
Among the advanced solutions, Lindab introduced Lindab Pascal [43], which is pre-
sented as a future solution on demand-controlled ventilation, with room-based controls
on temperature, CO2 or relative humidity. In addition to these sensors, placed on the
wall of the room, presence sensors are integrated in the di↵user, to maximise the energy
1Lindab [34], Exhausto [35], Dantherm [36], Nilan [37], Genvex [38], Airmaster A/S [30], Systemair
[39], Venti [40], InVentilate [41] and Øland [42]
20
==PAGE:41==
savings. Another advanced solution is the micro-ventilation [41]. It consists of two fa¸cade-
integrated ventilation units interacting among each other to provide balanced supply and
return airﬂows without the need of a piping system. Control sensors on humidity level,
CO2 or movement can be installed to further reduce the energy use.
It was ﬁnally concluded that the most popular ventilation strategies on the current
market use decentralised ventilation systems with central control sensor (i.e. installed in
the AHU) on relative humidity (predominant), temperature or CO2. The use of stepwise
control is also suggested by both consultants and producers (possible manual adjustments
are preferred). Among the control options, variable airﬂows are preferred, but basic sys-
tems with constant air volumes can still be found. Furthermore, the companies developing
indoor climate solutions are starting to propose more advanced solutions, with room-based
sensor or even room-based ventilation units.
2.4
E↵ect of indoor air pollution on human health
Indoor air pollution can be recognised as the modiﬁcation of the normal composition of
the indoor air, due to the presence of speciﬁc compounds, detected in concentrations or
duration such as to cause unwanted e↵ects on the human health. As deﬁned by the World
Health Organization [44], ”health is not only the absence of disease or inﬁrmity, but a
state of physical, mental ans social well-being”. In this project, any changes in occupants
well-being associated with the exposure to polluted air, are categorised as e↵ects on the
human health.
Air pollution in indoor environments represents a serious problem since most of the
people spend around 90% of their time inside buildings, of which about half in their own
houses [45]. The World Health Organization estimates that 2.7% of the diseases occurring
in the world, are related to indoor air pollution [46]. The risks associated with the exposure
to air contaminants are not limited to certain categories of people, but a↵ect the whole
population, which includes also more sensitive groups, as young children or elder people,
or even people already a↵ected by chronic illnesses.
21
==PAGE:42==
The e↵ects correlated to poor indoor air quality depend both on environmental and
personal factors, as type and concentration of the pollutants, presence and reaction with
other compounds, exposure time and sensitivity of the people exposed. The e↵ects can
be acute or chronic, as result of short or long-term exposure, respectively. Short-term
e↵ects can appear after a single exposure or after a short period of time, as reaction to a
single pollutant or to a mixture or them, even if the concentrations are low [9]. Usually,
the symptoms disappear after the harmful compound is eliminated. Long-term e↵ects are
associated to a prolonged exposure to the contaminants. A continuous exposure, even
at low concentrations, can facilitate the origin of systemic diseases (i.e. a↵ecting more
organs) and of cardiovascular illnesses, or aggravate the conditions of people with pre-
existing pathologies [9].
In Europe, indoor air pollution is responsible for the 4.6% of juvenile deaths (0-4 years
old) related to acute respiratory infections. High levels of indoor relative humidity can
cause a 50% increased risk of respiratory disorders or 13% increase of juvenile asthma [47].
In case of residences, the presence of air pollutants is directly associated to human
activities, building materials, furniture and to the use of cleaning products.
Also, air
pollutants may enter into the building through the outdoor air. Table 2.8 lists some of
the frequently occurring indoor air pollutants and their potential indoor sources.
Table 2.8: Relevant indoor air pollutants and their sources [9].
Source
Pollutant
Combustion processes using coal or gas
(e.g. cooking or heating)
Combustion products
(CO, NOx, SO2, particulate)
Building materials and insulation
Asbestos, particulate, radon, biological agents
Coating materials and carpets
Formaldehyde, VOC and biological agents
Furniture
Formaldehyde, VOC and biological agents
Liquids and cleaning products
Alcohols, phenols, VOC
Smoking
Hydrocarbons, VOC, CO, ﬁne particulate
Dust
Biological agents (indoor allergens, e.g. mites)
AC systems
CO2, VOC; biological agents
Occupants
CO2, biological agents (e.g. bacteria, virus, etc.)
Animals
Indoor allergens (e.g. fur)
22
==PAGE:43==
2.5
Indoor air pollutants
According to multiple studies [13, 48, 49], the 200-300 pollutants present in the indoor air,
can be classiﬁed into three categories: non-viable particles (Particulate Matter (PM)), bio-
contaminants (Bacteria, and Fungi) and gaseous pollutants (inorganic gases and Volatile
Organic Compounds (VOC)).
2.5.1
Non-viable particles
The term airborne particles refers to a complex mixture of organic and inorganic com-
pounds. These substances are characterised according to their physical and chemical prop-
erties, which inﬂuence their transportation or deposition in the air, respectively and their
e↵ect on health. The dimensions of the particulate matters (PM) are usually measured in
aerodynamic diameter. Only the particles with aerodynamic diameter smaller than 10 µm
(PM10) are relevant for studies on health risk assessment, since they are small enough to
be inhaled. The smaller is the aerodynamic diameter of the particles, the greater can be
the e↵ect on human health, since the particles can penetrate more into deep in the human
body (i.e. up to lungs and alveoli). Fine particles (PM2.5), with aerodynamic diameter
smaller than 2.5 µm are able to reach the lungs, whereas very ﬁne particles (PM1), as
well as nanoparticles (PM0.1), can penetrate until the alveoli. The impacts on human’s
health depends on the size and concentration of the particles, and on the duration of the
exposure. Examples could be cardiovascular diseases, impaired lung function, and lung
cancer.
2.5.2
Bio-contaminants
Bio-contaminants are pollutant agents with biological nature, which can be placed into
three main categories: micro-organisms (fungi, bacteria, virus, parasites), allergens (dust
mites, allergens of animal or vegetal origin) and mold. Viruses and bacteria are harmful
for the human health only when they reproduce and cause infections [9]. The allergens, as
pollens and dust mites, can provoke respiratory illnesses and asthma and are particularly
23
==PAGE:44==
bothersome for sensitive categories of allergic people. The presence of fungi is associated
with high relative humidity in the indoor environment which facilitate their growth. Mold
can develop also in the air conditioning system. The presence of mold is one of the main
causes of allergic reactions, as asthma, conjunctivitis and dermatitis.
Finally, typical
outdoor allergens, as pollens, can penetrate through the openings in the building and
accumulate in the indoor environment.
2.5.3
Gaseous Pollutants
The term gaseous pollutants refers to those chemicals or molecular contaminants, which
are found in the indoor air as gaseous phase. This includes inorganic gases, radon and
volatile organic compounds (VOC).
Carbon monoxide (CO), nitrogen dioxide (NO, NO2) and Ozone (O3) are typical exam-
ples of inorganic gases, which impoverish the indoor air by entering the building through
inﬁltrations, openings, or by the use of ventilation systems. Nitrogen dioxide and carbon
monoxide are also produced by combustion processes, whereas ozone is emitted while using
printers or copiers. High concentrations of carbon monoxide can produce severe e↵ects on
the human health, causing, in the worst cases, anoxemia (i.e. insuﬃcient supply of oxygen
to the organs) [13]. Ozone and nitrogen oxides are mainly known as respiratory irritants.
Radon is an odourless gas which contaminates the indoor environments by direct dif-
fusion from the soil through the slab of the building, but also due to the use of building
materials containing it. Due to its radioactivity, it a↵ects human health both by ioniza-
tion and inhalation. According to WHO [47], radon is estimated to be the second most
important cause of lung cancer, after cigarette smoke. The higher the concentration, the
higher the risk of cancer.
The name Organic Compounds is used to indicate a large group of compounds, emit-
ted by many di↵erent sources. These molecules are composed by atoms of carbon and
hydrogen, which can create bonds with oxygen or chlorine. Particularly, those with boil-
ing temperature in the range 50 ◦C to 240 ◦C are known as Volatile Organic Compounds
(VOC)
24
==PAGE:45==
VOC deﬁnition and classiﬁcation
Organic compounds are deﬁned by the U.S. Government Publishing Oﬃce (GPO) as any
molecule containing carbon, with exclusion of carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, and other
inorganic compounds as, ammonium carbonate, carbonic acid and metal carbonates [50].
Due to their chemical composition, some organic compounds evaporate under ordinary
indoor atmospheric conditions, namely at temperatures and pressures which can be easily
found in occupied rooms. As a result of their low boiling point temperatures and thus
high volatility, these compounds are known as volatile organic compounds (VOC). The
EU Directive 2004/42/CE deﬁnes a VOC as any organic compound with an initial boiling
point at temperature less or equal to 250 ◦C and at standard atmospheric pressure of
101.3 kPa [51].
VOC’s molecules are composed of carbon and hydrogen and additionally they can
contain atoms of oxygen or chlorine. According to they composition, they can be labelled
as hydrocarbons, carbonyl compounds or halogenated compounds, respectively.
Given that the European deﬁnition for VOC refers to a broad spectrum of compounds
with di↵erent levels of volatility, a supplementary classiﬁcation was made [52], according
to VOC’s boiling point (Table 2.9).
The lower the boiling point, the easier is to ﬁnd
the compounds in their gaseous phase, hence spread in the air, rather than deposited
on surfaces. On the other hand, the least volatile compounds can be found on surfaces,
building materials, dust or in liquids.
Table 2.9: VOC classiﬁcation (WHO, 1989 [52]).
Abbreviation
Name
Boiling point range [◦C]
Examples
VVOC
Very volatile
organic compounds
<0 to 50-100
Formaldehyde,
propane, butane
VOC
Volatile organic
compounds
50-100 to 240-260
Toluene, ethanol
d-Limonene
SVOC
Semi-volatile
organic compounds
240-260 to 380-400
Flame retardants
25
==PAGE:46==
The German Committee for Health-related Evaluation of Building Products (AgBB),
used a similar deﬁnition. In this case the criteria adopted for the classiﬁcation is based on
the results from the analysis of volatile organic compounds by the use of gas chromatog-
raphy. The method involves the separation of the components of the sample under test
due to di↵erences in the phase. The compounds that appear in the range of C6 to C16
are considered volatile organic compounds, whereas VVOC are the compounds appearing
before C6 and SVOC after C16 up to C22 [53].
Indoor sources
Among the hundreds of compounds belonging to the family of VOC, many can be found
in the outdoor environment and do not cause any relevant e↵ect on health due to their
nature (e.g. Terpenoids) or their low concentration. On the other hand, the presence of
numerous sources and the limited dimensions of the indoor spaces facilitate the build-up
of VOC, which can become a health hazard.
The same type of VOC compound is often emitted by many di↵erent indoor sources,
thus making it diﬃcult to deﬁne the correlation cause-e↵ect. Building materials are found
to be one of the major origins of VOC indoor, but also furniture, carpets, glues and cleaning
products contribute to the emissions. In Table 2.10, an exemplifying list of sources and
speciﬁc VOC emitted is listed.
Table 2.10: Source of VOC and relative compounds emitted [13].
Source
VOC types
Ambient air
Benzene, styrene, toluene
Bioe✏uents and hygienic products
Acetaldehyde, hexanal, d-limonene
Combustion (e.g. cooking, smoking)
Formaldehyde, aceraldehyde, naphthalene
Cleaning products and room deodorants
↵-pinene, d-limonene
Electronic equipment
Aldehydes and heavy hydrocarbons
Copiers and printers
ethylbenzene, toluene, aldehydes
Building materials
depend on the products used
An important factor to be considered when analysing the emission rate from indoor
26
==PAGE:47==
VOC sources is the time frame of the analysis.
Many studies [54, 55, 56] agree on asserting that building materials are the most relevant
causes of VOC and formaldehyde in new buildings, whereas uncertainties characterise
the long-term emissions. This is because VOC emission rates from building materials, and
from most of the other sources, change over time depending on the behaviour of the source
itself. Speciﬁcally, Brown [49] summarises some emission tendencies in four points:
• decreasing from high initial levels to nearly zero-levels (e.g. wet paints and coatings);
• slowly decaying or progressively levelling from high initial levels to nearly constant
ones (e.g. some carpets and ﬂoor coverings);
• increasing from nearly zero levels to high emission levels after some hours from the
application (e.g. alkyd paints);
• constant level.
The di↵erent behaviours are strictly dependent on the physical and chemical properties
of the single VOC, since each compound has, for example, di↵erent volatility, molar mass
and hydrolytic stability (i.e. ability to resist chemical decomposition in presence of water).
Furthermore, some speciﬁc chemical or physical conditions can result in modiﬁcations
of the VOC emitted from a speciﬁc source at di↵erent time stages.
For this purpose,
Wolko↵[57] distinguishes between primary and secondary emissions.
The former are
emitted directly from the source before any chemical or other reaction takes place. The
latter refers to those VOC which are emitted after being involved in or formed by di↵erent
processes. Secondary emissions can be related to the presence of water, oxidation, the
increase in temperature or the reaction with other VOC or other chemicals. On the long-
term, when considering the lifetime of a building, the secondary emissions appear to have
a more relevant impact on the occupants, rather then the primary emissions, which are
often considered when measuring VOC in new building [57].
Establishing the generation rate of VOC from building materials and other sources
is, thus, a delicate issue. Some climate parameters, as relative humidity, temperature,
air velocity, and oxidants concentration can alter the emission rate, provoking di↵erent
27
==PAGE:48==
e↵ects on primary and secondary emissions. Wolko↵[54] and Knudsen [58] studied the
e↵ects of these parameters on ﬁve di↵erent building products used in Denmark (i.e. three
ﬂoor coverings, an acrylic sealant and wall paint). According to their conclusions, the
air velocity does not a↵ect the emission rate on the short term, but can facilitate the
oxidation, with e↵ects on the secondary emissions. On the other hand, both temperature
and relative humidity inﬂuence the emissions of certain building materials, and especially
when evaporation is the emission mechanism. The e↵ect of temperature is greater on
liquids and when the temperature reaches 60 ◦C.
TVOC as indicator
When human bio-e✏uents were considered the main source of pollution in the indoor
environments, the concentration of CO2 was a generally accepted indicator of the indoor
air quality in buildings [59].
Successively, it was recognised that many other sources,
which are not of human nature, contribute in polluting the indoor air, especially through
the emission of volatile organic compounds. Growing attention was, thus, reserved to the
assessment of VOC concentrations in the indoor air, in order to evaluate their possible
e↵ects on human health.
In this context, the necessity of a complementary simple and fast indicator usable to
evaluate the IAQ led to the creation of a new parameter, named ”Total Volatile Organic
Compounds” (TVOC). In the late ’80s and ’90s, the term TVOC started to be used with
increasing frequency in the scientiﬁc papers, and was adopted to indicate the total concen-
tration of VOC in the analysed air, instead of presenting the individual concentration of
all the VOC found in the air sample. However, the results of these studies were often not
comparable, due to a lack of standardisation of the procedure to be used when calculating
a TVOC value. The techniques used di↵er in terms of simplicity and accuracy. The analy-
sis mainly use three di↵erent approaches [60]; two of them, namely PID (photo-ionisation
detector) and FID (ﬂame-ionisation detector) give real-time signals which can be seen as
indicator of TVOC, but they do not allow to identify the individual compounds. On the
other hand, the use of gas chromatography (GC) separates the components of a chemical
mixture, allowing their identiﬁcation. This last technique, although being more accurate,
28
==PAGE:49==
is more time demanding, since the sample collected has to be sent to a laboratory for the
analysis.
Gas chromatography is widely used to analyse chemical mixtures, but leaves space to
freedom during its sequential steps. Indeed, the result of the analysis depends on the choice
of the sorbent used for sampling, on the sample transfer technique and on the separation
steps. Therefore, its use in di↵erent studies does not implicitly mean that the resulting
TVOC values are comparable. The result of the separation step is a chromatogram showing
a sequence of peaks. When the peaks cannot be identiﬁed, the signals are compared to the
response factor of a reference compound, usually toluene. The TVOC value is obtained by
integration of the peak areas. This procedure has been subject to criticisms and di↵erent
authors have tried to propose alternative approaches. For example, another way is to
ﬁrst identify the individual compounds present in the mixture, then determining their
amount and ﬁnally summing the masses, to obtain a TVOC value. However, the sum is
limited to the measured VOC that are generally in inferior number compared to the actual
compounds present in the indoor air [61]. Clausen et al. [62] proposes a di↵erent method,
which combines the two previous ones. Particularly, the TVOC value is calculated as sum
of the individually-analysed VOC with the quantities obtained in the GC analysis using a
reference response factor (i.e. to consider in the sum also the compounds non individually
identiﬁable).
VOC e↵ects on humans health and indoor air guidelines
Humans are constantly exposed to contaminants by inhalation, dermal contact and inges-
tion. VOC are among the major pollutants in the indoor air and can provoke acute to
chronic diseases to the people exposed. The impact of VOC on human health is diﬃcult
to estimate, due the variety of number, composition and concentration of VOC in the
indoor air. In a literature review made by Guo et al. [63] the major health e↵ects of VOC
are listed and diversiﬁed according to their entity. The most hazardous e↵ects include
lung cancer, acute and chronic respiratory e↵ects and neurological toxicity (i.e.
brain
or nervous system’s damages). The exposure to VOC can also induce fatigue sensation,
dizziness, headaches and nausea, as well as eye and throat irritations.
29
==PAGE:50==
Among the VOC group, formaldehyde and benzene are found to be the most preva-
lent and harmful pollutants in indoor air [13].
Being both benzene and formaldehyde
very volatile organic compounds, the humans are exposed to their e↵ects mainly through
inhalation.
Benzene is a skin irritant and a moderate eye irritant and it is classiﬁed as Group-1
carcinogen by IARC [64]. Chronic exposure can also cause aplastic anaemia, namely a
reduction in the production of both red and white cells, and can decrease the resistance
to infections [65].
Benzene is present both in indoor and outdoor environments, but
the concentrations detected are generally higher in the indoor air.
When benzene is
inhaled, it is easily absorbed and spread throughout the body and it is well-established
to cause genotoxic cancer in humans. The excess lifetime risk of 1/10,000, 1/100,000 and
1/1,000,000 are associated to benzene exposure concentrations at 17, 1.7 and 0.17 µg/m3
[66]. Benzene appears thus to be harmful on a wide range of concentration levels, so the
World Health Organization concludes that no safe level of exposure can be recommended.
As consequence, no guidelines for indoor air concentrations are provided by WHO.
The World Health Organization investigated the risks for humans health associated
with formaldehyde exposure [66]. Acute and short term exposure in indoor environments
can cause lungs e↵ects, as asthma and allergies, eczema and irritations to the eyes and
to the upper airways. Sensory irritations have been reported for formaldehyde at con-
centrations varying from 0.15 to 1.25 mg/m3, even though a value below 0.125 mg/m3
in the indoor environment was considered safe in terms of sensory irritations. The IARC
(International Agency for Research on Cancer) classiﬁes formaldehyde as carcinogenic to
humans [67]. Studies on the long-term exposure to formaldehyde have demonstrated that
no excess nasopharyngeal cancer has been associated with a mean exposure level at or
below 1.25 mg/m3, with peaks of exposure at 5 mg/m3 and that e↵ects on bone marrow
or blood are possible at higher concentrations [66]. As consequence, since the e↵ect of the
exposure on the formaldehyde blood level appeared to be negligible at concentrations up
to 2.5 mg/m3, protection from nasal cancer should protect also against leukaemia [66].
Formaldehyde levels in the indoor environment vary depending on the age of the build-
ing, temperature, relative humidity and season, as well as on the air change rate. Although
30
==PAGE:51==
the formaldehyde concentration detected in new or renovated buildings can reach values
above 0.2 mg/m3, the average levels in homes are less than 0.05 mg/m3. This indicates
that at normal indoor concentration levels, the exposure to formaldehyde is not likely to
increase internal organ exposure [66]. The guidelines established by the World Health Or-
ganization for indoor formaldehyde levels aim to prevent sensory irritation. A short-term
(30 minutes) and long-term exposure limit value of 0.12 mg/m3, that was then rounded
to 0.1 mg/m3, is recommended.
Short-term and long-term exposure limit values (ELVs) for selected pollutants were
presented in Subtask 1 of the IEA-EBC Annex 68 [13]. The exposure limit values represent
the threshold concentration levels above which the exposure to a determined compound
could represent a health hazard. Indoor guidelines for TVOC, formaldehyde and benzene
are listed in Table 2.11.
Table 2.11: Short- and long-term ELVs for TVOC, formaldehyde and benzene. The averaging period for
the short-term exposure is shown in brackets [13].
Long-term ELV [µg/m3]
Short-term ELV [µg/m3]
TVOC
-
600 (8 hours)
Formaldehyde
9
123 (1 hour)
Benzene
0.2
110 (1 hour)
31
==PAGE:52==
32
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 3
Method
As already mentioned, the aim of this project is to suggest innovative improvements, in
terms of controls, to the current ventilation strategies applied in residential buildings.
Denmark has been used as test country in order to further improve the already advanced
technology in use. Indeed, a generalised thought is that even better performances could be
obtained, adopting demand-controlled strategies, which provide only the needed airﬂow
to guarantee the required level of indoor climate.
The analysis has been performed through a series of simulations, focused on the opti-
misation of di↵erent control strategies applied to CAV and VAV systems in a low energy
dwelling. The core of the investigations is divided into two main conﬂicting aspects, which
have to be traded o↵against each other. On one side, the tight energy requirements of
BR15 and BR20 oblige to pay particular attention to the energy performance of the build-
ing. On the other side, the low energy use must not compromise the indoor air quality,
and consequently the comfort level of the inhabitants. For this reason, to improve the
solidity of the investigations, the di↵erent strategies have been tested considering the ne-
cessity to dilute more pollutants than only CO2, including, therefore, also volatile organic
compounds (VOC).
33
==PAGE:54==
3.1
IDA ICE model description
The model created for the investigations is based on a multi-family building, chosen as
representative of newly built dwellings in the Danish building stock, located in a recently
built residential area in Copenhagen.
The test building is composed by ﬁve stories for a total of 85 apartments with di↵erent
sizes. The apartment chosen as case study is located at the 4th ﬂoor and is provided of
three bedrooms, two bathrooms, an open space with kitchen and living room and one
storage room, with a total ﬂoor area of 93.8 m2. The ﬂoor plan of the apartment is shown
in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Floor plan of the apartment investigated in IDA ICE [68, 69].
The three rooms highlighted in Figure 3.1 are considered as reference rooms. Bedroom
1 is the master bedroom occupied by two adults. The living room is the biggest room of
the apartment and is the only room provided by both supply and return airﬂow. Bathroom
1 is the biggest bathroom, considered as the most often used.
34
==PAGE:55==
The IDA ICE model was built with a high level of precision and aﬃnity to the reality.
The building materials were implemented with respect to a previous study conducted on
the same building [68, 69]. The main structure was based on concrete, for both walls and
ﬂoor. In Appendix A, the building materials used are listed with relative characteristics
and speciﬁcs.
The simulation period was set from the 1st of January to the 31st of December of
the reference year. The daily results shown in Chapter 4 are based on simulations run
for two weekdays respectively Tuesday and Wednesday of the ﬁrst week of the year. The
weather data used were provided by ASHRAE 2013 Fundamentals for the climate location
of Copenhagen Kastrup.
Di↵erent parameters were set in the IDA ICE model, considering some of them ﬁxed
in each investigation and let others varying, in order to ﬁnd the best system solution in
terms of energy use and indoor air quality. Among the ﬁxed parameters there are the
temperature setpoints, required to be met by the system, assumed to be 21◦C for the
heating season and 26 ◦C for the cooling season. The temperature setpoints were chosen
according to the heating and cooling ranges for category II of the standard DS/EN 15251
[32]. The setpoints for relative humidity were set following the setpoint for humidiﬁcation
and dehumidiﬁcation for category II of the standard DS/EN 15251 [32], since category II is
normally ”used for new buildings and renovations”. Only in bathrooms, relative humidity
setpoints were set according to category III of the standard DS/EN 15251, to avoid excess
of airﬂow. The same category was chosen to ﬁx the setpoint of CO2, assuming an outdoor
concentration of 400 ppm. More information about the ﬁxed setpoints for each room are
shown in Table 3.1.
35
==PAGE:56==
Table 3.1: Controller setpoints for bedrooms, living room and bathrooms.
Controller
Bedrooms and Living room
Bathrooms
Tmin [◦C]
21
21
Tmax [◦C]
26
26
RH min
25%
25%
RH max
60%
70%
CO2 min a
500
500
CO2 max a
900
900
Daylight min [lux]
100
100
aincluding outdoor concentration.
The apartment was equipped only with heating and ventilation system and no cooling
system was implemented in the model. Overheating was prevented through the use of
passive means, such as shading devices. The yearly overheating hours and the solutions
applied to limit them, can be found in Appendix B.
The heating system provided was an hydronic ﬂoor heating system with pipes immersed
in the concrete layer, placed 1 cm below the ﬂoor covering [68, 69]. The design power set
in IDA ICE to calculate the supply mass-ﬂow was considered equal to 16 W/m2 and
the temperature di↵erence at design power was set equal to 5◦C [68, 69].
As in the
previous study conducted on the same building, the heat transfer coeﬃcient was set equal
to 10 W/(m2K) [68, 69]. The ﬂoor heating system was implemented in IDA ICE with a
proportional control based on the operative temperature.
Regarding the ventilation system, the supply and return fans of the air handling unit
were considered with a total SFP value equal to 1.5 kW/(m3/s), as required by BR15 [31].
Both the heating and cooling coil were set as o↵in the simulation software, to reproduce
in the simulations what is commonly installed in Danish residential buildings.
Windows and doors conditions were also set as ﬁxed parameters in the model during
the whole simulation period. All the windows were kept close at all times, in order to
avoid natural ventilation interfere with the systems. The doors were considered always
open with 25% of opening, since closed doors created unbalances in the system.
36
==PAGE:57==
The variable parameters are represented by all the variables necessary to describe the
di↵erent ventilation strategies studied. This means that what has been changed through-
out the investigations is the type of ventilation system and the control type.
3.1.1
Internal gains and moisture production
The internal gains, as well as moisture production, are among the parameters maintained
ﬁxed in each model investigated. The internal gains and moisture sources considered were:
• Occupancy
• Light
• Shower use
• Bathroom use
• Cooking activities
• Equipment
All the listed moisture sources and internal gains were set considering the apartment
occupied by a family of four people, two adults and two kids. The family chosen is a
plausible Danish family, in which the adults are working people between 30 and 50 years
old and the children are between 6 and 14 years old, both attending school. The apartment
is a non-smoking area and no pets were considered living there. The CO2 emissions were
calculated by IDA ICE according to the activity level (metabolic rate) and the clothing
value (CLO). The metabolic rate was not varied among adults and children, to simplify
the model. Therefore, a modest overestimation of the CO2 concentrations is expected.
A complex assumption, that has to be made in residential buildings investigations,
is related to the modelling of the occupants’ behaviour [70]. The unpredictability of the
occupancy can be modelled through six di↵erent methodologies: stochastic models, de-
terministic models, psychological models, average value models, agent-based models, and
action-based models [70]. In this project, the occupancy schedule was created reproducing
37
==PAGE:58==
a plausible week of the family considered. The probability of having the residents spread
all over the rooms during the occupied hours was estimated (stochastic method). The
occupancy schedule was set in IDA ICE for each room and varies in a range 0 to 1. Occu-
pancy set to 0 refers to a non-occupied zone, whereas for a fully-occupied room (e.g. two
people are present in Bedroom 1) the occupancy is set to 1. Non-integer numbers refer
to the probability that the inhabitants are present in the zone for a fraction of hour. For
example, a presence of 0.15 represents a person in the zone for 9 minutes. The sum of
the occupancy schedule of each room is four, during each occupancy hour. This means
that the possibility of having two adults alone or two children alone in the home is never
considered.
During the weekdays the main activities of the four people are happening out of home,
namely at work or at school. The presence in the apartment is therefore limited to the
early morning and the evening, resulting in ten hours of unoccupancy between 7:00 and
17:00. In weekends, the occupants spend more time at home, cooking, cleaning, resting or
doing other light activities, and it is assumed that they never leave the house.
The calculation of an occupancy factor was necessary to overcome a limitation of IDA
ICE. In the IDA ICE software the occupancy schedule is multiplied in each moment by
the metabolic rate (MET) to calculate moisture and CO2 emission rates. However, only
one constant value can be set for the MET, not considering any variations in the activity
level along the day. Therefore, an occupancy factor was calculated to incorporate the
variations in the MET value along the day and the occupancy schedule (see respectively
Table 6 and Table 5 in Appendix C). The occupancy factor is thus calculated for each
room multiplying the hourly occupancy schedule by the hourly MET value (see Table 7
in Appendix C). For example, if the number of people present in a zone is equal to 0.15
and the activity level is 1.2 MET, the occupancy factor is 0.18. The obtained values are
ﬁnally set in the occupancy schedule of IDA ICE, whereas the MET value was set to 1
in the IDA ICE interface. The estimated occupancy schedules and the calculations of the
occupancy factors are presented in Appendix C.
The artiﬁcial light was scheduled according to the occupancy level during the day and
the weather data. The lack of a speciﬁc requirement for electric lighting in residential
38
==PAGE:59==
buildings, led to choose as reference values those used in a similar study on the same
apartment [69]. In each room, the light was designed to guarantee an illuminance level
at workplane height (0.8 m) equal to 200 lux, except for the kitchen, where it was set
to 300 lux [69]. This means that each zone was provided of a luminous eﬃcacy equal to
60 lm/W, using ﬂuorescent lights, perfectly complying the BR15 [31], which requires a
luminous eﬃcacy of at least 50 lm/W for energy-eﬃcient lighting [31]. Only the kitchen
was provided of LED lights for a total amount of 65 lm/W. The necessary power in Watt
per unit of light installed in each room is reported in Table 3.2.
Table 3.2: Necessary power in Watt per unit of light in each zone.
Necessary power
per unit [W]
Luminous Eﬃcacy
[lm/W]
Units
Bedroom 1
46.6
60
1
Bathroom 1
15.2
60
1
Bedroom 2
46.6
60
1
Living Room
43.2
60
3
Kitchen
30.0
65
1
Bedroom 3
36.8
60
1
Depot
7.5
60
1
Bathroom 2
12.0
60
1
The artiﬁcial light control was modelled based on the occupancy schedule and on the
daylight. As in the previous study, a control macro was designed in order to turn o↵the
light when the daylight is suﬃcient to fulﬁl the requirements [69]. The control is based on
a sensor that measures the illuminance in the room and compare it with the illuminance
setpoint, ﬁxed to 200 lux in each room and 300 lux in the kitchen. The signal is linked to
the occupancy schedule and the day-night schedule, in order to give an output signal able
to turn o↵the light if it is night time or if the room is not occupied or if the daylight in
the room is suﬃcient. The light schedule is presented for each room in Appendix D.
In each wet space, moisture production was considered according to the activities
occurring. For each bathroom, both the moisture production due to the shower use and
to the use of the sink (labelled as ”bathroom use”) were modelled. For the kitchen, the
moisture produced during cooking activities was considered.
39
==PAGE:60==
The amount of steam released during a shower varies based on its duration.
The
estimations of moisture release vary from 0.25 kg/shower for a 5-minute shower to 0.53
kg/shower for a 18-minute shower [19]. To have consistency with a study by Smith [19],
the moisture production was ﬁxed to 0.40 kg/shower for an average duration of 8 minutes.
The inputs used in IDA ICE are shown in Table 3.3.
Table 3.3: Moisture production.
Moisture production [kg/s]
Shower
1.11E-4
Bathroom use
2.78E-5
The typical scenario used by Smith in his study [19] was applied in this project to model
the moisture production from cooking activities in the kitchen. Depending on the type of
meal into preparation, the moisture loads are 0.45 kg, 0.57 kg and 1.33 kg [19], which were
assumed to be breakfast, lunch and dinner respectively. Again, mathematical calculations
had to be made to overcome a limitation of IDA ICE. Indeed, the IDA ICE interface allows
to set a unique value of water vapour emission per unit, in kg/s. Therefore, the water
vapour emission was set to 2.78E-04 kg/s, corresponding to a moisture production of 1
kg/h. According to the di↵erent level of cooking and time of food preparation, a factor
representing a 1-hour cooking activity was set into a schedule to di↵erentiate each meal
during the day. Breakfast was considered the meal with the least moisture production,
therefore it was set to 0.45. Lunch during the weekends was assumed to release a higher
amount of moisture, but still less than the dinner, considered the main meal. The factors
set into the cooking schedule for lunch (in weekends) and dinner (everyday) were thus 0.57
and 1.33, respectively (see Table 8 in Appendix D).
It was assumed that any other moisture production were negligible in the kitchen, due
to the presence of a dish washer, as in most of the new apartments in Copenhagen. Same
assumption was made for washing and drying of clothes (i.e. the moisture production was
neglected).
Lastly, one hour of cleaning (Sunday from 10:00-12:00) per week was considered. The
moisture coming from the ﬂoor mopping in each room was included as moisture production.
40
==PAGE:61==
According to [19], 5 g/m2 of moisture is released from mopping the ﬂoor.
3.2
Ventilation strategies
In order to decide which ventilation strategies were the most relevant and interesting to
study, a market analysis (see Chapter 2.3) has been conducted through interviews and
a questionnaire to producers and consultants. The results showed that the ventilation
strategies found to be the most widely used in Danish residences are the system with
constant air volume (CAV) and no sensor, and a variable air volume (VAV) controlled by
a sensor (e.g. RH sensor, T sensor, etc.) integrated in the AHU, installed in the exhaust
duct. A widely used type of ventilation system in multi-family buildings is decentralized,
which means that each apartment is equipped with an independent AHU system. Each
system is composed by multiple components, such as a supply/return unit, heat recovery,
fans and ducts which distribute the airﬂow to the rooms. All the systems investigated in
this project belong to this category and they di↵er in the type of airﬂow control, the type
of sensor and its position.
The investigations started with a CAV system that runs all the time at the minimum
airﬂow rates required from the Danish Building Code [31], i.e.
0.3 l/s per m2.
From
this starting point many of the technologies available on the market were implemented
to investigate which one achieves the best compromise between energy use and indoor
climate.
The investigations were divided into two main categories:
• Standard strategies
• Advanced strategies
In the ﬁrst category the most simple and commonly used technologies were included,
namely CAV systems and VAV systems with a central sensor installed in the exhaust duct
of the AHU. The cases investigated are reported in Table 3.4.
41
==PAGE:62==
Table 3.4: Standard strategies.
Strategy name
Type of sensor
Description
CAV min
-
Minimum airﬂow rates a
CAV
-
Increased airﬂow in the bathrooms b
VAV stepwise
CO2 control
Central sensor in the exhaust duct of the AHU
VAV stepwise
RH control
Central sensor in the exhaust duct of the AHU
VAV stepwise
T control
Central sensor in the exhaust duct of the AHU
VAV proportional
CO2 control
Central sensor in the exhaust duct of the AHU
VAV proportional
RH control
Central sensor in the exhaust duct of the AHU
VAV proportional
T control
Central sensor in the exhaust duct of the AHU
a0.3 l/s per m2 (of heated ﬂoor area) in supply and return and maximum extraction at 20 l/s in the
kitchen.
b0.3 l/s per m2 (of heated ﬂoor area) in supply, 15 l/s in return for bathrooms and maximum extraction
at 20 l/s in the kitchen.
In the ”VAV stepwise” systems, the airﬂow is supplied or extracted at three predeﬁned
levels (i.e. low, normal, boost), according to the RH, CO2 or temperature detected in
the room, as shown in Figure 3.2a, 3.2b and 3.2c. The maximum airﬂow rate is indicated
with 100% and the minimum with 0%, whose airﬂow rates in l/s depend on the rooms
(see Chapter 3.2.1).
(a) RH control
(b) CO2 control
(c) T control
Figure 3.2: Stepwise control of the airﬂows based on the levels of RH, CO2 or temperature detected in the
room.
42
==PAGE:63==
Besides the VAV stepwise, another type of variable air volume (VAV) systems was also
investigated. In the ”VAV proportional” the airﬂow changes dynamically according to the
output of the proportional control sensor installed in the AHU.
In the advanced strategies more accurate demand-controlled ventilation strategies with
room-based sensors are included. The cases selected for the investigation are presented in
Table 3.5. The main di↵erence between the systems listed in the table resides in the control
of supply and return airﬂows. In the balanced systems the airﬂows in supply equals the
airﬂow in return, whereas, in the unbalanced systems, the supply and the exhaust airﬂows
run independently, according to the needs in each room.
Table 3.5: Variable air volume strategies with balanced air ﬂow rate between supply and return.
Strategy name
Type of sensor
Description
VAV balanced
CO2 control
room-based sensors
VAV balanced
RH control
room-based sensors
VAV balanced
T control
room-based sensors
VAV balanced
CO2 and RH control a
room-based sensors
VAV unbalanced
CO2 control
room-based sensors
VAV unbalanced
RH control
room-based sensors
VAV unbalanced
T control
room-based sensors
VAV unbalanced
CO2 and RH control a
room-based sensors
aCO2 sensor in dry rooms and RH sensor in wet rooms.
The evaluation of the performance of the ventilation strategies, on the overall apart-
ment, is done by appraising the indoor air quality of three reference rooms, representing
the di↵erent zones of the apartment. The rooms chosen are the living room (Living room),
the main bathroom (Bathroom 1) and the main bedroom (Bedroom 1). These rooms were
chosen because characterised by critical conditions, namely the highest occupant density
(Bedroom 1), or because of the greater use of the room (Bathroom 1) compared to the
zones of the same type in the building. The IAQ performances are also analysed in the
Living room as it is the only zone with both supply and extraction (kitchen hood) ducts,
and because characterised by high level of occupancy and by speciﬁc human activities (e.g.
cooking).
43
==PAGE:64==
3.2.1
Airﬂow rates
According to the BR15, 0.3 l/s per m2 of fresh air has to be supplied to each habitable
room and to the building as a whole [31]. It represents the minimum ventilation rate
required for every strategy. In case of CAV systems, the supply airﬂows are maintained
constant at the minimum rate. The two CAV systems di↵er in terms of return airﬂow
rate, as shown in Table 3.6.
Table 3.6: Airﬂow rates for the CAV systems.
Strategy name
Supply airﬂow
Return airﬂow (bathrooms)
Return airﬂow (kitchen)
CAV min
0.3 l/s per m2a
0.3 l/s per m2 a
up to 20 l/s b
CAV
0.3 l/s per m2 a
15 l/s
up to 20 l/s b
aof heated ﬂoor area.
bstep control of the fan (i.e. 0 / 1 / 2). Minimum airﬂow at 0.3 l/s per m2 of heated ﬂoor area.
In the VAV strategies, the maximum total airﬂow in the apartment was set to 80 l/s
according to the maximum capacity of a reference unit from Airmaster [30]. Maximum
and minimum airﬂows are presented in in Table 3.7.
Table 3.7: Airﬂow rates for the VAV systems.
Room
Supply [l/(sm2)]
Return [l/(sm2)]
Supply [l/s]
Return [l/s]
Min
Max
Min
Max
Min
Max
Min
Max
Bedroom 1
0.3
1
-
-
4.2
13.5
-
-
Bedroom 2
0.3
1
-
-
4.2
13.5
-
-
Bedroom 3
0.3
1
-
-
4.2
11
-
-
Bathroom 1
-
-
1.3
4.2
-
5.9
19
Bathroom 2
-
-
1.6
5.2
-
5.9
19
Living room
0.3
1
0.3
1
13.3
42
13.3
42
Sum
25
80
25
80
The airﬂows are calculated in order to provide the same supply in terms of l/s per m2
in the dry room and guarantee the same extraction in l/s in the bathrooms. The return
airﬂow in the Living room corresponds to the kitchen hood. Its minimum and maximum
were set to 0.3 l/s per m2 and to 0.96 l/s per m2, respectively, in order to balance the
44
==PAGE:65==
supply airﬂows in the Living room. The ventilation rate of the kitchen hood is usually
manually adjustable on three levels (e.g. 0 / 1 / 2) and often guarantees a maximum
extraction of about 40 l/s[71]. This is implemented in IDA ICE through a schedule of the
ventilation that simulates the manual control of the occupants. When there are no cooking
activities, the kitchen hood extracts at its minimum ventilation rate (control set to 0). At
lunch-time (during weekends) and dinner-time, the airﬂow is increased to its maximum
capacity (extraction rate at 42 l/s), whereas during breakfast the airﬂow corresponds to
50% of its maximum capacity (extraction rate at 21 l/s).
3.2.2
Indicators for IAQ
In order to evaluate and compare the IAQ and energy performances of the di↵erent ven-
tilation strategies, multiple types of indicators are used, each of them focusing on speciﬁc
aspects.
Mean age of air
The mean age of air is deﬁned as the average time of residence of the air, since it has
entered the zone through the supply duct or the inﬁltrations [72], and therefore it is an
useful marker of the the freshness of the indoor air. When a zone is in steady state and
the ventilation is achieved through outside air only, the mean age of air corresponds to
the nominal time constant ⌧n, namely it is equal to the inverse of an air change per hour
[73], as expressed in Equation 3.1,
⌧n = V
q
[h]
(3.1)
where V is the total room volume and q is the supply airﬂow rate [m3/h] .
CO2 as indicator
Carbon Dioxide is a widely used indicator for indoor air quality assessments, being easily
associated to human bio-e✏uents. Therefore, it is used as marker for the indoor air quality
45
==PAGE:66==
in the zones.
A ﬁrst IAQ analysis is based on the evaluation of the levels of CO2 concentration in
the indoor air during occupancy. The software IDA ICE is used to calculate the number of
hours, weighted on the occupancy schedule in each room, at which the CO2 concentration
falls into pre-deﬁned ranges (Table 3.8). The ranges were speciﬁcally deﬁned for the current
project. By doing so, it is possible to make a preliminary evaluation of the sensitivity of
the control, or, in other words, of how accurately the demand-controlled ventilation is able
to constrain the build-up of CO2 in the rooms.
Table 3.8: CO2 as indicator of IAQ.
IAQ classiﬁcation
CO2 concentration
range [ppm]
Excellent
400 to 600
Good
600 to 800
Fair
800 to 900
Mediocre
900 to 1200
Bad
above 1200
Exposure to CO2
When assessing the e↵ect that a pollutant has on an individual, an additional indicator
is considered, the exposure. This parameter gives information about the concentration
of the pollutant that a person is experiencing while staying in the evaluated zone. Since
the concentration level varies over time, the exposure is thus the integral over time of the
concentration, weighted on the occupancy schedule (Eq. 3.2 [74]).
Ex =
t2
Z
t1
C(t)dt
[ppmh]
(3.2)
where Ex is the exposure, C(t) the concentration value of the pollutant at the instant
t 2 [t1, t2].
46
==PAGE:67==
A simpliﬁcation of Equation 3.2 had to be made since it was not possible to obtain
from IDA-ICE the exact function of the concentration over time. The CO2 concentration
was obtained in hourly steps, and then multiplied by the occupancy schedule of a person
in that room. The total exposure experienced by a person in room i is then obtained as
sum of the previously calculated components (Eq. 3.3):
Expi =
X
T
Ci(t) · Oi(t)
[ppmh]
(3.3)
where Expi is the exposure of one person in a room i, Ci(t) is the CO2 concentration
at time t 2 T in the room i, and Oi(t) is a number between 0 and 1, representing the
actual occupancy time fraction in the room at time t, being 1 a full-hour occupancy and
0 no occupancy.
The exposure index used, Iexp (Eq. 3.4), is the ratio of the e↵ective exposure, Expi,
calculated as in Eq. 3.3, and of the exposure limit value, ExpL,i.
Iexp = Expi
ExpL,i
(3.4)
The exposure limit ExpL,i is calculated in the same way as for Expi but with a constant
concentration, namely the CO2 limit value CL equal to 900 ppm (Eq 3.5).
ExpL,i =
X
T
CL · Oi(t)
[ppmh]
(3.5)
The exposure index, Iexp, shows if, on the long-term (1 year), the exposure which an
individual is experiencing over his staying in a particular room exceeds (Iexp > 1) or not
(Iexp < 1) the exposure limit associated with the CO2 concentration limit of 900 ppm.
Index of global performance
In order to compare the strategies among each other, a common index is necessary.
Toureilles [75] used an adimensional index of global performance Ig, deﬁned as ratio be-
47
==PAGE:68==
tween two normalised and adimensional indexes (Eq. 3.6):
Ig =
IIAQ
IEnergy
(3.6)
Toureilles’ index was found to be a valuable mean of comparison, so its indexes were
partially modiﬁed to be aligned with the present work.
IIAQ is deﬁned as the IAQ improvement, evaluated in terms of reduction in CO2
exposure among the di↵erent cases tested and calculated as in Equation 3.7 [75]:
IIAQ = Imax
exp −Iexp
Imax
exp −Imin
exp
(3.7)
Iexp is the exposure to CO2 in the simulated case, as deﬁned in Chapter 3.2.2, and
Imax
exp
and Imin
exp are the maximum and minimum exposure, respectively, obtained among
all the cases simulated. The index is normalised, so assumes values in the range 0-1. The
higher the index, the better is the reduction in the exposure to CO2 and therefore the
enhancement of the indoor air quality.
IEnergy indicates the additional energy use of the simulation analysed, in comparison
to the case with minimum energy use. It is deﬁned as in Equation 3.8 [75]:
IEnergy =
E −Emin
Emax −Emin
(3.8)
where E is the energy use of the case studied, and Emax and Emin represent the
maximum and minimum energy use among the cases tested. Again, the index is normalised
and thus included between 0 and 1. High values imply a relevant increase in the energy
use, in relation to the case with minimum energy use. Optimal cases are marked by indexes
close to zero.
The Ig indicator is thus expression of the global performance of the ventilation system
under analysis. Its value varies in the range 0-1. Systems with high Ig values represent
the most interesting solutions, since they achieve a good compromise between additional
energy use and improvement of the indoor air quality. However, since IAQ and energy use
48
==PAGE:69==
are weighted equally in the Ig index, it is impossible to estimate the impact of each factor
to the ﬁnal value. Therefore, an increase of Ig may be either due to an enhanced IAQ or
to a decreased energy use.
3.3
Innovative ventilation strategies
The main goal of this investigation is to evaluate the possibility of decreasing the min-
imum ventilation rate of 0.3 l/s per m2, stated in the Danish Building Code [31], when
the building is not occupied, to further reduce the energy use. However, the reduction
in the ventilation rate during non-occupied hours could expose the residents to excessive
concentrations of harmful pollutants when they arrive at home. The impact of the reduc-
tion of the minimum ventilation rate to 0.1 l/s per m2 during non-occupied hours is thus
investigated.
The study was conducted on the best three strategies resulted from the previous inves-
tigation, comparing them with the CAV system. Emissions of volatile organic compounds,
formaldehyde or benzene were included in the models to test if the ventilation strategies
considered are able to provide good indoor climate conditions when the occupants get
home. Firstly, the best strategies were tested keeping the minimum ventilation rate at
0.3 l/s per m2, during non-occupied hours.
Successively, the possibility to reduce the
minimum ventilation rate was investigated for the same strategies.
The minimum airﬂow rate chosen is equal to the one recommended in the Swedish
building regulation BBR [11]. In Sweden, when the building is not occupied, it is possible
to decrease the ventilation rate until 0.1 l/s per m2. According to [11], this is the required
background ventilation in order to dilute pollutants coming from indoor sources, such as
building materials and furniture.
The investigation was again performed with the use of the simulation tool IDA ICE,
through which the four systems selected were simulated under particular conditions.
TVOC, formaldehyde and benzene, simulated separately, were treated as gaseous con-
taminants present in the air, with the assumptions that no sorption or desorption from
49
==PAGE:70==
building materials was considered and that the background concentration was negligible.
For each strategy, four scenarios were considered, with the system running at 0.1 l/s
per m2 during non-occupied hours:
1. From 7:00 to 17:00 (10 hours)
2. From 7:00 to 15:00 (8 hours)
3. From 7:00 to 13:00 (6 hours)
4. From 7:00 to 11:00 (4 hours)
In each scenario the VOC build-up and the energy use were evaluated, in order to
understand for how many hours the ventilation rate could be lowered and when it must
be increased again, to guarantee a good level of indoor air quality.
The VOC emission rates were calculated following four di↵erent methods, based on
TVOC, formaldheyde and benzene:
• TVOC according to a previous study from Hesaraki [11]
• TVOC according to Annex C of the DS/EN 15251 [32]
• Formaldehyde according to Salthammer and Uhde [49]
• Benzene according to Salthammer and Uhde [49]
The ﬁrst method applied is the same reported by Hesaraki in [11], in which it is assessed
that the average concentration of TVOC in residential buildings is about 0.1 mg/m3. From
this value, the emission rate was calculated, according to Equation 3.9:
c = c0 · e−nt + m
q · (1 −e−nt)
(3.9)
where c is the pollutant concentration [ppm], c0 is the initial concentration [ppm] at
t=0, n is the number of air change per hour [h−1], t is the time [h], m is the emission rate
[kg/h] and q is the outdoor airﬂow rate [m3/h].
50
==PAGE:71==
The calculation is conducted considering the concentration c calculated for an inﬁnite
time (steady-state) and that the initial concentration is zero. In this way, the ﬁrst term of
Eq.3.9 can be neglected and the calculation allows to ﬁnd a constant emission rate equal
to 3 µg/s. This emission rate was set in the Living room, assuming mixing of air in the
entire apartment.
In the second method, the emission rate was calculated according to the DS/EN 15251
(Annex C) [32], in which the building are classiﬁed based on the level of contaminants
emissions. A building is deﬁned ”low polluting” if the emission of TVOC is lower than 0.2
mg/m2 per h [32]. Therefore, this value was used to calculate the constant emission rate
in each room. The data for each room are presented in Appendix G
The formaldehyde emission rate was calculated as the sum of the emission from di↵er-
ent sources present in each room. The sources considered were paints, laminated ﬂooring
and carpets. All the emission rates were measured after three days from the installation
of the products, according to Salthammer and Uhde [49], and assumed to be constant
over time. Emissions from furniture and cabinets, as well as electronic devices, had to
be excluded from the calculation, due to the lack of data based on the three-days experi-
ments. This underestimation of the emission rate has been taken in consideration during
the analysis of the results. Outdoor formaldehyde emissions were assumed to be negligible.
Further information about the calculation can be found in Appendix G. The data used in
the calculation for each room are presented in Table 3.9.
Table 3.9: Formaldehyde emission rates for di↵erent sources [49].
Source
Emission rate [µg/m2h]
Paints
60
Laminated ﬂooring
9
Carpet
32
Benzene is the last compound studied, using the same approach as for formaldehyde
(Salthammer and Uhde [49]). The sources considered are the same, except for the lami-
nated ﬂooring that was considered with zero emissions of benzene since the emission rate
reached after three days from the installation was negligible. Also in this case, the outdoor
51
==PAGE:72==
concentration was neglected. The benzene emission rates are listed in Table 3.10.
Table 3.10: Benzene emission rates for di↵erent sources [49].
Source
Emission rate [µg/m2h]
Paints
2
Laminated ﬂooring
0
Carpet
60
The emission rates calculated in the four methods were assumed to be constant over
time. In reality, most of the VOC emissions tend to decrease with the time, due to the
ageing of the materials [76].
This means that the ﬁrst days after the installation the
emission rate is higher and it stabilises on a lower value in a certain period of time. For
this reason, it was evaluated how the concentration build up would develop using emission
models, variable with the time.
The emission model used for benzene was based on a power law model for all the three
sources, paints (oil based), laminated ﬂooring and carpets, obtained from the PANDORA
project database [77]. Equation 3.10 and 3.11 show the emission model:
S = a1 · t−a2
p
if
t ≥tp
(3.10)
S = a1 · t−a2
if
t > tp
(3.11)
S is the emission rate of the material in time t and the value of the constant a1, a2 and tp
are presented in Table 3.11.
Table 3.11: Values of the constant used in the emission model.
Source
a1 [mg/(m2h)]
a2 [mg/(m2h)]
tp [h]
Carpet
0.002
0.353
5
Paint (oil based)
88.2
2.360
12
Flooring
0.001
0.257
5.2
52
==PAGE:73==
The decay over time of the emission rate of the three sources is shown in Figure 3.3.
It is noticeable that in the ﬁrst days the emissions are constant at their maximum levels,
while after about 6 days, they tend to decrease. Each source presents a di↵erent pattern
and decay time, but in the long-term perspective, they all stabilise on a lower value.
Figure 3.3: Benzene emission model for ﬂooring, paint and carpet [77].
The same evaluation was conducted for formaldehyde emissions, where carpets and
ﬂooring emission model were based on Equation 3.10 and 3.11. The value used for the
constant a1, a2 and tp are listed in Table 3.12.
Table 3.12: Values of the constants used in Equation 3.10 and 3.11.
Source
a1 [mg/(m2h)]
a2 [mg/(m2h)]
tp [h]
Carpet
0.045
0.363
36.2
Flooring
0.043
0.043
36.4
The only emission model available for paints from the same reference study [77] was
based on a discrete model, characterised by Equation 3.12:
S = ai
if
t = ti
(3.12)
53
==PAGE:74==
The emission model valid for carpet and ﬂooring [77] are illustrated in Figure 3.4. The
graph shows that also the formaldehyde emission rate from ﬂooring and carpet decreases
slowly with time and after about 30 days the emissions stabilise.
Figure 3.4: Formaldehyde emission models for ﬂooring and carpet [77].
Two discrete values for formaldehyde emissions from paints are presented in Table
3.13. Even though the pattern between the two discrete points is unknown, it is assumed
that also the formaldehyde emissions from oil based paints tend to decrease with time.
Table 3.13: Discrete formaldehyde emission model for paint.
Days after
installation
Formaldehyde
concentration [mg/m3]
3
1162
30
206
Further information about the emission rates calculation and how they were set in IDA
ICE are reported in Appendix G.
54
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 4
Results
The results are presented into two separate sections. The former concerns the assessment
of the ventilation strategies in terms of IAQ and energy use. The latter shows the re-
sults gathered from a deeper analysis on the indoor air quality, with focus on TVOC,
formaldehyde and benzene.
4.1
Ventilation strategies investigation
The assessment of the ventilation strategies is divided into four parts:
1. the IAQ performances of the standard strategies are evaluated;
2. the results of the advanced ventilation strategies are shown in terms of IAQ;
3. the energy use for standard and advanced strategies is compared;
4. the results obtained in the previous sections are gathered, to classify all the ventila-
tion strategies studied, through the use of a unique common indicator.
55
==PAGE:76==
4.1.1
Standard strategies
In this section the IAQ was evaluated in terms of relative humidity levels, mean age of air
and CO2 concentration for the eight standard strategies investigated (see Chapter 3.2).
Relative humidity
The monthly distribution of the relative humidity in Bedroom 1 for the CAV system with
minimum ventilation rate and for the VAV system with central RH sensor (stepwise) is
depicted in Figure 4.1. The performances of the VAV system with central RH sensor (step-
wise) are considered representative for the other simulated models. Indeed, the monthly
average RH values were found to slightly di↵er among the standard strategies with VAV
(0.6% di↵erence on average; 1.8% maximum di↵erence) and to present minor di↵erences
among the zone types (maximum 1% di↵erence on the monthly averages).
Figure 4.1: Monthly variation in the relative humidity levels in Bedroom 1.
Comparison between the
CAV system with minimum ventilation rate and the VAV system with central stepwise RH sensor, used as
reference for the other models.
It can be observed that all the standard strategies present the same tendency, with
56
==PAGE:77==
monthly medians increasing from the winter to the summer period. The CAV system with
minimum airﬂows shows the greatest RH levels throughout the year. The monthly median
is signiﬁcantly higher compared to the other ventilation strategies during the winter period,
but assumes similar values during summer time. For the CAV system the peaks in the
RH levels exceed 60% every month, excluding February, March and April; whereas, with
the VAV system the relative humidity levels are better controlled and exceed 60% only
during the summer months and October.
The number of hours in which the RH values exceeds the guidelines for category II of
the standard DS/EN 15251 is shown in Table 4.1. It can be observed that the number
of hours in which the RH is greater than 60% is considerably smaller than the amount of
hours during which the relative humidity is lesser than 25%.
Table 4.1: Number of hours in which the relative humidity exceeds 60% or is lower than 25% on a 1-year
time frame. The abbreviations used are: s.=stepwise; p.=proportional.
RH<25% [h]
RH>60% [h]
Bedroom1
Bathroom 1
Living room
Bedroom1
Bathroom 1
Living room
CAV min
443
644
623
191
333
335
CAV
710
827
935
102
145
157
VAV with central RH sensor (s.)
580
828
790
47
65
102
VAV with central RH sensor (p.)
590
834
798
48
51
82
VAV with central CO2 sensor (s.)
730
964
933
60
82
120
VAV with central CO2 sensor (p.)
804
1020
1017
58
72
109
VAV with central T sensor (s.)
755
1011
978
55
77
109
VAV with T sensor (p.)
728
990
948
50
63
86
The number of hours in which the RH values exceed 60% is constrained to 1% of the
yearly hours in about all the VAV models and rooms. Only the CAV systems appear to
be less eﬃcient in controlling the relative humidity. The relative humidity values for the
reference strategy with constant air volume at minimum rates exceeds 60% for 2% of the
yearly hours in Bedroom 1 and 4% in Bathroom 1 and Living room.
On the other hand, the number of hours in which the RH is lesser than 25% varies from
a minimum of 5% of the yearly hours for the CAV strategy with minimum airﬂows, to a
maximum of 12% of the yearly hours for the models with variable air volume controlled
by proportional CO2 sensors. However, the relative humidity never decreases below 10%,
value that is reached only for isolated hours throughout the year.
57
==PAGE:78==
Mean age of air
As shown in Table 4.2 the mean age of air di↵er slightly among the ventilation strategies
considered, with the exception of the CAV system with minimum ventilation rates. The
use of demand-controlled ventilation reduces considerably the age of air, whose mean is
decreased of up to 0.5 h compared to the CAV system with minimum ventilation rate.
Table 4.2: Mean age of air [h], calculated on a one-year time frame in Bedroom 1, Bathroom 1 and Living
room. The abbreviations used are: s.=stepwise; p.=proportional.
Mean age of air [h]
Bedroom1
Bathroom 1
Living room
CAV min
1.5
1.7
1.6
CAV
1.1
1.2
1.1
VAV with central RH sensor (s.)
1.2
1.4
1.3
VAV with central RH sensor (p.)
1.2
1.4
1.2
VAV with central CO2 sensor (s.)
1.2
1.4
1.3
VAV with central CO2 sensor (p.)
1.2
1.3
1.2
VAV with central T sensor (s.)
1.1
1.2
1.1
VAV with central T sensor (p.)
1.1
1.2
1.1
The CAV system with constant extraction at 15 l/s from the bathrooms shows the
lowest values of mean age of air in all rooms.
This because the extraction rate from
the bathrooms is constant and around 2.5 times higher than the corresponding minimum
values in the VAV models. As consequence, in the CAV system high volumes of air are
extracted at all time, with positive e↵ects on the mean age of air, especially when the
building is not occupied. During unoccupancy indeed, the mean age of air in the CAV
system remains stable at around 1.1-1.2 h or tends to decrease, whereas in the VAV models
it reaches peaks of 1.8-2.3 h, depending on the room considered (being the bathroom the
room presenting the highest values).
The zones were extraction ducts are installed (i.e. bathrooms and living room) show
higher values of mean age of air since, assuming perfect mixing of air, the extractors are
collecting also the polluted air coming from the dry rooms, which therefore contributes
in increasing the air age in the wet spaces. Furthermore, the bathrooms show the worst
conditions in regard to mean age of air, also because they are the only zones not supplied
58
==PAGE:79==
by fresh air, which reaches these zones only through the openings in the building. The
kitchen hood plays a key role in lowering the mean age of air in all zones. Indeed, when
the kitchen hood is extracting at its maximum rate (i.e. 42 l/s for the VAV models), it
contributes considerably in reducing the air age in all rooms.
Carbon dioxide
The CO2 concentration in the indoor air varies considerably with the type of room and
control strategy considered. For the analysis, the indoor air quality is ranked according
to the CO2 concentration detected, as described in Chapter 3.2.2.
Figure 4.2: IAQ evaluation in terms of CO2 concentration during occupancy time. 100% indicates the total
number of hours each room can be occupied, namely 6174 hours for Bedroom 1 and 3404 hours for Bathroom
1 and Living room. ’Excellent’=400-600 ppm; ’Good’=600-800 ppm; ’Fair’=800-900 ppm; ’Mediocre’=900-
1200; ’Bad’= above 1200 ppm. The types of sensor are abbreviated as: s.=stepwise; p.=proportional.
59
==PAGE:80==
For each room and control strategy, the amount of time during which the indoor
air quality can be labelled as ’Excellent’, ’Good’, ’Fair’, ’Mediocre’ or ’Bad’ is shown in
Figure 4.2. The number of hours are expressed as percentage of the total number of hours
of probable occupancy (see Chapter 3.1.1), so that 100% indicates 6174 hours for Bedroom
1 and 3404 hours for Bathroom 1 and Living room.
Bedroom 1 is the most critical room in terms of CO2 concentrations, due to the higher
occupant density and smaller size of the room compared, for example, to the Living room.
Moreover, only supply ducts are installed in the bedroom, so making it easier for the CO2
to build-up in the room, especially during night time, before the polluted air is extracted
by the exhaust ducts in living room and bathrooms. In Bedroom 1 the setpoint limit of 900
ppm is exceeded for around 30-35% of the occupied hours in all models. The ventilation
strategies with CO2 control sensor show the best performances in terms of CO2 control in
all rooms, even though they do not constrain the CO2 concentration below the setpoint
of 900 ppm. The CAV system with minimum ventilation rates is able to keep the CO2
concentration below the setpoint of 900 ppm only for less than 50% of the occupied time
in Bedroom 1, and shows concentrations above 1200 ppm for around 10% of the occupied
time, with peaks reaching 1600 ppm.
The same tendency is observed in Bathroom 1
and Living room, where the CAV system with minimum ventilation rate and the control
strategies with VAV controlled by CO2 sensors appear to be respectively the least and the
most performing in terms of CO2 control.
It is noticeable that also when the VAV is controlled by relative humidity or tem-
perature sensors, the airﬂows are still able to dilute the CO2, with limited concentration
di↵erences if compared with the VAV models with CO2 control sensor. The maximum
values reached do not di↵er signiﬁcantly among the cases and vary in the range 1300-1500
ppm for Bedroom 1, and do not exceed 1200 ppm in Bathroom 1 and Living room (with
the exception of the VAV with stepwise RH control which reaches almost 1300 ppm in
bathroom 1).
60
==PAGE:81==
4.1.2
Advanced strategies
The advanced strategies represent an attempt to further improve the IAQ, through the
use of room-based sensors for a localised control of the indoor pollutants.
The IAQ was evaluated in terms of relative humidity levels, mean age of air and CO2
concentration for the eight standard strategies investigated (see Chapter 3.2).
Relative humidity
The yearly average relative humidity falls in the range 37-40% for the reference rooms
in all the simulates cases, with two exceptions. The ventilation strategy with unbalanced
airﬂows controlled by temperature sensors presents average RH values of 41% in bathrooms
and living room and 42% in Bedroom 1. This is explained by analysing the ventilation
rates in each room. During the winter period the temperature sensor does not detect
high temperatures, so the ventilation system runs at minimum rates in almost all rooms.
As consequence, the ventilation airﬂows at the AHU are low (i.e.
approx.
17 l/s in
return and 25 l/s in supply) if compared with the other models, and so the heating
capacity of the heat recovery system. As consequence, the relative humidity of the supply
airﬂow undergoes a minimum reduction through the process of sensible heating in the
heat exchanger. Opposite trend is observed for the ventilation strategy with CO2 sensors
(balanced), which shows the highest monthly average ventilation rates over winter and
consequently the lowest relative humidity levels in its zones.
61
==PAGE:82==
These trends can be observed in Figure 4.3, which depicts the monthly averages of RH
for all the advanced strategies considered. The di↵erences in the airﬂow rates over the
winter months lead to variations in the levels of RH among the ventilation strategies, so
that the models with balanced airﬂows show lower levels of RH compared to the unbalanced
systems. This behaviour is observed also during the summer period, but to a small extent
due to the limited use of heat recovery.
Figure 4.3: Monthly relative humidity levels in Bedroom 1 for the standard strategies considered.
The
abbreviations used are: bal.=balanced; unbal.=unbalanced.
62
==PAGE:83==
Although the exceptions made by the VAV systems with temperature control sensors,
the advanced ventilation strategies can be divided into two groups, balanced and unbal-
anced strategies, within which the RH assumes comparable values throughout the months.
Figure 4.4 depicts the monthly variations in the RH levels in Bedroom 1 for the VAV sys-
tems with RH control sensor, representative for the balanced and unbalanced systems,
respectively. The median values is slightly higher for the unbalanced ventilation strate-
gies, as well as the maximum RH values throughout the year. On the other hand, the RH
reaches lower values in case of balanced systems. The di↵erences are more pronounced
during the winter months, but tend to level during summer.
Figure 4.4: Monthly variation in the relative humidity levels in Bedroom 1. Comparison between the VAV
systems, balanced and unbalanced, with RH sensors.
63
==PAGE:84==
The number of hours during which the RH exceeds 60% or is lower than 25% is shown
in Table 4.3. It can be observed that the number of hours with RH higher than 60% is
limited to 1-2% of the yearly hours for almost all the models. The only exception is made
by the ventilation system with unbalanced temperature sensors, whose relative humidity
exceeds 60% for around 4% of the yearly hours. On the other hand, this model shows RH
values lower than 25% for around 7% of the yearly hours, percentage that is signiﬁcantly
lower if compared to the other strategies, which exceed the limit for up to 14% of the time.
Again, this is explained with reference to the airﬂow rates of the di↵erent strategies. In
the case of unbalanced VAV with temperature control the airﬂows are lower on a monthly
average than those of the other models throughout the whole year. As consequence, on
one side the relative humidity is not well controlled and during summer it easily reaches
value that exceed 60%, on the other side during winter the lower ventilation rates limit
the heat recovery potential and consequently the RH reductions. Among the ventilation
strategies assessed, the ones with relative humidity control sensors guarantee, the best
compromise, limiting the RH drops below 25% to around 8% of the time and exceeding
60% for only 1% of the yearly hours.
Table 4.3: Number of hours in which the relative humidity exceeds 60% or is lower than 25% on a 1-year
time frame. The abbreviations used are: bal.=balanced; unabal.=unbalanced.
RH<25% [h]
RH>60% [h]
Bedroom1
Bathroom 1
Living room
Bedroom1
Bathroom 1
Living room
VAV (bal.) with RH sensors
593
851
804
46
37
67
VAV (unbal.) with RH sensors
495
737
692
100
106
133
VAV (bal.) with CO2 sensors
980
1219
1229
48
53
84
VAV (unbal.) with CO2 sensors
806
950
955
80
107
134
VAV (bal.) with T sensors
787
1048
1006
55
68
84
VAV (unbal.) with T sensors
432
629
600
202
397
377
VAV (bal.) with CO2/RH sensors
900
1108
1111
48
50
84
VAV (unbal.) with CO2/RH sensors
733
880
866
68
82
106
Mean age of air
The use of room-based sensors does not vary considerable the mean age of air if compared
with the corresponding standard strategies (i.e. the models with the same type of sensor
are compared), as shown in Table 4.4. The mean age of air is decreased of 0.1 hours in
approximately all the reference rooms. The only ventilation strategies which show more
64
==PAGE:85==
relevant di↵erences are the balanced system with CO2 sensors and the unbalanced system
with temperature sensors. This is due to a considerable variation in the airﬂow rates if
compared to the standard strategies with the corresponding control sensor. Indeed, the
increased airﬂow rate of the balanced system with CO2 control (on yearly average +52%
compared to the model with stepwise CO2 sensor and +39% compared to the model
with proportional CO2 sensor) contributes in decreasing the mean age of air, whereas the
lowered ventilation rate of the unbalanced system with temperature sensors leads to an
increase in the mean age of air in its zones.
Table 4.4: Mean age of air [h], calculated on a one-year time frame in Bedroom 1, Bathroom 1 and Living
room.
Mean age of air [h]
Bedroom1
Bathroom 1
Living room
VAV (balanced) with RH sensors
1.1
1.2
1.1
VAV (unbalanced) with RH sensors
1.1
1.3
1.1
VAV (balanced) with CO2 sensors
0.9
1.1
1.0
VAV (unbalanced) with CO2 sensors
1.1
1.3
1.2
VAV (balanced) with T sensors
1.0
1.1
1.0
VAV (unbalanced) with T sensors
1.4
1.6
1.5
VAV (balanced) with CO2/RH sensors
1.0
1.2
1.1
VAV (unbalanced) with CO2/RH sensors
1.0
1.2
1.1
Carbon dioxide
A visual evaluation of the IAQ in terms of CO2 concentration is depicted in Figure 4.5.
The use of room-based sensors allows to constrain the build-up of CO2 more eﬃciently if
compared to the standard strategies. The indoor climate results enhanced in all rooms and
especially with the use of unbalanced CO2 control sensors. The greatest improvements
are observed in Bedroom 1 where the amount of occupied hours exceeding 900 ppm is
limited to 30% when RH sensors are installed and to a maximum of 10% with CO2
sensors. The combination of CO2 and RH sensors seems to be an appropriate solution to
control the CO2, whose concentration never exceeds 900 ppm. Only when the airﬂows are
unbalanced and controlled by temperature sensors, the indoor air quality results worsened,
compared to the standard strategies with temperature sensor, with CO2 concentrations
that in Bedroom 1 exceed 900 ppm for more than 50% of the occupied time, and peaks
65
==PAGE:86==
reaching 1600 ppm during night time.
Figure 4.5: IAQ evaluation in terms of CO2 concentration during occupancy time. 100% indicates the total
number of hours each room can be occupied, namely 6174 hours for Bedroom 1 and 3404 hours for Bathroom
1 and Living room. ’Excellent’=400-600 ppm; ’Good’=600-800 ppm; ’Fair’=800-900 ppm; ’Mediocre’=900-
1200; ’Bad’= above 1200 ppm. The abbreviations used are: bal.=balanced; unbal.=unbalanced.
4.1.3
Energy use
Standard and advanced strategies are compared in terms of energy use for ventilation
(fans, pumps and heat recovery) and heating system (see Figure 4.6). The average energy
use among all the models is 12.8 kWh/m2 for ventilation and 11 kWh/m2 for district
heating. The standard strategies, with exception of the CAV system, present lower energy
use compared to the advanced strategies.
The CAV system with minimum ventilation rates shows the minimum energy use
among all the models. This is due to the reduced electricity use for ventilation. Indeed,
66
==PAGE:87==
the energy demand for heating is in this case slightly below the average. On the other
hand, the ventilation strategy with constant air volume set to 15 l/s in the bathrooms
and 0.3 l/s per m2 in the dry rooms shows the highest energy use among all the standard
strategies considered, due to the primary energy demand of 17.5 kWh/m2 for heating,
around 60% higher than the average demand among all the models.
Figure 4.6: Primary energy use [kWh/m2] for ventilation (fans and pumps) and district heating systems.
The abbreviations used are: s.=stepwise; p.=proportional; bal.=balanced; unbal.=unbalanced.
It can be observed that the yearly energy use for heating undergoes a minimum change
among the ventilation strategies with central control sensor installed in the AHU (max 0.9
kWh/m2 di↵erence), even though the energy use for ventilation varies more considerably.
This is particularly evident in the VAV systems with central sensor on temperature.
The use of room-based sensors increases considerably the electricity use for ventilation,
especially when the airﬂows are balanced. The use of higher ventilation rates is followed by
an increment in the energy demand for heating, which is more pronounced when the return
67
==PAGE:88==
and the supply airﬂows are not balanced at the AHU. Among the advanced strategies, the
worst case in terms of energy use is represented by the ventilation strategy with unbalanced
VAV controlled by CO2 and RH sensors, whereas the one with unbalanced airﬂows and
temperature sensors shows the lowest values of energy use for both the ventilation and the
heating systems.
4.1.4
Ranking of the ventilation strategies for the control of IAQ
All the ventilation strategies are ranked through the use of a common indicator, which
expresses the trade-o↵between IAQ and energy use (see Chapter 3.6). The CAV strategy
with minimum ventilation rates is used as base case since it is characterised by minimum
energy use and maximum CO2 exposure. IAQ improvement and additional energy use
are thus calculated for every room with reference to this model, which therefore does not
appear in the ranking.
The classiﬁcation of the ventilation strategies, for Bedroom 1, Bathroom 1 and Living
room is shown in Figures 4.7a,
4.7b and
4.7c, respectively. The ventilation strategies
are positioned di↵erently in the ranking depending on the considered room. This is due
to di↵erences in the IIAQ index. Indeed, the energy index, IEnergy, is building related, so
that it has the same value independently on the room considered, whereas what varies is
the exposure index, IIAQ. This parameter is dependent on the maximum and minimum
CO2 exposure levels that the occupants experience in the di↵erent zones. Furthermore,
since the index is normalised, the increase of 1% in the exposure index represents a con-
siderable variation in the IIAQ index, with consequent impact on the ﬁnal global index of
performance Ig (see Appendix F).
The ranking is used in the analysis as an indicative study to assess if there is a common
trend among the rooms, indicating which ventilation strategies have the best impact on
IAQ and energy consumption, but taking into account the previous considerations (i.e.
the index Ig is sensitive to minimal variations of the exposure) and parallel investigations.
68
==PAGE:89==
(a) Bedroom 1
(b) Bathroom 1
(c) Living room
Figure 4.7: Classiﬁcation of the ventilation strategies based on the index Ig in Bedroom 1, Bathroom 1 and
Living room. The abbreviations used are: s.=stepwise; p.=proportional; bal.=balanced; unbal.=unbalanced.
69
==PAGE:90==
The VAV ventilation strategy with central CO2 sensor (stepwise) assures the best
compromise between IAQ improvement and energy use. The CO2 exposure is reduced
by 7%, 13% and 15% in Bedroom 1, Bathroom 1 and Living room, respectively, with an
additional energy use of 9% compared to the base case. The VAV strategy with central
RH sensor (stepwise) appears to be the second best solution in living room and bathroom,
but only the fourth best solution in Bedroom 1. This is related to the time-frame during
which the zones are actually occupied. The bedrooms are mainly used over night, whereas
bathrooms and living room are used during the day. When the RH sensor is installed in
the exhaust duct of the AHU, the airﬂows are generally increased during day-time, when
human activities like cooking or showering contribute in raising the levels of moisture in
the zones, whereas they are kept at low rates during night, when the indoor moisture
production is mainly dependent on the human metabolism. This leads to increased CO2
exposure over night in bedrooms, but it does not a↵ect the exposure in bathrooms and
living room, since no occupants are present.
Since the index Ig weights equally IAQ and energy use, it is diﬃcult to estimate
which of the parameters has the main impact in determining the position in the ranking
of the evaluated ventilation strategy. Table 4.5 shows the energy demand and the CO2
exposure of the four ventilation strategies found to achieve the best compromise between
high IAQ level and low energy use. The additional energy demand and the reduction in
CO2 exposure in comparison with the base case are shown in brackets.
Table 4.5: Energy use and CO2 exposure for the ventilation strategies found to be the four best solutions.
In brackets the additional energy use, and the IAQ enhancement are shown. The abbreviations used are:
s.=stepwise; p.=proportional.
VAV with central
CO2 sensor (s.)
VAV with central
RH sensor (s.)
VAV with central
CO2 sensor (p.)
VAV with central
RH sensor (p.)
Energy demand [kWh]
18.6 (+9%)
19 (+12%)
19.9 (+17%)
19.6 (+15%)
CO2 exposure
Bedroom 1
1.02 (-7%)
1.04 (-5%)
0.99 (-9%)
1.04 (-5%)
Bathroom 1
0.79 (-13%)
0.81 (-11%)
0.77 (-15%)
0.8 (-12%)
Living room
0.75 (-15%)
0.77 (-13%)
0.73 (-17%)
0.76 (-14%)
Among the cases considered it appears that the energy use has a greater impact in
determining the ﬁnal value of the index of global performance. Indeed, even if the venti-
lation strategies with proportional sensors guarantee higher IAQ levels, achieving greater
70
==PAGE:91==
reductions in the CO2 exposure, the strategies with stepwise sensors obtained a better
placement in the ranking. This because the larger energy use of the strategies with pro-
portional sensors is not compensated by an equivalent or greater IAQ enhancement.
4.2
Innovative ventilation strategies investigation
In the second part of the analysis, the systems resulted optimal in the previous study (see
Chapter 4.1), were object of a deeper investigation regarding the indoor air quality. The
best three systems classiﬁed in the top positions of the ranking in Chapter 4.1.4 were:
• VAV stepwise with RH central sensor
• VAV stepwise with CO2 central sensor
• VAV proportional with CO2 central sensor
However, the third system was substituted with the VAV proportional with RH central
sensor, due to the need to control the relative humidity more than the CO2. Indeed, the
VAV with CO2 control presents higher airﬂows during occupancy time, and it is therefore
able to control also the relative humidity. On the other hand, any other moisture produced
during non-occupied hours is not well controlled by this system. As already explained in
Chapter 3.1.1, the moisture production has been estimated with reference to a previous
study, but in reality each family can produce di↵erent amount of moisture, according to
the habits. Therefore, a weak control of relative humidity can result in a bad indoor air
quality, but also in damaging the building itself. On the contrary, the RH sensor results
able to control the CO2, that even raising in the bedrooms during the night, does never
reach harmful concentrations.
71
==PAGE:92==
The three systems selected have been compared with the CAV system regarding the
ability to dilute indoor contaminants, such as volatile organic compounds (VOC). Hence,
the system analyzed were:
• CAV
• VAV with stepwise central RH sensor
• VAV with stepwise central CO2 sensor
• VAV with proportional central RH sensor
As explained in Chapter 3.3, the VOC investigation was conducted following four
di↵erent methods. The results of each method are presented using the Living room as
reference room, chosen for the highest ﬂoor area and walls area, on the basis of which
the emissions of contaminants were calculated. In this part of the study, Bathroom 1 and
Bedroom 1 presented the same pattern as the Living room. All the graphs were plotted
for two winter weekdays, selected as the worst case during the year.
Firstly, the base case of each system was analysed, considering the system running at
0.3 l/s per m2, as presented in Chapter 4.1. From the results of this case it was possible
to assess if a good IAQ was accomplished and if it could have been relevant to study the
innovative strategies, applying even lower minimum ventilation rates.
The results are presented for a reference room of the apartment that is the Living
room, chosen based on the fact that it is the biggest room of the house and it presents the
highest share of contaminants emissions, due to the presence of the carpet and the larger
area of walls and ﬂoor.
4.2.1
Harmful contaminants build-up
TVOC: ”Hesaraki method” calculation
The ﬁrst calculation method used to evaluate the TVOC emission rate was the ”Hesaraki
method”, as explained in Chapter 3.3.
72
==PAGE:93==
The TVOC build-up when the ventilation is provided applying the four di↵erent strate-
gies is illustrated in Figure 4.8.
Figure 4.8: Comparison between TVOC concentration in the Living room, for the three VAV systems and
the CAV system. TVOC emission rate calculated according to ”Hesaraki method”. The highlighted area
represents the non-occupied hours.
As stated in Chapter 2.5.3, the exposure limit value (ELV) for TVOC indoor con-
centration is equal to 600 µg/m3, deﬁned for 8 hours of exposure. It can be noticed in
Figure 4.8, that all the systems perform a good control of the contaminants and the con-
centration levels are widely below the limit suggested. Moreover, it can be observed that
the CAV system presents a stable pattern, without a clear build-up of contaminants. On
the contrary, the three VAV systems, varying the airﬂow according to the sensor’s signal,
are not always able to prevent the build-up. Indeed, the three peaks visible in Figure
4.8 occur during non-occupied hours and during the night. The highest peak of the VAV
systems is about 25% higher than the highest peak visible in the pattern of the CAV
system. The VAV system with stepwise CO2 sensor shows a slightly lower peak during
the night, compared to the VAV with stepwise RH sensor and the VAV with proportional
RH sensor. This is due to the fact that the CO2 sensor detects high level of CO2 and the
consequent airﬂow is higher than the one provided by the other two systems. However,
this behaviour is noticed only during the winter season, since the systems with RH sensor
tend to increase the airﬂow during summer, due to the inﬂuence of the outdoor conditions.
73
==PAGE:94==
The reason why in the morning and in the evening lower concentrations are registered is
related to the kitchen extractor. Indeed, the exhaust in the kitchen was boosted during
cooking hours and it results in a signiﬁcant contribution in the contaminants control. The
kitchen hood operation was set with the same schedule in all the strategies investigated,
hence, the decrease of contaminants concentration during cooking hours will appear in all
the graphs presented in this chapter.
After evaluating the behaviour of the strategies using the actual minimum ventilation
rate, the same four systems were studied with a lower minimum ventilation rate.
As
illustrated in Chapter 3.3, the demand-controlled ventilation were further investigated
considering a ”new” minimum airﬂow rate, equal to 0.1 l/s per m2.
The TVOC concentration builds up in the four strategies during non-occupied hours,
when the ventilation rate is decreased to 0.1 l/s per m2 (see Figures 4.9, 4.10, 4.11 and
4.12). The graphs illustrate the four di↵erent scenarios, in which the minimum ventilation
rate have been decreased for 10 hours, 8 hours, 6 hours and 4 hours. According to the ex-
posure limit value discussed in Chapter 2.5.3, in all the scenarios the TVOC concentration
is restrained below the limit of 600 µg/m3, even in the build-up phase.
Figure 4.9: TVOC build-up in the Living room, provided of CAV system. Calculation of the TVOC emission
rate according to ”Hesaraki method”. The highlighted area represents the non-occupancy hours.
74
==PAGE:95==
Figure 4.10: TVOC build-up in the Living room, for a VAV system with stepwise RH sensor. Calculation
of the TVOC emission rate according to ”Hesaraki method”.
The highlighted area represents the non-
occupancy hours.
The scenario in which the ventilation rate was reduced for 10 hours presents the highest
peak during non occupancy, whereas the one reduced for 4 hours shows the lowest peak.
The TVOC concentration reaches the highest level in the VAV system with stepwise RH
sensor, equal to 172 µg/m3. On the other hand, the CAV system, when reduced for 10
hours, results the system with the lowest peak, equal to 139 µg/m3. It is also observed
that the TVOC concentration for the CAV system presents a constant pattern, with an
average value around 68 µg/m3, during occupancy hours consistent with the constant
airﬂow provided.
As already described in the analysis for the base case, the behaviour of the systems
during the night is slightly di↵erent. The di↵erence resides in the airﬂow provided accord-
ing to the sensors. In the VAV with stepwise CO2 sensor the airﬂow results higher than in
the systems with RH sensor, since more CO2 than moisture is measured during the night.
75
==PAGE:96==
Figure 4.11: TVOC build-up in the Living room, for a VAV system with stepwise CO2 sensor. Calculation
of the TVOC emission rate according to ”Hesaraki method”.
The highlighted area represents the non-
occupancy hours.
Figure 4.12: TVOC build-up in the Living room, for a VAV system with proportional RH sensor. Cal-
culation of the TVOC emission rate according to ”Hesaraki method”. The highlighted area represents the
non-occupancy hours.
TVOC: ”DS/EN 15251 method”
In the second method, the TVOC emission rate was calculated according to the DS/EN
15251 (see Chapter 3.3).
76
==PAGE:97==
The build-up of the TVOC in the four systems is shown in Figure 4.13. The patterns
are similar to the ones observed in the previous method, with di↵erent peaks reached. Also
in this case, the CAV system performs the best control on the contaminants, thanks to the
constant airﬂow, while the three VAV have to manage a build-up during the hours in which
the ventilation is decreased. However, the graph shows that the TVOC concentration
results always below the exposure limit value of 600 µg/m3.
Figure 4.13: Comparison between TVOC concentration in the Living room, for the three VAV systems and
the CAV system. TVOC emission rate calculated according to ”DS/EN 15251 method”. The highlighted
area represents the non-occupied hours.
The highest peak is registered for the VAV system with stepwise RH sensor, with a
TVOC concentration equal to 143 µg/m3, whereas the lowest peak is shown for the CAV
system, equal to 98 µg/m3.
The build-up of TVOC in the living room for the CAV system and the VAV with
stepwise RH sensor is represented in Figures 4.14 and 4.15, respectively. In particular, the
VAV with stepwise RH sensor was chosen as representative case for all the VAV systems,
which reported similar patterns as in the previous method. The four di↵erent lines in the
graphs show the pattern of the TVOC when the ventilation rate is decreased to 0.1 l/s
per m2 for 10 hours, 8 hours, 6 hours and 4 hours.
77
==PAGE:98==
Figure 4.14: TVOC build-up in the Living room, provided of CAV system.
Calculation according to
”DS/EN 15251 method”. The highlighted area represents the non-occupied hours.
Figure 4.15: TVOC build-up in the Living room, provided of VAV system with stepwise RH sensor. Cal-
culation according to ”DS/EN 15251 method”. The highlighted area represents the non-occupied hours.
Also in this case, the scenario in which the ventilation rate is reduced for 10 hours
presents the highest TVOC concentration during non-occupied hours and the lowest is
registered for the 4 hours reduction scenario. Again, the highest peak is shown for the
VAV system with stepwise RH sensors equal to 264 µg/m3, about the 35% higher than the
78
==PAGE:99==
one resulted using the ”Hesaraki method”. The CAV system results the system with the
least concentration build-up and its highest peak (10 hours reduction scenario) is equal
to 212 µg/m3, about the 35% higher than the ”Hesaraki method”. Overall, the systems
performance in diluting contaminants is similar to the one delineated in the ”Hesaraki
method”, with an increase of the concentration values of about 35%.
Formaldehyde
To investigate more about VOC emissions, two major contaminants were analysed and
one of them is the formaldehyde.
As for the TVOC study, also for the formaldehyde, the preliminary study regards
the base case for each system, in order to evaluate if the airﬂow is able to dilute the
contaminant. Figure 4.16 shows the build-up of the formaldehyde with the four systems
considered.
The patterns are similar to the previous two cases, but in this case the
concentration is not always below the ELV of 123 µg/m3, limit considered for one hour of
human exposure.
Figure 4.16: Comparison between formaldehyde concentration in the Living room, for the three VAV systems
and the CAV system. Formaldehyde emission rate calculated according to the reference [49]. The highlighted
area represents the non-occupied hours.
79
==PAGE:100==
With a CAV system it is possible to control the concentration and keep it within the
suggested limit of 123 µg/m2 (see Figure 4.16). Whereas, among the three VAV systems,
the behaviours are dependent on the airﬂow. The build-up is signiﬁcant and the values
are reaching considerable concentration level. However, the most relevant span of hours
to evaluate is the occupancy hours: early morning, evening and night. It can be noticed
that the VAV system with stepwise RH sensor is not able to control the contaminant
properly, due to the fact that low relative humidity is measured by the sensor during
the night. Therefore, the airﬂow results to be not enough to dilute the formaldehyde, but
again, this happens only in winter. The highest peak registered for this system reaches 133
µg/m3. In this case, the occupants would have been exposed to high level of formaldehyde
concentration for about 5 hours during the night. The VAV system with proportional RH
sensor works slightly better than the previous one, since the airﬂow follows proportionally
the sensor signal. Thus, the maximum peak during the night reaches 122 µg/m3. As
expected, the best control of the formaldehyde concentration, among the VAV systems, is
performed by the VAV with stepwise CO2 sensor, also during the night. The concentration
level during occupancy results within the ELV listed in Chapter 2.5.3, 123 µg/m3.
The formaldehyde concentration, when the minimum ventilation rate is reduced for 10
hours, 8 hours, 6 hours and 4 hours is shown in Figures 4.17, 4.18, 4.19 and 4.20.
It can be noticed that the CAV system, in all the scenarios, presents a formaldehyde
concentration about 84 µg/m3 during occupied hours (see Figure 4.17). During the hours
in which the ventilation rate is reduced, the build-up reaches the maximum concentration
of 194 µg/m3. However, when the ventilation rate is increased again, the formaldehyde
decay is visible. The interesting results regard the formaldehyde concentration in each
scenario when the occupants get back home (17:00).
In the scenario in which the re-
duction is applied for 10 hours, a concentration of 136 µg/m3 is still measured at 18:00,
exposing the occupants to high concentration for one hour. In the remaining scenarios,
the concentration at 17:00 results to be below the ELV.
80
==PAGE:101==
Figure 4.17: Formaldehyde build-up in the living room, provided of CAV system. Calculation according to
the reference [49]. The highlighted area represents the non-occupancy hours.
Figure 4.18: Formaldehyde build-up in the living room, provided of VAV system with stepwise RH sensor.
Calculation according to the reference [49]. The highlighted area represents the non-occupancy hours.
The VAV systems show higher concentration compared to the CAV system. The VAV
system with stepwise RH control presents high level of concentration also during occupied
hours, in the two winter weekdays studied. The VAV with stepwise CO2 sensor performs a
good control during the night, keeping the formaldehyde concentration below 120 µg/m3.
81
==PAGE:102==
However, in none of the scenarios with reduced ventilation rate it was registered an accept-
able concentration between 17:00 and 18:00. The only moment in which the concentration
decreases drastically is during cooking hours, when the boosting of the kitchen hood is
operating.
The VAV with proportional RH sensor, as seen in the preliminary study, is able to
control the contaminant build-up during the night, reaching the maximum level of 122
µg/m3. The scenarios in which an acceptable concentration between 17:00 and 18:00 is
measured are the one with 6 hours and 4 hours of ventilation reduction. Overall, the
formaldehyde concentration takes from one to four hours, depending on the scenario,
before decaying below the suggested limit.
Figure 4.19: Formaldehyde build-up in the living room, provided of VAV system with stepwise CO2 sen-
sor.Calculation according to the reference [49]. The highlighted area represents the non-occupancy hours.
82
==PAGE:103==
Figure 4.20: Formaldehyde build-up in the living room, provided of VAV system with proportional RH
sensor.Calculation according to the reference [49]. The highlighted area represents the non-occupancy hours.
Benzene
The second major compound analysed is the benzene. Figure 4.21 shows the benzene
concentration when the ventilation is provided by the four systems considered.
As already explained for the previous approaches, the CAV system do not present a
clear contaminants build-up. The VAV systems follow the same pattern as in the previous
methods. According to the ELV presented in Chapter 2.5.3, the four patterns result more
than ten times lower than the limit of 110 µg/m3.
A further investigation, therefore, consists in the analysis of the benzene concentration
when the minimum ventilation rate of the four selected systems is reduced to 0.1 l/s per
m2 for 10 hours, 8 hours ,6 hours and 4 hours. Figures 4.22 and 4.23 show the benzene
concentration for the CAV system and for the VAV stepwise with RH sensor. Figure 4.23
is representative for the other two VAV systems, which presented similar patterns as in
the previous methods.
83
==PAGE:104==
Figure 4.21: Comparison between benzene concentration in the living room, for the three VAV systems and
the CAV system. Benzene emission rate calculated according to the reference [49]. The highlighted area
represents the non-occupied hours.
All the systems studied are able to control the benzene concentration during occupancy
hours. The average concentration registered during occupancy results more than ten times
lower than the ELV. It is conﬁrmed also with this approach that the CAV system performs
an optimal control of the contaminants, with a maximum peak of about 9 µg/m3. The
behaviour of the three VAV systems is similar and the maximum peak reached is about 12
µg/m3. Even though the outdoor concentration was neglected and the sources were likely
underestimated, there is still a large margin to maintain the indoor concentration below
the limit.
84
==PAGE:105==
Figure 4.22: Benzene build-up in the living room, provided of CAV system. Calculation according to the
reference [49]. The highlighted area represents the non-occupancy hours.
Figure 4.23:
Benzene build-up in the living room, provided of VAV system with stepwise RH sen-
sor.Calculation according to the reference [49]. The highlighted area represents the non-occupancy hours.
85
==PAGE:106==
4.2.2
Energy use
To further compare the four scenarios, the energy use is presented in Figures 4.24a, 4.24b,
4.24c and 4.24d. As expected, the bar charts show that the energy use for heating does
not vary signiﬁcantly, while the variation of the energy use for ventilation is slightly more
considerable.
(a) CAV system
(b) Stepwise RH sensor
(c) Stepwise CO2 sensor
(d) Proportional RH sensor
Figure 4.24: Comparison between the energy use in the CAV strategy and VAV strategies, when the airﬂow
is reduced during non-occupancy for 10, 8, 6 or 4 hours.
It can be noticed in the graphs that the CAV system, that was the best system in
diluting the contaminants, resulted in the highest primary energy demand. The primary
energy demand of the base cases of the VAV systems resulted between 33% and 37% lower
than the base case of the CAV system.
The energy savings registered after the reduction of the minimum ventilation rate is
restrained in the range between 9% and 22%, respectively for the case of 4 hours reduction
and 10 hours reduction, for the CAV system. Similar situation was noticed for the VAV
systems. In particular, both the VAV systems with RH control presented a variation,
compared to the base case, between 8% and 19%, respectively for the 4 hours reduction
86
==PAGE:107==
and 10 hours reduction.
Whereas, the VAV system with stepwise CO2 sensor varied
between 7% and 16%, for the same scenarios.
4.2.3
Evaluation of contaminants build-up on long-term
As explained in Chapter 3.3, the analyses of the build-up of formaldehyde and benzene
were conducted with emission rates calculated on the short-term, speciﬁcally three days
after the installation of the sources. To understand how it would have been if the emission
rate were calculated on the long-term, the same study has been repeated using emission
models valid for each source [77].
The build-up of benzene tends to decrease after 25 days (corresponding to 600 hours)
from the installation, with the VAV system with stepwise RH sensor (see Figure 4.25). The
system represented in the graph was selected as the worst case among the four systems
studied, since it is the one that provides the lowest airﬂow rate during winter night hours.
The other three systems studied presented a similar behaviour with better control of the
contaminant. It can be noticed that on the long-term the benzene concentration decreases
signiﬁcantly and it is restrained within the limit (see Figure 4.23).
The graph shows
the benzene build-up for the four scenarios in which the ventilation rate is reduced for 10
hours, 8 hours, 6 hours and 4 hours, considering four days. Each vertical line represents 24
hours. It is noticeable that the average benzene concentration during occupancy is around
0.2 µg/m3, compared to the previous case, in which it was measured around 7 µg/m3.
However, it is important to highlight that from the ﬁrst day (day 25 after installation)
the peaks tend to slowly decrease. A further decrease in the concentration build-up is
expected in the following days.
87
==PAGE:108==
Figure 4.25: Benzene build-up on the long term, for the VAV system with stepwise RH sensor.
88
==PAGE:109==
Chapter 5
Discussion
5.1
Ventilation strategies
The use of demand-controlled ventilation does not translate automatically into a reduction
in the energy use. It was observed that on one side, the use of central sensors installed
in the exhaust duct of the AHU helped to considerably decrease the energy demand for
ventilation and heating compared to the CAV system. On the other side, the use of room-
based control sensors signiﬁcantly increases the energy use for mechanical ventilation,
with consequent impacts on the energy use for heating. Indeed, the use of mechanical
ventilation introduces high heat losses, associated with the air renewal, which can account
for up to 50% of the total heat losses of the building [78]. This because during winter
the air is supplied into the building at temperatures lower than the setpoint for heating.
The use of heat recovery is thus fundamental to limit the heat losses while preheating the
in-going air before it is supplied to the building.
The heat recovery potential is strictly dependent on the airﬂow rates.
When the
airﬂows are not balanced, the heat recovery potential can be enhanced or diminished
depending on weather the return airﬂows are greater than the supply airﬂows or not,
respectively. In the case of CAV with minimum ventilation rates and VAV with unbalanced
airﬂows the heat recovery potential is low, since the supply airﬂow at the AHU is greater
than the return one. During winter time, the in-going air is supplied to the rooms at
89
==PAGE:110==
temperatures in the range 11-15◦C, much below the setpoint of 21◦C for the heating
system, with consequent increase in the energy use for heating. On the contrary, the CAV
system with constant extraction in the bathroom at 15 l/s presents higher return airﬂow
than supply. The exhaust airﬂow at the AHU are 1.7 times higher than the supply airﬂow
and consequently the heat recovery potential is high and the in-going airﬂow is supplied at
temperatures close to the setpoint. During the coldest months, when the heating demand
is higher, the ambient air is warmed inside the heat exchanger to up to 20◦C, so only
1◦C below the setpoint for heating. However, since the supply ventilation rate is much
lower than the extraction rate, the zone heating increases to maintain the temperature
setpoint in the room, with a consequent increase in the energy demand for heating. When
supply and return airﬂows are balanced at the AHU the end temperature of the in-going
air does not depend on the type of ventilation strategy or on the type of sensor installed
(assuming equal ambient temperature and indoor temperature for the comparison), but
has the same value among all the balanced strategies calculates to be in the range 18-21◦C.
What inﬂuences the energy use is thus the ventilation rate and its variations over the year.
The monthly average airﬂow rate varies considerably with the season and with the type
of sensor installed. The systems controlled by relative humidity or temperature sensors
increase noticeably their ventilation rates during summer, following the increased temper-
atures and RH of the ambient air. Consequently, the energy demand for the ventilation
system is high, but the increase in the airﬂows does not impact the energy use for heating.
On the other hand, the ventilation rates of the strategies controlled by CO2 or by CO2 and
RH are approximately stable throughout the year and show higher values than the other
strategies during the coldest months. This explains the higher energy use for heating even
if the energy use for the ventilation system is comparable.
The supply airﬂows of the ventilation strategies with relative humidity control, CO2
control and temperature control are compared in Figures 5.1a, 5.1b and 5.1c, respectively.
It can be noticed that the strategies with room-based sensors show the highest airﬂow
rates throughout the year. Particularly, as shown in Figure 5.1a the VAV with unbalanced
airﬂows and RH room-based sensors has the highest supply airﬂow rates throughout the
year. The yearly average values of its supply airﬂow are 87%, 34% and 28% higher than in
the CAV strategy, VAV strategy with stepwise control and VAV strategy with proportional
90
==PAGE:111==
control, respectively. This occurs because, with the use of a unique sensor in the AHU,
the airﬂow rates are increased or lowered depending on the overall relative humidity level
detected in the exhaust duct and are not connected to the demand of the single zones.
The ventilation system with central RH sensor (stepwise) shows thus a considerably lower
energy use for ventilation and heating compared to the ventilation strategies with room-
based sensors (-36% compared to the VAV with unbalanced airﬂows and RH sensors; -17%
compared to the VAV with balanced airﬂows and RH sensor) Similar considerations can
be drawn for the ventilation systems with CO2 or temperature control (Figures 5.1b and
5.1c), in which the ventilation strategies with room-based sensors show the highest yearly
average ventilation rates.
Among the strategies with central stepwise sensor, the one with a CO2 control sensor
uses the lowest energy for ventilation and heating. This happens because the airﬂows are
reduced to their minimum levels during non-occupied periods, when the CO2 concentration
decays. This consideration can be observed also in Figure 5.1. When the CO2 central
sensor is used the minimum supply airﬂow (25 l/s) is suﬃcient to limit the CO2 build-
up for more than 50% of the yearly hours. On the other hand, with the use of RH or
temperature sensors the the fan rotates at minimum speed for a shorter period of time,
namely for around 40% and 5% of the yearly hours with RH or temperature control,
respectively.
Through the use of duration curves it is also possible to estimate for how long time the
supply airﬂow required in demand-controlled ventilation is increased compared to the CAV
system. Only one strategy, namely the VAV (unbalanced) with temperature sensor, shows
supply airﬂow levels coinciding to those of the CAV model for most of the time. In this
case, the supply airﬂow is increased to maximum airﬂows only for about 5% of the time.
Opposite considerations can be drawn observing the airﬂows of the other DCV strategies.
When temperature control are installed, the minimum airﬂow seems to be suﬃcient to
control temperature variations for less than 10% of the yearly hours. When CO2 sensors
are used, the supply airﬂows correspond to the minimum ventilation rate for about 35%
of the time. This means that the use of CAV systems with minimum ventilation rate can
potentially lead to a worsen indoor climate, in terms of CO2 concentration, for more than
40% of the time, compared to the systems with CO2 sensors.
91
==PAGE:112==
(a) RH control
(b) CO2 control
(c) Temperature control
Figure 5.1: Duration curve for the supply airﬂows at the AHU for the ventilation strategies with RH,
CO2 or temperature control sensors calculated on a 1-year base. The abbreviations used are: s.=stepwise;
p.=proportinal.
92
==PAGE:113==
Similar considerations are deduced from Figure 5.1a. The airﬂows controlled by RH
sensors are increased above the minimum ventilation rate for around 90% of the time.
Therefore, the minimum airﬂows of the CAV strategy seem to be suﬃcient to control the
relative humidity for only 10% of the yearly hours. However, as it will be discussed in the
following paragraphs, the use of constant airﬂows at minimum levels does not result on
either harmful CO2 concentrations or on excessive RH levels in the simulations made.
Despite the signiﬁcant variations in the energy use, the ranges of temperature, CO2
and relative humidity levels show minor di↵erences among the models. In Figure 5.2 the
RH levels of four ventilation strategies are depicted. The pattern shown are representative
of all the standard and advanced strategies investigated (minor variations, up to 2%, are
observed when comparing strategies of the same type). The ﬁrst and third quartiles are
included in the range 30%-50% for all the ventilation strategies investigated, so fulﬁlling
category I of the standard DS/EN 15251. The CAV strategy with minimum ventilation
rates shows the highest median and maximum RH values, reaching 70% during summer
(category III). Indeed, when the water content in the ambient air increases, the airﬂows are
not suﬃcient to constrain the relative humidity level below 60%. However, the RH levels
above 70% should be limited to short periods of time, since they can favourite the microbial
growth and on the long-term damage the building materials [79]. On the other hand, the
use of demand-controlled ventilation positively a↵ects the RH levels, independently of the
type of sensor installed. The relative humidity exceeds 60% for up to 100 hours in most
of the VAV ventilation strategies. One exception is represented by the VAV strategy with
room-based temperature sensors and unbalanced airﬂows, due to the low ventilation rates
especially during winter. Moreover, since the peaks in the RH are reached only for short
periods of time (maximum of six-hour intervals), the high humidity levels appear not to
be particularly problematic for the occupants or the building durability. The RH levels
reach values as low as 13%, considerably lower than the recommended limit of 25%. This
is mostly due to the absence of an humidiﬁer in the heat recovery unit. An air-to-air heat
exchanger is used to pre-heat the inlet air, with no addition of moisture, with a consequent
decrease of the relative humidity. This phenomenon is particularly emphasized during the
winter period due to the low water content of the ambient air, and during non-occupancy
hours, when no indoor moisture sources are present (e.g. human metabolism, cooking
93
==PAGE:114==
activities, etc.).
Figure 5.2: Distribution of the relative humidity levels in a 1-year period. The four strategies shown are
representative of standard strategies and advanced strategies. The grey areas depict the recommended RH
limits for category I, II and III of the standard DS/EN 15251.
For the CAV system with minimum ventilation rates and for the unbalanced VAV
strategies the minimum RH levels are slightly higher (14%). This is because, being the
return airﬂow lower than the supply airﬂow at the AHU level, the potential for heat recov-
ery is reduced and consequently the sensible heating has a lower impact in decreasing the
relative humidity in the supply air. Low levels of RH can be associated with dryness of the
mucosa membranes and consequently skin and eye irritations [78]. However, experimental
studies have demonstrated that low RH levels are not perceived as bothersome when the
air is clean. Therefore, the dry-air perception, and not the relative humidity, is often used
as indicator of the sick building syndrome, to highlight poor indoor climate conditions
[80].
Similar considerations can be drawn for the CO2 concentration, which is used as second
indicator for the indoor air quality. The CO2 levels are well controlled by all ventilation
strategies, independently on the presence or type of sensor installed. The only exceptions
94
==PAGE:115==
are made by the CAV system with minimum ventilation rate and by the VAV (unbalanced)
with room-based temperature sensors. The former does not supply suﬃcient clean air
during night time to dilute the CO2 in the bedrooms, where the concentration reaches peak
values of 1610 ppm. The latter does not control accurately the CO2 build-up during winter
time, when the airﬂow rates are low due to the low indoor temperature detected. The
median value of the CO2 concentration slightly di↵er among all the ventilation strategies.
The lowest median value (617 ppm) is presented by the ventilation strategy with balanced
VAV and room-based CO2 control sensors. Compared to this minimum value, the median
is increased of 20% and 15% for the CAV strategies, and of 17% for the VAV system
(unbalanced) with temperature control. For all the other strategies the increase is included
in the range 5% to 8%. With the use of a central sensor on CO2 the concentration increases
up to around 1400 ppm, whereas with the use of CO2 room-based sensors the build-up is
limited to around 1100 ppm. It is noticeable that, also with the use of RH or temperature
sensors, the CO2 concentration does not reach values dangerous for health, since it is
limited to maximum 1500 ppm for the strategies with central sensor and 1400 ppm for the
strategies with room-based sensors. According to the ASHRAE Standard [81], the CO2
concentration becomes hazardous only above 5000 ppm, and can cause discomfort to the
occupants (tiredness, sleepiness and headache) at around 2000 ppm [82]. Therefore, all
the models constrain the CO2 build-up at harmless levels.
The combined use of di↵erent types of sensors is also assessed. The use of RH sensors
in the wet spaces and CO2 sensors in the dry spaces allows to control simultaneously CO2
and moisture production at their sources. The indoor air quality is enhanced in respect
to both CO2 and RH levels.
Indeed, the problem recorded with the use of CO2-only
control is that the RH levels are controlled less accurately during unoccupancy periods.
On the other hand, the use of RH-only sensors limits to a lesser extent the build-up of
CO2 over night when the occupants are sleeping and no other moisture emissions, than
those linked to the human metabolism, are detected. The results show divergent trends
in terms of energy use depending if the airﬂows are balanced or unbalanced at the AHU.
When the airﬂows are balanced, the use of RH and CO2 sensors leads to a reduction in
the energy demand for ventilation and heating if compared to the VAV system (balanced)
with CO2 sensors (-10%), but to an increase in the energy use in comparison to the
95
==PAGE:116==
VAV system (balanced) with room-based RH sensors (+2%). This demonstrates that the
use of room-based CO2 sensors also in the wet spaces leads to an over-estimation of the
ventilation needed to dilute the CO2 concentration. This because, due to the mixing of
air, the polluted air is gathered and expelled from the rooms where extraction ducts are
installed, and consequently high CO2 concentrations are detected also in the bathrooms.
However, by doing so the airﬂows tend to be increased on the overall building due to
the balancing of the airﬂows (+12% on a monthly average), even if high CO2 levels in
the bathrooms are not hazardous due to the low occupancy rate of the zone. This leads
to an unnecessary increase in the energy demand for ventilation (+8% compared to the
case with combined CO2 and RH sensors). On the contrary, the combined use of RH and
CO2 sensors points out that the use of RH sensors are often not suﬃcient to optimally
constrain the buld-up of CO2.
Comparing the monthly average values of the supply
airﬂows of the VAV systems with RH-only or combined RH and CO2 sensors, di↵erent
trends are observed throughout the year. The supply airﬂow rates of the VAV system with
RH sensors are on a monthly average 25% lower during winter, but 24% higher during
summer compared to those of the VAV system with combined CO2 and RH sensors. As
consequence, during summer the control on RH levels is adequate to control also the CO2
build-up, whereas during winter the CO2 concentrations cannot be constrain below 900
ppm, due to the low airﬂows. When the airﬂows are unbalanced, the energy used for
ventilation and heating is increased, compared to the VAV (balanced) with combined RH
and CO2 sensors. Speciﬁcally, although the energy demand for the ventilation is reduced
(-13%), the energy use for heating is considerably increased (+190%). This because the
supply airﬂows are higher than the return airﬂow and consequently the heat recovery
potential is limited.
The mean age of air does not show considerable variations among standard and ad-
vanced strategies, but conﬁrms that the use of demand-controlled ventilation has a positive
e↵ect on the indoor air quality. The mean age of air of the CAV systems are slightly inferior
compared to those of an other study [11], where a mean age of air of 1.8 h was calculated.
The VAV systems allows a considerable reduction in the mean age of air compared to the
CAV system. It can be observed that with the use of a central sensor in the AHU the
mean age of air can be reduced of up to 27%, 29% and 31% for Bedroom 1, Bathroom 1
96
==PAGE:117==
and Living room, respectively. The use of room-based sensors further decreases the mean
age of air in the zones, which is reduced of up to 40%, 35% and 38%, for Bedroom 1,
Bathroom 1 and Living room, respectively.
The use of an index of global performance was ﬁnally used to rank the ventilation
strategies. However, the use of this indicator does not give any information about the
individual factors of the ratio. In Figure 5.3 the trade-o↵between CO2 exposure and
energy use is depicted for all the sixteen ventilation strategies investigated.
Figure 5.3: Trade-o↵between IAQ (CO2 exposure) and energy use for the 16 ventilation strategies inves-
tigated. The abbreviations used are: unbal.=unbalanced; bal.=balanced; s.=stepwise; p.=proportional.
It can be observed that the ventilation strategies found to have the highest index of
global performance, namely those with central sensor, are all characterised by the lowest
energy use and the highest exposure index.
It can be noticed that the use of room-
based sensors helps to considerably reduce the CO2 exposure, but tends to increase the
energy use.
Only the two solutions with variable air volume and room-based sensors
97
==PAGE:118==
on CO2 or CO2 and RH achieve both low energy demand and good IAQ. However, the
enhancement of the IAQ related to the use of room-based sensors is not suﬃcient to
compensate the increased energy use. For example, the VAV systems (balanced) with
CO2 and RH sensors show a reduction of 20% in the CO2 exposure, compared to the CAV
with minimum airﬂows (base case) against an additional energy use of 38%. The DCV
strategies with central sensors show only a slight improvement of the IAQ, at the expenses
of a limited increase in the energy use. For example, the VAV system with central CO2
sensor (stepwise) reduces the CO2 exposure of 7%, with an additional energy use of only
9%. It can be deducted that the position in the ranking of the ventilation strategies is
mainly driven by their energy demand.
The accuracy of the results is ﬁnally discussed in relation to the assumptions made
when estimating CO2 and moisture productions. The CO2 production is related to the hu-
man metabolism and thus only depends on the number of people in the rooms. Therefore,
it is believed that the results found in terms of CO2 can be realistically associated with a
family of four adult people. The CO2 concentration would appear lower for a family with
children due to the reduced CO2 emission rate of children. More uncertainties are, how-
ever, connected to the estimation of the moisture production. The moisture production
are associated to the human metabolism as well as to other indoor activities. Therefore,
they are strongly dependent on the occupant’s behaviour. For example, drying the clothes
inside the house or taking long showers would inﬂuence the moisture production and thus
the water content of the air. Also the occupant’s type a↵ects the RH levels indoor. For ex-
ample, elder people are likely to spend more time at home and potentially cook for longer
time, with higher moisture emissions associated. In case of higher moisture production
the use of RH sensors might be preferred rather than CO2 or temperature sensors. Partic-
ularly, although the VAV strategies with CO2 control were found to control eﬃciently also
the relative humidity, the RH values are expected to increase, for equal airﬂow rates, if
the indoor moisture production is increased. On the other hand, with the use of demand-
controlled ventilation with RH sensors it would still be possible to constrain the RH level
at its target values, at the expenses of higher energy use. The increased airﬂows would
thus lead to a better control of the CO2, whose peaks could be then further reduced.
98
==PAGE:119==
5.2
Innovative ventilation strategies
The implementation of the VOC emissions in the model was subject to many assumptions,
which resulted in high inﬂuences on the results. The main uncertainty is represented by
the use of TVOC as indicator for VOC (see Chapter 2.5.3). The TVOC as indicator is a
concept not clearly determined, since there is not a unique method to deﬁne it. This leads
to more doubts in evaluating TVOC concentration with respect to the limits suggested.
The main reason why it was decided to use four di↵erent calculation methods for the VOC
emission rates is related to this uncertainties about the TVOC. Two di↵erent methods
were used to calculate TVOC, resulting in di↵erent level of emissions and concentration
in the apartment. The TVOC concentration, obtained from the emission rates calculated
with the ”Hesaraki method”, resulted about 35% lower than the one calculated according
to the DS/EN 15251. Therefore, the use of the emissions of a single compound, such as
formaldehyde or benzene, chosen among the most harmful and most common in dwellings,
seemed to be more reliable. However, the four calculation methods used in this project
were based on the assumption that the emission of VOC is constant during the time.
This is not completely realistic, since the way that the materials emit compounds can be
inﬂuenced from di↵erent external factors, such as time, temperature and relative humidity.
In order to compare the hypothetical constant emissions with the emission models
of each material, the long-term emissions of formaldehyde and benzene were evaluated,
using the emission models from PANDORA database [77]. Thanks to these models, it was
possible to see how the benzene concentration decays with time. It is expected that the
formaldehyde in the long-term would have shown the same reduction in the concentration
values.
The reason why the same study on the long-term was not presented for the
formaldehyde concentration is related to the lack of a power law curve valid for paints.
Indeed, for paints, only discrete values were available. In the long-term case, the relation
with the time was considered, but not the inﬂuence of temperature and relative humidity.
It has to be underlined that the number of emitters were underestimated when calculat-
ing the emission rates for formaldehyde and benzene. Furniture and electronic equipment
were not included, due to the lack of sources, based on three-days experiments. Further-
99
==PAGE:120==
more, the outdoor concentration was considered absent in all the four methods.
This
is because, mean VOC concentration is detected at higher levels in indoor spaces than
outdoor [83] and formaldehyde outdoor concentration is considerably lower than the one
indoor [66]. Regarding the benzene, neglecting the outdoor concentration leads to a con-
siderable underestimation of the indoor concentration, that is usually greatly inﬂuenced
by the outdoor one [84]. This approximation was mainly due to the fact that the outdoor
concentration is strongly dependent on the geographical area considered and no appropri-
ated data were found. The average outdoor concentration of benzene has been measured in
European urban areas between 10 µg/m3 and 50 µg/m3, depending on the traﬃc density
[84]. Even assuming the maximum value as outdoor contribution to the indoor concen-
tration, the short-term results are calculated to be still below the ELV of 110 µg/m3, for
each hour of exposure. Indeed, the results reported in Chapter 4.2, showed a large margin
left between the average concentration and the suggested exposure limit values. However,
the benzene ELV presented in Chapter 2.5.3 was undertaken from Subtask 1 [13], for
consistency of the reference sources, but many lower limit values have been deﬁned by
several countries. Further investigations are necessary to obtain precise results about the
indoor concentration of benzene, including background concentration and supplementary
emission sources.
Comparing the ability of the systems studied in diluting the contaminants, it was
observed a trend in which the CAV system and the VAV with stepwise CO2 sensor perform
a control of contaminants more precise and e↵ective than the two VAV systems with RH
sensor. As mentioned in Chapter 4.2, this is due to the airﬂow rate that the systems
send to the rooms. When the occupants are present, the system that controls better the
contaminants, beside the CAV, is the one with CO2 sensor, since it measures high level
of bio-e✏uents. However, this is valid for winter days, but not during summer, when the
airﬂow rate of the systems with RH sensor increases due to the di↵erent outdoor conditions.
On the contrary, the CO2 sensor keeps sending the same signal the whole year, being
inﬂuenced by the bio-e✏uents of the occupants. In all the ventilation strategies, lower
values were reached by the contaminants in the morning and in the evening. Those hours
are related to cooking activities, namely breakfast and dinner, when the boosting of the
kitchen hood is scheduled. The impact of the kitchen hood on the contaminants dilution
100
==PAGE:121==
is signiﬁcant. However, in reality the occupants not necessarily turn on the kitchen hood
every time a cooking activity is happening in the kitchen.
The results obtained show that the CAV system provides a good performance in terms
of indoor air quality, at 17:00, also when the minimum airﬂow rate is reduced, from 8
to 4 hours. In this cases, the TVOC concentration was found to be always below the
limit, in both the calculation methods. Formaldehyde concentration also resulted to be
lower than the exposure limit value. However, it is important to take into account that
the emission sources were underestimated and potentially higher concentration could be
reached. In particular, the concentration measured, at 17:00, in the 8 hours scenario, is
already below the ELV, and it is equal to 107 µg/m3. Benzene concentration resulted to
be widely in the range in all the scenarios. This leaves a good margin for further emission
from outdoor or any other material which was not included in the analysis. On the other
hand, the good performance on the IAQ leads to high energy use, highest than the other
three demand-controlled strategies.
The VAV system with stepwise CO2 sensor showed the best control of contaminants,
among the three demand-controlled strategies studied, presenting also the lowest primary
energy demand. The major gain is shown by the primary energy demand that resulted
37% lower than the CAV system. This is due to the limited amount of time in which the
system is boosting, since most of the time the airﬂow rate is at the minimum level, which
results enough to dilute CO2.
A comparison with the VAV system with stepwise RH sensor and the VAV with pro-
portional RH sensor shows that the VAV with stepwise CO2 required only about 5% of
primary energy less than the other two systems. This demonstrates that the type of sensor
do not make a signiﬁcant di↵erence regarding the energy demand, but it can deﬁnitely
change the indoor air quality. Indeed, the RH and CO2 sensors detect di↵erent conditions
during the night and during non-occupied hours. As consequence, when RH sensor is
used, the airﬂow may be not enough for the occupants comfort during the night. In the
same way, during non-occupied hours, there could be high level of moisture that the CO2
sensor would not detect. Consequently, since there is no production of bio-e✏uents, the
resulting airﬂow rate could be inadequate.
101
==PAGE:122==
It can be observed that a reduction of 10 hours of the minimum airﬂow rate, could
be a potential solution in terms of primary energy demand, since it shows a saving of
22% in the CAV system and about 18% in the VAV systems, compared to the base cases.
Concerning the IAQ, the reduction for 10 hours is not impacting the relative humidity,
increasing only of 1% compared to the base case (with maximum peak at 66%), as well as
the CO2 concentration, that is at the minimum during non occupancy. On the contrary,
the only contaminant that is not perfectly controlled is the formaldehyde. This is likely
due to the fact that the data used to calculate the emission rate are measured after three
days from the installation of the products. However, independently on the scenario, the
formaldehyde concentration appeared to be within the limit when the cooking activity
starts and the kitchen hood is in operation.
The pattern of CO2 and formaldehyde concentration during the two representative
winter weekdays, for the VAV system with stepwise CO2 sensor, selected as representative
case for the other systems studied is shown in Figure 5.4. The CO2 pattern is represen-
tative for both the base case and the case with 10 hours of minimum airﬂow reduction
(less than 1% di↵erence). The formaldehyde concentration is controlled approximately in
the same way in both the base case and the system with reduced minimum ventilation,
during occupancy. The di↵erence resides in the build-up phase. The scenario with re-
duced minimum airﬂow presents a peak nearly 2 times higher than the base case, during
unoccupancy. It is noticeable that about 3 hours after the occupants get home, the two
scenarios present again the same pattern.
A deeper investigation on the occupants exposure to formaldehyde was conducted for
the ﬁrst hour after they get back home. The yearly average values, shown in Table 5.1,
are presented for the scenario in which the ventilation rate was reduced for 10 hours. It
can be observed that the average yearly values are all above the exposure limit value of
123 µg/m3, valid for 1 hour exposure. The maximum value measured in each scenario is
also higher than the limit and the amount of days this happens represents nearly 50% of
the yearly weekdays. It was also noticed that the lowest values of exposure were registered
during summer months. Hence, especially for systems provided of RH sensor, it could be
a good recommendation to install new products in summer, since the airﬂows are higher
than in winter and the formaldehyde concentration is easily diluted.
102
==PAGE:123==
Figure 5.4: Formaldehyde and CO2 concentration patterns. Di↵erence between the formaldehyde
build-up in the base case and the build-up in the 10h-reduction case. VAV with stepwise CO2
sensor, selected as representative case for the other systems.
Table 5.1: Exposure of the occupants to formaldehyde in the ﬁrst hour after they are back home
(from 17:00 to 18:00).
Strategy
Average
exposure [µgh/m3]
Max exposure
value [µgh/m3]
Hours of exposure
above ELV
CAV
128.6
201.36
177
VAV stepwise RH
145.2
262.8
158
VAV stepwise CO2
154.1
263.4
163
VAV proportional RH
143.3
262.9
150
As already mentioned, the main reason why the formaldehyde concentration, and con-
sequently the occupants exposure, are above the limit resides in the data used to calculate
the emission rate, which were based on three-days measurements after the installation
of the products. The formaldehyde emission model in Chapter 3.3 conﬁrm that the be-
haviour of formaldehyde in the long-term would be di↵erent, since most of the sources
emissions decay with the time. However, it is expected that formaldehyde would present a
similar pattern as the one shown for benzene. Indeed, the benzene average concentration
decreased from 7 µg/m3 to 0.2 µg/m3 in about 30 days. In order to validate the results, it
would be interesting to investigate how the contaminants build-up would develop in case
the formaldehyde and benzene emission rates are calculated according to their emission
103
==PAGE:124==
models, considering the inﬂuence of temperature and relative humidity.
The concentration level of formaldehyde in the ﬁrst three hours after the occupants
get back home, for the VAV system with stepwise CO2 sensor is shown in Table 5.2. This
case can be seen as representative for the VAV systems, whose concentration levels di↵er
only of 2%.
Table 5.2: Formaldehyde concentration measured in the ﬁrst three hours after the occupants get
back home.
Scenario
Formaldehyde
concentration
at 17:00 [µg/m3]
Formaldehyde
concentration
at 18:00 [µg/m3]
Formaldehyde
concentration
at 19:00 [µg/m3]
10 hours reduction
250
195
103
8 hours reduction
166
148
87
6 hours reduction
140
133
82
4 hours reduction
132
129
81
The interesting trend noticed is related to the decay rapidity, which allows the concen-
tration of formaldehyde to quickly decrease below ELV. It can be observed that for all the
scenarios the concentration at 17:00 and 18:00 is still above 123 µgh/m3. At 19:00, the
ﬁrst concentration values below the limit are measured at 19:00. It needs to be highlighted
that from 18:00 to 19:00 dinner time was scheduled. During this hour the kitchen hood is
operating in boost mode, contributing in the contaminants control. Therefore, indepen-
dently on how long the ventilation rate is reduced, the best conditions of IAQ, in terms
of formaldehyde concentration, is reached after around one hour of airﬂow boosting. A
reduction of the ventilation rate for 10 hours could be a potential energy saving solution,
if the DCV system is properly designed, to provide enough airﬂow rate during boosting
mode.
As a conclusion of the analysis conducted and the results obtained, it can be assessed
that VOC concentration studies could be an interesting mean to further address the re-
search towards the implementation of VOC sensors. The control of VOC concentration
could be an auspicious solution to enhance the performances of DCV systems, as it is
conﬁrmed also in a VOC sensing dedicated study [10].
104
==PAGE:125==
5.3
IDA ICE simulation tool
5.3.1
The choice of the tool
During the model development, di↵erent software have been investigated before choosing
the most appropriate. The ﬁrst software considered was IDA ICE, a powerful simulation
tool provided by Equa Simulation AB, able to study at the same time the energy perfor-
mance and the indoor climate of the building, besides the building physics. The only limit
found on this tool was the lack of possibility to simulate a second pollutant generated
in the building. Indeed, this software considers the indoor pollution based on the CO2
produced by humans and equipment and on the moisture load present in the wet spaces.
Focusing on the possibility to simulate more pollutants, a speciﬁc software, CONTAM,
provided by NIST Multizone Modeling Website, was studied to understand the role of
di↵erent contaminants in multizone airﬂows. The limit of this tool was found in the lack
of possibility to study the energy performance together with the indoor climate. The last
simulation tool studied is called IES VE, provided by Integrated Environmental Solutions.
The software contains di↵erent applications to perform mainly energy analysis, indoor
climate assessment and Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) simulations. The limit
in using this program was given by the time available to properly learn it and the deep
knowledge necessary to perform what was necessary for this project. The software gives
the possibility to study a second pollutant (CO), but the user interface did not allow to set
VOC emissions. Likely, a deep knowledge of the software could have been appropriated to
simulate the VOC as if it was CO, considering the di↵erent chemical composition during
the results analysis, or, another option, modifying the CO properties into the software
script.
Therefore, the main problem faced with all the software was the integration of the VOC
as indoor pollutant. The solution implemented was ﬁnally based on IDA ICE, thanks to
the larger knowledge of the tool. The limit concerning the VOC background was over-
passed creating a model in the software, in which the VOC have been simulated in the
CO2 tab, with the assumption that any sorption or desorption of VOC from materials is
considered (see Appendix G).
105
==PAGE:126==
5.3.2
IDA ICE vs Reality
One of the major di↵erences between how the AHU performs in IDA ICE and in reality
is based on the way the airﬂow is supplied or extracted in the rooms. In reality, the air is
treated by the AHU and circulated by the fans, which have to force the air through the
ductworks, compensating the pressure losses. Once the air reaches the room where needs
to be supplied, the damper perform the control of the necessary airﬂow to send into the
room. IDA ICE is not developed to simulate pressure losses in the ducts, therefore, to
simulate the ﬂow distribution in the di↵erent rooms, it is required to set maximum and
minimum airﬂow rate in each room.
The presence of the kitchen hood was implemented in IDA ICE with a dedicated
schedule. The kitchen hood was extracting at 50% of the total airﬂow during breakfast
and 100% during dinner time. In the model, the ﬂow exhausted from the kitchen hood is
connected to the bathrooms exhaust. This means that the exhaust airﬂow used in the heat
recovery is higher than it is in reality. Indeed, in practice, the kitchen hood is considered
an independent extractor, that eliminates the exhaust air separately from the rest of the
system. Keeping the exhaust air into the system loop, when the airﬂow is balanced, would
mean to increase the supply every time that the kitchen hood is boosting, increasing energy
use and causing diﬃculties for the balancing of supply and exhaust ﬂows. In general, the
exhaust of the kitchen hood resulted to be an enormous help in each system, in terms
of RH control, CO2 concentration and compounds build up. In practise, it is up to the
occupants to turn the hood on and o↵and set the appropriate level of airﬂow, according
to the intensity of the cooking activity.
Regarding the IDA ICE model, some assumptions were adopted in order to simplify
the model. This did not create particular issues to the study, since the focus was more on
the comparison between di↵erent strategies than on the deeper study of each single system.
One of the assumptions regards the choice of keeping the doors open at 25% in all the
simulations, which was undertaken because closed doors created instability in the model.
Indeed, since the building is very airtight and there are small inﬁltration, the circulation of
the air in the rooms is obstructed. Also, mechanical supply only or extraction, without any
inﬁltration, tend to create under pressure or over pressure conditions in the room, leading
106
==PAGE:127==
to errors in the simulation program. In reality, it can be di↵erent, since the opening and
closing of the doors are dependent on the users’ habits. However, the system could react
to all the doors closed with diﬃculties in balancing supply and return. For this reason, it is
always suggested to add spacing under the doors or transfer grills, to allow air circulation
even with closed doors.
Similar decision was undertaken for the windows, which were assumed to be always
closed. In reality, this appear to be a big assumption, especially in summer, when the
occupants open the windows to help cooling down the indoor spaces. Therefore, it would
be interesting to test the impact that unplanned natural ventilation would cause to the
system.
The VAV system with stepwise control was implemented in IDA ICE with three di↵er-
ent sensors, working on three levels of airﬂow, as explained in Chapter 3.3. In practise, the
control based on di↵erent levels is usually implemented with a manual control, managed
by the users. This means that, the energy use as well as the indoor air quality are in the
occupants hands.
The software, in its standard interface, is not developed to perform complicated con-
trols. Two macro controls had to be created to perform the balancing of the airﬂows.
The balancing between supply and return does not happen automatically, therefore an
advanced macro control was created. The rooms were divided into two categories: wet
room (bathrooms and kitchen) and dry rooms (bedrooms and living room). The main
concept of the control is based on the comparison between the signal obtained from the
dry rooms and the one measured in the wet rooms. Once the higher signal is found, the
airﬂow rate is recalculated. The signal is detected through a proportional control that
can be set after CO2, relative humidity or temperature. Further information about the
macro can be found in Appendix E. A second advanced macro was created to simulate the
central sensor in the exhaust duct, as implemented in the standard strategies. IDA ICE
gives the possibility to set a central sensor. However, it sends a signal for the airﬂow rate
that is equal for each room. In this case, the presence of a kitchen extractor would have
unbalanced the supply and return airﬂow. The control created was based on the signal
detected from the sensor in the exhaust duct, elaborated with a proportional control that
107
==PAGE:128==
sends the information to all the wet and dry rooms, balancing the amount of airﬂow. The
macro used is presented in Appendix E.
Regarding the VOC study, the implementation in IDA ICE, explained deeply in Ap-
pendix G, was based on many assumptions regarding the VOC emissions. The method
used may not be completely realistic, since it assumes that the VOC are generic gaseous
contaminants simulated as CO2. This method should be validated with the use of speciﬁc
contaminants simulation software. However it is beyond the objectives of this study to
further investigate possible errors in this method.
5.4
Barriers to the implementation of mechanical ventila-
tion
In the implementation of advanced ventilation systems, in reality, some barriers have to be
faced. The main limits are represented by the implementation in practise of complicated
systems, the low interest of the inhabitants in having a ventilation system and the costs
of installation and maintenance.
The implementation in practise of a system able to reduce the minimum ventilation
rate during non-occupied hours represents a ﬁrst obstacle for a possible di↵usion of this
ventilation solution. The most technological and advanced way would likely be to imple-
ment a remote control in the system. However, by doing so the system is again managed
by the occupants and not everyone would be interested or even able to do it. A simple
way to reduce the airﬂow during non-occupancy time would be manually, but in this case,
the system would be turned on again only when the occupants are back home, and a boost
mode would be necessary to dilute the residual contaminants. In this respect, it would be
very interesting to further investigate how the indoor conditions would be if a CAV or a
VAV system would be turned completely o↵during non-occupancy and turned on again
with boost mode for about two hours. This would likely lead to noise issues, that from
interviews to producers and consultants, conducted in the Annex 68, resulted one of the
main reasons why people is not interesting in installing a ventilation system.
108
==PAGE:129==
Another barrier is represented by the aesthetic. The visual impact of vents, transfer
grills and spacing under doors is considerable and normally architects are not in favour
of visible and unwieldy ventilation systems. Usually, sophisticated systems that respect
the architectural concepts result much more expensive for both installation and operation
and maintenance costs.
The initial cost of the system is another important barrier for the di↵usion of advanced
DCV systems. The use of demand-controlled ventilation often requires the installation of
expensive control sensors which increase the costs of the overall ventilation system. In
addition to the cost of the single sensor (e.g. a sensor on CO2 can cost around 4500 DKK
excluding VAT [85]), the costs for maintenance and for supplementary components need
to be added to the operating costs of the system. Moreover, the complexity of the system
increases with the number of sensors installed, since more data signals have to be managed.
The energy saving potential related to reduced airﬂows must be signiﬁcant to pay o↵the
increased initial costs. According to Mortensen [15], who analysed the cost-e↵ectiveness
of DCV systems, room-based DCV systems in multi-family buildings are currently not
expected to compensate for the additional costs of the system.
109
==PAGE:130==
110
==PAGE:131==
Chapter 6
Conclusions
• The CO2 concentration does not reach harmful levels independently on the presence
or type of sensor installed. Only with the use of the CAV system with minimum
airﬂows at 0.3 l/s per m2 peaks of 1600 ppm are reached during night-time.
• The RH is constrained to the target levels independently on the type of sensor
installed.
The RH humidity exceeds 60% for maximum periods of 6 hours and
reaches 70% only for the CAV strategy with airﬂows at 0.3 l/s per m2.
• The sensor on relative humidity are suggested in order to control potentially in-
creased indoor moisture production rates, which may vary according to the occu-
pants type.
• Generally the use of balanced airﬂows is preferable for the overall energy perfor-
mances of the building, since it increases the heat recovery potential. However, to
limit the energy use, it is considered acceptable not to balance the supply airﬂows
when the extraction in the bathrooms is boosted. Unbalances on the airﬂows are
discouraged in the opposite situation, namely when the supply airﬂow rates become
greater than the return ones.
• The use of room-based sensors considerably enhance the IAQ in comparison to the
CAV system.
However the reduction in the energy use achieved with balanced
airﬂows is in the range 11-22% compared to the CAV strategy. This is considered
not suﬃcient to compensate the increased installation costs.
111
==PAGE:132==
• The use of a central sensor installed on the exhaust duct of the AHU appears to be
the solution which achieves the best compromise in terms of energy use and IAQ.
Particularly, with the use of RH control sensor (stepwise) the energy use is reduced
of 35% compared to the CAV strategy.
• The current minimum ventilation rate results, in most of the strategies, enough to
dilute contaminants.
• The CAV system results able to dilute both formaldehyde and benzene when the
airﬂow rate is reduced to 0.1 l/s per m2 during unoccupancy.
• Both the VAV systems with RH control showed diﬃculties in diluting the formalde-
hyde during winter. Adopting these systems, it is therefore, suggested to move in a
new apartment, changing the furniture or painting the walls during summer, when
the airﬂow driven by a RH sensor are likely to be higher.
• The TVOC resulted to be a not reliable indicator to evaluate VOC concentration.
• The decrease of the minimum ventilation rate resulted to be adequate to dilute the
benzene concentration in the short-term. Furthermore, in the long-term, namely
after more than 30 days from the installation of the products, the benzene average
concentration during occupancy decreased from 7 µg/m3 to 0.2. µg/m3.
• In the short-term evaluation, the formaldehyde resulted not completely controlled
from the VAV systems. It is expected that, after about 30 days from the installation,
the emissions would decrease. Ideally, this would be the time to wait before moving
in a new house where new products are installed, if the ventilation system is not
properly designed in terms of airﬂow rates.
• On the short-term, it was not registered a signiﬁcant di↵erence between the four
scenarios of airﬂow reduction. However, it was noticed that in all the scenarios, a
good level of IAQ in terms of contaminants was reached only after around 1 hour of
ventilation in boosting mode.
• A reduction of 10 hours can be considered a potential energy saving measure, if the
design of the DCV system is appropriate to boost the airﬂow when necessary.
112
==PAGE:133==
• For a VAV system, the energy saving registered when the ventilation rate is reduced
for 10 hours, compared to the base case, is about 18%.
• The choice of low-emitting materials and products together with an adequate venti-
lation rate are the most important ways to control formaldehyde emissions.
113
==PAGE:134==
114
==PAGE:135==
Chapter 7
Future work
To conclude this study, further investigations are suggested, in order to deeply analyse
particular aspects that could have been underestimated, assumed or not considered in
this project. A sensitivity analysis is ﬁnally necessary to test the robustness of the study.
Some keys parameters to be assessed are listed in the following.
• Another type of dwelling should be investigated, to test the impact of the size and
residence type on the performances of the ventilation system.
• The method should be tested with di↵erent type of occupants living in the apartment
(retired couple, students, young couple without children). It is suggested to analyse
the main di↵erences that this would cause, such as di↵erent occupancy schedule and
moisture production. In some cases, if the occupants do not leave home for many
hours, it is not suggested to study the reduction of the minimum airﬂow. It would
be easier and more realistic to think about a manual shut-o↵and on of the system
when occupants leave home for extended period of time (e.g. holidays).
• The system should be tested when the airﬂow is integrated with natural ventilation
coming from opening of windows.
• Formaldehyde and benzene build-up should be studied accounting for an increased
number of indoor sources (e.g.
furnitures, cabinets, electronic equipments, etc.).
Moreover, it would be interesting to improve the current study using a dedicated
115
==PAGE:136==
software for contaminants simulations (i.e. CONTAM or IAQx, provided by EPA),
in order to verify the truthfulness of the results.
• Field measurements could guarantee correct estimations of formaldehyde and ben-
zene emission rates. This would be also useful to validate the simulation model.
• Sorption and desorption of VOC should be considered, as well as inﬂuence of temper-
ature and relative humidity on the contaminants emission rates from indoor sources.
• Further investigations, under di↵erent assumptions, are suggested to verify if the
ventilation rate can be reduced for the entire unoccupancy period without compro-
mising the IAQ.
• It is suggested to assess what would be the impact of turning completely o↵a CAV or
VAV system, during non-occupied hours and turning it on again when the occupants
are back, adopting a boosting mode for one or two hours.
• The method should be tested also in a di↵erent climate zones, such as moderate and
warm climate. This would likely impact the relative humidity, the air temperature
and the system control behaviour.
116
==PAGE:137==
Bibliography
[1] B. Chenari, J. D. Carrilho, and M. Gameiro da Silva. Towards sustainable, energy-
eﬃcient and healthy ventilation strategies in buildings: A review. Renewable and
Sustainable Energies Reviews, 59:1426–1447, 2016.
[2] J. Laverge, N. Van Den Bossche, N. Heijmansb, and A. Janssens. Energy saving
potential and repercussions on indoor air quality of demand controlled residential
ventilation strategies. Building and Environment, 46:1497–1503, 2011.
[3] A. Gunner, G. Hultmark, A. Vorre, A. Afshari, and N.C. Bergsøe. Energy-saving
potential of a novel ventilation system with decentralised fans in an oﬃce building.
Energy and Buildings, 84:360–366, 2014.
[4] L. P´erez-Lombard, J. Ortiz, and C. Pout. A review on buildings energy consumption
information. Energy and buildings, 40:394–398, 2008.
[5] International Energy Agency. Technology roadmap energy-eﬃcient buildings: Heating
and cooling equipment. 2011.
[6] R. Mc Dowall. Fundamentals of HVAC systems. American Society of Heating, Re-
frigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers Inc., Atlanta, 2007.
[7] A. Hesaraki, J.A. Myrhen, and S. Holmberg. Inﬂuence of di↵erent ventilation levels
on indoor air quality and energy savings: A case study of a single-family house.
Sustainable Cities and Society, 19:165–172, 2015.
[8] C. A. Redlich, J. Sparer, and M. R. Cullen. Sick-building syndrome. Lancet, 349:1013–
1016, 1997.
117
==PAGE:138==
[9] Ministero della Salute. Inquinamento dell’aria indoor. Available:
http://www.salute.gov.it/portale/temi/p26.jsp?lingua=italianoid=4385area=indormenu=vuoto/
[Visited online on 05/2017] (In Italian).
[10] J. Kolarik. Demand specifying variables and current ventilation rate requirements
with respect to the future use of VOC sensing for dcv control. Paper presented at
33rd AIVC conference – 2nd TightVent conference, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2012.
[11] S. Holmberg A. Hesaraki. Demand-controlled ventilation in new residential buildings:
consequences on indoor air quality and energy savings. Indoor and Built Environment,
24:162–173, 2015.
[12] International Energy Agency. IEA −EBC Annex 68. Available:
http://www.iea-ebc-annex68.org/ [Visited online on 01/2017].
[13] M.O. Abadie and P. Wargocki. Indoor air quality design and control in low-energy
residential buildings. subtask 1: Deﬁning the metrics. IEA-EBC Annex 68, 2016.
[14] S. Kirchner, J-F. Arenesi, C. Cochet, C. Duboudin M. Derbez, P. Elias, A. Gre-
goire, B. J´edor, N. Pasquier J-P. Lucas, M. Pigneret, and O. Ramalho. Campagne
nationale logements: ´etat de la qualit´e de l’air dans les logements fran¸cais. Rapport
ﬁnal DDD/SB – 2006-57. Observatoire de la Qualit´e de l’Air Int´erieur, 2006.
[15] D.K. Mortensen, T. R. Nielsen, S. Svendsen, and L.D. Christo↵ersen. Demand con-
trolled ventilation for multi-family dwellings. demand speciﬁcation and and system
design.
Technical University of Denmark, Department of Civil Engineering, PhD
Thesis, 2011.
[16] J. Laverge, A. Janssens, I. Pollet, and A. Vens. Performance of natural, exhaust,
demand controlled exhaust and heat recovery residential ventilation systems as pre-
scribed by the standards in 5 european countries. Contribution to building physics,
pages 909–916, 2013.
[17] US Department of Energy. Energy.gov, energy saver. Available:
https://energy.gov/energysaver/whole-house-ventilation [Visited online on 01/2017].
118
==PAGE:139==
[18] A. A. Saleem, M. Bady, S. Ookawara, and A.K. Abdel-Rahman. Achieving standard
natural ventilation rate of dwellings in a hot-arid climate using solar chimney. Energy
and Buildings, 133:360–370, 2016.
[19] K. M. Smith and S. Svendsen. Development and operation of decentralized ventila-
tion for indoor climate and energy performance. Technical University of Denmark,
Department of Civil Engineering, 2015.
[20] J. Fern`andez-Seara, R. Diz, F. J. Uh`ıa, A. Dopazo, and J. M. Ferro. Experimen-
tal analysis of an air-to-air heat recovery unit for balanced ventilation systems in
residential buildings. Energy Conversion and Management, 52:635–640, 2011.
[21] Building Science Corporation −12 September 2013. buildingscience.com. Available:
https://buildingscience.com/documents/information-sheets/info-611-balanced-
ventilation-systems [Visited online on 12/2016].
[22] P.G. Wang, M. Scharling, and K.P. Nielsen.
2001-2010 design reference year for
denmark. Technical report 12-17, Danish Meteorological Institute, Copenhagen, 2012,
Available: http://www.dmi.dk/ﬁleadmin/Rapporter/TR/tr12-17.pdf.
[23] A. Mardiana-Idayu and S.B. Ri↵at. Review on heat recovery technologies for building
applications. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 16:1241–1255, 2012.
[24] T.K. Nielsen and C. Drivsholm. Energy eﬃcient demand controlled ventilation in
single family houses. Energy and Buildings, 42:1995–1998, 2010.
[25] V. Pavlovas. Demand controlled ventilation: A case study for existing swedish mul-
tifamily buildings. Energy and Buildings, 36:1029–1034, 2004.
[26] M. Kim and L. Baldini. Energy analysis of a decentralized ventilation system com-
pared with centralized ventilation systems in european climates: Based on review of
analyses. Energy and Buildings, 111:424–433, 2016.
[27] H. Manz, H. Huber, A. Schalin, A. Weber, M. Ferrazzini, and M. Studer. Performance
of single room ventilation units with recuperative or regenerative heat recovery. En-
ergy and Buildings, 31:37–47, 2000.
119
==PAGE:140==
[28] A. Novoselac and J. Srebric. A critical review on the performance and design of com-
bined cooled and ceiling and displacement ventilation system. Energy and Buildings,
34:497–509, 2002.
[29] Trox Techinik. trox.de. Available: https://www.trox.de/en/products/decentralised-
ventilation-systems-1fcdcd557bb423bc [Visited online on 05/2017].
[30] Airmaster. Decentral boligventilation. Available: http://www.airmaster.dk/decentral-
ventilation/decentral-boligventilation. [Visited online on 01/2017].
[31] The Danish Transport and Construction Agency. Building regulation 2015. Retrived
from - http://bygningsreglementet.dk, 2015.
[32] Dansk Standard.
Input-parametre til indeklimaet ved design og bestemmelse af
bygningers energimæssige ydeevne vedrørende indendørs luftkvalitet, termisk miljø,
belysning og akustik. 2007.
[33] A. Vanek. Demand control ventilation strategies for high indoor air quality in danish
residences. Technical University of Denmark Department of Civil Engineering, MSc
Thesis, 2017.
[34] Lindab. Lindab.com. Available: http://www.lindab.com/dk/pro/pages/ [Visited on-
line on 01/2017].
[35] Exhausto. Living boligventilation. Available: http://www.exhausto.dk/projektering
[Visited online on 01/2017].
[36] Dantherm. Boligventilation. Available: https://www.dantherm.com/dk/ventilation/
boligventilation/. [Visited on 01/2017].
[37] Nilan. Boligloesninger. Available: http://www.nilan.dk/da−dk/forside/loesninger/
boligloesninger. [Visited online on 01/2017].
[38] Genvex. Videnscenter. Available: http://www.genvex.dk/videnscenter/. [Visited on-
line on 01/2017].
[39] Systemair. Husvent. Available: https://www.systemair.com/dk/Husvent/. [Visited
online on 01/2017].
120
==PAGE:141==
[40] Venti.
Boligventilation.
Available:
http://www.venti.dk/Boligventilation.50.aspx.
[Visited online on 01/2017].
[41] InVentilate Sustainable Ventilation. inventilate.dk. Available:
http://www.inventilate.dk/Mikroventilation [Visited online on 05/2017].
[42] Øland. Oeland.dk. Available: https://oeland.dk/. [Visited online on 01/2017].
[43] Lindab. Lindab pascal. Available: http://www.lindab.com/dk/pro/products/Pages/pascal.aspx.
[Visited online on 01/2017].
[44] WHO. Constitution of the world health organization. International Health Confer-
ence, 1948.
[45] J. Laverge and A. Janssens. Heat recovery ventilation operation traded o↵against
natural and simple exhaust ventilation in europe by primary energy factor, carbon
dioxide emission, household consumer price and exergy. Energy and Buildings, 50:315–
323, 2012.
[46] WHO. Indoor air pollution, health and the burden of disease. Indoor air thematic
brieﬁng 2, 2002.
[47] WHO. WHO handbook on indoor radon: a public health perspective. World Health
Organization Report, 2009.
[48] L.G. M˚ansson and S.A. Svennberg. Demand controlled ventilating systems. Energy
Conservation in Buildings and Community Systems Program. Annex 18, 1992.
[49] T. Salthammer and E. Uhde. Organic indoor air pollutants - occurrence, measure-
ment, evaluation. 2009.
[50] U.S. Government Publishing Oﬃce. ecfr.gov. Available: https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-
bin/text-idx?SID=d60047cead92f29f6e2a9926b773adb9mc=truenode=se40.2.511100rgn =
div8[V isitedonlineon05/2017].
[51] EU Directive et al. Directive 2004/42/ce of the european parliament and of the council
of 21 april 2004 on the limitation of emissions of volatile organic compounds due to
the use of organic solvents in certain paints and varnishes and vehicle reﬁnishing
121
==PAGE:142==
products amending directive 1999/13/ec. Oﬃcial Journal of the European Union L,
143, 2004.
[52] WHO. Indoor air quality: Organic pollutants. EURO Reports and Studies No. 111,
1989.
[53] AgBB. Evaluation procedure for VOC emissions from building products. Committee
for Health-related Evaluation of Building Products, 2015.
[54] P. Wolko↵. Impact of air velocity, temperature, humidity, and air on long-term VOC
emissions from building products. Atmospheric Environment, 32:2659–2668, 1998.
[55] K. Rumchev, H. Brown, and J. Spickett. Volatile organic compounds: do they present
a risk to our health? Reviews on environmental health, 22(1), 2007.
[56] H. J¨arnstr¨om, K. Saarela, P. Kalliokoski, and A.L. Pasanen. Reference values for in-
door air pollutant concentrations in new, residential buildings in ﬁnland. Atmospheric
Environment, 40:7178–7191, 2006.
[57] P. Wolko↵. How to measure and evaluate volatile organic compound emissions from
building products. a perspecive. Atmospheric Environment, 32:2659–2668, 1998.
[58] H.N. Knudsen, U.D. Kjaer, P.A. Nielsen, and P. Wolko↵.
Sensory and chemical
characterization of VOC emissions from building products. impact of concentration
and air velocity. Atmospheric Environment, 33:1217–1230, 1999.
[59] S.P. Corgnati and S. Viazzo. Indoor air quality in classrooms: ﬁled campaign by ques-
tionnaires and measurements. AIVC 25th conference, air inﬁltration and ventilation
centre, pages 15–17, 2004.
[60] European Commission. Total volatile organic compounds (TVOC) in indoor air qual-
ity. Environment and Quality of life. Report No 19, 40:7178–7191, 2006.
[61] C. Krause, W. Mailahn, R. Nagel, C. Schulz, B. Seifert, and D. Ullrich. Occurence of
volatile organic compounds in the air of 500 homes in the federal republic of germany.
Indoor Air ’87, Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Indoor Air Quality
and Climate, 1:102–106, 1987.
122
==PAGE:143==
[62] P.A. Clausen, P. Wolko↵, E. Holst, and P.A. Nielsen. Long term emission of volatile
organic compounds from waterborne paints. methods of comparison.
Indoor Air,
1:562–576, 1991.
[63] H. Guo, S.C. Lee, L.Y. Chan, and W.M. Li. Risk assessment of exposure to volatile
organic compounds in di↵erent indoor environments. Environmental Research, 94:57–
66, 2004.
[64] IARC. Overall evaluations of carcinogenicity: an updating of iarc monographs vol-
umes 1 to 42. IARC Monogr Eval Carcinog Risks Hum Suppl., 7:1–440, 1987.
[65] WHO. Exposure to benzene: a major public health concern. Geneva, World Health
Organization, 2010.
[66] WHO. WHO guidelines for indoor air quality: Selected pollutants. Geneva: World
Health Organization, 2010.
[67] IARC. Formaldehyde, 2-butoxyethanol and 1-tert-butoxypropan-2-ol. IARC Mono-
graphs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals to Humans, 88:39–
325, 2006.
[68] E. Zilio. Analysis of building services systems for ﬂexible operation of buildings in
smart city district nordhavn. Technical University of Denmark, Department of Civil
Engineering, 2016.
[69] L.J. Sarran. Impact of building design parameters on energy ﬂexibility in nordhavn
district. Technical University of Denmark, Department of Civil Engineering, 2016.
[70] S. Carlucci, G. Lobaccaro, Y. Li, E. Catto Lucchino, and R. Ramaci. The e↵ect of
spatial and temporal randomness of stochastically generated occupancy schedules on
the energy performance of a multiresidential building. Energy and Buildings, 127:279–
300, 2016.
[71] Exhausto. Standardemhætter. Available: https://www.exhausto.dk/produkter/ESL.
[Visited online on 05/2017].
[72] M. Sandberg and M. Sjoberg. The use of moments for assessing air quality in venti-
lated room. Building and Environment, 18:181–197, 1983.
123
==PAGE:144==
[73] EQUA Simulation AB. User manual ida indoor climate and energy 4.5. 2013.
[74] WHO. Assessment of exposure to indoor air pollutants. WHO Regional Publications
European Series No. 78, 1997.
[75] C. Toureilles. Qualiﬁcation ´energ´etique et sanitaire des syst`emes d’´epuration int´egr´es
aux r´eseaux de ventilation. Universit´e de La Rochelle, 2015. (In French).
[76] G.J. Raw, S.K.D. Coward, V.M. Brown, and D.R. Crump. Exposure to air pollutants
in english homes. Journal of Exposure Analysis and Environmental Epidemiology,
14:85–94, 2004.
[77] M.O. Abadie and P. Blondeau. Pandora database: A compilation of indoor air pol-
lutant emissions. HVAC & R Research, 17:602–613, 2011.
[78] M. Woloszyn, T. Kalamees, M.O. Abadie, M. Steeman, and A.S. Kalagasidis. The
e↵ect of combining a relative-humidity-sensitive ventilation system with the moisture-
bu↵ering capacity of materials on indoor climate and energy eﬃciency of buildings.
Building and Environment, 44:515–524, 2009.
[79] D. Mortensen. Comparison of a constant air volume (CAV) and a demand controlled
ventilation (DCV) system in a residential building. 8th Symposium on building Physics
in the Nordic Countries, Copenhagen (Denmark), 2008.
[80] J. Sundell and T. Lindvall.
Indoor air humidity and sensation of dryness as risk
indicators of sbs. Indoor Air, 3:382–390, 1993.
[81] ASHRAE Standard. Ventilation for acceptable indoor air quality. Atmospheric En-
vironment, 2010.
[82] U. Satish, M.J. Mendell, K. Shekhar, T. Hotchi, D. Sullivan, S. Streufert, and W.J.
Fisk. Is CO2 an indoor pollutant? direct e↵ects of low-to-moderate CO2 concen-
trations on human decision-making performance. Environmental health perspectives,
120, 2012.
[83] R.D. Edwards, J. Jurvelin, K. Saarela, and M. Jantunen. VOC concentrations mea-
sured in personal samples and residential indoor, outdoor and workplace microenvi-
ronments in expolis-helsinki, ﬁnland. Atmospheric Environment, 35:4531–4543, 2001.
124
==PAGE:145==
[84] H. Skov, A.B. Hansen, G. Lorenzen, H.V. Andersen, P. Løfstrøm, and C.S. Chris-
tensen. Benzene exposure and the e↵ect of traﬃc pollution in copenhagen, denmark.
Atmospheric Environment, 35:2463–2471, 2001.
[85] Lindab. Katalog lindab. Available: http://katalog.lindab.dk/Ventilation/Prislister/
[Visited online on 05/2017].
[86] Rugidea.com. Standard american sizes for carpets and runners. Available:
http://www.rugidea.com/AmericanSizes.html [Visited online on 05/2017].
125
==PAGE:146==
126
==PAGE:147==
Appendices
A
Building materials
The total thickness and thermal conductivity of walls and ﬂoor used in the IDA ICE model
are presented in Table 1. The speciﬁc materials and the layers composition are listed in
Table 2.
In the ﬂoor structure an assumption has been made to overpass a limit of the software
in the layers composition set up.
The original hollow concrete layer of the ﬂoor has
been simulated considering an equal concrete layer characterized by the average thermal
properties of concrete and air, weighted on their percentage of presence in the composition
[68, 69].
Table 1: Total thickness and thermal conductivity of walls and ﬂoor [68, 69].
Construction element
Thickness [m]
Thermal conductivity
[W/mK]
External wall
0.558
0.125
Internal ﬂoor
0.456
0.266
Bathroom ﬂoor
0.506
0.916
Finally, the windows characteristics are listed in Table 3.
127
==PAGE:148==
Table 2: Building materials implemented in IDA ICE [68, 69]
Envelope element
Layer material
Thickness
[m]
Thermal
conductivity
[W/mK]
Thermal
capacity
[J/kgK]
Density
[kg/m3]
External walls
(from inside)
Concrete
0.15
1.65
1000
2200
Mineral wool
0.275
0.037
750
20
Air
0.025
0.139
1006
1.2
Brick
0.108
1.2
840
1600
Internal ﬂoor
(from the top)
Oak planks
0.03
0.17
2000
750
Concrete
0.06
1.65
1000
2200
Termotec
insulation
0.146
0.046
982
98
Hollow
concrete
0.22
0.918
1000
880
Bathroom ﬂoor
(from the top)
Concrete
0.1
1.65
1000
2200
Air
0.126
0.57
1006
1.2
Hollow
concrete
0.22
0.918
1000
880
Lightweight
concrete*
0.06
0.15
1050
500
Bearing internal
wall
Concrete
0.2
1.65
1000
2200
Non-bearing
internal wall
Aerated
concrete
0.1
0.14
1000
535
Bathroom wall
Lightweight
concrete
0.08
0.15
1050
500
Table 3: Windows properties [68, 69].
Window type
Glazing thickness
[mm]
Average frame
fraction [%]
U-value
g-value
LT
Triple glazing
4-18Ar-4-18Ar-4
48
22
0.81
39
72
128
==PAGE:149==
B
Overheating hours and solutions applied
The overheating problem was solved without the use of any cooling system. The apart-
ment was provided of a shading system, working according to the illuminance coming
through the windows. The shading control was set according to a previous study [69, 68]
proportionally to the illuminance, under the assumption that in reality the occupants
decide when to draw them.
The overheating was therefore solved and the yealry hours above 27◦C resulted to be
lower than 100. The number of yearly hours above 27◦C in each room of the apartment
is shown in Table 4.
Table 4: Overheating hours.
Room
Hours above 27 ◦C
Bedroom 1
1
Bathroom 1
23
Bedroom 2
0
Living room
3
Bedroom 3
1
Depot
0
Bathroom 2
25
The overheating data in Table 4 are referred to the CAV system working constantly
at minimum ventilation rate, used as worst reference case.
129
==PAGE:150==
C
Occupancy schedule
The occupancy schedule for all bedrooms, bathrooms and living rooms are shown in Ta-
ble 5. A reference week is represented, showing the variations i the occupancy among
weekdays, Saturdays and Sunday. Between Monday and Friday the occupants leave the
house from 7:00 to 17:00, whereas they are assumed to be at home during weekends. For
each occupied day the sum of the people present in the house is four. The MET values
corresponding to the activities carried out in the house are shown in Table 6. MET levels
equal to 0.8, 1.2 and 2 corresponds to activities as resting, sedentary and cooking or light
cleaning, respectively [48]. The MET multiplier used in IDA ICE is shown in Table 7. It
is calculated as:
Mt = Ot · METt
[MET]
(1)
where Mt is the MET multiplier at time t, Ot is the occupancy schedule at time t and
METt is the MET value associated to the corresponding activity level at time t.
130
==PAGE:151==
Table 5: Occupancy schedule during weekdays, Saturdays, Sunday and holidays for bedrooms, bathrooms and living room. The abbreviations used are: B1=Bedroom
1; B2=Bedroom 2; B3=Bedroom 3; BH1=Bathroom 1; BH2=Bathroom 2; LV=Living room.
Number of people (Weekdays)
0:00
1:00
2:00
3:00
4:00
5:30
6:00
7:00
8:00
9:00
10:00
11:00
12:00
13:00
14:00
15:00
16:00
17:00
18:00
19:00
20:00
21:00
22:00
23:00
0:00
B1
2
2
2
2
2
0.25
0.25
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.25
0.25
0.15
0.15
0.15
2
2
2
B2
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.25
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.25
0.25
0.15
0.15
1
1
1
1
B3
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.25
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.25
0.25
0.15
0.15
1
1
1
1
BH1
0
0
0
0
0
0.15
0.7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.25
0.25
0.15
0.3
0.3
0
0
0
BH2
0
0
0
0
0
0.15
0.7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.25
0.25
0.15
0.15
0.15
0
0
0
LV
0
0
0
0
0
1.45
1.85
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2.75
2.75
3.25
3.1
1.4
0
0
0
Sum
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
Number of people (Saturday)
B1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.3
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
2
B2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.25
0.25
0.75
0.75
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
1
1
1
B3
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.25
0.25
0.75
0.75
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
1
1
1
BH1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.7
0.25
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.25
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.25
0.3
0.15
0.3
0
BH2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.7
0.25
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.25
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.25
0.15
0.15
0.15
0
LV
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1.85
2.75
1.95
1.95
3.25
3.25
3.05
2.8
2.95
2.95
3.25
3.25
3.05
3.1
1.55
1.4
0
Sum
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
Number of people (Sunday and holidays)
B1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
0.25
0.25
0.75
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
2
2
2
B2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.25
0.25
0.75
0.25
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.5
0.5
0.25
0.15
0.15
0.15
1
1
1
1
B3
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.25
0.25
0.75
0.25
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.5
0.5
0.25
0.15
0.15
0.15
1
1
1
1
BH1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.7
0.25
0.15
0.5
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.25
0.25
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.25
0.25
0
0
0
BH2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.7
0.25
0.15
0.5
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.25
0.25
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.25
0.25
0
0
0
LV
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1.85
2.75
1.45
2.35
3.25
3.25
3.25
2.35
2.35
3.05
3.25
3.25
3.05
1.35
0
0
0
Sum
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
131
==PAGE:152==
Table 6: Occupants’ activity level [MET] during weekdays, Saturdays, Sunday and holidays for bedrooms, bathrooms and living room. The abbreviations used are:
B1=Bedroom 1; B2=Bedroom 2; B3=Bedroom 3; BH1=Bathroom 1; BH2=Bathroom 2; LV=Living room.
Activity level - MET (Weekdays)
00:00
01:00
02:00
03:00
04:00
05:30
06:00
07:00
08:00
09:00
10:00
11:00
12:00
13:00
14:00
15:00
16:00
17:00
18:00
19:00
20:00
21:00
22:00
23:00
00:00
B1
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
1.2
1.2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
0.8
0.8
0.8
B2
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
1.2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
B3
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
1.2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
BH1
0
0
0
0
0
1.2
1.2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
0
0
0
BH2
0
0
0
0
0
1.2
1.2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
0
0
0
LV
0
0
0
0
0
1.2
1.2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1.2
2
1.2
1.2
1.2
0
0
0
Activity level - MET (Saturdays)
B1
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
0.8
B2
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
0.8
0.8
0.8
B3
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
0.8
0.8
0.8
BH1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
0
BH2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
0
LV
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
0
Activity level - MET (Sunday and holidays)
B1
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
1.2
1.2
2.5
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
0.8
0.8
0.8
B2
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
1.2
1.2
2.5
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
B3
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
1.2
1.2
2.5
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
BH1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
0
0
0
BH2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
0
0
0
LV
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1.2
1.2
1.2
2.5
2
2
2
1.2
1.2
1.2
2
2
1.2
1.2
0
0
0
132
==PAGE:153==
Table 7: MET multiplier used to set the occupants’ schedules in IDA ICE for bedrooms, bathrooms and living room. The abbreviations used are: B1=Bedroom 1;
B2=Bedroom 2; B3=Bedroom 3; BH1=Bathroom 1; BH2=Bathroom 2; LV=Living room.
MET multiplier (Weekdays)
0:00
1:00
2:00
3:00
4:00
5:30
6:00
7:00
8:00
9:00
10:00
11:00
12:00
13:00
14:00
15:00
16:00
17:00
18:00
19:00
20:00
21:00
22:00
23:00
0:00
B1
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.3
0.3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.3
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.8
0.8
0.8
B2
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.3
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
B3
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.3
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
BH1
0
0
0
0
0
0.18
0.84
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.3
0.3
0.18
0.36
0.36
0
0
0
BH2
0
0
0
0
0
0.18
0.84
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.3
0.3
0.18
0.18
0.18
0
0
0
LV
0
0
0
0
0
0.435
0.555
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.825
1.375
0.975
0.93
0.42
0
0
0
MET multiplier (Saturday)
B1
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.36
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.8
B2
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.3
0.3
0.9
0.9
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.36
0.36
0.36
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.8
0.8
0.8
B3
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.3
0.3
0.9
0.9
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.36
0.36
0.36
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.8
0.8
0.8
BH1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.84
0.3
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.3
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.3
0.3
0.18
0.18
0
BH2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.84
0.3
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.3
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.3
0.18
0.18
0.18
0
LV
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.555
0.825
0.585
0.585
1.625
0.975
0.915
0.84
0.885
0.885
1.625
0.975
0.915
0.93
0.465
0.465
0
MET multiplier (Sunday and holidays)
B1
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.3
0.3
1.875
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.8
0.8
0.8
B2
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.3
0.3
1.875
0.3
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.6
0.6
0.3
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
B3
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.3
0.3
1.875
0.3
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.6
0.6
0.3
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
BH1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.84
0.3
0.18
0.6
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.3
0.3
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.3
0.3
0
0
0
BH2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.84
0.3
0.18
0.6
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.3
0.3
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.3
0.3
0
0
0
LV
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.555
0.825
0.435
1.46875
1.625
1.625
1.625
0.705
0.705
0.915
1.625
1.625
0.915
0.405
0
0
0
133
==PAGE:154==
D
Internal gains and moisture production
Extra moisture loads than those produced by human bio-e✏uents are set in IDA ICE
for taking into account the moisture production during bathroom use, showers, cooking
and cleaning activities. The schedules implemented in IDA ICE are shown in Table 8.
The schedules for bathroom use and shower are implemented in both Bathroom 1 and
Bathroom 2. The schedules for cooking are set as equipment in the living room. Cleaning
activities are assumed to happen in all rooms.
The schedule used in IDA ICE for the lighting system is shown in Table 9. The same
schedule is used for Bedroom 1, Bathroom 1, Bathroom 2 and Living room. Bedroom 1
and Bedroom 2 have a di↵erent light schedule during weekdays.
134
==PAGE:155==
Table 8: Schedules of the extra moisture loads implemented in IDA ICE.
Extra moisture load - schedule weekdays
0:00
1:00
2:00
3:00
4:00
5:30
6:00
7:00
8:00
9:00
10:00
11:00
12:00
13:00
14:00
15:00
16:00
17:00
18:00
19:00
20:00
21:00
22:00
23:00
0:00
Bathroom use
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
Shower
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Cooking
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.45
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1.33
0
0
0
0
0
0
Cleaning
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Extra moisture load - schedule Saturday
Bathroom use
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
Shower
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
Cooking
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.45
0
0
0
0.57
0
0
0
0
0
1.33
0
0
0
0
0
0
Cleaning
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Extra moisture load - schedule Sunday and holidays
Bathroom use
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
Shower
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Cooking
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.45
0
0
0.57
0
0
0
0
0
1.33
0
0
0
0
0
0
Cleaning
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
135
==PAGE:156==
Table 9: Schedules of the lighting system implemented in IDA ICE. The abbreviations used are: B1=Bedroom 1; B2=Bedroom 2; B3=Bedroom 3; BH1=Bathroom
1; BH2=Bathroom 2; LV=Living room.
Light schedule - Weekdays
0:00
1:00
2:00
3:00
4:00
5:30
6:00
7:00
8:00
9:00
10:00
11:00
12:00
13:00
14:00
15:00
16:00
17:00
18:00
19:00
20:00
21:00
22:00
23:00
0:00
B1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
B2
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
B3
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
BH1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
BH2
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
LV
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
Light schedule - Saturday
B1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
B2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
B3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
BH1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
BH2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
LV
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Light schedule - Sunday and holidays
B1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
B2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
B3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
BH1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
BH2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
LV
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
136
==PAGE:157==
E
IDA ICE macro
Balanced ventilation with central control sensor in the AHU
When the control sensor is installed in the AHU, the airﬂows are controlled centrally based
on the levels of CO2, RH or temperatures detected in the exhaust duct. In IDA ICE the
airﬂows are then regulated by sending the same signal to all the rooms. The airﬂow in
each room is then calculated through a linear transformation, which transforms the signal
into a corresponding value in l/s. A signal equal to 1 means that the maximum airﬂow is
required, whereas a signal equal to 0 corresponds to minimum airﬂow.
In IDA ICE the central control signal is simulated through the use of the supervisory
control, whose output is connected to all the zones in the building. A Macro had to be
made to balance the airﬂows, since the kitchen hood has its own schedule (based on daily
cooking hours), which is not associated to the signal generated in the supervisory control.
The linear transformation used to calculate the extraction rate (in l/s) of the kitchen
hood is shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1: Macro implemented in IDA ICE to simulate the kitchen hood. Linear transformation of the
signal into l/s.
137
==PAGE:158==
Figure 2: Supervisory control in IDA ICE. The signals for wet and dry rooms are calculated. Case
with stepwise control.
The calculation made inside the supervisory control to balance the airﬂows is shown
in Figure 2. The stepwise control is connected to the sensor in the AHU and generates a
signal, which is directly sent to the wet spaces (bathrooms).
The signal used for the dry rooms has to be recalculated to account for the kitchen
hood. This is done in three steps:
1. The signal used for the wet rooms is transformed linearly to L/s. The maximum
airﬂow corresponds to the di↵erence between the total maximum airﬂow at the AHU
and the maximum ventilation rate of the kitchen hood (38 = 80 −42). The mini-
mum airﬂow is the di↵erence between minimum airﬂow at the AHU and minimum
ventilation rate of the kitchen hood (11.67 = 25 −13.33).
2. The total airﬂow available in supply is calculated as di↵erence between the airﬂow
obtained from the linear transformation, and the airﬂow rate corresponding to the
extraction in the kitchen hood.
3. the signal for the dry room is calculated through an inverse linear transformation.
138
==PAGE:159==
Balanced ventilation with room-based control sensor
With room-based sensors, the signals controlling the airﬂow rates are calculated individu-
ally, by a proportional control, according to the level of RH, CO2 or temperature present
in each room. Therefore, without the implementation of Macro-controls, the airﬂows are
naturally unbalanced in IDA ICE. The airﬂows are balanced in six iterative steps:
1. in each dry room a proportional control sensor is installed and generates a signal
according to the need in the room.
2. In bathroom 1 a proportional control sensor is installed and generates a signal ac-
cording to the need in the room.
3. ”Macro 1”: the signal to be used in the wet rooms is recalculated in a way that it
balances the di↵erence between the sum of the airﬂows in supply and the airﬂow
correspondent to the kitchen hood (Figure 3).
4. ”Macro 2”: the signal calculated in ”Macro 1” is compared to the signal generated
from the proportional sensor installed in bathroom 1 (Aircontrol.outsignal (BH1)).
If the signal calculated in ”Macro 1” is higher than the signal ”Aircontrol.outsignal
(BH1)”, the signal to be used in the dry spaces is calculated. (Figure 4).
5. If the signal calculated in ”Macro 1” is greater than the signal generated from the
proportional sensor installed in bathroom 1 (Aircontrol.outsignal (BH1)), the signals
generated from the proportional controls in each dry room are used, whereas the
signal recalculated in ”Macro 1” is used to control the airﬂow in the bathrooms.
6. If the signal calculated in ”Macro 1” is smaller than the signal generated from the
proportional sensor installed in bathroom 1 (Aircontrol.outsignal (BH1)), the signal
generated in ”Macro 2” is used to control the airﬂow in the dry rooms, whereas the
signal ”Aircontrol.outsignal” generated by the proportional control in bathroom 1 is
used in both bathrooms.
139
==PAGE:160==
Figure 3: ”Macro 1” implemented in IDA ICE to calculate the signal used for the wet rooms. The
signal is calculated in in order to have the same airﬂow rate in terms of L/s in the wet spaces.
Figure 4: ”Macro 2” implemented in IDA ICE to calculate the signal used for the dry rooms. The
signal is calculated only if the signal generated from the proportional sensor installed in bathroom
1 (Aircontrol.outsignal (BH1)) is lower than the ”signal for return airﬂows” calculated in ”Macro
1”. The signal is calculated in order to have the same airﬂow rate in terms of L/s.m2 in the dry
spaces.
140
==PAGE:161==
F
Indicators calculations
The indexes used for the calculation of the index of global performance Ig are shown for
bedroom 1, bathroom 1 and living room, in Tables 10, 11 and 12, respectively.
Table 10: Calculation of the index of global performance Ig in bedroom 1.
Energy use
[kWh/m2]
Exposure CO2
IEnergy
IIAQ
Ig
CAV min
17
1.09
0
0
-
CAV
29.4
0.99
0.59
0.44
0.74
VAV (unbalanced) with RH sensor
29.5
0.98
0.59
0.48
0.81
VAV (unbalanced) with CO2 sensors
30.3
0.86
0.63
1.00
1.59
VAV (unbalanced) with T sensors
18.4
1.09
0.07
0.01
0.22
VAV (unbalanced) with CO2/RH sensors
38.1
0.86
1.00
1.00
1.00
VAV (balanced) with RH sensors
22.9
0.98
0.28
0.48
1.72
VAV (balanced) with CO2 sensors
26.1
0.91
0.43
0.78
1.82
VAV (balanced) with T sensors
25.6
0.98
0.41
0.48
1.18
VAV (balanced) with CO2/RH sensors
23.4
0.87
0.30
0.96
3.15
VAV with central stepwise RH sensor
19
1.04
0.09
0.22
2.33
VAV with central stepwise CO2 sensor
18.6
1.02
0.08
0.31
4.05
VAV with central stepwise T sensor
21.2
1
0.20
0.39
1.98
VAV with central proportional RH sensor
19.6
1.04
0.12
0.22
1.79
VAV with central proportional CO2 sensor
19.9
0.99
0.14
0.44
3.18
VAV with central proportional T sensor
22.3
1
0.25
0.39
1.57
Table 11: Calculation of the index of global performance Ig in bathroom 1.
Energy consumption
[kWh/m2]
Exposure CO2
IEnergy
IIAQ
Ig
CAV min
17
0.91
0
0
-
CAV
29.4
0.8
0.59
0.61
1.04
VAV (unbalanced) with RH sensor
29.5
0.8
0.59
0.61
1.03
VAV (unbalanced) with CO2 sensors
30.3
0.76
0.63
0.83
1.32
VAV (unbalanced) with T sensors
18.4
0.89
0.07
0.11
1.67
VAV (unbalanced) with CO2/RH sensors
38.1
0.73
1.00
1.00
1.00
VAV (balanced) with RH sensors
22.9
0.78
0.28
0.72
2.58
VAV (balanced) with CO2 sensors
26.1
0.731
0.43
0.99
2.31
VAV (balanced) with T sensors
25.6
0.77
0.41
0.78
1.91
VAV (balanced) with CO2/RH sensors
23.4
0.74
0.30
0.94
3.11
VAV with central stepwise RH sensor
19
0.81
0.09
0.56
5.86
VAV with central stepwise CO2 sensor
18.6
0.79
0.08
0.67
8.79
VAV with central stepwise T sensor
21.2
0.79
0.20
0.67
3.35
VAV with central proportional RH sensor
19.6
0.8
0.12
0.61
4.96
VAV with central proportional CO2 sensor
19.9
0.77
0.14
0.78
5.66
VAV with central proportional T sensor
22.3
0.79
0.25
0.67
2.65
141
==PAGE:162==
Table 12: Calculation of the index of global performance Ig in living room.
Energy consumption
[kWh/m2]
Exposure CO2
IEnergy
IIAQ
Ig
CAV min
17
0.88
CAV
29.4
0.79
0.59
0.45
0.77
VAV (unbalanced) with RH sensor
29.5
0.77
0.59
0.55
0.93
VAV (unbalanced) with CO2 sensors
30.3
0.72
0.63
0.80
1.27
VAV (unbalanced) with T sensors
18.4
0.85
0.07
0.15
2.26
VAV (unbalanced) with CO2/RH sensors
38.1
0.68
1.00
1.00
1.00
VAV (balanced) with RH sensors
22.9
0.74
0.28
0.70
2.50
VAV (balanced) with CO2 sensors
26.1
0.69
0.43
0.95
2.20
VAV (balanced) with T sensors
25.6
0.74
0.41
0.70
1.72
VAV (balanced) with CO2/RH sensors
23.4
0.71
0.30
0.85
2.80
VAV with central stepwise RH sensor
19
0.77
0.09
0.55
5.80
VAV with central stepwise CO2 sensor
18.6
0.75
0.08
0.65
8.57
VAV with central stepwise T sensor
21.2
0.75
0.20
0.65
3.27
VAV with central proportional RH sensor
19.6
0.76
0.12
0.60
4.87
VAV with central proportional CO2 sensor
19.9
0.73
0.14
0.75
5.46
VAV with central proportional T sensor
22.3
0.75
0.25
0.65
2.59
142
==PAGE:163==
G
VOC emissions calculation and implementation in IDA
ICE
The TVOC emission rate calculated with the ”DS/EN 15251 method” are presented in
Table 13 together with the formaldehyde and benzene emission rate. Each calculation
have been done according to the ﬂoor area, the amount of wall to paint and a carpet of a
standard size 170 x 240 cm [86], with a total area of 4.08 m2, placed in the living room.
Table 13: Calculated emission rates of TVOC, formaldehyde and benzene, for each room.
Room
Floor
area [m2]
Painting
area [m2]
TVOC emission
rate [mg/s]
Formaldehyde
[mg/s]
Benzene
[mg/s]
Bedroom 1
13.95
43.7
7.75E-04
7.63E-04
2.43E-05
Bathroom 1
4.96
29.82
2.5E-04
5.08E-04
1.66E-05
Bedroom 2
13.95
46.2
7.8E-04
8.05E-04
2.57E-05
Living room
44.42
100.95
0,0025
0,00183
1.24E-04
Bedroom 3
11.04
37.38
6.1E-04
6.51E-04
2.08E-05
Bathroom 2
3.62
25.19
2.01E-04
4.29E-04
1.40E-05
The VOC emission rate was set in IDA ICE in the CO2 emission rate tab, emitted
from the equipments. This resulted an acceptable approximation under the assumption
that any sorption or desorption from building materials was negligible.
To simulate the VOC emissions a second model was created for each scenario to sim-
ulate. The ”new model” was created using the original model, but removing any CO2,
moisture production or heat gain. However, the same airﬂow calculated according to the
original CO2 emissions and moisture production was kept. In this way, it was possible to
simulate, in the same ventilation conditions, the impact of VOC emissions.
The original airﬂow was kept using a tool in the macro (see Appendix E) called ”source
ﬁle”. This tool was necessary to give as input in the new model the same information of
the original model, to distribute the same airﬂow in the rooms. The source ﬁle was created
as a text ﬁle, in order to have the CO2 or RH signal for each time step. The original macro
is shown in Figure 1, whereas in Figure 5 can be noticed that the input for the control is
143
==PAGE:164==
a source ﬁle (.text).
Figure 5: Source ﬁle as input for the supervisory control implemented in IDA ICE.
To simulate the VOC emissions in the CO2 tab, a new output was necessary, to avoid
to get results inﬂuenced by the chemical properties of the CO2. Therefore, the VOC con-
centration was obtained in mg/kg (mg of contaminants per kg of air), which indicates the
pure amount of contaminants per kilograms of air. This amount was therefore multiplied
by the air density at the speciﬁc temperature, to get in result the concentration of VOC
in µg/m3.
144
==PAGE:165==
145
==PAGE:166==
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Nils Koppels All´e, Bld. 402
DK-2800 Kongens Lyngby
Denmark
Tlf: +45 4525 1700
Fax: 4588 3282
E-mail: byg@byg.dtu.dk
www.byg.dtu.dk
146
