==PAGE:1==
P E T E R B AY B A S T I A N
E F F I C I E N T U S E O F
S PAT I A L D ATA
S T R U C T U R E S I N
G P U S H A D E R S
D E PA R T M E N T O F A P P L I E D M AT H E M AT I C S A N D C O M P U T E R S C I E N C E
T E C H N I C A L U N I V E R S I T Y O F D E N M A R K
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Hybrid shadow rendering combines the quality of ray-tracing with
the speed of rasterization to provide high-quality shadows, but
has only been used with fragment shaders until now. We provide
a solution for hybrid shadow rendering using compute shaders in
the Unity game engine and provide 3 variations on the method for
utilizing the full SIMD width of the GPU, in a way not possible
using only fragment shaders. The results show that hybrid shadow
rendering provides a large performance increase over ray-tracing,
especially when restricting the t-interval of the ray. While the 3
methods provided did not yield an increase in performance, we
show that the traversal stack is a severe limitation with regards
to concurrency and that stackless traversal therefor is a must for
practical usage of hybrid shadow rendering. We also show that it
is possible to use hybrid shadow rendering without conservative
rasterization, removing the need of geometry shaders or special
hardware support.
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute by Peter Bay Bastian
(s113119) in fulﬁlment of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc.
in Engineering (Digital Media). The thesis has been completed in
the period between January 2nd 2017 and July 2nd 2017 under
the supervision of Jeppe Revall Frisvad, and in collaboration with
Unity Technologies under the supervision of Timothy Cooper. The
thesis is rated at 35 ECTS points.
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Introduction
7
Method
11
Implementation
29
Results
35
Discussion
45
Conclusion
49
Bibliography
51
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Introduction
This project will combine ray-traced shadows with a rasterization-
based graphics pipeline in the Unity game engine, in order to
achieve high-quality shadows. In doing so, we will look into the
architecture and performance of GPUs, algorithms and data struc-
tures appropriate for real-time ray tracing and how such can be
integrated into a rasterization pipeline. To achieve real-time per-
formance we will evaluate the hybrid shadow rendering technique
from Hertal et al. [HHW09] in a compute shader setting in order to
take advantage of the increased ﬂexibility of compute shaders.
Rasterization is the underlying method that is used to
render most games and other real-time contexts. Rasterization
reaches a similar level of quality as ray tracing for primary rays,
but ray tracing has shown to yield better quality for a variety of
effects compared to rasterization-based equivalents. On the other
hand, rasterization yields much better performance than ray tracing
does, in part due to the dedicated rasterization hardware available
in all GPUs, but also because it solves a more restricted problem.
Therefor it makes sense to combine rasterization and ray tracing
techniques into a hybrid rendering setup to get the speed of ras-
terization and the quality of ray tracing. This is also the trend that
we’re seeing in real-time graphics today, where ray tracing based
techniques are becoming more and more common. [GS16] [MM14]
[Aal13] [Tat06]
However, the usage is generally limited to ray marching, an
image-based type of ray tracing that allows for more possibilities
than rasterization, but does not take the full scene into account and
suffers from sampling artifacts due to being image based. While
this is not full-blown ray tracing as we know it from ofﬂine ren-
dering, it shows that GPUs are rapidly becoming faster and thus
we might not be far from a future where geometrically precise ray
tracing is partially used in real-time contexts.
One particular effect in real-time graphics that suffers a lot
from being rasterization-based is shadowing. The most utilized
method for rendering shadows in real-time is shadow mapping,
[Wil78] where the scene is rasterized from the light’s point of view
and then sampled during main camera rendering. Typically a
contact-hardening1 variant of percentage-closer ﬁltering (PCF)
1 The visual phenomena of a shadow
becoming softer the further it is from
the occluder, and likewise harder the
closer it is to the occluder.
==PAGE:8==
8
efficient use of spatial data structures in gpu shaders
[Fer05] is applied in order to achieve soft shadows by widening the
PCF image kernel based on the distance to the occluder. But soft
shadows occur naturally due to area light sources, while a shadow
map is inherently unable to represent an area light source.2 Heitz
2 Only light sources such as point, spot
and directional can be represented.
et al. [Hei+16] presents a method for real-time lighting using area
light sources. Unfortunately this method does not support shadow-
ing in itself, and shadow mapping is not of much help here due to
the aforementioned issue.
When performing shadow mapping, the sampling rate is com-
pletely determined upfront, but in reality we need different sam-
pling rates based on the distance to the camera and the occluders
and occludees. This causes various aliasing issues for shadow map-
ping. PCF can to a certain degree mask these artifacts, due to the
fact that it is essentially blurring the output.
Contact-hardening PCF is not practical to implement naively due
to the size of the image kernel becoming too big. Therefore vari-
ous optimizations have been developed, such as variance, [DL06]
exponential [Ann+08] and moment shadow mapping. [PK15] Un-
fortunately the approximations that are applied for these might
cause light leaking. Generally speaking, these artifacts are of vary-
ing acceptable degrees, but the fact of the matter is that they do not
provide physically correct soft shadows, but rather simulate the
phenomena.
Rosen provides a method for changing the sampling rate based
on various importance functions, which essentially warps the
shadow map to provide a higher sampling rate for objects on screen
and around edges. [Ros12] Unfortunately the changes in sam-
pling rates causes some slight ﬂickering in the shadow edges and
it is also not usable for area lights for the same reasons as normal
shadow mapping.
Story provides a very interesting method, which stores triangle
indices in a shadow map rather than depth. [Sto15] These trian-
gle indices are then looked up and ray traced against, providing
geometry-level precision shadowing. While this has a large storage
cost, so does a BVH. The downside is that their method requires
hardware support for conservative rasterization, which is not sup-
ported by AMD GPUs at the time of writing. As with other shadow
mapping techniques, the method does not work with area light
sources.
Looking towards the ofﬂine rendering world, these issues are not
apparent as ray tracing does not suffer from sampling issues and
light type limitations. The downside is that ray tracing tends to be
far more expensive computationally. Therefor this project will look
into methods of accelerating the performance of ray tracing in a
real-time context.
A lot of research goes into making ray tracing fast, but these
methods tend to be limited to ofﬂine rendering contexts. Further-
more, the GPU-based methods mostly uses CUDA, while in a real-
==PAGE:9==
introduction
9
time context we would be far more interested in a compute shader
based implementation, as that eases the integration with game en-
gines as well as providing wider platform support than CUDA.
This naturally means that assumptions based on NVIDIA hardware
speciﬁcs has to be widened to take other hardware vendors into
account. At the time of writing, the only hardware vendors that
produce GPUs with the needed computational power is NVIDIA
and AMD. While smartphone GPUs are also rapidly getting faster
and more powerful, they simply do not compare to desktop GPUs
yet and would greatly increase the complexity of the project. As
such they will not be considered.
A real-time context has a much different set of constraints than
an ofﬂine context. For example, in ofﬂine rendering, spending
a few seconds per frame on constructing acceleration structures
might cause a huge speed-up in the total amount of time spend
on rendering that frame. Whereas in real-time rendering those
few seconds are simply not available. As such it either has to be
a static pre-computation or very limited in the constant amount
of time it adds per frame. The bounding volume hierarchy (BVH)
acceleration structure is preferable due to its potential for handling
dynamic scenes efﬁciently. This project will look into appropriate
algorithms and structures for ray tracing in compute shaders.
We also have to take a great deal of caution when writing com-
pute shaders, due to the increased amount of manual control. It is
easy to write code that doesn’t perform well and as such we will
look into how compute shaders work and the general hardware of
modern GPUs.
While one way of making ray tracing fast is to improve on the
core algorithms, another way is to reduce the amount of work that
needs to be done. One such method is hybrid shadow rendering.
The core idea is to use a shadow map for coarse-grained shadow
computation and then a more expensive method is used for reﬁning
the edges of the shadows. Chan and Durand used this technique
to decrease the cost of shadow volume rendering. [CD04] [Cro77]
Later, Hertel et al. used the technique in combination with kD-tree
accelerated ray tracing. [HHW09]
While the latter was performed on GPUs, it was prior to the ex-
istance of compute shaders. Thus there might be certain efﬁciency
gains in implementing a similar method using compute shaders
and BVH accelerated ray tracing. While this project will not attempt
to implement soft shadows using the technique, there is still value
in evaluating the technique for hard shadows ﬁrst, as it has the po-
tential to be used for physically correct soft shadowing due to the
fact that ray tracing is used.
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Method
As noted in the introduction we will validate the viability of hybrid
shadow rendering using compute shaders rather than fragment
shaders. As we will be using compute shaders as our program-
ming platform, we look into what they are and how to efﬁciently
use them. The latter requires us to look at how modern GPUs are
architectured, as well as the features they provide, which might not
be strictly speciﬁed by the compute shader speciﬁcations.
We must also consider which construction and traversal methods
to use for the bounding volume hierarchy. Common to the modern
GPU construction methods are that they require one to construct all
the leaf nodes of the tree and then sort them in Z-order. Therefore
we explore a few parallel programming algorithms before look-
ing into BVH algorithms. Afterwards we consider at a high level
how these algorithms can efﬁciently be implemented in compute
shaders. We then consider the available construction and traversal
methods and evaluate which are appropriate for this project.
Having BVH and parallel programmings algorithms in place, we
explore the hybrid shadow rendering technique and consider how
to efﬁciently use the technique with compute shaders and what
difference that makes compared to fragment shaders. We must also
consider methods of visualization for both debugging purposes as
well as inspecting the results.
Compute Shaders
GPUs were originally introduced as specialized hardware for
speeding up 3D graphics. They did so by implementing expen-
sive parts of the software renderer in hardware. The most essential
feature is the rasterizer and the surrounding pieces of function-
ality required to make it work as well as the pieces that make it
fast. In order to support a wide variety of graphics, the GPU sup-
ported conﬁguring parts of the GPU pipeline, such as lighting and
transformation. This is what we today know as the ﬁxed-function
pipeline.
Eventually the hardware became more ﬂexible in order to meet
the ever increasing needs of graphics programs, and shaders were
born. Strictly speaking, they were not introduced with GPUs, but
rather by Pixar in 1988 for use in the RenderMan software. They
were described as special procedures3 used to extend the Render-
3 Declared in the RenderMan Shading
Language.
==PAGE:12==
12
efficient use of spatial data structures in gpu shaders
Man Interface with additional functionality at speciﬁc places of the
render pipeline, such as surface shading. [Pix88] Semantically, a
shader can be seen as a mapping over an input set.
These special procedures were adopted to the GPU pipeline,
forming the basis of what is known as the programmable pipeline.
Initially, GPUs only supported vertex and fragment shaders. [Shi01]
For vertex shaders, the input set is the collection of vertices being
rendered and the mapping might be a transformation between
coordinate systems. For fragment shaders the input set is the frag-
ments resulting from rasterization of a primitive, and the mapping
could be a combination of lighting, texturing and more.
A number of years went by as the two programmable pipeline
stages became more powerful, while parts of the ﬁxed-function
pipeline were deprecated. The ﬁxed-function pipeline is not com-
pletely gone today, but certain parts such as lighting and transfor-
mation do not remain.4 Blending, depth and stencil support is how-
4 Or rather, are implemented in soft-
ware for compatibility reasons, but the
specialized hardware is gone.
ever still provided through a ﬁxed-function interface. [SA17] Then
in 2006, NVIDIA introduced the CUDA programming API, allow-
ing GPUs to be used for general purpose computations. [NVI06]
This sparked a ton of research on reﬁtting various algorithms to run
on GPUs.
Meanwhile, no equivalent API was available in any of the real-
time graphics hardware APIs. Certain features have moved shaders
closer, such as vertex transform output5 and geometry shaders6,
5 Allows a buffer to be ﬁlled with an
item per vertex processed.
6 A shader stage that operates on ge-
ometry such as triangles or quads as
opposed to vertices. Has big perfor-
mance implications.
but they did not provide true general purpose computation capabil-
ities. Eventually, compute shaders were introduced. Direct3D was
the ﬁrst API to support this feature, as part of Direct3D 11 [Mic17]
which launched with Windows 7 in 2009. [Jam08] OpenGL was a
bit later to the party, with support for compute shaders arriving in
OpenGL 4.3, which was released in 2012. [The12] Today, support
for compute shaders is much wider. macOS has been the last major
platform to not support compute shaders, but with Metal being
released for macOS in 2015, all major platforms now have support.
[App15]
Compute shaders allow for more direct access to the programmable
part of the pipeline. Relating to the sematics of shaders above, they
allow us to deﬁne the input set we’re mapping over ourselves. In
fact, there is no longer a strict input and output. We’re able to read
and write to any memory location at any point in time.
Execution Model & Scheduling
A compute shader ﬁrst and foremost consists of a kernel function7,
7 Similar to how vertex and fragment
shaders map a function over an input
set.
which is the program that the GPU is going to run. As the GPU
uses a cooperative multi-tasking model, only a single program can
run at any time and cannot be temporarily paused. If it runs for
longer than it is allowed, the GPU driver will forcibly stop it.8 This
8 This typically results in a driver
crash.
means that the many threads that a GPU is capable of running
must all run the same kernel.
==PAGE:13==
method
13
This execution model is referred to as SIMT9. The smallest unit
9 Single instruction, multiple thread.
executable by the GPU is a thread group, the size of which is speci-
ﬁed in 3 dimensions as
(nx, ny, nz) ∈N3
along with the kernel function.10 As such the total number of
10 In DirectCompute the size is pro-
vided as an attribute to the kernel
function.
threads in a thread group is
n1 = nxnynz .
The fact that it is speciﬁed in 3 dimensions is merely an abstraction,
which is useful for certain tasks.11 We refer to the 3-dimensional
11 For example, in a kernel operating
on a 2D image we might want to work
on clusters of pixels.
index of a thread within its thread group as
(ix, iy, iz) ∈[0, nx[×[0, ny[×[0, nz[ .
We can ﬁnd the 1-dimensional index i1 ∈[0, ng[ of a thread within a
thread group as
i1 = ix + iynx + iznxny .
As such, the threads are laid out ﬁrst according to ix, then iy and
ﬁnally iz. Note that the thread group size can be (1, 1, 1), i.e. a
single thread, but we’ll see later why that is a horrible idea in most
situations.
Figure 1: A dispatch of (2, 2, 2) thread
groups using a thread group size of
(2, 2, 2). Each cube represents a thread
group, while the subdivisions of it
represents individual threads. The
matrix of cubes make up the entire
dispatch.
In order to execute a compute shader, the user dispatches a num-
ber of thread groups to run, either based on the amount of data to
be processed or simply a static amount large enough to saturate the
GPU. Once again, this is speciﬁed in 3 dimensions. This forms a
hierarchy of threads as visualized in ﬁgure 1. The entire dispatch
runs the same kernel.
Hardware Architecture
Before heading into the architecture of GPUs as well as the types
of parallism supported, let’s take a look at what CPUs offer. Mod-
ern CPUs have a certain number of cores, typically around 4, each
of which practically executes as an independent CPU, enabling
thread-level parallism. They also support instruction-level parallism
through pipelining and simultaneous multi-threading12. Finally,
12 Intel markets this as Hyper-
threading.
we have data-level parallism which is supported through SIMD13
13 Single instruction, multiple data.
in which e.g. the elements of two vectors can be added together
in parallel. The limitation of this is that a single instruction must
operate on multiple pieces of data in a certain structure. The AVX
extensions to the x86 instruction set14 can operate on 256 bit reg-
14 Which is one of the more modern,
yet widely supported SIMD variants
today.
isters, or in other words 8 ﬂoats.15 We say that the SIMD width of
15 AVX can also operate on 4 doubles,
but we’ll stick to ﬂoats as they are of
our interest.
AVX is 8 lanes.
A GPU also offers thread-level parallism through a number of
vector units16 each of which offer both data- and instruction-level
16 A vector unit corresponds to a CPU
core. AMD refers to these as vector
units, while NVIDIA refers to them as
streaming multi-processors.
parallism. But as we stated previously the entire dispatch has to
execute the same kernel, and so a vector unit is not as indepen-
dent as a CPU core. As the name suggests, a vector unit supports
==PAGE:14==
14
efficient use of spatial data structures in gpu shaders
vector instructions. In fact, that’s the only thing it can do and this
is the key to the massive parallism offered by GPUs. Furthermore
the SIMD width is far wider than on a CPU; NVIDIA uses 32-wide
vector units, while AMD uses 64-wide. The kernel is actually ex-
ecuted such that each SIMD lane is treated as a thread. This also
implies that when a kernel is executed on a vector unit, each lane
must execute the same instruction. NVIDIA refers to the unit of
work executed by a lane as a thread, while AMD refers to it as a
work item. Likewise NVIDIA refers to each lane as a CUDA core,
which can cause a certain amount of confusion as the vector unit
is more analogous to a CPU core than a lane is. Each terminology
has a degree of truth to it, but the fact of the matter is that vector
units provide a hierarchical structure in a way very similar to how
CPU cores do. A number of vector units are grouped together in a
compute unit, where they share certain resources.
A very useful concept is the wave, which refers to a group of
threads within a thread group executed simultaneously by a single
vector unit. That is, the wave size is equal to the SIMD width of the
device. NVIDIA refers to this as a warp. When a thread group is
scheduled, it is divided into a number of waves. This distribution
is completely static and predictable. The threads are indexed using
the 1-dimensional index i1; the ﬁrst wave consists of the ﬁrst n
threads, the second wave of the next n threads and so on. They
are called waves as the threads within a single wave move forward
together. Note that due to this, it is very important that the thread
group size is a multiple of the device wave size. If the thread group
is smaller than the wave front size, the thread group will never
utilize the entire SIMD width. If it is larger, but not a multiple, it
will have a similar effect.17 A vector unit provides simultaneous
17 E.g. a thread group size of 65 means
that 2 waves will run, but the second
will only use 1 out of 64 lanes.
multi-threading by internally scheduling waves, such that when
a wave is waiting for e.g. an expensive instruction or a memory
fetch, another wave will run instead. This is often referred to as
swapping out waves; the vector unit begins to execute instructions
from another wave. This can be seen as a multiplexing of various
streams of instructions onto the same stream. As instructions often
won’t execute in 1 clock cycle, this swapping happens all the time
and thus gives the impression that multiple waves run at the same
time. This is called latency hiding, as it hides the latency occuring
from operations. Due to this we must make sure that enough waves
are running, such that all the vector units can perform sufﬁcient
latency hiding.
Programs on the CPU tend to have branching18 and GPU kernels
18 if-statements, loops and so on.
are no different. Let’s imagine that inside a vector unit, some lanes
take execution path A and some take execution path B due to an
if-statement. We just said that a vector unit must execute the same
instruction across all lanes, but that is clearly not possible here. So
how do we even proceed? GPUs manage this by only executing
a single path at a time. All lanes that are on the other execution
path will perform no-ops in the meantime. This is called control
==PAGE:15==
method
15
ﬂow divergence and causes parts of the GPU to be unutilized. It is
very important to keep this detail in mind when designing parallel
algorithms to run on the GPU. Do note that different vector units
can execute different instructions, so we only need to consider
control ﬂow within a wave.
Resources
The GPU provides various memory resources that we can use. The
largest one is global memory. This is the amount of RAM that is
used for marketing of a GPU; it is typically in the order of several
gigabytes. It is readable and writable from both the GPU and the
CPU, and thus it is used by the CPU to feed data to the GPU.19 The
19 Of course, it is also possible to
simply generate data directly on the
GPU instead.
downside to the global memory is that it is rather slow compared
to the other types of memory available. Each compute unit has
an amount of registers which is distributed between all the active
threads in the compute unit; i.e. the registers of one thread cannot
be accessed by another thread. The total amount of memory avail-
able in the registers is typically in the order of a few kilobytes. Each
compute unit also has an amount of shared memory distributed be-
tween all the active thread groups on the compute unit. OpenGL
speciﬁes that each thread group must have access to at least 32 KiB
of shared memory. [SA17] The shared memory is much faster than
the global memory and is both readable and writable by all threads
in a thread group.
Thus a wave requires a certain amount of registers20 and shared
20 The amount of registers required by
each thread multiplied by the wave
size.
memory. A compute unit can only simultaneously run as many
waves are there are registers and shared memory for. If we use too
much memory per thread or thread group, the result is that the
compute unit won’t be able to perform sufﬁcient latency hiding,
which will cause a severe decrease in performance. While shared
memory is explicitly allocated, the amount of registers that are
used is a bit more loose. In the end, it is up to the driver’s shader
compiler which we have no control over. Generally speaking, as
long as a variable has a usage in the remaining part of the shader,
it consumes a register. As such, it is possible to write shaders in
a way that less registers are used and so it is not completely out
of our hands. It is possible to use various utilities from hardware
vendors to see how many registers a shader will use on speciﬁc
platforms. This allows one to select a set of variety of platforms to
target and optimize for.
Memory reads and writes within a wave do not need any mem-
ory barriers, as the threads are run in lock-step. This is important to
keep in mind when striving for efﬁciency. But if we wish to write to
shared memory from one wave and read it in another, we must use
a memory barrier to ensure that all memory accesses has been com-
pleted. The same is true for interaction between different thread
groups through global memory. Often when shared memory is in-
volved, we are interested in synchronizing the execution paths of all
==PAGE:16==
16
efficient use of spatial data structures in gpu shaders
the threads involved. We can choose to sync the entire thread group
while we wait for a memory barrier. It is not possible to sync dif-
ferent thread groups during a dispatch, and as such extra care must
be taken when interacting between these. It is, however, possible
to sync different thread groups by splitting the work into multiple
dispatches. This should be used sparingly, as all threads must ﬁnish
before the next dispatch can run.
Parallel Programming
As is evident, we can’t simply throw any kind of algorithm on the
GPU and expect it to run well. We need to take care both in design
as well as implemention of the algorithm. A lot of algorithms for
GPUs can be described in terms of a number of parallel primitives,
that is, more general algorithms that can be used as building blocks
for building speciﬁc algorithms. In practice it is not plug-and-play
due to efﬁciency, but it helps a lot to be able to break the mental
model into pieces that can be veriﬁed and reasoned about indepen-
dently. Furthermore, these general building blocks have existing
solutions that are well thought out. In this section, I will go over
various parallel programming algorithms that are needed for the
project. More precisely we need the radix sort in order to construct
a BVH on the GPU, and for that we need to be able to compute a
preﬁx sum.
Preﬁx Sum
The preﬁx sum is a very useful building block for parallel program-
ming. Given a sequence {Xi}n
i=0 the preﬁx sum describes another
set where each element is equal to the sum of all the preceding ele-
ments of the sequence. It is often referred to as a scan, which is the
generalization to any binary operation, rather than only addition.
The inclusive preﬁx sum ips X includes the element itself in the
sum, while the exclusive preﬁx sum eps X only contains the sum of
the preceding elements. We can deﬁne the exclusive and inclusive
preﬁx sums as
eps X =
(
i−1
∑
j=0
Xj
 i ∈[0, n[
)
, ips X =
(
i
∑
j=0
Xj
 i ∈[0, n[
)
.
Mapping between the 2 variants is very simple and thus, whether it
is an inclusive or exclusive preﬁx sum, becomes an implementation
detail:
(eps X)i = (ips X)i −Xi ,
(ips X)i = (eps X)i + ai .
In fact, mapping between the two is mostly a shift of elements. Go-
ing from inclusive to exclusive we shift all elements 1 to the right
and put a 0 as the ﬁrst element. Going from exclusive to inclu-
sive we shift all elements 1 to the left and set the last element to
==PAGE:17==
method
17
(eps X)n + Xn. Each does, however, serve it’s own purpose as some-
times the inclusive preﬁx sum will describe the problem at hand,
while at other times the exclusive will.
This seems like an inherently sequencial problem,21 but it does
21 Probably because the obvious solu-
tion is inherently sequencial.
in fact have several parallel solutions. Sengupta et al. provides an
efﬁcient solution for CUDA that takes advantage of the hierarchi-
cal architecture of GPUs. [SHG08] Each thread performs a preﬁx
sum of a number of elements, which is then combined within each
wave22, then combined within the thread group and ﬁnally com-
22 Remember that synchronization is
not needed inside a wave.
bined across thread groups. We combine results by performing a
preﬁx sum over the sum of each group, and then for each group
adding the sum of all the previous groups.
The algorithm can run over several dispatches to support larger
input sizes. If each thread handles nt elements23, then each wave
23 Multiple elements per thread is a
good idea both for input size scalabil-
ity as well as performance, as there is
some amount of overhead per thread.
can handle 32nt elements. Note that this is assuming an NVIDIA
GPU with a wave size of 32. We can have up to 1024 threads per
thread group, so each thread group can handle 1024nt elements.
When the algorithm combines results across thread groups, each
thread group writes the sum of the processed elements to a sep-
arate buffer, which is then preﬁx summed. So, if the number of
thread groups is larger than what a single thread group can handle,
we need to combine across thread groups again. This is done until
the work can be handled by a single thread group.
But, do keep in mind that we can perform a preﬁx sum over
(1024nt)2 elements without additional passes. In fact, it might be
beneﬁcial to simply increase the number of elements handled per
thread, if such a large input size is to be handled. As the input size
that can be handled increases quadratically with the number of
elements handled per thread, we can quickly reach very large input
sizes. The only limitation is the execution time of the dispatch, as
the GPU driver will halt if we take too long.
While AMD GPUs theoretically can handle more elements per
wave, due to a larger wave size of 64, we are limited by the maxi-
mum number of threads per thread group. The results from each
wave is combined in the same way as results from each thread
group; thus after having all waves run, a single wave is used to
combine the results. So, on an NVIDIA GPU we can have 32 waves
of 32 threads each, resulting in 1024 threads. On an AMD GPU
we would have 64 waves of 16 threads each. As such, the span of
the algorithm remains the same. In fact, we can just treat the AMD
GPU as the NVIDIA GPU and assume the same wave size. This
simply means that each physical wave actually runs 2 logical waves,
i.e. we do not take advantage of the implicit synchronization be-
yond 32 threads.
Radix Sort
The idea of the LBVH is to ﬁrst bring the leaf nodes of the tree
into correct order, by sorting them according to the Morton code.
==PAGE:18==
18
efficient use of spatial data structures in gpu shaders
The Morton code is a space-ﬁlling curve that maps a vector to an
integer. It is used to map each leaf node into an integer, which
can then be efﬁciently sorted using a radix sort. This is a counting
sort, as opposed to a comparing sort,24 and thus it solves a more
24 A counting sort ﬁnds the order by
counting elements.
restricted problem,25 which means that it should perform better.
25 A comparing sort ﬁnds the order by
comparing elements to one another.
Using the preﬁx sum as a building block, it is fairly easy to real-
ize a parallel radix sort on the GPU. The core idea of the radix sort
is to sort in several passes, where each pass sorts part of the key.
If the part of the key that is being sorted is identical for multiple
elements, the original order is maintained. Thus if we start from the
least signiﬁcant bits and move towards the most signiﬁcant bits, we
are guaranteed to end up with a sorted output. [HH]
The preﬁx sum is used to sort each part. Let’s ﬁrst assume
that each part is 1 bit and that we want to sort an input sequence
{X}n
i=0. This gives us 2 possible values that each element part can
take on. For each possible value c, we deﬁne a sequence26
26 part(x) extracts the part of the
element value that is currently being
sorted.
Xc = {if part(x) = c then 1 else 0 | x ∈X}
such that each element contains a 1 if the part is equal to c and a 0
otherwise. We can take the exclusive preﬁx sum of Xc to construct a
counting bucket for value c
Bc = eps Xc
where each element contains the number of preceding elements
of the same value. Using this sequence, we now know where each
element should go alongside all other elements that also has that
value, such that the original ordering is maintained. This is al-
most identical to performing a compaction of Xc, removing all the
zeros, except that we use it to compact the values of X for which
part(x) = c.
This leaves us with the question of where each group of values
should go. We put all the elements where part(x) = 0 in the begin-
ning of the ordered sequence and use B0 to determine the position.
After that goes all the elements where part(x) = 1; we simply take
the index provided by B1 and add to that the number of elements
for which part(x) = 0, i.e. ∑X0.
When our input elements consists of 32 bits, sorting 1
bit per pass will take too long, partially due to increased global
memory usage. Instead we can expand the above algorithm to
sort b bits at a time. It simply means that we now have 2b possible
values for the current part and as such 2b counting buckets. But
what about the ﬁnal part, where we place each group of values? We
can generalize that to handle b bits. First, we construct a counting
bucket BΣ for the number of occurences of each possible value
BΣ = eps
n
∑Xc
 c ∈[0, 2b[
o
.
Using this we can calculate the index in the sorted sequence for an
==PAGE:19==
method
19
element with value c and original index i:
isorted = BΣ,c + Bc,i .
This process is repeated until all bits are sorted. The choice of b
is not a matter of more is better, but rather a compromise between
the number of passes and counting buckets required. Sorting the
whole value at once, i.e. b = 32, is clearly not feasible as we would
need 232 counting buckets, each of which has the same length as
the input sequence. On the other hand, 32 passes is a bit excessive.
Table 1 shows the number of counting buckets and passes resulting
from sorting b ∈{1, 2, 4, 8} bits per pass. 4 bits per pass seems
like a reasonable compromise, but the best compromise should be
found emperically. It is also worth considering how much is to be
sorted; if we only need to sort 30 bits, we could sort 5 bits per pass,
which would result in 32 counting buckets and 6 passes.
Bits per pass
Counting buckets
Passes
1
1
32
2
4
16
4
16
8
8
256
4
Table 1: The number of counting
buckets (excluding BΣ) and passes
resulting from sorting 32-bit elements
with varying amounts of bits per pass.
As can be seen, most of the actual work is performed by the
preﬁx sum algorithm. There is, however, still the question of how
to store the counting buckets. The naive approach is to store the
counting buckets in the same way as the input. This means that
our space requirements increases by bn. We need to perform b2b
preﬁx sums over n elements. If each preﬁx sum needs to write n
elements, then we will be performing a lot of read and writes to
global memory.
But just because we use the exclusive preﬁx sum to reason about
the algorithm, doesn’t mean that we have to actually use it directly.
Instead, we can specialize the preﬁx sum algorithm to ﬁt the needs
of the radix sort algorithm. We know that we need to perform b
preﬁx sums over almost the same input data. The transformation
from X to Xc can be done using a bit-wise AND operation, i.e. it’s
practically free compared to a global memory read. So, if we per-
form the b preﬁx sums in the same kernel, we only need to read the
input data once and perform b ANDs, rather than read it b times.
But we still have an issue with the amount of data we write to
global memory. Note, however, that when calculating the sorted
index, we only use the result of 1 counting bucket for each index;
meaning that the other counting buckets are not used at all. In fact,
the only place where all values of all counting buckets are used
is during the wave preﬁx sum calcuation. After that, to combine
across waves, we only use the total sum of the elements of each
wave. Likewise, to combine across thread groups, we only use the
==PAGE:20==
20
efficient use of spatial data structures in gpu shaders
total sum of the elements of each thread group. As such, we only
need to write elements where Xc,i = 1 and since that is only true for
a single combination of c and i, we can get away with storing all the
preﬁx sums in the same sequence. Of course, we still need to store
the count of each combination per thread group, but that is far less
data on the whole.
As a final optimization, we can reduce our resource usage a
bit. The preﬁx sum algorithm stores the results of the preﬁx sum
from each wave in shared memory. A preﬁx sum is then computed
for the sum of the elements of each wave. Finally, each thread
writes to global memory. Note that we only need to store the pre-
ﬁx sum from each wave in shared memory, which might limits the
largest possible value that can occur when used for a radix sort, as
we only perform a preﬁx sum over zeros and ones. This means that
the maximum possible integer will be 1024nt −1. As such, we need
to be able to describe 1024nt different values, but anything more
than that is a waste of data.
As we don’t want banking conﬂicts between threads, each thread
must use a multiple of 32 bits to store its data. Already at 2 ele-
ments per thread, we need 11 bits per integer which implicates we
can only pack 2 integers into the 32 bits. On the other hand it also
means that we can go all the way to 64 elements per thread and
still pack 2 into the 32 bits. The advantage of this is that we effec-
tively reduce our shared memory usage by half, which should be
advantageous for performance.
Bounding Volume Hierarchies
In real life, it is very intuitive to simply grab an object at a partic-
ular point in space. In a computer, however, we tend to just store
things in sequences, but we often have a need to look at a particu-
lar region in space. For example, in ray tracing we perform a large
amount of ray-primitive intersections and it simply doesn’t scale
to test whether every single triangle of a huge triangle-soup lies in
the ray’s path. This is where spatial data structures comes into play;
they provide optimized access using spatial indexing at the cost
of more memory and construction time. The result is that ﬁnding
an element at a spatial location becomes less than O(n). Typically
these data structures have O(log n) look-up time complexity.
One such spatial data structure is the bounding volume hier-
archy (BVH). It is a tree where the leaf nodes reference geometry
primitives. All nodes are associated with a bounding volume that
completely contains it’s children. Most commonly an internal node
only has 2 children. It is possible to have more than 2 children per
internal node, but that makes more sense to SIMD-based traversal.
Although GPUs are also SIMD-based, we treat each SIMD lane as
its own thread and thus it does not make sense to have more than 2
children per node.
==PAGE:21==
method
21
Similarly it is possible to use anything as the bounding volume
for nodes, but most commonly an AABB27 is used. Another popu-
27 Axis-aligned bounding box.
lar choice is a sphere, which has the advantage of being indepen-
dent of the rotation of the coordinate system, but might not ﬁt the
internal geometry as well as an AABB. While technically anything
can be used, anything is not practical, as using the acceleration
structure must be faster than simply iterating all primitives.
Construction
A BVH is far more ﬂexible than e.g. a BSP tree, but that ﬂexibility
also means that the problem space for construction is far bigger. We
have to decide how to pair all elements from the leaves to the root
of the tree; in other words, the amount of combinations is huge and
thus we have to be smart about it.
Lauterbach et al. present two methods for constructing the hier-
archy; [Lau+09] one that is very fast which produces an LBVH,28,
28 Linear Bounding Volume Hierarchy.
and another that produces hierarchies of better quality but is
slower. The former works by ﬁrst constructing all leaf nodes of
the hierachy and then sorting in Morton order, which is done by
calculating the Morton code for the barycenter of the bounding
box for each leaf node and then using a radix sort29 to sort them.
29 Not required to be a radix sort, but it
is the most optimal choice.
Afterwards, the sorted leaf nodes are processed in order to pro-
duce split lists indicating where node are joined/split in the tree.
More speciﬁcally the splits are made at the ﬁrst differing bit in the
Morton code, starting from the most signiﬁcant bit.
The two algorithms are combined into a hybrid algorithm, where
the fast algorithm is used for the top part of the tree and the slower
algorithm for the bottom part. The advantage of this is that the
second algorithm can be applied in parallel for groups of leaves,
thus increasing the amount of parallelism possible.
The LBVH was improved upon by Pantaleoni and Luebke [PL10]
with the HLBVH by providing a faster method for constructing the
BVH based on the sorted leaf nodes, as well as a new algorithm
equivalent to the slower one of Lauterbach et al. They use the fast
algorithm for the bottom part of the tree, and then the slow algo-
rithm to combine the sub-trees. They argue that this method is
better, as higher tree quality is most important in the top part of
the tree. Garanzha et al. improved upon this further [GPM11] by
reformulating the HLBVH using work queues and binary search.
Finally, Karras improved upon these with an even faster method
for constructing the LBVH, which allows for better parallism on the
GPU by processing all levels of the tree at once. [Kar12]
While one possibility is to use another method for the lower
branches of the hierachy to improve quality, another is to generate
an LBVH using one of the above methods and then optimize it to
lower the SAH-cost. Karras and Aila [KA13] presents a fast method
for optimizing an existing BVH on the GPU by re-arranging within
subsets of the tree called treelets. As such the method is known as
==PAGE:22==
22
efficient use of spatial data structures in gpu shaders
Treelet Restructuring BVH. Afterwards, they improved upon the
method by using a bottom-up agglomerative clustering approach
for re-arranging within treelets, rather than evaluating all possible
solutions. [AK14] This method is, however, patented by NVIDIA.
Domingues and Pedrini independently provided a similar solution
also using agglomerative clustering. [DP15]
For this project we settle on the LBVH method by Karras [Kar12]
as it generates an LBVH faster than the other methods, and due to
the fact that the TRBVH methods must have a BVH to optimize on.
If time had allowed for it, it would have been possible to implement
the TRBVH methods on top of this.
Traversal
There are several methods available for traversing BVHs. They can
be put into 2 categories; stackful and stackless. The former uses
a stack to postpone nodes when there are multiple paths to take
during traversal. The latter also has the same need, but as the name
suggests manages to do so without a stack. The want of a stackless
method comes from the fact that a stack takes up a lot of GPU
resources. As discussed previously in the report, this means that
less thread groups can be active at once. On the other hand, the
stackless methods tend to have more overhead than the stackful.
The state of the art in stackful traversal methods is presented by
Aila and Laine in 2009. [AL09] Toczek et al. provides ones of the
earlier stackless traversal algorithms, in which they alter the data
structure by providing exit links at nodes, allowing the traverser
to skip parts of the tree as well as backtrack without using a stack.
[THM10] Laine provides a stackless traversal method that restarts
from the root when it needs to backtrack. It does so by storing a bit
of data per level which guides the traversal after the restart. [Lai10]
Áfra and Szirmay-Kalos also provide a stackless traversal method
[ÁS14] but unfortunately their results show that it is slower than
the stackful algorithm from Aila and Laine. Murguía et al. uses a
bit-trail to backtrack without a stack [Mur+13]. Binder and Keller
improves on this by using a perfect hashing scheme to lookup
where to backtrack to in constant time. [BK16]
One crucial factor is that the stackful method is the most triv-
ial to implement and yields good performance. The method by
Binder and Keller yields roughly 20% more rays per second com-
pared to the stackful method by Aila and Laine. While certainly
important for a production implementation, it was determined to
be non-essential for this project and as such the stackful method
was chosen.
Hybrid Shadow Rendering
While there is also lots of work that can be done to make BVH con-
struction and traversal more efﬁcient, another approach is to reduce
==PAGE:23==
method
23
the amount of work that is needed. Obviously we cannot simply
make the work magically disappear, so to put it in more realistic
terms, we’re interested in a method that allows us to solve part of
the problem in a much faster way; a more coarse-grained, but fast
method, similar to how the hybrid BVH construction algorithms
work.
That is exactly what hybrid shadow rendering allows us to.
Before we head into that, let’s take a look at shadow mapping, as
hybrid shadow rendering builds on top of that.
Typically, in real-time graphics, a technique called shadow map-
ping is used to calculate shadow for a scene. [Cro77] Given a light
L, the idea is to render the scene from the point of view of L into
a depth buffer, which we call the shadow map. We use a transfor-
mation matrix VL to transform coordinates from world-space to
light-space30 and then another matrix PL to project into clip space
30 Light-space meaning that the origin
and rotation of the coordinate system
matches that of the light.
seen from the light. Afterwards, we render the scene as usually.
During that we can determine light visibility for a given fragment.
We do so by taking the position of the fragment and projecting into
light-space using the light matrices. Given a fragment with position
pW in world space, the position in the clip-space of the light is
pCL = PLVLpW .
This corresponds to which fragment the position would have been
rasterized into in the shadow map. We can use this to sample the
depth value that was rasterized into that fragment of the shadow
map and compare it to our position; if the fragment in the shadow
map was closer to the light, then it must occlude our position and
thus the fragment we’re rendering is in shadow. Otherwise it is not
in shadow. pCL lies in the interval [−1, 1]2, so in order to sample the
shadow map we must bring it into the interval [0, 1]2, which is as
simple as dividing by 2 and adding a half to each component.
The limitation of shadow mapping lies in the fact that we ras-
terize the shadow map individually from the camera rendering.
That means that we’re actually reconstructing the signal that was
captured into the shadow map at each rendered fragment, and thus
we’re prone to aliasing if the resolution of the shadow map is not
high enough to capture the frequency of the geometry. This can be
countered by increasing the resolution of the shadow map, but that
presents other issues. We can only scale the shadow map resolu-
tion uniformly, but we need varying resolutions for different parts
of the shadow map. This is due to the fact that the shadow map is
essentially projected onto the rendered scene, and so as the distance
from the occluder to the occludee increases, so does the area that
the fragment is projected onto.
The aliasing typically presents itself in the edges of the shad-
ows, while the insides and outsides of the shadows appear clean.
When rendering shadows using shadow mappping, the 4 nearest31
31 Or more, depending on the ﬁltering
method.
texels of the shadow map is sampled and combined to construct a
visibility value in the interval [0, 1]. Unless the geometry is more
==PAGE:24==
24
efficient use of spatial data structures in gpu shaders
high frequent than what the shadow map can represent given its
resolution, we can decide whether a fragment is deﬁnitely in or not
in shadow if the 4 texels agree on the visibility. We can label the
fragment as occluded, visible or undecided.
This is exactly the coarse-grained method we’re looking for.
If a fragment is labeled as undecided we ray-trace it for increased
precision and to avoid artifacts, but otherwise we trust the shadow
map to decide whether the fragment is in shadow or not. By using
shadow mapping before tracing shadow rays with the BVH, we are
effectively culling the fragments with a much cheaper method.
Hertel et al. has used this method for kD-trees with success,
but not in compute shaders. [HHW09] They use a conservatively
rasterized shadow map, meaning that during rasterization, the
pixel center does not have to lie within the triangle, but rather the
triangle merely has to intersect the bounds of the pixel. The idea of
this is to make sure that no geometry is missed, since no ray tracing
will be performed if the shadow map does not successfully sample
high-frequent geometry; e.g. if there is a small hole in the geometry
between the 4 samples in the shadow map it will be falsely labeled.
They circumvent this by storing a triangle ID at each shadow map
texel for the triangle that was rasterized into it. They use this when
sampling the shadow map to determine whether the texel was fully
covered by the triangle. This is problematic if small triangles are
used, as triangles smaller than the shadow map texel cannot fully
cover a texel. As such, it would not produce incorrect results, but
rather the optimization would not work.
Unfortunately, hardware support for conservative rasterization
is not wide, and implementing it through shaders requires the use
of geometry shaders, which are known to have a large performance
construct. We experiment with using a regular shadow map for
this. The implication is that the shadow map resolution must be
high enough to capture at least 1 sample of the geometry, such that
the fragment can be marked as undecided and ray-traced. We do
not need any precision in these samples, as they are only used for
classiﬁcation and ray tracing takes care of the rest.
We can verify the assumption visually by calculating shadowing
using ray-tracing with our BVH for an entire buffer. We compute
the label for each pixel using the above technique; if the label is
undecided the pixel fulﬁlls the assumption no matter what, but if
the label is occluded or visible and doesn’t match what we calculated
using the BVH, then that pixel does not uphold the assumption.
This is of course no deﬁnitive proof, but it tells us something about
whether the technique works in practice for speciﬁc geometry.
Like Hertel et al. we also restrict the ray interval using the depth
values from the shadow map. We call this interval culling. Further-
more, we also restrict the maximum of the ray. We add a constant
value of 0.2 to each end of the interval. This value is not based on
anything, and thus the result of using interval culling is not guaran-
teed to be correct. The technique is advantageous because shadow
==PAGE:25==
method
25
rays often have to pass by other objects closely, before hitting the
occluder. But when the interval is restricted, we’re able to immedi-
ately skip a large part of the tree. The downside is that it increases
our dependence on a high-resolution shadow map, and it is not
guaranteed to provide correct results.
Due to the fact that we are implementing this using compute
shaders, we must consider how we make use of the additional
control. We present 4 different methods that will be implemented
and compared.
Naive
Dedicate a pixel per thread and let each thread
1. sample the shadow map and consider whether ray tracing is
needed,
2. perform ray tracing if needed.
We must also decide on a thread group size. As long as thread
group size is above the wave size, it should be ﬁne. A good, generic
choice is be 8 × 8 × 1, which is equal to the wave size of AMD
hardware and double the wave size of NVIDIA hardware. Like
Aila and Laine we use persistant traversal. [AL09] The idea is to
launch a static number of thread groups, possibly depending on the
hardware, such that the entire GPU is ﬁlled and then use a global
atomic counter to distribute work from a pool.
The issue with this method is that if only some threads inside
a wave need ray-tracing, the rest of the threads will have to wait
for those to ﬁnish. This is especially critical if only a single thread
needs to ray-trace.
Work distribution
Using persistant traversal, we could let each
thread group fetch a cluster of pixels, check if any needs ray-tracing
and ray trace if all pixels need to. If not, fetch another cluster of
pixels, check them and append to the previous pixels needing ray-
tracing until the entire wave is ﬁlled with rays to be traced. We
need a place to accumulate the rays, but would like to not increase
our shared memory usage due to concurrency. Fortunately, as this
only happens in-between traversal runs, we can simply repurpose
the space used for the traversal stack. That does however mean that
we cannot accumulate rays between traversal runs. We use an in-
wave preﬁx sum to ﬁnd storage indices for rays. For this we also
repurpose the traversal stack. We consider 2 approaches to ﬁnding
new pixels:
1. Only check new pixels in threads which do not yet have a ray.
2. Use all threads to check new pixels, throw away pixels if we end
up with too many.
The ﬁrst approach has the advantage that we do not end up with
too many pixels to be traced. On the other hand, if we’re missing a
==PAGE:26==
26
efficient use of spatial data structures in gpu shaders
single ray, we will have a single thread looping over pixels to ﬁnd a
ray. For the second approach, we need a way to handle overspilling
rays. As stated previously, we cannot save rays between traversal
runs. Instead we save the pixel index of the ﬁrst ray that overspills.
After traversal, we check pixels from that index on. While this
means duplicated work, it is only duplicated in threads that would
otherwise have been idle.
Compact
A simple method would be to separate the pixel check-
ing and the ray tracing into different shaders. The pixel checking
shader is then combined with a preﬁx sum shader, such that the
entire screen is compacted. That is, put a 0 if a pixel does not need
ray-tracing and a 1 if it does. Then perform a preﬁx sum over all
pixels and use that to compute the new position. Thus we have a
total of 4 steps32 for this method; intra thread group preﬁx sum
32 Which means that 4 dispatches are
required.
over all pixels, inter thread group preﬁx sum over the sums of each
thread group, compaction and ray-tracing.
This requires us to allocate a structured buffer large enough
to hold all pixels.33 First and foremost we would need to store
33 If we have n pixels, needing ray-
tracing or not, the structured buffer
must be able to contain n elements.
the indices of each remaining pixel. There is no point in storing
additional data such as ray direction, as we would suffer from
precision issues and/or increased memory bandwidth. If we use
16 bit of precision each for x and y indices, we can represent buffers
of up to 65536 × 65536, which should be enough for the foreseeable
future. This gives us a storage requirement of 4 bytes per pixel. Our
preﬁx sum algorithm can handle (1024n)2 items in a single pass,
where n is the number of items handled per thread. Handling 4
pixels per thread will allow for up to 8K resolutions and should
provide plenty of work for the GPU.
The downside of this method is that the preﬁx sum has a ﬁxed,
upfront cost that we would pay even if the entire screen has to be
ray-traced. In that event, the naive method is most likely faster. On
the other hand, if that was the most usual case, there wouldn’t be
much beneﬁt to hybrid shadow rendering in general. Also, a lot of
data is being transferred from and to global memory, which might
have a performance cost.
Heatmap Visualization
In order to make observations about the performance and other
characteristics resulting from the render, it is helpful to create vari-
ous visualizations. For instance, we might be interested in looking
at the number of triangle intersections made per pixel for a render.
We could display it as a grayscale value by mapping it to [0, 1] as
in where xmax is the maximum number of triangle intersections we
want to be able to visualize.
g(x) =
x
xmax
(1)
But that wouldn’t take advantage of the bandwidth available in
==PAGE:27==
method
27
a color display. This becomes a problem when different parts of the
render has highly varying numbers of intersection, as increasing
the maximum value will decrease the precision. Instead we could
display the values as a heatmap.
We can do that by mapping the number into the HSV34 color
34 Hue, Saturation, Value
space: Hue represents the color on a color wheel and saturation
represents the amount of color, i.e. for S = 1 the result is the color
from the hue as is, while for S = 0 the result becomes grayscale.
The third and ﬁnal component, value, scales the result towards
black, i.e. for V = 0 the result is black, while for V = 1 the result is
untouched.
So how do we actually map the number into these 3 values? We
want each value to represent part of the input number. First of all,
if the input value is 0 we want the result to be black. If the input
value is 1 we want the result to be white. I have chosen to let the
result go from black to red, then change color from red to pink (i.e.
on the color wheel) and ﬁnally from pink to white.
Our initial values are then (H, S, V) = (0, 1, 0), such that the
color is red, it is fully saturated and scaled all the way to black.
The ﬁrst part is accomplished by letting the value go from 0 to
1, the second part by letting the hue go from 0 to 1 and the third
part by letting the saturation go from 1 to 0. Like we had xmax for
transforming into a gray-scale value, we need 3 similar values for
each part. In a way the three components are then bands of the
input value and as such we can view their sizes as bandwidths
B = (BH, BS, BV). We generally need a saturation function:
sat(x) = max(0, min(1, x))
It simply clamps a value x ∈Rn to [0, 1]n. We can use this to divide
an input x into the 3 bands:
V(x) = sat
 x
BV

,
(2)
H(x) = sat
 x −BV
BH

,
(3)
S(x) = sat
 x −BV −BH
BS

(4)
After doing so we can convert from the HSV color space to the RGB
color space. Taylor provides a fast method for doing so that maps
well to shaders: [Tay10]
hue(H) = sat(|6H −3| −1, 2 −|6H −2|, 2 −|6H −4|),
(5)
rgb(H, S, V) = [(hue(H) −1)S + 1]V
(6)
==PAGE:28==
==PAGE:29==
Implementation
The following will provide a short overview of the various parts
and history of the implementation. Sections following will go into
more detail.
This project has been implemented and integrated into the ren-
dering of the Unity game engine. The very ﬁrst part that was im-
plemented was a basic ray tracer; only trace primary rays with no
shading. This was not to provide any results, but rather to be able
to get the integration of ray tracing and Unity working. This re-
quired code for extracting geometry data from the loaded Unity
scene into a format suitable for consumption in compute shaders.
Following that, work started on the algorithms required for BVH-
powered ray tracing. Unfortunately, the optimizations mentioned
for radix sort were not implemented. However, as we’re not up-
dating the BVH every frame, it does not affect the run-time perfor-
mance of the system.
Due to the amount of algorithms that had to play together for
this to work, a method was needed to separately verify the correct-
ness of the implementations. Unity provides built-in integration
with the NUnit testing framework through a GUI in the editor.35
35 While the tests can also be run
through the command line without
a GUI, this was not utilized in this
project.
For almost every compute shader, a test case was written using
generated data. For most of the algorithms, it is fairly trivial to
construct a correct output for an input on the CPU in an inefﬁcient
manner. After the algorithms were implemented, they were used to
implement BVH acceleration support in the basic ray tracer, in or-
der to verify the implementation visually. It was then trivial to take
the ray tracing code and use for shadowing rather than primary ray
tracing.
Initially the shadows were implemented as an image effect in
Unity, but this proved to be too limiting for hybrid shadow render-
ing. Therefore a custom render pipeline was implemented in Unity.
This render pipeline uses deferred lighting with support for only
a single light as no more was needed for the test scene. In order to
implement hybrid shadow rendering, shadow mapping had to be
implemented ﬁrst. Earlier in the project, the plan was that if time
allowed for it, area light shadows would be pursued. Thus, in or-
der to create something approximating an area light, a paraboloid
mapping was used for the shadow map, capturing a hemisphere
around the light source. Finally, the 4 methods for hybrid shadow
rendering was implemented on top of this.
==PAGE:30==
30
efficient use of spatial data structures in gpu shaders
Basic Ray Tracer
The ray tracer is implemented as a window in the Unity editor. Fig-
ure 2 shows a picture of this after a rendering. It loads proﬁles from
a custom asset type, which makes testing speciﬁc conﬁgurations
a lot easier. It is implemented very naively as a single kernel and
maps 1 thread to 1 pixel, tracing a single ray per pixel. It generates
the camera rays using camera matrices provided by Unity (such
that the output geometrically matches Unity) and then tests every
triangle for a possible intersection using Möller–Trumbore triangle
intersection. [MT05]
Figure 2: Basic ray tracer inside Unity.
Scene is lit by a single directional
light using barycentric coordinates as
albedo.
More speciﬁcally, Unity exposes two relevant matrices for a cam-
era: P, the projection matrix, and V, the world-to-camera matrix.
To go from world to clip-space coordinates they are combined as
PV. Each invocation of the compute shader knows which pixel it is
in (the dispatch thread ID) and we want to turn this into a world-
space point pw on the camera’s near-plane. The pixel position pp
is essentially a 2D point in a space N ∈

0, widthp
 ×
h
0, heightp
h
,
where widthp is the width of the screen in pixels. First of all we
need to scale the coordinate to [−1, 1]2. We ﬁrst use a scaling ma-
trix S, that scales by (
2
screenw ,
2
screenh ), afterwhich the coordinates lie
in [0, 2]2. We then use a translation matrix T that translates by −1
which puts the coordinates in [−1, 1]2. We now have the points in
clip-space and thus we can simply use the inverse the provided ma-
trices (PV)−1 to translate them into world space. The ﬁnal matrix
is then M = (PV)−1 TS. The beneﬁt of this approach is that the
rendering will match Unity’s rendering 1:1.
The geometry is gathered from the currently active scene.
Unity exposes an API for ﬁnding all game objects in the scene. Each
==PAGE:31==
implementation
31
of these game objects have a MeshFilter component that contains
the mesh of the game object. The triangle data is harvested from
the Unity scene graph and put into one big buffer. Each element
of the buffer contains 3 vertices and a normal. This data format
will not be sufﬁcient for the future, but the harvesting of data from
the Unity scene graph will. In this implementation, the data is
transformed into world-space coordinates in C#.
Render Pipeline
The shadow rendering was initially implemented as an image effect
for prototyping reasons. While this approach was later dropped in
favor of Scriptable Render Pipelines, the latter uses many of the same
APIs.
Image Effects
An image effect36 is a way of applying effects to a rendered image.
36 Often referred to as a post-processing
effect.
It doesn’t have to only use the color buffer as input, but typically it
will write to the color buffer.
There are two ways of implementing an image effect in Unity.
Common to both is that it is implemented as a component that is
attached to a camera. The ﬁrst method is the original way to write
an image effect in Unity. The component can implement a callback
method as follows:
1
void OnRenderImage(RenderTexture src, RenderTexture dest) {
2
Graphics.Blit(src, dest, mat); 37
37 Copy source texture into target
texture using the shader speciﬁed by
the material. Internally, a full-screen
quad is rendered to achieve this.
3
}
This method is called after all rendering is complete. Internally,
Unity maintains two render textures that it swaps as input and
output. This works well for simple image effects, like tonemapping,
but it only allows for using the color buffer as input and output.
It also does not allow one to specify when the call occurs during
rendering. For example, an SSAO38 image effect will want to run
38 Screen-space ambient occlusion.
before lighting so that it can write the occlusion into the G-Buffer
and affect only ambient lighting.
The second way is to use command buffers, which are a lower
level abstraction available in Unity for executing graphics com-
mands. They allow one to record commands into a buffer and then
let the Unity rendering system execute those. They can be executed
manually or hooked up to various points of the rendering path
such as after lighting, before post-process etc. [Uni17c]. The method
implemented above would look like the following:
1
var cmd = new CommandBuffer { name = 39
39 The name given to the command
buffer will be visible in various UI’s,
which makes debugging much easier.
2
"A descriptive name" };
3
cmd.Blit(src, dest, mat); 40
40 Record blit into command buffer.
4
camera.AddCommandBuffer(CameraEvent.AfterImageEffects, 41
41 Register command buffer to be run
at a certain point in rendering.
5
cmd);
==PAGE:32==
32
efficient use of spatial data structures in gpu shaders
As can be seen, this is a deferred execution model. Methods42
42 Equivalents of the Graphics.*
methods, such as Blit, as well as .
are called on the CommandBuffer, which records them for later
execution. The methods available consists of equivalents of the
Graphics.* functions and various methods for managing render
targets and global uniforms.
Note that this does not take advantage of the ﬂexibility provided
by command buffers at all. The downside to this ﬂexibility is that
it is less simple to use. The above code is provided in a free-form,
which leaves the question; when should it be called? There are sev-
eral options. If what is recorded into the command buffer doesn’t
depend on per-frame data, it simply has to be called after the com-
ponent is enabled. Otherwise it can be added in the OnPreRender()
callback method. But it also has to be removed again. If it is added
when the component is enabled, it should likewise be removed
when the component is disabled.
Scriptable Render Pipelines
While implementing the shadow rendering as an image effect al-
lowed for getting a prototype up and running, it did not provide
enough ﬂexibility. For example, the results of the shadow compu-
tation could not be taken into account during lighting, resulting in
incorrect output. Likewise, the shadowmap optimization requires
more control over the shadowmap rendering. This could partially
be achieved by modifying the built-in shaders used by Unity, but
the deferred rendering path in Unity is not trivial and would likely
affect implementation time a lot.
Going one abstraction level lower, Unity presents us with an ex-
perimental rendering feature called Scriptable Render Pipelines. This
allows one to essentially provide a custom render loop, which calls
into Unity API’s implemented in C++ for heavy tasks like frustum
culling. The user implements a function that is called once per ren-
dering, representing the body of the render loop. This function is
passed a ScriptableRenderContext as argument, which contains
methods for e.g. culling, drawing renderers and executing com-
mand buffers. As with the CommandBuffer, a deferred execution
model is used, so in a way it is also a command buffer.
Unity provides a basic render pipeline, which draws opaque and
transparent objects in a forward rendering style as well as a skybox.
[Uni17a] A render pipeline exists as an asset in Unity, so there is an
amount of code for managing that. The interesting part, however, is
the render loop code:
1
public override void Render(ScriptableRenderContext
renderContext, Camera[] cameras)
2
{
3
foreach (var camera in cameras) 43
43 Perform rendering for each camera
in the scene that needs rendering.
4
{
5
CullingParameters cullingParams; 44
44 Perform culling of lights, probes and
objects.
6
if (!CullResults.GetCullingParameters(camera, out
==PAGE:33==
implementation
33
cullingParams))
7
continue;
8
CullResults cull = CullResults.Cull(ref cullingParams,
context);
9
10
context.SetupCameraProperties(camera); 45
45 Setup camera properties for
rendering, such as sets render target,
view/projection matrices and other
per-camera built-in shader variables.
11
12
SetupLightShaderVariables(cull.visibleLights, 46
46 Setup global lighting shader
variables – not included for brevity.
13
context);
14
15
var settings = new DrawRendererSettings(cull, camera,
new ShaderPassName("BasicPass")); 47
47 Draw opaque objects using BasicPass
shader pass.
16
settings.sorting.flags = SortFlags.CommonOpaque;
17
settings.inputFilter.SetQueuesOpaque();
18
context.DrawRenderers(ref settings);
19
20
context.DrawSkybox(camera); 48
48 Draw skybox.
21
22
settings.sorting.flags = SortFlags.CommonTransparent; 49
49 Draw transparent objects using
BasicPass shader pass.
23
settings.inputFilter.SetQueuesTransparent();
24
context.DrawRenderers(ref settings);
25
26
context.Submit();
27
}
28
}
We are given control over what to render, when to render it
and what the environment is when rendering. So while attaching
command buffers to a camera would allow us to achieve most
things50, it implies that we have to maintain compatibility with
50 In combination with modiﬁying
built-in shaders.
existing graphics features. Implementing a new graphics feature is
in itself a challenge, and prototyping such often requires one to be
able to swiftly change the rendering setup, which can be a hassle if
we need to make sure that we didn’t break any features not related
to the project. Using scriptable render pipelines, we start more or
less from scratch51 and thus we don’t have to worry as much about
51 But still within the safe surroundings
of Unity.
compatibility with features of Unity that we do not need.
Deferred Lighting
We will use a deferred render pipeline for our solution. The naive
way of implementing lighting and shading for a rasterization
pipeline is called forward rendering; the lighting and shading is cal-
culated right away in the fragment shader of each rendered object.
This means that if another object is drawn on top of another,52 the
52 That is, drawn in that order.
results of the previous objects is discarded and thus the computa-
tional cost is wasted. Deferred rendering circumvents this waste by
writing the values needed for lighting calculation into temporary
buffers; typically at least albedo, specular, normal and position.
These buffers are collectively referred to as the G-Buffers, where the
==PAGE:34==
34
efficient use of spatial data structures in gpu shaders
G stands for geometry. Afterwards the lighting can be calculated
as a screen-space effect that samples these values. Naturally, the
lighting is only calculated once per fragment. Typically, the posi-
tion is stored indirectly as the depth, which can then be used to
re-construct the position.
Another advantage is that it allows the developer to logically
split shaders into several shaders, which potentially uses fewer
registers. As we intend to implement the hybrid shadow rendering
using compute shaders, we actually can’t use forward rendering at
all, since compute shaders cannot be used as part of the traditional
graphics pipeline on the GPU.
While a key advantage of deferred rendering is the ability to
handle many lights, we are not interested in doing so for our so-
lution. Thus we calculate lighting for a single light for all pixels,
and do not apply any techniques such as tiled or clustered lighting.
[OA11] [OBA12]
In order to easily switch shadowing techniques, we introduce
another G-buffer that stores shadow value and use this during
lighting calculations. For the lighting calculations, we use the built-
in lighting shader functions in Unity and base the code on the built-
in deferred rendering path. Summing up, the G-buffer consists of
the same as the built-in deferred renderer of Unity except that we
replace the last buffer with our shadow buffer:53 [Uni17b]
53 In the built-in pipeline of Unity it is
used for emission, lighting, lightmaps
and reﬂection probes.
1. (ARGB32) Diffuse (RGB), occlusion (A)
2. (ARGB32) Specular (RGB), roughness (A)
3. (ARGB2101010) World space normal (RGB), unused (A)
4. (ARGB32) Shadow (R), unused (GBA)
5. Depth & stencil
The steps of the render pipeline are:
1. Render shadow map
2. Draw objects into G-buffer
3. Compute shadows into shadow G-buffer
4. Calculate lighting
5. Blit to target buffer, possibly using debug shader
==PAGE:35==
Results
All results were obtained on a laptop with a Intel Core i7 4980HQ
CPU and an AMD Radeon R9 M370X GPU. The scene size that can
be used is limited by the construction method we’ve implemented.
The issue is that the C# code in our implementation that extracts
the geometry from Unity takes too long to run for high polygon
counts. The issue is not with the GPU code, as the GPU driver
would crash if each step used more than a few seconds.
Thread divergence occurs naturally while ray tracing as some
rays will almost immediately hit a surface, while other rays must
pass by a large amount of geometry. As the purpose of a shad-
owing algorithm essentially is to prove whether or not a ray is
occluded, every bounding box the ray hits must be tested for inter-
section to see whether a primitive (e.g. a triangle) is hit. So while
an occluded ray can exit early, a ray that actually hits the light
source must test for intersections all the way to the light source.
This is seen in ﬁgure 3 where a scene has been rendered with
shadows ray-traced using a BVH. Box intersections, triangle inter-
sections and stack pops are visualized using heatmaps. Note that
the heatmaps shows values for shadow rays, and not for camera
rays. In fact, the primary rays are rendered using rasterization and
not ray tracing at all.
First of all we see that the number of triangle intersections is
generally rather low, meaning that the BVH does what it’s sup-
posed to. On the other hand we see that the number of bounding
box intersections varies a lot. The key observation here is that they
vary the most around the edges of the shadows. This shows quite
well why hybrid shadow rendering is a good idea; we effectively
discard a large area of pixels that are expensive to trace. Of course,
Setup
Ray tracing
Shadow mapping
Total
Relative
Ray-tracing
86.41 ms
-
86.41 ms
100%
HBR (2562)
20.79 ms
0.03 ms
20.82 ms
24.10%
HBR (2562, I)
13.32 ms
0.03 ms
13.35 ms
15.45%
HBR (5122)
14.08 ms
0.04 ms
14.12 ms
16.34%
HBR (5122, I)
9.23 ms
0.04 ms
9.27 ms
10.73%
HBR (10242)
10.46 ms
0.05 ms
10.51 ms
12.17%
HBR (10242, I)
7.10 ms
0.05 ms
7.16 ms
8.28%
Table 2: GPU execution times using
ray tracing and hybrid shadow ren-
dering with an 8 × 8 kernel, a stack
size of 12 and a render resolution of
1920 × 1080 on a AMD Radeon M370X.
"I" indicates whether interval culling
was enabled. The scene used contains
7102 triangles.
==PAGE:36==
36
efficient use of spatial data structures in gpu shaders
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3: A simple scene rendered
with ray-traced shadows. The
heatmaps are for shadow rays. (a)
Normal render. (b) Heatmap of box
intersections (100 range per band). (c)
Heatmap of triangle intersections (10
range per band). (d) Heatmap of stack
pops (20 range per band).
we still have the edges themselves which are the most expensive,
but it is still a far lower amount of pixels to be ray-traced.
This is also well reﬂected in the performance results in table 2
(and ﬁgure 7). The rendering result for the same scene can be seen
in ﬁgure 8. It should of course be noted that the increase in perfor-
mance is dependent on the geometry and the size of the shadow
map. The latter is clearly reﬂected in table 2. We see in ﬁgure 2 that
it generally provides a bigger performance increase than doubling
the shadow map resolution does. This performance gain should
increase as the scene size and distance to light does, since more
and more geometry would be discarded early. We also see that the
cost of shadow mapping is negligible compared to the cost of ray
tracing.
Another observation is that the heatmaps for box intersections
and stack pops have a very similar distribution, which makes sense
as a pop generally means that more traversal and thus more box
intersections will occur. The stack popping is the stack-based traver-
sal algorithm’s way of backtracking.
In ﬁgure 9 we see a debug output that visually tests the assump-
tion that hybrid shadow rendering is based on. We see that the
method works for all the tested shadow map resolutions. Inter-
val culling, however, introduces error at a shadow map resolution
of 2562. For shadow map resolutions above that, it produces cor-
==PAGE:37==
results
37
Figure 4: CodeXL output for shadow
ray-tracing compute shader.
rect results. All conﬁgurations have the same error around cer-
tain edges. It is likely that this is due to small differences in the
ray-tracing and shadow mapping implementations, or due to an
incorrectly set depth state.
The CodeXL tool from AMD allows one to inspect shader
source code to see how many scalar and vector registers are used
after the shader is compiled by the driver. As such it is speciﬁc
to AMD GPUs based on the GCN architecture, but nevertheless
it is very important for reasoning about performance. Running
the shadow ray-tracing compute shader without hybrid shadow
rendering through CodeXL gives us the output in ﬁgure 4, which
shows that the shader uses 92 SGPRs and 34 VGPRs per thread.
These numbers are per thread. GCN provides 65536 VGPRs per
compute unit. GCN 1 and 2 provides 512 SGPRs per compute unit,
while GCN 3 increases the amount to 800 per compute unit. [Aal17]
Note that the tool also provides us with an maximum amount of
waves that can be in-ﬂight on each vector unit given the register
usage. This is calculated by rounding down the ratio between how
many registers the architecture provides and how many the shader
uses per wave. Since we have 2 kinds of registers, the one with the
largest ratio sets the limit.
We see that we can run 5 waves per vector unit.54 As GCN pro-
54 In CodeXL it is referred to as a
SIMD.
vides 4 vector units per compute unit, this means that we can run
20 waves per compute unit. As the thread group shared memory
is per compute unit, we want to look at how our usage of shared
memory affects us. Since the per-thread traversal stack is stored in
shared memory, we can ﬁnd our shared memory usage per wave in
bytes as
shared memory per wave = threads per wave · stack size · 4 + 4 .
We multiply the stack size by 4 as we’re storing a number of
32-bit unsigned integers55 and add 4 bytes for the shared work
55 I.e. 4 bytes per item.
==PAGE:38==
38
efficient use of spatial data structures in gpu shaders
counter. GCN provides 64 KiB of shared memory per compute unit
and as such we simply take the down-rounded ratio between that
and our usage per wave to ﬁnd the maximum number of waves
that can be in ﬂight given our shared memory usage. Table 4 shows
this calculated for a number of stack sizes. We see that if we want
to use the 20 waves allowed by our register usage, we must restrict
the stack size to 12 items. Table 5 shows execution times using
a number of stack sizes. Stack sizes below 12 were too small to
run the test scene. The timings are visualized in ﬁgure 5. We see
immediately that the stack size has a huge impact on performance,
due to the fact that increasing the stack size vastly increases the
amount of shared memory that is used and thus decreases the
amount of waves that can be in ﬂight.
Method
SGPR
VGPR
Waves per CU
Naive
94
34
20
WD1
90
39
20
WD2
92
42
20
Compact (step 1)
54
21
36
Compact (step 2)
36
12
40
Compact (step 3)
26
9
40
Compact (step 4)
38
28
36
Table 3: Register usage for the 4
HBR methods. Interval culling is not
enabled for any of the shaders. Note
that shared memory usage is not taken
into account for the number of active
waves per compute unit.
The methods implemented to take advantage of the ﬂexibility
of compute shaders have unfortunately failed to provide additional
performance. Please note that the compact method implementation
has stability issues when running under DirectX 12, which is the
only API we have been able to proﬁle successfully, and as such the
results for that method should be taken with a grain of salt. We see
in ﬁgure 6 that the naive method provides the best performance,
despite not utilizing the full SIMD width of the vector units. A
plausible theory is that the stack sizes are limiting the concurrency
to the point that additional SIMD utilization simply causes more
memory operations that cannot be latency hidden successfully due
to the amount of waves that can be in-ﬂight with the given register
and shared memory usage. We see in table 3 that the ray-tracing
step of the compaction method uses signiﬁcantly less registers than
the other methods and that the shared memory usage becomes the
bottleneck, meaning that traversal shader is only limited by the
traversal stack. Not surprisingly, the work distribution methods
do not lower the register count, as they do not split the shader into
several shaders.
As for the performance of the work distribution methods, it is
likely that the atomic counter is updated too often while looking
for pixels to trace. For persistant traversal using a global atomic
counter, Aila and Laine state that "As long as the atomic counter does
not cause signiﬁcant serialization, underutilization will not occur with
this design." [AL09]. If the atomic counter is accessed too frequently,
==PAGE:39==
results
39
it is certainly possible that it causes signiﬁcant serialization. For
the compaction method, it is also highly likely that the compaction
itself takes up the time it saves. It is noteworthy that the work dis-
tribution methods have a higher variance than both the compact
and naive methods. This causes frame stutter, as the amount of
time it takes to compute the shadows varies noticeably from frame
to frame. This is most likely due to the global atomic counter being
accessed too often, causing the distribution of work to be highly
dependent on the order of execution.
Stack size
Waves per CU
6
40
7
36
8
31
9
28
10
25
11
23
12
21
13
19
14
18
15
17
17
15
18
14
19
13
21
12
23
11
25
10
28
9
31
8
36
7
42
6
51
5
63
4
85
3
127
2
255
1
(a) 64-wide waves
Stack size
Waves per CU
12
40
13
39
14
36
15
34
16
31
17
30
18
28
19
26
20
25
21
24
22
23
23
22
24
21
25
20
26
19
28
18
30
17
31
16
34
15
36
14
39
13
42
12
46
11
51
10
56
9
63
8
73
7
85
6
102
5
127
4
170
3
255
2
(b) 32-wide waves
Table 4: Number of waves that can run
concurrently on each compute unit on
a GCN-based GPU. Register usage is
not taken into account. The amount of
waves is the maximum amount for that
stack size. As such, if you increment
the stack size by 1, you should go 1
row down.
==PAGE:40==
40
efficient use of spatial data structures in gpu shaders
12 13 14 15 17 18 19 21 23 25 28 31 36 42 51 63 85 127
Stack size
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
Duration (ms)
Figure 5: GPU execution times for
ray-tracing shadows at a resolution
of 1920 × 1080 using a number of
stack sizes. A kernel size of 8 × 8 was
used. The GPU was an AMD Radeon
M370X. The scene used contains 7102
triangles.
Stack size
Execution time
Relative
12
86.38 ms
100.00 %
13
87.27 ms
101.03 %
14
88.69 ms
102.67 %
15
90.75 ms
105.05 %
17
97.78 ms
113.19 %
18
102.78 ms
118.98 %
19
108.96 ms
126.13 %
21
116.35 ms
134.69 %
23
125.33 ms
145.09 %
25
136.19 ms
157.66 %
28
149.71 ms
173.31 %
31
149.72 ms
173.32 %
36
191.96 ms
222.22 %
42
226.34 ms
262.03 %
51
277.98 ms
321.81 %
63
277.98 ms
321.80 %
85
551.42 ms
638.35 %
127
551.40 ms
638.33 %
Table 5: GPU execution times for
ray-tracing at 1920 × 1080 using a
number of stack sizes. A kernel size
of 8 × 8 was used. The GPU was an
AMD Radeon M370X. The scene used
contains 7102 triangles.
==PAGE:41==
results
41
Compact
Naive
WD1
WD2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Duration (ms)
Figure 6: GPU execution times for ray-
tracing at 1920 × 1080 using different
HSR methods. The stack size used was
12. Interval culling was not enabled.
The GPU used was an AMD Radeon
M370X. The scene used contains 7102
triangles.
(0, False)
(256, False)
(256, True)
(512, False)
(512, True)
(1024, False)
(1024, True)
Shadow Map Resolution,Interval Enabled
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Duration (ms)
Name
        Ray tracing
        Shadow mapping
Figure 7: Comparison of GPU exe-
cution times using ray tracing and
hybrid shadow rendering with an
8 × 8 kernel, a stack size of 12 and a
render resolution of 1920 × 1080 on a
AMD Radeon M370X. The scene used
contains 7102 triangles.
==PAGE:42==
42
efficient use of spatial data structures in gpu shaders
(a) Ray-tracing
(b) HBR (2562)
(c) HBR (2562, I)
(d) HBR (5122)
(e) HBR (5122, I)
(f) HBR (10242)
(g) HBR (10242, I)
Figure 8: Rendering results from ray
tracing shadows with and without
hybrid shadow rendering, with an
8 × 8 kernel, a stack size of 12 and a
render resolution of 1920 × 1080 on
a AMD Radeon M370X. "I" indicates
whether interval culling was enabled.
The scene used contains 7102 triangles.
==PAGE:43==
results
43
(a) HBR (2562)
(b) HBR (2562, I)
(c) HBR (5122)
(d) HBR (5122, I)
(e) HBR (10242)
(f) HBR (10242, I)
Figure 9: Visual testing of whether
hybrid shadow rendering computes
the correct result or not. Red: The
pixel was incorrectly labeled by the
shadow map. Green: The pixel was
labeled as undecided. Light gray: The
pixel was correctly labeled as lit. Dark
gray: The pixel was correctly labeled
as in shadow. "I" indicates whether
interval culling was enabled.
==PAGE:44==
==PAGE:45==
Discussion
It seems that the speed-ups we achieve from hybrid shadow ren-
dering are greater than those achieved by Hertal et al. [HHW09] A
very possible reason could be that their test scenes stress the opti-
mization more than ours. E.g. rendering a solid grid would be close
to the worst case scenario for the optimization. Likewise, our test
scene does not contain a lot of polygons due to our implementation
for extracting geometry data from Unity running too slow.
Another factor is that they implement their ray tracer in a frag-
ment shader rather than a compute shader and that GPUs have
evolved quite a bit since their implementation, as almost 10 years
have passed.
While it would have been interesting to implement our solution
using fragment shaders and see if any speed-up occurred merely
from using compute shaders, such would not have been possible
with the traversal method we used, due to the fact that it stores
the stack in shared memory which is not available in fragment
shaders. Therefore, one might want to implement hybrid shadow
rendering using stackless traversal in both a fragment shader and
a compute shader in order to compare the performance of each
implementation.
The amount of stack pops relative to the amount of triangle in-
tersections in ﬁgure 3 shows us that we should be careful when
selecting a stackless traversal method, as it affects a component
of the ray-tracing that is responsible for a large part of the overall
performance. For example, restarting from the top gets expensive
very fast and might be more expensive than what is gained in la-
tency hiding. Likewise, due to the number of box intersections it
makes sense to optimize the box intersections to be faster in order
to increase the overall speed of the ray tracing.
It also would have been interesting to see how the other methods
of BVH construction would have affected the performance. While it
should deﬁnitely be positive, the question is how much.
We have only tested our solution on AMD hardware, and thus
it would have been interesting to see how it performs on NVIDIA
hardware. This would require changing certain parts of the code
to accommodate the 32-wide SIMDs of NVIDIA GPUs. The wave
optimizations we have applied are not speciﬁc to AMD hardware.
In the results, we see in table 4 that the stack size has great in-
==PAGE:46==
46
efficient use of spatial data structures in gpu shaders
ﬂuence over the traversal performance, and that we can achieve
large speed-ups by lowering it. However, the size of the stack de-
cides how large BVHs we can traverse. This means that our solu-
tion does not scale very nicely for larger scenes, as the stack size
would have to be increased. So, another option is to reduce the
thread group size below the wave size. While this means that we
won’t be taking full advantage of the SIMD width, it might yield
better performance due to more waves being in ﬂight at once, such
that the GPU can better hide the latency from memory reads.
But even if this yields better performance, it is much more
preferable to use the entire SIMD width and take advantage of
sufﬁcient latency hiding. This is an extremely good argument for
stackless traversal; if the stack does not have to be stored at all, the
concurrency of the shader is only limited by its register usage.
But that doesn’t mean that the shared memory should go
to waste. This could allow for even greater speed-up by using the
shared memory as a cache for parts of the BVH. Either the top part
of the tree could be cached, or perhaps recently visited nodes in
order to take advantage of coherent rays in the same wave.
Caching part of the BVH means that we have to consider how we
access the cached nodes. Storing the top part of the BVH would be
trivial if the nodes were laid out breadth-ﬁrst, as we would simply
use the same indices for the cache. That is unfortunately not the
case for the construction method by Karras that was used in this
project, as it stores the nodes in a depth-ﬁrst order. [Kar12] It would
be trivial using the method by Murguía et al. [Mur+13] or García
et al. [Gar+14]. If we instead look at caching recently visited nodes,
an indexing scheme could be something as simple as the nodes
index modulo the amount of nodes that can be cached, or perhaps
something slightly more complex to avoid colissions.
As each BVH node takes up 64 B, we can store just under half a
node per thread56 if we do not want to compromise on concurrency.
56 We need a single integer for the per
thread group cluster index.
Within an 8 × 8 thread group this would give us 21 cached nodes.
On NVIDIA platforms we would use a 4 × 8 thread group size,
limiting us to 15 nodes. But if we cannot come up with an implicit
indexing scheme,57 then we also need to store the node index,
57 E.g. if we were storing the top part
of the tree.
such that the user of the cache can check whether the element is
relevant or not. There is some amount of padding in the BVH node
layout we are using, which could be used to store this, meaning
that the storage size of the BVH node does not change. While it
might be tempting to increase the thread group size to beyond the
platform’s wave size, that would require research into whether
synchronization would be needed when reading and writing to the
cache.
In this implementation a naive approach has been taken in re-
gards to geometry storage due to time and complexity constraints.
In rasterization-based rendering, we store the geometry in vertex
==PAGE:47==
discussion
47
and index buffers. Ideally we would like to avoid duplicating that
data for the BVH. Of course that still leaves us with the internal
nodes for the BVH, but that is still far less data. It is not possible
to access the vertex and index buffers in Unity from scripting code
and as such it would require an engine-level change to support
sharing of geometry data. The graphics APIs do, however, allow for
compute shaders to read from vertex and index buffers.
How this data would be used for the BVH is not trivial. In Unity,
and most other game engines, vertex data is stored in object space.
Only in the vertex shader is it transformed, and the result of that
is not saved anywhere, except for a handful of vertices in a small
cache used internally in the pipeline. This is to avoid too much
memory trafﬁc, as the result is only used right after transform for
rasterization. Typically, if multiple rasterizations occur, they are
from different viewpoints.58 Likewise, that same memory trafﬁc
58 E.g. render from light and camera.
should be avoided for the BVH if updated every frame.
As a lot of geometry changes in games are simply afﬁne transfor-
mations, it makes sense to introduce transform nodes in the BVH,
such that the geometry itself is stored in object space, which the ray
is transformed into during traversal. This also means that the BVH
does not have to be re-built every frame, but rather its transform
node should simply be updated. The disadvantage is that there
cannot be overlapping bounding boxes between different objects,
which is likely to have a traversal cost. That is, the BVHs of objects
are completely separate. If the object is not skinned and does not
use vertex shader transformations,59 it is only subject to the afﬁne
59 This could be something like a vertex
shader for simulating grass movement
due to wind.
transformation caused by its transformation matrix. As such, the
BVH of an object could be pre-computed using more expensive
methods and thus achieve greater performance to offset the afore-
mentioned traversal cost.
If the object is skinned, its BVH must change in some way. A
simple re-ﬁt might be sufﬁcient for such, but it might also deteri-
orate to yield terrible traversal performance. We would prefer to
build the BVH as a pre-computation, such that we can achieve a
higher BVH quality. Another idea is to split the object based on the
bones. The hypothesis is that vertices around a bone are likely to
move coherently and as such would not deteriorate as much from
a re-ﬁtting. At run-time it would still simply be a re-ﬁt. It is done
by constructing the BVH of each part separately, thus disallowing
primitives to be shared between the parts that we divide the object
into.
While not pursued in this thesis, hybrid shadow rendering
has the potential to achieve physically correct soft shadows. Un-
fortunately, it is not trivial to do so with hybrid shadow rendering,
as it suffers from the same issue that other shadow mapping tech-
niques do; the samples in the shadow map are all taken from the
same origin. But non-trivial does not mean impossible. A possi-
ble solution is as follows: Imagine a ray from a point on the area
==PAGE:48==
48
efficient use of spatial data structures in gpu shaders
light to a fragment rendered from the main camera. We only have
a paraboloid shadow map in the center of the area light, so it does
not directly correlate to the ray we’re trying to trace. However, if
we consider all shadow map samples whose rays lie closest to the
shadow ray we want to trace, we can check whether the shadow
map samples ﬁnd an intersection close to the shadow ray. If that is
the case, we use the depth information for hybrid shadow render-
ing. Essentially, we would be ray-marching the shadow map and
so it should be possible to use a hierarchical Z-buffer to speed up
that step. As this step is deﬁnitely more expensive than the simple
shadow map sampling normally done with hybrid shadow render-
ing, we would like to avoid doing it for every shadow ray, since a
screen fragment will require many shadow rays to be traced. An
alternative could be to perform the step once per fragment and
instead check all shadow map samples that intersect the volume
spanned by the area light and the screen fragment.
Since a far larger area will be covered by shadows when com-
puting soft shadows, it is essential that a method similar to the
interval culling is created. While we restricted the t-interval in this
project, it would make more sense to use the shadow map values
to traverse as far into the BVH as possible using the volume. The
node reached can then be used as root for the individual rays to be
traced.
Perhaps it would make sense to implement the micro-rasterization
method proposed by Woop [Woo10] on GPU instead of CPU. The
argument here would be that we need samples covering the entire
area light either way, so the rays will be hitting all geometry that
lies within the volume anyway. Thus it might be faster to simply
rasterize the volume instead of tracing individual rays.
Comparing to imperfect shadow maps [Rit+08], using the BVH
for an area-light shadowing solution would not have the same tem-
poral stability issues, as the BVH ray-tracing provides geometry-
level precision and is not dependent on the camera position. Even
though a shadow map is used, and that is dependent on at least
the light position, we only use it to accelerate the ray-tracing and as
such it should not have an inﬂuence on the ﬁnal result. The micro-
rasterization method might however have temporal stability issues.
It would be interesting to combine it with temporal ﬁltering, such
that we instead accumulate samples and see whether that removes
the temporal instability.
==PAGE:49==
Conclusion
We have successfully integrated ray-tracing of meshes with raster-
ization in real-time rendering to provide an accurate shadowing
solution in the Unity game engine. This has required an in-depth
look at the available methods for parallel preﬁx sum, radix sort,
bounding volume hierarchy construction and traversal. While we’re
able to use geometry from Unity, our solution has issues with larger
scenes. These issues, however, have no relation with the methods
presented and is merely an implementation detail.
We have successfully used hybrid shadow rendering without
conservative rasterization, and shown that it greatly increases per-
formance over ray-traced shadows. Furthermore we show that there
are big performance increases to be gained from restricting the ray
interval based on the depth values in the shadow map, although
a better method able to guarantee correct results should be devel-
oped.
3 alternative methods of performing hybrid shadow rendering
have been presented in order to take advantage of the ﬂexibility
achieved by using compute shaders rather than fragment shaders.
While the presented alternative methods have not borne fruit, they
provide a point of reference on which future work can be based on.
We have analyzed the performance of these methods in order to
ﬁnd possible performance bottlenecks.
One such bottleneck we have found is the size of the traversal
stack. We have provided good evidence that stackless traversal is a
natural pairing with hybrid shadow rendering due to the increased
GPU concurrency. If large scenes are to be used for this approach,
it is essential that shared memory or registers do not have to be
wasted on a traversal stack. Stackless traversal would also be likely
to allow for the 3 alternative methods to perform better due to the
increased concurrency.
Given a better solution for construction, storage and updating
of the bounding volume hierarchy, this solution could be used
practically in a real-time context. However, if hard shadows are
desired, a better solution might be to use shadow volumes. [Cro77]
The advantage of hybrid shadow rendering over shadow volumes
and shadow mapping is the possibility of achieving physically
correct and temporally stable soft shadows, which we have laid
some of the groundwork for.
This project has been an incredible learning experience. The au-
==PAGE:50==
50
efficient use of spatial data structures in gpu shaders
thor has gone from having approximately zero knowledge of com-
pute shaders, bounding volume hierarchies and the inner workings
of ray tracing to having a deep understanding of how GPUs work
and how to design and implement efﬁcient algorithms for them, as
well as knowledge of the current state of the art within GPU-based
methods for bounding volume hierarchies.
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[Aal13]
F. P. Aalund. “A Comparative Study of Screen-Space
Ambient Occlusion Methods”. Master thesis. 2013 (cit.
on p. 7).
[Aal17]
S. Aaltonen. Optimizing GPU occupancy and resource
usage with large thread groups. Apr. 2017. url: http:
//archive.is/2017.07.01-121630/http://gpuopen.
com/optimizing- gpu- occupancy-resource- usage-
large-thread-groups/ (cit. on p. 37).
[AK14]
T. Aila and T. Karras. Agglomerative treelet restructuring
for bounding volume hierarchies. 2014 (cit. on p. 22).
[AL09]
T. Aila and S. Laine. “Understanding the efﬁciency of
ray traversal on GPUs”. In: Proceedings of the Conference
on High Performance Graphics 2009. 2009, pp. 145–149
(cit. on pp. 22, 25, 38).
[Ann+08]
T. Annen, T. Mertens, H. Seidel, E. Flerackers, and J.
Kautz. “Exponential Shadow Maps”. In: Proceedings of
Graphics Interface 2008. 2008, pp. 155–161 (cit. on p. 8).
[App15]
Apple. Apple Announces OS X El Capitan with Reﬁned
Experience & Improved Performance. June 2015. url:
http://archive.is/2017.07.02- 103851/https:
//www.apple.com/newsroom/2015/06/08Apple-
Announces - OS - X - El - Capitan - with - Refined -
Experience-Improved-Performance/ (cit. on p. 12).
[ÁS14]
A. T. Áfra and L. Szirmay-Kalos. “Stackless multi-
BVH traversal for CPU, MIC and GPU ray tracing”.
In: Computer Graphics Forum. Vol. 33. 2014, pp. 129–140
(cit. on p. 22).
[BK16]
N. Binder and A. Keller. “Efﬁcient Stackless Hierar-
chy Traversal on GPUs with Backtracking in Constant
Time”. In: Proceedings of High Performance Graphics.
2016, pp. 41–50 (cit. on p. 22).
[CD04]
E. Chan and F. Durand. “An Efﬁcient Hybrid Shadow
Rendering Algorithm”. In: Proceedings of the Fifteenth
Eurographics conference on Rendering Techniques. 2004
(cit. on p. 9).
==PAGE:52==
52
efficient use of spatial data structures in gpu shaders
[Cro77]
F. C. Crow. “Shadow algorithms for computer graph-
ics”. In: ACM SIGGRAPH Computer Graphics 11.2 (1977),
pp. 242–248 (cit. on pp. 9, 23, 49).
[DL06]
W. Donnelly and A. Lauritzen. “Variance shadow
maps”. In: Proceedings of the 2006 Symposium on Inter-
active 3D Graphics and Games. 2006, pp. 161–165 (cit. on
p. 8).
[DP15]
L. R. Domingues and H. Pedrini. “Bounding volume
hierarchy optimization through agglomerative treelet
restructuring”. In: Proceedings of the 7th Conference on
High-Performance Graphics. 2015, pp. 13–20 (cit. on
p. 22).
[Fer05]
R. Fernando. “Percentage-closer soft shadows”. In:
ACM SIGGRAPH 2005 Sketches. 2005, pp. 35–35 (cit. on
p. 8).
[Gar+14]
A. García, S. Murguia, U. Olivares, and F. F. Ramos.
“Fast parallel construction of stack-less complete LBVH
trees with efﬁcient bit-trail traversal for ray tracing”.
In: Proceedings of the 13th ACM SIGGRAPH International
Conference on Virtual-Reality Continuum and Its Applica-
tions in Industry. 2014, pp. 151–158 (cit. on p. 46).
[GPM11]
K. Garanzha, J. Pantaleoni, and D. McAllister. “Simpler
and faster HLBVH with work queues”. In: Proceedings
of the ACM SIGGRAPH Symposium on High Performance
Graphics. 2011, pp. 59–64 (cit. on p. 21).
[GS16]
M. Gjoel and M. Svendsen. “Low Complexity, High
Fidelity: The Rendering of INSIDE”. Game Developers
Conference Europe. 2016 (cit. on p. 7).
[Hei+16]
E. Heitz, J. Dupuy, S. Hill, and D. Neubelt. “Real-time
polygonal-light shading with linearly transformed
cosines”. In: ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 35.4
(2016), 41:1–48:8 (cit. on p. 8).
[HH]
T. Harada and L. Howes. “Introduction to GPU Radix
Sort”. In: Heterogeneouscompute.Org (), pp. 3–5 (cit. on
p. 18).
[HHW09]
S. Hertel, K. Hormann, and R. Westermann. “A hybrid
GPU rendering pipeline for alias-free hard shadows”.
In: Proceedings of Eurographics 2009 Area. April. 2009
(cit. on pp. 7, 9, 24, 45).
[Jam08]
D. James. Everything you need to know about DirectX 11.
Oct. 2008. url: http://archive.is/2017.07.02-
102958/http://www.techradar.com/news/software/
gaming/computing/everything-you-need-to-know-
about-directx-11-475655 (cit. on p. 12).
==PAGE:53==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
53
[KA13]
T. Karras and T. Aila. “Fast Parallel Construction of
High-quality Bounding Volume Hierarchies”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 5th High-Performance Graphics Conference.
2013, pp. 89–99 (cit. on p. 21).
[Kar12]
T. Karras. “Maximizing Parallelism in the Construction
of BVHs, Octrees, and K-d Trees”. In: Proceedings of
the Fourth ACM SIGGRAPH / Eurographics Conference
on High-Performance Graphics. 2012, pp. 33–37. arXiv:
9903011 [cs] (cit. on pp. 21, 22, 46).
[Lai10]
S. Laine. “Restart Trail for Stackless BVH Traversal”.
In: Proceedings of the Conference on High Performance
Graphics. 2010, pp. 107–111 (cit. on p. 22).
[Lau+09]
C. Lauterbach, M. Garland, S. Sengupta, D. Luebke,
and D. Manocha. “Fast BVH construction on GPUs”.
In: Computer Graphics Forum 28.2 (2009), pp. 375–384
(cit. on p. 21).
[Mic17]
Microsoft. Direct3D 11 Features. July 2017. url: http:
//archive.is/2017.07.02-103106/https://msdn.
microsoft.com/en- us/library/windows/desktop/
ff476342(v=vs.85).aspx (cit. on p. 12).
[MM14]
M. McGuire and M. Mara. “Efﬁcient GPU Screen-Space
Ray Tracing”. In: Journal of Computer Graphics Techniques
3.4 (2014), pp. 73–85 (cit. on p. 7).
[MT05]
T. Möller and B. Trumbore. “Fast, Minimum Storage
Ray/Triangle Intersection”. In: ACM SIGGRAPH 2005
Courses. 2005 (cit. on p. 30).
[Mur+13]
S. Murguía, F. Ávila, L. Reyes, and A. García. “Bit-
trail traversal for stackless LBVH on DirectCompute”.
In: GPU Pro 4: Advanced Rendering Techniques. 2013,
pp. 319–336 (cit. on pp. 22, 46).
[NVI06]
NVIDIA Corporation. NVIDIA Unveils CUDA™-The
GPU Computing Revolution Begins. Nov. 2006. url:
http://archive.is/2017.07.02- 100324/http:
//www.nvidia.com/object/IO_37226.html (cit. on
p. 12).
[OA11]
O. Olsson and U. Assarsson. “Tiled shading”. In:
Journal of Graphics, GPU, and Game Tools 15.4 (2011),
pp. 235–251 (cit. on p. 34).
[OBA12]
O. Olsson, M. Billeter, and U. Assarsson. “Clustered
deferred and forward shading”. In: Proceedings of
the Fourth ACM SIGGRAPH / Eurographics Conference
on High-Performance Graphics. 2012, pp. 87–96 (cit. on
p. 34).
[Pix88]
Pixar. The RenderMan Interface. 3.0. May 1988 (cit. on
p. 12).
==PAGE:54==
54
efficient use of spatial data structures in gpu shaders
[PK15]
C. Peters and R. Klein. “Moment Shadow Mapping”.
In: Proceedings of the 19th Symposium on Interactive 3D
Graphics and Games. 2015, pp. 7–14 (cit. on p. 8).
[PL10]
J. Pantaleoni and D. Luebke. “HLBVH: Hierarchi-
cal LBVH Construction for Real-Time Ray Tracing of
Dynamic Geometry”. In: Proceedings of the Conference
on High Performance Graphics. 2010, pp. 87–95 (cit. on
p. 21).
[Rit+08]
T. Ritschel, T. Grosch, M. H. Kim, and H. Seidel. “Im-
perfect Shadow Maps for Efﬁcient Computation of
Indirect Illumination”. In: ACM Transactions on Graphics
(TOG) 27.5 (2008), 129:1–129:8 (cit. on p. 48).
[Ros12]
P. Rosen. “Rectilinear texture warping for fast adap-
tive shadow mapping”. In: Proceedings of the ACM
SIGGRAPH Symposium on Interactive 3D Graphics and
Games. 2012, pp. 151–158 (cit. on p. 8).
[SA17]
M. Segal and K. Akeley. OpenGL 4.5 Core Proﬁle Spec-
iﬁcation. The Khronos Group Inc., June 2017 (cit. on
pp. 12, 15).
[SHG08]
S. Sengupta, M. Harris, and M. Garland. Efﬁcient Paral-
lel Scan Algorithms for GPUs. Tech. rep. NVIDIA Corpo-
ration, 2008 (cit. on p. 17).
[Shi01]
A. L. Shimpi. NVIDIA’s GeForce3: "NV20" Revealed.
Feb. 2001. url: http://archive.is/2017.07.01-
122136/http://www.anandtech.com/show/726 (cit. on
p. 12).
[Sto15]
J. Story. “Hybrid ray-traced shadows”. In: Game Devel-
oper Conference. 2015 (cit. on p. 8).
[Tat06]
N. Tatarchuk. “Dynamic Parallax Occlusion Mapping
with Approximate Soft Shadows”. In: Proceedings of the
2006 Symposium on Interactive 3D Graphics and Games.
2006, pp. 63–69 (cit. on p. 7).
[Tay10]
I. Taylor. RGB/HSV in HLSL. Nov. 2010. url: http:
//archive.is/2017.07.01-121859/http://chilliant.
blogspot.nl/2010/11/rgbhsv-in-hlsl.html (cit. on
p. 27).
[The12]
The Khronos Group Inc. Khronos Releases OpenGL 4.3
Speciﬁcation with Major Enhancements for the Standard
in Open, Cross-Platform 3D Graphics. Aug. 2012. url:
http://archive.is/2017.07.02- 103506/https:
//www.khronos.org/news/press/khronos-releases-
opengl-4.3-specification-with-major-enhancements
(cit. on p. 12).
==PAGE:55==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
55
[THM10]
T. Toczek, D. Houzet, and S. Mancini. “Efﬁcient stack-
less ray traversal for bounding sphere hierarchies
with CUDA”. In: Procedia Computer Science 1.1 (2010),
pp. 1111–1118 (cit. on p. 22).
[Uni17a]
Unity Technologies. Basic Render Pipeline Tutorial. Apr.
2017. url: https://github.com/Unity-Technologies/
ScriptableRenderLoop/blob/1beb50ec8e6a349b7ded8a0df9844bde3f61f7b0/
Assets/ScriptableRenderPipeline/BasicRenderPipelineTutorial/
BasicRenderPipeline.cs (cit. on p. 32).
[Uni17b]
Unity Technologies. Deferred shading rendering path. June
2017. url: http://archive.is/2017.07.02-132843/
https://docs.unity3d.com/Manual/RenderTech-
DeferredShading.html (cit. on p. 34).
[Uni17c]
Unity Technologies. Graphics Command Buffers. June
2017. url: http : / / archive . is / 2017 . 07 . 01 -
121801 / https : / / docs . unity3d . com / Manual /
GraphicsCommandBuffers.html (cit. on p. 31).
[Wil78]
L. Williams. “Casting Curved Shadows on Curved
Surfaces”. In: ACM SIGGRAPH Computer Graphics 12.3
(1978), pp. 270–274 (cit. on p. 7).
[Woo10]
S. Woop. A Fast Scanline Micro-Rasterization Kernel and
its Application to Soft Shadows. Tech. rep. Intel Corpora-
tion, 2010 (cit. on p. 48).
