==PAGE:1==
Sebastian Vogt (s151815)
Cooperative Transportation with
Non-holonomic Mobile Robots
Master’s Thesis, July 2017
==PAGE:2==
SEBASTIAN VOGT (S151815)
Cooperative Transportation with
Non-holonomic Mobile Robots
Master’s Thesis, July 2017
Supervisors:
Nils Axel Andersen, Associate Professor at the Electrical
Engineering Department of DTU
Jens Christian Andersen, Associate Professor at the Electrical
Engineering Department of DTU
Thomas Madsen Almdal, Consultant at the Danish
Technological Institute
DTU - Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby - 2017
==PAGE:3==
Cooperative Transportation with Non-holonomic Mobile Robots
This report was prepared by:
Sebastian Vogt (s151815)
Advisors:
Nils Axel Andersen, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
Jens Christian Andersen, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of
DTU
Thomas Madsen Almdal, Consultant at the Danish Technological Institute
DTU Electrical Engineering
Automation and Control
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 326
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 4525 3576
studieadministration@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
January 2017- July 2017
ECTS:
35
Education:
MSc
Field:
Electrical Engineering
Class:
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulﬁllment of the requirements
for graduation in the above education at the Technical University of
Denmark.
Copyrights:
©Sebastian Vogt, 2017
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis deals with the development of a control method for combining the capabil-
ities of two differential-drive robots, such that they carry out a transportation task in a
cooperative manner. Based on a problem analysis, a leader-follower formation is chosen
where the leading robot is assigned wheel speed commands while the follower, being
rigidly connected to the leader, runs behind. In order to support the leader, two control
objectives are identiﬁed. To achieve a distribution of load among the robots, a load sharing
controller is proposed, which compares the motor control voltages of leader and follower.
Furthermore, the design of an angle measurement device is given and its sensor reading
is utilized for the angular control of the follower with a PID controller. Finally, both
controllers are combined and the performance of the robot formation is evaluated in a real
test with an exemplary trajectory. Results and future work are discussed at the end of the
report.
i
==PAGE:5==
Preface
The idea of this thesis evolved when I visited the Danish Technological Institute in Odense
in November 2016, where I discussed possible thesis topics in the ﬁeld of mobile robotics
with Thomas and his colleagues. Due to their participation in the European project Safe-
COP, the topic of cooperative transportation was found.
This thesis would not have been possible without the guidance of my DTU supervisors
Nils Axel Andersen and Jens Christian Andersen. I would like to thank you a lot for all
your help.
I would also like to thank Thomas Madsen Almdal for giving me the opportunity to
contribute to their project.
Furthermore, I would like to say thank you to Henrik Poulsen who provided me with
valuable advices on the mechanical design and manufactured most of the mechanical parts.
That said, I would like to give thanks to the staff of DTU Skylab for their uncomplicated
help.
Last but not least, I would like to thank my family and friends so much for their encour-
agement and support throughout the thesis.
Sebastian Vogt (s151815)
ii
==PAGE:6==
Table of Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem Statement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
State of the Art
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Analysis of Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Report Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Load Sharing Control
6
2.1
Differential-Drive Robot
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
System Modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.1
DC Motor Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.2
Velocity Controlled DC Motor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.3
Load Sharing Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
System Analysis and Veriﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.1
Analysis of Open-loop System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.2
Modiﬁed Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3.3
Gathering of System Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.4
PI Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.4.1
Low-Pass Filter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.4.2
Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.4.3
Hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.5
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
iii
==PAGE:7==
TABLE OF CONTENTS
iv
3
Angular Control of Follower
32
3.1
Angle Measurement Device . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.1.1
Magnetic Encoder Sensor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.1.2
Mechanical Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2
System Modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3
System Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.4
PID Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.4.1
Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.4.2
Hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.4.3
Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.5
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4
Combined Control
44
4.1
Kinematics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2
Test Run of Combined Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.3
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5
Conclusion
52
5.1
Recommendations for Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
List of Figures
55
List of Abbreviations
57
Bibliography
58
Appendices
60
A System Parameters
61
A.1 Parameters of DC Motor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A.2 Parameters of SMR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
B
Load Sharing Control
62
B.1
Gathering of System Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
B.2
Discrete Load Sharing Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
B.3
Bode Diagram of Load Sharing Control Model with PI Controller
. . . .
65
C Angular Control of Follower
66
C.1
Technical Drawing of Angle Measurement Device . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
C.2
Discrete Angular Control Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
C.3
Bode Diagram of Angular Control Model with PID Controller
. . . . . .
70
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Transporting an object from one place to an other is part of all kinds of situations in our
everyday life. Irrespective of whether something is moved by a human or a machine, if the
object’s size or weight exceeds the capabilities of one carrier, the task requires support to
achieve maneuverability and to distribute the load among the participants.
The need for cooperative transportation becomes evident when very long objects, such
as wind turbine blades, are transported from the production facility to the construction
site of a wind-power plant. Unlike the well-known tractors with a semitrailer, actively
steering trailers are utilized to carry the weight of the blade in the back. This signiﬁcantly
improves the maneuverability of the whole train compared to a semi-trailer truck, where
the trailer follows the tractor in a passive manner. However, guiding the long vehicle along
road infrastructure poses a challenge which calls for an experienced driver as well as a
crew supervising critical situations encountered at crossings or narrow curves.
Apart from large-scale outdoor applications, cooperative transportation will become more
important in the context of service robotics applied to indoor environments such as
hospitals. While single mobile robots are already deployed for automating logistic tasks,
e.g. delivery of blood probes, the interaction among instances is still in a development
phase - especially from a physical point of view where two or more robots fulﬁll the same
task together.
Such skills are necessary when it comes to taking over work which is normally carried out
by a team of two employees. That includes the moving of hospital beds, both occupied by a
patient and empty. A bed becomes unoccupied when a patient is discharged from stationary
treatment. Before a new patient can take over a hospital bed, it must be thoroughly cleaned
1
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
2
and disinfected. Although most hospitals have a centralized bed-washing facility (CBWF),
the cleaning is done manually in the ward. This is because the procedure of moving a
bed from the patient’s room to the CBWF and back requires the same amount of time as
carrying out the cleaning process on site [1].
At the Odense University Hospital in Denmark, such a central cleaning facility is located
in the basement. The hospital releases more than 100,000 patients per year from 1,010
beds. In addition to that, more than 1.06 million outpatients are treated, some of whom
may require a bed. Moving a bed from the patient’s room to the basement involves up to
600 meters of walking and the use of an elevator. That said and taking into consideration
the low height and the heavy weight of a bed, this work can be described as non-ergonomic
and hard physical labor [2].
The Danish Technological Institute is one of 28 participants in the European project Safe-
COP. The aim of this project is to establish a reliable, real-time wireless communication
for so-called Cooperating Cyber-Physical Systems (CO-CPS). One of the use cases is the
cooperative moving of hospital beds. There are various aspects which need to be dealt with
to safely transport a bed mounted on caster wheels from A to B in a dynamic environment.
To conﬁgure robots with situational awareness of critical spots, surveillance modules
need to be installed and integrated into the network. Apart from the challenge of com-
munication and synchronization within the CO-CPS, another principal task is to ﬁnd out
how two mobile robots can grasp and move a hospital bed to carry out a safe transportation.
1.2
Problem Statement
An object shall be moved with non-holonomic mobile robots in an indoor environment.
Hence, the robot conﬁguration shall be able to follow a given trajectory. Meanwhile, the
robots may not counteract but share the load of transporting the object in an equal manner.
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
3
1.3
State of the Art
Utilizing multiple mobile robots to establish a formation has been subject to research
since multi-robot systems evolved [3]. A formation has the advantage that not every robot
needs to globally localize itself but tracks its position relative to the others in a group. The
problem of controlling a formation can be addressed with three approaches [4].
• behavior-based
• virtual structure
• leader-follower
As it is common for a decentralized approach, a behavior-based robot formation is designed
to set up a fault-tolerant system in which each robot acts fully autonomously [5]. A self-
organization of a robot team can be achieved by pre-implemented behavior sets. In the
context of cooperative transportation, examples for a behavior set could be maintain
position in formation or yield target position. Whether a behavior set is performed by
a robot, depends on if a pre-deﬁned threshold is reached. The threshold indicates the
importance of an action, which a robot weights in relation to other behavior sets. It uses
its sensor readings and messages from other robots to evaluate a current situation.
In spite of the great potential of autonomy and fault-tolerance, a behavior-based approach
can be characterized as an extensive mathematical formalization which poses the problem
of convergence, meaning that it cannot be guaranteed for a multi-robot team to form the
desired conﬁguration.[4]
A leader-follower formation control approach is presented in [6]. However, only the
followers are considered to be the robots which transport the object. It is assumed that
every robot is aware of its position and orientation provided by internal or external sensors.
The authors declare the object to become the virtual leader, to which the followers maintain
a relative, pre-deﬁned position. This depends on the shape of the object and the way the
robots are grasping it. Two possibilities are used for experiments: First, transporting the
object above the robots’ heads and second, lifting the object with a forklift attached to
each robot. Since the leader is virtual, its motion plan is computed by every follower. In
return, a follower uses this information to derive its own trajectory. A tracking controller
enables the robot to follow the overall movement. In the beginning, the followers share
their data to synchronize themselves.
The presented work was both simulated and tested in real applications using differential-
drive robots. As the error from ideal trajectory of the virtual leader lies within an accept-
able tolerance, the proposed method can be described as quite effective. Furthermore, the
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
4
method proves to be scalable since the number of robots used in experiments ranged from
two to three.
On the contrary to the previous work dealing with a virtual leader formation, a pure
leader-follower approach relies on a physically leading robot which receives the reference
trajectory or a target as a command. The method proposed in [7] puts the focus on implicit
communication among the participating robots. A number of small skid-steer drive robots
are utilized to perform the transportation of a ﬂat object above their heads in a cooperative
manner. Unlike other works where the object is rigidly coupled to the robots [8, 9],
frictional forces prevent the load from slipping away. To tolerate minor trajectory errors
and to reduce the risk of slipping load, every robot is equipped with a compliant structure
on top. Local sensors are utilized to keep track of physical interaction between the carried
object and the robot. While an optical sensor measures the translational displacement,
the relative rotational change is monitored with a contactless angular sensor. Given these
sensor readings, a feedback controller is locally implemented which makes inter-robot
communication unnecessary.
Due to its fully decentralized approach, the described system can be scaled to cater the need
of various transportation tasks. In order to avoid the manual derivation of mathematical
equations, the authors make use of a multi-body simulation tool. Simulation results as
well as experiments show a well-functioning control concept.
It can be concluded that a leader-follower conﬁguration is the easiest approach in terms
of implementation. This is because responsibilities can be split up between two parties,
assuming that the leader runs in the front and the follower in the back. On the one hand,
the leader tracks a given trajectory and it may also avoid obstacles. Basically, it knows
where to go and it sets the reference speed. On the other hand, the follower supports the
leader in terms of moving and maneuvering the load. However, there is a wide range of
how capable a follower can be.
1.4
Analysis of Problem Statement
Given the conclusion of the literature research in the previous section, a robot conﬁguration,
organized as a leader-follower formation, sets a basis for the project.
The problem statement describes an indoor environment which is generally considered
to be a two-dimensional plane. The most simple approach to moving an object is to
manipulate its position in one dimension, e.g. along a translational x-axis. As this does
not require angular control of the robots, the problem can be reduced to the load sharing
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
5
aspect. Basically, it deals with the acceleration of an object to reach a desired velocity.
Here, the role of the leader and the follower comes into play. A sandwich constellation is
achieved by having the leader pulling the object at the front while the follower pushes the
object from behind.
In order to monitor how effective the load is shared between the robots in such a constella-
tion, force sensors could be used. Since force sensors were not available for this project, an
alternative approach is chosen which does not depend on additional sensors. The voltages,
which a robot provides to its motors, indicate the amount of power the robot uses to drive
at a reference velocity. Given that this information is available for the utilized robots, the
motor control voltages are chosen as an indicator of a robot’s load.
Apart from the load sharing aspect, the problem statement also mentions a trajectory
which the robot conﬁguration should be able to follow. When assuming a two dimensional
trajectory, angular control becomes necessary. In addition, the use of non-holonomic
robots does not allow for movements in an arbitrary direction at any orientation. Based on
the allocation of responsibilities within a leader-follower formation, the follower shall be
provided with the capability of sensing the leader’s direction of motion. As the robots are
rigidly connected, preference is given to physical sensors rather than relying on localization
provided through odometry. Hence, an angular measurement device is developed.
Finally, the overall aim is to transport an object. For the sake of simplicity, the object is
represented by a pole which connects the robots.
1.5
Report Structure
The thesis is structured into ﬁve major parts. Following this introduction, Chapter 2
deals with ﬁnding an approach to sharing the load among the robots in a one dimensional
case. Subsequently, a PID controller is designed and implemented, which enables angular
control of the follower. In Chapter 4, a kinematic model is derived and implemented as a
Matlab simulator to plot the trajectory of a leader-follower formation. The same trajectory
is used in a real test to evaluate the performance of the combined control. The report
ﬁnishes with a conclusion and recommendations for future work in Chapter 5.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Load Sharing Control
This chapter addresses the problem of distributing the load among two differential-drive
robots. At ﬁrst, a differential-drive robot and the utilized software infrastructure are
presented, which are used throughout the project. Subsequently, a model of a load sharing
setup is derived. An open-loop system analysis is carried out and system parameters are
determined experimentally. Based on that, a low-pass ﬁlter is added to the system and a
PI controller is designed. The controller’s performance is evaluated through results from
simulation and a real test, followed by a conclusion.
2.1
Differential-Drive Robot
For carrying out courses and experiments in the ﬁeld of autonomous mobile robots, the
Automation and Control department at DTU has developed a differential-drive indoor
robot, named Small Mobile Robot (SMR), depicted in ﬁg. 2.1. The SMR is driven by
two DC motors mounted in the back. The torque is transmitted from the motor through a
two-stage toothed belt gearbox to the standard wheels. In order to measure the distance
traveled relative to the environment, each motorized wheel is equipped with an encoder.
For each of them, there is a PI velocity controller. The output of that is processed by a
pulse-width modulation (PWM). The pwm value is accessible as a RHD variable. Using
eq. (2.1) allows the conversion from pwm to the voltage U provided to a DC motor.
Uright = 12
128 · (pwmr −128)
(2.1)
Uleft = 12
128 · (−pwml −128)
(2.2)
It is worth noting, that the left motor is mounted in the opposite direction compared to the
right motor and therefore the pwm value is inverted. Hence, there is an additional minus
for Uleft.
6
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 2. LOAD SHARING CONTROL
7
Figure 2.1: Photo of Small Mobile Robot (SMR) with two caster wheels in the front and
two motorized wheels in the back, which make it a differential-drive robot. A laser scanner,
infrared distance sensors as well as a Kinect camera are visible.
Apart from the encoders, the SMR is equipped with optical sensors to perceive its envi-
ronment. A two dimensional laser scanner provides the SMRs with a position relative to
the visible walls and obstacles. Furthermore, a Kinect camera facilitates the robot with
short-range vision while infrared distance sensors enable the detection of an obstacle. The
SMR is also capable of following a line given a line sensor placed at the bottom side of
the robot. Thus far, the hardware capabilities have been described. Hence, the software
shall be addressed in the following.
Software
The Robot Systems Engineering (RSE) group of the Automation and Control department at
DTU Electrical Engineering created a software framework which enables mobile robots to
run autonomously [10]. As depicted in ﬁg. 2.2, the architecture of Mobile Robot Software
(Mobotware) is split into a real time and a soft real time part. The hardware abstraction
layer is embedded through the Robot Hardware Daemon (RHD). On the one hand, it works
as a sensor interface for reading time critical sensor measurements such as odometry or
obstacle detection sensors. On the other hand, a drive system and other actuators are
controlled. Given that, RHD provides a variable database of 32-bit integers with read and
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2. LOAD SHARING CONTROL
8
  



# $$%
&&'()(

!*$*+,
&&()&&--./
01234
5678
9:4+;8$6  *7,
<!%87
4=8$
7+,
#+,
5"
!$= >
7$!
&&?
@6 !$+@<,
&&
A)
7%
&&'()(

0 ! *
BC%!D
 !"
+7 *,
E<
4!7D*
*!7
+FF@G,
4=*!7
+FHIJF@G,
5==J*!$
"*$$6
5C*BK$
4=8$6
C D




 

Figure 2.2: Mobotware software architecture 1
write variables. As the communication is variable oriented, it facilitates a plug-in structure.
Such a plug-in will be described in section 3.1.1 as it is relevant for the integration of a
rotary position sensor. Another feature of RHD is a TCP/IP socket interface which allows
to send commands and to request RHD variable values.
In order to process the sensor data and derive an appropriate action, the Mobile Robot
Control (MRC) functions as a real time movement controller.
The soft real time part of Mobotware hosts a server for camera and laser scanner as well
as the tactical behavior script (SMRCL). There is a wide range of high-level commands
to make a robot perform e.g. navigation tasks. In order to keep track of the robot’s
performance, a log function is available. Thus, it is possible to plot the trajectory of a robot
given that odometry variables are saved in a log ﬁle for every sample with a time stamp.
Time stamps can be used to as reference to compare the performances of more than one
robot.
A stationary computer with a Linux distribution is used as a centralized controller, which
connects to the robots via a wireless network, utilizing the TCP/IP socket interface. For
carrying out tests, this setup was found to be the most convenient approach to control
multiple robots. The computer runs a Python script, which sends velocity commands to
the robots and requests data from the robots.
1Author: Jens Christian Andersen. Taken from lecture material: Robot Software Architecture 2016, p. 6
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2. LOAD SHARING CONTROL
9
2.2
System Modeling
2.2.1
DC Motor Model
A DC motor can be described as an electromechanical system [11], as it is demonstrated
in ﬁg. 2.3.
La
Ra
J
U(t)
ω(t)
-
+
i(t)
n
Figure 2.3: DC motor simpliﬁed as an electromechanical system with additional gear box
attached to the motor shaft. 2
Based on Kirchhoff’s voltage law and Newton’s second law, the following differential
equations are found.
v(t) = Rai(t) + La
di(t)
dt
+ kEω(t)
(2.3)
J ˙ω = kTi(t) + fω(t)
(2.4)
All relevant parameters are presented in table A.1 in the appendix. Since the inﬂuence of
high frequency dynamics is not be analyzed in this work, the inductance La is neglected,
which simpliﬁes eq. (2.3) to:
v(t) = Rai(t) + kEω(t)
(2.5)
While eq. (2.5) describes the electrical system, the mechanical system is given by eq. (2.4).
Hence, a block diagram of the DC motor is illustrated in ﬁg. 2.4. In addition to the relations
explained so far, the model also includes a load carried on a vehicle of the mass M and
with a wheel radius r. A wheel is attached to the motor shaft with a gear box in between,
which has the gear ratio n. In order to combine the rotor inertia J and the impact of the
load, ﬁg. 2.5 depicts a close-up on the relevant part of ﬁg. 2.4.
2Based on [11] p. 42
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2. LOAD SHARING CONTROL
10
Figure 2.4: DC motor model with voltage U as the input and rotational speed ω at the
rotor shaft as the output. In addition to the rotor inertia J, there is a mass M attached to
the rotor shaft which reduces the acceleration of the rotor.
Figure 2.5: Close-up on total moment of inertia as a part of the DC motor model. Being an
external load to motor, the mass M stands for the weight of a vehicle with a wheel radius
of r. A wheel is attached to the rotor shaft with a gear box in between, which has the gear
ratio n. The rotational acceleration ˙ω is transformed to translational acceleration a through
the ratio r/n. The acceleration acts on the mass which causes the force F. This force, in
return, lowers the momentum τ applied to the rotor shaft via the wheel and the gear box.
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 2. LOAD SHARING CONTROL
11
Based on that, the total moment of inertia is determined to be:
GIt(s) = ˙ω(s)
τ(s) =
1
J + M r2
n2
(2.6)
which shall be denoted It in the remainder of the report. Besides, because the dynamic
friction f has very little impact to the system dynamics compared to the total moment of
inertia, it shall be neglected for the remaining analysis. However, it will be re-introduced
in the simulation section 2.4.2. Thus, the DC motor model reduces to the block diagram
delineated in ﬁg. 2.6.
Figure 2.6: DC motor model where the inﬂuence of friction and inductance is neglected.
Besides, the inertia of both the rotor and the external load was combined in the total
moment of inertia It.
A transfer function, describing this DC motor, is determined to:
GM(s) = ω(s)
U(s) =
kT
ItRas + kEkT
(2.7)
and it is possible to gather the constants Ra, kT and It in the factor kmot:
kmot = kT
RaIt
(2.8)
which yields:
GM(s) =
kmot
s + kEkmot
(2.9)
2.2.2
Velocity Controlled DC Motor
The previous section resulted in a simpliﬁed model of a DC motor. Moving a vehicle
with a certain velocity, requires feedback control of the motor. Given a reference velocity
vref, the controller subtracts the current velocity v to determine the error e. As already
mentioned in section 2.1, the utilized robots use a PI regulator GPI(s).
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2. LOAD SHARING CONTROL
12
GPI(s) = Kp · Tis + 1
Tis
(2.10)
where Kp delineates the proportional gain and Ti the reset time. The combination of this
controller and the DC motor model can be seen in ﬁg. 2.7. Since the current velocity of a
vehicle is measured at the wheel, the ratio of wheel radius r over gear ratio n is placed
after the DC motor block to convert angular velocity to translational velocity. Furthermore,
the system bias kω is integrated into the feedback path of the system. It is used to describe
the uncertainty of the actual wheel radius. The radius could differ from speciﬁcations
if the tire is worn or if there is dirt sticking on the tread. In order to adjust the velocity
magnitude in simulations to the one in real tests, the factor kω is determined experimentally
in section 2.3.3.
Figure 2.7: Model of a velocity controlled DC motor using a PI controller. The system
bias kω is part of the feedback path in the system. It is used to describe the uncertainty of
the actual wheel radius.
Based on the block diagram in ﬁg. 2.7, the transfer function GMP I(s) is found to equal:
GMP I(s) =
v(s)
vref(s) =
GPI(s)GM(s) r
n
1 + GPI(s)GM(s) r
nkω
=
Kpkmotr (Tis + 1)
Tins2 + (Kpkωr + kEn) Tikmots + Kpkmotkωr
(2.11)
and it will be of importance for the development of a model for angular control in sec-
tion 3.2.
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 2. LOAD SHARING CONTROL
13
2.2.3
Load Sharing Model
Leader
Follower
Figure 2.8: Side view of test setup for load sharing control. Two robots are coupled
rigidly with a connecting proﬁle (blue). The leader drives forward while the follower goes
backwards, as indicated by the orientation of the caster wheels. This constellation was
chosen because it is easy to establish the rigid connection given that the aluminum proﬁle
can be used, which functions as a camera stand (red).
The model of a velocity controlled DC motor shall be used in this section to create a load
sharing model. Figure 2.8 depicts two rigidly connected robots. The objective is that the
leader pulls as much as the follower pushes - irrespective of the weight of an object in
between them. Due to the rigid connection the whole setup can be simpliﬁed to a single
vehicle, which, in return, is driven by a single DC motor. However, the aspect of two
operators acting on the same mass is implemented with two separate controllers which
provide a voltage to the motor. For the sake of simplicity, the voltages are summed up
which differs from the real implementation where the torque of both motors are added.
Based on these assumptions, a block diagram of a load sharing model is presented in
ﬁg. 2.9, where index 1 corresponds to the leader and index 2 to the follower respectively.
The ratio of wheel ratio over gear was simpliﬁed to equal one and therefore the symbolic
representation of r and n is waived. Nevertheless, it is important to analyze the inﬂuence
of different systems. Thus, the model has two distinct system biases kω1 and kω2.
The transfer function from vref to Uerror is derived analytically.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2. LOAD SHARING CONTROL
14
Figure 2.9: Given a common velocity reference vref, two velocity controlled DC motors
are combined to one model, where index 1 corresponds to the leader and 2 stands for the
follower. The control outputs U1 and U2 are added to share the load of driving one DC
motor. The output of the system is the voltage error Uerror, which shall converge to zero.
While both PI controllers have the same control parameters, two distinct system biases are
included.
G11(s) = U1(s)
vref1(s) = Kp (Tis + 1) (Tis2 + b1s + b0)
Tis (Tis2 + a1s + a0)
(2.12)
where
b1 = KpTikmotkω2 + TikEkmot
b0 = Kpkmotkω2
a1 = KpTikmot (kω1 + kω2) + TikEkmot
a0 = KpTikmot (kω1 + kω2)
G21(s) = U1(s)
vref2(s) = K2
p (b2s2 + b1s + b0)
Tis (Tis2 + a1s + a0)
(2.13)
where
b2 = T 2
i kmotkω1
b1 = 2Tikmotkω1
b0 = kmotkω1
a1 = KpTikmot (kω1 + kω2) + TikEkmot
a0 = Kpkmot (kω1 + kω2)
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 2. LOAD SHARING CONTROL
15
As the system is linear, it is possible to apply the superposition principle. Therefore, the
sum of eq. (2.12) and eq. (2.13) yields the following transfer function.
GU1(s) = U1(s)
vref(s) = G11(s) + G21(s)
= Kp (Tis + 1) (Tis2 + b1s + b0)
Tis (Tis2 + a1s + a0)
(2.14)
where
b1 = KpTikmot (−kω1 + kω2) + TikEkmot
b0 = Kpkmot (−kω1 + kω2)
a1 = KpTikmot (kω1 + kω2) + TikEkmot
a0 = Kpkmot (kω1 + kω2)
The same method is used to ﬁnd GU2(s).
G12(s) = U2(s)
vref1(s) = −K2
p (b2s2 + b1s + b0)
Tis (Tis2 + a1s + a0)
(2.15)
where
b2 = Tikmotkω2
b1 = 2Tikmotkω2
b0 = kmotkω2
a1 = KpTikmot (kω1 + kω2) + TikEkmot
a0 = Kpkmot (kω1 + kω2)
G22(s) = U2(s)
vref2(s) = Kp (Tis + 1) (Tis2 + b1s + b0)
Tis (Tis2 + a1s + a0)
(2.16)
where
b1 = KpTikmotkω1 + TikEkmot
b0 = Kpkmotkω1
a1 = KpTikmot (kω1 + kω2) + TikEkmot
a0 = Kpkmot (kω1 + kω2)
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2. LOAD SHARING CONTROL
16
GU2(s) = U2(s)
vref(s) = G12(s) + G22(s)
= Kp (Tis + 1) (Tis2 + b1s + b0)
Tis (Tis2 + a1s + a0)
(2.17)
where
b1 = KpTikmot (kω1 −kω2) + TikEkmot
b0 = Kpkmot (kω1 −kω2)
a1 = KpTikmot (kω1 + kω2) + TikEkmot
a0 = Kpkmot (kω1 + kω2)
Having derived GU1(s) and GU2(s) analytically, the system’s transfer function is found by
deﬁning the error Uerror.
Uerror(s) = GU1(s) −GU2(s)
(2.18)
Gsys(s) = Uerror(s)
vref(s) = −2K2
p (b2s2 + b1s + b0)
Tis (Tis2 + a1s + a0)
(2.19)
where
b2 = T 2
i kmot (kω1 −kω2)
b1 = 2Tikmot (kω1 −kω2)
b0 = kmot (kω1 −kω2)
a1 = KpTikmot (kω1 + kω2) + TikEkmot
a0 = Kpkmot (kω1 + kω2)
Given eq. (2.19), a case study shall be done. Assuming that the parameters for both systems
are exactly the same, in particular that kω1 = kω2, the error Uerror becomes zero since the
coefﬁcients b2, b1 and b0 yield zero. Nevertheless, since it is almost impossible to have two
identical physical robots, eq. (2.19) shall be further analyzed in section 2.3.1.
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 2. LOAD SHARING CONTROL
17
2.3
System Analysis and Veriﬁcation
2.3.1
Analysis of Open-loop System
The transfer function Gsys(s) (eq. (2.19)) can be rearranged such that it yields the follow-
ing.
Gsys(s) =
−
2K2
pb0
a0

b2
b0s2 + b1
b0s + 1

s

T 2
i
a0 s2 + Ti
a0s + 1

(2.20)
where
b2 = T 2
i kmot (kω1 −kω2)
b1 = 2Tikmot (kω1 −kω2)
b0 = kmot (kω1 −kω2)
a1 = KpTikmot (kω1 + kω2) + TikEkmot
a0 = Kpkmot (kω1 + kω2)
The resulting equation shows the same structure as eq. (2.21).
GOL(s) = K0 (bmsm + bm−1sm−1 + ... + b′
1s + 1)
sN (alsl + al−1sl−1 + ... + a1s + 1)
(2.21)
In respect to the steady-state, when s goes to zero, the system can be reduced to:
lim
s→0 Gsys(s) = lim
s→0
K0
sN
(2.22)
where
K0 = −2K2
pkmot (kω1 −kω2)
which contains a single integrator. Therefore, it can be concluded that the open-loop system
is marginally stable. The system type N is found to be N = 1, which indicates according
to [11], that the closed-loop system responds to a unity step with zero steady-state error
ess.
In addition to the symbolic analysis, a real test with two robots was carried out. As
illustrated in ﬁg. 2.10, two differential-drive robots are rigidly connected. However, the
connection gives rotational freedom along the axis of the connector in order to allow for
compensation of surface irregularities. Or to put it differently, both motorized wheels of
each robot shall always have full contact to the ﬂoor.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2. LOAD SHARING CONTROL
18
Figure 2.10: Test setup for load sharing control. Two differential-drive robots are rigidly
connected. The connector is mounted at low height to avoid the impact of compliance
since the housing of the SMR is less stiff in the upper part.
Real Test of Open-Loop System
Figure 2.11 shows a comparison of leader and follower performance, where the mean of
left and right control voltage was plotted for each robot.
In the beginning, both robots are standing still and there is no force acting between them.
However, there is a bias of the follower’s control voltage. At t = 1s, both robots are
commanded to run at a velocity of 0.3 m/s. After the transient phase, a steady-state error
of ess ≈0.15 V remains, showing that an open-loop control approach does not achieve an
effective load sharing. To simulate the impact of disturbance, the follower is commanded
a lower speed of 0.27 m/s at t = 15s. The leader takes all the load while the follower’s
control voltage reaches almost the same range of magnitude as in the initial phase at zero
speed.
The simulated disturbance can be seen as a situation, in which the leader encounters a
slope it needs to climb while the follower is still running on a planar surface. At that
moment, the leader has a greater load than the follower. Thus, a positive load sharing error
is generated. Reducing the follower’s reference velocity has the same outcome.
The test with real robots complements the conclusion that an open-loop controlled system
performs insufﬁciently. It can be concluded, that it is necessary to add a controller to
the system, which balances the difference between the systems. Given the scope of a
leader-follower formation, it is the follower’s task to adjust to the leader. As a result, the
voltage error Uerror shall be used as an input to the system controller.
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 2. LOAD SHARING CONTROL
19
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Leader
Follower
Figure 2.11: Comparison of control voltages U of rigidly connected leader and follower
robot responding to reference step and disturbance. In the beginning, both robots are
standing still and there is no force acting between them. However, there is a bias of the
follower’s control voltage. At t = 1s, both robots are commanded to run at a velocity of
0.3 m/s. A steady-state error of ess ≈0.15 V remains, showing that an open-loop control
approach does not achieve an effective load sharing. To simulate the impact of disturbance,
the follower is commanded a lower speed of 0.27 m/s at t = 15s. The leader takes all the
load while the follower’s control voltage reaches almost the same range of magnitude as
in the initial phase at zero speed. The plot is based on the mean of left and right control
voltage. As the experiment was carried out ﬁve times, the mean of these runs was used to
plot the performance of both leader and follower.
Given that a pure proportional controller cannot compensate for disturbance, which is
introduced before the integrator of the DC motor, it is required to add integral action to the
closed-loop system. For example, the total moment of inertia can change, depending on
the load attached to a robot. Thus, a PI controller shall be implemented in section 2.4.
2.3.2
Modiﬁed Model
Due to the ﬁndings of the previous section, the open-loop system model, visualized in
ﬁg. 2.9, is extended. As demonstrated in ﬁg. 2.12, the voltage error Uerror is fed back and
functions as the input to a PI controller, which is placed between the Uerror output and the
u input. Furthermore, the reference velocity vref is fed forward to the follower.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 2. LOAD SHARING CONTROL
20
Figure 2.12: Expanded load sharing model where the voltage error Uerror is fed back. It is
intended as the input to a PI controller, which shall be placed between the Uerror output
and the u input. Furthermore, the reference velocity vref is fed forward to the follower and
the conversion from rotational to translational is included. The signs for the generation
of the voltage error Uerror are switched for the derivation of a numeric open-loop transfer
function using the Matlab function linmod.
Before closing the loop, the open-loop system is analyzed numerically. The necessary
parameters for this analysis are determined in the next section. Since deriving a transfer
function from an open-loop system means that the feedback path is cut before the subtrac-
tion of output from reference, there shall be no minus sign in the feedback path. Therefore,
the plus and minus sign is switched for the generation of the voltage error Uerror. This is
in contrast to the principle, that if the leader’s voltage U1 is greater than the follower’s
voltage U2, the follower should drive faster to support the leader.
The Matlab function linmod is used to get the numeric transfer function GCT(s) which
yields:
GCT(s) = Uerror(s)
u(s)
= 10s3 + 200.1s2 + 1758s + 1.072 · 104
s3 + 7.2s2 + 84.1s
(2.23)
and the poles p and zeros z are found to be:
p1 = 0
(2.24)
p2,3 = −3.61 ± 8.43i
(2.25)
z1 = −12.82
(2.26)
z2,3 = −3.59 ± 8.41i
(2.27)
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 2. LOAD SHARING CONTROL
21
While the complex conjugated pole pair p2,3 lies in the left half plane, there is one pole
located in the origin, which tells that the system is marginally stable with oscillatory
behavior. The bode plot, presented in ﬁg. 2.13, shows that high frequencies are not
damped. Apart from that, the magnitude and phase corresponds to the bode plot of a
PI controller. The break frequency equals the reciprocal of the reset time TiSMR and
the magnitude settles at 20dB, which equals the proportional gain PSMR. Moreover, the
magnitude slope is −20dB per decade. Hence the conclusion that the system is dominated
by the PI velocity controllers.
20
30
40
50
60
70
10-1
100
101
102
103
-90
-45
0
System: G_CT
Frequency (rad/s): 12.8
Magnitude (dB): 23
Figure 2.13: Bode plot of open-loop system GCT(s) showing that frequencies higher than
10rad/s are not damped. The magnitude and phase corresponds to the characteristics of a
PI controller. The break frequency ωk = 12.8rad/s is equal to the reciprocal of the reset
time TiSMR. Moreover, the magnitude drops by −20dB per decade before it settles at
20dB, which equals the proportional gain PSMR.
2.3.3
Gathering of System Parameters
Based on the expanded model, which was introduced in the previous section, relevant
system parameters are determined. First, a mean of the sample time is found, which
states how fast the controller implemented in Python runs. Secondly, reverse engineering
is applied to ﬁnd the proportional gain and reset time of the SMR velocity controller.
Meanwhile, the system bias for both leader and follower is adjusted. Finally, the dynamic
motor friction is determined through manual tuning.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 2. LOAD SHARING CONTROL
22
Sample Time
To ﬁnd the sample time T of the hardware implementation in Python, a test was carried
out where the load sharing control is run for trun = 20s. Within the control loop, every
controller output signal is logged by writing it into a text ﬁle with a time stamp. Figure 2.14
visualizes the time elapsed between two time stamps, which yields the measured sample
time.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
Measured sample time
Mean sample time
Figure 2.14: Visualization of measured sample times from a control loop in Python which
is run for trun = 20s. Given the number of samples to be Ns = 994, the mean sample time
was computed to be T = 20.131ms. However, there a few iterations for which the sample
time exceeds the mean by far. This is because the computer, which is running the Python
script, is not meant for real time applications.
As the test was run for trun = 20s and Ns = 994 samples were recorded, the mean sample
time equals:
T = trun
Ns
= 20s
994 = 20.131ms
(2.28)
The variance was computed to:
σ2
T = 2.579ms
(2.29)
Given the variance, a tolerance band can be deﬁned.
tol = T ± σ2
T = 20.131 ± 2.579ms
(2.30)
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 2. LOAD SHARING CONTROL
23
Due to that, 98.89% of the measured samples lie within the the tolerance tol. Therefore, a
sample time of
T = 20ms
(2.31)
is used for further simulation and discretization within the load sharing control chapter.
P and I Term and System Bias
A reverse engineering approach is utilized to ﬁnd the proportional gain PSMR and the reset
time TiSMR of the SMR velocity controller. An experiment is carried out in which the
leading SMR is commanded to run forward with velocities ranging from 0.2m/s to 0.4m/s
in 0.05m/s steps. For the sake of simplicity, the measured velocity was smoothened with a
moving average ﬁlter of 8th order in Matlab. Figure 2.15 depicts the commanded reference
velocity as well as the measured velocity, based on the odometry of the robot.
The controller parameters PSMR and TiSMR are manually tuned to achieve a ﬁtting of the
simulated velocity to the measured one. As it can be seen in ﬁg. 2.15, the measured velocity
shows oscillatory behavior at the stationary state which is accompanied by a steady-state
error. In order to add that bias to the simulation, the system bias kω1 is manually tuned.
Once the controller settings are found, the procedure is repeated for the follower. By
contrast, only the follower’s system bias kω2 is to be acquired because the SMRs make use
of the same controller parameters. Placed in the appendix, ﬁg. B.1 shows that the tuned P
and I term achieve a reasonable match for the follower. The system bias kω2 differs approx.
by 0.5% from kω1.
The found parameters are as follows.
PSMR = 10
(2.32)
TiSMR = 0.078
(2.33)
kω1 = 0.965
(2.34)
kω2 = 0.97
(2.35)
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 2. LOAD SHARING CONTROL
24
5
10
15
20
25
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
Reference
Measured velocity
Simulation PSMR=10 TiSMR=0.078 k
2
=0.97
Figure 2.15: The leading differential-drive robot is commanded to run forward at different
wheel speeds, as indicated by the reference signal. The measured velocity is used to tune
the controller settings such that the simulated velocity ﬁts the measured one as good as
possible. For the sake of simplicity, the measured velocity was smoothened with an 8th
order moving average ﬁlter. Besides, the system bias kω1 is adjusted to make the simulation
adapt to the steady-state error.
Dynamic Friction
It is necessary to add dynamic friction to the model because it inﬂuences the magnitude of
the control voltage U. Since this is the most important system variable in respect to load
sharing, the magnitude in simulation is ﬁtted to the measured one. The same experiment,
which was described to ﬁnd the P and I term, is also used to determine the dynamic friction
f1 and f2. To carry out the tuning, the mean of left and right control voltage is plotted
in ﬁg. 2.16, as well as the corresponding simulated control voltage. It can be noticed
that the measured controller signal does not grow linearly with the commanded velocity.
Therefore, the friction f1 is adjusted such that it generates a match for the standard velocity
of v = 0.3m/s, which is the reference within the time frame from t = 10s to t = 16s. The
procedure is repeated for the follower of which the result of the tuning is shown in the
appendix, ﬁg. B.2. The following friction parameters are acquired.
f1 = 7.5 · 10−5N m s/rad
(2.36)
f2 = 9.5 · 10−5N m s/rad
(2.37)
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 2. LOAD SHARING CONTROL
25
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Measured control voltage
Simulation PSMR=10 TiSMR=0.078 k
1
=0.965 f1=0.75e-4
Figure 2.16: The leading differential-drive robot is commanded to run forward at different
wheel speeds, as it is shown in ﬁg. 2.15. The measured control voltage is used as a
reference to adjust the dynamic friction f1. Given that the measured controller signal does
not grow linearly in respect to the commanded velocity, the friction is only used to make
the simulated response ﬁt to the measured one at the standard velocity of v = 0.3m/s,
which is the reference within the time frame from t = 10s to t = 16s.
2.4
PI Controller
Based on the open-loop system GCT and system parameters found in the previous section,
a controller shall be designed which achieves a load sharing among leader and follower.
First, a low-pass ﬁlter is added to the open-loop system. After that, suitable control
parameters are derived and the control performance is analyzed with plots generated from
simulation and hardware test.
2.4.1
Low-Pass Filter
The transfer function of a ﬁrst order low-pass ﬁlter (LPF) is described in continuous time
(CT) by:
Gf(s) =
1
τfs + 1
(2.38)
where τf delineates the ﬁlter time constant. Given that the LPF shall be implemented on a
discrete time (DT) system, eq. (2.38) needs to be discretized using the sample time T.
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 2. LOAD SHARING CONTROL
26
It results in:
Gf(z) = y
x =
Tz + T
(T + 2τf) z + T −2τf
(2.39)
Implementing the LPF in code requires to make eq. (2.39) causal by dividing numerator
and denominator by z and solving for y to receive the current output value yk, which yields:
yk = T −2τf
T + 2τf
yk−1 +
T
T + 2τf
xk +
T
T + 2τf
xk−1
(2.40)
where yk−1 equals the previous output value, xk−1 corresponds to the previous input value
and xk delineates the current input value to the ﬁlter.
As it was found out by analyzing the open-loop system GCT shown in ﬁg. 2.13, the system
is improved by adding a low-pass ﬁlter for the break point frequency ωk.
τf = 1
ωk
=
1
12.8rad
s
= 0.0781s
(2.41)
Gf(s) =
1
0.0781s + 1
(2.42)
GCTf(s) = GCT(s) · Gf(s)
= 10s3 + 199.9s2 + 1755s + 1.1 · 104
0.0781s4 + 1.6s3 + 13.8s2 + 83.7s
(2.43)
p1 = 0
(2.44)
p2 = −12.80
(2.45)
p3,4 = −3.60 ± 8.41i
(2.46)
z1 = −12.80
(2.47)
z2,3 = −3.59 ± 8.40i
(2.48)
The low-pass ﬁlter introduces the pole p2 2.45 which is canceled by the zero z1 2.47.
The resulting bode diagram is presented in ﬁg. 2.17. The magnitude decreases with a slope
of 20dB per decade. The phase is constantly at −90°. However, this is only valid for a CT
system. Assuming the slowest sample time of the system to be T = 0.02s, the Nyquist
frequency equals:
fnyquist = 0.5 · 2π
T = 1.57 · 102rad/s
(2.49)
To move the cut-off frequency away from that critical frequency fnyquist , the open-loop
system shall be closed with a proportional gain equal to:
Kp = 0.1
(2.50)
Once the proportional gain is found, a value for the reset time Ti is assigned, too. Through
manual tuning, the best ﬁtting parameter was determined to be:
Ti = 0.1
(2.51)
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 2. LOAD SHARING CONTROL
27
-20
0
20
40
60
80
10-1
100
101
102
103
-180
-135
-90
-45
0
Figure 2.17: The open-loop system GCT is enhanced with a low-pass ﬁlter to dampen high
frequencies. It results in a magnitude slope of -20dB per decade. The phase is constantly
at −90°. However, this is only valid for a CT system. Assuming the slowest sample time
of the system to be T = 0.02s, the highest realizable frequency is 1.57 · 102rad/s. To
move the cut-off frequency away from the Nyquist frequency, the open-loop system shall
be closed with a proportional gain of Kp = 0.1.
2.4.2
Simulation
Simulating the behavior of the real system requires to discretize the SMR velocity controller.
GPISMR(z) = PSMR · TsSMR z + TsSMR
2TiSMR z −2TiSMR
(2.52)
where TsSMR = 0.01s. Moreover, the load sharing controller, which is to be implemented
in Python, needs to be discretized.
GPIP ython(z) = Kp ·
Tz + T
2Tiz −2Ti
(2.53)
where T = 0.02s. These controllers are used for the simulation model, shown in the
appendix, ﬁg. B.3. The simulation result is depicted in ﬁg. 2.18. At t = 1s, the reference
velocity is set to 0.3 m/s. As a result, the control voltages of leader and follower rise to
accelerate the train until the desired velocity is reached. In the transient phase, an error of
et = 0.0036V appears. To simulate the impact of disturbance, the follower is commanded
a lower speed of 0.27 m/s at t = 15s which causes a temporary error of ed = 0.27V.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 2. LOAD SHARING CONTROL
28
The controller achieves zero steady-state error effectively. A bode plot of the closed-loop
system is presented in the appendix, ﬁg. B.4. It shows that the system has a bandwidth of
10rad/s.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Leader
Follower
Uerror
Figure 2.18: Based on the simulation model of a closed-loop system with low-pass ﬁlter
and PI controller, the control voltages of leader and follower as well as the resulting
Uerrorare shown. At t = 1s, the reference velocity is set to 0.3 m/s. As a result, the control
voltages of leader and follower rise to accelerate the train until the desired velocity is
reached. In the transient phase, an error of et = 0.0036V appears. To simulate the impact
of disturbance, the follower is commanded a lower speed of 0.27 m/s at t = 15s which
causes a temporary error of ed = 0.27V. The controller achieves zero steady-state error
effectively.
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 2. LOAD SHARING CONTROL
29
2.4.3
Hardware
Due to the effective control performance provided by the simulation, the controller settings
are tested on the real system, which is introduced in section 2.3.1, in particular with a
photo of the test setup illustrated in ﬁg. 2.10. The procedure of a control loop iteration
is demonstrated by ﬁg. 2.20. A loop iteration consists of ﬁve steps. At ﬁrst, the current
motor load of both leader and follower is requested via wireless network communication.
Subsequently, the PWM values are converted into voltages to compute the load error Uerror.
Given that, a control action is derived and sent to the follower. Finally, the control action
is written to a log ﬁle with a time stamp.
Figure 2.19 presents a comparison of the control voltages U from the rigidly connected
leader and follower robot responding to reference step and disturbance. In the beginning,
both robots are standing still and there is no force acting between them. However, there is
a bias of the follower’s control voltage. At t = 1s, the reference velocity is set to 0.3 m/s.
Given that the robots velocities oscillate around a stationary-state, the control voltages
show oscillatory behavior, too - apart from noise. The oscillation of the voltage error
Uerror is caused by a delay of the follower’s voltage to the leader’s voltage of approx.
tdelay = 120ms. However, the impact of disturbance, for which the follower is commanded
a lower speed of 0.27 m/s at t = 15s, is compensated effectively by the load sharing
controller.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 2. LOAD SHARING CONTROL
30
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Leader
Follower
Uerror
Figure 2.19: Comparison of control voltages U of rigidly connected leader and follower
robot responding to reference step and disturbance. In the beginning, both robots are
standing still and there is no force acting between them. However, there is a bias of the
follower’s control voltage. At t = 1s, the reference velocity is set to 0.3 m/s. Given that
the robots velocities oscillate at the steady-state, the control voltages show oscillatory
behavior, too - apart from noise. The oscillation of the voltage error Uerror is caused by a
delay of the follower’s voltage to the leader’s voltage of approx. tdelay = 120ms. However,
the impact of disturbance, for which the follower is commanded a lower speed of 0.27
m/s at t = 15s, is compensated effectively by the load sharing controller.
2.5
Conclusion
This chapter has introduced a load sharing controller, which is based on the comparison of
motor control voltages of two rigidly connected robots.
The need for an external controller was demonstrated with an open-loop analysis. It
was assumed that a physical robot and its duplicate do not have the exact same system
parameters, in particular the same wheel radii. In addition, a real test with two rigidly
connected robots veriﬁed this conclusion.
Due to the gathering of system parameters, a numerical transfer function was created and
the system behavior towards noise was improved by adding a low-pass ﬁlter.
Finally, a PI controller was designed and its simulation result demonstrated the effec-
tiveness of the controller with zero load sharing error at steady-state. The hardware
implementation of the controller revealed that the controller setup acts too slow. As result,
the error does not converge to zero but oscillates at the steady-state.
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 2. LOAD SHARING CONTROL
31
Request data
from leader
Request data
from follower
While current time 
< end time
do
Determine 
control action
Send wheel speed 
command to 
follower
Write to log file
start
return
Figure 2.20: Flow chart of control loop which controls the follower to achieve load sharing.
The loop is run until an end time is reached. A loop iteration consists of ﬁve steps. At
ﬁrst, the current motor load of both leader and follower is requested via wireless network
communication. Subsequently, the PWM values are converted into voltages to compute the
load error Uerror. Given that, a control action is derived and sent to the follower. Finally,
the control action is written to a log ﬁle with a time stamp.
It is assumed that this is due to a delay introduced by the centralized controller, a PC
running a Python script, as well as the robot’s belt-drive gears which act as a mass-spring
damper.
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3
Angular Control of Follower
The objective of this chapter is to ﬁnd a control setup which enables a differential-drive
robot to perform angular movements based on a sensor input. For the sake of simplicity,
the robot does not translate but it turns on spot. That implies the impact of stationary
friction which the robot has to overcome before its starts to move. However, the inﬂuence
of stationary friction is neglected.
At ﬁrst, the design of an angle measurement device is presented. Based on a sketch of the
test setup, a system model is derived analytically and analyzed. Furthermore, the system
characteristics are determined by a numeric analysis. Finally, a controller is designed and
results from simulation and real test are compared to asses the controller’s performance.
3.1
Angle Measurement Device
3.1.1
Magnetic Encoder Sensor
In order to measure the relative angle between a robot and a pole attached to it, a physical
sensor is necessary. Given that the automation and control department at DTU successfully
implemented magnetic encoders for angle measurement, this type of sensor is chosen.
Besides, it is possible to make use of an already existing RHD plug-in, which makes the
sensor readings available as RHD variables.
The magnetic rotary position sensor AS5047P has a resolution of 14 bit per revolution [12]
which yields the smallest detectable change in angle to be approx. 0.02°. It is based on
hall sensors which detect the magnetic ﬁeld of a magnet positioned approx. 1mm above
the sensor.
32
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 3. ANGULAR CONTROL OF FOLLOWER
33
3.1.2
Mechanical Design
The main requirement of the angle measurement device is to be capable of withstanding
shear forces caused by pulling or pushing an object attached to the rod. Meanwhile,
the measurement unit shall be decoupled from such inﬂuences. In general, the device
shall be easy to mount above the rotational center of the SMR but also at other positions.
Furthermore, there shall be low friction for the rotation of the axle. As the distance between
the magnet and the sensor chip is critical for the functionality of the sensor, the mounting
of the PCB needs to be adjustable in height to achieve sufﬁcient alignment.
On the other hand, the device is not designed to give freedom to tilt movements which
occur if one robot does not drive on the same planar surface as the other. However, the
pole, which connects two robots, tolerates bending. Figure 3.1 illustrates the mechanical
design of the angle measurement device. A square aluminum proﬁle serves as the main
part and provides rigidity. The encoder axle is held by a bronze bearing, which reduces the
rotational friction. The pole is attached to the encoder axle through an adapter, which, in
return, is screwed on the axle and countered by a nut. The magnet holds itself to the steel
axle by magnetic force.
Axle 
adapter
Magnet
Bronze
bearing
Pole
Figure 3.1: Side view of angle measurement device in Solidworks. A square aluminum
proﬁle serves as the main part and provides rigidity. The encoder axle is held by a bronze
bearing, which reduces the rotational friction. The pole is attached to the encoder axle
through an adapter, which, in return, is screwed on the axle and countered by a nut. The
magnet holds itself to the steel axle by magnetic force.
The mounting of the rotary position sensor is depicted in ﬁg. 3.2. A technical drawing of
the angle measurement device can be found in ﬁg. C.1 in the appendix.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 3. ANGULAR CONTROL OF FOLLOWER
34
Figure 3.2: Photo of angle measurement device with rotary position sensor. The sensor
chip is positioned approx. 1mm below the magnet, given that the PCB can be adjusted in
height. The sensor is connected to a Teensy microcontroller and the sensor readings are
provided via a SPI interface.
.
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 3. ANGULAR CONTROL OF FOLLOWER
35
3.2
System Modeling
In the previous section, the design of an angle measurement device was presented. Fig-
ure 3.3 illustrates that the sensor, marked as a black dot, is positioned at the rotational
center of the robot such that its encoder axle coincides with the origin of the robot’s
reference frame. Furthermore, there is a pole attached to the encoder axle at zero degree
angle. The dashed line is to demonstrate a displacement of the pole in counter-clockwise
direction. As the angle θ grows, the right wheel shall drive the robot forward while the left
wheel is to spin in the opposite direction. Assuming that both wheels have the same wheel
radius r and run at the same speed, the robot should turn on spot to achieve θ = 0.
+θ 
0°
Vleft
Vright
Figure 3.3: Top view of test setup for angular control. The angle measurement device,
marked as a black dot, is positioned at the rotational center of the robot. There is a
pole attached to the encoder axle at zero degree angle. The dashed line demonstrates a
displacement of the pole in counter-clockwise direction. As the angle θ grows, the right
wheel shall drive the robot forward while the left wheel is to spin in the opposite direction.
Based on these assumptions, a model of an open-loop system is set up, as depicted in
ﬁg. 3.4. It mainly consists of two velocity controlled DC motors, which receive opposite
reference velocities. Besides, a velocity offset can be included which has its origin in the
load sharing control. Each subsystem GMP I outputs a translational velocity v which is
transformed to an angular velocity using the factor 1/(2w). The sum of both velocities
yields the angular velocity ω, which is integrated to get the angle θ, measured at the
rotational center of the differential-drive robot. It is important to mention that each
subsystem GMP I drives 50% of the total moment of inertia of the robot.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 3. ANGULAR CONTROL OF FOLLOWER
36
Figure 3.4: The open-loop system for angular control mainly consists of two velocity
controlled DC motors, which receive opposite reference velocities. Besides, a velocity
offset can be included which comes from the load sharing control. Each subsystem GMP I
outputs a translational velocity v which is transformed to angular velocity using the factor
1/(2w). The sum of both velocities yields the angular velocity ω, which is integrated to
get the angle θ, measured at the rotational center of the differential-drive robot.
Therefore, It equals:
It =
1
J + 0.5 · M r2
n2
(3.1)
It is used in kmot within the transfer function GMP I(s) eq. (2.11), which was already
derived in section 2.2.2. The transfer function is repeated below.
GMP I(s) =
v(s)
vref(s) =
GPI(s)GM(s) r
n
1 + GPI(s)GM(s) r
nkω
=
Kpkmotr (Tis + 1)
Tins2 + (Kpkωr + kEn) Tikmots + Kpkmotkωr
To ﬁnd the transfer function of the open-loop system H(s) analytically, the inﬂuence
of friction is neglected and it is assumed that the system bias kω is the same for both
subsystems. The system is split into Hleft(s) and Hright(s) which form a parallel circuit.
Hleft(s) = ωleft(s)
θref(s) = −GMP Ileft(s) · 1
2w
= −Kpkmotr (Tis + 1)
a2s2 + a1s + a0
(3.2)
where
a2 = 2Tinw
a1 = 2Tikmotw (Kpkωr + kEn)
a0 = 2Kpkmotkωwr
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 3. ANGULAR CONTROL OF FOLLOWER
37
Hright(s) = ωleft(s)
θref(s) = GMP Iright(s) · 1
2w
= Kpkmotr (Tis + 1)
a2s2 + a1s + a0
(3.3)
where
a2 = 2Tinw
a1 = 2Tikmotw (Kpkωr + kEn)
a0 = 2Kpkmotkωwr
Adding Hleft(s) and Hright(s) and putting it into series with an integrator yields the
open-loop transfer function H(s).
H(s) =
θ(s)
θref(s) = (−Hleft(s) + Hright(s)) 1
s
= Kpkmotr (Tis + 1)
s (a2s2 + a1s + a0)
(3.4)
where
a2 = Tinw
a1 = Tikmotw (Kpkωr + kEn)
a0 = Kpkmotkωwr
3.3
System Analysis
The transfer function H(s) (eq. (3.4)) can be rearranged such that it yields:
H(s) =
θ(s)
θref(s) =
Kpkmotr
a0
(Tis + 1)
s

a2
a0s2 + a1
a0s + 1

(3.5)
where
a2 = Tinw
a1 = Tikmotw (Kpkωr + kEn)
a0 = Kpkmotkωwr
In respect to a steady-state, when s goes to zero, the system converges to:
lim
s→0 H(s) = lim
s→0
K0
sN
(3.6)
where
K0 =
1
kωw
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 3. ANGULAR CONTROL OF FOLLOWER
38
It contains a single integrator. Therefore, it can be concluded that the open-loop system
is marginally stable. The system type N is found to be N = 1, which indicates that the
closed-loop system responses to a unity step with zero steady-state error ess.
Given that a pure P controller cannot compensate for disturbance which is introduced
before the integrator of the DC motor, it is required to add integral action to the closed-loop
system.
Based on the parameters found in section 2.3.3, the Matlab function linmod is used to
compute the numeric transfer function HCT(s). The Matlab function minreal is applied
with a tolerance of 0.001 to achieve zero pole cancellation. It yields:
HCT(s) =
θ(s)
θref(s) =
43.37s + 556
s3 + 17.7s2 + 140.9s
(3.7)
and the poles p and a zero z are found:
p1 = 0
(3.8)
p2,3 = −8.85 ± 7.92i
(3.9)
z1 = −12.82
(3.10)
While the complex conjugated pole pair p2,3 lies in the left half plane, there is one pole
located in the origin, which supports the ﬁndings of the symbolic analysis that the system
is marginally stable. The bode plot, presented in ﬁg. 3.5, shows that the system is unstable
for high frequencies as the phase reaches −180°. Therefore, a derivative term shall be
added to the controller in the next section.
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 3. ANGULAR CONTROL OF FOLLOWER
39
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
10-1
100
101
102
103
-180
-135
-90
Bode diagram - Open-loop system H CT
Figure 3.5: Bode plot of open-loop system HCT(s). Crossing the 0dB line at ωc = 4rad/s,
the magnitude has a slope of −20dB per decade before the break frequency at ωk =
11.4rad/s and after that it decreases with 40dB per decade. The phase reaches −180° at
frequency 5.6 · 102rad/s and the phase margin is found to be ϕr = 77.6°. When taking
into consideration that the Nyquist frequency equals 1.57 · 102rad/s for T = 0.02s, it can
be concluded that the phase needs to be improved.
3.4
PID Controller
The aim is that the robot responds to a reference step with not more than 20% overshoot.
Besides, the steady-state error shall not be larger than 2° and the rise time shall be shorter
than 1 second.
Based on the bode diagram shown in ﬁg. 3.5, a lead compensator is designed to raise the
phase for high frequencies. The attenuation factor α and phase-lead angle ωd are set to:
α = 0.05
(3.11)
ωd = 15rad/s
(3.12)
which results in a derivative time as follows:
Tda =
1
ωd
√α = 0.3
(3.13)
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 3. ANGULAR CONTROL OF FOLLOWER
40
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
10-1
100
101
102
103
0
30
60
90
Bode diagram - Lead compensator
Figure 3.6: Bode diagram of the D-term. Given an attenuation factor of α = 0.05 and a
phase-lead angle of ωd = 15rad/s, the derivative time equals Tda = 0.3. Hence, the corner
frequencies are set to ωdleft = 3.35rad/s and ωdright = 67.1rad/s.
As a result, the corner frequencies of the lead compensator yield:
ωdleft =
1
Tda
= 3.35rad/s
(3.14)
ωdright =
1
αTda
= 67.1rad/s
(3.15)
and the maximum phase lead angle φm equals:
φm = arcsin
1 −α
1 + α

= 64.79°
(3.16)
A bode diagram of the lead compensator Hd(s)
Hd(s) = Tdas + 1
Tdaαs + 1
(3.17)
is depicted in ﬁg. 3.6.
Given that a loop gain of smaller than 1 causes a large steady-state error, integral action is
added. The reset time Tia is tuned manually.
Tia = 0.2
(3.18)
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 3. ANGULAR CONTROL OF FOLLOWER
41
Finally, the proportional gain Kpa is set to:
Kpa = 1
(3.19)
based on a compromise. On the one hand, a higher gain causes too high velocity commands
and therefore saturation. On the other hand, a smaller gain makes the system response too
slow. That is also because the designed D-term reaches the limit of what is recommended,
as α should not be smaller than 0.05 and the maximum phase lead angle should not be
higher than 65°[13].
3.4.1
Simulation
In order to adapt the simulation model to the constraints of the real system, the controllers
are discretized. While the discrete PI controller (eq. (2.52)) is located in the forward path,
the discrete derivative term Hd(z) is placed in the feedback path. Assuming the impact
of a reference step, the commanded velocity is then reduced as the change of signal is
forwarded ﬁrst through the system before it reaches the derivative term. Hence, the change
of signal is not as rapid as at the error state.
Hd(z) =
(T + 2Tda) z −2Tda + T
(T + 2αTda) z −2αTda + T
(3.20)
The simulation model is illustrated in the appendix, ﬁg. C.2. A bode diagram of the
closed-loop system is also shown in the appendix, ﬁg. C.3. The system has a bandwidth of
3.37rad/s.
3.4.2
Hardware
The software implementation for the angular control is based on the Python script used for
load sharing control, presented in ﬁg. 2.20, except that there is no connection established
to the leading robot. To introduce a reference step to the real robot, the reference angle
θref in the Python control loop is changed from 0° to 45° at time t = 1s. A pole is attached
to the angle measurement device as visualized in the sketch shown in ﬁg. 3.3. The other
end of the pole is ﬁxed to a stand. Before the control loop is started, the mean of ten sensor
measurements is taken to ﬁnd an initial encoder position, which is used to deﬁne the zero
angle position.
3.4.3
Comparison
Figure 3.7 shows a comparison of the simulated and measured step response with a step
size of 45°. In simulation, a rise time of tr = 0.78s and a settling time of ts = 1.82s is
achieved, while the system overshoots by 6.5%.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 3. ANGULAR CONTROL OF FOLLOWER
42
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Angle  [rad]
Simulation 
Measured 
Reference ref
Figure 3.7: Comparison of simulated and measured step response to angular control system.
In simulation, the response is slower, achieves a better steady-state accuracy and has less
overshoot compared to the real test. The measured response has a delay of 80ms between
the reference step and the time the robot starts to turn. This is due to static friction as well
as the impact of the belt-drive gear which acts a mass-spring damper. Besides, there is an
overshoot of 15.5%.
The measured response has a delay of td = 80ms between the reference step and the time
the robot starts to turn. Nevertheless, the robot acts faster as its rise time equals tr = 0.53s
and the settling time is ts = 1.31s. That is at the cost of a higher overshoot of 15.5%.
Inside the tolerance band of 2°, the integral term of the controller attempts to improve the
steady-state error of ess = 0.75° at t = 3s. At t = 5s, an error of ess = 0.32° remains.
Both the delay td and the steady-state error are caused by static friction, which the robot
has to overcome.
The control objectives are met in the simulation but the real system has an overshoot which
exceeds the objective of not more than 10%.
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 3. ANGULAR CONTROL OF FOLLOWER
43
3.5
Conclusion
An angle measurement device was designed and manufactured, based on a magnetic
encoder. It provides a low-noise measurement for the angular control of a differential-drive
robot. A model of an open-loop system was derived. Due to analytical and numerical
system analysis, it was decided to design a PID controller. A manual tuning approach
resulted in a control performance with acceptable results. A comparison of the measured
and simulated step response revealed that the simulation only provides an approximation
of the real performance, given that static friction is not modeled. Nevertheless, the results
showed that the orientation of a differential-drive robot can be manipulated with an external
angle measurement device and a PID controller.
It is subject to future work to improve the model in terms of mass distribution. For the
sake of simplicity, it was assumed that each DC motor drives a wheel which is located at
a center of mass with an inertia of 50% of the total mass. This is in contrast to the real
robot, where the center of mass is located approximately in the middle of the robot. Hence,
the inertia at the outer part of the robot should be less than 50%. That would result in
a reduced rise time and therefore the model would match the faster response of the real
system better.
Another improvement could be achieved by designing the PID controller as a lead-lag
compensator based on a thorough frequency analysis.
Apart from that, the question arises if a step response is the ideal application to test
the controller. Providing the robot with a ramp signal seems to be a better choice as the
response is only affected by static friction in the beginning, when the robot has to overcome
static friction to start turning.
The performance of the controller is further analyzed in a combined control setup, where
the follower is connected to the leader rigidly while it follows the leader’s direction of
motion. The results of this are presented in the next chapter.
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 4
Combined Control
Based on the implementation of a load sharing controller and an angular controller, the
combination of both is used to achieve a cooperative transportation. The most simple
approach to a transportation task is to make the follower perform like a trailer which is
pulled by the leader. However, the follower shall act as an active trailer given the load
sharing control.
At ﬁrst, the kinematic constraints are derived. Based on that, a kinematic simulator
is implemented to plot a reference trajectory, followed by a real test in the proposed
conﬁguration.
4.1
Kinematics
d
w1
w2
w3
Figure 4.1: Sketch of top view on tricycle. The steered standard wheel w1 is considered
the leader. The follower is represented by wheel w2 and w3.
The setup of a leading differential-drive and a trailer can be abstracted to the kinematic
model of a tricycle. Figure 4.1 depicts a sketch of a tricycle where wheel w1 is considered
a steered standard wheel. This wheel represents the leader as it has an additional degree
of freedom around the vertical axis passing through the center of the wheel. The second
and third wheel are ﬁxed standard wheels which correspond to the left and right wheel of
a differential-drive robot. However, given their location on the same axle and the same
44
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 4. COMBINED CONTROL
45
orientation, they run parallel which means that their sliding constraints are identical. That
allows to simplify the tricycle model to a motorcycle with only one ﬁxed standard wheel
in the back, as it is illustrated in ﬁg. 4.2.
In order to simulate the poses of both leader and follower, two kinematic constraint
matrices need to be derived. Following the instructions in [14], the relevant mathematical
terms are introduced. The matrix R(δ)−1 is used to convert motion in the robot reference
frame (XR, YR) to motion in the global reference frame (XI, YI).
R(δ)−1 =


cos(δ)
−sin(δ)
0
sin(δ)
cos(δ)
0
0
0
1


(4.1)
The robot’s velocities in the global reference frame are given by:
˙ξI =


˙x
˙y
˙δ


(4.2)
A ﬁxed standard wheel has the rolling constraint:
h
sin(α + β)
−cos(α + β)
(−l) cos(β)
i
R(δ) ˙ξI −r ˙ϕ = 0
(4.3)
where r denotes the wheel radius and ˙ϕ delineates the wheel speed. The sliding constraint
equals:
h
cos(α + β)
sin(α + β)
l sin(β)
i
R(δ) ˙ξI = 0
(4.4)
The kinematic constraints for a steered standard wheel are the same except that the angle
β is not a single ﬁxed value but its value changes as a function of time β(t).
The geometric parameters are found given the sketch depicted in ﬁg. 4.2.
α1 = 0
α2 = π
β1 = β(t)
β2 = π
2
l1 = 0
l2 = d
Hence, the steered wheel w1 has the rolling constraint J1s and sliding constraint C1s:
h
sin(β1(t))
−cos(β1(t))
0
i
R(δ) ˙ξI −r ˙ϕ = 0
(4.5)
h
cos(β1(t))
sin(β1(t))
0
i
R(δ) ˙ξI = 0
(4.6)
The sliding constraint C2f of the ﬁxed wheel w2 yields:
h
0
−1
d
i
R(δ) ˙ξI = 0
(4.7)
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 4. COMBINED CONTROL
46
β1(t)
α2
XR1
YR1
β2
d
w1
w2
Figure 4.2: Sketch of top view on kinematic motorcycle setup. The steered standard wheel
w1 is considered as the leader which is located in the origin of the robot reference frame
(XR1, YR1), colored in blue. The follower is represented by wheel w2, which is separated
from w1 by a pole of length d.
The rolling constraint J2f of w2 is not needed because in respect to the kinematic model
the wheel is considered to roll freely as if it was a wheel of a passive trailer. Having
derived the constraints for both wheels, the constraint matrix Kw1 of the motorcycle setup
is determined as follows.
Kw1 =


J1s
C1s
C2f

=


sin(β1(t))
−cos(β1(t))
0
cos(β1(t))
sin(β1(t))
0
0
−1
d


(4.8)
Given the objective to simulate the trajectory of wheel’s pose, the kinematic constraint
equation is rearranged such that it equals ˙ξI. In order to transform the velocities to
positions, the term needs to be multiplied with the sample time Ts, which determines the
resolution of the plotted trajectory in simulation.
Pw1,k = Pw1,k−1 + R(δ)−1K−1
w1 V Ts
(4.9)
The current pose Pw1,k equals the old pose Pw1,k−1 plus the change in translation and
rotation based on the speed vector V times the sample time Ts.
Thus far, the pose of the front wheel w1 has been derived. As the same method is applied
for the rear wheel w2, the derivation is left out in the report.
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 4. COMBINED CONTROL
47
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Trajectory of motorcycle setup
Position of front wheel
Position of rear wheel
Figure 4.3: Plot of simulated trajectory of motorcycle setup. Given that the follower is
attached as trailer, it has a smaller turning radius than the leader.
Figure 4.3 shows the simulated trajectory of the motorcycle setup. The rear wheel has
the starting position at the origin of the coordinate system while the front wheel starts at
x = d, y = 0. The motorcycle drives forward for two meters and then a 180° left turn with
a radius of R = 1m is performed. Finally, the motorcycle drives forward for two more
meters.
4.2
Test Run of Combined Control
After having simulated the ideal trajectory of a motorcycle setup, it shall be used as a
reference for the real test. Figure 4.4 depicts a top view of the test setup where both robots
are connected with a pole which is mounted to the angle measurement device. Hence, the
pole connects the rotational centers of the leader with the one of the follower. Furthermore,
the photo shows how the robots should ideally be arranged. While the follower should
maintain the angle θ = 0° to the pole, the leader is given a trajectory which it should
follow, irrespective of the following robot.
The test is carried out as follows: Both robots are commanded to run at velocity of
v = 0.3m/s for 6.6s. Hence, they cover a distance of approximately 2m. In order to turn
at a radius of R = 1m at the same speed v, the inner and outer wheel speed are calculated
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 4. COMBINED CONTROL
48
Figure 4.4: Top view of test setup for combined control. Two differential-drive robots are
connected with a pole.The left robot acts as the follower and the right robot performs as a
leader.
as follows:
vinner = R −w
2
R
· v
(4.10)
vouter = R + w
2
R
· v
(4.11)
where w delineates the wheel separation of the differential-drive robot. The distance,
which needs to be covered for the arc length of a semicircle, equals:
sR = πR ≈3.14m
(4.12)
and given the reference velocity, the time is equal to:
tR = sR
v = 10.4s
(4.13)
The leader is commanded to run for the time tR at the inner and outer wheel speed vinner
and vouter in respect to the robot’s left and right wheel speed. Finally, the leader drives
forward as it was commanded in the beginning of the run.
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 4. COMBINED CONTROL
49
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Test run of combined control
Position of leader
Position of follower
Figure 4.5: Leader and follower travel. The leader’s position is based on odometry data.
The follower’s position is computed through the leader’s position and a logged angle,
which is measured between the pole and the leader.
Figure 4.5 shows the trajectory of both leader and follower. The leader’s position is
plotted based on the odometry data provided in SMRCL. Instead of plotting the follower’s
odometry, too, its position is computed in Matlab based on the logged angle, which is
measured between the pole and the leader by the leader’s angle measurement device.
Given the relative angle and the length of the pole d, the follower’s position is based on
the leader’s odometry and the computed offset.
It results in a smooth trajectory of the follower with minor oscillations. This observation
is supported by the plot of the follower’s angle θ, presented in ﬁg. 4.6. Hence, it can be
stated that the angle oscillates with an amplitude of approx. 1°, independent from whether
the robot conﬁguration drives forward or turns in a circle.
Apart from the angular control aspect, the performance of the load sharing control is
analyzed. The leader’s and follower’s voltages U1 and U2 are plotted in ﬁg. 4.7, as well
as the voltage error Uerror = U1 −U2. When comparing the error’s magnitude to the
one dimensional load sharing test in ﬁg. 2.19, it can be stated that the average error has
increased in magnitude. Meanwhile, the delay tdelay between a peak of the leader’s and
the follower’s voltage has also grown by approx. 50ms such that tdelay = 190ms. It is
assumed that this is partly caused by the way the robots are connected.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 4. COMBINED CONTROL
50
0
5
10
15
20
25
-2
-1
0
1
2
Angle  [°]
Figure 4.6: Angle θ measured during combined control test run. It oscillates with an
amplitude of approx. 1°, independent from whether the robot conﬁguration drives forward
(t = 1s to t = 7.6s and t = 18s to t = 24.6s ) or turns in a circle (t = 7.6s to t = 18s).
As the mounting position is at the highest point of the robot, there is also more compliance
introduced by the housing of each robot.
0
5
10
15
20
25
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Leader
Follower
Uerror
Figure 4.7: Comparison of control voltages for combined control setup. The signiﬁcant
increase of Uerror at t = 12.4s is caused by the sample time, which becomes more than
seven times larger at that time.
Another point to mention is the signiﬁcant increase of Uerror, starting at t = 12.4s. The
reason for this is found by considering the variance of sample time for this speciﬁc time.
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 4. COMBINED CONTROL
51
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
50
100
150
200
250
Measured sample time
X: 12.2
Y: 30.18
Figure 4.8: Variance of sample time for combined control setup. The sample time rises
from T = 30.18ms to more than 220ms at t = 12.2.
As depicted in ﬁg. 4.8, the sample time rises from T = 30.18ms to more than 220ms at
t = 12.2. That causes a performance drop for both angular and load sharing control. In
spite of that, the trajectory of the follower is not affected signiﬁcantly. However, it can be
concluded that the computer, which runs the control loop, needs to provide a ﬁxed sample
time in order to ensure a reliable control performance throughout a test.
4.3
Conclusion
An approach to cooperative transportation was proposed, in which the follower is attached
to the leader like a trailer. The kinematic constraints were derived, based on the simpliﬁca-
tion that this robot conﬁguration can be modeled as a motorcycle. A kinematic simulator
was implemented to plot an exemplary trajectory.
Given the previous presented methods of load sharing and angular control, a combined
control strategy was implemented in code. The robots were set up according to the trailer
approach. The leader was commanded to perform the simulated trajectory. Due to a
very small angular error of the follower, the logged trajectory matches the simulated one
well. On the other hand, the load sharing error has increased in comparison to the one
dimensional scenario. It is important to mention that the sample time has increased, too.
Moreover, a plot of the logged sample times reveals the chosen controller operating system
is not suitable as the sample time varies signiﬁcantly.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
This thesis has presented a control for combining the capabilities of two differential-drive
robots in order to perform a transportation task in a cooperative manner. The problem was
introduced and analyzed such that two control objectives were identiﬁed.
Hence, the second chapter addressed the task of ﬁnding a load sharing controller which
enables the robots to share the transportation load equally in a one dimensional case.
The system was modeled and the need for an external controller was demonstrated with
an open-loop analysis, both symbolic and in a real test. Subsequently, the system was
improved by adding a low-pass ﬁlter and a PI controller was designed. The effectiveness
of the controller was shown in simulation but the hardware implementation revealed that
the controller setup acts too slow, meaning that the follower’s support is delayed by approx.
120ms.
The other control objective was approached in Chapter 3. Given that the leader-follower
formation shall also be able to follow a two dimensional trajectory, it is necessary to
implement an angular control of a differential-drive robot. The design of an angular
measurement device was presented. Furthermore, a system was modeled which describes
an angular control setup. Due to a symbolic and numerical analysis, it was decided to
implement a PID controller.
A comparison of the measured and simulated step response showed that the simulation
only provides an approximation of the real performance, given that static friction is not
modeled. Nevertheless, the results showed the orientation of a differential-drive robot can
be manipulated with an external angle measurement device and a PID controller.
Finally, an approach to cooperative transportation was proposed, in which the follower
is attached to the leader like a trailer. Based on a kinematic model of the robot setup,
52
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSION
53
a reference trajectory was presented. The load sharing and the angular controller are
combined and the reference trajectory are performed by the robot setup. Given that the
angular control method works effectively, the logged trajectory matches the reference
adequately. However, the load sharing error has increased in comparison to the one
dimensional scenario, which is accompanied by an increased sample time. Moreover,
a plot of the logged sample times reveals the chosen controller operating system is not
suitable for the combined control task as the sample time varies signiﬁcantly.
5.1
Recommendations for Future Work
First of all, the control infrastructure could be upgraded with a real time safe control system
and a ﬁxed sample time. Given that the robots are rigidly connected while carrying out a
transportation task, a wired network connection between the robots could be established
using an Ethernet cable. That would improve the sample time as well, since the latency
through introduced by the wireless connection would be removed. It requires either to
utilize one of the robot’s on-board computers or to mount suitable hardware on a robot.
It was pointed out that both system models do not take the additional system dynamics into
account which causes the oscillation of a robot’s velocity at the steady-state. By adding a
mass-spring damper to the model of a velocity controlled DC motor, the modeling of this
system dynamic could be approached. Additionally, the angular control model could be
improved to achieve a better ﬁt to the real test. For the sake of simplicity, it was assumed
that each DC motor drives a wheel which is located at a center of mass with an inertia of
50% of the total mass. This is in contrast to the real robot, where the center of mass is
approximately located in the middle of the robot. Hence, the percentage of inertia at the
outer part of the robot should be smaller than 50%.
Apart from the modeling, the real system is to be tested further in respect to a minimum
turning radius depending on the distance between the robots. Another point to add is
the mounting position of the pole on a robot, which could be placed with an offset to
the rotational center of the robot. This would also be more feasible in respect to real
applications, where the coupling cannot be placed above a robots rotational center. As
result, an object could be transported which has caster wheels mounted to it, e.g. a creeper
dolly.
Finally, an advanced approach to cooperative transportation should be investigated, in
which the follower becomes an actively steering trailer. In detail, the maneuverability of
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSION
54
the robot setup could be enhanced if the follower orientated itself in the same angle relative
to the pole as the leader does, when it pulls a trailer. This is reminiscent of an articulated
vehicle, in which the steering is accomplished by a joint in the middle of the vehicle. To
give an example, a front end loader uses such kind of kinematics. However, two joints are
necessary to fulﬁll the cooperative transportation task.
==PAGE:62==
List of Figures
2.1
SMR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Mobotware software architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Circuit DC Motor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
DC Motor Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Total moment of inertia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6
Simpliﬁed model of a DC Motor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.7
Velocity Controlled DC Motor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.8
Sketch of Robot Setup for Load Sharing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.9
Load sharing model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.10 Test setup for load sharing control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.11 Performance of open-loop control for test of load sharing setup . . . . . . . .
19
2.12 Expanded load sharing model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.13 Bode diagram of open-loop system GCT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.14 Variance of Sample Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.15 Velocity step response of leader . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.16 Tuning of friction for leader . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.17 Bode diagram of open-loop system with low-pass ﬁlter . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.18 Simulation result of load sharing control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.19 Result of implemented load sharing control on hardware
. . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.20 Load sharing control procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.1
Mechanical design of angle measurement device . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2
Photo of magnetic encoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.3
Sketch of Robot Setup for Angular Control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.4
Model of angular control open-loop system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.5
Bode diagram of open-loop system HCT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
55
==PAGE:63==
List of Figures
56
3.6
Design of D-term . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.7
Comparison of simulated and measured step response to angular control system 42
4.1
Sketch of tricycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2
Sketch of motorcycle kinematic setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3
Plot of simulated trajectory of motorcycle setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.4
Top view of test setup for combined control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.5
Plot of trajectory of combined control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.6
Plot of angle θ measured during combined control test
. . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.7
Comparison of control voltages for combined control setup . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.8
Variance of sample time for combined control setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
B.1
Velocity step response of follower
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
B.2
Tuning of friction for follower
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
B.3
Discrete model of load sharing control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
B.4
Bode diagram of load sharing control model with PI controller . . . . . . . .
65
C.1
CAD Angle Measurement Device
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
C.2
Model of angular control system with PID controller
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
C.3
Bode diagram of angular control model with PID controller . . . . . . . . . .
70
==PAGE:64==
List of Abbreviations
CBWF
Centralized Bed-Washing Facility
CO-CPS Cooperating Cyber-Physical System
CT
Continuous time
DT
Discrete time
LPF
Low-pass ﬁlter
RHD
Robot Hardware Deamon
PWM
Pulse-Width Modulation
SMR
Small Mobile Robot
SMRCL Tactical behavior script
TCP/IP Transmission Control Protocol/ Internet Protocol
57
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1]
SafeCOP. Use Cases. www.safecop.eu/?page_id=45/. Accessed: June 14,
2017.
[2]
SafeCOP. Odense University Hospital. Accessed: June 14, 2017. URL: www .
safecop.eu/?page_id=171/.
[3]
L.E. Parker. “Multiple Mobile Robot Systems”. In: Springer Handbook of Robotics.
Ed. by Bruno Siciliano and Oussama Khatib. Springer, 2008, pp. 921–941. DOI:
10.1007/978-3-540-30301-5_41.
[4]
Luca Consolini et al. “Leader-follower formation control of nonholonomic mobile
robots with input constraints”. eng. In: Automatica 44.5 (2008), pp. 1343–1349.
ISSN: 18732836, 00051098. DOI: 10.1016/j.automatica.2007.09.019.
[5]
L.E. Parker. “ALLIANCE: an architecture for fault tolerant multirobot cooperation”.
In: Robotics and Automation, IEEE Transactions on 14.2 (1998), pp. 220–240. ISSN:
1042-296X.
[6]
Alpaslan Yufka and Metin Ozkan. “Formation-based Control Scheme for Coopera-
tive Transportation by Multiple Mobile Robots”. eng. In: International Journal of
Advanced Robotic Systems 12.9 (2015), p. 120. ISSN: 17298814, 17298806. DOI:
10.5772/60972.
[7]
Chia Choon Loh and Ansgar Trächtler. “Cooperative transportation of a load using
nonholonomic mobile robots”. In: Procedia Engineering 41 (Jan. 2012), pp. 860
–866.
[8]
X Yang et al. “A decentralized control system for cooperative transportation by
multiple non-holonomic mobile robots”. eng. In: International Journal of Con-
trol 77.10 (2004), pp. 949–963. ISSN: 13665820, 00207179. DOI: 10.1080/
00207170410001719765.
58
==PAGE:66==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
59
[9]
H. Takeda et al. “Load sharing algorithm for transporting an object by two mobile
robots in coordination”. eng. In: 2004 International Conference on Intelligent
Mechatronics and Automation, 2004. Proceedings (2004), pp. 374–378, 374–378.
DOI: 10.1109/ICIMA.2004.1384222.
[10]
Robot Systems Engineering group of Automation and Control at DTU Electrical
Engineering. Wiki pages. http://rsewiki.elektro.dtu.dk/index.
php/Main_Page. Accessed: July 5, 2017.
[11]
Ole Jannerup and Paul Haase Sørensen. Reguleringsteknik, 4. udgave. Polyteknisk
Forlag, 2009.
[12]
ams AG. AS5047P High-Resolution Position Sensor. http://ams.com/eng/
Products/Magnetic-Position-Sensors/Angle-Position-On-
Axis/AS5047P. Accessed: July 8, 2017.
[13]
Katsuhiko Ogata. Modern Control Engineering. 4th. Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA:
Prentice Hall PTR, 2001. ISBN: 0130609072.
[14]
R. Siegwart and I. Nourbakhsh. Introduction to Autonomous Mobile Robots. Vol. 2.
Scituate, MA, USA: Bradford Company, 2011. ISBN: 026219502X.
==PAGE:67==
Appendices
60
==PAGE:68==
APPENDIX A
System Parameters
A.1
Parameters of DC Motor
Name
Symbol
Value
Terminal resistance
Ra
0.34 Ω
Back-EMF constant
kE
4mVs/rad
Torque constant
kT
4mNm/A
Rotor inertia
J
46.9gcm2
Table A.1: DC motor data
A.2
Parameters of SMR
Name
Symbol
Value
Weight
M
8kg
Wheel radius
r
0.0325m
Wheel separation
w
0.26m
Gear ratio
n
16
Pole length
d
0.355m
Table A.2: SMR parameters
61
==PAGE:69==
APPENDIX B
Load Sharing Control
B.1
Gathering of System Parameters
5
10
15
20
25
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
Reference
Measured velocity
Simulation PSMR=10 TiSMR=0.078 k
2
=0.97
Figure B.1: The following differential-drive robot is commanded to run forward at different
wheel speeds, as indicated by the reference signal. The measured velocity is used to tune
the controller settings such that the simulated velocity ﬁts the measured one as good as
possible. For the sake of simplicity, the measured velocity was smoothened with an 8th
order moving average ﬁlter. Besides, the system bias kω2 is adjusted to make the simulation
adapt to the steady-state error.
62
==PAGE:70==
APPENDIX B. LOAD SHARING CONTROL
63
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Measured control voltage
Simulation PSMR=10 TiSMR=0.078 k
2
=0.97 f2=0.95e-4
Figure B.2: The following differential-drive robot is commanded to run forward at different
wheel speeds, as it is shown in ﬁg. 2.15. The measured control voltage is used as a reference
to adjust the dynamic friction f2. Given that the measured controller signal does not grow
linearly in respect to the commanded velocity, the friction is only used to make the
simulated response ﬁt to the measured one at the standard velocity of v = 0.3m/s, which
is the reference within the time frame from t = 10s to t = 16s.
B.2
Discrete Load Sharing Model
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX B. LOAD SHARING CONTROL
64
Figure B.3: Discrete model of load sharing control. The open-loop system G(s) is closed with a discrete PI controller in the forward path.
==PAGE:72==
APPENDIX B. LOAD SHARING CONTROL
65
B.3
Bode Diagram of Load Sharing Control Model with
PI Controller
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
103
-90
-45
0
Bode diagram - Closed-loop with PI controller and LPF
Figure B.4: Bode diagram of closed-loop load sharing control model with PI controller
and low-pass ﬁlter. The bandwidth equals 10rad/s.
==PAGE:73==
APPENDIX C
Angular Control of Follower
C.1
Technical Drawing of Angle Measurement Device
66
==PAGE:74==
APPENDIX C. ANGULAR CONTROL OF FOLLOWER
67
F
D
D
E
E
F
4
4
3
3
GEWICHT: 
2
2
1
C
C
B
MASSSTAB:1:1
ZEICHNUNGSNR.
A4
BLATT 1 VON 1
Assembly_encoder
B
A
BENENNUNG:
ÄNDERUNG
ZEICHNUNG NICHT SKALIEREN
WERKSTOFF:
DATUM
SIGNATUR
NAME
ENTGRATEN
KANTEN
UND SCHARFE
BRECHEN
OBERFLÄCHENGÜTE:
   WINKEL:
QUALITÄT
PRODUKTION
GENEHMIGT
GEPRÜFT
GEZEICHNET
A
WENN NICHT ANDERS DEFINIERT:
BEMASSUNGEN SIND IN MILLIMETER
OBERFLÄCHENBESCHAFFENHEIT:
TOLERANZEN:
   LINEAR:
1
A
A
A-A
 1.20 
 5.90 
 7.93 
 33.20 
 2 
 54 
SOLIDWORKS Lehrprodukt. Nur für Lehrzwecke.
Figure C.1: Technical Drawing of Angle Measurement Device. The drawing was scaled to
ﬁt within the margins of the page setup.
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIX C. ANGULAR CONTROL OF FOLLOWER
68
C.2
Discrete Angular Control Model
==PAGE:76==
APPENDIX C. ANGULAR CONTROL OF FOLLOWER
69
Figure C.2: The open-loop system H(s) is closed with a discrete PI controller in the forward path and a discrete derivative term in the feedback
path.
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX C. ANGULAR CONTROL OF FOLLOWER
70
C.3
Bode Diagram of Angular Control Model with PID
Controller
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
10-1
100
101
102
103
-180
-135
-90
-45
0
Bode diagram - Closed loop with PID controller
Figure C.3: Bode diagram of angular control model with PID controller. The bandwidth
equals 3.37rad/s.
