==PAGE:1==
Shore based recreational rod and reel spring fisheries on 
Funen; angler demography, catch rates, release rates, and 
aspects of angler behavior. 
 
Author:  
Casper Gundelund 
DTU Aqua 
Section of Inland Fisheries and Ecology 
Technical university of Denmark 
 
Supervisor: 
Christian Skov 
DTU Aqua 
Section of Inland Fisheries and Ecology 
Technical university of Denmark 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
Table of Contents 
A broad introduction to recreational fisheries .......................................................... 1 
Methods to investigate and manage recreational fisheries .............................................. 2 
Investigating the Danish sea trout fisheries ............................................................... 3 
Specific objectives ................................................................................................................ 3 
1) Roving creel survey; method description, bias and applicability under Danish 
conditions ...................................................................................................................... 5 
A) Roving creel survey design and interview procedure ................................................. 5 
B) Spatial coverage of interview sites .............................................................................. 10 
C) Applicability of roving creel survey in Danish shore based angling ....................... 12 
D) Improving roving creel survey procedures ................................................................ 13 
2) Angler demography - sea trout anglers on Funen .............................................. 14 
3) Angler specialization – sea trout anglers on Funen ............................................ 18 
Bibliography ............................................................................................................... 22 
Appendix A: ................................................................................................................ 25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
1 
A broad introduction to recreational fisheries  
 
 
Fishing as an activity has existed since ancient times. It has always been a way to 
secure survival or to generate the resources for ensuring basic nutritional needs, which 
are the basic principles behind subsistence and commercial fisheries (FAO, 2012). 
For some, fishing is more than nutrition; it is leisure or a sport. Fishing for leisure or 
sport is termed recreational fishing and can be defined as: Fishing of aquatic animals 
that do not constitute an individuals primary resource to meet basic nutritional needs 
and are not generally sold or traded (FAO, 2012).  
 
The first documented case of recreational fishing dates back to 1496 (Cowx, 2002). 
Today recreational fishing involves a large group of people. Fairly new estimates 
from Arlinghaus & Cooke (2009), showed that around 10,6 % (± 6,1 % SD) of the 
population, in countries with reliable statistics, are estimated to participate in 
recreational fishing. Estimates from Cooke & Cowx (2004) suggest that there could 
be between 220 and 700 million people participating in recreational fisheries, 
globally. Such estimates along with the fact that recreational fishing has completely 
replaced commercial fisheries in certain areas, which implies that certain fish 
populations in freshwater and coastal areas are only exploited by anglers (Arlinghaus 
et al., 2002; Mora, et al., 2009), has provided a need to understand the ecological 
effects of recreational fishing. The german cod fisheries is a perfect example of how 
investigations into recreational fishing can provide valuable information, as ultimately 
the TAC (total allowable catch) was changed, due to the amount harvested by 
recreational cod anglers (Strehlow et al., 2012).  
 
The ecological effects assiosiated with recreational fishing underlines the importance 
of investigations into this field. For several species, recreational fishing provides the 
highest fishing mortality compared to commercial fisheries (Cooke & Cowx, 2004), 
which gives rise to a set of conservational issues. As mentioned earlier, high 
exploitation can have detrimental effects, but also selective harvest, trophy fishing, 
disturbance during reproductive periods, sublethal effects, and enviromental 
disburbances caused by anglers are considered challenges, for recreational fishing 
(Arlinghaus & Cooke, 2009; Lewin et al., 2006). Many of these challenges can be 
investigated by looking into angler behavior. In order to quantify angler behavoir, 
specialization theory is often used. Specialization theory was first described by Bryan 
(1977) and later further conceptualized by Ditton et al. (1992). Specialization theory 
suggests that angler behavior can be explained by degree of specialization. As an 
example, more specialized anglers have higher propensity to do catch-and-release, 
have higher avidity (i.e. fishing trips per year), have higher benefit from the total 
fishing experience, and are more receptive for conservational messages and fishery 
regulations (Oh & Ditton, 2006). In order to determine angler specialization, several 
metrics have been investigated, such as skills, avidity and gear choice, and centrality 
to lifestyle (Beardmore et al., 2013). Centrality to lifestyle can be seen as the 
psychological commiment to, in this case, recreational fishing or in other words that 
an individual identifies itself as an angler (Beardmore et al., 2013 and references 
therein).  The extensive work to understand angler preferences, specialization, and 
ultimately behavior is based on the idea that understanding specialization makes it 
==PAGE:4==
 
2 
possible to predict angler behavior without studying it directly (Beardmore et al., 
2013). This could potentially be a large asset in terms of managing recreational 
fisheries. Through investigation into the specialization of the users of a certain 
fishery, a manager could predict whatever response these users have to new 
regulations. A manager could for example impose new regulations, such as a bag limit 
or maximum size limit, and predict how that would affect the fishery (Oh and Ditton, 
2006). 
 
The need to understand recreational fishing is not limited to ecological effects and the 
reason to investigate it is not limited to providing cost-effective alternatives for 
fisheries managers. Recreational fisheries is a million dollar industry that provides 
livelyhoods for a lot of people globally (Arlinghaus et al., 2002). Economy and 
recreational fisheries are intertwined by economic value as well as impact (Parkilla et 
al., 2010).  Economic value relates to the net benefit for society such as the harvest or 
option to harvest a fish, where economic impacts refers to the flow of economic 
activity through a community such as money generated from license sales or sales 
from tackle shops (Parkilla et al., 2010). Economy and ecology are just two aspects of 
recreational fishing, human dimensions are another. Human dimensions refer to the 
psychological, physiological, and social benefits received from recretional fisheries. 
For an individual, this could be satisfaction or even improved health (Parkilla et al., 
2010). Ecology, economy and human dimensions underlines that recreational fishing 
is a complex mechanism that balances between ecological consequences and 
economic/social benefits. To understand this complexity, a variety of methods have 
been developed, some of which I will summarize below.  
 
Methods to investigate and manage recreational fisheries 
 
In order to gain the necessary information for properly managing recreational 
fisheries, several methods have been developed and investigated. This includes, but is 
not limited to, roving creel surveys, acces surveys, aerial surveys, telephone surveys, 
mail surveys and angler diaries (Pollock et al., 1994; Guthrie et al., 1991; Malvestuto, 
1996; Cooke et al., 2000; Hartil et al., 2011). Combinations of these surveys are 
known as complementary surveys (Dorow & Arlinghaus, 2011). 
 
Acces surveys and roving creel surveys have been used extensively to investigate 
recreational fisheries (Pollock et al., 1994; Guthrie et al., 1991; Malvestuto, 1996). 
The acces and roving creel surveys are both intercept methods, where the fishery is 
sampled on-site, i.e anglers are approached and interviewed. For the acces survey this 
involves sampling at the acces points to a fishery, this could be where boats are 
docked or on parking lots near fishing sites where anglers gather. The roving creel 
survey on the other hand is a more active survey type, where boating anglers can be 
approached by boat, and anglers at the shore by foot (Pollock et al., 1994). The acces 
and roving creel survey are used to gather catch and effort data, but in principle 
anything can be asked during the interviews, this could be demography, 
socioeconomy and human dimensions. These surveys can be done with 
complementary surveys that illucidate angler effort, e.g. aerial surveys in which an 
airplane or drone is used to count the total number of anglers within a fishery. 
Alternatively, information about effort can be collected by cameras (Smallwood et al., 
2011) 
==PAGE:5==
 
3 
 
The acces survey and roving creel survey are on-site surveys as opposed to off-site 
surveys, which includes angler diaries, mail, and telephone surveys (Guthrie et al., 
1991; Cooke et al, 2000; Dorow & Arlinghaus,2011). Off-site surveys often rely on 
anglers having to recall their catch and effort, which can provide bias known as recall 
bias. Recalling information for several months can be difficult and thus provide 
biased estimates (Tarrant & Manfredo, 1993; Vaske et al., 2003; Connelly & Brown, 
1995). In Denmark, there has been a tradition for investigating recreational fisheries 
using off-site surveys, i.e. a combination of mail and telephone surveys. This has been 
done for the Danish eel, cod, and sea trout fishery (Sparrevohn & Storr-paulsen, 2012; 
Olesen & Storr-paulsen 2012). However, the level of recall bias in Danish off-site 
surveys has never been established, which calls for including supplementary on site 
surveys. Such on-site surveys were recently funded by the European Maritime and 
Fisheries Fund (EMFF), providing basis for several on going on-site surveys of 
Danish recreational fisheries, of which this thesis represents a minor part dealing with 
seatrout recreational fisheries. 
 
In recent years, a new approach for collecting data involving smartphone apps have 
emerged (Venturelli et al., 2016). An example of this is the Danish angler app 
Fangstjournalen, which relies on principles from citizen science, where the public (or 
in this case anglers) provides data to the fisheries scientists (Venturelli et al., 2016). 
Exactly because Fangstjournalen relies on data from the public and not trained 
professionals, there is a need to check the data quality from such platforms. This is 
why Fangstjournalen is an integral part of this investigation,.  
 
Investigating the Danish sea trout fisheries 
 
Sea trout is one the most targeted fish in Danish, rod and line, recreational fisheries. A 
recent survey estimated around 30% of all fishing trips in Denmark are for sea trout. 
(MFVM, 2010). Despite the popularity very little information, regarding the 
recreational sea trout fishery, i.e. with rod and line, hereafter called angling, is 
available.  
 
The overall objectives of this master thesis is to increase the knowledge about sea 
trout angling in Danish coastal waters with focus on exploring the role of different 
types of anglers, e.g. local vs. tourists and Fangstjournalen users vs. non users. 
Furthermore it is an objective to compare classic methods for investigating 
recreational fisheries, e.g. rowing creel surveys with more novel methods such as 
angler app data. Subsequently, a suite of specific objectives, based on the initial 
learning objectives outlined for the thesis, was addressed.  
 
Specific objectives 
1. To present and evaluate the Rowing creel survey method for shore based 
recreational angling. This includes; 
A: A detailed description of the creel survey design and the related interview 
procedure. 
==PAGE:6==
 
4 
B: A comparison of the spatial coverage of the interview sites visited during 
the roving creel survey with the spatial distribution of anglers obtained from 
aerial counts and a discussion on how this potentially bias the roving creel 
survey data. 
C. A general discussion of the applicability of using a rowing creel survey to 
explore catch rates and angler behavior in Danish shore based recreational 
angling.  
D. A discussion of how roving creel procedures, as used in this study, could be 
improved.  
 
2. To present user demography of local and non local (tourists) sea trout anglers, and 
compare this with the user demography of users of the app Fangstjournalen.  
 
3. To analyse, present, and discuss the role of angler specialization in relation to 
angler demography, angler satisfaction, avidity (i.e. self-stated number of fishing trips 
in a year), harvest rates, and release rates for sea trout anglers.  
 
4. To analyse, present, and discuss catch rates and release rates of sea trout. This 
includes a discussion of differences in catch rates and release rates between local 
anglers and tourists. 
 
5. To analyse the motivational reasons for catch-and-release of sea trout among 
anglers and discuss this in relation to previously conducted Danish surveys.  
 
Structure of the thesis 
The thesis consists of two parts. The first part has a report structure and includes a 
description of the study site and an overview of the different methods used in the 
survey. Next, objectives # 1, 2, and 3 are presented separately with own introduction, 
method and result section, discussion, and conclusion. 
 
The second part is a draft for a peer review paper aimed to be submitted for Fisheries 
Research. The paper draft deals with catch rates, release rates and motivational 
reasons for catch-and-release for shore based sea trout angling, and addresses the 
specific objectives # 4 and 5. The second part can be found in appendix A. 
 
 
Study site and data collection 
To investigate the shore based sea trout fishery, DTU Aqua chose the Island of Funen 
as a showcase. Funen is a Danish island, located between the two main parts of 
Denmark, Zealand and Jutland. Funen has an area of 3100 km2 with a coastline of 
1100 km. This covers not only the main island but also quite a few smaller islands. In 
this investigation, the smaller islands were disregarded for logistic reasons. This 
effectively reduced the coastline to 460 km. Sea trout fishing is very popular on 
Funen and is subject to considerable awareness from politicians, stakeholders, and 
media. Since the beginning of the 1990’s, a group of municipalities at Funen have 
worked together to facilitate sea trout fishing, especially the tourism business. This 
work is being coordinated by the “Sea trout Funen secretary” which employs two staff 
fulltime. “Sea trout Funen secretary” also works with owners of self-catering 
accommodation, hotels, campsites, tackle shops, fishing guides, and others to market 
sea trout fishing on Funen.  
==PAGE:7==
 
5 
 
Coastal recreational rod and reel fishing on Funen and elsewhere is often done from 
harbors, standing on the shore, or by wading into the water. In addition, it can also be 
done from boat. Due to logistics involved in including all types of fishing, we exclude 
boat fishing anglers from this survey. Shore based rod and reel anglers can basically 
fish anywhere along the coast. However, some fishing sites seem more popular than 
others and based on a fishing guidebook published by the “Sea trout Funen secretary” 
79 popular fishing sites at the mainland of Funen have been identified (see figure 1).  
 
The cornerstone of data used in this thesis stem from a roving creel survey that the 
author of this report conducted in spring 2017, where more than 700 anglers fishing at 
the coast of Funen were interviewed. In addition, aerial survey data, where the 
number of anglers in the study area was counted from airplane on a regular basis, and 
data from the angler app “Fangstjournalen” were used. This data was provided by 
DTU Aqua. The aerial survey, planned by DTU Aqua, involved 23 days of sampling 
anglers from a small plane. For each day, 460 km of coastline was sampled 
effectively. The aerial survey and the Fangstjournalen app will not be presented in 
detail, as it is not within the scope of this report. DTU Aqua chose a three-month 
sampling period from 01-03-2017 to 31-05-2017 as a temporal sampling frame. This 
period is considered to be a peak period for sea trout fishing in Denmark. 
 
1) Roving creel survey; method description, bias and 
applicability under Danish conditions 
A) Roving creel survey design and interview procedure 
 
To investigate shore based recreational angling, a roving creel survey (RCS) was 
conducted to gain vital information regarding catch rates, release rates, angler 
demography, angler behavior and socioeconomic aspects. In the following section a 
detailed description of how the RCS was conducted, is presented. 
 
Angling for sea trout can in principle take place anywhere on the island of Funen, but 
certain spots were assumed to be more popular. For this investigation, 79 sites were 
identified as a frame; these were derived from a fishing guidebook published by “Sea 
trout Funen”. 
 
The RCS was carried out by a single clerk (the author) in order to avoid interviewer 
bias (i.e. different interviewers could carry out interviews differently). In total, 74 
days were scheduled for sampling within the three-month period. In effect, 72 days 
were sampled due to the clerk being ill on two of the sampling days. Each sampling 
day consisted of 8 hours of sampling. The RCS was planned as stratified random 
multistage design. This design implies posterior definitions of different sampling units 
such as primary (PSU), secondary (SSU), and tertiary sampling units (TSU) (Pollock 
et al., 1994). 
  
 
 
==PAGE:8==
 
6 
PSU: 
The primary sampling unit consists of days, with unequal probability between 
weekdays (40 %) and weekends (60 %). This was at least the original idea, but 
because 36 days provided full coverage for weekends, the 8 remaining days were 
allocated to weekdays. In effect, this made the allocation with almost equal 
probability, 51 % and 49 % for weekdays and weekends, respectively. With two days 
being missed, in weekends, by illness the total allocation proved to be 53 % and 47 % 
for weekdays and weekends, respectively. 
 
SSU: 
The SSU for the RCS was divided into mornings and evenings with equal probability. 
Mornings were considered to be one hour after sunrise and 8 hours forward. For 
evenings, the sampling started 8 hours prior to sunset and was carried out till sunset. 
This system meant that the sampling followed the changes in light hours. This entails 
that the chance of over sampling during midday (overlap of morning and evening 
period) decreased as the sampling progressed. 
 
TSU: 
The tertiary sampling unit was fishing site. As no other information about fishing sites 
existed, DTU Aqua choose the 79 popular fishing sites described by the “sea trout 
Funen secretary” in the book “117 fine fishing spots” as interview sites (see figure 1). 
For every sampling day, a certain recipe was followed to ensure the 79 sites were 
visited randomly. 1) One of the 79 sites was chosen randomly. 2) The travel direction 
from the site was chosen as clockwise or counterclockwise, around the island, with 
equal probability. 3) The subsequent sites in the previously chosen travel direction 
would be visited with unequal probability. Based on input from local anglers and the 
“sea trout Funen-secretary”, sites were divided into three categories: Busy (100 % 
visit chance), medium busy (75 % visit chance) and not very busy (50 % visit chance) 
(see figure 1). These three steps were chosen to randomize the sampling but also to 
make sure that the chance of meeting anglers was increased. In order to provide the 
spatial coverage, a maximum of 2 hours per site was chosen. This implies that at least 
4 sites were sampled in a day.  
Figure 1: An overview of the designated interview sites on Funen. Busy sites (100 % visit 
chance), medium busy sites (75% visit chance) and not very busy sites (50 % visit chance) 
are presented as white, blue, and yellow numbers, respectively. 
==PAGE:9==
 
7 
The interview process: 
In the following, the interview process for the clerk is presented; upon arrival to a 
given site, I (herafter called “the clerk”) would scout the site using binoculars from 
vantage points, where it was possible. If no anglers were spotted from these vantage 
points, but cars were sighted at the designated parking spots, the site would be 
thoroughly searched. If no anglers or cars were spotted, the clerk would move on to 
the next site.  In the process of approaching an angler, the clerk introduced himself as 
an employee of the Danish Technical University (DTU). The clerk would then explain 
briefly what the survey included along with the purpose of the survey, followed by the 
question whether the angler would like to participate or not. In cases, where several 
anglers were fishing within close proximity to each other, the clerk was instructed to 
politely ask the anglers one by one to move away from the group in order to avoid 
overhearing bias (i.e. anglers adjusting their answer to that of other interviewed 
anglers)(Lockwood, 1997).  
 
The questionnaire was designed to take no longer than a maximum of 10 minutes. The 
clerk carried a tablet, which included the questionnaire in three different languages, 
Danish, English, and German. As the minds behind the planning of the RCS have 
Danish as their primary language, the English and German versions were sent to peers 
for review in order to ensure the same standard across all languages. The 
questionnaire included questions within different topics, which will be presented in 
the following section. Please note that the questionnaire was developed by DTU Aqua 
for multiple purposes and only a fraction of the questions are used in the present 
thesis. However, for the sake of coherence, I will present all the questions below and 
state specifically if the data is not used in the present thesis. 
 
Trip specific questions: 
The questionnaire began with a series of trip specific questions. This included trip 
length, which was done to get an estimate of angler effort. This included both the time 
an angler had been fishing, and for how long the angler would expect the fishing trip 
to continue.  
 
Sea trout is the dominant, but not the only, species targeted at the coastal areas of 
Funen. Cod, flatfish, and garfish were also expected to be the target of anglers from 
time to time, and thus a question was included to investigate the target fish of the 
angler.  
 
Following this, anglers were asked about their satisfaction with their trip and catch at 
the time of the interview. Both of these questions were asked as satisfaction on a 
Lickert scale from one to ten.  
 
Catch specific questions: 
The catch specific questions relate to the catch obtained during the fishing trip so far 
i.e, species caught, the number of fish caught, the number of released fish, the reasons 
for harvest and the reasons for release. The reasons for harvest were divided into the 
following statements: 
1. For consumption 
2. For bait 
3. For throwing away 
==PAGE:10==
 
8 
4. Other purposes 
 
 
The reasons for release were divided into the following questions: 
A) Maturity (a colored fish that had just spawned) 
B) Condition (angler stating that weight was not high enough compared to length) 
C) Principle (angler always release fish out of principle) 
D) Taste (angler does not like the taste of fish) 
E) Below minimum size (fish was below the mandatory minimum size (40 or 50 
cm) 
F) Below personal minimum size (fish was below an anglers personal minimum 
size) 
 
Expectations: 
The expectation specific questions relate to the expectations behind an angler’s 
perfect trip. This was asked as the number of sea trout caught or the size of caught sea 
trout in order for the trip to be perfect. The size included both length and weight. In 
addition, an angler would be asked when he or she had last experienced catching said 
amount or size of fish. The idea behind these questions was thought as a proxy for 
determining the importance of catching fish, and also to see whether sea trout anglers 
are trophy hunters or perhaps consumption minded. Further, it can be investigated 
how expectations influence angler satisfaction with trip and catch (Arlinghaus, 
2006A). Expectations are not within the scope of this report and will not be treated 
further. 
 
Self-stated skill and specialization: 
The next two questions involved the self-stated skill level and specialization by 
asking about the importance of angling as a hobby. In regards to skill, anglers were 
asked how skilled they considered themselves compared to the average angler on 
Funen. It was possible to choose between five different skill levels ranging from 
much better to much worse compared to the average angler. The importance of 
angling as a hobby had four options ranging from most important hobby to one hobby 
of many. The self-stated skill and specialization questions were asked as a way of 
investigating an anglers centrality to lifestyle. Centrality to lifestyle is not within the 
scope of this investigation and will not be treated further.  
 
Fangstjournalen and Fiskepleje: 
Since a part of this investigation involves comparing RCS to the angler app 
Fangstjournalen, anglers were asked whether they knew the app and if they were 
using it. In addition, anglers were asked whether they knew the webpage 
Fiskepleje.dk (a website that informs the public about management of fish stocks in 
freshwater and coastal areas).  
 
Socioeconomic specific: 
Next, a series of questions related to socioeconomic aspects were asked. This includes 
transportation to the fishing site and amount of spent in relation to the specific fishing 
trip. The socioeconomic aspects of sea trout fishing are not within the scope of this 
report, and will not be treated further. 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
 
9 
 
Fishing license: 
In Denmark two license types are available; angler and passive gear license. The 
passive gear license includes a permission to use passive gear (such as gillnets) as 
well as rod and reel. In addition, anglers can buy a day license, week license, or a year 
license. A couple of questions were asked in order to determine whether anglers have 
a license, what type of license they buy, and the reason for not having a license.  
Licenses are not within the scope of this report, and will not be treated further. 
 
Self-stated avidity: 
In order to investigate self-stated avidity, anglers were asked how many fishing trips 
they had done within the last three months and within the last 12 months both in 
coastal areas and in total. In addition to providing a proxy, even though it is not the 
best for angler specialization (Beardmore et al., 2013), this information can provide a 
measure of the importance of coastal angling compared to other types of angling. The 
idea is that the number of coastal trips to total trips ratio provides a measure for the 
importance for coastal fishing. 
 
Demography: 
In order to determine angler demography, a series of questions were asked regarding 
age, country, and postal code. Country and postal code are used to separate tourists 
from local anglers. In addition, the clerk noted the gender of the angler. 
 
Notes on specialization by the clerk: 
A few final notes were made by the clerk, when ending an interview. This involved 
angler specialization, crowding, and fishing style (i.e. spin or fly fisher).  
 
Angler specialization was determined subjectively by the clerk, based the gear and 
clothing used by the anglers. Gear choice is highly variable in sea trout fishing, 
ranging from old glass fiber spin fishing rods, to expensive carbon fiber fly fishing 
rods. Reels follow the same pattern. The clerk observed the gear of an angler and 
rated it on a scale from 1 to 10. As for clothing, a sea trout angler has many choices. 
Waders are a must-have item, and these can range from classic PVC or neoprene 
waders, to expensive breathable waders with separate wading boots. This also goes 
for wading jackets, which can be a standard raincoat or highly specialized jackets 
manufactured directly for sea trout anglers. Clothing was noted by the clerk on a scale 
from 1 to 10. 
 
After each interview, crowding was noted, simply by counting all visible anglers from 
the interview point. Crowding is not within the scope of this investigation and will not 
be treated further. Fishing style was noted by the clerk. This was done by looking at 
an anglers end-tackle. This could be lures, bombarda, flies etc. Fishing style is not 
within the scope of this investigation and will not be treated further 
 
Fish samples: 
If any sea trout were harvested by an angler the interview ended with the clerk 
measuring length, weight and taking samples. The samples included a scale sample, to 
determine fish age, and a sample of the adipose fin for DNA analysis. These analyses 
are not within the scope of this report. 
 
==PAGE:12==
 
10
B) Spatial coverage of interview sites 
 
Introduction 
 
A mentioned previously, 79 interview sites were initially chosen as the basis for the 
roving creel survey (RCS). This was based on the best available knowledge at the 
time when the survey was designed. Having said that, DTU Aqua had clear 
expectations that angling took place outside the 79 designated interview sites (“off 
interview site” here after “off-site”), but clearly no information regarding the extent of 
this were available. Hence in order to illuminate this, angler counts from the aerial 
survey conducted by DTU Aqua was used. Aerial surveys are often used to estimate 
the total effort in a fishery, and the spatial coverage (Pollock et al., 1994). This is 
done by the use of a GPS tracker or by manually plotting positions into a map, when 
doing the aerial counts. A comparison of the number anglers found on-site (i.e. on the 
designated interview sites) and off-site (i.e. off the designated interview sites) is 
useful, since it provides a validity assessment of the chosen interview sites. It 
provides means of investigating whether or not the RCS has an effort bias (i.e. high 
effort off-site and low effort on-site), and it can be used to determine if the interview 
sites should be changed for future studies. 
 
Methods 
 
In 23 days of sampling, a total of 2252 anglers were observed in the aerial survey. 
(unpublished material, DTU Aqua) This adds up to approximately 100 anglers for 
each flight. In order to determine the spatial coverage on the interview sites compared 
to “off-sites”, a simple map was created. This map was constructed in the program 
QGIS. Each of the 79 sites were manually drawn onto this map covering Funen, based 
on a book published by the “Sea trout Funen secretary”. Aerial survey data was 
provided by DTU aqua, as a set of geographical coordinates for each observed angler. 
Hereafter, anglers were plotted on the map containing the interview sites, which made 
it possible to find the proportion of anglers “off site”. In some cases, anglers were not 
necessarily interviewed directly on-site. Sometimes, anglers within close proximity 
(i.e. maximum a few hundred meters) of a site were interviewed an assigned to the 
nearest site. This effect was accounted for by having the RCS clerk (the author) assign 
the anglers to their respective sites in QGIS. The clerk had a very clear idea, from 
memory, which off-sites areas that were occasionally covered in the survey. The same 
off-site areas were thus considered as on-site in this investigation. This was 
considered an appropriate method for ensuring comparability between the sites 
covered in the RCS and data from the aerial survey. 
 
Results 
Of 2252 anglers, 1556 were found to be on-site, while 696 were found off-site (see 
figure 2). This suggests that the interview sites cover 69,1 % of the shore based 
recreational rod and reel fisheries on Funen.   
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:13==
 
11
Discussion 
 
The majority, approximately 70 %, of the shore based angling was covered within the 
RCS. Although this seems like a substantial amount, the potential exclusion of 30% of 
the population could lead to biases in the RCS results, i.e. if the population of anglers 
off-site are different than the population that was interviewed at the designated 
interview sites. These potential biases come down to the reason why anglers are 
targeting off-site areas. There is of course no way of knowing this without an 
investigation into the off-site areas, but one could imagine a few scenarios. Catch 
could be the reason for going off-site. If catches vary between on and off-site areas, 
this could potentially indicate a bias for the catch rates. This could result in over or 
under estimation of the actual catch rates. Crowding could also result in anglers 
moving off-site. The interview sites are most likely well known by many anglers as its 
available from the home page of the “Sea trout Funen secretary”. This could 
potentially drive anglers, that prefer not to be in crowd, off-site. A potential bias 
arises if the anglers off-site are different compared to the on-site anglers, in terms of 
behavior. If an angler segment or group is not present in the survey (an example could 
be local anglers with high degree of specialization), which could have consequences 
for management decisions in the future since predicted reactions to fishery regulations 
depend on angler specialization (Oh and Ditton, 2006).  
 
Figure 2: Spatial coverage of the interview sites. 69,1 % of the anglers was found to be on-site. 
Grey bars are the designated interview sites and red dots are off-site anglers. 
==PAGE:14==
 
12
 
C) Applicability of roving creel survey in Danish shore based angling 
In the last section spatial coverage was investigated. In this section reflections on the 
applicability of roving creel survey (RCS) in Danish shore based angling will be 
presented. This includes both positive and negative experiences that are meant to be 
an interesting read before one starts planning a future RCS in general and in Denmark 
specifically.  
 
In this study the designated interview sites varied in length and shape (see figure 2), 
which caused some challenges. Clearly, this variability is something that cannot be 
truly appreciated before one has visited the sites. Walking distance varies greatly. For 
some, the entire site is visible from the parking spot, whereas others required up to 14 
kilometers of walking in order to cover the entire site. The terrain also varied between 
the sites. Sand and stone was the usual, but for some sites, a rather lengthy walk in 
almost chest deep water was required. The site variation made it difficult to find the 
anglers, and in general the RCS proved to be hard work. Furthermore, it became 
evident that there is a difference in site popularity (see figure 2). This implies that 
sites were often visited, only to find that no one was fishing in the area. The lack of 
anglers at sites often resulted in quite of lot of driving in order to sites holding 
anglers. 200 or 300 km per day in car was not unusual. Thus as expected, a RSC study 
is labor and cost intensive.  
 
 
 
 
Indeed, cost and labor are the two main complications when considering the 
applicability of using RCS to investigate Danish shore based angling in the future. 
Was it worth it? The response speaks for itself (see table 1). 729 anglers were 
contacted in this RCS and 679 agreed to participate. This gives a total participation 
Figure 3: Site specific spatial distribution of interviews conducted in the roving creel survey. 
==PAGE:15==
 
13
rate of 93 %. The last 7 % were generally not negative about the survey. In fact, with 
exception of a few anglers, most of these were due to not being able to speak English, 
Danish or German. In my experience these were generally from Eastern-Europe. The 
communication barrier often lead to a discarded interview since the interviewed 
angler did not understand the questions, rather than unwillingness to participate. In a 
few instances, where this was experienced with angling parties, the angler most fluent 
in English would help by translating the questions, which potentially could be seen a 
bias. The general reception was extremely positive. Anglers would often talk about 
where they had met other anglers during the day, where they would often see other 
anglers, and subjects that would make accessibility for the sites easier, such as 
parking spots or routes. All in all, anglers seemed to be very eager to help, concerned 
about their fishery, and happy that someone wanted to put in the work required to 
investigate the fishery. Most did not mind that the interview was thorough, but in 
some instances especially the German anglers became quite restless. This was simply 
down to the clerk’s poor German, which could potentially be seen as a bias. The only 
slight negative experience concerning interview length was with anglers who had 
participated before (see specific objective 2 for further details). Often it was necessary 
to highlight to these participants that the interview the second time would be very 
quick and only concern catch and effort and trip expenditures, in order to get them to 
participate a second time. 
 
Table 1: Overview of interviews conducted in the roving creel survey. 
 
Total 
# of interviews 
729 
Yes/no to being interviewed 
679/50 
Participation rate 
93 % 
1./2. Time interviews 
 634/45 
# of sea trout anglers 
599 
 
Both negative and positive things can be said about this RCS, the general impression 
is positive, except for the cost and labor, but still things could be improved. The next 
chapter concerns ideas in regards to improving doing RCS in Danish shore based 
recreational angling. 
 
D) Improving roving creel survey procedures 
In this section, suggestions that would improve the process are presented which 
hopefully can be of help next time someone decides to do a Roving creel survey 
(RCS) on the shores of Denmark. 
 
As mentioned previously, the designated interview sites were assigned a certain 
“visit” probability. This was done in cooperation between DTU Aqua and the “Sea 
trout Funen secretary”. During the cause of this survey, it became clear that this 
“visit” probability did not always reflect the number of anglers on the interview site. 
This resulted in numerous visits to sites that were supposed to be busy, but never held 
anglers. In contrast were the sites that were supposed to be rarely visited, but always 
held anglers. In fact, the most popular site proved to be one assigned to be “not very 
busy”, which resulted in 50% visit chance for this particular site. A simple way to 
avoid this would be to schedule a preliminary aerial survey, that together with local 
know-how could provide the basis of an investigation. This is of course limited by 
==PAGE:16==
 
14
funding. A preliminary aerial survey could also provide an early spatial distribution.  
Approximately 30% of the anglers were found off-site by the aerial survey in this 
case. Some of the off-site areas held large concentrations of anglers. These areas 
could have been included in RCS, if the clerk knew they were there.  
 
A less cost-effective way to improve the study is simply by holding a meeting with 
the local anglers. The clerk learned a lot from the local anglers during the survey. To 
have this kind of information before the survey starts could be a great help.   
2) Angler demography - sea trout anglers on Funen 
 
Introduction 
 
Investigations into demography can be used to show who is participating within a 
fishery. Trends in demographics are important when making management plans for 
the future (Aas, 1996). It makes it possible to construct management plans that are 
aimed directly at the users. Demography also provides an insight into who is not using 
the fishery. Appropriate actions can be taken if it is suspected that certain segments 
are missing in fisheries. This could for example be campaigns that motivate younger 
people to fish, if a trend exists that the anglers are getting older. For the angling 
tourism on Funen, knowing who is not participating is vital. Especially if the goal is 
to increase participation rates. Another aspect of demographics, in relation to this 
investigation, is an investigation into the comparability of roving creel surveys and 
the angler app “Fangstjournalen”. Angler apps are a cost effective way to survey 
recreational fisheries, but the data needs to be validated (Venturelli et al., 2016). 
Differences in demographics between the surveys will give an idea about, whether or 
not the same anglers are sampled. If certain angler segments are not found in 
Fangstjournalen and in the RCS, actions can be taken to ensure recruitment of these 
segments.  
 
In the following section, angler demography from roving creel survey (RCS) 
interviews will be presented. This includes age, geographical area, and, gender. This 
will be compared to user demography from the angler app “Fangstjournalen”. In the 
RCS, anglers were asked if they were using “Fangstjournalen”. In addition to anglers 
interviewed in the RCS and actual data from “Fangstjournalen”, the anglers found to 
be using Fangstjournalen via the RCS provides a third group for comparison. The data 
from the app are referred to as Fangstjournalen (app), while the users of 
“Fangstjournalen” found via the RCS are referred to as Fangstjournalen (creel). 
 
Methods 
 
RCS interviews were conducted in Danish, English, and German (see table 2 for a 
quick overview). Geographical area was specified in the interviews. This was done 
either by postal codes in the Danish interviews, or by country in the German and 
English interviews. Postal codes made it possible to separate the users of 
Fangstjournalen into Danish tourists and local anglers, as I defined Danes with postal 
codes outside Funen as Danish tourists. None of the German or English interviewed 
anglers were found to be using “Fangstjournalen” in the RCS. For the Danish 
interviewed anglers 46 were found to be using “Fangstjournalen”, while 303 did not. 
==PAGE:17==
 
15
Sea trout anglers were identified in the RCS by asking each angler about their primary 
target. For this investigation, anglers fishing for other species such as garfish and 
flatfish were disregarded. The data from Fangstjournalen was provided by DTU Aqua 
and is limited to the reported fishing trips after sea trout on Funen within the same 
time frame as the RCS, from 01/03-2017 to 31/05-2017. 
 
 
Table 2:Overview of Danish, German and English interviews conducted in the roving creel 
survey (01/03-2017 – 31/05-2017). 
 
Danish 
German 
English 
# of interviews 
457 
167 
105 
Yes/no to being 
interviewed 
438/19 
161/6 
80/25 
Participation rate 
96 % 
96 % 
76 % 
1./2. Time interviews 415/23 
148/13 
74/6 
# of sea trout anglers 
372  
152 
75 
 
For the RCS interviews, age was compared for locals and tourists and users and non-
users of Fangstjournalen. The actual data from Fangstjournalen was used to compare 
age of anglers in Fangstjournalen to age of anglers in the creel survey. 
Age distribution was found to be normally distributed and thus made it possible to 
compare age of the groups using one-way ANOVA and t-test. Gender was 
investigated for both creel survey interviews and for Fangstjournalen data. 
 
Results 
 
The German and English interviews revealed that 14 different nationalities other than 
Danish were encountered in the survey (see figure 4). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Country distribution for German and English interviewed anglers. 
==PAGE:18==
 
16
 
 
 
The number of fishing trips, conducted by Danish tourists and locals, for sea trout 
varied between Fangstjournalen (app), Fangstjournalen (creel) and the RCS and so 
did the tourist to local proportion (see table 3).  
 
 
Table 3: Number of fishing trips for Danish tourists and local anglers fishing for sea trout on 
Funen, as found in Fangstjournalen (app), Fangstjournalen (creel), and the roving creel survey. 
 
 
Fangstjournalen 
(app) 
Fangstjournalen 
(creel) 
Roving creel 
survey 
Danish tourists 
760 
19 
98 
Local anglers 
1882 
27 
260 
Tourist to local 
proportion.  
0.41 
0.7 
0.38 
 
 
When comparing age between the angler groups; locals, Danish tourists, German 
tourists, and English tourists, no striking differences were observed (see figure 5). 
No significant differences were seen when comparing age between these groups, one-
way ANOVA (F = 0.805, df  = 3, p = 0.492). 
 
 
Figure 5: Age distribution for locals and tourists as found in the rowing creel survey 
 
 
When comparing age between Fangstjournalen (app), Fangstjournalen (creel), and the 
RCS, differences were observed (see figure 6). Fangstjournalen (app) users proved to 
be significantly younger compared to anglers interviewed in the creel survey, this was 
investigated using t-test (t = -2.83, p = 0.005.). Fangstjournalen (creel) users proved to 
==PAGE:19==
 
17
be significantly younger compared to anglers interviewed in the RCS (t = 3.02, p = 
0.004).  No significant difference in age was found between Fangstjournalen (app) 
and Fangstjournalen (creel) (t = -1.8, p = 0.08). 
 
 
Figure 6: Age distribution of anglers using Fangstjournalen (app and creel) and for anglers in 
the roving creel survey. 
 
For the creel survey, gender was found to be 99% male. For Fangstjournalen (app) 
98% was found to be male.   
 
Discussion 
 
Funen appears to be a popular place for tourists to fish for sea trout. Approximately 
55% of all anglers were tourists. Approximately 40% of all the anglers were tourists 
from outside Denmark. They originated from 14 different countries, with the vast 
majority being Germans. The large proportion of tourists could be a result of the 
planning of the RCS. The designated interview sites are published in book, in a 
multitude of languages. This could lead to a bias where the tourists are 
overrepresented. Another survey that included the anglers found off the designated 
interview sites could be done to investigate this effect. No other striking differences 
were found in terms of demography for locals and tourists, as they are very similar 
both in terms of age and gender. This suggests that the shore based sea trout angling 
appeals to male anglers averaging 48 years of age.  The fact that middle-aged male 
anglers are predominant is not totally unexpected. Arlinghaus (2006 B) found that 
being male is the best predictor for an angler in Germany. He also suspected that 
anglers in general are getting older, and this, eventually leads to a reduction in the 
number of anglers.  
 
When comparing demography between anglers found in the RCS, anglers using 
Fangstjournalen (app), and anglers using Fangstjournalen (creel), differences are 
observed both in terms of number of fishing trips conducted, and age. The proportion 
of fishing trips conducted by tourists in relation to locals from Fangstjournalen (app), 
can be seen as the probability of encountering either a Danish tourist or local fishing 
for sea trout on Funen. The probability of encountering a tourist was much higher for 
==PAGE:20==
 
18
Fangstjournalen (creel), compared to Fangstjournalen (app). This could be due to a 
fairly low sample size for Fangstjournalen (creel), because the probability was fairly 
similar for Fangstjournalen (app) compared to the RCS. That the tourist to local ratio 
was similar between Fangstjournalen (app) and the RCS, certainly acts as validation 
for Fangstjournalen (app) as a survey method. On the other hand anglers found in 
Fangstjournalen (app) and Fangstjournalen (creel) proved to be significantly younger 
compared to anglers found in the RCS. This does indicate that data from older anglers 
could be missing in Fangstjournalen. Venturelli et al. (2016) speculated that data from 
angler apps might be biased by demographics. If we assume that older anglers have 
more experience, and that experience is an important behavioral trait (Pollock et al., 
1994), this may result in inappropriate management actions, if the decision-making 
was based solely on Fangstjournalen. The average age found in the RCS was 48 
years, for angler using Fangstjournalen (app) this was 45. So even though there is a 
significant difference in age, the average age only differs by 3 years. This does not 
necessarily imply that different segments are surveyed. Overall Fangstjournalen (app) 
and the RCS seem to be compatible in terms of demography. 
 
3) Angler specialization – sea trout anglers on Funen 
 
Introduction 
 
The idea behind angler specialization theory was first described by Bryan (1977) and 
later further conceptualized by Ditton et al. (1992). Specialization theory suggests that 
angler behavior follows their degree of specialization, as an example more 
specizalised anglers likely to have higher propensity to do catch-and-release, higher 
avidity (i.e. fishing trips per year), higher benefit from the total fishing experience, 
and be more receptive for conservational messages and fishery regulations (Oh & 
Ditton, 2006). Angler specilization is a valuable asset in terms of managing 
recreational fisheries (Oh and Ditton, 2006). By investigating specialization of the 
users of a certain fishery, a manager could make a reliable prediction of the response 
that users may have to new regulations. As an example, a manager could impose new 
regulations, such as a bag limit or maximum size limit, and predict how that would 
affect the fishery (Oh and Ditton, 2006). Several metrics exists for investigating 
angler specialization, which includes, but is not limited to: Centrality to lifestyle 
(psychological commitment), avidity (i.e. frequency of going fishing), fisher type (for 
example spin or fly fishers) and experience (Beardmore et al., 2013). In this 
investigation a slightly different approach was made. The roving creel survey (RCS) 
clerk made a subjective assessment of the level of commitment to sea trout angling, 
by investigating the fishing gear and clothing worn by the anglers. To see 
commitment from fishing gear and clothing requires some sort of experience with sea 
trout angling. Luckily the RCS clerk is an avid angler himself.  
 
Methods 
 
Angler specialization was determined using two metrics that involved fishing gear 
and clothing worn by the anglers. For gear, anglers can choose to use either spin or fly 
gear, where fly fishers are considered more specialized. Gear specialization was noted 
on a scale from 1-10. 1-5 and 9 consisted of spinning gear ranging from very cheap 
==PAGE:21==
 
19
gear (1) – to high-end gear (fairly expensive) (5) and really expensive high-end gear 
(approximately 10,000 Danish kroner for rod and reel) (9). 6 –8 and 10 consisted of 
beginner fly gear (6) to really high-end (very expensive) fly gear (10). The clothing 
metric was also noted on a scale from 1 to 10. In terms of clothing, waders and 
wading jackets are a must for the far majority of sea trout anglers fishing from the 
coast. Here, highly specialized breathable waders with complementary wading boots 
and wading jackets, manufactured with sea trout anglers in mind, were a sign of high 
specialization (10). The more traditional waders manufactured in either PVC or 
neoprene, without the use of a wading jacket or wading boots was a sign of low 
specialization (1). An average specialization degree was calculated for each angler, 
based on the average between the gear and clothing metric.  
 
Angler specialization for sea trout anglers on Funen, was investigated in relation to 
angler demography, angler satisfaction, avidity (self-stated number of fishing trips 
done in a year), catch rates, and release rates, using a generalized linear model 
assuming a poisson distribution. The variables used can be seen in table 4. 
 
Table 4: Input to the generalized linear model made to investigate angler specialization. 
 
The generalized linear model assuming a poisson distribution relies on count data, this 
entailed that the average specialization needed to be rounded to the nearest positive 
Variable 
Variable type 
Form 
Specialization 
Predictor 
Scale from 1 to 10, where 
1 is low and 10 is high 
specialization 
Age 
Explanatory 
Angler age as continuous  
Area 
Explanatory 
Four area groups were 
made. Local anglers, 
Danish tourists, German 
tourists and English 
tourists. 
Trip satisfaction 
Explanatory 
Scale from 1 to 10 where 1 
is very unsatisfied and 10 
is very satisfied with the 
fishing trip. 
Catch satisfaction 
Explanatory 
Scale from 1 to 10 where 1 
is very unsatisfied and 10 
is very satisfied with the 
catch of the trip 
Catch rate 
Explanatory 
Individual catch rates 
calculated as fish/hour for 
all trips longer than 10 
minutes.  
Release rate 
Explanatory 
Individual release rates 
calculated # released/ # 
total.  
Avidity 
Explanatory 
Self- number of fishing 
trips conducted in the last 
year. 
==PAGE:22==
 
20
integer. Rounding the average specialization will undoubtedly remove some of the 
variation in the data, but it was necessary in order to use the poisson distribution.   
 Using a generalized linear model reduced the number of anglers investigated in order 
to gain explanatory power. This is why the total number of fishing trips for sea trout 
added up to 599, but in the model, a total of 410 trips were used. The first reduction in 
trip number comes from the calculation of catch rates. Here, all trips shorter than 10 
minutes were removed. The idea of removing short trips was taken from Pollock et al. 
(1994). This was done to remove unrealistically high catch rates from the set. In 
addition, all trips where any information for any of the explanatory variables was 
missing, the trip was removed. Missing information for the explanatory variables 
stems from angler not wanting to specify age, area, or avidity. On some instances, 
specialization was not noted, this happened when the clerk was in doubt about the 
gear or clothing, or when anglers had completed a trip and had already packed away 
their gear. For these 410 trips, 79, 53, 103, and 175 were carried out by Danish 
tourists, English tourists, German tourists, and local anglers, respectively.  
 
 
In the process of the making the best possible model, a model structure including all 
the previously mentioned terms, without interactions was made. Interactions were not 
included because this investigation was made to see the effects of different 
explanatory variables and not their combined effect. Lastly, a step-wise reduction 
method was used to remove terms that were insignificant to the model. Step-wise 
reduction is based on the AIC value (Akaike’s Information Criterion), which provides 
an estimate of the optimal model (Bozgodan, 1987). 
 
Results 
 
The step-wise reduction showed that geographical area, release rates, trip satisfaction, 
and avidity were significant for the model. This implies that age, catch satisfaction, 
and catch rates were not.  This suggests that the variation in angler specialization can 
be determined as a combination of an anglers geographical area, propensity to do 
catch and release, trip satisfaction, and avidity. 
 
Output from the model suggests that specialization varies with geographical area, i.e. 
English tourists being more specialized. The model used “being a Danish tourist” as a 
significant base, holding a specialization value of 5.7 (p = 2*10^-16), “being an 
English tourist” significantly increases specialization by 1.2 (p = 0.007). “Being a 
German tourist” is not significant compared to being a Danish tourist (p = 0.85), 
while “being local” significantly reduces specialization with 0.81, compared to being 
a Danish tourist (p = 0.0003).  
 
Increasing the propensity to do catch-and-release significantly increases specialization 
level (p = 0.005), suggesting that more specialized anglers are more inclined to catch 
and release. Being a more avid angler significantly increases specialization level (p = 
4.07*10^-09), i.e. specialized anglers fish more. Having lower trip satisfaction 
significantly decreases the level of specialization (p = 0.046), it indicates that 
specialized anglers are less satisfied with their trip.  
==PAGE:23==
 
21
 
Discussion 
 
Propensity do to catch-and-release significantly increased with angler specialization. 
This is very much in line with previous investigations (Oh and Ditton, 2006; 
Arlinghaus et al., 2007 and references therein). This could be due to a range of 
reasons. Specialized anglers have a higher dependency for the resource they are using, 
compared to anglers with lower specialization (Bryan, 1977; Ditton et al., 1992). As a 
result, anglers become more conservation minded, and will prefer to do catch-and-
release to secure sustainable use of the resource (Arlinghaus et al., 2007). For others, 
catch-and-release becomes a strict religion (Aas et al., 2002). The choice between 
keeping a fish or releasing it bounded in an individuals attitudes, beliefs, values, 
knowledge, and norms (Arlinghaus et al., 2007; Stensland & Aas, 2014), which 
underlines that catch-and-release is a complex mechanism. Increased avidity also 
significantly increased angler specialization among the sea trout anglers, which is also 
in line with previous investigations (Bryan, 1977; Ditton et al., 1992; Oh and Ditton, 
2006). Most likely it reflects that for, specialized anglers, fishing is a central part of 
their lifestyle and they spend most their leisure time fishing to ensure their socio-
psychological needs are met (Arlinghaus et al., 2007 and references therein).  
 
For trip satisfaction, it was expected that more specialized anglers would show higher 
appreciation from being on a trip (Oh and Ditton, 2006). This was not the case for sea 
trout anglers at Funen, as more specialized anglers seemed to be less satisfied with 
their trip. The most specialized anglers were found among the English tourist, and one 
could imagine that people investing time and money in travelling to Funen have high 
expectations, and are therefore at higher risk of being dissatisfied. This can be related 
to the idea that catch expectations are the primary driver for satisfaction (Arlinghaus, 
2006A). Studies have shown that as anglers become more specialized, they change 
from being catch orientated to having higher emphasis on nature and settings of the 
activity (Bryan, 1977; Ditton et al., 1992). This idea was recently challenged by 
Beardmore et al. (2011) who found more specialized anglers also had high catch 
orientation, which could possibly explain why the more specialized anglers on Funen 
seem to have lower trip satisfaction.  
 
The most specialized anglers are the English tourists. One can only imagine that catch 
motivations are high for anglers going on a fishing vacation, and that catch plays a 
major role for satisfaction. Catch satisfaction proved not to be significant for the 
model. When investigating catch satisfaction it was seen that nearly all anglers 
expressed a catch satisfaction of 2 or lower. This could be due catch expectations 
being high in general, and perhaps even higher for the more specialized anglers, and 
could explain why catch satisfaction was not significant for the model. Age was not 
significant for the model, which could be explained by the results presented earlier in 
section 2, where age was found not to be statistically different between the locals and 
tourists. Catch rates proved not to be significant for the model, this could be a result 
of the most specialized anglers being tourists, and that some sort of local know-how is 
ensuring that catch rates do not vary with specialization. Ditton et al. (1992) found 
that importance of equipment and the skillful use of that equipment increased with 
specialization. This effect can still be in effect for the anglers on Funen, but may not 
be enough to ensure higher catch rates. 
 
==PAGE:24==
 
22
Here, I used on-site gear and clothing valuation as a metric to evaluate angler 
specialization, and based on the obtained results, this seemed to be an appropriate 
method. Propensity to do catch-and-release, trip satisfaction, and avidity have all been 
shown to be associated with specialization in previous studies (Bryan, 1977; Ditton et 
al., 1992; Oh and Ditton, 2006). This was also the case for the gear and clothing 
metric. It is recognized that this metric is rather subjective, and that more strict 
guidelines could be used to develop this method in the future. Rounding off average 
specialization to integers could also remove some of the variation in the data, and 
maybe it could be possible to find a model with a better fit for data to avoid the 
removal of variation. All in all, this is an untested and rather subjective way of 
looking at specialization, but the results do fall in line with previous investigations, 
which is seen as a positive indication of validity. This method could be restricted to 
shore based anglers fishing for sea trout, further investigations for different fisheries 
and species are needed to discover, whether that is the case. 
  
Assuming that gear and clothing metrics are an appropriate measure of specialization 
makes it possible to apply the found information to the shore based angling for sea 
trout on Funen. With this in mind, it would be fair to say that the locals in generally 
have lower specialization compared to the tourists, and that English tourists in general 
have higher specialization compared to the other user groups. This information makes 
it possible to generate segment specific management plans, that can be used to secure 
sustainable fishing whilst making sure that anglers have the best possible fishing 
experience (Oh and Ditton, 2006). 
  
Bibliography 
 
Aas, Ø. (1996). Recreational fishing in Norway from 1970 to 1993: trends and  
geographical variation. Fisheries Management and Ecology , 3 (2), 107-118. 
Aas, Ø., Thailing, C. E., & Ditton, R. B. (2002). Controversy Over Catch‐and‐Release  
Recreational Fishing in Europe. Recreational fisheries: ecological, economic and 
social evaluation, 95-106. 
Arlinghaus, R. (2006A). On the apparently striking disconnect between motivation  
and satisfaction in recreational fishing: the case of catch orientation of German 
anglers. North American Journal of Fisheries Management , 26 (3), 592-605. 
Arlinghaus, R. (2006B). Understanding recreational angling participation in  
Germany: preparing for demographic change. Human Dimensions of Wildlife , 11 
(4), 229-240. 
Arlinghaus, R., & Cooke, S. J. (2009). Recreational fisheries: socioeconomic  
importance, conservation issues and management challenges. In J. B. Dickson, 
Hutton, & W. Adams, Recreational Hunting, Conservation and Rural 
Livelihoods: Science and Practice (pp. 39-58). Oxford: Blackwell Publishing . 
Arlinghaus, R., Cooke, S. J., Lyman, J., Policansky, D., Schwab, A., Suski, C., et al.  
(2007). Understanding the complexity of catch-and-release in recreational 
fishing: an integrative synthesis of global knowledge from historical, ethical, 
social, and biological perspectives. Reviews in Fisheries Science , 15 (1-2), 75-
167. 
Arlinghaus, R., Mehner, T., & & Cowx, I. G. (2002). Reconciling traditional inland  
==PAGE:25==
 
23
fisheries management and sustainability in industrialized countries, with 
emphasis on Europe. Fish and fisheries , 3 (4), 261-316. 
Beardmore, B., Haider, W., Hunt, L. M., & Arlinghaus, R. (2013). Evaluating the  
ability of specialization indicators to explain fishing preferences. Leisure 
Sciences , 35 (3), 273-292. 
Beardmore, B., Haider, W., Hunt, L. M., & Arlinghaus, R. (2011). The importance  
of trip context for determining primary angler motivations: are more specialized 
anglers more catch-oriented than previously believed? North American Journal of 
Fisheries Management , 31 (5), 861-879. 
Bozdogan, H. (1987). Model selection and Akaike's information criterion (AIC):  
The general theory and its analytical extensions. Psychometrika , 52 (3), 345-370. 
Bryan, H. (1977). Leisure value systems and recreational specialization: The case  
of trout fishermen. Journal of leisure research , 9 (3), 174. 
Connelly, N. A., & Brown, T. L. (1995). Use of angler diaries to examine biases  
associated with 12-month recall on mail questionnaires. Transactions of the 
American Fisheries Society , 124, 314–422. 
Cooke, S. J., & Cowx, I. G. (2004). The role of recreational fishing in global fish  
crises. BioScience , 54, 857-859. 
Cooke, S. J., Dunlop, W. I., Macclennan, D., & Power, G. (2000). Applications and  
characteristics of angler diary programmes in Ontario, Canada. Fisheries 
Management and Ecology , 7 (6), 473-487. 
Cowx, I. G. (2002). Recreational fishing. In Handbook of fish biology and fisheries  
(Vol. 2, pp. 367-390). 
Ditton, R. B., Loomis, D. K., & Choi, S. (1992). Recreation specialization: Re- 
conceptualization from a social worlds perspective. Journal of Leisure Research , 
24 (1), 33. 
Dorow, M., & Arlinghaus, R. (2011). A telephone-diary-mail approach to survey  
recreational fisheries on large geographic scales, with a note on annual landings 
estimates by anglers in northern Germany. American Fisheries Society 
Symposium , 75. 
FAO. (2012). Technical Guidelines for Responsible Fisheries: Recreational 
Fisheries.  
Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 
Guthrie, D., Heonig, J. M., Holliday, M., Jones, C. M., & al., e. Creel and angler  
surveys in fisheries management. American Fisheries Society Symposium 12. 
Hartill, B. W., Watson, T. G., & Bian, R. (2011). Refining and applying a maximum- 
count aerial-access survey design to estimate the harvest taken from New 
Zealand's largest recreational fishery. North American Journal of Fisheries 
Management , 31 (6), 1197-1210. 
Lewin, W. C., Arlinghaus, R., & Mehner, T. (2006). Documented and potential  
biological impacts of recreational fishing: insights for management and 
conservation. Reviews in Fisheries Science , 14 (4), 305-367. 
Lockwood, R. N. (1997). Evaluation of catch rate estimators from Michigan access  
point angler surveys. North American Journal of Fisheries Management, 17(3), 
611-620 
Malvestuto, S. P. (1996). Sampling the recreational creel. In R. B. Murphy, & W. D.  
Willis, Fisheries techniques, 2nd edition (pp. 591-623). Bethesda, Maryland: 
American Fisheries Society. 
MFVM. (2010). Lystfiskeri i Danmark - Hvem ? Hvor meget ? Hvordan? Ministeriet  
for Fødevarer, Landbrug og Fiskeri. 
==PAGE:26==
 
24
Mora, C., Myers, R. A., Coll, M., Libralato, S., Pitcher, T. J., Sumaila, R. U., et al.  
(2009). Management effectiveness of the world's marine fisheries. PLoS biology , 
7 (6), e1000131. 
Oh, C. O., & Ditton, R. B. (2006). Using recreation specialization to understand  
multi-attribute management preferences. Leisure Sciences , 28 (4), 369-384. 
Olesen, H. J., & Storr-Paulsen, M. Eel, cod and seatrout harvest in Danish  
recreational fishing during 2012. DTU Aqua report no. 293-2015. 
Parkkila, K., Arlinghaus, R., Artell, J., Gentner, M., Haider, W., Aas, Ø., et al. (2010).  
Methodologies for assessing socio-economic benefits of European inland 
recreational fisheries. EIFAC Occasional Paper No. 46 (p. 112). Ankara: FAO. 
Pollock, K., Jones, C., & Brown, T. (1994). Angler survey methods and their  
applications in fisheries management. (A. F. Society, Ed.) Bethesda, USA: AFS 
Special Publication 25 . 
Smallwood, C. B., Pollock, K. H., Wise, B. S., Hall, N. G., & Gaughan, D. J. (2011).  
Quantifying recreational fishing catch and effort: a pilot study of shore-based 
fishers in the Perth Metropolitan area. Fisheries Research Report. 
Sparrevohn, C. R., & Storr-Paulsen, M. (2012). Using interview-based recall  
surveys to estimate cod Gadus morhua and eel Anguilla anguilla harvest in 
Danish recreational fishing. ICES Journal of Marine Science , 69 (2), 323-330. 
Stensland, S., & Aas, Ø. (2014). The role of social norms and informal sanctions in  
catch‐and‐release angling. Fisheries management and ecology , 21 (4), 288-298. 
Strehlow, H. V., Schultz, N., Zimmermann, C., & Hammer, C. (2012). Cod catches  
taken by the German recreational fishery in the western Baltic Sea, 2005–2010: 
implications for stock assessment and management. ICES Journal of Marine 
Science , 69 (10), 1769-1780. 
Tarrant, M. A., & Manfredo, M. J. (1993). Digit preference, recall bias and  
nonresponse bias in self reports of angling participation. Leisure Sciences , 15, 
231–238. 
Vaske, J., Huan, T. C., & Beaman, J. (2003). The use of multiples in anglers’ recall  
of participation and harvest estimates: some results and implications. Leisure 
Sciences , 25, 399–409. 
Venturelli, P. A., Hyder, K., & Skov, C. (2016). Angler apps as a source of  
recreational fisheries data: opportunities, challenges and proposed standards. Fish 
and Fisheries , 18 (3), 578-595. 
 
 
==PAGE:27==
 
25
Appendix A: Catch rates, release rates, and reasons for 
release in Danish recreational sea trout fisheries. 
 
Casper Gundelund 
DTU Aqua 
Section of Inland Fisheries and Ecology 
Technical university of Denmark 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
Based on a roving creel survey; catch rates, release rates and motivational 
reasons for release were investigated for the shore based recreational sea trout  
(Salmo trutta t.) fishing on the Danish island of Funen within the timeframe from 
01/03-2017 to 31/05-2017. The investigation provided an overview of catch 
rates, release rates and motivational reasons for release, for all sea trout anglers 
and for four angler groups, locals, Danish tourists, German-speaking tourists and 
English-speaking tourists. Differences between locals and tourists were 
investigated to mitigate potential intrasectoral user conflicts.  For all sea trout 
anglers the total catch rate was 0.29 (fish/hour), release rate was 81 % and 
voluntary release rate was 0. 21 %. Release of sea trout was primarily because 
they were below the mandatory size limit. In the comparison of locals and 
tourists no significant differences were observed in catch rates or release rates, 
voluntary release rates were significantly higher for English tourists compared to 
the other angler groups. Motivational reasons for release were similar between 
locals, Danish tourists and German tourists, were the primary motivator were the 
mandatory size limit. For English tourists motivational reasons differed 
compared to the other groups; larger proportions released sea trout due to a 
personal size limit and because of a total catch-and-release principle.  
This study holds great value for future fisheries management for sea trout on 
Funen. It could potentially provide information regarding stock exploitation and 
provide the means to avoid potential intrasectoral user conflicts.  
==PAGE:28==
 
1 
Introduction 
Recreational fishing is present in 76 % of the world’s exclusive economic zones 
(Mora et al., 2009) and is considered to be the only user of many freshwater and 
coastal fish populations (Arlinghaus et al., 2002). Approximately 10,6 % of the 
population, in countries with reliable statistics, is estimated to participate in 
recreational fishing (Arlinghaus & Cooke, 2009). On a global scale, it is estimated 
that between 220 and 700 million people are participating in recreational fishing 
(Cooke & Cowx, 2004). With these numbers in mind, it has been recognized that 
understanding social and ecological aspects of recreational fishing, is vital to secure 
sustainable use (Arlinghaus et al., 2013). In fact, in many areas recreational fishing 
provides the highest fishing mortality for several species (Cooke & Cowx, 2004) and 
studies have shown that recreational fishing can have detrimental effects for fish 
populations and ecosystems (Post et al., 2002, Lewin et al., 2006).   
Dedicated management actions are needed to overcome ecological degradation 
stemming from recreational fisheries (Arlinghaus et al., 2016). For the fisheries 
managers, management of anglers is often just as impotant as managing the fish 
stocks (Arlinghaus et al., 2002; Aas & Ditton, 1998). In socioecological systems such 
as recreational fisheries, user conflicts are inevitable (Krueger & Decker, 1999). 
Intrasectoral user conflicts can arise, when different angler segments are coexploring 
the same fish stocks, and especially when the density of anglers are high in specific 
areas (Arlinghaus, 2005). In this type of conflict, anglers will usually blame each 
other for loss of acces and overfishing (Arlinghaus 2005, and references therein). For 
managers conflicts can result in costly political and legal processes in which they 
have little influence (Arlinghaus, 2005). A possible way to overcome these conflits 
are with information, persuasive communication and education (Arlinghaus, 2005). 
Knowledge, regarding how the different sides in a conflict, are in fact exploiting a 
certain fish stock must be gathered in order to informe, communicate, and educate. 
Comparing catch rates and release rates for different angler groups could provide an 
informative foundation for solving intrasectoral user conflicts, in regards to fish stock 
exploitation. Catch rates could provide an overview of whether certain groups are 
fishing more effectively and release rates could act as an indicator for the intend to 
conserve the stock. Catch rates and release rates also holds great value for the 
fisheries managers, as they often are the basis for regulations (Arlinghaus et al., 
2016). If catch and harvest leads to overexploitation, managers can impose 
regulations (Arlinghaus et al., 2016). Knowledge of release rates are also of great 
importance for the fisheries manager with the obvious part being how it is related to 
harvest, but catch-and-release fishing can also have detrimental effects for fish 
populations (Arlinghaus et al., 2007; Cooke et al., 2002). Catch-and-release fishing is 
often associated with sub-lethal effects and it is widely recognized that post-release 
mortality occur (Hühn & Arlinghaus, 2011; Bartholomew and Bohnsack, 2005).  
 
Recreational fishing is a popular activity in near-shore coastal areas (Coleman et al., 
2004) and in Denmark the Ministry of Enviroment and Food has estimated 37 % of all 
recreational fishing to be shore based and moreover 27 % of Danish recreational 
fishing to be shore based sea trout fishing, which makes sea trout the most popular 
target species for angling in Denmark (MFVM, 2010). However, the knowledge about 
this important recreational fishery is scarce as shore based fishery is a challenge to 
survey. Access is often diffuse and anglers are scattered over large areas. Traditional 
surveys, such as the roving creel survey and access survey has been extensively used 
==PAGE:29==
 
2 
to sample recreational fisheries in general (Pollock et al., 1994; Malvestuto, 1996) and 
shore based fisheries specifically (Smallwood et al., 2011; Attwood et al., 2016; 
Veiga et al., 2009). Both survey types are of on-site intercept design, which imply that 
anglers are met either during or after an ended fishing trip. The acces design is used 
when a fishery have limited points of entry, as opposed to the roving creel survey, 
where access points are diffuse (Pollock et al., 1994; Malvestuto, 1996). Hence, the 
roving creel survey appear to be the most suitable method to explore recreational 
shore based fishing in Denmark, due to the diffuse access points and scattered 
distribution of anglers. Rod and reel fishing (i.e. angling) is the most popular method 
in recreational fisheries (Arlinghaus et al., 2007). Recreational fishing in Denmark 
consists of both rod and reel fishing and passive gear fishing (i.e. using fykes and 
gillnets) (Sparrevohn & Storr-paulsen, 2012). This investigation only covered rod and 
reel fishing, hereafter referred to as angling. In Danish recreational fisheries specific 
knowledge about catch rates and release rates is scarse, even though surveys have 
been conducted in the past. The Danish eel and cod fishery was investigated using a 
recall based mail and telephone survey (Sparrevohn & Storr-paulsen, 2012).  Recall 
surveys are known to be subject of recall bias (Tarrant & Manfredo, 1993; Vaske et 
al., 2003; Connelly & Brown, 1995), which is why on-site knowledge could prove 
valuable for the Danish recreational fisheries. 
 
The objective of this study is to explore catch rates, release rates, and motivational 
reasons for release in a specific diffuse and hard to access coastal recreational fishery, 
using an onsite method, i.e. a roving creel survey and compare this between different 
user groups holding potential intresectoral conflicts.  
Methods 
Study area 
 
The study set out to explore sea trout angling in a specific Danish coastal area. As the 
entire Danish shoreline was to comprehensive to investigate, for logistic and 
economic reasons, we chose a specific part of Denmark, the island of Funen. Funen is 
a Danish island (see figure 1) and has an area of 3100 km2 with a coastline of 1100 
km. This covers not only the main island but also quite a few smaller islands. In this 
investigation the smaller islands were disregarded for logistic reasons. This 
effectively reduced the coastline to 460 km.  
 
Roving creel survey 
A roving creel survey (RCS) was conducted to gain information regarding catch rates, 
release rates, angler demography, and angler behavior, i.e. motivations for catch-and-
release fishing, for the shore based sea trout fishery on Funen. In total 74 days were 
scheduled for sampling, within a three-month period, in spring, where sea trout 
angling is known to peak (01/03-2017 – 31/05-2017). In effect 72 days were sampled 
due to the clerk being ill on two of the sampling days. Each sampling day consisted of 
8 hours of sampling. The RCS was conducted by a single clerk in order to avoid 
interviewer bias (Pollock et al., 1994). The RCS was planned as stratified random 
multistage design with a PSU, SSU and TSU following Pollock et al. (1994). 
 
 
 
==PAGE:30==
 
3 
 
 
PSU: 
The PSU consists of sampling days, with unequal probability between weekdays (40 
%) and weekends (60 %). This was at least the original idea. Because 36 days 
provided full coverage for weekends, the 8 remaining days were allocated to 
weekdays. In effect this made an allocation with almost equal probability, 51 % and 
49 % for weekdays and weekends, respectively. With two days being missed, in 
weekends, by illness the total allocation proved to be 53 % and 47 % for weekdays 
and weekends, respectively. 
 
SSU: 
The SSU consists of time of day. This was divided into mornings and evenings with 
equal probability. Mornings were considered to be one hour after sunrise and 8 hours 
forward. For evenings the sampling started 8 hours prior to sunset and was carried out 
until sunset. This system implies that the sampling followed the change in light hours. 
This was done because anglers were believed to start earlier and finish later as the 
light period increased during the course of the months.  
 
TSU: 
Interview sites were the tertiary sampling unit. They were chosen via a local angling 
guidebook that presents the 117 most popular angling sites on Funen. Because the 
smaller islands were removed from the survey, 117 became 79 designated interview 
sites. Choosing the designated interview sites in this manner could lead to a bias, 
where tourists are overrepresented in the survey, as discussed in Gundelund, 2017 
(the specific objective 3 in the report). An approach consisting of three steps were 
made for all the sampling days. The three steps included: 1) One of the 79 sites was 
chosen randomly. 2) The travel direction from the randomly chosen site was chosen 
Figure 1: Overview of the study area, including the designated interview sites (grey bars). 
==PAGE:31==
 
4 
as clockwise or counterclockwise, around the island, with equal probability. 3) The 
subsequent sites in the previously chosen travel direction would be visited with 
unequal probability. Based on input from local anglers and local municipalities, the 
interview sites were divided into three categories depending on the expected density 
of anglers: Busy (100 % visit chance), medium busy (75 % visit chance) and not very 
busy (50 % visit chance). These three steps were chosen both to randomize the 
sampling but also to make sure that the chance of meeting anglers was increased. In 
order to ensure sufficient spatial coverage, a maximum interview time of 2 hours per 
site was chosen. This implies that at least 4 sites were sampled in a day.  
Angler groups 
In order to explore catch rates and release rates between user groups, potentially 
holding intrasectoral conflicts, comparisons between local anglers and tourists were 
made. Locals and tourists were divided into four different angler groups; Locals, 
Danish tourists, German tourists and English tourists. The separation of locals and 
Danish tourists was done by postal code. German tourists were all anglers interviewed 
in German; this includes anglers from Germany and Austria.  English tourists were all 
anglers interviewed in English; this includes anglers with 14 different nationalities, 
where Dutch anglers were the most predominant.  
 
Catch rates 
During the RCS, anglers were asked how many sea trout they had caught and for how 
long they had been fishing, up until the time of the interview. As the catch and effort 
data comes from incomplete fishing trips, the mean of ratios estimator was used to 
determine catch rates. Following methods described by Pollock et al. (1997), Hoenig 
et al. (1997) and Smallwood et al. (2011). Daily catch rates were calculated as:   
 
                                                      
 
 
Where, 
c = total catch of sea trout by angler i, 
m = incomplete trip length (hours) by angler i, 
k = total number of anglers interviewed on day d. 
Trips shorter than 30 minutes were omitted from the analyses as proposed by Pollock 
et al. (1997) and Hoenig et al. (1997).  
 
Total catch rates for all days in the sampling period, expressed as fish per angler hour, 
were calculated as proposed by Smallwood et al. (2011) and follows: 
 
                                                    
 
         
where, 
n = total number of days sampled. 
 
Total catch rates were calculated for all interviewed anglers as well as the user 
groups; local anglers, Danish tourists, German tourists and English tourists.  
==PAGE:32==
 
5 
The catch rates were not normally distributed and it was not possible to normalize 
them using transformations. As a result, non-parametric kruskal-wallis test was used 
to test for differences, in catch rates between the groups. 
 
Release rates 
During the RCS, anglers were asked about the number of sea trout they had released 
up until the time of the interview. By combining the amount of caught, and released 
sea trout it was possible to calculate a release proportion, for each angler with at least 
a single catch. Total release rates were calculated as the average of the calculated 
release proportions for all anglers as well as the user groups; local anglers, Danish 
tourists, German tourists and English tourists. When studying release rates I 
calculated both the overall release rates as well as the release rate of sea trout above 
the minimum size. The latter reflects the voluntary release rate, which can be 
informative about angler attitudes and behavior towards conservation (Arlinghaus et 
al., 2007). Voluntary catch-and-release is dynamic and depends on a range of 
ecological, social and personal factors (Stensland et al., 2013). The voluntary release 
rates can provide an insight into these factors (Stensland et al., 2013). To test for 
differences, in release rates and voluntary release rates, between the groups, two 
separate logistic regressions, assuming binomial distribution were made. Release rates 
were chosen as the predictor variable and user group was chosen as a single 
explanatory variable.  
 
Motivational reasons for release 
To further explore for variation in attitudes toward catch and release fishing the RCS 
clerk asked about the motivational reason behind any release of sea trout. Here 
anglers could choose between six statements. A) Maturity, B) condition, C) principle, 
D) taste, E) mandatory and F) personal. Maturity was chosen if a sea trout was 
released because of the recent spawning period. Post-spawned sea trout are slim and 
colored and relatively easy for anglers to identify. Condition was not originally 
included in the survey, but several anglers stated that this was the reason for release. 
When asked what anglers meant by condition, they responded the sea trout had too 
low weight compared to its length and they did not consider it good for eating. 
Principle refers to sea trout being released because the angler holds a principle in 
which he or she always releases fish. Taste refers to sea trout being released because 
the angler simply does not like the taste of fish. Mandatory release is based on the 
mandatory size limit, which differs between 40 cm and 50 cm depending on the area 
on Funen. Personal refers to sea trout being released because an angler holds a 
personal size limit, which is considered to be above the mandatory size limit. 
Motivational reasons for release are presented visually, as the proportion of fish 
released for each category, which follows the outline presented by Ferter et al. 
(2013B).This was done for all anglers as well as for each of the user groups; local 
anglers, Danish tourists, German tourists and English tourists. 
 
Results 
In the RCS, 729 anglers were encountered on the shores of Funen. 679 chose to 
participate in the survey (response rate of 93%). 599 of 679 i.e. those who stated sea 
trout as their main target species on their fishing trip was included in further analyses.  
Of these 260 were local anglers, 98 Danish tourists, 152 German tourists and 75 were 
==PAGE:33==
 
6 
English tourists. 14 anglers could not be assigned to a geographical area and were 
excluded from the investigation of locals and tourists.  
 
Catch rates 
Catch rates varied between the different user groups, with local anglers having the 
highest catch rates (Table 1). However, no statistically significant difference was 
found between the groups using non-parametric kruskal-wallis test (k = 4.45, df = 3, p 
= 0.21). Potentially suggesting high variance within the user groups (see figure 2). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1: Total catch rates, release rates for all sea trout and voluntary release rates for sea trout 
above the mandatory size limit for all anglers and each of the user groups. 
 
All anglers 
Local 
anglers 
Danish 
tourists 
German 
tourists 
English 
tourists 
Catch rates 
(fish per 
hour) 
0.29 
0.39 
0.18 
0.16 
0.20 
Release 
rates  
81 % 
84 % 
77% 
71% 
89% 
Voluntary 
release 
rates 
21 % 
21 % 
13% 
15% 
50% 
 
Figure 2: Distribution of catch rates for the different user groups; Danish tourists, English 
tourists, German tourists and locals. 
==PAGE:34==
 
7 
 
Release rates 
Release rates of all sea trout (including fish below minimum size) varied between 71 
and 89% (Table 1), but was not statistically different between groups. The Danish 
tourists were used as a baseline for the model, but no significant differences were 
found, when comparing the baseline to; English tourists (p = 0.21), German tourists (p 
= 0.46) or locals (p = 0.37). Voluntary release rates varied between 13% and 50% and 
differences were found, between the user groups. 21 Danish tourists, 16 English 
tourists, 33 German tourists and 48 locals, were found to have caught at least one fish 
over the mandatory size limit. The Danish tourists were used as the baseline for the 
model. Release rates for English tourists proved to be significantly higher compared 
to the baseline (p = 0.002). No differences were seen for German and Danish tourists 
compared to the baseline (p = 0.93 and 0.30, respectively). 
 
Motivational reasons for release 
74 % of all sea trout were released due to the mandatory size limit. 3 %, 4 %, 10 % 7 
% and 2 % were released due to condition, maturity, personal size limit, total catch-
and-release principle and taste, respectively (see figure 3). For the locals, Danish 
tourists and German tourists the motivational reasons were quite similar to all anglers 
and the mandatory size limit was by far the most prominent reason. For the English 
tourists release because of the mandatory size limit was considerably lower (44 %), 
while personal size limit (38 %) and total catch-and-release principle (18 %) was 
considerably higher compared to the other groups (see figure 3). Only the Danish 
tourists and locals released sea trout due to maturity (see figure 3). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3:  Motivational reasons for release of sea trout for the entire survey and the user 
groups: Locals, Danish tourist, German tourists and English tourists. Condition refers to a low 
weight to length ratio, mandatory is the mandatory size limit, maturity refers to post-spawning 
sea trout, personal is a personal size limit above the mandatory, Principle refers to anglers 
having a total catch-and-release principle, and taste is anglers not liking the taste of fish. 
==PAGE:35==
 
8 
Discussion 
 
The total catch rate for the all interviewed anglers showed that anglers on average 
caught 0.29 sea trout per angling hour. This number can be used to calculate the total 
catch of sea trout by anglers, when coupled with estimates of angler effort 
(Smallwood et al., 2011), e.g. obtained by aerial surveys. However this was not within 
the scope of this investigation. As an average angling fishing trip for sea trout on 
Funen is around 3 hours (C. Skov, personal comm.) a rule of thump based on the 
catch rate would hence predict that on average an angler could expect to catch a sea 
trout on every trip. However, variation in catch rate clearly exists between individual 
anglers, i.e. due to skills, gear choice, luck etc. why exceptions to this rule of thump 
likely often occur. When looking at different user groups, i.e. locals and tourists, 
differences in catch rates were observed and it appeared that local knowledge 
influenced catch rates positively. However, the observed differences were not 
statistically significant. This could relate to methodological issues, i.e. the fact that the 
difference between angler groups was tested using non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis 
test. But since the data set was strongly zero inflated this may not be the ideal 
solution. Retrospectively, its likely it would have been more appropriate to use a two-
stage model, such as zero inflated poisson regression, that accounts for zero inflated 
data. Unfortunately, this was not possible within the time frame of this investigation, 
but should be considered in further studies. It should be noted that catch rate estimates 
from incomplete trips, i.e. RCSs, are often overestimated compared to estimates from 
complete trips (Keefe et al., 2009, McCormick et al., 2012). Hence, catch rates may 
be smaller than presented, but still this would be unlikely to affect any user group 
comparison. In conclusion and based on the results presented here, no user group 
conflicts should emerge from variation in catch rates. 
 
The release rate of sea trout found in this survey is remarkably high, i.e. 81 %. 
Compared to what is found for other species across the European recreational 
fisheries this is very high and only Pollock angling is England has higher release rates 
(Ferter et al., 2013A). The release rate found in the present study is also high 
compared to other studies of release rates of sea trout. Ferter et al. (2013A) used 
additional data from Sparrevohn & Storr-Paulsen (2012), who estimated sea trout 
release rates  to be 70 % for Danish shore-based angling, i.e a release rate below the 
present study. The method used by Sparrevohn & Storr-Paulsen (2012) was a mail 
survey where the respondents had to recall their catch up to 6 months back in time. 
Hence at least three possible mechanisms could explain the higher release rate found 
in this survey. The first is that release rates are underestimated when using recall-
based surveys. A large proportion of the sea trout are under minimum size and 
recalling a large number of smaller fish may be difficult, especially when it is within a 
6-month period. The second possible explanation involves the fact that the estimates 
from Ferter at al. (2013A) stem from the entire Danish sea trout fishery and it could 
be that release rates on Funen in general are higher. This effect can be investigated by 
using on-site methods, such as the RCS, in other Danish areas. The third possible 
explanation involves the idea that the year of the RCS had a larger year class of fish 
below minimum size, compared to the years of the recall survey. Higher release rates 
were found by Strehlow et al. (2012) in the German recreational cod fisheries, in 
years that had a larger year class for cod below minimum size.  
 
==PAGE:36==
 
9 
When looking exclusively at sea trout above the mandatory size limit, no difference in 
release rates existed between locals, Danish tourists and German tourists, while 
release rates for English tourists were significantly higher compared to the other 
angler groups. Approximately 55 % of the anglers interviewed in the RCS were 
tourists and this relative high abundance could feed intrasectoral user conflicts, 
between locals and tourists, on the island of Funen. Conflicts could include locals and 
tourists blaming each other for loss of access, overfishing or illegal harvest 
(Arlinghaus 2005 and references therein). However, the data presented in the present 
study, that no differences exists for locals and tourists in terms of catch rates and that 
release rates are similar except for the English tourists, which is higher compared to 
the other groups, holds great value for the future fisheries management on Funen. The 
catch rate and release rate estimates could be used to show the different angler groups, 
that the exploitation of the fish stock is similar across the angler groups and that the 
English tourists may in fact may be more conservation minded. Brownscombe et al. 
(2014) showed that tourists had higher propensity to do catch-and-release compared 
to local anglers in Canada. This effect is only seen for the English tourists in this 
investigation suggesting that propensity to do voluntary catch-and-release could vary 
between nationalities as previously shown by Ferter et al. (2013B) and Aas et al. 
(2002).  
 
Its notable that the sample size for the part of the present study that evaluates 
voluntary release rates is somewhat low and could inflict the presented results. Only 
21 Danish tourists, 16 English tourists, 33 German tourists and 48 locals had caught at 
least one sea trout above the mandatory size limit. In the ideal case, samples would 
have been much larger in order to ensure explanatory power.  However the presented 
results is supported by the analyses of motivational reasons for release between locals 
and tourists. Motivational reasons for release are very similar for Danish tourists, 
German tourists and locals. For these groups between 73 % and 80 % of the all fish 
released were due to the mandatory size limit. No profound differences were observed 
between the other reasons for release. However for the English-speaking tourists only 
43 % of the sea trout were released because of the Mandatory size limit and 38 % had 
a personal size limit above the mandatory limit. Additionally almost 20 % had a total 
catch-and-release policy. These findings could suggest that English tourists are more 
specialized compared to the other groups. Specialization theory states that in most 
cases, more specialized anglers have higher propensity to do catch-and-release (Oh 
and Ditton, 2006). The specialization by English tourist is further confirmed by 
separate analyses presented in Gundelund, 2017 (the specific objective 3 in the report) 
 
In a more general perspective, the main motivation for the release of sea trout on 
Funen follows patterns seen in Ferter et al. (2013B) and Veiga et al. (2009), where the 
mandatory size limit were the primary reason for release. Its notable that neither 
Ferter et al. (2013B) or Veiga et al. (2009) included sea trout in their reviews, but it 
seems a that the primary motivator for releasing fish in general are the mandatory size 
limit. Regardless the motivation behind any release, high release rates can be a 
problem for the fish stocks when post-release mortality is high (Hühn & Arlinghaus, 
2011; Bartholomew and Bohnsack, 2005). For the fisheries managers on Funen, 
research into post-release mortality of sea trout could be a strong asset. If mortality in 
general is high, recommendations for best practice of catch-and-release should be 
made. 
 
==PAGE:37==
 
10
To my best knowledge this is the first study to explore angler catch rates for sea trout 
within a shore based recreational fishery. This implies that there is no basis for 
comparison with other fisheries, but hopefully the presented estimates can be used as 
a reference for future investigations. To conclude further, it appears that release rates 
were very high for the Danish sea trout fishery on Funen. The mandatory size limit 
was the primary motivator for the release of sea trout. No difference was found 
between catch rates or release rates for locals and tourists. No differences in voluntary 
release rates were found for locals, Danish tourists and German tourists. Voluntary 
release rates for English tourists were significantly higher compared to the other 
groups. The English tourists had different motivational reasons for release compared 
to the other groups where mandatory size limit was the prime motivator. For the 
English tourists the personal size limit and the principle of always releasing fish 
motivators were much more profound compared to the other groups.  
Bibliography 
Aas, Ø., & Ditton, R. B. (1998). Human dimensions perspective on recreational  
fisheries management: implications for Europe. In P. H. Tompkins (Ed.), 
Recreational Fisheries: Social, Economic and Management Aspects (pp. pp. 
153–164). Oxford, UK: Blackwell Science, Fishing News Book. 
Aas, Ø., Thailing, C. E., & Ditton, R. B. (2002). Controversy over catch-and-release  
recreational fishing in Europe. In a. C. T. J. Pitcher (Ed.), Recreational Fisheries: 
Ecological, Economic and Social Evaluation (pp. 95–106). Oxford, UK: 
Blackwell Science. 
Arlinghaus, R. (2005). A conceptual framework to identify and understand  
conflicts in recreational fisheries systems, with implications for sustainable 
management. Aquatic Resources, Culture and Development , 1 (2), 145-174. 
Arlinghaus, R., & Cooke, S. J. (2009). Recreational fisheries: socioeconomic  
importance, conservation issues and management challenges. Recreational 
hunting, conservation and rural livelihoods: science and practice, 39-58. 
Arlinghaus, R., Cooke, S. J., Lyman, J., Policansky, D., Schwab, A., Suski, C., et al.  
(2007). Understanding the complexity of catch-and-release in recreational 
fishing: an integrative synthesis of global knowledge from historical, ethical, 
social, and biological perspectives. Reviews in Fisheries Science , 15 (1-2), 75-
167. 
Arlinghaus, R., Cooke, S. J., & Potts, W. (2013). Towards resilient recreational  
fisheries on a global scale through improved understanding of fish and fisher 
behaviour. Fisheries Management and Ecology, 20(2-3), 91-98. 
Arlinghaus, R., Lorenzen, K., Johnson, B. M., Cooke, S. J., & Cowx, I. G. (2016).  
Management of freshwater fisheries: addressing habitat, people and fishes. 
Freshwater fisheries ecology , 557-579. 
Arlinghaus, R., Mehner, T., & & Cowx, I. G. (2002). Reconciling traditional inland  
fisheries management and sustainability in industrialized countries, with 
emphasis on Europe. Fish and fisheries , 3 (4), 261-316. 
Attwood, C. G., van Zyl, C. S., Lombard, A. T., & McCagh, C. (2016).  
Seasonally and spatially referenced estimates of recreational shore-angling effort, 
catch composition, catch rates and total catch in the Goukamma Marine Protected 
Area, South Africa. African Journal of Marine Science , 38 (4), 563-579. 
Bartholomew, A., & Bohnsack, J. A. (2005). A review of catch-and-release angling  
==PAGE:38==
 
11
mortality with implications for no-take reserves. Reviews in Fish Biology and 
Fisheries , 15 (1-2), 129-154. 
Brownscombe, J. W., Bower, S. D., Bowden, W., Nowell, L., Midwood, J. D.,  
Johnson, N., et al. (2014). Canadian recreational fisheries: 35 years of social, 
biological, and economic dynamics from a national survey. Fisheries , 39 (6), 
251-260. 
Coleman, F. C., Figueira, W. F., Ueland, J. S., & Crowder, L. B. (2004). The impact 
of United States recreational fisheries on marine fish populations. science , 305 
(5692), 1958-1960. 
Connelly, N. A., & Brown, T. L. (1995). Use of angler diaries to examine biases  
associated with 12-month recall on mail questionnaires. Transactions of the 
American Fisheries Society , 124, 314–422. 
Cooke, S. J., & Cowx, I. G. (2004). The role of recreational fishing in global fish  
crises. BioScience , 54, 857-859. 
Cooke, S. J., Schreer, J. F., Wahl, D. H., & Philipp, D. P. (2002). hysiological impacts  
of catch-and-release angling practices on largemouth bass and smallmouth bass. 
In American Fisheries Society Symposium , pp. 489-512. 
Ferter, K., Borch, T., Kolding, J., & Vølstad, J. H. (2013B). Angler behaviour and  
implications for management‐catch‐and‐release among marine angling tourists 
in Norway. Fisheries Management and Ecology , 20 (2-3), 137-147. 
Ferter, K., Weltersbach, M. S., Strehlow, H. V., Vølstad, J. H., Alós, J., Arlinghaus, 
R., et al. (2013A). Unexpectedly high catch-and-release rates in European marine 
recreational fisheries: implications for science and management. ICES Journal of 
Marine Science , 70 (7), 1319-1329. 
Hühn, D., & Arlinghaus, R. (2011). Determinants of hooking mortality in  
freshwater recreational fisheries: a quantitative meta-analysis. American 
Fisheries Society Symposium , 75, 141-170. 
Hoenig, J. M., Jones, C. M., Pollock, K. H., Robson, D. S., & Wade, D. L. (1997).  
Calculation of catch rate and total catch in roving surveys of anglers. Biometrics , 
306-317. 
Keefe, D. G., Perry, R. C., & Luther, J. G. (2009). A comparison of two  
methodologies for estimating brook trout catch and harvest rates using 
incomplete and complete fishing trips. North American Journal of Fisheries 
Management , 29 (4), 1058-1064. 
Krueger, C. C., & Decker, D. J. (1999) The process of fisheries management. In K.  
C. WA (Ed.), Inland Fisheries Management in North America (2nd edition) (pp. 
31-59). Bethesda: American Fisheries Society,. 
Lewin, W. C., Arlinghaus, R., & Mehner, T. (2006). Documented and potential  
biological impacts of recreational fishing: insights for management and 
conservation. Reviews in Fisheries Science , 14 (4), 305-367. 
Malvestuto, S. P. (1996). Sampling the recreational creel. In R. B. Murphy, & W. D.  
Willis, Fisheries techniques, 2nd edition (pp. 591-623). Bethesda, Maryland: 
American Fisheries Society. 
McCormick, J. L., Quist, M. C., & Schill, D. J. (2012). Effect of survey design and  
catch rate estimation on total catch estimates in Chinook Salmon fisheries. North 
American journal of fisheries management , 32 (6), 1090-1101. 
MFVM. (2010). Lystfiskeri i Danmark - Hvem ? Hvor meget ? Hvordan? Ministeriet  
for Fødevarer, Landbrug og Fiskeri. 
Mora, C., Myers, R. A., Coll, M., Libralato, S., Pitcher, T. J., Sumaila, R. U., et al.  
==PAGE:39==
 
12
(2009). Management effectiveness of the world's marine fisheries. PLoS biology , 
7 (6), e1000131. 
Oh, C. O., & Ditton, R. B. (2006). Using recreation specialization to understand  
multi-attribute management preferences. Leisure Sciences , 28 (4), 369-384. 
Pollock, K. H., Hoenig, J. M., Jones, C. M., Robson, D. S., & Greene, C. J. (1997).  
Catch rate estimation for roving and access point surveys. North American 
Journal of Fisheries Management , 17 (1), 11-19. 
Pollock, K., Jones, C., & Brown, T. (1994). Angler survey methods and their  
applications in fisheries management. (A. F. Society, Ed.) Bethesda, USA: AFS 
Special Publication 25 . 
Post, J. R., Sullivan, M., Cox, S., Lester, N. P., Walters, C. J., Parkinson, E. A., et al.  
(2002). Canada's recreational fisheries: the invisible collapse? Fisheries , 27 (1), 
6-17. 
Smallwood, C. B., Pollock, K. H., Wise, B. S., Hall, N. G., & Gaughan, D. J. (2011).  
Quantifying recreational fishing catch and effort: a pilot study of shore-based 
fishers in the Perth Metropolitan area. Fisheries Research Report. 
Sparrevohn, C. R., & Storr-Paulsen, M. (2012). Using interview-based recall  
surveys to estimate cod Gadus morhua and eel Anguilla anguilla harvest in 
Danish recreational fishing. ICES Journal of Marine Science , 69 (2), 323-330. 
Stensland, S., Aas, Ø., & Mehmetoglu, M. (2013). The influence of norms and  
consequences on voluntary catch and release angling behavior. Human 
dimensions of wildlife, 18(5), 373-385. 
Strehlow, H. V., Schultz, N., Zimmermann, C., & Hammer, C. (2012). Cod catches  
taken by the German recreational fishery in the western Baltic Sea, 2005–2010: 
implications for stock assessment and management. ICES Journal of Marine 
Science , 69 (10), 1769-1780. 
Tarrant, M. A., & Manfredo, M. J. (1993). Digit preference, recall bias and  
nonresponse bias in self reports of angling participation. Leisure Sciences , 15, 
231–238. 
Vaske, J., Huan, T. C., & Beaman, J. (2003). The use of multiples in anglers’ recall  
of participation and harvest estimates: some results and implications. Leisure 
Sciences , 25, 399–409. 
Veiga, P., Ribeiro, J., Gonçalves, J. M., & Erzini, K. (2010). Quantifying recreational  
shore angling catch and harvest in southern Portugal (north‐east Atlantic Ocean): 
implications for conservation and integrated fisheries management. Journal of 
Fish Biology , 76 (9), 2216-2237. 
 
