==PAGE:1==
Placement Optimization for
Structure Monitoring Sensors
using Multiobjective Evolutionary
Algorithms
Cosmin Florin Avasalcai
s151329
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Nowadays, all industries attempt to take advantage of new emerging technolo-
gies, such as Internet of Things (IoT), Cloud and Fog Computing, to increase
their productivity. For example, industries such as Oil and Gas, Automotive,
Energy are upgrading their infrastructures and business models to use these
new technologies. In this thesis, we focus on Structural Monitoring, which is
used in several cases to prevent any possible damage that may appear within
the physical structure.
IoT sensors are used to monitor the "health" of physical structures. Currently,
in Structural Monitoring, there is no optimal solution for placing the sensors on
a structure. With current approaches sensors are placed based on ad-hoc tech-
niques, hence we need a new approach to ﬁnding an overall placement. Moreover,
the correctness of the placement is based, most of the time, on the experience of
the engineer. Unfortunately, this approach tends to be very diﬃcult when the
complexity of the structure is rising.
The scope of the thesis is to take a new approach to solving this problem, by
creating a method implemented as a software tool to improve Structural Health
Monitoring. We use meta-heuristic algorithms to ﬁnd a nearly-optimal solution
for the sensor placement, i.e, a multi-objective optimization algorithm called
NSGA-II. The two objectives maximize the quality of the sensor data and the
overall cost, including unit cost and installation constraints.
Our method takes as input an architecture model where the physical structure
architecture is described, the maximum number of sensors and the installation
cost of diﬀerent areas of the structure. Based on this information the method
==PAGE:4==
ii
outputs a placement of the sensors such that the quality of the measured data
is maximized and the overall cost is minimized.
The evaluation of the tool is performed on an Oil and Gas oﬀshore platform,
having information provided by civil engineering department regarding the prop-
erties of the structure.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁllment of the requirements
for acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis deals with ﬁnding the near-optimal sensor placement to improve the
correctness of the measured data and extend the lifetime of an Oil and Gas
oﬀshore platform.
The work has been supervised by Professor Paul Pop from DTU Compute and
Professor Rune Brincker from Department of Civil Engineering.
Lyngby, 01-August-2017
Cosmin Florin Avasalcai
s151329
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Thesis objectives and problem formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
4
2.1
Structural Health Monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Operational Modal Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.1
Modes of vibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.2
Node and antinode points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Sensor placement challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Internet of Things and Cloud Computing
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Related Work
12
4
System model
14
4.1
Architectural model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2
Sensor model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5
Optimization of sensor placement
19
5.1
Problem formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2
Meta-heuristic algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.2.1
Simulated Annealing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.2.2
Genetic Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.3
Fitness function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.3.1
Measurements quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
==PAGE:8==
vi
CONTENTS
5.3.2
Installation cost
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.4
NSGA-II . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.4.1
Initial Candidate solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.4.2
Non-Dominated sort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.4.3
Crowding distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.4.4
Tournament selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.4.5
Genetic Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.4.6
Replace Chromosome
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.5
Optimization tool implementation details
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6
Experimental evaluation
46
7
Conclusion and future work
55
7.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
Bibliography
57
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Thesis objectives and problem formulation
Our society is using complex physical structures to provide solutions to areas
such as transportation (e.g., roads, bridges), energy (e.g., energy grid, power
stations), oil and gas (e.g., oﬀshore platforms). Many of these structures are
safety critical: if their structural integrity is compromised, it can put in danger
the human life, damage the environment and introduce large ﬁnancial losses.
However, due to the microelectronics revolution, it is now very cheap to use
smart sensors to monitor the integrity of such structures. These sensors are
connected via wired or wireless networks and to the internet, forming thus the
Internet of Things. By monitoring the safety-critical structure we can improve
their safety, know where and when to perform maintenance and by doing so
increasing their lifetime (i.e., the period in which the structure can function
as intended without being a danger to the environment and workers).
For
example, by increasing the lifetime of an oﬀshore platform, we can extract more
oil and gas, leading to huge beneﬁts. However, in many areas, the installation
of sensors is very costly due to the diﬃculty of accessing the structures (e.g.,
oﬀshore platforms) and the placement of sensors to ensure the best-measured
data possible is non-trivial.
==PAGE:10==
2
Introduction
The objective of the thesis is to improve Structural Health Monitoring (SHM)
by proposing and implementing a method to ﬁnd a cost-eﬀective way of placing
monitoring sensors on a given structure. Based on meta-heuristic algorithms
that ﬁnd a near-optimal placement solution of the sensors.
We aim for an
extension of the lifetime of the structure which leads to large savings.
The
proposed method takes into consideration multiple objectives and constraint,
such as placing the sensors in allowed areas (i.e., on a structure there can be
oﬀ-limit areas or where the installation cost is very high) and making sure that
the measurements in the proposed position are not only correct but also have
improved measurement accuracy.
The sensors used in this thesis are unidirectional being able to measure only in
one direction. Furthermore, these sensors can be grouped at the same location
in order to obtain a 2D or 3D measurement location. All the measured data
gathered by the sensors describes the motions that the structure is performing
while it is excited by external factors (e.g., the wind, traﬃc, workers, waves,
etc.).
Of course, every location on the platform will be able to measure to some degree
the structure movement, but what is relevant to us is to ﬁnd the position where
the measured data is very accurate. By accurate, we mean that the dynamic
properties of the target structure can be obtained from the gathered data and
it is as close as possible to the ones that the structure had when it was built.
Moreover, the accuracy of the data is closely related to the location of the
sensors.
If a sensor is placed at a location close to a node point (for more
information see Section 2.2 from Chapter 2) then the accuracy of the data is
low, while if the sensor is placed as far as possible then the accuracy will go
up. Besides this, a sensor should be able to provide information about all mode
shapes (a detailed description of this is presented in Section 2.3 in Chapter 2).
In this thesis, we ignore the communication cost and assume that there is already
a viable way to gather all the measured data. Moreover, we assume that the
structure model, the installation cost of each area and the number of sensors
are known.
1.2
Thesis outline
The rest of the thesis is structured as follow:
Chapter 2 explains what structural health monitoring is and what new technolo-
gies are used to improve its measurement performance. An in-depth introduc-
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Thesis outline
3
tion to Operational Modal Analysis (OMA), which studies the free vibration of a
structure is given, oﬀering a better understanding of the method used through-
out this thesis.
In addition, the challenges faced by the engineers when the
sensors are placed on a structure are described. Finally, technologies like Inter-
net of Things and Cloud and Fog Computing that make it possible to monitor
the sensors placement methods are introduced.
In Chapter 3 the related work is presented, explaining the work that other
researchers have done in this ﬁeld.
In the end, a comparison with the tool
developed in this document is done.
The system model is described in detail in Chapter 4. This includes the ar-
chitecture model and the sensor model. In the architecture model, the target
structure is presented, explaining its properties as well. Meanwhile, in the sensor
model, the focus is on presenting the properties of the sensors.
Next, in Chapter 5, the method for the optimization of the sensors placement
is explained. First, the problem formulation is stated and the decision on what
meta-heuristic algorithm to use is discussed. Further, the ﬁtness functions used
by the optimization search algorithm are explained. Finally, the optimization
method is outlined and the implementation details are presented.
Finally, Chapter 6 presents the experimental evaluation of the method, while in
Chapter 7 concludes the thesis and present suggestion for future work.
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 2
Background
2.1
Structural Health Monitoring
Structural Health Monitoring (SHM) [AL16] is the process of implementing
technology solutions in order to analyze the state of an infrastructure. There
are several infrastructures such as large bridges, buildings or tunnels that need
this monitoring process since their structural damage could lead to fatal con-
sequences. Furthermore, companies started to use SHM for their production
factories to prevent any unwanted delays by performing a much better mainte-
nance of the factory.
In the case of the oﬀshore rigs, the risk is even higher, both for the probabil-
ity of having an accident and of the consequences of it. Therefore, the need
of implementing such a technology has a huge importance. Moreover, another
important reason behind the implementation of SHM in the Oil and Gas oﬀ-
shore industry is that the constant monitoring of the infrastructure extends the
lifetime of the platform; therefore, more oil can be extracted in the end.
Compared to the environment that buildings and bridges are facing on the main
land, the oﬀshore platforms are subject to a harsh environment. This includes
wave, current and wind loading, which have a diﬀerent impact on the infras-
tructure integrity such as fatigue damage or corrosion. On top of these natural
==PAGE:13==
2.2 Operational Modal Analysis
5
events, the inﬂuence of hazard scenarios should also be considered when imple-
menting SHM for oﬀshore platforms: impact of dropped objects, ship collisions,
ﬁre, and blast etc. see [MSSS08]. Any of these scenarios can lead to an infras-
tructure failure that may cause both human life and ﬁnancial losses, as well as
devastating eﬀects on the environment.
In order to implement successfully SHM to any structure, especially to an oﬀ-
shore platform, a careful analysis of all the available resources has to be per-
formed prior to installation stage. The choice of the sensor type and placement
on the structure, the communication infrastructure used and how to store the
data is done all in perspective to the environmental conditions found in the sea
and more important the restrictions that the particular rig is having.
One important problem that has to be solved is a large amount of data generated
by the sensors. In order to be eﬃcient, the data has to be sent to onshore where
complex algorithms can be applied and favorable results are found. But, most
of the old platforms do not have an existing ﬁber link connection to the onshore
making the process of transferring data more diﬃcult.
The only possibility
is to use the satellite link, but the transfer rate is very low, around 2 Mbps.
Hence, sending the generated data in one day can take up to one week or more.
This problem can be solved using new technologies like Internet of Things and
Cloud Computing that will enable new technological solutions for handling huge
amounts of stored data [ea15]. For the purpose of our thesis, this is assumed to
be already taken care oﬀ.
2.2
Operational Modal Analysis
Vibration test of structures was ﬁrst performed in the 1930s to investigate the
earthquake’s impact on the buildings. Since then the use of this technique in
civil engineering and structural health monitoring increased, helping to enhance
the structural integrity of structures.
Today, vibration tests are performed on structures to determine their natural
frequencies and its dynamic response to diﬀerent natural vibration or forced
vibrations. The natural vibrations are deﬁned by multiple outside and inside
factors like traﬃc, wind, waves, storms and even the equipment and people
working inside. Hence, this kind of structural excitement is produced by normal
operations conducted around the structure. In contrast, the forced vibrations
are performed by engineers at a given time, using speciﬁc methods such as me-
chanical shakers, man-excited motion and induced ground motion. Considering
the vibration classiﬁcation, two diﬀerent methods can be applied: Operational
==PAGE:14==
6
Background
Modal Analysis (OMA) [RB15] working with natural vibrations and Experi-
mental Modal Analysis (EMA) [RB15] for forced vibrations.
The EMA techniques are generally used to perform vibrations test on small or
medium structures. Such techniques require that special conditions are met to
induce vibrations using controlled forces. For example, the circulation has to
be stopped, the tenants have to be evacuated, special equipment is needed and
prior computations to determine the required frequency are performed. This
will increase the cost and make the process more complex. On the other hand,
for civil engineering large structures, OMA is more suitable. Taking advantage
of the natural vibrations, the problems that EMA is facing are not an issue
anymore.
OMA is based on the idea that the structure is being excited by natural vi-
brations. These vibrations must have properties close to the characteristics of a
white noise. A white noise has its intensity equally distributed over all frequency
levels [Wik17d]; such that all the mode shapes of a structure are uniformly ex-
cited making them easy to measure. Moreover, these techniques are attractive
to engineers, because they require a relatively low installation cost and are fast
to implement, due to the progress in measurements technology like sensors and
in computational methods.
A more general deﬁnition of what operation modal analysis represents is given
by [RB15]:
“Operational Modal Analysis is the process of characterizing the dy-
namic properties of an elastic structure by identifying its natural
modes of vibration from the operating responses. Each mode is as-
sociated with a speciﬁc natural frequency and damping factor, and
these two parameters can be identiﬁed from vibration data from
practically any point on the structure. In addition, each mode has
a characteristic ’mode shape’ which deﬁnes the spatial distribution
of movement over the entire structure”
2.2.1
Modes of vibration
Every vibration test aims to measure, as established above, the dynamic re-
sponse of diﬀerent vibrations. In fact, these responses are generating distinct
modes of vibrations for the tested structure that will show how it behaves un-
der various applied natural loads. A mode represents a stationary state where
the structure is vibrating sinusoidal at a ﬁxed frequency; each point having an
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Operational Modal Analysis
7
associated constant amplitude.
However, there is no interest in measuring all the modes that can appear. In
one word, only the dominant modes are of interest, since these are the ones
having the maximum amplitude for a given stored energy. Another property of
the dominant mode is that it represents a pattern of sinusoidal motion having
the same ﬁxed frequency and phase. Hence, only the ﬁrst distinct modes are
needed and measured to ﬁnd the structural integrity of a building.
In order to have a better understanding, let us consider the case when the
modes of a ﬁxed beam on a wall are determined. If you start and pull it down,
as much as you can, and then let is free you will observe that the ﬁrst movements
will be more deﬁned. They can be seen because of the higher amplitude from
the stagnant state.
Yet, with each movement, the amplitude will lower and
the motions will be smaller and less visible.
This is because it starts to be
closer to the motionless state and stop eventually. Hence, the importance of the
dominants modes, they have the maximum amplitude for a given energy (i.e.
the force we apply when the beam is pulled down).
An example of the ﬁrst four modes of a beam, ﬁxed at one end, is presented in
Figure 2.1
Figure 2.1: The ﬁrst 4 mode shapes of a beam [Wik17a]
As a rule, the mode is numbered based on the number of half waves in the
vibration. For example, the ﬁrst mode is having an only one-half wave, while
the second one is passing the standing state only once, hence the mode number
is two and so on.
==PAGE:16==
8
Background
2.2.2
Node and antinode points
Two relevant properties of a mode of vibration are the node and antinode points.
These are very important and needs to be taken into consideration when placing
sensors on a structure. The node represents the point in which the displacement
is null.
On the other hand, the antinode is located where the amplitude is
maximum and show the optimal spot for the sensors. See Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Node and Anti-node points
In the ﬁgure above, the red dots represent the node points and with green
points, the antinodes are shown. Looking at the green points, one pattern can
be observed that the amplitude lower with the mode number. Furthermore,
because these are only one dimension system the node is only a point. In the
case of a two dimensions system, the node will become a line in which the
displacement will be zero.
2.3
Sensor placement challenges
The ideal position for a sensor on a structure relies on knowing the node and
anti-node points of each mode shape. In theory, placing a sensor exactly at the
highest amplitude of a mode will give the most accurate measurement. Hence,
for the example of the beam, a number of sensors equal to the number of anti-
node points are needed. This itself is a challenge because the engineer cannot
ﬁnd the exact position of such points. He may know from experience that the
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Sensor placement challenges
9
end of the beam will always be an anti-node, thus a sensor can go there. But for
the remaining sensors, multiple tests have to be done to choose the near-optimal
position. Furthermore, the cost, the installation time and other constraints have
to be taken into account.
All of these factors drive the engineer to use the
minimum number of sensors as possible and still get good measurements.
Finding the minimum number of sensors is a challenge on its own. One could
argue that a structure can be monitored only using one or two sensors. In the
case of OMA, this is near to impossible, hence a reasonable number of sensors is
needed. This number is obtained by considering both the noise and mode shape
measured. If in the frequency channel there are measured two close modes, then
the minimum number of sensors is two. In addition, if there are also two noise
inputs the number of sensors will grow to four. In general, a system will almost
always have at least two modes and two noise inputs. Hence, the minimum
number of sensors to monitor correctly a structure is four. But as a rule, to
make sure to leave aside the uncertainties, one should always use ﬁve or six
sensors for any structure. Moreover, the node point should always be avoided.
Such a placement is presented in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Sensors placed on the anti-node position
Still, a sensor does not have to measure only one mode shape. It has to be able
to sense all the mode shapes and send good measured data to be computed for
all the modes. So, even if the position of the antinode points is known that does
not ensure the best placement of the sensors.
For example, after a closer look at the ﬁgure above, clearly, the proposed place-
ment is not the best. Sensor 1 will give an excellent measurement of mode 4
==PAGE:18==
10
Background
and mode 3 being close to or on the anti-node points, while for mode 2 the
resulted data is OK. On the other hand, the problem appears to be with mode
1 where the results are bad because it is close to the node point. Furthermore,
sensor 3 and sensor 5 will give the same results, being in the same position.
As a result, it is not an easy job to ﬁnd the near-optimal sensor placement. A
possible solution is given in Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: An example of good sensor placement
If for a building or a bridge there are so many challenges to conquer, where
the environment is not so harsh and there are no restrictions enforced by the
structure functionalities. Think of how big the challenge of ﬁnding the best
sensor placement on an oﬀshore platform; in which space is limited, there are
diﬀerent restrictions zones and the connectivity is an issue (i.e. should we use
cables or wireless).
Compared to 1 dimensional systems, like the beam example, where an expert
could ﬁnd the acceptable solution for the sensors. When it comes to solving more
complex systems, in 2 dimensions or 3 dimensions, the job becomes substantially
more challenging. Hence the need for computer programs to solve this problem.
2.4
Internet of Things and Cloud Computing
The Internet of Things opens the possibility of connecting multiple devices with
each other and to the internet, with the sole purpose of sharing data and informa-
tion. Such devices are sensors and embedded systems, having limited resources
==PAGE:19==
2.4 Internet of Things and Cloud Computing
11
that will only allow them to know some information about the surrounding area.
Hence, this concept was rapidly adopted by diﬀerent industries and is the basis
of multiple new applications such as smart cities, health monitoring, structural
health monitoring and smart grids among others. It is expected that there will
be around 26 billion of devices connected through IoT by the end of 2020. Due
to this, the transition from IPv4 to IPv6 is a must in order to support so many
connected devices [DN15].
Cloud Computing is a part of the IoT technology and addresses the problem
of remote storage and improved big data analytic. Cloud Computing oﬀers the
opportunity to use remote servers connected to the internet to store data and
perform complex computations of data instead of personal computer. It oﬀers
vast amounts of storage at a very small cost and will dynamically adapt the re-
sources to the needs of the customer. Furthermore, there are analytic algorithms
that can be applied to the stored data to get some valuable results. The beneﬁts
of Cloud Computing are signiﬁcant, but latency-sensitive applications cannot be
hosted in cloud infrastructure due to the unpredictable latency introduced by
Wide Area Network (WAN).
Even though most of the existing SHM do not use IoT the situation is starting
to change. Researchers, [WJX17], [AK17], are starting to look in this direction
proposing diﬀerent methods to incorporate IoT in structural health monitor-
ing. The unpredictable latency introduced by the Cloud is not an impediment
because the results are used to make predictions of the current state of the
structure. Hence, there is no need for real-time computation.
To conclude, IoT and Cloud Computing will have a great impact in SHM and
it will open the possibility for creating trusted sensors nets for monitoring the
oﬀshore platforms even is such harsh environment. In this thesis, we assume
that the sensors are connected to an IoT infrastructure and the data is collected
to the Cloud.
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 3
Related Work
In the last years, there was an increased interest from researchers in ﬁnding the
near-optimal sensor placement to improve Structural Health Monitoring. Most
of them propose the use of meta-heuristic algorithms to ﬁnd the solution for
diﬀerent structures.
The authors [THYG11] propose a method that is using an improved genetic al-
gorithm called “generalized genetic algorithm (GGA)” to ﬁnd the optimal sensor
placement. The GGA aims to improve the convergence speed and avoid it to
be premature. They only have one objective that takes into consideration the
result of a weighting function which measures the quality and performance of a
speciﬁc location called modal assurance criterion (MAC).
A similar approach for ﬁnding the optimal sensor placement for a structure in
which they aim to maximize the correctness of the measured data such that the
structure dynamic behavior can be fully characterized is suggested by [WLjX08].
On top of the MAC function as an objective, they consider also the modal strain
energy (MSE) which intends to ﬁnd a reduced conﬁguration of sensor placement.
In [LlLH13], the authors proposed a new method of optimal sensor placement
based on genetic algorithms with the purpose of capture complete and accurate
modal information of an oﬀshore platform. By dividing the degree of freedom
(DOF) between slave, the ones that do not have a big impact on the dynamic
==PAGE:21==
13
properties, and master which have a big impact; they are using the GUYAN
reduction to determine the DOFs where the damage has the maximum impact
on the structural integrity.
Another approach for ﬁnding the optimal sensor placement (OPS) is presented
in [RA07].
The goal was to use swarm intelligence technique called particle
swarm optimization (PSO) to solve the OPS problem. The algorithms aim to
precisely identify the modal frequencies and mode shapes.
More research was done in developing new techniques to identify the opti-
mal sensor placement and improve the measured data [FD09], [GWvdLL11],
[ARMRK14] and [MZ05], but none of them are using any type of meta-heuristic
algorithm proposing only the method which will identify the best position.
Still, there are not so many techniques that are suitable for performing SHM
for Oil and Gas oﬀshore platform, because of the harsh environment and the
speciﬁc restrictions (constraints for diﬀerent zones on the platform, limited space
to place the sensors). Hence, such constraints must be taken into consideration.
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 4
System model
4.1
Architectural model
The architecture consists of the structure on which the placement is done. In
this thesis, the structure focused on is an Oil and Gas oﬀshore platform. More
speciﬁcally, a slim tripod adapted for rig installation (STAR) type of platform
see Figure 4.1.
The STAR platform is an unmanned installation with the purpose of exploiting
marginal ﬁelds in the North Sea at a very low cost. It was designed by Maersk
Oil and currently function in the Danish part of the North Sea. Furthermore,
these type of platforms are reusable and can be moved to new locations [mae].
The top side, shown in the ﬁgure above, is a very simple structure having only
the necessary functionality for diﬀerent desired applications and is placed on a
tripod, see Figure 4.2.
Five mode shapes characterize the dynamic properties of the STAR platform
and based on them the sensor placement correctness will be evaluated. The
number of modes may diﬀer from one structure to another, hence we assume
that the engineer will provide the model for the new type of platform, and our
method can take into account any such model.
==PAGE:23==
4.1 Architectural model
15
Figure 4.1: STAR type platform top side [Fal]
Figure 4.2: STAR platform tripod [Fal]
In this case, mode 1 and 2 are similar. Mode 1 appears when the structure tilts
to left and right alongside Y axis. On the other hand, mode 2 is described by
the movement of the structure alongside X axis, tilting to front and back. One
part of mode 1 can be seen in Figure 4.3. Likewise, mode 4 and 5 are paired
and have similar properties. See Figure 4.4. Furthermore, the four modes are
deﬁned by a rotation and a translation.
As you can observe in the two images, the origin of the reference axes is ﬁxed
and positioned at the bottom of the tripod for all ﬁve modes. In the images,
this is marked with a blue dot. In the mode 4 image, there another green dot
that points where the initial state is crossed by the mode shape. This will be
used when computing the optimal sensor placement value.
==PAGE:24==
16
System model
Figure 4.3: Mode shape 1
Figure 4.4: Mode shape 4
==PAGE:25==
4.2 Sensor model
17
Mode 3 is diﬀerent from the other mode shapes and it concerns only the top side
of the platform. This mode represents the torque movement done by the plat-
form. Hence, it will be described by a rotation along Z axis with no translation.
The mode is shown in Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Mode shape 3
4.2
Sensor model
Each sensor is characterized by:
• Position of the sensor: shows the position where the sensor is placed using
the three set coordination (X, Y, and Z).
• Sensing direction: each sensor can measure data only from one direction.
Since there are three coordinates there will be three diﬀerent directions
and only one associated with a sensor at a time. The sensor that will
measure alongside X-axis will be called Sx, while Sy is used to describe
the sensor with the direction of Y-axis and Sz is used for the sensor with
the direction of Z-axis.
Hence, taking into account the two properties of a sensor and also the possibility
of measuring 1D, 2D or 3D, by placing more sensors at the same location, a
sensor position will look like this:
Sx = [[X, Y, Z coordinates], [dirx]]
(4.1)
Sy = [[X, Y, Z coordinates], [diry]]
(4.2)
==PAGE:26==
18
System model
Sz = [[X, Y, Z coordinates], [dirz]]
(4.3)
where dirx, diry and dirz are showing the sensing direction of the sensor.
The three equations 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3 are showing how a location of 1D sensor is
represented. In the case of 2D and 3D, the location will contain more sensors.
An example of a 3D measurement location is presented in the equation 4.4:
[[X, Y, Z coordinates], [dirx, diry, dirz]]
(4.4)
This eq. is composed of the three equations of a 1D sensor having the same X,
Y, Z coordinates.
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 5
Optimization of sensor
placement
5.1
Problem formulation
Based on the information given in the architecture model and software model
described in the previous chapter, the optimal location for all sensors is de-
termined such that the collected data describes the dynamic properties of the
structure accurately. Furthermore, the two objectives that validate the sensor
placement are:
1. Measurements quality is maximized. After placing all sensors their posi-
tion is evaluated and if the measurements are accurate, then the position
is optimal.
2. Installation cost is minimized.
Diﬀerent zones on an oﬀshore platform
have diﬀerent cost installations. If we have two diﬀerent areas, a free zone
where you can place almost all type of devices and the other has some
restrictions to electric devices, then the installation cost will be lower if
the sensor is placed in the ﬁrst zone compared to the second one.
Taking into consideration the following constraints:
==PAGE:28==
20
Optimization of sensor placement
• the number of sensors should not be greater than the maximum number
of sensors chosen by the user.
• to take into account all the constraints (e.g. limited space, oﬀ-limit areas,
free sparks zones, etc.) that an oﬀshore platform is having.
Figure 5.1: Good sensors placement on an oﬀshore structure
An example of a good sensor mapping is presented in Figure 5.1. There are
four zones having a diﬀerent cost installation, with the darker shade of gray
representing the biggest cost (see Section 5.3 for more details on how the cost is
computed). On top of that, the maximum number of sensors is 6 chosen based
on the discussion had in chapter 2. The Sx is represented with red, while Sy is
shown with blue and green dot represents Sz.
As you can see, there is one 3D measurement location in the right bottom
corner, one 2D location is placed near the (0, 0) corner and a 1D location
represented by Sx. This is considered a good sensor placement because the two
objectives are satisﬁed. The ﬁrst objective, measurement accuracy, is giving a
high accuracy simply because the sensors are placed far from the node points
and most important the two Sz are near the edges of the structure (see Section
5.5 for more details). For the second objective, because all sensors are placed in
the lower part of the structure, where wither shades of gray are found, the cost
==PAGE:29==
5.2 Meta-heuristic algorithms
21
installation is close to the lowest possible value (i.e., obtained when all sensors
are placed in the area with the lowest installation cost).
To get a better understanding of what is considered a bad solution, an example
of such mapping is shown in Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: Bad sensors placement on an oﬀshore structure
In this case, we have four 1D locations, from which two are represented by a
Sy sensor, one by a Sz sensor and one by Sx sensor.
Besides this, there is
a 2D location consisting of Sx and Sy. Judging from the perspective of the
two objectives we can conclude that this is not a good solution. For the ﬁrst
objective, this is not a measurement accuracy is not high because there are
some sensors that are placed on the node points. Moreover, being in the center
Sz sensor will not be able to measure any value other than 0, independent
of what mode we consider.
Thus, there will be multiple mode shapes that
the measurement data cannot capture. From the point of view of the second
objective, the installation cost is very high because we have sensors in the most
expensive area.
5.2
Meta-heuristic algorithms
A meta-heuristic algorithm is a high-level procedure that helps to ﬁnd a near-
optimal solution to an optimization problem (i.e. ﬁnding the best solution from
all possible solutions), taking into account the objectives and constraints that
the user may impose [Wik17b].The method performs well especially when the
==PAGE:30==
22
Optimization of sensor placement
information given is limited. Compared to optimization algorithms where at the
cost of using a large amount of computation time the solution found is optimal,
the meta-heuristic algorithms oﬀer a near-optimal solution but within a very
short computational time [BK05]. Hence, for a complex combinatorial prob-
lem using meta-heuristic algorithms yields the good results in a fairly relative
amount of time.
Researchers developed diﬀerent methods that are based on meta-heuristic algo-
rithms and help to ﬁnd the near-optimal solution. Some of these methods are
Simulated Annealing (SA), Swarm Intelligence and Genetic Algorithms (GA)
among others. From the mentioned methods, two were considered initially as a
solution for our optimization problem: SA and GA.
5.2.1
Simulated Annealing
Simulated Annealing is a local search meta-heuristic algorithm that provides
the means to escape a local minimum by accepting the worst solution with the
hope of ﬁnding a globally optimal solution. The method has been inspired by
the process of physical annealing with solids, in which the crystalline solids are
heated and then cooled down very slowly [GP10]. This cooling process will help
to achieve a solid that has a superior structural integrity.
The main idea of this algorithm is to test the cost function for diﬀerent conﬁgu-
rations and try to obtain a solution that minimizes the cost, obtaining the best
mapping that has been explored, according to our objective and constraints.
This is obtained by performing a series of transformations over the solution and
computing the resulting cost function.
After each performed transformation the cost function value is compared to the
value of the previous iteration (the previous solution).
If we obtain a lower
cost, we accept the new solution and continue with the algorithm. Otherwise,
we may accept it with some probability. The idea behind the acceptance of a
worse solution is to avoid getting stuck in locally optimal solutions and allow a
complete exploration of the solution space. The probability of accepting a worse
solution is directly aﬀected by the temperature of the current iteration. More
precisely, we will accept a worse solution if the following condition 5.1 is met:
e((oldcost−newcost)/temp) > rand
(5.1)
where: old_cost is the cost function value of the previously accepted solution;
==PAGE:31==
5.2 Meta-heuristic algorithms
23
new_cost is the cost function value of the new proposed solution; temp is the
temperature value of the current SA iteration and rand is a random value be-
tween 0 and 0,99.
The temperature in SA is ﬁrst set with an initial temperature and it has a
determined cooling rate.
The algorithm stops when we reach the minimum
temperature. Since the temperature in the SA algorithm will be higher in the
initial iterations, the probability of accepting a worse solution will be higher at
ﬁrst and decrease with time.
This algorithm is good at minimizing only one cost function (ﬁtness function)
and the ﬁnal results will be only one mapping of the sensors. Thus, it is not a
multi-objective algorithm. In the cost function, there can be multiple objectives
summed up and having diﬀerent weights, adding also a penalty related to the
constraints, but will not be able to give a solution where each individual has
the near-optimal value. It will always be a combined solution of all of them.
5.2.2
Genetic Algorithms
Genetic Algorithms are search methods based on principles of natural selection
and genetics that conceals the decision variables into a ﬁnite-length string of
alphabets Simulated a DNA molecule [BK05]. Furthermore, it borrows the spe-
ciﬁc naming from genetics like chromosome which represents the DNA molecule
that holds part or all the genetic markers of an organism, genes that is the ge-
netic marker transferred from a parent to an oﬀspring and alleles representing
the values of a gene. To make the analogy, in GAs the chromosome represents
the candidate solution strings, while the alphabets is a gene and the value of a
gene are called alleles.
The basis of GA stands in having the means to distinguish good solutions from
bad ones in order to ﬁnd good solutions and simulate the natural selection. This
can be obtained in two diﬀerent functions. The ﬁrst one is performed using a
computer simulation or a mathematical model known as objective function due
to the fact that the user does not have any inﬂuence on the decision. While the
second one puts the decision in the hands of the user and it is called subjective
function. But, regardless of what function is used the process is called having a
ﬁtness function that will help determine is a chromosome is a good solution or
not based on its ﬁtness value.
Another interesting concept is represented by the population. Genetic algorithms
have a population of chromosomes as the initial starting point and will ﬁnd in
the end a population of accepted solutions.
A thorough analysis has to be
==PAGE:32==
24
Optimization of sensor placement
performed in order to ﬁnd what is the good size for the population. This is very
important, because if the population size is too small the algorithm may lead to
substandard solutions; while if the size is too big then there will be an increase
computation time bringing no beneﬁts to the overall solution.
Once the ﬁtness function and the population size has been decided, the search
for a evolved solution can start. This process is based on the following steps:
1. Initialization. In this step, the initial population is created in a random
manner over the search space.
2. Evaluation. Every time a new population is created, the initial one or
during runtime, the ﬁtness value of each candidate solution is evaluated.
3. Selection. The purpose of this stage is to perform a selection between the
chromosomes based on their ﬁtness value choosing the one with the better
value, hence enforcing the survival-of-the-ﬁtness mechanism.
4. Recombination. The idea behind this step is to create a new oﬀspring (i.e.
new candidate solutions) by combining two or more parental solutions
from the current population.
5. Mutation. Compared to the recombination stage, where the new solution
is created from other solutions, the mutation stage modiﬁes randomly the
genes of a solution.
6. Replacement. The new population created using the last three steps will
replace the old one.
Because this method can take into account multiple objectives and oﬀers a pool
of solutions as a result, for the purpose of this thesis I decided to use GA to ﬁnd
the near-optimal placement. More exactly, an algorithm called Non-Dominated
Sorting Genetic Algorithms II (NSGA-II) [KDM02] is implemented.
5.3
Fitness function
Two ﬁtness functions have been deﬁned that will sum up the objectives and
constraints of the targeted platform. Each function will be in charge of ﬁnding
the good solution from its own perspective. The ﬁrst ﬁtness function is called
Measurements quality and will relate to the data quality gathered from the
current position of the sensors and the second ﬁtness function, called Installation
cost, will reveal the installation cost of placing the sensors on an area on the
platform.
==PAGE:33==
5.3 Fitness function
25
5.3.1
Measurements quality
One objective of the optimization method is to maximize this ﬁtness value, hence
a good candidate solution should have a value close to 1. More information’s
on why this should be close to 1 will be described brieﬂy below.
The method used to compute the correctness of the sensor placement is illus-
trated in [RB15]. It is based on the mode shape matrix created using the sensors
measurements and the addition of the noise. Moreover, it is working only if the
number of sensors is bigger than a number of modes, which in our case will be.
Let us consider that matrix A contains the true mode shapes of the structure
with the dimensions equal to n × m. In this case n is equal to the number of
sensors while m is equal to the number of mode shapes. An example of a matrix
A with 6 rows and 5 columns is presented in equation 5.2. Thus, the structure
has ﬁve mode shapes and 6 sensors placed on the structure, two measuring on
X-axis, two with Y direction and two with Z.
A =


mode1x1
mode2x1
mode3x1
mode4x1
mode5x1
mode1x2
mode2x2
mode3x2
mode4x2
mode5x2
mode1y1
mode2y1
mode3y1
mode4y1
mode5y1
mode1y2
mode2y2
mode3y2
mode4y2
mode5y2
mode1z1
mode2z1
mode3z1
mode4z1
mode5z1
mode1z2
mode2z2
mode3z2
mode4z2
mode5z2


(5.2)
Each column represents a mode shape, hence the ﬁrst column is describing the
properties of mode1 and so on. Each row represents the measurements that a
sensor can generate for each mode. For example, mode1x1 represents the data
measured by sensor 1 along side X-axis when mode shape 1 was performed,
mode1x2 represents the measured data from sensor 2 and so on for each sensor.
In the end, on a single row, we can see the measurements that a sensor can
generate for all modes.
Next, an estimation ˆA of matrix A is computed using a noise model. Using a
noise model will assure that the estimated matrix will be diﬀerent from the true
mode shapes matrix. In this thesis, each estimated mode shape ˆa is the sum of
the true mode shape a plus the noise and it is shown in equation 5.3.
ˆa = a + Xi
(5.3)
In eq. 5.3 Xi is a random vector, with the dimensions equal to a mode shape,
==PAGE:34==
26
Optimization of sensor placement
where each of its elements is a stochastic variable with standard deviation. To
create this random vector the following equation 5.4 is used:
σ = ε × max(ai)
(5.4)
where ai represents the element the true mode shape a and ε is a relative
uncertainty parameter of the sensors.
In conclusion, in order to obtain the
random vector, the Gaussian random function is used with standard deviation
equal to σ and mean value equal to 0. The probability Gaussian distribution is
shown in equation 5.5.
p(x) =
1
√
2 × π × σ2 × e−(x−µ)2
2×σ2
(5.5)
Knowing the estimated matrix ˆA we can start calculate the value of the sensor
placement using the next equation 5.6:
V = 1 −|1 −det( ˆA+ × A)|
(5.6)
where ˆA+ is the pseudo inverse of the estimated matrix ˆA.
The result of the multiplication between ˆA+ and A it shows how close the
estimated matrix is to the true mode shape matrix.
Hence, the closer the
product is to the identity matrix (I), the better is the sensor placement. As we
know, det(I) is always equal to 1 and det( ˆA+ ×A) can be smaller or bigger than
1, thus to measure always a positive deviation from the identity matrix the last
part of the equation is used |1 −det( ˆA+ × A)|. Finally, to obtain the value of
the sensor placement the value is subtracted from 1 resulting in the equation
presented above.
Lastly, it is important that the rank of the matrix resulted from the product
ˆA+ × A is not equal to the number of mode shapes. If so, the det( ˆA+ × A) will
be always equal to 0. Furthermore, as a consequence the result of eq. 5.6 will
be also 0. This implies that the current sensor locations are not able to measure
all the mode shapes, hence the solution is dismissed. So, to at least take into
consideration a certain sensor placement, the rank of the resulted matrix should
be always equal to the number of mode shapes.
==PAGE:35==
5.3 Fitness function
27
5.3.2
Installation cost
The second ﬁtness function that the optimization method will try to minimize
is the Installation cost. This is in charge of taking into consideration the instal-
lation cost associated with a certain area on the structure and penalize a sensor
position accordingly to how high the cost is to install a sensor in that area.
First, the ﬂoor plan of the structure will be created by the user and provided as
an input to the tool. The image is an SVG ﬁle that will describe the importance
of each area using diﬀerent colors. An example of such a ﬁle is shown in Figure
5.3.
Figure 5.3: The installation cost area of an oil and gas platform ﬂoor
The ﬁgure presents the diﬀerent installation cost that each zone of a single ﬂoor
is having, where if the shade of gray is darker the installation cost is more
expensive.
The installation cost of the current sensors location is computed with the help
of a function called cost(x,y), where x represents the shade of gray of the sensor
location area and y is representing the cost installation associated with x. In
our case, if x is represented by white then the cost for installing the sensors will
be 0, while if x is represented by black then this will be the most expensive
installation. Knowing this, for our areas, there will be a shade of gray between
these two limits of x and for each will be associated a cost of installation.
This function will return the total installation cost for the current sensor place-
ment solution.
==PAGE:36==
28
Optimization of sensor placement
5.4
NSGA-II
Non-dominated Sorting Genetics Algorithm - II (NSGA-II) is a fast non-dominated
sorting evolutionary algorithm having the computational complexity equal to
O(M N 2) [KDM02].
In this thesis, the NSGA-II algorithm is following the
algorithm presented in [SES09].
Being based on a genetic algorithm, the NSGA-II starts by initializing the pop-
ulation with random candidate solutions chosen from the search space. Every
time, a new random chromosome is created, before it is added to the population
its ﬁtness functions are computed.
Once, the population has reached its limit (the limit is chosen by the user and
has a big impact on the algorithm results) a non-dominated sorting algorithm
is applied on it. This sorting algorithm will compare the solutions between each
other and separates them into multiple fronts based on domination. In the ﬁrst
front will be placed only solutions that were not dominated by other solution,
the second front consists of individuals that are dominated only by the solutions
presented in the ﬁrst front and so on until all solutions are belonging to a front.
The candidate solutions from the ﬁrst front will have a rank of 0 and then the
rank will increment by one for each front.
Next, the crowding distance is computed for each solutions. The crowding dis-
tance big is the area between surrounding an individual until its reaches its
neighbors. These parameter alongside the rank will play an important role in
the tournament selection stage.
In the tournament selection parents are selected from the population based
on their rank and crowding distance. Then, on the selected parents, genetic
operations like mutation and crossover, are applied such that new oﬀsprings are
obtained.
Finally, the generated oﬀspring population is combined with the current popu-
lation and sorted again based on non-dominance. From this list, only the ﬁrst
N individuals (where N represents the size of the population) are selected.
The ﬂowchart of this algorithm is presented in the next Figure 5.4.
==PAGE:37==
5.4 NSGA-II
29
Figure 5.4: The NSGA-II ﬂowchart [Goe]
5.4.1
Initial Candidate solution
As explained in subsection 5.2.2 the population plays an important part in the
genetic algorithm containing all the candidate solutions (i.e.
chromosomes).
In this stage, the population is initialized with randomly created chromosomes
from the search space. The number of candidate solutions that a population
can contain is selected by the user.
A chromosome represents a candidate solution and it is deﬁned by the following
properties:
• Sensor list. The chromosome will be composed of a list of sensors equal to
the maximum number of sensors decided by the user. The location of the
sensors is picked randomly within the ﬂoor dimensions and their directions
as well.
• List of ﬁtness values. Each candidate solution will have associated the two
values computed with the help of our deﬁned ﬁtness functions.
• Chromosome name. This parameter will help identify the chromosome.
• Dominated Chromosomes list. The dominated list is used when the non-
dominating sorting is performed. More will be explained in a later sub-
section.
==PAGE:38==
30
Optimization of sensor placement
• Rank. Represents the number of the front in which the current chromo-
some is placed. The front with rank = 0 represents the best solutions
found by the tool.
• Crowding distance. Is deﬁned as an estimate of the area size surrounding
the current chromosome that is not including other solutions from the
population. This parameter is used also used in the non-dominanted sort
stage.
• np. Variable np is a counter that represents how many individuals have
dominated the current chromosome.
It is part of the non-dominating
sorting algorithm.
The pseudo-code for this function is presented in Algorithm 1:
Result: Population is initialized
create a new population object called pop;
for i = 0; i < N; i++ do
create a new chromosome object called chr;
set the name of the chromosome chr;
directions = random group of directions having from 1 to 3 directions
maximum;
for s = 0; s < len(directions); s++ do
create an empty list called position;
x = choose a random value between 0 and max coordinate X;
y = choose a random value between 0 and max coordinate Y;
z = maximum height of the ﬁrst ﬂoor;
position.append(x);
position.append(y);
position.append(z);
add the new created position to chr;
end
create modal matrix A;
compute Measurements quality ﬁtness value;
add it to chr;
compute Zone restrictions ﬁtness value;
add it to chr;
add the new created chromosome chr to population pop;
end
Algorithm 1: Initialize population
where N is the number of solutions that a population can hold and len(directions)
represent the number of locations in the search space where the group of sensors
==PAGE:39==
5.4 NSGA-II
31
is placed. As discussed in section 5.1 at a location there is placed a group of
sensors, but each sensor is having only a direction, hence we can say that at a
single position is placed a group of directions. Due to this fact, len(directions)
is giving the number of sensor locations.
The algorithm for ﬁnding the random group of directions is presented in Algo-
rithm 2:
Result: Return a list of groups of directions
create a counter noOfDirections and set it to 0;
create a list called directions;
while True do
choose a random group of directions called grpDir: a group of one
random direction; a group of 2 random directions or a group of all
three directions;
add the group to directions list;
noOfDirections += len(grpDir);
if noOfDirections == S then
return directions;
else
if noOfDirections > S then
newGrpDir = discard a random number of directions from
grpDir equal to S - (noOfDirections - len(grpDir));
add the newGrpDir in the last position of directions list;
return directions;
end
end
end
Algorithm 2: Find random group of directions
where S represents the number of sensors chosen by the user.
5.4.2
Non-Dominated sort
In this stage, the initialized population is sorted based on non-dominance. This
is a wide spread concept used in multi-objective algorithms when some objectives
have to be minimized and other maximized. Every candidate solution from the
population is compared with the other solution in order to determine if it is
dominated or it dominates it. The following deﬁnition described in [BK05] is
used to ﬁnd the dominating solution and it states like this:
==PAGE:40==
32
Optimization of sensor placement
"A solution x1 is said to dominate the other solution x2 if both
conditions 1 and 2 are correct:
1. The solution x1 is no worst than solution x1 in all objectives:
that is
fj(x1) <> fj(x2)forj = 1, 2, 3..., M
(5.7)
2. The solution x1 is strictly better than solution x1 in at least
one objective or
fj(x1) <> fj(x2)foratleastonej = 1, 2, 3..., M
(5.8)
"
where M is the number of ﬁtness values and symbol <> means that fj(x1)
is better than fj(x1) from the perspective of minimization or maximization of
fj(x1).
If one one of the above conditions is not fulﬁlled, then solution x1 will not
dominate solution x2.
To have a better understanding of this concept the next example is provided in
the next Figure 5.5:
Figure 5.5: Five objectives and their related fronts [BK05]
In the image above there are presented two ﬁtness functions: f1 that has to
be maximized and f2 that needs to be minimized. In the left graph there are
ﬁve diﬀerent solution with two ﬁtness values each (f1, f2). Thus, solution 1 is
having the values (9, 2), solution 2 it has the pair (8, 5), solution 3 it has (12,
1), solution 4 associated pair is (11, 3) and ﬁnally solution 5 has the pair of
functions (16, 2).
==PAGE:41==
5.4 NSGA-II
33
Because both functions are equally important to us, it is almost impossible to
ﬁnd a solution that will be considered good from both perspectives. Applying
the deﬁnition of domination stated above, we will be able to group them in
fronts, showing with each front multiple solutions that are good for one objective
perspective and the other.
For this part the dominated chromosome list, np and rank properties of a chro-
mosome are used. So, let us apply the deﬁnition for solution 1. First, solution
1 is compared with solution 2. Here, we can observe that solution 1 is better
that solution 2 from the perspective of f1 and it is better also for function f2,
hence solution 1 is dominating solution 2. In this case, solution 2 is added to
dominated chromosome list and np remains 0.
Next, solution 1 and 3 are compared and we can see that solution 3 is better
from the point of view of f1, but also from f2, thus dominating solution 1. At
this point np is incremented by 1 and then solution 1 is compared with 4. In
this case, because solution 1 is better than solution 4 from the perspective of f2
and is worst in respect to f1, we say that solution 4 is not dominating 1 and vice
versa. Once solution 1 is compared with all other solutions in the population,
the np is checked and if it is equal to 0 then the rank of the solution will be 0.
And so on for all the other solutions.
After all, solutions were processed and the ﬁrst front, having rank = 0, is found,
the next fronts can be created. This is achieved by taking each solution from
the ﬁrst front, looking at its dominated chromosome list and taking each so-
lution found there. For every solution found in the dominated list, the np is
decremented by 1 and then checked if it is equal to 0. If this is true, then it will
be added in the next front and continue.
On the right graph, the fronts in which the solutions were divided are presented.
As you can see, the best solutions are 3 and 5, because they are in the ﬁrst front.
Then in the second, some solutions are presented that are second best and ﬁnally
in the last front is the solution that does not dominate any other solution. These
front are also called Pareto fronts and they will always show starting from the
Pareto frontier (the ﬁrst front) the solutions will gradually be worst than the
previous one.
==PAGE:42==
34
Optimization of sensor placement
The pseudo-code can be observed in Algorithm 3:
Result: Population is sorted
create a list called ﬁrstFront;
create a new list in Population called fronts;
for each chr in population do
chr.np = 0;
create a new dominated chromosome list for chr;
for otherChr in population do
if chr is dominating otherChr then
add otherChr to dominated chromosome list;
end
if otherChr is dominating chr then
chr.np += 1;
end
end
if chr.np == 0 then
add the chromosome to ﬁrstFront;
chr.rank = 0;
end
end
add to fronts the ﬁrstFront list;
i = 0;
while len(fronts[i]) > 0 do
create a new list called nextFront;
for chr in fronts[i] do
for otherChr in dominated chromosome list of chr do
otherChr.np -= 1;
if otherChr.np == 0 then
otherChr.rank = i + 1;
add the chromosome to nextFront;
end
end
end
i += 1;
add nextFront to fronts;
end
return population;
Algorithm 3: Non-dominated sort
==PAGE:43==
5.4 NSGA-II
35
5.4.3
Crowding distance
After the non-dominated sort stage is complete the crowding distance is com-
puted and assigned to each chromosome from the population. Since the indi-
viduals are selected based on the rank and also the crowding distance in a later
stage. The crowding distance represents an estimate of the size of the largest
cuboid enclosing the current chromosome without including any other point in
the population [KDM02]. The next Figure 5.6 illustrates the cuboid surrounding
the current chromosome.
Figure 5.6: Crowding distance of ith solution [KDM02]
The crowding distance is calculated as follow: sort the population based on the
ﬁtness values, the crowding distance value assigned to the end of this list is
inﬁnite. Hence, the ﬁrst and the last chromosome in the population will always
have an inﬁnite distance value. On the other hand, for the remaining solutions,
the crowding distance is equal to the absolute distance between the functions
==PAGE:44==
36
Optimization of sensor placement
values of two adjacent solutions. The pseudo-code is shown in Algorithm 4:
Result: Compute crowding distance for each chromosome
for each front in fronts do
if len(front) > 0 then
maxLength = len(front);
for each chr in front do
initialize chr crowding distance value with 0;
end
for i = 0; i < no. of ﬁtness functions; i++ do
sort the solutions based on ﬁtness values;
assign inﬁnite values to boundaries of the list;
for j = 1; j < (maxLength - 1); j++ do
compute the crowding distance as follow:
front[j].crowdingDistance += (front[j + 1].objectives[i] -
front[j - 1].objectives[i]);
end
end
end
end
Algorithm 4: Crowding distance
5.4.4
Tournament selection
After the non-dominated sort and crowding distance stages are complete, the
selection of the chromosome for mating pool starts. The selection process is
based on what is know as crowded comparison operator [KDM02]. This is based
on knowing the rank and the crowding distance value for each chromosome in
the population, which was found in previous stages. The comparison is carried
out based on two criteria:
Solution x1 is chosen over solution x2 if
1. x1.rank < x2.rank or
2. x1.rank == x2.rank and x1.crowdingDistance > x2.crowdingDistance
In a tournament selection, two candidate solutions are chosen randomly from
the population and are compared using the crowded comparison operator. Then,
the solutions that won the tournament are placed in a mating pool having the
size equal to half the population size.
==PAGE:45==
5.4 NSGA-II
37
The pseudo-code is presented in Algorithm 5:
Result: Return the mating pool
create a new mating list called matingPool;
for i = 0; i < len(matingPool); i++ do
participants = select randomly two solutions from population;
best = None;
for each chr in participants do
if best is None or if chr has won the crowded comparison operator
with best then
best = chr;
end
end
add best to matingPool;
end
Algorithm 5: Tournament selection
5.4.5
Genetic Operations
At this point, from the other stages, we have a list of parents from which using
genetic operations oﬀspring solutions can be created. The two operations used to
ﬁnd new solutions are mutation and crossover. In this thesis, simulated Binary
Crossover (SBX) and polynomial mutation were used as described in [SES09].
The Simulated Binary Crossover is based on binary coding with single point
crossover. This means that if we have two parent p1 and p2 their children will
be c1 and c2. Hence, SBX simulates the binary crossover found in nature and
is given by the next two equations 5.9 and 5.10:
c1,k = 1
2 × [(1 −βk) × p1,k + (1 + βk) × p2,k]
(5.9)
c2,k = 1
2 × [(1 + βk) × p1,k + (1 −βk) × p2,k]
(5.10)
where c1,k and c2,k represents the child 1 and child 2 with kth component, while
p1,k and p2,k is representing the chosen parents. On the other hand, parameter
βk is a sample of a random number generated and can be obtained using an
uniformly random number u ∈(0, 1). The expressions are presented in the next
two equations 5.11 and 5.12:
==PAGE:46==
38
Optimization of sensor placement
β(u) = (2 × u)
1
(η+1) , , if u ≤0.5
(5.11)
β(u) =
1
[2 × (1 −u)]
1
(η+1) , , if u > 0.5
(5.12)
where η is given by the user and represents the distributed index for the crossover.
The polynomial mutation, on the other hand, it has the purpose of maintaining
genetic diversity by changing one or more values from a chromosome. Mutations
will be performed on a random chromosome based on a probability mutation de-
ﬁned by the user. It is important that this probability is set to small, otherwise,
the search could turn into a primitive random search [Wik17c].
The equation that is used to perform the polynomial mutation is shown in 5.13:
ck = pk + (pu
k −pl
k) × δk
(5.13)
where ck represents the child resulting from the mutation, while pu
k and pl
k is the
parent upper bound and lower bound component respectively. The parameter
δk is a small variation calculated with the following two expressions 5.14 and
5.15:
δk = (2 × rk)
1
ηm+1 −1, if rk < 0.5
(5.14)
δk = 1 −[2 × (1 −rk)]
1
ηm+1 , if rk ≥0.5
(5.15)
where rk ∈(0, 1) is an uniformly sampled random number and ηm represents
the mutation distribution index set by the user.
==PAGE:47==
5.4 NSGA-II
39
The pseudo-code of this stage is presented in Algorithm 6:
Result: Return the children created
create a new list called children;
for i = 0; i < N; i++ do
rand = a random number in (0,1);
if rand < 0.9 then
create two new Chromosome objects child1 and child2;
set a name for child1 and child2;
select two random individuals from population called parent1 and
parent1;
check to ensure that parent1 ̸= parent2;
for j = 0; j < no. of sensor group location of ﬁrst; j++ do
generate a random number in (0,1) called u;
compute βu using eq. 5.11 and 5.12;
obtain new location using eq. 5.9;
create child1 by adding ch1 and keeping the directions of ﬁrst
parent;
end
ﬁnd child2 by following the same steps above only using 5.10;
check to make sure that both child1 and child2 are in the search
space;
compute the true mode shape matrix A for child1 and child2;
compute the two ﬁtness values related to child1 and child2;
keep track of this crossover by setting wasCrossover = 1;
make wasMutation = 0;
else
select a random chromosome from population called parent3;
for j = 0; j < no. of sensor group location of parent3; j++ do
rk = a random number in (0,1);
compute δk using eq. 5.14 and 5.15;
ﬁnd the new coordinates of child3 using eq. 5.13;
check to make sure that child3 is in the search space;
end
compute the true mode shape matrix A for child3;
compute the two ﬁtness values related to child3;
keep track of this mutation by setting wasMutation = 1;
make wasCrossover = 0;
end
if wasCrossover == 1 then
add child1 and child2 to children list;
wasCrossover = 0;
end
if wasMutation == 1 then
add child3 to children list;
wasMutation = 0;
end
end
return children;
Algorithm 6: Genetic Operations
==PAGE:48==
40
Optimization of sensor placement
5.4.6
Replace Chromosome
Replace Chromosome stage is the moment where the candidate solutions for the
next iteration is created or the solution that the tool was found if there are no
iterations to come. Here, the new children list found in the genetic operations
stage is combined with the current population such that the best solution will
be selected. Because the new combined population consists of the previous and
current best solutions, elitism is ensured.
Now, the combined population is sorted based on non-dominated sort and the
selection of the best solutions for the new generation is done as follows: the new
generation is ﬁlled starting with the ﬁrst front increasing gradually until the
maximum number of elements is exceeded. At this point, we will start adding
elements from the last front added when the maximum limit was exceeded until
the new generation population is ﬁlled when all other solutions that could not
ﬁt inside the new population are discarded.
The pseudo-code is presented in Algorithm 7:
Result: The new population is created
create a new Population object called population;
sort the combined population with non-dominated sort;
compute the crowding distance for each element of the combined
population;
for each front in combined population do
add each element from front to population;
if len(population) == N then
break;
end
if len(population) == N then
break;
end
end
return population;
Algorithm 7: Replace chromosome
The properties of a chromosome and how a solution is modeled based on this is
presented in Section .
==PAGE:49==
5.5 Optimization tool implementation details
41
5.5
Optimization tool implementation details
In this thesis, a functional sensor placement tool has been created using the
NSGA-II algorithm presented in this chapter to ﬁnd a near-optimal sensor
placement location on a single ﬂoor of an oﬀshore Oil and Gas platform.
As an input, the optimization tool is taking an SVG ﬁle that describes the
ﬁrst-ﬂoor zones constraints and a JSON ﬁle which contains information, set by
the user, regarding the number maximum size of the population, the maximum
number of sensors, the search space area among other parameters that will aid
the tool. Based on this, the tool will output a plot of the mapping of the sensors
to the oﬀshore platform ﬂoor that will take into considerations the two ﬁtness
functions presented in section 5.3, see Figure 5.1 in section 5.1, and a text ﬁle
that enclose valuable information regarding the execution of the tool like the
execution time and each solution, suchlike:
• Chromosome name: represents the name of the Chromosome and helps
identify if it is a solution that was created using a mutation, a crossover
or it is one from the initial population.
• Chromosome list: contains the location where a group of sensors is placed.
An element of this list is a chromosome that contains the location and the
directions related to it.
• Objective function: consists of the two values resulted from the calculation
of the ﬁtness functions. The ﬁrst value represents the result of Measure-
ments quality function and the second value is the result of Installation
cost function.
• Rank: show in which front is placed the chromosome.
• Crowding distance: shows the value of the crowding distance.
As an example, a part of this ﬁle where the information related to one chromo-
some is presented is shown in Figure 5.7.
Besides the NSGA-II algorithm, two special function were created: the ﬁrst
special function aids the Measurements quality ﬁtness function by creating based
on the sensor measurements the true mode shape matrix A, while the second
special function is assisting Installation cost ﬁtness function by reading the
SVG ﬁle and ﬁnding the cost installation for each sensor. The two functions are
described in detail next, starting with the ﬁrst one.
==PAGE:50==
42
Optimization of sensor placement
Figure 5.7: Output information regarding one Chromosome
As we know, each sensor has associated a direction and each location can have
a group of sensors with unique directions. Every time, a mode shape inﬂuences
the platform, the sensors will measure accordingly to its direction. To measure
correctly mode1 the following measurements are taken, see eq. 5.16:
Sx = ∆; Sy = 0; Sz = 2 × (Xcoord −a) × ∆
h
(5.16)
where ∆is the maximum displacement of the platform when mode1, mode2
and mode3 are performed, while Sx, Sy and Sz represents the sensor with the
direction of X, Y and Z respectively, and h represent the height (the height in
our case is equal to the Z-coordinate of a location, because the reference point
is placed at the bottom of the structure, see Figure 4.3). The variable a is equal
to half of the X-axis ﬂoor, see Figure 5.8.
Figure 5.8: Variable a and b computation
Next, the other mode shapes sensor measurements are shown as follow: eq. 5.17
==PAGE:51==
5.5 Optimization tool implementation details
43
is representing the measurements for mode2, eq. 5.18 corresponds to mode3, eq.
5.19 is related to mode4 and eq. 5.20 to mode5:
Sx = 0; Sy = ∆; Sz = 2 × (Ycoord −b) × ∆
h
(5.17)
Sx = ∆
a × (Ycoord −b); Sy = ∆
a × (Xcoord −a); Sz = 0
(5.18)
Sx = δ; Sy = 0; Sz =
δ
Zcoord −(20/100 × Zcoord) × (Xcoord −a)
(5.19)
Sx = 0; Sy = δ; Sz =
δ
Zcoord −(20/100 × Zcoord) × (Ycoord −b)
(5.20)
where b is presented in Figure 5.8, δ represents the displacement for mode4
and mode5.
The three coordinates Xcoord, Ycoord and Zcoord represents the
coordinates of the sensor location and their purpose is to reposition the sensors
according to the reference point, which is in the center of the ﬂoor, see Figure
5.9.
As you can see, compared to mode1 and mode2, mode4 and mode5 have a
smaller displacement but a bigger rotation. Due to the fact that the height
is smaller that the maximum Zcoord. More exactly, we considered to be 20%
smaller.
Furthermore, as we mentioned in section 2.2, subsection 2.2.2, it is very impor-
tant to place the sensors as far as possible from the node points. In case of our
platform, the nodes are represented by two straight lines as shown in Figure
5.9. The blue line represents the node points for mode1 andmode4, while the
red line is for mode2 and mode5.
So, to get a good sensor placement, the locations have to be as far as possible
from the two node lines. If measuring the displacement, this is not relevant, due
to the fact that every location on the platform will measure the same displace-
ment. In the case of measuring the rotation, it impacts in a tremendous way
the values of Measurements quality ﬁtness test. Hence, it is desired to place the
Sz sensor near the edges of the platform.
==PAGE:52==
44
Optimization of sensor placement
Figure 5.9: Node lines and location of the reference point
Besides, the measurements of Sz sensor being dependent on the location of the
sensor, the sign of the measured value will be diﬀerent as well. Hence, if we
consider that the platform is tilting on the right side and the direction of Z is
pointing upwards, see Figure 4.3 and 4.4, the sensors placed on the left side of
node lines (the part of the platform that is higher) will have a positive sign,
while the sensor placed on the right side will have a negative sign (the left and
right side are related to Figure 5.9).
The pseudo-code is presented in Algorithm 8:
Result: Create mode shape matrix
set the displacement value;
compute a and b;
for each sensor in chromosome do
for each direction id sensor.directions do
if direction == direction of X then
compute Sx for all mode shapes;
end
if direction == direction of Y then
compute Sy for all mode shapes;
end
if direction == direction of Z then
compute Sz for all mode shapes;
end
end
end
create mode shape matrix A;
return A;
Algorithm 8: Create mode shape matrix
Once the SVG ﬁle is created, the second special function will ﬁnd the location
of each sensor on the ﬂoor and then based on its corresponding shade of grey
==PAGE:53==
5.5 Optimization tool implementation details
45
will compute the ﬁtness value for the current placement solution.
The algorithm used that ﬁnds the location of a sensor is based on the binary
search algorithm. First, the algorithm searches in the area created by the middle
of X and Y coordinates. Hence, it will search in four areas of the ﬂoor: ﬁrst is
the area created between x ∈[0, x/2) and y ∈[0, y/2), the second area created is
between x ∈[0, x/2) and y ∈[y/2, y], the third area is between x ∈[x/2, x] and
y ∈[y/2, y] and ﬁnally the fourth area is between x ∈[x/2, x] and y ∈[0, y/2).
When the area with the sensor is found, take all the color found there and
continue searching for the sensor location inside the recently discovered area and
search until there will remain only one color. This area representing where the
sensor is located. The pseudo-code of the algorithm is presented in Algorithm
9:
Result: Locate in which area the sensor is placed
areaCoordinates is initialized with X and Y coordinates of the SVG ﬁle;
while remainingAreas > 1 do
search in all areas created with the middle of the X and Y coordinates
given by areaCoordinates;
if sensor is found in one of the areas then
remainingAreas = number of colors found in that area;
areaCoordinates = the area coordinates where it is was found;
else
return error! Sensor out of range. The user should verify the
coordinates of the SVG ﬁle;
end
end
Algorithm 9: Find sensor location algorithm
After knowing the areas where the sensors are located, the ﬁtness function sums
up the penalty of each sensor location based on its color. At the moment there
are penalties for a few colors inserted, the ones that were used in doing the test
cases. Hence, the user is advised to use in his SVG ﬁle only those colors.
This optimization method was implemented in Python, due to its fast compu-
tation of matrix calculus.
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 6
Experimental evaluation
In this section, the experiments conducted to evaluate the optimization tool are
presented. In this set of experiments, we evaluate what impact the size of the
pool, the zone restrictions and the sensor uncertainty parameter (ε) have the
solution.
First of all, there are two architectures used for testing purposes:
• one ﬂoor plan is proposing a search space having the dimensions equal to
100×100, is divided into four diﬀerent zone restrictions. The image shows
in Figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: First tested architecture
==PAGE:55==
47
• the second ﬂoor plan tested is an extended search space having the di-
mensions equal to 200 × 100 and providing double the number of zone
restrictions. The search space is presented in Figure 6.2.
Figure 6.2: Second tested architecture
In the ﬁrst group of experiments, the eﬀects of having a larger size population of
individuals on the execution time and the solution found is investigated. Hence,
three sizes were chosen: a population size of 20 individuals, a population size of
30 individuals and one of 40. Moreover, all tests were performed under the same
circumstances (i.e. the same number of sensors, the same sensor uncertainty)
for a given number of generations. The three test cases are presented in Table
6.1.
Test case
No. of generations
Population size
Execution time
Case 1
100
20
82.286
500
20
408.057
1000
20
812.182
Case 2
100
30
133.622
500
30
676.843
1000
30
1310.102
Case 3
100
40
162.832
500
40
807.484
1000
40
2043.281
Table 6.1: Experimental results for diﬀerent size of population
The execution time shown in the table above it is measured in second. This
being said, if we look close we can see that both population size and number
of generations will have an impact on the execution time. Furthermore, the
execution time is growing at the same ratio as the number of generations is:
this means that the execution time at 100 generations will be roughly 5 times
smaller than the execution time obtained at 500 iterations.
Hence, we can
estimate what execution time other executions of the optimization tool.
==PAGE:56==
48
Experimental evaluation
In the next table 6.2 the solutions found in the ﬁrst front obtained for the three
cases are presented.
Test case
No. of
gen.
Results
Fit. Func. 1
Fit. Func. 2
Fit. Func. 1
Fit. Funct 2
Case 1
100
0.9927
2400
0.9960
2700
500
0.9961
1700
0.9964
7700
1000
0.9961
2400
0.9962
11700
Case 2
100
0.9950
2400
0.9968
6000
500
0.9950
1400
0.9967
4700
1000
0.9951
1700
0.9962
3700
Case 3
100
0.9937
2100
0.9966
8000
500
0.9944
1400
0.9970
9000
1000
0.9959
1700
0.9969
4400
Table 6.2: Experimental results for the two ﬁtness functions
As you can see, we always obtain two solutions: one that is having the best value
for the Measurements quality ﬁtness function and the worst value for Installation
cost ﬁtness function, while for the second solution the results are vice-versa.
Another important aspect is revealed when the solutions found executing the
tool having the same conditions in the three cases. The three sensor placement
is obtained with the following information: a number of iterations equal to 1000,
the number of sensors equal to 6 and ε equal to 0.001 (this represents a sensor
uncertainty of 2 %). The results are shown in the next three ﬁgures: Figure
6.3 represents the solution when population size is 20, while in Figure 6.3 the
population size is 30 and in Figure 6.3 is 40.
Comparing the three cases above, we can observe that using a larger population
will yield a better mapping because all sensors are pushed towards the edge of
the platform. More importantly the sensors with the direction of Z. Not only
that all sensors are at the edge in case 3, there are also used a bigger number
of Zcoord sensors that as we explained in section 5.5, it has a great impact in
the sensor placement selection ﬁtness value.
Hence, as a conclusion, the user is advised to use a population size equal to 40
or more, even though the execution time will be increased.
The second group of experiments aims to test the behavior of the optimization
method when a larger search space is provided. For this, the same three use
cases were applied. The execution times for the three cases are presented above
in Table 6.3.
==PAGE:57==
49
Figure 6.3: Sensor placement solution case 1
Figure 6.4: Sensor placement solution case 2
As you can see, even with a bigger search space the same pattern is kept as in
the case of the ﬁrst set of experiments. Moreover, the results are similar from
the point of view of the sensor location solution provided. Thus, using a bigger
size for the population is proved to give a better overall solution. Some solutions
are presented in the next ﬁgures 6.6 and 6.7:
In order to understand better the beneﬁts that our proposed optimization method
==PAGE:58==
50
Experimental evaluation
Figure 6.5: Sensor placement solution case 3
Test case
No. of generations
population size
execution time
Case 1
100
20
79.729
500
20
420.726
1000
20
848.886
Case 2
100
30
125.379
500
30
621.804
1000
30
1241.693
Case 3
100
40
169.370
500
40
850.093
1000
40
1718.366
Table 6.3: Experimental results for diﬀerent size of population for an extended
architecture
is introducing the following example is taken. Let us consider the case when
the engineer is placing the sensors manually based on their experience. For this
type of oﬀshore platform, they tend to believe that the best solution is to place
the sensors at the edge of the platform placing them in the corners. Such a
solution is shown in the following ﬁgures
If from the point of view of Measurements quality this will yield a very accurate
measurement data, from the point of view of the installation cost the results are
not so good. For the solution presented in Figure 6.8 the cost is equal to 5700
(5000 from the sensor placed in the black area and 700 from the sensor placed
==PAGE:59==
51
Test case
No. of
gen.
Results
Fit. Func. 1
Fit. Func. 2
Fit. Func. 1
Fit. Funct 2
Case 1
100
0.9958
1000
0.9965
4500
500
0.9963
1200
0.9965
5900
1000
0.9955
2400
0.9969
5200
Case 2
100
0.9962
1400
0.9966
6600
500
0.9959
400
0.9970
1400
1000
0.9962
400
0.9970
10600
Case 3
100
0.9955
700
0.9961
3500
500
0.9961
800
0.9969
7300
1000
0.9957
1100
0.9968
5400
Table 6.4: Experimental results for the two ﬁtness functions for an extended
architecture
Figure 6.6: Sensor placement solution for extended architecture 1
in the whiter shade of gray). This is the case, because the engineers do not have
the tools and possibility to compute the installation cost from the beginning.
In contrast, our method will obtain almost exactly results as in the case of
placing them manually. The result can be seen in the next Figure 6.10 and it
has a measurements quality accuracy of 0.9971 with a cost installation of 6000:
But, because our optimization method it takes into account the minimization of
the installation cost, the results obtained has a smaller measurements accuracy
of 0.9969 and a cost installation of 1700. This will dramatically minimize the
cost installation and at the same time keeping the quality of data very high.
The solution can be seen in Figure 6.11:
==PAGE:60==
52
Experimental evaluation
Figure 6.7: Sensor placement solution for extended architecture 2
Figure 6.8: Manual sensor placement solution 1
Figure 6.9: Manual sensor placement solution 2
In conclusion, the proposed method will give a huge beneﬁt from the point of
==PAGE:61==
53
Figure 6.10: Similar solution of sensor placement
Figure 6.11: Better results of sensor placement
view of the installation cost, proposing solutions that are not easy to predict
manually and more importantly these solutions have a small cost of installation,
which in our days it is a decisive factor in taking decisions.
A solution for multiple diﬀerent cost installation areas is presented in the next
Figure 6.12:
==PAGE:62==
54
Experimental evaluation
Figure 6.12: Another solution of sensor placement
Besides, to test the method used and to see if it is viable for using some hard
optimization problems. A software tool was created using Simulating Annealing
and Matlab that will provide a near-optimal solution for placing the sensors on
a beam with 3 mode shapes.
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 7
Conclusion and future work
7.1
Conclusion
In this thesis, a method and an optimization tool have been proposed that helps
to ﬁnd a near-optimal sensor placement on a structure, such that the structural
health monitoring process is improved and the sensor generated data will be
more accurate. Thus, the optimization tool suggests an approach to solve the
problem of ﬁnding the near-optimal sensor locations on a complex structure.
One such case is an oil and gas oﬀshore platform.
The achieved solution is introducing a mapping of the sensors on an oﬀshore
structure that takes into account two objectives: maximize the value of Sensor
placement selection function to ﬁnd a better sensor location and minimize the
Zone restrictions in such a way that the penalty introduced is reduced.
Finding the optimal solution such that all objectives are met is an optimization
problem. For complex structures, this type of problems is near impossible to
solve by testing every possible solution in the search space. Hence, using an
optimization algorithm that will give a near-optimal solution is a good way to
go. For this tool, a multi-objective genetic algorithm was used, called NSGA-II,
see section 5.4.
==PAGE:64==
56
Conclusion and future work
The implementation was tested with multiple conﬁgurations, like changing the
maximum size of the population, the number of sensors and diﬀerent area con-
straints conﬁguration.
7.2
Future work
Adding the possibility of placing sensors on diﬀerent ﬂoors of an oﬀshore struc-
ture, deﬁning new objectives to improve more the sensor placement and having
a library with multiple architecture models that the tool can test and oﬀer a
solution will greatly improve the current implementation.
Furthermore, making the tool more user-friendly by creating a user interface
with buttons and diﬀerent options will extend the usability even to engineers
that do not have any experience in the ﬁeld of computer science.
Finally, it will increase the understanding of how the mode shapes are inﬂuencing
the structure and how the sensor measurements are made if the tool will oﬀer a
3D visualization of the target structure.
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[AK17]
Abdelgawad Ahmed and Yelamarthi Kumar. Structural health
monitoring: Internet of things application. Midwest Symposium
on Circuits and Systems, March 2017.
[AL16]
C. Avasalcai and N. Lopez.
Structural monitoring and model
adaptation for risk assessment and decision making. December
2016.
[ARMRK14] K. Lakshmia A. Rama Mohan Raoa and S. Krishnakumarb. A
generalized optimal sensor placement technique for structural
health monitoring and system identiﬁcation.
1st International
Conference on Structural Integrity, ICONS-2014, 2014.
[BK05]
Edmund Burke and Graham Kendall. SEARCH METHODOLO-
GIES. Introductory Tutorials in Optimization and Decision Sup-
port Techniques. Springer, 2005.
[DN15]
A. Didic and P. Nikolaidis. REAL-TIME CONTROL IN INDUS-
TRIAL IOT. Malardalen University, Sweden, 2015.
[ea15]
R. Moriarty et al. A new reality for oil & gas. 2015.
[Fal]
Sune Falther. A star is born. https://goo.gl/PzYQMm.
[FD09]
Eric B. Flynn and Michael D.Todd. A bayesian approach to op-
timal sensor placement for structural health monitoring with ap-
plication to active sensing. Mechanical Systems and Signal Pro-
cessing, September 2009.
==PAGE:66==
58
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Goe]
Tushar Goel.
Elitist non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm:
Nsga-ii.
[GP10]
Michel Gendreanu and Jean-Yves Potvin.
Handbook of Meta-
heuristic. Second Edition. Springer, 2010.
[GWvdLL11] Robert L. Kosut Hassan Sedarat Gwendolyn W. van der Linden,
Abbas Emami-Naeini and Jerome P. Lynch. Optimal sensor place-
ment for health monitoring of civil structures. American Control
Conference, July 2011.
[KDM02]
Sameer Agarwal Kalyanmoy Deb, Amrit Pratap and T. Meyari-
van. A fast and elitist multi-objective genetic algorithm: Nsga-
ii. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 6, August
2002.
[LlLH13]
Xi Wang Ling ling Lu and Chen Guang Huang. A new method of
optimal sensor placement for modal identiﬁcation of oﬀshore plat-
form structure. The 2013 World Congress on Advances in Struc-
tural Engineering and Mechanics (ASEM13), September 2013.
[mae]
maerskoilblog.
Star platform technology.
https://goo.gl/
uvu9ex.
[MSSS08]
Philip May, D Sanderson, JV Sharp, and A Stacey. Structural
integrity monitoring: Review and appraisal of current technolo-
gies for oﬀshore applications. In ASME 2008 27th International
Conference on Oﬀshore Mechanics and Arctic Engineering, pages
247–263. American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 2008.
[MZ05]
M. Meo and G. Zumpano. On the optimal sensor placement tech-
niques for a bridge structure. Engineering Structures, May 2005.
[RA07]
A Rama Mohan Rao and Ganesh Anandakumar. Optimal place-
ment of sensors for structural system identiﬁcation and health
monitoring using a hybrid swarm intelligence technique. SMART
MATERIALS AND STRUCTURES, November 2007.
[RB15]
Carlos E. Ventura Rune Brincker. INTRODUCTION TO OPER-
ATIONAL MODAL ANALYSIS. Wiley, 2015.
[SES09]
ARAVIND SESHADRI. A fast elitist multi-objective genetic al-
gorithm: Nsga-ii. https://goo.gl/sYtU4Y, July 2009.
[THYG11]
Hong-Nan Li Ting-Hua Yi and Ming Gu. Optimal sensor place-
ment for health monitoring of high-rise structure based on genetic
algorithm. Mathematical Problems in Engineering, 2011, March
2011.
==PAGE:67==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
59
[Wik17a]
Wikipedia.
Euler–bernoulli beam theory.
https://goo.gl/
D7g3zT, June 2017.
[Wik17b]
Wikipedia.
Metaheuristic.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Metaheuristic, March 2017.
[Wik17c]
Wikipedia.
Mutation
(genetic
algorithm).
https:
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mutation_(genetic_algorithm),
June 2017.
[Wik17d]
Wikipedia.
White noise.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
White_noise, April 2017.
[WJX17]
Fu Yongfeng Wang Jun and Yang Xiaokang. An integrated sys-
tem for building structural health monitoring and early warning
based on an internet of things approach. International Journal of
Distributed Sensor Networks, 13, January 2017.
[WLjX08]
Yi Sun Wei Liu, Wei-cheng Gao and Min jian Xu. Optimal sen-
sor placement for spatial lattice structure based on genetic algo-
rithms. JOURNAL OF SOUND AND VIBRATION, March 2008.
