==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Production, characterization and oxidative
stability of electrosprayed fish oil-containing
capsules and stabilization with natural
antioxidants
Andres Pelayo (s151357)
Under the guidance of:
Pedro Jesus Garcia Moreno
Charlotte Jacobsen and
Ionnis S. Chronakis
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
DTU Food
National Food Institute
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Food
Building 202
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 35 88 70 00
food@food.dtu.dk
www.food.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Biopolymeric blends were made to enhance the oxidative stability of fish oil via encap-
sulation by electrospraying. Mixtures of whey protein concentrate (WPC) with dry
glucose syrup and pullulan were assesed. Fish oil was incorporated as 20 % weight of
fish oil relating to weight of biopolymers used in the solution.
Capsule characterization and oxidative stability of two different oil incorporation
approaches were studied on the first part of the study. One incorporation method
of fish oil into the biopolymeric solution was done by using an ultraturrax mixer fol-
lowed by homogenizing with microfluidizer. Another method was done by only using
ultraturrax mixing. The second part introduced two different types of antioxidants,
natural commercially available and seaweed extracts, to further improve the oxidative
stability.
Capsules containing fish oil were successfully obtained from electrospraying. How-
ever, the encapsulation did not enhance the oxidative stability of fish oil. PV of the
capsules exceeded the maximum limit of PV < 5 meq O2/kg oil. PV was measured
after production for the microfluidizer and ultraturrax method were 10.32 ± 0.095.
and 8.06 ± 3.25, respectively. The addition of antioxidants did not aid in the oxida-
tive stability and it was observed that the seaweed extract had a pro-oxidative effect
for both hydroperoxides and secondary oxidation products.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This MSc thesis was prepared at Research Group for Bioactives-Analysis and Appli-
cation, National Food Institute at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment
of the requirements for acquiring a MSc of Engineering in Chemical and Biochemical
Engineering. This project covers 32.5 ETCS credits.
Kongens Lyngby, July 21, 2017
Andres Pelayo
(s151357)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First, I would like to thank Stig Wedel, head of studies at Chemical and Biochemical
Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark for approving this thesis project.
Next my thesis advisor Postdoc Pedro Jesus Garcia Moreno for his support and
extreme patience throughout this thesis project. No matter the situation, he was
always there. At times it must have been stressful for him, but regardless he always
held a open door policy. I would also like to acknowledge Professor MSO Charlotte
Jacobsen and Ionnis S. Chronakis for guidance and suggestions when a problem was
faced.
Besides my advisors, I would like to acknowledge the lab technicians, Lis Berner,
Inge Holmberg and Thi Thu Trang, at the research group for Bioactives- Analysis
and Application, National Food Institute at Technical University of Denmark for their
great support and guidance on the analysis performed.
I would also like to acknowledge, Anders Daugaard and especially Liyun Yu, for
their help with DSC analysis at the Danish Polymer Center, Chemical and Biochem-
ical Engineering at Technical University of Denmark.
Finally, I would like to thank Jorge and Nail for being there for me, since day one
of my sudden life shift while being in Denmark. The lobos, Alejandro and Eugene,
for going places, whispering in my ear and telling me that life will give me another
set. Cecilie for understanding and dealing with me and helping me become a better
version of myself. All my family and friends, who supported my decision of continuing
in Denmark. And lastly, my mother for giving her absolute best in life to guarantee
the best possible outcome for my sisters and I.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
Nomenclature
xi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Aim of study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Fish Oil
3
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Lipid Oxidation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Antioxidants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Encapsulation Methods
9
3.1
Electrospraying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Biopolymers for Electrospraying
11
4.1
Whey Protein Concentrate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Citrem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.3
Pullulan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.4
Dried Glucose Syrup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.5
Zein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.6
Sucrose
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5
Analysis and Characterization Approach
15
5.1
Scanning Electron Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.2
Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.3
Differential scanning calorimetry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.4
Dynamic Headspace Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometry
. . . .
16
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6
Materials and Methods
19
6.1
Production of Capsules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6.2
Characterization of capsules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6.3
Characterization of capsules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6.4
Oxidative Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.5
Statistical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
7
Results and Discussion
27
7.1
Whey Protein Concentrate Emulsion: comparing oil incorporations
methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
7.2
Effect of antioxidants on oxidative stability of capsules . . . . . . . . .
42
8
Conclusion
49
9
Future Perspectives
51
Bibliography
53
A Zein Emulsions
61
B DSC Results
65
==PAGE:11==
Contents
ix
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
Nomenclature
AOX
Antioxidants
ATR
Attenuated total reflection
DGS
Dry Glucose Syrup
DHA
Docosalhexaenoic acid
DSC
Differential scanning calorimetry
EPA
Eicosapentaenoic acid
FTIR
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
GC-MS Gas chromatography mass spectrometry
ppm
Parts per million
PUFAs Polyunsaturated fatty acids
PV
Peroxide Value
WPC
Whey protein concentrate
==PAGE:14==
xii
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The supplementation of fish oil has been known to produce various health benefits.
Fish oil contains PUFAs, polyunsaturaded fatty acids, which have been shown to aid
in cardiovascular related issues[1]. PUFAs, mainly EPA and DHA, eicosapentaenoic
and docosalhexaenoic acid respectively, are the contributing factor to these benefits.
[1]
The fatty acids are primarily consumed through fatty fish, such as, mackerel,
sardine, and salmon to name few. The problem is that current western diets do not
provide the beneficial doses of EPA and DHA to be consumed for the potential health
benefits. This is where fish oil supplementation comes in place. There is already a
market of fish oil supplementation through oral capsules or liquid suspensions, but
not everyone is keen to purchase supplements. Therefore, enrichment of foods with
PUFAs will lead to more accessible consumption of the fatty acids. Foods that may be
enriched include dairy products, such as, milk, butter and yogurt and other products
such as breads and mayonnaise. [2]
Fish oil emulsions are currently used to enrich foods. However, in order provide
a higher oxidative stability, the fish oil must be encapsulated. The encapsulation
process must then be able to transform the liquid fish oil into powdered fish oil in
order to protect the fatty acids from oxidizing and protect against thermal stress from
the process of food enrichment. Spray drying has been used to study the oxidative
stability of capsules containing lipids.
Newer approaches, such as electrospraying
are able to encapsulate bioactives without the addition of heat to the process. The
use of electrospraying, along with biopolymers, may then be used to produce fish oil
containing capsules. Capsules are desired in order to facilitate the incorporation into
food matrices.
1.1
Aim of study
The aim of this study is to study the production, characterization and oxidative stabil-
ity of fish oil capsules obtained from electrospraying. Two different oil incorporation
methods will be studied to compare the solutions stability and the capsules morphol-
ogy, encapsulation efficiency and oxidative stability.
Finally, antioxidants will be
incorporated in order to study their effect on the oxidative stability of the capsules.
==PAGE:16==
2
1 Introduction
1.2
Hypothesis
The oxidation of fish oil will be delayed by encapsulating fish oil in biopolymeric
capsules produced by electrospraying. The wall material of the capsules will contain
dry glucose syrup, pullulan and whey protein concentrate. In order to further increase
the oxidative stability antioxidants will be incorporated.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Fish Oil
2.1
Introduction
Fish oil is extracted from fatty fish and fish by-product cuttings. The most common
method of producing fish oil is the wet reduction process. The main steps of this
process are cooking, pressing, and separating.(kim, book)) Fish oil contains omega-3
PUFAS, polyunsaturated fatty acids, which adds value to the food industry. The
omega-3 PUFAs in fish oil are mainly EPA (C20:5n-3) an DHA (C22:6n-3), eicos-
apentaenoic and docosalhexaenoicacid respectively, which have been shown to aid
in cardiovascular related issues. [1] Omega-3 PUFAs are highly susceptible to lipid
oxidation, which may degrade their nutritional properties. Therefore, it is of high
importance to enhance the oxidative stability of the fish oil and to prevent or slow
down the oxidation from occurring.
2.2
Lipid Oxidation
Lipid oxidation is a series of reactions that lead to the degradation of lipids. One of
the first steps of lipid oxidation involves the breakage of a carbon bond to create a
free radical. Unsaturated fats, such as fish oil, contain an allyl group, which makes
them more prone to oxidation compared to saturated fats. The reason is that the
allyl group has a CH bond in the carbon chain and the bond may be broken by metals
ions or light and therefore lead to formation of lipid radicals[3]
The lipid radicals are then further oxidized leading to the rancidity of oils. Oil
rancidity is accompanied by off flavors and unpleasant odors. The reason why lipid
oxidation is important, is because oxidized oils can cause oxidative stress in biological
systems which might lead to diseases. Therefore, it is important to understand how
lipid oxidation occurs in order to be able to slow down the reactions.
2.2.1
Mechanisms of oxidation
There are various mechanisms of oxidation, such as autoxidation, photooxidation and
lipoxygenation. Photooxidation occurs in the presence of light and lipoxygenation
in the presence of enzymes[4]. Lipoxygenation is not considered in this study since
refined fish oil does not contain any enzymes that will catalyze lipid oxidation. Pho-
==PAGE:18==
4
2 Fish Oil
tooxidation is important to control, since light can initiate the oxidation leading to
autoxidation. Therefore, exposure to light is to be minimized while processing the
fish oil solutions and products. When there exposure to light is controlled and there
are no oxidating enzymes present, the most important mechanism is autoxidation.
The reaction route of lipid oxidation presented in this report is called autoxidation.
Autoxidation may also be referred as oxidative rancidity[5]. It consists of three steps:
initiation, propagation and termination.
1. Initiation
The starting point is the unsaturated lipid. Initiation starts by the breakage of
the allylic bond. The hydrogen is primarily broken down by exposure to light,
which is also known as photo oxidation. Initiation step may also begin with
heat or decomposition by a metal ion. The chemical reaction is presented in
equation 2.1. The unsaturated lipid is represented as RH and reacts to form a
lipid radical, R·.
RH →R · + H·
(2.1)
2. Propagation
The lipid radical reacts with oxygen and forms lipid peroxyl radicals, see equa-
tion 2.2[3]. The lipid peroxyl radicals may then react with the unsaturated fat
to produce hydroperoxides and another lipid radical, see equation 2.3.
R · + O2 →ROO · + H·
(2.2)
ROO · + RH →ROOH + R·
(2.3)
With the lipid radical produced in equation 2.3, it creates a propagation step,
which then continues to react with oxygen and leads to more lipid peroxyl
radicals.
See figure 2.1 for representation of the initiation and propagation
steps of lipid oxidation.
The hydroperoxides formed in this step are therefore referred as primary oxi-
dation products. The hydroperoxides then degrade to volatile aldehydes and
ketones producing different odors and flavors.
3. Termination
The termination step involves the reaction of the lipid free radicals forming non
radical products. From equation 2.2 and 2.3 it can be seen that three possible
termination reactions can be formed.
R · + R· →RR
(2.4)
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Lipid Oxidation
5
Figure 2.1: Initiation and propagation steps of lipid oxidation [5].
ROO · + R· →ROOR·
(2.5)
ROO · + ROO· →ROOR + O2·
(2.6)
Another termination step is the reaction of antioxidants with the hydroper-
oxides formed. Antioxidants are able to quickly terminate lipid oxidation by
donating hydrogen bonds to form non radical products[6]. Therefore, addition
of antioxidants to fish oil may help control oxidation.
ROO · + AH →ROOH + A·
(2.7)
2.2.2
Secondary oxidation products
Primary oxidation products are the hydroperoxides formed during propagation step
of lipid oxidation. Figure 2.2 presents eight hydroperoxides from lipid oxidation of
EPA.[7] These hydroperoxides continue to degrade to form a variety of alcohols, alde-
hydes, ketones, hydrocarbons and aromatic compounds. The products of hydroperox-
ide degradation are also known as secondary oxidation products. Secondary oxidation
products from fish oil oxidation are listed in Table 2.1. Figure 2.3 summarizes the
degradation of lipid hydroperoxides into secondary oxidation products. β-scission is
the main mechanism of hydroperoxide degradation. The presence of metal ions can
further catalyze the oxidation and the β-scission mechanism. Metal ions react with
hydroperoxides to form alkoxy radicals, which then undergoes β-scission to generate
aldehydes. [8]. Therefore, it is important to minimize the content of metals in a
==PAGE:20==
6
2 Fish Oil
matrix containing fish oil or to control by the addition of antioxidants and or metal
chelators.
Figure 2.2: Hydroperoxides formed from EPA lipid oxidation in vitro and in vivo
[[7].
Table 2.1: Common secondary oxidation products from lipid oxidation of fish oil
adapted from [9] .
Alcohols
Aldehydes
Furans
Ketones
1-penten-3-ol
2-butenal
2-ethylfuran
1-penten-3-one
2-pentenol
2-pentenal
2-pentylfuran
3-hexen-2-one
1-hexen-3-ol
2,4-heptadienal
2-butanone
1,5-octadien-3-ol
2-hexanal
3-penten-2-one
hexanal
3,5-octadione
2-nonenal
2,6-nonadienal
2.3
Antioxidants
In order to reduce or stop lipid oxidation, antioxidants may be used. Antioxidants
are substances that inhibit or delay oxidation in food products. Antioxidants that
are approved for food use are monohydric or polyhydric phenols.[10] Antioxidants
can scavange free radicals and act as metal chelators. The two types of antioxidants
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Antioxidants
7
Figure 2.3: Hydroperoxide degradations adapted from [5].
presented in this study are, natural commercially available antioxidants, δ-tocopherol
and rosemary extract, and a seaweed extract, fucus vesiculosus.
δ-tocopherol is used as an antioxidant in this study.
Tocopherols are natural
antioxidants that are effective to use in lipids. Rosemary extracts are phenolic com-
pounds extracted from the rosemary plant, Rosmarinu officinalis. The activity of
rosemary comes from carnosic acid and carosol which they are active at high temper-
atures [11]. The rosemary extract is heat resistant and stable up to 200 °C. Rosemary
extracts have a synergistic effect with other antioxidants. A mixture of tocopherols
and rosamary extracts have been shown to inhibit fish oil oxidation catalyzed my iron
ions[12].
==PAGE:22==
8
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Encapsulation
Methods
Encapsulation methods of omega-3 PUFAs are designed to aid in the oxidative stabil-
ity of the fatty acids. Examples of encapsulation methods are emulsification, spray-
drying, and electrohydrodynamic processess. Electrohydrodyamic processes consists
of processing a polymer solution into a dry product by application of electricity. Two
categories in electrohydrodynamic processes are electrospinning and electrospraying.
An electrospinning process is distinguised by the formation of fibers, or mats, as the
final product. In contrast, an electrospraying process produces spherical shaped par-
ticles, or in a generalized term, powder. The encapsulation method of this study is
focused on electropraying homogenized solutions containing fish oil.
3.1
Electrospraying
Electrospraying is the process of generating many charged droplets from a polymeric
solution.
The process starts by passing a polymeric solution through a syringe with an
applicable electrical voltage. As the liquid passes, a Taylor cone is formed. When the
applied voltage exceed the surface charge density of the solution, many droplets are
ejected from the tip of the cone due to vericose instability. The charged droplets are
then attracted to an opposite charged or grounded collector. The solvent evaporates
in the process before the droplets reach the collector[13].
In order to produce particles, a low viscoelasticiy of the solution is required. This
property is attained by using low molecular weight polymers, as well as low concen-
tration, in order to produce particles[14]–[16]. The lab set up used for this study is
presented in Figure 3.1.
3.1.1
Solution and process parameters
In order to produce particles from electrospraying, solutions must follow certain pa-
rameters. To begin with, concentration and molecular weight of the solution must be
kept low in order to avoid fiber formation[17]–[19]. This goes in hand with viscocity,
==PAGE:24==
10
3 Encapsulation Methods
Syringe 
DD 
D 
0 
D 
DC Power Supply 
Pump 
Collector Plate 
Figure 3.1: Schematic diagram of electrospraying system used in laboratory.
because as concentration increases viscocity tends to increase, thus higher viscocity
may lead to fiber formation[20]. Another solution parameter is surface tension. [21]
In order to disperse multiple droplets from the Taylor cone, the voltage applied must
surpass the surface tension of the solution [22] [23].
Solution and process parameters go hand in hand. Processing parameters start
with the flow rate and voltage applied. As mentioned before, sufficient voltage is
required to eject particles from the Taylor cone, and a consistent flow rate must be in
place to maintain the Taylor cone. This means that the flow rate must be equivalent
to that of the ejecting particles, otherwise, the Taylor cone may be disrupt and wet
droplets may occur during the process. Another process parameter is distance from
the needle point and the collector. The distance can affect morphology and capsule
diameter. For example, if the distance is not long enough, the ejected particle may
not have enough time for the solvent to evaporate and thus collect wet product[19].
Finally, in order to have a stable process, ambient parameters must also be stable.
Humidity and temperature affect the polymer spray-ability and the morphology of
the product [19]
Currently, there are seven countries that produce electrospinning and electrospray-
ing machines for lab and mass production [24]. Reasearch is being conducted into the
encapsulation of bioactives using electrospraying and electrospinning technology[16].
Electrospraying is a promising technique that could improve the oxidative stability
of encapsulated fish oil because eletrospraying does not require heated air flow to
produce particles as opposed to spray drying. When electrospraying, droplets and
particle sizes are smaller, which may improve dispersion in a food matrix, but also in-
creased the specific surface area which could be detrimental to lipid oxidation. There
is also a high production efficiency in electrospraying since the particle motion can
be controlled by an electric field into the collector. All in all, electrospraying is a
promising technique that may aid chemical stability of oils and other bioactives by
the use of protective wall materials.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 4
Biopolymers for
Electrospraying
Food grade materials must be used in order to encapsulate bioactives for the food
industry. The use of biopolymers has been used in the encapsulation of bioactives
in spray drying and electrospraying[25]. However, the use of biopolymers in electro-
spraying results problematic due to the naturally high conductivity in biopolymers[26].
This creates unstable Taylor cones and lead to dripping and irregular morphology.
Therefore lower concentrations or a combination of biopolymers are preferred in order
to maintain a stable jet and particle production. This section describes the different
biopolymers used for encapsulation of bioactives and oils that are used in this study.
4.1
Whey Protein Concentrate
Whey protein concentrate is a natural protein that derives from whey, a byproduct
of the production of cheese. WPCs have a high nutritional value and are used in the
food industry due to its ability to emulsify and encapsulate bio-actives. WPCs have
been reported to have antioxidant properties [27], such as metal chelating and amino
acids acting as free radical scavengers, which makes WPC an excellent choice as an
encapsulating material.
WPC usage in oil in water emulsions is widely use. For example, spherical forms
of emulsions were obtained by nano-emulsions of fish oil in WPC [27]. Other WPC
stabilized emulsions were prepared with up to 20 % oil phase concentration of beta-
limonene [28].
WPC has been proven as an effective encapsulating material of different oils in
spray drying and electrosprayin. For example, a mixture of WPC with carbohydrates
have encapsulated flax seed oil by methods of spray drying[29]. Studies show, that
when WPC is employed as a wall material, it is able to increase the chemical stability
of bioactive compounds. Another concludes an increased oxidative stability of spray-
dried alpha-linolenic acid capsules [30].
One study demonstrates the stability of
electrosprayed beta-carotene capsules against photo-oxidation when WPC is used as
wall material[31]. Therefore, the emulsifying and protective properties of WPC makes
it a suitable biopolymer to encapsulate omega-3 PUFAs.
==PAGE:26==
12
4 Biopolymers for Electrospraying
4.2
Citrem
Citrem is an anionic emulfisier that is produced by esterifying fatty acids with citric
acid. Citrem is able to reduce the surface tension between water and oil and is able
to stabalize the emulsion[32].
Citrem and Tween80 have been evaluated on lipid oxidation in fish oil emulsions
and results show that Citrem provides higher oxidative stability in emulsions com-
pared to with Tween80, due to citrems metal chelating properties[33]. Due to its
emulsifying and metal chelating properties, citrem is used in this study to enhance
stability and lipid oxidation of the capsules.
4.3
Pullulan
Pullulan is a water soluble polysaccharide produce from the fermentation of starch by
Aureobasidium pullulans[34]. Pullulan has good viscosity properties and may form
films that are transparent, protect against thermal stress and are impermeable to
oxygen[35] [36]. Kshirsagar demonstrated the ability to emulsify turmeric olearesin
with the addition of 1 % pullulan[36]. Another study has proven the ability to encap-
sulate omega-3 PUFAs in pullulan fibers [37]. This study gives insight to the use of
pullulan as a wall material for encapsulating bioactives due to the oxidative stability
enhancement of the fish oil loaded capsules.
4.4
Dried Glucose Syrup
Dried glucose syrup is a carbohydrate powder used as sweeteners, nutritional additives
or texturizing agents. It is produced from spray drying syrups from the hydrolysis of
starch, with a dextrose equivalent, DE, higher than 20 [38]. The dextrose equivalent
value for the dried glucose syrup used for this study is between 35-40.
Dried glucose syrup can be used as a bulking agent and texturizing ingredient. It
has also been used in the encapsulation of spray dried fish oils and bioactives [39] [40]
[41]. Rusli has demonstrated the use of protein and dried glucose syrup combinations
as an effective encapsulating agent in spray drying[38]. Another important factor
of dried glucose syrup, is that glucose was able to inhibit autoxidation of methyl
lionate [42]. The ability to encapsulate and to provide oxidative protection makes
dried glucose syrup a candidate for bulking and encapsulating agent in this study.
4.5
Zein
Zein is a protein derived from corn. Zein is a hydrophobic protein that is soluble
in dilute acids and alcohols, but insoluble in water. Zein is considered a polymeric
==PAGE:27==
4.6 Sucrose
13
amphiphile which facilitates the encapsulation of oil based microspheres[43]. An ad-
vantage of producing zein films is that they have a high thermal resistance and offer
oxygen protection[44]. Zein can be electrosprayed to produce particles at concentra-
tions lower than 15 %. At higher concetrations fibers are ejected from the Taylor
cone jet.
Electrohydrodynamic processes have demonstrated that zein as a wall material
can improve the oxidative stability, provide stability against UV irradiation, aid in
dispersion of aqueous food matrices and improve sustained release of bioactives. [22],
[45]–[47].
4.6
Sucrose
Sucrose is simple sugar. It is a non reducing disachcharide that is made from glucose
and fructose units. it can be obtained from sugarcane or sugar beets. A distinctive
property of sucrose apart from other sugars is its solubility in diluted alcohols.
In a study of autoxidation of methyl lionate, sucrose was able to inhibit and or
enhance the oxidative stability [42]. Saccharide fibers and beads were obtained from
electrospinning sucrose solutions with a stable jet formation [48]. Lepe showed the
possibility of electrospinning sucrose, therefore in this study the possibility of using
sucrose as a bulking agent in combination with zein in ethanol is explored.
==PAGE:28==
14
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 5
Analysis and
Characterization
Approach
This chapter presents an introduction to the analysis used for characterization of the
final product.
5.1
Scanning Electron Microscopy
SEM images of the electropsrayed product were analyzed to study morphology. SEM
is used due to particle sizes produced and resolution needed. SEM is required when
10000x or greater magnifications are needed with a clarity output. This magnification
allows to characterize in nanometer and micrometer scales. The electron microscope
can gather topography and morphology of the sample introduced for scanning. The
working mechanism involves electron beams hitting the target sample and bouncing
off while electron detectors process the electron signals into a computerized image,
thus revealing surface detail and topography of the sample. Gold coating or metal
coating is used for biological specimens in order to increase the thermal conductivity
of the sample and therefore reducing damage to the sample.
5.2
Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, FTIR,[49] is used to obtain infrared spectrum
of absorption of a solid, liquid or gas. Specifically, attenuated total reflectance mode,
ATR, FTIR is used in this study. ATR-FTIR works by reflecting an IR beam on the
sample. The sample is placed in an ATR crystal and an IR beam passes through the
crystal resulting in the beam being reflected or transmitted. An attenuated response
is detected that is recorded as the wavelenght corresponding to the absorptinon of
the sample [9] Middle frequency range of Infrared Spectroscopy is used in this study,
==PAGE:30==
16
5 Analysis and Characterization Approach
which constitutes of wavenumbers, cm-̂1, in the range of 4000-400. This window of
wavenumbers allows identification of oxidation products from a sample. Table 5.1,
lists the wavenumbers corresponding to lipid groups along with the molecular action
involved, adapted from [9]. Studies have indicated that a decrease in band intensity
from cis double bonds are indicators of oxidation [9] Therefore, changes in cis double
bonds, specifically wavelenght 3012cm-1, will be studied in this report.
Table 5.1: Wavenumbers and groups affected by lipid oxidation in fish oil. Adapted
from [9] [50].
Wavenumber (cmˆ-1)
Functional Group
Molecular Action
3435
Hydroperoxides, PUFA
O-H stretching
3006-3012
Conjugated dienes (cis)
C=C stretching
5.3
Differential scanning calorimetry
Differential scanning calorimetry, DSC, measures the heat required to increase or
decrease the temperature of a sample. It measures the temperature difference of the
heat flow of the sample in comparison to a blank reference as a function of time.
The purpose of this analysis is to obtain the glass transition temperatures of the
biopolymers. This data is able to provide glass transition temperatures of samples.
Figure 5.1 shows a representation of a thermogram typically obtained from DSC
showing stages such as glass transition and crystalliation of a sample. As mention in
previous chapters, high glass transitions temperatures of the wall material of capsules
may slow down lipid oxidation. Therefore, DSC measurements are employed in this
study to further characterized the electroprayed biopolymeric particles of this study.
5.4
Dynamic Headspace Gas Chromatography Mass
Spectrometry
Dynamic headspace gas chromatography mass spetrometry, GC-MS, is a two step
process that detects and quantifies volatile molecules. The first step involves heating
a sample in a flask to release volatiles while purging nitrogen through the liquid
in order to to trap volatiles into a tube. The second step continues by connecting
the purged tubes to a gas chromatoraph to undergo thermal desorption. Figure 5.2
summarizes the two steps. The secondary oxidation products, volatiles, are identified
by the GC-MS system[9].
==PAGE:31==
5.4 Dynamic Headspace Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometry
17
Temperature
Heat Flow -> exothermic
Glass 
Transition
Cold 
Crystallisation
Melting
Cross-Linking
(Cure)
Oxidation 
Figure 5.1: DSC sample thermograph showing temperature transitions of a material
adapted from [51] .
Figure 5.2: Two step process for analyzing volatiles from dynamic headspace gas
GC-MS.
==PAGE:32==
18
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 6
Materials and
Methods
In this chapter the materials and methods will be discussed.
The whey protein
concentrate studies are included as part this study. The zein solutions will be included
in the appendix, as an addition and future exploration of zein mixtures for oxidative
stability of encapsulated omega-3 PUFAs.
6.1
Production of Capsules
6.1.1
Materials
Materials used for the biopolymeric are listed below.
1. WPC/Citrem DGS Pullulan emulsion
• Water, deionized water, DTU, Lyngby, Denmark.
• DGS, Dry glucose syrup, Cargill, Germany.
• Pullulan, Pullulan 200K, Hayashibara Co. LTD, Japan.
• Fish oil, cod liver oil, Maritex A/S, Denmark.
• WPC, Lacprodan DI8090, ARLA, Denmark.
• Citrem LR 10 Extra without antioxidants, Danisco, Denmark.
2. Zein-Sucrose solution
• Ethanol, VWR, Denmark.
• Sucrose, 57-50-1 Saccharose, Merck, Denmark.
• Zein, Z3625, Sigma-Aldrich, USA.
6.1.2
Solution Preparations
All solutions contain 20 % (w/w, weight of oil/weight of total solids) of fish oil.
==PAGE:34==
20
6 Materials and Methods
6.1.2.1
WPC solution
Solutions containing 0.5 wt% WPC, 0.5 wt% Citrem, 4 wt% Pullulan, 15 wt% Dry
glucose syrup and 20 wt% of fish oil with respect to total solid content, were pro-
duced in in two methods. Method 1 involved the use of a high pressure homogenizer,
microfluidizer, while method 2 uses a high speed disperser, ultraturrax.
For microfluidizer method 1:
The first stage involved the producing a 10 wt% fish oil in water emulsion. Emul-
sions were prepared by dissolving 1 wt% WPC in distilled water and left magnetic
stirring overnight at 5 °C. 1 wt% Citrem was stirred with 10 wt% fish oil for one
minute in closed conditions, to avoid oxidation of the oil. Thereafter, the citrem/-
fish oil mixture was added to the 1 wt% WPC aqueous solution mixing at 16,000
rpm. (Ystral mixex, Germany.) The citrem/fish oil mixture was added during the
first minute of mixing in a total mixing time of 3 minutes. The emulsion was then
homogenized through a microfluidizer (M110L Microfluidics, USA) at a pressure of
9,000 psi with a total of 3 passes.
The second stage involves the preparation of the biopolymeric solution and homog-
enization with the emulsion. An aqueous solution that would contain 4 wt% Pullulan
and 15 wt% dry glucose syrup in the final solution, was magnetically stirred for one
hour. The fish oil emulsion prepared in the first stage was then mixed under nitrogen
atmosphere with the biopolymeric solution with a magnetic stirrer for 30 mins at 5
°C in the dark. The solution was then homogenized through a microfluidizer at a
pressure of 9,000 psi with a total of 3 passes. The final solution is then 0.5 wt%
WPC, 0.5 wt% Citrem, 4 wt% Pullulan, 15 wt% Dry glucose syrup and 20 wt% of
fish oil with respect to total solid content.
For ultraturrax method 2:
The first stage, involves the preparation of the biopolymeric solution. An aqueous
solution that would contain 4 wt% Pullulan and 15 wt% in the final solution, was
magnetically stirred for one hour. The biopolymeric solution is then mixed with Ultra-
turrax (Ystral mixer, Germany) at 16,000 rpm. The solution is then passed throught
a microfluidizer at a pressure of 9,000 psi with a total of 3 pases.
For solutions
containing antioxidants, the addition is done during the mixing of the biopolymeric
solution with Ultraturrax.
The second stage involves homogenizing the fish oil in the solution. 20 wt% fish oil
is stirred with citrem and then mixed to the biopolymeric solution for five minutes at
17,500 rpm, with nitrogen flow and in an ice bath. The stirring continues for another
3 minutes. The final solution is then 0.5 wt% WPC, 0.5 wt% Citrem, 4 wt% Pullulan,
15 wt% Dry glucose syrup and 20 wt% of fish oil with respect to total solid content.
6.1.2.2
Zein solution - See Appendix A
Solutions containing 7.5 wt% Zein, 10 wt% sucrose and 20 wt% fish oil with respect
to total solid content in 75% ethanol were produced. 10 wt% of sucrose was stirred
with 75 % ethanol for 30 minutes or until dissolved. 7.5 wt% Zein was added to the
==PAGE:35==
6.2 Characterization of capsules
21
solution and let dissolved for another 30 minutes. 20 wt% was weighted and added
to the sucrose/zein solution and mixed with Ultraturrax at 16,000 rpm, one minute
while adding fish oil and 2 minutes after the addition of fish oil. Solution was kept in
an ice bath during Ultraturrax mixing and a nitrogen flow to avoid oxidation of the
fish oil.
6.1.3
Electrospraying setup
The solutions were processed in an electrospraying system. The system includes a
set-up of a DC power supply, infusion pump (NewEra Pump Systems, Inc, USA,)
grounded collector plate and stainless steel 16-gauge needles.
The solutions were
loaded in 5-ml disposable plastic syringes and pumped at different flow rates and
variable voltage. See Tablesx for the flow rate and voltage applied. The flow rate
and voltage applied were obtained from testing all solutions in order to maintain a
stable electrospraying process and avoid dripping. Figure 2 shows a stable formation
of Taylor cone. Maintaining a stable Taylor cone, helps avoid dripping and solution
lost. All solutions were electrosprayed at a distance of 15 cm from the tip of the
needle to the grounded collector plate. The collector plate was covered in aluminum
foil in order to gather samples for morphology studies. The experiments were carried
out at 23±2 °C and 26-35 % RH inside a ventilated hood.
6.2
Characterization of capsules
6.2.1
Droplet size distribution
Droplet size distribution of the emulsions were measured by a method reported by [52].
The droplet sizes were measured by laser diffraction in a Mastersizer 2000 (Malvern
Instruments, Ltd, UK.) Solution droplets were recirculated in water, or ethano for
zein capsules, at 3000 rpm until reaching an obscuration of 12%.
The refractive
indices for the oil particles was that of sunflower oil (1.469), water (1.330) and 75
% ethanol (1.365) for the dispersant. Measurements were made in duplicate after
production.
6.2.2
Morphology
The samples were transferred to specimen stubs and were sputter-coated (Quorum
Q150T ES, Quorum Technologies, UK) with gold. A scanning electron microscopy
(SEM) (Phenom Pro, Phenom-World, Eindhoven, Netherlands), was use to obtain
particles images thereafter, at an accelerating voltage of 10kV. ImageJ (National
Institutes of Health) was used for particle size distribution and mean diameter of
particles.
==PAGE:36==
22
6 Materials and Methods
6.3
Characterization of capsules
6.3.1
Encapsulation efficiency
Encapsulation efficiency was determined by modified method from [53]. Five milliliters
of heptane were added to a range 100 to 1000 mg of powder in a pyrex glass with cap.
The solution was place on a platform shaker for 2 minutes at x rpm. The solvent mix-
ture was then filtered into a graduate cylinder and rinsed with heptane three times
to reach a maximum volume of total heptane of 15 milliliters. The amount of hep-
tane collected on the graduated cylinder is recorded. The contents of the graduated
cylinder are then transferred to a previously weighted beaker. The solvent is let to
evaporate at room temperature and then continued to dry for one hour at a 100 °C.
The oil residue, or the surface oil, is determine by the mass difference of the beakers
before and after oil residue. The total oil is equal to the theoretical oil percentage
in the capsules. Taking into account solution volatility, the total oil content is multi-
plied by the fraction of the solvent recovered versus the total solvent used, therefore
EE is calculated in this study by eq. 6.1.
EE = mc × 20% −(mb2 −mb1)
mc × 20%
(6.1)
Where mc is the mass of the capsules, mb2 is the mass of the beaker after evapo-
ration and mb1 is the mass of the clean beaker.
6.3.2
Oil distribution
6.3.2.1
Capsule redistribution
The electrosprayed product was mixed with water to analyze oil droplet distribution.
100 mg of capsule product was mixed with 5mL of water on a magnetic stirrer for
5 minutes. For zein capsules, the same amount of product was mixed with 5 mL of
75 % aqueous ethanol. The solution was filtered and then the sizes were measured
by laser diffraction in a Mastersizer 2000 (Malvern Instruments, Ltd, UK.) Solution
droplets were recirculated in water at 3000 rpm until reaching an obscuration of 12%.
The refractive indices for the oil particles was that of sunflower oil (1.469) and water
(1.330) and 75 % ethanol (1.365) for the dispersant. Measurements were made in
duplicate.
6.3.2.2
Fluorescence microscopy
Nile red and fluorescein isothiocyanate were added to solutions prior to electrospray-
ing, in order to locate where the lipids and proteins are within the capsules. The
solution was electrosprayed into a coverslip and then covered with a glass slide. The
distribution of lipids and proteins was then analyzed with a fluorescence microscope,
Olympus BX53 fitted with a Retiga-6000 monochrome camera. (Olympus Danmark
==PAGE:37==
6.4 Oxidative Stability
23
A/S, Denmark.) Fluorescence was measured after irradiation at 580nm or 488 nm.
Images were captured using Olympus cellSens Dimension V1 software and processed
in Adobe Photoshop CS6.
6.3.3
Glass transition temperature
Glass transition temperature was determined through DSC measurements. 2 to 5
milligrams of capsules were weighted into an aluminum pan and analyzed in Discovery
DSC (TA Instruments, USA). The capsules were loaded and analyzed under nitrogen
flow of 50 mL/min at temperatures from -80 °C up to 200 °C at a heating rate of 10
°C per minute. The glass transition temperature was determined from the midpoint
of the heat flow derivative of the second scan. TRIOS software was used to analyze
the glass transition temperatures of samples.
6.4
Oxidative Stability
6.4.1
Attenuated total reflectence- Fourier transform IR
spectroscopy
ATR-FTIR spectra of samples was analyzed using Universal ATR Sampling Accessory
(PerkinElmer, USA) with Spectrum 100 FT-IR Spectrometer (PerkinElmer, USA.)
The spectra were measured from 4000 to 650 cm−1 with accumulations of 4 scans.
Capsule powder was placed on top of the ATR cystral and pressed with the integrated
tool at a level of 50 in the PerkinElmer Spectrum software. Electrosprayed product
was measured from storage product of 0, 4, 8, 14 and 21 days in a dark environment at
20 °C. The samples were measured at room temperature and were done in triplicates.
6.4.2
Oil Content
Determination of the oil content of capsules was done by modification the Bligh Dyer
method [54].
500 milligrams of electrosprayed product was dissolved in 10 mL of distilled water,
15 mL of chloroform and 30 mL of methanol. The solutions was mixed for 30 seconds
using a high performance disperching instrument(IKA T25 ULTRA-TURRAX, IKA®-
Werke GmbH Co. KG, Germany) at 15,000 rpm followed by the addition of 15mL
of chloroform and continued mixing for an additional 30 seconds. Next, 15 mL of
distilled water was added to the solution and centrifuge at 2800 rpm and 18 °C for
10 minutes. The methanol/water is removed by vacuum suction and the rest of the
solution is filtered. The extract is then weighted and left overnight in a beaker to
evaporate. The beaker is then dried for 2 hours at 105 °C and weighted when cooled.
The percentage of oil in the capsuled is calculated using equation ??
==PAGE:38==
24
6 Materials and Methods
% oil =
moil · mphase · 100
(mextract −moil) · mcapsules
× 100
(6.2)
where moil is the mass in grams of oil in the extract, mphase is the weight of the
chloroform phase, in this experiment the weight is 41 grams, as established by Trang
in [55], mextract is the mass of the extract weighted before evaporation and mcapsules is
the mass of capsule product used. The experiment was ran in duplicates. Remaining
extract can be used for peroxide value analysis.
6.4.3
Peroxide Value
Peroxide value was conducted based on a method by Shanta and Decker[56].
To
calculate the PV from the capsules, 7 to 8 grams of the extract from section 6.4.1,
was weighted in test tubes and left to evaporated in dark environment in a nitrogen
atmosphere for 4 hours or until dried. For the oil, approximately 100 mg of oil was
weighted in a test tube. 10 mL of 70/30 (v/v) chloroform/methanol solution was
added to the test tubes, then the test tubes was overlaid with nitrogen and mixed.
50 µL of thiocyanate-solution was added to the test tubes, then overlaid with N2 and
mix. Lastly, 50 µl Fe(II)chloride-solution was added to the test tubes and overlaid
with N2 and mixed. Reagent and blank test tubes were also prepared. The test tubes
were then incubated in a dark environment at room temperature for 5 minutes for
the irons to react and form a pigment or color change in the tubes. The absorbance
of the test tubes solutions were measured by UV spectrophotometer at a wavelenght
of 500 nm. PV is thereby calculted using equations 6.3
PV =
(As −Ab) · k
M(Fe) · moil · 2
(6.3)
Where As is the absorbance of the sample, Ab is the absorbance of the blank, k is
equal to 40.6, which the slope of the standard curve, M(Fe) is the molecular weight
of iron, moil is the weight of oil and 2 is the conversion factor from milliequivalent
of oxygen to milliequivalent of peroxide. The unit of PV is, milliequivalent of oxygen
divided by grams of oil. Samples were taken at day 0, 4, 8, 14 and 21 for analysis
and measured in duplicate.
6.4.4
Secondary oxidation products
Secondary oxidation products were measured by GC-MS. Samples containing 400
mg of capsule product were weighted in a 100 mL purge bottle, dissolved with 5
mL of distilled waer and 1 mL of antifoam (Synperonic 800 microL/L water.) The
bottles were heated at 45°C by submersion in water bath for 30 minutes while purging
nitrogen gas at 250 mL/min.
The volatiles were trapped using Tenax GR tubes.
The tubes were then dried by a nitrogen flow of 50 mL/min for 20 minutes. The
tubes were place in an Automated Thermal Desorber (ATD-400, Perkin Elmer, USA)
==PAGE:39==
6.5 Statistical Analysis
25
and the volatiles were desorbed at 200 °C, cryofocused on a cold trap at 30 °and
then released by heating to 220 °. The volatiles were transferred into the GC (HP
5890IIA, Hewlett Packard, USA; Column: DB1701, 30 m × 0.25 mm × 1.0 mm; JW
Scientific, USA.) The oven program in the GC had an initial temperature of 45 °C for
5 minutes, then increased with a step of 1.5 °C/min until 55 °C, then with a step of
2.5 °C until 90 °C and with 12 °C/min until 220 °C where the temperature was kept
constant for 4 minutes. The compounds were then analyzed by mass spectrometry
(HP 5972 mass-selective detector, Agilent TEchnologies, USA; electron ionization
mode, 70 eV; mass to charge ratio scan between 30 and 250.) The individual volatile
components were identified by both MSlibrary searches (Wiley 138 K, John Wiley and
Sons, Hewlett-Packard) and by external standards. The external standards used were
2-ethylfuran, 1-Penten-3-one, Pentanal, 1-Penten-3-ol, (E)-2-Pentenal, Hexanal, 2-
hexenal, heptanal, 2-pentylfuran, (E,E)-2,4-heptadienal and nonanal (Sigam-Aldrich,
Brøndby, Denmark.) These compounds were dissolved in 96 % ethanol and diluted
to approximately 1, 5, 10, 25 and 100 ￿g/g. Each diluted compunds were injected into
a Tenax tube and dried with nitrogen flow at 50 mL/min for 5 minutes. All samples
and standards were ran in triplicates.
6.5
Statistical Analysis
Data analysis was conducted using the software Statgraphics Centurion XV (Statis-
tical Graphics Corp., USA.) Data were expressed as mean and standard deviation
in triplicates. Multiple sample comparison analys was performed to identify signifi-
cant differences between samples. Next, Tukey’s test was used to identify significant
differences. The differences were considered significant when p < 0.05.
==PAGE:40==
26
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 7
Results and Discussion
This chapter presents and discusses the results obtained from the electrosprayed cap-
sules. In the first part, the two different oil incorporation methods, microfluidizer
and ultraturrax, will be compared. In the second part, the effects of the addition of
antioxidants will be presented.
7.1
Whey Protein Concentrate Emulsion: comparing oil
incorporations methods
This section will describe the approach of how the optimal WPC emulsion was selected.
Solution properties and particle properties will be discussed. Oxidative stability of
the capsules is also presented. All trial solutions had 20% (weight of oil/weight of
solids) of fish oil. Therefore, all the solution compositions listed in this section are
focused on the biopolymeric blend used and 20% (w/w) fish oil is assumed for all
solutions. Capsules were electrosprayed from two different homogenizing methods.
The first method involves homogenization of the solution by use of a microfluidizer.
This method was used to produce capsules in lab scale and pilot scale. The second
method uses only ultraturrax for homogenizing the solutions for pilot scale production.
A total of five solutions were produced and electrosprayed.
• Method 1: high speed disperser plus high pressure microfluidizer homogenizing.
– Compares lab and pilot scale production.
• Method 2: high speed disperser homogenizing.
– Compares the addition of antioxidants in pilot scale production.
7.1.1
Composition Selection
This study started by testing compositions of 1% WPC + 1% pullulan with amounts
of 10, 15 and 20% DGS in water. Although there are no established results of WPC as
an emulsifying agent with a ratio of 1:10 (protein:oil) in oil in water emulsions, whey
protein isolate has been proven to successfuly stabalized fish oil at that ratio [52].
Whey protein isolate contains higher amount of protein compared to WPC, but a
==PAGE:42==
28
7 Results and Discussion
study comparing the emulsifying properties of the proteins, demonstrates that WPC
had higher emulsifying properties that whey protein isolate[57]. Therefore, WPC at a
concentration of 1% was chosen for its emulsifying properties. DGS was chosen due to
previous studies with spray drying [38] and its uses as a bulking agent[40]. There are
no published records of DGS being used in electrospraying or electrospinning on its
own. The only study that includes DGS is one conducted by Luo, 2010 [58]; DGS is
presented in Luo’s study, but only because it is used as an ingredient of the pre-mixed
chocolate suspension. [58] Therefore, this study presents for the first time, the use of
DGS as a biopolymeric compound compatible with electrohydrodynamic processes.
The trial solutions presented contained 20 wt% fish oil and were all homogenized
by using an ultraturrax and a microfluidizer. No stable electrospraying was possible
at concentrations of 1%-1% or 1%-2% (WPC-pullulan) with 10, 15 and 20% glucose.
Dripping was observed from the needle point and collector and adjustments to flow
rate and voltage did not stabilize the Taylor cone. It must also be stated that at con-
centrations of 20% DGS, clogging would occur during microfluidizer homogenization.
In order to improve electro-sprayability, the amount of pullulan was raised. Con-
centrations of WPC remained the same, but concentrations of 20% of DGS were
discontinued due to clogging in the homogenizer.
Concentrations of 1% WPC and 15% DGS were fixed and then mixed with pullu-
lan ranging with concentrations of 3% to 6%. The electro-sprayability of the solution
improved with the addition of pullulan. Table 7.1 presents the results of different
pullulan concentrations on flowrate, voltage and morphology of solution. Table 7.2
presents the droplet size of the solution with varying pullulan concentration. Mor-
phology of selected capsules is presented in figure 7.1.
Table 7.1: Effect of pullulan concentration on biopolymeric blends of 1% WPC 15%
DGS with 20% fish oil with respect to solids.
Pullulan, %
Flowrate, mL/min
Voltage, kV
Morphology
3
0.003
14
capsules
4
0.006
16
capsules
5
0.012
18
capsule+fiber
6
0.014
18
fiber
Table 7.2: Droplet size of solution with varying pullulan concentration.
Pullulan, %
D 3,2
D 4,3
D 0.9
3
0.143 ±0.001
0.227 ±0.002
0.428 ±0.001
4
0.165 ±0.001
0.268 ±0.001
0.511 ±0.001
5
0.252 ±0.001
0.410 ±0.001
0.780 ±0.001
6
0.272 ±0.001
0.460 ±0.001
0.896 ±0.001
==PAGE:43==
7.1 Whey Protein Concentrate Emulsion: comparing oil incorporations methods
29
5 um 
5 um 
a) 1% WPC + 4% Pullulan + 15% DSG
b) 1% WPC + 5% Pullulan + 15% DSG
Figure 7.1: Morphology of a) 1% WPC + 4% Pullulan + 15% DSG and b) 1% WPC
+ 5% Pullulan + 15% DSG. Capsules are formed in concentrations of
4% Pullulan and fiber formation between capsules can be seen as the
concentration increases to 5% Pullulan.
It is seen that by increasing the amount of pullulan in the solution, the flowrate
increased. This is do to the flow properties of pullulan which help maintain a stable
jet formation [59]. Higher flowrates lead to higher production rates, meaning that the
solution will be processed faster and thus may help in the oxidative stability. Droplet
sizes also increase as pullulan concentration increases. The properties of the emulsions
are affected by droplet sizes, which can affect the electrosprayability of the solutions
[60]. When pullulan concentration was greater than 4%, fibers formed around the
capsules. Fibers are not desired in this study because particles, or powders, may
easily be added to food matrices.
Fibers form mats or layers, which is not ideal
to be dispersed in a food matrix [61].
Based on these results, the solution with
concentrations of 1% WPC + 4% pullulan + 15% DGS is selected to proceed.
7.1.1.1
Stability of WPC Solution
Small oil films began appearing on top of the solution after one day of storage. This
phenomena was visible by pointing a bright light to the surface of the solution. The
films developed to oil droplets over the days. In order to stabilize the solution, differ-
ent emulsification steps (see section 6.1.2.1, Microfluidizer method 1) were employed
to improve the emulsion. Addition of surfactants to the solution, 0.5 % and 1 % of
citrem, were studied to further stabilize the solutions.
The emulsions improved and no oil films were visible after homogenizing, there-
fore droplet size measurements and morphology were studied to further optimize the
solution composition. The results are presented in figure 7.2 and 7.3.
As seen in figure 7.2 and 7.4, 0.5 % WPC and 0.5 % citrem provided better results
in droplet size and morphology. The flowrates for the solutions were constant at 0.006
==PAGE:44==
30
7 Results and Discussion
8 u m
10  um
10  um
a) 1% WPC
b) 0.5% WPC + 0.5% Citrem
c) 1% WPC  + 0.5% Citrem
Figure 7.2: SEM images of whey protein concentrate and mixtures with citrem for
capsule characterization and solution selection.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
D3,2
D4,3
D0,9
Diameter, um
1% WPC
0.5% WPC + 0.5% Citrem 
1% WPC + 0.5% Citrem
Figure 7.3: Droplet sizes of whey protein concentrate and mixtures with citrem
emulsions.
mL/min and voltage decreased to 16kV with the addition of citrem. There were small
fibers in between capsules for 1% WPC solution and for 1% WPC + 0.5% Citrem.
0.5% WPC+ 0.5% Citrem shows improved morphology and spherical capsules with
no fibers in between.
Comparing the oil droplet sizes, emulsions containing citrem were lower for than
emulsions containing just WPC. Oil droplet sizes in emulsions have been researched
on their oxidative stability of oil in water emulsions, but there is no concrete evidence
stating that either smaller or larger droplet sizes enhance oxidative stability[62]. Fish
oil emulsions reports demonstrate that both smaller droplet sizes and larger droplet
sizes provide oxidative stability [63] [64]. In studies using proteins, low droplet sizes
ranging from 0.31 to 1.2 um provided better oxidative stability in oils [62]. Therefore,
it is hypothesized that a smaller droplet size will lead to better oxidative stability
when encapsulating fish oil with a protein.
However, it must be noted that the above is for oxidation in oil emulsions and not
==PAGE:45==
7.1 Whey Protein Concentrate Emulsion: comparing oil incorporations methods
31
0
2
4
6
8
10
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1000
Volume (%)
Particle Size (um)
Day 0
Day 4
Day 7
Figure 7.4: Droplet size of stable microfluidized solution.
in produced capsules. Having a stable homogenized solution with small oil droplet
sizes is believed to be encapsulated well in electrospraying, but it also means that the
capsules will have a larger specific surface area. In summary, the protective properties
of the wall material must be able to overcome the extra specific surface area acquired
with particles with small oil droplets.
Based on the above morphology and droplet sizes of the above, a solution contain-
ing a biopolymeric blend of 0.5 % WPC + 0.5 % citrem + 4 % pullulan + 15 % DGS
and 20 %(weight of oil/weight of oil) fish oil was selected.
7.1.1.2
Capsule Morphology
In this section the morphology of the capsules is discussed. Results for lab and pilot
scale production, using homogenizing method 1, and pilot scale using ultraturrax
method 2 are presented in figure 7.5, 7.6 and 7.7 respectively.
Mean: 0.925 ± 0.331
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Frequency (%)
Diameter (µm)
Figure 7.5: SEM images and particle histogram for capsules produced in lab scale
by microfluidizer homogenization.
==PAGE:46==
32
7 Results and Discussion
0
10
20
30
40
50
Frequency %
Diameter (µm)
Mean: 2.582 ± 1.519
Figure 7.6: SEM images and particle histogram for capsules produced in pilot scale
by microfluidizer homogenization.
0
10
20
30
40
50
Frequency
Diameter (µm)
 mean: 2.91 ± 1.62
Figure 7.7: SEM images and particle histogram for capsules produced in pilot scale
by ultraturrax homogenization.
Lab scale microfluidizer production led to smaller and more uniform capsules.
Moomand et al, has reported encapsulating 30 % fish oil (w/w) in solution containing
10% Zein (w/w). The particle sizes ranged from 400 to 500 nm in ethanol and 600 to
800 nm in isopropanol solutions [65]. In this study, the average particle size is 925 ±
331 nm, which does not fall in the range of the published zein capsules. This is due
to using different biopolymers for encapsulation and also different solvents.
In the case for pilot production, both microfluidizer and ultraturrax methods
displayed higher capsule diameters compared to lab scale. There is no significant
difference in particle sizes for the two different incorporation methods, but there is a
difference in particle sizes ranging from 0 to 2 µ m. 43% of particles are in this range
for the microfluidizer method, while only 32% of particles fall in the range (Tukey
p-value=0.90, insignificant differences). One difference between all three capsules is
that the pilot scale production shows different capsule surfaces, such as shrinking in
==PAGE:47==
7.1 Whey Protein Concentrate Emulsion: comparing oil incorporations methods
33
certain areas of the outer capsules in the capsule.
7.1.1.3
Encapsulation Efficiency
High encapsulation efficiency is desirable in order to prevent oxidation of fish oil. In
literature, high EE of 91.19 ± 2.3 % has been achieved by encapsulating 30 % fish oil
in zein fibers [65]. Figures 7.8, shows the encapsulation efficiency of capsules produced
in lab scale and in pilot scale.
75.40%
78.12%
85.66%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Encapsulation 
Efficiency
Lab - Microfluidizer
Pilot - Microfluidizer
Pilot - Ultraturrax
Figure 7.8: Lab and pilot scale encapsulation efficiency comparison.
0
2
4
6
8
10
0.0
1
0.1
1
10
100
Volume (%)
Particle Size (um)
Lab/Pilot
Microfluidizer Day 0
Lab/Pilot
Microfluidizer Day 2
Figure 7.9: Unexpected destabilization of solution used for lab and pilot studies due
to microfluidizer clogging.
There is a significant difference between the lab scale microfluidizer method and
the pilot scale ultraturrax method (p<0.01). The pilot scale ultraturrax is also sig-
==PAGE:48==
34
7 Results and Discussion
nificant different than the pilot scale microfluidizer (p<0.05). One reason for lower
encapsulation efficiency in the microfluidizer method 1 may be due to clogging of the
microfluidizer chamber. When the chamber is clogged the homogenization may be af-
fected resulting in a destabilized solution. This means larger droplets will be attained
and thus the encapsulation efficiency will be lower. Immediately after homogenizing,
10 mL of solution was stored in cold a environment to measure oil particle distribu-
tion. The analysis showed changes in droplet sizes from day 0 to day 2.(See figure
7.9.) This may be due to improper cleaning of the microfluidizer chamber. There-
fore, routine cleaning of the microfluidizer unit was established for before and after
emulsions. Future studies are to be performed to verify encapsulation efficiency.
7.1.1.4
Oil Distribution and Redispersion
Oil distribution in the capsules plays a role in the oxidative stability of the encapsu-
lated fish oil. If oil is not distributed evenly in the capsule, for example if oil is close to,
or in the shell of the capsule, the oil is unprotected and oxidation may occur. In order
to verify the the entrapment of oil, fluorescence microscopy images were produced.
Figure 7.10, shows the fluorescence microscopy images of the capsules produced in
lab scale.
In the fluorescence microscopy image, the green color represents the protein and
the red color represents lipids. The orange/yellow tone on the merged part of the
image represents the oil inside the capsule, red capsule inside the green capsule. It
can be seen that the capsules were able to encapsulate the fish oil. However, after
close inspection, it can be seen that some oil is near or in the wall of the capsules. See
figure 7.10 arrows pointing to possible oil near the wall material. This could affect
the oxidative stability, since the fish oil will have a less protective area.
The capsules were redispersed in distilled water and oil particle sizes were mea-
sured to compare the lipid distribution of the capsules to that of the solution. Figure
7.11 shows the oil particle distribution of the capsules and of the solution.
The
shifting to the right of both capsules indicates larger particle distribution from the
solution at Day 0. This is due to the changes in droplet sizes mention in the previous
section. Table 7.3 presents the oil droplet sizes for the capsules. The surface mean,
D(3,2), for lab scale microfluidizer and pilot scale ultraturrax are both smaller than
that off the pilot scale microfluidizer. (p<0.05) The effect of the destabilization of
the microfluidizer solutions is seen in the high D 0.9, 90% of particles measurement,
and is in agreement with figure 7.11.
==PAGE:49==
7.1 Whey Protein Concentrate Emulsion: comparing oil incorporations methods
35
Figure 7.10: Fluorescence microscopy scan of lab scale microfluidizer method.
Green color represents proteins. Red color represents lipids. Orange
represents the oil inside the protein. Arrows pointing to possible oil
near or on wall of capsule..
==PAGE:50==
36
7 Results and Discussion
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1000
Volume (%)
Particle Size (um)
Lab - Microfluidizer
Pilot - Microfluidizer
Pilot - Ultraturrax
Figure 7.11: Particle sizes of the redispersed capsules in water.
Table 7.3: Oil drop sizes for redispersed capsules from solutions with different oil
incorporation method.
Solution
D 3,2
D 4,3
D 0.9
Lab Microfluidizer
0.402 ±0.007
2.854 ±0.039
7.065 ±0.424
Pilot Microfluidizer
0.605 ±0.009
1.452 ±0.095
3.008 ±0.079
Pilot Ultraturrax
0.461 ±0.062
1.651 ±0.095
3.960±0.355
7.1.1.5
Glass Transition Temperature of Capsules
Glass transition temperature is the temperature where there is a change in the phys-
ical state from glassy to rubbery state without phase change[66].
A change from
glassy to rubbery may result in stability changes in low moisture foods [67]. There-
fore, increasing glass transition temperature of wall materials may aid in oxidative
stability of oils. DSC thermographs were analyzed for the materials (see figures B.1,
B.2, B.3 in Appendix B) and for the capsule produced by pilot scale microfluidizer.
DSC thermograph of the capsules is presented in figure 7.12. The DSC thermograph,
shows the heat flow of the capsule being heated to 200°C at a temperature step of 10
°C per minute. The derivative of the heat flow is presented in the graph in order to
locate the glass transition temperatures inside the capsule.
Analysis of the thermographs led to the following values of glass transition tem-
peratures: Tg of pullulan at 168.1°C , Tg of WPC at 32.2°C and Tg of DGS at 67°C.
Comparing to literature, reports show that WPC has a glass transition temperature
of around 60 °C [68]. Glucose syrups have reported having glass transition tempera-
tures between 31 up to 139 °C depending on the DE value [69]. Lastly, pullulan has
been was extrapolated from different mixtures to a reported glass transition temper-
ature of 180 °C. [70]. Storage moisture content affects glass transition temperatures
and this may explain the difference of values with literature.
==PAGE:51==
7.1 Whey Protein Concentrate Emulsion: comparing oil incorporations methods
37
Figure 7.12: DSC thermograph listing derivative peak height and midpoints per-
taining to glass transition temperatures.
7.1.2
Oxidative Stability
Oxidative studies of PV and volatiles were were performed on capsules produced from
pilot scale, due to large amounts of capsules needed for the studies. FTIR oxidative
stability was performed for both pilot and lab scale capsules.
7.1.2.1
FTIR
Oxidative studies were done using ATR-FTIR. Wavelenghts at around 3010 cm−1
have been shown to be associated with alkene C-H stretching of unsaturated fatty
acids [50]. A comparison study done on all materials used by FTIR scans demon-
strates that fish oil has a peak in the capsules at around 3012 cm−1. This wavelength
falls in the range presented by [50] Yoshida and Moomand [45]. Figure 7.13 presents
the difference in wavelengths for lab and pilot scale production.
A decrease in cis double bonds and decreased in band intensity are indicators of
lipid oxidation[9]. A decrease of cis double band intensity at wavelengths 3010 - 3015
cm−1 has been associated with hydroperoxides formation when using proteins as an
encapsulating material[46], [47]. It must be noted that the results from literature
use heating steps in order to induce oxidation. The oxidation measured in this study
==PAGE:52==
38
7 Results and Discussion
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
1.20
1.40
1.60
0
4
8
14
21
Normalized Absorbance
Day
Lab-Microfluidizer
Microfluidizer
Ultraturrax
Figure 7.13: FTIR: Normalized absorbance over time for capsules produces from
microfluidizer and ultraturrax methods.
was under the storage of 21 days in a dark environment at 20 °C. Capsules produced
from lab scale decreased in 3012 cm−1 wavelength intensity meaning oxidation is
occurring. In contrast, capsules produced in pilot scale provided higher oxidative
protection to the oil by measurements of FTIR. All measurements at day 21 were
significantly different (p<0.01.) The absorbance did not decrease for the pilot scale
capsules, meaning that the capsules provided better oxidative stability than the ones
produced in lab scale. The peroxide value of capsules is presented in the next section.
7.1.2.2
Peroxide Value
The oil content of the capsules is measured in order to further characterize the capsules
and to provide base measurements for the oxidative stability. The average oil content
of of the capsules produced from the different methods, microfluidizer and ultraturrax,
were determined to be 19.05 ± 0.72 % and 17.31 ± 0.68 % , respectively. Figure 7.14
compares the PV of the non-encapsulated fish oil and the encapsulated fish oil.
It is seen that the microfluidizer method starts at a PV of 10.32 ± 0.09 and ends at
27.28 ± 5.28meq O2/kg oil. The ultraturrax method starts at PV of 8.06 ± 3.25 and
ends at 19.74 ± 4.40 meq O2/kg oil. The differences in PV may be explained by the
surface mean area of the capsules. The surface mean area for the ultraturrax capsules
is significantly lower than the microfluidizer capsules(p<0.05). Smaller surface area
means lead to higher oxidative stability in spray dried capsules containing flax seed
oil[71].
Alternatively, in other studies, a protein combined with glucose syrup was spray
dried and able to remain below a PV of 10 for up to 21 days at 20 °C and 33% relative
==PAGE:53==
7.1 Whey Protein Concentrate Emulsion: comparing oil incorporations methods
39
0
10
20
30
40
0
4
8
14
21
PV (meq 02 / kg of oil)
Day
Oil
Microfluidizer
Ultraturrax
Figure 7.14: PV comparison of unprotected oil, encapsulated oil by microfluidizer
and encapsulated oil by ultraturrax.
humidity [72]. In another study, WPC/maltodextrin capsules containing flaxseed oil
produced by spray drying, reported PV ranges from 6.12 to 20 in two weeks, and up
to 100 by 4 weeks, stored at 45 °C for four weeks [29]. Thus, the results demonstrate
that electrospraying may aid in the oxidative stability of fish oil when compared to
other encapsulation methods. Secondary oxidation products, which are commonly
related to rancidity, off flavors and degration of fish oil, are presented in the next
section.
7.1.2.3
Secondary Oxidation Products, Volatiles
Capsules from pilot scale production were compared to unprotected fish oil to better
understand the effect of wall material and oxidative stability. In order to compare
the rate of oxidation, volatile concentrations from capsules and oil were calculated as
change in concetration between storage days. A change in concentration was calcu-
lated between the values of day 4 and day 0, day 8 and day 4, day 14 and day 8 and
day 21 and day 14. This was done in order to measure the change in concentration
regardless of added protection. Direct comparison of secondary oxidation products
in capsules is also presented in order to asses oxidative stability. The change in con-
centration between storage days of capsules and the unprotected fish oil is presented
in figure 7.15.
Unprotected fish oil showed a higher change in volatiles compared to the capsules.
The volatiles in the particles showed a steady increase in concentration day to day,
while the unprotected oil peaked at day 14 of storage.
It is also noted that the
particles were able to reduce the change in concentration compared to the uprotected
fish oil for 2-ethylfuran, 2-pentane-3-one and 2-penten-3-ol. In regards to the rancid
==PAGE:54==
40
7 Results and Discussion
0%
2000%
4000%
6000%
8000%
d0 - d4
d4 - d8
d8 - d14
d14 - d21
Volatiles, 
change in ng/g 
2-Ethylfuran
1-Penten-3-one
Pentanal
1-Penten-3-ol
(E)-2-Pentenal
Hexanal
0%
1000%
2000%
3000%
4000%
5000%
d0 - d4
d4 - d8
d8 - d14
d14 - d21
Volatiles, 
change in ng/g 
2-Ethylfuran
1-Penten-3-one
Pentanal
1-Penten-3-ol
(E)-2-Pentenal
Hexanal
0%
1000%
2000%
3000%
4000%
5000%
d0 - d4
d4 - d8
d8 - d14
d14 - d21
Volatiles, 
change in ng/g 
2-Ethylfuran
1-Penten-3-one
Pentanal
1-Penten-3-ol
(E)-2-Pentenal
Hexanal
a)
b)
c)
Figure 7.15: Change in volatile concentrations from day 0 to day 21 for a) un-
protected fish oil, b) encapsulated fish oil by microfluidizer and
c)encapsulated fish oil by ultraturrax.
==PAGE:55==
7.1 Whey Protein Concentrate Emulsion: comparing oil incorporations methods
41
taste of oxidzied fish oil, a higher increase was observed in the particles for (E,E)-2-
4-heptadienal compared to the unprotected oil [2]
The change in concentration gives an overall view of the formation of second
volatile products. In order to fully assess the oxidative stability of the capsules, a
direct comparison is needed between the capsules and the oil.
For this, the con-
centration present in the capsule is divided by the oil content in order to to have
units of nanograms/grams of oil. Figure 7.24 presents the comparison between oil
incorporation in the production of secondary products, for 1-penten-3-one, pentenal,
1-penten-3-ol and hexenal, which have all been reported to be secondary oxidation
products from fish oil. Although capsules had lower change in concentration during
storage, the capsules led to higher amounts secondary oxidation products than the
unprotected fish oil, when comparing gram to gram of oil.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0
4
8
14
21
1-penten-3-one,
ng/g oil
Days of storage
Ultraturrax
Microfluidizer
Oil
0
150
300
450
600
0
4
14
21
pentenal,
ng/g oil
Days of storage
Ultraturrax
Microfluidizer
Oil
0
400
800
1200
1600
0
4
8
14
21
1-penten-3-ol,
ng/g oil
Days of storage
Ultraturrax
Microfluidizer
Oil
0
150
300
450
600
0
4
8
14
21
hexenal,
ng/g oil
Days of storage
Ultraturrax
Microfluidizer
Oil
a)
b)
c)
d)
Figure 7.16: Secondary oxidation products from unprotected oil and from electro-
sprayed capsules. a) 1-penten-3-one b) pentenal, c) 1-pentene-3-ol and
d) hexenal.
It is seen that the incorporation of oil affects how different volatiles are formed,
but it does not enhance the oxidative stability of the oil.
Therefore, in order to
improve the oxidative stability of the encapsulated fish oil, addition of antioxidants
to the solutions using ultraturrax method 2 were studied. The results are presented
in the next section.
==PAGE:56==
42
7 Results and Discussion
7.2
Effect of antioxidants on oxidative stability of
capsules
Two new solutions were processed in order to compare the effects of commercial
antioxidants and seaweed extract antioxidant. The solutions are the following:
1. Control, ultraturrax solution presented in the previous section
2. 500 ppm δ-tocopherol + 500 ppm rosemary extract
3. Seaweed extract, F. vesiculosus, at ratio of 1:70, gram of extract:gram of oil
The solutions were homogenized by ultraturrax, a high speed disperser, Method
2, as mentioned in section 7.1.
7.2.1
Characterization of Capsules
Results for the morphology of the control and the solutions with added antioxidants
are presented in figures 7.19. Average particle diameters of the control, commercial an-
tioxidants and seaweeed extract were 2.906 ± 1.622 µm, 2.586 ± 2.037µm and 2.214 ±
1.59µm respectively. Comparison between the control ad the seaweed extract solution
shows a significant difference between the capsules diameters. (p<0.05) Compared
to literature, particle sizes for the seaweed extract were significant different (p<0.01)
than spray dried particles of chitosan, 3.1 ± 0.3 µm, containing 33 wt% fish oil [73].
0
10
20
30
40
50
Frequency
Diameter (µm)
avg: 2.906 ±  1.622
Figure 7.17: SEM image and particle histogram for capsules of the control solution.
==PAGE:57==
7.2 Effect of antioxidants on oxidative stability of capsules
43
0
10
20
30
40
50
Frequency
Diameter (µm)
avg: 2.586 ± 2.037
Figure 7.18: SEM images and particle histogram for capsules produced from solu-
tion containing commercial antioxidants.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Frequency
Diameter (µm)
avg: 2.214 ± 1.590
Figure 7.19: SEM images and particle histogram for capsules produced from solu-
tion containing seaweed extract.
High encapsulation efficiency has been recognized to positively affect oxidative
stability, therefore a high encapsulation efficiency is desired[74]. The encapsulation
efficiency of the particles was analyzed to determine if the addition of antioxidants
had an effect on EE, see figure 7.20. The encapsulation efficiency of the capsules were
higher that the previous results, section 7.1.1.4. EE from the control and the seaweed
solutions were significant different than from commercial solution (p<0.01). Similar
values in literature have been achieved for encapsulation efficiency at 85.9 % when
spray drying encapsulated tuna oil in a 4.5:1 oil to protein ratio [38]
The product was re-dispersed in water and the particle size distribution was mea-
sured, see figure 7.21.
The average droplet size for the redispersed solutions are
==PAGE:58==
44
7 Results and Discussion
85.66%
83.20%
85.71%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Encapsulation 
Efficiency
Control
Commercial
Seaweed
Figure 7.20: Encapsulation efficiency results for capsules electrosprayed from solu-
tions containing antioxidants.
presented in table 7.4.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1000
Volume, %
Particle Size, um
Control
Commercial AOX
Seaweed AOX
Figure 7.21: Redispersed particle size distribution of capsules electrosprayed from
solutions containing antioxidants.
7.2.2
FTIR
In order to improve the oxidative stability of the capsules, two types of antioxidants
were compared. The oxidative stability of the products were scan and analyzed by the
use of ATR-FTIR was used to detect changes in wavelength peaks. Wavelength 3012
==PAGE:59==
7.2 Effect of antioxidants on oxidative stability of capsules
45
Table 7.4: Oil droplet size of redispersed capsules and encapsulation efficiency.
Capsule Solution
Oil droplet size, µm
Encapsulation efficiency, %
D3,2
D0,9
Control
0.461 ±0.062
3.960 ±0.355
81.13 ±0.004
Commercial
0.632 ±0.100
4.592 ±0.826
78.88 ±0.008
Seaweed Extract
0.465 ±0.038
2.181 ±0.119
81.41 ±0.005
cm−1 was chosen as previously described in this chapter. The normalized absorbance
of the wavelength is presented in figure 7.22.
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
0
3
8
14
21
28
Normalized absorbance
Days of storage
Control
Commercial
Seaweed
Figure 7.22: Wavelenght 3012 of AOX.
The products from the control solution and the seaweed extract antioxidant so-
lution decreases from day 21 to day 28, while the products from the solution with
commercial antioxidant increases. The FTIR study did not provide enough data to
compare the lipid oxidation between the three different products since absorbance
reduction is not observed. This could also mean that the capsules were oxidative
stable, since there was no reduction of the wavelenght. At day 28, the control and
commercial antioxidant results were significant different than the seaweed extract
(p<0.05 and p<0.01, respectively.) It is seen that wavelength increase and decrease
over time and may therefore be necessary to scan wavelengths over a longer period
of time. Peroxide value is analyzed next in order to provide better oxidative stability
comparison.
==PAGE:60==
46
7 Results and Discussion
7.2.3
PV
Changes in PV of the capsules produced from the solutions containing antioxidants
are presented in figure 7.23. It is seen that the capsules started oxidizing at day
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
0
3
8
14
21
PV (meq 02 / kg of oil)
Day
Oil
Control
Commercial
Seaweed
Figure 7.23: PV of AOX.
0. A probable cause is that the fish oil began oxidizing while processing. Next, the
incorporation of seaweed extract lead to higher PV and it was significant different at
days 14 and 21 compared to the control solution (p<0.05). The PV of the capsules
produced with commercial antioxidants was also significant different than the seaweed
extract capsules (p<0.05). The reason for high PV in the seaweed extract capsules
may be contributed to its metal content[75]. Seaweed extracts contain trace metals,
although the antioxidants in them act as chelators, the trace amount of metals they
contain impede enhancing the oxidative stability of the capsules.
The results for
primary oxidation products in solutions containing antioxidants, demonstrate the the
encapsulated fish oil began oxidizing at day 0. The PVs measured were above the
permitted level for human consumption, PV of 5, therefore, antioxidants did not help
in the oxidative stability of primary oxidation products. Volatile studies are presented
next to further evaluate the oxidative stability of the capsules.
7.2.4
Secondary oxidation products, volatiles
Secondary oxidation products were analyzed for the control, commercial antioxidants
and seaweed extract capsules in order to evaluate the oxidative enhancement of the
addition of antioxidants. As mentioned before, there are three solutions, one control,
one with commercial antioxidants and one with seaweed extract.
For commercial
antioxidant, 500ppm δ-tocopherol + 500 ppm rosemary extract are used and for the
==PAGE:61==
7.2 Effect of antioxidants on oxidative stability of capsules
47
seaweed extract, F. vesiculosus extract is used. Results for volatiles between control
and antioxidants formulations are presented in figure 7.24.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0
4
8
14
21
1-penten-3-one,
ng/g oil
Days of storage
Control
Commercial
Seawed
0
200
400
600
800
0
4
8
14
21
pentenal,
ng/g oil
Days of storage
Control
Commercial
Seaweed
0
400
800
1200
1600
2000
0
4
8
14
21
1-penten-3-ol,
ng/g oil
Days of storage
Control
Commercial
Seaweed
a)
b)
c)
d)
0
200
400
600
800
0
4
8
14
21
(E)-2-pentenal,
ng/g oil
Days of storage
Control
Commercial
Seaweed
0
1500
3000
4500
6000
0
4
8
14
21
nonanal,
ng/g oil
Days of storage
Control
Commercial
Seaweed
f)
e)
0
200
400
600
800
0
4
8
14
21
hexenal,
ng/g oil
Days of storage
Control
Commercial
Seaweed
Figure 7.24: Secondary oxidation products from antioxidant capsules, a)1-penten-
3-one, b)pentenal c)1-penten-3-ol, d)hexanal, e) (E)-2-pentenal and f)
nonanal.
==PAGE:62==
48
7 Results and Discussion
As the fish oil continues to oxidize, the secondary oxidation products increase in
concentration. This can produce off flavors and smells. A pungent or rancid smell is
associated with 1-penten-3-one while a sweet smell is associated with 1-penten-3-ol
[47]. The formation of the volatiles presented can be compared to results obtained
from encapsulating fish oil in PVA nanofibers[52] 2016). Hexanal and nonanal are
presented in this study and they correspond to oxidation from omega-6 and omega-9
fatty acids, as described by Garcia-Moreno [47].
It can be seen that for the volatiles presented in figure 7.24, capsules produced
from seaweed extract solution presented higher concentration of volatiles (p<0.05).
There were also significant differences between concentrations of the control and the
commercial capsules for (E)-2-pentenal and nonanal (p<0.05). The seaweed extract
used in this study, F. vesiculosus, has been proven to show the ability to provide
oxidative stability to emulsified fish oil in low-moisture foods [75].
Volatiles are compared to literature of pullulan fibers from [52] after produc-
tion(day 0). For 1-penten-3-ol, the results from the capsules containing commercial
antioxidants and seaweed antioxidants were significantly lower (p<0.01) than litera-
ture values of 63 ± 2.3 ng/ng oil. There were no significant differences for hexanal,
158.1 ± 9.2 ng/ng oil. For nonanal, the control, commercial and seaweed antioxi-
dant capsules were significantly lower (p<0.01) than the concentration of 1944.4 ±
152.1 [52]. Meaning that the the capsules electrosprayed with different antioxidants
provided better oxidative stability than fibers produced by pullulan Garcia Moreno
2016.
Overall, the capsules produced from antioxidant solutions did not significantly
provide a better oxidative stability compared to the control solution. In the case
for the capsules containing seaweed antioxidant, oxidative protection varied, and this
might be due to the presence of metal traces in the extract [75]. Another reason for the
poor oxidative stability, might be to the fact that some polysaccharides may increase
lipid oxidation due to their levels of metal traces[76].
It has been demonstrated
that concentrations of metals such as iron at levels of 0.6 ppm and copper at 0.05
ppm, reduce the keeping time of lard [77].
Due to negative oxidative results, an
investigation was made and it was found that the pullulan of use in this study, had a
metal content of ppm less than 5 [78]. Therefore, future studies are to be done and
presence of metal ions must be minimized, either by material selection or chelating
antioxidants, in order to provide better oxidative stability of electrosprayed capsules
containing omeg-3 PUFAs.
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
A blend of 15 % dry glucose syrup, 4 % pullulan, 0.5 % whey protein concentrate and
0.5 % citrem, was able to to encapsulate 20 wt % fish oil in particles produced by
electrospraying. Two methods were used to incorporate fish oil into the biopolymeric
solution, one was using a microfluidizer, high pressure homogenizer, and another
was by ultraturrax, a high speed disperser. The ultraturrax method provided higher
encapsulation efficiency compared to the microfluidizer method. The encapsulation
efficiencies were above 80 % for the ultraturrax capsules and 78 % for the microflu-
idizer capsules.
FTIR results showed that both oil incorporation methods did not decrease in the
wavelenght associated with oxidation of fish oil during a storage experiment of 21
days in dark evironment at 20 °C, meaning that the capsules were oxidative stable.
When determining the PV content of the capsules, it was found that the capsules
produced at day 0 from the ultraturrax method had a PV of 8.06 ± 3.25, while the
microfluidizer had a PV of 10.32 ± 0.095. Both results were higher than the accepted
level of PV of 5, meaning the capsules were already oxidized at day 0. At the end
of the storage experiment, the PVs were 19.74 ± 4.40 for the ultraturrax capsules
and 27.28 ± 5.28 for the microfluidizer capsules. Secondary oxidation products were
also studied at a 21 day storage and the study showed higher amounts of volatiles in
both capsules compared to the unprotected fish oil. An explanation to these oxidative
results may be attributed to metal traces that are present in pullulan, as mentioned
in the previous chapter.
In order to improve the oxidative stability of the capsules, addition of antioxidants
in the solution was studied. Two different types of antioxidants were used, commer-
cially available antioxidants and seaweed antioxidants. The commercial antioxidants
were γ-tocopherol and rosemary extract at concentrations of 500 ppm for both. The
seaweed antioxidant was an ethanol extract from Fucus vesiculous and used in quanti-
ties of 1 g of extract to 70 grams of oil. These two groups of antioxidants were added
to the solutions before prior to electrospraying. The analysis of the FTIR showed
no decrease in the wavelenght associated with fish oil. However, PV results showed
that the capsules were already oxidized beginning at day 0. Moreover, at day 14, the
seaweed extract capsules were significantly more oxidized (p>0.05) than the control
and commercial capsules. The PVs at day 21 were as follows: 25.98 ± 1.83 for the
commercial antioxidant capsules and 34.63 ± 0.51 for the seaweed extract capsules.
Secondary oxidation products showed that the seaweed extract capsules resulted in
==PAGE:64==
50
8 Conclusion
higher concentration of volatiles when compared to the control and the commercial
antioxidants.
The use of antioxidants did not show an improvement in the oxidative stability of
the capsules. The seaweed extract provided the least protection and the reason may
be associated with the amount of trace metals typically found in seaweed extracts.
This may be the cause as to why higher PV and volatiles were noted in the capsules
containing the seaweed extract.
The capsules containing commercial antioxidants
provided better oxidative stability compared to the seaweed extract, but the results
were similar to that of the capsules produced from the control solution. Therefore,
the use of these two antioxidants did not provide positive results for the oxidative
protection of encapsulated fish oil from electrospraying.
All in all, capsules containing fish oil were obtained from electrospraying. This
study showed that a blend 0.5 % WPC and 0.5 % citrem acted as an emulsifier for
10 % fish oil in water. Combined with a biopolymeric blend of glucose and pullulan,
electrosprayed capsules were obtained. The addition of antioxidants did not improve
the oxidative stability of the capsules, therefore, future studies are to be done to study
the applications of the capsules in food products.
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 9
Future Perspectives
Capsules containing 20 wt % fish oil were successfully produced by electrospraying,
however their oxidative protection was not sufficient to protect the oil from oxidation.
The PV values at day 0 are 8.06 ± 3.25 at and at 19.74 ± 4.40 meq O2/kg oil at day 21.
In order to reduce the amount of hydroperoxides, different biopolymer combinations
or different antioxidants must be implemented.
Due to time constraints, the oxidative stability of each biopolymer was not studied.
Therefore, for future studies, PV of the emulsion of WPC and citrem must be studied
alone and compared to that of the addition of glucose and the addition of pullulan
separately. Previous studies have demonstrated PV of emulsions for WPC, pullulan
and different dextrans[37], however the oxidative stability of emulsions containing dry
glucose syrup have not been studied. When this is concluded, a better mixture of
biopolymers may be selected to improve the oxidative stability of electrosprayed fish
oil.
Finding another source of pullulan which contains less metal traces is encouraged
in order to improve the oxidative stability. One thing to add is that at the time of
this study, it was not known that pullulan contained trace metals. After research
of possible causes for the oil oxidizing, it was found that pullulan contained heavy
metals at concentration less than 5 ppm. Although a small amount, it might explain
the oxidation of the fish oil in this and previous studies.
Another approach, could be studying different mixtures of antioxidants, especially
metal chelating agents, such as ascorbic acid. This would help protect the biopoly-
meric solution and capsules from trace metals found in the materials used.
==PAGE:66==
52
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1]
C. Jacobsen, “Fish Oils: Composition and Health Effects,” in Encyclopedia of
Food and Health, Elsevier, 2016, pp. 686–692. doi: 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 12 -
384947-2.00295-6.
[2]
C. Jacobsen, N. S. Nielsen, A. F. Horn, and A.-D. M. Sørensen, Food enrichment
with omega-3 fatty acids, p. 426, isbn: 9780857094285.
[3]
E. N. Frankel, Lipid oxidation. Oily Press, 2005, p. 470, isbn: 9780953194988.
[4]
T. Wang and E. Hammond, “5 – Lipoxygenase and lipid oxidation in foods,” in
Oxidation in Foods and Beverages and Antioxidant Applications, 2010, pp. 105–
121, isbn: 9781845696481. doi: 10.1533/9780857090447.1.105.
[5]
S. Damodaran, K. L. ( L. Parkin, and O. R. Fennema, Fennema’s food chemistry.
CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2008, p. 1144, isbn: 9780849392726.
[6]
A. Ayala, M. F. Muñoz, and S. Argüelles, “Lipid Peroxidation: Production,
Metabolism, and Signaling Mechanisms of Malondialdehyde and 4-Hydroxy-2-
Nonenal,” Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity, vol. 2014, pp. 1–31, 2014,
issn: 1942-0900. doi: 10.1155/2014/360438.
[7]
H. Yin, J. D. Brooks, L. Gao, N. A. Porter, and J. D. Morrow, “Identification
of novel autoxidation products of the omega-3 fatty acid eicosapentaenoic acid
in vitro and in vivo.,” The Journal of biological chemistry, vol. 282, no. 41,
pp. 29 890–901, Oct. 2007, issn: 0021-9258. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M703108200.
[8]
X. Gu, W. Zhang, and R. G. Salomon, “Fragmentation of β-hydroxy hydroper-
oxides.,” The Journal of organic chemistry, vol. 77, no. 3, pp. 1554–9, Feb. 2012,
issn: 1520-6904. doi: 10.1021/jo201910g.
[9]
M. Hu and C. Jacobsen, Oxidative stability and shelf life of foods containing
oils and fats, isbn: 9781630670573.
[10]
A. ScienceDirect (Online service), S. Benjakul, W. Visessanguan, and E. Decker,
Food chemistry. Applied Science Publishers, 2006.
[11]
E. N. Frankel, S.-W. Huang, R. Aeschbach, and E. Prior, “Antioxidant Activity
of a Rosemary Extract and Its Constituents, Carnosic Acid, Carnosol, and Ros-
marinic Acid, in Bulk Oil and Oil-in-Water Emulsion,” Journal of Agricultural
and Food Chemistry, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 131–135, Jan. 1996, issn: 0021-8561.
doi: 10.1021/jf950374p.
==PAGE:68==
54
Bibliography
[12]
M. Tsimidou, E. Papavergou, and D. Boskou, “Evaluation of oregano antiox-
idant activity in mackerel oil,” Food Research International, vol. 28, no. 4,
pp. 431–433, Jan. 1995, issn: 09639969. doi: 10.1016/0963-9969(95)00031-G.
[13]
A. G. Bailey, “Electrostatic Spraying of Liquids,” Physics Bulletin, vol. 35, no. 4,
pp. 146–148, Apr. 1984, issn: 0031-9112. doi: 10.1088/0031-9112/35/4/018.
[14]
J. H. Yu, S. V. Fridrikh, and G. C. Rutledge, “The role of elasticity in the
formation of electrospun fibers,” Polymer, vol. 47, no. 13, pp. 4789–4797, Jun.
2006, issn: 00323861. doi: 10.1016/j.polymer.2006.04.050.
[15]
O. Regev, S. Vandebril, E. Zussman, and C. Clasen, “The role of interfacial
viscoelasticity in the stabilization of an electrospun jet,” Polymer, vol. 51, no.
12, pp. 2611–2620, May 2010, issn: 00323861. doi: 10.1016/j.polymer.2010.
03.061.
[16]
C. G. Drosou, M. K. Krokida, and C. G. Biliaderis, “Encapsulation of bioactive
compounds through electrospinning/electrospraying and spray drying: A com-
parative assessment of food-related applications,” Drying Technology, vol. 35,
no. 2, pp. 139–162, Jan. 2017. doi: 10.1080/07373937.2016.1162797.
[17]
J. Deitzel, J. Kleinmeyer, D. Harris, and N. Beck Tan, “The effect of processing
variables on the morphology of electrospun nanofibers and textiles,” Polymer,
vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 261–272, Jan. 2001, issn: 00323861. doi: 10.1016/S0032-
3861(00)00250-0.
[18]
A. Koski, K. Yim, and S. Shivkumar, “Effect of molecular weight on fibrous
PVA produced by electrospinning,” doi: 10.1016/S0167-577X(03)00532-9.
[19]
C. Sabliov, H. Chen, and R. Y. ( Y. Yada, Nanotechnology and functional foods
: effective delivery of bioactive ingredients, isbn: 1118462203.
[20]
C. Mit-uppatham, M. Nithitanakul, and P. Supaphol, “Ultrafine Electrospun
Polyamide-6 Fibers: Effect of Solution Conditions on Morphology and Aver-
age Fiber Diameter,” Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics, vol. 205, no. 17,
pp. 2327–2338, Nov. 2004, issn: 1022-1352. doi: 10.1002/macp.200400225.
[21]
Q. Yang, Z. Li, Y. Hong, Y. Zhao, S. Qiu, C. Wang, and Y. Wei, “Influence of sol-
vents on the formation of ultrathin uniform poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) nanofibers
with electrospinning,” Journal of Polymer Science Part B: Polymer Physics,
vol. 42, no. 20, pp. 3721–3726, Oct. 2004, issn: 0887-6266. doi: 10.1002/polb.
20222.
[22]
D. Brahatheeswaran, A. Mathew, R. G. Aswathy, Y. Nagaoka, K. Venugopal,
Y. Yoshida, T. Maekawa, and D. Sakthikumar, “Hybrid fluorescent curcumin
loaded zein electrospun nanofibrous scaffold for biomedical applications,” Biomed-
ical Materials, vol. 7, no. 4, p. 045 001, Aug. 2012, issn: 1748-6041. doi: 10.
1088/1748-6041/7/4/045001.
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
55
[23]
C. Huang, S. Chen, C. Lai, D. H. Reneker, H. Qiu, Y. Ye, and H. Hou, “Elec-
trospun polymer nanofibres with small diameters,” Nanotechnology, vol. 17, no.
6, pp. 1558–1563, Mar. 2006, issn: 0957-4484. doi: 10.1088/0957-4484/17/6/
004.
[24]
Electrospinning Mass Production Machine Providers. [Online]. Available: http:
//electrospintech.com/massproductionmachine.html#.WXR-64iGPDf.
[25]
J. J. Moreno, Innovative Processing Technologies for Foods with Bioactive Com-
pounds. Taylor and Francis, 2016, isbn: 9781498714846.
[26]
P. N. Sudha, Industrial applications of marine biopolymers, isbn: 9781498731485.
[27]
J.-Y. Hwang, H.-K. Ha, M.-R. Lee, J. W. Kim, H.-J. Kim, and W.-J. Lee,
“Physicochemical Property and Oxidative Stability of Whey Protein Concen-
trate Multiple Nanoemulsion Containing Fish Oil,” Journal of Food Science,
vol. 82, no. 2, pp. 437–444, Feb. 2017, issn: 00221147. doi: 10.1111/1750-
3841.13591.
[28]
S. M. Jafari, E. Assadpoor, Y. He, and B. Bhandari, “Encapsulation Efficiency
of Food Flavours and Oils during Spray Drying,” Drying Technology, vol. 26, no.
7, pp. 816–835, Jul. 2008, issn: 0737-3937. doi: 10.1080/07373930802135972.
[29]
H. C. Carneiro, R. V. Tonon, C. R. Grosso, and M. D. Hubinger, “Encapsula-
tion efficiency and oxidative stability of flaxseed oil microencapsulated by spray
drying using different combinations of wall materials,” Journal of Food Engi-
neering, vol. 115, no. 4, pp. 443–451, Apr. 2013, issn: 02608774. doi: 10.1016/
j.jfoodeng.2012.03.033.
[30]
S. S. Umesha, B. Monahar, and K. A. Naidu, “Microencapsulation of α-linolenic
acid-rich garden cress seed oil: Physical characteristics and oxidative stability,”
European Journal of Lipid Science and Technology, vol. 115, no. 12, pp. 1474–
1482, Dec. 2013, issn: 14387697. doi: 10.1002/ejlt.201300181.
[31]
A. López-Rubio and J. M. Lagaron, “Whey protein capsules obtained through
electrospraying for the encapsulation of bioactives,” Innovative Food Science &
Emerging Technologies, vol. 13, pp. 200–206, Jan. 2012, issn: 14668564. doi:
10.1016/j.ifset.2011.10.012.
[32]
V. Norn, Emulsifiers in food technology, p. 369, isbn: 0470670630.
[33]
A.-M. Haahr and C. Jacobsen, “Emulsifier type, metal chelation and pH affect
oxidative stability of n-3-enriched emulsions,” European Journal of Lipid Sci-
ence and Technology, vol. 110, no. 10, pp. 949–961, Oct. 2008, issn: 14387697.
doi: 10.1002/ejlt.200800035.
[34]
D. K. Kachhawa, P. Bhattacharjee, and R. S. Singhal, “Studies on downstream
processing of pullulan,” Carbohydrate Polymers, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 25–28, Apr.
2003, issn: 01448617. doi: 10.1016/S0144-8617(02)00261-8.
[35]
E. Kristo, C. G. Biliaderis, and A. Zampraka, “Water vapour barrier and tensile
properties of composite caseinate-pullulan films: Biopolymer composition effects
and impact of beeswax lamination,” doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2006.02.030.
==PAGE:70==
56
Bibliography
[36]
A. C. Kshirsagar, V. B. Yenge, A. Sarkar, and R. S. Singhal, “Efficacy of pul-
lulan in emulsification of turmeric oleoresin and its subsequent microencapsu-
lation,” Food Chemistry, vol. 113, pp. 1139–1145, doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.
2008.09.002.
[37]
P. J. García-Moreno, N. €. Ozdemir, K. Stephansen, R. V. Mateiu, Y. Echegoyen,
J. M. Lagaron, I. S. Chronakis, and C. Jacobsen, “Development of carbohydrate-
based nano-microstructures loaded with fish oil by using electrohydrodynamic
processing,” 2017. doi: 10.1016/j.foodhyd.2017.02.013.
[38]
J. K. Rusli, L. Sanguansri, and M. A. Augustin, “Stabilization of oils by mi-
croencapsulation with heated protein-glucose syrup mixtures,” Journal of the
American Oil Chemists’ Society, vol. 83, no. 11, pp. 965–972, Nov. 2006, issn:
0003-021X. doi: 10.1007/s11746-006-5054-6.
[39]
M. A. Augustin, L. Sanguansri, and O. Bode, “Maillard Reaction Products as
Encapsulants for Fish Oil Powders,” Journal of Food Science, vol. 71, no. 2, E25–
E32, May 2006, issn: 00221147. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2621.2006.tb08893.x.
[40]
S. Drusch, “Sugar beet pectin: A novel emulsifying wall component for microen-
capsulation of lipophilic food ingredients by spray-drying,” FOOD HYDRO-
COLLOIDS, vol. 21, pp. 1223–1228, 2007. doi: 10.1016/j.foodhyd.2006.08.
007.
[41]
S. Drusch, Y. Serfert, and K. Schwarz, “Microencapsulation of fish oil withn-
octenylsuccinate-derivatised starch: Flow properties and oxidative stability,”
European Journal of Lipid Science and Technology, vol. 108, no. 6, pp. 501–512,
Jun. 2006, issn: 1438-7697. doi: 10.1002/ejlt.200500312.
[42]
R. YAMAUCHI, Y. AOKI, T. SUGIURA, K. KATO, and Y. UENO, “Effect
of sugars and sugar analogs on autoxidation of methyl linoleate and safflower
oil.,” Agricultural and Biological Chemistry, vol. 46, no. 12, pp. 2997–3002, 1982,
issn: 0002-1369. doi: 10.1271/bbb1961.46.2997.
[43]
Q. Wang, L. Yin, and G. W. Padua, “Effect of Hydrophilic and Lipophilic
Compounds on Zein Microstructures,” doi: 10.1007/s11483-008-9080-9.
[44]
R. Shukla and M. Cheryan, “Zein: the industrial protein from corn,” Industrial
Crops and Products, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 171–192, May 2001, issn: 09266690. doi:
10.1016/S0926-6690(00)00064-9.
[45]
K. Moomand, K. M. Advisor, and L.-T. Lim, “Physicochemical Aspects of Ul-
trathin Electrospun Zein Fibres for Encapsulation of Fish Oil,” 2014.
[46]
A. Fernandez, S. Torres-Giner, and J. M. Lagaron, “Novel route to stabiliza-
tion of bioactive antioxidants by encapsulation in electrospun fibers of zein pro-
lamine,” Food hydrocolloids, vol. 23, pp. 1427–1432, doi: 10.1016/j.foodhyd.
2008.10.011.
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
57
[47]
L. G. Gómez-Mascaraque and A. López-Rubio, “Protein-based emulsion elec-
trosprayed micro- and submicroparticles for the encapsulation and stabilization
of thermosensitive hydrophobic bioactives,” Journal of Colloid and Interface
Science, 2016, issn: 10957103. doi: 10.1016/j.jcis.2015.11.061.
[48]
P. G. T. Lepe, N. Tucker, L. Simmons, A. J. A. Watson, A. J. Fairbanks,
and M. P. Staiger, “Sub-micron sized saccharide fibres via electrospinning,”
Electrospinning, vol. 1, pp. 1–9, 2016. doi: 10.1515/esp-2016-0001.
[49]
P. R. Griffiths and J. A. De Haseth, Fourier transform infrared spectrometry.
Wiley-Interscience, 2007, p. 529, isbn: 9780470106297.
[50]
S. Yoshida and H. Yoshida, “Nondestructive analyses of unsaturated fatty acid
species in dietary oils by attenuated total reflectance with Fourier transform
IR spectroscopy,” Biopolymers, vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 604–613, Dec. 2003, issn:
0006-3525. doi: 10.1002/bip.10505.
[51]
Verdonck, Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) Training Course, 2017.
[52]
P. J. García-Moreno, K. Stephansen, J. van der Kruijs, A. Guadix, E. M.
Guadix, I. S. Chronakis, and C. Jacobsen, “Encapsulation of fish oil in nanofibers
by emulsion electrospinning: Physical characterization and oxidative stability,”
Journal of Food Engineering, vol. 183, pp. 39–49, Aug. 2016, issn: 02608774.
doi: 10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2016.03.015.
[53]
E. K. Bae and S. J. Lee, “Microencapsulation of avocado oil by spray drying us-
ing whey protein and maltodextrin,” Journal of Microencapsulation, vol. 25, no.
8, pp. 549–560, Dec. 2008, issn: 0265-2048. doi: 10.1080/02652040802075682.
[54]
E. G. Bligh and W. J. Dyer, “A RAPID METHOD OF TOTAL LIPID EX-
TRACTION AND PURIFICATION,” Canadian Journal of Biochemistry and
Physiology, vol. 37, no. 8, pp. 911–917, Aug. 1959, issn: 0576-5544. doi: 10.
1139/o59-099.
[55]
D. F. Division of Industrial Food Research, Content of Oil, 2011.
[56]
N. C. Shantha and E. A. Decker, “Rapid, sensitive, iron-based spectrophoto-
metric methods for determination of peroxide values of food lipids.,” Journal
of AOAC International, vol. 77, no. 2, pp. 421–4, issn: 1060-3271.
[57]
R. JOST, R. BAECHLER, and G. MASSON, “Heat Gelation of Oil-in-Water
Emulsions Stabilized by Whey Protein,” Journal of Food Science, vol. 51, no.
2, pp. 440–444, Mar. 1986, issn: 0022-1147. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2621.1986.
tb11150.x.
[58]
C. J. Luo, S. Loh, E. Stride, and M. Edirisinghe, “Electrospraying and Electro-
spinning of Chocolate Suspensions,” doi: 10.1007/s11947-011-0534-6.
[59]
A. C. Stijnman, I. Bodnar, and R. Hans Tromp, “Electrospinning of food-grade
polysaccharides,” Food Hydrocolloids, vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 1393–1398, Jul. 2011,
issn: 0268005X. doi: 10.1016/j.foodhyd.2011.01.005.
==PAGE:72==
58
Bibliography
[60]
M. K. I. Khan, A. A. Maan, M. Schutyser, K. Schroën, and R. Boom, “Elec-
trospraying of water in oil emulsions for thin film coating,” Journal of Food
Engineering, vol. 119, no. 4, pp. 776–780, Dec. 2013, issn: 02608774. doi: 10.
1016/j.jfoodeng.2013.05.027.
[61]
J. Anu Bhushani and C. Anandharamakrishnan, “Electrospinning and electro-
spraying techniques: Potential food based applications,” Trends in Food Science
& Technology, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 21–33, Jul. 2014. doi: 10.1016/j.tifs.2014.
03.004.
[62]
C. C. Berton-Carabin, M.-H. Ropers, and C. Genot, “Lipid Oxidation in Oil-in-
Water Emulsions: Involvement of the Interfacial Layer,” Comprehensive Reviews
in Food Science and Food Safety, vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 945–977, Sep. 2014, issn:
15414337. doi: 10.1111/1541-4337.12097.
[63]
G. Azuma, N. Kimura, M. Hosokawa, and K. Miyashita, “Effect of droplet size
on the oxidative stability of soybean oil TAG and fish oil TAG in oil-in-water
emulsion.,” Journal of oleo science, vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 329–38, 2009, issn: 1347-
3352.
[64]
H.-S. Na, J.-N. Kim, J.-M. Kim, and K.-Y. Lee, “Encapsulation of fish oil
using cyclodextrin and whey protein concentrate,” Biotechnology and Bioprocess
Engineering, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 1077–1082, Dec. 2011, issn: 1226-8372. doi:
10.1007/s12257-011-0099-2.
[65]
K. Moomand and L.-T. Lim, “Oxidative stability of encapsulated fish oil in
electrospun zein fibres,” FRIN, vol. 62, pp. 523–532, 2014. doi: 10.1016/j.
foodres.2014.03.054.
[66]
C. Anandharamakrishnan and S. P. Ishwarya, Spray drying techniques for food
ingredient encapsulation, isbn: 1118864190.
[67]
B. P. Carter and S. J. Schmidt, “Developments in glass transition determination
in foods using moisture sorption isotherms,” Food Chemistry, vol. 132, no. 4,
pp. 1693–1698, Jun. 2012, issn: 03088146. doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2011.
06.022.
[68]
L. García, A. Cova, A. J. Sandoval, A. J. Müller, and L. M. Carrasquel, “Glass
transition temperatures of cassava starch–whey protein concentrate systems at
low and intermediate water content,” Carbohydrate Polymers, vol. 87, no. 2,
pp. 1375–1382, Jan. 2012, issn: 01448617. doi: 10.1016/j.carbpol.2011.09.
035.
[69]
R. W. Hartel, R. Ergun, and S. Vogel, “Phase/State Transitions of Confec-
tionery Sweeteners: Thermodynamic and Kinetic Aspects,” Comprehensive Re-
views in Food Science and Food Safety, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 17–32, Jan. 2011, issn:
15414337. doi: 10.1111/j.1541-4337.2010.00136.x.
[70]
T. Williamson, “Aqueous processing of biodegradable materials from renewable
resources by Stephen McCarthy,” Abstracts of Papers of the American Chemical
Society, vol. 217, 1999, issn: 00657727.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
59
[71]
A. Abd Ghani, S. Adachi, H. Shiga, T. L. Neoh, S. Adachi, and H. Yoshii,
“Effect of different dextrose equivalents of maltodextrin on oxidation stabil-
ity in encapsulated fish oil by spray drying,” Bioscience, Biotechnology, and
Biochemistry, vol. 81, no. 4, pp. 705–711, Apr. 2017, issn: 0916-8451. doi:
10.1080/09168451.2017.1281721.
[72]
S. Drusch, S. Berg, M. Scampicchio, Y. Serfert, V. Somoza, S. Mannino, and
K. Schwarz, “Role of glycated caseinate in stabilisation of microencapsulated
lipophilic functional ingredients,” Food Hydrocolloids, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 942–
948, May 2009, issn: 0268005X. doi: 10.1016/j.foodhyd.2008.07.004.
[73]
S. Hannah, S. E. Duncan, R. M. Davis, J. E. Marcy, S. F. O ’keefe, and
M. Roman, “MICROENCAPSULATION OF AN OMEGA-3 POLYUNSATU-
RATED FATTY ACID SOURCE WITH POLYSACCHARIDES FOR FOOD
APPLICATIONS MICROENCAPSULATION OF AN OMEGA-3 POLYUN-
SATURATED FATTY ACID SOURCE WITH POLYSACCHARIDES FOR
FOOD APPLICAITONS,” 2009.
[74]
S. Torres-Giner, A. Martinez-Abad, M. J. Ocio, and J. M. Lagaron, “Stabi-
lization of a Nutraceutical Omega-3 Fatty Acid by Encapsulation in Ultrathin
Electrosprayed Zein Prolamine,” Journal of Food Science, vol. 75, no. 6, N69–
N79, Aug. 2010, issn: 00221147. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3841.2010.01678.x.
[75]
D. B. Hermund, Extraction, characterization and application of antioxidants
from the Nordic brown alga Fucus vesiculosus, 2016.
[76]
D. J. McClements, E. Decker, and R. J. Elias, Oxidation in foods and beverages
and antioxidant applications. Volume 1, Understanding mechanisms of oxidation
and antioxidant activity. Woodhead Pub, 2010, p. 450, isbn: 9781845696481.
[77]
F. J. Flider and F. T. Orthoefer, “Metals in soybean oil,” Journal of the Amer-
ican Oil Chemists’ Society, vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 270–272, Mar. 1981, issn: 0003-
021X. doi: 10.1007/BF02582354.
[78]
H. International, “Pullulan GRAS Notification,” Tech. Rep., 2002. [Online].
Available: https://www.fda.gov/downloads/Food/IngredientsPackagingLabeling/
GRAS/NoticeInventory/ucm261324.pdf.
==PAGE:74==
60
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIX A
Zein Emulsions
In this appendix, results from zein emulsions are presented. Electrosprayed capsules
containing fish oil in a zein wall material were compared to capsules produced with a
zein-sucrose mixed. The solutions were prepared with 75 % ethanol as a solvent. Zein
solutions contained 20 wt % fish oil and 7.5 % of zein in 75% ethanol. Zein-sucrose
mixture contained 20 wt % fish oil, 10 % sucrose and 7.5 % zein in 75 % ethanol. The
flow rate of the process was 0.003 mL / min and the distance from the needle point
to the collector was 10 cm.
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
0
3
8
14
21
Noormalized Absorbane
Days of storage
Zein
Zein+Sucrose
Figure A.1: Wavelenght 3012 of Zein and Zein sucrose.
==PAGE:76==
62
A Zein Emulsions
0
10
20
30
40
50
Frequency
Diameter (um)
avg. 0.894 ± 0.27
Figure A.2: Histogram Zein Sucrose.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Frequency
Diameter (um)
avg. 0.638 ± 0.184
Figure A.3: Histogram Zein .
==PAGE:77==
A Zein Emulsions
63
86.97%
76.39%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Encapsulation 
Efficiency
Zein
Zein/Sucrose
Figure A.4: Encapsulation efficiency of Zein and ZeinSucrose capsules .
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1000
Volume (%)
Particle Size (um)
Zein/Sucrose
Redispersed
Figure A.5: Redispersed capsules of zein-sucrose in 75 % ethanol .
==PAGE:78==
64
A Zein Emulsions
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
Volume (%)
Particle Size (um)
Zein
Zein/Sucrose
Figure A.6: Encap Zein .
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX B
DSC Results
In this appendix, results from DSC of dry glucose syrup, whey protein concentrate
and pullulan are attached as thermographs.
180
-70
-20
30
80
130
Temperature
(°C)
-0.2400
-0.5500
-0.4725
-0.3950
-0.3175
Heat Flow (Normalized) (W/g) 
0.050
-0.125
-0.100
-0.075
-0.050
-0.025
0.000
0.025
derivative of heat flow over time
Dry Glucose Syrup
Exo Up
Peak height: -2.5e-3 (W/g)/(s)
Peak x: 70.023 °C
Midpoint type: Half height 
Midpoint: 67.801 °C
Figure B.1: DSC thermograph of DGS.
==PAGE:80==
66
B DSC Results
-50
0
50
100
150
200
Temperature
(°C)
-0.29
-0.41
-0.38
-0.35
-0.32
Heat Flow (Normalized) (W/g) 
0.050
-0.175
-0.150
-0.125
-0.100
-0.075
-0.050
-0.025
0.000
0.025
derivative of heat flow over time 
Whey protein concentrate
Exo Up
Peak height: 7.9e-4 (W/g) / (s)
Peak x: 30.630 °C
Midpoint type: Half height 
Midpoint: 32.239 °C
Peak height: 7.1e-4 (W/g) / (s)
Peak x: 53.263 °C
Midpoint type: Half height 
Midpoint: 55.522 °C
Figure B.2: DSC thermograph of WPC .
200
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
Temperature
(°C)
-0.20
-0.80
-0.74
-0.68
-0.62
-0.56
-0.50
-0.44
-0.38
-0.32
-0.26
Heat Flow (Normalized) (W/g) 
0.025
-0.175
-0.150
-0.125
-0.100
-0.075
-0.050
-0.025
0.000
derivative of heat flow over time
Pullulan
Exo Up
Peak height: -7.9e-4 (W/g) / (s) 
Peak x: 169.121 °C
Midpoint type: Half height 
Midpoint: 168.108 °C
Figure B.3: DSC thermograph of pullulan.
==PAGE:81==
==PAGE:82==
