==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
A renovation challenge in Nordic climates: simulation-based daylighting 
assessment in multistory residential buildings with heritage value 
 
 
MSc | Master Thesis  
A u t h o r : Milena Ślipek | MSc Student in Architectural Engineering 
 
S u p e r v i s o r s : 
Mandana Sarey Khanie | Postdoctoral Researcher  
Daria Żukowska-Tejsen | Assistant Professor 
Jakub Kolarik | Associated Professor  
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
2 
 
Foreword 
 
This report is a results of a Master Thesis project completed during the last semester of 
Master’s Degree in Architectural Engineering program at DTU Civil Engineering Department, 
Section for Building Energy. The project was carried out in the period form 23rd of January to 
27th of July 2017. It covers 35 ECTS points.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Author of the report: Milena Ślipek, s151240 
Delivery date: July 27th, 2017 
 
Supervisor: Daria Żukowska-Tejsen, Assistant Professor, DTU Civil Engineering 
Department  
Co-supervisors: 
Mandana Sarey Khanie, Postdoctoral Researcher, DTU Civil Engineering Department 
Jakub Kolarik, Associated Professor, DTU Civil Engineering Department 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
3 
 
Acknowledgements 
First of all I would like to thank Mandana Sarey Khanie, who was the co-supervisor of my 
Master Thesis, for being an admirable source of knowledge and inspiration in the field of my 
interests that I have chosen to explore within Master project – daylight and its relation to visual 
comfort. All the conversations that we had and over 300 exchanged emails made it possible 
to for me to develop and complete this study.  
I am also very grateful to the supervisor of my thesis – Daria Żukowska-Tejsen and co-
supervisor Jakub Kolarik for giving the direction of the study and coordinating its progress. I 
also appreciate their input in terms of holistic approach to the issue of buildings renovation, 
including the aspects of energy consumption and indoor environment.   
I would like to thank Toke Rammer Nielsen for his constructive feedback in terms of integrate 
design approach. 
I would also like to thank my boyfriend Marek Dejak, who as a DTU MSc in Digital Media 
Engineering provided me with professional guidance during the development of Matlab script 
to implement the novel visual assessment method that I have introduced as a part of my Master 
Thesis.  
I am grateful to Helle Foldbjerg Rasmussen for introducing the MicroShade concept, 
presenting the examples of its application and for her guidance in optimization of MicroShade 
application in the case study building model for simulation. 
I would like to thank John Alstan Jakubiec and Priji Balakrishnan for sharing the application 
that allows modeling of trees for simulation purposes developed by them. I am also grateful for 
their guidance to the tool usage.  
I am grateful to Henrik Norlander Smith, head of VELUX Building Industry Department, where 
I am employed as a Student Assistant, for supporting me with my career and interest in 
daylighting by enabling me to participate in Daylight Symposium 2017, which was a great 
academic experience and source of inspirations.  
Finally yet importantly I would like to thank Peter Foldbjerg, head of VELUX Knowledge Center 
for Daylight, Energy and Indoor Climate, where I have been working as a Student Intern, for 
providing the opportunity for me to participate and present a joint paper at the Healthy Buildings 
Europe 2017 Conference, which broadened my horizons in the area of indoor climate in 
buildings. 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
Abstract 
Larger Danish cites are characterized by architecture of multistory residential buildings built in 
the period 1850-1930. These buildings are in most cases arranged around a central courtyard, 
forming attractive settlements, favorable to inhabitants’ sense of community and security. They 
are meaningful part of city’s identity and therefore adequate measures should be provided to 
protect their unique architectural quality, but at the same time  keep them inhabitable. 
Numerous buildings constructed in the beginning of last century require renovation. Besides 
improving their general technical conditions and preventing from progressing damage resulting 
from building ageing, renovation brings potential for reduction of building’s energy 
consumption. One of the common practices to explore this potential is application of solar 
shading systems aiming at reduction of solar heat gain in the summer. The desired effect is 
reduction of energy demand for cooling in the summer season. Besides solar heat gain 
reduction there are also other purposes for solar shading devices implementation in buildings. 
Another important objective of their implementation is protection from visual discomfort related 
to daylight, namely glare. Solar shading devices are also used for privacy reasons.  
Notwithstanding the exact objectives for solar shading systems employment, their 
unquestionable effect will always be reduction of daylight levels in the building. This is a 
challenging issue in old multi-storey residential building, where as a consequence of wall 
thickness and relatively small window sizes, the daylight conditions are generally poor. Multiple 
additional factors are affecting the daylight conditions in the building. Most important to be 
included in case of building located in the dense urban tissue of the city is building’s 
“surrounding density”. Another, less influential in case of location in the city, yet important to 
be included is “greenery presence”. Finally, the properties of internal opaque materials should 
be considered when assessing the daylight conditions in the building. 
The aim of present simulation-based study was to examine the performance of multiple solar 
shading scenarios in a selected case study building located in the central area of Copenhagen. 
The performance of selected devices were tested for different orientations, surrounding density 
and greenery presence variants in order to assess which of those environmental factors have 
a major effect.  
The performance of the shading devices was also evaluated by their visual comfort 
enhancement potentials. The initial step was to determine the glare occurrence probability in 
the case study building employing a commonly used metric, Daylight Glare Probability (DGP). 
Using this model, glare was not detected in majority of cases. However, large illuminance 
contrast was observed between the bright area of window and the surrounding dark areas of 
the room on different view direction trajectories. Knowing that contrast variations can cause 
discomfort even in rooms of buildings, where daylight levels are relatively low, in order to detect 
these conditions in these buildings, we have developed a new method based on relative 
illuminance contrast. The newly developed Relative Contrast method (RC) was used in two 
different formulations on case study buildings’ rooms and compared to DGP and illuminance 
at the eye level (Ev) for an immersive 360-degree visual field. The immersive approach allows 
for evaluation of view direction dependencies of the three models. The RC method allows 
detecting the contrast variations in the room regardless of presence of direct sunlight with a 
large  view-direction dependency.  
In this thesis, we describe in depth the renovation challenges in the residential buildings such 
as the selected case study. With focus on daylighting aspects of renovation, we asses and 
compare shading devices for their daylight performance and visual comfort potentials. Finally 
the result of these assessments and a newly developed method for contrast variation detection 
RC is presented. This work has resulted in two conference papers that will be presented at 
LUX Europa international conference 2017 and can be found thereafter in the proceeding.
==PAGE:5==
 
 
Table of Contents 
 INTRODUCTION 
8 
 ARCHITECTURAL ASPECT OF RENOVATION 
8 
 ENERGY PERFORMANCE OF BUILDING AFTER RENOVATION 
8 
 INDOOR CLIMATE IN RENOVATED BUILDINGS 
9 
I.3.1 INDOOR AIR QUALITY 
10 
I.3.2 THERMAL COMFORT 
10 
 DAYLIGHTING AND RENOVATION POTENTIALS 
11 
 BACKGROUND 
12 
 IMPACTING FACTORS ON DAYLIGHT CONDITIONS IN BUILDINGS 
12 
II.1.1 INTERIOR FACTORS 
12 
II.1.2 EXTERIOR FACTORS 
13 
 DAYLIGHT STRATEGIES FOR IMPROVED CONDITIONS IN RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS 
15 
II.2.1 INTRODUCTION TO SOLAR SHADING SYSTEMS 
15 
II.2.2 CLASSIFICATION OF SOLAR SHADING DEVICES 
16 
II.2.3 CHARACTERISTICS OF MOVABLE SOLAR SHADING DEVICES 
18 
II.2.4 CHARACTERISTICS OF FIXED SOLAR SHADING DEVICES 
22 
 OBJECTIVES 
24 
 METHODOLOGY 
25 
 METRICS FOR DAYLIGHT CONDITION ASSESSMENT 
25 
IV.1.1 DAYLIGHT FACTOR (DF) 
25 
IV.1.2 USEFUL DAYLIGHT ILLUMINANCES (UDI) 
25 
IV.1.3 DAYLIGHT AUTONOMY (DA) 
25 
 DAYLIGHT-INDUCED VISUAL COMFORT ASSESSMENT 
26 
IV.2.1 DAYLIGHT GLARE INDEX (DGI) 
26 
IV.2.2 DAYLIGHT GLARE PROBABILITY (DGP) 
27 
 METRICS FOR THE ASSESSMENT OF DAYLIGHTING IN CASE STUDY BUILDING 
27 
 DAYLIGHT SIMULATION 
27 
 DAYLIGHT IN THE DANISH LEGISLATION 
28 
 CASE STUDY BUILDING DESCRIPTION 
29 
 CASE STUDY BUILDING MODELING 
31 
IV.7.1 3D MODELING OF BUILDING’S GEOMETRY 
31 
IV.7.2 MATERIALS PROPERTIES 
32 
IV.7.3 SENSOR POINTS MESH 
33 
 ORIENTATION OF THE CASE STUDY BUILDING 
35 
 MODELING OF CASE STUDY BUILDING’S SURROUNDING 
35 
IV.9.1 SURROUNDING DENSITY SCENARIO 1 – ORIGINAL SURROUNDING 
37 
IV.9.2 SURROUNDING DENSITY SCENARIO 2 
38 
==PAGE:6==
 
 
6 
 
IV.9.3 SURROUNDING DENSITY SCENARIO 3 
38 
IV.9.4 SURROUNDING DENSITY SCENARIO 4 
39 
 MODELING THE GREENERY 
39 
 CASE STUDY BUILDING OCCUPANCY PATTERNS 
41 
 SELECTION OF SHADING SYSTEMS FOR CASE STUDY BUILDING 
42 
 SOLAR SHADING DEVICES MODELING AND SETUP FOR SIMULATION PURPOSES 
44 
IV.13.1 MICROSHADE 
44 
IV.13.2 ROLLER BLINDS 
47 
IV.13.3 VENETIAN BLINDS 
52 
IV.13.4 AWNING BLIND MODELING AND SIMULATION 
60 
IV.13.5 MARKISOLETTE 
65 
 RESULTS 
69 
 THE STRUCTURE OF GRAPHS PRESENTING THE RESULT 
70 
 INTERIOR SURFACE MATERIAL AND DAYLIGHT PERFORMANCE 
70 
V.2.2 SUMMARY OF RESULTS 
71 
 DAYLIGHT PERFORMANCE ON DIFFERENT BUILDING FLOORS 
72 
V.3.2 SUMMARY OF RESULTS 
74 
 SURROUNDING DENSITY VARIATIONS AND DAYLIGHT PERFORMANCE 
74 
V.4.1 SURROUNDING DENSITY IMPACT ON DAYLIGHT LEVELS IN ROOMS FACING EAST 
75 
V.4.2 SURROUNDING DENSITY IMPACT ON DAYLIGHT LEVELS IN ROOMS FACING NORTH 
77 
V.4.3 SURROUNDING DENSITY IMPACT ON DAYLIGHT LEVELS IN ROOMS FACING SOUTH 
78 
V.4.4 SURROUNDING DENSITY IMPACT ON DAYLIGHT LEVELS IN ROOMS FACING WEST 
80 
V.4.5 SUMMARY OF RESULTS 
81 
 PRESENCE OF GREENERY AND DAYLIGHT PERFORMANCE 
81 
V.5.2 SUMMARY OF RESULTS 
83 
 DEVELOPMENT OF NOVEL METHOD FOR VISUAL COMFORT ASSESSMENT BASED ON 
ILLUMINANCE CONTRAST 
84 
 ABSTRACT 
84 
 INTRODUCTION 
85 
VI.2.1 VISUAL COMFORT ASSESSMENTS IN THE CASE STUDY BUILDING 
85 
VI.2.2 THE DEPENDENCY OF DGP INDEX RESULT ON CAMERA VIEW POINT AND VIEW DIRECTION 
88 
 METHODOLOGY 
90 
VI.3.1 IMMERSIVE SPATIAL APPROACH 
90 
VI.3.2 SOLID ANGLE AND POSITION INDEX DETERMINATION USING EVALGLARE 
91 
VI.3.3 IMAGE CONTRAST CALCULATION IN MATLAB 
92 
VI.3.4 DGPC: THE PHOTOMETRIC RELATION OF DGP 
93 
 RESULTS 
94 
VI.4.1 LIVING ROOM OF APARTMENT 2 (LR2); WEST-FACING WINDOWS 
94 
VI.4.2 KITCHEN OF APARTMENT 2 (K2); EAST-FACING WINDOWS 
95 
VI.4.3 LIVING ROOM OF APARTMENT 8 (LR 8); SOUTH-FACING WINDOWS 
96 
VI.4.4 KITCHEN OF APARTMENT 8 (K8,); NORTH-FACING WINDOWS 
97 
 SUMMARY OF RESULTS 
98 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
7 
 
 CONCLUSIONS 
99 
 CONCLUSIONS: INTERIOR SURFACE MATERIALS AND DAYLIGHT PERFORMANCE 
99 
 CONCLUSIONS: DAYLIGHT PERFORMANCE ON DIFFERENT BUILDING FLOORS 
99 
 CONCLUSIONS: DAYLIGHT PERFORMANCE FOR SURROUNDING DENSITY AND GREENERY SCENARIOS 
100 
 CONCLUSIONS: VISUAL COMFORT ASSESSMENT BASED ON CONTRAST 
100 
 FUTURE WORK 
101 
 APPENDICES 
102 
 APPENDIX A DF RESULTS FOR TWO SCENARIOS OF INTERIOR OPAQUE MATERIALS REFLECTANCE 
103 
 APPENDIX B DA RESULTS FOR DIFFERENT FLOORS OF CASE STUDY BUILDING 
105 
 APPENDIX C DA(150 LUX) RESULTS FOR DIFFERENT SURROUNDING DENSITY OPTIONS 
109 
 APPENDIX D DA(150 LUX) RESULTS ON THE GROUND FLOOR WITH AND WITHOUT COURTYARD GREENERY 113 
 APPENDIX E ANNUAL GLARE BASED ON DGP INDEX FOR SELECTED ROOMS OF CASES STUDY BUILDING 
117 
 CONFERENCE PAPERS 
118 
 LUX EUROPA 2017 CONFERENCE PAPER NO. 1 
118 
 LUX EUROPA 2017 CONFERENCE PAPER NO. 2 
123 
 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
128 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
 
 
8 
 
 
Introduction  
 
Renovation of residential multifamily buildings is a big potential for the improvement of living 
conditions in the centers of big cities. Increased standard of residential buildings, especially 
those with heritage value, positively influences the overall image of the city, by making it more 
livable. Another important potential of old, multifamily buildings renovation is improvement of 
their energy performance that applied on a big scale can contribute to energy savings of global 
significance. 
Despite the benefits that the residential building stock renovation can bring, the refurbishment 
rate of a housing stock during the past two years has been only 2% in the European countries 
(European Commission, 2010). Renovation of residential buildings is particularly challenging 
in terms of strategy selection and planning process. There are many aspects to be considered 
on the initial stages of the enterprise. In order for the renovation to be sustainable and 
successful, its economic, environmental and social aspects have to be considered in an 
integrated approach from the early planning stage. The study (Malmgren, Elfborg, & Mjörnell, 
2016) indicates that in order to account for those aspects, such methods like Life Cycle Cost 
(LCC), Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) and Social evaluation S2020 can be employed. 
From the building performance point of view, successful renovation results in increased energy 
efficiency of the building without its indoor environment being compromised. The recent 
researches show however that, because energy consumption reduction is very often a primary 
objective of renovation, the indoor environment in terms of indoor air quality is neglected, 
leading to insufficient ventilation rates that can negatively impact the occupants (Bekö, 
Földváry, Langer, & Arrhenius, 2016). To avoid such issues, a holistic approach should be 
applied to residential buildings renovation. 
One of the important indoor environment components that should be considered when 
planning residential buildings refurbishment is daylight. Exposure to daylight is important 
comfort factor, substantially contributing to occupants’ health and wellbeing (Veitch, 
Christoffersen, & Galasiu). Therefore, the access to daylight and use of its potentials should 
be considered as one of the factors constituting the overall indoor environment of renovated 
buildings.  
 
Architectural aspect of renovation  
First benefit that can be obtained from the renovation of residential buildings is increased 
aesthetical appearance of the building. This is achieved by renovation or replacement of the 
building’s elements that are damaged, and covered in dirt. Those are most often windows, or 
window panes, façade material, roofing and roof flashing. The impact of those elements on the 
general appearance of the building is substantial, thus their maintenance is important for the 
preservation of aesthetical value of the building. 
 
Energy performance of building after renovation  
One of the biggest challenges of nowadays world and therefore one of the biggest objective of 
European Union directives is to decrease the energy consumption and greenhouse gas 
emissions in the member countries (BPIE, 2011 ). Building sector is a responsible for 
approximately one third of the global energy consumption. Multifamily residential buildings, 
which are substantial portion of a building sector in European countries, are therefore important 
targets of energy-renovation (Bekö, Földváry, Langer, & Arrhenius, 2016).  
==PAGE:9==
 
 
9 
 
Renovation of multifamily residential buildings brings numerous potentials for an upgrade of 
energy performance of the building. The commonly applied approach in order to achieve this 
goal is to increase insulation level of building envelope. One of the solutions serving for this 
purpose is to apply additional insulation layer to the external walls of the building (Bekö, 
Földváry, Langer, & Arrhenius, 2016). Another way is also to replace the single-glazed 
windows for double- or triple-glazed ones, with higher level of air tightness and higher U-value 
(Dalenbäck, 1996). Those solutions, leading to the limitation of heat transfer between the 
building interior and exterior can contribute to energy savings during the heating season. 
Another way of reducing the energy consumption for heating in the Winter period is to allow 
the possession of solar heat gains. For this purpose, the windows with high g-value 
(transmission coefficient) can be applied, especially on the south façade of the building.  
There is also potential for energy consumption reduction in the summer season. The objective 
in the summer months, when the outdoor temperatures is high during the daytime is to prevent 
building’s rooms from overheating. In this way comfortable thermal conditions indoors can be 
assured without need for cooling that would contribute to raised energy consumption. The risk 
of excessive indoor temperatures during summer period is mainly caused by the solar radiation 
that enters building’s rooms through the windows. There are many solutions that can be 
applied to building’s fenestration system during the renovation process to limit the heat load 
from solar radiation. One of them is to replace the single-glazed windows with double-glazed 
ones. There can also be a windows with low-e or photo chromatic glazing applied, that have 
lower U-value and are therefore more efficient in blocking the solar radiation (Stack, Goulding, 
& Owen Lewis). Another solution for overheating that can be employed during the renovation 
process is the implementation of solar shading systems. Numerous solar shading solutions 
and their applications will be described in details in Section II.2. 
Reduction of electric lighting use is another potential for energy savings that should be 
considered as a part energy renovation of residential buildings. The approach to limit the 
energy consumption for artificial light is not only to implement energy-efficient lighting system, 
but also to assure that the potential of daylighting is used to a maximum extent. Therefore as 
a part of energy renovation strategy, the fenestration system of the building should be designed 
very carefully. It needs to be considered that implementation of window panes with low solar 
transmission coefficient will not only lead to heat load reduction during the summer but also 
daylight levels limitation through the whole year, which might lead to increased energy 
consumption for lighting. Another potential cause of excessive artificial lighting use is lack of 
solutions or inadequate solutions against visual discomfort caused by daylight. If the applied 
solar shading system that is supposed to prevent the occupant from glare or high illuminance 
contrast is almost entirely blocking the daylight, then the artificial light is likely to be used, which 
will contribute to increased energy consumption for lighting.  
 
Indoor climate in renovated buildings  
Although the energy consumption is usually taken into account when approaching the 
renovation of multifamily residential buildings, the indoor environment, especially indoor air 
quality is not very often considered sufficiently when establishing the renovation strategy 
(Bekö, Földváry, Langer, & Arrhenius, 2016). It is a common problem that energy renovation 
of buildings, aiming improved level of their insulation is leading to excessive air tightness and 
decreased infiltration of the building, which can result in poor indoor air quality and overheating. 
There are however ways to prevent such situations, and plan the residential buildings 
renovation in the way, that not only their energy efficiency will be optimized, by also thermal 
comfort and indoor air quality (see Sections I.3.1 - I.3.2). Another important indoor climate 
aspect to be considered in the renovation process is daylight (see Section I.4). 
==PAGE:10==
 
 
10 
 
I.3.1 
Indoor air quality  
As it has been already mention above, the energy renovation, mainly focused on improvement 
of building’s insulation level and air tightness may lead to the decreased air change rate in the 
building and therefore to worsening of indoor air quality. Thus, according to the principles of 
integrated design, the ventilation strategy should be determined as a part of renovation scope 
(Petersen & Svendsen). There are many potentials for indoor air quality improvement in the 
renovated building. Such solutions like optimization of natural ventilation or application of 
mechanical ventilation can be listed as examples. 
If the adequate measures for indoor air quality enhancement are not provided in the renovated 
building, with increased air-tightness, the quality of air indoors is likely to be worse after 
renovation than before. As a consequence the Sick Building Syndrome (SBS) san arise. There 
were studies carried out concerning the SBS that were trying to provide a consistent definition 
of the phenomenon. One of them says that ‘Sick Building Syndrome refers to a group of non-
specific symptoms with a temporal connection to a particular building, but with no specific or 
obvious cause’ (Greer, 2007). In another study the characteristic symptoms are listed, namely 
‘eye, nose and throat irritation, mental fatigue, headaches, nausea, dizziness and skin 
irritations’ (Hedge & Ericson, 1996). The SBS is related to the presence of various chemical 
pollutants in the air, originating from buildings installations, equipment and materials applied 
indoor. There are many studies being carried out to define the pollutants and their contribution 
to SBS (Abdul-Wahab, 2011).  
I.3.2 
Thermal comfort 
Another important aspect of indoor environment to be taken into account when approaching 
the renovation of building is the thermal comfort. The renovation strategy for thermal comfort 
optimization should be considered for both heating and cooling season.  
In the heating season it is important to prevent the indoor temperature from dropping below 
certain set point, e.g. 21°C with the least possible energy spending. To achieve that goal, there 
can be demand controlled heating system applied. Moreover, the ventilation system should be 
optimized in the way that it does not cause excessive heat losses. In case of mechanical 
ventilation system it can be achieved by the application of heat recovery unit. Another way of 
assuring good thermal comfort in the winter without excessive energy consumption can be 
passive solar heat gains possession through windows on the south façade. However in order 
to wisely use the solar heat gains, the fenestration system should be properly adjusted. 
Assuring the good indoor thermal comfort is particularly challenging in the summer, when there 
is a risk of overheating. As a principle, the overheating should be prevented, because it is 
difficult to get rid of the heat that has already accumulated in the rooms of the building. In order 
to prevent overheating, the solar radiation entering the building has to be reduced. This can 
be done by the application of solar shading devices or adequate selection of windows glazing 
e.g. multiple-layer glass, low-e or monochromatic glass etc. (Stack, Goulding, & Owen Lewis). 
Properly adjusted ventilation system can also have a cooling effect. The general objective 
when optimizing the summer thermal comfort is to avoid the use of air conditioning, which is 
energy consuming and approach to use the passive solutions. 
Overheating has a negative impact on both – health and well-being of an occupant. In extreme 
cases, exposure to excessive temperature, leading i.e. to increased risk of strokes can even 
contribute to mortality rate (Zero Caron Hut, 2015). On a daily basis, overheating has a 
negative impact on health. The most vulnerable age groups are elderly and small children 
(Valbjørn, 1993). Common affliction related to overheating problems is sleep disorder, which 
in the short term leads to decreased performance and in the long term causes serious 
==PAGE:11==
 
 
11 
 
diseases. Another potential ailment that can be caused by overheating is dehydration. Among 
the symptoms of dehydration heat cramps, fluid retention in ankles and feet, fainting, dizziness, 
heat rush and heat strokes can be listed (Zero Caron Hut, 2015). Summarizing, there are 
numerous negative human responses to high temperatures exposure, therefore it is essential 
to assure adequate protection from overheating in the inhabitable buildings. 
 
Daylighting and renovation potentials  
The proper usage of daylight allows reducing the energy consumption by reducing electrical 
light usage. Daylight is a best quality light for any type of visual task if not unbalanced or 
excessive in our visual field. More importantly, exposure to daylight has positive impact on 
occupants health and well-being (Veitch, Christoffersen, & Galasiu). Thus, harvesting 
maximum  daylight is desirable in indoor environment. 
There are numerous scientifically proved health benefits from the use of daylight in buildings. 
First of all it helps to regulate the circadian rhythm, meaning that sleep and awakens patterns 
are regulated. The research findings show that exposure to daylight during the day (especially 
in the morning) and dawning in the afternoon can contribute to sleep quality improvement and 
morning alertness (Veitch, Christoffersen, & Galasiu). Daylight has also positive influence of 
mood and social behavior. The view to the outside nature through the windows has similar 
effect. 
According to the research concerning the influence of daylight on not only psychological, but 
also physiological processes, many responses of human body to daylight can be observed 
(Zadeh, Shepley, Williams, & Chung, 2014). The examination conducted on a group of subject 
led to the finding that exposure to daylight contributes to lowered blood pressure, increased 
body temperature and blood oxygen saturation. It has been concluded that the decrease in 
blood pressure may be related to stress-reducing effect of daylight and view to the outside. 
Possible reason for blood oxygen saturation was indicated to be deep breathing related to 
overall comfort in the room with the access to daylight. Increased temperature might be caused 
by increased vigilance and core body temperature induced by the exposure to daylight in the 
morning. Summarizing, daylight is a factor stimulating and coordinating many processes in 
human body, therefore it should be used to maximum possible extent in inhabitable buildings. 
There are, however, drawbacks in using maximum daylight in building such as overheating 
risk or occurrences of visual discomfort such as glare. The overheating of rooms in summer is 
among other factors caused by solar heat gain from the windows in the summer months. It 
needs to be prevented by the application of adequate solar shading system. The same solution 
is also necessary in order to prevent glare from daylight that is caused by high illuminance 
levels and illuminance contrast. However the solutions must be selected properly, not to 
reduce daylight levels too excessively. 
In order to explore the potential of daylight the fenestration system should be optimized. Solar 
shading devices and advanced glazing systems are inevitable solutions to protect from 
overheating caused by solar radiation, even in Nordic climate where maximum temperatures 
in summer are lower than in lower latitudes. Those solutions are however reducing not only 
heat load, but also daylight, which introduces a challenge in selection of the appropriate 
strategy. It is therefore necessary to assure that optimal measures are applied. First, the 
environmental factors, like orientation, surrounding density and greenery (described in Section 
II.1.2) should be taken into account when selecting solar shading strategy. Secondly, the 
flexibility of solar shading device should be provided in a way that the device is not obstructing 
daylight and view to the outside when it is not necessary – there is no direct solar radiation 
that could cause visual discomfort and no overheating risk. 
==PAGE:12==
 
 
12 
 
Then designing for daylighting, it is necessary to detect potential sources of visual discomfort 
related to daylight and apply adequate solutions to prevent them. If glare problem will not be 
properly addressed in the concept of fenestration system retrofitting, occupants tend to employ 
solar shading device to protect themselves from visual discomfort and use of electric lighting 
is likely in this case. 
 
Background 
When establishing the strategy for building renovation, many internal and external, 
environmental factors affecting daylight conditions in the room should be taken into account. 
These factors can be divided into interior and exterior factors are listed and described in 
following Sections (II.1.1 - II.1.2). After determination of the impact that environmental factors 
have on the buildings it is necessary to establish the adequate daylighting strategy, that will 
enable to select adequate solutions for fenestration system. A comprehensive knowledge on 
existing methods is necessary. 
 
Impacting factors on daylight conditions in buildings 
When simulating and evaluating the daylight conditions in the residential building, not only the 
characteristics of its interior, meaning exact dimensions of rooms and windows and optical 
parameters of the internal materials should be taken into account as influential factors, but also 
the orientation of the building and arrangement of its surrounding. 
Consequently, different shading strategies can be considered for different facades of the same 
building, depending on what direction is the certain façade oriented as an optimal strategy. 
Moreover, obstructions in form of other architectural objects or greenery elements (trees or 
high bushes) that the façade is facing in relatively close distance can affect the daylight 
conditions for lower levels significantly, which should also be considered when exploiting the 
daylighting potential in the building.  
II.1.1 Interior factors 
II.1.1.1 
Properties of opaque surfaces  
Materials and colors applied in building’s interior have a substantial impact on daylight 
conditions, thus their selection should constitute a part of daylighting strategy (Ruck, 2000). 
The photometric characteristic of opaque materials that is considered in the context of 
daylighting is reflectance. Reflectance is an indicator of how much light hitting the surface will 
be reflected back (Tsangrassoulis, et al., 2004).  
As a principle, applying bright materials with high value of reflectance is beneficial for daylight 
enhancement in the room. It is important to assure that the floor surface has the reflectance 
value of at least 30% (Ruck, 2000). In addition, the ceiling material reflectance should be 
carefully selected, especially in case that the daylight – redirection strategy is applied. Daylight-
redirection strategy is aiming the daylight conditions optimization in the room. The systems 
redirecting daylight are either fixed, i.e. light shelves or movable, i.e. venetian blinds (see 
Section II.2). Their principle of operation is that they are reflecting the light towards the interior, 
in the way that it is further reflected from ceiling to the back of the room. As a results high 
illuminance in the immediate area of the window giving the potential for visual discomfort is 
prevented and at the same time daylight is reaching deeper in the room. However, the 
adequate reflectance of both – ceiling material and device material has to be assured for the 
daylight-redirecting system to work and not cause visual discomfort (Ruck, 2000). 
==PAGE:13==
 
 
13 
 
II.1.1.2 
Properties of fenestration system 
Another interior element of a building that substantially affects its daylight condition is 
fenestration system, in this case meaning window with all parts it consists of and accessories 
applied – fixed and movable solar shading devices. The geometry and photometric properties 
of all elements forming the fenestration are directly affecting the daylight in room. 
The exact type of facade windows is usually selected for a building according to both 
architectural and daylighting concept. Windows vary in their dimensions, frame to glazing area 
proportion, divisions and many other geometrical characteristics. All these varying properties 
should be considered when assessing the daylight conditions in the room e.g. by means of 
daylight simulations. 
The photometric properties are defined by reflectance and transmittance of fenestration 
system component’s surfaces. Brief definition of reflectance was provided in previous Section 
(II.1.1.1). Transmittance of a material indicates how much light it will let pass through.  
(Tsangrassoulis, et al., 2004). Both those parameters are expressed in percentages. For the 
window frame material the reflectance value should be specified. Most important is however 
to specify the transmittance value of glazing. The single (3mm) clear glazing has a light 
transmittance of 90%, in case of double clear glazing with thicker panes (6mm-gap-6mm) the 
transmittance value is 78% (Tsangrassoulis, et al., 2004). There are many types of advanced 
glazing systems preventing from overheating risk by reduction of solar heat gains. Among 
others tinted glass, reflective glass, low emissivity glass (commonly referred to as low-glass) 
can be listed (Stack, Goulding, & Owen Lewis). The light transmittance of those types of 
glazing is however lower than for clear glass. Some of them (e.g. tinted glass) also affect the 
perception of colors in room (Stack, Goulding, & Owen Lewis). 
Another element of fenestration system, which characteristics are necessary to specify 
precisely in order to assess daylight performance  is solar shading system. Both, geometrical 
and photometric features of solar shading device are subordinated to the specific functions 
that it is serving for. These functions include heat load reduction, prevention of visual 
discomfort related to daylight, privacy. Solar shading devices classification and characteristics 
are thoroughly described in Section II.2. 
II.1.2 Exterior factors 
II.1.2.1 
Orientation  
The orientation of building has a substantial impact on its daylight conditions. The amount of 
daylight, meaning intensity of visual spectrum of solar radiation and time of the day when the 
daylight is available, differ substantial even in identical rooms, depending on what direction are 
their windows facing. 
The rooms, which windows are facing south, are receiving the most of daylight, because the 
sun is operating from south throughout the majority of daytime hours. Therefore, larger amount 
of daylight penetrates the south-oriented rooms than in identical rooms facing other directions. 
It is therefore a common practice for the architects to locate the daytime-use rooms of 
residential buildings (living room, kitchen) in their southern parts, allowing substantial amount 
of daylight to the spaces where occupants are frequently present during the day. This way the 
occupants can take the advantage of daylight while performing their daily activities and are 
less likely to use artificial light, resulting in lower energy spending. However, it has to be also 
taken into account that the bigger amount of daylight means also bigger risk of glare and 
overheating, which should be prevented by the application of adequate solar shading system 
(Stack, Goulding, & Owen Lewis). Appropriate solar shading solutions should be applied in 
order to prevent those risks. 
==PAGE:14==
 
 
14 
 
In the west- and east-oriented rooms the operation of daylight is dependent on the exact time 
of the day. In east facing rooms, direct solar radiation can be expected in the morning. This 
orientation is often chosen for bedrooms location, because the occupants are exposed to 
higher daylight levels in the morning, when they wake up. However, it needs to be considered 
that in the summer season the heat load is accumulating in the east-facing rooms from early 
morning hours, therefore adequate solutions should be provided to prevent from overheating. 
west-oriented room are receiving the daylight in the afternoon and evening hours. This 
orientation in beneficial for location of daytime-use rooms, as they are well lit when occupants 
are coming back home from their workplaces and schools. 
The rooms facing north are receiving least amount of daylight; therefore, it should be avoided 
to located daytime-use spaces, like living room/kitchen in the northern part of the building. In 
the north-oriented rooms the risk of thermal or visual discomfort caused by solar radiation is 
low. Therefore solar shading devices are applied there if privacy provision is necessary, e.g. 
in bathrooms, otherwise their application is in most cases not necessary. The fenestration 
system on the northern façade should be adjusted in the way that solar radiation is used to a 
maximum extend. 
II.1.2.2 
Surrounding density 
Another important factor, that can have significant impact on the daylight conditions in the 
buildings, is the arrangement of its surrounding. The usual components of building’s 
surrounding are other buildings and greenery – trees and bushes. Those elements are 
obstructing the daylight, preventing it from reaching the evaluated building, and they are 
casting shadow on it. As a result the amount of solar irradiation entering the rooms of the 
building is significantly limited.  
Neighboring buildings are fixed component of a building’s surrounding, meaning that they 
affect the daylight conditions in evaluated building constantly. The shade from the building, 
however, varies with the length and angle depending on the position of sun, which changes 
with time of the day and season of the year. The impact that surrounding buildings have on the 
evaluated one is also dependent on their height and distance between them and the evaluated 
building.   
II.1.2.3 
Greenery  
The greenery elements surrounding the building – trees and bushes are alternating part of 
building surrounding. They are changing their form by growing and transforming their shapes 
to adapt to the surrounding and optimally benefit from the sun. Moreover, the deciduous trees 
are losing leaves for the wintertime, when the growing season is over.  
Similar to neighboring buildings, trees and bushes are also obstructing the daylight from 
reaching the evaluated building interior, and casting the shadow on its façade. However due 
to characteristics of greenery as a building’s surrounding elements listed above, the impact 
that they have on the daylight conditions is considerably less measurable. It is difficult to 
realistically determine the shape of shade casted by the tree and map its changes in time. 
Whereas the changes in time of conifers form could be neglected, the impact of deciduous 
trees on the daylight conditions in neighboring buildings is strongly impacted depending on 
whether they have leaves or not.   
For the purpose of daylight simulations’ time optimization the geometry of trees (if included) is 
usually significantly simplified, by modeling them as spheres and neglecting the gaps between 
leaves or representing the leafs as a polygons randomly distributed on single spherical 
surfaces (Balakrishnan & Jakubiec, 2016). Modeling the tree realistically, with leaves 
==PAGE:15==
 
 
15 
 
represented by non-coplanar polygons would significantly increase the simulation time due to 
calculation of light reflections between the leaves (Balakrishnan & Jakubiec, 2016). 
 
Daylight strategies for improved conditions in residential buildings 
II.2.1 Introduction to solar shading systems  
Among numerous solutions for glare and overheating problems that are possible to implement 
during the façade renovation one of the biggest potential is the application of solar shading 
system which has considerable impact not only on thermal, but also on visual aspects of indoor 
environment (Kuhn, 2017). In order to assure the improvement of thermal comfort and daylight 
conditions by application of solar shading devices, they should be carefully chosen for given 
application and an adequate control of the system has to be considered. 
Several possible benefits can be obtained from implementation of the solar shading systems. 
First application of solar shading devices is to limit the solar transmittance to the interior and 
therefore reduce the risk of overheating of the space in the cooling period of the year. The 
benefit in this case is reduction of energy consumption for cooling in summer (Sanots, 
Laustsen, & Svendsen). 
Application of some types of solar shading systems can also have positive impact in the 
heating period due to increase of U-value of the window. As a result, the heat losses are 
reduced in the winter time and thus the energy consumption for heating is lower 
(Tsangrassoulis, Shading and Daylight Systems, 2016).  
The other positive visual impacts of solar shading devices application is reduction of daylight 
transmittance through the window, when the luminance level on the work plane is too high 
causing reflections that are disturbing the vision (Hoffmann & Lee, 2015). This can for instance 
occur in the noon, in south-oriented rooms. Another important benefit from solar shading 
implementation is glare risk prevention. 
There are also negative impacts of solar shading systems implementation in cases that the 
device is not correctly chosen for the intended application, or it is not properly operated. 
First possible negative effect of inadequate solar shading system implementation is reduction 
of passive solar heat gains in the heating season, which may lead to increased energy 
consumption for heating in the late autumn/winter season (Stack, Goulding, & Owen Lewis). 
Wrongly applied or controlled shading system can also prevent the exploitation of daylighting 
potential. If the device is selected inadequately for certain climatic conditions and 
environmental factors (described in Section II.1) its activation will lead to decreased daylight 
levels. The same problem will arise from improper operation of movable solar shading devices 
(described in Section II.2.2). In case of manually operated device, it is important to assure that 
users know how to use it in order to optimize indoor climate. If the device is operated 
automatically, based on certain schedule or sensor reading, it is important to adjust the system 
properly. Wrong operation of solar shading system can substantially reduce the daylight levels 
in the room, causing occupants to use artificial light and therefore contributing to the increase 
of energy consumption for lighting.  
The other possible adverse consequence of inadequate solar shading system application is 
obstructing a view to the outside. View to the outside is important for human in order to identify 
the time of the day or recognize changing weather conditions (Boyce, 2014). Another 
==PAGE:16==
 
 
16 
 
advantage is the possibility for the eyes to regenerate while looking on faraway landscape for 
a while instead of constantly focusing on the task area (desk, countertop etc.) For these 
reasons, the lack of contact with external surrounding can have negative impact on occupant 
comfort and wellbeing. 
Another aspect to be carefully analyzed when considering application of solar shading system 
is the aesthetics of the building facades. Shading devices, especially the external ones can 
have substantial impact on the appearance of the building, and thus they should be chosen 
adequately not only to achieve good daylight and thermal performance, but also to not interfere 
with the architectural form of the building. 
II.2.2 Classification of solar shading devices 
There are numerous solar shading devices available on the market. They can be divided into 
several categories, depending on their position in relation to window and their operation 
principle. One possible classification scheme (Bellia, Marino, Minichiello, & Pedace, 2014) is 
presented on a diagram in the Figure 1 below. 
 
Figure 1 Solar shading classification scheme according to An overview on solar shading system for 
buildings study (Bellia, Marino, Minichiello, & Pedace, 2014) 
First aspect of proposed classification relates to the operation principle of the solar shading 
systems, such as: fixed shading devices, movable shading devices etc. According to the 
classification scheme, the movable solar shading devices can additionally be divided into two 
subgroups: manually controlled devices – operated by users in accordance with their 
preferences and automatically controlled devices – operating according to adjusted schedule 
or sensor reading.  
Movability of solar shading devices allows more flexibility, meaning that the position of device 
can be adjusted, depending for instance on the weather conditions. In this way solar radiation 
could be radically limited in the summer sunny days, when there is substantial risk of 
overheating and glare probability, whereas when the sky is overcast and temperatures lower, 
more solar radiation could be allowed to the room, allowing better daylight conditions.  
However as the risk from non-automatized movable solar shading systems application is that 
the occupants will not operate it properly, leading to inadequate daylight and thermal 
conditions. The study (Alcock, Fitzgerald, & Lewis) argues that majority of occupants is not 
even aware that shading devices role is not only to reduce excessive daylight levels, but in 
some cases also to allow more daylight to the back of the room. Thus they do not adjust the 
position of e.g. venetian blinds in a way that sunlight reflects form the ceiling, causing better 
distribution of daylight in the room. According to the study occupants would have to be trained 
in solar shading devices operation on order to assure that the solutions applied are performing 
==PAGE:17==
 
 
17 
 
as expected (Alcock, Fitzgerald, & Lewis). On the other hand there are studies that show 
dissatisfaction if the occupant does not have an override option. 
The main attribute and at the same time biggest disadvantage of fixed solar shading systems 
is that they do not adapt to the weather conditions (overcast vs. unobstructed sky), part of the 
day or season of the year (height and position of the sun). It means that their position can 
neither automatically nor manually be adjusted based on the amount of solar radiation entering 
the room, resulting in non-optimized thermal and daylight conditions. As it is mentioned in the 
study (Stack, Goulding, & Owen Lewis) fixed solar shading systems might be efficient in 
reflecting the direct solar radiation, but perform considerably worse against diffuse and 
reflected sunlight.  
However in some cases (e.g. on South façade) the application of fixed solar shading system 
can have positive impact on indoor environment throughout majority of time (Alcock, 
Fitzgerald, & Lewis). Moreover the study (Alcock, Fitzgerald, & Lewis) indicates that another 
advantages of fixed solar devices are their lower price and usual lack of complexity of both, 
installation and maintenance.  
Another aspect of classification presented on the diagram in Figure 1 is the position of solar 
shading device in relation to window. Three kinds of solar shading devices can be listed in this 
case: external, intermediate (inter-pane) and internal solar shading, being located on the 
external side on the window, between window panes and form the internal side window side 
respectively.  
Several studies on different cases indicate that the external solar shading devices are the most 
efficient ones as to the reduction of solar transmittance to the space. They can reduce up to 
80% of solar heat gain, comparing to 50-60% that can be reduced by internal devices (Alcock, 
Fitzgerald, & Lewis). The reason for that is that external solar shading systems are reflecting 
the sun rays before they are meeting the window pane, so that solar energy transmitted to the 
window pane throughout radiation is substantially limited. The energy is being stored in the 
shading device instead and then transmitted to the outside by radiation and convection.  
On the negative side of placing solar shading system on the external side of the window is that 
the device is exposed to the outside conditions (precipitations, air contamination, wind loads), 
which may effect in the necessity of more intense maintenance or more frequent replacement. 
The position of solar shading device in between the window panes or from the internal side of 
the proves to be less efficient than external placement of the device. The reason is that the 
solar radiation is being transmitted through the window pane before being reflected by the solar 
shading device. As a result solar energy stored in the window pane and a shading device itself 
is transmitted to the interior and the part of it that is reflected from the device meets the window 
pane yet again before being transmitted to the outside by radiation and convection. 
However internal and mid-pane shading devices are more efficient in reflecting the diffused 
and reflected solar radiation which have wider angle of incidence (Stack, Goulding, & Owen 
Lewis). Moreover, unlike external solar shading systems, the internal and intermediate devices 
are not much exposed to the outdoor conditions and therefore their maintenance is less 
problematic and the frequent replacement is not necessary.  
Apart from classification aspects indicated by the study (Bellia, Marino, Minichiello, & Pedace, 
2014), another study (Alcock, Fitzgerald, & Lewis) suggested also that solar shading systems 
can be classified based on the level of their complexity. According to the study either movable 
or fixed systems can be ‘simple’ or ‘complex’ depending on the optical and thermal properties 
==PAGE:18==
 
 
18 
 
of the materials utilized to produce them. As an example it is indicated that an overhang or a 
light shelf are fixed, simple systems, venetian blind is a movable, but also simple system, 
whereas rotating prismatic louvre system could be classified as movable, complex system.  
The study (Tsangrassoulis, Shading and Daylight Systems, 2016) indicates another aspect 
based on which the solar shading devices can be classified – angular selectivity of the system. 
The angular selectivity of the system specifies for which angle of the sunlight the direct solar 
radiation is entirely blocked by a given solar shading device. The parameter used to 
characterize the indicator is cut-off angle, which is the lowest angle of sunlight, for which no 
direct solar radiation is allowed to the room. It is shown on a schematic drawing in Figure 2.  
 
Figure 2 Cut-of angle, characterizing the angular selectivity of a solar shading system (Tsangrassoulis, 
Shading and Daylight Systems, 2016)) 
Based on angular selectivity, solar shading devices can be classified into two groups. The first 
group of devices represents no angular selectivity, which means that the reduction of both 
direct and diffuse solar radiation dos not depend on the angle of sunlight. Following devices 
can be included to this group: screens, curtains, roller blinds. Second group contains solar 
shading systems that can reflect the direct solar radiation at given range of angles, while 
allowing the diffused light to a certain extend for daylighting of the space. The examples of 
such solar shading devices are: louvers, blinds, fins, overhangs and egg-crates. 
II.2.3 Characteristics of movable solar shading devices 
II.2.3.1 
Roller blinds 
Roller blinds is a movable solar shading device, that can be installed either from the internal, 
mid-pane or external side of the window. It is a flat fabric, that reflects the solar radiation. The 
movability of roller blinds consists in their retractability. It means that the device can either be 
unrolled and cover the window pane, blocking the unwanted direct solar radiation, e.g. in sunny 
summer days, or it can be rolled up a thus not obstruct the window at all in case when the sky 
is overcast and there is no direct solar radiation or in winter, when the solar radiation is desired. 
It is shown in the Figure 3 below. 
==PAGE:19==
 
 
19 
 
 
Figure 3 Roller blind; a) unrolled, b) rolled up 
Roller blinds are simple, relatively inexpensive and widely applied devices. They principle of 
operation is always the same, but they can vary as to the type of fabric they are made from 
and the fabric’s colors. Both, material and color of the roller blinds have significant impact on 
its transmittance, reflectance and absorbance and thus also on their performance. Therefore, 
the specific type of device should be carefully selected, depending on the location, orientation 
and function of the building. It is also worth mentioning that the properties of fabric, the roller 
blind is made from is influenced by the position of the device. In case that the blind is mounted 
on the external side of the window, it will have to be made from much more resistible and thick 
fabric that the internal or mid-pane device. 
Each of the solar shading categories mentioned in the previous paragraph contain several 
specific types of devices. They vary in terms of technical aspects – the materials, structure, 
installation, disassembly etc. and, as a result, they vary in terms of thermal and visual 
performance. However it cannot be explicitly stated that one type of solar shading system is 
always more efficient than another one. Each case of application has to be considered 
separately taking into account the function, location, orientation and architectural form of the 
building in order to select the device which application is most beneficial not only performance-
wise, but also from the economical, practical and finally aesthetical point of view. 
II.2.3.2 
Venetian blinds  
Venetian blinds are an example of movable, retractable solar shading device. They can be 
installed either on internal, mid-pane or external side of the window. Venetian blinds consist of 
horizontal slats, which angle can be adjusted in order to control the solar radiation entering the 
room in a most efficient way. According to study (Kirimtat & Chatzikonstantinou, 2015) the 
standard dimensions of the system is 2,5 cm width slats with a 2,2 cm space between them 
(which means they overlap when closed, entirely blocking the solar radiation) and are placed 
on a distance of 2,5 cm from the window pane surface. However the slats of the external 
==PAGE:20==
 
 
20 
 
venetian blinds system are wider and thicker in order to assure resistance to the weather 
conditions. Depending on the position of the device in relation to the window, its specific 
application and expected aesthetical effect, venetian blinds system can be made of various 
materials: wood, fabric, plastic, aluminum. They are also available in many colors.   
The biggest advantage of venetian blinds application comes from the movability of the system. 
The position of slats can be adjusted in the way, that the direct solar radiation, causing too 
high illuminances on the work plane, glare risk and excessive solar heat gain can be blocked, 
while the diffused and reflected solar radiation, assuring good daylight conditions in the room 
is allowed. This principle of venetian blinds operation is presented in the Figure 4. Moreover 
the direct solar radiation can be redirected to the ceiling of the room, so that it reflects from its 
surface and reaches the rare of the room, considerably improving the daylight distribution in 
the space. To support this application of venetian blind, they surface should be covered with 
reflective material and the ceiling should be paint using reflective, white paint.  
 
Figure 4 Venetian blinds' principle of operation 
The performance of venetian blinds is influenced by many factors. First of all the geometrical 
properties, like width of the slats and distances between them, as well as tilt angle have a big 
impact on the efficiency of the device. Secondly the performance is also strongly influenced by 
the thermal and optical properties of the material, the slats are made from. Therefore, in a 
design process, the system should be carefully chosen for a given application.  
Important decision to be made when considering the application of venetian blinds is whether 
the system should be manual, operated by users, or automatized, sensor-based. The risk of 
selecting the manual system, as in case of each movable solar shading device, is that the 
occupant will not use it in an adequate way, which as a result, will lead to unfavorable thermal 
and daylight conditions in the room as well as increased energy consumption. On the other 
hand the automation of the system is expensive and requires more maintenance. 
==PAGE:21==
 
 
21 
 
II.2.3.3 
Awning Blind  
Awning blinds are included into the external solar shading systems category. Similarly like 
roller blinds, the solar-protecting material is fabric in this case, which dependent on the 
application and desired effect can be fiberglass screen, polyester or acrylic (Beck, Dolmans, 
Dutoo, Hall, & Seppanen, 2010). However, awning blinds, unlike roller blinds are tilted. As a 
result they most often don’t block the daylight to the extent that roller blinds do. Moreover they 
provide more view to the outside. 
Awning blinds can be either fixed or movable - retractable, however for their better performance 
in terms of thermal comfort in the building, retractable systems are more recommended, as 
they allow to avoid overheating in the summer period as well as obtain the solar gains in the 
winter (Stack, Goulding, & Owen Lewis).  
The element that enables the device’s fabric tilting is a drop arm of an awning blind. Depending 
on the type of the arm and resulting solution for a blind movement, there are two types of 
awning blinds: drop-arm awnings and folding-arm awnings. 
In case of folding-arm awnings, the arm responsible for the operation of blinds is foldable and 
self-supporting. It usually allows a big spans of the blind, even 4 m (ACRIMO A/S, 2015). It is 
recommended for the commercial building purposes, for instance above passages, terraces, 
where the big area of shading device, preferably allowing the unobstructed space beneath is 
preferred.  
The arm of drop-arm awnings is hinged either to the sides of the window frame, or to the wall 
on the sides of the window. The Arm of this type of awning blind gets straighten along with the 
process of the blind unfolding. In its final position, when the blind is fully unfold the arm is 
positioned perpendicular to the wall (window frame) of the building. 
There is also a sub-type of drop-arm awning, referred to as sliding arm awning blind, 
sometimes also called marquisolette. The solution is a combination of vertical surface parallel 
to the window, providing shade on is upper part and tilted surface on the bottom part of the 
window. Sliding-arm awning performs well in terms of resistance towards wind loads, because 
the arm of the blind is shorter which results in proportionally smaller effects of wind forces 
affecting the device. Awning blind’s classification is shown in the Figure 5 below. 
 
Figure 5 Awning blinds’ classification 
==PAGE:22==
 
 
22 
 
II.2.4 Characteristics of fixed solar shading devices 
II.2.4.1 
MicroShade 
MicroShade is an inter-pane fixed solar shading solution. It is a highly effective membrane that 
is implemented directly on the glass of the window with 2-leyers or 3-leyers of low-e glazing 
substantially reduces the solar heat gain, while the view to the outside and daylight are ensured 
(MicroShade, 2017).  
The membrane of MicroShade consists of microscopic lamellas, that are reflecting the direct 
sun. According to the producer, the shading effect of lamellas can be compared to the shading 
effect of exterior roller blinds (MicroShade, 2017). The Micro lamellas are structured in the 
way, that they are blocking the high angle radiation, while allowing low-angle radiation to great 
extent. As a result for the summer high-angle solar radiation 90% of solar heat gain can be 
reduced, whereas in the winter, then the sun angle is low, the solar radiation is reduced up to 
35%. 
The advance of MicroShade, comparing to other solar shading devices is however, that view 
to the outside is less obstructed – occupant is able to recognize the shapes and colors of 
external environment elements. There are several color variations of MicroShade, to be 
selected according to the preference and building aesthetics (MicroShade, 2017). 
II.2.4.2 
Horizontal overhang  
Horizontal overhang is an example of fixed, external solar shading system. According to study 
(Stack, Goulding, & Owen Lewis) its application can be beneficial despite the façade 
orientation in the southern climates, e.g. Mediterranean, where direct, high angle sunlight 
causes substantial solar heat gains, excessive illuminance levels and glare risk. It is also a 
common practice in Mediterranean to apply louvered overhangs, that not only provide the solar 
shading effect, but also allow unobstructed natural ventilation. In colder climates, e.g. northern 
Europe placement of horizontal overhang is worth considering mainly on the southern 
elevation, where the windows are exposed to high angle direct solar radiation.  
 
Figure 6 Horizontal overhang's principle of operation; a) summer situation, b) winter situation 
==PAGE:23==
 
 
23 
 
The advantage of horizontal overhang is that despite reflecting the unwanted high angle solar 
radiation in cooling season, it can also allow desired low-angle solar radiation in heating 
season (as shown on the drawing in the Figure 6 above). As a result not only the energy 
consumption for cooling is summer can be decreased but also the heating energy consumption 
in winter. The disadvantage of horizontal overhang is that is does not prevent from low-angle 
solar radiation in morning and afternoon/evening. This problem mainly occurs on east and west 
building’s facades. 
II.2.4.3 
Light shelf  
Light shelf is also an example of fixed solar shading system. Similarly as horizontal overhang, 
light shelf is also a horizontal element. The difference between systems is that light shelf is not 
located above the window, but it divides it into two parts that are referred to as lower-view 
window – the pert of the window beneath the light shelf and a clerestory – the upper part of 
the window, above the light shelf. Moreover, the light shelf is not only located outside the 
window, but it continues towards the interior of the room.  
The general principles of light shelf operation is similar to these of overhang – it prevents high 
angle solar radiation in the summer and allows low angle solar radiation in winter. However 
due to lower mounting it has additional function in summer situation. It not only prevents the 
high-angle summer solar radiation, but also reflects it in a way that it gets reflected from the 
ceiling and reaches the rear of the room (Figure 7). It means that the application of light shelf 
is not only to prevent glare and high illuminances but also to improve the daylight distribution 
on the room. In order to be efficient in redirecting sunlight to the back of the room the upper 
surface of the light shelf, as well as a ceiling surface should be covered with the highly-
reflective material/paint. 
 
Figure 7 Light shelf's principle of operation; a) summer situation, b) winter situation 
The disadvantage of solar shelf is that, similarly like other fixed systems, is not adaptive to the 
solar radiation angle and intensity. Therefore in order for it to be efficient it should be carefully 
designed, taking into account climate characteristics and all environmental factors. There are 
several parameters that have substantial impact on the light shelf performance – the height of 
the shelf, it’s depth to the outside and to the inside, the reflectance of its upper surface. The 
advantage of light shelf is that it is relatively inexpensive and simple solar shading system, that 
adequately designed can perform efficiently in numerous cases of application. 
 
==PAGE:24==
 
 
24 
 
 
Objectives 
The objective of present study is to investigate the daylighting potential in multi-story residential 
building with heritage value located in the center of Copenhagen. The daylight conditions in 
such building are expected to be poor due to factors like thick walls and relatively small window 
areas. Additionally, in the dense urban tissue the daylight levels are diminished as an effect of 
shading from another buildings 
The application of solar shading devices in buildings is necessary part of building renovation, 
providing for several reasons: overheating prevention, protection from visual discomfort related 
to daylight and privacy provision. The impact of selected solar shading devices on daylight 
conditions in the case study building was investigated. Performance of devices was tested for 
different internal and external environmental factors. The objective was to determine which 
devices show the best performance in terms of daylight for certain scenarios of interior 
materials properties, rooms’ floor number and orientation, surrounding density and greenery 
presence.  
Another objective was to assess the visual comfort related to daylight in the case study 
building. Due to the reason that existing model for the assessment of daylight glare (DGP 
index) did not detect glare for most cases, novel method for visual comfort assessment based 
on relative illuminance contrast was developed. The basis for development of new method was 
observation, that there is a high illuminance contrast between bright window area and dark 
surrounding area that brings the potential for visual discomfort occurrences in the room. The 
Relative Contrast (RC) model was used for immersive 360-degree visual field to determine its 
view direction dependency. Immersive spatial approach was also employed for DGP index 
components, in order to compare view direction dependency of the models. 
 
 
==PAGE:25==
 
 
25 
 
 
Methodology  
 Metrics for daylight condition assessment 
IV.1.1 Daylight Factor (DF) 
One of the commonly used metric for daylight condition assessment is Daylight Factor (DF). 
DF is a metric introduced in EN12665:2002 as ‘Ratio of the illuminance at a point on a given 
indoor plane due to the light received directly or indirectly from the sky of assumed or known 
illuminance distribution, to the illuminance on a horizontal plane due to unobstructed 
hemisphere of this sky. The contribution of direct sunlight to both illuminances is excluded’. 
DF is simulated for CIE standard overcast sky, meaning that only the illuminance from diffused 
sunlight is taken into account. As the DF metric does not consider realistic, time-varying sky 
and sun conditions, climate-based data is not employed for simulation purposes.  
DF does not provide any information about how are the daylight levels changing over the day 
and over the year. Moreover its values for particular room do not depend on which orientation 
are its windows facing. Because of that it cannot be used to realistically exploit the potential of 
daylight use in the building (Nabil & Mardaljevic, Useful daylight illuminance: a new paradigm 
for assessing daylight in buildings, 2005). 
IV.1.2 Useful Daylight Illuminances (UDI) 
The alternative approach to daylight levels evaluation in the room, based on climatic data and 
providing for realistic sky conditions is Useful Daylight Illuminance (UDI). UDI is referred as 
‘annual occurrence of illuminances across the work plane where all the illuminances are within 
the range 100-2000 lux’. 
According to the method the daylight illuminances classified as useful, meaning that there is a 
potential for the use of daylight, are falling in the range between 100 and 2000 lux. The 
illuminance values below 100 lux are falling short to UDI, because they are insufficient either 
for the perception of visual environment or to carry out the visual task. On the other hand the 
illuminance above 2000 lux are classified as excessive, because they can cause the visual or 
thermal discomfort (Nabil & Mardaljevic, Useful daylight illuminances: A replacement for 
daylight factors, 2006). 
Employing the UDI method for daylight simulation in Diva for Rhino, the daylight levels in a 
room are assessed based on the percentage of evaluated room floor area for which the UDI 
are achieved for at least 50% of time. 
IV.1.3 Daylight Autonomy (DA) 
Daylight Autonomy is another climate-based metric for daylight conditions assessment that 
considers specific meteorological information on annual basis.  
It originates from a Swiss norm (Association Suisse des Electriciens, 1989), where it was 
defined as ‘the percentage of the year when a minimum illuminance threshold is met by 
daylight alone’. The method was further altered and its present, commonly used definition is 
‘percentage of the occupied times of the year when the minimum illuminance requirement at 
the sensor is met by daylight alone’ (Reinhart & Walkenhorst, 2001). 
The threshold illuminance value for the DA assessment can be specified based on the type of 
the room, for which daylight conditions are evaluated. Minimum levels of illuminance for 
different types of spaces can be found in guidelines, such as IESNA Lighting Handbook. 
==PAGE:26==
 
 
26 
 
Simulating the DA in Diva for Rhino the results is a percentage of floor area for which the DA 
for specified threshold value of illuminance was achieved through at least 50% of occupied 
time. The occupied time means hours during the day when occupants are present specified in 
the occupancy schedule file. 
 Daylight-induced visual comfort assessment 
Glare is one of the contributors to visual discomfort sensation related to occupant’s exposure 
to certain light levels. The phenomenon of glare was introduced for the first time in 1910 and 
defined as a cause of discomfort (Vos, 2003). Further studies on glare were aiming the 
determination of visual-health-related consequences of glare.  
The contemporary studies led to classification of glare types based on its effect on occupants 
and their ability to perform the task (Stone, 2009). First type of glare referred to as disability 
and veiling (reflection) glare is a commonly experienced discomfort condition that is 
indisposing occupant of performing certain visual task, e.g. reading, typing. Second type of 
glare is discomfort glare, which enables the occupant to see and proceed on visual task, but 
negatively affects the visual perception, leading to distraction and discomfort ((CIE), 1989). 
The sensation of discomfort glare is subjective to greater extent than disability glare, and thus 
it is more difficult to assess and quantify.  
There are numerous models aiming the assessment of glare. However, a great majority of 
them is developed under artificial lighting conditions. There are however at least two methods 
that are applicable for daylight conditions. They are introduced and described in the following 
sections. 
IV.2.1 Daylight Glare Index (DGI) 
Daylight Glare Index (Referred to also as Cornell equation) is a glare prediction model 
originating from British Glare Index. DGI serves for the assessment of glare from a large-area 
light source (window) (Chauvel, Collins, & Dogniaux, 1982). The experiments for method 
development were conducted with less than 10 subjects, exposed to the light from fluorescent 
lamp from behind opal-diffusing glass of large area (Hopkinson, 1972). Validation studies 
indicate that the biggest correlation between predictions based on DGI model and observations 
for the daylight conditions is achieved for the conditions, when there is no direct sunlight, but 
only diffused light from the sky (Osterhaus, 2005). Furthermore, in the realistic daylight 
conditions, the occupant’s tolerance to glare is bigger than under artificial light conditions of 
experimental setup. Thus, DGI tend to over predict daylight occurrence (Jakubiec & Reinhart, 
2012). The DGP formula can be seen in equation below: 
𝐷𝐺𝐼= 10 ∙log(0.5 ∑
𝐿𝑠,𝑖𝑖
1.6 ∙𝛺𝑠
0.8
𝐿𝑏+ 0.07𝜔𝑠,𝑖
0.5 ∙𝐿𝑠
𝑛
𝑖=1
 
Where: 
Ls – Luminance of a glare source 
Ls,i – Luminance of a glare source i 
ωs,i – Slid angle of glare source i subtend at the eye 
Ωs – Solid angle of source modified for position factor  
Lb – Luminance of the background 
 
==PAGE:27==
 
 
27 
 
IV.2.2 Daylight Glare Probability (DGP) 
The DGP index model was developed for office set up under daylight conditions (Christoffersen 
& Wienold, 2006). The study was carried out in Denmark (SBi) and Germany (ISE) using the 
experimental rooms, arranged and equipped in a way, that they were corresponding to typical 
office setup. The rooms were rotated, allowing the investigation of different orientations impact. 
Moreover, the windows placement was variated and different solar shading devices were 
employed to test the impact of different fenestration systems. For each location – Germany 
and Denmark two test rooms have been used – one with subjects (test room) and one with 
equipment measuring the daylight conditions (reference room). Based on the results of 
measurements and the subject’s glare rating from the questionnaires, the DGP model was 
developed and adjusted, resulting with the equation below: 
𝐷𝐺𝑃= 5.87 ∙10−5 ∙𝐸𝑣+ 9.18 ∙10−2 × log (1 + ∑𝐿𝑠,𝑖
2 ∙𝜔𝑠,𝑖
𝐸𝑣
1.87 ∙𝑃𝑖
2
𝑖
) + 0.16 
Where: 
Ev - Illuminance at the vertical level 
Pi - position index of the glare source i 
The DGP formula and its photometric components is further analyzed in the Section VI. 
 Metrics for the assessment of daylighting in case study building 
Preliminary DF simulations were done to compare two material sets with different value of 
internal opaque materials reflectance. In materials set no.2, wall, ceiling and floor surfaces 
were given higher reflectance values than in materials set no. 1. The purpose of this 
investigation was to assess what is and impact of opaque interior surfaces materials od 
daylight levels. The DF results shown that daylight levels are slightly improved when second 
set of materials in applied (see results in Appendix A). 
For the assessment of solar shading performance relation to different environmental factor 
Daylight Autonomy metric was used with the threshold value of 150 lux. The target illuminance 
of 150 lux is relatively low and insufficient for specific visual tasks demanding certain level of 
precision. However, when establishing the target illuminance value it has been considered that 
in an old building with thick walls and insufficient area of glazing the expected daylight levels 
are generally low. Thus the concern was that establishing threshold value to higher (e.g. 200 
– 300 lux) the DA values obtained further as a result of simulation would be very low and 
therefore difficult to analyze. This hypothesis was further confirmed by the simulation results 
(see Section V). 
The DGP model was used for the assessment of visual comfort in the building. The reason for 
this metric employment was that, as mentioned above (Section IV.2.2) it is developed and 
applicable for daylight conditions. The results however shown that the DGP index does not 
detect any visual discomfort in case study building rooms. Therefore alternative method for 
visual comfort assessment in the building was further developed (see Section VI). 
 Daylight Simulation  
The assessment of case study building daylighting based on the values of metrics listed in 
previous section was achieved by means of daylight simulations. The Radiance-based tool 
Diva for Rhino was used for simulation purposes. 
==PAGE:28==
 
 
28 
 
Radiance is a state of the art illuminance prediction and synthetic imaging system based on 
ray tracing method. It has been first introduced by Greg Ward in Lawrence Berkeley 
Laboratories, California, USA. Radiance is under constant development and enhancement. 
The Radiance engine is employed by numerous common programs for daylight and lighting 
simulations. 
The program is based on physical properties of light and thus allows accurate and reliable 
calculations of illuminance/luminance (Mardajevic, 1995). It is capable of modeling complex, 
natural and artificial luminous entities – sky brightness, luminaire output distributions etc. 
Radiance supports variety of reflection and transmission models. Moreover, scene description 
input from CAD systems can be imported to the program as an input. 
 Daylight in the Danish legislation 
The regulations concerning daylight are included in national Danish Building Regulations 
(BR15) in paragraph ‘Light conditions’ (BR15 6.5). The paragraph consists of 3 sections – 
General (6.5.1), Daylight (6.5.2) and Electric lighting’ (6.5.3). The ‘Daylight’ section concerns 
the aspect of daylight and view to the outside. 
Section ‘General’ specifies that access to light is required in workrooms, occupiable rooms, 
habitable rooms and shared access routes without causing excessive heat load (6.5.1(1) – 
provision). It is further specified (6.5.1(1) – guidance), that the light levels should be adjusted 
to the type of activities performed in  specific room. Furthermore, the potential of daylight usage 
is mentioned in the context of occupant health and energy consumption for lighting. 
Specification about the use of daylight and daylight conditions assessment can be found in the 
‘Daylight’ section. There are two methods specified in the document that can be employed in 
order to determine whether the building complies with the requirements – one based on DF 
and the other one based on the proportion between window pane area and floor area. 
In the ‘Daylight’ section (6.5.2(1) - provision) there are general requirements listed concerning 
what types of rooms are supposed to have sufficient daylight levels. There is also a remark 
there concerning the necessity of overheating protection by means of fenestration system 
adjustment.  
It is further supplemented (6.5.2(1) - guidance) by the instructions about how to assess daylight 
conditions. It is specified there that in the workrooms the glazing area of façade windows 
should account for at least 10% of floor area, whereas in case of roof windows this percentage 
should at least be 7%. Additional conditions is specified that light transmittance of glazing is 
min. 75%, otherwise the proportion of glazed area must be increased. It is also explained how 
to calculate the glazing/floor area proportion if the exact parameters of window are not known. 
Alternative approach for daylight conditions assessment, indicated in document as a way to 
prove that the levels of daylight is sufficient is Daylight Factor. According to the guideline, the 
DF on workplaces should account for 2%. 
Another requirement specified in ‘Daylight’ section is view to the outside (6.5.2(2) - provision). 
It is further explained (6.5.2(2) - provision) that view to the is important factor contributing to 
overall perception of the room. The requirement is therefore that even if daylight is allowed in 
the room through the roof windows, the façade windows should be included as well, to allow 
the view to the outside.  
In a closing section of ‘Daylight’ (6.5.2(3)) it is stated that the exceptions from requirements 
can only be approved for rooms, where specific commercial activity is performed that demands 
limitation of daylight access. 
==PAGE:29==
 
 
29 
 
 Case study building description 
The building selected as a case study is the historical residential multi-storey building located 
in the northern area of central Copenhagen and its precise address is Ahornsgade 6B, 2200 
Copenhagen N. It is approximately 100 years old 5 storey building with a basement.  
The floors of case study building (except the basement, which is not considered for the daylight 
conditions assessment) have identical layouts. On each floor of the case study building there 
are 8 apartment located. The layout of case study building’s floor can be seen in the Figure 8 
below. On the picture the division into flats is indicated by the red-dots frames. Additionally the 
symbols are introduced, standing for particular apartments and their rooms, in order to allow 
easier communication when describing the simulation process and results.  
All apartments, except one (Apartment 7) consist of living room, bedroom and kitchen. There 
are four staircases on the front facades of the building – 3 on the west and one from the south, 
each serving for two apartments. Additionally, on the opposite site of regular staircases, from 
the side of courtyard, there are 4 staircases accessible from apartment’s kitchens, serving for 
fire safety evacuation. This solution is typical for historical residential buildings located in dense 
urban arrangement of Copenhagen due to increased fire-safety standards introduced after two 
severe fires of the city (1728 and 1795) that damaged its substantial part, leading to numerous 
deaths. The fires gave the beginning for reconsideration of architectural form of the residential 
buildings. 
The arrangement of apartments facing east - west directions can be characterized as regular. 
Apartments 1 and 2 have the same arrangement, mirrored along the axis running exactly in 
the middle between two stairs’ runs. Living rooms of those apartment are facing west whereas 
their kitchens and bedrooms are located on the east. The layout of Apartments 3 and 4 are 
following the exact same rules. Apartment 5 has the same arrangement as well, but the next 
Apartment is not its mirrored reflection, because the corner of building starts there. Thus the 
Apartment 6 has either the living room (LR6) or the bedroom (B6) both on the west. Its kitchen’s 
window is facing north- east direction.  
The next apartment (A7) due to its location in the building’s corner has the most irregular floor 
plan. It has also bigger area than other apartments and in contrast to them it has two bedrooms 
(B7a and B7b), that are facing south. The living room of Apartment 7 has windows facing 3 
different directions – west, south-west and south. The kitchen, similarly like the kitchen of 
Apartment 6 is facing north-east.  
Apartment 8 (A8) is south - north oriented. Its floor plan has regular shape, and the room’s 
arrangement similar to those of apartments A1 to A5. The living room of Apartment 8 has 
windows oriented towards south, whereas its kitchen and bedroom are north-oriented. 
 
==PAGE:30==
 
 
30 
 
 
Figure 8 Layout of the case study  building floor 
==PAGE:31==
 
 
31 
 
 Case study building modeling  
IV.7.1 3D modeling of building’s geometry  
The case study building model was created in Google SketchUp program end then exported 
to Rhino to be further used for the simulation purposes in Diva for Rhino. The basis for 
building’s geometry modeling was a pdf drawing of building’s floor plans that was exported to 
AutoCAD 2016 in order to be scaled and dimensioned. All the floors of the case study building 
are identical in terms of apartments’ layout. They have been modeled strictly according to plans 
drawings, meaning that no simplifications were introduced in terms of rooms shapes, although 
some of them are untypical and not diagonal, e.g. rooms of Apartment 7. 
When approaching the modeling of case study building, it was important to define building’s 
elements groups based on the material properties that will further have to be assigned to them. 
In order to assign material properties to building elements it is necessary to define the layers 
and materials in the model that will correspond to particular building’s elements materials. After 
that all the surfaces of the model will have to have the adequate layer and material properties 
assigned. Four types of elements with individual materials settings was modeled in the case 
study building: external wall, internal wall, floor, ceiling, window frame and window pane. 
There is a common practice in modeling for daylight simulations purposes to neglect the 
thicknesses of building elements – walls, windows frames, slabs, and just represent them with 
a single surfaces. The purpose is not only to reduce the time spend for modeling, but also 
simulation time, which is dependent on the model complexity level. However, in order for the 
simulation results to be more precise, the thicknesses of building elements have been included 
in the model for simulation in the case of this study. One reason is that thickness of the walls 
in the building with heritage value is substantial, which affects the daylight conditions in the 
room. Another purpose is that thickness of the wall and resulting depth of a windowsill along 
with the thickness of the window frame are affecting the exact placement of solar shading 
devices and its resulting performance. 
The external walls are built from two surfaces in order to include their thickness: the external 
surface has a layer and material assigned corresponding to ‘wall external’, and the internal 
one to ‘wall internal’. The thickness of external wall (distance from its internal and external 
surface in the model) varies from floor to floor. The principle is that with each floor the thickness 
of the wall is reduced by half of the block – 12 cm. The thickness of external wall on the ground 
floor is 72 cm, 60 cm on the first floor, 48 on the second floor, 36 cm on the third floor, and 24 
cm on the fourth floor. The slab of case study building has a thickness of 18 cm. It is 
represented in the model by two surfaces – upper one with the floor material and layer 
assigned and lower one with the layer and material settings for ceiling. 
There are three types of windows in the case study building corresponding to three types of 
rooms – living room window, bedroom window and kitchen window. All of them have different 
dimensions, but the same frame thickness – 6 cm and frame width 8 cm. The living room 
window is 105 cm wide and 165 cm high. It consists of 4 panels. Two upper panels have the 
pane dimensions of 38.5 x 45 cm, and to lower ones 38.5 x 92 cm. Kitchen window has a width 
of 120 cm and the height of 130 cm. It is also divided in four panels and the dimensions of 
upper panels’ panes are 46 x 46 cm, whereas the dimensions of lower panels are 46 x 56 cm. 
The full thickness of frame, where two panes meet is 12 cm for both – living room and bedroom 
window. The kitchen window has no divisions and its dimensions are 70 x 120 cm. The surface 
representing window panes is placed in the middle of window’s thickness – 3cm from the 
surface representing frame’s face. 
==PAGE:32==
 
 
32 
 
All windows are placed 105 mm from the external face of the façade wall regardless of the wall 
thickness for particular floor. The window sill height is 800 mm for all types of windows on all 
floors except for bedroom and kitchen windows located on the ground floor, in which case the 
window sill height is 110 cm.  
IV.7.2 Materials properties 
After modeling the case study building for the simulation purposes, it was necessary to assign 
the optical properties of surfaces’ materials in the model. The exact optical properties of the 
materials cannot be specified in this case, because the choice of materials to be applied in the 
interiors is a matter of occupants’ preference. Therefore, the option was to either assign the 
default materials’ properties, usually applied when there are no material specifications 
available for the simulation purposes, or to define the materials and find the information about 
their optical properties.  
It was decided to run Daylight Factor simulations for both material properties scenarios – with 
default material properties and with defined material properties. Optical properties of both 
groups of materials are listed in the Table 1 below. The simulations were conducted for the 
case study building without any solar shading system implemented for all surrounding density 
scenarios described in the Section IV.9.The purpose was to determine the impact of both sets 
of materials on daylight performance of the case study building. Based on the results the 
material set was selected, for which higher values of Daylight Factor were achieved. 
Table 1 Reflectance values of opaque interior surfaces for Materials set 1 and 2 
Opaque surface type 
Material set 1 – Reflectance [%] Material set 2 – Reflectance [%] 
Wall 
0.5 
0.8 (white paint) 
Floor 
0.2 
0.3 (light wooden floor) 
Ceiling 
0.7 
0.8 (white paint) 
Window frame 
0.7 
0.8 (white paint) 
Second set of materials corresponds to tendencies of materials selection typical for 
Scandinavian architecture (Mussari, 2016). The walls, ceiling and window frame are white and 
the floor material is clear pine wood. Their reflectance values were found in the material optical 
values database (Singapore University of Technology and Design, n.d.). The reflectance 
values were rounded up to the first decimal point. The colors of materials and corresponding 
optical properties can be found in the Table 2 below.  
Table 2 Optical properties of Material set 2 
Type of material and input data based on (reference  
Reflectance 
0.80 
==PAGE:33==
 
 
33 
 
0.80 
0.30 
After the opaque interior surfaces in the model have their Reflectance value defined, the next 
step was to define the type of glazing in the case study building models and based on the 
selected material type, assign its optical properties. The single-pane windows in the case study 
building has been replaced decade ago for the new double glazed windows. The purpose was 
to achieve better U-value of the windows and in this way contribute to increased energy 
performance of the building. Replacement of the windows gave also an opportunity to improve 
their air tightness, which is also a potential in terms of energy saving. In the model for daylight 
simulation the double-glazed clear glass was applied, corresponding to the real case situation. 
In the simulation model the glass is represent by single surface. The default double-glass 
material was selected for the simulation from the list of predefined materials in Diva. Its value 
of transmittance is 80%. 
IV.7.3 Sensor points mesh 
The part of the model essentially important for the precision and adequacy of daylight 
simulation is sensor point mesh, which is the surface, where the sensor points are placed. 
Sensor points are the exact coordinates for which the daylight metrics are being conducted 
during the daylight simulation. Therefore, it is of an utmost importance to assure that the points 
are positioned properly in the model for daylight simulation.  
IV.7.3.1 Sensor point mesh creation 
As a rule it is taken that the offset of sensor point mesh from the walls of the evaluated room 
should account for 50 cm. Keeping the distance from the walls and windows allows to avoid 
obtaining extremely low values of luminance (by the walls), and extremely high values of 
luminance (by the windows) that are negligible due to the reason that occupants are neither 
performing their activities nor placing their tasks areas so close to the internal surfaces of the 
room. Besides that, skipping the extreme values of luminance allows obtaining more balanced, 
and thus more reliable results of daylight simulations. 
The usual height of sensor point mesh above the floor of the room investigated is 85 cm. It is 
the approximate height for work plane, where certain tasks are performed by the occupants. 
In case that the precise height of the work plane is known, e.g. there is a specific desk or table 
==PAGE:34==
 
 
34 
 
defined and thus the height of its countertop upper surface is known, it can be taken for the 
evaluation. This is usually the case for the daylight conditions investigation in the office spaces. 
In case of residential buildings, defining occupant’s activities and tasks types, its specifics and 
resulting work plane height is most often impossible. Thus, the default work plane height value 
of 85 cm is assumed for the simulations. 
Another input parameter necessary to consider when creating the sensor point mesh is the 
distance between the sensor points. The more dense the sensor point mesh is, meaning the 
smaller distances between the points, the more precise and accurate the results of simulations 
will be, because the daylight metrics’ values will be calculated for a greater amount of points. 
However, this also means longer simulation time. In order to optimize the simulation time in 
the study there is a distance of 45 cm between senor points assumed in the study.  
IV.7.3.2 Sensor point mesh optimization 
Sensor point mesh is created in Diva by indicating the surface above which the program will 
automatically generate the sensor points having as an input already mentioned height above 
the floor and the distance between the points. It is most relevant to choose floor as reference 
surfaces for creating sensor point mesh, because the floor is reference for the sensor’s height. 
It is important in Diva to make sure that the floor surfaces normal has an upward direction.  
After importing the SketchUp model to Rhino the surfaces of floor have the coordinates 
subordinated to global coordinate system of the model. While creating the sensor points, 
however, Diva was assigning individual coordinate systems to the sensor point mesh, resulting 
in the sensor point mesh being not aligned with the floor area. As a result some of the sensor 
points were generated to close to the walls or even overlapping with them, which might cause 
inadequate and low values of daylight metrics. It can be seen on the picture in the Figure 9 
below The floor surfaces have been therefore redrawn in Rhino in order for them to have 
individual coordinates.  
 
Figure 9 Sensor point mesh before optimization 
After redrawing the surfaces in Rhino and assigning individual coordinates to them, it was 
observed that when creating the sensor point mesh, the sensor points in some of the rooms 
are still located to close to the wall. That applied for the cases of rooms with untypical shape 
– most often kitchens. Due to the lack of possible solutions to this problem, it has been decided 
to subtract the border parts of floor surfaces. Additionally the kitchens areas for evaluation 
==PAGE:35==
 
 
35 
 
were reduced, in the way that their entrance areas have been excluded. The reason was that 
those zones due to their shape and distance from the window wouldn’t get any daylight, 
substantially lowering the results for daylight metrics. Moreover, the entrance areas of the 
kitchen are not the potential task areas, which means that the daylight levels there are not 
meaningful for activities performed. The final sensor point mesh, for which the calculations was 
conducted, can be seen on the picture in the Figure 10 below.  
 
Figure 10 Sensor point mesh after optimization 
 Orientation of the case study building 
For the purpose of daylight simulation the original orientation of case study   building was 
adapted. The building has east – west orientation, meaning that majority of the rooms are 
facing east or west direction and less amount is exposed to north or south.  
Five out of eight apartments (A1 – A5) located on each floor of the building have living rooms 
(LR1 – LR5) facing west and kitchens (K1 – K5) as well as bedrooms (B1 – B5) facing east. 
One of the apartments (A6) has both living room (LR6) and bedroom (B6) facing west and the 
kitchen (K6) exposed to north – east. Kitchen of the Apartment 7 (A7) is also facing north-east, 
whereas its two bedrooms are facing south and the living room has windows exposed to west, 
south-west and south. The last apartment (A8) has north – south orientation, with the kitchen 
and bedroom facing north and living room exposed to south.  
 Modeling of case study building’s surrounding 
In order for the daylight simulations to give reliable results it is important to include the 
surrounding buildings in the simulation model. The reason is that the buildings that are in the 
immediate proximity of case study building will substantially impact its daylight conditions, 
usually in the way that the daylight levels are decreased (Sadeghi & Mistrick, 2015). Therefore 
considering the surrounding density is particularly important when carrying out the daylight 
study for the building located in dense urban tissue. Neglecting the neighboring buildings will 
usually lead to the simulation results showing much better daylight performance, than it is in 
the reality.  
Building located in the dense urban structure are exposed to shading effect from neighboring 
buildings. The extent of this impact depends on many factors, like distance between the 
buildings and their heights. In general the closer and the higher the neighboring building is the 
==PAGE:36==
 
 
36 
 
bigger impact it would have on daylight conditions in rooms of case study building. Therefore, 
the main dimensions of surrounding buildings (height, length, width) and the distance between 
them (width of the road with sidewalks and cycle path, or width of the courtyard) should be 
assessed correctly in the model for simulations.  
When modeling the surrounding of the building for simulation purposes it is also important to 
decide on surrounding level of details. It can refer to both – complexity of surrounding building’s 
geometrical form and variety of different surface materials present on building’s facades. Level 
of details concerns also greenery – whether it is going to be include in the model for simulation 
and if so, how is it going to be modeled. 
The study (Sadeghi & Mistrick, 2015) about surrounding modeling for simulation purposes, 
introduces several options of surrounding: high detailed surround with trees, high detailed 
surround (without trees), L-83 (high detailed surround with trees modelled as spheres), low 
detailed surround, building itself and no surround (see Figure 11). In case of high detailed 
surround, building shapes are modeled precisely, and there is a diversification of materials on 
ground and buildings’ facades, for instance, windows can be distinguished on building’s 
facades, or sidewalks on the ground. Low detailed surround consists of buildings modelled as 
cuboids with homogenous façade material and homogenous ground, without any greenery.  
For the purpose of the study it was decided to model the base study building surrounding in a 
simplified way, corresponding to Low Detailed Surround introduced in the study (Sadeghi & 
Mistrick, 2015). The main dimensions of surrounding buildings and their distances to case 
study building have been determined for this purpose using Google Earth. The reflectance of 
neighboring buildings façade material was assigned the same as cases study building’s façade 
– 30%. The reflectance of homogenous ground was set to 20%. It was decided to also include 
the greenery in the model for simulation, unlike in case of Low Detailed Surround introduced 
in the study (Sadeghi & Mistrick, 2015). 
 
Figure 11 Surrounding modeling - level of details scenarios (Sadeghi & Mistrick, 2015) 
==PAGE:37==
 
 
37 
 
After the surround modeling method has been determined and the base case surrounding was 
been modeled accordingly, alternative options of surrounding density have been determined 
in case of which not all the neighboring buildings are present. The reason of modeling 
alternative surrounding density scenarios was to determine how the neighboring buildings 
affects the daylight conditions in case study buildings rooms of different orientation, with 
different solar shading devices applied. The simulations were done for bottom floors of the 
building – ground floor and 1st floor and for its top floor – 4th floor. Thus the relation between 
shading effect from neighboring building and the floor of the building was possible to determine 
based on the analysis of results.  
IV.9.1 Surrounding density scenario 1 – original surrounding 
The case study building is located in the central area of Copenhagen, in the dense urban 
tissue. Therefore in the original urban arrangement, the case study building is surrounded by 
other buildings from all sides. There are four buildings in the immediate proximity of the case 
study building – two of them adjacent, creating the building’s quarter, and two of them on the 
opposite side of the road 
The building evaluated is L-shaped and it comprises a part of rectangular arrangement of 
similar residential buildings with the courtyard in the middle, as shown on the illustration in the 
Figure 12. The major part of the building (Longer arm of the L shape) is located on the west of 
rectangular buildings arrangement, and the minor part (shorter arm of the L Shape) is located 
on its south.  
From north and east it faces the façade of adjacent buildings, that together with case study   
building are creating one close rectangular arrangement. The adjacent building on the west is 
approx. the same height as the case study building, and the distance between it and the case 
study is equal to the width of the courtyard – 18m. The building on the north is lower than other 
surrounding buildings, because it has one floor less.  
 
Figure 12. Case study building's surrounding density scenario original urban arrangement; 
a) plan view, b) perspective view 
From the west, another residential building of the same height and architectural form is located, 
on the distance of road’s width with bicycle paths and sidewalks from both sides - altogether 
approximately 9m width. Its height is equal to the height of the building evaluated. A 
neighboring building on the south has four floors as well, but the distance between it and the 
case study building is bigger and accounts for 12m.  
==PAGE:38==
 
 
38 
 
IV.9.2 Surrounding density scenario 2 
In surrounding density scenario 2, the arrangement and parameters of surrounding buildings 
are the same as in original arrangement represented by scenario 1, except that the building 
located west from case study building is removed from the scene (see Figure 13). It is a 
representation of an alternative situation, where one of the building’s façades is facing a public 
square, park etc. In this hypothetical situation, rooms oriented towards west are expected to 
receive bigger amount of daylight during the day, which will further by examined with the 
daylight simulations. 
On each floor of the case study building, the west-facing rooms are living rooms of apartments 
no. 1-7 (LR1-LR7) and bedroom of apartment 6 (B6). Those rooms are expected to have the 
daylight levels increased in surrounding density scenario no. 2. 
 
Figure 13 Case study building's surrounding density scenario 2; a) plan view, b) perspective view 
IV.9.3 Surrounding density scenario 3 
Considering the architectural arrangement of building, the lack of obstruction in a form of 
neighboring building from the south affects daylight conditions in less amount of rooms in case 
study building than lack of western building. However the impact it has on those rooms is 
substantial, taking into account that the solar radiation from south is the most intense during 
the day.  
The rooms that are expected to have the daylight levels increased in surrounding density 
scenario no. 3. are living rooms of apartments no. 7 and 8 (LR7 and LR8) and bedrooms of 
apartment 7 (B7a and B7b). Surrounding density scenario no. 3 is presented in the Figure 14. 
 
==PAGE:39==
 
 
39 
 
 
Figure 14 Case study building's surrounding density scenario 3; a) plan view, b) perspective view 
IV.9.4 Surrounding density scenario 4 
In the surrounding scenario 4 (Figure 15), the building removed from the scene is neighboring 
building on the east, which is a part of rectangular arrangement of buildings adjacent to case 
study   building. As a result, kitchens and bedrooms of case study building that are facing the 
courtyard – east, are supposed to receive more daylight.  
 
Figure 15 Case study building's surrounding density scenario 4; a) plan view, b) perspective view 
 Modeling the greenery  
Since the case study building is located in the city center, it is not surrounded by a luxuriant 
greenery. Although there are several low trees and bushes in the courtyard of the building 
quarter that can potentially have an impact on the daylight conditions in some of the case study 
building’s rooms. The height of the trees in the courtyard does not exceed 3m for any of them, 
thus they are only expected to impact the daylight conditions in rooms located on the ground 
floor. The case study building’s rooms facing the courtyard – north- and east-oriented rooms 
are all apartment’s kitchens (K1-K7) and all bedrooms, besides bedroom of apartment no. 6 
(B1-B5, B7, B8). The daylight performance in those rooms can potentially by affected by the 
presence of greenery. 
==PAGE:40==
 
 
40 
 
The greenery implemented in the model for simulation purposes was created using 
gen_tree.exe – Trees Generator application developed by Priji Balakrishnan and Alstan 
Jakubiec based on their investigations on trees impact on daylight distribution (Balakrishnan 
& Jakubiec, 2016). The investigation has been concerning the characteristic of light tempering, 
scattering and transmitting by the tree cone. Its aim was to develop the model of tree applicable 
for daylight simulation purposes in a way that the behavior of light is adequately represented 
without extending the simulation time excessively. There was a HDR image technique applied 
in order to assess the proportion of leaves and gaps between them on a tree cone. The 
information gathered based on series of HDR images allowed the authors of the study to create 
generic model of a tree. The model can be reproduced for different cone sizes using Trees 
Generator. 
For the simulation model 4 trees have been generated with 6m diameter and 3 with the 
diameter of 3m, representing lower greenery – bushes. The trees are accumulated by the case 
study building, in the south-west corner of the courtyard, in organized arrangement. Bushes 
are located in the center of the courtyard, forming less organized pattern. The reflectance 
values for greenery has been set according to the data from webpage Lighting Materials for 
Simulation (Singapore University of Technology and Design, n.d.). According to the source, 
the reflectance of generic tree is 8.54% and bushes’ reflectance is 15.25%. The materials 
colors and their optical properties can be seen in the Table 3 below. The reflectance values 
were rounded and used as a n input for simulations. 
Table 3 Greenery material properties data 
Greenery type and material input data 
Value of Reflectance applied 
0.10 
0.15 
The trees models have been added to all the case study building surrounding density scenarios 
models. It was decided to simulate the daylight performance of building’s ground floor for all 
surrounding options with and without the greenery (see Figure 16). Surround density scenarios 
without the greenery implemented are representing not only the alternative that there is no 
greenery in the courtyard, but also the winter situation, when the deciduous trees are losing 
their leaves. 
==PAGE:41==
 
 
41 
 
 
Figure 16 Surrounding density scenarios for the ground floor simulations - without greenery (too row) 
and with greenery (bottom row) 
 Case study building occupancy patterns 
For the simulations of Daylight Autonomy in the case study building’s rooms, the hours of 
occupancy have to be specified. In order to assess at what time during the day are the 
occupants of residential building present at home, several occupancy patterns was assumed 
for four age groups specified based on the statistics of Danish society structure (Statistics 
Denmark, n.d.). The occupancy patterns can be seen on the timelines in Figure 17. 
First age group are children and youth up to 18 years old. According to current statistical data 
they are 21.54% of the Danish society. Children and youth (up to 18 years old) are assumed 
to be at school and performing after-school activities from 8 a.m. to 3 p.m. Younger children at 
the age up to 6 years old are assumed to be in kindergartens and nurseries during the daytime. 
The commuting time of 2h is also included in their outside-home time.  
Studying and working adults are assumed to be absent from home  between 7:00-18:00 - 11 
hours, including 9h of work/university education plus sport/social activities and 2h of 
commuting. Adults in the age group 27-66 that are assumed to work on the full time positions 
and are likely to have children, are assumed to not be present at home between 7 a.m. and 5 
p.m., in which 8 hours of work is included and 2 hours of commuting – 1h in the morning and 
1h after work.  
The last age group specified is elderly people at the age of 67 and above. The occupancy 
pattern for this age group of occupants is hard to determine, as it is not possible to specify 
some regular activities common for elderly people that would enable structuring their daily 
routine patterns. However, it has been assumed that elderly people are likely to be outside 
their homes from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. 
 
==PAGE:42==
 
 
42 
 
 
Figure 17 Assumed occupancy patterns for four predefined age groups of residential building's 
occupants 
Based on the analysis of four specific age groups occupancy patterns the final setting for the 
occupancy has been chosen, corresponding to the home presence of occupants that are 
assumed present at home most frequently – elderly people. The exact occupancy time 
specified for the simulation purposes is thus 7 a.m. to 10 a.m. and 6 p.m. to 7 p.m. It has also 
been considered, that besides elderly people some percentage of the others age groups’ 
representatives is likely to have different daily routine than presumed one. Thus when 
assessing the daylight conditions by the means of DA, the comfort of all potential occupants 
has been taken into account.  
 Selection of shading systems for case study building  
Multiple selection aspects have been considered when choosing solar shading devices for 
performance assessments in the case study building. Similarly like in case of other studies 
aiming the evaluation of shading systems impact on daylight quality (Dubois, 2002), the 
selection of specific types of devices was subordinated not only to the desired effect in terms 
of performance, but also to the architectural form and function of the building. Thus, the main 
selection criteria included performance in terms of daylight conditions, operational usability and 
robustness adequate for the residential building, and finally the aesthetical features that would 
be appropriate in building with heritage value. 
==PAGE:43==
 
 
43 
 
Daylighting performance of the shading devices was the first stage of our selection criteria. As 
a principle, the rooms of old residential buildings, located in the dense urban structure are not 
receiving substantial amount of daylight. It was therefore expected that daylight levels are 
going to be generally low in the case study building and that the occurrences of glare caused 
by direct solar radiation would occur rarely. This assumption was later on confirmed by our 
simulation results, which presented that almost no glare is detectable in the evaluated rooms 
of case study building by the means of DGP index (see Section IV.2). Therefore, it was 
concluded the solar shading devices are going to be used mainly for thermal comfort and 
privacy reasons and less often to control the daylight entering the rooms’ interiors. Therefore, 
movable devices, that can be employed when necessary was a selection priority. This would 
allow the shading devices to be deployed to prevent from overheating, and retracted when the 
provision of daylight is a priority. 
Another important issue when selecting the solar shading scenarios for case study building 
was their operational adequacy in the residential building. The assumptions was that in the 
rooms of residential building, that are serving for different functions and are used by occupants 
in a various ways depending on their daily routine and preference, the maximum flexibility of 
systems is assured in terms of devices operation. Therefore, all the selected solar shading 
devices (except for MicroShades) are movable systems and controlled manually by occupants. 
One of the main objectives in terms of aesthetical aspects was to select the devices that 
interfere with the architectural form of the building to a minimum extent. To meet this objective 
there were no fixed solar shading devices selected, e.g. light shelves or overhangs that would 
have permanent and substantial impact on architectural form of the building. Moreover, the 
colors of retractable solar shading device applied in the building are neutral, not contrasting 
with the colors of the building façade. In selection of these devices, we have also considered 
the most commonly used solutions applied in old, residential buildings in the center of 
Copenhagen. 
Taking into account all the assumption listed and described above, the solar shading scenarios 
for case study building have been determined. In the Table 4 the specific devices and their 
properties to be evaluated in the case study building model for simulation are listed.  
After identifying the optimal solar shading scenarios solutions based on our selection criteria, 
the next step was to define the strategy for their modeling and simulation setup. Here all of the 
retractable devices, except for Roller Blinds, was modeled according to the technical data 
provided by producers (see Section IV.13.3 - IV.13.5). Roller Blinds had the geometry modeled 
based on the specifications for existing device by WAREMA company, but optical properties 
of their fabric were adjusted based on the BRTDF function (Wienold, Kuhn, J., & Andersen, 
2017) - see Section IV.13.2. MicroShades have been modelled and simulated using the 
simulation information provided by the producer (see Section IV.13.1). In the following 
paragraphs, the detailed description and specifications of all devices, their modeling setup and 
simulations procedures are described.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:44==
 
 
44 
 
Table 4 Solar shading scenarios to be applied in case study building for the simulations purposes 
 Solar shading devices modeling and setup for simulation purposes  
IV.13.1 MicroShade 
The first device that has been modelled and applied in the case study building for the simulation 
purposes was MicroShade. One of the reasons for selecting MicroShade as one of the 
simulation scenarios was that it is relatively innovative solution, which performance has mainly 
been tested in office building, thus it was perceived as interesting to determine what effect 
does the device have on daylight conditions in residential buildings. Another reason for 
MicroShade selection was that the device has a neutral aesthetical appearance either in the 
building interior, or from the outside. Moreover it allows the view to the outside to the extent, 
that shapes and colours of landscape elements can be clearly recognized by the occupant.  
IV.13.1.1 MicroShade installation 
MicroShade is inter-pane type of solar shading device, thus it can only be applied on windows 
with two or three layers of glazing. This way the device is protected from dirt, humidity, 
mechanical damage and other factors that would have particularly negative impact on its 
performance, considering the microstructure characteristic of MicroShade. The device is glued 
directly to the window pane using glue stripes. Depending on the expected aesthetical effect, 
it can be placed in both ways – either with vertical or with horizontal arrangement of stripes. 
Device 
Position 
Device 
Geometry 
Material 
Optical properties 
Internal 
Roller blinds 
- 
White 
BRDF data 
Grey 
BRDF data 
Black 
BRDF data 
Venetian blinds 
C-shaped slat 
Color 1 – White 
(Warema 71000) 
Tvis=0.00 
R = 0.78 
Color 2 - Grey-Beige 
(Warema 71005) 
Tvis=0.00 
R = 0.64 
Inter pane  
MicroShade 
- 
MS-A 
BRDF Data 
External 
Awning blind 
Drop-arm 
awning blind 
Fabric 1 – brown 
(Warema 4007) 
Tvis=0.00 
R = 0.01 
Fabric 2 – grey  
(Warema 5860) 
Tvis=0.00 
R = 0.13 
Sliding-arm 
awning blind 
Fabric 1 – brown 
(Warema 4007) 
Tvis=0.00 
R = 0.01 
Fabric 2 – grey  
(Warema 5860) 
Tvis=0.00 
R = 0.13 
==PAGE:45==
 
 
45 
 
According to producer’s specification, MicroShade should only be applied on windows with 
low-e glazing. However one of the assumptions for different solar shading scenarios simulation 
in the case study building was that solar shading devices will be applied on the window with 2-
layer clear glass. Thus the potential of MicroShade system daylight performance simulation in 
combination clear glass have been consulted with company’s Technical Support 
representative. As a result of consultation it has been decided to simulate the system according 
to producer’s recommendation – assuming the optical properties of low-e glass. The reason is 
that MicroShade applied on low-e glass is a complementary system and its alterations are not 
supported by the producer. 
IV.13.1.2 Selection of MicroShade type 
There are two types of MicroShade – MS-A and MS-D that are different from each other in 
terms of daylight and thermal performance. In general, MicroShade type D provides better 
protection against excessive heat loads accumulation in building, at the same time blocking 
the daylight more excessively, whereas MicroShade type A allows more daylight to the interior 
of the building, but its potential for overheating protection is lower. Thus, the adequate type of 
MicroShade should be selected for specific type of building in given geographical location to 
assure the optimal performance of the device (MicroShade, 2017).  
The specifications for MicroShade application is provided by the producer in the document 
‘Selection Guideline for MicroShade products’. According to the Guideline for device 
application in Scandinavian countries, the device should be applied on all facades, besides 
north, north-west and northeast oriented. The type of device recommended is MS-D, although 
on south, south-west and southeast facing facades there can be optionally MS-A type of the 
device applied in order to allow passive solar heat gains in winter, and thus limit the energy 
consumption for heating.  
Due to the reason that MicroShade application in residential buildings with heritage value 
located in dense urban structure is rather unusual the selection of MicroShade type for the 
application in the case study building have been consulted with Technical Support 
representative from MicroShade A/S company. The recommendation was that optimal solution 
for device application in case study building, considering its generally poor daylight conditions, 
would be to apply MicroShade type MS-A on all the facades, besides N, EW and NE – oriented, 
where the device should not be applied at all.  
IV.13.1.3 MicroShade modeling  
Next step after selecting the adequate type of device for the application in the case study   
building was to implement it in the case study building model for the simulation purposes. 
MicroShade have been modelled according to producer’s instructions from the document 
‘Guideline to daylight simulations in Diva’. The guideline contains information about device 
modeling and material optical properties setup in the model. 
The window pane model of MicroShade window consists of two surfaces: one of them, facing 
building’s interior, represents window glass, whereas the other one, facing the exterior of the 
building, represents the MicroShade. It is important to assure that the normal of surface 
representing the device has a direction towards the outside. It has not been specified in the 
Guideline whether the MicroShade surface and window pane surface should overlap in the 
model or there is supposed to be a certain distance kept between them. In order to prevent 
errors during the simulation, the surfaces must not overlap, but the distance between them 
should be as small as possible. We decided, therefore, to use a 1 mm distance between 
MicroShade and the glazing surface. 
==PAGE:46==
 
 
46 
 
Figure 18 shows a section view of a window with MicroShade implementation. In order to 
assure the readability of the drawing the distance between the MicroShade surface and 
Window surface has been scaled. All measurements are given.  
 
Figure 18 MicroShade implementation – a) living room, b) bedroom and c) kitchen window sections 
IV.13.1.4 Optical properties of the MicroShade window system 
Subsequent step after implementing the MicroShade to the simulation model was to assign 
the optical properties for MicroShade layer and glazing layer. In the ‘Guideline to daylight 
simulations in Diva’ (MicroShade, 2017) it is specified by the producer of the Device how to 
adjust the materials settings. For the MicroShade layer the exact input to Material (.rad) file is 
listed as well as the Calculation (.cal) file that have to be implemented for simulation purposes.  
It is specified in the ‘Guideline to daylight simulations in Diva (MicroShade, 2017) that the 
material properties are assigned in the usual way by selecting from the drop-down menu for 
the surface representing the glazing. The materials are predefined in the Material (.rad) file 
provided by the producer. It is necessary to assure that the specific type of material selected 
is two panes low-e glass. For the application in the case study building simulation model the 
2-leyers low-e glass with 65% visual transmittance was selected from the glazing materials 
predefined in the program Material (.rad) file.  
 
==PAGE:47==
 
 
47 
 
Considering the microstructure of MicroShade, there is a considerably more complex material 
data input necessary to adequately determine the characteristics of light transmission and 
reflection from the material. MicroShade consists of Micro lamellas that that are scattering the 
light in many directions, depending on the incidence angle of sunrays reflected from them. For 
this purpose the MicroShade producer is providing a calculation (.cal) file where the 
characteristics of light reflection from the material is described as an algorithm derived from 
the Bidirectional Reflectance Transmittance Distribution Function (BRTDF). BRTDF is a data 
set describing optical properties of material that has a complex microstructure affecting the 
characteristics of light transmission and reflection. The BRTDF data for such material can only 
be derived by means of laboratory measurements or mathematical calculations (Bartell, 
Dereniak, & Wolfe, 1980) . As practicalities, the calculation (.cal) file has to be placed in the 
Radiance Library (.lib) folder in Diva directory. The Calculation file is linked to the material 
setting in the Material (.rad) file. The input to be implemented in Material (.rad) file located in 
Project directory or Diva directory is also provided by the producer.  
The MicroShade window model can be seen in the Figure 19. The figure shows the 3D 
modelled windows with MicroShade implementation for the three window sizes.  
 
Figure 19 Rhino model of MicroShade implemented in case study building model for simulation in Diva 
- a) living room, b) bedroom and c) kitchen window 
IV.13.2 Roller Blinds  
Internal roller blinds were the next solar shading solution that were implemented to the case 
study building and simulated daylight performance evaluation. Roller blinds are commonly 
used in residential buildings. Our observations about roller blinds are that these solar shading 
devices are commonly accessible, relatively inexpensive and easy to install and operate. 
Another advantage of this shading solution is that the device does not interfere excessively 
with the architectural form of the building with the heritage value mainly due to the fact that it 
is mounted internally. 
The geometry of the device was modeled based on the specifications provided by the producer 
– WAREMA (Table 1). Specific device – WAREMA Bracket Roller blinds S has been used as 
a reference for the technical parameters determination, meaning exact dimensions and 
installation type (WAREMA, 2017). The roller blinds were modeled for three different window 
==PAGE:48==
 
 
48 
 
sizes (living room, bedroom and kitchen) and applied to the case study building 3D model. The 
roller blinds were modeled in three different color variants with the generic optical properties 
of fabrics assigned based on BTRDF data.  
IV.13.2.1 Roller blinds’ installation and geometry   
The technical parameters of the device, meaning its type of installation, geometry and 
dimensions are based on WAREMA Bracket Roller Blind S. Bracket roller blinds, unlike 
cassette roller blinds, are not installed using full reveal width profile that covers the fabric when 
the device is retracted. There are only two small profiles (brackets) on the sides that allow the 
device installation and operation. This way neither the installation elements of the device nor 
the retracted device itself require substantial amount of space. Therefore, bracket roller blind 
can be mounted in the window reveal, without the risk that it will obstruct the view to the outside 
when it is retracted.  
The brackets of WAREMA Bracket Roller Blind S are mounted to the upper window sill, right 
in front of the window frame. The width of bracket is 53 mm and its height is 65 mm. When the 
device is retraced, meaning that the fabric is rolled up, it does not exceed the dimensions of 
the brackets. Thus, considering that the width of the windows frames in the case study   
building is 80 mm, which is more that the height of retracted device, the selected type of roller 
blinds can be installed in the window reveal without risk of obstructing the view to the outside. 
The device’s placement in relation to window is shown on drawings in Figures 20 and 21. 
 
Figure 20 Roller Blinds retracted – a) living room, b) bedroom and c) kitchen window sections 
==PAGE:49==
 
 
49 
 
The bracket of the roller blind are mounted at a distance of 20 mm from the window frame. 
Considering the dimensions of the window, the resulting distance from fabric of activated 
device to the internal surface of window frame is 63.5 mm and the distance to the internal 
surface of window pane is 83.5 mm.  
There is a 20 mm distance from the edge of the fabric to the window sill and the side jambs of 
the windows. The same distance is kept between the head jamb of the window and the upper 
part of roller blind, where the device is mounted and roller up. Reason for this gap is that in 
case of bracket roller blind, unlike for case roller blind, the device is not mounted to the head 
jamb of the window on its whole width, but only on the sides. As an effect it is hanging 20 mm 
below the head jamb, which is seen form the inside. 
 
Figure 21 Roller Blinds activated – a) living room, b) bedroom and c) kitchen window sections 
==PAGE:50==
 
 
50 
 
IV.13.2.2 Roller blinds’ geometry modeling  
For simulation purposes the model of roller blinds is simplified, meaning that neither the 
installation, nor the operation elements are modeled. Their impact for photometric evaluation 
of the system is low, therefore they can be neglected in the model for simulation, which will 
contribute to decreased simulation time. There is only single surface modeled, representing 
roller blind’s fabric. As the windows’ pane in the case study building model are represented by 
a single surface, considering the installation of the device, described in previous paragraph, 
the distance from the window pane surface to the device’s fabric surface is 95 mm. The 20 
mm distances from the edges of roller blind’s fabric to the windowsill and side jambs are also 
kept in the model. There is also 20 mm distance from the head jamb to the upper edge of 
surface representing roller blinds’ fabric, resulting from the bracket type of installation. The 
device’s implementation in the model for simulation is shown in the Figure 22 below. 
 
Figure 22 Roller Blinds implementation for simulation purposes – a) living room, b) bedroom and c) 
kitchen window sections 
Besides the surface representing the roller blind’s fabric, an additional surface – transmission 
surface – is needed to be implemented in the model for the simulation purposes (Figure 23). 
The transmission surface is used to assign the light transmittance properties of the device’s 
fabric that will later on be used by Radiance during the simulation process. It has the exact 
same dimensions as the surface representing roller blind’s fabric and it is placed in the position 
parallel to it, in the middle between the surface representing window pane and roller blind 
surface - 47.5 mm from the window pane.  
==PAGE:51==
 
 
51 
 
 
Figure 23 Rhino model of Roller blinds implemented in case study building model for simulation in 
Diva – a) living room, b) bedroom and c) kitchen window ; yellow surface - roller blind’s fabric, blue 
surface – transmission layer surface 
Taking into account all the conditions listed above, originating from device’s installation 
specification, the resulting dimensions of surfaces implemented in case study building model, 
for the roller blinds’ performance simulation are: 1010 x 1610 in the living room, 660 x 1160 in 
the kitchen and 1160 x 1260 mm in the bedroom. The whole overview of roller blinds’ surfaces 
dimension can be seen in the Table 5. 
Table 5 Size of the surface representing Roller blind's fabric in the simulation model 
Type of the window 
Window dimensions - 
width x height [mm] 
Roller blinds’ models surfaces 
dimensions - width x height [mm] 
Living room window 
1050 x 1650 
1010 x 1610 
Kitchen window  
700 x 1200 
660 x 1160 
Bedroom window 
1200 x 1300 
1160 x 1260 
IV.13.2.3 Assigning optical properties of roller blinds’ fabric  
In order to test the influence of different types of roller blinds on the daylight conditions in the 
case study building, fabrics of three different colours has been selected to simulate white, grey 
and black, all of them with the light transmittance value of 5%. Assigning optical properties of 
the roller blinds’ fabric to the surfaces implemented in the model, representing the device, has 
been an important step before running the simulations. 
The fabric of roller blind is made of fibers, intertwined in specific, intended way, therefore 
creating a complex microstructure, which has a substantial impact on its optical properties. 
The light is not simply reflected or transmitted through roller blind’s fabric at the same angle 
that it hits the device’s surface, as if it was for entirely flat and homogenous surface, but it is 
scattered in many directions. The directions of daylight rays reflection depend on numerous 
different incidence angles at which the rays are reflected depending on the contexture of fibers 
in roller blind’s fabric. 
==PAGE:52==
 
 
52 
 
In order to implement the light reflection characteristics of the roller blind’s fabric in the 
simulation model the predefined data resulting from Bidirectional Reflection Distribution 
Function (BRDF) has been used (Wienold, Kuhn, J., & Andersen, 2017). For this purpose the 
calculation file (.cal), where the light reflection specifications of material are defined, has to be 
placed in Diva Radiance Library (lib) directory, in order to be furthermore loaded and 
implemented by Radiance during the simulation process. 
The calculation file is linked in the Material file (rad.) where all the material types (white, grey, 
black fabric with 5% light transmittance) are listed. The Material (.rad) file has to be located 
either in the Diva Daylight directory or in the project Resources directory in order to be 
implemented by Radiance in the simulation process. Besides the link to the calculation file 
defining the light reflection characteristics of the roller blind’s fabrics, Material (.rad) file 
contains values of several parameters describing their basic optical properties: direct 
transmission for perpendicular incidence, diffuse transmission for perpendicular incidence, cut-
off angle of the fabric and its diffuse reflection 
As it has been already mentioned in Section IV.13.2. describing roller blind’s modeling for the 
simulation purposes, the light transmittance properties of the roller blind’s fabric are assigned 
to the transmission surface that is modelled on a separate layer and implemented in the model. 
The exact values of parameters that have to be assigned to the transmission layer are defined 
in Material (.rad) file. The data collected there applies for all color variants of roller blind’s fabric.  
IV.13.3 Venetian Blinds  
IV.13.3.1 Selection of venetian blinds type  
The main objective of any solar shading device is to optimize the daylight conditions in the 
room, thus the performance parameters are the first to be taken into account when choosing 
the specific model of the device. However the selection may be reduced, when taking into 
account the technical conditions of device application. The reason is that in practice not all the 
models of devices are available for all mounting and operation variations.  
From the technical point of view the selection of specific type of venetian blinds is impacted by 
several factors. First factor is the type of operation, meaning whether the device is going to be 
operated by cord, rod, ball chain or electric switch. The preference of the operation type is 
subjective matter and depends on occupant’s experience with different systems. However 
when making the decision on the type of shading device’s operation it is worth to take into 
account its robustness and comfort of use.  
Another technical aspect affecting the final selection of solar shading device is its mounting 
solution. The solution for device’s mounting is dependent on the type of window and the way 
it is installed on the wall. It is necessary to assure that the device is placed in the way that it 
does not interfere with the window, meaning that for instance none of its part is obscuring the 
view out when the device is retracted. The solutions for WAREMA venetian blinds mounting 
system are presented and described in Section IV.13.3. 
After the technical solutions for solar shading device mounting and operation are defined it is 
possible to select the specific solution from the ones available, meaning slat type and slat 
material, and resulting optical parameters. For the case study  building the traditional cord-rod 
type of operation was chosen and the installation type in front of the reveal. The selection of 
specific installation and operation solutions as well as specific type of slat and material are 
described in the following paragraphs.  
==PAGE:53==
 
 
53 
 
IV.13.3.2 Selection of the specific device type  
From all the specific products available, there has been Warema Type 1 of venetian blinds 
selected. The reason for that choice is big flexibility of the device application, meaning that it 
is suitable for both casement or hopper windows, and it can be installed either on the wall or 
on the ceiling. The specific model of the device is 1.35.01. First digit stands for Type number 
– 1, the second is a value of slat width – in this case 35 and third indicates the type of operation. 
In this case, as it was previously mentioned, the cord-rod type of operation has been selected. 
The cord serves for pulling the device up and to lower them down and rod is used to adjust the 
tilt of the slats. Other solutions of operation include ball chain, crank and electric witch. The 
reason for choosing cord rod is that the solution is typically applied in residential buildings, 
unlike crank or electric switch. Another aspect taken into account was its traditional 
appearance that might compose well with the window.  
IV.13.3.3 Selection of installation type  
The aesthetical appearance of the venetian blinds is strongly impacted by the selected type of 
installation (mounting type). There are several types of mounting introduced in the WAREMA 
inside trade manual (WAREMA, 2017) - see Table 6 below. However, the chosen type of 
venetian blind’s installation must not only been impacted by the aesthetical preferences, but 
also subordinated to the specifications of selected device type and the type of window and 
window installation, meaning it’s exact position in the wall, width of frame etc.  
Table 6 Venetian blinds installation types - illustrations and short descriptions (WAREMA, 2017) 
Installation type 1 
Installation type 2 
Installation type 3 
Installation type 4 
Mounted in front of 
the reveal 
Mounted in the 
reveal 
(installation in 
masonry) 
Mounted with 
clamping supports 
Mounted in the 
reveal 
(installation in 
mullion and transom 
construction) 
 
 
 
 
 
In case of the first type of installation – in front of the reveal, the distance between the window 
and the venetian blinds device depend on the thickness of the wall and depth of the window in 
the wall, meaning the distance between the internal surface of the wall and the window. This 
==PAGE:54==
 
 
54 
 
type of installation, unlike the installation types 2 and 4 (in the reveal) does not cause the 
problem of fitting the device and its accessories in the reveal. As it can be seen on the first a    
picture in the Table 6 above, regardless of the parameters of the window, its position in the 
wall and parameters of the device itself, there is no risk that any element of the device could 
obscure the window. On the other hand, the installation in the reveal (type 2 and 4 in the Table 
6)  allows smaller distance between the venetian blinds and the window and thereby higher 
integration of those two elements. Therefore, the impact that the device has on the overall 
visual appearance of the window is in this case decreased. The installation type 3, as shown 
on the illustration in the Table 6 requires the additional elements referred to as clamping 
supports (WAREMA, 2017). Clamping supports allow the installation of internal venetian 
blinds, even if the window is installed in the way that its framing elements are placed in front 
of internal surface of the wall. However, the additional supporting elements do obviously have 
an impact on the appearance of window-blinds system.  
As it was mention above, the most aesthetically neutral solution is installation in the reveal 
where due to the close distance between the window and the device the system is more 
integrated. Therefore, considering that in the building with heritage value the most desired 
solar shading systems are visually neutral ones, this solution proves to be the most an 
appropriate solution. When deciding about the installation type, however, the first condition to 
fulfill is to avoid obstructing any portion of the view to the outside when the device is retracted. 
Thus, it is necessary to determine the height of the device when all the slats are pulled up 
referred to as the “order height” and marked with the letter X in the Table 6. 
The order height includes the height of the profile that allows installation of the device and the 
thickness of all slats. Thus, its vale is dependent on the number of slats necessary to cover 
the window along its height when the device is pulled down. The precise value of the order 
height, related to the height of the window is specified by the producer in the inside trade 
manual (WAREMA, 2017). Additionally it is recommended to correct this number by additional 
15 mm the order height value determined based on window’s height. The heights of windows 
in case study building and resulting venetian blind’s order height are listed in the Table 7.  
Table 7 Venetian blinds order height based on windows height (WAREMA, 2017) 
Type of the window 
Height of the window 
[mm] 
Venetian blinds 
order height [mm] 
Corrected height of 
venetian blinds order 
[mm] 
Living room window 
1650 
95 
110 
Kitchen window  
1200 
80 
95 
Bedroom window 
1300 
85 
100 
After determining the height of venetian blinds order, it is possible to select the installation type 
based on the possibility to place it in the window reveal without obstructing the view to the 
outside. To fulfill this condition the height of venetian blind’s order in the case study building, 
considering its traditional window type and placement in the wall, should not exceed width of 
the window frame, which is 80 mm for all the window types in the building. Considering the 
high values of order height it is not possible to place venetian blinds in the reveals in any of 
the rooms, without obstructing the view to the outside when the devices are retracted. 
Therefore, the Installation type 1 – in front of the reveal is selected as the most suitable 
alternative solution. 
In the case study building, the window is placed 105 mm deep from the external face of the 
wall. Due to non-constant thickness of external wall, increasing from floor to floor ranging from 
240  mm  to 750 mm, the distance from internal face of the wall to the window is different for 
==PAGE:55==
 
 
55 
 
each floor. The thickness of the wall on each floor and resulting depths of internal part of 
windowsill are given in the Table 8 below.  
Table 8 The approximate distances from the window to venetian blinds system. 
Floor number 
Thickness of the wall [mm] 
Approx. distance from the 
window to venetian blinds 
[mm] 
Floor 0 (Ground floor) 
720 
615 
Floor 1 
600 
495 
Floor 2 
480 
375 
Floor 3 
360 
255 
Floor 4 
240 
135 
 
IV.13.3.4 Selection of the venetian blinds color  
The last step is to specify the material and color of the device. Those properties are directly 
affecting the optical parameters of device’s material, meaning visual transmittance and 
reflectance. Majority of the venetian blinds models have opaque acrylic or aluminum slats, with 
zero value of visual transmittance. However, there can be specific solutions found, where partly 
transparent materials are used in order to enhance daylighting. The reflectance of material is 
affected by its color – the lighter the color, the higher value of reflectance, darker colors result 
in higher value of absorbance and lower reflectance. Thus, the material and color of slats 
should be selected according to the expected effect on daylighting and solar shading. It the 
daylighting is a main objective, meaning redirecting the daylight to the rare of the room, by 
adjusting the angle of the slats adequately, then the materials of high – 70% of light 
transmittance should be selected. On the other hand, when the main purpose of shading 
device is the protection from excessive luminance levels, the darker slat materials should be 
considered, with considerably lower value of reflectance. 
The selected color and type of material can also affect the overall aesthetical appearance of 
the building, therefore the architectural form of the building should be considered when 
choosing the device. Selecting the material and colors of solar shading device in a building 
with heritage value is particularly challenging. Even though the final aesthetical effect will 
usually be a subjective matter, the general principle is to select the most possible visually 
neutral device. However, the desired daylighting effect should always be the main basis for the 
decision about device’s material and color. For the case study building the approach was to 
choose the materials from a neutral color palette. 
In the case study building, where the daylight conditions and distribution of daylight are 
expected to be rather insufficient due to the layout of room and inadequate area of windows, 
allowing for maximum daylight, not sun screening will be objective of venetian blinds 
application. Thus, relatively bright colors of device’s slats are to be considered. Selection of 
bright colors is also justified from the aesthetical point of view, as the façade is painted in light 
beige color and the interiors of the building are expected (and highly recommended) to be paint 
in white which is the general tendency in Scandinavian architecture (Mussari, 2016), serving 
not only for pure aesthetical appearance, but also better daylighting.  
Two colours, marked in the Table 9 below were selected to define the optical parameters’ 
values when simulating the daylight conditions in case study  building apartment’s rooms.  
==PAGE:56==
 
 
56 
 
Table 9 Properties of Venetian blind's material applied in case study building 
Material type 
Material’s color  
Visual transmittance 
of the material (Tvis) 
Visual reflectance of 
the material (Rvis) 
Warema Slat 
Design 71000 
white 
 
0.00 
0.78 
Warema Slat 
Design 71005 
grey-beige 
 
0.00 
0.64 
 
The First one – WAREMA Slat Design 71000 is cold white colored acrylic slat with the highest 
available value of reflectance, accounting for 78%. White color slats of the venetian blinds are 
expected to compose well either with the building’s façade viewed from the outside, or with the 
interiors of the building – white walls and white window frame. The second selected slat 
material WAREMA Slat Design 71005 is grey-beige color with lower value of reflectance (64%). 
The 71005 color is closely similar to building’s façade paint and therefore it is expected to 
compose well with the façade when the venetian blind is pulled down. The two colors, varying 
with the reflectance value were selected in order to determine on the results analysis stage, 
after collecting simulation results, how does the reflectance value of slat’s material impact the 
daylight conditions and distribution of daylight in the rooms.  
IV.13.3.5 Venetian blinds positions  
Venetian blinds are unique in the way that majority of this types of devices available on the 
market, are possible to split it in two independently operated parts. It means that slats are 
divided into two groups of slats – upper group, covering the upper part of the window and lower 
part, covering the bottom part of the window. The bottom part is usually at least twice as high 
as upper part.  
Such division allows for a more advanced strategy of daylight control. The example of different 
screening and daylighting strategies achieved by varying slat tilt angles of independently 
controlled slat groups is introduced by WAREMA Inside Trade manual (WAREMA, 2017). The 
schematic drawings of 3 venetian blind positions is shown in the Figure 24 below.  
On the illustration in the Figure 24a slats of both slats groups are tilted in the way that they are 
blocking the light entirely, reflecting it to the outside. Their tilt angle is approximately 5 degrees 
in this case. Considering that, slats are wider than the spaces between they center points 
(rotation points) it is assured that no direct light is passing to the interior through the gaps 
between the slats. On the second drawing (Figure 24b) there is a venetian blinds position 
presented, where the tilt angle of the upper part of slats is 90 degrees, whereas the bottom 
group of slats is closed, similarly like all the slats in the first position presented. In this position 
the bottom part of venetian blinds allow protection from glare and high luminance levels caused 
by direct solar radiation, whereas the upper part of the device not only allows the diffuse solar 
radiation, but also redirects the direct sunlight to the back of the room. Such configuration is 
effective for low-angle solar radiation. In case of third position (Figure 24c) of venetian blinds 
its upper part is tilted approximately 90 degrees upwards, meaning, that they are reversed in 
a way that the solar radiation is reflected by internal part of the slats. Lower group of slats is 
tilted by approximately 85 degrees, which prevents from high angle direct solar radiation, but 
allows diffused light into room. 
==PAGE:57==
 
 
57 
 
 
Figure 24 Split curtains scheme for venetian blinds type 1.35.01 – a) Low (Down), b) Tilt, c) High (Up) 
According to WAREMA Inside Trade Manual (WAREMA, 2017), for the 1.35.01 type of 
venetian blinds it is possible to split the slats into two groups with the proportion either 1:3 or 
2:5 (number of slats in the upper part of device : number of slats in the lower part of the device). 
For the venetian blinds application in the case study building the slats split proportion of 2:5 
has been selected. The purpose of including more slats to the upper part of the device, than it 
would be possible with 1:3 proportion of slats split is to take the most possible advantage of 
daylighting through the upper part of the window, while the lower part is protected from direct 
solar radiation. Such daylighting strategy can be particularly beneficial in case of rooms having 
generally poor daylight conditions – low daylight levels and uneven distribution of daylight.  
There were 2 slats configurations chosen for the optimization of the device performance. In 
the first configuration, all the slats have the same tilt angle, accounting for 90 degrees. This 
position of venetian blinds’ slats allows the diffused solar radiation at the same time preventing 
the high angle direct solar radiation. In order to protect from low angle solar radiation, the 
second slat’s configuration was introduced. In the second position of the device the split of 
slats into upper (2:5 of all slats) and lower (3:5 of all slats) parts is used. The configuration is 
the same as the second one introduced in WAREMA Inside Trade Manual – upper part is open 
(90 degrees slats angle) allowing diffused light and redirecting low angle direct solar radiation 
on similar principle as a light shelf, whereas the lower part is closed to block direct light that 
might cause visual discomfort.  
The device in both positions is shown in The Figure 25. The exact location of the venetian 
blinds on the internal face of the wall can be seen on the drawings. On each drawing the height 
of the whole system (including the installation profile and the bottom profile) is dimensioned as 
well as the height of the slats’ order.  
 
==PAGE:58==
 
 
58 
 
 
Figure 25 Venetian blinds with 2nd slats' configuration - a) living room, b) bedroom and c) kitchen 
window; pictures on top – device position 1, pictures on bottom – device position 2 
==PAGE:59==
 
 
59 
 
IV.13.3.6 Venetian blinds modeling  
In order to simulate the venetian blinds system in Diva, it was necessary to prepare the 3D 
morel representing their geometry. The first step was to draw them in the 2D section view in 
AutoCAD. To start with, the technical drawing in AutoCAD format, downloaded from WAREMA 
website was used. The drawing (presented in the Figure 26) contains the geometry of slats as 
well as installation and operation system of the venetian blinds in front and section view. It 
served as a reference for creating the drawings of the system applied on the reference 
building’s windows.  
 
Figure 26 WAREMA internal Venetian Blind type 1.35.01 – front and section view (WAREMA, 2017) 
Based on the AutoCAD drawing from WAREMA, section views of the venetian blinds applied 
to the specific rooms of case study building were created. Furthermore the device was modeled 
for the implementation in the simulation model. The models od venetian blinds in all positions 
can be seen in Figure 27. Models on the top represent the configuration of the system with all 
slats tilted by 90 degrees. Slats configuration, where the upper part of the device is opened 
(90 degreed slats tilt angle) and the bottom part is closed is represented by models on the 
bottom of Figure 27. There are the windows of living room, bedroom and kitchen on second 
floor presented.  
==PAGE:60==
 
 
60 
 
 
Figure 27 Rhino model of Venetian blinds applied in case study building model for simulation in Diva – 
a) living room, b) bedroom and c) kitchen window; pictures on top – device position 1, pictures on 
bottom – device position 2  
IV.13.3.7 Venetian blinds operation principle  
The settings for venetian blinds operation are adjusted in the options for dynamic solar shading 
device in Diva for Rhino. It was specified for venetian blinds to be manually operated, meaning 
that occupants are employing the device and adjusting its exact position based on the 
presence of direct sunlight on the work plane. In the further settings the layers are specified 
containing the device geometry to be implemented for certain device state. For the base state 
of the device, meaning that it is not employed, neither of the layers is selected. In the next 
device states, the layers containing geometry corresponding to device’s positions (see Figure 
27) are selected. In the simulation process the state of the device is adjusted automatically 
based on direct sunlight presence on the work plane.  
IV.13.4 Awning blind modeling and simulation  
Drop arm awning blind is an external, movable solar shading system, commonly applied in 
central areas of Copenhagen for both residential and public use buildings. It was observed that 
awning blinds are being more commonly chosen as a solar shading system for both modern 
buildings and buildings with heritage value. Awning blind’s fabric is tilted and therefore another 
benefit from its application is that even though it provides an effective protection against the 
consequences of excessive solar radiation, at the same time it allows the diffused light to enter 
from the side. In addition, some view to the outside is possible even if the device is retracted.  
==PAGE:61==
 
 
61 
 
IV.13.4.1 Selection of the specific type of device for the reference  
For the application in the case study building WAREMA drop arm Awning Blind type 340 were 
selected as a reference for modeling and simulation setup (WAREMA, 2017). The device is 
mounted outside the reveal and it can either be operated with the motor or with the crank. It is 
suitable for application on vertical punched windows and element windows. 
Drop arm awning blind consists of several elements responsible for installation and operation 
of the device. When the fabric of the device is rolled up it is positioned in the fabric shaft, under 
the cover panel, that is protecting the material from exposure to weather factors. The fabric 
shaft is mounted to the external wall using fabric shaft console. The bottom edge of drop arm 
awning blind’s fabric is attached to drop profile. The drop profile is connected to drop arm which 
is pulling the drop profile down when the device is being retracted. Therefore the tilt angle of 
an awning blind’s fabric depends on the drop arm angle in relation to window – the bigger the 
drop arm angle is the smaller the tilt angle of device’s fabric. All the elements that WAREMA 
Drop Arm Awning consists of are listed and described on the illustration in Figure 28. 
 
Figure 28 WAREMA drop arm Awning Blind type 340 – perspective with components description 
(WAREMA, 2017) 
IV.13.4.2 Awning blinds position applied in the simulation models  
For the simulation purposes, there are several states of solar shading device defined and 
implemented in case study building model for simulation purposes. The base state position of 
solar shading device in the model for simulation is that there is no solar shading device 
activated, meaning that no geometry is selected to represent the position of solar shading 
device. The base state is followed by two states of solar shading system defined in the model 
for simulation, representing two specific positions of the device.  
==PAGE:62==
 
 
62 
 
In the first specified position of the solar shading device, the drop arm of an awning blind is 
completely extended making a 90° angle to the window - Figure 29 (a-c). The resulting tilt 
angle of device’s to the window pane  is 37°. In this position of an awning blind the bottom part 
of the window is not obstructed by the device. As a result the high-angle solar radiation is 
prevented from entering the room, while at the same time diffused light and the view to the 
outside are not obstructed.  
 
Figure 29 Awning Blinds position 1 – a) living room, b) bedroom and c) kitchen window sections 
In the second position of the device (Figure 30a-c), the angle of drop arm is adjusted for each 
window in the way, that the maximum possible area of the windows is obstructed by the 
devices fabric. The principle of operation is that the more the drop arm is tilted downwards (the 
bigger is its angle in relation to window), the smaller the tilt angle of fabric and as a result the 
bigger part of the window is obstructed by the device’s fabric.  
 
Figure 30 Awning Blinds position 2 – a) living room, b) bedroom and c) kitchen window sections 
 
==PAGE:63==
 
 
63 
 
The second position of drop arm awning blind is selected separately for the three window 
types. The angle of drop arm in Living Room’s window is 135° (maximum possible drop arm 
angle for selected type of the device) and the device’s fabric tilt angle is 15°. Due to the height 
of the living room window, it is not possible to fully obstruct it with selected type of awning blind 
- even applying the biggest possible drop arm angle the bottom part of the window remains 
unobstructed – Figure 30 (a) 
The height of bedroom and kitchen windows allow covering them by adjusting the adequate 
angle of the drop arm. The drop arm angle was therefore adjusted in the way that full that the 
windows are covered on their full height while the biggest achievable tilt angle of device’s fabric 
is kept. Drop arm angle in the kitchen is 115° and resulting tilt angle of a fabric is 25° Figure 
30 (c). To cover the bedroom window fully, the drop arm angle is 125° and the fabric tilt angle 
is 20° Figure 30 (b). 
IV.13.4.3 Optical properties of drop Awning Blind’s material 
For the application in case study building, two different color variants of acrylic drop arm awning 
blinds were selected. The first one in Warema Acryl Lumera Design number 4007 – brown, 
with 0% visual transmittance and 1% reflectance. Another selected material type is WAREMA 
Acryl Lumera Design number – grey, with 0% visual transmittance and 13% reflectance. As 
indicated by the values of optical properties parameters, both of the material variants selected, 
are highly absorptive with no transmittance (see Table 10 below).  
Table 10 Properties of Markisolette’s material applied in case study building 
Material type 
Material’s color  
Visual transmittance of 
the material (Tvis) 
Visual reflectance of 
the material (Rvis) 
Warema Acryl 
Lumera 4007 
0.00 
0.01 
Warema Acryl 5860 
 
0.00 
0.13 
 
IV.13.4.4 Drop arm awning blinds modeling  
Similarly as in case of other devices, simplified geometry of awning blinds have been created 
for the implementation in case study building simulation model. All the elements responsible 
for device installation and operation were considered while modeling the device. The crucial 
part of the device – its fabric was modelled as a single surface in both position described above 
for all window types in the case study building – living room, bedroom and kitchen type, as 
presented on the drawings in Figure 31 and models in Figure 32. 
==PAGE:64==
 
 
64 
 
 
Figure 31 Awning Blinds implementation for simulation purposes – a) living room, b) bedroom and c) 
kitchen window sections  
An additional surface was introduced to the model, representing the connection of the awning 
blind to outside wall of the case study building. The surface is perpendicular to the window and 
it fills up the gap between the device’s fabric and the façade surface, where the device would 
be mounted. Introducing the surface, the penetration of sun rays through the gap is prevented 
from being included during the simulation process, which is important for the accuracy and 
reliability of simulation results.  
 
Figure 32 Rhino model of Awning Blinds applied in case study building model for simulation in Diva – 
a) living room, b) bedroom and c) kitchen window; pictures on top – device position 1, pictures on 
bottom – device position 2 
==PAGE:65==
 
 
65 
 
The next step of model preparation before the simulation was to assign the material properties 
to the awning blind’s model. For this purpose the material input data has been created based 
on the optical properties of material provided by the producer (described in the paragraph 
above) and added to Material (.rad file) in the project directory. After supplementing the 
Material file it was possible to select adequate materials for the device’s models.  
Before starting the simulation it was necessary to assign the detailed solar shading device 
settings – introduce the solar shading device positions. The operation type selected for the 
device is manual. The adequate position of solar shading device is selected depending on the 
presence of direct solar radiation on the work plane represented by sensor point mesh. Three 
states of the device are defined in detailed solar shading device settings: the base state with 
no device geometry chosen, meaning that the awning blind is retracted, state one 
corresponding to the device modelled in position 1 and state 2 corresponding to the device in 
position 2. After this setup the models is ready for simulations.  
IV.13.5 Markisolette  
Another solar shading device to be modeled and implemented in a case study   building model 
was a sliding arm awning blind, often referred to as markisolette. Markisolette is a type of an 
awning blind, alternative to drop arm awning blind. Similarly, as in a drop arm awning blind, 
markisolette is an external solar shading screen. However, unlike a drop arm awning blind, 
sliding arm awning blind is not entirely tilted. It consists of the upper part, which is vertical – 
parallel to the surface of window pane, and the lower part which is tilted and its tilt angle 
depends on the position of the device. The exact geometry of device as well as the proportions 
between the upper and the lower part of markisolette depend on a producer and specific model 
of the device. 
Markisolette is a solar shading device that combines the benefits of roller blind application with 
the benefits of drop arm awning blind. The upper, vertical part efficiently protects from 
excessive solar radiation, regardless its angle, whereas the lower part protects high-angle 
solar radiation, at the same time allowing the view to the outside and diffuse light. The 
geometry of the device is also beneficial from mechanical point of view - because only the 
lower part of the device is tilted, it is exposed less to the wind forces than drop arm awning 
blind, which is entirely tilted. 
IV.13.5.1 Dimensions of selected type of the device 
The geometry of the device and resulting proportion between the upper – vertical and lower – 
tilted part of the device depends on the dimensions of elements that specific types of device 
consists of. The overall height of the device is determined by the guide rail length, which should 
be selected according to the height of the window. The dimensions of device’s elements that 
are responsible for its movement and positioning are however constant for specific type of the 
device. Those are length of the drop arm and height at which it is mounted on the guide rail as 
well as length of connecting rail. The drop arm is responsible for the movement of drop profile, 
where bottom edge of markisolette’s fabric is placed, whereas connecting rail is an element 
responsible for movement of the guiding tube, at which the fabric changes the position in 
relation to window from parallel to tilted.  
For the application in the case study, building WAREMA Markisolette 150 has been n selected 
as a basis for device modeling (WAREMA, 2017). The guide rail of the markisolette was 
selected for all the windows’ types in the building (living room, bedroom and kitchen window) 
according to their height. As it can be seen on the illustration in the Figure 33, the fixed 
dimensions of device’s elements are in this case: length of the drop arm (541 mm), distance 
==PAGE:66==
 
 
66 
 
from the bottom of guide rail to the drop arm mounting (~425 m) and length of the connecting 
rail that is responsible for the movement of guiding tube (503 mm).  
 
Figure 33 WAREMA Markisolette 150 – a) perspective with components description, b) section view 
(WAREMA, 2017) 
As it has already been mentioned above, the length of markisolette’s guide rail depends on the 
height of the windows. For the living room window that is 1650 height, the length of the guide 
rail is 1670 mm, for 1300 mm high bedroom window it is 1320 mm and for the window in the 
kitchen (1200 mm height) guide rail’s length is 1220 mm. The guiding tube – an element where 
the markisolette changes its position from vertical to tilted is placed at the height of 953 mm 
the guide rail for all windows, despite their height and resulting guide rail’s height. Above this 
height, the vertical part of markisolette has a height of 717 mm in the living room, 367 mm in 
the bedroom and 267 mm in the kitchen, which does not change with the change of device’s 
position.  
IV.13.5.2 Markisolette’s positions in the case study building 
The position of markisolette, meaning the its lower part tilt angle depends on the angle of drop 
arm in relation to the guide rail. For all the window types in case study building, there were two 
positions of the device selected for the simulation purposes – Figure 34. In the first position 
the drop arm is at 90° angle in relation to the guide rail. The resulting tilt angle of lower part of 
markisolette’s fabric is 45°. In the second position the maximal drop arm angle for selected 
type of the device has been considered, which is 145°. In this case the tilt angle of lower part 
of device’s fabric is 18°. 
When the markisolette is in its first position, the lower part of the window is uncovered. For the 
selected WAREMA Markisolette 150 with the drop arm angle positioned at 90°, the height of 
uncovered part of the window is 450 mm. In this configuration of the markisolette, the high-
angle direct solar radiation is prevented, while still allowing the diffused light and preserving 
some view to the outside. Second position of the device is activated in order to protect from 
low-angle solar radiation, for instance in the morning in the East-facing rooms and in the 
evening is west-facing rooms.  
==PAGE:67==
 
 
67 
 
 
Figure 34 Two positions of Markisolette – a) living room, b) bedroom and c) kitchen window sections  
 
Figure 35 Markisolettes implementation for simulation purposes – a) living room, b) bedroom and c) 
kitchen window sections  
 
IV.13.5.3 Markisolette’s modeling and simulation setup 
For the purpose of simulations, simplified model of markisolette was created (see Figure 35 
above). The elements of the device responsible for its installation and operation were not 
included on the device’s model. Only the fabric was modelled as an object consisting of two 
surfaces – one representing the upper vertical part and one representing the lower – tilted part 
of the device. For each type of the window markisolette’s fabric has been modelled in both 
positions – with the greater and lesser tilt angle of its lower part. After completing the models 
they were implemented in the case study building model on a separate layer (see Figure 36). 
==PAGE:68==
 
 
68 
 
 
Figure 36 Rhino model of Markisolettes applied in case study building model for simulation in Diva – a) 
living room, b) bedroom and c) kitchen window; pictures on top – device position 1, pictures on bottom 
– device position 2  
The next step of model preparation before the simulation was to assign the material properties 
to the markisolette’s model. The Markisolette’s material variants selected for simulation 
purposes are the same as those selected in case of Awning Blind - Warema Acryl Lumera 
Design number 4007 – brown, with 0% visual transmittance and 1% reflectance and WAREMA 
Acryl Lumera Design number – grey, with 0% visual transmittance and 13% reflectance. The 
optical properties of materials was already implemented in Material (.rad) file during drop arm 
awning blinds simulation setup. Thus, it was only necessary to assign adequate materials to 
the Markisolette geometry layer.  
Furthermore, the detailed solar shading device settings have been assigned. The manual 
operation of markisolette has been selected. The device is activated and its adequate position 
selected with regard to the presence of direct solar radiation on the work plane represented by 
sensor point mesh. There are three states of the device defined in detail solar shading device 
settings: the base state with no solar shading device, meaning that the markisolette is 
retracted, state one corresponding to the device modelled in position 1 and state 2 
corresponding to the device in position 2. After this setup the models is ready for simulations.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:69==
 
 
69 
 
 
Results 
The simulations have been performed on 3 specific floors – ground floor, 1st floor and 4th floor, 
or 4 surrounding density scenarios and two scenarios of greenery for the ground floor. The 
resulting number of cases corresponding to different external (environmental) factors affecting 
daylight is 16. The overview of cases can be seen in the Figure 37. 
 
Figure 37 Summary of Surrounding density and greenery presence scenarios 
As it can be seen from the overview of solar shading scenario in the building presented in 
Table 4 (Section IV.12). There were 11 specific solar shading devices selected for the 
implementation in the case study building. Multiplying the number of cases for different external 
factors simulated for all the solar shading devices, the resulting number of simulations carried 
out was 176. Considering that on each floor of case study building 25 rooms were evaluated, 
the resulting number of DA results is supposed to be 3520. However, due to incorrectly 
specified floor plane for sensor point mesh creation in case of B7b on 4th floor, SD 1 the DA 
result for this specific room is missing for all solar shading scenarios. Therefore, the final 
number of results is 3509. 
Considering the size of database obtained as simulations results, the adequate strategy of 
results representation was specified. With an explorative approach, we describe the effect of 
several internal and external factors on daylight performance. These factors are describe 
briefly below and the results are presented in detail in following sections:  
 
Daylight performance dependency on interior surface material: two material set up 
(material set up 1 and material set up 2) were tested. The cross effect of material and 
surrounding density (1-4) was investigated.  
 
Daylight performance dependency on building’s floors: daylight performance on each 
floor (0, 1 and 4) and for the all implemented shading system (1- 11) are shown and 
described.   
==PAGE:70==
 
 
70 
 
 
Daylight performance dependency on surrounding density: Two surrounding density (with 
and without neighboring building in 9-12 m distance) are tested for four building 
orientations (E, N, S, W) and all the shading systems.  
 
Daylight performance dependency on greenery presence: The shading effect of greenery 
(with or without greenery) is tested and compared to the shading effect of surrounding 
density (with or without neighboring building)  
 
The structure of graphs presenting the result  
The graphs in the Appendices A-B are structured in similar way. The y axes refers to the score 
for a given daylight metric (DF for graphs in Appendix A and DA for graphs in Appendices B-
D). On x axes the rooms of case study building are distributed, grouped according to particular 
conditions, for which impact is being analyzed (surrounding density, floor, greenery, materials).  
The same order of rooms is applied for all the graphs and it refers to room’s orientation, which 
is indicated in colors. The principle is that as first the east- facing rooms are listed (orange 
color of bars), then the north facing rooms (blue color of bars), south facing rooms (red color 
of bars) and west facing rooms (yellow bars). The Rooms are referred to in the legend on the 
right, that is also following the color code. On the Figure 38 the rooms grouping according to 
their orientation is presented.  
 
Figure 38 Rooms classification according to their orientation; orange - east-facing rooms, blue - north 
facing rooms, red - south-facing rooms, yellow - west facing rooms 
 
Interior surface material and daylight performance   
The first daylight simulations conducted were aiming at observing the impact of optical 
properties of opaque interior surfaces on the daylight performance of the case study building. 
These simulations were done with no solar shading device implemented in the case study.  
Daylight Factor simulations were carried out with two scenarios of interior surface material 
properties (see Table 1 in Section IV.7.2). In the first scenario, internal opaque materials had 
the default reflectance values. This default setting is usually applied for the simulations when 
the photometric properties of the materials are missing. The second scenario, the optical 
properties of materials commonly used in Scandinavian design was selected (Mussari, 2016). 
==PAGE:71==
 
 
71 
 
The impact of greenery was not taken into account. The results are presented on four graphs 
in Appendix A (Section IX). On each graph the results are shown for specific DA scenario. 
The DF simulations for both material reflectance scenarios was done for all the building floor 
levels investigated (ground floor, 1st floor and 4th floor) and surrounding density scenarios. The 
results are collected on the graphs that can be found in Appendix A. Each graph presents the 
results for different surrounding density scenario - graph no. 1 shows the DF results for 
surrounding density scenario no.1, graph no. 2 for surrounding density 2 etc. (surrounding 
density scenarios are described in Sections IV.9.1 - IV.9.4). 
V.2.1.1 
DF results for different materials properties scenarios – surrounding density no. 1  
The DF results collected on the Graph no. 1 in Appendix A show that the DF values in the 
rooms located on the ground floor of the case study building are lower than 2% (the minimum 
requirement). In the majority of rooms (23 out of 25 rooms) the DF is beneath 0.5% for the 
Material set no.1. For material set no. 2 the DF values on the ground floor are slightly larger – 
they are ranging between 0.4 – 0.9%. Similar difference in DF values can be observed between 
materials set 1 and 2 on the 1st floor. On the 4th floor of the case study building the DF values 
are higher in comparison to the lower floors. The difference between DF values for material 
set no. 1 and material set no.2 is proportionally higher for some of the rooms, e.g. the DF in 
LR7 is 0.5% higher with materials set no. 2 applied than for materials set no.1.  
V.2.1.2 
DF results for different materials properties scenarios – surrounding density no. 2 
In case of SD scenario no.2, where the neighboring building on the west from case study 
building is excluded (Graph no. 2 in Appendix A), the DF values are considerably higher in the 
west facing rooms (yellow color on the graph no. 2 in Appendix A). It can be seen that by 
applying the interior opaque materials of higher reflectance value, the resulting DF value in the 
rooms is increased by 0.4-0.5% on all floor of the case study building.  
V.2.1.3 
DF results for different materials properties scenarios – surrounding density no. 3 
In SD scenario no. 3, for which the results are presented in the Graph no. 3 in Appendix A, 
there is no neighboring building on the south from the case study building. Therefore is this 
case the south-facing rooms of case study building have considerably higher value of DF. The 
result collected on the graph show, that by applying the more reflective interior materials 
(material set no. 2), the DF values are 0.3-0.5% higher than with default materials (materials 
set no. 1).  
V.2.1.4 
DF results for different materials properties scenarios – surrounding density no. 4 
The results for SD no. 4 are presented on the Graph 4 in Appendix A. In case of this SD 
scenario, where the neighboring building that is closing the courtyard from the east is excluded, 
the DF values for east-facing rooms are higher comparing to other SD scenarios. It can be 
seen from the graph, that for the DF values for east-facing rooms are in this case slightly (0.2-
0.3%) higher for materials set no. 2 than for material set no. 1. 
V.2.2 Summary of results  
Two material sets  were compared for two options of sounding density (with and without 
neighboring building) on four room orientations – E, N, S and W. Using material set 2 which 
are ceiling, floor and wall materials with higher reflectance value improves the daylight 
conditions. This improvement is most significant for east-east oriented rooms.   
In addition, the effect of shading from neighboring buildings are apparent. Here we had two 
scenarios, with and without neighboring building. The distance to the neighboring buildings is 
9 – 12 m, depending on the building. For both material settings 1 and 2 these worsen when 
==PAGE:72==
 
 
72 
 
the building is shaded. The effect of surrounding density is also further investigated in following 
sections.  Finally, the general conclusion was that for material set 2 the resulting DF values 
were higher. Therefore, it was decided to use the corresponding material settings for the DA 
simulations aiming the evaluation of solar shading devices performance 
 
Daylight performance on different building floors 
To have a better understanding of overall daylight performance in the building, we did daylight 
performance evaluations on three floors: ground floor, 1st floor and the 4th floor.  In the Appendix 
B the results are collected in graphs showing the impact of floor on which case study building’s 
rooms are located on the daylight conditions in them. There are the separate graphs for all 
solar shading devices and for the case without any solar shading device. On each graphs the 
DA values are shown on 3 investigated floors for Surrounding Density Scenario no. 1 – base 
case scenario. All other SD scenarios and greenery presence scenarios are excluded for the 
analysis. In the dense urban tissue, one expects that the lower floors are receiving 
considerably less daylight. This is due to shading by the neighboring building. On the other 
hand, the rooms located on the upper floors of the building are less exposed to this effect.  
The impact of the shading from the neighboring building depends on the height of neighboring 
buildings and the distance between the two buildings. Principally, the higher the neighboring 
buildings are and the closer they are located, the more floors of evaluated building will be 
impacted by the shading effect. Our results confirms this principle and we can see that in the 
case study building, there is a substantial decrease in daylight levels in the lower floors, due 
to the fact that neighboring buildings are the same height and the distance to them is relatively 
small. 
Here we used DA to show the daylight performance on each level for SD scenario no. 1. The 
relation between the DA in case study building’s rooms and the floors, on which they are 
located is presented for all solar shading scenarios on the graphs in Appendix B. The results 
for particular rooms are grouped according to room’s orientation indicated by colors (orange – 
E, blue – N, red – S, yellow – W) and their order is the same as in the legend on the left side 
of the graphs. In following sections the explorative analysis for each shading device and their 
performance on each of the simulated floors are presented.  
V.3.1.1 
Daylight performance on different floors: no solar shading device 
When no solar shading device is applied it can be observed on Graph 1 in Appendix B that 
regardless of rooms’ orientation the DA values are slightly higher on the 1st floor than on the 
ground floor and definitely highest on the 4th floor.  
The DA values in East-facing rooms of the case study building with no solar shading device 
applied are ranging from 10 to 19% on the ground floor, 14-23% on the 1st floor and from 39 
to 51% on the 4th floor. In the north facing rooms, the DA values on the ground floor are in the 
range between 8 and 18%, similar on the first floor - between 8 and 20% and considerably 
higher on the 4th floor – 29 to 48%. The DA values in the south –facing rooms are also rising 
gradually from floor to floor – on the ground floor the max DA is in this case 31%, on the 1st 
floor 39% and on the 4th floor it is 59% (highest DA value in the whole building). In the east-
oriented rooms the DA values range on the ground floor is 6-9%, 11-16% on the 1st floor and 
43-51% on the 4th floor. 
V.3.1.2 
Daylight performance on different floors: MicroShade 
In case of rooms where the MicroShades has been applied the difference in DA vales for 
different floors can be observed as well (Graph 2 in Appendix B). Here we have applied 
MicroShade to three orientations. Based on the information provided by the producer in 
==PAGE:73==
 
 
73 
 
‘Selection Guidelines for MicroShades products’ (MicroShade, 2017) and the consultation with 
Technical Support it was decided not to apply the device for the north-facing rooms. Therefore, 
the results are similar to above for this orientation.  
The DA values obtained for east-facing rooms on the ground floor are not exceeding 5%, 
whereas on the 1st floor they are slightly higher (up to 8% for some of the rooms) and the 
highest values can be observed in the east-facing rooms on the 4th floor – approx. 21-22% in 
Bedrooms and 28-30% in kitchens. In south –facing rooms on the ground floor and first floor 
the DA values are relatively low – up to 10%, whereas on the 4th floor the max. DA values is 
43%. The DA values in west-facing rooms located on the ground floor are close to 0, and up 
to 3% on the 1st floor. On the 4th floor the DA values on west-facing rooms are in the range 
between, 21-32%. 
An interesting observation is that MicroShade has substantially diminished the light levels on 
the ground floor (the most shaded floor), comparing to the impact of other devices. In the east 
facing rooms with MicroShades applied the DA values are 4 times lower than in the same 
rooms without MicroShade. In west facing rooms on the ground floor the DA values are in the 
range between 7 and 9% when the MicroShades are not applied and around 1% MicroShade. 
V.3.1.3 
Daylight performance on different floors: Roller Blinds 
The DA results for Roller Blinds type 1 and 2 (collected on the graphs 3 and 4 in Appendix B) 
are similar to each other – the daylight conditions are improving gradually from floor to floor. 
For all rooms orientation the DA values are generally low on the ground floor, slightly higher 
on the 1st floor and considerably higher on the 4th floor – often several times as high as on 
ground floor or 1st floor. This trend is similar to the general trend that can be observed in results 
for the scenario without any solar shading device. 
According to the obtained DA values collected on the Graph 5 in Appendix B, application of 
Roller Blinds (RB) type 3 results in diminished daylight levels in the rooms located on the 1st 
floor comparing to RB type 1 and 2. In this particular case the DA values are lower in the rooms 
located on the 1st floor of case study building than in the rooms on the ground floor, which is a 
trend opposite to observed for all the other solar shading scenarios. The DA values in east- 
and north-oriented rooms on the ground floor are in the range between 4 and 11%, whereas 
on the 1st floor they are close to 0. In the east-facing rooms the DA ranges from 6% to 11% 
whereas the range of its values on the 1st floor is from 1% to 6%. The DA values in south-
facing rooms on the ground floor are from 4 to 14% and up to 4% on the 1st floor.  
On the 4th floor the DA values in the rooms with Roller Blinds type 3 applied are the highest, 
similarly as in case of other types of roller blinds and other solar shading devices listed above.  
V.3.1.4 
Daylight performance on different floors: Venetian Blinds 
The DA  result of for both types of Venetian Blinds are almost identical, which can be observed 
on Graphs 6 and 7 in Appendix B. 
The DA values in the east-, north- and south – oriented rooms located on the ground floor of 
the case study building are slightly higher than the DA values in the same rooms located on 
the 1st floor. The opposite trend can be observed for west-facing rooms – The DA values there 
are higher on the 1st floor thank on the ground floor. The highest DA values for all the rooms 
despite their orientation are achieved on the 4th floor of the case study building.  
Manually controlled venetian blinds have enhanced the daylight by a small factor. In the 
simulation process, the employment of the device and selection of its exact positions is based 
on the presence of direct daylight on a work plane (in this case sensor point mesh surface). In 
==PAGE:74==
 
 
74 
 
this way the behavior of occupant that uses the device for protection against visual discomfort 
is represented. 
V.3.1.5 
Daylight performance on different floors: Awning Blinds 
The DA results are similar for both types of Awning Blinds applied in the rooms of case study 
building, which can be seen on Graphs 8 and 8 in Appendix B.  
In case of east-facing rooms, the DA values are slightly higher for the first floors than for the 
ground floor. The same tendency can be observed in the west-facing rooms, where the DA 
values are up to 3% in the rooms on the ground floor and up to 6% on the 1st floor. Also for the 
South-facing rooms the DA values are higher on the 1st floor than on the ground floor. On the 
other hand, the DA values in North-facing rooms on the 1st floor are slightly (1-2%) lower than 
on the ground floor. However, the highest DA values can be observed in the rooms located on 
the 4th floor.  
V.3.1.6 
Daylight performance on different floors: Markisolettes 
In most rooms cases Markisolettes shows generally lowest results comparing to all the other 
solar shading scenarios (Graphs 10 and 11 in Appendix B). Although the tendency in terms of 
relation between daylight levels in the rooms and floor, where they are located is similar.  
In general, the differences between DA values in the rooms located on the ground floor and 1st 
floor are relatively small. The east-facing rooms have the same DA values for 1st floor and 
ground floor. In Case on north-facing rooms the DA is slightly lower on the first floor than on 
the ground floor. The DA values in south- and east-facing rooms are slightly higher on the 1st 
floor than on the ground floor. In case of all room orientation options the highest DA values are 
however achieved on the 4th floor. 
V.3.2 Summary of results  
As a general finding for all the base case and all solar shading device cases it can be stated 
that the shading effect from neighboring buildings is significant for bottom floors of the building.  
An interesting observation is that MicroShade application leads to significant daylight levels 
limitation when the window is shaded. The same can be observed for the Roller blind type 3 
on the 1st floor – the DA values in this specific case of device case are lower for the 1st floor 
than on the ground floor. Both types of Awning blinds are performing better than other devices 
applied on west-facing rooms on the bottom floors (especially 1st floor, where DA values are 
exceeding 5% for majority of rooms) 
Generally the lowest DA values are achieved for Markisolettes. The difference between their 
performance and performance of other solar shading systems in terms of daylight is particularly 
distinctive on the 4th floor. 
 
Surrounding density variations and daylight performance   
Another analysis carried out based on the results concerns the impact of surrounding density 
scenarios on daylight performance case study building. One of the objectives of the simulation 
has been to determine the influence of surrounding density explained in Sections IV.9.1-IV.9.4 
on the daylight performance of selected solar shading devices for all rooms in different floors. 
The results are presented on the graphs in Appendix B. The DA results are presented on 
separate graphs for each solar shading scenario. The impact of SD scenario on daylight 
performance is analyzed on two selected floors – 1st and 4th floor. 
The results are described in the sections below in the way that performance of all solar shading 
scenarios are described for groups of rooms according to their orientation. For each orientation 
==PAGE:75==
 
 
75 
 
the DA values are compared for SD scenario 1 – base case scenario and SD scenario, where 
the building is missing that is expected to have shading effect on rooms facing it, e.g. for the 
south-facing rooms the results are compared for SD no. 1 scenario and SD no. 3 scenario, 
where the neighboring building on the south is missing. 
The first observation from the Graphs 1-11 in Appendix C is that the extent of surrounding 
density’s impact on daylight performance depends on the floor, for which the analysis in carried 
out. We can see that on the first floor, where case study building’s rooms are excessively 
shaded by neighboring buildings through majority of time, the results have very diverse trends 
for different surrounding scenarios. On the other hand, the result show more similar trend for 
rooms located on 4th floor the DA(150%) despite the surrounding density option. The reason 
is that, the shading effect from surrounding buildings is small on the upper levels of the building.  
There are several trends of daylight levels dependency on surrounding density scenarios in 
relation to the rooms orientation. As expected, it can be observed based on the results of 
DA(150lux) that on the first floor the daylight is substantially enhanced for the rooms that in 
particular surrounding density scenarios cases are not facing the neighboring building. 
Therefore the DA(150%) values are highest for Surrounding Density (SD) scenario 2 in the 
west-facing rooms, for Surrounding Density 3 in the south-facing rooms and in the east-facing 
rooms for SD scenario no. 4.  
V.4.1 Surrounding density impact on daylight levels in rooms facing east 
east facing rooms – bedrooms and kitchen of the case study building are facing the neighboring 
building in case of SD no. 1-3, whereas in Surrounding Density (SD) scenario no. 4 there is no 
building on the east. Therefore, in order to analyze the impact of SD on daylight conditions in 
east-oriented rooms, only the results for SD no.1 and SD no. 4 will be compared for the 1st and 
4th floor. 
V.4.1.1 
Surrounding density impact on daylight levels in rooms facing east, no solar shading 
device 
In the kitchens and bedrooms located on the 1st floor with windows oriented towards east 
(orange bars on the graphs), the DA (150lux) values when there is no solar shading device 
vary from ~13% (B5) to 23% (K1) in case of Surrounding Density (SD) scenario 1. For the SD 
scenario no. 4 the resulting values of the same rooms are considerably higher and vary from 
~25% to ~37%. 
Interesting finding is that for the east facing rooms with no solar shading device, receiving the 
highest levels of daylight (K1, K2, K3, K4) the DA results trends are reversed in the way that, 
e.g. the room with the highest DA level – K1 in case of SD no.1 has lowest DA results for DA 
scenario no.  4. Inversely for the room which among 4 other rooms listed receives the smallest 
DA value in case of SD no. 1 – kitchen of Apartment no. 2 (K2), its DA value is the highest for 
SD no. 4.  
On 4th floor the DA results for east-facing rooms without any solar shading devices applied are 
the same for both SD scenarios 1 and 4. The DA values in the bedrooms are reaching 40%, 
whereas the DA(150lux) values in kitchens are in the range of 45-49%. 
V.4.1.2 
Surrounding density impact on daylight levels in rooms facing east, MicroShade 
In case of east-facing rooms with the MicroShade system applied the general tendencies of 
DA results distribution in the rooms of case study building are similar to those for scenario 
without any solar shading device. However, the values of DA are considerably lower as an 
effect of device application. 
==PAGE:76==
 
 
76 
 
For SD cases no.1 the DA values in kitchens and bedrooms facing east are in the range of 4-
7%, whereas in case of SD scenario no.4 the range of DA values is form ~8-24%. On the 
Fourth floor the DA results for rooms with MicroShade applied are similar for both SD scenario 
no. 1 and 4 - ~20% DA in bedrooms and ~ 30% in kitchens.  
V.4.1.3 
Surrounding density impact on daylight levels in rooms facing east, Roller Blinds 
The DA results for east-oriented rooms with Roller Blinds type no.1 are showing the same 
trends as in case of MicroShade in terms of distribution of results for particular rooms of case 
study building. However, the values of DA are in general slightly higher for scenario with Roller 
Blinds type 1 and 2 than for MicroShade shading scenario. 
In case of SD scenario 1 DA (150lux) for rooms located on the 1st floor is in the range from 
above 5% to 13% and for SD scenario no. 4 it is from 10% to 25%. On the 4th floor the values 
of DA (150 lux) are approx. 24% in the bedrooms and 33% in kitchens for both SD scenarios 
– 1 and 4.  
The values of DA(150 lux) in east-facing rooms with Roller Blinds type no.1 applied are similar 
to those for Roller Blinds type no.2 solar shading scenario described below, which means that 
both grey and white fabric with light transmittance of 5% perform similar in terms of their impact 
on daylight conditions in case study building rooms. 
The DA (150 lux) results for the scenario with Roller Blinds type no. 3 are similar to type 1 and 
2 for the rooms located on 4th floor (both SD scenarios - 1 and 4). In case of rooms located on 
the 1st floor, the results for RB type 3 are similar to described above for RB 1 and 2 in case of 
SD no. 4. However for the same rooms the DA values for RB type 3 are considerably lower 
than for RB type 1 and 2 in case of SD scenario no. 1. It is an interesting finding that only in 
this specific case there is a substantial difference between the performance of RB types 1 and 
2 and RB3 in terms of daylight. 
V.4.1.4 
Surrounding density impact on daylight levels in rooms facing east, Venetian Blinds 
In case of Venetian Blinds application the daylight levels are generally decreased in the east-
facing rooms of case study   building comparing to Rolling Blinds solar shading scenarios 
In the rooms located on 1st floor with the Venetian blinds type 1 applied on the windows, the 
DA(150 lux) values are in the range of 5% - 11% in case of SD scenario no.1, whereas in case 
of SD no.4 the values are higher – 7%-22%. On the fourth floor, the results are similar for both 
SD scenarios 1 and 4. The DA (150 lux) values there are approx. 25% in the bedrooms and 
30-34% in the kitchens. 
In east-facing rooms of case study building with Venetian blinds type 2 (grey-beige slats) 
applied the resulting DA (150lux) values are slightly lower than with the Venetian Blinds type 
1 (white slats applied). However, the distribution of results, meaning the relation between 
results for different rooms and for bot SD scenarios – 1 and 4 remained the same.  
V.4.1.5 
Surrounding density impact on daylight levels in rooms facing east, Awning Blinds 
The DA(150 lux) values in east-facing rooms of the case study building with drop arm Awning 
Blinds are the same for both types of device’s fabric - brown (Awning Blind type 1) and dark 
grey (Awning Blind type 2).  
In the rooms located on first floor with the SD scenarios no. 1, the DA values are ranging from 
4% to 11%. In case of SD type 4, the values are higher – 8-25%. On the fourth floor, similarly 
as in case of other solar shading devices, the results are not showing sensitivity to the 
surrounding density. In the kitchens with Awning Blinds applied, the DA values are ranging 
from 30 – 35%, whereas in bedrooms the range of DA values is from 15 to 19%. It can be 
==PAGE:77==
 
 
77 
 
observed that in case of Awning Blinds application the resulting DA (150 lux) values in the 
bedrooms are considerably lower than in the kitchens on the 4th floor. The difference between 
daylight levels in those two types of rooms facing east is also noticeable for other types of solar 
shading systems implemented, but to a lower extend. 
V.4.1.6 
Surrounding density impact on daylight levels in rooms facing east, Markisolettes 
The DA (150 lux) values for east-facing rooms with Markisolettes applied are generally lower 
than in case of all the other solar shading systems listed above. For both types of Markisolette, 
meaning both fabric colors (brown and dark grey), the results are almost identical, similarly as 
in case of drop-arm awning blinds, which performance was simulated for the same two types 
of material color.  
In the east-facing rooms located on first floor with SD scenarios 1 the DA values are in the 
range of 4-8%, whereas in case of SD 4, the values are ranging from 7 to 18%. On the fourth 
floor of the building, in the east-facing kitchens the DA values are 19-24%, whereas in east-
facing bedrooms the values range is from 12-14% (SD 1 and 4) 
V.4.2 Surrounding density impact on daylight levels in rooms facing north 
In the north-facing rooms there is a big variety in terms of DA (150 lux) results for different 
rooms. The main cause of this variety is irregular arrangement of those rooms in the building. 
There are four rooms classified as north-oriented: kitchen and bedroom of Apartment no. 8 (K8 
and B8), that are exactly north-oriented, and kitchens of Apartment no. 6 and 7 (K6 and K7) 
that have windows facing north-east and have particularly limited access to daylight due to 
their location by the edge of the building’s courtyard. 
In order to investigate the effect of surrounding density on daylight conditions in the north-
facing rooms the DA values are compared for two SD scenarios 1 and 4. The reason is that 
only lack of the neighboring building on the east (SD4) can affect daylight conditions in north-
oriented rooms. To verify this impact the results are compared to SD scenario 1, in which case 
all buildings are present.  
V.4.2.1 
Surrounding density impact on daylight levels in rooms facing north, no solar 
shading device 
When there is no solar shading device applied in the north-facing rooms listed below, the DA 
(150 lux) on the 1st floor ranges from 8% (K7) to 20% (K8) in case of SD no.1. The DA (150 
lux) values in case of SD no.4 (when there is no neighboring building from the east) are higher 
and are ranging from 12% (K7) to 29% (K6). The resulting DA values in N-facing rooms on the 
4th floor are almost the same in case of both SD 1 and 4 scenarios. The DA (150 lux) values 
are the lowest for B8 and K7 and are oscillating around 30%, whereas the DA in K6 is slightly 
above 40% and in K8 it is around 48%. 
The DA results are the same for MicroShades, because following the guidance provided by 
the producer; the device has not been applied on the N-facing windows.  
V.4.2.2 
Surrounding density impact on daylight levels in rooms facing north, Roller Blinds 
According to the simulations’ results, Roller Blinds type 1 and 2 applied on the windows in 
north-facing rooms have almost identical impact on the daylight performance in case study 
building rooms, regardless different materials color (type 1 –white fabric, type 2 – grey fabric). 
On the first floor in case of Surrounding Density type 1 the DA values are the same and are 
oscillating between 3% (K7) and 7% (K8). The values are slightly higher for SD 4 and in this 
case the DA value in NE-facing K8 is higher than in K8 and accounts for 9%. In north-facing 
==PAGE:78==
 
 
78 
 
rooms on 4th floor the results are the same for SD scenarios no. 1 and 4 – 9% DA in B8 and 
K7, 16% in K6 and 17.5% in K8. 
The impact of Roller Blinds type no. 3 on daylight performance in case study   building’s rooms 
in terms of DA (150 lux) is the same for both floors and both SD scenarios, except the rooms 
located on 1st floor with SD scenario no.1 of. The values of DA (150 lux) are close to 0 in this 
particular case.  
V.4.2.3 
Surrounding density impact on daylight levels in rooms facing north, Venetian Blinds 
The DA (150 lux) values on the first floor of north-oriented rooms of the case study building 
are almost the same as in case of Roller Blinds for all SD scenarios. However according to the 
results for the fourth floor, the daylight levels there are generally lower than those achieved 
with Roller Blinds applied. The DA values for both types of Venetian Blinds are almost the 
same in B8 and K7 – around 7-8% for both SD scenarios. In K8 and K6 DA values are generally 
higher – approx. 13% in K8 and 14% K6. 
V.4.2.4 
Surrounding density impact on daylight levels in rooms facing north, Awning Blinds 
The DA values in north-facing rooms are almost the same for both types of Awning Blinds 
applied. In the rooms located on first floor, in case of SD scenarios no. 1 the DA values are in 
the range from 3 to 8%. In case of SD no.4, the values are slightly higher for K8 and K6 – 8% 
and 15% respectively. The DA values on the fourth floor in case of SD no. 1 are approx. 10% 
in B8 and K7, 18% in K6 and 24% in K8. For SD scenario 4 the DA values are slightly (1-2%) 
higher.  
V.4.2.5 
Surrounding density impact on daylight levels in rooms facing north, Markisolettes  
Both types of Markisolette – with the brown and dark grey material are performing in the same 
way in terms of DA (150 lux) in case study building’s rooms facing north. In the rooms located 
on the first floor the DA values are in the range of 3 to 8% in case of SD no. 1 and 4 – 9% in 
case of SD no. 4. In the north-facing rooms on the fourth floor, for both SD 1 and 4 scenarios, 
the value of DA (150 lux) is around 7% - 8% in B8 and K7, 17% in K8 and 14% in K6. 
V.4.3 Surrounding density impact on daylight levels in rooms facing south  
The DA values for south-facing rooms of the case study building are also diversified due to 
different layouts and sizes of the rooms and different windows placement. There are four rooms 
in the group of south-oriented rooms. Two of them are bedrooms of Apartment no. 7 – B7a 
with 2 south-oriented windows and B7b with one south-oriented Window. Another room 
classified as south-facing is living room of Apartment no. 7 that due to its location in the corner 
of the building has untypical floor plan and 3 windows facing different directions – W, S and 
WS. Last south-oriented room is LR8 – Living room of Apartment no. 8 that has two windows 
oriented toward south.  
The DA (150 lux) values are always missing for B7b on the fourth floor for the SD scenario 4. 
The reason is that the surface representing room’s floor has accidentally not been selected 
when creating the sensor point mesh for this particular simulation model. 
To analyze the impact of surrounding density on daylight conditions in rooms facing south two 
scenarios of SD will be compared SD no.3, where there is no neighboring building on the south 
and SD no.1, where all the buildings are present. The results will be analyzed for investigated 
floors – 1st and 4th floor.  
There is one room classified as south-oriented, for which the DA results on the 1st floor are 
varying for more than one SD scenario. It is LR7, which as it was already mentioned, has 
untypical layout and windows oriented towards three directions – west, south-west and south. 
==PAGE:79==
 
 
79 
 
Therefore, DA results for this room are similar for SD no.1 and 4 but vary for SD no. 2 and 3. 
The room will not be referred to in the results description below. 
V.4.3.1 
Surrounding density impact on daylight levels in rooms facing south, no solar 
shading device 
In the south-facing rooms on the first floor or the case study building without any solar shading 
device applied the DA values are impacted by the SD scenario. The DA values for SD no. 1 
are ranging from 15% in B7b to 39% for LR7. In general the DA (150 lux) values are the highest 
in case of SD no. 3. They are ranging from 41% in B7b to 52% in LR7.  
For the rooms located of fourth floor of the case study building the DA (150 lux) values are less 
diversified between SD no. 1 and 3. The minimum DA value is in this case 42% in B7b, whereas 
the maximum can be observed for LR7 and is reaching 59%. 
V.4.3.2 
Surrounding density impact on daylight levels in rooms facing south, MicroShade 
The DA values for case study   building’s rooms located on 1st floor with MicroShade applied 
are similarly like in case without any solar shading device, dependent on SD scenario. For SD 
scenario no. 1, the DA values are ranging from 2% (B7b) to 10% (LR7).According to the results 
however the highest values of DA (150 lux) in south-facing rooms on the 1st floor can be noticed 
for SD no.3. The minimum DA value is in this case 16% (B7b), whereas the maximum is 30% 
(LR7).  
On the 4th floor, where the daylight conditions are less impacted by the effect of shading from 
neighboring building, the DA (150 lux) values are less diversified between SD 1 and 4. The DA 
(150 lux) values are in this case ranging from 27% (B7b, SD2) to 43% (LR7, SD3). 
V.4.3.3 
Surrounding density impact on daylight levels in rooms facing south, Roller Blinds 
The DA (150 lux) values are similar in rooms of case study building with the Rolling Blinds type 
no.1 and type no.2 applied. On the first floor, they are higher than in case of MicroShade 
application. For SD no.1 the DA (150 lux) value are in the range of 6% to 17%. The DA values 
are generally highest in case of SD no. 3, ranging from 19% in B7b to 30% in LR7.  
The results for 1st floor with the Roller Blinds type no.3 applied are similar to those for RB type 
no. 1 and 2, except for SD scenario 1, in which case the values are lower – ranging from 2% 
to 4%.  
On the fourth floor, the results are similar for all the Roller Blinds types and for both SD 
scenarios 1 and 3. The minimum DA value is in this case 20% and the maximum above 40%.  
The daylight performance of both types of Venetian Blinds in terms of DA (150 lux) is almost 
identical to the performance of Roller Blinds types 1 and 2.  
V.4.3.4 
Surrounding density impact on daylight levels in rooms facing south, Awning Blinds 
Both Types of Awning Blinds are performing similar in terms of DA (150 lux) in the case study 
building’s rooms. It can also be observed based on the result’s graphs that higher values of 
DA are achieved with the Awning Blinds applied than in case of MicroShade, Roller Blinds and 
Venetian Blinds.  
In case study building’s rooms located on the ground floor the highest DA (150 lux) values are 
achieved in case of SD scenario no. 3 – min. 26%, max. 37%. The DA (150 lux) maximum DA 
value for SD no. 1 it is 22%. For the rooms located on the 4th floor of the case study building 
the DA results are similar for Surrounding Density scenarios no. 1 and 3 and are ranging from 
22% to 42%.  
==PAGE:80==
 
 
80 
 
V.4.3.5 
Surrounding density impact on daylight levels in rooms facing south, Markisolettes 
The DA values achieved for Markisolettes solar shading scenario are considerably lower in 
south-facing case study building’s rooms, than in case of other solar shading scenarios 
described above. The substantial difference can especially be observed in case of rooms that 
are expected to receive the majority of solar radiation – rooms located on the 4th floor, that are 
not exposed to shading effect form surrounding buildings and south-facing rooms on the 1st 
floor in case of SD scenario no. 3. 
Both types of Markisolettes (dark grey and brown material) are showing similar daylight 
performance in terms of DA (150 lux). In the rooms located of first floor, the DA values for SD 
scenario no.1 are in the range of 4-15% and 17-26% for SD scenario no. 3. On the fourth floor 
the DA values are similar for SD scenario no. 1 and 3. The minimum DA value for SD no. 1 is 
13% and max. 24%. In case of SD scenario no. 3, the values are slightly higher, ranging from 
16% to 26%. 
V.4.4 Surrounding density impact on daylight levels in rooms facing west 
In the case study building there are seven rooms with the windows oriented towards west. Six 
of them are living rooms of Apartments no. 1- 6 (LR1, LR2, LR3, LR4, LR5, LR6). Last rooms 
facing west is bedroom of Apartment 6. From the results for all solar shading scenarios, for 
different particular Floor and surrounding density scenarios it can be observed that the DA 
(150 lux) values are similar for all living rooms facing west. The reason is that all those rooms 
have almost the same layout and two windows of the same size. However, the DA (150 lux) 
for west-facing bedroom of Apartment 6 is lower in comparison to the results for living rooms, 
which is due to the reason that there is only one window in this room. 
The effect of surrounding density in west-facing rooms on 1st and 4th floor can be observed 
when comparing their DA results for surrounding density case no. 1 (with all neighboring 
buildings) and 2 (with the building on the west missing). 
V.4.4.1 
Surrounding density impact on daylight levels in rooms facing west, no solar shading 
device 
It can be observed from the results that the results of DA (150 lux) in the west-facing rooms on 
the first floor is dependent on the SD scenario. The DA values are in this case highest for SD 
scenario 2 and are ranging from 37% in B6 to 50% in LR1-6. The reason for such high values 
in case of this SD scenario is lack of neighboring building on the west, what would have a 
shading effect on west-facing rooms. For the rooms located on first floor with SD scenario no. 
1 the DA values are ranging from 11% in B6 to 18% in LR6. On the fourth floor the results of 
DA are not dependent on SD option and are ranging from 43% in B6 to 50-53% in west-facing 
living rooms (both SD no. 1 and 2) 
V.4.4.2 
Surrounding density impact on daylight levels in rooms facing west, MicroShades  
In the west-facing rooms located on the 1st floor of the case study building the DA (150 lux) 
values for SD scenario no. 1 are generally low – 2-4%. In case of SD scenario no. 2 the values 
are higher – 17% in B6 and 24% in Living rooms of Apartments 1-6. On the fourth floor the 
min, DA (150 lux) value is 21% (B6) and maximum values are reaching 33% (LR1-6). 
V.4.4.3 
Surrounding density impact on daylight levels in rooms facing west, Roller Blinds 
According to the simulation results the DA values are similar for all three types of Roller Blinds, 
except that in case of Roller Blinds type 3 in the west-facing rooms on the 1st floor the values 
are lower (close to 0) in case of SD scenario 1. The DA values for the same floor and SD case 
with the Roller Blinds type 1 and 2 applied in west-facing rooms are ranging from 3 to 6%. In 
case of all three types of RB (white, grey and black with the light transmittance of 5%), the DA 
==PAGE:81==
 
 
81 
 
values are higher for SD no. 2 - in the range from 19% to 31%. The DA values on the fourth 
floor (both AD 1 and 2 scenarios) are in the same range as in the first floor for SD scenario no. 
2. 
The performance of both types of Venetian Blinds in terms of DA (150 lux) on the first floor of 
case study building is similar to the performance of Roller Blinds type 1 and 2 for all SD 
scenarios. The DA values on the fourth floor are 2-3% lower for Venetian Blinds than for Roller 
Blinds type 1 and 2. 
V.4.4.4 
Surrounding density impact on daylight levels in rooms facing west, Awning Blinds 
The DA values achieved in the west-facing rooms of the case study building are slightly higher 
for the Awning Blinds solar shading scenario than for the devices described above. The 
daylight performance is almost the same in case of both types of Awning Blind, despite different 
material colors.  
In the west-facing rooms located on the 1st floor of case study building the DA values are in 
the range of 4%-7% for SD scenarios no. 1. In case of SD scenario no. 2 the values are higher 
– min 17% in B6 and maximum 31% in LR1 and LR2 (Awning Blinds type no. 1) 
On the fourth floor, the DA values are almost identical in west-facing rooms, regardless SD 
scenario, ranging from 17% in B6 to 30% in the living rooms.  
V.4.4.5 
Surrounding density impact on daylight levels in rooms facing west, Markisolettes 
The daylight levels for Markisolettes solar shading scenario are generally lower than for all the 
other devices mentioned above. On the first floor of the building the DA values in west-facing 
rooms are in the range between 3-5% for SD scenario no. 1. In case of SD scenario no. 2 the 
DA values are considerably higher – min. 13% in B6 and 22-23% in the living rooms. Interesting 
observation is that these DA scores for first floor, SD no. 2 are higher than those achieved on 
the fourth floor for all SD scenarios. The values on the fourth floor are ranging from 12% (B6) 
to 18% in the living rooms.  
V.4.5 Summary of results 
In order to see the effect of surround, we compare we compare the three SD scenarios 2-4 
with SD1 (base case SD scenario). This comparison will allow to evaluate the effect of existing 
surround to a non-existing for the rooms having different orientation (west, south, north and 
east respectively. It is carried out for the building located on the first floor and 4th floor of the 
study case building in order to investigate what is the difference of SD impact on bottom floors 
comparing to the upper floors.  
The general finding for all solar shading scenario is that the shading impact from neighboring 
building leads to diminished daylight levels on the first floor, but does not affect the rooms on 
the fourth floor. For the SD 2 the DA values are higher in W-oriented rooms on the 1st floor, for 
SD3 this effect can be seen for S- oriented rooms and for SD 4 the DA levels the effect is 
observable for east-oriented rooms and north-oriented rooms (to a smaller extend).  
As a next step, this analysis we need to observe different distances from neighboring building 
to find the critical distances, for which the shading impact starts to be observed. 
 
Presence of greenery and daylight performance  
The courtyard greenery is only expected to have an effect on daylight conditions on the ground 
floor of case study building. Moreover, only rooms that are exposed to the courtyard – kitchens 
and bedrooms facing east and north can potentially have their daylight levels diminished due 
to the presence of greenery. Therefore, only kitchens and bedrooms located on ground floor 
==PAGE:82==
 
 
82 
 
have the DA results analyzed with regards to greenery impact. Thus, for both greenery 
scenarios – with and without bushes and trees in the courtyard the daylight performance in 
terms of DA has been analyzed in the North and west-facing rooms located on the ground floor 
of the case study building without and with solar shading devices evaluated. 
The results are collected in Appendix D (Section IX) in from of graphs for each solar shading 
scenario. The DA values for case without and with greenery are shown there for two 
surrounding density scenarios – 1 (base case SD) and 4 (without neighboring building on the 
East). The reason for this scenario set up was to  compare  the shading effect from the building 
and shading effect from the greenery. 
The results are only analyzed for north and west-facing rooms located on the ground floor, 
because only those rooms are exposed to the courtyard, where the greenery is expected to be 
present. It has been decided to compare DA (150 lux) in selected rooms for SD no. 1 and 4 in 
order to analyze what additional effect has the presence/lack of presence of the building 
closing the courtyard from the west – on the same side where the greenery is present in relation 
to the case study building.  
The results can be found in the Appendix D. The following sections describe the results in 
detail.  and described for all the solar shading scenarios in the sections below.  
V.5.1.1 
Presence of greenery and daylight performance: No shading device 
The courtyard greenery has a limited impact on the DA (150 lux) values in north- and west-
facing rooms of the case study building for both SD scenarios – no. 1 and 4. In case of SD 
scenario no. 1 The DA values are 1-2% lower in west-facing rooms when the courtyard 
greenery is present comparing to no-greenery scenario. In case of north-facing rooms for the 
same SD scenario the impact of greenery on daylight levels is larger. The DA value in K8 for 
instance is 17% for no-greenery scenario and 13% when the greenery is present.  
In case of SD scenario no. 4 the DA (150 lux) values in west-facing rooms of the case study 
building are generally higher – ranging from 23 to 38% for the scenario without courtyard 
greenery and 18% - 36% when the courtyard greenery is present. In north-facing rooms the 
DA values are in range of 11% to 28% with no greenery present and 10% to 23% with greenery.  
V.5.1.2 
Presence of greenery and daylight performance: MicroShades  
MicroShade is not installed on the north-facing façade and therefore, the results are similar to 
the scenario with no shading device.  
The DA values in west-facing rooms are similar for both scenarios with and without greenery 
for surrounding density no. 1 and are ranging from 2 to 5%. However, larger impact of greenery 
on daylight performance can be observed for the SD scenario no. 4. The DA values for the 
scenario without courtyard greenery are ranging from 8% to 22%, whereas in case with the 
greenery the min DA (150 lux) value is 4% and the max. is 21%.   
V.5.1.3 
Presence of greenery and daylight performance: Roller Blinds  
The impact of courtyard greenery on daylight performance in north and east-facing rooms with 
all types of Roller Blinds applied is limited in case SD no. 1. The DA values for east-facing 
rooms are in the range of 5%-11%, and for north-facing rooms 3-8%. 
In case of SD no.4 there is a small impact of greenery presence of DA value, but the difference 
between the results for greenery/no greenery scenarios is usually not bigger than 2%. In the 
east facing rooms with Roller Blinds applied the DA values are ranging from 9% (without 
greenery) to 25% (with greenery) and 7% (with greenery) 26% (without greenery). The DA 
==PAGE:83==
 
 
83 
 
values in north facing rooms are in the range between 3% to 9%. The impact of greenery is 
negligible in this case.  
V.5.1.4 
Presence of greenery and daylight performance: Venetian Blinds  
When using either of the Venetian Blinds types, with SD no. 1, the impact of greenery on DA 
(150 lux) results is negligible for both east- and north-facing rooms. The DA (150 lux) values 
are in this case in the range of 6 to 11% in east-facing rooms and 4-7% in the north-facing 
rooms.  
In case of SD no.4, the DA (150 lux) in north-oriented rooms range from minimum 4% (for both 
– with and without greenery) to maximum 7% (with greenery) and 9% (without greenery). The 
DA (150 lux) values in east-oriented rooms for SD no. 4 case are in the rage of 5% to 19% 
with greenery and 7% to 21% without greenery.   
V.5.1.5 
Presence of greenery and daylight performance: Awning Blinds  
In the north- and east-oriented case study building’s rooms with both types of Awning Blinds 
applied the greenery presence does not have significant impact on daylight performance in 
case of both SD scenarios – no.1 and 4.  
The DA values in east-oriented rooms are ranging from 4 to 10% for SD scenario no. 1 and 
from 5 to 25% for SD scenario no. 4. In The north, oriented rooms the DA values are in the 
range of 3% to 6-7% for SD scenario no. 1 and in the range of 3 to 9% for SD scenario no. 4. 
V.5.1.6 
Presence of greenery and daylight performance: Markisolettes  
The greenery does not have any significant impact on the daylight performance in the case 
study building’s rooms with Markisolettes applied on windows.  
The DA values in the east-facing rooms located on the ground floor are in the range of 5-7% 
for SD scenario 1. In the north-facing rooms the values are ranging from 3 to 7% in this case. 
For the SD scenario no. 4 the DA values are generally higher in the north- and east-facing 
rooms. The DA values range in east-oriented rooms is 5-19% and in the north-oriented rooms 
3-8%. 
V.5.2 Summary of results 
A major observation here was that the greenery´s shading impact is smaller than the 
surrounding building. In other words, presence of a courtyard with greenery does not worsen 
the daylight condition significantly but rather create a more pleasant view outside the window. 
Whereas, if no other obstructions is present, one might want to be more selective about the 
selection of greenery type. In case of MicroShade the effect of greenery is larger, especially 
for the N-oriented windows, and in case all the other shading devices it is not significant but 
adds view out quality. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:84==
 
 
84 
 
 
Development of Novel method for visual comfort assessment based on 
illuminance contrast  
 Abstract 
Approaching the evaluation of daylighting in building, it is not sufficient to just examine what 
are the daylight levels in spaces, meaning the distribution of illuminance on work plane and 
resulting values for daylight metrics, like DF or DA (Mardaljevic, Anderson, Roy, & 
Christoffersen, 2011), but it is vital to assess the visual comfort related to daylight. In the 
context of daylight usage, the state of visual comfort is when the occupant is not distracted by 
daylight in the way that presence of direct or reflected daylight in the Field of View (FOV) will 
impede of completely indispose the performed task (Vos, 2003). , the state of visual discomfort 
related to daylight conditions does not necessarily have to be caused by extremely high 
illuminance levels in the FOV, but can also be a consequence of high illuminance contrast 
between the task area and the background of the task. (Hansen, et al., 2016). 
The state of visual discomfort related to daylight, caused by high illuminance values in the FOV 
I often referred to as glare. It results in numerous responses of human body, among which 
rubbing eyes, watery eyes, squinted eyes and glare source avoidance can be listed as 
immediate and most common. However, the discomfort sensation and its results are 
subjective, which should be taken into account, when approaching the evaluation of glare. 
There were several methods developed for the assessment of visual comfort. These methods 
rely on empirical models where subjective human response is correlated with a sophisticated 
relation of physical photometric quantities that represent perceived luminance contrast at the 
eye level. All of them were targeting the assessment of visual comfort in offices for either 
electrical lighting or (rarely) daylight conditions (Vos, 2003). One of these models which 
addresses daylight-induced visual discomfort is Daylight Glare Probability (DGP) index. DGP 
is used to quantify the percentage probability of glare perception, developed for an office room 
under daylight conditions. 
The DGP formula consists of two main components. The first component is the vertical 
illuminance at the eye level (EV). This parameter shows a particular sensitivity when direct sun 
is the cause of visual discomfort. The second one, Glare Impact (GI) (Sarey Khanie, Wienold, 
& Andersen, A sensitivity analysis on glare detection parameters (remote presentation), 2014), 
is a summation of the luminance of all the glare sources weighted by their corresponding size 
in solid angle unit and sensitivity in the FOV measured by a Position Index (PI) function 
(Luckiesh & Guth, 1949), and finally divided by Ev. The GI accounts for contrast-inducted glare, 
meaning the discomfort caused by high contrast between the center area of the FOV and the 
surroundings. Nevertheless, its contribution to the overall result for DGP is considerably 
smaller than Ev. As a result, the impact of contrast on the potential visual discomfort sensation 
is considered only to a limited extend when using the DGP index.  
In the case study building with relatively small windows and thick wall, located in the dense 
urban tissue, the daylight levels are low, as indicated by the DA results. Moreover, the 
presence of direct sunlight during the majority of the occupied hours is rare, and therefore, 
almost no discomfort caused by excessive glare or higher illuminance levels at the eye is 
detected when running the numerical simulations for the DGP index. However, high contrast 
between window area and the rest of the room can occur. Knowing that contrast variations 
even in lower luminous environments can cause discomfort (Hansen, et al., 2016), in order to 
detect these conditions in these buildings, we have developed a new method based on relative 
illuminance contrast. The newly developed Relative Contrast model (RC) is based on relative 
==PAGE:85==
 
 
85 
 
contrast in the FOV. The method was used in the case study building for detection of potential 
visual contrast-induced discomfort. 
The RC method has been applied in four rooms located on the fourth floor of the case study 
building – living rooms and kitchens of Apartment 2 (east-west oriented) ad Apartment 8 (north-
south oriented). After the rooms for investigation have been specified it was necessary to 
determine view point and view direction for them based on the location of task area. Although, 
unlike in case of office room set up, where for the task are there can be usually the desk 
selected and potentially most common view direction would be the computer screen, the 
selection of view point and view direction in the rooms of residential building is not that 
straightforward. It is difficult to specify the fixed task area in rooms of the residential building – 
occupant are changing their activities and positions more dynamically comparing to office. 
Therefore for the evaluation of potential visual discomfort by means of RI and determination of 
its view-direction dependency, the immersive spatial approach have been applied 
(Amundadottir, Rockcastle, Sarey Khanie, & Andersen, 2017) 
Described above work process leading to the development of novel method for visual comfort 
assessment in residential buildings and its employment in the case study building is presented 
on the diagram below in Figure 39. 
 
Figure 39 Diagram presenting workflow for novel visual comfort assessment method 
 Introduction 
In the following sections the main observations from Annual Glare assessment based on DGP 
index (first step in the workflow – see the diagram in Figure 39 above) are described. They 
gave the beginning to contemplations about alternative methods of visual contrast assessment 
in the buildings that have low daylight levels, which further led to the development of Relative 
Contrast model. 
VI.2.1 Visual comfort assessments in the case study building  
The major causes of high illuminance contrast - low daylight levels and poor distribution of 
daylight can be seen on false color visualization of Daylight Factor (DF) results in the rooms 
of case study building. On the image in Figure 40 the results of DF simulation in the case study 
building (Floor 4, Surrounding density 1) are presented. The general observation is that even 
in case of most favorable conditions achievable in the case study building – on the fourth floor, 
==PAGE:86==
 
 
86 
 
where windows are less exposed to shading from surrounding buildings than on lever levels, 
the daylight conditions in terms of quantity and distribution of daylight, are poor.  
 
Figure 40 DF values on 4th floor of case study building (Surrounding density 1) - base for daylight 
distribution analysis 
The results for Annual Glare in several rooms of case study building (LR2, B2, K2, LR8, K8) 
based on the values of DGP index throughout the year are presented in the Appendix E.  
The investigated rooms are located on the 4th floor, and the base case surrounding density 
scenario has been selected for evaluation – SD 1. In each of the rooms, the camera has been 
placed in the proximity of the window (max. 1.5 m distance from the window) on the 
approximate height of sitting persons eyes – 1.2 m. The camera direction was toward the 
window. For the overview of camera position, the perspective images of each room are 
attached to the results (created for 21 September at 9 a.m. under overcast sky conditions).  
fisheye perspective images The perspective images are creating using fisheye projection 
principle, meaning that distance from the center of the image is proportional  to the angle of 
camera’s view direction. As a result, half of the room space is projected onto a spherical image.  
The results of Annual Glare simulations conducted in Diva for rhino are collected on temporal 
maps. There are month of the year listed on the x axes and hours of the day on the y axes. 
The results for DGP over time are indicated by colors – green for imperceptible glare 
(0.35>DGP), yellow for perceptible glare (0.40>DGP≥0.35), orange for disturbing glare 
(0.45>DGP≥0.40) and red for intolerable glare (DGP≥0.45). The results show that the 
occurrences of glare detected by DGP index are very rare in east- west and especially north-
facing rooms. Only for south-facing LR8 the intolerable glare is detected for almost all days in 
the year in noon  
Even though glare is not detected for most of the rooms cases by means of DGP index, other 
potential sources of visual discomfort cannot be excluded. Observing the rendered  fisheye 
perspective images in Appendix E, we could see when the window is in the center of the field 
of camera view it is considerably brighter than the background areas (areas remaining when 
the window brightness). This is a natural consequence of the illuminance distribution in the 
room, where the daylight enters through the façade window/windows placed on only one side 
of the room and due to generally very low daylight levels, the impression of high contrast is 
enlarged.  
==PAGE:87==
 
 
87 
 
Figure 41 shows a the relation between daylight levels in LR2 and distance from the window. 
It is based on the values of illuminance – luminous flux that is received per unit area of a 
surface, expressed in lux (lx). It can be seen that the illuminance levels  in the direct proximity 
to the window (0 – 100 cm from the window ) fall in the range 1000 – 2000 lux, in the middle 
of the room the illuminance value is approx. 200 lux and its declining toward the back of the 
room the value of 100 lux. It can be concluded that in front of the windows the illuminance 
levels are too high for majority of activities, whereas in the back of the rooms the illuminance 
levels are insufficient.  
 
Figure 41 Graph showing the illuminance distribution on the work plane in relation to the distance from 
the window (Living Room 2 of Apartment 2; Surrounding density 1) 
The high contrast in the room resulting from uneven distribution of daylight can also be 
observed on the false color example image in the Figure 42. where the luminance distribution 
in the room (LR2, A2) on 20th March at 9 a.m. is shown. The Luminance is defined as the 
luminous intensity of a surface in specific direction, divided by the projected area as viewed 
from that direction expressed in cd/m2. As the windows in the room are facing west, there is 
no direct sun entering the room at this time that could cause glare detectable by DGP. 
However, high luminance contrast can be observed with the highest value of illuminance 
accounting for ~2900 cd/m2 and lowest ~ 13 cd/m2.  
1872
1113
720
457
338
220
194
137
100
91
102
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
0
100
200
300
400
500
Average value of Illuminance [lux]
distance from the window [cm]
Illuminance value dependency on the distance to the window at 85 cm 
work plane height  in the Living Room of Apartment 2 (LR2, A2), 
Surrounding density 1 (S1)
Illumiance value
==PAGE:88==
 
 
88 
 
 
Figure 42 False color luminance image showing the distribution and extreme values of luminance in 
living room of Apartment 2 (Surrounding density 1; 20th Match, 9 a.m.) 
Knowing that the extreme luminance values are not representative for the assessment of 
contrast that could cause the visual discomfort, they indicate that there most probably is a 
major difference between the illuminance at the eye from the center of the field of view and the 
background area.  
The question is how much the existing methods are sensitive to these contrast changes in the 
field of view and if they can be captured for further evaluations.  
VI.2.2 The dependency of DGP index result on camera view point and view direction 
What has also been observed during the analysis of glare results analysis was that the values 
of DGP are highly dependent on the camera view point and view direction. In the Figure 43 
below there is an example presented of relation between the Diva simulation results for Annual 
Glare and the camera position in the living room 8 of Apartment 8 (LR8, A8), Surrounding 
Density 3 (without the neighboring building on the south). 
==PAGE:89==
 
 
89 
 
 
Figure 43 Annual glare results dependence on the position of camera in relation to window (living room 
of Apartment 8; Surrounding density 3) 
The upper graph shows the results for annual glare based on DGP index simulated for the 
camera placed in the center of the room (as indicated by the image on the left), on the average 
height of sitting person’s eyes – 122 cm, oriented towards window, whereas on the graph 
below the results of the same metric is shown simulated for the same conditions, with the 
difference that the camera is placed right in front of the window (approx. 50 cm from the window 
– like it is shown in the image to the left).  
As it can be seen from the figure above there is a major difference in the annual distribution 
based on DGP results received for camera position in the center of the room and camera 
placed in direct proximity to the window (both oriented towards window, placed on the same 
height). The biggest sensitivity of DGP results to camera direction is observed in the spring-
summer months from the beginning of May to the end of July.  What is an expected cause on 
this difference is that in the Summer months the South-facing window of Apartment’s 8 living 
room is exposed to high-angle solar radiation of high intensity. As an effect, a relatively small 
area of the room, by the window is exposed to direct solar radiation. The glare is thus detected, 
when the camera is placed within this area, whereas outside it the DGP values are 
considerably lower – glare is not detected. 
View direction dependency of DGP has been also observed by previous studies, which have 
suggested a somewhat arbitrary angular range for view direction selection or have introduced 
new evaluation methods for detecting responsive view direction in the immersive space (Sarey 
Khanie, Stoll, Einhauser, Wienold, & Andersen, Gaze-driven approach for estimating 
luminance values in the field of view for discomfort assessments, 2015). 
Depending on the room orientation and resulting characteristics of window exposure to solar 
radiation, the differences between simulated glare results are expected to vary for different 
camera placements (view points) and camera direction (view direction). Therefore, for further 
simulations aiming the contrast assessment, the immersive spatial approach is applied. 
 
 
==PAGE:90==
 
 
90 
 
 Methodology 
VI.3.1 Immersive spatial approach  
In the further investigations for contrast assessment in the rooms of case study building, the 
immersive spatial approach have been applied (Amundadottir, Rockcastle, Sarey Khanie, & 
Andersen, 2017). Instead of choosing one camera view direction for the simulation, immersive 
range of view directions have been considered to create a set of images that will constitute a 
base for contrast analysis (Sarey Khanie, Stoll, Einhauser, Wienold, & Andersen, Gaze-driven 
approach for estimating luminance values in the field of view for discomfort assessments, 
2015). For this purpose the camera has been placed in the center of each room investigated 
– living room and kitchen of Apartments 2 and 8 (LR2, K2, LR8, K8) at the average height of 
a sitting persons eyes – 122 cm and oriented towards 9 different directions. The rule for 
adjusting camera directions is the same for all the rooms investigated, despite their orientation 
– first view direction is perpendicularly towards the window, and the following ones are 
clockwise rotated 40° apart, as it is presented on the image in the Figure 44.  
 
Figure 44 Camera view directions in four rooms selected for visual comfort investigation - immersive 
spatial approach; the principle shown with an arrow on the example of kitchen of Apartment 2 
For all the camera view directions in all investigated rooms mentioned above, High Quality, 
High Dynamic Range (HDR) images are rendered in Diva for Rhino. The example set of 
images obtained can be seem in the Figure 45. All images are perspective views that are 
created using 180° degrees fisheye lens type of transformation, which widens the field of view 
considerably. For contrast investigation, similarly like for visual comfort assessment based on 
other commonly applied metrics that are based on the perspective image, the space 
transformation has to be considered. The method is explained in one of the following 
paragraphs.  
 
==PAGE:91==
 
 
91 
 
 
Figure 45 Set of images rendered applying immersive spatial approach (Living Room 2 of Apartment 2) 
The HDR perspective images created for 9 view camera directions in 4 selected rooms have 
been produced for several specific points of time, similarly as it is done in case of ‘Point in time 
glare’ type of simulation. The selected points in time are in equinox and solstice days, during 
the occupancy hours – 20th March, 21st June, 22nd September and 21st December at 7 a.m., 9 
a.m., 4 p.m. and 6 p.m. During the simulation process it turned out not to be possible to render 
the images for 21.12 at 18 p.m. The cause is insufficient level of daylight at this time of the 
shortest day in the year. The resulting overall number of images for all the directions in all 
rooms selected for investigation in the points of time listed above is 567.540 
VI.3.2 Solid angle and Position index determination using Evalglare  
The illuminance contrast was calculated as a standard deviation of illuminance values on each 
rendered image. To be calculated, it was thus necessary to first derive the illuminance values 
of the images’ pixels, bearing in mind that each image is a 2-dimensional transformation of 3-
dimensional space with the specified angular projection algorithm. The HDR images obtained 
as a result of Radiance rendering fisheye lens images, meaning that to generate them the 
angular (-vta) view type is used. The principle for fisheye projection is that the distance from 
the center of the image is proportional  to the angle of camera’s view direction. As a result, half 
of the environment (in this case the room space) is projected onto a spherical image. Therefore 
it was first necessary to determine the sizes of pixels on the image.   
In order to determine solid angle values for pixels of the fisheye lens images produces as a 
result of simulation Evalglare was used. Evalglare is a Radiance-based tool to evaluate glare 
caused by daylight. It is implemented in Diva for Rhino. The program automatically detects 
glare based on the areas of HDR fisheye image, that are exceeding the threshold value of 
luminance – the glare zones (Wienold & Christoffersen, Evalglare - a new RADIANCE-based 
tool to evaluate daylight glare in office spaces). Among others, Evalglare has an embedded 
function to calculate the size of glare source by weighting the pixels classified as glare sources 
==PAGE:92==
 
 
92 
 
by their solid angle values. Thus, defining all the pixels on the image as a glare sources, by 
setting the b parameter (threshold parameters) to very low value, allows to determine the 
values of their solid angles from Evalglare.  
Another parameter derived for all pixel points using Evalglare that will further be used in the 
novel contrast assessment method is Position Index (PI) parameter (Luckiesh & Guth, 1949). 
PI is the parameter that stands for the change in discomfort glare sensation relative to the 
azimuth and elevation of the glare source and position occupant’s line of sight. 
After the solid angle and position index was obtained as an output from Evalglare it was 
possible to use it in Matlab to calculate the Relative Contrast for all images (see Section VI.3.3). 
Within the same processing workflow in Evalglare, DGP, Ev and GI components were derived. 
The latter was then calculated for all cases in Matlab (see Section VI.3.4). Collecting the results 
for both – RC and DGP index components it was possible to compare their applicability and 
view-direction dependency.  
VI.3.3 Image contrast calculation in Matlab  
After creating the final txt file input containing parameters necessary for contrast calculation it 
was possible to read it in Matlab along with the fisheye lens images. Nine images showing nine 
different view directions in the room evaluated for a given point in time have been read and 
processed one by one in the Matlab script. First step in order to assess the contrast on each 
of the images was to calculate illuminance of every pixel.  
For this purpose the RGB values of each pixel was read in Matlab and the illuminance was 
calculated for each pixel based on the following formula (1). 
Illuminance = 179∙ (0.265∙R + 0.670∙G + 0.065∙B)   
(1) 
In order to account for the pixels’ sizes, the calculated values of pixel’s illuminances were 
multiplied by corresponding solid angle values. The resulting pixels illuminance values 
weighted by the pixel’s sizes were used to calculated the contrast on each image. The purpose 
of calculating the contrast for nine images (nine view directions) of one room was to evaluate 
the whole 360-degree space and also determine the view direction dependencies  of each 
model or parameter. The contrast was calculated based on the standard deviation of pixels 
illuminance values according to the formula (2). 
The contrast was also calculated based on the pixels illuminance values weighted by the 
position index in order to assess what impact does the position of potential contrast source 
have on results and determine whether the view direction is affecting the discrepancy between 
the values of contrast calculated including the position index and the ones calculated 
neglecting it. In order to account for the position of contrast source, the pixels illuminance 
value, weighted with the solid angle of pixels had to further be divided by position index of each 
pixel. Then, similar as before, the contrast was calculated based on standard deviation of 
resulting pixels illuminance values, according to the formula (3). 
 
RC=  
1
𝐿𝑚√1
𝑁∑((𝐿𝑖 . 𝜔𝑖) −𝜇1)
2  
 
  
(2) 
 
RCPI= 
1
𝐿𝑚√1
𝑁∑((𝐿𝑖 . 𝜔𝑖𝑃𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥
⁄
) −𝜇2)
2
 
 
(3) 
==PAGE:93==
 
 
93 
 
Where 
Lm – average luminance of the scene 
Li – luminance of the pixel 
ωi – solid angle of the pixel 
Pindex – position index of each pixel 
μ1 – mean of all value corresponding to (Li ∙ ωi) 
μ1 – mean of all value corresponding to (Li ∙ ωi / Pindex)  
VI.3.4 DGPc: The Photometric Relation of DGP 
In order to determine whether the calculated contrast based on standard deviation of images’ 
illuminance value shows more sensitivity to view direction than DGP, the values of DGP 
formulas photometric components was calculated for each image. For this purpose the DGP 
index (4) has been closely analyzed in order to determine how is the contrast aspect 
considered in the formula and how much does the contrast contribute to the overall results 
when applying the DGP index for visual comfort assessment.  
The original DGP index formula is following: 
𝐷𝐺𝑃= 5.87 ∙10−5 ∙𝐸𝑣+ 9.18 ∙10−2 × log (1 + ∑
𝐿𝑠,𝑖
2 ∙𝜔𝑠,𝑖
𝐸𝑣1.87∙𝑃𝑖
2
𝑖
) + 0.16 
 
(4) 
Where: 
Ev - illuminance at the vertical level 
Ls,I - luminance of glare source i 
ωs,I - solid angle of the glare source i subtend at the eve level 
Pi - position index of the glare source i  
There can be two photometric components of DGP formula indicated, as shown in the formula 
5. The first component is Ev – vertical illuminance at the eye level. This parameter shows the 
particular sensitivity, when the direct sun is a cause of visual discomfort. The second one, 
referred to as Glare Impact (GI) is summation of all the glare sources luminance weighted by 
their corresponding solid angle and position index values, divided by Ev. The GI is the part of 
DGP formula, applied for assessment of contras-inducted glare, meaning the discomfort 
caused by high contrast between the illuminance in the center area of view and the illuminance 
of background. With the GI component, the contrast part of glare is determined based on the 
intensity of the glare source, its size and location. Nevertheless, its contribution to the overall 
result for DGP is considerably smaller than Ev. As a result, impact of contrast on the potential 
visual discomfort sensation is considered to a limited extend using the DGP index. 
𝐷𝐺𝑃= 5.87 ∙10−5 ∙𝐸𝑣+ 9.18 ∙10−2 × log (1 + ∑
𝐿𝑠,𝑖
2 ∙𝜔𝑠,𝑖
𝐸𝑣1.87∙𝑃𝑖
2
𝑖
) + 0.16 
 
(5) 
 
  
 
 
Vertical 
illuminance  
Glare Impact 
==PAGE:94==
 
 
94 
 
The photometric components - Ev and GI, were derived processing all the images. The sum of 
Ev and GI represents the photometric part of the DGP formula. This relation, which is called 
DGPc here, includes only the photometric quantities of DGP without the weighting exponents, 
which are determined by the empirical modeling process in accordance with the subjective 
responses from the study behind the formula (Christoffersen & Wienold, 2006). DGPc allows 
for comparison of the results only based on photometric variations. DGPc, Ev and GI were then 
compared with RC and RCPI to determine their sensitivity to the view directions.  
 Results 
The results from the study are shown in radar graphs for each time point on rows and time of 
the year on columns, Figures 46-49. In each chart the values corresponding to DGPc, GI, Ev, 
RC and RCPI are shown for each of the nine view directions. On each plot the windows 
orientation is specified (e.g. in Figure 46 west is shown with W). The results from all the 
evaluated rooms are presented. The results are shown and compared using radar graphs, 
which is a two-dimensional graph for representing multivariate results. Each vertex of the radar 
graphs represents 1 out of nine view directions, for which all the parameters described above 
were calculated. 
VI.4.1 Living room of Apartment 2 (LR2); west-facing windows 
One of the rooms, where the visual comfort was investigated is living room of Apartment no.2 
located on the fourth floor of the building. The apartment is west-east oriented and its area is 
45 m2. The living room has an area of 17 m2 and its windows are facing west. The visual 
comfort parameters in the room are presented on the radar plots in Figure 46. 
The graphs show that RCPI has the most sensitivity to view direction. The shape of the RCPI 
plot is never symmetrical in relation to the window, unlike the plots of other parameters for 
several particular dates. The values of RCPI , however are higher in case of camera view 
direction 2 and 3 – to the right from the window in most cases, meaning that the relative 
contrast is much higher when looking to these directions. This is due to the relatively high 
brightness of the window in relation to the rest of the room and the location of the window in 
the FOV. The graphs also show that the Ev values are symmetrical in relation to the window, 
with the highest illuminance directly in front of the window, gradually decreasing towards the 
back of the room. GI shows the same trend, however with lower values. In all graphs DGPc 
and Ev are almost overlapping. 
Despite the season of the year, the plots for all metrics have repetitive shapes for the morning 
hours. This is due to lack of direct sunlight in the west-facing room. It can also be observed in 
Figure 46 that in the equinox days all parameters’ values show similar trends both at 4 and 6 
p.m., which is due to a similar angle of the sun in these days. Also on solstice day June 21. at 
4 p.m. the Ev plot is similar for 7 and 9 p.m., whereas the RC and RCPI show different view-
direction dependent tendencies in the afternoon than in the morning. The same can be seen 
for December 22. – the plot of Ev at 4 p.m. has similar shape to 7 and 9 a.m., the shape of RC 
and RCPI changes for different periods of the day, indicating that strongest contrast in the 
afternoon is detected for different view directions compared to the morning. 
==PAGE:95==
 
 
95 
 
 
Figure 46 Radar plots of visual comfort parameters in solstice and equinox days at 4 specific hours 
during the occupancy in living room of Apartment no.2 
VI.4.2 Kitchen of Apartment 2 (K2); east-facing windows 
The windows in Kitchen 2 of Apartment 2, where the contrast has been calculated are oriented 
towards east (Figure 47). Thus, the presence of direct solar radiation is expected in the room 
in the morning hours (7 and 9 a.m.). As a result there can be a big variation observed of RC, 
RCPI, Ev and GI values in relation to view direction, which is indicated by varying shapes of 
plots for different solstice and equinox days at the morning hours. On the other hand, at the 
afternoon hours (4 and 6 p.m.) plots of all the parameters values have similar shapes for 
different equinox and solstice days.  
From the plots for contrast parameters values in the morning hours it can be observed that in 
December solstice days in the morning (7 a.m. and 9 a.m.) the plots showing contrast 
parameters values have similar shapes to all the plots showing parameter’s values in the 
afternoon hours. Another observation is that the plots for 7 a.m. and 9 a.m. are showing the 
same trends of contrast parameters view direction dependency for both equinox days – 20th 
Match and 22 September.  
However the shapes of plots for equinox days are distinctively different at 7 a.m. than at 9 a.m. 
At 7 a.m. for both 20th Match and 22nd September it is clear from graphs that the highest 
values of Ev and GI are towards the window, while the highest values of RC and RCPI are not 
only for the direction towards windows, but also to the sides of the window. At 9 a.m. the plots 
for RC and Ev on equinox days show similar trends in terms of view-direction dependency – 
==PAGE:96==
 
 
96 
 
they are regular, showing that the parameters have similar values for all direction, except for 
direction 4 (towards left, back side of the room), for which RC and DGPc values or considerably 
lower. The plot of RCPI has most irregular shape, with the highest values of contrast parameters 
to the sides of the window. 
 
Figure 47 Radar plots of visual comfort parameters in solstice and equinox days at 4 specific hours 
during the occupancy in kitchen of Apartment no.2 
VI.4.3 Living room of Apartment 8 (LR 8); south-facing windows 
The visual comfort parameters values were also calculated in living room of Apartment no.8. 
Their radar plots can be seen in Figure 48. This north-south oriented apartment is located on 
the fourth floor and has an area of approx. 44m2. The living room has an area of approx. 17 
m2 and is oriented towards south. An overview of plots shows that the morning and afternoon 
hours of solstice and equinox days for both DGPc components – Ev and GI, are less sensitive 
to the view direction than the RC and RCPI parameters. The values of Ev and GI do not show 
large variations for different view directions, thus the plots have regular shapes and in most 
cases the highest discomfort glare was only detected in the direction towards the window. 
Similar to the previous results, RC and RCPI indicate considerably higher view direction 
dependency of the parameters’ values. Other interesting observations show when there is no 
direct sunlight expected in the rooms, e.g. 7 a.m. and 18 a.m., the shapes of RC and RCPI 
plots are similar for all the solstice and equinox days. Both parameters values are lowest for 
the view direction towards the back of the room. RC contrast is slightly higher towards the left 
side from the window, whereas the RCPI values are highest for the view directions towards the 
right side of the window. At 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. (both closer to midday, when the angle of solar 
==PAGE:97==
 
 
97 
 
radiation is highest) the shapes of both RC and RCPI plots vary distinctively for different solstice 
and equinox days.  
 
Figure 48 Radar plots of visual comfort parameters in solstice and equinox days at 4 specific hours 
during the occupancy in Living Room of apartment no.8 
VI.4.4 Kitchen of Apartment 8 (K8,); north-facing windows 
In the kitchen 8 of Apartment 8, facing north the shapes contrast parameter’ plots are similar 
either for morning or afternoon hours in both solstice and equinox days (Figure 49). The reason 
is that no direct or reflected sunlight is expected in the north-facing room at any season of the 
year or time of the day.  
The RC plot is symmetrical in relation to the window, similarly like Ev and GI plots. Values of 
those parameters indicate that the strongest contrast is detected for the view direction towards 
the window and then it declines gradually for the view direction towards the back of the room. 
According to the RCPI plot shape the contrast is also lowest in the view direction towards the 
back of the room. However, unlike for all the other parameters, RCPI value is not the highest 
for the view direction towards the window, but towards the sides of the room, with the highest 
values of parameter to the right in relation to window.   
==PAGE:98==
 
 
98 
 
 
Figure 49 Radar plots of visual comfort parameters in solstice and equinox days at 4 specific hours 
during the occupancy in kitchen of apartment no.8 
 Summary of results  
The results from the simulation-based study on visual comfort assessment in the case study 
building with heritage value in central Copenhagen showed that this type of building has façade 
typology that does not allow for sufficient daylight penetration over the year. Moreover, 
relatively dark interior spaces comparing to the bright window surfaces could lead to visually 
uncomfortable conditions. However, this is of course a subjective assessment and the same 
condition can be rated as cozy and appreciated in such building. Nevertheless, the results of 
the present study show that such conditions of high contrast cannot be detected by the existing 
commonly used metrics for visual comfort assessments such as DGP. In cases with low 
illuminance levels, DGP model only shows sensitivity when there is a direct and reflected 
sunlight in the FOV. The reason is that the dominant component of DGP is Ev, whereas the GI 
(Glare Impact), that stands for the illuminance contrast has less contribution to the overall 
result of DGP index. In this study a newly developed relative contrast model RCPI, is presented 
as a new approach for visual comfort assessment based on contrast. It allows detecting and 
quantifying contrast in the room, despite the presence of direct or reflected sunlight in the FOV 
or lack of it. RCPI values vary distinctively for different view directions in relation to window, 
unlike the values of DGP and its components that are mostly showing sensitivity towards the 
window. 
 
==PAGE:99==
 
 
99 
 
 
Conclusions  
For the investigations of different solar shading systems performance in the multistory 
residential building with heritage value a building from central area of Copenhagen was 
selected as case study. Daylight performance of 10 specific solar shading devices types’ was 
assessed for several scenarios of case study building’s environment. The impact of internal 
factors (materials’ properties) and external factors (surrounding density and greenery 
presence) was investigated.  
Furthermore the evaluation of visual comfort in case study building was conducted. For this 
purpose I introduced a new method for capturing contrast variations in whole 360-degree room 
space for conditions when there is no direct sun in the FOV and the illuminance levels at the 
eye are low but the scene is contrasted, which is potential source of discomfort 
 Conclusions: interior surface materials and daylight performance 
Based on the analysis of internal materials properties impact it was observed, that selection of 
materials with relatively high reflectance value (white walls and ceiling, pine wood floor) the 
daylight levels can be enhanced in the building, where general daylight conditions are poor.  
In the bottom floors of the case study building surrounded by neighboring buildings from all 
sites the DF value oscillates around the value of 0.5%, which is far below the 2% value required 
for habitable spaces. Analyzing different surrounding density scenarios shown that daylight 
levels on the bottom floors are higher in the rooms that are not exposed to shading effect from 
neighboring buildings. In this case additional enhancement of daylight levels by adjustment of 
the material properties can result in fulfilling the requirements for minimum DF, which is 
observed e.g. for west-facing rooms on the 1st floor, SD2 (Appendix A, Graph 2). 
In buildings having such poor daylight conditions as case study all the possible measures that 
can lead to daylight conditions improvement should be considered, including application of 
materials with higher reflectance value. Their beneficial influence is largest in rooms facing 
west and south.  
 Conclusions: daylight performance on different building floors 
Based on the results of DA in the rooms of different floor without any solar shading device 
applied (Graph 1 in Appendix B) it can be concluded that only rooms located on the fourth floor 
can be autonomous of artificial light approximately 50% of the time over the year. This applies 
to south-, west- and majority of east-facing rooms. Application of any type of solar shading 
device reduces daylight in the way, that DA of 50% is no longer achieved, even for the rooms 
on 4t floor. 
The DA values achieved for the bottom floors of the building are generally low due to shading 
effect from neighboring buildings. It can however be observed that some of the devices are 
diminishing the daylight on ground floor and first floor more drastically then others. The 
example of such device is MicroShade – its performance in terms of daylight is comparable to 
other devices on the fourth floor, whereas the DA values achieved on bottom floors are up to 
two times lower than for other devices. Similar observation can be made for black roller blinds 
applied in the rooms on the 1st floor. Those two types of devices shouldn’t be used I the rooms 
that are exposed to shading from other buildings.  
In general the lowest DA values an all floors are achieved in case of Markisolettes application. 
Based on the results it can be concluded that if the application of awning blinds is considered 
for the building such as case study, the drop-arm Awning Blinds should be selected and not 
Markisolettes (sliding-arm awning blinds).  
==PAGE:100==
 
 
100 
 
 Conclusions: daylight performance for surrounding density and greenery 
scenarios 
Analyzing the results showing the relation between the DA values in the rooms on first and 
fourth floor of the building it can be observed that neighboring buildings have significant 
shading impact on the rooms located on the first floor, whereas their impact on the rooms on 
fourth floor is negligible. This tendency applies for all solar shading scenario and the scenario 
without any solar shading device.  
The performance of different solar shading systems in terms of daylight was analyzed for all 
orientations of rooms on the first floor based on the DA values achieved when the neighboring 
building was excluded. In case of south facing rooms on the first floor that are not shaded by 
neighboring buildings the best performance in terms of daylight is observed for the Awning 
Blinds application (even 10% larger DA). On the west façade all devices show similar 
performance when the shading from surrounding is excluded (~30%DA), except for 
Microshade and Markisolette that perform worse (DA<25%). The best daylight performance in 
west-oriented rooms is achieved in case of Venetian Blinds application – 32% DA. For the 
east-oriented rooms the daylight levels achieved for Venetian Blinds and Markisolettes 
application are lower than for other devices. The daylight conditions in north-oriented rooms 
on the first floor are generally low. In this case the performance of solar shading systems was 
compared for SD no. 4 and based on this comparison it was concluded that Awning Blinds 
perform better than other devices.   
Unlike the neighboring buildings, the courtyard greenery does not show any significant impact 
on daylight levels on the ground floor of case study building. In other words, the presence of 
greenery in the courtyard does not worsen the daylight conditions significantly, but rather 
create a more pleasant view outside the window. However, if no other obstructions is present, 
one might want to be more selective about the type of greenery.  
 Conclusions: Visual comfort assessment based on contrast  
The newly developed model for visual comfort assessment in building with low daylight levels 
allows to detect the contrast in the room, regardless presence of direct or reflected sunlight in 
the FOV. Moreover, according to the results of simulations conducted for 360-degree room 
space, the newly developed model shows significant sensitivity to view direction, meaning that 
results vary for different view directions and the contrast is not always highest towards the 
window and minor towards the back of the room. The finding concerning large variation of 
contrast in 360-degree room space leads to the conclusion that visual discomfort needs to be 
prevented not only in situations where the window is in the FOV, but also when it is outside it. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:101==
 
 
101 
 
 
Future work 
In this master thesis study several interior and exterior parameters and their impact on daylight 
were observes. Many aspects of daylighting in multi-storey residential buildings that were 
brought up in the study – influence of solar shading systems and correlation between their 
performance and environmental conditions, can be expanded and other scenarios can be 
checked for a broader knowledge about the performance of different shading devices in similar 
buildings. Furthermore, the novel method for assessment of visual comfort based on Relative 
Contrast requires further development and validation. Several steps that should be taken to 
develop the study further are described below.  
The variation in surrounding density in the study concerned the presence/lack of presence of 
neighboring buildings in the immediate proximity of case study building. The distances to 
neighboring buildings were fixed and assumed based on the base case scenario. It could lead 
to interesting findings if additional surrounding density scenarios would be introduced, with 
varied distance between case study and neighboring buildings.  
There are also potentials for broadening the study of greenery impact on daylight conditions. 
The ‘Trees Generator’ tool based on the study concerning light penetration through trees 
(Balakrishnan & Jakubiec, 2016) described in IV.6 is constantly in progress. Further directions 
of its development include investigation of different trees species impact on daylight. Based on 
the research modeling options in ‘Trees generator’ will be expanded. The new features of the 
tool could be utilized in the present study. For this purpose, more thorough analysis of greenery 
in case study building courtyard have to be conducted, aiming the identification of trees species 
and measurements of exact dimensions of their cones. Additionally multiple scenarios of 
greenery arrangement could be introduced including e.g. distribution of greenery – 
courtyard/front side of the building, season of the year – summer/winter situation (deciduous 
trees loosing leaves) 
There is obviously a great potential to broaden the range of solar shading scenarios considered 
in the study. There are numerous types solar shading devices that were not included in the 
study and investigation of their performance in terms of daylight could lead to interesting 
findings. The limitation is however, that devices selection should be subordinated to 
architectural form of the building. Furthermore, different glazing types could be studied and 
multiple scenarios for glazing-shading introduced, to observe how those two fenestration 
components are influencing each other’s performance 
Last but not least, the novel method for visual comfort assessments should further be 
developed. The method is based on the hypothesis that high illuminance contrast in the FOV 
can be the major cause of visual discomfort in inadequately lit rooms of old residential buildings 
which might lead to covering the windows and longer usage of artificial light. The experiments 
with subjects are potential method to support this hypothesis and investigate to what extend 
the contrast is disturbing. As a result the RC model, that currently includes only the photometric 
parameters would be supplement by weighting exponents, determined in an empirical 
modeling process in accordance with subject responses on the perceived visual comfort. 
 
 
==PAGE:102==
 
 
102 
 
 
Appendices 
 
On the attached picture below there is a plan of the case study rooms located with the 
evaluated rooms, grouped and marked with colors according to their orientation. The picture 
is supposed to be used for the analysis of data collected on the Graphs in Appendices A-D. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:103==
 
 
103 
 
 Appendix A DF results for two scenarios of interior opaque materials reflectance  
 
 
 
0,0%
0,5%
1,0%
1,5%
2,0%
2,5%
3,0%
3,5%
4,0%
Materials set 1
Materials set 2
Materials set 1
Materials set 2
Materials set 1
Materials set 2
Floor 0
Floor 1
Floor 4
DF value
Material set | no. floor
GRAPH 1: Relation between the DF values in case study building's rooms and the increased 
value of opaque interior surfaces' Reflectance | Surrounding Density scenario no. 1
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
B7a
B7b
LR8
LR7
LR1
LR2
LR3
LR4
LR5
LR6
B6
0,0%
0,5%
1,0%
1,5%
2,0%
2,5%
3,0%
3,5%
4,0%
Materials set 1
Materials set 2
Materials set 1
Materials set 2
Materials set 1
Materials set 2
Floor 0
Floor 1
Floor 4
DF value
Material set | no. floor
GRAPH 2: Relation between the DF values in case study building's rooms and the increased 
value of opaque interior surfaces' Reflectance | Surrounding Density scenario no. 2
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
B7a
B7b
LR8
LR7
LR1
LR2
LR3
LR4
LR5
LR6
B6
==PAGE:104==
 
 
104 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0,0%
0,5%
1,0%
1,5%
2,0%
2,5%
3,0%
3,5%
4,0%
Materials set 1
Materials set 2
Materials set 1
Materials set 2
Materials set 1
Materials set 2
Floor 0
Floor 1
Floor 4
DF value
Material set | no. floor
GRAPH 3: Relation between the DF values in case study building's rooms and the increased 
value of opaque interior surfaces' Reflectance | Surrounding Density scenaario no. 3
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
B7a
B7b
LR8
LR7
LR1
LR2
LR3
LR4
LR5
LR6
B6
0,0%
0,5%
1,0%
1,5%
2,0%
2,5%
3,0%
3,5%
4,0%
Materials set 1
Materials set 2
Materials set 1
Materials set 2
Materials set 1
Materials set 2
Floor 0
Floor 1
Floor 4
DF value
Material set | no. floor
GRAPH 4: Relation between the DF values in case study building's rooms and the increased 
value of opaque interior surfaces' Reflectance | Surrounding Density scenario no. 4
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
B7a
B7b
LR8
LR7
LR1
LR2
LR3
LR4
LR5
LR6
B6
==PAGE:105==
 
 
105 
 
 Appendix B DA results for different floors of case study building  
 
 
 
 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
Floor 0
Floor 1
Floor 4
No solar shading device
DA (150lux)
floor no. | shading device type
GRAPH 1: Relation between the DA (150 lux) in rooms where no 
solar shading device is applied and the floors they belong to
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
B7a
B7b
LR8
LR7
LR1
LR2
LR3
LR4
LR5
LR6
B6
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
Floor 0
Floor 1
Floor 4
MicroShade
DA (150lux)
floor no. | shading device type
GRAPH 2: Relation between the DA (150 lux) in rooms where 
MicroShades are applied and the floors they belong to
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
B7a
B7b
LR8
LR7
LR1
LR2
LR3
LR4
LR5
LR6
B6
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
Floor 0
Floor 1
Floor 4
Roller Blinds 1
DA (150lux)
floor no. | shading device type
GRAPH 3: Relation between the DA (150 lux) in rooms where 
Roller Blinds type 1 are applied and the floors they belong to
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
B7a
B7b
LR8
LR7
LR1
LR2
LR3
LR4
LR5
LR6
B6
==PAGE:106==
 
 
106 
 
 
 
 
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
Floor 0
Floor 1
Floor 4
Roller Blinds 2
DA (150lux)
floor no. | shading device type
GRAPH 4: Relation between the DA (150 lux) in rooms where 
Roller Blinds type 2 are applied and the floors they belong to
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
B7a
B7b
LR8
LR7
LR1
LR2
LR3
LR4
LR5
LR6
B6
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
Floor 0
Floor 1
Floor 4
Roller Blinds 3
DA (150lux)
floor no. | shading device type
GRAPH 5: Relation between the DA (150 lux) in rooms where 
Roller Blinds type 3 are applied and the floors they belong to
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
B7a
B7b
LR8
LR7
LR1
LR2
LR3
LR4
LR5
LR6
B6
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
Floor 0
Floor 1
Floor 4
Venetian Blinds 1
DA (150lux)
floor no. | shading device type
GRAPH 6: Relation between the DA (150 lux) in rooms where 
Venetian Blinds type 1 are applied and the floors they belong to
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
B7a
B7b
LR8
LR7
LR1
LR2
LR3
LR4
LR5
LR6
B6
==PAGE:107==
 
 
107 
 
 
 
 
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
Floor 0
Floor 1
Floor 4
Venetian Blinds 2
DA (150lux)
floor no. | shading device type
GRAPH 7: Relation between the DA (150 lux) in rooms where 
Venetian Blinds type 2 are applied and the floors they belong to
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
B7a
B7b
LR8
LR7
LR1
LR2
LR3
LR4
LR5
LR6
B6
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
Floor 0
Floor 1
Floor 4
Awning Blinds 1
DA (150lux)
floor no. | shading device type
GRAPH 8: Relation between the DA (150 lux) in rooms where 
Awning Blinds type 1 are applied and the floors they belong to
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
B7a
B7b
LR8
LR7
LR1
LR2
LR3
LR4
LR5
LR6
B6
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
Floor 0
Floor 1
Floor 4
Awning Blinds 2
DA (150lux)
floor no. | shading device type
GRAPH 9: Relation between the DA (150 lux) in rooms where 
Awning Blinds type 2 are applied and the floors they belong to
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
B7a
B7b
LR8
LR7
LR1
LR2
LR3
LR4
LR5
LR6
B6
==PAGE:108==
 
 
108 
 
 
 
 
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
Floor 0
Floor 1
Floor 4
Markisolette 1
DA (150lux)
floor no. | shading device type
GRAPH 10: Relation between DA (150 lux) in room where
Markisolettes type 1 are applied and floor on which the room is 
located
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
B7a
B7b
LR8
LR7
LR1
LR2
LR3
LR4
LR5
LR6
B6
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
Floor 0
Floor 1
Floor 4
Markisolette 2
DA (150lux)
floor no. | shading device type
GRAPH 11: Relation between DA (150 lux) in room where
Markisolettes type 2 are applied and floor on which the room is 
located
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
B7a
B7b
LR8
LR7
LR1
LR2
LR3
LR4
LR5
LR6
B6
==PAGE:109==
 
 
109 
 
 Appendix C DA(150 lux) results for different Surrounding Density options 
 
 
 
 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
Surrounding
1
Surrounding
2
Surrounding
3
Surrounding
4
Surrounding
1
Surrounding
2
Surrounding
3
Surrounding
4
Floor 1
Floor 4
DA (150%)
Surrounding density | no. floor
GRAPH 1: Relation between the DA(150 lux) in rooms on 1st and 4th floor where no solar 
shading device applied and case study building surroundng density 
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
B7a
B7b
LR8
LR7
LR1
LR2
LR3
LR4
LR5
LR6
B6
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
Surrounding
1
Surrounding
2
Surrounding
3
Surrounding
4
Surrounding
1
Surrounding
2
Surrounding
3
Surrounding
4
Floor 1
Floor 4
DA (150%)
Surrounding density | no. floor
GRAPH 2: Relation between the DA(150 lux) in rooms on 1st and 4th floor where 
MicroShades are applied and case study building surroundng density 
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
B7a
B7b
LR8
LR7
LR1
LR2
LR3
LR4
LR5
LR6
B6
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
Surrounding
1
Surrounding
2
Surrounding
3
Surrounding
4
Surrounding
1
Surrounding
2
Surrounding
3
Surrounding
4
Floor 1
Floor 4
DA (150%)
Surrounding density | no. floor
GRAPH 3: Relation between the DA(150 lux) in rooms on 1st and 4th floor where Roller 
Blinds type 1 are applied and case study building surroundng density 
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
B7a
B7b
LR8
LR7
LR1
LR2
LR3
LR4
LR5
LR6
B6
==PAGE:110==
 
 
110 
 
 
 
 
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
Surrounding
1
Surrounding
2
Surrounding
3
Surrounding
4
Surrounding
1
Surrounding
2
Surrounding
3
Surrounding
4
Floor 1
Floor 4
DA (150%)
Surrounding density | no. floor
GRAPH 4: Relation between the DA(150 lux) in rooms on 1st and 4th floor where Roller 
Blinds type 2 are applied and case study building surroundng density 
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
B7a
B7b
LR8
LR7
LR1
LR2
LR3
LR4
LR5
LR6
B6
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
Surrounding
1
Surrounding
2
Surrounding
3
Surrounding
4
Surrounding
1
Surrounding
2
Surrounding
3
Surrounding
4
Floor 1
Floor 4
DA (150%)
Surrounding density | no. floor
GRAPH 5: Relation between the DA(150 lux) in rooms on 1st and 4th floor where Roller 
Blinds type 3 are applied and case study building surroundng density 
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
B7a
B7b
LR8
LR7
LR1
LR2
LR3
LR4
LR5
LR6
B6
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
Surrounding
1
Surrounding
2
Surrounding
3
Surrounding
4
Surrounding
1
Surrounding
2
Surrounding
3
Surrounding
4
Floor 1
Floor 4
DA (150%)
Surrounding density | no. floor
GRAPH 6: Relation between the DA(150 lux) in rooms on 1st and 4th floor where 
Venetian Blinds type 1 are applied and case study building surroundng density 
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
B7a
B7b
LR8
LR7
LR1
LR2
LR3
LR4
LR5
LR6
B6
==PAGE:111==
 
 
111 
 
 
 
 
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
Surrounding
1
Surrounding
2
Surrounding
3
Surrounding
4
Surrounding
1
Surrounding
2
Surrounding
3
Surrounding
4
Floor 1
Floor 4
DA (150%)
Surrounding density | no. floor
GRAPH 7: Relation between the DA(150 lux) in rooms on 1st and 4th floor where 
Venetian Blinds type 2 are applied and case study building surroundng density 
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
B7a
B7b
LR8
LR7
LR1
LR2
LR3
LR4
LR5
LR6
B6
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
Surrounding
1
Surrounding
2
Surrounding
3
Surrounding
4
Surrounding
1
Surrounding
2
Surrounding
3
Surrounding
4
Floor 1
Floor 4
DA (150%)
Surrounding density | no. floor
GRAPH 8: Relation between the DA(150 lux) in rooms on 1st and 4th floor where Awning 
Blinds type 1 are applied and case study building surroundng density 
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
B7a
B7b
LR8
LR7
LR1
LR2
LR3
LR4
LR5
LR6
B6
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
Surrounding
1
Surrounding
2
Surrounding
3
Surrounding
4
Surrounding
1
Surrounding
2
Surrounding
3
Surrounding
4
Floor 1
Floor 4
DA (150%)
Surrounding density | no. floor
GRAPH 9: Relation between the DA(150 lux) in rooms on 1st and 4th floor where Awning 
Blinds type 2 are applied and case study building surroundng density 
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
B7a
B7b
LR8
LR7
LR1
LR2
LR3
LR4
LR5
LR6
B6
==PAGE:112==
 
 
112 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
Surrounding
1
Surrounding
2
Surrounding
3
Surrounding
4
Surrounding
1
Surrounding
2
Surrounding
3
Surrounding
4
Floor 1
Floor 4
DA (150%)
Surrounding density | no. floor
GRAPH 10: Relation between the DA(150 lux) in rooms on 1st and 4th floor where 
Markisolettes type 1 are applied and case study building surroundng density 
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
B7a
B7b
LR8
LR7
LR1
LR2
LR3
LR4
LR5
LR6
B6
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
Surrounding
1
Surrounding
2
Surrounding
3
Surrounding
4
Surrounding
1
Surrounding
2
Surrounding
3
Surrounding
4
Floor 1
Floor 4
DA (150%)
Surrounding density | no. floor
GRAPH 11: Relation between the DA(150 lux) in rooms on 1st and 4th floor where 
Markisolettes type 2 are applied and case study building surroundng density 
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
B7a
B7b
LR8
LR7
LR1
LR2
LR3
LR4
LR5
LR6
B6
==PAGE:113==
 
 
113 
 
 Appendix D DA(150 lux) results on the ground floor with and without courtyard 
greenery 
 
 
 
 
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
Without
Greenery
With Greenery
Without
Greenery
With Greenery
Surrounding 1
Surrounding 4
DA (150%)
Greenery presence | Surrounding Density scenario
GRAPH 1: Relation between the DA(150 lux) in rooms on 
groundfloor floor where no solar shading device is applied and the 
presence of courtyard greenery
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
Without
Greenery
With Greenery
Without
Greenery
With Greenery
Surrounding 1
Surrounding 4
DA (150%)
Greenery presence | Surrounding Density scenario
GRAPH 2: Relation between the DA(150 lux) in rooms on 
groundfloor floor where MicroShades are applied and the 
presence of courtyard greenery
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
Without
Greenery
With Greenery
Without
Greenery
With Greenery
Surrounding 1
Surrounding 4
DA (150%)
Greenery presence | Surrounding Density scenario
GRAPH 3: Relation between the DA(150 lux) in rooms on 
groundfloor floor where Roller Blinds type 1 are applied and the 
presence of courtyard greenery
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
==PAGE:114==
 
 
114 
 
 
 
 
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
Without
Greenery
With Greenery
Without
Greenery
With Greenery
Surrounding 1
Surrounding 4
DA (150%)
Greenery presence | Surrounding Density scenario
GRAPH 4: Relation between the DA(150 lux) in rooms on 
groundfloor floor where Roller Blinds type 2 are applied and the 
presence of courtyard greenery
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
Without
Greenery
With Greenery
Without
Greenery
With Greenery
Surrounding 1
Surrounding 4
DA (150%)
Greenery presence | Surrounding Density scenario
GRAPH 5: Relation between the DA(150 lux) in rooms on 
groundfloor floor where Roller Blinds type 3 are applied and the 
presence of courtyard greenery
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
Without
Greenery
With Greenery
Without
Greenery
With Greenery
Surrounding 1
Surrounding 4
DA (150%)
Greenery presence | Surrounding Density scenario
GRAPH 6: Relation between the DA(150 lux) in rooms on 
groundfloor floor where Venetian Blinds type 1 are applied and the 
presence of courtyard greenery
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
==PAGE:115==
 
 
115 
 
 
 
 
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
Without
Greenery
With Greenery
Without
Greenery
With Greenery
Surrounding 1
Surrounding 4
DA (150%)
Greenery presence | Surrounding Density scenario
GRAPH 7: Relation between the DA(150 lux) in rooms on 
groundfloor floor where Venetian Blinds type 2 are applied and the 
presence of courtyard greenery
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
Without
Greenery
With Greenery
Without
Greenery
With Greenery
Surrounding 1
Surrounding 4
DA (150%)
Greenery presence | Surrounding Density scenario
GRAPH 8: Relation between the DA(150 lux) in rooms on 
groundfloor floor where Awning Blinds type 1 are applied and the 
presence of courtyard greenery
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
Without
Greenery
With Greenery
Without
Greenery
With Greenery
Surrounding 1
Surrounding 4
DA (150%)
Greenery presence | Surrounding Density scenario
GRAPH 9: Relation between the DA(150 lux) in rooms on 
groundfloor floor where Awning Blinds type 2 are applied and the 
presence of courtyard greenery
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
==PAGE:116==
 
 
116 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
Without
Greenery
With Greenery
Without
Greenery
With Greenery
Surrounding 1
Surrounding 4
DA (150%)
Greenery presence | Surrounding Density scenario
GRAPH 10: Relation between the DA(150 lux) in rooms on 
groundfloor floor where Markisolettes type 1 are applied and the 
presence of courtyard greenery
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
Without
Greenery
With Greenery
Without
Greenery
With Greenery
Surrounding 1
Surrounding 4
DA (150%)
Greenery presence | Surrounding Density scenario
GRAPH 11: Relation between the DA(150 lux) in rooms on 
groundfloor floor where Markisolettes type 2 are applied and the 
presence of courtyard greenery
K1
B1
K2
B2
K3
B3
K4
B4
K5
B5
K8
B8
K6
K7
==PAGE:117==
 
 
117 
 
 Appendix E Annual glare based on DGP Index for selected rooms of cases study 
building 
 
 
 
HDR images (21.09; 9 a.m.) 
Annual glare results based on DGP index 
LR2 
(W) 
 
 
B2 
(E) 
 
 
K2 
(E) 
 
 
LR8 
(S) 
 
 
B8 
(N) 
 
 
B8 
(N) 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:118==
 
 
 
Conference Papers 
 
Lux Europa 2017 Conference Paper no. 1 
Visual Comfort Evaluation in Residential 
Buildings: a Simulation-Based Study 
Ślipek M., Sarey Khanie M., Zukowska D., Kolarik J., Nielsen, T.R. 
Department of Civil Engineering 
Technical University of Denmark 
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark 
masak@byg.dtu.dk 
 
 
Abstract— Despite desirability of direct sunlight access in residential buildings, visual discomfort risks for these building types 
are less known. A simulation-based study was performed on a typical residential building with heritage value in central 
Copenhagen in order to evaluate its visual comfort characteristics using existing methods. Our results show that, although high 
relative contrast exist for view-directions not only towards window, these situations are not captured by the existing methods. 
A new method for quantification of a relative contrast over the 360° span of the space was thus introduced. 
 
Index Terms—Daylighting, Gaze (View) direction, Residential buildings, Visual comfort, HDRI techniques 
 
I. 
INTRODCUTION 
Visual discomfort caused by daylight has been observed in extend targeting commercial buildings with a focus on 
office buildings. These studies have proposed several metrics to describe discomfort caused by excessive or unbalanced 
luminous contrast within a fixed Field of View (FOV) with respect to a office visual task-area [1] ,e.g. monitor screen. 
Task-oriented visual comfort evaluation, however, does not seem to be as relevant in residential interior spaces where the 
classification of a task and its position is less defined. Although several studies have explored the applicability of different 
daylight metrics to residential buildings [2] and daylight energy saving benefits [3], the visual comfort assessment 
methods in this building typology have not been addressed. 
 
The visual comfort assessment methods are developed majorly in experimental set ups under electrical lighting with 
few exceptions that address this phenomenon under daylight conditions [4]. These methods rely on empirical models 
where subjective human response is correlated with a sophisticated relation of physical photometric quantities that 
represent perceived luminance contrast at the eye level. One of these models which addresses daylight-induced visual 
discomfort is Daylight Glare Probability (DGP) index. DGP is used to quantify the percentage probability of glare 
perception, developed for an office room under daylight conditions [5].  
 
The DGP formula consists of two main components. The first component is the vertical illuminance at the eye level 
(EV). This parameter shows a particular sensitivity when direct sun is the cause of visual discomfort. The second one, 
Glare Impact (GI) [6], is a summation of the luminance of all the glare sources weighted by their corresponding size in 
solid angle unit and sensitivity in the FOV measured by a Position Index (PI) function [7], and finally divided by Ev. The 
GI accounts for contrast-inducted glare, meaning the discomfort caused by high contrast between the center area of the 
FOV and the surroundings. Nevertheless, its contribution to the overall result for DGP is considerably smaller than Ev. 
As a result, the impact of contrast on the potential visual discomfort sensation is considered only to a limited extend when 
using the DGP index.  
 
In buildings with relatively small windows and thick walls, the daylight levels are low and presence of daylight and 
direct sunlight during the majority of the occupied hours is rare, and therefore, almost no discomfort caused by excessive 
glare or higher illuminance levels at the eye is detected when running the numerical simulations for the DGP index. 
However, high contrast between window area and the rest of the room can occur. Knowing that contrast variations even 
in lower luminous environments can cause discomfort [8], in order to detect these conditions in these buildings, we have 
developed a new method based on relative illuminance contrast. The newly developed Relative Cotrast model (RC) is 
based on relative contrast in the FOV. We used this method for detection of potential visual contrast-induced discomfort 
in the chosen case study building and determination of its view-direction dependency [9, 10]. 
 
The objective of the presented study is to detect the potential visual comfort and determine its view direction 
dependency in a typical old apartment building in Copenhagen by using the Relative Contrast model. 
==PAGE:119==
 
 
119 
 
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
Photometric behavior of a selected case study was observed with numerical simulations using the lighting rendering 
tool, Radiance [11]. The chosen residential building for this study represents a larger range of buildings in central 
Copenhagen, built in period from 1850 till mid 1950s, using the same principles [12]. These buildings have masonry thick 
walls and relatively small windows (1 m with to 1.65 m height in living rooms). The building has five above ground 
stories – ground floor plus four floors. There are 8 apartments located on each floor - 6 of them with the E-W orientation, 
1 facing N-S, both types consisting of a living room, bedroom and kitchen, and 1 apartment with the windows facing SW 
and NE and an additional bedroom.  
 
The relative illuminance contrast in living rooms and kitchens of several apartments of the case study building was 
investigated. This was done using High dynamic range (HDR) rendering techniques with angular fisheye perspective 
view types rendered in Radiance. The illuminance contrast was calculated as a standard deviation of illuminance values 
on each rendered image. To be calculated, it was thus necessary to first derive the illuminance values of the images’ 
pixels, bearing in mind that each image is a 2-dimensional transformation of 3-dimensional space with the specified 
angular projection algorithm. We used Evalglare tool [5] to derive the solid angle distribution of pixels, DGP and the 
glare sources’ luminance intensity and size. The obtained data from Evalglare was used in Matlab to calculate the Relative 
Contrast (RC). In order to compare the view direction dependency and applicability of the DGP index components and 
RC, the angular fisheye images HDR images were rendered for a range of view directions with an immersive approach 
[13] for different room types in the selected case study. All the simulations were done for four selected points in time 
during the occupancy hours on equinox and solstice days – March 20, June 21, and September 22 and December 21– at 
7 a.m., 9 a.m., 4 p.m. and 6 p.m. During the simulation process, it turned out not to be possible to render the images for 
21.12 at 6 p.m. due to insufficient level of daylight at this time of the shortest day in the year. The whole process is 
described in details in the following paragraphs.Due to space limitation, only results from the simulations for living rooms 
in two apartments in the buildings are presented in the paper. 
o Immersive Spatial Approach 
Investigations for contrast assessment in the rooms of the case study building was done using an immersive spatial 
approach [13]. Instead of choosing one camera view direction for the simulation, a range of view directions were 
considered to render a set of images that can constitute a base for contrast analysis. For this purpose, the camera was 
placed in the centre of each of 4 investigated room at the height of 122 cm (the average height of a sitting persons eyes) 
and oriented towards 9 different directions. The rule for adjusting view directions was the same for all investigated rooms, 
despite their orientation – the first view direction was perpendicularly towards the window, and the following ones were 
clockwise rotated 40° apart.  
o Solid angle and Position index determination using Evalglare 
The HDR images, were generated by use of the angular (-vta) fisheye view type [11]. The principle for fisheye 
projection is that the distance from the center of the image is proportional to the angle of the camera’s view direction. As 
a result, half of the environment (in this case the room space) is projected onto a spherical image. Using the Radiance-
based tool Evalglare [5], size of all pixels in solid angle values for the fisheye images were determined. Another parameter 
derived from Evalglare, which was further used is the Position Index (PI) parameter for all pixel points. These two 
parameters were then used in RC for quantifying the relative contrast of each rendered image. Within the same processing 
workflow in Evalglare, DGP, Ev and GI components were derived. The latter was then calculated for all cases in Matlab.  
o Image Contrast Calculation in Matlab 
Sets of fisheye HDR images showing the 9 view directions of each room at each point in time were read in Matlab 
along with their RGB values and  pixel parameters. The first step in order to assess the contrast on each of the images 
was to calculate the illuminance values of image pixels. For this purpose, the illuminance for each pixel was calculated 
based on  using the RGB values (1). 
  
Illuminance = 179∙ (0.265∙R + 0.670∙G + 0.065∙B)    
(1) 
 
In order to account for the pixels’ sizes, the calculated values of pixels’ illuminances were multiplied by corresponding 
solid angle values. The resulting pixels illuminance values weighted by the pixels’ sizes were used to calculated the 
contrast on each image. The relative contrast (RC) was calculated based on the standard deviation of the pixels illuminance 
values according to (2). This relative contrast was also calculated based on the pixels illuminance values weighted by the 
PI (RCPI)  (3).  
 
RC=  
1
𝐿𝑚√1
𝑁∑((𝐿𝑖 . 𝜔𝑖) −𝜇1)
2 
 
 
 (2) 
 
==PAGE:120==
 
 
120 
 
RCPI= 
1
𝐿𝑚√1
𝑁∑((𝐿𝑖 . 𝜔𝑖𝑃𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥
⁄
) −𝜇2)
2
 
 
(3) 
Where 
Lm – average luminance of the scene 
Li – luminance of the pixel 
ωi – solid angle of the pixel 
Pindex – position index of each pixel 
μ1 – mean of all value corresponding to (Li ∙ ωi) 
μ1 – mean of all value corresponding to (Li ∙ ωi / Pindex)  
 
o DGPc: The Photometric Relation of DGP  
The photometric components of the DGP, i.e.  Ev and GI, were derived processing all the images. The sum of Ev and 
GI represents the photometric part of the DGP formula. This relation, which is called DGPc here, includes only the 
photometric quantities of DGP without the weighting exponents, which are determined by the empirical modelling process 
in accordance with the subjective responses from the study behind the formula [5]. DGPc allows for comparison of the 
results only based on photometric variations. DGPc, Ev and GI were then compared with RC and RCPI to determine their 
sensitivity to the view directions.  
III. 
RESULTS  
The results from the study are presented in radar charts in Fig.1 and 2 for each time point on rows and time of the year 
on columns. The values  of DGPc, GI, Ev, RC and RCPI are shown for each of the 9 view directions. On each plot the 
windows orientation is specified (e.g. in Fig. 1 west is shown with W). Only the results from the two living rooms facing 
West and South are presented.  
o Living Room of Apartment 2 West-facing windows 
Living room of apartment no. 2 located on the 5th floor of the building, is one of the investigated rooms. The apartment 
is West-East oriented and its area is 45 m2. The living room has an area of 17 m2 and its windows are facing west. The 
radar plots for the room in Fig. 1 show that RCPI has the most sensitivity to view direction. The shape of the RCPI plot is 
never symmetrical in relation to the window, unlike the plots of other parameters for several particular dates. The values 
of RCPI , however, are higher in case of camera view direction 2 and 3 – to the right from the window in most cases, 
meaning that the relative contrast is much higher when looking to these directions. This is due to the relatively high 
brightness of the window in relation to the rest of the room and the location of the window in the FOV.  
 
The graphs also show that the Ev values are symmetrical in relation to the window, with the highest illuminance 
directly in front of the window, gradually decreasing towards the back of the room. The GI plots show the same trend, 
however with lower values. In all graphs DGPc and Ev are almost overlapping. Despite the season of the year, the plots 
for all metrics have repetitive shapes for the morning hours. This is due to lack of direct sunlight in the West-facing room. 
It can also be observed in Fig. 1 that in the equinox days all parameters’ values show similar trends both at 4 and 6 p.m., 
which is due to a similar angle of the sun in these days. Also on solstice day June 21. at 4 p.m. the Ev plot is similar for 
7 and 9 p.m., whereas the RC and RCPI plots show different view-direction dependent tendencies in the afternoon than in 
the morning. The same can be seen for December 22. – the plot of Ev at 4 p.m. has similar shape to the plots for 7 and 9 
a.m., while the shape of RC and RCPI plots change for different periods of the day, indicating that strongest contrast in 
the afternoon is detected for different view directions compared to the morning. 
o Living Room of Apartment 8; South-facing windows 
The visual comfort parameters values were also calculated for living room of apartment no. 8 and the radar plots for 
the room can be seen in Fig. 2. This North-South oriented apartment is located on the 5th floor and has an area of approx. 
44 m2. The living room has an area of approx. 17 m2 and is oriented towards south. An overview of plots shows that the 
morning and afternoon hours of solstice and equinox days for both DGPc components – EV and GI, are less sensitive to 
the view direction than the RC and RCPI parameters. The values of EV and GI do not show large variations for different 
view directions, thus the plots have regular shapes and in most cases the highest discomfort glare was only detected in 
the direction towards the window.  
 
Similar to the previous results, RC and RCPI indicate considerably higher view direction dependency of the parameters’ 
values. Another interesting observation is that when there is no direct sunlight expected in the rooms, e.g. 7 a.m. and 18 
a.m., the shapes of the RC and RCPI plots are similar for all the solstice and equinox days. Both parameters values are 
lowest for the view direction towards the back of the room. RC contrast is slightly higher towards the left side from the 
window, whereas the RCPI values are highest for the view directions towards the right side of the window. At 9 a.m. and 
4 p.m. (both closer to midday, when the angle of solar radiation is highest) the shapes of both RC and RCPI plots vary 
distinctively for different solstice and equinox days.  
 
==PAGE:121==
 
 
121 
 
 
Figure 50 Radar plots of visual comfort parameters in solstice and equinox days at four specific hours during the occupancy in the living room of 
apartment no.2 (W – west, the window orientation) 
 
 
Figure 51 Radar plots of visual comfort parameters in solstice and equinox days at four specific hours during the occupancy in the living room of 
apartment no.8 (S – south, the window orientation) 
==PAGE:122==
 
 
122 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS  
The results from the simulatin-based study on visual comfort asessments in the typical residentail building with heritage 
value in central Copenhagen are showen. This type of building has a façade typology that does not allow for sufficient 
daylight penetration over the year. Moreover, relatively dark interior spaces comparing to the bright window surfaces 
could lead to visually uncomfortable conditions. This is, however, a subjective assessment and the same condition can be 
rated as cozy and appreciated in such building.  
 
The results of the present study show that such conditions of high contrast can not be detected by the exisitng commonly 
used metrics for visual comfort assessments such as DGP. In cases with low illuminance levels, the DGP model only 
shows sensitivity when there is a direct and reflected sulight in the FOV. The reason is that the dominant component of 
DGP is EV, whereas the GI (Glare Impact), that stands for the illuminance contrast has less contribution to the overall 
result of the DGP index.  
 
In this study a newly developed relative contrast model RCPI, is presented as a new approach for visual comfort 
assessment based on contrast. It allows detecting and quantifying contrast in the room, despite the presence of direct or 
reflected sunlight in the FOV or lack of it. RCPI values vary distinctively for different view directions in relation to a 
window, unlike the values of DGP and its components that are mostly showing sensitivity towards the window. 
V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors would like to thank Grundejernes Investeringsfond for financing this project.  
VI. REFERENCES 
[1] 
P. R. Boyce, Human factors in lighting. Crc press, 2014. 
[2] 
J. Mardaljevic, M. Andersen, N. Roy, J. Christofferesen “Daylighting metrics for residential buildings,” Proc. 
27th Sess. CIE, p. 18, 2011. 
[3] 
K. Negendahl and T. R. Nielsen, “Building energy optimization in the early design stages: A simplified 
method,” Energy Build., vol. 105, pp. 88–99, Oct. 2015. 
[4] 
J. J. Vos, “Reflections on glare,” Light. Res. Technol., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 163–176, 2003. 
[5] 
J. Wienold and J. Christoffersen, “Evaluation methods and development of a new glare prediction model for 
daylight environments with the use of CCD cameras,” Energy Build., vol. 38, no. 7, pp. 743–757, 2006. 
[6] 
M. Sarey Khanie, J. Wienold, and M. Andersen, “A sensitivity analysis on glare detection parameters (remote 
presentation),” in 13th International Radiance Workshop 2014, 2014. 
[7] 
M. Luckiesh and S. K. Guth, “Brightness in Visual Field at Borderline Between Comfort and Discomfort 
BCD),” Illum. Eng., 1949. 
[8] 
P. Hansen, M. Sarey Khanie, T. E. Kuhn, J. Christoffersen, J. Wienold, and M. Andersen, “Glare Caused By 
Contrast Between Task And Immediate Surround: An Evaluation Of Luminance Distribution In The Field Of 
View,” in Proceedings Of Cie 2016 Lighting Quality And Energy Efficiency ((ISBN: 978-3-902842-65-7), 2016, 
no. EPFL-CONF-223114, pp. 132–141. 
[9] 
M. Sarey Khanie, J. Stoll, W. Einhäuser, J. Wienold, and M. Andersen, “Gaze-driven approach for estimating 
luminance values in the field of view for discomfort assessments,” in 28th CIE Session, 2015, no. EPFL-CONF-
208931. 
[10] 
M. Sarey Khanie, J. Stoll, W. Einhaeuser, J. Wienold, and M. Andersen, “Gaze responsive visual comfort: New 
findings on gaze behaviour in a daylit office space in relation to glare,” in Proceedings Of Cie 2016 Lighting 
Quality And Energy Efficiency ((ISBN: 978-3-902842-65-7), 2016, no. EPFL-CONF-223115 (ISBN: 978-3-
902842-65-7), pp. 373–384. 
[11] 
G.W. Larson, R. Shakespeare, Rendering with Radiance: the art and science of lighting visualization. 
Booksurge Llc, 2004. 
[12] 
M. Sarey Khanie, D. Zukowska, J. Kolarik, and T. R. Nielsen, “An Evaluation Method for Façade Renovation 
Strategies in Residential Buildings Using Gaze Responsive Visual Comfort Assessments,” in LUXEURPOPA, 
2017. 
[13] 
M. L. Amundadottir, S. Rockcastle, M. S. Khanie, and M. Andersen, “A human-centric approach to assess 
daylight in buildings for non-visual health potential, visual interest and gaze behavior,” Build. Environ., vol. 
113, pp. 5–21, 2017. 
==PAGE:123==
 
 
 
Lux Europa 2017 Conference Paper no. 2 
An Evaluation Method for Façade Renovation 
Strategies in Residential Buildings Using Gaze 
Responsive Visual Comfort Assessments 
Sarey Khanie, M., Ślipek, M., Zukowska D., Kolarik J., Nielsen T.R. 
Department of Civil Engineering 
Technical University of Denmark 
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark 
masak@byg.dtu.dk 
 
Abstract— Maintaining daylight quality while ensuring thermal comfort during periods of high solar gain proves to 
be a challenge in renovated multi-story housing. The objective of this study was to develop guidelines for facade 
renovation, where overheating problems can only be avoided through façade solutions. As a first step, different 
shading systems have been investigated and compared in terms of their daylight performance, visual comfort and 
gaze responsive characteristics. This trio evaluation method is going to be further developed and used for a larger 
set of selected shading devices. 
Keywords: Daylighting, Gaze Behaviour, Overheating, Residential Buildings, Visual Comfort 
I. 
     INTRODUCTION 
Enhanced daylight quality in indoor environment is dependent on a series of multi-dimensional and dynamic physical 
and psychological parameters. Each pragmatic combination of these parameters at pre-design phase can lead to a different 
design outcome. The main challenge is to reach an embracive energy efficient and human-centric decision that allows for 
maximum use of daylight with energy saving benefits to enrich tenants’ health and visual quality while avoiding visual and 
overheating. Most studies on daylighting and energy savings target commercial buildings with less focus on residential 
buildings’ needs [1]. It is, however, commonly known that in residential buildings direct sunlight penetration is desirable 
and several countries have regulations to ensure a minimum required amount of direct daylight penetration [2]. 
Concurrently, advancing energy efficient solutions in renovation phase necessitate adopting high-insulation and air-
tightness to avoid heat loss through transmission or infiltration. In addition, residential ventilation systems in many 
countries are only designed to ensure proper indoor air quality and not to cool indoor air [3] because air conditioning is not 
an energy efficient option [4]. Venting by opening of windows can be used for cooling purposes in moderate climates, 
but has limitations related to theft risks and outside noise. In combination with an increase in occupancy hours in 
residences due to the possibility of remote working, risk of being exposed to high indoor temperatures has increased. This 
has a negative effect on occupants health, wellbeing and productivity [5] especially among vulnerable groups such as 
children and elderly [6]. Moreover, elevated temperatures during day-time are followed by consequent high temperatures 
during night-time day which distorts the sleep quality [7]. 
To prevent overheating, one solution is to limit the solar heat gains through the façade. Experiences from high 
performance buildings show that cost-efficient dynamic solar shading can lead to energy savings related to cooling of up 
to 62% [8]. If the façade strategies are wisely set, an optimized use of daylight can enhance the energy efficiency of the 
buildings as well [9]. However, the selection of appropriate shading systems for residential buildings proves to be a 
challenge. This is partially due to limitations on appearance change of certain residential buildings rising from e.g. public 
preferences and acceptance. Weather conditions mainly in terms of external shading devices can also restrict the use of 
certain types of devices. Finally, fewer studies with focus on subjective preferences in this type of buildings add on to the 
complexity of the design decision-making process in such cases. 
The objective of the presented study was to evaluate shading systems for façade renovation strategies based on daylight 
performance and daylight-induced visual risks. 
 
o 
Daylight Performance 
When renovating residential buildings, one of the objectives should be to ensure maximum use of daylight to ensure 
tenants’ enhanced health, well-being and visual quality, while avoiding visual and thermal discomfort caused by excessive 
daylight penetration and overheating. Daylight performance can be predicted by use of daylight metrics developed in the 
past decades. These metrics can mainly be categorized as either static or dynamic. Daylight factor (DF) is a static metric 
and it is used to measure the amount of diffuse daylight delivered to a point in space under overcast daylit conditions. DF 
is hence insensitive to climate, orientation, and surrounding of the building [10]. This metric limits exploiting the daylight 
potentials in buildings while neglecting eventual visual discomfort risks [11]. A number of Climate-Based Daylight 
==PAGE:124==
 
 
124 
 
Modelling (CBDM) metrics have, however, been proposed in order to overcome this shortcoming. In recent years the 
metrics such as Daylight Autonomy (DA) and Useful Daylight Illuminance (UDI) have been used for dynamic evaluation 
of daylight potentials in indoor environments [11]. 
 
o 
Visual Discomfort 
While playing a crucial role in any building’s overall performance, discomfort glare is very hard to predict and design 
for [12] and it is a major concern in developing the right façade typology for its daylight performance. Several studies on 
discomfort glare in the past decades have led to mathematical models for discomfort glare quantification. These models 
have a larger focus on artificial lighting conditions and fewer attempt on daylighting with use of artificial lighting base 
experiments [13] and, more recently, under daylight conditions for Daylight Glare Probability (DGP) [12]. The models 
are mainly based on empirical methods where human subjective assessments are associated with relevant photometric 
relations linked with visual visibility and luminance contrast. 
Additionally, a few studies have explored objective measures such as certain pupil fluctuation [14] and activities of 
facial muscles in the vicinity of the eye [15] to identify a source of discomfort. More recent studies have reported 
physiological responses such as degree of eye opening [16], eye movements and pupil constrictions [17] as indicators for 
discomfort glare. However, so far, only studies based on subjective assessments by means of questionnaires have been 
used to quantify discomfort glare. 
 
o 
Gaze and Visual Comfort 
Gaze direction is where we direct our line of sight by jointly moving our eyes, head and body. With each gaze shift 
the luminance distribution in the field of view (FOV) changes and the visual system needs to re-adapt. Knowing that 
visual comfort perception is mainly dependent on the luminance distribution across different parts of the FOV [18], the 
gaze shifts and the eventual changes in adaptation level can impact the subjective or objective responses to  luminous 
environment. So far, an assumption behind development of existing discomfort glare prediction metrics has been that the 
gaze direction is fixed towards a task area. In early design phases or in certain building types such as residential buildings, 
the “task area” is not the main design criteria. However, the visual comfort assessment for these types of buildings still 
proves to be beneficial.  
Several recent studies have addressed the eye physiological response such as an eye opening in relation to glare [16]. 
Interpretation of the gaze shifts and re-adaptation process have been, however,(arbitrarily) addressed by extending gaze 
directions to a preferred angular range [19]. The dynamic gaze shifts responses to light and implementation of them in 
visual comfort assessments was then advanced [20] through a series of experimental studies where gaze observations with 
eye-tracking techniques coupled with photometric observations with high dynamic range (HDR) imaging techniques were 
used. The latter study led to development of a new gaze responsive method for discomfort glare evaluations based on 
prediction of gaze shifts as result of excessive glary patches in the field of view. This is done by means of a predictive 
model termed Light-driven gaze responsive (GRL) which calculates the gaze shifts as response to glary patches in the 
FOV, their size and position in the FOV, and the average luminance the eye is adapted to. The predictive behaviour 
always sways away from the glary patches. 
II. 
    METHODODLOGY 
In the present simulation-based study, six shading systems were evaluated for their daylight performance and 
afterwards four of them (due to time constraints) were evaluated for gaze responsive comfort. Daylight performance of 
the six shading systems with manual control were investigated using Diva for Rhino for three floors of the building, two 
neighbouring density scenarios (with or without) and two vegetation scenarios (with or without). Visual comfort 
simulations were done based on immersive spatial approach [21] in order to assess the photometric behaviour in a larger 
visual span. Based on this method several HDR renderings over a range of gaze (view) directions were simulated and 
evaluated for gaze responsiveness using the GRL model [21] and visual comfort using the DGP model [12]. The visual 
span was set to 112.5°, which started from a perpendicular vector to the south-facing window, and ended at 112.5° inside 
the room where the window disappeared from the FOV. This visual span was divided into six gaze (view) directions and 
six 180° angular fisheye HDR images. The occupant position in a room (a viewpoint) was assumed to be at 1500 mm 
from the window and 1000 mm from the wall behind. All visual comfort related simulations were done for four time 
points during the occupancy hours set for residences (in time periods of 7 a.m. – 10 a.m. and 4 p.m. – 6 p.m.) for one day 
in a year May 30 using Radiance rendering tool [22] and Evalglare tool [12]. 
 
o 
Case study  
The case study building is a 4-storey residential building with heritage value located in central Copenhagen. The 
building represents a larger range of buildings in Denmark  built in the period between 1850 and mid-1950s.  The floors 
of the building (except the basement, which is not considered for the daylight conditions assessment) have identical 
layouts. The relevant specifications of the case study can be seen in Table I. Among the six apartment types, the more 
common layout with a south facing living room was chosen for the investigation. 
 
Table I. Study case building specifications. 
==PAGE:125==
 
 
125 
 
.Building Typology 
Year 
Exterior Walls 
 
Simulated materials 
Walls 
Floor 
Ceiling 
 
1850-
1950 
 
Masonry bricks  
 
(1-11/2 sten, increase 
with ½ per block from the 
2nd floor) 
Reflectance 
80 % 
 
Specularity  
0.36% 
Reflectance 
30 % 
 
Specularity  
0 % 
Reflectance 80 
% 
 
Specularity  
0.44 % 
 
Table II. Detail specifications of simulated systems. 
Device 
Position 
Shading 
System 
Device 
Geometry 
Material 
Optical 
properties 
 
System 1 
Double-pane 
clear 
glazing 
- 
- 
Tvis = 82% 
Internal 
System 2 
Roller blinds 
- 
Grey 
BRDF 
calculation 
External 
System 3 
Venetian blinds 
C-shaped 
slat 
Color 1 – White 
(Warema 71000) 
Tvis = 0.00 
R = 0.78 
External 
System 4 
MicroShade 
- 
MS-A 
BRDF 
calculation 
Internal 
System 5 
Roller blinds 
 
White 
BRDF 
calculation 
External 
System 6 
Venetian blinds -45° 
cut off angle 
 
Color 2 - Grey-
Beige 
(Warema 71005) 
Tvis = 0.00 
R = 0.64 
 
o 
 Shading Systems 
The selected systems from the numerous solar shading devices available on the market can be seen in Table II. System 
1 represents the initial façade setting, Systems 2 and 4 include internal roller blinds, which are commonly used in 
residential buildings due to relatively low cost, easy instalment and operation, which interfere with the architectural form 
of the building only in a minimal degree. However, the device has limited effect for overheating preventions. In the 
simulations, the roller blinds geometry was simplified to two surfaces in addition to the glazing: a single surface 
representing roller blind’s fabric with complex optical properties in 95 mm distance from the window pane and a 
transmission surface to assign the light transmittance properties.  
Generic C shape venetian blinds were investigated as System 3 and System 6. There are several technical 
specifications to consider when selecting venetian blinds such as installation and operational type but it is mainly the 
slat’s material and colour of the venetian blinds that affect its optical properties.  
The last simulated device (System 4) was MicroShade. MicroShade is a thin metal sheet with microstructure surface, 
which is applied on windows with two or three layers of glazing. The device is glued directly to the window pane using 
glue stripes. 
III. 
    RESULTS 
o 
 Daylight Performance 
For all the rooms listed on each floor of the building the daylight simulations in Diva for Rhino were conducted in order 
to assess the daylight conditions based on two daylight metrics: Daylight Factor (DF) and Daylight Autonomy (DA 150 
(lx) set as threshold). Table III shows the DA results for a south facing living room on the first and fifth floors for two 
different neighbouring densities (with or without) and two vegetation scenarios (with or without). The results of 
simulations showed that the daylight levels are insufficient, with the DA reaching only 150 (lx) approx. 53.4% of the time 
in the rooms only on the top floor. As expected, it can be seen that the DA values decrease for lower floors and with 
presence of a neighbouring building and/or vegetation. Use of shading systems reduces the daylight availability 
throughout the year. A grey venetian blind has the worse effect compare to all the other systems and we can see that 
MicroShade has the lowest DA value when either a neighbouring building or vegetation shades the façade.  
 
 
Table III. DA results for four neighbouring densities and the six shading systems. 
DA 150 (lx) 
Simulated Conditions 
Neighbouring density  (No vegetation) 
Neighbouring density   
(with  vegetation) 
Without 
Without 
With  
Without  
With 
Without  
With 
Shading systems 
Floor 5 
Floor 3 
Floor 3 
Floor 1 
Floor 1 
Floor 1 
Floor 1 
System 1 
53.4% 
50.0% 
22.7% 
48.1% 
17.5% 
47.5% 
17.3% 
System 2 
30.5% 
28.8% 
9.8% 
30.0% 
8.2% 
29.5% 
8.2% 
System 3 
30.6% 
29.2% 
9.5% 
35.4% 
10.0% 
35.4% 
10.3% 
System 4 
31.6% 
26.1% 
3.6% 
23.0% 
1.6% 
1.6% 
1.7% 
System 5 
31.6% 
29.6% 
10.1% 
30.3% 
8.5% 
30.2% 
8.6% 
System 6 
27.4% 
27.8% 
8.8% 
34.5% 
9.6% 
34.3% 
9.6% 
==PAGE:126==
 
 
126 
 
 
Figure 1. DGP results for Systems 1, 2, 3 and 4  for 4 time points within the occupancy hours 7 a.m. – 10 a.m. and 4 p.m. – 6 p.m. 
 
Figure 2. Responsive gaze direction predicted by GRL for 4 time points within the occupancy hours 7 a.m. – 10 a.m. and 4 p.m. – 6 p.m..   
==PAGE:127==
 
 
127 
 
o 
Gaze Responsiveness and Discomfort Glare  
Radar graphs representing the DGP results for Systems 1, 2, 3 and 4 are shown in Fig.1. The results are reported for 
the 112.5° visual span where gaze (view) direction d1 is towards south direction and d6  at 112.5°inside the room from 
the window. In the graphs, the panorama extension of the FOV was highlighted. The DGP reduction can be observed by 
all the shading devices with the same trend over time. This reduction leads to DGP value equal to 0 at gaze (view) direction 
d6. 
The gaze shift frequency distribution is shown in Fig. 2. The graphs are angular histograms where the number of gaze 
directions falling in 5 bin zones (z1-z5) are shown. The representation of the visual span is the same as the previous graphs. 
The gaze (view) directions are largely corresponding to the discomfort glare predictions, which means that the highest 
gaze (view) directions frequencies are on zones where there is maximum discomfort glare reduction by means of the 
shading devices. This behaviour is consistent with roller blinds (System 2) and MicroShade (System 4) where a slight 
angle inside the room can assure a minimum exposure to discomfort glare. In case of venetian blinds (System 3), the 
general reduction of luminance levels in the room due to the 45° cut off angle of the slats, has created an even distribution 
of the gaze (view) direction frequencies. Moreover, in case of the initial case (System 1), higher glare impacts in all six 
view directions have shifted the gaze similarly for morning and afternoon. Whereas at 10 a.m. the gaze shift is more 
prominent due to the brightest glary patches in the FOV. 
IV. 
   CONCLUSION 
A combined gaze responsive visual comfort and daylight performance evaluations were conducted in order to assess various 
solar shading systems for residential buildings. The chosen evaluation methods allow assessing the daylight levels 
availability while assuring avoiding visual discomfort conditions. Daylight performance was assessed using DA. The visual 
comfort was then assessed for discomfort glare prediction using DGP and gaze responsiveness using GRL evaluations 
methods for a selection of four shading systems. These evaluations were done for span of visual field from looking 
perpendicularly outside the window towards 112.5° inside the room where the window disappears from the FOV. The 
adopted three evaluation methods define different aspects of design for both façade and the interior space. This so called 
“trio evaluation method” will be further developed for a sensitive comparison of the shading devices. Limitations such as 
neglection of view attraction dependencies for visual comfort assessments are going to be addressed. 
V. 
    ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors would like to thank Grundejernes Investeringsfond for financing this project.  
VI. 
    REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. Mardaljevic, M.Andersen, N. Roy, J. Christoffersen, “Daylighting metrics for residential buildings,” Proc. 27th Sess. CIE, p. 18, 2011. 
[2] 
B. Engineering, “The sunlight beam index,” vol. 48, pp. 55–69, 2016. 
[3] 
N. Christian and P. Vejsig, “Aalborg Universitet Energirigtig ventilation ved renovering og byfornyelse.” 
[4] 
A. Mavrogianni, J. Davies,   J. Taylor , Z. Chalabi, P. Biddulph, E. Oikonomou, P. Das,  B. Jones , “The impact of occupancy patterns, 
occupant-controlled ventilation and shading on indoor overheating risk in domestic environments,” Build. Environ., vol. 78, pp. 183–198, 
Aug. 2014. 
[5] 
T. Akimoto, S. Tanabe, T. Yanai, and M. Sasaki, “Thermal comfort and productivity - {Evaluation} of workplace environment in a task 
conditioned office,” Build. Environ., vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 45–50, 2009. 
[6] 
N. Djongyang, R. Tchinda, and D. Njomo, “Thermal comfort: A review paper,” Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 2626–2640, 
Dec. 2010. 
[7] 
L. Peeters, R. de Dear, J. Hensen, and W. D’haeseleer, “Thermal comfort in residential buildings: {Comfort} values and scales for building 
energy simulation,” Appl. Energy, vol. 86, no. 5, pp. 772–780, 2009. 
[8] 
A. Tzempelikos, “A Review of Optical Properties of Shading Devices,” Adv. Build. Energy Res., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 211–239, 2008. 
[9] 
M.-C. Dubois, “Shading devices and daylight quality: an evaluation based on simple performance indicators,” Light. Res. Technol., vol. 35, 
no. 1, pp. 61–76, 2003. 
[10] 
J. Mardaljevic, L. Heschong, and E. Lee, “Daylight metrics and energy savings,” Light. Res. Technol., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 261–283, Apr. 2009. 
[11] 
C. Reinhart, F, J. Mardaljevic, and Z. Rogers, “Dynamic Daylight Performance Metrics for Sustainable Building Design,” J. Illum. Eng. Soc. 
North Am., vol. 3, no. 1, 2013. 
[12] 
J. Wienold and J. Christoffersen, “Evaluation methods and development of a new glare prediction model for daylight environments with the 
use of CCD cameras,” Energy Build., vol. 38, no. 7, pp. 743–757, 2006. 
[13] 
I. Ashdown, “Sensitivity analysis of glare rating metrics,” Leukos, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 115–122, 2005. 
[14] 
P. A. Howarth, G. Heron, D. S. Greenhouse, I. L. Bailey, and S. M. Berman, “Discomfort from glare: The role of pupillary hippus†,” Light. 
Res. Technol., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 37–42, 1993. 
[15] 
G. A. Fry and V. M. King, “The pupillary response and discomfort glare,” J. Illum. Eng. Soc., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 307–324, 1975. 
[16] 
J. A. Yamin Garretón, R. G. Rodriguez, A. Ruiz, and A. E. Pattini, “Degree of eye opening: A new discomfort glare indicator,” Build. 
Environ., vol. 88, pp. 142–150, Jun. 2015. 
[17] 
Y. Lin, S. Fotios, M. Wei, Y. Liu, W. Guo, and Y. Sun, “Eye movement and pupil size constriction under discomfort glare.,” Invest. 
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci., vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 1649–1656, 2015. 
[18] 
S. Guth, “Light and comfort.,” Ind. Med. Surg., vol. 27, no. 11, pp. 570–574, 1958. 
[19] 
J. Jakubiec and C. Reinhart, “The ‘adaptive zone’ - A concept for assessing discomfort glare throughout daylit spaces,” Light. Res. Technol., 
vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 149–170, 2011. 
[20] 
M. Sarey Khanie, J. Stoll, W. Einhäuser, J. Wienold, and M. Andersen, “Gaze and discomfort glare, Part 1: Development of a gaze-driven 
photometry,” Light. Res. Technol. 
[21] 
M. L. Amundadottir, S. Rockcastle, M. S. Khanie, and M. Andersen, “A human-centric approach to assess daylight in buildings for non-
visual health potential, visual interest and gaze behavior,” Build. Environ., vol. 113, pp. 5–21, 2017. 
[22] 
G.W. Larson, R. Shakespeare, Rendering with Radiance: the art and science of lighting visualization. Booksurge Llc, 2004.
==PAGE:128==
 
 
 
Bibliography 
 
(CIE), I. C. (1989). International Lighting Voabulary.  
9241-303, ISO/FDIS: Ergonomics of hyman-system interaction - Part 303: Requirements for 
electronic visual displays. (2008). 
Abdul-Wahab, S. A. (2011). Sick Building Syndrome in Public Buildings and Workplaces. 
Springer. 
ACRIMO A/S. (2015). ACRIMO A/S - Products. Retrieved from Official Webpage of ACRIMO 
A/S Company: http://www.acrimo.dk/produkter/knaekarmsmarkiser/ 
Alcock, R., Fitzgerald, E., & Lewis, J. O. (n.d.). Market Study of Shading Systems in the 
European Union. Dublin. 
Amundadottir, M. L., Rockcastle, S., Sarey Khanie, M., & Andersen, M. (2017). A human-
centric approach to assess daylight in buildings for non-visual health potential, visual 
interest and gaze behavior. Build. Environ., vol. 113, 5-21. 
Balakrishnan, P., & Jakubiec, J. A. (2016). Measuring Light Through Trees for Daylight 
Simulations: A Photographic and Photometric method. Singapore: Singapore 
University of Technology and Design. 
Bartell, F. O., Dereniak, E. L., & Wolfe, W. L. (1980). The Theory And Measurement Of 
Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Function (BRDF) And Bidirectional 
Transmittance Distribution Function (BTDF). Proceedings of Spie--the International 
Society for Optical Engineering. SPIE. 
Beck, W., Dolmans, D., Dutoo, G., Hall, A., & Seppanen, O. (2010). Solar Shading; How to 
integrate solar shading in sustainable buildings. REHVA, ES-SO. 
Bekö, G., Földváry, V., Langer, S., & Arrhenius, K. (2016). Indoor air quality in a multifamily 
apartment building before and after energy renovation. 
Bellia, L., Marino, C., Minichiello, F., & Pedace, A. (2014). An overview on solar shading 
systems for buildings. 
Boyce, P. R. (2014). Human Factors in Lighting. CRC press. 
BPIE. (2011 ). Buildings Performance Institute Europe: Europe´s buildings under the 
microscope. A country-by-country review of the energy performance of buildings.  
Chauvel, P., Collins, J. B., & Dogniaux, R. (1982). Glare from windows: current views of the 
problem. Lighting Research and Technology, Volume 14, Issue 1, pp. 31-46. 
Christoffersen, J., & Wienold, J. (2006). Evaluation methods and development of new glare 
prediction model for daylight environments with the use of CCD cameras. Energy and 
Buildings, vol. 38, pp. 743-757. 
Correia de Silva, P., Leal, V., & Andersen, M. (2012). Influence of shading control patterns 
on the energy assessment of office spaces. Energy and Buildings, pp. 50, 35-48. 
Dalenbäck, J.-O. (1996). Solar energy in building renovation. Energy and Buildings, pp. 39-
50. 
==PAGE:129==
 
 
129 
 
Dubois, M.-C. (2002). Shading devices and daylight quality: an evaluation based on simple 
performance indicators. 
European Commission. (2010). Energy-Efficient Buildings PPP. Multi-Annual Roadmap and 
Longer Term Strategy. Brussels.: European Commission Directorate General for 
Research. 
Greer, C. (2007). Something in the air: A critical review of literature on the topic of sick 
building syndrome. World Saf J 16(1), (pp. 23-26). 
Hansen, P., Sarey Khanie, M., Kuhn, T. E., Christoffersen, J., Wienold, J., & Andersen, M. 
(2016). Glare Caused By Contrast Between Task And Immediate Surround: An 
Evaluation Of Luminance Distribution In The Field Of View. Proceedings Of Cie 2016 
Lighting Quality And Energy Efficiency ((ISBN: 978-3-902842-65-7), no. EPFL-CONF-
223114,, (pp. 132–141). 
Hedge, A., & Ericson, W. (1996). Predicting sick building syndrome at the individual and 
aggregate levels. Environ Int 22(1), (pp. 3–19). 
Hoffmann, S., & Lee, S. E. (2015). Potential energy savings with exterior shades in large 
office buildings and the impact of discomfort glare. Berkeley: Ernest Orlando 
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. 
Hopkinson, R. G. (1972). Glare from Daylighting in buildings. Applied Ergonomics, Volume 3, 
Issue 4, pp. 206-215. 
Jakubiec, J. A., & Reinhart, C. F. (2012). The 'adaptive zone' - A concept for assessing 
discomfort glare throughout daylit spaces. Lighting Research and Technology, 
Volume 44, Issue 2, pp. 149-170. 
Kirimtat, A. K., & Chatzikonstantinou, I. (2015). Review of simulation modeling for shading 
devices in buildings. 
Kuhn, T. E. (2017). State of the art of advanced solar control devices for buildings. Solar 
Energy. 
Larson, G. W., & Shakespeare, R. (2004). Rendering with Radiance: the art and science of 
lighting visualization. Booksurge Llc. 
Luckiesh, M., & Guth, S. K. (1949). Brightness in Visual Field at Borderline Between Comfort 
and Discomfort (BCD). Illuminating Engineering Society, pp. 44, 650-670. 
Malmgren, L., Elfborg, S., & Mjörnell, K. (2016). Development of a decision support tool for 
sustainable renovation - a case study. Structural Survey, Vol. 34 Issue: 1, pp. 3-11. 
Mardajevic, J. (1995). Validation of a lihting simulation program under real sky conditions. 
Lighting Res. Technol. 27(4), pp. 181-188. 
Mardaljevic, J., Anderson, M., Roy, N., & Christoffersen, J. (2011). Daylighting metrics for 
residential buildings . Proc. 27th Sess. CIE, (p. 18). 
MicroShade. (2017, 04 20). Guideline to daylight simulations with DIVA. Retrieved from 
Microshade: A new benchmark for solar shading: 
http://www.microshade.net/media/15918/diva-daylight-simulation-guideline.pdf 
MicroShade. (2017). MicroShade: downloads & software. Retrieved from MicroShade: A new 
benchamrk for solar shaidng: http://www.microshade.net/downloads-software.aspx 
==PAGE:130==
 
 
130 
 
Mussari, M. (2016). Danish Modern: Between Art and Design. Bloomsbury Academic. 
Nabil, A., & Mardaljevic, J. (2005). Useful daylight illuminance: a new paradigm for assessing 
daylight in buildings. Lighting Res. Technol., 37, pp. 41-59. 
Nabil, A., & Mardaljevic, J. (2006). Useful daylight illuminances: A replacement for daylight 
factors. 905–913. 
Negendahl, K., & Nielsen, T. R. (2015). Building energy optimization in the early desing 
stages: A simplified method. Energy Build., vol. 105, 88-99. 
Osterhaus, W. K. (2005). Discomfort glare assessment and prevention for daylight 
applications in office environments. Solar Energy, Volume 79, Issue 2, pp. 140-158. 
Petersen, S., & Svendsen, S. (n.d.). Method for integrated design of low energy buildings 
with high quality indoor environment. 
Reihart, C. F., Mardaljevic, J., & Rogers, Z. (2006). Dynamic daylight performance metrics 
for sustainable building design. LEUKOS Volume 3 Issue 1. 
Reinhart, C. F., & Walkenhorst, O. (2001). Validation of dynamic RADIANCE-based daylight 
simuations for a test office with external blinds. Energy and Buildings, 33, pp. 683-
697. 
Ruck, N. (2000). Daylight in Buildings: a source book on daylighting systems and 
components, A report of IEA SHC Task 21/ ECBCS Annex 29. Berkeley: Lawrence 
Berkeley National Laboratory. 
Sadeghi, R., & Mistrick, R. (2015, August 19). Modelling the exterior surround - how much 
detail is necessary. 2015 Internation Radiance Workshop. 
Sanots, I. P., Laustsen, J., & Svendsen, S. (n.d.). Characterization and performance 
evaluation of solar shading devices. 
Sarey Khanie, M., Stoll, J., Einhauser, W., Wienold, J., & Andersen, M. (2015). Gaze-driven 
approach for estimating luminance values in the field of view for discomfort 
assessments. 28th CIE Session, no. EPFL-CONF-208931.  
Sarey Khanie, M., Stoll, J., Einhauser, W., Wienold, J., & Andersen, M. (2016). Gaze 
responsive visual comfort: New findings on gaze behaviour in a daylit office space in 
relation to glare. Proceedings Of Cie 2016 Lighting Quality And Energy Efficiency 
((ISBN: 978-3-902842-65-7), no. EPFL-CONF-223115 (ISBN: 978-3-902842-65-7), 
(pp. 373–384). 
Sarey Khanie, M., Wienold, J., & Andersen, M. (2014). A sensitivity analysis on glare 
detection parameters (remote presentation). 13th International Radiance Workshop 
2014.  
Sarey Khanie, M., Zukowska-Tajsen, D., Kolarik, J., & Nielsen, T. R. (2017). An Evaluation 
Method for Façade Renovation Strategies in Residential Buildings Using Gaze 
Responsive Visual Comfort Assessments. Lux Europa 2017.  
Singapore University of Technology and Design. (n.d.). Ligting Materials for Simulation. 
Retrieved from http://www.lighting-materials.com/ 
Stack, A., Goulding, J., & Owen Lewis, J. (n.d.). Shading systems; Solar shading fo the 
European climates. Dublin: Energy Research Group, University College Dublin. 
==PAGE:131==
 
 
131 
 
Statistics Denmark. (n.d.). Retrieved from http://www.dst.dk/en 
Stone, P. T. (2009). A model for the explanation of discomfort and pain in the eye caused by 
light. Lighting Research and Technology, 41(2), pp. 109-121. 
Tsangrassoulis, A. (2016). Shading and Daylight Systems. In Energy Performance of 
Buildings (pp. 437-466). Switzerland: Springer Internationl Publishing. 
Tsangrassoulis, A., Synnefa, A., Jacobs, A., Wilson, M., Solomon, J., Fontoynont, M., . . . 
Zimmermann, A. (2004). SynthLight Handbook.  
Valbjørn, O. (1993). SBI-rapport 230: Indeklimaets påvirkninger. Hørsholm: Statens Byg-
geforskningsinstitut. 
Veitch, J., Christoffersen, J., & Galasiu, A. (n.d.). Daylight and View through Residential 
Windows: Effect on Well-being. 
Vos, J. (2003). Reflections on glare . Light. Res. Technol., vol. 35, no. 2, 163-176. 
WAREMA. (2017). WAREMA Collection Consultant. Retrieved from Official Webpage of 
WAREMA Company: http://www.awnings-collection.com/ 
WAREMA. (2017, March 1). WAREMA Sun Shading Planner: Technical data - Inside Trade. 
Retrieved from Official Webpage of WAREMA Company : 
http://www.sonnenschutzplaner.de/ 
WAREMA. (2017, March 1). WAREMA Sun Shading Planner: Technical data - Window 
Awnings. Retrieved from Official webpage of WAREMA Company: 
http://www.sonnenschutzplaner.de/ 
Wienold, J., & Christoffersen, J. (n.d.). Evalglare - a new RADIANCE-based tool to evaluate 
daylight glare in office spaces. 
Wienold, J., Kuhn, T. E., J., C., & Andersen, M. (2017). Annual glare evaluation for fabrics. 
PLEA 2017 Edinburgh - Design to Thrive. Edinburgh. 
Zadeh, R. S., Shepley, M. M., Williams, G., & Chung, S. S. (2014). The Impact of Windows 
and Daylight on Acute-Care Nurses' Physiological, Psychological, and Behavioral 
Health. Herd: Health Environments Research and Design Journal, Volume 7, Issue 4, 
pp. 35-61. 
Zero Caron Hut. (2015). Retrieved from Impacts of overheating – Evidence review. [pdf]: 
http://www.zerocarbonhub.org/sites/default/files/resources/reports/ZCH-Overheat-
ingEvidenceReview-Impacts.pdf 
 
