==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Computer Science and Engineering
A Security Framework for Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles and Practical Exploitation Analy-
sis
Thomas Holdgaard Lützen (s093291)
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads
Building 324
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
English/Danish
The goal of this thesis is to present a general model for drones in order to conduct a
risk analysis of them. The CORAS method and NIST risk management framework
is used to do conduct the analysis. This is done in order to make a general secu-
rity framework for drones and test it against different practical exploits to see if the
framework catches the correct threats. The Parrot AR drone 2.0 is used as a reference
point and the same exploits are tested on the SJRC T30VR drone. Furthermore the
reverse engineering and exploitation of an RC controlled Hubsan nano Q4 cam drone
is done by using a software defined radio. Afterwards the results of the experiments
are used to find mitigation proposals on the most critical threats and to secure the
drones. This showcases that the threats would have been captured by the security
framework and could have been prevented using it. In the end future work in relation
to be conducted in the field of drone security is presented.
Målet med dette speciale er at præsentere en generel model for droner for at
kunne udføre en risikoanalyse af dem. CORAS metoden og NIST risiko management
frameworket bruges til udførelsen af analysen. Dette gøres for at lave et generelt
sikkerhedsframework for droner og teste det imod forskellige praktiske angreb for at
se om frameworket opfanger de korrekte trusler. Parrot AR 2.0 dronen bruges som
referencepunkt og de samme angreb testes på en SJRC T30VR drone. Derudover
undersøges reverse engineering og angreb af en radiokontrolleret Hubsan nano Q4
cam drone ved hjælp af en software defined radio. Bagefter bruges resultaterne af
eksperimenterne til at finde løsningsforslag på de mest kritiske trusler og for at sikre
dronerne.
Dette viser at truslerne vil blive opfanget af sikkerhedsframeworket og
kunne være undgået ved at bruge det. Til sidst præsenteres fremtidigt arbejde der
skal udføres inden for dronesikkerhed.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment of the requirements
for acquiring a Masters degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
The aim of this thesis project will be to create a generic security framework for
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles. In order to make such a framework the following will
have to be investigated:
Developing a generic model of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles:
• What protocols are used in drone communication?
• How does the drone position itself and navigate?
• What different sensors exist in the drone and what are their functions?
Analyzing the attack surface of the generic model:
• Threats to UAVs (strategic threats (to UAV mission) and tactical threats (to
UAV operation)
• Vulnerabilities (identification of known and probable attack vectors) Implement-
ing security measures
• Mapping threats to mitigating security technologies
• Mitigating threats and managing risks
• Prioritising implementation of security measures
After the security framework has been created a practical part will be done where
different types of exploits are to be carried out and an overall security evaluation will
be made of a given drone.
Kongens Lyngby, August 4, 2017
==PAGE:6==
iv
Preface
Thomas Holdgaard Lützen (s093291)
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would first of all like to thank my supervisor Christian Damsgaard Jensen for the
support, ideas and feedback given throughout the project.
Second i would like to thank my co-supervisor Michael Linden-Vørnle and Rasmus
post for making sure that i could use a radio dead room in order to experiment with
the Blade x40 without any radio interference.
Also I would like to thank my girlfriend Maria and family for their continuous
support and for keeping up my motivation during the course of this project.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary English/Danish
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
A generic model for drones
3
2.1
Drone Definition and Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Drone Subsystems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Rules for flying with drones in Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Risk Management and Analysis of Threats to Drones
11
3.1
Risk and Cyber-Risk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Risk Management Frameworks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Risk analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Practical Exploit Experiments
31
4.1
The Drones and the exploits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Risk mitigation and Evaluation of the Security Model
45
5.1
Mitigation of Threats
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6
Future Work, Discussion and Conclusion
49
6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.2
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.3
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
A Appendix
53
A.1 Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
A.2 Test environment for GNU Radio and Wireless security
. . . . . . . .
54
A.3 Obstacle Damage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
Bibliography
57
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles(UAVs), popularly known as drones, have been around for
over a century and have mostly been used for military offence and reconnaissance
purposes. But in recent years advances in technology have been able to shrink the
components and price so that drones now are readily available for commercial as well
as recreational use. 140.000 drones were sold worldwide in 2014 and that number is
estimated to increase to 1.7 million in 2020 [Ins]
The different uses for drones are varied as shown in the following list:
• Used for the 3 D’s (Dull, Dirty, Dangerous) type of Work[Dia]
• Light shows as done by Intel, breaking the world record for most drones flown
by one pilot [Kap]
• Finding illegal eel traps in inlets and controlling crops for the Danish Agrifish
Agency.[HR]
• For recreational and commercial aerial photos[HR] and selfies[Airb]
• For racing purposes [Nat]
• For researchers and hobbyists alike.
• For crowd control.
• For various inspections of nature, farming etc.
with all these different areas where drones find their use, one starts to wonder
about safety, security and privacy. With their increased adaptation it may only be a
matter of time before a drone gets stolen or accidents occur. The following list will
showcase some of the different drone related incidents.
• IT security consultant Nils Rodday was able to hack a drone used by the police,
by using another XBEE chip to carry out a man in the middle attack and send
commands to the drone. This was done in collaboration with KPMG in the
Netherlands as part of his master thesis. [Rod15]
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
• Samy Kamkar have developed a tool called Skyjack which takes over AR Par-
rot 2.0 drones using the known MAC address range of the drones. The tool
deauthenticates the original controller and afterwards assumes control. [Kam]
• Daesh(ISIS) uses rudimentary drones to deliver bombs or film their acts of
terror. [Pos]
• A government worker crashed his DJI phantom on the white house lawn. [Tim].
After the crash DJI updated their no fly zones for Washington DC.
This project will aim to make a generic model of the different types of commercial
drones available by looking at the different components they contain: Be it amount of
rotors, types of sensors,etc. This will also include the protocols used by the drones and
how they position themselves and achieve flight. Afterwards a thorough risk analysis
will be conducted which will discover the different threats to the drone. Once the
threats are identified they will be mapped to current mitigation techniques and an
evaluation will be made on what security measures to prioritise and what residual risk
will be left. This will lead to a generic security framework to evaluate the security
for drones, which can be expanded upon, by using the methods provided.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
A generic model for
drones
This chapter aims to develop a generic model for drones by covering the different
components that they consist of. This will include sensors, amount of rotors, motors,
type of system boards and other components.
Beside the components, a generic
model of the control protocols will also be presented. Furthermore the new rules for
operating drones in Denmark will also be covered.
2.1
Drone Definition and Types
When looking up the term drone in the [Dic] the first thing that comes up is the verb
drone, which constitutes a low humming sound. The term applied to UAV’s is rather
fitting since they produce that exact sound when flying.
In technical terms a drone is a battery or fuel powered aerial vehicle without a
pilot on board, which can be flown autonomously by its on-board flight controller +
GPS or by remote control. This thesis looks only at the battery powered drones.
Reg Austin, author of Unmanned Aircraft Systems have given a more formal
definition: ”The Unmanned Aerial System [UAS] comprises a number of sub-systems
which include the aircraft (often referred to as a UAV or unmanned air vehicle), its
payloads, the control station(s) (and, often, other remote stations), aircraft launch
and recovery sub-systems where applicable, support subsystems, communication sub-
systems, transport sub-systems, etc.”[Aus11]
As can be read, the terms Unmanned Aerial Vehicle, Unmanned Aerial System
and Drone are used interchangeably when talking about the same device. This report
will use UAV and drone.
Fixed Wing The fixed wing UAV looks more or less like an airplane in its de-
sign. Most military drones, like the Reaper MQ-9, falls into this category[Com]. An
example of a fixed wing drone available for the public is the Parrot Disco shown in
the picture below:
One downside of fixed wing drones is that they require more space to land than
the drone types described below.
==PAGE:14==
4
2 A generic model for drones
Figure 2.1: The Parrot Disco.
Single Rotor The single rotor drone is basically designed as a helicopter. The
use of this type of drone is not widespread since they are more expensive to produce.
The most used type is the Yamaha RMAX which is used for crop dusting.[Yam]
Multirotor Quadcopters are the most widespread type of multirotor drone avail-
able and they are named as such due to their utilisation of 4 vertically oriented pro-
pellers fixed in an X, H or + configuration to attain flight.[Qua] Two of the propellers
spin clockwise and two counterclockwise to cancel out torque, so the quadcopter does
not start to spin. To fly forwards, backwards, and sideways different speeds are ap-
plied to the motors by the flight controller causing the quadcopter to go in the desired
direction. The flight terminology for drones is as such: Yaw means the rotation of a
drone around its own axis on a level plane. Pitch means the flight angle when going
forwards or backwards. Roll means the flight angle to either side. The figure below
shows the different axes and the drone is facing its front in the direction of the x-axis.
Figure 2.2: Flight axes of the drone.
A variety of design configurations exist for multirotor drones and some of the most
popular can be seen in the figure below, taken from [Gui]
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Drone Subsystems
5
Figure 2.3: Different multirotor designs.
2.2
Drone Subsystems
After the design has been chosen it is time to select essential subsystems and desired
accessories for extra functionality, for the drone.
2.2.1
Essential subsystems
Flight Controller The flight controller (FC) is essentially the brain of the drone
ensuring stable flight by translating commands from the remote or cellphone to the
electronic speed controllers(ESC’s). Without a flight controller it would be impossi-
ble for a human operator to control the speed of all 4 propellers at once. The flight
controller may contain an accelerometer, gyroscope, barometer, ultrasound and GPS.
These devices can aid the pilot in keeping the drone in the air and avoiding crashes
and will be described below.
Most of the commercial drones available comes with pre-programmed flight con-
trollers but when building your own they are programmable, so the reactions of the
==PAGE:16==
6
2 A generic model for drones
drone can be fine-tuned to fit its specific purpose. Depending on the type of controller
various software is available to write to configuration to the board. One popular open
source tool is Cleanflight[Cle] which is a Google chrome extension that supports 8
different flight controller boards.
Sensors in the flight controller
As stated above the flight controller can contain a lot of sensors to aid in stable
flight. Typically both gyroscope and accelerometer is included in an inertial mea-
surement unit(IMU). Simple drones us a 3 axis gyroscope and they only measure
rotation rates around in the 3 axes that are roll, pitch and yaw. More advanced
drones use a six axis gyroscope which is a 3 axis gyroscope with a 3d accelerometer
added which measures the orientation of the drone relative to earths gravity. The
same principle is also used in smartphones. The IMU can also include a magnetome-
ter to calibrate against orientation drift. The more advanced the onboard IMU is, the
easier and more forgiving it is to fly the drone. The advanced IMU protects against
gusts of wind, to a degree, by keeping the drone stable and manoeuvring is also easier
which makes drones with six axis gyros able to do high speed racing and aerial stunts.
Proximity Sensors The flight controller can have more integrated sensors, than
the IMU, to position itself. These may be ultrasound for lower altitude measurements
and a barometer for higher altitude.[Gab]
Motors and Propellers The muscle of the drone creating lift to enable flight.
The type of motor used are typically of the brushless DC variant and can be ei-
ther an inrunner or outrunner type. This means that either casing of the motors
spins(outrunner) or it only spins internally(inrunner) when power is applied.
The propellers comes in different shapes depending on how big the drone is and
what it needs to be used for.(Racing, stable hovering etc.). They are typically made
of plastic but can also be made of carbon fiber.
Electronic Speed Control The Electronic Speed Control(ESC) is a programmable
microcontroller, which controls the speed of the brushless motors. Different types sup-
porting different amperage’s and battery types exist and the choice of ESC depends
on the motor and rotor type.
Power Distribution Board The power distribution board(PDB) is a small
board which helps to distribute power to the different components of the drone.
Battery Powering the motors and onboard electronics of the drones are lithium-
polymer (LiPo) batteries. When selecting a battery for a quadcopter one must be
aware of 3 things: The battery capacity, battery voltage and discharge rate. The
capacity, which is measured in milli-Ampere-hours(mAh), is for how long the battery
can provide energy. Typically for a larger capacity, the bigger the battery is so there
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Drone Subsystems
7
are tradeoffs to be made in regards to the weight compared to the lift of the motors
and flighttime.
The voltage measures how much power the battery can provide, so for example a
higher voltage means bigger motors.
The discharge rate(C rating) is a measure of how fast energy can be extracted
from the battery. If the C rating is too low the drone will perform badly and the
battery can be damaged. To calculate the total current draw of the system the follow-
ing formula can be used: Max continuous Amp draw(A) = Battery Capacity (in Ah)
x Discharge rate (C) [Dro]. This can be used to compare against how much power
the motors draw to see if the design can provide the correct amount of power for the
system.
Most drones for sale have a battery time between 5 to 30 minutes depending on
size and functionality.
Remote Control / Video feed / Telemetry There are different ways to con-
trol a drone during flight. One way is to use a remote control (radio transmitter) to
send commands to the radio receiver connected to the flight controller. The other is
by using a smartphone / tablet with an installed control app. Typically when using
a control app the device needs to connect to a 802.11 Wi-Fi network provided by the
drone.
Both the modern radio transmitters and the smartphone/tablet uses the unli-
censed 2.4GHz industrial, scientific and medical band(ISM). Other bands that may
be used are: 5.8Ghz to avoid interference when sending a live video feed back to a
smartphone / other device while the drone is being controlled with the 2.4Ghz band
or vice versa.
The radio transmitters bind their functions to channels and to be able to control
a drone with the bare minimum requires 4 channels. One for pitch, one for yaw, one
for roll and one for throttle. For more functions to be controlled by the transmitter
additional channels are required. These functions could be to arm the drone so its
ready for flight, control a camera gimbal, sound a buzzer to locate the drone if lost etc.
Depending on the complexity of the controller and smartphone apps, they can
receive telemetry data of the drones speed, acceleration, altitude and battery status.
The most simple version of a control protocol for a flight controller is to have the
throttle stick directly control the speed of the motors. This craves a more skilled
pilot to keep the drone airborne since the smallest adjustments can change the flight
path of the drone. The more advanced drones available uses the onboard gyroscope
and accelerometer and other sensors to auto hover making it a bit more easy for a
==PAGE:18==
8
2 A generic model for drones
beginner pilot to keep them airborne. This protocol will adjust the motor speed tem-
porarily to ascend or descend when the pilot interfaces with the remote control and
afterwards maintain altitude.
The generic control protocol for a pitch, yaw or roll packet could contain: angle
of pitch and speed depending on what direction the controller is set to.
Radio Transceiver A radio transceiver enabling the flight controller to receive
commands from a radio transmitter and send telemetry data back.
Navigational lights For night flying as well as making it easier to see which
direction the drone is heading it needs navigational lights. Most drones use green for
the two front propellers and red for the two in the back. A variation of blue and red
also exist.
Operating System Some of the more advanced drones may have an micro-kernel
version of the Linux operating system (OS) onboard which acts as the flight controller.
Typically this makes the system quite modifiable since the source code can be changed
as needed. There is a chance of turning the drone into a brick as well if the code is
damaged or files are deleted.
2.2.2
Peripherals
Service Port Flight controllers have service ports so that the firmware can be cus-
tomized to the users need. These can be micro-USB or USB. The port can also act
as a way to store data as described below.
Camera and First-Person View Cameras may be integrated into the drone
design. This can be both as integrated or strapped to the drone or attached in a
gimbal. Typical attached cameras can be small action cameras like the GoPro or
DSLR cameras.
The drone can also have First-person view(FPV) capability which transmits live
video back to a headset. This enables the pilot to see what the drone sees and feel
like the pilot in an airplane. The radio frequencies used by the FPV system can be:
900 Mhz, 1.2 Ghz, 2.4Ghz and 5.8GHz.
Data Storage USB or smart card storage for storing sensor specific data or pho-
tos/videos.
Global Navigation Satellite System(GNSS) A GNSS using the satellites
from the Global Positioning System(GPS), the Russian GLONASS system or a com-
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Rules for flying with drones in Denmark
9
bination of both can either be built into the flight controller or be purchased as an
add on. This allows the drone to achieve autonomous flight by following a predefined
route. The onboard GPS can also help maintain no flight zones such as over airports
and military installations.
An overview of how the different components fit in the quadcopter is presented
below:
Figure 2.4: Drone component summary.
So now that you have bought a fancy drone with a lot of functionality where are
you allowed to fly it? The section below lists the new rules from the Danish Transport,
Construction and Housing agency.
2.3
Rules for flying with drones in Denmark
The following lists contains the new rules(legislation) on drone flight which have taken
effect from the 1st of July 2017. The rules are for drones above 250 g. The no flight
zones for Denmark can be seen on http://zzz42drone.naviair.dk/index.php. [Traa]
For hobbyists the following rules apply:
• The pilot must acquire a drone permit by answering 12 questions on www.droneregler.dk
and register as a drone owner.
• The registration number, name and telephone number must be printed on the
drone/drones.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 A generic model for drones
• The pilot must have a liability insurance for the drone with a sum of 0,75 million
DKK.
• The drone pilot is responsible for following the rules for photography in public
and private settings. A pilot must obtain permission from the owner if he/she
wishes to photograph private land.
• The maximum altitude is a 100 m. and flight must be within visual line of
sight(VLOS).
• Drones above 7 kg and jet driven drones must only take off from permitted
model airfields and having a liability insurance is mandatory.
• Flight above persons is not allowed. The lives and property of others must not
be endangered.
• Flight over densely populated areas as well as holiday homes, campsites and
larger groups of people is not allowed.
• The distance to military airfields must be at least 8 kilometres.
• The distance to airports must be at least 5 kilometres.
• The distance to larger public roads must be at least 150 metres. The same
counts for the properties of the royal family,
• Drone must give way for manned aircraft.
• For night flying the drone must be equipped with navigational lights showing
the direction of flight for the drone. The takeoff / landing area must be lighted
as well.
For commercial use, the pilot must acquire a valid drone pilot license.
After
acquiring one, the pilot is granted permission to fly the drone in cities as well for
professional purposes. Given that they follow the following rules [Trab]
• The drone must be registered and insured.
• The pilot must be 18 years or above.
• Permits must be acquired when flying close to / above private property.
• The police must receive a notice 24 hours prior to flight.
Now that the model of a generic drone has been defined, a risk analysis of all the
subcomponents can be made.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3
Risk Management and
Analysis of Threats to
Drones
This chapter aims to develop a security model for drones by covering different risk
analysis frameworks and after selecting the ones that are of relevance, a thorough risk
analysis will be carried out. The different threats and how to minimise or mitigate
them will be covered.
3.1
Risk and Cyber-Risk
Before we look at the different risk management frameworks we need to define risk
and risk related terms. The definitions in this section will be taken from the Cyber
Risk Management book by Atle Refsdal, Bjørnar Solhaug and Ketil Stolen [RSS15].
The book is based on the ISO 27000 and 31000 series of managing information secu-
rity and risk management.
So first of all what is a risk? A risk is defined as follows:
Definition 3.1. A risk is the potential for something to go wrong and the effects
cause harm or loss. If something goes wrong it is called an incident. How severe the
risk is depends on how likely it is to occur and the consequence it has on an asset.
An incident is thus:
Definition 3.2. An incident is an event that harms or decrease the value of an asset.
and an asset is:
Definition 3.3. An asset is something of value to a party.
A stakeholder and a party is:
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Risk Management and Analysis of Threats to Drones
Definition 3.4. A party is a company, organization, person, group or other body
that the risk assessment is carried out on behalf of. The party can be thought of as
a stakeholder, but a stakeholder can also be some other organization or person which
may be affected or affect the subject of the assessment.
The basic idea behind risk and risk analysis is that the party and assets of concern
are to be identified before risk can be discussed or assessed. Once that is done, the
risk level for different threats can be set based on the likelihood and consequence of
the risk. This is called the risk level and it can be defined as the multiplication of
probability of occurrence and monetary loss.
The first thing to do when assessing risk is to establish context where both inter-
nal and external relevant context is defined. External context includes relationships
with stakeholders and regulatory, societal, legal and financial environments. Internal
context includes goals, policies and capabilities. Once both have been identified, the
goal of the risk assessment is laid out and therefore this step requires decision makers
to participate. The target is defined to be one or many systems or the organization
or its departments. Assumptions of the target are specified and the risk assessment
can use these as input.
Once the assets have been identified the vulnerabilities and threats must be identi-
fied. Without any assets there wont be any vulnerabilities and without vulnerabilities
no threats. So by identifying threats and understanding how they may lead to inci-
dents.
Definition 3.5. A vulnerability is a flaw, weakness, error or deficiency that can be
exploited by a threat to do damage to an asset.
and so a threat is defined as:
Definition 3.6. A threat is an event or action that is caused by a threat source and
may lead to an incident.
Threat sources can be human and non-human. Examples of human threat sources
can be hackers, disgruntled-employees or government agencies. Non-human threats
can be lightning strikes, floods or fires.
A cyber-risk is defined as a risk which is caused by a cyber-threat. This defines the
threats as coming only from the cyberspace domain such as a Denial of Service(DoS)
attack. A server room flooding is not viewed as a cyber-risk unless it was a cyber-
threat that contributed to the flooding.
Due to the encompassing nature of the
cyber-domain there may be threats coming from a lot of different places and there
is potentially adversaries everywhere.
The same goes for stakeholders as users of
any given system or service. When assessing cyber-threats one distinguishes between
malicious and non-malicious threats. Malicious being an adversary deliberately trying
to damage or compromise the system and non-malicious being programming errors
==PAGE:23==
3.1 Risk and Cyber-Risk
13
and accidents. Looking at malicious threats the motive, skill level, resources and
other factors of the adversary is essential. The attack surface of a system is anywhere
the adversary can gain access and information enters and exits the system. When
looking for vulnerabilities in a system in order to harden it one can use Mitre’s
Common Weakness Enumeration [Mit] or the publications by OWASP.
The different type adversaries are listed here:
Script Kiddie: A person who use existing code that others have made to try
and brake systems. The script kiddie lacks the skill to write code themselves.
Hacker: A cyber criminal with the skill set to match.
Capable of exploiting
vulnerabilities and writing malicious code themselves.
Government/National agencies: An advanced persistent threat with the re-
sources and motivation to cause severe damage to systems.
The adversaries can be classified as either a passive or active adversary.
The
passive just listens in on the communication channels and tries to find valuable in-
formation. The active attacker tries to find vulnerabilities in the system by doing
port scans or actively trying to break in using Denial of Service attacks or exploiting
vulnerabilities.
When doing information security analysis the following three properties: Confi-
dentiality, Integrity and Availability, also called the CIA triad, are important.
• Confidentiality: Ensuring that a data is not disclosed to unauthorised parties.
• Integrity: Ensuring that data has not been altered wrongly. For example during
transfer, modification or via deletion.
• Availability: Having access to the resources when needed.
In addition to the triad Donn B Parker defined 3 other components which together
with the CIA triad composes the Parkerian Hexad [Pen]
• Possession or Control: Having in ones physical possession or taking into ones
control. Something owned or controlled. Confidential data can be can be pos-
sessed or controlled by an unauthorised party without breaking confidentiality.
• Authenticity: Assurance that a data exchange is from the source it claims to
be. So parties have to identify themselves.
• Utility: Data must be in a usable form. For example if a company needs to
share data with another company and encrypts it before they send it and then
forgets the key. The data then lives up to five of the six components in the
Parkerian hexad but is useless.
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Risk Management and Analysis of Threats to Drones
3.2
Risk Management Frameworks
3.2.1
CORAS
The CORAS method [Den+07] consists of eight steps where the first four are used
to establish a understanding of the target of the analysis. The CORAS modelling
language is used to describe the target of analysis.
All assumptions of the environment the target is supposed to work in, needs to
be documented as well as limitations, what should receive special attention, what to
ignore and so on. The other four steps are for the detailed risk analysis where the
risk levels are set for concrete risks and potential treatments are identified for risks
that are unacceptable. Stepwise the method is as follows:
1. Gather information from the client about the target of the analysis.
2. Present the information gathered to the client.
List threats, vulnerabilities,
threat scenarios and incidents.
3. Make a refined description of the target with all assumptions and preconditions
to settle any issues that might come up. Identify assets and document them
with the CORAS modelling language.
4. After the analyst have refined the description the customer must approve the
description. The scales for likelihood of an event occurring, the consequences
thereof and the risk evaluation criteria must be formulated. Typically a risk
evaluation matrix will be used where rows are frequency of the incident happen-
ing and columns consequence.
5. A workshop is made with people having expertise of the target of analysis.
Threats, vulnerabilities and threat scenarios are identified. Threat diagrams
are constructed with the modelling language.
6. Using the threats described in step 5 the likelihood and consequence of them
occurring are to be estimated. Once done, the estimates will be used to calculate
the risk values and determine if the risk can be accepted or should be further
evaluated for treatment.
7. The customer will be given the first overall risk picture and this can spark
adjustments and corrections of the information. Which risk must be considered
for treatment and which can be accepted must be determined.
8. Identification of treatments for unacceptable risks happens in this step and
this is done by making CORAS treatment diagrams. The goal is to minimise
likelihood and consequence with cost-benefit in mind before the final plan is
made. The treatments are typically taken from best practices and the threat
diagrams are annotated with the treatments.
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Risk Management Frameworks
15
CORAS Modelling Language
The Modelling language, which is based on the unified modelling language(UML),
consist of the following elements:
Figure 3.1: The CORAS Modelling Language.
As can be seen the language can be used to model threat and treatment scenarios
with accidents, deliberate threats, non human threats such as system failures and
what assets are affected. Five types of diagrams can be constructed from the elements
and they are: Asset diagrams, threat diagrams, risk diagrams, treatment diagrams
and treatment overview diagrams. The diagrams can be made with the CORAS tool
freely available for download from the CORAS website.[Sto]
3.2.2
Octave Allegro
The Octave Allegro method[Car+07] focuses on information assets depending on how
they are used, stored, transported and processed. This gives the threats, vulnera-
bilities and disruptions they are exposed to as a result.
To do an octave allegro
assessment the first thing one must first establish the risk measurement criteria in
areas such as reputation, finance, productivity, safety, health and fines and legal
penalties. When those have been set up the different information assets of impor-
tance to the department are defined. Afterwards a brainstorm of the different threats
to the assets are done and the most critical assets are then selected. These threats
are then evaluated against the measurement criteria and what the probability are of
them happening and this gives an overall risk level for each threat. As the last step
mitigation suggestions are made for each type of threat. The analysis is conducted
with helpful worksheets which guide the risk analysts in correctly using the method.
3.2.3
NIST FISMA Risk Management Framework(RMF)
The national institute of standards and technology federal information security act[NIS]
aims to develop key security standards to support implementation of categorising
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Risk Management and Analysis of Threats to Drones
information systems, selecting appropriate security controls and assessing their effec-
tiveness.
The risk management framework under FISMA provides a six step process which
integrates security and risk management into the development lifecycle. The steps
are as follows
1. Categorising system and information flow(Where is information stored, pro-
cessed or transmitted?).
2. Select a set of baseline security controls for the system based on its categorisa-
tion.
3. Implement the selected controls and describe how they are employed in the
system and the environment the system operates in.
4. Assess the controls implemented to check for correct operation and desired
outcome.
5. Authorize system operation based on risk to assets and operations based on the
decision that the risk is acceptable.
6. Monitor and assess selected security controls on an ongoing basis including
effectiveness of said controls, change management and conduct security impact
analyses.
Each of the above step uses standards developed by NIST which can be seen in
the figure below:
Figure 3.2: The FISMA RMF.
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Risk analysis
17
3.3
Risk analysis
The risk analysis of drones will use the CORAS method since the graphical modelling
language can quickly give an overview of the threats and risks of the drone subsystems.
It is easier to quickly determine if ones drone is at risk, than going through many
worksheets. CORAS will mostly be used for the modelling language and not for the
workshops and brainstorms since this thesis is written by me only. Instead the threats
that I come up with will be compared to the state of the art in cyber risk for drones.
Besides the CORAS method the elements of the Parkerian hexad will also be taken
into account when looking at the different assets and how the vulnerabilities affect
them.
3.3.1
Drone Environment
The first thing to do is to describe the context of the drone and the environment it
operates in. Drones can be used for both indoor and outdoor flying and depending on
the amount of obstacles and the weather, the risk of a crash occurring, or damaging
the drone, goes up. The environment is described in the following figure:
Figure 3.3: The Drone Environment.
As can be seen the drone can be flown in an indoor or outdoor environment and
both can have obstacles, but usually indoors have more in the form of furniture, ex-
cept when flying in a gym or the like. On the other hand when flying outside the
weather can have impact since most drones are not made for conditions like hard
wind or rain. This is due to most drones being built to be light weight without hulls
so water can seep into the circuit boards and the motors not being strong enough to
hold the drone steady in hard wind.
In any of the environments there can be adversaries and bystanders, although as
we can see in the drone rules in chapter 2, pilots are not supposed to be flying next
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Risk Management and Analysis of Threats to Drones
to persons unless its in a commercial setting.
So to define all the subjects and objects in the drones environment.
Definition 3.7. Drone: The drone following a pre-planned route or flown by the
pilot.
Definition 3.8. Pilot: The drone operator which flies the drone for either recre-
ational or commercial use.
Definition 3.9. Control signals: The signal that is sent from the remote control or
app to the drone. Telemetry is also part of this signal.
Definition 3.10. Adversary: A person with bad intentions for the drone.
The
adversary will try to attack the drone in various ways with various means .
Definition 3.11. Bystander: A person happening to be nearby when the drone is
flown.
Definition 3.12. Obstacles: Furniture, trees, bushes and birds/animals depending
on where the drone is flown.
The risk analysis can now make use of both the generic drone model described in
chapter 2 and the definition of the operating environment from above. The analysis
will take a system based approach where the different components are regarded as
assets to be protected. Furthermore the data flow in the drone must also be considered
as assets, since the adversary can attack those as well and they are of importance to
the drone operating correctly.
The risk levels of consequence and likelihood for incidents will be defined as follows:
• Very low: The consequences are almost not noticeable and the incident occurs
rarely with years apart.
• Low: The consequences have a minor impact and the incident can occur with
months apart or yearly.
• Medium: The consequences have an impact and the incident can occur on a
monthly basis.
• High: The consequences have a severe impact and the incident can occur within
few weeks.
• Critical: The consequences have a devastating impact and the incident can
occur daily or weekly.
The levels can be composed into the following risk matrix:
The color coding indicates the priority of mitigating the risks. Green is low pri-
ority since these have a low impact and happen rarely. Yellow is medium priority
because even some of the incidents may happen rarely their impact is greater. Red
is critical to mitigate as these incidents have a severe impact and the probability of
them happening is great.
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Risk analysis
19
Likelihood
Consequence
Very Low
Low
Medium
High
Critical
Very Low
Low
Medium
High
Critical
Table 3.1: Risk Matrix.
3.3.2
Threat identification
As stated the components of the drone will lay the groundwork for the threat identi-
fication. The main assets for functioning are identified in the diagram below:
Figure 3.4: The Drone Assets.
The most crucial assets have been identified as direct assets and the less critical
as indirect.
3.3.2.1
Physical Threats
Battery
The first threat that comes to mind for the system as a whole, is that if the battery
is depleted of power or short circuits the drone comes to a grinding halt, making it
crash or unable to take off. So therefore the incidents related to batteries are:
• Drone crashes.
• Broken battery.
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Risk Management and Analysis of Threats to Drones
Weather
If the drone is flown outside the weather may pose a threat to the drone if it is
not built to handle strong winds or rain. Up or downdrafts may bring the drone out
of balance and water can destroy the circuits. Depending on the drone it might have
an emergency mode which activates depending on the measurements from the IMU
and then the motors shut off. Depending on the altitude the drone can suffer severe
damage. Heat may do the same as most drones do not have any cooling systems
onboard for the motors, battery or other components.
If its a more ”manually”
controlled drone where the throttle is controlled by the pilot, the responsibility to
bring it down safely is on them. So the possible incidents are:
• Rain: Onboard circuits damaged, drone crashes.
• Wind: Turbulence may cause the drone to destabilize and activate emergency
mode, drone crashes
• Heat: The drone overheats which damages the internal components and the
drone crashes. There is also a risk of the battery blowing up if it is a cheaply
manufactured one.
• Cold: The flight time of the drone will be less in cold weather due to the
slowdown of the chemical reaction in the LiPo batteries.[Han]
Obstacles Obstacles both inside and outside can cause damage to the drone if
they are hit. Propellers can easily break if plastic ones are used and property can be
damaged as well if the drone hits anything of value. If the drone is remote controlled
it is up to the skill of the pilot to keep it away from any obstacles that might be in
the flight path. If the path is pre-planned the drone needs obstacle detection and
avoidance which will be discussed further in the treatments of risks.
• Obstacle or bystander is hit by the drone which causes damage to both the
drone and the obstacle or bystander.
Adversary has physical access to the drone If an adversary has physical
access to the drone he can damage the motors, propellers or other component in such
a way that renders the drone inoperable or results in a crash.
• Drone is rendered inoperable
• Drone crashes.
3.3.2.2
Wireless Threats
Since the drones are remote controlled via RC or Wi-Fi this opens up for a mix of
different threats. These threats are mostly based on attacking the control signal of
the drone. Some drones use an easily recognisable Wi-Fi hotspot such as the Parrot
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Risk analysis
21
AR. Drone 2.0 which have the SSID names of ar_drone_xxxxx where xxxxx is a
random number.
This thesis will not consider any attacks on the smartphone via its OS or malicious
control apps downloaded via app-stores.
Jamming / Deauthentication An adversary can jam the signal to the drone by
using a Software Defined Radio(SDR) if he knows the frequency on which the drone
operates. This will cause the drone to loose its control signals from the RC which,
depending on how the drone is configured, will either cause it to crash, just hover
or go into emergency mode. Jamming on Wi-Fi signals can also be done since it is
just a radio signal in the 2.4 Ghz range. If the drone is controlled via Wi-Fi and the
attacker does not have an SDR or other radio equipment nearby a deauthentication
attack[Aira] can be done, which will have the same effect as jamming. To do this the
MAC address of the drones Wi-Fi hotspot must be known and those addresses can
be obtained from registration authorities. After finding the hotspot with the right
mac address the attacker can deauthenticate the clients from the hotspot. In both
cases the threat leads to loss of control until the jamming or deauthentication stops.
• Loss of control of drone, possible crash.
Compromised Wi-Fi security This specific Wi-Fi attack will be able to break
the password used for securing the drones Wi-Fi if it has any at all. The attack meth-
ods depends on the type of security used and the author hopes that WPA2 is used for
securing the drones Wi-Fi, but producers might use less secure standards like WEP.
Cracking the password will use the tool Aircrack in which the adversary deauthenti-
cates the client as described above and then captures the handshake. Afterwards the
attacker will need to brute force the password and by that time the drone may have
run out of battery or completed its mission. Poor passwords play a role in the time
it takes to gain access since the adversary can use rainbow tables to easily find the
most common passwords.
• Wi-Fi compromised, adversary can access drone network and carry out attacks
described below.
• No or poor password management, Wi-Fi easily compromised.
Eavesdropping An adversary may eavesdrop on the data sent to or from the
drone to or from the control app or the RC controller. Both telemetry and video data
can be caught if the Wi-Fi network is unprotected or the adversary utilises a SDR.
Control data can also be captured during this to be used in a replay attack.
The confidentiality of the control and telemetry data is harmed.
• Video feed accessed via control app: Depending on where the drone is flown the
privacy of the pilot can be violated.
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Risk Management and Analysis of Threats to Drones
• Control data recorded: Can be used by an adversary in a replay or fabrication
attack described below.
• Telemetry data recorded: Can be used by adversary to gain knowledge about
the flying speed of the drone and location.
Replay An adversary may record the control commands sent to the drone and
replay them. This can be done by either intercepting radio transmissions from the
RC controller or by recording the packets sent over Wi-Fi. Even if the packets are
encrypted a replay attack can still be carried out
The availability and control of the drone may be harmed.
• Recording and replaying RC signals. Loss of control over drone, possible crash.
• Recording packets and replaying them.
Loss of control over drone, possible
crash.
Fabricated Control Signals An adversary can fabricate his own control signals
if he knows the protocol used by the drone and the controller. Some of the protocols
are given by the drone producers[Par] and others have been reverse engineered[Hunb].
This will allow control of the drone from any medium capable of transmitting radio
signals or Wi-Fi packets depending on the drone.
The integrity of the control data, availability and control of the drone is harmed.
• Loss of control over drone, possible redirection to unknown location / theft or
crash.
Modified Control or Telemetry Data An adversary may conduct a man in
the middle attack sending wrong data back to the controller or to the drone. The
integrity of the control data and telemetry data is harmed.
• Loss of control over drone, trying to counteract wrong data sent.
Interference / Out of Range / Poor Link Quality Since many drones uti-
lize the 2.4Ghz ISM band that most wireless routers and other equipment use as well
there is a threat of the control signals experiencing interference. This may result in
the drone behaving in unexpected ways and being harder to control when flying close
to apartment complexes or other locations where the 2.4Ghz band is filled up.
Both RC controllers and smartphone apps have a limited operating range. For
RC controllers the range is about a mile if not modified and for smartphone apps it
is about 50m depending on the conditions for the flight location.
The transceiver in the drone may be of poor quality so that the link is degraded
resulting in bad controls or loss of telemetry data.
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Risk analysis
23
The availability of telemetry data and control of the drone is harmed.
• Interference on the radio band where the drone controller operate, loss of control
and possible crash.
• Out of range makes the drone uncontrollable and it either hovers until the
battery runs out or crashes.
3.3.2.3
Sensor Threats
GNSS Drones equipped with a GNSS can achieve a higher degree of autonomy since
they can follow pre-planned routes defined in flight planer software. No-flight zones
can also be enforced such as the ones defined by DJI [DJI]. One thing to notice is
that all the no flight zones described in the drone rules are not added to the DJI
drones. A threat to pre-planned flight and the usage of GPS in drones is that civilian
GPS use no encryption and the signals can be spoofed as done by a group of the
university of Texas at Austin [She+12]. The group managed to change the altitude
of the drone by spoofing the signals with a stronger signal than the satellites produce.
If the drone relies on the GPS signal too much the route can be changed and the
no fly zones bypassed since the drone can be made to believe that it is somewhere
else. This is a serious threat since deliveries by drone are expected to be a reality
if legislation favours it. One could imagine that an adversary would be interested in
the payloads that these delivery drones carry since it would be fairly easy to spoof
the signal and grab the things to be delivered.
• Pre-planned routes can be changed, loss of drone.
• Drone can be forced to land or fly higher, loss of drone or payload.
• No fly zones can be bypassed leading to drones flying where they definitely are
not supposed to. This can result in legal charges and damage of property /
putting bystanders in harms way.
Ultrasound A sonic attack can be launched against the ultrasound sensors which
could interfere with the short distance calculations of certain drones utilizing this
technology. It can even interfere with some flight controllers which are vulnerable to
specific frequencies, causing the drone to crash. [Son+15] The flight controller have
to be investigated before the attack but it is nevertheless possible to down a drone
with sound.
• Ultrasound interference may cause altitude changes when attacking the sensor.
• The flight controller can be attacked by sound frequencies causing the drone to
crash.
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Risk Management and Analysis of Threats to Drones
3.3.2.4
OS Threats
Some drones may run a minimised version of the Linux kernel and if the system is not
hardened, a range of attack vectors are available. For example the system may have
an open file transfer protocol(FTP) port, Telnet port or secure shell(SSH) port with
no or default password. This allows an adversary to download and upload, execute or
modify code or OS source code. This may be of use to people wanting to modify the
drone but may also cause unwanted behaviour or render the drone inoperable. The
adversary may also abuse a service port e.g. USB if one is available.
• FTP access: download or upload files to the drone, loss of data, upload of
malicious files.
• Telnet / SSH access: execute malicious code, modify existing code, kill running
processes. Drone crash, bricking or unwanted behaviour.
• USB access: Execute malicious code or use in combination with the two threats
above to damage the system.
• System crash: Resulting in the drone rebooting or getting stuck in a deadlock
which could result in a crash.
3.3.2.5
Legal Threats
If the rules for flying drones mentioned in chapter 2 are broken fines can be adminis-
tered to the pilot or company who owns the drone. The fines for private pilots is in
the range of 2000-5000 danish kroner(DKK) and businesses can get fines up to 10000
DKK.
• Fines can be administered for flying illegally if the perpetrator is caught.
• The reputation of the company might be at stake as well if the drone is used
illegally.
A summary of the incidents, threats and their sources can be seen in the following
table. The direct assets will be the drone as a whole and the different data types.
The incidents that can occur from the threats are:
• Drone:
DC1: Drone crash / damage
DC2: Lack of training for the pilot.
• Control Data
CD1: Confidentiality of control data harmed
CD2: Integrity of control data harmed.
CD3: Availability of control data and control of drone is harmed.
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Risk analysis
25
• Telemetry Data
TD1: Confidentiality of telemetry data harmed
TD2: Integrity of telemetry data harmed.
TD3: Availability of telemetry data harmed.
• Sensor Data
SD1: Confidentiality of sensor data harmed
SD2: Integrity of sensor data harmed.
SD3: Availability of sensor data harmed.
• Fines F1: Fines for flying illegally and loss of reputation.
• Payload: P1: Damage, loss or theft of payload.
ID
Threat
Source
Incident
T1
Battery Depleted
Battery
DC1,P1
T2
Bad weather
Weather conditions
DC1, DC2 P1
T3
Hitting obstacle or bystander
Obstacle or bystander
DC1, DC2 F1,
P1
T4
Damaged drone
Physical access to drone
by adversary
DC1
T5
Eavesdropping
Passive adversary
CD1, TD1, SD1
T6
Jamming / Deauthentication
Active adversary
DC1, CD3, TD3,
SD3
T7
Replay attack
Active adversary
CD2
T8
Fabrication attack
Active adversary
DC1, CD2,TD2
T9
Modification attack
Active adversary
DC1, CD2, TD2
T10
Interference / Out of Range
Radio Transceiver
DC1,DC2 CD3,
TD3, SD3
T11
GNSS spoofing
GNSS receiver
CD2, TD2, SD2,
SD3
T12
OS compromised
Active attacker
DC1,CD1, CD2,
CD3, TD1, TD2,
TD3, SD1, SD2,
SD3, P1
T13
OS crash
OS error
DC1, P1, CD3,
TD3, SD3
T14
Legal threats
Breaking drone rules
DC2, F1
Table 3.2: Threats, Sources and Incidents.
To ensure that all the relevant threats and incidents are identified a comparison
is done with state of the art reports on drone cyber risk in the next subsection. This
is done instead of doing that CORAS workshops since that would be difficult given
that this report is a one person effort.
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Risk Management and Analysis of Threats to Drones
3.3.3
Comparison with state of the art
When looking at the report done by Sidorov et. al[Sid+17] and Mansfield et. al.
[Man+13] it can be seen that the wireless attack surfaces have been covered by this
thesis as well. The report by Sidorov has some extra attack surfaces which are:
T15: Gain Attacks against gain scheduling is an attack against approximations
that would be good enough even if a system is dependent on something in a non-linear
way. The report describes the lift of the drone as a system dependent on the rotations
per minute of the propellers in a non-linear way. Specific linear approximations can
be good enough for making the drone fly by it knowing its own weight. Attacking the
gain system can result in the drone taking action to try and stabilize itself leading
to instability or a crash. The attack can be categorized as a threat to control data
integrity.
T16: Fuzzing Fuzzing attacks consist of sending partially or completely random
/ malformed data against a system which might cause it to crash if or switch to a
wrong mode of operation if it is not 100% protected against unexpected input.
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Risk analysis
27
3.3.3.1
Visualization of threats and
The threats found above will be visualised using CORAS threat diagrams to gain an
overview of how much the active, passive and nonhuman threats can influence the
drone.
The threats of the active adversary are summarized in this threat diagram:
Figure 3.5: The active adversary threats.
The threats of the passive adversary are summarized in this following threat dia-
gram:
Figure 3.6: The passive adversary threats.
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Risk Management and Analysis of Threats to Drones
The nonhuman threats are summarized in the following threat
Figure 3.7: The nonhuman threats.
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Risk analysis
29
3.3.3.2
Consequence and Likelihood
Now that the threats have been listed and overviews of them have been made its time
to identify the likelihood and consequence for each of the main 16 threats.
ID
Threat
Likelihood
Consequence
T1
Battery Depleted
High
Medium
T2
Bad Weather/ Exposed Circuitry
Medium
Medium
T3
Hitting Obstacle or Bystander
Medium
High
T4
Damaged drone
Low
High
T5
Eavesdropping
High
Medium
T6
Jamming / Deauthentication
Medium
High
T7
Replay attack
Medium
Medium
T8
Fabrication attack
Medium
Critical
T9
Modification attack
Medium
Critical
T10
Interference / Out of Range
Medium
High
T11
GNSS Spoofing
Medium
Critical
T12
OS compromised
Medium
Critical
T13
OS crash
Low
High
T14
Legal threat
Medium
Medium
T15
Gain attack
Medium
Medium
T16
Fuzzing attack
Medium
Medium
Table 3.3: Likelihood and Consequence Identification.
Inserted into the risk matrix the threat environment looks like:
Likelihood
Consequence
Very Low
Low
Medium
High
Critical
Very Low
Low
Medium
T2, T7, T14, T15, T16
T1,T5
High
T13 T4
T3, T6, T10
Critical
T8, T9, T11, T12
Table 3.4: Risk Matrix with Threats.
The top four risks are the T8:Fabrication, T9: Modification, T11: GNSS Spoofing
and T12: OS compromised. After those comes the medium/high, high/medium risks
which are T1: Battery, T3: Hitting Obstacle or Bystander,T5: Eavesdropping, T6:
Jamming / Deauthentication, T10: Interference / Out of Range. How to mitigate or
control the threats will be covered in chapter 5 on risk treatment after the practical
experiments have been conducted. Depending on how the experiments go the threat
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Risk Management and Analysis of Threats to Drones
environment might look different and the risk matrix can be revised. The critical
threats can be used as a framework on what pitfalls to avoid when developing drones.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4
Practical Exploit
Experiments
This chapter covers the practical exploit experiments on two different drones using
a Nuand BladeRF x40 Software Defined Radio(SDR) and the wireless exploit tools
in Kali Linux. The test environment is described in the appendix. The parrot AR.
Drone 2.0 is given as the example of a drone lacking in security and afterwards the
attempts of taking over a Hubsan Nano drone using the BladeRF will be described.
After finding out that using a SDR as means to attack the drones had to steep
a learning curve, attempts at taking over an SJRC T30VR using the same Wi-Fi
attacks as done on the AR drone, will be documented.
4.1
The Drones and the exploits
4.1.1
Parrot AR. Drone 2.0
The Parrot AR. Drone 2.0 is the drone used to measure other drones security against
since it has been the most experimented upon, due to its lack of security. The Parrot
Bebop also has inherited the same flaws as the AR. Drone.
The specifications of the AR drone is:
• Battery: 1500 mAH battery providing up to 36 minutes of flight time.
• Weight: With Indoor frame: 420 gram, With outdoor frame: 380 gram.
• Radio: 2.4 GHz Wi-Fi smartphone controlled.
• A GPS module is available as an add on to the USB port of the drone to fly
pre-planned routes.
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Practical Exploit Experiments
Figure 4.1: The Parrot AR. 2.0 Drone.
Extensive work and exploits have been made on this drone and some of the vul-
nerabilities are [PBC14][Sza]:
• Open Wi-Fi access point generated by the drone.
• Open FTP port with no password giving access to download or upload files
from the drone.
• Open Telnet port with root access giving full access to the drone system. The
drone can be crashed by killing the jobs running on the Linux system.
• The protocol is known so the drone is vulnerable to fabrication attacks once the
adversary is logged on to the Wi-Fi. One such example is Nodecopter.js which
is a Node.js implementation that can be used to communicate with the drone.
• SkyJack as mentioned in the introduction.
The drone has a security measure which is called pairing which allows the drone
to drop packets from anything else than the MAC address it is paired to. But MAC
addresses can be spoofed and the feature can be turned off remotely by triggering a
deauthentication attack and sniff the real user and application id so that the control
packet can be spoofed and pairing turned off.
Pleban Et. Al have made a WPA feature available for the AR drone which allows
the drone to connect to a smartphone hotspot instead which secures the drone from
unauthorized access but a laptop is needed to set up the pairing between the phone
and drone making it cumbersome to set up for non-technical users.
So to summarize the threats available to exploit for the parrot: T1, T5, T6, T7,
T8, T9 and T11
==PAGE:43==
4.1 The Drones and the exploits
33
4.1.2
Hubsan Nano Q4 Cam Plus + SDR
The Hubsan Nano Q4 Cam plus is a nano size drone controlled by an RC controller
which makes it ideal for testing with an SDR. The specifications of the drone are:
• Battery: LiPo 180 mAh providing 5-7 minutes of flight time and takes 30 min-
utes to charge via USB.
• Weight: 20 gram.
• Radio: 2.4Ghz RC controller
Figure 4.2: The Hubsan drone with its controller, charging cable and extra pro-
pellers.
The idea was to rapid reverse the control signals from the remote to the drone
by using the steps described in the Rapid Radio Reversing report by Michael Oss-
mann[Gad]. Michael is known for founding Great Scott Gadgets which have created
the HackRF which is an SDR similar to the BladeRF used in this thesis.
The first step is to acquire and identify the signal used by the drone and after
watching Michaels SDR tutorials on youtube to get a feeling of how to use the different
SDR tools i was lead to fccid.io. On this site you can find reports about all things
radio transmitting that are sold in the USA and the hubsan controller is on there as
well giving me a good starting point on what frequencies to investigate.[FCC]
The test report reveals that the drone operates on frequencies between 2420 to
2650 MHz and utilizes Gaussian Frequency Shift Keying as its modulation scheme.
There are 10 channels with 5 MHz between them.
So the next thing to do was to install the BladeRF. Getting the right dependencies
for GNU Radio and the other tools to use proved troublesome so after getting the
latest version of Kali Linux and only installing the program GQRX did the tools work.
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Practical Exploit Experiments
GQRX is an open source frequency scanner powered by the GNURadio Platform
with support for many devices including the BladeRF. Before the tool can be used
on is required to load the correct fpga for the chipset by using the command line
interface for the BladeRF by writing BladeRF-cli -i for int the linux terminal. Once
in the tool I write load fpga /path/to/fpgafile. to load the fpga image. Once the
image is loaded the different tools can be used. The following figure shows GQRX
primed in on the frequency of 2430 MHz with some peaks available that might be
noise or data.
Figure 4.3: GQRX Gui.
I was able to borrow the High Power lab control room to conduct the RC tests
since it had radio dead properties once the door was shut. My first experiment was to
find the control signal from the RC controller to the drone and i powered up the tiny
Hubsan drone and scanned through from 2420 MHz to 2465 MHz while operating
the drone and sending roll and pitch commands to it. There were some spikes but
nothing that responded to when I used the controls. A couple of hours we’re used
each day i had the lab available, manually scanning through the frequencies which
proved tedious. It seemed that the drone utilizes frequency hopping and later more
evidence came up supporting this. With the help of my supervisor i acquired the help
of Keld Norman from Dubex who had a hand held jamming device which jammed
sequentially and nothing happened while I operated the drone.
After doing some researching I found out that the protocol for the Hubsan X4
drone was reverse engineered by Jim Hung[Hunb] using a login analyzer on the debug
ports of the controller. He has made a full protocol specification available[Huna] as
well which could prove useful for future work if Hubsan has used the same protocol
for the Q4. The protocol has also been implemented in GNU Radio to be used to
==PAGE:45==
4.1 The Drones and the exploits
35
control the drone with a Joystick by Mike Walters.[Wal]. Looking through the source
code of the gr-hubsan project I found a GFSK demodulator GNU Radio class and
realized I was way in over my head on competencies trying to reverse engineer the
drone protocol by using the BladeRF and that will be left for future work.
The following figure demonstrates what is needed in GNU Radio to demodulate
a signal.
Figure 4.4: GNU Radio.
All the different blocks seen on the figure compiles to python code and the rele-
vant drivers are incorporated as to interface with the different SDR’s available. GNU
Radio is a really powerful tool but prerequisite knowledge is required in order to do
a project of this magnitude.
Other tests:
• Sudden lack of control signal: The other tests carried out on the Hubsan drone
was to see what would happen if the RC controller was turned off during flight.
The result was that the drone would stop its motors completely and go into
pairing mode to await pairing with the controller again, resulting in a crash.
If I would be able to carry out a jamming attack I would expect the same to
happen.
• Battery on low power: Since there is no telemetry data available for the Hubsan,
the drone blink with its navigational lights quickly when it is almost out of
power, signalling the pilot that it is time to land.
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Practical Exploit Experiments
4.1.3
SJRC T30VR FPV Drone
The SJRC T30VR is a mid-range quadcopter drone with a price of 999 kr.
The
package contains an RC controller and FPV glasses that can be used in conjunction
with a smartphone app to provide FPV flight through the camera that attaches to the
bottom of the drone. The camera can be turned up or down with the RC controller
to change the viewing angle. This is done by connecting to th open Wi-Fi network
that the drone creates when active and looking at the SSID it is quite similar to the
way the AR drones. The SSID for the T30VR is SJRC-8C4399 which makes it easy
to spot when looking for drone related access points. The app does not provide a way
to change the name or add a password to it.
Figure 4.5: The SJRC drone.
The specifications of the drone are:
• Battery: LiPo 750 mAh providing 7-9 minutes of flight time and takes 90 min-
utes to charge via USB.
• Weight: 141 gram.
• Radio: 2.4 GHz RC controller or 2.4GHz Wi-Fi smartphone controlled.
4.1.3.1
Initial Reconnaissance
The first thing to do when assessing security is to do passive reconnaissance to find
out more about the drone and what attack vectors are open. As described above the
wireless access point that the drone provides is easy to locate by its name and it is
without Wi-Fi security, leaving it open to attackers.
==PAGE:47==
4.1 The Drones and the exploits
37
First finding: The wireless access point is open for anyone to connect.
Connecting to the network I used Nmap[Lyo] to scan for open ports and the result
was:
Figure 4.6: Nmap Results.
Second Finding: As can be seen from the figure above several ports are open
and it seems that the operating system of the drone is Busybox[Vla] which is a scaled
down executable of many Unix utilities for embedded systems. The open ports are:
• Port 23 with Telnet which gives me a chance to login.
• Port 80 which means that there is a web server running.
• Port 554 running the Real Time Streaming Protocol(RTSP) for the camera feed.
• Port 8080 which could also be a website running on the server.
Third Finding:
I then tried to login via telnet using Putty which gave the following:
Figure 4.7: Telnet Login Prompt.
Using different default usernames such as admin/admin, root/toor yielded noth-
ing. A google search for the keywords ”telnet”, sjrc” ”t30vr” yielded nothing as well
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Practical Exploit Experiments
so access to the OS of the drone is closed off.
Fourth Finding: After trying the telnet connection i went to the web page of
the IP address of the drone (192.168.0.1) via a browser which gave the following page:
Figure 4.8: Camera Firmware Web Page.
It seems that it is possible to upgrade the firmware of the camera attached to the
drone. I have not tried to upload any file out of fear of bricking the drone. Besides
the manufacturer of the camera is unknown so finding a firmware update is very tricky.
==PAGE:49==
4.1 The Drones and the exploits
39
Fifth finding: Still thinking about the telnet access, i wondered if there was a
hidden password in the source code for the control app. I downloaded the Android
Application Packet(APK) from the Google Play appstore[Xia] and afterwards used
the online decompiler from javadecompiler.com[jav] to decompile the APK into its re-
spective java classes. I then used the windows search function to search for passwords
and the following interesting file DevWifiSet.java came up:
Figure 4.9: DevWifiset.java results.
Trying the username and passwords listed in the figure below gave no access to
telnet.
Sixth finding The last thing I tried was to see if the RTSP port used any user-
name or password by using an RTSP brute force tool.[ST].
Figure 4.10: RTSP result.
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Practical Exploit Experiments
The result of the test is that the drone broadcasts an open RTSP stream out on
the Wireless network it creates. Searching through the source code gave the following
link from the ETValue.Java class:
1 public static final String NETWORK_REQUEST = "rtsp://192.168.0.1/0";
.
Using VLC media player, which can open RTSP streams, i was able to access the
feed of the camera. So to summarize:
Vulnerabilities so far:
1. Open Wi-Fi network which anyone can connect to.
2. Open RTSP Stream which can be streamed once the right link is found. This
is a violation of the confidentiality of telemetry data (TD1).
4.1.3.2
Wireless Tests
Wireless range Wondering how far the range of the Wi-Fi extends, I placed the
drone in my living room and went outside while having the control app opened. An
example of the view from the app is:
Figure 4.11: The view from the app with controls primed and ready..
==PAGE:51==
4.1 The Drones and the exploits
41
The left virtual joystick controls height and yaw and right controls pitch and roll.
The buttons in the middle control takeoff and landing as this is automated.
The range of the drone only extended 10 meters from my living room and to see
if I was still connected, I pushed the liftoff button while out of range. Thinking that
the T30VR used UDP packets for control, I went inside again, only to find the drone
taking flight as soon as my phone had reconnected to the Wi-Fi. This revealed that
the app uses a TCP/IP connection instead as it resend the packet. Unable to do
anything fast enough, the drone took off and hurdled towards my orchid. One thing I
can take away from this, is that drones can double as excellent weed-whackers. This
made me think of the defined risk of hitting obstacles or bystanders from chapter 3
right away. The damage can be seen in the appendix.
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Practical Exploit Experiments
Deauthentication attack Since the attacks on the Parrot AR relies heavily
on deauthentication I tried the same thing with the T30VR. First i connected my
Samsung S7 edge and booted up Kali Linux via USB on my computer. Afterwards i
followed the same steps as done by bertoli.tech[Gus] and using Aircrack. The Samsung
S7 edge was the first phone to connect and the one to be able to control the drone.
The iPhone could also connect and see the video feed but not control the drone.
1. First I put my Wireless card into monitor mode using:
1 airmon-ng start wlan0
.
2. Then the access points and their clients are discovered with the following com-
mand:
1 airodump-ng wlan0mon
.
which gives:
Figure 4.12: Capturing the nearby access points..
as can be seen from the figure, the airodump command lists the access point
and two clients. The client with the mac address is the AC:5F:3E:FD:B0:84 is
the s7 edge and the 1C:1A:C0:2B:73:EE is the iPhone.
3. After finding the MAC addresses a deauthentication attack can be carried out
against the S7 edge with the following command:
==PAGE:53==
4.1 The Drones and the exploits
43
1 aireplay-ng -0 1000 -a E0:B9:4D:8C:43:99 -c AC:5F:3E:FD:B0:84 wlan0mon
.
-0 is the command for deauthentication, 1000 the number of times to deauthen-
ticate, -a the MAC of the access point,-c the client and in the end the interface
on which to send the packets. The command was fired after the drone had
taken flight and the s7 edge was then unable to see the video feed as the picture
froze and the drone didn’t respond to commands. After it crashing into the
wall, deauthentication packets still being sent, I tried using the iPhone to lift
off and that now controlled the drone. So using the deauthentication attack
to take over the drone is a very real threat. This violates confidentiality and
availability of the control data and telemetry data and the control of the drone.
DC1,CD1 & CD3 ,TD1 & TD3 are the incidents that can happen from using
this type of attack.
Figure 4.13: Deauthentication packets being sent against the S7 edge.
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Practical Exploit Experiments
RC plus Smartphone The last experiment conducted was to see if the smart-
phone could control the SJRC drone while it was paired with the RC controller. The
result was that the smartphone was able to recieve the RTSP feed but not control
the drone.
The things learned from both the initial reconnaissance and deauthentication at-
tack is that it is fairly easy to attack a drone using Wi-Fi and make it crash or gain
control of it. Depending on the features an attacker may access the camera or other
data available.
The threats available to exploit the SJRC is: T1, T5, T6, T7, T8, T9.
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 5
Risk mitigation and
Evaluation of the
Security Model
This chapter will provide mitigation techniques for the most critical threat and provide
a revised threat picture for the drone security model. Furthermore the security model
will be evaluated as a whole.
5.1
Mitigation of Threats
From the analysis in chapter 3 and the practical experiments in chapter 4, it can
be seen that the greatest threats to drones are the loss of power, eavesdropping and
attacks on the control data. This section aims to propose viable controls or solutions
to mitigate the most critical threats. Since the AR drone and the SJRC drone share
many threat similarities they will be classified as Wi-Fi based drones and compared
to the purely RC based.
5.1.1
Wi-Fi based drones
• T1 Battery Depleted: Sooner or later the battery of the drone is going to
run dry and most drones already have built in controls that warns the user via
telemetry that the battery is almost out of power and that it is advisable to
land the drone. Other drones without telemetry blinks their navigational lights
quickly to signal that the battery is almost out of power.
• T5 Eavesdropping: Both the Parrot and SJRC drone are vulnerable to eaves-
dropping as they both sport open Wi-Fi networks. Running versions of Linux
the manufacturers should add relevant Wi-Fi security to avoid adversaries to
eavesdrop on the communication or at least give users the possibility to activate
it as an option. Smart phone users are used to entering credentials to connect
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Risk mitigation and Evaluation of the Security Model
to access points anyhow so this would not be too much of a hassle for them as it
would be a one time doing. The users should be instructed in choosing a strong
password as well so that it would not be easy to break the protection while the
drone is in the air.
• T6 Jamming / Deauthentication: Both the AR drone and the SJRC drone
are vulnerable to deauthentication attacks as proven by the experiments done to
others on the AR Drone and my experiments on the SJRC. Used in conjunction
with an adversary owned smartphone it is possible to gain full control of the
drone. To secure against deauthentication the IEEE 802.11w standard could
be used but it requires that both the access point and clients support it and
the drone would still be vulnerable to jamming attacks. This also seems like an
expensive method for the producer to implement.
• T7: Replay No replay attacks we’re conducted on the SJRC drone and this
will be left for future work.
Depending on the protocol it uses it might be
possible to do a replay attack by using Wireshark to sniff the network packets
between the smart phone and drone.
The AR drone has protection against
replay attacks since its command protocol utilizes nonces to ensure freshness of
the UDP packets transmitted.
• T8: Fabrication attack Once the protocol is know it is easy to fabricate
packets via python or in the case of the AR drone using Nodecopter.js to control
the drone. In the case of the SJRC future work is needed to eavesdrop or look
through the control app source code to reverse engineer the protocol. Here as
with T5 adding a layer of Wi-Fi security would prevent an adversary from being
able to send commands to the drone.
• T9: Modification Attack For both wireless drones it would be possible to
conduct a man in the middle attack although it might prove harder to do for
the SJRC since the protocol used is not yet known. An attacker would then be
able to send wrong telemetry data to the smartphone confusing the pilot and
resulting in a crash. As with T5, Wi-Fi security would mitigate this threat.
• T12: OS compromised For the AR drone one solution to mitigate the OS
access threats would be to add passwords to the open ports of the drone and
a possibility to reset those passwords with the reset button at the bottom of
the drone. Another possibility would be to deny access to the Telnet, FTP and
SSH ports altogether since most customers would not need specific access to
those in order to fly their drone.
• T13: OS crash No OS crashes of the drones we’re experienced during the
experiments but it is certainly possible to induce one on the AR drone by using
T12 and killing processes. So unless an active adversary attacks the operating
==PAGE:57==
5.1 Mitigation of Threats
47
system the likelihood of an OS crash is rightly estimated as low but might
happen for cheaper drones.
• ”Operator based threats” T2, T3,T10, T14: The threat T2, T3 and T14
are typically operator induced and can be mitigated by the right training in
flying a drone and flying within the boundaries of the law. Another possibility
to avoid T3 is to add obstacle detection to the drone.
This would greatly
help unskilled pilots in keeping their drone in once piece and would also help
drone delivery services avoid unnecessary crashes. Furthermore for T10 other
frequencies could be used or a broader size of the spectrum with more channels
to utilize will help securing against interference.
Comparison RC: For RC it is much harder to eavesdrop since one has to be
able to distinguish the modulated signal in the midst of all the other signals being
sent on the ISM-band. Furthermore the protocol the drone uses to communicate data
must be known in order to get anything meaningful data. If access could be gained
to the data it might be that the protocols are not necessarily more secure than the
ones used in Wi-Fi based drones but just harder to see. Therefore the same threats
for RC has lower likelihood of happening, as the adversary would have to be more
advanced than just exploiting commonly known Wi-Fi threats.
T11: GNSS(Applicable for both Wi-Fi and RC controlled drones There
is no known way to fully mitigate GNSS spoofing since there is no added security to
the protocol. The only way to avoid it would be to scan the data received and look
for anomalies. [Bir+16]. This would be an expensive method to implement for ”Toy”
drones but could perhaps be used for more commercial drones like delivery drones
since they rely much more on GNSS to deliver their payload to customers.
The mitigation to prioritise would be to secure the Wi-Fi communication chan-
nels as both the eavesdropping and fabrication/modification rely on the channel being
open and vulnerable. If the channel still needs to be open appropriate measures to en-
crypt communication and ensuring confidentiality and integrity should be taken. The
other risks that are not covered in this chapter will be deemed acceptable for recre-
ational drones since the likelihood and consequences are low enough so the battery
time limits the time an attacker has to do damage if the Wi-Fi channel is secure.
==PAGE:58==
48
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 6
Future Work, Discussion
and Conclusion
This chapter will list the future work to be done in the research area of drone security.
This is regarded as an important field since a lot of companies and governments seem
to be interested in utilizing drones.
6.1
Future work
6.1.1
SJRC Drone
Replay and Fabrication Sniffing the control packets via Wi-Fi, if possible, and
conducting a replay or fabrication attack would be an excellent way to test the pro-
tocol security of the SJRC drone.
Busybox Telnet Access Getting telnet access to the drone would also be inter-
esting as to see if it was possible to add WPA functionality to the access point of the
drone or adding a username and password to the RTSP.
6.1.2
SDR Reverse Engineering
Getting knowledge and experience in the field of signal processing, using GNU Radio
and using GQRX would prove useful before attempting to reverse engineer or modify
existing projects that use the Hubsan protocol to see if it is the same as used on the
Hubsan X4. Many of the drone companies might use the same protocol so once it is
broken in one place it will be possible to reuse it for other drones. Preferably this
should be undertaken by someone with a lot of experience in both computer security
and radio communication in general.
==PAGE:60==
50
6 Future Work, Discussion and Conclusion
6.2
Discussion
From the practical tests it could be seen that the model was able to capture the
threats found on the Wi-Fi based drones easily. Had it not been for the complexity
of using an SDR to capture and demodulate the signals the same threats would also
have been captured as well. The model only captures threats to the system and drone
as a whole and does not care for pilots with malicious intents or the safety or privacy
of bystanders. The drone rules should be sufficient in doing so by promising large
fines to keep most people away from doing illegal flights. For the rest the drone license
plate project by SDU[JSS16] could transmit the owner and location of the drone via
GPRS to be used as evidence. This could however still be spoofed or tampered with.
Using the NIST RMF and CORAS in combination was a good idea as the threat
diagrams provided a quick overview of the different type of threats a passive and
active adversary were able to carry out. Although the method in itself was not that
usable since no workshops could be held as this thesis is a one man effort. Instead
the threats found were compared to the state of the art using a report describing a
system for drone traffic in Singapore which gave some extra threats to add.
When comparing Wi-Fi against RC controlled drones it seems that the complexity
of exploiting RC is higher due to frequency hopping and modulations schemes. Also
not knowing the protocol beforehand leaves an adversary in the blind of it is not
described anywhere. The adversary has to perform a lot of investigation before going
out with an SDR and taking out drones. Since Wi-Fi is a thorough tested standard
it is easier for manufacturers to use and the availability of smartphones for everyone
makes them optimal for controlling a drone via an app. One downside is that Wi-Fi is
everywhere and an attacker need only a Wireless card in his PC, using his smartphone
or mini computers like a Raspberry Pi to carry out an attack. The skills required
and more expensive equipment is mainly what have kept adversaries from taking over
drones by the numbers using an SDR.
Comparing the risk of having people taking over the drone when no security is
enabled from the wireless access point compared to when it is I deem it a good trade
off as the users would only have to set a password and save the access point on their
phone once. Of course companies would have to add the extra cost of implementing
it in their budget but if it could keep drones from crashing or being stolen it would
be worth it reputation wise for them.
6.3
Conclusion
Using the CORAS method and the NIST RMF a model was created for ensuring
the security of drones.
This was done by identifying all the subcomponents that
a drone consists of, in order to identify the critical assets for ensuring operation.
Furthermore the environment of the drone was taken into consideration, as some
of the sub elements also pose a threat to the drone. Several risks where identified
==PAGE:61==
6.3 Conclusion
51
by looking at the components and data as assets and these were visualised using the
CORAS modelling language. After identifying the different risks and estimating their
likelihood and consequence, a series of experiments were conducted in order to see if
the model would be able to capture the vulnerabilities exploited. These experiments
showed that when drones are piloted by an RC controller and not a Wi-Fi based one,
the level of complexity of the exploits rises. This calls for a more skilled adversary
in order to make use of them while Wi-Fi based drones can be attacked with already
known methods. A common thing for all the different drones is that security does
not seem to be a priority and that some of the companies producing drones does not
implement it. If drones are to be used more for both recreational and commercial
purposes, which seems to be the case considering the rise of the number of drones
sold, more attacks will surely occur in the future.
By doing the practical experiments I was able to see that the framework could
capture the threats against the drones and make a classification of drones that are
Wi-Fi control based and have little to no security measures implemented. Based on
this the different mitigation proposals to the threats were listed and and evaluated.
==PAGE:62==
52
==PAGE:63==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
A.1
Abbreviations
• APK: Android Application Packet
• DoS: Denial of Service
• ESC: Electronic Speed Controller
• FC: Flight Controller
• FPV: First Person View
• GLONASS: Global Navigation Satellite System
• GNSS: Global Navigation Satellite system (Covering both GLONASS AND
GPS)
• GPS: Global Positioning System
• IMU: Inertial Measurement Unit.
• ISM band: Industrial, Scientific and Medical radio band
• mAh: Milli Ampere Hour
• PDB: Power Distribution Board
• OS: Operating System
• RC: Radio Controlled
• RMF: Risk Management Framework
• RTSP: Real Time Streaming Protocol.
• SDR: Software Defined Radio
• SSID: Service Set Identifier
• TCP/IP: Transmission Control Protocol / Internet Protocol
==PAGE:64==
54
A Appendix
• UAV: Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
• UDP: User Datagram Protocol
• UML: Unified Modelling Language
• WPA: Wi-fi Protected Access
A.2
Test environment for GNU Radio and Wireless
security
The SDR conducted were run on a Virtualbox image of the latest Kali distribution
set up with 3 CPU cores, 4096 MB of ram and 128 MB of graphics memory. The
host system is an Asus N56JR laptop with a core i7-4700HQ @ 2.4 GHz per core, 12
GB of ram and a NVIDIA GTX 760 M. To set up the environment, GQRX[Cse] was
installed as it contains the necessary Osmocom drivers and other dependencies for
the Nuand BladeRF x40 to run.
The deauthentication tests were run on the same system as above but with the
Kali OS being on a USB drive since this allowed direct access to the Intel 7260
Wireless card in the host machine. The smartphones used to test the control app for
the SJRC T30VR with, were a Samsung S7 Edge and an Iphone 5s.
==PAGE:65==
A.3 Obstacle Damage
55
A.3
Obstacle Damage
Figure A.1: The damage.
==PAGE:66==
56
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[Aira]
Aircrack. Aircrack-ng Deauthentication. https://www.aircrack- ng.
org/doku.php?id=deauthentication. Accessed: 2017-07-25.
[Airb]
Airselfie. Air selfie homepage. http : / / www . airselfiecamera . com/.
Accessed: 2017-05-31.
[Aus11]
Reg Austin. Unmanned aircraft systems: UAVS design, development and
deployment. Volume 54. John Wiley & Sons, 2011.
[Bir+16]
Zachary Birnbaum et al. “Unmanned aerial vehicle security using recur-
sive parameter estimation”. In: Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems
84.1-4 (2016), pages 107–120.
[Car+07]
Richard A Caralli et al. Introducing octave allegro: Improving the infor-
mation security risk assessment process. Technical report. CARNEGIE-
MELLON UNIV PITTSBURGH PA SOFTWARE ENGINEERING INST,
2007.
[Cle]
Cleanflight. Cleanflight. http://cleanflight.com/. Accessed: 2017-06-
24.
[Com]
Air Combat Command. MQ-9 Reaper. http://www.af.mil/About-
Us/Fact-Sheets/Display/Article/104470/mq-9-reaper/. Accessed:
2017-06-18.
[Cse]
Alexandru Csete. gqrx. http://gqrx.dk. Accessed: 2017-06-03.
[Den+07]
Folker Den Braber et al. “Model-based security analysis in seven steps—a
guided tour to the coras method”. In: BT Technology Journal 25.1 (2007),
pages 101–117.
[Dia]
Ann Diab. Drones perform the Dull, Dirty or Dangerous work. https:
//tech.co/drones-dull-dirty-dangerous-2014-11. Accessed: 2017-
07-04.
[Dic]
Cambridge Dictionary. Meaning of “drone” in the English Dictionary.
http : / / dictionary . cambridge .org / dictionary/ english / drone.
Accessed: 2017-06-18.
[DJI]
DJI. DJI Fly Safe: No Fly Zones. http://www.dji.com/flysafe/no-
fly. Accessed: 2017-07-26.
==PAGE:68==
58
Bibliography
[Dro]
Dronetest.com. How to choose the best battery for your drone. http :
//www.dronetrest.com/t/lipo- batteries- how- to- choose- the-
best-battery-for-your-drone/1277. Accessed: 2017-06-24.
[FCC]
FCC. FCC ID 2AEXY002TX. https://fccid.io/2AEXY002TX. Ac-
cessed: 2017-08-03.
[Gab]
Jon Gabay. Sensor-Based Collision Avoidance Solutions for Drone Fleets.
https : / / www . digikey . com / en / articles / techzone / 2016 / mar /
sensor-based-collision-avoidance-solutions-for-drone-fleets.
Accessed: 2017-07-26.
[Gad]
Michael Ossman (Great Scott Gadgets). “Rapid Radio Reversing”. In: ().
Accessed: 2017-08-03.
[Gui]
UAV Guide. Multicopter. http://wiki.theuavguide.com/wiki/Multicopter.
Accessed: 2017-06-18.
[Gus]
Gustavo. Parrot AR.drone Denial of Service (DoS) Attack. http : / /
bertoli.tech/geral/parrot-ar-drone-denial-of-service-dos-
attack/. Accessed: 2017-08-02.
[Han]
Andrew Hansen. Flying Drones in Cold Weather. https://www.autelrobotics.
com/blog/flying- drones- in- cold- weather- 3- tips- to- do- it-
right/. Accessed: 2017-07-30.
[HR]
The Danish Ministry of Higher Education and Research. Danmarks Dron-
estrategi. Accessed: 2017-05-31.
[Huna]
Jim Hung. Hubsan X4 H107L Quadcopter Control Protocol. http://
www . jimhung . co . uk / wp - content / uploads / 2014 / 11 / HubsanX4 _
ProtocolSpec_v1.txt. Accessed: 2017-08-04.
[Hunb]
Jim Hung. Reverse Engineering a Hubsan X4 Quadcopter. http://www.
jimhung.co.uk/?p=1349. Accessed: 2017-07-26.
[Ins]
Teknologisk Institut. Kortlægning af droner i danmark. https://universe.
ida.dk/media/10547564/teknologisk-institut-2016-kortlaegning-
af-droner-i-danmark-final.pdf. Accessed: 2017-06-02.
[jav]
javadecompilers.com. Android APK Decompiler. http://www.javadecompilers.
com/apk. Accessed: 2017-08-02.
[JSS16]
Kjeld Jensen, Martin Skriver, and Ulrik Pagh Schultz. “Drone Identifica-
tion and Tracking in Denmark”. In: (2016).
[Kam]
Samy Kamkar. Skyjack. https : / / github . com / samyk / skyjack. Ac-
cessed: 2017-06-28.
[Kap]
Ken Kaplan. Intel’s 500 Drone Light Show. https://iq.intel.com/500-
drones-light-show-sets-record/. Accessed: 2017-05-31.
[Lyo]
Gordon Lyon. Nmap: the Network Mapper. https://nmap.org/.
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
59
[Man+13]
Katrina Mansfield et al. “Unmanned aerial vehicle smart device ground
control station cyber security threat model”. In: Technologies for Home-
land Security (HST), 2013 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE.
2013, pages 722–728.
[Mit]
Mitre. Mitre Common Weakness Enumeration. http://cwe.mitre.org/.
Accessed: 2017-07-16.
[Nat]
Danish Drone Nationals. Danish Drone Nationals. http://danishdronenationals.
com/. Accessed: 2017-06-02.
[NIS]
NIST. Risk Management Framework (RMF) OVERVIEW. https : / /
beta.csrc.nist.gov/Projects/Risk-Management/Risk-Management-
Framework-(RMF)-Overview. Accessed: 2017-07-12.
[Par]
Parrot. Parrot For Developers. http://developer.parrot.com/. Ac-
cessed: 2017-07-26.
[PBC14]
Johann-Sebastian Pleban, Ricardo Band, and Reiner Creutzburg. “Hack-
ing and securing the AR. Drone 2.0 quadcopter: investigations for im-
proving the security of a toy”. In: IS&T/SPIE Electronic Imaging. Inter-
national Society for Optics and Photonics. 2014, pages 90300L–90300L.
[Pen]
Georgie Pender-Bey. “THE PARKERIAN HEXAD”. In: ().
[Pos]
Washington Post. ISIS drones are attacking U.S. troops and disrupting
airstrikes in Raqqa, officials say. https://www.washingtonpost.com/
news/checkpoint/wp/2017/06/14/isis- drones- are- attacking-
u- s- troops- and- disrupting- airstrikes- in- raqqa- officials-
say/?utm_term=.ee80dbd37712. Accessed: 2017-06-28.
[Qua]
Quadcoptercloud. How do quadcopters work. http://www.quadcoptercloud.
com/how-do-quadcopters-work/. Accessed: 2017-06-18.
[Rod15]
Nils Miro Rodday. “Exploring security vulnerabilities of unmanned aerial
vehicles”. Master’s thesis. University of Twente, 2015.
[RSS15]
Atle Refsdal, Bjørnar Solhaug, and Ketil Stølen. “Cyber-Risk Manage-
ment”. In: Cyber-Risk Management. Springer, 2015.
[She+12]
Daniel P Shepard et al. “Evaluation of smart grid and civilian UAV vul-
nerability to GPS spoofing attacks”. In: Proceedings of the ION GNSS
Meeting. Volume 3. 2012, pages 3591–3605.
[Sid+17]
V Sidorov et al. “A study of cyber security threats to traffic management
of unmanned aircraft systems”. In: Air Traffic Management Research In-
stitute, NTU, Tech. Rep (2017).
[Son+15]
Yunmok Son et al. “Rocking Drones with Intentional Sound Noise on
Gyroscopic Sensors.” In: USENIX Security Symposium. 2015, pages 881–
896.
[ST]
Luke Stephens and Tek-Security. RTSP_Authgrinder. https://github.
com/Tek-Security-Group/rtsp_authgrinder. Accessed: 2017-08-02.
==PAGE:70==
60
Bibliography
[Sto]
Ketil Stolen. The CORAS Method. http://coras.sourceforge.net.
Accessed: 2017-07-17.
[Sza]
Mark Szabo. Lets Hack a Drone! https://github.com/markszabo/
drone-hacking. Accessed: 2017-08-04.
[Tim]
NY Times. White house drone crash. https://www.nytimes.com/2015/
01/28/us/white-house-drone.html. Accessed: 2017-07-26.
[Traa]
Bolig og Byggestyrelsen Trafik. Vejledende luftrumsrestriktioner for droner.
http://zzz42drone.naviair.dk/index.php. Accesed: 2017-07-01.
[Trab]
Trafikstyrelsen. Flyvning med droner i bymæssigt område. https://www.
trafikstyrelsen.dk/DA/Luftfart/Flyveoperationer/Luftfartserhverv/
Droneflyvning-i-Danmark/Flyvning-i-by.aspx. Accessed: 2017-06-
15.
[Vla]
Denys Vlasenko. BusyBox: The Swiss Army Knife of Embedded Linux.
https://busybox.net/about.html. Accessed: 2017-08-01.
[Wal]
Mike Walters. gr-hubsan. https://github.com/miek/gr-hubsan. Ac-
cessed: 2017-08-04.
[Xia]
Zheng Xiang. SJ RC App. https://play.google.com/store/apps/
details?id=sz.macroship.sjrc.wifi.app&hl=da. Accessed: 2017-08-
02.
[Yam]
Yamaha. Yamaha RMAX. http://rmax.yamaha-motor.com.au/. Ac-
cessed: 2017-07-06.
