==PAGE:1==
==PAGE:2==
2
==PAGE:3==
i
An expert is a person who has made
all the mistakes that can be made
in a very narrow ﬁeld.
— Niels Bohr
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The primary goal of this thesis was to develop a terahertz time-domain (THz-
TD) hyperspectral imaging platform to perform in-situ artworks investigation.
The requirement of a new system, comes from the necessity to have a new
instrument able to perform high resolution analysis in non-destructive and non-
invasive way, overcoming limitations of conventional set-ups.
In the past, THz-TD imaging has already shown its human-safe potentiality
on cultural heritage application, revealing hidden features of paintings and, in
some cases, providing the bases for pigments investigation.
This research is about the development of an algorithm that allows to com-
putationally extract hyperspectral information from conventional THz-TD data,
and to process images over a broad range of frequencies. A dedicated section to
extract hyperspectral images of inner layers has also been developed based on
the peak selection principle.
The algorithm has been tested on an orthodox Russian icon, with the aim
of understanding about layers structures, pigments and damages present on the
painting surface. The icon has been initially scanned with a short wave infrared
(SWIR) hyperspectral system to create a baseline dataset for a comprehensive
analysis. Considerations on the newly developed system has been outlined on
the base of the comparison of the two datasets.
Beside hypercube reconstruction, the developed algorithm has few tools for
basic hyperspectral investigation.
The research outcome, although challenging, have allowed to demonstrate
the feasibility of the projects and conﬁrmed this technology can have interesting
use and development in cultural heritage diagnostic ﬁeld.
The results obtained have allowed to investigate details on the painting non
visible with other methodology such as, for instance, restoration treatments and
identiﬁcation of gold as painting material. From this study it clearly appears
that there is room to further develop the technique by integrating more eﬃcient
tools to explore new applications and improve the data interpretation.
This work will still continue with some planned tasks that aim to further
investigate spectral marks for pigments as well as to distinguish golden leaves
from painted gold.
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
ABSTRACT
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgments
I want to express my gratitude to both my supervisors Professor Peter Uhd
Jepsen and Falko Kuester for all the support given throughout the research and
the project development.
A thanks go to the Center for Research in Optics (CIO) in Leon (Mexico)
and in particular to Enrique Castro Camus and Corinna Koch-Dandolo, who
have believed in my project, supporting me during the data acquisition process
giving me full access to their instruments. Thanks to Nicholas Hubenko, who
kindly agree to temporally loan his Russian icon for this research.
I sincerely thank the CISA3 and Calit2 group for the amazing time spent
together collaborating and constructively brainstorming. Thanks to my closer
colleagues and friends Eric, Chris, Vid, Luca, Dominique, Mike, Jessica, James
and Twain who all helped me to accomplish my project giving me useful tips
and input, besides memorable ’lab’s out’ nights. A special thanks goes to Luke,
for the countless coﬀees and cookies, for the beers, the burritos on Tuesday and
for the DroneBall games. A thanks also to Gianmarco, my ﬁrst friend in San
Diego, for the time spent together and the accurate procrastination.
I’m also grateful to my family for their encouragement throughout the time
and for the economic support. Thanks to my parents, my father and my mother,
who have demonstrated once more to know how to support me among diﬃculties
and distance. Thanks to my sister, Greta. Ever-present presence, in all my
experiences.
Thanks to Reed Avenue and its couch, and to Pardis for the great time spent
together and [...]. Thank you to the Rock Bottom, especially to Sam, for the
innumerable burgers and happy hours.
Last but not least, a thanks to Martina and Alex for their support and help
during the whole Master. I wouldn’t be where I am without them.
Thank you.
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research project has been conducted in collaboration with CISA3 and
Calit2, groups belonging to Electrical and Computer Science Engineering De-
partment of University of California, San Diego. It is here also acknowledged
the contribution from Norsk Elektro Optikk AS (NEO), who loaned two of their
HySpex cameras for the VNIR/SWIR hyperspectral measurements, and Centro
de Investigasiones en Optica, A.C. (CIO), who gave full availability in using
their THz-TD instruments.
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
iii
Acknowledgments
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theoretical Background
3
2.1
Hyperspectral imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Working principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.2
Typical applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.3
Applications in cultural heritage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Terahertz Time-Domain (THz-TD) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Terahertz radiations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.2
Working principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.3
Terahertz generation and detection with photo-conductive
antennas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.4
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.5
Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.6
Applications of terahertz
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Preliminary study
15
3.1
Concept development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
System design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.1
THz sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.2
Detectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.3
Set-up considerations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Beneﬁts of THz-TD system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Algorithm development
19
4.1
Algorithm part I: hypercube processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.1.1
General investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.1.2
Multivariate analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Algorithm part II: THz data processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4.2.1
Conventional processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2.2
Hypercube construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Materials and methods
31
5.1
Investigated painting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Instrumentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2.1
Terahertz Time-Domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2.2
Hyperspectral cameras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2.3
X-Ray Fluorescence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6
Results and discussion
35
6.1
Conventional THz-TD imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.1.1
Enface images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.1.2
B-scan image . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.1.3
Time of ﬂight image . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2
THz hyperspectral imaging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.2.1
THz-TD hyperspectral images: general processing
. . . .
38
6.2.2
Complete waveform vs. single peak images
. . . . . . . .
42
6.3
Conventional hyperspectral vs. THz hyperspectral
. . . . . . . .
42
6.4
Considerations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7
Conclusions
47
7.1
Outlooks and future works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
Appendix A Matlab code
55
A.1 Part I: Hyperspectral data investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
A.2 Part II: THz data investigation and hypercube maker
. . . . . .
65
Appendix B Additional processed data
83
Appendix C Used instruments
87
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Project objective
Over the last decades, chemical and physical analysis have gained substantial
importance in cultural heritage investigation, playing a key role in art diagnostic.
In recent years particular attention has been paid to non-destructive and non-
invasive techniques, making a considerable eﬀort in developing new systems
able to provide more accurate information about a piece of art, without directly
altering or moving it away from its site. A major role in this evolution has
certainly been played by imaging systems. Even though they have since long
been applied to cultural heritage, only recently they have been combined with
spectroscopic techniques in order to provide material information of the analyzed
sample. An evident example of this is the progress of hyperspectral systems (see
section 2.1), which were lately been used to identify pigments as well as speciﬁc
features such as restoration treatments and preparation sketches on paintings.
The purpose of this thesis is to explore the possibility of expanding the
concept of hyperspectral system, conventionally working in visible (VIS) near-
infrared (NIR) and short-wave infrared (SWIR) range, to the terahertz (THz)
radiation. The objective of the conducted research is to provide a new imaging
tool to be used in conjunction with conventional, previously existing, systems.
The research process has been ﬁrst based on thorough literature review to ensure
about the project feasibility and direct its structure. Successively terahertz time-
domain (THz-TD) measurements (see section 2.2) on a Russian icon has been
conducted and an algorithm has been implemented to computationally extract
THz hyperspectral information.
A THz hyperspectral platform has been developed, and processed data have
been compared to SWIR measurements. The comparison of datasets was meant
to reveal strength and weakness of the newly introduced technique.
Due to the limited capability of THz spectroscopy for pigments investiga-
tion [1,2], this work has been mainly focused in the development of the imaging
apparatus rather than spectral analysis.
1
==PAGE:12==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
The research has been conducted in form of collaboration between three
institutions, Technical University of Denmark, Copenhagen (Denmark), Uni-
versity of California, San Diego (USA) and the Center for Research in Optics,
Leon (Mexico).
1.2
Thesis structure
The thesis is structured in seven chapters, each of which is covering a funda-
mental step of the conducted research. A project objective is presented in the
introduction (chapter 1). Followed by theoretical background (chapter 2) and
preliminary study (chapter 3), in which elements of theory and the project’s
design concepts are discussed. The algorithm development (chapter 4) repre-
sent the core of the project and it introduces the working principles upon which
the developed algorithm is based, while in materials and methods (chapter 5)
the scanned painting and the instruments used are described. Results and dis-
cussion (chapter 6), is presenting the data processed throughout the developed
algorithm and conclusions (chapter 7) summarizes the project.
==PAGE:13==
2
Theoretical Background
2.1
Hyperspectral imaging
2.1.1
Working principles
Developed at ﬁrst for remote sensing and astrophysics purposes, spectral imag-
ing (SI) technology has found widespread application in the last twenty years
among diﬀerent research ﬁelds including medicine, pharmacology, agriculture,
environmental science and cultural heritage diagnostic. Based on the acquisition
of a set of images at well-deﬁned frequencies, this technique has been distinct
between multispectral (MSI) and hyperspectral imaging (HSI), according to
how ﬁnely divided are the spectral bands. In other words how many bands (or
channels) the system provides. In general, HSI has more and narrower divided
bands than MSI. Conventionally hundred or more bands are required to refer
to a hyperspectral system.
These instruments are usually working in a point-to-point scan mode, record-
ing the reﬂectance of each pixel at diﬀerent wavelengths and combining them
in a sequence of spectral images, called hypercube. From this, the reﬂectance
spectrum can be extracted at each point of the image and provide both spatial
and spectral information (Figure 2.1).
A conventional hyperspectral apparatus conﬁguration is generally composed
by lighting, focusing optics, detector and wavelength selector. All of these com-
ponents are equally important and essential. For art diagnostic applications,
the most common set-up includes a broadband lighting source placed at 45◦,
which irradiate the sample, and a perpendicular detector, which records the
reﬂected radiation (Figure 2.2). Diﬀerent detectors are available for hyperspec-
tral imaging and they are chosen according to spectral range of interest and
required sensitivity. Charge-coupled devices (CCD) or complementary metal-
oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) sensors are used in the visible and near infrared
range (300-1000 nm) while InGaAs or HgCdTe are normally adopted for short
wave infrared (900-2500 nm). The wavelength can be selected either ﬁltering
3
==PAGE:14==
4
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
Figure 2.1: Schematic representation of hypercube showing both spatial and spectral infor-
mation.
the illumination or the reﬂected light. In the ﬁrst case a monochromator is used
to ﬁlter the illumination beam before it reaches the sample, this reduces the
light exposure, which is an important advantage for light sensitive materials,
but provides less ﬂexibility and portability than others. In the second case, the
wavelength is selected through ﬁltering or dispersing the reﬂected light. This
process can be achieved in two ways: in the snapshot mode, the entire spectrum
is collected simultaneously at each point and spatial area, while in the sequential
mode a spectral ﬁlter is placed between the lens and the detector in order to
scan an area (point or line) at speciﬁc wavelengths.
2.1.2
Typical applications
Beside art investigation (discussed in 2.1.3), conventional HSI systems 1 can be
used for a broad range of measurements. M. Manley [3] provides an overview
on NIR hyperspectral analysis of biological materials with outstanding appli-
cations related to food and agriculture investigations. Meat and ﬁsh products
can be controlled by revealing fecal infection in chicken carcasses, predicting
beef tenderness and detecting parasites in cod ﬁllets (e.g. nematodes). Quality
inspection on fruits and vegetables can be performed using short wavelength
1Being the objective of this thesis the development of a new hyperspectral system, during
the text it will be refered to conventional hyperspectral when talking about Vis, NIR and
SWIR hyperspectral systems.
==PAGE:15==
2.1. HYPERSPECTRAL IMAGING
5
Figure 2.2: Schematic representation of HSI system working principle.
(400-1000 nm). Fecal contamination, early bruising and chilling injury, can be
spotted enabling prevention of potentially short shelf-life of products. In some
cases, by applying multivariate analysis, damages can be detected before they
are actually visible to naked eye. Qualitative (e.g. classiﬁcation of wheat, based
on quality) and quantitative (e.g. moisture, oil and oleic content) measurements
can be performed on cereals as well as detection of fungal infection of maize. An
additional example of food agriculture analysis is given by Amr Abd-Elrahman
et al in [4], in which a multipurpose low-cost hypespectral imaging system has
been developed and used in two study cases: to detect and quantify bacterial
diseases in tomato vegetation and to estimate chlorophyll-a (chl-a) concentra-
tion in aquaculture ponds, respectively.
Non-food applications are also common. Among them environmental changes
and related human impact can be studied by looking at wood and soils. Phar-
maceutical assessment can be performed by determining and mapping concen-
tration and distribution of active compounds in produced tablet. In medicine
diagnosis, hyperspectral imaging is used to perform pulse oxiometry, brain and
muscle oxiometry, functional brain cortex mapping and optical mammography.
2.1.3
Applications in cultural heritage
Hyperspectral imaging analysis ﬁnds widespread application in the ﬁeld of cul-
tural heritage and art conservation [5–12]. Hyperspectral data can be processed
to obtain an in-depth understanding of an investigated artifacts, distinguishing
and identifying, for instance, diﬀerent materials from their spectral signatures.
In addition, multivariate analysis is often used to group spatial pixel with similar
features.
==PAGE:16==
6
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
Underdrawings and pentimenti can be visualized in paintings, sometimes
overcoming the infrared reﬂectography (IRR) wavelength limitation, which af-
fects materials such as iron gall ink and sepia as, in fact, some materials absorb
or reﬂect light only in a speciﬁc narrow range of frequencies and their features
are often lost in the broadband imaging technique such as IRR. Minerals and
gems can be studied and identiﬁed. When UV-induced and VIS-ﬂuorescence
is used, HSI technique can diﬀerentiate and identify organic binders based on
their diﬀerent intensities and ﬂuorescence colors.
Pigments and inks can be
characterized and mapped, providing higher ﬂexibility than conventional spec-
troscopic method such as FORS, UV-Vis or NIR spectroscopy.
Qualitative
inter-band comparison can be performed, revealing hidden pieces of informa-
tion such as damages and restorations. Conservation treatments, such as laser
ablation cleaning, can be also evaluated and transportation damages may be
spotted. In conclusion color rendering imaging, based on visible range data,
enables accurate images of the painting under any lighting conditions by means
of tri-stimulus values determination.
2.2
Terahertz Time-Domain (THz-TD)
As of today, a broad range of THz equipments exist, each working in diﬀerent
geometries (i.e. transmission and reﬂection) and featured with diﬀerent types of
excitation sources (i.e. broadband and continuous wave). The following section
focus in the description of the system used in this research: THz time domain
with photo-conductive antennas (PCA) as source and detector. Other systems
kinds are described in section 3.2.
2.2.1
Terahertz radiations
For long diﬃcult to access, the terahertz (THz or T-ray) region of electromag-
netic spectrum (0.1-10 THz) is higher in frequency than most electronic sources
and lower in frequency than most optical sources. Lying between microwaves
and infrared light (Figure 2.3), this region has been poorly explored and histor-
ically deﬁned as ’terahertz gap’ due to the lack of proper instruments to access
it. Technological development and semiconductor growth, however, made now
possible to produce THz waves and use them for imaging and spectroscopic
analysis.
Due to their non-ionizing nature, THz waves are a relatively safe way to
penetrate a variety of non-metallic materials. However, recent researches proved
that long exposure or high power radiation could lead to genetic malformation
over the time and under speciﬁc conditions [13,14] as they can aﬀect biological
functions in a non-destructive way. These conditions are respectively high power
(e.g. exposure to 3.6 THz radiation at 15 mW/cm2 for 30 minutes, tested on
mice) and/or extended exposure (above 6 hours).
Non-conducting materials
such as cloths, paper, cardboard, plastic and ceramic are transparent to T-ray,
==PAGE:17==
2.2. TERAHERTZ TIME-DOMAIN (THZ-TD)
7
Figure 2.3: Visual representation of electromagnetic spectrum evidencing the terahertz gap.
Image link: http://physicscentral.com/explore/action/nano-cupcakes.cfm
while fog, liquid water or metal are hardly penetrated due to their absorption
and reﬂection.
2.2.2
Working principles
Recently, THz application has been a growing science involving development
of new instruments and technology.
Depending on the purpose of the mea-
surement, one can choose among a broad range of systems each made for the
required application. A detailed description of spectroscopic and imaging sys-
tems is given in [1,15]. Broadband terahertz time-domain (THz-TD) technique
based on photo-conductive antennas (PCA) is now discussed with more detail
as it represents the reference system for this thesis.
A THz-TD measurement is a real-time detection of an electromagnetic wave’s
electric ﬁeld after it propagates through the sample. A basic experiment set-up
is shown in ﬁgure 2.4. It consists of a THz source (emitter) and a THz detector
(receiver), both pumped by a femtosecond laser. The produced laser pulse is
sent to a beam splitter to be divided. One portion is directed to the emitter
and transformed into a single-cycle THz radiation with a pulse duration of one
picosecond or less, which is then directed to the sample and focused to the re-
ceiver. The remaining portion of the femtosecond pulse (probe) is sent to a time
delay stage before being focused to the receiver. The resulting signal is recorded
only when both the probe and the THz pulse are caught by the detector chip.
By modifying the time delay of the probe pulse, the electric ﬁeld of the THz
pulse can be deﬁned as function of time. Fourier transformation of the recorded
signal provides amplitude and phase of the pulse. It is important to note that
the registered signal is proportional to how the electric ﬁeld changes and not
to its intensity. This allows to directly determine the refractive index n and
absorption coeﬃcient α of a sample without using the Kramers-Kronig relation.
==PAGE:18==
8
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
Figure 2.4: Schematic representation of a basic THz-TD system in transmission mode.
2.2.3
Terahertz generation and detection with photo-conductive
antennas
Thanks to technology improvement, diﬀerent types of THz sources and detectors
have been developed and used, however, only the photo-conductive antennas
(PCAs) will be discussed in this thesis. The application of PCA to generate
and detect THz radiation was ﬁrst described by Martin van Exter et al. in
1989 [16]. A PCA is a fast optical activated switch made by two metal electrodes
embedded in a semiconductor material plate (a graphic representation of it is
shown in ﬁgure 2.5).
A THz radiation can be produced by focusing a femtosecond laser pulse of
similar wavelength of the semiconductor band gap to the interstice between the
electrodes, producing electron-hole pairs. The free carriers are accelerated by
the electric ﬁeld produced applying a bias voltage between the metal electrodes,
this acceleration leads to a fast change in current density, described as induced
dipole, which produces a THz transient. The produced radiation is described
as
ET Hz(t) ∝dj(t)
dt
(2.1)
where ET Hz is the THz electric ﬁeld radiated by the antenna and j is the
photocurrent generated in the gap, this correspond to the convolution of the
optical pulse shape (femtosecond laser pulse) Popt(t) with the response of the
photoswitch [17,18]
j(t) = Popt(t) ⊗[nem(t)qvem(t)]
(2.2)
==PAGE:19==
2.2. TERAHERTZ TIME-DOMAIN (THZ-TD)
9
Figure 2.5: Schematic representation of photo-conductive antenna to generate and detect
THz radiations.
where nem, vem and q are respectively the density, velocity and charge of carriers.
Detection of THz radiation by means of photo-conductive antenna works
similarly to what already described. A femtosecond probe pulse hits the antenna
and generates electron-hole pairs, if the THz pulse arrives during the carriers’
lifetime, they are accelerated towards the electrodes before they are recaptured.
This generates a current in the gap equals to
J(τ) =
Z ∞
−∞
ET Hz(t)σ(t −τ)dt
(2.3)
where σ is the conductivity and τ is the relative time delay between the laser
pulse and the arriving THz ﬁeld E(t).
The current is ampliﬁed and converted to a voltage which is then detected
using a lock-in ampliﬁer.
2.2.4
Data analysis
Terahertz time domain systems normally obtain images by raster scanning an
object along two dimensions (X, Y) and collecting the outcoming radiations
either in reﬂection or in transmission mode. The recorded signal at each spatial
coordinate is proportional to the electric ﬁeld strength of the THz pulse as
function of time, E(t). Frequency information (amplitude and phase) can be
obtained by Fourier transforming the data according to
E(ω) = 1
2π
Z ∞
−∞
e−iωtE(t)dt
(2.4)
==PAGE:20==
10
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
Figure 2.6: Schematic representation of THz pulse propagation across the sample. Image
credit: [19]
When the THz pulse passes through the sample it undergoes reﬂections at
layer interfaces, gaining a phase Psam (Figure 2.6). Assuming the simplest case
of a compact monolayer sample at normal incidence, the signal propagation is
deﬁned as
Et(ω) = E0(ω)t12t23Psam(ω, d)
(2.5)
for a transmitted signal (Et(ω)), with Psam described as
Psam(ω, d) = eienωd/c
(2.6)
and t12 and t23, representing the complex Fresnel ﬁeld transmission coeﬃcient,
which for normal incidence and dry air as surrounding medium are
t12 =
2
1 + en(ω)
(2.7)
t23 =
2en(ω)
1 + en(ω)
(2.8)
where en = n + ik is the complex refractive index of the sample. Here n is the
real refractive index and k is the extinction coeﬃcient, related to the absorption
coeﬃcient α as k = αc
2ω. Thus, equation 2.5 can be rewritten as
Et(ω) = E0(ω)
4n
(n + 1)2 e−αd/2einωd/c
(2.9)
==PAGE:21==
2.2. TERAHERTZ TIME-DOMAIN (THZ-TD)
11
Similarly reﬂected signals at air/sample interface, Er(ω) and sample/air
interface Er′(ω), are deﬁned as
Er(ω) = E0r12
(2.10)
Er′(ω) = E0t12r23t21e−αd/2einωd/c
(2.11)
where r is the Fresnel reﬂection coeﬃcient, which at the same conditions ex-
pressed for transmission is
r = n −1
n + 1
(2.12)
Information such as refraction index and absorption coeﬃcient can be de-
termined by considering the ratio of sample reﬂection to the reference reﬂection
(equation 2.13).
The reference signal is normally recorded by replacing the
sample with a metallic surface.
|r|eiφ = en −1
en + 1 = n + ik −1
n + ik + 1
(2.13)
Inverting equation 2.13, real refraction index and absorption coeﬃcient of
analyzed sample can be calculated
n(ω) =
1 −|r|2
1 + |r|2 −2|r|cosφ
(2.14)
α(ω) = 4πν
c
2|r|sinφ
1 + |r|2 −2|r|cosφ
(2.15)
In THz-TD measurements, the temporal spacing ∆t between the reﬂected
pulses is proportional to the optical thickness of the layer d. In other words, the
acquired raw data in time domain provide information about the penetration
depth (z) of the THz signal
z =
d
cosϕ = c
n
∆t
2
(2.16)
where ϕ is the refraction angle determined by Snell’s law (equation 2.17) , for
an incident angle θ
ϕ = sin−1( nair
nsam
sinθ)
(2.17)
Assuming a normal incidence conﬁguration, the layer thickness can be de-
rived as
d = c∆t
2n
(2.18)
==PAGE:22==
12
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
2.2.5
Imaging
Acquired data can be imaged based on diﬀerent parameters, according to the
information needed. Non-destructive testing (NDT) nomenclature is conven-
tionally adopted to refer to the data type showed. This classiﬁcation is normally
divided in three formats: A-scan, B-scan and C-scan respectively.
The A-scan is the representation of a simple THz signal as function of time.
The B-scan is a non-invasive cross-sectional representation of the sample, where
the time increment (Y-axis) for each pixel of a scan line (X-axis) is pictured in
false color in order to provide information about the reﬂected THz ﬁeld strength.
This image format can be quite useful to better understand the inner structure
of a sample and its layer stratiﬁcation. The C-scan, instead, gives a front view
(enface) of the scanned area. This can be generated by using the maximum,
minimum or the peak-to-peak values of the pulse temporal amplitude E(t), as
well as the pulse area or power over a speciﬁc time interval (time windowing).
Frequency parametric images can be created prior Fourier transformation of
data [19].
In addition, a three dimensional time-of-ﬂight (ToF) image can be created
by plotting the pulse delay with regard to a reference pulse for each pixel.
2.2.6
Applications of terahertz
THz spectroscopy and imaging is applied to diﬀerent research ﬁelds, delivering
relevant beneﬁts compared to other techniques. The most popular applications
are summarized in the following section, with speciﬁc attention for cultural
heritage and art diagnostic analysis. Because of its extremely low energy, THz
spectroscopy is a valuable option to safely investigate living organisms and useful
for medical diagnosis [15], in fact THz emissions can penetrate human tissue up
to few micrometers allowing, for instance, the recognition and monitoring of
skin cancer.
Thanks to its penetration power and metal reﬂective response,
THz radiation can be employed in body scanner to reveal presence of weapons,
explosive and in some cases drugs underneath cloths and fabric [15, 20, 21].
Contents of envelops can also be scanned without the need of open them.
Industrial applications are also quite common to monitor manufacturing pro-
cess in plastics, and pharmaceutical industries [15, 20]. In the ﬁrst case, THz
application allows to monitor polymeric process as well as plastic weld joints
quality, i.e. moisture content etc. In pharmaceutical industry is an essential
tool to monitor compounds dosage and perform quality check. Materials char-
acterization is also possible by means of THz-TD spectroscopy [22].
Yet, an interesting use is in food industry, where THz system has been used
as valuable non-ionized alternative for metallic contamination detection [20].
Although the high content of water in food may limits THz penetration and
therefore not always the best technique.
THz technology has also been successfully applied to cultural heritage ar-
tifacts as valid solution to conventional imaging techniques such as IR reﬂec-
==PAGE:23==
2.2. TERAHERTZ TIME-DOMAIN (THZ-TD)
13
toggraphy and X-Ray radiography. An overview of general applications in art
conservation is given in [20, 23, 24]. Most of the art materials are sensible to
THz radiation and therefore providing interesting results when analyzed. His-
torical documents, such as archival documents and stuck of papyrus, have been
inspected with positive results. Metal corrosion, stone conservation, historic
plastic and historic textiles and mummies are all target ﬁelds of interest and
have shown promising outcomes. All the references can be found in [23].
Paintings analysis is probably the most relevant application in art ﬁeld.
C. Koch-Dandolo et al. [19, 25, 26] demonstrated the penetration capability of
THz-TD imaging when applied on canvas and wood paintings, proving that
this technique can be a reasonable alternative to XRR to access and study
pentimenti2. K. Fukunaga in [1,2,27] discusses the potentialities and limitations
of THz spectroscopy for pigments and binders investigation. Altough in theory
THz technology can be used to identify pigments of various natures, due to
the particle size limitations3 only very few pigments can be recognized from
their spectrum requiring, in most of the cases, sample in form of pellets and
transmission mode measurement are required.
2In art, the word pentimenti refers to a painting being covered by anther painting
3Some pigments, especially when derived from minerals, have particle’s size similar or
equal to THz wavelength range, therefore obtained spectra can be aﬀected by Rayleigh and
Mie scattering [1,23]
==PAGE:24==
14
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
==PAGE:25==
3
Preliminary study
This chapter introduces the design of the project. To simplify the reading, it
has been divided in three main sections: concept development (section 3.1),
which highlights all needed features and structures the ﬁnal idea, system design
(section 3.2), which contains a literature review on various THz systems and
conduces to the most suitable choice for the ongoing research and the deﬁnition
of the system and set-up considerations (section 3.2.3).
In conclusion some
beneﬁts of THz-TD system (section 3.3) are discussed to motivates the hardware
solution chosen to ﬁt both requirement and research time frame.
3.1
Concept development
Aiming to develop a new hyperspectral imaging platform, the goal of this thesis
was to create a THz based hyperspectral system able to reveal conservation sta-
tus of painted artifacts and possibly to be used to identify applied pigments. The
project was intended to provide a new set-up able to overcome the major limita-
tions of conventional imaging systems (e.g. visible/near infrared hyperspectral,
X-Ray radiography etc.) and serve as aid for future conservation treatments.
Among the speciﬁc requirements the new system needed good imaging capabil-
ities, high resolution and sensitivity, fast acquisition time as well as possibility
to perform spectroscopic measurements. Usability, aﬀordability, portability and
reliability had to be taken into account throughout the research as the system
is meant to be used in in-situ museum analysis.
There are several reasons which have lead to develop a THz based hyper-
spectral system. Among these the fast scanning speed, the relative easiness to
obtain optical information about the sample (i.e. refractive index and absorp-
tion coeﬃcient), the considerable penetration depth compared to IR sources and
the non existing possibility to heat up and degrade the sample, contrarily to IR
and UV sources. Due to the nature of the involved radiation, it has been de-
cided to develop a speciﬁc algorithm able to extract hyperspectral information
computing raw data rather than a completely new system.
15
==PAGE:26==
16
CHAPTER 3. PRELIMINARY STUDY
3.2
System design
In this section few diﬀerent system conﬁgurations are considered and compared
in order to outline the optimal design for a possible THz hyperspectral imaging
system. The purpose is to provide an overview on various kind of THz instru-
ments available on market and motivate the reasons behind the adopted ﬁnal
conﬁguration. Working principles of mentioned devices are not provided here.
For further information about these may refer to references.
Terahertz measurements can be divided in two relevant categories: spec-
troscopy and imaging. In most of the cases they are related each other, however
pure spectroscopic analysis can be conducted using a Fourier transform THz
system (FT-THz) based on a Michelson interferometer. This set up can cover a
range from 1.0 to 20 THz with a resolution of 30 GHz at room temperature. As
FT-THz is not a ﬁeld of interest for imaging application, it will not be further
described, more information about its working principle and applications can
be found in [1,28].
3.2.1
THz sources
Terahertz sources can be grouped in two categories: broadband sources, which
are generally based on conversion of ultrashort optical pulses into few cycle
of THz pulses, and continuous wave sources (CW), which are more spectrally
deﬁned. In the detailed comparison between the two, presented by Karpowicz
et al. in [29], both their advantages and limitations are highlighted. On the one
hand CW sources have the advantages of basic set-ups and lower prices, but
they provide limited data information i.e. transmitted energy. On the other
hand broadband sources (also known as pulsed THz) are complex and expensive
systems but able to provide a rich dataset, carrying information about electric
ﬁeld magnitude, optical path length (transmission time), absorption spectrum,
phase and pulse shape. However, broadband sources are covering a broad range
of the electromagnetic spectrum, limiting the possibility of directly selecting
a single frequency from a hardware prospective. It would be possible to use
narrow-band frequency ﬁlters to select a given frequency, however most of the
source power would be discarded, turning this option in a wasteful alternative
compared to single-frequency sources. It is clear that this represent a notable
limitation for a hyperspectral set-up.
The most common broadband sources are photoconductive antennas (PCA)
[1, 15] while the most used CW sources are photomixer, gas lasers, free elec-
tron laser, quantum cascade laser (QCL) and gun diodes [1, 15, 30]. Table 3.1
summarizes the main features of THz imaging sources.
3.2.2
Detectors
Continuous wave detectors are normally selected according to the purpose of
the analysis. Altough a typical choice is a microbolometer focal plane array
==PAGE:27==
3.2. SYSTEM DESIGN
17
Table 3.1: Comparison between THz sources
Working frequency range
Spectral resolution
Notes
Quantum cascade
laser (QCL)
1 - 5 THz
NA
It needs cryocooler
Gun diodes
GaAs: 0.01-0.2 THz,
GaN: 0.01 - 3 THz
NA
It works at room T
Gas laser
It depends from
the gas species
It depends from
the gas species
Frequency not tunable
Photomixing
0.1 - 3 THz
< 1 GHz
-
Photoconductive
antenna (PCA)
0.1 - 3 THz
3 GHz
It provides depth proﬁle
if used in reﬂection mode
[1,15,31], to date there are other options available. Jun Yang et al. have shown
the high performance of a pyroelectric camera detector coupled with a gas laser
source [32], while Boukhayma and Boppel presented their alternative based on
low-noise complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) detector [33,34].
Valid alternatives to conventional microbolometer are silicon charge-coupled
devices (CCD), which works at higher resolution [35]. Table 3.2 summarizes the
main features of THz imaging sources.
Table 3.2: Comparison between THz detectors
Operation range
(Frequency)
Pixel
size
Number
of
pixels
Frame
rates
Signal-to-noise
ratio
Notes
Bolometer
0.5-2 THz
NA
320x240
30-60 fps
80 dB
In most cases
and for high
resolution, it needs
cryocooler
Pyroelectric
camera
0.3-300 THz
100 µm
124x124
50 fps
60 dB
-
CMOS
NA
23.5 µm
320x240
100 fps
NA
-
CCD
5-13 THz
4.65 µm
1360x1024
100 fps
>64 dB
Sensibility not
good < 6 THz
PCA
0.02 - 3.5 THz
> 100 µm
NA
100 and 1000 fps
determined by
measurements range
> 80 dB
-
3.2.3
Set-up considerations
According to project speciﬁcations, the system must be compact and portable
for in-situ measurements, fast enough to conduct daily based scan, able to pro-
vide spectroscopic information and have a tunable frequency over a wide region
of the electromagnetic spectrum. Time-domain systems were discarded due to
their broadband sources, which would make impossible to select the frequency.
Instead, CW sources appeared to be more appropriate to reproduce a THz hy-
perspectral imaging system. They truly provide higher resolution other than
higher ﬂexibility, allowing to select a single frequency at time and use it to im-
==PAGE:28==
18
CHAPTER 3. PRELIMINARY STUDY
age a sample. By combining more sources and recreating images at each band,
hyperspectral analysis will become possible, although limitations such as need
of cooling have to be taken into account.
Even though gas lasers have ﬁxed frequency, they have been considered un-
suitable for hyperspectral application as the only way to tune these sources is
to change the gas species. Gun diodes has the advantage to operate at room
temperature, however coupling more multipliers the maximum frequency range
achievable is 0.1 - 2.0 THz with a big loss in power while frequency increases.
Photomixing and quantum cascade laser (QCL) are probably the most suit-
able CW sources for hyperspectral application, however QCL requires a cooling
system, which make in-situ analysis more complicated [15,30].
Bolometer is the most common detector in CW measurement [15, 30, 31],
however, high resolution data can be achieved by cooled systems, and therefore
they are not usable for portable application. Nemoto et al. [36] have developed
an uncooled micro-bolometer usable in the range 0.5-2 THz, which it might
potentially works if coupled with the right source. A valuable alternative to
cooled bolometer is a pyroelectric camera [32], but is low resolution (pixel size
100 µm) and it is generally coupled with a gas laser as source and therefore it
has been beforehand excluded as possible detector. CMOS and CCD cameras
have also been used for CW imaging [33–35], however the ﬁrst is normally paired
with a QCL source while the second has frequency dependent sensitivity, which
yield poor resolution images for frequencies below 6 THz.
3.3
Beneﬁts of THz-TD system
Based on the previous considerations, it was ﬁnally decided to use an existing
THz-TD imaging system, working in reﬂection mode, instead of setting-up a
completely new instrument. The research itself has been therefore focused on
developing a working algorithm able to extract hyperspectral information from
time-domain data (see chapter 4), making possible to investigate a painting
over a broad range of frequencies. Conventional THz-TD instruments are able
to provide bands separation of 3 GHz (spectral resolution) over the frequency
range 0.1-3.0 THz. This design choice integrates the possibility to use all pieces
of information provided by TD instruments, such as electric ﬁeld magnitude,
depth proﬁle, absorption spectrum etc., besides the advantages of its compact
hardware well-suitable for in-situ analysis. Last but not least, THz-TD is al-
ready known from cultural heritage community.
==PAGE:29==
4
Algorithm development
This chapter describes the details of the algorithm used to create the THz
hypercube and process the data. The algorithm has been fully implemented in
MATLAB and consists of two main parts, each divided in few sections. The
part I (blue frame on ﬂowchart of ﬁgure 4.1), is used to process hyperspectral
data regardless of the camera used for acquisition. The part II (red frame on
ﬂowchart of ﬁgure 4.1) is used to process THz-TD data, to obtain conventional
images and to extract the THz hypercube. Speciﬁc information about the code
and implementation, are contained in appendix A.
To be noted that this work has been tested on one dataset only, and because
of this, the algorithm has been optimized for the speciﬁc conditions under which
data were recorded. This means that, even though all possible data responses
has been taken into account during the design process , some unexpected vari-
ables could aﬀect diﬀerent datasets, compromising the ﬁnal result. It is therefore
important to consider that further implementations might be needed in order
to apply this algorithm to a more generic study case.
4.1
Algorithm part I: hypercube processing
The ﬁrst of the two parts of the algorithm has been developed for the speciﬁc
purpose of dealing with generic hyperspectral data in form of hypercube and
provides both basic investigations and multivariate analysis tools.
Available
literature [37, 38] oﬀered the concepts necessary to develop and customize a
script to hyperspectral investigation and aided to accomplish in the task.
4.1.1
General investigation
In order to obtain a ﬁrst overview of the data and to be able to identify the
most meaningful areas of the painting, an average image was computed at ﬁrst.
In this stage the mean over the z axis (wavelength) is calculated and plotted per
each pixel. It is important to note that at this point all the spectral features
19
==PAGE:30==
20
CHAPTER 4. ALGORITHM DEVELOPMENT
 
Start 
Processing 
Input data 
Are they 
hyperspectral 
data? 
Process  
THz data 
Create 
hypercube 
VIS/NIR/SWIR 
hypercube 
Process 
hypercube 
Single band 
images 
Composite 
image 
Mean 
image 
Spectral 
investigation 
Multivariate 
analysis 
Save output 
No 
Yes 
See 
Section 4.2 
THz processing  
Part II 
Part I 
THz 
hypercube 
Figure 4.1: Algorithm ﬂowchart for data processing. In blue, the ﬁrst part of algorithm
developed to process hyperspectral data. In red, the second part of the algorithm developed
to generate conventional THz images and extract THz hypercube
==PAGE:31==
4.1. ALGORITHM PART I: HYPERCUBE PROCESSING
21
are lost and therefore the image can only be considered for initial investigation
reference. If near infrared data are used, the produced image will look similar
to an IR reﬂectography.
In order to get a ﬁrst glance and an idea of how the painting responses over
the full frequency (or wavelength) range, a hypermovie can be produced. A
hypermovie is a short videoclip, displaying the progression from the ﬁrst to the
last considered band, showing the painting’s response at each step. From this
video, one or more speciﬁc pixels of interest may be selected and its reﬂectance
spectrum generated. Images at designated wavelengths can be extracted from
the hypercube and compared each other. In same cases can be useful to sum
or subtract two or more images extracted at diﬀerent bands, and recreate a
false color composite image to highlight speciﬁc features, which appear only in
a narrow range of wavelengths.
Examples of basic investigation output are shown in chapter 6.2.2 and ap-
pendix B.
4.1.2
Multivariate analysis
Multivariate analysis and chemometrics techniques have been extensively used
to treat spectral data of diﬀerent natures. Among statistical tools, the principal
component analysis (PCA), which transforms highly correlated variables into a
smaller set of uncorrelated components of progressively decreasing variance, is
mostly used. In other words a X-matrix, composed by n pixels (objects) and m
wavelengths/frequencies (variables), is transformed to deﬁne a new set of axes
a to express the correlation between the variables data points. The new axes
a take the name of principal components (PCs) and represent the maximum
variance of the dataset. They are deﬁned by their loading vector pi, where i is
the number of component
pi = (p1, p2, ..., pa)
(4.1)
p is usually normalized to 1 so that
pT
i pi = 1
(4.2)
Mathematically, the loadings are the cosine of the angles between each new
axis and the original axis, and they represent the contribution of each original
variable to evrey principal component [8]. In such a manner, a loading matrix
P can be created by storing all loading vectors as columns. The P-matrix is
now deﬁned by m x a. The object distribution, and therefore their correlation
upon principal components, is expressed in the score matrix T, described as n
x a. The scores are the orthogonal projections of the data on a loading vector.
A mathematical representation of the score matrix T is [39]
T = X · P
(4.3)
PCA is typically used for data reduction, as the number of components
expressing the most of dataset variance is much less than m. However it is also
==PAGE:32==
22
CHAPTER 4. ALGORITHM DEVELOPMENT
used to reveal relations (correlation) between variables and to ﬁnd variations
which might not be visible otherwise. In hyperspectral analysis, PCA is often
used to group spectra with similar features and to visualize areas with highly
correlated aspects [3,8,9,40–46].
Since principal component analysis requires a bi-dimensional data matrix,
the hypercubes need to be unfolded before to be processed. This is done by
multiply rows and columns of the three-dimensional matrix. Once the score
matrix is calculated the cube is rebuild, sorting the PCs along the z-axis. In
this way an image per each principal component can be reconstructed [37,38].
To be noted that in this case, principal components images have no physical
meaning, instead they show the correlation between points. As additional aid
to interpret the data, the loading vectors can be plotted over the variables, to
get an idea of the greatest contribution of variability in the dataset.
4.2
Algorithm part II: THz data processing
The second part of the algorithm has been developed to process THz data. As
shown by the ﬂowchart in ﬁgure 4.1, the input data are ﬁrst treated to produce
conventional images (subsection 4.2.1), hence the THz hypercube is extracted
and processed through the part I of the algorithm, where hyperspectral process-
ing is performed (see section 4.1).
The design of this part has been a complex task, especially to handle the
noise detection and exclusion. Particularly challenging was to cope with diﬀer-
ent grades of noise and to ﬁnd a proper way to deal with them. Diﬀerent ﬁlters
and thresholds has been joined together in order to obtain the most possible
clean signal. More speciﬁc information on subject can be found in subsection
4.2.2.
4.2.1
Conventional processing
The initial section of part II of the algorithm generates conventional THz images,
such as time-of-ﬂight, B-scan and C-scan images. Before processing, the sample
impulse has to be isolated from the raw data. This can be done by deconvolving
the output signals [47–52]. A time domain waveform is a convolution of the
reference incident THz pulse1 i(t), with the sample response function s(t)
r(t) = i(t) ⊗s(t) + b(t)
(4.4)
where r(t) is the THz reﬂected signal (electric ﬁeld) and b(t) is the noise, deﬁned
by recording the background2. Applying the convolution theorem, the sample
impulse function s(t) can be retrieved by inverse Fourier transform as follow
1A reference pulse is recorded by scanning a metal plate with high reﬂectivity and same
instrument setting used to scan the sample.
2A background signal is recorded by scanning the surrounding air with same instrument
setting used to scan the sample.
==PAGE:33==
4.2. ALGORITHM PART II: THZ DATA PROCESSING
23
s(t) = FFT −1
FFT(r(t) −b(t))
FFT(i(t) −b(t))

(4.5)
with FFT standing for fast Fourier transform and FFT −1 standing for inverse
fast Fourier transfom.
However, dividing small numbers will give rise to a large population of atyp-
ical values, which generate intense spikes in high frequency region. Because of
this, the deconvolution process is paired with a low-pass ﬁlter to obtain cleaner
results. Thus equation 4.5 became
s(t) = FFT −1

filter · FFT(r(t) −b(t))
FFT(i(t) −b(t))

(4.6)
There are a broad range of ﬁlters to window the signal and in this speciﬁc
case a Hann (or Hanning) ﬁlter has been adopted
w(n) = 0.5

1 −cos

2π n
N

, 0 ≤n ≤N
(4.7)
where n are frequencies points and N is the cut-oﬀ(critical) frequency.
A
window of 320 points and a cut-oﬀfrequency of 2.0 THz have been empirically
chosen.
In many cases deconvolution with only frequency-domain ﬁltering is not
suﬃcient to guarantee a satisfactory signal-to-noise ratio, especially when high
value of N are selected.
For this reason, a stationary wavelet shrinkage is
applied to the processed signal in order to further attenuate the residual noise.
A symlet wavelets (sym4) and decomposition values between 3 and 5 have been
experimentally chosen [49,52]. A waveform smoothed with wavelet transform is
shown in ﬁgure 4.2.
Images directly created from the raw data might present artifacts due to the
reference pulse, this is why it is really important to deconvolve the recorded
signals before processing them. In addition, deconvolving the data also helps to
improve the resolution of the processed images. An example of this is shown in
ﬁgure 4.3.
4.2.2
Hypercube construction
The core operation of the algorithm is to extract hyperspectral information
from raw data and store them in a hypercube (ﬁgure 4.4). This is done by
computationally extracting a set of frequencies from each Fourier transformed
waveform and plotting their amplitude at each point applying a colormap. A
visual representation of this process is given in the ﬂowchart of ﬁgure 4.5.
Sometimes it could be required to obtain images from diﬀerent layers and
in this case extracting information from one peak at the time instead of the
complete waveform may deliver better outcome. The reason for this is that the
waveform itself contains information about the whole painting’s structure and
therefore even the image from the ﬁrst interface (paint layer) could be aﬀected
by deeper layers, as for instance the preparation, and the actual image might be
==PAGE:34==
24
CHAPTER 4. ALGORITHM DEVELOPMENT
Figure 4.2: Pixel waveform smoothed with wavelet transform. In gray the raw data signal
after deconvolution (cut-oﬀfrequency of 3 THz), in black the smoothed signal after wavelet
transform. In the inset a close up of the timetrace.
altered. In addition, since the air/paint interface yields the strongest contribute
in the image, it is almost impossible to isolate other interfaces based on the
complete waveform. However, by selecting individual peaks of the time trace it
is possible to obtain higher resolution image of the visible paint layer, besides
allowing imaging of deeper layers. A comparison between complete waveform
and single peak images is shown in chapter 6.2.2.
Producing a single peak hypercube is an elaborate process that involves a
sequence of complex steps, from peaks selection to signal processing. Dealing
with noise, however, is among the most critical complications and thresholds
have to be set to cut a line between real noise and true data.
The area to
be scanned is generally set slightly bigger than the actual size of the painting,
this is to ensure that no portions are excluded by the data capture. As this
surrounding areas generate a set of background noise pixels with no particular
features and intensity several order of magnitude smaller than real pulses, they
need to be trimmed out.
These pixels have been detected and excluded by
setting a threshold equal to the minimum value of the maximum peak of the
data waveform. A contour plot based on the max peaks (ﬁgure 4.6) was created
and the value set manually in the script. All those pixels having a max peak
value lower than the set threshold are stored as 0.
White noise is also aﬀecting the data signals and this generates misalignment
of selected peaks resulting in incorrect images. In other words, let’s consider two
waveform belonging to diﬀerent pixels, a and b, where a is aﬀected by noise and b
is reasonably smooth. In an ideal case, creating an image of the third peak means
to plot the third peaks of all waveform obtaining a nice and clean representation
==PAGE:35==
4.2. ALGORITHM PART II: THZ DATA PROCESSING
25
Figure 4.3: Deconvolution example.
of the third layer. However, the third peak in waveform a is not necessarily the
actual third peak of the data signal, but it might be a noise peak. In this case,
the third peak of waveform b would be aligned with a noise peak of waveform
a and more likely the third peak of waveform a will be aligned with the fourth
peak of waveform b. Extending this issue to painting scale, composed of many
waveform, the resulting image of the third peak will probably look very noisy.
This problem is addressed in the algorithm with another threshold composed
by two distinct parameters: minimum peak height and peak prominence3. The
ﬁrst value can be determined upon an optimization process based on a set of
nine trial waveforms, evenly distributed over the painting surface. Starting from
the maximum peak, the value is halved if the number of peaks detected is lower
than the number of peaks set and multiplied by 1.5 if the number of detected
peak is higher than the number of peaks set. The prominence value, instead, is
empirically set.
When processing the data, n number of peaks have to be found along each
waveform, where n is proportional to the amount of layers to be processed. The
peaks are found by determining where the ﬁrst derivative is equal to zero. Once
decided the peak of interest, a tukey window4 of the peak’s width size is created
3The prominence of a peak measures how much of the peak stands out due to its intrinsic
height and its location relative to other peaks. A low isolated peak can be more prominent
than one that is higher but is an otherwise unremarkable member of a tall range [?]
4Cosine taper window equal to one over (1 −α/2)N points, with a cosine taper from one
==PAGE:36==
26
CHAPTER 4. ALGORITHM DEVELOPMENT
 
Load 
dataset 
Are the signals 
noisy?  
Signal  
Deconvolution 
Median filter 
Smoothing   
Image the complete 
waveform?   
Chose number 
of peaks (n) to 
image   
Select a 
waveform (ii, jj) 
Is it noise?   
Store it 
as 0   
Select the first n peaks 
of the waveform   
Are, some of these 
peaks, noise?   
Apply a threshold 
Does the  
waveform have n 
peaks?   
Find the minimum number of peaks 
respecting the threshold   
Store the values and locations of 
found peaks  
Store remaining void as 0  
Was it the 
 last pixel (max(ii), 
max(jj))?   
Create the  
Hypercube 
 
Save  
Hypercube   
Yes
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Store the values and  
locations of peaks in  
structure array  
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Figure 4.4: Flow chart of algorithm for hypercube reconstruction.
==PAGE:37==
4.2. ALGORITHM PART II: THZ DATA PROCESSING
27
Figure 4.5: Schematic representation of hypercube construction working principle.
and applied at the waveform, setting everything outside the window to zero. In
this way, only the chosen peak is shaped and further processed (ﬁgure 4.7).
The selected peak can then be Fourier transformed and the hypercube ex-
tracted through the same procedure used to treat the complete waveform. A
representation of hypercube reconstruction of a single peak is shown in ﬁgure
4.8.
Once the all data have been processed, values of peak such as height, location
and width are stored in a structure array ready to be accessed when constructing
the hypercube. In case a signal has less than n peaks, the voids are stored with
a value of 0. Processing the data in this way allows to store the data per peak
and to construct hypercube of speciﬁc layers.
Note that, proceeding in this way, a really narrow region of the signal is
selected when a peak is isolated. Fourier transforming this narrow region gives
rise to a broad and smooth curve, which is actually not containing relevant
frequency features. In other words, the spectral information contained in the
waveform are lost because what it is transformed is the shape of the window
used to select the peak, rather than the actual signal. However, diﬀerences in
materials are still visible as the height of the curve is given by the height of the
pulse, which changes with variation in refractive indexes.
In case of noisy data sometimes can be useful to apply an additional ﬁlter
to smooth signal. For this purpose a median ﬁlter has been adopted, this is a
nonlinear dynamic processing tool normally used for video and image correction.
to zero for the remaining points (α/2)N [53].
==PAGE:38==
28
CHAPTER 4. ALGORITHM DEVELOPMENT
Figure 4.6: First threshold selection output.
The idea behind the median ﬁlter is to divide the waveform in subset of n points,
the window. Every entry of the signal is replaced by the median value of the
subset, this is then shifted of one point repeating the procedure over the entire
signal. Mathematically, this can be expressed as [54]
y(n) = med{x(i)}
(4.8)
where i = n, n −1, ..., n −M and M is a positive integer number. The input
samples x(n), the signal, is a vector of values expressed by
x(n) = {x(n), x(n −1), ..., x(n −M)}T
(4.9)
Note that in order to obtain an output vector of the same length of the input
vector, ﬁrst and last values are repeated creating the subset window.
==PAGE:39==
4.2. ALGORITHM PART II: THZ DATA PROCESSING
29
Figure 4.7: Schematic representation of peak windowing process.
==PAGE:40==
30
CHAPTER 4. ALGORITHM DEVELOPMENT
Figure 4.8: Schematic representation of hypercube construction of a single peak.
==PAGE:41==
5
Materials and methods
5.1
Investigated painting
The investigated painting, belonging to a private collection, is a reproduction of
Our Lady of Kazan from unknown artist. It is a common Russian orthodox icon,
painted on a 21.5 x 27 cm wooden tablet. Not much is available about period
or technique used to be painted, however the icon shows clear sign of previous
restoration treatments, such as retouches and crack consolidation. The painting
is shown in ﬁgure 5.1.
Gilded icons are normally made by four layers consisting in support, usu-
ally a wood tablet, two layers of preparation, gesso1 and bole2, and the actual
paint/gold layer. In some cases the painting can be protected by a varnish layer.
The measurements of the painting were conducted at two diﬀerent facility
locations. Hyperspectral imaging and XRF analysis have been acquired at Uni-
versity of California, San Diego (USA), while THz-TD data have been collected
at Centro de Investigasiones de Optica, Leon (Mexico).
5.2
Instrumentation
5.2.1
Terahertz Time-Domain
A Picometrix T-Gauge (T-Ray 5000) device has been used to perform the THz-
TD investigation. THis is featured with a femtosecond ﬁber laser coupled with
a photoconductive transceiver head mounted in a motor stage moving in XY
directions, and a rapid-scanning normal incidence system which generates and
detects short pulses within the frequency range of 0.1 - 3.0 THz. A measurement
1White paint mixture consisting in a combination of chalk, gypsum and a white pigment,
usually lead or zinc white. Normally used in art to prepare a substrate (i.e. canvas or wood).
2Clay based pigment of brown/reddish color used to give warmth to gold leafs in gilding
process.
31
==PAGE:42==
32
CHAPTER 5. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 5.1: Optical photo of investigated painting. Our Lady of Kazan, wooden tablet 21.5
x 27 cm, unknown artist.
window of 160 ps with temporal resolution of 0.1 ps was used. Data acquisition
sampling was set to 1000 scan/s.
The full-size icon has been scanned with a pixel size of 0.5 mm at 70 mm/sec,
with recording rate of 7.1 wfms/pix, while few details sections were scanned with
a higher resolution (i.e. pixel size of 0.1 mm at 80 mm/sec, with recording rate
of 1.3 wfms/pix).
5.2.2
Hyperspectral cameras
A commercial short-wave infrared hyperspectral camera of the HySpex series
from NEO, has been used to cover the wavelength range 930 - 2500 nm. The
camera is working in sequential mode using a transmission grating ﬁlter and
recording images through a customized HgCdTe (MCT) detector.
Relevant
speciﬁcations of the system are highligthed below.
Table 5.1: HySpex cameras: system speciﬁcations
SWIR-384
Spectral range
930 - 2500 nm
Spatial pixels
384
F-number
f/2
Spectral channels
288
Spectral sampling
5.45 nm
Frame rate (max speed)
400 fps
Sensor head power
30 W
FPA cooling temperature
150 K
Operation distance (camera-sample)
30 cm
Pixel size (resolution)
260 µm
==PAGE:43==
5.2. INSTRUMENTATION
33
The camera has been mounted on a WAVEcam platform [55, 56], used to
control the motion and scan the painting.
5.2.3
X-Ray Fluorescence
With the purpose of conﬁrming the nature of pigments, an X-Ray ﬂuorescence
(XRF) measurements have been also conducted to investigate the elemental
composition of certain pigments. A handle Bruker tracer III-SD has been used
in air, without ﬁlter ﬁlter set and a voltage of 40 kV and current of 11.20 µA
has been applied.
==PAGE:44==
34
CHAPTER 5. MATERIALS AND METHODS
==PAGE:45==
6
Results and discussion
6.1
Conventional THz-TD imaging
In order to obtain a general understanding of the studied painting, a conven-
tional THz-TD data such as enface images, B-scan and time-of-ﬂight reconstruc-
tions have been initially produced.
6.1.1
Enface images
As expected, the enface images (ﬁgure 6.1) of the painting show a strong reﬂec-
tion on gilded details such as the background and the decoration of the Virgin’s
cloths, damages of the surface (i.e. cracks and scratches) and previous restora-
tions traces. The red writings are surprisingly not visible contrarily to the other
red details, like for instance glows and inner frame. This would suggest that
the visible red details are engraving rather than actual painted areas. Some
engraved guideline for the writing are also visible. Both peak-to-peak and max
peak images reveal an extremely accurate gilding process with only some minor
visible overlaps between paint and gold leaves. The two images show similar
features, however the global max image has higher resolution. Small details
such as the ﬂower on the Virgin’s head and few lines in the Child’s glow are
reveled as well as damages and restorations, which appear more visible in the
global max image.
6.1.2
B-scan image
The B-scan is generally used to gather additional information about the paint-
ing substrate and layers structure. This can be either recorded over a speciﬁc
circumscribed area or over an entire line.
Figure 6.2 shows a B-scan image
recorded along the X axis at half the height of the painting. The surface of the
icon appears clearly bent, common condition of old wood tablets.
35
==PAGE:46==
36
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 6.1: Enface images of analyzed painting - (a) Peak-to-peak image, (b) Max image
==PAGE:47==
6.1. CONVENTIONAL THZ-TD IMAGING
37
Figure 6.2: B-scan representation of central height (y axis/2) line along the x axis, and a
schematic representation of cross-section. Colormap and y-axis (time) have been rescaled to
highlight ﬁnal result.
The problem of old wood tablets could easily lead to false data interpretation.
In fact, when the sample’s surface is curved, an additional component from
the reﬂection angle aﬀects the returning radiation resulting in a diﬀerence in
the pulse amplitudes. This could, in some cases, can be misinterpreted as a
diﬀerence in material.
The B-scan provides also useful information about layers stratiﬁcation pro-
viding a non-invasive cross-section of an area. In our speciﬁc case there are ﬁve
interfaces recognizable 6.2: air/varnish layer, varnish/paint layer, paint/bole
layer, bole/ground layer, ground/wood substrate.
6.1.3
Time of ﬂight image
The time-of-ﬂight image is normally used to reveal morphological defects of the
outer surface and to characterize possible cracks and damages. The time re-
sponse of each pixel can be plotted either in a bi- or in a three-dimensional
space. In the ﬁrst case, to each spatial point is assigned a color gradient rep-
resenting the pulse delay in picoseconds, while in the latest two dimensions are
expressed by the spatial coordinates (xy axes) and the third dimension (z axis)
is representing the returning time of the THz radiation.
Figure 6.3 shows bi- (6.3b) and three-dimensional (6.3d) time of ﬂight rep-
resentation of the painting. As already clear from the B-scan, the icon surface
is bent along the left side and the up right corner and a conﬁrmation of this is
given by the proﬁle pictures of the icon (ﬁgure 6.3a and 6.3c)
==PAGE:48==
38
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 6.3: (a) Icon proﬁle of bottom part, (b) 2D time-of-ﬂight representation, (c) icon
proﬁle of upper part, (d) 3D time-of-ﬂight representation
6.2
THz hyperspectral imaging
Even though this technique is still at its primordial stage and not yet suﬃciently
developed, THz-TD hyperspectral imaging has a good potential to provide ad-
ditional information during art diagnostic investigations. Hyperspectral images
of deeper layers, for instance, could reveal hidden information not accessible
with other techniques.
In this section some examples of processed THz-TD
hyperspectral images are shown.
6.2.1
THz-TD hyperspectral images: general processing
Once the hypercube is extracted, a ﬁrst investigation based on general process-
ing was conducted. Most of the attention has been focused on spectral and
multivariate analysis.
A preliminary study on red and gold details has been initially conducted,
expecting to identify spectral features to support the determination of speciﬁc
pigments. Six spectra have been extracted from the Child’s cloths, looking for
an absorption peak in the frequency range 1.0 - 1.3 THz. As demonstrated by
A. G´omez Sep´ulveda [57], vermilion red has a strong absorption peak within this
range. Simultaneously a set of ten spectra has been extracted, both from the
background’s gold leaf and from the painted gold on Child’s cloths, in order to
deﬁne a methodology to distinguish between painted gold and gold leaf. Figure
6.4 is showing the extracted spectra. Both in red pigment and in gold analysis
two diﬀerent groups of spectra are distinguishable. Two of the spectra taken
from red pigments (sp 1 and sp 6) have a general lower amplitude trend and
==PAGE:49==
6.2. THZ HYPERSPECTRAL IMAGING
39
Figure 6.4: THz-TD spectral analysis of red and gold paints.
==PAGE:50==
40
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
show an absorption peak between 1.2 and 1.4 THz. For this reason, two diﬀer-
ent red pigments have been assumed to be used, one for the main cloth and one
for the darker detail. The gold spectra, instead, are following the same pattern,
however three of them (sp 7, sp 8 and sp 9) are ending with a lower amplitude
and more pronounced absorption peaks. They are all belonging to gold leaf of
the same area. However, since sp 6 and sp 10 are behaving diﬀerently, it is not
clear yet whether this is a ﬁngerprint feature to recognize gold leaf from gold
paint or not.
Principal component analysis has been additionally computed and the out-
put images displayed (ﬁgure 6.6). In this speciﬁc case, a number of ﬁve compo-
nents have been chosen. As depicted in ﬁgure 6.5, this is the optimal number
of components needed to explain the most variance within the dataset.
Figure 6.5: Loading and latent plots generated by principal component analysis of the full
waveform.
==PAGE:51==
6.2. THZ HYPERSPECTRAL IMAGING
41
The frequency ranges of the components, over which the correlation of scores
is expressed, is shown by the loading plot in ﬁgure 6.5. For instance, in com-
ponent one the points are correlated over the all range of frequencies used and
this is the reason why PC1 reconstruction resembles the peak-to-peak image.
PC2 describes a correlation between a frequency range of approximately 0.1 -
0.5 THz, in here diﬀerences between pigments in character’s faces are notice-
able. The Child’s hairs also show a strong correlation with the Virgin’s cloths,
yielding the assumption they have been partially painted with the same pig-
ment. PC3 express correlation in two frequency region, 0.1 - 0.4 THz and from
0.8 THz onward respectively. This time Child’s hairs look correlated to faces’
shadows, thus more likely they have been painted with a mixture of reddish
and black pigments, used for other features as well. PC4 and PC5, instead are
showing minor details.
Figure 6.6: First ﬁve components images of the complete waveform dataset.
==PAGE:52==
42
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
6.2.2
Complete waveform vs. single peak images
An interesting feature of THz hyperspectral technique is the peak selection. By
isolating a single peak of each waveform as shown in chapter 4, hyperspectral
information of inner layers can be obtained so to provide a deeper understanding
of the analyzed painting. In addition, if the main interface peak is selected, a
cleaner and higher resolution image of the visible paint layer can be obtained.
Figure 6.7 shows a comparison between images taken at frequencies 0.306
THz, 0.619 THz and 1.056 THz of the complete waveform and the second peak
(representing the main interface). It is clear how the output obtained processing
the complete waveform embeds a relevant contribution from deeper layers, es-
pecially at low and high frequencies. Peak two images, instead, show only layer
related details enhancing most of their features. Characters faces, the ﬂower
on the Virgin’s head and the ﬁngers of the child’s hand are too blurred to be
noticed in the complete waveform reconstruction whereas they are well resolved
in the second peak image.
Processing images of deeper layers it is also possible, ﬁgure 6.8 shows hyper-
spectral images of peaks six and seven representing the preparation layers. It
can be seen how the applied ground is visible in all those parts in which gold is
not present, this because of the high reﬂectivity of the metal does not allow to
image the immediate underneath layer. However, a consistent pattern is visible
by increasing the frequency, this has been identiﬁed as the wood grains of the
support tablet.
The same working principle of selecting a speciﬁc peak and recreating an
inner layer could potentially be applied to more structured painting, revealing
hidden hyperspectral information.
6.3
Conventional hyperspectral vs. THz hyper-
spectral
THz-hyperspectral images of second peak have been compared to a SWIR hy-
perspectral dataset of the same painting, recorded with a commercial camera.
Both techniques show their advantages and limitations. A visual representation
of each technique shortcomings is shown in ﬁgure 6.9.
On the one hand the inconsistency and conjunction of gold leaves are notice-
able in SWIR-HSI data as well as all the red details, such as writings, characters’
glows and characters’ frame. On the other hand, previous restorations and dam-
ages such as cracks and scratches are more evident in THz-HSI. Gold painted
details are also visible in THz-HSI image. In ﬁrst instance, by looking at SWIR-
HS images and hypermovie, the details of child’s cloths seemed to be painted
with a yellow pigment rather than with gold paint. In fact, they are not well
distinguishable from the rest of the cloths and they are not comparable with
the background, contrarily to what would shows the THz-HS image. Here, they
clearly resemble the background. In order to clarify situation, an XRF mea-
surements has been taken to reveal the pigment’s nature. Figure 6.10 shows
==PAGE:53==
6.3. CONVENTIONAL HYPERSPECTRAL VS. THZ HYPERSPECTRAL43
Figure 6.7: Comparison between the complete waveform and peak two images. Bands 50,100
and 170, respectively frequencies 0.306 THz, 0.619 THz and 1.056 THz.
==PAGE:54==
44
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 6.8: Hyperspectral images of peaks six and seven. Bands 50,100 and 170, respectively
frequencies 0.306 THz, 0.619 THz and 1.056 THz.
==PAGE:55==
6.4. CONSIDERATIONS
45
Figure 6.9: (a) SWIR-HS image, band 120 (wavelength 1600.88 nm), (b) THz-HS image of
peak two, band 100 (frequency 0.62 THz), (c)in blue details missing in SWIR image, in red
details missing in THz-HS
two XRF spectra taken from the red cloth and the painted detail on it. As it
can be seen, the two spectra are ﬁtting except for three peaks belonging to gold
element. Thus, it can be determined that the detail has been painted using gold
on top of the red, further identiﬁed as vermilion due to the relevant presence of
mercury.
6.4
Considerations
Although the algorithm can be further implemented, remarkable results have
been achieved. It has been proven that it is possible to extract hyperspectral
information from THz data and that some of the sample’s features are visible
only at speciﬁc range of frequency. For instance, looking at the hypermovie,
the ﬂower on the Virgin’s head is visible from about 0.857 to 1.387, while the
ﬂower on the Virgin’s shoulder from 0.787 to 1.181 THz. The details inside the
child’s glow start to be visible at 0.875 THz and getting well resolved at 1.150
THz. The red writing on the left of the Virgin’s head are also visible in only a
speciﬁc range, i.e. from 1.087 to 1.200 THz.
Also hypercubes of deeper layers can be extracted although it is still un-
certain wheather they are proving actual hyperspectal information or only a
representation of the painting based on peaks heights. The comparison between
THz technique and SWIR-HSI shows useful aspects which can improve a diag-
nosis of a painting.
==PAGE:56==
46
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 6.10: XRF spectra. In blue painted gold (sp 1) and in orange vermilion red (sp 2)
==PAGE:57==
7
Conclusions
This work is the result of a six-months long study aiming to set the basis for a
three-dimensional THz-TD hyperspectral imaging investigation of painted arti-
facts. Despite the enduring confrontation with the challenges of exploring a new
frontier, this thesis demonstrates that it is possible to extract hyperspectral in-
formation from THz-TD data, particularly useful to improve the understanding
of many details of the analyzed painting.
The goal was to explore the possibility to extend the concept of hyperspectral
imaging to THz technology for a comprehensive study of a paintings. Supported
by a broad preliminary literature review, the idea of developing a new hardware
platform was phased out in favor of the development of a dedicated algorithm to
extract data. In this way, instead of obtaining a sequence of spectral separated
images as measurements output, a hypercube is computationally extracted from
time-domain raw data. The algorithm is meant to be used on a broad range of
data regardless from the nature of the analyzed painting and the instruments
used.
In ﬁrst instance, the work was based on extracting a hypercube of the com-
plete waveform of each pixel.
From this computation the potential of THz
hyperspectral imaging is emerging when looking at speciﬁc details, only visi-
ble in a certain frequency range. In addition, spectral investigation of speciﬁc
paints has been possible by extracting the spectra of speciﬁc pixels from the
hypercube.
As the produced images are made on the contribution from all layers in the
painting simultaneously, a section for single peak hypercube construction has
been developed. In this way, a peak from the signals is isolated and used to
recreate inner layers images. This allows to reproduce images of the preparation
layers and the grains of wood substrate, enabling a three-dimensional investiga-
tion. In addition, higher resolution images of the main interface can be observed
as the contribution of other layers is excluded. However, even though imaging
of diﬀerent layers at speciﬁc frequencies is possible, in this process the spectral
information strictly related to the complete waveforms are lost.
47
==PAGE:58==
48
CHAPTER 7. CONCLUSIONS
The developed algorithm has been tested with the data collected from the
investigation of a Russian icon and the outcome results have been compared
to the data obtained by means of SWIR-HSI. Both complete waveform and
single peak processing revealed valuable results. The study indicates a eﬃcient
complementarity.
Both techniques show particular details not visible with the other and there-
fore the use of both THz-HSI and conventional HSI shall be suggested for a more
accurate diagnosis of the artworks.
On the basis of the results of this research, promising perspective for new
frontiers in conservation studies and art investigation can be foreseen and this
thesis project has opened the possibility for future works.
7.1
Outlooks and future works
This work has shown positive and remarkable results however, several area
would deﬁnitely need additional implementations in order to improve usability
and further enhance application. The discussed algorithm has room to be im-
proved in its computational speed and eﬃciency. It can be featured to include
additional investigation tools for pigments mapping as well.
An interactive
PCA tool can be included in the multivariate analysis section, in which using
segmentation process will be possibe to select a points cloud on the score plot
and immeditialy locate where it is in the painting image [40, 41, 45]. Spectral
image classiﬁcation methods such as spectral angle mapper (SAM) and spectral
correlation mapper (SCM) [58] can also be included to map pigments. A false
color reconstruction based on both spectral features and principal component
analysis would help simplifying interpretation of the data for more accurate re-
sults.
As a contribution of this work, based on the collected data, spectral analysis
for pigments identiﬁcation will be pursued. A characteristic peak in the range 1.0
- 1.2 THz will be investigated as ﬁngerprint feature for vermilion red recognition
in reﬂection mode. In addition, a comparison between gold leaf and painted
gold spectra will be conducted to deﬁne characteristic aspects to distinguish the
two. Mapping of these spectral components will also be computed, imaging they
distribution throughout the painting and identifying related area. In conclusion,
the produced algorithm will be tested on diﬀerent datasets to prove the usability
and reproducibility of the method and, in case, further implement it.
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
[1] Kaori Fukunaga. THz Technology Applied to Cultural Heritage in Practice.
Springer, Tokyo, 2016.
[2] K Fukunaga and M Picollo. Terahertz time domain spectroscopy and imag-
ing applied to cultural heritage. 13th International Symposium of Nonde-
structive Characterization of Materials, (May):1–6, 2013.
[3] Marena Manley.
Near-infrared spectroscopy and hyperspectral imaging:
non-destructive analysis of biological materials. Chemical Society Reviews,
43(since 1949):8200–8214, 2014.
[4] Amr Abd-Elrahman, Roshan Pande-Chhetri, and Gary Vallad. Design and
development of a multi-purpose low-cost hyperspectral imaging system.
Remote Sensing, 3(3):570–586, 2011.
[5] Haida Liang.
Advances in multispectral and hyperspectral imaging for
archaeology and art conservation. Applied Physics A: Materials Science
and Processing, 106(2):309–323, 2012.
[6] Antonino Cosentino. Multispectral Imaging of Pigments With a Digital
Camera and 12 Interferential Filters. e-Preservation Science, 12:1–7, 2015.
[7] A Polak, T Kelman, P Murray, S Marshall, D. J.M. Stothard, N. Eastaugh,
and F Eastaugh. Use of infrared hyperspectral imaging as an aid for paint
identiﬁcation. Journal of Spectral Imaging, 5(1):1–10, 2016.
[8] S Baronti, A Casini, F Lotti, and S Porcinai. Multispectral Imaging Sys-
tem for the Mapping of Pigments in Works of Art by use of Principal-
Component Analysis. Applied optics, 37(8):1299–309, 1998.
[9] Claudia Daﬀara, Enrico Pampaloni, Luca Pezzati, Marco Barucci, and Raf-
faella Fontana. Scanning multispectral IR reﬂectography SMIRR: An ad-
vanced tool for art diagnostics. Accounts of Chemical Research, 43(6):847–
856, 2010.
[10] Claudia Daﬀara and Raﬀaella Fontana. Multispectral Infrared Reﬂectogra-
phy to Diﬀerentiate Features in Paintings. Microscopy and Microanalysis,
17(05):691–695, 2011.
49
==PAGE:60==
50
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[11] Christian Fischer and Ioanna Kakoulli. Multispectral and hyperspectral
imaging technologies in conservation: current research and potential appli-
cations. Reviews in Conservation, 7(7):3–16, 2006.
[12] P. Carcagn`ı, A. Della Patria, R. Fontana, M. Greco, M. Mastroianni,
M. Materazzi, E. Pampaloni, and L. Pezzati.
Multispectral imaging of
paintings by optical scanning. Optics and Lasers in Engineering, 45(3):360–
367, 2007.
[13] B.S. Alexandrov, M. Lisa Phipps, L.B. Alexandrov, L.G. Booshehri,
A. Erat, J. Zabolotny, C.H. Mielke, H.-T. Chen, G. Rodriguez, K.O. Ras-
mussen, J.S. Martinez, A.R. Bishop, and A. Usheva. Speciﬁcity and Het-
erogeneity of Terahertz Radiation Eﬀect on Gene Expression in Mouse Mes-
enchymal Stem Cells. Scientiﬁc Reports, 3(9):2679–2689, 2013.
[14] B. S. Alexandrov, V. Gelev, A. R. Bishop, A. Usheva, and K. Rasmussen.
DNA breathing dynamics in the presence of a terahertz ﬁeld.
Physics
Letters, Section A: General, Atomic and Solid State Physics, 374(10):1214–
1217, 2010.
[15] Kai-Erik Peiponen, J.Axel Zeitler, and Makoto Kuwata-Gonokami. Tera-
hertz Spectroscopy and Imaging. Springer, 2013.
[16] Martin van Exter, Ch. Fattinger, and D. Grischkowsky. Terahertz time-
domain spectroscopy of water vapor. Optics Letters, 14(20):1128, 1989.
[17] D Leonel, G Fredric, R Jean-Francois, and Jean-Kuis Coutaz. Analyti-
cal Modeling and Optimization of Terahertz Time-Domain Spectroscopy
Experiments Using Photoswitches as Antennas. IEEE Journal of Selected
Topics of Quantum Electronics, 7(4):605–623, 2001.
[18] Matthias Hoﬀmann. Novel Techniques in THz-Time-Domain-Spectrscopy.
PhD thesis, Albert-Ludwigs-Universitat Freiburg, 2006.
[19] Corinna L. Koch-Dandolo. Development of nondestructive inspection tools
for cultural heritage artefacts with 3D THz imaging. PhD thesis, Technical
University of Denmark, 2015.
[20] P.U. Jepsen, D.G. Cooke, and M. Koch. Terahertz spectroscopy and imag-
ing - Modern techniques and applications.
Laser & Photonics Reviews,
5(1):124–166, jan 2011.
[21] Jian Chen, Yunqing Chen, Hongwei Zhao, Glenn J Bastiaans, and X-C
Zhang.
Absorption coeﬃcients of selected explosives and related com-
pounds in the range of 0.1-2.8 THz. Optics express, 15(19):12060–12067,
2007.
[22] By Mira Naftaly and Robert E Miles.
Terahertz Time-Domain Spec-
troscopy for Material Characterization.
Proceedings of the IEEE,
95(8):1658, 2007.
==PAGE:61==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
51
[23] Antonino Cosentino. Terahertz and Cultural Heritage Science: Examina-
tion of Art and Archaeology. Technologies, 4(1):6, 2016.
[24] J. Bianca Jackson, John Bowen, Gillian Walker, Julien Labaune, Gerard
Mourou, Michel Menu, and Kaori Fukunaga. A survey of terahertz appli-
cations in cultural heritage conservation science. IEEE Transactions on
Terahertz Science and Technology, 1(1):220–231, 2011.
[25] Corinna L. Koch Dandolo, Troels Filtenborg, Jacob Skou-Hansen, and Pe-
ter Uhd Jepsen. Analysis of a seventeenth-century panel painting by reﬂec-
tion terahertz time-domain imaging (THz-TDI): contribution of ultrafast
optics to museum collections inspection. Applied Physics A, 2015.
[26] Corinna L. Koch-Dandolo, Troels Filtenborg, Kaori Fukunaga, Jacob Skou-
Hansen, and Peter Uhd Jepsen. Reﬂection terahertz time-domain imaging
for analysis of an 18th century neoclassical easel painting. Applied Optics,
54(16):5123, 2015.
[27] Kaori Fukunaga. Construction of open terahertz spectral database. Journal
of the National Institute of Information and Communications Technology,
55(1):61–66, 2008.
[28] Clarence Karr and John J. Kovach. Far-Infrared Spectroscopy of Minerals
and Inorganics. Applied Spectroscopy, 23(3):219–223, 1969.
[29] Nicholas Karpowicz, Hua Zhong, Jingzhou Xu, Kuang-I Lin, Jenn-Shyong
Hwang, and Xi-cheng X-C Zhang. Comparison between pulsed terahertz
time-domain imaging and continuous wave terahertz imaging. Semiconduc-
tor Science and Technology, 20(7):S293–S299, 2005.
[30] Alan W Lee, Tsung-Yu Kao, Ian A Zimmerman, Naoki Oda, and Qing Hu.
Terahertz imaging with quantum cascade lasers . 9854:98540R–98540R–10,
2016.
[31] Q Hu and A W M Lee. Real-time, continuous-wave terahertz imaging using
a microbolometer focal-plane array. Optics Letters, 30(19):2563–2565, 2010.
[32] Jun Yang, Shuangchen Ruan, and Min Zhang.
Real-time, continuous-
wave terahertz imaging by a pyroelectric camera. Chinese Optics Letters,
6(1):29–31, 2008.
[33] Assim Boukhayma, Antoine Dupret, Jean Pierre Rostaing, and Christian
Enz. A low-noise CMOS THz imager based on source modulation and an
in-pixel high-Q passive switched-capacitor N-path ﬁlter. Sensors (Switzer-
land), 16(3), 2016.
[34] S. Boppel, A. Lisauskas, and H.G. Roskos. Terahertz array imagers: to-
wards the implementation of terahertz cameras with plasma-wave-based sil-
icon MOSFET detectors. Woodhead Publishing Limited, 2013.
==PAGE:62==
52
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[35] Mostafa Shalaby, Carlo Vicario, and Christoph P Hauri. High-performing
nonlinear visualization of terahertz radiation on a silicon charge-coupled
device. Nature communications, 6:8439, 2015.
[36] Natsuki Nemoto, Natsuki Kanda, Ryo Imai, Kuniaki Konishi, Masaru
Miyoshi, Seiji Kurashina, Tokuhito Sasaki, Naoki Oda, and Makoto
Kuwata-Gonokami.
High-Sensitivity and Broadband, Real-Time Tera-
hertz Camera Incorporating a Micro-Bolometer Array with Resonant Cav-
ity Structure. IEEE Transactions on Terahertz Science and Technology,
6(2):175–182, 2016.
[37] James Burger and Aoife Gowen.
Data handling in hyperspectral image
analysis. Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems, 108(1):13–22,
2011.
[38] Ronan Dorrepaal, Cristina Malegori, and Aoife Gowen. Tutorial: Time
series hyperspectral image analysis. Journal of Near Infrared Spectroscopy,
24(2):89–107, 2016.
[39] Kurt Varmuza and Peter Filzmoser. Introduction to Multivariate Statisti-
cal Analysis in Chemometrics. CRC Press Taylor & Francis Group, Boca
Raton, 2008.
[40] C. Bonifazzi, P. Carcagn`ı, R. Fontana, M. Greco, M. Mastroianni, M. Mat-
erazzi, E. Pampaloni, L. Pezzati, and D. Bencini. A scanning device for
VIS – NIR multispectral imaging of paintings. Journal of Optics A: Pure
and Applied Optics, 10, 2008.
[41] Emilio Catelli, Lise Lyngsnes, Bjørn K˚are, Kidane Fanta, and Silvano
Bracci. Spectrochimica Acta Part A : Molecular and Biomolecular Spec-
troscopy An explorative chemometric approach applied to hyperspectral
images for the study of illuminated manuscripts. Spectrochimica Acta Part
A: Molecular and Biomolecular Spectroscopy, 177:69–78, 2017.
[42] Christian Asinger. Classiﬁcation of Color Pigments in Hyperspectral Im-
ages. 2004.
[43] Craig Rodarmel and Jie Shan. Principal Component Analysis for Hyper-
spectral Image Classiﬁcation. 62(2), 2002.
[44] Nathan Torbick and Brian Becker. Evaluating Principal Components Anal-
ysis for Identifying Optimal Bands Using Wetland Hyperspectral Measure-
ments. pages 408–417, 2009.
[45] F. Tsai, E.K. Lin, and K. Yoshino. Spectrally segmented principal compo-
nent analysis of hyperspectral imagery for mapping invasive plant species
F. TSAI, E.-K. LIN and K. YOSHINO. Journal, International Remote, O
F, (June), 2006.
==PAGE:63==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
53
[46] Paul L M Geladi, Hans F. Grahn, and James E. Burger.
Multivariate
Images, Hyperspectral Imaging: Background and Equipment. John Wiley
& Sons, Ltd, 2007.
[47] Yang Chen, Yiwen Sun, and Emma Pickwell-MacPherson. Total variation
deconvolution for terahertz pulsed imaging. Inverse Problems in Science
and Engineering, 19(2):223–232, 2011.
[48] Gillian C Walker, John W Bowen, Julien Labaune, J-Bianca Jackson, Sillas
Hadjiloucas, John Roberts, Gerard Mourou, and Michel Menu. Terahertz
deconvolution. Optics Express, 20(25):27230–41, 2012.
[49] Yang
Chen,
Shengyang
Huang,
and
Emma
Pickwell-MacPherson.
Frequency-wavelet domain deconvolution for terahertz reﬂection imaging
and spectroscopy. Optics Express, 18(2):1177, 2010.
[50] Kiarash Ahi and Mehdi Anwar.
Developing terahertz imaging equation
and enhancement of the resolution of terahertz images using deconvolution.
9856:98560N, 2016.
[51] Tiantian Guo, Zhilong Ding, Di Zhang, Jun Zhou, Junsheng Yu, and Xi-
aodong Chen. Study on algorithms of terahertz pulsed reﬂection imaging.
UCMMT 2013 - 2013 6th UK, Europe, China Millimeter Waves and THz
Technology Workshop, pages 0–1, 2013.
[52] Junliang Dong, J Bianca Jackson, Marcello Melis, David Giovanacci,
Gillian C Walker, Alexandre Locquet, John W Bowen, and D S Citrin.
Terahertz frequency-wavelet domain deconvolution for stratigraphic and
subsurface investigation of art painting. Optics Express, 24(23):26972, 2016.
[53]
[54] A D Poularikas. The Handbook of Formulas and Tables for Signal Process-
ing - Chapter 7: Windows. CRC Press, Boca Raton, 1999.
[55] Juraj M I ˇC Ek and J´an Kapitul´ık. Median ﬁlter. Journal of Information,
COntrol Na Managment Systems, 1(2):51–56, 2003.
[56] Samantha Stout, James Strawson, Eric Lo, and Falko Kuester. The WAVE-
cam : Ultra-High Resolution Imaging of Paintings. In Digital Heritage,
volume 1, pages 1–7. IEE, 2015.
[57] Samantha Stout. A Diagnostic Exam for the Non-invasive Identiﬁcation of
the Artist’s Palette of Pigments. PhD thesis, University of California, San
Diego, 2015.
[58] Alma Montserrat G´omez Sep´ulveda. Aplicaci´on de la t´ecnica de terahertz
para la obtenci´on de im´agenes y an´alisis espectrosc´opicos de pintura de
caballeta. Evaluaci´on de un t´ecnica de an´alisis no invasivo. PhD thesis,
2015.
==PAGE:64==
54
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[59] Hilda Deborah, Sony George, and Jon Yngve Hardeberg. Pigment map-
ping of the scream (1893) based on hyperspectral imaging. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), 8509 LNCS(1893):247–256,
2014.
==PAGE:65==
A
Matlab code
A.1
Part I: Hyperspectral data investigation
1 % Hyperspectral
data
i n v e s t i g a t i o n
2 % Algorithm ,
part
I
3 % ( c ) Emanuele D’ Angelo ,
2017
4
5 %%
6
c l o s e
a l l ;
7
c l e a r
a l l ;
8
c l c ;
9
10 %% LOAD DATA
11
12
display ( ’ Loading data . . . ’ )
13 % Load hypercube
14 % look
at
http ://www. ehu . eus / ccwintco / uploads /d/dc/
LoadHypercubesMatlab . pdf
15 % f or
further
information
16
hypercube = multibandread ( ’F:\ hyspec wood icon \COSCH
Round Robin
Trial Data\VNIR\RRT−WhiteBal−1
m VNIR 1800 SN00824 7500 us 1x 2016 −02−01
T222712 raw rad f32 REF . img ’ ,
[1597 ,
384 ,
288] ,
’ f l o a t
’ ,
0 ,
’ bsq ’ ,
’ ieee −l e ’ ) ;
17
18 % nr : number of
rows −l i n e s
19 % nc : number of
columns −samples
20 % nb : number of
bands −channels
21
[ nr nc nb ] = s i z e ( hypercube ) ;
22
55
==PAGE:66==
56
APPENDIX A. MATLAB CODE
23 %% CREATE AVERAGE IMAGE
24
25
mean image = true ;
% Set
the mean image computation on
26
27
i f
mean image
28
mean img = mean( hypercube , 3 ) ;
% c a l c u l a t e
the mean
over
the
third
dimension
( wavelengths )
29
30
f i g u r e
31
ax1 = subplot (1 ,2 ,1) ;
32
imagesc ( mean img )
33
colormap ( ax1 , gray )
% create an image in
grayscale
34
axis
equal
35
36
ax2 = subplot (1 ,2 ,2) ;
37
imagesc ( mean img )
38
colormap ( ax2 , j e t )
% create an image in
f a l s e c o l o r
39
axis
equal
40
41
end
42
43 %% HYPERCUBE MOVIE
44
45 % Activate
the
hyperspectral
movie and saving
46
hypercube movie = true ;
47
hyper thz = true ;
48
save movie = f a l s e ;
49
50 % Reproduce a movie covering
the whole band range
51
i f
hypercube movie
52
53
f i g u r e ()
54
f or
i i = 1: bands
% set number of
bands
55
56
img band ii = squeeze ( hypercube ( : , : , i i ) ) ;
57
58
59
i f
hyper thz
60
imagesc ( imrotate ( img band ii ,90) )
61
axis
image
62
t i t l e ( { [ ’HYPERSPECTRAL MOVIE’ ] ; [ ’ Peak :
’ ,
num2str ( peak ) ] ; [ ’Band :
’ , num2str ( i i ) ] ; [
s p r i n t f ( ’ Frequency :
%6.3 f THz ’ ,
freq used
( i i ) ) ] } )
63
64
e l s e
==PAGE:67==
A.1. PART I: HYPERSPECTRAL DATA INVESTIGATION
57
65
imagesc ( img band ii )
66
axis
image
67
t i t l e ( { [ ’HYPERSPECTRAL MOVIE’ ] ; [ ’ Instrument :
SWIR ’ ] ; [ ’Band :
’ , num2str ( i i ) ] ; [ s p r i n t f ( ’
Wavelengths :
%6.3 f nm ’ ,
wavelengths ( i i ) )
] } )
68
end
69
70
% Set
the
gcf
( f i g u r e window)
to
screen
s i z e
to
optimize
the frame
71
% r e s o l u t i o n
and save
the frame .
72
set ( gcf , ’ Position ’ ,[0
30 2550
1480])
73
F( i i ) = getframe ( gcf ) ;
74
75
pause ( 0 . 1 )
76
77
end
78
79
i f
save movie
80
81
i f
hyper thz
82
% Create a movie
object and set
quality and frame
rate
83
movie object = VideoWriter ( [ ’ Deconvolved −cut
o f f
2THz−hyperspectral
movie peak ( ’ , num2str ( peak
) , ’ ) ’ ] ) ;
84
e l s e
85
movie object = VideoWriter ( ’ Hyperspectral
movie SWIR ’ ) ;
86
end
87
88
movie object . Quality = 100;
89
movie object . FrameRate = 4;
90
91
open ( movie object )
92
writeVideo ( movie object ,F)
% save
the movie
93
c l o s e ( movie object )
94
95
end
96
97
end
98
99 %% SINGLE IMAGE INVESTIGATION
100
101 % Select
the band to
display on three
d i f f e r e n t
images
102
single band 1 = 50;
==PAGE:68==
58
APPENDIX A. MATLAB CODE
103
single band 2 = 170;
104
single band 3 = 200;
105
106 % Convert the band in
frequency /wavelength
107
i f
hyper thz
108
s i n g l e f r e q 1 = freq ( single band 1 ) ;
109
s i n g l e f r e q 2 = freq ( single band 2 ) ;
110
s i n g l e f r e q 3 = freq ( single band 3 ) ;
111
e l s e
112
si ng le w av el 1 = wavelengths ( single band 1 ) ;
113
si ng le w av el 2 = wavelengths ( single band 2 ) ;
114
si ng le w av el 3 = wavelengths ( single band 3 ) ;
115
end
116
117 % Display
s p e c i f i c
band ( channel ) images
118
f i g u r e
119
img band 1 = squeeze ( hypercube ( : , : , single band 1 ) ) ;
%
s e l e c t
the
channel
120
imagesc ( imrotate ( img band 1 ,90) )
121
axis
equal
122
colormap ( gray )
123
colorbar
124 %brighten ( 0 . 6 )
125
i f
hyper thz
126
t i t l e ( { [ ’HYPERSPECTRAL IMAGE’ ] ; [ ’ Peak :
’ , num2str (
peak ) ] ; [ ’Band :
’ , num2str ( single band 1 ) ] ; [ ’
Frequency :
’ , num2str ( s i n g l e f r e q 1 ) , ’THz ’ ] } )
127
e l s e
128
t i t l e ( { [ ’HYPERSPECTRAL IMAGE’ ] ; [ ’ Instrument : SWIR ’ ] ; [
’Band :
’ , num2str ( single band 1 ) ] ; [ ’ Wavelengths :
’
, num2str ( s in gl e w av el 1 ) ,
’ nm ’ ] } )
129
end
130
131
f i g u r e
132
img band 2 = squeeze ( hypercube ( : , : , single band 2 ) ) ;
%
s e l e c t
the
channel
133
imagesc ( imrotate ( img band 2 ,90) )
134
axis
equal
135
colormap ( gray )
136
colorbar
137 %brighten ( 0 . 6 )
138
i f
hyper thz
139
t i t l e ( { [ ’HYPERSPECTRAL IMAGE’ ] ; [ ’ Peak :
’ , num2str (
peak ) ] ; [ ’Band :
’ , num2str ( single band 2 ) ] ; [ ’
Frequency :
’ , num2str ( s i n g l e f r e q 2 ) , ’THz ’ ] } )
140
e l s e
==PAGE:69==
A.1. PART I: HYPERSPECTRAL DATA INVESTIGATION
59
141
t i t l e ( { [ ’HYPERSPECTRAL IMAGE’ ] ; [ ’ Instrument : SWIR ’ ] ; [
’Band :
’ , num2str ( single band 2 ) ] ; [ ’ Wavelengths :
’
, num2str ( sin gl e w av el 2 ) ,
’ nm ’ ] } )
142
end
143
144
f i g u r e
145
img band 3 = squeeze ( hypercube ( : , : , single band 3 ) ) ;
146
imagesc ( imrotate ( img band 3 ,90) )
147
axis
equal
148
colormap ( gray )
149 %brighten ( 0 . 6 )
150
colorbar
151
152
i f
hyper thz
153
t i t l e ( { [ ’HYPERSPECTRAL IMAGE’ ] ; [ ’ Peak :
’ , num2str (
peak ) ] ; [ ’Band :
’ , num2str ( single band 3 ) ] ; [ ’
Frequency :
’ , num2str ( s i n g l e f r e q 3 ) , ’THz ’ ] } )
154
e l s e
155
t i t l e ( { [ ’HYPERSPECTRAL IMAGE’ ] ; [ ’ Instrument : SWIR ’ ] ; [
’Band :
’ , num2str ( single band 3 ) ] ; [ ’ Wavelengths :
’
, num2str ( sin gl e w av el 3 ) ,
’ nm ’ ] } )
156
end
157
158 %% COMPOSIT IMAGE INVESTIGATION
159
160
band difference = f a l s e ;
% set
computation
of
d i f f e r e n c e
image
[ band one −band two ]
161
multiple band comp = true ; % set
computation
of
composite
image from
three
or more bands
162
163 % Select
the two bands to work with
164
composite band 1 = 20;
165
composit band 2 = 170;
166
167
band one = squeeze ( hypercube ( : , : , composite band 1 ) ) ;
%
s e l e c t
the
f i r s t
band from hypercube
168
band two = squeeze ( hypercube ( : , : , composit band 2 ) ) ;
%
s e l e c t
the
second band from hypercube
169
170 % Create
composite RGB image
of two bands
171
f i g u r e
172
subplot (2 ,2 ,1)
173
imagesc ( band one )
% show the band one image
174
axis
equal
175
colorbar ()
176
colormap ( gray )
==PAGE:70==
60
APPENDIX A. MATLAB CODE
177
t i t l e ( [ ’Band
’ , num2str ( composite band 1 ) ] )
178
179
subplot (2 ,2 ,3)
180
imagesc ( band two )
% show the band two image
181
axis
equal
182
colorbar ()
183
colormap ( gray )
184
t i t l e ( [ ’Band
’ , num2str ( composit band 2 ) ] )
185
186
subplot ( 2 , 2 , [ 2 , 4 ] )
187
rgb composite = imfuse ( band one ,
band two ,
’ f a l s e c o l o r ’ ) ;
% create a two band composite rgb image .
Gray :
two
images have the same
i n t e n s i t i e s ,
magenta & green :
d i f f e r e n t
i n t e n s i t i e s
188
imagesc ( rgb composite )
% show the
composite image
189
axis
equal
190
t i t l e ( { [ ’RGB Composite image ’ ]
[ ’ band
’ , num2str (
composite band 1 ) ,
’ & band
’ , num2str ( composit band 2
) ] } )
191
192 % Create a composite
d i f f e r e n c e
image
193
i f
band difference
194
f i g u r e
195
rgb c omposite diff = imfuse ( band one ,
band two ,
’ d i f f ’
) ;
196
imagesc ( rgb composite diff )
197
axis
equal
198
t i t l e ( { [ ’ Composite
d i f f e r e n c e
image ’ ]
[ ’ band
’ ,
num2str ( composite band 1 ) ,
’ −band
’ , num2str (
composit band 2 ) ] } )
199
colormap ( gray )
200
end
201
202 % Create a composite image
of
multiple
( three
or more )
bands
−
No RGB image
203
i f
multiple band comp
204
205
% Select
the bands to
use
206
multiple band1 = 30;
207
multiple band2 = 80;
208
multiple band3 = 150;
209
210
multiple band one = squeeze ( hypercube ( : , : ,
multiple band1 ) ) ;
211
multiple band two = squeeze ( hypercube ( : , : ,
multiple band2 ) ) ;
==PAGE:71==
A.1. PART I: HYPERSPECTRAL DATA INVESTIGATION
61
212
multiple band three = squeeze ( hypercube ( : , : ,
multiple band3 ) ) ;
213
214
% Create
the image
215
f i g u r e
216
multiple band img = multiple band one +
multiple band two + multiple band three ;
217
imagesc ( multiple band img )
218
axis
equal
219
t i t l e ( { [ ’ Composite image ’ ]
[ ’ band
’ , num2str (
multiple band1 ) ,
’ , band
’ , num2str ( multiple band2
) ,
’ & band ’ , num2str ( multiple band3 ) ] } )
220
colormap ( j e t )
221
222
end
223
224 %% SPECTRAL INVESTIGATION
225
226 % Select
the
p i x e l
227
l i n e 1 = 738;
228
row1 = 3487;
229
230
l i n e 2 = 39;
231
row2 = 2827;
232
233
l i n e 3 = 79;
234
row3 = 2713;
235
236
spectrum1 = squeeze ( hypercube ( line1 , row1 , : ) ) ;
237
spectrum2 = squeeze ( hypercube ( line2 , row2 , : ) ) ;
238
spectrum3 = squeeze ( hypercube ( line3 , row3 , : ) ) ;
239
240
241 % Reflectance
normalization −set
value from 0 to 1
242
normSpectrum = spectrum1 −min( spectrum1 ( : ) ) ;
243
normSpectrum = normSpectrum ./ max( normSpectrum ( : ) ) ;
244
245 % Display
the spectrum
of
s e l e c t e d
p i x e l
246 % I f
x axis wavelength
i s
set
as
true ,
show wavelenths on
x axis
247 % otherwise show bands number on x axis
248
f i g u r e
249
plot ( normSpectrum )
% use
the band as
unit
250
xlabel ( ’ Bands ’ )
251
t i t l e ( { [ ’ Spectrum ’ ]
[ ’ l i n e :
’ , num2str ( l i n e 1 ) ,
’ band :
’ ,
num2str ( row1 ) ] } )
==PAGE:72==
62
APPENDIX A. MATLAB CODE
252
ylabel ( ’ Reflectance ’ )
253
254
255 % Display a set
of
three
spectra −not normalized
r e f l e c t a n c e
256
f i g u r e
257
plot ( spectrum1 )
258
xlabel ( ’ Bands ’ )
259
ylabel ( ’ Reflectance ’ )
260
hold on
261
plot ( spectrum2 )
262
xlabel ( ’ Bands ’ )
263
ylabel ( ’ Reflectance ’ )
264
plot ( spectrum3 )
265
xlabel ( ’ Bands ’ )
266
ylabel ( ’ Reflectance ’ )
267
legend ( [ ’ l :
’ , num2str ( l i n e 1 ) ,
’
r :
’ , num2str ( row1 ) ] , . . .
268
[ ’ l :
’ , num2str ( l i n e 2 ) ,
’
r :
’ , num2str ( row2 ) ] , . . .
269
[ ’ l :
’ , num2str ( l i n e 3 ) ,
’
r :
’ , num2str ( row3 ) ] ) ;
270
271 %% PCA COMPUTATION
272
273 % Set x and y parameters
274
x = nr ∗nc ;
275
y = nb ;
276
277 % Unfold the hypercube
in 2D matrix
278
display
’ Unfolding
hypercube . . . ’
279
unfolded hypercube = reshape ( hypercube ,
[ x y ] ) ;
280
281 % Perform pca on unfolded
hypercube
282
display
’ Performing PCA . . . ’
283
[ coeff , score , latent ] = pca ( unfolded hypercube ) ;
284
285 %% PCA ANALYSIS
286
287
s c o r e p l o t = f a l s e ;
% set
the computation
of
score
plot
288
pc images = true ;
% set
the computation
of
p r i n c i p a l
component images
289
290
f i g u r e
291
plot ( latent ,
’k ’ )
292
xlabel
’ Principal
components ’
293
ylabel
’ Eigenvalues ’
294
t i t l e
’ Latent
plot ’
295
==PAGE:73==
A.1. PART I: HYPERSPECTRAL DATA INVESTIGATION
63
296
i f
s c o r e p l o t
297
298
f i g u r e
299
plot ( c o e f f ( : , 1 : 1 0 ) ) ;
300
301
pc1 = score ( : , 1 ) ;
302
pc2 = score ( : , 2 ) ;
303
pc3 = score ( : , 3 ) ;
304
305
f i g u r e
306
plot ( pc1 , pc2 ,
’ . ’ ,
’ markersize ’ ,
0.5)
307
t i t l e ( ’PC1 vs PC2 ’ )
308
309
f i g u r e
310
plot ( pc2 , pc3 ,
’ . ’ ,
’ markersize ’ ,
0.5)
311
t i t l e ( ’PC2 vs PC3 ’ )
312
313
f i g u r e
314
plot ( pc1 , pc3 ,
’ . ’ ,
’ markersize ’ ,
0.5)
315
t i t l e ( ’PC1 vs PC3 ’ )
316
317
f i g u r e
318
scatter3 ( pc1 , pc2 , pc3 )
319
xlabel ( ’PC1 ’ )
320
ylabel ( ’PC2 ’ )
321
z l a b e l ( ’PC3 ’ )
322
end
323
324
i f
pc images
325
326
% Refold
scores
in 3D array
to
reproduce
p r i n c i p a l
component images
327
r e f o l d e d s c o r e s = reshape ( score , [ nr , nc , nb ] ) ;
328
329
num components = 5;
% choose number of
components
330
331
% Create a set
of pc images
equal
to
the
choosen
number of
components
332
f or
i i = 1: num components
333
img pc i = squeeze ( r e f o l d e d s c o r e s ( : , : , i i ) ) ;
334
335
f i g u r e
336
imagesc ( imrotate ( img pc i ,90) )
337
axis
equal
338
colormap ( gray )
339
==PAGE:74==
64
APPENDIX A. MATLAB CODE
340
i f
hyper thz
341
t i t l e ( { [ ’PC ’ , num2str ( i i ) ] , [ ’ Peak :
’ ,
num2str ( peak ) ] } )
342
e l s e
343
t i t l e ( { [ ’PC’ , num2str ( i i ) ] , [ ’ Instrument : SWIR
’ ] } )
344
end
345
end
346
end
==PAGE:75==
A.2. PART II: THZ DATA INVESTIGATION AND HYPERCUBE MAKER65
A.2
Part II: THz data investigation and hyper-
cube maker
1 %
THz data
i n v e s t i g a t i o n
2 %
& THz hypercube maker
3 %
Algorithm ,
part
I I
4 % ( c ) Emanuele D’ Angelo ,
2017
5
6 %%
7
c l o s e
a l l
8
c l e a r
a l l
9
c l c
10
11
12 %%%%%%%%%%%%%
13 %
LOAD DATA
%
14 %%%%%%%%%%%%%
15
16 %cd ( [ ’ / Volumes/My Passport / thz td wooden icon / d e t a i l s ’ ] )
17 %cd
( [ ’C:\ Users \ cisa3 \Dropbox\ Glyptotek\ Glyptotek THz
scans \ Source code ’ ] )
18
19
display
’ Loading picoimage
f i l e
. . . ’
20
21 % Read picoimage
22
[ FileName , PathName ] = u i g e t f i l e ( ’ ∗. picoimage ’ , ’ choose
picoimage ’ , ’ Multiselect ’ , ’ o f f ’ ) ;
23
[ wf , axis1numpixels , a x i s 1 p i x e l s i z e , axis2numpixels ,
a x i s 2 p i x e l s i z e , pointsperwaveform , timebetweenpoints ] =
read picoimage (PathName , FileName ) ;
24
wf = wf ( 3 : s i z e (wf , 1 ) −3 ,3: s i z e (wf , 2 ) −3 ,:) ;
25
26 % Reference
27
r e f e r e n c e = dlmread ( ’ r e f e r e n c e . picotd ’ , ’ ’ ,
5 ,0) ;
% load
the
r e f e r e n c e
f i l e
28
y r e f e r e n c e = r e f e r e n c e ( : , 2 ) ;
% take
only
the
second
column
29
y r e f e r e n c e = y r e f e r e n c e ∗(2.6214 e+04) ;
% s c a l e
the
s i n g l e
point measurement waveform to image
p i x e l
waveform
30
31 % Background
32
background = dlmread ( ’ background . picotd ’ , ’ ’ ,
5 ,0) ;
%
load
the background
f i l e
==PAGE:76==
66
APPENDIX A. MATLAB CODE
33
y background = background ( : , 2 ) ;
% take
only
the
second
column
34
y background = y background ∗(2.6214 e+04) ;
% s c a l e
the
s i n g l e
point measurement waveform to image
p i x e l
waveform
35
36 % Define
the
f u l l
time range
37
time = transpose ( 0 : timebetweenpoints : ( length ( wf )−1)∗
timebetweenpoints ) ;
38
39 % Define
the
f u l l
frequency
range
40
freq = ( 1 . / ( timebetweenpoints .∗length ( y background ) ) ∗(0:
length ( y background ) −1)) ’ ;
41
freq used = freq (1:200) ;
42
43 % Frequency
i n t e r v a l
44
f r e q i n t e r v a l = 1/( length ( y background ) ∗timebetweenpoints
) ;
45
46 % Define x and y v a r a i b l e s
47
x = s i z e (wf , 1 ) ;
48
y = s i z e (wf , 2 ) ;
49
50 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
51 %
SIGNAL DECONVOLUTION
%
52 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
53
54
deconvolution = true ;
55
56
i f
deconvolution
57
58
% Allocate
matrices
fo r
deconvolved data and
f i l t e r
59
deconv wf noWavelet = zeros (x , y , s i z e (wf , 3 ) ) ;
60
deconv wf wavelet = zeros (x , y , s i z e (wf , 3 ) ) ;
61
f i l t = zeros ( s i z e (wf , 3 ) ,1) ;
62
63
% Create a Hann
f i l t e r
of
321 points ,
cut−o f f
freq
at
2THz
64
filter window = hann (321 , ’ pe rio dic ’ ) ;
65
f i l t (1:321) = filter window ;
66
67
f f t r e f e r e n c e = f f t ( y reference −y background ) ;
68
69
display
’ Deconvolution
. . . ’
70
71
t i c
==PAGE:77==
A.2. PART II: THZ DATA INVESTIGATION AND HYPERCUBE MAKER67
72
f or
i i = 1: x
73
f or
j j = 1: y
74
75
% Select a each waveform
76
temp data = squeeze ( double ( wf ( i i , jj , : ) ) )−
y background ;
77
78
% Perform deconvoluion
79
deconv pixel timeDomain = i f f t ( f i l t . ∗( f f t (
temp data ) / f f t r e f e r e n c e ) ) ;
80
deconv pixel timeDomain = r e a l (
deconv pixel timeDomain ( : , 2 1 ) ) ;
81
deconv wf noWavelet ( i i , jj , : ) =
deconv pixel timeDomain ;
82
83
% Wavelet transform
the
deconvolved data
84
wavelet wf = wden( deconv pixel timeDomain , ’
sqtwolog ’ , ’ s ’ , ’mln ’ ,3 , ’sym4 ’ ) ;
85
deconv wf wavelet ( i i , jj , : ) = wavelet wf ;
86
87
end
88
end
89
toc
90
91
save ( ’F:\ thz td wooden icon \
workspace deconvolution 321points 1 −321
detail bottom −l e f t w r i t i n g ’ )
% savethe
workspace
92
93
% Set
the waveform matrix = to
deconvolved
matrix
94
% and y background = 0 to do not mess up with the
r e s t
of
the code
95
wf = deconv wf wavelet ;
96
y background = 0;
97
98
end
99
100 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
101 %
CREATE THz HYPERCUBE
%
102 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
103
104 % Define
the number of bands ,
from 1 to
s i z e (wf , 3 )
105
bands = 250;
106
107 % Allocate
the 3D matrix
f o r
the hypercube
108
thz hypercube = zeros (x , y , bands ) ;
109
==PAGE:78==
68
APPENDIX A. MATLAB CODE
110
display
’ Creating
the hypercube
. . . ’
111
112
f or
i i = 1: x
113
f or
j j = 1: y
114
115
% Take the
i i ,
j j
pixel ’ s waveform
116
temp data = squeeze ( double ( wf ( i i , jj , : ) ) )−
y background ;
117
118
% Fourier
transform
the waveform conresponding
to
each
p i x e l
119
f f t d a t a = f f t ( temp data ) ;
120
121
% Store
the
transformed
data
in
to
the z
axis
of
the data cube
122
f or k = 1: bands
123
thz hypercube ( i i , jj , k) = abs ( f f t d a t a (k) ) ;
124
end
125
end
126
end
127
128 % Delete some v a r i a b l e s
to keep the workspace
clean
129
c l e a r
i i
j j
f f t ∗temp∗
130
131 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
132 %
CONVENTIONAL PROCESSING
%
133 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
134
135 % PRODUCE THE C−SCANS
136
137 % Allocate
matrices
fo r
enface
images
138
peak to peak = zeros (x , y) ;
139
max img = zeros (x , y) ;
140
global max = zeros (x , y) ;
141
min img = zeros (x , y) ;
142
143
display
’ Producing the C−scan
. . . ’
144
145
f or
i i = 1: x
146
f or
j j = 1: y
147
148
temp data = squeeze ( double ( wf ( i i , jj , : ) ) )−
y background ;
149
150
% Calculate max and min peaks
151
abs max peak = max( abs ( temp data ) ) ;
% absolute
==PAGE:79==
A.2. PART II: THZ DATA INVESTIGATION AND HYPERCUBE MAKER69
max peak
152
max peak = max( temp data ) ;
% max peak
153
min peak = min( temp data ) ;
% min peak
154
155
% Store
values
f o r
enface C−scan
in
preallocated
matrices
156
peak to peak ( i i , j j ) = max peak −min peak ;
157
max img ( i i , j j ) = max peak ;
158
global max ( i i , j j ) = abs max peak ;
159
min img ( i i , j j ) = min peak ;
160
161
end
162
end
163
164 % Produce the peak−to−peak image
165
f i g u r e
166
imagesc ( imrotate ( peak to peak ,90) )
167
colormap ( gray )
168
brighten (0.15)
169
axis
image
170
t i t l e
’ Enface peak−to−peak image ’
171
172 % Produce the maximum image
173
f i g u r e
174
imagesc ( imrotate (max img ,90) )
175
colormap ( gray )
176
brighten (0.15)
177
axis
image
178
t i t l e
’Max image ’
179
180
f i g u r e
181
imagesc ( imrotate ( global max ,90) )
182
colormap ( gray )
183
brighten (0.15)
184
axis
image
185
t i t l e
’ Global max image ’
186
187 % Produce minimum image
188
f i g u r e
189
imagesc ( imrotate ( min img ,90) )
190
colormap ( gray )
191
brighten (0.15)
192
axis
image
193
t i t l e
’Min image ’
194
195
c l e a r
i i
j j
abs∗max∗min∗temp∗
==PAGE:80==
70
APPENDIX A. MATLAB CODE
196
197 %% PROCESS THE C−SCANS −CONTRAST ENHANCEMENT
198
199 % Enable
contrast
enhancement
200
contrast enhanc = f a l s e ;
201
202
i f
contrast enhanc
203
% Normalize data
204
peak to peak norm = mat2gray ( peak to peak ) ;
%
convert a matrix
to
i n t e n s i t y
image ,
values
range :
0.0
( black )
to
1.0
( f u l l
i n t e n s i t y
or
white )
205
peak to peak 255 = im2uint8 ( peak to peak norm ) ;
%
convert
the image to
unsigned 8−bit
i n t e g e r s
in
the
range
[0
255]
206
peak to peak cont = adapthisteq ( peak to peak 255 ) ;
%
enhances
the
contrast
of
the
grayscale
image I by
transforming
the
values
. . .
207 %. . . using
contrast −limited
adaptive
histogram
equaliz ation
(CLAHE) .
208
209
global max norm = mat2gray ( global max ) ;
210
global max 255 = im2uint8 ( global max norm ) ;
211
global max cont = adapthisteq ( global max 255 ) ;
212
213
% Produce the
contrast
enhanced
enface
image
214
f i g u r e
215
imagesc ( imrotate ( peak to peak cont ,90) )
216
colormap ( gray )
217
brighten ( 0 . 3 ) % brighten
( value > 0)
or darken ( value
< 0) color map
218
axis
image
219
t i t l e
’ Contrast enhanced
enface peak−to−peak ’
220
221
% Produce the
contrast
enhanced
global maximum image
222
f i g u r e
223
imagesc ( imrotate ( global max cont ,90) )
224
colormap ( gray )
225
%brighten ( 0 . 3 )
226
axis
image
227
t i t l e
’ Contrast enhanced
global max ’
228
end
229
230 %% PRODUCE B−SCANS
231
232 % Activate
s e l e c t i o n
of
l i n e
fo r b−scan
233
l i n e s e l e c t i o n = f a l s e ;
==PAGE:81==
A.2. PART II: THZ DATA INVESTIGATION AND HYPERCUBE MAKER71
234
235 % Allocate
the b−scan
matrices
236
b scan ce ntral x = zeros (x , s i z e (wf , 3 ) ) ;
237
b s c a n s e l e c t e d x = zeros (x , s i z e (wf , 3 ) ) ;
238
239
b scan ce ntral y = zeros (y , s i z e (wf , 3 ) ) ;
240
241
display
’ Producind the B−scan
. . . ’
242
243 % Compute the B−scan
of a central
l i n e
( over x axis )
244
f o r
i i = 1: x
245
b scan ce ntral x ( i i , : ) = squeeze ( double ( wf ( i i ,
round (
y/2) ,
: ) ) )−y background ;
246
end
247
248 % Compute the B−scan
of a central
l i n e
( over y axis )
249
f o r
j j = 1: y
250
b scan ce ntral y ( jj , : ) = squeeze ( double ( wf ( round (x/2)
,
jj ,
: ) ) )−y background ;
251
end
252
253
i f
l i n e s e l e c t i o n
254
255
% Compute the B−scan
of a
s e l e c t e d
l i n e
( over x axis )
256
l i n e = 450;
% choose
the y
l i n e
257
258
f or
i i = 1: x
259
b s c a n s e l e c t e d x ( i i , : ) = squeeze ( double ( wf ( i i ,
line , : ) ) )−y background ;
260
end
261
262
f i g u r e
263
imagesc ( time , x ,
b scan selected x ,[ −2500
1500])
264
colormap ( j e t )
265
xlim ([40
100])
266
t i t l e ( [ ’B−scan
l i n e n .
’ , num2str ( l i n e ) ,
’
(x axis ) ’
] )
267
xlabel
’ time ( ps ) ’
268
ylabel
’ p i x e l number along x axis ’
269
270
end
271
272 % Display
the B−scans
273
f i g u r e
274
imagesc (x ,
time ,
b scan central x ’ ,[ −0.0035
0 . 0 0 6 ] )
275
colormap ( j e t )
==PAGE:82==
72
APPENDIX A. MATLAB CODE
276
ylim ([40
75])
277
t i t l e
’B−scan
of
central
l i n e
(x axis ) ’
278
ylabel ( ’ time ( ps ) ’ , ’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,14)
279
xlabel ( ’ p i x e l number along x axis ’ , ’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,14)
280 %set ( gca , ’ fontize ’ , 1 0)
281
282
f i g u r e
283
imagesc ( time , x ,
b scan central y ,[ −0.005
0 . 0 0 9 ] )
284
colormap ( j e t )
285
xlim ([40
70])
286
t i t l e
’B−scan
of
central
l i n e
(y axis ) ’
287
xlabel
’ time ( ps ) ’
288
ylabel
’ p i x e l number along y axis ’
289
290
c l e a r
i i
j j
291
292 %% PRODUCE TIME−OF−FLIGHT (TOF) IMAGE
293
294
t i m e o f f l i g h t = true ;
295
296 % Time−of−f l i g t h
images ,
defined
as
the
d i f f e r e n c e
between the
l o ca ti o n
297 % of
sample max peak and lo c at io n
of
r e f e r e n c e max peak
298
299
i f
t i m e o f f l i g h t
300
% Allocate
the time−of−f l i g h t
matrix
301
tof img = zeros (x , y) ;
302
303
display
’ Producing the time−of−f l i g h t
( t o f ) image
. . .
’
304
305
% Find value and l o ca ti o n
of
r e f e r e n c e max peak
306
[ max ref
loc max ref ] = max( y reference −y background )
;
307
308
f or
i i = 1: x
309
f or
j j = 1: y
310
311
temp data = squeeze ( double ( wf ( i i , jj , : ) ) )−
y background ;
312
313
314
% Find value and l o ca ti o n
of
sample max peak
315
[ max sample loc max sample ] = max( temp data ) ;
316
317
%Store
t o f
values
in
tof img
matrix
==PAGE:83==
A.2. PART II: THZ DATA INVESTIGATION AND HYPERCUBE MAKER73
318
i f
loc max ref >= loc max sample
319
tof img ( i i , j j ) = loc max ref −
loc max sample ;
320
e l s e i f
loc max ref < loc max sample
321
tof img ( i i , j j ) = loc max sample −
loc max ref ;
322
end
323
end
324
end
325
326
% Reframe image to
cut
o f f
the
noise on the edge
327
tof reframed = tof img (21:444 ,
1 1 : 5 3 5 , : ) ;
328
329
% Display
the 2D t o f
image −colorbar
i s
showing
delay
in
time
330
f i g u r e
331
imagesc ( imrotate ( tof reframed ,90) )
332
colorbar
333
axis
image
334
t i t l e
’Time−of−f l i g h t
2D image ’
335
336
% Create a surface
render
based on 3D r e c o s t r a c t i o n
of
t o f
337
f i g u r e
338
su r f ( tof reframed ’ )
339
set ( gca , ’ ZDir ’ , ’ reverse ’ )
%reverse
the z
axis
340
xlabel
’X Pixels ’
341
ylabel
’Y Pixels ’
342
z l a b e l
’Time [ ps ] ’
343
t i t l e
’ Surface
reconstruction
(3D t o f ) ’
344
345
f i g u r e
346
contourf ( tof reframed ’ )
347
axis
image
348
349
c l e a r
i i
j j
temp∗max∗loc ∗
350
end
351
352 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
353 %
LAYER SELECTION
%
354 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
355
356 % SMOOTHING W/ MEDIAN FILTER
357
358 % Enable smoothing
359
smoothing = true ;
==PAGE:84==
74
APPENDIX A. MATLAB CODE
360
361
i f
smoothing
362
363
% Select
parameters
fo r
moving average
(MA)
f i l t e r
364
points = 5;
% Choose number of
points
( subset )
365
366
% Allocate an empty matrix
fo r
smoothed waveform
367
smooth wf = zeros (x , y , s i z e (wf , 3 ) ) ;
368
369
display
’ Smoothing
s i g n a l
. . . ’
370
371
f or
i i = 1: x
372
f or
j j = 1: y
373
374
temp data = squeeze ( double ( wf ( i i , jj , : ) ) )−
y background ;
375
376
% Smooth the
s e l e c t e d
s i g n a l by applying MA
f i l t e r
377
smooth signal = medfilt1 ( temp data , points ) ;
378
379
% Save the smotheed
s i g n a l
380
smooth wf ( i i , jj , : ) = smooth signal ;
381
382
end
383
end
384
385
end
386
387
388 %% FIND PARAMETERS TO THRESHOLD THE PEAK FINDER
389
390 % Allocate a matrix
containing
the max value
of
a l l
the
waveforms
391
max matrix = zeros (x , y) ;
392
393
f or
i i = 1: x
394
f or
j j = 1: y
395
396
i f
smoothing
397
temp = squeeze ( smooth wf ( i i , jj , : ) ) ;
398
e l s e
399
% Select
a
s i n g l e
p i x e l
and find
the max
value
of
i t s
waveform
400
temp = squeeze ( double ( wf ( i i , jj , : ) ) )−
y background ;
==PAGE:85==
A.2. PART II: THZ DATA INVESTIGATION AND HYPERCUBE MAKER75
401
end
402
403
%max peak = max( abs (temp) ) ;
404
max peak = max(temp) ;
405
406
max matrix ( i i , j j ) = max peak ;
407
408
end
409
end
410
411 % Sort
the peaks
in
descend way to
plot them and choose
the
f i r s t
threshold
412
max matrix descend = sort ( max matrix ,
’ descend ’ ) ;
413
414
f i g u r e
415
plot ( max matrix descend )
416
417
f i g u r e
418
contourf ( max matrix ’ )
419
axis
image
420
colorbar
421
422
f i g u r e
423
contour3 ( max matrix ’ )
424
axis
image
425
colormap ( gray )
426
colorbar
427
428
429 % Divide x and y axis
in
thirds and calutate
t h e i r mid
value by dividing
i t
430 % by two
431
x third = x /3;
432
y third = y /3;
433
x mid third = x third /2;
434
y mid third = y third /2;
435
436
i f
smoothing
437
% Select
nine
t r i a l
waveforms from the data by
dividing
both x and y in
438
% thirds and taking
the
center
of
each ninth ,
finding
h a l f x−third and h a l f
439
% y−third .
440
s p t r i a l 1 = squeeze ( smooth wf ( round ( x mid third ) ,
round ( y mid third ) , : ) ) ;
441
s p t r i a l 2 = squeeze ( smooth wf ( round ( x third+
==PAGE:86==
76
APPENDIX A. MATLAB CODE
x mid third ) , round ( y mid third ) , : ) ) ;
442
s p t r i a l 3 = squeeze ( smooth wf ( round ((2∗x third )+
x mid third ) , round ( y mid third ) , : ) ) ;
443
s p t r i a l 4 = squeeze ( smooth wf ( round ( x mid third ) ,
round ( y third+y mid third ) , : ) ) ;
444
s p t r i a l 5 = squeeze ( smooth wf ( round ( x third+
x mid third ) , round ( y third+y mid third ) , : ) ) ;
445
s p t r i a l 6 = squeeze ( smooth wf ( round ((2∗x third )+
x mid third ) , round ( y third+y mid third ) , : ) ) ;
446
s p t r i a l 7 = squeeze ( smooth wf ( round ( x mid third ) ,
round ((2∗y third )+y mid third ) , : ) ) ;
447
s p t r i a l 8 = squeeze ( smooth wf ( round ( x third+
x mid third ) , round ((2∗y third )+y mid third ) , : ) ) ;
448
s p t r i a l 9 = squeeze ( smooth wf ( round ((2∗x third )+
x mid third ) , round ((2∗y third )+y mid third ) , : ) ) ;
449
e l s e
450
% Select
nine
t r i a l
waveforms from the data by
dividing
both x and y in
451
% thirds and taking
the
center
of
each ninth ,
finding
h a l f x−third and h a l f
452
% y−third .
453
s p t r i a l 1 = squeeze ( double ( wf ( round ( x mid third ) ,
round ( y mid third ) , : ) ) )−y background ;
454
s p t r i a l 2 = squeeze ( double ( wf ( round ( x third+
x mid third ) , round ( y mid third ) , : ) ) )−y background ;
455
s p t r i a l 3 = squeeze ( double ( wf ( round ((2∗x third )+
x mid third ) , round ( y mid third ) , : ) ) )−y background ;
456
s p t r i a l 4 = squeeze ( double ( wf ( round ( x mid third ) ,
round ( y third+y mid third ) , : ) ) )−y background ;
457
s p t r i a l 5 = squeeze ( double ( wf ( round ( x third+
x mid third ) , round ( y third+y mid third ) , : ) ) )−
y background ;
458
s p t r i a l 6 = squeeze ( double ( wf ( round ((2∗x third )+
x mid third ) , round ( y third+y mid third ) , : ) ) )−
y background ;
459
s p t r i a l 7 = squeeze ( double ( wf ( round ( x mid third ) ,
round ((2∗y third )+y mid third ) , : ) ) )−y background ;
460
s p t r i a l 8 = squeeze ( double ( wf ( round ( x third+
x mid third ) , round ((2∗y third )+y mid third ) , : ) ) )−
y background ;
461
s p t r i a l 9 = squeeze ( double ( wf ( round ((2∗x third )+
x mid third ) , round ((2∗y third )+y mid third ) , : ) ) )−
y background ;
462
end
463
464 % Store
the
( absolute
value ) waveforms
in a matrix
==PAGE:87==
A.2. PART II: THZ DATA INVESTIGATION AND HYPERCUBE MAKER77
465
t r i a l m a t r i x = [ abs ( s p t r i a l 1 ) , abs ( s p t r i a l 2 ) , abs (
s p t r i a l 3 ) , abs ( s p t r i a l 4 ) , abs ( s p t r i a l 5 ) , abs (
s p t r i a l 6 ) , abs ( s p t r i a l 7 ) , abs ( s p t r i a l 8 ) , abs (
s p t r i a l 9 ) ] ;
466
467
trial max = max(max( t r i a l m a t r i x ) ) ;
% find
the max
value
of
t r i a l
matrix
468
469
threshold = trial max ;
% set
the
threshold
value
as
t r i a l max
470
471
num iteration = 0;
% i n i t i a l i z e
number of
i t e r a t i o n s
472
num peaks = zeros (1 ,9) ;
% a l l o c a t e
the number of
peaks
matrix
473
474
while
num iteration < 500
475
f or
i i = 1:9
476
num peaks ( i i ) = length ( findpeaks ( t r i a l m a t r i x ( : ,
i i ) ,
’ MinPeakHeight ’ ,
threshold ) ) ;
% return a
vector
containing
the number of
thresholded
peaks
477
end
478
479
% I f
the number of
peaks
i s < 20
divide
the
threshold
value by 2 and
480
% r e i t e r a t e .
481
% I f
the number of
peaks
i s > 20 multiply
the
threshold by 1.5 and
r e i t e r a t e
482
%
483
% The value 20
i s
set
acconding
to
the number of
peaks
I want to
look
484
% f or .
485
i f
min( num peaks ) < 20
486
threshold = threshold /2;
487
e l s e i f
min( num peaks ) > 20
488
threshold = 1.5∗threshold ;
489
e l s e
490
return
491
end
492
493
num iteration=num iteration +1;
% increase
i t e r a t i o n
by one
494
end
495
496 %% FIND THE FIRST n PEAKS AND STORE THEM IN STRUCTURE
ARRAY
==PAGE:88==
78
APPENDIX A. MATLAB CODE
497
498 % Choose number of
peaks
to compute
499
num peaks = 10;
500
501 % Set
the peak
threshold
to
separe
the
noize
p i x e l s
from
actual
s i g n a l s
502
peak threshold = 0.0008;
503
504
f or
i i = 1: x
505
f or
j j = 1: y
506
507
i f
smoothing
508
temp data = squeeze ( smooth wf ( i i , jj , : ) ) ;
509
e l s e
510
temp data = squeeze ( double ( wf ( i i , jj , : ) ) )−
y background ;
511
end
512
513
i f max( temp data ) >= peak threshold
514
515
% Find peak value
( pks ) , peak
l o ca ti o n
(
loc pks ) , peak width and
516
% peak prominence
of
the peaks with
i n t e n s i t y
higher
than 30
517
[ pks ,
loc pks ,
width ,
prominence ] = findpeaks
( abs ( temp data ) , ’ MinPeakHeight ’ ,
threshold
,
’ MinPeakProminence ’ ,
0.00007) ;
518
519
% Be sure
that
the
s i g n a l
has more than
’
num peaks” peaks
520
% otherwise
store
the
remaining
peaks as 0
521
i f
length ( pks ) >= num peaks
522
523
% Store
only
the
f i r s t
’ num peaks ’
peaks
524
f or k = 1: num peaks
525
526
% Create a structure
array
containing
the OBJECT p i x e l
and
527
% FIELDS value ,
width and l o ca ti o n
528
529
% To read
as :
give me the
value /peak/
l oc at i on
of
peak k of
530
% p i x e l
i , j
531
p i x e l ( i i , j j ) . peak (k) . value = pks (k) ;
532
p i x e l ( i i , j j ) . peak (k) . width = width (k)
;
==PAGE:89==
A.2. PART II: THZ DATA INVESTIGATION AND HYPERCUBE MAKER79
533
p i x e l ( i i , j j ) . peak (k) . l oc at i on =
loc pks (k) ;
534
535
end
536
537
e l s e i f
length ( pks ) < num peaks
538
539
f or k = 1: length ( pks )
540
p i x e l ( i i , j j ) . peak (k) . value = pks (k) ;
541
p i x e l ( i i , j j ) . peak (k) . width = width (k)
;
542
p i x e l ( i i , j j ) . peak (k) . l oc at i on =
loc pks (k) ;
543
end
544
545
f or kk = length ( pks ) +1:num peaks
546
547
p i x e l ( i i , j j ) . peak ( kk ) . value = 0;
548
p i x e l ( i i , j j ) . peak ( kk ) . width = 0;
549
p i x e l ( i i , j j ) . peak ( kk ) . l oc a ti o n = 0;
550
end
551
552
end
553
554
e l s e
555
f or k = 1: num peaks
556
557
p i x e l ( i i , j j ) . peak (k) . value = 0;
558
p i x e l ( i i , j j ) . peak (k) . width = 0;
559
p i x e l ( i i , j j ) . peak (k) . l oc at i on = 0;
560
561
end
562
end
563
end
564
end
565
566 %% CREATE AN IMAGE OF THE THE SELECTED PEAK AND CREATE A
HYPERCUBE
567
568 % Select
the peak to
look
at
569
peak = 2;
570
571
display
’ Producing the hypercube
of
s e l e c t e d
peak
. . . ’
572
573
bands = 250;
574
win hypercube = zeros (x , y , bands ) ;
==PAGE:90==
80
APPENDIX A. MATLAB CODE
575
576
f or
i i = 1: x
577
f or
j j = 1: y
578
579
peak width = p i x e l ( i i , j j ) . peak ( peak ) . width ;
580
581
wind sizing elem = round (( peak width+5)/2) ;
582
w = tukeywin (( wind sizing elem ∗2) +1, 0.25) ;
583
584
i f
smoothing
585
temp data = squeeze ( smooth wf ( i i , jj , : ) ) ;
586
e l s e
587
temp data = squeeze ( double ( wf ( i i , jj , : ) ) )−
y background ;
588
end
589
590
% Create a matrix
of
zeros
having
the
s i z e
of
points
per waveform
591
% and apply
the window w to
i t
592
593
window filt = zeros ( s i z e (wf , 3 ) ,1) ;
594
i f
( p i x e l ( i i , j j ) . peak ( peak ) . lo c at io n >
wind sizing elem && p i x e l ( i i , j j ) . peak ( peak ) .
l oc at i on < s i z e (wf , 3 )−wind sizing elem )
595
window filt ( f l o o r ( p i x e l ( i i , j j ) . peak ( peak ) .
location −wind sizing elem : p i x e l ( i i , j j ) .
peak ( peak ) . lo c at i on+wind sizing elem ) ) = w
;
596
end
597
598
% Apply the window on the waveform to
s e l e c t
a
s p e c i f i c
peak and
599
% Fourier
transform
the
s e l e c t e d
peak
600
windowed temp data = temp data .∗window filt ;
601
FFT window = f f t ( windowed temp data ) ;
602
fft window ( i i , j j ) = sum( abs (FFT window (5:200) ) ) ;
% s e l e c t
the
frequency
i n t e r v a l
603
604
% Create
the hypercube
605
f or k = 1: bands
606
win hypercube ( i i , jj , k) = abs (FFT window(k) ) ;
607
end
608
end
609
end
610
611
spectral image = fft window ;
==PAGE:91==
A.2. PART II: THZ DATA INVESTIGATION AND HYPERCUBE MAKER81
612
613
f i g u r e
614
imagesc ( imrotate ( spectral image ,90) )
615
axis
image
616
t i t l e ( [ ’ Peak
’
, num2str ( peak ) ] )
==PAGE:92==
82
APPENDIX A. MATLAB CODE
==PAGE:93==
B
Additional processed data
In this appendix, some additional processed images are showed.
Figure B.1: Mean image of peak two hypercube
83
==PAGE:94==
84
APPENDIX B. ADDITIONAL PROCESSED DATA
Figure B.2: Example of composite image of band 70 and band 180. Gray areas indicates
where the images have the same intensities whereas green and magenta indicates where they
have same intensities.
==PAGE:95==
85
Figure B.3: Score plots of PC1 vs PC2, PC1 vs PC3 and PC2 vs PC3.
==PAGE:96==
86
APPENDIX B. ADDITIONAL PROCESSED DATA
==PAGE:97==
C
Used instruments
Figure C.1: SWIR-HSI camera
87
==PAGE:98==
88
APPENDIX C. USED INSTRUMENTS
Figure C.2: THz-TD system
