==PAGE:1==
Konstantinos Anyfantakis
COMPARISON OF OBJECTIVE AND
SUBJECTIVE MEASURES OF
COCHLEAR COMPRESSION
MASTER THESIS, AUGUST 2017
==PAGE:2==
Comparison of objective and subjective measures of cochlear compression
This report was prepared by:
Konstantinos Anyfantakis
Advisors:
Bastian Epp, bepp@elektro.dtu.dk
Ewen MacDonald, emcd@elektro.dtu.dk
Michal Fereczkowski , mfer@elektro.dtu.dk
DTU Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 352
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 45253954
studieadministration@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
January 23rd, 2017- August 13th, 2017
ECTS:
35
Education:
Master of Science
Field:
Engineering Acoustics
Class:
Master thesis
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for graduation
in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
©Konstantinos Anyfantakis, 2017
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The processing of the sound in the cochlea exhibits a non-linear behaviour, which is assumed to originate
from the outer hair cell (OHC) activity, the so called cochlear ampliﬁer. Physiological measurements in
non-human mammals have shown that the compressive behaviour starts at input levels of approximately
25 dB SPL [Robles and Ruggero, 2001] at the characteristic frequency place. Additionally, behaviorally
derived BM I/O functions using growth of masking (GOM) and temporal masking curves (TMCs) have
shown compressive behaviour within the input range of approximately 30 to 80 dB SPL. The most pop-
ular method for deriving the BM I/O function is the TMCs method using on-frequency TMCs as the
input and off-frequency TMCs as reference for obtaining the basilar membrane input/output (BM I/O)
function. Moreover, it is believed that the DPOAEs reﬂect the health of the OHCs and that the BM I/O
function can be derived using as input the level of the second primary and as output the level of the cor-
responding cubic distortion product fDP = 2f1 −f2. People with sensory-neural hearing loss exhibit
sometimes reduced compression exponents that it is believed to reﬂect damaged OHCs, but this is not always
the case. There are also listeners with elevated hearing thresholds that exhibit normal compression exponents.
In the present study, the compression exponents from 10 normal hearing (NH) and 6 hearing impaired (HI)
listeners were estimated using a fast TMC based behavioural method (i.e. the Grid method) and an objective
method (DPOAE recordings). Concerning the DPOAE recordings, the L1,L2 primary levels relation was
determined using two different paradigms, the so called scissors paradigm (i.e. L1 = 0.4L2 + 39) and the
equal level paradigm (i.e. L1 = L2). The characteristic frequencies that were examined were 1, 2 and
4 kHz. In addition, the DPOAE stimuli were calibrated using the forward pressure level (FPL) method
in order the sound pressure level (SPL) at the eardrum to be known. Furthermore, source unmixing was
applied on the DPOAE recordings for avoiding the presence of ﬁne structure on the DP spectrum. The
ﬁne structure originates from the interference between the generator component that it is believed to be
generated at the overlapping place of the two primaries and the reﬂection component that originates from the
characteristic place on the basilar membrane where the peak of the fDP traveling wave is located. By un-
mixing the DP, the reﬂection component is attenuated and as a consequence the DP spectrum is smoothed out.
The comparison of the Grid - TMC inferred compression exponents with those inferred from the DPOAE
(scissors paradigm) exhibited signiﬁcant moderate correlation for all the frequencies and all the listeners (i.e,
NH and HI). In addition, the data were analyzed per frequency showing moderate to high correlation coefﬁ-
cient at 1 kHz and quite high correlation at 2 and 4 kHz. Furthermore, paired t-test suggested insigniﬁcant
differences between the mean values of the compression exponents inferred from these two methods except
for the compression exponents at 4 kHz. On the other hand, the DPOAE (equal level paradigm) seems to over-
i
==PAGE:4==
ABSTRACT
ii
estimate the compression exponents in comparison with the Grid - TMC and the DPOAE (scissors paradigm).
Nevertheless, there are limitations such as the number of the subjects and the number of the DP recordings
per subject but also other that are indicated and need to be improved. It seems that the methods for measuring
the peripheral compression, which were used in the present study, are not clinically feasible in their current
form, but they suggest a pilot for further investigation.
==PAGE:5==
Resumé
Behandlingen af lyd i cochlea udviser en ikke-lineær adfærd, som antages at stamme fra de ydre hårcellers
(OHC) aktivitet, den såkaldte cochleære forstærker. Fysiologiske målinger i ikke-humane pattedyr har vist,
at den kompressive adfærd starter ved indgangsniveauer på omkring 25 dB SPL [Robles and Ruggero, 2001]
ved det karakteristiske frekvenssted. Derudover har adfærdsmæssigt aﬂedte basilar membran I/O funktioner,
ved hjælp af vækst af maskeringer (GOM) og tidsmaskeringskurver (TMCs) vist, komprimerende adfærd
for indgangsniveauer på omkring 30 til 80 dB SPL. Den mest populære metode til at udlede den basilære
membrans I/O funktion er TMC-metoden ved anvendelse af til-frekvens TMC’er som input og fra-frekvens
TMC’er som reference til opnåelse af den basilære membrans indgang/udgang (I/O) funktion. Desuden
antages det, at DPOAE’erne afspejler de ydre hårcellers sundhed, og at den basilære membrans I/O funktion
kan aﬂedes ved at anvende niveauet af den sekundære primær som input og niveauet af det tilsvarende ku-
biske forvrængningsprodukt fDP = 2f1 −f2 som output. Personer med sensorneuralt høretab udviser af og
til reduceret kompressionseksponenter, der antages at afspejle beskadigede ydre hårceller, men dette er ikke
altid tilfældet. Der er også lyttere med forhøjede høretærskler, der har normale kompressionseksponenter.
I dette studie blev kompressionseksponenterne fra 10 normalt hørende (NH) og 6 hørehæmmede (HH) lyttere
estimeret ved hjælp af en hurtig TMC-baseret adfærdsmæssig metode (eksempelvis Grid metoden) og en
objektiv metode (DPOAE målinger). Med hensyn til DPOAE-målingerne blev primær niveauforholdet for
L1, L2 bestemt ved hjælp af to forskellige paradigmer, det såkaldte sakse-paradigme (dvs. L1 = 0.4L2 +39)
og ens-niveau-paradigmet (L1 = L2). De karakteristiske frekvenser, der blev undersøgt, var 1, 2 og 4 kHz.
Derudover blev DPOAE-stimuli kalibreret ved anvendelse af fremadtrykniveau (FPL) metoden, for at kende
lydtryksniveauet (SPL) ved trommehinden. Desuden blev kildeadskillelse påført DPOAE-målingerne, for
at undgå tilstedeværelsen af ﬁnstruktur på DP-spektret. Finstrukturen stammer fra interferensen mellem
generatorkomponenten, der menes at blive genereret på det overlappende sted for de to primære og reﬂek-
sionskomponenten, der stammer fra det karakteristiske sted på den basilar membranen, hvorpå maksimum
for fDP -bevægelsesbølgen er placeret. Ved at adskille DP’en dæmpes reﬂeksionskomponenten og som følge
heraf glattes DP-spektret ud.
Sammenligningen af Grid-TMC-udledte kompressionseksponenter med dem udledt fra DPOAE (sakse-
paradigmet) udviste en signiﬁkant moderat korrelation for alle frekvenserne og alle lyttere (dvs. NH og HH).
Derudover, blev dataene analyseret pr. Frekvens. Dette viste en moderat til høj korrelationskoefﬁcient ved 1
kHz og en temmelig høj korrelation ved 2 og 4 kHz. Yderligere indikerede den parrede t-test ikkesigniﬁkante
forskelle mellem middelværdierne af kompressionseksponenterne udledt fra de to metoder, med undtagelse
af kompressionseksponenterne for 4 kHz. På den anden side synes DPOAE (ens-niveau-paradigmet) at
iii
==PAGE:6==
RESUMÉ
iv
overestimere kompressionseksponenterne i sammenligning med Grid-TMC og DPOAE (sakse-paradigmet).
Ikke desto mindre er der begrænsninger, såsom antallet af testpersoner og antallet af DP-målinger pr.
testperson, men også andet, der er indikeret og er nødt til at blive forbedret. Det ser ud til, at metoderne
til måling af den perifere kompression, som blev anvendt i dette studie, ikke er klinisk brugbare i deres
nuværende form, men de foreslår en pilot til yderligere undersøgelse.
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Ewen McDonald, Bastian Epp and Michal Fereczkowski for the
academic support, guidance and patience they showed to me during the last 6 months. I would like to thank
especially Michal, for spending a lot of his time and energy on supporting me not only from an academic
perspective but also as a friend. Special thanks to Raul Sanchez Lopez for the long talks especially on the
early days of the project.
Special thanks to Kren Rahbek Nørgaard for providing the FPL calibration algorithm as well as to Glenis
Long and Simon Henin for providing the source unmixing algorithm.
I would additionally like to thank all the listeners who participated in the experimental procedure as test
subjects for being patient and cooperative.
Special thanks to Mikæl Kjær Petersen and Pernille Holtegaard for the abstract translation to Danish.
Finally, I would like to thank my wife for supporting me every day as well as my parents and my sister for
sending me their positive energy and love from thousands of miles away.
v
==PAGE:8==
Abbreviations
AD/DA
Analogue to digital/Digital to analogue converter
AFC
Alternative forced choice
BM
Basilar membrane
BMI/O
Basilar membrane input/output function
CAHR
Center of Applied Hearing Research
CF
Characteristic frequency
dB HL
Decibels Hearing Level
DP
Distortion product
DPOAE
Distortion product otoacoustic emission
DTU
Danmark Tekniske Universitet
EqL
Equal level paradigm
FPL
Forward pressure level
Fs
Sampling frequency
GOM
Growth of masking
GUI
Graphical user interface
HI
Hearing impaired
IHC
Inner hair cell
KP
Knee point
NH
Normal hearing
OAE
Otoacoustic emission
OHC
Outer hair cell
RMS
Route Mean Square
vi
==PAGE:9==
ABBREVIATIONS
vii
Sc
Scissors paradigm
SFOAE
Stimulus frequency otoacoustic emission
SNR
Signal to noise ratio
SPL
Sound pressure level
std
standard deviation
TM
Tectorial membrane
TMC
Temporal masking curve
==PAGE:10==
Table of Contents
Abstract
i
Resumé
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Abbreviations
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Introduction to the human hearing system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.2
Cochlear compression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.3
Behavioral methods for measuring cochlear compression in humans . . . . . . . .
4
1.1.4
Measure of cochlear compression using DPOAE recordings
. . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.1.5
Comparison of behaviorally and physiologically inferred BM I/O functions . . . .
13
1.2
Motivation and Aim of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2
Methods
15
2.1
Subjects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2
DPOAE recordings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.1
DPOAE recording setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.2
DPOAE recording stimuli
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.3
Calibration of stimuli for DPOAE recordings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2.4
Averaging of DPOAE recordings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.2.5
Source unmixing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.3
Collection of TMCs using the Grid method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.3.1
TMCs playback setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.3.2
Grid - TMC experiment parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.3.3
Listener’s training
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.3.4
Interpolation for averaging TMCs and estimation of BM I/O functions . . . . . . .
25
2.3.5
BM I/O Curve ﬁtting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3
Results
27
3.1
Comparison of BM I/O functions inferred from Grid-TMCs and DPOAEs . . . . . . . . .
27
3.1.1
Normal hearing listeners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
viii
==PAGE:11==
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ix
3.1.2
Source unmixing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.1.3
Hearing impaired listeners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.1.4
Source unmixing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.2
Correlation between Grid and DPOAE inferred compression exponents
. . . . . . . . . .
44
3.3
Relation between compression exponents and absolute thresholds
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.4
Relation between cochlear compression and characteristic frequency . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4
Discussion
50
4.1
Listeners’ training and TMCs collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.2
Fitting of the data for obtaining the BM I/O functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.3
Non-optimal sweeping rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.4
Averaging of DPOAE recordings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.5
DPOAE SNR criterion choice
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.6
Methods variability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.7
DPOAE source unmixing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.8
Fine structure in HI listeners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.9
Correlation between Grid-TMC and DPOAE based compression estimates . . . . . . . . .
54
4.9.1
Grid-TMC and DPOAE scissors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.9.2
Grid-TMC and DPOAE equal-level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.10 Optimal L1 - L2 relation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.11 Time efﬁciency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5
Conclusion
58
5.1
General conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.2
Outlook and future work suggestions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
Appendix A
61
Appendix B
64
Bibliography
66
List of Figures
69
List of Tables
73
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Background
1.1.1
Introduction to the human hearing system
In this section, the main stages of the sound waves conversion into electrical signals are described and how
these signals are transmitted through the auditory neurons.
As it can be seen in ﬁgure 1.1, the ﬁrst part of the auditory system that is faced by a sound wave is the pinna.
The sound wave arrives at the pinna and through the ear canal is transmitted to the tympanic membrane.
Then, the tympanic membrane starts vibrating and the vibrations are transmitted through the middle ear,
which consists of three bones (malleus, incus and stapes) to the oval window. The oval window connects the
middle ear with the cochlea.
The cochlea is a spiral shape tube, which is ﬁlled with ﬂuid (i.e. the perilymph). The vibrations are
transferred into the cochlea through the oval window and the basilar membrane starts vibrating.
The mechanical properties of the basilar membrane vary continuously from the base to the apex. Those
variations are responsible for the different place resonances across the basilar membrane as a function of
frequency. The higher frequencies’ characteristic places are located close to the base and the the lower
frequencies’ characteristic places are located more towards the apex. As an effect of place-dependent
characteristics of the BM, the excitation in response to a tonal input forms a travelling wave on the basilar
membrane. On the other hand, the basilar membrane can be imagined as a frequency analyzer.
The way that the basilar membrane extracts the spectral information of the sound is quite similar to that
of an overlapping band pass ﬁlter-bank. The movements of the basilar membrane leads to movement of
the tectorial membrane. The relative movement of both membranes bends the stereocilia at the top of each
inner hair-cell. This bending of the stereo-cilia will lead to depolarization of the hair-cell and as an effect,
electrical activity (spikes) will be generated in the corresponding auditory nerve ﬁbers. Thus, each of the
auditory nerve ﬁbers is tuned to speciﬁc region of the cochlea, which means that they are tuned to speciﬁc
frequencies, the so called characteristic frequencies (CF).
1
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
2
Outer ear 
Middle ear 
Inner ear 
Figure 1.1: Demonstration of the human outer, middle and inner ear. Adapted from Sherwood [2014].
In ﬁgure 1.2 is presented the organ of Corti. The inner hair-cells (IHC), responsible for the conversion of
the BM movements to spikes are positioned below the Tectorial Membrane (TM) and it can be observed
that they compose one line of cells along the TM. On the other hand, the outer hair-cells (OHC) structure
consists of three rows of hair-cells along the TM. The outer hair-cells are activated the same way as the inner
hair-cells, but the change in electric potential leads to change in the cell’s length. Thus the outer hair cells
can affect the motion of the basilar membrane, i.e., they can amplify the BM movements. Measurements of
the BM responses in non-human mammals that have been conducted in vivo, show responses that are sharply
tuned to the characteristic frequencies [Robles and Ruggero, 2001]. On the other hand, measurements on
human cadaver cochlea conducted by Von Békésy, G. and Wever [1960] exhibit less sharply tuned responses.
This observation can be interpreted as a clue for the existence of the so called cochlear ampliﬁer or active
mechanism, which is believed to originate from OHCs and ceases its action after death of the cells. The
cochlear ampliﬁer ampliﬁes the movements of the basilar membrane by causing sharp excitation.
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
3
Figure 1.2: Organ of Corti: Where TM is the Tectorial Membrane, BM is the basilar membrane, IHC is the
inner hair-cell, OHC is the outer hair-cells. Adapted from [Robles and Ruggero, 2001].
1.1.2
Cochlear compression
The peripheral auditory system response can be described by the relation between its input and its output.
A property of the sound stimulus (e.g. sound pressure level) is considered as an input, and output can be
estimated from e.g. behavioral responses, otoacoustic emission (OAEs), auditory brain-stem responses. This
input - output function exhibits some compressive behavior within moderate levels of input level range, i.e.,
a 10 dB change in the input level (e.g., 50 to 60 dB SPL) leads to less than 10 dB change in the response
level. If the response level change was 2 dB, the compression rate would be estimated as 10/2 = 5 and
the compression exponent (the inverse of compression rate) would equal 0.2. The function describing the
relation between the input level to the basilar membrane and the membrane’s response is called Basilar
Membrane Input/Output (BMI/O) function.
In vivo measurement of cochlear compression in non human mammals.
In vivo measurements have been conducted on mammals, mainly guinea pigs and chinchillas. Robles and
Ruggero [2001] measured the input output functions of the chinchilla cochlea. In ﬁgure 1.3 some of the
data from that study are presented. It can be observed that the slope of the BM I/O function when excited
with a stimulus of frequency at and close to the CF is quite low, while at frequencies far from the CF the
slope is higher. This corresponds to compressive and linear response, respectively. In the case of close-to-CF
stimulation, the compression exponent is lower (i.e. higher compression) at moderate and high levels with
the lower values of the compression exponent being approximately equal to 0.2 dB/dB. At low levels (i.e.
below 40 dB SPL) the slope of the BM I/O becomes less shallow and approaches 1 dB/dB, i.e. linear
behaviour. On the other hand, the BM I/O response to frequencies far from the CF exhibits a compression
exponent close to 1 dB/dB (i.e. parallel lines to the 1/1 dashed line) across all input levels. Nevertheless,
there are two frequencies close to the CF (i.e. 11 and 12 kHz) that exhibit similar to on-frequency behaviour.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
4
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 1.3: (a) BMI/O functions, were evoked using pure tone stimuli with frequency equal to or lower than
the characteristic frequency (CF = 10 kHz). (b) BMI/O functions of chinchilla, recorded using pure tone
stimuli of frequency equal to or higher than the characteristic frequency. The dotted line shows the linear
reference. Adapted from [Robles and Ruggero, 2001].
1.1.3
Behavioral methods for measuring cochlear compression in humans
Growth of Masking (GOM)
Oxenham and Plack [1997] investigated the cochlear non-linearity using a behavioral method called Growth
of Masking (GOM). This method employs a forward masking task (tone-burst masker preceding a tone-burst
target) with the masker - target time-gap ﬁxed. Two conditions were tested. In the ﬁrst condition, the masker
and target frequencies are identical, hence the condition is called the“on-frequency condition”. In the second
condition, the frequency of the masker is lower than the target frequency and the condition is called the
“off-frequency condition”. Some results from this study are presented in ﬁgure 1.4. It can be seen that for the
NH listeners the on-frequency GOM-curve is linear, due to the fact that the both the masker and the target
have same frequency and the BM response at the target place is compressive for both of them especially at
those moderate to high levels that the target and the masker are [Robles and Ruggero, 2001]. Taking two
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
5
compressive functions one against the other, the compressive behaviour is cancelled out and the result is a
linear function. On the other hand, the off-frequency masker has a close to or linear response at the target
tone CF place on the BM [Ruggero et al., 1997]. Thus, plotting the off-frequency masker threshold (linear
response) against the target (compressive), a compressive I/O function is obtained.
On the other hand, in ﬁgure 1.4, it can also be observed that the data for HI listeners exhibit similar slopes
for both the on and off - frequency tasks. This means that the input output function of those listeners will
be linear, which is assumed to arise from a non-functioning cochlear ampliﬁer. One important limitation
of the GOM method is that with increasing target level, the BM excitation spreads over a wider range of
frequencies, hence the measurement may be affected by off-frequency listening. The method presented next
employs a target ﬁxed at low level, which limits the spread of excitation and reduces the corresponding risk.
Figure 1.4: GOM: Required masker level in order the target tone to be masked as a function of the target
level. The target tone frequency is 6 kHz. The solid data points represent responses to on-frequency masker
(6 kHz) and the open symbols to off-frequency masker (3 kHz). The time gap between masker and target
was ﬁxed at 2 ms [Oxenham and Plack, 1997].
Temporal Masking Curves (TMCs)
Nelson et al. [2001] proposed another forward masking based method for measuring the cochlear compression.
The compression exponent values inferred by this method were similar to the values inferred by using
physiological measurements in animals conducted by Robles and Ruggero [2001] as well as to Oxenham and
Plack [1997] results. For obtaining the I/O function, Nelson et al. [2001] measured the masker thresholds of
a ﬁxed, low level target for different time-gaps between the offset of a pure tone masker and the onset of a
pure tone target. As before, on-frequency and off-frequency conditions were considered and in the latter the
masker frequency was about an octave below the target frequency. Then, using a procedure presented in
ﬁgure 1.6, they plotted the off-frequency TMCs as a function of the on-frequency TMCs in order to obtain
the I/O function. The main assumption of this method is that in the on-frequency case the BM response
increases compressively but the off-frequency response increases linearly at the CF place on the BM. In
ﬁgure 1.5 a representative plot from Nelson et al. [2001] is presented, which shows the TMCs inferred from
the forward masking task. It can be clearly seen that the slope of the off-frequency TMC is lower than the
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
6
slope of the on-frequency curve. The increased in slope of the on-frequency curve is assumed to indicate
compressive processing of the masker, while the target-tone and the off-frequency masker is assumed to be
linearly processed.
Figure 1.5: Temporal masking curves (TMCs) of 1kHz target frequency and several masker frequencies.
Taken from [Nelson et al., 2001]
Figure 1.6: Derivation of basilar membrane I/O responses from temporal masking curves. Left panel: Sketch
of temporal masking curves (TMCs). The ﬁrst and third sections of the on-frequency TMC, g(t), correspond
to the linear region of BM I/O while the second section corresponds to the compressive region. The arrows
indicate the knee point (KP) level, i.e. the masker level at which the slope of g(t) changes. When the masker
level exceeds the KP level, the increase in masker level with masker-signal gap has to overcome the BM
compression, hence the steeper slope. The ﬁrst and third sections of the on-frequency TMC are set equal
to the slope of the off-frequency curve, f(t). Note, that it is possible to estimate the KP level based on the
on-frequency curve. Right panel: Sketch of the BM I/O function (solid line) derived from the TMCs shown
in the left panel. Masker levels of g(t) and f(t) deﬁne the ordinate and abscissa, respectively. The arrow
points towards the KP level. The mid-section of the curve describes the compressive response, while the two
outer sections correspond to the linear response of the BM. The dashed curve reﬂects the linear reference.
Adapted from Fereczkowski [2015]
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
7
Figure 1.7 shows BM I/O functions inferred from the TMC data from Nelson et al. [2001] for a target-
frequency of 1 kHz and on-frequency masker frequency ranging from 500 to 1000 Hz. The frequencies of
the masker are presented at the upper left corner of ﬁgure 1.7. It can be seen that as the masker frequency
decreases, the BM I/O estimate becomes more and more linear. The observations of Nelson et al. [2001] are
similar to those of Robles and Ruggero [2001], establishing the TMC method as the psycho-physical way
for estimating the I/O function of the human cochlea.
While potentially useful for cochlear compression estimation, the TMC method as described in Nelson et al.
[2001] is very time-consuming and has high training requirements ([Rosengard et al., 2005], [Fereczkowski,
2015]). This limits the potential application of the method in clinical settings. For lack of a better alternative,
the TMC has become a method of choice for cochlear compression estimation.
Figure 1.7: Basilar Membrane Input-Output (BM I/O) function at and below the the frequency of the target
tone, 1kHz [Nelson et al., 2001]
Measuring cochlear compression using the grid method
Fereczkowski [2015] proposed a new threshold tracking method (the Grid method) to improve the time-
efﬁciency of the TMC procedure. The task is quite similar to that of Nelson et al. [2001]. The key difference
is that while Nelson et al. [2001] used individual runs to estimate masker-thresholds for each masker-target
gap, the time gap and the masker level are varied simultaneously in the Grid method. Figure 1.8 presents an
example of how the grid method works. There is a response probability surface (RPS) which consists of
predetermined points, which are deﬁned by 2 parameters, parameter 1 along the abscissa and parameter 2
along the ordinate. In the case of a TMC experiment, parameter 1 corresponds to the masker-target gap and
parameter 2 corresponds to the masker-level. The main assumption of the Grid method is that the underlying
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
8
threshold curve is monotonic. This assumption is met in the TMC case, since the curves are driven by
the forward-masking recovery. By taking into consideration the monotonicity of the TMC curve it can be
showed that the grid surface is divided into two regions, the "yes" and the "no" region, ﬁgure 1.8, where
the target undergoes less or more masking, respectively. As one progresses “into” the "no" region the task
becomes more difﬁcult for the listener, which means that the probability of answering correctly is reduced.
On the other hand, while progressing into the "yes" region the values of the parameters are such that make
the task easier for the listener, hence the probability of obtaining a correct answer by the subject is increased.
Each run of the experiment starts in the "yes" region (short masker-signal gap, but a low masker-level (this is
unlike in ﬁgure 1.8, where the values of both parameters are rather large), such that the listener can clearly
perceive the target. The listener is presented with three intervals, two of which contain the masker alone
and the remaining one contains the masker-target pair. Then, the listener chooses the interval containing the
target. For two successive correct responses of the listener, the task becomes more difﬁcult by increasing the
masker level. When the response is incorrect, the target level remains the same, but the masker - target time
gap is increased. Thus, the method is similar to a traditional 3-AFC 1-up, 2-down method.
Figure 1.8: Example of a possible curve that could be obtained using the grid method. The white squares
correspond to positive answers (i.e. the listener correctly identiﬁed the target interval) and the black squares
correspond to negative answers (i.e. the listener did not correctly identify the target interval). The arrows
mark the path that followed on the grid surface. [Fereczkowski, 2015]
Fereczkowski [2015] compared the Grid method with a 1-up, 1-down rule to the Single Interval Up-Down
method of Lecluyse and Meddis [2009]. The TMC threshold estimates of the grid method were very highly
and signiﬁcantly correlated to the reference thresholds R2 = 0.91, p < 0.0001, ﬁgure 1.9.
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
9
Figure 1.9: Scatter plot of the thresholds inferred using classic TMC, abscissa and the grid method, ordinate.
The R2 correlation coefﬁcient is 0.91 with p < 0.0001 [Fereczkowski, 2015].
1.1.4
Measure of cochlear compression using DPOAE recordings
Distortion product otoacoustic emissions (DPOAEs) are sounds emitted by the ear. For the DPOAEs to
be evoked, two stimuli, referred as primary 1 and primary 2, must be presented to the ear. A nonlinear
interaction between the primaries will take place in the cochlea and this non-linearity is related to the
function of the healthy OHCs. Thus, a damage of the OHCs leads to reduction or complete absence of the
DPOAEs [Dorn et al., 2001]. It is believed that using the DPOAEs, the BM I/O function can be inferred
(e.g. [Dorn et al., 2001], [Neely et al., 2003]). The most prominent distortion component in humans is the
cubic distortion 2f1 −f2. The primaries are usually pure tones of frequencies close to each other. The most
popular f2/f1 ratio that gives high levels of the distortion component 2f1 −f2 is 1.22 [Harris et al., 1989]
and the most established level relation paradigm between the primaries is the so called "scissors paradigm",
where the amplitude of the ﬁrst primary is given by L1 = 0.4L2 + 39 where L2 is always smaller than
L1. The scissors paradigm is valid up to L2 = 65 dB SPL where L1 = L2 [Kummer et al., 1998]. It is a
common practice the equal level paradigm (L1 = L2) to be used for L2 ≥65 dB SPL.
It is believed that the DPOAEs are generated in the cochlea by two mechanisms (i.e. non-linear distortion and
coherent reﬂection due to random perturbations on the BM mechanics) [Shera and Guinan Jr, 1999]. This
means that each distortion product consists of two components, the generator component and the reﬂection
component. The distortion product is generated due to the overlapping of the travelling waves of the two
primaries on the BM and depends on the OHC activity. Thus, the 2f1 −f2 component is created at the
f1,f2 overlap place and it is then propagating to oval window. On the other hand, the reﬂection component
does not depend only on the OHC activity. The forward fDP traveling wave that was created at the f1,f2
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
10
overlapping region on the BM is reﬂected backwards at its characteristic place of the BM to the oval window
[Shera and Guinan Jr, 1999]. In ﬁgure 1.10 is presented schematically the two mechanisms system that
generates the DPOAEs.
Figure 1.10: Schematic representation of the generation of stimulus - frequency (top) and distortion product
(bottom) otoacoustic emissions. The stimulus-frequency OAEs are generated by a coherent reﬂection of
the forward traveling wave at the characteristic place of the stimulus frequency on the BM. The DPOAEs
are generated due to the overlapping of the traveling waves of the primaries near the f2 place on the BM.
Then the DP wave is traveling to two directions. One part of the DP travels backwards to the oval window
(generator component) and its second part travels forward to the apex. The forward traveling DP is reﬂected
backwards from the characteristic place of the DP to the oval window (reﬂection component). Adapted from
[Shera and Guinan Jr, 1999].
Due to the phase difference between the generator and the reﬂection component, the spectrum of the signal
recorded in the ear canal exhibits a ﬁne structure. This ﬁne structure is caused due to the constructive
and destructive interference between the two components [Kalluri and Shera, 2001]. Figure 1.11 presents
the spectrum with the ﬁne structure, the spectrum of the generator component alone, the spectrum of the
reﬂection component and their corresponding phase response for three different L2 input levels.
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
11
Figure 1.11: Magnitude spectra and phase responses of DPOAEs evoked by three different L2 (i.e. 30, 50
and 80 dB SPL). The thick black lines represent the generator components, the doted lines represent the
reﬂection component and the grey thick lines represent the combination of them resulting in a ﬁne structure.
For the measurement of the presented data where used a ﬁxed f2/f1 ratio and for determining L1 the scissors
paradigm (L1 = 0.4L2 + 39) was used. Adapted from [Mauermann and Kollmeier, 2004]
BMI/O functions inferred from DPOAEs
Figures 1.12 and 1.13 presents the BMI/O functions inferred from DPOAEs from two studies (i.e. [Dorn
et al., 2001] and [Neely et al., 2009]) in which, different stimuli level parameters were used. It can be
seen that the shape of the functions is not dramatically different. This suggests that small differences in
the frequency and level relation between the primaries will not signiﬁcantly affect the shape of the BM
I/O functions [Neely et al., 2009]. Further, by comparing the BM I/O function from the two studies, more
and more common characteristics can be observed. For instance, the higher is the absolute threshold of the
subjects, the higher is the DPOAE threshold as well as the narrower is the level range of the compressive
part of the BM I/O.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
12
Figure 1.12: Median DPOAE levels as a function of L2, plotted according to the hearing loss of the subjects,
from 0 dB HL to 70 dB HL. The level relation between the primaries was L1 = 0.4L2 + 39 and the f2/f1
ratio was ﬁxed at 1.22. Adapted from [Dorn et al., 2001].
Figure 1.13: Median DPOAE levels as a function of L2, plotted according to the hearing loss of the subjects,
from 0 dB HL to 60 dB HL. The level relation was given by L1 = 80 + 0.137log2(18/f2)(L2 −80) and
the f1/f2 ratio were given by f2/f1 = 1.22 + log2(9.6/f2)(L2/415)2. Adapted from [Neely et al., 2009]
The mean value across frequencies of the minimum compression exponents estimates from two studies,
[Dorn et al., 2001], and [Neely et al., 2003] were found to be between 0.25 and 0.33 dB/dB for NH listeners,
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
13
approximately 0.4 for listeners with absolute thresholds from 25 - 35 dB HL and from approximately 0.65 to
1 for subjects with higher thresholds.
1.1.5
Comparison of behaviorally and physiologically inferred BM I/O functions
Johannesen and Lopez-Poveda [2008] investigated the possible correlation of the cochlear non-linearity
properties inferred psycho-physically (TMCs) and physiologically (DPOAEs) in NH listeners. For the
DPOAE measurements, the level relation between the primaries was determined by an extrapolated "scis-
sors" paradigm (i.e. they kept the same level relation also for L2 > 65 dB SPL). The f2/f1 ratio was ﬁxed
at 1.2. For reducing the ﬁne structure they measured the DPOAEs for ﬁve different f2 primaries (0.98f2,
0.99f2, 1.01f2 and 1.02f2) near the frequency of interest and then they averaged their recorded levels.
In ﬁgure 1.14 is presented the correlation plot between the compression exponents inferred from the DPOAEs
vs those inferred from the TMCs of Johannesen and Lopez-Poveda [2008] study on a group of normal
hearing listeners. They found a strong correlation at 4 kHz by ﬁtting the data points for obtaining the BM I/O
functions using 3rd order polynomial, but they did not ﬁnd a strong correlation for the entirety of the data
points. Johannesen and Lopez-Poveda [2008] also ﬁtted their data points using linear ﬁttings for estimating
the BM I/O functions, but they did not ﬁnd any strong correlation between the compression exponents
inferred from the two methods. In ﬁgure 1.14 are presented the correlation plots between the compression
exponents inferred psychofysically and physiologically.
Figure 1.14: Correlation between compression exponents inferred in normal hearing listeners from TMCs
and DPOAEs ﬁtted (A) using 3rd order polynomial and (B) using linear regression at L2 range from 40 to
65 dB SPL. Solid lines show linear ﬁt to the 4kHz data points and the dashed lines show the linear ﬁtting to
all data. Taken from [Johannesen and Lopez-Poveda, 2008].
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
14
1.2
Motivation and Aim of the project
Cochlea is one of the ﬁrst and most important stages of the auditory system. Nevertheless, it is not possible
to directly measure its response to stimuli. The most popular behavioral method for measuring the BM I/O
function is the temporal masking curves (TMCs). Moreover, otoacoustic emissions (OAEs) are believed to
allow estimation of the cochlear non-linearity in an objective way, i.e., without requiring active participation
of the listener. Despite both methods being expected to estimate peripheral compression, correlation between
the corresponding estimates has only been found at one audiometric frequency in NH listeners [Johannesen
and Lopez-Poveda, 2008]. No correlation has so far been found in HI listeners. One of the potential
reasons for this lack of correlation is the ﬁne structure of the recorded DPOAE spectrum, which arises
due to interference between the generator and reﬂection DP components, i.e., the data collection process
may have been sub-optimal in previous studies. Therefore, the main aim of the study was to reassess
the correlation between the compression rates of the BM I/O functions inferred from the behavioural and
objective methods in NH and HI listeners, taking into account the recent developments in source unmixing
techniques. Speciﬁcally, a procedure of the sweeping primaries [Long et al., 2008] was employed in the
current study. Another source of variability in DP response estimates was identiﬁed. Due to individual
resonances in the outer-ear, the sound pressure level of the primaries presented at the eardrum might be
different from those intended. This might lead to sub-optimal amount of overlap between the corresponding
travelling waves and further, to reduced power of generated DPOAEs. To eliminate this source of variability,
forward pressure level calibration was used here. Moreover, to reduce experimental time, BM I/O functions
were inferred from TMCs obtained using the Grid method. The data collection and analysis was performed
for three audiometric frequencies (1, 2 and 4 kHz) in 10 normal hearing and 6 hearing impaired listeners.
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 2
Methods
This chapter presents the details of the setups and the signal processing that were used for the TMC measure-
ments and the recordings of the DPOAEs as well as tools for the analysis of the results.
2.1
Subjects
10 normal hearing and 6 hearing impaired listeners with sensory-neural hearing loss participated in the
experiments. The normal hearing listeners exhibited clinically normal hearing thresholds ≤20 dB HL at all
audiometric frequencies. The hearing impaired listeners exhibited hearing thresholds from 25 up to 70 dB
HL at the tested frequencies of 1, 2 and 4 kHz. One ear was measured for each listener and it was selected to
be that with the smoothest audiogram.
2.2
DPOAE recordings
2.2.1
DPOAE recording setup
The setup for the DPOAE recordings is presented in ﬁgure 2.1. The signal was created on a Windows PC,
using Matlab (2015a) and it was fed to the sound card through a USB 2.0 connection. Through the optical
outputs of the sound-card (RME Fireface UCX) the signal was transferred to the AD/DA converter (RME
ADI-8 DS Mk III). The digital-to-analog converted signal was transferred from the balanced line output of
the D/A converter to the balanced line input of the probe system (Etymotic Research ER-10X) and delivered
to the listener’s ear with a two-loudspeaker probe.
Moreover, the insert-probe has a built-in microphone that captures the sound waves that are present in the
ear canal. Then, the captured sound waves are converted into electrical signal. The electrical signal will
pass through the pre-ampliﬁer of the probe system and will be ampliﬁed by 20 dB. The ampliﬁed signal
of the microphone is then fed to the balanced line output of the probe unit to the balanced line input of
the AD/DA converter. The analog-to-digital converted signal will reach the optical input of the sound card
through the optical output of the AD/DA converter. From there, it will be fed to the computer through a USB
2.0 connection and stored.
The DPOAE recordings were conducted at the physiology lab of the Center for Applied Hearing Research
(CAHR) at the campus of Technical University of Denmark. Each subject was lying comfortably on a bed in
15
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 2. METHODS
16
a sound insulated booth.
PC 
Soundcard 
RME Fireface  
UCX 
AD/DA converter 
RME ADI-8 DS MK III 
Probe system 
EtymoBc Research 
ER-10X 
BOOTH 
USB  
connecBon 
SBmuli 
analogue 
signal 
Mic signal 
ADAT  
connecBon 
SBmuli digital 
 signal 
Ampliﬁed mic  
signal in digital 
format 
SBmuli  
analogue  
signal 
 
Ampliﬁed  
mic signal 
+20dB 
Ear  
probe 
Signal ready 
to be  
recorded 
SBmuli digital 
 signal 
Analogue  
balanced  
connecBon 
Figure 2.1: DPOAE recording setup. The blue cables carry the stimuli, generated in the PC, in digital format,
the green cables carry the converted from digital to analogue stimuli. The magenta cables carry the signal
captured by the probe microphone and the dark red cables carry the converted from analogue to digital
microphone signal.
2.2.2
DPOAE recording stimuli
The stimuli that were used for the recording of the DPOAEs were continuously sweeping primaries. The
sweeps were linear with frequency increasing in time covering the frequency range of one octave in 2
seconds [Long et al., 2008]. The frequencies of interest in this study are 1, 2 and 4 kHz. Thus, the following
sweep frequency range of the second primary was chosen: from 750 Hz to 1.5 kHz, from 1.5 kHz to 3 kHz
and from 3 kHz to 6 kHz. These ranges were selected such that the target frequencies fell roughly in the
middle of the sweep, to avoid edge effects in the analysis. The frequency ratio between the primaries was
ﬁxed at f2/f1 = 1.22. For maximization of the 2f1 −f2 distortion product in normal hearing subjects, the
so called scissors paradigm, which is described by the formula L1 = 0.4L2 + 39, for L2 ≤65 dB [Kummer
et al., 1998], was used . For L2 > 65 dB, L1 = L2. Furthermore, a second paradigm was examined, called
equal level paradigm, where L1 = L2 for any level. The levels of the second primary that were used during
the measurements were from 35 to 80 dB SPL with a step of 15 dB. The above mentioned levels were
selected under the assumption that the range of levels at which the BM I/O is compressive extends from
approximately 30 to approximately 85 dB SPL, for normal hearing listeners (i.e. audiometric thresholds ≤20
dB HL) [Neely et al., 2003]. 108 recordings were performed for each level-frequency-paradigm-listener
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 2. METHODS
17
combination. Furthermore, the primaries were calibrated in situ every approximately 1 min. in order the
variability of the stimuli level at the ear drum to be kept as low as possible.
2.2.3
Calibration of stimuli for DPOAE recordings
For recording DPOAEs a probe has to be inserted in the ear canal. The probe emits the two primaries
through two built-in loudspeakers (one primary per loudspeaker) and records the DPOAEs using a built-in
microphone. The ear canal is essentially a closed end tube. This means that standing waves can be present.
The standing waves can affect the effective level (at the ear-drum) of the primaries emitted in the ear canal as
well as the level of the recordings. This means that the sound pressure level that can be measured in such
cavity does not represent the sound pressure level emitted by the source. This is caused by the variability of
the insertion depth of the probe in the ear canal. The sound pressure level varies as a function of this insertion
depth. The insertion depth of the probe in the ear canal varies because the subject cannot be completely
still for a long time during the measurement. Thus, the standing waves will change their position along the
ear canal and the measured SPL will vary. For plotting the BM I/O function inferred from DPOAEs, it is
crucial that the SPL level of stimuli at the tympanic membrane is known, as the SPL of the second primary
corresponds to the input of the BM I/O function. To estimate the pressure at the eardrum, a forward-pressure
level (FPL) calibration was performed.
The probe that is inserted in the ear canal has built in the two loudspeakers that will play the two primaries and
the microphone that is responsible for capturing the sound in the ear canal. This means that the loudspeakers
and the microphone are placed at the same point as it is demonstrated in ﬁgure 2.2. This essentially means
that the sound pressure level at the ear canal entrance is known. What is unknown is the sound pressure level
at the tympanic membrane.
Figure 2.2: Demonstration of the position in the ear canal of the built-in the probe loudspeakers and
microphone.
For the calculation of the pressure at the tympanic membrane, the measured at the entrance of the ear canal
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 2. METHODS
18
pressure can be used. Then, the measured pressure can be separated into two components, a forward and
a reverse component [Scheperle et al., 2008]. For the calculation of the two pressure components, the
characteristic impedance, Z0, and the load impedance, ZL, must be known.
Estimation of the Thevenin equivalent source characteristics
The ﬁrst step of the forward pressure level (FPL) calibration is the estimation of the Thevenin equivalent
source pressure, Ps, and source impedance, Zs. This part of the calibration code was kindly provided
by Kren Rahbek Nørgaard, from Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The Thevenin equivalent of
each of the probe loudspeakers was determined using one cavity with adjustable length and temperature,
which is built-in the probe system. The adjustable length of the cavity gives to the user the choice of using
several cavity lengths without the inconvenience of using external set of tubes as well as the control of the
temperature in the cavity. The steps for estimating the Thevenin equivalent of the source are presented
below:
• Place the probe in the calibrator cavity of the probe system ER-10X. Set the length of the cavity at
the desired length and reproduce a broad-band stimulus from one of the probe built-in loudspeakers.
Measure the pressure Pc with the built in microphone. Repeat the same procedure for three more
cavity lengths. The ideal impedance of the cavity Zc is preliminary known and it is given by equation
2.1.
Zc = −jZ0cot(kL)
(2.1)
Where Z0 is the acoustic impedance of a plane propagating wave in the cavity, which is a tube. Where
L is the length of the cavity and k the wave number.
• For calculating the source impedance, Zs, equation 2.2 can be used.
Ps
Zs + Zc
= Pc
Zc
(2.2)
After four measurements of Pc, one for each cavity length, we have four different versions of equation
2.2.
For estimating the source pressure Ps, it is assumed that the sound pressure level at time t = 0
consists only of the forward pressure level. This means that Z0 = Zc because in this case there are
no reﬂections and the pressure moves only forward. Thus, an initial estimate of Ps was obtained.
Then, the only unknown in equation 2.2 is the source impedance Zs. For the ﬁnal estimations of
the Thevenin equivalent source characteristics an iterative procedure is used. During the iterative
procedure, the impedance of the cavity Zc was adjusted until the minimum reﬂectance was reached
(i.e. Zc = Z0), which essentially means that the cavity impedance estimates were being adjusted until
the error was minimized. The estimated cavity impedance was calculated using equation 2.3.
Zcest =
Zs
Ps
Pc −1
(2.3)
During the iterative procedure, Zcest, was calculated several times. Every time Zcest was calculated,
Zs and Ps were updated, using the corresponding Zcest. The reason why Zcest is calculated many
times is because the insertion of the probe in each calibration cavity is not accurate. The insertion
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 2. METHODS
19
depth can vary across measurements. This means that L in equation 2.1 varies every time the probe is
inserted in the tube and Zc is not equal to Zcest. What the iterative procedure does, is an estimation of
Zcest by taking into account a small insertion depth offset. The offset is from 0.9 times the length of
the cavity to 1.1 times the length of the cavity, using a step of 0.001. By using these predetermined
steps the algorithm essentially scans a length range in which it is assumed that is lying the real cavity
length. Finally, it chooses the cavity offset that gives the minimum error, which is calculated by using
equation 2.4
error = 1 −Zcest
Zc
(2.4)
The corresponding Zs and Ps are the Thevenin equivalent source characteristics.
• The above describe procedure was repeated for the second probe loudspeaker.
Estimation of the loudspeaker transfer function
The second step was the estimation of the transfer function of each of the probe built-in loudspeakers. During
this procedure the coupler B&K 4157 and the SPL meter B&K 2636 were used. The setup is presented in
ﬁgure 2.3.
PC 
Soundcard 
RME Fireface  
UCX 
AD/DA converter 
RME ADI-8 DS MK III 
Probe system 
EtymoBc Research 
ER-10X 
BOOTH 
USB  
connecBon 
SBmuli 
analogue 
signal 
Mic signal 
ADAT  
connecBon 
SBmuli digital 
 signal 
Ampliﬁed mic  
signal in digital 
format 
SBmuli  
analogue 
signal 
 
Ampliﬁed  
mic signal 
+20dB 
Ear  
probe 
Signal ready 
to be  
recorded 
SBmuli digital 
 signal 
Analogue  
balanced  
connecBon 
Coupler 
Analogue 
unbalanced   
connecBon 
Coupler’s  
output 
Ampliﬁed 
coupler’s  
output 
 
SPL meter 
Ampliﬁed coupler’s 
output in digital format 
Coupler’s signal 
Ready to be recorded 
Analogue 
unbalanced   
connecBon 
Figure 2.3: Calibration setup. The blue cables carry the stimuli, generated in the PC, in digital format,
the green cables carry the converted from digital to analogue stimuli. The magenta cables carry the signal
captured by the probe microphone. The red cables carry the converted from analogue to digital microphone
signal. The orange cables carry the captured by the microphone of the coupler signal. The signal ﬁrst
passes through the SPL meter, where it is ampliﬁed, and then it is fed to the AD/DA converter in order to be
converted from analogue to digital format. The converted signal is transferred from the AD/DA converter
through ADAT connection to the sound-card and from the sound-card to the computer through USB 2.0
connection (red cables).
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 2. METHODS
20
The difference between ﬁgure 2.3 and ﬁgure 2.1 is that the probe is placed in the coupler instead of the
subject’s ear canal, and the signal from the output of the coupler was ampliﬁed by the SPL meter (orange
cables). Then it was converted and transferred through the converter and the sound-card to the PC in order to
be recorded (brown cables).
The transfer function of the coupler was obtained using a matlab script which was kindly provided by Kren
Rahbek Nørgaard, from Technical University of Denmark (DTU). This script measures the transfer function
of the coupler following the explained bellow steps.
• It plays short sweeps and simultaneously records them using the probe microphone. The recorded
signal represents the pressure at the probe. This means that now the pressure at the probe PP R, the
Thevenin equivalent pressure Ps and impedance Zs of the source are known. This means that the
pressure at the end of the cavity can be calculated. This is essentially the same procedure that is used
for the calibration in the ear canal, which is explained later in this chapter. The impedance of the
coupler is given by equation 2.5
ZCOUP =
Zs
Ps
PP R −1
(2.5)
The measured pressure is now analyzed in forward pressure P+ = PP R
2

1 + ZCOUP
Z0

and reverse
pressure P−= PP R
2

1 −ZCOUP
Z0

. The phase difference between the forward and the reverse
pressure affects the sum pressure due to constructive and destructive interference. Thus, for calculating
the pressure at the microphone of the coupler (at the end of the cavity) equation 2.6 can be used.
PT OT =| P+ | + | P−|
(2.6)
Then, by knowing the pressure at the probe and at the end of the coupler we can calculate the transfer
function of the coupler by using equation 2.7
TCOUP = PP R
PT OT
(2.7)
• Now the transfer function of the coupler is known. The number of samples that TCOUP consists of is
1024. The stimulus that was used for the estimation of the transfer function of the built-in the coupler
loudspeaker is a 60 sec long linear sweep with frequency range from 20 Hz to 20 kHz. This means
that the stimulus is much longer in time than the transfer function of the coupler. In order to make
them equal regarding their length, the transfer function of the coupler was interpolated, using Matlab
function interp1 with spline method. Then, | TCOUP | was inverted and the absolute value of the
inverted transfer transfer function of the coupler, | T −1
COUP |, was multiplied with the absolute value of
the stimulus in frequency domain. So, the compensation for the coupler transfer function is applied
only for the amplitude. For jumping from time to frequency domain Matlab function fft was used.
Then by using the Matlab function ifft the stimulus was converted back in time domain, ready to be
reproduced by the loudspeaker in the coupler. The stimulus was reproduced 4 times in order to take
the average for improving the SNR. This time the microphone of the coupler is used. What is now
recorded is the sweep affected only by the loudspeaker transfer function, Tloud. In order to obtain
Tloud, equation 2.8 was used.
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 2. METHODS
21
Tloud = | Ploud |
| Pstim |
(2.8)
Where Ploud is the recorded, by the microphone of the coupler, pressure and Sstim is the created in
Matlab stimulus signal, they are both in frequency domain. The length of Tloud was 2646000 samples.
Estimation of the ear canal transfer function
For the estimation of the ear canal transfer function TEC, the probe was placed in the ear canal of the subject.
Again, the matlab script as well as the setup that were used for the estimation of the transfer function of the
coupler were used here.
Filtering of the stimuli with the inverse transfer functions
At this point the transfer function of the ear canal and the transfer function of the loudspeakers have been
estimated. Now, what remains to be done is the inverse of the transfer functions to be applied on the
primaries.
• The primaries are linear sweeps of two seconds time duration (88200 samples). The transfer function
of the ear canal has a length of 1024 samples and the transfer function of each loudspeaker has a
length of 2646000 samples. The transfer function of the ear canal was interpolated and the transfer
function of each loudspeaker was down-sampled in order to equalize their length with the length of the
primaries. Both processes were applied on the transfer functions using the matlab function interp1.
• The absolute value of the transfer functions were inverted in frequency domain. Then, they were
applied on each primary using equation 2.9.
Scomp =| T −1
EC | · | T −1
loud | · | Sstim |
(2.9)
Where Scomp is the stimulus that includes the compensation for the ear canal and the loudspeaker
transfer functions.
• The phase information of Sstim was extracted previously and applied to Scomp just before the
application of the inverse Fourier transform in order to keep it unaffected. This is crucial for the source
unmixing.
Validation of FPL calibration
In the validation of the FPL calibration the main assumption is that the coupler is a good model of the ear.
The advantage of the coupler is that instead of the ear drum, it has a microphone at the end of its cavity.
Using the microphone of the coupler it is possible to observe if the calibrated response at the end of the
coupler is as expected, i.e. ﬂat. Relying on this measurement it can be assumed that the response at the
ear drum will be ﬂat as well. In ﬁgure 2.4 are presented two versions of the second primary. The blue line
shows the signal without any processing. This is a sweep from 3 to 6 kHz within the time interval of 2
sec. The black line shows the same signal multiplied with the inverse transfer functions of the coupler and
loudspeaker that reproduces the second primary. It can be seen that the magnitude of the ﬁltered signal is
different than the magnitude of the pure signal, due to the ﬁltering, but the phase response is the same for
both signals. This is the signal that will be reproduced by the probe loudspeaker. The same procedure was
followed for the ﬁrst primary.
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 2. METHODS
22
Figure 2.5 shows the calibrated signal recorded, by the coupler-microphone. It is clearly visible that the
calibration was efﬁcient as the recorded signal by the microphone of the coupler is ﬂat, as it was for the pure
signal. Now it is validated that the signal, which arrives at the tympanic membrane has a ﬂat magnitude
response. What remains to be adjusted is the overall level of the sweep. Equation 2.10 was used to achieve
that.
WL = 10
Lt−Lmeas
20
(2.10)
Where WL is the scaling factor that the signal will be multiplied by. Where Lt is the target presentation
level of the sweep that the operator wants to present at the tympanic membrane of the listener and Lmeas is
the level of the unscaled sweep, estimated with the SPL meter.
Figure 2.4: The blue lines demonstrate the spectrum of the unprocessed second primary sweep, which covers
the frequency range from 3 to 6 kHz in two seconds. The black lines demonstrate the same sweep after the
ﬁltering with the inverse transfer function of the coupler and the loudspeaker. The top panels demonstrate
the magnitudes and the bottom panels the phase responses.
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 2. METHODS
23
Figure 2.5: Spectrum of the calibrated signal recorded by the coupler’s microphone. The top panel illustrates
the magnitude and the bottom panel the phase response of the second primary.
2.2.4
Averaging of DPOAE recordings
Due to ambient noise and occasional movement of the listener, some of the recordings had to be rejected,
due to their low signal to noise ratio. Assuming that the sound pressure level of the primaries and the sound
pressure level of the corresponding distortion product are not varying across runs, it can be assumed that any
increase of the RMS level of the recording is due to noise. Thus, out of 108 recordings performed for each
condition, 16 with the lowest RMS level were chosen for further analysis and averaged to improve SNR.
2.2.5
Source unmixing
Regarding the source unmixing, a pcode that was kindly provided by Glenis Long and Simon Henin from
The City University of New York (CUNY) was used. In some cases the unmixing was sub-optimal, as the
unmixed magnitude exhibited dips and peaks. The source unmixing was essentially based on the performance
of a narrow band pass ﬁlter with moving center frequency in time. It has been mentioned previously in this
chapter that the stimuli were linear continuously sweeping primaries with a rate of 2sec/oct. Using this type
of primaries, the reﬂection component of the DP can be avoided and as a consequence, the ﬁne structure
in the spectrum of the DP can be considerably reduced (Long et al 2008). As mentioned previously, the
Matlab procedure used here was a precompiled code from Glennis Long and Simon Henin, hence the access
to the details of the algorithm is limited. However, the approach is based on the LSF procedure of Long
and Talmadge [1997]. The approach relies on a’priori knowledge of the time-frequency dependencies in
the stimulus (primaries) and the corresponding DPOAEs. In fact, both primaries and DPs are modelled
as a combination of sine and cosine sweeps with known frequency ranges. An additional assumption is
that there is no delay between the primaries and the corresponding DP generator component while the
reﬂection component is delayed. By cross-correlating the recorded signal (including the primaries reﬂected
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 2. METHODS
24
form the eardrum and the DPs) with the model-signal, the procedure estimates the relative amplitudes of
the model-components in the recording. The analysis is run using successive Hanning windows of 0.5
second duration. Such a long duration of the window, together with the moving-frequency nature of the
model-sweep, forms a moving bandpass ﬁlter with a 2 Hz bandwidth at each time-instant. Assuming that
the reﬂection DP component is delayed, compared to the generator component, at each instant of time,
the reﬂection component has a lower instantaneous frequency than the generator. Thus, a 2 Hz bandpass
ﬁlter centered at the generator component will attenuate the lagging reﬂection. Mathematical details of the
correlation-based LSF procedure can be found in the Long and Talmadge 1997. However, the description
there concerns a slightly different scenario – the derivation is made for pure tones that are used in the model
there, while here sweeps are used.
2.3
Collection of TMCs using the Grid method
2.3.1
TMCs playback setup
The setup for the TMCs is presented in ﬁgure 2.6. The signal was created on a Windows PC using Matlab
(2015a) and it was fed to the sound card (RME Fireface UCX) through a USB 2.0 connection. The conversion
of the digital signal to analogue were conducted by the AD/DA converters of the sound card. The analogue
signal was fed to the headphones ampliﬁer (modiﬁed version of the SPL Phonitor mini with 6 step switch for
volume control) and from the headphones output of the headphone ampliﬁer, the signal was played through
the headphones (Sennheiser HD650 for the NH listeners and HDA200 for the HI listeners). The subject was
sitting comfortably on an ofﬁce chair in a sound insulated booth, in front of a touch screen, which was used
for the transfer of the visual information to the subject as well as for the responses of the subject.
The collection of the TMCs was conducted in the psycho-acoustics lab of the Center for Applied Hearing
Research (CAHR) at the campus of the Technical University of Denmark.
PC 
Soundcard 
RME Fireface  
UCX 
Headphones amp  
SPL Phonitor mini 
(modiﬁed) 
 
BOOTH 
USB  
connec@on 
S@muli digital 
 signal 
S@muli analogue 
signal 
Analogue  
Headphones  
signal 
Analogue  
balanced  
connec@on 
Figure 2.6: Behavioral experiment setup. The blue cable carries the stimuli, generated in the PC, in digital
format. The green cable carries the converted from digital to analogue stimuli and the black cable carries the
fed to the headphones signal.
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 2. METHODS
25
2.3.2
Grid - TMC experiment parameters
The stimuli that were used for the TMCs procedure were pure tones with duration of 200ms (masker tone)
and 16ms (target tone). The target frequencies that were examined were 1, 2, and 4 kHz. Therefore 3
on-frequency conditions were tested. However, only off-frequency condition was tested, where the target
frequency was 4 kHz and the masker frequency was 0.55 · 4000 = 2200 Hz. The resulting TMC was taken
as a linear reference for all on-frequency conditions. When it was not possible, due to elevated thresholds,
the off-frequency TMCs were measured using 2 kHz as the frequency of the target tone.
The time-gap between the masker and the target tone as well as the level of the masker were varying
according to the subjects answers. When the answer of the subject was correct, the task was getting
harder by increasing the level of the masker. On the other hand, when the answer was wrong, the task
was getting easier by increasing the time-gap between the masker and the target tone. The combinations
between the masker levels and the gaps were predetermined in steps, forming a grid. The masker was
increasing with a step of 3 dB SPL and the gap was increasing with a step of 5 ms. At the beginning of
each grid-procedure run, the masker-signal gap was set to 10 ms and the masker was varied according to
the standard 3-AFC, 1-up-2-down tracking method, i.e., only the masker-level was varied for the ﬁrst 6
reversals. After the 6 reversals, the run was continued with the grid procedure and both masker-level and
time-gap were varied according to the listener’s responses. This was done to stabilize the estimate of the ﬁrst
threshold, as some of the runs in Chapter 4 of [Fereczkowski, 2015] showed unexpectedly low masker-level
estimates at the beginning of the run. Six runs of the Grid procedure were completed for each condition tested.
The maximum presented level in the Grid-TMC experiment was set to 95 dB SPL for the normal hearing
listeners and up to 100 for the HI listeners. Nevertheless, the maximum level was reduced if the listener
reported discomfort due to excessive loudness.
2.3.3
Listener’s training
The listener’s task during the behavioural experiment was the detection of small quality differences among
the presented sounds (forward masking task). Those quality differences are relatively minute and hard to be
perceived by a naive listener. Therefore, behavioral training was administered to all listeners. First, each
listener was familiarized with the forward masking stimuli and the 3-AFC task using a custom GUI interface
and with aid of the experimenter. Subsequently, the listener was trained in the forward masking task with the
standard and the Grid tracking method, for all 4 conditions tested. The training took at least 2 hours. The
training for a given condition was considered successful, if the standard error of 3 consecutive runs at each
of two time-gaps (10 and 40 ms) was below 3 dB.
2.3.4
Interpolation for averaging TMCs and estimation of BM I/O functions
The obtained TMCs were a result of averaging across six runs. The abscissa of the plot consists of time-gaps
and the ordinate consists of thresholds. Since the method adaptively varies masker-levels and masker-target
gaps in each individual run, it is the most likely that the gap-threshold pairs of one run will not exactly match
those of the other runs. Linear interpolation of thresholds estimated within each run was used to estimate the
thresholds at the gaps not estimated in that particular run. No extrapolation was used.
The BM I/O functions were inferred from TMCs by matching the on- and off-frequency threshold estimates,
as described in chapter 1. Again, if the on- and off-frequency TMC thresholds were estimated at no-matching
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 2. METHODS
26
gaps, linear interpolation was used to “ﬁll in”. As before, no extrapolation was used, so the maximum
time-gap used to estimate an individual BM I/O was the smaller of the two (on- and off-frequency) highest
gaps.
2.3.5
BM I/O Curve ﬁtting
The ﬁtting of the BM I/O functions inferred from TMCs and DPOAEs was a simple linear regression
ﬁtting. Using the built in Matlab (2015a) function glmﬁt, the parameters (i.e. offset and slope) of the linear
regression were calculated.
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 3
Results
This chapter presents the effects of data processing and analysis performed on the data collected during
the study. The ﬁrst section presents BM I/O data inferred from TMCs and DPOAEs for normal hearing
and hearing impaired listeners, together with the corresponding regression ﬁts. The next section presents
results of correlation analysis performed on the compression exponents estimated from the BM I/O ﬁts.
The remaining two sections focus on correlations between the estimated exponents and listener’s hearing
thresholds, as well as a relation between tested frequency and compression estimates. Additional data, such
as individual listeners’ hearing thresholds and individual TMCs inferred from the Grid method are presented
in the Appendix.
3.1
Comparison of BM I/O functions inferred from Grid-TMCs and DPOAEs
This section focuses on the BM I/O esimates from all the NH and HI listeners together with the corresponding
regression analysis. The analysis focuses on the compression exponents inferred from the Grid-TMC, the
DPOAE (scissors paradigm) and the DPOAE (equal level paradigm). In all the subsequent ﬁgures, the
output of the DPOAE inferred data points is shifted upwards (without any re-scaling), in order to aid visual
comparability with the behaviourally derived BM I/Os. The data have been ﬁtted with linear regression
using the Matlab built in function glmﬁt for obtaining the parameters of the ﬁtted line (i.e. slope and offset).
The linear ﬁtting of the Grid - TMC inferred data was applied to the data points within the input range of
35 - 80 dB SPL, i.e. the range of the second primary level L2. While Neely et al. [2009] suggested that a
two-slope model provides better ﬁt to BM I/O functions 96% of the time, the linear regression ﬁtting used in
the present study,due to a limited number of data points obtained from the DPOAE measurements (at most
four per condition). The compression exponent estimate of the BM I/O function is deﬁned as the slope of
the ﬁtted line.
3.1.1
Normal hearing listeners
Figures 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3 present the BM I/O functions inferred from the Grid method, the DPOAE (scissors)
and DPOAE (equal level) paradigms for all 10 NH listeners (each listener’s data are presented in a separate
panel). Each ﬁgure illustrates the data and their ﬁttings for one characteristic frequency (i.e. 1, 2 and 4 kHz
respectively). In each panel, the blue diamonds, the red circles and the black circles represent the data points
inferred from the Grid, the DPOAE (scissors paradigm) and the DPOAE (equal level paradigm) methods
respectively. When the circles are open, they correspond to DPOAE inferred data points with SNR<5 dB,
and when they are solid represents DPOAE inferred data points with SNR≥5 dB. The solid straight lines
correspond to the linear ﬁttings of the data points from each method. The line-color matches the color of the
27
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
28
data symbols and the dashed lines show the linear reference, i.e. it has the slope of 1 dB/dB. Overall, the
slopes of the ﬁtted lines seem to be comparable between methods, particularly between the Grid and the
scissors paradigm at 2 and 4 kHz. Examination of individual cases for each frequency, reveals a difference
in compression exponent smaller than 0.05 for listeners NHL8 and NHL10 at 1 kHz, NHL7, NHL8, NHL9
and NHL10 at 2 kHz and for listeners NHL6, NHL9 and NHL10 at 4 kHz.
On the other hand, there are cases were the compression exponents inferred from these two methods are
quite different. For instance, the difference between the compression exponent inferred from the Grid and
the DPOAE (scissors) methods for NHL3 at 2 kHz is approximately 0.3 dB/dB.
Another observation that could be made is that the similarity between the slopes of the BM I/O functions
inferred from the Grid and those inferred from the DPOAE (equal level) is smaller than in the scissors case.
Most of the time, the DPOAE (equal level) inferred slopes are steeper than the corresponding slopes from
the Grid as well as from the DPOAE (scissors) inferred ones. In the case of the behavioral experiment the
basilar membrane is driven by the probe (i.e. a pure tone) at the CF place. On the other hand, in order the
DPOAEs to be evoked, 2 primaries must be presented simultaneously. In this case the BM will be excited at
two places by the two primaries. The CF place in this case is assumed to be close to the f2 place on the BM.
The overlap of the two excited places on the BM will evoke the distortion product. Boege and Janssen [2002]
described that using the scissors paradigm (i.e. L1 = 0.4L2 + 39) for evoking DPOAEs, the overlapping
on the BM takes place closer to the place where is the peak of the second primary traveling wave (i.e. on
frequency). On the other hand the equal level paradigm causes the maximum overlap location on the BM
to be towards the apex (i.e. off frequency). Physiological measurements have shown that the closer to the
characteristic frequency is the excitation taking place the more compressive is the response of the cochlea
[Robles and Ruggero, 2001]. This may explain the fact that the Grid - TMC and the DPOAE (scissors)
inferred BMI/O functions exhibit shallower slopes (i.e. more compressive) than the DPOAE (equal level
paradigm) inferred ones. It seems that the equal level paradigm does not evoke optimal overlap.
Moreover, out of 10 · 4 · 3 = 120 data points to be obtained, there are 25 data points inferred from the
DPOAE (equal level) method below the 5 dB SNR criterion, most of them for input level L2 = 35 dB SPL.
On the other hand this is not the case for the DPOAE (scissors) inferred data, where only 6 data points are
bellow the 5 dB SNR criterion. For obtaining the maximum DPOAE amplitude, optimal stimulation must be
achieved for maximum overlap close to the f2 place on the basilar membrane. The f2 place is assumed to be
the region that mainly contributes to the generation of the generator component [Brown and Kemp, 1984].
Later, Kummer et al. [1998] suggested that the maximum overlap can be achieved by using the scissors
paradigm for L2 up to 65 dB SPL. Thus, the lack of data points above the SNR criterion for the DPOAE
(equal level) data may have been caused due to the L1,L2 relation which cause a non-optimal overlap on the
BM. Furthermore, there are some technical uncertainties that may have contributed to this small SNR as
well, that are discussed later in the present report.
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
29
NHL8
Input [dB SPL]
40
60
80
Output [dB]
40
60
80
100
NHL9
Input [dB SPL]
40
60
80
NHL10
Input [dB SPL]
40
60
80
NHL5
Output [dB]
40
60
80
100
NHL6
NHL7
GRID
Sc SNR>5dB
EqL SNR>5dB
EqL SNR<5dB
Grid fit
Sc fit
EqL fit
1:1
NHL2
Output [dB]
40
60
80
100
NHL3
NHL4
NHL1
Output [dB]
40
60
80
100
Figure 3.1: BMI/O functions of all the NH listeners at 1 kHz. The blue diamonds corresponds to the data
points inferred from the Grid method, the solid red circles and the solid black circles represent the data
points with SNR ≥5 dB inferred from the DPOAE (scissors paradigm) and DPOAE (equal level paradigm)
respectively. The minimum SNR criterion for acceptance of the DPOAE-based data points was 5 dB. The
open red and black circles represent the data inferred from the DPOAE (scissors paradigm) and DPOAE
(equal level paradigm) respectively with SNR < 5 dB. The solid blue line is the linear regression ﬁtted to
the Grid inferred data points, which fall within the input level range of 35 - 80 dB SPL (i.e. second primary
level L2, range). The red and black solid straight lines are linear regressions ﬁtted to the data with SNR ≥5
dB from each DPOAE method (i.e. scissors and equal level paradigms). The black dashed line is the linear
reference.
In ﬁgures 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3 it can be observed that the data points inferred from the GRID - TMC method
(i.e. blue diamonds) span different level ranges in individual listeners. The lower bound BM I/O input
level for each listener depends on the individual threshold of the on-frequency TMC estimated at the 10 ms
masker-target gap (the lowest gap measured). The upper bound depends on the smaller of the maximum
masker-target gaps measured in the on and off-frequency conditions. In particular, the maximum BM I/O
input level was equal to the on-frequency threshold estimated at that gap.
Regarding the DPOAE inferred BMI/O functions, it must be mentioned at this point that each of them was
obtained using at most 4 data points. The lack of a bigger number of DPOAE data points is a limitation
of the present study. The choice of measuring the DPOAEs for only 4 L2 primary levels (i.e. 35, 50, 65
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
30
and 80 dB SPL) decided in order both the scissors and the equal level paradigm to be measured within an
approximately 2 hours session.
NHL8
Input [dB SPL]
40
60
80
Output [dB]
40
60
80
100
NHL9
Input [dB SPL]
40
60
80
NHL10
Input [dB SPL]
40
60
80
NHL5
Output [dB]
40
60
80
100
NHL6
NHL7
NHL2
Output [dB]
40
60
80
100
NHL3
NHL4
NHL1
Output [dB]
40
60
80
100
GRID
Sc SNR>5dB
Sc SNR<5dB
EqL SNR>5dB
EqL SNR<5dB
Grid fit
Sc fit
EqL fit
1:1
Figure 3.2: The same as ﬁgure 3.1, but for the CF of 2 kHz.
Concerning, the DPOAE (scissors paradigm) inferred compression exponents, their mean values across
subjects are 0.2402, 0.3210 and 0.3374 dB/dB at 1, 2 and 4 kHz respectively. Dorn et al. [2001], using the
DPOAE (scissors paradigm), found compression exponents for NH listeners from 0.16 to 0.34 dB/dB for
the frequency range of 1 to 6 kHz. In the frequencies of interest of the present study they found 0.31, 0.34
and 0.24 dB/dB for f2 of 1, 2 and 4 kHz respectively by ﬁtting the BM I/O data points with a 3rd order
polynomial and without applying source unmixing to the recorded DPOAEs. In both Dorn et al. [2001]
and the present study the compression exponents from normal hearing listeners fall within the range of
approximately 0.24 to 0.34 dB/dB.
On the other hand, the compression exponents inferred from the DPOAE (equal level) are much higher (i.e.
less compressive) than those inferred from the other two methods. The mean values of the compression
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
31
exponents for each frequency across subjects are 0.5314, 0.5951, 0.4928 dB/dB at 1, 2 and 4 kHz respectively.
As described previously in this chapter, the non-optimal overlapping might be responsible for this behaviour.
NHL8
Input [dB SPL]
40
60
80
Output [dB]
40
60
80
100
NHL9
Input [dB SPL]
40
60
80
NHL10
Input [dB SPL]
40
60
80
NHL5
Output [dB]
40
60
80
100
NHL6
NHL7
NHL2
Output [dB]
40
60
80
100
NHL3
GRID
Sc SNR>5dB
Sc SNR<5dB
EqL SNR>5dB
EqL SNR<5dB
Grid fit
Sc fit
EqL fit
1:1
NHL4
NHL1
Output [dB]
40
60
80
100
Figure 3.3: The same as ﬁgure 3.1, but for the CF of 4 kHz.
Tables 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3 presents the values of the compression exponents estimated for the normal hearing
listeners, as well as the mean value and the standard deviation of the compression exponent per method per
frequency across listeners. The behaviorally inferred values are similar to those from previous studies, where
the compression exponent was estimated to be approximately from 0.15 to 0.35 dB/dB (e.g [Oxenham and
Plack, 1997] and [Nelson et al., 2001]). Looking at individual compression exponents, in some cases (i.e. at
1 kHz NHL3, NHL4, at 2 kHz NHL10, at 4 kHz NHL9) the compression exponent is slightly higher, from
approximately 0.40 to 0.45 dB/dB. Such compression exponent estimates in NH listeners have been reported
previously as well (e.g. [Rosengard et al., 2005]).
Johannesen and Lopez-Poveda [2008] found mean compression exponents across frequencies of 0.13 and
0.04 dB/dB from data obtained from TMC - based and DPOAE (extrapolated scissors paradigm) methods
using 3rd order polynomials for the ﬁtting. These values are smaller than the values measured in the present
study. Additionally, they ﬁtted their data with linear regression within the input level range of 40 - 65 dB,
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
32
and they reported mean compression exponents of 0.31 and 0.18 dB/dB inferred from TMCs and DPOAE
(extrapolated scissors paradigm) respectively, for the frequencies of 0.5, 1, 2 and 4 kHz. The TMC inferred
mean compression exponent ﬁtted with linear regression from Johannesen and Lopez-Poveda [2008] study
is similar with the corresponding compression exponent in the present study, which was 0.2713 dB/dB
considering only the frequencies of 1, 2 and 4 kHz. Furthermore the input level range that was taken into
account for the ﬁtting was limited to be from 35 to 80 dB SPL. On the other hand, the DPOAE (scissors)
inferred mean compression exponents in the present study were estimated to be 0.2995 dB/dB i.e., higher
than the 0.18 dB/dB that Johannesen and Lopez-Poveda [2008] reported for their linear ﬁtted data. They
indicated the importance of the ﬁtting, as it notably affects the estimation of the compression exponent. Two
other important differences between the two studies, concerning the DPOAEs part, are the calibration of
the primaries and the source unmixing of the DP. In the present study FPL calibration of the primaries was
used, which essentially means that the SPL at the tympanic membrane was known. Furthermore, source
unmixing was applied on the DP, in order the ﬁne structure caused by the interference between the generator
and the reﬂection components to be suppressed. Johannesen and Lopez-Poveda [2008] did not use FPL
calibration and tried to reduce the ﬁne structure with a different technique, i.e. by averaging 5 DPs evoked
by f2 primaries of close by frequencies (i.e. 0.98f2, 0.99f2, f2, 1.01f2, 1.02f2). Finally, the mean DPOAE
(equal level paradigm) inferred compression exponent was 0.5398.
Table 3.1: Compression exponents of each of the NHLs at 1 kHz inferred from the Grid method, the DPOAE
(scissors paradigm) and the DPOAE (equal level paradigm). The mean value of the compression exponents
across subjects for each method is presented with its standard deviation. The frequency of 1kHz in this
case corresponds to the f2 for the DPOAEs and to the target tone frequency for the Grid - TMC method.
The compression exponent is deﬁned as the slope of the linear ﬁtting on the data points. The Grid inferred
compression exponents are estimated from the slope of the ﬁtted line to the Grid data for input level within
the range of 35 - 80 dB SPL (i.e. L2 range).
NH
1 kHz
Subject
Grid
DPOAE Scissors
DPOAE Equal level
NHL1
0.2990
0.0189
0.4184
NHL2
0.2599
0.3820
0.4671
NHL3
0.4015
0.1034
0.5360
NHL4
0.4440
0.2734
0.6703
NHL5
0.2707
0.4131
0.7313
NHL6
0.2771
0.0676
0.5617
NHL7
0.2043
0.3336
0.4804
NHL8
0.3509
0.3080
0.4973
NHL9
0.3122
0.1737
0.4286
NHL10
0.3209
0.3282
0.5228
mean ± std
0.3141 ± 0.0702
0.2402 ± 0.1391
0.5314 ± 0.1008
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
33
Table 3.2: The same as 3.1, but for 2 kHz.
NH
2 kHz
Subject
Grid
DPOAE Scissors
DPOAE Equal level
NHL1
0.1956
0.2789
0.2877
NHL2
0.1973
0.2668
0.5569
NHL3
0.2320
0.5398
0.5483
NHL4
0.3236
0.2626
0.6536
NHL5
0.2522
0.2771
0.7746
NHL6
0.2722
0.3745
0.6498
NHL7
0.2285
0.2284
0.4334
NHL8
0.2146
0.2299
0.5387
NHL9
0.3283
0.3614
0.5837
NHL10
0.4011
0.3905
0.7112
mean ± std
0.2645 ± 0.0671
0.3210 ± 0.0967
0.5951 ± 0.1023
Table 3.3: The same as 3.1, but for 4 kHz.
NH
4 kHz
Subject
Grid
DPOAE Scissors
DPOAE Equal level
NHL1
0.2051
0.3442
0.2877
NHL2
0.1906
0.3137
0.8027
NHL3
0.1998
0.3291
0.5230
NHL4
0.2226
0.3013
0.3652
NHL5
0.1906
0.3712
0.5884
NHL6
0.2851
0.3267
0.4907
NHL7
0.1846
0.2545
0.4940
NHL8
0.1854
0.4803
0.4635
NHL9
0.4140
0.3881
0.7944
NHL10
0.2748
0.2648
0.1180
mean ± std
0.2353 ± 0.0725
0.3374 ± 0.0653
0.4928 ± 0.2099
3.1.2
Source unmixing
Figures 3.4 and 3.5, present the BM I/O functions from two of the normal hearing listeners as examples
to emphasize the details in each case. It can be observed that some points of the DPOAE inferred BM I/O
functions evoked by lower level stimuli, have higher outputs than other points, which were evoked by higher
level stimuli. For instance, in ﬁgure 3.4, in the case of the scissors paradigm (red data points) at 1 kHz, the
output level that corresponds to the input level L2 = 50 dB SPL is higher than both next two points that
evoked by L2 = 65 dB SPL and L2 = 80 dB SPL respectively. In ﬁgure 3.5 at 1 kHz DPOAE (scissors) the
level of the DPOAE for L2 = 50 dB SPL is higher in level than the DPOAE evoked by L2 = 65 dB SPL.
This behaviour is unexpected and affects the slope of the corresponding BM I/O function. In order to be
investigated, the corresponding unmixed magnitudes must be examined.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
34
Input [dB SPL]
40
60
80
Output [dB]
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
NHL1 - 1kHz
Input [dB SPL]
40
60
80
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
NHL1 - 2kHz
Input [dB SPL]
40
60
80
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
NHL1 - 4kHz
GRID
Sc SNR>5dB
EqL SNR>5dB
EqL SNR<5dB
Grid fit
Sc fit
EqL fit
1:1
Figure 3.4: BM I/0 function of subject NHL1 for three characteristic frequencies (i.e. 1, 2 and 4 kHz). The
blue diamonds, the red circles and the black circles represent the Grid - TMC, the DPOAE (scissors paradigm)
and the DPOAE (equal level paradigm) inferred data points respectively. The open circles represent DPOAE
inferred data that their SNR was less than 5 dB (i.e. below the SNR criterion of acceptance). The open
circles can be red or black for DPOAE (scissors paradigm) and DPOAE (equal level paradigm) respectively.
For the estimation of the BM I/O function a linear regression ﬁtting is applied to the data points inferred
from each of the three experiments. The blue line is ﬁtted to the Grid - TMC data (ﬁtted in the input level
range 35 - 80 dB SPL), the red line is ﬁtted to the DPOAE (scissors paradigm) data and the black line is ﬁtted
to the DPOAE (equal level paradigm) data. The DPOAE inferred data that have been taken into account for
the ﬁtting are those with SNR≥5 dB.
Input [dB SPL]
40
60
80
Output [dB]
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
NHL9 - 1kHz
Input [dB SPL]
40
60
80
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
NHL9 - 2kHz
GRID
Sc SNR>5 dB
EqL SNR>5 dB
Grid fit
Sc fit
EqL fit
1:1
Input [dB SPL]
40
60
80
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
NHL9 - 4kHz
Figure 3.5: The same as ﬁgure 3.4 for subject NHL9.
Figures 3.6 and 3.7 illustrate the unmixed DP grams for L2 from 750 to 1500 Hz of the normal hearing
listeners NHL1 and NHL9 respectively. The abscissa consists of the frequencies of the cubic DP, given by
2f1 −f2 and the ordinate corresponds to an arbitrary magnitude logarithmic scale. What is important at
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
35
this point is the relative magnitudes among the DPs, which were evoked by different L2 levels, at the DP
frequency of interest that is marked with the black dashed line (≈639 Hz). In ﬁgure 3.6, the highest level DP
component is that evoked by L2 = 50 dB SPL. The next strongest DP is that evoked by L2 = 80 dB SPL.
Third comes the component evoked by L2 = 35 dB SPL and last comes the DP evoked by L2 = 65 dB SPL.
Regarding listener NHL9, it can be observed in ﬁgure 3.7 that the situation is similar with listener NHL1.
The ﬁne structure of the DP gram is quite smoothed out, which essentially means that the presented curves
are unmixed quite efﬁciently (maybe not perfectly) and they seem to represent the generator components.
Such magnitude variations that are exhibited in the DP grams of ﬁgures 3.6 and 3.7 were also present in
unmixed magnitudes in the study of Long et al. [2008]. Nevertheless, it seems that those variations are
enough prominent in order to affect the relative magnitudes of the unmixed DPs.
One more observation that can be made is that this phenomenon is present at all frequencies and for other
NH listeners as well. At 1 kHz it is present for all the NH listeners, at 2kHz for all the NH listeners except
NHL1 and NHL10. The NHL3 does not have data points with SNR ≥5 dB inferred from the DPOAE
(scissors paradigm) below 65 dB SPL. At 4 kHz it is present only for NHL8 and NHL10. What all these
DPOAE (scissors paradigm) inferred data points have in common is that the input level of L2 = 65 dB
SPL always gives lower level output than the corresponding output of the input level L2 = 50 dB SPL.
A possible explanation for this behaviour is that the L1,L2 primary level relation follows the equal level
paradigm for the L2 = 65 and L2 = 80 dB SPL because the scissors paradigm is optimal up to 65 dB SPL
without including this value and it is a common practice the equal level paradigm to be used for L2 ≥65 dB
SPL. This means that the overlapping of the primaries is not optimal at these input levels as it was mentioned
previously in the present chapter. Thus, due to non-optimal overlapping, the excitation of the DP is not as
strong as it is when the scissors paradigm is used and as a consequence the level of the generator component
which is evoked due to this overlapping is smaller than those evoked by using the scissors paradigm, even if
they were evoked by lower L2 primary levels. An example of what described in the present paragraph can be
observed in ﬁgure 3.7 at 1 kHz. The magnitude of the DP evoked by L2 = 50 dB SPL (scissors paradigm) is
higher than the magnitude of the DP evoked by L2 = 65 dB SPL (equal level paradigm) across most of the
frequencies of the DP.
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
36
Frequency [Hz]
550
600
650
700
750
800
850
900
Arbitrary magnitude [dB]
-130
-125
-120
-115
-110
-105
Unmixed DP gram of kons
L2 = 35 dB SPL
L2 = 50 dB SPL
L2 = 65 dB SPL
L2 = 80 dB SPL
DP frequency
NHL1 
Figure 3.6: Magnitudes of listener NHL1 obtained after the unmixing of the DPOAE (scissors) recordings
for f2 from 750 to 1500 Hz. Each of the red curves represents the unmixed component evoked by each of
the four L2 levels. The black dashed line indicates the DP frequency of interest (i.e. 2f1 −f2 ≈639).
Frequency [Hz]
550
600
650
700
750
800
850
900
Arbitrary magnitude [dB]
-130
-125
-120
-115
-110
-105
-100
-95
-90
Unmixed DP gram of ebla
L2 = 35 dB SPL
L2 = 50 dB SPL
L2 = 65 dB SPL
L2 = 80 dB SPL
DP frequency
NHL9 
Figure 3.7: The same as ﬁgure 3.6, but for normal hearing listener NHL9.
Regarding the DP grams in ﬁgure 3.8, in the case of L2 = 35 dB SPL, it seems that the unmixing is not
optimal, as the ﬁne structure seems to be still present. According to Mauermann and Kollmeier [2004], if the
contribution of the reﬂection component is higher than the contribution of the generator component, which
is possible especially at low L2 levels, there will be ﬁne structure present. In such case, it is possible that the
attenuation obtained by the moving ﬁlter is not enough for avoiding the interference of the generator with the
reﬂection component. The result in such case will be the partial suppression of the ﬁne structure phenomenon.
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
37
Due to this, there is still enough interference between the generator and the reﬂection component, which
causes peaks and dips in the DP gram. This seems to be the case in ﬁgure 3.8 for L2 = 35 dB SPL.
Figure 3.9 presents the mixed DP grams of the normal hearing listener NHL2. The interference of the
generator and the reﬂection components causes the ﬁne structure that exhibits very strong ﬂuctuations.
Comparing ﬁgure 3.8 with ﬁgure 3.9 it is obvious that the unmixing is quite efﬁcient. Even in the case of the
DP, which was evoked by L2 = 35 dB SPL were the unmixing is not perfect, the DP gram is quite smoothed
out in comparison with the mixed magnitudes.
Frequency [Hz]
2200
2400
2600
2800
3000
3200
3400
3600
Arbitrary magnitude [dB]
-190
-180
-170
-160
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
Unmixed DP gram NHL2
L2 = 35 dB SPL
L2 = 50 dB SPL
L2 = 65 dB SPL
L2 = 80 dB SPL
DP frequency
Figure 3.8: The same as ﬁgure 3.6, but for normal hearing listener NHL2 for f2 from 3 to 6 kHz. The black
dashed line indicates the DP frequency of interest (i.e. 2f1 −f2 ≈2557).
Frequency [Hz]
2200
2400
2600
2800
3000
3200
3400
3600
Arbitrary magnitude [dB]
-150
-145
-140
-135
-130
-125
-120
-115
-110
-105
-100
Mixed DP gram NHL2
L2 = 35 dB SPL
L2 = 50 dB SPL
L2 = 65 dB SPL
L2 = 80 dB SPL
DP frequency
Figure 3.9: Mixed (i.e. before unmixing) magnitudes of NHL2 for f2 from 3 to 6 kHz. Each of the red
curves represents the mixed magnitude of the distortion product evoked by each of the four L2 levels (i.e. 35,
50 65 and 80 dB SPL). The black dashed line indicates the DP frequency of interest (i.e. 2f1 −f2 ≈2557).
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
38
3.1.3
Hearing impaired listeners
Figures 3.10, 3.11 and 3.12 present the BM I/O functions of the HI listeners. The shapes and the colors are
the same as in the corresponding ﬁgures for the NH listeners (i.e. ﬁgures 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3) and have the same
correspondence.
What can be observed here is that in some cases the exhibited slopes are similar to those of NH listeners
despite the fact that the absolute thresholds of the HI listeners are elevated. For instance, at 1 and 2 kHz
the Grid inferred BM I/O functions of the hearing impaired listeners HIL2 and HIL6 exhibit quite shallow
slopes. Despite that fact, this is not always the case, as some HI listeners exhibited quite steep slopes close
to 1, for instance HIL6 at 4 kHz. One more observation that can be made for the HI listeners is that in many
cases it was not possible to obtain DPOAE data points with SNR criterion of 5 dB. When less than 2 DPOAE
inferred data points were below the SNR criterion, the measurement was excluded from further analysis,
since 2 points at least are needed in order a straight line to be ﬁtted.
At 2 kHz, where the absolute thresholds of the HI listeners were in the range between 25 and 45 dB HL only
in two cases it was possible the BM I/O function to be estimated for each of the DPOAE level paradigms.
At 4 kHz almost all of the recordings were below the SNR criterion. In only one case it was possible the
BM I/O function to be estimated (i.e., for HIL3 using the scissors paradigm). This behaviour was caused
probably due to the high thresholds ranging from 35 to 70 dB HL. In fact there was only one recording with
more than 1 point above SNR criterion at 4 kHz and this was for the lowest hearing threshold (i.e. 35 dB
HL) at this frequency. In the case of the equal level paradigm, the number of the recordings that reached
the SNR criterion was even smaller and in none of the listeners it was feasible to collect more than 1 point
above the SNR criterion. As it was mentioned previously, one more factor that is a limitation for obtaining
DPOAE points above the SNR criterion is the low energy that is provided per frequency when the primaries
are sweeps, which is the case in the present study. Furthermore, the sweeping rate of the sweeping primaries
was doubled every time the f2 was increased by one octave, which is translated to even more reduction of the
distributed energy per frequency. Thus, the optimization of the sweeping rate per octave by choosing a fast
enough rate in order the unmixing to work properly and at the same time a slow enough rate for providing as
much energy as possible might increase the probability of recording DPOAEs above the SNR criterion. This
limitation of the method is further discussed in the next chapter.
Sometimes, the inferred compression exponents exceeded 1 dB/dB, i.e. showed expansive behaviour. This
can be seen in ﬁgure 3.11, for the case of BM I/O functions of the listeners HIL1 and HIL5 inferred from
the Grid method. Compression exponent greater than 1 was also estimated for subject HIL2 and HIL4
at 4 kHz at the BM I/O function inferred from the behavioural data. Moreover, HIL3 exhibits compres-
sion exponent greater than 1 at 1 kHz for the BM I/O function inferred from the DPOAE (equal level)
method. Such values while implausible, they suggest the presence of linear behaviour. Such values in-
ferred from TMC - based measures have been reported also in previous studies (e.g. [Rosengard et al., 2005]).
There are BM I/O functions inferred from the Grid method that consist only of 2 or 3 data points. In such
cases, the listener needed high stimuli levels in order to be able to just detect the sounds due to the high
absolute thresholds. For instance at 4 kHz, the listener HIL2 had an absolute threshold of 70 dB HL. The
second reason of obtaining only 2 data points was the discomfort of the listener at high levels. Thus, the
measurement should start at a high level and should end at a higher level quite close to the starting one.
As it was mentioned previously, in many cases the slopes of the BM I/O functions were quite shallow despite
the high absolute threshold of the HI listeners at the corresponding characteristic frequency, but on the other
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
39
hand, there are only a few DPOAE inferred points above the SNR criterion. A smaller step between the L2
levels might be beneﬁcial in order the existence of OHC activity at neighbor L2 levels to be investigated.
Nevertheless, with such high compression obtained from the Grid method, it was expected that there would
be collected more DPOAE data points above the SNR criterion, but it was not the case mainly at 2 and 4
kHz. Again the limitation of the sweeping primaries to provide small amount of energy on each frequency
along the sweep makes the collection of the DPOAEs more difﬁcult especially for HI listeners.
Furthermore, it can be observed that by increasing the frequency of interest, less DPOAEs above the SNR
criterion were collected. The increment of the absolute thresholds in combination with increased sweeping
rate are the most obvious reasons for this tendency. By increasing the frequency of interest, but at the same
time keeping the overall sweep duration constant (i.e. 2sec/oct), the sweeping rate is increased and the
distributed energy per frequency is reduced. Moreover, the averaging approach is not optimized, while the
16 recordings with the lowest rms value were averaged. The optimization of the sweeping rate per octave
and the optimization of the averaging would possibly give more data points above the SNR criterion. These
drawbacks are discussed in the next chapter.
HIL5
Input [dB SPL]
30
40
50
60
70
80
Output [dB]
40
60
80
100
HIL6
Input [dB SPL]
30
40
50
60
70
80
HIL3
Output [dB]
40
60
80
100
GRID
Sc SNR>5dB
Sc SNR<5dB
EqL SNR>5dB
EqL SNR<5dB
Grid fit
Sc fit
EqL fit
1:1
HIL4
HIL1
Output [dB]
40
60
80
100
HIL2
Figure 3.10: The same as ﬁgure 3.1 but, for HI listeners.
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
40
HIL5
Input [dB SPL]
30
40
50
60
70
80
Output [dB]
40
60
80
100
HIL6
Input [dB SPL]
30
40
50
60
70
80
HIL3
Output [dB]
40
60
80
100
HIL4
HIL1
Output [dB]
40
60
80
100
GRID
Sc SNR>5dB
Sc SNR<5dB
EqL SNR>5dB
EqL SNR<5dB
Grid fit
Sc fit
EqL fit
1:1
HIL2
Figure 3.11: The same as ﬁgure 3.1 but, for HI listeners at 2 kHz.
As it was indicated in the present chapter, in many cases the exhibited compression exponents are close to
normal even when the absolute threshold is quite high. But on the other hand, in some cases the opposite
behaviour is present. For instance, in table 3.4 it can be seen that the subject HIL5 has an absolute threshold
of 25 dB HL and a Grid - TMC inferred compression exponent of 0.6848 dB/dB, which is the highest
behaviourally inferred compression exponent at 1 kHz. Also, HIL1 at 2 kHz exhibits a very high Grid
inferred compression exponent (i.e. 1.2124 dB/dB) despite the fact that the absolute threshold is 25 dB HL
at this frequency. However, in this case, it is clear that the straight-line does not ﬁt the data well.
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
41
HIL5
Input [dB SPL]
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Output [dB]
40
60
80
100
HIL6
Input [dB SPL]
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
HIL3
Output [dB]
40
60
80
100
GRID
Sc SNR>5dB
Sc SNR<5dB
EqL SNR>5dB
EqL SNR<5dB
Grid fit
Sc fit
1:1
HIL4
HIL1
Output [dB]
40
60
80
100
HIL2
Figure 3.12: The same as ﬁgure 3.1 but, for HI listeners at 4 kHz.
The same behaviour can be observed at the compression exponents inferred from DPOAEs. For instance, at
1 kHz the listener HIL2 exhibits an absolute threshold of 35 dB HL but the corresponding DPOAE (scissors
paradigm) inferred compression exponent is estimated to be 0.2189 dB/dB, while the corresponding absolute
threshold is 35 dB HL. The above mentioned behavior is consistent with previous studies (e.g. [Rosengard
et al., 2005], [Dorn et al., 2001]). More precisely, Plack et al. [2004] estimated the maximum compression
exponents behaviourally and reported that in many cases, subjects with mild to moderate hearing loss
exhibited close to normal compression exponents. On the other hand, Rosengard et al. [2005] reported that
most of the subjects in that study had more linearized responses but they assumed that this tendency was due
to severe impairment of the HILs. It seems that the results in the present study are partially in agreement
with those from Plack et al. [2004] and partially in agreement with those from Rosengard et al. [2005].
Moreover, the standard deviation of the Grid - inferred compression exponents is much higher for the HI
listeners than for the NH listeners. The highest standard deviation is at 4 kHz and it is 0.6385 dB/dB while
at 2 kHz the corresponding value is 0.3886 dB/dB and at 1 kHz is 0.1555 dB/dB. Such high variability
is expected here due to the high variability of the absolute thresholds. At 4 kHz the standard deviation is
increased more due to the contributions of some implausible (i.e. > 1) compression exponents.
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
42
Table 3.4: The same as ﬁgure 3.1, but for the hearing impaired listeners. The absolute behavioral threshold
of each of the hearing impaired listeners is presented as well.
HI
1 kHz
Subject
Absolute threshold [dB HL]
Grid
DPOAE Scissors
DPOAE Equal level
HIL1
30
0.6236
0.4898
0.5110
HIL2
35
0.2988
0.2189
0.3070
HIL3
40
0.6418
0.8198
1.5879
HIL4
25
0.4755
0.2760
0.3183
HIL5
25
0.6848
-
-
HIL6
45
0.3887
0.3870
-
mean ± std
0.5189 ± 0.1555
0.4383 ± 0.2373
0.6811 ± 0.6118
Table 3.5: The same as ﬁgure 3.1, but at 2 kHz for the hearing impaired listeners. The absolute behavioral
threshold of each of the hearing impaired listeners is presented as well.
HI
2 kHz
Subject
Absolute threshold [dB HL]
Grid
DPOAE Scissors
DPOAE Equal level
HIL1
25
1.2124
0.6611
0.9586
HIL2
45
0.3627
-
-
HIL3
40
0.5791
-
-
HIL4
35
0.5873
0.4316
0.6721
HIL5
40
1.1521
-
-
HIL6
40
0.3166
-
-
mean ± std
0.7017 ± 0.3886
0.5464 ± 0.1623
0.8154 ± 0.2026
Table 3.6: The same as ﬁgure 3.1, but at 4 kHz for the hearing impaired listeners. The absolute behavioral
threshold of each of the hearing impaired listeners is presented as well.
HI
4 kHz
Subject
Absolute threshold [dB HL]
Grid
DPOAE Scissors
DPOAE Equal level
HIL1
50
0.6268
-
-
HIL2
70
1.1247
-
-
HIL3
35
0.4936
0.8470
-
HIL4
60
2.1652
-
-
HIL5
65
0.5047
-
-
HIL6
50
0.8071
-
-
mean ± std
0.9537 ± 0.6385
-
-
3.1.4
Source unmixing
There is some controversy regarding the need for source-unmixing in case of HI listeners. Figure 3.13
illustrates the unmixed magnitudes (i.e. theoretically only the generator component magnitude) of the
hearing impaired listener HIL6 at 1 kHz. There are only three curves, instead of four, because only three
of them had SNR ≥5 dB. The unmixing seems to be sub-optimal, as there are deep sharp notches across
frequencies, fact that indicates only partial suppression of the ﬁne structure. On the other hand, in ﬁgure 3.14
are presented the corresponding mixed magnitudes, i.e. before the source unmixing, which are formed by the
contribution of the generator and the reﬂection components. It is obvious that the recorded DPs exhibit quite
sharp magnitude ﬂuctuations across frequencies. These two ﬁgures are presented as an example in order
the ﬁne structure to be shown, which is present even at frequencies that the listener has elevated hearing
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
43
thresholds. For instance, in this example the listener has a behaviourally measured hearing threshold of 45
dB HL at 1 kHz (i.e. at f2 which was used for evoking the DP, indicated by the black dashed line).
Frequency [Hz]
550
600
650
700
750
800
850
900
Arbitrary magnitude [dB]
-150
-145
-140
-135
-130
-125
-120
-115
-110
-105
-100
Unmixed DP gram HIL6
L2 = 35 dB SPL
L2 = 50 dB SPL
L2 = 80 dB SPL
DP frequency
Figure 3.13: Magnitudes obtained after the unmixing of the DPOAE (scissors) recordings of listener HIL6.
Each of the red curves represents the unmixed component evoked by each of the four L2 levels. The black
dashed line indicates the DP frequency of interest (i.e. 2f1 −f2).
Frequency [Hz]
550
600
650
700
750
800
850
900
Arbitrary magnitude [dB]
-140
-135
-130
-125
-120
-115
-110
-105
-100
-95
-90
Mixed DP gram HIL6
L2 = 35 dB SPL
L2 = 50 dB SPL
L2 = 80 dB SPL
DP frequency
Figure 3.14: Mixed (i.e. before unmixing) magnitudes of NHL6 at 1 kHz. Each of the red curves represents
the mixed magnitude of the distortion product evoked by each of the four L2 levels (i.e. 35, 50 and 80 dB
SPL). The black dashed line indicates the DP frequency of interest (i.e. 2f1 −f2).
The observation of ﬁne structure in HI listeners is in agreement with He and Schmiedt [1996] who reported
that the ﬁne structure is always present as long as DPOAEs can be recorded. On the other hand Mauermann
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
44
et al. [1999] reported that the ﬁne structure vanishes in the case that the fDP is in the range of impairment.
This does not seem to be the case here. The behavioural thresholds (check appendix A) of the HIL6 are
normal below 500 Hz but his threshold at 750 Hz is 40 dB HL and at 1 kHz it is 45 dB HL. Despite that
fact, the ﬁne structure in the range of 750 to 900 Hz, is quite prominent. It is possible that in such cases the
elevated thresholds stem from other reasons than the damage of the OHCs.
3.2
Correlation between Grid and DPOAE inferred compression exponents
In this section the correlation between the Grid - TMC and the DPOAE inferred compression exponents is
examined. The correlation coefﬁcient was estimated using the Matlab built in function corrcoef. Furthermore,
signiﬁcance of the difference between the means of the data inferred from different methods was estimated
using paired t-test. The Matlab built in function ttest was used for these estimations.
In ﬁgure 3.15 (A) the compression exponents inferred from the Grid - TMC method and the DPOAE (scissors
paradigm) method are compared and in ﬁgure 3.15 (B) the compression exponents inferred from the Grid -
TMC method and the DPOAE (equal level paradigm) method. The red circles, the blue triangles and the
black squares represent the frequencies of 1, 2 and 4 kHz respectively. The corresponding solid lines of the
same colors represent linear ﬁttings to the data of each frequency and the dashed magenta line represents the
linear ﬁtting to all the data. The black dashed line is the 1/1 correlation diagonal.
The correlation coefﬁcient for all the subjects (i.e. NH and HI) between the Grid - TMC and the DPOAE
(scissors paradigm) inferred compression exponents is R = 0.5149 and it is signiﬁcant (p < 0.001). Using
a paired t-test their mean difference of 0.0068 was found to be insigniﬁcant (p > 0.05). Furthermore, the
data were analyzed per frequency. In ﬁgure 3.16 are presented the correlation ﬁgures between the Grid
and the DPOAE (scissors) inferred compression exponents per CF. At 1 kHz the correlation coefﬁcient
was R = 0.5936, and it was signiﬁcant (p < 0.02). At 2 kHz the correlation coefﬁcient was 0.7772 and
it was signiﬁcant (p < 0.03) as well. Quite high was the correlation coefﬁcient at 4 kHz as well, where
R = 0.7116 and it was signiﬁcant too. Moreover, the p-value using a paired t-test between the repeated
measures of the compression exponents with these two different methods was calculated per frequency. The
difference between the means of the compression exponents inferred from Grid and DPOAE (scissors) was
insigniﬁcant, except the 4 kHz data were the difference of 0.1250 was found to be signiﬁcant (p < 0.05).
In ﬁgure 3.16 (C) can be seen that most of the data points are above the correlation diagonal, which is the
reason for the signiﬁcant difference between the means at 4 kHz.
In 5 out of 12 cases the SNR of the DPOAE evoked by L2 = 35 dB SPL and L2 = 50 dB SPL was bellow 5
dB and the slope of the BM I/O function was mainly driven by the two last data points which were inferred
by using equal level paradigm, because the scissors paradigm is valid for L2 up to 65 dB SPL. When the
BM I/O function is driven mainly by such data points, the compression exponents might be overestimated in
comparison with the Grid inferred ones.
When considering the second DPOAE paradigm, the correlation coefﬁcient between the Grid - TMC and the
DPOAE (equal level) inferred compression exponents is R = 0.4852 and it is signiﬁcant (p < 0.05). The
paired t-test suggests that the difference between their means of 0.2380 is signiﬁcant p < 0.05 as well. A
quite strong and signiﬁcant correlation was found again for the data of 2 kHz with R = 0.8092 (p < 0.002)
but the paired t-test showed that their mean difference is signiﬁcant (p << 0.05). At 1 kHz R = 0.5417 and
it is signiﬁcant (p < 0.05) but the difference between the means of the compression exponents from these
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
45
two methods was again signiﬁcant. Finally, at 4 kHz the correlation is weak, R = 0.2116 and insigniﬁcant
(p > 0.05) and the difference between the means was signiﬁcant. There is a trend here, the paired t-test
showed that there is always a signiﬁcant difference between the mean values of the compression exponents
inferred from the Grid and the DPOAE (equal level) methods. This is reﬂected by ﬁgure 3.17 where it is
obvious that the most of the DPOAE (equal level) compression exponents are above the correlation diagonal,
exhibiting overestimated compression exponents in comparison with the Grid inferred ones.
As it has been mentioned previously in this chapter, it seems that the equal level paradigm is not the optimal
one for estimating the cochlear compression. Despite that fact the correlation coefﬁcient at 2 kHz is very high.
Grid [dB/dB]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
DPOAE Scissors [dB/dB]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
A. Compression exponent - Sc
1kHz
1kHz fit
2kHz
2kHz fit
4kHz
4kHz fit
all data fit
1/1
Grid [dB/dB]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
DPOAE Equal Level [dB/dB]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
B. Compression exponent - EqL
Figure 3.15: (A): Correlation between compression exponent measures inferred from the Grid method and
DPOAE recordings using the scissors paradigm for determining the primaries’ level relation. (B): Correlation
between compression exponent estimates inferred from the Grid method and DPOAE recordings using the
equal level paradigm. The BM I/O functions, from which the compression exponents were estimated, were
derived using linear regression ﬁtting on the data points. The red circles, blue triangles and black squares
represent the compression exponents of the BM I/O functions at 1, 2 and 4 kHz respectively. The solid lines
shows linear ﬁtting of the data points per frequency, the magenta dashed line shows linear ﬁtting for all data
points and the black dashed line is the 1 to 1 correlation diagonal. The data points represent the compression
exponents from all the subjects of the present study.
Next, the correlation for only the NH listeners’ data was investigated. The correlation coefﬁcient between the
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
46
Grid - TMC and the DPOAE (scissors) inferred compression exponents for only the NH listeners is -0.1706
and it is insigniﬁcant (p = 0.5240). Also, their mean difference of 0.0282 is insigniﬁcant (p = 0.2016). The
correlation coefﬁcient between Grid - TMC and the DPOAE (equal level) inferred compression exponents
is 0.2023 and it is insigniﬁcant (p = 0.2879). Their mean difference of 0.2685 is signiﬁcant (p << 0.05).
Johannesen and Lopez-Poveda [2008] found a correlation coefﬁcient R = 0.32 for linearly ﬁtted BMI/Os
over the input level range of 40-65 dB SPL. They also found strong correlation coefﬁcient (R = 0.92) at 4
kHz using 3rd order polynomial ﬁtting.
Regarding the HI listeners correlation between the Grid - TMC and the DPOAE (scissors) inferred compres-
sion exponents, the correlation coefﬁcient is R = 0.4637 but it is insigniﬁcant (p = 0.2472) and their mean
difference of 0.0738 is not signiﬁcant (p = 0.4625). Furthermore, the correlation coefﬁcient between the
Grid - TMC and the DPOAE (equal level) inferred compression exponents is quite similar R = 0.4678 and
it is insigniﬁcant (p = 0.3495). Moreover their mean difference of 0.0859 is insigniﬁcant (p = 0.6513).
The lack of signiﬁcance of the estimated correlation coefﬁcients may be due to low number of data points
entering the correlation. Only 8 data points entered the correlation between the Grid method and the
scissors method, while just 6 points were used when comparing Grid and equal level paradigms. This means
that compression estimates could be obtained form DPOAE data in less than 50% of cases (6 listeners,
3 frequencies). It is plausible that the examination of a bigger sample of listeners is necessary for the
discovered trends to be conﬁrmed.
Grid [dB/dB]
0
0.5
1
DPOAE Scissors [dB/dB]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
A. 1kHz
Grid [dB/dB]
0
0.5
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
B. 2kHz
Grid [dB/dB]
0
0.5
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
C. 4kHz
Figure 3.16: Correlation between compression exponent measures inferred from the Grid method and
DPOAE recordings using scissors paradigm. Each panel corresponds to different characteristic frequency
(i.e. 1, 2 and 4 kHz). The BM I/O functions, from which the compression exponents were estimated, were
derived using linear regression ﬁtting on the data points. The black dashed line is the 1 to 1 correlation
diagonal. The data points represents compression exponents from all the subjects (i.e. NH and HI). The red
blue and black solid lines correspond to linear ﬁttings for 1, 2 and 4 kHz data points.
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
47
Grid [dB/dB]
0
0.5
1
DPOAE EqL [dB/dB]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
A. 1kHz
Grid [dB/dB]
0
0.5
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
B. 2kHz
Grid [dB/dB]
0
0.5
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
C. 4kHz
Figure 3.17: The same as ﬁgure 3.16 but for the DPOAE stimulation were used primaris with equal levels
(i.e. L1 = L2).
3.3
Relation between compression exponents and absolute thresholds
This section examines whether the compression exponents inferred from the Grid - TMC and DPOAE
methods vary as a function of the absolute threshold. Figure 3.18 presents data for all the subjects (i.e. NH
and HI). The red circles represent the compression exponents at 1 kHz, the blue triangles at 2 kHz and the
black squares at 4 kHz. The solid lines with the corresponding colors represent the linear ﬁtting of the data
points for each frequency. The dashed magenta line represent the linear ﬁtting of all the data.
At ﬁrst glance in ﬁgure 3.18 it can be seen that there is a tendency of the compression exponents to be
increased (i.e. compression decreases) as a function of the absolute threshold in all three cases (i.e. Grid,
DPOAE-scissors and DPOAE-equal level). This trend was expected due to the inclusion of the HI listeners
who exhibit higher compression exponents in some cases. Moreover, the compression exponents, inferred
from the Grid and the DPOAE (scissors) methods, exhibit a high variability at thresholds above 20 dB HL.
A two sample t-test was performed in order to be examined if the difference between the means of the
compression exponents from NH listeners (i.e. up to 20 dB HL) and those from HI listeners (i.e. above 20
dB HL) was signiﬁcant. The difference between the two groups was found to be signiﬁcant in both Grid
and DPOAE (scissors) paradigms. In the case of the DPOAE (equal level) paradigm, the NH-HI difference
was not found to be signiﬁcant. This behaviour can be explained by the fact that the compression exponents
inferred from this method were overestimated even for the normal hearing listeners. In addition, the R2
coefﬁcient between the hearing threshold and the compression exponent estimated behaviorally was 0.4418.
The corresponding coefﬁcients for the scissors method was 0.2736 and it was 0.1385 for the equal-level
method. The corresponding p-values were < 0.001 for the Grid and the DPOAE (scissors). For the DPOAE
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
48
(equal level) the p-value was < 0.03. In the calculations of the R2 coefﬁcients and p-values all the listeners
(i.e. NHL and HIL) and all the frequencies (i.e. 1, 2 and 4 kHz) were taken into account.
0
20
40
60
comp. exp. [dB/dB]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
A. Grid
Abs. threshold [dB HL]
0
20
40
60
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
B. DPOAE Scissors
1kHz
1kHz fit
2kHz
2kHz fit
4kHz
4kHz fit
all data fit
Abs. threshold [dB HL]
0
20
40
60
comp. exp. [dB/dB]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
C. DPOAE equal level
Figure 3.18: Compression exponents inferred from the Grid method (A), DPOAE recordings using scissors
paradigm (B) and DPOAE recordings using the equal level paradigm (C) as a function of the absolute
threshold. The red circles, blue triangles and black squares represent the the frequencies 1, 2 and 4 kHz
respectively. The solid lines shows linear ﬁtting of the data per frequency, the magenta dashed line shows
linear ﬁtting for all data points. Data are presented for all the subjects (i.e., NH and HI).
3.4
Relation between cochlear compression and characteristic frequency
This section investigates whether the compression exponent, inferred from the Grid - TMC and DPOAE
methods, varies with frequency.
Figure 3.19 presents the compression exponents as a function of the characteristic frequency for all the
listeners (i.e. NH and HI). The blue diamonds, the red ﬁlled and the black ﬁlled circles represent the
Grid, DPOAE (scissors) and DPOAE (equal level) inferred compression exponents as a function of the
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
49
characteristic frequency. The blue, red and black solid lines are the linear ﬁttings to the corresponding data.
The slopes of the linear ﬁttings are quite shallow indicating no big variation of the compression exponent
across frequencies. It was also conﬁrmed by two sample t-tests which showed that there is no signiﬁcant
difference between the mean values of the compression exponents for none of frequency pairs.
These ﬁndings are consistent with what Johannesen and Lopez-Poveda [2008] reported. They did not ﬁnd
signiﬁcant mean differences of the compression exponents inferred by TMC-based method and DPOAE
(scissors). The sample they had in their study were consisted of only normal hearing listeners though.
Frequency [kHz]
0
1
2
3
4
5
Compression exponent [dB/dB]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
A. Grid
Frequency [kHz]
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
B. DPOAE Scissors
Frequency [kHz]
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
C. DPOAE Equal level
Figure 3.19: Compression exponent as a function of characteristic frequency. The blue diamonds, the red
circles and the black circles represents the compression exponents inferred from Grid, DPOAE (scissors)
and DPOAE (equal level) methods per characteristic frequency.
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 4
Discussion
4.1
Listeners’ training and TMCs collection
Due to the perceptual complexity of the Grid - TMC task, the listeners should be trained in order to be able
to follow the procedure. Furthermore, the average listener does not know what is a masker and what is a
target tone and they do not know how to pay attention in order to detect the target. Moreover, it is likely
that during the procedure the listener will use different cues in order to detect the target. For instance some
listeners were paying attention at the end of each interval in order to detect the target. In some cases it was a
good approach but while the time-gap between the masker and the target was increased, the listeners reported
that they had to change their cue in order to detect the target, because the way the sound was perceived, was
altered. The listeners reported that they were able to detect the target due to perceived echo at the end of
the interval, due to perceived altered pitch of the interval and due to perceived impulsive sound at the end
of the interval. The whole training procedure lasted for at least 2 hours. In some cases, a second training
session was required to meet the 3 dB standard-error-criterion in the 1-up 2-down 3-AFC task (i.e., non-grid).
Overall, the training is quite time consuming and some listeners got frustrated due to difﬁculty of the task.
After the training was completed, the Grid experiment took place for most of the listeners after one or
after a couple of days in order to avoid the task to be forgotten by the them. The ﬁrst six runs of the Grid
task were measured and averaged out per characteristic frequency for the on-frequency masker, but only
the frequency of 4 kHz for the off-frequency masker. In some cases, due to high absolute thresholds at 4
kHz it was not possible to measure with off-frequency conditions. In such case the off-frequency condi-
tion was measured at the characteristic frequency of 2 kHz. The whole procedure lasts approximately 2 hours.
4.2
Fitting of the data for obtaining the BM I/O functions
As it was mentioned in chapter 3, the linear ﬁtting was selected due to the small number of DPOAE inferred
data points (i.e. four if all of them were above the SNR criterion of 5 dB). The L2 range was from 35 to
80 dB SPL and the step between two successive L2 was 15 dB (i.e. L2 = 35, 50, 65 and 80 dB SPL). In
many cases the number of points available for the ﬁtting was reduced to 3 or even 2 due to insufﬁcient SNR,
mostly at lower L2 levels. On the other hand, the Grid usually inferred more than four data points and in
many cases they covered a wider input level range. Due to that fact, for the ﬁtting of the straight line to
the Grid inferred data, only those data points within the input level range of the DPOAEs (i.e. 35 to 80 dB
SPL) were taken into account. This was done in order to assure comparability of the compression exponents
inferred from these two methods. According to [Neely et al., 2009] the best ﬁtting for the BM I/O functions,
50
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 4. DISCUSSION
51
96% of the time, is a two slope ﬁtting. Some results in the present study also suggest that the linear ﬁtting
may not be the optimal one. For instance, if the actual BM I/O was compressive above the 35 dB SPL, the
slope (i.e. the compression exponent) of the BM I/O inferred from linear ﬁtting would be affected by a data
point which essentially does not belong to the compressive input level region. Similarly, if a data point
collected at L2 = 80 dB SPL, L2 belongs to the high-level linear portion of the BM I/O and the single-line
ﬁt is not an appropriate model for the data. If the step between two successive L2 was lower, e.g. 5 dB, more
data points would have been collected and it would be possible to ﬁt a function with more parameters (e.g
two slopes ﬁtting or three slopes ﬁtting) to the data without over-ﬁtting. The reason why only four points
were measured in this study was in order the DPOAEs to be measured using two different L1 - L2 relation
paradigms (i.e. scissors and equal level) within one session of approximately 2 hours.
4.3
Non-optimal sweeping rate
One important parameter of the stimuli that could have affected the recorded DPOAE levels is the rate of the
sweeping primaries. As it was mentioned in chapter 2 the continuous sweeping primaries were chosen to
cover 1 octave in 2 sec. This is the suggested by Long et al. [2008] sweeping rate for the source unmixing
technique to work optimally. According to their ﬁndings, the 16 sec/oct and the 8 sec/oct sweeping rates did
not exhibit satisfactory unmixing performance. The octaves that were chosen here were 0.75 to 1.5 kHz,
1.5 kHz to 3 kHz and 3 to 6 kHz in order the DPOAEs of the characteristic frequencies 1, 2 and 4 kHz to
fall approximately in the middle of the sweeps for avoiding edge effects in the signal. The variation of the
rates essentially means that the energy distribution is different for each octave band because the energy per
second is distributed in different bandwidths depending on the sweeping rate. For instance, in the case of the
primary sweeping from 0.75 to 1.5 kHz, the sweeping rate is 375 Hz/sec. On the other hand, the rate of the
sweeping primary from 3 to 6 kHz is 1.5 kHz/sec. This essentially means that the time that the auditory
system was exposed to each characteristic frequency was being reduced every time that the sweeping rate
was increased. At this point it must be considered that a decrease of the sweeping rate (i.e. slower sweeping)
would possibly lead to unsatisfactory source unmixing [Long et al., 2008]. On the other hand, an increase of
the sweeping rate (i.e. faster sweeping) would lead to an even greater reduction of the distributed energy
per frequency and an extreme increment of the sweeping rate would lead to an almost impulsive stimulus,
which would spread the excitation along the basilar membrane. Thus, it seems that an optimized procedure
for estimating the optimal sweeping rate per bandwidth is needed, in order the source unmixing and the
maximum energy per frequency to be achieved. A systematic quantiﬁcation of evenly distributed sweeping
rates per octave for observing the lowest possible sweeping rate that provides effective source unmixing for
each speciﬁc octave would possibly improve the SNR of the recordings. Nevertheless, despite the potentially
suboptimal rates used in the present study, DPOAEs were obtained from a HI listener with absolute threshold
of 45 dB HL. Thus, by optimizing the sweeping rate per octave maybe it would be possible to measure more
compression exponents from HI listeners.
Nevertheless, Long et al. [2008] were not interested to obtain high level DPOAEs. They were interested in a
fast sweep that would move the center frequency of their bandpass ﬁlter fast enough in order to avoid the
delayed reﬂection component. Thus, a systematic quantiﬁcation of the optimal sweep rate
4.4
Averaging of DPOAE recordings
In order to improve the SNR of the DPOAE recordings, they were averaged out. For each paradigm, for each
characteristic frequency and for each level 108 recordings were collected. Each of those recordings consisted
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 4. DISCUSSION
52
of the primaries reﬂected from the tympanic membrane, the DPOAE and noise, which mainly comes from
the body of the subject. It was assumed that the reﬂected primaries and the DPOAEs have constant SPL
across runs, which means that the only reason for the overall RMS to be increased is noise. From these 108
recordings 16 were chosen, which showed lowest RMS assuming that they will be less noisy. Thus, only
15% of the recordings were taken into account for the averaging. As mentioned before, the low energy per
frequency that the sweeping primaries provide is a drawback for obtaining high SNR values. Due to this
limitation of the method, it seems that a more optimized procedure for averaging is needed. An averaging
procedure that would average all the recordings that improve the SNR and reject those which decrease the
SNR would be a better approach in order to increase the number of recordings contributing to the average.
4.5
DPOAE SNR criterion choice
The SNR criterion for rejecting recordings was set initially to 10 dB, but only a few DPOAE data points had
SNRs above that criterion, particularly in the case of the HI listeners. In fact, out of 6 HI listeners that took
part in the experiment, compression exponent could be estimated only in two of them at the 1 kHz target and
two of them at 2 kHz target. The SNR criterion of 10 dB combined with the previously described averaging
method was considered as a quite conservative approach, since the sweeping primaries do not provide a lot
of energy per frequency, which means that the SNR was preliminary expected to be low. In order to include
more DPOAE points in the analysis it was decided to relax the SNR criterion (i.e., decrease the SNR limit).
Two factors were taken into account for choosing the new SNR criterion. The ﬁrst factor was the number of
additional compression exponents that could be inferred form the DPOAE data. However, to limit the risk of
including data that was highly contaminated with noise, the second factor was the RMS difference measured
between the entire set of DPOAE (scissors) compression exponents and the corresponding Grid estimates for
each SNR criterion. Similarly for the Grid and DPOAE (equal level). Four SNR criteria were examined: 10,
6, 5 and 3 dB.
Table 4.1 presents the comparison of both factors across the four conditions.
Table 4.1: RMS of the difference between the compression exponents inferred from the Grid and the DPOAE
methods for each SNR criterion. Number of compression exponents inferred from the DPOAE (scissors
paradigm) and DPOAE (equal level paradigm) for each SNR criterion.
10 dB SNR
6 dB SNR
5 dB SNR
3 dB SNR
RMS(Grid-scissors)
0.1714
0.1754
0.1754
0.2014
RMS(Grid-eql)
0.3335
0.3444
0.3241
0.3554
Number of HILs CEs
at 1/2/4 kHz (scissors)
2/2/0
4/2/1
5/2/1
5/3/1
Number of HILs CEs
at 1/2/4 kHz (eql)
2/2/0
4/2/0
4/2/0
5/3/0
In case of the scissors paradigm, the baseline (10 dB criterion) RMS value was 0.1714, and as mentioned
above, 4 compression exponents from HI listeners were obtained. Reducing the SNR to 6 dB led to inclusion
of additional 3 compression exponents, but at the expense of increasing the RMS to 0.1754 (2% increase
with respect to 10 dB). Further SNR reduction led to inclusion of one extra CE for the 5 dB criterion and
another compression exponent for the 3 dB criterion. However, while RMS in the 3 dB criterion increased
(with respect to 6 dB) by almost 15%, while no increase was found in the 5 dB condition.
In case of the equal level paradigm, the baseline (10 dB criterion) RMS value was 0.3335, and as mentioned
4 compression exponents from HI listenerss were obtained. Reducing the SNR to 6 dB led to inclusion of
additional 2 compression exponents, but at the expense of increasing the RMS to 0.3444 (3% increase with
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 4. DISCUSSION
53
respect to 10 dB). Further SNR reduction did no led to inclusion of extra compression exponent for the 5
dB criterion, while 2 more compression exponents were included for the 3 dB criterion. Interestingly, the
RMS difference decreased slightly between 6 and 5 dB SNR conditions (6%), but increased again in the 3
dB condition (10%). Overall, the 5 dB SNR criterion was found to offer best compromise between inﬂated
RMS and increased number of CE estimates. It must be mentioned at this point that the determination of the
SNR criterion could be further optimized by comparing more and more evenly distributed SNR criteria.
4.6
Methods variability
This section examines the within-method variability, as well as the between-methods variability.
It is assumed that the compression exponent across frequencies for each NH listener remains unchanged.
[Johannesen and Lopez-Poveda, 2008]. Thus, it can be assumed that the RMS-error of the compression
exponents across frequencies for each NH listener originates from the variability that the method adds to
the measure. In order to examine which is the within-method variability, the mean RMS-error across NH
listeners per method was calculated. The mean RMS-error of the compression exponents inferred from the
Grid method is 0.0483 and it is the smallest within-method error. The corresponding mean RMS-error of the
DPOAE (scissors paradigm) was 0.0870 and from the DPOAE (equal level paradigm) even higher 0.0979.
The small number of data points (maximum 4) that were used for the estimation of the DPOAE inferred BM
I/O functions is a possible reason for this high variability that the DPOAE methods exhibit compared to that
of the Grid method.
In addition, for the between-methods variability for the NH listeners to be examined, the RMS of the
difference between compression-exponent estimates, from two methods at a time, was calculated. For the
Grid-DPOAE (scissors paradigm) pair of methods, the value that was obtained is 0.1288. The corresponding
value for the Grid-DPOAE (equal level paradigm) is 0.2789. Then, including both the NH and HI listeners,
the corresponding values were increased to 0.1754 and 0.3241 respectively. This behavior was expected, as
the BM I/O functions obtained from HI listeners using the DPOAE methods were derived by even less data
points than those of the NH listeners.
4.7
DPOAE source unmixing
The idea of the method is that the narrow band pass ﬁlter changes so fast its center frequency that when
the reﬂection component arrives (delayed compared to the generator component) the center frequency of
the ﬁlter is moved from the frequency of the DP and the reﬂection component is attenuated. But what
happens when the reﬂection component is very strong? According to Mauermann and Kollmeier [2004], the
contribution of the reﬂection component can be high and in some cases maybe higher than the contribution
of the generator component. In such case, it is possible the attenuation that the window applies to the late
arrived reﬂection component is not enough for avoiding the interference between the two components. In
such case the suppression of the ﬁne structure is sub-optimal due to the interference that remains between
the generator and the reﬂection component, which causes peaks and dips in the DP gram. Thus, in such case
a partial source unmixing gives a smoothed DP gram that is not completely free of the ﬁne structure, which
is exhibited across frequencies when the interference between the generator and the reﬂection component
takes place. This is just a speculation of what could be the reason for the sub-optimal source unmixing. A
better knowledge of what is the signal processing that is applied on the signal by the pcode and a further
access to its parameters would be beneﬁcial in order the conﬁdence of this interpretation to be increased.
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 4. DISCUSSION
54
4.8
Fine structure in HI listeners
It is believed that the ﬁne structure that the DP spectrum exhibits across frequencies is a phenomenon
caused by the interference between the generator component, which is generated close to the peak of the f2
traveling wave, and the reﬂection component, which originates from the partial reﬂection of the DP at the
characteristic place near the peak of the fDP on the BM [Shera and Guinan Jr, 1999]. Mauermann et al.
[1999] reported that the ﬁne structure vanishes when fDP happens to be in the range of hearing loss, while
at the same time the f2 characteristic place produces relatively strong generator components. In the present
study, this does not seem to be the case. There were cases (e.g. HIL6) that the ﬁne structure was quite
prominent at frequencies with audiometric threshold in the range of 40 to 45 dB SPL. On the other hand,
other HI listeners exhibited reduced ﬁne structure but not completely vanished. Konrad-Martin and Neely
[2002] studied the contribution of the generator and the reﬂection components in HI listeners using a ﬁxed
2nd primary at f2 = 4 kHz. They reported that the high latency components were quite prominent in listener
with sloping hearing loss. On the other hand, this was not the case for the rising hearing losses, where the
high latency components were vanishing.
4.9
Correlation between Grid-TMC and DPOAE based compression estimates
The correlations and paired t-tests were calculated between the Grid and the DPOAE (scissors paradigm) in-
ferred compression exponents as well as between the Grid and the DPOAE (equal level) inferred compression
exponents.
4.9.1
Grid-TMC and DPOAE scissors
The correlation measured across frequencies, for all the NH and HI listeners could be characterized as
moderate, exhibiting a signiﬁcant correlation coefﬁcient of 0.5149. A paired t-test between the compres-
sion exponents inferred from the two methods showed that the difference between their means of 0.0068
was insigniﬁcant. The signiﬁcant correlation coefﬁcient between the compression exponents of these two
methods at 1 kHz was R = 0.5936 and their insigniﬁcant mean difference was 0.0651. The highest
correlation coefﬁcient (R = 0.7772) between the compression exponents of the Grid and the DPOAE
(scissors) methods was exhibited at 2 kHz CF and it was signiﬁcant with insigniﬁcant difference of 0.0119
between their means. At 4 kHz the correlation coefﬁcient was high as well, with R = 0.7116. This time
the difference between the means (0.1250) of the compression exponents inferred from these two methods
was signiﬁcant. This signiﬁcant difference between the means stems from the fact that most the DPOAE
(scissors) inferred compression exponents at 4 kHz are overestimated in comparison with those inferred
from the Grid method, as it can be observed in ﬁgure 3.16. This behaviour could stem from the fact that
for 4 NH listeners the ﬁrst DPOAE (scissors) inferred data point (i.e. for L2 = 35 dB SPL) was rejected
due to its low SNR for NHL2, NHL3, NHL5 and NHL8. In addition, both the ﬁrst and the second data
points (i.e, for L2 = 35 and L2 = 50 dB SPL) were rejected for the HI listener HL3. This means that the
BM I/O functions of these 5 listeners were driven mostly or even exclusively by the last two data points
(i.e. L2 = 65 and L2 = 80 dB SPL) which are obtained by using the equal level paradigm, as it was
mentioned previously in this chapter. The low energy per frequency that the sweeping primaries provide,
especially for the octave from 3 to 6 kHz, where the sweeping rate is very fast (i.e. 1500Hz/sec) in com-
bination with the non-optimal averaging seem to be responsible for these below the SNR criterion data points.
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 4. DISCUSSION
55
The across frequency correlation between the compression exponents inferred from these two methods for
the HI listeners were close to moderate exhibiting an insigniﬁcant correlation coefﬁcient of 0.4637 with
their means difference of 0.0738 being insigniﬁcant. Despite that fact the HI data consist of only eight
compression exponent pairs from the two methods, which means that the reliability of the results seems to
be small for conﬁdent conclusions.
The comparison of the compression exponents from these two methods for only the NH listeners showed
insigniﬁcant correlation coefﬁcient of -0.1706 with the difference between their means of 0.0282 being
insigniﬁcant. It must be mentioned at this point that the correlation between the compression exponents
inferred from the behavioural and the objective method was expected to be small. Assuming that the
compression exponents from NH listeners fall within a small range, the noise that the method adds to the
data can cause this small correlation.
Overall, the data suggests an existing correspondence between the compression exponents inferred from the
Grid and the DPOAE (scissors) methods. However, a small number of listeners, together with relatively
large variability of the methods limits the reliability of these ﬁndings.
4.9.2
Grid-TMC and DPOAE equal-level
The correlation coefﬁcient between the Grid and the DPOAE (equal level) inferred compression exponents
including all the listeners and all the frequencies was 0.5417 and it was signiﬁcant. On the other hand the
paired t-test between the compression exponents inferred from these two methods showed that the difference
between their means of 0.2380 was signiﬁcant. At 2 kHz the estimated correlation coefﬁcient was quite
strong (R = 0.8098). Moreover, it was the highest correlation that was calculated in the present study.
Despite that fact, the mean difference between the means of the compression exponents inferred from the
Grid and the DPOAE (equal level) was signiﬁcant as well. For any comparison (i.e. comparison across
frequencies, comparison for the NH listeners, comparison of the HI listeners) between the compression
exponents inferred from the Grid and the DPOAE (equal level) methods, the difference between their means
was always signiﬁcant at the 5% level. The compression exponents inferred from the DPOAE (equal level)
method were almost always greater than those inferred from the Grid method (ﬁgure 3.15) and this is the
reason for not exhibiting equal means. The DPOAE (equal level) method overestimates the compression
exponent in comparison with the Grid and the DPOAE (scissors paradigm) methods. This could be in-
terpreted as evidence that it is unlike that there is a relation between the compression exponents inferred
from the Grid and the DPOAE (equal level). This was partially expected. As Boege and Janssen [2002]
reported, the scissors paradigm suggested by Kummer et al. [1998] is the most suitable for measuring the
BM I/O functions because it causes the overlap between the traveling on the BM waves to take place closer
to the peak of the f2 traveling wave, (i.e., on frequency). This is not the case for the equal level paradigm,
which causes the overlap towards the apex. The reason why it was included in the measurements of the
present study was because it was not compared with a behavioral method in combination with the source
unmixing, thus it was not conﬁrmed that it is not the proper primary level relation for measuring the cochlear
compression, but it seems that the overlapping is not optimal in order to evoke the maximum level of the
DPOAEs neither the maximum compression of the cochlea.
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 4. DISCUSSION
56
4.10
Optimal L1 - L2 relation
As it has been discussed in the present study but also in previous studies (e.g. [Boege and Janssen, 2002]),
the level relation between the two primaries is a crucial parameter for measuring the BM I/O functions using
DPOAE based methods. The scissors paradigm seems to work better than the equal level paradigm while
it causes the overlap between the two traveling waves to take place closer to the peak of the f2 traveling
wave on the BM. Furthermore, it seems that it is a better paradigm, at least than the equal level paradigm, for
estimating the cochlear compression.
In some cases, the DPOAE (scissors) data points evoked by a low L2 had higher magnitude than the DPOAE
evoked by a higher L2. For instance, in some cases the evoked DPOAE by L2 = 50 dB SPL, exhibited
higher magnitude than the DPOAE evoked by L2 = 65 dB SPL. A possible reason that could have caused
such behavior is that for L2 ≥65 dB SPL, the equal level paradigm was used. In the case of the DPOAE
(scissors paradigm) in the present study, the level relation between the two primaries is determined according
to L1 = 0.4L2 + 39 for L2 = 35 and L2 = 50 dB SPL, but when L2 = 65 or L2 = 80 dB SPL the
level relation between the two primaries is calculated according to the equal level paradigm. The scissors
paradigm is considered to be optimal [Kummer et al., 1998] for L2 up to 65 dB SPL, thus it is a common
practice for L2 ≥65 dB SPL, the equal level paradigm to be used (e.g [Neely et al., 2003]). Boege and
Janssen [2002] reported that using the scissors paradigm the overlap between the travelling waves caused by
the primaries on the BM happens close to the peak of the f2 traveling wave and reﬂects the compressive
growth. On the other hand when the overlapping is not optimal (e.g. caused by the equal level paradigm) the
level of the DPOAEs is expected to be lower. This seems to be the case in many of the DPOAE (scissors)
recordings in the present study.
Nevertheless, the scissors paradigm is frequency and subject independent and according to Zelle et al.
[2015], it is not optimal for obtaining the highest possible level of the DPOAEs (i.e. maximum on-frequency
overlapping). The scissors paradigm is a linear function of the form ax+b, where a = 0.4 and b = 39. Zelle
et al. [2015] reported that the optimal a decreases with increasing frequency and the optimal b increases with
frequency using pulsed and continuous stimuli for evoking the DPOAEs. Furthermore, they explained this
behaviour based in ﬁndings from previous studies regarding the mechanical and physiological properties of
the basal and apical part of the BM. They reported that towards the base of the cochlea, the spacing between
the evoked traveling waves increases, which is assumed to cause the variations of the optimal parameters a
and b. Zelle et al. [2015] estimated the optimal L1 per listener,frequency and L2 by plotting L1,L2 maps
were the optimal L1 was that evoking the maximum DPOAE magnitude for predetermined L2. Finally, they
suggested that optimal L1,L2 pairs can be obtained either independently for each listener or across subjects
for each frequency. This strategy maybe lead to more optimal L1,L2 paradigms than both equal level and
scissors paradigms and should be considered in future studies.
4.11
Time efﬁciency
One of the aims of the present study is the ascertainment of the clinical feasibility of the methods used
for the BMI/O functions estimation. One very important speciﬁcation in order the method to be used
in the clinic is to be relatively fast. Especially the behavioral methods are usually quite time consum-
ing. In the present study, were measured the TMCs for three audiometric frequencies (i.e. 1, 2 and 4
kHz) for on-frequency masker and one audiometric frequency (i.e. 4 or 2 kHz, 2 kHz in case that the
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 4. DISCUSSION
57
measurement at 4 kHz was not possible due to high absolute threshold) for off-frequency masker (linear
reference). For each measurement were averaged 6 runs and each run lasted for approximately 5 minutes
with the masker step ﬁxed at 3 dB and the gap step ﬁxed at 5 ms. This means that 24 runs in total per 5 min
each were measured, i.e. 2 hours per subject. This experimental duration is quite long for clinical application.
Despite that fact, it is quite interesting that if only the ﬁrst 2 runs out of 6 were taken into account, the
correlation between the compression exponents inferred from the Grid and the DPOAEs (scissors) was
reduced to 0.4010 (p = 0.0126), but the difference between their means remained insigniﬁcant (p = 0.0764).
Measuring just 2 runs per frequency per condition (i.e. on- and off-frequency) the duration of the experiment
can be reduced from 2 hours to 40 minutes, or 30, in case of measuring just two BM I/Os. The duration of
the experiment could be further reduced by increasing the step size of the masker level and the time-gap, but
at the same time the resolution would be decreased. Furthermore, the training of the listener must be taken
into consideration. In the present study, the training lasted for at least 2 hours. The duration of the training is
a big drawback for the clinical application of the Grid method.
Regarding the DPOAE based methods, their main advantage is that they do not require active participation
of the listener. In the present study the listener was lying comfortably on a bed and the only requirement
was to stay as quiet as possible. This is not the case for the Grid method that requires trained listeners and a
relative effort from them in order to follow the task.
Concerning the testing time, the measurement of four L2 levels for one frequency took approximately 25
minutes, including in situ FPL calibration every approximately 1 minute in order the variability of the input
levels at the ear drum to be kept low. In the present study, linear sweeps were used (i.e. due to the source
unmixing), despite the fact that only one audiometric frequency per octave was examined. The advantage of
the sweeping primaries for the clinical application, is that many frequencies can be measured simultaneously.
For instance, in the present study the sweeping 2nd primaries were in the frequency ranges from 750 to
1500, from 1500 to 3000 and from 3000 to 6000 Hz. One run for each octave can be measured in 2 seconds.
Thus for 108 runs and 8 L2 levels, it will take approximately 2.5 hours for all the continuous characteristic
frequencies from 750 to 6000 Hz to be measured. Despite the fact that using this method it is possible to
measure quite many frequencies relatively fast, the duration of the measurement is far from being feasible
for clinical application.
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
5.1
General conclusions
The main aim of the present study was the comparison of the behaviourally inferred compression expo-
nents using the Grid - TMC method with objectively inferred compression exponents using either recorded
DPOAEs (scissors paradigm) or DPOAEs (equal level paradigm). Moreover, if the methods are useful for
clinical application was an additional question.
The mean values of the Grid - TMC inferred compression exponents from NH listeners were in agreement
with the literature, despite the fact that in some of the previous studies, the data points were ﬁtted using 3rd
order polynomials or n-sections ﬁtting, while in the present study linear regression was used for the ﬁtting.
Regarding the DPOAE measurements of the NH listeners, the mean values of the compression exponents
inferred from the DPOAE (scissors paradigm) were also similar with previous studies, despite the fact that in
those studies neither source unmixing of the DPs nor FPL calibration of the primaries was used. Also, using
the source unmixing, it was possible to estimate individual compression exponents inferred from DPOAEs
and compare them with the behaviourally inferred ones.
The estimated correlation coefﬁcients between the Grid and the DPOAE (scissors paradigm) inferred com-
pression exponents were quite high and signiﬁcant at 2 and 4 kHz (R = 0.7772 and R = 0.7116), signiﬁcant
and more than moderate (R = 0.5936) at 1 kHz and signiﬁcant as well as more than moderate (R = 0.5149)
for all the frequencies. Additionally, the difference between the means of the compression exponents
inferred from the Grid and the DPOAE (scissors paradigm) was always insigniﬁcant except the 4 kHz data.
Furthermore, the DPOAE methods exhibited higher within method variability than the Grid method. Despite
the fact that the correlation analysis and the paired t-tests suggest pretty satisfactory numbers, we have to
take into account all the pitfalls.
The number of the listeners that participated in the present study (i.e. 10 NH listeners and 6 HI listeners) is a
small number for conﬁdent conclusions. Moreover, the non optimal sweeping rate of the primaries does not
provide the best possible energy per frequency. In addition, the non optimal averaging limits the highest
SNR that could be obtained if an optimized averaging procedure was used. Also, the non optimal choice of
the SNR criterion limits the maximum number of the data points that could have been obtained. Furthermore,
the limited knowledge of how the source unmixing pcode processes the signal limits the operator from
improving the source unmixing in cases that it was not optimal. All the above mentioned drawbacks limited
the collection of DPOAE recordings especially at 2 and 4 kHz. Additionally, the small number of input
58
==PAGE:70==
CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSION
59
levels that were used for the DP recording provides BM I/O functions with low resolution and does not
allow optimal ﬁtting of the data. One more concern is how optimal is the scissors paradigm for measuring
compression exponents, which is frequency and subject independent as well as the usage of the equal level
paradigm for L2 ≥65 dB SPL. Maybe a frequency and subject dependent L2 - L1 relation would be more
suitable for measuring compression exponents individually. Despite all the above mentioned drawbacks, in
the present study was estimated BM I/O functions from HI listeners with absolute thresholds up to 45 dB HL
at 1 kHz. Thus, it seems that the DPOAE using sweeping primaries method has some potential to become
a useful tool for measuring DPOAEs of HI listeners with elevated absolute thresholds up to at least 45 dB HL.
Regarding, the clinical feasibility of the Grid method it seems that the long training that is required is the
major limitation of the method in order to be used in the clinic despite the fact that it exhibited less variable
compression exponents across listeners than the DPOAE methods. On the other hand the DPOAE (scissors
paradigm) using sweeping primaries method has the advantage that it does not require any participation from
the listener and it can measure a wide range of continuous frequencies simultaneously, but for the moment is
a quite time consuming method. One more limitation is the maximum hearing threshold at which DPOAEs
can be recorded and it seems that it is at least up to 45 dB HL at 1 kHz. The optimization of the settings that
were mentioned previously could potentially increase the maximum hearing threshold at which, DPOAEs
could be recorded.
5.2
Outlook and future work suggestions
In the current study were used three methods (i.e., Grid, DPOAE (scissors paradigm) and DPOAE (equal
level paradigm)) for measuring the cochlear compression and it seems that the results of the Grid method
and the DPOAE (scissors paradigm) are in in quite some agreement, which is pretty exciting. Nevertheless
there are quite some parameters and settings of the experiments to be improved. They are listed bellow:
• Examination of a reasonably larger number of subjects.
• Recording of more DPOAE points, i.e., recording for more L2 levels, increasing this way the resolution
of the BM I/O function as well as the ﬁtting options.
• Optimization of the sweeping rate per octave for increasing the energy that the sweeping primaries
provide.
• Optimization of L1,L2 level relation paradigm using frequency and subject dependent paradigm.
• Optimization of the averaging procedure for the DPOAE recordings in order the highest possible SNR
to be obtained, including in the averaging all the recordings that improve the SNR.
• Systematic quantiﬁcation of the SNR criterion for rejecting DPOAE recordings by comparing many
evenly distributed criteria and chose the best compromise between the measurement variability and
the number of obtained compression exponents.
• Better knowledge of the source unmixing algorithm for improving the sub-optimal unmixing when it
is necessary.
The methods that were examined in the present study are not just yet clinically useful due to their long testing
times. Nevertheless, the results of the present study look promising despite the limitations, as it seems that
there is some relation between the compression exponents inferred from the Grid and the DPOAE (scissors
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSION
60
paradigm) methods. Further investigation is needed for the conﬁrmation of the ﬁndings of the present study
using more optimized methods and settings as well as more listeners.
==PAGE:72==
Appendix A
Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of the NHLs
Table 1: Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of NHL1.
NHL1
Frequency [kHz]
0.25
0.50
0.75
1
1.5
2
3
4
6
Behavioural
threshold [dB HL]
0
5
0
0
-5
-10
0
0
10
Table 2: Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of NHL2.
NHL2
Frequency [kHz]
0.25
0.50
0.75
1
1.5
2
3
4
6
Behavioural
threshold [dB HL]
5
5
0
0
-10
-5
0
15
0
Table 3: Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of NHL3.
NHL3
Frequency [kHz]
0.25
0.50
0.75
1
1.5
2
3
4
6
Behavioural
threshold [dB HL]
0
-5
0
0
0
0
0
5
0
Table 4: Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of NHL4.
NHL4
Frequency [kHz]
0.25
0.50
0.75
1
1.5
2
3
4
6
Behavioural
threshold [dB HL]
0
5
0
10
0
-5
0
0
0
Table 5: Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of NHL5.
NHL5
Frequency [kHz]
0.25
0.50
0.75
1
1.5
2
3
4
6
Behavioural
threshold [dB HL]
0
5
0
5
5
5
5
5
0
61
==PAGE:73==
APPENDIX A
62
Table 6: Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of NHL6.
NHL6
Frequency [kHz]
0.25
0.50
0.75
1
1.5
2
3
4
6
Behavioural
threshold [dB HL]
5
5
10
5
5
0
0
5
10
Table 7: Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of NHL7.
NHL7
Frequency [kHz]
0.25
0.50
0.75
1
1.5
2
3
4
6
Behavioural
threshold [dB HL]
0
5
5
5
5
0
5
5
0
Table 8: Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of NHL8.
NHL8
Frequency [kHz]
0.25
0.50
0.75
1
1.5
2
3
4
6
Behavioural
threshold [dB HL]
5
10
0
0
0
-5
5
0
0
Table 9: Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of NHL9.
NHL9
Frequency [kHz]
0.25
0.50
0.75
1
1.5
2
3
4
6
Behavioural
threshold [dB HL]
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
Table 10: Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of NHL10.
NHL10
Frequency [kHz]
0.25
0.50
0.75
1
1.5
2
3
4
6
Behavioural
threshold [dB HL]
10
5
5
10
5
10
5
10
0
Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of the HILs
Table 11: Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of HIL1.
HIL1
Frequency [kHz]
0.25
0.50
0.75
1
1.5
2
3
4
6
Behavioural
threshold [dB HL]
20
25
20
30
20
25
40
50
45
Table 12: Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of HIL2.
HIL2
Frequency [kHz]
0.25
0.50
0.75
1
1.5
2
3
4
6
Behavioural
threshold [dB HL]
5
15
25
35
40
45
65
70
80
==PAGE:74==
APPENDIX A
63
Table 13: Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of HIL3.
HIL3
Frequency [kHz]
0.25
0.50
0.75
1
1.5
2
3
4
6
Behavioural
threshold [dB HL]
35
55
50
40
40
40
35
35
35
Table 14: Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of HIL4.
HIL4
Frequency [kHz]
0.25
0.50
0.75
1
1.5
2
3
4
6
Behavioural
threshold [dB HL]
15
15
25
25
20
35
60
60
60
Table 15: Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of HIL5.
HIL5
Frequency [kHz]
0.25
0.50
0.75
1
1.5
2
3
4
6
Behavioural
threshold [dB HL]
0
10
15
25
20
40
50
65
70
Table 16: Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of HIL6.
HIL6
Frequency [kHz]
0.25
0.50
0.75
1
1.5
2
3
4
6
Behavioural
threshold [dB HL]
5
25
40
45
40
40
45
50
70
==PAGE:75==
Appendix B
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0
50
100
NHL5
On-freq 1kHz
On-freq 2kHz
On-freq 4kHz
Off-freq
Gap [sec]
0
0.05
0.1
Lm [dB SPL]
0
50
100
NHL9
Gap [sec]
0
0.05
0.1
0
50
100
NHL10
0
0.05
0.1
Lm [dB SPL]
0
50
100
NHL5
0
0.05
0.1
0
50
100
NHL6
0
0.05
0.1
Lm [dB SPL]
0
50
100
NHL7
0
0.05
0.1
0
50
100
NHL2
0
0.05
0.1
Lm [dB SPL]
0
50
100
NHL3
0
0.05
0.1
0
50
100
NHL4
0
0.05
0.1
Lm [dB SPL]
0
50
100
NHL1
Figure 1: Grid inferred TMCs. The red, the blue and the black colors represent the on-frequency TMCs
(i.e. those obtained using masker at the same frequency with the target) for 1, 2 and 4 kHz respectively. The
magenta represents the off-frequency TMC, which was used as the assumed linear reference for obtaining
the behaviourally estimated BMI/O functions.
64
==PAGE:76==
APPENDIX B
65
Gap [sec]
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
Lm [dB SPL]
40
60
80
100
HIL5
On-freq 1kHz
On-freq 2kHz
On-freq 4kHz
Off-freq
Gap [sec]
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
40
60
80
100
HIL6
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
Lm [dB SPL]
40
60
80
100
HIL3
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
40
60
80
100
pdes
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
Lm [dB SPL]
40
60
80
100
HIL1
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
40
60
80
100
HIL2
Figure 2: The same as ﬁgure 1, but for the HI listeners.
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
Luis Robles and Mario A Ruggero. Mechanics of the Mammalian Cochlea. 81(3):1305–1352, 2001.
Lauralee Sherwood. Human physiology. From cells to systems. Gengage learning, 9th edition, 2014.
Von Békésy, G. and EG Wever. Experiments in Hearing. Woodbury: Acoustical Society of America, 1960.
a J Oxenham and C J Plack. A behavioral measure of basilar-membrane nonlinearity in listeners with normal
and impaired hearing. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 101(6):3666–3675, 1997. ISSN
00014966. doi: 10.1121/1.418327.
Mario A Ruggero, Nola C Rich, A Recio, S S Narayan, and L Robles. Basilar-membrane responses to tones
at the base of the chinchilla cochlea. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 101(4):2151–2163,
1997. ISSN 0001-4966. doi: 10.1121/1.421377. URL http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/
articlerender.fcgi?artid=3578390&tool=pmcentrez&rendertype=abstract.
D. A. Nelson, A. C. Schroder, and M. Wojtczak. A new procedure for measuring peripheral compression in
normal-hearing and hearing-impaired listeners. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 110
(October):2045–2064, 2001. ISSN 00014966. doi: 10.1121/1.1404439.
Michal Fereczkowski. Time-efﬁcient behavioural estimates of cochlear compression. PhD thesis, Technical
University of Denmark (DTU), 2015.
P S Rosengard, A J Oxenham, and L D Braida. Comparing different estimates of cochlear compression in
listeners with normal and impaired hearing. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 117(5):
3028–3041, 2005. ISSN 0001-4966. doi: 10.1121/1.1883367.
Wendy Lecluyse and Ray Meddis. A simple single-interval adaptive procedure for estimating thresholds
in normal and impaired listeners. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 126(5):2570–2579,
2009. ISSN 00014966. doi: 10.1121/1.3238248.
P a Dorn, D Konrad-Martin, S T Neely, D H Keefe, E Cyr, and M P Gorga. Distortion product otoacoustic
emission input/output functions in normal-hearing and hearing-impaired human ears. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 110(6):3119–3131, 2001. ISSN 00014966. doi: 10.1121/1.1417524.
Stephen T Neely, Michael P Gorga, and Patricia A Dorn. Cochlear compression estimates from measurements
of distortion-product otoacoustic emissions. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 114(3):
1499–1507, 2003. ISSN 0001-4966. doi: 10.1121/1.1604122.
66
==PAGE:78==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
67
F P Harris, B L Lonsbury-Martin, B B Stagner, a C Coats, and G K Martin. Acoustic distortion products
in humans: Systematic changes in amplitudes as a function of f2/f1 ratio. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 85(1):220–229, 1989. ISSN 0001-4966. doi: 10.1121/1.397728.
P Kummer, T Janssen, and W Arnold. The level and growth behavior of the 2 f1-f2 distortion product
otoacoustic emission and its relationship to auditory sensitivity in normal hearing and cochlear hearing
loss. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 103(6):3431–44, 1998. ISSN 0001-4966. doi:
10.1121/1.423054. URL http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9637030.
C. A. Shera and J. J. Guinan Jr. Evoked otoacoustic emissions arise by two fundamentally different
mechanisms: a taxonomy for mammalian OAEs. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 105
(2):782–798, 1999. ISSN 00014966. doi: 10.1121/1.426948.
R Kalluri and C a Shera. Distortion-product source unmixing: a test of the two-mechanism model for
DPOAE generation. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 109(2):622–637, 2001. ISSN
00014966. doi: 10.1121/1.1334597. URL http://link.aip.org/link/JASMAN/v109/i2/
p622/s1&Agg=doi.
Manfred Mauermann and Birger Kollmeier. Distortion product otoacoustic emission (DPOAE) input/output
functions and the inﬂuence of the second DPOAE source. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 116(4 Pt 1):2199–2212, 2004. ISSN 00014966. doi: 10.1121/1.1791719.
Stephen T Neely, Tiffany a Johnson, Judy Kopun, Darcia M Dierking, and Michael P Gorga. Distortion-
product otoacoustic emission input/output characteristics in normal-hearing and hearing-impaired human
ears. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 126(2):728–738, 2009. ISSN 00014966. doi:
10.1121/1.3158859.
Peter T. Johannesen and Enrique A. Lopez-Poveda. Cochlear nonlinearity in normal-hearing subjects
as inferred psychophysically and from distortion-product otoacoustic emissions. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 124(4):2149–2163, 2008. ISSN 1520-8524. doi: 10.1121/1.2968692. URL
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19062855.
Glenis R Long, Carrick L Talmadge, and Jungmee Lee. Measuring distortion product otoacoustic emissions
using continuously sweeping primaries. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 124(3):1613–
26, 2008. ISSN 1520-8524. doi: 10.1121/1.2949505. URL http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/19045653.
Rachel A. Scheperle, Stephen T. Neely, Judy G. Kopun, and Michael P. Gorga. Inﬂuence of <i>in situ</i>
, sound-level calibration on distortion-product otoacoustic emission variability. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 124(1):288–300, 2008. ISSN 0001-4966. doi: 10.1121/1.2931953. URL
http://asa.scitation.org/doi/10.1121/1.2931953.
GR R Long and CL L Talmadge. Spontaneous otoacoustic emission frequency is modulated by heartbeat.
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 102(November):2831–2848, 1997. ISSN 00014966.
doi: 10.1121/1.420339. URL http://link.aip.org/link/?JASMAN/102/2831/1.
Paul Boege and Thomas Janssen. Pure-tone threshold estimation from extrapolated distortion product
otoacoustic emission I/O-functions in normal and cochlear hearing loss ears. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 111(4):1810–1818, 2002. ISSN 00014966. doi: 10.1121/1.1460923.
==PAGE:79==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
68
a M Brown and D T Kemp. Suppressibility of the 2f1-f2 stimulated acoustic emissions in gerbil and man.
Hearing research, 13:29–37, 1984. ISSN 0378-5955.
Christopher J Plack, Vit Drgaenrique A Lopez-poveda, Christopher J Plack, Vit Drga, and Enrique A
Lopez-poveda. Inferred basilar-membrane response functions for listeners with mild to moderate sen-
sorineural hearing loss Inferred basilar-membrane response functions for listeners with mild to moderate
sensorineural hearing loss. 1684, 2004. doi: 10.1121/1.1675812.
N J He and R a Schmiedt. Effects of aging on the ﬁne structure of the 2f1-f2 acoustic distortion product.
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 99(2):1002–15, 1996. ISSN 0001-4966. doi: 10.1121/1.
414629. URL http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8609283.
M. Mauermann, S. Uppenkamp, P. W van Hengel, and B. Kollmeier. Evidence for the distortion product
frequency place as a source of distortion product otoacoustic emission (DPOAE) ﬁne structure in humans.
I. Fine structure and higher-order DPOAE as a function of the frequency ratio f2/f1. J Acoust Soc Am, 106
(6):3473–83, 1999. ISSN 0001-4966. doi: 10.1121/1.428201. URL http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/10615687.
Dawn Konrad-Martin and Stephen T Neely. Sources of DPOAEs revealed by suppression experiments,
inverse fast Fourier transforms, and SFOAEs in impaired ears. The Journal of the . . . , 111(4):1800–1809,
2002. ISSN 00014966. doi: 10.1121/1.1455024. URL http://link.aip.org/link/?JASMAN/
111/1800/1.
Dennis Zelle, John P. Thiericke, Ernst Dalhoff, and Anthony W. Gummer. Level dependence of the
nonlinear-distortion component of distortion-product otoacoustic emissions in humans. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 138(6):3475–90, 2015. ISSN 1520-8524. doi: 10.1121/1.4936860. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1121/1.4936860.
==PAGE:80==
List of Figures
1.1
Demonstration of the human outer, middle and inner ear. Adapted from Sherwood [2014].
. .
2
1.2
Organ of Corti: Where TM is the Tectorial Membrane, BM is the basilar membrane, IHC is the
inner hair-cell, OHC is the outer hair-cells. Adapted from [Robles and Ruggero, 2001]. . . . .
3
1.3
(a) BMI/O functions, were evoked using pure tone stimuli with frequency equal to or lower than
the characteristic frequency (CF = 10 kHz). (b) BMI/O functions of chinchilla, recorded using
pure tone stimuli of frequency equal to or higher than the characteristic frequency. The dotted
line shows the linear reference. Adapted from [Robles and Ruggero, 2001]. . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
GOM: Required masker level in order the target tone to be masked as a function of the target
level. The target tone frequency is 6 kHz. The solid data points represent responses to on-
frequency masker (6 kHz) and the open symbols to off-frequency masker (3 kHz). The time gap
between masker and target was ﬁxed at 2 ms [Oxenham and Plack, 1997]. . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Temporal masking curves (TMCs) of 1kHz target frequency and several masker frequencies.
Taken from [Nelson et al., 2001] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.6
Derivation of basilar membrane I/O responses from temporal masking curves. Left panel: Sketch
of temporal masking curves (TMCs). The ﬁrst and third sections of the on-frequency TMC,
g(t), correspond to the linear region of BM I/O while the second section corresponds to the
compressive region. The arrows indicate the knee point (KP) level, i.e. the masker level at which
the slope of g(t) changes. When the masker level exceeds the KP level, the increase in masker
level with masker-signal gap has to overcome the BM compression, hence the steeper slope. The
ﬁrst and third sections of the on-frequency TMC are set equal to the slope of the off-frequency
curve, f(t). Note, that it is possible to estimate the KP level based on the on-frequency curve.
Right panel: Sketch of the BM I/O function (solid line) derived from the TMCs shown in the left
panel. Masker levels of g(t) and f(t) deﬁne the ordinate and abscissa, respectively. The arrow
points towards the KP level. The mid-section of the curve describes the compressive response,
while the two outer sections correspond to the linear response of the BM. The dashed curve
reﬂects the linear reference. Adapted from Fereczkowski [2015] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.7
Basilar Membrane Input-Output (BM I/O) function at and below the the frequency of the target
tone, 1kHz [Nelson et al., 2001]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.8
Example of a possible curve that could be obtained using the grid method. The white squares
correspond to positive answers (i.e. the listener correctly identiﬁed the target interval) and the
black squares correspond to negative answers (i.e. the listener did not correctly identify the
target interval). The arrows mark the path that followed on the grid surface. [Fereczkowski, 2015]
8
69
==PAGE:81==
List of Figures
70
1.9
Scatter plot of the thresholds inferred using classic TMC, abscissa and the grid method, ordinate.
The R2 correlation coefﬁcient is 0.91 with p < 0.0001 [Fereczkowski, 2015]. . . . . . . . . .
9
1.10 Schematic representation of the generation of stimulus - frequency (top) and distortion product
(bottom) otoacoustic emissions. The stimulus-frequency OAEs are generated by a coherent
reﬂection of the forward traveling wave at the characteristic place of the stimulus frequency
on the BM. The DPOAEs are generated due to the overlapping of the traveling waves of the
primaries near the f2 place on the BM. Then the DP wave is traveling to two directions. One
part of the DP travels backwards to the oval window (generator component) and its second
part travels forward to the apex. The forward traveling DP is reﬂected backwards from the
characteristic place of the DP to the oval window (reﬂection component). Adapted from [Shera
and Guinan Jr, 1999]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.11 Magnitude spectra and phase responses of DPOAEs evoked by three different L2 (i.e. 30, 50 and
80 dB SPL). The thick black lines represent the generator components, the doted lines represent
the reﬂection component and the grey thick lines represent the combination of them resulting
in a ﬁne structure. For the measurement of the presented data where used a ﬁxed f2/f1 ratio
and for determining L1 the scissors paradigm (L1 = 0.4L2 + 39) was used. Adapted from
[Mauermann and Kollmeier, 2004] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.12 Median DPOAE levels as a function of L2, plotted according to the hearing loss of the subjects,
from 0 dB HL to 70 dB HL. The level relation between the primaries was L1 = 0.4L2 + 39 and
the f2/f1 ratio was ﬁxed at 1.22. Adapted from [Dorn et al., 2001].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.13 Median DPOAE levels as a function of L2, plotted according to the hearing loss of the subjects,
from 0 dB HL to 60 dB HL. The level relation was given by L1 = 80 + 0.137log2(18/f2)(L2 −
80) and the f1/f2 ratio were given by f2/f1 = 1.22 + log2(9.6/f2)(L2/415)2. Adapted from
[Neely et al., 2009] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.14 Correlation between compression exponents inferred in normal hearing listeners from TMCs
and DPOAEs ﬁtted (A) using 3rd order polynomial and (B) using linear regression at L2 range
from 40 to 65 dB SPL. Solid lines show linear ﬁt to the 4kHz data points and the dashed lines
show the linear ﬁtting to all data. Taken from [Johannesen and Lopez-Poveda, 2008]. . . . . .
13
2.1
DPOAE recording setup. The blue cables carry the stimuli, generated in the PC, in digital format,
the green cables carry the converted from digital to analogue stimuli. The magenta cables carry
the signal captured by the probe microphone and the dark red cables carry the converted from
analogue to digital microphone signal. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2
Demonstration of the position in the ear canal of the built-in the probe loudspeakers and
microphone. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3
Calibration setup. The blue cables carry the stimuli, generated in the PC, in digital format, the
green cables carry the converted from digital to analogue stimuli. The magenta cables carry the
signal captured by the probe microphone. The red cables carry the converted from analogue
to digital microphone signal. The orange cables carry the captured by the microphone of the
coupler signal. The signal ﬁrst passes through the SPL meter, where it is ampliﬁed, and then it
is fed to the AD/DA converter in order to be converted from analogue to digital format. The
converted signal is transferred from the AD/DA converter through ADAT connection to the
sound-card and from the sound-card to the computer through USB 2.0 connection (red cables).
19
==PAGE:82==
List of Figures
71
2.4
The blue lines demonstrate the spectrum of the unprocessed second primary sweep, which covers
the frequency range from 3 to 6 kHz in two seconds. The black lines demonstrate the same
sweep after the ﬁltering with the inverse transfer function of the coupler and the loudspeaker.
The top panels demonstrate the magnitudes and the bottom panels the phase responses. . . . .
22
2.5
Spectrum of the calibrated signal recorded by the coupler’s microphone. The top panel illustrates
the magnitude and the bottom panel the phase response of the second primary. . . . . . . . . .
23
2.6
Behavioral experiment setup. The blue cable carries the stimuli, generated in the PC, in digital
format. The green cable carries the converted from digital to analogue stimuli and the black
cable carries the fed to the headphones signal. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1
BMI/O functions of all the NH listeners at 1 kHz. The blue diamonds corresponds to the data
points inferred from the Grid method, the solid red circles and the solid black circles represent
the data points with SNR ≥5 dB inferred from the DPOAE (scissors paradigm) and DPOAE
(equal level paradigm) respectively. The minimum SNR criterion for acceptance of the DPOAE-
based data points was 5 dB. The open red and black circles represent the data inferred from the
DPOAE (scissors paradigm) and DPOAE (equal level paradigm) respectively with SNR < 5
dB. The solid blue line is the linear regression ﬁtted to the Grid inferred data points, which fall
within the input level range of 35 - 80 dB SPL (i.e. second primary level L2, range). The red
and black solid straight lines are linear regressions ﬁtted to the data with SNR ≥5 dB from
each DPOAE method (i.e. scissors and equal level paradigms). The black dashed line is the
linear reference. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
The same as ﬁgure 3.1, but for the CF of 2 kHz. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3
The same as ﬁgure 3.1, but for the CF of 4 kHz. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4
BM I/0 function of subject NHL1 for three characteristic frequencies (i.e. 1, 2 and 4 kHz). The
blue diamonds, the red circles and the black circles represent the Grid - TMC, the DPOAE
(scissors paradigm) and the DPOAE (equal level paradigm) inferred data points respectively.
The open circles represent DPOAE inferred data that their SNR was less than 5 dB (i.e. below
the SNR criterion of acceptance). The open circles can be red or black for DPOAE (scissors
paradigm) and DPOAE (equal level paradigm) respectively. For the estimation of the BM I/O
function a linear regression ﬁtting is applied to the data points inferred from each of the three
experiments. The blue line is ﬁtted to the Grid - TMC data (ﬁtted in the input level range 35 - 80
dB SPL), the red line is ﬁtted to the DPOAE (scissors paradigm) data and the black line is ﬁtted
to the DPOAE (equal level paradigm) data. The DPOAE inferred data that have been taken into
account for the ﬁtting are those with SNR≥5 dB. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.5
The same as ﬁgure 3.4 for subject NHL9.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.6
Magnitudes of listener NHL1 obtained after the unmixing of the DPOAE (scissors) recordings
for f2 from 750 to 1500 Hz. Each of the red curves represents the unmixed component evoked
by each of the four L2 levels. The black dashed line indicates the DP frequency of interest (i.e.
2f1 −f2 ≈639). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.7
The same as ﬁgure 3.6, but for normal hearing listener NHL9.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.8
The same as ﬁgure 3.6, but for normal hearing listener NHL2 for f2 from 3 to 6 kHz. The black
dashed line indicates the DP frequency of interest (i.e. 2f1 −f2 ≈2557). . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.9
Mixed (i.e. before unmixing) magnitudes of NHL2 for f2 from 3 to 6 kHz. Each of the red
curves represents the mixed magnitude of the distortion product evoked by each of the four L2
levels (i.e. 35, 50 65 and 80 dB SPL). The black dashed line indicates the DP frequency of
interest (i.e. 2f1 −f2 ≈2557). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
==PAGE:83==
List of Figures
72
3.10 The same as ﬁgure 3.1 but, for HI listeners.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.11 The same as ﬁgure 3.1 but, for HI listeners at 2 kHz.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.12 The same as ﬁgure 3.1 but, for HI listeners at 4 kHz.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.13 Magnitudes obtained after the unmixing of the DPOAE (scissors) recordings of listener HIL6.
Each of the red curves represents the unmixed component evoked by each of the four L2 levels.
The black dashed line indicates the DP frequency of interest (i.e. 2f1 −f2). . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.14 Mixed (i.e. before unmixing) magnitudes of NHL6 at 1 kHz. Each of the red curves represents
the mixed magnitude of the distortion product evoked by each of the four L2 levels (i.e. 35, 50
and 80 dB SPL). The black dashed line indicates the DP frequency of interest (i.e. 2f1 −f2). .
43
3.15 (A): Correlation between compression exponent measures inferred from the Grid method and
DPOAE recordings using the scissors paradigm for determining the primaries’ level relation.
(B): Correlation between compression exponent estimates inferred from the Grid method and
DPOAE recordings using the equal level paradigm. The BM I/O functions, from which the
compression exponents were estimated, were derived using linear regression ﬁtting on the data
points. The red circles, blue triangles and black squares represent the compression exponents of
the BM I/O functions at 1, 2 and 4 kHz respectively. The solid lines shows linear ﬁtting of the
data points per frequency, the magenta dashed line shows linear ﬁtting for all data points and the
black dashed line is the 1 to 1 correlation diagonal. The data points represent the compression
exponents from all the subjects of the present study. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.16 Correlation between compression exponent measures inferred from the Grid method and DPOAE
recordings using scissors paradigm. Each panel corresponds to different characteristic frequency
(i.e. 1, 2 and 4 kHz). The BM I/O functions, from which the compression exponents were
estimated, were derived using linear regression ﬁtting on the data points. The black dashed line
is the 1 to 1 correlation diagonal. The data points represents compression exponents from all the
subjects (i.e. NH and HI). The red blue and black solid lines correspond to linear ﬁttings for 1, 2
and 4 kHz data points.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.17 The same as ﬁgure 3.16 but for the DPOAE stimulation were used primaris with equal levels
(i.e. L1 = L2).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.18 Compression exponents inferred from the Grid method (A), DPOAE recordings using scissors
paradigm (B) and DPOAE recordings using the equal level paradigm (C) as a function of the
absolute threshold. The red circles, blue triangles and black squares represent the the frequencies
1, 2 and 4 kHz respectively. The solid lines shows linear ﬁtting of the data per frequency, the
magenta dashed line shows linear ﬁtting for all data points. Data are presented for all the subjects
(i.e., NH and HI). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.19 Compression exponent as a function of characteristic frequency. The blue diamonds, the red
circles and the black circles represents the compression exponents inferred from Grid, DPOAE
(scissors) and DPOAE (equal level) methods per characteristic frequency.
. . . . . . . . . . .
49
1
Grid inferred TMCs. The red, the blue and the black colors represent the on-frequency TMCs
(i.e. those obtained using masker at the same frequency with the target) for 1, 2 and 4 kHz
respectively. The magenta represents the off-frequency TMC, which was used as the assumed
linear reference for obtaining the behaviourally estimated BMI/O functions. . . . . . . . . . .
64
2
The same as ﬁgure 1, but for the HI listeners.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
==PAGE:84==
List of Tables
3.1
Compression exponents of each of the NHLs at 1 kHz inferred from the Grid method, the
DPOAE (scissors paradigm) and the DPOAE (equal level paradigm). The mean value of the
compression exponents across subjects for each method is presented with its standard deviation.
The frequency of 1kHz in this case corresponds to the f2 for the DPOAEs and to the target tone
frequency for the Grid - TMC method. The compression exponent is deﬁned as the slope of the
linear ﬁtting on the data points. The Grid inferred compression exponents are estimated from
the slope of the ﬁtted line to the Grid data for input level within the range of 35 - 80 dB SPL (i.e.
L2 range). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.2
The same as 3.1, but for 2 kHz. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3
The same as 3.1, but for 4 kHz. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.4
The same as ﬁgure 3.1, but for the hearing impaired listeners. The absolute behavioral threshold
of each of the hearing impaired listeners is presented as well. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.5
The same as ﬁgure 3.1, but at 2 kHz for the hearing impaired listeners. The absolute behavioral
threshold of each of the hearing impaired listeners is presented as well. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.6
The same as ﬁgure 3.1, but at 4 kHz for the hearing impaired listeners. The absolute behavioral
threshold of each of the hearing impaired listeners is presented as well. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.1
RMS of the difference between the compression exponents inferred from the Grid and the
DPOAE methods for each SNR criterion. Number of compression exponents inferred from the
DPOAE (scissors paradigm) and DPOAE (equal level paradigm) for each SNR criterion. . . .
52
1
Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of NHL1.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
2
Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of NHL2.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
3
Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of NHL3.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4
Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of NHL4.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5
Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of NHL5.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6
Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of NHL6.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7
Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of NHL7.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
8
Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of NHL8.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
9
Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of NHL9.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
10
Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of NHL10. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
11
Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of HIL1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
12
Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of HIL2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
73
==PAGE:85==
List of Tables
74
13
Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of HIL3. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
14
Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of HIL4. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
15
Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of HIL5. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
16
Behaviourally obtained hearing thresholds of HIL6. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
