==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Displacement Mapping
in Deferred Shading
Parallax Shadows in Tessellation Displacement
Riccardo Loggini (s151002)
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
GPU tessellation displacement mapping is increasing its popularity in real-time ap-
plications. This adds to the already available Per-Pixel displacement mapping tech-
niques that focus on fragment calculations instead. Each approach has its own ad-
vantages and drawbacks which leads also to different use cases.
In this area, tessellation has its own limits when dealing with shadow maps: efficient
shadow mapping algorithms can not fully handle small displacement, producing ex-
aggerate shadowing effects.
This thesis wants to explore the available GPU displacement mapping techniques
and find a shadowing hybrid solution that can take advantage from different ways of
thinking, both in terms of performance and visual result.
There is a comparison between the Per-Vertex tessellation displacement mapping and
the Per-Pixel parallax occlusion mapping, to enlighten their advantages and draw-
backs, performance and visual result one versus the other.
To improve parallax occlusion mapping, self soft shadows are generated with a similar
algorithm.
To improve tessellation displacement mapping, screen space ambient occlusion and
shadow mapping have been implemented.
As last step, there is a merging of the two techniques: using parallax self soft shad-
owing into tessellation displacement mapping.
This was possible because there is a direct mapping between the per-vertex texture
displacement to the parallax mapping domain, the texture tangent space.
The merging showed a good outcome. Parallax shadows are much more precise than
a common shadow mapping pass, require less computational time and they can be
used to supply shadows even for the smallest displacement detail on a tessellation
displacement surface.
This hybrid technique can be a viable solution to achieve a higher level of detail for
tessellated surfaces dynamic shadows in a game like environment.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master’s thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a Master’s degree in Digital Media Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, July 14, 2017
Riccardo Loggini (s151002)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
This thesis is dedicated to my parents Teresa and Giancarlo who supported me both
financially and emotionally during all my student years.
I thank professor Jeppe Revall Frisvad and his inspiring passion for computer graphics,
for the guidance during this project.
I thank Joey de Vries for the precious introduction material related to many real-time
graphics topics.
In the end I thank DTU for these two years of great experience.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
3
2.1
A Deferred Pipeline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Per-pixel Displacement Mapping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Tessellation Displacement Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4
Screen Space Ambient Occlusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.5
Omnidirectional Shadow Mapping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
System Design
27
3.1
Deferred Shader . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2
Per-pixel Displacement Mapping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3
Tessellation Displacement Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.4
Screen Space Ambient Occlusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.5
Omnidirectional Shadow Mapping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4
Results
53
4.1
Used Software and Hardware
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.2
Parallax Occlusion Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.3
Tessellation Displacement Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.4
Omni-directional Shadow Maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
4.5
Parallax Shadows in Tessellation Displacement Mapping . . . . . . . .
67
5
Conclusion
73
A Leftover Details
75
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
A.1 From NDC to Clip coordinates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
A.2 SSAO: refining the sample kernel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
B Geometric Concepts
81
B.1
Transformation Matrices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
B.2
Normal Matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
B.3
Geometry Spaces and Coordinates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
B.4
Reflection vector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
B.5
Gram–Schmidt process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
B.6
Tangent Space and the TBN Matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
Bibliography
95
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Adding geometric details to surfaces can be easier using displacement maps.
Displacement maps are grey scale textures applied to meshes that define an offset
value for each surface point.
Just think at the advantages for an artist to use displacement maps: they can use
all their brushes directly to paint in texture to define exactly how the displacement
should look like.
The render programmer can then decide the level of detail, so the precision in follow-
ing the displacement maps values.
There are two families of algorithms to implement displacement mapping:
• Per-Pixel: approach that is based on texture offsetting to give the viewer a
sense of depth
• Per-Vertex: approach that relies on enhance the surface geometry complexity
to then change its geometric shape
From one side Per-Pixel methods, like the Parallax Occlusion Mapping implemented
in this project, are able to generate self soft shadows (here called Parallax Shadows)
even for the smaller displacement detail described in the displacement map.
From the other side, Per-Vertex methods can rely on all the algorithms based on
geometry that are used also for the non-displaced models, for example screen space
ambient occlusion and shadow maps.
Unfortunately, efficient shadow maps usually suffer from loss of precision for smaller
geometric details.
Since tessellation displaced surfaces are using the same input data of parallax map-
ping to generate the displacement, it is still possible to use the parallax shadows
algorithm underneath.
This will allow to use tessellation displacement and still having precise dynamic shad-
ows on the newly displaced geometry at a fair computational time.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
1.1
Related Work
Displacement mapping, introduced by Cook [Coo84], was born as an improvement
over bump mapping [Bli78] to overcome the issue of view-point dependency over the
quality of result.
The proposed solution was modifying the underlying surface geometry, based on grey
scale textures (called height maps) values.
These per-vertex based approaches became famous in the offline domain like described
in Pharr [PH96] and Heidrich [HS98] papers. These methods present low performance
in the current programmable GPU and they are not suitable for real-time applications
due to their computational costs.
The idea of combining displacement mapping with texture lookups was proposed by
Patterson, who called his method as inverse displacement mapping [PHL91], after
named per-pixel displacement by the subsequent papers, for its different approach
focused in pixel shader calculations.
One of the significant disadvantages of per-pixel approaches is the lack of correct ob-
ject silhouettes since these techniques do not modify the actual geometry. Accurate
silhouettes can be generated by using prismatic voxel shell volume as Wang proposes
in [Wan+04] or by encoding the surface curvature information with quadric surfaces,
like Oliveira and Policarpo describe [OP05].
Natalya Tatarchuk [Tat06] presents parallax occlusion mapping, a per-pixel ray trac-
ing algorithm still used in today games [Pol14]. She also presents a way to render self
soft shadows, that in this report will be addressed as Parallax Shadows.
Still, parallax mapping approaches will produce severe aliasing and excessive flat-
tening at steep viewing angles: these are two drawbacks that are common to all
commonly used per-pixel approaches at the time of writing this report.
Per-Vertex Displacement came to fashion again in recent years with the introduction
of the tessellation stage in the programmable pipeline of the most common consumer
grade real-time graphics API available [Tat08].
At that time, geometry tessellation was already a case of study from a decade: Doggett
and Hirche [DH00] proposed one of the first attempt to take advantage of the par-
allel nature of GPU to render vertex displacement directly on it (using the pixel
pipelines). Umenhoffer and Szirmay-Kalos [SU08] make an extensive overview of the
most famous per-pixel displacement methods comparing results with per-vertex dis-
placement. They come to the conclusion that vertex displacement, thanks to the
progressive hardware capabilities, is becoming the more viable displacement mapping
solution for its visual output to performance ratio. In this context, tessellation dis-
placement mapping is still a fairly new approach in applications like games [Bur15]
and more optimization is needed. Usually techniques like shadow mapping do not
consider small displacement features because of quality of result over performance
reasons.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
This chapter will describe most of the mathematical tools and concepts used for the
project.
==PAGE:14==
4
2 Theory
2.1
A Deferred Pipeline
Displacement mapping finds many use cases into modern video games, real-time ap-
plications that runs with the many consumer-grade graphics cards currently available.
In this environment, I chose to use deferred shading, a very common graphics pipeline
used in many of the recent video games like GTA V [Cou15].
When we talk about deferred rendering, we roughly divide the rendering pipeline
in a first geometry pass followed by a lighting pass. This means first retrieving all
the inputs (depth, normals, albedo color, specular intensity and possibly others) for
lighting calculations in a per pixel manner, stored in the so called G-buffer, and only
later render the scene. Considering the 3D objects included in our view frustum, the
deferred algorithm can be summarized with the following pseudocode, as suggested
by Policarpo and Fonseca in their tutorial [Pol+05].
1 for each object do
2
G-buffer = lighting properties of object;
3 for each light do
4
framebuffer += light_model(G-buffer,light);
Listing 2.1: Deferred rendering approach pseudocode.
The rendering complexity can be seen as O (num_objects + num_lights). It has to
be taken into account that the complexity will be heavily influenced by rendering reso-
lution (e.g. how many pixel we are shading) because again, only the visible fragments
(the ones that will compose the final screen image) will be subject to light calculation.
This brings to consider the timing as O (screen_resolution ∗num_lights).
The fact of computing light contribution only on the finally visible fragments is a
major advantage compared to a forward pipeline where rendered fragments are some-
times discarded.
It has to be stated though that nowadays the average forward renderer engine adopts
occlusion culling and early z-test to minimize overdraw.
The general deferred shading pipeline can be seen in Figure 2.1 and the relative
screens example Figure 2.2.
• Geometry Stage: its primary function is to fill the G-buffer using models
meshes data.
G-buffer is a collection of screen sized textures. Each texture contain a different
information of the visible geometry (e.g. positions, normals, color) for further
light calculation.
• Lighting Stage: it is mainly used to calculate light contributions for each
visible geometry position.
All the pixels that will be visible in the final render will be the result of single
light calculations using the corresponding pixels in the G-buffer’ screen sized
==PAGE:15==
2.1 A Deferred Pipeline
5
Figure 2.1: Deferred shading pipeline scheme.
textures.
This process is known as ”per-pixel” lighting.
2.1.1
Lighting
This study focused on point lights as the only type of light source.
A point light source emanates the same amount of light in every possible space direc-
tion.
Light contribution will be calculated for each visible screen space point (in a so called
”per-pixel” manner) using the Phong reflection model, as described in chapter 6 of
[Hug14].
Light calculation is the sum of three contributions: ambient, specular and diffuse
components.
In my case I am using a lighting model based on the Phong one, called WPF re-
flectance model and the following list will describe its components.
• Ambient Reflection: This component is the most crude approximation of
light scattered and bounced by all the other surrounding surfaces into the cur-
rent one. It is represented by a constant amount of light addition as seen in
(2.1), where Ia is color/intensity of the scene’s ambient light(RGB vector), ka
the efficiency factor of the material to show ambient light and Cd is the innate
(the diffuse, the proper) material color.
amb = Ia ka Cd
(2.1)
• Diffuse Reflection: the direct light contribution to the material, computed
with Lambert’s cosine rule, as seen in Figure 2.3(a).
The brightness of the reflected light is only dependent on how directly the inci-
dent light hits the surface.
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Theory
(a) Positions
(b) Normals
(c) Diffuse
(d) Specular
(e) Lit Result
Figure 2.2: Example of G-buffer content (the first 4 screens) and the corresponding
lighting stage result.
==PAGE:17==
2.1 A Deferred Pipeline
7
Be ⃗l light to visible position direction, ⃗n surface normal, θ the angle between
−⃗l and ⃗n, Id color/intensity of the light and Cd is the innate (the diffuse, the
proper) material color, then the diffuse contribution to light can be expressed
with (2.2).
diff = Id Cd max {cos (θ), 0}
(2.2)
The last term can be explained if we think to the case when θ < 0.
In this situation the light is behind the surface and so the diffuse contribution
needs to be zero.
• Specular Reflection: the specular highlight that shiny materials show, which
is a brighter version of the material diffuse color.
The formula is (2.3) and, as we can see, it is view point dependent (a difference
with the diffuse component).
spec = Id ks [cos(δ)]s
(2.3)
With reference to Figure 2.3(b), δ is the angle between reflect direction ⃗r and
the view direction ⃗v, so cos(δ) = ⃗r · ⃗v.
The reflection vector ⃗r is obtained as described in Appendix B.4 thanks to the
rule of angle of incidence θl is equal to angle of reflection θr.
The term cos(δ) ensures that specular effect is stronger when we approach the
situation where the view direction ⃗v is parallel to the reflection direction ⃗r.
The Specular Exponent s controls the specular component ”drop-off” rate,
so how fast the specular highlights will fade out.
For very shiny surfaces (like plastic) this exponent value goes between 100 and
1000.
The whole generalized formula for the WPF model, considering only point lights, can
be seen in (2.4) to calculate light on a visible position p.
lightp = amb +
∑
light
i
diff (i) +
∑
light
i
spec (i)
= (Ia ka Cd) + Id
∑
light
i
[Cd ∗max {cos θ, 0} + ks (cos δ)s]
(2.4)
Note that in real cases there are more efficient implementations which uses different
approach to measure δ, like the Blinn-Phong model, described in [Hug14].
2.1.1.1
Attenuation and volume bounds
In reality, the light reflected from an observed point P of distance d from the light
source L, is quadratically inverse to d2.
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Theory
(a) Diffuse Reflection
(b) Specular Reflection
Figure 2.3: Diffuse and specular reflection reference schemes.
We can model this effect to give a ”radial falloff” to point lights by using an inverse
quadratic function of d, as showed in (2.5).
att =
1
a2d2 + a1d + a0
(2.5)
⃗a = [a2, a1, a0] are the quadratic, linear and constant attenuation terms. ⃗a will lower
the light intensity proportionally to d = ||L −P||.
The attenuation factor would be theoretically applied to every light calculation on
the visible geometry.
When d is reasonably big there might be the case where the calculated light contri-
bution is too small to be noticed and it might be not worth the calculation time.
Let’s consider ε →0+ as the minimum intensity value we accept for the attenuated
light intensity, then we can write (2.6) to find the radius (or range) R.
attR ∗Imax = ε
a2R2 + a1R + a0 = Imax
1
ε
a2R2 + a1R + a0 −Imax
1
ε = 0
⇒R =
−a1 +
√
a2
1 −4a2
(
a0 −Imax
ε
)
2a2
(2.6)
The range R will delimit the spherical effectiveness volume bounds for a certain
point light.
==PAGE:19==
2.1 A Deferred Pipeline
9
Each time we are going to calculate a point light contribution from L to the visible
position P, we will first check if d = ||L −P|| < R.
Figure 2.4: Point light radial falloff example and range of effectiveness. Courtesy
of Unity3D.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Theory
2.2
Per-pixel Displacement Mapping
There is a type of displacement mapping that relies exclusively on fragment calcula-
tion.
In this way the initial geometry of the displaced surface will remain the same (or it
will change slightly) and a sense of depth is created based on the height map.
This kind of displacement technique can be seen as an ”optical illusion”: what it
does in practice is put an offset to the visible textures in clever ways that will fake
geometry displacements in gain of performance.
A visual representation of this concept can be seen in Figure 2.5 where S is the vis-
ible surface from the view position. The surface contains multiple information for
each tangent coordinate pair (u, v) such as diffuse color, specular intensity, normal
direction but, most of all, the displacement value h (u, v) .
An extensive study of the various kinds of per-pixel displacement is done by Umen-
hoffer and Szirmay-Kalos in [SU08].
We can distinguish the different algorithms in families based on the accuracy they
have to find the intersection point B between the view ray and the height map, as
shown in Figure 2.5.
• Non-iterative methods: this family of algorithms is the most approximate
and the computationally fastest.
Figure 2.5: Principle of per-pixel displacement mapping: the viewer looking at the
surface S would normally get visual information from S (A) but he will
receive S (B) instead. The choice of B is based on the intersection of
the view ray with the surface displacement function h .
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Per-pixel Displacement Mapping
11
These algorithms require at most one additional texture sample after the view
ray first hits the surface.
The visual sense of depth is good for small displacements but bad otherwise.
The most successful example of this family is normal mapping that has been a
solid solution to simulate small displacements for decades.
An example of a bad visual result can be seen with parallax mapping in Fig-
ure 2.6. This is explained in detail in Section 2.2.1.
• Iterative methods: this subset of per-pixel displacement algorithms relies on
multiple texture lookups done with ray marching steps. They achieve the best
visual result at the expense of computational time and handling additional data.
– Unsafe iterative: these methods use different kinds of ray marching (e.g.
forward steps or linear search) along the view ray but we can never be
sure to hit the nearest displacement intersection to the viewer, as shown
in Figure 2.8.
A positive side is that we can shorten the ray marching step (or use other
checks in the case of linear search) to decrease the number of hit errors
but again, we will never be sure to avoid a displacement thinner than the
chosen step.
An example of this category is the steep parallax mapping, explained in
Section 2.2.2.
– Safe iterative: this subset of methods will ensure the view ray to get the
first intersection between the view ray and the displacement function.
These algorithms are also the most expensive in the per-pixel displacement
spectrum and they often rely on additional, precomputed, spatial data.
An example of this category is the so called sphere tracing method, de-
scribed in the NVIDIA GPU Gems 2 book [Woo05], that uses sphere trac-
ing to sample 3D textures.
• Hybrid: in this last group of per-pixel displacement methods there is a switch
of algorithm approach when we have enough reasons to think that the solution
for the first ray-hit is in a fairly small interval.
The hybrid methods are the best in terms of visual result vs. performance.
An example is the parallax occlusion mapping described in Section 2.2.2 with
starts with ray-marching and then finds the averaged solution by linear inter-
polation.
2.2.1
Parallax Mapping
The basic parallax mapping technique is a non-iterative per-pixel method that can
lead to bad visual results, as you can see in Figure 2.7.
The idea behind it is shown in Figure 2.6: the ray intersection is taken always with
the bottom plane of the displacement domain.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Theory
Figure 2.6: Basic parallax mapping algorithm concept in tangent space: the point
B is chosen based on the intersection of the view ray with the bottom
of the displacement domain.
This big approximation leads to a good result only when the view angle with the
surface is minimal, that means looking at the surface in a spot that is exactly in front
of the viewer.
In this particular example the visual error will be relevant because the wanted inter-
section (red dot) corresponds to a height value that is approximately one third of the
sampled one in B.
In real use cases, parallax mapping result is adjusted with clever methods by taking
in consideration the height value in B over the total or its normal direction. These
adjustments are made without adding additional samples to the surface S textures.
More informations are found in the article by Umenhoffer and Szirmay-Kalos in
[SU08].
We are interested to find point B x and y coordinates in tangent space, because those
are also the (u, v) coordinates to sample the surface S. Let’s suppose we are working
on a planar surface S.
The first step is find view direction ⃗p in tangent space relative to the surface S which
is possible by calculating the TBN change of basis matrix which has been extensively
discussed in Appendix B.6. Calculation of ⃗p is shown in (2.7) with reference to Fig-
ure 2.6. To find A and V in tangent space, we will need the relative positions in world
space Aworld and Vworld. The TBN matrix I am using transforms coordinates from
tangent space to world space, so calculating A and V in tangent space will require
to use the inverse of the TBN. Since T,B and N are unit length vectors forming a
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Per-pixel Displacement Mapping
13
Figure 2.7: Basic parallax mapping algorithm result: its result is particularly wrong
when there are big height differences in the displacement map, such as
bricks coming out from a wall.
The result is appropriate only in the center area of the surface where
the view vector is almost perpendicular with the surface normal .
base, the TBN will have the inverse matrix equal to the transpose.
Atangent = [TBN]T Aworld
Vtangent =]TBN]T Vworld
⃗p =
Atangent −Vtangent
∥Atangent −Vtangent∥
(2.7)
For the view ray in tangent space to go from point A to the bottom of the displace-
ment plane it is going to decrease its z coordinate by hmax.
Naming B′ the intersection of view ray with the bottom plane, its x and y coordinates
in tangent space are the same ones of B, the point that we are looking for, because
the surface S is plane and parallel to the bottom surface for hypothesis.
Considering ⃗p = (px, py, pz), A = (Ax, Ay, Az) and B = (Bx, By, Bz), all referencing
to the surface tangent space, we can write (2.8).
Az + t′ pz = Az −hmax
⇒t′ pz = −hmax
⇒t′ = −hmax/pz
(2.8)
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Theory
With the view line parameter value t′ it is possible to calculate x and y tangent space
coordinates of B as in (2.9).
Bx = B′
x = Ax + t′ px
By = B′
y = Ay + t′ py
(2.9)
As said before, with Bx and By it is possible to sample surface S to get all the
information for light computation, such as albedo, normal direction, specular intensity
and of course displaced position from the height map.
2.2.2
Parallax Occlusion Mapping
Parallax occlusion mapping is a hybrid per-pixel displacement approach.
It starts with ray marching along the view ray in surface tangent space and it uses a
linear interpolation to improve the initial result.
The first part of the algorithm is also known as Steep Parallax Mapping, an unsafe
iterative method that relies exclusively on ray marching.
Its concept can be seen in Figure 2.8: the height map h is iteratively sampled i times
at positions ti until condition (2.11) is met.
We can start by defining the vector ⃗l = (lx, ly, lz), which is obtained by choosing a
marching step length ls in direction of ⃗p from (2.7).
We can then define ⃗l as (2.10).
⃗l = ls ⃗p
(2.10)
The length of ⃗l will grow at fixed rate for each iteration i until condition (2.11) is
met, which means the view ray sample i is under the displaced surface h (ti) and the
ray intersection relies on the view ray between the sample i and the sample i −1.
h (ti) > h (bi)
(2.11)
The visual result of this first phase of parallax occlusion can be seen in Figure 2.9.
Although it produces a much better result than the basic parallax mapping, some
noticeable artifacts are still present like the layered effect on all the displaced surface.
This is due to taking texture samples at fixed steps, and it can be attenuated by
lowering the ray marching step length ls. Obviously the smaller the step is, the more
computational time is required.
The second phase of the parallax occlusion algorithm consists in a linear interpola-
tion between the last iteration height value and its previous.
The process is shown in Figure 2.10.
Let ti the point found in the first phase and ti−1 the point from its previous ray
marching step, then we can further approximate the intersection as shown in (2.12).
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Per-pixel Displacement Mapping
15
Figure 2.8: An example of how a unsafe iterative ray-marching method can miss
the first displacement intersection and return the second one.
In this example four iterations were necessary to find an intersection.
∆i = h (bi) −h (ti)
∆i−1 = h (bi−1) −h (ti−1)
wB =
∆i
∆i + ∆i−1
B′ = (1 −wB) bi + wB bi−1
(2.12)
With reference to Figure 2.10, B′ has the same x and y tangent space coordinates
as B, its projection to the visible surface S, and that is all we need to sample the
textures attached to S for light calculation.
The result after the interpolation can be seen in Figure 2.11.
2.2.3
Ray-traced self shadows
With the same ray approach of parallax mapping is possible to compute self shadow-
ing.
For every position calculated with parallax mapping, we can also calculate a shadow
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Theory
Figure 2.9: Steep parallax mapping example. The displacements show a character-
istic layered effect.
Figure 2.10: Second phase of parallax occlusion: interpolation between the last two
ray marching steps.
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Per-pixel Displacement Mapping
17
(a) Steep Parallax
(b) Parallax Occlusion
Figure 2.11: First and second phase results of parallax occlusion.
factor considering the ray between the point light and the intersection point B with
the heightmap, as Figure 2.12 shows. There kind of shadows are more accurate than
shadow mapping but they are also generally more expensive, because a ray is traced
for each visible position.
The explanation of the implemented algorithm can be found in Section 3.2.0.1.
Figure 2.12: Tangent space parallax shadow calculation: if the ray between the
intersection point with height map and the light position is occluded,
then a shadow factor will be calculated.
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Theory
2.3
Tessellation Displacement Mapping
The common conception of displacement mapping often refers to a per-vertex ap-
proach, where the geometry vertex positions are displaced from their initial values to
add more details to the model.
Notice that with this method, displacement will be applied to all the surface vertices
and the more vertices we will use, the more details we will be able to achieve.
The overall process can be resumed in two steps:
• Tessellation: the parametric surface geometry gets a higher complexity by
decomposing the initial shape in multiple smaller sub-shapes (that will all end
up being triangles before the rasterization stage) as can be seen in Figure 2.14.
• Vertex Displacement: once we have enough geometric complexity in the
surface we can displace the vertices based on height (or displacement) map
values, as shown in (2.13).
Given the position of a parametric surface ⃗S (u, v) function of its texture coordinates,
⃗nS its normal texture (or equivalently the vertex normal at coordinates (u, v)), h (u, v)
the surface heightmap, the displaced surface ⃗S′ (u, v) can be represented as in (2.13).
⃗S′ (u, v) = ⃗S (u, v) + h (u, v) ⃗nS (u, v)
(2.13)
This approach has become more famous in the recent years and this led to find new
solutions to implement it efficiently.
The bottleneck of this approach relies into bandwidth between the processing units
and the assets on the graphics card, handling a lot of vertex data, as mentioned in
Figure 2.13: Example of hardware tessellation, courtesy of Codeflow [Boe10].
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Tessellation Displacement Mapping
19
Figure 2.14: Reference displacement scheme for (2.13).
[Nie+16].
2.3.1
The Tessellation Stage
Around 2006 ATI introduced the tessellation stage with the XBOX360 game console
(Direct3D 11) [Tat08], and NVIDIA quickly followed up with 400 GPU series [NVI08].
OpenGL present equivalent features from version 4 [Khr].
Since I have used OpenGL for the implementation, I will refer to the structure and
nomenclature of it Figure 2.15 but Direct3D has an equivalent setup. As we can see
from Figure 2.15, the tessellation stage is made up of three parts: control, tessellation,
evaluation.
• Control Stage: this is a programmable stage (usually set up by a shader) that
receives the input from the vertex shader and it is responsible for two tasks:
setting up the tessellation engine parameters and defining the vertex data that
will be sent as input of the evaluation stage. This is also where a level of detail
(LOD) mechanic can be applied to the tessellation.
• Tessellation Engine: this is a fixed function, configurable in the control stage.
Here the previous geometry in the pipeline will be broken in smaller primitives
(points, lines or triangles) per-vertex data. This data will be given as input to
the evaluation stage.
• Evaluation Stage: this programmable stage (controlled by a shader) receives
the new vertex data generated by the tessellation engine and it will be responsi-
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Theory
Figure 2.15: Tessellation stage structure.
Courtesy of Victor Bushong.
ble to send the complete per-vertex attributes to the rest of the pipeline. This
is also the stage where vertex displacement happens.
After the evaluation stage, the geometry has been tessellated and displaced, ready to
pass trough geometry shader or directly to shape assembly and then rasterization.
More implementation details are present in Section 3.3.
2.3.2
Screen Space LOD
When using hardware tessellation, most of the time it includes a level of detail
(LOD) algorithm acted in the tessellation control shader.
These algorithm will apply a different level of subdivision to the polygons based on
some criteria, with the purpose of lowering the number of geometry subdivisions made
when it is not needed.
In the most common case, specifically when using a perspective projection, we want
a higher level of detail (more tessellation) to the geometry near the viewer and less
on the far distance. This happens because less pixel of the screen will be dedicated
to draw far geometry.
I will bring one of the simplest algorithms of this genre that is based on the screen
space edge length of each tessellated polygon.
Let’s take a quad as the polygon that will be subject to tessellation. The first step
we do is calculate the length of its edges in screen space.
Let P1,win and P2,win be positions, in window space, of the vertices defining the quad
edge ei. Let li be the screen space length of the quad edge ei, we can assign the
tessellation factor tf (ei) as described in (2.14).
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Tessellation Displacement Mapping
21
Figure 2.16: Screen space LOD example: e2 corresponds to one tessellation factor
unit while e1 corresponds to three units.
li = ∥P2,win −P1,win∥
ti = li
tf
(2.14)
In the example of Figure 2.16, the edge e2 has l2 ∼= tf that means it will not be
subdivided in subsegments during the tessellation. Meanwhile for e1 we have l1 ∼=
3 ∗tf ⇒t1 ∼= 3 so during the tessellation process e1 will be subdivided in 3 smaller
segments.
==PAGE:32==
22
2 Theory
2.4
Screen Space Ambient Occlusion
Up to this moment the illumination model that has been used includes a constant
function as contribution of ambient light.
We can improve the ambient term by adding an effect called Screen Space Ambient
Occlusion (SSAO), able to add soft shadows inside creases, holes and surfaces that
are close to each other.
The SSAO final result is a factor in the range [0, 1] that will be applied to the final
ambient component in the shading equation for each pixel render.
The core concept behind my implementation is to examine each visible space point
position and determine how much that point is occluded (e.g. hidden by other sur-
faces).
2.4.1
The Samples Kernel
How to determine how occluded a visible point position is? This is the first question
to implement an SSAO effect and of course the answer varies from one implementa-
tion to another.
In my case the answer is conceptually building an hemisphere centered on the point
position and oriented toward the point normal. This hemisphere will in most of the
cases intersect the surrounding geometry. The percentage of volume that relies inside
other geometries will compose the amount of ambient occlusion for the center point.
In a computer graphics environment this concept is of course subject to discretization
and the area will be represented by sample points randomly placed inside the hemi-
sphere. Given a point position P in the visible space, it is possible to summarize the
occlusion factor with
occlusionFactor (P) = 1 −samplesInsideSurroundingGeometry (P)
totalSamples (P)
Figure 2.17: Samples hemispheres of two visible point locations. The one on the
left is not intersecting any geometry so the ambient occlusion factor
value will be one (courtesy of learnopengl.com).
==PAGE:33==
2.4 Screen Space Ambient Occlusion
23
The samples will be generated and stored in memory in tangent space and in a
unitary radius hemisphere. The general sample tangent space coordinates are shown
in equation (2.15).
s′
r =


xr
yr
zr

=


rand(−1, 1)
rand(−1, 1)
rand(0, 1)


sr = rand(0, 1) s′r
∥s′r∥
(2.15)
A different sample kernel will be created for each visible position we saved into the
G-buffer. At render time, the kernel will be transformed from tangent to world space,
centered on the pixel G-buffer position, scaled by the chosen kernel radius and ori-
ented toward the pixel G-buffer normal. We will then retrieve the sample’s window
coordinates in order to compare their depth with the depth of the visible pixels in
the G-buffer having their same window coordinates.
If a sample depth will be greater than depth of the visible position in its same coor-
dinates, then the sample is occluded.
Let s be the sample in tangent space of equation (2.15), Pworld the pixel G-buffer
position in world space, TBN the matrix to rotate the kernel from tangent space to
world space and direct it toward the G-buffer normal, Mproj the projection transfor-
mation matrix, sn the rotated sample in world space, wc the fourth coordinate of a
sample position in clip space, R the kernel radius.
The series of transformations made to s at render time is described in (2.16).
snormwin is the sample in normalized window coordinates (with the x and y coordi-
nates still in range [0, 1], without respectively multiply by pixel columns and rows
number) and this is useful to compare directly in texture coordinates when we deal
with screen-sized textures, which is frequent considering for example that this project
is based on deferred shading.
⃗sn =TBN⃗s
⃗sworld =Pworld + R⃗sn
⃗sNDC = (Mproj ⃗sworld) /wc
⃗snormwin =1
2 (⃗sNDC + 1)
(2.16)
The result obtained by SSAO can be tweaked with respect to the number of samples
that we use and the radius for our hemisphere kernel.
Important to notice is that the size of the scene has an impact on the final factor
because it is strictly related to the radius (and consequently number of samples) that
we use.
Implementation details will be described in the system design chapter Section 3.4.
==PAGE:34==
24
2 Theory
2.5
Omnidirectional Shadow Mapping
Shadow mapping allows to create dynamic shadows in our scene.
Ominidirectional Shadow Mapping is one way to implement shadow maps for point
lights, which radiate light in every possible direction.
In this project it can be useful to enrich the per-vertex geometry visual output.
The related algorithms are based on the scene geometry.
An example of shadow mapping can be seen in Figure 2.18.
Shadow mapping is
generally divided in two stages:
• Generate the shadowmap: the shadowmap is a grey scale texture that stores
depth information from the light point of view, as seen in Figure 2.19.
This texture is commonly filled by using the window depth buffer data (which
is a non-linearized variable because it is usually given in NDC coordinates).
We will eventually use the distance from light position to geometry in world
space instead of depth buffer data to have a linear variable.
The omnidirectional shadow map will need to fill all the 6 faces of a cubemap
in this manner to provide data for a point light.
• Shadow algorithm: having depth from point light allow us to compare it with
the distance between point light and each visible position as seen in Figure 2.20.
Figure 2.18: Omnidirectional Shadowmaps example (green for debugging pur-
poses).
==PAGE:35==
2.5 Omnidirectional Shadow Mapping
25
Referring to Figure 2.20, if the condition ||A −L|| > d is met, then the point A
will be in shadow and we can (for example) decrease the overall light contribu-
tion into it.
More details and implementation are given in Section 3.5.
Figure 2.19: First stage of shadow mapping: the distance from light to the sur-
rounding geometry (commonly seen as depth) will be stored in a grey
scale texture called shadowmap.
==PAGE:36==
26
2 Theory
Figure 2.20: Second stage of shadow mapping: an algorithm will compare depth
sampled from depthmap with the distance of the point light L from
the visible point A.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3
System Design
==PAGE:38==
28
3 System Design
3.1
Deferred Shader
This section implements the theory of Section 2.1.1, and describes the light calcu-
lation acted in the deferred shader lighting stage by Algorithm 1, with reference to
Figure 3.1.
Algorithm 1 Light calculation in lighting stage fragment shader
1: Given: (x, y, z) normalized screen space coordinates, world space view position V
2: Given: G-buffer’ screen sized textures of positions, normals and diffuse+specular
components of visible geometry respectively Tp, Tn, Tds
3: Given: set of point lights pLights= {li} with each li having a series of parameters,
light attenuation quadratic, linear and constant components l.[a2, a1, a0], light
radious of effectiveness l.r, light world position l.pos ∈ℜ3, light diffuse color l.Id
4: Given: ambient light color Ia, surface material ambient light effectiveness coeffi-
cient ka and material specular exponent s
5: ⃗p ←sample Tp at (x, y)
6: ⃗n ←sample Tn at (x, y)
7: ⃗Cd ←[sample Tds at (x, y)].rgb
8: ⃗ks ←[sample Tds at (x, y)].a
9: ⃗v ←(V −⃗p)/||V −⃗p||
10: C ←0
11: for l in pLights do
12:
d ←||l.pos −⃗p||
13:
if d < l.r then
14:
⃗l ←(l.pos −⃗p)/d
15:
⃗r ←⃗l −2(⃗l · ⃗n)⃗n
16:
cos δ ←⃗v · ⃗r
17:
cos θ ←⃗n · −⃗l
18:
att←1/(l.a2 ∗d2 + l.a1 ∗d + l.a0)
19:
C ←C+att∗Id ∗[Cd ∗max(cos θ, 0) + ks ∗(cos δ)s]
20:
end if
21: end for
22: return C + Ia ∗ka ∗Cd
==PAGE:39==
3.1 Deferred Shader
29
Figure 3.1: Reference image for light contribution in Algorithm 1.
==PAGE:40==
30
3 System Design
3.2
Per-pixel Displacement Mapping
To represent the per-pixel displacement mapping, the Parallax Occlusion mapping
has been chosen for the implementation, as one of the best trade-offs between quality
of result and performance.
The essential purpose of parallax mapping (and so parallax occlusion) is to displace
the texture coordinates of each observed point on the surface A as we were looking
at B to create a sense of depth.
The pseudocode in Algorithm 2 explains how to get the tangent space coordinates of
B, with reference to Figure 3.2.
As explained in the theory section Section 2.2.2, the algorithm starts with a ray
marching from the visible position A on the geometric surface and when the step
point b is lower than the corresponding sampled heightmap value h, an interpolation
between the last two ray steps is made in order to find the texOffset value and so
calculate the position of B.
3.2.0.1
Self Soft Shadows
Parallax mapping concept can be also applied to generate self shadows based on
heightmap, as shown in Figure 3.3.
When we apply parallax mapping and obtain the intersection point B with the
heightmap, we can cast a ray from B to the light position L and check if this ray gets
occluded by the heightmap values.
To compute the ray marching steps, the algorithm calculates the intersection AL of
the light ray with the geometry surface, based on the equation of the ray, as shown
Figure 3.2: Parallax Occlusion Mapping algorithm scheme in tangent space.
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Per-pixel Displacement Mapping
31
Algorithm 2 Parallax Occlusion Mapping
1: Given: tangent space observed point A, tantent space view position V , heightmap
texture Th, ray-marching step length pstep
2: ⃗nv ←(A −V )/||A −V ||
3: ⃗p ←⃗nv ∗pstep
4: b ←A
5: h ←sample Th at b.xy
6: while b.z > h do
7:
b ←b + ⃗p
8:
h ←sample Th at b.xy
9: end while
10: bprev ←b −⃗p
11: hprev ←sample Th at bprev.xy
12: ∆←b.z −h
13: ∆prev ←bprev.z −hprev
14: w ←
∆
∆−∆prev
15: intersection←w ∗bprev + (1 −w) ∗b
16: intersection.z ←sample Th at intersection.xy
17: return intersection
Figure 3.3: Tangent space ray traced self shadows in parallax mapping.
==PAGE:42==
32
3 System Design
in (3.1).
We find AL with the property of the tangent space, which gives each point on the
geometric surface z coordinate equal to zero.
B.z + t (L.z −B.z) = AL.z = 0
⇒t′ =
−B.z
L.z −B.z
AL = B + t′ (L −B)
(3.1)
When in Algorithm 3 we verify that a visible point is in shadow, we also compute
a ratio to generate smooth shadow transition, based on how high and how far the
occlusion is from the visible position B.
Let’s say we have a ray marching step point b and its relative sampled height h from
the heightmap, then we can compute its shadow factor with (3.2).
∆=
h −b
∥b −B∥
(3.2)
We will take the biggest value of ∆among all the corresponding values of b: this
factor represents the amount of shadow for the visible position B.
We see that the shadow factor will be higher if the displacement height h is bigger
than the ray marching step b z coordinate.
The factor is also reduced based on how far the ray point b is from the visible position
B.
If h is lower than the sample b, we are not interested in the corresponding ∆because
it means the ray is higher than the displacement in that moment.
The algorithm returns 1 −∆to be directly multiplied by the light contribution for
the visible position B.
One further optimization to the algorithm would be calculate shadow only for the
visible points B who have the normal direction facing the direction of the light towards
B. We can express this condition with (3.3).
⃗
nB · (B −L) > 0
(3.3)
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Per-pixel Displacement Mapping
33
Algorithm 3 Parallax Shadow Factor calculation
1: Given: tangent space light position L, tangent space view ray intersection B
with heightmap sampled from Th, number of light ray samples nsteps to calculate
shadow softness
2: Initialize: ∆←0, b ←B
3: t ←−B.z/(L.z −B.z)
4: Al ←B + t ∗(L −B)
5: ⃗p ←(Al −B)/nsteps
6: for nsteps do
7:
b ←b + ⃗p
8:
h ←sample Th at b.xy
9:
∆new ←h −b
10:
∆new ←∆new/||b −B||
11:
if ∆new > ∆then
12:
∆←∆new
13:
end if
14: end for
15: return 1 −∆
==PAGE:44==
34
3 System Design
3.3
Tessellation Displacement Mapping
Tessellation is a powerful tool that requires to know how to be used properly.
As stated in [Nie+16] tessellation can decrease the rendering factor by 6 times com-
pared with using the traditional index and vertex buffers.
On the other hand, if the tessellation factor to apply is low (around 1) the perfor-
mance can be even 5 times slower than the traditional methods.
The key advantage of tessellation is that input polygons are directly processed by the
GPU streaming multi-processors without requiring additional global memory access
to withdraw additional vertex data and this minimizes the memory I/O.
A more detailed version of the tessellation stage can be seen in Figure 3.4.
3.3.1
Control Stage
This is the first part of the tessellation stage, it is programmable and it receives the
input from the vertex shader.
In most of the cases this stage is controlled by the Tessellation Control Shader
(TCS) but tessellation can be done without it by setting parameters at CPU time.
The TCS can be resumed with the following:
• Input: as stated before, the TCS will receive vertex data from the vertex shader,
but in form of Patches.
Patches are rendering primitives that represents the polygon unit in which the
tessellation will take place. They are composed of a set of vertices that take
the name of Control Points. TCS will run once for each control point of each
Figure 3.4: The Tessellation stage in OpenGL 4, courtesy of [SWH15].
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Tessellation Displacement Mapping
35
patch.
There is a maximum number of control points that we can use for our patches
but that number is at least 32.
• Function: the main function of the TCS is setting the tessellation parameters
for the tessellation engine. This can of course change based on user defined
conditions and it is where we can set a Level of Detail (LOD) mechanic in
our tessellation (more details in Section 3.3.1.1).
At the beginning of the TCS we will also have to specify the desired number
of control points for our patches and the type of tessellation we want to apply
(next section Section 3.3.2 will talk about that).
• Output: other than tessellation settings, we will send the patch control points
attributes (normals, colors, etc.) that will be received as input by the evaluation
stage Section 3.3.3 , that means we can also change them on the fly.
3.3.1.1
Screen Space Level of Detail
When using GPU tessellation is is possible to apply a level of detail mechanic to in-
crease performance: visible geometry far away will be tessellated less than geometry
near the point of view.
It is possible to implement such algorithm in the tessellation control shader where we
set the directive for the tessellation engine such as the inner and outer tessellation
levels.
The general form of LOD that has been implemented can be seen in Algorithm 4 with
a possible reference to figure Figure 2.16.
Each edge of the quad patch will be tessellated (subdivided) in smaller segments
based on its length in screen space: the bigger the segment appears on the screen,
the more is near the viewer and so the more it will be tessellated.
It has to be stated that this algorithm is quite basic and contains limitations: just
think to the case where the patch is near the viewer but one edge is in line with the
view direction. In this case the the edge will appear very small on the screen (a point
if exactly aligned with the view direction) and a very small tessellation level will be
applied to it.
A further refinement that complicates the algorithm a bit, is presented in [Bus15]
where the edges will be tessellated based on their screen spaced length as if they were
always perpendicular to the view direction, but here is omitted for simplicity.
3.3.2
Tessellation Engine
The tessellation engine is only configurable (by the TCS) and not programmable.
It will receive patches data from the TCS and it will generate per-vertex data based
==PAGE:46==
36
3 System Design
Algorithm 4 Level of Detail in Tessellation Control Shader
1: Given: patch vertex index I = {0, 1, 2, 3}, model-view-projection matrix MV P ∈
ℜ4 × ℜ4, local space patch vertex positions {pi|i ∈I}, screen pixel width and
height spix = [pixelWidth, pixelHeight] ⊂(ℵ+)2, level of detail factor fLOD ∈ℜ.
2: if invocationID = 0 then
3:
for i in I do
4:
pi_clip ←MV P ∗pi
5:
pi_NDC ←pi_clip.w
6:
pi_win ←(pi_NDC.xy + 1) ∗(spix ∗0.5)
7:
end for
8:
for i in I do
9:
ei ←
pi_win −p(i+1)mod4_win
 /fLOD
10:
end for
11:
outerTessLevel ←[e0, e1, e2, e3]
12:
innerTessLevel ←[(e0 + e3)/2, (e1 + e2)/2]
13: end if
on the tessellation settings. This data will be passed to the evaluation stage (Sec-
tion 3.3.3) as an input.
There are two types of tessellation settings that the engine will use to generate the
new vertex data: Outer and Inner Tessellation Levels. The former is used to
define in how many sub-segments the edges of the patch will be subdivided into, while
the latter defines the amount of subdivision that will happen inside the patch area.
In OpenGL 4 specifically, there are three tessellation modes available and this
choice will also change the type of output vertex data received by the TES.
• Quads: the patch will be tessellated into smaller quadrilaterals (quads). Each
quad will be then represented with a couple of triangles since triangle is the
only convex polygon accepted by the rasterizer.For this mode we can set four
outer tessellation levels (one for each edge) and two for the inner tessellation.
The generated output for each new vertex will consist into the two corresponding
quadrilateral barycentric coordinates. Since this mode is the one that has been
used for the implementation, a complete overview is in Section 3.3.2.1.
• Triangles: the patch will be split into smaller triangles based on the tessel-
lation levels set in the TCS. For this mode we can set three different outer
tessellation levels (one for each triangle edge) and one inner tessellation level.
The generated output for each new vertex will be the three barycentric coordi-
nates relative to the relative triangle control points.
• Isolines: the patch will be interpreted with line primitives. Based on the (u, v)
texture space, lines primitives will be created with constant v coordinates. Each
line will be broken into subsegments along the u direction. For this mode the
tessellation levels include only two outer values: the first for the number of lines
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Tessellation Displacement Mapping
37
and the second for the number of subdivisions for each line.
The output will be primitive line segments.
3.3.2.1
Quad Tessellation Mode
Most of 3D artists use quadrilateral polygons to make their models and this is due to
animation and light calculation purposes [Plu14].
Applying tessellation on these models gives the best result if the base tessellation unit
patch is a quad, and that led to have an entire mode dedicated to it.
We again specify that even with using quad tessellation, each polygon will be subdi-
vided in smaller triangles, to be able to get drawn by the GPU.
The tessellation engine uses an algorithm to compute the position of all the new ver-
tices and some (but not all) of the edges connecting them [Khr].
The quad tessellation works with a total of six tessellation float parameters: four
outer tessellation levels (one for each quad edge) and two for the inner tessel-
lation complexity.
From now on we will refer to their abbreviations ”outer levels” and ”inner levels”.
The algorithm is divided in two steps: building concentric rings and adding rings con-
nections. The first step, building concentric rings can be summarized as it follows:
1. Remove the most degenerate case: if all tessellation levels values are 1.0 nothing
will get tessellated and the quad will be translated into two triangles.
2. If one inner level is 1.0 and at least one outer level is greater than 1.0, then
the inner level will be approximated to 2.0 and this will ensure that if any
tessellation happens, we will have at least one new vertex inside the original
patch.
Quad
Triangle
Isoline
Figure 3.5: Tessellation modes in OpenGL 4 courtesy of [SWH15] .
==PAGE:48==
38
3 System Design
3. The patch edges will be subdivided based on inner levels (note: inner and not
outer for now). The first inner level will be applied to both horizontal edges
and the second one will be applied to both vertical.
4. Build a concentric inner quad: we place the new four vertices based on the
vertices position of the outer quad.
To place each new vertex, we take the nearest vertices to the corners of the
outer quad and find the intersection of traced perpendicular lines to the edges
of the outer quad.
With the same manner, perpendicular lines are traced passing by the remaining
vertices of the outer quad and the intersection with the inner quad will determine
the position of the rest of the vertices.
This step is visually explained in Figure 3.6.
5. Repeat the subdivision of step 3) with the new concentric inner quad.
6. Repeat step 4) with the new concentric inner quad now considered as the outer
quad.
Repeat the above process until at least one of these two conditions are met:
• One or both vertical and horizontal sides have only one segment: the
resulting quad will be the inner most quad.
• One or both vertical and horizontal sides have exactly two segments: the
inner most quad (ring) is degenerate. This means that instead of a
quad, our inner most shape will be a horizontal or vertical segment or just
a point. A point happens when both vertical and horizontal sides have
only one segment.
Figure 3.6: Step 4 of quad tessellation first part: the outer ring is subdivided based
on inner tessellation levels, then an inner ring is created (left) and later
all the other inner ring vertices based on perpendicular lines intersec-
tions.
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Tessellation Displacement Mapping
39
Figure 3.7: Step 6 of quad tessellation first part: possible outcomes.
From left to right: normal ring, degenerate segment and degenerate
vertex.
Courtesy of Khronos group.
7. Discard the outer most subdivision (of our original quad patch) and subdivide
the four edges using the four outer levels.
The second part of the algorithm is used to build ring connections between the
just generated loops of vertices and edges.
This will set down a general layout for the sub quads that will compose our tessellated
geometry.
It is important to specify that some of the final edges will be missing in this algorithm,
but this is because the rest of the edges are implementation dependent, so we can not
be sure where they will be put in the final geometry.
The second part of the algorithm just ensures the following:
• The area of the quad will be completely covered by the generated triangulation
• No part of the area will be covered more than once
• Rings inside connections are guaranteed to exist
• Each ring corner is guaranteed to have connections to the two vertices of the
previous ring that generated it. Similarly, each other vertex of the inner ring
is guaranteed to have a connection with the vertex on the previous ring that
generated it.
When the algorithm finishes, all the new vertex data will be available in form of local
coordinates relative to the patch that contains them.
The vertex data output from the tessellator engine will be passed to the evaluation
stage in form of normalized 2D coordinates (similar to texture coordinates) based on
the initial quad patch that contains them.
==PAGE:50==
40
3 System Design
(a) After First Part
(b) After Second Part
Figure 3.8: Quad tessellation algorithm result after the first part and after the sec-
ond one. Note that the result of the second part is only one of the
possible because some vertex connections are implementation depen-
dent. Outer tessellation values: 4, 2, 9 and 3. Inner tessellation values:
6 and 7.Courtesy of khronos group.
Note that this format happens because of quad tessellation, because if we were going
to use triangle tessellation (for example) we would have received the three barycentric
coordinates relative to the triangle patch).
3.3.3
Evaluation Stage
This is the last stage of tessellation and it is programmable using a shader, normally
called Tessellation Evaluation Shader (TES).
This shader can be also seen as a second vertex shader, but this time including all
the vertices output from the tessellator engine.
• Input: The TES will receive two distinct input: all the per-vertex attributes
belonging to the initial patch that was then tessellated, and per-vertex local
coordinates of the newly generated vertices.
These coordinates refers to the patch that originated the vertices.
All the per vertex attributes from the original patch will be available as well.
• Function:It will be responsible for generating all the per vertex attributes that
will be passed to the geometry shader if present or to the shape assembly.
Most of the time these attributes are generated by interpolation, using the
barycentric coordinates (in case of triangle tessellation) or normal 2D coordi-
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Tessellation Displacement Mapping
41
nates (when using quad tessellation) received by the tessellator engine.
This is also where displacement mapping occurs.
• Output: the output will be the per-vertex data of all the new and old vertices
3.3.3.1
Vertex Displacement
Vertex displacement can be done in the tessellation evaluation shader when we have
all the new vertex data at our disposal.
This vertex data needs to be calculated first, because the tessellator engine will pro-
duce only 2D normalized coordinates based on the initial patch that has been tessel-
lated, as shown in Figure 3.9.
Calculation of attributes is usually made by interpolation, and in the case of quad
tessellation, three interpolations are needed for every vertex attribute.
The pseudocode of the whole evaluation shader for quad tessellation is in Algorithm 5,
that will run once for every generated vertex after the tessellation.
Figure 3.9: Calculation of vertex attributes for vertices generated by quad tessel-
lation. The tessellator engine will produce normalized 2D coordinates
based on patch vertices, then to find the interpolated attributes in v,
two first interpolations are made to find v′ and v′′ along the horizontal
axis, then a third interpolation is made between v′ and v′′ along the
vertical cooridinate.
==PAGE:52==
42
3 System Design
Algorithm 5 Tessellation Evaluation Shader with Vertex Displacement
1: Given: set of vertex attributes A = {position, normal, diffuse, . . . aj}, current
TES iteration vertex v, 2D normalized coordinates of v relative to the quad patch
tessCoords ∈[0, 1] ⊂ℜ2, heightmap texture for current patch Th, patch vertices
[v1, v2, v3, v4], displacement scale factor fdisp ∈ℜ
2: for aj in A do
3:
partial1 ←linearInterpolation(aj[v0], aj[v1], tessCoords.x)
4:
partial2 ←linearInterpolation(aj[v2], aj[v3], tessCoords.x)
5:
aj[v] ←linearInterpolation(partial1, partial2, tessCoords.y)
6: end for
7: h ←sample Th at tessCoords
8: position[v] ←position[v] + normal[v] ∗h ∗fdisp
==PAGE:53==
3.4 Screen Space Ambient Occlusion
43
3.4
Screen Space Ambient Occlusion
The Ambient Occlusion needs to be computed before the light calculation and to be
precise it finds a place between the deferred geometry and lighting pass.
My implementation is composed by two passes: an ambient occlusion calculation and
a blurring post-process, as Figure 3.10 shows.
The first pass will calculate the ambient occlusion factor along with a noise factor
that will be corrected using a simple blur effect.
The whole implementation is subject to various performance improving methods
and differs from the theory description in some ways.
• Single samples kernel: The theory section states that the samples kernel will
be calculated for each pixel G-buffer position, but it will not.
Only one sample kernel will be created (client side) and used for each position
after getting randomly rotated.
• Random kernel rotations: The random kernel rotations can be saved into
a screen-sized texture to be available in the fragment shader on a per-pixel
manner.
Another optimization that we can do at this point is to create only a small
amount of random rotations and then use them as a pattern to repeat on all
over the texture.
• Correcting Artifacts: Due to the optimizations we made in the previous
points, the first occlusion render result will appear with a ”pixelated” pattern.
We solve this problem by blurring the overall result.
The blur filter that was used is a very simple one and can have negative sides,
but this will be discussed later.
Figure 3.10: Extended deferred shading pipeline with the inclusion of SSAO passes.
==PAGE:54==
44
3 System Design
3.4.1
Building the Samples Kernel
We already discussed with equation (2.15) the general shape of the samples that form
a kernel. Each sample will be generated and stored in tangent space within a unitary
radius hemisphere oriented toward the positive z-axis.
Only at render time the samples will be scaled based on the chosen kernel radius and
placed in the proper window coordinates.
As listed in Section 3.4, the kernel random rotations are also computed and saved
for each pixel in tangent space.
A random rotation ⃗nr is represented by an euclidean direction as can be seen in equa-
tion (3.4).
⃗nr



xr = rand(−1, 1)
yr = rand(−1, 1)
zr = rand(−1, 1)
(3.4)
This direction will be subject to the Gram-Schmidt process to generate a vector T
orthogonal to the corresponding G-buffer normal N (saved in world space). Then we
can define a change of basis matrix TBN to transform our samples from tangent to
world space. Those samples will be randomly rotated because T is random. TBN
will be built per each pixel as illustrated in (3.5).
N = sampled normal from the G-buffer
T = Gram-Schmidt(⃗nr, N)
B =
N × T
∥N × T∥
TBN = ⟨T, B, N⟩
(3.5)
A full description of the Gram-Schmidt process can be found in Appendix B.5 and
the function definition relative to (3.5) is at (3.6).
Gram-Schmidt( ⃗nr, N) =
⃗nr −N ( ⃗nr · N)
∥⃗nr −N ( ⃗nr · N)∥
(3.6)
A visual representation of the TBN matrix construction for each visible point position
P is shown in Figure 3.11.
As mentioned before, a small pattern of random rotations will be repeated on a
screen-sized space, to have a random rotation available for each pixel.
3.4.2
SSAO Shader
The first pass of the SSAO shader computes the occlusion factor for each pixel in the
G-buffer.
The input values are
==PAGE:55==
3.4 Screen Space Ambient Occlusion
45
Figure 3.11: TBN matrix construction for the visible point position P, to transform
the samples hemisphere from tangent to world space.
N is the geometry normal in world space relative to the position P.
Figure 3.12: Concept behind the TBN matrix: transformation from tangent to
world space.
==PAGE:56==
46
3 System Design
• per-pixel depth values
• per-pixel normal values
• samples kernel
• random rotations texture
The output value is only the SSAO factor for each screen pixel (stored in a color
buffer texture).
For each screen pixel, all the steps in this phase can be summarized with Algorithm 6.
Algorithm 6 Pixel Shader for the SSAO pass
1: Given:
(x, y, z) pixel window coordinates (z is depth),Td G-buffer depth
texture,Tn G-buffer normal texture in view space, S = {s1, . . . , sk} kernel
samples,r kernel radius,Trot texture of random kernel rotations,Mproj projection
matrix.
2: P ←sample Td at (x, y) and transform to view space
3: N ←sample Tn at (x, y)
4: T ←sample Trot at (x, y)
5: T ←T −N (T · N) / ∥T −N (T · N)∥
▷Gram–Schmidt process on T with N
6: B ←N × T/ ∥N × T∥
▷Bitangent computation
7: TBN ←3 × 3 matrix using T,B and N as columns
8: occlusion ←0
9: for s ∈S do
10:
s ←P + (TBN · s) ∗r
▷s from tangent to view space
11:
s ←(Mproj · s) /wc
▷s from view to NDC space
12:
(x′, y′, z′) ←0.5 ∗s + 0.5
▷s from NDC to normalized window space
13:
d ←sample Td at (x′, y′)
14:
if d < z′ then
▷current sample position is occluded
15:
contribution ←min
(
r
∥z−d∥, 1
)
16:
occlusion ←occlusion + contribution
17:
end if
18: end for
19: occlusion ←occlusion/k
20: return occlusion
The TBN (Tangent, Bitangent, Normal) matrix is a change of basis matrix and
was used to transform the sample direction, on the unitary hemisphere kernel, from
local tangent space to world space.
Tangent direction is computed with the Gram–Schmidt process applied to the random
rotation to be orthogonal to the sampled normal direction.
The resulting vector lays on the plane defined by the normal and the random rotation,
==PAGE:57==
3.4 Screen Space Ambient Occlusion
47
it is normalized and orthogonal to the normal.
A more detailed description of the Gram–Schmidt process is fount at Appendix B.5.
Another detail of Algorithm 6 is the contribution variable, that increment the occlu-
sion factor based on the sample distance from the kernel center. If depth difference
between the occluded sample kernel center is bigger than the kernel radius, the occlu-
sion contribution will decrease and for longer distances tend to zero. This function
avoid unnecessary effect along objects borders.
In Algorithm 6 a detail has been omitted which is handling the case when, calculat-
ing a sample position from tangent to window space, the coordinates fall outside the
window space ([0, 1] × [0, 1]). This leads to sampling unpredictable values from the
depth textures assigned to d and it leads to a wrong calculation of occlusion factors
along the screen borders. For this reason is important to check if each sample window
position is pertinent before proceeding with the relative occlusion calculation. The
result can be seen in Figure 3.13.
3.4.3
Blur shader
After computing the SSAO scaling factor per pixel, we can observe that the result
is presented with a ”pixelated” pattern. This is due to the optimizations we made
(using the same samples kernel and random rotations as a repeated pattern).
My implementation is correcting these artifact by using a simple blur post process
pass.
Be c (x, y) the occlusion factor computed for the pixel at (x, y) window space coordi-
Figure 3.13: First pass result in the SSAO pipeline (courtesy of learnopengl.com).
==PAGE:58==
48
3 System Design
nates, computed in the previous pass. The expression (3.7) summarizes the blurring
done for each pixel.
c′ (x, y) = 1
25
2
∑
i=−2
2
∑
j=−2
c (x + i, y + j)
(3.7)
An example of the final SSAO factor result can be seen in Figure 3.14.
This simple blur filter is computationally fast but its biggest drawback can be recog-
nized when rendering sharp edges, where the occlusion should have a solid appearance
but it will be shown soft instead.
A smarter (but more expensive) blur filter would be the so called ”bilateral filter”
suggested in the Hands on Real-time Graphics book [Bær+16].
Figure 3.14: Second pass result in the SSAO pipeline (courtesy of learnopengl.com).
==PAGE:59==
3.5 Omnidirectional Shadow Mapping
49
3.5
Omnidirectional Shadow Mapping
Shadowmapping begins by generating the depth map from the light point of view.
In the case of omnidirectional shadowmaps we will need to render six different depth
maps to fill a cubemap centered in the point light position.
A way to do it is by using the geometry shader as shown in Algorithm 7 which de-
creases the amount of code to write by a lot but, since it runs on the geometry shader,
it might not be the most efficient way to do it.
An important note is that before running Algorithm 7 the system needs to know that
the render target or the depth texture is our cube map.
Algorithm 7 Geometry Shader to generate Shadow Cube Map
1: Given: vector of six view-projection matrices sV P (one for each cube map face),
input data from previous stage gl_in (from either vertex or tessellation shaders)
containing position in world space
2: Given: vector of layers of our render target gl_layer (system variable), setting
variable gl_Position for the current vertex position (system variable)
3: for face = 0 to 5 do
4:
gl_layer ←face
5:
for vertex = 0 to 2 do
6:
v_pos ←gl_in[vertex].position
7:
gl_Position ←sV P[face] ∗v_pos
8:
EmitV ertex()
9:
end for
10:
EmitPrimitive()
11: end for
As you may already know, geometry shader runs once for each primitive of chosen
type.
In our case we are handling triangles and for each triangle we will generate 6 different
output triangles, one in each cube map face.
For each face we proceed as follow:
• directing the system to draw into the current cube map face
• transform the triangle geometry from world into clip space relative to the cube
map face we are rendering into
• generate vertices and emit each primitive triangle for the shape assembly and
later rasterization
When we have the shadow cubemap at our disposal we can use it to produce
shadows.
==PAGE:60==
50
3 System Design
The algorithm is usually placed where light calculation happens. In the case of a
deferred pipeline, this happens in the lighting stage fragment shader.
The shadow map algorithm will produce a coefficient that will be applied to the whole
light contribution, lowering its intensity.
Such proceedings can be seen in Algorithm 8 and Figure 3.15 refers to it.
The algorithm is using Percentage-Closer filtering as shown in Figure 3.16.
For the visible point A, multiple samples are taken around it and the light occlusion
is performed for each of them.
The number of samples in shadow over the total number of samples will determine
the shadow factor to apply to A.
This feature allows to achieve soft shadows.
Figure 3.15: Omnidirectional shadows computation: the distance from light posi-
tion L to the visible point is A is computed and compared to the value
sampled from the shadow cube map in direction c = A −L.
If the sampled depth is smaller than ||A −L|| then the point A is in
shadow..
==PAGE:61==
3.5 Omnidirectional Shadow Mapping
51
Algorithm 8 Omnidirectional Shadows
1: Given: world space visible point position A, desired number of samples nsamples
around the visible point, vector of random directions vecnd[nsamples] around A,
shadow cube map Tcd of distance values stored in world space, light position L
in world space,
2: Initialize: ∆sh ←1/nsamples
3: for i = 0 to nsamples −1 do
4:
zl ←(A + ⃗nd[i] ∗rs) −L
5:
c ←sample Tcd at zl
6:
if ||zl|| > c then
7:
fsh ←fsh + ∆sh
8:
end if
9: end for
Figure 3.16: Percentage-closer Filtering to achieve soft shadows: in the figure, 5
samples are taken around A and 3 of them are in shadow. This will
bring to a shadow factor of 3/5 for A.
==PAGE:62==
52
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 4
Results
==PAGE:64==
54
4 Results
4.1
Used Software and Hardware
The hardware that has been used for these tests is my laptop from late 2015.
• Laptop MSI PX60
– OS: Windows 10
– Graphics adapter: NVIDIA GeForce GTX 950M - 2048 MB
– Processor: Intel Core i7-5700HQ 2.7 GHz
• Screen resolution: 1600x900 pixels
• Graphics API: OpenGL 4
• Programming language: C++11
==PAGE:65==
4.2 Parallax Occlusion Mapping
55
4.2
Parallax Occlusion Mapping
Parallax Occlusion Mapping represents the Per-Pixel displacement methods and three
visual results are included in Figure 4.1 where you can see a floor composed by 15x15
quads.
I chose 100 as the number of parallax layers, that means having a ray-marching step
of ||⃗p|| = 1/100 = 0.01 in an unitary depth space. This setting has been chosen to
show the maximum level of detail tested in this session.
The first thing to notice is the quality of result depends on the angle between the
view direction and the surface normal: the more we look to the horizon, the worse
the depth effect will look.
As a result Figure 4.1(c) will have the lowest accuracy, giving a sense of depth only
in the center region near the view position.
The best visual result is given in Figure 4.1(a) where the view direction is almost
parallel to the surface normal.
This angle dependency is mainly due to the ray marching step precision: the bigger
the angle, the more chances we have to miss the ray intersection with the height map
displacement.
Light calculation is ”almost correct” in the sense that it should be done in tangent
space while in the test it has been done in world space without accounting the position
displacement. It will give a slight difference in lighting applied to the surface but not
so much.
This was because of the deferred shading pipeline: once we arrive at light calculation,
we lose all the geometry information of the objects in the scene, including tangent
space transformation matrix, other than the data stored in the G-buffer.
Visual feedback showed that the optimal amount of parallax layers is 30 for the
current resolution (1600x900) and settings, meaning that a higher value will have a
less noticeable effect and could not be worth the calculation.
One of the biggest drawbacks of Per-Pixel displacement is that it can not directly
interact with geometry based algorithms such as screen space ambient occlusion or
shadow mapping. To make those work we would need to implement some additional
process to extract the geometry data when those algorithm face per-pixel displaced
surfaces.
Overall parallax occlusion mapping is a light weight approach to give the sense of
Parallax Layers Number
Ray-marching Step Size
Geometry Stage Time (ms/frame)
10
0.1
3.21
25
0.04
4.69
50
0.02
5
75
0.013
6.88
100
0.01
7.29
Table 4.1: Parallax Occlusion Mapping performance.
==PAGE:66==
56
4 Results
(a) 80 degrees view direction to surface normal
(b) 40 degrees view direction to surface normal
(c) 20 degrees view direction to surface normal
Figure 4.1: Different viewing angles in Parallax Occlusion Mapping.
==PAGE:67==
4.2 Parallax Occlusion Mapping
57
Figure 4.2: Parallax Occlusion performance.
depth to surfaces.
We still have to take in mind that it remains an approximation with its limitations
on visual result precision.
4.2.1
Parallax Shadows
Parallax Shadows use the same ray-marching algorithm concept of parallax mapping
and they can produce soft self shadowing, as seen in Figure 4.3.
As it was happening for the parallax occlusion mapping case, parallax shadows visual
precision also depends on the angle between the view direction, that in this case be-
comes the light point of view, and the surface normal.
If the light is too close to the surface, parallax shadows will fade in the longer distance
because in those cases is easier to miss the height map displacement to calculate the
shadow contribution.
The more shadow samples we use and the more accurate our shadows will be when
the light ray forms a big angle with the surface normal.
If the light rays forms short angles with the surface normal, there are no real advan-
tages in using many shadow samples.
Figure 4.4 shows the parallax shadows computation time together with parallax
occlusion set on a fixed layer number of 30.
==PAGE:68==
58
4 Results
(a) Lit with parallax shadows
(b) Lit without parallax shadows
(c) Albedo G-buffer content with parallax shadows applied
Figure 4.3: Different viewing angles in Parallax Occlusion Mapping.
==PAGE:69==
4.2 Parallax Occlusion Mapping
59
Geometry Stage Time (ms/frame)
Shadow Samples Number
Parallax Occlusion Mapping
Parallax Shadows
Total
10
4.8
1.08
5.88
20
4.8
1.87
6.67
30
4.8
2.73
7.53
40
4.8
3.94
8.74
50
4.8
5.15
9.95
Table 4.2: Parallax Shadows in Parallax Occlusion Mapping performance for one
point light.
Figure 4.4: Shadows in Parallax Occlusion performance.
==PAGE:70==
60
4 Results
From visual output, 30 shadow samples would give already more than satisfying re-
sults, that together with parallax occlusion would spend 7, 53 milliseconds per frame.
30 shadow samples is a medium value, suitable for relatively small intensity point
lights.
This comes because when the light rays bend too much with the surface normal, shad-
ows will start to produce artifacts but in those situations the current point is too far
from the point light so an inaccurate shadow will be no problem.
==PAGE:71==
4.3 Tessellation Displacement Mapping
61
4.3
Tessellation Displacement Mapping
Tessellation Displacement Mapping represented the per-Vertex displacement family
of algorithms.
An example of visual result is placed in Figure 4.5 where we can see the lit frame
and its corresponding wireframe view. The whole floor counts around 500 thousand
triangles generated by tessellation.
It has to be stated that only one draw call has been used for the render in the figure
and the following tests.
Draw calls number increment will have a negative influence on tessellation perfor-
mance.
Figure 4.6 enlight the time increase for different triangles amounts. Tessellation has
a linear increase but the computation time will already be relevant for smaller primi-
tives amounts.
In the performance count the implemented screen space level of detail (Screen LOD)
played a big role in giving a satisfying visual result and still maintaining the number
of primitives relatively low.
Tessellation can be a valid method to produce more
primitive for displacement mapping, but it has to be used wisely only where it is
needed: we can consider 100 thousand primitives as the threshold after which it will
be useful to use tessellation, otherwise it will be better to stick with the default vertex
attributes upload to have the optimal performance.
Geometry Stage Time (ms/frame)
Thousands of Generated Primitives
0.6
8
1.6
100
3.4
250
6.1
500
8.8
750
12.6
1000
Table 4.3: Tessellation Displacement performance.
==PAGE:72==
62
4 Results
(a) Lit tessellated terrain
(b) Wireframe tessellated terrain
Figure 4.5: Tessellation displacement mapping result.
==PAGE:73==
4.3 Tessellation Displacement Mapping
63
Figure 4.6: Tessellation Displacement performance.
==PAGE:74==
64
4 Results
4.4
Omni-directional Shadow Maps
Omni-directional shadow maps supply shadows for point light so they need to provide
depth data in all the possible directions in 3d space.
To do that this technique uses a ”shadow” depth cube map that is updated each
frame and this cost a lot more on time than a directional light shadow map, for the
fact that we need to render depth for 6 times (once for each cube map face).
An example of this technique is shown in Figure 4.7 where the first screen shows the
result when we also use tessellation to render the depth cube map faces.
The second and third image are the debug views of the first one, respectively when
using and when not using tessellation in the cube map creation.
As we can already imagine, the timing difference between Figure 4.7(b) and Fig-
ure 4.7(c) is really noticeable, as described in Table 4.4.
A big factor in this performance comparison is the fact that we need to render 6 faces
of the cubemap so the time growth is around 6 (maybe optimized to 4) times slower
than a single depth texture render.
Omni-directional shadow maps are a viable solution when we want dynamic shadows
for a point light, but it would not work good on performance if also using tessellation
to generate the shadow cube map faces.
Figure 4.8 shows proof of tessellation being really heavy on performance when used
in this type of shadow mapping technique and as we can see from Figure 4.7(b) it
can not produce an accurate result either.
This brings to consider this shadow mapping technique to generate shadows for all
the geometry in the scene (like the character in the example screens) without using
tessellation.
It will be not the best choice for small displacement mapping features like the ground
pebbles.
Triangles quantity (thousands units)
Shadow Cube Map creation (ms/frame)
non-tessellated
tessellated
non-tessellated
tessellated
19
60
0.32
1
19
100
0.32
1.7
19
200
0.32
6.6
19
300
0.32
13.2
19
400
0.32
44.2
Table 4.4: Omni-directional shadow cube map creation performance.
==PAGE:75==
4.4 Omni-directional Shadow Maps
65
(a) Lit tessellated shadow map result
(b) Debug view of tessellated shadow map contribution
(c) Debug view of non-tessellated shadow map contribution
Figure 4.7: Omni-directional shadow maps visual results.
==PAGE:76==
66
4 Results
Figure 4.8: Omni-directional shadow maps performance with using tessellation at
different levels.
==PAGE:77==
4.5 Parallax Shadows in Tessellation Displacement Mapping
67
4.5
Parallax Shadows in Tessellation Displacement
Mapping
This last section shows the final results of this thesis: using parallax shadows in tes-
sellated surfaces.
Before the discussion, it is important to specify that Screen Space Ambient Occlusion
effect is present in most of the per-pixel tessellation screens. It has not been tested
independently because it resulted as a nice to have feature. No further development
has been done on it rather than the base implementation. It will enhance the visual
shadow result to a fairly big computational price that can be considered around 18
milliseconds per frame.
Figure 4.9(a) shows the final merge: a tessellated floor with self shadowing given by
parallax shadows and the human model shadow given by shadow mapping without
the use of tessellation.
This is the best visual result of shadows achieved in this thesis.
To visually compare this result, Figure 4.9(b) shows the scene without parallax shad-
ows and Figure 4.9(c) shows the result by only using shadow maps but with tessella-
tion active.
This last result gives a worse performance compared to Figure 4.9(a) both in terms
of visual output and computational time.
Figure 4.10 results shows that the tessellation factor will have less influence on
parallax shadow generation with growing number of triangles.
Handling 600 thousands tessellated triangles gives a slight increase in parallax shad-
ows computation time, when changing shadow samples quantity.
This is a direct conclusion of the fact that, since parallax shadows time grows with
the number of screen pixels it has to render, having a highly tessellated surface will
make more triangles correspond to the same fragment, and the shadow computation
time to remain almost constant.
shows a last performance comparison by using tessellated shadow maps versus using
the hybrid solution with parallax shadows.
In real use cases I strongly doubt that tessellation would be ever considered for shadow
map creation, but it was still worth comparing to have a sense of measure.
The tessellated geometry used for the test scene is composed by 300 thousands trian-
gles and it was maintained static. By using a high number of shadow samples like
50, the required total time will be still lower than using a tessellated shadow map
solution.
As a tested solution, a number of 25 shadow samples showed a good compromise for
the visual result.
==PAGE:78==
68
4 Results
(a) Parallax shadows + non tessellated shadow mapping in tessellation dis-
placement
(b) Only non tessellated shadow mapping
(c) Only tessellated shadow mapping
Figure 4.9: Final results of parallax shadows versus tessellated shadows in tessel-
lated displacement.
==PAGE:79==
4.5 Parallax Shadows in Tessellation Displacement Mapping
69
Geometry Stage time (ms/frame)
Parallax
Shad-
ows
samples
(units)
Triangles
quan-
tity
(thousand
units)
Parallax
Shad-
ows
Geometry
Total
10
100K
1.01
1.75
2.76
20
100K
2.25
1.75
4
30
100K
3.35
1.75
5.1
40
100K
4.55
1.75
6.3
50
100K
5.75
1.75
7.5
10
300K
1.53
5.53
7.06
20
300K
3.71
5.53
9.24
30
300K
5.98
5.53
11.51
40
300K
8.19
5.53
13.72
50
300K
10.39
5.53
15.92
10
600K
1.59
7.24
8.83
20
600K
3.79
7.24
11.03
30
600K
6.12
7.24
13.36
40
600K
8.37
7.24
15.61
50
600K
10.66
7.24
17.9
Table 4.5: Parallax Shadows in Tessellated Geometry performance.
==PAGE:80==
70
4 Results
Figure 4.10: Parallax shadows in tessellation displacement performance.
==PAGE:81==
4.5 Parallax Shadows in Tessellation Displacement Mapping
71
Figure 4.11: Shadow maps using tessellation versus parallax shadows hybrid solu-
tion.
==PAGE:82==
72
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
Parallax occlusion shadows were able to well integrate into tessellated displacement
mapping.
This technique allows to generate precise soft self shadows for the tessellated displace-
ments, still being able to integrate additional geometry based algorithms, like screen
space ambient occlusion and shadow mapping.
This technique is giving a good result both in terms of visual output and in perfor-
mance, compared to the only use of shadow mapping.
Using tessellation to create omni-directional shadow maps showed much worse compu-
tation timing and it is an option that would not be able to compete against parallax
shadows.
Parallax shadowing still have its drawbacks in precision: the angle between the sur-
face normal and the light ray direction will influence the visual outcome. The bigger
the angle, the more shadow samples will be needed to have a correct shadowing.
This should not be a problem for low intensity point lights that aim to light displaced
surfaces only when the light rays have a slight angle with the surface normal.
Ultimately, shadow mapping and parallax shadows can be combined together: shadow
maps are generated for all the scene geometry without using tessellation, while par-
allax shadows will provide self soft shadowing for the tessellated models.
I expect this shadow technique to be useful in use cases like games but only as an
optional feature rather than a default one, because it still add a level of computation
that might be reserved to the higher level of detail.
==PAGE:84==
74
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIX A
Leftover Details
A.0.1
Reconstructing Position from Depth
Light calculation made for a point in space generally requires the world or view po-
sition of the point, so going back from NDC to world or view coordinates is a more
frequent operation rather than NDC to clip coordinates transformation.
In a deferred pipeline this information can be stored in a screen size buffer, meaning
save a 3D position for each pixel we are going to render.
This process can be optimized a lot by only saving the depth from the point NDC
coordinates and later compute view position with it.
Depth is a scalar and it can be stored on a single buffer channel (out of four) instead
of three requested for an euclidean position (x, y, z). This change of data often brings
to save the use of a buffer, such as storing normal and depth of points in the same
buffer (three channels for the normal and one for depth).
This depth can be obtained using either depth buffer values or from the point world
position itself, as Pettineo describes in his article [Pet09].
Depth can be retrieved in many ways, depending on the target coordinate space and
precision we want to achieve.
In any case, we start by finding the position’s Normalized Device Coordinates.
Let us assume that we have the window coordinates of the pixel where our point has
been projected, so the first operation is transforming the x and y Window Coodinates
to Normalized Device Coordinates (NDC) coordinates. The operation is described in
(A.1) with W and H the number of pixels columns and rows in our window View-
port. xw , yw and zw are window space coordinates and zw is usually available by
the system only if depth buffer is being used (as it happens in OpenGL).
xNDC = 2 xw
W −1
yNDC = 2 yw
H −1
zNDC = 2 zw −1
(A.1)
For a general transformation overview, it is possible to consult the Hands on Real-time
Graphics book [Bær+16].
==PAGE:86==
76
A Leftover Details
A.0.1.1
From NDC to Eye(View) coordinates
When light contribution is calculated, it is usually done in world or view space. For
this reason the conversion from NDC to view coordinates is more common than NDC
to clip coordinates.
It is possible to convert from window directly to view coordinates with the following
equation
Mproj
−1


xc
yc
zc
wc


NDC
=


αxv
αyv
αzv
α

⇒1
α


αxv
αyv
αzv
α

=


xv
yv
zv
1


view
where the α factor is due to skipping the inverse W-divide step.
==PAGE:87==
A.1 From NDC to Clip coordinates
77
A.1
From NDC to Clip coordinates
The relation that ties NDC to Clip space is


x
y
z
1


NDC
=
1
wc


xc
yc
zc
wc


clip
that means our goal is to find the fourth clip space component wc in order to execute
the inverse W-divide operation, as described in the OpenGL wiki[khr16].
Let’s consider the relation between clip and view space to focus on how wc is found.


xc
yc
zc
wc


clip
= Mproj


xv
yv
zv
1


view
where Mproj is the projection matrix.
At this point we make the assumption that the projection matrix we are using is in
the form
Mproj =


- row
1 -
- row
2 -
0
0
T1
T2
0
0
E1
0


and this is not a big limitation, since this form is a common case, like the perspective
projection matrix used for this project (more details in the appendix).
The fourth component in clip coordinates wc is found from the dot product of the
projection matrix fourth row with the point view coordinates. Naming respectively
PNDC , Pc , Pv the NDC, clip, view coordinates of a point position P, we can write
wc =
[0
0
E1
0]
· Pv
=E1 zv
a simplification that brings to be interested only in zv. In order to find it, the clip
space z component can be helpful since it is a linear combination that involves only
the z and w component of the view space coordinates. That is helped from the fact
that wv = 1 for common convention.
PNDC = Pc
E1 zv
⇒zNDC =
zc
E1 zv
= T1 ∗zv + T2 ∗wv
E1 zv
= T1 ∗zv + T2
E1 zv
==PAGE:88==
78
A Leftover Details
Now the last equation is implicit in respect of zv and the other values are known. It
is finally possible to compute wc
zNDC −T1
E1
=
T2
E1 zv
⇒zv =
T2
E1 zNDC −T1
⇒wc =
T2
zNDC −T1
E1
==PAGE:89==
A.2 SSAO: refining the sample kernel
79
A.2
SSAO: refining the sample kernel
Since now the samples positions have been considered randomly placed in all over
the hemisphere. The fact is that we want more precision near the point position,
so one thing we can do is to move all the samples toward the center with a linear
interpolation. The interpolation will weight each sample based on their sample list
index: the samples with smaller list index will be attracted more towards the origin
despite their initial position (whether previously near or far from the origin).
Be s′ (i) the previously obtained sample at index i in an array of n elements, lmin the
minimum scale factor given to the position. The final stored sample position s (i) is
computed with equation (A.2).
s (i) = s′ (i)
[
lmin +
( i
n
)2
(1 −lmin)
]
(A.2)
A visual representation of the scaled samples can be seen in figure Figure A.1 and
compared to figure Figure 2.17.
Figure A.1: On the left the graph of sample index (0 to n) vs. distance from the ker-
nel center (lmin to 1). On the right, samples hemispheres with random
samples positions that have been scaled. (courtesy of learnopengl.com).
==PAGE:90==
80
==PAGE:91==
APPENDIX B
Geometric Concepts
Will follow a list of geometric definitions of concepts that have been used to write
this report.
==PAGE:92==
82
B Geometric Concepts
B.1
Transformation Matrices
B.1.1
Rotation
The rotation of a position in euclidean space around an axis [Rx, Ry, Rz] of an angle
θ can be achieved by multiplication with the matrix (B.1).


cos θ + Rx
2 (1 −cos θ)
RxRy (1 −cos θ) −Rz sin θ
RxRz (1 −cos θ) + Ry sin θ
0
RxRy (1 −cos θ) + Rz sin θ
cos θ + Ry
2 (1 −cos θ)
RyRz (1 −cos θ) −Rx sin θ
0
RxRz (1 −cos θ) −Ry sin θ
RzRy (1 −cos θ) + Rx sin θ
cos θ + Rz
2 (1 −cos θ)
0
0
0
0
1


(B.1)
Rotation matrices are always orthogonal so its transpose matrix is also its inverse.
B.1.2
Translation and Scale
Translation and scaling of a position in the 3D space can be achieved by multiplica-
tion with the matrix (B.2), where:
• the position will be scaled along the x,y and z axis by Sx,Sy and Sz
• the position will be translated along the x,y and z axis by Tx,Ty and Tz


Sx
0
0
Tx
0
Sy
0
Ty
0
0
Sz
Tz
0
0
0
1


(B.2)
When Sx,Sy and Sz have the same value we say that we are applying an uniform
scaling.
Uniform scales are not orthogonal, but they are direction preserving so re-normalizing
after a uniform scale will give you the same normal.
B.1.3
Projection
Projection matrix is conceptually used to project 3D data into a 2D plane.
Different projection transformation exist but here only one case will be listed because
it is the only one used for this project: perspective projection.
Perspective projection will also scale the geometry to give a visual sense of depth, as
you can see in Figure B.1.
The 3D bounding volume defined by the projection is commonly called view frus-
tum and in the case of perspective projection it is a pyramid section.
It is important to notice that the perspective projection applies a non-uniform scale
to the w-coordinate, in particular the more far from the camera a visible vertex is,
==PAGE:93==
B.1 Transformation Matrices
83
Figure B.1: View frustum for the perspective projection (courtesy of Uttam
Khanal).
the higher the w-coordinate becomes.
That implies the 3D clip coordinate system will not be linearand we will have a lot
more depth (z-coordinate value) precision near the view point rather than far away.
Vertical and horizontal straight lines before the perspective projection will still appear
straight after it.
The transformation matrix for the perspective projection Mproj can be seen in (B.3)
where A is the aspect ratio, n and f are the near and far plane distances from the
origin (that in view space corresponds to the view position) and α is the field of view.
Mproj =


1
A cot α
2
0
0
0
0
cot α
2
0
0
0
0
n+f
n−f
2nf
n−f
0
0
−1
0


(B.3)
More details can be found in the book [Bær+16].
==PAGE:94==
84
B Geometric Concepts
B.2
Normal Matrix
If a change of transformation matrix is composed by uniform scales, rotations and
translations it can be also used on vertex normals or other direction vectors.
The case is different if a transformation matrix contains non-uniform scale transfor-
mations (e.g. shear).
Turns out that for the normals the matrix to apply is Mn in (B.4).
M = transformation matrix
Mr = UpperLeft3x3 (M)
Mn =
[
Mr
−1]T
(B.4)
We are considering the upper left 3x3 sub-matrix Mr because it is where the rotation
resides in a transformation matrix.
To explain the result at (B.4) let’s consider the plane geometry case in Figure B.2
where the V segment, delimited by P1 and P2, along with the segment normal N are
subject to a non-uniform scaling by the multiplication with respectively Mp and Mn.
We can define V ′,P1
′ , P2
′ and N ′ as the resulting values from the transformation, as
listed in (B.5).
V = P1 −P2
V ′ = Mp V
N ′ = Mn N
(B.5)
One property remains between before and after the transformation which is the or-
thogonality between V ,N and V ′,N ′ that in vector multiplication is expressed in (B.6)
Figure B.2: Non-uniform scaling in plane geometry.
==PAGE:95==
B.2 Normal Matrix
85
where the last passage is due to the property of transpose of matrix product.
N ′ · V ′ = 0
⇒(N ′)T V ′ = 0
⇒(Mn N)T (Mp V ) = 0
⇒N T Mn
T Mp V = 0
(B.6)
Since N and V are orthogonal, an interpretation with vector products brings N T V =
0 so the last equation of (B.6) is satisfied only if Mn
T MP = In where In is the identity
matrix. Lastly we arrive to the final conclusion with (B.7).
Mn
T MP = In
⇒Mn
T = In MP
−1
⇒Mn
T = MP
−1
⇒Mn =
[
MP
−1]T
(B.7)
==PAGE:96==
86
B Geometric Concepts
B.3
Geometry Spaces and Coordinates
The thesis refers to a series of geometry spaces which are commonly used in a real-
time graphics environment. The used names are particularly common in the OpenGL
domain. The geometry spaces pipeline that was used for this thesis can be seen in
Figure B.3 and will follow a brief description of all stages.
• Local Coordinates: also known as model or object coordinates refers to the
geometry space that is proper to a set of models stored in a single file.
That means when we load any set of models from a single file, all its vertices
spatial attributes are intended to be in local coordinates.
• World Coordinates: refers to the world space, where all the models spatial
data is stored relative to a fixed common origin.
The transition between local to world coordinates can be composed by transla-
tions, rotations and scaling transformations.
• View Coordinates: refers to the view space, also called eye or camera space.
This geometry space can be interpreted as viewing the scene from a camera
placed somewhere in the world space.
Aside from interpretation, this space is obtained by translating and rotating all
the geometry in world space around the origin to match the position and the
orientation of the camera.
This comes handy if we decide to have more than one camera in our scene,
so every camera will have its own view matrix and changing camera is only a
matter of changing view transformation.
Figure B.3: Geometry Spaces pipeline that has been used for the thesis project
(courtesy of Silicon Graphics).
==PAGE:97==
B.3 Geometry Spaces and Coordinates
87
• Clip Coordinates: define a 3D volume in front of the camera that will be con-
sidered for rendering. All the geometry outside this volume will be ”clipped”
(discarded) by the system at the beginning of rasterization stage: each vertex
will proceed further in the pipeline only if it satisfies the relation (B.8) where
[xclip, yclip, zclip, wclip] is the vertex position in clip coordinates.
−wclip < xclip, yclip, zclip < wclip
(B.8)
Conceptually, clip coordinates refers to the first space where 3D geometry has
been ”projected” into the 2D domain screen, like taking a photo.
The transformation from view to clip coordinates is made by a projection matrix,
described in Appendix B.1.3.
OpenGL rasterizer expects the vertices positions to be in clip space, then it will
execute the further transformations by itself.
• Normalized Device Coordinates (NDC): is obtained by performing the so
called perspective divide operation, shown in (B.9).


x
y
z
1


NDC
= 1
wc


xc
yc
zc
wc


clip
(B.9)
• Window Coordinates: are obtained with (B.10) where W and H are respec-
tively the number of columns and rows of screen pixels that we are rendering.


x
y
z


w
=


W
xNDC +1
2
H
yNDC +1
2
zNDC +1
2


(B.10)
The (x, y) subdomain represent the pixel locations on the screen while the z
still refers to depth from near to far plane but in a normalized range [0, 1]. The
variables are taken from the ViewPort settings and in OpenGL they can be
edited with the function glViewport.
==PAGE:98==
88
B Geometric Concepts
B.4
Reflection vector
To calculate specular reflection light contribution I used the reflection vector, an ideal
abstraction to determine the direction of light when reflected by a surface.
The reflection vector can be expressed by (B.11) with reference to Figure B.4, where ⃗l
is the direction from the light position to the observed point, ⃗r is the reflection vector
and ⃗n is the surface normal.
⃗r = ⃗l −2
(
⃗l · ⃗n
)
⃗n
(B.11)
To understand (B.11) we have to take into account a particular hypothesis which
is (B.12) derived by physics properties (more details in chapter 1.13.3 of [Hug14]).
θr = θl
(B.12)
If we decompose ⃗l in its projection and orthogonal projection on ⃗n, respectively proj⃗n⃗l
and ortho⃗n⃗l we can write (B.13)
⃗l = proj⃗n⃗l + ortho⃗n⃗l
=
(
⃗l · ⃗n
)
⃗n +
[
⃗l −
(
⃗l · ⃗n
)
⃗n
]
(B.13)
Figure B.4: Reflection vector ⃗r given incoming light direction ⃗l and the surface
normal ⃗n.
==PAGE:99==
B.4 Reflection vector
89
Now looking at Figure B.4 we can notice the equalities in (B.14).
proj⃗n⃗r = −proj⃗n⃗l
ortho⃗n⃗r = ortho⃗n⃗l
(B.14)
With those equalities we can derive ⃗r as shown in (B.15).
⃗r = proj⃗n⃗r + ortho⃗n⃗r
= −proj⃗n⃗l + ortho⃗n⃗l
(B.15)
We then arrive to (B.11) by substitution.
==PAGE:100==
90
B Geometric Concepts
B.5
Gram–Schmidt process
Gram–Schmidt process is used to orthogonalize vector basis and in this project it was
applied on the two-dimensional domain.
Suppose we start with a two-dimesional non-orthogonal basis { ⃗u1, ⃗v2} where ⃗u1 has
already unit length. To orthonormalize ⃗v2 with ⃗u1 we can define the function listed
in (B.16) and based on Figure B.5. The result will be the orthogonal basis { ⃗u1, ⃗u2}.
Gram-Schmidt (⃗v2, ⃗u1) =
⃗v2 −⃗u1 (⃗v2 · ⃗u1)
∥⃗v2 −⃗u1 (⃗v2 · ⃗u1)∥= ⃗u2
(B.16)
To understand the meaning of it we can start by decomposing ⃗v2 with the parallel
⃗x2 and perpendicular ⃗y2 vectors to ⃗u1 as seen in (B.17).
⃗v2 = ⃗x2 + ⃗y2
⇒⃗y2 = ⃗v2 −⃗x2
= ⃗v2 −ProjU1 (⃗v2)
(B.17)
We are interested to find ⃗y2 because its direction is ⃗u2. To calculate ⃗y2 we need the
projection of ⃗v2 into the one-dimensional space ⃗U1 relative to the basis {u1}.
The properties of orthogonal basis facilitate the calculation of ProjU1 shown in (B.18).
ProjU1 (⃗v2) = (⃗v2 · ⃗u1) ⃗u1
(B.18)
To arrive at the initial listed result in (B.16) there is only the need to normalize ⃗y2
as (B.19) reports.
⃗u2 =
⃗y2
∥⃗y2∥
(B.19)
Remember that the newly obtained orthogonal basis can be easily extended to the
three-dimensional domain { ⃗u1, ⃗u2, ⃗u3} using the normalized cross product, as shown
Figure B.5:
Gram-Shmidt process in two dimensions to orthogonalize the basis
{ ⃗u1, ⃗v2} into { ⃗u1, ⃗u2} .
==PAGE:101==
B.5 Gram–Schmidt process
91
in (B.20).
⃗u3 =
⃗u1 × ⃗u2
∥⃗u1 × ⃗u2∥
(B.20)
==PAGE:102==
92
B Geometric Concepts
B.6
Tangent Space and the TBN Matrix
It often happens to have the need of handling geometry concepts relative to a sur-
face, where variables are expressed in a basis that relies on surface directions and/or
texture coordinate applied to that.
This space is also known as Tangent Space and there is often the need to have
a change of basis from it to the commonly used ones (e.g. object, world and view
spaces).
The change of basis matrix used for this operation is called TBN Matrix because
it is defined using the orthonormal vectors: Tangent T, Bitangent (or Binormal) B
and Normal N as the matrix columns.
TBN = ⟨Tangent, Bitangent, Normal⟩
In the general case, we start having a surface S (u, v) with defined texture 2D coor-
dinates (u, v) ∈[0, 1]2 ⊂ℜ2.
It is possible to do a linear parametrization from the texture space (u, v) to tangent
space of surface S by defining the Tangent direction T going toward the increment of
the first texture coordinate u along S and, in a similar manner, defining the Bitangent
direction B toward the second texture coordinate v.
To complete the base, the Normal vector N is considered as the normal direction of
the surface S on each considered coordinate, as described in (B.21).
Figure B.6 shows the transition from texture to tangent space.
T =∂S/∂u
B =∂S/∂v
N = ⃗nS (u, v)
(B.21)
Notice that if the surface is flat, like a plane section, we will have the same TBN
matrix for all the surface points, but this does not happen frequently and usually the
TBN matrix is computed per triangle and assigned to each vertex.
It is important to specify that in real situations where we handle non-flat surfaces,
vertices are often shared by two or more triangles. In those cases the vertices get
the average of the independently calculated tangent, bitangent and normals of each
triangle that shares them.
Luckily for the beginner programmer, the most famous model loaders have options
to automatically calculate the TBN matrix for each triangle on the loaded meshes.
We usually have at our disposal the normal at a particular point on the each trian-
gle surface, obtained either by vertex normals interpolation or by a normal map (for
example).
In order to determine the Tangent and Bitangent vectors we can have a better look
at the situation with Figure B.7.
Be (ui, vi) the 2D texture coordinate for the vertex position Pi of the triangle in
Figure B.7. The difference (∆uj, ∆vj) is calculated from the texture coordinates of
==PAGE:103==
B.6 Tangent Space and the TBN Matrix
93
Figure B.6: Mapping from Parametric Texture Space to Cartesian Tangent Space.
Figure B.7: Mapping from UV to Tangent space.
==PAGE:104==
94
B Geometric Concepts
the two vertices delimiting the edge Ej as defined in (B.22).





E1 = P2 −P1
∆u1 = u2 −u1
∆v1 = v2 −v1





E2 = P3 −P2
∆u2 = u3 −u2
∆v2 = v3 −v2
(B.22)
We then can write the relations in (B.23).
E1 = ∆u1 T + ∆v1 B
E2 = ∆u2 T + ∆v2 B
(B.23)
The system described in (B.23) can be written in form of matrix multiplication as
shown in (B.24), to easily find T and B.
The texture coordinates difference matrix inversion is possible because it is a non-
singular square matrix, since its determinant is not zero.
This conclusion comes
because its rows are linearly independent due to corresponding to two different edges
of a triangle.
[E1
E2
]
=
[∆u1
∆v1
∆u2
∆v2
] [T
B
]
⇒
[T
B
]
=
[∆u1
∆v1
∆u2
∆v2
]−1 [E1
E2
]
=
1
∆u1∆v2 −∆u2∆v1
[ ∆v2
−∆v1
−∆u2
∆u1
] [E1
E2
]
(B.24)
Notice that we do not have to calculate both Tangent and Bitangent with (B.24) be-
cause we know that Tangent, Bitangent and Normal form a basis and are orthogonal
one to each other.
That is the reason why, once having the Normal and the Tangent (for example), it is
possible to use the vector cross product and find the Bitangent as shown in (B.25).
B =
N × T
∥N × T∥
(B.25)
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
[Bær+16]
Andreas Bærentzen et al. Hands on Real-Time Graphics. 2016.
[Bli78]
James F Blinn. “Simulation of wrinkled surfaces”. In: SIGGRAPH. 1978.
[Boe10]
Florian Boesch. OpenGL 4 Tessellation. 2010. url: http://codeflow.
org/entries/2010/nov/07/opengl-4-tessellation/.
[Bur15]
Steve Burke. Defining Tessellation and Its Impact on Game Graphics.
2015. url: http://www.gamersnexus.net/guides/1936- what- is-
tessellation-game-graphics.
[Bus15]
Victor Bush. Tessellated terrain with dynamic LOD. 2015. url: http:
//victorbush.com/2015/01/tessellated-terrain/.
[Coo84]
Robert L Cook. “Shade trees”. In: SIGGRAPH. 1984.
[Cou15]
Adrian Courrèges. GTA V - Graphics Study. 2015. url: http://www.
adriancourreges.com/blog/2015/11/02/gta-v-graphics-study/.
[DH00]
Michael C Doggett and Johannes Hirche. “Adaptive View Dependent
Tessellation of Displacement Maps”. In: Workshop on Graphics Hardware.
2000.
[HS98]
Wolfgang Heidrich and Hans-Peter Seidel. “Ray-tracing Procedural Dis-
placement Shaders”. In: Graphics Interface. 1998.
[Hug14]
et al. Hughes J.F. Computer graphics. Principles and practice. 3ed. AW,
2014. isbn: 9780321399526. url: http://gen.lib.rus.ec/book/index.
php?md5=F464CD0043EB5336AA0543FE20A0561B.
[Khr]
Khronos Group. OpenGL Tessellation. url: https://www.khronos.org/
opengl/wiki/Tessellation.
[khr16]
khronos. Compute eye space from window space. 2016. url: https://www.
khronos.org/opengl/wiki/Compute_eye_space_from_window_space.
[Nie+16]
M Niebner et al. “Real-Time Rendering Techniques with Hardware Tes-
sellation”. In: Computer Graphics Forum 35.1 (2016), pages 113–137. doi:
10.1111/cgf.12714. url: http://dx.doi.org.proxy.findit.dtu.
dk/10.1111/cgf.12714.
[NVI08]
NVIDIA. DirectX 11 Tessellation. 2008. url: http://www.nvidia.com/
object/tessellation.html.
==PAGE:106==
96
Bibliography
[OP05]
Manuel M Oliveira and Fabio Policarpo. “An Efficient Representation for
Surface Details”. In: 2005.
[Pet09]
Matt Pettineo. Reconstructing position from depth. 2009. url: https://
mynameismjp.wordpress.com/2009/03/10/reconstructing-position-
from-depth/.
[PH96]
Matt Pharr and Pat Hanrahan. “Geometry Caching for Ray-Tracing Dis-
placement Maps”. In: Rendering Techniques. 1996.
[PHL91]
John W Patterson, Stuart G Hoggar, and J R Logie. “Inverse Displace-
ment Mapping”. In: Comput. Graph. Forum 10 (1991), pages 129–139.
[Plu14]
Pluralsight. Why Are Ngons and Triangles so Bad? 2014. url: https:
//www.pluralsight.com/blog/film-games/ngons-triangles-bad.
[Pol+05]
Fabio Policarpo et al. “Deferred Shading Tutorial”. In: 2005.
[Pol14]
Polycount. Parallax Mapping in Games. 2014. url: http://wiki.polycount.
com/wiki/Parallax_Map.
[SU08]
L Szirmay-Kalos and T Umenhoffer. “Displacement Mapping on the GPU
- State of the Art”. In: Computer Graphics Forum 27.1 (2008).
[SWH15]
Graham Sellers, Richard S Wright, and Nicholas Haemel. OpenGL Super-
bible: Comprehensive Tutorial and Reference. 7th. Addison-Wesley Pro-
fessional, 2015. isbn: 0672337479, 9780672337475.
[Tat06]
Natalya Tatarchuk. “Practical Parallax Occlusion Mapping with Approxi-
mate Soft Shadows for Detailed Surface Rendering”. In: ACM SIGGRAPH
2006 Courses. SIGGRAPH ’06. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2006, pages 81–
112. isbn: 1-59593-364-6. doi: 10.1145/1185657.1185830. url: http:
//doi.acm.org/10.1145/1185657.1185830.
[Tat08]
Natalya Tatarchuk. Advanced Topics in GPU Tessellation. Technical re-
port. 2008. url: https://developer.amd.com/wordpress/media/
2013/01/Tatarchuk-Tessellation-Gamefest2008.pdf.
[Wan+04]
Xi Wang et al. “Generalized Displacement Maps”. In: Rendering Tech-
niques. 2004.
[Woo05]
Cliff (University of Virginia) Woolley. GPU Gems 2. Volume 2. 2005. isbn:
0321335597. url: http://http.developer.nvidia.com/GPUGems2/
gpugems2_chapter08.html.
