==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Biotechnology
Global Sewage Project
Predicting feature significance for global
antimicrobial resistance persistence in metage-
nomics sewage samples by applying arti-
ficial intelligence
Corentin Guérinot (s151185)
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
b
==PAGE:3==
This report was prepared by:
Corentin Guérinot
Coding in cooperation with:
Mads Kirkegaard
Supervisors:
Assistant Professor Josef Korbinian Vogt
Associate Professor Thomas Nordahl Petersen
DTU Bioinformatics
Department of Bio and Health Informatics
Technical University of Denmark
Kemitorvet
Building 208
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
info@bioinformatics.dtu.dk
http://www.bioinformatics.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
d
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master’s Thesis was prepared at the Department of Bio and Health Informatics at
the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a
Master of Science degree in Biotechnology. This report represents 30 ECTS points.
The work was carried out at the Center for Biological Sequence Analysis (CBS), Depart-
ment of Bioinformatics, under supervision of Assistant Professor Josef Korbinian Vogt
and Associate Professor Thomas Nordahl Petersen.
Kongens Lyngby, July 31, 2017
Corentin Guérinot (s151185)
==PAGE:6==
ii
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I thank both my supervisors Assistant Prof. Josef Korbinian Vogt and Associate Prof.
Thomas Nordahl Petersen for their help and availability during the project. The auton-
omy they let me, together with their advice and support helped restoring my faith in
science.
I would like to thank Mads Kirkegaard for his precious help in the early phases of the
project. Many thanks to my friends at Sorgenfrivej 8, at DTU, and back home.
Heartfelt thanks to my family for their support.
==PAGE:8==
iv
==PAGE:9==
Abstract
Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR) spreading at a very high pace and endangering the
life of many patients around the world is compelling the healthcare system to change
paradigm in the treatment of infection. In order to tackle at best the emergence and
persistence of AMR, heightened and powerful surveillance system needs to be put on.
Global Sewage Project strives for it by addressing the AMR issue through metagenomics
analysis of sewage water samples. This project is carried out under the hypothesis that
human sewage can be used to detect, explain and predict emergence and trends of AMR
through mathematical modeling.
This Master’s Thesis consists in a first step towards this ambitious goal, working espe-
cially with some economic, health-related and geographic features from the World Bank.
After highlighting the high degree of correlations between these 19 features, different
Random Forests models are fitted using samples from 59 different countries: binary
classification and regression for global AMR count and binary classification for resis-
tance clusters. After sequential forward feature selection, which improved significantly
the model accuracy, the unbiased estimate of the performance was 0.84 for the global
binary classifier, the coefficient of determination for the regression was 0.39, and the re-
sults for resistance clusters were highly variable. Despite the overall good performances
of the models, it is unsure whether the predicted variable is truly AMR and not only a
measure of country’s level of development.
From these models fitted on the available dataset, the features importance could be
assessed, exhibiting the overall high significance of Number of Physicians per 1000 in-
habitants and Cause of death, by communicable diseases and maternal, prenatal and
nutrition conditions. A paradox has been raised between the importance of certain fea-
tures and their position in the forward selection procedure. Lastly predictions have been
run on unseen data enabling to establish some risk profile on a world map, an intuitive
tool to use and analyze.
==PAGE:10==
vi
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Abstract
v
Contents
vii
Abbreviations
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Antimicrobial Resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Metagenomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Global Sewage Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Random Forests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4.1
Decision Trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4.2
Growing Random Forest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4.3
Parameters Tuning and Characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4.4
Out-Of-Bag Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4.5
Random Forest Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Material and Methods
9
2.1
Metagenomic Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.1
Next Generation Sequencing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.2
Alignment and Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.3
CD-HIT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.4
Count Normalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.1
Global Sewage Metadata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.2
World Bank Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.3
Data Transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Machine Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.1
Computation and Graphical Representation
. . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.2
Performance Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.3
Model Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
==PAGE:12==
viii
Contents
3
Results and Discussion
17
3.1
Feature Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.1
Correlations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.2
Principal Component Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
AMR Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.1
A 2-classes Problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.2
Model Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.3
Features Significance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.4
Predictive Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3
AMR Regression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3.1
Model Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3.2
Features Significance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3.3
Predictive Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.4
Resistance Clusters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.4.1
Clusters Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.4.2
Prediction Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.4.3
Features Significance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4
Perspective
39
4.1
Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
Machine Learning Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3
Future Direction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5
Conclusion
43
A
Supplementary Material
45
Bibliography
53
==PAGE:13==
Abbreviations
• AMR – Antimicrobial Resistance
• AUC – Area Under the ROC Curve
• BWA – Burrows-Wheeler Aligner
• CART – Classification And Regression Trees
• CI – Confidence Interval
• CIA – Central Intelligence Agency
• DNA – Deoxyribonucleic Acid
• FMM – Fraction of Match/Mismatches
• GDP – Gross Domestic Product
• GS – Global Sewage
• HDI – Human Development Index
• MAS – Minimum Alignment Score
• NGS – Next Generation Sequencing
• NIR – No-information Rate
• OOB – Out-Of-Bag
• PC – Principal Component
• PCA – Principal Component Analysis
• RF – Random Forest
• RFC – Random Forest Classifier
• RFR – Random Forest Regressor
• ROC – Receiver Operating Characteristic
• WB – World Bank
==PAGE:14==
x
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In this introduction the important concepts addressed in this Master’s Thesis will be
presented.
First one will shed some light on antimicrobial resistance, then one will
introduce the principles of metagenomics, a brief description of Global Sewage will be
given before a theoretical presentation of a machine learning technique: Random Forests.
1.1
Antimicrobial Resistance
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) denotes the ability for a micro-organism to resist to
the effects of an antimicrobial medication, be it antibiotics, antivirals, antimalarials or
antifungals; the following study focuses especially on antibiotics resistance. In this case,
these drugs are no longer effective to kill the bacteria or even limit their growth; as a
consequence the infection can spread and endanger the patient’s life and his community
[1].
A large number of antimicrobial treatment, such as penicillin, have been discovered
from the substances naturally produced by micro-organisms; the phenomenon of resis-
tance against it is therefore not recent. What has changed over the last decades is the
excessive or inappropriate use of antibiotics in medical or veterinary settings. Together
with an important increase of international travels, the global rise of antibiotics around
the world favor the emergence of resistance [2]
Given their high mutation rate and their ability to exchange DNA through plasmid,
bacteria have a high propensity to change their genetic material quickly, enabling them
to adapt to new environment. The overuse or misuse of antibiotics for human plus an
extensive agricultural usage trigger selective pressure on resistant bacteria, removing
drug-sensitive bacteria and allowing resistant ones to reproduce as a result of natural
selection [3]. Once it is acquired, antibiotic resistance can be transmitted by vertical
transfer to subsequent generations, or by horizontal transfer when genes of interest are
exchanged from one bacteria to another [4], resulting in a whole resistant population.
The resistance mechanisms are numerous, to name but a few [5]:
==PAGE:16==
2
1 Introduction
• Production of beta-lactamases, enzymes hydrolysing and thus inactivating beta-
lactams antibiotics.
• Decrease bacterial membrane permeability through down-regulation of porin.
• Increase the activity of efflux pump draining antibiotic out of the bacteria.
• Modification of antibiotic target protein, preventing thus strong binding.
Current methods to detect resistant bacteria are slow and time-consuming, it mainly
consists in phenotypic tests after culture of a reported resistant pathogen; some methods
also include mass spectrometry experiments or molecular tests [6]. Such processes are
poorly sensitive and narrow as they do not allow detection of non-enzymatic mechanisms,
moreover they do not give any quantitative insight on the resistance.
Antibiotic resistance has become a clinical and economic burden, as it implies pro-
longed hospital stay for patients, trained practitioners and quarantine setting. Several
countries have already reported treatment failure for gonorrhea [2], and a British study
recently claimed that 50 million people could die a year by 2050 because of AMR [7]. The
low availability of new drug candidates, the modest foreseen profits and the perceived
obstacle of regulatory barriers can explain somehow the reluctance of pharmaceutical
companies to develop new antimicrobials [1]; however the fewer new drugs available the
higher risk of resistance to currently used antibiotics.
This alarming situation calls for a better and broader surveillance program for AMR,
which could quickly ease diagnosis and therapy guidance. The proposed project tries to
address this challenge through metagenomic study of sewage samples.
1.2
Metagenomics
One major issue when dealing with microbiology and especially bacterial genomic is the
difficulty in cultivation of the micro-organism of interest. Environmental microbiologists
estimate indeed that less than 2% of existing bacteria can be cultured in the laboratory
[8]. Setting out from this premise it seems unrealistic to base AMR monitoring on cul-
tures, as it would imply to let more than 98% of bacterial diversity aside.
The favored approach is then metagenomics: a technique shunting the bacterial cul-
tures step by directly sequencing and analyzing DNA from all the genomes found in an
environment [9]. The emergence of such a discipline has been enabled by the sequencing
performance breakthroughs with powerful methods of next generation sequencing (NGS).
Technologies such as pyrosequencing are capable to generate a tremendous amount of
data at an ever-decreasing cost, while computational power and analysis tools are im-
proving in the meantime.
==PAGE:17==
1.3 Global Sewage Project
3
The metagenomic analysis starts with the sampling of some element from a given
environment – here sewage water samples, the DNA is then extracted and prepared
for sequencing. The resulting DNA undergo then shotgun sequencing outputting reads
ready for bioinformatics analysis. The workflow usually starts with the removal of se-
quencing library adapters followed by a quality control, where low-quality sequences
are removed. Remaining reads can then be compared to available reference sequence
databases (this step is sometimes called mapping as well) or assembled de novo into
contigs without any reference genome [10].
Shotgun metagenomics is a particularly indicated technique to detect which species or
genes are present in an environmental community, and it will thus be used to characterize
AMR as part of the Global Sewage project.
1.3
Global Sewage Project
While AMR is evermore threatening global health, current methods to monitor and
characterize it seem to reach their limits nowadays. The timing required for detecting
resistant bacterial strains remains of paramount importance, hence a slowed-down treat-
ment and a delay behind potential epidemic. It appears a crying need for a global AMR
surveillance program, mixing NGS techniques and mathematical modeling, in order to
predict and prevent future spread of AMR.
Global Sewage (GS) project falls within this scope: “working from the hypothesis
that metagenomic sequencing of human sewage can be used to detect, and in combi-
nation with epidemiological / ecological modeling, explain and predict emergence and
trends of AMR” [11]. Currently in its early phase, this project is expected to become
“the first global real-time, large-scale AMR surveillance of human populations, facilitat-
ing better and faster detection of AMR leading to a paradigm shift in the way AMR
surveillance is conducted” [11].
Along the project, sewage water samples will be collected from more than 100 cities
around the world, representing a fitted candidate for such a study as it contains material
from a large and mostly healthy population. Use of metagenomic sequencing for surveil-
lance of AMR gene has already been assessed and approved in a study on toilets waste
from international flights [12], consisting of a proof of concept. A map in Figure 1.1
shows all sampling sites where data have been generated up until now, and therefore
used for this Master’s Thesis.
The Centre for Biological Sequence analysis (CBS) at DTU (Technical University of
Denmark), where I have realized this project, is taking part to GS on the bioinformat-
ics analysis, as well as DTU Food Department in charge of the samples handling and
==PAGE:18==
4
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1: Sampling sites participating to the Global Sewage Project.
data generation, while the University of Edinburgh addresses statistical analysis and
modeling.
1.4
Random Forests
The recent progress in computation combined with the advances in statistical theories
enabled the emergence of machine learning [13].
This term refers to the process of
conception, analysis and implementation of methods enabling the machine – i.e. the
computer – to learn and build predictions based on data.
Random Forests (RF) are a very popular and easy-to-implement method, formally
developed by Breiman et al. [14], for which predictions on unseen data are made using
rules learned from a labeled training dataset. RF can be used for two different purposes:
• Classification: assigning a class label to each sample
• Regression: predicting continuous output variable for each sample [13]
In this project, RF have been used as a binary classifier to predict the level of antimi-
crobial resistance in sewage water samples, the concepts introduced below correspond to
this specific case. The algorithm consists in the construction of a multitude of decision
trees, trained on slightly different subsets obtained by bagging. The final prediction is
made by majority vote in the ensemble of trees [15], and the estimation of the perfor-
mance on unseen data is made through out-of-bag error assessment.
==PAGE:19==
1.4 Random Forests
5
1.4.1
Decision Trees
Initially, decision trees have been an efficient tool in data mining, enabling quick sorting
of large datasets through a succession of binary decisions. As a predictive model, it has
become a widely used supervised learning technique, taking several predictor values as
an input and outputting a class label.
In terms of architecture, such a tree is made of nodes and splits to the data, initial-
ized with the entire training set in the first node. According to the CART algorithm [16]
(Classification and Regression Trees), the dataset is segmented into two child nodes using
a predictor variable, and the construction is performed so forth until reaching terminal
nodes. From the latter, no further split can be made insofar as they only contain one
single class representatives: one talks about the purity of terminal nodes. Predictions
are then made on the content of these terminal nodes, following an adapted decision
path [16].
The choice in the splits is paramount when growing a decision tree, it is made using
a specific impurity metrics; CART algorithm is based on Gini index G (1.1). In a node
m, representing Nm observations, let pm,k the proportion of class k observations.
pm,k =
1
Nm
∑
xi∈Rm
I(yi = k) ; G =
K
∑
k=1
pm,k(1 −pm,k)
(1.1)
It measures in each node the probability to misclassify a randomly labeled element
from the set [17]. Splits are then made according to their decrease in Gini impurity at
each node.
Decision trees exhibit several advantages: they are very fast to grow and do not
require lots of computation power in predictions as they are not based on mathematical
models. The drawbacks however are numerous: decision trees are very noisy and have
a high associated variance. Indeed, given the hierarchical process of splitting, an early
error can easily propagate and lead to an important instability [13]. As a consequence,
the risk is that the tree detects noise inherent to the training set rather than significant
patterns paramount for generalization: this phenomenon is called overfitting. A pruning
step is usually performed after growing the tree in order to minimize this effect.
To overcome these challenges, several statisticians successively proposed and optimized
the concept of RF, obtained by bagging, and showing higher generalization accuracy
[15].
1.4.2
Growing Random Forest
The concept of bagging lies in the averaging of many noisy yet rather unbiased models
– here decision trees, reducing thus the associated variance and leading to a more stable
==PAGE:20==
6
1 Introduction
final predictor. The way RF are grown is presented below in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Random Forest for Regression or Classification
1: Given: number of trees in RF B, number of samples N, number of input variables
M, minimum node size nmin.
2: for b = 1 to B do
3:
Draw a bootstrap sample Z∗of size N from the training data.
4:
Grow a RF tree Tb to the bootstrapped data.
5:
repeat
6:
Select m variables at random from the M variables.
7:
Pick the best variable/split-point among the m.
8:
Split the node into two daughter nodes.
9:
until nmin is reached
10: end for
11: Output the ensemble of trees {Tb}1
B.
Classification: Class prediction for a given sample x corresponds the mode class ob-
tained in the RF, i.e. to the majority vote of the ensemble of trees [17]
Regression: The prediction for a given sample is the average of the predictions from
individual trees of the forest.
1.4.3
Parameters Tuning and Characteristics
Breiman demonstrated that RF error rate depended upon two parameters [15]:
• Correlation between trees in the RF: already reduced by the bootstrapping proce-
dures and the random based variable selection at each split; the lower the better.
• Strength of each tree in the RF: accuracy of individual trees; the higher the better.
One can adjust both parameters by differing m and finding the optimal trade-off, as
they both monotonically vary with respect to m. Another hyperparameter to tune is B,
the number of trees in the RF, it is usually picked so that the accuracy stabilizes.
RF exhibit excellent accuracy among competitive algorithms, capable of effectively
handling missing data and outliers using proximities. The multiplication of de-correlated
trees implies an important decrease in variance while keeping the bias low, hence the
drastic limitation of overfitting paramount when generalization is sought [14] Last but
not least, the bagging process allows not to split dataset when assessing the performance,
through the use of out-of-bag samples.
==PAGE:21==
1.4 Random Forests
7
1.4.4
Out-Of-Bag Samples
Theoretically one can demonstrate that a bootstrap sample – i.e. N samples randomly
drawn with replacement from an N-sized dataset – overlaps about two-third of the orig-
inal dataset, for N big enough [13]. Each tree in the RF is grown using a different
bootstrap sample from the original dataset, letting thus about one-third of the samples
left out and not used to build each individual tree. Those are called out-of-bag (OOB)
samples, and by definition have not been seen yet by the tree, therefore they can be
used as a classification test set yielding an unbiased estimate for the performance.
Let x be a sample, one looks at the majority vote of the trees for which x is out-
of-bag, and compare the so-obtained class to the true one. Repeating this process over
the whole dataset, the probability that the predicted class is not equal to the true class
averaged over all classes is called the out-of-bag error estimate [15]. The main advantage
of this method is that no cross-validation or separated test set is needed to assess the
predictive accuracy unbiasedly, allowing RF to perform well on relatively small datasets.
Besides out-of-bag samples can be used to assess each variable importance, in other
words their prediction strength. In order to evaluate the importance of variable p, one
should for each tree pass down the OOB samples and record the prediction accuracy.
Then the values for the variable p are randomly shuffled among the OOB samples and the
corresponding accuracy is again computed; the difference in accuracy obtained for each
tree is finally averaged over the RF [13]. Usually variables importance are expressed in
percentage, by construction they add up to 100%, and they stand as a unbiased estimate
of prediction driving strength of each variable, allowing comparison amongst them.
1.4.5
Random Forest Regression
The theory explained above refers mainly to RF classification, however RF can be used
as well in order to predict continuous output: it is the case of RF regression. The key
principles are very similar to the RF classifier, except for the following:
• The output is not a class label anymore but a continuous value, hence modification
in the impurity calculation, replaced for each node by the variance for the of the
samples contained in the node.
• The prediction for a given sample is the average of the predictions from individual
trees of the forest.
• To estimate the performance of the regression, OOB samples are used to compute
the coefficient of determination R2 (1.2), expressing the proportion of the variance
in the output values predictable from the input variables through the model. In
other words, this coefficient is equivalent to an estimation of the goodness of fit
for the model. A R2 of 1 corresponds to a perfect fit, a R2 of 0 is characteristic
==PAGE:22==
8
1 Introduction
for constant model, whereas a value below 0 indicate that the predictions follow a
trend opposite to the true values.
Considering the n true values yi, each associated with a predicted value fi, and y is
the mean of the observed data y = 1
n
∑
i yi. We have:
R2 = 1 −
∑
i(yi −fi)2
∑
i(yi −y)2
(1.2)
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2
Material and Methods
2.1
Metagenomic Data
Here will be described the data generation a bit more into details.
Except for the
normalization part, all the following steps had been done previously to this Master’s
Thesis and the data was accessible on Computerome under the following path
/home/projects/cge/analysis/globalsewage/ and associated folders.
2.1.1
Next Generation Sequencing
Samples collection, shipping and storage have been done in accordance to GS guide-
lines and DNA extraction have been performed using the method described here [18],
ensuring more trustful results for bacterial genes than plasmid. Deep sequencing have
been achieved using Illumina technology, outputting paired end reads of 150bp each in
FASTQ format.
2.1.2
Alignment and Filtering
The pipeline MGmapper is comprised of four successive steps [19]:
1. Pre-processing of raw reads: trimming and adapter removal using Trimmomatic
[20].
2. Reads mapping to reference databases using Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA) with
default settings: minimum alignment score MAS = 30; fraction of allowed mis-
matches FMM ≤0.01.
3. Best hits identification in bestmode for MetaHitAssembly, Bacteria, Bacteria_draft,
Plasmid and Human Microbiome or fullmode for ResFinder.
4. Post-processing or filtering of results according to the following criteria: read count
> 10, mismatch ratio < 0.01, size normalized abundance > 0.01 and unique read
count fraction > 0.5%.
==PAGE:24==
10
2 Material and Methods
ResFinder is a database containing information on AMR genes from sequenced or
partially sequenced bacterial isolates. It is specific for genes acquired through horizontal
transfer and does not include mechanisms mediated by chromosomal mutations [21].
The different parts of the following study use alternatively filtered or non-filtered counts,
it corresponds to the 4th step of the pipeline described above.
2.1.3
CD-HIT
The program CD-HIT [22], widely employed for clustering biological sequences, was
used in order to reduce sequence redundancy and to increase hereafter the performance
of further analyses. Initially developed to cluster protein sequences, the program has
been extended to support clustering nucleotide sequences [23]. The clustering had been
performed by a third-party on filtered counts with 90% similarity, leading to the creation
of so-called resistance clusters; data was available on Computerome.
A recapitulative presentation of the mapping and clustering results with or without
filtering is available below in Table 2.1.
No Filter
Standard Filter
Bacteria Species
6302
4207
ResFinder Genes
1643
348
ResFinder Clusters
370
176
Table 2.1: Results of mapping and clustering with and without MGmapper filter.
2.1.4
Count Normalization
Given the discrepancies in sequencing depth among the different samples, some normal-
ization needed to be applied on the read counts in order to generate comparable data for
further modeling. Since the resistance genes found in ResFinder are of bacterial origin,
the number of reads mapped to this database was divided by the total bacterial read
count for each sample, i.e. mapped to Human Microbiome, Bacteria, Bacteria_draft
and MetaHit. This operation has been done using non-filtered counts.
The distribution of bacterial read counts, ResFinder counts and normalized counts
over the different samples are displayed in Figure 2.1. The number of reads mapped to
ResFinder genes, summed up for each sample, multiply by 1000, and then normalized
over the total bacterial read counts, is called AMR count in what follows.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Dataset
11
Figure 2.1: Distribution histogram of ResFinder Read Counts (red), Total Bacterial
Read Counts (blue) and AMR count (green).
2.2
Dataset
In this early step of the Global Sewage project, we have been working with 77 samples
coming from 59 different countries collected in the three first months of year 2016. Aside
from the outcome of the metagenomic study, some more data have been collected as
potential candidates for explanatory variables in the model to be built.
2.2.1
Global Sewage Metadata
Around the different sites taking part to the GS project, the responsible for the sam-
pling had to complete an informative survey about the specificities of the waste water
treatment plant and some local characteristics. A comprehensive list of these features
can be found in Table A.1, they will be denoted as GS metadata in the rest of this
==PAGE:26==
12
2 Material and Methods
report. Amongst these metadata some of the features have been disregarded for this
study, they are to be found in the Table A.1. Further comments about these features,
e.g. the type of the sampling site or samples related information, will be given in the
Perspective paragraph.
The incompleteness of some survey answers have been tackled as best as possible,
looking for missing information on the Internet, especially for population and temper-
ature.
Other parameters such as storage time and shipping temperature have been
extrapolated taking the median of existing values. Last, the feature Region has been
transformed through one-hot encoding, splitting it into 7 different binary variables rep-
resenting different regions of the world: Europe, North America, South America, Asia,
Middle East, Africa and Oceania.
2.2.2
World Bank Data
The DataBank is an analysis and vizualisation tool developed by The World Bank (WB),
describing overall economic situation as well as health, nutrition and population statis-
tics of the 189 member countries [24].
A selection of features have been made beforehand by F. Aarestrup from DTU-Food,
yielding to a list of 24 features likely to relate to antimicrobial resistance, they can be
seen in Table A.2. Corresponding data have then been imported from WB Database,
keeping for each country the most up-to-date value over a period spanning from 2005
to 2015, in order to limit missing data. 5 features still had too scarce data, they have
then been discarded from the study, and the few missing values for the 19 others have
been completed by neighboring countries extrapolation or by some Internet research –
e.g. on CIA World Fact Book [25].
2.2.3
Data Transformation
The count matrices and GS metadata have been stored in data frames indexed by sample
codes, whereas WB data are collected country-wise. The former have then been averaged
for every country over their representative samples, in order to build a predictive model
with respect to countries. These features have then been normalized: centred to the
mean and component-wise scaled to unit variance [26]. Correlation studies have been
performed using Spearman coefficient for its ability to detect non-linear correlations
between variables, unlike Pearson coefficient.
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Machine Learning
13
2.3
Machine Learning
2.3.1
Computation and Graphical Representation
All coding activities have been made using Python; the familiarization with basic pro-
gramming was achieved following online courses on Coursera [27] such as Programming
for everybody and Introduction to data science using Python. These courses were given
by Charles Severance, following his textbook Python for Informatics [28], and gave me
an excellent introduction to this language. The package scikit-learn was used to per-
form all machine learning techniques implemented throughout this Master’s thesis, and
data structures were managed using mainly panda. The sklearn suite is very powerful
for data science, it has been completed with matplotlib and seaborn for the graphs
and plotly for the chloropleth maps i.e. thematic maps in which areas are colored
according to a certain variable.
2.3.2
Performance Estimation
For every predictive model fitted, it is paramount to estimate the performance in order
to select the most powerful ones. As presented before in the introduction, the OOB
accuracy is a good estimate of the model performance on unseen data – it corresponds
theoretically to the outcome of a 3-fold cross-validation. For every classification accu-
racy computed it is important to compare it with some standards, and we usually opt for
the accuracy corresponding to random guess, named in other words no-information rate
(NIR). When dealing with binary classification problem, this NIR corresponds to the
proportion of the most populated class; in case of balanced classes the NIR is then 50%.
In the report, the performance is often measured by measuring the difference between
the OOB accuracy and the NIR.
To get a graphical overview of the sensitivity and specificity of the model fitted, some
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve are drawn. It represents the evolution of
the true-positive rate (sensitivity) as a function of the false positive rate (1-specificity),
and the goodness of fit is usually assessed by calculating the area under ROC curve
(AUC), 1 being the best value. An example is provided in Figure 2.2, the AUC corre-
sponds to the zone shaded in gray. In the case of RFC, drawing ROC curves enables
to get confidence values for the probability estimates of predicted classes, i.e. to know
whether the vote of the trees shows a clear majority or tight results.
Given the random aspect of the model fitting, it is crucial to have a robust estimate
for the performance, the OOB accuracies provided in this report are averaged over 50
runs, unless explicitly stipulated otherwise. The accuracy rates are computed along with
their 95% confidence interval and one-sided Student t-test are performed for comparison
(between accuracies, or towards NIR).
==PAGE:28==
14
2 Material and Methods
Figure 2.2: An example of ROC curve with AUC shaded in gray.
2.3.3
Model Tuning
In the introductive paragraph about Random Forests, it is said that the only parame-
ters influencing RF are B, the number of trees in the RF and m, the number of features
taken into account at each split. B and m are called the hyperparameters of the model,
meaning that a variation of their values trigger different predictions and thus different
performance. Before fitting any model, one needs to optimize m and B in a step called
hyperparameters tuning, it is done by following the evolution of RF performance with
respect to B, the number of trees in the forest, for different usual values of m. RF bi-
nary classifiers (binary RFC) have then been trained on the dataset used for the whole
study (59 countries divided into 2 equally populated classes and 19 WB features), for
the following values of m: 3, none i.e. 19, and ‘sqrt’ i.e. 4, the nearest integer to square
root of 19.
The results are presented in Figure 2.3, we see that OOB error rate follow the same
trend for the 3 different versions of RFC: a strong decrease at first before a plateau
and constant oscillations due to noise. It seems that RFC with max_features (aka
m) = ‘sqrt’ gives the lowest OOB error rate and then can be trusted for predictions.
Interestingly the lowest plateau is comprised between 80 and 140 trees in the forest, and
in order to maintain computational time reasonable we choose B = 80 for the rest of
the study.
Sequential forward selection is the method used to select the features given the best
performing model. It is an iterative process in which one starts with no feature in the
model, with a performance corresponding to the NIR. At each iteration step, we add the
feature which best improves the OOB accuracy of our model; the process usually stops
when the addition of any new variable does not improve the performance.
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Machine Learning
15
Figure 2.3: Evolution of OOB error rate for RFC, with respect to the number of trees
in the forest and the number of features considered at each split.
In order to get a graphical overview of the predictions made by RF in a two-class
problem, it is possible to plot decision surfaces. It consists in partitioning the features
space – usually 2-dimensional for graphical convenience – into two sets of different colors,
one for each class (here blue and red). In the case of a single tree classifier, the difference
between these two regions of the plot are clear and precise because the decision process
is uninominal. For RF however it is based on the vote from all the trees in the forest,
highlighting thus uncertainty regions where both colors overlap.
==PAGE:30==
16
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3
Results and Discussion
In this section will be presented the results obtained throughout the Master’s Thesis, to-
gether with some interpretation. Starting from the cornerstone of Global Sewage project,
i.e. the hypothesis that metagenomic sequencing of sewage samples can provide good es-
timate of AMR, we will try to bring together World Bank features and AMR abundance.
First one will perform some features analysis, then classification and regression models
will be fitted and optimized for AMR count in order to make some predictions on other
countries, finally we will delve into the resistance clusters modeling. The outline of the
Master’s Thesis is presented on the hierarchical diagram presented in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Outline of the Master’s Thesis.
==PAGE:32==
18
3 Results and Discussion
3.1
Feature Analysis
In this first part, we are going to delve more into the features that will be used to fit the
predictive model. In the following analysis, one will first find a correlation study and
then some explanation of the variance.
3.1.1
Correlations
The correlation study is performed by calculating Spearman coefficient for the GS meta-
data and WB data. The results are to be seen on the heat maps showed on Figure 3.2
for GS metadata and on Figure 3.3 for WB data; the whole heat map can be found in
Figure A.1.
Figure 3.2: Global Sewage metadata Spearman correlation heat map.
Concerning GS metadata, features are very poorly correlated except for Temperature
before sampling day and Temperature sampling day which exhibit a very high coefficient
of 0.98, and can be easily explained by the relative constancy of this parameter over two
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Feature Analysis
19
Figure 3.3: World Bank features Spearman correlation heat map.
successive days. It seems that the temperature correlates with Europe as well, which is
consistent with the climate homogeneity in the winter, when sampling was done.
As for the WB data, correlations are strong and numerous between the different
features investigated; they are more difficult to apprehend as well. A few remarkable
values to notice are the very high correlations (above 0,70) between GDP per capita,
Improved Sanitation, Health Expenditure, Urban population, Physicians and Life Ex-
pectancy. These features can be used to assess development disparities between coun-
tries, and thus exhibit what characterize westernized countries. This multicollinearity
could hinder somehow the model fitting to come, however the use of Random Forests is
supposed to prevent this drawback.
One should notice as well the almost absence of correlations (all coefficient under 0.5)
for Population Density, Agricultural Land, Death Rate, Food Imports and Food Exports,
be it with any other feature. These features denote some more geographical and physical
realities for the countries at stake, and therefore cannot be considered as a proxy for
==PAGE:34==
20
3 Results and Discussion
their wealth or Human Development Index (HDI).
Some scatterplots are displayed in Figure 3.4 to show the correlation trend between
pairs of features; taking instances of correlated and non-correlated ones: Physicians,
Health Expenditure, Food Exports and Birth Rate. While looking at these plots, one
should bear in mind that Spearman coefficient accounts for non-linear dependency as
well, hence the exponential-like relation between Physicians and Health Expenditure.
Besides one can notice on the histograms on the diagonal of Figure 3.4 the non-uniform
distribution for the features, leading to blobs on the scatterplots.
Figure 3.4: Representation of the distribution of some features.
3.1.2
Principal Component Analysis
In order to overcome correlations and propose some explanations for the variance, a
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is performed on the whole set of features. The
regional features – i.e. the 7 continents to which countries belong – have not been taken
==PAGE:35==
3.1 Feature Analysis
21
into account for the PCA in a purpose of clarity for graphical representation; it brings
then at 26 the number of features for 59 countries.
The cumulative variance explained as a function of the principal components added
is displayed on Figure 3.5, the first two principal components (PC) account for almost
half of the variance (48%). The 10 most important features and their associated coeffi-
cient (in absolute value) in the linear combinations are shown in Table 3.1 for PC1 and
Table A.3 for PC2.
Figure 3.5: PCA Cumulative Variance.
PC1 – Features
Weight
Life expectancy
0.290
Cause of Death
0.288
Birth Rate
0.287
Physicians
0.284
Improved Sanitation
0.279
Temperature Sampling Day
0.248
Access to water
0.243
Temperature before Sampling Day
0.243
Urban Population
0.242
GDP per capita
0.235
Table 3.1: First Principal Component, 10 first features with their weight (absolute
value).
==PAGE:36==
22
3 Results and Discussion
For PC1 we find a lot of the previously identified correlated WB features, such as
Life Expectancy, Physicians or GDP per capita, as well as an insight on the temperature.
The coefficient being quite similar – in a range between 0.24 and 0.30 – no feature is
taking over the others, confirming the multicollinearity among WB data. When it comes
down to PC2, the features found are those identified as less correlated beforehand, such
as Death Rate, Population Density and Agricultural Land as well as some GS metadata,
e.g. Storage Temperature. One should notice however that PC1 accounts for far more
variance (38%) than PC2 (10%), and thus that the disparities in development explain
an important share of the variance.
The different countries are colored by region in the principal components space
(PC1; PC2) on Figure 3.6, we can see that the points are more spread along the hori-
zontal axis i.e. PC1, while there is more homogeneity along the vertical axis i.e. PC2,
except for an outlier point on top representing Singapore. One can notice that points of
the same color, i.e. countries from the same region, cluster approximately together, for
instance North America and Europe – westernized countries – for low values of PC1. On
the opposite, African countries bears greater values for PC1 as well as Asian countries;
Middle East representatives are more central on this plot, as they are geographically.
Figure 3.6: Countries colored by region represented in the PC space.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 AMR Classification
23
3.2
AMR Classification
In this second part we will address the main body of this project, that is to say the fitting
of the predictive model for AMR. After having explained in what consists the 2-classes
problem one will explain how the predictor was fitted and optimized. The significance
of the explanatory features will then be assessed, and finally the model will be extended
to other countries for predictive study.
3.2.1
A 2-classes Problem
The proposed work aims at explaining the AMR count defined earlier as a function of
WB parameters. On the map shown in Figure 3.7 these AMR counts are represented on
a continuous scale of blue for the 59 countries available for the study. One can clearly
see distribution disparities, e.g. high counts in Africa and South America globally, av-
erage counts in Asia and lower counts in Europe, Oceania and North America. Beware
however of the scaling factor on this kind of map, which can distort the reality because
of the size on some countries.
Figure 3.7: Chloropleth map of true AMR counts.
At first it is proposed not directly to predict AMR counts on a continuous scale but
on a discrete one, what follows is then a classification problem; a regression study is yet
available later in this report. The available data for AMR counts has to be discretized
and it is chosen to bin them into two classes, namely Low and High, those can be
considered as a scale of risk of presence of AMR. The threshold defining the cut between
these two classes is selected through a sliding cut process defined as follow:
==PAGE:38==
24
3 Results and Discussion
1. The cut spans the distribution by step of 2%.
2. For each cut, we fit Random Forests Classifiers (RFC) with the 19 WB features,
and assess the prediction performance.
3. The cut associated to the best performance is kept and will be used in the rest of
the study.
The results are shown on the graph from Figure 3.8, where one can see the AMR
count distribution in green in the background. The best performance (OOB accuracy
24.9% above NIR) is obtained for a cut at 50%, the associated AMR count being the
median 1.02. From now on and for the rest of the study, the cut will be set at 50% of the
count distribution, dividing the dataset into two theoretically equal parts: 29 countries
whose AMR counts are labeled as Low, and 30 countries labeled as High, the pivotal
value coming from the United States of America (USA).
Figure 3.8: RFC performance as a function of the position of the cut between 2 classes.
This discretization procedure can be questioned, it is thought however that dividing
AMR counts into two classes of equal importance made sense in the light of the expected
goal of the model. The outcome will indeed be that a country would be classified as
having AMR count higher or below a certain threshold, depending on WB features.
The number of classes has been set to two in order to favor results interpretation and
easier performance estimation. One could argue though that the threshold has been
==PAGE:39==
3.2 AMR Classification
25
arbitrarily set, in the sense that its position depends on available AMR counts and is
thus susceptible to vary if further data was added.
3.2.2
Model Optimization
Once the threshold for the cut has been set, one can focus more on the model optimiza-
tion, aiming at reaching the best predicting performance on unseen data by keeping
only a subset of features. In view of this, a forward feature selection method is per-
formed; consisting in an iterative process, for which at each step, the feature yielding
to the best accuracy possible is selected after having testing them all. The results of
this wrapper method are shown in Figure 3.9, the OOB accuracy is represented with
its 95% confidence interval as a function of the features sequentially added to the model.
Figure 3.9: RFC performance assessed along forward feature selection.
From this graph, it seems that the best performing model takes into account the 6
following WB features as explanatory variables: Birth Rate, Physicians, Food Exports,
Health Expenditure, Livestock Production and Food imports. The associated prediction
==PAGE:40==
26
3 Results and Discussion
accuracy estimated for unseen data is 85.4% (CI: [84.9%; 86.1%]).
To pursue the performance comparison between the model including all 19 features
and the one only including the 6 aforementioned features, ROC curves – for OOB sam-
ples – for both models are shown in Figure 3.10. We retrieve and confirm the previous
conclusion as the AUC is greater for the 6 features model (0.87) than the one for the
19 features model (0.81); besides one can note that training error in null for both models.
The features selected for the final model fitting are rather complicated to apprehend
as they refer to various realities: demography (Birth Rate), public health (Physicians
and Health Expenditure), economy and agriculture (Food Imports/Exports and Livestock
Production).
Note that you can find further details about the WB features in the
Table A.2. Again, these features reflects an overall developmental reality and AMR
count can thus be related to it.
Figure 3.10: ROC curves for the 6 selected features model and the 19 features model.
==PAGE:41==
3.2 AMR Classification
27
3.2.3
Features Significance
Along the forward selection we have assessed the features importance at each step of
the process; the results are to be seen on Figure 3.11. Given the relative difficulty to
grasp all information, features importance at the last step are presented in Table A.4.
The stacked bar plot depicting the evolution of features importance is very informative
though, as it shows that there is no clear correlation between the selection of a given
feature and its associated importance. Indeed, one can mention the relative low impor-
tance Food Exports and Livestock Production in spite of their selection in 3rd and 5th
position. Conversely, we can note the high importance of Cause of Death and Water
Source despite their late positions in the selection process.
Figure 3.11: Feature Importance assessment along the RFC forward selection process.
There is some trade-off between the position of the features in the selection process
and their associated importance in the model, it does not seem to follow a particular
pattern, still it is striking enough to underline. We can find a beginning of explanation
in the way the importance is assessed (through shuffling of a variable among OOB sam-
ples), which tends to consider each features independently from the others, whereas in
the forward selection process, features are added according to their contribution in accu-
racy to the already existing model. The first position of Birth Rate in both importance
and feature selection somehow gives credit to this reasoning.
To assess the influence of the main features on the classification we can plot decision
surfaces associated to RFC; it is however limited to two features at a time. Such decision
==PAGE:42==
28
3 Results and Discussion
surfaces are shown in Figure 3.12 with three different pairs of features selected among the
six used for the final model fitting; Low AMR counts are colored in blue and High in red.
From these plots, one cannot only draw clear conclusions, for instance blurred regions
between blue and red are not really labeled as it is the case for [Food Imports; Food
Exports] where the points are scattered. For other features the labeling seem however
obvious, witness the almost exclusively blue region for high values ofHealth Expenditure.
To complete these decision surfaces, scatterplots are available in the Figure A.2 for every
pair among the six features used for final model fitting (the dataset used is described in
the following part).
Figure 3.12: Decision Surfaces of RFC for 3 pairs of WB features.
3.2.4
Predictive Study
The final model has now been established, the binary RFC is trained with the 59 samples
available and the 6 selected features: Birth Rate, Physicians, Food exports, Health Ex-
penditure, Livestock Production and Food Imports; we obtain an OOB accuracy of 84.7%.
In a purpose of predictions comparison, we fit another model using all the features; we
==PAGE:43==
3.2 AMR Classification
29
obtain an OOB accuracy of 76.2%. The results of a more in-depth comparative study
of both models is shown in Figure 3.13, the distribution of the OOB accuracies on 100
runs is represented; the statistics computed using Student t-test exhibits a significant
difference (p −value = 3.96 × 10−18).
Figure 3.13: Performance obtained for two different RFC models on 100 runs.
These models are used for predictions on WB data obtained from the database, which
represent 165 countries, i.e. 106 more than the training set. The values for WB features
were gathered the same way as described in the methods section, and then underwent
the same normalization used for model fitting. The results obtained for the 6-features
model are represented on the map in Figure 3.14, the dynamic version can be found in
html format in supplementary material; note that both models assign 107 countries to
class High and 58 to class Low. To compare more in-depth this labeling, we run 100
predictions and count the differences in labeling: Romania, Cyprus, Slovenia, Argentina,
Chile and Japan exhibit discrepancies more than half of the time.
For a brief description of the predictive map, we see that Africa is almost exclusively
labeled as High, as well as Asia and South America to a lesser extent. European countries
are labeled as Low in their majority, the few colored in red belong to the training set
and their true label was indeed High; to compare more globally these predictions to the
true AMR counts, one can refer to Figure 3.7. Finally one should bear in mind that
the labeling high/low depends on the threshold established beforehand and splitting the
training set into two almost equal classes. The results obtained by prediction exhibit
proportions of 2
3 High for 1
3 Low, this shows some bias in the initial dataset used for
model fitting, and calls then for further data in order to make the predictor more robust
==PAGE:44==
30
3 Results and Discussion
Figure 3.14: Chloropleth world map of predicted AMR class with RFC final model.
3.3
AMR Regression
In this third part we will try to precise previous results by advancing from classification
to regression, in order to predict continuous values of AMR count for different countries.
The following paragraphs will articulate the same way as the classification part: we will
first present how the model has been optimized, then we will assess the importance of the
explanatory features, and finally we will lead a predictive study and globally compare
the results from classification and regression.
3.3.1
Model Optimization
The method at stake is called Random Forests Regressor (RFR) and is described in the
Methods section. The dataset used for model fitting is the same as for RFC, i.e. the
19 WB features for 59 countries for which AMR count have been averaged over their
representative samples. Sequential forward feature selection is performed again, and the
results are to be seen on Figure 3.15, the accuracy here is represented by the coefficient
of determination R2 as a function of the features added.
From this graph it seems that the best performing model takes into account the
three3 following WB features as explanatory variables: Improved Sanitation, Agricul-
tural Land and Water Source. The associated value of R2 is 0.39, which is almost twice
the initial value (0.22 for Improved Sanitation only), and the final value (0.24 for the
model including all features). The model including the three features aforementioned
performs strikingly better than all the others, and it is interesting to notice that these
==PAGE:45==
3.3 AMR Regression
31
Figure 3.15: RFR performance assessed along forward feature selection.
selected features are completely different from the 6 obtained for RFC. Water Source
and Improved Sanitation refer again to the development of the countries and their public
health situation; the presence of Agricultural Land may be more questionable. A tenta-
tive explanation is that this feature is rather normally distributed across the countries
of the dataset and thus very useful in predicting continuous values, more than other
features scarcely spread. Scatterplots representing the distribution of the three selected
features is available in Figure A.3 to illustrate this.
3.3.2
Features Significance
On the same pattern that what has been done before, features importance have been as-
sessed at each step of the forward selection process, the results are shown on Figure 3.16;
features importance at the last step are presented in Table A.5. We can draw the same
conclusions as for RFC, and the absence of correlations between the position of the fea-
tures in the selection process and their importance is even more striking. One can name
the example of Hospital Beds, whose importance is the greatest from far, although it is
not included in the best performing model (selected in 5th position).
==PAGE:46==
32
3 Results and Discussion
Figure 3.16: Feature Importance assessment along the RFR forward selection process.
To compare features importance at the final step of the selection for RFC and RFR,
one can have a look at Figure A.7. We can first note differences in the distribution:
there is a clear cut between the three most important features and the rest of them for
RFR, whereas it is smoother for RFC. Concerning the identity of the main features, we
find Cause of Death and Physicians in common for both in the top five, but there are
globally important discrepancies.
3.3.3
Predictive Study
The final model has now been established, the RFR is trained with the 59 samples
available and the three selected features: Improved Sanitation, Agricultural Land and
Water Source; the obtained coefficient of determination is R2 = 0.40. R2 for both 3-
features model and 19-features model have been computed for 100 runs; the results are
shown on Figure 3.17 and the Student t-test computed exhibits a significant difference
(p −value = 1.55 × 10 −75) accounting for far better performance for the 3-features
model. The differences between true AMR counts and predicted values are shown in
Figure A.4 for countries of the training set, it shows globally that high counts are under-
estimated while low counts are overestimated, leading to a narrowed-down distribution
of predicted counts.
This model has been used for predictions on the same 165 countries tested for clas-
sification, the fitted results are shown on the map in Figure 3.18; the map showing
true counts from the training set is to be found in Figure 3.7. Comparing both maps
does not enable to draw important conclusions, one can see that the fitted AMR counts
follow the same trend as the true ones. Contrary to the classification predictions, here
the regressed values show more in-region differences, for instance in Africa where all
countries seem to have quite high AMR counts exhibiting yet important nuances (e.g.
==PAGE:47==
3.3 AMR Regression
33
Figure 3.17: Performance obtained for two different RFR models on 100 runs.
Egypt and Madagascar). Europe still exhibits low predicted counts consistently while
more disparities are observed through South America where Brazil has far higher AMR
count than Uruguay for example.
Figure 3.18: Chloropleth world map of predicted AMR counts with RFR final model.
One should still add a caveat to these predictions by reminding the estimate R2 on
unseen data for the final model, allowing only an explanation of 40% of the variance.
From the map in Figure 3.18 and the apparent domination of “middle ranged blue” (not
too dark, neither too light), it could be inferred that the model predicts in-between
values. A bar plot showing in different colors true counts from the training set and
predicted counts for the rest of the countries is available in Figure A.5, it does not
confirm the precedent impression, exhibiting a distribution rather uniformly spread.
==PAGE:48==
34
3 Results and Discussion
3.4
Resistance Clusters
In this fourth part, we look at AMR from a different angle by considering resistance clus-
ters obtained with CD-HIT, instead of AMR count which was the sum of all ResFinder
counts. By doing so we will refine our approach to the cluster level and still try to fit
models with WB features as explanatory variables and assess their importance.
3.4.1
Clusters Overview
In order to narrow down our AMR study, clustering has been performed using CD-HIT
with 90% similarity, resulting in a reduction in the number of output variable to con-
sider for modeling. Looking back at Table 2.1, this number drops from 1643 ResFinder
genes found after mapping (non-filtered counts) to 176 clusters (filtered counts). It has
been chosen to base the study of resistance clusters on filtered counts, in order to reduce
the false-positive assigning of certain reads to wrong clusters, hence a larger degree of
confidence in the counts. Moreover fitting binary RFC on the 13 most abundant clusters
using filtered counts exhibited on average better accuracy than using non-filtered ones
Figure A.6.
Cluster
Sum
Mean
Variance
msr(E)_4_EU294228
181.61
2.36
16.70
tet(Q)_3_U73497
71.82
0.93
9.07
msr(D)_2_AF274302
68.91
0.90
3.37
tet(M)_1_X92947
46.34
0.60
5.04
tet(O)_1_M18896
38.67
0.50
0.82
Table 3.2: The top five most abundant clusters and their variance.
The 5 most abundant clusters in the available samples are shown in Table 3.2 with
their mean and variance. The msr(E)_4_EU294228 is by far the most common across
the samples with a mean more than twice greater than tet(Q)_3_U73497 in second po-
sition. The former contains actually only one gene classified in macrolide, lincosamide
and streptogramin B resistance; the latter contain 4 genes providing resistance against
tetracycline. As a rule of thumb, it can be considered that the 3 first letters in the
ResFinder gene identification code refer to the antimicrobials for which the given gene
provide resistance; e.g. aac for aminoglycoside, tet for tetracycline, mef for macrolide
and bla for beta-lactam.
In order to grasp the geographical repartition of these resistance clusters, the world
map in Figure 3.19 is provided. For each continent (or Region in this project, including
Middle East), the 3 most abundant clusters are represented proportionally to their mean
over the corresponding samples. We see again that msr(E)_4_EU294228 is the most
==PAGE:49==
3.4 Resistance Clusters
35
Figure 3.19: Repartition of main resistance clusters per region.
abundant resistance cluster around the world, however in second and third position
clusters vary from a region to another. In terms of global quantity, Africa and South
America seem to have greater counts than the other regions, especially Oceania, North
America and Europe.
3.4.2
Prediction Performance
After this brief presentation of the resistance clusters and their geographical reparti-
tion, we are now going to perform a predictive study on the same basis as before for
the AMR classification problem. For each cluster a binary RFC is fitted with a cut
at 50% of the counts distribution, the performance is assessed through OOB accuracy
and features importance are evaluated as well. The models are trained using the same
dataset as before, with counts coming from 59 different countries and 19 WB features
as explanatory variables. To get a glimpse over the results, we present in Table 3.3
the performance (accuracy and distance to no-information rate (NIR)) for the five most
abundant clusters, as well as the five best and worse performing models. One can see
that high abundance does not necessarily go along with good predicting performance,
as shown by msr(E)_4_EU294228; globally these results exhibit lots of disparities and
no clear trend.
The mean performances indicated in Table 3.3 is taken over the resistance clusters
having a count variance greater than 0.001, representing 80 of them. Such a choice has
==PAGE:50==
36
3 Results and Discussion
Cluster
Accuracy
Distance to NIR
Variance
msr(E)_4_EU294228
0.480
-0.028
16.664
tet(Q)_3_U73497
0.655
0.147
9.070
tet(M)_1_X92947
0.705
0.196
5.042
msr(D)_2_AF274302
0.572
0.064
3.365
tet(32)_1_EU722333
0.753
0.244
2.019
tet(O)_1_M18896
0.778
0.269
0.824
aadA1_1_X02340
0.774
0.266
0.253
strB_1_M96392
0.767
0.258
0.154
floR_1_AF071555
0.764
0.256
0.050
tet(32)_1_EU722333
0.753
0.244
2.019
erm(G)_1_M15332
0.628
-0.067
0.026
blaCARB-5_1_AF135373
0.523
-0.071
0.017
cat_2_M35190
0.662
-0.084
0.001
blaOXA-5_1_X58272
0.556
-0.105
0.002
blaOXA-209_1_JF268688
0.406
-0.153
0.002
Mean
0.711
0.060
Table 3.3: Accuracy, distance to NIR and variance for some resistance clusters RFC
predictors: 5 most abundant, 5 best performing and 5 worst performing.
been made – and will be kept for the next paragraph – so that averages are not flattened
too much. Indeed, it often happens that only few countries have non-null counts for
resistance clusters having very low variance, the discretization into two classes with a
cut at 50% becomes problematic then, yielding to a huge majority of countries classified
as Low (which is more of an absence actually) and only very few countries classified as
High. The model fitting for such data can thus be pathological, and the performance of
the RFC is poor compared to NIR as it would be nearly 100%.
3.4.3
Features Significance
Throughout the fitting of all the predictive models, the importance of every explanatory
features has been assessed. In order to avoid the pitfalls of scarce count distributions
described in the precedent paragraph, these features importance are evaluated for each
of the 80 resistance clusters having highest variance.
For each feature then the importance is averaged over all 80 predictive models (later
called “Raw mean”); a “weighted mean” is computed as well for each feature where each
contribution to the importance is multiplied by the distance to NIR obtained for the
associated RFC. Basically it means that well performing models will be more taken into
consideration in the calculation of the weighted feature importance, and the poorly per-
forming ones will be penalized. The results are presented as grouped horizontal bar plot
on Figure 3.20, they can be easily compared with the previous importances obtained for
==PAGE:51==
3.4 Resistance Clusters
37
RFC and RFR for AMR count on Figure A.7.
Figure 3.20: WB Features Importance averaged over 80 resistance clusters RFC mod-
els, using 2 different calculation methods.
Interestingly, as the raw importances did not exhibit a clear hierarchy, the weighted
ones show more separation between features and imply a clear ranking. It seems indeed
that the weighting increases the already high importances and decreases the low ones,
resulting in a gap widening amongst them. At the end of the day, Physicians and Cause
of Death appear once again among the most important features whereas Food Export-
s/Imports, Agricultural Land and Death Rate follow the opposite pattern. Globally these
findings account for the same conclusions drawn in the paragraph about AMR classifi-
cation.
==PAGE:52==
38
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 4
Perspective
Various predictive models have then been fitted along this project, most of them showing
strong performance estimate, these results and their interpretation will be questioned
in this section. This reconsideration will be carried out at different levels, starting from
the dataset used, commenting then on the machine learning techniques used, and lastly
proposing future directions and potential improvements for the models.
4.1
Dataset
The first question to address is whether the available data should be trusted or not. Tak-
ing the study at the very beginning one should interrogate the standardization of the
sampling methods. Indeed according to GS metadata which consists of a survey filled by
the participants to the project, sewage water samples have been taken at different steps
of the treatment process. Together with various temperature of storage and shipping,
these differences could imply discrepancies in the final results.
Moreover the usual pitfalls of metagenomics data should be taken into account as
well, whether this is DNA extraction, amplification and sequencing depth, or trimming,
distribution distortion and bias introduced by threshold setting [29]. Here all the samples
have been analyzed using the same techniques making them theoretically comparable
with each other, we are just unsure of how precise the results they convey are compared
to the reality. The ResFinder database completeness can be questioned too, as all re-
sistance mechanisms have not been characterized yet.
World Bank features have been used as explanatory variables for model fitting and it
is sometimes unclear on how these data have been gathered. Most of them are statistical
estimates given by the government and there is no way to check the credibility of such
parameters. Besides some of the values have been completed “by hand” in order to have
a full dataset and not lose precious information.
==PAGE:54==
40
4 Perspective
4.2
Machine Learning Techniques
Aside from the data, the methods used to extract information and draw conclusions from
them can be called into question. First of all the robustness of a model depend primarily
on the data available for training, regardless the machine learning algorithm used for
fitting the predictor. Here we only disposed of samples for 59 countries, explaining the
initial choice of binary classification to reduce the scope. With the currently ongoing
data sampling around the world, the models will doubtlessly better and become more
robust.
Questioning the availability of data, on can wonder why GS metadata has not been
used for model fitting. The answers are many, the main being the predictive aim of such
models, when they are used to give AMR estimation for countries not present in the
initial dataset. A good choice for this metadata would be to divide it into two different
categories: making a first set of features standard methods (e.g. storage temperature,
sampling site) and the others explanatory variables (e.g. temperature on sampling day,
GPS coordinates).
Doing so it would still be possible to make predictions for other
countries while adding some information to the model.
All along the project RF was used to build predictive models, to be sure its ease of
implementation and flexibility advocated for its use. Some other techniques have been
used in this project especially for regression, the results have not been as conclusive yet.
One of the property of RF is to deal nicely with correlated features, enabling us to fit
trustful models even though WB features showed high multicollinearity.
The assessment of features significance need be addressed as well, the method used
throughout this report is the permutation accuracy importance on OOB samples. It
has been shown though, that this measure is somehow biased towards variables having
wide distribution [30]; the main reasons identified being the CART algorithm used for
growing trees and the bootstrap sampling procedure.
4.3
Future Direction
Provided more data is gathered under the GS project, several suggestions can be made to
go further in AMR prediction. For instance one could imagine training models at a finer
geographic scale, translating the extensivity of some countries such as Russia or the USA.
Fitting regional models could be of great interest as well, reflecting local abundance of
AMR and improving thus the surveillance. Once the project is even more advanced, one
could even think to add some dynamics to the predictions, such as food trade between
countries and migration statistics, in order to predict the spread of AMR across borders.
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Future Direction
41
Another axis of progression is to have a look at the chemical components found in
sewage water, and the drug usage for every country participating to the study. Some
data was already available, depicting antimicrobials residues found in the samples, yet
these concentrations were not to be trusted. The global concept would then consists
into taking into consideration one type of antibiotics – say tetracycline – and to build a
specific model for the resistance against it. It would imply splitting ResFinder database
and taking only the share corresponding to tetracycline resistance regardless sequence
similarity, changing hence the clustering paradigm. The predicted variable would then
be some “tetracycline resistance count” and the explanatory variables could be WB
features, tetracycline residues and tetracycline usage in several countries.
If such a
method turns out to be conclusive, it could enable policymakers to adapt public health
orientations, and GS would have succeeded in its scientific endeavor.
==PAGE:56==
42
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
From sewage water samples to antimicrobial resistance monitoring, this was the am-
bitious purpose of the project this Master Thesis falls within. Metagenomics analysis
made available an estimation of the abundance of certain resistance genes in the col-
lected samples, the actual goal being to build predictive models able to generalize on
unseen data. The explanatory variables were selected in the World Bank database, and
amongst them driving factors for AMR were identified through their importance.
The chosen features exhibited high correlations using Spearman definition, showing
some redundancy in the dataset; the performances of the different predictors were satis-
fying though. Random Forests Classifier had an estimate OOB accuracy of 0.84 in the
AMR two-class problem for the final model trained with six features; the OOB coefficient
of determination for regression was 0.39 for the final model trained with three features.
The resistance cluster investigation showed nuanced performances, with an accuracy ap-
proaching 0.80 for some predictive models (e.g. for tet(O)_1_M18896), whereas others
had accuracy below no-information rate (such as blaOXA209_1_JF268688).
Together all these models were used to assess feature significance, showing however
discrepancies according to which predictions were made (AMR classification, AMR re-
gression or clusters classification). The high importance given to Number of physicians
per 1000 inhabitants and to Cause of death, by communicable diseases and maternal,
prenatal and nutrition conditions was one point of agreement between them all.
At the end of the day one can but have mixed review about the results. On the
one hand the predictor performances are highly satisfying, but on the other hand the
low amount of data may make fear for lack of robustness. There is a high risk as well
that the models predict more the level of development of countries than AMR, given the
nature of the features used for training.
==PAGE:58==
44
==PAGE:59==
APPENDIX A
Supplementary Material
Feature name
Decision
Country
conserved
Region (or continent)
one hot encoded
City
discarded
Sewage Type
discarded
GPS coordinates
discarded
Population using Sewage
conserved
Date of Sampling
discarded
Sewage Flow rank
discarded
Samples Viscosity
discarded
Temperature Day before Sampling
conserved
Temperature on Sampling Day
conserved
Sample Temperature
discarded
Precipitation
conserved
Storage Time
conserved
Storage Temperature
conserved
Shipping Temperature
conserved
Table A.1: Description of Global Sewage metadata.
==PAGE:60==
46
A Supplementary Material
Short Version
Description
Agricultural Land
Agricultural land (% of land area)
Birth Rate
Birth rate, crude (per 1,000 people)
Death Rate
Death rate, crude (per 1,000 people)
Food Exports
Food exports (% of merchandise exports)
Food Imports
Food imports (% of merchandise imports)
GDP Growth
GDP growth (annual %)
GDP per Capita
GDP per capita (current US$)
Water Source
Improved water source, urban (% of urban population with access)
Migrant Stock
International migrant stock (% of population)
International Tourism
International tourism, number of arrivals
Life Expectancy
Life expectancy at birth, total (years)
Livestock Production
Livestock production index (2004-2006 = 100)
Population Density
Population density (people per sq. km of land area)
Cause of Death
Cause of death, by communicable diseases and maternal,
prenatal and nutrition conditions (% of total)
Urban Population
Urban population (% of total)
Health Expenditure
Health expenditure per capita (current US$)
Hospital Beds
Hospital beds (per 1,000 people)
Improved Sanitation
Improved sanitation facilities,
urban (% of urban population with access)
Physicians
Physicians (per 1,000 people)
Data not Available
ARI treatment (% of children under 5 taken to a health provider)
Data not Available
Community health workers (per 1,000 people)
Data not Available
Diarrhea treatment (% of children under 5 receiving oral
rehydration and continued feeding)
Data not Available
Diarrhea treatment (% of children under 5
who received ORS packet)
Data not Available
Poverty gap at national poverty lines (%)
Table A.2: Presentation of the 24 World Bank features.
==PAGE:61==
A Supplementary Material
47
PC2 – Features
Weight
Death Rate
0.486
Population Density
0.410
Temperature Sampling Day
0.284
Agricultural Land
0.280
Temperature before Sampling Day
0.267
Food Imports
0.253
Storage Temperature
0.222
Hospital Beds
0.201
Health Expenditure
0.175
Life Expectancy
0.165
Table A.3: Second Principal Component, 10 first features with their weight (absolute
value).
Features
Importance
Birth Rate
0.120
Physicians
0.118
Cause of Death
0.081
Water Source
0.078
Life Expectancy
0.055
Health Expenditure
0.049
GDP per capita
0.049
Improved Sanitation
0.049
International Tourism
0.048
Urban Population
0.048
Table A.4: Features Importance for RFC fitted with 19 features.
Features
Importance
Hospital Beds
0.214
Improved Sanitation
0.170
Cause of Death
0.133
Physicians
0.054
Water Source
0.052
Life Expectancy
0.050
Birth Rate
0.040
Food Imports
0.038
Food Exports
0.037
Health Expenditure
0.022
Table A.5: Features Importance for RFR fitted with 19 features.
==PAGE:62==
48
A Supplementary Material
Figure A.1: All features Spearman correlation heat map.
==PAGE:63==
A Supplementary Material
49
Figure A.2: Distribution and repartition of the predicted classes (High in red, Low in
blue) with respect to the 6 features used for final model fitting.
==PAGE:64==
50
A Supplementary Material
Figure A.3: Distribution of the 3 features used for RFR final model fitting.
Figure A.4: Comparison of true and predicted AMR counts used for training the final
RFR model.
==PAGE:65==
A Supplementary Material
51
Figure A.5: Distribution of AMR counts predicted by the final RFR model.
Figure A.6: Comparison of RFC performance for resistance clusters counts obtained
with or without MGmapper filter.
==PAGE:66==
52
A Supplementary Material
Figure A.7: Comparison of features importance obtained for RFR and RFC.
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1]
C Lee Ventola. “The antibiotic resistance crisis: part 1: causes and threats.” In: P
T 40.4 (Apr. 2015), pp. 277–83. issn: 1052-1372.
[2]
“WHO | Antimicrobial resistance”. In: WHO (2016). url: http://www.who.int/
mediacentre/factsheets/fs194/en/.
[3]
A. F. Read and R. J. Woods. “Antibiotic resistance management”. In: Evol. Med.
Public Heal. 2014.1 (Nov. 2014), pp. 147–147. issn: 2050-6201. doi: 10.1093/
emph/eou024.
[4]
Christian J H von Wintersdorff et al. “Dissemination of Antimicrobial Resistance
in Microbial Ecosystems through Horizontal Gene Transfer.” In: Front. Microbiol.
7 (2016), p. 173. issn: 1664-302X. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00173.
[5]
Jose M Munita and Cesar A Arias. “Mechanisms of Antibiotic Resistance.” In:
Microbiol. Spectr. 4.2 (Apr. 2016). issn: 2165-0497. doi: 10.1128/microbiolspec.
VMBF-0016-2015.
[6]
T. Naas, L. Poirel, and P. Nordmann. “Minor extended-spectrum β-lactamases”.
In: Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 14 (Jan. 2008), pp. 42–52. issn: 1198743X. doi: 10.
1111/j.1469-0691.2007.01861.x.
[7]
Jim O ’ Neill. “Antimicrobial Resistance: Tackling a crisis for the health and wealth
of nations The Review on Antimicrobial Resistance Chaired”. In: (2014).
[8]
William Wade. “Unculturable bacteria–the uncharacterized organisms that cause
oral infections.” In: J. R. Soc. Med. 95.2 (Feb. 2002), pp. 81–3. issn: 0141-0768.
[9]
Anastasis Oulas et al. “Metagenomics: tools and insights for analyzing next-generation
sequencing data derived from biodiversity studies.” In: Bioinform. Biol. Insights 9
(2015), pp. 75–88. issn: 1177-9322. doi: 10.4137/BBI.S12462.
[10]
Ruth R Miller et al. “Metagenomics for pathogen detection in public health.” In:
Genome Med. 5.9 (2013), p. 81. issn: 1756-994X. doi: 10.1186/gm485.
[11]
Carel Jaspers and Project Development. “Brief project description”. In: July (2012),
pp. 5–16.
[12]
Thomas Nordahl Petersen et al. “Meta-genomic analysis of toilet waste from long
distance flights; a step towards global surveillance of infectious diseases and an-
timicrobial resistance.” In: Sci. Rep. 5.April (2015), p. 11444. issn: 2045-2322. doi:
10.1038/srep11444.
==PAGE:68==
54
Bibliography
[13]
Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, and J. H. (Jerome H.) Friedman. The elements of
statistical learning : data mining, inference, and prediction, p. 745. isbn: 9780387848587.
[14]
Leo. Breiman. Classification and regression trees. Chapman & Hall, 1993, p. 358.
isbn: 0412048418.
[15]
Random forests - classification description. url: https://www.stat.berkeley.
edu/%7B~%7Dbreiman/RandomForests/cc%7B%5C_%7Dhome.htm (visited on
07/30/2017).
[16]
Decision Trees. url: http://www.statsoft.com/Textbook/Decision-Trees
(visited on 07/30/2017).
[17]
Random Forest | STATISTICA. url: http://www.statsoft.com/Textbook/
Random-Forest (visited on 07/30/2017).
[18]
Berith E Knudsen et al. “Impact of Sample Type and DNA Isolation Procedure
on Genomic Inference of Microbiome Composition”. In: bioRxiv (2016).
[19]
Thomas Nordahl Petersen et al. “MGmapper: Reference based mapping and taxon-
omy annotation of metagenomics sequence reads”. In: PLoS One 12.5 (May 2017).
Ed. by Lingling An, e0176469. issn: 1932-6203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0176469. url: http://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0176469.
[20]
Anthony M Bolger, Marc Lohse, and Bjoern Usadel. “Trimmomatic: a flexible trim-
mer for Illumina sequence data.” In: Bioinformatics 30.15 (Aug. 2014), pp. 2114–
20. issn: 1367-4811. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btu170.
[21]
Basil Britto Xavier et al. “Consolidating and Exploring Antibiotic Resistance Gene
Data Resources.” In: J. Clin. Microbiol. 54.4 (Apr. 2016), pp. 851–9. issn: 1098-
660X. doi: 10.1128/JCM.02717-15.
[22]
W. Li and A. Godzik. “Cd-hit: a fast program for clustering and comparing large
sets of protein or nucleotide sequences”. In: Bioinformatics 22.13 (July 2006),
pp. 1658–1659. issn: 1367-4803. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btl158.
[23]
Limin Fu et al. “CD-HIT: accelerated for clustering the next-generation sequencing
data”. In: Bioinformatics 28.23 (Dec. 2012), pp. 3150–3152. issn: 1367-4803. doi:
10.1093/bioinformatics/bts565.
[24]
Indicators | Data. url: http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/ (visited on
07/31/2017).
[25]
The World Factbook — Central Intelligence Agency. url: https://www.cia.gov/
library/publications/the-world-factbook/ (visited on 07/31/2017).
[26]
sklearn.preprocessing.scale — scikit-learn 0.18.2 documentation. url: http://
scikit- learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.preprocessing.
scale.html (visited on 07/30/2017).
[27]
Coursera | Online Courses From Top Universities. Join for Free. url: https:
//www.coursera.org/ (visited on 07/31/2017).
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
55
[28]
“Python for Informatics Exploring Information Charles Severance”. In: (). url:
http://www.pythonlearn.com/book%7B%5C_%7D007.pdf.
[29]
Tom O. Delmont, Pascal Simonet, and Timothy M. Vogel. “Mastering method-
ological pitfalls for surviving the metagenomic jungle”. In: BioEssays 35.8 (Aug.
2013), pp. 744–754. issn: 02659247. doi: 10.1002/bies.201200155.
[30]
Carolin Strobl et al. “Bias in random forest variable importance measures: Illus-
trations, sources and a solution”. In: BMC Bioinformatics 8.1 (2007), p. 25. issn:
14712105. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-8-25.
==PAGE:70==
