==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Coarse LES and VLES simulation approaches
for urban flows
Ioannis Sifnaios (s151009)
Supervisors:
Jianhua Fan, Jens Chr. Bennetsen
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej
Building 118
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 1700
byg@byg.dtu.dk
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Civil Engineering (DTU
Byg) at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for ac-
quiring a M.Sc. degree in Sustainable Energy. The thesis was conducted during the
spring semester of 2017 and corresponds to 30 ECTS. It was carried out under the su-
pervision of Associate Professor Jianhua Fan from DTU Byg and Jens Chr. Bennetsen
from Rambøll.
Kongens Lyngby, July 14, 2017
Ioannis Sifnaios (s151009)
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Regarding this thesis I would like to thank Associate Professor Jianhua Fan for his
guidance through this thesis and also for helping me finding this project in coopera-
tion with Rambøll. I would also like to thank Jens Chr. Bennetsen for giving me so
many pieces of advice and information on my thesis. Apart from proposing the topic
of this thesis, his deep knowledge on CFD and his immediate response to all of my
queries helped me learn a lot about CFD and solved a lot of problems that came up
during the procedure.
As I now finish two more years of studying, I would like to thank all the people
who stood by me during this time. First of all my family for their support and for
believing in me. Also my friends, especially Christos and Panagiotis, for being there
when I needed help. Last but not least, I would like to thank Stella who is the reason
why I managed to finish this thesis. If it hadn’t been her taking care of all the everyday
things, I wouldn’t be able to work as much as this thesis needed.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
In recent years, it is a common practice to use wind-tunnel experiments and/or Com-
putational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) codes in order to simulate phenomena taking place
in the atmospheric boundary layer (for example pollutant dispersion), since they are
generally capable of capturing the complexity of the under-study problem. Exist-
ing papers have studied gas dispersion around isolated buildings using RANS and
LES models but also in densely built urban areas. The scope of this thesis was to
make an assessment of the modelling requirements in order to capture wind flow
in an urban environment using ANSYS CFX as a computational tool. Initially, the
turbulence conditions at the inlet of the domain were examined. Having decided on
the conditions, gas dispersion was examined for gas that was emitted inside the en-
velope of the building (basic case) but also outside of it (stack case) using RANS and
transient models. It was found that for the basic case, only the LES model managed
to represent the concentrations correctly, but took 6 days to complete the simulation.
Regarding the stack case, RNG k-ε model was the one that came closer to the experi-
mental results among the tested RANS models. Following to that, the k-ε model was
tested on densely-built urban geometries for different width of streets. It was found
that, for densely-built urban geometries, the selected properties and settings of the
source and fluid, depend on the changes in distances between the buildings. Finally,
a comparison between ANSYS Fluent and CFX was done, since Fluent results were
available for the studied cases.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Abstract
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Limitations
3
3
Theoretical Part
5
3.1
Wind Profile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.1.1
Inside the Atmospheric Boundary Layer (ABL) . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.1.2
Around a cubic obstacle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Turbulence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Raynolds Averaged Navier Stokes (RANS) equations models . . . . . .
7
3.3.1
k-ε turbulence model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3.2
Re-Normalisation Group (RNG) k-ε turbulence model
. . . . .
8
3.3.3
Shear Stress Transport (SST) turbulence model . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
Transient equations models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4.1
Large Eddy Simulation (LES) turbulence model . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4.2
Detached Eddy Simulation (DES) turbulence model . . . . . . .
10
3.4.3
Scale Adaptive Simulation (SAS) turbulence model
. . . . . . .
10
3.5
Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy (CFL) condition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.6
Wall treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.7
Advection term
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Setup of the Small-scale Models
15
4.1
Basic Case
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.1.1
Geometry and Mesh creation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.1.2
Boundary Conditions and settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
4.2
Stack Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2.1
Geometry and Mesh creation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2.2
Boundary Conditions and settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5
Results of small-scale models
19
5.1
Turbulence conditions of the inlet of the domain . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2
Basic Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2.1
RANS results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2.2
Transient Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.3
Stack Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6
Setup of the Multi-block Models
35
6.1
Case A
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.1.1
Geometry and Mesh creation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.1.2
Boundary conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.2
Case B
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.3
Case C
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7
Results of Multi-block models
41
7.1
Case A
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.2
Case B
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7.3
Case C
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
8
Conclusions
49
8.1
Overall Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
8.2
Proposals for future research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
Bibliography
51
A Code used for creating the wind’s logarithmic profile
53
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In recent years, it is a common practice to use wind-tunnel experiments and/or Com-
putational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) codes in order to simulate phenomena taking place
in the atmospheric boundary layer (for example pollutant dispersion), since they are
generally capable of capturing the complexity of the under-study problem. For this
reason, a lot of studies have tried to identify the accuracy and reliability of CFD sim-
ulations, by using them in order to validate wind-tunnel results.
Existing papers have studied gas dispersion around isolated buildings using RANS
(Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes) and LES (Large Eddy Dissipation) models [GP11]
but also in densely built urban areas [BBvHT16]. It has to be stated though that the
previously mentioned studies have used ANSYS Fluent in order to perform these sim-
ulations.
The scope of this thesis is to make an assessment of the modelling requirements
in order to capture wind flow in an urban environment using ANSYS CFX as a com-
putational tool.
Initially, gas dispersion cases were modelled using RANS, LES, DES and SAS tur-
bulence models around isolated buildings. The obtained results were validated us-
ing existing wind-tunnel experiments. In order to implement these modelling ap-
proaches effectively, a study of the required mesh density (for capturing the urban
flow) was performed and the decided density of the mesh depended on the mod-
elling approach and the available computing power. The first studied case was an
isolated cube which emitted gas from a source placed at its top surface [WWL83].
The second was an isolated rectangular building which emitted gas from a stack lo-
cated downstream of the building [AHH80].
As a final step, gas dispersion was studied using RANS models in a densely built
urban area. Three different building arrays were modelled under a fixed wind angle.
The results were validated from a wind-tunnel experiment [Gar09].
==PAGE:12==
2
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Limitations
At this point it has to be stated that there were some limitations regarding the used
computational resources in this thesis.
All the performed simulations were done using the ”Researcher Licence” of AN-
SYS CFX which is available to students in some databars of DTU. The simulations
were executed using the ”High Performance Computing Server” remotely, which be-
longs to the DTU-Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science.
However, the department poses some limitations to the use of the server by stu-
dents; namely each student can use up to 20 cores and 16 Gb of RAM in each run for
a running time of maximum 24 hours. Apart from that, each student is given up to
30 Gb of storage.
Taking into consideration the above limitations, it was only possible to run tran-
sient simulations for the small-scale models used which used a mesh up to approxi-
mately 3 millions elements. For the more complicated models (referred in the thesis
as multi-block models), in which a mesh of approximately 60 million elements was
used, only steady state simulations could be run with the available resources at DTU.
The only time dependent simulation in the mutli-block cases was performed for
Case A and was done in the Risk and Safety Department of Rambøll. However, by the
day of the hand-in of this thesis, only partial results were available. For this reason,
it was decided to present the full results of the simulation the day of the presentation
and not include the partial results in the text of the thesis.
For the reasons explained above, contrary to the title of the thesis, most of the
performed simulations were done using steady state simulations.
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 3
Theoretical Part
In this part of the thesis the basic theoretical background a reader would need in
order to understand the results, is presented. Also, information is given on the used
turbulence models, Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy condition, used approach on wall treat-
ment and information on the way of thinking when choosing the advection term of
the equations. It has to be stated that most of the presented information refers to how
the above stated topics are related to ANSYS CFX, which was the used software in
this thesis.
3.1
Wind Profile
3.1.1
Inside the Atmospheric Boundary Layer (ABL)
As Atmospheric Boundary Layer (ABL) is defined the approximately 1 km high
layer above the earth’s surface [Rak14]. ABL is characterized by the strong presence
of turbulence created by the surface of the earth.
The earth’s surface affects also the wind profile inside the ABL. The friction of
the ground reduces the velocity of the wind. In general, it can be stated that the
wind velocity follows a nearly logarithmic profile inside the surface layer. Thus, the
relation between wind velocity V and height from the surface of the ground z can be
written as following:
V = u∗
k ln
( z
zo
)
(3.1)
Where k = 0.4 is the von Karman constant, u∗is the friction velocity and zo is the
aerodynamic roughness length of the ground. In order to calculate friction velocity,
Equation 3.2 is used:
u∗=
√τs
ρ
(3.2)
Where τs is the shear stress at the surface and ρ is the density of the fluid near the
surface.
==PAGE:16==
6
3 Theoretical Part
Figure 3.1: Wind profile inside the atmospheric boundary layer [Ube17]
In Figure 3.1, the wind profile inside the ABL is presented for surfaces having
different roughness. It can be observed that for more rough surfaces (meaning having
a larger aerodynamic roughness length), wind velocity reaches a steady value at a
larger height.
The equations used in order to create the wind profile were provided by Rambøll’s
Risk and Safety Department. Using the code presented in Appendix A, a logarithmic
profile was created for wind velocity inside the domain. This profile was applied in
the inlet of all the simulated models.
3.1.2
Around a cubic obstacle
The presence of a cubic obstacle increases the surface friction and adverse pres-
sure gradients that lead in separating the flow from the surface of the obstacle [AHH80].
As it can be seen in Figure 3.2, the separation region reattaches to the ground down-
stream of the building creating a cavity region which leads to recirculation of the flow.
The main characteristics of the recirculating flow are the low velocities and the high
turbulence. The dimensions of the created cavity region are dependent on the build-
ing length perpendicular to the flow and on the turbulence levels in the approaching
flow.
The region downstream of the reattachment point is characterized by increased
dispersion which gradually diminishes, returning to the initial upwind profile.
==PAGE:17==
3.2 Turbulence
7
Figure 3.2: Diagram of the envelope and cavity regions in the wake of a cube [AHH80]
3.2
Turbulence
When modeling turbulence, it is impossible to perform a numerical simulation
for a complex model due to very large memory demands. For this reason, k-ε and
k-ω two-equation turbulence models can be used, which offer a compromise between
numerical effort and computational accuracy, using the gradient diffusion hypothe-
sis to relate Reynolds stresses, mean velocity and turbulent viscosity [ANS13]. The
turbulence models used in this thesis were: the k-ε, RNG k-ε and Shear Stress Trans-
port models for steady state simulations and the Large Eddy Dissipation, Detached
Eddy Dissipation and Scale Adaptive Simulation models for transient simulations.
3.3
Raynolds Averaged Navier Stokes (RANS)
equations models
For steady state simulations, the RANS approach was used. Using this approach,
transport equations are modified having averaged and fluctuating components and
only the averaged quantities are computed.
3.3.1
k-ε turbulence model
In the k-ε model, k is the turbulence kinetic energy, representing the mean kinetic
energy per unit mass associated with eddies in a turbulent flow [VM95]. This param-
eter shows the variance of fluctuations in velocity. Letter ε, represents the turbulence
==PAGE:18==
8
3 Theoretical Part
eddy dissipation, indicating the rate at which the velocity fluctuations dissipate. The
governing equations for this model are:
µt = ρ Cµ
k2
ε
(3.3)
∂(ρk)
∂t
+ ∂(ρkUi)
∂xi
=
∂
∂xi
[(
µ + µt
σk
) ∂k
∂xi
]
+ 2µt Eij · Eij −ρ ε
(3.4)
∂(ρε)
∂t
+ ∂(ρεUi)
∂xi
=
∂
∂xi
[(
µ + µt
σε
) ∂ε
∂xi
]
+ C1ε
ε
k 2µt Eij · Eij −C2ε ρ ε2
k
(3.5)
Equation 3.3 is used for defining the eddy viscosity. The meaning of equations 3.4
and 3.5 is that the rate of change of k (or ε) plus the transport of k (or ε) by convection,
are equal to the transport of k (or ε) by diffusion plus the rate of production of k (or
ε) minus the rate of destruction of k (or ε) [VM95].
In the above equations five constants are included; namely Cµ, σk, σε, C1ε, C2ε.
Their standard values according to literature [VM95], which were also used in the
simulations, are Cµ = 0.09, σk = 1.00, σε = 1.30, C1ε = 1.44, C2ε = 1.92.
3.3.2
Re-Normalisation Group (RNG) k-ε turbulence
model
The difference between the standard k-ε with the RNG k-ε model is that in the
latter, the Navier-Stokes equations are re-normalised in order to take into account
smaller scales of motion [Yak92]. The eddy viscosity in the standard k-ε model is
defined by a single turbulence length scale whereas the RNG tries to capture all the
length scales that contribute to the turbulent diffusion, trough changes in the pro-
duction term [Wil06].
The governing equations are the same as in the standard k-ε model, but the coef-
ficients of the equations are different. In the RNG model, Cµ = 0.0845, σk = 0.7194,
σε = 0.7194, C1ε = 1.42, C2ε = 1.68 [Wil06].
3.3.3
Shear Stress Transport (SST) turbulence model
The SST model is a combination of the k-ε and k-ω model. It uses the k-ω to predict
the flow in the inner boundary layer and the k-ε in the rest of the domain [NPV07].
The governing equations for this model are:
νT =
α1 k
max(α1 ω, S F2)
(3.6)
∂(ρk)
∂t
+ ∂(ρkUi)
∂xi
=
∂
∂xi
[
(ν + νT σk) ∂k
∂xi
]
+ Pk −β∗ρ k ω
(3.7)
==PAGE:19==
3.4 Transient equations models
9
∂(ρω)
∂t
+ ∂(ρωUi)
∂xi
=
∂
∂xi
[
(ν+νT σω) ∂ω
∂xi
]
+α ρ S2+2(1−F1) ρ σω2
1
ω
∂k
∂xi
∂ω
∂xi
−β ρ ω2
(3.8)
Where Equation 3.6 represents the kinematic eddy viscosity, Equation 3.7 the tur-
bulence kinetic energy and Equation 3.8 the specific dissipation rate. In the above
equations, F1 is equal to zero away from the boundary layer (giving the k-ε model)
and equal to one inside it (giving the k-ω model) [FRML03].
3.4
Transient equations models
3.4.1
Large Eddy Simulation (LES) turbulence model
The idea behind the Large Eddy Simulation is that the large scales of motion,
due to their size and strength, provide a more effective transport of the conserved
properties of the flow than the small scales [LMP05]. For this reason, to perform this
modeling, a velocity field containing only large scale components is needed. In order
to achieve this, a filter is applied to the velocity field. After the filtering, the velocity
field results in a form like the following:
ui = ¯ui + u′
i
(3.9)
Where ¯ui is the resolvable part of the flow (large scales) and u′
i is the subgrid-
scale part of the flow (small scales). The filtered momentum equations are presented
in Equation 3.10, which resemble the RANS equations:
∂(ρui)
∂t
+ ∂(ρuiuj)
∂xj
= −∂p
∂xi
+
∂
∂xj
(2 ρν ¯
Sij + ρTij)
(3.10)
Where ν is the subgrid scale turbulent viscosity and ¯
Sij is the ”rate-of-strain ten-
sor” for the resolved scale, equal to:
¯
Sij = 1
2
( ∂ui
∂xj
+ ∂uj
∂xi
)
(3.11)
Tij is the ”subgrid-scale Reynolds stress (SGS Reynolds stress) tensor” responsi-
ble for momentum exchanges between the subgrid and filtered scales [LMP05], given
by the expression:
Tij = ui uj −uiuj
(3.12)
Due to the fact that the quantity uiuj cannot be easily computed, a modeling ap-
proximation is used to perform the calculation. The models used in order to approx-
imate the SGS Reynolds stress are called ”subgrid-scale (SGS) models”. In ANSYS
CFX there are three SGS models available: the Smagorinsky model, the Dynamic
Smagorinsky-Lilly model and the WALE model.
==PAGE:20==
10
3 Theoretical Part
3.4.2
Detached Eddy Simulation (DES) turbulence
model
Due to the fact that the use of LES in boundary layer flows having high Reynolds
numbers is very computational demanding, hybrid models were created, attempting
to combine the best aspects of RANS and LES methodologies in one model. Such an
example is the Detached Eddy Simulation (DES) model [ANS13]. The idea behind the
DES model is to use the RANS formulation to treat near wall regions (inside attached
and mildly separated boundary layers) and use LES for the rest of the domain. LES
formulation is also used in massively separated regions [ANS13]. One drawback of
the DES model is the fact that the regions in which each formulation will be used
have to be defined by the model automatically.
In order for ANSYS CFX to overcome this problem, its DES model is based on the
SST model which is quite accurate in predicting the turbulent boundary layers up to
separation. In order for the model to decide when it has to switch from the steady
to the unsteady flow, a blending function is used. This function is based on many
parameters such as grid spacing, ratio of vorticity and strain rate [ANS13].
3.4.3
Scale Adaptive Simulation (SAS) turbulence model
The Scale Adaptive Simulation (SAS) is an Unsteady-RANS (URANS) model, which
enables the analysis of the turbulence spectrum in unstable flow conditions [ANS13].
It introduces the von Karman (LvK)length scale in the turbulence calculations. This
length scale is expressed as:
LvK = κ S
|U”|
(3.13)
Where S is a scalar invariant of the strain rate tensor (Sij), U” is the second deriva-
tive of velocity and κ is the von Karman constant.
Using the above mentioned length scale, the model adopts an LES behaviour in
the unsteady regions of the domain while has a RANS behavior in the stable-flow
regions. By default, the RANS model that ANSYS CFX uses is the SST model.
It can be noticed that there is a similarity between the SAS and DES model. Their
basic difference is that when these models have to switch from the treatment of the
steady to the unsteady flow, SAS uses the von Karman length while DES uses a blend-
ing function.
3.5
Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy (CFL) condition
In all transient simulations, the Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy condition was used. The
CFL principle states that the numerical domain of dependence must contain the
mathematical (physical) domain of dependence [CT05]. This is a necessary but not
==PAGE:21==
3.6 Wall treatment
11
sufficient condition in order to achieve stability (convergence) in the solution. The
one dimension CFL condition is expressed as:
CFL ≡|u| ∆t
∆x
≤1
(3.14)
Where u is the velocity of the fluid, ∆t is the used time-step and ∆x is the mesh
size. That means that in order for stability to be maintained, the choice of time-step
should depend on mesh size. A simple explanation of the above condition could
be that, within one time step, the fluid particles should move from one cell to the
adjacent one. Because if CFL > 1 then the fluid particles would move through two
or more cells in one time step which can affect convergence negatively.
3.6
Wall treatment
In the simulated models the boundary of the domain representing the ground
was treated as a rough wall. Since the surface roughness leads to increased turbu-
lence production near the wall, special treatment had to be applied. In order for
the turbulence models to resolve adequately the corresponding equations and pro-
duce an accurate near-wall profile, a sufficiently fine mesh is required. Regarding the
height of the mesh near the wall, two parameters are taken into consideration; the
sand grain roughness of the surface and the dimensionless wall distance Yplus (y+).
The variable y+ is based on the distance from the wall to the first node and the wall
shear stress [ANS13]. It can be calculated as:
y+ = y ρ u∗
µ
(3.15)
Where y is the distance from the wall, ρ is the density, u∗is the friction velocity
and µ is the dynamic viscosity.
The estimations of y+ in this thesis were performed using an on-line tool provided
by the forum CFD Online [Onl17]. This tool used the free-stream velocity, density of
the fluid, dynamic viscosity, boundary layer length and desired y+ value to calculate
the Reynolds number of the flow as well as the estimated wall distance.
The appropriate value of the ”desired y+ value” of each model, was selected
avoiding the ”buffer layer” (y+ = 5∼30), since the behaviour of velocity cannot be
easily predicted in this region, as it can be seen in Figure 3.3.
In the used version of ASNSYS CFX, it is possible for the user to select the desired
y+ value based just on the level of detail it would be necessary to have in the near-wall
regions. However, in previous versions, the user had to take into consideration the
fact that the ”estimated wall distance” had to be larger than the sand grain roughness
of the wall.
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Theoretical Part
Figure 3.3: Velocity profiles in turbulent wall flow
3.7
Advection term
Due to the fact that the analytical solution of the Navier-Stokes equations can be
only performed for simple flows under ideal conditions, a numerical approach is
used in CFD software. This approach replaces the equations with algebraic approx-
imations which can be solved numerically [ANS13]. Many of these approximations
are based on series expansion approximations of continuous functions; for example
on the Taylor series.
In ANSYS CFX, solution fields and other properties are stored at the mesh nodes
[ANS13]. Afterwards, finite-element shape functions are used in order to approxi-
mate the solution field or gradients at the integration points. The functions used are
in the following form:
ϕ =
Nnode
∑
i=1
Ni ϕi
(3.16)
Where Ni is the shape function for node i (which depends on the shape of the
element used; namely hexahedral, tetrahedral, wedge or pyramid element) and ϕi is
the value of parameter ϕ at node i. The summation is performed over all nodes of an
element.
The order-accuracy of the approximation can be controlled by the user of ANSYS.
Selecting a low-order approximation scheme gives a robust solution but diffusive dis-
==PAGE:23==
3.7 Advection term
13
cretization errors which tend to smear steep gradients will occur. Increasing the ac-
curacy (meaning using high-order approximations) implies that errors are reduced
quicker with mesh or time step size refinement [ANS13]. However, that increases
also the computational load and makes the solution less robust (meaning less nu-
merically stable) than selecting a low-order approximation.
In ANSYS CFX there are three options regarding the Order Accuracy of the so-
lution; namely First Order Upwind Differencing Scheme, High Resolution Scheme and
Specified Blend Factor (which can be tuned by a β factor leading in a result somewhere
in between the other two schemes).
In general, in the simulations performed, High Resolution was used for the inserted
variable (gas), continuity and momentum and First Order Upwind for turbulence nu-
merics (kinetic energy and eddy dissipation). That way, it was possible to obtain
accurate results without using too much computational resources. However, the fi-
nal choice in each case was also affected by the results deriving from each scheme.
==PAGE:24==
14
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 4
Setup of the Small-scale Models
Since it was not clear which turbulence model had to be used in CFX in order to
model the air flow around buildings, some tests were performed using some of the
available turbulence models of this platform. In order to save time and computational
resources, it was decided to perform these tests in a small scale model, so as the
results to be obtained relatively fast. For this reason, the testing was based on the
results from an existing paper [GP11], where ANSYS Fluent and experimental data
were used for simulating the dispersion of a pollutant around an isolated building.
4.1
Basic Case
The first small scale model tested; named as ”basic case”, consisted of a cube repre-
senting an isolated building. At the top of the cube, gas was emitted from a circular
surface.
4.1.1
Geometry and Mesh creation
The domain was created based on Best Practices guideline [FJ07], including a cu-
bic building having a height of H=0.05 m. The domain’s length equaled to 26H (5H
upstream of the building and 20H downstream), in order for the boundaries to be
outside of the zone of influence of the building. The width of the domain was 11H
and the height 6H. The diameter of the circular surface from where the gas emission
occurred was D=0.005 m, located at the center of the cube’s top surface.
The geometry was meshed using tet as well as hex mesh. The created number of
elements using tet-mesh was 2,223,375 while using hex-mesh was 1,684,204. In order
to create a good quality tet-mesh, inflation was applied to the surface of the ground
and the building. The inflation setting used was First Layer Thickness using a first
layer height of 2.7 × 10−3 m. These settings were chosen after wall treatment for the
rough surfaces of the model for a desired y+ value of 40. An overview of the created
meshes can be seen in the figures below.
==PAGE:26==
16
4 Setup of the Small-scale Models
(a) Geometry
(b) Tet-mesh
(c) Hex-mesh
Figure 4.1: Basic case geometry and meshes
4.1.2
Boundary Conditions and settings
The settings applied to the boundaries of the domain were taken from experimen-
tal data [WWL83]. A summary of the used values is presented in the table below.
Table 4.1: Domain boundary settings- basic case
Characteristic Parameters
Ground aerodynamic roughness
7.5 × 10−5 m
Reference height
0.05 m
Reference velocity
3.3 m/s
Reynolds number
1.1 × 104
Gas velocity
0.627 m/s
The ground was modeled as a rough wall, the building as a smooth wall, the
side boundaries as symmetry, the top boundary as a free slip wall and the outlet
as opening having zero static pressure. The Schmidt number used was equal to 0.5
and the kinematic diffusivity of the gas was taken equal to 1.1 × 10−5 m2/s, as the
simulated gas was supposed to be helium [E.L09].
In the RANS simulations of the basic case, due to low complexity of the model, in
was decided to use High Resolution scheme for all parameters in order to have an as
==PAGE:27==
4.2 Stack Case
17
much as possible accurate solution.
For Transient simulations performed on this case, High Resolution scheme was se-
lected for the Additional Variable (gas), Momentum and Continuity and First Order
Backward Euler for Transient Scheme.
4.2
Stack Case
The second small scale model tested; named as ”stack case”, consisted of a rectan-
gular building having a stack in its downstream, emitting gas in the building’s wake.
4.2.1
Geometry and Mesh creation
The domain was created based on Best Practices guideline [FJ07], including a rect-
angular building having dimensions H*2H*H in the x, y and z direction respectively.
In this case H was taken equal to 0.25 m. The stack’s height was 1.5H and its diameter
was 0.042H. The domain’s length equaled to 26H (5H upstream of the building and
20H downstream), its width was 14H and its height 7H.
The domain was decided to be meshed using only tet mesh. The created number
of elements using tet-mesh was 6,687,241. In order to create a good quality tet-mesh,
inflation was applied to the surface of the ground and the building. The inflation
setting used was First Layer Thickness using a first layer height of 1.1 × 10−2 m. These
settings were chosen after wall treatment for the rough surfaces using a desired y+
value of 100. An overview of the created mesh can be seen in the figures below.
(a) Geometry
(b) Tet-mesh
Figure 4.2: Stack case geometry and mesh
In this model, due to the fact that the emission of the gas took place away from the
building and outside of the created envelope of the building, it was decided to use
Mesh Adaption using a Node Factor equal to 2, refining automatically the mesh based
on the gas concentration and the pressure gradient.
==PAGE:28==
18
4 Setup of the Small-scale Models
4.2.2
Boundary Conditions and settings
The settings applied to the boundaries of the domain were taken from experimen-
tal data [AHH80]. A summary of the used values is presented in Table 4.2.
The ground was modeled as a rough wall, the building as a smooth wall, the
side boundaries as symmetry, the top boundary as a free slip wall and the outlet
as opening having zero static pressure. The Schmidt number used was equal to 0.5
and the kinematic diffusivity of the gas was taken equal to 1.1 × 10−5 m2/s, as the
simulated gas was supposed to be helium [E.L09].
Table 4.2: Domain boundary settings- stack case
Characteristic Parameters
Ground aerodynamic roughness
6.5 × 10−4 m
Reference height
0.375 m
Reference velocity
2.34 m/s
Reynolds number
6 × 104
Gas velocity
3.51 m/s
Gas turbulence intensity
10 %
In this case, it was decided to use High Resolution scheme for momentum and conti-
nuity, but Upwind scheme for turbulence kinetic energy, turbulence eddy dissipation
and gas concentration. This decision was done because under these settings the so-
lution was easier to converge and also the results of the model came closer to the
experiment.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 5
Results of small-scale models
The basic and stack case models were simulated using various turbulence models. The
obtained results were compared to an existing paper, where experimental data from
wind tunnel tests as well as CFD results using ANSYS Fluent were used [GP11]. For
this reason, the presented results were created in the same format as in this paper.
All the gas concentrations were expressed in non-dimensional form, named K. The
plotted concentration coefficient derived from:
K = c
Co
(5.1)
Co =
Qe
H2 Uref
(5.2)
Where c is the instantaneous gas concentration in kg/m3, Co is the reference gas
concentration in kg/m3, Qe is the exhaust rate of the pollutant in kg/s, H is the build-
ing height in m and Uref is the wind speed at reference height in m/s.
Initially, results for the basic case are presented having different turbulence con-
ditions at the inlet of the domain. The selected conditions were later applied on the
inlet in order to compare the various RANS models and different meshes to each
other.
5.1
Turbulence conditions of the inlet of the
domain
A very important parameter to be decided before the start of the simulations was
the turbulence conditions at the inlet of the domain.
The default selection of ANSYS CFX for turbulence is the ”Medium intensity (5%)”.
In CFX, turbulence intensity is defined as:
I =
u′
uavg
==PAGE:30==
20
5 Results of small-scale models
Where u’ is the root-mean-square of the velocity fluctuations and uavg is the mean
flow velocity. This term is kept constant inside the domain and is used from CFX to
determine the turbulence kinetic energy:
k = 3
2(uavg I)2
As well as to calculate the turbulence eddy dissipation:
ε = k3/2
l
Where l is the turbulence length scale.
It can be seen that this way of estimating turbulence is a rough approximation
which might prove very useful in cases where there is no knowledge of the turbulence
conditions of the domain.
As an alternative way of defining turbulence, CFX gives the opportunity to the
user to insert directly the equations for k and ε. Under these settings, the equations
used were taken from Rambøll’s Risk and Safety Department and are presented in
Appendix A. In order to compare the results, cases were run and the kinetic energy
and eddy dissipation were compared in the same part of the domain. The results are
presented in the figures below.
It can be noticed in figures 5.1 and 5.2, that the k and ε’s results come much closer
to realistic conditions in the Atmospheric Boundary Layer than the Medium Intensity
ones. Also, in Figures 5.3 and 5.4, it can be seen that the turbulence models have very
big differences between them depending on the choice of the turbulence conditions
at the inlet of the domain. However, the results using the k and ε setting at the inlet
of the domain came closer to the experiment but also to the available results from
ANSYS Fluent so it was decided to proceed with those.
==PAGE:31==
5.1 Turbulence conditions of the inlet of the domain
21
Figure 5.1: Turbulence Kinetic Energy for the two different turbulence conditions at
the inlet
Figure 5.2: Turbulence Eddy Dissipation for the two different turbulence conditions
at the inlet
==PAGE:32==
22
5 Results of small-scale models
(a) k-ε (Medium intensity)
(b) RNG (Medium intensity)
(c) SST (Medium intensity)
(d) k-ε (k and ε)
(e) RNG (k and ε)
(f) SST (k and ε)
Figure 5.3: Basic case contours of K on the top of the building for different turbulence
conditions in the domain’s inlet
(a) k-ε (Medium intensity)
(b) RNG (Medium intensity)
(c) SST (Medium intensity)
(d) k-ε (k and ε)
(e) RNG (k and ε)
(f) SST (k and ε)
Figure 5.4: Basic case contours of K in the wake of the building for different turbu-
lence conditions in the domain’s inlet
==PAGE:33==
5.2 Basic Model
23
5.2
Basic Model
5.2.1
RANS results
Having decided on the turbulence settings applied on the inlet, concentration
contours of K were created on the top of the building (horizontal plane) as well as in
the wake of the building (vertical plane). Also, an iso-surface of K=1 was plotted.
The used turbulence models were applied to 4 different meshing scenarios; namely
a tet-meshed case (2.2 million cells), a hex-meshed case (1.68 million cells), a refined
tet-mesh case (10.9 million cells) and a refined hex-mesh case (3.89 million cells).
(a) Experiment
(b) tet-mesh
(c) hex-mesh
(d) refined tet-mesh
(e) refined hex-mesh
(f) Fluent
Figure 5.5: Basic case k-ε contours of K on the top of the building
As it can be seen in Figure 5.5a, in the experiment, due to the low exhaust rate
of the gas on the top of the building, part of it was transported upwind creating a
back-flow.
All scenarios of the k-ε model failed to reproduce the back-flow of the gas; in all
cases the gas is just blown away. It can be noticed that the k-ε model of CFX gave very
similar results to the one from Fluent. The refinement of the mesh did not seem to
affect the results. The computational time needed for these simulations is presented
in the table below.
==PAGE:34==
24
5 Results of small-scale models
Table 5.1: Computational time- basic case k-ε
Computational time of different scenarios
Tet-mesh (2.2 million cells)
4 min
Hex-mesh (1.68 million cells)
5 min
Tet-mesh (10.9 million cells)
9 min
Hex-mesh (3.89 million cells)
13 min
It could be stated that the refinement of the mesh in this turbulence model is con-
sidered unnecessary since it did not improve the results. However, since the model
was simple and this particular turbulence model was easy to converge, the total com-
putational time remained low.
(a) Experiment
(b) tet-mesh
(c) hex-mesh
(d) refined tet-mesh
(e) refined hex-mesh
(f) Fluent
Figure 5.6: Basic case RNG k-ε contours of K on the top of the building
All scenarios of the RNG k-ε model clearly reproduced the upstream transport of
the gas. It can be noticed that for the highest gas concentration (red-colour contour),
the simulated result was quite accurate. Also, CFX and Fluent had similar contour
shape for the lowest concentration (light-blue contour), especially the refined ones.
On the contrary, Fluent seemed to overestimate the shape of the high-concentration
contours while CFX was closer to experimental data. Nonetheless, all the results
==PAGE:35==
5.2 Basic Model
25
could be still considered not to represent adequately the experimental data. The com-
putational time needed for these simulations is presented in the table below.
Table 5.2: Computational time- basic case RNG k-ε
Computational time of different scenarios
Tet-mesh (2.2 million cells)
6 min
Hex-mesh (1.68 million cells)
7 min
Tet-mesh (10.9 million cells)
20 min
Hex-mesh (3.89 million cells)
16 min
It can be seen that the refinement of the mesh improved slightly the results, giving
them a more ”triangular” shape but still the results do not justify the increase in
computational time.
(a) Experiment
(b) tet-mesh
(c) hex-mesh
(d) refined tet-mesh
(e) refined hex-mesh
Figure 5.7: Basic case SST contours of K on the top of the building
In the above figures it can be noticed that the back-flow of the gas was also cap-
tured by all scenarios of the Shear Stress Transport models. This turbulence model
was not applied in Fluent so the obtained results were only compared to the exper-
imental data. In these scenarios, the hex-mesh represented accurately the highest-
concentration contour (K=100) while it failed to reproduce the rest contours. The
==PAGE:36==
26
5 Results of small-scale models
case that came closer to the experimental data was the tet-mesh before the refine-
ment. The paradox is that, after refining the tet-mesh, the results were not improved
at all; on the contrary they were more different than the experiment. On the other
hand, refining the hex-mesh had almost no effect on the results. Overall, it could be
said that the tet-mesh (before refinement) of the SST case came closer to the exper-
iment that any other of the RANS models, regarding the contours at the top of the
building.
The computational time needed for these simulations is presented in the table
below.
Table 5.3: Computational time- basic case SST
Computational time of different scenarios
Tet-mesh (2.2 million cells)
8 min
Hex-mesh (1.68 million cells)
6 min
Tet-mesh (10.9 million cells)
21 min
Hex-mesh (3.89 million cells)
17 min
Contours of K, for the previously mentioned turbulence models and meshes, were
also plotted in the wake of the building in order to examine the shape and diffusivity
of the created plume. All the below figures were created appropriately in order to
have the same axes as the figures presenting the experimental data. The short black
line in the middle of the vertical axis represents the height of the building.
(a) Experiment
(b) tet-mesh
(c) hex-mesh
(d) refined tet-mesh
(e) refined hex-mesh
(f) Fluent
Figure 5.8: Basic case k-ε contours of K in the wake of the building
It can be seen in the above figures that, in general, the k-ε model seemed to over-
estimate the gas concentration in all the meshing scenarios compared to the experi-
ment. The contours of the tet and hex-mesh were very similar regarding the high gas
concentrations. Regarding the low concentrations (K=1) it was noticed that the hex-
==PAGE:37==
5.2 Basic Model
27
mesh was more diffusive in the y-direction. Comparing CFX with Fluent, it seemed
that Fluent overestimated the shape of the contours while CFX came closer to the
experiment.
(a) Experiment
(b) tet-mesh
(c) hex-mesh
(d) refined tet-mesh
(e) refined hex-mesh
(f) Fluent
Figure 5.9: Basic case RNG k-ε contours of K in the wake of the building
Similar behaviour to the k-ε model presented the RNG k-ε model. Also in this case
the contours extended more than the experiment in the horizontal axis. Comparing
this model to the one from Fluent, it can be noticed that the tet-case was very similar
to Fluent. However, it is obvious that both CFX and Fluent overestimated the gas
concentration.
(a) Experiment
(b) tet-mesh
(c) hex-mesh
(d) refined tet-mesh
(e) refined hex-mesh
Figure 5.10: Basic case SST contours of K in the wake of the building
Regarding the SST model, the contours in the wake of the building had similar be-
haviour to the previously tested models. However, the non-refined tet-meshed case
of the SST model was the one that came closer to the experimental data compared
==PAGE:38==
28
5 Results of small-scale models
to the previously tested models. This model was not tested in Fluent so it is only
compared to the experiment.
Following to the contours, iso-surfaces of K=1 were also created, in order to have
a 3D inspection of the created plume by the gas. Due to the fact that there were no
experimental data showing this kind of figure, the obtained results are compared to
the Fluent LES model.
The conclusions that were drawn by the results, were the same as the ones for the
contours in the wake of the building. It can be seen in figures 5.11, 5.12 and 5.13 that
all the iso-surfaces are longer (more diffuse) than the LES case and the only case that
comes closer is the SST tet-meshed case (Figure 5.13b).
(a) Fluent LES
(b) tet-mesh
(c) hex-mesh
(d) refined tet-mesh
(e) refined hex-mesh
(f) Fluent
Figure 5.11: Basic case k-ε iso-surfaces for K=1
(a) Fluent LES
(b) tet-mesh
(c) hex-mesh
(d) refined tet-mesh
(e) refined hex-mesh
(f) Fluent
Figure 5.12: Basic case RNG k-ε iso-surfaces for K=1
==PAGE:39==
5.2 Basic Model
29
(a) Fluent LES
(b) tet-mesh
(c) hex-mesh
(d) refined tet-mesh
(e) refined hex-mesh
Figure 5.13: Basic case SST iso-surfaces for K=1
Having presented the results of the basic case for different turbulence models and
for different meshes, it could be stated that ANSYS CFX is probably not a suitable tool
in order to compare the results of the hex-mesh and tet-mesh. The reason behind this
is that CFX uses a combination of the Finite Element Method and the Finite Volume
Method making the solution more accurate and less dependent on the mesh created
by the user, as the volume of control is created by the program and is assembled
around the nodes. That means that each element created by the user is divided in
sub-volumes by CFX and the equations are solved on these new volumes.
Also, CFX performs a 2-gradient calculation on each face of the element. As a
consequence, the computational time of the tet-mesh (which has 4 or 5 faces) is lower
than the one of the hex-mesh (which has 6 faces).
For these reasons it was decided to perform the rest of the calculations using a
tet-mesh.
5.2.2
Transient Results
In order to perform Transient simulations for the basic case, a refinement was per-
formed in the mesh, choosing a y+ value smaller than 5, which led to a decrease in
the height of the inflation layer around the cube. That way, a more detailed mesh
was created in the near-wall region. This change led to an increase of the mesh ele-
ments number, having a total of 3.18 million cells. The total time of the simulation
was selected at 10s having a time-step of 0.0025s. The selection of the time-step was
done taking into consideration the CFL condition. The average running time of the
simulations was 145 hours for the LES model (approximately 6 days), 92 hours for
the SAS model (approximately 4 days) and 84 hours for the DES (approximately 3.5
days).
The turbulence models used were the LES-Smagorinsky, the DES and the SAS-
SST. The obtained results are presented in the figures below.
==PAGE:40==
30
5 Results of small-scale models
(a) Experiment
(b) Fluent LES
(c) LES
(d) SAS
(e) DES
Figure 5.14: LES, SAS and DES models on the top of the building
In Figure 5.14 it can be observed that the DES and SAS models gave much less
accurate results than the LES simulation. Despite the fact that both of them captured
the behaviour of the gas upstream, they failed to reproduce the gas concentration
downstream of the gas-inlet. The only model that managed to create the triangular
shape of the contours on the top of the building was the LES. Comparing Fluent with
CFX, the contours are quite similar although CFX seemed to overestimate the width
of the contours for K=50 and K=10 more than Fluent.
Regarding the contours in the wake of the building, it can be seen in Figure 5.15
that none of the tested models came close to the experimental data. All transient
models overestimated the shape of the high-concentration contours (K=3, 2.5, 2, 1)
but on the other hand, underestimated the shape of the low-concentration contours.
Generally, it could be stated that the results are much more diffusive in the x and z-
direction than expected. The contour that came closer to the experiment was the K=1
for the SAS model.
Regarding the iso-surfaces for K=1, due to the fact that no experimental data were
available, they were compared to the LES results of Fluent. As it was expected from
the above figures, the plume that came closer to Fluent LES was the one created by
the SAS model. The 3D representation confirmed the fact that the results were more
diffusive in the x-direction than Fluent LES, for all models.
==PAGE:41==
5.2 Basic Model
31
(a) Experiment
(b) Fluent LES
(c) LES
(d) SAS
(e) DES
Figure 5.15: LES, SAS and DES models in the wake of the building
(a) Fluent LES
(b) LES
(c) SAS
(d) DES
Figure 5.16: LES, SAS and DES models’ contours of K=1
Overall, it could be stated that the LES was the only turbulence model that man-
aged to represent the gas dispersion around the cube adequately. However, the fact
that LES took around 6 days to calculate the results while the SST model (which was
the one giving the best results from the RANS models) needed less than half an hour,
makes the necessity of using of transient modelling questionable for this case.
==PAGE:42==
32
5 Results of small-scale models
5.3
Stack Model
The behaviour of the stack model was examined by creating 3 lines inside the
domain. The gas concentration on them, was compared to experimental data. Apart
from that, iso-surfaces of K=1 were created as well as concentration contours of K on
a vertical plane in the middle of the domain.
(a) Horizontal line at x = 1.25m and z = 0.025m
(b) Horizontal line at x = 1.25m and z = 0.375m
(c) Vertical line at x = 1.25m and y = 0m
Figure 5.17: Comparison of k-ε, RNG k-ε and SST to experimental data
==PAGE:43==
5.3 Stack Model
33
As it can be seen in Figure 5.17a, near the ground (at height z=0.025 m), SST model
underestimated the gas concentration. The RNG k-ε, represented the shape of the
curve more satisfactory but failed to capture the highest concentrations. Clearly, the
most accurate model representing the gas concentration at the location of the stack
(point Y=0) was found to be the k-ε model.
In Figure 5.17b, at the height of the stack (z=0.375 m), it can be noticed that all 3
models overestimated the gas concentration away from the stack (points Y=-0.2 and
Y=0.2). However, regarding the highest concentration at the position of the stack
(Y=0), the RNG k-ε model was the one that came closer to the experimental data.
The other two models underestimated the gas concentration.
Finally, as it is seen in Figure 5.17c, on a vertical line parallel to the stack, none
of the three models managed to capture the pick concentration. While the height at
which the peak concentration was located was estimated correctly by all 3 models, the
calculated concentration was approximately 30% lower than the experimental value.
However, again the one that came closer from the 3 was the RNG k-ε model.
In Figure 5.18, the iso-surfaces of K=1 were plotted in order to have a 3D visualiza-
tion of the created plume. Due to the fact that no experimental data were available at
this format, the calculated results were compared to the Fluent LES results. As it was
expected, the RNG k-ε model was the one that came closer to the LES case although
it was less diffusive in the x-direction.
(a) Fluent LES
(b) Fluent k-ε
(c) Fluent RNG k-ε
(d) CFX k-ε
(e) CFX RNG k-ε
(f) CFX SST
Figure 5.18: Stack case iso-surfaces for K=1
==PAGE:44==
34
5 Results of small-scale models
(a) Fluent k-ε
(b) Fluent RNG k-ε
(c) CFX k-ε
(d) CFX RNG k-ε
(e) CFX SST
Figure 5.19: Stack case contours of K
Comparing CFX and Fluent, the results of the k-ε model seemed to be very similar
between the two, whereas the RNG k-ε in CFX was much less diffusive compared to
Fluent. A similar conclusion can be drawn when comparing the contours in the wake
of the building. The computational time of the models used is presented in Table 5.4.
Overall, it can be said that the RNG k-ε model was the one that came closer to the
experimental results compared to the other two.
Table 5.4: Computational time- stack case
Computational time of turbulence models
k-ε
39 min
RNG k-ε
1 hour 23 min
SST
1 hour 30 min
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 6
Setup of the Multi-block Models
Having performed the simulations in small scale, the testing of turbulence models
continued in more complex geometries. In this case, instead of simulating a single
building, blocks of buildings were simulated.
The analysis was based on the Phd thesis of Garbero [Gar09] which included
a wind tunnel experiment on the geometry and on an existing paper by Blocken
[BBvHT16] where ANSYS Fluent was used as a computational tool.
6.1
Case A
6.1.1
Geometry and Mesh creation
Regarding geometry, it was decided to create a domain as similar as possible to the
wind tunnel in which the experiment took place. For this reason, 5 rows of buildings
were created parallel to the domain and 15 rows rotated by 2.5o in order to represent
a wind angle of 2.5o. Each row consisted of 12 buildings. The dimensions of the
buildings were W=L= 0.25m having a height of H= 0.05m and the width of the streets
was taken equal to 0.05 m. The domain was created based on Best Practices guideline
[FJ07], having a length of 7.6 m, width of 4.25 m and height of 1.6 m. The first row
of buildings had a distance of 10H from the inlet and the last row of buildings had a
distance of 15H from the end of the domain. A gas source was placed in the middle of
a street intersection having 5 rotated building rows and columns upstream (so having
10 rows upstream in total). The dimensions of the gas source were 0.01×0.01×0.002
m and had emission rate of 0.01 kg/m3s, turbulence kinetic energy of 0.16 W/m3 and
eddy dissipation 0.5 W/(m3s). The source was placed at a height of 0.025 m.
The geometry was meshed using tet-mesh. In order to improve the effectiveness
of the mesh, a refinement was done around and downstream of the source. Also a
prismatic layer was created around the buildings and on the ground surface, apply-
ing 5 layers of inflation with a desired y+ of 4. The extend and size of the refine-
ment around the source was done in order to have approximately 30 cells across the
streets of interest, as it was found that this number was sufficient in order to capture
the concentration adequately. The mesh derived from these settings consisted of ap-
==PAGE:46==
36
6 Setup of the Multi-block Models
proximately 54 million elements. The created geometry and mesh are presented in
the figures below. In Figure 6.1a the black arrow indicates the inlet of the domain
and in Figure 6.1b, the red cross indicates the position of the source.
(a) Geometry
(b) Tet-mesh
Figure 6.1: Case A geometry and mesh
At this point it has to be stated that the created geometry differs from the one
used in Blocken’s paper [BBvHT16]. In his paper, instead of rotating the geometry,
he applied different wind angles on the inlet of the domain. This method gave good
results using ANSYS Fluent but when applied using ANSYS CFX, it failed to repro-
duce the experiment. More comments on this are presented in the results.
6.1.2
Boundary conditions
The settings applied to the boundaries of the domain were taken from experimen-
tal data [BBvHT16]. A summary of the used values is presented in the table below.
Table 6.1: Domain boundary settings- Case A
Characteristic Parameters
Ground aerodynamic roughness
0.02 m
Reference height
0.8 m
Reference velocity
5 m/s
Reynolds number
9.8 × 104
The ground was modeled as a rough wall having a sand grain roughness of 0.001m.
The buildings’ walls were modeled as smooth walls but the buildings’ roofs as rough
walls, having a sand grain roughness of 0.001m (this was done in order to simulate
obstacles located at the roofs of the buildings like chimneys etc). The sides and the
top of the domain were modelled as smooth walls and the outlet as opening having
zero static pressure.
A multi-component approach was followed regarding the gas, using a combina-
tion of air and ethane, taking also into consideration buoyancy and gravity. This
==PAGE:47==
6.1 Case A
37
choice was done due to the fact that ethane was also used in the experiment. A pas-
sive gas approach was tested but it was found that the multi-component gave results
closer to the experimental. Ethane has a density of 1.356 kg/m3 and a kinematic dif-
fusivity of 1.453 × 10−5 m2/s [E.L09]. After trials, the Schmidt number was decided
to be taken equal to 0.7.
It was decided to proceed with the available experimental values regarding the
wind speed and turbulence kinetic energy profiles at the inlet of the domain. In order
to represent the profiles as accurate as possible, sixth order polynomial equations
were used. The used profiles are presented in the figures below.
(a) Wind Speed profile
(b) Turbulence Kinetic Energy profile
Figure 6.2: Wind speed and turbulence kinetic energy profiles that were applied to
the inlet of the domain
==PAGE:48==
38
6 Setup of the Multi-block Models
6.2
Case B
As in Case A, it was decided to create a domain as similar as possible to the wind
tunnel in which the experiment took place. For this reason, 5 rows of buildings were
created parallel to the domain and 14 rows rotated by 2.5o in order to represent a
wind angle of 2.5o. Each row consisted of 10 buildings. Same dimensions were used
for the buildings but in this case the width of the streets which were parallel to the
inlet (y-direction) was taken equal to 0.1 m. The domain was created based on Best
Practices guideline [FJ07], having a length of 7.9 m, width of 3.67 m and height of 1.6
m. The first row of buildings had a distance of 10H from the inlet and the last row of
buildings had a distance of 15H from the end of the domain. A gas source was placed
in the middle of a street intersection having 5 rotated building rows and columns
upstream (so having 10 rows upstream in total). The same geometry, position and
properties were used for the gas source as in the previous case.
Also, the exact same procedure was followed in the mesh creation as in Case A,
resulting in a mesh of 61.7 million elements. The created domain is presented in the
figure below. Regarding the boundary conditions, they were taken identical to Case
A.
Figure 6.3: Case B geometry
6.3
Case C
For the last case, the same way of thinking was followed as in the previous two,
but in this case, the width of the streets vertical to the inlet (x-direction) was taken
equal to 0.1 m. As in Case B, 14 rows were created, having 10 buildings in each row.
Apart from the rotated by 2.5o geometry, 5 rows parallel to the domain were also
created. The domain was created based on Best Practices guideline [FJ07], having a
length of 7.05 m, width of 4.09 m and height of 1.6 m. The first row of buildings had
a distance of 10H from the inlet and the last row of buildings had a distance of 15H
from the end of the domain. The same geometry, position and properties were used
for the gas source as in the previous cases.
==PAGE:49==
6.3 Case C
39
Also, the exact same procedure was followed in the mesh creation as in Case A,
resulting in a mesh of 63.2 million elements. The created domain is presented in the
figure below. Regarding the boundary conditions, they were taken identical to Case
A.
Figure 6.4: Case C geometry
==PAGE:50==
40
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 7
Results of Multi-block models
The obtained results were compared to an existing paper, which contained experi-
mental data from wind tunnel tests [Gar09]. For this reason, the presented results
were created in the same format as in this paper. All the gas concentrations were
expressed in non-dimensional form, named K. The plotted concentration coefficient
derived from:
K = C UH L H
Q
× 10−6
(7.1)
Where C is the mean concentration in ppm, UH is the mean wind speed at height
H in m/s, L is the length of the buildings in m, H is the height of buildings in m and
Q is the emission rate of the pollutant in m3/s.
As stated before, in the multi-block cases, it was not possible to use the geometry
Blocken used when using ANSYS Fluent and apply it to CFX. The main problem when
using that geometry was that the obtained velocity field did not came in an agreement
with the one suggested by the wind-tunnel experiment [VG10], as it is presented in
the figure below.
(a) Case A
(b) Case B
(c) Case C
Figure 7.1: Mean flow streamlines and mean velocity field as calculated by the wind-
tunnel experiment [VG10]
==PAGE:52==
42
7 Results of Multi-block models
The different velocity field led to a difference in the expected concentrations. For
this reason, it was decided to create the domains as described in Chapter 6.
After testing various RANS models, it was decided to proceed with the simula-
tions using the k-ε model as it was the one that came closer to the expected movement
of the gas and to the values of the experimental data. The results of the other tested
RANS models were not presented in this thesis as it was considered unnecessary.
Five monitor points were created downstream of the source and the simulations
were stopped when the gas concentration in these points reached a stable value. The
stabilization of the concentration occurred after approximately 110 iterations.
7.1
Case A
In order to compare the obtained results with the experiment, four parallel sampling-
lines were created inside the domain, in different distances from the source. A pre-
view of the created lines is presented below. The red cross indicates the position of
the source. The simulation time of Case A was 3 hours.
Figure 7.2: Sampling lines in Case A
In Figure 7.3, a contour at height 0.0025 m showing the concentration of the gas
is presented as well as the velocity vectors of a part of the domain. It can be noticed
that the created velocity field by CFX was very similar to the one created by the wind-
tunnel experiment.
In Figure 7.4, a comparison between the obtained and the experimental results is
presented. The experimental values are represented with the black dots. It can be no-
ticed that the maximum gas concentrations along the lines were predicted with great
accuracy for lines 1,2 and 4 by CFX. A small deviation form the experimental data
can be seen moving away from the maximum concentration, where the simulated
values drop faster than the experimental and thus reach zero concentrations sooner.
==PAGE:53==
7.1 Case A
43
(a) Gas contour
(b) Velocity field
Figure 7.3: Case A contour of gas concentration and velocity filed
(a) First line
(b) Second line
(c) Third line
(d) Fourth line
Figure 7.4: Comparison of the simulated to the experimental results in Case A
==PAGE:54==
44
7 Results of Multi-block models
7.2
Case B
In Case B, three parallel sampling-lines of different lengths were created inside
the domain in different distances from the source. A preview of the created lines is
presented below. The red cross indicates the position of the source. The simulation
time of Case B was 4 hours.
Figure 7.5: Sampling lines in Case B
In Figure 7.6, a contour at height 0.0025 m showing the concentration of the gas
downstream of the source is presented, as well as the created velocity field between
the buildings. In this case, the velocity field (and as an extend the gas contours), due
to the larger width of the streets, created a trend of moving the gas to the left.
(a) Gas contour
(b) Velocity field
Figure 7.6: Case B contour of gas concentration and velocity filed
This movement of the gas to the left was anticipated as the available experimen-
==PAGE:55==
7.3 Case C
45
tal values showed the same trend. In Figure 7.7, the simulation results are plotted
against the experimental ones. It can be observed that the simulated results overes-
timated the gas concentration in all the lines. Apart from that, the pick of the curves
was found shifted towards the left, compared to the experimental results. Nonethe-
less, the shapes of the created curves were in good agreement with the experiment.
(a) First line
(b) Second line
(c) Third line
Figure 7.7: Comparison of the simulated to the experimental results in Case B
7.3
Case C
In Case C, four parallel sampling-lines were created inside the domain in different
distances from the source. A preview of the created lines is presented below. The red
cross indicates the position of the source. The simulation time of Case C was 3 hours
and 40 minutes.
==PAGE:56==
46
7 Results of Multi-block models
Figure 7.8: Sampling lines in Case C
In Figure 7.9, a contour at height 0.0025 m showing the concentration of the gas is
presented as well as the velocity vectors of a part of the domain. It can be noticed that
the created velocity field by CFX is very similar to the one created by the wind-tunnel
experiment.
(a) Gas contour
(b) Velocity field
Figure 7.9: Case C contour of gas concentration and velocity filed
In Figure 7.10, the simulated curves were plotted against the experimental val-
ues. It can be observed that, for this case, the simulated data underestimated the gas
concentration along the lines. In all four lines, despite the fact that the shape of the
curves is in good agreement with the expected one by the experiment, the maximum
concentration values are lower.
==PAGE:57==
7.3 Case C
47
(a) First line
(b) Second line
(c) Third line
(d) Fourth line
Figure 7.10: Comparison of the simulated to the experimental results in Case C
In general, it could be stated that the k-ε model represented adequately the re-
sults in all simulated cases. The selection of the settings under which the simulations
were performed (Schmidt number, Turbulence Kinetic Energy and Eddy Dissipation of the
source) were done based on the results of Case A. For this reason, the simulated re-
sults of Case A are the ones which are almost identical to the experimental. However,
changing the width of the streets, it was observed that a different tuning of the above
parameters might be necessary. The increase of the street width in the y-direction
(Case B) led to an overestimation of the results while the increase of the street width
in x-direction (Case C), led to an underestimation of the gas concentrations by CFX.
That leads to the conclusion that the properties of the domain and the source used
in a simulation, should be decided depending on the geometry of the array of the
buildings.
==PAGE:58==
48
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusions
8.1
Overall Discussion
The scope of this thesis was to make an assessment of the modelling requirements
in order to capture wind flow in an urban environment using ANSYS CFX as a com-
putational tool.
Regarding turbulence conditions at the inlet of the domain, it was found that,
while ”Medium Intensity (5%)” is a useful option when the conditions at the inlet are
not known, it failed to represent the profiles correctly. Due to the fact that it is a rough
approximation, if the physics of the problem are known, it is preferred to use the ”k
and ε” setting in which the equations of turbulence are inserted by the user.
On the case of gas dispersion around an isolated building, all RANS models failed
to reproduce accurately the concentration contours. Among k-ε, RNG k-ε and SST,
the one that came closer to the results was the SST model. Of the transient mod-
els used, LES was the only turbulence model that managed to represent the gas dis-
persion around the cube adequately. However, the computational time needed for
producing the results was approximately 6 days.
For cases where the gas is emitted outside of the envelope of the building (like the
stack case) RANS models were found to reproduce the results more accurately than
in the Basic case. Of the tested RANS models, RNG k-ε had the highest accuracy in
calculating the gas concentration.
It was found that k-ε model was able to represent the gas concentrations satisfac-
tory, when simulating gas dispersion in a densely-built urban area. However, regula-
tion of the properties of the source and the fluid (like the Schmidt number, Turbulence
Kinetic Energy and Eddy Dissipation) has to be done in order to predict the results
accurately because they are affected by the geometry of the array of the buildings.
In this thesis, some of the papers used for references included CFD results which
were created using ANSYS Fluent. That way it was possible to do a comparison be-
tween Fluent and CFX.
It was found that the use of the k-ε model gave very similar results for both Fluent
and CFX in all the tested cases. On the other hand, the use of the RNG k-ε in CFX
gave less diffusive results compared to the ones by Fluent.
Another finding was that, by applying the same boundary conditions to Fluent
==PAGE:60==
50
8 Conclusions
and CFX, different results were obtained for the mutli-block cases.
Finally, it was found that ANSYS CFX is probably not a suitable tool in order to
compare the results of the hex-mesh and tet-mesh, since not many differences can be
seen in the results of the two meshes. The reason behind this is probably that CFX
uses a combination of the Finite Element Method and the Finite Volume Method
making the solution more accurate and less dependent on the mesh created by the
user, as the volume of control is created by the program and is assembled around the
nodes.
8.2
Proposals for future research
Having the necessary computational resources, it would be interesting to see if the
multi-block cases concentrations could be more accurately predicted using transient
models.
Also, a challenging case would be to examine whether the k-ε model can predict
the gas concentrations accurately in non-symmetric densely-built urban geometries.
Initially, both these ideas were going to be included in this thesis but due to lack
of computational resources it was not possible to execute them. For this reason, they
are suggested as possible future research.
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[AHH80]
Roger S. Thompson Robert E. Lawson Jr. Alan H. Huber, William H. Sny-
der. The effects of a squat building on short stack effluents- a wind tunnel
study. Technical Report EPA-600/4-80-055, United States Environmen-
tal Protection Agency, 230 South Dearborn Street, Chicago, Illinois 60604,
December 1980.
[ANS13]
ANSYS Inc., 275 Technology Drive Canonsburg. ANSYS CFX-Solver The-
ory Guide, 15.0 edition, November 2013.
[BBvHT16] Vervoort R. Blocken B. and van Hooff T. Reduction of outdoor partic-
ulate matter concentrations by local removal in semi-enclosed parking
garages: A preliminary case study for eindhoven city center. Journal of
Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics, 159:80–98, 2016.
[CT05]
Kafyeke F. Laurendeau E. Cebeci T., Shao J. P. Computational Fluid Dy-
namics for Engineers. Springer, 2005.
[E.L09]
Cussler E.L. Diffusion: Mass Transfer in Fluid Systems. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, third edition, 2009.
[FJ07]
Schlunzen H. Carissimo B. Franke J., Hellsten A. Best practice guideline
for the CFD simulation of flow in the urban environment- COST Action
732. Technical report, University of Hamburg- Meteorological Institute-
Centre for Marine and Atmospheric Sciences, Bundesstrasse 55, 20146
Hamburg, Germany, May 2007.
[FRML03]
M. Kuntz F. R. Menter and R. Langtry. Ten years of industrial experience
with the sst turbulence model. Turbulence, Heat and Mass Transfer, 4, 2003.
[Gar09]
Valeria Garbero. Pollutant dispersion in urban canopy, study of the plume be-
haviour through an obstacle array. PhD thesis, DIASP, Politecnico di Torino
- LMFA, Ecole Centrale de Lyon, 2009.
[GP11]
van Heijst GJF Gousseau P, Blocken B. CFD simulation of pollutant dis-
persion around isolated buildings: on the role of convective and turbu-
==PAGE:62==
52
Bibliography
lent mass fluxes in the prediction accuracy. Journal of Hazardous Materials,
194:422–434, 2011.
[LMP05]
Metais O. Lesieur M. and Comte P. Large Eddy Simulations of Turbulence.
Cambridge University Press, 2005.
[NPV07]
Awbi H. B. Davidson L. Schalin A. Nielsen P. V., Allard F. REHVA Guide-
book - Computational Fluid Dynamics in Ventilation Design. REHVA, 2007.
[Onl17]
CFD Online. Y+ Wall Distance Estimation, March 2017.
[Rak14]
Aniko Rakai. Towards operational modelling of flow and dispersion in urban
areas with Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD). PhD thesis, Budapest Uni-
versity of Technology and Economics, 2014.
[Ube17]
Chris Uberti. Rockets to sprockets, April 2017.
[VG10]
Lionel Soulhac Valeria Garbero, Pietro Salizzoni. Experimental study of
pollutant dispersion within a network of streets. Boundary-Layer Meteo-
rology, 136:457–487, September 2010.
[VM95]
H. K. Versteeg and W. Malalasekera. An introduction to Computational
Fluid Dynamics- The finite volume method. Longman Scientific & Technical,
1995.
[Wil06]
David C. Wilcox. Turbulence modeling for CFD. DCW Industries, 3rd edi-
tion, November 2006.
[WWL83]
Robert N. Meroney Wen-Whai Li. Gas dispersion near a cubical model
building. part 1: Mean concentration measurements. Journal of Wind En-
gineering and Industrial Aerodynamics, 12:15–33, 1983.
[Yak92]
Orszag S.A. Thangam S. Gatski T.B. & Speziale C.G. Yakhot, V. Develop-
ment of turbulence models for shear flows by a double expansion tech-
nique. Physics of Fluids A, 4(7):1510–1520, 1992.
==PAGE:63==
APPENDIX A
Code used for creating the
wind’s logarithmic profile
1 # Explanation of expressions
2 # ==========================
3 #
4 # Glossary of names
5 # -----------------
6 #
7 # -----------------
8 # wind profile section
9 # -----------------
10 # ReferenceHeight = reference height above ground
11 # ReferenceSpeed = velocity at reference height
12 # groundRougness = ground aerodynamic roughness
13 # example values
14 # open sea 0.005 [m]
15 # open terrain 0.05 [m]
16 # forest or suberbs 0.5 [m]
17 # city centre 2 [m]
18 # ak = Von Karmen constant
19 # uStar = friction velocity
20 # zgrnd = height of the ground
21 # zprof = height above ground
22 # speed = wind speed as a function of height
23 # windAngle = wind angle (measured from the x axis)
24 # uWind = x component of wind speed
25 # vWind = y component of wind speed
26 # wWind = z component of wind speed
27 # cmu = k-epsilon turbulence model constant
28 # teWind = wind turbulent kinetic energy
29 # edWind = wind turbulent eddy dissipation
30 # sandGrainRoughness = sand grain roughness height of the ground
31 # -----------------
32 # buoyancy section
33 # -----------------
34 # Wair - molecular weight of air
35 # tamb - ambient temperature
36 # refP - reference pressure
37 # denref - reference density
==PAGE:64==
54
A Code used for creating the wind’s logarithmic profile
38 # -----------------
39 # pressure profile section
40 # -----------------
41 # Pground - absoulte pressure at the ground
42 # zRefBuoy - buoyancy reference height
43 # the buoyancy reference location should be set consistently on the domain
models form
44 # isoScaleHeight - atmospheric scale height
45 # Patmos - vertical profile of absolute pressure
46 # Popening - The pressure to set on a vertical opening
47 #
48
49 LIBRARY:
50 CEL:
51 EXPRESSIONS:
52 ReferenceHeight = 10.0 [m]
53 ReferenceSpeed = 5.0 [m sˆ-1]
54 groundRougness = 2 [m]
55 ak = 0.41
56 cmu = 0.09
57 zgrnd = 0 [m]
58 windAngle = 60 [deg]
59
60 uStar = ak*ReferenceSpeed/loge(ReferenceHeight/groundRougness)
61 zprof = max(groundRougness ,z-zgrnd)
62 speed = uStar*loge(zprof/groundRougness)/ak
63 uWind = speed*cos(windAngle)
64 vWind = speed*sin(windAngle)
65 wWind = 0.0 [m/s]
66 teWind = (uStarˆ2)/sqrt(cmu)
67 edWind = (uStarˆ3)/(ak*zprof)
68 sandGrainRoughness = groundRougness*exp(8.48*ak)
69
70 Wair = 28.96 [kg/kmol]
71 denref = Wair * refP/(R*tamb)
72 refP = 1 [atm]
73 tamb = 25 [C]
74
75 zGround = zgrnd
76 Pground = refP
77 zRefBuoy = zgrnd
78 isoScaleHeight = R*tamb/(Wair*g)
79 Patmos = Pground*exp(-(z-zGround)/isoScaleHeight)
80 Popening = Patmos-refP+denref*g*(z-zRefBuoy)
==PAGE:65==
==PAGE:66==
