==PAGE:1==
Master’s Thesis
Study of Room Acoustics and Noise at
Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg Hospital
Author
Thea Mathilde Larsen
Supervised by
Assoc. Prof. Cheol-Ho Jeong
Assoc. Prof. Jonas Brunskog
Co-Supervised by
Mai-Britt Beldam (Ecophon)
Dated
July 31, 2017
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Foreword
The initial goal of this study was to complete an intervention by installing an acoustic
suspended ceiling in a hospital room. However, in the process of ﬁnding a suitable
room for the study it was soon realized how little knowledge and attention was given
to acoustics in the Danish healthcare system. The scope of the project was therefore
changed to contribute with general knowledge about acoustic conditions in the Danish
healthcare system in the hope of increasing awareness. A lot of attention has been given
to the project from companies and researchers which resulted in funding from Danish
Sound to continue work on the project in cooperation with the companies Ecophon,
Niras, Henning Larsen Arkitekter and Hvidovre hospital.
i
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgement
The author would like to thank her supervisors from Acoustic Technology, Technical
University of Denmark, Cheol-Ho Jeong and Jonas Brunskog for support and advise,
and to her co-superviser from Ecophon Mai-Britt Beldam for support, advise, pho-
tographs, sketches and occasional drives to the hospitals even at ﬁve in the morning.
Also thanks to Danish Sound for funding to proceed with the project and to the com-
panies and their representatives who are cooperating in the project: Mai-Britt Beldam
from Ecophon, Christoﬀer Andreas Weitze from Niras, Finnur Kari Pind Jörgensson
from Henning Larsen Arkitekter and Jens Hjortkjær from Hvidovre Hospital and a spe-
cial thank to Ejnar Videbæk from Niras for producing the Odeon model for the project.
Thanks to Harald Meyer from Bispebjerg Hospital for participating with his department
and developing contact to HR-employee Tina Duelund who contacted all working en-
vironment representatives at Bispebjerg and Frederikberg Hospital. Thanks to all the
representatives from the departments Alberte Ciaramilaro, Hanne Dahl, Christa Sonne,
Zijad Klica, Jacob Gørtz and thanks to all the hospital staﬀwho participated in the
project, the project would not have been possible without you. Finally, thanks to Nina,
Samuel and Sarah for reviewing the ﬁnal report.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Foreign studies have shown that noise levels in hospitals have increased over the past
50 years and are now far above satisfactory levels. Despite the evidence of increased
hospital noise in other countries, no equivalent research has been performed in Den-
mark. This study aims to be the ﬁrst step in investigating and creating awareness of
the magnitude of the problem in Danish Hospitals. The scope of the project was to
investigate if poor room acoustics in hospitals could explain staﬀ’s perception of noise
and if improvements to room acoustics could solve problems with high noise levels
in hospitals. A total of 20 diﬀerent rooms in six departments in Bispebjerg and Fred-
erikberg Hospitals were investigated through measurement of acoustical properties and
staﬀﬁlling out questionnaires. Rooms were sorted into four main issues and compared
to the staﬀ’s responses. The measured parameters showed a variety of room acoustic
conditions. However, the acoustic conditions could not directly be correlated to the
staﬀ’s perception. Improvements of room acoustics could lower average noise levels,
but disturbance caused by peak noise levels can not be eliminated in this way and must
be brought down by other means.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Resumé
Udenlandske studier har vist, at støjniveauet i hospitaler er steget de sidste 50 år, og er
nu langt over et behageligt niveau. På trods af beviser på at hospitalsstøj er stigende
i andre lande, er lignende forskning ikke blevet udført i Danmark. Dette studie sigter
efter at tage det første skridt til at undersøge og skabe opmærksomhed om størrelsen
på dette problem i danske hospitaler. Formålet med projektet var at undersøge om util-
strækkelig rum akustik i hospitaler kan forklare medarbejderes opfattelse af støj, og
om forbedringer af rum akustikken kunne løse problemet med høje støjniveauer i hos-
pitaler. Totalt blev 20 forskellige rum i seks forskellige afdelinger på Bispebjerg og
Frederiksberg hospital undersøgt ved at måle akustiske parametre, og ved at personale
udfyldte spørgeskemaer. Rum blev inddelt i ﬁre hovedproblemer og sammenlignet med
personalets svar til spørgeskemaerne. De målte parametre viste stor forskel i akustiske
forhold i de forskellige rum. Dog kunne de akustiske forhold ikke direkte korreleres
med personalets opfattelse. Forbedringer af rum akustik kan sænke gennemsnitlige
støjniveauer i hospitaler, men forstyrrelser forårsaget af spids niveauer kan ikke elim-
ineres på denne måde og bør sænkes på andre måder.
iv
==PAGE:7==
List of Abbreviations
ANOVA - Analysis of variance
C50 - Clarity index
Cor - Corridor
CR - Control room
D - Dermatological department
D.Ex12 - Examination room 12 in dermatological department
D.Ex18 - Examination room 18 in dermatological department
D.LR - Lunch room in dermatological department
D.NS - Nurse station in dermatological department
dB - Decibels
dB(A) - A-weighted decibels
E - Emergency department
E.SO - Secretary oﬃce in emergency department
E.NS - Nurse station in emergency department
EDT - Early decay time
Ex - Examination room
HVAC - Heating ventilation, and air conditioning
Hz - Hertz, the unit of sound wave frequency
ICU - Intensive care unit
L10 - Level of sound exceeding 10 % of the recorded time interval
L90 - Level of sound exceeding 90 % of the recorded time interval
LAeq - A-weighted equivalent continuous sound level
LAFmax - The maximum sound level occurring during the measurement period, where A
indicates A-weighted sound, F indicates the meter speed of fast
LAFmin - The minimum sound level occurring during the measurement period, where A
indicates A-weighted sound, F indicates the meter speed of fast
Ldn - The equivalent A-weighted sound level during 24 hours time period with 10 dB
weighting applied to the equivalent sound level during the night time of 10 pm to 7 am
v
==PAGE:8==
Leq - Equivalent steady sound level, the equivalent continuous sound level that contains
the same total sound energy as the actual time-varying sound within a given speciﬁed
time period
LR - Lunch room
m - Meters
MR - Meeting room
NS - Nurse station
OR - Oﬃce
P - Palliative department
P.LR - Lunch room in palliative department
Q1 - The question: "When you think back over the past 6 months, how disturbed have
you been by noise while you have been at work?"
Q2 - The question: "When you think back over the past six months how often have you
experienced that you could not hear or understand what a colleague and/or a patient
said because of noise?"
Q3 - The question: "When thinking about the past six months, how often have you ex-
perienced that you could not speak conﬁdentially with a patient without other patients
hearing you?"
Q4 - The question: "When thinking back over the past six months, how often have you
experienced that a patient said that he/she could not hear or understand important in-
formation you have given?"
Q5 - The question: "When thinking back over the past six months, cross out up to ﬁve
noise sources you found disturbing at your work place"
R - Rehabilitation department
R.OR1 - Oﬃce 1 in rehabilitation department
R.OR2 - Oﬃce 2 in rehabilitation department
R.TR - Treatment room in rehabilitation department
s - Seconds
SO - Secretary oﬃce
SPL - Sound pressure level
STI - Speech transmission index
T20 - Measure for reverberation time
TR - Treatment room
W - Work and occupational medicine department
W.Ex1 - Examination room 1 in work and occupational medicine department
W.Ex3 - Examination room 3 in work and occupational medicine department
vi
==PAGE:9==
W.Ex5 - Examination room 5 in work and occupational medicine department
W.Cor - Corridor in work and occupational medicine department
W.WR - Waiting room in work and occupational medicine department
W.SO - Secretary oﬃce in work and occupational medicine department
W.MR - Meeting room in work and occupational medicine department
WHO - World Health Organization
WR - Waiting room
X - X-ray department
X.OR1 - Oﬃce 1 in x-ray department
X.OR2 - Oﬃce 2 in x-ray department
X.CR - Control room in x-ray department
µPa - Micro Pascal
χ2 - Chi-squared
vii
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Foreword
i
Acknowledgement
ii
Abstract
iii
Resumé
iv
List of Abbreviations
v
1
Introduction
1
Motivation and Objectives
3
2
Background
4
3
Theory
9
3.1
Room Acoustics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.1
Impulse Response
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.2
Reverberation Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.3
Deﬁnition and Clarity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.4
Speech Transmission Index
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Quantitative Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.1
Questionnaires . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.2
Response Rate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Noise
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3.1
Average and percentile levels in Noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3.2
A-weighted sound ﬁlter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Method
21
4.1
Categorization of issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
viii
==PAGE:12==
Contents
Contents
4.2
Measuring Room Acoustic parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Questionnaires
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3.1
Statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
Noise measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4.1
Dermatological department . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4.2
Work and occupational medicine department
. . . . . . . . . .
28
4.5
Simulated solution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Interviews with hospital departments
32
5.1
Departments at Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg
Hospitals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2
Departments which were not included in the study . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.3
General observations regarding acoustics in Danish hospitals . . . . . .
42
6
Results
44
6.1
Acoustic parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.1.1
Examination rooms and treatment rooms
. . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.1.2
Nurse stations, control rooms, waiting rooms and corridors . . .
47
6.1.3
Oﬃces
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.1.4
Meeting rooms and lunch rooms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.2
Characteristics of each issue
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.3
Questionnaire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.3.1
All participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.3.2
Sorting questionnaires into issues based on department. . . . . .
65
6.3.3
Sorting questionnaire answers into issues based on votes on
rooms.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
6.4
Correlation between mean reverberation time T20 and mean question
score for each room . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.5
Noise
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
6.5.1
Dermatological department . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
6.5.2
Work and occupational medicine department
. . . . . . . . . .
77
6.6
Simulated solution for D.Ex12 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
7
Discussion
82
7.1
Guidelines to room types in hospitals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
7.2
Room acoustics compared to staﬀ’s perception of noise . . . . . . . . .
84
7.3
Noise in hospitals, mean values and peaks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
ix
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Contents
7.4
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
7.5
Future perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
8
Conclusion
88
Bibliography
93
Appendices
I
A Appendix
II
A.1
Questionnaires
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
III
A.2
Room details
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
V
A.3
Plots of rooms with the issue Noise building up . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXVI
A.4
Plots of rooms with the issue Reverberation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXVIII
A.5
Plots of the rooms with the issue Noisy/hectic environment . . . . . . . XXX
A.6
Plots of the rooms with the issue Lack of speech privacy between rooms XXXII
A.7
Correlation analysis of issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXXIV
A.7.1
Correlation matrices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXXIV
A.7.2
Blind sorting rooms into issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXXV
A.8
All data presented as circle plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXXVI
A.9
Correlation of questions and parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXXVIII
A.10 R-scripts for Mixed Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXXIX
A.11 Rooms sorted into departments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XLI
A.12 R-scripts for one-way ANOVA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XLIII
A.13 Sketch of D.Ex12 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XLV
A.14 Materials for Odeon model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XLVI
x
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
Chapter
1
Introduction
Hospital noise and acoustics is a theme that most people can recognize. Most people
link hospitals with noise from equipment and large sterile rooms adjacent to empty and
reverberant corridors. Danish hospitals are presumably not very diﬀerent from this gen-
eral impression of hospitals. Besides a few numbers of guidelines for room acoustics
and noise in healthcare facilities in the Danish Building Regulation, not much attention
has been given to hospital noise and acoustics in Denmark.
Through the past years, attention and research have been in favour of room acoustics in
classrooms, schools and rooms for educational purposes and a large number of school
and education facilities are covered in the Danish Building Regulation. There may be
several reasons for the lack of research within hospital noise and acoustics. One reason
can be that the accessibility to schools is much higher than to hospitals, since schools
are only run a few hours every day and are closed during breaks and holidays, whereas
hospitals are open every day all year around. Another reason may be the increasing
pressure on Danish hospitals. Since 2007, the Danish public healthcare system has
been forced to increase productivity with 2 % every year. Furthermore, in 2016 and
2017 the Danish hospitals have implemented a new IT-system (Sundhedsplatformen),
which in the future should make record writing more eﬀective, and leave more time for
the hospital staﬀwith the patients. During the present up-start phase it may result in
stress and annoyance among the staﬀ. With these things in mind, it is understandable
that the priority in Danish healthcare is not research in noise and acoustics. However,
research from other countries show that awareness of noise and acoustics and attempts
to bring noise levels down are important (more details on this research will be explained
in chapter 2).
1
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 1. Introduction
Despite challenges with accessibility to the Danish healthcare system this study at-
tempts to be a ﬁrst step into the ﬁeld of hospital acoustics in Denmark. The focus of
this study is to investigate whether noise problems in Danish hospitals experienced by
staﬀcould be caused by poor room acoustics. The study focus on noise problems in
hospitals in the Copenhagen region and further investigations were performed in Bis-
pebjerg and Frederiksberg hospital.
2
==PAGE:17==
Motivation and Objectives
Studies investigating noise in hospitals suggest solving the problem by improving room
acoustics by installing absorption panels [53] [56]. This study aims to investigate the
need for improving room acoustics in hospitals along with investigating the staﬀopin-
ion of the noise problem. The objectives are:
• How are the room acoustics in rooms which have been reported problematic re-
garding acoustics and noise by staﬀin Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg Hospitals?
• According to staﬀ’s perception of disturbance level caused by noise and how
frequently they experience three noise and acoustical phenomena, are the noise
and acoustics in some rooms worse than others?
• Can improvements of room acoustics in hospitals bring down average and peak
noise levels and can they bring down staﬀmembers noise disturbance?
• What challenges are linked to improving acoustics in Bispebjerg and Frederiks-
berg hospital and can they be solved?
The objectives will be met by:
• Interviewing and talking to hospital staﬀabout issues regarding noise and acous-
tics and were these issues appear.
• Measure the acoustic parameters (EDT, T20, C50, STI) in rooms at Bispebjerg and
Frederiksberg Hospitals in accordance with interviews with staﬀ.
• Have a group of staﬀﬁll out questionnaires about noise and scenarios known to
be linked to acoustics and noise.
• Simulate a solution for one room with one kind of issue and investigate the chal-
lenges in trying to design and implement the solution.
3
==PAGE:18==
==PAGE:19==
Chapter
2
Background
Hospital noise and acoustics have been recognized as a problem for many years. One
of the ﬁrst to evidence the problem was Florence Nightingale who said, "Unneces-
sary noise is the most cruel absence of care which can be inﬂicted on either sick or
well". [44]
Though awareness of the problem of hospital noise has existed for more than 150 years,
the problem has only increased. Busch-Vishniac performed a large study in 2005 where
she collected reliable data from all available studies with measured A-weighted sound
pressure level. She plotted the data for both day and night time as a function of the
published year of the study. The plots showed that the average noise levels for both day
and night time in hospitals have been increasing since the sixties, which tended to be a
general problem since the studies used were from all over the world. The results from
the study are shown in ﬁgures 2.1 and 2.2.
Figure 2.1: Plot of increasing noise levels during day time in hospitals from 1960 to 2005.
From [6].
4
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 2. Background
Figure 2.2: Plot of increasing noise levels during night time in hospitals from 1960 to 2005.
From [6].
Besides the data used in Busch-Vishniacs study, other studies support the claim that
hospitals are noisy [6]. Gladd and Saunders investigated noise levels in a veteran fair
medical center chemotherapy [24]. They measured noise levels Monday through Thurs-
day to LAeq = 52dB and handed out questionnaires to staﬀ, visitors and patients. The
questionnaires showed that staﬀwere more unsatisﬁed than visitors and patients. Tsara
measured noise levels in a pulmonary ward and ICU (intensive care unit) in a hospital
in Greece over a seven-day period. The noise levels in the pulmonary was found to be
LA,eq= 52.6 dB and at the ICU, LA,eq = 59 dB [55]. Several other studies have shown
high noise levels in hospitals, hereabout in operational rooms (LA,eq = 66 dB) [34],
another operation room over 15 minutes of surgery (LA,eq = 77.32 dB(A)) [42], in an
emergency department (LA,eq=65 to 73 dB) [47], and in an ICU over 24 hours (LA,eq=51
to 55 dB) [31].
Noise inﬂuence on patients
It is well known that noise has a negative eﬀect on the comfort of patients [28]. Lack
of sleep or disturbed sleep is often a consequence of noise, which may lead to slow
recovery for patients in a hospital. Elbaz performed a study at an ICU to ﬁnd a link
between sleep disturbance and noise in the unit [16]. 11 patients participated, none of
which were severely ill. It was found that the patients slept the same number of hours
as in quiet condition, but were more disturbed in noisy condition (77 dB(C)) than in
5
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2. Background
quiet condition. An interesting aspect is what noise sources in hospitals have largest
eﬀect on patients and their sleep. Buxton et al. found that the noise sources that had
greatest arousal eﬀect on their sleeping subjects were hospital alarms and voices espe-
cially upset voices [7]. Reverberation in rooms has been found to have an inﬂuence on
the arousal in patient’s sleep in a study were subjects were sleeping under two diﬀerent
conditions, one with absorbing ceiling tiles and one with reﬂective ceiling tiles [3]. Fife
investigated the length of hospital stays at the University hospital in Minnesota for two
periods, one with construction noise and one with no construction noise. It was found
that the patients hospitalized during the noisy period had signiﬁcantly (p<0.05) longer
hospital stays than patients in the not noisy period [21]. A literature study by Timothy
Hsu mentions several studies which showed that noise (85 dB white noise for 15 min-
utes over 19.5 days) slowed the healing of wounds in rats [28], and Monjan found that
exposing rats to noise (100 dB for 5 seconds every minute for an hour) had a negative
eﬀect on their immune system [40]. Though both studies were performed on animals it
is possible the eﬀect is the same on humans.
Noise inﬂuence on hospital staﬀ
Noise does not alone have an inﬂuence on patients it also has an inﬂuence on staﬀ[52].
Morrison investigated the link between noise and stress for 11 nurses at John Hopkins
Hospital, Baltimore. It was found that average heart rates were correlated with years
of experience and noise [41]. Noise has also been found to be one of the sources to
induce stress in hospital staﬀ. Topf investigated stress and burnout through question-
naires in 100 critical care nurses and found that noise induced stress may account for
one-half of the total stress linked to critical care circumstances. Topf also found that
the most disturbing noises for nurses were beeping monitors, alarms on equipment and
telephones [54]. Noise may also inﬂuence hospitals staﬀ’s quality of work. Mahmood
investigated nurses’ perception and medical errors through questionnaires, and among
several issues, noise was pointed out to have a negative inﬂuence on medical errors [39].
The major way of communicating in hospitals is through speech, which is inﬂuenced
by either noise, reverberation or both. Woloshynowych found in a none experimental
study that interruptions e.g from noise can lead to communication errors and medical
errors [57]. Flynn et al. 1996, cited in [52], performed a study where medical errors
were investigated in a pharmacy, and it showed that as noise levels increased, medical
errors increased to a point and then decreased.
6
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 2. Background
Intervention studies
Several standards and organizations have come up with recommendations for noise
level limitations and criteria for room acoustics. The most well-known are the rec-
ommendations from the World Health Organization WHO, who recommend a Lmax =
40dB(A) at night measured at fast setting, in patient rooms they recommend Leq = 35
dB(A) during the day and Leq=30dB(A) at night [58]. However, none of these recom-
mendations are being kept in one single of the studies included in [6], and neither in
the studies mentioned in [24] [55] [34] [42] [47] [31].
Several studies have investigated interventions designed to lower the amount of noise in
hospitals, with variable success. One of the ﬁrst intervention studies was performed in
the sixties by Hurst who tried to improve awareness of noise in hospitals and reduce the
noise, which was found successful [29]. Since then Richardson investigated what in-
ﬂuence staﬀ’s behaviour/equipment had on noise levels and how to reduce them. Noise
peaks were reduced from 96 dB to 78 dB by reducing ringing volume, wearing soft
soled shoes and telephones switched to vibrate [51]. Taylor-Ford did a similar study
with two hospital units, one was introduced to a program to reduce noise, a control
unit was not. However the study did not show any signiﬁcant inﬂuence on noise levels
nor on people’s perception of noise [53]. Also, Dube performed an before and after
intervention study ﬁnding that mornings were the noisiest and people disliked voices,
carts, cars and cardiac monitors. The intervention was found to have a small eﬀect on
hospital staﬀand noise levels [12]. Most recently Wiese investigated the noise levels
before and after a renovation of a hospital wing. The results showed a very little reduc-
tion in noise, however, the renovation was not targeted at noise reduction [56]. Another
renovation study was made by Philbin and Gray in an intensive care nursery. Noise was
reduced both from staﬀbehaviour and renovation. The study led to high reductions of
sound levels and the department was perceived three to four times quieter [32].
Several of these studies suggest that improving room acoustics is a more eﬀective way
of reducing noise. This is supported by a study by Macleod who installed self-made
absorption panels in a hallway in John Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore. The installation
led to a reduction in reverberation time of 0.24 s and a 5 dB(A) average noise reduc-
tion [38]. Improvement of room acoustics was also found to improve the psychosocial
work environment of healthcare [4]. The eﬀect of improved room acoustics was studied
by Hagerman who found indications that room acoustics had an inﬂuence on coronary
7
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2. Background
patients. This was based on a higher use of the medicin ultra beta blockers by the pa-
tients during a period with reﬂective ceiling tiles compared to a period with absorbing
ceiling tiles [25].
The hospital environment is often used for bringing over important information from
staﬀto patients or from staﬀto other staﬀmembers. This can also be a problem with
a noisy or reverberant environment for staﬀand patients but especially for patients
suﬀering from hearing impairment, which is often seen in elderly people. Harris and
Swenson found that speech recognition was signiﬁcantly decreased for hearing im-
paired with an increasing reverberation time and between a condition with a S/N of
+10 dB and no background noise [26]. In a recent study, Reinhart found that the ability
of people wearing hearing aids to recognize consonants (recognition of consonants is
often used as a predictor for speech intelligibility), was decreased signiﬁcantly with
increased reverberation time [50]. Although these studies were both performed in lab-
oratories, they do indicate that important information may get lost in communication
between often elderly patients and staﬀin hospitals.
Hospital acoustics in Denmark
In Denmark noise and acoustics in hospitals has not been given much attention. It
is only until recently in 2013 that the Danish Building Regulation added guidelines
to acoustics in hospitals, as well as other buildings. The guidelines for room acous-
tics state that the reverberation time in patients’ rooms should not exceed 0.8 s for the
frequency bands 125-4000 Hz and the reverberation time in examination rooms and
treatment rooms should not exceed 0.6 s for the frequency bands 125-4000 Hz, with a
liberation of 20 % for 125 Hz [18]. The guideline also states that patient rooms, ex-
amination rooms and treatment rooms should correspond to the general regulations so
that users are ensured satisfying acoustical conditions. Oﬃces in hospitals are covered
by the guidelines for oﬃces, which are a reverberation time of 0.6 s for single oﬃces
and meeting rooms. However only a small number of rooms exclusive for hospitals and
healthcare facilities are covered by these guidelines. Knowledge about preferable room
acoustics for nurse stations, operation rooms, x-ray control stations, waiting rooms etc.
are missing. Besides the building regulation no Danish studies on hospital noise and
acoustics have been conducted.
8
==PAGE:24==
==PAGE:25==
Chapter
3
Theory
In this chapter the background theory, which is the basis for the measurements per-
formed and design of questionnaires is explained.
3.1
Room Acoustics
When deciding on which room acoustic parameters should be measured and investi-
gated the function of the hospital was considered. Though most of the aforementioned
studies (see chapter 2) focus on the inﬂuence of room acoustics directly on patients,
in this study it was also taken into account that a hospital is a working place for the
staﬀand room acoustics and noise have an inﬂuence on their work as well, which di-
rectly or indirectly link to the care of the patient. In addition to including reverberation
time, which alone has been found to have inﬂuence on sick [25], it was also found im-
portant to include room acoustic parameters measuring communication conditions. It
was considered that good communication conditions are not only important when staﬀ
communicate with patients but also when staﬀcommunicate with one another.
3.1.1
Impulse Response
All the acoustic parameters used in this study were derived from the impulse response.
The impulse response describes the reaction of change as a function of time. Since a
room can be considered an acoustical transmission system, the impulse response con-
tains the complete description of the changes a sound system undergoes traveling from
one place in the room to another [36]. Most acoustics parameters can be executed from
measurements of the impulse response, which is why it is commonly used for measur-
ing ordinary acoustics and suggested in [10].
In this study, the exponential sweep, also known as the logarithmic sine sweep, was
used. The e-sweep has a pink (1/f) spectrum and therefore has equal energy in each
octave-band to ensure a good signal to noise ratio in the lower frequencies [1].
The impulse response was obtained in the software program DIRAC (Bruel & Kjær),
9
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 3. Theory
3.1. Room Acoustics
from which the parameters early decay time (EDT), reverberation time T20, clarity C50
and Speech transmission index (STI) were executed. To ensure reliable results the tail
of the impulse response graph should be even, which was checked and ensured for
all measurements made in this study. The impulse response from DIRAC is shown in
ﬁgure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Impulse Response obtained in DIRAC.
3.1.2
Reverberation Time
Reverberation time was measured in this project partly because it is the best known of
the room acoustic parameters and also because it is the only room acoustic parameter
included in BR15 for hospitals.
The Parameter T20
The reverberation time, T, is the time it takes a sound source in a room to decrease 60
dB, given as:
T60 = (t−65dB −t−5dB)
When measuring reverberation time it is common practice to measure a shorter de-
crease of the sound source usually a drop of 30 dB or 20 dB drops, and multiply it as
shown below.
T30 = 2 · (t−35dB −t−5dB)
T20 = 3 · (t−25dB −t−5dB)
10
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3. Theory
3.1. Room Acoustics
where t−x denotes the time when the decay has decreased to X dB below its start value.
In this study T20 was used due to it being the parameter representing reverberation time
in BR15 [22].
When deriving the reverberation time from DIRAC it is important to ensure that the
decay curve is even preferably for 60 dB, though 20 dB will theoretically do. In this
study, it was ensured that the decay curve was even for approximately 40 dB. In ﬁgure
3.2 a decay curve from DIRAC is shown, the decay curve shows an even decay for 50
dB.
The reverberation time can also be derived from the absorption area A, given by:
T = 0.16 · V
A
Where V is the volume of the room [23]. In [18] the guideline for shared oﬃces is:
A ≥1.1 · afloor
Where afloor is the ﬂoor area. This corresponds to a reverberation time for shared oﬃces
of:
T ≤0.16 ·
 
V
1.1 · afloor
!
Which is used to calculate the recommended reverberation time T20 for shared oﬃces.
Figure 3.2: Decay curve from DIRAC.
Early Decay time (EDT)
In most situations, a sound source such as running speech or music will not get to de-
crease 30 or 20 dB, therefore, it is interesting to look into early decay time (EDT) as it
11
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 3. Theory
3.1. Room Acoustics
has turned out to have a better correlation with the reverberant perceived during running
speech. EDT is also deﬁned as the rate of decay of the sound source but from its initial
part, the interval from 0 to -10 dB. Given as
EDT = (t−10dB −t0)
The EDT is often found to vary signiﬁcantly throughout a room due to its dependence
of levels and distributions in time of the early reﬂections which varies with positions of
source and receiver in room [22].
3.1.3
Deﬁnition and Clarity
Besides reverberation time and early decay time, other parameters are found useful to
explain impulse response and hereby the acoustics of a room. In the following, the
subjective parameters deﬁnition and clarity are explained in accordance with [36].
The early reﬂections of a sound signal are found to be heard together with the direct
sound as long as their time delay does not exceed a certain limit. The early reﬂections
eﬀect are to make the sound source appear more extended and to increase the apparent
loudness of the direct sound. Later reﬂections are noticed as echoes and are considered
unfavourable in cases where high speech intelligibility is wanted. In general, any rever-
beration impairs the intelligibility of speech as it distorts the time structure and mixes
up the spectral characteristics of successive syllables. The critical time delay which sep-
arates useful reﬂections from detrimental reﬂections is somewhere in the range from 50
to 100 ms. The ﬁrst attempt to deﬁne an objective criterion of "distinctness of sound",
derived from the impulse response, was "deﬁnition" or "deutlichkeit", which is the ratio
between the early and total sound energy and given in percent. It is deﬁned as:
D50 =
R 50ms
0
h2(t)dt
R ∞
0 h2(t)dt
Where h2 is the distribution of the impulse response energy in time. The relationship
between the "deﬁnition", D, and syllable intelligibility is shown in ﬁgure 3.3, which
clearly shows that the greater D the higher speech intelligibility.
12
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3. Theory
3.1. Room Acoustics
Figure 3.3: Relationship between deﬁnition D and speech intelligibility in percent. From [36].
In the above equation for D the time limit for early reﬂections is 50 ms.
Another parameter which quantity is similar to deﬁnition but more used for character-
ising the transparency of music in a concert hall is the clarity index, C. C is expressed
in dB and can also be used to deﬁne speech intelligibility as D, which it is used for in
this study. Normally the time delay used for the clarity index for concert halls is 80 ms,
but as clarity index here is used for speech intelligibility in rooms, the same time delay
as normally used for D, 50 ms, is used. Clarity index C50 is deﬁned as:
C50 = 10 · log

R 50ms
0
g2(t)dt
R ∞
50ms g2(t)dt

The higher the ratio between the energy in the impulse response arriving before and
after 50 ms, the more early sound dominates and the clearer the sound [36].
3.1.4
Speech Transmission Index
A more detailed way of measuring speech intelligibility beside C50 is by deriving the
speech transmission index (STI) from the impulse response. The speech transmission
index was developed by Houtgast and Steeneken in 1985 by converting the modulation
transfer function (MTF) data measured in seven octave bands and at 14 modulation
frequencies into one single ﬁgure of merit [36].
The STI-metric measures how much the modulation index (m) of an amplitude-modulation
13
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 3. Theory
3.1. Room Acoustics
is reduced from the transmission through a room. Figure 3.4 shows the situation of a
speaker and listener, where the modulation depth from the speaker to the receiver will
be reduced due to reverberation, echo and noise. The modulation transfer function
describes to what extend the modulation is transferred from source to receiver as a
function of the modulation frequency F. F ranges from 0.63 to 12.5 Hz. For a STI anal-
ysis, the modulation reduction factor m(F) is determined for seven octave bands (125
Hz to 8000 Hz), which adds up to 98 modulation factors. The modulation reduction
factor, m(F), is the ratio between the input and output modulation indices:
m(F) = m2
m2
The STI is then calculated by converting each of the 98 modulation indices to an ap-
parent signal-to-noise ratio
(S/N)app = 10log

m
1 −m

These values are then averaged after truncating the values which exceed the range of
±15dB and the ﬁnal result is then obtained by performing the average (S/N)app and
normalizing the result into an index between 0 and 1:
S TI = 1
30
h
(S/N)app + 15
i
Figure 3.5 shows the STI intervals between 0 and 1, which correspond to the diﬀerent
speech intelligibility from bad to excellent.
In 3.5 the diﬀerent intervals for STI are given for the diﬀerent quality levels of speech
intelligibility.
The pc program DIRAC, used for the measurements in this study, calculates the STI
value. The program diﬀerentiates between male and female voices excluding the fre-
quency band 125 Hz for the female voice spectrum model [5] and [36].
14
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3. Theory
3.2. Quantitative Parameters
Figure 3.4: Relationship between speech intelligibility and modulation depth. From [5].
Figure 3.5: STI values correspondence to speech intelligibility from Bad to Excellent. From [5].
3.2
Quantitative Parameters
The survey is the most widely used social science data sampling technique. In the
following sections the techniques used to create a questionnaire are explained based
on [43].
3.2.1
Questionnaires
When designing questionnaires two key principles are important: 1) Avoid possible
confusion and keep the respondent’s perspective in mind. 2) The questions should pro-
vide a valid and reliable measure so that the respondents should quickly understand
each question’s meaning as it was intended, answer completely and honestly, and be-
lieve that their answers are meaningful. The following steps to design the questionnaire
were checked for the questionnaires for this study, based on [43].
15
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 3. Theory
3.2. Quantitative Parameters
1. Consider the design of the questionnaire
(a) Length of questionnaire: Long questionnaires give more information and
are more cost eﬀective, however longer questionnaires may cause a lower
response rate.
(b) Organization of questionnaire: order of questions to minimize respondents
discomfort and confusion.
(c) Avoid context eﬀect: The context eﬀect is when an overall tone setting or
set of topics heard by respondents aﬀect how they interpret the meaning of
the subsequent question.
2. Questionnaire Layout and Format
(a) How is the questionnaire ﬁlled out, with boxes, circles, matrix etc.
(b) Response categories: How are the questions answered? Examples: Excel-
lent, Good, Fair, Poor or Approve/Disapprove etc.
3. Check the language
(a) Avoid jargon, slang and abbreviations.
(b) Avoid ambiguity, confusion and vagueness.
(c) Avoid emotional language and prestige bias.
(d) Avoid double-barreled questions.
(e) Avoid leading questions.
(f) Avoid questions beyond respondent’s capabilities.
(g) Avoid false premises.
(h) Avoid asking distant future intentions.
(i) Avoid double negatives.
(j) Avoid overlapping or unbalanced response categories.
16
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3. Theory
3.2. Quantitative Parameters
3.2.2
Response Rate
The response rate is given as:
Response Rate = Number of completed surveys /Number of people contacted
The response rate is based on the success of ﬁve component rates. These ﬁve compo-
nent rates are: location rate, contact rate, eligibility rate, Cooperation rate and com-
pletion rate. In this study, the response rate was calculated with inspiration from these
ﬁve rates and a number of more were added. The calculated response rates were based
on [43].
Location rate - Percentage of respondents in the sampling frame who are located.
Contact rate: - Percentage of located respondents who are contacted.
Cooperation rate - Percentage of contacted, eligible respondents who agree to par-
ticipate.
Refusal rate - Percentage contacted, who refuse to participate.
Completion rate - Percentage of cooperating respondents who complete the survey.
Cooperation response rate - The number of people contacted, who participated in
the survey investigation divided by the number of people contacted.
Completion response rate - The number of people, who completed the questionnaire
divided by the number of people contacted, given as.
Total response rate - Percentage of all respondents in the initial sampling frame who
were located, contacted, eligible, agreed to participate and completed the entire ques-
tionnaire.
Acceptable response rates vary by how the survey is administered. In this study ques-
tionnaires were send out by an online link and handed out in paperform, for which the
following response rates are to be expected [46]:
• Online: Above 30% is good
17
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 3. Theory
3.3. Noise
• Face-to-face: 80-85% is good
The acceptable sample size depend on the size of the population. Practically a small
population (under 500) need a large sample ratio (above 30 %), where a large popula-
tion (over 150,000), an equally good accuracy can be obtained with a small sampling
ratio (1 percent) [43].
3.3
Noise
The main focus of this study was room acoustics, noise measurements were also per-
formed as samples in selected rooms. Noise was measured in sound pressure level
(SPL), which is given by:
Lp = 20log
 p
p0
!
where p is the root mean square sound pressure and p0 is the reference sound pressure.
The most commonly used reference sound pressure in air is:
p0 = 20µPa
3.3.1
Average and percentile levels in Noise
Average noise levels are calculated as logarithmic averages , which are calculated with
the formula:
Lave = 10log1
n
P 10
Ln
10
Percentile levels (Ln) is another way of investigating the average noise levels, often
used for measuring environmental noise. Ln is deﬁned as the noise level exceeded for
n% of the measurement time.
In this study L90 and L10 levels are calculated. Furthermore day and night levels are
calculated, where the same deﬁnition for day and night are used as for the environmen-
tal day/night noise level Ldn which are:
Day: 7 am to 10 pm (7.00-22.00)
Night: 10 pm to 7 am (7.00-22.00)
However penalties are not being given to the night period, which is procedure for Ldn.
18
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3. Theory
3.3. Noise
3.3.2
A-weighted sound ﬁlter
Weighting ﬁlters for noise have been developed for diﬀerent purposes. As this study
investigates the human perception of noise, it was obvious to use the A-weighted ﬁlter.
The A-weighted ﬁlter is a standard weighting of the audible frequencies designed to
reﬂect the response of the human ear. The A-weightings of the diﬀerent frequencies
are shown in ﬁgure 3.6, represented as the blue curve. The A-weighted frequency ﬁlter
takes into account that the human ear is more sensitive to the frequencies in the 1000-
4000 Hz region than to very low or very high frequencies, as visualized in ﬁgure ﬁgure
3.7.
Figure 3.6: Weigting of the diﬀferent frequencies for A-weighted, C-weighted and Z-weighted
ﬁlters. From [8]
19
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 3. Theory
3.3. Noise
Figure 3.7: Normal equal-loudness-level contours for pure tones under free-ﬁeld listening con-
ditions. From ISO 226 (2003)
Slow and fast time weightings
When measuring noise over time two diﬀerent settings are available, slow and fast time
weighting. The slow and fast time weightings are a lack from the analogue sound level
meters. Fast time weighting corresponds to a 125 ms time constant, slow corresponds
to a 1000 ms time constant. In this study, fast time weighting was used since it is
often used for measuring environmental noise and it is comparable with the WHO
recommendations.
20
==PAGE:37==
Chapter
4
Method
Two hospitals administratively operating together participated in this project. The two
hospitals Bispebjerg Hospital and Frederiksberg Hospital are situated in Copenhagen
municipality and Frederiksberg municipality respectively. Bispebjerg Hospital was
built in 1913 designed by the architect Martin Nyrop, who was also the architect of
the Town hall in Copenhagen, which is why the hospital is a listed building [33]. Fred-
eriksberg hospital was built in 1903 and is not listed. Together the two hospitals have
about 3000 employees.
4.1
Categorization of issues
All working environmental representatives at the two hospitals were contacted and
asked if employees at the diﬀerent departments had mentioned problems regarding
noise and acoustics. Nine working environmental representatives responded to the
request.
Bispebjerg and Frederiskberg Hospitals have 24 departments with patient
contact, all nine representatives came from departments with patient contact. Each
department was visited prior to the measurements described in chapter 5. The employ-
ees were questioned on their opinion about noise and the acoustical conditions in their
work place. Based on the qualitative interviews a number of issues were identiﬁed
and seemed to apply to several rooms in the diﬀerent departments. The issues were as
follows:
• Noise building up
• Reverberation in room
• Noisy/hectic environment
• Lack of speech privacy between rooms
• Lack of speech privacy within rooms
• Noise from alarms and hospital equipment
21
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 4. Method
4.1. Categorization of issues
Each room visited was then categorized under a type of issue. The departments with
the issue Noise from alarms and hospital equipment and Lack of speech privacy within
rooms were not included in the continued investigation. A matrix with issues and rooms
is shown in ﬁgure 4.1. A total of 20 rooms in six diﬀerent departments were included
in the investigation.
Figure 4.1: Matrix showing departments, categories of issues and rooms within each depart-
ment. A cross states which issue the room was categorized within.
22
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4. Method
4.2. Measuring Room Acoustic parameters
4.2
Measuring Room Acoustic parameters
Each room listed in table 4.1 was measured using the program DIRAC, where the
parameters EDT, T20, C50, STI and S/N were derived from the program and background
noise was measured over a time interval of approximately 5 minutes. For the measuring
of the room acoustic parameters the following equipment was used:
• Microphone Supply Brüel & Kjær type 5935 L
• Ampliﬁer Lab gruppen LAB 300
• Microphone Unit Brüel & Kjær Type 4192-L-001
• Dell laptop with Brüel & Kjær DIRAC software installed
• Dodecahedron speaker
• SPL meter Brüel & Kjær Type 2239
• Sound calibrator Brüel & Kjær type 4231
E-sweeps were used with a length of 2.73 s in accordance with being at least double the
reverberation time of the measured room. One channel was used, with a pre-average
of 5. The background noise was measured with the SPL meter, which was calibrated
right before the measurements. The measurements were made in accordance [10] at
engineering level, with two microphone positions per room placed approximately one
meter from any surface and with ﬁve microphone positions per speaker position with
approximately one meter between each microphone position. Microphone and speaker
were placed in 1.5 meters height from the ﬂoor. Sketches with approximate placements
of sources and receivers are shown in A.2 for each room. In rooms less than 12 m2
only three microphone positions per speaker position were measured. In all cases two
measurements were made per position. The STI was measured according to DS/EN
60268, where impulse response was derived from an e-sweep. It was ensured for each
measurement that S/N was above 15 dB for the 1/1 octave bands in range 63-16000
Hz. The STI was measured with a dodecahedron speaker instead of a mono-directional
speaker, which is required in [17].
Dimensions of each room were measured after measuring the acoustics along with
sketching the furniture and layout of the rooms. The number of absorption panels were
recorded along with type of absorption panel if recognized, number of people in the
room during measurements and other observations which could have inﬂuence on the
measurements. In chapter A.2 these data can be seen for each room.
23
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 4. Method
4.3. Questionnaires
4.3
Questionnaires
Questionnaire surveys were designed to obtain a quantitative opinion from the staﬀin
the diﬀerent departments. The questionnaires were designed with ﬁve major questions.
It was prioritized to make the questionnaire short as it was evaluated that the hospi-
tal staﬀwould be more likely to ﬁll it out if short. The questionnaire was organized
with general information about the participant ﬁrst, questions in the middle, and sensi-
tive questions last to avoid the sensitive questions to inﬂuence the privious questions.
It was decided to have boxes ticked for answers in the questionnaire and as response
category ﬁve possible responses were used. The questionnaire was inspired by the
questionnaires used in [56], as the two studies have considerable similarities. Finally,
the language was checked to be in accordance with the theory from [43] and the vocab-
ulary was based on [20].
The ﬁrst question in the questionnaire (Q1) was:
"When you think back over the past 6 months, how disturbed have you been by noise
while you have been at work?"
With ﬁve possible answers:
• "Not at all"
• "A little"
• "Moderately"
• "Much"
• "Extremely"
.
The second question (Q2) was:
"When you think back over the past six months how often have you experienced that
you could not hear or understand what a colleague and/or a patient said because of
noise?"
24
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 4. Method
4.3. Questionnaires
with the possibility of answering:
• "Never"
• "Rarely"
• "Sometimes"
• "Often"
• "Always".
,
The third question (Q3) was:
"When thinking about the past six months, how often have you experienced that you
could not speak conﬁdentially with a patient without other patients hearing you?"
Which had the same available for answers as Q2. For Q1, Q2 and Q3 the participants
were also asked to answer in what rooms they experienced the phenomenon with the
possibility of answering:
• "Examination room"
• "Meeting room"
• "Waiting room"
• "Corridor"
• "Oﬃce"
• "Patient room"
• Write their own answer
The participants could cross out up to three rooms where the phenomenon occurred.
For the Q3 only the following rooms were available to cross out:
• "Examination room"
• "Oﬃce"
• "Patient room"
• Write their own answer
as it was considered to be beyond the room functions to expect to be able to have
conﬁdent talks in the other rooms.
The last question in the questionnaire (Q5), regarded noise sources and was:
"When thinking back over the past six months, cross out up to ﬁve noise sources you
found disturbing at your work place"
25
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 4. Method
4.3. Questionnaires
with the possibility of answering:
• "Medical equipment",
• "Alarms"
• "Oﬃce equipment"
• "TV"
• "Other entertainment equipment"
• "Rolling carts"
• "Building installations"
• "Talking in rooms you are in"
• "Talk outside of rooms you are in"
• Write their own answer
The participants were also asked to ﬁll out, age, gender, whether they knew if they had
hearing impairment and if they considered themselves to be sensitive towards noise.
Later in the project a question about their profession was added as well.
For Two of the departments, dermatological department and rehabilitation department,
an additional question (Q4) was added, which was:
"When thinking back over the past six months, how often have you experienced that a
patient said that he/she could not hear or understand important information you have
given?"
with the same possible answers as for Q2 and Q3. In addition to Q4 the participants
also asked to write in what rooms the phenomenon occurred, with the same possibilities
as Q3. The ﬁnal questionnaire survey was in Danish. In A.1 the questionnaire can be
found together with the on-line version of Q4.
The representatives from each department selected whether they wanted the question-
naire survey in paper or online form. The questionnaires were sent out electronically
to all staﬀmembers at the working and occupational medicine department (28 people),
Dermatological department (31 people) and the rehabilitation department (4 people).
In the x-ray department and palliative department, the questionnaires were handed out
in paper form, the representatives from the departments were in charge of handing them
out and have staﬀmembers ﬁlling them out. The representatives were given about two
weeks to have the staﬀto ﬁll the questionnaires out, and it was considered possible that
all working in the departments possibly could ﬁll out the questionnaire, which were 30
people in the palliative department and 55 people in the X-ray department. At the Emer-
gency department, it remains unknown how many staﬀmembers had the questionnaire
26
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 4. Method
4.4. Noise measurements
sent out electronically, two people ﬁlled it out in paper form, while the measurements
were performed.
4.3.1
Statistics
Signiﬁcant results were achieved with a one-way analysis of variance (one-way ANOVA)
and a repeating measures ANOVA, using the method of mixed models method, with the
code lme4 (Douglas Bates, Martin Maechler, Ben Bolker, Steve Walker 2015) in the
statistics program R (Core Team 2017). The answers to the questionnaires were as-
sumed to be normally distributed and have independence variables or for the mixed
models method, repeating variables stated as random eﬀect.
4.4
Noise measurements
Noise measurements were performed in four rooms in Bispebjerg Hospital to compare
the noise levels with those from hospitals in other studies. The goal was to obtain noise
measurements from at least one room with each issue. Measurements were obtained
for rooms with the issues; Noise building up, Reverberation and Lack of speech Privacy
between rooms, and was not obtained for a room with the issue Noisy/hectic environ-
ment. The noise measurements were performed over a 24 hours period with a Brüel
& Kjær 2250 SPL meter. The device was set to logging every 10 seconds measuring
A-weighted sound pressure level, C-weighted peaks and LAFmin and LAFmax, fast
time weighting corresponding to measuring over 125 milliseconds.
4.4.1
Dermatological department
The rooms in which noise was measured were examination room 12 (D.Ex12) and the
nurse station (D.NS) at the Dermatological department. D.Ex12 noise was measured
since it was the room for which an acoustical solution was planned on being designed.
D.NS was measured to investigate if the noise levels corresponded with other studies
performed internationally. In D.Ex12 there was a particular high hygiene requirement
[45], which demanded that the SPL meter was cleaned with surgical spirit and placed in
a plastic bag and placed on top of a cabinet with an extension cable with the microphone
hanging from a lamp. The microphone and cable were also cleaned with surgical spirit.
In D.NS the SPL meter was placed approximately 0.5 meters from the wall on a tripod
on top of a table. Pictures of the placements of the two SPL meters can be seen in ﬁgure
4.2. D.Ex12 was in use every day from 8.00 to 15.00. The noise measurements were
27
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 4. Method
4.4. Noise measurements
scheduled for a day where the department was busiest, according to the employees. The
measurements were performed over a Tuesday and Wednesday on the 9th of May 2017
from 15:16 to the 10th of May 2017 at 15:16. D.NS was in use day and night but with
more activity around shifts. The measurements of D.NS were performed on Tuesday
the 9th of May at 15:35 to Wednesday the 10th of May at 15:35.
The nurse station was occupied most of the time during the 24 hours.
Figure 4.2: Installation of SPL meter in Dermatological department. To the left the installation
in D.Ex12, the microphone is hanging from a cable from a lamp, the SPL meter is put away on
top of the closet. To the right the installation of the SPL meter in D.NS. The meter is placed on
top of a table approximately 0.5 meters from the wall.
4.4.2
Work and occupational medicine department
Noise was measured at the work and occupational medicine department in examination
rooms 1 and 3. These two rooms were picked as they are nearly the same size, but
examination room 1 (W.Ex1) had no absorption panels, where examination room 3
(W.Ex3) did have absorption panels installed. W.Ex3 had 10 absorption panels of size
60x60 cm presumably of the type Ecophon Master B placed equally distributed on
the walls. Noise measurements were made in these rooms to assess the eﬀect of the
acoustic panels. In both rooms, the SPL meter was placed approximately 0.5 meters
from the wall on a tripod next to the doctors desk. The placement of the two SPL meters
in the rooms are shown in ﬁgure 4.3. The examination rooms were in use from 9.00
28
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4. Method
4.4. Noise measurements
am to approximately 15.00 pm, and employees were present one hour before and one
hour after the consultation hours. The measurements were performed from Monday the
22nd of May at 14:14 to Tuesday 23rd of May at 14:14 in W.Ex1 and the same days
from 14:21 to 14:21 in W.Ex3.
Figure 4.3: Installation of SPL meters in work and occupational medicine department. To the
left the installation in W.Ex1. The SPL meter is placed on a tripod beside the doctor desk and
behind one of the two chairs the patients usually employ. To the right the installation of the SPL
meter in W.Ex3. The SPL meter is placed on a tripod beside the doctor desk and behind one
of the two chairs the patients usually employ. In the upper part of the picture, two absorption
panels can be seen.
29
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 4. Method
4.5. Simulated solution
4.5
Simulated solution
One room was further investigated to simulate a solution. This room was D.Ex12 at
the dermatological department. This room was chosen as it represented several of the
typical challenges for examination rooms in Bispebjerg Hospital, and potentially for
other older hospitals. The challenges were:
• It had large ﬂoor to ceiling height presumably causing reverberation and low
clarity
• It had high requirements for hygiene
• It was in a listed building
Furthermore, the room was mainly used for examination of elderly people. Elderly
people are more often hearing impaired, which is especially negatively inﬂuenced by
high reverberation in rooms [50] and [26]. These challenges demand a solution which
lower the reverberation so that patients are not forced to wear headphones and nurses
and doctors talk into a microphone to communicate with the patients, as reported in
chapter 5. The solution also had to live up to a high demand of cleanliness, the infor-
mation here about was obtained in an interview with the cleaning staﬀat the hospital.
The cleaning staﬀinformed that the room was cleaned four times per year using regu-
lar cleaning soap with a method which included friction at the ceiling, this was why a
visible grid construction for a suspended ceiling is not a possibility [45]. Furthermore
since the building was listed, it was a requirement that the solution was visually neutral.
The product which was suggested for the solution was Ecophon Hygiene Labotec Ds
which is made of high density glass wool and painted with the particle repellent paint
Akutex HP [14]. The plates were advised to be mounted on a none visible grid system
which is constructed to withstand the pressure and friction resulting from [15].
The room was drawn in Sketchup 2017 and the sketch can be seen in A.13. The sketch
was implemented in the program Odeon. The impulse response was set to 2000 ms, the
gain was set to 65 dB and the position of the speaker was set to (x,y,z)=(3.00;2.07;1.50)
and the three receivers were placed (x,y,z)=(1.04;1.24;1.50), (x,y,z)=(4.27;1.98;1.50)
and (x,y,z)=(1.86,2,51;1,50), respectively, which can be seen in ﬁgure 4.4. A simu-
lation of the measured room was derived as well as a model with the solution imple-
mented, giving information about EDT, T20, C50 and STI, before and after installing the
solution. All work performed in Odeon was performed by Ejnar Ejnar Videbæk from
Niras. Material list and sketch with materials can be found in A.14
30
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4. Method
4.5. Simulated solution
Figure 4.4: Model from Odeon. The red dot is the source placed at (x,y,z)=(3.00;2.07;1.50),
and the blue dots are the receivers placed at (x,y,z)=(1.04;1.24;1.50), (x,y,z)=(4.27;1.98;1.50)
and (x,y,z)=(1.86,2,51;1,50).
31
==PAGE:48==
==PAGE:49==
Chapter
5
Interviews with hospital departments
This chapter is based the interviews and dialogues which were held with the staﬀat the
Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg Hospitals to clarify the types of problems and challenges
the staﬀwere reporting regarding noise and acoustics. These interviews and dialogues
can potentially give future investigations a general idea of the conditions and chal-
lenges, regarding noise and acoustics, in the healthcare system. All departments which
were visited and interviewed are included in this chapter, including those which were
not investigated with acoustic measurements in this study. Abbreviations of rooms can
be found in table 4.1.
5.1
Departments at Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg
Hospitals
Work and occupational medicine department
The ﬁrst department which was visited and participated as pilot in the project was the
work and occupational medicine department. They had an interest in participating in
the project due to their meeting/conference room. The working environment repre-
sentative informed that several in the department experienced that noise was building
up in the room, when they were many people present at the same time. Especially
one colleague, who was hearing impaired could not eat lunch in the room because the
voices building up gave her temporary tinnitus. The meeting room had several kinds of
absorption panels installed on the walls among these large porous panels with artistic
motives in frames.
32
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 5. Interviews with hospital departments
5.1. Departments at Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg
Hospitals
Figure 5.1: Sketch of adjacent rooms in the
working and occupational medicine depart-
ment. Gray objects represent furniture.
It was decided to measure the meeting/-
conference room and at the same time
the ambulatory in the department, sketch
in ﬁgure 5.1. When talking to the sec-
retaries working in the ambulatory they
told that a radio was playing constantly in
the waiting room, to avoid that patients in
the waiting room overhearing what was
said in the examination rooms, which
had entrances from the waiting room and
the corridor. Furthermore, the secretaries
also mentioned that they found their of-
ﬁce reverberant. It was noticed that sev-
eral of the examination rooms had ab-
sorption panels installed on the wall sup-
posedly of the type Ecophon Master B,
which is a type of absorption panel made
for gluing directly on the surface (ceiling or wall) and are made of glass wool [13]. The
panels can be seen in ﬁgure 5.2 top left.
In summary the working and occupational medicine department participated in the
study with seven rooms: W.MR with the issue Noise building up, W.Ex1, W.Ex3,
W.Ex5. W.Cor and W.WR each with the issue Lack of speech privacy between rooms
and W.SO with the issue Reverberation.
33
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 5. Interviews with hospital departments
5.1. Departments at Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg
Hospitals
Figure 5.2: Top left: Absorption panels in W.Ex3. Top right: Varies absorption panels in W.MR.
Bottom: Radio playing in W.WR to mask conversations in the examination rooms, the sign says:
"The radio must not be turned oﬀ!"
Emergency department
Figure 5.3: Sketch of adjacent rooms in emer-
gency department. Gray opjects represent fur-
niture.
The interest in participating in the project
from the emergency department was due
to a noisy secretary oﬃce, as expressed
by the secretaries. The department was
visited and the secretaries could then
elaborate that the nurse station from
which the secretary oﬃce was entered,
sketch in ﬁgure 5.3, was often hectic
due to nurses walking back and forth,
checking their screens, the emergency
phone ringing, nurses talking to each
other about patients and so forth.
The
secretaries did not want to have the door
closed and said that it did solve the noise
problem. The secretaries said that the noise made it hard for them to concentrate on
their work and they easily got interrupted. It was noted that the nurse station was al-
34
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 5. Interviews with hospital departments
5.1. Departments at Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg
Hospitals
most empty of furniture and that both rooms had suspended acoustic ceilings made of
perforated metal plates with a type of absorbing material behind, a picture of the ceiling
can be seen in ﬁgure 5.4.
In summary the emergency department participated in the project with two rooms E.SO
and E.NS both with the issue Noisy/hectic environment.
Figure 5.4: Acoustic ceiling in E.SO.
Dermatological department
The working environment representative from the dermatological department was in-
terested in participating in the project due to noise and acoustical issues in four rooms,
two examination rooms, a nurse station and a lunch room.
She explained that they had problems in the two examination rooms due to reverber-
ation. They experienced that patients could not hear them clearly when they were
talking, which had lead them to acquire a small microphone and headphones to use for
communicating with the patients. The rooms were considered very reverberant and it
was noted that half of examination room 12 had a suspended ceiling with older metal
tiles, most likely with the function of hiding away ventilation ducts and made in metal
for hygienic purposes, the ceiling can be seen in ﬁgure5.5. None of the rooms had any
acoustic regulations which was attributed to the building being listed, as was veriﬁed
by [35].
The problems in the nurse station was explained to be that when many people were in
the room at the same time it was hard to focus on work because of talking, which was
building up in the room. The room was often used by many people at the same time
35
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 5. Interviews with hospital departments
5.1. Departments at Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg
Hospitals
and used to write records, which demanded focus. It was noted that the nurse station
had a suspended ceiling installed with perforated ceiling tiles made of perforated metal
tiles with a absorbing material inside. The lunch room was explained to have the same
problem with noise building up in the room when many people were in the room at the
same time, though it was not as crucial in the lunch room as in the nurse station since it
was not used for focused work. It created annoyance that lunch and breaks could not be
experienced in a quiet environment. It was noted that the lunch room had several older
acoustic panels installed, made of a porous material in a metal frame shown in ﬁgure
5.5.
In summary the dermatological department participated with four rooms; D.Ex12 and
D.Ex18 with the issue Reverberation and D.NS and D.LR with the issue Noise building
up.
Figure 5.5: Left: Metal ceiling panels in D.Ex12. Right: Older absorption panels in D.LR.
Palliative department
Palliative department participated in the project with their lunch room. The head nurse
of the department perceived that noise was building up in the room when many peo-
ple were gathered. The room was also used for educational purposes, where a single
person would talk, which was not considered a problem. The room had newer absorp-
tion panels installed presumably of the type Ecophon Master B, the same panels as in
W.Ex3, but it was not enough to prevent the noise building up, according to the nurse.
The room was not perceived particular reverberant. Also, other rooms were visited in
the department, among them a patient room which was found very reverberant. It was
attempted to arrange to measure the patient room also, but this was unfortunately not
possible.
36
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 5. Interviews with hospital departments
5.1. Departments at Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg
Hospitals
In summary the palliative department participated with one room P.LR with the issue
Noise building up.
Rehabilitation department
Figure 5.6: Sketch of adjacent rooms in reha-
bilitation department. Gray objects represent
furniture.
The department volunteered to the project
as it is a sub department of the larger
Rehabilitation department at Frederiks-
berg hospital, which had recently moved
into three new rooms, sketch of the three
rooms are shown in ﬁgure 5.6.
The
staﬀmembers had contacted the work-
ing environment representative because
they found the rooms reverberant and
uncomfortable acoustically.
Especially
one of the three rooms caused discomfort
and the working representative was con-
cerned that the room would end up being used as storage, due to the poor acoustics. The
rooms were, while the project was running, used as oﬃces for the four staﬀmembers
who were aﬃliated the sub department. However, there were plans to convert one of the
rooms into a rehabilitation/treatment room primarily for their elderly patients. When
visiting the rooms, it was noticed that two of the rooms were severely reverberant and
the room less reverberant, the room in the middle, had a suspended ceiling installed
made of porous ceiling panels, which can be seen in ﬁgure 5.7. The two other rooms
had no acoustic regulations and a large ﬂoor to ceiling height.
In summary the rehabilitation department participated with the rooms R.OR1, R.OR2
and R.TR with the issues Reverberation, though R.OR2 was considered better acousti-
cally than the two other rooms.
37
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 5. Interviews with hospital departments
5.1. Departments at Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg
Hospitals
Figure 5.7: Acoustic ceiling in R.OR2.
X-ray department
Figure 5.8: Sketch of adjacent rooms in x-ray
department. Gray object represent furniture.
The X-ray department volunteered to the
project because of three rooms, they
found noisy.
Two of the rooms were
oﬃces, where one of them (X.OR1)
was used as a passage to another oﬃce
(X.OR2) and to a small storage room,
sketch in 5.8. X.OR1 also had a small
"glass box" attached to the room which
was used as a reception. The users of the
two rooms explained that people passed
through the room regularly, which was
also noticed when visiting and that espe-
cially the person in the reception was dis-
turbed by noise in the room. It was also
common that people would hang around
in the room and talk which was disturbing
for the secretaries. The room had several
absorption panels installed on the walls presumably of the type Ecophon Master B,
which had reduced the noise but the staﬀstill found the room reverberant, however,
this was not the perceived when visited. Users of X.OR2 was mostly disturbed by
38
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 5. Interviews with hospital departments
5.1. Departments at Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg
Hospitals
noise coming from X.OR1, but found it uncomfortable to keep the door between the
rooms shut. They also explained that noise would come from the corridor, which they
avoided by shutting the door to the corridor.
The department also had a control room (X.CR) which they found noisy. The control
room had an area with a small ﬂoor to ceiling height and in the same room another
area with a very large ﬂoor to ceiling height. The room was also used as a passage to
another control room and as a passage for entering the room with the x-ray scanner.
The radiographers told that a lot of people passed through the room while they were
sitting and working which they found very disturbing. Furthermore, they found that
the abnormal construction of the room led to more noise in the end of the room with a
large ceiling to ﬂoor height. A suspended ceiling was installed in the part of the room
with large ﬂoor to ceiling height and absorption panels had been installed at both ends
of the room, which the staﬀexpressed had improved the acoustic environment.
In summary, the X-ray department participated with three rooms X.OR1, X.OR2 and
X.CR with the issue Noisy/Hectic environment.
Figure 5.9: Acoustic ceiling and absorption panels in X.CR. The sign says: "Quiet area".
39
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 5. Interviews with hospital departments
5.2. Departments which were not included in the study
5.2
Departments which were not included in the study
Besides the six departments at Bispebjerg and Frederikberg Hospital which were in-
cluded in the study, four other departments were visited at Bispebjerg hospital, Hvi-
dovre hospital and Rigshospitalet, which were after the interview considered not suit-
able for this study. However, the interviews and impressions received at the interviews
were considered important for the general knowledge about hospital acoustics.
Respiratory medicine department, Bispebjerg hospital
The respiratory medicine department had an interest in the project due to noise in the
entire department but especially in their two nurse stations. The head nurse of the
department explained that they constantly had alarms going oﬀwhich the nurses was
found stressful. It was observed during the visit that alarms were going oﬀcontinuously
in the nurse station and in the hallway with intervals of a few minutes all the time. They
also showed their intermediary ward where at least one patient at the time was given
oxygen and where a nurse was sitting guard for 8 hours at a time while doing other work
which demanded focus. When visiting one patient was being given oxygen, which was
measured to a SPL of 70 dB(A) over a few minutes, though measured on a cellphone
and not on a trusted device. The respiratory medicine department would be considered
a department with the issues, Noisy/hectic environment in the nurse station and along
with the issue Noise from Alarms and equipment in the intermediary ward and in the
hallways. The department was unfortunately not included in this study due outsourcing
to a bachelor project, which was later abandoned.
Orthopaedic surgical department, Bispebjerg hospital
The department Orthopaedic surgical department was interested in participating in the
project due to their lunch room, which they found noisy when many people were in the
room at the same time. They said that noise was building up when several people were
talking at the same time and that the coﬀee machine and dishwasher in the room added
to this phenomenon. They found it particularly disturbing since it was the only place
they could relax during their work day. The department was not included in the project,
as two other lunch rooms with similar issues were already included the project and the
priority was rooms exclusive for hospitals.
40
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 5. Interviews with hospital departments
5.2. Departments which were not included in the study
Biomedical department, Rigshospitalet
The biomedical department at Rigshospitalet did not treat any patients but was a con-
stant working department taking care of blood analysis for Rigshospitalet. The de-
partment experienced constant noise from their machinery which was used to do the
analyses of blood and tests. One room was visited where a SPL of 80 dB(A) was mea-
sured, though on a cellphone and not a fully trusted device. The noise came primarily
from medical equipment, several people were working on tests in the room, work which
required focus. They had recently changed their work hours so that the people working
in this very noisy room only had four hours of continuous work in the room and after-
wards had duties in less noisy rooms. It was crucial for the work performed that the
staﬀmembers could communicate clearly, so earplugs and earmuﬀs were not found to
be suitable solution to minimize noise exposure. The department was not included in
the scope of this project, as departments with patient interaction being prioritized.
MRI department, Hvidovre Hospital
Hvidovre Hospital was visited and inspected for the project without them reporting
about any noise or acoustical problems. The hospital was visited solely for the purpose
of giving the author an impression of the acoustics and noise in a newer hospital, Hvi-
dovre Hospital was built in 1976. When visited and by talking to the staﬀa handful of
problems regarding noise and acoustics were revealed. The department was working
with MRI-scanners and two employees sitting in a room next to the control room for the
MRI-scanner explained that they were disturbed by noise from the MRI-scanner and
also from the HVAC system. Also, a nurse station in a linked department, but in another
building, was visited where the nurses, radiographers and doctors told that the environ-
ment was hectic and sometimes it was hard to hear each other when they were many
people working in the station, the station was not considered particular reverberant.
41
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 5. Interviews with hospital departments 5.3. General observations regarding acoustics in Danish hospitals
5.3
General observations regarding acoustics in Danish
hospitals
From visiting these diﬀerent hospitals with diﬀerent categories of issues the impres-
sion was that the two old hospitals Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg were suﬀering from
many reverberant rooms, some which had been attempted ﬁxed with easy solutions of
installing absorption panels on the walls, in accordance with the preference of the staﬀ
who used the rooms and not with considerations about acoustics. In rooms with high
hygiene demands or in listed buildings the problems remained unsolved. Rooms with
high hygiene demands include patient rooms and examination rooms, which could in-
dicate that Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg hospitals have a general problem regarding
room acoustics in patient rooms and examination rooms, which is not thoroughly illu-
minated in this study.
Several departments reported that the lunch rooms, which beside of being used for eat-
ing lunch often were also often were used for taking breaks, were very noisy. Most of
the lunch rooms visited were improved acoustically with absorption panels, but only
with a limited eﬀect according to the staﬀ. This may be an indication that hospital staﬀ
are lacking a quiet place to relax during their breaks before continuing their busy and
noisy work. In BR15 only patient rooms, treatment room and examination rooms have
guidelines. Staﬀcomplaining about lunch rooms and other types of rooms not included
in BR15 indicates that more research of acoustics in rooms in the healthcare system is
needed to create a satisfactory working environment in hospitals.
When contacting and communicating with the hospitals for this study, all rooms re-
ported were rooms where the acoustics and noise were bothering the staﬀ, but the pa-
tient’s interests regarding these issues were never adressed? Annually a nationwide
questionnaire survey for patients is performed [19]. A start to elucidating the expe-
rience from the patient’s point of view could be to include questions about noise and
sleep disturbance in these questionnaires.
Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg hospital are both old hospitals which are planned on be-
ing renovated and extended within the next ten years [33]. Until now the impression
is that noise and acoustical problems have been solved one room at a time which has
given a confusing and incoherent impression architecturally and does not correspond
with the purpose of listing buildings. An overall acoustic renovation in accordance with
42
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 5. Interviews with hospital departments 5.3. General observations regarding acoustics in Danish hospitals
the Danish Building regulation, which also respected the architectural impressions and
practically lives up to high hygienic requirements to cleaning would be a good start.
However, more knowledge about room types and functions of room types in hospitals
are needed, to improve existing guidelines to examination rooms, treatment rooms and
patient rooms and to include guidelines for room types, which are not included in the
existing regulations.
The impression from the two hospitals Rigshospitalet and Hvidovre Hospital was that
reverberation was not as dominant a problem. However these hospitals still suﬀered
from noise from equipment and installations, which according to the people inter-
viewed was disturbing for their work. This indicates that noise levels should be brought
down not only by improving room acoustics but also by investigating the noise sources
and designing solutions to minimize them.
43
==PAGE:61==
Chapter
6
Results
In the following chapter the results will be presented and discussed. Abbreviations used
for rooms and issues are shown in the following table:
Figure 6.1: Abbreviations for department and room type, which identiﬁes the room abbrevia-
tions. Table of speciﬁc abbreviations of rooms are listed in ﬁgure 4.1.
44
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 6. Results
6.1. Acoustic parameters
6.1
Acoustic parameters
The frequencies studied were in the 1/1 octave band from 63 Hz to 8000 Hz. In the
following chapter the results for EDT, T20, C50 and STI in the measured rooms are
shown. The results for each room are presented according to the type of room in four
categories:
• examination rooms and treatment rooms
• nurse station, control rooms, waiting rooms and corridors
• oﬃces
• meeting rooms and lunch rooms
6.1.1
Examination rooms and treatment rooms
Five examination rooms (D.Ex12, D.Ex18, W.Ex1, W.Ex3, and W.Ex5) and one treat-
ment room (R.TR) were measured. Five of the six rooms all show an EDT and T20 of
above 0.6 s for the frequency bands 63-4000 Hz W.Ex3 has lower values, but this was
expected as the room had acoustic panels on the walls, ﬁgures 6.2 and 6.3. Despite
this, W.Ex3 still has an EDT and T20 above 0.6 s for the low frequencies (63 to 250).
According to BR15 a reverberation time T20 of 0.6 s is the requirement to examination
rooms and treatment rooms, these requirements are not fulﬁlled. The clarity C50 was
low (below 4 dB) for all rooms in all frequency bands between 63-4000 Hz, except for
W.Ex3, ﬁgure 6.4. This exception for W.Ex3 is expected for rooms with high reverber-
ation time. W.Ex3 has the highest clarity for the frequencies 500-8000 Hz, but a clarity
index as the other rooms for 63-250 Hz. The room that was particularly notable for poor
room acoustics according to EDT, T20 and C50 was R.TR, which seems problematic as
the room was intended to be used for exercising and treating elderly patients. R.TR also
stood out regarding STI, where it was the only room with the STI level "Fair", where
the other rooms achieved a level of "Good" and W.Ex3 achieved the level "Excellent",
ﬁgure 6.5.
45
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 6. Results
6.1. Acoustic parameters
Figure 6.2: Results for early decay time for the ﬁve examination rooms and one treatment
room. Explanation of abbreviations are shown in table 6.1. On the x-axis the 1/1 octave bands
are listed between 63-8000 Hz on the y-axis the EDT is shown in seconds. Vertical lines show
the conﬁdence interval.
Figure 6.3: Results for reverberation time T20 for the ﬁve examination rooms and one treatment
room. Explanation of abbreviations in table 6.1, red dashed line shows the requirement in [18].
On the x-axis the 1/1 octave bands are listed between 63-8000 Hz on the y-axis T20 is shown in
seconds. Vertical lines show the conﬁdence interval.
46
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 6. Results
6.1. Acoustic parameters
Figure 6.4: Results for clarity C50 for the ﬁve examination rooms and one treatment room.
Explanation of abbreviations are shown in table 6.1. On the x-axis the 1/1 octave bands are
listed between 63-8000 Hz, on the y-axis C50 is shown in dB. Vertical lines show the conﬁdence
interval.
Figure 6.5: Results for STI value for female and male for the ﬁve examination rooms and one
treatment room. Speech intelligibility is presented to the right of the STI value.
6.1.2
Nurse stations, control rooms, waiting rooms and corridors
Two nurse stations (D.NS and E.NS), one control room (X.CR), one corridor (W.Cor)
and one waiting room (W.WR) were measured and are plotted together. These rooms
are all exclusive for healthcare facilities (except for the corridor) and have no room
acoustic recommendations in BR15. The reverberation times EDT and T20 show very
diﬀerent results between the ﬁve rooms, ﬁgure 6.6 and 6.7. E.NS and X.CR both have
T20 values around 0.4 s for all frequencies except for 63 Hz. D.NS follow the same
T20 pattern for frequencies from 500-8000 Hz but T20 values increase for the low fre-
quencies. W.Cor and W.WR both have very high EDT and T20 and EDT values, they
47
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 6. Results
6.1. Acoustic parameters
are also unique compared to the three other rooms as none of them have acoustic reg-
ulations. The three rooms D.NS, E.NS and X.CR all have high C50 values between
250-8000 Hz, ﬁgure 6.8, except for X.CR which drops to 0 dB for 8000 Hz and for the
low frequencies 63-125 Hz C50 is decreasing. W.Cor and W.WR both have very low
C50, which correspond to the STI values which are "Fair" for W.WR and W.Cor and
"Excellent" for D.NS, E.NS and X.CR, ﬁgure 6.9. The results show that although nurse
stations and control rooms are not mentioned in BR15, they still have good acoustics,
but the acoustics could be improved for the low frequencies in D.NS, which would also
help the issue reported of Noise building up in the room. The staﬀexplained that it was
primarily voices which were building up in the room and male and female voices have
pitch in the lower frequencies, which, for this room, also are the frequencies with high
EDT and T20 values. The corridor and waiting room are very reverberant, and if this
applies in general for these types of rooms in hospitals, it may be a problem noise can
travel from especially corridors to adjacent rooms, which could be patient rooms.
Figure 6.6: Results for early decay time for the two nurse station, one control room, one waiting
room and one corridor. Explanation of abbreviations are shown in table 6.1. On the x-axis the
1/1 octave bands are listed between 63-8000 Hz, on the y-axis the early decay time is shown in
seconds. Vertical lines show the conﬁdence interval.
48
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 6. Results
6.1. Acoustic parameters
Figure 6.7: Results for reverberation time T20 for the two nurse station, one control room,
one waiting room and one corridor. Explaination of abbreviations are shown in table 6.1, red
dashed line shows the requirement in [18] to examination and treatment rooms. On the x-axis
the 1/1 octave bands are listed between 63-8000 Hz, on the y-axis T20 is shown in seconds.
Vertical lines show the conﬁdence interval.
Figure 6.8: Results for clarity C50 for the two nurse station, one control room, one waiting
room and one corridor. Explanation of abbreviations are shown in table 6.1. On the x-axis the
1/1 octave bands are listed between 63-8000 Hz, on the y-axis C50 is shown in dB. Vertical lines
show the conﬁdence interval.
49
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 6. Results
6.1. Acoustic parameters
Figure 6.9: Results for STI for female and male for the two nurse station, one control room,
one waiting room and one corridor. Explanation of abbreviations are shown in table 6.1. The
speech intelligibility is presented to the right of the STI value.
6.1.3
Oﬃces
Six oﬃces (E.SO, R. OR1, R.OR2, W.SO, X.OR1 and X.OR2 were measured. These
rooms were categorized together because they are all oﬃces in the hospitals. The room
acoustics are covered in BR15 with the recommendation for shared oﬃces, which is that
the absorption area should be larger or equal to 1.1 times the ﬂoor area. The recom-
mended reverberation times T20 are calculated for each oﬃce room in 6.10. The plots
of the measured rooms can be divided in three groups: The ﬁrst group with X.OR1,
X.OR2 and E.SO, have EDT and T20 values at around 0.4 s, ﬁgures 6.11 and 6.12.
The second group with R.OR1 and W.SO have EDT and T20 values around 0.6 s for
500-4000 Hz and lower for 8000 Hz and increasing for the low frequencies (63-250
Hz). The third group of R.OR2 has very high EDT and T20 values over all frequencies.
C50 values show the same pattern. High C50 values for the ﬁrst group with the three
rooms X.OR1, X.OR2 and E.SO, ﬁgure 6.13. Lower C50 values for the second group
with R.OR1 and W.SO around 4 dB and very low C50 values over all frequencies for
the group with R.OR2. The STI is "Excellent" for the three oﬃces X.OR1, X.OR2
and E.SO and "Good" for R.OR1, R.OR2 and W.SO. These results show that several
of the oﬃces in Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg hospital do not fulﬁl the requirements
for BR15, presumably because the requirements must only have to be followed when
renovating, which has not been done in the aﬀected rooms.
Figure 6.10: Recommended reverberation time T20 for shared oﬃce rooms from [18], calcu-
lated from ﬂoor area.
50
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 6. Results
6.1. Acoustic parameters
Figure 6.11: Results for early decay time for the six oﬃces. Explanation of abbreviations are
shown in table 6.1. On the x-axis the 1/1 octave bands are listed between 63-8000 Hz on the
y-axis the early decay time is shown in seconds. Vertical lines show the conﬁdence interval.
Figure 6.12: Results for reverberation time T20 for the six oﬃces. Explanation of abbreviations
are shown in table 6.1, red dashed line shows the requirement in [18] for single person oﬃces
and meeting rooms. On the x-axis the 1/1 octave bands are listed between 63-8000 Hz on the
y-axis T20 is shown in seconds. Vertical lines show the conﬁdence interval.
51
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 6. Results
6.1. Acoustic parameters
Figure 6.13: Results for clarity C50 for the six oﬃces. Explanation of abbreviations are shown
in table 6.1. On the x-axis the 1/1 octave bands are listed between 63-8000 Hz, on the y-axis
C50 is shown in dB. Vertical lines show the conﬁdence interval.
Figure 6.14: Results for STI for female and male for the six oﬃces. Explanation of abbreviations
are shown in table 6.1. Speech intelligibility interval is presented to the right of the STI value.
6.1.4
Meeting rooms and lunch rooms
Two lunch rooms (D.LR and P.LR) and one meeting room (W.MR) were measured.
The lunch rooms were reported to occasionally being used as meeting rooms and were
therefore plotted together. The requirement in BR15 to meeting rooms is a reverber-
ation time of 0.6 s. All three rooms show values around and just below 0.6 s for the
higher frequencies (500-8000 Hz) for EDT and T20 with an exception of P.LR, which
was just above 0.6 s for frequencies between 500-4000 Hz, ﬁgures 6.15 and 6.16. For
the lower frequencies (63-250 Hz) the values EDT and T20 are above the recommended
0.6 s. For P.LR and W.MR C50 values are in the midrange, at 4 dB, for the higher fre-
quencies (500-8000 Hz), and slightly lower at 2 dB for the low frequencies 63-250 Hz,
52
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 6. Results
6.1. Acoustic parameters
ﬁgure 6.17. D.LR is increasing from 0 dB at 63 Hz to 10 dB at 1000 Hz and staying up
for the high frequencies. Only D.LR has an "Excellent" STI, the STI values in W.MR
and P.LR are in the high end of the range for "Good", ﬁgure 6.18.
Figure 6.15: Results for early decay time for the two lunch rooms and one meeting room.
Explanation of abbreviations are shown in table 6.1. On the x-axis the 1/1 octave bands are
given between 63-8000 Hz, on the y-axis the early decay time is shown in seconds. Vertical
lines show the conﬁdence interval.
53
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 6. Results
6.1. Acoustic parameters
Figure 6.16: Results for reverberation time T20 for the two lunch rooms and one meeting room.
Explanation of abbreviations are shown in table 6.1, red dashed line shows the requirement in
the Danish Building Regulation 2015. On the x-axis the 1/1 frequency bands are given between
63-8000 Hz, on the y-axis T20 is shown in seconds. Vertical lines show the conﬁdence interval.
Figure 6.17: Results for clarity C50 for the two lunch rooms and one meeting room. Explanation
of abbreviations are shown in table 6.1. On the x-axis the 1/1 octave bands are given between
63-8000 Hz on the y-axis C50 is shown in dB. Vertical lines show the conﬁdence interval.
54
==PAGE:72==
Chapter 6. Results
6.2. Characteristics of each issue
Figure 6.18: Results for STI for females and males for the two lunch rooms and one meeting
room. Explanation of abbreviations are shown in table 6.1. Quality interval is presented to the
right of the STI value.
6.2
Characteristics of each issue
The twenty rooms measured were characterized by four diﬀerent issues explained in
chapters 4 and 5 and the categorization is shown in ﬁgure 4.1. The rooms with the
same issues were plotted together for the four acoustic parameters EDT, T20, C50 and
STI, which are shown in A.3, A.4, A.5 and A.6, to see if the issues could be explained
by room acoustics.
Noise building up
Four rooms were categorized with the issue Noise building up. The issue was based on
reports from the staﬀinterviewed that noise, especially voices, was building up when
many people were gathered in the rooms. When looking at the similarities for the plot
for the issue Noise building up all four rooms show the same T20 pattern, with low T20
values for the high frequencies (500-4000 Hz) and an increase for the low frequencies
(63-250 Hz). This shows that the issue Noise building up presumably can be linked to
the shape of T20 over the frequencies 63-8000 Hz. This was checked with a correlation
analysis for T20 over the vector of T20 values over the frequencies 63-16000 Hz for each
room with the issue Noise building up, ﬁgure 6.19. The ﬁgure shows that T20 correlate
well for the four rooms, with the exception for between P.LR and D.LR, which only
gives a correlation coeﬃcient of 0.87. Correlation matrices were also performed for
the other acoustic parameters and the other issues, which did not reveal as consistent
results, shown in A.7. This result indicates that the issue of Noise Building up is linked
to the shape of T20 over the frequencies 63-8000 Hz. When visited these kinds of rooms
did not obviously show an acoustical problem presumably because when visited only
two or three people were present in the room at the same time.
55
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 6. Results
6.2. Characteristics of each issue
Figure 6.19: Correlation matrix between vectors of T20 for frequencies between 63-8000 Hz for
the categorized issue Noise building up. Values shown are Pearson correlation coeﬃcient, gray
color indicates values above 0.9.
Reverberation in room
When looking for characteristics for the rooms with the issue Reverberation it is no-
ticeable that all ﬁve rooms have EDT and T20 values for all frequencies above the
recommended value from BR15 of 0.6 s. All ﬁve rooms also have low values for C50
and are "Fair"-"Good" speech intelligibility. Two rooms (W.Ex5 and R.OR1) show the
same T20 pattern as was seen for rooms with the issue Noise building up, where the T20
for high frequencies (500-8000 Hz) are relatively low and the low frequencies (125-250
Hz) are higher, though the T20 drops again for 63 Hz, which was not the case for the
rooms with the issue Noise building up. It is proposed that the reason why the users did
not complain about Noise building up in these rooms, is due to a more dominant issue
with reverberation, and due to the room function. None of these two rooms were used
for gathering many people, as was the case with the rooms categorized under Noise
building up.
An attempt to solve the issue of Reverberation in the room D.Ex12 is explained in
section 6.6.
Noisy/hectic environment
When looking for characteristics for the issue Noisy/hectic environment it was notice-
able that all ﬁve rooms had EDT and T20 values around 0.4 s, high C50 and "Excellent"
STI values. According to these results the problem is not to be found in the acoustic
conditions and absorption of the rooms. The problems with noise must be linked to
another parameter, most likely the function of the room, based on what was obtained
from the interviews with the two departments, chapter 5. A way to investigate this issue
further would be to do SPL measurements over 24 hours or more in the ﬁve diﬀerent
rooms. Plans for conducting the measurements were made with the emergency depart-
ment (E), but unfortunately it was not achievable within the time frame of this project.
56
==PAGE:74==
Chapter 6. Results
6.2. Characteristics of each issue
Lack of speech privacy between rooms
When looking for characteristics for the issue Lack of speech privacy between rooms
it is noted that none of the plots have anything obvious in common beside EDT and
T20 values being above 0.6 s, except W.Ex3. This corresponds to the thesis that Lack
of speech privacy between rooms cannot alone be described as a room acoustic issue.
The issue should be investigated by measuring the airborne sound insulation between
the rooms in question. For the working and occupational medicine department the lack
of speech privacy was between the examination rooms, the waiting room and corridor.
BR15 covers sound insulations between rooms in healthcare facilities by requiring a
weighted apparent sound reduction index R′
w = 44dB, and even higher requirements,
but not speciﬁed, regarding rooms for private conversation, which include examination
rooms. Therefore these rooms should be tested in accordance with [30], to see if they
fulﬁl the BR15 requirements, but this was not possible within this project’s time frame.
However, lack of speech privacy between rooms is negatively inﬂuenced by reﬂective
materials in the room, causing high EDT, T20 values. Reﬂective materials cause higher
sound levels due to more reﬂected sound, which may result in less speech privacy be-
tween a room with reﬂective materials and an adjacent room. Though the rooms had
EDT and T20 values above 0.6 it was assumed that reverberation was not reported as an
issue for these rooms, because all of the patients visiting this department were working
people and not elderly and therefore not very likely to be hearing impaired.
In summary the characteristics of the four issues showed that rooms with the issue
Noise building up could be linked to the general shape of the plots of T20 over the fre-
quencies 63-8000 Hz. Correlation analysis were also performed for the other issues,
which did not reveal any strong correlations. From looking at the plots for the other
three issues, the issue Reverberation can be identiﬁed by T20 values above 0.6 s. for
most frequencies. The issue Noisy/Hectic environment can be identiﬁed by T20 and
EDT values below 0.6 for most frequencies and the issue Lack of speech privacy be-
tween rooms could not be identiﬁed with any of these acoustic parameters. A blind test
was performed to test if the rooms could be sorted into the issues based on these char-
acteristics, which was done mostly with success for Noise building up, Reverberation
and Noisy/hectic environment. The result of the test can be seen in A.7.2.
57
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 6. Results
6.3. Questionnaire
6.3
Questionnaire
The questionnaire results are presented ﬁrst by all results and afterwards sorted under
the four issues, for which statistical tests were performed. The questions are abbrevi-
ated as follows:
• Q1:
"When you think back over the past 6 months, how disturbed have you been by
noise while you have been at work?"
• Q2:
"When you think back over the past six months how often have you experienced
that you could not hear or understand what a colleague and/or a patient said
because of noise?"
• Q3:
"When thinking about the past six months, how often have you experienced that
you could not speak conﬁdentially with a patient without other patients hearing
you?"
• Q4:
"When thinking back over the past six months, how often have you experienced
that a patient said that he/she could not hear or understand important
information you have given?"
58
==PAGE:76==
Chapter 6. Results
6.3. Questionnaire
6.3.1
All participants
In the following section, the results from all participants who ﬁlled out the question-
naire are shown. Response rates in accordance with [43] are shown for each department
and for all department in ﬁgure 6.20.
The total calculated response rate of 4.07 % is considered low according to [43], who
suggested a response rate of 30 % for a population of less than 500 people (here 3000
people). Furthermore, the people who participated in the study, all came from depart-
ments that had contacted the project due to noise and acoustical problems, which may
explain some of the results as representing the most unsatisﬁed staﬀmembers. The
cooperation and completion response rates are considered high for the online question-
naires, which usually is around 30 % compared to 48.3 to 100 % in this study. The
two departments (P and X) that ﬁlled out the questionnaires in paper form have lower
cooperation and completion response rates than expected, which are usually 80-85 %
compared to 20 % and 31 % respectively in this study. In ﬁgure 6.21 the distributions
of gender, age, hearing impairment and sensitivity to noise among the participants are
shown.
59
==PAGE:77==
Chapter 6. Results
6.3. Questionnaire
Figure 6.20: Response rates for each department, abbreviations can be found in 6.1 and for all participants. The rates are made in accordance with [43].
60
==PAGE:78==
Chapter 6. Results
6.3. Questionnaire
In 6.21 the distribution of participants’ gender, age, if they were hearing impaired or
sensitive to noise, are shown.
Figure 6.21: Distribution of gender, age, hearing impairment and sensitivity to noise among
participants.
In ﬁgure 6.22 the distribution of answers to Q1 is shown. 64 people answered the ques-
tion and the ﬁgure shows that 27% felt considerably or extremely disturbed where only
3 % felt not disturbed at all. The ﬁgure also shows that the results, hereby the amount
of disturbance, was normally distributed. It was unclear in which rooms Q1 occured,
ﬁgure 6.24. Participants felt disturbed by noise equally in the control room, nurse sta-
tions, meeting/lunch rooms, reception, oﬃces, corridors and examination rooms. This
may indicate that participants generally felt disturbed by noise at work and not in one
type of room particularly.
In ﬁgure 6.23 the distribution of answers to Q2 in shown. 64 participants answered the
question and 27 % found that they always or often could not hear others, while 9 %
never experience the phenomenon. The ﬁgure also shows that the answers were nor-
mally distributed. Q2 especially occurred in meeting/lunch rooms (38 %), ﬁgure 6.24.
In ﬁgure 6.23 the distribution Q3 is shown. 61 participants answered the question 34
% felt that they either sometimes or always could not speak conﬁdentially with a pa-
tient though at the other end of the scale 22 % said that they never experienced the
phenomenon. The ﬁgure also shows that the answers were approximately normally
61
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 6. Results
6.3. Questionnaire
distributed. Q3 happened most often in patient rooms, ﬁgure 6.24. Examination rooms
were also experienced for having lack of privacy, which is considered a greater problem
as privacy is essential for their function.
In ﬁgure 6.23 the distribution of answers to Q4 is shown. Only two departments were
given this question resulting in only 19 participants answering the question. Only 6
% often experienced the phenomenon and 17 % never experienced it. The ﬁgure also
shows that the answers were normally distributed around the answer "Rarely". This re-
sult shows that this phenomenon happens less frequently than the three other questions.
However, it may be a result of staﬀnot noticing it, since it does not aﬀect them as much
as the patient or it may be a result of patients being too embarrassed to say anything to
the staﬀor don’t want to be a burden. Q4 was mostly voted present in patient rooms
and examination rooms, ﬁgure 6.24, which are also the rooms were patients are most
present at the hospital, and therefore does not make a reasonable comparison to the
other rooms.
Figure 6.22: Percent of responses to question Q1. n indicates that 64 subjects answered the
question.
62
==PAGE:80==
Chapter 6. Results
6.3. Questionnaire
Figure 6.23: Percent of responses to questions Q2, Q3 and Q4. n indicates that 64, 61 and 19
subjects answered the questions respectively.
Figure 6.25 shows the noise sources participants found disturbing. Talking in rooms
where the participants were present was the noise source which received the most votes.
Also talking in corridors and rooms where the participant was not in were rated high
compared to the other sources. In general, participants found talking the most disturb-
ing noise source. Of noise sources that did not include talking, alarms and carts in the
corridors received most votes.
A correlation matrix was made for correlations between the four diﬀerent questions
and gender, age, sensitivity to noise and hearing impairment. The correlations were
performed in the program R [49] and showed no correlations between any of the pa-
rameters and questions. Furthermore, a correlation matrix was made between all four
questions individually, which did not show any correlations either. Both matrices can
be seen in A.9. Based on this correlation analysis it was decided not to proceed with
further investigations into the correlation of these parameters and the answers to the
four diﬀerent questions.
63
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 6. Results
6.3. Questionnaire
Figure 6.24: Rooms of which the subject found that they were most disturbed or experienced
the phenomenons the most. The subjects could pick up to three diﬀerent rooms for Q1 and Q2,
and up to two rooms for Q3 and Q4. n indicates the total number of votes within each question,
which were 102, 86, 52 and 17 respectively.
Figure 6.25: Responses to disturbing noise sources in Q5. Subjects could pick up to ﬁve diﬀerent
noise sources they found disturbing. n indicates the total number of votes which was 163.
64
==PAGE:82==
Chapter 6. Results
6.3. Questionnaire
6.3.2
Sorting questionnaires into issues based on department.
The questionnaires from each department were sorted into the four diﬀerent issues pre-
sented in table 4.1. If a department had multiple numbers of rooms, each room with
a diﬀerent issue, the questionnaires from the department were duplicated and used for
both issues in question. A linear mixed eﬀect analysis was performed in R [49] with
the package lme4 [2], to ﬁnd out if each question could explain the issues with subjects
as random eﬀect (Qn ∼issue + (1|S ubject)). Due to an error in R saying that the data
contained too many duplications, due to the duplications of questionnaires, this test was
not possible to run. Instead an analysis to ﬁnd out if the question could explain issues
with the department as random eﬀect (Q1 ∼issue + (1|department)) was performed.
It should be mentioned that it violates the assumption of independence of the data to
ignore that each subject occurred more than once. In the analysis, the answers "ex-
tremely" and "always" were given the score 5, "considerably" and "often", were given
the score 4, "moderately" and "sometimes" the score 3, "slightly" and "rarely" the score
2 and ﬁnally "not at all" and "never" the score 1, boxplot of the data is shown in ﬁg-
ures 6.29 and 6.30. Random eﬀect intercepts were made for departments, and subjects
were considered residuals. P-values were obtained by likelihood ratio tests of the full
model with the eﬀect in question against the model without the eﬀect in question. It
was found that none of the questions could be explained by issue, the results were:
(˜χ2(3) = 2.20, p = 0.5327) for Q1, (˜χ2(3) = 0, p = 1) for Q2 and (˜χ2(3) = 0, p = 1)
for Q3. Codes and results from R can be seen in A.10. The reason why this test did
not reveal that any of the issues are signiﬁcantly worse compared to the others may be
due to the duplication of the questionnaires which may have resulted in similar means
of answers for each issue. Alternatively it may show that all four issues were equally
prevalent.
65
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 6. Results
6.3. Questionnaire
Figure 6.26: Boxplot of all the data for Q1, divided into the four issues. The cross is the mean
value, the thick horizontal line is the median value.
Figure 6.27: Boxplot of all the data for Q2, Q3 and Q4, divided into the four issues. The cross
is the mean value, the thick horizontal line is the median value.
66
==PAGE:84==
Chapter 6. Results
6.3. Questionnaire
6.3.3
Sorting questionnaire answers into issues based on votes on
rooms.
As it is undesirable to have duplication of data when performing statistical tests an-
other method to sort the departments into each issue was used. In the questionnaires,
the participants had answered to each question in which rooms they found that the phe-
nomenon in the question occurred, with the possibility of crossing out up to three rooms
for Q1 and Q2, and two rooms for Q3 and Q4. InA.11, the answers to which rooms
each phenomenon occurred divided into departments are shown. Based on these ﬁg-
ures, it was evaluated in which rooms most participants in each department voted that
the phenomenon was worst. If the type of room was measured, that room was placed
under the respective issue, and the questionnaires for the whole department were put
under that issue. For example, if most participants in the x-ray department said that
they were disturbed by noise (Q1) in the control room (38%), then all questionnaires
from the x-ray department were put under the issue Noisy/hectic environment since the
measured control room (X.CR) in the x-ray department was categorized with the issue
Noisy/hectic environment. In table 6.28 the sorting of all departments for each question
into each issue is shown. If most participants in the department had voted for rooms
which were not measured, which was the case for the question for Q3, the department
was not included in the test, which is why some departments are not present for some
questions in the ﬁgure. This method resulted in no repetition of subjects in the statis-
tical test which resulted that a one-way ANOVA test could be run for each question
for the four diﬀerent issues without violating the assumptions. The means of all the
questions within each issue are shown in ﬁgures 6.29 and 6.30.
Figure 6.28: The division of questionnaires into each issue for each question. n is for the
number of questionnaires for each question under each issue.
67
==PAGE:85==
Chapter 6. Results
6.3. Questionnaire
A one-way ANOVA was run between the issues for each question to see if any of the
issues were found signiﬁcantly diﬀerent for each question individually.
A one-way independent ANOVA with the ﬁxed factor issue (four levels: NoiseBuild-
ing, Reverberation, NoisyHectic, SpeechPrivacy) and the random factor Subjects was
performed for the three questions Q1, Q2 and Q3. For Q1 there was no eﬀect of issue.
For Q2 there was a weak eﬀect of issue with a signiﬁcance level of 0.05 (F(2.61) =
3.723, p < 0.0298). According to the Tukey HSD performed the signiﬁcance was
between the issues Noisy/hectic environment and Noise building up. This result re-
veals that the the issue of Noisy/hectic environment is still present despite that the room
acoustics being considered satisfactory and that it is a substantial problem to the de-
partments exposed to it. For Q3 there was an eﬀect of issue with a signiﬁcance level of
0.001 (F(2, 46) = 10.66, p < 0.000157). According to the Tukey HSD performed the
signiﬁcance was between the issues Reverberation and Speech privacy. Meaning that
subjects working in the department with room(s) with the issue Reverberation experi-
enced Q3 (speech privacy) signiﬁcantly more often (according to their own perception)
than the subjects with rooms with the issue Lack of speech privacy between rooms.
However, the only department sorted into the issue Reverberation was the dermatolog-
ical department, due to 22 % rating that they experienced lack of speech privacy in the
examination rooms. Far more subjects in the department rated that this was a problem
in patient rooms (68 %). Therefore, this result most likely does not say anything about
the issue Reverberation but rather something about the unmeasured room type patient
rooms. ANOVA script from R from the tests can be found in A.12.
68
==PAGE:86==
Chapter 6. Results
6.3. Questionnaire
Figure 6.29: Average of the answers Q1, when sorted the answer to the question into issues
with no duplication of data.
Figure 6.30: Average of the answers to Q2, Q3 and Q4, when sorted the answers to the questions
into issues with no duplication of data.
69
==PAGE:87==
Chapter 6. Results 6.4. Correlation between mean reverberation time T20 and mean question score for each room
6.4
Correlation between mean reverberation time T20
and mean question score for each room
A correlation was performed for each room by calculating the average reverberation
time, T20, over the frequency bands 63-8000 Hz for each room. Each subject had voted
in which rooms they found that the phenomenon in each question was worst, which
meant that each room could speciﬁcally be linked to the answer the subject had given
to each question. A mean of the subjects answers to each room was then calculated and
plotted as a function of the average reverberation time T0 for each room. This was done
for each of the three questions Q1, Q2 and Q3.
In ﬁgure 6.31 the correlation between the average over all frequencies for T20 and the
mean answer to Q1 is shown. The plot shows that there is no tendency to high rever-
beration time leading to staﬀbeing more disturbed by noise. In fact the plot shows a
weak tendency that low reverberation time leads to staﬀbeing more disturbed.
In ﬁgure 6.32 the correlation between average T20 for each room and the mean answer
to Q2 is shown. The plot shows that there is no tendency to high reverberation time
leading to staﬀnot being able to hear one another or patients due to noise. On the
contrary the plot shows a weak tendency to the opposite. In ﬁgure 6.33 the correlation
between average T20 for each room and the mean answer to Q3 is shown. The plot
shows the same tendency as the two previous plots.
70
==PAGE:88==
Chapter 6. Results 6.4. Correlation between mean reverberation time T20 and mean question score for each room
Figure 6.31: Correlation between average reverberation time T20 over the frequency bands
63-8000 Hz given on the x-axis and mean answer between 1 (not disturbed) and 5 (extremely
disturbed) for the Q1 for each room. Vertical black lines shows the conﬁdence interval. Red
line shows the trend.
Figure 6.32: Correlation between average reverberation time T20 over the frequency bands 63-
8000 Hz given on the x-axis and mean answer between 1 (never) and 5 (always) for the Q2 for
each room. Vertical black lines shows the conﬁdence interval. Red line shows the trend.
71
==PAGE:89==
Chapter 6. Results
6.5. Noise
Figure 6.33: Correlation between average reverberation time T20 over the frequency bands 63-
8000 Hz given on the x-axis and mean answer between 1 (never) and 5 (always) for the Q2 for
each room. Vertical black lines shows the conﬁdence interval. Red line shows the trend.
6.5
Noise
Sound pressure levels in four rooms in two diﬀerent departments were measured over
24 hours. The days of the week was chosen, which the staﬀin the two departments
considered the busiest days. In 6.34 the calculated logarithmic average noise levels are
shown over all 24 hours. Averages for day time (7:00 to 22:00) and averages for night
time (22:00 to 7:00) is calculated for D.NS. Averages for occupied time (8:00 to 1600)
and unoccupied time (16:00 to 8:00) are calculated for D.Ex12, W.Ex1 and W.Ex3.
The average SPL values show that for the rooms with a low average reverberation time,
high clarity and "Excellent" STI (D.NS and W.Ex3) the noise levels are also lower than
in the two other rooms, in average during the 24 hours and in average during the day
time. The LAFmax average in D.NS is the highest of the four rooms at night, however,
it is also the only room used at night.
In 6.35 The max, min and L90 and L10 values are shown for the four rooms, which will
be commented in the following sections.
72
==PAGE:90==
Chapter 6. Results
6.5. Noise
Figure 6.34: Logarithmic average of sound pressure level values over 24 hours, day/occupied,
night/unoccupied condition for the four rooms D.Ex12, D.NS, W.Ex1 and W.Ex3.
Figure 6.35: LAFMax value, LAFmin value, L90 and L10 for 24 hours, day/occupied, night/unoc-
cupied condition for the four rooms D.Ex12, D.NS, W.Ex1 and W.Ex3.
73
==PAGE:91==
Chapter 6. Results
6.5. Noise
Figure 6.36: Average noise levels in A-weighted sound pressure level for each frequency in the
1/1 octave band for the four measured rooms D.Ex12, D.NS, W.Ex1 and W.Ex3.
74
==PAGE:92==
Chapter 6. Results
6.5. Noise
6.5.1
Dermatological department
Examination room 12 (D.Ex12)
Figure 6.37 shows the A-weighted sound pressure level over 24 hours in examination
room 12. It shows a drop in noise at around 16:00, which was noted as the time when
the staﬀmembers left the department. The background noise level (between 16:00 and
6:00) was just below 40 dB. The graph shows activity in the room from around 6:00,
possibly cleaning, a quiet period between 6:30 and 8:00 and activity again after 8:00
until around 16:00. The maximum sound pressure level was measured at around 11:00
to 91.1 dB, which is the highest max value of all four rooms. The value L10, which
tells the noise level exceeded 10 % of the time of the measurement duration, shown in
ﬁgure 6.35, is 60.4 dB during the occupied time, which is also the highest value of the
four rooms. The frequencies with the highest average sound pressure level during the
24 hours were found to be 500-2000 Hz at nearly 50 dB ﬁgure6.36.
Figure 6.37: Noise levels measured over 24 hours in D.Ex12. Date and time on the x-axis and
A-weighted sound pressure level on the y-axis.
75
==PAGE:93==
Chapter 6. Results
6.5. Noise
Nurse station (D.NS)
Diﬀerently from the three examination rooms, the nurse station was in use during all
24 hours measured. Figure 6.38 shows the noise levels measured during all 24 hours.
It shows a minimum noise level at around 35 dB, which drops at around 1:00 to 30
dB. The drop is likely attributed to equipment e.g. HVAC. The ﬁgure shows several
peaks through out the day and night reaching up to 84 dB, which is also the maximum
sound pressure level measured in accordance with ﬁgure 6.35, which is only slightly
lower at night at 83.5 dB. The noisiest time interval was from 7:00 to 17:30. L10 was
calculated to 55.4 dB during the 24 hours and was fairly lower at night at only 45.5
dB. The frequencies with the highest average sound pressure levels during the 24 hours
were found to be 500-2000 Hz at around 48 dB according to 6.36.
Figure 6.38: Noise levels measured over 24 hours in D.NS. Date and time on the x-axis and
A-weighted sound pressure level on the y-axis.
76
==PAGE:94==
Chapter 6. Results
6.5. Noise
6.5.2
Work and occupational medicine department
Examination room 1 (W.Ex1)
Figure 6.39 shows high noise levels until around 16:00, most likely due to occupation,
a background noise level after 16:00 at around 30 dB with a few peaks up to 50 dB.
Activity in the room started temporarily around 6:45 most likely cleaning, the activity
started again in the room around 8:00 when the secretaries arrived. The peak levels
in the room were between 10:30 and 11:00 and reached peaks at more than 90 dB,
the max value were found to be 90.2 dB, ﬁgure 6.35. L10 was for the occupied hours
54.6 dB, which is two dB lower than in W.Ex3, however, this may be a result of less
occupied time in W.Ex1, as the LAFmax for the two rooms show a clear diﬀerence.
The frequencies with the highest average sound pressure level during the 24 hours was
found to be 500 Hz at nearly 50 dB and at 1000 and 2000 Hz which was slightly lower
at 42 dB according to 6.36.
Figure 6.39: Noise levels measured over 24 hours in W.Ex1. Date and time on the x-axis and
A-weighted sound pressure level on the y-axis.
77
==PAGE:95==
Chapter 6. Results
6.5. Noise
Examination room 3 (W.Ex3)
Figure 6.40 shows somewhat the same pattern as ﬁgure 6.39, where the noise levels
were high until around 17:00, around the time when the staﬀmembers get oﬀwork,
the background levels were 30-40 dB with peaks above 50 dB, perhaps due to traﬃc
noise from outside the building. Activity in the room started again at around 6:45 which
was most likely cleaning. The noise level stayed up at around 60 dB until 8:00, where
it went down until 9:00, where it rose again to between 60-70 dB. The highest noise
level was measured at 9.00 to 82.1 dB, which is 8 dB lower than the maximum value
in W.Ex1. In general, the maximum noise levels in W.Ex3 were between 70-80 dB.
L10 for the occupied time was 56.6 dB. The diﬀerence in sound pressure level values
between W.Ex1 and W.Ex3 are especially clear for the average SPLs and the maximum
levels. The frequencies with the highest average SPL during the 24 hours were found
to be 500 Hz at nearly 50 dB and 1000 Hz at 42 dB, 6.36.
Figure 6.40: Noise levels measured over 24 hours in examination room 3 at Work and occupa-
tional medical department. Date and time on the x-axis and A-weighted sound pressure level
on the y-axis.
78
==PAGE:96==
Chapter 6. Results
6.6. Simulated solution for D.Ex12
6.6
Simulated solution for D.Ex12
An acoustic solution was designed for examination room 12 in the dermatological de-
partment and tested in Odeon, the tested solution is a suspended ceiling, with absorption
panels of the type Ecophon Hygiene Labotec DS [14]. In ﬁgures 6.41, 6.42 and 6.43
the results from the simulated room in the program Odeon are shown with the mea-
sured values (measured) and the simulated before and after values for EDT, T20 and
C50. The simulated before condition was close to the measured values for the low and
mid frequencies (125-2000 Hz) but diverted slightly for 63 Hz and 4000-8000 Hz. The
simulated after case show huge improvements, here the EDT is almost ﬂat at 0.45 s
for all mid and high frequencies (250-8000 Hz) and around 0.7 s for 63 Hz and 0.6
s for 125 Hz. The results are higher for T20 at 0.6 s or lower for all mid and high
frequencies (250-8000 Hz), and higher for the low frequencies (63-125 Hz) at 0.8 and
0.7 respectively. The installation of this ceiling will fulﬁl the requirements from the
Danish Building Regulation 2015. The C50 parameter is also improved to 7-10 dB for
all mid and high frequencies, though lower for the low frequencies (63-125 Hz) at 4-5
dB. The STI values for males and females were improved from 0.63 to 0.78 and went
from the quality level "Good" to "Excellent". Since the function of the room is to have
examinations of a single person, with no more than four people present (one patient,
one relative, one nurse and one doctor) in the room at the time and most likely only
one talker at the time, these results are considered a huge improvement to the room.
The solution will likely solve the acoustical problems in the room, simultaneously with
fulﬁlling the requirements to cleaning and hygiene and being visually neutral, which
has potential for getting accepted though the building is listed.
79
==PAGE:97==
Chapter 6. Results
6.6. Simulated solution for D.Ex12
Figure 6.41: EDT for Examination Room 12 in reality (green) and in the simulated case before
(orange) and after (yellow) the installation of Ecophon Hygiene Labotec Ds. On the horizontal
axis the 1/1 octave bands between 63-8000 Hz are shown and on the vertical axis the EDT in
seconds are shown. Vertical lines represent the standard deviation.
Figure 6.42: T20 for Examination Room 12 in reality (green) and in the simulated case before
(orange) and after (yellow) the installation of Ecophon Hygiene Labotec Ds. On the horizontal
axis the 1/1 octave bands between 63-8000 Hz are shown and on the vertical axis the T20 in
seconds are shown. Vertical lines represent the standard deviation.
80
==PAGE:98==
Chapter 6. Results
6.6. Simulated solution for D.Ex12
Figure 6.43: C50 for Examination Room 12 in reality (green) and in the simulated case before
(orange) and after (yellow) the installation of Ecophon Hygiene Labotec Ds. On the horizontal
axis the 1/1 octave bands between 63-8000 Hz are shown and on the vertical axis the T20 in
seconds are shown. Vertical lines represent the standard deviation.
Figure 6.44: STI for Examination Room 12 measured and in the simulated case before and after
the installation of Ecophon Hygiene Labotec Ds.
81
==PAGE:99==
Chapter
7
Discussion
7.1
Guidelines to room types in hospitals
The room acoustic conditions for the measured rooms varied between very poor acous-
tics to excellent acoustics. Room acoustic parameters for examinations rooms and treat-
ment rooms revealed that ﬁve out of six rooms had poor room acoustics. Examination
rooms and treatment rooms are rooms with high hygiene requirements, which can be a
challenge to installation of acoustic regulation. Rooms with hygiene requirements are
presumably rooms used by patients, which opens up for a potential broad acoustical
problem of examination rooms, patient rooms and treatment rooms in Bispebjerg and
Frederiksberg Hospitals, those being particular reverberant. In accordance with several
studies this may have inﬂuence on patients’ sleep [3], patients’ amount of medicine
intake [25] and on both patients’ and staﬀs’ psychosocial environment [4]. Further-
more, many of the patients at the hospital are elderly people and presumably hearing
impaired, as hearing impairment increases with age [48]. Reverberation in rooms may
lead to loss of important information [26], even if wearing hearing aid [50]. Rever-
beration may also cause loss of information for normal hearing patients in reverberant
rooms in accordance with Culling’s study, showing that reverberation impair listeners
ability to distinguish between two competing voices, which is a likely scenario in a
hospital [9].
Reverberation was an issue in D.Ex12, where the staﬀreported that they sometimes
used headphones and microphone to communicate with patients, which is an easy and
cheap solution but only solves the problem regarding communication. Furthermore, it
is possible that patients are embarrassed to say that they cannot hear the hospital staﬀ
or don’t want to be a burden. Therefore they may pretend that they can hear and under-
stand the information given, though it is not the case. The challenge of implementing
acoustic regulation despite high hygiene requirements and regular profound cleaning
was investigated. A product from Ecophon, which fulﬁlled the requirements was im-
82
==PAGE:100==
Chapter 7. Discussion
7.1. Guidelines to room types in hospitals
plemented in a model of the room and simulated in Odeon. The results showed a the-
oretical solution to the problem of reverberation, which also fulﬁls the guidelines from
BR15. The noise measurements performed in W.Ex1 and W.Ex3 showed a diﬀerence
in average noise levels of 4 dB and a reduction of 8 dB in max sound pressure levels.
Since the two rooms were similar in size and volume and the only diﬀerence was the
acoustic regulation, however another type of acoustic panels, this result indicates that
it is likely to obtain a similar reduction in average noise levels and a reduction of max
levels in D.Ex12. The result of the simulated solution in Odeon shows that satisfactory
room acoustics are achievable in hospital rooms with high hygiene requirements.
The plots of the three acoustical parameters and STI for the measured rooms reveals
that a large number of rooms measured for this study, do not fulﬁl the requirements
in BR15. Especially the waiting room and the corridor revealed unsatisfactory room
acoustics. Waiting rooms and corridors are not listed in the BR15 requirements. It
would be meaningful to include those room types in the guidelines for hospitals, prefer-
ably corridors adjacent to patient rooms, examination rooms and treatment rooms, as
noise from corridors may travel and disturb patients in those room types.
The two lunch rooms and the one meeting room measured where categorized with the
issue Noise building up, and it was found that the rooms with this issue all showed
plots for EDT and T20 with higher values for the low frequencies. This indicates that
a high reverberation time for low frequencies causes noise building up or rather voices
building up in rooms. From talking with the staﬀ, it bothered several that they did not
have a quiet place to eat their lunch or take a break during the day. Based on these
results it is recommended that architects and designer of hospitals include quiet spaces,
where staﬀcan retire for periods of time to relax and recharge before continuing to a
noisy and hectic working environment.
83
==PAGE:101==
Chapter 7. Discussion
7.2. Room acoustics compared to staﬀ’s perception of noise
7.2
Room acoustics compared to staﬀ’s perception of
noise
The questionnaires in this study showed that only 3 % of the staﬀwere not at all dis-
turbed by noise at work, indicating that noise is a common problem. The measured
room acoustics showed a variety of good and poor room acoustic conditions. The cor-
relation analysis between averaged reverberation time for each room measured and the
mean of the answers for Q1, Q2 and Q3 showed a slight tendency that subjects were
more disturbed and experienced Q2 and Q3 more often in rooms with a short aver-
age reverberation time. The correlation result corresponds with the result from the
one-way ANOVA test. The ANOVA test showed that subjects with the issue Noisy/hec-
tic environment signiﬁcantly (p>0.05) more often experienced Q2 than subjects from
departments with the issue Noise building up. The types of rooms where this issue oc-
curred were shared oﬃces, a control room and a nurse station. Those three room types
are all rooms where the work require concentration, which usually are most favourably
done in a private environment such as a single oﬃce. This argument is supported by
the investigation of hospital oﬃces made by Hodgson, who found that people in pri-
vate oﬃces were more satisﬁed with privacy and acoustics than people in shared or
open plan oﬃces [27]. In addition satisfaction with acoustics and privacy were directly
correlated with work satisfaction, control, well being and job satisfaction. This issue
shows that not all problems regarding noise can be solved by installing absorption pan-
els or suspended ceiling, the use and the function of the room must also be taken into
account. This was done by Luertz who performed a study where two ICU rooms were
renovated with focus on room acoustics. [37] Among other initiatives, Luertz created
areas for conversation isolated from the ICU room with a glass wall, so that staﬀcould
talk and observe the patient without disturbing the patient. The study showed a signiﬁ-
cant reduction in average noise levels. Something similar could be considered for staﬀ
who work in hospital environments with many people walking through the room where
they do work which require concentration. It should be mentioned though that the issue
Noisy/hectic environment was only seen in facilities not used by patients and therefore
do not inﬂuence the patients directly.
Another perspective to this result is that the departments with good room acoustics and
negative attitude towards noise according to the questionnaires, have simply built up a
culture of complaining about noise, which has been observed before. Furthermore it
has been found that people who are introvert easily get disturbed by noise when they are
84
==PAGE:102==
Chapter 7. Discussion
7.3. Noise in hospitals, mean values and peaks
concentrating. Presumably a person who chose a job working individually in an oﬃce,
is also a more introvert person than a person who chose a career taking care of other
people as nurse or a doctor working in other types of hospital rooms. However, there
was not an increased number of people with this issue who had answered in the ques-
tionnaire that they were sensitive to noise. It has also been observed that people who
have been exposed to noise over longer periods of time become more sensitive towards
it and get disturbed and annoyed even by regular noise. This is also a phenomenon
which increases with age.
7.3
Noise in hospitals, mean values and peaks
The noise measurements in this study correspond well to the picture regarding noise in
hospitals reported in the literature, chapter 2. The lowest average noise level reported
in previous studies was 51 dB in an ICU [31] and the highest was 77.3 dB in an op-
eration room during surgery. [42] In this study the average in occupied hours in the
examination rooms were between 55.8 dB(A) and 59,8 dB(A) which are in the middle
of the previous reported. The average over all 24 hours in the nurse station (D.NS) of
51.6 dB(A) is in the low end of the range. The average noise levels for all four rooms
show a pattern of that the two rooms, which generally were measured to have good
room acoustics (D.NS and W.Ex3), both during the day and over all 24 hours had lower
average noise levels than the two rooms with poorer room acoustics. This shows that
acoustic regulation inﬂuence the average noise levels. However, when looking at the
maximum noise levels for especially the nurse station (D.NS) it reveals that on four
occasions the noise levels reached values above 80 dB at night and the maximum noise
peak was measured to 83.3 dB. Especially these peaks are problematic and should be
given attention. The nurse station was found to have good room acoustics, besides the
relative high EDT and T20 values for the low frequencies. These noise measurements
support the point that noise is still present and may lead to disturbance in staﬀdespite
good room acoustics. It should be investigated what causes these peaks and how they
can be minimized.
The noise sources which were found disturbing by most participants were all sources
including talking. These results correspond well to the study performed by Dube, which
also showed that staﬀfound voices to be one of the most annoying noise sources [12].
Buxton found that voices and especially upset voices had the greatest inﬂuence on peo-
ple’s sleep [7], however the results in this study do not say anything directly about what
85
==PAGE:103==
Chapter 7. Discussion
7.4. Limitations
noise sources patients are exposed to. The results do show that voices are present and
disturbing staﬀ, therefore it may also be the case for patients, which should be consid-
ered when trying to minimize noise. Of inanimate noise sources, the staﬀvoted carts
in corridors and alarms highest, this corresponds to Topf’s study regarding burnout in
critical care nurses. [54] She found that alarms on equipment and beeping monitors to
be two of the worst noise sources besides telephones.
7.4
Limitations
Some limitations were observed during this study.
The recruited departments were encouraged to participate in the project if they had had
anyone in the department complaining about noise or acoustics. Results from the ques-
tionnaires most likely are biased by that the only people participated were already in a
department with reported noise. This investigation may only show the most disturbed
staﬀat Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg Hospital and cannot be representative of noise
disturbance in hospital staﬀ.
It was decided to categorized the diﬀerent rooms into issues. This decision was taken to
divide the responses to the questionnaires into larger groups than alone by department.
Only 64 staﬀmembers ﬁlled out the questionnaire, some departments with down to
only four respondents, making each respondent in those departments more dominant.
This was tried to be avoided with the categorization of issues. The categorization of
issues may have been limited by a subjective opinion by the author and may reveal a
naive picture of noise and acoustical problems in Danish hospitals. Furthermore, a less
dominant reason for this choice was that the intention with the project was not to solve
the problems in each room individually as a consultant but to investigate if staﬀmem-
bers disturbance level was caused alone by room acoustics.
For two departments, performing the measurements was outsourced to two groups of
students taking the course Architectural Acoustics at Technical University of Denmark.
The two departments which were outsourced were the palliative department with the
room P.LR and the X-ray department with the rooms X.OR1, X.OR2 and X.CR. The
students were instructed to follow the same method as described in chapter 4, this was
unfortunately only followed by the students measuring P.LR. This resulted in missing
information for X.OR1, X.OR2 and X.CR on room dimensions, number and type of
86
==PAGE:104==
Chapter 7. Discussion
7.5. Future perspectives
absorption panels, number of people in the room during measurements, placements of
source and receiver and background noise levels. Room dimensions, information on
interior and background noise levels were obtained by the author later in the project,
but information on placements of sources and receivers and number of people present
during the measurements are unfortunately unknown. Despite the missing information,
it was decided to include the measured data for the three rooms.
7.5
Future perspectives
This study was performed to achieve knowledge about acoustics in the Danish health-
care system. The study reveals that research within this ﬁeld is missing, and has poten-
tial to be obtained in Denmark.
The hospitals investigated in this study were both old hospitals with issues inﬂuenced
by old fashion design solutions which in some cases do not fulﬁl the requirements to
room functions in present times hospitals. A way to proceed would be to compare the
obtained data from this study with data from newer hospitals to see if the conclusions
from this study apply to other Danish hospitals.
The study revealed that improvement of room acoustics can bring down average noise
levels, but high noise peaks (of above 80 dB) were measured despite of excellent room
acoustics. Another way to proceed would be to investigate what causes these high noise
peaks in hospitals and how they can be brought down. Furthermore, this investigation
showed that hospital equipment was a dominant noise source, more research should be
performed on how to bring down noise sources in hospitals, such as noise from metal
carts, noise from test equipment, alarms etc.
In this study only staﬀmembers were included in the questionnaire surveys. Participa-
tion was voluntary and based on the staﬀ’s interests, resulting in all rooms investigated
were rooms used by staﬀ, and rooms with noise and acoustical problems according to
staﬀ. An interesting angle to investigate is the patient’s perspective with focus on rooms
used by patients. Such an investigation could be on speech privacy in shared patient
rooms by measuring with methods from [11].
87
==PAGE:105==
Chapter
8
Conclusion
The room acoustics of twenty rooms at Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg hospital were
measured and investigated by the parameters Early Decay time, Reverberation time,
T20, Clarity, C50 and Speech Transmission Index. The investigation revealed a vari-
ety of acoustic conditions from poor to excellent acoustical conditions in the diﬀerent
rooms. Six diﬀerent overall issues regarding noise and acoustics were detected in the
hospitals investigated, where the rooms measured were categorized with four of the
issues. These issues were compared to the staﬀmembers level of noise disturbance and
how often they experienced three phenomena caused by noise and poor room acous-
tics, assessed with a questionnaire survey. The comparison revealed that staﬀwere
equally disturbed for all four issues and there was no correlation between average re-
verberation time in each measured room and staﬀmembers level of disturbance or how
frequently they experienced three noise and acoustic related phenomena. This indi-
cates that noise disturbance of hospital staﬀcannot be remedied with the improvement
of room acoustics alone, though it is able to reduce the general noise experienced. Peak
noise levels should be solved through behavioural change, and designing hospitals and
hospital equipment with the aim of bringing peak noise levels down. This conclusion
is supported by a sample of noise measured over 24 hours in four of the investigated
rooms which revealed that rooms with good room acoustics had lower average noise
levels over the 24 hours, but still reached high maximum levels of noise. Finally, an
acoustic solution was designed for one of the investigated rooms, which fulﬁlled the
high hygienic requirements in the room and was simulated to improve room acoustics
in the room and expected to lower the average noise levels. All in all, there are sev-
eral challenges to improving acoustics in Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg hospital, which
would beneﬁt from more awareness and research into the ﬁeld of hospital acoustics.
88
==PAGE:106==
==PAGE:107==
Bibliography
[1] Acoustics Engineering. Measuring Impulse Responses Using Dirac. (August):1–
30, 2007.
[2] D.M. Bates, M. Maechler, and B. Bolker. lme4: Linear mixed-eﬀects models
using S4 classes, 2012.
[3] Soren Berg. Impact of Reduced Reverberation Time on Sound-Induced Arousals
During Sleep. Sleep, 24(3):289–292, 2001.
[4] V Blomkvist. Acoustics and psychosocial environment in intensive coronary care.
Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 62(3):e1–e1, 2005.
[5] Brüel & Kjær. Measuring Speech Intelligibility using DIRAC Type 7841. Appli-
cation Note, (March):1–8, 2008.
[6] Ilene J. Busch-Vishniac, James E. West, Colin Barnhill, Tyrone Hunter, Douglas
Orellana, and Ram Chivukula.
Noise levels in Johns Hopkins Hospital.
The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 118(6):3629–3645, 2005.
[7] Orfeu M Buxton, Jeﬀrey M Ellenbogen, Wei Wang, Andy Carballeira, Shawn O
Connor, Dan Cooper, Ankit J Gordhandas, Scott M Mckinney, and Jo M Solet.
Sleep Disruption due to Hospital Noises Annals of Internal Medicine. Annals of
Internal Medicine, 157(3):170–179, 2013.
[8] Cirrus Research plc. A Guide to Noise Measurement Terminology. 2015.
[9] John F. Culling, Kathryn I. Hodder, and Chaz Yee Toh. Eﬀects of reverberation on
perceptual segregation of competing voices. The Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 114(5):2871, 2003.
[10] DS/EN 3382-2. Akustik - Måling af rumakustiske parametre - Del 1 : Rum til
optræden Acoustics - Measurement of room acoustic. 2009.
89
==PAGE:108==
Bibliography
Bibliography
[11] DS/EN 3382-3. Dansk standard Akustik - Måling af rumakustiske parametre -
Del 3 : Åbne kontorrum Acoustics - Measurement of room acoustic parameters -
Part 3 : Open plan oﬃces. 2012.
[12] Joyce A. Overman Dube, Melissa M. Barth, Cheryl A. Cmiel, Susanne M. Cut-
shall, Shelly M. Olson, Stephanie J. Sulla, Jeﬀrey C. Nesbitt, Steven C. Sobczak,
and Diane E. Holland. Environmental Noise Sources and Interventions to Mini-
mize Them. Journal of Nursing Care Quality, 23(3):216–224, 2008.
[13] Ecophon Saint-gobain. Ecophon Master F M52. (Iso 4611).
[14] Ecophon Saint-gobain. Ecophon Hygiene Labotec Ds. 2016.
[15] Ecophon Saint-gobain. Hygiene Labotec Ds. 2016.
[16] Maxime Elbaz, Damien Léger, Fabien Sauvet, Benoit Champigneulle, Stéphane
Rio, Mélanie Strauss, Mounir Chennaoui, Christian Guilleminault, and Jean Paul
Mira. Sound level intensity severely disrupts sleep in ventilated ICU patients
throughout a 24-h period: a preliminary 24-h study of sleep stages and associated
sound levels. Annals of Intensive Care, 7(1):25, 2017.
[17] En/DS 60268. Dansk standard Udstyr til lydsystemer, Del 16 : Objektiv vurdering
af taleforståelighed ved hjælp af taletransmissionsindeks. 2011.
[18] Energistyrelsen.
Vejledning om lydbestemmelser i Bygningsreglement 2015
(akustisk indeklima). 2016(12275110):1–36, 2015.
[19] Enhed for Evaluering og Brugerinddragelse. Den Landsdækkende Undersøgelse
af Patientoplevelser 2015. 2016.
[20] J.M. Fields, R.G. De Jong, T. Gjestland, I.H. Flindell, R.F.S. Job, S. Kurra,
P. Lercher, M. Vallet, T. Yano, R. Guski, U. Felcher-Suhr, and R. Schumer.
Standardized General-Purpose Noise Reaction Questions for Community Noise
Surveys: Research and a Recommendation.
Journal of Sound and Vibration,
242(4):641–679, 2001.
[21] D. Fife and E. Rappaport. Noise and hospital stay. American Journal of Public
Health, 66(7):680–681, 1976.
[22] Anders Christian Gade. Room Acoustic Engineering. DTU Elektro, Acoustic
Technology, Technical University of Denmark, 2003.
90
==PAGE:109==
Bibliography
Bibliography
[23] C. Gade. Room acoustic computer modelling. (March):1–9, 2009.
[24] Dana K. Gladd and Gabrielle H. Saunders. Ambient noise levels in the chemother-
apy clinic. (2):1–12, 2008.
[25] Inger Hagerman, Gundars Rasmanis, Vanja Blomkvist, Roger Ulrich, Claire Anne
Eriksen, and Töres Theorell. Inﬂuence of intensive coronary care acoustics on
the quality of care and physiological state of patients. International Journal of
Cardiology, 98(2):267–270, 2005.
[26] Richard W. Harris and David W. Swenson. Eﬀects of Reverberation and Noise on
Speech Recognition by Adults with Various Amounts of Sensorineural Hearing
Impairment. International Journal of Audiology, 29(6):314–321, 1990.
[27] Murray Hodgson. Subjective Acoustical Evaluation of Healthcare oﬃce Facili-
ties. pages 2–3, 2016.
[28] Timothy Hsu, Erica E. Ryherd, Kerstin Persson Waye, and Jeremy Ackerman.
Noise pollution in hospitals: Impact on patients. Journal of Clinical Outcomes
Management, 19(7):301–309, 2012.
[29] T.W. Hurst. Is noise important in hospitals?
International Journal of Nursing
Studies, 3(3):125–135, 1966.
[30] ISO 140-4. Acoustics - Measurement of sound insulation in buildings and of
building elements. 1998, 1998.
[31] Lotta Johansson, Ingegerd Bergbom, Kerstin Persson Waye, Erica Ryherd, and
Berit Lindahl. The sound environment in an ICU patient room-A content analysis
of sound levels and patient experiences. Intensive and Critical Care Nursing,
28(5):269–279, 2012.
[32] M. Kathleen Philbin, Katherine H. Taber, and L. Anne Hayman. Preliminary
report: Changes in vital signs of term newborns during MR. American Journal of
Neuroradiology, 17(6):1033–1036, 1996.
[33] Karen Grønkjær Kjeldsen.
Bispebjerg Hospital er fredet - og skal Nybygges,
2011.
[34] Jonathan M. Kracht, Ilene J. Busch-Vishniac, and James E. West. Noise in the
operating rooms of Johns Hopkins Hospital. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 121(5):2673–2680, 2007.
91
==PAGE:110==
Bibliography
Bibliography
[35] Kulturstyrelsen København. Fredningssag Bispebjerg Hospital. pages 18–23,
2013.
[36] Heinrich Kuttruﬀ. Room acoustics. 2009.
[37] A Luetz, B Weiss, T Penzel, I Fietze, M Glos, K D Wernecke, B Bluemke, A M
Dehn, T Willemeit, A Finke, and C Spies. Feasibility of noise reduction by a
modiﬁcation in ICU environment. Physiological Measurement, 37(7):1041–1055,
2016.
[38] M MacLeod, J Dunn, I J Busch-Vishniac, J E West, and A Reedy. Quieting Wein-
berg 5C: a case study in hospital noise control. J Acoust Soc Am, 121(6):3501–
3508, 2007.
[39] Atiya Mahmood, Habib Chaudhury, and Maria Valente. Nurses’ perceptions of
how physical environment aﬀects medication errors in acute care settings. Applied
Nursing Research, 24(4):229–237, 2011.
[40] Andrew A. Monjan.
Stess-Induced Modulation of the Immune Response.
196(4287):307–308, 1977.
[41] W E Morrison, E C Haas, D H Shaﬀner, E S Garrett, and J C Fackler. Noise,
stress, and annoyance in a pediatric intensive care unit. Critical Care Medicine,
31(1):113–119, 2003.
[42] V S Murthy, S K Malhotra, I Bala, and M Raghunathan. Detrimental eﬀects
of noise on anaesthetists. Canadian journal of anaesthesia = Journal canadien
d’anesthésie, 42:608–11, 1995.
[43] W L Neuman.
Social Research Methods: Qualitative and Quantitative Ap-
proaches, volume 8. 2014.
[44] Florance Nightingale. Notes on Nursing. 1859.
[45] Jette Nissen. Hospitalshygiejne. 2014.
[46] The University of Texas.
Response Rates.
Encyclopedia of Survey Research
Methods, pages 759–762, 2008.
[47] Douglas Orellana, Ilene J. Busch-Vishniac, and James E. Est. Noise in the adult
emergency department of John Hopkins Hospital. J Acoust Soc Am, pages 1996–
1999, 2007.
92
==PAGE:111==
Bibliography
Bibliography
[48] Torben Poulsen. Acoustic Communication - Hearing and Speech. 2008.
[49] {R Core Team}.
R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing,
2017.
[50] Paul N Reinhart, Pamela E Souza, Nirmal K Srinivasan, and Frederick J Gallun.
Eﬀects of Reverberation and Compression on Consonant Identiﬁcation in Individ-
uals with Hearing Impairment. Ear & Hearing, 37(2):144–152, 2015.
[51] Annette Richardson, Abigail Thompson, Elaine Coghill, Iain Chambers, and
Chris Turnock. Development and implementation of a noise reduction interven-
tion programme: A pre- and postaudit of three hospital wards. Journal of Clinical
Nursing, 18(23):3316–3324, 2009.
[52] Erica E. Ryherd, Selen Okcu, Jeremy Ackerman, Craig Zimring, and Kerstin Pers-
son Waye. Noise pollution in Hospitals: Impacts on staﬀ. Journal of Clinical
Outcomes Management, 19(11):491–500, 2012.
[53] Rebecca Taylor-Ford, Anita Catlin, Mollie LaPlante, and Candace Weinke. Ef-
fect of a noise reduction program on a medical-surgical unit. Clinical nursing
research, 17:74–88, 2008.
[54] M. Topf and E Dillon. Noise-induced stress as a predictor of burnout in critical
care nurses. Journal of Critical Care, 17(5):567–574, 1988.
[55] Venetia Tsara, Evangelia Nena, Evangelia Serasli, Vasilis Vasileiadis, Dimitris
Matamis, and Pandora Christaki. Noise levels in Greek hospitals. (10):110–112,
2008.
[56] Cassandra H Wiese. Investigation of Patient Perception of Hospital Noise and
Sound Level Measurements : Before , During , and After Renovations of a Hos-
pital Wing. 2010.
[57] Maria Woloshynowych, Rachel Davis, Ruth Brown, and Charles Vincent. Com-
munication Patterns in a UK Emergency Department.
Annals of Emergency
Medicine, 50(4):407–413, 2007.
[58] World Health Organization. Guidelines for community noise. Technical report,
World Health Organization, 1999.
93
==PAGE:112==
Appendices
I
==PAGE:113==
Appendix
A
Appendix
II
==PAGE:114==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.1. Questionnaires
A.1
Questionnaires
III
==PAGE:115==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.1. Questionnaires
IV
==PAGE:116==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.2. Room details
A.2
Room details
In the following appendix each room is presented with data collected, sketch with
source receiver positions (red item is the source, blue item is the receiver, gray items
represent furniture) and picture taken of the room.
V
==PAGE:117==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.2. Room details
VI
==PAGE:118==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.2. Room details
VII
==PAGE:119==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.2. Room details
VIII
==PAGE:120==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.2. Room details
IX
==PAGE:121==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.2. Room details
X
==PAGE:122==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.2. Room details
XI
==PAGE:123==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.2. Room details
XII
==PAGE:124==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.2. Room details
XIII
==PAGE:125==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.2. Room details
XIV
==PAGE:126==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.2. Room details
XV
==PAGE:127==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.2. Room details
XVI
==PAGE:128==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.2. Room details
XVII
==PAGE:129==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.2. Room details
XVIII
==PAGE:130==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.2. Room details
XIX
==PAGE:131==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.2. Room details
XX
==PAGE:132==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.2. Room details
XXI
==PAGE:133==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.2. Room details
XXII
==PAGE:134==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.2. Room details
XXIII
==PAGE:135==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.2. Room details
XXIV
==PAGE:136==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.2. Room details
XXV
==PAGE:137==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.3. Plots of rooms with the issue Noise building up
A.3
Plots of rooms with the issue Noise building up
Figure A.1: Results for early decay time for the four rooms within the category Noise building
up, explanation of abbreviations for the diﬀerent rooms are shown in table 4.1. On the x-axis
the 1/1 octave bands are listed between 63-8000 Hz on the y-axis the early decay time is shown
in seconds. Vertical lines show the conﬁdence interval.
Figure A.2: Results for STI value for females and males. Speech intelligibility interval is pre-
sented to the right of the STI value.
XXVI
==PAGE:138==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.3. Plots of rooms with the issue Noise building up
Figure A.3: Results for reverberation time T20 for the four rooms within the category Noise
building up, explanation of abbreviations for the diﬀerent rooms are shown in table 4.1, red
dashed line shows the requirement in [18]. On the x-axis the 1/1 octave bands are listed between
63-8000 Hz on the y-axis T20 is shown in seconds. Vertical lines show the conﬁdence interval.
Figure A.4: Results for clarity C50 for the four rooms within the category Noise building up,
explanation of abbreviations for the diﬀerent rooms are shown in table 4.1. On the x-axis the
1/1 octave bands are listed between 63-8000 Hz, on the y-axis C50 is shown in dB. Vertical lines
show the conﬁdence interval.
XXVII
==PAGE:139==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.4. Plots of rooms with the issue Reverberation
A.4
Plots of rooms with the issue Reverberation
Figure A.5: Results for early decay time for the two nurse station, one control room, one waiting
room and one corridor, abbreviations are shown in table 4.1. On the x-axis the 1/1 octave bands
are listed between 63-8000 Hz, on the y-axis the early decay time is shown in seconds. Vertical
lines show the conﬁdence interval.
Figure A.6: Results for STI for female and male for the two nurse station, one control room, one
waiting room and one corridor, abbreviations are shown in table 4.1. The speech intelligibility
is presented to the right of the STI value.
XXVIII
==PAGE:140==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.4. Plots of rooms with the issue Reverberation
Figure A.7: Results for reverberation time T20 for the two nurse station, one control room, one
waiting room and one corridor, abbreviations are shown in table 4.1, red dashed line shows the
requirement in [18] to Examination rooms and treatment rooms. On the x-axis the 1/1 octave
bands are listed between 63-8000 Hz, on the y-axis T20 is shown in seconds. Vertical lines show
the conﬁdence interval.
Figure A.8: Results for clarity C50 for the two nurse station, one control room, one waiting room
and one corridor, abbreviations are shown in table 4.1. On the x-axis the 1/1 octave bands are
listed between 63-8000 Hz, on the y-axis C50 is shown in dB. Vertical lines show the conﬁdence
interval.
XXIX
==PAGE:141==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.5. Plots of the rooms with the issue Noisy/hectic environment
A.5
Plots of the rooms with the issue Noisy/hectic envi-
ronment
Figure A.9: Results for early decay time for the ﬁve rooms within the category Noisy/Hectic
environment, explanation of abbreviations for the diﬀerent rooms are shown in table 4.1. On
the x-axis the 1/1 octave bands are listed between 63-8000 Hz on the y-axis the early decay time
is shown in seconds. Vertical lines show the conﬁdence interval.
Figure A.10: Results for STI for females and males. Speech intelligibility interval is presented
to the right of the STI value.
XXX
==PAGE:142==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.5. Plots of the rooms with the issue Noisy/hectic environment
Figure A.11:
Results for reverberation time T20 for the ﬁve rooms within the category
Noisy/Hectic environment, explanation of abbreviations for the diﬀerent rooms are shown in
table 4.1, red dashed line shows the requirement in the Danish Building Regulation 2015 for
single person oﬃces and meeting rooms. On the x-axis the 1/1 octave bands are listed between
63-8000 Hz on the y-axis T20 is shown in seconds. Vertical lines show the conﬁdence interval.
Figure A.12: Results for clarity C50 for the ﬁve rooms within the categorization Noisy/Hectic
environment, explanation of abbreviations for the diﬀerent rooms are shown in table 4.1. On
the x-axis the 1/1 octave bands are listed between 63-8000 Hz, on the y-axis C50 is shown in dB.
Vertical lines show the conﬁdence interval.
XXXI
==PAGE:143==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.6. Plots of the rooms with the issue Lack of speech privacy between rooms
A.6
Plots of the rooms with the issue Lack of speech
privacy between rooms
Figure A.13: Results for early decay time for the ﬁve rooms within the category Lack of Speech
Privacy between rooms, explanation of abbreviations for the diﬀerent rooms are shown in table
4.1. On the x-axis the 1/1 octave bands are given between 63-8000 Hz, on the y-axis the early
decay time is shown in seconds. Vertical lines show the conﬁdence interval.
Figure A.14: Results for STI for females and males. Quality interval is presented to the right of
the STI value.
XXXII
==PAGE:144==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.6. Plots of the rooms with the issue Lack of speech privacy between rooms
Figure A.15: Results for reverberation time T20 for the ﬁve rooms within the category Lack of
Speech Privacy between rooms, explanation of abbreviations for the diﬀerent rooms are shown
in table 4.1, red dashed line shows the requirement in the Danish Building Regulation 2015. On
the x-axis the 1/1 frequency bands are given between 63-8000 Hz, on the y-axis T20 is shown in
seconds. Vertical lines show the conﬁdence interval.
Figure A.16: Results for clarity C50 for the ﬁve rooms within the category Lack of Speech
Privacy between Rooms, explanation of abbreviations for the diﬀerent rooms are shown in
table 4.1. On the x-axis the 1/1 octave bands are given between 63-8000 Hz on the y-axis C50
is shown in dB. Vertical lines show the conﬁdence interval.
XXXIII
==PAGE:145==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.7. Correlation analysis of issues
A.7
Correlation analysis of issues
A.7.1
Correlation matrices
Figure A.17: Correlation matrix between vectors of EDT for frequencies between 63-16000 Hz
for the four categorized issues. Top left is the correlation matrix for Noise Building up (N),
Bottom left is the correlation matrix for Reverberation in Room (R), top right is the correlation
matrix for Noisy/Hectic environment and bottom right is the correlation matrix for Lack of
speech privacy between rooms. Values shown are Pearson correlation coeﬃcient, gray indicates
values above 0.9.
Figure A.18: Correlation matrix between vectors of T20 for frequencies between 63-16000 Hz
for the four categorized issues. Top left is the correlation matrix for Noise Building up (N),
Bottom left is the correlation matrix for Reverberation in Room (R), top right is the correlation
matrix for Noisy/Hectic environment and bottom right is the correlation matrix for Lack of
speech privacy between rooms. Values shown are Pearson correlation coeﬃcient, gray indicates
values above 0.9.
XXXIV
==PAGE:146==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.7. Correlation analysis of issues
Figure A.19: Correlation matrix between vectors of C50 for frequencies between 63-16000 Hz
for the four categorized issues. Top left is the correlation matrix for Noise Building up (N),
Bottom left is the correlation matrix for Reverberation in Room (R), top right is the correlation
matrix for Noisy/Hectic environment and bottom right is the correlation matrix for Lack of
speech privacy between rooms. Values shown are Pearson correlation coeﬃcient, gray indicates
values above 0.9.
A.7.2
Blind sorting rooms into issues
Figure A.20: Results of test were the author blind sorted the rooms into the diﬀerent issues.
Abbreviations for rooms and issues can be found in table 4.1.
XXXV
==PAGE:147==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.8. All data presented as circle plots
A.8
All data presented as circle plots
Figure A.21: Percent of answers to the question: "When you think about the past 6 months, how
disturbed have you been by noise when you have been at work?", with the possible answers
"Not at all", "Slightly", "Moderately", "Considerably" and "Extremely". 64 four participants
answered the question.
Figure A.22: Percent of answers to the question: "When you think about the past six months
how often have you experienced you could not hear or understand what a colleague and/or
a patient said because of noise?", with the possible answers "Never", "Rarely", "Sometimes",
"Often" and "Always". 64 four participants answered the question.
XXXVI
==PAGE:148==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.8. All data presented as circle plots
Figure A.23: Percents of answers to the question: "When thinking about the past six months how
often have you experienced that you could not speak conﬁdentially with a patient without other
patients hearing you?", with the possible answers "Never", "Rarely", "Sometimes", "Often" and
"Always". 61 four participants answered the question.
Figure A.24: Percents of answers to the question: "When thinking about the past six months
how often have you experienced that a patient said that he/she could not hear or understand
important information you have given?", with the possible answers "Never", "Rarely", "Some-
times", "Often" and "Always". 19 four participants answered the question.
XXXVII
==PAGE:149==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.9. Correlation of questions and parameters
A.9
Correlation of questions and parameters
Figure A.25: Correlation matrix between Q1, Q2, Q3, Q4 and the parameters Age, Gender,
Sensitive to noise, Hearing impaired.
Figure A.26: Correlation matrix between Q1, Q2, Q3 and Q4.
XXXVIII
==PAGE:150==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.10. R-scripts for Mixed Models
A.10
R-scripts for Mixed Models
Figure A.27: Script from R for performing linear mixed eﬀect analysis.
XXXIX
==PAGE:151==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.10. R-scripts for Mixed Models
Figure A.28: Results from R for performing linear mixed eﬀect analysis on Q1, Q2, Q3 and Q4
with department as random eﬀect.
XL
==PAGE:152==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.11. Rooms sorted into departments
A.11
Rooms sorted into departments
Figure A.29: Answers to in which rooms the phenomenon: "When you think about the past
6 months, how disturbed have you been by noise when you have been at work?" most often
occurred divided into departments. The participants could cross out up to three rooms.
Figure A.30: Answers to in which rooms the phenomenon: "When you think about the past six
months how often have you experienced you could not hear or understand what a colleague
and/or a patient said because of noise?" most often occurred divided into departments. The
participants could cross out up to three rooms.
XLI
==PAGE:153==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.11. Rooms sorted into departments
Figure A.31: Answers to in which rooms the phenomenon: "When thinking about the past six
months how often have you experienced that you could not speak conﬁdentially with a patient
without other patients hearing you?" most often occurred divided into departments. The par-
ticipants could cross out up to three rooms.
XLII
==PAGE:154==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.12. R-scripts for one-way ANOVA
A.12
R-scripts for one-way ANOVA
Figure A.32: Script from R for performing ANOVA.
Figure A.33: Results from R for performing ANOVA Q1.
XLIII
==PAGE:155==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.12. R-scripts for one-way ANOVA
Figure A.34: Results from R for performing ANOVA Q2.
Figure A.35: Results from R for performing ANOVA Q3.
XLIV
==PAGE:156==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.13. Sketch of D.Ex12
A.13
Sketch of D.Ex12
Figure A.36: Sketch performed in Sketchup of D.Ex12.
XLV
==PAGE:157==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.14. Materials for Odeon model
A.14
Materials for Odeon model
Figure A.37: Sketch performed in Sketchup of D.Ex12 with materials used in Odeon.
XLVI
==PAGE:158==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.14. Materials for Odeon model
Figure A.38: Materials and absorption coeﬃcients used in Odeon, for the model before imple-
menting suspended ceiling.
Figure A.39: Materials and absorption coeﬃcients used in Odeon, for the model after imple-
menting suspended ceiling.
XLVII
