==PAGE:1==
Optimization of bridge design for
long span bridges
Rolf Gedevad Hovmand
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Civil Engineering
Brovej, building 118,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 1700
byg@byg.dtu.dk
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The aim of this thesis is to develop a principle optimization program that can
reduce the material consumption of orthotropic steel bridge deck. This is done
not only to lower the material usage, but also to try to increase of the span
length for bridges by lower the self-weight of the bridge.
The program will be developed using matlab, python, and abaqus. matlab
will be the managing program that will run the minimization algorithm that will
reduce the material consumption. abaqus will be used as a FE analysis program
that will perform analyses of constructions, and python is used to model the FE
models in abaqus.
The deck from the Izmit Bay Bridge will be used as reference for the FE models
of the optimization. The optimization of the bridge deck will be for a stiened
plate at the top of the bridge deck between two diaphragms.
To begin with, an optimization program is made for a cantilever beam with a
discontinuous cross-section at middle span. This is done to make a connection
between the three programs, and to show that it is possible to make an opti-
mization program using the three programs. Two optimizations for the beam
are performed. The rst optimization is to optimize the material distribution
for a constant volume of the beam and to nd the lowest possible deection of
the beam tip. The other optimization is to nd the smallest volume of the beam
given a constrain of a maximum deection of the beam tip. The results from
both optimizations showed compliance between analytical results and results
from abaqus. The analyzes showed that it was possible to make an optimiza-
tion program using the three programs.
After that, the plate from Izmit Bay Bridge was optimized for stability and
fatigue. Many simplications were made in the FE model of the bridge plate,
including supports, but also the geometry was changed from closed trapezoidal
stieners to open rib stieners. These changes changed the design properties,
but it was accepted as the optimization program should be principle for opti-
mization of long span bridge deck, and not necessarily the one from Izmit Bay
Bridge.
==PAGE:4==
ii
The results from the stability analysis showed that the design was optimized
both for the initial dimensions of the design and for the Izmit Bay Bridge deck
plate. On the other hand, the fatigue analysis showed that there were problems
with the stresses and the method of extracting the results. The problem wasn't
solve, but suggestions to how it could be solved was presented.
Finally, a combined optimization analysis was made for both stability and fa-
tigue.
The analysis showed that there were still problems with the fatigue
analysis, but also that the optimization program could solve two optimization
problems at the same time. The optimization program thus has the potential
to make optimizations of orthotropic bridge decks by improving the FE models
and the method of extracting data.
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Målet for denne afhandling er at udvikle et principielt optimeringsprogram, som
kan reducere materialeforbruget for orthotrope stålbrodæk. Dette gøres, for at
muliggøre forøgelsen af spændlængden for broer.
Programmet vil blive udviklet vha. matlab, python og abaqus. matlab vil
være det styrende program, som vil køre minimerings algoritmen, der vil redu-
cere materialeforbruget. abaqus anvendes som analyse program, der vil udføre
analyser af konstruktioner, og python anvendes til at modellere FE modellerne
i abaqus.
Brodækket, der tages udgangspunkt i for optimerings FE modellerne, er fra bro-
en Izmit Bay Bridge. I optimeringsprogrammet ses der på en afstivede plade i
toppen af brodækket og som er placeret imellem to slidsevægge.
Til at starte med laves et optimeringsprogram for en udragende bjælke med dis-
kontinuerlig tværsnit på midten af bæjlken. Dette gøres for at oprette forbindelse
mellem de tre programmer, og for at vise, at det er muligt at lave et optime-
ringsprogram med de tre programmer. Der udføres to optimeringer for bjælken.
Den første optimering er, at optimere materialefordelingen ved konstant volu-
men af bjælken og nde den mindst mulige nedbøjning af bjælkeenden. Den
anden optimere er at nde det mindste volumen af bjælken givet en begræns-
ning iform af en maximal nedbøjning. Resultaterne viste, at det var muligt at
lave et optimeringsprogram vha. de tre programmer.
Herefter blev pladen fra Izmit Bay Bridge optimeret for stabilitet og udmattelse.
Der blev foretaget mange simpliceringer i FE modellen af bropladen heriblandt
understøttinger men også geometrien blev ændret fra lukkede trapezformede af-
stivere til åbne ribbe afstivere. Dette ændrede på konstruktionens egenskaber,
men det blev accepteret, da optimeringsprogrammet skulle være principielt for
broer med lang spænd og ikke nødvendigvis Izmit Bay Bridge.
Resultaterne fra stabilitetsanalysen viste, at konstruktionen blev optimeret bå-
de mht. startdimensionerne for konstruktionen og mht. pladen fra Izmit Bay
Bridge. Derimod viste analysen for udmattelse, at der var problemer med spæn-
dingerne og den måde resultaterne blev trukket ud på. Problemet blev ikke løst,
==PAGE:6==
iv
men der blev givet forslag til hvordan det kunne løses.
Til sidst blev en samlet optimeringsanalyse foretaget for både stabilitet og ud-
mattelse. Analysen viste, at der fortsat var problemer udmattelsesundersøgel-
sen, men også, at optimeringsprogrammet kunne løse to optimeringsproblemer
på samme tid. Optimeringsprogrammet har dermed potentiale til at kunne fo-
retage optimeringer af orthotrope brodæk ved forbedrelse af FE modellerne og
udtrækningen af data.
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Civil Engineering at DTU in
fullment of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc. in Civil Engineering.
The thesis deals with optimization of bridge deck for long span bridges, by
developing an optimization program using the programs matlab, python and
abaqus.
The thesis has been prepared in a period from 2nd of January to the 8th July,
and it is representing 32.5 ECTS points.
Lyngby, 8. July2017
Rolf Gedevad Hovmand
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my two supervisors Associated Professor Peter Noe Poulsen
and Associated Professor John Forbes Olesen, who have helped and guided me
throughout the project.
I will also like to thank Associated Professor Jens
Henrik Nielsen for assistance in abaqus.
A special thanks to M. Sc. Allan Schougaard for guidance and help with the
report.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Background study
5
3
Izmit Bay Bridge
7
3.1
Cross-sectional and Material properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Programs and functions
15
4.1
Program structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2
MATLAB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
Python
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4
ABAQUS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.5
Limitation of program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Stability
29
5.1
Buckling of plates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2
Stiened plates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3
Linear perturbation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6
Fatigue
37
6.1
Local stress range . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.1.1
Nominal or modied (local) nominal stress
. . . . . . . .
40
6.1.2
Geometric (hot spot, structural) stress . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.1.3
Eective notch stress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.2
Structural verication method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.2.1
Fatigue strength
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.2.2
S-N curves
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
6.3
Structural analysis for fatigue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7
Optimisation programs
49
7.1
Optimisation for displacements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.1.1
FE model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7.1.2
Analytical approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7.1.3
Constant volume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7.1.4
Constant displacement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7.2
Optimization for stability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7.2.1
FE model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
7.2.2
Optimization results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7.3
Optimization for fatigue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
7.3.1
FE model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
7.3.2
Optimization results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
8
Combined optimization program
81
8.1
Optimization results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
9
Discussion
83
10 Conclusion
87
11 Further work
89
12 Enclosed CD
91
Bibliography
93
A Great Belt Bridge cost
1
B Cantilever beam (constant volume)
3
B.1
MATLAB - Main.m
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
B.2
MATLAB - Ana.m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
B.3
MATLAB - Aba.m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
B.4
Python - Main.py . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
B.5
Python - Output.py
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
C Cantilever beam (constant displacement)
15
C.1 MATLAB - Main.m
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
C.2 MATLAB - Ana.m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
C.3 MATLAB - Aba.m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
C.4 Python - Main.py . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
C.5 Python - Output.py
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
==PAGE:13==
CONTENTS
xi
D Stability
27
D.1 MATLAB - Main.m
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
D.2 MATLAB - Aba.m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
D.3 Python - Main.py . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
D.4 Python - Output.py
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
E Fatigue
55
E.1
MATLAB - Main.m
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
E.2
MATLAB - Aba.m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
E.3
Python - Main.py . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
E.4
Python - Output.py
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
F Combined model
81
F.1
MATLAB - Main.m
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
F.2
MATLAB - Aba.m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
G Mesh convergence of cantilever beam
85
H Mesh convergence of plate for stability
87
I
Damage report from COWI
89
J
Elastic centre and comp. force
93
K Stress distribution in plate for fatigue analysis.
101
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In modern bridge design, the orthotropic steel deck rib system has become more
popular ever since it was invented by German engineers in the 1950s [18]. This
is due to the light weight and high stiness. The orthotropic steel decks have
made it possible to make more slender bridges and increase the span lengths.
For instance is the orthotropic steel deck system used in the Japanese suspen-
sion bridge Akashi Kaiky	o Bridge, which has the longest span in the world.
Also the Great Belt Bridge in Denmark is build using orthotropic steel decks.
The name orthotropic comes from the words orthogonal and anisotropic. In
general the bridge deck system consist of a steel plate, which are stiened lon-
gitudinally or transversely, or both directions. This gives anisotropic structural
properties orthogonally in the bridge deck, which is the reason to the name.
The rib system can be open or closed. An overview of the dierent rib systems
are shown in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: (Left) Open and (Right) closed rib systems.[1]
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
The rib system is used in many types of bridges (Plate-Girder bridges, Box-
Girder bridges, Movable bridges, Truss bridges, Cable-Stayed bridges and Sus-
pension bridges) [18]. The systems have been improved though the years, but
the optimal rib system is depending on the individual bridge, due to dierent
load cases for each bridge. However, from experiments it has been found that
the most practical rib system is a closed rib system with a trapezoidal shape
[18]. This is also the type that is used for the bridges with the longest main
span.
When designing orthotropic steel decks, aspects like stress distribution, stabil-
ity, deections and shear force distribution are considered, but it has turned
out that the most critical problem with the orthotropic decks is fatigue. For
the past decades investigations of fatigue failures have been performed, which
shows that most of the fatigue fails was cause by cracks. The fatigue cracks
occurred at the welded connection details, such as the rib-to-deck plate and
rib-to-diaphragm, because the connections are sensitive to large stresses and
residual stresses, which occur because of the self-weight and wheel load [5]. It
is therefore important to take fatigue into account when designing orthotropic
bridges since this is the limiting factor for the lifetime of the bridge.
Figure 1.2: Rib-to-deck plate cracks. [27]
Construction of a bridge is very expensive. As an example, in the period from
1990-1998 the Danish government paid 24.1 billion DKK for the Great Belt
Bridge. If the bridge was build in 2017, the price would be DKK 33.8 billion
which corresponds to USD 5.1 billion see Appendix A. If the bridge deck was
optimized in order to reduce the material usage, the self-weight and the resource
cost of the bridge would also be reduced. This would be benecial nancially
and for the nature. Furthermore, the reduction of the self-weight would make
it possible to increase the main span of bridges, due to the lower self-weight of
the bridge.
The purpose of this project is to develop a nite element (FE) optimization pro-
==PAGE:17==
3
gram that can nd the optimal dimensions of the components in an orthotropic
steel deck in order to get the lowest possible volume. The Izmit Bay Bridge see
chapter 3, is used as a reference bridge, since it will be one of the most optimized
orthotropic bridge decks and have one of the longest main span in the world.
The bridge has a record of 5m between the diaphragms, where the Great Belt
Bridge has 4m between the diaphragms. This however leads to a larger stiness
requirement of the orthotropic deck.
The program that will handle the optimization algorithm is matlab and the
FE program used for the structural analysis is the commercial program abaqus.
First a simple cantilever beam is optimized. This optimization is performed to
show that it is possible to make an optimization program using matlab's built-
in algorithm and abaqus as structural analyzer. When it is shown that the
optimization is possible using the programs, the bridge deck will be analyzed
for stability and fatigue. The FE model of a full bridge deck is a complicated
model consisting of beam, plate and shell elements. The optimization program
is therefore developed for a single top lane plate between to diaphragms. This is
done to make a more simple model and to make small steps toward developing
a optimization program for a full scale bridge deck.
Even though the basis of the FE model is the Izmit Bay Bridge, the geometry
of the rib system is changed from a closed trapezoidal rib system to a open
vertical plated system in FE model. This is done to simplify the geometry of
the model. An optimization program for both stability and fatigue is developed
though out the report for the FE model, and nally a combined optimization
of the FE model will be performed.
==PAGE:18==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Background study
Since the orthotropic steel deck was invented in the 1950s a lot of research of the
deck have been made. Before starting the project, a literature study was made
to see if a similar project, where an optimization program for an orthotropic
steel deck was developed by using matlab, python and abaqus.
The study quickly showed that the primarily research for the orthotropic bridge
deck was to optimize the bridges for fatigue cracks. This was due to reports of
fatigue cracks in a large number of bridges all over the world [4] [5] [6]. Ever since
the fatigue cracks were detected, large eorts have been made to prevent the
fatigue cracks. In the 90's, lots of research were conducted for the Eurocodes,
which developed guidelines and categorized the specic detail fatigue cracks into
fatigue categories [7]. The guidelines and fatigue categories is also known as the
nominal stress approach, and it is the most commonly used fatigue verication
[6] [8] [9].
In order to prevent the fatigue cracks many parametric studies of changing the
thicknesses of the dierent members have been made [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14].
Typically the parameters studied was the the thickness of the top plate and the
thickness of the ribs. Most of the results showed that increasing the deck plate
will reduce the considered stress range, and that the optimal dimension for the
bridge deck was individual for each specic bridge.
==PAGE:20==
6
Background study
Further investigation to nd new concepts of an orthotropic deck, where fatigue
cracks do not appear, is still ongoing. This shows that the primarily focus on
optimizing the orthotropic bridges has been on nd a new design concept for the
rib system, and not to make a program, which can nd the optimal dimensions
for members of the bridge deck based on known concepts.
This project is not about nding new calculation methods for fatigue cracks or to
come up with new concepts for rib systems and investigate themes. The project
is to use a current rib system and to use the already known design concepts,
such as the nominal stress approach presented by the Eurocode, to optimize the
bridge deck with respect to the material usage. Based on the literature study,
this has not been made before, or atleast not with the procedure used in this
project.
When the members in the bridge deck are pushed to their geometrical limits, the
phenomena buckling can occur in the members [22]. Therefore, two structural
analyzes are performed in the optimization program for the bridge deck: one
for stability of the structural members and one for fatigue cracks.
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3
Izmit Bay Bridge
Throughout this project an optimization program for optimizing orhtotropic
steel decks is developed. As an basis for the development of the program, the
Izmit Bay Bridge (IBB) is used. The bridge is located at the Gulf of Izmit at
the eastern end of the Sea of Marmara and approximately 50 km south-east of
Istanbul. The bridge is also known as the Osman Gazi Bridge, and it is the
largest part of the Osman Gazi project. Besides the IBB the project consist of
420 km highway. The project aimed to improve the Turkish infrastructure and
industry by reducing the travel time from Izmir to the city of Istanbul. The
project was completed 30. of June 2016, it costed US$ 1.2 billion and the travel
time was reduced from six-and-half hours to three-and-half hour between the
two cities. [22]
The IBB was designed by the Japanese company IHI and the architectural
rm Dissing+Weitling. The engineering design was performed by the Danish
engineering company COWI A/S.
The bridge is a suspension bridge with a 1550 m main span (the fourth longest
in the world) and two side spans each 566 m long. In Figure 3.1 and Figure 3.2
the side-view of the entire bridge and a close-up on the southern part of the
bridge can be seen respectively. The geometry of the bridge in the gures are
for the nal state of the bridge, which means that the cables and hangers need
to be pre-tensioned in order to get the geometry due to the dead load. The
pre-tension of the cables will not be investigated in this project.
The girder and pylons are made of steel and the foundations and anchor blocks
are made of concrete.
==PAGE:22==
8
Izmit Bay Bridge
Figure 3.1: Side-view of Izmit Bay Bridge. [15]
Figure 3.2: Close-up on the southern part of Izmit Bay Bridge.[15]
The bridge has two main cables and a total of 202 hangers. The transverse
distance between the main cables are 30m. The main cables are anchored to
the anchor blocks at each end of the bridge and runs over the pylons in cable
saddles.
The girder of IBB is a box girder made of 25m long segments, which are as-
sembled midway between hangers. The bridge has six lanes, where the outer
lanes in each direction are designed to carry heavier trac. These lanes are
used as reference for the development of the optimization program throughout
the report. The geometry of the girder varies along the bridge, but a typical
cross-section of the girder is seen in Figure 3.4 and Figure 3.5. The width of the
typical cross-section between the pylons is 35.9m including inspection walkways
and the maximum height is 4.75m at the centreline (CL) [15].
==PAGE:23==
9
Figure 3.3: Typical cross-section of the girder.[23]
==PAGE:24==
10
Izmit Bay Bridge
Figure 3.4: Cross-section of the right side of the girder.[15]
The diaphragms, which are transferring the trac load out to the hangers and
gives the girder a high torsional stiness, are installed for every 5m in the longi-
tudinal direction. Furthermore inclined rods are installed in order to connect the
upper and lower diaphragm beams. The stiness in the longitudinal direction
is ensured by orthotropic trapezoidal steel plates (ribs) with a 600mm center
distance from each other. In Figure 3.5 a detailed cross-section of the girder and
the diaphragm are shown. The geometry of the ribs used at the outer trac
lane (reference lane) and the associated cut-out in the diaphragm are shown in
Figure 3.6 and Figure 3.7. Instead of the closed trapezoidal ribs the FE model
will be modelled with opened plate ribs. This is done to simplify the model.
The FE model is explain in details in section 7.2.
The bridge pylons are shown in Figure 3.8. The pylons are slightly inclined.
The pylon pair at each end of the midspan have the same geometry and are
connected by an upper and lower cross beam. The bridge girder is installed so
that only transverse support is ensured at the pylons.
==PAGE:25==
11
Figure 3.5: (a) Cross-section of girder without diaphragm.
(b) Diaphragm
and internal rods. [15]
==PAGE:26==
12
Izmit Bay Bridge
Figure 3.6: Deck rib type T2. [15]
Figure 3.7: Deck rib cut-out. [15]
Figure 3.8: Open and closed rib systems. [15]
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Cross-sectional and Material properties
13
3.1
Cross-sectional and Material properties
The cross-sectional and material properties used in the master's thesis Bjærre
[15] are used. The properties in that project are obtained from other reliable
sources, such as COWI A/S and another master's thesis. In Bjærre [15] the
information of the cross-sectional properties, which were given by COWI A/S,
was simplied and the bridge was divide into dierent sections. An overview of
the sections can be seen in Figure 3.9. The corresponding cross-sectional prop-
erties are listed in Table 3.1 and the material properties are listed in Table 3.2.
Figure 3.9: Denition sketch for regions with constant cross-section. [15]
==PAGE:28==
14
Izmit Bay Bridge
Table 3.1: Cross-sectional properties.[15]
Area
Moment of inertia
Torsional stiness
Structural member
A[m2]
Ix[m4]
Iy[m4]
Iz[m4]
Iv[m4]
Deck region A
1.24
-
97.61
3.94
8.63
Deck region B
1.56
-
129.17
5.33
11.62
Pylon region C
3.01
21.93
-
26.63
28.53
Pylon region D
1.34
8.93
-
8.83
8.34
Pylon region E
12.89
-
-
357.90
-
Pylon region F
35.98
-
-
599.74
-
Pylon lower cross-beam
1.06
5.21
1.63
-
3.21
Pylon upper cross-beam
0.55
2.83
0.86
-
1.86
Main cable
0.39
-
0.01
0.01
0
Hanger
0.016
2.09e-5
.
2.09e-5
0
Table 3.2: Material properties. [15]
Density
Young's modulus
Poisson's ratio
Yield strength
Material
ρ[kg/m3]
E[GPa]
ν[−]
fy[MPa]
Construction stell
7850
210
0.3
460
Cable steel
7850
195
0.3
1770
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 4
Programs and functions
To optimize the bridge to achieve as little material usage as possible the three
programs matlab, python and abaqus are used. The programming of the
optimization program will contain both self-programmed scripts and functions,
which are self written, and built-in functions, which are functions inside the
programs.
In this section the structure of the optimization program is outlined. It is rec-
ommended that the reader has a basic knowledge of the programs and that the
information in this chapter is taking into thought when reading the following
chapters. At this point in the report the content in this chapter can be hard
to follow. However, when looking at the scripts in Appendix B, Appendix C,
Appendix D, Appendix E Appendix F.
The optimization programs will have a general structure, however for each opti-
mization analysis the program will slightly dier. The dierences will be spec-
ied for the individual optimization analysis in chapter 7.
However, in this
section an overview of the general structure and the ow of data will be pre-
sented rst. A more detailed description of the scripts and functions written
and used in the analysis for the stability of the bridge deck is made. Finally a
description of the most essential build-in functions in the programmes will be
explained.
In chapter 7 the optimization programs will be used to perform optimizations
of structures to show that the program is working as intended.
==PAGE:30==
16
Programs and functions
4.1
Program structure
To optimize the material usage for the orthotropic bridge deck the three pro-
grams matlab, python and abaqus are used. The idea of this section is to
give the reader an understanding of the basic programming without going to
much in details. It is however important to point out that it is expected that
the reader has a basic knowledge of the three programs.
The main program used to make the optimization is matlab. The main script of
the whole optimization program is called Main.m. The script will handle the in-
put data, such as dimensions, material properties, loads and initial guesses of the
variable dimensions for the structural analysis, and call both self-programmed
and built-in functions in matlab. Furthermore, the function that is optimized
(object function), which is the function of the volume of the structure, which is
analysed, is specied in Mian.m. A built-in minimization algorithm in matlab
eg. fminsearch or fmincon is performing the minimization. The minimization
function will call a self-programmed function Aba.m. This function writes the di-
mensions, material properties and loads to a python-le, Var.py. Furthermore,
it opens the FE program abaqus, and runs a python-le, Main.py, which is
containing the information of the structure and thereby models the structure in
abaqus. When abaqus has performed the structural analysis the script Out-
out.py is run and the desired results are written to a text-le, Output.txt. The
text-le is loaded into Aba.m, and the data is evaluated. If the object function
is minimized as much as possible and the potential constrains are satised, the
algorithm will stop and the results are send to the main script Main.m. If the
object function is not fully optimized, the algorithm will make a change in the
variable dimensions, and make the structural analysis in abaqus until the ob-
ject function is fully optimized.
A owchart of the optimization program is illustrated in Figure 4.1 and an
overview of the dierent self-programmed les are listed in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Overview of the program les.
matlab-les
Python-les
abaqus
Main.m
Main.py
Aba.m
Var.py
(Ana.m)
Output.py
==PAGE:31==
4.1 Program structure
17
Figure 4.1: Flowchart of the optimization program
The script Ana.m is in brackets in Table 4.1 because it is only used for comparing
an analytical and numerical solution for a displacement optimization problem.
The optimization is performed in section 7.1.
In the following each programs purpose is explained, a walkthrough of the self-
programmed scripts and functions are made and the essential built-in functions
in the programs are described. All the self-programmed scripts and functions
can be found in Appendix B, Appendix C, Appendix D, Appendix E and Ap-
pendix F.
==PAGE:32==
18
Programs and functions
4.2
MATLAB
As explained matlab will be the program performing the optimization algo-
rithm.
Both scripts and self-programmed functions are used together with
built-in functions.
The most important part of the optimization program is
the script main.m. This is the main script, that contains all the property data
for the FE model in abaqus (e.g. dimensions, material properties and loads),
the objective function V , which has to be optimized and calls functions such as
self-programmed functions and built-in optimization algorithm. In this project,
the objective function will be the volume of the structural model.
In the following, the self-programmed and the most important built-in functions
are explained.
Self-programmed scripts and functions
A walk through of the self-programmed scripts and self-programmed functions
for the fatigue optimization problem is made. The scripts and functions can
be found in Appendix D. The scripts and functions for the other optimization
programmes can be found in Appendix B, Appendix C, Appendix E and Ap-
pendix F. Usable comments are written in all the scripts and functions, and
they should be understandable based on the comments and the following walk
through.
Main.m
Line 4-9 The permanent dimensions for the structure are specied.
Line 11-13 The initial guesses for the three variable dimensions: the thick-
ness of the plate tp, the thickness of the ribs ts and the the height of the
ribs hs, are specied. In the script, multiple initials guess are specied in
a row vector.
Line 15 Young's modulus is specied.
Line 18 The volume of the structure is made as a function, which has
three variables corresponding to the ones from line 11-13. The function
of the volume will be used as the object function later.
Line 21-29 All the input data for the minimization algorithm fmincon
are specied.
The function is a built-in function and will therefore be
explained later. It is important to use the same notation for tp, ts and hs
when they are inserted in the dierent arguments.
==PAGE:33==
4.2 MATLAB
19
Line 31 The options for the optimization algorithm are specied. This is
discussed in section 4.5.
Line 34-47 A for-loop that runs the minimization algorithm fmincon for
each of the specied initial guesses and stores the results in a matrix re.
Line 36 The initial cross-section area A0 is specied.
Line 38 The load P is specied.
Line 41 The self-programmed function for the nonlinear constrains Aba.m
is made as a function, where the input arguments are specied.
Line 44 The minimization algorithm fmincon, where all the input and
output arguments are specied.
Line 45-46 The initial guesses, the optimized dimensions, the optimized
volume and the exitag is stores in a matrix re.
In Main.m the self-programmed function Aba.m is called. In the following a
walk through of this function is made.
Aba.m
Line 6-10 Values for the constrains are specied.
Line 13-24 A python le Var.py is created or opened, where the variables
are written to the le. The variables form the le Var.py is later loaded
into the le Main.py and are used in abaqus.
27-28 It is decided if the Graphical User Interface is used or not when
abaqus is running.
Line 31 The le Main.py is specied, so it can be used as the script, that
will be run in the abaqus analysis.
Line 36 abaqus is opened and Main.py is run with or without the Graph-
ical User Interface.
Line 42 The results from abaqus are written to a txt-le and is loaded
into Aba.m.
Line 45 The value, which is desired from the structural analysis in abaqus,
is execrated form the results, which were loaded in from Output.txt.
Line 46-47 The constrains are checked.
==PAGE:34==
20
Programs and functions
For every optimization analysis, both a Main.m and a Aba.m le is made. De-
pending on which optimization analysis is preformed the script and functions
will vary a little, but looking at the walk through in this section and comparing
the scripts and functions it should be possible to understand the other scripts
and functions. Furthermore, for the optimization analysis with the cantilever
beam in section 7.1, and additional self-programmed function Ana.m is made,
however it is quit similar to the Aba.m and it has commons, thus it will not be
explained in further details.
Built-in functions
Throughout the self-programmed scripts and functions some matlab built-in
functions are used. In the following, the most important built-in functions are
outlined.
fminsearch
In general the function is used to nd a minimum of a mathematical uncon-
strained function with multiple variables. In other words, the function is a non-
linear programming solver that searches for the minimum of a problem specied
by
min
x f(x)
where f(x) is a mathematical function that returns a scalar, and x is a vector
or a matrix. By specifying a starting vector x0, fminsearch attempts to return
a vector x, which is a local minimizer of the mathematical function near the
starting vector. The algorithm used for the minimization is the Nelder-Mead
simplex algorithm.
The algorithm is a so called heuristic technique which
means that it is not guaranteed to be the optimal or perfect method to use,
but it is sucient for immediate goal. The technique is practical to use, when
an optimal solution is impossible, because it can speed up the process to nd a
solution that is satisfying.
The fminsearch is called the following way:
[x, fval, exitag] = fminsearch(fun,x0)
where fun is the objective function, that is optimized, x0 is the starting point
of the optimization, x is the local minimum of the objective function, fval is the
function value and exitflag describes the exit condition, which can be found in
Table 4.2.
In this project the objective function fun is the function of the volume of the
structure denoted V in the main script. The output of the function x is contain-
ing the minimum dimensions, which is optimized for, and fval is the function
value (volume) at the given minimum point e.i. at x.
==PAGE:35==
4.2 MATLAB
21
fminsearch is used to nd the minimum height of a cantilever beam see subsec-
tion 7.1.3.
Table 4.2: Exitag and exit condition for fminsearch. [25]
Exitfalg
Exit condition
1
The function converged to a solution x.
0
Number of iterations exceeded options.MaxIter or number of
function evaluations exceeded options.MaxFunEvals.
-1
The algorithm was terminated by the output function.
fmincon
In general the function is used to nd a minimum of a mathematical constrained
function with multiple variables. Just like fminsearch, fmincon is a nonlinear
programming solver, which nds the minimum of a problem specied by
minx f(x) such that















c(x)
≤0
ceq(x)
= 0
A · x
≤b
Aeq · x
= beq
lb
≤x ≤ub
where A is a matrix for linear inequality constrained, b is a vector of linear
inequality constrained, Aeq is a matrix for linear equality constrained, beq is
a vector of linear equality constrained, c is an array of nonlinear inequality
constrains, ceq is an array of nonlinear equality constrains, lb is a vector of
lower bounds and ub is a vector of upper bounds. The nonlinear constrained (c
and ceq) are made in an separate self-programmed function e.g. aba.m, which
was explained earlier. The algorithm starts at a starting point specied in x0
and then tries to nd a minimizer for the objective function fun subjected to
one or more constrains.
fmincon has four dierent optimization algorithms. The algorithms are listed
below. The reason behind the selection of the algorithm is explained, but the
algorithms will not be explained in further detail.
• Interior point (default).
The algorithm can handle both large, sparse
problems as well as dense problems. The algorithm is strong because it
can recover form NaN and Inf results. Furthermore, the algorithm satisfy
the bounds for all iterations. It is a large-scale algorithm.
• Trust Region Reective. The algorithm is eective, but it requires a gra-
==PAGE:36==
22
Programs and functions
dient. Furthermore, it allows only bounds or linear equality, but not both.
If the requirements are met, the algorithm can handle both large sparse
and small dense problems eectively. It is a large-scale algorithm.
• SPQ. Just like the Interior point, SPQ can also recover form NaN and Inf
results and it also satisfy the bounds at every iteration, but it is not a
large-scale algorithm.
• Active set. The advantage of this algorithm is that it can take large steps,
which adds speed, and it is eective on some problems with nonsmooth
constraints, but it is not a large-scale algorithm.
A large-scale algorithm is an algorithm, that handles linear algebra without
the need to store nor operate on full matrices. This saves a lot of memory and
calculation time. In contrast a medium-scale algorithm creates full matrices and
uses dense linear algebra, which can use a lot of memory and may require long
calculation time. Note: a large algorithm can be used to solve a small problem,
i.e. the size of the algorithm has nothing to do with the size of the problem
and vice versa. The algorithm chosen is the Interior point algorithm, because
it is a large-scale algorithm, which will reduce the calculation time, and doesn't
need to be provided with a gradient. If the constraints are nonsmooth, which
can be the case for the optimization of buckling, the active set algorithm can be
considered. This is not done in this project, since the project is not focussing
on testing the built-in algorithm.
The function is called by
[x, fval, exitag] = fmincon(fun,x0,A,b,Aeq,beq,lb,ub,nonlcon,optimiotions)
The call to the function is similar to the one of fminsearch. It is important to
note, that all the inputs need to be specied if the nonlinear constrain function
(nonlcon) is used. If there is no linear constrains, the vectors and matrices has
to be empty, e.g. in matlab the matrix for linear inequality constrain is specify
by A = [ ]. fmincon has more exit conditions than fminsearch. The exitflag
and the exit conditions are listed in Table 4.3. The optimoptions is specifying
a set of options for the optimization. This is described in the following.
It is important to note, that fmincon is a gradient-based method, which is
designed to work on problems where the objective and constraint functions are
both continuous and have continuous rst derivatives.
==PAGE:37==
4.2 MATLAB
23
Table 4.3: Exitag and exit condition for the interior point algorithm. [25]
Exitfalg
Exit condition
2
Change in x was less than options.StepTolerance and
maximum constraint was less than options.ConstrantTolerance.
1
First-order optimality measure was less than
options.OptimalityTolerance, and maximum constraint violation
was less than options.ConstraintTolerance.
0
Number of iterations exceeded options.MaxIterations or number of
function evaluations exceeded options.MaxFunctionEvaluations.
-1
Stopped by an output function or plot function.
-2
No feasible point was found.
-3
Objective function at current iteration went below
options.ObjectiveLimit and maximum constraint violation was less
than options.ConstraintTolerance.
optimoptions
optimoptions is a built-in function, that creates options for optimization func-
tions. Generally the options that are changed are the dierent tolerances, such
has constraintTolerace (tolerance on the constrain violation, default is 1e−6).
Other tolerance can also be changed. The function is called by
options=optimoptions(SolverName,Name,Value)
where SolverName is the name of the optimization algorithm e.g. fminsearch,
fmincon ect., Name is the name of the parameter, which is changed e.g. con-
straintTolerace and V alue is the desired value of the changing parameter.
In this project the values of constraintTolerace and DiMinChange are changed.
Especially DiMinChange is vary important, since it makes the optimization
program possible to work properly, because of the loss of digits in abaqus. This
is explained and discussed more detailed in section 4.5.
system
system is a built-in function that executes operating system command and re-
turns a output. In the script the function is used to open abaqus and execute
a python-script. In the function it can be decided, if the analysis is performed
with or without the abaqus gui, which is the Graphical User Interface. The ad-
vantage of not using the GUI is that the analysis is performed more smooth and
faster. The disadvantage is that the analysis can be using more licenses/tokens.
For a windows system, the function is called by
system(['abaqus cae', mo, myscript])
where mo is deciding if the analysis is performed with (mo = 'script') or with-
out (mo = 'noGUI') the GUI, and myscript is the main python-script, that is
==PAGE:38==
24
Programs and functions
executed in abaqus.
The function is used in all the programmed functions where abaqus is perform-
ing an analysis.
4.3
Python
In python the code for the structural part, which is analyzed in abaqus, is
written. The scripts in python will consist of a main-script Main.py, a output-
script Output.py and a variable-script Var.py.
The variable script will only
contain variables from matlab, such as length, width, heights ect., and is loaded
into the main script. Therefore, no further explanation of this script will be
done. The main-script will contain all the programming of the structural part,
which is analyzed. Most of the code is basic code for abaqus programming, but
the built-in function waitForCompletion is especially crucial for the program
to run. The output-script gets the output data from the analysis in abaqus
and writes the results to a txt-le. This is done by opening the odb-le, which
contains the output data from abaqus, and then translate the binary numbers
from the odb-le to readable numbers, which is then written to a txt-le.
In the following a walkthrough of the self-programmed scripts and a description
of the most important built-in functions are done.
Self-programmed scripts
A walk through the self-programmed scripts for the fatigue optimization problem
is made. The scripts can be found in Appendix D. Usable comments are written
in all of the scripts, and they should be understandable based on the comments
and the following walk through.
Main.py
Line 1-15 Importing relevant packages for abaqus.
Line 18 Loading the variables from the le Var.py.
Line 21-22 Changing the name of the model.
Line 25-54 Creating the plate with ribs as a 3D deformable model.
Line 57-64 Creating steel material.
Line 68-79 Creating sections for the plate and the ribs. The material is
assigned to the section.
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Python
25
Line 84-98 Finding faces for the plate. These will be used to assign the
section.
Line 101 Assign the plate section to each plate face.
Line 104-117 Finding faces for the ribs. These will be used to assign the
section.
Line 120 Assign the rib section to each rib face.
Line 126-196 Finding edges for the plate and ribs for boundary conditions
and loads.
Line 199-231 Creating sets for boundary conditions.
Line 234-292 Create surfaces for loads.
Line 298-300 Assembling the relevant parts. Only one in this case.
Line 307 Creating a perturbation buckling step, which will make a per-
turbation buckling analysis.
Line 314-345 Specifying the boundary conditions.
Line 348-407 Specifying the load.
Line 413 Assigning element type (STRI65) for the model.
Line 416 Specifying a global element size.
Line 420-426 Seed specic edges by number.
Line 429 Set mesh controls to be triangular elements.
Line 435 Setting the element types for each face.
Line 438 Generate mesh for the model.
Line 443-449 Creating a job and performing the structural analysis.
Line 452 Getting the results by executing the le Output.py.
Output.py
Line 2-15 Importing relevant packages for abaqus.
Line 18 Open the Odb-le.
Line 19 Selecting the relevant step where the result is extracted from.
==PAGE:40==
26
Programs and functions
Line 24 Selecting the relevant frame, where the result is extracted from.
The frame frames[-1] will always be the last frame. This is useful when
getting results form e.g. static analysis.
Line 26 The eigenvalue λ is extracted.
Line 32-34 Writing the results to a txt-le Output.txt.
Built-in functions
The important built-in functions are outlined in the following.
waitForCompletion
When running the python script, all variables in the script is checked to see
if there are any unknowns, before the script is actually started. Because of this
procedure, the programme will make an error message, because it can't nd
the odb-le from abaqus, since abaqus hasn't started or ended its analysis.
By using the built-in function waitForCompletion after the job in abaqus
are submitted, it is possible for abaqus to perform the analysis and make the
output-le. After the analysis is done, the python-script continues whit the rest
of the script.
openOdb
The results from abaqus are stored as binary numbers in an odb-le. To access
the obd-le and to convert the results to readable numbers the function open-
Odb is used. The desired results can then be extracted and written to a txt-le.
It is important to remember to close the Odb-le again by using odb.close().
4.4
ABAQUS
abaqus is used to perform structural analyzes for the optimization problems.
For that reason no programming is performed in this program. Still some built-
in functions are used. These are explained in the following.
MPC-BEAM
MPC (Multi-Point Constraint) is a type of connection that denes multi-point
constraints between two points. This can be in form of linear and nonlinear
constrains between nodes. This is useful to connect two parts with dierent and
continuously changing cross-section throughout an analysis, e.g. an optimization
analysis.
The built-in type MPC-BEAM is establishing the connection between two nodes
by a rigid beam, which constrain the displacement and rotation at the rst node
==PAGE:41==
4.4 ABAQUS
27
to the displacement and rotation at the second node. This connector type is
used to connect two beam parts in section 7.1.
Tie
The tie connector ties two surfaces together for the duration of a simulation.
There are two types of surface-based tie formulations Surface-to-surface and
Node-to-surface. The Surface-to-surface formulation is used in this project to
transfer the load from the trucks wheels to the bridge deck. By using the Surface-
to-surface, a master and a slave surface has to be specied. For the optimization
of fatigue (see section 7.3), the truck wheels will be the slave surface and the
bridge will be the master surface. The tie connector constrains the nodes of
the slave surface to have the same motion as the closets node on the master
surface. Furthermore, it will take the initial thickness and oset of the shell
elements underlying the surface into account and it allows transitions in mesh
density within the model. This is every useful, since the elements in the model
are shells and the wheels and deck will have displaced mesh to each other.
==PAGE:42==
28
Programs and functions
4.5
Limitation of program
Before making an optimization program for the whole bridge deck, an optimiza-
tion for the displacement of a cantilever beam is performed, see section 7.1. The
performance of the optimization showed incorrect results between an analytical
solution and the one obtained from abaqus at the beginning. An investigation
was made to nd the reason for this. It turned out that abaqus uses some kind
of function like oat(6) when writing the input-le (inp-le) for the analysis.
This means that only six numbers are written to the input le even though
the value has more than 6 digits. As default fminsearch and fmincon have a
minimum change in variables for nite-dierence gradients (a positive scalar)
at 0, ie. that matlab can make a change in the variable down to 0. MAT-
LAB made a change of 10−15, which was too small of a change because of the
digit limitation of the input to the inp-le. It is important to point out, that
MATLAB uses absolute values for tolerances. To get around the problem, the
built-in function optimoptions was used, where diminchange was set to 10−5.
Thereby, it was possible to perform the analysis and get acceptable results as
shown in section 7.1. The limitation of the input data has a huge eect on the
results, as they can be rounded to rough, e.g if the dimensions in the analysis
are in meters, the result will only be certain for 10−5 as long as no dimension
is larger than 10 m.
The problem can be solved by writing the inp-le itself, but taking the time
into consideration, it was decided, that it would be too time consuming and
that there was a larger probability of making writing errors.
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 5
Stability
Stability is the phenomena where a physical system can return to equilibrium
when it is slightly disturbed.
When a structure is at its geometrical limits,
i.e. the structure becomes slender e.g. long slender struts, thin at plates or
thin cylindrical shells, instability can occur in the structure when compression
stresses exits. Looking at the column exposed to an axial compression force N in
Figure 5.1. The column is initially straight and is in equilibrium for small values
of N, which means that even though a disturbing force would cause deections,
the column would return to its straight position. When the compression force
reaches a certain level, the stable equilibrium reaches a limit. This level of the
load is called the critical load and is denoted Ncr. At this stage, also known
as the bifurcation point, the column is still in equilibrium, however if the
structure deects by a small disturbance, the deformations will be permanently.
If the load exceeds Ncr the straight positioning of the column will be unstable.
At this point a slight disturbance will cause large displacements and will lead to
a collapse of the column by buckling. In Figure 5.2 the deection relationship
compared to the axial force is shown.
Figure 5.1: Simple supported col-
umn. [22]
Figure 5.2: Axial force vs deec-
tion relationship. [22]
==PAGE:44==
30
Stability
If the structure is not perfectly straight at the beginning the deection already
starts when the load is applied. Therefore, no sudden buckling by bifurcation
occurs, however a continuous increase in the deection will happen.
In this
project, the structural members are assumed to be perfectly straight, and the
instability will occur when the load exceeds the critical load Ncr.
5.1
Buckling of plates
Buckling of a plate is on many point identical to the buckling of an idea column.
As long as the load doesn't exceed the critical load, both column and plate will
stay straight. The major dierence between the columns, plates and shells in the
elastic range is the bearing capacity. For the columns all the bearing capacity
is used when the critical load is reached, whereas the plate in the case where
the postcritical strength is achieved with acceptably small lateral deections
will have some bearing capacity left and a load greater than the critical load is
acceptable. This is illustrated in Figure 5.3.
Figure 5.3: Elastic postbuckling curves for compressed elements. [22]
The extra bearing capacity for the plate comes from the out-of-plane deections,
which occur when the plate tends to buckle and results in membrane forces
due to stretching in the mid-plane of the plate. This can be explained from
a rectangular plate as illustrated in Figure 5.4, where a single half-way buckle
==PAGE:45==
5.1 Buckling of plates
31
mode occurs. The plate is supported on all edges with either simple or clamped
supports and is subjected to an uniform uniaxial compression load. By changing
the plate to be represented as strips, it is seen that the longitudinal strips tend
to buckle. For a compression load larger than Ncr the strips will buckle, however
the strips close to the edges will be constrained to remain straight.
Figure 5.4: Fundamental case for compressive plate buckling. [22]
The buckling of the plate will cause an elongation of the transverse strips because
the longitudinal edges are restraining the movement in the transverse direction.
This restrain causes tensile membrane forces in the transverse strips, which will
apply a stabilising eect on the longitudinal strips.
This is the reason why
the plate has an extra bearing capacity after the Ncr. The ultimate load is
nally reached when the stiness of the plate has suciently deteriorated due
to material yielding [22].
Depending on how the plate is loaded, the buckle mode changes. If a plate
is subjected to more than one load component, the buckle mode can be an
interaction between the two load components. The dierent buckle modes are
shown in Figure 5.5.
==PAGE:46==
32
Stability
Figure 5.5: Buckling modes for plates. [22]
The number of buckles in the buckling mode depends on the ratio between the
length and width of the plate. If the length of the plate increases compared to
the width of the plate, the number of buckles increases. This is illustrated in
Figure 5.6 where k is the buckling coecient for axial compression and m is the
number of buckles.
Figure 5.6: Variations in buckled mode with aspect ratio for plate panel in
longitudinal compression. [21]
Though out the optimization process the ratio between the width and length
of the ribs are changing. This will cause the number of buckles in the ribs to
change, and will lead to local minimum points. It is therefore not certain that
==PAGE:47==
5.2 Stiened plates
33
the optimized dimensions are the global minimum point, which is the most
optimal, for the optimization.
5.2
Stiened plates
The desire to make longer and slender structures leads to an increased tendency
to employ thin-walled, plated structures. This is also the case for bridges. The
thin-walled plates are used to take in-plane force and are extremely exposed to
buckle because of their small thickness. An way to increase the stability of the
plates are to provide plates with open or torsionally rigid closed stieners. The
dierent stiener types can be seen in Figure 5.7. The stieners can both be in
the longitudinal and in the transverse direction. If the stieners are arranged
in a regular orthogonal grid, and the spacing is small enough to smear the
stieners to a continuum in the analysis, such a stiened plate is called an
orthogonal anisotropic plate or in short, an orthotropic plate [22].
Figure 5.7: (a) Open stiener. (b) Closed stiener. [22]
Even though the plate is stiened, buckling can still occur when the load exceeds
Ncr. Both the plate and the stiener can buckle. The stiener are more vulner-
able for buckling if they are opened than closed because of the torsional stiness
of the closed stieners. An illustration of a plate buckling between the stieners
and buckling of the stieners are shown i Figure 5.8. The plate can also buckle
as a whole. This is illustrated in Figure 5.9. These plates represent the whole
bridges deck, where the transverse stieners are illustrating the diaphragms. In
this project only one segment is analyzed, and the bridge deck is assumed to
be buckling as a stiened panel (c) in Figure 5.9, which is important to specify
when establishing the boundary conditions in the FE model.
==PAGE:48==
34
Stability
Figure 5.8: (a) Buckling modes for plate between ribs. (b) Buckling modes
for ribs. [21]
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Stiened plates
35
Figure 5.9: Buckling modes for stiende plates in compression. [22]
==PAGE:50==
36
Stability
5.3
Linear perturbation
In abaqus the buckling analysis will be performed by using linear perturbation.
For this analysis type there are only linear responses for each analysis step.
The buckling analysis is solved by using the eigenvalue problem to estimate
the critical (bifurcation) load for the structure. This is done by specifying an
incremental loading pattern, QN, in the buckling step. The incremental load
will be the compression force in the bridge deck. The magnitude of the load is
not important since it will be scaled by a load multiplier, λi, which is found in
the eigenvalue problem
(KNM
0
+ λiKNM
∆
)vM
i
= 0
(5.1)
where KMN
0
is the stiness matrix corresponding to the base state, which in-
cludes the eects of the preloads P N (if any), KMN
∆
is the dierential initial
stress and load stiness matrix due to the incremental loading pattern QN, λi
are the eigenvalues, vM
i
are the buckling mode shapes (eigenvectors), M and N
refer to degrees of freedom M and N of the whole model and i refers to the ith
buckling mode.
The buckling analysis is performed in section 7.2.
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 6
Fatigue
Fatigue is the process of initiation and propagation of cracks though a structural
part. This is caused by repeatedly loading and unloading (cyclic loading), which
cause uctuation stress in the structure.
When the stresses reach a certain
magnitude, microscopic cracks begin to develop at the stress concentrations.
The signicant fatigue crack starts to initiate when slip in the plane starts.
This is caused by the dislocation movement, which serves as a stress raiser.
The dislocation movement is illustrated in Figure 6.1 as three dierent fracture
modes.
Figure 6.1: Three dierent fracture modes. (a) Opening mode (tensile stress).
(b) Sliding mode (in-plane shear stress). (c) Tearing mode (out-
of-plane shear stress).
==PAGE:52==
38
Fatigue
The fatigue process is typically described by three phases, which is illustrated
in Figure 6.2 and represented in the following.
Crack initiation phase: small microscopic cracks are initiated in the surface of
the material. The cracks are so small that they only extend over a few material
grains size. The cracks propagate in a slightly diagonal direction with respect
to the plane of the material surface.
Crack propagation phase: a dominant crack is developed and propagate normal
to the material surface. The crack growth at this stage can be described by
Paris' law.
Final fracture phase: the crack is so large that it can cause nal fracture in the
structure. This happens when the reduced cross-section becomes insucient to
carry the peak load without failure.
Figure 6.2: The fatigue process can be described by three phases; crack ini-
tiation (phase 1), crack propagation (phase 2) and nale fracture
(phase 3). [15]
Typically the cracks will occur at areas with high local tensile stresses, known as
stress raisers or hot spots. For steel structures the cracks are almost for certain
to propagate at the weld toe. The reason for this is that the welding process
imposes high tensile residual stress and discontinuities from where the crack
may grow. The discontinuities of the material decreases or remove the crack
initiation phase, which then allows the crack to propagate for most of its life
time. Furthermore, the weld causes sharp changes in material direction, which
increases the stress concentration.
==PAGE:53==
6.1 Local stress range
39
In order to determine the fatigue life time of a structure, the local stress ranges
are compared to an allowable stress range. Methods to calculate the local stress
range and the allowable stress range are presented in section 6.1 and section 6.2
respectively. The allowable stress range are determined by using detail classi-
cations and associated S-N curves.
6.1
Local stress range
The local stress range used for estimating the fatigue life time will be found
using a FE model. If the FE model is not made with a certain detailing level of
the welds, the stresses will be incomparable to the allowable stress range from
the detail category and the S-N curves. In order to make the stresses from the
FE model comparable three dierent denitions are used in general.
• Nominal or modied (local) nominal stress.
• Geometric (hot spot, structural) stress.
• Eective notch stress (notch stress, total stress)
Each of the denitions have limitations and place requirements on the FE model.
The dierences between the stress for the three denitions are illustrated in
Figure 6.3.
Figure 6.3: Stress distribution for welded attachments. [15]
==PAGE:54==
40
Fatigue
6.1.1
Nominal or modied (local) nominal stress
The nominal stress is the stress calculated in the sectional area under consid-
eration, that the local stress raising eects of the welded joint is disregarded,
but the stress raising eects of the macro-geometric shape of the component in
the area around the joint is included. Geometric features such as discontinuities
and misalignment can locally increase the stress. This can be taking into ac-
count by the use of appropriate stress concentration factors. These are used in
conjunction with the nominal stress to give the modied nominal stress in the
concerned area.
For a beam-like component, the calculations of the stress variation and the mod-
ied (also local) nominal stress can be done by simple beam theory, where the
eect of a welded on attachment is ignored. For the bridge the macro-geometric
eect is e.g. the cut-outs in the diaphragm beams, which is not included in this
project. Overall elastic behaviour is assumed.
6.1.2
Geometric (hot spot, structural) stress
The structural or geometric stress σHS is determined on the surface at the hot
spot.
It is including all stress raising eects of a structural detail, but it is
excluding the non-linear stress peak σnl caused by the notch of the welded toe.
The approach is generally used for plate, shell or tubular structures, and where
there is no clearly dened nominal stress due to complex geometry eects.
By using a FE analysis, the local stress at the hot spot will correspond to a
singular point in which the stress eld will not be exact, according to theory
of elasticity. Therefore, methods to approximate the hot spot stress have been
developed. One of these methods are the surface stress extrapolation method,
which is the method used in this project. The procedure of the method is in
accordance with IIW recommendations [17]. The linearization between the two
reference points is illustrated in Figure 6.4.
==PAGE:55==
6.1 Local stress range
41
Figure 6.4: Denition of hot
spot stress. [17]
Figure 6.5: Reference
points
of
mesh. [17]
High-order elements will be used for the FE model, which is explained in sec-
tion 7.2. The element length will therefore be equal to the thickness of the plate
at the hot spot. The evaluation of the stress will be at the mid-side points or
surface centres respectively, i.e. at two reference points 0.5t and 1.5t, as it is
illustrated in Figure 6.5 (b). The linear extrapolation is given by:
σHS = 1.50σ0.5t −0.50σ1.5t
(6.1)
6.1.3
Eective notch stress
In contrast to the nominal stress and the hot spot stress approach the eec-
tive notch stress is the total stress at the root of the notch, obtained assuming
linear-elastic behaviour.
This demands a very precise volumetric FE model,
which includes the geometry of the weld, in order to include the stresses from
the weld toe. The eective notch stress is compared to a single fatigue resis-
tance strength. It has to be noted that the stress range at the weld toe of the
attached structural members has to be assessed with the hot spot stress as well
as misalignments and discontinuities need to be explicitly modelled.
The method is useful for fatigue failures rising from the wield root and to com-
pare the eects of dierent weld geometries, but because of the detail level
required, the method is rarely used for practical purpose and not included in
the Eurocode [21].
==PAGE:56==
42
Fatigue
6.2
Structural verication method
The stress range determined from the FE model is used to assess the fatigue
damage done by the load. Since the scope of this project is to make a program
that can perform an optimization for fatigue and not to investigate the actual
fatigue damage, only one of many verication methods are used. The method
used to calculate the fatigue strength of the bridge deck is according to the
Eurocode 3.
6.2.1
Fatigue strength
The fatigue strength is based on the S-N curves, which corresponds to typical
detail categories. The categories for this project will be presented later. The
number of each category represents the reference value ∆σC and ∆τC for the
fatigue strength at 2 million cycles in N/mm2. The fatigue strength can be
obtained for constant amplitude nominal stresses by:
∆σm
R NR = ∆σm
C 2 × 106
with m = 3 for N ≤5 × 106
(6.2)
where ∆σR is the direct stress range, NR is the design life time expressed as
number of cycles related to a constant stress range and m is the slope of the
fatigue strength curve.
For the stress ranges below the constant amplitude
fatigue limit, see Figure 6.6, the fatigue strength is determined by:
∆σm
R NR = ∆σm
D2 × 106
with m = 5 for 5 × 106 ≤N ≤108
(6.3)
where ∆σD =
  2
5
 1
3 ∆σC = 0.737∆σC.
The verication of the fatigue strength can be found by:
γF f∆σE
∆σC/γMf
≤1.0
(6.4)
where γF f is the partial factor for equivalent constant amplitude stress range
∆σE, γMf is the partial factor for fatigue strength ∆σC and ∆σE is the equiv-
alent constant amplitude stress range related to nmax.
If there is no information about ∆σE the Damage accumulation method can
==PAGE:57==
6.2 Structural verication method
43
be used. The failure criterion is based on the Palmgren Miner's summation
rule. The rule denes an accumulated damage Dd, which is based on a number
of cycles at a given level of stress range with respect to the number of cycles to
failure estimated by the corresponding S-N curve. Pamlgren Miner's summation
rule is dened as:
Dd =
n
X
i
nEi
NRi
≤1.00
(6.5)
where nEi is the number of cycles associated with each factored stress range
γF f∆σi. Using Palmgren Miner's safety verication together with Equation 6.2
and Equation 6.3 the accumulated damage becomes:
Dd =
X
i
2×106
∆σC
γMf
1
γF f∆σi
3
+
X
j
5×106
∆σD
γMf
1
γF f∆σj
5
≤1.00 (6.6)
It is however also necessary to check if the nominal, modied nominal or geo-
metric stress range is not exceeding:
∆σ ≤1.5fy
for direct stress range
∆τ ≤1.5fy
√
3
for shear stress range
(6.7)
==PAGE:58==
44
Fatigue
6.2.2
S-N curves
As previously mentioned, the fatigue endurance, which is the life to failure
expressed in cycles under the action of a constant amplitude stress history, is
determined by using the S-N curves. The relation between the applied load or
state of stress needs to be related to the resistance of the structure relative to
fatigue crack growth, and this can be done by the S-N curves presented in the
Eurocode. The S-N curves are presented by a log-log-linear regression model.
The model is based on empirical test data, which relates the cycle nominal or
hot spot stress range to an endurance dened by number of cycles to failure.
The number of cycles are dened for a probability of failure of 5%. The S-N
curves for cycle nominal stress are shown in Figure 6.6.
Figure 6.6: The S-N curves dening the fatigue endurance as a function of a
nominal stress range. [21]
==PAGE:59==
6.3 Structural analysis for fatigue
45
6.3
Structural analysis for fatigue
In En 1993-1-9 Annex B the verication method for the fatigue resistance using
the geometric (hot spot) stress is presented. This would be in accordance to the
method used in the FE model. However, from Bjærre [15] it is stated that COWI
used the nominal detail categories presented in EN 1993-1-9 Annex A. There
were several reasons for this decision, but the most important is that Annex B
doesn't cover eects of misalignments. The misalignments from e.g. fabrication
have to be modelled an taken into consideration, however, this is every time
consuming, and therefore a more conservative choice using the nominal detail
categories were used in Bjærre [15] for the COWI design verication. This will
also be the procedure in this project.
When designing a bridge many construction details have to be investigated. This
has been done for the Izmit Bay Bridge by COWI. COWIs investigation resulted
in a damage report. The report results are adopted from [15] and are shown
in Appendix I. In this project the investigation will be performed for a plate
of the outer lane spanning between two diaphragms as explained in chapter 3.
Furthermore, the focus in this project is to establish a principle optimization
program and not to make a full analysis of the bridge. Therefore, is the detail,
which is experience the most fatigue damage, used for the optimization program.
The damage report is used to specify the detail. The detail is located at the weld
toe of the partial penetration weld between the orthotropic deck top plate and
the ribs. In the damage report, this detail is referred to as detail 1a. The detail
with the potential fatigue crack in the top plate is illustrated in Figure 6.7. The
nominal detail category corresponding to detail 1a is illustrated in Figure 6.8.
Figure 6.7: Detail 1a. Fatigue crack initiating at the plate underside caused
by transverse direct stresses. [15]
==PAGE:60==
46
Fatigue
Figure 6.8: Nominal stress category for detail 1a. [21]
The load for the fatigue analysis will also be simplify. In Eurocode 1 ve dierent
load models are accepted for evaluating fatigue. These models are called Fatigue
Load Model 1-5 (FLM). In the structural analysis for the optimization program
FLM 4 is used, since it is the most extensive model without using the recorded
trac data, which is not obtainable. Furthermore, FLM 4 was used for the
original design by COWI according to [15]. FLM 4 had 23 dierent vehicle types.
The dierent vehicle types are build up by ve dierent axle types. Each axle
consists of between two and six patch wheel loads, each measuring 320 × 220 mm
at pavement level. When designing a real bridge, all the vehicle combinations
has be investigated to nd the accumulated damage Dd. This is however too
time consuming, and therefore only the load with the most inuence will be
investigated. From COWIs damage report, it is seen that vehicle type 5A-H
Appendix I gives the largest damages for detail 1a. The geometric conguration
of vehicle 5A-H is illustrated in Figure 6.9. As it is seen from the gure, the
vehicle type consist of 5 axles: one steering and four standard, and the largest
load at the second axle with a magnitude of 100kN. Furthermore, it is seen that
the vehicle is longer then the distance between two diaphragms. This means,
that either the front part (axle type A and B) or the back part (axle type C,
D and E) is implemented in the FE model. It is decided that the front part is
used for in the FE model.
==PAGE:61==
6.3 Structural analysis for fatigue
47
Figure 6.9: Geometric conguration of vehicle 5A-H with load magnitudes.
[15]
The load from the vehicles are placed on the surface of the pavement. Because
of the pavement, the area where the load from the vehicles are acting is larger
in the orthotropic deck. According to Eurocode 1 [20] the dispersal through the
pavement and the orthotropic deck can be taken as a spread-to-depth ratio of
1 horizontally to 1 vertically down to the middle plane of the top plate. This
is illustrated in Figure 6.10. As the pavement is 60mm and the top plate has
a thickness of 14mm the dispersal allow an increase by 2 × 67mm of the length
and width of the load surface. For axle type 2 in Figure 6.9 the dispersal causes
an overlap of the two neighboring load surfaces. This is handle in the FE model
by making a simplication where the load is allowed to be distributed over a
single surface, which is representing both wheels.
Figure 6.10: Dispersal of concentrated loads through pavement and or-
thotropic decks. [20]
The placement of the load has a large inuence on the stresses in the bridge
deck. The worst placement of the load can be found using inuence lines, as it
is done in [15]. However, this will not be done in this project, but it has to be
investigated for a real-world design. The placement of the vehicle will be in
the middle of the lane.
==PAGE:62==
48
Fatigue
In this project the closed trapezoidal ribs will be changed to open plate ribs.
This is explained in section 7.2. The change in geometry will also change the
nominal stress category. The nominal stress category should instead be the one
in Figure 6.11. However, the fatigue verication stress range will be adopted
from the FE model Alternative 3 in [15], which is corresponding to the original
design verication from COWI. The fatigue stress range is therefore chosen to
be 36MPa.
Figure 6.11: Nominal stress category for FE model. [21]
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 7
Optimisation programs
In this section optimization programs for displacement, stability and fatigue are
performed to show that is is possible to develop a optimization program for
orthtropic bridge decks.
The structure that is used for the optimization problem for displacement is a
cantilever beam. The cantilever beam will be optimized for two problems: the
rst problem will be to nd the lowest deection of the tip by having a constant
volume of the beam, and the second will be to nd the lowest volume for a
constant deection of the tip. The main purpose is to establish the connection
between the programs and to show that it is possible to use matlabs build-in
optimization algorithm to solve the dierent optimization problems.
For the optimization of stability and fatigue a model corresponding to the top
plate of the outer lane of the Izmit Bay Bridge is used. The plate will be stiened
with longitudinal opened plate ribs instead of the closed trapezoidal ribs. The
theory in chapter 5 and chapter 6 will be used in the optimization programs.
Each optimization problem and FE model is specied in the associated section.
==PAGE:64==
50
Optimisation programs
7.1
Optimisation for displacements
In this section two dierent optimization problems of a cantilever steel beam
with a rectangular cross-section are solved. The rst problem will be to nd
the optimal material distribution in order to get the lowest deection of the
beam. The second problem will be to nd the lowest amount of material used
for a giving maximal deection. The cantilever beam will be divide into two
parts each with a dierent cross-section height, which will cause a discontinuous
bending stiness of the beam. The part at the support is called Part 1 and
the exterior part is called Part 2. A sketch of the cantilever beam can be seen
in Figure 7.1.
l
a
a
1
2
Figure 7.1: (Left) Cantilever beam. (Right) The two parts of the cantilever
beam.
The two parts will have the same Youngs's modulus E, the same length a and
the same thickness/width of the cross-section t. The properties are listed in
Table 7.1.
The variable, that will be optimized, will be the height of each part, h1 and h2,
which are the height of Part 1 and Part 2 respectively. The change in the
cross-section height, will give dierent moment of inertia I and each part will
thereby have dierent bending stiness EI.
Table 7.1: Properties of the cantilever beam
Thickness
Length of parts
Young's modulus
Poisson's ratio
t[m]
a[m]
E[GPa]
ν[m]
Cantilever beam
0.25
2.5
2.1
0.3
The purpose of these analysis is to establish a connection between matlab
and abaqus and to develop an optimization program of the given problems.
Both an analytical and a numerical approach for the optimization problem is
performed. The analytical approach is made to verify the numerical approach.
The optimization program in this section will be the basis for other optimization
programs in this project.
==PAGE:65==
7.1 Optimisation for displacements
51
7.1.1
FE model
For both of the optimization problems, a general FE model is used, where small
changes are made for each problem. These changes will be specied for each
problem. As explained in chapter 4 the FE model will be written in a python-
script and then applied to abaqus, which will perform a static analysis of the
cantilever beam.
The FE model of the cantilever beam will be a 2D planar deformable model,
where Part 1 and Part 2 will be modelled as an individual part each. The
material properties (Young's modulus) and the prole shape (rectangular) are
specied and assigned to each part. The properties are listed in Table 7.1. The
beam orientation, which is need to be specied, is chosen so that the underside
is at the bottom of the beam.
The two beam parts are connected with a MPC-BEAM connector, see section 4.4
for more information about the connector. A static step is created, where the
boundary condition and the load are applied to the model, see Figure 7.2. The
boundary condition is made in python by using the code xed, which means
that the displacements in x- and y-directions (ux and uy) and the rotation (ϕ)
are constrained.
Figure 7.2: FE model in abaqus.
The model is meshed. The element type used is B23, which are Euler-Bernoulli
elements, which disregard shear deformations.
The B23 element type corre-
sponds to the Bernoulli beam theory, which will be used for an analytical ap-
proach, in order to verify the results from abaqus. The mesh size has been
investigated to ensure converged results. This is presented in Appendix G. The
mesh is chosen to be 5 elements per part, see Figure 7.3.
==PAGE:66==
52
Optimisation programs
Figure 7.3: Mesh of one part of the FE model.
To ensure that the model works as intended without evaluating the results, a
plot of the deformed model is checked. This is shown in Figure 7.4. The defor-
mation plot will be the only preliminary check, since the optimization problem
is concerning the deformation.
Figure 7.4: Deformation plot of the cantilever beam from abaqus.
The gure shows that the tip of the beam will deect, which is as expected.
The model is therefore considered to work as desired.
==PAGE:67==
7.1 Optimisation for displacements
53
7.1.2
Analytical approach
The analytical approach will be done by two methods: The Force Method and
Static of linear elastic beams. The Static of linear elastic beams method is
based on the equations from Teknisk Ståbi [24].
The Force Method
In order to nd the displacement, the force method is used. The moment due to
the transverse load at the tip, will increase linearly towards the support. Because
the moment is increasing towards the support, it is assumed that a smaller cross-
section of part 2 is sucient from a strength perspective. The beam is considered
slender and the eect of shear deformation is therefore neglected.
a
a
P
2Pa
M 0
a
a
P 1 = 1
2a
M 1
Figure 7.5: (Left) Actual moment distribution.
(Right) Test load moment
distribution.
The only deformation will come from the moments. The moment due to the
actual load is
M 0 = 2aP
(7.1)
and the moment due to the test load is
M 1 = 2a
(7.2)
==PAGE:68==
54
Optimisation programs
By using the equation of virtual work, and divide the integral into two parts
due to the change in bending stiness, the tip displacement is found by
uAnalytical,1 =
Z a
0
M 0M 1
EI1
+
Z 2a
a
M 0M 1
EI2
= 7
3
Pa3
EI1
+ 1
3
Pa3
EI2
(7.3)
Static of linear elastic beams
It is assumed that the material of the beam is linear elastic with a modulus of
elasticity E, Poissions relation ν and the deformations are small. Even though
the beam has a local change in stiness, each beam part has a constant stiness,
which means that the formulas from [24] can be used.
The beam is split-up as illustrated in Figure 7.6.
a
Q2
M2
α
1
a
P
2
Figure 7.6: (Left) Deformation of part 1. (Right) Deformation of part 2.
The total displacement of the beam tip, is a sum of all the displacement con-
tributions from part 1 and 2. Since part 2 is only exposed to a point load, the
displacement is given as:
u2 = 1
3
Pa3
EI2
(7.4)
Furthermore, the load will cause a moment M2 = Pa and a shear force Q2 = P
at the support. This shear force will act as a tip load on part 1, and should
not be taking as an actual shear force in the beam, since the deformations from
shear forces are neglected according to Bernoulli beam theory.
The internal
forces will give a contribution to the displacement of part 1.
Part 1 is exposed to the internal forces from part 2. The displacement due to
the force Q2 is:
u1,Q2 = 1
3
Pa3
EI1
(7.5)
==PAGE:69==
7.1 Optimisation for displacements
55
The shear force also gives a rotation, α, of the beam tip. The rotation con-
tributes to the displacement, and from trigonometry the displacement becomes:
u1,αQ2 = αa = 1
2
Pa2
EI1
a = 1
2
Pa3
EI1
(7.6)
The last contribution is the moment, and the associated rotation.
u1,M = 1
8
M2(2a)2
EI1
= 1
8
Pa3
EI1
(7.7)
u1,αM = M2a2
EI
= Pa3
EI1
(7.8)
By summing all the contributions (Equation 7.4, Equation 7.5, Equation 7.6,
Equation 7.7 and Equation 7.8), the total displacement can be expressed by:
uAnalytical,2 = u1,Q2 + u1,αQ2 + u1,M + u1,αM + u2 = 7
3
Pa3
EI1
+ 1
3
Pa3
EI2
(7.9)
Comparing Equation 7.3 and Equation 7.9 it is observed that the two approaches
gives the same result, which where expected.
7.1.3
Constant volume
The rst optimization problem will be to nd the optimal distribution of the
beam material, in order to get the lowest displacement of the beam, when ap-
plying a transverse load at the tip of the beam. The set-up of the optimization
problem is illustrated in Figure 7.7.
==PAGE:70==
56
Optimisation programs
a
a
P
1
2
a
a
P
u
Figure 7.7: (Left) Cantilever beam with tip load. (Right) Deformation of the
cantilever beam.
In order to nd the optimal distribution of the material, the beam is giving an
average height h, i.e. h = h1 = h2. This will give the beam a total volume of
Vtot = 2aht = (h1 + h2)at
(7.10)
The optimization will be to nd the smallest h1 and thereby nd the material
distribution needed in order to get the lowest displacement as possible and still
keep a total volume of Vtot, i.e. the total volume of the beam will not change.
Since the displacement of the beam is depending on the height of the two beam
parts, it is necessary to establish an expression, where h2 is depending on h1 to
perform the optimization. From Equation 7.10 h2 is giving as
h2 = 2aht
at
−h1at
at
= 2h −h1
(7.11)
In the follow both an analytical and numerical optimization of the beam will be
performed. The calculations for the displacement in the analytical and numeri-
cal approach will be based on the Bernoulli beam theory, which means that the
shear deformations are neglected and the beam has to be elastic. The analyti-
cal solution will be used to verify the results from the numerical solution. The
average height is set to h = 0.25, and the tip load is set to P = 1N. The model
and load is small compared to the size of a bridge, but as mentioned earlier
the purpose of this optimization problem is to establish a connection between
matlab and abaqus and to perform the optimization. The object function in
the minimization algorithm will be the displacement given in Equation 7.3 and
the displacement from the FE model.
==PAGE:71==
7.1 Optimisation for displacements
57
7.1.3.1
Numerical solution
The numerical analysis will be done by using abaqus. The FEM model will
be made as explained in subsection 7.1.1. The model will have one variable
h1, which will be optimized. The optimization algorithm used is the built-in
function fminsearch, which is explained in section 4.2. The scripts and self-
programmed functions are listed in Appendix B.
7.1.3.2
Analytical solution
The analytical solution will be done by using Equation 7.3. The optimization
algorithm used is the built-in function fminsearch, which is explained in sec-
tion 4.2. The scripts and self-programmed functions are listed in Appendix B.
7.1.3.3
Optimization results
Running the optimization program ve dierent initial guesses (IG) for h1 is
used. This is done to see how stable the optimization program is. The initial
guesses are listed in Table 7.2.
Table 7.2: Initial guesses for the optimization routine.
IG
h1[m]
1
0.001
2
0.002
3
0.003
4
0.004
5
0.005
For the analytical solution and IG 1, the deformation as a function of h1 is
plotted in Figure 7.8 and Figure 7.9 respectively.
==PAGE:72==
58
Optimisation programs
Figure 7.8: The displacement as a
function of h1 for the
analytical solution.
Figure 7.9: The displacement as a
function of h1 for the
numerical solution.
The two curves looks exactly the same, and plotting them in the same plot also
conrms that they are, see Figure 7.10.
Figure 7.10: The displacement as a function of h1 for both solutions.
This shows that the analytical and the numerical solution are corresponding to
each other. From the gures, the optimal value of h1 is found where the mini-
mum point of the curves are. The results for the analytical and the numerical
solution are obtained from matlab and are listed in Table 7.3. In the table, the
==PAGE:73==
7.1 Optimisation for displacements
59
deviation is the deviation between the results from the analytical solution and
the dierent IG.
Table 7.3: Displacement and material distribution for constant volume
Results
Material distribution
Deviation
Analysis
h1[m]
h2[m]
uy[10−7m]
h1[%]
h2[%]
h1[%]
h2[%]
uy[%]
Analytical
0.24770
0.15230
8.8532
61.94
38.06
-
-
-
IG 1
0.24775
0.15225
8.8532
61.94
38.06
0.020
0.033
0.000
IG 2
0.24770
0.15230
8.8532
61.94
38.06
0.000
0.000
0.000
IG 3
0.24765
0.15235
8.8532
61.91
38.09
0.020
0.033
0.000
IG 4
0.24770
0.15230
8.8532
61.94
38.06
0.000
0.000
0.000
IG 5
0.24769
0.15231
8.8532
61.92
38.08
0.004
0.007
0.000
The results from the table show good consistency between the analytical and
numerical solution, which were also the case when looking at Figure 7.10. The
largest deviation between the analytical and the numerical solution are 0.033
%, which is a very low deviation. The deviation may be caused by numerical
errors in abaqus, such as rounding o the input numbers to a certain number
of digits. This problem is discussed in section 4.5. Even though, there are some
loss of digits throughout the analysis, the results are satisfying.
The results also show, that the program is very stable. The deviation between
the results from the ve dierent IG are very small. This is also illustrated in
Figure 7.13 and Figure 7.14, where h1 are plotted for each IG. It is observed
that the results are placed in a straight line.
Figure 7.11: Results of h1 for each IG.
==PAGE:74==
60
Optimisation programs
Based on this optimization problem, it is shown that it is possible to use mat-
lab's optimization algorithm fminsearch together with abaqus's FE analyzes.
To make sure that other matlab optimization algorithm works, another opti-
mization problem for the cantilever beam is performed.
7.1.4
Constant displacement
The optimization problem is now changed, so that both h1 and h2 are variables.
This means that h1 and h2 is not associated. The optimization will be to nd
the minimum value of the total volume for a restrained deection. The restrain
deection is chosen to be
umax ≤
a
400
(7.12)
The analytical solution is the same as the one from the previous optimization
program and is given in Equation 7.3, and the FE model in python and abaqus
are also the same as described in subsection 7.1.1. However, in matlab the func-
tion fminsearch is on longer possible to use, since the optimization contains two
variables and has a constrain. Therefore, the optimization algorithm fmincon
is used instead, see section 4.2 for more information about fmincon. The input
arguments for fmincon can be found in Table 7.4.
Table 7.4: Input for fmincon.
Input arguments
A
b
Aeq
beq
lb
ub
Values
[ ]
[ ]
[ ]
[ ]
[0.1 0.1]
[ ]
The tip load is set to P = 100kN, and like the previous analysis, ve initial
guesses are used. These are listed in Table 7.5. The objective function is the
volume of the beam given in by:
V = (h1 + h2)at
(7.13)
and the nonlinear constrain function is given in Equation 7.12, where umax is
found analytical from Equation 7.3 and the displacement from the FE model.
==PAGE:75==
7.1 Optimisation for displacements
61
Table 7.5: Displacement and material distribution for displacement.
IG
h1[m]
h2[m]
1
2.0
0.5
2
2.0
1.0
3
2.0
1.2
4
3.0
1.0
5
5.0
1.0
The scripts and self-programmed functions are listed in Appendix C.
7.1.4.1
Optimization results
In Table 7.6 the results from the optimization program are listed using the
input arguments and the initial guesses. The results show that the analytical
and numerical solution match perfectly, which is every good results but also a
little surprising. A minor deviation was expected because of the loss of digits
in the numerical approach.
Table 7.6: Displacement and material distribution for constant volume
Results
Material distribution
Deviation
Analysis
h1[m]
h2[m]
uy[10−3m]
h1[%]
h2[%]
h1[%]
h2[%]
uy[%]
Analytical
1.29127
0.793858
6.5160
61.93
38.07
-
-
-
IG 1
1.29127
0.793858
6.5162
61.93
38.07
0.000
0.000
0.003
IG 2
1.29127
0.793858
6.5162
61.93
38.07
0.000
0.000
0.003
IG 3
1.29127
0.793858
6.5162
61.93
38.07
0.000
0.000
0.003
IG 4
1.29127
0.793858
6.5162
61.93
38.07
0.000
0.000
0.003
IG 5
1.29127
0.793858
6.5162
61.93
38.07
0.000
0.000
0.003
Comparing the material distribution from the two optimization programs for
the cantilever beam, it is observed that the material distribution matches. This
further conrms that the optimization program of the cantilever with a constrain
deection is working.
Just like the program for the constant volume, this program is also stable. This
is shown in Figure 7.12, Figure 7.13 and from Table 7.6.
==PAGE:76==
62
Optimisation programs
Figure 7.12: Obtained numerical
results of h1.
Figure 7.13: Obtained numerical
results of h2.
The two optimization analyzes show that it is possible to establish an optimiza-
tion program using matlab's solver algorithm fminsearch and fmincon by using
abaqus as a nite element analyzer. The programs will be used as a basis for
the following analyzes, where small modications to the scripts are made to
adjust them to the respective problem.
==PAGE:77==
7.2 Optimization for stability
63
7.2
Optimization for stability
Now that it is shown that it is possible to optimize a cantilever beam, a more
relevant optimization analysis for the bridge deck is performed. As explained in
chapter 3 the optimization will be made for the top plate with ribs for the outer
lane spanning between two diaphragms. This is indicated with a red circle in
Figure 7.14.
Figure 7.14: Cross-section of Izmit Bay Bridge. One of the outer lanes are
indicated with a red circle.
The geometry of the trapezoidal ribs, can be too complex to start with. There-
fore, a more simple geometry, where the closed trapezoidal ribs are changed to
open ribs, are used to begin with. The open ribs will be simple vertical plates
(see Figure 1.1 the one lowest of the open rib types). The placement of the
vertical rib plates will correspond to the places where the trapezoidal ribs are
attached to the top plate see Figure 7.15. The change of rib type will have
an inuence on how the bridge deck will perform. By changing from closed to
open ribs, the transverse stiness will lower signicantly, and the results from
the analysis will therefore dier from the results from COWI. Furthermore, the
inclination of the top plate is also neglected, to simplify the model even more.
This will also be accepted, since the optimization program will be a principle
optimization program to show, that it is possible to use the procedure used
throughout this project to make an optimization program of othotropic bridges.
Making this changes, the model will consist of a horizontal plate and 14 vertical
plate ribs. A sketch of the cross-section and the model in 3D is illustrated in
Figure 7.15 and Figure 7.16 respectively.
==PAGE:78==
64
Optimisation programs
w
ds
2 ws
ds
ws
ds
ws
ds
ws
ds
ws
ds
ws
ds
ws
db
hs
Figure 7.15: Cross-section of the model used for analysis. The dashed lines
indicate the trapezoidal ribs and the fully drawn lines the open
ribs.
In Figure 7.15 db is the distance to the boundary, ds is the distance between the
ribs, ws is the width of the trapezoidal ribs and hs is the height of the ribs. The
dimensions are based on Izmit Bay Bridge, which was presented in chapter 3.
A sketch of the full plate model for the analysis is shown in Figure 7.16. In
the gure L indicates the distance between two diaphragms and w is the total
width of the lane.
w
L
hs
Figure 7.16: Sketch of the model for analysis.
As explained in chapter 5 buckling occurs when a plate is exposed to compres-
sion. The bridge deck has a large internal moment primarily due to its massive
self-weight. The moment will not be investigated in this project, but a mag-
nitude of 109Nm is adopted from [15], since this was the moment used for the
test models in that project. The moment is split up into a force couple, tension
in the bottom and compression in the top of the bridge deck. The compression
force due to the moment will naturally cause a compression in the top plate.
==PAGE:79==
7.2 Optimization for stability
65
The compression force is determined by nding the elastic centre of the cross-
section.
Since the cross-section for the bridge deck is not symmetric in the
horizontally direction, the elastic centre needs to be determined. The elastic
centre was found to be 1.73m below the top surface. The compression force is
specied as a stress over the cross-section, and it is determined by Navier
σ = M
I ye
(7.14)
where M is the moment, I is the moment of inertia of the bridge deck and ye
is the distance from the top plate to the elastic centre. The compression force
was found to be P = 17.72 MN
m2 . The calculations of the compression force and
elastic centre can be found in Appendix J.
The optimization of the bridge deck will be to nd the smallest volume of the
plate by changing the thickness of the plate tp, the thickness of the ribs ts and
the height of the ribs hs in order for the plate to be stable. The permanent
dimensions of the model is listed in Table 7.7 and the material properties are
listed in Table 3.2.
Table 7.7: Dimensions for the model.
Length
Width
Dis. to boundary
Dis. between ribs
Width ribs
L[m]
w[m]
db[m]
ds[m]
ws[m]
5
4.452
0.4045
0.3050
0.2950
For the optimization of stability, the optimization algorithm fmincon is used.
The objective function will be the volume
V = L · w · tp + nribs · ts · hs · L
(7.15)
where nribs are number of ribs. The nonlinear constrain function will be
A0
A ≤λ
(7.16)
where A0 is the initial cross-section area of the model, A is the actual area of
the model and λ (eigenvalue) is the scaling multiplier for the load to become
Ncr, which was explained in section 5.3.
The input arguments for fmincon are listed in Table 7.8.
==PAGE:80==
66
Optimisation programs
Table 7.8: Input arguments for fmincon.
Input arguments
A
b
Aeq
beq
lb
ub
Values
[ ]
[ ]
[ ]
[ ]
[0.006 0.006 0.05]
[ ]
Just like the cantilever beam, ve initial guesses are made. These are listed in
Table 7.9.
Table 7.9: Initial guesses for tp, ts and hs for the optimization.
IG
tp[m]
ts[m]
hs[m]
1
0.020
0.008
0.500
2
0.010
0.010
0.400
3
0.015
0.015
0.450
4
0.030
0.020
0.550
5
0.040
0.030
0.600
In the following the modelling of the plate in abaqus are outlined.
7.2.1
FE model
The stiened plate in Figure 7.16 will be made as one single part in abaqus
with the given dimensions listed in Table 7.7. Since the plate and ribs have a
signicantly smaller thickness than the rest of the construction parts and the
fact that they are taken the compression force in their own plane, they are
considered as shells. The model is therefore made as a homogeneous shell with
prescribed shell thickness. The plate and ribs are each assigned a section with
their respective thickness and material properties (the material properties are
the same for the plate and ribs). Here the placement of the nodes in the thickness
of the shell are specied. It is important to place the nodes correctly, since the
load are placed in them and the results are likewise obtained from them. The
dierent placements of the nodes can be seen in Figure 7.17. Depending on
the analysis, the nodes can be placed dierently, but for the stability analysis,
the nodes will be placed in the middle surface, because the compression force
is distributed over the cross-section. If the nodes were not placed in the middle
surface, the compression force would make a moment/rotation of the plate due
to the eccentric placement of the load, which will have an inuence on the
buckling of the plate.
==PAGE:81==
7.2 Optimization for stability
67
Figure 7.17: Node placement in shell elements. [26]
The model is assembled and a linear perturbation buckling step is created for
the buckling analysis, see section 5.3. The boundary conditions are specied.
This can be done in many ways because it is unclear how exactly the deck
plates are interacting with each other. This means that if it is assumed that the
plate is xed supported by the diaphragms, the model will be too sti, but
if the diaphragms are assumed to be simple supports, the model will not have
enough stiness compared to the reality. The stiness of the supports will not
be investigated in this project. It is assumed that the diaphragms are simple
supports, because the energy needed for the plate to buckle is the lowest for
this type of supports see chapter 5. Furthermore, the deck can expand in the
longitudinal direction.
The same goes for the boundary conditions in the transverse direction. Here
the plate is connected to another plate. Depending on how the bridge deck is
buckling in the transverse direction, the boundaries of the model could be on
a buckle top, bot or at deck plane see the buckle modes in Figure 5.5. If the
boundary is at a buckle top or bot the rotation in the plane is zero, however
the boundary can move up and down. If the boundary is at the plane of the
deck, the boundary doesn't move vertical, but has a rotation. Furthermore, the
transverse boundary is considerate as a symmetry line, and the plate cannot
expand in the transverse direction. The eect of the two boundary condition
type in the transverse direction are briey investigated.
The compression load is applied over the whole cross-section. In Figure 7.18 the
model with boundary conditions and loads are shown.
==PAGE:82==
68
Optimisation programs
Figure 7.18: Boundary conditions
and loads for bound-
aries at buckle top.
Figure 7.19: Boundary conditions
and loads for bound-
aries at plate plane.
The model is meshed with the element type STRI65, which are 6-mode trian-
gular thin shell, using ve degrees of freedom per node. The elements are high
ordens elements, and the number of elements used in the height of the ribs can
be reduce, because of the 'midside' nodes.
There will not be performed a full investigation of the converging of the mesh.
Only in the longitudinal direction will a brief investigation be made. The con-
vergence investigation can be found in Appendix H. It was found that a mesh
size of L/20 was sucient. When designing in the real-world a full conver-
gence investigation has to be preformed. The mesh of the model can be seen in
Figure 7.20
Figure 7.20: Mesh of the plate.
All other settings than the ones specied are default. The scripts and functions
==PAGE:83==
7.2 Optimization for stability
69
can be found in Appendix D.
7.2.2
Optimization results
Running the optimization analysis it was observed that there where dierent
buckling mode shapes. Two of the mode shapes are shown in Figure 7.21 and
Figure 7.22.
Figure 7.21: Buckling of the ribs. tp = 0.02, ts = 0.008 and hs = 0.5.
Figure 7.22: Buckling of the plate. tp = 0.02, ts = 0.02 and hs = 0.08.
The mode shape in Figure 7.21 shows that the ribs are buckling. This happens
when the ribs are long and thin, and thereby have a lower Ncr than the plate.
The other mode shape shown in Figure 7.22 shows that the whole plate is
buckling just like stiened panel buckling shown in Figure 5.9. This happen
when the ribs are short.
These two buckling types were also expected.
A
buckling type, which could have occurred but wasn't observed, was the plate
buckling in Figure 5.8 (a), where the plate is buckling between the ribs.
The results from the optimization program for tp, ts and hs are listed in Ta-
ble 7.10 for the FE model with constrain rotation boundary conditions and in
Table 7.11 for the FE model with constrain movement.
==PAGE:84==
70
Optimisation programs
Table 7.10: Results for boundary conditions constraining rotation.
Results
Exitag
Initial volume
Material reduction
Analysis
tp[m]
ts[m]
hs[m]
V [m3]
[−]
V [m3]
[%]
IG 1
0.0112
0.0097
0.2581
0.4249
2
0.7252
41.40
IG 2
0.0085
0.0072
0.2372
0.3090
2
0.5026
38.53
IG 3
0.0117
0.0097
0.2596
0.4383
2
0.8064
45.64
IG 4
0.0160
0.0149
0.3100
0.6795
2
1.4378
52.74
IG 5
0.0187
0.0187
0.3252
0.9230
2
2.1504
57.08
Table 7.11: Results boundary conditions constrain movement.
Results
Exitag
Initial volume
Material reduction
Analysis
tp[m]
ts[m]
hs[m]
V [m3]
[−]
V [m3]
[%]
IG 1
0.0100
0.0095
0.2679
0.4005
2
0.7252
44.78
IG 2
0.0081
0.0074
0.2450
0.3065
2
0.5026
39.02
IG 3
0.0106
0.0103
0.2746
0.4339
2
0.8064
46.19
IG 4
0.0159
0.0148
0.3023
0.6672
2
1.4378
53.60
IG 5
0.0200
0.0197
0.3334
0.9060
2
2.1504
57.87
The result shows that the optimization program optimize the volume of the
plate signicantly, which was the purpose. The material reduction is between
38% and 57%, which is a huge amount. The large material saving is denitely
depending on the initial guess. If the initial guess had been closer to the optimal
dimensions the material reduction would have been smaller.
The optimized dimensions are plotted in Figure 7.23, Figure 7.24, Figure 7.25
and Figure 7.26.
Figure 7.23: Optimized
plate
thickness.
Figure 7.24: Optimized rib thick-
ness.
==PAGE:85==
7.2 Optimization for stability
71
Figure 7.25: Optimized
rib
height.
Figure 7.26: Optimized plate vol-
ume.
From the gures and the tables, it is observed that the boundary conditions
have a inuence on the results. In general the dimensions are larger for the FE
model with constrain movement. This indicates that the structure is stier for
a constrain movement boundary condition. However, the deviation between the
results for the two boundary condition types, are very small. Furthermore, it
is observed that the optimization program show unstable behaviour, since the
optimized dimension are dierent for each initial guess. This could be indicating
that the algorithm fmincon is unstable. Still, even though the FE model changes
boundary conditions, the results are quite similar for each of the initial guesses,
which indicates, that there are some consistency of the algorithm.
A more
reasonable reason is the buckling coecient explained in chapter 5. If the critical
buckling load is determined based on the ribs, the number of buckles can changes
a lot when the height of the ribs are changed. Therefore, local minimum points
as indicated in Figure 5.6 can occur. If e.g. the ratio between the length of the
rib (L) and the height (hs) is 1 and 2, the algorithm could be nding one of these
points as a minimum point, which is actually a local minimum. It is therefore
important to make a qualied guess for the initial dimensions of the design to
avoid unintended local minimum points. The exitag 2 from the algorithm also
tells that the minimum is a local minimum, that satisfy the constrains.
Comparing the results from the optimization program and the dimensions from
Izmit Bay Bridge, see Figure 3.6. The dimensions from Izmit Bay Bridge is:
tp = 0.014m, ts = 0.008m and hs = 0.36m. From the optimization program the
dimensions are in the ranges: tp = 0.0081m −0.02m, ts = 0.0072m −0.00197m
and hs = 0.2372m −0.3334m. It is seen that each of the dimensions from the
bridge are in the range of the obtained results from the FE model except the
hs, which is slightly higher for the bridge. This is a very acceptable result when
the simplications of the FE model is taken into account, especially the change
==PAGE:86==
72
Optimisation programs
of geometry, since a lot of torsional stiness are lost by the change.
7.3
Optimization for fatigue
The last optimization of the bridge deck will be an optimization for fatigue. The
theory presented in chapter 6 will be used for the optimization analysis, however
because of time issues the stresses will not be found by the recommended ap-
proach for the geometric stress see section 6.1. Instead the stress will be taken
directly in the connection between the plate and the ribs. This is not ideal, but
it is accepted since the program is principle.
The structure for the optimization will be the same as the one used for the
optimization for stability. This means that the optimizing dimensions are the
plate thickness tp, the rib thickness ts and the rib height hs and the permanent
dimensions are given in Table 7.7. The optimization algorithm used is fmincon,
and the object function, input arguments and initial guesses are the same as in
Equation 7.15, Table 7.8 and Table 7.9 respectively. The nonlinear constrain
function is change to
∆σR ≥σHS
(7.17)
where ∆σR is the fatigue stress range and σHS is the hot spot stress from the
FE model.
7.3.1
FE model
The FE model used for the fatigue analysis is in general the same as the one
used for the stability analysis with constrain rotation. The geometry are the
same and the boundary conditions are the same.
For the fatigue analysis, a general static analysis is performed for the model
in order to nd the stresses in the model. Fatigue cracks typically develop in
the top plate form the welds. Since the welds are at the bottom of the plate,
the stresses of interest are at this place. Therefore, the nodes are placed at the
bottom of the thickness of the plate see Figure 7.17. The placement of the nodes
in the plate will not have the same inuence as it did for the stability analysis,
because the load is applied vertically on the plate from the vehicles as explained
in chapter 6. The load from the vehicle is implemented by making a structural
part for the vehicle and placing it on top of the top plate. The structural part
for the vehicle will be made as exible shell elements, i.e. the part has to be so
==PAGE:87==
7.3 Optimization for fatigue
73
exible, that it doesn't eect the result of the analysis from e.g. traction in the
surface. The two parts are connected by the connection type tie, see section 4.4.
The load and boundary conditions for the model is shown in Figure 7.27.
Figure 7.27: Load and boundary conditions.
The elements used in the model is triangle shell elements STRI65. It could be
argued that beam elements would be preferred for the analysis, since the load
is placed orthogonal on the plane of the plate. However, the shell element will
still be used. Furthermore, an investigation for the converging of the mesh has
not be done. This should have been performed. The mesh of the model can be
seen in Figure 7.22.
==PAGE:88==
74
Optimisation programs
Figure 7.28: Mesh of the plate.
All other settings than the ones specied are default. The scripts and functions
can be found in Appendix E.
Normally the stresses from the FE analysis are extracted by nding the stresses
at the integration points of the elements. When these are found, the stresses are
specied by take the average of the values in the integration points attached to
the node. Thereby are the stresses in each node found and the largest stresses
can be found. This would also be the preferred way of getting the stresses if
the material orientation would be the same for both the plate and the stieners.
In the model the plate will have one material orientation and the ribs will have
another, see Figure 7.29 and Figure 7.30. In the gures the cyan color is 1-axis,
the yellow color is 2-axis and the red color is 3-axis/shell normal.
Figure 7.29: Material orientation of plate.
==PAGE:89==
7.3 Optimization for fatigue
75
Figure 7.30: Material orientation of the ribs.
An attempt to change the material orientation so that the plate and stieners
would have the same orientation failed. abaqus came with the following error
message:The user dened normal of the material orientation of 8400 elements,
as dened in *ORIENTATION, is orthogonal to the GASKET, COHESIVE,
SHELL or MEMBRANE normal direction. Check input data. The elements
have been identied in element set ErrElemUserNormMatOrient.
Instead the stresses from the FE analysis were extracted from the odb-le by
using a macro. The macro takes the value from the nodes in the view port.
This implies that a stress plot for the structure has to be made in order to nd
the node with the largest stress magnitude. When the node is found, the stress
can be extracted from the list made from the macro. However, to be sure that
the node is at the same place in the model, the model has to be meshed with the
same number of nodes. For that purpose seeding the edges by number is eec-
tive, but it locks the meshing of the model, and it is therefore not the optimal
way of getting the values, however because of time issues, this was the procedure.
==PAGE:90==
76
Optimisation programs
7.3.2
Optimization results
Running the optimization program, an output of the stress distribution is shown
in Figure 7.31. Since the fatigue is caused by tensile stresses, the stresses in the
transverse direction (x-direction in the global coordinate system for the FE
model) is of interest. These are represented as S11 in abaqus for the plate. It
is important to investigate the material orientation of each part of the model,
because the orientation can dier from part to part.
Figure 7.31: Stress in x-direction S11 for the full plate. tp = 0.02, tp = 0.008
and hs = 0.5.
It is observed from Figure 7.31 that the hot spots are located at the back vehicles.
This was also expected because the load from the vehicles are larger at this
area. A close-up on the hot spot areas shows that the stress are largest at the
connections between the top plate and the ribs, which was expected as well.
The close-up is shown in Figure 7.32.
==PAGE:91==
7.3 Optimization for fatigue
77
Figure 7.32: Close-up on hot spots.
Using the constrain from Equation 7.17 the optimization algorithm stopped by
the lower bounds i.e.
tp = 0.006, ts = 0.006 and hs = 0.05.
This is not
the desired solution of the optimization analysis, but is actually a result that
is expected when looking at the stresses for the analysis step. For each step
in the analysis the corresponding hot spot stress, which was chosen based on
Figure 7.32, is plotted in Figure 7.33.
Figure 7.33: Stresses S11 in each analytical step.
==PAGE:92==
78
Optimisation programs
The gure shows that the constrain is satised at all times, and therefore is the
algorithm returning the lower bounds as the result. It is notable that for some
dimensions, the stress changes to a compression stress. This is unexpected and
could indicating that the model itself or the method of extracting the results
are incorrect. If a mesh control and a hand calculation was made for the model,
the results could have been checked. However, this is not done and the results
from the model are therefore questionable.
A small investigation is performed by making stress distribution plots for dif-
ferent values of tp, ts and hs. The plots are shown in Appendix K. The gures
show, that even for small changes in the three parameters can change the stress
distribution in the whole model. The stress distribution for the dimensions cor-
responding to the size of the dimensions of the bridge deck (see Figure K.7)
gives a plot, where the hot spots are located at the back of the vehicle. How-
ever, when the dimensions are lowered these hot spots disappear and other
hot spots appear in other places for the plate, which make it almost impossible
to make the analysis by extracting the stress using a macro. A solution could be
to split the plate and stieners into two parts and tie them together. By doing
this, the maximum stress could be found for just the plate by using a macro.
However, this implies that it doesn't matter where maximum stress is located
in the plate.
To test the algorithm and to see if the dimensions in [15] can be recovered using
the optimization program, the constrain is change to:
σHS ≥∆σR
(7.18)
In real life, this does not make any sense since the hot spot stress will be larger
than the stress range and will cause fatigue cracks. This analysis will only be
used to see how the algorithm is performing. The results are listed in Table 7.12.
Table 7.12: Results boundary conditions constrain movement.
Results
Exitag
Initial volume
Material reduction
Analysis
tp[m]
ts[m]
hs[m]
V [m3]
[−]
V [m3]
[%]
IG 1
0.0060
0.0060
0.0598
0.1587
1
0.7252
78.12
IG 2
0.0060
0.0060
0.0598
0.1587
1
0.5026
68.42
IG 3
0.0060
0.0060
0.0598
0.1587
1
0.8064
80.32
IG 4
0.0060
0.0060
0.0598
0.1587
1
1.4378
88.96
IG 5
0.0060
0.0060
0.0598
0.1587
1
2.1504
92.62
From the table it is seen that the result are identical for the dierent initial
guesses. This shows that the algorithm is stable, since it is nding the same
==PAGE:93==
7.3 Optimization for fatigue
79
results even though the initial guesses are dierent, which was not the case for
the fatigue optimization.
The results are almost the same as the lower bounds, which show that the same
problem with the stress distribution also applies for this analysis. The change in
the stresses indicates that something in the model could be wrong. It is dicult
to predict an accurate stress distribution before hand, however changing the
thickness of the plate should increase the stresses in the plate. But because of
the changes to the rib thickness and the rib height, at the same time, the stress
distribution changes a lot.
==PAGE:94==
80
Optimisation programs
==PAGE:95==
Chapter 8
Combined optimization
program
In chapter 7 it was shown that it is possible to make optimize programs for
the deection of a beam and stability of a stiened plate. The optimization of
fatigue was not developed properly. In this chapter it is shown how to make an
optimization program, which can optimize for two optimization problems. For
this purpose the stiened plate in section 7.2 is used, and the two optimizations
will be for stability and fatigue. Since it was not possible to optimize for fatigue,
this will only be a demonstration of have the program can be set-up to optimize
for two problems.
The FE models from section 7.2 and section 7.3 is reused together with the
dimensions, object function and input arguments.
Small changes are made
in the scripts and self-programmed functions for the names of the variables.
The scripts and self-programmed functions can be found in Appendix F. The
nonlinear constrain function will now have two constrains
λ ≥A0
A
∆σR ≥σHS
(8.1)
For this optimization program, only one analysis is performed. The initial guess
will be IG 1 in Table 7.9.
Based on the previous optimization analysis, it is expected that the results
primarily will be based on the optimization of the buckling, since the fatigue
optimization resulted in the lower bounds in section 7.3.
==PAGE:96==
82
Combined optimization program
8.1
Optimization results
The results from the optimization analysis is presented in Table 8.1.
Table 8.1: Results for boundary conditions constraining rotation.
Results
Exitag
Initial volume
Material reduction
Analysis
tp[m]
ts[m]
hs[m]
V [m3]
[−]
V [m3]
[%]
IG 1
0.0113
0.0068
0.2096
0.3504
2
0.7252
51.68
The results show that the optimization program is reducing the material usage
relative to the initial dimensions. Just like the other optimizations the material
reduction was very high, about 50%, which again is caused by the large initial
dimensions.
When comparing the result with the ones obtained in Table 7.10, it is observed
that the result doesn't correspond exactly to each other. The results from the
combined optimization is lower than the ones from the fatigue optimization. It
is primarily the dimensions of the ribs, which diers between the models, i.e.
ts and tp is lowest for the combined model. This shows that the optimization
for fatigue has an inuence on the optimization in the combined optimization
program, which is a little unexpected considering the results from section 7.3.
Because only one analysis is performed, lack of results and informations to see if
the results for the giving initial guess was a yer or if the optimization program
is working as intended. Therefore, more analyzes have to be performed in order
to make a nal conclusion for whether or not the combined optimization program
for the stiened plate is working as intended.
==PAGE:97==
Chapter 9
Discussion
Throughout this project several optimization programs where developed. The
programs were built up by using the programs: matlab as the optimization
algorithm, python as a storage of the FE model information and abaqus as
calculator for the FE analysis.
To begin with the connection between the three programs were established by
optimising a cantilever beam. There were no problems connection the three
programs, however the optimization using abaqus wasn't corresponding to an
analytical approach. It turned out that the input le to the analysis in abaqus
was only containing 6 digits for cross-section dimensions, i.e. thickness, width,
height ect. This can cause problems for the optimization algorithm in matlab,
because the algorithm is changing dimensions in a relative size of the numbers.
For a structure with large dierences between the dimensions, which are opti-
mized, the algorithm may not nd the correct solution, because the change in
the dimensions are so small to have an inuence on the calculations in abaqus.
This was also the case for the optimization of the cantilever beam. The problem
was handled by changing the minimum size of the change of the dimensions.
Another way can be to chose more convenient units such as cm or mm instead
of meters. The only way to solve the problem is to write the input le (inp-le)
self.
By changing the minimum size of the change in the optimization algorithm, it
was possible to make an optimization program for the cantilever beam by using
the two minimization algorithms fminsearch and fmincon. Both optimization
programs showed almost no deviation from abaqus and an analytical approach.
The original idea was to make an optimization program for a plate with ribs
based on a top plate from Izmit Bay Bridge. However the closed trapezoidal
ribs from Izmit Bay Bridge was changed to opened plate ribs. This was done
==PAGE:98==
84
Discussion
because the complexity of the trapezoidal ribs, and because the optimization
program is meant to be a principle program to show that it is possible to make
an optimization program using matlab, python and abaqus for long span
bridges. The change of the ribs made the comparison between the dimensions
found in the analysis and the dimensions of Izmit Bay Bridge more dicult.
When making the FE model of the stiened plate several assumptions were
made.
The boundary conditions in both the longitudinal and transverse di-
rections where simplied. It was assumed that the diaphragms in the bridge
was acting as simple supports for the plate in the longitudinal direction, which
doesn't imply enough stiness to the structure. Also the rods in the bridge
deck was assumed to act as simple supports in the transverse direction. This is
also not corresponding to the reality. These boundary conditions are not giving
enough sti to the FE model compared to the real bridge and the results will
therefore deviate from the Izmit Bay Bridge.
The optimization program for stability showed acceptable results. The program
optimized the structure compared to the initial dimensions, and they where in an
acceptable range of the dimensions of Izmit Bay Bridge, even with the changes
in geometry and simplications of the FE model. The results also showed that
dierent initial dimensions would result in dierent optimized dimensions. This
could be caused by the algorithm nding local minimum points and therefore
not nd the most optimal solution. The local minimum points could indicate
that the FE model takes dynamical plate behaviour into account. It is therefore
a wise idea to make several initial guess of the dimensions when running the
optimization program.
The results from the fatigue optimization program was not as expected. Or-
thotropic bridges are typically designed based on the fatigue stresses however,
the optimization results converged to the lower bounds of the algorithm.
It
turned out that the stresses changed in magnitude and from compression to
tension and vise versa when the dimensions of the thickness of the plate, the
thickness of the stieners and height of the stieners changed. This was a prob-
lem because of the method used to extract the stresses. The stresses where
extracted from one specic node, and when the stresses were changing, the
node didn't contain the largest stress any longer. This caused the optimization
program to get unwanted results. This could be indicating that something is
wrong with the model, or that the method of extracting the results are inappro-
priate. The method to extract the results are denitely not the must eective
or optimal way of doing it. Therefore, a more reliable method of extracting the
results is needed.
A suggestion for a method of extracting the stress is to take the largest stress
for the whole model for all calculations, the problem with this method is, that
it isn't certain that the maximum stress is at a connection between the plate
and a stiener. Another suggestion could be to make the material orientation
==PAGE:99==
85
the same for both plate and stieners, this was attempted in section 7.3 but
without any success.
Furthermore, shell elements were used in the FE model. Beam elements would
properly have been preferred, since the plate is load perpendicular to its plane.
This can be taken into consideration for further analysis.
At last an optimization program combining stability and fatigue was made. It
was dicult to conclude anything from the analysis, because only one result were
obtained. However the result showed that the fatigue analysis had an inuence
on the optimization. This was unexpected since it for its own analysis converged
to the lower bounds of the algorithm.
This has to be further investigated,
but it shows that it is possible to make an optimization program with several
constrains.
==PAGE:100==
86
Discussion
==PAGE:101==
Chapter 10
Conclusion
Based on the analyzes made throughout this project, it is concluded that it
is possible to make an optimization program for atleast the stability of an or-
thtropic steel deck using the three programs matlab, python and abaqus.
matlab is used to manage the optimization by running the optimization algo-
rithm, python used as a storage of the FE model information and abaqus was
used as calculator for the FE analysis. However it wasn't possible to optimize
for fatigue.
The analysis for the stability optimization showed that the program optimized
the structure with respect to the volume (material usage). The structure were
also optimized in comparison to the reference model (Izmit Bay Bridge), even
though many simplications were made and a lot of stiness was removed from
the structure due to changing of the rib system and boundary conditions. The
results showed that local minimum points where found for dierent initial di-
mensions.
This indicates that the FE model is taken the ratio between the
length and width of the plates into account.
The analysis for the fatigue however, showed that there were problems with the
analysis and unexpected results were obtained. The reason for the unexpected
results were caused by the changes in the stresses in the plate when changing
the dimensions of the plate thickness, the thickness of the stieners and the
height of the stieners. The changes made the hot spot change places in the
plate, which made it impossible to get a proper results, because the algorithm
converged to the lower bound.
==PAGE:102==
88
Conclusion
Also a combined optimization program for stability and fatigue was developed.
The program optimized the structure compared to the initial structure and Izmit
Bay Bridge. The results were almost the same as for the stability optimization
because of the problems with the fatigue model.
However, the optimization
program showed that could be capable of optimizing for two constrains.
If a solution to the problems in the fatigue optimization is solved, the optimiza-
tion program will most likely be capable to optimize the bridge deck of Izmit
Bay Bridge. Also future othotropic bridges can be optimized before construc-
tion, which could result in longer main span for the bridges and reduction of
material used. However, the FE models need to be more detailed, than the ones
in this project.
==PAGE:103==
Chapter 11
Further work
The future work with the optimization program will primarily be to improve
the model for the fatigue analysis and to make it work properly. When the
optimization program for fatigue is working the next step is to make a combined
optimization program for both stability and fatigue.
A proposal was made
in the project, which should be working when the optimization for fatigue is
working. However, an investigation has to be made to insure that the combined
optimization program is working properly.
Furthermore, the optimization program for the Izmit Bay Bridge can be further
developed by improving the FE models. The models had a lot of simplications
and the extraction of stresses in the fatigue analysis wasn't performed the most
optimal way. This is the major points where the optimization program can be
develop on.
To be able to compare the results with the Izmit Bay Bridge, the geometry of
the rib system has to be changed to a trapezoidal closed system. This will make
the FE model more complex. This will also make the optimization program
more relevant for other bridges since the closed trapezoidal rib systems are used
for the bridges with the longest main spans. Also an extension of the FE model
to contain more than a single top plate can improve the program.
The optimization algorithm itself is dicult to optimize.
A possibility is to
change the minimization algorithm to one of the other built-in algorithm in
matlab or to develop one.
==PAGE:104==
90
Further work
==PAGE:105==
Chapter 12
Enclosed CD
• Combined model - folder
 Aba.m
 Main.m
 MainStab.py
 OutputStab.m
 MainFat.py
 OutputFat.m
• ConstantDisplacement - folder
 Aba.m
 Ana.m
 Main.m
 Main.py
 Output.m
• ConstantVolume - folder
 Aba.m
 Ana.m
 Main.m
 Main.py
 Output.m
• Fatigue - folder
==PAGE:106==
92
Enclosed CD
 Aba.m
 Main.m
 Main.py
 Output.m
• Stability - folder
 Aba.m
 Main.m
 Main.py
 Output.m
==PAGE:107==
Bibliography
[1] Abdullah Fettahoglu. Optimizing rib width to height and rib spacing to deck
plate thickness ratios in orthotropic decks. Cogent Engineering 2016.
[2] Cost index for the Great Belt Bridge. http://www.statistikbanken.dk/VEJ2,
Juli 2017
[3] Ination
of
DKK.
http://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/emner/priser-og-
forbrug/forbrugerpriser/forbrugerprisindeks
[4] Ronaldo C. Battista, Michéle S. Pfeil, and Eliane M.L. Carvalhob. Fatigue
Life Estimates for a Slender Orthotropic Steel Deck. Journal of Constructional
Steel Research, 64:134143, 2008.
[5] Z. H. Qian and D. Abruzzese. Fatigue failure of welded connections at or-
thotropic bridges. Frattura Ed Integrità Strutturale, 9:105112, 2009.
[6] Chungsheng Wang, Yacheng Feng, and Lan Duan Fatigue damage evaluation
and retrot of steel orthotropic bridge decks. Key Engineering Materials, 413-
414:741748, 2009.
[7] M. H. Kolstein and J. Wardenier. Fatigue Strength of Welded Joints in Or-
thotropic Steel Bridge Decks. Welding in the World, 38:175194, 1996.
[8] Ye Xia, Hani Nassif, Eui-Seung Hwang, and Daniel Linzell. Optimization of
design details in orthotropic steel decks subjected to static and fatigue loads.
Transportation Research Record, 2331:1423, 2013.
[9] Abdullah Fettahoglu. Fatigue Strength of Welded Joints in Orthotropic Steel
Bridge Decks. International Journal of Advances in Engineering & Technology,
6(4):15121523, 2013.
[10] Robert J. Connor. Inuence of Cutout Geometry on Stresses at Welded
Rib-to-Diaphragm Connections in Steel Orthotropic Bridge Decks. Journal of
the Transportation Research Board, 1892:7887, 2004.
==PAGE:108==
94
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[11] Chang-Kook Oh, Kee-Jeung Hong, Doobyong Bae, Heungsub Do, and Tae-
jin Han. Analytical and experimental studies on optimal details of orthotropic
steel decks for long span bridges. International Journal of Steel Structures,
11(2):227234, 2011.
[12] Chang-Kook Oh and Doobyong Bae. Fatigue test of an advanced orthotropic
steel deck system using high performance steel for bridges. International Jour-
nal of Steel Structures, 13(1):93101, 2013.
[13] Man-Chung Tang. A new concept of orthotropic steel bridge deck. Structure
and Infrastructure Engineering, 7:587595, 2011.
[14] Zhenwang Wu, Kaifeng Zheng, Yingjie Cui, and Yanbin Shui. Optimization
study on open shaped ribs arrangement and diaphragm cutout for steel or-
thotropic box girder. Advanced Materials Research, 443-444:10721077, 2012.
[15] Simon Bjærre. Improvements to Present Design Philosophy of Orthotropic
Steel Decks with Focus on Fatigue. Department of Civil Engineering, Technical
University of Denmark, June 2015.
[16] Brian M. Kozy, Robert J. Conor, Duncan Paterson, and Dennis R. Mertz.
Proposed Revisions to AASHTO-LRFD Bridge Design Specications for Or-
thotropic Steel Deck Bridges. ASCE-AMER SOC CIVIL ENGINEERS, 2011.
[17] Recommendations for fatigue design of welded joints and components.
Technical Report IIW-1823-07. International Institute of Welding, 2008 .
[18] Wai-Fah Chen Lian Duan. Bridge Engineering Handbook. CRC Press 2000.
[19] SONG Young-sheng and DING You-liang. Inuence of local geometrical
parameters on fatigue performance of orthotropic steel deck. Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark.
[20] Eurocode 1: Actions on structures  Part 2: Trac loads on bridges. Tech-
nical Report DS/EN 1991-2:2003, Dansk standard, 2003.
[21] Eurocode 3: Design of steel structures - Part 1-9: Fatigues. Technical Re-
port DS/EN 1993-1-9:2007, Dansk standard, 2007.
[22] Course material for in advanced steel structures on DTU 2016. The Euro-
pean Steel Design Education Programme (ESDEP) - http://fgg-web.fgg.uni-
lj.si/ /pmoze/ESDEP/master/toc.htm
[23] Presentation
of
the
Izmit
Bay
Bridge
from
COWI.
http://www.brodag.dk/Synopsis/2014/11%20IZMIT.pdf
[24] Jensen B. C. (2013):, Teknisk Ståbi. Nyt Teknisk Forlag, København K,
Denmark.
==PAGE:109==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
95
[25] MATLAB home page. https://se.mathworks.com/products/matlab.html
[26] ABAQS manual. http://abaqus.software.polimi.it/v6.14/index.html
[27] Zhi-Gang Xiao, Kentaro Yamada, Samol Ya, Xiao-Ling Zhao. Stress anal-
yses and fatigue evaluation of rib-to-deck joints in steel orthotropic decks.
International Journal of Fatigue 30 (2008) 13871397
==PAGE:110==
96
BIBLIOGRAPHY
==PAGE:111==
Appendix A
Great Belt Bridge cost
The price for the Great Belt Bridge in the period form 1990-1998 is calculated
in the following.
==PAGE:112==
Price for the Great Belt Bridge during construction time (http://www.statistikbanken.dk/
VEJ2).
The numbers are en millions DKK
≔
Pris98
=
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
2709
2356
3993
4566
3271
2197
2675
1479
825
⋅
2.407 10
4
Pris in 2017 due to inflation from 1998 - 2017 (http://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/emner/
priser-og-forbrug/forbrugerpriser/forbrugerprisindeks)
≔
Pris17
=
⋅
――
101.3
72.2
Pris98
⋅
3.377 10
4
The price is converted to millions US$. The extage rate between US$ and DKK in July 
2017
≔
DKK
0.15
≔
US
=
⋅
DKK Pris17
⋅
5.066 10
3
The price during the construction time was US$ 5.066 billion.
==PAGE:113==
Appendix B
Cantilever beam (constant
volume)
B.1
MATLAB - Main.m
1
% Optemization program
for a
c a n t i l e v e r beam with a
constant
volume
2
clear
a l l ;
close
all ;
clc
3
%% Parameters
for
the beam
4
h = 0 . 2 ;
% The avetage
height
of
the beam [m]
5
l = 5;
% Total
length
of
the beam [m]
6
a = l /2;
% Length
of
each
part
of
the beam [m]
7
t = a /10;
% The thickness
of
the beam [m]
8
E = 210 e9 ;
% Modulus of
e l a s t i c i t y
for
s t e e l
[Pa]
9
p = 1;
% Force
at
the
t i p
of
the beam [N]
10
Vtot = h∗2∗a∗t ; % Total volume
of
the beam [m3]
11
12
%% Finding
the minimum height
using
the
a n a l y t i c a l
s o l u t i o n
13
14
% E s t a b l i s h i n g a function
from the
s e l f −programmed
15
% function Ana,
which
i s
c a l c u l a t i n g
the
t i p
16
% displacement ,
with a
v a r i a b l e
h1
17
% ( height
of
the
i n t e r n a l
part ) .
18
Ana = @( h1 )Ana(h1 , h , a , t ,E, p) ;
19
20
% I n i t i a l
guess
of h1
21
x0 =[0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
0 . 0 0 5 ] ;
==PAGE:114==
4
Cantilever beam (constant volume)
22
23
% Finding
the
height
of
the
i n t e r n a l
part and the
24
% displacement
of
the
t i p
using
fminsearch .
25
for
i=length ( xo )
26
[ h1ana , uana ] = fminsearch (Ana , x0 ( i ) )
27
end
28
29
% Calculating
the
height
of
the
e x t e r i o r
part
30
h2ana=2∗h−h1ana ;
31
32
% Checking
the
volume
33
V1ana = ( h1ana+h2ana ) ∗a∗t ;
34
35
%% Finding
the minimum height
using
36
% numerical
s o l u t i o n
(ABAQUS) .
37
38
% E s t a b l i s h i n g a function
from the
s e l f −programmed
39
% function Aba ,
which
i s
c a l t u l a t i n g
the
t i p
displacement
40
% with a
v a r i a b l e
h1 ( height
of
the
i n t e r n a l
part ) .
41
abaqus = @( h1 )Aba(h1 , h , a , t ,E, p) ;
42
43
% I n i t i a l
guess
44
x0 =[0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
0 . 0 0 5 ] ;
45
46
% Finding
the
height
of
the
i n t e r n a l
part and the
47
% displacement
of
the
t i p
using
fminsearch .
48
for
i=length ( x0 )
49
[ h1aba , uaba ] = fminsearch ( abaqus , x0 ( i ) ) ;
50
end
51
52
% Finding
the
height
of
the
e x t e r i o r
part
53
h2aba=2∗h−h1aba
54
55
% Checking
the
volume
56
Vaba = ( h1aba+h2aba ) ∗a∗t ;
57
58
% I n i t i a l
guess
59
x0 =[0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
0 . 0 0 5 ] ;
60
61
%% Results
62
fprintf ( ' Analytical  displacement :  %.4d\n ' , uana )
63
fprintf ( ' Analytical  height  part  1:  %.4d\n ' , h1aba )
64
fprintf ( ' Analytical  height  part  2:  %.4d\n ' , h2aba )
65
fprintf ( ' Numerical displacement :  %.4d\n ' , uaba )
==PAGE:115==
MATLAB - Ana.m
5
66
fprintf ( ' Numerical height  part  1:  %.4d\n ' , h1aba )
67
fprintf ( ' Numerical height  part  2:  %.4d\n ' , h2aba )
B.2
MATLAB - Ana.m
1
function u = Ana(h1 , h , a , t ,E,P)
2
% A function
that
c a l c u l a t e s
the
t i p
displacement
of a
3
% c a n t i l e v e r beam using a
a n a l y t i c a l
s o l u t i o n
using
4
% the
force
method . The function
i s
used
to
find
the
5
% minimum height
of
the
i n t e r n a l
part and
6
% the minimum t i p
displacement .
7
%% Parameters
8
% The volume
[m3]
9
% V = h∗2∗a∗t ;
10
% Moment at
the
midtpoint
of
the beam [Nm]
11
% M = p∗a ;
12
% Moment of
i n e r t i a
for
i n t e r n a l
part
[m4]
13
I1 = h1^3∗t /12;
14
% The hieght
of
the
e x t e r i o r
[m]
15
% h2 = V/(a∗t )−h1 ;
16
% Moment of
i n e r t i a
for
external
part
[m4]
17
I2 = (2∗h−h1 ) ^3∗t /12;
18
19
% Displacement
of
the
t i p
20
u = 7/3∗P∗a^3/(E∗I1 )+1/3∗P∗a^3/(E∗I2 ) ;
21
end
==PAGE:116==
6
Cantilever beam (constant volume)
B.3
MATLAB - Aba.m
1
function uaba = Aba(h1 , h , a , t ,E,P)
2
% A function
that
c a l c u l a t e s
the
t i p
displacement
of a
3
% c a n t i l e v e r beam using ABAQUS. The function
i s
used
to
4
% find
the minimum height
of
the
i n t e r n a l
part and
5
% minimum t i p
displacement .
6
%% Making a python
f i l e
and writing
v a r i a b l e s
to
i t
7
f i d = fopen ( 'Var . py ' ,
'w ' ) ;
8
fprintf ( fid , 'h = %d\n ' ,h) ;
9
fprintf ( fid , ' a = %d\n ' , a ) ;
10
fprintf ( fid , ' t  = %d\n ' , t ) ;
11
fprintf ( fid , ' h1 = %d\n ' , h1 ) ;
12
fprintf ( fid , 'E = %d\n ' ,E) ;
13
fprintf ( fid , 'P = %d\n ' ,P) ;
14
fclose ( f i d ) ;
15
16
%% E s t a b l i s h
connection
to ABAQUS
17
mo='noGUI ' ; % Running
s c r i p t
without
the Abaqus/CAE GUI
18
% mo=' script ' ; % Running
s c r i p t
with
the Abaqus/CAE GUI
19
20
% Pythonscript run in ABAQUS
21
myscript='=Main . py ' ;
22
23
% Open ABAQUS and running
myscript
24
system ( [ ' abaqus cae  ' ,mo, myscript ] ) ; % Windows system
25
26
% For Unix system
27
% unix ( [ ' abaqus cae
' ,mo, myscript ] ) ;
%Unix system
28
29
% Loading
output from ABAQUS
30
load Output . txt
31
32
% Tip displacement
33
uaba = Output (end) ;
34
end
==PAGE:117==
Python - Main.py
7
B.4
Python - Main.py
1
# Imports
2
from part import ∗
3
from material import ∗
4
from se ction import ∗
5
from assembly import ∗
6
from step import ∗
7
from i n t e r a c t i o n import ∗
8
from load import ∗
9
from mesh import ∗
10
from optimization import ∗
11
from job import ∗
12
from sketch import ∗
13
from v i s u a l i z a t i o n
import ∗
14
from connectorBehavior import ∗
15
from odbAccess import ∗
16
17
# Load
v a r i a b l e s
18
execfile ( 'Var . py ' )
19
20
# Change model name
21
mdb. models . changeKey (fromName=' Model−1 ' , toName='Beam ' )
22
myModel = mdb. models [ 'Beam ' ]
23
24
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Part −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
25
import part
26
27
# Creating
part 1 ( h a l f
of
the beam)
28
# Create a sketch
for
the
base
feature .
29
mySketch1 = myModel . ConstrainedSketch (name=' beamProfile1 '
,
sheetSize =10)
30
31
# Specifying
the
s t a r t
and end point
the beam ( part
1) .
32
mySketch1 . Line ( point1 =(0.0 ,0.0) ,
point2=(a , 0 . 0 ) )
33
34
# Create
the beam as a 2D,
deformable
part .
35
myBeam1 = myModel . Part (name='Beam1 ' ,
dimensionality=
TWO_D_PLANAR,
type=DEFORMABLE_BODY)
36
37
# Making the
part
as a wire
38
myBeam1. BaseWire ( sketch=mySketch1 )
39
==PAGE:118==
8
Cantilever beam (constant volume)
40
# Creating
part 2 ( h a l f
of
the beam)
41
# Create a sketch
for
the
base
feature .
42
mySketch2 = myModel . ConstrainedSketch (name=' beamProfile2 '
,
sheetSize =5)
43
44
# Specifying
the
s t a r t
and end point
the beam ( part
2) .
45
mySketch2 . Line ( point1=(a , 0 . 0 ) ,
point2 =(2∗a , 0 . 0 ) )
46
47
# Create
the beam as a 2D,
deformable
part .
48
myBeam2 = myModel . Part (name='Beam2 ' ,
dimensionality=
TWO_D_PLANAR,
type=DEFORMABLE_BODY)
49
50
# Making the model as a wire
51
myBeam2. BaseWire ( sketch=mySketch2 )
52
53
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Material −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
54
import material
55
56
# Create a material
s t e e l .
57
mySteel = myModel . Material (name=' Steel ' )
58
59
# Create
the
e l a s t i c
pr op er ti es :
youngsModulus
i s
210.E9
and poissonsRatio
i s
0.3
60
e l a s t i c P r o p e r t i e s = (E,
0.3)
61
mySteel . E l a s t i c ( table=( e l a s t i c P r o p e r t i e s ,
)
)
62
63
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−P r o f i l e −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
64
# Creating
the
cross−section
of
part 1 as a
p r o f i l e
65
myProfile1 = myModel . RectangularProfile ( a=t , b=h1 , name='
P r o f i l e 1 ' )
66
67
# Creating
the
cross−section
of
part 2 as a
p r o f i l e
68
myProfile2 = myModel . RectangularProfile ( a=t , b=2∗h−h1 ,
name=' P r o f i l e 2 ' )
69
70
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Section −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
71
import se ction
72
73
# Makes a section
with
the
material and
p r o f i l e .
74
mySection1 = myModel . BeamSection ( consistentMassMatrix=
False ,
i n t e g r a t i o n=DURING_ANALYSIS,
material=' Steel ' ,
name=' beamSection1 ' ,
poissonRatio =0.0 ,
p r o f i l e='
P r o f i l e 1 ' ,
temperatureVar=LINEAR)
75
# Finds
the
edge
of
part 1
==PAGE:119==
Python - Main.py
9
76
edgeBeam1 = myBeam1. edges . findAt ( ( ( a /2 ,0.0 ,0.0) ,) )
77
# Assign
the
section
to
the
part .
78
myBeam1. SectionAssignment ( o f f s e t =0.0 ,
o f f s e t F i e l d=' ' ,
offsetType=MIDDLE_SURFACE,
region=Region ( edges=
edgeBeam1 ) , sectionName=' beamSection1 ' ,
thicknessAssignment=FROM_SECTION)
79
# Assign beam orientation
80
myBeam1. assignBeamSectionOrientation ( method=N1_COSINES,
n1 =(0.0 ,
0.0 ,
−1.0) ,
region=Region ( edges=edgeBeam1 ) )
81
82
# Makes a section
with
the
material and
p r o f i l e .
83
mySection2 = myModel . BeamSection ( consistentMassMatrix=
False ,
i n t e g r a t i o n=DURING_ANALYSIS,
material=' Steel ' ,
name=' beamSection2 ' ,
poissonRatio =0.0 ,
p r o f i l e='
P r o f i l e 2 ' ,
temperatureVar=LINEAR)
84
# Finds
the
edge
of
part 2
85
edgeBeam2 = myBeam2. edges . findAt (((3/2 ∗a , 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
86
# Assign
the
section
to
the
part .
87
myBeam2. SectionAssignment ( o f f s e t =0.0 ,
o f f s e t F i e l d=' ' ,
offsetType=MIDDLE_SURFACE,
region=Region ( edges=
edgeBeam2 ) , sectionName=' beamSection2 ' ,
thicknessAssignment=FROM_SECTION)
88
# Assign beam orientation
89
myBeam2. assignBeamSectionOrientation ( method=N1_COSINES,
n1 =(0.0 ,
0.0 ,
−1.0) ,
region=Region ( edges=edgeBeam2 ) )
90
91
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Assembly −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
92
import assembly
93
94
# Making a shortcut .
95
myAssembly = myModel . rootAssembly
96
# Making instances
97
myInstance1 = myAssembly . Instance (name=' beamInstance1 ' ,
part=myBeam1,
dependent=ON)
98
myInstance2 = myAssembly . Instance (name=' beamInstance2 ' ,
part=myBeam2,
dependent=ON)
99
100
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Nodes −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
101
102
# Make nodes
for
connection
103
myBeam1. Set (name=' Part1Node1 ' ,
v e r t i c e s =(myBeam1. v e r t i c e s
. findAt ( ( ( 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,
) ) ) )
104
myBeam1. Set (name=' Part1Node2 ' ,
v e r t i c e s =(myBeam1. v e r t i c e s
. findAt ( ( ( a , 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,
) ) ) )
==PAGE:120==
10
Cantilever beam (constant volume)
105
myBeam2. Set (name=' Part2Node1 ' ,
v e r t i c e s =(myBeam2. v e r t i c e s
. findAt ( ( ( a , 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,
) ) ) )
106
myBeam2. Set (name=' Part2Node2 ' ,
v e r t i c e s =(myBeam2. v e r t i c e s
. findAt (((2∗a , 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,
) ) ) )
107
108
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Step −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
109
import step
110
111
# Create a step . The time
period
of
the
s t a t i c
step
i s
1.0 , and the
i n i t i a l
incrementation
i s
0 . 1 ;
112
# the
step
i s
created
a f t e r
the
i n i t i a l
step .
113
myModel . StaticStep (name=' stepLoad ' ,
previous=' I n i t i a l ' ,
timePeriod =1.0 ,
i n i t i a l I n c =0.1 ,
d e s c r i p t i o n=' Load at  
tip  of  the  beam . ' )
114
115
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Connections −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
116
117
# Creating a BEAM−MPC connection
between
the tow
parts .
118
myModel . MultipointConstraint ( controlPoint=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Part1Node2 ' ] , mpcType=BEAM_MPC, name=' Cennection
' ,
surface=myInstance2 . s e t s [ ' Part2Node1 ' ] ,
userMode=
DOF_MODE_MPC,
userType=0)
119
120
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Load and BC −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
121
import load
122
123
# Create a boundary
condition
that
encastres
at
the
l e f t
end of
the beam .
124
myModel . DisplacementBC (name=' Fixed ' , createStepName='
stepLoad ' ,
region=myInstance1 . s e t s [ ' Part1Node1 ' ] ,
u1
=0.0 , u2=0.0 , ur3 =0.0)
125
126
# Create a
t i p
load
at
the
r i g h t
end .
127
myModel . ConcentratedForce ( cf2=−P,
createStepName='
stepLoad ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM, name=' PointLoad ' ,
region=myInstance2 . s e t s [ ' Part2Node2 ' ] )
128
129
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Mesh −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
130
import mesh
131
# Assign an element
type
to
the
part .
132
elemType = ElemType( elemCode=B23 ,
elemLibrary=STANDARD)
133
# Mesh part 1
134
# Set
elementtype
==PAGE:121==
Python - Main.py
11
135
myBeam1. setElementType ( elemTypes=(elemType , ) ,
regions=
Region ( edges=edgeBeam1 ) )
136
# Seed
the
part
instance .
137
myBeam1. seedEdgeByNumber ( constraint=FINER,
edges=(
edgeBeam1 ) , number=5)
138
# Generate mesh
139
myBeam1. generateMesh ()
140
141
# Mesh part 2
142
# Set
elementtype
143
myBeam2. setElementType ( elemTypes=(elemType , ) ,
regions=
Region ( edges=edgeBeam2 ) )
144
# Seed
the
part
instance .
145
myBeam2. seedEdgeByNumber ( constraint=FINER,
edges=(
edgeBeam2 ) , number=5)
146
# Generate mesh
147
myBeam2. generateMesh ()
148
149
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Job −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
150
import job
151
152
# Create an analysis
job
for
the model and submit
i t .
153
jobName = ' cantileverbeam '
154
155
myJob = mdb. Job (name=jobName ,
model='Beam ' , d e s c r i p t i o n='
Cantilever  beam ' )
156
157
# Wait for
the
job
to
complete .
158
myJob . submit ()
159
myJob . waitForCompletion ()
160
161
# Make output
162
execfile ( ' Output . py ' )
==PAGE:122==
12
Cantilever beam (constant volume)
B.5
Python - Output.py
1
import se ction
2
import regionToolset
3
import displayGroupMdbToolset as dgm
4
import part
5
import material
6
import assembly
7
import step
8
import i n t e r a c t i o n
9
import load
10
import mesh
11
import optimization
12
import job
13
import sketch
14
import v i s u a l i z a t i o n
15
import xyPlot
16
import displayGroupOdbToolset as dgo
17
import connectorBehavior
18
19
# open an
o u t p u t f i l e
20
odb = openOdb( path=' cantileverbeam . odb ' )
21
22
# " shortcut " for
the
rootAssembly
o b j e c t
23
myAssembly = odb . rootAssembly
24
25
# s e t t i n g
the
step and frame (−1 = l a s t )
to
be used
26
stepframe = odb . steps [ ' stepLoad ' ] . frames [ −1]
27
28
# Getting
the
deformation
f i e l d
out
29
d e f l e c t i o n = stepframe . fieldOutputs [ 'U' ]
30
31
# Getting
the
deformation
in
instance "BEAMINSTANCE1"
32
El_node_deflection1 = d e f l e c t i o n . getSubset ( region=
myAssembly . instances [ 'BEAMINSTANCE1' ] ) . values
33
34
# Writing
the
deformation
in
the y−d i r e c t i o n
into Uy1
35
for v in El_node_deflection1 :
36
Uy1 = v . data [ 1 ] # Displacements
in y−d i r e c t i o n
37
38
# Getting
the
deformation
in
instance "BEAMINSTANCE2"
39
El_node_deflection2 = d e f l e c t i o n . getSubset ( region=
myAssembly . instances [ 'BEAMINSTANCE2' ] ) . values
==PAGE:123==
Python - Output.py
13
40
41
# Writing
the
deformation
in
the y−d i r e c t i o n
into Uy1
42
for v in El_node_deflection2 :
43
Uy2 = v . data [ 1 ] # Displacements
in y−d i r e c t i o n
44
45
Umax1 = Uy1 .max() # Finding
the maximum displacement
in
beaminstance 1
46
Umax2 = Uy2 .max() # Finding
the maximum displacement
in
beaminstance 2
47
48
print (Umax1) # j u s t
to
print some output
49
print (Umax2) # j u s t
to
print some output
50
51
# Finding
the masximum deformation
52
Umax = max(abs(Umax1) , abs(Umax2) )
53
54
print (Umax)
55
odb . c l o s e ()
56
57
# Writing
information
to a txt −f i l e
58
f i l = open( ' Output . txt ' ,mode=' a ' )
# opens a
f i l e
for
writing
access
( appending )
59
f i l . write ( str (Umax) + ' \n ' )
# s t r i n g
to
write
in
the
f i l e
60
f i l . c l o s e ()
# c l o s i n g
the
f i l e
again
==PAGE:124==
14
Cantilever beam (constant volume)
==PAGE:125==
Appendix C
Cantilever beam (constant
displacement)
C.1
MATLAB - Main.m
1
% Optemization program
for a
c a n t i l e v e r beam with a
constant
volume
2
clear
a l l ;
close
all ;
clc
3
%% Parameters
for
the beam
4
h = 0 . 2 ;
% The avetage
height
of
the beam [m]
5
l = 5;
% Total
length
of
the beam [m]
6
a = l /2;
% Length
of
each
part
of
the beam [m]
7
t = a /10;
% The thickness
of
the beam [m]
8
E = 210 e9 ;
% Modulus of
e l a s t i c i t y
for
s t e e l
[Pa]
9
p = 1;
% Force
at
the
t i p
of
the beam [N]
10
Vtot = h∗2∗a∗t ; % Total volume
of
the beam [m3]
11
12
%% Finding
the minimum height
using
the
a n a l y t i c a l
s o l u t i o n
13
14
% E s t a b l i s h i n g a function
from the
s e l f −programmed
15
% function Ana,
which
i s
c a l c u l a t i n g
the
t i p
16
% displacement ,
with a
v a r i a b l e
h1
17
% ( height
of
the
i n t e r n a l
part ) .
18
Ana = @( h1 )Ana(h1 , h , a , t ,E, p) ;
19
20
% I n i t i a l
guess
of h1
21
x0 =[0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
0 . 0 0 5 ] ;
==PAGE:126==
16
Cantilever beam (constant displacement)
22
23
% Finding
the
height
of
the
i n t e r n a l
part and the
24
% displacement
of
the
t i p
using
fminsearch .
25
for
i=length ( xo )
26
[ h1ana , uana ] = fminsearch (Ana , x0 ( i ) )
27
end
28
29
% Calculating
the
height
of
the
e x t e r i o r
part
30
h2ana=2∗h−h1ana ;
31
32
% Checking
the
volume
33
V1ana = ( h1ana+h2ana ) ∗a∗t ;
34
35
%% Finding
the minimum height
using
36
% numerical
s o l u t i o n
(ABAQUS) .
37
38
% E s t a b l i s h i n g a function
from the
s e l f −programmed
39
% function Aba ,
which
i s
c a l t u l a t i n g
the
t i p
displacement
,
40
% with a
v a r i a b l e
h1 ( height
of
the
i n t e r n a l
part ) .
41
abaqus = @( h1 )Aba(h1 , h , a , t ,E, p) ;
42
43
% I n i t i a l
guess
44
x0 =[0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
0 . 0 0 5 ] ;
45
46
% Finding
the
height
of
the
i n t e r n a l
part and the
47
% displacement
of
the
t i p
using
fminsearch .
48
for
i=length ( x0 )
49
[ h1aba , uaba ] = fminsearch ( abaqus , x0 ( i ) ) ;
50
end
51
52
% Finding
the
height
of
the
e x t e r i o r
part
53
h2aba=2∗h−h1aba
54
55
% Checking
the
volume
56
Vaba = ( h1aba+h2aba ) ∗a∗t ;
57
58
% I n i t i a l
guess
59
x0 =[0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
0 . 0 0 5 ] ;
60
61
%% Results
62
fprintf ( ' Analytical  displacement :  %.4d\n ' , uana )
63
fprintf ( ' Analytical  height  part  1:  %.4d\n ' , h1aba )
64
fprintf ( ' Analytical  height  part  2:  %.4d\n ' , h2aba )
==PAGE:127==
MATLAB - Ana.m
17
65
fprintf ( ' Numerical displacement :  %.4d\n ' , uaba )
66
fprintf ( ' Numerical height  part  1:  %.4d\n ' , h1aba )
67
fprintf ( ' Numerical height  part  2:  %.4d\n ' , h2aba )
C.2
MATLAB - Ana.m
1
function
[ uana , ueq ] = Ana(x , a , t ,E,P, umax)
2
% A function
that
c a l c u l a t e s
the
displacement
of a
c a n t i l e v e r beam .
3
% The function
i s
used
to
find
the minimum height
of
the
i n t e r n a l
part and
4
% e x t e r i o r
part
with a constrained
t i p
displacement .
5
%% Parameters
6
M = P∗a ;
% Moment at
the
midtpoint
of
the beam
7
I1 = x (1) ^3∗t /12;
% Moment of
i n e r t i a
for
part
1
8
I2 = x (2) ^3∗t /12;
% Moment of
i n e r t i a
for
part
1
9
10
% Displacement
of
the
t i p
11
u =7/3∗P∗a^3/(E∗I1 )+1/3∗P∗a^3/(E∗I2 ) ;
12
13
% constrians
14
uana = u −umax ;
15
ueq= [ ] ;
16
end
==PAGE:128==
18
Cantilever beam (constant displacement)
C.3
MATLAB - Aba.m
1
function
[ uaba , ueq ] = Aba(x , a , t ,E,P, umax)
2
% A function
that
c a l c u l a t e s
the
t i p
displacement
of a
c a n t i l e v e r beam using ABAQUS.
3
% The function
i s
used
to
find
the minimum height
of
the
i n t e r n a l
part and
4
% e x t e r i o r
part
with a constrained
t i p
displacement .
5
%% Making a python
f i l e
and writing
v a r i a b l e s
to
i t
6
h1 = x (1) ;
7
h2 = x (2) ;
8
f i d = fopen ( 'Var . py ' ,
'w ' ) ;
9
fprintf ( fid , ' h1 = %.16e\n ' , h1 ) ;
10
fprintf ( fid , ' h2 = %.16e\n ' , h2 ) ;
11
fprintf ( fid , ' a = %.16e\n ' , a ) ;
12
fprintf ( fid , ' t  = %.16e\n ' , t ) ;
13
fprintf ( fid , 'E = %.16e\n ' ,E) ;
14
fprintf ( fid , 'P = %.16e\n ' ,P) ;
15
fclose ( f i d ) ;
16
17
%% E s t a b l i s h
connection
to ABAQUS
18
mo='noGUI ' ; % Running
s c r i p t
without
the Abaqus/CAE GUI
19
% mo=' script ' ; % Running
s c r i p t
with
the Abaqus/CAE GUI
20
21
% Pythonscript run in ABAQUS
22
myscript='=Main . py ' ;
23
24
%Make part ( run Abaqus )
25
% unix ( [ ' abaqus cae
' ,mo, myscript ] ) ;
%Unix system
26
27
% Open ABAQUS and running
myscript
28
system ( [ ' abaqus cae  ' ,mo, myscript ] ) ; % Windows system
29
30
% Loading
output from ABAQUS
31
load Output . txt
32
33
% Constrains
34
uaba = Output (end , 1 ) −umax ;
35
ueq = [ ] ;
36
end
==PAGE:129==
Python - Main.py
19
C.4
Python - Main.py
1
# Imports
2
from part import ∗
3
from material import ∗
4
from se ction import ∗
5
from assembly import ∗
6
from step import ∗
7
from i n t e r a c t i o n import ∗
8
from load import ∗
9
from mesh import ∗
10
from optimization import ∗
11
from job import ∗
12
from sketch import ∗
13
from v i s u a l i z a t i o n
import ∗
14
from connectorBehavior import ∗
15
from odbAccess import ∗
16
17
# Load
v a r i a b l e s
18
execfile ( 'Var . py ' )
19
20
# Change model name
21
mdb. models . changeKey (fromName=' Model−1 ' , toName='Beam ' )
22
myModel = mdb. models [ 'Beam ' ]
23
24
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Part −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
25
import part
26
27
# Creating
part 1 ( h a l f
of
the beam)
28
# Create a sketch
for
the
base
feature .
29
mySketch1 = myModel . ConstrainedSketch (name=' beamProfile1 '
,
sheetSize =10)
30
31
# Specifying
the
s t a r t
and end point
the beam ( part
1) .
32
mySketch1 . Line ( point1 =(0.0 ,0.0) ,
point2=(a , 0 . 0 ) )
33
34
# Create
the beam as a 2D,
deformable
part .
35
myBeam1 = myModel . Part (name='Beam1 ' ,
dimensionality=
TWO_D_PLANAR,
type=DEFORMABLE_BODY)
36
37
# Making the
part
as a wire
38
myBeam1. BaseWire ( sketch=mySketch1 )
39
==PAGE:130==
20
Cantilever beam (constant displacement)
40
# Creating
part 2 ( h a l f
of
the beam)
41
# Create a sketch
for
the
base
feature .
42
mySketch2 = myModel . ConstrainedSketch (name=' beamProfile2 '
,
sheetSize =5)
43
44
# Specifying
the
s t a r t
and end point
the beam ( part
2) .
45
mySketch2 . Line ( point1=(a , 0 . 0 ) ,
point2 =(2∗a , 0 . 0 ) )
46
47
# Create
the beam as a 2D,
deformable
part .
48
myBeam2 = myModel . Part (name='Beam2 ' ,
dimensionality=
TWO_D_PLANAR,
type=DEFORMABLE_BODY)
49
50
# Making the model as a wire
51
myBeam2. BaseWire ( sketch=mySketch2 )
52
53
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Material −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
54
import material
55
56
# Create a material .
57
mySteel = myModel . Material (name=' Steel ' )
58
59
# Create
the
e l a s t i c
pr op er ti es :
youngsModulus
i s
210.E9
and poissonsRatio
i s
0.3
60
e l a s t i c P r o p e r t i e s = (E,
0.3)
61
mySteel . E l a s t i c ( table=( e l a s t i c P r o p e r t i e s ,
)
)
62
63
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−P r o f i l e −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
64
# Creating
the
cross−section
of
part 1 as a
p r o f i l e
65
myProfile1 = myModel . RectangularProfile ( a=t , b=h1 , name='
P r o f i l e 1 ' )
66
67
# Creating
the
cross−section
of
part 2 as a
p r o f i l e
68
myProfile2 = myModel . RectangularProfile ( a=t , b=h2 , name='
P r o f i l e 2 ' )
69
70
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Section −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
71
import se ction
72
73
# Makes a section
with
the
material and
p r o f i l e .
74
mySection1 = myModel . BeamSection ( consistentMassMatrix=
False ,
i n t e g r a t i o n=DURING_ANALYSIS,
material=' Steel ' ,
name=' beamSection1 ' ,
poissonRatio =0.0 ,
p r o f i l e='
P r o f i l e 1 ' ,
temperatureVar=LINEAR)
75
# Finds
the
edge
of
part 1
==PAGE:131==
Python - Main.py
21
76
edgeBeam1 = myBeam1. edges . findAt ( ( ( a /2 ,0.0 ,0.0) ,) )
77
# Assign
the
section
to
the
part .
78
myBeam1. SectionAssignment ( o f f s e t =0.0 ,
o f f s e t F i e l d=' ' ,
offsetType=MIDDLE_SURFACE,
region=Region ( edges=
edgeBeam1 ) , sectionName=' beamSection1 ' ,
thicknessAssignment=FROM_SECTION)
79
# Assign beam orientation
80
myBeam1. assignBeamSectionOrientation ( method=N1_COSINES,
n1 =(0.0 ,
0.0 ,
−1.0) ,
region=Region ( edges=edgeBeam1 ) )
81
82
# Makes a section
with
the
material and
p r o f i l e .
83
mySection2 = myModel . BeamSection ( consistentMassMatrix=
False ,
i n t e g r a t i o n=DURING_ANALYSIS,
material=' Steel ' ,
name=' beamSection2 ' ,
poissonRatio =0.0 ,
p r o f i l e='
P r o f i l e 2 ' ,
temperatureVar=LINEAR)
84
# Finds
the
edge
of
part 2
85
edgeBeam2 = myBeam2. edges . findAt (((3/2 ∗a , 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
86
# Assign
the
section
to
the
part .
87
myBeam2. SectionAssignment ( o f f s e t =0.0 ,
o f f s e t F i e l d=' ' ,
offsetType=MIDDLE_SURFACE,
region=Region ( edges=
edgeBeam2 ) , sectionName=' beamSection2 ' ,
thicknessAssignment=FROM_SECTION)
88
# Assign beam orientation
89
myBeam2. assignBeamSectionOrientation ( method=N1_COSINES,
n1 =(0.0 ,
0.0 ,
−1.0) ,
region=Region ( edges=edgeBeam2 ) )
90
91
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Assembly −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
92
import assembly
93
94
# Making a shortcut .
95
myAssembly = myModel . rootAssembly
96
# Making instances
97
myInstance1 = myAssembly . Instance (name=' beamInstance1 ' ,
part=myBeam1,
dependent=ON)
98
myInstance2 = myAssembly . Instance (name=' beamInstance2 ' ,
part=myBeam2,
dependent=ON)
99
100
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Nodes −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
101
102
# Make nodes
for
connection
103
myBeam1. Set (name=' Part1Node1 ' ,
v e r t i c e s =(myBeam1. v e r t i c e s
. findAt ( ( ( 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,
) ) ) )
104
myBeam1. Set (name=' Part1Node2 ' ,
v e r t i c e s =(myBeam1. v e r t i c e s
. findAt ( ( ( a , 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,
) ) ) )
==PAGE:132==
22
Cantilever beam (constant displacement)
105
myBeam2. Set (name=' Part2Node1 ' ,
v e r t i c e s =(myBeam2. v e r t i c e s
. findAt ( ( ( a , 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,
) ) ) )
106
myBeam2. Set (name=' Part2Node2 ' ,
v e r t i c e s =(myBeam2. v e r t i c e s
. findAt (((2∗a , 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,
) ) ) )
107
108
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Step −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
109
import step
110
111
# Create a step . The time
period
of
the
s t a t i c
step
i s
1.0 , and the
i n i t i a l
incrementation
i s
0 . 1 ;
112
# the
step
i s
created
a f t e r
the
i n i t i a l
step .
113
myModel . StaticStep (name=' stepLoad ' ,
previous=' I n i t i a l ' ,
timePeriod =1.0 ,
i n i t i a l I n c =0.1 ,
d e s c r i p t i o n=' Load at  
tip  of  the  beam . ' )
114
115
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Connections −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
116
117
# Creating a BEAM−MPC connection
between
the tow
parts .
118
myModel . MultipointConstraint ( controlPoint=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Part1Node2 ' ] , mpcType=BEAM_MPC, name=' Cennection
' ,
surface=myInstance2 . s e t s [ ' Part2Node1 ' ] ,
userMode=
DOF_MODE_MPC,
userType=0)
119
120
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Load and BC −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
121
import load
122
123
# Create a boundary
condition
that
encastres
at
the
l e f t
end of
the beam .
124
myModel . DisplacementBC (name=' Fixed ' , createStepName='
stepLoad ' ,
region=myInstance1 . s e t s [ ' Part1Node1 ' ] ,
u1
=0.0 , u2=0.0 , ur3 =0.0)
125
126
# Create a
t i p
load
at
the
r i g h t
end .
127
myModel . ConcentratedForce ( cf2=−P,
createStepName='
stepLoad ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM, name=' PointLoad ' ,
region=myInstance2 . s e t s [ ' Part2Node2 ' ] )
128
129
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Mesh −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
130
import mesh
131
# Assign an element
type
to
the
part .
132
elemType = ElemType( elemCode=B23 ,
elemLibrary=STANDARD)
133
# Mesh part 1
134
# Set
elementtype
==PAGE:133==
Python - Output.py
23
135
myBeam1. setElementType ( elemTypes=(elemType , ) ,
regions=
Region ( edges=edgeBeam1 ) )
136
# Seed
the
part
instance .
137
myBeam1. seedEdgeByNumber ( constraint=FINER,
edges=(
edgeBeam1 ) , number=5)
138
# Generate mesh
139
myBeam1. generateMesh ()
140
141
# Mesh part 2
142
# Set
elementtype
143
myBeam2. setElementType ( elemTypes=(elemType , ) ,
regions=
Region ( edges=edgeBeam2 ) )
144
# Seed
the
part
instance .
145
myBeam2. seedEdgeByNumber ( constraint=FINER,
edges=(
edgeBeam2 ) , number=5)
146
# Generate mesh
147
myBeam2. generateMesh ()
148
149
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Job −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
150
import job
151
152
# Create an analysis
job
for
the model and submit
i t .
153
jobName = ' cantileverbeam '
154
155
myJob = mdb. Job (name=jobName ,
model='Beam ' , d e s c r i p t i o n='
Cantilever  beam ' )
156
157
# Wait for
the
job
to
complete .
158
myJob . submit ()
159
myJob . waitForCompletion ()
160
161
# Make output
162
execfile ( ' Output . py ' )
C.5
Python - Output.py
1
import section
2
import regionToolset
3
import displayGroupMdbToolset as dgm
4
import part
5
import material
==PAGE:134==
24
Cantilever beam (constant displacement)
6
import assembly
7
import step
8
import i n t e r a c t i o n
9
import load
10
import mesh
11
import optimization
12
import job
13
import sketch
14
import v i s u a l i z a t i o n
15
import xyPlot
16
import displayGroupOdbToolset as dgo
17
import connectorBehavior
18
19
# open an
o u t p u t f i l e
20
odb = openOdb( path=' cantileverbeam . odb ' )
21
22
# " shortcut " for
the
rootAssembly
o b j e c t
23
myAssembly = odb . rootAssembly
24
25
# s e t t i n g
the
step and frame (−1 = l a s t )
to
be used
26
stepframe = odb . steps [ ' stepLoad ' ] . frames [ −1]
27
28
# Getting
the
deformation
f i e l d
out
29
d e f l e c t i o n = stepframe . fieldOutputs [ 'U' ]
30
31
# Getting
the
deformation
in
instance "BEAMINSTANCE1"
32
El_node_deflection1 = d e f l e c t i o n . getSubset ( region=
myAssembly . instances [ 'BEAMINSTANCE1' ] ) . values
33
34
# Writing
the
deformation
in
the y−d i r e c t i o n
into Uy1
35
for v in El_node_deflection1 :
36
Uy1 = v . data [ 1 ] # Displacements
in y−d i r e c t i o n
37
38
# Getting
the
deformation
in
instance "BEAMINSTANCE2"
39
El_node_deflection2 = d e f l e c t i o n . getSubset ( region=
myAssembly . instances [ 'BEAMINSTANCE2' ] ) . values
40
41
# Writing
the
deformation
in
the y−d i r e c t i o n
into Uy1
42
for v in El_node_deflection2 :
43
Uy2 = v . data [ 1 ] # Displacements
in y−d i r e c t i o n
44
45
Umax1 = Uy1 .max() # Finding
the maximum displacement
46
Umax2 = Uy2 .max() # Finding
the maximum displacement
47
==PAGE:135==
Python - Output.py
25
48
print (Umax1) # j u s t
to
print some output
49
print (Umax2) # j u s t
to
print some output
50
51
# Finding
the masximum deformation
52
Umax = max(abs(Umax1) , abs(Umax2) )
53
54
print (Umax)
55
odb . c l o s e ()
56
57
f i l = open( ' Output . txt ' ,mode=' a ' )
# opens a
f i l e
for
writing
access
( appending )
58
f i l . write ( str ( ' { : . 1 6 e} ' . format(Umax) ) + '   '
+ str ( '
{ : . 1 6 e} ' . format( h1 ) ) + '   ' + str ( ' { : . 1 6 e} ' . format( h2 )
) + ' \n ' )
# s t r i n g
to
write
in
the
f i l e
59
f i l . c l o s e ()
# c l o s i n g
the
f i l e
again
==PAGE:136==
26
Cantilever beam (constant displacement)
==PAGE:137==
Appendix D
Stability
D.1
MATLAB - Main.m
1
% Optemization program
for
s t a b i l i t y
of a
s t i f f e n e d
p l a t e
2
clear
a l l ;
close
all ;
clc
3
%% Parameters
for
s t i f f e n d e
p l a t e
4
L = 5;
% Total
length
of
the
p l a t e
[m]
5
ws = 0.295;
% Width of
the
s t i f f e n e r
[m]
6
ds = 0.3 05;
% Distance
between
r i b s
[m]
7
db = 0.552−ws /2; % Distance from
l a s t
s t i f f e n e r
to BC [m]
8
w = ds/2+7∗ws+6∗ds+db ;% Total
width
of
the
p l a t e
[m]
9
nribs = 14;
% Number of
r i b s
10
11
% Thickness
of
the
p l a t e
[m]
( i n i t i a l
guess )
12
tp = [ 0 . 0 2 ] ;
13
% Thickness
of
the
s t i f f e n e r s
[m]
( i n i t i a l
guess )
14
ts = [ 0 . 0 0 8 ] ;
15
% Height
of
the
s t i f f n e r
[m]
( i n i t i a l
guess )
16
hs = [ 0 . 5 ] ;
17
18
E = 210 e9 ;
% Modulus of
e l a s t i c i t y
for
s t e e l
[Pa]
19
20
% Object
function .
21
% x (1)
i s
the
thickness
of
the
plate ,
22
% x (2)
i s
the
thickness
of
the
s t i f f e n e r
23
% and x (3)
i s
the
height
of
the
s t i f f e n e r .
24
V = @(x)L∗w∗x (1)+nribs ∗x (2) ∗x (3) ∗L;
25
==PAGE:138==
28
Stability
26
%% Optimization program
27
x0 = [ tp
28
ts
29
hs ] ;
% I n i t i a l
point
for
x
30
A = [ ] ;
% Matrix
for
l i n e a r
i n e q u l i t y
constraints
31
b = [ ] ;
% Vector
for
l i n e a r
i n e q u l i t y
constraints
32
Aeq = [ ] ;
% Matrix
for
l i n e a r
e q u l i t y
constraints
33
beq = [ ] ;
% Vector
for
l i n e a r
e q u l i t y
constraints
34
lb = [ 0 . 0 0 6 , 0 . 0 0 6 , 0 . 0 5 ] ; % Vector
for
lower
bounds
35
ub = [ ] ;
% Vector
for
upper bounds
36
37
% Specifying
the
options
for
the
optimization
function
38
options = optimoptions ( @fmincon , ' DiffMinChange ' ,1 e −5, '
ConstraintTolerance ' ,1 e−5) ;
39
40
re = [ ] ;
41
% Making the
optimization
42
for
i =1:length ( x0 ( 1 , : ) )
43
% I n i t i a l
cross−section
area :
44
A0 = w∗tp ( i )+nribs ∗ts ( i ) ∗hs ( i ) ;
% Cross−section
area
[cm2]
45
46
P = 17.72∗10^6∗A0/w;
% Normal force on the
p l a t e
[
N/cm]
47
48
% E s t a b l i s h i n g a nonlinear
constraint
function
49
abaqus = @(x)Aba(x , L,w, db , ws , ds , nribs ,A0,E,P) ;
50
51
% Running the
minimization
algorithm
52
[ x , fval , e x i t f l a g ] = fmincon (V, x0 ( : , i ) ,A, b , Aeq , beq , lb ,
ub , abaqus , options )
53
guess = [ x0 ( : , i ) ' x '
f v a l
e x i t f l a g ] ;
54
re = [ re ; guess ] ;
55
end
56
%% Results
57
fprintf ( ' Thickness  of  the  plate  :  %.4d cm\n ' ,x (1) )
58
fprintf ( ' Thickness  of  the  s t i f f e n e r s  :  %.4d cm\n ' ,x (2) )
59
fprintf ( ' Height of  the  s t i f f n e r :  %.4d cm\n ' ,x (3) )
==PAGE:139==
MATLAB - Aba.m
29
D.2
MATLAB - Aba.m
1
function
[ c , ceq ] = Aba(x , L,w, db , ws , ds , nribs ,A0,E,P)
2
% A function
that
c a l c u l a t e s
the
t i p
displacement
of a
c a n t i l e v e r beam using ABAQUS.
3
% The function
i s
used
to
find
the minimum height
of
the
i n t e r n a l
part and
4
% minimum t i p
displacement .
5
%% Calculation
ares and loads
6
% Cross−section
area
in model
7
Am = w∗x (1)+nribs ∗x (2) ∗x (3) ;
8
P = P∗A0/Am; % Load over
the
cross−section
9
10
%% Make a python
f i l e
with
v a r i a b l e s
11
f i d = fopen ( 'Var . py ' ,
'w ' ) ;
12
fprintf ( fid , 'L = %.16e\n ' ,L) ;
13
fprintf ( fid , 'w = %.16e\n ' ,w) ;
14
fprintf ( fid , 'db = %.16e\n ' ,db) ;
15
fprintf ( fid , 'ws = %.16e\n ' ,ws) ;
16
fprintf ( fid , ' ds = %.16e\n ' , ds ) ;
17
fprintf ( fid , ' tp = %.16e\n ' ,x (1) ) ; % tp
[m]
18
fprintf ( fid , ' ts  = %.16e\n ' ,x (2) ) ; % Ts [m]
19
fprintf ( fid , ' hs = %.16e\n ' ,x (3) ) ; % hs
[m]
20
fprintf ( fid , 'E = %.16e\n ' ,E) ;
21
fprintf ( fid , 'P = %.16e\n ' ,P) ;
22
fclose ( f i d ) ;
23
24
%% E s t a b l i s h
connection
to ABAQUS
25
mo='noGUI ' ; % Running
s c r i p t
without
the Abaqus/CAE GUI
26
% mo=' script ' ; % Running
s c r i p t
with
the Abaqus/CAE GUI
27
28
% Pythonscript run in ABAQUS
29
myscript='=Main . py ' ;
30
31
% Open ABAQUS and running
myscript
32
system ( [ ' abaqus cae  ' ,mo, myscript ] ) ; % Windows system
33
34
% For Unix system
35
% unix ( [ ' abaqus cae
' ,mo, myscript ] ) ;
%Unix system
36
37
% Load output from ABAQUS
38
load Output . txt
39
==PAGE:140==
30
Stability
40
% Getting
the
eigenvalue
41
EigenValue = Output (end , 1 ) ;
42
43
% constrains
44
c = A0/Am−EigenValue ;
45
ceq = [ ] ;
46
end
D.3
Python - Main.py
1
# Impots
2
from part import ∗
3
from material import ∗
4
from se ctio n import ∗
5
from assembly import ∗
6
from step import ∗
7
from i n t e r a c t i o n import ∗
8
from load import ∗
9
from mesh import ∗
10
from optimization import ∗
11
from job import ∗
12
from sketch import ∗
13
from v i s u a l i z a t i o n
import ∗
14
from connectorBehavior import ∗
15
from odbAccess import ∗
16
17
# Load
v a r i a b l e s
18
execfile ( 'Var . py ' )
19
20
# Change model name
21
mdb. models . changeKey (fromName=' Model−1 ' , toName=' Plate ' )
22
myModel = mdb. models [ ' Plate ' ]
23
24
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Part −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
25
import part
26
27
# Creating
the
structure
as a part
28
# Create a sketch
for
the
base
feature .
29
mySketch = myModel . ConstrainedSketch (name=' Plate ' ,
sheetSize =10)
30
==PAGE:141==
Python - Main.py
31
31
# Create
the
horizonal
p l a t e
32
mySketch . Line ( point1 =(0.0 ,0.0) ,
point2=(w, 0 . 0 ) )
33
34
# Create
the
v e r t i c a l
r i b s
35
mySketch . Line ( point1=(ds /2 ,0.0) ,
point2=(ds/2,−hs ) )
36
mySketch . Line ( point1=(ds/2+ws , 0 . 0 ) ,
point2=(ds/2+ws,−hs ) )
37
mySketch . Line ( point1=(ds/2+ws+ds , 0 . 0 ) ,
point2=(ds/2+ws+ds
,−hs ) )
38
mySketch . Line ( point1=(ds/2+2∗ws+ds , 0 . 0 ) ,
point2=(ds/2+2∗
ws+ds ,−hs ) )
39
mySketch . Line ( point1=(ds/2+2∗ws+2∗ds , 0 . 0 ) ,
point2=(ds
/2+2∗ws+2∗ds ,−hs ) )
40
mySketch . Line ( point1=(ds/2+3∗ws+2∗ds , 0 . 0 ) ,
point2=(ds
/2+3∗ws+2∗ds ,−hs ) )
41
mySketch . Line ( point1=(ds/2+3∗ws+3∗ds , 0 . 0 ) ,
point2=(ds
/2+3∗ws+3∗ds ,−hs ) )
42
mySketch . Line ( point1=(ds/2+4∗ws+3∗ds , 0 . 0 ) ,
point2=(ds
/2+4∗ws+3∗ds ,−hs ) )
43
mySketch . Line ( point1=(ds/2+4∗ws+4∗ds , 0 . 0 ) ,
point2=(ds
/2+4∗ws+4∗ds ,−hs ) )
44
mySketch . Line ( point1=(ds/2+5∗ws+4∗ds , 0 . 0 ) ,
point2=(ds
/2+5∗ws+4∗ds ,−hs ) )
45
mySketch . Line ( point1=(ds/2+5∗ws+5∗ds , 0 . 0 ) ,
point2=(ds
/2+5∗ws+5∗ds ,−hs ) )
46
mySketch . Line ( point1=(ds/2+6∗ws+5∗ds , 0 . 0 ) ,
point2=(ds
/2+6∗ws+5∗ds ,−hs ) )
47
mySketch . Line ( point1=(ds/2+6∗ws+6∗ds , 0 . 0 ) ,
point2=(ds
/2+6∗ws+6∗ds ,−hs ) )
48
mySketch . Line ( point1=(ds/2+7∗ws+6∗ds , 0 . 0 ) ,
point2=(ds
/2+7∗ws+6∗ds ,−hs ) )
49
50
# Create a the
part
as a three −dimensional ,
deformable
part .
51
myPlate = myModel . Part (name=' Plate ' ,
dimensionality=
THREE_D,
type=DEFORMABLE_BODY)
52
53
# Create
the
part ' s
base
feature
by
extruding
the
sketch
through a distance L
54
myPlate . BaseShellExtrude ( depth=L,
sketch=mySketch )
55
56
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Material −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
57
import material
58
59
# Create a
s t e e l
material .
==PAGE:142==
32
Stability
60
mySteel = myModel . Material (name=' Steel ' )
61
62
# Create
the
e l a s t i c
pr op er ti es :
youngsModulus
i s
210.E9
and poissonsRatio
i s
0.3
63
e l a s t i c P r o p e r t i e s = (E,
0.3)
64
mySteel . E l a s t i c ( table=( e l a s t i c P r o p e r t i e s ,
)
)
65
66
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Section −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
67
# Create a section
for
the
p l a t e .
Material
i s
s p e c i f i e d .
68
mySection1 = myModel . HomogeneousShellSection ( i d e a l i z a t i o n
=NO_IDEALIZATION,
69
integrationRule=SIMPSON,
material=' Steel ' , name='
Plate ' , numIntPts=5,
70
poissonDefinition=DEFAULT,
preIntegrate=OFF,
temperature=GRADIENT,
71
thickness=tp ,
thicknessField=' ' ,
thicknessModulus=
None ,
thicknessType=
72
UNIFORM,
useDensity=OFF)
73
74
# Create a section
for
the
r i b s .
Material
i s
s p e c i f i e d .
75
mySection2 = myModel . HomogeneousShellSection ( i d e a l i z a t i o n
=NO_IDEALIZATION,
76
integrationRule=SIMPSON,
material=' Steel ' , name='
S t i f f e n e r ' , numIntPts=5,
77
poissonDefinition=DEFAULT,
preIntegrate=OFF,
temperature=GRADIENT,
78
thickness=ts ,
thicknessField=' ' ,
thicknessModulus=
None ,
thicknessType=
79
UNIFORM,
useDensity=OFF)
80
81
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Section
Assignment −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
82
import se ction
83
# Finding each
face
of
the
p l a t e
for
assigning
section .
84
facePlate1 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds /4 ,0.0 ,0.0) ,) )
85
facePlate2 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+ws /2 ,0.0 ,0.0) ,) )
86
facePlate3 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+ws+ds /2 ,0.0 ,0.0)
,) )
87
facePlate4 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+3∗ws/2+ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
88
facePlate5 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+2∗ws+3∗ds
/ 2 , 0 . 0 , 0.0) ,) )
89
facePlate6 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+5∗ws/2+2∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
==PAGE:143==
Python - Main.py
33
90
facePlate7 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+3∗ws+5∗ds
/ 2 , 0 . 0 ,0.0) ,) )
91
facePlate8 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+7∗ws/2+3∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
92
facePlate9 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+4∗ws+7∗ds
/ 2 , 0 . 0 ,0.0) ,) )
93
facePlate10 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+9∗ws/2+4∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
94
facePlate11 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+5∗ws+9∗ds
/ 2 , 0 . 0 ,0.0) ,) )
95
facePlate12 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+11∗ws/2+5∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
96
facePlate13 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+6∗ws+11∗ds
/ 2 , 0 . 0 ,0.0) ,) )
97
facePlate14 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+13∗ws/2+6∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
98
facePlate15 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+7∗ws+6∗ds+db
/ 2 , 0 . 0 ,0.0) ,) )
99
100
# Assign
section
to
the
p l a t e
faces
101
mySectionP = myPlate . SectionAssignment ( o f f s e t =0.0 ,
o f f s e t F i e l d=' ' ,
offsetType=MIDDLE_SURFACE,
region=
Region ( f a c e s=facePlate1+facePlate2+facePlate3+
facePlate4+facePlate5+facePlate6+facePlate7+facePlate8
+facePlate9+facePlate10+facePlate11+facePlate12+
facePlate13+facePlate14+facePlate15 ) , sectionName='
Plate ' ,
thicknessAssignment=FROM_SECTION)
102
103
# Finding each
face
of
the
r i b s
for
assigning
section .
104
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds /2 ,0.0 ,0.0) ,) )
105
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 2 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+ws , 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 )
,) )
106
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 3 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+ws+ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
107
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 4 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+2∗ws+ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
108
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 5 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+2∗ws+2∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
109
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 6 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+3∗ws+2∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
110
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 7 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+3∗ws+3∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
111
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 8 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+4∗ws+3∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
==PAGE:144==
34
Stability
112
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 9 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+4∗ws+4∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
113
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 0 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+5∗ws+4∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
114
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 1 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+5∗ws+5∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
115
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 2 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+6∗ws+5∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
116
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 3 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+6∗ws+6∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
117
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 4 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+7∗ws+6∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
118
119
# Assign
section
to
the
r i b
faces
120
mySectionS = myPlate . SectionAssignment ( o f f s e t =0.0 ,
o f f s e t F i e l d=' ' ,
offsetType=MIDDLE_SURFACE,
region=
Region ( f a c e s=f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 2+
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 3+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 4+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 5+
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 6+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 7+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 8+
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 9+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 0+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 1+
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 2+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 3+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 4 ) ,
sectionName=' S t i f f e n e r ' ,
thicknessAssignment=
FROM_SECTION)
121
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Surfaces and Sets −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
122
# Finding
edges
for
Sets and surfaces
for BC and Load
123
124
# Edges
of
the
p l a t e
125
# Edges at
z=0
126
edgePlate1 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds /4 ,0.0 ,0.0) ,) )
127
edgePlate2 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+ws /2 ,0.0 ,0.0) ,) )
128
edgePlate3 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+ws+ds /2 ,0.0 ,0.0)
,) )
129
edgePlate4 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+3∗ws/2+ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
130
edgePlate5 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+2∗ws+3∗ds
/ 2 , 0 . 0 , 0.0) ,) )
131
edgePlate6 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+5∗ws/2+2∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
132
edgePlate7 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+3∗ws+5∗ds
/ 2 , 0 . 0 , 0.0) ,) )
133
edgePlate8 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+7∗ws/2+3∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
134
edgePlate9 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+4∗ws+7∗ds
/ 2 , 0 . 0 , 0.0) ,) )
==PAGE:145==
Python - Main.py
35
135
edgePlate10 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+9∗ws/2+4∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
136
edgePlate11 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+5∗ws+9∗ds
/ 2 , 0 . 0 ,0.0) ,) )
137
edgePlate12 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+11∗ws/2+5∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
138
edgePlate13 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+6∗ws+11∗ds
/ 2 , 0 . 0 ,0.0) ,) )
139
edgePlate14 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+13∗ws/2+6∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
140
edgePlate15 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+7∗ws+6∗ds+db
/ 2 , 0 . 0 ,0.0) ,) )
141
142
# Edges at
z=L
143
edgePlate16 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds /4 ,0.0 ,L) ,) )
144
edgePlate17 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+ws /2 ,0.0 ,L) ,) )
145
edgePlate18 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+ws+ds /2 ,0.0 ,L)
,) )
146
edgePlate19 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+3∗ws/2+ds , 0 . 0 , L
) ,) )
147
edgePlate20 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+2∗ws+3∗ds
/2 ,0.0 ,L) ,) )
148
edgePlate21 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+5∗ws/2+2∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
149
edgePlate22 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+3∗ws+5∗ds
/2 ,0.0 ,L) ,) )
150
edgePlate23 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+7∗ws/2+3∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
151
edgePlate24 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+4∗ws+7∗ds
/2 ,0.0 ,L) ,) )
152
edgePlate25 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+9∗ws/2+4∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
153
edgePlate26 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+5∗ws+9∗ds
/2 ,0.0 ,L) ,) )
154
edgePlate27 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+11∗ws/2+5∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
155
edgePlate28 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+6∗ws+11∗ds
/2 ,0.0 ,L) ,) )
156
edgePlate29 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+13∗ws/2+6∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
157
edgePlate30 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+7∗ws+6∗ds+db
/2 ,0.0 ,L) ,) )
158
159
#Plate
edge
at x=0
==PAGE:146==
36
Stability
160
edgePlate31=myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 , L/2) ,) )
161
162
#Plate
edge
at x=w
163
edgePlate32=myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( (w, 0 . 0 , L/2) ,) )
164
165
# Edges
of
the
r i b s
166
# Edges at
z=0
167
e d g e S t i f f e n e r 1 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds /2 ,0.0 ,0.0) ,) )
168
e d g e S t i f f e n e r 2 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+ws , 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 )
,) )
169
e d g e S t i f f e n e r 3 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+ws+ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
170
e d g e S t i f f e n e r 4 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+2∗ws+ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
171
e d g e S t i f f e n e r 5 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+2∗ws+2∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
172
e d g e S t i f f e n e r 6 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+3∗ws+2∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
173
e d g e S t i f f e n e r 7 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+3∗ws+3∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
174
e d g e S t i f f e n e r 8 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+4∗ws+3∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
175
e d g e S t i f f e n e r 9 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+4∗ws+4∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
176
edgeSt iffener10 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+5∗ws+4∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
177
edgeSt iffener11 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+5∗ws+5∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
178
edgeSt iffener12 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+6∗ws+5∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
179
edgeSt iffener13 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+6∗ws+6∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
180
edgeSt iffener14 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+7∗ws+6∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
181
182
# Edges at
z=L
183
edgeSt iffener15 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds /2 ,0.0 ,L) ,) )
184
edgeSt iffener16 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+ws , 0 . 0 , L) ,)
)
185
edgeSt iffener17 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+ws+ds , 0 . 0 , L
) ,) )
186
edgeSt iffener18 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+2∗ws+ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
==PAGE:147==
Python - Main.py
37
187
edgeSt iffener19 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+2∗ws+2∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
188
edgeSt iffener20 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+3∗ws+2∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
189
edgeSt iffener21 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+3∗ws+3∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
190
edgeSt iffener22 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+4∗ws+3∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
191
edgeSt iffener23 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+4∗ws+4∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
192
edgeSt iffener24 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+5∗ws+4∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
193
edgeSt iffener25 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+5∗ws+5∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
194
edgeSt iffener26 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+6∗ws+5∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
195
edgeSt iffener27 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+6∗ws+6∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
196
edgeSt iffener28 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+7∗ws+6∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
197
198
#Creating
Sets
for BC
199
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate1 ) ,name=' Boundary plate1 ' )
200
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate2 ) ,name=' Boundary plate2 ' )
201
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate3 ) ,name=' Boundary plate3 ' )
202
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate4 ) ,name=' Boundary plate4 ' )
203
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate5 ) ,name=' Boundary plate5 ' )
204
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate6 ) ,name=' Boundary plate6 ' )
205
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate7 ) ,name=' Boundary plate7 ' )
206
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate8 ) ,name=' Boundary plate8 ' )
207
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate9 ) ,name=' Boundary plate9 ' )
208
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate10 ) ,name=' Boundary plate10 ' )
209
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate11 ) ,name=' Boundary plate11 ' )
210
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate12 ) ,name=' Boundary plate12 ' )
211
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate13 ) ,name=' Boundary plate13 ' )
212
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate14 ) ,name=' Boundary plate14 ' )
213
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate15 ) ,name=' Boundary plate15 ' )
214
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate16 ) ,name=' Boundary plate16 ' )
215
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate17 ) ,name=' Boundary plate17 ' )
216
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate18 ) ,name=' Boundary plate18 ' )
217
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate19 ) ,name=' Boundary plate19 ' )
218
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate20 ) ,name=' Boundary plate20 ' )
219
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate21 ) ,name=' Boundary plate21 ' )
220
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate22 ) ,name=' Boundary plate22 ' )
==PAGE:148==
38
Stability
221
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate23 ) ,name=' Boundary plate23 ' )
222
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate24 ) ,name=' Boundary plate24 ' )
223
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate25 ) ,name=' Boundary plate25 ' )
224
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate26 ) ,name=' Boundary plate26 ' )
225
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate27 ) ,name=' Boundary plate27 ' )
226
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate28 ) ,name=' Boundary plate28 ' )
227
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate29 ) ,name=' Boundary plate29 ' )
228
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate30 ) ,name=' Boundary plate30 ' )
229
230
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate31 ) ,name=' Boundary plate31 ' )
231
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate32 ) ,name=' Boundary plate32 ' )
232
233
#Creating
Surfaces
for Load
234
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=(edgePlate1 ) ,name='
plateSurface1 ' )
235
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=(edgePlate2 ) ,name='
plateSurface2 ' )
236
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=(edgePlate3 ) ,name='
plateSurface3 ' )
237
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=(edgePlate4 ) ,name='
plateSurface4 ' )
238
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=(edgePlate5 ) ,name='
plateSurface5 ' )
239
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=(edgePlate6 ) ,name='
plateSurface6 ' )
240
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=(edgePlate7 ) ,name='
plateSurface7 ' )
241
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=(edgePlate8 ) ,name='
plateSurface8 ' )
242
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=(edgePlate9 ) ,name='
plateSurface9 ' )
243
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=(edgePlate10 ) ,name='
plateSurface10 ' )
244
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=(edgePlate11 ) ,name='
plateSurface11 ' )
245
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=(edgePlate12 ) ,name='
plateSurface12 ' )
246
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=(edgePlate13 ) ,name='
plateSurface13 ' )
247
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=(edgePlate14 ) ,name='
plateSurface14 ' )
248
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=(edgePlate15 ) ,name='
plateSurface15 ' )
==PAGE:149==
Python - Main.py
39
249
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=(edgePlate16 ) ,name='
plateSurface16 ' )
250
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=(edgePlate17 ) ,name='
plateSurface17 ' )
251
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=(edgePlate18 ) ,name='
plateSurface18 ' )
252
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=(edgePlate19 ) ,name='
plateSurface19 ' )
253
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=(edgePlate20 ) ,name='
plateSurface20 ' )
254
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=(edgePlate21 ) ,name='
plateSurface21 ' )
255
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=(edgePlate22 ) ,name='
plateSurface22 ' )
256
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=(edgePlate23 ) ,name='
plateSurface23 ' )
257
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=(edgePlate24 ) ,name='
plateSurface24 ' )
258
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=(edgePlate25 ) ,name='
plateSurface25 ' )
259
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=(edgePlate26 ) ,name='
plateSurface26 ' )
260
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=(edgePlate27 ) ,name='
plateSurface27 ' )
261
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=(edgePlate28 ) ,name='
plateSurface28 ' )
262
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=(edgePlate29 ) ,name='
plateSurface29 ' )
263
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=(edgePlate30 ) ,name='
plateSurface30 ' )
264
265
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=( e d g e S t i f f e n e r 1 ) ,name='
s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 1 ' )
266
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=( e d g e S t i f f e n e r 2 ) ,name='
s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 2 ' )
267
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=( e d g e S t i f f e n e r 3 ) ,name='
s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 3 ' )
268
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=( e d g e S t i f f e n e r 4 ) ,name='
s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 4 ' )
269
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=( e d g e S t i f f e n e r 5 ) ,name='
s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 5 ' )
270
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=( e d g e S t i f f e n e r 6 ) ,name='
s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 6 ' )
==PAGE:150==
40
Stability
271
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=( e d g e S t i f f e n e r 7 ) ,name='
s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 7 ' )
272
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=( e d g e S t i f f e n e r 8 ) ,name='
s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 8 ' )
273
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=( e d g e S t i f f e n e r 9 ) ,name='
s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 9 ' )
274
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=( edgeStiffener10 ) ,name='
s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 1 0 ' )
275
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=( edgeStiffener11 ) ,name='
s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 1 1 ' )
276
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=( edgeStiffener12 ) ,name='
s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 1 2 ' )
277
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=( edgeStiffener13 ) ,name='
s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 1 3 ' )
278
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=( edgeStiffener14 ) ,name='
s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 1 4 ' )
279
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=( edgeStiffener15 ) ,name='
s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 1 5 ' )
280
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=( edgeStiffener16 ) ,name='
s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 1 6 ' )
281
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=( edgeStiffener17 ) ,name='
s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 1 7 ' )
282
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=( edgeStiffener18 ) ,name='
s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 1 8 ' )
283
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=( edgeStiffener19 ) ,name='
s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 1 9 ' )
284
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=( edgeStiffener20 ) ,name='
s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 2 0 ' )
285
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=( edgeStiffener21 ) ,name='
s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 2 1 ' )
286
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=( edgeStiffener22 ) ,name='
s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 2 2 ' )
287
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=( edgeStiffener23 ) ,name='
s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 2 3 ' )
288
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=( edgeStiffener24 ) ,name='
s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 2 4 ' )
289
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=( edgeStiffener25 ) ,name='
s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 2 5 ' )
290
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=( edgeStiffener26 ) ,name='
s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 2 6 ' )
291
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=( edgeStiffener27 ) ,name='
s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 2 7 ' )
292
myPlate . Surface ( side1Edges=( edgeStiffener28 ) ,name='
s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 2 8 ' )
==PAGE:151==
Python - Main.py
41
293
294
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Assembly −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
295
import assembly
296
297
# Making a shortcut .
298
myAssembly = myModel . rootAssembly
299
# Making instances
300
myInstance = myAssembly . Instance (name=' plateInstance ' ,
part=myPlate ,
dependent=ON)
301
302
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Step −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
303
import step
304
305
# Create a perturbation
buckling
step . The maxIterations
are
increased .
306
# The step
i s
created
a f t e r
the
i n i t i a l
step .
307
myModel . BuckleStep (name=' Buckle ' , numEigen=1, previous='
I n i t i a l ' ,
vectors =2, maxIterations =2000,
d e s c r i p t i o n='
Buckle a n a l y s i s . ' )
308
309
310
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Load and BC −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
311
import load
312
313
# Create boundary
conditions .
314
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis1 ' ,
region=myInstance . s e t s
[ ' Boundary plate1 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=
UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
315
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis2 ' ,
region=myInstance . s e t s
[ ' Boundary plate2 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=
UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
316
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis3 ' ,
region=myInstance . s e t s
[ ' Boundary plate3 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=
UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
317
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis4 ' ,
region=myInstance . s e t s
[ ' Boundary plate4 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=
==PAGE:152==
42
Stability
UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
318
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis5 ' ,
region=myInstance . s e t s
[ ' Boundary plate5 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=
UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
319
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis6 ' ,
region=myInstance . s e t s
[ ' Boundary plate6 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=
UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
320
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis7 ' ,
region=myInstance . s e t s
[ ' Boundary plate7 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=
UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
321
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis8 ' ,
region=myInstance . s e t s
[ ' Boundary plate8 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=
UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
322
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis9 ' ,
region=myInstance . s e t s
[ ' Boundary plate9 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=
UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
323
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis10 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate10 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
324
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis11 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate11 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
325
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis12 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate12 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
326
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis13 ' ,
region=myInstance .
==PAGE:153==
Python - Main.py
43
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate13 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
327
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis14 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate14 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
328
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis15 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate15 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
329
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis16 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate16 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=SET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
330
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis17 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate17 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=SET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
331
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis18 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate18 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=SET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
332
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis19 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate19 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=SET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
333
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis20 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate20 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=SET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
334
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis21 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate21 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=SET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
335
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
==PAGE:154==
44
Stability
localCsys=None , name='y−axis22 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate22 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=SET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
336
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis23 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate23 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=SET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
337
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis24 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate24 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=SET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
338
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis25 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate25 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=SET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
339
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis26 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate26 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=SET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
340
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis27 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate27 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=SET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
341
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis28 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate28 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=SET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
342
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis29 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate29 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=SET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
343
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis30 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate30 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=SET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
==PAGE:155==
Python - Main.py
45
344
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis31 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate31 ' ] ,
u1=SET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
345
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis32 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate32 ' ] ,
u1=SET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
346
347
# Create
p l a t e
load
348
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' plateLoad1 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' plateSurface1 ' ] )
349
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' plateLoad2 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' plateSurface2 ' ] )
350
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' plateLoad3 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' plateSurface3 ' ] )
351
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' plateLoad4 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' plateSurface4 ' ] )
352
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' plateLoad5 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' plateSurface5 ' ] )
353
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' plateLoad6 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' plateSurface6 ' ] )
354
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' plateLoad7 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' plateSurface7 ' ] )
355
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' plateLoad8 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' plateSurface8 ' ] )
==PAGE:156==
46
Stability
356
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' plateLoad9 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' plateSurface9 ' ] )
357
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' plateLoad10 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' plateSurface10 ' ] )
358
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' plateLoad11 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' plateSurface11 ' ] )
359
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' plateLoad12 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' plateSurface12 ' ] )
360
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' plateLoad13 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' plateSurface13 ' ] )
361
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' plateLoad14 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' plateSurface14 ' ] )
362
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' plateLoad15 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' plateSurface15 ' ] )
363
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' plateLoad16 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' plateSurface16 ' ] )
364
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' plateLoad17 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' plateSurface17 ' ] )
365
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' plateLoad18 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' plateSurface18 ' ] )
366
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' plateLoad19 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' plateSurface19 ' ] )
==PAGE:157==
Python - Main.py
47
367
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' plateLoad20 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' plateSurface20 ' ] )
368
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' plateLoad21 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' plateSurface21 ' ] )
369
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' plateLoad22 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' plateSurface22 ' ] )
370
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' plateLoad23 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' plateSurface23 ' ] )
371
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' plateLoad24 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' plateSurface24 ' ] )
372
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' plateLoad25 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' plateSurface25 ' ] )
373
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' plateLoad26 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' plateSurface26 ' ] )
374
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' plateLoad27 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' plateSurface27 ' ] )
375
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' plateLoad28 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' plateSurface28 ' ] )
376
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' plateLoad29 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' plateSurface29 ' ] )
377
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' plateLoad30 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' plateSurface30 ' ] )
==PAGE:158==
48
Stability
378
379
# Create
r i b s
load
380
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' stiffenerLoad1 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 1 ' ] )
381
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' stiffenerLoad2 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 2 ' ] )
382
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' stiffenerLoad3 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 3 ' ] )
383
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' stiffenerLoad4 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 4 ' ] )
384
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' stiffenerLoad5 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 5 ' ] )
385
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' stiffenerLoad6 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 6 ' ] )
386
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' stiffenerLoad7 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 7 ' ] )
387
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' stiffenerLoad8 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 8 ' ] )
388
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' stiffenerLoad9 ' ,
region=myInstance .
s u r f a c e s [ ' s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 9 ' ] )
389
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' stiffenerLoad10 ' ,
region=myInstance
. s u r f a c e s [ ' s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 1 0 ' ] )
390
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
==PAGE:159==
Python - Main.py
49
magnitude=P, name=' stiffenerLoad11 ' ,
region=myInstance
. s u r f a c e s [ ' s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 1 1 ' ] )
391
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' stiffenerLoad12 ' ,
region=myInstance
. s u r f a c e s [ ' s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 1 2 ' ] )
392
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' stiffenerLoad13 ' ,
region=myInstance
. s u r f a c e s [ ' s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 1 3 ' ] )
393
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' stiffenerLoad14 ' ,
region=myInstance
. s u r f a c e s [ ' s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 1 4 ' ] )
394
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' stiffenerLoad15 ' ,
region=myInstance
. s u r f a c e s [ ' s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 1 5 ' ] )
395
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' stiffenerLoad16 ' ,
region=myInstance
. s u r f a c e s [ ' s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 1 6 ' ] )
396
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' stiffenerLoad17 ' ,
region=myInstance
. s u r f a c e s [ ' s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 1 7 ' ] )
397
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' stiffenerLoad18 ' ,
region=myInstance
. s u r f a c e s [ ' s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 1 8 ' ] )
398
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' stiffenerLoad19 ' ,
region=myInstance
. s u r f a c e s [ ' s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 1 9 ' ] )
399
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' stiffenerLoad20 ' ,
region=myInstance
. s u r f a c e s [ ' s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 2 0 ' ] )
400
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' stiffenerLoad21 ' ,
region=myInstance
. s u r f a c e s [ ' s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 2 1 ' ] )
401
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
==PAGE:160==
50
Stability
magnitude=P, name=' stiffenerLoad22 ' ,
region=myInstance
. s u r f a c e s [ ' s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 2 2 ' ] )
402
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' stiffenerLoad23 ' ,
region=myInstance
. s u r f a c e s [ ' s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 2 3 ' ] )
403
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' stiffenerLoad24 ' ,
region=myInstance
. s u r f a c e s [ ' s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 2 4 ' ] )
404
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' stiffenerLoad25 ' ,
region=myInstance
. s u r f a c e s [ ' s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 2 5 ' ] )
405
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' stiffenerLoad26 ' ,
region=myInstance
. s u r f a c e s [ ' s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 2 6 ' ] )
406
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' stiffenerLoad27 ' ,
region=myInstance
. s u r f a c e s [ ' s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 2 7 ' ] )
407
myModel . ShellEdgeLoad ( createStepName=' Buckle ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
localCsys=None ,
magnitude=P, name=' stiffenerLoad28 ' ,
region=myInstance
. s u r f a c e s [ ' s t i f f e n e r S u r f a c e 2 8 ' ] )
408
409
410
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Mesh −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
411
import mesh
412
# Assign an element
type
to
the
part .
413
elemType = ElemType( elemCode=STRI65 ,
elemLibrary=STANDARD
)
414
415
#Seed
g l o b a l
416
myPlate . seedPart ( deviationFactor =0.1 , minSizeFactor =0.1 ,
s i z e=L/20)
417
418
# Seed
p l a t e
edges
between
r i b s
419
420
myPlate . seedEdgeByNumber ( constraint=FINER,
edges=(
edgePlate1 ) , number=2)
421
myPlate . seedEdgeByNumber ( constraint=FINER,
edges=(
edgePlate2+edgePlate3+edgePlate4+edgePlate5+edgePlate6
==PAGE:161==
Python - Main.py
51
+edgePlate7+edgePlate8+edgePlate9+edgePlate10+
edgePlate11+edgePlate12+edgePlate13+edgePlate14+
edgePlate17+edgePlate18+edgePlate19+
edgePlate20edgePlate21+edgePlate22+edgePlate23+
edgePlate24+edgePlate25+edgePlate26+edgePlate27+
edgePlate28+edgePlate29 ) , number=4)
422
myPlate . seedEdgeByNumber ( constraint=FINER,
edges=(
edgePlate15 ) , number=6)
423
myPlate . seedEdgeByNumber ( constraint=FINER,
edges=(
edgePlate30 ) , number=6)
424
425
# Seed
v e r t i c a l
edges
of
r i b s
426
myPlate . seedEdgeByNumber ( constraint=FINER,
edges=(
e d g e S t i f f e n e r 1+e d g e S t i f f e n e r 2+e d g e S t i f f e n e r 3+
e d g e S t i f f e n e r 4+e d g e S t i f f e n e r 5+e d g e S t i f f e n e r 6+
e d g e S t i f f e n e r 7+e d g e S t i f f e n e r 8+e d g e S t i f f e n e r 9+
edgeStiffener10+edgeStiffener11+edgeStiffener12+
edgeStiffener13+edgeStiffener14+edgeStiffener15+
edgeStiffener16+edgeStiffener17+edgeStiffener18+
edgeStiffener19+edgeStiffener20+edgeStiffener21+
edgeStiffener22+edgeStiffener23+edgeStiffener24+
edgeStiffener25+edgeStiffener26+edgeStiffener27+
edgeStiffener28 ) ,number=2)
427
428
# Set mesh control
429
myPlate . setMeshControls ( elemShape=TRI , regions=facePlate1+
facePlate2+facePlate3+facePlate4+facePlate5+facePlate6
+facePlate7+facePlate8+facePlate9+facePlate10+
facePlate11+facePlate12+facePlate13+facePlate14+
facePlate15 )
430
myPlate . setMeshControls ( elemShape=TRI , regions=
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 2+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 3+
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 4+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 5+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 6+
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 7+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 8+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 9+
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 0+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 1+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 2+
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 3+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 4 )
431
432
433
# Set
elementtype
434
myPlate . setElementType ( elemTypes=(elemType , ) , regions=
Region ( f a c e s=facePlate1+facePlate2+facePlate3+
facePlate4+facePlate5+facePlate6+facePlate7+facePlate8
+facePlate9+facePlate10+facePlate11+facePlate12+
facePlate13+facePlate14+facePlate15 ) )
==PAGE:162==
52
Stability
435
myPlate . setElementType ( elemTypes=(elemType , ) , regions=
Region ( f a c e s=f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 2+
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 3+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 4+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 5+
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 6+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 7+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 8+
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 9+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 0+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 1+
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 2+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 3+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 4 ) )
436
437
# Generate mesh
438
myPlate . generateMesh ()
439
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Job −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
440
import job
441
442
# Create an analysis
job
for
the model and submit
i t .
443
jobName = ' Buckling '
444
445
myJob = mdb. Job (name=jobName ,
model=' Plate ' , d e s c r i p t i o n='
Buckling ' )
446
447
# Wait for
the
job
to
complete .
448
myJob . submit ()
449
myJob . waitForCompletion ()
450
451
# Make output
452
execfile ( ' Output . py ' )
D.4
Python - Output.py
1
# Imports
2
from part import ∗
3
from material import ∗
4
from se ctio n import ∗
5
from assembly import ∗
6
from step import ∗
7
from i n t e r a c t i o n import ∗
8
from load import ∗
9
from mesh import ∗
10
from optimization import ∗
11
from job import ∗
12
from sketch import ∗
13
from v i s u a l i z a t i o n
import ∗
14
from connectorBehavior import ∗
==PAGE:163==
Python - Output.py
53
15
from odbAccess import ∗
16
17
# Open Odb−f i l e
18
odb = openOdb( path=' Buckling . odb ' )
19
20
# S e l c e t i n g
step
21
STEP = odb . steps . values () [ 0 ]
22
23
# Get the
Eigenvalue
24
EigVal_string=STEP. frames [ 1 ] . d e s c r i p t i o n
25
26
EigVal=EigVal_string [ 2 8 : ]
27
28
odb . c l o s e ()
29
30
print EigVal
31
32
f i l = open( ' Output . txt ' ,mode=' a ' )
# opens a
f i l e
for
writing
access
( appending )
33
f i l . write ( str ( EigVal ) + '    ' + str ( ' { : . 1 6 e} ' . format( tp ) )
+ '    ' + str ( ' { : . 1 6 e} ' . format( ts ) ) + '    ' + str ( '
{ : . 1 6 e} ' . format( hs ) ) + ' \n ' ) # s t r i n g
to
write
in
the
f i l e
34
f i l . c l o s e ()
# c l o s i n g
the
f i l e
again
==PAGE:164==
54
Stability
==PAGE:165==
Appendix E
Fatigue
E.1
MATLAB - Main.m
1
% Optemization program
for
s t a b i l i t y
of a
s t i f f e n e d
p l a t e
2
clear
a l l ;
close
all ;
clc
3
%% Parameters
for
s t i f f e n d e
p l a t e
4
L = 5;
% Total
length
of
the
p l a t e
[m]
5
ws = 0.295;
% Width of
the
s t i f f e n e r
[m]
6
ds = 0.3 05;
% Distance
between
r i b s
[m]
7
db = 0.552−ws /2; % Distance from
l a s t
s t i f f e n e r
to BC [m]
8
w = ds/2+7∗ws+6∗ds+db ;% Total
width
of
the
p l a t e
[m]
9
nribs = 14;
% Number of
r i b s
10
11
% Thickness
of
the
p l a t e
[m]
( i n i t i a l
guess )
12
tp = [ 0 . 0 2 ] ;
13
% Thickness
of
the
s t i f f e n e r s
[m]
( i n i t i a l
guess )
14
ts = [ 0 . 0 0 8 ] ;
15
% Height
of
the
s t i f f e n e r
[m]
( i n i t i a l
guess )
16
hs = [ 0 . 5 ] ;
17
18
E = 210 e9 ;
% Modulus of
e l a s t i c i t y
for
s t e e l
[Pa]
19
20
% Object
function .
21
% x (1)
i s
the
thickness
of
the
plate ,
22
% x (2)
i s
the
thickness
of
the
s t i f f e n e r
23
% and x (3)
i s
the
height
of
the
s t i f f e n e r .
24
V = @(x)L∗w∗x (1)+nribs ∗x (2) ∗x (3) ∗L;
25
==PAGE:166==
56
Fatigue
26
%% Optimization program
27
x0 = [ tp
28
ts
29
hs ] ;
% I n i t i a l
point
for
x
30
A = [ ] ;
% Matrix
for
l i n e a r
i n e q u l i t y
constraints
31
b = [ ] ;
% Vector
for
l i n e a r
i n e q u l i t y
constraints
32
Aeq = [ ] ;
% Matrix
for
l i n e a r
e q u l i t y
constraints
33
beq = [ ] ;
% Vector
for
l i n e a r
e q u l i t y
constraints
34
lb = [ 0 . 0 0 6 , 0 . 0 0 6 , 0 . 0 5 ] ; % Vector
for
lower
bounds
35
ub = [ ] ;
% Vector
for
upper bounds
36
37
% Specifying
the
options
for
the
optimization
function
38
options = optimoptions ( @fmincon , ' DiffMinChange ' ,1 e −5, '
ConstraintTolerance ' ,1 e−5) ;
39
40
re = [ ] ;
41
% Making the
optimization
42
for
i =1:length ( x0 ( 1 , : ) )
43
% I n i t i a l
cross−section
area
[m2 ] :
44
A0 = w∗tp ( i )+nribs ∗ts ( i ) ∗hs ( i ) ;
45
46
P = 17.72∗10^6∗A0/w; % Normal force on the
p l a t e
[N/m
]
47
48
% E s t a b l i s h i n g a nonlinear
constraint
function
49
abaqus = @(x)Aba(x , L,w, db , ws , ds , nribs ,A0,E,P) ;
50
51
% Running the
minimization
algorithm
52
[ x , fval , e x i t f l a g ] = fmincon (V, x0 ( : , i ) ,A, b , Aeq , beq , lb ,
ub , abaqus , options )
53
guess = [ x0 ( : , i ) ' x '
f v a l
e x i t f l a g ] ;
54
re = [ re ; guess ] ;
55
end
56
%% Results
57
fprintf ( ' Thickness  of  the  plate  :  %.4d cm\n ' ,x (1) )
58
fprintf ( ' Thickness  of  the  s t i f f e n e r s  :  %.4d cm\n ' ,x (2) )
59
fprintf ( ' Height of  the  s t i f f n e r :  %.4d cm\n ' ,x (3) )
==PAGE:167==
MATLAB - Aba.m
57
E.2
MATLAB - Aba.m
1
function
[ c , ceq ] = Aba(x , L,w, db , ws , ds ,E, sigma ,P)
2
% A function
that
c a l c u l a t e s
the
t i p
displacement
of a
3
% c a n t i l e v e r beam using ABAQUS.
4
% The function
i s
used
to
find
the
optimal
dimensions
for
5
% a
s t i f f e n e d
p l a t e
with a constrains .
6
%% Make a python
f i l e
with
v a r i a b l e s
7
f i d = fopen ( 'Var . py ' ,
'w ' ) ;
8
fprintf ( fid , 'L = %.16e\n ' ,L) ;
9
fprintf ( fid , 'w = %.16e\n ' ,w) ;
10
fprintf ( fid , 'db = %.16e\n ' ,db) ;
11
fprintf ( fid , 'ws = %.16e\n ' ,ws) ;
12
fprintf ( fid , ' ds = %.16e\n ' , ds ) ;
13
fprintf ( fid , ' tp = %.16e\n ' ,x (1) ) ;
% tp
[m]
14
fprintf ( fid , ' ts  = %.16e\n ' ,x (2) ) ;
% t s
[m]
15
fprintf ( fid , ' hs = %.16e\n ' ,x (3) ) ;
% hs
[m]
16
fprintf ( fid , 'E = %.16e\n ' ,E) ;
17
fprintf ( fid , 'P = %.16e\n ' ,P) ;
18
fclose ( f i d ) ;
19
20
%% E s t a b l i s h
connection
to ABAQUS
21
mo='noGUI ' ; % Running
s c r i p t
without
the Abaqus/CAE GUI
22
% mo=' script ' ; % Running
s c r i p t
with
the Abaqus/CAE GUI
23
24
% Pythonscript run in ABAQUS
25
myscript='=Main . py ' ;
26
27
% Open ABAQUS and running
myscript
28
system ( [ ' abaqus cae  ' ,mo, myscript ] ) ; % Windows system
29
30
% For Unix system
31
% unix ( [ ' abaqus cae
' ,mo, myscript ] ) ;
%Unix system
32
33
% Load output from ABAQUS
34
load Output . txt
35
36
% Get s11
37
S11 = Output (end , end) ;
38
39
% Constrains
40
c = sigma−S11 ;
41
ceq = [ ] ;
==PAGE:168==
58
Fatigue
42
end
E.3
Python - Main.py
1
# Imports
2
from part import ∗
3
from material import ∗
4
from se ctio n import ∗
5
from assembly import ∗
6
from step import ∗
7
from i n t e r a c t i o n import ∗
8
from load import ∗
9
from mesh import ∗
10
from optimization import ∗
11
from job import ∗
12
from sketch import ∗
13
from v i s u a l i z a t i o n
import ∗
14
from connectorBehavior import ∗
15
from odbAccess import ∗
16
17
# Load
v a r i a b l e s
18
execfile ( 'Var . py ' )
19
20
# Change model name
21
mdb. models . changeKey (fromName=' Model−1 ' , toName=' Plate ' )
22
myModel = mdb. models [ ' Plate ' ]
23
24
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Part −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
25
import part
26
27
# Creating
the
structure
as a part
28
# Create a sketch
for
the
base
feature .
29
mySketch1 = myModel . ConstrainedSketch (name=' Plate ' ,
sheetSize =10)
30
31
# Create
the
horizonal
p l a t e
32
mySketch1 . Line ( point1 =(0.0 ,0.0) ,
point2=(w, 0 . 0 ) )
33
34
# Create
the
v e r t i c a l
r i b s
35
mySketch1 . Line ( point1=(ds /2 ,0.0) ,
point2=(ds/2,−hs ) )
==PAGE:169==
Python - Main.py
59
36
mySketch1 . Line ( point1=(ds/2+ws , 0 . 0 ) ,
point2=(ds/2+ws,−hs )
)
37
mySketch1 . Line ( point1=(ds/2+ws+ds , 0 . 0 ) ,
point2=(ds/2+ws+
ds ,−hs ) )
38
mySketch1 . Line ( point1=(ds/2+2∗ws+ds , 0 . 0 ) ,
point2=(ds/2+2∗
ws+ds ,−hs ) )
39
mySketch1 . Line ( point1=(ds/2+2∗ws+2∗ds , 0 . 0 ) ,
point2=(ds
/2+2∗ws+2∗ds ,−hs ) )
40
mySketch1 . Line ( point1=(ds/2+3∗ws+2∗ds , 0 . 0 ) ,
point2=(ds
/2+3∗ws+2∗ds ,−hs ) )
41
mySketch1 . Line ( point1=(ds/2+3∗ws+3∗ds , 0 . 0 ) ,
point2=(ds
/2+3∗ws+3∗ds ,−hs ) )
42
mySketch1 . Line ( point1=(ds/2+4∗ws+3∗ds , 0 . 0 ) ,
point2=(ds
/2+4∗ws+3∗ds ,−hs ) )
43
mySketch1 . Line ( point1=(ds/2+4∗ws+4∗ds , 0 . 0 ) ,
point2=(ds
/2+4∗ws+4∗ds ,−hs ) )
44
mySketch1 . Line ( point1=(ds/2+5∗ws+4∗ds , 0 . 0 ) ,
point2=(ds
/2+5∗ws+4∗ds ,−hs ) )
45
mySketch1 . Line ( point1=(ds/2+5∗ws+5∗ds , 0 . 0 ) ,
point2=(ds
/2+5∗ws+5∗ds ,−hs ) )
46
mySketch1 . Line ( point1=(ds/2+6∗ws+5∗ds , 0 . 0 ) ,
point2=(ds
/2+6∗ws+5∗ds ,−hs ) )
47
mySketch1 . Line ( point1=(ds/2+6∗ws+6∗ds , 0 . 0 ) ,
point2=(ds
/2+6∗ws+6∗ds ,−hs ) )
48
mySketch1 . Line ( point1=(ds/2+7∗ws+6∗ds , 0 . 0 ) ,
point2=(ds
/2+7∗ws+6∗ds ,−hs ) )
49
50
# Create a the
part
as a three −dimensional ,
deformable
part .
51
myPlate = myModel . Part (name=' Plate ' ,
dimensionality=
THREE_D,
type=DEFORMABLE_BODY)
52
53
# Create
the
part ' s
base
feature
by
extruding
the
sketch
through a distance L
54
myPlate . BaseShellExtrude ( depth=L,
sketch=mySketch1 )
55
56
# Creating
the
truck
as a part
57
# Create a sketch
for
the
base
feature .
58
mySketch2 = myModel . ConstrainedSketch (name=' Truck ' ,
sheetSize =5)
59
60
mySketch2 . rectangle ( point1=(w/2 −1−0.177, L/2 −1.75 −0.227) ,
point2=(w/2−1+0.177, L/2 −1.75+0.227) )
==PAGE:170==
60
Fatigue
61
mySketch2 . rectangle ( point1=(w/2+1 −0.177, L/2 −1.75 −0.227) ,
point2=(w/2+1+0.177 , L/2 −1.75+0.227) )
62
mySketch2 . rectangle ( point1=(w/2 −0.90 −0.397 , L
/2+1.75 −0.227) ,
point2=(w/2 −0.90+0.397 , L
/2+1.75+0.227) )
63
mySketch2 . rectangle ( point1=(w/2+0.90 −0.397 , L
/2+1.75 −0.227) ,
point2=(w/2+0.90+0.397 , L
/2+1.75+0.227) )
64
65
# Create a the
part
as a three −dimensional ,
deformable
part .
66
myTruck = myModel . Part (name=' Truck ' , dimensionality=
THREE_D,
type=DEFORMABLE_BODY)
67
68
myTruck . BaseShell ( sketch=mySketch2 )
69
70
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Material −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
71
import material
72
73
# Create a
s t e e l
material .
74
mySteel = myModel . Material (name=' Steel ' )
75
76
# Create
the
e l a s t i c
pr op er ti es :
youngsModulus
i s
210.E9
and poissonsRatio
i s
0.3
77
e l a s t i c P r o p e r t i e s 1 = (E,
0.0)
78
mySteel . E l a s t i c ( table=( e l a s t i c P r o p e r t i e s 1 ,
)
)
79
80
# Create a truck
material .
81
myTruckm = myModel . Material (name=' Truck ' )
82
83
# Create
the
e l a s t i c
pr op er ti es :
youngsModulus
i s
1.E3
and poissonsRatio
i s
0.3
84
e l a s t i c P r o p e r t i e s 2 = (1 e3 ,
0.3)
85
myTruckm . E l a s t i c ( table=( e l a s t i c P r o p e r t i e s 2 ,
)
)
86
87
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Section −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
88
# Create a section
for
the
p l a t e .
Material
i s
s p e c i f i e d .
89
myProfile1 = myModel . HomogeneousShellSection ( i d e a l i z a t i o n
=NO_IDEALIZATION,
90
integrationRule=SIMPSON,
material=' Steel ' , name='
Plate ' , numIntPts=5,
91
poissonDefinition=DEFAULT,
preIntegrate=OFF,
temperature=GRADIENT,
==PAGE:171==
Python - Main.py
61
92
thickness=tp ,
thicknessField=' ' ,
thicknessModulus=
None ,
thicknessType=
93
UNIFORM,
useDensity=OFF)
94
95
# Create a section
for
the
r i b s .
Material
i s
s p e c i f i e d .
96
myProfile2 = myModel . HomogeneousShellSection ( i d e a l i z a t i o n
=NO_IDEALIZATION,
97
integrationRule=SIMPSON,
material=' Steel ' , name='
S t i f f e n e r ' , numIntPts=5,
98
poissonDefinition=DEFAULT,
preIntegrate=OFF,
temperature=GRADIENT,
99
thickness=ts ,
thicknessField=' ' ,
thicknessModulus=
None ,
thicknessType=
100
UNIFORM,
useDensity=OFF)
101
102
# Create a section
for
the
truck .
Material
i s
s p e c i f i e d .
103
myProfile3 = myModel . HomogeneousShellSection ( i d e a l i z a t i o n
=NO_IDEALIZATION,
104
integrationRule=SIMPSON,
material=' Truck ' , name='
Truck ' , numIntPts=5,
105
poissonDefinition=DEFAULT,
preIntegrate=OFF,
temperature=GRADIENT,
106
thickness=ts ,
thicknessField=' ' ,
thicknessModulus=
None ,
thicknessType=
107
UNIFORM,
useDensity=OFF)
108
109
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Section
Assignment −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
110
import section
111
112
# Finding each
face
of
the
p l a t e
for
assigning
section .
113
facePlate1 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds /4 ,0.0 ,0.0) ,) )
114
facePlate2 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+ws /2 ,0.0 ,0.0) ,) )
115
facePlate3 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+ws+ds /2 ,0.0 ,0.0)
,) )
116
facePlate4 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+3∗ws/2+ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
117
facePlate5 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+2∗ws+3∗ds
/ 2 , 0 . 0 ,0.0) ,) )
118
facePlate6 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+5∗ws/2+2∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
119
facePlate7 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+3∗ws+5∗ds
/ 2 , 0 . 0 ,0.0) ,) )
120
facePlate8 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+7∗ws/2+3∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
==PAGE:172==
62
Fatigue
121
facePlate9 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+4∗ws+7∗ds
/ 2 , 0 . 0 , 0.0) ,) )
122
facePlate10 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+9∗ws/2+4∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
123
facePlate11 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+5∗ws+9∗ds
/ 2 , 0 . 0 , 0.0) ,) )
124
facePlate12 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+11∗ws/2+5∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
125
facePlate13 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+6∗ws+11∗ds
/ 2 , 0 . 0 , 0.0) ,) )
126
facePlate14 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+13∗ws/2+6∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
127
facePlate15 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+7∗ws+6∗ds+db
/ 2 , 0 . 0 , 0.0) ,) )
128
129
# Assign
section
to
the
p l a t e
faces
130
mySectionP = myPlate . SectionAssignment ( o f f s e t =0.0 ,
o f f s e t F i e l d=' ' ,
offsetType=BOTTOM_SURFACE,
region=
Region ( f a c e s=facePlate1+facePlate2+facePlate3+
facePlate4+facePlate5+facePlate6+facePlate7+facePlate8
+facePlate9+facePlate10+facePlate11+facePlate12+
facePlate13+facePlate14+facePlate15 ) , sectionName='
Plate ' ,
thicknessAssignment=FROM_SECTION)
131
132
# Finding each
face
of
the
r i b s
for
assigning
section .
133
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds /2 ,0.0 ,0.0) ,) )
134
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 2 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+ws , 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 )
,) )
135
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 3 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+ws+ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
136
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 4 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+2∗ws+ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
137
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 5 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+2∗ws+2∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
138
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 6 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+3∗ws+2∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
139
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 7 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+3∗ws+3∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
140
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 8 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+4∗ws+3∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
141
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 9 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+4∗ws+4∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
142
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 0 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+5∗ws+4∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
==PAGE:173==
Python - Main.py
63
143
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 1 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+5∗ws+5∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
144
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 2 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+6∗ws+5∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
145
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 3 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+6∗ws+6∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
146
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 4 = myPlate . f a c e s . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+7∗ws+6∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
147
148
# Assign
section
to
the
r i b
faces
149
mySectionS = myPlate . SectionAssignment ( o f f s e t =0.0 ,
o f f s e t F i e l d=' ' ,
offsetType=MIDDLE_SURFACE,
region=
Region ( f a c e s=f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 2+
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 3+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 4+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 5+
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 6+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 7+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 8+
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 9+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 0+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 1+
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 2+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 3+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 4 ) ,
sectionName=' S t i f f e n e r ' ,
thicknessAssignment=
FROM_SECTION)
150
151
# Finding each
face
of
the
truck
for
assigning
section .
152
faceTruck1 = myTruck . f a c e s . findAt ( ( (w/2 −1+0.177, L
/2 −1.75+0.227 ,0.0) ,) )
153
faceTruck2 = myTruck . f a c e s . findAt ( ( (w/2+1+0.177 , L
/2 −1.75+0.227 ,0.0) ,) )
154
faceTruck3 = myTruck . f a c e s . findAt ( ( (w/2 −0.90+0.397 , L
/2+1.75+0.227 ,0.0) ,) )
155
faceTruck4 = myTruck . f a c e s . findAt ( ( (w/2+0.90+0.397 , L
/2+1.75+0.227 ,0.0) ,) )
156
157
# Assign
section
to
the
trck
faces
158
mySectionT = myTruck . SectionAssignment ( o f f s e t =0.0 ,
o f f s e t F i e l d=' ' ,
offsetType=BOTTOM_SURFACE,
region=
Region ( f a c e s=faceTruck1+faceTruck2+faceTruck3+
faceTruck4 ) , sectionName=' Truck ' ,
thicknessAssignment=
FROM_SECTION)
159
160
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Surfaces and Sets −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
161
#Finding
edges
for
Sets and surfaces
for BC and Load
162
163
## Edges
of
the
p l a t e
164
## Edges at
z=0
165
edgePlate1 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds /4 ,0.0 ,0.0) ,) )
166
edgePlate2 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+ws /2 ,0.0 ,0.0) ,) )
==PAGE:174==
64
Fatigue
167
edgePlate3 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+ws+ds /2 ,0.0 ,0.0)
,) )
168
edgePlate4 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+3∗ws/2+ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
169
edgePlate5 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+2∗ws+3∗ds
/ 2 , 0 . 0 , 0.0) ,) )
170
edgePlate6 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+5∗ws/2+2∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
171
edgePlate7 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+3∗ws+5∗ds
/ 2 , 0 . 0 , 0.0) ,) )
172
edgePlate8 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+7∗ws/2+3∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
173
edgePlate9 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+4∗ws+7∗ds
/ 2 , 0 . 0 , 0.0) ,) )
174
edgePlate10 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+9∗ws/2+4∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
175
edgePlate11 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+5∗ws+9∗ds
/ 2 , 0 . 0 , 0.0) ,) )
176
edgePlate12 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+11∗ws/2+5∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
177
edgePlate13 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+6∗ws+11∗ds
/ 2 , 0 . 0 , 0.0) ,) )
178
edgePlate14 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+13∗ws/2+6∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
179
edgePlate15 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+7∗ws+6∗ds+db
/ 2 , 0 . 0 , 0.0) ,) )
180
181
## Edges at
z=L
182
edgePlate16 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds /4 ,0.0 ,L) ,) )
183
edgePlate17 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+ws /2 ,0.0 ,L) ,) )
184
edgePlate18 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+ws+ds /2 ,0.0 ,L)
,) )
185
edgePlate19 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+3∗ws/2+ds , 0 . 0 , L
) ,) )
186
edgePlate20 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+2∗ws+3∗ds
/2 ,0.0 ,L) ,) )
187
edgePlate21 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+5∗ws/2+2∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
188
edgePlate22 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+3∗ws+5∗ds
/2 ,0.0 ,L) ,) )
189
edgePlate23 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+7∗ws/2+3∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
190
edgePlate24 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+4∗ws+7∗ds
/2 ,0.0 ,L) ,) )
==PAGE:175==
Python - Main.py
65
191
edgePlate25 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+9∗ws/2+4∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
192
edgePlate26 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+5∗ws+9∗ds
/2 ,0.0 ,L) ,) )
193
edgePlate27 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+11∗ws/2+5∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
194
edgePlate28 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+6∗ws+11∗ds
/2 ,0.0 ,L) ,) )
195
edgePlate29 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+13∗ws/2+6∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
196
edgePlate30 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+7∗ws+6∗ds+db
/2 ,0.0 ,L) ,) )
197
198
199
##Plate
edge
at x=0
200
edgePlate31=myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 , L/2) ,) )
201
202
##Plate
edge
at x=w
203
edgePlate32=myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( (w, 0 . 0 , L/2) ,) )
204
205
206
## Edges
of
the
s t i f f e n e r s
207
## Edges at
z=0
208
e d g e S t i f f e n e r 1 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds /2 ,0.0 ,0.0) ,) )
209
e d g e S t i f f e n e r 2 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+ws , 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 )
,) )
210
e d g e S t i f f e n e r 3 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+ws+ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
211
e d g e S t i f f e n e r 4 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+2∗ws+ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
212
e d g e S t i f f e n e r 5 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+2∗ws+2∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
213
e d g e S t i f f e n e r 6 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+3∗ws+2∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
214
e d g e S t i f f e n e r 7 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+3∗ws+3∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
215
e d g e S t i f f e n e r 8 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+4∗ws+3∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
216
e d g e S t i f f e n e r 9 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+4∗ws+4∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
217
edgeSt iffener10 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+5∗ws+4∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
218
edgeSt iffener11 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+5∗ws+5∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
==PAGE:176==
66
Fatigue
219
edgeSt iffener12 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+6∗ws+5∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
220
edgeSt iffener13 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+6∗ws+6∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
221
edgeSt iffener14 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+7∗ws+6∗ds
, 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 ) ,) )
222
223
## Edges at
z=L
224
edgeSt iffener15 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds /2 ,0.0 ,L) ,) )
225
edgeSt iffener16 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+ws , 0 . 0 , L) ,)
)
226
edgeSt iffener17 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+ws+ds , 0 . 0 , L
) ,) )
227
edgeSt iffener18 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+2∗ws+ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
228
edgeSt iffener19 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+2∗ws+2∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
229
edgeSt iffener20 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+3∗ws+2∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
230
edgeSt iffener21 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+3∗ws+3∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
231
edgeSt iffener22 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+4∗ws+3∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
232
edgeSt iffener23 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+4∗ws+4∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
233
edgeSt iffener24 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+5∗ws+4∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
234
edgeSt iffener25 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+5∗ws+5∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
235
edgeSt iffener26 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+6∗ws+5∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
236
edgeSt iffener27 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+6∗ws+6∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
237
edgeSt iffener28 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+7∗ws+6∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L) ,) )
238
239
# Top edges
to
define
surface
240
t o p S t i f f e n e r 1 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds /2 ,0.0 ,L/2) ,) )
241
t o p S t i f f e n e r 2 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+ws , 0 . 0 , L/2) ,)
)
242
t o p S t i f f e n e r 3 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+ws+ds , 0 . 0 , L
/2) ,) )
243
t o p S t i f f e n e r 4 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+2∗ws+ds , 0 . 0 , L
/2) ,) )
==PAGE:177==
Python - Main.py
67
244
t o p S t i f f e n e r 5 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+2∗ws+2∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L/2) ,) )
245
t o p S t i f f e n e r 6 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+3∗ws+2∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L/2) ,) )
246
t o p S t i f f e n e r 7 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+3∗ws+3∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L/2) ,) )
247
t o p S t i f f e n e r 8 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+4∗ws+3∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L/2) ,) )
248
t o p S t i f f e n e r 9 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+4∗ws+4∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L/2) ,) )
249
t o p S t i f f e n e r 1 0 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+5∗ws+4∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L/2) ,) )
250
t o p S t i f f e n e r 1 1 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+5∗ws+5∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L/2) ,) )
251
t o p S t i f f e n e r 1 2 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+6∗ws+5∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L/2) ,) )
252
t o p S t i f f e n e r 1 3 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+6∗ws+6∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L/2) ,) )
253
t o p S t i f f e n e r 1 4 = myPlate . edges . findAt ( ( ( ds/2+7∗ws+6∗ds
, 0 . 0 , L/2) ,) )
254
255
## Truck edges
256
edgeTruck1 = myTruck . edges . findAt ( ( (w/2−1,L
/2 −1.75 −0.227 ,0.0) ,) )
257
edgeTruck2 = myTruck . edges . findAt ( ( (w/2−1,L
/2 −1.75+0.227 ,0.0) ,) )
258
edgeTruck3 = myTruck . edges . findAt ( ( (w/2 −1−0.177,L
/2 −1.75 ,0.0) ,) )
259
edgeTruck4 = myTruck . edges . findAt ( ( (w/2 −1+0.177,L
/2 −1.75 ,0.0) ,) )
260
261
edgeTruck5 = myTruck . edges . findAt ( ( (w/2+1,L
/2 −1.75 −0.227 ,0.0) ,) )
262
edgeTruck6 = myTruck . edges . findAt ( ( (w/2+1,L
/2 −1.75+0.227 ,0.0) ,) )
263
edgeTruck7 = myTruck . edges . findAt ( ( (w/2+1 −0.177,L
/2 −1.75 ,0.0) ,) )
264
edgeTruck8 = myTruck . edges . findAt ( ( (w/2+1+0.177 ,L
/2 −1.75 ,0.0) ,) )
265
266
edgeTruck9 = myTruck . edges . findAt ( ( (w/2 −0.90 ,L
/2+1.75 −0.227 ,0.0) ,) )
267
edgeTruck10 = myTruck . edges . findAt ( ( (w/2 −0.90 ,L
/2+1.75+0.227 ,0.0) ,) )
==PAGE:178==
68
Fatigue
268
edgeTruck11 = myTruck . edges . findAt ( ( (w/2 −0.90 −0.397 ,L
/2+1.75 ,0.0) ,) )
269
edgeTruck12 = myTruck . edges . findAt ( ( (w/2 −0.90+0.397 ,L
/2+1.75 ,0.0) ,) )
270
271
edgeTruck13 = myTruck . edges . findAt ( ( (w/2+0.90 ,L
/2+1.75 −0.227 ,0.0) ,) )
272
edgeTruck14 = myTruck . edges . findAt ( ( (w/2+0.90 ,L
/2+1.75+0.227 ,0.0) ,) )
273
edgeTruck15 = myTruck . edges . findAt ( ( (w/2+0.90 −0.397 ,L
/2+1.75 ,0.0) ,) )
274
edgeTruck16 = myTruck . edges . findAt ( ( (w/2+0.90+0.397 ,L
/2+1.75 ,0.0) ,) )
275
276
##Creating
Sets
for BC
277
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate1 ) ,name=' Boundary plate1 ' )
278
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate2 ) ,name=' Boundary plate2 ' )
279
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate3 ) ,name=' Boundary plate3 ' )
280
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate4 ) ,name=' Boundary plate4 ' )
281
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate5 ) ,name=' Boundary plate5 ' )
282
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate6 ) ,name=' Boundary plate6 ' )
283
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate7 ) ,name=' Boundary plate7 ' )
284
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate8 ) ,name=' Boundary plate8 ' )
285
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate9 ) ,name=' Boundary plate9 ' )
286
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate10 ) ,name=' Boundary plate10 ' )
287
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate11 ) ,name=' Boundary plate11 ' )
288
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate12 ) ,name=' Boundary plate12 ' )
289
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate13 ) ,name=' Boundary plate13 ' )
290
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate14 ) ,name=' Boundary plate14 ' )
291
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate15 ) ,name=' Boundary plate15 ' )
292
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate16 ) ,name=' Boundary plate16 ' )
293
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate17 ) ,name=' Boundary plate17 ' )
294
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate18 ) ,name=' Boundary plate18 ' )
295
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate19 ) ,name=' Boundary plate19 ' )
296
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate20 ) ,name=' Boundary plate20 ' )
297
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate21 ) ,name=' Boundary plate21 ' )
298
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate22 ) ,name=' Boundary plate22 ' )
299
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate23 ) ,name=' Boundary plate23 ' )
300
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate24 ) ,name=' Boundary plate24 ' )
301
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate25 ) ,name=' Boundary plate25 ' )
302
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate26 ) ,name=' Boundary plate26 ' )
303
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate27 ) ,name=' Boundary plate27 ' )
304
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate28 ) ,name=' Boundary plate28 ' )
305
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate29 ) ,name=' Boundary plate29 ' )
==PAGE:179==
Python - Main.py
69
306
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate30 ) ,name=' Boundary plate30 ' )
307
308
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate31 ) ,name=' Boundary plate31 ' )
309
myPlate . Set ( edges=(edgePlate32 ) ,name=' Boundary plate32 ' )
310
311
#Creating
Surfaces
for Load
312
myPlate . Surface ( side1Faces=(facePlate1+facePlate2+
facePlate3+facePlate4+facePlate5+facePlate6+facePlate7
+facePlate8+facePlate9+facePlate10+facePlate11+
facePlate12+facePlate13+facePlate14+facePlate15 ) ,name=
' SurfPlate1 ' )
313
314
myPlate . Surface ( side2Faces=(facePlate1+facePlate2+
facePlate3+facePlate4+facePlate5+facePlate6+facePlate7
+facePlate8+facePlate9+facePlate10+facePlate11+
facePlate12+facePlate13+facePlate14+facePlate15 ) ,name=
' SurfPlate2 ' )
315
316
myTruck . Surface ( side2Faces=(faceTruck1+faceTruck2 ) ,name='
Front ' )
317
myTruck . Surface ( side2Faces=(faceTruck3+faceTruck4 ) ,name='
Back ' )
318
319
myTruck . Surface ( side2Faces=(faceTruck1+faceTruck2+
faceTruck3+faceTruck4 ) ,name=' Truck ' )
320
321
322
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Assembly −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
323
import assembly
324
325
# Making a shortcut .
326
myAssembly = myModel . rootAssembly
327
# Making instances
328
myInstance1 = myAssembly . Instance (name=' plateInstance ' ,
part=myPlate ,
dependent=ON)
329
myInstance2 = myAssembly . Instance (name=' truckInstance ' ,
part=myTruck ,
dependent=ON)
330
331
# Rotate
truck
to
be
h o r i z o n t a l
332
myAssembly . rotate ( angle =90.0 ,
axisDirection =(1.0 ,
0.0 ,
0.0) ,
axisPoint =(0.0 ,
0.0 ,
0.0) ,
ins tanceL ist =( '
truckInstance ' ,
) )
333
334
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Step −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
==PAGE:180==
70
Fatigue
335
import step
336
337
# Create a step . The time
period
of
the
s t a t i c
step
i s
1.0 , and the
i n i t i a l
incrementation
i s
0 . 1 ;
338
# the
step
i s
created
a f t e r
the
i n i t i a l
step .
339
myModel . StaticStep (name=' stepLoad ' ,
previous=' I n i t i a l ' ,
timePeriod =1.0 ,
i n i t i a l I n c =0.1 ,
d e s c r i p t i o n=' Static  
a n a l y s i s  of  plade  f or  f a t i g u e . ' )
340
341
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Connections −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
342
# Connecting
the
truck and
p l a t e
togehter
343
myModel . Tie ( adjust=ON,
master=myInstance1 . s u r f a c e s [ '
SurfPlate1 ' ] , name=' Constraint −1 ' ,
positionToleranceMethod=COMPUTED,
slave=myInstance2 .
s u r f a c e s [ ' Truck ' ] ,
thickness=OFF,
tieRotations=ON)
344
345
346
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Load and BC −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
347
import load
348
349
# Create a boundary
condition
that
encastres
one end of
the beam .
350
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis1 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate1 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
351
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis2 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate2 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
352
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis3 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate3 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
353
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis4 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate4 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
354
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
==PAGE:181==
Python - Main.py
71
localCsys=None , name='y−axis5 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate5 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
355
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis6 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate6 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
356
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis7 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate7 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
357
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis8 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate8 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
358
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis9 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate9 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
359
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis10 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate10 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
360
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis11 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate11 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
361
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis12 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate12 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
362
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis13 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate13 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
==PAGE:182==
72
Fatigue
363
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis14 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate14 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
364
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis15 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate15 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
365
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis16 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate16 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=SET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
366
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis17 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate17 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=SET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
367
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis18 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate18 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=SET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
368
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis19 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate19 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=SET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
369
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis20 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate20 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=SET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
370
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis21 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate21 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=SET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
371
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis22 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate22 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=SET,
==PAGE:183==
Python - Main.py
73
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
372
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis23 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate23 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=SET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
373
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis24 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate24 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=SET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
374
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis25 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate25 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=SET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
375
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis26 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate26 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=SET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
376
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis27 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate27 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=SET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
377
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis28 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate28 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=SET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
378
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis29 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate29 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=SET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
379
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis30 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate30 ' ] ,
u1=UNSET,
u2=SET,
u3=SET,
ur1=UNSET,
ur2=UNSET,
ur3=UNSET)
380
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis31 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
==PAGE:184==
74
Fatigue
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate31 ' ] ,
u1=SET,
u2=UNSET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=SET,
ur2=SET,
ur3=UNSET)
381
myModel . DisplacementBC ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
I n i t i a l ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
fieldName=' ' ,
localCsys=None , name='y−axis32 ' ,
region=myInstance1 .
s e t s [ ' Boundary plate32 ' ] ,
u1=SET,
u2=UNSET,
u3=UNSET,
ur1=SET,
ur2=SET,
ur3=UNSET)
382
383
#Create
pressure
load from
trucks
384
myModel . Pressure ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
stepLoad ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
magnitude=P∗7/10 , name=' truckLoad1 ' ,
region=
myInstance2 . s u r f a c e s [ ' Front ' ] )
385
myModel . Pressure ( amplitude=UNSET,
createStepName='
stepLoad ' ,
distributionType=UNIFORM,
f i e l d=' ' ,
magnitude=P, name=' truckLoad2 ' ,
region=myInstance2 .
s u r f a c e s [ ' Back ' ] )
386
387
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Mesh −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
388
import mesh
389
# Assign an element
type
to
the
part .
390
elemType = ElemType( elemCode=STRI65 ,
elemLibrary=STANDARD
)
391
392
#Seed
g l o b a l
393
myPlate . seedPart ( deviationFactor=tp , minSizeFactor=tp ,
s i z e=L/100)
394
395
#seed
edges
396
myPlate . seedEdgeByNumber ( constraint=FINER,
edges=(
e d g e S t i f f e n e r 1+e d g e S t i f f e n e r 2+e d g e S t i f f e n e r 3+
e d g e S t i f f e n e r 4+e d g e S t i f f e n e r 5+e d g e S t i f f e n e r 6+
e d g e S t i f f e n e r 7+e d g e S t i f f e n e r 8+e d g e S t i f f e n e r 9+
edgeSti ffener10+edgeStiffener11+edgeStiffener12+
edgeSti ffener13+edgeStiffener14+edgeStiffener15+
edgeSti ffener16+edgeStiffener17+edgeStiffener18+
edgeSti ffener19+edgeStiffener20+edgeStiffener21+
edgeSti ffener22+edgeStiffener23+edgeStiffener24+
edgeSti ffener25+edgeStiffener26+edgeStiffener27+
edgeSti ffener28 ) , number=6)
397
398
#s et mesh control
399
myPlate . setMeshControls ( elemShape=TRI , regions=facePlate1+
facePlate2+facePlate3+facePlate4+facePlate5+facePlate6
==PAGE:185==
Python - Main.py
75
+facePlate7+facePlate8+facePlate9+facePlate10+
facePlate11+facePlate12+facePlate13+facePlate14+
facePlate15 )
400
myPlate . setMeshControls ( elemShape=TRI , regions=
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 2+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 3+
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 4+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 5+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 6+
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 7+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 8+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 9+
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 0+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 1+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 2+
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 3+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 4 )
401
402
# Set
elementtype
403
myPlate . setElementType ( elemTypes=(elemType , ) , regions=
Region ( f a c e s=facePlate1+facePlate2+facePlate3+
facePlate4+facePlate5+facePlate6+facePlate7+facePlate8
+facePlate9+facePlate10+facePlate11+facePlate12+
facePlate13+facePlate14+facePlate15 ) )
404
myPlate . setElementType ( elemTypes=(elemType , ) , regions=
Region ( f a c e s=f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 2+
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 3+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 4+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 5+
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 6+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 7+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 8+
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 9+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 0+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 1+
f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 2+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 3+f a c e S t i f f e n e r 1 4 ) )
405
406
##Generate mesh
407
myPlate . generateMesh ()
408
409
# Mesh trucks
410
myTruck . seedEdgeByNumber ( constraint=FINER,
edges=(
edgeTruck1 ) , number=6)
411
myTruck . seedEdgeByNumber ( constraint=FINER,
edges=(
edgeTruck2 ) , number=6)
412
myTruck . seedEdgeByNumber ( constraint=FINER,
edges=(
edgeTruck3 ) , number=8)
413
myTruck . seedEdgeByNumber ( constraint=FINER,
edges=(
edgeTruck4 ) , number=8)
414
myTruck . seedEdgeByNumber ( constraint=FINER,
edges=(
edgeTruck5 ) , number=6)
415
myTruck . seedEdgeByNumber ( constraint=FINER,
edges=(
edgeTruck6 ) , number=6)
416
myTruck . seedEdgeByNumber ( constraint=FINER,
edges=(
edgeTruck7 ) , number=8)
417
myTruck . seedEdgeByNumber ( constraint=FINER,
edges=(
edgeTruck8 ) , number=8)
==PAGE:186==
76
Fatigue
418
myTruck . seedEdgeByNumber ( constraint=FINER,
edges=(
edgeTruck9 ) , number=12)
419
myTruck . seedEdgeByNumber ( constraint=FINER,
edges=(
edgeTruck10 ) , number=12)
420
myTruck . seedEdgeByNumber ( constraint=FINER,
edges=(
edgeTruck11 ) , number=8)
421
myTruck . seedEdgeByNumber ( constraint=FINER,
edges=(
edgeTruck12 ) , number=8)
422
myTruck . seedEdgeByNumber ( constraint=FINER,
edges=(
edgeTruck13 ) , number=12)
423
myTruck . seedEdgeByNumber ( constraint=FINER,
edges=(
edgeTruck14 ) , number=12)
424
myTruck . seedEdgeByNumber ( constraint=FINER,
edges=(
edgeTruck15 ) , number=8)
425
myTruck . seedEdgeByNumber ( constraint=FINER,
edges=(
edgeTruck16 ) , number=8)
426
427
# Set mesh control
428
myTruck . setMeshControls ( elemShape=TRI , regions=faceTruck1+
faceTruck2+faceTruck3+faceTruck4 )
429
430
# Set
elementtype
431
myTruck . setElementType ( elemTypes=(elemType , ) , regions=
Region ( f a c e s=faceTruck1+faceTruck2+faceTruck3+
faceTruck4 ) )
432
433
# Generate mesh
434
myTruck . generateMesh ()
435
436
437
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Job −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
438
import job
439
440
# Create an analysis
job
for
the model and submit
i t .
441
jobName = ' Buckling '
442
443
myJob = mdb. Job (name=jobName ,
model=' Plate ' , d e s c r i p t i o n='
Buckling ' )
444
445
# Wait for
the
job
to
complete .
446
myJob . submit ()
447
myJob . waitForCompletion ()
448
==PAGE:187==
Python - Output.py
77
449
f i l = open( ' Output . txt ' ,mode=' a ' )
# opens a
f i l e
for
writing
access
( appending )
450
f i l . write ( str ( ' { : . 1 6 e} ' . format( tp ) )
+ '    ' + str ( ' { : . 1 6
e} ' . format( ts ) ) + '    ' + str ( ' { : . 1 6 e} ' . format( hs ) ) +
'    ' ) # s t r i n g
to
write
in
the
f i l e
451
f i l . c l o s e ()
# c l o s i n g
the
f i l e
again
452
453
# Make output
454
execfile ( ' Output . py ' )
E.4
Python - Output.py
1
# Imports
2
from abaqus import ∗
3
from abaqusConstants import ∗
4
import __main__
5
import section
6
import regionToolset
7
import displayGroupMdbToolset as dgm
8
import part
9
import material
10
import assembly
11
import step
12
import i n t e r a c t i o n
13
import load
14
import mesh
15
import optimization
16
import job
17
import sketch
18
import v i s u a l i z a t i o n
19
import xyPlot
20
import displayGroupOdbToolset as dgo
21
import connectorBehavior
22
23
# Open the
odb and the
the
s t r e s s max. Pricipal
and S11
from viewport
24
a = mdb. models [ ' Plate ' ] . rootAssembly
25
s e s s i o n . viewports [ ' Viewport :  1 ' ] . setValues (
displayedObject=a )
26
o3 = s e s s i o n . openOdb(name=' Buckling . odb ' )
==PAGE:188==
78
Fatigue
27
s e s s i o n . viewports [ ' Viewport :  1 ' ] . setValues (
displayedObject=o3 )
28
s e s s i o n . mdbData . summary ()
29
s e s s i o n . viewports [ ' Viewport :  1 ' ] . assemblyDisplay .
setValues ( optimizationTasks=OFF,
geometricRestrictions
=OFF,
stopConditions=OFF)
30
odb = s e s s i o n . odbs [ ' Buckling . odb ' ]
31
s e s s i o n . viewports [ ' Viewport :  1 ' ] . setValues (
displayedObject=odb )
32
l e a f = dgo . LeafFromOdbElementSections ( elementSections=(
33
'PLATEINSTANCE._PICKEDSET3. Section −
ASSEMBLY_PLATEINSTANCE__PICKEDSET3' ,
34
'TRUCKINSTANCE._PICKEDSET2. Section −
ASSEMBLY_TRUCKINSTANCE__PICKEDSET2' ,
35
) )
36
s e s s i o n . viewports [ ' Viewport :  1 ' ] . odbDisplay . displayGroup .
remove ( l e a f=l e a f )
37
dg = s e s s i o n . viewports [ ' Viewport :  1 ' ] . odbDisplay .
displayGroup
38
dg = s e s s i o n . DisplayGroup (name=' DisplayGroup −2 ' ,
objectToCopy=dg )
39
s e s s i o n . viewports [ ' Viewport :  1 ' ] . odbDisplay . setValues (
visibleDisplayGroups=(dg ,
) )
40
s e s s i o n . viewports [ ' Viewport :  1 ' ] . odbDisplay .
displayGroupInstances [ ' DisplayGroup −2 ' ] . setValues (
lockOptions=OFF)
41
odb = s e s s i o n . odbs [ ' Buckling . odb ' ]
42
S = s e s s i o n . xyDataListFromField ( odb=odb ,
outputPosition=
NODAL,
variable =(( 'S ' ,
43
INTEGRATION_POINT,
((INVARIANT,
'Max.  Principal ' ) ,
(
COMPONENT,
' S11 ' ) ,
44
) ) ,
) ,
nodeSets=( 'PLATEINSTANCE._PICKEDSET2 ' , '
PLATEINSTANCE._PICKEDSET3 ' ,
) )
45
46
# Total number of node in
the
instance " Plate "
47
NoNodes=len ( odb . rootAssembly . instances [ 'PLATEINSTANCE' ] .
nodes )
48
49
# Node where
the
l a r g e s t max. Principal
s t r e s s
i s
50
b = max(S [ 1 1 6 3 ] )
51
SmaxPrin = b [ 1 ]
52
53
# Node where
the
l a r g e s t
S11
s t r e s s
i s
54
c = max(S[1163+NoNodes ] )
==PAGE:189==
Python - Output.py
79
55
S11 = c [ 1 ]
56
57
print SmaxPrin
58
print S11
59
60
odb . c l o s e ()
61
62
f i l = open( ' Output . txt ' ,mode=' a ' )
# opens a
f i l e
for
writing
access
( appending )
63
f i l . write ( str ( SmaxPrin ) + '   '
+ str ( S11 )+ ' \n ' ) #
s t r i n g
to
write
in
the
f i l e
64
f i l . c l o s e ()
# c l o s i n g
the
f i l e
again
==PAGE:190==
80
Fatigue
==PAGE:191==
Appendix F
Combined model
F.1
MATLAB - Main.m
1
% Optemization program
for
s t a b i l i t y
of a
s t i f f e n e d
p l a t e
2
clear
a l l ;
close
all ;
clc
3
%% Parameters
4
L = 5;
% Total
length
of
the
p l a t e
[m]
5
ws = 0.295;
% Width of
the
s t i f f e n e r
[m]
6
ds = 0.3 05;
% Distance
between
r i b s
[m]
7
db = 0.552−ws /2;
% Distance from
l a s t
s t i f f e n e r
to BC [m]
8
w = ds/2+7∗ws+6∗ds+db ;
% Total
width
of
the
p l a t e
[m]
9
nribs = 14;
% Number of
r i b s
10
11
% Thickness
of
the
p l a t e
[m]
( i n i t i a l
guess )
12
tp = [ 0 . 0 2
0.01
0.015
0.03
0 . 0 4 ] ;
13
% Thickness
of
the
s t i f f e n e r s
[m]
( i n i t i a l
guess )
14
ts = [0.008
0.01
0.015
0.02
0 . 0 3 ] ;
15
% Height
of
the
s t i f f n e r
[m]
( i n i t i a l
guess )
16
hs = [ 0 . 5
0.4
0.45
0.55
0 . 6 ] ;
17
18
E = 210 e9 ;
% Modulus of
e l a s t i c i t y
for
s t e e l
[Pa]
19
20
PFat = 100 e3 ; % Load from the
back
v e h i c l e
( f a t i g u e )
[N]
21
sigma = 36 e6 ; % Stress
range ( f a t i g u e )
[Pa ]
22
23
% Object
function .
24
% x (1)
i s
the
thickness
of
the
plate ,
==PAGE:192==
82
Combined model
25
% x (2)
i s
the
thickness
of
the
s t i f f e n e r
26
% and x (3)
i s
the
height
of
the
s t i f f e n e r
27
V = @(x)L∗w∗x (1)+nribs ∗x (2) ∗x (3) ∗L;
28
29
%% Optimization program
30
x0 = [ tp
31
ts
32
hs ] ;
% I n i t i a l
point
for
x
33
A = [ ] ;
% Matrix
for
l i n e a r
i n e q u l i t y
constraints
34
b = [ ] ;
% Vector
for
l i n e a r
i n e q u l i t y
constraints
35
Aeq = [ ] ;
% Matrix
for
l i n e a r
e q u l i t y
constraints
36
beq = [ ] ;
% Vector
for
l i n e a r
e q u l i t y
constraints
37
lb = [ 0 . 0 0 6 , 0 . 0 0 6 , 0 . 0 5 ] ; % Vector
for
lower
bounds
38
ub = [ ] ;
% Vector
for
upper bounds
39
40
% Specifying
the
options
for
the
optimization
function
41
options = optimoptions ( @fmincon , ' DiffMinChange ' ,1 e −5, '
ConstraintTolerance ' ,1 e−5) ;
42
43
re = [ ] ;
44
% Making the
optimization
45
for
i =1:length ( x0 ( 1 , : ) )
46
% I n i t i a l
cross−section
area
[m2 ] :
47
A0 = w∗tp ( i )+nribs ∗ts ( i ) ∗hs ( i ) ;
48
49
% Normal force on the
p l a t e
[N/m]
50
PStab = 17.72∗10^6∗A0/w;
51
52
% E s t a b l i s h i n g a nonlinear
constraint
function
53
abaqus = @(x)Aba(x , L,w, db , ws , ds , nribs ,E,A0, PStab ,
sigma , PFat) ;
54
55
% Running the
minimization
algorithm
56
[ x , fval , e x i t f l a g ] = fmincon (V, x0 ( : , i ) ,A, b , Aeq , beq , lb ,
ub , abaqus , options )
57
guess = [ x0 ( : , i ) ' x '
f v a l
e x i t f l a g ] ;
58
re = [ re ; guess ] ;
59
end
60
%% Results
61
fprintf ( ' Thickness  of  the  plate  :  %.4d m\n ' ,x (1) )
62
fprintf ( ' Thickness  of  the  s t i f f e n e r s  :  %.4d m\n ' ,x (2) )
63
fprintf ( ' Height of  the  s t i f f n e r :  %.4d m\n ' ,x (3) )
==PAGE:193==
MATLAB - Aba.m
83
F.2
MATLAB - Aba.m
1
function
[ c , ceq ] = Aba(x , L,w, db , ws , ds , nribs ,E,A0, PStab ,
sigma , PFat)
2
% A function
that
c a l c u l a t e s
the
t i p
displacement
of a
3
%
c a n t i l e v e r beam using ABAQUS.
4
% The function
i s
used
to
find
the
optimal
dimensions
for
5
% a
s t i f f e n e d
p l a t e
with a constrains .
6
%% Calculation
ares and loads
7
Am = w∗x (1)+nribs ∗x (2) ∗x (3) ; % Cross−section
area
in
model
8
P1 = PStab∗A0/Am; % Load over
the
cross−section
9
10
%% Make a python
f i l e
with
v a r i a b l e s
11
f i d = fopen ( 'Var . py ' ,
'w ' ) ;
12
fprintf ( fid , 'L = %.16e\n ' ,L) ;
13
fprintf ( fid , 'w = %.16e\n ' ,w) ;
14
fprintf ( fid , 'db = %.16e\n ' ,db) ;
15
fprintf ( fid , 'ws = %.16e\n ' ,ws) ;
16
fprintf ( fid , ' ds = %.16e\n ' , ds ) ;
17
fprintf ( fid , ' tp = %.16e\n ' ,x (1) ) ;
% tp
[m]
18
fprintf ( fid , ' ts  = %.16e\n ' ,x (2) ) ;
% t s
[m]
19
fprintf ( fid , ' hs = %.16e\n ' ,x (3) ) ;
% hs
[m]
20
fprintf ( fid , 'E = %.16e\n ' ,E) ;
21
fprintf ( fid , 'PFat = %.16e\n ' ,PFat) ;
22
fprintf ( fid , ' PStab = %.16e\n ' , PStab ) ;
23
fclose ( f i d ) ;
24
25
%% E s t a b l i s h
connection
to ABAQUS
26
mo='noGUI ' ; % Running
s c r i p t
without
the Abaqus/CAE GUI
27
% mo=' script ' ; % Running
s c r i p t
with
the Abaqus/CAE GUI
28
29
% Pythonscript run in ABAQUS
30
myscript1='=MainStab . py ' ;
31
myscript2='=MainFat . py ' ;
32
33
% Open ABAQUS and running
myscript
34
system ( [ ' abaqus cae  ' ,mo, myscript1 ] ) ; % Windows system
35
system ( [ ' abaqus cae  ' ,mo, myscript2 ] ) ; % Windows system
36
37
% For Unix system
38
% unix ( [ ' abaqus cae
' ,mo, myscript ] ) ;
%Unix system
39
==PAGE:194==
84
Combined model
40
%% Load output from ABAQUS
41
load OutputStab . txt
42
load OutputFat . txt
43
44
45
% Getting
the
eigenvalue
46
EigenValue = OutputStab (end , 1 ) ;
47
% Get s11
48
S11 = OutputFat (end , end) ;
49
50
% constrains
51
c = [A0/Am−EigenValue ;
52
S11−sigma ] ;
53
ceq = [ ] ;
54
end
The python les will not be shown because these are more or less identical to
the ones for the stability and the fatigue. It is important to change the names
on the of the txt-les and the names of the load variables in the dierent scripts,
so they are corresponding to the right ones.
==PAGE:195==
Appendix G
Mesh convergence of
cantilever beam
For the FE model of the cantilever beam a check of the mesh convergence is
performed. The convergence check is performed by increasing the number of
elements in each part of the beam and compare the displacement with the num-
ber of elements. The elements used are high order elements B23. In Figure G.1
the displacement as function of the number of elements are plotted.
Figure G.1: Mesh convergence of the cantilever beam.
It is seen that the displacement is already converged at one element per part.
Because the analysis is quick, it is chosen to use ve elements per part.
==PAGE:196==
86
Mesh convergence of cantilever beam
==PAGE:197==
Appendix H
Mesh convergence of plate
for stability
For the FE model of the plate a not adequate mesh convergence check is per-
formed. This is only used to show how the mesh convergence check is performed,
but a more in depth investigating needs to be performed. The elements are
STRI65. In Figure H.1 the eigenvalue as function of the number of elements are
plotted.
Figure H.1: Mesh convergence of plate in the longitudinal direction.
It is seen that the eigenvalue is converged at around 3200 elements, which cor-
respond to a element size of L/20 in the longitudinal direction. This will be the
meshed used in the model.
==PAGE:198==
88
Mesh convergence of plate for stability
==PAGE:199==
Appendix I
Damage report from COWI
The results in this appendix is adopted from [15].
==PAGE:200==
 
 
==PAGE:201==
 
==PAGE:202==
92
Damage report from COWI
==PAGE:203==
Appendix J
Elastic centre and comp.
force
The elastic centre of the bridge deck is calculated and the compression force from
a moment with a magnitude of 109N/m is determined in the following.
==PAGE:204==
The inclination of the top plate is neglected in order to simplify the calculation. 
The center of the deck i selected as the origo
Height of the deck at: 
≔
H
4.75 m
Plate type T1
Deck thickness:
≔
td
14 mm
Rib thickness:
≔
tr
7 mm
Rib height:
≔
hr
360 mm
Rib width top:
≔
wrt
295 mm
Rib width bottom:
≔
wrb
180 mm
Rib distance:
≔
dr
600 mm
Rib web inclined width:
≔
wri
=
―――
−
wrt
wrb
2
0.0575 m
Rib side length:
≔
drw
=
‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾
+
wri
2
hr
2
0.364563 m
Rib area:
≔
ArT1
=
⋅
⎛⎝
+
⋅
2 drw
wrb⎞⎠tr
⎛⎝
⋅
6.363883 10
3 ⎞⎠mm
2
Number of ribs:
≔
nr
13
Length of plate T1:
≔
lT1
7800 mm
Area of plate T1:
≔
AT1
=
⋅
lT1 td
0.1092 m
2
Total area of plate T1:
≔
AT1tot
=
+
⋅
ArT1 nr
AT1
0.19193 m
2
First moment of area:
≔
ST1
=
+
⋅
⎛
⎜⎝
+
⋅
⋅
⋅
2 drw tr
⎛
⎜⎝
―――
−
H
hr
2
⎞
⎟⎠
⋅
⋅
wrb tr
⎛
⎜⎝
−
―
H
2
hr
⎞
⎟⎠
⎞
⎟⎠
nr
⋅
AT1 ―
H
2
0.437995 m
3
==PAGE:205==
Plate type T2
Deck thickness:
≔
td
14 mm
Rib thickness:
≔
tr
8 mm
Rib height:
≔
hr
360 mm
Rib width top:
≔
wrt
295 mm
Rib width bottom:
≔
wrb
180 mm
Rib distance:
≔
dr
600 mm
Rib web inclined width:
≔
wri
=
―――
−
wrt
wrb
2
0.0575 m
Rib side length:
≔
drw
=
‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾
+
wri
2
hr
2
0.364563 m
Rib area:
≔
ArT2
=
⋅
⎛⎝
+
⋅
2 drw
wrb⎞⎠tr
⎛⎝
⋅
7.27301 10
3 ⎞⎠mm
2
Number of ribs:
≔
nr
8
Length of plate T2:
≔
lT2
5052 mm
Area of plate T2:
≔
AT2
=
⋅
lT2 td
0.070728 m
2
Total area of plate T2:
≔
AT2tot
=
+
⋅
ArT2 nr
AT2
0.128912 m
2
First moment of area:
≔
ST2
=
+
⋅
⎛
⎜⎝
+
⋅
⋅
⋅
2 drw tr
⎛
⎜⎝
―――
−
H
hr
2
⎞
⎟⎠
⋅
⋅
wrb tr
⎛
⎜⎝
−
―
H
2
hr
⎞
⎟⎠
⎞
⎟⎠
nr
⋅
AT2 ―
H
2
0.293619 m
3
==PAGE:206==
Incline Web Plate (IWP)
Deck thickness:
≔
td
14 mm
Rib thickness:
≔
tr
6 mm
Rib height:
≔
hr
360 mm
Rib width top:
≔
wrt
450 mm
Rib width bottom:
≔
wrb
180 mm
Rib distance:
≔
dr
1000 mm
Rib web inclined width:
≔
wri
=
―――
−
wrt
wrb
2
0.135 m
Rib side length:
≔
drw
=
‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾
+
wri
2
hr
2
0.38448 m
Rib area:
≔
ArIWP
=
⋅
⎛⎝
+
⋅
2 drw
wrb⎞⎠tr
⎛⎝
⋅
5.693762 10
3 ⎞⎠mm
2
Number of ribs:
≔
nr
2
Length of plate IWP:
≔
lIWP
=
(
+
+
+
579
757
1000
716) mm
3.052 m
Area of plate IWP:
≔
AIWP
=
⋅
lIWP td
0.042728 m
2
Total area of plate IWP:
≔
AIWPtot
=
+
⋅
ArIWP nr
AIWP
0.054116 m
2
First moment of area:
≔
SIWP
=
+
+
⋅
⋅
ArIWP ―
3
8
H
⋅
⋅
ArIWP ―
1
8
H
⋅
⋅
AIWP ―
1
4
H
0.064262 m
3
==PAGE:207==
Bottom Plates (BP)
Deck thickness:
≔
td
9 mm
Rib thickness:
≔
tr
6 mm
Rib height:
≔
hr
300 mm
Rib width top:
≔
wrt
450 mm
Rib width bottom:
≔
wrb
180 mm
Rib distance:
≔
dr
1000 mm
Rib web inclined width:
≔
wri
=
―――
−
wrt
wrb
2
0.135 m
Rib side length:
≔
drw
=
‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾
+
wri
2
hr
2
0.328976 m
Rib area:
≔
ArBP
=
⋅
⎛⎝
+
⋅
2 drw
wrb⎞⎠tr
⎛⎝
⋅
5.027708 10
3 ⎞⎠mm
2
Number of ribs:
≔
nr
15
Length of plate IWP:
≔
lBP
=
⎛
⎜⎝
+
+
+
―――
10890
2
555
⋅
3 450
7920⎞
⎟⎠
mm
15.27 m
Area of plate IWP:
≔
ABP
=
⋅
lBP td
0.13743 m
2
Total area of plate IWP:
≔
ABPtot
=
+
⋅
ArBP nr
ABP
0.212846 m
2
First moment of area:
≔
SrBP
=
⋅
⎛
⎜⎝
+
⋅
⋅
⋅
2 drw tr
⎛
⎜⎝
+
−―
H
2
―
hr
2
⎞
⎟⎠
⋅
⋅
wrb tr
⎛
⎜⎝
+
−―
H
2
hr
⎞
⎟⎠
⎞
⎟⎠
nr
−0.16537 m
3
≔
SpBP
=
+
⋅
⋅
⎛
⎜⎝
+
―――
10890
2
555⎞
⎟⎠
mm td
⎛
⎜⎝
――
−H
2
⎞
⎟⎠
⋅
⋅
(
+
⋅
3 450
7920) mm td
⎛
⎜⎝
――
−H
4
⎞
⎟⎠
−0.227323 m
3
≔
SBP
=
+
SrBP
SpBP
−0.392693 m
3
==PAGE:208==
Walkway plate (WWP)
Deck thickness:
≔
td
8 mm
Rib thickness:
≔
tr
6 mm
Rib height:
≔
hr
200 mm
Rib width top:
≔
wrt
300 mm
Rib width bottom:
≔
wrb
0 mm
Rib distance:
≔
dr
640 mm
Rib web inclined width:
≔
wri
=
―――
−
wrt
wrb
2
0.15 m
Rib side length:
≔
drw
=
‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾
+
wri
2
hr
2
0.25 m
Rib area:
≔
ArWWP
=
⋅
⎛⎝
+
⋅
2 drw
wrb⎞⎠tr
⎛⎝⋅
3 10
3 ⎞⎠mm
2
Number of ribs:
≔
nr
4
Length of plate IWP:
≔
lWWP
=
2920 mm
2.92 m
Area of plate IWP:
≔
AWWP
=
⋅
lWWP td
0.02336 m
2
Total area of plate IWP:
≔
AWWPtot
=
+
⋅
ArWWP nr
AWWP
0.03536 m
2
First moment of area:
≔
SWWP
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
2 drw tr nr
⎛
⎜⎝
――
−hr
2
⎞
⎟⎠
−0.0012 m
3
==PAGE:209==
Elastic center
Total area of cross-section:
≔
Atot
=
⋅
2 ⎛⎝
+
+
+
+
AT1tot
AT2tot
ABPtot
AIWPtot
AWWPtot⎞⎠
1.246327 m
2
Total static moment:
≔
Stot
=
⋅
2 ⎛⎝
+
+
+
+
ST1
ST2
SBP
SIWP
SWWP⎞⎠
0.803968 m
3
Elastic center:
≔
ce
=
――
Stot
Atot
0.645069 m
Distance to elastic center from the top:
≔
ye
=
−
―
H
2
ce
1.729931 m
Load on edge
Moment acting on the full cross-section:
≔
M
⋅
10
9 N m
Moment of inertia from COWI:
≔
Itot
97.61 m
4
Stress at edge:
≔
σ
=
⋅
――
M
Itot
ye
⎛⎝
⋅
1.772 10
7 ⎞⎠――
N
m
2
==PAGE:210==
100
Elastic centre and comp. force
==PAGE:211==
Appendix K
Stress distribution in plate
for fatigue analysis.
In the following the stress distribution plots for the fatigue analysis are pre-
sented. The stresses are S11, which is the stresses in the transverse direction.
Figure K.1: Stress distribution for tp = 0.006m, ts = 0.006m and hs = 0.05m.
==PAGE:212==
102
Stress distribution in plate for fatigue analysis.
Figure K.2: Stress distribution for tp = 0.01m, ts = 0.013m and hs = 0.055m.
Figure K.3: Stress distribution for tp = 0.009m, ts = 0.013m and hs =
0.055m.
==PAGE:213==
103
Figure K.4: Stress distribution for tp = 0.01m, ts = 0.012m and hs = 0.055m.
Figure K.5: Stress distribution for tp = 0.01m, ts = 0.008m and hs = 0.055m.
==PAGE:214==
104
Stress distribution in plate for fatigue analysis.
Figure K.6: Stress distribution for tp = 0.014m, ts = 0.019m and hs = 0.1m.
Figure K.7: Stress distribution for tp = 0.02m, ts = 0.008m and hs = 0.5m.
