==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
Accessibility 
Index for 
Aabenraa 
Municipality 
      
MASTER’S THESIS 
 
Saxe Skygebjerg 
S113761 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
 
Master’s thesis 
 
 
Saxe Brejning Skygebjerg 
Department of Mangement 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
Supervisors: 
Michael Bruhn Barfod 
Yannick Cornet 
Naja Laura Emilie Barlach Hansen 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
2 
Preface 
This thesis entitled “Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality” concludes my study at the MSc 
programme “Transport and Logistics” at the department of Management Engineering at the 
Technical University of Denmark. The thesis is accounting for 35 ECTS point and has conducted 
within over a timespan of six consecutive months in the period of 23/01 – 23/7 2017. The thesis has 
been supervised by Michael Bruhn Barfoed, Yannick Cornet and Naja Barlach Hansen.  
When I first started at DTU at my undergraduate programme of Traffic and Transportation in 2011, 
I was taught in improving the effectiveness of transportation system which especially focused on 
strengthen mobility and thus increasing the distances possible to undergo in shortest time 
achievable. However, I never learned in detail on the issue of increasing mobility as supposed to 
benefit as many as possible reshapes the design and spatial structure of modern society where the 
length between activities can be expanded while overall catchment area is maintained. Those without 
proper means of transportation are however left behind as access mainly is provided to groups with 
strong mobility abilities. I first learned about this issue in the beginning of my master where the 
importance of changing the focus from mobility to accessibility also was introduced to me during my 
first semester. The term quickly gained my interest and its position in my concluding thesis is a 
consequent result.  
I would first of all like to thank my three supervisors. Michael Bruhn Barfod for his knowledgeable 
and competent supervision for the last six months from which I clearly can feel the thesis has been 
improved significantly. Yannick Cornet for the many great discussions and assistance not only during 
this thesis but in other courses, and furthermore for being one of the main reasons for my interest in 
sustainable transportation in the first place. Naja Barlach Hansen, as well as the municipality of 
Aabenraa, for making it possible to apply the index to a real case by providing data and helping me 
getting in contact with the target residents in the area. I am excited to continue the work and assist 
the municipality in the near future with assessments based on the accessibility index from this 
project. Furthermore, I would like to thank the National Travel Survey for providing me with data 
for the case-area and Jacob Kronbak for giving me great advices on the use of GIS.   
I would also like to thank my friends and family who have supported me throughout the last half year 
and helped keeping me motivated by taking interest in the thesis by encouraging in helpful 
discussions, proof-reading and by just being great company. A special thanks to my dad for his 
support throughout my whole study at DTU. There is little to no doubt I would not be where I am 
without his help and assistance for the last years. I am finally thankful for having had the opportunity 
for studying at DTU for the last almost six years. The time has been demanding on many levels but 
also truly inspiring and rewarding and has giving me great insight and knowledge which I will bring 
with me further in life. 
 
 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Saxe Brejning Skygebjerg 
Copenhagen, July 2017 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
3 
Abstract  
The objective for this master’s thesis has been to design an index which can be used to measure the 
level of accessibility for target groups in located in less densely populated towns in Denmark. By 
using Geographic Information System (GIS) the index is designed to provide decision-makers with 
an easy-to-understand assessment tool. The index has been applied to the towns of Aabenraa and 
Rødekro being the study-case area with focus on senior residents.  
Through relevant literature, the concept of accessibility has been examined through relevant 
literature, where especially the difference between the concept and mobility is pointed out. Mobility 
is usually a simple measure for how far a person can/may undergo within a certain time or other 
costs. Accessibility also takes the aspect of mobility into consideration but expands further, where 
the focus especially is seen in whether people can reach their destination. Depending on the applied 
definition of the concept, various parameters can be added, however, using the framework for Geurs 
and van Wee’s framework for their review of accessibility measures for land-use and transport 
strategies (Geurs & van Wee 2004), four main components are introduced. One of the components 
is concerning mobility, where locations and characteristics of the transportation network is 
considered. However, a land-use component is also presented which focus on the location and 
characteristic of people and activities being the demand and supply. The distances between the 
people and their desired destination has an impact on how much mobility is needed to reach the 
goal, which therefore interacts with the transportation component.  
Personal mobility has been increasing, especially due to affordable cars and in investments in 
infrastructure, meaning travel distances can be increased while travel time is maintained. When 
people can access activities further away, local activities are often closed or reduced due spending 
costs. Those who are not able to obtain higher mobility may therefore experience a reduction in 
accessibility even if nothing has changed at a personal level. Some groups are in higher risk of not 
having access to transport by car, due to either being uncappable of driving (revoked driver license 
or under the legal driving age) or due to expenses of having a car. These low-mobility groups may 
therefore be suffering of low accessibility, especially in areas of low population density where car is 
a more common mode of transportation.  
A location-based index has been designed based on the transportation and land-use component since 
both are concerning the position and characteristics of people, activities and transit stops. By 
assigning activities which weights how important they have been estimated to be to the senior 
residents and plotting these, a score can be assigned to each citizen based on whether an activity 
from a category is close. The score is therefore representing the land-use aspect of the concept of 
accessibility. The mobility aspect of the index takes basis in the remainder of the score assigned to 
the citizens, meaning those who are more isolated from activities may receive a higher added score. 
The public transportation service provided in the area is assessed seen from how many categories of 
activities are within proximity of the transit stops, in addition to the frequency of the town bus lines.  
The accessibility index has been applied to the case study area of Aabenraa and Rødekro for an initial 
run by using default settings based on various literature. The index showed clear tendencies of higher 
accessibility in areas around the centre and southern part of Aabenraa and in the centre Rødekro. 
These areas all have a wide range of categorical activities close by, while also having public 
transportation operating within proximity. Areas with neither activities or public transportation did 
not perform as well, which were often seen in larger residential neighbourhoods and housing located 
far from Aabenraa and Rødekro.  
The index thus takes two components into consideration out of the four proposed. The individual 
factor is a very important aspect of accessibility since it contains information on the variability of 
==PAGE:5==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
4 
needs, abilities, and income among others, which however is difficult to assess when it is desired to 
sum the findings into one simple index. Through an interview approach, the abilities and needs of 
senior residents in the case-study area to adjust the settings from the default index. The results from 
the interview indicate a calibration of the index was necessary to fit the profile of needs and 
importance of activities in the area. The sample size of the interview approach was very small and 
has been supported by plenary sessions to find the exact calibrated settings.  
The findings of the index have however not changed significantly from the initial to the calibrated 
settings, which especially is caused by the location of the activities not have changed and still are 
found in the more central areas of the case area. By weighting the population seen from the score, 
areas which do not have access to neither activities or transportation while also have a high 
population density are highlighted. A larger neighbourhood in the western part of Aabenraa, leading 
to a recommendation of alteration of a bus lines into the area to increase the additional score for 
public transportation in the index.  
Other recommendations are on a longer term and more difficult to give since further improvements 
in accessibility will be from either; moving the senior citizens closer to activities or locating activities 
within in proximity of the residents. In principle of free will of settlement concerning both residents 
and private business the recommendations must therefore be in a long-term planning of location of 
elder houses and a more spatial spread and diverse location of activities. Furthermore, multiple of 
the nursing homes in the case study area were pointed out by the analysis which may be due to them 
often being located in outlying parts of a town. These can however be seen to be self-sufficient in 
many of the identified activities; food is prepared, cultural gatherings are taken place on site and 
medical assistance may always be close. These facilities may therefore not be in urgent need of having 
their accessibility level improved, indicating the quality checks is necessary by area-familiar 
personal, who also can assess the identified activities.  
Several improvements have been proposed and the index may be considered a to be expanded 
further, where it can be used for other user-profiles for other low-mobility groups by identifying and 
plotting additional activities and finding the importance of these for the profiles. Accessibility is 
complex to assess with its many parameters and founding an assessment solely on location-based 
measurement is not considered sufficient and further expansion is needed to achieve holistic 
evaluation. However, this index is believed to be an assistance in benchmarking in assessments and 
therefore be a part of securing accessibility to more people in the future regardless of location.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
5 
Abstract in Danish 
Formålet for dette kandidatspeciale har været at opstille et indeks, som skal kunne bruges til at måle 
tilgængelighedsniveau i mindre tæt befolkede byer i Danmark. Ved at benytte Geografiske 
Informations Systemer (GIS) er indekset designet til at forsyne beslutningstagere med et let 
anvendeligt og enkelt værktøj til undersøgelser. Tilgængelighedsindekset er blevet anvendt for 
byerne Aabenraa og Rødekro som case-område med fokus på ældre borgere.  
Gennem relevant litteratur er konceptet bag tilgængelighed blevet undersøgt, hvor især forskellen 
mellem begreberne mobilitet og tilgængelighed er klargjort. Mobilitet er normalt en enkel måling 
for, hvor langt en person kan rejse indenfor en bestemt tid eller anden omkostning. Tilgængelighed 
betragter ligeledes mobilitet, men udvider yderligere og tager I højere udgangspunkt i om, hvorvidt 
rejsende er i stand til at nå deres destination. Afhængig af den specifikke definition kan forskellige 
parameter sammensættes og tilføjes, hvor det anvendte koncept for begrebet i dette projekt er blevet 
grundlagt af Geurs og van Wee’s foreslåede struktur. Gennem deres vurdering af målemetoder af 
arealanvendelse og og transportstrategier (Geurs & van Wee 2004), har de defineret fire 
komponenter som anvendes til målinger af tilgængelighed. En af disse betragter mobilitet gennem 
lokalitet og karakteristika af transport netværket, hvor en anden komponent har samme tilgang men 
i stedet for fokuserer på arealanvendelse. Afstanden mellem mennesker og deres destination har stor 
betydning for hvor meget mobilitet er nødvendigt for at kunne nå rejsemålet, hvilket derved 
interagerer med den komponent, som beskriver transport.  
Som personlig mobilitet er forøget blandt andet på grund af mere prisgunstige biler og investeringer 
i infrastruktur har det betydet, at rejseafstande har kunne stige, mens rejsetiden er vedligeholdt. At 
rejsende kan nå aktiviteter længere væk kan have medføre, at lokale faciliteter bliver lukket til fordel 
for mere centraliserede på grund af sparekrav eller lignende for at effektivisere. Beboere, som ikke 
har mulighed for at opnå en højere mobilitet, kan derfor opleve en reduktion i tilgængelighed, selv 
om intet har ændret sig i personlige egenskaber. Visse grupper er mere udsat for ikke at have adgang 
til biler, enten ved at være ukvalificerede til at køre (frataget kørekort eller under den lovlige 
kørealder) eller ved ikke at have ressourcer til at eje en bil. Disse lavmobilitetsgrupper kan derfor I 
højere grad opleve lav tilgængelighed, især i områder med lav befolkningstæthed, hvor bil er et mere 
alment transportmiddel.  
Et lokationsbaseret indeks inspireret af transport og arealanvendelse komponenterne er derved 
blevet opstillet da begge betragter lokalitet og karakteristika af beboere/rejsende, aktiviteter og 
stoppesteder/stationer. Ved at kategorisere aktiviteter og tildele disse en vægtning efter betydning 
for ældre borgere, kan en værdi tilskrives beboere alt efter nærved liggende aktivitets-kategorier. 
Denne værdi repræsenterer derfor arealanvendelses aspektet af tilgængelighedskonceptet. 
Mobilitetsdelen af indekset består af en faktor som ganges på den resterende del, en borger er fra at 
have en fuld score. Derved vil en større værdi kunne tilskrives de borgere, som bor mere isoleret fra 
aktiviteter. En vurdering af offentlig transport i undersøgelsesområdet er foretaget ved at finde det 
antal af aktivitets-kategorier, de opererende buslinjer passere nært forbi, hvorved en værdi tilskrives 
hver linje, som igen tilskrives de beboere som bor nær stoppesteder for de pågældende buslinjer. 
Yderligere har afgangsfrekvens en betydning for den tildelte værdi for hver linje.  
Tilgængelighedsindekset er blevet anvendt til undersøgelsesområdet bestående af byerne Aabenraa 
og Rødekro for en foreløbig gennemgang ved brug af ”standardindstillinger” baseret på en vurdering 
af litteratur. Indekset illustreres gennem 100x100 meter zoner og har derigennem vist klare 
tendenser til højere tilgængelighed i områder omkring centrale og sydlige del af Aabenraa, samt 
området ved Rødekro station. Disse områder har alle til fælles en vid udstrækning af forskellige 
aktiviteter samtidig med offentlig transport i nærheden. De områder, som både er foruden aktiviteter 
==PAGE:7==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
6 
og transport service blev er blevet tildelt en lavere indeks-værdi, hvilket især er større villakvarterer, 
samt fjernt beliggende beboelse.     
Indekset tager derved to komponenter i betragtning ud af de i alt fire foreslåede. En af de resterende 
komponenter beskriver de individuelle attributter for den rejsende, herunder de varierende forhold 
til behov, evner, indkomst mm. Disse personlige egenskaber har stor betydning for den enkelte 
muligheder for rejse, men er derimod svære at inkludere da det i høj grad er svært at analysere 
personlige behov i en større skala. Gennem en interview-tilgang af ældre borgere i 
undersøgelsesområdet er evner og behov blevet vurderet, hvilket er blevet anvendt til at justere 
indstillingerne fra den første gennemgang. Tilgangen inkluderede både individuelle interviews, med 
kvantitative data som formål, samt fokus-sessioner med flere tilstedeværende. Resultaterne fra 
interviewene indikerede at en kalibrering var nødvendig for at kunne tilpasses the generelle profil 
for de ældre borgere i området, som set ud fra deres holdning til betydning af aktiviteter. Antallet af 
de adspurgte i den individuelle tilgang er beskedent og justeringen af vægtningen har derfor været 
baseret på en vurdering set ud fra en kombination af resultat fra interview, fokus-interviews samt 
litteratur.  
Resultaterne fra indekset har imidlertid ikke vist større ændringer fra den første gennemgang til det 
kalibrerede indeks med justerede indstillinger. Dette har især været grundet i, at placeringen af 
aktiviteterne ikke har ændret sig væsentligt og stadigvæk hovedsageligt er at finde i de mere centrale 
dele af undersøgelsesområdet. Gennem en vægtning af befolkningstal i de enkelte zoner, set ud fra 
scoren fra indekset kan områder, som både har en relativ høj befolkningstæthed samt en lav indeks-
værdi, findes. Et større villakvarter i den vestlige del af Aabenraa blev gennem denne analyse fundet 
til især at være fokuskrævende. Dette har medført en foreslået ændring af busdriften til at også 
betjene det pågældende område for at kunne øge mobilitets aspektet.  
Andre anbefalinger er derimod givet på en længere planlægningshorisont og er derudover svære at 
formulere konkret, da forbedringer som set ud fra indekset, udover transportmæssige, er givet ved: 
At flytte ældre borgere tættere på aktiviteter, eller at placere aktiviteter i nærheden af borgere. Ud 
fra princippet om fri vilje af placering, gældende både borgere og private virksomheder, er 
anbefalingerne langsigtede vedrørende planlægning af placering af ældreboliger og mere varierende 
lokalitetsspredning for aktiviteter. Derudover var flere plejehjem fremhævede for de to byer, da flere 
af disse er placeret i yderkantlige områder. Plejehjem kan dog anses som at kunne forsyne deres 
beboeres med aktiviteter og andre behov, da en kantine serverer mad, kulturelle begivenheder finder 
sted og læger er i kontakt til stederne. Disse plejehjem har derfor muligvis ikke et stort behov for at 
få styrket deres tilgængelighed, hvorved kvalitetscheck af resultaterne er nødvendige af 
områdekendte.  
Adskillige forbedringer er blevet foreslået til indekset og kan derfor betragtes som et igangværende 
projekt som skal udvikles yderligere. Fremtidig brug af indekset vil kunne være i form af flere 
brugerprofiler for andre lav-mobilitetsgrupper ved at tilføje flere aktiviteter og designe profilerne 
således, at de passer nøjere overens med den gruppe som ønskes analyseret. Tilgængelighed er et 
omfattende begreb som derved også er kompliceret at beskrive og undersøge grundet de mange 
tilhørende parametre. En vurdering alene baseret på lokalitetsbaseret målinger er ikke tilstrækkeligt 
og det er nødvendigt at udvide yderligere for at tilnærme sig en helhedsvurdering af præstationen af 
et område. Forhåbentlig kan dette indeks anvendes til at assistere i sammenligningsgrund i 
vurderinger og derigennem være en del af at sikre tilgængelighed til flere borgere i fremtiden uanset 
deres placering. 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
7 
Table of contents 
 
1 
Introduction .................................................................................................................................. 9 
1.1 
Subject ................................................................................................................................... 9 
1.2 
Purpose of thesis ................................................................................................................... 9 
1.3 
Learning objectives ............................................................................................................. 10 
1.4 
Structure of thesis (reading guide) ....................................................................................... 11 
2 
Background ................................................................................................................................. 12 
2.1 
Accessibility ......................................................................................................................... 12 
2.2 
Case study area .................................................................................................................... 21 
2.3 
Current travel behaviour ..................................................................................................... 24 
3 
Methodology ............................................................................................................................... 31 
3.1 
Measuring accessibility ....................................................................................................... 31 
3.2 
Location-based measurement ............................................................................................. 33 
3.3 
Location-based index .......................................................................................................... 39 
3.4 
Interviews ............................................................................................................................ 42 
3.5 
Use of Geographic Information System (GIS) .................................................................... 45 
4 
Application to the case ................................................................................................................ 47 
4.1 
Data ..................................................................................................................................... 47 
4.2 
Initial accessibility index ..................................................................................................... 50 
4.3 
Results from interviews ....................................................................................................... 59 
4.4 
Calibration of the index ....................................................................................................... 63 
4.5 
Calibration of weighting ...................................................................................................... 65 
5 
Results and recommendations ................................................................................................... 67 
5.1 
Identified activities after calibration ................................................................................... 67 
5.2 
Land-use score for senior residents in Aabenraa ................................................................ 68 
5.3 
Segment oriented perspective ............................................................................................. 74 
5.4 
Recommendations to Aabenraa Municipality.................................................................... 80 
6 
Discussion ................................................................................................................................... 86 
6.1 
Criteria for changes in level of accessibility ........................................................................ 86 
6.2 
Index issues / improvements .............................................................................................. 87 
6.3 
General points ..................................................................................................................... 90 
7 
Conclusion .................................................................................................................................. 92 
References .......................................................................................................................................... 94 
Appendix ............................................................................................................................................ 96 
 
==PAGE:9==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
8 
Terms and abbreviations  
The listed terms and abbreviations are used throughout this thesis. The first two terms can be 
perceived as the foundation of the overall work and based on literature from various authors. The 
remaining terms and abbreviations are designed for this project.  
Mobility 
The effectiveness of movement. Usually measured by 
traffic speed or vehicles kilometres travelled. A high 
level of mobility therefore grants access to areas farer 
away as travel distance can be increased while the 
travel time is maintained. 
Accessibility 
Describes the access to activities by including several 
parameters. Mobility is an aspect of accessibility 
among others, where also the spatial location of 
activities people is considered, as well many 
individually attributes. 
Initial index 
The initial index is without any adjustment of settings 
and therefore based on assumptions of the importance 
of various activities as destinations. 
Calibrated index 
The index can be calibrated by changing the settings 
by given inputs from analysis in the case study area, 
giving the calibrated index. 
Land-use score 
A proximity score given the amount of unique 
categorical activities each citizen has nearby, based 
upon their importance given by the settings. The land-
use score functions as the basis for the index. 
Full index 
The full accessibility index (also just described as the 
accessibility index) is found by adding an additional 
score as based on the service level of public 
transportation near citizens. 
WPI 
Weighted Population Index – A weighting of 
population as seen from the found score to find areas 
with high population density which are performing 
poorly in the accessibility index. 
WAM 
Weighted Area Mobility – Areas with high land-use 
score but with poor transportation coverage, 
indicating the areas have many activities but are not 
easily accessible from outside. 
Segment oriented analysis 
Chancing of the settings for the accessibility index to 
fit a different user-profile. Can be used for assessing 
well areas are suited for example mobile impaired. 
 
==PAGE:10==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
9 
1 Introduction  
The objective of this thesis is to design an index for “accessibility” which will be applied to a case-
study to assess the performance of the area. This chapter will introduce the reasoning behind 
focusing on accessibility, outlining the learning objectives and finally, present the overall structure 
for the thesis.  
1.1 Subject 
The sufficient level of mobility required to reach desired destinations varies dependent on the 
location. Residents in areas with low population density is in higher degree reliant on effective 
transportation, where especially car is a preferred mode. Arguable, this is due to private vehicles 
being more adapted for longer distances in addition to door-to-door transportation where the 
travellers are enabled to be flexible and therefore can choose to go directly to the destination. Due to 
the general density in rural areas is generally lower, activities are further apart, consequently making 
more sustainable alternatives modes, such as walking, biking and public transportation less 
attractive (Lucas & Jones 2012). Those without access to a car due to not either having the capacities 
or abilities does therefore not have the same level of accessibility meaning more difficulties in 
reaching destinations and subsequently creating social inequalities. Senior residents, children and 
youth, lone parents, disabled people, low income groups and other marginalized groups are in higher 
risk of not having access to a car due to lack of funds or capabilities to drive and are therefore exposed 
in being excluded from society due to prevention of participating in activities (Lucas 2010).  
Mobility is however not the only enabler in reaching destinations, where changing focus on planning 
for solutions which allow movement through accessibility rather than mobility may help aiding every 
population group in reaching destinations (Curtis 2013). Accessibility is a well-known concept in 
both transport and urban planning, and is concerned with the interplay of between two main 
components: land-use and transport. In other words, the location and characteristics of activities 
(schools, jobs, shopping, etc) drives travel demands and therefore the location and characteristics of 
transport infrastructure and inversely the provision of transport infrastructure drives the 
development of new activities at destinations which were not previously reachable (Geurs & van Wee 
2004). A third component is less well covered in transport modelling, indicators, and planning, 
which is human, individual component; the variability in needs, abilities and income creates various 
levels of accessibility to both social, essential, and everyday activities. A set of indicators can be used 
to represent accessibility for a wider aspect to include the supply and demand for everyone travelling 
within a given area. An index focusing on accessibility can then be used to report, highlight, and 
benchmark the progress in form of sustainable movement in areas with lower population density for 
decision-makers.  
1.2 Purpose of thesis 
The purpose of this project is to construct a simple and easy-to-understand way to report progress 
on the accessibility level for low-mobility groups in towns with lower population density (“Købstad”). 
The project will define indicators for accessibility and sustainable mobility at the scale of the 
municipality with consideration for future comparison with other comparable Danish towns. 
The proposed index will be applied for an assessment of the accessibility level in the municipality of 
Aabenraa being showcase for the project. Results from the analysis will be used to formulate 
recommendations which may be used to improve the overall accessibility level for senior residents 
in Aabenraa, and in further planning of the town area.  
==PAGE:11==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
10 
1.3 Learning objectives  
Achieve a comprehensive understanding of the terms accessibility and mobility by finding relevant 
literature, and furthermore consider the importance of possessing an acceptable level as an 
individual.  
Design an index which report the level of accessibility based on the found literature  
Ensure the index is simple and easy-to-understand format for decision makers, by presenting it using 
Geographical Information System (GIS).  
Apply the index to a case-study in the municipality of Aabenraa. 
Validate and adjusting the index’s assumptions on the needs, attitudes, abilities etc. for the senior 
residents in the area to ensure its competence in assessing the level of accessibility in Aabenraa. 
Report on the current situation in the case area and provide recommendations concerning 
improvement of the general accessibility level in Aabenraa formulated as based upon on the results 
from the index.   
Discuss the index based upon a critical theoretical perspective. 
Evaluate the validity of the recommendations based upon the findings from the discussion of the 
index and identify its further use 
 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
11 
1.4 Structure of thesis (reading guide)  
The thesis is structure as follows:  
Chapter 1: Introduction  
Introduced and presented the purpose and outline of this master’s thesis. The chapter included the 
subject, learning objectives and structure of the thesis.  
Chapter 2: Background 
Will present an overview of the concept of accessibility through relevant literature where important 
parameters will be identified which will be used for the foundation for the index. The main 
differences between accessibility and mobility will be presented, additional will the development of 
social exclusion due to higher mobility levels be presented to understand the importance of ensuring 
accessibility for all residents. Furthermore, will the case study area of Aabenraa be presented with 
the current travel behaviour for the target group.   
Chapter 3: Methodology  
Given the understanding of accessibility and its important parameters, the index is presented based 
on various location-based measurements inspired by the literature. The index is essentially broken 
down into two aspects; land-use and transportation, which both are based on the importance of 
having certain activities within proximity, where transportation furthermore takes service level of 
provided public transportation into consideration. Interview approaches are introduced which can 
assist in calibrating the index in order to be applied for the case area of Aabenraa. Finally, the GIS 
software used for the assessment is presented in addition to the most important applied functions 
for calculating and illustrating the results of the index.  
Chapter 4: Application to the case 
Using a default setting inspired by literature, an initial accessibility index is applied to the case study 
area of Aabenraa. The results are found by first finding the distances from citizens to the identified 
activities for then afterwards assessing the public transportation network in the town. Data from 
conducted interviews in the area is furthermore presented which will be used to calibrate the index 
by changing the main settings.  
Chapter 5: Results and recommendations 
Given the new settings, the accessibility index is calculated over for the case study area. The analysis 
is furthermore expanded by changing the user-profiles to fit other segmentations of the target group. 
Based on the findings from the accessibility index, recommendations are formulated to the 
municipality on how to improve the overall accessibility level for the target group, which includes a 
small case of a proposed alteration of the town busses.  
Chapter 6: Discussion 
A discussion of the validity of the index is conducted seen from a theoretical point of view. 
Weaknesses in the index is identified and presented to which improvements are proposed. Overall 
points regarding accessibility seen for the index is furthermore discussed.  
Chapter 7: Conclusion  
The conclusion of this master’s thesis is presented seen from the outlined learning objectives. Finally, 
further use of the index is proposed.  
==PAGE:13==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
12 
2 Background  
An in-depth review of the concept of accessibility and its impact on different segmentations of the 
population is necessary to achieve a well-oriented and holistic index of accessibility seen for an 
overall perspective and for the chosen focus group. This background chapter will be divided into 
three sections; a review of the concept of accessibility by gathering information on important terms 
to be used in the index, a background section for the municipality of Aabenraa and finally an overview 
of the characteristics of the municipality, such as current travel tendencies with focus on senior 
residents. 
2.1 Accessibility  
Evaluation of published literature will contribute in gaining an understanding of accessibility and its 
associated parameters which are significant when measuring, especially seen from an index. The 
analysis will additionally focus on the importance of having a basic level of accessibility by identifying 
the consequences of not being able to reach certain destinations, which may lead to complication in 
staying socially active in a society. This sub-section will find definitions of the term accessibility, 
investigate social exclusion caused by lack of transportation, identify parameter/measurements to 
create a framework for measurements and furthermore, through literature.  
The concept of accessibility is an often-used key-term when assessing an overall functionality of a 
transport system. The term, however, has many definitions, and depending on the given perspective, 
different ones may be chosen. The term is often misunderstood for mobility or poorly defined to, for 
example, only to include travel time between areas even though more parameters are present (Geurs 
& van Wee 2004). It is therefore important to find and use a clear definition of the concept of 
accessibility to determine what the term covers of possibilities for measurements methods, and to 
know its limitations.  
A classic and often-used definition was proposed by Walter Hansen in his paper on “How 
Accessibility Shapes Land Use” (Hansen 1959), were accessibility is defined to be “the potential of 
opportunities for interactions”. Accessibility is thus described being the possibility for reaching 
interactions (activities/facilities) without transportation being mentioned, it gives an understanding 
of the term to be more than just the journey from an origin to a destination. Hansen defines 
accessibility to be a “measure of the intensity of possibilities for interactions” in an area and uses the 
gravitational principle based upon a relation of the distance and the size or weight of an activity. This 
method is also often used when forecasting the demand for trips in transport modelling and is more 
focused upon the need for transport, and may therefore not be sufficient in the more holistic 
perspective of accessibility, which is desired. Anything which connects people to desired activities or 
facilities, thus creating an opportunity, is described being accessibility according to Hansen. 
However, anything which improves the possibility for an interaction may be perceived to be an 
increase in the possibility of interaction. More effective means of transportation or upgraded 
infrastructure (mobility aspect) is an example, in addition to improving individual prosperity or 
more affordable transportation may lead to more people gaining the opportunity to reach their 
activities and thereby increasing their level of accessibility. A more holistic definition is therefore 
needed to gain the desired well-oriented perspective of the concept of accessibility.  
Karst T. Geurs and Bert van Wee defined a framework for measuring accessibility in their review of 
the concept “Accessibility Evaluation of Land-Use and Transport Strategies: Review and Research 
Directions” (Geurs & van Wee 2004). In the review Geurs and Wee define accessibility seen from a 
more location-based perspective in their review: 
“The extent to which land-use and transport systems enable (groups of) individuals to reach 
activities or destinations by means of a (combination of) transport mode(s)” 
==PAGE:14==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
13 
This definition focus on a relationship between land-use and transportation systems which 
combined gives people the opportunity for interaction (activities or destinations) by using means of 
transportation. Transport, or mobility/movement, is thereby the connector for people and their 
given destinations, but is however only one aspect of the term accessibility, where land-use, being 
perceived to be the location of both people and desired activities, is another.  
The review done by Geurs and Wee (2004) is relatively old, but is however still widely cited and used 
in other papers and has at the time of writing 495 citations, which gives an indication of the methods 
popularity for assessing accessibility. The framework for measuring accessibility such as proposed 
by Geurs and Wee (2004) has been commonly used in several assessments, based on its concept of 
different factions of the aspects, where land-use and transport are two out of four. The components 
to use in assessing accessibility are identified as:  
• 
Land-use 
Land-use describes the location and characteristics of the supply and demand for interactions, 
where supply is the activities/facilities and the demand is the people seeking them. Areas with a 
high population density is therefore considered to be natural centres of demand, while a high 
concentration of activities such as jobs, schools, recreational facilities etc. is an expected 
attractor. The component furthermore includes limitations of the supply (for example school 
vacancies), which may lower the final number of potential trips due to demand competition.     
• 
Transport 
The transport component describes location and characteristics of a given transportation 
network, which may be perceived to be the physical connector to create the opportunities for 
interaction between demand and supply. The component contains information of modes of 
transportation in the network (e.g. car, train, bus, or bike), the travel time and cost and 
furthermore effort of the travel such as comfort and reliability level for a given mode. The 
demand for transportation is determined by the “output” from the component for land-use 
where, for example, remoteness between population and activities might lead to a higher need 
for mobility while shorter distances could lead to a reduction in the need for transportation.   
• 
Temporal  
Many activities/facilities are time-restricted for example by opening hours, meaning individuals 
may be constrained temporally, which is described by the temporal component. Extending 
opening hours can have a positive effect on an individual’s overall accessibility, or by giving 
workers more flexible time-schedules.   
• 
Individual  
The component is focuses on accessibility seen from an individual level, where needs and 
characteristics for the individual traveller is considered. The restrictions for the traveller may be 
parameters such as income, age, (dis)abilities (physical condition), children, driving licence etc. 
The needs for the individual are determined by his or her characteristics, where for example 
individuals with a higher education may be able to get jobs closer to home due to the 
competitiveness or otherwise have a higher income level, which might enable a person to buy 
and use a car for travel, which extends the person’s scope of mobility, or just owning a driving 
licence gives additional potency in movement.   
The framework for the interaction between the components is illustrated at Figure 1, where the 
influence the components have on the level of accessibility can be seen. Indirect relations between 
==PAGE:15==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
14 
the component are present additionally, which was mentioned earlier for the transport component, 
where the location and characteristics for the land-use determined the demand for transportation. 
The components are not always influencing each other mutually, where for example transport 
services can be seen not to have any effect on land-use. A response mechanism from the level of 
accessibility is however affecting all the components through “feedback-loops”, where a poor level 
of transport might influence people’s choice of location, in addition to better services might enable 
people on moving further out of the city.  
 
Figure 1 – The four components of accessibility and their relationship (Geurs & van Wee 2004) 
Geurs and Wee (2004) states there is no best approach for accessibility due to the various situations 
and the given purpose of an assessment. Choice of method must therefore always be adjusted to be 
relevant for the given case. In the review, they present various views on measurement, which are 
separated into four perspectives;  
• 
Infrastructure-based measurements which mainly focus on service level of the 
infrastructure such as travel speed and congestion, in addition to different mode of transport 
available. The perspective is mainly used in planning of traffic.  
 
• 
Location-based measurements is often used in urban and transport planning. Indicators 
for the perspective are focused on the location of supplying activities seen from the demand. 
Examples could be the number of attractions reachable within a given travel time.  
 
• 
Person-based measurements describes the accessibility level at a more individual level. The 
perspective is often used in micro-level analysis with a smaller group of people.  
 
• 
Utility-based measurements focus on economic benefits or disadvantages caused by an 
increase or decrease in the accessibility level for individual persons or the society. The 
perspective is often used in economic studies.  
==PAGE:16==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
15 
2.1.1 Transport-related social exclusion 
The term of social exclusion is, similar to accessibility, regarded to be a wide term, which cannot be 
used by a single indicator or without any definition. It is therefore necessary to find description and 
explanation of the concept to gain an understanding for it for further usage. Levitas et al. defined 
social exclusion during their analysis of the term as: 
‘It [Social exclusion] involves both the lack or denial of resources, rights, goods and services, and 
the inability to participate in the normal relationships and activities, available to the majority of 
people in a society, whether in economic, social, cultural or political arenas. It affects both the 
quality of life of individuals and the equity and cohesion of society as a whole.’ (Levitas et al. 2007) 
From the definition, social exclusion is seen to be provoked, among others, due to lack of services 
and the inability to participate in activities/relationships (opportunities) which normally are 
available for most. The activities or relationships may be for different types and therefore not be 
restricted to purely basic needs, but anything which in general excludes an individual from society. 
Lack of transportation services could therefore be one of these parameters which exclude an 
individual from social/economic/cultural opportunities or just basic needs such as purchasing 
groceries.  
In a review with focus on social exclusion seen by disadvantages in transportation (Lucas 2010), the 
author emphasized assessment to be perceived by interactions between the following progressive 
factors: 
• 
The characteristics of the individual (age, income-level, disabilities, etc.). 
• 
The structure of society, such as public transport being affordable, available, and adequate 
and having local services. 
• 
The economy in a larger perspective (local, national, and global) such as structuring of labour 
market, cultural influences, and legislative framework.  
The first two factors may be recognized to be similar the individual and transport component from 
the accessibility model framework from Geurs and Wee (2004), where the interaction between these 
two factors may be seen to be mutual indirect relationship which links the components in the 
framework. The last factor mentioned by Lucas adds a wider perspective on the concept, where 
cultural influences, among others, are mentioned to have an impact as part of a larger exclusionary 
factor.  
Lucas (2010) mentions the change in focus on now being on the social consequences when in lack of 
access to key life-enhancing opportunities due to lack of proper transportation services, and 
therefore not on the transport services itself. The measurement indicators are today in employment, 
education, health rates etc., and therefore moving away from a system-based approach on 
transportation service-level, to instead focusing on people fulfilling their needs. Equality in 
accessibility where equal access to opportunities and/or meeting basic needs is hence the main 
“indicators”, which however is a more complex problem position to evaluate, compared to a 
traditional mobility assessment where time and cost are the main indicators. Knowing there is a 
relation between accessibility and social exclusion leads to a necessity of adjusting the concept of the 
component-framework as proposed by Geurs and Wee to include the exclusion seen from lack of 
access. In the review on transport and social exclusion by Lucas (2010), three main dimensions for 
transport-related social exclusion are identified; placed-based measures for the activities, social-
category such as social segmentations, and a transportation-based profile. A concept is proposed 
which includes the mentioned factors, which can be seen at Figure 2.  
==PAGE:17==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
16 
 
Figure 2 – Proposed approach to transport-related social exclusion by factors affecting accessibility (Lucas 2010) 
The approach is similar to the component-framework proposed by Geurs and Wee (2004), where 
the activities-factor relates to the land-use component, which also is the case for transport-factor to 
transport-component and people to the individual-component. The concept proposed in Figure 2 
may be considered simpler, where for example the temporal component is missing. However, the 
approach gives five outcomes which can be used in case the given circumstances which means 
reaching an activity is difficult and problematic; proceed, abandon, reschedule, relocate, replace, 
which however are seen from a personal level. However, if too many individuals are forced to either 
abandon, replace, relocate or reschedule their plans, focus from a planner may be required due too 
==PAGE:18==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
17 
many loses opportunities to participate in desired activities. The approach proposed in the review by 
Lucas offers more considerations for the individual factors/components, in addition to the outcome 
possibilities, where Geurs and Wee however have a focus on measures, which may be used basis for 
the index. The factor-framework and the measurement presented by Lucas may be used when more 
specific inspiration for the accessibility perspective is needed.   
Kenyon et al. have described accessibility-related social exclusion in an often-used definition:  
‘The process by which people are prevented from participating in the economic, political and social 
life of the community because of reduced accessibility to opportunities, services and social 
networks, due in whole or part to insufficient mobility in a society and environment built around 
the assumption of high mobility’ (Kenyon et al. 2002). 
Prevention from participation in economic, political, and social life in a community is mentioned to 
be a possible outcome of reduced accessibility caused by having insufficient level of mobility in a 
society assuming high mobility. The last part of the definition mentions a society and environment 
which is based on an assumption of high mobility, which indicates a relativeness of the term; whether 
an individual’s mobility level is sufficient or not is therefore determined by the given 
environment/society. The problem of the tendency is relational since increasing levels of mobility 
actually may lead to reduced accessibility and eventually exclude those without access to more 
efficient modes of transportation (Lucas 2010).  
2.1.2 Car as dominating mode and hyper-mobility 
The concept of accessibility is dynamic and therefore subject to change which can be seen in the 
definition-framework by Geurs and Wee, at Figure 1, with the four components and their indirect 
relationship and feedback loops. Since the conditions in the components change, relationships 
between them progresses which over time affects the structure of a society and finally changes the 
accessibility level for each citizen. Cars were a gamechanger for accessibility in the 1960’s, where 
mass-production and increased welfare made cars affordable and soon became dominant in 
societies, and still are to this day (Lucas 2010). Transport by car is a very flexible and efficient mode 
of transport for a traveller in most areas, which due to door-to-door transportation almost eliminates 
any inefficient modes of transport which are linked to public transportation, such as walking. The 
travel-distance can therefore be increased significantly while travel-time is maintained. With a 
majority of people in a society being able to buy a car and thus enabled to travel further using the 
same travel-time, the overall mobility level increases. More services will therefore be within reach 
for more people, which might mean shutdowns of many smaller facilities in one area, due to more 
activities in nearby cities can be reached by more people. The segment of the population without the 
capacity of a car can however not reach the services, which causes the low accessibility, Lucas 
explains it as:  
“(…) the more mobile society becomes the more certain groups are excluded from and/or 
disproportionately impacted by the system” (Lucas 2010). 
A society which is moving towards higher levels of mobility will therefore often centralize its key- 
life-improving institutions due to reduced running costs. The risk for segments of the population to 
come out of reach of these activities due to a low level of mobility is thus increased and those who 
live too far away may lose the opportunity. Maintaining the same level of mobility can therefore over 
time lead to an actual reduction in accessibility caused by more activities are moved to more central 
locations. Reducing the usage of cars and mobility for the rest of the population is per Kenyon the 
only method planners and policy makers can use which will succeed in reducing an increasing social 
exclusion in a society (Kenyon et al. 2002), since increasing the mobility level for all is expected to 
be too expensive and may may also be very difficult from a planners perspective.   
==PAGE:19==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
18 
As mentioned in Kenyon’s definition of accessibility-related social exclusion, the problem occurs 
when high mobility is assumed in a society. Before the 1960’s it was not necessary to own a car, where 
car ownership today in many areas outside cities are nessecary in order to being able to participate 
in society. The problem of decreasing accessibility for the low mobility segment of the population is 
dynamic which can be seen from Figure 3.  
 
Figure 3 – Illustration of dynamics of diminishing accessibility for non-car users (Lucas 2010) 
The figure shows the progress of how car-mode becomes more dominant and how travellers without 
access to a car are either being pushed towards acquiring one, be concentrated in areas closer to the 
activities and therefore often also more exposed to the impacts of car use, or lose accessibility. 
Overall, the car usage increases when local services decrease, and the number of local services 
declines when more travellers use activities further away. “Hyper-mobility” describes an imbalance 
in mobility when society is adapting to car-use as the social norm, where the outcome is, as 
mentioned, fewer more centralized services and poorer public transportation coverage is thus a 
consequence (Khisty & Zeitler 2001), which can be uphold to the tendency described at Figure 3.  
Furthermore is the increase in car-use self-perpetuating, where many who identifies themselves of 
being suffering from transport disadvantage were found to be relatively wealthy and with a high level 
of mobility (Currie & Delbosc 2010). This might be explained by travellers felt level of mobility is 
attitudinal, where smaller inconveniences like congestion mainly is being perceived to be 
disadvantages by those who use car. The tendency is however still to build more effective 
infrastructure for the car-segment, which again leads to more cars on the roads (Khisty & Zeitler 
2001). This tendency is found worrisome by some, due to hyper-mobility societies mainly focus on 
those who can afford and are able drive a car;   
“The private car is the enemy of social solidarity in as much as public transport is its friend. The 
private car isolates people and puts them in competition with other road users” (Barry 1998) 
==PAGE:20==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
19 
Barry (1998) criticizes the increasing use of cars especially due to more institutions which are 
supposed to be free of charge and commonly used by a majority of the population becomes out of 
reach. The institutions which is meant to ensure a level of equality in society through free services 
therefore still primarily is for those who can afford the cost and/or time or have the abilities to 
undergo the travel. Car dominated areas therefore have isolated groups of people who due to an 
imbalance of mobility cannot complete a travel due to lack of resources, abilities, and/or other 
restrictions, while a majority of the population is able to fulfil their own needs by having access to 
proper means of transportation.  
Increasing the mobility is therefore only improving one aspect of the accessibility concept, which 
may increase certain groups vulnerability for being socially excluded. As they cannot follow the 
change in trends of travel patterns meaning consequently the overall level of accessibility is not 
improved. Instead of focusing on increasing mobility for some groups, other focus point should be 
found, where accessibility is increased without segments of the population subsequently having its 
level decreased as the cost. In a presentation by Curtis it was proposed to pursue “sustainable 
accessibility”, which he described being:   
“Achieving movement (travel) through accessibility rather than mobility”  
 
(Curtis 2013) 
Curtis’ focus is especially through planning of public transportation being an efficient mode which 
covers as many of activities as possible within a given area, which therefore should make it a 
competitive mean of travelling in a region. This is especially seen from him being one of the 
developers of the SNAMUTS (Spatial Network Analysis for Multi-Modal Urban Transport Systems) 
method of assessing public transportation, which namely focuses on coverage of activities and 
interaction of public transportation networks. He additionally mentions the planning of the land-
use, which he describes as being the location of people and activities, to be an important tool for 
achieving sustainable accessibility and should be considered at the same priority such as traffic 
planning. By having a proper planned region for land-use, which by its own already bring origin 
closer to destination, gives an improvement on reducing the need for high mobility and thereby 
increases the accessibility level. neither groups of travellers, mobility-sensitive or mobility-strong, 
may therefore be affected negatively.     
2.1.3 Low-mobility groups 
Groups which have a lower level of mobility compared to the rest of population are in risk of being 
excluded socially as poor or unavailable transportation is a potentially exclusionary factor. The 
individual need is however also an important factor when deciding the level of accessibility which is 
seen in both the approach for Lucas (2010) and the Geurs and Wee (2004). An active group will be 
more vulnerable to a reduction in mobility, while groups with fewer travel need/wishes will be less 
affected. A low-mobility group is defined from personal characteristics and therefore belong to the 
“people” factor or “individual” component, reasons might be such as resources, abilities, age (low or 
high) attitudes etc., and a stratification of people as seen from one or more of the characteristics is 
therefore necessary to ensure the results can be used properly.    
An increasing socio-demographic group in Denmark and many European countries as well (Haustein 
2012) is older people, where according to the population projection from Statistics Denmark it is 
expected to see an increase in people age of 65 or above in almost every Danish municipality and by 
2030 almost every fourth will be a member of this age group (Statistics Denmark 2010). Statistics 
Denmark also projects a higher concentration of seniors in the more remote lying municipalities, 
such as Aabenraa. The younger segment of the population is at the same time decreasing in these 
municipalities, which especially may be due to the location of higher educational institutions, where 
==PAGE:21==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
20 
students travel towards the larger cities. Consequently, the population-share of older people in the 
retirement age is increasing. Historically there have been a negative relation between increasing age 
(after 65) and trip-making, but due to changes in life-style and better health, more people who are 
above the retirement age in higher degree will maintain their mobility level (Haustein 2012), as they 
may be able to drive a car for longer. This increase in trips is especially seen in the social/leisure 
category, where it before mainly had been basic needs, such as visits to the doctor or grocery 
shopping. This indicates on one side a more mobile segment of seniors, while also an increased risk 
of further reliance on private transportation as due to a more car dominated area, which will leave 
those less mobile in the segment group more isolated. Older people are increasing in mobility where 
85 % of the age group of 65 -74 and 70 % of people aged 75 and above in Denmark feel near non 
limitations in their mobility (Haustein 2012). However, as mentioned earlier, the groups who felt 
most limitations in their ability to travel were often also the ones who conducted most trips, which 
therefore could indicate older people have a smaller need for trips and/or can conduct these with 
fewer time constraints. The focus should therefore in higher degree be on whether or not older people 
meet their own needs as seen from how important access to a car is to fulfil this. The older segment 
of the population may in many cases be suffering for low mobility, but the level of accessibility is not 
necessarily low, which is due to the other assessment factors. It is however an interesting group, as 
due its decrease in mobility and increasing size. 
A study conducted by Sonja Haustein and Anu Kristiina assessed the mobility needs of older people 
and how important a driving licences was for this group (Haustein & Siren 2014). Through a survey, 
the study gathered information on 863 individuals who were born in 1939/1940 (aged 70 at the time 
of the survey) to find the needs for the group as well as if these needs were fulfilled or not. The 
respondents were divided into three groups; those with a driver’s license, those who never had a 
licence, and those who had given up their licence. Through the interview, the respondents were asked 
to how often they conducted various activities and whether they wanted to do the activity more often, 
which indicates if there were any unrealised mobility needs. The study showed both of the groups 
without licence had more unmet needs compared to the respondents with a licence, especially the 
group of people who had owned a licence previously. Health parameters showed to be very relevant 
to the unrealised needs as well as giving up driving licence. A relation was shown for respondents 
who never had a licence to also have fewer resources, which may indicate the reason for never having 
acquired a driver licence / car. The authors expected seniors who never had a driving licence being 
more adapted to a life without car and therefore more open for other transport forms, which to some 
degree was supported by their findings of attitudes for other modes. The study furthermore analysed 
whether more information and better access to alternative transport modes (i.e. public 
transportation, biking, etc.) would improve the seniors’ mobility needs when transitioning from 
driver to ex-driver, which had been shown to be important factors in other studies however was not 
the case for the resent study by Haustein and Siren. Other transport modes could therefore according 
to the study not fully compensate for the mobility needs as compared to being able to drive a car 
(Haustein & Siren 2014).  
Other methods are therefore needed for meeting the unrealised mobility needs for the older people 
who suffer for low-mobility. An analysis of resident and travel choices for older residents analysed 
the relation between the distance to a store in a neighbourhood compared to the choice of walking 
or not, where the study showed especially citizens with a higher age to have a higher sensitivity (Cao 
et al. 2007). A threshold was found to be at around 400 meters, where most trips no longer were 
attractive for walking and other means of transportation was found necessary, depending on the 
“perceived safety in the area”, which corresponds with the framework proposed by Lucas (2010) 
concerning the environment surrounding activities. The accessibility level is therefore especially 
found in the location, and thus distances, from the older residents where neighbourhood nearby 
==PAGE:22==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
21 
activities (neighbourhood accessibility) is an very important factor for whether or not mobility needs 
are met (Cao et al. 2007). The Haustein and Siren study (2014) showed most unrealised needs in the 
category for friends and family (especially those farther away), which however is a complex category 
of activities to identify, evaluate and plan for, as the assessment then would have to be on a very 
individual level, where planners cannot optimize location of people as seen from their 
friends/relatives, which instead must be left a personal task. Measuring the level of accessibility must 
therefore take a starting point in other activities.  
2.2 Case study area 
The location for assessment is the municipality of Aabenraa. Located in the southernmost part of the 
Danish peninsula Jutland and thus near the German border, the municipality can be perceived to be 
a part of lower densely populated region of Denmark. The population is 58,869 pr. 2016 distributed 
over an area covering 941 km2 making up a population density of 63 inhabitants/km2 distributed 
over 25 towns as well as Aabenraa itself.  The municipality of Aabenraa, as well as nearby regions, is 
illustrated at Map 1. 
 
Map 1 – Municipality borders of Aabenraa  
The city-area of Aabenraa-Rødekro can be seen to have almost grown together and only being 
separated by the the E45 highway. Together, the area has a population of more than 20.000 
residents, making it the 28th biggest in Denmark when measuring by population size, compared to 
be 41st when only considering Aabenraa alone. The municipality of Aabenraa covers as mentioned 
almost 940 km2 which consists of with 25 minor towns distributed over the area. Aggregating data 
on this level may cause many uncertainties, especially when considering how travelling may be 
fundamentally different when leaving a more densely populated area. When finding trip distribution 
==PAGE:23==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
22 
in traffic modelling, the so-called gravity model is often used, which describes the ratio between 
distance/cost/time and attractiveness of a location. Hansen (1959) uses the model as well when 
describing accessibility, where the model is used as a decay function for the activities in a given area. 
Higher distance/cost/time will decrease the probability of a trip being taken, simultaneously with 
the shorter distance to other towns/cities will make it attractive and will thus increasing the 
complexity of this assessment, a more restricted area is therefore required. The confined area of 
interest for the index is therefore chosen to be for the city-area of Aabenraa and Rødekro, as shown 
at Map 2. 
 
Map 2 – Illustration of the case-study area  
2.2.1 Transportation in the area 
The E45 highway goes through the whole municipality and enables citizens from Aabenraa/Rødekro 
to reach the cities of Sønderborg, Flensburg and the triangle region within 60 minutes by car. Train 
services are spread over the major towns in the area, however, no trains are operating in and out of 
Aabenraa as due to geographical and historical reasons. The closest station with active train lines are 
in Rødekro, meaning travellers must connect there before being able to take train as a mean of 
transportation. 
==PAGE:24==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
23 
 
Map 3 - Local town busses for Aabenraa and Rødekro 
Aabenraa has five local town busses coordinated by Sydtrafik, which all have starting point at the 
bus-central in the centre of Aabenraa, with varying general frequencies between one and two 
departures an hour. The first two bus lines mainly connect Aabenraa with the station with different 
routes to service the interlaying area between Aabenraa and Rødekro, such as the hospital. The third 
bus connects Aabenraa with the smaller town of Løjt Kirkeby located north of the Aabenraa, as well 
as the area surrounding it which however mainly is located outside of the area of interest. The last 
two busses mainly service the southern and western parts of Aabenraa, among other connect the city 
centre with the city hall. The bus routes and their stops are shown at Map 3. Some lines have split 
sections of the route to service a larger area, these segments only have half frequency and are marked 
at the map with broken lines. Route 4 only services the area around the town hall during week-days, 
while it takes a shorter route in the weekends. For the sake of simplicity only the route for week-days 
is drawn on the map as well as being considered for the index.  
Regional busses are furthermore servicing the area, they all, however use the same transit stops as 
the town busses and are therefore not illustrated at the map. This means some stops have an actual 
higher frequency due to being serviced by more lines and therefore might be more attractive to live 
closer to. Several regional bus lines are operating in the municipality where many of them however 
do not have routes in the area of interest and are therefore not included.The data provided by 
Sydtrafik to the municipality of Aabenraa has not been found to be updated and a research has been 
conducted through Google Maps and the national  “Rejseplanen” of the transportation services. 
==PAGE:25==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
24 
2.2.2 Citizen location 
The municipality of Aabenraa has provided information on the location of homes for senior citizen 
at the age of 65 or above which has been illustrated at Map 4. The data is not age-specific in the sense 
of knowing the exact age of the citizen, but only contains information about the location of every 
citizen above the target age in the municipality. The total initial number of observations is 13.516, 
the required data for the index however only needs to be the location of those citizens located within 
the area of interest as seen at Map 2. The data has therefore been down-scaled to only include the 
locations of homes of citizens in the within Aabenraa-Rødekro area, resulting in a total number 5.424 
of citizens for the analysis.  
 
Map 4 – Illustration of location of the 5.424 citizens above the age of 65 within the area of interest  
The locations of the residents as presented by dots are illustrated at Map 4 where most citizens are 
indicated to be located around the centre of Aabenraa and Rødekro. The area between the two towns 
is far less densely populated, which also mostly consists of industrial districts or forest.  
2.3 Current travel behaviour  
Senior citizens were found to have higher risk of suffering for low-mobility (Lucas 2010; Lucas & 
Stanley n.d.; Haustein & Siren 2014; Haustein 2012; Cao et al. 2007) and therefore also in risk of 
being excluded of society. It is therefore of interest to examine the travel patterns for this segment 
as to see if it can be determined if the given group is exposed for a lower level of mobility as compared 
to others in the same region and furthermore uphold it to the literature as described earlier. A 
background analysis may help in the construction of the index as by recognizing important 
parameters to include as well as which to exclude. This sub-section will therefore assess the current 
==PAGE:26==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
25 
travel tendencies for the focus group in the area by using the Danish National Travel Survey 
(Transportvaneundersøgelse 2017).  
The National Travel Survey is conducted by the Technical University of Denmark with the main 
objective to chart the travel tendencies for the Danish population in the age group of 10 to 85. The 
survey is based upon questionnaires which are sent out every day, either by phone interview or 
online, for which the respondents are asked into the details of their travel trips the day before. The 
data from the survey is a sample and must therefore be considered carefully since it does not 
necessarily show the holistic picture of the tendencies in a given area, where usually 1.000 
respondents are required in a sample to meet the general assumption of representativeness.  
The survey does not have the required respondents above the age of 65 in the municipality of 
Aabenraa alone and it is therefore necessary to include the two adjacent municipalities; Haderslev 
and Sønderborg. The municipality of Haderslev is relatively similar to the one of Aabenraa as seen 
by location, population, area size, and by having one major town and otherwise smaller villages. 
Sønderborg is a bit smaller in area in area but considerable larger in population, especially for the 
town of Sønderborg, it is however found justifiable to compare the three municipalities as they are 
still in the same “category”.  Aabenraa Municipality is not a member of the survey and specific 
information for the area is therefore not accessible as the project is written in coloration. It is 
however possible to receive general data, especially due to the necessity of merging the adjacent 
municipalities. Every question in the questionnaire is optional, which means not all respondents may 
have chosen to answer every question due to various reasons, the number of respondents is therefore 
varying.  
2.3.1 Age and occupancy of the respondents  
The Danish National Travel Survey selects the respondents as seen by representativeness for the 
country as a whole and therefore aim at having similar age group in the sample as in the country. 
The number of people in an age is naturally declining as after a certain age, which also is the case for 
the sample as seen at Table 1.  
Table 1 – Age of the respondents for age group 65+ for Aabenraa, Haderslev and Sønderborg 
Age 
Percentage 
65-70 
46% 
71-75 
32% 
76-80 
14% 
80+  
8% 
 
Looking at the occupancy at Table 2 of reveals a clear majority of the respondents being retired, 
which is likely due to high age of the focus group, 3 % of the respondents are however still in the 
workforce either as employee or as self-employed. The small percentage of the respondents who are 
still working indicates no necessity of including jobs/workplaces as supply activities for the 
population.  
 
 
==PAGE:27==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
26 
Table 2 - Occupancy of the respondents for Aabenraa, Haderslev and Sønderborg 
Occupancy 
Percentage 
Retired / 
Early 
retirement 
97% 
Employee 
2% 
Self-
employed 
1% 
 
2.3.2 Trip purpose 
The purposes of the trips conducted by the respondents are interesting as the occupancy of the 
respondents is almost monotonous, especially as work-home trips usually are a very frequent trip 
purpose for many. It furthermore gives insight to the life of the travellers and helps understanding 
of which activities the travellers are interested in.  
 
Figure 4 - Distribution of trip purposes overall for the 
municipality of Aabenraa 
 
Figure 5 – Distribution of trip purposes for the older age 
group for Aabenraa, Haderslev and Sønderborg 
  
The purposes of the travels are nearly distributed equally between two categories for seniors, which 
is illustrated at Table 3, where leisure and errand are the main objectives for travel, where leisure is 
defined as participating in hobbies, sports, or anything which improves the quality of life and errands 
for example could be buying groceries. Only 2 % of the trips were to/from work which corresponds 
with the occupancies seen at Error! Reference source not found.. Leisure and errands remain t
he two main purpose categories when considering trips for every age group in Aabenraa as seen by 
Figure 5, while work/home, trips during work and education make up for 26 % of the trips. The trip 
purposes confirm the assumption of the small importance of jobs as activities and these will therefore 
not be included in the index.  
16%
38%
36%
6%
4%
Trip purpose (Overall for 
Aabenraa)
Word
Errand
Freetime
2%
44%
53%
1% 0%
Trip purpose (65+ for 
Aabenraa, Haderslev and 
Sønderborg)
Word
Errand
Freetime
During work
Edducation
==PAGE:28==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
27 
2.3.3 Trip length and production 
The average trip length can show an indication of how far the focus group travels in the three 
municipalities. Average measures can however not give a full perspective on general travel 
tendencies, especially not when the sample consist of a large area and including both people from 
towns and villages in varying seizes as well as people living outside densely populated areas.  
A trip is furthermore not to be confused with a journey as the two terms have different definition in 
the survey. A trip is defined as when as the travel from one stop or purpose to another, while a journey 
is described as the whole trip-chain from “origin-to-origin”.  
Table 3 – Trip length and production  
Age group 
Average trip 
length (km) 
Average trip 
length (min) 
Trip production 
65+ (Aabenraa, 
Haderslev and 
Sønderborg)  
42,78 
52,92 
2,90 
Overall (Only for 
municipality of 
Aabenraa) 
46,0 
50,40 
2,90 
 
From Table 3 the average trip length and production are displayed for the people aged 65+ in the 
three municipalities. The trips can be seen to be relatively large both when measured in time and 
distance, the numbers have however been affirmed by the national survey. The found average length 
indicates a great amount of people’s day in the given area is spend traveling. The average trip length 
people in the age group 65+ is relatively the same as the overall average trip length for the 
municipality of Aabenraa. Older people in the three municipalities are however travelling shorter 
distances but using longer time, which may indicate a decline in the level of mobility.  
2.3.4 Time of day for trip 
The fewer home/work trips can help explain the tendency of time of departure illustrated at Figure 
6 for the 65+ age group, where fewer are travelling in the usual peak-hours (7-9 and 15-17) during 
the morning and afternoon peak-hours. The older group still have more concentrated hours of 
departure during the days, where 10 am is the most popular hour overall and 2 pm is the busiest 
hour in the afternoon. 10 am being the hour during the day with the highest number of departures 
for the seniors may indicate a deliberate choice of avoiding the busiest travel hours and wait until 
fewer are travelling while still being early.  
==PAGE:29==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
28 
 
Figure 6 – Hour of departure for the age group 65+ for Aabenraa, Haderslev and Sønderborg 
The travel hour tendency indicates a more flexible group which is able to move more freely due the 
fewer restraints set up by the purposes, i.e. no specific meeting time at a workplace. The temporal 
component is already not included in the framework by Lucas (2010), and as the departure time 
tendencies show relatively high time availability for the seniors, the necessity of including opening 
hours and other temporal constraints in the index is reduced.  
2.3.5 Mode of transportation  
 
The mode-shares as seen at Figure 7 and Figure 8 are calculated from the total number of trips and 
more modes may therefore have been used in one trip-chain (or journey). Some modes are more 
often used in collaboration with others as connectors, as for example walking to and from bus stops 
or train stations, while other modes are purely used due to a higher flexibility since it can cover the 
whole door-to-door trip, such as car or bicycles. The figure therefore shows mode-shares where some 
of the trips have included more modes of transportation 
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
04-08 
am
9 am 
10 am
11 am
12 am
1 pm
2 pm
3 pm
4 pm
5 pm
6 pm
7 pm
8 pm - 1 
am
Time of departure during the day for senior 
residents
==PAGE:30==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
29 
 
Figure 7 - Distribution of mode of transportation as seen by the 
number of trips for age group 65+ for Aabenraa, Haderslev and 
Sønderborg 
 
Figure 8 – Distribution of mode of transportation as seen 
overall for Aabenraa 
The largest mode share for the 65+ age group is according to the information illustrated at Figure 7, 
as driver of a car, which nearly covers half of all trips. Car driver and passengers is almost two thirds 
of the total trips, while walking and biking modes are just over one third. Walking and biking are 
relatively low-scoring when considering mobility which may indicate a short distance between origin 
and destination. Walking is as mentioned before often used as a connector mode to bus or train, but 
the mode-shares public transportation is as seen at the figure covering 1 % of all the trips taken. 
Walking might therefore have been the primary mode of transport in the trips shown in figure.  
The car mode share is decreasing when comparing the age group 65+ to the overall mode share for 
Aabenraa, while walking and bicycle are increasing. The change in mode share could be due to a 
higher degree of freedom when choosing the destination with leisure as the most common trip 
purpose, while home/work trips almost completely disappears. This corresponds to Table 3 which 
displayed a small decrease in the average travel distance, while the average time when travelling 
however increased. Motorised private transportation is however continued the dominant mode of 
transportation in the area, which indicates a high number of older people who still have driving 
license and access to at a car. 
2.3.6 Number of cars and driver licences  
Most household for the older age group have a car, where 10% are without a car which overall 
corresponds with the driving licence status, as seen at Figure 10, where almost 4 out of 5 in the age 
group have a driving licence. A small number of the age group have lost their driving licence, which 
can be due to several reasons, but most likely due to the age of the focus group. 
23%
12%
48%
16%
1%
Mode of transportation (Age 
group 65+)
Walk
Bicycle
Car driver
Car passenger
Public
17%
9%
57%
15%
2%
Mode share (Overal for 
Aabenraa)
Walk
Bicycle
Car Driver
Car passenger
Public
==PAGE:31==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
30 
Figure 9 – Car-ownership for age group 65+ for Aabenraa, 
Haderslev and Sønderborg 
Figure 10 – Driver license status for age group 65+ for 
Aabenraa, Haderslev and Sønderborg 
The findings from the national survey will make some concrete impacts on the index such as jobs 
and temporal constraints not will be included. The output from the survey has furthermore expanded 
the knowledge on the population such as car being a dominant mode, while public transportation 
has very few users in the area as seen by the whole region.  
 
 
10%
80%
10%
Car-ownership per household
0
1
2 or more
13%
79%
8%
Driver licence status
Has never had one
Has one
Has had one
==PAGE:32==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
31 
3 Methodology 
The four components concept of accessibility presented by Geurs and Wee (2004), and the similar 
approach presented by Lucas in the transport-related social exclusion review (Lucas 2010), both 
have various dimensions with different potential measurements. Relevant methods must be selected 
and combined for a potential index to be as competent as possible in assessing the level of 
accessibility for the chosen segment. This section will present the proposed framework for the 
structure for the index which will be based upon the approaches presented by both Geurs & Wee and 
Lucas.  
3.1 Measuring accessibility  
As it is given from the various definitions, the concept of accessibility depends on its given 
perspective, which means a measurement is reliant on the focus of the assessment. It is therefore 
needed to find possible methods in order to build a model for the accessibility index. Table 4 gives a 
more specific understanding of the measurement-based perspectives as seen from a given point of 
view (components) as laid out by Geurs and Wee (2004). The given method in a matrix cell does not 
represent a holistic assessment of accessibility but only a specific focus, which meanwhile ignores 
other relevant elements, meaning a combination of the measurement-tools presented in the table 
however, to some degree, reflect a more well-oriented aspect of the level of accessibility in a given 
area.  
Table 4 – Possible methods of measurements as seen from perspective on component (Geurs & van Wee 2004) 
Measure 
Component 
Transport 
Land-use 
Temporal 
Individual 
Infrastructure-
based 
Travelling speed: 
Vehicle-hours 
lost in congestion 
- 
Peak hour-period; 24-
hour period 
Trip-based 
stratification, e.g. 
home-to-work, 
business 
Location-
based 
Travel time 
and/or cost 
between location 
of activities 
Amount and 
spatial distribution 
of the demand for 
and/or supply of 
opportunities 
Travel time and costs 
may differ, e.g. 
between hours of the 
day, between days of 
the week, or seasons 
Stratification of the 
population (e.g. by 
income, educational 
level) 
Person-based 
Travel time 
between 
locations of 
activities 
Amount and 
spatial distribution 
of supplied 
opportunities 
Temporal constraints 
for activities and time 
avail- able for activities 
Accessibility is 
analysed at 
individual level 
Utility-based 
Travel costs 
between 
locations of 
activities 
Amount and 
spatial distribution 
of supplied 
opportunities 
Travel time and costs 
may differ, e.g. 
between hours of the 
day, between days of 
the week, or seasons 
Utility is derived at 
the individual or 
homogeneous 
population group 
level 
 
Stratification of the population already gives some restriction as well as characteristics to the 
assessment as is seen in the location-based measure for the individual component. The matrix 
proposes focus on the spatial distribution of supplied opportunities when considering the land-use, 
and for location-based measures the demand and supply perspective is included as well. Given the 
importance of neighbourhood accessibility (Cao et al. 2007) in addition to the focus on sustainable 
accessibility (Curtis 2013), a prioritized focus on proximity to activities (supply) seen from the 
==PAGE:33==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
32 
location of the citizens (demand) is pyritized since it was found to be vital to whether or not 
transportation was needed.  
Research on assessment of services levels in transportation is extensive when it comes to private car, 
however when concerning public transportation, no usual measurement method is present. This may 
especially be due to the complexity of the network while also often in lack of data (Hawas et al. 2016), 
three main points have however been identified as vital when assessing public transport; access to 
public transport (transit stops at people), duration of travel and number of departures (travel time 
and frequency), and access to destinations (transit stops at activities) (Mavoa et al. 2012). The stops 
near demand (people) as well as the stops near supply (activities) combined with journey time should 
therefore give a relatively well-reflected aspect on the service level of public transportation in an area. 
Travel-time calculations may however be difficult to use in the index for potential trips as almost 
infinity possibilities are present, even when considering smaller networks. A bus route may be using 
a time-table which can be measured in time, but connecting all potential combinations of stops for 
just one line increases the complexity. It therefore requires information on origin and destination 
for each traveller to calculate exact travel times, which increases the need for necessary material. 
Origin-destination data usually only include information on journeys which have taken place, and 
increase the complexity further when trying to find the possible travel time for trips to other places. 
Another focus could be on the potential accessibility level provided by the public transit system in 
the area.  
SNAMUTS (Spatial Network Analysis for Multimodal Urban Transport Systems) is mentioned by 
Mavoa (2012) during a review of possible methods of GIS-based destination accessibility. The model 
is developed and presented by Carey Curtis and Jan Scheurer as an alternative method of measuring 
the potential access given by a public transport system (Curtis & Scheurer 2010). The model is based 
upon spatial activities instead of destinations and their spatial proximity from a public transport 
system. It differs from many methods of measuring public transportations as it does not use travel 
time as its cost, but instead has based it on the average travel time for a bus-route. The method of 
SNAMUTS should according to its developers be considered a supply-side tool, which does not 
provide any calculation on the usage of a transport system, but instead investigates its part in 
assisting travel to activities in its given area. Seven key indicators for SNAMUTS is presented which 
may however concern the connectivity of the network and are therefore meant for be used to bigger 
cities with a more extensive public transportation system. One of the indicators however adds a land-
use perspective as being a contour-measurement of the number of activity nodes within the 
catchment area of the transit stops in the network. Using a land-use perspective to the assessment 
of the level of transportation service will build on the same data and may give a better understanding 
of how well the routes are planned as seen from the facilities/activities they pass through. Not 
including travel time will however restrict the holistic understanding of the public transportation 
and only highlight if it can provide proper access to activities. A report produced by Incentive 
Partners for the Ministry of Transportation found a bigger need for focus on frequency of service 
when the travel time was shorter, however without setting an exact threshold for when the 
importance of travel time becomes greater than the one for time between departures (Incentive 
Partners 2010). Frequency is an easier level of service to measure and as seen from the report from 
Incentive Partners, it can help to determine the quality of the public transportation in the area.  
 
 
==PAGE:34==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
33 
3.2 Location-based measurement  
Both the land-use and transport component in Geurs and Wee’s framework can be described as 
location-based due to their focus on location and characteristics for demand, supply of 
activities/facilities and transportation services. The location of citizens is considered as the demand 
for both the land-use and transportation aspect and this may therefore be seen as the starting point 
of the analysis. Citizens are relatively easy to identify, especially since their characteristics are found 
from the focus group, while activities and proper transportation services may however be more 
difficult to identify and characterize.  
3.2.1 Identification of characteristics for activities/facilities 
The land-use component focuses on the location and characteristics of supply and demand, where 
location of demand is the housing of the people aged 65+ and supply is considered as activities or 
facilities which have the interest for the age group. Finding the right characteristics of supply may be 
complex and can never be fully representative due to the diversity of individualities. The list of 
activities should however attempt to include the characteristics of both needs as well as leisure for 
the age group of 65+ based both on the national survey as well as the list of activities as proposed in 
the described literature (Haustein & Siren 2014; Barton et al. 2012).The main supply of 
activities/facilities for the land-use component is categorized overall as follows:  
- 
Medical facilities 
- 
Cultural activities/facilities i.e. museums, libraries, communal room, cinemas 
- 
Other recreational activities/facilities i.e. parks, and similar 
- 
Shopping facilities (groceries)  
Doctor visits and grocery shopping facilities which are included in the list may be characterized as 
needs as they are normal necessities in most people lives. Only recreational facilities/activities in the 
interest for older people will be included, which however may be a wrongful consideration as the 
exact interest for seniors is unknown. The list can furthermore not include personal needs or leisure 
such as location of family and friends or private associations such as communities and alike.  
Some areas may seem more attractive than others due to proximity of a higher number of activities, 
however, several of the activities may either very alike or have same characteristic, which therefore 
not offer a citizen more diverse span of facilities/activities. Having one medical office nearby is in 
this analysis considered to be an important need for the population segment, any additional will 
however not influence the level of medical care for a citizen and therefore should not impact 
accessibility level as only one is needed. Activities are also assumed to have different influence of 
either importance or attractiveness, where some activities are considered as critical for the age group, 
while other are considered to have a lower influence.  
3.2.2 Distance buffer  
The possibility for interactions between demand and supply is a key measure for accessibility which 
among other parameters is determined by the distance between these. A distance for the fixed citizen 
buffer must be decided before the proximity of the land-use entities can be found. The chosen 
distance is crucial for the output of the index, but is also complex due to its simplicity where only the 
bee-line is considered and not the actual travel length. The distance from the home of a citizen to an 
activity/facility in this analysis will therefore be the minimum or “best case”, but the needed travel 
length will mostly be longer. In some extreme situations, a barrier effect will give wrong results where 
the measured distance between an entity and a home of a citizen is described as “within range”, but 
a highway/railway/river etc. may block the way and therefore not being easily accessible.  
==PAGE:35==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
34 
 
Figure 11 – Graphic illustration of problematics when using simple distance buffer 
Figure 11 illustrates the problem of using a simple fixed distance buffer, where both citizen 1 and 2 
are within proximity of the store according to the buffer, however a river separates the first citizen, 
for which the store is not easily accessible. In the index, both citizens will be described as within 
range of the store, where in reality only Citizen 2 will. A more common problem would be the 
necessity of following roads from origin to the entity, which will prolong the travel distance and the 
distance as described by the beeline is very rarely accurate. The distances for the fixed buffers must 
therefore be conservative set to make up for the unknown real length between demand and supply.  
3.2.3 Categorical ranking  
Activities are for this reason put into a categorically ranking system to ensure a uniqueness in an 
area which also takes the influence of the activities into account. All categorizes are ranked with a 
weight being distributed between them to ensure a normalized score, which is crucial in allowing 
possible comparable assessments to other similar towns.  
 
 
==PAGE:36==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
35 
Table 5 - Categories with assigned weight  
Rank 
Category 
Assigned weight 
1 
Activity A 
Weight A 
2 
Activity B 
Weight B 
3 
Activity C 
Weight C 
4 
Activity D 
Weight D 
5 
Activity E 
Weight E 
6 
Activity F 
Weight F 
 
3.2.4 Assigning score for land-use 
The score for index citizen-based, where each citizen receives an accumulated score, where in land-
use aspect it is depending on the proximity of identified activities. A citizen may only have one 
“active” proximate category as described earlier, meaning several activities with similar 
characteristics will not be accounted for. The principle of categoric proximity is illustrated at Figure 
12.   
 
 
Figure 12 – Graphic illustration of the principle of proximate categories 
==PAGE:37==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
36 
Figure 12 illustrates three citizens with various activities/facilities surrounding them and a fixed 
distance buffer spanning from the citizens. If an entity is within a citizen’s distance buffer it will be 
counted for and written into the citizen’s attribute table from where the final score will be found as 
seen by the number of unique categories nearby. The score is assigned based upon the following 
formula:  
𝐿𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑖= ∑(𝐵𝑗∗𝑊𝑗)
𝑁
𝑗=1
 
Where 
i is the individual citizen 
j is the activity category 
B is the binary factor for the categories where 
 
B is 1 if any activity for the j category is in proximity to the i citizen 
 
B is 0 of no activity for the j category is in proximity for the i citizen 
W is the weight for the j category 
An example of calculating a land-use score based upon the illustration from Figure 12 can be seen at 
Table 6.  
Table 6 – Example attribute tables for citizens with finalized score for land-use  
Category 
Number Medical 
Shopping 
Number Cultural 
Finalized score 
Weight 
50 
30 
20 
Citizen 1 
0 
3 
0 
30 
Citizen 2 
2 
1 
0 
80 
Citizen 3 
1 
1 
1 
100 
 
In this simple example 100 points can be reached, which can be achieved by having activities from 
all categories nearby. Having many activities or facilities is as mentioned not necessarily an 
advantage for a citizen, as it can be seen from the table do all the citizens in the example have three 
entities within their distance buffer, but still assigned various final scores.  
• 
The first citizen has three entities nearby which all are from the shopping category which 
causes an assigned weight of 30 to be assigned. No other activities from other categories are 
within the buffer and has no additional score is therefore assigned.   
• 
The second citizen shares one of the shopping entities with citizen 1 and has furthermore two 
entities from the medical category nearby. An accumulated score of 80 is from the weight for 
shopping (30) and medical (50). 
• 
The third citizen shares entities from medical and shopping category with the two other 
citizens, as well as having a proximate entity from the cultural category. The finalized score 
for the last citizen is therefore 100 for the accumulated weight of Shopping, Medical and 
Cultural.  
The last citizen therefore has the highest score for land-use due to the proximity of facilities/activities 
of various characteristics, which indicates a more suitable location for the age group as based on the 
chosen categories, identified activities, and assigned weights.  
==PAGE:38==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
37 
3.2.5 Identification of transport services  
The transportation aspect of the index uses the same method as land-use of being citizen-based with 
score assigned as seen by proximity of entities, which in this part are transport services. The relevant 
characteristics of facilities for transportation need to be identified as before with the land-use aspect. 
Analysis of transportation is complex as different modes have various characteristics, where some 
are easier to assess while others have an expanding number of parameters and therefore harder to 
measure. This location-based aspect of the index will not consider private transportation (e.g. cars 
and bicycles) due to both a lack of data and to obtain a focus on transport services provided by the 
municipality. The transportation service for this assessment is required to have following 
characteristics for being relevant for a location-based approach for the index:   
• 
Public transportation  
• 
Located within the area of interest.  
• 
Mainly operate within the area. Train stations are therefore not accounted for as they mainly 
only service regional/inter-regional areas. A bus stop at a station will however still be 
accounted for.  
• 
Have a fixed location of operation (i.e. bus stops). Services such as “Flex Traffic” is therefore 
not accounted for in this  
A schematic illustration of the proximity principle for the transport services can be seen at Figure 13.    
 
Figure 13 – Graphic illustration of principle of proximity for transport services with bus line as example 
Living close to a bus line is not enough to gain a higher sore, since the bus service should be physically 
accessible, which requires having a bus stop nearby. Citizen 3 as seen at Figure 13, lives close to a 
==PAGE:39==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
38 
bus line, but has however no stops within proximity, in this example the citizen will therefore not 
receive any score for the transport aspect.   
3.2.6 Assigning score for transportation  
Mobility is perceived to become more crucial as the number of nearby activities/facilities from the 
land-use decreases. Travel should be achieved by movement instead of mobility as described by 
Curtis (2013), which means access to activities is reduced, more mobility is needed in order to reach 
the desired destination. This should be reflected in the assigned score for nearby transportation 
services. A citizen located within proximity of a several various activities/facilities nearby is less 
likely to travel to others instead of using the ones nearby and therefore not in the same need of 
transport services. The assigned score for the transportation aspect should therefore weigh higher 
for citizens with lower score for the land-use aspect of the index and transportation services will 
therefore function as an “add-on” to the land-use aspect. 
The various services in the area must be identified, which includes the different modes of public 
transportation and the level of service for these. The indicator provided by the SNAMUT method 
concerning contour measurement will provide information on the coverage of service based on the 
stops proximity to the land-use activities spanning from 0, meaning very poor service with no 
activities nearby, up until 1, meaning provision of movement to all types of activities. The calculated 
land-use factor will count for the whole line and not just the single transit stops along a route. The 
reasoning for this is once a person has boarded a bus/train the major inconvenience has passed, 
meaning travel time is ignored, which has been mentioned earlier. Longer travel time will usually 
count as negative factor for reaching activities, but will not be accounted for based on the relatively 
short distances in the town in focus. Service level will instead be on the frequencies of departures, 
which as described have a high influence on the felt level of service on shorter trips (Incentive 
Partners 2010). An example of identifying transportation services can be seen at Table 7.  
Table 7 – Example of identifying transportation services and finding their service-factor 
Mode 
of 
transportation / line 
(route) 
Service level 
Dimensioning 
frequency 
(FMax) 
Transport parameter 
factor 
Line Land-use 
(LLU) 
Peak frequency per 
hour (FLine) 
Mode/Line 1 
40 
3 
6 
0.20 
Mode/Line 2 
60 
1 
6 
0.10 
Mode/Line 3 
70 
4 
6 
0.46 
  
The example shown at Table 7 present three lines of public transportation where the service level is 
based on a land-use score found from the location of the respective lines transit stops, as well the 
peak frequency during the day. A dimensioning factor is introduced which is used to normalize as 
well as to compare the given services to as desired level of service, which in this case is frequency. 
The proportion of the actual frequency of the lines compared dimensioning level is found which will 
be used to find the transport parameter for each of the lines given line line-use the following 
calculation:  
𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑃𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟𝐹𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟= 𝐿𝐿𝑈∗𝐹𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒
𝐹𝑀𝑎𝑥
∗0.01 
A citizen will be assigned the value of transport parameter for a given line if a transit stop is within 
proximity, should multiple lines operate nearby the line with the highest value will be written into 
the citizens attribute table. Some modes of public transportation may be seen as more attractive, 
==PAGE:40==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
39 
such as metro or train services, which can be reflected in the fixed distance buffers where more 
appealing modes have a larger acceptable walking length. In larger cities, the public transportation 
modes usually include high-class services, which however are rare in less densely populated areas. 
Busses are usually the backbone of public transportation for intern travel for towns with a relatively 
low population density and will therefore be the focus for the add-on transportation parameter.  
3.3 Location-based index  
Having found the calculations for land-use score for each citizen as well as the transportation 
parameter for public transportation in the area, the finalized index for the location-based 
measurement can be found. The final index is presented as the following formula:  
𝐿𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑈𝑠𝑒+ ((𝐿𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑀𝑎𝑥−𝐿𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑈𝑠𝑒) ∗𝐼𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒𝐹𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟∗𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑃𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟) 
(1) 
(1) The final expression for the accessibility index which later on will be used as input per 
individual citizen.  
The main input for the index is the activities/facilities proximity score, land-use, which will be 
ranging between 0 and a given max. As mentioned earlier, citizen with a lower score will have more 
to gain from having transportation services nearby, which is indicated by the parameter, which can 
influence the residue (missing share) for the citizens score. Being able to influence the whole 
remaining part of the score is however excessively as it means a citizen with 0 land-use score can 
achieve a 100 score on the index, a new factor must therefore be found to decide the amount of the 
residue which can be added. The inconvenience factor is given as a percentage of the missing share 
for the land-use score and can therefore range between 0 and 1. If the factor is 1 then the whole 
residue can be influenced by the transport parameter, while 0 will mean no influence at all.  
The index must however be presented at an aggregated level for a better understanding of the result. 
The index can be presented at three main levels.  
• 
Single score  
The scores assigned to citizens is the basis for the index, but may not be visualized as much due 
to the various scores from a specific location.   
• 
Overall score 
The index may be presented as a total average of the citizens’ score within an area of interest. It 
is however not possible to visualize the overall score or pinpoint focus areas as it only consists of 
a single aggregated number. The score may therefore mainly be used when comparing the results 
to other similar towns.  
• 
Grid zones 
A balance between an overall and specific score may be found in fixed grid zones, which and be 
assigned the average score of the citizens within its borders and visualized at a more aggregated 
level.  
3.3.1 Weighted Population index 
The accessibility index as proposed will assign a score based on a general focus and will therefore not 
give an in-depth description of the given area. By adjusting the scores to as seen by different 
perspectives of the index, as either different weighing or a new consideration of relationship between 
components, may help expanding the understanding of the performance of the area.  
==PAGE:41==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
40 
The index for location-based measurements will as presented in grid zones not be reflecting the 
population density due to an average score. Low-scoring zones may only include a few citizens, while 
other low scores zones which might have a higher density will not will be described by their 
appearances. Focus should be on those zones with a low index-score and a relatively high population 
density, these areas are in higher need of attention and improvement of these zones will raise the 
score for several citizens, helping the overall score for the index. The zones are found using the 
following formula which is a reciprocal value of the average zone index-score:  
𝑊𝑃𝐼=
𝑁𝑖
∑𝑆𝑖+ 1 
WPI is the Weighted Population Index Score 
Ni is the total number of citizens within zone i  
∑Si is the summation of the average score for the zone i 
Denominator (∑s) has been offset by one in order to avoid dividing by zero. From this formula, four 
scenarios can be established:  
Table 8 – Scenarios for the weighted population index 
Scenario 
High index-score 
Low index-score 
Low 
population 
density 
WPI < 1 
A small number of citizens live within 
close range of various activities. No 
attention required. The zone is a 
suitable location for an increase in 
citizens 
WPI ≈ 1 
A small number of citizens are out of 
range from activities/facilities. The zone 
is not necessarily a focus area due to the 
low population density, but an increase 
is not recommended. 
 
High 
population 
density 
WPI ≈ 1 
A high number of citizens are within 
range of activities. No attention 
required. 
WPI > 1 
Focus zone 
Many citizens live out of range from 
activities/facilities. Improvements in 
this zone will benefit most citizens. 
 
The result for the weighted focus-score will range between 0 and up until the population of the given 
zone, which will occur if the index-score is 0 and a higher score will therefore indicate a poor 
performance of the area. The WPI can however not be normalized due to the interval of the index-
score being between 0 and 100, while the population density in a zone has no upper limit. The upper 
classification of the WPI score will therefore be subject to variation, for most parts it can be set up in 
the following scheme:  
WPI < 1 (High) 
1 < WPI < 2 (Medium) 
2 < WPI < N (Poor) 
The last levels of the classification may as mentioned be changed due to the population of the given 
zone in question. The ranking given above has 1 as the critical value for a high score, as a zone can 
have a population of 1 and a score of 0 (1 due to added point), which will result in a WPI value of 1, 
which is not a good index-score but acceptable condition as due to the low population. A visualization 
of the weighted score may include more intervals as focus should be on the zones with the highest 
WPI, which are the poorest performing areas.  
==PAGE:42==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
41 
3.3.2 Weighted Area-Mobility index 
If residents in a zone have activities from all categorical nearby, the zone will receive a full index 
score indifferent of the coverage by public transportation. In a scenario where a zone has a high land-
use score but a low level of transport service, the residents might be self-sufficient in accessibility, 
where the zone however is relatively inaccessible. A zone with many activities should be accessible 
for other citizens outside of the given area to expand the number of users to the activities. A formula 
is therefore proposed to identify zones with a high land-use but poor level of public transportation 
services.  
𝑊𝐴𝑀= 𝐿𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑈𝑠𝑒∗𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑃𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟−𝐿𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑈𝑠𝑒∗(𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑃𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟−1) 
Weighted Area-Mobility is based on assigning a high score to zones with many activities and high 
level of transportation, while not punishing the zones with a low land-use and poor transportation. 
Only zones with a poor level of transportation while still having a high land-use will receive a reduced 
score. The inconvenience factor is not used as the actual transport services alone is in focus and 
therefore needs to be assessed fully.  
The first part of the formula is based upon the land-use in relation to the provided level of 
transportation. A higher score for the land-use component will result in the score being more 
sensitive to the transport services. Values from the first part of the formula can therefore range 
between 0 and 100. The second part of the formula penalises zones which are poorly-connected to 
the transportation while still considering land-use. Values from the second part of the formula can 
therefore range between -100 and 0. Combining both sections will give result in a score ranging 
between -100 and 100. It should be noted, a transport parameter of 0.5 will always result in a WAM-
score of 0. Four scenarios are described based upon the formula, which also was the case for the 
weighted population index.  
Table 9 – Scenarios for the Weighted Area-Mobility index 
Scenario 
High level of transportation 
services 
Parameter > 0,5 
Low level of transportation 
services 
Parameter < 0,5 
Low land-use 
score   
(< 50)  
0 < WAM < 50 
Residents have a low variety of 
activities/facilities, but however 
has a high level of transportation 
services, as the index focuses on 
transportation the residents will 
receive a small boost to the score 
as seen from their land-use 
-50 <WAM < 0 
Residents in this zone have received a 
low general index score as they are 
performing poorly in both the 
components. The WAM-index however 
focuses on the relation between land-
use and transportation services and will 
therefore only mildly penalize a zone 
with poor land-use. 
High land-use 
score 
(> 50) 
50 < WAM < 100 
Residents in the zone both have a 
high variety of activities/facilities 
as well as being well connected to 
the transportation system, 
citizens from outside therefore 
also have access to the zone 
-100 <WAM < -50 
Residents have a high variety of 
activities/facilities nearby but are 
however in lack of proper public 
transportation services, which indicates 
the zone is also not accessible from 
other citizens.  The index therefore 
penalizes the zone. 
The WAM-index can be used when planning new transport lines. Connecting the two lowest scoring 
scenario groups with a bus line will increase the mobility in both especially since it will link low and 
high land-use scoring areas together.  
==PAGE:43==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
42 
3.3.3 Segment orientation 
The proposed accessibility index attempts to include all citizens meaning it can be considered a 
compromise-based approach. The importance of activities and facilities and distance buffer are 
found from an overall perspective, which is a balanced assumption. A segmentation of older people 
in the area could be seen from personal mobility, where a younger segment might be more mobile 
by themselves and might be looking for more “active” activities, such as sport facilities and this strong 
mobility group might also be willing to walk further. The opposite might be the case for a 
segmentation focused on citizens who are mobility-impaired and thus in need of short distances or 
help to access activities. A change in orientation requires a new evaluation of the basic input for the 
index, which are as follows:  
• 
Weighting of activities  
• 
Fixed distance buffer radius (walking distances) 
• 
Dimensioning of service level for public transport 
• 
Inconvenience factor  
Using a segmentation-oriented weighing may also open the index up for other groups of the area of 
index, where other “mobility impaired” groups can be included, such as citizens below 18 (driving 
licence) or 16 (moped licence) or generally physical impaired groups.  
3.4 Interviews 
The current categories and their assigned weights are based on information from literature, as well 
as intuition to some degree. Finding how well-fitting the senior-citizen profiles are could help in 
validating the index, as well as identifying issues which requires attention. A qualitative bottom-up 
approach may also assist in understanding possible important factors when describing tendencies. 
This section will therefore through interviews in the area assess the index in its present form, as seen 
from responses on the categories and their importance. 
Both quantitative and a qualitative data are desired results from the interviews, where in-depth 
answers may help interpret the reasoning behind the found importance on the activities. The 
interviews approach therefore needs to have two agendas; finding a quantitative answer for the rank 
of each of the activities and a qualitative response to this. It is however found difficult to have too 
many qualitative interviews due to time restrictions, and the interview scheme therefore proposed 
to include two interview approaches to obtain both types of data while also satisfying possible time 
constraints: 
• 
Individual  
The objective for the individual interviews is to find quantitative responses to the 
importance of having the listed activities close to the target group. The interviews will 
not be transcribed, instead the interviewer is filling out a question “check-list” as seen 
from the answers from the respondent.  
• 
Plenary 
A longer session with several respondents which objective is to give qualitative 
responses the use of the various activities and how important it is perceived to have these 
proximate to their homes. The interviews are transcribed and can be used to interpret 
the results from the individual approach.   
 
==PAGE:44==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
43 
As it is desired to find a qualitative reasoning to the ranking of activities importance, both interview 
approaches will have the same questions being asked. Both interviews methods may be conducted 
regardless of order as the results first will be interpreted later during an analysis, the answers from 
the plenary session will as mentioned not be used for ranking of the activities.  
3.4.1 Designing questions 
The main purpose of conducting interviews in this research is as mentioned to validate both the 
chosen categories as well as their importance for being able to participate in society. Questions must 
therefore mainly concern the priority being in proximity to the categories.  
Sonja Hausteins interviews for the paper concerning seniors unmet mobility needs (Haustein & Siren 
2014) is used as inspiration for finding relevant questions for the respondents, as it was also used for 
identifying the current categories and their assigned weighting. The Haustein and Siren research 
(2014) especially focused on the respondents’ frequency to a list of eight “everyday” activities, which 
are given as:  
- 
Shopping 
- 
Shopping at specialist store   
- 
Bank, Post 
- 
Doctors, hospitals etc.  
- 
Friends/family nearby 
- 
Friends/family farther away 
- 
Pursuing one’s hobby  
- 
Get out w/o special purpose  
Several of the categories are individual-based located, such as family and friends, and hobbies which 
have been mentioned as being too difficult to include in a quantitative approach because too many 
variables then would come into play. A reflection of the importance of the non-measurable activities 
can however be useful for the plenary sessions in order to see if they maybe overlap with already 
identified categories. The qualitative bottom-up evaluation may be used to assess the importance of 
the more individual activities, as long as the used categories in the current index are included as well.  
In the survey by Haustein and Siren 863 respondents were asked into how often they participated in 
the listed activities on a scale from 1 ([almost] never) to 6 ([almost] every day). The result, as seen 
from Figure 14, showed highest frequencies for shopping (groceries), friends and family nearby, 
pursuing hobbies, and to get out without special purpose. Activities with lower frequency is shopping 
at specialist stores, bank and post, and friends/family farther away, while the lowest being visiting 
doctors or hospitals. The respondents are asked into and separated as seen from their driving licence 
status (never-drivers, ex-drivers and drivers), which however does not seem to indicate a difference 
in the frequency of participation of activities, with the exception of the bank and post category.  
==PAGE:45==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
44 
 
Figure 14 – Frequency of the listed activities (Haustein & Siren 2014) 
The weighting for the land-use score in the index is based upon a current perception of how 
important it is to have the activity close, seen from both need and frequency. While using the 
Haustein and Siren’s and Barton et al. (2012) research to provide information concerning the level 
of frequency, the questions for the interviews in this analysis may focus on the perceived importance 
of being close to certain activities. The priority of the questions will therefore be to rank the categories 
to see if the current weighting is valid for the target group in the area.  
The ranking of categories will be representing the land-use score of the index, where the 
transportation-section also needs to be validated. The Haustein and Siren (2014) research also 
focused, as mentioned earlier, on the unrealised mobility needs. This was seen from if the 
respondents wanted to participate more in activities if possible, which gave indication on whether 
people are being restricted due to lack of mobility. The interview question can be inspired by this 
approach, while also finding the most and least used modes of transportation, to consider if use of 
some modes causes more unrealised mobility needs than others. Given the time restraints and 
therefore also an expected low sample-size, the interview approach will not be going into depth with 
the demographics or health of the respondents, other than age and driver-licence and the 
respondents home location. The questions for the interview can be seen in the appendix and are as 
seen formulated in English, however Danish will be the spoken language during the interviews. The 
chosen list of activities for which it is desired to know the importance of proximity are:  
- 
Doctors 
- 
Groceries (shopping)  
- 
Shopping at specialist store (Clothes, bakery, lottery etc.)  
- 
Cultural facilities (Cinema, theatre, library etc.)  
- 
Sport facilities (Gym, swimming pools, fitness centres etc.) 
- 
Recreational (Parks, green areas etc.)  
- 
Allotment gardens  
- 
Friends and family  
==PAGE:46==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
45 
The list of activities for the interviews can be seen to have been extended when compared to the five 
categories used in the current index for the land-use score. Changes are found in the additions of 
“shopping at specialist store”, “sport facilities” and “family and friends”. The first one is found in an 
expansion from the “groceries” category and is inspired by both the Haustein and Siren (2014) and 
Barton et al. (2012) research where more niche shopping was included or shopping was split into 
more categories. The second is a split in the “cultural facilities” where sport facilities have their own 
category due to an assumption of restriction in mobility also could be due to health reasons which 
limits the use of sport facilities. The interview approach may be able confirm or disprove these 
assumptions. The last addition is “family and friends”, which as mentioned is not possible to plot on 
a map due to too many individual parameters, but is used especially for the plenary approach where 
it may be found whether activities also can function as meeting places.  
It would be favourable to have each of the respondents rank between the eight categories of activities 
as this would require the seniors to evaluate the importance of these as seen against each other. This 
is however perceived to be too difficult to conduct due to the many possibilities for the senior and a 
Likert1 scale is used instead. The respondent is asked about the importance of each of the eight listed 
categories and the response is marked on the given scale by the interviewer, for who the question 
sheets is purely made for. From the results from the individual interview, a weight can be multiplied 
to level of the response on the Likert scale which will assign each category a score and can thus be 
ranked as seen from each other. The scheme is as follow:  
- 
5 points to each response of responses of “Very important” 
- 
4 points to each response of “Important” 
- 
3 points to each response of “Moderately important”  
- 
2 points to each response of “Little importance  
- 
1 point to each response of “Unimportant”  
The last part of the questionnaire will be focusing on the respondents perceived level mobility and if 
they feel restricted in participating in any of the listed everyday activities. The respondents are 
furthermore asked into their most and least preferred modes of transportation which hopefully can 
be linked to any unrealised mobility needs. Acceptable walking distances is the last question which 
will be used to evaluate the distance buffers for activity/transit stop to see if these are set reasonable 
at the current level.   
3.5 Use of Geographic Information System (GIS)  
GIS is an ideal choice of tool when presenting the results from the calculations. The system is broad 
term, but it may be used to register and model geographical data to which the output can be used for 
assessment and further analysis. For this assessment, GIS will be used to plot the location of homes 
of senior citizens, the evaluated activities and public transit stops. The software applied for the index 
has been the open-source application “QGIS”.  
Each category of activities, as well as citizens and transit stops are added as a vector layer to the 
geographical model either by being plotting manually or by having received the coordinates. In 
addition to their location, other information can be stored for each entity where each category can 
contain different attribute fields to which various data can be stored. For example, citizens may have 
fields describing their address by street, floor, postcode etc. One unique ID (ObjectID) is given to 
each citizen which for this assessment is the main attribute for residents, as long as the stratification 
concerning age constraints has been conducted before the layer is added to the model.  
                                                        
1 Scale:” Very important” – “Important” – “Moderately important” – “Little importance” – “unimportant” 
==PAGE:47==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
46 
The application can create polygons as distance buffers from each vector (entity) with a given radius, 
from which other vectors within the borders can be counted. The counting of vectors is based upon 
their category meaning other attributes not are being considered as well as several analyses has to 
be conducted, one for each category. The polygons however contain the same attributes as the vectors 
they are based upon, meaning the added information found from the analysis can be joined back to 
the citizens attribute fields by joining them with the polygons by their ObjectID. Each citizen-vector 
therefore contain information concerning the number of activities within its radius, from which the 
land-use score can be calculated by simple “if-statements” using the integrated python console. The 
same procedure is conducted again for the transportation aspect, where lines and their transit stops 
are being the considered entities, similar to citizens, the score however is assigned to each line as a 
whole. The accessibility index can thus be calculated as given both the land-use and transportation 
aspect. The index score is stored as an attribute for each citizen to which the information can be 
added to grids, or zones, by spatial overlap which gives a clearer understanding of the performance 
of the various regions of the case-study area.  
 
 
==PAGE:48==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
47 
4 Application to the case  
Applying the location-based index for the aspect requires geographical data which mainly consist of 
the position of citizens of the considered target group as demand, as well as the location and 
characteristics of activities for the land-use aspect describing demand, and transportation services 
for the mobility dimension. Based on this data, the accessibility level can be calculated for the area, 
where most input however are based upon assumption, where the interview approach can assist in 
providing more reliable information. This section will present the location-based data, apply and 
present the initial accessibility index followed by a calibration based on an evaluation of interviews 
conducted in the area.  
4.1 Data 
 
The data used for applying the location-based index for the area of Aabenraa-Rødekro is presented 
and illustrated, if possible, in order to gain an understanding of the area and the characteristics of 
the location-based data. The chosen categorised activities as found from literature is furthermore 
weighted as seen from their importance of proximity. A grid consisting of 100x100 meters zones is 
applied as seen at Map 5 to simplify the results for the citizens. Far from all are inhabited, especially 
which is understandable considering the usual density of a town being higher in central parts. 834 
zones have at least 1 citizen living within its 100x100 meters area, and most of the zones have a fairly 
low population as it can be seen at the illustration, with the highest densities being surrounding the 
centres of Aabenraa and Rødekro. 
 
Map 5 – Population density and identification of nursing and care homes, as well as senior housing 
==PAGE:49==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
48 
4.1.1 Activities  
The characteristics of the activities must be identified before the location of the supply for citizens 
can be found. Overall features of the facilities have already been listed earlier as based on the 
literature, especially as seen by the paper by Haustein and Siren (2014) and Barton et al. (2012). The 
studies described important activities such as medical services, shopping for food as well as for other 
products, and indoor and outdoor recreational facilities. Pursuing hobbies and seeing friends and 
family was furthermore found important, which however are difficult destinations to locate and 
measure as they are unique for each citizen. From the gathered characteristics, a list of identified 
important general activities is completed as well as located. The categories as well as the activities 
are based on approximations, which should be noted.  
• 
Medical  
Medical visits were not found to be very frequent (Haustein & Siren 2014) but the need of being 
relatively close is perceived to important when considering the age of the senior in relation to 
emergencies. The locations of medical facilities are medical centres and have been found through a 
list of doctors in the area. The area of Aabenraa-Rødekro has in total 9 medical centres mainly located 
in the city-centre of Aabenraa, with a few exceptions in the southern part of the city, as well as in 
Rødekro. Hospitals are not included as these are a centralized facility and cannot due to their size be 
found within close proximity to each citizen.  
• 
Shopping  
The category of shopping is mainly defined by the characteristics of groceries, but also pedestrian 
streets with a high concentration of shopping possibilities have been included in the category list. 
The locations can vary between being of a single or cluster of stores. 13 locations have been found for 
the category in Aabenraa-Rødekro.  
• 
Cultural  
The cultural activities are inspired by the indoor recreational facilities as presented by Barton et al. 
(2012). The category includes libraries, museums, sports halls, cinemas as well as churches. The 
category therefore spans relatively wide, covering both more classic cultural facilities and churches 
to sport activities and cinemas. The wide span is most likely to cover most interests; however, a 
citizen might gain a higher score without the person being interested in the given activity. Research 
of the area has found 13 locations where the majority is located close to centre of Aabenraa with a 
few facilities in Rødekro.  
• 
Allotment Gardens 
Allotment gardens, or allotment gardens (Danish: Kolonihave), are included in the land-use aspect 
to function as an outdoor recreational activity as well as a research of the area showed relatively 
many in the area. The allotments of gardens functions as either compensation for people living in 
apartments or as an additional garden for residents in houses. 7 locations of allotment gardens in 
the area of interest, exclusively located in the outskirts of Aabenraa.  
• 
Parks 
Green areas in the Park category spans over parks, forest with trails and graveyards and are therefore 
also a part of outdoor recreational activities. Many of the locations spans over large areas and more 
geographical points are therefore added. The additional points should not influence the final score 
as the category’s weight only can be assigned once to each citizen. In total 7 locations have been found 
for the category, mostly located in the outskirts of Aabenraa.  
==PAGE:50==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
49 
• 
Unspecific  
The final category takes any relevant activities/facilities which cannot be put into a category and may 
therefore be seen at a “left-over” category. Only two facilities have been identified for the category 
which are the town hall in the southern part of Aabenraa and the local police station in the northern 
part. The unspecific category is necessary if it is desired to both include activities outside of the listed 
groups as well as to uphold the normalization.  
Information regarding locations of the activities/facilities has been found through a research of the 
area of interest for each of the categories. Locations for the identified activities for the listed 
categories is illustrated at Map 6.  
 
Map 6 - Identified activities within the case area of Aabenraa and Rødekro 
A concentration of activities is clearly seen around the centre of Aabenraa where most categories 
seem to be present, with the exception of the last one which describes the unspecific facilities. The 
centre of Rødekro has however relatively few of the identified activities, where only shopping 
facilities and a library was found. A doctor is located in the eastern part of the town as well as a 
church in the south. Parks are seen to have many point-entities, which however is due to the necessity 
of having them described as vectors and not polygons for the further work. It is therefore attempted 
to mark each entrance to parks or trails for forest to indicate the access point for these outdoor 
recreational activities.  
The categories are listed at Table 10 as well as their individual weighting. When assigning the weight 
to the categories, a ratio between the necessity and frequency of a visit have been considered. The 
assigned weights are however mostly based on speculations as based on the described literature. The 
==PAGE:51==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
50 
last category for unspecific is assigned a medium weight as several activities may be present, which 
may span from an actual highly influent level to a lower level of importance and the score assigned 
of 15 is therefore a compromise as being between the highest (30) and lowest (5). 
Table 10 – Categories and their assigned weight for the initial index 
Rank 
Category 
Assigned 
weight 
Examples 
 
1 
Medical 
30 
Medical centres (Hospitals not 
included) 
 
2 
Shopping 
25 
Groceries, supe 
 
3 
Cultural recreational 
activities 
15 
Museum, library, sport facilities, 
churches etc. 
 
4 
Allotment gardens 
10 
Allotments, 
5 
Parks and green areas 
5 
Parks, Forrest, graveyards 
6 
Unspecified activities 
15 
Unspecific activities 
 
4.2 Initial accessibility index 
The index may now be conducted to area of Aabenraa and Rødekro, where the land-use will be found 
initially, followed by an assessment of the transport services to which the full index may be applied. 
This section will present the results for the location-based measurements in the progressive fashion 
as described, where more parameters of the index are being added over time.  
4.2.1 Land-use score 
The distance for the fixed buffer for each citizen has been chosen to be 300 meters, due to the focus 
on activities being very close as well as the chosen mode of transportation should be walking. The 
real distance will as mentioned usually be longer than the given radius for the distance buffers, and 
the threshold at 400 meters as set by Cao et al (2007) is therefore reduced to 300 meters to make up 
for the approximate actual distance.  
Given the chosen distance for the fixed buffers, the index for land-use is calculated by counting the 
entities of the identified categories within the range of each of the citizens which are added it to each 
of the citizens information. From the number of unique categories proximate to the residents a score 
based on the category weight can be found for which a finalized land-use score is assigned. The plot 
average score from the citizens within 100x100 zones has been calculated via QGIS and is illustrated 
at Map 7.  
==PAGE:52==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
51 
 
Map 7 - Index for the land-use parameter illustrated in 100x100 meter grids 
Map 7 shows a clear tendency of zones having a higher score when being closer to the centre of 
Aabenraa, where many entities were identified. The map highlights three main areas with a higher 
score, where clusters of activities from unique categories are present. These areas are located at the 
town-midpoint of Aabenraa, Rugkobbel in the southern part of Aabenraa close to a smaller mall, and 
around Rødekro station. These areas all have shopping, cultural and recreational activities close by, 
where Aabenraa and Rugkobbel furthermore have medical clinics and are thus receiving the extra 
score.  
Some areas in the northern part of Aabenraa are ranging between 20 to 40 in the land-use score, 
which especially is due to the nearby shopping facilities. The score could be considered low but is 
however still ranking higher than the surrounding areas and may therefore be viewed as minor 
clusters of activities. These areas especially lack medical and cultural activities to be able to reach a 
comparable score as the highlighted centres. No zone in this analysis for Aabenraa reach a full 100 
score for land-use, which mainly is due to the definition of the unspecific category and its identified 
activities, where only two locations have been found. A higher number of entities in this category 
would increase the likelihood of a zone receiving a full score. Furthermore, no parks are present at 
the centre of Aabenraa, which also keeps the zones from a full score.  
4.2.2 Transportation 
The transport services which meet the listed requirement are only local busses operating in and 
between Aabenraa and Rødekro. Regional busses are not included as the they already are following 
almost the exact same routes as town busses, but however with a lower frequency as well as being 
less accessibly due to higher steps when boarding the bus, which may exclude mobile-impaired. The 
==PAGE:53==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
52 
town busses with 300 meters buffers emerging from the transit stops are illustrated and shown at 
Map 8, as well with the listed activities. The same distances are used as for the transportation aspects 
as for the activities proximity. This consequently means a citizen in a worst-case scenario may walk 
300 + 300 meters combined when using public transportation for reaching an activity. The 
inconvenience factor is used to correct for the extra effort by reducing the possible added score. Only 
town busses are included in the assessment meaning there are no various distance buffers for the 
bus lines as the mode of transportation is assumed to be equally attractive for the potential 
passengers, not considering other parameters. 
 
Map 8 – Illustration of bus lines with 300 meters fixed distance buffer from stops with plotted activities  
The illustration at Map 8 also show the categorical activities and their approximate distance to the 
bus lines. It is important to once again mention the uncertainty of using distance buffers for 
proximity measurement, as the real distances to the activites may not be as close to the transit stops 
as illustrated. Most lines are seen to have stops within range to several various facilities, which 
especially is due to all routes originating from the same bus-hub at the central part of Aabenraa, close 
to the central activity centres. Based on the given input from the bus stops proximity, a land-use 
score for each bus line can be calculated.  
 
 
==PAGE:54==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
53 
Table 11 – Town bus lines with respective number of stops within proximity of the activity categories  
 
Medical 
Shopping 
Cultural 
Gardens 
Parks 
Unspecific 
Line 1 
2 
7 
4 
1 
2 
0 
Line 2 
5 
10 
4 
0 
0 
0 
Line 3  
2 
3 
4 
1 
0 
2 
Line 4 
1 
4 
3 
1 
0 
3 
Line 5 
2 
4 
4 
1 
7 
0 
 
The number of activities within proximity of the bus stops are found and listed at Table 11, which 
contain the sum of stops with at least one of the activities from the identified categories nearby for 
each of the lines. Many of the same activities are accounted for at least twice due to a very short 
distance between the bus stops, meaning several distance buffers are overlapping each other and 
therefore consequently having the same activities within proximity of multiple bus stops. This is for 
example seen for bus line 4, which has 3 stops within range of entities from the unspecific category, 
even though the category only withholds two activities. In this case, the city hall is accounted for 
three times.   
The transport parameter for each line can be found by calculating a score for the bus lines similar to 
land-use, in addition to including frequency of the lines, to which a dimensioning factor is associated. 
Deciding the factor is problematic, as it could be set after the highest frequency in Denmark, such as 
a metro line or a busy bus line in Copenhagen. This level of public transportation for cities or larger 
towns is however not comparable to a town like Aabenraa where the frequency is significantly lower, 
which again may be applicable for most middle-sized towns in Denmark. The dimensioning factor 
has therefore been chosen to be based upon the frequency level of the fifth largest town in Denmark, 
Esbjerg, as this town is neither being too large or too small and therefore possibly acceptable, while 
also still being an ambitious goal for service level. The shortest time between departures in Esbjerg 
will by the summer 2017 be 15 minutes, meaning a frequency of 4 per hour, which therefore will be 
used as FMax. From the information and assumption of dimensioning frequency, the transport 
parameter can be found as seen at Table 12.  
Table 12 – Service level for the bus lines and the consequently transport parameter 
Lines 
(routes)  
Service level 
Dimensioning 
frequency (FMax) 
Transport parameter 
factor 
Line Land-use 
(LLU) 
Peak frequency 
(FLine) 
Line 1 
85 
2 
4 
0.43 
Line 2 
70 
2 
4 
0.35 
Line 3  
95 
1 
4 
0.24 
Line 4 
95 
1 
4 
0.24 
Line 5 
85 
1 
4 
0.21 
 
No line reaches a full LLU as none have all categorical activities near to the bus stops. Line 3 and 4 
are however very close and are only in need of passing a park to have a full LLU score. The town 
buses have a varying operation frequency of 2 to 1 every hour, which at best is half of the 
dimensioning factor consequently reducing the LLU by at least 50 %. Those lines with one departure 
==PAGE:55==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
54 
every hour are assigned with only one fourth of their score to the transport parameter, even though 
some of the lines these have highest LLU.  
Since all required input has been collected for both citizen and transportation proximities, the full 
accessibility index can be found by combining the data from the given method which will produce 
results for the initial assessment.  
4.2.3 Full accessibility index for Aabenraa 
The score for land-use is used as the foundation for the index, where the transport parameter is used 
to be a compensating add-on value. The added value is designed to benefit especially those citizens 
in lack of nearby activities by assigning a higher score if they are in range of public transportation. 
The inconvenience factor however dictates how much of the remaining land-use may be affected by 
the transport parameter and is the given index shown at the map set to be 0.75, meaning 75 % of the 
missing land-use score may be affected. The additional inputs are applied to the land-use score and 
the accessibility index for the initial assessment of the case can be calculated. The index is illustrated 
at Map 9.   
 
Map 9 – Initial accessibility index for Aabenraa illustrated in 100x100 meter grids 
Applying the full index to Aabenraa illustrated at Map 9 gives an additional score to relatively many 
areas, where most zones now have at score higher than 0. One main difference in the maps are zones 
located along the main roads have received a boost in score compared to before, which is due to the 
roads also being the routes for the bus services. This is especially seen in the southern/south-western 
and north/north-eastern part of Aabenraa as well as the southern part of Rødekro. These areas do 
not have a high neighbourhood accessibility but is however compensated by the public 
==PAGE:56==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
55 
transportation services which is operating nearby. Outskirts regions which are farther away from 
major roads are still performing poorly in the assessment as they have not received any additional 
score. Red zones on the map are therefore areas which are without both local activities as well as 
public transportation services.  
The difference between the land-use and full index score seen respectively at Map 7 and Map 9 is 
especially seen in the areas with a low land-use score but within proximity to public transportation. 
The additional score for transport services are biggest at zones with few activities due to the score 
being assigned to the remaining part of the land-use. Areas with an already high score and within 
range of bus stops also receive a bonus, which however will not be as significant as the one given to 
areas with a low land-use score. The differences in scores between land-use and full index is 
illustrated at Map 10, where the zones which have changed most significantly are those with a 0 score 
in land-use, while being within proximity to line 1 which has the highest transport factor.   
 
Map 10 – Difference in citizens score as seen from land-use and full accessibility index 
Figure 15 illustrates the share of citizen score for both the land-use and full index. Before 
transportation was added, more than 50 % of the senior residents were located in areas with a score 
below 10. Following the additional score from public transportation, the share was reduced to below 
30 %, where especially the interval 30-40 increased which most likely is due to the areas proximate 
to line 1. A small share of the residents has increased their score to be in the second-highest interval, 
which previously were without any citizens.  
==PAGE:57==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
56 
 
Figure 15 – Change in score between land-use and full accessibility index  
The average overall score is expected to increase as transportation only assign additional score, 
where, as seen by Table 13, the average score is almost doubled from 14.6 to 27.4. However, many of 
the citizens are still located in areas with no direct access to any of the listed activities or nearby 
public transportation.  
Table 13 – Overall score for the Aabenraa case for the initial accessibility index 
 
Land-use 
Full index 
Average score 
14.6 
27.4 
 
4.2.4 Weighted Population Index  
Citizens living in poor performing areas are most likely required to have their own private modes of 
transportation, such as bike, moped and/or car, to reach activities/facilities farther than at least 300 
meters away if they are not willing to walk. The former map highlights many of these areas in 
Aabenraa, which need focus from planning if to be improved, however population density of those 
poorer performing zones should be taken into consideration as more people in these zones will 
benefit from improvement toward higher accessibility The WPI method is therefore applied to the 
full index to identify zones where many residents are out of range from nearby activities as well as 
coverage by public transportation. These areas can be seen at Map 11, where the index highlights 
those areas which have a low index-score and a relatively high population density.  
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
0-10
10-20
20-30
30-40
40-50
50-60
60-70
70-80
80-90
90-100
Percentage of senior residents within interval as seen from 
both land-use and the full index
Land-Use
Full index
==PAGE:58==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
57 
 
Map 11 – Weighted Population Index for the initial accessibility index illustrated in 100x100 meter grids 
The map indicates relatively many areas which are performing poorly, where almost all are located 
in the outskirts of Aabenraa and Rødekro. By comparing Map 9 and Map 11 it is possible to identify 
those areas which are performing poorly in the WPI also have an overall low index score assigned, 
which is in accordance with the underlying thought of the weighting. Low population density is 
indicated in zones with a low overall score from both the full index and WPI. These areas suffer from 
low accessibility but only few residents are affected. Focus areas are, seen from WPI, especially where 
larger clusters of poor performing zones are located, which from the illustration at Map 11 are in the 
western and northern part of Aabenraa as well as the north-western and southern part of Rødekro. 
Zones with the highest score, thus worst performing, is in Rise in Rødekro, where one of the largest 
nursing homes of the municipality is located. Four zones are assigned a WPI between 12 and 23, 
same as the zone population, meaning this area has a high density of senior citizens without any 
activities of public transportation nearby. Making improvements in regions with several poor 
performing zones will not only benefit the residents in the specific zone, but also the adjacent which 
may lead to an increase in accessibility for the whole region.  
4.2.5 Weighted Area Mobility index 
Mobility can be seen to have two main purposes; provide movement out and movement in to a given 
area. The perspective of mobility which has had the focus in the accessibility index has been on the 
provided services away from a location since it was important to see if the residents have services. 
Zones with a high land-use score should however be accessible since they have been identified to 
have activities which are attractive for citizens living outside. A Weighted Area Mobility assessment 
will highlight these zones and may help identify areas where improvements in mobility can be 
==PAGE:59==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
58 
beneficial. The WAM analysis of identifying poor level of transport services in areas with a high land-
use is illustrated at Map 12.  
 
Map 12 – Weighted Area Mobility for the initial index illustrated by 100x100 grids 
No zone is receiving a score above 0 which mainly is due to the frequency of the busses compared to 
the dimensioning factor, which at least is at double. The transport value, based on the line land-use, 
will therefore always be reduced by half and never reach over 0.5 which, due to the method of 
calculation, is necessary in order to reach a positive WAM score. The inconvenience factor is not 
applied for WAM, but only when calculating the full accessibility index.  
Three regions are seen to have a lower WAM score compared to the rest of the zones within the area 
of focus which are in; the southern and central part of Aabenraa and north-eastern part of Rødekro. 
The zones in Rødekro are only performing slightly worse compared to the rest of the town and are 
located a residential area just out of range of bus services. The area in the southern part does have 
service provided by the town bus line 4, however, the service is only available during the weekends, 
as the weekday route goes along the town hall instead. The weekend route has not been considered 
to be the main service for the bus and has therefore not been included in the analysis. Upgrading the 
line to have full service during weekdays will increase the mobility in the area in addition to 
improving the assigned WAM score, which however might reduce the score elsewhere. The last area 
in focus is the central part of Aabenraa, which mainly consists of a pedestrian zone combined with 
narrow streets are unfit for bus services due to historical dimensioning. Improving mobility in this 
area may be very difficult due to the physical constraints and furthermore reduce the amenity value 
of the area. The low WAM score is therefore considered to be a part of any older town with an old 
centre.  
==PAGE:60==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
59 
4.3 Results from interviews 
The index has provided a method of assessing accessibility for seniors seen from the established 
assumptions and input. It is however in its current form based on a top-down analysis without 
knowledge of the actual needs, preferences, or attitudes of senior citizens in the area. Gaining more 
information on the situation in the area of focus would help improving the validity of the index and 
furthermore also provide a different method to assess the current level of accessibility in Aabenraa 
and Rødekro. A more qualitative approach to the area is therefore taken to validate and improve the 
current accessibility index. 
The responses from the interviews will in this sub-chapter be presented from both approaches to 
give a more full-oriented representation of the seniors’ perception of the importance of the distance 
to activities and whether their mobility needs are satisfied.   
4.3.1 Location and settings  
The activity centre “Kirsebærhavens Aktivitetscenter” has been used as location for the interviews. 
All users of the centre must either be over 60 years old, early retired, or a pensioner and being a 
resident of the municipality. The centre is controlled by the users and function as a volunteer-based 
community where the daily lead however is employed by the municipality of Aabenraa. The users of 
the centre must furthermore be self-reliant, meaning, they must be able to get to the location by 
themselves and not be dependent on any further help other than their own. The centre is therefore 
an obvious choice as location for the interview as the user-profile is in accordance with one for the 
research. Very mobile-impaired will however not be included in the interviews because these are not 
users of the centre and therefore not represented in the interview approach.  
The interviews were conducted over two days from the 23th to the 24th of May, which was a briefer 
period than planned for, but the holyday of Ascension Day (Thursday) shortened the week. The 
number of users was furthermore reduced due to the shorter week as well as the approaching 
summer vacation.   
4.3.2 Results 
Only 12 individual interviews were conducted both due to the short time period and the fewer users 
in the centre, however, three plenary interviews were accomplished which may help support the 
fragile sample as well as the further evaluation and discussion of the result.  
An average score (spanning from 1 to 5) is calculated from which the categories can be ranked 
amongst them, which can be seen at Figure 16. “Family and Friends” are valued the highest, while 
very few have found living within range of allotment gardens to be important. The results from the 
individual must be met with some degree of scepticism, as the users at times were confused by the 
questions and therefore answered based on their own idea of what they had been asked. Each 
category will be evaluated based both on the results from the individual interview and plenary 
sessions. A full transcription of each of the three plenary sessions is attached in the appendix.  
==PAGE:61==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
60 
 
Figure 16 – Ranking of the eight categories from the responses from individual interviews 
- 
Family and friends (Score: 4.9)  
Seeing family and friends has received the highest rank on scale from all respondents except for one. 
Replies from the plenary interviews also gives an indication on the importance of the category, where 
during the first session a user points out many activities are usually in participation along others, 
thus at some level satisfying the need for seeing people.  
- 
Recreational (Score: 3.8) 
Being able to walk in a park and/or visiting green areas has also been valued very high, with a clear 
majority of the respondent evaluating it to be “important”, which however also brings it down more 
than a whole score-point compared to the “Family and Friends” category. Some of the respondents 
were during a plenary session indicating they feel as they live in the middle of nature with one saying; 
“We actually have it just around the corner”2, implying Aabenraa to be located within natural 
recreative activities, with others from same session acknowledging and confirming they share the 
same opinion. Different attitudes are however present, with one respondent seeing a lack of parks in 
Aabenraa; “I would have to say we lack this here in Aabenraa (…) I do not think we have any nice 
parks here – Maybe the smaller ones down at (…)”3. There is therefore a difference in the view from 
the two respondents, where one perceives Aabenraa to be in the middle of nature by being close to 
the sea and forests, while the other one addressing a lack of “official” parks. A perception of being in 
nature may be enough to fulfil the need of having parks close. Others may be in more need of having 
official parks close, which however also is easier to plot on a map compared to a perception which is 
difficult to evaluates accessibility satisfaction on the basis of. The different perception of nature may 
also be caused due to poor interviewing skills which gives various conceptions of the question.  
                                                        
2 Translated from Danish: ”Det har vi jo lige rundt om døren” Plenary interview page 3.  
3 Translated from Danish: ” Der vil jeg nok sige at der mangler lidt hernede i Aabenraa (…) Ja, jeg 
synes ikke at vi har nogen særligt fine parker – Vi de har de små dernede ved …”. Plenary session 2 
- page 5 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Community Gardens
Specialist Store
Sport Facilities
Doctor visit
Cultural Facilities
Groceries
Recreational
Familiy and Friends
Ranking of categories based on the individual interviews
Very important
Important
Moderately important
Little Importance
Unimportant
==PAGE:62==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
61 
- 
Groceries (Score: 3.4)  
The third highest scoring category is shopping for groceries, which is defined both by convenience 
stores and supermarkets, where a majority of the respondents from the individual interviews has 
given it an “important” rating on the scale.  Several present at the plenary sessions pointed out the 
comfort and importance of having the possibility of being able to buy groceries close to their home. 
One respondent remark: “It would be nice to get to down to the street, across the corner and then 
have a store – But that is not the case anymore”4, which clearly indicates a desire to have stores 
closer.  
Having nearby stores is perceived as important, especially as a senior where it may not be possible 
to carry too heavy bags home from a convenience store. A problem with carrying the articles home 
also might increase the necessity of taking more trips to bring everything home, or simply not being 
able to go shopping. For some seniors, assistant is required when shopping for groceries which is 
supplied by the Dane Age Association which two respondents at two different plenary sessions 
inform they are using this initiative for shopping. The service is weekly where the seniors are picked 
up at their homes addresses and driven to supermarket in the town from where they are allotted time 
to conduct their shopping and afterwards brought home with their articles. The service is offered for 
both Aabenraa and Rødekro, and in other smaller towns in the municipality.  
- 
Cultural facilities (3.3)  
The importance of having cultural facilities nearby is according to the responses from the individual 
interviews almost as important as being able to buy groceries without walking too far. This might be 
due to an unclear questioning of the respondents and general poor interviewing performance, 
especially as several participants during the sessions started listing the different cultural activities 
around the town of Aabenraa. It is however understood as the users found the facilities important 
since it connects them to the municipality with concerts and other happenings, as well as meeting 
people.  
- 
Doctor (3.0)  
Having medical facilities close are not perceived to be important compared to the category currently 
having the highest weighting of the activities. According to the responses for the interviews, the visits 
to a doctor are relatively few and usually also scheduled well before which makes it possible for the 
seniors to plan for public transportation and if necessary a cab if in a hurry. Other participants 
however pointed out they consider it important having a doctor close, however without giving any 
reason to it. A medical centre may therefore not be necessary to have in the neighbourhood, but still 
important to have within a reasonable distance.  
- 
Sport facilities (2.3)  
Cultural and sport facilities are both in the same category in the land-use score for the initial index, 
however as argued before, less healthy seniors may not see the two of these as equally important. In 
this survey, the category is split and from the individual interviews results a difference in perception 
of importance it is indicated, where sport facilities are less valued when compared to cultural. During 
the plenary sessions, several respondents points out the fitness centre associated with the activity 
centre at Kirsebærhaven, as well as they use the municipal swimming pool. Some of the sport 
facilities are however also used as cultural facilities e.g. the local stadium which can be used for both 
                                                        
4 Translated from Danish: ”Det kunne være rart at man kom ned til gaden over på hjørnet og så 
have en forretning – Men det har man altså ikke længere”. Plenary session 2 - page 4 
==PAGE:63==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
62 
sport purposes or as a spectator, as one of the respondents say: “I attend handball (…) I have my 
regular seat in the hall”5, some of the location may therefore still be seen as combined. Several of 
the respondents mentions fitness centres, which may indicate these as location which should be 
included in the category.   
- 
Shopping at specialist stores (1.8)  
Adding another shopping possibility was as mentioned inspired by the Haustein and Siren’s (2014) 
research. This focus of this category is relatively unspecific but includes buying items which are are 
non-groceries, such as clothes-stores, pharmacies or more special articles which are sold at niche 
stores. Few respondents from the individual interviews found the category to be “moderately 
important” or more. The lack of clear classification of the activities may have caused 
misunderstandings since not all possibilities of the category is explained. More respondents 
mentioned shopping in the centre of the town if they are looking for gifts or something else more 
niche inspired. Other remarkes no special need for buying other places than at supermarkets as their 
assortment is wider than a usual convenience-store, or going south of the Danish-German border to 
go shopping as it is significantly cheaper and the distance is only 30 kilometres.  
- 
Allotment gardens (1.3) 
The category of allotment gardens has not been found to be important with only two respondents 
from the individual interviews rating them more than “unimportant”. Several of the respondents 
from the plenary sessions mention the many gardens but did not find them important. One 
remarked, those who own an allotment usually are people from the centre of town who lives in an 
apartment. Living very close to one’s allotment is therefore rarely a necessity as the purpose of the 
garden is to be a replacement of not having one close.   
4.3.3 Unrealised mobility needs 
The respondents were furthermore asked if they at times felt restricted in participating in activities 
due to lack of mobility. The results from the individual interview can however not be used to provide 
any quantitative answer as the sample size is far too small to give any proper response, especially if 
should be seen from driving licence status or preferred mode of transport. The respondents from the 
plenary sessions were asked the same questions, which may give some indication on whether or not 
the senior residents feel they have any unsatisfied mobility needs.  
Very few gave indication of being in lack of mobility, especially those with a driving licence and car, 
as well as those being able to use their bike or scooters without any problems. One mentioned some 
problems reaching activities in the music and theatre hall of Aabenra which was problematic due to 
the low service levels of the busses, to which another responded she could take a Flex-traffic cab. 
Following this comment raised some uncertainties among the present seniors on whether or not 
anyone could, which led to a respondent sharing an experience with the Flex-traffic: “I have once 
tried to have called the hospital in Sønderborg. (…) Then they asked me, how I usually travelled to 
everyday activities, - I walk or use the town-bus, - Oh well, then you can just do the same when 
going to Sønderborg, just take the regional-bus, then the discussion had ended (..) that can restrict 
one a bit”6. It is unsure if the respondent took the bus or any other mode of transportation to the 
hospital, but acknowledged some felt mobility restriction.  
                                                        
5 Translated from Danish: ” Jeg går til håndbold (…) Jeg har min faste plads nede i hallen” Plenary session 
1-  page 5 
6 Translated from Danish: ”Men jeg har prøvet en gang at have ringet fordi jeg skulle til Sønderborg sygehus 
(…) Så spurgte de til mig og om, hvordan kommer jeg kom frem i det daglige – Der går jeg eller tager 
==PAGE:64==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
63 
During the same session, several of the respondents criticised the level of information for the public 
transportation in the town where time-tables are no longer printed and sent out, which means the 
seniors must order plans or find the time of departure by themselves. The same respondent who 
shared the experience with Flex-traffic told another, concerning a trip to the national hospital in 
Copenhagen. “I had plans on going to the national hospital in April and it was actually kind of 
annoying because it was my daughter who should help, but then she should have three days off (…) 
she would have to take me to the national hospital and then, if I were so lucky, I could come back 
home on the third day – But if not, then she would have to stay and would have to take time off 
from work (…) I’m not taking a train to Copenhagen by myself”7. The respondent therefore did not 
attend the examination at the hospital, and indicated the main reason to be not wanting to take the 
train to the capitol by herself due to the lack, or fear of not understanding, the given information. 
Others at the session acknowledge they share the opinion.  
The shared experiences from the respondents at the plenary session showed unrealised mobility 
needs, or at least perceived mobility-restriction, which however in two of the cases were trips going 
out of town and one even out the region. Most of the respondents felt competent in their mobility 
level when being within the area of focus (Aabenraa and Rødekro), with few feeling some needs not 
being fulfilled due to lack of information and poor service. However, as seen in the shopping for 
groceries category, many agree on some activities to be close due to some restriction in the mobility-
level for the seniors.  
The acceptable walking distance was included in the survey but gave too many various answers to 
which an average length could be identified. A more specific question could most likely have helped 
in achieving more usable results for the acceptable walking distance.  
4.4 Calibration of the index  
The results found in the qualitative approach show conflicting perceptions of importance of the given 
activities between the respondents and the current index weighting. A calibration is therefore 
necessary to ensure the index to be an efficient indicator as possible in finding areas with a low level 
of accessibility. This section will go through the current activities categories and compare these to 
the results from qualitative approach to see if they are in need of adjustment  
It is desired to maintain the current 0–100 point index as it gives an easy and clear understanding 
of the performances of the areas. Consequently, meaning a calibration in means of a weight-increase 
in one category will dictate a decrease in another. It is vital to maintain a mutual level of importance 
between the categories, which however is difficult to assess due to the small sample size and the 
quality of the plenary interviews. The newly assigned weighting will therefore be from an overall 
evaluation based upon the interviews as well as literature.  
4.4.1 Evaluation of categories and weighting 
The two highest weighted categories in the first iteration of the index, medical and shopping, seem 
to have been very poorly weighted. Doctor visits have been shown to have a relatively low frequency 
(Haustein & Siren 2014) as well as not being perceived so important by the respondents in the 
                                                        
bybussen – Nå ja, det kan du også gøre når du skal til Sønderborg, så tager du bare rutebilen, så var det 
færdigdiskuteret (…) Ja, og det kan så godt begrænse én lidt”. Plenary session 3 page 5.  
 
7 Translated from Danish: ”Nu skulle jeg til Rigshospitalet her i april og det var faktisk træls fordi så var det 
min datter som skulle, men hun skulle have fri i tre dage (…) Men så skulle hun transportere mig til 
Rigshospitalet og så, hvis jeg var heldig, kunne jeg komme hjem på tredjedagen – Men hvis ikke, så skulle 
hun jo blive der. Og hun skulle så have fri fra arbejde. (…) Jeg skal ikke med tog til København alene.” 
Plenary session – Page 8.  
==PAGE:65==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
64 
interviews. Shopping however has a high frequency and has also been found to be important in the 
interview.   
Medical is currently the highest-valued while shopping is scoring second-highest, which in the 
calibration need to be adjusted to the advantage of the groceries category. Shopping is in the index 
focused on groceries especially as convenience stores and supermarkets are easily characterized and 
identified. If the category instead is expanded to consider any kind of retail then it will be more 
difficult to identify the stores and to know when the “need” has been satisfied. One respondent in a 
plenary session expressed he did not find niche stores important and he instead could get non-
groceries articles at supermarkets. This inspires to adjust the category to be split up in three activities 
as “niche”, “convenient” and “supermarket” sections which will function as a progressive weighting. 
The gradual weighting will be set to assign a citizen the lowest value if only niche stores are in 
proximity, a medium score for convenience stores (groceries) and finally a maximum score for 
supermarkets. A combination of having both a convenience and niche stores nearby will result in the 
maximum score being assigned, which is considered to be equivalent to the weight for supermarkets. 
Supermarkets have a larger selection, while a combination of niche and a convenience store is 
perceived to cover approximately the same a supermarket. Having a convenience store and only one 
niche store nearby will however not to be enough for the maximum score to be assigned and only a 
concentration of smaller stores will be accepted in the index. This is due to the perception of wider 
variety offered at a supermarket only can be equivalent when several smaller niche stores are present.   
The result from the interviews furthermore showed a different perception of cultural and sport 
facilities, where cultural activities were perceived to be more important to have close and the category 
will therefore be split into two. Examples of cultural activities are cinemas, libraries, theatres, and 
sport facilities where it is possible to be spectators, such as stadiums. Sport activities includes but 
are not limited to swimming pools, stadiums, sport halls and fitness centres, which will be identified 
and localised. The cultural activities should according to the results from the individual interviews 
be assigned with a higher weigh compared to sport facilities as they were given a relatively high 
ranking.  
Allotment gardens were by the respondents not found to be an important activity to within range of. 
Allotments are often in some distance from their owners’ home location since they function as 
replacement to having a private garden and the category is therefore removed from the land-use 
score. The current 10-point weight allocated for the category is released and can be distributed for 
other categories, which especially is useful with the new division of the cultural activities as well as 
the expansion of the shopping category.   
 
 
==PAGE:66==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
65 
4.5 Calibration of weighting   
The land-use score of the index has been calibrated based on the evaluation of the result from the 
respondents in the interview approach. The calibration of the weighting of the adjusted categories 
can be seen at Table 14.   
Table 14 – Adjusted categories with new weighting  
Rank 
Category 
Weight 
Examples 
 
1 
Niche stores 
10 
Smaller stores  
Convenience stores 
25 
Convenience stores 
Supermarket  
35 
Supermarkets  
Niche + convenience  
35 
- 
- 
2 
Cultural 
20 
Museum, library, cinemas, theatres, 
etc. 
 
3 
Parks and green areas 
15 
Parks, Forrest with trails, graveyards 
4 
Medical 
10 
Medical 
centres 
(Hospitals 
not 
included) 
 
5 
Sport 
10 
Swimming pools, stadiums, fitness 
centres 
6 
Unspecified activities 
10 
Unspecific activities 
 
 
• 
Shopping 
The progressive weighting is as shown at the table an increasing score depending on the specific 
shopping facilities nearby. The scheme assigns scores as previously where only one score can be 
assigned from each category, meaning no more than 35 points can be given to any citizen from the 
shopping activities nearby.  
• 
Cultural  
Cultural facilities were found to be relatively important by the respondents and its weight is therefore 
increased from 15 to 20 points. Sport activities without the possibilities of being a spectator has been 
moved and is instead being a part of the category.  
• 
Parks and green areas  
The category with the biggest increase in weight are the parks and green areas as it had the second 
highest rating by the users of the activity centre, following friends and family. It is however not being 
weighted as high in the index, as several of the respondents during the plenary sessions agreed on 
them feeling they were being close to nature just by living in Aabenraa. The score is therefore a 
compromise of the different perceptions.  
• 
Medical  
The medical category has been significantly reduced since several seniors did not find them vital to 
have nearby as they went infrequent and often planned the visit ahead. Having a doctor close was 
however found to be important to some of the respondents, as well as not being found to be 
redundant in a neighbourhood. The category is therefore kept in the land-use score but with a 
significantly reduced weight.  
==PAGE:67==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
66 
• 
Sport 
The new category focuses on the physical active activities and includes but are not limited to public 
swimming pools, stadiums, and fitness centres. The weight is relatively low which is due to the low 
ranking by the respondents, in addition to not all of the target group being able to use these because 
of possible reduced physical abilities.  
• 
Unspecific activities  
The last category of the unspecific activities is kept from the initial land-use scheme. The weight has 
however been lowered and is therefore no longer ranking from an average score, which mainly is due 
to the very few included activities plotted for area of focus for the case.  
 
 
==PAGE:68==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
67 
5 Results and recommendations  
Having calibrated the initial index based upon the interview with senior residents from the case area, 
it is expected to give a more valid assessment of the accessibility level. A new calculation with the 
new inputs will therefore be conducted to see how well the area is performing, in addition to finding 
the differences between the findings from the initial and calibrated index. The results will be 
presented as previous with a progressive addition of parameters. Additionally, a segmentation 
oriented assessment will be conducted to analyse the performance of the case area given a different 
method input combined with a different citizen-profile from a new weighting of activities.  
5.1 Identified activities after calibration 
The changes for the activities have been listed and the calibration of the index commence with a new 
identification of the location of entities which have been done. Medical and park facilities are the sole 
categories without any changes in either new location or addition of activities, where the rest of the 
categorical activities have major or minor modifications at some level. The location of activities for 
the calibrated index are found at Map 13.  
 
Map 13 – Identified activities for the calibrated index 
One modification is the more specific shopping category, where three different entities are accounted 
for. No additional entities are however added to the category, where only a stratification of the 
previous one has been conducted. New additions are found at the sport category where especially 
fitness centres have provided more locations to the area. As allotments have been removed from the 
land-use activities, the entities for the category has also been removed. From the newly adjusted 
==PAGE:69==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
68 
activities, the land-use score can be calculated based upon on the proximity from the homes of senior 
residents and also the weighting.    
5.2 Land-use score for senior residents in Aabenraa 
The adjustment of the activities and their weighting have not been able to impact the land-use score 
significantly as seen at Map 14 when compared to the initial calculation, Map 7. Similar tendencies 
are present, where large clusters of well performing zones are present near the centre of Aabenraa, 
while medium-high zones are found at the centre of Rødekro and at Rugkobbel. However, some of 
the scores for the centres at the outskirts area of Aaberaa are now performing almost as well as the 
area at Rugkobbel, which had zones with higher scoring citizens in the initial land-use analysis. A 
main reason is the reduction of assigned weight for the medical category, as the citizens living close 
to the centre at Rugkobbel has a doctor’s practice close. The new weighting means the zones around 
the area are assigned with a small additional score and loses its advantages compared to adjacent 
zones. Shopping has had an increase which consequently brings the score of the areas closer. Some 
outskirts areas can be seen to have received an increase in intervals from 0-10 to 10-20 due to the 
increase of weight for parks, especially seen in the southern part of Aabenraa.   
 
Map 14  Land-Use score after the calibration  
5.2.1 Transportation level for the calibrated index 
The score for the public transportation is calculated based upon the adjusted activities. The number 
of stops which are within range of the calibrated activities from the categories are found and are 
listed at Table 15.   
==PAGE:70==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
69 
Table 15 - Town bus lines with respective number of stops within proximity of the calibrated activity  
Cultural 
Medical 
Parks 
Sport 
Shopping  
Unspecific 
Line 1 
4 
2 
2 
3 
2 
0 
Line 2 
5 
5 
0 
3 
3 
0 
Line 3 
4 
2 
0 
0 
3 
2 
Line 4 
3 
1 
0 
3 
1 
3 
Line 5 
4 
2 
7 
6 
1 
0 
 
From the found number of unique categories for each of the bus lines, a score is assigned based on 
the new weighting of the categories. The peak frequency has not changed for the calibration as this 
is fixed to the current service in Aabenraa and Rødekro. The dimensioning frequency is also at the 
level as for the initial index. The additional score given by the transport parameter is found and listed 
at Table 16.  
Table 16 – Public transportation level for the calibrated index assessment 
Service level 
Dimensioning 
Frequency 
Transport 
Parameter 
Transport 
parameter 
factor 
Line Land-Use (LLU) 
Peak Frequency 
Line 1 
90 
2 
4 
45.00 
0.45 
Line 2 
75 
2 
4 
37.50 
0.38 
Line 3 
75 
1 
4 
18.75 
0.19 
Line 4 
85 
1 
4 
21.25 
0.22 
Line 5 
90 
1 
4 
22.50 
0.23 
 
The land-use score for the busses, Table 16,  have increased for line 1, 2, and 5 compared to the initial 
score, Table 12. Both line 1 and 5 benefit from the reduction in the unspecific category as it has every 
bus stops in range of all other activities. Town bus 2 has a small increase of 5 points due sport being 
added, but is however still lacking green areas along its route. The rest of the town busses have 
decreased LLU scores, especially line 3 as it lacks both the increased park category while also not 
passing any sport facilities. The line has one of the lowest scores and combined with a low frequency 
it ends with transport parameter factor of only 0.19. The score, combined with the inconvenience 
factor still being set at 0.75 will consequently mean a very little score added to those citizens out of 
range of activities.  
5.2.2 Full index score  
The full accessibility index can be calculated and visualized based upon the calibrated input seen 
from the adjusted categories and weighting. The calibrated index is following the same methodology 
as the initial, where the score is based on the proximity to activities and the level of transportation is 
compensating citizen who are more isolated compared to those located in more areas with a higher 
concentration of various activities.  
==PAGE:71==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
70 
 
Map 15 – Calibrated accessibility index   
The tendency of citizens living near major roads are benefitting from the full index are shown again, 
which also was seen for the initial index at Map 9. No major changes are however indicated in the 
results for the calibrated index, where residents located in the outskirt areas of Aabenraa and 
Rødekro are receiving a poorer score compared to those living in the central parts or close to smaller 
density centres of activities. The same areas are therefore performing poorly and the adjustment in 
activity categories and their weighting did therefore not seem to change their score, but merely 
achieved modifying the result of those zones which already had some level of accessibility according 
to the index.  
5.2.3 Difference in score 
A more specific difference map can be seen at Map 16. The score is especially seen to have been 
decreased in the areas just east of the Rugkobbel centre, which is due to the reduction in doctor 
weight. The areas west for the centre has received a compensating score for the increase weight of 
parks, which the residents located east do not benefit from. The score of the northern part of central 
Aabenraa has also been slightly reduced, which also is due to the significant reduction in the weight 
for being in proximity of a doctor. Areas close to the unspecific category as well as allotments have 
also seen a reduction in their score, which especially is in the north-eastern and south-eastern part 
of Aabenraa. Several areas maintain their score of 0, which especially is seen in the larger residential 
neighbourhoods which neither has activities or public transportation services operating nearby.  
==PAGE:72==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
71 
 
Map 16 – Difference in score from initial to calibrated index  
The small difference in score between the two index-settings from initial to calibrated is even clearer 
when illustrating the distribution of score between the intervals, as seen by Figure 17. Some residents 
are moved to higher score with a higher share being in the “70-80” interval. Residents with index-
score in the lower intervals do however not seem to change significantly.  
 
Figure 17 – Illustration of accessibility score for both the initial and calibrated index 
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
0-10
10-20
20-30
30-40
40-50
50-60
60-70
70-80
80-90
90-100
Comparion of accessibility index score for initial and calibrated 
index
Initial
Calibrated
==PAGE:73==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
72 
The overall average score for the residents is listed at Table 17. The calibrated index assigns a higher 
average score to the citizens, however only a very small increase in score less than 1 is seen.  
Table 17 – Average score for the initial and calibrated index 
 
Initial index 
Calibrated index 
Average score 
27.4 
28.2 
 
5.2.4 Weighted population index 
The WPI for the calibrated index gives a similar result compared to one conducted for the initial 
index, where “Skoverridderkvarteret”, the northwestern part of Rødekro and Aabenraa together with 
Rise all have a high WPI score. However, one interesting observation can be made based upon Map 
17. The nursing home “Lergården” located in the southern part of Høje Kolstrup has gone from WPI 
score of near 0 in the initial index to of 14 – 24 after the calibration. The citizens in the zones were 
previously being assigned with a land-use score given from the allotment nearby, thus receiving 10 
points each. The zones where therefore not highlighted in the first WPI assessment as all citizens in 
the zone had some accessibility level and consequently not found to be in immediate need of 
improved accessibility. Eliminating allotments from the listed activities has therefore made them 
appear in WPI index, even though only a very little score has been removed. A sensitivity in the 
applied formula for calculating WPI is thereby noticed, where only very small index scores near 0 
will give indication of required focus.  
 
Map 17 – WPI for the accessibility index after the calibration  
==PAGE:74==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
73 
The otherwise very similar results from the initial and calibrated index may be explained based upon 
Map 18 which illustrates the location of the senior residents of the compared to the identified 
activities with 300-meters distance buffers. When comparing the map to the land-use score at Map 
14 it is clear to see the reason of the poor performance of the zones in the outskirts. By maintaining 
a fixed score, the residents outside of the buffers will never receive a score above zero indifferent of 
the weighing scheme. Only transportation services can improve the score in these regions because 
no activities are present and if the mobility provided by the public transportation network is at a too 
low level only few options are left, especially if health is a concern.  
 
Map 18 – Senior residents as compared to the identified activities given a 300-meters buffer 
 
Since buying groceries were found to be both important and being one of the most frequent 
participated activity, the location of these are crucial for the level of accessibility. Map 19 illustrates 
the 10 convenience stores and 3 supermarkets within the area of interest, where an interesting 
tendency can be observed. With only one exception, all activities of the category are located next to, 
or very near, a major road. The catchment area may therefore not be the most important factor when 
choosing a placement of a store, but instead the number of travellers passing by. As car being the 
most used mode of transportation by almost ¾, when including car passengers, of all trips taken in 
Aabenraa as it was found earlier (Transportvaneundersøgelsen 2017) , the location of the stores can 
be understood. It is convenient for the travellers to be able to buy groceries on the way home from 
job or similar and by having the stores laying out to the major road, the chance of travellers passing 
them along their route is increased. However, those ¼ who are not using car as their mode of 
transportation are most likely not benefitting from this scheme and are therefore having their 
accessibility level reduced if they do not live close to busy streets, which reduced other aspects on the 
==PAGE:75==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
74 
quality of life. This can be compared to the dynamics of diminishing accessibility for non-car user as 
described by Lucas (2010) and illustrated at Figure 3, from the tendency of locating stores close to 
major roads where it may be seen as an indication of society moving towards hyper-mobility.  
An example of the outcome of the choice of location is seen in the industrial area east for the centre 
of Rødekro, where a single senior citizen is living. The area should due to its character not have focus 
on the activities required for citizens, but however the location assigns a higher score compared to 
some residential area. This is due to the location of convenience stores in these areas as they are close 
to a major road, and maybe being close to jobs too. A citizen living in an industrial area is therefore 
receiving a higher accessibility level, seen from land-use, compared to larger areas of residential 
neighbourhoods.  
 
Map 19 – Location of supermarkets and convenience stores 
5.3 Segment oriented perspective  
The accessibility index is after the calibration still focused on being representative for all the seniors 
in the area. An overall assessment gives some insight to the general situation where some segments 
of the focus group however will be performing better while other are experiencing a lower level of 
accessibility. In the attempt on achieving a deeper understanding of the condition for the whole 
population, a segmented oriented perspective analysis is conducted. Many segmentations could be 
have been chosen to be highlighted in the differences in accessibility level, either seen by abilities, 
attitudes or other individual characteristics. This analysis will focus on abilities with physical 
condition as the main enabler for participating in the identified activities. Two group segments are 
proposed; immobile and highly mobile, where different adjustments of weighting and re-scaling of 
various assumptions in an attempt to characterize the profile of the two groups.  
==PAGE:76==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
75 
Five main inputs can be identified for the index, where changes in these consequently also will give 
a different result when assessing the accessibility level. The inputs will function as the adjusters when 
creating the profiles for the two groups, where changes mainly will be based on assumptions, as the 
objective of the analysis is to illustrate different imagined scenarios.  The inputs can be summarized 
as:  
• 
Identified activities  
• 
Weighting of activities  
• 
Fixed distance buffer radius (walking distances) 
• 
Dimensioning of service level for public transport 
• 
Inconvenience factor  
Some activities may be more attractive to people with a better physical condition than others, for 
example sport facilities. It may be argued against this statement as citizens with a worse physical 
condition may actually be in greater need of having access to fitness centres, but assumptions are for 
the immobile group not being able to use these facilities due to high mobility-impairment. The 
acceptable walking distances seen by the fixed buffers are therefore also determined by the physical 
condition of the chosen group, where immobile will have shorter acceptable distances compared to 
the group with an assumed high level of personal mobility. Inconvenient travel by public 
transportation may also be seen to be more severe when the group is more impaired than the other, 
as boarding of the shuttle can be difficult and more walking may be required as first getting to the 
bus stop and then onward to the activity. The weight and catchment area for the activities are 
adjusted and shown at Table 15.   
Table 18 – Weight and catchment area for the two profiles for the segment oriented perspective analysis 
Category 
Activity 
Impaired 
Mobile 
Weight 
Distance 
(meter) 
Weight 
Distance 
(meter) 
1 
Niche stores 
10 
300 
10 
800 
Convenient 
stores 
30 
300 
20 
600 
Supermarket 
40 
300 
30 
300 
Nice + convenient 
40 
300 
30 
- 
2 
Cultural 
20 
300 
20 
800 
3 
Parks and green 
areas 
10 
300 
20 
800 
4 
Medical 
30 
300 
10 
800 
5 
Sport 
0 
- 
20 
800 
6 
Unspecified 
activities 
0 
- 
0 
- 
Transportation 
Inconvenience factor 
Inconvenience factor 
0.5 
0.85 
 
A new concept is introduced for the segment analysis; the varying catchment area. Acceptable 
walking distances vary dependent on the activity, which however only will be applied for the mobile 
segment. The distances for the impaired group is the same as the overall assessment to be fixed at 
300 meters for all activities. For the mobile group catchment length is 800 meters for all categories 
except for shopping as it is assumed these activities requires carrying of articles back home, where it 
furthermore is assumed supermarkets and convenient stores produce larger purchases and therefore 
==PAGE:77==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
76 
have a reduced catchment area. The longer distances for activities however is contradicting with the 
neighbourhood accessibility threshold proposed in the research by Cao et al. (2007), where 400 
meters seemed to be the acceptable distance for seniors when walking. Having increased the 
catchment areas for some activities are perceived to be reasonable due to the narrowed down 
assessment where high personal mobility is in focus.  
Weighting for the activities are as mentioned mainly based on assumptions but still leans on the 
results from the interviews in the calibration of the index. The maximum score for shopping is still 
considered to be the highest for both groups, where the score is however higher for the impaired. 
Sport and medical are the two categories with the highest difference between the groups, where 
nearby medical services are perceived to be more important for the impaired, while sport facilities 
have an assigned weight of 0. The weight for the unspecific category has for the perspective analysis 
chosen to be set to 0, as too few activities were identified.  
The inconvenience factor for impaired is set to be 0.50, meaning only 50 % of the remaining score 
from the land-use aspect can be affected seen from the transport parameter. Proximity to activities 
is therefore prioritized heavily for the impaired group of the seniors where public transportation 
cannot compensate as much. The factor for the mobile is raised from the 0.75 for the overall 
assessment, to 0,85 and therefore being able to affect more of the remaining score from land-use. 
Proper public transportation can therefore in higher degree compensate areas with few activities 
nearby.  
5.3.1 Mobility impaired oriented index 
The index for mobility impaired is the first of the segments to be presented. The land-use is 
calculated based on the inputs from Table 18  for all the senior citizens in the area to find those 
locations which are poorly suited for residents with reduced physical mobility.  
==PAGE:78==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
77 
 
Map 20 – Land-Use for the mobility impaired group segment 
Very few areas are overserved to be performing well and they are mainly located at the centre of 
Aabenraa, Rugkobbel and Rødekro. The zones at the centre of Aabenraa are however seen to have 
been assigned with very high scores solely based upon the proximity to activities, which most likely 
is due to removal of the unspecific category. Every area with shopping facilities is already given a 
high score and having a supermarket and a doctor’s practice within 300 meters will results in a score 
of 70, which is the main reason for the high performing areas in Aabenraa and Rugkobbel. Rødekro 
has a supermarket and a library, classified as cultural activity, which combined gives a score of 60. 
The doctor’s practice location in the eastern part of town consequently assigns the town with a lower 
score at the centre.  
Generally, the same patterns are present as for the full index of where the areas with high accessibility 
score are located, however just at a more concentrated level. This is due to the same reason as the 
small changes between the initial and full index, either should more activities be added/moved 
and/or a significant change in weighting should be applied. The frequency has not been modified for 
transportation in the given scenario, meaning only smaller changes for the LLU scores. The 
assessment for public transportation service the group segment can be found in Appendix 1.  The 
tendencies are therefore continued seen for the full accessibility index in Appendix 2, where citizens 
along major roads in outskirts areas are benefitting from the additional score for the transport 
parameter.  
A WPI cannot be applied for the segment oriented analysis as the given inputs are based on a citizens-
profile which is not expected to characterize every citizen in the area. because all citizens in a zone 
==PAGE:79==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
78 
cannot be identified by the profile, it will not give a proper indication of the performance of the zones 
seen by the number of citizens in zones with a low score.  
5.3.2 Mobile segment 
The accessibility level for the mobile citizen-profile is found for which a different weighting has been 
distributed to the categories, however also a varying acceptable walking distance where most of the 
categories have had their buffer increased. As usual, the land-use score for the citizens are found, 
which is illustrated in Map 21. 
 
Map 21 – Illustration of land-use score for the citizens-profile assuming high mobility competence  
The zones with a higher land-use score are seen to have increased significantly compared to the 
scores from index at Map 14, which likely is due to the general increase in acceptable walking 
distances, meaning the activities can provide services to a larger catchment area. The activity centres 
identified earlier at the centre of Aabenraa, Rugkobbel and Rødekro can see to emit scores to areas 
surrounding them and the varying distance buffers can actually be seen at Map 21, where zones are 
decreasing in scores as the length from the centres are increased. The general distances at 800 
meters leaves only a few outskirts zones in Aabenraa without any score, while the north-west and 
south-west in Rødekro have many locations out of range for activities leaving them without any 
score.  
The line land-use is found using the same distance buffers for the bus lines as for activities as well as 
the same weighting, the score is therefore expected to increase as it has with the score for citizens. 
The actual and the dimensioning frequency has not changed in this scenario and is set to be same as 
ones found for the initial index.   
==PAGE:80==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
79 
Table 19 – Service level and calculated transport parameter factor for the five town bus lines in Aabenraa-Rødekro 
Lines (Routes) 
Service Level 
Dimensioning 
frequency 
Transport 
parameter 
Transport 
parameter 
factor 
LLU 
Peak Frequency 
Line 1 
100 
2 
4 
50 
0.50 
Line 2 
100 
2 
4 
50 
0.50 
Line 3 
100 
1 
4 
25 
0.25 
Line 4 
100 
1 
4 
25 
0.25 
Line 5 
100 
1 
4 
25 
0.25 
 
All lines are in this scenario within range of all activities with their respective stops based upon the 
new distances, which can be seen at Table 19. The frequencies seen from the dimensioning level of 
service however reduces the score for the two lines by half while the remaining lines only keeps ¼ of 
their LLU score. The full index for the residents-profile with assumed high mobility is found as based 
on the input from land-use and transportation. The inconvenience factor for public transportation is 
set to be quite tolerant at 0.85, meaning a large amount of the remaining score from land-use can be 
compensated by transportation.  
Most zones have in the scenario either direct access to relatively many activities by walking or are 
compensated by public transportation. Some areas are however still not performing well, which are 
seen in the outskirts regions, where the western / south-western part of Rødekro and mid-western 
region of Aabenraa. Even with the highly assumed walking distances these areas are assigned with a 
low accessibility level, meaning higher self-provided mobility is required to reach distances from 
these zones where cars most likely are the preferred mode of transportation.    
==PAGE:81==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
80 
 
Map 22 – Accessibility index for the citizens-profile assuming high mobility competence 
5.4 Recommendations to Aabenraa Municipality  
Based upon the findings from the constructed accessibility index, recommendations to the 
municipality of Aabenraa will be formulated. A proposal for alternation for some of the town bus 
lines will furthermore be presented as calculated from the index.  
5.4.1 Findings 
The index has indicated a few areas in Aabenraa and Rødekro to have a relatively high concentration 
of activities seen by the land-use score. The outskirts of Aabenraa together with the major part of 
Aabenraa town were however found to have a low number of the activities from the identified 
categories, and these areas have therefore been recognized to be in need of mobility in order for the 
citizens to reach areas with higher land-use. An assessment of the coverage of the public 
transportation system in the area has focused on the town busses and the activities which are within 
reach from the stops. An improvement to the level of accessibility was noticeable after having added 
the level of transportation to the score of the citizen, where a few areas in the outskirts part of 
Aabenraa and Rødekro however have shown to be exposed to low accessibility. These areas are 
therefore both in lack of nearby activities and public mobility and there in need of providing more 
efficient movement by themselves. Focusing on areas with a higher population and low index-score 
highlighted areas where improvements would benefit most citizens. A final assessment showed areas 
with a high land-use score but they were inaccessible with public transportation and thereby 
improvements of the provided service could help more people in reaching these areas with a higher 
concentration of activities.  
==PAGE:82==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
81 
5.4.2 Recommendations 
The recommendations for the municipality will, if based on the index, mainly focus on three aspects; 
location of citizens, location of activities and provided transportation services. It is assumed the 
municipality desires to have as many of its citizens to be located within areas with a high level of 
accessibility, seen from the land-use score for zones at map Map 14. If not possible, then mobility 
should be provided to connect these citizens to activities in order to maintain an acceptable level of 
accessibility. Zones which are isolated from both facilities and public transportation are seen from 
the index to provide very low or none accessibility to its residents, which however does not include 
private means of transportation, such as cars.  
People should in principle be allowed to choose where they live and therefore also whether it is in a 
well-connected area or not. The municipality can therefore not distribute the residents by force into 
areas with higher accessibility and if the method of bringing citizens closer to the activities other 
instatement must be used. Cheap and easily accessible homes relatively close to activities may over 
a longer time-span reduce the number of poor-performance zones. However, with the current age 
for the focus group set at 65, a large share of the residents will still be in shape of driving and may 
just have left the working force. A user-profile of those citizens with requirements of being located 
closer to the activities must therefore be designed properly, followed by a demographics analysis of 
the share of citizens matching the profile living in poor performing zones.  
Providing more activities to the citizens are likewise difficult, especially seen from two perspectives. 
Firstly, many identified activities are private and can therefore not be forced to operate at a given 
location and secondly, locating activities in outskirts regions will make them less accessible for 
citizens living at the centre which is better connected transport-wise. Locating activities at the centre 
is therefore more attractive both from a commercial and planning perspective and finding a suitable 
location for activities may therefore show to be difficult. Adding smaller centres as the one seen in 
Rugkobbel which have both convenience stores, smaller stores and a doctor’s practice in poor 
performing zones would improve the score for these as well as the areas surrounding them.  
Transportation therefore, arguable, seems to be the only reasonable tool the municipality has full 
control of. Using the WPI as seen at Map 17 gives as mentioned indication of the zones of focus due 
to the lack of activities and public transportation, while simultaneously having a relatively large 
population density. Zones in the north-western part of Rødekro and the western and northern part 
of Aabenraa are performing poorly in the weighted index indicating many citizens are living without 
access to neither activities or public transportation. The zones are all located in relatively low density 
residential areas, with no passing major road, meaning establishing public transportation in these 
areas is difficult. A turning area may therefore be required as it is seen for line 5, which may not fit 
into the overall transport planning for the two towns, as the lines are cut short or will expand travel 
time. Alternatively, operation in areas beyond the town border could be necessary due to the design 
of the infrastructure, which may not be in any interest when planning a town bus. 
5.4.3 Alteration of town busses 
Inspired by the alignment for bus line 1 and 2 with the various route, a proposal is formulated for a 
modification of line 2. The suggestion focuses on the area of the Skovridder-neighbourhood located 
in the western part of Aabenraa, which according to the WPI assessment had several poor performing 
zones. The proposal comes in two editions; establishing a new line, or splitting line 2 into two 
changing routes as it is seen today, however at a significantly smaller level. The alignment, as 
illustrated at Map 23, will in both cases be the same. The line will depart south of the bus station and 
follow line 5 for a short while before going towards the Skovridder neighbourhood where it after 
going north will align with the current line going towards Rødekro station. The line proposal has not 
==PAGE:83==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
82 
been tested to whether the infrastructure can support a bus line and should therefore only be 
considered to be an example of a bus alteration.  
 
Map 23 – Alteration of town bus lines in the case area 
The line will give some mobility to the residents of the neighbourhood while not requiring a turning 
area as it continues as line 2. The score for the accessibility index however depends on the choice of 
the proposed edition, as it determines the service level for either one combined or two separate lines 
as frequency and line land-use will be different. The actual service would however be the same and 
only the calculated score using the methodology will give different results.  
As line 2 currently has a frequency of 2 times an hour, this could be split between two alignments 
given them an actual hourly departure, where only few stops on the current line would have a reduced 
service. However, one of the varying current routes in Aabenraa should be discontinued as it would 
end with a complex time table with a departure every 90 minutes (every third departure).  
Table 20 – Service level for the proposed town bus line 2.5 maintaining the frequency of line 2 
Lines 
(routes)  
Service level 
Dimensioning 
frequency (FMax) 
Transport 
parameter 
Transport 
parameter 
factor 
Line 
Land-use 
(LLU) 
Peak frequency 
(FLine) 
Line 2 
75 
2 
4 
37.50 
0.38 
Line 2.5 
90 
1 
4 
22.50 
0.23 
 
==PAGE:84==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
83 
The additional score to the accessibility index given by the transport parameter can be seen at Table 
20. The LLU score is higher for the proposed route as it passes a park at the Brundlund museum, 
adding 15 points to the land-use. In this example, the new line is set to have one departure every 
hour, while the current line maintains its frequency, meaning the new town bus is penalised harder 
due to its lower number of services. This approach of measurement is applied to maintain the citizens 
present score as only the current bus stops which are affected.  Another method of measurement for 
the line is to separate the town busses and perceive them as two individual routes where line 2 has 
its frequency reduced. The transport parameter factor will consequently be reduced significantly as 
seen by Table 21.  
Table 21 - Service level for the proposed town bus line 2.5 reducing the frequency of line 2 
Lines 
(routes)  
Service level 
Dimensioning 
frequency (FMax) 
Transport 
parameter 
Transport 
parameter 
factor 
Line 
Land-use 
(LLU) 
Peak frequency 
(FLine) 
Line 2 
75 
1 
4 
18.75 
0.19 
Line 2.5 
90 
1 
4 
22.50 
0.23 
 
Neither approaches are correct as the index cannot distinguish between bus lines and actual service 
as it only focuses on the nearby line with the highest transport factor. This indicates a misconception 
of the mobility level provided by public transportation calculated for the index as several lines can 
be within proximity of a citizen but only one line will be accounted for. In order to compensate for 
flaws and in pursuing to illustrate the actual service provided as good as possible, the edition given 
at Table 20 will be used for calculation of the proposed alteration in town busses. The calculated 
accessibility index with the proposed changes is illustrated at Map 24. 
==PAGE:85==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
84 
 
Map 24 – Accessibility index for the case area with the alternated town bus line 
The only difference between the index with the proposed town bus line compared to the original, is 
in the area along the new route where the current line 2 is not operating, especially seen in the 
Skovridder-neighbourhood. However, the line only improves the score in the area with around 17 
points, because the inconvenience parameter reduces the score provided by transportation. The 
neighbourhood will nevertheless provide mobility to the area which before was isolated from both 
activities and as public transportation. The difference in scores is illustrated at Map 25, where the 
change in scores is more evident. The map does however not consider the reduction in service along 
the current line due to the complications for the model as mentioned before.  
 
==PAGE:86==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
85 
 
Map 25 – Difference in Accessibility score for proposed town bus line 2.5 
The WPI for the alternations can be seen at Appendix 3, where most zones in the neighbourhood 
no longer are poor performing. The example of the nursing home at Lergården however illustrated 
misperception with the WPI formula, where only zones with a 0 score were highlighted. As the 
zones only are achieving an average of 17 points, more can be done such as focusing on the location 
of activities. 
 
 
==PAGE:87==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
86 
6 Discussion  
The objective for the index has been be an easy-to-understand method of measuring accessibility for 
senior citizens in lower densely populated areas. However, because the concept of accessibility is 
complex to measure as it includes many parameters and perspectives, some issues with the index are 
unavoidable leading it to either show misleading results or not being comprehensive enough in its 
measurement. This section will therefore discuss known issues for the index and propose 
improvements to cover these, as well as improvements in general. Current accessibility tendencies 
will furthermore be discussed together with the further use of the index.  
6.1 Criteria for changes in level of accessibility  
It can be considered an impossible pursuit to design an index which by itself can measure 
accessibility since the parameters never can be seen to be perfect, regardless of how many are being 
added. Accessibility is complex and therefore multi-faceted, leaving an assessment with partial 
representation of the given situation. It is therefore important to have presented the choices on what 
to illustrate, hence, will the representation of the index be clear in addition to knowing what is being 
left out. 
Geurs and Van Wee (2004) list five criteria for how changes in the components will affect the 
accessibility level, where some of these may be used for formulating recommendations for the 
municipality of Aabenraa. Furthermore, the criteria can help indicate the quality and limitations of 
the index. If the changes, mentioned by the criteria, should occur in the case-study area then whether 
the index will behave as is dictated by the authors will give a theoretical validation to the assessment 
tool.   
The first criterion declares if the service level of transportation in the area improves, so should the 
accessibility to any activity in the same area, or from the area. The contrary is applied if the service 
level is reduced. The mode of transportation is not stated and it is therefore assumed any means are 
included, while the examples of level of service is travel time, costs, and effort. It is expected 
frequency also is a part of the service level, especially for public transportation. The index will show 
improvements if either the frequency is changed up until the dimensioning frequency or if the access 
to the transport network (additional stops or expansion of new routes) is improved seen from the 
location of the residents, however only if new unique categories for activities are being reached. 
Travel time is not included in the index and a reduction will not be measured and assigned to the 
scores of those citizens living close to the public transport network. Adding more stops or adjusting 
the route could therefore bring the line closer to some activities at the cost of travel time, which 
however in the index only would be calculated positively.  
Second and third criteria describe the behaviour of accessibility when opportunities for an activity 
are changed. If the number of opportunities for an activity is increased so should the level of 
accessibility to this activity indifferent of location as the capacity is increased, if the number of 
opportunities are reduced, the level of accessibility should be decreased. Furthermore, if demand 
should increase for an activity with a certain capacity constraint, then will the level of accessibility 
decrease, opposite scenario if demand is reduced. The index does not include capacity restrictions 
demand for the activities, therefore will any changes in either not be identified and will therefore not 
affect the accessibility score of the citizens.  
The last two criteria focus on the abilities for individuals to participate in activities. Firstly, 
improvements in opportunities for an activity will not affect the accessibility level for an individual 
if time constrictions conflict thus preventing the individual in participation. The index does not 
include a temporal component as the general time budget for the senior citizens was indicated to be 
flexible given the departure times is outside peak hours. The index will therefore not take time budget 
==PAGE:88==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
87 
for individual or open hours for activities into account, as doing so likewise would be complex and 
not guaranteed to be easy-to-understand. The last criterion dictates, should mobility be improved 
for one mode of transportation, then should the accessibility level only be improved by those who 
have the sufficient funds and capabilities to use the mode. The index takes its root point in this issue 
and while it cannot measure whether a citizen can use a mode or not due to only public transportation 
being included, and as the index builds on measuring neighbourhood. Accessibility by means of 
transportation by public services can only to some degree compensate having the activities close.  
As seen from the listed criteria, the index should mostly be used in the first one concerning 
transportation services. However, the criteria do not mention the land-use aspect of the location of 
demand (residents) which also will influence the accessibility level, as a higher share of citizens living 
around the activity density centres will improve the performance.  
6.2 Index issues / improvements  
The index builds on locations of activities as the main source of supply, which is found reasonable as 
accessibility is concerning granting people access to participate in desired activities. However, many 
activities are unique for each person and aggregating these to one segment of people will most likely 
mean some more individual activities of importance are left out. As approximately 50 % of the senior 
citizens in the sample by the national travel survey showed to have free time as the purpose of their 
trip (Transportvaneundersøgelsen 2017), as well trips without no special purpose have a high weekly 
frequency (Haustein & Siren 2014), the identified categories are most likely not covering all of the 
trips taken. The identified activities are therefore only seen from common importance and not 
individual.  
Localizing the activities without any proper method can also leave out facilities which improves the 
accessibility in an area, such as not register a convenience store or a trail entrance to a forest. 
Furthermore, the characterization of the category can exclude facilities which offhand does not seem 
to provide same services, while in the actual situation they do. The index does not include stores at 
tank stations or kiosk at corners, which may function as substitute for convenience stores, where one 
respondent in a plenary session requested more smaller stores nearby. Kiosk and tank station stores 
could therefore have been included in the progressive weighting of the shopping category to also 
include smaller stores which still are possible to characterize. Adding activities with these 
characteristics can however be conducted with help from planners who know the area. In general, 
should all activities be quality checked to ensure they can offer the services they have been 
characterised as.  
Distribution of weights to the identified activities is achieved to be determined based upon a common 
perception, where some individuals may see the need as bigger and therefore a larger weight should 
be assigned to the given activity. An individual can furthermore be located close to an activity which 
he/she does not find attractive, while other activities in the same categories might have more 
interest. An example could be a citizen living close to stadium but being interested in other cultural 
activities such as theatre or music, which is not within proximity. The citizen will then still have to 
travel to other parts of town to participate in the desired activities, meaning the accessibility level for 
this category is not as the score may indicate. The concept of progressive weighting could be 
expanded to other categories in order to improve the issue, where activities in a category is put into 
sub-categories as seen with shopping. For example, for culture theatres, sport facilities with 
spectating possibilities and community centres could be in each one of their own, where the citizen 
score would increase as more of the sub-categories are present within proximity.  
The assumptions for the index in its current form assumes one size fits all for both activities and 
their importance, which cannot be applied to actual circumstances which therefore also only will give 
==PAGE:89==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
88 
an indication of the accessibility level and not the exact one, as very few activities can be found to 
have the same influence on all, such as shopping.  
The index is normalised on a scale 0-100 scale, which mainly is to make the index comparable 
between other similar towns as well as having an understandable difference between the levels. 
Accessibility may however be considered to be a too complex concept to be normalised to a bounded 
scale, and the index should therefore more be seen as an “accessibility satisfaction” level for the 
residents to have access to required activities. Removing the boundaries might affect the easy-to-
understand concept of the index as it is easier to comprehend a score going from 0 – 100.  
The distances are from the given input based upon fixed distances which are applied for every citizen 
indifferent of the circumstances. The topography for Aabenraa, Map 26, is very hilly especially in the 
centre of Aabenraa, which in the index has a high index score. According to the accessibility measure 
from Lucas (2010), hills should be included if they were significant due to the distances being more 
difficult to overcome. The distance buffers should ideally take hills into consideration and penalise 
if difficult terrain is present by shorten the acceptable length before an activity is accounted for. The 
data concerning topography is however not interactive and can therefore not be used for calculation 
for acceptable walking distances and information concerning the topography must therefore be 
applied manually to the attributes of the citizens given their location.  
 
Map 26 – Topography of Aabenraa and the area of interest 
The proximity analysis could further be expanded to also include an acceptable biking distance, 
where a lower share of the categories weight will be assigned to include more sustainable modes of 
transportation. The national travel survey found 9 % of the senior citizen in the combined 
==PAGE:90==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
89 
municipalities of Aabenraa, Haderslev and Sønderborg to travel by bicycle, where mode shares must 
be expected to be higher in towns due to the shorter distances to activities compared to the outlying 
rural areas. The distances to activities from each citizen could therefore be perceived coming two 
buffers, where walking distance would invoke a full category score, while activities within biking 
distances may only assign a reduced score.   
More ideally would the proximity analysis be based on network distances instead of fixed buffers. 
Variable acceptable distances could still be used for walking and biking. A link layer with all roads 
would then be necessary to calculate the exact lengths between the citizens and the activities, which 
furthermore would require more calculations as the distances for each resident-vector would have 
to be found.  
 
Figure 18 –Illustrated example of improvement of distance buffers by seen by either walking or biking 
The transportation component is included in the index as the factor for transport service level. The 
factor is determined by the land-use score for the whole line seen from the activities reachable from 
the transit stops. The reason behind putting activities in categories is to avoid accounting of activities 
with same characteristics twice, which however is not applicable when the transport parameter is 
added to a citizen’s score.  If a citizen lacks a category, which is not covered by the bus line being in 
proximity of the resident, however, an additional score from the bus line will still be assigned and 
thus in-directly counting some activities twice. A fairer added score would be by matching the 
activities in proximity from the citizen and bus lines. If the bus can grant access to a missing category 
for a citizen, then the weight will be assigned, while still considering the service level in addition to 
the inconvenience factor. Some activities may furthermore be considered as more sensitive to 
travelling with public transportation because of to the inconvenience of having to connect to the 
==PAGE:91==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
90 
transit stop in order to access the network, as well as reaching the desired activity from the stop. The 
inconvenience factor could therefore be variable based upon the activities, where more sensitive 
activities are penalised more, such as shopping due to the need of carrying articles, if they only are 
reachable by public transportation, while others only have a small reduction in score. 
For a transport system to be included in the index it has to be applicable to some characteristics, 
such as having transit stops. The location-based measures can only include assessment if there is a 
specific site for operation, otherwise it is not measurable by the index. Flex-traffic is however a 
service for mobility-impaired citizens and having the offer within a municipality will therefore 
strengthen senior citizens accessibility regardless of their exact location which should be included in 
the index at some level when comparing to other municipalities.  
6.2.1 Services for mobility impaired  
Many areas in the mobility impaired segment analysis have found to be poorly suited for residents 
who are matches with user-profile. Most outskirts regions have poor scores and assistance is 
therefore perceived as a requirement if any of the residents in these zones are mobility challenged. 
Being physically impaired may however for some citizens be severe as to a point where almost any 
walking distance is unacceptable. The index will in this scenario not be applicable as it is based on 
access to activities by either walking or by town busses and if none of these are acceptable, 
proximities becomes irrelevant. Other services are however present such as Flex-Traffic for mobility, 
domiciliary care for help in the seniors’ home and shopping assistant as mentioned earlier by the 
DaneAge Association. Senior residents belonging to the mobility-impaired segment may therefore 
be in a zone with low accessibility but still have the required services provided. Flex-Traffic has 
however been subject for criticism in the plenary sessions and the service may therefore not offer 
mobility as desired, this discussion will however not include the quality of the provided services. 
Other services can be offered residents with a reduced mobility level, such as “mobility-scooters” 
which may extend a citizen’s range significantly and therefore can reach activities further away. One 
respondent in a plenary session mentioned being very glad for her scooter which have enabled her 
to participate more in society.  
6.3 General points 
The principle of free will of choice for location for both citizens as well as private activities/facilities 
are as mentioned a complex issue as many factors are included when deciding one’s home, such as 
price, comfort, overall amenity value etc. The required mobility may not be as important if it is 
provided by being capable driving a car. Planning mobility into urban-planning is an often-used tool 
for ensuring public mobility is provided for as many residents as possible, consequently reducing the 
need for cars. An example is the finger-plan in the Greater-Copenhagen area, where expansion of 
Copenhagen would ensure high-class public transportation to be proximate to a majority of 
residential and work-spaces. The index for this project may be used likewise to assess if areas either 
already are sufficient in activities or if they are connected to these by public transportation. When 
planning new residential areas, the index can be used to this assessment. 
Efficient non-private mobility has as mentioned mainly been provided by car in the rural parts as 
due to a required critical mass in an area before high-class public transportation becomes relevant. 
However, mobility by car is changing where either car-sharing by car-pooling with strangers or more 
advanced autonomous vehicles are a fast-growing technology, meaning being able to drive a car itself 
in the future may become less relevant for the individual level of mobility. Respondents from the 
plenary sessions did however not seem to be fond of newer technology, such as internet browsing, 
making it difficult to be applied for the current generation of seniors. Level of felt-safety is also an 
important factor, meaning the technology may have to be perceived as common before seniors will 
==PAGE:92==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
91 
use it, where a change from being a driver to being a passenger will no longer be felt as the line 
between the two “modes” of transportation will perish.  
One method of increasing the level of accessibility is to have a high range of activities close to the 
residents, however, concentrating categories may create a skewed balance in the levels between the 
different mobility groups. Malls are known to have a high concentration of activities which mainly 
focus on shopping including supermarkets, but in some cases also cultural facilities such as cinemas. 
An outskirt location is often required for malls due to their size, consequently making them mainly 
accessible by car when in rural areas, leaving those not capable behind as local stores are closed due 
to the competition of the centres with high shopping-activities density. The main objective of the 
analysis is thus highlighted again by the difference in mobility among different groups and how to 
avoid, or at least reduce, the felt unbalance in accessibility. The location-based index as constructed 
for this project may assist planners in distributing activities to insure a high level of accessibility for 
all citizens within the town area, where a fair distribution of activities is important for the overall 
performance of the index.  
 
 
==PAGE:93==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
92 
7 Conclusion  
This master’s thesis has focused on creating an index to measure accessibility which has been applied 
for senior citizens living in Aabenraa and Rødekro. Through relevant literature important aspects of 
accessibility have been identified and described by the four components approach as proposed by 
Geurs and Wee (2004), and three of these have been attempted to be included in the measure. The 
land-use and transportation components have mostly been focusing on quantitative characteristics 
which have been used as the basis for the index by being a proximity-based measure. An interview 
approach of the citizens in the municipality has furthermore been conducted and the results have 
provided a basis for a calibration of the index by adjustment of the main settings.  
The finalized calibrated index has been applied to the case study in an attempt to measure and 
illustrate the level of accessibility on a normalised 0-100 scale for senior citizens. A general tendency 
clearly shows a higher accessibility level in the town centres, especially in Aabenraa however also 
Rødekro and in the southern part of Aabenraa (Rugkobbel). These areas all have various unique 
activities present while also having public transportation nearby, meaning they are performing well 
in both the land-use and transportation aspect. Several areas in the outskirts region in the case study 
area are not performing as well, where especially residential neighbourhoods are experiencing low 
accessibility scores as they often are isolated from both activities and public transportation. Higher 
mobility levels are therefore required in order to be resident in these areas.  
As based on the results from the index, recommendations have been formulated for the municipality 
of Aabenraa. Three main approaches can be used for increasing the accessibility level, based upon 
the applied index; placing activities closer to citizens, moving citizens closer to activities or by 
providing more public transportation to specific areas. As both residents and private business have 
free will to choose whether to move/start at a certain location, these can mainly only be planned for 
in the longer term, for which this index can be used to validate new urban development. As for public 
transportation, a smaller change has been proposed to one of the bus lines, which would increase the 
accessibility score for the “Skovridder”-neighbourhood in the western part of Aabenraa.  
Later identified improvements to the index has been proposed, which may help the method by 
providing a more qualified tool when measuring accessibility. Especially identifying important 
activities as well as assigning these an appropriate weight is crucial for the validity of the results. The 
scheme of distributing the points can also be improved by being detailed further, especially by 
activities in the same category only can allocate points once, even though different attitudes 
consequently means a various level of attractions of the activities seen from the population’s 
perspective. The transportation aspect of the index can also be improved by focusing on each citizen 
needs in form of identifying lacking nearby activities, instead for assigning an overall score.  
Accessibility can be measured or achieved by various methods, it should however also be recognised 
when improvements in certain areas not will make larger change as some citizens are less sensitive 
than others. An example is nursing homes where the residents may be immobile and being serviced 
at the facility. Increasing the number of activities or plan for more public transportation in these 
areas may therefore not be as vital as in other areas.  
Designing an index which solely will represent accessibility is most likely an impossible task and it 
is therefore considered important knowing which aspect of the concept is being measured by 
presenting it clearly, in addition on being aware on what is being left out of an assessment as the 
index only will give partial representation. The index should therefore never be used by itself, but 
always be accompanied with other analyses and by people who are familiar with the area, both for 
quality checking the found activities, as well as identifying which of the highlighted areas should be 
put in focus.  
==PAGE:94==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
93 
7.1 Further use of index 
The accessibility index constructed for the assessment in this thesis have focused on senior citizens. 
Changing the settings for the index can however include other groups of the population, as it was 
shown for the segment oriented perspective. By identifying, categorising and plotting as many 
activities as possible will permit further analysis of the accessibility level for the population and not 
only senior citizens. User-profiles can be created by knowing important activities within population 
groups, simultaneously with having information on the location of the given citizens can help in 
assessing the approximate overall accessibility level, however through several analyses.  
Accessibility is more difficult to measure compared to mobility as more factors and parameters are 
included in the concept. Achieving movement through accessibility rather than increased mobility, 
as described by Curtis (2013), can help in ensuring everyone being able to reach their destination 
which may help in increasing the life quality for people, especially those living in more rural areas of 
Denmark where mobility by car is required to a higher degree. This index is not a full measure to 
achieve this, but it can hopefully to assist in finding the right solutions. It is easy to change 
parameters in the model and thus run several calculations by varying only one parameter at the time. 
In this way sensitivity of the various parameters can be identified and the most cost-effective 
measures can be decided.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:95==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
94 
References 
Barry, B., 1998. Social Exclusion , Social Isolation and the Distribution of Income. Centre for 
Analysis of Social Exclusion, London School of Economics- CASEpaper, (August), pp.1–24. 
Barton, H., Horswell, M. & Millar, P., 2012. Neighbourhood Accessibility and Active Travel. Planning 
Practice 
and 
Research, 
27(2), 
pp.177–201. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/02697459.2012.661636. 
Cao, X., Mokhtarian, P.L. & Handy, S.L., 2007. Residential and travel choices of elderly residents of 
Northern California. 48th Annual Transportation Research Forum 2007, 1, pp.417–438. 
Currie, G. & Delbosc, A., 2010. Modelling the social and psychological impacts of transport 
disadvantage. , pp.953–966. 
Curtis, C., 2013. Planning for Sustainable Accessibility. 
Curtis, C. & Scheurer, J., 2010. Planning for sustainable accessibility: Developing tools to aid 
discussion and decision-making. Progress in Planning, 74(2), pp.53–106. 
Geurs, K.T. & van Wee, B., 2004. Accessibility evaluation of land-use and transport strategies: 
Review and research directions. Journal of Transport Geography, 12(2), pp.127–140. 
Hansen, W.G., 1959. How Accessibility Shapes Land Use. , 25(2), pp.73–76. 
Haustein, S., 2012. Mobility behavior of the elderly: An attitude-based segmentation approach for a 
heterogeneous target group. Transportation, 39(6), pp.1079–1103. 
Haustein, S. & Siren, A.K., 2014. Seniors ’ unmet mobility needs – how important is a driving 
licence ? Publication date : Seniors ’ unmet mobility needs – how important is a driving licence ? 
Sonja Haustein a , * and Anu Siren b Department of Transport , Technical University of 
Denmark ,. 
Hawas, Y.E., Hassan, M.N. & Abulibdeh, A., 2016. A multi-criteria approach of assessing public 
transport accessibility at a strategic level. Journal of Transport Geography, 57, pp.19–34. 
Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2016.09.011. 
Incentive Partners, 2010. Togets konkurrenceevne - ” En jernbane i vækst ” Kundeparametre og 
udvalgte instrumenter. 
Kenyon, S., Lyons, G. & Rafferty, J., 2002. Transport and social exclusion: Investigating the 
possibility of promoting inclusion through virtual mobility. Journal of Transport Geography, 
10(3), pp.207–219. 
Khisty, C.J. & Zeitler, U., 2001. Is Hypermobility a Challenge for Transport Ethics and Systemicity? 
Systemic Practice and Action Research, 14(5), pp.597–613. 
Levitas, R. et al., 2007. the Multi-Dimensional Analysis of Social Exclusion By. Lloydia Cincinnati, 
(January), 
pp.1–246. 
Available 
at: 
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.127.339&amp;rep=rep1&amp;type
=pdf. 
Lucas, K., 2010. Transport and Social Exclusion : Where Are We Now ? , pp.1–23. 
Lucas, K. & Jones, P., 2012. Social impacts and equity issues in transport: An introduction. Journal 
of Transport Geography, 21, pp.1–3. 
Lucas, K. & Stanley, J., ACHIEVING SOCIALLY SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORT IN THE 
DEVELOPMENT CONTEXT Karen Lucas* (a) and Janet Stanley (b). , pp.1–18. 
==PAGE:96==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
95 
Mavoa, S. et al., 2012. GIS based destination accessibility via public transit and walking in Auckland, 
New Zealand. Journal of Transport Geography, 20(1), pp.15–22. Available at: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2011.10.001. 
Statistics Denmark, 2010. Andelen af ældre vil stige i mere end 30 år. Befolkningsfremskrivninger 
2010-2050, (219), p.2. 
Transportvaneundersøgelsen, 2017. Danish National Travel Survey, 
 
 
 
==PAGE:97==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
96 
Appendix 
 
Appendix 1 - Service level for town busses in the assumed low mobility group segment 
Service level 
Dimensioning 
Frequency 
Transport 
Parameter 
Transport 
parameter 
factor 
 
Line Land-Use (LLU) 
Peak Frequency 
Line 1 
100 
2 
4 
50.00 
0.50 
Line 2 
90 
2 
4 
45.00 
0.45 
Line 3 
90 
1 
4 
22.50 
0.23 
Line 4 
90 
1 
4 
22.50 
0.23 
Line 5 
100 
1 
4 
25.00 
0.25 
 
 
Appendix 2 – Full accessibility index for the mobility impaired group segment 
==PAGE:98==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
97 
 
Appendix 3 – WPI for sceanario for alteration of town bus lines 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:99==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
98 
Interview Scheme:  
Formalities  
- 
What is your age?  
 
- 
Do you have a driver’s licence?  
o If yes – Do you have access to a car?  
- 
Location of home  
Activities  
- 
How would you rank the following activities of importance to your daily life?  
Doctor visit 
Very important – Important – Indifferent – Little importance – No importance 
Groceries  
Very important – Important – Indifferent – Little importance – No importance 
Follow up: Where? (normal grocery or supermarket etc) 
Shopping at a specialist store 
Very important – Important – Indifferent – Little importance – No importance 
If important or higher: What kind of specialist do you find visit? 
Cultural facilities (i.e. going to cinema, museum, theatre, library etc.) 
Very important – Important – Indifferent – Little importance – No importance 
Follow up: Which of the listed cultural facilities do you find most important?  
Sport facilities (Gym, public swimming pool, sport events) 
Very important – Important – Indifferent – Little importance – No importance 
Follow up: Which of the listed sport facilities do you find most important? 
Recreational (visits to parks or green areas)  
Very important – Important – Indifferent – Little importance – No importance 
Community gardens 
Very important – Important – Indifferent – Little importance – No importance 
Family and friends 
Very important – Important – Indifferent – Little importance – No importance 
Follow up: do you more often visit family members of friends, than they visit you? 
- 
Is there any other group of activities you often attend to?  
- 
How often do you participate in everyday activities?  
- 
If possible, would you attend everyday activities more than you do now?  
o If yes – Why are you attending more everyday activities?  
==PAGE:100==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
99 
 
Mobility 
- 
Which of the following modes of transport would you say, you use the oftenest?  
Car – Walk – Bicycle – Public transportation – Other 
 
- 
Which of the following modes of transport would you say, you use the least (More answers 
possible)? 
Car – Walk – Bicycle – Public transportation – Other 
 
- 
How far would you say is too long to walk for an activity?  
 < 50 < 100 < 200 < 300 < 400 < 500 < 600 < 700 < 800 < 900 < 1000   
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:101==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
10
Transcript:  
 
Plenum interview 1 
Date:  
23th of May 
Language:  
Danish (occasional mild accent)  
Duration:  
17 minutes  
Settings:  
Five users are having lunch after different activities, where four of them accepts to participate in 
the interview which may be conducted meanwhile. All have plans shortly after. Before the interview 
is started the users are quickly informed of the purpose of the project, the agenda for the questions 
as well as the further use of their answers.   
U[n]: Represent a user of the activity centre present for the interview. 
Sx: Represent Saxe, the interviewer  
U[x]: Represent unidentified user  
 
Transcript:  
 Sx: Hvor gamle er I, hvis jeg må spørger?  
U1: uh!  
U2: Den var værre 
Sx: Ja, vi tager de hårde spørgsmål først 
U2: Hvad tror du?  
Sx: Det tør jeg da slet ikke at begive mig ud i 
U2: (Til U1) Han kan da ikke regne ud, hvor gammel du er  
U1: Nej, det kan han da ikke – Sådan en ung mand som mig 
U2: Jeg er 72 
U1: Jeg er 83  
Sx: (Spørger til U3) Vil du også?  
U3: Jeg er 87  
U1: Hold da op da 
U4: Jeg er på vej til de 84 
Sx: Ja, og vi har jo allerede snakket (referere til en gåtur tidligere på dagen med 
”rollatorbanden”)  
==PAGE:102==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
101 
Sx: Har I kørekort?  
U1 Jaja da  
U3: Jeg har aldrig haft et kørekort  
Sx: Du har aldrig haft en kørekort?  
U3: Nej, det har aldrig interesseret mig  
U5: (Havde oprindeligt valgt ikke at deltage i interviewet med tilføjer fra siden): Det har jeg 
heller ikke  
Sx: Hvordan kan det være?  
U2: Det kommer jo an på, hvor gammel du er i den alder  
Flere taler samtidig – uforståeligt  
Sx: Bor I alle i byen, altså Aabenraa? – Eller det sådan lidt …?  
U2: Midt i byen 
Sx: Midt i byen, ja 
U1: Jo, jeg bor da også midt i byen, eller joh, ja, nede ved fjorden 
Sx: Nede ved fjorden  
U1: Nede ved vandet  
U5: Og jeg bor herude (Kirsebærhaven)  
U2: Altså her ved siden af aktivitetscentret 
U3: Jeg bor oppe ved Kirsebærhaven  
Sx: Så det er også lige her?  
U1: Ja 
Hvor vigtigt vil I sige det er at bo tæt på steder, hvor I kan handle?  
U5: Ældre Sagen med ud at handle 
Sx: Hvad?  
U5: Ældre Sagen   
Sx: Det gør det?  
U5: De tager med ud at handle  
Sx: Ah okay ja 
U2: De kører med i bus – om onsdagen de kører ud og handler  
Sx: ja  
U2: Og de har en bus som – de kører sammen   
Sx: Så man samlet op med bussen og så tager I ud at handler sammen?  
==PAGE:103==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
10
U5: Ja  
U2: Altså jeg bor lige ved siden af det der indkøbscenter midt inde i byen  
Sx: ja, okay, hvor langt er det så, sådan ca?  
U2: 200 meter 
Sx: 200 meter, og det går du bare lige ned til, eller?  
U2: aaaargh,  
Sx: argh?  
U2: Nogle gange så cykler jeg  
Sx: Aaah ja okay  
U2: Og så nogle gange i bil – Det kommer jo an på, hvad jeg skal have med og om jeg skal videre 
– men det er intet problem, det er tæt ved 
U1: Over ved stand – over til Fakta ... (utydeligt) … 
U2: Ja?  
Sx: Altså 300 meter til Fakta?  
U2: Ja, til Fakta og Netto og Lidl og den slags  
(referere vist til den høje koncentration af indkøbsmuligheder midt i byen)  
Sx: Går du så til det, hvis det er?  
U1: Argh (afkræftende) – Jeg er gammel – Skal ikke bære rundt på for meget jo 
Sx: Hvad med mere specielle forretninger, det kunne for eksempel være møbler, eller … hvis der 
er nogle specielle formål med indkøbene  
U1: Altså, nu er der jo ikke mere end de 300 meter, det ligger jo derhenne i hjørnet jo  
Sx: Det kunne være mange ting, det kunne fx være, hvis man går meget op i vin  
U2: Det kan du få både i Løvbjerg og i Føtex og … Det har de alle steder – Også i Fakta og Rema  
Sx: Så indkøb foregår mest bare i –  
U2: Og ellers så kører vi bare over grænsen, hvis det er 
U1: Over og have nogle billige bajer  
Sx: Er der ikke kommet pant på dem nu?  
U1 + U2: Nej nej nej  
Sx: Det kunne være at jeg selv skulle en tur over – Skulle have spurgt mine venner i København 
om de skulle have noget med  
U1: Så skulle have haft en trailer med 
U2: Det er jo billigere at købe fødevare i Tyskland jo – Der er kun 20 % moms  
==PAGE:104==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
10
Sx: Ah okay 
U1: Ej, men det gør jeg nu ikke. Med så lidt som mig  
U5: Men dem med familie, de kan da spare penge  
U2: Ja, de kan de i hvert fald  
Sx: Ja, vel især, hvis de bor tæt nok på 
U2: Ja, der er jo kun 30 km derned  
Sx: Det er jo ingenting herfra  
U1: Nej, det er det ikke 
Sx: Hvad med kulturelle aktiviteter, det kunne være biograf, eller at gå til koncerter eller museum 
… 
U1:Meget meget lidt kulturel, må jeg nok sige  
Sx: Meget lidt kulturel  
U2: Meget lidt – Det er dog ikke så længe siden at jeg var i biografen of se den der – hvad var det 
– ”Du Forsvinder”  
Sx: Ah ja, 
U1: Det var … (uforståeligt)  
U1: Vi har en god biograf midt i byen – og vi har teatre og vi har museer – og så har vi 
aktiviteter her om sommeren med ringridning og det er noget comedy classic nede ved havnen og 
generelt, aktiviteter til hele byen – Og der kommer cirkus en gang imellem – Så har vi en 
svømmehal  
Sx: ja, den har jeg så under sportsfaciliteter – Men hvor vigtigt er det at bo tæt på kulturelle 
aktiviteter, er det noget som i bruger ofte … eller?  
U1: Ja altså, det er det for de unge Gazværket  
Sx: Ja, lige ved siden af busstationen?  
Flere i kor: Ja  
U3: Nemlig 
U1: Jeg kan dog ikke … (uforståeligt) …   
U2: Du er sgu da fuld af løgn  
U1: Nå?  
U2: De har lavet en afdeling til dig  
U1: Nå  
U5: Mit barnebarn var dernede en aften, så kom hans mor derind. Så sagde han ”Ej mor, her skal 
du ikke være”  
Latter 
==PAGE:105==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
10
U2: Jojo 
Sx: Hvad så med sportsfaciliteter? – Det er så også svømmehal for eksempel  
U1: Ja, der er jeg mere – Jeg går til håndbold  
Sx: Ja okay?  
U1: Håndboldpiger  
Sx: aah  
U1: Jeg har min faste plads nede i hallen  
U2: Jeg har været i svømmehal her i formiddags fra 8 til 10  
Sx: ja okay  
….  
Sx: Hvad med rekreative områder, såsom parker og lignende – hvor vigtigt er det for jer at bo 
så’en tæt på et sted, hvor man kan komme ud i det grønne?  
Flere taler samtidig  
U2: Vi ligger da midt i det grønne områder – fjorden og skov rundt om 
U3: og løglandet rundt  
U2 Ja og løglandet rundt ja  
Sx: Og det er vigtigt, altså, at være tæt på det grønne?  
U2: Jaja, naturen har vi nærmest lige uden for døren jo – Og så har vi sejlklubber og boldklubber 
– you name it – De gamle sejlskibe de kommer herind i samarbejd med Flensborg og Sønderborg 
så er havnen fyldt op med dem og aktiviteter.  
Sx: ja  
…  
Sx: Hvad med kolonihaver?  
U2: Dem har vi mange af  
U1: Der ligger endda en lige derovre  
U2: Danmarks ældste er her jo  
Sx: Ja, det læste jeg godt om  
Flere taler samtidig om antallet af kolonihaver i Aabenraa 
U2: Ja, dem har vi mange af 
Sx: Ja, det var det jeg så da jeg plottede aktiviteter ind. Og så tænkte jeg, at det måske var noget, 
som var vigtigt for folk, at der er kolonihaver  
U2: Ja, men det er det. For dem som bor inden i byen i lejlighed, det er mange af dem som har en 
kolonihave  
==PAGE:106==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
10
Sx: Ja, som en form for erstatning?  
U5: Der er mange her i Kirsebærhaven som har en kolonihave  
U2: Ja, det kunne jeg tænke mig 
U5: ja, blandt andet Rita, som hjælper til I køkkenet, hun har en kolonihave – Og hende Ena, hun 
har også en  
Sx: Hvad med familie og venner,  
U2: Venner har vi ingen af  
Sx: hehe, nu ved jeg ikke om jeg skal grine eller …  
Latter 
U2: nej nej, dem har vi mange af – Det er helt sikkert  
Sx: Og det rangere højere end alle de aktiviteter, som jeg lige have nævnt? – Altså som sådan 
noget som sportsfaciliteter og lignende  
U2: Ja altså folk er jo med i foreninger og du (U1) spiller med i Krolf, så ofte går det sammen 
under et  
U1: Ja, altså for eksempel, nu spiser vi herude, men altså jo, det er jo vigtigt. Men det vi så har 
indbyrdes så det er jo faktisk mere vigtigt  
U2: Ja og her kan vi læse avis og tale om nyheder og om, hvad der sker – det er en vigtig del af 
det ja  
U1: Ja, for når man sidder derhjemme alene og glor ud af vinduet – Det er sgu ikke så sjovt  
U3: … uforståeligt …. 
U2: Ja, det er tredje pinsedag – der går de med orkester gennem byen med cylinderhat og med 
trægevær med en blomst i  
U1: Ja, de skyder af med trægeværer – Der er det med, at blive indendørs  
U2: Ja det er noget gammelt noget. Loger har vi også  
U1: Så det ender måske med at du flytter herned?  
Sx: Ja, det kunne da næsten godt være  
…. 
Sx: Hvor ofte vil I sige at I deltager i aktiviteter?  
U1: Ja, det må næsten være hver eneste dag – Jeg spiller billard tirsdag formiddag og onsdag 
formiddag spiller jeg krolf, torsdag aften spiller jeg kort og søndag formiddag spiller vi krolf og 
så tager vi ellers ud til stævner og så’en.  
Sx: Og, hvor sker det henne?  
U1: Vi har en Krolf bane nede ved slottet  
… Flere snakker samtidig om Krolf baner … 
==PAGE:107==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
10
Sx: Føler I, at I bliver begrænset i at deltage i aktiviteter på grund af transport?  
U1: Jeg gør ikke, men jeg har en lille bil. Jeg sgu kørekort endnu – Det gælder jo kun et år ad 
gangen nu  
U2: Om jeg bliver begrænset i at deltage i aktiviteter på grund af hvad?  
Sx: Transport – Eller manglen på transport  
U2: Overhovedet ikke  
Sx: Overhovedet ikke?  
U2: nej nej, overhovedet ikke – Men jeg har også kørekort endnu  
Sx: hvad så uden kørekort, er det så et problem?  
U3: Jeg har en knallert  
Sx: ah okay – Så, hvilke transportmidler vil I så sige at I bruger oftest?  
U5: det er nok bus 
U1: Det er så nok min bil – Men jeg har også en cykel – Og en el-cykel, så jeg kan sagtens komme 
rundt 
U2: Jeg har cykel også jo, men bil er nok mest  
U3: Jeg også cykel  
U1: Men jeg har en god bil – vi har jo ikke længere end vi kan gå jo 
Sx: Og hvor langt, vil I sige det er? Altså, hvor langt skal man gå før det er for langt – Ej det var 
en mærkelig måde at spørge om det … Hvor langt, synes i er acceptabelt at gå for en aktivitet? Og 
det kunne for eksempel være hertil  
U1: Ja, hvor langt er der hertil fra stranden?  
U2: Du ville nok godt kunne gå det på en halv time  
U1: Ah jo, det kunne jeg vel nok godt gå – Kan vel gå i en … halvanden time eller  
U2: en 10 km ca.  
Sx: Hvis I så for eksempel skulle handle ind? – Så er det vel for langt?  
U1: ja jo, især, hvis man skal have meget 
U5: Ja, jeg handler jo ind med Ældre Sagen  
U1: Du har da Rema 1000 i nærheden  
U5: Ja, men det er jo netop nemmere at tage bussen (Ældre Sagens bus til indkøb)  
U1: ja det er da nok rigtigt  
U2: Vi har forretninger nok i byen – Og vi får flere endnu  
U1: Ja, der skulle komme en ny Rema 1000  
Sx: Et sidste spørgsmål, hvilket transportmiddel bruger i mindst?  
==PAGE:108==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
10
U1: Mindst?  
U2: Flyvemaskine  
U1: Ej, det er nok min cykel jeg bruger mindst  
Sx: Hvad med den offentlige transport?  
U1: ja, nej  
U2: Det er sjældent  
U1: Der kører dog bybus rundt i hele byen – Og der kører de her regionalbusser – Det er de blå  
(person kommer ind)  
U2: Hej Gunnar  
Sx: Det var vel faktisk også bare det.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
==PAGE:109==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
10
Plenum interview 2:  
Date:  
23th of May. 
Language: 
Danish (Occasional heavy accent)  
Duration:  
16 minutes 
Settings:  
Four users of the activity centre are present, all female. The group is getting ready to play board 
game as part of the activity called “de små grå” (referring to the the little grey cells) as an exercise 
in a continued use of the brain. The game was scheduled to start after lunch (15 minutes after the 
interview was initiated) the time between could therefore be used to consult the early attendees.   
Before the interview is started the users are quickly informed of the purpose of the project as well 
as the agenda for the questions.   
U[n]: Represent the user of the activity centre present for the interview. 
Sx: Represent Saxe, the interviewer.  
Ux: If the person cannot be identified  
 
Transcript:  
Sx: Først vil jeg spørge om jeres alder?  
U1: Jeg er 78 
U2: Det er jeg også 
U3: Jeg er 74 
U4: 81 
Sx: Ja. Og selvfølgelig, hvis man ikke har lyst til at svare på noget af det her, så lader man bare være 
U1: Jaja selvfølgelig så gør man ligesom … (utydeligt) … og siger ”ingen kommentarer”  
Latter  
Sx: (jokende) Ja, så kan man lave politikeren  
Ux (Uforståeligt) 
Sx: Har I kørekort?  
U1 + U2: Jeg har ikke 
U3: Jeg forstod ikke, hvad du spørger om?  
U2: (Som svar til u3) har du kørekort?  
U3: (forsætter, lidt utydeligt)  
==PAGE:110==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
10
Sx: Har I kørekort?  
U3: Nej  
Sx: Har I nogensinde haft kørekort?   
U3: Ja, men jeg har afleveret det  
Sx: Okay  
U1: jeg har aldrig haft. Det har aldrig været en del af mit liv. Nej jeg har aldrig haft kørekort 
Sx: Aldrig haft kørtekort?  
U1: Nej – det er ikke fordi det er blevet taget, jeg har simpelthen bare aldrig haft et  
Sx: Nej, hvordan kan det være?  
U1: Jamen, det ved jeg ikke. Jeg var bare ikke så interesseret, han (referere til sin mand) fik sit 
kørekort, så tænkte jeg at så var det fint. Så sagde min veninde, at du skal til at få dit kørekort for 
ellers … (utydeligt) … men det var jeg for sløv til, så nu må jeg gå eller også så må jeg cykle!  
Sx: Ja … Bor I alle sammen i Aabenraa?  
U1: Jeg gør  
U3: Jeg bor herover i kallemosen   
U4: Jeg bor i Kirsebærhaven  
Sx: Det er lige herved?  
Flere bekræfter i kor 
U3: Ja, det er også ved kallemosen  
Sx: Ja … Hvor vigtigt vil I sige det er, at bo tæt på en læge?  
…  
Sx: Altså ud fra ”ikke særligt vigtigt” til ”meget vigtigt”  
U1: Nej det synes jeg ikke …  
U2: Temmelig vigtigt  
Sx: Temmelig vigtigt?  
U2: Ellers, så jeg kan komme derhen med noget offentlig transport  
Sx: ja  
U1: Ja, jeg har en nede i byen. Jeg tager bussen og ellers tager jeg en taxa, hvis det haster – og hvor 
langt inde i byen … - er det langt i din verden?  
Sx: Ja, altså, når jeg siger langt, så mener jeg lige i nærheden  
U1: Altså, jeg vil sige, at, hvis man kan komme derhen med offentlig transportmiddel – Men det 
kan man jo også.  
U2: Ja, som pensionist kan man jo få …  
==PAGE:111==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
110 
U3: Så skal man først have læge da (mulig reference til lægeerklæring, usikker)  
U2: Men, hvis det er sådan at det har man ikke prøvet, så ved man ikke, hvad det er  
Længere samtidig utydelig snak  
Sx: Så det synes du ikke det er vigtigt, at bo tæt på en læge?  
U3: altså, jeg bor her og min læge han bor, åh uha, hvad hedder den da? – Så skal jeg lige se i mit – 
den her (referere til sygesikringskort)  
U2: Ja men det må være her i by, det kan ikke være langt – Det skal man have tilladelse til da.  
Flere taler samtidig  
U1: Hvis jeg skal til lægen så kan jeg tage (uforståeligt) – og det er billigt, det koster 40 kroner 
Sx: Ja, det er … flex trafikken? Er det ikke?  
U1: Jo  
U3: Det er Rådhusgade i Aabenraa  
Sx: Ah okay, tak  
U3: (uforståeligt men griner lidt til sidst)  
Sx: Hvad med at bo tæt på et supermarked?  
U1: Ja, det synes jeg nu er ret – for nu her er det på gåben eller på cykel, så det er rart nok at man 
lige kan gå og så tage lidt med hjem ad gangen  
U2: Det er i det hele taget rart at have et supermarked tæt på når man kommer op i vores alder  
U1: Ja, jo det er det  
U3: Altså supermarked, altså der er hver onsdag formiddag der kommer de og de er fra Ældre 
Sagen  
Sx: Ældre Sagen?  
U3: Og de samler op og så kører vi til Føtex 
U1: Der er utroligt mange gode ting  
U3: Ja det er der ikke?  
U1: Og det er også specielt for Aabenraa, det tror jeg. Det ved du måske, hvis du har arbejdet med 
sådan noget  
Sx: Nej, det er første gang at jeg hører om det faktisk, det med Ældre Sagen – Meget interessant 
synes jeg  
U3: Og det er altså Føtex – Og vi bliver jo hentet – Ellers kunne jeg ikke kommer derhen – For jeg 
er ikke så godt gående.  
U1: Ja de kommer og henter dem og bringer og der er en café – Så får man hyggen med.  
Ux: Uforståeligt  
==PAGE:112==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
111 
U3: det kunne være rart at man kom ned til gaden over på hjørnet og så have en forretning – Men 
det har man altså ikke længere 
Sx: Nej. Det er også det som det her handler om. Altså bilens kommen og har været med til at 
centralisere, hvor vare bliver lokaliseret i storcentre og så videre – Så det rykkes væk fra byerne og 
ud midt mellem byerne – Så bygges det kun én gang.  
Sx: Handler nogen af jer ind i specialist butikker, når jeg siger specialist butikker så mener jeg det 
kunne være en vinforhandler – Jeg mangler en god definition på den her.  
U1: Der er mange fine små butikker inde i byen  
U2: Det kunne være te, for eksempel?  
Sx: Te, også ja  
U1: Ja, og kaffe og såen?  
Sx: Ja, generelt, indkøb som ikke er i et supermarked?  
U1: Nej, så er det nede i byen  
Sx. Nej okay, men føler I at det er vigtigt at bo tæt på sådan et (referere til specialist butikker)  
U3: nej  
U2: Altså når man skal købe gaver og sådan noget, så tager man derhen  
U1: Ja ja – og få lidt godt  
Sx: Hvad med kulturelle faciliteter – Der mener jeg biografer, eller museer eller teater eller 
bibliotek?  
U1: Der er jo også noget i Ældre Sagen, hvor man går i biografen en gang om måneden – Og så er 
der et fint museum hernede, det har fået nogle gode udstillinger om Afrika, noget tysk, hvor de 
tager til Afrika. Og så har vi en sønderjyllandshal, hvor der kommer teatre og koncerter  
U3: Og et godt bibliotek har vi også  
U1: og et bibliotek ja, det må vi da ikke glemme da  
U3: Og biblioteket kommer kørende op til mig når jeg ringer og henter op til mig igen og det er især 
fordi jeg ikke kan klare det trappeværk og det hele  
Sx: Ja – Så I bruger de kulturelle faciliteter ofte vil I selv sige? – Og det skal siges at det her også 
inklusiv – Centret her.  
U1 + U2: ja  
Sx: Hvad med sports faciliteter – Altså idrætsudøvende.  
U1: Jamen der har de bygget et fint center herovre og en multiarena er de ved at bygge, hvor man 
kan bruge …  
U2: Vi har et lille fitnesscenter hernede (referere til aktivitetscentrets eget lille fitness lokale)  
Sx: Ah ja, det så jeg godt  
U2: Ja, men vi har da flere fitnesscentre  
==PAGE:113==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
112 
U1: Ja, og den der multiarena  
U2: Ja, den bor jeg tæt på  
Sx: Hvad med parker og grønne arealer?   
U2: Der vil jeg nok sige at der mangler lidt hernede i Aabenraa  
Sx: Der mangler lidt?  
U2: Ja, jeg synes ikke at vi har nogen særligt fine parker – Vi de har de små dernede ved … ikke?  
U1: Vi har skove vi kan gå i?  
U2: Ja skov, men det er offentligt jo ikke?  
U1: Og dernede ved HP Hansensgade, det er jo altid unge mennesker dernede  
U2: Jamen, det er jo skateboard 
U1: ja, ja det synes jeg er så fint  
 
U2: Det er jo ikke en grøn park for pensionister  
Sx: Nej nej, men det, det er også derfor jeg tænker på grønne arealer. Men det synes i er vigtigt at 
bo tæt på? Eller det?   
U1: For dem som bor inde i byen … (utydeligt) … Men dem som bor inde i byen og ikke kan gå de 
har ikke ret mange fine parker de kan gå i  
Flere taler samtidig i længere tid  
U2: Men altså, i forhold til byens størrelse, så synes jeg at vi mangler nogle parker  
U1: Men vi har stranden og den er da fin og lignende 
U2: Jojo, men, hvis man bor i byen og er dårligt gående – Så kan du ikke gå derned til stranden  
U1: Nej, men så kan man måske heller ikke bruge det på samme måde – Ellers må man tage en 
taxa derned.  
Flere taler samtidig  
Sx: Er der andre aktiviteter i deltager i? – Som ikke er det, som jeg har nævnt nu?  
U1: Ikke sådan nogle offentlige  
Sx: Nej, så det er altså som private, altså familie og venner?  
U1: Ja og gymnastik og sådan noget 
U2: Jeg kan ikke komme på noget – hvis man nu havde spillet i et orkester, så havde det måske 
været. – Eller spejder eller sådan noget  
Sx: Hvor ofte deltager I, i aktiviteter?  
U1: Det er jo en gang om ugen – Altså når der er noget, som man synes er interessant  
U4: Jeg er her flere gange om ugen – Og det kan man jo gøre som man har tid og lyst – Og du kan 
komme her hver dag – Der er mange faciliteter  
==PAGE:114==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
113 
U1: Nå ja, for resten, ja undskyld, der er for resten også en gammel gård … (uforståeligt) …  
U2: Mikkelsens gård?  
U1: Ja, Mikkelsen, en gammel bondegård som er indrettet til, hvor man kan komme ind i pæne 
stuer og sidde og drikke kaffe – Og så en gang i mellem er der weekend med bageweekend med 
frisk … Så bager vi en rigtig stor gang og der har også sommetider været taler og sådan noget  
Sx: Ah okay … Er der nogen af jer, som føler at I bliver begrænset i at deltage i aktiviteter på grund 
af transport 
U1: Nej  
Kort stilhed  
U2: Under det man har kunne lave har vi også seniordans her i huset.  
U3: Og square dans og folkedans  
U2: Ja, jeg ved ikke, hvor mange forskellige ting der er her i huset  
Lidt utydelig snak om dans  
Sx: Hvilket transportmiddel, vil I sige at I bruger oftest?  
U1: Bybus  
U2: Min cykel  
U1: Benene  
Sx: Hvad med bil?  
U2: Jo, den bliver da brugt lidt  
U3: Bil har jeg afleveret  
Sx: Ja, den var afleveret?  
Sx: Så bil er måske faktisk det transportmiddel I bruger mindst?  
U1: Men du spurgte om offentligt transportmiddel?  
Sx: Nej, jeg mente transportmiddel  
U1: Ah okay  
Sx: Og der er offentligt transport så et transportmiddel  
U1: Ah jaja … Og heldigvis går der en bus herfra, hver time – Men det er gør det jo ikke mange 
andre steder. Nej, det er det også (uforståeligt) … De vil styrke den offentlige transport og så 
skærer de ned i den  
Sx: og som sidste spørgsmål; hvor langt vil I gå til et busstoppested? Altså, hvor langt finder i 
acceptabelt til et busstoppested? Er det 100, 200, 300, 400, 500 meter  
U3: Det kommer jo ret meget an på, hvor godt gående man er  
Sx: Ja, det er lige præcis det  
==PAGE:115==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
114 
U3: Ja, så der siger jeg pas  
U2: Ja, hun vil ikke gå dertil – og jeg vil sige en 200. Altså, du kan da godt gå til et busstoppested?  
U3: Joda  
U2: Altså, hvor du først er så gammel at du ikke kan gå længere – Så afhænger det jo af – at du 
stadigvæk kan gå – jeg kan da gå en 5 – 10 kilometer  
U3: Argh, det kan jeg ikke dog  
U1: Men det kommer jo an på de specielle situationer for de gamle – Og det skal du også lige huske 
at have med  
Sx: ja den tages også med og tages højde for  
U3: Det der mangler er jo, at man lige kommer ned ad gaden – og det har vi jo haft i … 
(uforståeligt) … så var en lille købmandsforretning, hvor der kunne købes brød og de vigtigste ting 
du brugte til daglig – Men de står ingen steder mere.  
U1: Nej, lige præcis.  
U3: … (uforståeligt) …  
Resten af interviewet omhandler U3’s børn og er ikke fundet relevant at transskribere 
 
 
 
==PAGE:116==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
115 
Plenum interview 3:  
Date:  
24th of May. 
Language:  
Danish (Occasional heavy accent)  
Duration:  
18 minutes 
Settings:  
11 users of the activity centre are present after having participated in “bobby lacing”. The activity 
ended at 11:15 and many users to leave for lunch before 12, which left only short time for the 
interviews, which there ended up being one group. 10 are female and one male. Other present is 
Pia, who is an assistant working in the activity centre.  
U: represent the users of the centre (Ux indicates it was not possible to identify the person)  
Pi: Pia the assistant at the centre 
Sx: Saxe  
Note:  
Due to the accent, not all of the interview is transcribed as some parts are unintelligible.   
 
Sx: Jeg vil gerne starte med at spørge om, hvor mange af jer som har kørekort?  
U1: Det har jeg  
U2: (til sin sidemand) Hvad spørger han om?  
U3: (svarer U2) Om, hvor mange som har kørekort?  
U2: Det har jeg ikke  
Sx: Okay. Hvor mange… Dem som har kørekort, vil I ikke lige række hånden op?  
(tæller)  
Sx: Fire – Okay, hvor mange har så mistet sit kørekort?  
(Lettere forvirring om spørgsmålet)  
Sx: Hvor mange har mistet, altså har haft, men har det ikke længere?  
U3: Ah, nej jeg har aldrig mistet det.  
U4: Jeg har haft  
U2: Jeg har også haft  
Sx: Så det er to? – Så resten af jer har altså aldrig haft et kørekort?  
U3: mm-m (bekræftende)  
Ux: nej  
==PAGE:117==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
116 
Sx: Hvor vigtigt ser i det, om at bo tæt på et indkøbscenter? Eller at have indkøbsmuligheder tæt 
på?  
U3: Meget vigtigt  
(Flere taler samtidig om at det er vigtigt – længere uforståelig samtale)  
Sx: Øhm … Hvad med sådan noget som mere specialist butikker? Det kan være alt som tøjbutikker, 
apotek, vinforhandlere, møbler -  Ting som man generelt ikke kan købe i en Fakta eller Netto. Ser I 
det som vigtigt?  
U4: Jo, det er vigtigt at det er tæt på, men det er det bare ikke. Så skal vi helt ind i by for at hente 
det.  
Sx: Ja  
U5: (uforståeligt)  
U4: (Som svar til U5) Ja, men jeg synes jo ikke at det er tæt på, jeg skal bruge el-scooter.  
(smågrin)  
Sx: Jeg vil også gerne snakke transportformer, men helst om lidt.  
U4: Men altså, så er det jo ikke tæt på.  
Sx: nej, men spørgsmålet er så –  
Ux: Nej, men så er det jo ikke svært at komme ind i byen jo, det er at sætte dig på din crosser og så 
køre.  
U4: Ja selvfølgelig, men det går sgu da i stykker ind i mellem.  
Ux: Det gør min heldigvis ikke.  
Sx: Nej okay, men det er om, hvor vigtigt i føler det er at bo tæt på.  
U4 + U3: Det er vigtigt.  
Sx: Hvad med at bo tæt på en læge? – Hvor vigtigt synes i at det er?  
Kortere stilhed  
Samtidig flere: Njo (generelt tøven)  
U4: Jo det er også vigtigt  
U1: Jo, det er det  
Sx: Ja – Hvad med at bo tæt på kulturelle faciliteter og der tænker jeg på biografer eller biblioteker, 
eller …   
U1: Jo, det er stort set det samme synes jeg  
Sx: Det er det også?  
U6: Vi kører derefter, hvis det er det – Jeg synes at jeg har været vidt omkring – til koncerter. Og 
jeg har noget familie som er bil. 
U3: Hvis man ikke har muligheden for at køre, så findes der flex-taxa.  
==PAGE:118==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
117 
Sx: Ja – Det vil jeg rigtigt gerne spørge ind til lidt senere.  
Ux: Det bruger jeg også – Taxi  
Sx: Altså Flexen? (Flex-trafik)  
Ux: Ja.  
Sx: Hvad med at bo tæt på sportsfaciliteter? – Og det kan være idrætshaller sømmehaller …  
U6: Ja, det ville faktisk være godt – Du (referere til sin sidemand) kan jo gå hen til svømmehallen, 
og det kan vi for så vidt også.     
U4: Det kan man også hernede.  
Flere taler samtidig i kort tid om placering af svømmehallen og adgang dertil.  
Sx: Hvad med at … ja?  
U4: Jeg siger bare, at fordi jeg er for kortbenet så kan jeg også køre el-scooter (fra ikke helt 
færdiggjort samtale med sidemanden)  
Sx: aha – hvad med at bo tæt på rekreative områder – Der tænker jeg på grønne områder, såsom 
parker …  
U6: Skove, søer  
Sx: Ja og skove og, … altså bare …  
U1: Det har vi jo faktisk tæt på …  
U6: Det har vi jo lige rundt om døren  
U3: Det har vi tæt på 
U4: Det har vi nemlig tæt på  
Sx: Men synes I så også at det er vigtigt at have det tæt på?  
U6 + U4 + flere i kor: ja  
Sx: (Smågrinende) Det hele er vigtigt?  
Flere i kro: Ja 
Sx: Okay, hvad med kolonihaver? At bo tæt på en kolonihave? – Er det vigtigt?  
U6: Det bor vi også tæt på – Der er mange kolonihaver.  
Sx: Det var det jeg lagde mærke til men …  
Pi: Det han (referere til sx) gerne vil have med ind, det er, er det vigtigt for jer at bo tæt på en 
kolonihave 
Ux: Nej 
U6: Ja, det er det da for mig, for jeg har en kolonihave  
Pi: Jaja, men, hvad siger resten?  
U3 + U1: Det er ikke så vigtigt  
==PAGE:119==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
118 
Flere i kor: Nej  
Pi: Så i det store hele er det ikke så vigtigt.  
Sx: Nej okay, så i det store hele, ikke så vigtigt nej.  
U5: For mig er det vigtigt, men jeg skal have en anden til at hjælpe mig for … 
Uforståeligt da boremaskine begynder at larme  
U6: Sig mig, hvad laver hende den tekniske assistent derover? Står hun med en boremaskine?  
Mindre latter  
Sx: Hvad med at bo tæt på familie og venner?  
U6 + U4: Det er vigtigt.  
…  
Sx: Hvor ofte deltager I, i aktiviteter. Og med aktiviteter der mener jeg alle de ting som jeg lige har 
nævnt. Altså med at handle, besøge lægen, gå i biografen eller teater, svømme hal – alt det. Hvor 
ofte gør i det? – Er det dagligt eller nede på …  
U6: Det er jævnligt  
Sx: Jævnligt? Og det er –  
U5: Ja og jeg gør det om fredagen.  
Sx: Ja … altså  
U5: Handikap (usikker på reference)   
Sx: Ja okay, men det som i har deltaget i, i dag er jo også en aktivitet  
U6: Ja  
Sx: Så det er …  
U6: Jævnligt 
Sx: Og det er? Altså en to-tre gange om ugen eller er det  
U6: Hver uge med gymnastikken i hvert fald.  
Sx: Ja, og indkøb er også?  
Pi: Generelt er det vel et par gange om ugen I er aktive? På den ene eller anden måde?  
U1: Ja, det er rigtigt.  
U5: Nu, kommer jeg to gange her vist, men der er også andet  
Pi: Ja, du handler vel også?  
U5: Jaja, …  
Pi: Og så skal du måske også lige lægen eller på apoteket  
U3: Jojo  
==PAGE:120==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
119 
U6: Ja, så faktisk så skal man jo noget hver dag  
Sx: Ja, så det er …  
U3: Så er der noget flere gange ugentligt.  
Pi: Eller dagligt, er det vel?  
U6: Dagligt skal man vel et eller andet  
Sx: Føler nogen af jer, at I bliver begrænset i at deltage i aktiviteter på grund af mangel på 
transport?  
U6: Det er vel oppe til en selv …  
U5: det kan der godt være, hvis der er noget over i Sønderjyllandshallen for eksempel,  
U6: Så kan du tage en bus.  
U1: ja, det kan man ikke hele tiden  
U6: Jo da  
U5: Aaargh, det kan du ikke da  
U6: Så kan du tage en flex 
U3: Det kan man måske – Men jeg skulle bruge 
U6: Du skal visiteres til den  
U3: Jeg har skulle bruge …  
U4: Det skal du da ikke, - Flex kan alle og enhver bruge  
U3: Men jeg har prøvet en gang at have ringet fordi jeg skulle til Sønderborg sygehus. Der troede 
jeg – At fordi at mine børn kunne hjælpe, men de havde nok at se til – Så spurgte de til mig og om, 
hvordan kommer jeg kom frem i det daglige – Der går jeg eller tager bybussen – Nå ja, det kan du 
også gøre når du skal til Sønderborg, så tager du bare rutebilen, så var det færdigdiskuteret  
U6: Det må have været en rimelig uforskammet en for du har lov til at  
U4: Du har ret til transportbefordring  
Flere bekræfter  
U3: Det er jo den sag – at for ældre mennesker der skal på sygehus til undersøgelse og sådan noget 
– Så skal man ringe til det nummer. (uforståeligt) og så tænkte jeg, det er må det nummer at jeg 
skal ringe til. Men så hører jeg også at Ander og Mette (ikke tilstedeværende) havde fået lidt samme 
svar, altså lidt uforskammet.  
U6: Så skal man virkelig brokke sig  
U3: Ja, og det kan så godt begrænse én lidt. – Ja det gør det.  
Sx: Ja   
U3: For mig, i hvert fald.  
U5: Også for mig – Det kan jeg godt fortælle dig – Det er uforskammet.  
==PAGE:121==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
12
Sx: Ja – og det er så på grund af det vi kalder for et lavt komfortniveau  
Ux: Ja det må.  
Pi: Måske serviceniveau?  
Sx: Ja, serviceniveau.  
Mindre utydelig samtale i baggrund om U3’s historie  
U3: Hvad siger du?  
U5: Sådan skal man ikke tale til folk.  
U3: Nej og jeg hørte at hende Rose (ikke tilstedeværende) som kommer herned at de også brugte 
den på hende. Men man skal bare lukke munden. De er faktisk ret frækt. Men mine børn kan jo 
køre mig, hvis det er. Men det er det som jeg ikke vil have. Det er kun, hvis det er meget 
nødvendigt. Forstår du, hvad jeg siger?  
Sx: Ja jeg forstår.  
U3: Grinende – Du forstår det hele?  
Sx: Ja, det øhm, jeg var her også i går og der har jeg fået en lille lektion i Sønderjysk  
U3: Ah okay, ellers må du sige til.  
Sx: Jeg har også jysk familie, så det er hjælper lidt – Men min fars fætter kan jeg ikke forstå.  
Kort snak om jysk  
Sx: Hvilke transportmidler vil I sige at I bruger mest?  
U3: Bussen  
U1: Bilen  
U6: Om sommeren bruger jeg bussen og om vinteren bruger jeg flex.  
Sx: aha. Så der er mange her som bruger offentlig transport?  
Flere tøvende i kor: Ja  
U4: Jeg bruger nu kun min scooter. Kun når jeg skal herud, så bruger jeg det der fleks-trafik. – To 
gange om ugen.  
Sx: Okay. Og, hvilke transportmidler bruger I så mindst? Og her tænker jeg ud fra enten bil – gang 
– cykel – Offentlig transport.  
U6: Det jeg bruger mindst? Det er jo bil  
Pi: Er der nogen af jer som cykler da?  
U6: Jeg ville gerne op på den igen (Referere til cykel)  
Pi: For så kan man da sige, at hvis ingen af jer cykler, så er det vel det som i bruger mindst?  
U6: Ja, jeg kan ikke komme op på cyklen.  
==PAGE:122==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
121 
U3: Før i tiden var det jo det, som jeg brugte mest – Men jeg væltede et par gange også – Det 
begrænser for jeg tør ikke at cykle mere.  
Ux: Det havde været godt at cykle, men, hvis det er noget om aftenen så vil man jo ikke.  
Sx: Nej okay. – Hvor langt vil I sige at der er for langt at gå til et busstoppested? Jeg tænker om det 
er under 100 meter, under 500 meter under en kilometer.  
U6: 500 meter kan jeg godt gå, men jeg kan da ikke rende land og rige rundt for at finde et 
busstoppested.  
U3: Nej – For man skal tænke over at komme hen til et busstoppested, det er vel det ud mener?  
Sx: Ja, altså for at komme hen til busstoppestedet.  
Pi: Hvor langt, som er rimeligt for jer at kunne gå.  
U6: 500 meter er for langt  
Ux: Vi er jo privilegerede for vi bor så tæt på. 
Ux: Jeg kan sagtens gå en tur på 10 kilometer, men hvis skal have noget med tilbage fra byen, så vil 
jeg nødigt få mere end 500 meter.  
U3: 500 meter? Det er jo ikke meget.  
Ux: Ej det er det måske ikke.  
Pi: Det kommer jo an på, hvad man har af fysiske skavanker jo.  
Sx: Det var faktisk bare det jeg ville spørge jer om.  
U3: Det var da smertefrit.  
Sx: Men, hvis I har noget at tilføje om jeres transportvaner så …  
U7: Ja, vi er nok de eneste her som har bil. Jeg kører min samlever hele tiden. (samlever sidder 
som sidemand)  
Sx: Ja, så der er to med bil, nej tre med bil.  
U4: Jeg kører med min el-scooter hele tiden. Det er et virkeligt godt hjælpemiddel.  
Sx: El-scooteren?  
U4: Den er simpelthen god. Det vil jeg sige dig – Det er det bedste køretøj jeg nogensinde har 
prøvet.  
U4: Ja, det er ikke sådan med toget. Jeg ville ikke ane, hvordan jeg skulle købe en billet til toget.  
U3: Nej, det kan man vel heller ikke.  
U4: Nej, det kan du ikke som ældre mennesker, hvad gør man? – Du kan ikke bare stige på toget i 
Rødekro  
Sx: Især ikke, fordi Rødekro station ikke har …  
U7: Nej, og det med billetautomat … Nej førhen kunne man … 
U4: Før kunne du gå hen til et billetkontor  
==PAGE:123==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
 
DTU Management 
12
U7: Nogle steder har jeg set at man kan bruge et hævekort.  
U4: Ja, men så skal du taste en masse forskelligt ind.  
U7: Ja, hvor du vil hen og det sted du vil køre. Sådan har det været, for jeg har en gang kørt fra 
Bramming, hvor jeg lod bilen stå  
U4: Hvornår går toget, det kan du heller ikke se nogen steder – Det er jo svært for folk som ikke 
kan komme ind på nettet.  
Sx: Derudover er der heller ikke elevatorer på Rødekro station.  
U4: Nej – Det er der heller ikke. Og det er der mange steder som der ikke er.  
U3: Nu skulle jeg til Rigshospitalet (København) her i april og det var faktisk træls fordi så var det 
min datter som skulle, men hun skulle have fri i tre dage.  
Sx: Fordi hun skulle hente dig her?  
U3: Ja, hun bor her i byen. Men så skulle hun transportere mig til Rigshospitalet og så, hvis jeg var 
heldig, kunne jeg komme hjem på tredjedagen – Men hvis ikke, så skulle hun jo blive der. Og hun 
skulle så have fri fra arbejde. Der er mange ting som spiller ind ikke?  
Sx: Ja, det kan jeg godt se.  
U3: Jeg skal ikke med tog til København alene (smågrinende)  
U7: (uforståeligt)  
U3: (Som svar til U7): Ja, men så kommer du til København, og hvor skal du så hen?  
U6: Ej det er svært. Nu har jeg jo boet derover, så jeg kan jo finde ud af det når jeg kommer dertil. 
Men alligevel nu har jeg været væk fra det i et stykke tid, så kan jeg tænke på, hvordan var det jeg 
gjorde, og hvor er det lige jeg kommer hen, hvis jeg stiger på bussen (i København red.). laver de 
den så om, så er jeg på den.  
Sx: Ja – Så det er også med informationen?  
U6: Ja, informationen er meget dårlig – Både med bustider og alt muligt.  
U3: Du kan ikke få en skriftlig oversigt som køreplaner mere. Man skal skrive efter den hos 
Sydtrafik.  
U4: De har stoppet deres trykte køreplaner. Du kan få dem, hvis du skriver til dem i Sydtrafik.  
Sx: Og så kan man få den tilsendt?  
U4: Ja, og om det så er en besparelse for dem – Det har jeg mistro til at det er – For havde de nu 
lavet en større med alle busserne i, bybusser, landbusser og hvad har vi, det havde været billigere, 
hvis de havde sendt sådan en for 50 kroner. Frem for at skulle sætte frimærker på.  
U6: Jamen det gør ikke noget, du kan bare sende den som billigpost og så vente 20 dage (jokende).   
Latter  
U4: Det er godt med dig.  
U6: Det ventede jeg på en pakke.  
==PAGE:124==
 
Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality 
 
 
DTU Management  
123 
U4: Hvis nu jeg skulle bruge den i morgen – Så kan jeg ikke vente 20 dage.  
U6: Du kan heller ikke bestille en køreplan så snert.  
U4: Ej, det ved jeg godt.  
U6: Det kan du ikke få den til.  
Sx: Det er meget interessant, med informationen.  
U4: Jeg synes at man blæser lidt på ældre mennesker. Man tænker ikke over at der er problemer 
der. Hvorfor skulle vi begynde at interessere os for alt sådan noget der som vi ikke har nogen brug 
for i det daglige. Jeg kan se unge mennesker, og sådan er tiden jo at man skal følge med, men, 
hvorfor skal vi, som har andre ting at lave, sidde foran computeren og lave en helt masse med en 
computer som vi aldrig har brugt før.  
Ux: Det er svært til tider.  
U6: Man har jo også mulighed for at sige fra.  
U4: Ja, det har jeg sandelig også gjort.  
U6: Ja, det har jeg også – Men jeg synes at det er noget uartigt noget at man ikke kan få et 
almindeligt brev uden at man skal melde fra på alt muligt  
U4: Men vi overlever.  
Sx: Tusind tak. Det var hyggeligt.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
