==PAGE:1==
Time-Domain Analysis of
Flexibly-Supported Oﬀshore
Wind Turbine subjected to
Seismic Excitations
Master thesis
Hanne Svellingen Pedersen
Supervisor:
Asst. Prof. Evangelos Katsanos
July 2017
==PAGE:2==
Master of Science in Engineering
Civil Engineering
Time-Domain Analysis of Flexibly-Supported Oﬀshore Wind Turbine subjected to
Seismic Excitations
Master thesis
Hanne Svellingen Pedersen
s142500@student.dtu.dk
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Civil Engineering
DTU Civil Engineering
Brovej
Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
DENMARK
Tel. +45 4525 1700
byg@byg.dtu.dk
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis and all work done in connection with it has been performed to meet
and fulﬁll the requirements stated in the study programme Master of Science in
Civil Engineering (MSc CEng) at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU),
Department of Civil Engineering. The study has been carried out in the time
period from January to July 2017, herein included the online introduction course
to HAWC2 provided by DTU Wind Energy.
Danish title: Tidsdomæne analyse af ﬂeksibelt understøttet oﬀ-
shore vindmølle turbine udsat for seismiske belast-
ninger
English title: Time-domain analysis of ﬂexibly-supported Oﬀshore
Wind Turbine subjected to Seismic Excitations
ECTS points: 32.5
Type: Master thesis
Start date: 2017-01-23
End date: 2017-07-29
Cooperating Department: DTU Wind Energy
Project is carried out in: Denmark
Copenhagen, July 29th 2017
Hanne Svellingen Pedersen
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The development in the wind industry has lead to the installation of oﬀshore
wind farms in earthquake prone areas, potentially exposing the structures to
signiﬁcant time ﬂuctuating dynamic loads that may cause injurious eﬀects on
the structural integrity. The interrelation eﬀects between the wind turbine
and the support structure dominate the dynamic response, as its frequencies
occur within a range near the environmental related excitation frequencies. To
ensure reliable designs, the eﬀects of the subsoil and support structure on the
natural vibration characteristics of the wind turbine must be considered in the
dynamic analysis of response. The aero-servo-elastic code HAWC2 facilitates
the time-domain analysis of the 5-MW NREL utility scale reference model
under normal operating and idling states with the presence of wind, waves
and earthquake loads, including the soil-structure-interaction considered for
monopile foundation. The inclusion of soil-structure-interaction is shown to
have potential signiﬁcant impact on the seismic response of the oﬀshore wind
turbine, estimated by means of moment and shear force demand in addition to
accelerations and displacements along the tower elevation.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
iii
Contents
vi
List of Figures
vii
List of Tables
ix
Acknowledgements
xi
Summary
xiii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Wind Energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Literature Review on Wind Turbines and Seismic Hazards .
5
1.4
Scope, Motivation and Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2
Model Description
13
2.1
The NREL Oﬀshore 5-MW Wind Turbine . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2
HAWC2: An Aero-Servo-Elastic Code
. . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
Deﬁnition and Implementation of Loads . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Validation of Code
29
3.1
Benchmark Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
Validation of Earthquake Module in HAWC2
. . . . . . . .
31
3.3
Validation of Soil Module in HAWC2 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4
Soil-Structure-Interaction
39
4.1
Soil Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
Selection of Soil Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
Time-Domain Analysis
45
5.1
Operational States of a Wind Turbine
. . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2
Initial Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3
Environmental Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.4
Sum of Simulations Scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6
Simulation Results and Discussion
55
6.1
Dynamic Responses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2
Inﬂuence of Wind Speed on Response Results . . . . . . . .
58
6.3
Spectral Accelerations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
6.4
SSI Implications on Wind Turbine Response . . . . . . . . .
63
7
Conclusions and Future Directions
71
7.1
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
7.2
Recommendations for Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
Bibliography
75
A Validation of Earthquake Module
79
A.1
High-Rise Tower Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
A.2
Low-Rise Tower Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
B Validation of Soil Module
97
B.1
Earthquake: Kobe
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
B.2
Earthquake: Manjil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
100
B.3
Earthquake: Northridge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
102
B.4
Earthquake: Whittier
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
104
C Characteristics of the 10 Earthquakes
107
D Response Results
111
D.1
Accelerations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
112
D.2
Displacements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
122
D.3
Moments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
132
D.4
Shear Forces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
142
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
1.1
Global new investment in renewable energy. Source: UNEP [1] .
2
1.2
Global cumulative installed wind capacity 2001-2016. Source: GWEC
[2] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Top ten new installed wind capacity in 2016. Source: GWEC [2]
3
1.4
Chinese oﬀshore installations 2007-2016. Source: GWEC [2] . . .
4
2.1
The NREL 5-MW baseline oﬀshore wind turbine [3]. . . . . . . .
13
2.2
A single degree of freedom mass-spring-dashpot system excited by
an external force. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.3
The mass-spring-dashpot system including SSI
. . . . . . . . . .
26
3.1
Time-histories of the four selected earthquake motions. . . . . . .
32
3.2
Elastic response spectra of the four selected earthquakes.
. . . .
32
3.3
Base moments, Mx,y [kNm], for each tower excited by the four
earthquakes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.4
Tower top displacements, ux,y [m], for each tower excited by the
four earthquakes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.5
The four diﬀerent soil models available in HAWC2 [4]
. . . . . .
35
3.6
Base moments, Mx,y [kNm], for the ﬂexibly-supported high-rise
tower excited by the four earthquakes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.7
Tower top displacements, ux,y [m], for the ﬂexibly-supported high-
rise tower excited by the four earthquakes . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.1
Pitch regulated variable speed phases of a wind turbine
. . . . .
46
5.2
Pitch angle, θ, and rotational velocity, Ω, of the shaft for diﬀerent
mean wind speeds, Um . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.3
Inﬂuence of time-step to relative error and computational costs .
49
5.4
Irregular sea-state created in HAWC2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.5
Magnitude and distance distribution of the PEER-NGA database
records. Illustration taken from PEER-NGA database. . . . . . .
52
6.1
First fore-aft bending mode for the (i) ﬁxed base, (ii) dense soil and
(iii) soft soil models. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.2
First side-to-side bending mode for the (i) ﬁxed base, (ii) dense soil
and (iii) soft soil models. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.3
Second fore-aft bending mode for the (i) ﬁxed base, (ii) dense soil
and (iii) soft soil models. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.4
Second side-to-side bending mode for the (i) ﬁxed base, (ii) dense
soil and (iii) soft soil models.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.5
Mean of the maximum of SRSS of displacement and moment response
for 10 earthquake simulations during operational state. . . . . . .
59
==PAGE:10==
viii
List of Figures
6.6
Mean of the maximum of SRSS of displacement and moment response
for 10 earthquake simulations during idling state. . . . . . . . . .
60
6.7
Comparison between operational and idling state for mean of maxi-
mum moment distribution.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.8
Elastic response spectra of the ten earthquake motions showing the
fundamental periods of the wind turbine.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.9
Elastic response spectra of the ten earthquake motions showing the
second vibration modes of the wind turbine. . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.10 Maximum moment demand for diﬀerent soil scenarios and opera-
tional states considering the rated mean wind speed, Um = 11.4
m/s. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6.11 Maximum and minimum response in each direction of the wind
turbine when subjected to the Manjil earthquake during rated mean
wind speed. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.12 Maximum shear demand for diﬀerent soil scenarios and operational
states considering the rated mean wind speed, Um = 11.4 m/s. .
66
6.13 Maximum accelerations along height for operational (upper) and
idling (lower) state of wind turbine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
6.14 Maximum SRSS top displacements for the wind turbine exposed to
rated mean wind speed. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
==PAGE:11==
List of Tables
2.1
Speciﬁcations of the NREL 5-MW wind turbine [5] . . . . . . . .
14
2.2
Structural properties of the NREL 5-MW wind turbine [5] . . . .
15
2.3
Eigenfrequency f, period, T, and logarithmic decrement, δ, for the
ﬁxed-base NREL 5-MW wind turbine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4
Rayleigh damping coeﬃcients of the NREL 5-MW wind turbine as
modelled in HAWC2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1
Structural characteristics of the two benchmark models
. . . . .
30
3.2
Natural frequencies, fi, of the ﬁxed-base benchmark models.
. .
31
3.3
Characteristics of the four selected earthquakes included in the
validation scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.4
Stiﬀness matrix coeﬃcients for the validation scheme . . . . . . .
36
3.5
Natural frequencies, fi, of the ﬂexibly-supported high-rise tower
37
4.1
Characteristics of the subsoils and monopile used in the analysis
43
4.2
The spring and dashpot coeﬃcients for diﬀerent soil conditions
according to Table 4.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.1
Wind parameters included in the time-domain analysis . . . . . .
50
5.2
The ten earthquake ground motions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.1
Eigenfrequency, f, for diﬀerent soil conditions according to Table
4.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.2
Comparison of natural periods, T [s], for turbine and soil models
according to Table 4.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to thank my supervisor, assistant professor
Evangelos Katsanos, for his unending support throughout the completion of
this study at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). By means of his
guidance and encouragement, I have encountered the many challenges along
the way and evolved knowledge, both on an academic and personal level.
Furthermore I would like to thank associate professor Varvara Zania from
the department of Civil Engineering at DTU, who contributed with valuable
information with regard to the soil modelling, and the senior researches, Torben
J. Larsen and Anders M. Hansen, from DTU Wind Technology at Campus Risø,
for their help with the development and validation of the aero-elastic-code of
HAWC2.
Last, but not least, I would like to express my warmest gratitude towards my
family, who has given me unconditional support throughout my entire education
and been a rock whenever time has been hard. Thank you.
==PAGE:14==
xii
==PAGE:15==
Summary
Wind energy has in the recent decades become a cost eﬀective and rapidly
used renewable energy source. These green infrastructures are currently being
produced with rotor diameters and heights well above 100 m. A consequence of
optimisation on the blades and tower is that these contemporary wind turbines
are slender and ﬂexible structures, for which their ﬁrst natural vibration modes
are close to environmental excitation frequencies. This together with the ex-
pansion seen of wind turbines moving into seismic prone areas, poses both new
structural requirements and design objectives.
This MSc thesis comprehends a numerical, time-domain analysis of the
structural response of the NREL 5-MW utility scale reference wind turbine
model [5] including the eﬀects of soil-structure-interaction, when subjected to
a multi-hazardous environment consisting of wind, waves and seismic events.
Simulations are run by means of the aero-servo-elastic code HAWC2, developed
by researchers from DTU Wind Energy at Risø Campus.
Some of the code modules in HAWC2 are developed or extended in order to
incorporate seismic strong ground to the aero-servo-elastic simulation, coupling
the eﬀects of soil-structure-interaction. To further ensure the reliability of these
codes, meticulous validation procedures are performed on both the earthquake
and soil module. Herein, two diﬀerent benchmark models are developed and
analysed with regards to their seismic response derived from HAWC2 and
SAP2000, enabling a platform for comparison. The latter software is widely
used and recognized in the ﬁeld of structural and seismic engineering.
To account for the ﬂexibility of the wind turbine, two representative soil con-
ditions are selected. Based on these and the monopile foundation, given for the
reference model by means of the Oﬀshore Code Comparison Collaboration (OC3
project) [6], appropriate springs and dashpot coeﬃcients are derived. Moreover,
ten diﬀerent earthquakes comprehending a generic set of characteristics are
selected from the PEER-NGA database. In a similar manner, i.e. with aim
to provide a general and reliable oﬀshore environment for the wind turbine
to be exposed to, three mean wind speeds and one sea-state are implemented
for time-domain analysis. In total, considering the two ﬂexible conditions and
the ﬁxed base together with the normal operational and the idling state of the
turbine, this leads to 180 simulations.
==PAGE:16==
xiv
Summary
Response results are thoroughly investigated by means of diﬀerent demands,
such as moment, shear, displacements and accelerations, derived through the
square root of the sum of squares (SRSS) for multiple locations of the tower.
The computed results identify the importance of including the interrelation
eﬀects between support and superstructure, as these may seriously aﬀect the
dynamic characteristics of the system. Consequently, higher response results
can be observed for the structure, particularly on moment and shear demand
at higher elevations of the tower, which have to be taken into account to secure
reliable and cost-eﬀective design solutions. In addition, the inﬂuence of the wind
speed in the assessment of earthquake hazard is shown to be of a minor degree,
though maximum demands are often derived in the normal operational state
of the turbine. Hence, the need to regard fully coupled loading and controller
scenarios by means of aero-servo-elastic codes is found signiﬁcant to derive an
accurate analysis.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The high demand for green energy in the world today has made the development
of wind technology reach new heights, with oﬀshore wind turbines currently
being installed in seismic prone areas. Moreover, these tall and slender contem-
porary wind turbines have natural vibration modes close to the environmental
excitation frequencies, which poses new requirements on the structural integrity.
The sum of this has led to the interest of studying the response of such an
oﬀshore wind turbine in a multi-hazardous environment, including the eﬀects of
soil-structure-interaction. A more detailed introduction into this highly current
topic will be given in the following, leading to the scope of this MSc thesis.
1.1
Background
Carbon dioxide, CO2, is a part of the global carbon cycle and the levels in the
atmosphere vary naturally. However, research has showed that the level today
is 30 % higher than at any other time during the last 400.000 years [7]; an
increase developed since the start of the industrialisation revolution. Currently,
there is a major consensus among climate researchers that suggest that this
atmospheric composition is man made. These greenhouse gas emissions have
led to a global temperature increase over the last century [7], a climate change
that may lead to rising of the sea level and less rainfall, which are threatening
to both people and species in terms of land being ﬂooded and drought in large
areas, in addition to a warmer climate in general.
At the same time, the global population and the overall standard of living
increases, which leads to an even higher demand for energy. In order to stabilize
the demand-supply balance, renewable energy consumption is a necessity world-
wide. Technical solutions to harvest green energy are continually advancing,
while the low footprint these sources have on the environment is essential for
the future. The sum of this makes them competitive against traditional energy
techniques such as coal and oil.
The 197 nations that signed the Paris Agreement on Climate Change in
2015 mirror the pursuit of renewable energy in the world today. The agreement
aims to keep the temperature increase this century within a maximum of 2 ◦C
from pre-industrial levels [8], and furthermore to strengthen the performance of
each country to manage the impacts from the climate change by providing a
framework for both technology and ﬁnances. The key to achieve these goals is
to remove energy consumption from fossil fuels and continue to focus on the
renewable sources.
==PAGE:18==
2
1 Introduction
The majority of research and investments in the renewable sector have taken
place within the last couple of decades, showing the fast growing progress and
potential that this sector holds. Today, several renewable sources are being
considered, such as solar, hydro, geothermal and wind energy. In 2016, the
amount of installed power capacity from green sources passed 138 GW, not
including hydro-electric projects of more than 50 MW [1]. This was an increase
of 11 GW from the previous year. For the last ﬁve years, new investments in
the sector of renewable energy have also overtaken those in fossil fuels, with an
all-time high reached in 2015. As seen in Fig. 1.1, the annual total was at this
point more than six times higher than in 2004, passing $ 312 billion.
Figure 1.1: Global new investment in renewable energy. Source: UNEP [1]
In 2016 however, the investments dropped from the aforementioned record.
According to the UNEP’s "Global Trends in Renewable Energy Investment 2017"
[1], this was an outcome of reduced dollar-denominated costs. In addition, it
was seen that several of the projects commissioned last year were ﬁnanced at the
end of 2015 and that various other projects went on scheduled pauses in 2016.
Despite this, oﬀshore wind experienced a growth of 41% in investment decisions
from 2015, reaching an annual total of $ 29.9 billion. The technology of utilizing
wind to harvest energy is both cost-eﬃcient and well establish. Combined with
the easy availability of wind worldwide, the expansion of this industry seems
inevitable.
1.2
Wind Energy
As stated in the Global Wind Energy Council (GWEC) wind statistics report
from 2016 [2], 54.6 GW of new wind power capacity was installed globally last
year. By looking at the cumulative installed wind generating capacity from the
past 15 years shown in Fig. 1.2, it can be concluded that trend has been one
of rapid growth during the last decade. More speciﬁcally, the amount of wind
power installed across the global market has been doubling approximately every
==PAGE:19==
1.2 Wind Energy
3
three years, standing now at roughly 487 GW. With one of the predominant
roles that wind power has in the production of renewable energy, this trend is
projected to continue in the future.
Figure 1.2: Global cumulative installed wind capacity 2001-2016.
Source:
GWEC [2]
Today, the wind energy market comprises over 90 countries. Leading the
positive growth in new installations is Asia, with China being the biggest con-
tributor, as seen in Fig. 1.3. The electricity production from wind energy in
China passed 168 GW last year, an increase of more than 270 % from 2011 [2].
India is also expanding in this market, setting a national annual record with
3.6 GW new wind power installations in 2016.
Brazil has been the leading nation of wind power production in Latin
America the latter years. Last year, Brazil installed more than 10.7 GW of
wind power, positioning them among the top ﬁve biggest contributors that year.
Figure 1.3 illustrates the distribution amongst the top ten share holders of new
installed wind power in 2016 globally, depicting the strong position of Brazil.
Furthermore, several new markets are emerging in this area, such as Chile and
Uruguay, who respectively hold a total of 1.424 and 1.210 MW installed wind
power.
Figure 1.3: Top ten new installed wind capacity in 2016. Source: GWEC [2]
==PAGE:20==
4
1 Introduction
The oﬀshore wind market beat records in 2015 with 3.4 GW of new power
capacity installed. Last year, the number was standing at a total of 14.4 GW
across 14 markets globally [2]. Although the European coast stalled almost
88 % of it, the oﬀshore industry has started spreading to the United States
and Asia, with China being again the biggest contributor. This latter market
has experienced a rapid growth since the initiation in 2007, as seen in Fig. 1.4.
Oﬀshore wind furthermore underwent a dramatic price reduction last year. As
the technology has matured and with new generations of up to 9 MW machines,
the current situation is that oﬀshore wind in some circumstances is cheaper
than onshore wind.
As the demand for green energy sources increases and based on the growth
that can be seen in wind energy installations, it is profound that this is a
promising sector. With the ﬂexibility in terms of size, wind farms can be used
throughout both commercial and residential sectors. Additionally, development
of agriculture and farming can still evolve in areas where wind farms are installed.
These infrastructures hold the potential to support economic development and
furthermore provide energy to remote areas, which today are not served with
suﬃcient electric frameworks.
Figure 1.4: Chinese oﬀshore installations 2007-2016. Source: GWEC [2]
From the trends seen in energy production from wind power and the fur-
ther anticipated expansion, the means of design and analysis of the servicing
structures have to advance in order to be resilient to various conditions. The
primary objective in wind turbine design is to make the structure adequate
for environmental exposures, i.e. wind, waves and currents (if oﬀshore), and
operational loading. However, as these green infrastructures now are spreading
around the world, their lifetime reliability may also be threatened by extreme
natural hazards such as earthquakes in seismic prone areas.
Several wind turbines have already been installed in various areas that are
exposed to seismic activity, i.e. in Southern Europe, South and North America,
and in Asia (China, India and Korea). Thus, progress has to be made in
understanding the impact of this hazardous condition in addition to the loads
==PAGE:21==
1.3 Literature Review on Wind Turbines and Seismic Hazards
5
from wind, waves and operation. Some studies have already been dedicated to
this work (see sec. 1.3), from which it has been concluded that seismic loading
may govern the reliability of wind turbines.
With the forecast of the wind industry pointing towards further expansion,
moving both into oﬀshore environments and to areas of seismic activity, it is of
interest to study the impact of earthquake excitations to oﬀshore wind turbines.
Hence, this MSc thesis aims to investigate the response of an horizontal axis
oﬀshore wind turbine exposed to the coupled environmental loads and those
imposed by earthquakes, also including the eﬀect of soil-structure interaction.
1.3
Literature Review on Wind Turbines and
Seismic Hazards
The latter chapter introduced the development in the renewable section, pri-
marily focusing on the technologies related to wind power. As seen, large
investments are made worldwide to further explore this energy source and diﬀer-
ent research have and are being conducted on the area. In order to understand
how far the technology has come, especially regarding earthquake hazard, it is of
relevance to investigate the studies related to wind turbines and their coupling
to multi-hazardous environments. Furthermore, studies including soil-structure
interaction (SSI) are of special interest, as these eﬀects may be signiﬁcant for
slender structures such as a wind turbine. The following literature review aims
to give a picture of the current situation by looking at the existing literature
within in these frames.
The literature available around wind technology can primarily be divided
into two groups, namely the analytical and numerical approaches consisting of
data simulations and analysis through diﬀerent software, and the experimental
studies. Due to several challenges in creating a realistic experimental set-up
based on the complexity of both the structure and environmental conditions,
this group falls within the minority of existing material. However, the review
presented further on excludes the experimental studies, as the nature of this
thesis is a numerical one.
1.3.1
State of the Art
During the last decades wind turbines have been constructed in many areas
around the globe and this trend seems only to endure, while at the same time
the capacity and size of wind farms are continuing to increase. This has intro-
duced a broader amount of conditions that the infrastructures are exposed to.
Furthermore, as discussed in sec. 1.2, wind energy has an important role in
the global energy market, meaning that it is of signiﬁcance to assess the risk
related to these structures.
The scientiﬁc interest of developing design and construction solutions of
wind turbines that will be robust and cost-eﬃcient is a direct consequence of the
development stated above, and with the expansion of wind technology moving
into areas potentially exposed to extreme natural hazards in addition to the
==PAGE:22==
6
1 Introduction
regular environmental conditions, broader analysis and understanding of these
coupled actions are becoming of high importance.
Assessment of structural behaviour and reliability of wind turbines exposed
to seismic excitations is in itself not a new subject. However, the increase of
computational power has resulted in more advanced codes that are able to treat
the complexity of coupled dynamic systems. These aero-elastic codes can model
and analyse the controller of the turbine in a detailed manner, as well as the
external environmental conditions, such as wind, waves and currents. As will
be presented in the following, several studies have been performed investigating
wind turbines exposed to earthquakes in varying degrees of complexity, either
following a deterministic approach or through probabilistic modelling.
A Deterministic Approach to Seismic Analysis of Wind Turbines
The existing literature on wind turbines exposed to earthquakes shows that
the research conducted within a deterministic framework are commonly linked
to Frequency Domain Analysis (FDA) or Time Domain Analysis (TDA). The
diﬀerence lies within how the seismic actions are computed, where the FDA
utilises response spectra and the TDA represent the excitations through accel-
eration time-histories. In addition, there are several degrees to the complexity
of the wind turbine models, ranging from simple one-degree-of-freedom systems
to fully developed ﬁnite element (FE) representations.
Both the aforementioned methods were assessed by Bazeos et al. [9], where
a 37 m tall wind turbine tower was analysed using two diﬀerent FE reﬁnements.
An advanced 3D model was used for the FDA method, where the elastic spec-
trum was derived from the Greek Seismic Code. The TDA was implemented on
a multi-degree-of-freedom (MDOF) system, i.e. a simple cantilever beam with
lumped masses along the height of the tower, which was exposed to diﬀerent
artiﬁcial acceleration time series matching the same code as used for the FDA.
The results in terms of tower top accelerations and displacements were almost
identical for both cases. Hence, the study concluded that the earthquake in-
duced loads were less critical than the pseudo-static aerodynamic loads for areas
of low seismic activity. A study of similar characteristics was conducted by
Ritschel et al. [10], in which the same conclusions were derived. This time, a 60
m high wind turbine, modelled as a MDOF system, were subjected to Eurocode
8 [28] spectra in addition to artiﬁcial accelerograms. However, the FDA method
led to high conservative estimations of the base moments in the tower. The
latter observation were further explored by Witcher [11], who included diﬀerent
operational states of the wind turbine, i.e. one parked and one operational
condition. It was seen that the normally used damping ratio of 5% involved in
the frequency domain analysis was not representable for the parked condition,
in which the aerodynamic damping will be signiﬁcantly lower. The results
obtained from the TDA were in better agreement with the characteristics of the
two diﬀerent conditions. Accordingly, the study showed the need of evaluating
aerodynamic damping in the analysis.
Wind turbines are in reality complex devices, consisting of several bodies and
an advanced control system designed to produce power at an all times maximum
==PAGE:23==
1.3 Literature Review on Wind Turbines and Seismic Hazards
7
level. The out-most power generation is achieved by keeping the torque or
shaft angular velocity in a steady state, which the control system regulates by
pitching the blades after the wind speed and turbulence intensity exposure. In
the same manner, a shut-down of the wind turbine is generated when the control
system detects too intensive vibrations due to signiﬁcant load exposure. The
latter scenario will hence lead to other damping properties than the operational
state, meaning that an assumption of a constant aerodynamic damping will
correspond in misleading results. Due to these characteristics, which are all
varying over time, it follows that the TDA has become the superior method in
order to properly analyse a wind turbine. Adding to this, the aforementioned
method can also diﬀerentiate between the directions of the wind and seismic
excitations, which may aﬀect the structural response of the wind turbine. As
the computational power has grown stronger, this method is seen to be favoured
in assessing the performance of a wind turbine exposed to earthquake loads.
The time-domain analysis was along these lines adopted by Wang et al. [12]
in the evaluation of a 70 m tall, 1.65 MW wind turbine excited by the El Centro
earthquake of 1940. For this purpose, one simple model with a lumped mass
representing the rotor and one fully developed FE model were exposed to the
wave scaled to a peak ground acceleration (PGA) of 0.51 g. The comparison
gave diverse results in terms of structural response, but it also unfolded a
common high drift at the top of the tower, identifying in such way the powerful
inﬂuence of the earthquake action on the design of wind turbines in seismic
prone areas. Comparable studies have further emphasized that it is of high
relevance to account for earthquake loads as it will aﬀect the reliability of the
infrastructures, such as He et al. [13] and Song et al. [14]. In both studies,
integrated FE models were investigated using TDA. However, common for the
aforementioned studies are the limited samples of earthquake loads and, more-
over, full coupling between the diﬀerent environmental actions was not achieved.
In contemplation of reducing the partiality in the seismic demand assessment,
a modern wind turbine were exposed to 22 pair of seismic far-fault motions by
Asareh et al. [15]. Furthermore, by using an aeroelastic code, the simulations
accounted for coupling between the variations in wind proﬁles and the horizon-
tal components from the earthquake excitations. The study showed that the
interaction with the turbine’s rated wind speed induced the largest seismic base
moments. Following this, Alati et al. [16] ran simulations using an oﬀshore wind
turbine with two diﬀerent supports, namely a jacket and a tripod, considering
the idling, operational and emergency shut down conditions for both structures.
The research included a fully integrated loading environment, combining the
wind, waves and currents coupled with 49 earthquake motions, in addition to the
internal control system of the wind turbine. The complex simulations concluded
that the demand notably increased when the seismic events were included,
also for moderate peak ground accelerations. The contemplated environmental
actions in the study were to some degree site limited, but nevertheless, the
conclusion underlines the critical eﬀect an earthquake may have on the design.
The signiﬁcance of seismic actions have further been derived by several
other studies, for instance in the extended study of Prowell [17], who assessed
various turbines ranging from 65 kW to 5 MW rated power and included all
==PAGE:24==
8
1 Introduction
three operational states. The combined loading environment from turbulent
wind ﬁelds and a selection of 99 earthquake motions were seen to induce a
considerably higher demand on the structure compared to the analysis of wind
alone, the conclusion being valid for all the operational conditions.
More advanced codes that accounts concurrently for the all possible coupling
eﬀects related to wind turbines are often based on the multi-body simulations,
such as the HAWC2 code used in this study (see sec. 2.2). Utilizing the multi-
body approach, Jin et al. [18] studied a joined blade-tower-foundation model
and found high force ﬂuctuations at the base of the tower, which disturbed
the power production of the infrastructure. This approach has been favoured
as it has proven eﬃcient for simulations of multi-hazard environments, and in
accordance with the aforementioned study, it has revealed that the occurrence
of earthquakes can threaten the performance of the wind turbine even with no
damage on the structure.
A Probabilistic Approach to Seismic Analysis of Wind Turbines
The studies introduced in the latter sections are all based on deterministic
methods that simplify the uncertainties related to the complexity of wind
turbines in terms of structural properties, dynamic environmental behaviour
and design assumptions, to mention some. The dependability of this ﬁeld of
research may therefore be questioned. The probabilistic approaches include a
broader quantiﬁcation of the many challenges involved in this sort of engineering
problem, yet there exist far less literature within these frames.
In the study of Kiyomiya [19], the structural reliability of a 60 m high wind
turbine with a rated power of 1.65 MW subjected to both wind loads and seismic
motions were assessed by use of the Weibull distribution, which is well-known
within failure analysis. The joint probability density function was applied to
examine the probability of merged occurrence of particular intensity values
from the two applied loads. The simulations were conducted using an advanced
FE model for the wind turbine, with a single seismic event assessed through
time-domain analysis and pseudo-static horizontal forces representing the wind.
The simultaneous appearance of extreme wind and earthquake actions was
identiﬁed to be of low probability, while the wind herein was concluded to be
the predominant design for the structure. Howbeit, the preceding results are
limited by means of the small, early-stage wind turbine subjected to a very
restricted sample of environmental loads.
Another seismic fragility analysis were conducted by Nuta et al. [20], who
investigated a 1.65 MW wind turbine only exposed to earthquake excitations.
The structure were modelled with ﬁnite elements, but did not include the nacelle
or rotor blades. By use of an incremental dynamic analysis procedure, the
intensity of the three applied seismic motions were increased by additions to
produce a sample space of data. Probabilistic estimations for diﬀerent demand
measures were then derived for three chosen geographical sites, from which it
was concluded that the earthquake prone area was identiﬁed with the highest
risk.
==PAGE:25==
1.3 Literature Review on Wind Turbines and Seismic Hazards
9
Both wind loads and earthquake motions were included in the work of Men-
sah et al. [21], who analysed the coupled eﬀect of these environmental actions
with the use of an aeroelastic code. The probabilistic study were conducted on
a modern wind turbine with 5 MW rating power operating in three diﬀerent
conditions, namely the running, parked and emergency shut-down scenarios. 550
simulations were run, which consisted of a broad variety of real strong ground
motions and generated wind ﬁelds. The research showed that the inﬂuence
of seismic eﬀects were considerably greater than those from the wind loading,
concluding the need to recognize seismic hazard in the design of wind turbines.
Expanding to this, Mardfekri & Gardoni [22] evaluated the risk of an
oﬀshore wind turbine exposed to multi-coupled hazards containing of wind,
waves, currents and seismic actions. The analyses herein were highly advanced,
including a wide range of structural properties and demand conﬁgurations.
Based on this, a fragility analysis was assessed for the 90 m high contemporary
5 MW wind turbine. Furthermore, the fragility curves were coupled to the
probability of the annual occurrence of the aforementioned exposures. Again, it
was concluded that the fragility of the wind turbine was signiﬁcantly increased
due to the impact of earthquakes. Furthermore, the study showed that the
probability of failure was higher than the prescriptive.
Eﬀects of Soil-Structure Interaction
The soil proﬁle can resolutely aﬀect the dynamic response of a structure, espe-
cially if the latter is high and slender. The eﬀects herein are with regard to the
mode shapes and natural frequencies of the structure, which furthermore have
an impact on the structural damping properties. For wind turbines, this may
establish critical aspects in both the analysis and design, why it is of importance
to investigate the interaction between the soil compliance and the foundation
system.
By use of numerical simulations, Bazeos et al. [9] looked into the dynamic
behaviour of a wind turbine when considering the soil-structure interaction
(SSI). To account for this phenomena, sets of springs and dashpots were included
in the FE model to represent the interface between the soil and foundation. The
eigenvalue analysis showed that the ﬂexible system had a fundamental frequency
distinctly lower than the corresponding ﬁxed system. Also the higher vibration
modes were seen to diﬀer in shape and natural frequencies as an eﬀect of the SSI.
The NREL 5-MW reference wind turbine was implemented in the work of
Damgaard et al. [23] to study the natural vibration characteristics of an oﬀshore
wind turbine with monopile foundation. Two diﬀerent soil models and three
wind speeds were considered in the simulations, which were run in HAWC2.
From the results it was seen that the dynamic response is sensitive to the soil,
as this changes the modal parameters of the wind turbine. Furthermore, they
investigated the impact of fatigue damage and found that the inclusion of SSI
is important for the 1 Hz equivalent moment at seabed.
A spring-based model was again utilised in the study of Alati et al. [16], who
detected that the ﬂexibility of the soil is also relevant for the response of a wind
==PAGE:26==
10
1 Introduction
turbine when subjected to earthquake excitations. More speciﬁcally, the results
showed that the bending moments at the root of the blades increased notably
in correspondence to the soil compliance. Further research was conducted by
Kjørlaug et al. [24], who herein adopted a comprehensive FE model with solid
elements to represent the soil layers supporting the foundation. The eigenvalue
analysis of the complete model concluded again that the natural frequencies
of the wind turbine are signiﬁcantly aﬀected by the characteristics of the soil
proﬁle. In addition, analyses were run utilising the FDA approach with an
earthquake motion of diﬀering amplitude. The latter showed that soft soil
conditions induced higher dynamic response with regard to base moments and
lateral displacements from the seismic motion than from the wind-response.
Haciefendioglu et al. [25] conducted a parametric study in order to estimate
the eﬀects of varying soil foundations coupled with random seismic excitation.
Herein, an oﬀshore wind turbine was modelled using 3D ﬁnite elements in
ANSYS, and the analyses considered the interaction between the structure, sea
water and soil. The study terminated that the displacement values increased as
the soil got softer. Similar conclusions were drawn by Lai et al. [26], who anal-
ysed the impact of earthquake motions and SSI on the 5-MW NREL reference
wind turbine in an oﬀshore environment using FAST. According to the results,
the eﬀects from SSI can inﬂuence the dynamic behaviour of these structures
and lead to higher moments in the support structures. Hence, the study sub-
stantiates the need to also include ﬂexible bottom design for oﬀshore wind farms.
Within the frames of soil-foundation response, some research have also been
made regarding vertical excitations of wind turbines when exposed to seismic
motions. The work of Ritschel et al. [10] showed that earthquake loads derived
from vertical excitations may induce higher response than normal design loads
in a wind turbine. This was seen particularly for the upper part of the structure,
which may be crucial for the performance of a wind turbine as this is where
sensitive equipment such as the nacelle and rotor is located. Similar conclusions
were drawn by Kjørlaug et al. [27]. Moreover, this study showed that the soft
and rocky soil characteristics induced almost three and eight times ampliﬁed
vertical accelerations, respectively. The latter emphasizes the importance of
including SSI eﬀects in the design, as higher accelerations will result in more
demanding inertial forces.
1.3.2
State of Practice
Wind technology is clearly seen as a fast-growing branch within the energy
market, where new studies are published and knowledge is increasing almost on
a daily basis. Simultaneously, these infrastructures are spreading geographically,
reaching into earthquake prone areas, which arises the interest of including a
state-of-practice review within the frames of wind turbine design in relation to
seismic actions. Hence, this sub chapter aims to provide an overview of the
prescriptions given by available codes and standards.
The European Committee for Standardisation provides standards on struc-
tural design for the Europen Union, where the EN 1998-1 [28] applies to general
rules for earthquake resistant design of buildings. It presents the FDA method
==PAGE:27==
1.3 Literature Review on Wind Turbines and Seismic Hazards
11
as the main design procedure, for which the response spectra is dependant on
several diﬀerent values, i.e. behaviour factor q and damping ratio ζ. How-
ever, wind turbines are not amongst the prescribed structures in this standard,
and the complex composition of the response of a wind turbine, including
the structural ﬂexibility, environmental loads and the internal control system,
makes the determination of the necessary FDA parameters unclear to deﬁne.
The International Organization of Standardisation (ISO) gives prescriptions
of oﬀshore structures in the oil and gas industry through the standard ISO
19901-2 [29], but the same challenges are found here.
Standards and technical speciﬁcations for electrical, electronic and related
technologies are provided by The International Electrotechnical Comission
(IEC), commonly applied in both Europe and the United States. The IEC
61400-1 [30] contains design requirements regarding wind turbines and states
that special considerations are needed when the location of the structure is
classiﬁed as prone to seismically activity. More speciﬁcally, the FDA method
is given as the described design procedure for the earthquake loads, which
furthermore are to be superposed with the aerodynamic loads. If there is a
wide enough set of simulations, the standard also includes the alternative of
implementing the TDA method. However, as it assumes in general that it is of
rare occurrence that the design driving actions are of seismic nature there are
no minimum requirements related to this.
Another relevant provider of frameworks and guidelines within the maritime,
energy and oil and gas industries is DNV GL AS. Their standard about support
structures for wind turbines, namely the DNVGL-ST-0126 [31], emphasizes that
geological characteristics should be determined in order to anticipate the seismic
inﬂuence in the design. Furthermore, it mentions the need to investigate the SSI
eﬀects in the analysis. Despite this, there are no speciﬁcations regarding how
the design procedure should be conducted when seismic hazards are included,
other than further references to ISO 19901-2 and EN 1998-1.
There are not many relevant codes for the design of wind turbines in the US
either, besides the aforementioned IEC 6400-1. Hence, the design procedures are
often based on the code standard for general structural design, the International
Building Code (IBC), or the European prescriptions. The IBC further refers
to the ASCE 7-10 [32], which provides minimum demands for buildings and
other structures, for assessment on seismically resistant design. Nonetheless,
the limitations seen earlier in the EN 1998-1 regarding the required structural
and usage parameters are found to be a problem also in this prescriptive code.
In general it can be seen that there is a lack of prescriptions regarding
earthquake resistant design of wind turbines. Even more so, the fully coupled
response of a wind turbine subjected to seismic excitations will also include
eﬀects from the soil-structure interaction, the aerodynamics and hydrodynamics
(if oﬀshore) loading, as well as the internal structural ﬂexibility and the controller
system. Hence, as the wind energy industry continues to grow into seismically
prone regions, the need for more detailed and accurate design codes including
TDA procedures is signiﬁcant.
==PAGE:28==
12
1 Introduction
1.4
Scope, Motivation and Methodology
The massive expansion of wind turbines in Asia (China, India and South Korea)
as well as in Northern and Latin America (USA, Chile, Argentina and Brazil),
as seen in sec. 1.2, poses new requirements and design objectives that these
green infrastructures should meet successfully. A multi-hazard environment
consisting of the conventional wind and wave loads (in case of oﬀshore in-
stallation), along with the earthquake induced strong ground motions, may
seriously jeopardise the structural integrity and reliability of oﬀshore wind
turbines located in seismic-prone areas. Hence, it is of paramount importance
to establish an eﬃcient framework that predicts with increased accuracy the
structural performance of wind turbines when subjected to such a demanding
set of hazardous sources.
The state-of-art review showed that the interest of conducting research
within the frames of seismic impact on wind turbines has arisen and that several
studies have already investigated in topics related to this. Albeit the many
studies, there is a limited amount that include a comprehensive coupling of the
multi-hazard environment connected to contemporary wind turbines, not to
mention the soil-structure interaction eﬀects. Moreover, the state-of-practice
presented in sec. 1.3 exposed the lack of prescriptions when considering earth-
quake exposure on wind turbines, though simultaneously stating the need to
include these eﬀects in the design procedure.
Along these lines, the general layout of this MSc thesis intends to evaluate
the response and performance of an oﬀshore wind turbine when subjected to the
fully coupled load-environment including wind, waves and earthquake hazards,
the latter being represented by time-series of strong ground motions recorded
during past seismic events. The aim is furthermore to quantify the eﬀect of the
soil ﬂexibility, calculated for diﬀerent soil conditions and included by use of ap-
propriate springs and dashpots, with regards to the dynamic performance of the
oﬀshore wind turbine. For this purpose, the response results obtained from the
ﬁxed-base and a ﬂexible-based oﬀshore wind turbine will be thoroughly analysed.
The use of advanced aero-servo-elastic codes, being dedicated to the mod-
elling, analysis and design of wind turbines, is favoured nowadays instead of
employing the conventional FE software that may treat marginally the aerody-
namic and hydrodynamic eﬀects on wind turbines. In this manner, HAWC2,
being an already developed aero-servo-elastic code, constitutes a well-established
tool that can be used to model holistically a modern oﬀshore wind turbine
(including all its diﬀerent components such as the foundation substructure, the
supporting tower, the hub, the rotor and the blades) and conduct time-domain
analysis under various sets of time-variant exposures. To provide a generic and
pertinent study, a contemporary 5 MW oﬀshore wind turbine with monopile
foundation is adopted herein for the analysis.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 2
Model Description
The model utilized for simulations and research purposes in this study is the
ﬁctive 5-MW reference wind turbine provided by the National Renewable Energy
Laboratory (NREL). The main aerodynamics and control-system properties of
this turbine, as well as the structural details, are thoroughly described in the
following subchapter. In addition, this chapter presents the basic aero-elastic
principles and the aero-servo-elastic code of HAWC2 developed by DTU Wind
Energy Department, adopted herein for the time-domain simulations of the
wind turbine. Furthermore, the deﬁnition of the wind, waves and earthquakes
loads utilized for the analyses are given along with the implementation of them
in HAWC2.
Figure 2.1: The NREL 5-MW baseline oﬀshore wind turbine [3].
==PAGE:30==
14
2 Model Description
2.1
The NREL Oﬀshore 5-MW Wind Turbine
The NREL reference model is a conventional horizontal axis three bladed up-
wind turbine, which was developed to support studies that aim to evaluate
oﬀshore wind technology. The model has already been adopted for several
studies, as notable in sec. 1.3, and will likely carry on to be utilized as a
standardized reference for research purposes. Thus, the NREL 5 MW model is
a reasonable choice for the aspiration of assessing the seismic demand on an
oﬀshore wind turbine. Its speciﬁcations are based on a composition of design
information provided by diﬀerent manufacturers of turbines [5], where the main
characteristics can be seen in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1: Speciﬁcations of the NREL 5-MW wind turbine [5]
Rating
5 MW
Rotor Orientation, Conﬁguration
Upwind, 3 blades
Control
Variable Speed, Collective Pitch
Drivetrain
High Speed, Multiple-Stage Gearbox
Cut-In, Rated, Cut-Out Wind Speeds
3 m/s, 11.4 m/s, 25 m/s
Cut-In, Rated Rotor Speed
6.9 rpm, 12.2 rpm
Rated Tip Speed
80 m/s
A wind turbine is a complex structure consisting of several diﬀerent bodies.
This particular model has a circular monopile foundation with constant cross
sectional properties, which is assumed to be installed on a water depth of 20
meters, as seen on Fig. 2.1. The tower is rigidly connected to the top of the
monopile and the diameter of its cross section is linearly decreasing along the
tower height. The blades have a length of 61.5 meters and are bolted to the
pitch mechanism of the hub, which is located at the front of the nacelle. The
latter houses the generating components of the turbine. A full description of
the aforementioned structural and mechanical parts of the NREL 5-MW wind
turbine can be found in Jonkman et al. [5], while the most relevant data is
gathered in Table 2.2.
==PAGE:31==
2.2 HAWC2: An Aero-Servo-Elastic Code
15
Table 2.2: Structural properties of the NREL 5-MW wind turbine [5]
Monopile
Tower
Nacelle
Rotor
Ext. diameter [m]
6.0
6.0/3.87 *
-
126
Thickness [mm]
60.0
27.0/19.0 *
-
-
Mass [kg]
175,117
347,500
240,000
110,000
Young’s Modulus [MPa]
210,000
-
-
Shear Modulus [MPa]
80,800
-
-
Steel Density [kg/m3]
8,500**
-
-
* Base/top location
** Eﬀective value to account for bolts, welds, paint and not considered ﬂanges
2.2
HAWC2: An Aero-Servo-Elastic Code
The Horizontal Axis Wind turbine simulation Code of 2nd generation (HAWC2)
is an aero-servo-elastic code which can be utilized to run time-domain analysis
of wind turbines. The structural response of the NREL 5-MW oﬀshore wind
turbine will through this code be investigated when exposed to a multi-hazard
environment consisting of wind, waves and currents in addition to seismic exci-
tations. The development of the code’s main core started back in 2003 through
the Aeroelastic Design Research Program, which is part of the DTU Wind
Energy department located at Risø Campus in Denmark. The code has been
veriﬁed by diﬀerent measurements and through testing with other comparable
codes. Today, HAWC2 has been implemented in various studies and is also
utilized for industrial operations, both in design and for veriﬁcation purposes.
HAWC2 incorporates several models in a coupled simulation setting in
order to analyse the structural response. It connects the aerodynamic forces
developed from the wind proﬁle with the internal control system (servo) of
the wind turbine, which furthermore interact with the structural stiﬀness and
motions, namely the elastic and inertial forces. For oﬀshore infrastructures as
the one investigated in this project, additional dynamics pertinent to the wa-
ter environment, such as sea current, waves and hydrodynamics, can be included.
The advanced coupling to extreme hazards like the one of an earthquake
==PAGE:32==
16
2 Model Description
event can be incorporated in the simulations through the implementation of
submodels. In the same manner, foundation dynamics in terms of diﬀerent types
of support structures and ﬂexibility parameters can be considered, which is
necessary for the evaluation of the soil-structure-interaction. Details regarding
the these parts of the main code can be found in chap. 3.
2.2.1
Structural Model in HAWC2
The structural model of the wind turbine in HAWC2 utilizes the theory of
ﬂexible multibody dynamics (MBD). In this approach, two or more independent
bodies, either rigid or ﬂexible, are joined together by use of algebraic constraints.
Following the approach of MBD, the comprehensive motion of the multibody
system is split into a rigid part and an elastic part. The latter motions are
superimposed, while the rigid body motions are regarded in a ﬂoating frame
reference. The combination of large rigid body motions and elastic deformations
are hence easily united, like for instance the gyration of the blades due to rotor
and the deformations caused by external loading.
The model of the NREL 5-MW oﬀshore wind turbine adopted herein consists
of the following six bodies:
Monopile The 30 meter high foundation
Tower The column between the monopile and the turbine
Tower-top The joint between the tower and the horizontal drivetrain
Shaft The nacelle with drivetrain and connection to the rotor
Hub The connection between the shaft and the blades
Blades The three blades of the rotor
The bodies consist of Timoshenko beam elements with six degrees-of-freedom
(DOF), i.e. translation and rotation around the three main axis (x,y,z), thus
accounting for the overall ﬂexibility of the wind turbine. These elements are
especially favourable for the rotor blades as the ﬂexibility in both the edgewise,
ﬂapwise and torsional direction are all taken into account. Furthermore, the
constraints are deﬁned by restraining or releasing the relevant DOFs between the
bodies, so that they either represent a ﬁxed relative position in the multi-body
system or a bearing. The beam elements also have mass and inertia properties.
By means of this, the forces that are related to the bodies mass and inertia are
included in addition to the stiﬀness.
The characteristics of the geometry and material of the diﬀerent main bodies
of the wind turbine are implemented through the deﬁnition of the Timoschenko
beam elements. The bodies of the wind turbine are discretized with various
reﬁnement in order to account for the individual degree of complexity with
regard to the aforementioned properties. Note that the structural model utilized
within the frames of this study is in its entirety developed and validated by
qualiﬁed researchers from the DTU department of Wind Energy.
==PAGE:33==
2.2 HAWC2: An Aero-Servo-Elastic Code
17
2.2.2
Eigenvalue Analysis
The structural properties given for the NREL 5-MW oﬀshore wind turbine
enable the calculation of a modal analysis, i.e. the eigenvalue problem, to ﬁnd
the dynamic characteristics of the structure. These are of high importance
when investigating the eﬀects of the hazardous loading conditions imposed by
earthquake events and soil-structure interaction, as it has been shown in the
litterature review in sec. 1.3 that the soil foundation may seriously aﬀect the
natural frequencies of a wind turbine.
In order to compare the ﬁxed-base oﬀshore wind turbine to corresponding
ﬂexibly-supported structures, eigenvalue analyses have been run. The ﬁrst eight
natural frequencies of the ﬁxed-base 5-MW wind turbine are listed in Table 2.3,
together with the corresponding periods and logarithmic decrement. However,
the natural frequencies of the ﬂexibly-supported oﬀshore wind turbines are pre-
sented in chap. 4, wherein comparisons are made and the relevant information
with regards to the soil modelling is given.
Table 2.3: Eigenfrequency f, period, T, and logarithmic decrement, δ, for the
ﬁxed-base NREL 5-MW wind turbine
Mode
f [Hz]
T [s]
δ [%]
1st Tower fore-aft
0.2757
3.627
1.313
1st Tower side-side
0.2797
3.575
1.330
1st Drivetrain torsion
0.6091
1.642
2.594
1st Blade collective ﬂap
0.6412
1.560
2.900
1st Blade asym. ﬂapwise pitch
0.6741
1.484
3.117
1st Blade asym. ﬂapwise yaw
1.0011
0.999
2.931
1st Blade asym. edgewise pitch
1.0134
0.987
2.974
1st Blade asym. edgewise yaw
1.5765
0.634
6.231
A variety of aero-elastic codes were included in the study by Jonkmann et
al. [5] when the NREL 5-MW wind turbine was developed. Herein, it was found
that the modal damping could not be harmonized between software utilizing
==PAGE:34==
18
2 Model Description
the MBD theory, i.e. HAWC2, and the modal theory based software, such as
Bladed and FAST. The numerical challenges were discovered to be imposed by
too low Rayleigh damping coeﬃcients.
Rayleigh damping is often used to represent the internal structural damping.
This viscous damping is proportional to a linear combination of stiﬀness and
mass, as seen in Eq. (2.1). Here, C is the damping matrix, while M and K
respectively are the mass and stiﬀness matrices. The constants α and β give
the proportionality.
C = α M + β K
(2.1)
The mass proportional term provides inversely proportional damping, while
the stiﬀness proportional term contributes linearly proportional damping, both
in relation to the response frequency.
In HAWC2, the Rayleigh damping coeﬃcients are implemented into the
code. More speciﬁcally, for each of the main bodies included in a model, the
parameters are deﬁned for all three spatial directions. The modal damping
ratios of the entire structure is then derived as a summation of the contributions
from each of the bodies. When such a system is considered, i.e. a multi-body
model, the mass proportional contribution to the damping is very limited [33].
The applied Rayleigh damping coeﬃcients, meaning the mass and stiﬀness
proportional terms, for the NREL 5-MW wind turbine as modelled in HAWC2
for the time-domain analysis are presented in Table 2.4. These coeﬃcients are
entirely developed and validated by the DTU Wind Energy Department.
Table 2.4: Rayleigh damping coeﬃcients of the NREL 5-MW wind turbine as
modelled in HAWC2
Monopile
Tower
Tower-top
Shaft
Hub
Blades
αx
4.50E-2
6.45E-4
2.50E-4
0.00
2.00E-5
0.00
αy
4.50E-2
6.45E-4
1.40E-4
0.00
2.00E-5
0.00
αz
8.00E-1
1.25E-3
2.00E-3
7.07E-3
2.00E-4
0.00
βx
1.20E-3
1.40E-3
3.00E-5
4.65E-4
3.00E-6
1.41E-3
βy
1.20E-3
1.40E-3
3.00E-5
4.65E-4
3.00E-6
2.39E-3
βz
4.50E-4
1.25E-3
2.00E-4
7.07E-3
2.00E-5
4.50E-5
==PAGE:35==
2.3 Deﬁnition and Implementation of Loads
19
2.3
Deﬁnition and Implementation of Loads
In order to run simulations and obtain meaningful results, it is vital not only to
build an accurate structural model, but also to predict and simulate the loads
in a precisely manner. Hence, the following sections aim to provide the relevant
theory and deﬁnitions of the environmental actions, i.e. those of wind, waves
and the earthquake excitations, that the oﬀshore wind turbine analysed herein
is exposed to. In addition, a presentation of how the aero-servo-elastic code
HAWC2 implement the loads for the time-domain analysis is given.
2.3.1
Wind Actions
Wind turbines are installed to generate power from the kinetic energy provided
by the motion of air. Thus, the wind conditions and the loads these present are
of high relevance to understand in order to simulate the response of such an
infrastructure.
Wind Conditions
There are three highly important parameters when studying the wind conditions
on any structure, and more speciﬁcally within the framework of modelling wind
turbines in HAWC2, namely the wind proﬁle, the mean wind speed and the
turbulence intensity. The mean wind speed is deﬁned as the average wind speed
in a 10 minutes interval, while it is the variation of this parameter along the
height from the ground that deﬁnes the wind proﬁle for a given site. Adding to
this, the turbulence intensity is a quantify that distinguishes the gusts in the
airﬂow, i.e. the standard deviation of the wind speed towards its mean value.
The preceding parameters can thus be used to determine the actions of the
wind for any speciﬁc height. The characteristics of the wind ﬁeld for the model
adopted herein are based on the prescriptions given by IEC 61400-3 [34], which
provides requirements for the design of oﬀshore wind turbines.
The wind proﬁle follows the power law, meaning that the mean wind speed
of any given height, z, can be described by Eq. (2.2).
V (z) = Vhub ·
 z
zhub
α
(2.2)
Herein, Vhub is the mean wind speed at the height of the wind turbine’s
hub, zhub. The power law exponent, α, is a constant corresponding to the
conditions surrounding the structure, i.e. for normal oﬀshore conditions this is
to be implemented as 0.14.
The turbulence intensity is determined by Eq. (2.3),
Tint =
σ1
Vhub
(2.3)
in which σ1 is further expressed by Eq. (2.4), and is deﬁned as the standard
deviation of the wind speed’s longitudinal component.
==PAGE:36==
20
2 Model Description
σ1 =
Vhub
ln

zhub
z0
 + 1.28 · 1.44 · I15
(2.4)
The latter expression contains the mean turbulence intensity, I15, at hub
height, which according to IEC 61400-1 [30] is equivalent to the reference value,
Iref. The minimum reference turbulence intensity for an onshore environment
can be assumed as corresponding to those for open sea conditions, and hence
Iref is set to be 0.12. In addition, Eq. (2.4) is dependant on the roughness
length, z0, which for a logarithmic wind proﬁle is the height that gives a wind
speed theoretically equal to zero. This value can be determined as the minimum
of Charnock’s relation, given by Eq. (2.5).
z0 = Ac
g

κ · Vhub
ln

zhub
z0



2
(2.5)
Here, Ac is the Charnock parameter equal to 0.011 (assuming again an open
sea environment), while g is the gravitational acceleration and κ is betoken as
the von Kármán coeﬃcient, which yields 0.40.
This sums up the expressions necessary to deﬁne the wind conditions, leading
further to the generation of the wind ﬁeld. HAWC2 utilises the Mann turbulence
model to create the wind ﬁeld, which is in correspondence with the prescriptions
[34]. In this manner, the Mann model in HAWC2 simulates the turbulent
atmospheric wind state by use of spectral tensors in three dimensions. The
starting point herein is the energy spectrum of isotropic turbulence, namely the
von Kármán spectrum, which can be seen in Eq. (2.6).
E(k) = αϵ2/3 L5/3
(Lk)4
(1 + (Lk)2 )17/6
(2.6)
The concentrated energy, E(k), can hereby be obtained for any particular
frequency, f, constituted in the wave number, k = 2πf
U , along with the mean
wind speed, U. Furthermore, eq. (2.6) is based on the length scale, L, which is
a constant considered to be 29.4 m for modern wind turbines higher than 40
m [30]. Lastly, the αϵ2/3 parameter determines the variance level of the wind
speed in the longitudinal direction, which herein is interpreted with the value 1.0.
A scaling factor, given by Eq.
(2.7), is ultimately applied in all three
directions of the Mann turbulence box (u, v and w) in order to ensure a correct
wind variance level.
SF =
s
σ2
target
σ2
(2.7)
Here, σ is the standard deviation of the turbulence, estimated at the center
point of the turbulent box, while the sought turbulence intensity yields the
σtarget value. It follows that the aforementioned parameters are calculated from
the mean wind speed and the turbulence intensity, as seen in Eq. (2.3).
==PAGE:37==
2.3 Deﬁnition and Implementation of Loads
21
Aerodynamic Loads
Wind ﬂows impose aerodynamic loads onto a structure, and these can be calcu-
lated by the means of the parameters introduced in the former sections. It is
mainly the blades of a wind turbine that are inﬂuenced by aerodynamic loads,
while the tower is inconsiderably aﬀected.
The rotor of the wind turbine modiﬁes the air ﬂow in both speed and
direction. This eﬀect is called induction and is modelled by means of the Blade
Element Momentum (BEM) theory in HAWC2 [35], which assumes that the
rotor acts as an actuator disc on the air ﬂow. More speciﬁcally, the disc, or rotor,
is then assumed to be frictionless with inﬁnite blades and constantly loaded.
The reduction of axial speed originates a slow down in the downstream ﬂow
without compressing it. As it is assumed that the mass ﬂow rate is constant,
this means that the mass volume passing the rotor must increase. The induction
factor a indicates the decrease in free ﬂow speed at the rotor plane by the
relation in Eq. (2.8), where U∞and UD are the wind speeds upstream from
and at the rotor, respectively.
a = U∞−UD
U∞
(2.8)
The theory of simple momentum can be derived from Eq. (2.8), in which the
momentum change is related to the variation of pressure and speed across the
disc actuator. This phenomena is known as thrust. The decrement of the axial
momentum imposes a reduction of the energy in the air ﬂow, which transfers to
kinematic energy in the blades and causes the shaft to rotate. The shaft then
ordeals two opposite directed torques; one commenced by the generator and
one from the air ﬂow. The latter imposes an equal and contrary torque on the
air, causing the particles in the air to withstand a change of momentum. This
means that there is also a change of tangential velocity, which can be expressed
by the tangential ﬂow induction factor, a′, as seen in Eq. (2.9).
a(1 −a) = λ2
r · a′
(2.9)
The local speed ratio, λr, is given by Eq. (2.10) as the correlation between
the tangential velocity of the local rotating ring over the upstream wind speed,
where r is the radius and Ωis the angular velocity of the shaft.
λr = r Ω
U∞
(2.10)
The resultant relative velocity, W, that acts on the blade can be derived by
the aforementioned theory, as given in Eq. (2.11). This parameter is necessary
to determine the angle of the wind ﬂow to the blade.
W =
p
U 2∞(1 −a)2 + r2Ω2 (1 −a′)2
(2.11)
Based on the magnitude and angle of attack of the wind, the forces acting
on the blade can be determined. The BEM theory states that the lift and drag
forces, respectively given by Eq. (2.12) and (2.13), are identical for two equal,
though isolated, elements in a two-dimensional ﬂow, given that the angle of
attack is the same.
==PAGE:38==
22
2 Model Description
δL = 1
2ρW 2 c Cl δr
(2.12)
δD = 1
2ρW 2 c Cd δr
(2.13)
Here, ρ is the density of the air, c is the blade section’s chore length, whereas
Cl and Cd respectively denote the lift and drag coeﬃcients. The last parameter,
δr, expresses the length that the blade occupy the annular ring.
The overall aerodynamic loads, i.e. lift and drag forces, can then be deter-
mined based on the thrust and torque that are calculated from each annular
ring in the span-wise length. However, the BEM theory assumes that each
annuli is independent and derives the loads individually, whereas in reality the
ﬂow is contiguous. Furthermore, the induction factor, which otherwise vary
radially, is assumed to be a constant within this theory. Nevertheless, it has
been demonstrated that these assumptions provide results in good agreement
with reality [36], while simultaneously allowing for lower computational costs.
2.3.2
Hydro Imposed Actions
As the wind turbine studied herein is located oﬀshore, it is necessary to un-
derstand the hydrodynamic loads that are imposed by waves and currents. In
order to simulate these and create a time history of the sea-state, linear waves
are generated in HAWC2 by use of the JONSWAP spectrum. These are further
superimposed to create a more realistic sea-state consisting of irregular waves.
The current is simpliﬁed to be of constant depth, though a more realistic set up
would be to use a shear ﬂow distribution. However, this assumption is of minor
importance for the dynamic response of the wind turbine. The hydrodynamic
loads derived from the aforementioned conditions are in HAWC2 calculated by
means of the Morison equation.
Waves and Current Conditions
In order to create the sea conditions for the simulations in HAWC2, parameters
regarding the waves and current have to be deﬁned. For the latter, that means
the velocity of the current, while the waves are calculated by means of the
signiﬁcant wave height, Hs, and corresponding peak period, Tp. A relation
between the two aforementioned parameters can be calculated at 10 m above
the sea mean level for a particular signiﬁcant wave height and when the mean
wind speed, u, is determined, as seen in Eq. (2.14) [37].
fp = 0.148 · H−0.6
m0
· u0.2
(2.14)
Here, fp is the peak wave frequency, i.e. one over the peak period, Tp.
The theoretical signiﬁcant wave height, Hm0, is a parameter in connection to
the moment of zero-order, m0, of the wave spectrum. More speciﬁcally, the
spectrum shows the variance of the sea surface, from which it follows that
the zero moment represents the area under the spectral curve. The spectral
width, ϵ, varies between 0 and 1, respectively denoting linear waves with a
narrow spectrum and a irregular wave pattern by use of a wide spectrum.
==PAGE:39==
2.3 Deﬁnition and Implementation of Loads
23
This parameter is commonly set to 0.4-0.5, which yields an expression for
the signiﬁcant wave height, Hs, equal to 3.7√m0 [38]. Hence, the moment
of zero-order can be derived for a given signiﬁcant wave height, enabling the
calculation of the peak wave frequency through Eq. (2.15)
Hm0 = 4 √m0
(2.15)
By means of the signiﬁcant wave height, Hs, and peak wave period, Tp,
the JONSWAP spectrum can be utilized in order to model a varied sea-state.
The Joint North Sea Wave Observation Project (JONSWAP) collected and
analysed wave data, which led to the spectrum given by Eq. (2.16). This model
is prescribed by IEC 61400-3 [34] to simulate waves that continue to grow with
time.
SJS(j) = 0.3125 H2
s Tp
 f
fp
−5
exp
 
−1.25
 f
fp
4!
(1 −0.287 ln λ) λ
exp

−0.5

f
fp −1
σ
2
(2.16)
Herein, λ is the peak enhancement factor, deﬁning the sharpness of the
spectrum by use of the relations seen in Eq. (2.17).
λ =







5
for Tp
√Hs < 3.6
exp

5.75 −1.15
Tp
√Hs

for 3.6 ≤
Tp
√Hs ≤5
5
for
Tp
√Hs > 5 ≤fp
(2.17)
The constant σ in Eq. (2.16) is is deﬁned by Eq. (2.18), which is seen to be
dependant on the wave frequency, f, in relation to the peak wave frequency.
σ =
(
0.07
for f ≤fp
0.09
for f > fp
(2.18)
Thus, the spectral distribution of regular waves can be deﬁned. The irregular
sea-state that is used in the simulations is further developed by superposition
of the regular waves.
==PAGE:40==
24
2 Model Description
Hydrodynamic Loads
Structural elements located in water are subjected to hydrodynamic loads
imposed by waves and current. For the oﬀshore wind turbine studied herein,
these loads are of relevance for the tower that is located at 20 m water depth.
The force acting on a body subjected to oscillatory ﬂow can be calculated by
the Morison equation, which is how HAWC2 applies the hydrodynamic load
interaction.
For a circular cylinder with diameter D, the drag force per unit length, Fd,
can by found by use of Eq. (2.19).
Fd = 1
2 ρ Cd D u |u|
(2.19)
Here, the density of sea water is denoted ρ, while Cd and u respectively are
the drag coeﬃcient and velocity of the ﬂow.
In addition to the drag force, the oscillatory sea state imposes an inertia
force, which consists of the contributions from the hydrodynamic mass force and
the Froude-Krylov force. The eﬀect of the hydrodynamic mass is equivalent to
that of a moving body in stable ﬂuid, i.e. it is the inertia added to a system due
to the acceleration of the surrounding ﬂuid, which is imposed by the motion of
the body itself. The hydrodynamic mass force, Fm, is deﬁned by Eq. (2.20) and
corresponds in absolute terms to the situation where a steady body is subjected
to oscillatory ﬂow.
Fm = ρ Cm A ˙u
(2.20)
In Eq. (2.20), Cm is the hydrodynamic mass coeﬃcient, which for a cir-
cular cross section equals 1, A is the area of the cross section and ˙u is the
acceleration of the ﬂow, in which the dot denotes derivation with respect to time.
The Froude-Krylov force, Fp, expressed by Eq. (2.21), takes the outer-ﬂow
eﬀects into account. This force arise from the ﬁeld of unsteady pressure caused
by undisturbed waves.
Fp = ρ A ˙u
(2.21)
The deﬁnition of the parameters included in the current subchapter, enables
the calculation of the Morison equation (2.22), resulting in the total inline force
parallel to the ﬂow direction. To account for the eﬀect that the structure itself
is in motion due to the loads, Eq. (2.22) is expressed by the relative velocity of
the ﬂuid and body. The velocity of the body is given by v.
F = 1
2 ρ Cd D (u −v) |u −v| + ρ Cm A ( ˙u −˙v) + ρ A ˙u
(2.22)
==PAGE:41==
2.3 Deﬁnition and Implementation of Loads
25
2.3.3
Earthquake Actions
Strong ground motions of recorded earthquakes are implemented in HAWC2
through compiled FORTRAN 90 scripts in terms of dynamic-linked libraries
(dll) ﬁles. In general, these ﬁles link and load shared libraries needed by the
executable for the running process. Within the frames of HAWC2, a dll ﬁle
allows for the enforcement of the external seismic imposed actions. The strong
ground motions can herein be applied as acceleration time histories in the three
spatial directions.
Single Degree of Freedom System
To comprehend the behaviour of a dynamic system introduced to prescribed
ground motions, i.e. the earthquake loading, a single degree of freedom system
is considered, as illustrated in Fig. 2.2.
Figure 2.2: A single degree of freedom mass-spring-dashpot system excited by
an external force.
The considered system can be described through its mass, m, in addition
to the spring and dashpot coeﬃcients, k and c respectively. Furthermore, an
external force, F, is applied to the mass. Considering the second law of Newton
in addition to the ground displacement, ug, from which the dashpot and spring
forces respectively depend on the relative displacement and velocity (ur = u−ug
and ˙ur = ˙u −˙ug) of the mass, the equation of motion can be derived as Eq.
(2.23). Such derivation can be found in any literature regarding structural
dynamics [39].
m¨u + c ˙u + ku = F + c ˙ug + kug
(2.23)
Herein, only the seismic loading is taken into account, while the structural
complexity of the wind turbine is disregarded. In terms of the relative motions,
the above expression can be rewritten as Eq. (2.24).
m¨ur + c ˙ur + kur = F −m ¨ug
(2.24)
The soil-structure interaction introduces a more complex problem, which
is illustrated in Fig. 2.3. The interface, i.e. a degree of freedom, between the
structure and the soil is represented by the additional mass, mb. Attached to
this mass is the spring and dashpot coeﬃcients, ks and cs, that respectively
represents the stiﬀness and damping of the soil. The ground motion is further-
more accommodated at the end of these, by which the eﬀect of the soil to the
==PAGE:42==
26
2 Model Description
seismic response of the system is accounted for.
Figure 2.3: The mass-spring-dashpot system including SSI
By means of Newton’s second law, the equations of motions of the system
are given by Eq. (2.26) and (2.25). These are respectively derived for the mass
mb and mf.
mf ¨u + c ˙u + ku −c ˙ub −kub = F −m ¨ug
(2.25)
−ku −c ˙u + mb¨ub + (c + cs) ˙ub + (k + ks)ub = −cs ˙ug −ksug
(2.26)
It should be noted that the mass mb is considered to be that of the interface
degree of freedom between the structure and the soil, i.e. it is not the soil
mass. Furthermore, mb has to be considered a non-zero value, as the system
otherwise cannot be described by a single degree of freedom with equivalent
stiﬀness and damping contributions. Eliminating this degree of freedom means
that the structural stiﬀness, k, and damping, c, would be in direct relation to
the motions of the ground, ug and ˙ug. More speciﬁcally, the ground motion
would then be applied directly at the structure instead of through the soil. This
would give an inaccurate problem, and hence the interface degree of freedom
must be present.
The equations of motions derived for the system including the SSI can be
rewritten into matrix form, as seen in Eq. (2.27).
M¨u + (C + Cs)˙u + (K + Ks)u = f + Cs ˙us + Ksus
(2.27)
Herein, the diﬀerent terms are as follows:
M =
mf
0
0
mb

,
C =
 c
−c
−c
c

,
Cs =
0
0
0
cs

K =
 k
−k
−k
k

,
Ks =
0
0
0
ks

,
u =
uf
ub

,
us =
 0
ug

,
f =
F
0

==PAGE:43==
2.3 Deﬁnition and Implementation of Loads
27
As shown in Eq. (2.28), the forces imposed by the ground motion and
exerted through the soil onto the system can be isolated .
fs = Cs(˙us −˙u) + Ks(us −u)
(2.28)
By inserting the latter expression into Eq. (2.27), a more general equation
of motion is obtained, which can be seen by Eq. (2.29).
M¨u + C˙u + Ku = f −fs
(2.29)
The herein described dynamic system is composed by two parts, namely the
structure itself and the contribution of the soil. The structure is characterised
by its mass, M, in addition to its internal damping and stiﬀness, C and K.
Similar, the soil contribution is presented by a soil stiﬀness, Ks, and a damping,
Ks.
General Formulation
The general expression given by Eq. (2.29) is also valid for larger systems, given
that both the degrees of freedom discussed in the former section, i.e. the free
and the interface degree of freedom, are properly diﬀerentiated. By referring to
the free degrees of freedom by the subscript f, and similarly using b to describe
the interface degrees of freedom, the following matrices, can be expressed:
M =

Mﬀ
Mfb
Mbf
Mbb

,
C =

Cﬀ
Cfb
Cbf
Cbb

,
K =

Kﬀ
Kfb
Kbf
Kbb

,
u =
uf
ub

Cs =

0
0
0
Cs,bb

,
Ks =

0
0
0
Ks,bb

,
us =
 0
ug

,
F =
f
0

These are respectively derived for the structure, in the ﬁrst line, and the
soil, in the second, in addition to the external forces, F. In the latter matrix,
the external forces are applied only to the free nodes. More speciﬁcally, the
interaction forces of the soil, fs, that are, evidently, related to the interface node,
are dependant on the structure’s relative motion to the ground, i.e. ub −ug and
˙ub −˙ug. By assuming that the motion of the structure at the interface point
is identical to the ground motion, that is ub = ug and ˙ub = ˙ug, no forces are
imposed at the interaction point.
For linearly behaviour of the soil, fs can be derived using Eq. (2.28). In this
case, the dynamic behaviour of the system can be modelled by means of Eq.
(2.27). The latter expression is given in terms of absolute motions, u. However,
==PAGE:44==
28
2 Model Description
within the frames of earthquake actions, the equation of motion is sometimes
written by means of the relative motion to that of the ground: ur = u−ug. This
can be convenient, as it represents the earthquake by means of inertial forces for
each node, M¨ur, similar to Eq. (2.24). More speciﬁcally, it eliminates further
work related to the ground motions, as seismic events are usually recorded by
means of acceleration time series. Editing Eq. (2.27) in terms of the relative
displacements, gives the expression seen in Eq. (2.30).
M¨ur + (C + Cs)˙ur + (K + Ks)ur = f −M¨us −C˙us −Kus
(2.30)
As seen, this transformation is not that beneﬁcial for SSI problems, consid-
ering that it still contain the ground displacements and velocities. Moreover,
the equation is only valid if the excitation is equal for all interface nodes. Thus,
the formulation including the absolute displacements is utilized.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 3
Validation of Code
To ensure the most accurate simulations and response results from the time-
history analysis, it is of high importance to validate the aero-elastic-code of
HAWC2. The validation is also necessary in order to control that the implemen-
tation of earthquake motions and the eﬀects from the soil-structure interaction
are treated as expected, as well as the structural properties, such as geometry,
materials, mass, stiﬀness and damping eﬀects. Along these lines, corresponding
simulations have been run in both HAWC2 and SAP2000 to investigate if the
results obtained are consistent and hence reliable. The latter software is a
well-known and widely used ﬁnite element code within the frames of seismic
analysis.
3.1
Benchmark Models
Two structures of diﬀerent characteristics have been created in order to check
that the aero-elastic-code HAWC2 meets the requirements and fulﬁlls its in-
tended purpose, both for the incorporation of earthquake actions and the eﬀects
from soil-structure interaction. As it is not possible to simulate complex wind
turbines in the framework of SAP2000, the models adopted herein are two tower
structures with simple geometry; one high-rise and one low-rise. Both towers
have solid, circular cross-sections with same dimensions along their respective
heights, and all the relevant geometrical and material parameters are given in
Table 3.1. The two structural systems are designed with the intention that
they can be reproduced with the exact same characteristics in both software to
ensure that the validation scheme is accurate.
In order to ensure an optimal matching between the models when utilizing
the two diﬀerent software, eigenvalue analyses have been derived to match the
dynamic characteristics of the towers. Herein, the modal damping has been
harmonized for the ﬁrst 40 modes of both models. This procedure was based
on the logarithmic decrement, δ, which can be retrieved through HAWC2. For
an underdamped system in the time domain, the modal damping ratio, ζ, can
then be derived from the relation given by Eq. (3.1).
==PAGE:46==
30
3 Validation of Code
ζ ≃
δ
2 π
(3.1)
The modal damping rations have further been implemented in the models
created in SAP2000, hence ensuring the same dynamic characteristics for the
analyses between the software. This harmonization is of importance to ensure
that the response results from the validation schemes are accurate for compar-
isons, meaning that the structures will respond in the same manner in both
software when subjected to identical loading conditions.
Table 3.1: Structural characteristics of the two benchmark models
Low-Rise Tower
High-Rise Tower
Height [m]
8.0
66.0
Diameter [m]
0.25
0.60
Number of FE [-]
32
44
Size of FE [m]
0.25
1.50
Elasticity modulus [N/m2]
2.10E11
Shear modulus [N/m2]
8.0768231E10
Steel density [kg/m3]
7850
The ﬁrst eight natural frequencies of both towers with ﬁxed base conditions
are listed in Table 3.2, where it can be seen that the models are close to identical
between SAP2000 and HAWC2. Due to the characteristics of the towers, i.e.
the symmetry of the cross-section, the natural frequencies occur as pairs of
same values.
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Validation of Earthquake Module in HAWC2
31
Table 3.2: Natural frequencies, fi, of the ﬁxed-base benchmark models.
Frequency
Low-Rise Tower
High-Rise Tower
fi [Hz]
SAP2000
HAWC2
SAP2000
HAWC2
1 & 2
2.823
2.824
0.0996
0.0965
3 & 4
17.586
17.604
0.6238
0.6242
5 & 6
48.811
48.892
1.7445
1.7465
7 & 8
94.489
94.695
3.4134
3.4189
It should be noted that the dynamic characteristics of the towers are in-
troduced in the current section only when modelled with ﬁxed base. The
earthquake module in HAWC2 is entirely validated based on these models,
which can be seen in sec. 3.2. For the validation of the soil module in HAWC2,
springs are implemented at the base of the tower to represent the soil conditions.
However, these models with their corresponding characteristics are explained in
details in sec. 3.3.
3.2
Validation of Earthquake Module in HAWC2
The aero-servo-elastic code of HAWC2 is fundamentally dedicated to analyse
a wind turbine in the time-domain when the structure is subjected to loading
conditions from wind and water. The development of the dll ﬁle introduced in
sec. 2.3, enables the simulations to furthermore include the actions imposed by
seismic activity.
The ﬁrst developed earthquake module in HAWC2 incorporated the seismic
motions as an acceleration input in the bottom node of the structure [40].
However, as this code could only include ﬁxed base conditions, while the aim of
this study is to investigate ﬂexibly-supported oﬀshore wind turbines subjected
to seismic excitations, a new earthquake module had to be developed. The
new dll ﬁle and its interaction with the core code of HAWC2, implements the
time series of the seismic motions into the acceleration ﬁelds in all three spatial
directions, meaning that all elements of mass are subjected to the forces these
impose. By means of this, the structure can be deﬁned with diﬀerent boundary
conditions while exposed to seismic excitations.
==PAGE:48==
32
3 Validation of Code
As the earthquake module intended for implementation to this current study
is new in the framework of HAWC2, there exists no documented veriﬁcation
of this part of the code. Hence, to ensure that the module provides reliable
simulations and accurate response results, it is necessary to develop a validation
scheme as a prerequisite for the study. For this purpose, the two benchmark
models described in sec. 3.1 are adopted herein to investigate the seismic
response. The structures are considered to have ﬁxed boundary conditions
within the frames of this validation.
Four real recorded strong ground motions, i.e. acceleration time-series,
of former seismic events have been selected for the purpose of validating the
earthquake module. These can be seen in Fig. 3.1, while the corresponding
elastic response spectra are shown in Fig. 3.2.
Figure 3.1: Time-histories of the four selected earthquake motions.
Figure 3.2: Elastic response spectra of the four selected earthquakes.
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Validation of Earthquake Module in HAWC2
33
The detailed characteristics of the seismic events are presented in Table
3.3. The earthquakes have speciﬁcally been selected herein to provide a variety
of peak ground accelerations (PGA), time-step and duration of the loading
conditions.
Table 3.3: Characteristics of the four selected earthquakes included in the
validation scheme
Earthquake
Magnitude
Epic. [km]
NEHRP
PGA [g]
Record st.
Kobe
6.90
25.40
B
0.300
Kobe
Japan, 1995
University
Manjil
7.37
77.84
D
0.170
Abhar
Iran, 1990
Northridge-01
6.69
13.39
D
0.459
Beverly Hills
USA, 1994
14145 Mulhol
Whittier Narrows-01
5.99
19.81
D
0.331
Compton
USA, 1987
Castlegate St.
By means of time-domain analyses, the two structures, i.e. the high rise and
low rise towers, were excited by the four seismic motions in both SAP2000 and
HAWC2. Furthermore, to compare the results between the software, diﬀerent
sections along each of the towers have been deﬁned as output locations for the
response, namely the base, the middle section and the top of the two structures.
From these locations, the structural response in terms of displacement, velocity,
acceleration and forces have been collected and analysed.
The results obtained from the simulations of the structures subjected to
all four earthquake motions, show an almost identical match. The bending
moments, Mx,y, derived at the base of the two structural system are pre-
sented in Fig. 3.3, while the tower top displacements, ux,y, can be seen in
Fig. 3.4. Both the aforementioned verify the good relation between the results
obtained by SAP2000 and HAWC2. Though only a representative selection
of the validation results are presented in this chapter, the entire set of com-
parisons follow the same trend. The results of these can be found in Appendix A.
==PAGE:50==
34
3 Validation of Code
Figure 3.3: Base moments, Mx,y [kNm], for each tower excited by the four
earthquakes
Figure 3.4: Tower top displacements, ux,y [m], for each tower excited by the
four earthquakes
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Validation of Soil Module in HAWC2
35
Seeing that HAWC2 provides close to identical reponse results as a widely
used software for seismic engineering, i.e. SAP2000, it may be concluded that
the new earthquake module implemented in the main code of HAWC2 is reliable,
and thus can be further used for investigations of seismic analysis of various
structural systems.
3.3
Validation of Soil Module in HAWC2
Within the framework of HAWC2, diﬀerent soil models already exist. The inten-
tion of these is to mimic the interaction which occur between the substructure
of the wind turbine and the soil. In order to include the ﬂexibility of the wind
turbine studied herein when excited by seismic motions, a validation scheme
has been run on the chosen soil module. By means of this, the aim is to validate
both the soil module in itself and the coupled simulation set-up between the
earthquake and soil modules.
Currently, there are four diﬀerent soil modules that can be implemented
into the main code of HAWC2. These are all based on more simple engineering
approaches, i.e. less computational expensive than advanced FE simulations.
The simplest model in HAWC2 ignores the soil and assumes ﬁxed boundary
conditions, which is the approach implemented in the validation scheme for
the earthquake module seen in the latter chapter. Another approach is the
Apparent Fixity Length, where the tower is extended by a certain length. This
part of the structure is then assigned properties which will mimic that of a
soil model. The third model utilizes coupled springs, which are applied at the
bottom of the structure. Lastly, it is possible to use distributed non-linear
springs with force-displacement curves (p-y curves) to model the soil.
Figure 3.5: The four diﬀerent soil models available in HAWC2 [4]
The distributed non-linear soil-springs approach satisfy the proposed design
guidelines given by DNV-GL [31]. This model incorporates the soil damping in
a simple manner through Rayleigh frequency-dependant coeﬃcients, in which
the modal parameters must be known prior to the simulation. Hence, this
approach may be questionable. Instead, the soil-structure interaction (SSI)
herein is addressed by connecting the base of the structure to a rigid support
==PAGE:52==
36
3 Validation of Code
with translational and rotational springs, as utilized in earlier studies including
the SSI impact on oﬀshore wind turbines [23] [26].
The soil model adopted herein is a matrix representation, which is imple-
mented to the main code through an external dll ﬁle in the same manner as
the earthquake motions. It uses a set of coupled rotational and translational
single springs, which then results in a stiﬀness matrix that couples the degrees
of freedom. The physical meaning of the stiﬀness matrix, seen in Eq. (3.2),
is that both a lateral deﬂection, uF , and a rotation, ϕF , occur from a lateral
load, F. Similar, a moment M causes both a rotation, ϕM, and a deﬂection, uM.
 ku,F
ku,M
kϕ,F
kϕ,M
  w
ϕ

=
 F
M

(3.2)
For the validation of the soil module in HAWC2, i.e. the coupled springs
model, the high-rise tower as presented in sec. 3.1 is utilized. The coeﬃcients of
the stiﬀness matrix for the validation scheme herein are based on the Oﬀshore
Code Comparison Collaboration (OC3) by Jonkman et al. [6], which takes
into account the API-sand model. However, as the OC3 project utilized the
NREL 5-MW reference wind turbine, which has other structural characteristics
than the high-rise tower adopted herein as the benchmark model, the stiﬀness
matrix coeﬃcients have been scaled down by a factor of 1E4. The ﬁnal coeﬃ-
cients, that are implemented in the validation simulations, are listed in Table 3.4.
Table 3.4: Stiﬀness matrix coeﬃcients for the validation scheme
ku,F
2.58E9
N/m
ku,M = kϕ,F
-2.26E10
N/rad
kϕ,F = ku,M
-2.26E10
N/rad
kϕ,M
2.64E11
Nm/rad
In HAWC2, the spring coeﬃcients are implemented to the main code through
an external dll ﬁle, in the same manner as the earthquake motions. The lateral
and rotational springs are attached to the bottom node of the high-rise tower.
To verify the response results in HAWC2, the tower has been correspondingly
modelled in SAP2000, and the eigenvalue problem has been solved. As seen in
Table 3.5, the dynamic characteristics of the ﬂexibly-supported high-rise tower
are very similar in both software. Note that the frequencies are given in pairs, as
the tower is symmetrical and hence provide equal modal shapes in two directions.
==PAGE:53==
3.3 Validation of Soil Module in HAWC2
37
Table 3.5: Natural frequencies, fi, of the ﬂexibly-supported high-rise tower
fi [Hz]
SAP2000
HAWC2
1 & 2
0.0989
0.0987
3 & 4
0.6146
0.6231
5 & 6
1.7034
1.7431
7 & 8
3.2924
3.4085
Finally, time-domain analyses have been run on the ﬂexibly-supported high-
rise tower when excited by the ﬁve real strong ground motions seen in Fig.
3.1. As for the earthquake module validation, the response results in terms of
displacements, velocity, acceleration and forces have been derived from both
software and compared to each other.
Figure 3.6: Base moments, Mx,y [kNm], for the ﬂexibly-supported high-rise
tower excited by the four earthquakes
==PAGE:54==
38
3 Validation of Code
The bending moments, Mx,y, at the base frame of the ﬂexibly-supported
high-rise tower, imposed by each of the four earthquakes, are presented in Fig.
3.6. It is seen that HAWC2 provides close to identical response as SAP2000.
An equal good relation is noticeable for the displacements, ux,y, at the top joint
of the tower, which can be seen in Fig. 3.7.
Figure 3.7: Tower top displacements, ux,y [m], for the ﬂexibly-supported high-
rise tower excited by the four earthquakes
Based on the close to identical response results between the two software,
it is profound that HAWC2 can dependably and predict the seismic response
of a structure with ﬂexible support conditions. Hence, the aero-servo-elastic
code is validated and can be used for the research frame proposed by this MSc
thesis. It should be noted that only a selection of the response results for the
soil module validation is presented in this chapter. However, the same trend
as seen herein is true for the entire set of comparisons, which are presented in
Appendix B.
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 4
Soil-Structure-
Interaction
The interaction between the soil and the structure, from here on denoted SSI,
may seriously aﬀect the response of both the sub- and superstructure, as was
seen in the literature review (see sec. 1.3.1). The aim of this MSc thesis is overall
to investigate the eﬀect of the soil ﬂexibility on an oﬀshore wind turbine excited
by earthquake motions. Hence, this chapter intends to provide the necessary
theoretical background for modelling the soil and furthermore compare the
dynamic characteristics of the wind turbine structures with diﬀerent ﬂexibilities.
4.1
Soil Modelling
When considering wind turbines, Risø and DNV-GL (former DNV) in coopera-
tion provided a set of guidelines for design in 2002 [41]. These prescriptions
remark the importance of investigating the SSI by including appropriate springs
at the base of the structure in order to account for the stiﬀness of the sur-
rounding soil and the eﬀect it has on the wind turbine. The spring coeﬃcients
herein depend on the type of foundation. Furthermore, in the frames of seismic
response, such springs should account for the frequency dependant dynamic
variation.
For the 5-MW NREL reference wind turbine adopted herein, the foundation
is modelled as a monopile. For such foundations, the distributed springs model
utilizing p-y curves is recommended [41], as mentioned in sec. 3.3. Following
this approach conveniently accounts for the kinematic SSI, but also assumes
that the layers of soil are uncoupled. However, when coupling this approach
to include earthquake motions in the analysis, ground motions have to be
deﬁned for each of the diﬀerent soil layers by means of ground response inquiries
[3]. Thus, the coupled springs model as introduced in the validation chapter
(see sec. 3.3), formulates an easier approach to account for the soil reaction.
Moreover, equivalent coeﬃcients for discrete springs and dashpots that account
for the soil embedded monopile’s dynamic impedances are already available in
existing literature ([42], [43]). Several studies have furthermore utilized this
modelling approach to account for SSI, such as Bazeos et al. [9] and Lai et
al. [26]. For simplicity of both the modelling and the implementation with
the existing aero-servo-elastic code, this latter approach is adopted to this study.
==PAGE:56==
40
4 Soil-Structure-Interaction
4.1.1
Theoretical Background
To comprehend the idea of equivalent springs and dashpots, an inﬁnitely long
soil embedded monopile is considered. If a harmonic force, F(t), excites an
inﬁnitely small part of this monopile, the force can then be deﬁned as Eq. (4.1).
Herein, ω is the excitation frequency.
F(t) = F eiωt
(4.1)
Furthermore, it is assumed that both the force and the response has a single
translational degree of freedom. The out of phase response, u(t), to the force
on the inﬁnitely small part of the monopile is then given by Eq. (4.2). Note
that both F and u are complex amplitudes, including the phase lag between
the excitation and response.
u(t) = u eiωt
(4.2)
By the relation between the force and the response, the complex dynamic
stiﬀness [44], also known as the impedance function, can be obtained as:
k∗= F(t)
u(t) = k(ω) + iωc(ω)
(4.3)
In Eq. (4.3), the terms k(ω) and c(ω) accordingly represent the equivalent
coeﬃcients of the spring and dashpot. These correspond to the response in
terms of the in- and out-of-phase components, respectively.
By considering the response, u(t), as the displacement of the monopile
relative to the ground, as discussed in sec. 2.3, and regarding the force, F(t),
to be that exerted due to this motion from the soil onto the monopile, the
aforementioned principle can be utilized for seismic soil-structure-interaction
problems. This method simpliﬁes the complex behaviour of the soil however, as
it assumes that the force imposed by the soil to one point of the monopile is
independent from any other such forces obtained at other sections.
Discrete Modelling
As initially introduced in the current chapter, the monopile of the oﬀshore wind
turbine can be modelled discretely at the base surface, meaning the mud-line
herein. The complete system of the foundation is then reduced to one node,
where the discrete springs and dashpots are represented through corresponding
stiﬀness and damping matrices. This is illustrated by the coupled springs model
in Fig. 3.5.
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Soil Modelling
41
Considering this single degree of freedom system, the equation of motion can
be written as Eq. (4.4) [39], by balance of the inertial force, m¨u, the damping
force, c ˙u, the elastic force, ku, and the external harmonic force, F(t) = |F|eiωt.
m¨u + c ˙u + ku = F(t)
(4.4)
If the response is assumed to follow the same form as the force, i.e u(t) =
|u|eiωt, Eq. (4.5) can be used to deﬁne the complex dynamic stiﬀness.
k∗= F(t)
u(t) = k −mω2 + iωc
(4.5)
By comparing the above expression with Eq. (4.3), it is seen that the
system’s equivalent spring comprises the inertial and the elastic contribution
of the original system, whereas the damping contribution is included in the
equivalent dashpot.
Following this principle, the system corresponding to the monopile of the
wind turbine can be reduced by calculating its equivalent complex dynamic
stiﬀness. More speciﬁcally, a unit harmonic load is applied at each degree of
freedom at the base node of the structure (at mudline level), for which the
ﬂexibility matrix can be derived based on the complex responses obtained by
these unit loads. The ﬂexibility matrix is frequency-dependant and contains
real and imaginary parts, respectively representing the stiﬀness and damping
of the condensed system, which can be taken as the set of spring and dashpot
coeﬃcients to be applied at the mudline node. The non-diagonal terms in the
ﬂexibility matrix accounts for the coupling that occurs between translational
and rotational degrees of freedom. The obtained coeﬃcients are also referred to
as impedance functions, as further discussed in the following sections, which for
a range of diﬀerent foundation systems have been derived and documented in
the existing literature.
Discretizing the foundation system into one node has the advantage that
the seismic motion only needs to be known and exercised at the ground surface
rather than for all soil layers that the monopile is embedded in. Per contra,
this also indicates that the kinematic interaction between the structure and
soil is not taken into account, as a result of the diﬀerence in the pile response
and the motion of the ground itself.
Hence, it can be assumed that the
response is generated from the inertial interaction alone, i.e. by the mass of the
superstructure.
==PAGE:58==
42
4 Soil-Structure-Interaction
Dynamic Impedance Functions
The eﬀect of soil ﬂexibility, which modiﬁes the foundation system stiﬀness, can
be accounted for by a set of complex impedance functions that are frequency
dependent [23]. These functions relate the excitation forces with the resulting
displacements at the top of the pile. As discussed in the latter section, the real
and imaginary parts of the dynamic impedance functions respectively represent
the stiﬀness and damping.
An axis-symmetric monopile, as the one investigated herein, usually has
both three translational and rotational degrees of freedom. These are related to
the ﬂexibility matrix, K, in addition to the force vector, F, in the three spatial
directions as seen in Eq. (4.6). Note that herein, axial displacement, uz, and
torsion, ϕz, are neglected
F = Ku ⇒


Fx
Fy
Fz
Mx
My
Mz


=


kxx
0
0
0
−krx
0
0
kxx
0
krx
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
krx
0
krr
0
0
−krx
0
0
0
krr
0
0
0
0
0
0
0




ux
uy
uz
ϕx
ϕy
ϕz


(4.6)
Following this approach, the mass of the subsoil part of the pile is not
considered, as discussed earlier herein. Such properties can be accounted for by
applying discrete mass and inertia elements at the mudline. The contribution
of the soil embedded part of the monopile to the modes of interest is, however,
given predominantly by the stiﬀness properties.
4.2
Selection of Soil Parameters
For the purpose of investigating the dynamic response of the oﬀshore wind
turbine by means of varying ﬂexibility, two types of soil has been selected: A
dense soil and a soft soil. The intention of this selection is to cover the eﬀects
both when including a small ﬂexiility to the wind turbine, in terms of the dense
soil, and a rather large ﬂexibility, considering the soft soil, in comparison to
the ﬁxed-base model. The properties of the soils are based on the classiﬁcation
given by Eurocode 8 [28], which can be seen below.
Class A - Rock or rock-like geological formation, υs > 800 m/s
Class B - Deposits of very dense sand, gravel, or very stiﬀclay,
υs ϵ ⟨360, 800⟩m/s
Class C - Deep deposits of dense or medium dense sand, gravel or
stiﬀclay, υs ϵ ⟨180, 360⟩m/s
Class D - Deposits of loose-to-medium cohesion-less soil or of pre-
dominantly soft-to-ﬁrm cohesive soil. υs < 180 m/s
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Selection of Soil Parameters
43
The soils selected for the analysis herein correspond to Class B and D,
respectively representing dense and soft conditions. The diﬀerent properties
of the soils are given in Table 4.1, in which the characteristics of the monopile
foundation are also seen. These values are collected from the study of Damgaard
et al. [23], who used them to illustrate an example of deﬁning the impedance
coeﬃcients based on the early work from Novak et al. [42] on piles in horizontal
vibrations. Furthermore, the monopile in this study corresponds to that of the
NREL 5-MW wind turbine, which herein is the utilized reference model. It is
also the same monopile that was utilized in the OC3 project by Jonkman et al.
[5] to model the soil-pile interaction, as documented by Passon [46].
Table 4.1: Characteristics of the subsoils and monopile used in the analysis
Material
Type
υs
ν
ρ
ζ
H
Lp
dp
tp
[-]
[-]
[m/s]
[-]
[kg/m3]
[-]
[m]
[m]
[m]
[mm]
Soil 1
Sand
400
0.35
1700
0.025
30
-
-
-
Soil 2
Sand
100
0.35
1700
0.025
30
-
-
-
Monopile
Steel
3271
0.25
7850
0
-
30
6
60
Based on soil conditions and the frequencies relevant for the vibration of
wind turbines, the dynamic impedance functions have been solved in the work
of Damgaard et al. [23]. By means of this, the spring and dashpot coeﬃcients
can be derived for the two soil types. These values are introduced in Table 4.2,
from which the stiﬀness matrices can be formed at the mudline.
Table 4.2: The spring and dashpot coeﬃcients for diﬀerent soil conditions
according to Table 4.1
Soil type
kxx (trans.)
krx (coupled)
krx (coupled)
krr (rot.)
[kN/m]
[kN-m/rad]
[kN-m/rad]
[kN/rad]
1
1.1280E7
-3.6263E7
-3.6263E7
2.9466E8
2
1.3359E6
-1.0261E7
-1.0261E7
1.6014E8
Thus, the diﬀerent ﬂexible models intended to analyse to investigate the
eﬀect of SSI on wind turbines within this MSc thesis are enabled.
==PAGE:60==
44
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 5
Time-Domain
Analysis
Wind turbines are complex structures designed to optimize the production of
energy from the wind. The response is hence dependant on both the environmen-
tal loading conditions and the interaction between the controller (servo system)
and the state of the turbine. In order to derive a ﬁnal simulation scheme and to
further run the time-domain analyses on the oﬀshore wind turbine, considering
both the ﬁxed base structure and the eﬀects of including SSI, both the states
of the wind turbine and the multi-hazard environment that it will be exposed
to must be deﬁned.
The aim of this chapter is therefore to provide the necessary information
about the diﬀerent states of a wind turbine in general and, evidently, those
included in the following analyses. In accordance to this, the determination of
various initial conditions are also given. Finally, the selection and deﬁnition
of the diﬀerent loads adopted herein are described in details, leading to the
formulation of the ﬁnal simulation scheme on which time-domain analyses will
be run.
5.1
Operational States of a Wind Turbine
When studying the aero-elastic context of a wind turbine, the mutual eﬀects of
structural ﬂexibility and aerodynamic forces are considered. More speciﬁcally,
the deformations of the wind turbine will vary along with the aerodynamic forces.
The blades or the tower’s relative orientation with respect to the wind ﬂow is
altered by the deformations, which again change the aerodynamic actions. This
mutual inﬂuence may be referred to as a coupled problem. In a contemporary
wind turbine, there are many coupled problems, such as controller strategies,
environmental conditions and the wakes of nearby turbines. Hence, an impor-
tant preparation for the simulation set-up with use of the aero-servo-elastic
code HAWC2, is to implement and control the NREL 5-MW reference wind
turbine in a reliable manner.
A wind turbine has various operational states that are characterized by
predeﬁned parameters. There are two stationary states in which the structure
either produces power or is standing still. The rest of the states are transition
phases, i.e. when the turbine is moving from one state to another.
==PAGE:62==
46
5 Time-Domain Analysis
Before the wind turbine starts up, it runs a system check on a great number
of criteria to indicate whether or not the turbine is ready to operate. If the
signals are positive, the turbine will be yawed to the direction of the wind and
start-up will begin if the wind speed is within the operating range. The NREL
5-MW turbine operates between wind speeds of 3 m/s to 25 m/s, as seen in
Table 2.1, with a rated value of 11.4 m/s. Below the rated wind speed, the
turbine will operate at partial load, meaning that the blades have a ﬁxed pitch
angle to extract as much power as possible under these conditions. Full power
production is obtained when the wind speed exceeds the rated value. In this
phase, the pitch angle of the blades is controlled such that the rated power is
not exceeded, as is illustrated in Fig. 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Pitch regulated variable speed phases of a wind turbine
In addition, a wind turbine is equipped with diﬀerent sensors that can signal
the controller to implement a shut-down. This is done to prevent damage, for
instance from too high wind speeds or icing, to mention some. The shut-down is
activated by pitching the blades, which in the ﬁnal phase can reach an angular
speed of 4 deg/s. By means of this, the torque introduced by the wind will
smoothly fade, while the remaining rotation is decayed by the electrical torque
working against it. Thus, the angular velocity of the rotor comes to a stop.
In existing literature, as introduced in the review in sec. 1.3, many studies
regarding wind turbines, investigating either seismic response, the eﬀects of
soil-structure-interaction or other inquiries, include three diﬀerent operational
states, namely a parked or idling case, normal operation and an emergency
shut-down scenario. The eﬀects of seismic and aerodynamic load interaction
were thoroughly analysed in the work done by Asareh et al. [47], wherein the
aforementioned operational states were included for the contemporary wind
turbine. For a wide range of wind speeds and earthquakes, it was seen that the
emergency shut-down scenario never induced higher demands on the structure
than for the normal operation state of the turbine. Similar conclusions were
drawn by Sanz [40], who included no less than 80 strong ground motions in
the fragility analysis of a 5-MW wind turbine, and by Lai et al. [26], in the
==PAGE:63==
5.2 Initial Conditions
47
dynamic load analysis of SSI eﬀects under earthquake loading.
The reason why many of the studies related to the seismic assessment of
wind turbines include the emergency shut-down state of the turbine is that
earthquake hazards may introduce high accelerations at hub height, which
can seriously jeopardize the sensitive equipment within the nacelle. Hence, a
shut-down sensor would typical be installed to detect the accelerations at this
elevation of the structure. However, the emergency shut-down scenario requires
a lot of predeﬁned settings of the controller system and, evidently, strategies to
accordingly proceed with this protocol. As this state does not hold a straight-
forward solution, while also seeing that several studies conclude that this state
does not indulge higher response than for the constantly operating state, it has
been chosen not to include the assessment of the emergency shut-down scenario
in the following. By means of this, the amount of insecure parameters that may
inﬂuence the results is minimized.
Based on the herein discussed, the two following operational states have
been considered:
Normal operating This is the operational state wherein the wind turbine
produces power. However, it is conﬁgured in such a
manner that there is no possibility for it to shut down,
regardless of the loading conditions.
Idling In this phase, the wind turbine is on stand-still. More
speciﬁcally, the shaft is in this case not able to rotate,
while maximum pitch angle is initiated for the blades to
obtain minimum exposure to the wind.
The diﬀerence between the two stand-still states of a wind turbine, i.e. idling
and parked, lays in the pitch control. More speciﬁcally, for turbines with ﬁxed
pitch systems, where the blades do not feather, the turbine comes to a complete
stop by means of an aerodynamic brake. The term idling is only used for active
pitch wind turbines, such as the reference model studied herein. This condition
would otherwise be described as parked condition for ﬁxed pitch turbines [47].
5.2
Initial Conditions
The coupling between the structure, the imposed loads and the controller system
arises advanced and to some extent computational heavy simulations. Thus, it
is beneﬁcial to deﬁne certain initial conditions for the diﬀerent exposures and
to furthermore investigate the sensitivity of the time-step implemented in the
simulations.
When applying wind loads in the simulations, these are seen to act corre-
spondingly to that of an impulse. More speciﬁcally, as the simulation starts
up, no loads have yet been introduced, while the air ﬂow suddenly hits the
structure at the ﬁrst time-step. The impact of the pulse introduced by the
simulated wind ﬁeld varies correspondingly to the initial conditions set for the
wind turbine, i.e. the pitch angle of the blades, θ, and the rotational speed
==PAGE:64==
48
5 Time-Domain Analysis
of the shaft, Ω. The further the initial conditions are from the values these
parameters will hold for the given wind loads, the larger the pulse will be.
Even though equilibrium is obtained after a certain time, this initial instability
leads to a transient response part. In order to reduce computational time, this
transient part should be minimized. More importantly, the response becomes
very sensitive to the time-step for long transient periods. Particularly, a drift is
seen to occur at the peak of the transient part for just a minor modiﬁcation of
the time-step, leading to diﬀerent equilibrium states. Hence, this transient part
should also be minimized to increase the accuracy of the of the response results.
Figure 5.2: Pitch angle, θ, and rotational velocity, Ω, of the shaft for diﬀerent
mean wind speeds, Um
A ramp of increasing mean wind speeds, as seen in Fig. 5.2, has been run
on the wind turbine in order to analyse the correspondingly blade pitching and
rotation of the shaft. In correlation with the normal operational state of a wind
turbine, as illustrated in Fig. 5.1, it is seen that the controller system keeps the
angular velocity of the shaft constant by pitching the blades when the rated
wind speed of 11.4 m/s is exceeded. By inserting the obtained equilibrium
values as initial conditions for the diﬀerent mean wind speeds, the unstable
conditions described above can be avoided.
However, to obtain low computational costs while simultaneously securing
accurate response results, an additional analysis has been run with regard
to the sensitivity of the time-step applied in the simulations. By assuming
that the relative error is insigniﬁcantly for a time-step of 0.0005 s, which is
the smallest time-step applied in this analysis scheme, the relative error of a
set of diﬀerent time-steps can be deﬁned. Furthermore, the most hazardous
environment intended to simulate within this thesis has been chosen as the
reference case, to provide the most unstable set-up conditions. By means of
==PAGE:65==
5.3 Environmental Loads
49
this, the simulations contain a mean wind speed of 25 m/s, a signiﬁcant wave
height of 6.5 m and a strong ground motion record with a time-step of 0.005 s.
The mean base frame moment, excluding the transient part of the response, of
the monopile is calculated herein to determine the relative error. In addition,
the computational time of these simulations have been compared. In total 12
time-steps have been included in this test, ranging from 0.0005 s to 0.064 s.
Figure 5.3: Inﬂuence of time-step to relative error and computational costs
The results of the sensitivity analysis on the time-step are compared in
Fig. 5.3, where it can be seen the time integration becomes questionable for
time-steps of higher value than 0.003 s. The value of 0.005 s predicts the best
relationship between computational time cost and accuracy of the results, which
is also in accordance with a similar test conducted by Sanz [40]. Based on the
result and seeing that the smallest time-step of the strong ground motions of
the earthquakes intended to use in this study is 0.005 s, this value is chosen as
the time-step for all further simulations.
5.3
Environmental Loads
The NREL 5-MW oﬀshore wind turbine assessed herein is assumed to be si-
multaneously exposed to three diﬀerent sources, namely the wind, waves and
seismic excitations, hence describing a scenario that an oﬀshore wind turbine in-
stalled in a seismically prone area could potentially experience during its lifetime.
The inquiries formulated in this study intend to provide a general assessment
towards the eﬀect of soil-structure-interaction within the scope described above.
Thus, a speciﬁc location has not been chosen to select and deﬁne the hazardous
environment and their corresponding loading parameters. On the contrary,
the loading conditions adopted herein are based on the intention of creating
a generic exposure set that can represent various sites. Some plausible values
have therefore been selected to represent the conditions of a typical oﬀshore
environment. In similar ways, the seismic strong ground motions included
herein, are selected in order to create a reasonable variety of characteristics.
==PAGE:66==
50
5 Time-Domain Analysis
5.3.1
Wind Loads
In order to include some realistic values concerning the wind conditions oﬀshore,
while also considering the operational states of the 5-MW wind turbine, as
discussed in sec. 5.1, three diﬀerent wind speeds have been deﬁned. These
correspond to the cut-in, rated and cut-out wind speeds for the reference model
utilized herein. In such ways, the entire operational spectrum of the wind
turbine is covered, ranging from the minimum to the maximum value.
The wind loads are deﬁned by means of the mean wind speed, Um, and
its corresponding turbulence intensity, Tint. As explained in sec. 2.3.1, these
respectively describe the average wind speed for a 10 minutes interval and
the gusts in the airﬂow, and are calculated based on the prescriptions in IEC
61400-3 [30]. The herein included wind speeds can be seen in Table 5.1, together
with their corresponding turbulence intensity.
Table 5.1: Wind parameters included in the time-domain analysis
Cut-in
Rated
Cut-out
Mean wind speed
3.0
11.4
25.0
Um [m/s]
Turbulence intensity
0.134
0.094
0.095
Tint [-]
It may be discussed that when the wind turbine is in an idling state, the
wind speed should either be below or exceed this threshold interval. However,
the turbine may also be out of operation due to maintenance or curtailment, in
which the speciﬁc structure will still be exposed to the same wind speed. In
addition, comparisons between the seismic response of the wind turbine can
easier be drawn when utilizing the same wind conditions.
By means of this, the simulation set-up regarding the oﬀshore wind conditions
which will be utilized for the main time-domain analysis is speciﬁed.
5.3.2
Wave Loads
The basic presumption considering the deﬁnition of the herein applied sea-state,
is that the likelihood that two extreme hazards occur simultaneously is low,
such as the event of an earthquake at the same time as a severe sea-state. The
latter hazard happens during storm conditions, which is not the case for the
investigated wind speeds utilized in this study. Hence, a signiﬁcant wave height,
Hs, of 6.5 m has been chosen for the following time-domain analysis. This value
describes a relative strong sea-state, though not entering the extreme range.
Similar studies have also considered this a reasonable loading condition [16] [22]
[26]. The fragility analysis conducted by Sanz [40] furthermore revealed that
==PAGE:67==
5.3 Environmental Loads
51
the inﬂuence of the sea-state on the seismic response of an oﬀshore wind turbine
(identical to the reference model included here) was marginal to negligible. The
deﬁnition of the signiﬁcant wave height and corresponding peak period, Tp, in
addition to the mean wind speed, enables the derivation of the JONSWAP wave
spectra, as explained in sec. 2.3.2.
In order to complete the loop regarding the sea-state simulation within the
framework of HAWC2, the current parameter also needs to be deﬁned. Surface
currents may reach a speed of 2.5 m/s, but would usually fall in the speed range
of a few centimetres to half a meter per second [48]. Thus, the current herein
has been deﬁned to have a velocity of 1 m/s, which is considered to be on the
conservative side. An example of the irregular waves created in HAWC2 by
means of the above deﬁned parameters can be seen in Fig. 5.4.
Figure 5.4: Irregular sea-state created in HAWC2.
A ﬁnal note regarding the wind and wave loading is that these are regarded
aligned in the simulations, i.e. acting in the same direction. More speciﬁcally,
the wind turbine is exposed by these loads in the global y-direction, as speciﬁed
by the aero-servo-elastic code HAWC2.
5.3.3
Seismic Loads
To represent the hazardous loads of the earthquakes, real records of strong
ground motions are utilized. Such recordings are available as three-directional
acceleration time-series in the PEER-NGA database, comprised by 173 past
seismic events. Cooperating with 1456 recording stations around the world,
the database currently consists of more than 3.500 three-components ground
motion records. As can be seen in Fig. 5.5, the magnitude of these recordings
lies within a range of 4 to 8, with an epicentral distance of approximately 0.2
to 600 km.
==PAGE:68==
52
5 Time-Domain Analysis
Figure 5.5: Magnitude and distance distribution of the PEER-NGA database
records. Illustration taken from PEER-NGA database.
Within this database, information regarding the characteristics of the diﬀer-
ent recordings can also be found. These include the magnitude of the earthquake
and type of faulting, the location of the hypocentre and characteristics of the
site, in addition to the duration, time and date of the recording, to mention some.
The aforementioned reveals that there are a lot of records to chose from.
Thus, some selection criteria has to be deﬁned. Common practice in structural
engineering is often to select seismic motions that relates to a speciﬁc site
scenario or that provides, by help of scaling protocols, a predetermined intensity
measure [49]. As initially discussed in the current chapter, the intention of this
study is to derive generic results, which requires a variety of characteristics. In
this way, the selected ground motions are not site-speciﬁc, but rather reﬂecting
diﬀerent seismotectonic environments.
To keep the number of simulations to a reasonable amount, ten strong ground
motions have been collected herein. The selection criteria are summarized below:
Location On the contrary of investigating a speciﬁc site, it has
deliberately been chosen to include seismic events from
diﬀerent regions around the world.
Magnitude The ten sets of motions include both moderate magni-
tude earthquake events (M = 6-7) and high magnitude
(M = 7-8).
==PAGE:69==
5.3 Environmental Loads
53
Epicentral distance Covering a range from approxemately 13 to 78 km, both
near- and far-ﬁeld motions are included, which enables
a variety of spectral accelerations.
Mean period Adding to the above criteria, it has been of special inter-
est to include ground motions with high mean periods.
As wind turbines are high and slender structures, their
natural periods are rather high, especially when account-
ing for ﬂexibility due to soil. Hence, some of the motions
included are intentionally selected to impose greater
response than others.
By means of this, a multi-criteria scheme has been drawn. It should be
noted that the strong ground motions included herein consist of sets with
horizontal components, meaning that vertical vibrations are neglected. The ten
ground motions chosen in accordance with the preceding criteria are presented
in Table 5.2. More details regarding the earthquakes can be seen in Appendix C.
Table 5.2: The ten earthquake ground motions
Earthquake,
Magn.
EpiD
PGA
Tm
Record
region and year
[km]
(x/y) [g]
(x/y) [s]
station
Chi-Chi
7.62
37.73
0.124/
1.212/
TCU107
Taiwan, 1999
0.158
1.412
Imperial Valley-06
6.53
27.47
0.439/
1.395/
El Centro
US-CA, 1979
0.411
0.949
Kobe
6.90
25.40
0.725/
1.040/
Kobe
Japan, 1995
0.776
0.697
University
Kocaeli
7.51
19.30
0.268/
1.373/
Yarimca
Turkey, 1999
0.349
1.356
Loma Prieta
6.93
47.90
0.215/
1.119/
Hollister
US-CA, 1989
0.247
1.014
City Hall
Manjil
7.37
77.84
0.132/
0.744/
Abhar
Iran, 1990
0.209
1.513
Northridge-01
6.69
13.39
0.416/
0.746/
Beverly Hills
US-CA, 1994
0.516
0.644
14145 Mulhol
Smart1(40)
6.32
67.16
0.182/
1.125/
SMART1
Taiwan, 1986
0.254
0.847
M07
Superstition Hills-02
6.54
29.41
0.207/
1.164/
Wildlife
US-CA, 1987
0.181
0.934
Liquef. Array
Whittier Narrows-01
5.99
19.81
0.332/
0.510/
Compton
US-CA, 1987
0.333
0.310
Castlegate St.
==PAGE:70==
54
5 Time-Domain Analysis
5.4
Sum of Simulations Scheme
As a result of the diﬀerent loads presented in this chapter, i.e. three distinctive
mean wind speeds, one sea-state and ten real ground motions, in addition to
the two conditions of the turbine, a total of 60 load cases has been deﬁned.
To further investigate the eﬀects of the soil-ﬂexibility, which will enable the
necessary data to discuss the scope of this thesis, the two diﬀerent soils presented
in chap. 4 are included besides the ﬁxed-base case. Hence, this leads to an
overall of 180 simulations.
The results derived from the time-domain analysis of each deﬁned simulation
as stated in the previous, i.e. the fully coupled scenario consisting of wind, waves
and currents, seismic events and soil-ﬂexibility, are disclosed in the following
chapter.
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 6
Simulation Results
and Discussion
In the ﬁnal step of this study, 180 simulations were run in the time-domain
using the aero-servo-elastic code of HAWC2, compiled with the herein developed
seismic module that also may be coupled to a soil module (see chap. 3). All
the simulations were performed with 300 s time durations, in which the strong
ground motions of the earthquakes were implemented 150 s into the simulation.
By means of this, the transient behaviour and, evidently, transient response of
the turbine at the beginning of the coupled exposure set would have entirely
decayed.
Two operational conditions for the wind turbine were considered herein,
namely normal operating and idling. In the latter mode, the analysis was
performed with the pitch angle of the blades set to 84 degrees, i.e. the max-
imum pitch angle deﬁned for the reference model. In this manner, the blade
edges were encountered almost parallel to the wind direction, meaning that
the wind generated lift load was at a minimum level. The rotor was more
speciﬁcally not able to rotate, acquiring no torque for power production during
this condition. For the normal operational condition, the initial conditions as
presented in sec. 5.2 were implemented based on the diﬀerent mean wind speeds
included herein, which was found to reduce the transient part of the simulations.
6.1
Dynamic Responses
The deﬁnition of the diﬀerent soils and corresponding spring coeﬃcients in chap.
4 enable the set-up for a modal analysis, and thus the eigenvalue problem has
been solved for the ﬂexibly-supported structures studied herein. By means of
this, the dynamic characteristics of the wind turbine with ﬁxed bottom, which
was introduced in sec. 2.2.2, can be compared to the ﬂexible bottom case
including SSI eﬀects.
The ﬁrst natural frequency occurred at 0.2636 Hz for the fore-aft bending
mode and at 0.2671 Hz for the side-to-side bending mode, in the case where
the wind turbine was modelled with dense soil. This equals a reduction of
approximately 4.5% compared to the ﬁxed base model. By observing the mode
shapes, as illustrated in Fig. 6.1 and 6.2, some small inﬂuence can be seen on
base rotation due to the relative stiﬀness of the dense soil and monopile system.
When the soft soil conditions were further introduced, the ﬁrst natural tower
frequencies were reduced to respectively 0.2489 Hz and 0.2517 Hz for the fore-aft
==PAGE:72==
56
6 Simulation Results and Discussion
and side-to-side modes, about 10% down in comparison to the wind turbine
with ﬁxed base. In agreement with this, a larger base rotation is observed for
both modes (Fig. 6.1 and 6.2).
Figure 6.1: First fore-aft bending mode for the (i) ﬁxed base, (ii) dense soil and
(iii) soft soil models.
Figure 6.2: First side-to-side bending mode for the (i) ﬁxed base, (ii) dense soil
and (iii) soft soil models.
The second bending mode of the system considering the dense soil was
predicted at 1.9704 Hz for the side-to-side mode and 2.0514 Hz fore-aft mode,
which deviates more from the frequencies of the ﬁxed base, i.e. a 10-12 %
reduction. The mode shapes show some inﬂuence on the base rotation (Fig. 6.3
and 6.4), but again these are observed to be more signiﬁcant for the system
with the soft soil conditions. The corresponding second natural frequencies were
here predicted at 1.6223 Hz and 1.8193 Hz, respectively for the side-to-side and
fore-aft modes. In relation to the ﬁxed base, this is a decrease of more than 20%.
The observations herein correspond to those drawn in similar studies [9] [26] [50].
==PAGE:73==
6.1 Dynamic Responses
57
Figure 6.3: Second fore-aft bending mode for the (i) ﬁxed base, (ii) dense soil
and (iii) soft soil models.
Figure 6.4: Second side-to-side bending mode for the (i) ﬁxed base, (ii) dense
soil and (iii) soft soil models.
The impact of soil-structure-interaction on the modal frequencies is shown
in Table 6.1 for all three soil stiﬀness scenarios. Comparing the eigenfrequencies
between the three diﬀerent models, it is seen the these decrease as the SSI is
taken into account, which is in good relation with comparable research [23]
[24]. On the contrary, the modes related to the blades are not decreasing
particularly in relation to the ﬂexibility of the foundation system. However, this
is expected, as the blades are connected to the shaft which freely rotates around
the generator axis, thus not aﬀecting the natural vibration modes corresponding
to the motion of the blades.
==PAGE:74==
58
6 Simulation Results and Discussion
Table 6.1: Eigenfrequency, f, for diﬀerent soil conditions according to Table 4.1
Mode
f [Hz]
Fixed base
Soil 1
Soil 2
1st Tower fore-aft
0.2757
0.2636
0.2489
1st Tower side-side
0.2797
0.2671
0.2517
1st Drivetrain torsion
0.6091
0.6091
0.6091
1st Blade collective ﬂap
0.6412
0.6402
0.6388
1st Blade asym. ﬂapwise pitch
0.6741
0.6734
0.6725
1st Blade asym. ﬂapwise yaw
1.0011
1.0001
1.0006
1st Blade asym. edgewise pitch
1.0134
1.0129
1.0121
1st Blade asym. edgewise yaw
1.5765
1.5763
1.5201
2nd Tower side-side
2.2450
1.9704
1.6223
2nd Tower fore-aft
2.2580
2.0514
1.8193
Hence it is reasonable to conclude that SSI has an evident inﬂuence to the
dynamic behaviour of the wind turbines, as discussed in sec. 1.3.1, and the
necessity of including these eﬀects to accurately calculate the dynamic responses
of contemporary wind turbines can be drawn.
6.2
Inﬂuence of Wind Speed on Response
Results
To get some insight into the inﬂuence of the deﬁned wind conditions in relation
to the seismic assessment for the oﬀshore wind turbine, a comparative study
will be discussed herein.
The results obtained from displacements and moments for the three diﬀerent
mean wind speeds are shown in Fig. 6.5 for the oﬀshore wind turbine in the
operational state. As the earthquake load is applied in both the fore-aft and
side-to-side directions, the mean of the maximum of the square root of the sum
of squares (SRSS) for the response in both directions for all 10 seismic motions
analysed over the three wind ﬁelds is considered for observation. These are
derived for several sections along the height of the wind turbine in order to
study the response for the entire tower elevation.
==PAGE:75==
6.2 Inﬂuence of Wind Speed on Response Results
59
Figure 6.5: Mean of the maximum of SRSS of displacement and moment
response for 10 earthquake simulations during operational state.
Looking at the displacements, it is evident that the softest soil conditions
provoke the highest response in the wind turbine, with two to three times higher
displacements at the tower top compared to the ﬁxed-base system. This is a
consequence of the wind turbine being more ﬂexible to rotate at the base during
these soil conditions. Such signiﬁcant diﬀerence can not be observed for the
displacements between the three diﬀerent mean wind speeds however, where the
inﬂuence on the contrary is of a minor degree. Nonetheless, it is seen that the
rated mean wind speed derives the largest response for the wind turbine in soft
soil. For both the dense soil conditions and the ﬁxed-base case, the response is
somewhat higher for the cut-out wind speed in comparison to the two other
mean wind speeds.
The moment demand on the wind turbine in soft soil conditions is seen
not to diﬀer as much as the displacements. However, as the ﬂexibly-base wind
turbine is, evidently, more ﬂexible than the ﬁxed-base structure, this observation
is as expected. The diﬀerent mean wind speeds are again observed not to have
a very big impact on the response. For the base moments, the inﬂuence is close
to negligible.
The corresponding response results for the wind turbine during the idling
state are given in Fig. 6.6. Here, it can be seen that the mean wind speed has a
==PAGE:76==
60
6 Simulation Results and Discussion
more signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the response. Note that the values on the response
axis diﬀer between Fig. 6.5 and 6.6.
Figure 6.6: Mean of the maximum of SRSS of displacement and moment
response for 10 earthquake simulations during idling state.
The idling wind turbine is considerably more aﬀected by the the cut-out
wind speed than the wind turbine during the operational state. This shows the
eﬀect of aerodynamic damping to the structure when the turbine is operating,
a phenomena which reduces the seismic force acting on structure due to vibra-
tions caused by the wind [51]. Apart from that, the same inﬂuence of the wind
speeds to the diﬀerent soil conditions can be drawn for the idling state as the
operational state.
The operational state imposes in general slightly higher response on the
wind turbine than the idling state for the cut-in and rated wind speeds. This
observation is better illustrated in Fig. 6.7, where the moment distributions for
these two mean wind speeds are plotted together.
==PAGE:77==
6.3 Spectral Accelerations
61
Figure 6.7: Comparison between operational and idling state for mean of
maximum moment distribution.
The observations found herein are aligned with the conclusions made by
Asareh et al. [47], who analysed such demands for a broad variety of wind speeds.
All in all, the inﬂuence of the mean wind speed is found to be of limited sig-
niﬁcance when the wind turbine is simultaneously subjected to earthquake loads.
6.3
Spectral Accelerations
The predominant structural periods are long for contemporary wind turbines,
such as the 5-MW utility scale reference model represents. Spectral acceleration,
Sa, is a unit describing the maximum acceleration on a structure imposed
by the earthquake motion, usually measured by terms of the gravitational
acceleration, g. The spectral acceleration can be speciﬁed for the diﬀerent
oscillation frequencies and a speciﬁed degree of damping. More speciﬁcally,
the spectral accelerations that correlate to the natural periods of the structure
is then obtained, which forms a response spectrum when plotted. Table 6.2
shows the natural periods for the two ﬁrst vibration modes of the tower structure.
Table 6.2: Comparison of natural periods, T [s], for turbine and soil models
according to Table 4.1
Mode
Fixed base
Soil 1
Soil 2
1st Tower fore-aft
3.627
3.794
4.018
1st Tower side-side
3.575
3.744
3.973
2nd Tower side-side
0.445
0.508
0.616
2nd Tower fore-aft
0.443
0.488
0.550
==PAGE:78==
62
6 Simulation Results and Discussion
In order to get an idea of the imposed hazard that the herein included
earthquakes may inﬂict on the wind turbine, it is of interest to investigate their
response spectra accordingly. Due to the aerodynamic damping induced in the
operational state of a wind turbine, the elastic response spectrum is obtained
by a damping degree of 5%, while the idling state is presented by 1% damping.
By means of this, the response spectra in both horziontal directions are shown
in Fig. 6.8. The fundamental periods of the wind turbine corresponding to the
fore-aft and side-side frequencies of the tower (see Table 6.2) are outlined in
the plots, both with and without SSI included.
Some preliminary assumptions can be drawn by investigating the elastic
spectra in relation to the fundamental vibration modes. For instance, the
Kocaeli earthquake can be expected to induce the largest x-directional seismic
response in the wind turbine, while Imperial Valley-06 and Manjil seem to
impose the biggest threat in the y-direction. The latter applies in particular to
the wind turbine in the idling state when SSI eﬀects are not included.
Figure 6.8: Elastic response spectra of the ten earthquake motions showing the
fundamental periods of the wind turbine.
In similar ways, the second vibration mode has been plotted in relation to
the response spectra of the herein included earthquakes in Fig. 6.9. These
are seen to fall in a range where the earthquakes in general impose much
higher threat to the wind turbine. Depending on the frequency content, it
can be seen that the ﬂexibly-supported wind turbine may be more at risk
than ﬁxed-base for some of the seismic motions if the second vibration mode
is activated. Northridge-01 and Whittier Narrows-01 are examples of such cases.
==PAGE:79==
6.4 SSI Implications on Wind Turbine Response
63
Figure 6.9: Elastic response spectra of the ten earthquake motions showing the
second vibration modes of the wind turbine.
6.4
SSI Implications on Wind Turbine Response
To study the potential implications of the three soil scenarios, the maximum
demands in terms of displacements u, accelerations ¨u, moments M, and shear
F, along the height of the wind will be analysed herein. The moment and
shear have been calculated at the base and top of the tower structure, and in
addition at 14 locations in between these two points, wherein the maximum
values calculated from the SRSS of the two horizontal components of the tower
at each time step. The displacements and accelerations have been found in a
similar way, but for a total of 56 sections along the structure.
Moment Response
The resulting maximum moments along the height of the wind turbine exposed
by the rated wind speed are shown in Fig. 6.10 for each soil scenario. The
dotted grey line herein marks the mean water level. The x-axis furthermore
diﬀers between the ten earthquake plots, to better see the variations between
the soil conditions.
==PAGE:80==
64
6 Simulation Results and Discussion
Figure 6.10: Maximum moment demand for diﬀerent soil scenarios and opera-
tional states considering the rated mean wind speed, Um = 11.4 m/s.
These results clearly show that the operational state of the wind turbine im-
pose the largest demand in terms of bending moments along the tower structure,
as has been similarly reported by other studies [26]. Moreover, the inﬂuence of
soil-structure-interaction is seen to derive diﬀerent demands on the wind turbine,
meaning that the response is to a large degree dependant on the earthquake
motion.
A ﬂexible structure is more prone to rotate at the base compared to a stiﬀer
system, as discussed in sec. 6.1. Hence, it would in general be expected that the
wind turbine would experience higher moment demands when the SSI eﬀects
are not included. Nonetheless, several of the seismic events yield the largest
moments when the structure is ﬂexibly-based. The most distinct example of this
is the Smart1 earthquake, during which the soft soil conditions impose about 30
% higher maximum moments along the height than for the two other foundation
systems. Besides the Smart1 event, Loma Prieta, Whittier Narrows-01 and to
some extent Northridge-01 are seen to be more exposed when the wind turbine
is considered with SSI eﬀects. The relation between these events is not very
distinct, but they are all of moderate magnitude and peak ground accelerations,
as can be seen in Table 5.2.
Another interesting perspective is the SSI eﬀects imposed at the higher
parts of the structure. Compared to the base moments, a higher number of the
motions increase the demand on diﬀerent sections along the upper two thirds
of the wind turbine. Particularly, a small peak near the point of maximum
displacement in the second vibration mode can be observed for some of the
seismic events, which is aligned with the conclusions stated by Prowell et al. [50]
==PAGE:81==
6.4 SSI Implications on Wind Turbine Response
65
Based on the spectral acceleration plots in sec. 6.3, it was expected that
the Manjil earthquake would impose high demands, particularly for the y-
directional response of the ﬁxed-base wind turbine. As seen in Fig. 6.10, this
speciﬁc case derive the by far highest demand on the wind turbine in terms
of moment response. Fig. 6.11 shows all the response results obtained for the
Manjil earthquake during the rated mean wind speed. In good agreement to
the presumptions, the response along the elevation of the wind turbine for the
Manjil is seen to be particular for the y-direction.
Figure 6.11: Maximum and minimum response in each direction of the wind
turbine when subjected to the Manjil earthquake during rated mean wind speed.
The moment response shows in general that the behaviour of the wind
turbine is to a large degree dependant on the characteristics of the seismic
event, as the soil stiﬀness do not provide similar response for all load cases.
However, the inclusion of soil is seen to inﬂuence the maximum moment demand
distributions. In particular at higher elevations of the tower.
Shear Response
The resulting shear demand, calculated by means of SRSS as initially discussed,
can be seen for all system ﬂexibilities and earthquakes motions in Fig. 6.12.
Note again that the response axis diﬀer between the sub-plots, as the response
==PAGE:82==
66
6 Simulation Results and Discussion
is highly dependant on the seismic event.
Figure 6.12: Maximum shear demand for diﬀerent soil scenarios and operational
states considering the rated mean wind speed, Um = 11.4 m/s.
From the maximum shear distributions, it can be observed that inclusion
of soil-ﬂexibility always impose higher base demand on the wind turbine than
the ﬁxed-base case. Along the height, the results diﬀer more between the three
diﬀerent systems. Nonetheless, the eﬀects of SSI on the shear demand show
how this consideration cannot be neglected when it comes to foundation design,
as implied also by Lai et al. [26]. The results also demonstrates that the
operational state of the turbine yields higher demand on the wind turbine than
the idling condition, but without very large diﬀerences.
The largest response in terms of shear distribution along the height is seen
for the Northridge-01, Manjil, Kocaeli and Kobe earthquakes, which except for
the Chi-Chi event are those of highest magnitude amongst the ten earthquakes.
However, no clear connection can be derived beyond this.
Acceleration Response
The Manjil load case, as seen in Fig. 6.11, also demonstrates how the second
vibration mode is activated for the accelerations in both directions of the struc-
ture, which has been found to be the case for many of the seismic motions
herein. These ﬁndings are in line with the conclusions drawn by Alati et al. [16],
who for three diﬀerent foundation systems found considerable high accelerations
==PAGE:83==
6.4 SSI Implications on Wind Turbine Response
67
at about two thirds height of the wind turbine. Some representative examples
of this are given in Fig. 6.13, where even some of the higher vibration modes of
the oﬀshore wind turbine can be detected.
Figure 6.13: Maximum accelerations along height for operational (upper) and
idling (lower) state of wind turbine
Considering the operational states of the turbine herein, it can be concluded
that they aﬀect the acceleration response in a varying degree. For the Whittier
earthquake, the accelerations between the two states are not very much higher
for the ﬁxed-base case, nor when the wind turbine is considered to be located in
dense soil. However, the dense soil seems to activate some higher modes in the
operational condition, while the second vibration mode is dominating for the
idling condition. The soft soil on the contrary induce much higher accelerations
in the structure when the turbine is idling, which, if anything, is opposite to
what can be detected for the other events introduced in Fig. 6.13.
The Whittier earthquake respectively has mean periods of 0.510 s and 0.310
s for the x- and y-direction (see Table 5.2), meaning that the energy of the
motion is centred around frequencies close to the second vibrations modes of
the wind turbine. This is particularly valid for the ﬁxed-base and dense soil
systems, where the second fore-aft periods are respectively 0.445 s and 0.508
s, and the side-to-side are 0.443 s and 0.488 s, as given in Table 6.2. The
diﬀerence between the operational states for the response corresponding to
the ﬂexibly-supported wind turbine in soft soil conditions can be explained by
investigating the response spectra in Fig. 6.9, in which it is seen that the idling
state poses higher spectral accelerations than the operational state. The two
other soil conditions on the contrary, do not have signiﬁcant diﬀerences between
the operational states in the Whittier case.
Thus, it can be derived that the response momentously depends on the
frequency content of the seismic motion and, evidently, the intensity of it.
==PAGE:84==
68
6 Simulation Results and Discussion
Displacement Response
The time-histories of the maximum tower top displacement in terms of SRSS
response for some of the seismic events are given in Fig. 6.14. From these
time-histories it can ﬁrst of all be seen that the governing load is the earthquake
motions, applied 150 s into the simulations. Furthermore, the eﬀects of the
soil-structure-interaction correspond to those discussed in sec. 6.2, i.e. that
more ﬂexibility results in higher tower top displacements.
Figure 6.14: Maximum SRSS top displacements for the wind turbine exposed
to rated mean wind speed.
For the ﬁxed-base wind turbine, it is observed that the operational state
of the turbine provokes somewhat higher peak responses in terms of tower top
displacements. The opposite is seen for the dense soil conditions, while the the
soft soil provides a less consistent picture. This again shows the coupled problem
==PAGE:85==
6.4 SSI Implications on Wind Turbine Response
69
investigated herein, namely that the response at all times depends on a variety
of diﬀerent loading conditions. It would be expected to see a larger deviation in
damping between the two turbine states due the aerodynamic damping, which
is an eﬀect of the blades having a larger exposure area aﬀected by pressure
from the wind during the operational state. However, the eﬀect of this is not
found to be signiﬁcant on the response, which is noticeable also when looking at
the maximum moments in Fig. 6.10 and the maximum accelerations in Fig. 6.13.
Among the seismic events given in Fig. 6.14, Imperial Valley is seen to
provoke the largest displacements over the time-interval, while the peak value
is seen from the Kobe earthquake. Both these earthquakes have high peak
ground accelerations in relation to the selection of motions included in this study.
All in all, the maximum resulting displacements are seen to increase in
general as the soil gets softer. While only some reference cases are shown here,
this observation is governing for all cases, in agreement with other studies on SSI
[13] [25]. Again, the coupled eﬀects from the operational state, soil-structure-
interaction and earthquake motion (intensity and frequency content), are seen
to derive diﬀerent demands on the wind turbine, which implies the importance
of investigating these eﬀects during the dynamic design analysis.
While only a representative selection of the results are given herein, all the
obtained respose results for the 180 time-domain simulations can be found in
Appendix D.
==PAGE:86==
70
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusions and
Future Directions
In the following, the ﬁnal conclusions regarding the most relevant ﬁndings from
the latter chapter and the overall work herein will be discussed with regards
to the main motivation for this study, as initially presented in sec. 1.4. Some
considerations and recommondations for future work within the framework of
seismic analysis including SSI eﬀects with the use of aero-servo-elastic codes
are given at the end.
7.1
Conclusions
A numerical investigation of the seismic demand of a ﬂexibly-supported oﬀshore
wind turbine founded on a monopile substructure by means of time-domain
analysis utilizing the aero-servo-elastic code HAWC2 has been presented. By
means of this, several demands obtained by a total of 180 simulations have been
compared, considering the eﬀects of soil-structure-interaction to the overall
dynamic system and furthermore the seismic response of the wind turbine.
From this study, several concluding remarks can be drawn, as summarized and
presented below:
- The inclusion of SSI may signiﬁcantly change the dynamic properties of
the oﬀshore wind turbine. It was seen that the eigenfrequencies of the
wind turbine decreased as the the soil stiﬀness got lower, and the second
bending mode was clearly impacted, showing increased rotation at the
base.
- The wind turbine can experience higher design loads in case of earthquake
assessment due to the ampliﬁed response as an eﬀect of soil-ﬂexibility.
Particularly, the displacements increased as the soil got softer, and near
the maximum displacement in the second vibration mode, the tower
experienced a general higher demand in moment and shear. Hence,
special consideration for this part of the structure may be required for
large wind turbines in earthquake prone areas.
- The seismic motions are seen to be the governing load for all cases
investigated herein. Thus, earthquake loading might be the predominant
load case for design of oﬀshore wind turbine in seismically prone areas.
- The diﬀerence of wind speeds was seen to inﬂuence the results in a very
limited degree. However, the rated wind speed did in general derive
somewhat higher resulting responses. Similarly was the operational
==PAGE:88==
72
7 Conclusions and Future Directions
state seen to impose highest demands in general.
This emphasizes
the importance of capturing the fully coupled scenario from loading
conditions and operational states to derive correct design loads. In this
manner, aero-servo-elastic codes like HAWC2 are necessary tools.
7.2
Recommendations for Future Work
Interesting aspects regarding many of the topics included herein have had to
be disregarded, respectively considering the time frame of this work and the
necessity of aligning the research in a speciﬁc direction. Nonetheless, to capture
the broader picture, some thoughts on further potentially work will be presented
in the following.
As addressed on several occasions in this thesis, wind turbines are complex
structures. Two operational states of the turbine were included in the simula-
tions analysed herein. However, a deeper study into the emergency shut-down
scenario (described in details in sec. 5.1), both regarding diﬀerent shut-down
mechanisms and the protocols following, could derive some interesting prospects.
Especially considering the structural demand when exposed to a multi-hazardous
environment, as the dynamic characteristics of the structure would undergo a
change during this transient period from operating to idling.
Adding to the complexity of these infrastructures, this study has been
focusing on the structural response of the tower, while it can be seen that
many of the ﬁrst vibration modes regard the blades of the wind turbine (Table
6.1). By means of the frequency content in the seismic event, the blades may
undergo some large deformations that could aﬀect the overall integrity of the
wind turbine. Furthermore, it could be relevant to investigate the eﬀects of
the seismic wave directions towards the wind turbine, both for the tower and
blades. Some studies have also addressed that vertical excitations may induce
high response in wind turbines [10], especially when coupling the eﬀects of SSI
[27], which introduces an intriguing platform for analysis.
In the manner of soil-structure-interaction, a numerous of expansions can
be considered. While a monopile foundation was adopted herein, it could be of
interest to compare diﬀerent support structures that, evidently, will comprehend
varying stiﬀness to the overall system. Regarding the soil model, developments
can be evolved to account for non-local soil eﬀects, as well as non-linear soil
behaviour and damping to examine the diﬀerences in the seismic response
between such model and the simpliﬁed spring and dashpot method utilising
speciﬁcally tuned coeﬃcients for the regarded foundation.
The fundamental criteria to the selection of loading parameters for this study
has been to create a generic set of loads considering an oﬀshore environment.
On the contrary, an interesting scope would be to consider site-speciﬁc data. In
this manner, lifetime assessments can be investigated and demand and capacity
models could be derived for particular regions.
==PAGE:89==
7.2 Recommendations for Future Work
73
On this ﬁnal note, it is also worth mentioning that fatigue considerations,
as well as ageing and deterioration of the wind turbine, could evolve some
new design aspects when the goal is to assess the lifetime reliability of such
infrastructures.
==PAGE:90==
74
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
[1]
Frankfurt School - UNEP Collaborating Centre for Climate & Sustainable
Energy Finance, “Global Trends in Renewable Energy,” Bloomberg New
Energy Finance, vol. 9, 2017.
[2]
Global Wind Energy Council, “Global Wind Statistics 2016,” Journal of
Chemical Information and Modeling, vol. 53, no. 9, pp. 1689–1699, 2017.
[3]
D. H. Kim, S. G. Lee, and I. K. Lee, “Seismic fragility analysis of 5 MW
oﬀshore wind turbine,” Renewable Energy, vol. 65, pp. 250–256, 2014.
[4]
“HAWC2 Soil Model: Introduction to Soil Models,” pp. 1–5, Copenhagen,
Denmark: DTU Wind Energy, Technical University of Denmark.
[5]
J. Jonkman, S. Butterﬁeld, W. Musial, and G. Scott, “Deﬁnition of a
5-MW reference wind turbine for oﬀshore system development,” Contract,
no. February, pp. 1–75, 2009.
[6]
J. Jonkman and W. Musial, “Oﬀshore code comparison collaboration (OC3)
for IEA task 23 oﬀshore wind technology and deployment,” Contract,
vol. 303, no. December, pp. 275–3000, 2010.
[7]
C. Change, “IPCC Fourth Assessment Report,” The Physical Science Basis,
vol. 2, p. 580, 2007.
[8]
C. L. Spash, “This Changes Nothing: The Paris Agreement to Ignore
Reality,” Globalizations, vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 1–6, 2016.
[9]
N. Bazeos, G. D. Hatzigeorgiou, I. D. Hondros, H. Karamaneas, D. L.
Karabalis, and D. E. Beskos, “Static, seismic and stability analyses of a
prototype wind turbine steel tower,” Engineering Structures, vol. 24, no. 8,
pp. 1015–1025, 2002.
[10] U. Ritschel, I. Warnke, J. Kirchner, and B. Meussen, “Wind turbines and
earthquakes,” in 2nd World Wind Energy Conference, pp. 1–8, 2003.
[11] D. Witcher, “Seismic analysis of wind turbines in the time domain,” in
Wind Energy, vol. 8, pp. 81–91, 2005.
[12] L. Wang and Y. Zhang, “Inﬂuence of simpliﬁed models on seismic response
analysis of wind turbine towers,” Applied Mechanics and Materials, vol. 94-
96, pp. 369–374, 2011.
[13] G. He and J. Li, “Seismic Analysis of Wind Turbine System Including
Soil-structure Interaction,” in The 14th World Conference on Earthquake
Engineering, pp. 1–7, 2008.
==PAGE:92==
76
Bibliography
[14] B. Song, Y. Yi, and J. C. Wu, “Study on Seismic Dynamic Response of
Oﬀshore Wind Turbine Tower with Monopile Foundation Based on M
Method,” Advanced Materials Research, vol. 663, pp. 686–691, 2013.
[15] M.-A. Asareh and J. S. Volz, “Evaluation of Aerodynamic and Seismic
Coupling for Wind Turbines using Finite Element Approach,” in IMECE,
vol. 4, (San Diego, California), pp. 1–7, 2013.
[16] N. Alati, G. Failla, and F. Arena, “Seismic analysis of oﬀshore wind turbines
on bottom-ﬁxed support structures,” Phil. Trans. R. Soc., vol. 373, no. 2035,
2015.
[17] I. Prowell, An experimental and numerical study of wind turbine seismic
behaviour. PhD thesis, University of California, San Diego, 2011.
[18] X. Jin, H. Liu, and W. Ju, “Wind Turbine Seismic Load Analysis Based
on Numerical Calculation,” Strojniški vestnik – Journal of Mechanical
Engineering, vol. 60, no. 10, pp. 638–648, 2014.
[19] O. Kiyomiya, “Dynamic Response Analysis of Onshore Wind Energy Power
Units during Earthquakes and Wind,” Wind Energy, vol. 3, pp. 520–526,
2002.
[20] E. Nuta, C. Christopoulos, and J. A. Packer, “Methodology for seismic risk
assessment for tubular steel wind turbine towers: Application to canadian
seismic environment,” Canadian Journal of Civil Engineering, 2011.
[21] A. F. Mensah, L. Duenas-Osorio, I. Prowell, and M. A. Asareh, “Probabilis-
tic Combination of Earthquake and Operational Loads for Wind Turbines,”
15th World Conference on Earthquake Engineering (15WCEE), At Lisbon,
Portugal, no. January, 2012.
[22] M. Mardfekri and P. Gardoni, “Multi-hazard reliability assessment of
oﬀshore wind turbines,” Wind Energy, vol. 17, no. April 2013 (2014),
pp. 657–669, 2014.
[23] M. Damgaard, V. Zania, L. V. Andersen, and L. B. Ibsen, “Eﬀects of
soil-structure interaction on real time dynamic response of oﬀshore wind
turbines on monopiles,” Engineering Structures, vol. 75, pp. 388–401, 2014.
[24] R. A. Kjørlaug, A. M. Kaynia, and A. Elgamal, “Seismic Response of Wind
Turbines due to Earthquake and Wind Loading,” in The EURODYN 9th
International Conference on Structural Dynamics, no. July, pp. 3627–3634,
2014.
[25] K. Haciefendioglu, “Stochastic seismic response analysis of oﬀshore wind
turbine including ﬂuid-structure-soil interaction,” Structural Design of Tall
and Spatial Buildings, vol. 21, no. 12, pp. 867–878, 2012.
[26] W.-j. Lai, W.-n. Su, and C.-c. Huang, “Dynamic Load Analysis for Oﬀshore
Wind Turbine with Flexible Bottom Condition under Earthquake Load-
ing,” in The 26th International Ocean and Polar Engineering Conference,
(Rhodes, Greece), pp. 379–384, 2016.
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
77
[27] R. A. Kjørlaug and A. M. Kaynia, “Vertical earthquake response of
megawatt-sized wind turbine with soil-structure interaction eﬀects,” Earth-
quake Engineering and Structural Dynamics, vol. 44, no. 13, pp. 2341–2358,
2015.
[28] European Committee for Standardization, Eurocode 8: Design of structures
for earthquake resistance - Part 1 : General rules, seismic actions and
rules for buildings. 2004.
[29] International Organization for Standardization (ISO), “Petroleum and
natural gas industries: Speciﬁc requirements for oﬀshore structures - Part
2: Seismic design procedures,” 2004.
[30] International Eletrotechnical Commision, “IEC 61400-1 Wind Turbines -
Part 1: Design requirements,” 2005.
[31] Det Norske Veritas & Germanischer Lloyd, “DNVGL-ST-0126 : Support
structures for wind turbines,” 2016.
[32] American Society of Civil Engineers, ASCE/SEI 7-10 Minimum Design
Loads for Buildings and Other Structures. 2010.
[33] T. J. Larsen and A. M. Hansen, How 2 HAWC2, the user’s manual,
vol. 1597. 2015.
[34] D. Quarton, “An International Design Standard for Oﬀshore Wind Turbines:
IEC 61400-3,” Copenhagen Oﬀshore Wind (COW) Conference, 2005.
[35] “HAWC2 Aerodynamic Model: Rotor Aerodynamics,” pp. 1–17, Copen-
hagen, Denmark: DTU Wind Energy, Technical University of Denmark.
[36] T. Burton, D. Sharpe, N. Jenkind, and E. Bossanyi, Wind Energy Handbook.
Chichester, United Kingdom: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2001.
[37] A. K. Laing, W. Gemmill, A. K. Magnusson, L. Burroughs, M. Reistad,
M. Khandekar, L. Holthuijsen, J. A. Ewing, and D. J. T. Carter, Guide to
Wave Analysis, vol. 1998. 1998.
[38] Z. Liu and P. Frigaard, “Generation and analysis of random waves,” 2001.
[39] S. Krenk, Dynamics of Structures, vol. 1. Copenhagen, Denmark: Technical
University of Denmark, 2013.
[40] A. A. Sanz, “Seismic Analysis of Wind Turbines,” 2016.
[41] DNV/Riso, “Guidelines for Design of Wind Turbines,” 2002.
[42] M. Novak and T. Nogami, “Soil-pile interaction in horizontal vibration,”
Earthquake Engineering & Structural Dynamics, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 263–281,
1977.
[43] G. Gazetas, “Foundation Vibrations,” in Foundation Engineering Handbook,
pp. 553–593, Springer US, 1991.
[44] S. Sabin, “Understanding and using dynamic stiﬀness-A Tutorial,” Orbit.
Second Quarter, vol. 2, pp. 44–54, 2000.
==PAGE:94==
78
Bibliography
[45] IISEE, “Seismic bedrock Bedrock, and engineering.”
[46] P. Passon, “Derivation and Description of the Soil-Pile-Interaction Models,”
2006.
[47] M. A. Asareh, W. Schonberg, and J. Volz, “Eﬀects of seismic and aerody-
namic load interaction on structural dynamic response of multi-megawatt
utility scale horizontal axis wind turbines,” Renewable Energy, vol. 86,
pp. 49–58, 2015.
[48] P. Chapman, “Ocean Currents.”
[49] E. I. Katsanos, A. G. Sextos, and G. D. Manolis, “Selection of earthquake
ground motion records: A state-of-the-art review from a structural engineer-
ing perspective,” Soil Dynamics and Earthquake Engineering, pp. 157–169,
2010.
[50] I. Prowell, A. Elgamal, and J. Lu, “Modeling The Inﬂuence Of Soil Structure
Interaction On The Seismic Response Of A 5 Mw Wind Turbine,” in
2010 - Fifth International Conference on Recent Advances in Geotechnical
Earthquake Engineering and Soil Dynamics, Scholars’ Mine, 2010.
[51] V. Valamanesh and A. T. Myers, “Aerodynamic Damping and Seismic
Response of Horizontal Axis Wind Turbine Towers,” Journal of Structural
Engineering, vol. 140, no. 11, p. 04014090, 2014.
==PAGE:95==
APPENDIX A
Validation of
Earthquake Module
The current appendix includes the entire validation scheme for the earthquake
module implemented into the main core of HAWC2. This includes the two
benchmark models, as described in sec. 3.1, excited by the four real strong
ground motions given in 3.2. The comparisons are made from the response
results in terms of displacements, u, velocity, ˙u, and acceleration, ¨u, at respec-
tively the base, mid and top point of the towers. In addition, the moments, M,
and shear forces, F, at the base and mid frame of the two structures have been
compared.
==PAGE:96==
80
A Validation of Earthquake Module
A.1
High-Rise Tower Response
A.1.1
Earthquake: Kobe
Figure A.1: Top joint response
Figure A.2: Middle joint response
==PAGE:97==
A.1 High-Rise Tower Response
81
Figure A.3: Top frame response
Figure A.4: Middle frame response
==PAGE:98==
82
A Validation of Earthquake Module
A.1.2
Earthquake: Manjil
Figure A.5: Top joint response
Figure A.6: Middle joint response
==PAGE:99==
A.1 High-Rise Tower Response
83
Figure A.7: Top frame response
Figure A.8: Middle frame response
==PAGE:100==
84
A Validation of Earthquake Module
A.1.3
Earthquake: Northridge
Figure A.9: Top joint response
Figure A.10: Middle joint response
==PAGE:101==
A.1 High-Rise Tower Response
85
Figure A.11: Top frame response
Figure A.12: Middle frame response
==PAGE:102==
86
A Validation of Earthquake Module
A.1.4
Earthquake: Whittier
Figure A.13: Top joint response
Figure A.14: Middle joint response
==PAGE:103==
A.1 High-Rise Tower Response
87
Figure A.15: Top frame response
Figure A.16: Middle frame response
==PAGE:104==
88
A Validation of Earthquake Module
A.2
Low-Rise Tower Response
A.2.1
Earthquake: Kobe
Figure A.17: Top joint response
Figure A.18: Middle joint response
==PAGE:105==
A.2 Low-Rise Tower Response
89
Figure A.19: Top frame response
Figure A.20: Middle frame response
==PAGE:106==
90
A Validation of Earthquake Module
A.2.2
Earthquake: Manjil
Figure A.21: Top joint response
Figure A.22: Middle joint response
==PAGE:107==
A.2 Low-Rise Tower Response
91
Figure A.23: Top frame response
Figure A.24: Middle frame response
==PAGE:108==
92
A Validation of Earthquake Module
A.2.3
Earthquake: Northridge
Figure A.25: Top joint response
Figure A.26: Middle joint response
==PAGE:109==
A.2 Low-Rise Tower Response
93
Figure A.27: Top frame response
Figure A.28: Middle frame response
==PAGE:110==
94
A Validation of Earthquake Module
A.2.4
Earthquake: Whittier
Figure A.29: Top joint response
Figure A.30: Middle joint response
==PAGE:111==
A.2 Low-Rise Tower Response
95
Figure A.31: Top frame response
Figure A.32: Middle frame response
==PAGE:112==
96
==PAGE:113==
APPENDIX B
Validation of Soil
Module
The current appendix includes the entire validation scheme for the soil module
implemented into the main core of HAWC2.
The validation scheme is run on the high-rise tower, as described in sec. 3.1,
excited by the four real strong ground motions given in 3.2. Furthermore, the
tower is made ﬂexible by the spring values speciﬁed in sec. 3.3. The comparisons
are made from the response results obtained by HAWC2 and SAP2000, and
includes displacements, u, velocity, ˙u, and acceleration, ¨u, at respectively the
base and top point of the tower. In addition, the moments, M, and shear forces,
F, at the base and mid frame of the structure have been compared.
==PAGE:114==
98
B Validation of Soil Module
B.1
Earthquake: Kobe
Figure B.1: Top joint response
Figure B.2: Base joint response
==PAGE:115==
B.1 Earthquake: Kobe
99
Figure B.3: Base frame response
Figure B.4: Middle frame response
==PAGE:116==
100
B Validation of Soil Module
B.2
Earthquake: Manjil
Figure B.5: Top joint response
Figure B.6: Base joint response
==PAGE:117==
B.2 Earthquake: Manjil
101
Figure B.7: Base frame response
Figure B.8: Middle frame response
==PAGE:118==
102
B Validation of Soil Module
B.3
Earthquake: Northridge
Figure B.9: Top joint response
Figure B.10: Base joint response
==PAGE:119==
B.3 Earthquake: Northridge
103
Figure B.11: Base frame response
Figure B.12: Middle frame response
==PAGE:120==
104
B Validation of Soil Module
B.4
Earthquake: Whittier
Figure B.13: Top joint response
Figure B.14: Base joint response
==PAGE:121==
B.4 Earthquake: Whittier
105
Figure B.15: Base frame response
Figure B.16: Middle frame response
==PAGE:122==
106
==PAGE:123==
APPENDIX C
Characteristics of the
10 Earthquakes
The ten seismic events included in the time-domain analysis of ﬂexibly-supported
wind turbine are presented with all relevant data in this appendix. The two
following tables respectively presents basic information regarding each record,
as collected from the PEER-NGA database, and the mean period and spectral
accelerations they impose on the NREL 5-MW reference wind turbine adopted
herein.
==PAGE:124==
108
C Characteristics of the 10 Earthquakes
Earthquake name
Year
Magn.
EpiD
NEHRP
PGA (x/y)
MO.DY
Record
and region
[km]
soil
[g]
station
Chi-Chi, Taiwan
1999
7.62
37.73
C
0.124/0.158
20.09
TCU107
Imperial Valley-06, US-CA
1979
6.53
27.47
D
0.439/0.411
15.10
El Centro Array #6
Kobe, Japan
1995
6.90
25.40
B
0.725/0.776
16.01
Kobe University
Kocaeli, Turkey
1999
7.51
19.30
D
0.268/0.349
17.08
Yarimca
Loma Prieta, US-CA
1989
6.93
47.90
D
0.215/0.247
18.10
Hollister City Hall
Manjil, Iran
1990
7.37
77.84
D
0.132/.209
20.06
Abhar
Northridge-01, US-CA
1994
6.69
13.39
D
0.416/0.516
17.01
Beverly Hills - 14145 Mulhol
Smart1(40), Taiwan
1986
6.32
67.16
D
0.182/0.254
20.05
SMART1 M07
Superstition Hills-02, US-CA
1987
6.54
29.41
D
0.207/0.181
24.11
Wildlife Liquef. Array
Whittier Narrows-01, US-CA
1987
5.99
19.81
D
0.332/0.333
01.10
Compton - Castlegate St
==PAGE:125==
C Characteristics of the 10 Earthquakes
109
Earthquake name
Tm (x/y)
Sa,5% (x/y) [g]
Sa,1% (x/y) [g]
and region
[s]
Fix
100
25
Fix
100
25
Chi-Chi, Taiwan
1.212/1.412
0.133/0.153
0.120/0.126
0.105/0.107
0.188/0.227
0.158/0.177
0.159/0.149
Imperial Valley-06, US-CA
1.395/0.949
0.210/0.442
0.191/0.412
0.167/0.368
0.230/0.529
0.208/0.492
0.189/0.440
Kobe, Japan
1.040/0.697
0.251/0.132
0.198/0.117
0.165/0.105
0.268/0.155
0.208/0.123
0.184/0.109
Kocaeli, Turkey
1.373/.1356
0.307/0.296
0.324/0.279
0.321/0.251
0.503/0.474
0.488/0.358
0.405/0.321
Loma Prieta, US-CA
1.119/1.014
0.099/0.107
0.087/0.097
0.093/0.084
0.127/0.165
0.091/0.102
0.100/0.088
Manjil, Iran
0.744/1.513
0.152/0.468
0.127/0.351
0.083/0.226
0.251/0.795
0.198/0.511
0.114/0.293
Northridge-01, US-CA
0.746/0.644
0.061/0.053
0.055/0.049
0.050/0.043
0.061/0.055
0.053/0.050
0.049/0.043
Smart1(40), Taiwan
1.125/0.847
0.041/0.023
0.036/0.021
0.031/0.019
0.041/0.022
0.036/0.021
0.031/0.019
Superstition Hills-02, US-CA
1.164/0.934
0.095/0.194
0.094/0.159
0.118/0.123
0.119/0.315
0.110/0.247
0.185/0.181
Whittier Narrows-01, US-CA
0.510/0.310
0.020/0.007
0.020/0.006
0.017/0.006
0.032/0.006
0.029/0.006
0.025/0.007
==PAGE:126==
110
==PAGE:127==
APPENDIX D
Response Results
This appendix includes all the response results obtained by the ﬁnal simulations
as discussed in chapters 5 - 7, i.e. for the fully coupled load cases consisting of
environmental loads from the wind, waves and diﬀerent earthquakes, as well as
two operational cases and three soil conditions.
The results are herein presented by minimum and maximum response along
the height of the oﬀshore wind turbine, in addition to maximum resultant
response calculated by means of SRSS.
==PAGE:128==
112
D Response Results
D.1
Accelerations
Seismic event: Chi-Chi
==PAGE:129==
D.1 Accelerations
113
Seismic event: Imperial Valley-06
==PAGE:130==
114
D Response Results
Seismic event: Kobe
==PAGE:131==
D.1 Accelerations
115
Seismic event: Kocaeli
==PAGE:132==
116
D Response Results
Seismic event: Loma Prieta
==PAGE:133==
D.1 Accelerations
117
Seismic event: Manjil
==PAGE:134==
118
D Response Results
Seismic event: Northridge-01
==PAGE:135==
D.1 Accelerations
119
Seismic event: Smart1(40)
==PAGE:136==
120
D Response Results
Seismic event:Superstition Hills-02
==PAGE:137==
D.1 Accelerations
121
Seismic event: Whittier Narrows-01
==PAGE:138==
122
D Response Results
D.2
Displacements
Seismic event: Chi-Chi
==PAGE:139==
D.2 Displacements
123
Seismic event: Imperial Valley-06
==PAGE:140==
124
D Response Results
Seismic event: Kobe
==PAGE:141==
D.2 Displacements
125
Seismic event: Kocaeli
==PAGE:142==
126
D Response Results
Seismic event: Loma Prieta
==PAGE:143==
D.2 Displacements
127
Seismic event: Manjil
==PAGE:144==
128
D Response Results
Seismic event: Northridge-01
==PAGE:145==
D.2 Displacements
129
Seismic event: Smart1(40)
==PAGE:146==
130
D Response Results
Seismic event:Superstition Hills-02
==PAGE:147==
D.2 Displacements
131
Seismic event: Whittier Narrows-01
==PAGE:148==
132
D Response Results
D.3
Moments
Seismic event: Chi-Chi
==PAGE:149==
D.3 Moments
133
Seismic event: Imperial Valley-06
==PAGE:150==
134
D Response Results
Seismic event: Kobe
==PAGE:151==
D.3 Moments
135
Seismic event: Kocaeli
==PAGE:152==
136
D Response Results
Seismic event: Loma Prieta
==PAGE:153==
D.3 Moments
137
Seismic event: Manjil
==PAGE:154==
138
D Response Results
Seismic event: Northridge-01
==PAGE:155==
D.3 Moments
139
Seismic event: Smart1(40)
==PAGE:156==
140
D Response Results
Seismic event:Superstition Hills-02
==PAGE:157==
D.3 Moments
141
Seismic event: Whittier Narrows-01
==PAGE:158==
142
D Response Results
D.4
Shear Forces
Seismic event: Chi-Chi
==PAGE:159==
D.4 Shear Forces
143
Seismic event: Imperial Valley-06
==PAGE:160==
144
D Response Results
Seismic event: Kobe
==PAGE:161==
D.4 Shear Forces
145
Seismic event: Kocaeli
==PAGE:162==
146
D Response Results
Seismic event: Loma Prieta
==PAGE:163==
D.4 Shear Forces
147
Seismic event: Manjil
==PAGE:164==
148
D Response Results
Seismic event: Northridge-01
==PAGE:165==
D.4 Shear Forces
149
Seismic event: Smart1(40)
==PAGE:166==
150
D Response Results
Seismic event:Superstition Hills-02
==PAGE:167==
D.4 Shear Forces
151
Seismic event: Whittier Narrows-01
==PAGE:168==
152
==PAGE:169==
==PAGE:170==
