==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
CFD simulations on an oscillating fl at plate in 
water, at the surface and deep below
Th or Th erkelsen Christensen
July 2017
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This thesis was performed at DTU mechanical engineering in fullment for
acquiring a M.Sc in mechanical engineering.
The study deals with numerical simulations performed in STAR-CCM+,
where an Wave Energy Converter (WEC) has been analysed. In this study
the only focus is the energy absorbing part, the plate, which is moved, by the
incoming wave. The WEC is designed by Wavepiston where Kristian Glejbøl
(external supervisor of the project, Wavepiston employee) and Troels Lukassen
(Ph.d student and Wavepiston employee) helped with delivering crucial in-
formation to the project with respect to the what analysis Wavepiston was
interested in having performed. Jens Honore Walther (Supervisor, DTU me-
chanical engineering) has assisted with his great knowledge of STAR-CCM+
in order to optimize and provide helpfull input with respect to the set-up of
the numerical model. Furthermore Jens has been the primary supervisor of
this thesis.
Despite the fact that a WEC is analysed, no physical waves are implemented
in the numerical model. The waves are approximated as an oscillatory move-
ment of a plate. This thesis consist of mainly three parts. The overall theory
used in this thesis is represented. The numerical model used in STAR-CCM+
is described. A space and time-related convergence study of the model has been
performed. This study is compared with available literature. The validated
model is to be used to simulate dierent plate shapes, at several Keulegan-
Carpenter and Froude-numbers. In this part the inuence of having several
plates placed after one another is analysed. Furthermore the case where the
movement of the plate is at an angle relative to the normal of the plate. It
should be noted that after each section the ow is visualized with respect
to the performed simulations. Only a representative amount of ow elds is
viewed, in order to avoid tediousness. The residuals corresponding to the sim-
ulations are also the be shown in order to clarify that the equations involved
has been solved to a satisfactory level. However, the residual plots are mostly
positioned in the appendix. Once again only a representative residual plots
has been chosen to show, since more than 400 simulations has been performed
in this project.
i
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis is performed in cooperation with Wavepiston, who has developed
a wave energy converter. The wave energy converter consists of many parts.
In this thesis the focus is based upon the energy extracting part, a at plate,
will be analysed in this thesis.
CFD simulations has been run in STAR-CCM+ where the model is validated
against literature. The inuence of the free surface has been investigated in
two cases.
First case where the KC- and Froude-number is kept constant throughout the
depth. In this case it was found that at Fr ≥0.72 the non-dimensional force
and force coecients (drag and added mass) would increase with increased
depth. Whereas is the Froude number is low the opposite would occur. It was
found that at a depth equal to 3 times the characteristic length of the plate,
the results stabilized and would not change if the plate was moved even deeper
in the water. The results obtained deep below the surface has been validated
against literature.
Second case real-life wave data has been applied to the model which results
in a varying KC- and Froude-number with respect to the depth. Here several
plate shapes (square, rectangular, circular and trapezoid) has been evaluated.
It was found that the maximum force occurred at the surface and on a rect-
angular plate. The eect of rounding the corners of a square plate has been
analysed. The main conclusion of this analysis is that the rounded edges does
not inuence the results signicantly. The inuence of having the plate moved
along a trajectory at an angle relative to the normal of the plate. Here it
was found that the angle is very important with respect to the maximum
non-dimensional force on the plate.
Finally the case where several plates are positioned after one another is inves-
tigated. This has been tested with 1, 2 and 3 plates at dierent distance apart.
The results showed that at a distance of more than 3 times the characteristic
length of the plate they would no longer inuence one another signicantly.
The results showed that the outer plates would have an equal force acting upon
them due to symmetry, and that the plate in middle is highly inuenced by
the neighbouring plates due to shadow eect.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Theory
4
2.1
Governing equations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Force coecients
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Wave Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.3
Non-dimensional parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Numerical model in STAR-CCM+
14
3.1
Finite volume method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Navier-Stokes equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.1
Turbulence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Volume of Fluid Multi-phase model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4
Segregated Flow Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Results
22
4.1
Convergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Domain and boundary conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Data processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3.1
Spatial Convergence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3.2
Time related convergence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4
Depth
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4.1
Froude and Keulegan-Carpenter . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4.2
Comparison with the work of Tian 2016 [1] . . . . . . . .
40
4.5
Plate shape . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.5.1
Plate dimensions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.5.2
Non-dimensional testing parameters . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.5.3
Roundings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.6
Angle of attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.7
Several plates and distances between plates . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.7.1
Flow visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5
Summary and Conclusion
64
5.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
6
Appendix
67
6.1
Residuals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
6.2
Flow visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6.2.1
Circular cross-section . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6.2.2
Trapezoid cross-section . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.2.3
Rectangular cross-section . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6.3
Force units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
Bibliography
73
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Nomenclature
Constants
ρ
Density of uid
g
Gravitational acceleration
µ
Dynamic viscosity
ν
Kinematic viscosity
Hydrodynamic coecients
CD
Coecient of drag
CM
Coecient of added mass
CA
Inertia coecient
CW
Wavedamping coecient
β
Stokes number
Re
Reynolds number
Rey
Reynold number at a distance y from the wall
y
Distance from wall
Fr
Froude number
KC
Keulegan-Carpenter number
D
Non-dimensional depth parameter
k
Turbulence kinetic energy
ε
Dissipation rate of turbulence
α
Mixture coecient of uids
sαi
Source term
u
Velocity vector in 3 dimensions (u,v,w)
Cµ
Damping function
k
Turbulent kinetic energy
Position and velocity
ξ
Position
˙ξ
Velocity
¨ξ
Acceleration
Dimension parameters
A0
Cross-sectional area
V0
Volume
D
Characteristic length of object
L
Depth of plate relative to a free surface
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Miscellaneous
m
Mass of displaced uid
t
Physical time
u∞
Maximum free stream velocity
T
Period of oscillation
∆t
Time step increment
N,S,E,W
Neighbouring control volumes
n,s,e,w
Control volume faces
I
Identity matrix
vi
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1
Introduction
This report governs the analysis of CFD calculations on an oscillating at
plate with a free surface. The results are to be used to analyse a Wave Energy
Converter (WEC) developed by Wavepiston. The main target of this project
is to determine the force coecients of drag (CD) and added mass (CM) at
dierent values of the Keulegan-Carpenter (KC) number, Froude (Fr) number
and distance below the water surface.
The spatial and time-related convergence of a square plate at the water
surface is performed in STAR-CCM+, in order to have a trustworthy model for
the future simulations. The plate will be oscillating and the water is stationary.
The model obtained by this convergence study is used to analyse many aspects
of the ow around a at plate.
Once a satisfactory spatial and time-related convergence has been reached
at the water surface, the plate will be moved deep below the surface to analyse
the inuence of the depth. When the plate is positioned deep enough in order
for the solution not to change signicantly when moved deeper, the results are
to be compared with available literature (Tian 2016 [1]).
The overall shape of the plate is analysed. This includes changing the shape
from square, to a rectangular, trapezoid and a circular shape. Furthermore
the inuence of having sharp and round corners are analysed. The orientation
of the plate with respect to the incoming ow is also the be analysed.
Finally several plates are to be positioned after one another in order to
determine their inuence on one another. In this study the inuence of distance
and number of plates are to be analysed.
1.1
Background
The need for environmental friendly electricity has never been higher. To solve
this issue Wavepiston has designed a system to generate electricity from wave
energy.
The system is easily scalable and is projected to be cheaper than
oshore wind energy, once the system is being mass produced. The energy
collecting part in the Wavepiston system is a at plate, which this project will
focus upon.
Experimental analysis of the hydrodynamics on a at plate in water at a
1
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1.
Introduction
test-facility is very expensive and time consuming. Therefore CFD-simulations
are used in order to determine force coecients of dierent plate shapes.
The Wavepiston system
The system designed by Wavepiston are to be presented in the following sec-
tion. The overall structure is illustrated in gure 1.1 where the plates are the
orange rectangles. As seen several plates are mounted along a singe wire, the
only limit is the length of the wire.
Figure 1.1: Principle of the Wavepiston system
this system is easily scalable, as illustrated in gure 1.2 since several systems
can be placed in a parallel pattern. The entire energy harvested from waves
are collected into one station on shore where the wave energy is converted into
electrical energy.
Figure 1.2: Scalability of the Wavepiston system
the mechanical principle for harvesting wave energy is illustrated in gure 1.3.
Here it is shown that the plate is attached to two pistons which are capable
of pumping seawater. The principle is that when a wave hits the plate, the
plate moves. The movement of the plate results in a movement of the pistons
which then pumps seawater under pressure into a hose which is connected to
a turbine. The plate as shown in gure 1.3 is the one analysed in this project
2
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1.
Introduction
and the structural elements and pistons are not modelled or analysed. The
size plate in the current prototype is 2x2m but is expected to be increased to
3x3m and up to 5x5m. The main target is to determine the drag and added
mass coecient for dierent plate shapes.
Figure 1.3: Mechanical principle of the Wavepiston system
3
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 2
Theory
2.1
Governing equations
In this section the main equations, theory and method of dataprocessing for
this project are to be presented. The method used for dataprocessing is also
to be presented. The main target for this project to determine the coecients
of drag and added mass for dierent plates in an oscillatory ow. Despite the
change in plate geometry the characteristic length of the plate is the same. The
Morison equation, see equation 2.1.1 [2], is used to determine the coecient of
drag and added mass. This equation however is only truly valid when the free
surface is not signicantly inuenced by the oscillatory motion. In the case
where the plate generates waves one more force coecient is introduced, wave
damping (See equation 2.1.2) [10]. It is observed that the Morison equation
(equation 2.1.1) is also a part of equation 2.1.2.
In equation 2.1.1 the rst term is related to the viscous eects, and the
second term is related to the added mass coecient and thereby the hydro-
dynamic mass force (inertia forces) on the plate. In this project the plate is
assumed to be weightless, otherwise a term consisting of ρplateV0¨ξ would be
added to equation 2.1.1 and 2.1.2 in order to satisfy Newtons second law.
F = 1
2A0ρ ˙ξ| ˙ξ|CD + ρV0¨ξCM
(2.1.1)
F = 1
2A0ρ ˙ξ| ˙ξ|CD + ρV0¨ξCM + CW ˙ξ
(2.1.2)
in equation 2.1.1 and 2.1.2 the position, velocity and acceleration are dened
as periodic functions as shown in equation 2.1.3, 2.1.4 and 2.1.5 respectively.
ξ(t) = −1
2πu∞T cos
2π
T t

(2.1.3)
˙ξ(t) = u∞sin
2π
T t

(2.1.4)
¨ξ(t) = u∞
2π
T cos
2π
T t

(2.1.5)
4
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 2.
Theory
the position, velocity and acceleration are as shown in the equations above
based upon the maximum free stream velocity (u∞) and the period of the
oscillations (T).
2.1.1
Force coecients
The force coecients in this study are the drag (CD), added mass (CM) and
wave damping (CW). These are essential in describing the hydrodynamic forces
on an oscillating object in a uid.
Drag
The drag coecient is associated with the cross-sectional area of the plate and
represents the viscous forces on the plate. The drag is commonly described in
a uniform one-directional ow, where several standard values of this parameter
for dierent shapes can be obtained in the literature. However when the plate
oscillates these standard values are no longer valid due to the radical change
in the ow behaviour. For a square plate in a uniform one-directional ow the
general value of drag is CD = 1.18 [4]. Whereas according to [1] the value of
drag is no longer constant for an oscillating ow where it varies from CD = 4
to CD = 12 in the investigated area of 0.15 ≤KC ≤3.15. The parameter of
drag is a function of CD(A0, F, ρ, KC, Fr)
Added mass
The coeeicnt of added mass is associated to the volume of the object, and
is related to the inertia forces on the plate, see equation 2.1.1. The added
mass is the inertia added to a system because an accelerating or declerating
body must deect a part of the surrounding uid as it moves through it. In
reality, the entire volume will be accelerated to various degrees, where the uid
closest to the plate will be accelerated the most and decreases further from the
plate. The dimensionless added mass, which is the one used in this project,
is dened by the added mass divided by the displaced uid, see equation
2.1.6. This force will dominate the results hence it will be the most reliable
parameter to estimate [1].
The parameter of added mass is a function of
CM(V0, F, ρ, KC, Fr)
Cm = m′
ρV0
(2.1.6)
where m′ is equal the total mass which is accelerated when the plate is oscil-
lated, ρV0 is the mass of the displaced volume.
Wave damping [10]
The coecient of wave damping is expected to be 0 when the plate is deep
below the water surface, which implies no signicant waves at the surface
(section 2.1). This parameter is however subject to large uncertainties which
5
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2.
Theory
makes it hard to estimate precisely. A simple investigation of a signal generated
based upon equation 2.1.2. The method of Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) (see
section 4.3) is applied to the signal to nd the parameters of CD, CM and CW
has been performed. It should be noted that the terms involving sin(. . . ) and
sin(. . . )|sin(. . . )| in equation 2.1.2 are correlated hence it is hard to estimate
the respective parameters associated to these terms. A noise signal of 5% was
added to the signal. The noise (γ) is added as a random signal that is in the
range of ±0.05 the signal called F is described in equation 2.1.7
F = (1 + γ)F
(2.1.7)
It shoved that even after 1000 full periods the results for wave damping
never became trustworthy (see gure 2.1). Even though it is the right proce-
dure to solve this system when waves are generated at the surface, it will not
be studied in this project. This is due to the fact that the results for wave
damping are unreliable and unstable, and limitations by computational time.
Mathematically this means that the wave damping, which cannot be removed
physically, is included in the drag coecient. Therefore it is expected that the
drag coecient changes when the plate is closer to the surface and generates
waves.
Figure 2.1: Error when applying least squares to equation 2.1.2 with 5% noise
if the wave damping is excluded (CW = 0) and only the values of drag and
added mass are evaluated. The following plot shows the error under the same
conditions as in gure 2.1. The error, when 5% noise is added to the coecients
of CD and CM in equation 2.1.1, are plotted in gure 2.2.
6
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2.
Theory
Figure 2.2: Error when applying least square to 2.1.1 with 5% noise
here it is observed that despite the 5% noise the reconstruction using least
squares is accurate within 1 % which is satisfactory for the following analysis.
2.1.2
Wave Theory
In order to keep the model simple and fast with respect to solving, physical
waves will not be modelled in this project. However the horizontal velocity of
real-life waves in included in the model. This allows for determining the KC-
and Froude-number for a full scale WEC. The water wave mechanics are based
upon Marine Hydrodynamics [8] and only regular wave theory will be used in
this study. The main parameters used in dening the maximum velocity of a
wave is shown in gure 2.3.
7
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2.
Theory
Figure 2.3: Parameters needed for dening particle velocities in waves [8].
in gure 2.3, z is the vertical position relative to the water surface level (SWL
on gure 2.3), H is the height of the wave from crest to trough, d is the water
depth (z = −d at seabed).
To determine the height and period of the wave, physical wave data has to
be analysed. The wavedata is provided by Nielsen 2017 [9], and the results
needed for this study are shown in table 2.1. The results origin from data
measured 5 km West of Hanstholm Harbour [9]. This data is used in equation
2.1.9 to obtain the wavelength of the most common wave state.
Table 2.1: Wave state data
Wave state
H [m]
T [s]
Probability
1
1.02
6.8
44.7 %
2
1.93
7.1
24.1 %
3
2.9
8.1
8.5 %
4
3.94
9.5
2.8 %
5
4.82
10.4
0.8 %
since wave state 1 has a probability of 44.7 % of occurring, it is chosen for
calculation of the water particle velocity on this wave state. Therefore a Height
of 1.02m and a period T = 6.8s is used to determine the maximum horizontal
water particle velocity.
In order to obtain the horizontal water particle velocity the following table
is used:
to determine the relative depth the wavelength has to be determined. The
wavelength is determined by equation 2.1.8 [8].
L = gT 2
2π tanh
2πd
L

(2.1.8)
8
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 2.
Theory
Table 2.2: Horizontal water particle velocity denition [8]
Relative depth
Horizontal particle velocity
Vertical particle velocity
Shallow water
d
L <
1
20
u = H
2
p g
d cos θ
w = Hπ
T
 1 + z
d

sin θ
Transitional water
1
20 < d
L < 1
2
u = H
2
gT
L
cosh[2π(z+d)/L]
cosh(2πd/L)
cos θ
w = H
2
gT
L
sinh[2π(z+d)/L]
cosh(2πd/L)
sin θ
Deep water
d
L > 1
2
u = πH
T e( 2πz
L ) cos θ
u = πH
T e( 2πz
L ) sin θ
equation 2.1.8 involves some diculty in solving, since L appears on both sides
of the equation. However Eckart (1952) gives an approximate expression for
equation 2.1.8, this approximation is accurate within about 10 % [8].
L ≈gT 2
2π
s
tanh
4π2
T 2
d
g

= 70.1m
(2.1.9)
equation 2.1.9 is the one used in this project due to its simplicity and proper
approximation.
Based upon the above theory, the maximum particle velocity can be deter-
mined using table 2.2. The water depth is 20 m (d/L = 0.28), and thereby
the relative depth is concluded to be transitional. Thereby the maximum hor-
izontal particle velocity at specic depths and θ = 0 can be determined by
equation 2.1.10.
u0 = H
2
gT
L
cosh [2π(z + d)/L]
cosh(2πd/L)
cos θ = 0.49m/s
(2.1.10)
in gure 2.4 it is plotted how the velocity changes when the position z is moved
below the surfaces. In gure 2.4 the results obtained for the other wave states
are included as well to visualize the span of maximum horizontal velocity.
9
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2.
Theory
Figure 2.4: Change in velocity relative to distance from the surface
the water particle velocity is used to determine the relevant Froude-number
for investigation. This parameter is shown in equation 2.1.13. The period
of the wave combined with the water particle velocity are used to dene the
Keulegan-Carpenter number, see equation 2.1.11.
2.1.3
Non-dimensional parameters
The equations 2.1.3, 2.1.4 and 2.1.5 are highly dependent on several non-
dimensional parameters, to determine the position, velocity, acceleration and
frequency of the motion of the plate. Non-dimensional parameters are used
since the results can then be scaled as wanted for later use of the results.
The Keulegan-Carpenter parameter (KC), which is also called the non-
dimensional period number, describes the relative importance of the drag forces
over inertia forces on an object in an oscillatory ow.
The Stokes number (β) describes the ow behaviour (Laminar or turbulent)
due to its relation to the Reynolds number (see equation 2.1.12). The ow in
this study is heavily turbulent therefore this parameter is less important than
the KC- and Froude-number. Therefore the Stokes number will not be focused
upon in this study. The Froude-number also plays an important role due to
the free surface and a non-dimensional depth, radius and force is to dened as
well.
Keulegan-Carpenter, Froude and Stokes
The dependencies for Keulegan-Carpenter number (KC-number) is seen in
equation 2.1.11. Here it is observed that this parameter is dependent on the
10
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 2.
Theory
period of the oscillation, maximum freestream velocity and characteristic di-
ameter of the object. The hydraulic diameter is given as D =
q
4A0
π , based
upon the area of a circle as in Tian 2016 [1].
KC = Tu∞
D
(2.1.11)
the Stokes number (β) which is the ratio between the KC-number and the
Reynolds number (Re) is seen in equation 2.1.12
β = Re
KC = D2
Tν ,
where
Re = u∞D
ν
(2.1.12)
the parameters of β and KC are the main parameters in describing the be-
haviour of the uid. As shown in equation 2.1.12 this parameter is directly
linked to the Reynolds number. The Reynolds number gives a measure of the
ratio of inertial forces to viscous forces and is key parameter in describing the
ow behaviour, since it denotes the degree of turbulence present.
Furthermore gravity and a free surface is present in the model hence two non
dimensional parameters are added, the Froude-number and a depth parame-
ter. The Froude-number describes the relationship between the maximum free
stream velocity, gravity and the characteristic length, see equation 2.1.13.
Fr =
u∞
√gD
(2.1.13)
the Froude-number describes the conditions for the ow domain.
D is the
characteristic length of the object, g is the gravity and u∞is the maximum
free stream velocity.
Depth parameter
The depth parameter (D) describes the position of the plates highest point
relative to the water surface.
The expression for this parameter is seen in
equation 2.1.14 and the provided illustration is shown in gure 2.5.
D = L
D
(2.1.14)
where L is the position of a point on the plate which is closest to the initial
surface and D is the characteristic diameter of the object which is dened as
D =
q
4A0
π . This value increases as the plate is moved further under the water,
hence L is increased.
11
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2.
Theory
Figure 2.5: illustrative description of the depth parameter
Distance parameter between plates
More plates are to be placed in close proximity to one another in order to
analyse when the plates will have a negative eect on the force coecients.
Whereas negative means that the force on the plates is decreased when com-
pared to results for a single plate. This requires one more non-dimensional
parameter. It is dened in the same manner as the depth parameter (equa-
tion 2.1.14) but the distance (Lp) is the distance between two plates. The
non-dimensional parameter is shown in equation 2.1.15.
Dp = Lp
D
(2.1.15)
in gure 2.6 the denition of Lp is illustrated. It is shown that plate 1 and 2
are the same distance apart as plate 2 and 3.
Figure 2.6: Illustrative description of the distance between several plates Lp
'
Edge parameter
The shape of the plate is to be investigated with respect to sharp edges anded
rounded edges. In order to be able to scale these shape modications into
a real-life plate a non-dimensional parameter has to be dened.
The non-
dimensional rounding is dened as shown in equation 2.1.16.
DR = R
D
(2.1.16)
12
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 2.
Theory
where the parameter R is the radius of the rounding and is visualized in gure
2.7.
Figure 2.7: Illustrative dention of the rounding radius R
Non-dimensional force
In order to be able to compare force results despite velocity and acceleration
changes a dimensionless force is introduced. The non dimensional force is seen
in equation 2.1.17.
F =
F
ρV0 max(¨ξ)
(2.1.17)
this non dimensional parameter becomes important when comparing results
obtained at dierent values of the KC and Frouder-number.
13
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3
Numerical model in STAR-CCM+
In this section the numerical model applied in STAR-CCM+ are described. It
is chosen to use STAR-CCM+ since limited research has been made within
the topic analysed in this thesis, and STAR-CCM+ is one of the heaviest CFD
software available, hence limited assumptions are needed in the model. The
nite volume method are presented in order to visualise a single cell (control
volume) and describe the mathematical theory of the CFD simulations. Sec-
ondly the equations solved and the algorithm used are shown in order to clarify
the procedure of solving.
3.1
Finite volume method
The nite volume method is used to transfer information between each cells
in the mesh. Each cell has a specic number of faces. Since this model is 3
dimensional each cell has 6 faces, n, s, e, w, l and h. However to simplify this
explanation a 2 dimensional cell with neighbouring cells and boundaries are
shown in gure 3.1.
14
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 3.
Numerical model in STAR-CCM+
Figure 3.1: Illustration of a 2D cell. Red: cell center, blue and yellow are
boundary points values which are determined by the boundary conditions [6].
as illustrated in gure 3.1 the cell P has four faces n,s,e,w and four neighbouring
cells N,S,E,W. Information is carried on from cell P to the four others. The
blue and yellow points are the boundary conditions. The boundary conditions
inuences the cells closest to the boundary. The cells close to the boundary
then passes on information to the neighbouring cells and so on. Each cell is
also known as a control volume, since the volume is in control of checking
continuity and thereby convergence. Within a control volume it is possible to
measure the level of continuity i.e. the coherence between the amount of uid
that enters and exits the cell. It is needed to keep the continuity residual as
low as possible. A third dimension would ad two more neighbours L and H
which are located respectively above and below the cell P shown in gure 3.1.
3.2
Navier-Stokes equation
The Navier-Stokes equation is the backbone of CFD modelling. The full com-
pressible Navier-Stokes equation is seen in equation 3.2.1. Which is a partial
dierent equation in 1, 2 or 3 dimensions, depending on the model. The model
in this thesis is 3 dimensional [13].
ρ
∂u
∂t + u · ∇u

|
{z
}
1
= −∇p
| {z }
2
+ ∇·

µ(∇u + (∇u)T) −2
3µ(∇· u)I

|
{z
}
3
+ F
|{z}
4
(3.2.1)
where u is the uid velocity, p is the uid pressure, ρ is the uid densit and
µ is the dynamic viscosity. When fully expanded in 3 dimensions equation
15
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3.
Numerical model in STAR-CCM+
3.2.1 is three equations, one for each direction (x,y,z). The terms in equation
3.2.1 are; 1 inertial forces, which is related to velocity and acceleration of the
uid, 2 pressure forces, 3 viscous forces, 4 external forces such as gravity. The
Navier-Stokes equation is always solved together with the continuity equation
[13].
δρ
δt + ∇(ρu) = 0
(3.2.2)
this equation makes sure that the amount of uid that enters a control volume
also exits the control volume. The continuity criteria is the most important
criteria in CFD, since mass conservation is very important.
In this study the velocities of the uid is expected to be low, hence the Mach
number (M = u0/c ≪0.3) [13] the assumption of incompressibility is valid.
This reduces the continuity equation into
∇u = 0
(3.2.3)
the term −2/3µ(∇u)I can be removed from equation 3.2.1, because the diver-
gence of the velocity is equal to zero [13].
3.2.1
Turbulence
Due to expected turbulence turbulence is activated in the model. The Realiz-
able two-layer K-epsilon turbulence model is used. Solving the Navier-Stokes
equation with turbulence is beyond what is computationally realisable [13].
The Reynolds-Averaged Navier Stokes (RANS) model is used in STAR-CCM+.
The values of the velocity and pressure components are divided into a mean
value and a uctuating component:
u = u + u′
(3.2.4)
p = p + p′
(3.2.5)
the process may be thought of as time averaging for steady-state situations
and ensemble averaging for repeatable transient solutions. The time averaging
for steady state situations is seen in equation 3.2.6
u = 1
T
Z T
0
udt
(3.2.6)
the incompressible RANS formulations is shown in equation 3.2.7 [13]
ρ(u · ∇u) + ∇·
 µT(∇u + (∇u)T
|
{z
}
1
= −∇p
| {z }
2
+ ∇· (µ(∇u + (∇u)T))
|
{z
}
3
+ F
|{z}
4
(3.2.7)
where u and p are the time-averaged velocity and pressure respectively. µT
represents the turbulent viscosity. The turbulent viscosity is evaluated using
16
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 3.
Numerical model in STAR-CCM+
the k-epsilon turbulence model, which is used in this study. The paramter T is
a tensor quantity, known as the Reynolds stress tensor, which has the following
denition [7]:
Tt ≡−ρu′u′ = −ρ


u′u′
u′v′
u′w′
u′v′
v′v′
v′w′
u′w′
v′w′
w′w′


(3.2.8)
however the challenge is to model the Reynolds stress tensor in equation 3.2.8 in
terms of the mean ow quantities, and hence provide closure of the governing
equations. In STAR-CMM+ two basic approaches are used; Eddy viscosity
models, and Reynolds stress transport models. In this study the Realizable
Two-layer K-epsilon turbulence model is used. This model is in the same genre
as Eddy viscosity models, hence Eddy viscosity models are described in the
following section.
Eddy Viscosity Models
Eddy viscosity models use the concept of a turbulent viscosity µt to model the
Reynolds stress tensor as a function of the mean ow quantities. The most
common model, and the one applied in this study, is known as the Boussinesq
approximation [7]
Tt = 2µtS −2
3 (µt∇· u + ρk) I
(3.2.9)
where I is the identity matrix, k is the turbulent kinetic energy and S is the
strain tensor [7]:
S = 1
2
 ∇u + ∇uT
(3.2.10)
Realizable Two-Layer K-epsilon
The realizable K-epsilon model with the Two-Layer approach, which is used in
this study. In this approach, the computation is divided into two layers; The
layer next to the wall, and a layer near the wall. In the layer next to the wall,
the turbulent viscosity and dissipation rate, µt and ε respectively are specied
as functions of wall distance. In the near-wall layer the values of ε are blended
smoothly with the values computed from solving the transport equation far
from the wall. The transport equations for the Eulerian multiphase is shown
in the equations below [7].
d
dt
Z
V
αiρikidV +
Z
A
αiρiki(ui −ug) · da =
Z
A
αi

µi + µt
i
σk

∇ki · da+
Z
V
αi

f c
i Gk
i + Gb
i −ρi
 (εi −ε0) + Y M
i

+ Sk
i + Skr
i

dV +
X
i̸=j
 mijkij
j −mjiki

(3.2.11)
17
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3.
Numerical model in STAR-CCM+
d
dt
Z
V
αiρiεidV +
Z
A
αiρiεi(ui −ug) · da =
Z
A
αi

µi + µt
i
σε

∇εi · da+
Z
V
αi
1
T

f c
i Cε1Sε + εi
ki
 Cε1Cε3Gb
i

−
εi
ki + √νεi
Cε2ρi(εi −ε0) + Sε
i + Sεr
i

dV+
X
i̸=j
 mijεij
j −mjiεi

(3.2.12)
where the subscript i denotes the dierent phases. αi is the volume fraction
(see section 3.3). Skr
i
and Sεr
i
are source terms for the continuous phase when
modelling Eulerian particle induced turbulence. f c
i is the curvature correction
factor for each phase. Gk is the turbulent production term, Gb is the bouancy
production term, the bouancy is not investigated in this study hence it is set
to zero. Y M compressibility modifcation, the model is incompressible hence
this is set to zero. µt is the turbulent viscosity [7].
µt = ρCµfµkT
(3.2.13)
where fµ is a damping function dened as.
fµ = 1 −exp
h
−

Cd0
p
Rey + Cd1Rey + Cd2Re2
y
i
(3.2.14)
where Cd0 = 0.091, Cd1 = 0.0042 and Cd2 = 0.00011 [7]. In this section T is
the turbulent time-scale, which as calculated as.
T = min

max
k
ϵ , CT
rν
ε

,
CT
√
3CµS

(3.2.15)
where CT is the realizable time scale coecient which has a standard value of
0.6. In the standard K-epsilon model the value of Cµ is constant, however in
the realizable model this is not the case. Cµ is dened as seen below [7].
Cµ =
1
A0 + AsU (∗) k
ε
(3.2.16)
where
U (∗) =
sX
i,j
SijSij + WijWij
(3.2.17)
in equation 3.2.17 W is the roationt rate tensor. This tensor is closely related
to the measurement of vorticity, which is used in this study to visualize the
ow.
W = 1
2(∇u −∇vT)
(3.2.18)
the remaining coecients in equation 3.2.16 are:
18
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 3.
Numerical model in STAR-CCM+
As =
√
6 cos(ϕ)
ϕ = 1
3acos(
√
6W)
W = SijSjkSki
p
SijSij
3
A0 = 4.0
where S is the modulus of the mean strain rate tensor.
The coecient of Cε1 is dened as follows [7]
Cε1 = max

0.43,
η
5 + η

(3.2.19)
where η = Sk
ε . The remaining coecients dening the model are set to:
Cε2 = 1.9
σk = 1.0
σε = 1.2
(3.2.20)
the dissipation rate ε which is computed by the two-layer model is given by
[7].
ε = k3/2
lε
(3.2.21)
where the length scale lε is a function of lε = f(y, Rey). The wall distance
Reynolds number Rey is given by Rey =
√
ky
ν . The length scales is dened
according to the standard K-epsilon model:
lϵ = Cld
(3.2.22)
where d is the distance to the wall and Cl = 2.55 [7].
3.3
Volume of Fluid Multi-phase model
When a free surface is applied the Volume of Fluid (VoF) multiphase model is
applied, the Eulerian Multiphase model is used. The free surface requires extra
care with respect to solving the system, particularly the boundary between
water and air. A free surface is seen as a freely moving boundary due to the
fact that waves are generated at the water level. Therefore the boundary is
able to move physically depending on the force and motions applied to the
uid. By using this method a cell can contain a mixture of uids, however
only with a linear gradient of the surface. The relationship of uids in a single
cell is dened by αi = Vi/V ∈[0, 1], where i is the number of the cell. The
value of αi = 0 denes that no water is within the cell, and αi = 1 states that
the cell is full of water. Any value of αi between 0 and 1 states that there is
a mixture of air and water within the q'th cell (void fraction) [5]. The above
19
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3.
Numerical model in STAR-CCM+
mentioned behaviour of α is valid for all uids present in the model. The
density and viscosity within a cell is dened as:
ρ =
P
i ρiαi
µ =
P
i µiαi
1 =
P
i αi
where αi = Vi/V , i is the i'th uid or phase (water, air etc.). The last expres-
sion in the equations above determines that the cell has to be full of uids.
The conservation equation that describes the transport of volume fractions αi
is:
d
dt
Z
V
αidV +
Z
S
αi(v −vg)da =
Z
V

sαi −αi
ρi
Dρi
Dt

dV
(3.3.1)
where Dρi
Dt is the material of Lagrangian derivative of the phase densities ρi,
and sαi is the source or sink of the i'th phase. This equation is solved together
with the Navier-Stokes equation in order to take the free surface into account.
It is not expected that the surface tension is important for this project hence
it is assumed that there is no surface tension.
3.4
Segregated Flow Approach
The segregated ow solver is applied in STAR-CCM+. This solver solves the
ow equations, on for pressure and one for each component of velocity. The
solver is based upon a guessed value and a correction term.
v = v∗+ v′
(3.4.1)
p = p∗+ p′
(3.4.2)
where v∗and p∗are the guessed values for velocity and pressure, v′ and p′
are the correction terms. The segregated ow solver uses the Semi Implicit
Method for Pressure Linked Equations (SIMPLE) algorithm. The algorithm
can be summarized in the following steps [7]
1. Set the boundary conditions
2. Computed the reconstruction gradients of velocity and pressure
3. Compute the velocity and pressure gradients
4. Solve the discretized momentum equation. This creates the intermediate
velocity eld v∗
5. Compute the uncorrected mass uxes at faces. m∗
f
6. Solve the pressure correction equation. This produces cell values for thee
pressure correction p'
20
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 3.
Numerical model in STAR-CCM+
7. Update the pressure eld
pn+1 = pn + ωp′
where ω is the under-relaxation factor for pressure
8. Update the boundary pressure corrections p′
b
9. Correct the face mass uxes:
mn+1
f
= m∗
f + m
where m is the previous time step mass ux.
10. Correct the cell velocities
vn+1 = v∗−V ∇p′
a
′v
p
where ∇p′ is the gradient of the pressure corrections, a
′v
p is the vector
of central coecients for the discretized linear system representing the
velocity equation, and V is the cell volume.
11. Update density due to pressure changes (Not used in this case since it is
assumed that the ow is incompressible, hence the density is constant)
12. Free all temporary storage
13. Repeat above until convergence and proceed to next time step
in the list above a "*" indicates that the value is predicted. This algorithm
continues until satisfactory convergence has been reached.
Convergence is
reached when the residual of each iteration is acceptable. In this project a
convergence criteria with a continuity of 1e-04 is used. The continuity criteria
is a measurement of the equilibrium of uid entering and exiting a control
volume.
Implicit unsteady
The Implicit Unsteady model is activated, hense the Implicit Unsteady solver
becomes active. The primary function of this function is to control the update
at each physical time for the calculation [7]. Furthermore, this function also
controls the time-step size and thereby allows to solve with respect to progres-
sion in time. For this function to be available the Segregated Flow model (see
above) has to be activated.
21
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 4
Results
4.1
Convergence
In this section the spatial and time-related convergence of the simulations will
be analysed. The convergence study is based upon a worst case scenario with
ba high value of KC (KC = 6) and the plate located at the surface level
(D = 0). Once the convergence at the surface is satisfactory the plate is to be
moved deep below the surface in order to compare the results with [1]. Deep
below the surface two shapes of plates are to be tested in order to verify that
the simulations set-up is reliable for other shapes than a square plate. The
other plate tested is circular, with the same cross-sectional area as the square
plate. The physical dimensions in STAR-CCM+ of the two plates used can be
seen in table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Plate dimensions and shapes
Plate shape
Side length (Diameter)
Thickness
Square
0.17 m
0.004 m
Circular
0.2 m
0.004 m
in this project other plate shapes are to be tested as well, but no data is
available for validation. Therefore other shapes than a square and a circular
are not analysed with respect to validating the model. The aim is to be able
to use the same model for each simulation no matter the plate shape, hence
the KC- and Froude-number is high. The results obtained for the square and
circular plate are to be compared with available literature. Finally the data
processing procedure is presented.
4.2
Domain and boundary conditions
The domain size and boundary conditions applied to the model are essential
for obtaining trustworthy results. The boundary condition has to be as close
to physical correct as possible, and the boundary conditions has to be far
enough from the plate to avoid reections from the boundaries. If the boundary
22
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 4.
Results
conditions are too close to the plate they will inuence the ow around the
plate and therefore have inuence on the results.
The boundary conditions used are visualized in gure 4.1. Here the water
surface is visible since it plays an important role in the simulations. Further-
more it is observed that the part of the domain that contains air is signicantly
smaller than the volume with water, this is due to the fact that the expected
wave generation is rather limited and the ow eld of the air is not important
for the results.
Figure 4.1: Illustration of the domain size with respect boundary conditions
and positions marked. The position of the center of the top edge of the plate
is provided in the gure as (x,y,z) coordinates.
the velocity inlets are only used to specify the water level, the inlet velocity is
0 m/s since the entire domain is moved according to ˙ξ in the x-direction and
the water is stationary. The position of the plate is controlled by the velocity
function in the x-direction (equation 2.1.4), and kept stationary in the y- and
z-direction. It should be noted that the water is stationary and the plate is
forced to move. This equals to moving the plate in steady water. The inlet in
the top is set to 100% air and in the bottom it is set to 100% water, whereas
the front and back velocity inlet and symmetry conditions is set to be a volume
23
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 4.
Results
fraction of air and water. Furthermore it is shown on gure 4.1 that the domain
is much larger than the plate itself. Simulations has been run with a smaller
domain, however this provided an error that made the model unsolvable. The
error occurred when a wave of a signicant size hit the boundary conditions. It
is not wanted that any wave generated by the plate hits the boundaries hence
the volume of the domain is rather large.
In gure 4.2 the ow eld around the plate is illustrated. Here it is observed
that the plate is not inuenced by the boundary conditions hence the domain
is of a sucient size. The case shown in gure 4.2 is based upon KC = 6 and
Fr = 1.62.
Figure 4.2: Waves generated at the surface to the left (Top view), velocity eld
generated by plate the surface (Side view). In both gures the entire domain
is shown in order visualize the domain size compared to the plates inuence
on the uid.
in gure 4.2 to the left the water surface is illustrated. Here it is observed
that the waves generated by the plate are close to non-existent far from the
plate. Close to the boundaries the waves have disappeared. Furthermore it is
observed on the gure to the right that the uid is not moving close to the
boundaries. Furthermore it has been tested to increase the size of domain
in order to validate that the domain is large enough. The analysis showed
that the domain shown in gure 4.2 is large enough. The specic dimensions
of the domain are illustrated in gure 4.1. The domain might seem larger
than needed for this convergence study, especially when compared to the size
of the plate (see table 4.1), however it is preferable to use this exact model
throughout this project, where several plates are to be analysed at once in
order to see their respective inuence on one another. Since the submersion of
the plate are to be changed with respect to the water surface, the domain has
been made suciently high.
4.3
Data processing
Ordinary Least Squares [11]
The method of Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) is used in this thesis to anal-
yse the numerical results obtained in STAR-CCM+. The OLS method is a
24
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 4.
Results
standard approach in regression analysis and is especially ecient when more
equations (data points) are available than unknown coecients. The main
target of least squares is to decreases the dierence between the estimates and
measure results.
ri = yi −ˆyi
(4.3.1)
where ri is the residual, yi is the measured data and ˆyi is the estimation of
the results. Often the summed squares is used to combine the residual into a
single value.
S =
n
X
i=1
r2
i
(4.3.2)
the estimation is based upon theoretical equations. In this thesis the theoret-
ical equation is seen in equation 2.1.1 where the two parameters, CD and CM
is to be estimated. Naturally it is wanted to achieve a residual which is as low
as possible (S = 0).
Based upon equation 2.1.1 the least squares is performed in the following
manner.
CD
CM

=
 AT · A
−1 · ATF
(4.3.3)
where A is the coecient matrix which is based upon equation 2.1.1. F is the
measured signal obtained directly from STAR-CCM+.
A =
1
2A0ρ ˙ξ| ˙ξ|
ρV0¨ξ

(4.3.4)
Dependency of chosen period
When analysing the results it showed that the chosen period for analysis is of
great importance, due to the fact that the force on the plate never becomes
periodic over 1 period. In the case shown in gure 4.3 it is observed that the
force is periodic over 3 periods, despite the fact that the movement is periodic.
This phenomena will be explained later in this thesis.
The expression "chosen period" should be understood as visualized in gure
4.3.
25
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 4.
Results
Figure 4.3: Illustration of chosen period. 2nd period is chosen to the left, and
6th and 7th period is chosen to the right, meaning a span of 2 periods.
in gure 4.3 it is visualized how the term chosen period should be understood.
It is observed that even though 1 or 2 periods in time is chosen, the force do
not end in at the same as would be the case if the signal is completely periodic.
This is caused by the fact that the movement of the plate and the force is not
in phase and the force signal is, as plotted in gure 4.3 not completely periodic.
When the period span is increased the red curve is prolonged for the chosen
amount of periods. In gure 4.4 the inuence of the chosen period is observed
with respect to the chosen period of oscillation.
Figure 4.4: Illustration of obtained coecients at a single period for evaluation
in gure 4.4 it is observed how the drag and added mass are dependent on the
chosen period. When compared to the force signal it is expected that these
values, when only one period is chosen, will be unsteady. Therefore one period
is not enough for estimating the parameters (CD and CM) properly. Therefore
it is investigated how many periods should be used in order to obtain a proper
estimation of the drag and added mass.
Dependency of chosen period span
The eect of the chosen period span is observed in gure 4.5. In gure 4.5
there is a signicant dierence between the results with respect to the size of
26
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 4.
Results
the period span.
Figure 4.5: Estimation of drag and added mass according to the period span.
The 5. period is chosen as the beginning.
in gure 4.5 it is concluded that the estimate does not become completely
stable, the deviation when a span of 12 to 15 periods is used is very limited. It
is observed that if an innite amount of data was available the results seen in
gure 4.5 would be steady. However it is not possible to generate enough data
due to limited time to make the analysis completely stable, hence 20 periods
of oscillations is used as stopping criteria throughout this report.
Fitting
As described in section 4.3, the method of ordinary least squares is used.
In gure 4.6 the contribution of each term in equation 2.1.1 is seen.
It is
observed that the method provides a fair t of the signal. The force related to
the coecient of drag is in phase with the acceleration (ass seen in equation
2.1.1). It is observed that the contribution of the terms related to the drag and
added mass is similar despite the fact that they are not in phase (see gure
4.6). The added mass in the phase with the velocity of the plate and the drag
is in phase with the acceleration (as seen in equation 2.1.1).
27
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 4.
Results
Figure 4.6: Fitted force signal compared with raw signal and contribution of
the terms related to drag and added mass in equation 2.1.1.
in gure 4.6 it is observed that there is a minor dierence between the tted
signal (Fit Force) and the raw data, which is acceptable. This dierence is
acceptable due to the nature of the data processing. The curve "Fit Force" is
a sum of "Fit Cd Force" and "Fit Cm Force" and does therefore represent the
t related to the Morison equation (equation 2.1.1).
4.3.1
Spatial Convergence
In this section the spatial convergence are to be presented with the top edge
of the plate positioned at the free surface (D = 0). This convergence study
is made based on the a case with KC= 6 and Fr= 1.62. Which is relatively
high values of KC- and Froude-number this case is expected to generate large
waves and splashes compared to lower values of KC- and Froude-number. It
is anticipated that a spatial resolution that is satisfactory for this case also
is satisfactory for lower values of KC- and Froude-number due to decreased
amplitude of waves and splashes. The plate is positioned in such a manner
that the top edge, is at the water level as illustrated on gure 4.2 (D = 0).
The entire domain is oscillated in the x-direction according to gure 4.2, in
order to move the plate in steady water. The results of spatial convergence
is observed in gure 4.7. Theoretically it does not matter whether the plate
is oscillated or the uid is oscillated, physically the forces on the plate is the
same in both cases.
28
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 4.
Results
Figure 4.7: Spatial convergence of a at plate at the water surface. Kc = 6
and Fr = 1.62
the results obtained for dierent mesh resolutions are plotted in gure 4.7. In
gure 4.7 it is observed that the spatial resolution does not change the results
signicantly, deviation is within 5% for both parameters investigated. However
at a low number of cells, it is observed that the results are very sensitive to a
small increment in number of cells. The parameter of drag and added mass at
more than 500,000 cells does not change signicantly. Therefore it is chosen to
use a mesh resolution of 500,000 cells which is marked with red in gure 4.7.
Meshing
The mesh used in the above convergence study, is illustrated in gure 4.8. The
mesh is divided into two volumes each with a dierent mesh resolution. The
volumes are marked in gure 4.8.
29
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4.
Results
(a) Dierent mesh volumes in the z-x plane.
(b) Dierent mesh volumes in the y-z plane.
Figure 4.8: The blue line indicates the water surface and the purple line indi-
cates the position of the plate.
the green volume increases the resolution uniformly around the plate. The size
of the elements is the same in all directions close to the plate. The volume
is attached to the plate, and if the plate is moved deeper in the water this
renement stays in the same relative position to the plate. The dimensions of
this renement is as visualized in gure 4.8. It should be noted that the top
edge of the green volume is 0.5m from the center of the plate in the z-direction.
The vertical sides are mirrored around the plate.
The red volume is needed in order to have a good resolution of the water
surface with respect to wave generation. Therefore this mesh is only rened
in the z-direction. The water surface requires a good resolution in order to
resolve potential large gradients due to the plate movement. The red volume
is positioned in such a manner that the water surface (the blue line) is in the
middle of this volume. This chosen since the plate is capable of generating
30
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 4.
Results
waves in the positive and negative z-direction. This volume is 0.4m high and
is therefore able to provide a ne resolution for waves which are up to 0.2m
high. This renement is applied at the entire surface.
When the plate is moved deep below the surface the green renement follow
the plate as illustrated in gure 4.9.
It should be noted that the relative
position of the green renement does not change as the plate is moved deeper
in the water. However the red renement remains at the same position (the
water surface).
Figure 4.9: Mesh deep below the surface at D = 3.1
4.3.2
Time related convergence
In order to obtain a fast and accurate model the resolution in time is very
important. It is wanted to obtain the lowest time-step that provides a solution
which is not sensitive to a small change in the size of the time-step. It is
chosen to make this analysis with a time-step that is based upon time-steps
pr. period. This is done in order to have the same relative time-step at other
values of the KC- and Froude-number. The time-step is calculated as shown
in equation 4.3.5
∆t =
T
Time-steps pr.period
(4.3.5)
the chosen spatial resolution (see gure 4.7) has been run with dierent res-
olutions in time. This result is plotted in gure 4.10. Once again the chosen
resolution is marked by a red point.
31
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4.
Results
Figure 4.10: Time related convergence of a at plate at the water surface.
the results obtained for drag and added mass with respect to dierent time-
step sizes is plotted in gure 4.10. Here it is observed that the solution is very
dependent on the resolution in time especially at a low number of time-step pr.
period. It is observed that at more than 200 time-steps pr. period the result
does not change signicantly, hence a time-step of 200 pr. period is chosen to
be sucient.
Residuals
The residuals obtained for the chosen simulation is shown in gure 4.11. Here it
is observed that for each iteration the residual for each component is decreased.
It is observed that the continuity does not have the same peak as the other
parameters. This is due to the fact that the velocity the domain does not
change a lot between each time-step, hence the continuity criterion is rather
simple to full however it is hard to bring the continuity residual even further
down. Despite the low change in the continuity residual, it is observed that the
value of this residual is low compared to the other residuals hence a satisfactory
level of the residual has been reached.
32
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 4.
Results
Figure 4.11: Residuals at simulation with 500,000 cells and with 200 time-steps
pr. period.
the momentum residuals have a rather large peak, this indicates that the ow
changes signicantly between each time-step. However after a proper amount
of iterations the residual for the momentum equations also decreases to a
satisfactory level.
4.4
Depth
The depth of the plate plays a signicant role with respect to the forces on the
plate and behaviour of the surrounding uid. In this section the raw inuence
of the free surface is analysed. The plate is moved deep below the surface in
order to be able to compare the results obtained with STAR-CCM+ against
Tian 2016 [1].
It is expected that when a certain depth has been reached the Froude number
has no inuence on the results, due to the fact that the free surface is no
inuenced by the plate.
4.4.1
Froude and Keulegan-Carpenter
The results obtained when the KC- and Froude-numnber is kept constant is
seen in gure 4.12, 4.13 and 4.14 which is related to the drag, added mass
and non-dimensional force respectively. It is observed that when D > 3 the
solution barely changes with respect to coecients of drag, added mass and
non-dimensional maximum force. Furthermore it is observed that the coef-
cients at dierent Froude number, are close to equal at D > 3, hence the
Froude number is no longer important for the simulations at this depth. This
is expected, since the Froude-number describes the conditions at the surface.
However the KC-number has a signicant inuence on the results, which also is
expected due to Tian 2016 [1], where the Froude-number is not even mentioned
and only the inuence of the KC-number is analysed. When the KC-number
increases the coecient of drag decreases and the coecient of added mass
increases which is observed in gure 4.12 and 4.13 respectively. This indicates
that at higher values of the KC-number the forces becomes more dominated
by inertia forces (the added mass term) compared to the viscous drag. These
33
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 4.
Results
results show that more uid is accelerated at higher values of the KC-number
than at lower values of the KC-number, hence more energy can be extracted
from the incoming wave. At low values of the Froude-number (Fr = 0.1) it is
observed that the coecient of drag and added mass is highest at the surface.
Whereas the opposite is the case is at higher values of the Froude-number
(Fr ≥0.72), the reason for this phenomena is explained visually later in this
section.
This phenomena is investigated visually by analysing the physical
behaviour of the ow, see Flow visualisation later in this section.
Figure 4.12: Drag coecient at dierent values of KC- and Froude-number
with respect to depth
in gure 4.12 and 4.13 the inuence of the free surface is observed. When
the plate is a low distance from the surface D = 0.3 the results has changed
signicantly hence the surface plays a major role with respect the the forces on
the plate. This is caused by the fact that waves are generated which changes
the ow and thereby the force on the plate. The model has been tested at
high values of the KC- and Froude-number this is done in order to check the
stability and reliability of the model. It is observed that at the surface (D = 0)
34
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 4.
Results
the coecients of drag, added mass and non-dimensional force increases as the
Froude-number decreases. It should be noted that at high values of the KC-
number the simulation results are inuenced more by the Froude-number (see
the upper left graph in gure 4.14), when compared to the lower right gure.
Figure 4.13: Coecient of added mass at dierent values of KC- and Froude-
number with respect to depth
in the simulations performed related to the above results the KC- and Froude-
number are kept constant with respect to depth which is not a true picture of
a real-life wave (see section 2.1.2), but allows to analyse the inuence of the
free surface.
35
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 4.
Results
Figure 4.14: Non-dimensional force at dierent values of KC- and Froude-
number with respect to depth
therefore, in order to achieve the maximum non-dimensional force on the plate,
it should be positioned as low as possible at high Froude numbers (Fr ≥0.5).
At low Froude-numbers (Fr ≤0.1) the plate should be positioned at the
surface. It should be noted that the force in gure 4.14 is non-dimensional.
Therefore despite the fact that it seems that the plate has highest force, it
does not when the dimensional force is analysed. This is shown in appendix
gure 6.7
In section 4.5 real-life wave data are included in order to obtain a true view
of the inuence depth when the KC- and Froude-number are no longer constant
with respect to depth.
Flow visualisation
In this section the ow is to be visualized in order to clarify exactly what
physical meaning the value of KC- and Froude-number has on the ow. The
ow is to be visualized at the surface where it visible what inuence the plate
with the prescribed movement has on the surface.
36
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 4.
Results
(a) Fr = 2
(b) Fr = 1.5
(c) Fr = 1
(d) Fr = 0.1
Figure 4.15: Waves generated at the surface (D = 0) at constant KC-number
(KC = 6) and varying Froude number
in gure 4.15 the waves generated at dierent Froude-numbers and constant
KC-number throughout the gures. It is observed that a high value of the
Froude-number and KC-number results in splashing. Therefore the non-dimensional
force decreases at the surface at high values of the KC- and Froude-number.
At a low Froude-number (Fr = 0.1) it is observed that barely any waves are
generated hence the plate pushes a large amount of water in front of it, there-
fore the non-dimensional force increases at the surface as it is shown in gure
4.15. The splashing occurring where Fr = 2 results in an unsteady force signal
measured on the plate. Therefore it is expected that at lower values of the
Froude-number the measured force signal will become more stable and thereby
periodic.
37
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4.
Results
(a) Kc = 6
(b) Kc = 4
(c) Kc = 2
(d) Kc = 0.6
Figure 4.16: Waves generated at the surface (D = 0) at constant Froude
number (Fr = 1) and varying KC-number
in gure 4.16 the inuence of the KC-number at constant Froude-number, at
the surface is illustrated.
It is observed that both the KC-number as well
as the Froude-number has an inuence on the disturbance of the surface. It
is observed that at KC = 0.6 the disturbance is signicantly lower than at
KC = 6. A high value of the KC-number indicates a long period or a high
velocity (see equation 2.1.11, and a high value of the Froude-number yields
a high velocity. Therefore as illustrated in the gures a lot of splashing and
wave generation is present at high values of the KC- and Froude-number.
38
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 4.
Results
(a) D = 0
(b) D = 0.1
(c) D = 1.1
(d) D = 4.6
Figure 4.17: Waves generated at contant KC-number (KC = 6) and constant
Froude-number (Fr = 0.72) and varying depth, which is noted at each gure.
in gure 4.17 it is illustrated how the depth inuences the generation of waves
at constant KC- and Froude-number (KC = 6 and Fr = 2). It is observed
that at D = 3.1 the surface is no longer inuenced signicantly. Therefore
the results obtained at depth deeper than D = 3.1 do not change signicantly
which is also shown in gure 4.14.
39
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4.
Results
(a) KC = 6
(b) KC = 4
(c) KC = 2
(d) KC = 0.6
Figure 4.18: Vorticity = 2/s deep below the surface at Fr = 1.62 and D = 4.6,
after 20 periods of oscillations
the vorticity generated deep below the surface, at varying KC-number and after
20 periods of oscillations are illustrated in gure 4.18. It should be noticed
that the gures in gure 4.18 is not the same scale. Vorticity is a measurement
of vortexes generated, the larger the volume the larger the vortexes. In gure
4.18 it is observed how the KC- and Froude-number inuences the vorticity
generated deep below the surface. The vorticity is visualized as a volume with
constant vorticity = 2/s. However, the shape of the vorticity volume changes
signicantly throughout the variation of KC-number. This indicates that at
higher KC-number the plate generate large vortices due to a long period of the
motion and therefore does the vorticity volume become long. Whereas when
the KC-number is low (KC = 0.6) small vortices are generated locally hence
the volume becomes relatively small.
4.4.2
Comparison with the work of Tian 2016 [1]
In order to validate the above results from STAR-CCM+ with results obtain
by Tian 2016 [1], the plate is moved deep below the surface (D = 4.6) (see
gure 4.12 and 4.13). The results are compared with the work for Tian 2016
[1].
The simulations has been run for a square plate as above, and also a
circular plate. The circular plate is included in order to verify that the spatial
and time-wise resolution also is applicable on other plate shapes than a square
40
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 4.
Results
plate.
The results for the square plate are plotted in gure 4.19. The maximum
error is about 8 % which is concluded to be acceptable. Furthermore it is
observed that the error in general is higher for the comparison of CD. This is
caused by the fact that the ow is dominated by inertia forces hence the drag
coecient is subject to large uncertainties due to its limited presence [1].
Figure 4.19: Experimental results of Tian 2016 [1] for a square plate compared
with present numerical results from STAR-CCM+
the results obtained for the circular plate at the same parameters as the square
plate are plotted in gure 4.20. In this case the maximum error is about 13%.
Furthermore it is observed that a relatively large error in the drag coecient
does not necessarily result in a similar deviation in the added mass coecient.
Figure 4.20: Experimental results of Tian 2016 [1] for a circular plate compared
with present numerical results from STAR-CCM+
41
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 4.
Results
limited research in this area has been performed prior to this study hence Tian
2016 [1] has had limited available literature as well for validation of their results
hence the deviations stated above are acceptable. The physical position of the
plate is not the same, however in Tian 2016[1] it is stated "... the inuence
of the free surface should be carefully checked". Furthermore the movement of
the plate in [1] is vertically (along the z-axis1) whereas in STAR-CCM+ the
plate is moved back and forth (along the x-axis). If the statement that the free
surface play no role at this depth is correct it should not matter whether the
plate is moved in the one direction or the other. Especially at low KC-numbers
a signicant deviation (compared to higher value of KC) are observed.
4.5
Plate shape
In order to optimize the energy output of the WEC, the shape plate is inves-
tigated. Furthermore it wanted to see how the shape of the plate inuences
the coecients of drag and added mass. The plates all have the same cross-
sectional area and volume. The plates are to be simulated at real-life wave
data and plate sizes. A real-life plate dimensions are provided by Wavepiston
are; 2x2m, 3x3m and 5x5m. The plates are positioned at dierent depths in
order to observe any dierences among the plate shapes tested.
4.5.1
Plate dimensions
The analysed plate shapes are as follows; Square, rectangular, circular and
trapezoid. The dimension relationships are illustrated in gure 4.21, the blue
line indicates the water surface. The plates orientation are as shown in the
gure with respect to the water surface.
Figure 4.21: Plate shapes and relative dimensions. The blue line indicates the
surface level relative to the plate shape, in order to show the orientation of the
plate.
it should be noted that the parameter "a" is not the same for each shape.
The parameter "a" is determined by the area of the plate, in order to obtain
a characteristic length of D = 0.2m.
1The gravity is parallel with the z-axis in STAR-CCM+
42
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 4.
Results
4.5.2
Non-dimensional testing parameters
Based upon the analysis performed in section 2.1.2 the KC- and Froude-number
can be determined based on wave state 1 (see section 2.1.2). The velocity of
the wave is calculated as an average across the plates height. The analysed
range of KC- and Froude-number is illustrated in gure 4.22.
Figure 4.22: Span of KC- and Froude-number with respect to cross-sectional
area of the plate for real-life wave data.
as shown in gure 4.22 the KC- and Froude-number is signicantly lower than
the values used in section 4.4.1 for validation and convergence study (KC = 6
and Fr = 1.6).
However since the model is stable and reliable at higher
values of the KC- and Froude-number, where the system is harder to solve,
the model is also appropriate at lower values of the KC- and Froude-number.
The inuence when these two parameters are kept constant despite the depth
are shown in section 4.4.1, in this section neither the KC- or Froude-number
are kept constant with respect to depth. A uniform ow eld is used to model
the wave, therefore an average of the KC- and Froude-number across the plate
has been performed in order to state the velocity for the specic plate.
The dierent plates are simulated at ve dierent depths and compared
with each plate size meaning a total of fteen simulations are to be performed
for each plate shape. The values of KC, Froude and D can be seen in table
4.2. The values of the KC- and Froude-number does not changes much at low
values of D, however it is chosen to take these small changes into account in
order to be as close to reality as possible. Only by doing so, it can be stated
exactly how much inuence the distance to the free surface has on the force on
the plate. Since a uniform ow velocity is used, the velocity of the ow, and
thereby the Froude-number, is determined at the position of the center of the
plate.
43
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 4.
Results
Table 4.2: Non-dimensional parameters for testing dierent plate shapes. The
non-dimensional parameters are based upon wave state 1 (see section 2.1.2)
Based on A = 2x2m
Based on A = 3x3m
Based on A = 5x5m
KC = 1.35
Fr = 0.10
D = 0
KC = 0.86
Fr = 0.07
D = 0
KC = 0.48
Fr = 0.05
D = 0
KC = 1.32
Fr = 0.09
D = 0.1
KC = 0.84
Fr = 0.07
D = 0.1
KC = 0.46
Fr = 0.05
D = 0.1
KC = 1.27
Fr = 0.09
D = 0.3
KC = 0.79
Fr = 0.07
D = 0.3
KC = 0.42
Fr = 0.05
D = 0.3
KC = 1.23
Fr = 0.09
D = 0.5
KC = 0.75
Fr = 0.06
D = 0.5
KC = 0.38
Fr = 0.04
D = 0.5
KC = 0.79
Fr = 0.06
D = 3
KC = 0.41
Fr = 0.04
D = 3
KC = 0.19
Fr = 0.02
D = 3
in table 4.2 it is observed, that the non-dimensional parameters, do not changes
signicantly at the rst four depths (D = 0, 0.1, 0.3 and 0.5). Furthermore it is
observed, that there is a signicant dierence in KC- and Froude-number from
D = 0 to D = 3, which indicates a large dierence in relative velocity, since
the period of the wave is constant throughout the depth. The results in the
following are all plotted as a function of the depth. In the following, it is left
to the reader to pair the results with their respective KC- and Froude-number.
The results obtained form STAR-CCM+ are shown in the gures 4.23, 4.24
and 4.25. Here it is observed that there is no signicant dierence between the
shapes of the plate.
44
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 4.
Results
Figure 4.23: Drag coecient according to depth for dierent plate shapes
in gure 4.23 the coecient of drag with respect to depth is plotted. It is
observed that the rectangular plate in general has the highest drag coecient
and the trapezoid plate has the lowest drag coecient. Further more it is
observed that it is rather important to be positioned as close to the surface
as possible, due to the low values of KC-number and especially the Froude-
number (see section 4.4.1). It is also observed that the value of the drag rstly
drop but then as the depth increase even more the coecient increases.
45
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 4.
Results
Figure 4.24: Coecient of added mass according to depth for dierent plate
shapes
the added mass behaves similar to the drag coecient, but has a tendency of
stabilizing or decreasing as the depth increases. However the drag increased
slightly when the depth were increased further. This indicates, that the forces
becomes more viscous dominant when far below the surface, this tendency
was not observed in section 4.4.1 where the KC- and Froude-number is kept
constant throughout the depth. In gure 4.24 it is observer that the added
mass is nearly stabilizing at a certain depth (D > 3), due to the fact that
the free surface no longer inuences the respective plate. Furthermore it is
observed that in order to achieve the highest coecient of added mass, the
plate should be positioned as close to the surface is physically possible.
46
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 4.
Results
Figure 4.25:
Non-dimensional force according to depth for dierent plate
shapes
the maximum non-dimensional force on the plate with respect to depth (D)
is plotted in gure 4.25. This is caused by the fact, that the KC- and Froude-
number decreases as the depth increases as shown in table 4.2. The KC- and
Froude-number decreases due to the change in velocity caused by the physical
behaviour of a wave (see section 2.1.2).
If compared with gure 4.14 where the KC- and Froude-number are kept
constant, here it is observed that the force levels out at a certain depth.
Finally it can be concluded, that the rectangular plate tends to have a
slightly higher maximum force at the surface level. Deep under the surface
the forces of all tested plate shapes becomes close to similar. Despite the fact
that the maximum non-dimensional force occurs for the rectangular plate, it
is chosen to continue the project with a square plate as test object.
In the next set of simulations the inuence of the angle of attack is to be
analysed. In this case a constant depth of D = 0 is used since the analysis
above showed, that the maximum force is obtained at this depth and a single
set of KC- and Froude-number is used based upon A = 5x5m.
Flow visualizations
In this minor section the ow will be visualized in order to see the inuence on
the dierent values of KC- and Froude-number. Firstly the vorticity generated
47
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 4.
Results
at the water surface are shown. The surface is not shown due to the fact that
barely any disturbance of the surface is occurring, due to a combination of a
low KC- and Froude-number (see gure 4.15 at Fr = 0.1). A volume where the
vorticity = 2/s is therefore illustrated. In gure 4.26, the vorticity generated
at the surface after 20 periods is illustrated. It is shown that the dierence
between the vorticity generated ,is very small. However it is observed that the
volume with a vorticity equal 2 /s is larger at gure 4.26a than gure 4.26b and
4.26c. This indicates, that the surface is more disturbed, the non-dimensional
force is therefore higher as shown in gure 4.25, when the KC- and Froude-
number is based upon a smaller plate. This phenomena is also observed in
gure 4.14.
(a) Vorticity generated at KC = 1.35
and Fr = 0.1, based on 2x2m plate
(b) Waves generated at KC = 0.86
and Fr = 0.07, based on 3x3m plate
(c) Waves generated at KC = 0.48
and Fr = 0.05, based on 5x5m plate
Figure 4.26: Vorticity generated at D = 0, based upon dierent plate sizes
the vorticity generated at the surface is illustrated in gure 4.26, at dierent
KC- and Froude-number. When the vorticity generated deep below the surface
is analysed it can be observed that, the vorticity is low after 20 periods of
oscillations (see gure 4.27). In gure 4.27a vorticity = 1/s is used. It is
being observed that the vorticity pattern changes signicantly if compared
with gure 4.26.
This pattern change is caused by the fact that the free
surface no longer inuences the plate, and thereby the boundaries close to
the plate. The vorticity pattern around the plate deep under the surface is
quarter symmetric which is visible in gure 4.27a. Once again it is observed
that the volume with a vorticity = 1/s becomes smaller, as the KC- and
Froude-number decreases.
It should be noted, that all snapshots has been
taken after 20 periods of oscillations.
48
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 4.
Results
(a) Vorticity = 1/s at KC = 0.79 and
Fr = 0.06
(b) Vorticity = 1/s at KC = 0.41 and
Fr = 0.04
(c) Vorticity = 1/s at KC = 0.19 and
Fr = 0.02
Figure 4.27: Vorticity around a square plate at a depth of D = 3
for the remaining plate shapes tested, a set of similar gures are shown in the
appendix section 6.2. The low vorticity generation indicates that ow separates
less from the plate than at higher values of the KC- and Froude-number, as
shown in gure 4.26.
4.5.3
Roundings
The corners of the square plate will now be rounded, in order to analyse the
inuence of having rounded corners. The cross-sectional area is kept the same
as above, the characteristic diameter of the object is still 0.2 m. The eect of
the roundings, has been performed in 4 stages and the plates are illustrated in
gure 4.28.
49
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 4.
Results
(a) DR = 0
(b) DR = 0.125
(c) DR = 0.250
(d) DR = 0.375
Figure 4.28: Squares plates with rounded corners.
the non-dimensional parameter describing the roundings are illustrated in g-
ure 4.28. The plate is only tested at the surface level (D = 0).
The results of this analysis, with respect to the coecient of drag, is plotted
in gure 4.29. Here it is observed, that the drag coecient gets inuenced
slightly. However there is no clear pattern with respect to the roundings (DR).
Figure 4.29: Drag coecient at dierent roundings (DR)
in gure 4.30 the results for the added mass is plotted it is once again observed
that the inuence of the rounding is limited, and no clear pattern is present.
50
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 4.
Results
Figure 4.30: Added mass coecient at dierent roundings (DR)
the non-dimensional force is analysed in gure 4.31, where it is plotted as a
function of the rounding parameter. It can be observed that the inuence of
the roundings is small, which is also seen when the drag and added mass is
analysed.
51
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 4.
Results
Figure 4.31: Non-dimensional force for dierent roundings (DR)
based on the above analysis there is no signicant dierence between the size
of the rounding (DR) and the respective force coecients. Therefore it is to be
concluded, that it does not matter whether the plate has rounded corners or
not. However it should be noted that the non-dimensional force has a tendency
of decreasing as the parameter DR increases.
4.6
Angle of attack
So far the ow has moved normal to the plate. The inuence of the angle
of the wave will now be analysed. The ow is kept in the same direction as
the above analysis, but the plate is angled to wards the ow. It is chosen
to perform this analysis for 0, 10, 20, 30 and 40 degrees. Where 0 degrees
is the perpendicular to the plate, as in the previous simulations. It should
be noted, that the KC- and Froude-number is kept constant, at KC = 0.48
and Fr = 0.05 corresponding to the values based on A = 5x5m in table 4.2.
The simulations has only been performed in this one case with a square, sharp
edged plate.
52
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 4.
Results
Figure 4.32: Drag coecient at dierent angle of attack for a square, sharp
edged plate
in gure 4.32 the drag coecient with respect to angle of attack is plotted.
Figure 4.32 illustrates that when the angle increases, the drag coecient de-
creases non-linearly. A non-linear relationship is also observed when the ow
is uniform and one directional (Xavier Ortis (2015) [12]). Where the dierence
pr. degree increases, as the angle increases.
Figure 4.33: Added mass at dierent angle of attack for a square, sharp edged
plate
the drop in non-dimensional force and corresponding force coecients (CD
and CM), is caused by two main factors. The projected area as seen from
the ow direction is smaller with increased angle of attack.
Secondly the
hydrodynamics around the plate is dierent.
53
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 4.
Results
Figure 4.34: Non-dimensional force at dierent angle of attack
based upon the above analysis, it is rather important to mount the plates in
the right direction, relative to the expected ow and wave direction.
Flow visualisation
The behaviour of the vorticity is visualized in gure 4.35 for dierent angle of
attack. It is illustrated, that the volume with a vorticity = 2/s is decreasing
with increased angle of attack. This supports the results above, where it is
observed, that the maximum force on the plate decreases with increased angle
of attack.
54
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 4.
Results
(a) Vorticity = 2/s at 0 degrees
(b) Vorticity = 2/s at 20 degrees
(c) Vorticity = 2/s at 40 degrees
Figure 4.35: Vorticity generated at the surface at dierent angle of attack and
KC = 0.48 and Fr = 0.05
4.7
Several plates and distances between plates
In this section several plates are to be positioned after one another as in the
Wavepiston system (section 1.1) in order to analyse, how the characteristic
length (Dp) inuences the non-dimensional force and force coecients of the
plate. It is chosen to perform the analysis at 1, 2 and 3 plates. The distances
between the plates are chosen to be 0.5, 1, 2, 3 and 4 characteristic lengths
(Dp). It is chosen to perform this analysis on a square plate as in the above
analysis. A sketch of the distance between the plates and numbering of these
are illustrated in gure 2.6. The naming of the plates are performed according
to the notation in gure 2.6. In the following gures, a line called "single plate"
indicates the results obtained above where only on plate is positioned in the
domain. When only two plates are present the third plate should be ignored
in gure 2.6. All plates move in phase since the relative distance between the
plates is much smaller that the wavelength (see section 2.1.2)
2 plates
In this section the case with two plates are evaluated. The KC- and Froude-
number used in these simulations corresponds to the values at the rst row in
table 4.2, the title of each plot indicates the column in the table. The results
obtained with two plates are plotted in gure 4.36, where it can be observed
how CD is inuenced by the characteristic length (Dp). It is observed that the
plates has to be a relatively high characteristic length (Dp) apart before the
55
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 4.
Results
plates no longer inuences each other. A non-linear relationship between CD
and Dp is observed. Furthermore it is observed that the coecient of drag is
dependent on which size of plate the values of the KC- and Froude-number is
based upon. There is a tendency that the larger the plate it is based upon,
the larger the inuence is present, this is also observed in gure 4.37. This is
caused by the fact that if the plate is larger, a larger volume of the uid would
be inuenced and therefore a larger distance is needed between the plate in
order for them not to be inuenced by one another.
Figure 4.36: Drag coecients with two plates after one another, the value of
the KC- and Froude-number are as seen in the rst row in table 4.2
the results with respect to added mass of two plates plotted in gure 4.37. It
is observed that the relationship between added mass and Dp is non-linear and
potentially at innite Dp the coecient of added mass would reach the one
obtained for a single plate. It is observed when the KC- and Froude-number
is based upon a 2x2m plate, the coecient of added mass exceeds the value
obtained for a single plate. This phenomena can be caused by a minor change
in the force signal, which however is not visible. When the force signal changes
slightly the values of CD and CM changes as well.
56
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 4.
Results
Figure 4.37: Added mass with two plates after one another, the value of the
KC- and Froude-number are as seen in the rst row in table 4.2
nally the non-dimensional force is analysed, see gure 4.38. As well as the
force coecients, the force on the two plates are similar. This similarity is
caused by the fact that a symmetry conditions is true for the two plates. It
should be noted, that the force is extracted as: max(|F|), and never exceeds
the force obtained for a single plate. Moreover it is observed that a non-linear
relationship of the maximum non-dimensional force and Dp is present, which
is also the case for the extracted force coecients.
57
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 4.
Results
Figure 4.38: Non-dimensional force with two plates after one another, the value
of the KC- and Froude-number are as seen in the rst row in table 4.2
furthermore it is observed that the force plate 1 or 2 never exceeds the force
obtained by a single plate. However the force coecients are at some points
than what is obtained for a single plate. However at Dp > 3 the force on each
plate is very close to the simulations at a single plate. Therefore in order to
achieve the highest force on the plates it is important to have a proper distance
between the plates. Moreover it is observed that the force coecient related to
plate 1 and 2 are similar. This phenomena is caused by the fact that symmetry
is present.
3 plates
In this section three plates are positioned after one another. Firstly the drag
coecient is analysed. It is observed that, plate 1 and 3 have a higher drag
coecient than plate 2. The same is the case with respect to the coecient
of added mass and the non-dimensional force. This is caused by the fact, that
plate 2 is positioned between plate 1 and 3. Hence the ow is inuenced by
plate 1 and 3 before it reaches plate 2 and therefore as expected the force
on plate 2 is lower than plate 1 and 3. This statement is visually explained
later in this section. The drag coecient as function of Dp is plotted in gure
4.39. Here it is observed that a non linear relationship is present, and that the
58
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 4.
Results
coecient of drag is lower for plate 2 than plate 1 and 3.
Figure 4.39: Drag coecients with two plates after one another, the value of
the KC- and-Froude number are as seen in the rst row in table 4.2
furthermore it is observed in the gures that plate 1 and 3 has roughly the
same value, when it comes to drag, added mass and non-dimensional force.
This is caused by the same phenomena, as when two plates are positioned
after one another. To the left of plate 1 there is open waters, but to the right
there is a plate (plate 2). The same is the case for plate 3, and therefore the
force on plate 1 and 3 should be equal,which is shown in gure 4.41.
59
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 4.
Results
Figure 4.40: Added mass with three plates after one another, the value of the
KC- and Froude-number are as seen in the rst row in table 4.2
60
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 4.
Results
Figure 4.41: Non-dimensional force with three plates after one another, the
value of the KC- and Froude-number are as seen in the rst row in table 4.2
based upon the above analysis it can be concluded, that a single plate has
the highest force acting upon it.
However in real-life several plates are to
be positioned after one another as in the Wavepiston system (section 1.1).
Therefore the most important aspect of the above analysis is the distance
between the plates.
It is observed that the relative dierence of the non-
dimensional force and force coecients at Dp = 4 is larger when the values of
the KC- and Froude-number is based upon a larger plate size. This indicates
that when a larger plate is used, they should be positioned at a even higher
value of Dp apart. It is observed that, at Dp ≥3 the curves has a tendency
of attening even without matching the results obtained for a single plate.
However it is expected that if the plates are innitely far from one another,
the non-dimensional force and force coecients should match the one observed
for a single plate, it is however not possible to move the plate further away from
another due to the size of the domain. If the distance Dp where to be increased
the spatial and time-related convergence should be validated once more. In
real-life more than 3 plates are to positioned after one another. Therefore it
could be relevant to study a case of 4, 5 or 10 plates, with a greater distance
between the plates than Dp = 4.
61
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 4.
Results
4.7.1
Flow visualization
The vorticity generated with 2 plates is illustrated in gure 4.42. Here it is
observed that when the plates are close to one another the vortexes generated
by the two plates are mixed together. This is also visible in the results above.
Whereas when the plates are further away from one another (Dp = 4) it is
observed that they do not inuence each other greatly, which is also shown in
the results above.
(a) Dp = 0.5
(b) Dp = 1
(c) Dp = 4
Figure 4.42: Vorticity = 2/s generated with 2 plates, based upon KC = 0.86
and Fr = 0.07
the vorticity generated with 3 plates is visualized in gure 4.43. Once again
it is observed that once the distance is high enough (Dp = 4) the plates no
longer inuences each other, however the results above indicates that a small
inuence is present. It is observed that when the plates are close to each other
(Dp = 0.5) the vorticity volume becomes close to one volume, hence the plates
greatly inuences each other.
62
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 4.
Results
(a) Dp = 0.5
(b) Dp = 1
(c) Dp = 4
Figure 4.43: Vorticity = 2 /s generated with 3 plates, based upon A =3x3m,
KC = 0.86 and Fr = 0.07
there is a great comparison between the results observed and the ow visuali-
sations shown in this section. The remaining ow visualizations yield more or
less the same result, hence they are not shown.
63
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 5
Summary and Conclusion
In this report a numerical model capable of simulating an oscillating at plate
in a domain with water and a free surface, has been developed. The model
is based upon the assumption, that a wave can be represented by a uniform
oscillatory movement. In the model the water is stationary and the plate is
moving. This is based upon the fact, that it does not matter whether the
plate is moved or uid is moved. The convergence of this model was rstly
veried at the surface and secondly compared with literature [1] where the
plate is submerged deep below the surface. In order to nd the specic depth
at which the free surface no longer inuences the results, several simulations
where performed. The simulations, where run at a wide range of KC- and
Froude-number. The KC- and Froude-number was, in this case, kept constant
with respect to depth. This showed that the force on the plate increased, as the
depth increased at Fr ≥0.72. At a low value of the Froude-number (Fr = 0.1)
the opposite is the case. In this case, the force was at its maximum, at the
surface and decreased as the depth increased. This phenomena was caused by
the fact that it is harder to move water than air, due to higher density and
viscosity. However at a low value of the Froude-number (Fr = 0.1) this is
not the case. This is caused by a signicant change in the ow where limitede
splashing and wave generation were observed. It was found, that at a depth
of D = 3.1 (equal to 3.1 time the characteristic diameter of the plate) the free
surface no longer inuenced the results, if the depth was increased. At this
depth the results were compared with [1], where a satisfactory comparison was
found.
The next part was analysing the shape of the plate. In this analysis real-life
wave data was introduced to the model. This was resulting in a varying KC-
and Froude-number with respect to the depth. The parameters was determined
by an average across the plate, in order to still be able to oscillate the plate
in stationary water.
The KC- and Froude-number where both based upon
three dierent real-life plate sizes, determined by Wavepiston. Several plate
shapes where tested (square, circular, rectangular and trapezoid). There was
limited dierence among the tested plates, however a rectangular plate showed
to have the highest force among the analysed plates. Despite the fact that the
maximum force occurred at a rectangular plate, the study continued with the
64
==PAGE:72==
Chapter 5.
Summary and Conclusion
square plate. The eect of rounded corners was simulated. It showed that
the eect of rounded corners was limited and inconclusive. The nal set of
simulations, with only one plate in the model, analysed how the force on the
plate would be inuenced, if the wave approached the plate at angle dierent
from normal to the plate. These simulations showed, that the force would
decrease as the angle increased, hence the orientation with respect to the wave
direction is important.
Finally the inuence of having several plates positioned after one another
was analysed. This analysis was performed with 2 and 3 plates. The plates
were oscillated under the same conditions, meaning their velocity and accel-
eration was equal at all times. With two plates after one another it showed
that the force on the plates decreased the closer the plates were to one an-
other. Furthermore the distance between the plates had to be more than 3
characteristic lengths from another before no signicant inuence was visible.
Moreover the force on the two plates was found to be equal. With three plates
in the model almost the same conclusion was reached. However the plate in
the middle did not reach the same force as a single plate, even with a distance
between the plates equal to more than 3 times the characteristic length of the
plate.
Therefore as a nal notice and recommendation to Wavepiston. The shape
of the plate, among the tested shapes is of limited importance. The distance
between the plates is however very important with respect to the force on the
plates, due the plates inuencing one another. Furthermore the orientation
of plate with respect to the incoming wave is of high importance to create
an ecient WEC. Furthermore the depth also plays an important role with
respect to the maximum force on the plate.
5.1
Future work
Limited amount of research in the topic analysed in this thesis has been per-
formed.
Therefore the next step in this project would be to compare the
results presented in this thesis with experimental data. In order to have the
same movement in an experiment the following experimental set-up is sug-
gested (see gure 5.1). The motor has to be able to provide a linear movement
in the direction of the "motion" arrows. The water level has the be variable
in order to run experiments at dierent depths without having to move the
plate physically. The plate should be connected to a force transducer that is
capable of functioning under water. The force transducer might be positioned
away from the plate, to avoid inuencing the ow around the plate.
65
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 5.
Summary and Conclusion
Figure 5.1: Illustration of experimental set-up.
the motor has to be able to provide a wide range of KC- and Froude-number.
Which mean that the motor has to function at a variety of frequencies and
amplitudes.
66
==PAGE:74==
Chapter 6
Appendix
6.1
Residuals
Figure 6.1: Residuals at KC = 6, Fr = 2 and D = 0
67
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 6.
Appendix
Figure 6.2: Residuals at KC = 4, Fr = 0.1 and D = 0.1
Figure 6.3: Residuals at KC = 6, Fr = 0.1 and D = 4.6
68
==PAGE:76==
Chapter 6.
Appendix
6.2
Flow visualization
6.2.1
Circular cross-section
(a) Vorticity at D = 0
(b) Vorticity at D = 0.5
(c) Vorticity at D = 3
Figure 6.4: Vorticity around a circular plate
69
==PAGE:77==
Chapter 6.
Appendix
6.2.2
Trapezoid cross-section
(a) Vorticity at D = 0
(b) Vorticity at D = 0.5
(c) Vorticity at D = 3
Figure 6.5: Vorticity around a circular plate
70
==PAGE:78==
Chapter 6.
Appendix
6.2.3
Rectangular cross-section
(a) Vorticity at D = 0
(b) Vorticity at D = 0.5
(c) Vorticity at D = 3
Figure 6.6: Vorticity around a circular plate
71
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 6.
Appendix
6.3
Force units
Figure 6.7: Force at dierent KC and Froude-number with units
72
==PAGE:80==
Bibliography
[1] X. Tian, L. Tao, X. Li and J. Yang (2016). Hydrodynamic coecients of
oscillating at plates at 0.15 ≤KC ≤3.15, Springer
[2] G. H. Keulegan and L. H. Carpenter (1958), Forces on Cylinders and
Plates in an Oscillating Fluid, Journal of Research of the National Bu-
reau of Standards.
[3] Walther, J. H., Jensen, J. T., Sørensen, J. N., & Larsen, P. S. (1994).
Discrete Vortex Method for Two-dimensional Flow past Bodies of Ar-
bitrary Shape Undergoing Prescribed Rotary and Translational Motion.
Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark: Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
[4] F. W. Robert, M. T. Alan, P. J. Philip and L. C. John (2012). Fluid
Mechanics, eighth edition (SI Version), John Wiley and Sons, inc. Asia.
[5] D. Ghosh, AK Mittal and SK Bhattacharyya (2016). Multiphase model-
ing of tsunami impact on building with openings, The Journal of Com-
putational Multiphase Flows, Sage.
[6] Computational Fluid Dynamics, Bingham B. Harry, Larsen S. Poul and
Barker Allan V. (2015), Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Kon-
gens Lyngby, Denmark.
[7] STAR-CCM+ Documentation version 11.02, CD-adapco (2016)
[8] Water Wave Mechanics chapter II-1, C. Linwood Vincent and Zeki
Demirbilek (2008), Coastal and Hydraulics Laboratory, Vicksburg, Mis-
sissippi
[9] CFD Simulation of Wave Energy Converter,
Nielsen K. Rasmus
(2017),Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Kongens Lyngby,
Denmark.
[10] Marine Hydrodynamics, J.N. Newman (1977), The MIT Press
[11] Ordinary Leasy-Squares Regression, Hutcheson,G.D.(2011), The SAGE
Dictionary of Quantitative Management Research.
[12] Forces and Moments on Flat Plates of Small Aspect Ratio with Applica-
tion to PV Wind Loads and Small Wind Turbine blades, Xavier Ortiz,
David Rival and David Wood (2015), Energies, ISN 1996-1073
73
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
[13] Navier-Stokes
equation,
https://www.comsol.com/multiphysics/
navier-stokes-equations, 13/7-2017
74
==PAGE:82==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Fluid Mechanics, Coastal and Maritime Engineering
Technical University of Denmark 
Nils Koppels Allé, Bld. 403
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Phone (+45) 4525 1360
Fax  (+45) 4588 4325
www.mek.dtu.dk
