==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Analysis of cell type speciﬁc pathway
expression in single cell data
Author: Kasper Thystrup Karstensen
Internal supervisor: Thomas Sicheritz-Pont´en, Professor
Technological university of Denmark
External supervisors:
Tune Pers, Associate Professor
Pascal Timshel, Ph.D.
Section for Metabolic Genetics, KU
Birgitte Kornum, Senior researcher and group leader
Molecular Sleep Laboratory, Rigshospitalet
Technical University of Denmark
Lyngby, Denmark
August 2017
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Conventional bulk sequencing (bulk-seq) methods oﬀers a great opportunity for dis-
covering the transcriptome in an entire cell population, however when analysing
homogeneous or rare cell types, bulk-seq falls short. Currently state of the art single
cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) methods have provided scientists with new means
for analysing the transcriptome in individual cells. scRNA-seq studies on homoge-
nous cell populations have revealed many unknown subtypes of cells. However, the
ﬁeld of scRNA-seq experiments is dynamic and many technological advancement as
well as new issues have been introduced. Yet one ﬁeld that seems to be neglected, is
the analysis of pathway expression in scRNA-seq data. In this study, a scRNA-seq
dataset were processed, to yield 8 diverse cell clusters. A bulk-seq method called
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) along with two custom made baseline meth-
ods, were applied on the processed data in order to compare the performances and
then benchmark the methods. Each applied method were evaluated relative to their
ability at ranking cell type associated pathways high in the deﬁned cell clusters.
Both scRNA processing and pathway analysis were successfully performed, however
several obstacles were revealed during the course of this thesis. I found out that
GSEA can potentially be used to analyse pathway enrichment in scRNA-seq data.
However in order to give a deﬁnite answer, the pathways used for performing GSEA
must be specialised for analysing single cell data. Since the conventional pathways
are too generalized to provide reliable results in scRNA-seq data.
Keywords: Single cell sequencing, pathway analysis, scRNA-seq data processing,
cell type clustering, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
i
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis was performed in a collaboration between the Section for Metabolic
Genetics at Copenhagen University, Molecular Sleep Laboratory at Rigshospitalet
Glostrup, and Center for Biological Sequence Analysis at the Technical University
of Denmark.
Tune Pers and Pascal Timshel provided bioinformatic supervision, while Birgitte
Rahbek Kornum provided biomedical supervision.
The thesis covers processing of single cell RNA sequencing data into cell clusters,
and the application custom made as well as well established methods for pathway
analysis.
The thesis is intended as a hybrid between a proof of concept and a methodology
comparison study, by suggesting and performing a strategy for applying tools which
are not normally used for single cell RNA sequencing data. This tool are used in the
hopes of expanding the palette of known methods for analysing pathway expression
on single cell RNA sequencing data.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Kasper Thystrup Karstensen, Masters Student.
Technical University of Denmark
2017-08-14
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank my lifelong friend Andreas Tanke Nielsen as well as my brother
Rasmus Thystrup Karstensen, for correcting my silly english grammatical mistakes
and for withstanding page upon page of something as confusing as biology.
I would like to thank the colleagues at the Center for Basic Metabolic Research.
I likewise thank all the colleagues I had this past year at Forskerparken Glostrup.
Especially thanks to Helene, Helle, Maja, and Natalie. I’m glad I were able to break
bread with you guys.
I would like to thank my by far most invested supervisor, Pascal Timshel. I have
never met a guy who had a more busy schedule, yet who were still was able to
consistently take a weekly session, every time providing golden advice. Pascal has
helped me to evolve as a student and has helped me push the project forward, when
I couldn’t see where to go next.
I would specially like to thank Birgitte Rahbek Kornum for taking me into her
small research group for an entire year. Yep, for one year she kept me outside the
safe walls of DTU and presented me to an entirely diﬀerent academic world. During
my stay I learned the valuable lesson of sparring and asking questions into ﬁelds
that are completely new to me. I Learned that Birgitte is a valuable supervisor,
who invests herself in everything you make, while being available with a minutes
notice. Without Birgitte I would never have been pushed out in the newest frontier
presented by Single cell technology.
iv
==PAGE:6==
I would like to thank Tune Hannes Pers, he have always acted as the oracle with a
calm overview. Even though we didn’t hold meetings frequently, every single meeting
sent me oﬀwith a fresh overview and a better plan for my Thesis. His insights in the
scientiﬁc ﬁeld and experience with master students have provided me with a valuable
resource.
In addition I thank my mother in law... I mean handling both kids at the same
time...Alone? That’s tough! Also thanks to my own parent for additionally investing
in my project, by looking after my kids when my mother in law was exhausted.
Thanks to my kids, for providing a wonderfull distraction from the thesis!
Lastly, many thanks go out to my girlfriend Terese Nørskov, for keeping hold of
the fort despite having a full time job. Without her inﬂuence from the very early
years at DTU, I would never have grown up to the task of actually accomplishing a
master’s degree!
v
==PAGE:7==
List of Abbreviations
It could deﬁnetely be advantagous to keep this page close while reading the thesis.
• cDNA: Complementary DNA
• CTAP: Cell type associated pathways
• ECU: Enriched Count Unit. - A single count, where a pathway were found
signiﬁcantly enriched in a given cell cluster.
• ES: Enrichment Score
• FDR: False Discovery Rate
• GO: Gene Ontology
• GSEA: Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
• MES: Mouse
• mRNA: Messenger RNA
• NES: Normalized Enrichment Score
• PBMC: Peripheral Mononuclear Blood Cells - P.12 meth
• PCA: Principal Component Analysis
• PCs: Principal Components
• scRNA-seq: single cell RNA sequencing - p.1 intro
• U-test: Mann-Whitney U-test
• UMI: Unique Molecule Identiﬁer
vi
==PAGE:8==
Supplementary materials
R
R.tar.xz (Archive format used in unix) To run the R scripts, Seurat, dplyr, and
Matrix R packages are required
In order to install Seurat confront http://satijalab.org/seurat/install.html
Run the R scripts in the order indicated, the ﬁrst script ”01 pbmc3k markdown.Rmd”
are written in R Markdown, and are published as ”pbmc3k.pdf.
Python
Folder of scripts, and basic ﬁles needed to execute script. Linux approach for ex-
ecuting: chmod 744 RUNME.py ./RUNME.py -h (For help page) ./RUNME.py -
g=pathway collection ﬁle -m=marker genes ﬁle -p=cluster proﬁle ﬁle
GSEA
GSEA.tar.xz (Archive format used in unix) In this supplementary material, output
from the GSEA analysis are included, alongside a custom made Python script for ex-
tracting informations from the results. The script are called ”handle gsea results.py”,
and can be run from its current folder.
vii
==PAGE:9==
Pathway Analysis
The output of the Python scripts included in the above Python section, were exported
into a tab separated text ﬁle, and is included as ”Pathway analysis.tsv”.
Results
The results from each methods were manually gathered into a Pathway X Cell cluster
matrix, stating the methods which deﬁned the pathway to be signiﬁacnlty enriched
in a given cell cluster. The results ﬁle are included as ”Results.xlsx” and as ”Re-
sults.ods”
viii
==PAGE:10==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgments
v
List of Abbreviations
vi
Supplementary materials
viii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Single cell RNA sequencing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3.1
Processing of biological samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3.2
Processing the sequencing data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.3.3
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.4
Challenges in scRNA-seq . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.4.1
Biological challenges
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.4.2
Technological challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2
Methods
15
2.1
Data included for the analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2
Processing of single cell RNA sequencing data . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.1
Filtration and outlier removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.2
Dimensionality reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2.3
Grouping and identiﬁcation of cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2.3.1
Clustering of cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.2.3.2
Marker gene analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.2.3.3
Typing cell clusters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
ix
==PAGE:11==
Contents
2.3
Pathway analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.3.1
Averaged cell proﬁles - Baseline methods . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.3.2
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.3.3
Determining cell type associated pathways . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.3.3.1
Marker gene enrichment in pathways . . . . . . . . .
30
2.3.3.2
Evaluation of signiﬁcant pathways
. . . . . . . . . .
31
2.3.3.3
Benchmarking the methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3
Results
33
3.1
Performance of the methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.1.1
Baseline method with T-test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.1.2
Baseline method with U-test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.1.3
Gene set enrichment analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.1.4
Comparison of the methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.2
Benchmarking the methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4
Discussion
39
4.1
Data processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1.1
Determination of cell clusters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2
Determining cell type associated pathways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.2.1
Predicting cell types from signiﬁcant pathways . . . . . . . . .
42
4.2.2
Baseline methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.2.3
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3
Benchmarking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.4
Biological properties of pathways
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.5
Limitations to the applied approaches in this thesis . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.6
Perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5
Conclusions
50
Bibliography
52
x
==PAGE:12==
Contents
Appendices
57
A Cell type labelling
58
B GSEA settings
60
C Cell Type Associated Pathways identiﬁed through inspection
61
C.1 CTAPs applicable for benchmarking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
xi
==PAGE:13==
1
Introduction
Recent advancements in sample sequencing have led to the invention of single cell se-
quencing. Beforehand, large suspensions of unknown organisms and cell populations
could be sequenced, to yield the genome, the epigenome, and the transcriptome of
the sample. However, the sequencing method could only yield results representing
the average expression values in a bulk population, this type of sequencing are hence-
forth refered to as bulk sequencing (bulk-seq). Over time the sequencing cost have
been drastically reduced, enabling more bulk-seq studies to be conducted, causing
the generation of enormous amounts amount of bulk-sequencing data.1 Currently
single cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) forms the latest trends in sequencing stud-
ies, presenting a state of the art approach to expand the biological knowledge behind
the transcriptomes of individual cells in a vast cell population.2 There are many
approaches to analyse and interpret scRNA-seq data. However as the ﬁeld advances,
new issues are continuously discovered, many of which are countered through corre-
sponding development of new tools.3,4
Instead of contributing to the development and discoveries of new tools, this thesis
takes a step back to evaluate whether application of older tools, can lead to new
biological insights when applied on scRNA-seq data.
1.1
Goal
The main goal of this thesis is to answer the following question:
“Is it possible to detect pathway enrichment in individual cells from scRNA-seq data,
using a bulk-sequencing method called Gene Set Enrichment Analysis?”
1
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 1. Introduction
To answer this question, a single cell RNA sequencing dataset were processed to
yield a variety of diﬀerent cell clusters. A pathway collection was then downloaded
and used in order to perform pathway analysis on individual cell clusters. Pathway
analysis were performed using Gene Set Enrichment Analysis along with two custom
made baseline methods. The top ranked results for each cell cluster were compared
for each method. Lastly each top ranked pathway was manually investigated, in
order to predict which cell types could potentially have enriched expression of the
given pathway, henceforth referred as cell type associated pathways. The top ranked
results of each method were compared to the predicted cell types and each method
was benchmarked relative to their ability to detect enrichment in cell type associated
pathways.
1.2
Background
Messenger RNA molecules (mRNA) are synthesised from DNA. mRNA conveys ge-
netic information from DNA to the ribosomes, which in turn translates the infor-
mation into proteins. Bulk-seq enables easy ampliﬁcation and sequencing of mRNA
molecules, providing an opportunity to gain insights into the entire cell populations
in a sample.5 However, when analysing rare cells or speciﬁc subtypes in homogenous
samples, bulk-sequencing falls short because bulk-seq is limited to analysing the av-
eraged gene expressions in a sample. Bulk-seq lacks the ability to distinguishing
the gene expression in individual cells. scRNA-seq oﬀers a way of sequencing the
transcriptome of each individual cell in a given population. scRNA-seq experiments
are the current state of the art method for analysing rare cell types in an otherwise
homogenous cell population.6,2,1
In 2009, Tang et al. 7 published the ﬁrst transcriptome generated with scRNA-
seq. The original ambition with single cells transcriptomics was to provide a reliable
method for obtaining sequencing results in samples with minute amount of biolog-
ical material. Sequencing of delicate cell populations, such as rare tumor cells or
embryonic stem cells in a early developmental state, have proved to be inaccurate
when analyzed in bulk-seq datsets.6 It was later discovered that scRNA-seq proved
2
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1. Introduction
to excel at revealing minuscule subpopulations within homogenous cell populations.8
As the scRNA-seq methodology was further developed, high-throughput technolo-
gies were implemented. This implementation enabled simultaneous proﬁling of thou-
sands to hundreds of thousands of cells, providing scientists with a new opportunity
to draw minute details in biological landscapes.1,6
Despite recent technological advancements, many biological and technological chal-
lenges still proceeds from generating and analysing scRNA-seq data. While several
companies and research laboratories have developed advanced setups and proce-
dures for performing single cell experiments, there are yet to be presented a golden
standard in processing and evaluating the scRNA-seq data.6,2 As a consequence, a
variety of computational tools have been and are still being developed for processing
scRNA-seq data. Each of these tools specialize in minimizing biological as well as
technological noise-causing factors. Some of the more noteworthy and freely avail-
able tools, have been developed by Satija et al. 9, Fan et al. 10, and Trapnell et al. 11.
Each tool presents its own approach to interpret and analyse scRNA-seq data. All
of them are programmed in R, allowing for easy implementation.
Satija et al. 9 have developed a tool named Seurat, originally developed for recre-
ating spatial information of each cell that is lost during dissociation and suspendion
of tissue samples. Currently, Seurat has evolved into a tool which is focused on pro-
viding means for easily processing scRNA-seq data, while oﬀering a generous degree
of functionality and customization.
Fan et al. 10 developed a tool called PAGODA. It organizes cells relative to correla-
tions between overexpressed genes which is based on weighted principal components
(PCs). PAGODA can be utilized for discovering correlations between sets of genes.
Discovered sets of genes are then correlated to known gene ontology (GO) terms and
curated Gene sets.
Trapnell et al. 11 have provided an algorithm named Monocle, which introduces pseu-
dotime trajectory of cell states, in order to determine the cell cycle state in each cell.
3
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 1. Introduction
1.3
Single cell RNA sequencing
The processes behind a single cell RNA-sequencing experiment is roughly divided
into sample processing and scRNA-seq data processing. Sample processing is per-
formed by preparing tissue or cell populations into appropriate samples. Often, the
sample process includes dissociation of tissue into a soluble suspension, which is a
prerequisite for capturing cells in high throughput aperture. During single cell iso-
lation, the cell transcriptome are tagged and then reverse transcriped. After reverse
transcription, the transcriptomes of all cells are pooled for bulk ampliﬁcation and
for later sequencing. For further details, see Section 1.3.1.
Raw sequencing data is computationally processed to yield single cell expression
proﬁles. Noise reduction procedures are then performed on the expression proﬁles,
these procedures includes data standardization, cell clustering, and marker gene de-
tection. The data processing procedures are brieﬂy described in Section 1.3.2, while
the analytical procedures are described in Section 2.2.
1.3.1
Processing of biological samples
Prior to isolating single cells, tissue sample or cell populations are dissociated into a
solution of viable cells. The cell concentration in the suspension is determined relative
to the speciﬁcations of the platform used for single cell sample processing. Such
speciﬁcations include minimum cell concentration, based on the expected capture
rate from sample processing procedures. Currently, there are a few methods which
can acquire cells directly from tissue without the need for dissociation, yet these
methods have limited capacity in terms of total amount of captured cells.6
Capture of single cells and subsequent transcriptome ampliﬁcation, can be achieved
through a variety of methodologies. These methodologies are usually decided on the
basis of the experiment and the type of samples used. One general approach is to
utilize a technique called GemCode12 which is implemented into automated single
cell apertures, like the 10x genomics Chromium platform.13
For the Chromium platform, a cell suspension is loaded into one or more of the
eight available sample wells. Cell suspension is loaded from the well and is then
4
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 1. Introduction
led through a narrow microtube channel, suspending cell further into a loose bead
on a string formation. The cell suspension then intercepts with a channel which
transports suspended gel beads. The gel bead are suspended in a water solution
containing enzymes, which are used later in single cell processing.
The channel
with single cells and beads passes a microdroplet forming channel, which provides
a constant ﬂow of oil. Paired single cells and beads are captured inside a closed
microenvironment formed by the droplets. For a graphical overview, see Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Droplet Formation: Speciﬁc barcoded gel beads are lead through a
microtube channel which intercepts another channel that provides a ﬂow of single
cell. Single cells and gel beads are then encapsulated into a droplet, by passing a
channel containing an oily suspension. Figure brought in courtesy of Annika Branting
from the 10x Genomics staﬀ.
Cells captured in droplets are lysed, causing the release of barcode fragments from
the gel beads and the mRNA molecules from the cells. The poly-A tail of the mRNA
contents are primed with the barcode fragments. The barcode fragment consists
of a primer site for sequencing, a barcode nucleotide sequence, a unique molecule
identiﬁer (UMI) sequence, and a poly-T primer sequence, all shown in Figure 1.3.
mRNA transcripts and barcode fragments are fused together, allowing reverse
transcription of the entire cell transcriptome. The reverse transcription is performed
to translate the transcriptome from mRNA into complementary DNA (cDNA), which
is a prerequisite for ampliﬁcation. This is vizualised in Figure 1.2.
5
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 1. Introduction
The barcode sequence acts as an identiﬁer for a unique droplet, eﬀectively stamping
the transcript contents of a given droplet with its respective parent cell. The UMI
is a short randomized nucleotide sequence, which represents the actual quantity
of mRNA molecules in the captured cell prior to ampliﬁcation. By tagging each
transcript with an unique UMI, ampliﬁcation bias can be neglected regardless to
the generaated amount of cloned cDNA molecules. An overview of the described
processes are shown in 1.4.
Figure 1.2: Reverse Transcription: The captured cell is lysed inside a droplet,
and the mRNA contents are primed with the Poly-T tail from the barcode fragment.
Primed mRNA molecules undergoes reverse transcription, yielding cDNA of the cell
transcriptome. Figure brought in courtesy of Annika Branting from the 10x Genomics
staﬀ.
6
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 1. Introduction
Figure 1.3: Barcoded Gel Beads: Each droplet contains a prediﬁned barcode frag-
ment. The barcode fragment consist of a unique cell-barcode sequence (10x Barcode),
a short unique molecule identiﬁer sequence (UMI), and two primer sites, one for re-
verse transcription synthesis (Poly(dT)VN) and one for next generation sequencing
(R1). Figure brought in courtesy of Annika Branting from the 10x Genomics staﬀ.
After reverse transcription, droplets are broken down and their contents are pooled
for cDNA ampliﬁcation represented in Figure 1.4. The ampliﬁed transcriptome prod-
uct are harvested for subsequent sequencing.14
7
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 1. Introduction
Figure 1.4: Transcriptome Pooling: Each droplet are broken after reverse tran-
scription and the cDNA transcriptome of all cells are pooled. Next, the pooled cDNA
molecules are ampliﬁed. Figure brought in courtesy of Annika Branting from the 10x
Genomics staﬀ.
1.3.2
Processing the sequencing data
Sequencing of the pooled transcriptome yields a large collection of unmodiﬁed reads.
Each read is formatted by splitting the barcode fragment sequence from the re-
maining mRNA transcript. Next, mRNA transcripts are aligned to a genome of
the organism from which the samples originate.13 Gene labels are identiﬁed through
alignment to the genome, they are then assigned to their respective mapped reads.
The cell barcodes and UMI tags are then mapped back to their respective transcripts.
UMI quantiﬁcation and correction are performed for identical genes in each cell,
by merging reads with similar UMI tags into a single unit. UMI tags which diﬀers by
only a single nucleotide, are likewise merged into a single unit to reduce ampliﬁcation
8
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 1. Introduction
errors.
Each unit are then counted, eﬀectively quantifying the actual amount of
original transcripts in a given cell.
Lastly, the quantiﬁcation of each transcriptome is assigned to their respective bar-
codes, in order to compile the expression proﬁle of each captured cell. A sparse
single cell expression matrix is generated by exporting each proﬁle from the expres-
sion proﬁles individually, while ignoring genes which were not counted within a single
cell.
1.3.3
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) is a method that was developed by the Broad
Institute, it has been used widely for explorative research on bulk-sequencing data
and has been utilized to provide new biological insights for diseases like diabetes.15
GSEA can be applied on bulk- seq data for analysing the enrichment of single path-
ways, to provide an overall enrichment score (ES). The ES is determined by analysing
the expression of a given pathway in a deﬁned phenotypic group (in this thesis a
given cell cluster) and then compare the group with the expression of the remaining
population.16
First, pathway genes are ranked in a gene list L relative to the diﬀerential expres-
sion between the two deﬁned phenotypic groups, where highly expressed genes are
ranked at the top of the list L. Next, the ranked list L is iterated from top to bot-
tom, while a walking score are continuously regulated for the analysed pathway. The
walking score increases when a gene in the list L is a member gene of the pathway.
The score decreases when a gene in the list L is absent in the pathway. Scores are
determined from the rank of each evaluated gene. Finally, the ES is determined as
the global maximum of the iterative walking score.
The signiﬁcance of each ES is estimated by performing an empirical permutation
test on the phenotype groups, where scores are calculated for each permutation.
Eventually, the permutations provides a null distribution of scores, which is used to
calculate the empirical nominal P value of the original ES. For illustrative purposes
a ﬁgure of an enriched pathway are shown in Figure 1.5.
9
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 1. Introduction
Enrichment scores of each pathway are normalized according to the pathway size.
Then the proportion of pathways which are falsely deemed to be signiﬁcantly en-
riched, is estimated by calculating the false discovery rates (FDR) on the normalized
enrichment scores (NES). Lastly, signiﬁcance levels are adjusted by repeating the
procedures for calculating the empirical nominal P-values, now using the NES.
10
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 1. Introduction
Figure 1.5: Enriched Pathway Result: This ﬁgure shows the resulting graph gen-
erated from running GSEA on the CD8+ cluster determined in Section 2.2.3.3. The
pathway are the ”Natural Killer Cell Mediated Cytotoxicity” from the Kegg database.
The green line depicts the walking score. The middle region shows vertically black
lines, for each match between a gene in the ranked list L and the pathway member
genes. The bottom region shows the metric score relative to the walking score. The
entire left side of the graph represents the correlation of the CD8+ cluster, while the
entire right section represent the correlation of the remaining cell population with
the pathway. The global maximum walking score (top point of the green curve)
represents the ES for the pathway in the CD8+ cluster.
11
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 1. Introduction
1.4
Challenges in scRNA-seq
Similarly to other sequencing methods, performing scRNA-seq experiments includes
a variety of challenges to overcome. This section covers some of the main challenges
and aspects in performing and analysing scRNA-seq experiments, by splitting the
types of challenges into two main categories:
The biological category covers some of the issues that are caused by natural re-
sponses to sample preparation or being part of the normal cell cycle. These aspects
are knwon to interfere with the speciﬁcity of the scRNA-seq experiment.
The technological category covers some of the aspects related to accidentally
causing damage to the cells when performing the experiment, along with challenges
associated with capturing the transcriptome of individual cells.
1.4.1
Biological challenges
Uniquely for scRNA-seq experiments, captured cells provides a snapshot of the cell
state at a given time point. As a consequence, scRNA-seq is extremely sensitive
to biological factors such as transcriptional bursting. Transcriptional bursts are the
phenomenon in which the transcriptome of a cell are spontaneous and unpredictable
rather than being continuous. Other biological factors likewise aﬀects the quality
in scRNA-seq experiments. These includes cell stress as well as the position of a
individual cell in the cell cycle.1,11,17
Tissue sample processing will likely introduce alterations of the expression pattern
in the cell populations. Therefore, optimization of sample preparation is key for
yielding a high quality single cell-dataset.2,9 Additionally, even though sample tissue
might be known prior to performing scRNA-seq, cell communities are decomposed
during sample processing. The decomposision of cell communities prevents cell-cell
interaction studies from being conducted directly from scRNA-seq data. Satija et al. 9
developed an algorithm for modeling spatial localization information in scRNA-seq
experiments, by determining and adding spatial information of the analyzed samples
when building the model. However, in order to generate spatial information in single
cell experiments, additional experimental procedures are required. For more deatils
12
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 1. Introduction
on reconstruction of spatial information, see Satija et al. 9.
The availability of transcripts in bulk-sequencing experiments are much larger rel-
ative to the transcripts of a single cell in scRNA-seq experiments. As some mRNA
transcripts remains untagged during the lysis phase in scRNA-seq, the ampliﬁcation
step are prone to neglect lowly expressed genes.2,18. Also, ampliﬁcation is biased
towards the longer transcripts, ultimately leading to a bias towards long highly ex-
pressed genes.1
1.4.2
Technological challenges
Apart from the biological issues previously discussed, single cell processing likewise
introduces technological issues. Issues such as the risk of causing cell damage during
cell capture, which may lead to increased stress responses or even breakage of the
cell membrane. Additionally, empty and multiplet cell captures can lead to misin-
terpretation of cell proﬁles. While some platforms are sensitive to multiplets and
empty captures, other platforms oﬀers manual or automatic microscopic inspection
of the captured cells. While the required time in manual microscopic inspection is
proportional with the amount of cells, experiments with limited and sensitive tissue
samples can yield a great beneﬁt from microscopic inspection. This is because the
inspection increases the chance of discovering and thus excluding low quality cells,
ultimately reducing the biologically noisy data from the dataset.
Scientists have approached the issue of excluding low quality cells from a bioin-
formatics perspective. In a recent experiment performed by Ilicic et al. 17, a large
population of mouse embryonic stem cells were analyzed using the Fluidigm C1 plat-
form (See Infobox below). Visually damaged cells, multiplets, and empty wells, were
used to train a machine learning algorithm. The aim was to generate an algorithm
for identifying genetic and technological features in low quality cells. In order to
benchmark the algorithm, external datasets which comprised of tissue from mice
and humans, were analysed prior to the training of the algorithm. The algorithm
performed well in conﬁrming low quality cells for mouse embryonic stem cells in other
mice as well as on other mouse tissue cells. Unfortunately, the algorithm performed
13
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 1. Introduction
less remarkable on human cells.
One major paradigm shift when working with scRNA-seq experminets, is the fact
that upon single cell isolation every individual cell represents a tiny experiment with
its own batch eﬀects. To clarify, each droplet that contains a single cell and single
bead, produces inevitable variability. To address this Tung et al. 4 examined the
performance and variability, when performing scRNA-seq experimnets on a Fluidigm
C1 platform using a variety of diﬀerent approaches. They found that the majority
of the technological variation was driven by genotype. However, during their study
they also indicated that UMI reads were biased for estimating transcript quantity.
These types of ﬁndings suggests that extra cares should be taken, when analsying
UMI-based scRNA-seq data. The platform is brieﬂy described in Infobox Fludigm
C1 platform.
Fluidigm C1 platform
The Fluidigm C1 platform performs cell capture through a microﬂow system,
where each cell are captured as part of being pushed through several wells
in a microtiter plate. Uniquely for the well based method, each well can be
inspected through microscopy, in order to determine the quality of each single
cell capture instance. Each well provides a microenvironment for ampliﬁcation
steps.19
14
==PAGE:27==
2
Methods
This chapter is split into three main sections. The ﬁrst section brieﬂy describes the
downloaded dataset as well as the selected pathway collection.
The next section described the data processing procedures. In general these pro-
cedures are outlier ﬁltration, dimensionality reduction, and clustering of cell types.
As the goal of this thesis is to examine the use of Pathway analysis in single cell
sequencing experiments, the results of the processing procedures are covered in this
chapter.
The last section covers how pathway analysis was performed, how the performances
of each method was evaluated, and how the individual methods were benchmarked.
2.1
Data included for the analysis
Several research organizations provides open access resources for downloading scRNA-
seq datasets, such as the 10X genomics support site20. The 10x genomics site provides
a selection of freely available datasets. From the 10x support site, the “3k PBMCs
from a Healthy Donor”21 dataset was downloaded. It consisted of 2700 unique bar-
codes and 32738 unique transcripts, generated from peripheral mononuclear blood
cells (PBMCs). This dataset was selected on the basis of examining cell type asso-
ciated pathways in immune cells from the human species.
Pathway collections were accessed through the Molecular Signatures Database
(MSigDB),16,15 this database contains multiple collections of gene sets. Each gene
set collection were formed based on criteria, such as a collection of gene sets as-
sociated throughout multiple GO terms and a collection of computational gene set
15
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 2. Methods
deﬁned by mining of cancer-oriented microarray data. To ensure that pathways were
manually curated and based solely on ﬁndings from scientiﬁc literature, the “C2 cu-
rated gene sets - CP: Canonical pathways (gene symbols)”22 collection were used for
this analysis. Henceforth gene sets are referred as pathways.
2.2
Processing of single cell RNA sequencing data
Among the available of computational tools for processing single cell dataset also
described in Chapter 1.2, Seurat was the only tool used for processing the single
cell data. This decision was based on the vast availability and customizability of
functions central to processing single cell data, as well as the quality of the written
documentation and user-friendly guides, oﬀered by the developer team.23 All scripts
and results from the processing steps are included in Supplementary material R.
2.2.1
Filtration and outlier removal
The dataset was imported into Seurat. Expression proﬁles of each individual barcode
was log-normalized, followed by centering and scaling of its respective unique tran-
script counts. Normalization aid in reducing variability between expression proﬁles.
Centering and scaling of transcript counts are a prerequisite for future dimensionality
reduction.
Barcode proﬁles were ﬁltrated to exclude barcode proﬁles with an overall transcript
count of less than 200 UMIs. Transcripts with a preﬁx of “MT-” were considered
as mitochondrial genes and therefore used for calculating the percentage of mito-
chondrial genes in each proﬁle. The dispersion of UMI’s per cell, the number of
unique transcripts per cell, and the percentages of mitochondrial genes per cell were
examined and plotted as violin plot(Figure 2.1). Cells expressing high amount of
mitochondrial genes have been associated with cell damage, and can be used as an
indicator for low quality cells. For further details please consult Ilicic et al. 17.
16
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 2. Methods
Figure 2.1: Dispersion in Violinplots: Violinplots of three parameters, used for
distinguishing outliers in the dataset. The plot shows the dispersion of number of
unique transcripts (left), number of UMI counts (middle) and percentages of mito-
chondrial genes in a given cell (right), throughout each unique cell barcode.
These plots indicate that the majority of proﬁles were based around dense ar-
eas with a few outlying proﬁles. The outlying proﬁles were examined further by
inspecting their distribution, which is shown in Figure 2.2.
17
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 2. Methods
Figure 2.2: Dipsersion in Scatterplots: The number of unique transcripts (left)
and percentage of mitochondrial genes (right), relative to the the cumulative number
of UMIs in a cell, were represented in scatterplots. Outlier cells can be seen on the
top right corner of the left plot, and the buttom right as well as top left corners of
the right plot.
A maximum threshold was determined for unique transcripts per cell to be 2.500
genes.
The maximum UMI count allowed per cell was determined to be 10.000
counts, while the maximum percentage of mitochondrial genes allowed in a cell was
determined to be 15%. Outlier exclusion was performed by ﬁltering out proﬁles which
discriminated the determined thresholds. From this point, single barcodes were now
considered to be actual single cells, while unique transcripts were considered to be
unique genes.
18
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 2. Methods
The outlier removal process resulted in exclusion of 13 cell-like objects along with
19024 unaccounted unique transcripts. After outlier exclusion, the remaining dataset
consisted of 13714 unique genes dispersed throughout 2687 diﬀerent cells.
2.2.2
Dimensionality reduction
Dimensionality reduction of the ﬁltered data was a prerequisite for future analysis
in Seurat. However, due to phenomenons such as transcriptional bursts introduced
in section 1.4, gene expression data could be expected to be extremely variable.
To account for this variability, the average expression and variance were calculated
for each gene and then distributed into 20 bins based on similar averaged expressions.
A Z-score for the variance in each gene were calculated for each bin. The Z-score
represents the stability between the average expression and variance of a given gene.
In total 1858 genes were found to have a high stability, between a high variability
and their respective average expression. The variability of all genes are shown in
Figure 2.3.
19
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 2. Methods
Figure 2.3: Stability in Variance: This plot shows the names and distribution of
the genes which proved to have the most stable high variability after the varaiblity
test. In future analysis, some of these genes will also be determined as marker genes.
Principal component analysis (PCA) was subsequently performed on the subsam-
ple of 1858 genes, providing the PCA rotation values for the ﬁrst 40 PCs. Afterwards
the remaining genes were projected onto the generated PCA landscape shown in Fig-
ure 2.4.
An elbow plot for the ﬁrst 20 PCs were generated to manually determine the
minimum amount of signiﬁcant PCs, which accounted for the largest amount of
variation. The ﬁrst 10 PCs were determined to be signiﬁcant through inspection of
ﬁgure 2.5.
It is possible to use other statistical approaches for determining the minimum
20
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 2. Methods
amount of signiﬁcant PCs in Seurat, some of these are mentioned in Supplementary
material PBMC3k Markdown.
Figure 2.4:
Principal Components:
This ﬁgure shows the ﬁrst two PCs of the
entire dataset, after the principal com-
ponents were mapped to the rotational
values.
Figure 2.5: Elbow Plot: The minimum
signiﬁcant PCs were estimated by manu-
ally inspecting the explained variance of
each PC, in the entire dataset.
2.2.3
Grouping and identiﬁcation of cells
A major hallmark prior to performing pathway analysis on scRNA-seq data, conﬁdes
in the clustering and subsequent labelling of the cells in the dataset. The amount of
determined cell clusters and the distribution of cells throughout each cluster, diﬀers
depending on the method and parameters used for clustering analysis. In this theisis,
a general overview of cell types were desired, and thus clustering of the most basic cell
types were prioritized. Labelling of cell types was performed by manually inspecting
top ranked marker genes in each deﬁned cell cluster.
21
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 2. Methods
2.2.3.1
Clustering of cells
Clustering was performed, after dimensionality reduction of data. The clustering
algorithm applied in this project was based on a principle named PhenoGraph by
Levine et al. 24. PhenoGraph models the data in a high dimensional space by applying
the data in a k-nearest neighbor graph. The nearest neighbor graph is structured so
that cells are plotted as nodes, each being interconnected to their nearest neighbors
by edges.
The edges represents the correlation between connected cells.
Highly
correlated cells are placed in clouds, where the cloud densities are relative to the
amount of nearby correlating interconnected cells.
The shared nearest neighbor
algorithm is then applied to the clouds, distributing the highly interconnected nodes
into communities. Each community eﬀectively forms a phenotypic cell cluster.9,24
The in-built cluster function in Seurat oﬀers a granularity option, which is scalable
to the size of the dataset. The granularity enables the user to deﬁne the resolution
of which the clusters are extracted from the graph. The level of details distinguished
by the shared nearest neighbor algorithm is controlled by the resolution. A high
granularity results in generation of more clusters, which is brieﬂy exampliﬁed in
Infobox Clustering Resolution. For more details on the clustering algorithm, please
consult Satija et al. 9 as well as the documentation for the “FindClusters” function
provided in the Seurat R package.
Data projection of the ﬁrst 10 PCs were used for clustering, using a granularity
setting of 0.5. This yielded eight cell clusters, represented in Figure 2.6.
22
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 2. Methods
Figure 2.6: Visual Representation of scRNA-seq Data: Vizual repressentation
of the dataset, including the assigned cluster labels. Two-dimensional visualization
were generated from tSNE plots.
Clustering Resolution
A granularity of factor 0.8 would yield nine clusters. However, later marker
gene analysis indicated that two clusters were CD4+ subgroups. These two
clusters are shown in heatmaps and t SNE plots, there are identiﬁed as clusters
0 and 1, in Supplementary material PBMC3k Markdown. As two subgroups
of monocytes were already identiﬁed, it was prioritized to work a granularity
factor of 0.5. This yielded eight clusters instead of nine.
23
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 2. Methods
2.2.3.2
Marker gene analysis
Marker gene analysis was performed individually for each gene. This was done by comparing the average diﬀerential
gene expression in a cluster, with the averaged diﬀerential gene expression in the remaining population. Bimodular
Likelihood-ratio test was used for calculating the diﬀerential expression of individual genes in each cluster. The test is
described in McDavid et al. 25.
Diﬀerential expression analysis was performed for each individual clusters. Genes with a P value lower or equal to
0.01 was considered as marker genes. Some clusters yielded more than 100 marker genes while other yielded less. The
top 100 ranked marker genes were used later in the marker gene enrichment test described in Section 2.3.3.1. A selection
of the top 10 diﬀerentially expressed marker genes are shown in Table 2.1.
CD4+
CD14+
B-cells
CD8+
FCGR3A+
NK
Dendritic
Megakaryocytes
T-cells
Monocytes
T-cells
Monocytes
cells
cells
Cluster 0
Cluster 1
Cluster 2
Cluster 3
Cluster 4
Cluster 5
Cluster 6
Cluster 7
LDHB
S100A9
CD79A
CCL5
LST1
GNLY
FCER1A
PPBP
CD3D
S100A8
CD74
NKG7
COTL1
NKG7
CLEC10A
HIST1H2AC
LTB
LYZ
HLA-DRA
GZMA
AIF1
GZMB
HLA-DPA1
CLU
CD3E
LGALS2
CD79B
CST7
FCER1G
PRF1
HLA-DPB1
CD9
IL7R
FCN1
MS4A1
GZMK
FCGR3A
FGFBP2
HLA-DRB1
PF4
NOSIP
TYROBP
HLA-DQA1
CTSW
IFITM3
SPON2
HLA-DRA
SDPR
CCR7
CST3
HLA-DQB1
KLRG1
MS4A7
GZMA
CST3
GNG11
LEF1
LGALS1
TCL1A
CD8A
RP11-290F20.3
CST7
HLA-DQA1
TUBB1
MAL
CD14
LINC00926
GZMH
SERPINA1
CCL4
HLA-DRB5
SPARC
AQP3
MS4A6A
VPREB3
LYAR
TIMP1
IGFBP7
HLA-DQB1
GP9
Table 2.1: Top 10 Marker Genes: Marker genes were identiﬁed by performing diﬀerential expression analysis of each
gene, comparing one cluster with the remaining population individually for each cell cluster. The top 10 marker genes
were ranked according to their assigned P-stat.
24
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 2. Methods
2.2.3.3
Typing cell clusters
The top two deferentially expressed marker genes were explored and used in combi-
nation with the top 10 marker genes. First, violin plots were generated for the top
2 genes to visualize the degree of dispersion for each of the marker genes, these are
shown in Figure 2.7. Second, the localization of the cells which expressed the marker
genes were mapped, by highlighting each selected marker gene in the generated t-SNE
landscape, this is vizualised in Figure 2.8.
Figure 2.7: Expression of Top 2 Marker Genes: These plots shows the expression
of the top 2 ranked marker genes throughout each cluster. Each column contains
pairwise plots starting with cluster 0 and 1.
25
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 2. Methods
Figure 2.8: Mapping of Top 2 Marker Genes: The top 2 ranked marker genes
were mapped according to the two dimensional representation of clusters, which is
illustrated in Figure 2.6.
Localization of the cells which expressed the marker genes were mapped by high-
lighting each selected marker gene in the generated t-SNE landscape (Figure 2.8).
Clusters were assigned a cell type label, using a combination of looking up top 10
genes in a variety of online gene databases26,27,28 and comparing the violin and cluster
mapping t-SNE plots. The cell typing results are shown in Table 2.2 and mapping
of cell types are shown in Figure 2.9. For a full description of the details used for
identifying cell types see Appendix A. All described processing steps were performed
using Seurat.
26
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 2. Methods
Cluster
Cell type
0
CD4 T-cells
1
CD14 Monocytes
2
B-cells
3
CD8 T-cells
4
FCGR3A Monocytes
5
Natural Killer cells
6
Dendritic cells
7
Macrophages
Table 2.2: Cell Type Labelling: Cell types were determined for each cluster by
examining database entries for the top 10 ranked marker genes along with inspecting
Figures 2.7 & 2.8.
Figure 2.9: Assigning Cell Labels: Two dimensional representation of the data
set, with the cell type labels assigned to each cluster.
Inspection of the cell clusters from Figure 2.9, revealed that CD4+ and CD8+
cell clusters had some overlapping cells. Additionally, a slight overlap was observed
between CD8+ and natural killer cells.
27
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 2. Methods
2.3
Pathway analysis
The application of pathway analysis for exploring biological relationships, was based
on the selected pathways described in Section 2.1. The expression patterns of these
pathways in the selected scRNA-seq data were used to calculate the pathway enrich-
ment for each cell cluster. Pathway analysis was performed using the GSEA and
the two baseline methods. The top ranked signiﬁcantly expressed pathways of each
cluster, were manually inspected to predict which cell types that potentially could
have an enriched expression of a given pathway.
2.3.1
Averaged cell proﬁles - Baseline methods
The averaged expression proﬁle was generated for each cell cluster by collecting the
median gene expression value for each gene present in a cluster. When generating
the averaged cell proﬁles, the median of each gene value was used to generate the
proﬁle. This approach was prioritised over using the mean, because genes with very
low expression values throughout a given cluster would have a median value of zero.
Pathway expression proﬁles were generated individually in cell clusters, by map-
ping the corresponding median gene values to pathway genes. For each generated
pathway proﬁle, a complementary proﬁle were generated using the remaining cluster
median genes with a value higher than zero. In the case that a pathway contained
genes which were not present in the cell cluster proﬁle, these were included in the
pathway proﬁle, with an assigned value of zero.
The baseline methods were performed by testing which were used to determined
signiﬁcant enrichment of each pathway in a given cluster. This was done by indi-
vidually testing pathways against their complementary proﬁles for each cell cluster,
using the ”Students T-test” and ”Mann-Whitneys U-test”.
Finally in order to increase the statistical power of future comparison of between all
methods, Bonferroni correction was performed for each single test. This was achieved
by dividing a critical alpha value of 0.05, with the product of the total amount of
pathways analyzed, multiplied with the number of methods used for analysis, multi-
plied with the total amount of cell clusters. Pathway proﬁles that were signiﬁcantly
28
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 2. Methods
higher expressed in a given cell cluster compared to their complementary proﬁles,
were determined to be signiﬁcantly enriched in that speciﬁc cell cluster.
Averaged cluster proﬁles were extracted from Seurat after data preprocessing,
while all described analytical steps were performed through custom made scripts.
These are included in Supplementary methods Python.
2.3.2
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
The GSEA software was chosen because it is a mainstream approach to analysing
pathways, and it can be applied on grouped scRNA-seq data. In addition, it is freely
available and up to date.
GSEA was executed using the 3.0-beta-build3. In order for scRNA-seq data to be
loaded into the GSEA software, the data was reformatted according to the require-
ments of the software. First, Expression data were extracted from Seurat and then
reformatted into a Cell X Expression matrix using a custom made python script.
Next, an indexing ﬁle was created for each cell, indicating the cell types of each
individual cell.
Finally, both the expression matrix and indexing ﬁle were loaded into the GSEA
software.
The analysis was executed individually for each cell cluster, using the
parameters described in Appendix B. A report were automatically generated for
each analysed cell cluster after each GSEA run. The report provided an overview of
the plots, heatmaps, and spreadsheets generated during execution.
The most relevant information from the GSEA report ﬁles, were extracted, using
a custom made python script. Both the reports from GSEA and the custom made
scripts are included in Supplementary materials GSEA.
2.3.3
Determining cell type associated pathways
In order to compare the performance of each method, from a biological standpoint,
determining cell type associated pathways (CTAPs) from the top ranked enriched
pathways are a vital step. The CTAPs aid in interpreting whether enrichment of a
pathway, would be predictable relative to the analysed cell types. This subsection
29
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 2. Methods
covers the process and approaches used for predicting the cell types of each top
ranked enriched pathway.
2.3.3.1
Marker gene enrichment in pathways
A pool of the top 100 signiﬁcantly diﬀerentially expressed marker genes, were ex-
tracted for each cell cluster using Seurat. Likewise, a pool was generated for each
pathway, containing the genes that were present in all other pathways. Afterwards,
membership tests were performed for the pool of marker genes to count the amount
of marker gene members in a given pathway, along with the amount of marker genes
outside the pathway gene pool.
A contingency table were made for each pathway containing the counts provided
during the membership testing, individually for each cell cluster. The contingency
table is cisualized in Table 2.3.
Then Fisher’s exact test was performed on the
contingency table, testing for signiﬁcant enrichment of marker genes membership
in the given pathway. The Bonferroni correction was calculated by multiplying the
total amount of pathways, with the amount of cell clusters. The level of signiﬁcance
was deﬁned by dividing the alpha value with the Bonferroni correction.
Pathway (P)
Non-pathway (NP)
gene count
gene count
Marker gene (M) count
M + P
M + NP
Non-marker gene (NM) count
NM + P
NM + NP
Table 2.3: Contigency Table: An overview of the contigency table used for for
determining signiﬁcant enrichment of marker genes in a given pathway.
The marker gene enrichment analysis was supposed to provide an indicator for
distinguishing and selecting the cell associated pathways.
Of all 1329 pathways,
a total of 8904 unique genes were detected, whereas the total amount of marker
genes, were approximately 100 genes per cell cluster. No pathway was determined
to have a signiﬁcant enrichment of marker genes. Whether that was because of the
skewness between the populations, or if the design of the enrichment analysis could
be optimized, was not further examined.
30
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 2. Methods
Apart from extracting the marker genes from Seurat, all of above steps were per-
formed using custom made scripts, included in Supplementary materials Python and
R.
2.3.3.2
Evaluation of signiﬁcant pathways
Instead of using the results from the Marker Gene Enrichment Analysis, pathways
were manually evaluated. For each cell cluster in each method, statistically enriched
pathways were ranked individually, according to their stats score for the baseline
methods and to the normalized enrichment score for GSEA. The top 20 highest
ranked signiﬁcantly enriched pathways for each cell cluster, were selected for further
pathway analysis.
A pathway X cell cluster matrix were generated relative to the method results.
Each of the pathways in the matrix was manually inspected, to predict which cells
were expected to be associated with the given pathway. The manual inspection was
based on a combination of the database description entries from the MSigDB29, in-
formation found on online resources, and by inspecting the genes of each pathway. To
enhance the process of evaluating each inspected pathway, Birgitte Rahbek Kornum
(Senior researcher) assisted in predicting cell types.
In the case that the genes of a pathway were too generalized, prediction of cell
types were more diﬃcult. To handle these types of pathways, expected downstream-
and upstream-cell types were taken into consideration. An expected ‘direction’ was
determined for that pathway. The expected direction was determined to account for
one group of cell types, being most likely enriched for a given pathway than others.
2.3.3.3
Benchmarking the methods
The performance in identifying cell type associated pathways by GSEA and by base-
line methods were evaluated, ﬁrst by assessing the performances of each method and
then by assigning a cumulative Benchmark score to each methodology based on the
predicted cell types. A method would be rewarded or penalised, according to the
correlation between resulting cell clusters and predicted cell types of a given pathway.
31
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 2. Methods
The penalty were included, to aid in distinguishing between methods that had few
yet precise results, and methods that had many yet less precise results.
A full reward were assigned to a method, when the resulting cell clusters of a
given pathway correlated with the predicted cell types. A full reward was likewise
assigned to a method, when the resulting cell clusters of a method, correlated with the
predicted direction, which were either the upstream or downstream cell types. Both
of these rewarding are referred as consistent ECUs. A partial reward was assigned
to a method, when the resulting cell clusters of a given pathway correlated with the
wrong direction. The partial rewarding is referred as a divergent ECU. A penalty
was assigned to a method, when the resulting cell clusters were not correlating with
any of the predicted cell types. A full reward had a score value of 1, whereas a partial
reward had a score value of 0.5, and penalties had a score value of -0.5.
32
==PAGE:45==
3
Results
This chapter focuses on presenting the results generated from analysing pathway ex-
pression in scRNA-seq data. In the next few sections, perfromances and results from
each method are presented. Then, a short section presents the results from bench-
marking each of the methods. The results from the pathway analysis are included
as Supplementary material Pathway analysis.
3.1
Performance of the methods
The baseline methods were used as a foundation for comparing the performance with
the GSEA method. The baseline methods were based on comparing the average
pathway expression proﬁles with their respective complementary expression proﬁles.
The comparison was performed with T-test and U-test.
The results of methods
deﬁned a level of signiﬁcance for each tested pathway for each of the individual
given cell clusters. The results was quantiﬁed into a custom made unit. One unit
represents a single count, where a pathway was found signiﬁcantly enriched in a given
cell cluster, this unit is henceforth referred as the Enriched Count Unit (ECU).
3.1.1
Baseline method with T-test
The baseline method performed with T-test, identiﬁed a pool of 743 ECUs out of a
total count of 10632 cluster speciﬁc pathways. From this pool, 158 top ranked ECUs
were collected. A total of eight ECUs belonged to CTAPs within the collection. The
distribution of the cell clusters covered by these eight ECUs are shown in Figure 3.1.
33
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 3. Results
Figure 3.1: Baseline T-test distribution: The distribution of the cell clusters
covered by the enriched CTAPs.
3.1.2
Baseline method with U-test
The baseline method performed with U-test, identiﬁed a pool of 1478 ECUs out of a
total count of 10632 cluster speciﬁc pathways. From this pool, 156 top ranked ECUs
were collected. A total of ﬁve ECUs belonged to CTAPs within the collection. All
ﬁve were signiﬁcantly enriched in the CD8 T-cell cluster (see Table 3.1).
3.1.3
Gene set enrichment analysis
GSEA identiﬁed a pool of 1843 ECUs. From this pool 153 top ranked ECUs were
collected. A total of 46 ECUs belonged to to CTAPs within the collection. The
distribution of the cell clusters covered by these 46 ECUs are shown in Figure 3.2.
34
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 3. Results
Figure 3.2: GSEA distribution: he distribution of the cell clusters covered by the
enriched CTAPs.
Reports and results generated from the Gene Set Enrichment Analysis are included
in Supplementary material GSEA.
3.1.4
Comparison of the methods
Each method had approximately the same amount of top ranked ECU’s, however
both baseline methods had a small collection of CTAP ECUs relative to the GSEA
results. The relationship between identiﬁed CTAP ECUs and the pool of top ranked
ECUs are shown in Table 3.1
35
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 3. Results
Total
Top ranked
Cell cluster
%Cell cluster
Method
ECU
ECU
associated ECU
associated ECU
GSEA
1843
153
46
30.1%
T-test
743
158
11
7.0%
U-test
1478
156
5
3.2%
Table 3.1: Performance of Methods: This table provides an overview for the
performance of each method.
Total ECU: The ECU count of the total amount
of cases in which pathways were found signiﬁcantly enriched in a cell cluster after
Bonferroni correction. Top ranked ECU: The total ECU count from the pool of top
ranked pathways. Cell cluster associated ECU: The total ECU count determined to
belong to the CTAPs which were identiﬁed by pathway inspection. %Cell cluster
associated ECU: Percentage of cell cluster associated ECU, relative to the collection
of top ranked ECU.
In some cases, multiple methods had overlapping results where a pathway were
found enriched in the same cell cluster, this is shown in Table 3.2. The baseline T-test
and U-test methods where overlapping most frequently, this supports the fact that
both methods were very similar. However, for the top ranked cell type associated
ECUs, there were only three cases of overlapping, these overlaps were between the
GSEA and Baseline T-test results. Results from each pathway analysis are included
in Supplementary material Pathway Analsys
Top ranked
Cell cluster
Methods
ECU
associated ECU
GSEA only
119
43
T-test only
71
9
U-test only
91
5
T-test and U-test
58
0
GSEA and T-test
27
3
GSEA and U-test
2
0
All tests 5
0
Table 3.2: Overview of Overlapping Results: An overview of top ranked ECU
and Cell cluster associated ECU, where methods lead to overlapping results.
36
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 3. Results
3.2
Benchmarking the methods
In total, 41 pathways were determined to be CTAPs. After predicted cell types were
assigned to these pathways, 33 pathways proved to be applicable for benchmarking
each method. A total of eight CTAPs were excluded from the benchmarking, as
these were applicable to all cell clusters, or any cell type in general. For a complete
overview of the CTAPs see Appendix C.
For each method, the resulting cell clusters identiﬁed to have a signiﬁcantly en-
riched expression of a given pathway, were compared to the predicted cell types for
that respective pathway. When all 33 pathway were compared, Benchmark scores
were assigned to each method, based on the scoring cirteria which was deﬁned in
Section 2.3.3.3. The parameters and results of the benchmarking are shown in Table
3.3.
The consistent accuracy was calculated by dividing the amount of consistent ECUs,
with the total amount of applicable ECUs.
The overall accuracy was calculated
by dividing the sum of consistent and divergent ECUs, with the total amount of
applicable ECUs. When comparing the consistent accuracy as well as the overall
accuracy, both baseline methods were more accurate than the GSEA method. Yet,
both baseline methods determined less than 10 ECUs, compared to GSEA which
determined 35 ECUs. For the benchmark scores, GSEA scored higher than both
of the baseline methods.
This reveals that the GSEA method generally ranked
biologically expected pathways higher than the baseline methods. This could be an
indication that the GSEA method is better suited for analysing pathway expression
in single cell data, because it provides a high rank for more pathways which are
correlated with the predicted cell types.
37
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 3. Results
Total
Consistent
Divergent
Benchmark
Consistent
Overall
Method
ECUs
ECUs
ECUs
score
accuracy
accuracy
GSEA
35
18
6
15.5
51.43%
65.57%
T-test
9
6
2
6.5
66.67%
88.89%
U-test
4
3
0
2.5
75.00%
75.00%
Table 3.3: Benchmarking: Overview of the parameters and scores used during
the benchmarking of each method.
Total ECU: Amount of ECUs applicable for
benchmarking. Consistent ECU: Cases where the resulting cell types ﬁts with the
predicted cell type, in a given CTAP. Divergent ECUs: Cases where the resulting
cell types did ﬁt cells which were inderectly predicted, in a given CTAP. Benchmark
score: The cumulative benchmark score of a given method, calcuated by summing
the amount of consistent-, divergent- and penlized ECUs. Consistent accuracy: The
percentage of Consistent ECUs relative to the Total ECUs. Overall accuracy: The
percentage of the summed Consistency ECUs and Divergent ECUs, relative to Total
ECUs.
All results from analysing the performance of each method are included as Sup-
plementary material ”Results”.
38
==PAGE:51==
4
Discussion
In this thesis, diﬀerent types of pathway analysis were performed on a single cell
sequencing dataset, consisting of 2700 peripherial blood mononuclear cells.
The
dataset processing of the scRNA-seq data was performed in Seurat. Outlier removal
and dimensionality reduction were successfully executed, while clustering provided
a total of eight diﬀerent cell types, which were all identiﬁed by using top ranked
marker genes, combined with database research, and visual mapping and dispersion
of the top 2 marker genes. In total seven diﬀerent cell types were identiﬁed from the
eight clusters, of which two clusters represented diﬀerent subgroups of Monocytes.
Benchmarking were successfuly performed on each method. However, despite the
considerations and precautions taken for performing this thesis, many obstacles and
limitations revealed themselves during execution of methods and interpretation of
results.
This chapter covers the considerations, observations, and ideas which were dis-
covered during the course of making this thesis. First considerations concerning the
processing of data are covered. Next, performance of each method is discussed, and
then the process of benchmarking each method are covered. Lastly, limitations and
perspectives are discussed.
4.1
Data processing
Despite the availability of several diﬀerent tools, preprocessing and quality analysis
were exclusively performed by processing the data through Seurat. This decision
was based upon two criteria.
First many of the other tools, had their own way
39
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 4. Discussion
of structuring the data in R as an object. Thus for each additional method, data
would have to be structured and stored accordingly to the required format of each
implemented tools.
This would provide new obstacles, as data would be stored
multiple times in diﬀerent formats. Also, implementation of new tools would require
a thorough insight into how each individual tool structures the data in order to
reformat the existing data, to ﬁt the needs of the implemented tool.
One tool which were heavily considered, were the machine learning algorithm, for
discovering low quality cells by Ilicic et al. 17. This tool was described in Section 1.4.2.
The tool seemed promising at ﬁrst glance, yet thorough inspection revealed that the
methodology behind this algorithm, has several pitfalls for this thesis. Most impor-
tantly, the algorithm are trained on data generated from a diﬀerent platform, which
yields results as Reads instead of UMI counts. In addition to this, the algorithm
was trained entirely from mouse embryonic stem cells, introducing bias towards an
entirely diﬀerent species as well as a early progenitor cell. Some minor drawbacks
were that during training of the algorithm, cells were inspected visually through mi-
croscopy to determine whether each cell were damaged, multiplets, or entirely absent.
Although it is intuitive and a great approach to optimize the process of sorting out
low quality cells, the algorithm is solely trained with cells that are visually damaged.
Lastly, the inspection of cells were performed manually, introducing additional bias
for training the unbiased algorithm.
In Seurat low quality cells were removed by applying arbitrary thresholds for UMI
counts, total amount of genes, as well as percentage of mitochondrial genes in a cell.
These thresholds were determined from manually inspecting the distribution of cell
data, and could be a potential source of bias. Whilst complete removal of low quality
cells cannot be guaranteed by removing cells which violates the deﬁned thresholds,
extreme outliers are prevented from skewing the data (see Section 2.2.1). Further
statistical methodologies for appropriately and automatic identifying these types of
outlier cells, may prove helpful for improving the quality of future data analysis.
40
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 4. Discussion
4.1.1
Determination of cell clusters
Dimensionality reduction was executed prior to cell clustering by applying Princi-
pal Component analysis. However, to ensure that extreme data points would not
dominate the Rotational landscape of the principal components, the averaged vari-
ability distribution were analysed (see Section 2.2.2). A subset of the most stably
highly variable genes was generated and the rotational landscape of the principal
components was calculated from this subset. One could hypothesize that the aver-
aged variable distribution may correlate to the deﬁned marker genes, as these were
deﬁned as the genes which were most diﬀerentially expressed (see Section 2.2.3.2). In
other words, these genes were determined to be the most variable genes for a given
cluster compared to the remaining population.
After dimensionality reduction, I settled with using the ﬁrst 10 principal compo-
nents, this decision were based on the reading of an elbow plot. It was possible to use
a more statistical approach such as the jackstraw method, which is brieﬂy described
in Supplementary material PBMC3k Markdown. However, as the jackstraw step
were time- and memory consuming, the elbow plot were deemed suﬃcient for this
thesis.
During determination of cell clusters, I originally used a resolution factor of 0.8,
this yielded a total of nine clusters as described in Infobx Clustering Resolution
in Section 2.2.3.1.
The extra cluster seemed to be a subgroup of the CD4+ T-
cell cluster. While being biologically interesting, it was preferred to work with as
few subtypes as possible, in when trying out and evaluating new methods. Thus a
resolution factor of 0.5 was chosen, yielding a total of eight cell clusters of which two
clusters were distinct monocyte subtypes.
Cell type labeling were performed by a combination of visual inspection of the
top 2 diﬀerentially expressed marker genes and screening various database entries
for the top 10 most diﬀerentially expressed marker genes. A full description of the
cell cluster labelling are included in Appendix A.
41
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 4. Discussion
4.2
Determining cell type associated pathways
Marker gene enrichment analysis was performed to provide an indicator for whether
a pathway was associable with a speciﬁc cell cluster. Yet not a single pathway was
shown to have a signiﬁcant enrichment throughout all the clusters.
There could
be several reasons for this ﬁnding (see Section 2.3.3.1). However from a biological
standpoint, there is a main diﬀerence in marker gene cell expression in general,
compared to the expression of functional genes in a pathway. In other words, because
a gene is expressed exclusively in one cell type compared to others, it doesn’t mean
that the gene is the main benefactor of entire pathways. Marker genes expression
in general and their role in a given pathway does not always correlate, and thus no
pathway showed an enrichment of marker genes.
4.2.1
Predicting cell types from signiﬁcant pathways
In contrast to analysing marker gene enrichment of a pathway in each cell cluster,
pathways were manually inspected in order to provide a basis for Benchmarking the
methods. The inspection of pathways were a slow and diﬃcult process. Some path-
ways had limited to no description provided at their respective database. Prediction
of cell types from these pathways, could only be decided on the basis of the path-
way name and the involved genes. In this thesis, manual inspection was determined
to be the best approach, as the amount of pathways to examine was limited. Yet,
for experiments with larger amounts of pathways an automated method would be
beneﬁcial.
4.2.2
Baseline methods
The baseline methods were performed, using a T-test as well as a U-test individually.
The T-test was included as a parametric test, while the Mann-Whitney U-test was
included as a non-parametric test. Bulk sequencing data usually are analyzed using
parametric methods, whereas the enormous amount of data generated in modern
scRNA-seq experiments allows for non-parametric analysis.30. Both baseline analyses
42
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 4. Discussion
were performed by deﬁning a median expression proﬁle for each pathway along with
their respective complementary proﬁle.
This approach had the risk of being too
generalized, as all genes in an entire cell cluster were reduced into a single median
value. However, as the goal of the thesis were to examine the performance of GSEA,
the baseline method would prove appropriate for comparison.
When comparing the total amount of identiﬁed ECUs, the non-parametric Mann-
Whitney U-test seemed to outperform the parametric T-test, which could support
the claim that non-parametric tests are better suited for scRNA-seq analysis. When
comparing the total amount of top ranked cell type associated ECUs, T-test slightly
outperforms the U-test. This, on the other hand, could suggest that T-test were
better applicable for deﬁning top ranked ECUs. For more details see Table 3.1. Un-
fortunately, these observed tendencies stemmed from a limited amount of comparible
results and should be examined on a larger scale, before any the previous conclusions
can be claimed.
4.2.3
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
GSEA was included as the main method for analysing pathway expression in scRNA-
seq data. The method provides a sophisticated algorithm for ranking and scoring
the expression of pathways. The score are based on the rank of each pathway genes
in the gene list L,16 which is described further in Section 2.3.2
4.3
Benchmarking
It could be expected that both baseline methods would top rank housekeeping path-
ways rather than pathways involved in cell type speciﬁc functionality. This is because
the housekeeping gene expression is more consistent than the expression of function-
ality genes.
This was supported by the Benchmarking of each method, as both
baseline methods proved to be very accurate, yet were found lacking in identifying
top ranked CTAPs and was further indicated by low Benchmark scores, relative to
the GSEA score.
43
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 4. Discussion
GSEA were just as well expected to top rank a majority of housekeeping pathways,
yet due to the more sophisticated algorithm, it was likewise expected to identify a
larger fraction of cell type speciﬁc functional pathways. This were supported by the
Benchmarking scores, as GSEA identiﬁed the highest amount of CTAPs. GSEA
proved to be more successful in top ranking cell type associated pathways, and could
therefore be an appropriate tool to use, when analysing a pathway expression in
single cell data. However as discussed in Section 4.5, pathways should be narrowed
down to be more speciﬁc for single cell pathways, if the full potential of GSEA should
be achieved.
4.4
Biological properties of pathways
In the total collection of 148 signiﬁcantly enriched pathways, nine Reactome path-
ways were associated with coagulation.
Collectively, T-test and GSEA identiﬁed
six out of nine pathways to be exclusive enriched in the Megakaryocyte cluster.
An example of a coagulation associated pathway could be “Formation of ﬁbrin clot
(Clotting cascade)”. This pathway is described to be associated with the cascade
that generates a clot, as a consequence of acquiring an injury. The pathway is a
member of a larger Homeostasis pathway, which was determined to be signiﬁcant
in all cell clusters by both baseline methods. The Reactome database provided a
visual representation of the overall Homeostasis pathway, including sub pathways
to the aforementioned Clotting Cascade. A total of four signiﬁcant pathways from
the Reactome database, were associated to the overall Homeostasis cascade. This is
shown in Figure 4.1
44
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 4. Discussion
Figure 4.1: Homeostasis Cascade: This diagram from the Reactome database,
shows an overview of the Homeostasis cascade. A total of nine pathways were iden-
tifyed as signiﬁcantly enriched in megakaryocytes. All of these pathways originated
from the Reactome database and four signiﬁcantly enriched pathways were repre-
sented by this diagram.
A total of 19 signiﬁcantly enriched pathways were associated with diseases, of
which 13 pathways were signiﬁcantly enriched in the B-cell cluster. The majority
of the B-cell pathways were determined mainly the baseline T-test method. Disease
pathways such as “Allograft Rejection”, “Asthma”, and “Autoimmune Thyroid Dis-
ease” were signiﬁcantly enriched for the B-cells, CD14+ Monocytes, and Dendritic
cells clusters. In the overall collection of top ranked enriched pathways, ﬁve disease
associated pathways were found signiﬁcant. Disease pathways like Hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy, were found to be signiﬁcantly enriched in megakaryocytes by the GSEA
and the baseline T-test methods. Cases like these could be interesting to examine,
as multiple methods indicates that a pathway related to a speciﬁc disease, could be
associated with megakaryocytes.
A few of the 41 cell type associated pathways were examined. Pathways such as
45
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 4. Discussion
“Interferon Signaling” of Reactome were expected to be present throughout all the
cell clusters except Megakaryocytes. However, only a few cell type were shown to
contain enirhcment of ”Intereferon signaling” associated pathways. The pathways
“Interferon Alpha/Beta Signaling”, “Interferon Gamma Signaling”, and ”Intereferon
signaling” are all represented in the ”Intereferon signaling” diagram. This is shown
in Figure 4.2 and Supplementary Material Results.
Figure 4.2: Interferon Signalling:
Another interesting pathway was the “Natural Killer Cell Mediated Cytotoxicity”,
which were found signiﬁcantly enriched in CD8 T-cells and NK-cells by the GSEA
and the baseline T-test methods. As both cell clusters contained overlapping marker
genes,(also indicated in Table 2.1), it could be expected that both cell clusters are
slightly intermingled. By suggestion from Birgitte Rahbek Kornum, these pathways
could be signiﬁcantly enriched in both the CD8 T-cells and the NK-cells clusters, due
to potential presence of T-natural killer cells in the overall cell population. These
T-Natural killer cells were unaccounted for during clustering.
46
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 4. Discussion
4.5
Limitations to the applied approaches in this
thesis
As mentioned in Section 1.2, other tools have been developed for analysing and
interpreting scRNA-seq data. One such tool which analyses the over-dispersion of
pathways, are called PAGODA.10 The tool calculates the PCA weights, in order to
collect a set of genes which are compared to a collection of pathways and GO terms.
PAGODA could be an optimal tool to compare with GSEA. However the GSEA
method yields a ranked collection of signiﬁcantly enriched pathways based on a user
deﬁned collection of pathways, while PAGODA suggests correlating sets of genes,
compared to a predeﬁned collection of pathways and GO terms. In other words,
both methods provides diﬀerent types of outcome, which could prove rather diﬃcult
to compare.
Despite PAGODA being developed speciﬁcally for analysing scRNA-seq data,
GSEA is still an interesting tool to analyze, as it could potentially yiedl reliable
results when applied on scRNA-seq data. The use of well-established bulk sequenc-
ing methods for pathway expression analysis, such as GSEA seems sparsely reviewed
when it comes to its use in scRNA-seq data.
Bonferroni correction were performed to enhance the criteria for determining sig-
niﬁcance of each method. In addition, false discovery rates were automatically calcu-
lated for the GSEA method. However, FDR were not implemented for the baseline
methods. This is a major drawback for the statistical power of the determined sig-
niﬁcant results.
One major limitation to analysing pathway expression in single cell data, were the
nature of the pathways used in this thesis. The pathways from MSigDB were gen-
erated in interest of discovering gene-gene interactions within bulk sequencing data.
As the transcriptome of a single cell cannot be isolated in native bulk sequencing
data, the pathways includes genes which spans throughout multiple cell types. In
other words, for most of the included pathways, upstream processes were intermixed
with downstream processes. In this thesis, upstream processes refer to the genes ex-
pressed within a single cell that ultimately yield a product which are then secreted.
47
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 4. Discussion
Downstream processes refer to the genes expressed when local cells are aﬀected by
the secreted products. While the generalization in pathway genes could be beneﬁcial
to analysing bulk data, it provides a major issue for analysing single cell sequencing.
This is because in scRNA-seq data, the upstream and downstream interactions are
intermixed and measured relative to the expression levels of the same cell, rather
than relative to the expression levels of the entire cell population as it was intended.
After generation of results, the top 20 enriched pathways of each cell cluster were
copied onto a manually generated matrix, included in Supplementary material Re-
sults.
During these transactions, errors could be introduced as the results were
inserted into the matrix.
Another potential source of error was from the overall
determination and prediction of cell types in each pathway. Since the title, the de-
scription, and the genes of each pathway were manually evaluated, bias could be
introduced during the process of determining the predicted cell types. An example
of a pathway which could be misinterpreted are included in Infobox The CD8 TCR
Downstream pathway
In general when examining pathway expression, a bias towards consistently ex-
pressed pathways such as housekeeping pathways can be expected.16,15,31 Whereas
cell type speciﬁc functionality pathways would be more diﬃcult to detect, since ex-
pression of such pathways are more conditional. Thus, in order to enhance pathway
expression analysis, methods that distinguish between cell type functional pathways
and regular housekeeping pathways should be applied.
The CD8 TCR Downstream pathway
A pathway such as the “CD8 TCR Downstream Pathway” was a ﬁne example
of a misinterpreted pathway. As the pathway title includes the word “Down-
stream”, the pathway would be expected to represent the process of a T-cell
receptor being activated and thus expected to be signiﬁcantly enriched for
CD8+ T-cells only, yet the pathway was determined to be signiﬁcantly en-
riched in the CD4+ T-Cells as well as the FCGR3A+ Monocytes clusters by
the GSEA method.
48
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 4. Discussion
4.6
Perspectives
For future pathway analysis, methods like GSEA may be useful.
However, as a
prequisitive for a high quality, single cell interaction pathways should be developed
and used instead of generalised pathways. Once the GSEA setup has been opti-
mized and customised, the analysis can be enhanced by adding external modules like
protein-protein interaction analysis. The ﬁeld of single cell sequencing are contin-
uously advancing, allowing analysis of transcriptomes, splice variants, epigenetism,
and proteomes of a single cell. By evolving the approaches and methods applied for
pathway analysis, there are many biological discoveries yet to be made.
Additionally, scRNA-seq oﬀers a new oppertunity for enhancing cell identiﬁcation
in bulk-seq experiments. In 2010 Shen-Orr et al. 32 published a study proposing a
deconvelution method for analysing the diﬀerential gene expression of each cell in
a biological sample, based on relative cell-type frequencies observed from microar-
ray data. Later many deconvolution methods have been developed and optimized,
providing a better way of analysing bulk-seq data.33 By applying the deconvelution
method on whole-blood microarray datasets, hundreds of otherwise undetected diﬀer-
entially expresed genes were discovered. Now that the expression proﬁle of individual
cells can be gerenated through scRNA-seq sequencing, application of deconvelution
techniques combined with individual cell proﬁles, can enhance diﬀerential expression
studies from bulk-seq data. With the expanding avilability of scRNA-seq datasets
brieﬂy mentioned in Section 2.1, development of a such deconvelution algorithm
could be beneﬁcial for many scientists, without the need of running any laboratory
procedures.
49
==PAGE:62==
5
Conclusions
This thesis set out to determine whether it was possible to detect enrichment of path-
ways in scRNA-seq data, by using a convensional bulk-seq method called Gene Set
Enrichment Analysis. Processing and clustering of a scRNA-seq dataset was success-
full. Applying a Canonical Pathway collection, which was solely curated from scien-
tiﬁc publications, succesfully identiﬁed 1843 cases of enriched pathways throughout
8 distinct cell clusters for the GSEA method. Performance of GSEA were compared
with two baseline methods. Manual inspection of a selection of top ranked enriched
pathways, revealed that GSEA identiﬁed 46 cases of CTAPs, whereas the baseline
T-test and U-test methods revealed 11 and 5 cases respectively. Benhcmarking each
methods with the above results, revealed that GSEA had a slightly lower accuracy in
identifying cell cluster associated pathways, when compared to both baseline meth-
ods. Yet in terms of detecting CTAPs that correlated with the predicted cell types
cell cluster associated pathway enrichment, GSEA scored higher at the Benchmark
scale than both baseline methods.
The marker gene enrichment analysis did not aid in deﬁning cell cluster associated
pathways, thus manual inspection was necessary. This process could be optimized by
applying a computational tool, which could deﬁne CTAPs directly from the scRNA-
seq data. The use of the baseline method were not necessarily enlightening in evalu-
ating the performance of GSEA itself. However, it did reveal that GSEA as a more
sophisticated tool that did outperform the custom designed baseline methods. A
better strategy for comparing performance of GSEA, would be to determine a way
to apply and compared single cell speciﬁc pathway analysis tools, like PAGODA.
From the manual inspection of the pathway genes, I learned the importance of us-
50
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 5. Conclusions
ing speciﬁc and accurate pathways, when analysing scRNA-seq data. While bulk-seq
data analysis may beneﬁt from using generalised pathways, scRNA-seq experiments
are penalised from the lack of cell type pathway speciﬁcity. Overall GSEA could po-
tentialy perform very well in scRNA-seq experiments if applied with custom designed
pathways, which are speciﬁc to individual cell types.
51
==PAGE:64==
Bibliography
[1] Serena Liu and Cole Trapnell.
Single-cell transcriptome sequencing: recent
advances and remaining challenges. F1000Research, 5, 2016.
[2] Rhonda Bacher and Christina Kendziorski. Design and computational analysis
of single-cell rna-sequencing experiments. Genome biology, 17(1):63, 2016.
[3] Antoine-Emmanuel Saliba, Alexander J Westermann, Stanislaw A Gorski, and
J¨org Vogel. Single-cell rna-seq: advances and future challenges. Nucleic acids
research, 42(14):8845–8860, 2014.
[4] Po-Yuan Tung, John D Blischak, Chiaowen Joyce Hsiao, David A Knowles,
Jonathan E Burnett, Jonathan K Pritchard, and Yoav Gilad. Batch eﬀects and
the eﬀective design of single-cell gene expression studies. Scientiﬁc reports, 7:
39921, 2017.
[5] Zhong Wang, Mark Gerstein, and Michael Snyder. Rna-seq: a revolutionary
tool for transcriptomics. Nature reviews genetics, 10(1):57–63, 2009.
[6] Aleksandra A Kolodziejczyk, Jong Kyoung Kim, Valentine Svensson, John C
Marioni, and Sarah A Teichmann. The technology and biology of single-cell rna
sequencing. Molecular cell, 58(4):610–620, 2015.
[7] Fuchou Tang, Catalin Barbacioru, Yangzhou Wang, Ellen Nordman, Clarence
Lee, Nanlan Xu, Xiaohui Wang, John Bodeau, Brian B Tuch, Asim Siddiqui,
et al. mrna-seq whole-transcriptome analysis of a single cell. Nature methods, 6
(5):377–382, 2009.
[8] Alex K Shalek, Rahul Satija, Xian Adiconis, Rona S Gertner, Jellert T
Gaublomme, Raktima Raychowdhury, Schragi Schwartz, Nir Yosef, Christine
Malboeuf, Diana Lu, et al.
Single-cell transcriptomics reveals bimodality in
expression and splicing in immune cells. Nature, 498(7453):236, 2013.
52
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[9] Rahul Satija, Jeﬀrey A Farrell, David Gennert, Alexander F Schier, and Aviv
Regev. Spatial reconstruction of single-cell gene expression data. Nature biotech-
nology, 33(5):495–502, 2015.
[10] Jean Fan, Neeraj Salathia, Rui Liu, Gwendolyn E Kaeser, Yun C Yung, Joseph L
Herman, Fiona Kaper, Jian-Bing Fan, Kun Zhang, Jerold Chun, et al. Charac-
terizing transcriptional heterogeneity through pathway and gene set overdisper-
sion analysis. Nature methods, 13(3):241, 2016.
[11] Cole Trapnell, Davide Cacchiarelli, Jonna Grimsby, Prapti Pokharel, Shuqiang
Li, Michael Morse, Niall J Lennon, Kenneth J Livak, Tarjei S Mikkelsen, and
John L Rinn. The dynamics and regulators of cell fate decisions are revealed
by pseudotemporal ordering of single cells. Nature biotechnology, 32(4):381–386,
2014.
[12] Evan Z Macosko, Anindita Basu, Rahul Satija, James Nemesh, Karthik Shekhar,
Melissa Goldman, Itay Tirosh, Allison R Bialas, Nolan Kamitaki, Emily M
Martersteck, et al. Highly parallel genome-wide expression proﬁling of individual
cells using nanoliter droplets. Cell, 161(5):1202–1214, 2015.
[13] Grace XY Zheng, Jessica M Terry, Phillip Belgrader, Paul Ryvkin, Zachary W
Bent, Ryan Wilson, Solongo B Ziraldo, Tobias D Wheeler, GeoﬀP McDermott,
Junjie Zhu, et al. Massively parallel digital transcriptional proﬁling of single
cells. Nature communications, 8:14049, 2017.
[14] 10x
Genomics.
Library
prep
-
single
cell
gene
expression
-
oﬃ-
cial
10x
genomics
support.
https://support.10xgenomics.com/
single-cell-gene-expression/library-prep, 2017. Accessed: 2017-08-06.
[15] Vamsi K Mootha, Cecilia M Lindgren, Karl-Fredrik Eriksson, Aravind Subra-
manian, Smita Sihag, Joseph Lehar, Pere Puigserver, Emma Carlsson, Martin
Ridderstr˚ale, Esa Laurila, et al. Pgc-1 [alpha]-responsive genes involved in oxida-
tive phosphorylation are coordinately downregulated in human diabetes. Nature
genetics, 34(3):267, 2003.
53
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography
[16] Aravind Subramanian, Pablo Tamayo, Vamsi K Mootha, Sayan Mukherjee, Ben-
jamin L Ebert, Michael A Gillette, Amanda Paulovich, Scott L Pomeroy, Todd R
Golub, Eric S Lander, et al. Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based
approach for interpreting genome-wide expression proﬁles. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 102(43):15545–15550, 2005.
[17] Tomislav Ilicic, Jong Kyoung Kim, Aleksandra A Kolodziejczyk, Frederik Otzen
Bagger, Davis James McCarthy, John C Marioni, and Sarah A Teichmann.
Classiﬁcation of low quality cells from single-cell rna-seq data. Genome biology,
17(1):29, 2016.
[18] Allon Wagner, Aviv Regev, and Nir Yosef. Revealing the vectors of cellular
identity with single-cell genomics. Nature biotechnology, 34(11):1145–1160, 2016.
[19] Fluidigm.
Fluidigm — products.
https://www.fluidigm.com/products/
c1-system, 2017. Accessed: 2017-08-06.
[20] 10x Genomics. Datasets - single cell gene expression - oﬃcial 10x genomics sup-
port. https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-expression/
datasets, 2017. Accessed: 2017-08-07.
[21] 10x Genomics. Datasets - single cell gene expression - oﬃcial 10x genomics sup-
port. https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-expression/
datasets/1.1.0/pbmc3k, 2017. Accessed: 2017-08-07.
[22] Massachusetts Institute of Technology Broad Institute and University of Cal-
ifornia.
Gsea — msigdb — msigdb collections - broad institute.
http:
//software.broadinstitute.org/gsea/msigdb/collections.jsp#C2, 2017.
Accessed: 2017-08-07.
[23] Satija lab. Seurat. http://satijalab.org/seurat/, 2017. Accessed: 2017-08-
13.
[24] Jacob H Levine, Erin F Simonds, Sean C Bendall, Kara L Davis, D Amir El-
ad, Michelle D Tadmor, Oren Litvin, Harris G Fienberg, Astraea Jager, Eli R
54
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
Zunder, et al. Data-driven phenotypic dissection of aml reveals progenitor-like
cells that correlate with prognosis. Cell, 162(1):184–197, 2015.
[25] Andrew McDavid, Greg Finak, Pratip K Chattopadyay, Maria Dominguez, Lau-
rie Lamoreaux, Steven S Ma, Mario Roederer, and Raphael Gottardo. Data
exploration, quality control and testing in single-cell qpcr-based gene expression
experiments. Bioinformatics, 29(4):461–467, 2012.
[26] Johns Hopkins University. Omim - online mendelian inheritance in man. https:
//www.omim.org/, 2017. Accessed: 2017-08-10.
[27] Weizmann Institute of Science. Genecards - human genes — gene database —
gene search. http://www.genecards.org/, 2017. Accessed: 2017-08-10.
[28] US government and National Library of Medicine. Home - gene - ncbi. https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/, 2017. Accessed: 2017-08-10.
[29] Massachusetts Institute of Technology Broad Institute and University of Cal-
ifornia. Gsea — msigdb - broad institute. software.broadinstitute.org/
gsea/msigdb, 2017. Accessed: 2017-08-10.
[30] Peter V Kharchenko, Lev Silberstein, and David T Scadden. Bayesian approach
to single-cell diﬀerential expression analysis. Nature methods, 11(7):740–742,
2014.
[31] Christiaan A de Leeuw, Benjamin M Neale, Tom Heskes, and Danielle
Posthuma. The statistical properties of gene-set analysis. Nature Reviews Ge-
netics, 17(6):353–364, 2016.
[32] Shai S Shen-Orr, Robert Tibshirani, Purvesh Khatri, Dale L Bodian, Frank
Staedtler, Nicholas M Perry, Trevor Hastie, Minnie M Sarwal, Mark M Davis,
and Atul J Butte.
Cell type–speciﬁc gene expression diﬀerences in complex
tissues. Nature methods, 7(4):287–289, 2010.
55
==PAGE:68==
Bibliography
[33] Shai S Shen-Orr and Renaud Gaujoux. Computational deconvolution: extract-
ing cell type-speciﬁc information from heterogeneous samples. Current opinion
in immunology, 25(5):571–578, 2013.
56
==PAGE:69==
Appendices
57
==PAGE:70==
A
Cell type labelling
A selection of top 10 ranked marker genes were screened on following databases for
deﬁning their cell type labels:
• The Online Mendelian Inheritance in Men (OMIM) database.26
• GeneCards: The Human Gene Database.27
• NCBI gene database.28
Cluster 0 The marker gene IL7R of Cluster 0 are associated with lymphopoiesis,
and have an inﬂuence of formation CD8+ memory T-cells, by increasing survivabil-
ity.[OMIM] High expression of IL7R have been associated with CD4+ T-cells,[genecards]
suggesting that Cluster 0 were most likely representing CD4+ T-cells.
Cluster 1 The marker gene CD14 of cluster 1, are an monocyte diﬀerentiation
antigen. [OMIM, wikigene] It were only expressed as a marker gene in cluster 1,
which in that context were labelled CD14+ Monocytes.
Cluster 2 The marker gene CD79A of cluster 2 were expressed in B-cells and are
considered as a part of the B-cell antigen receptor complex.[OMIM] Expression and
gene mapping of CD79A were restricted within cluster 2, indicating that this cluster
represented B-cells.
Cluster 3 The marker genes CD8A of cluster 3 codes for the alpha chain of
CD8.[NCBI gene, genecards] It was therefore assumed that cluster 3 were CD8+
T-cells.
Cluster 4 The marker gene FCGR3A of cluster 4 are associated with Monocytes,
natural killer cells, and a smaller subset of T-cells.[OMIM] Gene expression and map-
ping of FCGR3A were restricted to cluster 4 and cluster 5. As the other top 2 marker
58
==PAGE:71==
Appendix A. Cell type labelling
gene - LST1 were associated with monocyte diﬀerentiation, yet were expressed and
mapped in the CD14+ Monocyte cluster, Cluster 4 were labelled with FCGR3A+
Monocytes.
Cluster 5 The marker genes GNLY[NCBI gene, OMIM] and GZMB[NCBI gene,
OMIM] are associated with Natural killer cells and cytotoxic T-cells. Gene expression
and mapping of both marker gene distributions were restricted to cluster 5. Other
marker genes like NKG7 are a associated with both Natural killer cells and Cytotoxic
T-cells. As NKG7 were a marker gene for both Cluster 5 and the CD8+ T-cell cluster,
both clusters could potentially contain many overlapping cells. However, as cluster 5
did not express CD8A as a marker genes, it was assumed to be representing Natural
Killer cells.
Cluster 6 The marker gene FCGR1A of cluster 6, are explicitly expressed in
dendritic cells and macrophages [OMIM], which corresponds well to the restriction
of marker gene distribution indicated by the violin plot. The marker gene CLEC10A
encodes a member of the C-type lectin-like domain (CTLD) protein[NCBI gene],
this protein are associated with activation of dendritic cells [NCBI]. Overall it were
assumed that Cluster 6 represented Dendritic cells.
Cluster 7 The marker genes PPBP [NCBI gene, OMIM] and PF4 [NCBI gene,
OMIM] are both produced by activated platelets.
Both genes were restricted to
cluster 7, for the marker gene distribution shown in the violin plot, and the gene
mapping shown in the tSNE plots. It was therefore assumed that cluster 7 repre-
sented Macrophages.
59
==PAGE:72==
B
GSEA settings
In the “Home” tab, the data matrix ﬁle “matrix.txt” were loaded, along with the
index ﬁle “index.cls”, this contained group identiﬁers along with their respective cell
type labels, used for the data matrix.
In the “Run GSEA” Tab, “Expression dataset” were selected to be the “ma-
trix.txt” ﬁle. The “Gene sets database” were set to: “c2.cp.v6.0.symbols.gmt”,
this was then downloaded prior to the run. “Phenotype labels” were set to: “X vs
REST”, where X represent an individual run with one of the respective cluster labels
(e.g. B-cells) “Collapse dataset to gene symbols” were set to “false”, if this was
set to “true”, no gene sets were determined to be signiﬁcant. “Chip platform”
were set to “GENE SYMBOL.chip”, to enable naming of genes recognized by the
GSEA software during the run
Under the “Basic ﬁelds” section, the analysis were named after its respective phe-
notype label. “Metric for ranking genes” were set to “tTest”
The analysis were run with all other options left as their default value.
60
==PAGE:73==
C
Cell Type Associated Pathways identiﬁed
through inspection
C.1
CTAPs applicable for benchmarking
REACTOME ENDOSOMAL VACUOLAR PATHWAY
NK Cells (T) Cross-presentation, Antigen presenting cells Predicted cell types: Den-
dritic, monocytes
BIOCARTA CASPASE PATHWAY
CD8 T-cell (G) Apoptosis, Programmed cell death, Triggered by Cytotoxic and
stress/mitochondrial, Cysteine proteases Predicted cell types: Cytotoxic cells, Mono-
cytes
BIOCARTA CTCF PATHWAY
CD14 Monocytes (G) Signalling in immature B cells, induction of cell cycle arrest
and apoptosis Predicted cell types: B-cells
BIOCARTA CTL PATHWAY
NK-cells (T) Cytotoxic T-cell induction of apoptosis, MHC-I / TCR interaction
Predicted cell types: CD8 T-cells, NK cells
BIOCARTA IL12 PATHWAY
CD4 T-cells (G), FCGR3A Monocytes(G) Inducing Th1 cell diﬀerentiation, activat-
ing T cells and NK cells, Secreted by dendritic cells and macrophages Predicted cell
types: Downstream: T cells, Upstream: Monocytes, NK cells Expected direction:
Downstream
BIOCARTA IL7 PATHWAY
61
==PAGE:74==
Appendix C. Cell Type Associated Pathways identiﬁed through inspection
FCGR3A Monocytes(G) Key cytokine essential for development of B cells and T
cells. Predicted cell types: Downstream: B cells, T cells, Upstream: Dendritic cells
Expected direction: Upstream
BIOCARTA INFLAM PATHWAY
Dendritic cells (G) Inﬂammatory response, Macrophages stimulate Leukocytes Pre-
dicted cell types: T-cells, B-cells, Monocytes
BIOCARTA NKCELLS PATHWAY
CD8 T-cells (G) Natural killer cell are distinct from B and T cells, cell-mediated
cytotoxicity Predicted cell types: NK-cells, T-cells, B-cells
BIOCARTA NO2IL12 PATHWAY
FCGR3A Monocytes (G) Innate immunity against infection by intracellular para-
sites, Macrophages stimulate NK cells by IL12, NOS2 stimulation in activates NK-
cells. Predicted cell types: NK-Cells, Monocytes, T-cells
BIOCARTA SET PATHWAY
NK Cells (T) Granzyme A, a cytotoxic protease released by Cytotoxic T cells for
inducing apoptosis, cleaves the SET complex, which inhibits apoptosis. Predicted
cell types: Cytotoxic T-cells
BIOCARTA TCR PATHWAY
CD4 T-cells (G), FCGR3A Monocytes (G) T cell receptor for activating CD4 and
CD8 T cells. Predicted cell types: T cells
BIOCARTA TCYTOTOXIC PATHWAY
CD8 T-Cells (T) Cytotoxic T cells, release of secretory granules to induce lysis of
the targeted cell, express ligand to bind target cells and induce apoptosis. Predicted
cell types: Cytotoxic T-cells
BIOCARTA TH1TH2 PATHWAY
Dendritic cells (G) Helper T cells, produce pro-inﬂammatory cytokines, produce the
cytokines Predicted cell types: Downstream: Monocytes, Dendritic, Upstream: CD4
T cells Expected direction: Upstream
BIOCARTA TOB1 PATHWAY
CD4 T-Cells (G), FCGR3A Monocytes (G) Repression of T cell activation, High
expression of Tob in unstimulated and anergic T cells, reduced in activated T cells.
62
==PAGE:75==
Appendix C. Cell Type Associated Pathways identiﬁed through inspection
Predicted cell types: T cells
KEGG ANTIGEN PROCESSING AND PRESENTATION
CD14 Monocytes (G), Dendritic cells (GT) Antigen processing and presentation
Predicted cell types: B cells, Monocytes, Dendritic cells
KEGG B CELL RECEPTOR SIGNALING PATHWAY
CD14 Monocytes (G) Production and secretion of antibody molecules. Predicted
cell types: B cells
KEGG FC GAMMA R MEDIATED PHAGOCYTOSIS
NK-Cells (G) Uptake and destruction of pathogens and foreign molecules Predicted
cell types: Monocytes
KEGG HEMATOPOIETIC CELL LINEAGE
Megakaryocyte (T) Hematopoietic stem cell, Diﬀerentiation process Predicted cell
types: Megakaryocyte
KEGG INTESTINAL IMMUNE NETWORK FOR IGA PRODUCTION
CD14 Monocytes (G), BCells (T), Dendritic cells (GT) Network interaction for induc-
ing generation of immunoglobulin A antibodies. Predicted cell types: Downstream:
B cells, Upstream: Dendritic cells, Monocytes Expected direction: Upstream
KEGG NATURAL KILLER CELL MEDIATED CYTOTOXICITY
CD8 T-cells (G), NK-cells (T) Natural killer cell cytotoxicity *Predicted cell types:
NK T-cells,
KEGG T CELL RECEPTOR SIGNALING PATHWAY
FCGR3A Monocytes (G) Activation of T lymphocytes through T cell receptor Pre-
dicted cell types: Downstream: T cells, Upstream: Monocytes, Dendritic, B-cells
Expected direction: Downstream
PID BCR 5PATHWAY
CD14 Monocytes (G) B Cell receptor signaling pathway. Predicted cell types: Down-
stream: B cells, Upstream: Dendritic cells, Monocytes Expected direction: Down-
stream
PID CD8 TCR DOWNSTREAM PATHWAY
CD4 T-Cells (G), CD8 T-Cells (U), FCGR3A Monocytes (G) Signaling in naive CD8
T cells Predicted cell types: CD8 T cells
63
==PAGE:76==
Appendix C. Cell Type Associated Pathways identiﬁed through inspection
PID CD8 TCR PATHWAY
CD4 T-Cells (G), CD8 T-Cells (U), FCGR3A Monocytes (G) Signaling in naive CD8
T cells Predicted cell types: Downstream: T cells, Upstream: B-cells, Monocytes,
Dendritic cells Expected direction: Downstream
PID IL12 2PATHWAY
CD8 T-Cells (U), FCGR3A Monocytes (G) IL12-mediated signaling Predicted cell
types: Downstream: T cells, Upstream: Monocytes, NK cells Expected direction:
Downstream
REACTOME ANTIGEN ACTIVATES B CELL RECEPTOR LEADING TO
GENERATION OF SECOND MESSENGERS
CD14 Monocytes (G) Activation of B Cells Leading to Generation of Second Mes-
sengers Predicted cell types: Downstream: B cells, Upstream: Dendritic cells, Mono-
cytes Expected direction: Downstream
REACTOME ANTIGEN PROCESSING CROSS PRESENTATION
CD8 T-Cells (U) Cross-presentation/cross-priming present exogenous antigens on
MHC class I, by APC’s Predicted cell types: Monocytes, Dendritic cells
REACTOME DOWNSTREAM TCR SIGNALING
Dendritic cells (G) T cell receptor signalling Predicted cell types: T cells
REACTOME INTRINSIC PATHWAY FOR APOPTOSIS
CD8 T cells (G) Apoptosis functions in response to intracellular stress Predicted cell
types: Cytotoxic Cells
REACTOME MHC CLASS II ANTIGEN PRESENTATION
CD14 Monocytes (G), BCells (G) Antigen presenting cells expression of MHC-II.
Predicted cell types: Upstream: B cells, Dendritic cells, Monocytes, Downstream:
B-cells and T-cells Expected direction: Upstream
REACTOME PD1 SIGNALING
Dendritic cells (GT) Negative regulators of TCR signaling Predicted cell types:
Downstream: CD4 T cells, Upstream: Dendritic cells Expected direction: Down-
stream
REACTOME TCR SIGNALING
Dendritic Cells (G) Activation of T cell by APC’s Predicted cell types: Downstream:
64
==PAGE:77==
Appendix C. Cell Type Associated Pathways identiﬁed through inspection
T cells, Upstream: Dendritic cells Expected direction: Upstream
SA CASPASE CASCADE
CD8 TCells (G) Programmed cell death by apoptosis. Predicted cell types: CD8 T
cells, NK-cells
CTAPs excluded from benchmarking
REACTOME ANTIGEN PRESENTATION FOLDING ASSEMBLY AND PEP-
TIDE LOADING OF CLASS I MHC
CD8 TCells (U), FCGR3A Monocytes (G) The process of antigen presentation, the
folding assembly and peptide loading of MHC class I molecules.
REACTOME ER PHAGOSOME PATHWAY
CD8 TCells (G), FCGR3A Monocytes (G) ER fusion with phagosome for loading
onto MHC-I.
REACTOME IMMUNOREGULATORY INTERACTIONS BETWEEN A LYM-
PHOID AND A NON LYMPHOID CELL
CD8 TCells (G), FCGR3A Monocytes (G), NK Cells (G) Modifying response of cells
of B cells, T cells and NK cells
REACTOME INTERFERON ALPHA BETA SIGNALING
CD8 TCells (G) Signalling of IFN in Innate immune system, and parts of adaptive
immune system.
REACTOME INTERFERON GAMMA SIGNALING
CD14 Monocytes (G), Dendritic Cells (G) Secreted by activated immune cells, T
cells, NK cells, and APC’s
REACTOME INTERFERON SIGNALING
NK Cells (G) Secreted by activated immune cells, T cells, NK cells, and APC’s
REACTOME TRAFFICKING AND PROCESSING OF ENDOSOMAL TLR
CD14 Monocytes (T) Toll like receptor processing
PID TOLL ENDOGENOUS PATHWAY
CD14 Monocytes (T), B-Cells (G) Toll like receptor signalling.
65
