==PAGE:1==
Entity Neural Networks for
Natural Language
Understanding
A Question-Answering Investigation
Yannis Flet-Berliac
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Despite the strong attention from many businesses in the technological world
and the constant research from the natural language processing community,
question answering is still an unresolved problem.
Henaﬀet al. and Seo et al. each introduced state of the art methods to perform
question answering tasks with artiﬁcial neural networks. One model is composed
of a set of artiﬁcial memory blocks that extract an understanding from a given
context while the other approach performs a recurrent reduction between a query
and the observations over an environment. Those architectures have proven to
outperform all previous models in the question answering ecosystem.
The thesis comprises the study, implementation and evaluation of the question
answering models that the literature review has motivated to use. Performance
measurements has been conducted on the models themselves and as a compari-
son to the others.
==PAGE:4==
Nomenclature
The next list describes the most frequent abbreviations and symbols that will
be used in the master thesis project.
Abbreviations
ANN
Artiﬁcial Neural Network.
BPTT
Back-Propagation Through Time.
CNN
Convolutional Neural Network.
DMN
Dynamic Memory Network.
EntNet
Recurrent Entity Network.
FFNN
Feed-Forward Neural Network.
N2N
End-to-End Memory Network.
QA
Question Answering.
QRN
Query-Reduction Network.
RNN
Recurrent Neural Network.
SV M
Support Vector Machine.
Symbols
ˆh
The vector ˆh = (h1, . . . , hN) denoting the hidden units of a ANN.
ˆt
The vector ˆt = (t1, . . . , tK) denoting the target values of a ANN.
ˆx
The vector ˆx = (x1, . . . , xM) denoting the input vector of a ANN.
ˆy
The vector ˆy = (y1, . . . , yK) denoting the output units of a ANN.
ˆy(ˆx; θ)
The output of a neural network.
R
Real Numbers
σ
The logistic sigmoid function.
θ
All the parameters of a neural network.
b
The bias parameters of a neural network.
E(w)
The predicted error of a model given w.
K
The number of output units of a network. Also denotes the dimension
of the output space.
M
The number of input units of a network.
N
The number of hidden units in a hidden layer.
U, V, W
Weight matrices with interactions between units in a layer.
w
The weight parameters of a neural network.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁllment of the re-
quirements for acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering. The work was carried out in
the period from January 2017 to July 2017.
Lyngby, 23-July-2017
Yannis Flet-Berliac
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to express the deepest appreciation to my
supervisor Professor Ole Winther for the constructive discussions, pragmatic
feedback and essential guidance during the development of this thesis. I would
like to express my gratitude to my co-supervisor PhD Student Lars Maaløe for
all his enlightening advices and technical expertise.
I also owe my strong gratitude to Professor Michael Kai Petersen, being also
my Head of Studies, for his insightful comments, invaluable suggestions and his
warm encouragements throughout my master at DTU.
I am particularly grateful for the assistance given by Jim Fleming concerning
the implementation of one of the models tackled in this project. I would also
like to thank Cognitalk and Doctrine with which the discussions have always
been constructive and fruitful.
Last but not least, I want to thank my family, close ones and friends. Without
their patience and constant support, this paper thesis would not have material-
ized.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Preliminaries
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Natural Language Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Motivations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Problems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.6
The bAbI dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Theory
13
2.1
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
Recurrent Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.3
Deep Learning and End-to-end Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3
State of the Art
29
3.1
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
Proposal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4
Design Methodology
37
4.1
Input Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
Inner Units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3
Output Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
5
Implementations
45
5.1
Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2
Framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3
Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.4
Essential Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.5
Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6
Experiments
55
6.1
Entity Memory Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2
Query-Reduction Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.3
Building and training Char2Sentence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.4
Query-Reduction Network with redesign . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
7
Conclusions and future work
71
A Appendix A
77
A.1 SVM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
A.2 GRU and LSTM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
B Appendix B
81
B.1
Simulations with the EntNet model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
B.2
Simulations with the QRN model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
B.3
Simulations with the Char2Word module
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
C Appendix C
89
C.1 Custom bi-directional RNN (QRN) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
C.2 Dynamic Memory Cell (EntNet)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
Bibliography
95
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Intelligence is the ability to adapt to change. – Stephen Hawking
In the contemporary age, everything that we can feel, see, say or hear can
be converted from our analog world to the digital one. There are also many
physical events that we know about the existence but that we cannot sense,
such as gravitational waves or sub-visible particles. Those can be converted as
well into the digital world. Thus, a blurry and incomplete projection of our
world is translated into a ﬁnite tensor of information into this secondary digital
world that we feed with information continuously. Then the data collected can
be used.
Deep learning and recurrent neural networks have fueled language modeling
research in the past few years as it allowed researchers to explore many tasks.
As humans, those tasks can be accomplished eﬀortless but for language modeling
systems, it remains unrealistic to hand-code the underlying strong conditional
independence assumptions.
In this chapter, we will ﬁrstly have a short introduction to the concepts of
machine learning, neural networks and deep learning. Secondly, we will elab-
orate on language understanding with question answering and how the neural
network technology can be attractively helpful for this ﬁeld. Thirdly, we will
present the problems that we aim to tackle using this technology. Eventually,
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
we will introduce our objectives for the master thesis and the dataset that will
be applied.
1.1
Preliminaries
Neural network-based methods are diﬀerent from rule-based systems in the way
that rule-based programs use rules prepared by humans. Artiﬁcial neural net-
works use mechanisms that have been learned by the machine using sophisti-
cated algorithms.
In NVIDIA’s blog, Michael Copeland gives a clear illustration (ﬁgure 1.1) of
the diﬀerent terms AI, machine learning and deep learning. The ﬁgure shows
a chronological development partly led by some popular breakthrough such as
computers programs playing checkers, spam ﬁltering or vision computing.
Figure 1.1: Relationship between AI, machine learning and deep learning
Machine learning refers to any technique that focuses on teaching the machine
how it can learn statistical parameters from a large amount of training data.
Machine learning techniques can be supervised (e.g. classiﬁcation) if the training
of the machine learning task is made for every input and its corresponding target.
It can be unsupervised (e.g. clustering) if the machine is trained only with a set
of inputs. Else, it can be semi-supervised (e.g. generative models). A popular
choice for a supervised machine learning algorithm is Support Vector Machine
(SVM) which can be used for both classiﬁcation and regression.
Deep learning is a speciﬁc variety of neural networks, which itself is a speciﬁc
type of machine learning. Deep neural networks have more layers than normal
and also special components to deal with all sorts of data (text, audio, images,
etc.). Some special structures are Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) or
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN). In the most general way, CNN will learn
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Natural Language Processing
3
to recognize patterns across space (e.g. suitable for images) whereas RNN will
learn to recognize patterns across time (e.g. suitable for sequences of words).
When working with Artiﬁcial Neural Network (ANN) models, one must un-
derstand the diﬀerent encoding and decoding techniques. An ANN processes
chunks of information that need to be encoded. The encoder maps input data to
a diﬀerent (often lower dimensional, compressed) feature representation. This
representation x will be fed into the ANN layers and will output y = f(x).
The internal parameters of the ANN will be modiﬁed following an optimization
algorithm and will ultimately learn mappings of y = f(x) for new data x. The
output y will then be projected back into the relevant space by the decoder. For
instance, the input and output can be a sequence of words (machine translation)
or an image and a sequence (image captioning).
An attention mechanism can be applied to an encoder-decoder system to help
the learning: for a machine translation, as the model is translating the sentence
step-by-step, the attention mechanism will allow the decoder to “attend” to
diﬀerent parts of the encoded source sentence. The model can learn what to
attend to based on the input sentence and what it has translated so far.
The concepts that are directly applicable to the project are covered in detail in
the Theory chapter.
1.2
Natural Language Processing
Studies have shown evidence that humans can think, create and evolve with
the language being, if not deterministic, at least of great inﬂuence [1, 2]. Our
understanding of the world is painted by the brush strokes of our language, but
is also conﬁned by it. This gives the strong intuition that engineering models
capable of understanding our language will give us the possibility to generate
systems that can better understand our thoughts and the world.
Natural Language Processing (NLP) refers to all systems that work together to
operate end-to-end interactions between machines and humans. Natural Lan-
guage Understanding (NLU) is more narrow, yet important. In order to con-
duct any NLP task, one need to understand language. NLU encompasses how
to best handle unstructured inputs that are governed by poorly deﬁned and
ﬂexible rules. Then it converts them into a structured form that a machine can
understand and act upon. In his paper [3] from 1987, Peter Norvig conveys
that text understanding consists essentially in reading texts formed in natural
languages by determining the explicit and implicit meaning of each element.
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
From there, it is making inferences about the implicit and explicit properties of
the extracted meaning.
Language Understanding is a critical part of artiﬁcial general intelligence and
NLP is one of the most important technologies of the information age; also the
most challenging.
Deep learning has brought huge advancements in NLP. Fundamental ideas like
external memory or attention mechanism have quickly led to signiﬁcant improve-
ments on tasks such as neural machine translation and question answering. As
a simple example, the introduction of automatic alignment in machine transla-
tion has quickly improved the performances in the ﬁeld and triggered eﬃcient
sequence-to-sequence models. Yet the ANN applications for NLP are still far
from satisfying. Firstly, for a deep learning model to learn and start being ac-
curate, it needs a massive amount of data and computational power. Second,
other machine learning techniques are still very useful to NLP and researchers
use them in addition to ANN. As an example, n-gram word statistics are an
eﬀective way of disambiguating diﬀerent senses of the same word, better than
most ANN models.
A lot of NLP tasks can be cast as a Question Answering (QA) task:
• text comprehension: Why did Romeo climb the balcony?
• machine translation: What is the translation in French?
• topic modeling: What are the three main topics of this text?
In the thesis we will focus on Question Answering as a way to model our lan-
guage.
1.3
Motivations
Formally, one can picture language understanding as a combination of three
diﬀerent perspectives over a sentence. This concept of perspective appears to
be at the center of language understanding, and more generically, binding to
intelligence.
According to [3], the ﬁrst aspect of a given chunk of text is the semantic in-
formation which is the speciﬁc meaning of individual words. The second is the
syntax information which is the sentence structure (e.g. subject-action-object).
==PAGE:15==
1.4 Problems
5
The third aspect is the context information which is about the concept that is
being discussed in the sentence. Of course, those diﬀerent perspectives taken
separately does not entail much meaning, those components need to be com-
bined together to extract a full understanding from the language.
Pursuing
these analysis can be accomplished through machine learning models or rule-
based systems. However, those methods alone have not given persuasive results,
until deep learning came into play; and there is a logical reason for their suit-
ability to the problem. From data, neural networks learn mappings between x
and y. If trained on text, the mappings will extract features from multiple levels
of taxonomy. In [4] for instance, OpenAI trained a model to predict the next
character in a sentence and discovered unexpectedly that the feature vector had
one element (neuron) focusing exclusively on the sentiment of a text.
Mathematics are concise and universal; a mathematical equation considers by
deﬁnition the same element from two diﬀerent perspectives.
When Einstein
viewed the energy of a body from a completely diﬀerent perspective, he made
E = mc2 [5] famous. The idea that very small amounts of mass can poten-
tially be converted into a very large amount of energy and vice-versa was a
breakthrough.
To understand language and its implicit meanings, a model needs to be able to
manipulate perspective. The goal of the project is to build a neural network-
based question answering system. It needs to be able to build its own perspective
over a given story eﬀectively with small amount of data.
The next section
presents the multiple applications that can beneﬁt from this technology.
1.4
Problems
1.4.1
Conversational Interfaces
Conversational interfaces have several purposes: understand the natural lan-
guage of humans, process it and accurately interact with the user. In addition
to this, a conversational interface should extract the context of any situation
fast and with minimum knowledge. There are two basic types of conversational
interfaces:
• retrieval-based models (WeChat API) which use a repository of predeﬁned
responses and some heuristics to pick an appropriate response based on
the input and context.
==PAGE:16==
6
Introduction
• generative models (sequence-to-sequence models) which do not rely on
predeﬁned responses and generate new responses from scratch.
The Question Answering paradigm is central to conversational interfaces for
obvious reasons. From a set of structured knowledge, the system interface needs
to understand the user seamlessly and execute an action or give a feedback.
The largest tech companies are battling hard to propose the best conversational
interface product (Apple with Siri, Google with Google Now, Amazon with Echo,
Microsoft with Cortana, Facebook with M, etc.). From ﬁgure 1.2 it appears
clearly that their aspiration is to reach a human-level speaking companion that
would stay at home or be in anywhere else in our smartphones.
Figure 1.2: Cortana’s branding by Microsoft
As a result, one qualitative objective for the AI teams will be to pass the Turing
test, i.e.
requiring that a human being should be unable to distinguish the
machine from another human being by using the replies to questions asked to
both. Humans have been intrigued by this potential outcome for a long time
now; still we are not there yet. The question of a machine that could think
is a long lasting question and in 1637, René Descartes [6] already underlined
that automata were capable of responding to human interactions, not with an
accurate feedback loop but still could respond.
Inference is when the model parameters learned during the training are used
to make predictions. A speech recognition model will make inferences mainly
based on the learning of phonemes features [7]. In contrast, to be able to make
inferences from new situations with little context information, a conversational
model per se needs to learn from few examples. The inference process needs to
build a rapid sketch of a given environment.
There is a clear goal to get closer to a more ﬂexible, autonomous and accurate
conversational interface. This will drive the project into studying a Question
Answering system that is performing well on small datasets.
==PAGE:17==
1.4 Problems
7
1.4.2
Language Industry
1.4.2.1
Translation
The translation industry is moving at a very fast pace - it is expected to grow
by 42% by 2020 according to the U.S. Bureau of Statistics [8]. Moreover, while
introducing a manifold of challenges, it gains huge attraction in the research
community. In September 2016, Yonghui Wu et al. [9] introduced a new neural
machine translation system. In essence, it is composed of an encoder that takes
a sentence from the source language and converts it into a ﬁxed length vector.
That vector is then mapped to the target language using the decoder with an
attention mechanism that connects the top layer of the encoder to the bottom
layer of the decoder.
The translation industry is also very attracted by this technology as it can
automatize some of their processes such as topic extraction and quality analysis.
Human translators could beneﬁt from Question Answering systems trained on
specialized text analysis and provide even better services to the translation
industry.
1.4.2.2
Legal
In the legal sector where workers are dealing with enormous amount of legal
documentation, this technology could be time-saving for ﬁnding the relevant
information. According to Alexandre Dusséaux, founder of Doctrine, when re-
trieving and studying a rendered judgment, lawyers would both be able to ﬁnd
the information that they need for their case and also save a large amount of
time with a question answering system. Such a system could scan the entire
court decision database. On this matter, Phong-Khac Do et al. [10] tackled the
problem of extracting critical information from legal documents with question
answering based on CNN and other machine learning techniques such as SVM,
although giving quite conservative results.
1.4.2.3
Knowledge
Another ﬁeld that question answering would disrupt is the knowledge storage
and retrieval. In a more extensive manner than with legal documents, knowl-
edge is intended here to represent any kind of knowledge than humans have
accumulated through the years. Asking question is the only way individuals
==PAGE:18==
8
Introduction
can get knowledge and reason, either namely asking questions to other individ-
uals, typing in the search-bar on Google or at the library, or asking questions
to our self knowledge and experiences.
What a more natural way then for a system to deal with human knowledge
in a question answering setup. This was at the core of this paper [11] from
Yusuke Watanabe et al.; the authors use a corpus of documents (the source of
knowledge) to perform a question answering task on. While working on the
thesis, we were lucky enough to contact a start-up, Cognitalk, which claim is to
create a “digital companion that lives in the digital world” and which purpose
is to ﬁnd, gather, and share any relevant information for the user.
1.5
Objectives
After an in-depth review of the state of the art models in machine and deep
learning for question answering, we will study the Recurrent Entity Network
(EntNet) model [12]. We will implement the network and experiment on it with
a Question Answering dataset. Later, we will observe that despite good results,
the model performs poorly when trained on smaller datasets.
As a result we will then investigate another architecture that is more eﬃcient
and can learn from fewer observations. The model is called Query-Reduction
Network (QRN) [13] and is inspired by RNN-based models with gating mecha-
nism such as LSTM [14] or GRU [15] cells. We will implement and evaluate the
model on a small dataset.
Finally, we deemed it necessary to experiment with a modiﬁed architecture of
the QRN model. With a new input module (Char2Sentence) the model will
extract the representations of the input sentences from the character-level in-
stead of word-level. The new encoder is a dynamic extractor which produces a
progressive transformation from a character representation to a sentence repre-
sentation.
The models will be evaluated using the bAbI dataset which was introduced
in 2015 by Weston et al. [16]. It is claimed to be a prerequisite to pass for
any system aiming at full text understanding and reasoning. Hence, having a
Question Answering model performing well on the small version (1k) of this
dataset will help to demonstrate its potential to solve the problems which we
discussed.
==PAGE:19==
1.6 The bAbI dataset
9
1.6
The bAbI dataset
The bAbI dataset is a benchmark dataset for Question Answering and covers a
large range of tasks. It has originally been released by Facebook AI Research
(FAIR) and is a synthetic set of data counting 1k or 10k records for 20 diﬀerent
tasks, each of which will be presented below. The tasks are all composed of
three distinct parts:
• the story: the environment or context.
• the question: the trigger.
• the answer: the target or prediction.
The 20 tasks have been indexed as follows:
Task ID
Name
1
Single Supporting Fact
2
Two Supporting Facts
3
Three Supporting Facts
4
Two Argument Relations
5
Three Argument Relations
6
Yes/No Questions
7
Counting
8
Lists/Sets
9
Simple Negation
10
Indeﬁnite Knowledge
11
Basic Coreference
12
Conjunction
13
Compound Coreference
14
Time Reasoning
15
Basic Deduction
16
Basic Induction
17
Positional Reasoning
18
Size Reasoning
19
Path Finding
20
Agent’s Motivations
All the tasks are noiseless meaning that a human able to read the language can
potentially achieve 100% in accuracy. Moreover, the supervision in the training
set is given by the true answer to the question together with the set of relevant
==PAGE:20==
10
Introduction
statements that are relevant to the question. The ﬁgures 1.3 and 1.4 give an
overview of the dataset with one example for each of the 20 tasks.
Figure 1.3: Sample statements, questions and answers from tasks 1 to 10
==PAGE:21==
1.6 The bAbI dataset
11
Figure 1.4: Sample statements, questions and answers from tasks 11 to 20
==PAGE:22==
12
Introduction
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2
Theory
In the previous chapter we introduced the scope of this project. The goal will
be to study question answering models and investigate their capacity to perform
well on small datasets. In this chapter, we will cover the theory for this master
thesis.
2.1
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
2.1.1
Initial formulation
Researchers in the ﬁeld of Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANN) and neuroscientists
have much in common in their spectrum of knowledge.
Indeed, ANN were
initially inspired by the multiple discoveries from the research conveyed in the
brain area. Today, some researchers in neuroscience beneﬁt from the discoveries
established within the ANN community back to their ﬁeld, and are able to
consider new neural behaviours.
The brain has a large network of interconnected neurons, which acts as a highway
for the information to be transmitted from point A to point B. An interesting
analogy between a neuron and an artiﬁcial neuron is illustrated in ﬁgure 2.1 -
==PAGE:24==
14
Theory
the colors match the neuron attributes. But the real power of the brain is not
the number of neurons, but really the number of connections its dendrites have
with each other, and the global strength of the neural web. Those are formally
the parameters w in the ANN.
Figure 2.1: Analogy for the artiﬁcial neuron
These independent artiﬁcial neurons are tied with each other and form the neural
network. The illustration in ﬁgure 2.2 shows a neural network with a single layer
(formally the hidden layer) which plays the intermediate role between the input
and the output neurons.
All neurons in this very elementary network share the same cell design, or archi-
tecture, or structure - they also hold their own parameters. As such, a network
can potentially be accustomed to ﬁt any objective and compute any function at
all. No matter what is the function f to model, there exists a neural network
so that for every possible input ˆx, the value f(ˆx) (or a close approximation) is
outputed from the network.
In the particular case of a neural network which mimics the behaviour of a
classiﬁer similar to the one illustrated in ﬁgure 2.2, we denote ˆx = (x1, . . . , xM)
the input unit vector, the hidden layer units ˆh = (h1, . . . , hN) and the output
units ˆy = (y1, . . . , yK). The choice for K is deﬁned by the number of class in
the case of a multiclass classiﬁer. The units in the hidden layer computes M
linear combinations:
zj = bj +
M
X
i=1
xi × wij
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
15
Figure 2.2: The most simple neural network
The activities z are calculated from the input vector ˆx = (x1, . . . , xM) and for
each i ∈1, . . . , N unit in a hidden layer. The bias bj is attached to hidden unit
j. Then the activities ˆz are applied to a non-linear diﬀerentiable function f,
namely the transfer-function, or activation function:
hj = f(zj)
(2.1)
From the mathematical theory, the universal approximation theorem [17] states
that “a feed-forward network with a single hidden layer containing a ﬁnite num-
ber of neurons (e.g. a multilayer perceptron), can approximate continuous func-
tions on compact subsets of Rn, under mild assumptions on the activation func-
tion”. The ﬁrst version of this signiﬁcant theorem was proved by George Cy-
benko in 1989 for sigmoid activation functions. In essence, the theorem uses the
result that a continuous function on a compact set can be approximated by a
piece-wise constant function. From this, a piece-wise constant function can be
represented as a neural network as demonstrated below.
For the regions where the function is constant, use a neural network as an indi-
cator function for this region. Then, use a ﬁnal linear layer with a single output
node that takes as input the linear combination of the indicator functions times
the weights. The weights being equal to the constant value of the corresponding
region in the original piece-wise constant function, the model reconstructed the
piece-wise constant function.
==PAGE:26==
16
Theory
Thus, the theorem states that simple neural networks can represent a wide
variety of interesting functions when given appropriate parameters. The uncer-
tainty subsists though concerning the algorithmic learn-ability of those valuable
parameters. In short, the theorem of universal approximation demonstrates that
neural networks have a likeliness for universality and can be applicable in a wide
range of domains.
Of course, this does not mean that a neural network can be used to exactly
compute any function - rather, it is possible to have an approximation that
is theoretically very good.
By increasing the number of hidden neurons the
approximation can be improved, but this may lead to worse results because the
model will potentially generalize poorly on new data. This behaviour, namely
overﬁtting, will be discussed on practical examples further in the project.
2.1.2
Feed-forward neural networks
The model that has just been discussed is called a feed-forward neural network
(also called multilayer perceptron). Formally, a feed-forward network deﬁnes a
mapping ˆy = f(ˆx; θ) and learns the values of parameters θ that result in the
best function approximation.
The name feed-forward comes from its design. Inside the network, the informa-
tion ﬂow goes from the input x to the output y without interfering back with
the input again. When feed-forward neural networks are extended to include
feedback connections, then they are called recurrent neural networks. They are
introduced in the next section.
In a perceptron network, neurons output a value 0 or 1 depending on whether
the weighted sum P
i wixi is less or greater than a threshold value. But this
leaves us with a problem: if any change happens in the weights of the network,
this will cause a huge corresponding change in the output of the network. We do
not want such a behaviour because it makes the learning very diﬃcult. This can
be avoided using a diﬀerent activation function, such as a sigmoid (ﬁgure 2.3,
Source: Georg Johann).
If we go back to ﬁgure 2.1 and set the function f to a sigmoid, this issue is
solved because this function is smoother than the perceptron. Moreover the
polarization of the sigmoid function will help the network activity to stabilize
and the learning algorithm to converge.
==PAGE:27==
2.1 Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
17
Figure 2.3: The sigmoid functions
2.1.3
Training and optimization
The learning rule for the project is supervised, meaning that the model is trained
using labeled data. An unsupervised process on the contrary will learn without
any other clue than the data points themselves.
Figure 2.4: A non-trivial error surface
The cost (or error, or loss) function E measures the performance a neural net-
work with respect to its predictions and the expected output.
The learning
algorithm, back-propagation, performs gradient descent within the solution’s
vector space towards, hopefully, a global minimum along the steepest vector of
the error surface. The global minimum is the theoretical solution with the low-
==PAGE:28==
18
Theory
est possible error (we discuss the error function in the next section). The error
surface itself is a hyperparaboloid but is seldom smooth and in most problems
the solution space is quite irregular with numerous pits and hills (ﬁgure 2.4 is a
visualization of what it might look like, Source: Armin Bahl). The shape of the
error function may cause the network to settle down in a local minimum, which
is to avoid.
Interestingly we can think of an analogy of this optimization algorithm with the
idea of a ball dropping in a deep valley and settling down at the bottom. Most
learning rules have built-in mathematical terms to assist in this process. They
control the speed (Beta-coeﬃcient), the rate of convergence between the current
solution and the global minimum, or the momentum of the learning which helps
the network to overcome obstacles (local minima) in the error surface.
During optimization we want the cost function E to be minimized as much as
possible. A 3D illustration of the loss function is pictured in ﬁgure 2.5 with the
current position of the loss metric in the hyperparaboloid.
Figure 2.5: Illustration of the loss function
Looking at the ﬁgure, the loss is moving by a small amount ∆ˆx in the ˆx direction
and by a small amount ∆ˆy in the ˆy direction. The cost E is denoted z in the
ﬁgure and follows ∂E
∂ˆx ∆ˆx + ∂E
∂ˆy ∆ˆy. Adjustments for ˆx and ˆy are made in order
to obtain a negative change for E and to eventually minimize it.
Getting back to our initial formulation of a neural network, we want to compute
∂E
∂θt to back-propagate the error through the entire network. From this stage
==PAGE:29==
2.1 Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
19
of the report, some theoretical illustration is necessary. We declare bl
j the bias
of the jth neuron in the lth layer. We also set al
j as the activation of the jth
neuron in the lth layer. From here, the activation al
j from the jth neuron in the
lth layer is related to the (l −1)th layer by summing over all neurons K in the
(l −1)th layer:
al
j = f(
X
k=1
al−1
k
wl
jk + bl
j).
(2.2)
wl
jk is the weight element corresponding to the jth neuron in the lth layer and
the kth neuron in the (l −1)th layer. By choosing the logistic sigmoid function
as the activation function, we obtain:
al
j = σ(
X
k=1
al−1
k
wl
jk + bl
j).
(2.3)
We can write this equation in a more compact form by denoting the activation
vector al corresponding to the components al
j of all the neurons in layer l. We
can also denote wl the weight matrix for the lth layer. The elements of the
weight matrix wl are the weights connecting to the lth layer of neurons, i.e. the
entry in the jth row and kth column is wl
jk. Finally we denote bl the bias vector
of the lth layer. We obtain:
al = σ(
X
k=1
al−1wl + bl)
= σ(zl).
We retrieve the intermediate quantity from 2.1 with the setup of more than a
single hidden layer. It is worth noting that zl
j = P
k=1 al−1
k
wl
jk + bl
j.
We assume now that E denotes the error function and δl
j denotes the error of
the jth neuron in the lth layer. In order to update the model, we want to relate
δl
j to
∂E
∂wl
jk and ∂E
∂bl
j . δl
j is deﬁned by:
δl
j ≡∂E
∂zl
j
.
(2.4)
For the output layer L,
δL
j = ∂E
∂zL
j
.
(2.5)
Applying the chain rule, we can use the other partial derivatives:
δL
j =
X
k
∂E
∂aL
k
∂aL
k
∂zL
j
(2.6)
==PAGE:30==
20
Theory
where k are the neurons in the output layer. Naturally, ∂aL
k /∂zL
j = 0 when
k ̸= j. Consequently we obtain:
δL
j = ∂E
∂aL
j
∂aL
j
∂zL
j
.
(2.7)
Finally aL
j = σ(zL
j ) so we have:
δL
j = ∂E
∂aL
j
σ′(zL
j ).
(2.8)
The equation for the error δl in the lth layer is, using the chain rule:
δl
j = ∂E
∂zl
j
=
X
k
∂E
∂zl+1
k
∂zl+1
k
∂zl
j
=
X
k
δl+1
k
∂zl+1
k
∂zl
j
and
zl+1
k
=
X
j
wl+1
kj al
j + bl+1
k
=
X
j
wl+1
kj σ(zl
j) + bl+1
k
,
(2.9)
hence
∂zl+1
k
∂zl
j
= wl+1
kj σ′(zl
j)
(2.10)
and ﬁnally we obtain:
δl
j =
X
k
wl+1
kj δl+1
k
σ′(zl
j).
(2.11)
Eventually we want to compute the cost with respect to any bias and any weight
in the network. We can demonstrate that:
∂E
∂bl
j
= δl
j
(2.12)
and:
∂E
∂wl
jk
= al−1
k
δl
j.
(2.13)
==PAGE:31==
2.1 Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
21
Let θ be the whole set of parameters (weights and bias) of the model and η the
learning rate (hyper-parameter). θ is updated following:
θt+1 = θt −η ∂E
∂θt
(2.14)
With the gradient update rule, the set of parameters is updated in an iterative
way accordingly to one single objective: minimizing the error function E.
Initially and in theory the Gradient Descent (GD) algorithm would need to run
through all the possible samples in the training set before being able to make
each update. This sounds obviously not ideal in terms of computing perfor-
mances and eﬃciency because if the amount of training samples is very large,
then using gradient descent may take too much time. Hopefully, using Stochas-
tic Gradient Descent (respectively Minibatch Stochastic Gradient Descent), only
one (respectively a subset) of the training samples from the training set will be
suﬃcient to operate the update rule of the gradient descent. The term stochastic
comes from the fact that the gradient based on a single training sample will be
a stochastic approximation of the true cost gradient.
Therefore, Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) often converges much faster com-
pared to simple Gradient Descent (GD). But the error function is not as well
minimized as when using GD since the model does not go through the whole
training set. Nevertheless in most cases, the close approximation that one gets
with SGD for the parameters are suﬃcient because they reach the optimal values
and keep oscillating there.
There are diﬀerent techniques used to improve the gradient-based learning of a
model. The most popular one is using an adaptive learning rate η by choosing
a decrease constant d that will shrink the learning rate over time t:
η(t + 1) =
η(t)
1 + t × d
Another useful technique improving the gradient-based learning is momentum.
This method helps accelerate SGD in the relevant direction and dampen oscilla-
tions. Compared to the classic update rule, momentum adds a fraction γ of the
update vector from the previous time step to the current update vector. With
θ the model parameters, we obtain:
ut = γut−1 + η∇θE(θ)
θ = θ −ut
==PAGE:32==
22
Theory
2.1.4
Error functions
The error function is a critical element of the learning and is at the center of the
optimization algorithm. It is the measure of how well a neural network models
a problem.
Several types of cost function exist, but they all share some requirements:
• It must be able to be written as an average E =
1
M
P
x Ex over the errors
Ex of individual training examples x.
• The cost function must not be dependent on any activation values of the
neural network besides the output values yk of the output layer. In this
manner, the chain rule can be used.
In the following are presented some popular examples for a cost function. The
quadratic cost, or mean squared error is deﬁned as:
E = 1
2
X
i
(yi −ti)2
with yi the output of the neural network, ti the expected output of the neural
network and i the observations. There is also the binomial cross-entropy cost
deﬁned as:
E = −
X
i
[tilog(yi) + (1 −ti)log(1 −yi)]
with yi the binary sample label. This cost function is just a special case of the
multinomial cross-entropy cost:
E = −1
n
X
i
X
j
tijlog(yij)
where i indexes the observations, j indexes the classes and yij denotes the one-
hot vector label of the observation with yij ∈(0, 1) and ∀i , P
j yij = 1.
The multinomial cross-entropy cost is equivalent to the Kullback-Leibler (KL)
divergence between a ﬁxed empirical distribution and the predicted distribution.
The KL divergence measures the diﬀerence between two probability distribu-
tions. For instance if we denote P and Q two probability distributions, the KL
divergence from Q to P is written DKL(P∥Q) and is deﬁned as:
DKL(P∥Q) =
X
i
P(i)log P(i)
Q(i).
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Recurrent Neural Networks
23
2.2
Recurrent Neural Networks
2.2.1
Formulation
Contrary to feed-forward networks, Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) are char-
acterized by their feedback loop which allows their outputs at time t to be fed
back together with the new input at time t+1.
A recurrent neural network has the ability to memorize information which has an
interesting application: by extracting and maintaining the latent representation
of an input, RNN can capture sequential information. In contrast with feed-
forward networks, RNN can by design extract a (relatively) persistent context.
Moreover, RNN have the ability to capture sequential data of arbitrary length.
The more the number of time steps increase, the more recurrent connections
are created, and the more the recurrent unit gets inﬂuenced by the neighbours
of a sequence. Meanwhile the recurrent connections increase the depth of the
network, the amount of parameters remains the same by sharing weights in the
RNN.
An illustration of the recurrent capacity of recurrent neural networks is shown
in ﬁgure 2.6. Instead of strictly passing the information through, a recurrent
unit allows its output to be passed as input in the next iteration.
Figure 2.6: From a feed-forward neuron to a recurrent neuron
In summary, RNN have the following properties:
• Store information. The RNN can use the feedback connection to store
information over time in the form of activations.
• Learn sequential data. The RNN can operate sequential data of arbitrary
==PAGE:34==
24
Theory
length.
Use cases are for instance mapping an image with a sentence
(one-to-many approach), or a sequence of images (video) with a scalar
(many-to-one approach).
Figure 2.7 illustrates an RNN with a sequence at the character-level.
Figure 2.7: Vanilla character-level RNN
The training of an RNN is simply done by unfolding the net. Figure 2.8 illus-
trates this for a network consisting of one recurrent layer. The network can be
unfolded into k instances (k = 4 in the example). After unfolding, the network
can be trained in the same way as a feed-forward network with back-propagation,
except that each epoch needs to run through each unfolded layer. As a resut,
the algorithm for a RNN is called back-propagation through time (BPTT).
The goal is to calculate the gradients for the error E with respect to the pa-
rameters U, V and W of the network, and then use the SGD rule to update the
parameters. Just like we sum up the errors, we also sum up the gradients at
each time step for one training example:
∂E
∂V =
X
t
∂Et
∂V .
Then, to calculate these gradients we use the chain rule. For the error E3 we
==PAGE:35==
2.2 Recurrent Neural Networks
25
Figure 2.8: Back-propagation through time (BPTT) for E3 only
have:
∂E3
∂V
=
3
X
t=0
∂E3
∂y3
∂y3
∂s3
∂s3
∂st
∂st
∂V .
Eventually we use the back-propagation algorithm and update the parameters
with respect to their previous value and the learning rate.
2.2.2
Drawbacks and solution
RNN have greatly impacted sequential data modeling, but one major drawback
of the latter is that the range of contextual information is limited and the BPTT
does not work properly. Indeed, this is the case when the gradients of the cost
function are either vanishing or exploding. In the literature, this problem is
known as the vanishing gradient or exploding gradient problem.
The vanishing gradient problem happens when the network is learning hard
to bridge long time dependencies: it takes a large amount of time, or does not
work at all. On the contrary, the exploding gradient problem leads to oscillating
weights, which is also reducing the quality of the network. In practical terms,
this means that when a RNN tries to learn how to store the information over
many time intervals with large gradients, the chain rule will incidentally cause
==PAGE:36==
26
Theory
the previous gradients to be very large. As a consequence, the loss optimum
will be continuously missed during optimization and the model will never learn.
As an answer to this problem, Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) cells have been
introduced in 1997 by Hochreiter et al. [14] and were designed to overcome the
error back ﬂow problems by having gates inside their units.
2.3
Deep Learning and End-to-end Systems
End-to-end deep learning is in essence the idea of outputting complex data types
from raw features. Such systems can be for instance speech recognition with
audio transcripts, image captioning, or steering for self-driving cars. Thinking
about the case of speech recognition, training an end-to-end system overcomes
the need for hard-coding a feature detection algorithm for phonemes or for a
separate language system. Such end-to-end systems have a richer feature space
and are less subject to noise. The model can be both more robust and ﬂexible.
This learning also reduces the eﬀort of human design by omitting any hand-
crafted intermediary algorithm and directly learning the solution of a given
problem from the sampled dataset. Moreover this lets the model set its pa-
rameters the best to target the most needed features and reportedly performed
better in a variety of applications [18, 19].
Conceptually, end-to-end systems is what many researchers would aim for when
building machine learning models. Those systems are often a set of modules
piled on top of the other. The input module, or encoder, transforms new data
points into an higher-level representation.
The output module, or decoder,
transforms the learned representation of the neural network into a representation
that is intelligible and that serves the purpose of why the system has been build
for at the ﬁrst place.
A sequence-to-sequence machine translation model is a good example of such
systems.
It takes as input the source language, the encoder transforms the
data from the source language space into an internal space representation. At
the other side of the system the decoder transforms the sentence representa-
tion from the internal feature space to the target language representation. In
the project, the input modules which will be studied are a Position Encoding
and a Char2Sentence module. The output module will be a projection module
that translates the network’s internal representation into a vocabulary-length
dimensional space.
==PAGE:37==
2.4 Discussion
27
2.4
Discussion
Deep learning models are no more than a mapping between an input and an
output, a mapping between A and B. That makes this technology a potentially
universal source of value for many problems. For any medium that is in the dig-
ital world, deep learning can potentially be applied for tasks such as translation,
transcription, recognition, or understanding.
Henceforward, in this chapter the artiﬁcial neural networks have been trans-
versely introduced together with the presentation of the recurrent neural net-
works and their need for the project. We ended the discussion articulating the
forthcoming work and promises brought by deep learning.
==PAGE:38==
28
Theory
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 3
State of the Art
In this chapter, we introduce the work and models that will be tackled in the
project, by means of an explanation of the networks and the illustration of their
architectures. From this learning, we will outline our proposal of action plan.
3.1
Related work
In this section we give an introduction to the work accomplished in Natural
Language Processing and especially in Question Answering.
3.1.1
Character-Level understanding
Using a naive and sub-optimal segmentation algorithm (e.g.
built from the
word-level) implies the vocabulary to be ﬁlled with many similar words that
share the same lexeme but have a diﬀerent morphology. To overcome this issue
some rules need to be deﬁned during pre-processing such as tokenization and
stemming. A new token that is not in the vocabulary can be a problem, so
word-level algorithms need huge corpora in order to capture all possible words.
==PAGE:40==
30
State of the Art
In contrast, the vocabulary for character-level algorithms is simply the alphabet
and punctuation, which solves numerous issues. First, since those models are
independent from a ﬁxed-size vocabulary, they perform better when making
inferences on unknown words. Additionally the word will not be processed as
all the other “UNK” tokens as it is done with a word-level system. Second, they
are robust to misspellings since a misspelled word will still be similar to the true
word. On the contrary, at the word-level the word will be seen as a completely
diﬀerent and unknown word. Thirdly, the decoder projection will be less costly
on a small-sized character-level vocabulary compared to a large-sized word-level
one.
Those are strong motivations for experimenting with character-level segmen-
tation algorithms. Moreover, Chung et al. [20] recently showed that another
advantage of character-level modeling for language understanding is that it can
model the composition of any character sequence and thereby better extract
rare morphological variants.
A side eﬀect of using character-level encoding is that it will require to capture
very long-term dependencies, implying the use of architectures such as Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) units [14], Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) [15] or
similar. For word-level encoding, the same RNN-cell architectures are used to
capture long-term dependencies. Nevertheless, capturing enough context when
extracting the features on the character-level requires more eﬀort.
To help capture the context of a story, some models make use of a latent mem-
ory which is then confronted to the question. The most important models are
presented in the following.
3.1.2
Memory Networks
In this section we introduce the dominant memory networks models from the
QA community. When relevant, an illustration representing the architecture
of the models has been sketched: in all the illustrations (except the Recurrent
Entity Network), the successive sentences of a story are denoted x1, . . . , xT (xt
for the Recurrent Entity Network) and the query is denoted q.
3.1.2.1
Neural Turing Machine
Introduced by Graves et al. in 2014, the Neural Turing Machine (NTM) [21] uses
a continuous memory representation. The NTM memory uses both content and
==PAGE:41==
3.1 Related work
31
address-based access and was applied to more abstract operations of sorting and
recall. It is somewhat diﬀerent to the focus of this thesis but was inspirational
for the following models.
3.1.2.2
Dynamic Memory Network
In their paper, Kumar et al. [22] introduced the Dynamic Memory Network
(DMN). It is composed of an episodic memory module which search for in-
formation according to its current internal representation of the story and the
question.
Within several passes denoted hops, the model is able from the encoded question
to generate the correct answer. Those hops help the model to use transitive
inference. The method takes the story as a whole, in a long vector representation
where the sentences are concatenated into a long list of word tokens.
In essence the model uses an hybrid architecture between the attention mech-
anism and the RNN in order to model the story. As illustrated in ﬁgure 3.1,
the architecture consists of two distinct GRU: one for the time axis (rectangle
nodes) and one for the layer axis (circle nodes). The time-axis GRU summa-
rizes the entire memory in each layer whereas the layer-axis GRU controls the
attention weights in each layer. The architecture of the model is quite complex
and needs a large amount of parameters. As a consequence, it annunciates a
diﬃcult training and overﬁtting on small datasets.
After several hops, the question vector is concatenated with the output vec-
tor and put through a last GRU. The output of the GRU is then multiplied
with a weight matrix and projected to a softmax function that outputs the pre-
dicted answer. The authors obtained good results on a strongly supervised bAbI
dataset (a strongly supervised setup gives indication about where the relevant
sentences are in the story). In the development of the project we want to tackle
the problem with the weakly supervised bAbI dataset as it is composed of all
the sentences of a story without any clue about whether a given sentence is
useful for answering the question or not, like in a real-world setup.
3.1.2.3
End-to-end Memory Network
Using a diﬀerent approach, End-to-end Memory Network (N2N) [23] takes each
sentence of a story independently using Position Encoding [23] (where the posi-
tion of the words aﬀects the representation of the sentence, contrary to a simple
==PAGE:42==
32
State of the Art
Figure 3.1: Dynamic Neural Network
bag-of-words) and a temporal encoding that extracts the chronology of the story.
Hence, this model also operates on the word-level and performed very well on
a weakly supervised bAbI dataset. N2N summarizes the entire memory in each
layer to control the attention in the next layer as depicted in ﬁgure 3.2.
Close to the input story, the layer computes the inner product between the
embedding B of the sentences and the question. The output of the softmax of
this layer is then linearly combined with B. After performing this for several
steps, the output y passes through the answer module and is projected into the
answer vocabulary. Contrary to the DMN model, N2N does not use a GRU and
y is directly summed to the question embedding, then multiplied with a weight
matrix and passed through a softmax. This model is using less parameters and
is as a result easier to train.
==PAGE:43==
3.1 Related work
33
Figure 3.2: End-to-end Memory Network
3.1.2.4
Recurrent Entity Network
The Recurrent Entity Network (EntNet) model [12] is the most recent memory
network model for question answering at the time of writing. It performed better
than the DMN and N2N on the 10k weakly supervised bAbI dataset. With the
1k dataset although, it performed worse, as the model complexity is still quite
important.
The singularity of the EntNet is to be able to capture a “representation of the
world” (using the authors’ words) through the diﬀerent entities. It has been
demonstrated to extract entities like characters, places or objects directly from
the sentences representations.
In other words, the network can maintain a set of high-level concepts with their
properties updated as new information is received. For instance, if a sentence is
the textual description of an event, such as Mary walks out of the bathroom, the
agent should learn how to update its estimate of Mary’s location. Moreover,
it should be able to update the list (and number) of people present in each
==PAGE:44==
34
State of the Art
room. If Mary was carrying a towel, the location of the towel and the list of
objects in the bathroom must be updated. When one read a story, each sentence
that is read makes one’s brain update its internal representation of the current
situation.
Figure 3.3: Entity Neural Network (Source: [12])
An illustration of the network can be found in ﬁgure 3.3. This architecture will
be implemented and evaluated further in the project. The cell keys w1, . . . , wm
support the gating mechanism:
gj = σ(sT
t hj + sT
t wj).
(3.1)
The gating function is composed of two terms: sT
t hj makes the gate open for
memory slots whose content matches the input and sT
t wj makes the gate open
for memory slots whose key matches the input. It determines how much the jth
memory should be updated.
It is important to note that the most recent publications have focused on the
10k samples version of the bAbI dataset. Although, solving them with only 1k
examples per task remains an open problem which will require improving the
sample eﬃciency for this kind of models.
==PAGE:45==
3.1 Related work
35
3.1.3
Query-Reduction Network
From those limitations, we now introduce a singular model which is not part
of the memory networks family: the Query-Reduction Network (QRN). It is
performing better than the memory networks models on the 10k and the 1k
datasets.
Its design is simple and intuitive. At each time step, the query-reduction cell
reduces the question together with the context of each sentence from a story.
The cell acts very similarly to a GRU cell with an update gate that measures
the similarity between a given sentence and the query. An illustration of this
neural network can be seen in ﬁgure 3.4.
Figure 3.4: Query-Reduction Network
An important and critical contrast with other memory-based approaches is that
the QRN candidate state ˜ht does not depend on the previous hidden state. This
is an important fact: it means that the internal representation of the query is
updated locally for each sentence. From layer to layer the query representation
changes as new understanding is inferred over the answer. In summary, the
==PAGE:46==
36
State of the Art
QRN cell is both an attention mechanism and a RNN.
3.2
Proposal
The thesis objectives are solved in following iterative stages:
1. The EntNet model. We implement the architecture and evaluate its per-
formances. This will also give familiarity with the bAbI dataset that will
be used in all subsequent experiments. Then I will focus on the small (1k)
version of the bAbI dataset which is more challenging with respect to over-
ﬁtting than the large (10k) dataset. With the recent progress in Question
Answering the best algorithms can solve the tasks almost perfectly using
the 10k dataset.
2. The QRN model. We use the learnings from the previous experiment for
the QRN implementation. I also want to visualize how the model learns
and observe how the architecture extracts its own representation of the
story to answer the question.
3. The Char2Word and Word2Sentence modules. Those are input encoders
that extract the sentence representation from the character-level. We will
train those modules isolated from the rest with a simple task that will
extract the representation of a sentence from the character-level.
4. Lastly, those input modules will be plugged into the QRN implementation,
replacing its Position Encoding and the whole system will be challenged
using the same experiment pipeline as for the original QRN model exper-
iment.
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4
Design Methodology
After a short introduction, this chapter will go in detail over the methodology
to build the network and cell architectures for the project with the underlying
equations of the models.
In the human brain there is a region, the neocortex which, as its name im-
plies, appeared the latest in our brain and is considered as being the “crowning
achievement of evolution and the biological substrate of human mental prowess”
[24]. From the same source is extracted ﬁgure 4.1 which shows a comparison
between the brains of a mouse, a macaque monkey and a human. Each of them
are scaled accordingly to convey the following idea: the neocortex in the human
brain represents the great majority of the cerebral cortex.
The prefrontal cortex, which has no counterpart in the mouse, is shaded in blue
in the macaque and the human brains. The bottom diagrams of the cerebral
sections illustrate that there has been a relatively small increase in the thickness
of the cortex (dark purple outline) compared with the large increase in surface
area (x1, x100 and x1000 for the mouses, macaque monkeys and humans respec-
tively).
Inside the human brain, the neocortex has six layers and contains between 10
and 14 billion neurons. Each cortical layer contains diﬀerent neuronal shapes,
sizes and density as well as diﬀerent organizations of nerve ﬁbers. The neurons
==PAGE:48==
38
Design Methodology
Figure 4.1: a, b and c are the cerebral hemispheres of a mouse, a macaque
monkey and a human brain respectively.
exchange brief electrical pulses called action potentials.
Similarly, computer algorithms that mimic these biological structures are for-
mally called artiﬁcial neural networks. Neural network research is motivated
by two desires. Firstly, obtain a better understanding of the human brain and
reach similar performances artiﬁcially. Secondly, develop computer models that
can deal with abstract and poorly deﬁned problems by using end-to-end systems
when possible.
The architecture of a neural network can be either established from the imitation
of what a biologist sees under a microscope or from a mathematical analysis of
a given problem. Yet, the architecture is often a combination of both.
A neural network has three types of layers: input, hidden and output.
• The input layer. It is determined by the shape of the input data. For an
image, it will be dependant of the size of the image and the resolution of
the input nodes. For an audio, it will depend on the window size chosen for
the Fourier decomposition of the input. For a text, it will vary depending
on the chosen tokenization algorithm and the extraction level of the model:
for instance character-level [25] or word-level [26].
==PAGE:49==
4.1 Input Module
39
• The hidden layers.
They should be set accordingly to the need of the
problem that is addressed and the amount of data available.
• The output layer. It should ﬁt accordingly with the model conﬁguration.
It depends on whether the network returns a class label (e.g. a word in a
vocabulary) or a regression value (e.g. a sentiment score). If the model is
a regressor, the output size will be one. On the contrary, if it is a classiﬁer
the output will have the same size as the output space, for instance the
vocabulary size.
The following sections will present in detail the diﬀerent parts to build the
models of the thesis. We will go step by step from the input module to the
output module.
4.1
Input Module
The input module is a major piece of the project. It accounts for the transla-
tion between two hyper-planes W →S, from the word space to an embedded
representation of the sentence.
4.1.1
Position Encoding
For the EntNet and the QRN model, the input module is composed of two parts.
The ﬁrst element is an encoding layer that summarizes the input element into
and input vector of ﬁxed length d. Particularly the encoder starts by associating
each word w in the vocabulary with its vector representation xw ∈Rd. These
vectors are stored as the columns of a d×V dimensional word embedding matrix
L, where V is the vocabulary size.
The second element is a Position Encoding (PE) and has ﬁrst been introduced
in [23]. Formally, let fi be the encoded version of the sentence i, the output for
the sentence i from the PE is:
fi =
X
j
lj · wij
with lkj = (1 −j/J) −(k/d)(1 −2j/J)
where d is the dimension of the embedding, J is the total number of words in
the sentence, k the index of the embedding and i the index of the word in the
==PAGE:50==
40
Design Methodology
sentence. Figure 4.2 illustrates how the order of the words aﬀects the sentence
representation.
Figure 4.2: How the Position Encoding works (the shade is linked to the ma-
trix values)
The PE extracts from a sequence of words the feature vectors of each word
together with their ordering in the sentence. It spreads the information of the
word ordering over the embedding. This representation extraction is accurate
and uses a conservative number of parameters.
4.1.2
Char2Word, Word2Sentence, Sentence2Story
Then we introduce a new encoder/input module that we call Char2Word. It
transforms the character representation into a word representation. Likewise,
Word2Sentence and Sentence2Story transform from word to sentence and from
sentence to story.
The architectures of the Char2Word and of the complete
Char2Story are illustrated in ﬁgures 4.4 and 4.3.
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Input Module
41
Figure 4.3: Char2Word
Figure 4.4: Char2Story
The sentences of a story are concatenated and form a long vector. Formally,
let tC, tW and tS be respectively the time steps at the character-level for the
characters, the end-of-word and the end-of-sentence. We assume each time step
t has an input xC
t
and a hidden state hC
t
computed by a basic RNN at the
character-level. hW
t
and hS
t are respectively the hidden states at the word-level
and sentence-level.
==PAGE:52==
42
Design Methodology
The internal mechanics of the RNN inside the Char2Word are deﬁned as:
hC
tC = RNN(xC
tC, hC
tC−1)
= tanh(W CxC
tC + U ChC
tC−1 + bC).
Inside the Word2Sentence:
hW
tW = RNN(hC
tW , hW
tW −1)
= tanh(W W hC
tW + U W hW
tW −1 + bW )
hW
tW corresponds to the hidden representations of each word in the sentences of
a story. Finally, we want to extract the sentence representation hS
tS:
hS
tS = RNN(hW
tS , hS
tS−1)
= tanh(W ShW
tS + U ShS
tS−1 + bS).
This vector representation will be fed into the next layers of the QRN model.
The architecture will be tested against the Position Encoding from the QRN
model. The experiments are conducted later in this project and will reported
in chapter 6.
4.2
Inner Units
4.2.1
Entity Memory Cells
The Entity Memory Cells, also called the Dynamic Memory of the EntNet is the
core of the Recurrent Entity Networks [12] model. Its latent memory is a dis-
parate set of memory cells, each of those has a unique vector key wj (represents
the location) and a hidden state memory hj (represents the content).
We denote the key vectors w1, w2, · · · , wm and the memory (hidden state) vec-
tors h1, h2, · · · , hm. The keys let the sentence representation st go through when
the lexical semantics match.
The gating function determines how much the memory j should be aﬀected by
the given input with
gj = σ(sT
t hj + sT
t wj).
Then, the model updates its internal state hj. U, V and W are weights matrices
shared across all memory cells. We have
ehj = φ(Uhj + V wj + Wst)
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Output Module
43
with φ any activation function.
The model ﬁnally processes to the memory
update according to
hj = hj + gj ⊙ehj.
As a last step, the hidden memory is normalized
hj =
hj
∥hj∥.
By making sure the memories lie on the unit sphere, all the information is in
the phase. So when adding the candidate memory to a given hj, the cosine
similarity decreases between the updated and the original memories. Hence, old
information is forgotten each time a new is added.
4.2.2
Query-Reduction Cells
An illustration of the inputs and outputs of the QRN cells is presented in ﬁg-
ure 3.4. The sentence representation denoted xi is attributed as input to the
cell together with the query representation. The same sentence representation
is put through the following layers along with the reduced query vector.
The equations associated to this architecture are as follows and are share a lot
with the the GRU cell equations:
zt = α(xt, qt) = σ(W (z)(xt ◦qt) + b(z))
˜ht = ρ(xt, qt) = tanh(W (h)[xt; qt] + b(h))
ht = zt˜ht + (1 −zt)ht−1.
◦is the element-wise vector multiplication and [; ] concatenates the vectors along
the row.
The update gate of the QRN cell measures the relevance between the input
sentence and the query, similar to the global attention mechanism in the N2N
[23]. Nevertheless a major diﬀerence is that the QRN cell computes its sigmoid
function on the current time step (the sentence at time step t) internally and
not globally over all the time steps of the story.
4.3
Output Module
The vector representation of the answer ˆh is the last hidden state of the neural
network and will be fed into the output module. This module transforms ˆh
==PAGE:54==
44
Design Methodology
from the latent space to the output/external space. The projection mechanism
is often a single-layer softmax classiﬁer that maps ˆh to a V-dimensional sparse
vector. ˆy ∈RV with
ˆy = softmax(W yˆh)
where W y ∈RV ×d is the output weight matrix and d is the dimension of ˆh.
The network ﬁnally outputs the predicted answer by computing a simple argmax
from ˆy. For questions with multiple-word answers, the model considers during
the pre-processing each of them as a single word that contains punctuation such
as space and comma, and puts it in the vocabulary.
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 5
Implementations
The implementation of the models has been a dominant focus of the project.
This chapter will go through the overall techniques used and the most essential
implementations.
5.1
Setup
Python was the programming language used for the implementation of the mod-
els. I used the IDE PyCharm 2017.1 for its good user experience and its support
for editing code from a remote server. I version controlled the scripts1 using
GitHub. With regards to the computing power, I used my own CPU machine
(2,7 GHz Intel Core i5) for the implementation, debugging and testings. For the
experiments, we ran the models with GPU support on Amazon Web Services
(AWS) instances (p2.xlarge and p2.8xlarge) and DTU Compute machines.
1github.com/yfletberliac/Mango
==PAGE:56==
46
Implementations
5.2
Framework
We used TensorFlow, an open source software library released in 2015 by Google.
The framework makes it easier for developers to design, build, and train machine
learning models. According to its creators, TensorFlow is an “open-source soft-
ware library for Machine Intelligence”2. TensorFlow has been chosen over other
machine learning frameworks (like Torch, Theano or Caﬀe) for the following
reasons:
• Its large community engagement that helps building clean API, useful
modules and encourages support within the community.
• The high-quality metaframeworks such as TensorFlow Slim and TFLearn.
• The use of TensorBoard, a visualization interface that can display the
network graph (useful at implementation or debugging stages).
It can
also display the curves of any metric or variable.
Figure 5.1 shows a
screen-shot of the QRN graph using the Char2Sentence module.
Figure 5.1: Tensorboard visualization
2tensorflow.org
==PAGE:57==
5.3 Learning
47
5.3
Learning
5.3.1
Model initialization
One important topic is the initialization of the model. A bad weight initializa-
tion can lead to a training that will never converge because the models imple-
mented in the project are unstable.
All the weights in the inner units have been initialized using the method intro-
duced by Glorot and Bengio [27], also called the Xavier initialization. Let us
suppose that we have an input x with M components and a linear neuron with
random weights w. We have:
Y = w1x1 + w2x2 + · · · + wMxM.
The variance of wixi is:
Var(wixi) = E[xi]2Var(wi) + E[wi]2Var(xi) + Var(wi)Var(xi).
If the inputs and weights both have mean 0, that is summarized to:
Var(wixi) = Var(wi)Var(xi).
We now infer the assumption that the xi and wi are independent and identically
distributed. It simpliﬁes to:
Var(Y ) = Var(w1x1 + w2x2 + · · · + wMxM)
= MVar(wi)Var(xi).
If we want the same variance for the input and the output, the variance of the
weights must be:
Var(wi) = 1
M =
1
Min
.
We go through the same steps for the backpropagated signal and obtain:
Var(wi) =
1
Mout
.
==PAGE:58==
48
Implementations
The only way to satisfy the two constraints is to have Min = Mout, which cannot
be always satisﬁed. As a compromise, Glorot and Bengio decided to take the
average of the two and initialize the weights with:
Var(w) =
2
Min + Mout
.
5.3.2
Sorting
For a machine to build itself an understanding, in other words for a model to
have a good performance, it is often fruitful to think of an algorithm that runs
a progressive learning. So the models have been trained sorting the stories from
the shortest to the longest ones, similarly to children that need to learn small
sentences before going into more complex ones.
5.3.3
L2-regularization
We used the L2-regularization for all the models as they are challenged by
overﬁtting. This produces weight decay against overﬁtting which is often char-
acterized by weight values that are very large in magnitude.
In order to do this, a small term in the loss function is added. This term is a
fraction of the sum of the squared weights of the model. Therefore, larger weight
values will contribute to larger error, and so smaller weights will be rewarded.
In the case of a classiﬁer,
E = Ecross_entropy + λ × ∥w∥
with E the new loss function with L2-regularization, Ecross_entropy the original
cross entropy loss, λ the fraction for L2-regularization and ∥w∥the sum of
squared weight values.
5.3.4
Dropout
Dropout [28] is also a form of regularization since it constrains the network
when ﬁtting to the data at training time. It essentially forces a neural network
to learn multiple independent representations of the same data by alternately
randomly disabling neurons in the learning phase. In essence, it is comparable
to using the mean outputs of many separately trained neural networks. We also
use this method in all the models to reduce overﬁtting.
==PAGE:59==
5.4 Essential Components
49
5.3.5
Bi-directional RNN
To answer a query, a model does not solely need to see the past sentences of
a story, the query answers can also depend on future sentences. In order to
incorporate this, we state:
ht = −→
ht + ←−
ht
For the QRN model we initially used the basic RNN function from TensorFlow
with our custom QRN cell. But we could not do the same with the bi-direction
version (tf.nn.bidirectional_dynamic_rnn) as the function was not compatible
with tuples (with a sentence and a query as inputs). So we adapted it ourselves;
the script can be found in Appendix C.
5.4
Essential Components
Position Encoding module
The Position Encoding can be implemented almost directly from the mathemat-
ical equations and is not computationally demanding since its parameters are
ﬁxed in the pre-processing part of the model.
def
get_position_encoding (self , embedding , max_length , scope
=None):
"""
Module
described in [End -To -End Memory
Networks ]( https
:// arxiv.org/abs /1502.01852) as Position
Encoding (PE
).
The mask
allows the
ordering of words in a sentence to
affect the
encoding.
"""
J, d = max_length , self.config.embed_size
l = np.zeros ((J, d))
with tf. variable_scope(scope , ’PE ’):
for j in range(J):
for k in range(d):
l[j, k] = (1. - (j + 1.) / J) - ((k + 1.) /
d) * (1. - 2. * (j + 1.) / J)
self.l = tf.constant(l, shape =[J, d])
m = tf.reduce_sum(embedding * tf.cast(self.l, tf.
float32), 2, name=’m’)
return m
==PAGE:60==
50
Implementations
Char2Sentence module
The Char2Sentence module has been an interesting part to implement.
We
wanted this module not to slow down the overall computations. So we chose
to compute and store all the words and sentences indices in the pre-processing
part and load them in the TensorFlow graph when needed during the training.
The indices have been computed like following:
x = [char_idx[c] for c in story_char]
indices_word = [[k, i] for i, o in enumerate(x) if o ==
char_idx [" "] or o == char_idx ["."]]
indices_sentence = [[k, i] for i, o in enumerate(x) if o ==
char_idx ["."]]
with char_idx and word_idx respectively the index dictionaries for the charac-
ters and the words. Sentences have been set to the same length (padding) to
be inputed in the recurrent layer. Using their actual length the RNN function
copies the last hidden state until the end of the sentence.
The Char2Word implementation is shown below: the inputs are the character-
level sentences and the outputs are the word-level representation of the same
sentences. The tf.gather_nd function gathers the slices from the hidden states
of the ﬁrst RNN according to the provided indices.
with tf. variable_scope (" Char2Word "):
## RNN cell
initialization
cell0 = tf.contrib.rnn.BasicRNNCell(self.config.
hidden_size)
cell0 = tf.contrib.rnn.DropoutWrapper (cell0 ,
input_keep_prob =self.dropout_placeholder ,
output_keep_prob =self. dropout_placeholder )
## basic RNN
self.outputs0 , self.final_state0 = tf.nn.dynamic_rnn(
cell0 , inputs_story , sequence_length =self.X_length ,
initial_state=self.initial_state0 )
## reshape
the pre -processed
indices
==PAGE:61==
5.4 Essential Components
51
indices_word = tf.reshape(self.Indices_word , [-1, 2])
## extract
the time
steps
indice_word
corresponding to
the words
inputs1 = tf.gather_nd(self.outputs0 , indices_word )
## reshape to be fed to the next RNN
inputs1 = tf.reshape(inputs1 , [self.config.batch_size ,
self.config.num_steps_story_word , self.config.
hidden_size ])
5.4.1
QRN Cell
We implemented the QRN cell using tf.contrib.rnn.RNNCell to create a custom
RNN cell class.
class
QRNCell(tf.contrib.rnn.RNNCell):
"""
Implementation of a QRN cell as described in [arXiv
:1606.04582].
"""
def
__init__(self , num_units , input_size=None ,
activation=tanh):
self._num_units = num_units
self._activation = activation
@property
def
state_size(self):
return
self._num_units
@property
def
output_size(self):
return
self._num_units
def
__call__(self , inputs , state , scope=None):
with vs. variable_scope(scope or ’qrn_cell ’):
with vs. variable_scope (’update_gate ’):
z = sigmoid(linear(inputs [0] * inputs [1],
self._num_units))
with vs. variable_scope (’candidate ’):
c = self._activation(linear(tf.concat(inputs
, 1), self._num_units))
with vs. variable_scope (’reset_gate ’):
==PAGE:62==
52
Implementations
r = sigmoid(linear(inputs [0] * inputs [1],
self._num_units))
new_h = z * r * c + (1 - z) * state
return new_h , new_h
def linear(input , output_size , scope=None):
"""
Linear map: output[k] = sum_i(Matrix[k, i] * args[i] ) +
Bias[k]
Args:
args: a tensor or a list of 2D, batch x n, Tensors.
output_size: int , second
dimension of W[i].
scope: VariableScope
for the
created
subgraph; defaults
to "Linear ".
Returns:
A 2D Tensor
with
shape [batch x output_size] equal to
sum_i(args[i] * W[i]), where W[i]s are newly
created
matrices.
"""
shape = input.get_shape ().as_list ()
input_size = shape [1]
with tf. variable_scope(scope or "Linear "):
matrix = tf.get_variable (" Matrix", [output_size ,
input_size], dtype=input.dtype ,
initializer=tf.contrib.
layers.
xavier_initializer ())
bias_term = tf.get_variable (" Bias", [output_size],
dtype=input.dtype)
return tf.matmul(input , tf.transpose(matrix)) +
bias_term
5.5
Training
We separated the bAbI dataset into 10% for development and the rest for train-
ing. For the EntNet model we used 20 memory blocks and a hidden state size
of 100. For the QRN model we used a hidden state size of 50 for the cell, sim-
ilar to the paper. For both models, a batch size of 32 has been chosen for the
==PAGE:63==
5.5 Training
53
1k dataset and 128 for the 10k dataset. The embedding size in the input and
output modules was 50. Their weights were initialized with zero mean and a
standard deviation of 1/
√
d, d being the embedding size.
The loss function was the cross entropy between ˆy and the one-hot vector of
the true answer ˆt. The loss was minimized by Stochastic Gradient Descent for
a maximum of 500 epochs. The learning rate was controlled by AdaGrad [29].
Finally, since the models are sensitive to the weights initialization, we repeated
each training procedure 3 times with a new random initialization of the weights
and reported the result on the test data with the lowest loss on the development
data.
==PAGE:64==
54
Implementations
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 6
Experiments
We will now address the experiments on the EntNet model, the QRN model
and compare it in the character-level with the Char2Sentence module.
6.1
Entity Memory Network
Machine intelligence needs to understand the concept of perspective to be capa-
ble of being able to map an environment. The EntNet, is composed of memory
blocks that will be responsible for a given set of entities/objects/locations. They
will structurally map an environment. In the context of the project, the envi-
ronment will be a story (a set of sentences).
The EntNet model has been implemented from scratch. However, without the
support and the initial implementation of Jim Fleming, especially the imple-
mentation of the Dynamic Memory Cell1, the work would have been harder.
The training pipeline algorithm has been made in order for the 10k and 1k
dataset to be used. Because of time constraints, in total three runs with diﬀer-
ent initialization seeds have been made and we selected the one with the best
1github.com/jimfleming
==PAGE:66==
56
Experiments
performance. The tasks that passed (above 95% of accuracy) are denoted in
bold. In total, the model passed 13/20 tasks on the 10k dataset.
The results from the best run are as follows:
Task ID
Epochs
Train Loss
Train Acc.
Test Loss
Test Acc.
Task 1
20
0.05
98.35
0.13
95.97
Task 2
200
0.17
97.96
3.51
32.71
Task 3
140
0.06
99.97
4.19
35.10
Task 4
20
0.00
100
0.00
100
Task 5
10
0.06
98.72
0.07
98.86
Task 6
50
0.01
99.78
0.16
95.21
Task 7
20
0.03
98.57
0.05
98.23
Task 8
20
0.02
99.19
0.07
97.60
Task 9
200
0.00
100
0.33
90.52
Task 10
40
0.01
99.85
0.17
95.52
Task 11
50
0.00
100
0.29
95.31
Task 12
20
0.00
100
0.01
99.90
Task 13
50
0.00
100
0.24
95.52
Task 14
200
0.00
100
0.63
79.06
Task 15
50
0.02
99.43
0.11
95.42
Task 16
200
0.49
80.78
0.88
47.60
Task 17
200
0.00
100
0.35
90.63
Task 18
40
0.06
96.73
0.07
95.83
Task 19
170
0.04
99.98
1.69
41.77
Task 20
20
0.03
98.43
0.03
98.97
In addition, we plotted some graphs depicting very good generalization perfor-
mances for some tasks (ﬁgure 6.1) but also poor generalization and overﬁtting
for other tasks. The complete set of graphs can be found in the Appendix B.
Notably, the tasks 2 (ﬁgure 6.2) and 3 (ﬁgure 6.3) have reportedly been very
hard to train. Task 1 needs one supporting fact to answer the question, but
tasks 2 and 3 need respectively 2 and 3 supporting facts. A bad performance
for those tasks can be explained by the vanishing gradient problem. Indeed,
ﬁrstly the stories will incidentally be longer for those tasks and the model needs
to remember more sentences to be able to answer the question. Secondly, the
question is provided after the memory blocks, in the output module. Hence,
since the memory blocks does not have an unlimited memory capacity, it can
potentially be hard for them to eﬀectively memorize the relevant information.
Also, despite good performances with the 10k bAbI dataset, when the model
==PAGE:67==
6.1 Entity Memory Network
57
Figure 6.1: Training and Validation graphs for Task 10: Indeﬁnite Knowledge
Figure 6.2: Training and Validation graphs for Task 2: Two Supporting Facts
is trained on 1k samples, it overﬁts drastically and performs badly (it passes
only 4/20 tasks). The Dynamic Memory Network (DMN) and the End-to-end
Memory Network (N2N) act similarly and perform poorly on a smaller dataset.
The reasons for this observation are multiple. First, due to the model complexity
the model battles really hard to avoid overﬁtting.
This phenomenon seems
inevitable even using regularization tools such as dropout and L2-regularization.
Second, 1k examples for each tasks is too few and this model cannot learn how
to separate the diﬀerent entities between its several memory blocks with such
little knowledge and few examples.
In conclusion, despite the EntNet model being conceptually extremely interest-
ing, its current architecture makes the training diﬃcult. We observed overﬁtting
and low generalization performance due to the model complexity. At this stage,
the objective to study a model able to learn from few examples is not met. We
==PAGE:68==
58
Experiments
Figure 6.3: Training and Validation graphs for Task 3:
Three Supporting
Facts
want to train an eﬃcient model capable of extracting a context with a conser-
vative number of observations, unlike the EntNet, the N2N or the DMN. As a
result, we chose to study the Query-Reduction Network.
6.2
Query-Reduction Network
As presented previously, the Query-reduction Network (QRN) takes advantage
of a modiﬁed RNN cell that reduces the query with the sentence representation.
Intuitively, one will be more eﬃcient in ﬁnding the answer to a question by
reading a text by knowing the question beforehand.
The QRN model has also been implemented from scratch. The training pipeline
is the same as before. The results are reported below:
==PAGE:69==
6.2 Query-Reduction Network
59
Task ID
Epochs
Train Loss
Train Acc.
Test Acc.
Task 1
500
0.07
100
100
Task 2
500
0.29
100
100
Task 3
560
0.82
99.21
96.43
Task 4
500
0.14
100
100
Task 5
500
0.09
100
98.79
Task 6
500
0.07
100
100
Task 7
700
0.12
99.98
95.87
Task 8
500
0.15
99.88
99.20
Task 9
700
0.06
100
97.68
Task 10
500
0.08
100
97.78
Task 11
500
0.07
100
100
Task 12
500
0.10
100
100
Task 13
500
0.12
99.88
96.78
Task 14
500
0.16
100
82.76
Task 15
500
0.07
100
100
Task 16
500
0.43
100
46.17
Task 17
500
0.31
96.65
51.62
Task 18
500
0.16
95.09
92.74
Task 19
500
0.67
100
15.63
Task 20
500
0.11
98.44
97.98
Some of the graphs for the loss and accuracy are plotted in the following. The
complete set of curves can be seen in the Appendix B.
Figure 6.4: Training and Validation graphs for Task 7: Counting
Figure 6.4 for task 7 shows a good ﬁt between the training and testing curve,
which proves there is no overﬁtting. For this task the model has been trained
==PAGE:70==
60
Experiments
Figure 6.5: Training and Validation graphs for Task 15: Basic Deduction
Figure 6.6: Training and Validation graphs for Task 16: Basic Induction
during 680 epochs (500 epochs usually) in order to reach a test accuracy score
above 95%.
Figure 6.5 for task 15 is an example of a model that starts to
overﬁt during training but nevertheless succeeds eventually to reach a good
generalization. Finally ﬁgure 6.6 for task 16 is an example of a task that is
not learned successfully, with a large overﬁtting from the model. Task 16 is a
diﬃcult task that remains unsolved by the question answering community for
the 1k dataset. It is about learning to make basic inductions, which can be a
diﬃcult task to do even for an adult.
In conclusion, the QRN model passed 15/20 tasks on the 1k dataset (as a re-
minder, the EntNet model passed only 4/20). We achieved the same score as in
the original paper. Considering the average loss score for the 20 tasks, we are
almost achieving the same as the authors since our score is 11.43 and theirs is
11.3.
==PAGE:71==
6.2 Query-Reduction Network
61
One interesting fact is that we did not pass the same tasks. Indeed, they did not
pass task 7 (Counting) whereas we did, and we did not pass the task 14 (Time
Reasoning) whereas they did. Depending on the initialization some tasks will
converge faster than others in addition to their diﬀerent level of diﬃculty. Nev-
ertheless, both of those tasks when failed presented a fairly good test accuracy
(90.6% for task 7 and 82.76% for task 14).
The QRN architecture outperforms all other models, giving good evidence that it
is a model that can eﬃciently extract a context even from few data observations.
We believe it will be a major inspiration for future work on text-based question
answering and shows great potential in carrying out conversations that require
a multi-hop reasoning.
In the following we wanted to go a bit further in understanding how the model
extracts a representation of the story so we observed how it processes informa-
tion. In order to do that, we visualize the QRN cells.
As a recall, a QRN cell is composed of an update gate and a reset gate as pictured
below (note that the reset gate has been added during the implementation to
support the learning):
zt = α(xt, qt) = σ(W z(xt ◦qt) + bz)
rt = β(xt, qt) = σ(W r(xt ◦qt) + br)
˜ht = ρ(xt, qt) = tanh(W h[xt; qt] + bh)
ht = ztrt˜ht + (1 −zt)ht−1
In the model that has been trained, 2 or 3 layers of QRN cells have been used,
with a hidden unit size of 50. We will observe for some examples what the
magnitudes of the update and reset gates are.
This will illustrate how the
cells give importance to some sentences to answer the query, or how they are
discarded.
In the ﬁgures 6.7 and 6.8 we show the scalar magnitudes of the
update and reset gates for each sentence.
Figure 6.7: Visualization of the update and reset gates in the QRN model for
task 2 from the test set: a preliminary example
==PAGE:72==
62
Experiments
Figure 6.8: Visualization of the update and reset gates in the QRN model for
task 2 from the test set: a more complex example
From the visualization, one can see the question on the far left and the predicted
and truth answers on the far right, respectively yp and y. The columns denote
the layer number of the model (1 is the closest to the input). z denotes the
update gate, rf and rb denote respectively the forward and backward reset
gates.
In ﬁgure 6.7 we can observe a high update gate magnitude in the ﬁrst two layers
corresponding to the sentence informing about who has the milk. In the last
layer the update gate magnitude is high for the sentence which states where
the person (in the example, Mary) went (from the example, she went to the
hallway). This was a preliminary example.
In ﬁgure 6.8 we can observe that each time the word apple is mentioned in one of
the sentences, the update gate magnitude is high for the ﬁrst and second layer.
Indeed, the query is asking Where is the apple?.
An additional observation
that we did not have in the previous example can be observed from the second
layer. The magnitude of the forward reset gate rf for the third time step is
very low (0.09), the reason for this is most probably because the third sentence
of the story states that Daniel dropped the apple, meaning that the apple does
not belong to Daniel anymore and consequently the previous sentences are no
longer relevant to address the question of ﬁnding where the apple is. On the
other hand, all the gate magnitudes are high for the twelfth sentence: John
picked up the apple there. From this, the third layer just needs to understand
where John ﬁnally went with the apple. As a result, the third layer’s update
gate magnitudes are all high. Finally, the network’s design can extract the story
time line since each time step corresponds to a sentence. Thus the model knows
where John was the most recently: the answer is in the last sentences that
reﬂects John’s location.
==PAGE:73==
6.2 Query-Reduction Network
63
Figure 6.9: Visualization of the update and reset gates in the QRN model for
task 8 from the test set
Figure 6.10: Visualization of the update and reset gates in the QRN model
for task 8 from the test set
In the two examples above, one can see in ﬁgure 6.9 that for the question What
is John carrying?, as soon as the model crosses the ﬁrst statement relating to
John, it forgets everything before by assigning a very low value to the reset
gates. In contrast, the second time the model crosses a sentence reporting John,
the reset gate has a higher magnitude, meaning that it has learned to keep the
previous items in memory. This is veriﬁed in the second layer: the update gate
targets all the sentences where John appears.
In ﬁgure 6.9 we observe a diﬀerent behaviour. The question is What is Sandra
carrying? and the ﬁrst sentence where Sandra appears triggers - similarly to
the previous example - an very low value for the reset gates.
Nevertheless,
when the sentence Sandra dropped the football is encountered - meaning that
Sandra does not carry anything anymore - the reset gates are also almost null.
This demonstrates that the model understood that from there on, the previous
sentences were useless and were worth forgetting.
Figure 6.11 showcases that the QRN layers eﬀectively avoid long-term depen-
dency problems. Indeed, all the sentences have been integrated in the latent
memory from step to step with a reset gate close to 1. Although the model still
can relate to information from the ﬁrst sentence because the candidate reduced
query (i.e. the candidate hidden state) does not depend on previous steps but
only on the current step. This is an advantage compared to other RNN-based
models with gating mechanism (GRU or LSTM).
Finally, ﬁgures 6.12 and 6.13 show that the model can make inferences on action
motivation.
In the example, the questions asks about the reason why Yann
==PAGE:74==
64
Experiments
Figure 6.11: Visualization of the update and reset gates in the QRN model
for task 15 from the test set
Figure 6.12: Visualization of the update and reset gates in the QRN model
for task 20 from the test set
Figure 6.13: Visualization of the update and reset gates in the QRN model
for task 20 from the test set
went to the garden. By means of the QRN cells, the model learned from the
environment that when an individual in bored, it tends to go to the bedroom.
Respectively, from what the model observed during the training, it predicted
that Yann would go to the garden because he is bored.
It appears that the QRN model learns well how to accurately update its current
state of knowledge as a new reduced query is fed into the cell. The model also
succeeds in capturing behavioural patterns by memorizing frequent observations.
We succeeded in reproducing the best performance (at the time of writing) on
the small version of the bAbI dataset.
==PAGE:75==
6.3 Building and training Char2Sentence
65
6.3
Building and training Char2Sentence
At this stage of the master thesis, we wanted to study and evaluate another
sentence extraction system.
That is the reason why we modiﬁed the input
module of the QRN model.
The new encoder, Char2Sentence, has been presented in chapter 4 and ex-
tracts the information at the character-level. It outputs a representation at the
sentence-level, similar to the position encoding module. We will implement the
module and evaluate whether it improves the performances of the model or not.
In a preliminary experiment, we ﬁrst write an algorithm for a simple task: trans-
form a sentence from the character-level to the word-level. In other words, the
model should have as input a sequence of characters with letters and punctu-
ation and as output the sequence of the corresponding words. We also trained
the model on the single stories of the bAbI dataset.
Below are the graphs of the loss and accuracy for this task (using the text from
task 3 and 16). The complete set of curves for the other stories is reported in
the Appendix B.
Figure 6.14: Training and Validation graphs for Char2Word trained on Task
3
As it can be observed, the model converges quickly after 3 or 4 epochs. We did
the same experiments with the Char2Word and Word2Sentence modules stacked
on top of each other as illustrated in ﬁgure 4.4. We discarded the Sentence2Story
==PAGE:76==
66
Experiments
Figure 6.15: Training and Validation graphs for Char2Word trained on Task
16
since the input of the QRN cell must be at the sentence-level. Thereafter, we
trained the model on the joint dataset meaning that all the tasks stories have
been gathered and shuﬄed.
The Char2Sentence receives as input a sequence of characters with letters and
punctuation and outputs the sequence of the corresponding sentences. The ﬁnal
model has eventually been saved with frozen parameters to keep them for later
use. Indeed, this constitutes a pre-training for the input module of our next
experiment with the QRN model using the Char2Sentence module.
6.4
Query-Reduction Network with redesign
We will now study how performs the QRN on the question answering tasks by
extracting the story representation with the Char2Sentence.
One drawback of this change is that the new module brings more parameters
into the model creating a more complex architecture. We consequently need to
increase the regularization of the model if we want to prevent the model from
overﬁtting. To demonstrate this, we do a quick comparison between the number
of parameters of the input modules. As an example, let us choose a sentence
with a length of 20 words and 100 characters.
==PAGE:77==
6.4 Query-Reduction Network with redesign
67
The Position Encoder (PE) accounts for only the projection matrix into the
embedding space. Indeed, those are the only trainable parameters (the matrix
l is composed of constants that depend exclusively on the embedding size and
the maximum length of the sentence). With an embedding size of 50, we have:
nb_params_pe = 20 × 50 = 1000.
For the Char2Sentence although, the number of parameters depends on the
number of time steps for the characters and for the words. Since the module is
composed of two stacked RNN on top of each other, we obtain
nb_params_c2s = (100 × 50 + 50 × 50) + (20 × 50 + 50 × 50) = 11000.
The only way to handle this overﬂow of parameters is to reduce the hidden size,
and we decided to choose 10, which brings the number of parameters down to
1400.
We now evaluate the Char2Sentence redesign on the 1k bAbI dataset. The re-
sults are balanced between tasks that converged and others that did not learn
at all whereas they did for the previous model.
Hence, we report that this
character-level module performs worse than the position encoding module.
Figure 6.16: Training and Validation graphs for the QRN with Char2Sentence
trained on Task 4
The two examples above illustrate this conclusion: ﬁgure 6.16 shows a suc-
cessful learning but ﬁgure 6.17 shows a failing training although the same task
succeeded when using the position encoding on word-level.
==PAGE:78==
68
Experiments
Figure 6.17: Training and Validation graphs for the QRN with Char2Sentence
trained on Task 15
6.5
Discussion
It has been observed previously that training these architectures is often unsta-
ble so we deemed necessary to make several trials and a number of three runs
per models appeared to be a good compromise between experimental require-
ments and time. The other papers trained the models 10 times and up to 50
times. In the following, we summarize and evaluate our experiments.
Firstly, we argued that the EntNet model was not able to learn from few amount
of data. Its architecture is simply too complex and the model overﬁts when asked
to learn from fewer observations. DMN and N2N are comparable memory net-
works that also demand an important amount data. As a result, we proposed to
study a model that employs less parameter resources while being more accurate
on few data.
Hence, we then evaluated the QRN model on the small 1k bAbI dataset. The
results were much superior compared to the EntNet model. The QRN cell is
more dynamic and closer to the meaning of each sentence challenged by the
question. The observation of the QRN cell demonstrated its ability to update
the query reduction with new relevant information.
Then, we wanted to study further the input module of the QRN model. Al-
though it was performing successfully on the 1k dataset, we decided to evaluate
the same model on the character-level. The Position Encoder has been replaced
==PAGE:79==
6.5 Discussion
69
by the Char2Sentence encoder.
Lastly, we evaluated the performances of the resigned model by comparing the
results with the original QRN model. The conclusion is that in the context
of our study, learning from a lower semantic level does not help the model to
be more eﬃcient. Rather, it produces poorer generalization performances with
lower test scores.
==PAGE:80==
70
Experiments
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 7
Conclusions and future work
In this master thesis project, we investigated the last advancements in Question
Answering. We implemented credible models with good potential for language
understanding and evaluated their performances on the bAbI dataset.
This
dataset is a benchmark QA dataset constructed as a preliminary step for any
aspiring good language understanding model and because it is challenging in a
number of ways by providing a large scope of diversiﬁed tasks:
1. Single Supporting Fact
2. Two Supporting Facts
3. Three Supporting Facts
4. Two Argument Relations
5. Three Argument Relations
6. Yes/No Questions
7. Counting
8. Lists/Sets
9. Simple Negation
10. Indeﬁnite Knowledge
11. Basic Coreference
12. Conjunction
13. Compound Coreference
14. Time Reasoning
15. Basic Deduction
16. Basic Induction
17. Positional Reasoning
18. Size Reasoning
19. Path Finding
20. Agent’s Motivations
==PAGE:82==
72
Conclusions and future work
We also have introduced the Char2Sentence encoder and applied the module
to the Query-Reduction Network model.
We will now discuss what we can
learn from the experiments in relation to our initial hypotheses and address the
obstacles encountered during this project. Finally we will outline the possible
future work.
Synthesis of the results
In the ﬁrst instance, this project focused strongly on memory networks as a way
to extract meaningful memory slots that would then be confronted with the
query in the controller nodes and the output module. Those models make an
intensive use of artiﬁcial neural networks in a challenging way as the problems
takes into account two inputs: an environment and a query. During the project
there was obviously a unique opportunity to develop a general knowledge in the
ﬁeld of language understanding and make an in-depth study of the underlying
mathematics of the question answering models.
First, the EntNet model has been implemented and evaluated on the bAbI
dataset.
Its architecture proves to be able to successfully model a story by
splitting its memory components that focus on the diﬀerent entities of an envi-
ronment (characters, places, objects, etc.). This model is particularly interesting
since it can be trained end-to-end and could potentially be trained on even larger
datasets using the Stochastic Gradient Descent algorithm and scale to a larger
set of observations. By contrast, the EntNet has conﬁrmed to perform poorly
on smaller datasets.
Second, as the focus of the project was to investigate question answering models
that can learn eﬃciently from few data points, we focused on less complex
models. By reducing the query with the input sentences, the Query-Reduction
Network has proven to perform better than the memory networks and can learn
from small amount of data. Using a gated-recurrent cell, the model can extract
at each time step a sigmoid representation of the relevant facts. By design,
the architecture also discards the long-term dependency problem as the inputs
are taken from the current time step only.
Although, the cell can still take
advantage of the recurrent capability of a RNN to model sequential data.
From the comparison between an input module with a Position Encoding and
with a Char2Sentence encoder, the QRN model has demonstrated to be more
eﬃcient when learning with the PE on the word-level. The drawback of having
an encoder at the character-level was that it cannot learn from too few observa-
tions. The hope was to guide the model to extract a better representation of the
story by means of a smooth and step-wise encoding from the lowest semantic
==PAGE:83==
73
level and with a reduced vocabulary size. Nevertheless, the complexity of the
model was too high.
A theoretically plausible assumption is that by introducing more parameters
into the encoder architecture, we give more freedom to the nonlinear conﬁgu-
rations and the input module is consequently not able to converge with minor
knowledge. The encoder cannot give an accurate overview over the sentence to
the rest of the model because it is asked too much and given too little learning
resources.
Recurrent Neural Networks for Language Modeling
Besides the work done by the research community on QA systems, RNN models
have proven to be performing well to model sequential data in general and
particularly language. It also helps connecting language modeling more closely
to machine learning, data encoding and cognitive sciences research.
Undeniably, RNN have shown great success in many NLP tasks:
language
modeling and generating text, machine translation, image captioning or speech
recognition. We demonstrated along this project that QRN cells are performing
particularly well for QA tasks. Their recurrent structure capture long-term de-
pendencies without vanishing the information and with an attention mechanism
within the cell architecture.
Obstacles in Training Large Neural Networks
The master thesis project and experiments have certainly pushed to gain expe-
rience and learn the good practices for training large neural networks. Some of
these practices are presented in [30] and [31], supported by mathematical and
experimental proofs. Along the project, several good practices were adopted.
First, the training data needed to be correctly pre-processed before being fed into
any of the models. Parsing, tokenization and vectorization have been performed
and tested at the character and word-level. Second, we wanted to use as few
regularization as possible to maintain a good learning. Therefore, the number of
hidden units and layers was chosen to avoid any superﬂuous parameters. Third,
the models were very sensitive to the weight initialization. A good practice was
then to train the models several times each with a diﬀerent random initialization.
Fourth, the learning rate has been a very diﬃcult hyper-parameter to tune. It
is governing the learning process, then if it is set too small the model might take
==PAGE:84==
74
Conclusions and future work
very long to converge but if it is too large the loss will increase and lead to very
poor generalization performances. In general, the regularization (dropout and
L2-regularization) hyper-parameters have also been diﬃcult to tune. Lastly, it
is faster to use GPU-supported instances when training large neural networks.
So this project has also given the opportunity to learn and make use of GPU
machines, both from Amazon Web Services and DTU Compute.
Nevertheless, the time allocated to these tasks during the project was certainly
fruitful and was an interesting process. Also, it was a good opportunity to gain
experience and intuition when training neural networks.
Obstacles in Evaluating the Performances
Evaluating the performances of the models was a diﬃcult task because since
the neural networks are composed of multi-layer nonlinear structures, they are
not transparent. The loss and accuracy metrics are a good way to evaluate a
model’s performance. Yet with only those metrics, it is not possible to have
a clear and deep understanding of how the model really works and why it is
succeeding or failing.
To tackle this problem, we decided to visualize the gates in the QRN cell to
understand why the model was performing well or was generalizing poorly. Nev-
ertheless, when the model was performing poorly not much could be done. For
example, it would have been interesting to go further and guide the model into
the right answer by providing a feedback when answering false. In the work
that has been conducted in [32] the authors give a feedback loop to the model
when asking questions. This framework would have helped to take action from
failing tasks, but it was too far away from the scope of the project.
Future work
The iterative process of ﬁne tuning is massively time consuming. As a gen-
eral note, it could be interesting to engage work into a structured framework
concerning this experimentation process with neural networks. Furthermore,
additional research needs to be conducted in the ﬁeld of question answering. In
the following, we give several directions where QA research is going.
Real-world datasets. The bAbI dataset is a synthetic dataset about activity
in a simulated world, it does not take into account the noisiness, bias and
richness of real world texts. Its vocabulary is also very limited and the sentence
==PAGE:85==
75
forms are very constrained. As a consequence, it is not suﬃcient for a good
question answering model to pass the bAbI dataset. Other challenging datasets
exist like for instance the SQuAD dataset [33] and NewsQA [34].
Joint training. Joint training (using the 20 tasks simultaneously) has been
reported [23] to helping the training. It would be interesting to train the model
on the 1k bAbI dataset to corroborate the use of the additional character-level
module since this would virtually add training data and reduce overﬁtting. This
would also make the model more generic.
Position Encoding on the character-level. This would also be interesting
to slightly modify the Position Encoding module by making it work on the
character-level. This would not add more parameters since the matrix needed
for this input is not trainable.
The only trainable parameters for the input
module would consequently be in the embedding matrix, and there would be
fewer compared to the context of a word-level extraction. This would leverage
the Out-of-Vocabulary (OoV) problem while reducing the number of parameters.
Hybrid input module. One idea that came out while discussing with my
supervisor was to train a question answering model both on the character-level
and word-level, with the rest of the model shared by the modules. Only the
input module would switch, the rest of the model would remain the same.
This concept could theoretically eliminate the issues that come with each of the
tokenization level solutions while leading the rest of the model to convergence.
Instead of being adversarial, the two inter-switched modules would be collateral.
Relational model.
The Relational Network (RN) [35] has the capacity to
compute relations by design, similar to CNN that have the capacity to reason
about spatial properties and RNN that can reason about sequential dependen-
cies. Formally, the RN is driven by the function:
RN(O) = fφ(
X
i,j
gθ(oi, oj))
where the input is a set O of objects (o1, o2, . . . , on) and fφ and gθ are two
functions with learnable parameters φ and θ.
It has been tested on the bAbI dataset (each object is a sentence in a story)
and solved 18/20 of the tasks on the 10k version. It would be interesting to
study this architecture and evaluate it on the smaller version, or with another
QA dataset.er
==PAGE:86==
76
Conclusions and future work
==PAGE:87==
Appendix A
Appendix A
This appendix gives a more detailed view over some of the concepts that does
not have direct inﬂuence on the main topic of the thesis, but have been found
relevant to the overall theory.
A.1
SVM
SVM is a supervised machine learning algorithm which can be used for both
classiﬁcation and regression. To stay concise, we will brieﬂy introduce SVM
with the simplest classiﬁcation problem with some data points each belonging
to one of the two classes.
A simple linear solution to this problem can be viewed in a framework where
data points are p-dimensional vectors and where we want to separate such points
with a (p-1)-dimensional hyper-plane.
In ﬁgure A.1 is a binary classiﬁcation problem (with points labeled yi = ±1)
that is linearly separable. All the points are deﬁned by the vector x = (x1, x2).
Formally, any point x lying on the separating hyper-plane satisﬁes:
xT w + b = 0
==PAGE:88==
78
Appendix A
Figure A.1: A binary classiﬁcation problem that is linearly separable
with w the vector normal to the hyper-plane and b a constant that describes
how much the hyper-plane is shifted relative to the origin. Accordingly, the
distance of the hyper-plane from the origin is
b
∥w∥.
Now, the margin M and a can be introduced. They satisfy M =
2a
∥w∥and:
xT
i w + b ≥a for yi = 1
xT
i w + b ≤−a for yi = −1
This can be compactly written as:
∀i, yi(xT
i w + b) ≥a
Since it will just change the scale of b and w, we can set a = 1. Consequently,
if the goal is to maximize the margin M between the two dotted lines in the
ﬁgure,
1
∥w∥should be maximized or to avoid a non-convex objective function,
∥w2∥should be minimized.
==PAGE:89==
A.2 GRU and LSTM
79
Finally, this can be put as:
minimize 1
2∥w2∥
subject to g(w, b) = −yi(xT
i w + b) + 1 ≤0 (i = 1, . . . , n).
A.2
GRU and LSTM
Two very popular RNN-based models with gating mechanism are GRU and
LSTM. Compared to LSTM [14], GRU [15] is a special case of it. It controls the
ﬂow of information like the LSTM unit, but without having to use a memory
unit. It just exposes the full hidden content without any control.
The GRU gates, candidate and hidden state follow:
zt = σ(xtU z + ht−1W z)
rt = σ(xtU r + ht−1W r)
˜ht = tanh(xtU h + (ht−1 ◦rt)W h)
ht = (1 −zt) ◦˜ht + ztht−1.
Whereas the equations for the LSTM cell are:
it = σ(xtU i + ht−1W i)
ft = σ(xtU f + ht−1W f)
ot = σ(xtU o + ht−1W o)
˜ht = tanh(xtU h + ht−1W h)
ct = ct−1 ◦ft + ˜ht ◦it
ht = tanh(ct) ◦ot.
As mentioned in chapter 5 when reporting the results of the QRN model, both
GRU and LSTM cell use the previous hidden state and the current input to
obtain the candidate hidden state, contrary to the QRN cell. This gives it some
advantages like being able to avoid vanishing gradient and reducing overﬁtting
during training thanks to a lighter architecture and simpler model.
==PAGE:90==
80
Appendix A
==PAGE:91==
Appendix B
Appendix B
This appendix gives more results from the experiments.
B.1
Simulations with the EntNet model
The EntNet model has been tested against the bAbI dataset. The complete set
of results are as follow, for a training on each of the 10k question-answer pairs
of the dataset, with the 20 tasks.
B.2
Simulations with the QRN model
The experimentations with the QRN model have also been tested against the
bAbI dataset. The full results are in the ﬁgures B.3 and B.4, for a training on
each of the 1k question-answer pairs of the dataset, with the 20 tasks.
==PAGE:92==
82
Appendix B
Figure B.1: EntNet implementation: Training and Validation loss and accu-
racy for the bAbI tasks ranging from 1 to 10
==PAGE:93==
B.2 Simulations with the QRN model
83
Figure B.2: EntNet implementation: Training and Validation loss and accu-
racy for the bAbI tasks ranging from 11 to 20
==PAGE:94==
84
Appendix B
Figure B.3: QRN implementation: Training and Validation loss and accuracy
for the bAbI tasks ranging from 1 to 10
==PAGE:95==
B.2 Simulations with the QRN model
85
Figure B.4: QRN implementation: Training and Validation loss and accuracy
for the bAbI tasks ranging from 11 to 20
==PAGE:96==
86
Appendix B
B.3
Simulations with the Char2Word module
We have tested an isolated Char2Word module to validate its implementation
and evaluate its potential.
The complete set of results are as follows, for a
training on each of the 10k question-answer pairs of the dataset, with the 20
tasks.
To keep the report clear and synthetic, we chose to leave the other
redundant plots concerning the other parts of the module out of the report.
==PAGE:97==
B.3 Simulations with the Char2Word module
87
Figure B.5: Char2Word implementation: Training and Validation loss and
accuracy for the bAbI tasks ranging from 1 to 10
==PAGE:98==
88
Appendix B
Figure B.6: Char2Word implementation: Training and Validation loss and
accuracy for the bAbI tasks ranging from 11 to 20
==PAGE:99==
Appendix C
Appendix C
This appendix contains some of the algorithms that acted as fundamental parts
to the models.
C.1
Custom bi-directional RNN (QRN)
Below is the function that has been customized from TensorFlow in order to
handle the scenario where the input is a tuple.
def
custom_bidirectional_dynamic_rnn (cell_fw , cell_bw ,
inputs , sequence_length =None , initial_state_fw =None ,
initial_state_bw =None , dtype=None , parallel_iterations =
None , swap_memory=False , time_major=False , scope=None):
with vs. variable_scope(scope or " bidirectional_rnn "):
# Forward
direction
with vs. variable_scope ("fw") as fw_scope:
==PAGE:100==
90
Appendix C
output_fw , output_state_fw = tf.nn.dynamic_rnn(
cell=cell_fw , inputs=inputs , sequence_length =
sequence_length , initial_state =
initial_state_fw , dtype=dtype ,
parallel_iterations =parallel_iterations ,
swap_memory=swap_memory , time_major=
time_major , scope=fw_scope)
# Backward
direction
if not
time_major:
time_dim = 1
batch_dim = 0
else:
time_dim = 0
batch_dim = 1
def
_reverse(input_ , seq_lengths , seq_dim , batch_dim
):
if seq_lengths is not None:
return
array_ops. reverse_sequence (input=
input_ , seq_lengths=seq_lengths , seq_dim=
seq_dim , batch_dim=batch_dim)
else:
return
array_ops.reverse(input_ , axis =[
seq_dim ])
with vs. variable_scope ("bw") as bw_scope:
inputs_reverse_story = _reverse(inputs [0],
seq_lengths=sequence_length , seq_dim=time_dim
, batch_dim=batch_dim)
inputs_reverse_question = _reverse(inputs [1],
seq_lengths=sequence_length , seq_dim=time_dim
, batch_dim=batch_dim)
tmp , output_state_bw = tf.nn.dynamic_rnn(cell=
cell_bw , inputs =[ inputs_reverse_story ,
inputs_reverse_question ], sequence_length =
sequence_length , initial_state =
initial_state_bw , dtype=dtype ,
parallel_iterations =parallel_iterations ,
swap_memory=swap_memory , time_major=
time_major , scope=bw_scope)
output_bw = _reverse(tmp , seq_lengths=
sequence_length ,
seq_dim=time_dim , batch_dim=batch_dim)
outputs = (output_fw , output_bw)
==PAGE:101==
C.2 Dynamic Memory Cell (EntNet)
91
output_states = (output_state_fw , output_state_bw )
return
outputs , output_states
C.2
Dynamic Memory Cell (EntNet)
The implementation of the dynamic memory cell is reported below. The com-
ments in the code make references to the original paper [12].
class
DynamicMemoryCell (tf.contrib.rnn.RNNCell):
def
__init__(self ,
num_blocks ,
num_units_per_block ,
keys ,
initializer=None ,
recurrent_initializer =None ,
activation=tf.nn.relu):
self._num_blocks = num_blocks # M
self. _num_units_per_block = num_units_per_block # d
self._keys = keys
self._activation = activation # \phi
self._initializer = initializer
self. _recurrent_initializer = recurrent_initializer
@property
def
state_size(self):
"Return the total
state
size of the cell , across all
blocks ."
return
self._num_blocks * self. _num_units_per_block
@property
def
output_size(self):
"Return the total
output
size of the cell , across
all blocks ."
return
self._num_blocks * self. _num_units_per_block
def
zero_state(self , batch_size , dtype):
"Initialize
the memory to the key values ."
zero_state = tf.concat ([tf.expand_dims(key , axis =0)
for key in self._keys], axis =1)
==PAGE:102==
92
Appendix C
zero_state_batch = tf.tile(zero_state , [batch_size ,
1])
return
zero_state_batch
def
get_gate(self , state_j , key_j , inputs):
"""
Implements
the gate (scalar for each
block).
Equation 2:
g_j <- \sigma(s_t^T h_j + s_t^T w_j)
"""
a = tf.reduce_sum(inputs * state_j , axis =1)
b = tf.reduce_sum(inputs * key_j , axis =1)
return tf.sigmoid(a + b)
def
get_candidate(self , state_j , key_j , inputs , U, V, W,
U_bias):
"""
Represents
the new memory
candidate
that will be
weighted by the
gate
value and
combined
with the
existing
memory.
Equation 3:
h_j^~ <- \phi(U h_j + V w_j + W s_t)
"""
key_V = tf.matmul(key_j , V)
state_U = tf.matmul(state_j , U) + U_bias
inputs_W = tf.matmul(inputs , W)
return
self._activation(state_U * inputs_W * key_V)
def
__call__(self , inputs , state , scope=None):
with tf. variable_scope(scope or type(self).__name__ ,
initializer=self._initializer):
U = tf.get_variable(’U’, [self.
_num_units_per_block , self.
_num_units_per_block ],
initializer=self.
_recurrent_initializer )
V = tf.get_variable(’V’, [self.
_num_units_per_block , self.
_num_units_per_block ],
initializer=self.
_recurrent_initializer )
W = tf.get_variable(’W’, [self.
_num_units_per_block , self.
_num_units_per_block ],
initializer=self.
_recurrent_initializer )
==PAGE:103==
C.2 Dynamic Memory Cell (EntNet)
93
U_bias = tf.get_variable(’U_bias ’, [self.
_num_units_per_block ])
# Split the hidden
state
into
blocks (each U, V,
W are shared
across
blocks).
state = tf.split(state , self._num_blocks , axis
=1)
next_states = []
for j, state_j in enumerate(state): # Hidden
State (j)
key_j = tf.expand_dims(self._keys[j], axis
=0)
gate_j = self.get_gate(state_j , key_j ,
inputs)
candidate_j = self. get_candidate (state_j ,
key_j , inputs , U, V, W, U_bias)
# Equation 4: h_j <- h_j + g_j * h_j^~
# Perform an update of the hidden
state (
memory).
state_j_next = state_j + tf.expand_dims(
gate_j ,
-1) * candidate_j
# Equation 5: h_j <- h_j / \norm{h_j}
# Forget
previous
memories by normalization.
state_j_next_norm = tf.norm(
tensor=state_j_next ,
ord=’euclidean ’,
axis=-1,
keep_dims=True)
state_j_next_norm = tf.where(
tf.greater(state_j_next_norm , 0.0) ,
state_j_next_norm ,
tf.ones_like( state_j_next_norm ))
state_j_next = state_j_next /
state_j_next_norm
next_states.append( state_j_next )
state_next = tf.concat(next_states , axis =1)
return
state_next , state_next
==PAGE:104==
94
Appendix C
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
[1] L. Boroditsky, “Linguistic relativity,” Encyclopedia of cognitive science,
2003.
[2] N. Vukovic, M. Feurra, A. Shpektor, A. Myachykov, and Y. Shtyrov, “Pri-
mary motor cortex functionally contributes to language comprehension: An
online rtms study,” Neuropsychologia, vol. 96, pp. 222–229, 2017.
[3] P. Norvig, “Inference in text understanding.,” in AAAI, pp. 561–565, 1987.
[4] A. Radford, R. Józefowicz, and I. Sutskever, “Learning to generate reviews
and discovering sentiment,” CoRR, vol. abs/1704.01444, 2017.
[5] A. Einstein, “Ist die trägheit eines körpers von seinem energieinhalt ab-
hängig?,” Annalen der Physik, vol. 323, no. 13, pp. 639–641, 1905.
[6] R. Descartes, Discourse on Method and Meditations on First Philosophy.
New Haven and London: Yale University Press., 1996.
[7] D. Amodei, R. Anubhai, E. Battenberg, C. Case, J. Casper, B. Catanzaro,
J. Chen, M. Chrzanowski, A. Coates, G. Diamos, E. Elsen, J. Engel, L. Fan,
C. Fougner, T. Han, A. Y. Hannun, B. Jun, P. LeGresley, L. Lin, S. Narang,
A. Y. Ng, S. Ozair, R. Prenger, J. Raiman, S. Satheesh, D. Seetapun,
S. Sengupta, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, C. Wang, B. Xiao, D. Yogatama, J. Zhan,
and Z. Zhu, “Deep speech 2: End-to-end speech recognition in english and
mandarin,” CoRR, vol. abs/1512.02595, 2015.
[8] Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, “Interpreters and
Translators.”
<https://www.bls.gov/ooh/media-and-communication/
interpreters-and-translators.htm>.
==PAGE:106==
96
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[9] Y. Wu, M. Schuster, Z. Chen, Q. V. Le, M. Norouzi, W. Macherey,
M. Krikun, Y. Cao, Q. Gao, K. Macherey, J. Klingner, A. Shah, M. John-
son, X. Liu, L. Kaiser, S. Gouws, Y. Kato, T. Kudo, H. Kazawa, K. Stevens,
G. Kurian, N. Patil, W. Wang, C. Young, J. Smith, J. Riesa, A. Rudnick,
O. Vinyals, G. Corrado, M. Hughes, and J. Dean, “Google’s neural ma-
chine translation system: Bridging the gap between human and machine
translation,” CoRR, vol. abs/1609.08144, 2016.
[10] P. Do, H. Nguyen, C. Tran, M. Nguyen, and M. Nguyen, “Legal question an-
swering using ranking SVM and deep convolutional neural network,” CoRR,
vol. abs/1703.05320, 2017.
[11] Y. Watanabe, B. Dhingra, and R. Salakhutdinov, “Question answer-
ing from unstructured text by retrieval and comprehension,”
CoRR,
vol. abs/1703.08885, 2017.
[12] M. Henaﬀ, J. Weston, A. Szlam, A. Bordes, and Y. LeCun, “Track-
ing the world state with recurrent entity networks,”
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1612.03969, 2016.
[13] M. Seo, S. Min, A. Farhadi, and H. Hajishirzi, “Query-Reduction Networks
for Question Answering,” ArXiv e-prints, June 2016.
[14] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural com-
putation, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
[15] K. Cho, B. Van Merriënboer, C. Gulcehre, D. Bahdanau, F. Bougares,
H. Schwenk, and Y. Bengio, “Learning phrase representations using
rnn encoder-decoder for statistical machine translation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1406.1078, 2014.
[16] J. Weston, A. Bordes, S. Chopra, A. M. Rush, B. van Merriënboer,
A. Joulin, and T. Mikolov, “Towards ai-complete question answering: A
set of prerequisite toy tasks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.05698, 2015.
[17] Wikipedia, “Universal approximation theorem — wikipedia, the free ency-
clopedia,” 2017.
[18] M. Bojarski,
D. D. Testa,
D. Dworakowski,
B. Firner,
B. Flepp,
P. Goyal, L. D. Jackel, M. Monfort, U. Muller, J. Zhang, X. Zhang,
J. Zhao, and K. Zieba, “End to end learning for self-driving cars,” CoRR,
vol. abs/1604.07316, 2016.
[19] A.
Y.
Hannun,
C.
Case,
J.
Casper,
B.
Catanzaro,
G.
Diamos,
E. Elsen, R. Prenger, S. Satheesh, S. Sengupta, A. Coates, and A. Y.
Ng, “Deep speech:
Scaling up end-to-end speech recognition,” CoRR,
vol. abs/1412.5567, 2014.
==PAGE:107==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
97
[20] J. Chung, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “A character-level decoder with-
out explicit segmentation for neural machine translation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1603.06147, 2016.
[21] A. Graves, G. Wayne, and I. Danihelka, “Neural turing machines,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1410.5401, 2014.
[22] A. Kumar, O. Irsoy, P. Ondruska, M. Iyyer, J. Bradbury, I. Gulrajani,
V. Zhong, R. Paulus, and R. Socher, “Ask me anything: Dynamic memory
networks for natural language processing,” in International Conference on
Machine Learning, pp. 1378–1387, 2016.
[23] S. Sukhbaatar, J. Weston, R. Fergus, et al., “End-to-end memory networks,”
in Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 2440–2448, 2015.
[24] P. Rakic, “Evolution of the neocortex: a perspective from developmental
biology,” Nature Reviews Neuroscience, vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 724–735, 2009.
[25] X. Zhang, J. J. Zhao, and Y. LeCun, “Character-level convolutional net-
works for text classiﬁcation,” CoRR, vol. abs/1509.01626, 2015.
[26] I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, and Q. V. Le, “Sequence to sequence learning with
neural networks,” CoRR, vol. abs/1409.3215, 2014.
[27] X. Glorot and Y. Bengio, “Understanding the diﬃculty of training deep
feedforward neural networks,” in Proceedings of the Thirteenth Interna-
tional Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS-10)
(Y. W. Teh and D. M. Titterington, eds.), vol. 9, pp. 249–256, 2010.
[28] G. E. Hinton, N. Srivastava, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and R. Salakhut-
dinov, “Improving neural networks by preventing co-adaptation of feature
detectors,” CoRR, vol. abs/1207.0580, 2012.
[29] J. Duchi, E. Hazan, and Y. Singer, “Adaptive subgradient methods for
online learning and stochastic optimization,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 12,
pp. 2121–2159, July 2011.
[30] Y. A. LeCun, L. Bottou, G. B. Orr, and K.-R. Müller, “Eﬃcient back-
prop,” in Neural networks: Tricks of the trade, pp. 9–48, Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2012.
[31] Y. Bengio, “Practical recommendations for gradient-based training of deep
architectures,” CoRR, vol. abs/1206.5533, 2012.
[32] J. Li, A. H. Miller, S. Chopra, M. Ranzato, and J. Weston, “Dialogue
learning with human-in-the-loop,” CoRR, vol. abs/1611.09823, 2016.
==PAGE:108==
98
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[33] P. Rajpurkar, J. Zhang, K. Lopyrev, and P. Liang, “Squad: 100, 000+
questions for machine comprehension of text,” CoRR, vol. abs/1606.05250,
2016.
[34] A. Trischler, T. Wang, X. Yuan, J. Harris, A. Sordoni, P. Bachman,
and K. Suleman, “Newsqa: A machine comprehension dataset,” CoRR,
vol. abs/1611.09830, 2016.
[35] A. Santoro, D. Raposo, D. G. Barrett, M. Malinowski, R. Pascanu,
P. Battaglia, and T. Lillicrap, “A simple neural network module for re-
lational reasoning,” ArXiv e-prints, June 2017.
