==PAGE:1==
 
Aleixo Cambeiro Barreiro 
Vision-Based Detection and 
Tracking of Marine Vehicles 
Using Convolutional Neural 
Networks 
MasterβÄôs thesis, July 2017 
==PAGE:2==
Vision-Based Detection and Tracking of Marine Vehicles Using Convolutional Neural 
Networks 
Vision baseret detektion og tracking af skibe ved brug af Convolutional Neural Networks 
 
Report written by: 
Aleixo Cambeiro Barreiro 
 
Advisor(s): 
Ole Ravn 
Jinwhan Kim 
 
 
DTU Electrical Engineering 
Automation and Control 
Technical University of Denmark 
Elektrovej 
Building 326 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark 
Tel : +45 4525 3576 
 
studieadministration@elektro.dtu.dk   
 
 
Project period: 
 
August 2016 βÄ™ July 2017 
ECTS: 
 
40 ECTS 
Education: 
 
MSc 
Field: 
 
Electrical Engineering 
Class: 
 
Public 
 
Remarks: 
 
This report is submitted as partial fulfilment of the requirements 
for graduation in the above education at the Technical 
University of Denmark. 
 
 
Copyrights: 
 
¬© Aleixo Cambeiro Barreiro, 2017 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
Contents
Contents
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
List of Tables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
List of Figures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Chapter 1.
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation and background
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
Chapter 2.
Vision-Based Detection of Marine Vehicles
5
2.1
Image Feature Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Faster-RCNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Application to Vision-Based Ship Detection . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
Chapter 3.
New Tracking Filter Algorithm
12
3.1
Target Tracking and Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Proposed Tracking Filter Formulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.1
Adaptation of Existing Measurement Method . . . . . .
17
3.2.2
New Measuring Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
Chapter 4.
Results and Discussion
22
4.1
Accuracy analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Robustness analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
Chapter 5.
Conclusions
35
5.1
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
Bibliography
37
i
==PAGE:4==
List of Tables
4.1
RMSE for the diο§Äerent approaches on both datasets: M1a, the existing measuring ap-
proach; M1b, replacing the relative range œ¹T measurement by the angle Έ¥T ; and M1c,
using both measurements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
ii
==PAGE:5==
List of Figures
2.1
Flow diagram of the region proposal in Faster-RCNN.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Comparison of detection results between the approach based on Faster-RCNN [17] (left
column) and the existing method [14] (right column) for some frames of Dataset 1. . . . .
11
3.1
Coordinate frames involved in the measurements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Errors in the horizon detection. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Illustration of the concept of vertical bearing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
Illustration of the derivation of the Έ¥T angle from a side view perspective. . . . . . . . . .
18
4.1
RMSE for the diο§Äerent approaches on the Dataset 1, including the test with the manual
horizon ο§¹x. 1a indicates the M1a method (the existing measuring approach); 1b indicates
M1b, replacing the relative range œ¹T measurement by the angle Έ¥T ; and 1c indicates M1c,
using both measurements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
RMSE for the diο§Äerent approaches on the Dataset 2, including the test with the manual
horizon ο§¹x. 1a indicates the M1a method (the existing measuring approach); 1b indicates
M1b, replacing the relative range œ¹T measurement by the angle Έ¥T ; and 1c indicates M1c,
using both measurements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Position error of the estimate of the target with respect to the ground truth given by
the AIS measurements in the Dataset 1 with a manual detection. 1a indicates the M1a
method (the existing measuring approach); 1b indicates M1b, replacing the relative range
œ¹T measurement by the angle Έ¥T ; and 1c indicates M1c, using both measurements. . . . .
25
4.4
2D position plot showing the trajectories of the ships and the estimate of the target for the
results from Dataset 1. 1a indicates the M1a method (the existing measuring approach);
1b indicates M1b, replacing the relative range œ¹T measurement by the angle Έ¥T ; and 1c
indicates M1c, using both measurements. The long lines with origin at the last points in
the trajectories of the estimate and the observer indicate their headings in that instant.
.
27
4.5
Estimate of the targetβÄôs height as measured in the Dataset 1 using manual detection. 1b
indicates the M1b method, replacing the relative range œ¹T measurement by the angle Έ¥T
in the original one; and 1c indicates M1c, using both measurements.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.6
Detection performed by the adapted Faster-RCNN for a frame extracted from the Dataset
1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.7
Detection performed by the adapted Faster-RCNN for a frame extracted from the Dataset
1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.8
Position error of the estimate of the target with respect to the ground truth given by the
AIS measurements in the Dataset 1 with detection from Faster-RCNN. 1a indicates the
M1a method (the existing measuring approach); 1b indicates M1b, replacing the relative
range œ¹T measurement by the angle Έ¥T ; and 1c indicates M1c, using both measurements. .
30
4.9
Estimate of the targetβÄôs height as measured in the Dataset 1 with detection from Faster-
RCNN. 1b indicates the M1b method, replacing the relative range œ¹T measurement by the
angle Έ¥T in the original one; and 1c indicates M1c, using both measurements. . . . . . . .
31
iii
==PAGE:6==
4.10 2D position plot showing the trajectories of the ships and the estimate of the target for the
results from Dataset 1. 1a indicates the M1a method (the existing measuring approach);
1b indicates M1b, replacing the relative range œ¹T measurement by the angle Έ¥T ; and 1c
indicates M1c, using both measurements. The long lines with origin at the last points in
the trajectories of the estimate and the observer indicate their headings in that instant.
.
32
iv
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1.
Introduction
In this chapter, the motivation for this work will be discussed and the existing work in the ο§¹eld will
be introduced, with a review of the tendencies in the state of the art approaches that are widely used and
oο§Äer the best results in diο§Äerent applications related to this study. Moreover, the claimed contributions
of this dissertation will be stated and brieο§²y summarized.
1.1
Motivation and background
The motivation of this study arises from the many potential applications of the automatic detection
and tracking of maritime vehicles.
A very relevant one would be the advance towards autonomous
navigation of sea vehicles. Autonomous navigation is becoming more important nowadays, receiving
more and more attention from the scientiο§¹c community as it starts to become feasible, due to the many
advantages it oο§Äers. To begin with, it potentially saves resources, by allowing to autonomously perform
tasks that require human attention or direct involvement in order to be solved. This makes such processes
cheaper, both economically and in terms of time required from human operators. It also increases the
time endurance, by allowing systems that used to be human-controlled to work continuously, without
performance degradation due to human fatigue. Another advantage of eliminating the necessity of human
presence is the avoidance of risks to the life or health of operators in dangerous tasks.
Examples of activities that would beneο§¹t from autonomous navigation of maritime vehicles would
include:
βÄΔ Military operations. An example would be shooting practices, making it possible for an au-
tonomous vehicle to carry the target without risking human lives. It could also carry military
supplies in war zones.
βÄΔ Data collection. It would be possible for autonomous vehicles to collect diο§Äerent types of data,
about water pollution, for example, without the need of humans being exposed to these agents or
even coordinating the search.
βÄΔ Rescue operations. When disasters happen in the ocean, such as the crash of a plane or a sinking
ship, sending many vehicles to the accident site for search and rescue operations.
βÄΔ Transportation. Economic and safe transportation of goods and passengers by reducing labor
cost and human errors.
βÄΔ Surveillance. Unmanned surveillance of the oceans for illegal ο§¹shing or drug traο§Éc, for example,
could be very useful, given that the vehicles would be able to perform indeο§¹nitely without fatigue
or danger to police oο§Écers.
These are just some of the countless applications that autonomous marine vehicles could be used for.
However, autonomous systems lack the human expertise to evaluate the situations and need, therefore,
some extra measures to ensure they are safe. A very important point to be taken into account is the
traο§Éc safety: as an autonomous agent becomes part of an environment shared with other navigating
1
==PAGE:8==
vehicles, it is crucial to ensure that they abide by the traο§Éc rules to avoid collisions. This, of course,
applies to the maritime traο§Éc as well.
The work developed in this dissertation is an attempt to achieve a safer navigation, by making the
automatic tracking of maritime vehicles more robust and accurate, giving the observer the possibility to
react on time and avoid accidents. The means used in order to achieve this, as well as the current work
on the ο§¹eld will be explained in this thesis.
1.2
Related work
The tracking of maritime vehicles has attracted the attention of the scientiο§¹c community for a long
time because of its many potential applications, as stated in the introduction. Hence, the research done
in this ο§¹eld is abundant. However, a big part of this work relies on devices designed to aid the maritime
navigation, most notably radars or Automatic Identiο§¹cation System (AIS). Examples of this kind of
solutions are the work by Dzvonkovskaya et al. [4] or Braca et al. [3] in which diο§Äerent approaches to
ship tracking by means of radar and AIS are proposed.
However, according to the SOLAS convention [7], developed by the International Maritime Organi-
zation, not all ships are required to carry an AIS on board.
Regarding the radar, although it is usually a fairly robust sensor that can work under diο§Äerent
weather and visibility conditions and has a very long detection range, there are some scenarios in which
its performance might not be good enough in order to successfully achieve the fulο§¹llment of certain tasks.
For example, it has diο§Éculties in detecting some small vessels such as ο§¹shing boats and rigid inο§²atable
boats (RIB) which, in addition, might suddenly disappear from the scope without any alert when the
range is under a certain threshold. Moreover, its scanning period might be too long for operation in close
distances, making it impossible to react in some cases if the speed of a target is high enough, given that
it can travel a large distance between one detection and the next [14].
Due to the aforementioned limitations of some of the most widely used navigation devices for detec-
tion of other vehicles, it is important to ο§¹nd a way to cover this blind spot by means of some complemen-
tary sensing methods that can work under such conditions in order to achieve a safe, fully autonomous
navigation.
It is under this premise that the reference work for this dissertation [14] proposed the use of a
camera in the detection of target ships. Although the use of a stereo-system with two cameras was
also suggested, given the limitations imposed by the need of a suο§Écient baseline distance for range
detection, it has been decided that a monocular camera would be more ο§²exible and could be preferred.
For that reason, this work is focused on a monocular system, yet leaving room for the introduction of
the alternative of stereopsis.
The purpose of this vision system is to detect the ship in order to allow its tracking based on diο§Äerent
properties of the camera geometry. There are diο§Äerent feasible approaches for addressing the issue of the
detection of vehicles in an image. A distinction of two main branches could be done, one of them being
based on the so-called traditional computer vision, and the other one, corresponding to a more modern
tendency, based on methods belonging to the area of machine learning, with particular interest on those
using artiο§¹cial neural networks.
The methods under the ο§¹rst of these branches rely on the feasibility of developing a mathematical
model that represents the problem accurately enough to give a solution to it. However, the problem
of the detection is an ill-posed one, being very hard to deο§¹ne mathematically what makes a part of an
2
==PAGE:9==
image a boat, for example. The work by Park [14] is an example of that, in which basic features are
extracted from the image and several assumptions are used to determine which of the clusters of features
belong to a vehicle.
On the other hand, the methods based on machine learning rely on the feasibility of extraction of
information from some sample cases that is general enough to extend to the ο§¹nal use cases. These can be
combined with human knowledge, used to shape the problem and narrow down the component that has
to be learnt. An example of this is the widely used concept of bag of words. This method ο§¹rst extracts
image features represented by descriptors.
These descriptors are designed based on experience and
mathematical knowledge to have certain desirable properties, namely uniqueness or invariance to diο§Äerent
factors including illumination or geometrical transformations. The well-known SIFT [11], SURF [1] or
ORB [19] are examples of such feature descriptors. As a second step, it uses a learning mechanism, most
commonly a support vector machine (SVM), in order to statistically learn what features belong to which
classes from a predetermined set. This scheme has been widely used in image classiο§¹cation and object
detection which provided very good results in several challenges, such as ILSVRC [20].
Despite of the aforementioned scheme topping the ranks of accuracy in detection for several years,
it had the limitation of using human-engineered features and, in case of the SVM, only being able to
learn linear regressions. As stated before, the problem of detection is an ill-posed one, meaning that
learning should be a more suitable method than describing a mathematical representation. This leads to
the conclusion that utilizing an end-to-end learnable framework is more desirable than using handcrafted
features in the scheme.
Recently, the concept of artiο§¹cial neural network regains importance, after failed attempts to use it
in the past, limited by the available technology at the moment. These approaches aim at approximating
an unknown function, that is often considered too complex to be deο§¹ned manually, relating the possible
inputs with the desired outputs. This is done by learning the parameters of an arbitrary non-linear
function which, in the case of deep-learning, would consist of several layers. In order to do this, the basic
scheme includes the deο§¹nition of the functionβÄôs structure (number of parameters, disposition in layers
and connectivity between them, introduction of non-linearities...), the deο§¹nition of a loss function and
a strategy for minimization. The problem of training is, thus, to optimize the non-linear function for
function approximation in high-dimensional spaces [2].
In 2012, Krizhevsky developed a solution [8] based on a convolutional neural network that signiο§¹-
cantly outperformed the existing methods in the ILSVRC challenge [20]. This drew the attention of the
scientiο§¹c community again to the neural networks, as their potential with the support of current technol-
ogy had been made evident. Deep learning algorithms show results far superior to those of traditional
algorithms for many purposes, especially in problems that are ill-posed and hard to describe by means
of mathematical models.
Among the solutions based on deep-learning, there are diο§Äerent state-of-the-art approaches that oο§Äer
the best results in diο§Äerent detection rankings, such as ILSVRC [20] or COCO [9]. Some of these solutions
are based on very deep networks that, given the high amount of parameters required for the representation
of the corresponding functions, might not be suitable for running on single, general-purpose GPUs, such
as the residual network proposed by He et al. [6]. On the other hand, some deep-learning-based methods
can be used for real time processing in generally aο§Äordable computers, such as the Faster-RCNN [17],
yet oο§Äering results that keep it on top of the benchmarks.
Regarding the tracking, Park explains in his work [14, 15] that one of the most used methods for
passive tracking, which can be performed with the described camera system, is the known as bearings
3
==PAGE:10==
only tracking (BOT). This method utilizes the information given by the bearing from the observer to the
targets in order to determine their relative positions. As this author notices, the observability provided
by this scheme in some scenarios is very limited, requiring the observer to alter the trajectory in order to
improve it, which might not always be desirable or possible. Therefore, Park introduces a measurement
system that supports this method by adding the information given by the vertical distance from the
targets to the horizon in the captured images. This yields some results that could allow the reliable
range detection without the necessity of carrying out the aforementioned trajectory alterations. This
approach, nonetheless, has some limitations that will be discussed in detail in the corresponding chapter
of this dissertation.
1.3
Contributions
This thesis studies a state-of-the-art method for tracking maritime vehicles [14], analyzing its lim-
itations and proposing some improvements. These contributions will be focused mainly on two points,
as explained in what follows.
βÄΔ Visual detection of targets in an image.
As stated in the previous section, the original
schemes use methods belonging to the traditional branch of the computer vision, engineered by
humans and based on mathematical models of the world. This requires diο§Äerent assumptions and
simpliο§¹cations in order to make it feasible. However, as indicated by the tendencies in research
and published results, deep-learning approaches seem to outperform the traditional methods in
such tasks. Therefore, a deep-learning-based approach, Faster-RCNN [17], is used to improve the
detection of the solution, making it more robust by eliminating the given assumptions and requiring
no parameter ο§¹ne-tuning after the training, regardless of the weather conditions and other factors,
which can mostly be overcome if the network is trained properly.
βÄΔ Tracking of the detected targets. Once targets are detected, a solution should be able to
keep track of them. In the original work, the BOT method was used as a base, including another
measurement in order to augment the observability of the ο§¹lter system. However, this has some
limitations that will be introduced in the corresponding chapters. Therefore, some alternatives are
proposed in order to compensate for some of these limitations.
1.4
Thesis Outline
As a brief outline of this dissertation, the contents of the chapters are as follows. In the Chapter 2,
the proposed method for the detection of target ships in images and its adaptation to the concrete
problem are explained. In the Chapter 3, the tracking model of the reference work is analyzed, as well
as some of its limitations and the modiο§¹cations in order to improve the accuracy and robustness of the
results. In the Chapter 4, the results of the proposed solution are presented and analyzed, extracting
the corresponding conclusions about the feasibility and eο§Écacy of the proposed improvements. Finally,
in Chapter 5 the information presented throughout this dissertation is summarized, and some possible
future lines of work spawning from the limited scope of this work are proposed.
4
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 2.
Vision-Based Detection of Marine Vehicles
A core part in the tracking of target marine vehicles is the detection, as already explained in the
previous chapter. In this dissertation, the focus is on a monocular camera system, meaning that the
detection will be performed over an image stream. In order to do this, an approach based on deep
learning has been chosen as a core element, namely the Faster-RCNN [17] model, instead of the existing
method based on feature extraction and the use of priors [14]. In this chapter, the existing approach will
be introduced and the new model will be presented in detail, explaining its characteristics and how it has
been adapted in order to address the concrete problem that is the subject of this thesis: the detection
of marine vehicles.
2.1
Image Feature Extraction
The existing detection method is based, as stated previously, in feature extraction combined with
the use of information priors and some computer vision techniques. Throughout this section, its overall
functioning scheme will be explained in order to understand its limitations and compare it to the newly-
proposed approach.
In this scheme, ο§¹rstly the current image is obtained from the camera and taken as an input to the
detection module. As a ο§¹rst step into this pipeline, some pre-processing takes place in order to prepare
the picture for the detection phase. This step includes a transformation to gray scale and down-sampling,
in order to achieve computational feasibility while keeping the real-time constraints. A morphology ο§¹lter
is included as well, intended to suppress the eο§Äects of the noise coming from diο§Äerent elements such as
waves, wakes or reο§²ections on the sea surface.
Once the input picture has been pre-processed, a Hough transform is applied in order to search for
prominent lines in the Hough space corresponding to the image. The goal of this search is to ο§¹nd the line
that corresponds to the horizon, which should be the most prominent one in the aforementioned search
space. Determining this line has two main purposes in this approach. The ο§¹rst of them is to use it in
combination with prior information in order to reduce the search space in the detection process, as it will
be explained further on in this section. The second purpose is not related to the detection module, but
to the extraction of information from it in order to perform the tracking, and will be, therefore, covered
in the New Tracking Filter Algorithm Chapter.
At this point, given the pre-processed picture and the detected horizon line on it, a feature extraction
method (FAST [18]) is applied to the image in order to extract visually salient points from it. In doing
so, the information priors are used to discard feature points that lie over the horizon line regarding them
as outliers and assuming that the rest belong to targets, given that the pre-processing is expected to
eliminate or reduce the noise. This is based on the assumption that boats will appear below the horizon
and will be the only sources of abundant salient features groups in that area.
With the extracted feature points that have not been rejected yet, several clusters are formed using
a threshold based on euclidean distance. Those which are too small will be considered to be product of
noise and not belonging to targets, trying to reduce again the impact of environmental factors in the
detection. Then, for each of the clusters, a bounding box is established as the smallest frame with a
rectangular shape parallel to the borders of the image containing the corresponding cloud of points. This
5
==PAGE:12==
is known as the coarse detection region.
This region is not expected to be highly accurate, given that nearby feature points not belonging to
the ship, most notably the ones corresponding to the wakes it leaves behinds and on both sides, could
alter the perimeter. Moreover, there is no guarantee that the borders of the ship will contain features or
that these features will be evenly distributed along its surface, meaning that parts of a target could be
left out of the detection area. This is just an approximation of where the ship is.
In order to improve the results, a maximally stable extremal regions (MSER) detector [13] is used,
which extracts a diο§Äerent type of features in the region of interest (ROI) given by the current bounding
box and determines extremal regions as stable connected components of the image. This is expected to
improve the results of the coarse detection region, yielding to what is termed as ο§¹ne detection region,
but it is still not perfect and it does not always provide a solution, being the use of FAST features the
fallback strategy.
As seen throughout this section, this method is based on strong assumptions and it could be quite
sensitive to noise and require some accurate ο§¹ne-tuning. These limitations mostly arise from the attempt
to address an ill-posed problem using a mathematical model. This, as explained in the introductory
chapter, has been proven not to be the best approach given the alternatives oο§Äered by current technology.
This yields to the decision of using a module based on deep learning for this purpose in this study,
presented in the next section.
2.2
Faster-RCNN
As an overall functioning scheme, Faster-RCNN performs detection of objects in an image in two
stages. In the ο§¹rst one it does a region proposal, suggesting which areas of the images might contain
objects. The second part focuses on distinguishing what kind of objects are contained in the proposed
regions, if any at all (else they will be regarded as background). This approach is trained end-to-end,
meaning that all of its components are learned, from input to output.
The key idea in this approach is that both stages have as a prerequisite a feature map of the
analyzed image in order to obtain their results. Therefore, the feature extraction part of the network,
which constitutes a big portion of the total, can be shared for both purposes. This allows to add a region
proposal stage to a conventional classiο§¹cation neural network with a cost that is almost negligible. This
is an advantage with respect to other methods that use a separate algorithm for the ο§¹rst step.
Given this overall insight to this tool, a more detailed description of its components will be given in
what follows.
To begin with, the region proposal stage takes as an input an image of any size, making use of the
principle known as convolutionalization [10]. This principle allows the design of a network equivalent to
one based on fully-connected layers for a ο§¹xed input size, adding the possibility to escalate in order to ο§¹t
diο§Äerent input sizes, as opposed to the fully-connected counterpart, which is more rigid and only accepts
inputs with the dimensions it has been designed to process.
Given an input, the ο§¹rst processing step is the generation of the corresponding feature map, to
which end, a generic classiο§¹cation network can be used as a base, removing the ο§¹nal layers and leaving
only the part that is dedicated to this functionality. The original paper proposes the use of the Zeiler
and Fergus model (ZF) [22] and the Simonyan and Zisserman one (VGG-16) [21]. The former is smaller,
with 5 shareable convolutional layers for feature extraction, in contrast with the 13 corresponding layers
of the latter. Therefore, the ZF model will result in simpler functions with the following consequences:
6
==PAGE:13==
βÄΔ The representation of the feature information will be simpler, with a lower level of hierarchization,
meaning that the models that can be learnt by this network will be simpler that those of its coun-
terpart. This implies that, if the target model is complex enough and the network can be trained
to a near-optimal state, the performance will probably be lower for the simpler representation.
βÄΔ The resulting function will have less parameters and will be structured in a smaller amount of
layers, which will result in lower memory requirements and shorter processing time per image.
βÄΔ Training smaller networks is easier, given that the amount of parameters that should be tuned is
smaller. Therefore this approach should allow training with smaller datasets, oο§Äering better results
in such cases.
In this work, the network that has been used is the smaller one (ZF). With its memory requirements,
it can be trained on a single, general-purpose GPU, easily accessible in the market and with a reason-
able cost that should make its inclusion in most robotic systems aο§Äordable. In this study, a NVIDIA
GEFORCE GTX 1080 has been employed both for training and testing, and its memory has suο§Éced for
both.
Another reason supporting the choice of this architecture is the fact that the acquisition of datasets
for determined scenarios is not always straightforward and. Hence, training should be kept as simple
as possible, making the adaptation of the solution to diο§Äerent purposes more feasible, including the
detection in this work.
Moreover, tests have been performed training the network on the datasets known as PASCAL VOC
Dataset [5] and Singapore Maritime Dataset (SMD)[16] with detection results in short sample clips that
hint at this model being suο§Écient to address this problem. The training process will be addressed in
more detail further on in this section.
With this, the feature map corresponding to an input image can be obtained. At this point, the
network slides an N Ο½ N window over this output, mapping the contents in each position of this window
to a lower-dimensional feature that can be used in the next step. This is implemented as a convolutional
ο§¹lter, which allows for its weights to be shared by all the locations.
Each of the features obtained this way becomes the input to two sibling layers that compute in
parallel a box regression and its objectness score (the degree of belief of its contents being an object).
This setup can be seen in Figure 2.1.
Also in this stage the concept of anchor is introduced. For each of the sliding window positions,
there are k simultaneous region proposals, corresponding to diο§Äerent aspect rates and scales (in this work
3 scales and 3 region proposals, amounting to a total of 9 proposals), which are called anchors. Hence,
the output of the box regression layer would have a size of 4k in order to represent the coordinates of the
k regressed boxes it calculates, whereas the scoring layer would have an output size of 2k, representing
the degree of belief of the two possibilities (object or background) for each of the boxes.
This strategy is introduced in order to keep a higher level of ο§²exibility for the shapes and sizes of the
detected objects, showing similar results to those obtained training with images in diο§Äerent scales and
multiple ο§¹lter sizes without the inconveniences of the extra memory requirements that these alternatives
imply.
It should also be noticed that these anchors, as the region proposals themselves, are translation-
invariant, meaning that the corresponding object could be moved inside the image with the result being
the translation of the corresponding proposal, up to the networkβÄôs total stride.
7
==PAGE:14==
ο§¹gure 2.1: Flow diagram of the region proposal in Faster-RCNN.
Regarding the training of this part of the network, it begins with the labelling of the anchors as
positive or negative according to their degree of overlapping with the ground-truth boxes, existing the
possibility of not using any of the labels for non-critical values so that the corresponding anchors do not
aο§Äect the training. Given this setup, the loss function is deο§¹ned as:
L(pi, ti) =
1
Ncls
X
i
Lcls(pi, pβà½
i ) + ΈΜ
1
Nreg
X
i
pβà½
i Lreg(ti, tβà½
i )
(2.1)
where i is the index of each anchor in the batch, pi and ti are the probability of the corresponding
region containing an object and its regressed coordinates, the asterisk super-index indicates the ground
truth, Ncls, Nreg and ΈΜ are normalization and weighting terms, and Lcls and Lreg are a log loss over two
classes and a distance function.
Given the region proposal, the second stage addresses the classiο§¹cation of the contents of each of
them into diο§Äerent object categories, by means of a standard classiο§¹cation network (with fully connected
layers and a ο§¹nal softmax function to give the probability per class), as if they were separated pictures.
As stated before, in order to perform a classiο§¹cation task, the extraction of features is also necessary, so
this component can be shared with the part of the network that processes the ο§¹rst stage.
It should be noticed that the separate training of both modules would lead to diο§Äerent parameters for
the feature extraction part of the network, ο§¹tting better each of the individual problems. Nevertheless,
this part should be shared, meaning that the parameters should be the same. In order to deal with this,
there are diο§Äerent alternatives in training the network. The one used consists of a 4-steps training:
1. Training the region proposal part of the network, initializing the feature detection part with the
weights resulting from training the corresponding classiο§¹cation network against ImageNet [20],
making use of the principles of knowledge transfer and ο§¹ne-tuning; and the rest of the layers with
random weights.
8
==PAGE:15==
2. Training the whole detection network using as a base for region proposal the output of the previous
step.
3. Repeat the ο§¹rst step, but taking as a base the output of the second one and ο§¹xing the feature
extraction part so the weights are not changed.
4. Train using the whole detection network from the output of the previous step, but only ο§¹ne-tuning
the layers speciο§¹c to the second stage (region classiο§¹cation).
The result of this process is a detection network with the feature extraction convolutional layers
shared for both stages.
2.3
Application to Vision-Based Ship Detection
As a ο§¹rst step, a retraining with the original network architecture and the dataset used in the paper
(Pascal VOC 2007 + 2012) [5] was performed. After this, the architecture was modiο§¹ed to detect only
ships, discarding the possible sources of confusion, given that the original network sometimes mistakenly
labeled them, mostly as airplanes. Having done this, it was re-trained against the subset of the previous
dataset composed by the pictures that contained ships, modifying the labels to only take this class into
account. The results, measured as MAP, were not as high as the ones resulting from training in the
original dataset (46.9% vs. 59.9%), which seems to be reasonable taking into consideration the drastic
reduction of the amount of data available to perform the training.
With these results on sight, the adapted network model was trained again, but this time including
some extra images from another dataset[16]. To this end, some frames of the videos were selected and
extracted manually, and a labelling tool was designed and used to label the images. This led to almost
60 extra images with several boats per picture on average. Including this extra dataset in the customized
one used previously, the MAP when tested against the same test set again goes up to around 57.4%,
hinting that it can be retrained and yield some good results if the data is enough. As a remark, the
model seems to perform better in uncluttered scenes, in open sea. It also seems to be reasonably tolerant
to changes in weather conditions.
At this point, the system was tested against a dataset, referenced in the Chapter 4 as Dataset 1,
which was not used in any way in the training process. This allows to compare the detection results with
those of the existing approach. In order to make a qualitative comparison, a short clip has been created
for each method. Some relevant frame pairs of these clips can be seen in Figure 2.2.
Some relevant facts can be observed in the clips.
Firstly, the detection using the deep-learning
approach is much more stable, detecting the ship from further away and in almost every frame since
the ο§¹rst detection, whereas in the original method the detection has a shorter range and appears to be
much more erratic. This can be extended to the quality of the detection. For many frames, the existing
algorithm returns a bounding box that is much bigger than the actual target in the image, while the
Faster-RCNN module, despite of not being always completely accurate, keeps reasonable predictions for
every frame. In the original method, actually, the detection boxes are not always centered around the
target, but dragged away from it by features coming from waves, wakes or reο§²ections in water. It must
be noticed that, sometimes, the proposed method detects two ships where there is one. Nevertheless, the
corresponding boxes usually have some high degree of overlapping that allows to easily determine that
they come from the same target.
9
==PAGE:16==
As an overall, it seems reasonable to say based on this qualitative comparison that the proposed
approach widely outperforms the original one, oο§Äering a more robust and accurate detection, without
the need of any ο§¹ne-tuning of parameters. This makes tracking methods that require an accurate and
stable detection become feasible, such as the ones that will be introduced in the next chapter.
It is possible to see, however, that even after the second training the results are not perfect. Although
they seem to be mostly reasonable, some overο§¹tting has been detected when training that could possibly
be tackled by means of diο§Äerent approaches. An example of such a measure would be including more
images that would allow a better region proposal learning, putting up for all the information lost from
the training without the other classes. Another example would be the labeling of wakes and waves as a
diο§Äerent class, which would give more training material to the region proposal part and might help the
network in understanding that, despite of the fact of vessels and wakes appearing mostly together, they
are diο§Äerent entities. This will be left as possible future work.
10
==PAGE:17==
ο§¹gure
2.2: Comparison of detection results between the approach based on Faster-RCNN [17] (left
column) and the existing method [14] (right column) for some frames of Dataset 1.
11
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 3.
New Tracking Filter Algorithm
As previously stated, in this study the focus will be on tracking using a monocular camera. This helps
bridge the range gap of the radar which, otherwise a reliable and robust measurement system, can have
some diο§Éculties in some scenarios at close distances. This method of tracking depends completely on the
detection of the target in an image. The latter subject being addressed in the Vision-Based Detection of
Marine Vehicles chapter, the use of the corresponding results in order to obtain the required information
about the ship will be addressed in this one.
As a starting point, ParkβÄôs method [14], introduced earlier as the reference work in this study, will
be explained in detail in order to understand the overall functioning of the tracking framework. After
that, the proposed modiο§¹cations will be presented and described.
3.1
Target Tracking and Estimation
As a ο§¹rst step, the information that will be kept about both the observing ship and the targets will
be discussed in what follows. This information is expected to be used when determining the behavior of
the observing ship in the case of autonomous navigation, and it should, therefore, be complete enough
to make the right decisions.
In order to keep an estimate of the states, an Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) is used as an observer
of the system, yielding the following states vector:
X = [XT
0, XT
T ]T
(3.1)
where:
X0 =
οΘ°
οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘΑ
xo
yo
œà0
V0
οΘΙ
οΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΜ
(3.2)
contains the instantaneous state variables for the observer vessel, and XT contains the variables for
each of the visible targets stacked in a similar fashion, being x and y the absolute coordinates of the
corresponding ship on the plane, œà, its absolute heading, and v, its speed along the longitudinal axis. It
should be noted how all of these variables are deο§¹ned on a global reference frame in order to simplify
the process of preserving the coherence between diο§Äerent measurements.
Regarding the dynamics, the kinematics of the observer ship are modelled as
ΥôX0 =
οΘ°
οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘΑ
V0cos(œà0)
V0sin(œà0)
0
0
οΘΙ
οΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΜ
(3.3)
in a simpliο§¹cation that considers a constant speed along the longitudinal axis and a constant heading,
with no movement along other axes, relying on the observations to be able to make the system overcome
12
==PAGE:19==
the inaccuracies of this basic scheme. This can be extended to the target ships, yielding the following
dynamics model:
ΥôX =
"
ΥôX0
ΥôXT
#
+ w
(3.4)
where w represents the process noise, modelled as a zero-mean Gaussian distribution w βàΦN(0, Q),
where Q would be the covariance matrix representing the uncertainty coming from the simpliο§¹cation of
the model.
With this, a model of the elements of the world considered relevant for navigation is deο§¹ned. In order
to obtain the information necessary for using this model by means of readings of the available sensors,
the magnitudes that are going to be measured should be deο§¹ned, as well as their relations with the given
states. The reference work measures the relative bearing to the targets, as most of the solutions in this
ο§¹eld seem to do. In addition, Park includes in his model a measurement of the range to those targets in
order to improve the observability in determined situations. Both of these measurements can be related
to the states vector as follows, yielding the measurements vector required by the Kalman ο§¹lter:
ZTi =
"
ZΈ≤i
Zœ¹i
#
=
οΘ°
οΘΑ
ΈΗTi βà£œà0
q
βàÜx2
Ti + βàÜy2
Ti
οΘΙ
οΘΜ
(3.5)
being ΈΗTi the relative bearing of the target i with respect to the observer, which can be calculated as
ΈΗTi = tanβà£1(βàÜyTi/βàÜxTi), and βàÜxTi and βàÜyTi representing the absolute coordinates diο§Äerence between
the observer and the target.
This indicates how the estimates of the measured magnitudes can be obtained from the states in
order to perform the measurement update step of the Kalman ο§¹lter. In order to complete this step, it is
necessary to determine how to measure them using the data coming from the existing sensors. This will
be detailed in what follows. Regarding the states of the observer ship, they can be measured directly
by the positioning sensors on board, such as GPS and IMU. They are, therefore, not addressed in this
work.
As a ο§¹rst step in introducing the reader to the measurements, the involved coordinate frames will
be displayed, as seen in Figure 3.1.
sea
x
y
z
OW
O
Έ±
x
y
OIm
hor
œÜ
œà0
ο§¹gure 3.1: Coordinate frames involved in the measurements.
13
==PAGE:20==
As it is possible to observe in the ο§¹gure, the horizon is indicated in the image plane. This is so
because it is relevant information in order to establish the roll and the pitch of the camera, since those
canβÄôt be obtained from the GPS, and they are necessary in order to apply the corresponding corrections
to the measurements.
The detection of the horizon in the image is, therefore, an important part in this algorithm. In order
to achieve this, a morphological ο§¹lter is applied so as to remove the noise associated to the waves, for
example, and the edges of the image are extracted. Given those it is possible, using the method known
as Hough transform, to determine the most prominent straight line in the image which, in open sea,
can be assumed to correspond to the horizon. It should be noticed that, given the application of the
morphological ο§¹lter and the limited resolution of the camera and the Hough-space search, the horizon
detector can be slightly inaccurate in some cases. The eο§Äects of this on the overall performance will be
discussed further on.
Given this setup, it is possible to explain the process of acquisition of the measurements from the
image. The ο§¹rst of them, the relative bearing, can be found by measuring the distance from the center
of the detected target to the vertical line crossing the center of the camera. In order to do this, it should
be remembered that verticality is deο§¹ned as being perpendicular to the horizon, given that the image
plane might be rotated. Hence, the distance should be measured as parallel to it, since it is horizontal
bearing what is to be measured. This distance would give the bearing in pixels. However, if the camera
is calibrated, by using the knowledge of its ο§¹eld of view (FOV) and the size of the images in pixels, the
conversion to an angle is straightforward, as given by the next equation:
Έ≤T =
FC
wIp

Έ≤I
T cos(œÜ)
(3.6)
where the fraction represents the conversion factor between pixels and angles in the image, Έ≤I
T is
the pixel distance in the lateral direction between the targetβÄôs center and the center line of the image,
and œÜ is the slope of the horizon.
Regarding the relative range measurement, it can be estimated by determining the vertical distance
between the targetβÄôs lowest point and the horizon through the equation:
œ¹T =
hc
tan(Έ¥T )cos(Έ≤T )
(3.7)
where hc represents the height of the camera and the angle Έ¥T can be calculated as:
Έ¥T =
οΘ±
οΘ≤
οΘ≥
Έ≥T + Έ± + œΒ βâàΈ≥T + Έ±
if yI
h βâΛyI
c
Έ≥T βà£Έ± + œΒ βâàΈ≥T βà£Έ±
otherwise
(3.8)
being yI
c and yI
h the vertical coordinates of the image center and the horizon, Έ≥T = tanβà£1(bI
T /f) and
Έ± = tanβà£1(hI
p/f), where f is the focal length of the camera and bI
T and hI
p are the pixel distances from
the center point of the image to the lower boundary of the detection box and to the horizon, respectively.
œΒ is the angle between the horizon as given by the sea surface and the actual horizontal plane.
This completes the explanations on the functioning of the observer ο§¹lter used for tracking. Never-
theless, there is still one issue that should be addressed, which is how to distinguish the same ship in two
consecutive frames as the same target. In order to do this, some sort of distance estimation has to be
performed to determine how far the detected target is from the ones that are being tracked, considering
it to be the same than the corresponding pair if the distance is below a threshold.
14
==PAGE:21==
In order to do this, the Mahalanobis distance [12] is proposed by the author in this approach, given
that it allows to measure the distance between a point and a statistical distribution. Then, it is possible
to compute the distance between a measurement and a possible matching estimation based on the states
of a target as:
[zk βà£ΥÜzβà£
k ]T Sβà£1[zk βà£ΥÜzβà£
k ]
(3.9)
where zk is the measurement, ΥÜzβà£
k is the estimation based on the states, and S is the covariance
matrix associated to the uncertainty of this estimation.
Given this distance, the algorithm used to determine the matching pairs is the closest neighbor,
taking the one with the smallest distance if it is below a threshold, and creating a new ship if the
distance is above a threshold (the measurement is far enough from the nearest estimate as to consider
that a new target has been detected).
With this, the explanation of the base approach is concluded. It enables visual tracking of ships,
improving the results of the widely used Bears Only Tracking (BOT) method. It provides a fair ob-
servability without the need of modifying the planned trajectory of the observer even in those cases in
which the BOT method has problems, such as head on situations. Nevertheless, this approach has some
limitations, that will be discussed in what follows.
To begin with, this method neglects the curvature of the earth. This aο§Äects the calculation of the
pitch, derived from the vertical distance from the center of the camera to the detected horizon. It also
has some inο§²uence on how the range to the targets is calculated, since this distance is calculated over a
ο§²at surface.
Moreover, a point representation is used for the ships. Regarding the observer ship, this implies that
the position given by the GPS is not the same as the one occupied by the camera, although the diο§Äerence
is small and consistent, so it should not aο§Äect noticeably the results. On the other hand, for the targets
this point can vary as it is calculated from a planar image and the target might change its relative
heading with respect to the observer, for example. This diο§Äerence can be relevant in the calculations,
especially the inaccuracy in the position of the lowest point of the target, as it will be explained in the
next point.
Regarding the horizon detection, it is sometimes not perfect, due to the limitations imposed by the
use of a morphological ο§¹lter to correct the original image, and the limited resolution of both the search
for prominent lines in the Hough space and the image. An example of this can be seen in Figure 3.2.
This is relevant since, as explained before, the vertical distance between the lowest point of a target
and the horizon is used in order to estimate the relative range to that target. In this process, the tangent
of the angle given by this distance in the picture is used as given by the previously introduced formula:
œ¹T =
hT
tan(Έ¥T )cos(Έ≤T )
(3.10)
Being the tangent part of the denominator, for small angles the errors will be magniο§¹ed greatly.
Therefore, when the ship is relatively far (appearing close to the horizon in the image), the aforementioned
inaccuracies in the horizon detection and in the position of the lowest point of the ship might become
relevant. This means that the range calculation will become much more sensitive to errors the further
the target is, and the eο§Äect of every pixel of deviation will become signiο§¹cant.
Due to these limitations, the range calculated through this method can be highly inaccurate in some
scenarios. Despite of this, if the estimated variance of the sensor noise is set to be high enough in the
15
==PAGE:22==
ο§¹gure 3.2: Errors in the horizon detection.
Kalman ο§¹lter framework, the solution will converge faster than previously existing methods, such as the
BOT, even when the situation is diο§Écult for this algorithm, such as a head-on approach.
3.2
Proposed Tracking Filter Formulation
Some limitations of the original model have been presented in the previous section, regarding in-
accuracies of diο§Äerent types leading to wrong estimations of the real ranges to the targets. In order to
tackle this problem, diο§Äerent approaches can be taken. One of them would be ο§¹nding diο§Äerent sources
of information.
In this case, it has been noticed that some information can be extracted from the size of the bounding-
box around the targets in the image. Intuitively it is possible to see that, as the target approaches the
observer, it will have a bigger projection on the image, making the corresponding box bigger as well,
given the fact that the cameras have a conic ο§¹eld of view.
In a deeper review of this intuitive principle, it should be taken into account the fact that there are
several factors aο§Äecting the size of the projection of the target in the image other than the range to it,
including the size of the ship itself. On this regard, the perceived height should be more stable, given
the planar motion along the horizontal plane that has been assumed, whereas the perceived width will
probably vary more with the turning of the target ship, for example.
Under this premise, adding the assumption that the height of a target can roughly be estimated,
16
==PAGE:23==
then another source of information about the range to a target is proposed which, if successful, would
also add some rough information on its dimensions, which could be useful in determining the type of
boat it is and, for example, in determining the behavior that observer should have towards it.
Around this key idea, diο§Äerent modiο§¹cations have been proposed, that will be addressed in what
follows.
3.2.1
Adaptation of Existing Measurement Method
The existing measurement method can be adapted in order to make use of the idea proposed by
the beginning of this section. If the original method is termed as M1a, then it is possible to conceive a
modiο§¹cation that can be labeled M1b which would replace the range to the target (œ¹T ) in the measurement
vector of the Kalman ο§¹lter framework by an angle Έ¥T , related to the size of the projection of the target
on the image plane. This angle can be deο§¹ned as:
Έ¥T = Έ≤βÄ≤
C βà£Έ≤βÄ≤
L
(3.11)
where Έ≤βÄ≤
L and Έ≤βÄ≤
C are, respectively, the vertical bearings of the lowest point of the target ship and
its center point with respect to the camera. This set-up is illustrated in Figure 3.3.
sea
O
T
Έ±
Έ≤βÄ≤
C
Έ≤βÄ≤
L
ο§¹gure 3.3: Illustration of the concept of vertical bearing.
In the ο§¹gure it can also be observed that the pitch angle of the camera has been represented, labeled
as Έ±, pointing at where the center of the image would be.
The Έ¥T angle can be calculated from the states vector if an extra state for each target is added,
corresponding to their heights. Then, the states vector would become:
XT =
οΘ°
οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘΑ
xT
yT
hT
œàT
VT
οΘΙ
οΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΜ
(3.12)
With this, Έ¥T can be calculated as:
Έ¥T = tanβà£1
 hT /2 βà£hc
œ¹T cos(Έ≤T )

βà£tanβà£1

βà£hc
œ¹T cos(Έ≤T )

(3.13)
where hc is the height of the camera. This can be derived from the diagram displayed in Figure 3.4.
17
==PAGE:24==
img
cam
hc
sea
Target
hT
œ¹T cos(Έ≤T )
Έ≤βÄ≤
C
Έ≤βÄ≤
L
Έ¥T
Έ±
Έ≥
ΈΗ
Έ¥T
d2
d1
ο§¹gure 3.4: Illustration of the derivation of the Έ¥T angle from a side view perspective.
In this diagram, it is also possible to see that this angle can be related to the projection of the
corresponding segment in the image. The diο§Äerence between the angles ΈΗ and Έ≥ from the ο§¹gure should
yield Έ¥T . These angles can be obtained from the image if the projections of the lowest and center point of
the target ship are projected along a line parallel to the horizon into another perpendicular to it passing
through the image center. If the camera calibration parameters are known, then the conversion from
pixel units to the original angle is straightforward as given by:
ΈΗ = atan(d1
F )
Έ≥ = atan(d2
F )
(3.14)
where F is the focal length in pixel units. This process applies a correction for the roll of the ship
given that the horizon is taken as a reference for the horizontal plane.
Regarding to the pitch, since both angles are equally aο§Äected by it, the diο§Äerence should not need
to be corrected in this sense, for the eο§Äect of the pitch on them would cancel out, as it is possible to see
in the next equation:
Έ¥ = Έ≥ βà£ΈΗ = (Έ≤βÄ≤
C βà£
Έ± ) βà£(Έ≤βÄ≤
L βà£
Έ± ) = Έ≤βÄ≤
C βà£Έ≤βÄ≤
L
(3.15)
In the image, this measurement would be related to the size of the bounding-box of the target (i.e.,
to the size of the projection of the target) which depends, as shown in the previous equation, on the
range to the target along the longitudinal direction of the observer vessel. Therefore, the range can be
observed through this measurement if the estimated height (hT ) and bearing (Έ≤T ) are relatively accurate.
Then, the measurements vector would become:
ZTi =
"
ZΈ≤i
ZΈ¥i
#
=
οΘ°
οΘΑ
ΈΗTi βà£œà0
tanβà£1 
hT /2βà£hc
œ¹T cos(Έ≤T )

βà£tanβà£1 
βà£hc
œ¹T cos(Έ≤T )

οΘΙ
οΘΜ
(3.16)
As a variant, which can be termed M1c, it is possible to keep the relative range œ¹T as part of the
18
==PAGE:25==
measurements vector, leading to:
ZTi =
οΘ°
οΘ·οΘ·οΘΑ
ZΈ≤i
ZΈ¥i
Zœ¹i
οΘΙ
οΘΚοΘΚοΘΜ=
οΘ°
οΘ·οΘ·οΘΑ
ΈΗTi βà£œà0
tanβà£1 
hT /2βà£hc
œ¹T cos(Έ≤T )

βà£tanβà£1 
βà£hc
œ¹T cos(Έ≤T )

œ¹T
οΘΙ
οΘΚοΘΚοΘΜ
(3.17)
This would mean a redundant calculation of the relative range, as it is possible to see in the previous
equation. This redundancy, measuring the same value in two diο§Äerent ways, could improve the robustness
of the solution with the measurements correcting each other if the variance is modelled correctly.
It is reasonable to think that the measurement of the angle Έ¥T , as opposed to the direct estimation
of the range based on the pixel distance between the lower part of the boat and the horizon, will not
degrade so much with the inaccuracies of the horizon detection. This is due to the fact that the angles
necessary for the measurement are processed through a simple subtraction operation, and not using
trigonometric functions or as a part of a formula that increases the sensitivity to errors in order to
obtain the ο§¹nal value. Additionally, the wrong pitch should be cancelled when ο§¹nding the diο§Äerence
between both angles containing it. On the other hand, as seen in the previous section, the existing
measurement has problems in some cases coming from the use of the tangent of an angle obtained in a
similar fashion in the denominator of a fraction, amplifying the inaccuracies.
3.2.2
New Measuring Method
Another measurement could be developed by using the size of the bounding box.
In this case,
it would be possible to directly predict the latter, instead of using an intermediate angle. Along this
subsection, the derivations leading to this and the corresponding implications will be discussed.
In order to carry out these derivations, the relevant coordinate frames involved in the measurement
should be taken into account. A scheme of their arrangement can be seen in Figure 3.1 as formerly
introduced in this chapter.
Firstly, the projection to image coordinates of a point in real world absolute coordinates can be
determined as:
ImP = C WP
(3.18)
where C is the camera matrix, composed as:
C = K[R|T] =
οΘΪ
οΘ§
οΘ§
οΘ≠
fx
s
cx
0
fy
cy
0
0
1
οΘΕ
οΘΖ
οΘΖ
οΘΗ[R|T]
(3.19)
being K the matrix of the intrinsic camera parameters, and R and T the rotation matrix and
translation vector with respect to the origin of coordinates in the absolute real world frame. The elements
composing K are: fx and fy, representing the focal length of the camera in the horizontal and vertical
direction, as measured in pixels; cx and cy, which indicate the position of the center of the image; and
s, the skew parameter, that in most cases can be neglected due to nowadays cameras having pixels with
more regular shapes and almost no skew.
Taking this into account, an intermediate coordinates frame between the global one (OW ) and the
one of the image plane (OIm) can be introduced in order to help in describing the transformations between
them, so as to complete the information that allows to obtain the camera matrix C. This intermediate
19
==PAGE:26==
coordinates frame, which will be referred to as OC can be placed on the optical center of the camera,
with the ΥÜX and ΥÜY axes aligned with those of the image plane. Given this setup, the transformations
between OW and OC are as follows:
βÄΔ Translation to the position of the cameraβÄôs optic center [xc, yc, βà£hc]T .
βÄΔ Rotation by 90 degrees about ΥÜX, followed by another one by 90 degrees about the new ΥÜY , in order
to align the axes to ο§¹t the camera convention.
βÄΔ Dynamic rotation due to this of the observer ship, which accounts for changes on the roll, pitch
and yaw of the camera.
With this, the camera matrix C can be obtained, since the T and R parameters can now be de-
termined from the described transformations. This means that the bounding box for a frame can be
predicted from the states vector if it is augmented properly. As in the previous section, it can be aug-
mented just with the height of the targets, or it could as well be augmented with their widths if it is
considered stable enough. It should be noticed that, in the ο§¹rst case, only the upper and lower boundaries
of the bounding box would be predicted. Next, the derivation of these estimates will be shown including
the width, even though this could simply be dropped later. Starting with the states vector, it would look
like:
XT =
οΘ°
οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘΑ
xT
yT
hT
wT
œàT
VT
οΘΙ
οΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΜ
(3.20)
Given this, the measurement vector that would give the boundaries of the bounding box would be:
ZT =
οΘ°
οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘΑ
xmin
xmax
ymin
ymax
οΘΙ
οΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΜ
(3.21)
which can be calculated from the states vector through the following equations:
xmin = ΥÜX T norm

K

[R|T][xT, yT, hβÄ≤]T βà£wβÄ≤ ΥÜZ

xmax = ΥÜX T norm

K

[R|T][xT, yT, hβÄ≤]T + wβÄ≤ ΥÜZ

ymin = ΥÜY T norm
 C[xT, yT, 0]T 
ymax = ΥÜY T norm
 C[xT, yT, βà£hT ]T 
(3.22)
where, as seen before, C is the camera matrix, K its intrinsic component, and hβÄ≤ = hT
2 and wβÄ≤ = wT
2 .
Moreover, norm indicates the normalization of the homogeneous coordinates vectors.
With this, the estimates can be obtained from the model in order to perform the measurement
update of the Kalman ο§¹lter. Regarding the actual measurements from the image, their acquisition is
straightforward as they coincide with the boundaries of the bounding-box for each detected target, so
no further calculations would be required.
20
==PAGE:27==
This method of measurement, which could be termed M2 following the previously established con-
vention, could have a double purpose. On one hand, it could be used to update the belief about the
states of the targets. On the other hand, it could also be used as a support for the detection module,
helping correct possibly inaccurate detection boxes. This could, for example, complement the use of a
diο§Äerent type of measurement.
21
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 4.
Results and Discussion
In this chapter, the results of this thesis will be displayed and analyzed, oο§Äering the corresponding
explanations. These results will consist of a comparison of the performances of the diο§Äerent measurement
methods developed in this study in order to put up for some of the limitations of the original solution,
as well as some comments on the feasibility of use of the detection module that has been proposed.
Regarding the measurement methods, the ones that will be compared are the already existing one,
labeled in previous chapters as M1a, and its adaptations using the size of the bounding box and the
estimation of the targetsβÄô heights in order to improve the tracking, labelled as M1b and M1c. In order to
have a clearer perspective of which is which, the corresponding equations are displayed again below.
M1a)
ZTi =
"
ZΈ≤i
Zœ¹i
#
=
οΘ°
οΘΑ
ΈΗTi βà£œà0
q
βàÜx2
Ti + βàÜy2
Ti
οΘΙ
οΘΜ
M1b)
ZTi =
"
ZΈ≤i
ZΈ¥i
#
=
οΘ°
οΘΑ
ΈΗTi βà£œà0
tanβà£1 
hT /2βà£hc
œ¹T cos(Έ≤T )

βà£tanβà£1 
βà£hc
œ¹T cos(Έ≤T )

οΘΙ
οΘΜ
M1c)
ZTi =
οΘ°
οΘ·οΘ·οΘΑ
ZΈ≤i
ZΈ¥i
Zœ¹i
οΘΙ
οΘΚοΘΚοΘΜ=
οΘ°
οΘ·οΘ·οΘΑ
ΈΗTi βà£œà0
tanβà£1 
hT /2βà£hc
œ¹T cos(Έ≤T )

βà£tanβà£1 
βà£hc
œ¹T cos(Έ≤T )

œ¹T
οΘΙ
οΘΚοΘΚοΘΜ
(4.1)
Regarding the method labeled as M2, although it has been introduced and its formulation has been
developed in the New Tracking Filter Algorithm chapter, it has not yet been implemented and it is left,
hence, as a possible line of future work.
In order to carry out a comparison, an evaluation framework has been set up. In this framework,
the tracking solution is tested against two diο§Äerent datasets, in which the detection is performed and
the estimate of the targetβÄôs position compared with the information given by the corresponding AIS
system, using that as ground truth. The overall performance metric that will be used is, therefore, the
euclidean distance between the estimate and the ground truth, taking this as the error. For each test,
the average error over time (RMSE) is calculated as an overall index of accuracy, as done in the reference
work [14]. However, this might not always be a completely reliable indicator, since the information of
the distribution of this error over time is also important. Therefore, the plots of the errors over time will
also be included as part of the results for some representative cases. A series of animations have also
been generated, plotting the position over time of the observer and target based on the ground truth, as
well as the estimate of the former and the estimated heading of both vehicles, allowing a more intuitive
inspection of the development of the action, with more information that the one given by the error plots.
Nevertheless, due to the limitations of a printed format, they cannot be included in this dissertation,
although they have been used to support the drawing of some conclusions about the results. Instead,
the ο§¹nal states of these animations will be included so as to give a rough idea of the path followed by
the ships and estimates, which might help in getting an overview of the situation despite of the lack of
time ο§²ow.
In addition to this, a separation will be made between the measurement methods and those for the
detection when evaluating the results, since they are diο§Äerent improvement proposals. In order to analyze
22
==PAGE:29==
M1a (range œ¹T )
M1b (angle Έ¥T )
M1c (both)
Dataset 1
Ann (Hor. ο§¹x)
26.6208
7.8782
26.2669
Annotation
37.6683
7.8782
34.8139
Faster-RCNN
41.9351
23.5439
27.9333
Dataset 2
Ann (Hor. ο§¹x)
35.8134
13.2851
35.0732
Annotation
46.9494
13.7454
44.0079
Faster-RCNN
48.7165
38.0659
33.4381
table 4.1: RMSE for the diο§Äerent approaches on both datasets: M1a, the existing measuring approach;
M1b, replacing the relative range œ¹T measurement by the angle Έ¥T ; and M1c, using both measurements.
their eο§Äects separately, the measurement methods will be isolated ο§¹rst. To this end, the detection will
be carried out manually, by means of manual annotation of the images with bounding-boxes around the
target ship. This will show the performance of the diο§Äerent proposed alternatives for measurement under
near-perfect detection conditions, which should indicate the overall accuracy of the model.
The results of the measurements using the proposed detection method will also be displayed and
analyzed on a diο§Äerent section, which could give an insight of the feasibility of the use of these solutions
in real scenarios and the robustness of each one against the degradation of the quality of the detection.
The quality of the detection itself will also be brieο§²y discussed, although not from a high-level-of-detail,
quantitative point of view, but merely as an insight. It should be remembered that the improvements in
detection have already been addressed in the corresponding section, isolated from the complete solution.
About the datasets, two diο§Äerent head-on situations have been selected, given that the previous
methods based on bears only tracking had problems with such scenarios, creating the need to alter the
trajectory of the observer in order to increase the observability. Avoiding these unnecessary maneuvers
was one of the main contributions claimed in the reference work, to which this solution is compared.
As implied by the term head-on, in both clips a target vessel approaches the observer from the front,
approximately following a straight line. The main diο§Äerence between both clips is that, in the ο§¹rst one,
which will be referred to from now on as Dataset 1, it is the target ship that deviates from its original
path in order to avoid the collision, whereas in the second one, accordingly denominated Dataset 2, the
observer alters the initial route to this end.
With the evaluation framework deο§¹ned, the analysis of the results will be introduced in what follows.
It will be divided in two main sections: the one explaining the results obtained from the annotated
datasets, and the one explaining those obtained through the use of the proposed automatic detection
method. In the end, some conclusions will be presented.
The overall results that will be discussed over these sections, namely, the RMSE obtained for each
of the tests, can be seen in the graphs displayed in Figures 4.1, 4.2. These results are also displayed in
a more compact form in Table 4.1. It should be taken into account that these results are not intended
to reο§²ect the improvement of the detection module. A comparison with the complete solution using the
existing one has not been done, due to the infeasibility of accessing the original code. For a comparison
that shows the improvements of the detection module, the reader is referred to Chapter 2.
23
==PAGE:30==
ο§¹gure 4.1: RMSE for the diο§Äerent approaches on the Dataset 1, including the test with the manual
horizon ο§¹x. 1a indicates the M1a method (the existing measuring approach); 1b indicates M1b, replacing
the relative range œ¹T measurement by the angle Έ¥T ; and 1c indicates M1c, using both measurements.
ο§¹gure 4.2: RMSE for the diο§Äerent approaches on the Dataset 2, including the test with the manual
horizon ο§¹x. 1a indicates the M1a method (the existing measuring approach); 1b indicates M1b, replacing
the relative range œ¹T measurement by the angle Έ¥T ; and 1c indicates M1c, using both measurements.
4.1
Accuracy analysis
As explained previously, in order to isolate the eο§Äect of the measurement method chosen for the
solution, tests have been performed using images annotated with manual detection.
It is possible to see from the displayed RMSE results that the measurement method labeled as M1b
seems to oο§Äer results that are far better than those provided by the alternatives in the situation of perfect
detection. Before analyzing this and the intervening factors, as previously stated, the evolution of the
position error of the estimates over time should be taken into account. This is plotted for the results
obtained using the Dataset 1 in the graph shown in Figure 4.3.
24
==PAGE:31==
ο§¹gure 4.3: Position error of the estimate of the target with respect to the ground truth given by the
AIS measurements in the Dataset 1 with a manual detection. 1a indicates the M1a method (the existing
measuring approach); 1b indicates M1b, replacing the relative range œ¹T measurement by the angle Έ¥T ;
and 1c indicates M1c, using both measurements.
In the displayed graph it is possible to see that, in accordance to the results shown by the RMSE
analysis, the M1b method performs consistently better than the other two under these circumstances of
near-perfect detection, keeping a position error of around 10 meters all along the trajectory, whereas the
other two, with results quite similar to each other, reach peaks of around 60 meters error. It is noticeable
that, even though these two have quite a similar tendency, the results of M1c are slightly better than
those of the original M1a.
In a deeper analysis of the behavior of the estimates for the diο§Äerent solutions, it is possible to
add that, as an overall, the one using M1b as a measurement keeps track of the target vessel reasonably
during the whole maneuver, taking into account the limitations discussed in a previous chapter about
the point representation of the ships in this model, and the fact that the ground truth for the position of
the ships is given by the GPS of the observer and the AIS system of the target, which do not correspond
exactly with the position of the observing camera and the measured point of the target, that might
change between frames.
Regarding the other two methods, there are further limitations that aο§Äect the results which do not
aο§Äect to M1b. One of them is the simpliο§¹cation of the model, ignoring the curvature of the earth and
calculating the distances using the horizon as a reference to determine the horizontal plane through
the center of the cameraβÄôs lens, and considering that the range to the target is measured over a ο§²at
surface. Another one is the fact that small changes in the angle measured between the lowest point of
the ship and the horizon can cause a big distortion of the results of the relative ranges calculated using
this approach, given the shape of the equation used in doing so, with the tangent of that angle in the
denominator, especially relevant for long range measurements where this angle will be smaller and the
25
==PAGE:32==
error proportionally bigger.
In the studied cases, probably due to the eο§Äect of the morphological ο§¹lter applied in order to remove
noise from the image, the calculated horizon has a small oο§Äset in average over the frames with respect
to the height of the image where it should be, although the angle calculated as its slope seems to be
quite accurate, mostly limited by the 1-degree resolution used for the analysis of the image on the Hough
space. This oο§Äset, although consisting of only a small amount of pixels, accounts for big part of the
errors in the calculation of the range to the targets, resulting in a substantial under-estimation of the real
value, pushing the estimate of the position towards the observer, in spite of the fact of the corresponding
sensor-noise variance being tuned to a considerably high value in order to minimize the impact of wrong
measurements on the tracking.
For these reasons, the initial estimate increases its distance to the ground truth values in the begin-
ning of the sequence, with a prompt peak of accuracy in the case that the initial estimate was further
away than the actual value and they cross when the former gets closer to the observer at a much faster
rate due to the aforementioned under-estimations of the range. However, as the estimate, as well as the
real target, get closer to the observer, the model starts to correct the current belief due to the contra-
dictory information that it is receiving and with the added accuracy coming from the decrease of the
relative error in the angle between the lowest point of the target and the horizon as this gets wider.
Then, the model decreases the approaching rate of the estimate of the targetβÄôs position to the point
of nearly-stopping it, which explains the growth in accuracy as the range to the real observed vessel
is reduced. This wrong behavior comes from the inherent inaccuracies of the model, combined with a
non-perfect horizon detector, which does not seem to aο§Äect the proposed measurement method, M1b.
This could be expected, since the pitch angle of the camera, given by the height of the horizon in the
image, is cancelled in the acquisition of the measured value, as explained in the corresponding chapter.
This analysis is backed up by the plots of the positions of the ships and estimates for each of the
methods as applied to Dataset 1, which can be seen in Figure 4.4. Despite the lack of time ο§²ow in the
representation, it is possible to see that the results ο§¹t the conclusions.
As explained in the previous analysis, the accuracy in the horizon detection is very important for
M1a and M1c. In order to support this hypothesis, an experiment has been carried out, manually adding
an oο§Äset to the originally calculated height of the horizon, making it ο§¹t better the real line in the image.
This is added as a constant for all the frames and is, by no means, claimed to be completely accurate,
but roughly cover the average error of some pixels in the measurements. The results can be seen in the
RMSE analysis in Figures 4.1, 4.2 and, in a more compact form, in Table 4.1. It is possible to appreciate
a noticeable decrease of the error in the estimates of the targetβÄôs pose for the M1a and M1c methods,
but not so for the M1b, reaο§Érming the hypotheses that this one should not be aο§Äected by such errors.
Given this analysis, it is possible to conclude that the M1b model seems to widely outperform the
other two if the detection is good enough, based on the experimental data for these head-on situations.
This seems to be due to the limitations in the accuracy of the model for the relative range measurements
in the existing approach, hinting at the newly introduced measurement magnitude (Έ¥T ) being more
robust against errors in factors non-related to the quality of detection of the targets.
This being said, a further analysis can be performed if the estimates for the height of the target are
displayed for the diο§Äerent methods (only M1b and M1c, given that M1a does not use this state). The
corresponding plot for the results from Dataset 1 can be seen in Figure 4.5.
In this analysis, there is a basic limitation in the fact that the true height of the target vessel is
unknown, restricting its study to a theoretical approach consisting of hypotheses about the trends seen
26
==PAGE:33==
ο§¹gure 4.4: 2D position plot showing the trajectories of the ships and the estimate of the target for the
results from Dataset 1. 1a indicates the M1a method (the existing measuring approach); 1b indicates
M1b, replacing the relative range œ¹T measurement by the angle Έ¥T ; and 1c indicates M1c, using both
measurements. The long lines with origin at the last points in the trajectories of the estimate and the
observer indicate their headings in that instant.
in the data. This being said, it can be observed that the initial height is overridden immediately by the
ο§¹rst measurements due to its very high initial variance. From that point on, it decreases monotonously
until the end of the sequence. The decrease is more pronounced in the M1c method, given that the
underestimation of the relative range coming from a diο§Äerent measurement source, namely the already
existing approach, aο§Äects the results.
Being this said, the labeling convention that has been used, in accordance to what has been seen
in the PASCAL VOC dataset [5], keeps the antenna of the target vessel inside the bounding box. It is
possible to see that the tip of this antenna is in a slightly higher position that the head of the driver,
whose feet seem to be in the order of some tens of centimeters above the sea level. This means that an
estimate of the height of the ship, to the tip of its antenna, could be reasonable if somewhere above the
average height of a person. It is possible to see that, for both datasets, the height estimates of the target
given by M1b tend to a value slightly over 2 meters, which seems to be close to the real one based on
the previous reasoning and, in any case, a fairly good estimation that could be helpful, for example, in
determining the type of a ship that is approaching.
4.2
Robustness analysis
In the previous section, the results have been analyzed isolating the measurement methods by
providing manual detection to the system. In the current one, the eο§Äects of using the proposed detection
method, Faster-RCNN [17], will be discussed.
27
==PAGE:34==
ο§¹gure 4.5: Estimate of the targetβÄôs height as measured in the Dataset 1 using manual detection. 1b
indicates the M1b method, replacing the relative range œ¹T measurement by the angle Έ¥T in the original
one; and 1c indicates M1c, using both measurements.
Firstly, it is important to notice the preparation of the network before usage in this task. More
information about this can be found on the corresponding chapter of this dissertation.
As a brief
summary, it can be said that the network has been modiο§¹ed to only detect ships and trained on two
datasets [5, 16]. The number of images used for the training is still far below the original one and it is
expected that better results could be obtained if a bigger dataset was available.
As an overall, qualitative evaluation of the results, it can be said that the detection is more accurate
than the original approach and more robust to environmental noise, as this created by waves or reο§²ections
on the sea surface, without the requirements of ο§¹ne-tuning for each use depending on diο§Äerent factors
such as the weather. Although the videos of the detection cannot be included in this dissertation due
to the limitations imposed by the format, oriented towards the printing of it, it is possible to appreciate
this on the frame extracted from the Dataset 1 seen on Figure 4.6.
In this frame, it is possible to see that the bounding box adjusts quite accurately to the perimeter
around the target ship, ignoring the wakes it leaves behind and all the splashes around it. On the other
hand, as it has been stated, this solution is not perfect as it is, and it seems likely that it will improve
with training. Some detections have lower quality, especially in long range, as seen in Figure 4.7.
In this frame, the generated bounding box is wider than the contour of the ship, including the wakes.
It should be taken into account that this is a relatively long range, over 200 meters, according to the
ground truth based on GPS and AIS, and that the ship is diο§Écult to distinguish precisely due to its
size and the limited resolution of the image. In any case, diο§Äerent measures could be taken in order to
improve the accuracy of the detection, as it will be suggested in the section addressing future work. For
a more detailed comparison of the proposed method with the existing approach, the reader is referred
to the Vision-Based Detection of Marine Vehicles Chapter.
28
==PAGE:35==
ο§¹gure 4.6: Detection performed by the adapted Faster-RCNN for a frame extracted from the Dataset
1.
ο§¹gure 4.7: Detection performed by the adapted Faster-RCNN for a frame extracted from the Dataset
1.
Regarding the error analysis, by looking at the RMSE charts in Figures 4.1, 4.2 it can be seen that
the M1b methodβÄôs performance degrades noticeably as the quality of detection lowers, reaching an RMSE
29
==PAGE:36==
ο§¹gure 4.8: Position error of the estimate of the target with respect to the ground truth given by the
AIS measurements in the Dataset 1 with detection from Faster-RCNN. 1a indicates the M1a method
(the existing measuring approach); 1b indicates M1b, replacing the relative range œ¹T measurement by
the angle Έ¥T ; and 1c indicates M1c, using both measurements.
value for the tests comparable to those of the other methods, which remain relatively stable. Actually,
it is possible to see a decrease of the error for M1c with respect to the test with manual detection. This
counter-intuitive result will be explained later on this section. Before that, the graph with the plot of
the position error over time for the results from Dataset 1 will be analyzed in order to get an insight of
how these RMSE values were reached and to make a fair comparison, as displayed in Figure 4.8.
In this plot, it can be observed that the M1a and M1c methods have a similar trend to that shown
in the previous case, tending towards an error peak at the beginning due to the underestimation of the
relative range to the target, that decreases again as the target gets actually closer to the observer and
catches up with the estimate. In this case, however, it is noticeable that the results of M1c converge
faster and more accurately to the real position as given by the ground truth data than those of M1a.
On the other hand, M1b seems to yield some reasonable results at the beginning, while having an error
peak further ahead in time, which descends again when the target gets very close to the observer. In
order to understand this, the estimates of the height for both M1b and M1c methods should be plotted
and analyzed, complementing the information of the previous charts. They are displayed for the results
from Dataset 1 in Figure 4.9.
In this plot, it is evident that the initial estimates for the targetβÄôs height are overestimated, despite
of the real height of the vessel being unknown, following the reasoning introduced in the previous section.
This is due to the bounding box being bigger than it should in the initial frames, when the ship is very
far, being errors on this phase more relevant since they are proportionally bigger, given that the bounding
boxes are smaller. From this point on, it is possible to see that, whereas the M1c method changes its
belief of the height of the target due to the fact that it is receiving conο§²icting information from the other
30
==PAGE:37==
ο§¹gure 4.9: Estimate of the targetβÄôs height as measured in the Dataset 1 with detection from Faster-
RCNN. 1b indicates the M1b method, replacing the relative range œ¹T measurement by the angle Έ¥T in
the original one; and 1c indicates M1c, using both measurements.
measurement (the relative range as estimated from the distance from the horizon to the lowest part of the
target in the pictures) which makes it apply some corrections; M1b does not change this belief, making
it overestimate the range to the target.
From this, it is possible to explain the behavior of the pose estimate in both solutions. For M1b, the
shipβÄôs height is overestimated, making it look like it is a bigger ship that is further away. Hence, despite
of it being able to reasonably track the target for a brief period in the beginning of the sequence, then the
changes in the size of the bounding box are not coherent with the camera model and the belief of the height
and speed of approach of the target, whose pose estimate is kept at a further distance than it should,
being the relative range overestimated. This explains the error peak as the observed vessel approaches
the camera, whereas the estimate does not move closer accordingly. This could be dangerous, for the
observer would think that the target is further and it does not need to react, when there might actually
be a risk of collision and some evasion maneuver should be carried out. It is noticeable, nonetheless,
the fact that when the target gets closer, the estimation of the height is corrected accordingly in order
to make the measurements coherent with the model, and towards a reasonable value (between 2 and 3
meters). When this happens, the position estimate is also corrected, being pushed towards the values
given by the ground truth data.
As in the previous section, the position plots for each method will be displayed for the results from
Dataset 1 in order to support the previous analysis, as seen in Figure 4.10.
Several conclusions can be extracted from this analysis:
βÄΔ Sampling frequency: In the used datasets, the frequency of image retrieval is of 5Hz. However,
the system can operate fast enough to double this rate in the computer used for the tests. This is
31
==PAGE:38==
ο§¹gure 4.10: 2D position plot showing the trajectories of the ships and the estimate of the target for the
results from Dataset 1. 1a indicates the M1a method (the existing measuring approach); 1b indicates
M1b, replacing the relative range œ¹T measurement by the angle Έ¥T ; and 1c indicates M1c, using both
measurements. The long lines with origin at the last points in the trajectories of the estimate and the
observer indicate their headings in that instant.
with a non-optimized MATLAB code and without running the GPU-based calculations in parallel
to the CPU-based ones, which have an approximately balanced weight in the total computation
time. It is reasonable to think, therefore, that it would be feasible to sample at least at 10Hz,
which could help in making the solution converge faster to the real value.
βÄΔ Sensor-noise variance: It is fairly evident that in this approach the initial measurements have a
much higher relative error than the later ones, when the target gets closer and it becomes easier to
detect it correctly and the errors weight less in the overall result. However, the variance modeled
for the sensor noise in the Kalman ο§¹lter design does not vary over time. A possible improvement
would be to transform this static model into a dynamic one that somehow uses the relative range to
the target as a weight in calculating the uncertainty level of the measurements. If this is done, it is
reasonable to expect better results, especially in the case of automatic, non-perfect detection: as it
has been seen in the plots shown in this section, the M1b method is trapped in the initial estimate
of the targetβÄôs height, possibly due to the new measurements having the same level of uncertainty
than the previous ones. It is possible that a dynamic model for the sensor-noise variance could
change this.
Moreover, if developed, this dynamic model could also be used on the existing measurement method
since, as previously explained, the errors are critical in the ο§¹rst part of the sequence, when the
observed vessel is further.
βÄΔ Level of zoom: In the datasets used, the camera utilized no zoom in order to capture the images
32
==PAGE:39==
of the target. If some level of zoom was used, the target could be detected from further away, and its
trajectory estimated earlier leaving more room for mistakes in the tracking and safety maneuvers.
In the case of the M1b method, it might have enough time to correct the estimate before the ships
get dangerously close, avoiding the risk of a collision. On the other hand, this would limit the ο§¹eld
of view, making it more likely that ships appearing from the sides will not be detected on time.
Hence, a compromise solution should be reached, that balances the available reaction time and the
ο§¹eld of view of the sensor. Another solution would be using more than one camera in order to put
up for the lost ο§¹eld of view.
Regarding the results of the M1c method, as previously stated, the fact that the results with au-
tomatic detection are worse than the ones using the annotated datasets is counter-intuitive. It can,
however, be explained based on what has been seen along this chapter. Firstly, it has been seen that for
these datasets the measurement of the relative range to a target based on the distance to the horizon
consistently underestimates the real range, pulling the position estimates of that vessel close to the ob-
server. This is due to the limitations of the model, including an big sensitivity to the horizon detection
results, and is therefore independent of the quality of the detection. Regarding the newly introduced
measured magnitude, Έ¥T , it does not exhibit such a behavior, and it seems to be an accurate model,
giving reasonable results when the detection works correctly. Therefore, when annotation is provided,
M1c gets accurate information from the measurement of Έ¥T , which is corrupted by the measurements of
œ¹T . Nevertheless, in the case of automatic detection, as it has been seen in this section, the bounding
boxes being overly-sized at the beginning of the sequence make the system overestimate the range to the
target. Thus, M1c receives an overestimation of the range from the measurement of Έ¥T and an under-
estimation from the measurement of œ¹T , which seem to balance out giving in concrete situations better
results than those obtained using manual detection. This dissertation in no way claims that using the
proposed detection method is better than manual annotation for this measurement approach, but the
proposed measurement method seems to be more robust than the original one, by obtaining redundant
information from diο§Äerent sources which help correct errors from any of the involved parts, oο§Äering re-
sults consistently better than those of M1a for all of the presented scenarios. It is also remarkable the
fact that the estimate of the targetβÄôs height for this method converges to a reasonable value fairly fast,
so it could be used for other possible purposes such as helping in the identiο§¹cation of the ship category
of the targets, or rough estimation of maneuverability.
4.3
Summary
In this chapter, the results of the tests performed with the proposed solution have been presented and
analyzed. As an overall summary, it seems that the measured magnitude Έ¥T provides a more accurate
model of the real world, resulting in more useful information than the existing measurement of œ¹T ,
provided the detection is good enough. It has also been explained that, while the proposed detection
module seems to widely outperform the feature-based approach and work fairly well and be robust
enough without the need of situation-speciο§¹c ο§¹ne-tuning, it can still be improved. Given the results
of this module, the tracking based on the measurements of Έ¥T seems to degrade notably.
However,
the combination of both measurements seems to be quite robust, obtaining redundant information from
diο§Äerent sources, outperforming the current approach in every one of the tested scenarios (two diο§Äerent
datasets with manual and automatic detection).
33
==PAGE:40==
It must be noticed that, despite of its degradation due to this of the quality of the detection, the
measurement method M1b seemed to converge when the target is close enough, which could be suο§Écient
if the frequency of sampling is augmented or a diο§Äerent level of zoom is used. It has also been suggested
in this chapter that a dynamic model of the sensor-noise variance could be used in the design of the
Kalman ο§¹lter observer. It would account for the uncertainty of the measurements being higher when the
target is further and harder to perceive. This could avoid some problems such as the model M1b being
stuck with an initially wrong perception of the targetβÄôs height that is hard to modify.
As a summary, it could be said that the measurement model M1b clearly outperforms the rest when
the detection is good enough, although it easily degrades its performance with that of the detection and,
for a more general scenario in which the accuracy in the detection cannot be guaranteed, M1c should
probably be used, being more robust and outperforming the existing M1a. It is possible, however, that
further improvements in detection or modelling of the problem would change this situation, making M1b
reliable enough to be used in the general case while giving the best performance in terms of accuracy.
In any case, the results seem to be better than those using the original approach for all the situations.
34
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 5.
Conclusions
In this chapter, a summary of the work done in this study will be presented, as well as some possible
future work directions that could be followed in order to improve the current results.
5.1
Summary
In this work, the problem of tracking of maritime vehicles based on a monocular camera system has
been addressed. The goal is to build a solution that allows to accurately estimate the position of targets
without utilizing the most-widely used navigation sensors, such as AIS or GPS, to cover the situations
in which these cannot guarantee a good performance.
The current work on the ο§¹eld has been examined, and the solution given to this problem by Park [14]
has been chosen as a reference work, due to its alternative approach to the existing methods, such as
bears only tracking, which increases the observability and allows tracking without altering the route of
the observer.
Taking as a reference the aforementioned study, in this dissertation some improvement measures have
been designed in order to increase the accuracy and allow a safer navigation. They have been proposed
in two main lines: detection and tracking. In the former, the situation-speciο§¹c model of the original
work has been changed by a more accurate and robust module based on the Faster-RCNN [17] system
that does not require any ο§¹ne-tuning to work in diο§Äerent scenarios. Regarding tracking, a modiο§¹cation
of the measurement model of the Kalman ο§¹lter in the existing work has been proposed, along with
a completely diο§Äerent approach, both of them based on the camera geometry and the perceived size
of the targets. Although both have been theoretically developed, only the adaptation of the original
measurement method has been implemented in this study, and the corresponding results have been
discussed.
Coming from some inaccuracies in the original measurement model, its results have been proven
improvable. The modiο§¹cations applied to it yield better results in terms of the errors of the position
estimate of the target for every one of the tested scenarios. Even though the overall results are positive,
there are still some factors that could be improved in order to obtain a higher accuracy tracking. They
will be addressed in the next section.
5.2
Future work
Along this dissertation, several measures have been proposed that could yield an improvement of
the results, some of which have not been implemented due to the time constraints of this study. These
will be grouped and revised brieο§²y in this section, as listed below.
βÄΔ Implement M2 measurement. It could yield diο§Äerent results from the M1 variants. It could
also be used to propose bounding boxes based on the states vector, which could be used in reο§¹ning
the detection, while keeping other measurement approach as the main one.
βÄΔ Reο§¹ne detection results. Some method could be used in order to reο§¹ne the detection results,
such as MSER, used in the reference work.
The importance of an accurate detection for the
35
==PAGE:42==
newly-proposed measurement method has been proven in this dissertation.
βÄΔ Retrain the neural network. Collecting a dataset and retraining it would expand the amount
of data available, probably reducing the overο§¹tting of the model. It would also help if the images
in the dataset are from scenarios similar to the ones that will be dealt with in reality. A variant has
been proposed, marking the waves/wakes as diο§Äerent classes, which would augment the available
data for training the region proposal and might help the network distinguish them from the ships.
Moreover, nowadays there is a tendency towards the use of game engines in order to extend training
datasets that could be explored.
βÄΔ Use an adaptive model for the sensor noise in the Kalman ο§¹lter. It has been shown
that the fact that the measurements are less precise when the target is far can cause problems in
the tracking such as underestimation of the range to the target or the system getting stuck at the
height estimate that has been predicted ο§¹rst. Hence, an adaptive model could be used to weight
the estimated uncertainty of the measurements by a factor depending on the distance to the target
vessel.
βÄΔ Sensor fusion. Although this work is based on the use of a monocular camera system in order to
increase its ο§²exibility of implementation and use, the integration of the information obtained from
it with that coming from other sensors could be considered as future work, such as the use of a
second camera to perform stereopsis (with the limitations given by the baseline), or the combination
of the existing one with a LIDAR. This could help both increase the accuracy of the detection and
of the tracking.
These are just some of the multiple possibilities that are available in order to give continuity to this
line of work. They have been thought of while working on the implementation of the current solution
and observing its limitations, in the belief that they might help in overcoming them.
36
==PAGE:43==
Bibliography
[1] Herbert Bay, Tinne Tuytelaars, and Luc Van Gool. Surf: Speeded up robust features. Computer
visionβÄ™ECCV 2006, pages 404βÄ™417, 2006.
[2] Yoshua Bengio, Ian J Goodfellow, and Aaron Courville. Deep learning. Nature, 521:436βÄ™444, 2015.
[3] Paolo Braca, Michele Vespe, Salvatore Maresca, and Jochen Horstmann.
A novel approach to
high frequency radar ship tracking exploiting aspect diversity. In Geoscience and Remote Sensing
Symposium (IGARSS), 2012 IEEE International, pages 6895βÄ™6898. IEEE, 2012.
[4] Anna Dzvonkovskaya, Klaus-Werner Gurgel, Hermann Rohling, and Thomas Schlick. Low power
high frequency surface wave radar application for ship detection and tracking.
In Radar, 2008
International Conference on, pages 627βÄ™632. IEEE, 2008.
[5] M. Everingham, L. Van Gool, C. K. I. Williams, J. Winn, and A. Zisserman. The pascal visual
object classes (voc) challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision, 88(2):303βÄ™338, June 2010.
[6] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
nition. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2016.
[7] International Maritime Organization. International convention for the safety of life at sea (solas),
1974.
http://www.imo.org/en/About/Conventions/ListOfConventions/Pages/
International-Convention-for-the-Safety-of-Life-at-Sea-(SOLAS),-1974.aspx.
[8] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoο§Ärey E Hinton. Imagenet classiο§¹cation with deep convo-
lutional neural networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 1097βÄ™1105,
2012.
[9] Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
DollΟΓr, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In European Confer-
ence on Computer Vision, pages 740βÄ™755. Springer, 2014.
[10] Jonathan Long, Evan Shelhamer, and Trevor Darrell. Fully convolutional networks for semantic
segmentation. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
June 2015.
[11] David G Lowe. Distinctive image features from scale-invariant keypoints. International journal of
computer vision, 60(2):91βÄ™110, 2004.
[12] Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis. On the generalized distance in statistics. Proceedings of the National
Institute of Sciences (Calcutta), 2:49βÄ™55, 1936.
[13] Jiri Matas, Ondrej Chum, Martin Urban, and TomΟΓs Pajdla. Robust wide-baseline stereo from
maximally stable extremal regions. Image and vision computing, 22(10):761βÄ™767, 2004.
37
==PAGE:44==
[14] Jeonghong Park. Probabilistic assessment of collision risk and its application toward autonomous
navigation of unmanned surface vessels. PhD thesis, Korea Institute of Science and Technology,
2016.
[15] Jeonghong Park, Jinwhan Kim, and Nam-sun Son. Passive target tracking of marine traο§Éc ships
using onboard monocular camera for unmanned surface vessel. Electronics Letters, 51(13):987βÄ™989,
2015.
[16] Dilip K Prasad, Deepu Rajan, Lily Rachmawati, E Rajabaly, and Chai Quek. Video processing
from electro-optical sensors for object detection and tracking in maritime environment: a survey.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.05842, 2016.
[17] Shaoqing Ren, Kaiming He, Ross B. Girshick, and Jian Sun. Faster R-CNN: towards real-time
object detection with region proposal networks. CoRR, abs/1506.01497, 2015.
[18] Edward Rosten, Reid Porter, and Tom Drummond. Faster and better: A machine learning approach
to corner detection. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 32(1):105βÄ™119,
2010.
[19] Ethan Rublee, Vincent Rabaud, Kurt Konolige, and Gary Bradski. Orb: An eο§Écient alternative to
sift or surf. In Computer Vision (ICCV), 2011 IEEE International Conference on, pages 2564βÄ™2571.
IEEE, 2011.
[20] Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng
Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg, and Li Fei-Fei.
ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision
(IJCV), 115(3):211βÄ™252, 2015.
[21] Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
recognition. CoRR, abs/1409.1556, 2014.
[22] Matthew D Zeiler and Rob Fergus.
Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks.
In
European conference on computer vision, pages 818βÄ™833. Springer, 2014.
38
==PAGE:45==
39
