==PAGE:1==
Dynamics and Topology of Boundary Layer
Eruption
Anne Ryelund Nielsen, s113273
July, 2017
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Dynamics and Topology of Boundary Layer Erup-
tion
Author:
Anne Ryelund Nielsen, s113273
Supervisor:
Morten Brøns, Professor, DTU Compute
Co-supervisors:
Matthias Heil, Professor, The University of Manchester
Morten Andersen, Assistant professor, Roskilde University
Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Project period:
February 1. 2017 - July 21. 2017
ETCS points:
30
Education:
Master of Science
Field:
Mathematical Modelling and Computations
i
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquir-
ing a masters degree in Mathematical Modelling and Computations.
First of all I would like to thank my main supervisor Professor Morten Brøns, who has given
me an excellent guidance and support during the entire process. He always had the time
to discuss my project and every discussion has been a pleasure. I would also like to thank
my co-supervisor Professor Matthias Heil, who has supported me with the numerical part of
my project. Without his guidance and great help in setting up the code, it would not have
been possible to achieve so satisfying numerical results within the scope of this project. In
addition, I would also like to thank my second co-supervisor Morten Andersen. He gave me
a good introduction to his previous studies and to the subject in general. By sharing all
his considerations, he made it easier for me to choose how to approach the project form the
beginning.
Finally, I would like to thank my family, friends and fellow students who have supported me
through the whole process.
Kongens Lyngby, July 21, 2017
Anne Ryelund Nielsen, s113273
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
A vortex convected close to a no-slip wall will induce a viscous response from the boundary
layer. As part of this response the boundary layer may organize itself into a secondary vortex
structure and erupt from the wall. We study this boundary layer eruption phenomenon in
two dimensions. As with most ﬂuid dynamics phenomena, the physics of the boundary layer
eruption is quite complicated - even in two dimensions. We are therefore concerned with a
precise and formal description, explaining how new vortices are created in the initial phase.
Our studies include a detailed explanation of how we choose to model the phenomenon from
a mathematical and numerical point of view. Furthermore, we show that there are only
two free parameters in our model - Reynolds number and a parameter a describing the ratio
between the size of the initial vortex and its distance to the wall. In order to obtain numerical
simulations, we implement a discretisation of our model using the open-source ﬁnite element
library oomph-lib. To study the topological changes during the eruption process we need
a strict mathematical deﬁnition of a vortex.
There is, however, no universally accepted
deﬁnition of a vortex. In this study, we focus on two quite diﬀerent deﬁnitions of a vortex.
First we deﬁne a vortex center as local maximum or minimum of vorticity and based on
tools from dynamical system theory we analyse the creation and disappearance of these
extremal points. We show that the basic vortex creation mechanism is a bifurcation, where
the level curves of the vorticity deform and create a cusp point from which a saddle and an
extremum of the vorticity are created simultaneously. By analysing our numerical results for
diﬀerent parameter values, we see that all topological changes in the initial phase are due to
this saddle-center bifurcation. Our second choice of a vortex deﬁnition is the so called Q-
criterion, where Q is a scalar ﬁeld measuring the stretching relative to the rotation. A vortex
region is then deﬁned as a region with positive Q-value, corresponding to a region where the
rotation is dominating. To analyse the changes in the topological structure of the vortex
regions, we consider the contour curves, Q = 0, which encircles any vortex region. The most
important theoretical question in our studies has been to describe how such contour curves
bifurcate. In a comprehensive analysis we prove that four diﬀerent types of bifurcations
occur under speciﬁc conditions. Later we analyse our numerical results and observe that
these four types of bifurcations all occur in our simulations. For both vortex criteria we
present a complete overview of the topological phase space, which accounts for all observed
changes as Reynolds number and a are varied individually. By comparing the bifurcation
diagrams, we show that there is no simple correlation between the two criteria in general.
Our analytical results show, however, that on a no-slip boundary the present of a bifurcation
point for the Q = 0 contour curves depends only on the vorticity and its derivatives. As a
main result of this project, we have obtained a detailed understanding of some mechanisms
that cause new vortices to occur during the boundary layer eruption process.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface
ii
Abstract
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Fundamentals of Fluid Dynamics
4
2.1
Two-dimensional ﬂow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Vortex Criteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
State of the Art
11
4
Physical Formulation of the Problem
13
4.1
The setting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
Nondimensionalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.3
An Important Note about the Choice of Scaling used in the Simulations . . .
17
5
The Numerical Method
19
5.1
The Finite-Element Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2
The Numerical Setting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.3
Post-processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.4
Validation of the Numerical Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6
Theoretical Results about the Q = 0 Contour Curves
28
6.1
Bifurcations Away from the No-slip wall
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.2
Bifurcations on a No-slip Wall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.3
Location of Vortex Region . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7
Theoretical Results about Vorticity Extrema
53
8
Numerical Results
56
8.1
Vortex Center as a Local Extremum of Vorticity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
8.2
Vortex as a Connected Region with Positive Q-value
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
8.3
Illustration of the Result in Theorem 6.15
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
8.4
Discussion of the Numerical Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
9
Conclusion
69
References
70
Appendices
72
A
Additional result used in Section 6.2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
B
The main driver code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
iv
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
The internal friction, due to viscosity of ﬂuids in motion, is often very small. In many ﬂu-
ids of interest it is so small that a mathematical model considering the ﬂuid as inviscid is
satisfactory for many purposes. On the other hand there are good reasons why the internal
friction should not be neglected in general. The presence of viscosity does not only change
the quantitative behaviour of a ﬂuid. In some cases we even see signiﬁcant qualitative ef-
fects. In the year 1904, the German engineer Ludwig Prandtl formulated a description of the
boundary layer concept. Today, the modern world of aerodynamics and ﬂuid dynamics is still
dominated by Prandtl’s ideas [2]. He explained how a viscous ﬂuid, immediately adjacent
to a surface, will stick to the surface. Furthermore, he explained how this no-slip condition
would lead to eﬀects of friction, that occur only in the immediate vicinity of the surface.
The thin layer of ﬂuid close to a surface, where the eﬀects of the viscosity are signiﬁcant, is
referred to as the boundary layer [14]. In some cases the structure of the boundary layer is
unstable and we see a separation of the boundary layer into the surrounding ﬂuid. In his
article Motion of ﬂuids with very little viscosity, Prandtl describe it in the following way,
”in certain cases, the ﬂow separates from the surface at a point entirely determined by ex-
ternal conditions. A ﬂuid layer, which is set in rotation by the friction on the wall, is thus
forced into the free ﬂuid and, in accomplishing a complete transformation of the ﬂow, plays
the same role as the Helmholz separation layer.” [13].
The described phenomenon is also know as eruption of the boundary layer. In the boundary
layer the friction causes a local spinning motion in ﬂuid (known as vorticity). If the bound-
ary layer loses stability this vorticity may organise itself into vortex structures and erupt
from the surface. The historical interest in understanding the behavior of the boundary
layers arises from the importance of the eruption phenomenon in eg. dynamic stall or lift
hysteresis, which occur in helicopter aerodynamics [17].
In this thesis we investigate the response of the boundary layer when a vortex is convected
close to a rigid wall. An example of such an interaction is observed when vortices produced
at the tip of an aircraft wing interact with the boundary layers produced on the ground [5].
We limit our studies to dealing with two dimensional models of the setting. Based on results
from previous studies, [1, 5, 11], we expect to see creation, destruction and interaction of
vortices. In Figure 1.1 an example of the eruption process is shown. Initially, the vortex in-
duces a vorticity layer at the wall. As time goes by, the vorticity organizes itself in vortex-like
structures and erupt from the wall. At the latest time step, we sense that two new vortices
have occurred as a response to the initial vortex. In this project we are concerned with a sys-
tematic description of the topological changes which occur in the ﬂow during the initial phase
of the eruption process. In this regard, we consider the phenomenon from both a numerical
and analytical point of view. We preform our numerical simulations using the open-source
ﬁnite-element library oomph-lib which is developed and maintained by Matthias Heil and
Andrew Hazel of the School of Mathematics at The University of Manchester. In our analyti-
cal description of the phenomenon we consider the ﬂow as a dynamical system and our results
are based on dynamical system theory. We have chosen not to write an overall theory sec-
1
==PAGE:8==
tion about dynamical system theory. Instead, we will introduce some mathematical concepts
throughout the report and present them in relation to the context in which they will be used.
t = 1
t = 36
t = 70
t = 114
Figure 1.1: The boundary layer eruption process is illustrated by simulation results
from four diﬀerent stages. The vorticity contours with values from −0.3 to 0.3 is
shown. Negative vorticity is colored in blue while positive vorticity is colored in
red. The Reynolds number in this case is 18000.
In Section 2, we give a short introduction to some important concepts in ﬂuid dynamics,
including a discussion on how to deﬁne a vortex mathematically. In Section 3 we give a brief
review of some previous studies of the boundary layer eruption phenomenon. We focus on
studies where the eruption process is also induced by a two-dimensional vortex close to a
rigid wall. In the section we elaborate on the diﬀerent models and the numerical approaches.
Besides these introductory sections, the thesis is organised in three main parts.
The ﬁrst part is Section 4 and Section 5 where we describe our way of modelling the eruption
phenomenon. In Section 4 we give a precise physical formulation of the problem and explain
how the ﬂow is governed by the Navier-Stokes equations. In Section 5 we approach the
mathematical model from a numerical point of view. We explain the numerical setting and
how we post-process and evaluate the obtained numerical results based on diﬀerent vortex
criteria.
2
==PAGE:9==
In Section 6 and 7 we consider boundary layer eruption from an purely analytical perspective.
The main analytical result is an extensive analysis of the structural changes in the ﬂow based
on the so called Q-criterion for vortices. A number of theorems are presented in Section 6
and, to the best of our knowledge, this study is the ﬁrst to examine and prove these results.
In Section 7 we are concerned with a vortex criterion based on the local extrema of the
vorticity. The section contain a reformulation of a number of theoretical results developed
by Morten Brøns in [4].
The ﬁnal part of the thesis is Section 8. Here we present and discuss our numerical results.
We present a complete overview of the topological changes in the initial phase. This is done
in the form of bifurcation diagrams. Furthermore, we relate our numerical results to some of
the analytical results in Section 6. Finally, we come up with suggestions on how to continue
with further studies based on our results.
3
==PAGE:10==
2
Fundamentals of Fluid Dynamics
In this section we will give a brief introduction to some important concepts in ﬂuid dynam-
ics. The derivation of all the presented results can be found in any textbook about ﬂuid
dynamics, such as [14], [15]. A cornerstone in ﬂuid dynamics is the so called Navier-Stokes
equations of motion which apply to both liquids and gases.
The Navier–Stokes equations are based on the assumption that the ﬂuid, at the scale of
interest, can be considered a continuous substance instead of discrete particles. Another
necessary assumption is that all the ﬁelds of interest, like pressure, ﬂow velocity and density,
are diﬀerentiable.
The Navier–Stokes equations are derived by considering a ﬂuid as a
large collection of elementary ﬂuid parcels, which are small enough to be “inﬁnitesimal”
with respect to the length scale and large enough to be distinguished from microscopic
particles such as molecules. By applying Newton’s second law of motion on the ﬂuid parcels,
one can derive the Navier-Stokes equation representing the conservation of momentum in a
ﬂuid. For a Newtonian ﬂuid the forces are proportional to the rates of change of the ﬂuid’s
velocity vector, implying that the dynamic viscosity of the ﬂuid is constant. In the case of
a compressible Newtonian ﬂuid, the Naiver-Stokes equation is given as,
∂u
∂t + u · ∇u = 1
ρ∇· (µ(∇u + (∇u)T −2
3
µ
ρ(∇· u)I) −1
ρ∇p
(2.1)
where µ is the constant dynamic viscosity of the ﬂuid and at any given time and point,
ρ(x, t) is the density of the ﬂuid, u(x, t) is the velocity ﬁeld and p(x, t) is the pressure. The
Navier-stokes equation (2.1) is always solved together with the so called continuity equation,
∂ρ(x, t)
∂t
+ ∇· (ρ(x, t)u(x, t)) = 0.
(2.2)
It states that the rate of change in density of the ﬂuid in a point is equal to the net mass ﬂux
leaving (or entering) a point. It therefore follows directly form the principle of conservation
of mass.
In ﬂuid dynamics, an incompressible ﬂuid is a ﬂuid where the density, ρ, is constant at any
given time and point. By the continuity equation in (2.2) it hence follows that,
∇· u = 0,
(2.3)
implying that the ﬂow in a incompressible ﬂuid is divergence free.
In reality, all ﬂuids
are compressible to some extent, but assuming that a ﬂuid is incompressible is a useful
idealization used to simplify the analysis. As an example, water is slightly compressible
but we often treat it as incompressible because the pressure changes involved are too small
to make a signiﬁcant change to the density. By (2.3), we get that (2.1) simpliﬁes to the
following Navier–Stokes equation for an incompressible Newtonian ﬂuid
∂u
∂t + (u · ∇)u = −1
ρ∇p + ν∆u,
(2.4)
4
==PAGE:11==
where ν =
µ
ρ is the kinematic viscosity of the ﬂuid.
The diﬀerent terms in (2.4) corre-
spond to diﬀerent forces per unit mass acting on the ﬂuid. The left hand side is the inertial
accelerations while the right hand side is the sum of the viscous acceleration and the pres-
sure force per unit mass. Other external forces should be added if they are acting on the ﬂuid.
The Reynolds number, Re, is an important dimensionless quantity in ﬂuid mechanics. It
characterises the relative importance of inertial and viscous forces in a particular ﬂow. By
choosing a reference length L and a reference velocity U, that characterise a particular ﬂow,
the Reynolds number is deﬁned as,
Re = inertia acceleration
viscous accelaration = U 2/L
νU/L2 = UL
ν .
(2.5)
To obtain a particular solution to (2.3) and (2.4) the equations need to be solved with a
set of boundary conditions and initial conditions. For a viscous ﬂuid, i.e. a ﬂuid with vis-
cosity ν > 0, we use a no-slip condition on a solid boundary. That is the assumption that
there is no relative velocity between the surface and the ﬂuid immediately next to the surface.
In ﬂuid dynamics, a vortex is a region in a ﬂuid in which the ﬂow rotates around an axis line.
However, as discussed in [9], we are lacking a precise (and unique) mathematical deﬁnition of
a vortex. In section 2.2 we will elaborate on some of the commonly used deﬁnitions. But ﬁrst
we will introduce a key concept in the dynamics of vortices: the vorticity, ω. The vorticity
describes the local spinning motion at a point in the ﬂuid. Mathematically, the vorticity is
deﬁned as the inﬁnitesimal rotation of the 3-dimensional velocity ﬁeld u, more precisely the
curl of u,
ω = ∇× u
(2.6)
Described in words, the vorticity at a point is a vector representing how the velocity vector
will change if we move an inﬁnitesimal distance in a direction perpendicular to the velocity.
2.1
Two-dimensional ﬂow
Although ﬂuids ﬂow is three-dimensional in nature, it is common to use two dimensional
models in ﬂuid dynamics. A two-dimensional ﬂow is deﬁned as a ﬂow where the velocity at
every point is parallel to a ﬁxed plane, so that
u(x, y, z, t) =


u(x, y, t)
v(x, y, t)
0

,
(2.7)
if the ﬁxed plane is the xy-plane. In general, pressure and velocity vary in all directions, but
in some cases the only signiﬁcant changes occur in two directions (or even only in one). In
these cases the analysis of the ﬂow can be simpliﬁed a lot by assuming that the ﬂow is two
dimensional. In this project we limit our studies to deal with two dimensional models.
5
==PAGE:12==
In a two-dimensional ﬂow the expression for the vorticity simpliﬁes to,
ω = ∇×


u
v
0

=


0
0
ω


(2.8)
where,
ω(x, y, t) = ∂v(x, y, t)
∂x
−∂u(x, y, t)
∂y
,
(2.9)
implying that the vorticity is nothing but a scalar ﬁeld.
In the analysis of a two-dimensional, incompressible ﬂow, the deﬁnition of a stream function,
ψ : R2 →R, is a very useful mathematical tool as well as a practical way of visualizing a
ﬂow. A stream function, ψ : R2 →R, is a function with the property
u = ∂ψ
∂y ,
v = −∂ψ
∂x .
(2.10)
By substitution (2.10) into (2.2) we get that,
∇· u = ∂u
∂x + ∂u
∂x = ∂
∂x
∂ψ
∂y + ∂
∂y

−∂ψ
∂x

= 0.
(2.11)
As the derivatives commute, we see that the existence of a stream function ensures that the
continuity equation is automatically satisﬁed. The existence of the stream function follows
from Greens Theorem, the proof will, however, be omitted here.
The stream function ψ is closely related to the so called (instantaneous) streamlines of a
ﬂow. These are curves in R2 (or in general R3), satisfying that they are tangent to the
velocity ﬁeld u at a ﬁxed time t0, i.e.
dx(t0)
dt
= u(x, y, t0)
dy(t0)
dt
= v(x, y, t0),
(2.12)
which in terms of the stream function ψ is given by the following Hamiltonian system,
dx
dt = ∂ψ
∂y
dy
dt = −∂ψ
∂x .
(2.13)
We see that the dynamical system in (2.13) is completely described by the scalar function
ψ, which is the so called Hamiltonian function. We recall that the solution curves of such a
system are simply the level sets of the Hamiltonian function. The value the stream function
is therefore constant along any streamline. A classical vortex deﬁnition is the existence of
closed or spiralling streamlines in the ﬂow. In the following section we will elaborate on this
deﬁnition and several others.
6
==PAGE:13==
2.2
Vortex Criteria
We later want to study the eruption phenomenon where new vortices are created at a no-slip
wall. As we want to classify when a vortex occur or disappear, a natural ﬁrst question is
how to deﬁne a vortex mathematically. By taking a brief look at the literature we realize
the this task is far from trivial. According to G. Haller (2005),
”The notion of a vortex is so widely used in ﬂuid dynamics that few pause to examine what
the word strictly means. Those who do take a closer look quickly realize the diﬃculty of
deﬁning vortices unambiguously” [6].
Most commonly, vortices are deﬁned to be regions with high vorticity, regions with closed or
spiralling streamlines, regions with low pressure or regions where the velocity gradient tensor
has complex eigenvalues. All these deﬁnitions have been described and discussed by several
authors, including Jeong & Hussain [9]. We will use the streamline criterion to compare our
results with earlier studies, but our main analysis will be based on the vorticity extrema
and the Q criterion. We will in the following paragraphs elaborate on these deﬁnitions of a
vortex, including pros and cons.
Streamlines
A very common way to characterize a ﬂow is by the streamlines of the velocity ﬁeld. Stream-
lines are the trajectories of the following dynamical system,
˙x = u(x)
(2.14)
where u is the instantaneous velocity ﬁeld. In other words, a streamline is a curve through
space that at every point is tangent to the vector ﬁeld. In a steady-state ﬂow, a streamline
will represent the path of a massless particle. If we observe closed or spiralling streamlines
it indicates that the ﬂuid is (instantaneously) moving around a common axis. It is, however,
problematic to use closed or spiralling streamlines as a deﬁnition of vortices, since the stream
function ψ is not Galilean invariant. If a constant is added to the velocity ﬁeld, it may
change the pattern of the streamlines, and if the added velocity is very large it is clear that
the streamlines will become almost straight. In order to ensure that a vortex is deﬂected in
the streamlines, it is necessary to choose a frame of reference moving with the speed of the
vortex center. It is clear, however, that this deﬁnition will fail in a ﬂow containing several
vortices moving at diﬀerent speeds.
Vorticity Extremum
We recall that the vorticity, ω, describes the local spinning motion at a point in the ﬂuid.
In vortex cores we expect the magnitude of vorticity to attain high values relative to its
environment. In two dimensions it is common to deﬁne a vortex as a region with large
magnitude of vorticity. The sign of the vorticity determines (by the right-hand-rule) the
direction of rotation for a given vortex. To obtain a more speciﬁc mathematical deﬁnition,
a vortex core can be deﬁned as a local extremum of vorticity. In other words, an extremum
7
==PAGE:14==
of vorticity is a so-called feature point for a vortex [10]. We recall that critical points for the
vorticity are point satisfying that,
ωx = 0 and ωy = 0,
(2.15)
where the subscripts denote the partial derivatives that are taken. In addition, we have that
critical points satisfying the following suﬃcient (but not necessary) condition are classiﬁed
as local extrema.
det(Hω) = ωxxωyy −ω2
xy > 0.
(2.16)
Where Hω is a short notation of the Hessian matrix of ω. We must, however, be aware
that there is no universal threshold that determines when the magnitude of the vorticity in
a region is high enough to be considered a vortex. Furthermore, the vorticity may also be
relatively high in parallel shear ﬂows, where no vortices are present. Close to a no-slip wall
the velocity gradients in the ﬂuid are large which results in high vorticity along the entire
boundary. We therefore restrict our attention to isolated extrema of the vorticity away from
the boundary. We recall that the vorticity only depends on derivatives of the velocity ﬁeld
and hence it is invariant under any Galilean transformation.
Q-criterion
The Q-criterion, developed by Hunt et al. (1988), [18], locates regions where rotation domi-
nates strain in the ﬂow. This criterion and other popular methods for vortex identiﬁcation,
are based on the analysis of the velocity gradient tensor ∇u. As this is a second order tensor,
it can be decomposed into a symmetric and a skew-symmetric part,
∇u = S + Ω,
(2.17)
where
S = 1
2(∇u + ∇uT)
(2.18)
and
Ω= 1
2(∇u −∇uT).
(2.19)
The symmetric tensor, S, is known as the strain rate tensor while the skew-symmetric tensor,
Ω, is called the rotation tensor. In two dimensions we get that,
∇u =
ux
vx
uy
vy

,
(2.20)
and
S =

ux
1
2(vx + uy)
1
2(vx + uy)
vy

,
(2.21)
8
==PAGE:15==
Ω=

0
1
2(vx −uy)
1
2(uy −vx)
0

=
 0
1
2ω
−1
2ω
0

.
(2.22)
The expression in (2.22) shows how the rotation tensor and the vorticity are closely related.
In fact the rotation tensor is also called the vorticity tensor.
In general Q is deﬁned as the following measure of stretching relative to the rotation,
Q = 1
2(∥Ω∥2 −∥S∥2)
(2.23)
where
∥Ω∥2 = tr(ΩΩT)
and
∥S∥2 = tr(SST)
(2.24)
A large Q value at a point can therefore be interpreted as a point where the vorticity is
dominating the strain rate and the Q-criterion deﬁne a vortex as a connected ﬂuid region
with a positive Q value. In two dimensions Q reduces to,
Q = 1
2(∥Ω∥2 −∥S∥2)
= 1
2(1
2ω2 −(u2
x + v2
y + 1
2v2
x + 1
2u2
y + vxuy))
= 1
2(1
2(vx −uy)2 −(u2
x + v2
y + 1
2v2
x + 1
2u2
y + vxuy))
= −1
2(u2
x + v2
y + 2vxuy)).
(2.25)
By the incompressibility condition in (2.3), we have that vy = −ux, and hence it follows
that,
Q = −u2
x −vxuy
= uxvy −vxuy.
(2.26)
Hence we see that in two dimensions, the Q-value simpliﬁes to the determinant of the velocity
gradient, det(∇u). On a no-slip wall, the velocities are constantly zero and it can easily be
shown that Q vanishes at any (smooth) no-slip boundary. Hence, it is clear that no points
on a no-slip wall can be part of a vortex region when we use the Q criterion as deﬁnition of
a vortex. This means that we avoid the issues with the boundary points which is associated
with the vorticity extrema criterion. However, it is important to be aware that the Q crite-
rion can not distinguish which way the vortices rotate. To include that information in our
analysis we will need the sign of the vorticity.
Q can also be expressed as,
Q = −u2
x −vxuy
= −u2
x −(ω + uy)uy.
(2.27)
9
==PAGE:16==
Indicating that there is no simple connection between the vortices deﬁned by vorticity ex-
trema and vortices deﬁned by the Q criterion. In Section 6.2, we prove the somehow sur-
prising result that the presence of a vortex region (with Q > 0) adjacent to the wall depends
only on the vorticity and its derivatives.
10
==PAGE:17==
3
State of the Art
In this section we will give a brief introduction to some previous studies, all considering a
two-dimensional model of vortex close to a rigid wall with a no-slip condition. As a starting
point for our studies, we consider the PhD thesis of M. Andersen, [1]. The results in this
thesis will serve as a main basis for comparison and therefore, we will especially elaborate on
the approach in this study. However, we will brieﬂy comment on a few diﬀerent approaches.
In the end of this section we will explain how our studies are related to the described studies.
In two dimensional models of inviscid ﬂow, it is common to use a point vortex model. In
a point vortex model it is assumed that the vorticity ﬁeld is a superposition of Dirac delta
distributions (or point vortices) and everywhere else the vorticity is zero. In the work done
by Doligalski and Walker in 1983, [5], they use a point vortex model to represent the vortex
above the wall. Since such a model is inviscid it does not satisfy the no-slip condition on
the wall and the studies by Doligalski and Walker are concerned with the interaction of a
point vortex model with a viscous model of the boundary layer. In the studies by Kudela
& Malecha in 2009, [11], the point vortex was replaced by a small circular area of concen-
trated vorticity, a so called thick vortex core. A third, but slightly diﬀerent model, is used
by M. Andersen in [1]. Here the initial vortex is modelled as a Gaussian distribution of
vorticity. The studies by Kudela & Malecha and Andersen [1, 11] are both dealing with
the interactions of the vortex patch with the wall for diﬀerent values of Reynolds number.
However, the numerical approaches are very diﬀerent. Kudela & Malecha are solving the
Helmholtz equation describing the evolution of the vorticity ﬁeld in time1. The equation is
solved in two step using the so called vortex particle method and in each time step vorticity
is added at the wall until the no-slip condition is satisﬁed. In the studies by M. Andersen, the
two-dimensional Navier-Stokes equation for incompressible ﬂuid coupled with the continuity
equation is considered instead. In this case the no-slip condition is added as a boundary
condition. The Navier-Stokes equation is solved numerically by using a code developed by
Prof. M. Thompson and his group at Monash University, Australia. The code is based on
the spectral element method, which is a formulation of the ﬁnite element method that uses
high-order piecewise polynomials as basis functions.
In the post-processing of the numerical simulations M. Andersen (and Kudela & Malecha)
are mainly identifying vortices by the instantaneous streamline pattern in the ﬂuid. The
analysis of the streamline pattern is based on locating bifurcations where critical points are
created or destroyed. In [3], Balci et al. uses bifurcation theory to obtain a topological
phase space, which account for all observed changes in streamline pattern during the erup-
tion process. In addition to the streamline pattern M. Andersen consider the contour curves
of the vorticity and shows that there is a good correspondence between streamline centers
and regions of concentrated vorticity.
In our studies we use a Gaussian distribution of vorticity and a setting similar to the one
1The Navier-Stokes equations are transformed into the Helmholtz equation by taking the curl of both
sides of the equations.
11
==PAGE:18==
in [1]. However, we perform our numerical simulations using code from a diﬀerent ﬁnite
element library named oomph-lib. By choosing the same setup as in [1], these results can
be used for validation of our numerical procedure. Apart form varying Reynolds number,
we also investigate how the eruption process depends on the size of the initial vortex. In the
post-processing of our results we choose two diﬀerent vortex deﬁnitions: the local extrema
of vorticity and the Q-criterion (see section 2). Instead of only considering the contours
of the vorticity, we identify all critical points and we are therefore able to make a precise
bifurcation analysis of the simulations, showing how the eruption process depend on time,
Reynolds number and the size of the initial vortex. The same approach is used by Heil et al.
to study the ﬂow past a cylinder [8]. The Q-criterion has not been considered by Andersen
or Kudela & Malecha and to the best of our knowledge, no one else has given a detailed
description of the eruption phenomenon based on the Q-criterion.
12
==PAGE:19==
4
Physical Formulation of the Problem
As described in the previous section we want to study the boundary layer eruption phe-
nomenon when a vortex is present close to a rigid wall. To investigate the phenomenon
from a numerical and analytical point of view, we need a precise mathematical description
of the situation. In this section we describe in detail how we model the situation and how
our model can be simpliﬁed to depend on only two free parameters, including the Reynolds
number and a characteristic parameter for the initial vortex.
d
c
x
y
Figure 4.1: Initial conﬁguration. A Gaussian distributed vortex is placed with a
distance d to the rigid wall. c is the characteristic length for the Gaussian distribu-
tion
4.1
The setting
We limit our studies to deal with a two dimensional ﬂuid domain and study the eruption
process in a coordinate system ﬁxed to the rigid wall. Our initial conﬁguration is a single
initial vortex present close to the wall as illustrated in Figure 4.1. In order to be consistent
with the procedure in [1], we represent our initial vortex by a Gaussian vortex patch with
the vorticity distribution given as,
ω(x, y) = ω0e−x2+(y−d)2
c2
(4.1)
where (0, d) is the center of the vortex, ω0 is initial vorticity at the center and c is the
characteristic length for the Gaussian distribution. In polar coordinates based at the vortex
center, the initial vorticity distribution is given as,
ω(r, θ) = ω0e−( r
c)
2
(4.2)
13
==PAGE:20==
where r is the distance from (0, d). The motion of the initial vortex is governed by the
Navier-Stokes equations of viscous and incompressible ﬂuids coupled with the continuity
equation. These equations are already stated in Section 2, but we will repeat here. For any
given time and point in the ﬂuid, the velocity ﬁeld, u(x, t) = (u(x, y, t), v(x, y, t)), satisﬁes
the following equations,
∂u
∂t + (u · ∇)u = −1
ρ∇p + ν∆u
∇· u = 0,
(4.3)
where ν is the kinematic viscosity of the ﬂuid, p is the pressure and ρ is the constant ﬂuid
density. To complete our mathematical description of the problem, the equations in (4.3)
must be complemented by boundary conditions and initial conditions.
The initial condition is the velocity ﬁeld u(x, 0) = u0(x, y) generated by the initial Gaussian
vortex path in an unbounded space. We can calculate u0 analytically, by recalling that the
initial vorticity is deﬁned as the curl of the initial velocity ﬁeld,
ω(x, y) = ∇× u0(x, y),
(4.4)
which in polar coordinates (r, θ), implies that
ω(r, θ) = 1
r
∂(ruθ
0(r, θ))
∂r
−∂ur
0(r, θ)
∂θ

.
(4.5)
We have rotational symmetry in the system, implying that ∂ur
0
∂θ = 0. Combining the expres-
sion in (4.5) with (4.2) we obtain that,
∂(ruθ
0(r, θ))
∂r
= rω0e−( r
c)
2
,
(4.6)
or equivalently,
uθ
0(r, θ) = 1
r
Z 0
r
rω0e−( r
c)
2
dr.
(4.7)
By calculating the integral, we get the following explicit expression for the initial velocity
ﬁeld given in polar coordinates.
uθ
0(r, θ) = ω0c2
2r

1 −e−( r
c)
2
ur
0(r, θ) = 0
(4.8)
Remark 4.1 The initial velocity, u0 can be expressed in cartesian coordinates by letting,
r =
p
x2 + (y −d)2
and
θ = atan2(y −d, x)
(4.9)
Then,
u0(x, y) =
u0(x, y)
v0(x, y)

=
−uθ
0(r, θ) sin(θ)
uθ
0(r, θ) cos(θ).

(4.10)
14
==PAGE:21==
From our illustration in Figure 4.1 it is clear that B = {(x, y)|y = 0} is the set of boundary
points on the rigid wall in our model. We want to impose a no-slip condition on the wall,
which corresponds to the following Dirichlet boundary condition,
u(x, y, t) = 0,
for all (x, y) ∈B.
(4.11)
First of all, it is important to point out that the initial condition in (4.8) does not satisfy
the no-slip boundary condition. Hence, we have a singularity in the system for t = 0. In
Section 5.2 we will describe how we can avoid this singularity in our numerical simulations
by placing an image vortex of opposite sign at the same distance the wall.
By the equations (4.3), (4.8) and (4.11) we have a precise mathematical deﬁnition of our
problem which is dependent on the physical parameters, c, d, ω0, ν and ρ. It would be
a comprehensive analysis to study the topological changes of the system in relation to all
of these parameters. In the following section we show how non-dimensionalization of the
problem can reduce the number of free parameters.
4.2
Nondimensionalization
In order to simplify the analysis of our problem, we want reduce the number of free param-
eters. This can be done by introducing non-dimensional variables to remove all units from
the equations. We aim to scale the system such that quantities are measured relative to
some quantities intrinsic to the system. The non-dimensional variables are constructed by
choosing the reference length (L) and reference velocity (U) scale as,
L = d [m],
U = 1
2|ω0|c [m/s],
(4.12)
which also can be combined to provide the time (T) and pressure (P) scale,
T = L
U =
2d
|ω0|c [s],
P = ρU 2 = ρω2
0c2
4
[kg/(m · s2)].
(4.13)
Hence we can deﬁne the following non-dimensional version of each variable,
ex = x
L,
er = r
L,
eu = u
U ,
et = t
T ,
ep = p
P .
(4.14)
By substituting these dimensionless variables into (4.3), we get that,
U
T
∂eu
∂et + U 2
L (eu · ∇)eu = −P
ρL∇ep + νU
L2 ∆eu
1
L∇· eu = 0,
(4.15)
or equivalently, by (4.13),
∂eu
∂et + (eu · ∇)eu = −∇ep + ν
LU ∆eu
∇· eu = 0.
(4.16)
15
==PAGE:22==
We recall that the parameter LU
ν
is the classical deﬁnition of the Reynolds number for a
given system. In our speciﬁc case, it follows from (4.12), that the Reynolds number is given
as,
Re = LU
ν
= |ω0|dc
2ν
,
(4.17)
which is a scaling of the viscosity ν, speciﬁc to our system parameters. In conclusion, we get
that the only free parameter in the non-dimensional Navier-Stokes and continuity equations
is the Reynolds number,
∂eu
∂et + (eu · ∇)eu = −∇ep + 1
Re∆eu
∇· eu = 0.
(4.18)
In terms of the non-dimensional variables, the no-slip boundary condition, (4.11), is given
as
Ueu = 0
for all Lex ∈B.
(4.19)
or equivalently,
eu = 0
for all ex ∈B.
(4.20)
The initial condition of the problem, (4.8), can be rewritten in the following way,
euθ
0(r, θ) = uθ
0(r, θ)
U
= ω0c
|ω0|r

1 −e−r2
c2

= sign (ω0)c
r

1 −e−r2
c2

.
(4.21)
or in terms of er,
euθ
0(er, θ) = sign (ω0) c
der

1 −e−d2er2
c2

.
(4.22)
We deﬁne the parameter a to be the ratio between c and d, i.e.
a = c
d.
(4.23)
Hence, we get that the initial velocity ﬁeld is dependent only on the parameter a, such that
euθ
0(er, θ) = sign (ω0)a
er

1 −e−er2
a2

.
(4.24)
Summing up, we have redeﬁned our problem, so that it is dimensionless and deﬁned by
(4.18), (4.20) and (4.24). For simplicity, we are dropping the tildes in the notation and we
will now deal with ﬁnding and analysing numerical solutions of the following problem.
16
==PAGE:23==
∂u(x, t)(x, t)
∂t
+ (u · ∇)u(x, t) = −∇p + 1
Re∆u(x, t)
(4.25a)
∇· u(x, t) = 0
(4.25b)
u(x, t) = 0
for all x ∈B, t > 0
(4.25c)
u(x, 0) = u0(x, y),
(4.25d)
where the initial velocity ﬁeld u0 is deﬁned in polar coordinates as,
u0(r, θ)) =


0
sign (ω0)a
r

1 −e−r2
a2


.
(4.26)
In the scaled equations (4.25) the only free parameters are the Reynolds number, Re, and
the parameter a representing the ratio between the size of the initial vortex and the distance
to the wall. Furthermore, we have to choose a direction of rotation for the initial vortex, i.e.
choose whether ω0 is positive or negative. In addition to the free parameters, we see that the
system depends on time, t, which is an independent variable. In our further analysis we will
aim to describe how diﬀerent topological changes in the vortex structure will occur when we
change the free parameters and vary the time.
4.3
An Important Note about the Choice of Scaling used in the
Simulations
In the previous section we showed that a scaling of our problem will reduce the number of free
parameters from ﬁve to two. However, in the previous studies by Andersen and Kudela &
Malecha , [1,11], they specify three parameters independently. The initial vortex is speciﬁed
by the ratio a = 0.3 and its non-dimensional vorticity Ω0 = −1.25. In addition, a value of
Reynolds number is speciﬁed. We choose to name this Reynolds number, c
Re, to indicate
that it does not correspond to the same scaling as Re deﬁned in (4.17). In the studies by
Morten Andersen the main problem is deﬁned as,
∂u(x, t)(x, t)
∂t
+ (u · ∇)u(x, t) = −∇p + 1
c
Re
∆u(x, t)
(4.27a)
∇· u(x, t) = 0
(4.27b)
u(x, t) = 0
for all x ∈B, t > 0
(4.27c)
u(x, 0) = u0(x, y),
(4.27d)
17
==PAGE:24==
where the initial velocity ﬁeld u0 is deﬁned in polar coordinates as,
u0(r, θ)) =


0
Ω0a2
2r

1 −e−r2
a2


.
(4.28)
All parameters and variables in (4.27) are non-dimensional and for a general choice of velocity
scale U and length scale L, Ω0 must therefore be deﬁned as,
Ω0 = ω0L
U
(4.29)
If we choose our previous scaling of length and velocity as deﬁned in (4.12), we get that,
Ω0 = ω0L
U
=
ω0d
1
2|ω0|c = sign(ω0)2
a,
(4.30)
implying that a and Ω0 can not be chosen independently. Therefore the main problem in
(4.27) must have been scaled by other choices of L and U. It is clear, however, that both [1]
and [11] uses the reference length L = d. By letting the scaling of the velocity ﬁeld U be
unspeciﬁed, we can show that there is a simple relation between Re and c
Re. By the classical
deﬁnition, the Reynolds number for this system is then,
c
Re = Ud
ν .
(4.31)
Hence we can relate the two Reynolds numbers Re and c
Re in the following way,
Re = |ω0|dc
2ν
=
|Ω0|U
d
d2a
2ν
= 1
2|Ω0|aUd
ν
= 1
2|Ω0|ac
Re.
(4.32)
Implying that the Reynolds number in our desired scaling, Re, can be found from c
Re by
multiplying with 1
2|Ω0|a.
In order to compare our results with the results obtained in the previous studies, we choose
to work with the main problem speciﬁed in (4.27) and (4.28) and ﬁx Ω0 = −1.25. However,
we are aware that the Reynolds number, c
Re is a scaled version of the natural choice for this
system. Furthermore, we are aware that varying the parameter a for a ﬁxed Reynold number
c
Re, corresponds to varying both a and the natural choice of Reynolds number, Re. In order
to simplify the notation, we will refer to c
Re, as Reynolds number or just Re though out the
rest of this thesis.
18
==PAGE:25==
5
The Numerical Method
In this section we will elaborate on how numerical solutions to our main problem in (4.27)
can be obtained. As Navier-Stokes equations are non-linear equations of great complexity,
they are extremely hard (or impossible) to solve analytically. However, it is not an easy
task to solve our problem numerically, either. Fortunately, the open-source ﬁnite-element
library oomph-lib includes suitable software for our simulations. oomph-lib is developed
and maintained by Matthias Heil and Andrew Hazel of the School of Mathematics at The
University of Manchester.
All simulations in this project are set up in oomph-lib with
guidance from Matthias Heil. In Appendix B the main driver code is shown. The code is
written in C++ and uses many diﬀerent functions from the oomph-lib library 2. In Section
5.2 we will discuss in detail how the numerical simulations are set up. The oomph-lib library
uses a object-oriented implementation of the ﬁnite-element method [7]. In the following
section we give a very brief overview of the main idea behind the ﬁnite-element method. But
speciﬁc details about the implementation is beyond the scope of this project.
5.1
The Finite-Element Method
In this section we give an overview of the basic ideas in the ﬁnite element method, further
details can be found in various textbooks such as [19]. A common way to write a partial
diﬀerential equation is in the residual form, obtained by moving all terms to the left-hand-
side of the equation, so that the general second order partial diﬀerential equation on a two
dimensional domain Ωcan be written as,
R(x, y; u, ux, uy, uxx, uxy, uyy) = 0
in Ω
(5.1)
where the unknown u = u(x, y) is a vector function. To keep the notation compact, we omit
the explicit dependence of the derivatives and write,
R(x, y; u(x, y)) = 0
in Ω
(5.2)
with Dirichlet boundary conditions on ∂Ω
u|∂Ω= g,
(5.3)
where the function g is given.
The ﬁrst step in ﬁnite element analysis is to reformulate the system of partial diﬀerential
equations to its weak formulation. In the weak formulation, the diﬀerential equations are
multiplied by any test function v(x, y) that vanishes on the boundary and then integrated
over the spatial domain. A weak solution uw is therefore a function satisfying that,
Z Z
Ω
v(x, y)R(x, y; uw(x, y))dxdy = 0
in Ω
(5.4)
2Download here: http://www.maths.manchester.ac.uk/~mheil/doc/download/html/index.html
19
==PAGE:26==
and
uw|∂Ω= g,
(5.5)
Then domain is divided into non-overlapping subdomains Ωi, with N interior vertices. The
function values at these vertices correspond to the nodal values in a ﬁnite-element mesh. In
two dimensions these subdomains are typically simple pieces such as triangles or quadrilat-
erals. Within each subdomain all test functions are piecewise linear (or quadratic) functions.
The word element, in the name ﬁnite element method, refers either to the subdomains or to
the piecewise linear test functions, depending on the author. A simple choice of test func-
tions could be v1(x, y), v2(x, y), . . . , vN(x, y) where each test function vi(x, y) = 1 at vertex
number i and equal to 0 at all other vertices. The main goal in the ﬁnite element method
is to approximate u(x, y) as a linear combination of the test functions. However, the test
functions vanish on the boundary which is not the case for u. Therefore we decompose u as,
u(x, y) = up(x, y) + uh(x, y)
(5.6)
where up is an (arbitrary) function that satisﬁes the Dirichlet boundary condition and uh is
the function that satisﬁes the homogeneous boundary condition. Hence, the ﬁnite element
approximation of u, is
uN(x, y) = up(x, y) + U1v1(x, y) + · · · + UNvN(x, y)
(5.7)
By substituting uN as the weak solution in (5.4) and integrating over each subdomain, we
obtain a discretised set of element equations to the original problem. By combining these
equations we get a global set of element equations where the coﬃcients U1, U2, . . . , UN
are the unknown variables. Depending on the partial diﬀerential equation, this system of
equations can be either linear or non-linear. In the general nonlinear case the set of equations
must be solved by an iterative method such as Newton’s method.
By the construction
of our test functions, vi, the majority of test functions will be equal to zero on a given
element. Therefore, we get a sparse Jacobian matrix of the system and we can apply a
sparse factorization method within Newton’s method.
5.2
The Numerical Setting
In this section we will elaborate on the computational details such as the geometry of the
problem, the choice of grid and setting of boundary conditions and initial conditions. As dis-
cussed in Section 4.2, the initial velocity ﬁeld in (4.28) does not satisfy the no-slip boundary
condition. A common way to construct an initial velocity ﬁeld, satisfying that the velocity
component normal to the wall is zero, is the so-called ”method of images”. This approach
takes advantage of the fact that there can be no ﬂow across lines of symmetry. The initial
velocity ﬁeld is modelled by placing an image vortex with opposite vorticity below the solid
wall with the same distance to the wall, see Figure 5.1. Due to the symmetry around the
wall such an image vortex causes a velocity component normal to the wall that is opposite
to the real vortex. Adding these components we get that the initial velocity ﬁeld is parallel
to the wall as illustrated in Figure 5.1. This initial velocity ﬁeld correspond to a free-slip
condition on the wall, which would only be the case in an inviscid ﬂow.
20
==PAGE:27==
The vortex-wall interaction, modelled by a pair of counter-rotating vortices, will result in a
net advection of the initial vortex in negative direction along the wall. As a result we would
need a large computational domain to make sure that the vortex is suﬃciently far away
form the boundaries. We can to some extend avoid a large domain by adding a uniform
background velocity k. If k is chosen to be opposite of the initial advection speed, we will
make sure that the vortex initially preserve the same horizontal position. This is eﬀectively
equivalent to a change of inertial system. The frame of reference is now the initial vortex
and the boundary is moving with the speed k. As described in Section 2.2 our analysis will
be based on vortex criteria which are Galilean invariant, so this change of inertial system
will not eﬀect our results. In Section 5.4 we will brieﬂy consider the streamlines as a vortex
criterion, this is done with the purpose of comparing our numerical results directly with the
results by Morten Andersen in [1]. Because of this comparison, we choose k = 0.02812, as
done by Morten Andersen.
d
c
d
c
Figure 5.1: The initial velocity ﬁeld u0 is constructed by placing an image vortex
below the boundary, as illustrated. The direction of the velocity ﬁeld is represented
by arrows. The symmetry causes the velocity ﬁeld to be horizontal at the wall.
In Figure 5.2 (a), the computational domain is illustrated.
We chose it, in accordance
with [1], to be the rectangular domain where −3.63 ≤x ≤3.63 and 0 ≤y ≤5.13. Due to
the no-slip condition, we expect a thin boundary layer with high vorticity close to the wall,
hence we need a mesh with high resolution in this area. However, it is not necessary to have
equally high resolution further away from the wall. To limit the computational work, we
therefore divide our domain into two diﬀerent regions. In the region closest to the boundary,
the distance between the mesh points are decreasing exponentially towards the wall. In the
rest of the domain we use a uniform spacing in the mesh with the same size as the largest
mesh in the exponential region. We have chosen this structure to ensure a smooth transition
21
==PAGE:28==
between the two regions. The outer edge of the exponential region is y = 0.850194 and
the mesh is constructed in a way such that 50% of the elements are within the exponential
region. The structure of the mesh is seen in Figure 5.2 (b), but be aware that this mesh is
much coarser than the mesh we used for our simulations. The mesh shown in Figure 5.2 (b)
is constructed with 18 × 23 elements and in our ﬁnal simulations we use 144 × 171 elements.
The ﬁnal number of elements was chosen in order to ensure that the spatial resolution was
adequate, while the computational time was limited as much as possible. To ensure that our
method is converged with 144 × 171 elements, we have been running some test simulations
with twice as many elements.
In this case we obtained the same numerical results and
conclude that our spatial resolution is suﬃciently high.
y = 5.13
x = 3.63
x = −3.63
Uniform spacing
Exponential spacing
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.2: (a) The computational domain spanning from x = −3.63 to x = −3.63
and from y = 0 to y = 5.13. The domain is separated into two regions, one with
uniform spacing of the mesh and one with exponential spacing. (b) An example of
the structure of our rectangular mesh constructed with 18 × 23 elements.
On the outer boundaries of our domain we impose the following Dirichlet boundary condi-
tions, for t > 0,
u(−3.63, y, t) = u0(−3.63, y)
(5.8)
u(3.63, y, t) = u0(3.63, y)
(5.9)
u(x, 0, t) = u0(x, 0)
(5.10)
u(x, 5.13, t) = u0(x, 5.13)
(5.11)
v(x, 5.13, t) = v0(x, 5.13).
(5.12)
Here u0 = (u0, v0) is the analytic solution to the initial counter-rotating vortex pair plus
the uniform background ﬂow, k. By these Dirichlet conditions we ﬁx the horizontal velocity
ﬁeld at all boundaries and the vertical velocity at the top boundary. Notice, that we do not
impose the no-slip boundary condition from the beginning of our simulations. In [1] Morten
22
==PAGE:29==
Andersen discovered that he could avoid instability in the numerical solutions by letting the
initial velocity ﬁeld readjust before adding the no-slip condition. We see that the initial
velocity ﬁeld of the counter-rotating vortex pair results in some initial oscillations. But after
a relatively short time the vorticity will readjust to a new elliptic distribution where the
oscillations are damped, see Figure 5.3 (b). After this settling time the no-slip condition
u(x, 0, t) = k and v(x, 0, t) = 0 is instantaneously imposed on the wall. We chose the settling
time to be 10 non-dimensional time units. As shown in Figure 5.3 (c), the no-slip condition
immediately induces a thin vorticity layer at the boundary. We use the conﬁguration in
Figure 5.3 (c) as a starting point for our main computations.
t = −1
t = −10
t = 0
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.3: Zoom in on the region close to the initial vortex. (a) The initial Gaussian
distributed vorticity, without a no-slip condition imposed. (b) The slightly elliptical
vorticity distribution at the time step just before the no-slip condition is imposed.
(c) Stating point for the main computations. The no-slip condition is imposed and
vorticity is induced at the boundary.
Using the described setup we are stepping forward in time and compute the velocity ﬁelds,
u, v, and the pressure, p, at every mesh point for each time step. Besides these variables
we are also computing the derivatives of the velocities, the vorticity and some derivatives
of the vorticity. So for each simulation, we have approximations of the following quantities
23
==PAGE:30==
available at each mesh point in the domain u, v, p, ux, uy, vx, vy, ω, ωx, ωy, ωxx, ωyy and ωxy.
As described earlier, we are only concerned with the initial phase of the boundary layer
eruption phenomenon. Therefore, we limit our simulations to contain information about the
quantities until the non-dimensional time step t = 150.
5.3
Post-processing
After performing simulations with the oomph-lib library, our next step is to use the re-
sults to make a numerical analysis of the phenomenon. We use the open source program
ParaView3 to visualize and post-process our simulations. As described in Section 2.2 we
want to consider two diﬀerent vortex criteria: the local vorticity extrema and the Q criterion.
To identify the local extrema of the vorticity, ω, we use ParaView’s contour function to
draw the zero contour curves of ωx and ωy. These contour curves correspond to lines of ω
with zero-growth in the x- or y-direction and are usually called the nullclines of ω. At any
intersection point between the nullclines there is a critical point for ω. In Figure 5.4 (a) the
vorticity distribution is shown with the y- and x-nullcline drawn in black and white. We see
that the nullclines intersect a lot of times, especially in the region away form the boundary.
In this region the vorticity is below the computer precision and we see that every point is
an intersecting point of the nullclines. As a candidate for a vortex center we only consider
the isolated critical points.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.4: Numerical results for Re = 4000 and t = 52. The vorticity contours
with values from −0.5 to 0.5 are colored in blue and red. (a) The nullclines ωy = 0
and ωx = 0 are drawn in black and white, respectively. (b) The nullclines ωy = 0
and ωx = 0 are colored according to the Hessian determinant at each point.
In order to distinguish between saddle points and local extrema, we compute the Hessian
3Download here: https://www.paraview.org/download/
24
==PAGE:31==
determinant,
det(Hω) = ωxxωyy −ω2
xy.
(5.13)
In Figure 5.4 (b) the nullclines are colored according to the Hessian determinant at each
point. We clearly see two intersection points with positive Hessian determinant, correspond-
ing to local minima or maxima of the vorticity. Besides the initial vortex with negative
vorticity a new vortex with positive vorticity has erupted form the boundary layer.
In order to identify vortices as regions with positive Q value, we compute Q at every mesh
point. From the available quantities, Q is computed as
Q = uxvy −uyvx.
(5.14)
We use ParaView’s contour function to draw the Q = 0 contour curves. In Figure 5.5 these
contour curves are shown as green lines on top of the vorticity distribution. At this exact
time step, we see that a closed contour curve self-intersect. At a later time step the curve
divides in two and a vortex is separated. This speciﬁc change in structure will be discussed
in details in Section 6.
Figure 5.5: Numerical results for Re = 4000 and t = 52. The vorticity contours
with values from −0.5 to 0.5 are colored in blue and red. The green curves are the
zero contour curves of Q, that encircles vortex regions with positive Q-value.
For the two diﬀerent vortex criteria we vary both the Reynolds numbers and our initial pa-
rameter a and investigate the topological changes in vortex structure. A complete description
of our numerical results is given in Section 8.
5.4
Validation of the Numerical Method
In this section we aim to validate our numerical results by comparing with some of the
results made by M. Andersen in [1]. For this purpose, we consider for a short while the
streamlines of the ﬂow. Streamlines can be generated by ParaView’s Stream Tracer ﬁlter.
From a collection of seed points the Stream Tracer ﬁlter does numerical integration along
25
==PAGE:32==
the velocity ﬁeld until a streamline crosses the exterior boundary or a given maximum
propagation time is exceeded.
t = 5
t = 5
t = 20
t = 20
t = 45
t = 45
Figure 5.6: Zoom in on the region close to the initial vortex. With Re = 4000 the
streamlines and the vorticity contour are shown for three diﬀerent time steps. Left
column: Results form Morten Andersen’s PhD project, the ﬁgures are borrowed
from [1] with permission. Right column: Our own results at the same time steps.
26
==PAGE:33==
In Figure 5.6 we compare our numerical results with the results made by Morten Andersen.
The streamline structure and vorticity distribution are compared for Re = 4000 at three
diﬀerent time steps. At time t = 5 we see closed streamlines around the initial vortex and
a thin vorticity layer close to the wall. For t = 20 some of the boundary layer vorticity is
drawn into the surrounding ﬂuid and for both results we see a small new region with closed
streamlines just above the wall. Later, at time t = 45 the new vortex region has grown
and is moved further away from the wall. Qualitatively the results in Figure 5.6 agree quite
well, but it seems that the dynamics of eruption process are evolving faster in our case. We
believe that the small variations are due to the inherent diﬀerence in numerical methods.
The fact that the results agree qualitatively make us convinced that our numerical method
works as desired.
27
==PAGE:34==
6
Theoretical Results about the Q = 0 Contour Curves
In Section 2.2 we introduced the idea of deﬁning a vortex as a region with a positive Q-value.
Furthermore, we showed that in two dimensions, the Q-value simpliﬁes to the determinant
of the velocity gradient, i.e.
Q(x, y) = det (∇u(x, y))
= ux(x, y)vy(x, y) −uy(x, y)vx(x, y)
In this section we want to analyse under which conditions we see topological changes of the
regions where Q > 0. In the analysis, we make use of higher order derivatives of Q and
therefore we make the following necessary remark.
Remark 6.1 We consider Q as a smooth function with derivatives of all orders everywhere
in its domain.
Instead of analysing the structure of regions with positive Q-value, we consider the contour
curves Q = 0, which must encircle any bounded and connected region with positive Q-value.
In our analysis we will classify whether or not we see qualitative changes in the local structure
of the contour curves, as Q is perturbed. We say that two contour patterns are qualitative
alike if they are topological equivalent. Topological equivalence is a concept which is widely
used for velocity ﬁelds as deﬁned in [4]. Here we give our own deﬁnition in terms of contour
curves.
Deﬁnition 6.2 (Topological Equivalence) Let V be an open subset of R2 and let Q and
Q′ be smooth real functions on V . The zero contour curves of Q and Q′ are topologically
equivalent if there exist a continuous, bijective map h, whose inverse is also continuous,
that maps the zero contour curve of Q onto the zero contour of Q′. If h is only deﬁned
in a neighbourhood of some x0 ∈V , we say that the contour curves are locally topological
equivalent at x0.
In our analysis we are primarily concerned with the local changes in structure, and we will
therefore only consider the deﬁnition of local topological equivalence. It is clear from the
deﬁnition that any point where a contour curve is self-intersecting or any isolated contour
point must be preserved if two structures are locally topological equivalent. Having speciﬁed
what we mean by qualitatively alike structures, we can discuss whether or not a small
perturbation will result in a change of the structure. This is done in terms of local structural
stability,
Deﬁnition 6.3 (Local Structural Stability) Let V be an open subset of R2 and let Q
and bQ be smooth real functions on V . The contour curve Q(x) = 0 is locally structurally
stable at some x0 ∈V , if for any suﬃciently small perturbation bQ(x), the contour curve
Q(x) + bQ(x) = 0 is locally topological equivalent to Q(x) = 0 at x0. A contour curve which
is not locally structurally stable is called locally structurally unstable.
28
==PAGE:35==
The deﬁnition requires the concept of a perturbation being suﬃciently small. In order to
clarify, we consider a perturbation suﬃciently small if it is small in terms of the C1-norm.
That is,
∥bQ(x)∥C1 = sup
x∈V
| bQ(x)| + sup
x∈V
| bQx(x)| + sup
x∈V
| bQy(x)|,
(6.1)
being suﬃciently small. In the following two sections we show that under certain conditions
we have a local unstable structure of the contour curves. This is done by considering Q as a
function of a certain bifurcation parameter vector µ ∈Rn and then classifying the so called
bifurcation points for Q = 0.
Deﬁnition 6.4 (Bifurcation point) Let Q(x, µ) be a family of functions satisfying that
Q(x, µ∗) = 0 is locally structurally unstable at x∗then (x∗, µ∗) is a bifurcation point for the
contour curve.
As our ﬂow is time dependent it is natural to consider the time, t, as the bifurcation param-
eter. Q may however, also depend on other parameters such as Reynolds number, the initial
vorticity and so on.
An essential tool in proving our results is the Implicit Function Theorem, which can be found
in various textbooks. Here the theorem is stated as given in [12],
Theorem 6.5 (Implicit Function Theorem) Let U be an open set in Rn × Rk and F ∈
Cr(U, Rn) with r ≥1. Suppose there is a point (x0, µ0) ∈U such that F(x0; µ0) = c and
DxF(x0, µ0) is a nonsingular n × n matrix. Then there are open sets V ⊂Rn and W ⊂Rk
and a unique Cr function ξ(µ) : W →V for which x0 = ξ(µ0) and F(ξ(µ); µ) = c.
We divide our analysis into three sections. In Section 6.1 we describe two types of bifurcations
happening away from the no-slip wall. While we in Section 6.2 consider bifurcation points
present on the wall. In Section 6.3 we prove the additional result, that a vortex region will
always be present when a zero contour curve of Q is connected to the boundary.
6.1
Bifurcations Away from the No-slip wall
In this section we consider the zero contour curves of Q in the region of the ﬂuid which is
away from the wall. Our goal is to characterize under which conditions we see topological
changes in local structure. In the following theorem we prove for any non-critical point
(x∗, y∗) and any bifurcation parameter vector µ∗, (x∗, y∗, µ∗) cannot be a bifurcation point
for Q = 0.
Theorem 6.6 Let (x∗, y∗), y∗> 0 be a point which for some parameter vector µ∗∈Rn,
satisﬁes that,
Q(x∗, y∗, µ∗) = 0
(6.2)
and in addition,
Qx(x∗, y∗, µ∗) ̸= 0
or
Qy(x∗, y∗, µ∗) ̸= 0.
(6.3)
Then (x∗, y∗, µ∗) is not a bifurcation point for the Q = 0 contour curve.
29
==PAGE:36==
Proof. First we consider the case where Qx(x∗, y∗, µ∗) ̸= 0, then it follows by the Implicit
Function Theorem that there exist neighbourhood B ⊆Rn+1 around (y∗, µ∗) and a unique
continuous function φ : B →R such that φ(y∗, µ∗) = x∗and Q(φ(y), y, µ) = 0 for all (y, µ)
in B. Stated in a slightly diﬀerent way, φ(y, µ∗) = x is the only zero contour curve in a
neighbourhood of (x∗, y∗) and for any suﬃciently small perturbation of µ∗the contour curve
φ(y, µ) = x will be topological equivalent to φ(y, µ∗) = x. Hence, (x∗, y∗, µ∗) is not a bifur-
cation point for the zero contour curve of Q.
If we instead consider the case where Qx(x∗, y∗, µ∗) = 0, we can use that Qy(x∗, y∗, µ∗) is
necessarily non-zero and by a completely similar argument, we have a unique zero contour
curve in a neighbourhood of (x∗, y∗, µ∗).
□
From the above result it follows that we must look for critical points for Q to identify possible
bifurcation points on the zero contour curve. In Theorem 6.8 we show that a critical point
on the contour curve satisfying two additional conditions is bifurcation point. One of the
additional conditions is that the critical point for Q is non-degenerate at time t = t∗. The
main step in our proof is based on the fact that a function near a non-degenerate critical
point can be represented in a convenient way by an appropriate choice of local coordinates.
This result is known as the Morse lemma and can be found in various textbooks, such as [16].
Here we state a version of the lemma which is speciﬁc for functions deﬁned on a subset of
R2.
Theorem 6.7 (The Morse lemma) Let V ⊆R2 be open and let F be a real-valued smooth
function on V . If x∗is a non-degenerate critical point for F, then there exists a coordinate
chart (ˆx1, ˆx2) in a neighbourhood U of x∗such that ˆxi(x∗) = 0 for i = 1, 2 and
F(ˆx1, ˆx2) = F(x∗) ± ˆx2
1 ± ˆx2
2,
(6.4)
where the signs depend on the Hessian matrix, H, of F at x∗in the following way.
F(ˆx1, ˆx2) = F(x∗) + ˆx2
1 −ˆx2
2
if H(F(x∗)) is indeﬁnite
(6.5)
F(ˆx1, ˆx2) = F(x∗) + ˆx2
1 + ˆx2
2
if H(F(x∗)) is positive deﬁnite
(6.6)
F(ˆx1, ˆx2) = F(x∗) −ˆx2
1 −ˆx2
2
if H(F(x∗)) is negative deﬁnite.
(6.7)
The Morse lemma generalizes to functions deﬁned on a diﬀerentiable manifold M of any
dimension, but for our purpose we will only need the version stated above. We are now
ready to prove the main theorem in this section.
Theorem 6.8 Let (x∗, y∗, t∗), y > 0 be a point satisfying that,
Q(x∗, y∗, t∗) = 0
(6.8)
Qx(x∗, y∗, t∗) = 0
(6.9)
Qy(x∗, y∗, t∗) = 0
(6.10)
Qt(x∗, y∗, t∗) ̸= 0
(6.11)
30
==PAGE:37==
and that,
HQ(x∗, y∗, t∗) =
Qxx(x∗, y∗, t∗)
Qxy(x∗, y∗, t∗)
Qxy(x∗, y∗, t∗)
Qyy(x∗, y∗, t∗)

is regular.
(6.12)
Then (x∗, y∗, t∗) is a bifurcation point. There are two possible types of bifurcations, these are
illustrated in Figure 6.1 and 6.2. The type of bifurcation depends on whether the Hessian in
(6.12) is deﬁnite or indeﬁnite.
Proof. It follows from the Implicit Function Theorem that, there exists a neighbourhood
N1 ⊆R2 around (x∗, y∗) and a unique continuous function T : N1 →R such that T(x∗, y∗) =
t∗and Q(x, y, T(x, y)) = 0 for all (x, y) in N1. By solving the equation t = T(x, y) for
(x, y) ∈N1 we then determine the zero contour curve of Q at time t in the neighbourhood
N1. In order to characterise the topological structure of the contour curves we need some
properties of the function T. By diﬀerentiating Q with respect to x, we obtain that,
Qx(x, y, T(x, y)) + Qt(x, y, T(x, y))Tx(x, y) = 0,
and
Qxx(x, y, T(x, y)) + Qxt(x, y, T(x, y))Tx(x, y) + Qtx(x, y, T(x, y))Tx(x, t)+
Qtt(x, y, T(x, y))Tx(x, t)2 + Qt(x, y, t)Txx(x, y) = 0.
Implying that,
Tx(x∗, y∗) = −Qx(x∗, y∗, T(x∗, y∗))
Qt(x∗, y∗, T(x∗, y∗) = −Qx(x∗, y∗, t∗)
Qt(x∗, y∗, t∗) = 0.
(6.13)
and
Txx(x∗, y∗) = −Qxx(x∗, y∗, T(x∗, y∗))
Qt(x∗, y∗, T(x∗, y∗)) = −Qxx(x∗, y∗, t∗)
Qt(x∗, y∗, t∗) .
(6.14)
Similarly, by diﬀerentiating with respect to y we obtain that,
Ty(x∗, y∗) = −Qy(x∗, y∗, t∗)
Qt(x∗, y∗, t∗) = 0,
(6.15)
Tyy(x∗, y∗) = −Qyy(x∗, y∗, t∗)
Qt(x∗, y∗, t∗)
(6.16)
31
==PAGE:38==
and
Txy(x∗, y∗) = −Qxy(x∗, y∗, t∗)
Qt(x∗, y∗, t∗) .
(6.17)
By the results in (6.13) and (6.15), we see that the (x∗, y∗) is a critical point for T. Fur-
thermore, it follows by (6.14), (6.16) and (6.17) that the Hessian of T at (x∗, y∗) can be
expressed as,
HT(x∗, y∗) =
Txx(x∗, y∗)
Txy(x∗, y∗)
Txy(x∗, y∗)
Tyy(x∗, y∗)

= −
1
Qt(x∗, y∗, t∗)
Qxx(x∗, y∗, t∗)
Qxy(x∗, y∗, t∗)
Qxy(x∗, y∗, t∗)
Qyy(x∗, y∗, t∗)

= −
1
Qt(x∗, y∗, t∗)HQ(x∗, y∗, t∗),
(6.18)
implying that HT(x∗, y∗) is a regular matrix. Hence, we conclude that the critical point
(x∗, y∗) for T is non-degenerate and the type of critical point depends only on HQ and the
sign of Qt. By the Morse Lemma it follows that there exist a coordinate chart (ˆx, ˆy) in a
neighbourhood N2 ⊆N1 of (x∗, y∗) such that,
ˆx(x∗, y∗) = 0,
ˆy(x∗, y∗) = 0
(6.19)
and
T(ˆx, ˆy) = t∗+ ˆx2 −ˆy2
if HT(x∗, y∗) is indeﬁnite
(6.20a)
T(ˆx, ˆy) = t∗+ ˆx2 + ˆy2
if HT(x∗, y∗) is positive deﬁnite
(6.20b)
T(ˆx, ˆy) = t∗−ˆx2 −ˆy2
if HT(x∗, y∗) is negative deﬁnite.
(6.20c)
These three cases correspond to the critical point (x∗, y∗) being a saddle, a local maximum or
a local minimum of T. We consider the three cases in separate sections below. Here we let ˆN2
be the neighbourhood of (0, 0) corresponding to the image of N2 under the coordinate change.
Case A
By (6.18) is follows that HT(x∗, y∗) is indeﬁnite if and only if HQ(x∗, y∗, t∗) is indeﬁnite. So
for det(HQ(x∗, y∗, t∗)) < 0, we have that
T(ˆx, ˆy) = t∗+ ˆx2 −ˆy2,
(6.21)
for any (ˆx, ˆy) in ˆN2. At time t = t∗,
T(ˆx, ˆy) = t∗+ ˆx2 −ˆy2 = t∗,
(6.22)
or equivalent,
ˆx2 −ˆy2 = 0.
(6.23)
32
==PAGE:39==
The solution to this equation is the pair of straight lines given by ˆy = ˆx and ˆy = −ˆx which
intersect at (0, 0). Implying that the zero contour curves of Q at t∗are topological equivalent
to the situation is illustrated in Figure 6.1 (b).
For t ̸= t∗,
T(ˆx, ˆy) = t∗+ ˆx2 −ˆy2 = t,
(6.24)
or equivalent,
ˆx2 −ˆy2 = t −t∗̸= 0.
(6.25)
If t is chosen suﬃciently close to t∗we ensure that (6.25) has a set of solutions in ˆN2. If
t > t∗, the right-hand side of (6.25) is positive and the solution curve is a hyperbola with
the x-axis as the principal axis and the zero contour curve of Q in this case is illustrated
in Figure 6.2 (c).
Similarly, if t < t∗, the right-hand side of (6.25) is negative and the
solution is a hyperbola with the y-axis as the principal axis and the zero contour curve of Q
is illustrated in Figure 6.2 (a). We will denote this kind of local changes in structure of the
Q = 0 curve a Type A bifurcation. However, we notice that in terms of topology it is not
possible to distinguish the local structure in ﬁgure (a) and (c). From a local point of view,
it therefore not possible to tell the diﬀerence between a fusion and a separation of contour
curves.
Type A bifurcation
(x∗, y∗)
(a)
(b)
(c)
t = t∗
Figure 6.1: Illustration of the local changes in structure of the Q = 0 contour
curves under a type A bifurcation.
The solid lines illustrates the topology in a
neighbourhood of the bifurcation point (x∗, y∗, t∗), while the the dotted lines is an
example of a global structure.
We have already observed that the type A bifurcation occur in our simulations. In Figure
5.5 we see a situation very close to type A bifurcation point.
Case B
We now consider the case in (6.20b). First we recall that HT(x∗, y∗) is positive deﬁnite if
det(HT(x∗, y∗)) > 0
and tr(HT(x∗, y∗) > 0.
(6.26)
33
==PAGE:40==
By the result in (6.18) we get that (6.26) is satisﬁed if and only if,
det(HQ(x∗, y∗)) > 0
and
sign(tr(HQ(x∗, y∗, t∗)) ̸= sign(Qt(x∗, y∗, t∗)).
(6.27)
For these conditions satisﬁed we have that,
T(ˆx, ˆy) = t∗+ ˆx2 + ˆy2,
(6.28)
for any (ˆx, ˆy) in ˆN2. So for time t = t∗if follows that,
T(ˆx, ˆy) = t∗+ ˆx2 + ˆy2 = t∗,
(6.29)
or equivalent,
ˆx2 + ˆy2 = 0.
(6.30)
There is clearly only a single possible solution to this equation, (ˆx, ˆy) = (0, 0). By (6.19),
this point correspond to the critical point (x∗, y∗). Implying that the zero contour curves of
Q at t∗is topological equivalent to the situation is illustrated in Figure 6.2 (b).
For t ̸= t∗,
T(ˆx, ˆy) = t∗+ ˆx2 + ˆy2 = t,
(6.31)
or equivalent,
ˆx2 + ˆy2 = t −t∗̸= 0.
(6.32)
If t > t∗, the right-hand side of (6.32) is positive and the solution curve is a circle with radius
√t −t∗. If t is chosen suﬃciently close to t∗we ensure the circle is contained in ˆN2. Then
the zero contour curve of Q is topological equivalent to the illustration in Figure 6.2 (c). On
the other hand, if t < t∗, the right-hand side of (6.32) is negative and there cannot be any
point (ˆx, ˆy) in ˆN2 which is part of the zero contour curve of Q. This situation is illustrated
in Figure 6.2 (a). We will denote this kind of local changes in structure a Type B bifurcation
of the Q = 0 contour curve. In this speciﬁc case the bifurcation happens ”forward” from the
structure in (a) to the structure in (c).
Type B bifurcation
(a)
(b)
(c)
(x∗, y∗)
t = t∗
Figure 6.2: Illustration of the local changes in structure of the Q = 0 contour curves
under a type B bifurcation. At the bifurcation point (x∗, y∗, t∗) there is exactly one
point where Q = 0.
34
==PAGE:41==
Case C
We now consider the case in (6.20c). First we recall that Ht(x∗, y∗) is negative deﬁnite if
det(HT(x∗, y∗)) > 0
and tr(HT(x∗, y∗) < 0.
(6.33)
By the result in (6.18) we get that (6.33) is satisﬁed if and only if,
det(HQ(x∗, y∗)) > 0
and
sign(tr(HQ(x∗, y∗, t∗)) = sign(Qt(x∗, y∗, t∗)).
(6.34)
For these conditions satisﬁed we have that,
T(ˆx, ˆy) = t∗−ˆx2 −ˆy2,
(6.35)
for any (ˆx, ˆy) in ˆN2. So for time t = t∗we have that,
T(ˆx, ˆy) = t∗−ˆx2 −ˆy2 = t∗,
(6.36)
or equivalent,
ˆx2 + ˆy2 = 0.
(6.37)
As in case B, there is only the solution, (ˆx, ˆy) = (0, 0) to this equation and the structure of
Q = 0 at t∗is topological equivalent to the situation is illustrated in Figure 6.2 (b).
For t ̸= t∗,
T(ˆx, ˆy) = t∗−ˆx2 −ˆy2 = t,
(6.38)
or equivalent,
ˆx2 + ˆy2 = t∗−t ̸= 0.
(6.39)
We notice that this equation is similar to (6.32) except for the sign of the right-hand side.
By an analysis completely similar to the one in case B we get that a Type B bifurcation
happens ”backward” at the point (x∗, y∗, t∗).
We have now considered all possible cases where a point (x∗, y∗, t∗) satisfy the ﬁve conditions
(6.8)-(6.12). In all cases (x∗, y∗, t∗) is a bifurcation point.
□
In the above proof of Theorem 6.8 we got that, at a point (x∗, y∗, t∗) satisfying the ﬁve
conditions in the theorem correspond to either a type A or a type B bifurcation point.
For diﬀerent conditions we saw that the type B bifurcation would happen either forward or
backward. For the Type A bifurcation it was not possible to make a similar analysis. We saw
that the local changes that occur during a ”forward” Type A bifurcation where topological
equivalent to the ”backward” Type A bifurcation. A complete overview of the cases is given
in Table 6.1 below.
35
==PAGE:42==
det(HQ((x∗, y∗, t∗))
tr(HQ(x∗, y∗, t∗))
Qt(x∗, y∗, t∗)
Type of bifurcation
-
+/-
+/-
A
+
+
+
B backward
+
+
-
B forward
+
-
+
B forward
+
-
-
B backward
Table 6.1: Let (x∗, y∗, t∗) be a bifurcation point satisfying the ﬁve conditions in
Theorem 6.8.
Then this table summarizes which type of bifurcation will occur
depending on the signs of det(HQ), tr(HQ) and Qt.
6.2
Bifurcations on a No-slip Wall
In this section we will describe how Q = 0 isocurves can occur and erupt form the no-slip
wall. Let B be the set of points on the boundary with the no-slip condition. For simplicity
we consider a ﬂat wall and choose a coordinate system such that the ﬂuid is in the region
y ≥0. Hence,
B = {(x, y)|y = 0}.
And the no-slip conditions are as follows,
u(x, 0) = ψy(x, 0) = k
v(x, 0) = −ψx(x, 0) = 0,
where ψ : R2 →R is the stream function, described in section 2.1. Since the velocity does
not change along the ﬁxed wall, all the higher order derivatives in the x direction are zero,
ψxx(x, 0) = ψxxx(x, 0) = ψxxxx(x, 0) = · · · = 0.
(6.40)
and
ψyx(x, 0) = ψyxx(x, 0) = ψyxxx(x, 0) = · · · = 0.
(6.41)
We recall that the Q-value is deﬁned as the determinant of the velocity gradient,
Q = uxvy −uyvx = ψyyψxx −ψ2
xy,
(6.42)
which gives us that Q = 0 at any boundary point.
Any non-degenerate critical point is locally structurally stable. Hence, we seek a degenerate
critical point for the Q-value to locate a bifurcation on the boundary. However, the follow-
ing Theorem shows that we can not immediately locate possible bifurcation points on the
boundary.
Theorem 6.9 Any boundary point (x, 0) is a degenerate critical point for Q.
36
==PAGE:43==
Proof. From (6.42) we get that,
Qx = ψxyyψxx + ψyyψxxx −2ψxyψxxy,
(6.43)
and
Qy = ψyyyψxx + ψyyψxxy −2ψxyψxyy.
(6.44)
It then follows from (6.40) and (6.41), that
Qx(x, 0) = 0, and Qy(x, 0) = 0.
(6.45)
Implying that every point on the boundary is a critical point for the Q-value. Furthermore
the ﬁrst order derivatives of Q are not changing along the ﬁxed wall which implies that,
Qxx(x, 0) = Qxy(x, 0) = 0.
(6.46)
We recall that the Hessian determinant of Q, is given as
det (H) = QxxQyy −Q2
xy.
(6.47)
Which gives us that det (H) = 0 at every boundary point (x, 0). Summing up we have that
the boundary points are all degenerate critical points.
□
Theorem 6.9 tells us that the second derivative test is inconclusive for all the critical boundary
points. In order to locate possible bifurcation points we need to perform a higher order
derivative test. For any ﬁxed x, we want to express Q(x, y) by it’s Taylor expansion. But
we want to use a version of the Taylor’s Theorem, which is slightly diﬀerent from what is
usually stated in any textbook, therefore we prove the result in the following Theorem.
Theorem 6.10 (Alternative version of Taylor’s Theorem) Let f be a continuous func-
tion with n + 1 continuous derivatives on an open interval containing x = 0. Then it follows
for each x in the interval that
f(x) =
n
X
j=0
f (j)(0)
j!
xj

+ xn+1 ef(x)
(6.48)
where ef is the following continuous function,
ef(x) = 1
n!
Z 1
0
f (n+1)(x(1 −s))snds
(6.49)
Proof. We will prove this Theorem by induction on n. First we consider the case where
n = 1. By the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus it follows that,
f(x) = f(0) +
Z x
0
f ′(t)dt
37
==PAGE:44==
We now substitute the integration variable by t = x(1 −s) and get that,
f(x) = f(0) +
Z 0
1
f ′(x(1 −s))(−x)ds
= f(0) + x
Z 1
0
f ′(x(1 −s))ds
We can apply integration by parts if we consider the integrand as a product of 1 and the
function itself, hence we get that,
f(x) = f(0) + x
Z 1
0
f ′(x(1 −s))ds
= f(0) + x[sf ′(x(1 −s))]1
0 −x
Z 1
0
f ′′(x(1 −s))(−x)sds
= f(0) + xf ′(0) + x2
Z 1
0
f ′′(x(1 −s))sds,
implying that the statement is true for the base case, n = 1. Now we assume that,
f(x) =
k
X
j=0
f (j)(0)
j!
xj

+ xk+1 ef(x)
(6.50)
where ef is the following continuous function,
ef(x) = 1
k!
Z 1
0
f (k+1)(x(1 −s))skds.
(6.51)
By partial integration we obtain that,
xk+1 ef(x) = xk+1 1
k!
Z 1
0
f (k+1)(x(1 −s))skds
= xk+1 1
k!

f (k+1)(x(1 −s))
1
k + 1sk+1
1
0
−xk+1 1
k!
Z 1
0
f (k+2)(x(1 −s))(−x)
1
k + 1sk+1ds
=
1
k + 1!f (k+1)(0)xk+1 + xk+2
1
(k + 1)!
Z 1
0
f (k+2)(x(1 −s))sk+1ds.
Showing that the result is true for n = k + 1, which concludes the proof of this theorem.
□
In order to apply our result we let eQ be the continuous function deﬁned as,
eQ(x, y) :=
Z 1
0
Qyy(x, y(1 −s))sds.
(6.52)
38
==PAGE:45==
If we for a ﬁxed x apply Theorem 6.10 it follows that we can express Q as,
Q(x, y) = Q(x, 0) + Qy(x, 0)y + eQ(x, y)y2,
which by (6.45) simpliﬁes to,
Q(x, y) = eQ(x, y)y2.
(6.53)
This expression for Q will be central to our further analysis. First we make the following
two remarks
Remark 6.11 The only non trivial zeros for Q are also zeros for eQ.
Remark 6.12 The sign of Q is determined by the sign of eQ for y ̸= 0.
The function eQ it is clearly less degenerate than Q and it might have isolated zeros on the
boundary. As a ﬁrst simple observation we see that if eQ(x∗, 0) ̸= 0, then it follows from
the continuity of eQ that there is a neighbourhood around (x∗, 0) where eQ ̸= 0. The trivial
boundary points, y = 0, are the therefore the only solution to Q = 0 in a neighbourhood of
(x∗, 0).
In the view of these remarks we will in the following analysis only focus on the characteristics
of eQ instead of Q. It is now natural to ask under which physical conditions eQ actually has
zeros on the boundary.
In Theorem 6.14 below, we see that the presence of zeros only
depends on the vorticity, ω, and its derivatives along the wall. To simplify the notation
in the following sections we ﬁrst deﬁne a function K corresponding to eQ restricted to the
boundary.
Deﬁnition 6.13 K is the function satisfying that K(x) = eQ(x, 0) for all x.
Theorem 6.14 The function K and its derivatives can be expressed in terms of the vorticity,
the simplest ones being,
K(x) = 1
2ω(x, 0)ωxx(x, 0) −ωx(x, 0)2
(6.54)
K′(x) = 1
2ω(x, 0)ωxxx(x, 0) −3
2ωx(x, 0)ωxx(x, 0).
(6.55)
Proof. By diﬀerentiating (6.53) twice with respect to y, we get that,
Qyy(x, y) = 2 eQ(x, y) + 4 eQy(x, y)y + eQyy(x, y)y2,
(6.56)
implying that eQ has the following simple expression on the boundary,
eQ(x, 0) = 1
2Qyy(x, 0).
(6.57)
An expression for Qyy(x, 0) in terms of the stream function can be found by diﬀerentiating
(6.44) with respect to y. By restricting the result to the boundary and using the results in
(6.40) and (6.41), we get that
39
==PAGE:46==
Qyy(x, 0) = ψyy(x, 0)ψxxyy(x, 0) −2ψxyy(x, 0)2.
In order to express the result in terms of the vorticity, ω, we recall that vorticity is deﬁned
as the curl of the velocity ﬁeld,
ω = vx −uy = −ψxx −ψyy.
(6.58)
On the boundary (6.58) simpliﬁes to,
ω(x, 0) = −ψyy(x, 0).
(6.59)
In terms of ω, we can therefore express Qyy(x, 0) as,
Qyy(x, 0) = ω(x, 0)ωxx(x, 0) −2ωx(x, 0)2.
(6.60)
Since K(x) = eQ(x, 0), the results in (6.57) and (6.60) implies that,
K(x) = 1
2ω(x, 0)ωxx(x, 0) −ωx(x, 0)2.
By diﬀerentiating K we directly obtain that,
K′(x) = 1
2ω(x, 0)ωxxx(x, 0) −3
2ωx(x, 0)ωxx(x, 0),
and so on for higher order derivatives of K.
□
In the rest of this section we show that a zero point for K, may correspond to either a
structurally stable critical point for Q or a bifurcation point. The two types of points diﬀer
by fulﬁlling either the non-degeneracy conditions K′(x∗) ̸= 0 or the degeneracy conditions
K′(x∗) = 0.
Theorem 6.15 Let (x∗, 0) be a boundary point satisfying that,
K(x∗) = 0
(6.61)
K′(x∗) ̸= 0.
(6.62)
Then there is a curve x = ϕ(y) intersecting the boundary at (x∗, 0), such that eQ = 0 along
the curve.
Proof. Let (x∗, 0) be a boundary point satisfying (6.61) and (6.62). Then
eQ(x∗, 0) = 0,
eQx(x∗, 0) ̸= 0.
Hence it follows by the Implicit Function Theorem that there exists an interval B around
y = 0 and a unique continuous function ϕ : B →R such that ϕ(0) = x∗and eQ(ϕ(y), y) = 0
for all y in B. By (6.53) it then follows that,
40
==PAGE:47==
Q(ϕ(y), y) = y2 eQ(ϕ(y), y) = 0,
for all y ∈B.
Summing up we have that locally around (x∗, 0), (ϕ(y), y) is a contour curve for Q, where
Q = 0. Since the entire boundary is part of the same contour curve, we see the contour
curve intersect itself at (x∗, 0).
□
The situation described in Theorem 6.15, is illustrated in Figure 6.3. Since ϕ is uniquely
determined there is a neighbourhood around (x∗, 0) where the structure of the contour curve,
eQ = 0, is topologically equivalent to the illustration. The slope of ϕ at the intersecting point,
(x∗, 0), can be found be diﬀerentiating eQ(ϕ(y), y)) with respect to y,
eQx(ϕ(y), y))ϕ′(y) + eQy(ϕ(y), y)) = 0,
and hence we get that,
ϕ′(0) = −
eQy(x∗, 0)
eQx(x∗, 0)
.
As predicted by the Implicit Function Theorem ϕ′(0) is well-deﬁned, since eQx(x∗, 0) ̸= 0. In
order to get a physical expression for the slope we can express it in terms of the vorticity.
This is done by using the result in Theorem 6.14 in combination with a similar result in
Appendix A,
ϕ′(0) = −
1
2ωy(x, 0)ωxx(x, 0) + 1
6ω(x, 0)ωxx(x, 0) −ωxy(x, 0)ωx(x, 0)
1
2ω(x∗, 0)ωxxx(x∗, 0) −3
2ωx(x∗, 0)ωxx(x∗, 0)
.
(6.63)
Although the expression depends only on vorticity, it is not easy to make any physical
interpretation of the expression.
(x∗, 0)
y = 0
x = ϕ(y)
Figure 6.3: Illustration of the situation in Theorem 6.15 where the contour curve
eQ = 0 intersects the boundary at (x∗, 0).
In the following Theorem we consider the degenerate case where K′(x∗) = 0. By adding
two new non-degeneracy conditions we ﬁnd that the contour curve eQ = 0 is tangent to the
boundary at x = x∗. Later we will see that this point is structurally unstable and might be
a possible bifurcation point for Q.
41
==PAGE:48==
Theorem 6.16 Let (x∗, 0) be a boundary point satisfying that,
K(x∗) = 0
K′(x∗) = 0
K′′(x∗) ̸= 0
eQy(x∗, 0) ̸= 0
Then there is a curve y = γ(x) which is tangent to the boundary at (x∗, 0). Furthermore,
eQ = 0 along the curve.
Proof. It follows by the Implicit Function Theorem that, there exists an interval B around
x = x∗and a unique continuous function γ : B →R such that γ(x∗) = 0 and eQ(x, γ(x)) = 0
for all x in B. By diﬀerentiating with respect to x, we obtain that,
eQx(x, γ(x)) + eQy(x, γ(x))γ′(x) = 0,
and
eQxx(x, γ(x)) + 2 eQxy(x, γ(x))γ′(x) + eQyy(x, γ(x))γ′(x)2 + eQy(x, γ(x))γ′′(x) = 0.
Hence,
γ′(x∗) = −
eQx(x∗, γ(x∗))
eQy(x∗, γ(x∗))
= −
eQx(x∗, 0)
eQy(x∗, 0)
= 0.
(6.64)
and
γ′′(x∗) = −
eQxx(x∗, 0)
eQy(x∗, 0)
̸= 0.
(6.65)
The two conditions in (6.64) and (6.65), imply that in a neighbourhood around (x∗, 0),
the graph of γ is topologically equivalent to the one of the cases in Figure 6.4, where the
boundary, y = 0, is tangent to γ at x = x∗.
Figure 6.4, a) shows the situation where
γ′′(x∗) < 0 while Figure 6.4, b) shows the situation where γ′′(x∗) > 0.
(a)
(b)
y = γ(x)
y = γ(x)
(x∗, 0)
(x∗, 0)
Figure 6.4: Illustration of the situation in Theorem 6.16 where γ is tangent to the
boundary at (x∗, 0). (a) Illustration of the case where γ′′(x∗) < 0. (b) Illustration
of the case where γ′′(x∗) > 0.
42
==PAGE:49==
By (6.53) it follows that,
Q(x, γ(x)) = y2 eQ(x, γ(x)) = 0,
for all x ∈B.
Therefore we have that locally around (x∗, 0), (x, γ(x)) is a contour curve for Q, where
Q = 0. Since the entire boundary is part of the same contour curve, we see the contour
curve is tangent to itself at (x∗, 0).
□
The results in Theorem 6.15 and Theorem 6.16 give us the conditions for two diﬀerent local
structures of the contour curves, Q = 0. Until now, we have only considered the topological
structure for a ﬁxed setting. But Q may also dependent on parameters such as time, Reynolds
number, initial vorticity and so on. In order to discuss structural stability we now consider
Q as a continuous function of x, y and a certain parameter vector µ. Hence we want to
investigate how the two diﬀerent topological structures, are aﬀected by small perturbations
in µ. First we consider boundary points (x∗, 0) satisfying Theorem 6.15.
Theorem 6.17 For a ﬁxed parameter vector µ = µ∗, let (x∗, 0) be a point satisfying the
conditions in Theorem 6.15. Then it follows for any ﬁxed µ suﬃciently close to µ∗that there
is a curve x = X(y, µ) intersecting the boundary at a point (X(0, µ), 0), such that eQ = 0
along the curve.
Proof. From the conditions we have that,
K(x∗, µ∗) = eQ(x∗, 0, µ∗) = 0
Kx(x∗, µ∗) = eQx(x∗, 0, µ∗) ̸= 0
Hence it follows by the Implicit Function Theorem that, there exists a neighbourhood B ⊆R2
around (0, µ∗) and a unique continuous function X : B →R such that X(0, µ∗) = x∗and
eQ(X(y, µ), y, µ) = 0 for all (y, µ) in B. So for any µ suﬃciently close to µ∗we have that,
x = X(0, µ) is a unique zero point for eQ on the boundary as illustrated in Figure 6.5.
(x∗, 0)
y = 0
x = X(y, µ∗)
x = X(y, µ)
(X(0, µ), 0)
Figure 6.5: Illustration of how a suﬃciently small perturbation in µ will aﬀect the
structure of the contour curve, eQ = 0.
43
==PAGE:50==
□
The result in Theorem 6.17 shows that qualitative behaviour of the contour curve, Q = 0,
is unaﬀected by small perturbations in µ. We can therefore conclude that (x∗, 0, µ∗) cannot
be a bifurcation point for the contour curve.
We now consider a boundary point (x∗, 0), which for a ﬁxed parameter vector µ = µ∗sat-
isﬁes Theorem 6.16. The illustration in Figure 6.6 show four possible structurally changes
in the Q = 0 contour curve. Notice that the illustration is not a proof that a bifurcation
will actually occur at (x∗, 0, µ∗), but it shows why we intuitively expect that an arbitrarily
small perturbation in µ might change the number of intersecting points to either two or zero.
Furthermore, we see that will not be able to detect a structural change equivalent to the
one illustrated in Figure 6.6 b), since it does not aﬀect the structure of Q = 0 in the region
where the ﬂuid is deﬁned to be.
Q = 0
Q = 0
a)
c)
Q = 0
Q = 0
b)
d)
(x∗, 0)
(x∗, 0)
(x∗, 0)
(x∗, 0)
Figure 6.6: Illustration of four possible structurally changes of the Q = 0 contour
curve, as a result of small perturbations.
In the following theorem our goal is give some speciﬁc conditions for which changes in the
structure will occur. This is done by including the time dependency in eQ and examining
whether or not a small change in time will cause a sudden topological change in the structure
of the contour curves. By adding the transversality condition, Kt ̸= 0, we prove that number
of zero points of eQ will change locally for small perturbation in time. Furthermore we classify
these changes as two main types of bifurcations illustrated in Figure 6.7 and Figure 6.8.
44
==PAGE:51==
Theorem 6.18 At time t = t∗, let (x∗, 0) be a boundary point satisfying that,
K(x∗, t∗) = 0
Kx(x∗, t∗) = 0
Kxx(x∗, t∗) ̸= 0
Kt(x∗, t∗) ̸= 0
eQy(x∗, 0, t∗) ̸= 0
(6.66)
Then (x∗, 0, t∗) is a bifurcation point for Q. There are two possible types of bifurcations,
these are illustrated in Figure 6.7 and Figure 6.8. The type of bifurcation which will occur
at (x∗, 0, t∗) depends on the signs of eQy, Kxx and Kt.
Proof. It follows by the Implicit Function Theorem that, there exists a neighbourhood B ⊆
R2 around (x∗, t∗) and a unique continuous function Y : B →R such that Y (x∗, t∗) = 0 and
eQ(x, Y (x, t), t) = 0 for all (x, t) in B. By diﬀerentiating with respect to x, we obtain that,
eQx(x, Y (x, t), t) + eQy(x, Y (x, t), t)Yx(x, t) = 0,
and
eQxx(x, Y (x, t), t) + eQxy(x, Y (x, t), t)Yx(x, t) + eQxy(x, Y (x, t), t)Yx(x, t)+
eQyy(x, Y (x, t), t)Yx(x, t)2 + eQy(x, Y (x, t), t)Yxx(x, t) = 0.
Implying that,
Yx(x∗, t∗) = −
eQx(x∗, Y (x∗, t∗), t∗)
eQy(x∗, Y (x∗, t∗), t∗)
= −
eQx(x∗, 0, t∗)
eQy(x∗, 0, t∗)
= 0.
(6.67)
and
Yxx(x∗, t∗) = −
eQxx(x∗, Y (x∗, t∗), t∗)
eQy(x∗, Y (x∗, t∗), t∗)
= −
eQxx(x∗, 0, t∗)
eQy(x∗, 0, t∗)
̸= 0.
(6.68)
Similarly, by diﬀerentiating with respect to t,
eQt(x, Y (x, t), t) + eQy(x, Y (x, t), t)Yt(x, t) = 0,
and we obtain that,
Yt(x∗, t∗) = −
eQt(x∗, Y (x∗, t∗), t∗)
eQy(x∗, Y (x∗, t∗), t∗)
= −
eQt(x∗, 0, t∗)
eQy(x∗, 0, t∗)
̸= 0.
(6.69)
45
==PAGE:52==
By the results in (6.68) and (6.69), we see that the local behaviour of Y around (x∗, t∗)
will be highly depend on the signs of the functions eQy, eQxx and eQt. For simplicity, we ﬁrst
consider the case where
sign( eQxx(x∗, 0, t∗)) = sign( eQy(x∗, 0, t∗)).
Hence, we get that Yxx(x∗, t∗) < 0, implying that there is an interval around x = x∗where
Y (x, t∗) is a strictly concave function with maximum value in x = x∗. By using the conditions
in (6.67) and (6.68) it follows from the Implicit Function Theorem that there exist a unique
function ξ, such that ξ(t∗) = x∗and Yx(ξ(t), t) = 0 for any t suﬃciently close to t∗. Summing
up we have that, for any ﬁxed t suﬃciently close to t∗, Y (x, t) is a strictly concave function
with maximum in x = ξ(t). To determine the sign of the maximum value, we notice that,
lim
t→t∗
Y (ξ(t), t)
t −t∗

= lim
t→t∗
Y (ξ(t), t) −Y (x∗, t∗)
t −t∗

= Yt(x∗, t∗) ̸= 0
Implying that, for any ﬁxed t suﬃciently close to t∗,
sign(Y (ξ(t), t)) = sign(t −t∗) sign(Yt(x∗, t∗)).
(6.70)
By considering the time as running forward (t > t∗), we conclude that Y (ξ(t), t) is positive if
Yt(x∗, t∗) is positive. A positive maximum value of the strictly concave function Y , indicates
that Y has two zeros points in a neighbourhood of x = x∗. We can prove this indication
by using the Implicit Function Theorem once again. There exist a unique function η, such
that η(x∗) = t∗and Y (x, η(x)) = 0 for any x suﬃciently close to x∗. By diﬀerentiating,
Y (x, η(x)) = 0, with respect to x we get that,
η′(x∗) = −Yx(x∗, η(x∗))
Yt(x∗, η(x∗)) = −Yx(x∗, t∗)
Yt(x∗, t∗) = 0
and
η′′(x∗) = −Yxx(x∗, η(x∗))
Yt(x∗, η(x∗)) = −Yxx(x∗, t∗)
Yt(x∗, t∗) > 0.
These results implies that η is a strictly convex function with minimum value in x = x∗.
Summing up, we have that if we choose a suﬃciently small t > t∗, η(x) = t got to solutions
in neighbourhood of x = x∗. These two solutions are zero points for Y , since Y (x, η(x)) = 0.
The uniqueness of ξ implies that Yx is non-zero at the two zero points for Y .
We can
therefore conclude that eQx is also non-zero and the two zero points are structurally stable
critical points for Q satisfying the conditions in Theorem 6.15. The structural change at the
bifurcation point (x∗, 0, t∗) is illustrated in Figure 6.7, where the stable structures before and
after the bifurcation point are shown. From now on we will denote this kind of structural
change a Type C bifurcation in Q. If we instead consider the situation where Yt(x∗, t∗) is
negative. It is possible to show that a Type C bifurcation will still occur, but in this case it
will run backwards (from right to left). With diﬀerent combinations of signs of the functions
46
==PAGE:53==
eQy, eQxx and eQt, we can construct arguments similar to the above. Hence we get that at
any point (x∗, 0, t∗) satisfying the ﬁve conditions (6.66), a Type C bifurcation or a Type D
bifurcation (see Figure 6.8) will occur either forward or backward. A complete overview of
all cases is given in Table 6.2.
□
eQy(x∗, 0, t∗)
Kxx(x∗, t∗)
Kt(x∗, t∗)
Type of bifurcation
+
+
+
C forward
+
+
-
C backward
+
-
+
D forward
+
-
-
D backward
-
+
+
D forward
-
+
-
D backward
-
-
+
C forward
-
-
-
C backward
Table 6.2: Let (x∗, 0, t∗) be a bifurcation point satisfying the ﬁve conditions in
Theorem 6.18. Then this table summarizes which type of bifurcation will occur
depending on the signs of eQy, Kxx and Kt.
Type C bifurcation
(x∗, 0, t∗)
Figure 6.7: Illustration of the local changes in structure under a type C bifurcation.
The solid lines are the visible contour curves of Q = 0, since they are inside the
region containing the ﬂuid.
47
==PAGE:54==
Type D bifurcation
(x∗, 0, t∗)
Figure 6.8: Illustration of the local changes in structure under a Type D bifurcation.
The solid lines are the visible contour curves of Q = 0, since they are inside the
region containing the ﬂuid.
In Section 8.2 we will verify that our numerical results are consistent with the theoretical
results in this section. This is done by calculating a numerical approximation to the function
K, and considering its zero points on the boundary.
6.3
Location of Vortex Region
First we recall that a vortex region is deﬁned as a region where Q > 0. But a contour curve
where Q = 0 is not necessarily the boundary for such a region, since the points on the curve
could be line of non-isolated maxima for Q. In this section we will again consider the two
two diﬀerent structures of the contour curves, described in Theorem 6.15 and Theorem 6.16.
In both of these cases we are able to prove that the contour curve where Q = 0 actually is
the limit of a vortex region. First we consider any structurally stable critical point, (x∗, 0),
satisfying the conditions in Theorem 6.15, and prove that there is a vortex region on either
the left or the right side of the curve x = ϕ(y).
Theorem 6.19 Let (x∗, 0) be a boundary point satisfying that,
K(x∗) = 0
K′(x∗) ̸= 0,
and let ϕ be the unique continuous function deﬁned in the proof of Theorem 6.15. Then there
is a vortex region in a neighbourhood, N, of (x∗, 0).
The vortex region is located such that,
1. If K′(x∗) > 0, then any point (x0, y0) ∈N, y0 > 0, is part of a vortex region if
x0 > ϕ(y0).
2. If K′(x∗) < 0, then any point (x0, y0) ∈N, y0 > 0, is part of a vortex region if
x0 < ϕ(y0).
48
==PAGE:55==
Proof. From the proof of Theorem 6.15 we know that there exist a neighbourhood, N1, of
(x∗, 0) where the points on the curve, (ϕ(y), y), are the only points satisfying that eQ = 0.
Furthermore, we know that eQx(x∗, 0) ̸= 0, and hence it follows from the continuity of eQx
that there is a neighbourhood, N2, of (x∗, 0) where eQx(x, y) ̸= 0.
(x∗, 0)
N1 ∩N2
x = ϕ(y)
∇eQ(ϕ(y0), y0)
(ϕ(y0), y0)
Figure 6.9: Illustration the situation in the proof of Theorem 6.19, where there is
a neighbourhood of (x∗, 0) where any gradient, ∇eQ(ϕ(y0), y0), is diﬀerent from the
zero vector.
We now consider points in the intersection of the two neighbourhoods N1 and N2, illustrated
by the dotted line in Figure 6.9. Let (x0, y0) be an arbitrary point in N1 ∩N2. Then,
eQx(ϕ(y0), y0) ̸= 0
Implying that,
∇eQ(ϕ(y0), y0) =
 
eQx(ϕ(y0), y0)
eQy(ϕ(y0), y0)
!
̸= ⃗0.
Since the gradient is diﬀerent from the zero vector we conclude that eQ will change sign when
crossing the curve. Furthermore, we know that the points on the curve are the only points
in N1 ∩N2 satisfying that eQ = 0. Therefore we conclude that,
For eQx(ϕ(y0), y0) > 0,
eQ(x0, y0) > 0
if
x0 > ϕ(y0),
eQ(x0, y0) < 0
if
x0 < ϕ(y0).
And the opposite is true for eQx(ϕ(y0), y0) < 0, where
49
==PAGE:56==
eQ(x0, y0) < 0
if
x0 < ϕ(y0),
eQ(x0, y0) > 0
if
x0 > ϕ(y0).
Since eQx(ϕ(y0), y0) is non-zero in N1 ∩N2, we can also conclude that,
sign( eQx(ϕ(y0), y0)) = sign( eQx(x∗, 0))) = sign(K′(x∗))
Summing up we have that eQ(x0, y0) > 0 if
x0 > ϕ(y0) and K′(x∗) > 0
(6.71)
or if
x0 < ϕ(y0) and K′(x∗) < 0.
(6.72)
By recalling that Q(x, y) = y2 eQ(x, y), we have that Q > 0 if y0 ̸= 0 and the conditions in
(6.71) and (6.72) are satisﬁed.
□
We now consider any boundary point (x∗, 0) satisfying the conditions in Theorem 6.16. The
theorem tells us the contour curve, given by the unique function γ, is tangent to the boundary
at (x∗, 0). Furthermore, we recall that the contour curve is outside our domain if γ is locally
a concave function. In the following theorem we add the condition,
sign(K′′(x∗)) ̸= sign( eQy(x∗, 0)),
which ensures that the curve x = γ(y), is inside our domain. By a proof very similar to the
above we show that there is a vortex region either above or below the curve x = γ(y).
Theorem 6.20 Let (x∗, 0) be a boundary point satisfying that,
K(x∗) = 0
K′(x∗) = 0
K′′(x∗) ̸= 0
eQy(x∗, 0) ̸= 0
and
sign(K′′(x∗)) ̸= sign( eQy(x∗, 0)).
Furthermore, let γ be the unique continuous function deﬁned in the proof of Theorem 6.16.
Then there is a vortex region in a neighbourhood, N, of (x∗, 0).
The vortex region is located such that,
1. If eQy(x∗, 0) > 0, then any point (x0, y0) ∈N,y0 > 0, is part of a vortex region if
y0 > γ(x0).
50
==PAGE:57==
2. If eQy(x∗, 0) < 0, then any point (x0, y0) ∈N, y0 > 0, is part of a vortex region if
y0 < γ(x0).
Proof. From the proof of Theorem 6.16 we know that there exist a neighbourhood, N1, of
(x∗, 0) where the points on the curve, (x, γ(x)), are the only points satisfying that eQ = 0.
Furthermore, we know that eQy(x∗, 0) ̸= 0, and hence it follows from the continuity of eQy
that there is a neighbourhood, N2, of (x∗, 0) where eQy(x, y) ̸= 0.
(x∗, 0)
N1 ∩N2
y = γ(x)
∇eQ(x0, γ(x0))
(x0, γ(x0))
Figure 6.10: Illustration the situation in the proof of Theorem 6.20, where there is
a neighbourhood of (x∗, 0) where any gradient, ∇eQ(x0, γ(x0)), is diﬀerent from the
zero vector.
We now consider points in the intersection of the two neighbourhoods N1 and N2, illustrated
by the dotted line in Figure 6.10. Let (x0, y0) be an arbitrary point in N1 ∩N2. Then,
eQy(x0, γ(x0)) ̸= 0
Implying that,
∇eQ(x0, γ(x0)) =
 
eQx(x0, γ(x0))
eQy(x0, γ(x0))
!
̸= ⃗0.
Since the gradient is diﬀerent from the zero vector we conclude that eQ will change sign when
crossing the curve. Furthermore, we know that the points on the curve are the only points
in N1 ∩N2 satisfying that eQ = 0. Therefore we conclude that,
For eQy(x0, γ(x0)) > 0,
51
==PAGE:58==
eQ(x0, y0) > 0
if
y0 > γ(x0),
eQ(x0, y0) < 0
if
y0 < γ(x0).
And the opposite is true for eQy(x0, γ(x0)) < 0, where
eQ(x0, y0) < 0
if
y0 < γ(x0),
eQ(x0, y0) > 0
if
y0 > γ(x0).
We conclude the proof by recalling that the sign of Q is the same as the sign of eQ for y > 0.
□
52
==PAGE:59==
7
Theoretical Results about Vorticity Extrema
In Section 2.2 we discussed how a vortex can be deﬁned as a vorticity extremum, i.e. a point
in space and time where,
ωx(x, y, t) = ωy(x, y, t) = 0
(7.1)
and the Hessian matrix is positive or negative deﬁnite.
In this section we consider the
dynamics and stability of vortices deﬁned as vorticity extrema. This is done by considering
the vorticity ω as a function depending on (x, y) and a certain parameter vector µ,
ω = ω(x, y; µ).
(7.2)
The dependency on time, t, is now included in the parameter vector µ, which also may contain
other parameters such as a Reynolds number and the initial vorticity.
The bifurcations
of vorticity extrema may be understood using dynamical system theory. This is done by
considering the following dynamical system,
dx
ds = ωy(x, y; µ)
dy
ds = −ωx(x, y; µ)
(7.3)
By this deﬁnition, we see that a critical point of the dynamical system in (7.3) corresponds
to critical point for ω. To understand the dynamics of the vorticity extrema, it might there-
fore be useful also to consider all types of critical points which for a Hamiltonian system
only includes center points, saddle points and degenerate points. In general it is diﬃcult to
explain the physical importance of a saddle point in vorticity but in this section, we will see
the how they play an important role in creation of new vortices.
We notice that our dynamical system is completely equivalent to the Hamiltonian system
for the streamlines, deﬁned in (2.13) in our theory section. The only diﬀerence is that our
system is governed by ω instead of the stream function, ψ. In [4], Brøns derives a number of
theoretical results for a general dynamical system of this form. All the results developed by
Brøns may therefore be used to analyse the system governed by ω instead of ψ. The analysis
by Brøns is based on an expansion of ψ in a Taylor Series at the origin. In our new context
we consider the Taylor expansion of the vorticity at the origin, given by,
ω(x, y) =
∞
X
n,m=0
an,mxnym.
(7.4)
In this expression the dependency of the parameter vector µ can be interpreted as a depen-
dency of the coeﬃcients ai,j and the dynamical system in (7.3) can be written as,
 dx
ds
dy
ds
!
=
a0,1
a1,0

+
 a1,1
2a0,2
2a2,0
−a1,1
 x
y

+ O(∥(x, y)∥2).
(7.5)
53
==PAGE:60==
We notice that (x, y) = (0, 0) is a critical point for the vorticity if a1,0 = a0,1 = 0. By the
Implicit Function Theorem (Theorem (6.5)) it immediately follows that any non-degenerate
critical point is locally structurally stable (see proof in [12]). In our search for a possible
bifurcation point we are therefore only interested in the behaviour of the dynamical system in
a neighbourhood of a degenerate critical point. A general technique for studying bifurcations
in multidimensional system is to use normal form transformations. In [4], Brøns uses non-
linear coordinate transformations to transform the taylor expansion of ψ into its normal form.
The normal form is the ”simplest” representative of a family of ﬂows that are equivalent up
to a coordinate transformation [12]. Brøns proves a very general theorem that gives the
normal form of ψ, depending on N parameters. The simplest normal form, with only a
single free parameter is, according to Brøns, given as,
ω(x, y) = 1
2y2 + c1x + 1
3x3 + O(∥(x, y)∥4)
(7.6)
Instead of considering the full normal form of ω, we consider the following truncated version,
ω(x, y) = 1
2y2 + c1x + 1
3x3.
(7.7)
A complete analysis of a possible bifurcation should include a proof of the truncated normal
form being topologically equivalent to the full normal form. According to Brøns this is, in
some cases, very technically demanding. The proof is not included in [4] and it is beyond
the scope of this project as well.
In this section we focus on providing an analytical explanation of the behaviour we observe
in our simulations. The simplest type of bifurcation is called a codimension one bifurcation,
which refers to the fact that only a single parameter must be varied in order for the bifurca-
tion to occur. By considering the simple truncated normal form in (7.7), we aim to analyse
possible bifurcations with codimension one.
By assuming that ω can be expressed by the polynomial in (7.7), our dynamical system in
(7.3) simpliﬁes to,
dx
ds = ωy(x, y; c1) = y
dy
ds = −ωx(x, y; c1) = −c1 −x2,
(7.8)
implying that all possible critical points are situated on the x-axis. Furthermore, the critical
points must fulﬁl that,
ωx(x, y; c1) = c1 + x2 = 0
(7.9)
or equivalently,
x = ±√−c1,
(7.10)
54
==PAGE:61==
implying that for c1 < 0 two critical points exist, for c1 = 0 a single critical point exists and
for c1 > 0 no critical points exist. The type of critical point is determined by the eigenvalues
of the Jacobian at the critical point. From (7.8), the Jacobian is given as,
J(±√−c1, 0) =

0
1
∓2√−c1
0

.
(7.11)
Implying that, for c1 = 0, the single critical point is degenerate. For x = −√−c1, c1 < 0,
the Jacobian has two real eigenvalues of opposite sign, corresponding to (−√−c1, 0) being
a saddle point. While for x = √−c1, c1 < 0, the Jacobian has two imaginary eigenvalues of
opposite sign, corresponding to (√−c1, 0) being a center point. By this analysis, we see that
a saddle point and a center point coalesce and disappear for c1 = 0. We denote this bifurca-
tion a saddle-center bifurcation. In [4], Brøns shows that for a ﬂow away from a boundary,
this is the only possible codimension one bifurcation.
In Figure 7.1 the vorticity contours are illustrated during a saddle-center bifurcation. We
see that a vortex in the ﬂow (a center point) will occur or disappear at a cusp point together
with a saddle point by varying a single parameter c1. It is necessary, however, to point out
that c1 is a mathematical parameter. By this analysis it is not possible to relate c1 directly
to the physical parameters of the system such as time, Reynolds number and initial vorticity.
The analysis just shows that a saddle-center bifurcation may occur when single parameter
is varied.
Figure 7.1: Illustration of the saddle-center bifurcation, where the black lines illus-
trates the contour curves of ω. For c1 < 0 there is two critical points - a saddle and
a center. For c1 = 0 there is one (degenerate) critical point - a cusp and for c1 > 0
there is no critical points. The ﬁgure is borrowed from [4] with permission.
The analysis of the truncated normal form could be continued to any order N, corresponding
to bifurcations with higher codimension. For a codimension k bifurcation, we require k spe-
cial conditions to be fulﬁlled simultaneously. Therefore, it is more unlikely that a bifurcation
occur in a ﬂow if the codimension is high. In our simulations, presented in section 6 we only
observe the described saddle-center bifurcation, therefore we will leave out the analysis of
higher order truncated normal forms. For further information see [4].
55
==PAGE:62==
8
Numerical Results
In this section we present a complete overview of the numerical results obtained in this study.
The section is divided into four subsections. In Section 8.1 we present the results obtained
by using vorticity extrema as a vortex criterion. In Section 8.2 we present similar results
obtained by using the Q-criterion. In Section 8.3 we verify that our numerical results are
consistent with the derived theoretical result in Theorem 6.15. In the last section, Section 8.4,
we compare the numerical results for the two diﬀerent vortex criteria and discuss the overall
quality and limitations of our numerical results. In all sections we show several examples
of our post-processed simulations. For a detailed explanation of the post-processing process
see Section 5.3.
8.1
Vortex Center as a Local Extremum of Vorticity
In this section, the topological changes in the vortex structure are considered by analysing
bifurcations in the vorticity ﬁeld. We are only concerned with bifurcations where the number
of extremal points in vorticity is changing. Such a bifurcation corresponds to a creation or
destruction of a vortex center.
t = 18
t = 27
t = 33
t = 18
t = 27
t = 33
Figure 8.1: An example of a saddle-center bifurcation for Re = 10000 and a = 0.3.
The vorticity contours are shown in blue and red, with values from −0.3 to 0.3.
In the top row the nullclines ωy = 0 and ωx = 0 are drawn in black and white,
respectively. In the bottom row the nullclines are colored according to the sign of
the Hessian determinant, such that positive values are green and negative are blue.
56
==PAGE:63==
In Figure 8.1 we see an example of an observed bifurcation in the boundary layer. The
simulation is performed for Re = 10000 and a = 0.3 and the ﬁgure shows a zoom in on the
structures close to the wall at three diﬀerent time steps. At t = 18, the only intersecting
point between the nullclines is the minimum corresponding to the initial vortex. At t = 27,
we see that two nullclines are tangent to each other (or intersecting slightly) at a point in the
boundary layer. At t = 33, we observe that a saddle point and a maximum of the vorticity
are created. We recognize this change in vortex structure as the saddle-center bifurcation
described in Section 7 and illustrated in Figure 7.1. The bifurcation point is approximately
t = 27, which is the ﬁrst time step where the nullclines intersect. For a ﬁxed a = 0.3 we
vary Reynolds number from 500 to 12000 and note the time step at which any bifurcation
occur. The only bifurcation we observe is the saddle-center bifurcation, either as described
in the example above or a reverse order where a saddle and a center collide and annihilate
each other. The reverse bifurcation corresponds to a vortex disappearing. In our range of
Reynolds number we observe up to three diﬀerent vortices that occur (and disappear) in-
dependently of each other. We enumerate the vortices by referring to the order in which
they occur in time. Vortex no. 1 and Vortex no. 3 correspond to vorticity maxima which
are vortices rotating counter-clockwise. Vortex no. 2, however, corresponds to a vorticity
minimum, which is a clockwise rotating vortex. All time steps for which a either vortex
occur or disappear are presented in Table 8.1 below.
Vortex no. 1
Vortex no. 2
Vortex no. 3
Reynolds Number
Occurs
Disappears
Occurs
Disappears
Occurs
Disappears
500
-
-
-
-
-
-
800
t = 51
t = 108
-
-
-
-
1000
t = 41
t = 123
-
-
-
-
1200
t = 37
t = 135
-
-
-
-
1300
t = 35
t = 142
-
-
-
-
1500
t = 34
-
-
-
-
-
2000
t = 31
-
-
-
-
-
2300
t = 30
-
-
-
t = 148
-
2500
t = 30
-
-
-
t = 138
-
3000
t = 29
-
-
-
t = 122
-
3500
t = 29
-
-
-
t = 111
-
4000
t = 29
-
-
-
t = 107
-
6000
t = 28
-
t = 79
t = 84
t = 103
-
6500
t = 28
-
t = 76
t = 86
t = 102
-
7000
t = 28
-
t = 72
t = 87
t = 101
-
8000
t = 27
-
t = 66
t = 89
t = 100
-
10000
t = 27
-
t = 61
t = 94
t = 98
-
12000
t = 26
-
t = 58
t = 99
t = 96
-
Table 8.1: Overview of bifurcations taking place in the time span t = 0 to t =
150, for a ﬁxed a = 0.3.
The listed times indicate a saddle-center bifurcation,
corresponding to a vortex center occurring or disappearing at that time step.
57
==PAGE:64==
In a similar, way we ﬁx Re = 8000 and preform simulations varying a from 0.15 to 0.4. For
each value of a we write down at which times step the three vortices occur and disappear.
All bifurcation point are listed in Table 8.2 below.
Vortex no. 1
Vortex no. 2
Vortex no. 3
a
Occurs
Disappears
Occurs
Disappears
Occurs
Disappears
0.15
t = 115
-
-
-
-
-
0.2
t = 61
-
-
-
-
-
0.225
t = 48
-
-
-
-
-
0.24
t = 42
-
t = 124
t = 128
-
-
0.25
t = 39
-
t = 113
t = 120
t = 140
-
0.275
t = 32
-
t = 89
t = 103
t = 118
-
0.3
t = 27
-
t = 66
t = 89
t = 100
-
0.325
t = 23
-
t = 54
t = 81
t = 86
-
0.35
t = 21
-
t = 46
t = 74
t = 76
-
0.375
t = 19
-
t = 40
t = 69
t = 65
-
0.4
t = 18
-
t = 35
t = 67
t = 62
-
Table 8.2: Overview of bifurcations taking place in the time span t = 0 to t =
150, for a ﬁxed Re = 8000. The listed times indicate a saddle-center bifurcation,
corresponding to a vortex center occurring or disappearing at that time step.
From the results in Table 8.1 and Table 8.2, we see that the topological changes depend on
the two free parameters Re and a as well as the independent variable t. We are therefore
concerned with a three dimensional phase space, where the results in the two tables, only
provide informations about two perpendicular cross sections in the phase space. In order to
obtain a better overview and intuition about the results, we draw two bifurcation diagrams
corresponding to the two cross sections of the phase space, see Figure 8.2 and Figure 8.3.
The bifurcation diagrams indicates that our phase space is divided into ﬁve regions, with
the following topological structure,
I - Only the initial vortex is present.
II - Vortex no. 1 is present along with the initial vortex.
III - Vortex no. 1 and no. 2 are present along with the initial vortex.
IV - Vortex no. 1, no. 2 and no. 3 are are present along with the initial vortex.
V - Vortex no. 1 and no. 3 are present along with the initial vortex.
58
==PAGE:65==
t
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Re
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
I
II
V
IV
III
Figure 8.2: Bifurcation diagram summarising the results in Table 8.1.
t
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
a
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
I
II
III
V
IV
Figure 8.3: Bifurcation diagram summarising the results in Table 8.2.
59
==PAGE:66==
8.2
Vortex as a Connected Region with Positive Q-value
In this section, the topological changes in the vortex structure is considered by analysing
bifurcations of the Q = 0 contour curves. In Section 6, we proved that four diﬀerent types
of bifurcations will occur under speciﬁc conditions. We named these bifurcations with the
capital letters A, B, C and D. Analysing our numerical results, we ﬁnd that all four kinds
of bifurcations occur in simulations with large enough Reynolds number and a-value. In the
ﬁgures 8.4, 8.5, 8.6 and 8.7, we show an example of each type of bifurcation. All these ﬁgures
are part of the same simulation, where Re = 12000 and a = 0.3.
t = 46
t = 47
t = 48
Type A Bifurcation
Figure 8.4: An example of a Type A bifurcation for Re = 12000 and a = 0.3. The
zero contour curves of Q are coloured in green. In addition, the vorticity distribution
is shown in blue and red contours with values from −0.5 to 0.5.
t = 41
t = 43
t = 47
Type B Bifurcation
Figure 8.5: An example of a Type B bifurcation for Re = 12000 and a = 0.3. The
zero contour curves of Q are coloured in green. In addition, the vorticity distribution
is shown in blue and red contours with values from −0.5 to 0.5.
60
==PAGE:67==
t = 24
t = 26
t = 35
Type C Bifurcation
Figure 8.6: An example of a Type C bifurcation for Re = 12000 and a = 0.3. The
zero contour curves of Q are coloured in green. In addition, the vorticity distribution
is shown in blue and red contours with values from −0.5 to 0.5.
t = 9
t = 14
t = 19
Type D Bifurcation
Figure 8.7: An example of a Type D bifurcation for Re = 12000 and a = 0.3. The
zero contour curves of Q are coloured in green. In addition, the vorticity distribution
is shown in blue and red contours with values from −0.5 to 0.5.
In order to obtain an overview of the structural changes we ﬁx a = 0.3 and vary Reynolds
number. As a start we focus on the range where Reynolds number is varied from 3000 to
12000. We will return to the range of lower Reynolds numbers later in this section. For
each simulation we note the time steps for which any bifurcations occur (see Table 8.3). In
a similar way ﬁx Re = 8000 and perform simulations varying a from 0.15 to 0.4, the results
are presented in Table 8.4. In all these simulations, the only types of bifurcations, that we
observe, are those four we already described. In the speciﬁed ranges of Reynolds number
and a, the structural changes we observe are connected to the occurrence of four diﬀerent
vortices. We enumerate the vortices by referring to the order in which they occur in time
(in the case where Re = 10000 and a = 0.3).
61
==PAGE:68==
Vortex no. 1
Vortex no. 2
Vortex no. 3
Vortex no. 4
Re
Type C
Type D
Type C
Type D
Type A
Type B
Type B
Type B
3000
t = 4
t = 15
t = 31
t = 89
t = 58
t = 86
-
-
4000
t = 4
t = 15
t = 29
t = 83
t = 53
t = 87
-
-
6000
t = 4
t = 14
t = 28
t = 79
t = 50
t = 88
-
-
7000
t = 4
t = 14
t = 27
t = 79
t = 50
t = 89
-
-
8000
t = 4
t = 14
t = 27
t = 79
t = 50
t = 90
-
-
9750
t = 4
t = 14
t = 26
t = 80
t = 49
t = 91
t = 54
t = 63
10000
t = 4
t = 14
t = 26
t = 80
t = 49
t = 91
t = 51
t = 66
12000
t = 4
t = 14
t = 26
t = 82
t = 48
t = 92
t = 43
t = 76
Table 8.3: Overview of bifurcations taking place in the time span t = 0 to t = 150,
for a ﬁxed a = 0.3.
Vortex no. 1
Vortex no. 2
Vortex no. 3
Vortex no. 4
a
Type C
Type D
Type C
Type D
Type A
Type B
Type B
Type B
0.15
t = 13
t = 55
t = 134
-
-
-
-
-
0.16
t = 12
t = 47
t = 112
-
-
-
-
-
0.175
t = 10
t = 39
t = 90
-
-
-
-
-
0.185
t = 9
t = 34
t = 78
-
t = 142
-
-
-
0.2
t = 8
t = 30
t = 65
-
t = 117
-
-
-
0.225
t = 6
t = 24
t = 49
t = 149
t = 89
t = 150
-
-
0.24
t = 5
t = 20
t = 42
t = 119
t = 77
t = 135
-
-
0.25
t = 5
t = 20
t = 39
t = 110
t = 71
t = 126
-
-
0.275
t = 4
t = 17
t = 32
t = 91
t = 59
t = 105
-
-
0.3
t = 4
t = 14
t = 27
t = 79
t = 50
t = 90
-
-
0.325
t = 3
t = 13
t = 23
t = 70
t = 43
t = 78
-
-
0.33
t = 3
t = 11
t = 22
t = 68
t = 42
t = 75
t = 47
t = 54
0.34
t = 3
t = 11
t = 22
t = 65
t = 40
t = 71
t = 39
t = 56
0.35
t = 3
t = 11
t = 20
t = 63
t = 38
t = 68
t = 35
t = 56
0.375
t = 3
t = 10
t = 18
t = 58
t = 34
t = 59
t = 29
t = 54
0.4
t = 3
t = 9
t = 16
t = 54
t = 31
t = 52
t = 24
t = 52
Table 8.4: Overview of bifurcations taking place in the time span t = 0 to t = 150,
for a ﬁxed Re = 8000.
By summarizing the results in Table 8.3 and Table 8.4 we observe nine diﬀerent structures
of the erupted vortices. The topology of these structures are illustrated in Figure 8.8 and
numbered using capital Roman numerals. We notice, however, that the vortex structures in
V and VII are topologically equivalent. The reason why we still choose to give them separate
numbers is because of the diﬀerence in direction of rotation. Vortex no. 3 is rotating counter-
clockwise while Vortex no. 4 is rotating clockwise. At this point, we must keep in mind that
the Q-criterion cannot distinguish which way the vortices are rotating. We will therefore
need the vorticity contours to obtain information about the rotation.
62
==PAGE:69==
2
1
2
1
3
2
1
3
2
1
4
3
2
4
1
1
1
2
1
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX
Figure 8.8: An illustration of the topology of the nine diﬀerent vortex structures we
observe in our simulations. The black lines represent the Q = 0 contour curves and
the number 1 to 4 refer to the four diﬀerent vortices. The initial vortex is omitted
in all illustrations.
In order to obtain a better overview we want to relate the above illustration of topologies
to the the examples of bifurcations presented in Figure 8.4, 8.5, 8.6 and 8.7. This is done in
the following way,
Figure 8.4: The Type A bifurcation shown in this ﬁgure corresponds to change in topology
from structure V to structure VI.
Figure 8.5: The Type B bifurcation shown in this ﬁgure corresponds to change in topology
from structure IV to structure V.
Figure 8.6: The Type C bifurcation shown in this ﬁgure corresponds to change in topology
from structure III to structure IV.
Figure 8.7: The Type D bifurcation shown in this ﬁgure corresponds to change in topology
from structure II to structure III.
63
==PAGE:70==
t
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Re
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
10000
11000
12000
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX
IV
Figure 8.9: Bifurcation diagram summarising the results in Table 8.3.
t
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
a
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
VI
III
II
I
VII
IX
IV
V
VIII
IV
Figure 8.10: Bifurcation diagram summarising the results in Table 8.4.
64
==PAGE:71==
A complete overview of all the obtained results is given in Figure 8.9 and Figure 8.10. In
these we present two bifurcation diagrams corresponding to two perpendicular cross sections
of our three dimensional phase space. The two bifurcation diagrams indicate that within our
range of Reynolds number, the structure of the vortices no. 1, 2 and 3 are almost indepen-
dent of Reynolds number but clearly dependent on a.
So far, we have only presented results where the Reynolds number is varied in a range from
3000 to 12000. In this range we observe structural changes that are qualitatively the same
as the changes we see when a is varied between 0.15 and 0.4. We will, however, expand
our studies to consider Reynolds number in the range from 300 to 2500 as well. In this
new range we observe that the Q-criterion characterizes structural changes which are quite
diﬀerent and cannot be related directly to the four vortices we observe for higher Reynolds
numbers. We also observe some new topological structures that are not equivalent to any
of the nine structures illustrated in Figure 8.8. In Figure 8.11 we have summarized all our
obtained results for a = 0.3 and Re varied between 300 and 2500.
Figure 8.11: Bifurcation diagram summarising the results of simulations where
a = 0.3 and Reynolds number is in the range from 300 to 2500. Within each region
the topological structure of the Q = 0 contour curve is illustrated in green.
65
==PAGE:72==
Figure 8.11 indicates a rather complicated bifurcation pattern for this lower range of Reynolds
number. In addition, the ﬁgure also shows that the structure is highly dependent on Reynolds
number in this range. For a more accurate overview, it would therefore be necessary to
include further simulations.
In order to explain the complicated bifurcation pattern we
notice that the magnitude of Q-values in this range is less signiﬁcant and varies closely
around zero. For small Q-values we will therefore also expect that the existence and location
of the zero contour curves of Q tend to be more unpredictable. These results indicate that
the Q-criterion might be inaccurate below a certain threshold for Q.
8.3
Illustration of the Result in Theorem 6.15
In this section we want to verify that our numerical results are consistent with the derived
theoretical result in Theorem 6.15. Our numerical results include the vorticity, ω, and its
ﬁrst and second order derivatives at all mesh points. At every mesh point, (xi, 0), along the
no-slip boundary, we can therefore compute the K-value as,
K(xi) = 1
2ω(xi, 0)ωxx(xi, 0) −ωx(xi, 0)2.
As an example we consider the numerical results for Reynolds number 12000 at time t = 2
and t = 7, respectively. In Figure 8.12 (a) the vorticity contours and the zero contour curve
of Q are shown in the region around the initial vortex. The ﬁgure shows that there is no part
of the Q = 0 contour curve which is connected to the boundary contour. Figure 8.12 (b)
shows the graph of K. We see that K < 0, for all x-values on the boundary. By Theorem
6.15 this is consistent with the fact that Q = 0 is not intersecting the boundary. In Figure
8.13 we see similar plots for t = 7. Here the K-value is zero at x = −0.86 and x = −0.38 and
at both of these points we see that K′(x) ̸= 0. These points correspond to two intersecting
points at (−0.86, 0) and (−0.38, 0). By Theorem 6.15 this is consistent with the fact that
Q = 0 is connected to the boundary contour at (−0.86, 0) and (−0.38, 0).
66
==PAGE:73==
(a)
x
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
K
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
(b)
Figure 8.12: For Reynolds number 12000 at time t = 2. (a) A zoom in on the region
around the initial vortex. The vorticity contours have values between −0.3 and 0.3
and the white curves are the zero contour curves of Q. (b) The K value is plotted
as a function of the x coordinate on the boundary.
(a)
x
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
K
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
(b)
Figure 8.13: For Reynolds number 12000 at time t = 2. (a) A zoom in on the region
around the initial vortex. The vorticity contours have values between −0.3 and 0.3
and the white curves are the zero contour curves of Q. (b) The K value is plotted
as a function of the x coordinate on the boundary.
67
==PAGE:74==
8.4
Discussion of the Numerical Results
In the previous sections, all our numerical results are summarized in the form of bifurcation
diagrams, see the ﬁgures 8.2, 8.3, 8.9 and 8.10. The two bifurcation diagrams belonging to
the Q criterion have a more complicated structure than the two belonging to the vorticity
criterion. This is due to the fact that there are several diﬀerent types of bifurcations occur-
ring when the Q criterion is considered. A comparison of the bifurcation diagrams for the
Q criterion and the vorticity criterion indicates that there is no simple correlation between
the two criteria. There are, however, some similarities. In both cases, we observe a more
complex vortex structure for higher Reynolds numbers and higher values of a. Furthermore,
we observe that a single clockwise rotating vortex occurs for both criterion and we may
somehow relate the regions where this vortex is present. In that perspective, the regions III
and IV in Figure 8.2 correspond to the regions V and VI in Figure 8.9. It is clear, however,
that the size and shape of these regions are highly dependent on the criterion. Since the two
criteria diﬀer greatly in the characterization of vortices, it might be interesting to consider
a combination of the two. As a possible alternative criterion one could deﬁne a vortex as an
extremal point of vorticity present in a region where Q is positive.
In the previous studies by Kudela & Malecha and Andersen [1,11], it is shown that based on
a streamline criterion there exists a threshold value of Re above which, the eruption process
takes place. Figure 8.2 shows that a similar result applies when we use extremal points of
vorticity as vortex criterion. From our results we conclude that for a ﬁxed a = 0.3 there is
a threshold somewhere in the range between Re = 500 and Re = 800. We cannot conclude
a similar result for the Q criterion within the range of Reynolds numbers we have considered.
Some general limitation to our numerical studies are the computational time and storage
options. Every simulation we make takes around 4-6 hours to compute and generates around
50 GB of data ﬁles. The number of simulations we have computed corresponds to the num-
ber of rows in the tables 8.2, 8.1, 8.3 and 8.4. Due to the limited time frame of this project,
we are therefore only considering the initial phase from t = 0 to t = 150. It would, however,
be very interesting to investigate the eruption process over a long period of time, in which
case it may be possible to observe more complex bifurcations.
In this study the no-slip boundary condition was instantaneously switched on. We chose
this convenient way of modelling as it involves a minimal initial disturbance of the ﬂuid. It
is clearly not possible to reproduce such a situation in a laboratory. Modelling an initial
vortex further away form the wall and moving it in a direction towards the wall would have
been a more reproducible setup. On the other hand such simulations would require a much
larger computational domain and would thus generate even bigger data ﬁles.
An additional limitation of our numerical method is the manual way in which we read
the timing of the bifurcations. An opportunity for further studies could be to consider an
automated identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of the diﬀerent topological structures.
68
==PAGE:75==
9
Conclusion
To conclude this thesis, we will brieﬂy review our main results.
We have investigating
the response of the boundary layer when a vortex is convected close to a rigid wall. Our
investigations were based on a two dimensional model, where the initial condition was a
Gaussian distributed vorticity patch and the rigid wall was represented by a no-slip boundary
condition.
In our studies we have considered two diﬀerent vortex criteria: the vorticity
extremum criterion and the Q-criterion. By mathematical and numerical analyses we have
characterized the topological changes in the initial phase of the eruption process. Our main
analytical result is a description of how the zero contour curves of Q bifurcate and a proof that
four diﬀerent types of bifurcations will occur under speciﬁc conditions. We have performed
our numerical simulations using the open source ﬁnite element library oomph-lib. As a
ﬁrst step we used our numerical setting to recreate some results obtained by M. Andersen
in [1]. By comparing these recreated results with the original results, we veriﬁed that our
numerical method works as desired. Our overall numerical results consist of simulations
where the Reynolds number is in the range from 300 to 12000, and a is varied between 0.15
and 0.4. For both of our vortex criteria we have presented our numerical results in terms of
bifurcation diagrams. These diagrams give a complete overview of all the observed changes
in topology as Re and a are varied individually. We observed that the bifurcations of Q = 0
contour curves in our simulations correspond to the four analytical predicted bifurcations.
For the vorticity extrema we only observed structural changes that correspond to a simple
saddle-center bifurcation with codimension one. Our analytical results in Theorem 6.14 and
Theorem 6.15 show that on the boundary the bifurcation points for the Q = 0 contour curves
depend only on the vorticity and its derivatives. On the other hand, our numerical results
show that in general there is no simple correlation between our two choices of vortex criteria.
69
==PAGE:76==
References
[1] M. Andersen. Topology of Streamlines and Vorticity Contours for Two - Dimensional
Flows. PhD thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2013.
[2] J. D. Anderson Jr. Ludwig Prandtl’s boundary layer. Physics Today, 58(12):42–48,
2005.
[3] Adnan Balci, Morten Andersen, M. C. Thompson, and Morten Brøns. Codimension
three bifurcation of streamline patterns close to a no-slip wall: A topological description
of boundary layer eruption. Physics of Fluids, 27(5):53603, 2015.
[4] M. Brøns. Streamline topology: Patterns in ﬂuid ﬂows and their bifurcations. Advances
in Applied Mechanics, 41:1–42, 2007.
[5] T. L. Doligalski and J. D. A. Walker.
The boundary-layer induced by a convected
two-dimensional vortex. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 139:1–28, 1984.
[6] G. Haller. An objective deﬁnition of a vortex. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 525:1–26,
2005.
[7] M. Heil and A. L. Hazel. oomph-lib - an object-oriented multi-physics ﬁnite-element
library. Lecture Notes in Computational Science and Engineering, 53:19–49, 2006.
[8] Matthias Heil, Jordan Rosso, Andrew L. Hazel, and Morten Brøns. Topological ﬂuid
mechanics of the formation of the k´arm´an-vortex street. Journal of Fluid Mechanics,
812:199–221, 2017.
[9] J. Jeong and F. Hussain. On the identiﬁcation of a vortex. Journal of Fluid Mechanics,
285:69–94, 1 1995.
[10] Jens Kasten, Jan Reininghaus, Ingrid Hotz, Hans-Christian Hege, Bernd R. Noack,
Guillaume Daviller, and Marek Morzynski.
Acceleration feature points of unsteady
shear ﬂows. page 16, 2014.
[11] H. Kudela and Z. M. Malecha. Eruption of a boundary layer induced by a 2d vortex
patch. Fluid Dynamics Research, 41(5):055502, 2009.
[12] J. D. Meiss. Diﬀerential Dynamical Systems (Monographs on Mathematical Modeling
and Computation). Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 11 2007.
[13] L. Prandtl. Motion of ﬂuids with very little viscosity. United States National Advisory
Committee for Aeronautics – Technical Memorandums, (452), 1928.
[14] Z.U.A. Warsi. Fluid Dynamics: Theoretical and Computational Approaches, Third Edi-
tion. Mechanical Engineering. Taylor & Francis, 2005.
[15] F. White. Viscous ﬂuid ﬂow. McGraw-Hill series in mechanical engineering. McGraw-
Hill New York, 1974.
70
==PAGE:77==
[16] S. Wiggins. Introduction to Applied Nonlinear Dynamical Systems and Chaos. Texts in
Applied Mathematics. Springer New York, 2003.
[17] J. C. Williams.
Incompressible boundary-layer separation.
Annual Review of Fluid
Mechanics, 9(1):113–144, 1977.
[18] A. A. Wray, P. Moin, and J. C. R. Hunt. Eddies, streams, and convergence zones in
turbulent ﬂows. Center for Turbulence Research Report CTR-S88, pages 193–208, 1988.
[19] P. Wriggers. Nonlinear ﬁnite element methods. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008.
71
==PAGE:78==
Appendices
A
Additional result used in Section 6.2
Theorem A.1 Let (x, 0) be any boundary point, then
eQy(x, 0) = 1
2ωy(x, 0)ωxx(x, 0) + 1
6ω(x, 0)ωxx(x, 0) −ωxy(x, 0)ωx(x, 0)
Proof. We recall that Q by (6.53) is given as,
Q(x, y) = eQ(x, y)y2.
By diﬀerentiating this expression three times with respect to y we obtain that
Qyyy(x, y) = 2 eQy(x, y) + 4 eQyy(x, y)y + 4 eQy(x, y) + eQyyy(x, y)y2 + 2 eQyy(x, y)y
= 6 eQy(x, y) + 6 eQyy(x, y)y + eQyyy(x, y)y2,
implying that eQy has the following simple expression on the boundary,
eQy(x, 0) = 1
6Qyyy(x, 0).
In terms of the stream function,
Qy = ψyyyψxx + ψyyψxxy −2ψxyψxyy
Qyy = ψyyyyψxx + ψyyyψxxy + ψyyyψxxy + ψyyψxxyy −2ψxyyψxyy −2ψxyψxyyy
Qyyy = ψyyyyyψxx + ψyyyyψxxy + ψyyyyψxxy + ψyyyψxxyy + ψyyyyψxxy + ψyyyψxxyy+
ψyyyψxxyy + ψyyψxxyy −2ψxyyyψxyy −2ψxyyψxyyy −2ψxyyψxyyy −2ψxyψxyyyy.
By the result in (6.40) and (6.41) we get that,
eQy(x, 0) = 1
6Qyyy(x, 0)
= 1
6 (3ψyyy(x, 0)ψxxyy(x, 0) + ψyy(x, 0)ψxxyy(x, 0) −6ψxyyy(x, 0)ψxyy(x, 0))
= 1
2ψyyy(x, 0)ψxxyy(x, 0) + 1
6ψyy(x, 0)ψxxyy(x, 0) −ψxyyy(x, 0)ψxyy(x, 0).
In order to express the result in terms of the vorticity, ω, we recall that vorticity on the
boundary (6.58) simpliﬁes to,
ω(x, 0) = −ψxx(x, 0) −ψyy(x, 0) = −ψyy(x, 0).
Hence we get that,
eQy(x, 0) = 1
2ωy(x, 0)ωxx(x, 0) + 1
6ω(x, 0)ωxx(x, 0) −ωxy(x, 0)ωx(x, 0).
□
72
==PAGE:79==
B
The main driver code
//====================================================================
// Driver
for Anne ’ s MSc pro ject
// The oomphlib
headers
#include ” generic . h”
#include ” navier stokes . h”
// The mesh
#include ”meshes/ rectangular quadmesh . h”
#include ” vorticity smoother . h”
using namespace std ;
using namespace oomph ;
//===start of namespace=================================================
/// Namespace for
g l o b a l
parameters
//======================================================================
namespace Global Parameters
{
/// Reynolds number
double Re=8000;
/// Left
end of
computational domain
double X l e f t =−3.63;
/// Right end of
computational domain
double X right =3.63;
/// Height
of
computational domain
double Height =5.13;
// Mesh parameters :
//−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
// Overall number of
elements can be
c o n t r o l l e d
by
scalng
//
f a c t o r
/// Overall
s c a l i n g
f a c t o r
for number of
elements
double Mesh scaling factor =0.5;
/// Percentage
of
elements
squashed
into ”boundary
layer ”
double Percentage of elements in bl =50.0;
/// Exponential
f a c t o r mesh squashing
in BL region
double Alpha bl =5.0;
// Mesh spacing
in
vortex
region
double H vortex =0.025;
// Mesh spacing
in
vortex
region
73
==PAGE:80==
double Hx outside vortex =0.025;
/// Thickness
of
the
middle
region
into
which we squash
/// the
elements
double X mid=4.5;
// Parameters
for
vortex
//−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
/// x
p ositio n
of
vortex
double X vortex =0.0;
/// x
p ositio n
of
vortex
double Y vortex =1.0;
/// Uniform background
flow
double K=0.02812;
///
I n i t i a l
condition
for
v e l o c i t y
void
i n i t i a l c o n d i t i o n ( const Vector<double>& x ,
Vector<double>& u)
{
// Parameters from Morten ’ s
t h e s i s
double a =0.3;
double omega 0=−1.25;
// Top vortex
double r1=sqrt (pow(x[0] −X vortex ,2)+
pow(x[1] −Y vortex , 2 ) ) ;
double theta1=atan2 (x[1] −Y vortex , x[0] −X vortex ) ;
// double
u theta1=−a/r1 ∗(1.0−exp(−r1∗r1 /(a∗a ) ) ) ;
double u theta1=omega 0∗a∗a /(2.0∗r1 )∗(1.0 −exp(−r1 ∗r1 /( a∗a ) ) ) ;
// Bottom vortex
double r2=sqrt (pow(x[0] −X vortex ,2)+
pow(x[1]+ Y vortex , 2 ) ) ;
double theta2=atan2 (x[1]+ Y vortex , x[0] −X vortex ) ;
// double
u theta2=−a/r2 ∗(1.0−exp(−r2∗r2 /(a∗a ) ) ) ;
double u theta2=omega 0∗a∗a /(2.0∗r2 )∗(1.0 −exp(−r2 ∗r2 /( a∗a ) ) ) ;
u[0]=−u theta1 ∗sin ( theta1)+u theta2 ∗sin ( theta2)+K;
u[1]=
u theta1 ∗cos ( theta1)−u theta2 ∗cos ( theta2 ) ;
}
} // end of namespace
//===s t a r t o f p r o b l e m c l a s s=============================================
/// Problem
c l a s s
for Anne ’ s MSc problem
//======================================================================
template<class ELEMENT>
class AnneProblem
:
public Problem
{
74
==PAGE:81==
public :
/// Constructor :
AnneProblem ( ) ;
//Update
before
s o lv e
i s
empty
void actions before newton solve ()
{}
/// \ short
Update
a f t e r
so l v e
i s
empty
void
a c t i o n s a f t e r n e w t o n s o l v e ()
{}
/// Actions
before
adapt :
empty
void actions before adapt (){}
/// After
adaptation
void
a c t i o n s a f t e r a d a p t ()
{
complete problem setup ( ) ;
}
/// Doc the
s o l u t i o n
void doc solution ( DocInfo& doc info ) ;
/// Impose no
s l i p
and re−assign
eqn numbers
void impose no slip on bottom boundary ( ) ;
/// Assign
s y n t h e t i c
flow
f i e l d
void
a s s i g n s y n t h e t i c v e l o c f i e l d ( ) ;
/// Check
v o r t i c i t y
smoothing
void check smoothed vorticity ( DocInfo& doc info ) ;
private :
/// Complete problem
setup
void complete problem setup ( ) ;
/// oomph−l i b
i t e r a t i v e
l i n e a r
s o l v e r
I t e r a t i v e L i n e a r S o l v e r ∗Solver pt ;
/// Preconditioner
NavierStokesSchurComplementPreconditioner ∗Prec pt ;
/// Inexact
s o l v e r
for P block
Preconditioner ∗P matrix preconditioner pt ;
/// Inexact
s o l v e r
for F block
Preconditioner ∗F matrix preconditioner pt ;
/// V o r t icity
recoverer
VorticitySmoother<ELEMENT>∗
V o r t i c i t y r e c o v e r e r p t ;
}; // end of
problem class
75
==PAGE:82==
//===s t a r t o f c o n s t r u c t o r=============================================
/// Problem
constructor
//====================================================================
template<class ELEMENT>
AnneProblem<ELEMENT>:: AnneProblem ()
{
// Make an instance
of
the
v o r t i c i t y
recoverer
unsigned nrecovery order =2;
V o r t i c i t y r e c o v e r e r p t=new VorticitySmoother<ELEMENT>(nrecovery order ) ;
// Allocate
the
timestepper
add time stepper pt (new BDF<2>);
// Number of
elements
in x
d i r e c t i o n .
// purely
nominal
i n i t i a l
value
unsigned nx=10;
// Number of
elements
in y
d i r e c t i o n
// purely
nominal
i n i t i a l
value
unsigned ny=10;
// Left
end of
computational domain
double x min=Global Parameters : : X l e f t ;
// Right end of
computational domain
double x max=Global Parameters : : X right ;
// Botton
of
computational domain
double y min =0.0;
// Height
of
computational domain
double y max=Global Parameters : : Height ;
// Parameters
for mesh squashing :
//−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
// Mesh spacing
in
vortex
region
double dy vortex=Global Parameters : : H vortex ;
// Width of
central
region
containing
vortex
double x mid=Global Parameters : : X mid ;
// Make approximately
square
elements
in
vortex
region
// make sure
i t ’ s an even number
unsigned nx mid=2∗unsigned (0.5∗x mid/ dy vortex ) ;
// Mesh spacing
in
side
b i t s −−make sure
that
in
t o t a l
we
// have an even number of
elements
double n side=2∗unsigned (0.5∗( x max−x min−x mid )/
Global Parameters : : Hx outside vortex ) ;
76
==PAGE:83==
// Mesh squashing
exponential
f a c t o r
double alpha=Global Parameters : : Alpha bl ;
//
I d e n t i f y
point
in
current mesh where we switch
from
exponential
// to
uniform
spacing
double
p e r c e n t a g e e l i n b l=Global Parameters : : Percentage of elements in bl ;
unsigned ny bl=unsigned(double(ny)∗p e r c e n t a g e e l i n b l /1 0 0. 0) ;
double
y b l o r i g=double( ny bl )/double(ny)∗y max ;
// Constants
r e l a t e d
to mapping
functions
double d f d y a t y b l o r i g=alpha ∗exp ( alpha )/( y b l o r i g ∗( exp ( alpha ) −1.0));
double n ormalising factor =1.0+ d f d y a t y b l o r i g ∗(y max−y b l o r i g ) ;
oomph info << ” outer
edge
of
exponential
region :
”
<< y max/ normalising factor << std : : endl ;
// Now re−assign
the
actual number of
elements
in y
d i r e c t i o n
oomph info << ”Changed ny from :
” << ny ;
double current dy vortex=(y max−y max/ normalising factor )/
(double(ny)∗(100.0 −p e r c e n t a g e e l i n b l ) / 1 0 0 . 0 ) ;
ny∗=current dy vortex / dy vortex ;
oomph info << ” to :
” << ny << std : : endl ;
// Scale
i t
nx mid=2∗unsigned (0.5∗double( nx mid )∗Global Parameters : : Mesh scaling factor ) ;
n side =2∗unsigned (0.5∗double( n side )∗Global Parameters : : Mesh scaling factor ) ;
ny=unsigned(double(ny)∗Global Parameters : : Mesh scaling factor ) ;
// How many in
t o t a l ?
nx=nx mid+n side ;
// Ignore
a l l
t h i s
for
v o r t i c i t y
convergence
check
i f
(CommandLineArgs : : command line flag has been set ( ”−−v a l i d a t e p r o j e c t i o n ” ))
{
nx=10;
ny=10;
}
oomph info << ”And f i n a l l y
building mesh with ” << nx << ” x ” << ny
<< ” elements . ” << std : : endl ;
//Now create
the mesh
mesh pt () =
new RefineableRectangularQuadMesh<ELEMENT>(nx , ny , x min , x max , y min , y max ,
time stepper pt ( ) ) ;
// No squashing
i f
projection
v a l i d a t i o n
i f
( ! CommandLineArgs : : command line flag has been set ( ”−−v a l i d a t e p r o j e c t i o n ” ))
{
// Adjust nodes
v e r t i c a l l y
unsigned nnod=mesh pt()−>nnode ( ) ;
for
(unsigned j =0; j<nnod ; j++)
77
==PAGE:84==
{
double y=mesh pt()−>node pt ( j)−>x ( 1 ) ;
i f
(y<=y b l o r i g )
{
mesh pt()−>node pt ( j)−>x(1)=
y max∗( exp ( alpha ∗(y/ y b l o r i g )) −1.0)/( exp ( alpha ) −1.0)/
n ormalising factor ;
}
else
{
mesh pt()−>node pt ( j)−>x(1)=y max∗
(1.0+ d f d y a t y b l o r i g ∗(y−y b l o r i g ))/ normalising factor ;
}
}
// Squash
i t
to
middle
region
double dx uniform=(x max−x min )/double(nx ) ;
double
x l e f t o r i g=−double( nx mid /2)∗dx uniform ;
double
x r i g h t o r i g=−x l e f t o r i g ;
unsigned no nod=mesh pt()−>nnode ( ) ;
for
(unsigned j =0; j<no nod ; j++)
{
double x=mesh pt()−>node pt ( j)−>x ( 0 ) ;
i f
(x<=x r i g h t o r i g && x>=x l e f t o r i g )
{
mesh pt()−>node pt ( j)−>x(0)=x mid∗x/( x r i g h t o r i g −x l e f t o r i g ) ;
}
else
i f
(x<=x l e f t o r i g )
{
mesh pt()−>node pt ( j)−>x(0)=−x mid/2.0+
( x min+x mid /2.0)∗( x−x l e f t o r i g )/( x min−x l e f t o r i g ) ;
}
else
{
mesh pt()−>node pt ( j)−>x(0)=x mid/2.0+
(x max−x mid /2.0)∗( x−x r i g h t o r i g )/( x max−x r i g h t o r i g ) ;
}
}
}
// Output mesh
ofstream
s o m e f i l e ;
char filename [ 1 0 0 ] ;
s p r i n t f ( filename , ”mesh . dat” ) ;
s o m e f i l e . open ( filename ) ;
unsigned npts =2;
mesh pt()−>output ( some file , npts ) ;
s o m e f i l e . c l o s e ( ) ;
// Check enumeration
of
boundaries
mesh pt()−>output boundaries ( ” boundaries . dat” ) ;
78
==PAGE:85==
// Set
the
boundary
conditions
for
t h i s
problem :
All
nodes are
//
f r e e
by
d e f a u l t −−j u s t
pin
the
ones
that
have
D i r i c h l e t
conditions
// here
unsigned num bound=mesh pt()−>nboundary ( ) ;
for (unsigned ibound=0;ibound<num bound ; ibound++)
{
unsigned num nod=mesh pt()−>nboundary node ( ibound ) ;
for
(unsigned inod =0;inod<num nod ; inod++)
{
// Imposed
v e l o c i t y
on top
(2)
i f
(( ibound==2))
{
mesh pt()−>boundary node pt ( ibound , inod)−>pin ( 0 ) ;
mesh pt()−>boundary node pt ( ibound , inod)−>pin ( 1 ) ;
}
// Horizontal
outflow on the
l e f t
(3) and
r i g h t
(1) and no penetration
// at
bottom
(0)
else
i f
(( ibound ==0)||( ibound ==1)|| ( ibound==3) )
{
mesh pt()−>boundary node pt ( ibound , inod)−>pin ( 1 ) ;
}
}
} // end loop
over
boundaries
//Complete
the
problem
setup
to make the
elements
f u l l y
f un ct io na l
complete problem setup ( ) ;
// Assign
equation numbers
assign eqn numbers ( ) ;
// Setup
i n i t i a l
condition
//−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
// Loop over nodes
Vector<double> x ( 2 ) ;
Vector<double> u ( 2 ) ;
unsigned num nod = mesh pt()−>nnode ( ) ;
for
(unsigned n=0;n<num nod ; n++)
{
// Get nodal
coordinates
x[0]= mesh pt()−>node pt (n)−>x ( 0 ) ;
x[1]= mesh pt()−>node pt (n)−>x ( 1 ) ;
// Get
i n i t i a l
v e l o c i t y
f i e l d
Global Parameters : : i n i t i a l c o n d i t i o n (x , u ) ;
// Assign
s o l u t i o n
mesh pt()−>node pt (n)−>s et v al u e (0 ,u [ 0 ] ) ;
mesh pt()−>node pt (n)−>s et v al u e (1 ,u [ 1 ] ) ;
}
// Linear
s o l v e r
79
==PAGE:86==
//−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
i f
(CommandLineArgs : : command line flag has been set ( ”−−use oomph gmres” ))
{
// Use GMRES
Solver pt=new GMRES<CRDoubleMatrix >;
l i n e a r s o l v e r p t ()= Solver pt ;
// Set
preconditioner
Prec pt=new NavierStokesSchurComplementPreconditioner ( this ) ;
Prec pt−>set navier stokes mesh ( this−>mesh pt ( ) ) ;
Solver pt −>preconditioner pt ()= Prec pt ;
#ifdef OOMPH HAS MUMPS
// Schur complement
preconditioner
P matrix preconditioner pt = new NewMumpsPreconditioner ;
Prec pt−>s e t p p r e c o n d i t i o n e r ( P matrix preconditioner pt ) ;
#endif
// Create
i n t e r n a l
preconditioners
used on momentum block
//−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
bool use block diagonal for momentum=true ;
i f
( use block diagonal for momentum )
{
F matrix preconditioner pt =
new BlockDiagonalPreconditioner<CRDoubleMatrix >;
#ifdef OOMPH HAS MUMPS
// Use mumps for
block
s o l v e s
dynamic cast<BlockDiagonalPreconditioner<CRDoubleMatrix>∗>
( F matrix preconditioner pt)−>s e t s u b s i d i a r y p r e c o n d i t i o n e r f u n c t i o n
( Mumps Subsidiary Preconditioner Helper : : set mumps preconditioner ) ;
#endif
// Use Hypre
for momentum block
Prec pt−>s e t f p r e c o n d i t i o n e r ( F matrix preconditioner pt ) ;
}
}
} // end of
constructor
//==s t a r t o f d o c s o l u t i o n=================================================
/// Doc the
s o l u t i o n
//========================================================================
80
==PAGE:87==
template<class ELEMENT>
void AnneProblem<ELEMENT>:: doc solution ( DocInfo& doc info )
{
// Reconstruct smooth
v o r t i c i t y
V o r t i c i t y re cov ere r pt −>r e c o v e r v o r t i c i t y ( mesh pt ( ) ) ;
ofstream
s o m e f i l e ;
char filename [ 1 0 0 ] ;
// Number of
p l o t
points
unsigned npts =5;
// Output
s o l u t i o n
s p r i n t f ( filename , ”%s / soln%i . dat” , doc info . directory ( ) . c s t r () ,
doc info . number ( ) ) ;
s o m e f i l e . open ( filename ) ;
mesh pt()−>output ( some file , npts ) ;
s o m e f i l e . c l o s e ( ) ;
// Output
a n a l y t i c a l
v o r t i c i t y
and
derivs −−uses
fake
( zero )
data
for
//
veloc and pressure
i f
(CommandLineArgs : : command line flag has been set ( ”−−v a l i d a t e p r o j e c t i o n ” ))
{
s p r i n t f ( filename ,
”%s / a n a l y t i c a l v o r t i c i t y a n d i n d i c a t o r%i . dat” ,
doc info . directory ( ) . c s t r () ,
doc info . number ( ) ) ;
s o m e f i l e . open ( filename ) ;
unsigned nel=mesh pt()−>nelement ( ) ;
for
(unsigned e=0;e<nel ; e++)
{
ELEMENT∗
e l p t=dynamic cast<ELEMENT∗>(mesh pt()−>element pt ( e ) ) ;
el pt −>o u t p u t a n a l y t i c a l v e l o c a n d v o r t i c i t y ( some file , npts ) ;
}
s o m e f i l e . c l o s e ( ) ;
}
} //
e n d o f d o c s o l u t i o n
//========================================================================
/// Complete problem
setup
//========================================================================
template<class ELEMENT>
void AnneProblem<ELEMENT>:: complete problem setup ()
{
// Unpin
a l l
pressure
dofs
RefineableNavierStokesEquations <2>::
u n p i n a l l p r e s s u r e d o f s ( mesh pt()−>element pt ( ) ) ;
//Loop over
the
elements
81
==PAGE:88==
unsigned n e l = mesh pt()−>nelement ( ) ;
for (unsigned e=0;e<n e l ; e++)
{
//Cast
to a
f l u i d
element
ELEMENT ∗e l p t = dynamic cast<ELEMENT∗>(mesh pt()−>element pt ( e ) ) ;
// Set
the
Reynolds number
el pt −>re pt () = &Global Parameters : : Re ;
el pt −>r e s t p t () = &Global Parameters : : Re ;
// Set
exact
s o l u t i o n
for
v o r t i c i t y
and
derivs
( for
v a l i d a t i o n )
el pt −>e x a c t v o r t i c i t y f c t p t ()=&Global Parameters : : s y n t h e t i c v o r t i c i t y ;
// Pin smoothed
v o r t i c i t y
el pt −>pin smoothed vorticity ( ) ;
}
// Pin redudant
pressure
dofs
RefineableNavierStokesEquations <2>::
pin redundant nodal pressures ( mesh pt()−>element pt ( ) ) ;
}
//========================================================================
/// Impose no
s l i p
and re−assign
eqn numbers
//========================================================================
template<class ELEMENT>
void AnneProblem<ELEMENT>:: impose no slip on bottom boundary ()
{
// Pin
h o r i z o n t a l
v e l o c i t y
at
bottom boundary and apply
correction
unsigned ibound=0;
unsigned num nod=mesh pt()−>nboundary node ( ibound ) ;
for
(unsigned inod =0;inod<num nod ; inod++)
{
mesh pt()−>boundary node pt ( ibound , inod)−>pin ( 0 ) ;
mesh pt()−>boundary node pt ( ibound , inod)−>s et v al u e (0 , Global Parameters : :K) ;
}
// Re−assign
equation numbers
oomph info << std : : endl
<< ” ndofs
before
applying no
s l i p
at bottom boundary :
”
<< ndof () << std : : endl ;
assign eqn numbers ( ) ;
oomph info << ” ndofs
a f t e r
applying no
s l i p
at bottom boundary
:
”
<< ndof () << std : : endl << std : : endl ;
}
82
==PAGE:89==
//==S t a r t o f a s s i g n s y n t h f l o w f i e l d======================================
/// Assign
s y n t h e t i c
flow
f i e l d
//========================================================================
template<class ELEMENT>
void AnneProblem<ELEMENT>:: a s s i g n s y n t h e t i c v e l o c f i e l d ()
{
Vector<double> x ( 2 ) ;
Vector<double> u ( 2 ) ;
// Loop over
a l l
nodes
unsigned nnod=mesh pt()−>nnode ( ) ;
for
(unsigned j =0; j<nnod ; j++)
{
Node∗nod pt=mesh pt()−>node pt ( j ) ;
x[0]= nod pt−>x ( 0 ) ;
x[1]= nod pt−>x ( 1 ) ;
Global Parameters : : s y n t h e t i c v e l o c i t y f i e l d (x , u ) ;
nod pt−>s et v al u e (0 ,u [ 0 ] ) ;
nod pt−>s et v al u e (1 ,u [ 1 ] ) ;
}
}
//==start check smoothed vort=============================================
/// Check the
smoothed
v o r t i c i t y
//========================================================================
template<class ELEMENT>
void AnneProblem<ELEMENT>:: check smoothed vorticity ( DocInfo& doc info )
{
ofstream
s o m e f i l e ;
char filename [ 1 0 0 0 0 ] ;
s p r i n t f ( filename , ”%s / vorticity convergence . dat” ,
doc info . directory ( ) . c s t r ( ) ) ;
s o m e f i l e . open ( filename ) ;
s o m e f i l e << ”VARIABLES=\”nel \” ,\” sqrt (1/ nel )\” , ”
<< ”\” Error ( vort )\” , ”
<< ”\” Error ( dvort /dx )\” , ”
<< ”\” Error ( dvort /dy )\” , ”
<< ”\” Error (dˆ2 vort /dx ˆ2)\” , ”
<< ”\” Error (dˆ2 vort /dxdy )\” , ”
<< ”\” Error (dˆ2 vort /dy ˆ2)\” , ”
<< ”\” Error (dˆ3 vort /dx ˆ3)\” , ”
<< ”\” Error (dˆ3 vort /dxˆ2dy )\” , ”
<< ”\” Error (dˆ3 vort /dxdy ˆ2)\” , ”
<< ”\” Error (dˆ3 vort /dy ˆ3)\” , ”
<< ”\” Error (du/dx )\” , ”
<< ”\” Error (du/dy )\” , ”
<< ”\” Error (dv/dx )\” , ”
<< ”\” Error (dv/dy )\” , ”
<< ”\”Area\”\n” ;
// Uniform mesh refinements
unsigned n=5;
for
(unsigned
i i =0; i i <n ; i i ++)
83
==PAGE:90==
{
// Assign
s y n t h e t i c
v e l o c i t y
f i e l d
a s s i g n s y n t h e t i c v e l o c f i e l d ( ) ;
// Smooth
i t !
V o r t i c it y re cov ere r pt −>r e c o v e r v o r t i c i t y ( mesh pt ( ) ) ;
// Get error
in
projection
double
f u l l a r e a =0.0;
Vector<double> f u l l e r r o r ( 1 4 , 0 . 0 ) ;
unsigned nel=mesh pt()−>nelement ( ) ;
s o m e f i l e << nel << ” ” << sqrt (1.0/ double( nel )) << ” ” ;
for
(unsigned e=0;e<nel ; e++)
{
ELEMENT∗
e l p t=dynamic cast<ELEMENT∗>(mesh pt()−>element pt ( e ) ) ;
double
s i z e=el pt −>s i z e ( ) ;
f u l l a r e a+=s i z e ;
for
(unsigned
i =0; i <14; i++)
{
double
e l e r r o r=el pt −>v o r t i c i t y e r r o r s q u a r e d ( i ) ;
f u l l e r r o r [ i ]+= e l e r r o r ;
}
}
for
(unsigned
i =0; i <14; i++)
{
s o m e f i l e << sqrt ( f u l l e r r o r [ i ] ) << ” ” ;
}
s o m e f i l e << f u l l a r e a << ” ”
<< std : : endl ;
doc solution ( doc info ) ;
doc info . number()++;
// Refine
i f
( i i !=(n−1))
{
r e f i n e u n i f o r m l y ( ) ;
}
}
s o m e f i l e . c l o s e ( ) ;
// Done !
e x i t ( 0 ) ;
}
//===start of main======================================================
/// Driver
code
for Anne channel
problem
//======================================================================
84
==PAGE:91==
int main ( int argc ,
char∗argv [ ] )
{
#ifdef OOMPH HAS MPI
MPI Helpers : : i n i t ( argc , argv ) ;
#endif
// Store command l i n e
arguments
CommandLineArgs : : setup ( argc , argv ) ;
// Validation
of
projection ?
CommandLineArgs : : specify command line flag ( ”−−v a l i d a t e p r o j e c t i o n ” ) ;
// Reynolds number
CommandLineArgs : : specify command line flag ( ”−−re ” ,
&Global Parameters : : Re ) ;
// Scaling
f a c t o r
for number of
elements
in mesh
CommandLineArgs : : specify command line flag (
”−−mesh scaling factor ” ,
&Global Parameters : : Mesh scaling factor ) ;
// Use gmres?
CommandLineArgs : : specify command line flag ( ”−−use oomph gmres” ) ;
// Parse command l i n e
CommandLineArgs : : parse and assign ( ) ;
// Doc what has
a c t u a l l y
been
s p e c i f i e d
on the command l i n e
CommandLineArgs : : d o c s p e c i f i e d f l a g s ( ) ;
// Set up doc
info
DocInfo
doc info ;
doc info . s e t d i r e c t o r y ( ”RESLT” ) ;
// Set up problem
AnneProblem<VorticitySmootherElement<ProjectableTaylorHoodElement
<RefineableQTaylorHoodElement<2> > > >
problem ;
// Check
v o r t i c i t y
smoothing
then
stop
i f
(CommandLineArgs : : command line flag has been set ( ”−−v a l i d a t e p r o j e c t i o n ” ))
{
problem . check smoothed vorticity ( doc info ) ;
}
//
I n i t i a l i s e
a l l
h i s t o r y
values
for an impulsive
s t a r t
double dt=1;
problem . i n i t i a l i s e d t ( dt ) ;
problem . a s s i g n i n i t i a l v a l u e s i m p u l s i v e ( ) ;
// Number of
timesteps
u n t i l
switch−over
to no
s l i p
unsigned ntsteps =10;
85
==PAGE:92==
// Doc
i n i t i a l
condition
problem . doc solution ( doc info ) ;
// increment
counter
doc info . number()++;
//Loop over
the
timesteps
for (unsigned t =1;t<=ntsteps ; t++)
{
oomph info << ”TIMESTEP ” << t << std : : endl ;
//Take one
f i x e d
timestep
problem . unsteady newton solve ( dt ) ;
//Output
the
time
oomph info << ”Time
i s now ” << problem . time pt()−>time () << std : : endl ;
// Doc s o l u t i o n
problem . doc solution ( doc info ) ;
// increment
counter
doc info . number()++;
}
// Now do no
s l i p
problem . impose no slip on bottom boundary ( ) ;
//Loop over
the
remaining
timesteps
ntsteps =150;
for (unsigned t =1;t<=ntsteps ; t++)
{
oomph info << ”TIMESTEP ” << t << std : : endl ;
//Take one
f i x e d
timestep
problem . unsteady newton solve ( dt ) ;
//Output
the
time
oomph info << ”Time
i s now ” << problem . time pt()−>time () << std : : endl ;
// Doc s o l u t i o n
problem . doc solution ( doc info ) ;
// increment
counter
doc info . number()++;
}
#ifdef OOMPH HAS MPI
MPI Helpers : : f i n a l i z e ( ) ;
#endif
} // end of main
86
