==PAGE:1==
1
Multi-output travel demand and travel time
prediction with Deep Learning
Inigo Reiriz Irulegui
Abstract—Origin-destination (OD) demand forecasting is an essential support for real-time trafﬁc models and their application on
intelligent transportation systems. It is essentially a time series prediction regression problem, which implies that the nearest historical
demand can be valuable information for predicting the future demand. The proposed Deep Learning approach is applied to the
short-term forecasting origin-destination (OD) travel demand in NYC, United States. Some of the ODs are correlated with each other.
Therefore, modeling multiple ODs together may improve the predictions. In this work, we view the OD prediction problem as a
multi-output regression problem, where, our experiments show, modeling multiple ODs together in a deep neural network could
improve the predictions for correlated ODs.
Index Terms—Travel demand forecasting, travel time forecasting, deep learning (DL), machine learning (ML), long-short term memory
(LSTM), convolutional neural network (CNN), single-output regression, multi-output regression.
!
1
INTRODUCTION
S
HORT term forecasting of travel demand is a challenge
mainly due to three dependencies:
•
Time dependencies: travel demand has strong peri-
odicity. For example, the demand is expected to be
high during morning and evening peaks and to be
low in between and during sleeping hours. Further-
more, the short term travel demand is dependent on
the trend of the nearest historic travel demand.
•
Spatial dependencies: Demand in one speciﬁc zone is
not only determined by the variables of this zone, but
dependent on all the zonal variables in the network
[9]. In general, variables of the nearby zones have
stronger inﬂuence than distant ones, which implies
the need of models that are able to capture local
spatial dependencies.
•
Other dependencies: Variables such as day-of-week
and weather conditions might have inﬂuences on
short-term travel demand.
Recently, deep learning (DL) approaches have been used
for trafﬁc ﬂow prediction. Long-short-term memory (LSTM)
neural networks have been used to capture long-term
dependencies for short-term trafﬁc speed prediction [17].
Furthermore, 1-dimension convolutional neural network
(CNN) and LSTM have been combined in order to capture
spatio-temporal correlations [18]. Zhang et al. presented a
deep spatio-temporal residual network to predict the inﬂow
and outﬂow in each region of a city simultaneously [19].
Shi et al. integrated CNN and LSTM in one end-to-end
deep learning structure, named convolutional LSTM (conv-
LSTM) [20].
•
This thesis has been written with the Department of Management Engi-
neering, Technical University of Denmark, DK, for acquiring a Master of
Science Degree in Digital Media Engineering.
E-mail: inigoreiriz@gmail.com
This paper presents several multi-output and single-
output DL structures for short-term travel demand and
travel time prediction.
2
LITERATURE REVIEW
There are a broad range of problems in the domain of
transportation, similar to the origin-destination (OD) de-
mand forecasting problem. These problems include, trafﬁc
speed destination [1], trafﬁc volume prediction [2], origin-
destination matrices forecasting [3], bus arrival time predic-
tion [4] etc. In order to solve these forecasting problems, a
broad range of applications have been proposed, including
the ARIMA family [5], local regression model [6], neural
network based algorithms [7] and Bayesian inferring ap-
proaches [8].
Recently, more and more deep learning (DL) algorithms
have been used in trafﬁc prediction problems due to their
capability of capturing complex relationships from huge
amount of data. In order to address spatial correlations,
Convolutional Neural Networks developed by LeCun [10]
are commonly used to learn the local and global spatial cor-
relations in large-scale network trafﬁc forecasting problems.
In terms of temporal correlations, the family of recurrent
neural networks (RNN) [11] is one of the most suitable
structures. However, the traditional RNN suffered from a
vanishing gradient problem which made it impossible to
store long-term information. In order to overcome this issue,
a long-short-term-memory network (LSTM) was presented
[12].
One of the obstacles in trafﬁc forecasting lies within cap-
turing spatio-temporal correlations. However, neither CNN
or RNN are suitable models for spatio-temporal forecasting
problems. Convolutional Neural Networks fail to capture
the temporal dependencies, while Long-short-term-memory
Networks are not capable of capturing spatial correlations.
Thus, in order to capture spatial and temporal dependencies
simultaneously, researchers have made several attempts.
==PAGE:2==
2
Wang et al. presented a recurrent convolutional neural net-
work architecture composed of an input layer, a convolu-
tional layer, and the recurrent layer [13]. Furthermore, Shi
et al, presented the Convolutional-LSTM for precipitation
nowcasting, which was a typical spatio-temporal forecasting
problem [20].
In
this
study,
considering
that
short-term
origin-
destination demand is not only dependent on its own
spatio-temporal properties but also dependent on inde-
pendent variables (time-of-day, day-of-week, weather), we
present several architectures that address these depen-
dences both independently and simultaneously.
3
BACKGROUND
3.1
Neural Networks
Neural networks are interconnected mathematical neurons
distributed in layers. A neuron does the weighted sum of all
of its inputs, adds a constant which we call bias, and feeds
this sum through an activation function. There are several
activation functions. However, the one thing they all share
in common is that they are non-linear.
y = f
 X
i=1
wi ∗xi + b
!
where wi, xi and b are the weights, input values of de-
mand intensity and bias fed through an activation function
f.
Figure 1: One layer neural network.
This can be formalized, not just for one input sequence,
but for a batch of one hundred input sequences (see ﬁgure
2).
In mathematical terms, the input X is nothing but a
matrix of one hundred time series sequences, one per row,
each sequence of length n. The weights matrix, W, is a
column vector of length n, since we just want one prediction
per input sequence. Finally, we add the biases and we get
the predictions.
Furthermore, for each of the input sequences in the
batch, we have the correct labels. Thus, in order to assess
the quality of the predictions, we compute the error between
what the system predicts and what is known to be true.
The error metric used for the loss in this study is the Mean
Squared Error (MSE), the formulation of which is given as
follows.
Figure 2
ϵ = 1
N
N
X
i=1
(yi −¯yi)2
where yi, ¯yi are the ith ground truth and the estimated
value of demand intensity and N is the size of the train set.
Thus, the training process is about computing the differ-
ence between what the system predicts and what is known
to be true and adjust the weights and biases in such a way
to make the MSE smaller.
This is accomplished in a step called the Back-propagation
process, which minimizes the loss function (mean squared
error between what the system predicts and what is known
to be true) by computing its gradient. Apart from depend-
ing on the training labels and sequences, the MSE also
depends on weights and biases. Thus, the gradient of the
loss function is a vector of partial derivatives of this function
relatively to all weights and all biases in the system.
The gradient by default points up. However, we add
a minus sign in order go where the loss is minimum. We
can think of the gradient as an arrow pointing us where to
go in the space of weights and biases: going on a direction
in the space means modifying weights and biases by some
fraction. This is computed in a training loop:
•
We ﬁrst compute the gradient on a given batch of
data.
•
We then add a little fraction of this gradient to our
weights and biases to make them evolve.
•
We start over the same process with a new batch of
data.
The fraction of the gradient that is being added to the
weights and biases in the training loop is what we call
the learning rate. The main reason why we don’t add a full
gradient is to avoid going too fast. As a metaphor, we might
be in the peak of a mountain and want to reach the bottom.
However, if we jump very big distances we may end up in
neighboring mountains and never reach our target. Thus,
making small steps is a safe way of reaching the bottom.
==PAGE:3==
3
As mentioned before, samples are trained in batches,
i.e, one hundred samples at a time. This is mainly for two
reasons:
•
Batching uses bigger matrices and bigger matrices
are easier to optimize in GPUs.
•
By computing the gradient in each sample, there can
be a bit of variation in where the gradient points
from one sample to another. By computing it in a
number of samples at a time, we get a consensus
over n samples what is the best suitable direction.
3.2
Deep Neural Networks
Deep learning is making neural networks deep by adding
more layers. In the following example, each neuron in the
ﬁrst layer of neurons does the weighted sum of all the
inputs, adds a bias and feeds the sum through the sigmoid
activation function. A second layer can be added where
each neuron does the weighted sum of all the outputs of
the previous layer, adds a bias and feeds the sum through
another sigmoid activation function. This is how layers are
stacked high.
For the speciﬁc case of a regression problem, the last
layer’s activation function must be the identity. However,
previous layers can use any. The most popular one is called
Sigmoid (see ﬁgure 3).
Figure 3: Deep Neural Network
Sigmoid
is a continuous function going from 0 to 1.
Its main drawback is the ﬂatness on the sides (ﬂat means
gradient of 0). Thus, the gradient that we compute in the
neural network might end up with very small values, and
since that is what we use to move forward, we stop and
don’t go forward any more. This is what is known as
Vanishing gradient problem.
ReLU is another commonly used activation which
doesn’t run into vanishing gradient problems. This function
is 0 for all negative values and the identity for all positive
values (see ﬁgure 4). There is a consensus that the biological
neurons in our head behave the same way ReLU does. When
they are not stimulated they output 0. When they start being
stimulated above a certain threshold, they output something
proportional to the amount of stimulation.
Deep neural networks are prone to over-ﬁtting. Each
time we add a layer to our network, we need to add a
weights matrix and a bias vector. Over-ﬁtting occurs when
the network contains too many degrees of freedom (too
many weights and biases). Thus, we need to constrain the
degrees of freedom to force the network create patterns that
can generalize to data that has never seen before. One of the
Figure 4: ReLU
most commonly used techniques is dropout and involves
replacing neurons with zeros.
We ﬁrst keep a probability of chance of each neuron to
remain in the network. In ﬁgure 5, the chance is 75%. At each
iteration of the training loop, we roll the dice and replace
25% of the neurons with zeros.
Figure 5: Dropout technique
Being the output of these neurons constants with zeros,
means, they no longer depend on weights and biases. Thus,
their weights and biases are no longer present in the loss
function computation, which means the gradient won’t have
terms for those weights and biases and hence, won’t be
updated on that iteration of the training loop.
3.2.1
Recurrent Neural Networks
Recurrent neural networks are a class of artiﬁcial neural
networks that allow to exhibit dynamic temporal behavior.
These recurrent neural networks are used in time steps. At
one time step, the input is taken (the internal state will be
zero at that point), activations are created at the intermediate
layer (using the hyperbolic tangent in this case), which are
then concatenated to a new input vector in the next time
step (see ﬁgure 6).
They can also be represented as a neural network cell. At
each time step, an input Xt is fed into the cell which outputs
an internal state H. The internal state H is computed at each
step and re-injected into the next input at the next time step.
This internal state is also used to compute the outputs at the
last time step.
This architecture is very useful for sequences. Due to its
internal state it will be able to remember something that
happened at one point in the sequence and do something
else at another point of the sequence based on that.
However, how do we train them? By giving some input
Xt, the network will produce some output Yt. As the desired
outputs are known, we force them and perform a back-
propagation step, which modiﬁes the internal weights and
biases. That might output good results if the problem were
==PAGE:4==
4
Figure 6: Recurrent Neural Network
the weights and biases. What if the problem is the input
state? A back-propagation step can modify weights and
biases but the input state is a constant.
The solution is to unroll the cell multiple times in order
to train it (see ﬁgure 7). Now, if Y5 is not correct due to
the internal state H4, we can perform a back-propagation
step so as to modify weights and biases in such a way to
inﬂuence H0, in a such a way to inﬂuence H1 and so on.
This way, the input state H4 going into the last cell, contains
the correct values in order to output the desired values.
Figure 7: Training Recurrent Neural Network
In addition, recurrent neural networks can be stacked in
order to go deep.
Figure 8: Stacked recurrent neural network
Furthermore, as mentioned before, long-term depen-
dencies are a problem for these networks. The following
example is used as illustration.
"Michael C. was born in Paris, France. He is married
and has three children. He received a M.S. in neurosciences from
the University Pierre & Marie Curie and then spent most of his
career in Switzerland, at the Ecole Polytechnique de Lausanne. He
specialized in child and adolescent psychiatry and his ﬁrst ﬁeld of
research was severe mood disorders in adolescents. His mother
tongue is..."
By unrolling the network ﬁve times ("His mother tongue
is ... ") we can teach the network that what it comes after
Figure 9: Vanishing gradient example
is more likely a language name. However, the context that
the person was born in France is far away at the beginning.
The only way we can teach the network to output the word
French and not just any language, is by unrolling it as many
times as there are words in the full sequence. Thus, recurrent
neural networks are always very deep and this is where
vanishing gradient problems arise.
Long Short Term Memory networks, usually called
LSTMs, are a special kind of RNN, capable of learning long-
term dependencies. They were introduced by Hochreiter &
Schmidhuber [16] and were explicitly designed to avoid the
long-term dependency problem.
Figure 10: LSTM architecture
As mentioned before, the input to these cells is the
concatenation of the real input and the internal state at
the previous step. Gates are neural network layers with
a sigmoid activation function. Thus, they output values
between 0 and 1, which are then multiplied element-wise
by a state vector.
•
If the neural network layer outputs zeros, values in
the state vector won’t go through the gate.
•
If the neural network layers outputs ones, values in
the state vector will go through the gate.
•
All intermediate cases can be considered as well.
The main idea behind LSTMs is to maintain a second
internal state Ct, which represents the memory of the cell.
Thus, we deﬁne three gates: a forget gate, an update
gate and a result gate. At each step, the new contents of
==PAGE:5==
5
the memory will be what we had previously in memory
multiplied by what we want to forget plus what we have as
the new input multiplied by what we choose to remember.
This is illustrated mathematically in the following equa-
tions.
concatenate : X = Xt|Ht−1
forget_gate : f = σ(X ∗Wf + bf)
update_gate : u = σ(X ∗Wu + bu)
result_gate : r = σ(X ∗Wr + br)
input : X′ = tanh(X ∗Wc + bc)
new_C : Ct = f ∗Ct−1 + u ∗X′
new_H : Ht = r ∗tanh(Ct)
output : Yt = r ∗tanh(Ct)
The ﬁrst equation is the concatenation between the real
input and the internal state at the previous step. The fol-
lowing three equations deﬁne the gates in the cell. These
neural networks cannot use any activation function but the
sigmoid, since we want them to output values between zero
and one to use them as gates. The 5th equation is a size
adaptation of the concatenation made at the 1st equation.
Vectors inside the cell are of size n. Inputs, however, are of
size p + n, after the concatenation. Thus, the 5th equation
brings the input down in size to be usable through the
hyperbolic tangent neural layer. The 6th equation computes
the new internal memory state: forget gate multiplied by
its previous state (what we had previously in memory mul-
tiplied by what we choose to forget) plus the update gate
multiplied by the new input (what we choose to remem-
ber from the new inputs). The 7th equation computes the
external state H, which results from multiplying the result
gate (what we choose to output) by the internal memory
state C. The hyperbolic tangent in this equation is a size
adaptation, not a neural network layer. All the parameters
in the equations are in the range [0,1]. However, the internal
state C is the result of the sum of two parameters. Thus, it
can grow above the range [0,1]. Hence, hyperbolic tangent
is used to bring it back to the range [-1,1].
The most popular recurrent network cell is GRU.
Figure 11: GRU cell
A GRU cell has two gates, a reset gate r, and an update
gate z. Intuitively, the reset gate determines how to combine
the new input with the previous memory, and the update
gate deﬁnes how much of the memory to keep with us.
X = Xt|Ht−1
z = σ(X ∗Wz + bz)
r = σ(X ∗Wr + br)
X′ = Xt|r ∗Ht−1
X′′ = tanh(X′ ∗Wc + bc)
Ht = (1 −z) ∗Ht−1 + z ∗X′′
Yt = Ht ∗W + b
The basic idea of using this gating mechanism to learn
long-term dependencies is the same as in an LSTM, but there
are few differences:
•
A GRU has two gates while an LSTM has three. Thus,
it has one less weights matrix and bias vector making
it cheaper to compute.
•
GRUs don’t have an internal memory Ct. In addition,
they don’t have the output gate that is present in
LSTMs.
•
The input and forget gates are combined in an update
gate z. The reset gate r is applied directly to the
previous hidden state.
Furthermore, there are several ways of training these
networks. The ﬁrst approach we use is many-to-many, where
we force the output to be the input shifted by one time step
(in order to make predictions one time step ahead). Thus,
the output sequence is the same as the input sequence and
the value at the last time step is new.
Figure 12: Many-To-Many
The second approach we use is many-to-one, where we
take the last element of the input, shift it by one time step
and use that as our desired output.
Figure 13: Many-To-One
==PAGE:6==
6
3.2.2
Convolutional Neural Networks
Convolutional neural networks are a class of artiﬁcial neu-
ral networks used to learn spatial correlations. We use 1-
dimensional convolutions since our input is a time series
sequence.
Figure 14: left: Convolution with kernel of size 3*3
right: Convolution with kernel of size 1*1
These convolutions are mostly used to change the num-
ber of feature maps. Speciﬁcally, we are going to scale the
number of maps in order to feed higher level features into
our LSTM, which will output our predictions.
In addition, we use a technique called batch normal-
ization. Batch normalization is a method that normalizes
the activations in order to make sure inputs of the next
neural layer are properly centered and scaled. Figure 15
shows an input (sum of weights plus bias) that is fed into
an activation function. The gaussian is very ﬂat on the sides,
having most of the values concentrated in the middle. By
putting the sigmoid activation function in the background
we can observe all our outputs will mostly be in the negative
side of the sigmoid.
Figure 15: Logits before applying batch normalization
As we work on mini-batches, we can compute statistics
on them and use those to re-scale and re-center inputs
by subtracting the average and dividing by the standard
deviation over the mini-batch. Values of x in a mini-batch
B = {x1...m} are normalized according to the next set of
equations:
µβ = 1
m
m
X
i=1
xi
σβ =
v
u
u
t 1
m
m
X
i=1
(xi −µβ)2 + ϵ
ˆxi = ˆxi −µβ
σβ
yi = αxi + β
However, the fact that a neural layer is outputting values
squeezed to one side of the activation function might be
signiﬁcant. Thus, by re-scaling and re-centering we may be
destroying valuable information.
Batch normalization allows us to re-scale the inputs back
using two learnable parameters, α and β. Thus, the neural
network can decide during training to assign the standard
deviation to α and the average to β and give the original x
back as a result, if that is the right thing to do.
As mentioned before, batch normalization is applied
before the activation function so as to take the maximum
advantage of the useful portion of the activation function
(see ﬁgure 16).
Figure 16
After being applied, bands are equally distributed across
the full range of the activation function and the gaussian is
centered on the linear part.
Figure 17: Logits after applying batch normalization
3.3
Single-output regression
Single-output methods are models trained on a training
set to predict the value of a single-target variable. In this
==PAGE:7==
7
way, the targets are predicted independently and potential
relationships between them cannot be exploited.
3.4
Multi-output regression
Multi-output regression aims to simultaneously predict
multiple real value output variables. State-of-the-art multi-
output regression methods are mainly based on transform-
ing the multi-output regression problem into single target
problems, then building a model for each target and ﬁnally
concatenating all the predictions. The main drawback of
these methods is that the relationships among the targets
are ignored, and the targets are predicted independently,
which may affect the overall quality of the predictions.
This study presents a novel multi-output deep neural
network in which relationships among targets are taken into
consideration and targets are predicted simultaneously.
4
MATERIALS AND METHODS
TensorFlow is an open source software library aiming at ma-
chine learning. This library was originally developed by the
Google Brain Team for the purposes of conducting machine
learning and deep neural networks research. In this paper,
the corresponding application programming interface (API)
is used as an underlying library to conduct our research and
formulate our models.
This study applies deep neural network (single-output
and multi-output) models on two different data sets with
two different purposes.
•
Most of the work has been done with the public NYC
Taxi data where the goal is to predict travel demand
between origin-destinations (ODs).
•
Those models have been then applied to data
acquired from Movia (a danish public transport
agency) with the aim to predict bus travel times in
Copenhagen.
4.1
Data preparation (NYC)
4.1.1
Data overview
The New York City Taxi data consists of 29 zones. Each of
the study zones are identiﬁed by a unique number between
1 and 29. For each day, origin-destination (OD) information
is available at a 30 min period for 6.5 years (2009-2016). Data
attributes are illustrated below.
Pick-up Zone
Drop-off Zone
Date
Hour
Minute
Pickups
1
1
2009-01-01
0
0
47
1
1
2009-01-01
0
1
72
1
1
2009-01-01
1
0
49
1
1
2009-01-01
1
1
45
1
1
2009-01-01
2
0
61
1
1
2009-01-01
2
1
27
1
1
2009-01-01
3
0
43
1
1
2009-01-01
3
1
45
Table 1: NYC Taxi data attributes.
The ﬁrst record indicates that on 2009-01-01, from 00:00
to 00.30 a.m, 47 people were picked up by a taxi to travel
within zone 1.
In addition to the provided data, additional informa-
tion such as weather information has been acquired from
Weather Underground through its application program-
ming interface (API).
4.1.2
Data preprocessing
4.1.2.1
Injecting missing records:
A data preprocessing step is conducted to make the
data applicable in our models. Theoretically, the data should
have 113880 samples (6.5 years * 365 days * 48 half-hours)
per origin-destination group, but actually, on average, two
thirds of the records are available for each OD.
The reason for the data shortage is nothing but the
absence of samples whenever the travel demand at a given
time step from one origin to a destination is zero. Thus,
those missing samples have been injected so as to have a
continuous time series over the six and a half years.
4.1.2.2
Trend removal:
Our time series dataset contains a seasonal component,
which is a cycle that repeats over time, daily. This repeating
cycle obscures the signal that we want to model when
forecasting. Hence, removing the daily seasonal component
from our time series may result in a clearer relationship
between the input sequence and the predicted output.
The way the seasonality component has been deter-
mined is by plotting our data over a full month, for a
particular OD.
Figure 18: Seasonal stationary time series
The dataset shows a strong seasonality at the level of
the day. Thus, we compute the average travel demand at
a speciﬁc hour and day, say 9.00 a.m on Mondays, and
subtract that from every record with the same hour and day
to correct for seasonality.
Removing the seasonal component creates a new dataset
shown below, and conﬁrms that the seasonality adjusted
dataset does indeed remove the daily cycles to a certain
extent
Figure 19: Non-stationary time series
4.1.3
Origin-destination matrix
The origin-destination (OD) matrix matches origins and des-
tinations to develop a "trip table", a matrix that displays the
number of trips going from each origin to each destination
(see ﬁgure 20),
==PAGE:8==
8
Figure 20: 2-D Origin-destination matrix.
where Tij = trips from origin i to destination j. Note that
the diagonal represents intra zonal trips.
This study adds a third dimension to the OD matrix,
where Tij = trips from origin i to destination j for a period
of 6.5 years with a time step of half an hour.
Figure 21: 3-D origin-destination matrix.
4.1.4
Feature engineering
Features are a very important part to the predictive models
we use. Hence. we explicitly deﬁne several attributes:
•
Considering the temporal relationship of travel de-
mand, in order to forecast travel demand at time
interval xt we should use the travel demand data
at previous time intervals, i.e., xt-1 xt-2 ..., xt-timesteps
We set the number of lags to be 48 half hours, which
covers travel demand values for a full day before we
make a prediction half an hour ahead.
•
Time-of-day and day-of-week: By examining the dis-
tribution of demand intensity with respect to time,
24 hours in each day can be intuitively divided into 3
periods: peak-hours, off-peak hours and sleep hours.
We simply rank the hours based on the demand
intensity. We further introduce the dummy variable
h, to characterize this attribute of time-of-day, given
by:
h =



2,
if t belongs to peak hours
1,
if t belongs to off peak hours
0,
if t belongs to sleep hours
We also denote another dummy variable d, to be
the day of the week, which reﬂects distinguished
properties between weekdays and weekends.
d =

0,
if t belongs to weekdays
1,
if t belongs to weekends
•
Weather conditions might inﬂuence the decision of
taking a taxi at a certain moment. Thus we introduce
the categorical variable w, which catches up especial
properties between sunny, rainy and snowy days.
w =



0,
if d belongs to sunny days
1,
if d belongs to rainy days
2,
if d belongs to snowy days
4.1.5
Correlations between ODs
The aim of this work is to model correlated time series
sequences using multi-output deep neural networks. Hence.
we explore relations between ODs in order to ﬁnd highly
correlated ones and use them in our predictive models.
The most common measure of correlation in statistics is
the Pearson Correlation Coefﬁcient, which is a measure of
the linear combination of two variables X and Y . It has a
value between +1 and -1, where 1 is total positive linear
correlation, 0 is no linear correlation, and -1 is total negative
linear correlation. The mathematical formula is given as
follows:
ρx,y = cov(x, y)
σxσy
where
•
cov is the covariance
•
σx is the standard deviation of origin-destination x
•
σy is the standard deviation of origin-destination y
We have built an interactive map with D3.js, a JavaScript
library for manipulating documents based on data. The map
is accessible here. It is an illustration of all possible pairwise
combinations of ODs, 841 to be speciﬁc (29 origins * 29
destinations), and the correlations of the rest of destinations
with them.
As an example, the following ﬁgure sets,
•
origin at zone 1 (green area)
•
destination at zone 19 (blue area)
and shows its correlation with the rest of destinations,
having the origin ﬁxed.
Figure 22: Origin: Manhattan, Destination: Manhattan
==PAGE:9==
9
Not surprisingly, areas with highest correlations (red
ones) are zones nearby the destination we initially set.
After some exploration, by setting the origin somewhere
in Manhattan and making the destinations be the three
airports in NYC (John F. Kennedy, LaGuardia and Newark
Liberty International airports), we found out some highly
correlated ODs.
Thus, the ﬁrst case sets the destination in John F.
Kennedy International Airport (JFK) and shows correla-
tions with the rest of destinations. Interestingly, the areas
with highest correlation are the two remaining airports:
LaGuardia (ρ = 0.7925) and Newark (ρ = 0.751).
Destinations
LGA
Newark
Correlation
0.7925
0.751
Table 2: OD correlations.
Figure 23: Origin: Manhattan, Destination: John F. Kennedy
International Airport
Following on from that, the second case changes the
destination to LaGuardia (LGA), highest correlations being
the ones represented in the following table.
Destinations
JFK
Newark
Correlation
0.7925
0.7108
Table 3: OD correlations.
Figure 24: Origin: Manhattan, Destination: LaGuardia Air-
port
The last case sets the destination in Newark International
airport with the following outcome.
Destinations
JFK
LGA
Correlation
0.751
0.7108
Table 4: OD correlations.
Figure 25: Origin: Manhattan, Destination: Newark Liberty
International Airport
Therefore, from this point on, this study focuses on
building travel demand predictive models having these
three airports as targets. More speciﬁcally, we explore
whether modeling these correlated ODs together in a deep
neural network leads to better predictions than modeling
them independently.
==PAGE:10==
10
4.2
Single-output deep learning approaches (NYC)
In this paper, three different approaches are proposed. In
order to address spatial correlations we develop a CNN
model that learns local spatial correlations from the input
data. In addition, we build an LSTM neural network which
learns temporal correlations. Lastly, we combine both of
them in a Convolutional-LSTM network so that we can
capture spatial and temporal correlations simultaneously.
4.2.1
Convolutional Neural Network model
One dimensional CNNs can generate deep feature maps of
the input time series by using convolution operations.
The architecture used in this study consists of an ini-
tial convolutional layer that generates a number of feature
maps of the input sequence. Those feature maps are then
down-sampled by a pooling layer and fed through another
convolutional layer. Resulting feature maps are then down-
sampled again through a pooling layer and fed into a dense
layer in order to get our predictions.
Figure 26: Fully-connected CNN architecture
More speciﬁcally, the input to the convolutional neural
layer is a one-dimensional time series, which is initially
convolved with a kernel of length 8 and 64 ﬁlters. We then
apply a batch normalization step in order to re-scale and
re-center our logits (weighted sum of inputs plus bias) and
take advantage of the useful portion of the ReLU activation
function. We then perform a max-pooling operation with a
kernel of size 2 and a stride of 2 so as to down-sample its
dimension. We now have features maps of dimensionality
64. We get them into another convolutional neural layer
with a kernel of length 8 and 32 ﬁlters so as to reduce
the dimensionality. Batch normalization is applied to logits,
again, before they go into the ReLU activation function.
Lastly, another max pooling operation is applied on them
before they are fed into a fully-connected layer with an
identity activation function in order to get our predictions.
Layer
Type
Num Channels
Kernel size/ Stride
Num ﬁlters
0
Input
1
-
-
Conv1D
64
8/1
64
BatchNorm
64
-
-
ReLU activation
64
-
-
MaxPool
64
2/2
-
1
Conv1D
32
8/1
32
BatchNorm
32
-
-
ReLU activation
32
-
MaxPool
32
2/2
-
2
Fully-Connected
1
-
-
Identity activation
1
-
-
Table 5: CNN neural layers
It is important to note that we did not use a dropout
layer. In a CNN, each neuron produces a feature map.
Since drop-out works per neuron, dropping a neuron means
that the corresponding feature map is dropped - e.g. each
time step has a value of zero. In addition to that, convo-
lutional layers don’t have many parameters, therefore they
need less regularization. Simultaneously, batch normaliza-
tion provides regularization and can sometimes remove the
need for dropout [15].
4.2.2
Long-short term memory model
The input vector to these models is a batch of one dimen-
sional time series sequences of length equal to 48 half hours,
which covers travel demand for a full day before we make
predictions half an hour ahead.
In order to train these models we unroll the network 48
times. The process happens as follows: we take an input
value X0 from the input time series, feed it into the GRU
cell, which creates an output H0. Then, we give it the next
value in the time series, X1, and creates another output
value, H1, based on the last output H0 and the current time
series input value X1. Thus, there is a ﬂow of the previous
output as the input to the next state. Ultimately, we take
last time step’s output vector H48, and feed it into a fully-
connected layer in order to get one prediction per sample in
the batch.
Figure 27: Fully-connected LSTM architecture
==PAGE:11==
11
We take the last time step’s output vector and feed
that into the fully-connected layer since it is a summary
of everything that has happened up to that time step. As
an example, we can imagine reading a sentence that goes
into a four layer LSTM. The summary of the meaning of
that sentence is the last layer’s last output. Then we can
use a machine translation model that takes that output
vector and uses another LSTM to decode it into a different
language. Thus, there is certain degree of summarization as
we progress through the sequence.
In addition, drop-out is applied on the output values of
the LSTM within the recurrence loop (on the output at step
t, before it is used to compute the output at t+1).
4.2.3
Convolutional-LSTM model
This architecture combines convolutional and recurrent lay-
ers. The convolutional layers act as feature extractors and
provide abstract representations of the input time series in
feature maps to the recurrent layer, which captures temporal
dependencies on them.
Figure 28: Convlutional-LSTM architecture
More precisely, the input to the ﬁrst convolutional neural
layer is a one-dimensional time series, which is convolved
with a kernel of length 8 and 64 ﬁlters. We then apply a
batch normalization step so as to re-scale and re-center the
convolved outputs before they are fed into the ReLU acti-
vation function. We then perform a max-pooling operation
with a kernel of size 2 and a stride of 2 so as to down-
sample its dimension. Those feature maps are fed into a
second convolutional layer with 32 ﬁlters, followed by batch
normalization, ReLU activation function and max-pooling
steps.
The input to the LSTM is a feature map of 32 dimensions.
The network is unrolled 48 times in order to train it. Finally,
we take last time step’s output vector H48 and feed it into a
dense layer with the identity activation function so as to get
one prediction per sample in the batch.
Layer
Type
Num Channels
Kernel size/ Stride
Num ﬁlters
0
Input
1
-
-
Conv1D
64
8/1
64
BatchNorm
64
-
-
ReLU activation
64
-
-
MaxPool
64
2/2
-
1
Conv1D
32
8/1
32
BatchNorm
32
-
-
ReLU activation
32
-
MaxPool
32
2/2
-
2
LSTM
32
-
-
Fully-connected
1
-
-
Identity activation
1
-
-
Table 6: Convolutional-LSTM neural layers
4.3
Multi-output deep learning approach (NYC)
4.3.1
Multi-output LSTM
This section presents a new multi-input-multi-output deep
neural network architecture, which we use to simultane-
ously predict travel demand by taking relationships among
targets into consideration.
It takes three inputs:
•
Travel demand time series from area 16 (Manhattan)
to area 27 (JFK).
•
Travel demand time series from area 16 (Manhattan)
to area 28 (LaGuardia).
•
Travel demand time series from area 16 (Manhattan)
to area 29 (Newark Liberty).
and outputs travel demand half an hour ahead at each
airport destination.
In order to train it, we unroll each recurrent neural
network 48 times. Each input is then fed independently
into an LSTM. Next, we take each LSTM’s last time step’s
output vector H48 and concatenate them. Ultimately, we
feed that into a fully-connected layer with the identity acti-
vation function in order to get multiple output predictions
concurrently.
Why does this network take relationships between corre-
lated input time series into consideration? Back-propagation
step will minimize the loss function (mean squared error)
between what the network predicts and what is known to
be true by computing its gradient. The gradient is the partial
derivative of the loss function relatively to all weights and
biases in the network. Thus, weights and biases from each
independent LSTM will be simultaneously adjusted in such
a way to make the shared mean squared error smaller.
==PAGE:12==
12
Figure 29: Multi-input-multi-output deep neural network architecture
4.4
Multiple Linear Regression & Support Vector Re-
gression (NYC)
We use Multiple Linear Regression and Support Vector
Regression, so that performances coming from our deep
neural networks have a baseline to be compared to.
Regression allows us to model mathematically the rela-
tionship between two or more variables. Nearest historical
travel demand values will be the independent variables
to our multiple-regression model (x1...xp). The dependent
variable, y, is the travel demand we are trying to predict half
an hour ahead. The formulation of the multiple regression
equation is the following:
y = β0 + β1x1 + β2x2 + ...βpxp
The following ﬁgure represents three single-output mul-
tiple regression models. Those can be similarly applied to
Support Vector Regression models. Each model consists
of 48 historical travel demand independent variables and
predicts travel demand half an hour ahead at each airport
destination independently,
Figure 30: Single-output multiple regression
In addition, we build multi-output multiple regression
models by stacking independent variables from each model
one after the other.
Figure 31: Multi-output multiple regression
==PAGE:13==
13
4.5
Hyper-parameter optimization (NYC)
A machine learning model is the deﬁnition of a mathe-
matical formula with a number of parameters that need
to be learned from the data. However, there is another
kind of parameters that cannot be directly learned from the
regular training process. These parameters express higher
level properties, such as its complexity or how fast it should
learn. They are called hyper-parameters.
A deep learning model is parameterised by a large
number of different parameters (e.g., learning rate, number
of hidden units, number of layers, ... ). Setting these hyper-
parameters has a big impact on the overall results achieved.
Grid Search is the most commonly used technique. Using
knowledge one has about the problem identiﬁes ranges for
the hyper-parameters and looks at a ﬁxed set of points in
those ranges. However, it is possible that the optimal points
in this space are not in the set of ﬁxed points that the grid
search is looking at.
This study uses Random Search, instead. Like grid
search, we use knowledge of the problem to identify ranges
for the hyper-parameters. However, instead of picking val-
ues from those ranges in a methodical way, we instead
pick them randomly. This process is repeated until we ﬁnd
the hyper-parameters that work best for our deep neural
network. Yoshua Bengio proposes this to be the baseline
against which all other methods should be compared and
demonstrates that tends to work better than the rest of the
methods [14].
The parameter space that we explore is the following.
We run a total of 30 iterations over it.
Optimization
Hyper-parameter
Space
learning-rate
1E-02 - 1E-05
LSTM-hidden-size
50-300
Table 7: Hyper-parameter optimization space.
The number of hyper-parameters to tune have been
constrained to two since these are the ones that are likely
to have most impact in the performance of our deep neural
network.
The optimization is summarized in Algorithm 1, where
we use data from the ﬁrst half of year 2015 to tune our
network. We ﬁrst remove the trend from the time series of
each OD and extract train and test sets. We split it into 3
months of train and 3 months of test sets. We then deﬁne a
range of hyper-parameters and pick them randomly in each
iteration of the outer loop. For each of them, we go through
a number of training loops, where we train a fully-connected
single-output LSTM and compute the loss at each iteration.
Losses on the test set are visualized with TensorBoard (a
TensorFlow visualization tool for plotting metrics), which
are shown further on the study and will let us know which
set of hyper-parameters work best.
Algorithm 1 Hyper-parameter tuning (Random Search)
Input: First 6 months of data from 2015
Past observations of demand intensity (lags).
Output:
Prediction of travel demand 30 min ahead.
1: procedure
Detrend time series of each OD
Extract train and test sets
2:
for iteration in num_iterations do
3:
Generate Random Hyper Parameters
4:
for epoch in num_epochs do
5:
for batch in num_batches_train do
6:
Extract a batch of samples
7:
Perform forward propagation
8:
Train model with SGD and Backprop
9:
end for
10:
for batch in num_batches_test do
11:
Extract a batch of samples
12:
Perform forward propagation
13:
Compute RMSE on validation set
14:
end for
15:
end for
16:
end for
17: end procedure
4.6
Sliding-window approach (NYC)
This section explains how single-output and multi-output
models presented previously are trained and tested so as to
compare their performance.
The hyper-parameter tuning algorithm makes use of
data from the ﬁrst six months of year 2015. Once we ﬁnd
the optimal ones, we test them on a validation set. The
validation set covers travel demand data for the second half
of year 2015.
We use a sliding window approach, where we re-train
our models every 5 days, simulating a real-time trafﬁc
scenario. This way we avoid the risk of overﬁtting to only
a subsample of the data, and to an unrealistic scenario (not
real-time).
We use 25 days of bootstrap data (see Algorithm 2) and a
window of 5 days. We initialize our weights and go through
a number of epochs, where we train our models on the
bootstrap data. Once models are trained, we test them on
the next 5 days. Next, a new iteration of the outer loop
begins, where we slide the window 5 days, in such a way
that our training set is composed by 30 days. Weights are
re-initialized, we go through a number of epochs, train our
models on the extended bootstrap data and test them on
the next 5 days. We keep doing this until the bootstrap data
covers all 6 months.
==PAGE:14==
14
Algorithm 2 Sliding Window Strategy
Input: Last 6 months of data from 2015
Past observations of demand intensity (lags).
Output:
Prediction of travel demand 30 min ahead.
1: procedure
2:
Detrend time series of each OD
3:
for current_window in windows do
4:
Initialize weights randomly
5:
for epoch in num_epochs do
6:
for batch in num_batches do
7:
Extract a batch of samples
8:
Perform forward propagation
9:
Train model with SGD and Backprop
10:
end for
11:
end for
12:
Test model on current window
13:
Compute RMSE
14:
end for
15: end procedure
4.7
Space exploration (NYC)
So far, all ODs explored have an origin set in Manhattan.
This section presents an algorithm that adds an outer loop
allowing us to explore the space of origins in NYC.
The process is summarized in Algorithm 3, where we use
data from the second half of year 2015. We start by picking
an origin in the outer loop and removing the trend from
the time series of each OD. We use 25 of days of bootstrap,
as before, and a window of 5 days. Weights are initialized
and we go through a number of epochs, where we train our
models on the bootstrap data. Having models trained, we
test them on the next 5 days. Then, we slide the window 5
days, in such a way that the training set is extended to 30
days. Weights are re-initialized, we go through a number of
training loops, train our models on the bootstrap data and
test them on the following 5 days. We keep iterating until
the bootstrap data covers all 6 months. Ultimately, a new
iteration of the outer loop begins, where we pick a different
origin in NYC and repeat the process.
Algorithm 3 Space Exploration
Input: Last 6 months of data from 2015
Past observations of demand intensity (lags).
Output:
Prediction of travel demand 30 min ahead.
1: procedure
2:
for origin in origin_space do
3:
Detrend time series of each OD
4:
for current_window in windows do
5:
Extract train and test sets
6:
Initialize weights randomly
7:
for epoch in num_epochs do
8:
for batch in num_batches do
9:
Extract a batch of samples
10:
Perform forward propagation
11:
Train model with SGD and Backprop
12:
end for
13:
end for
14:
Test model on current window
15:
Compute RMSE
16:
end for
17:
end for
18: end procedure
4.8
Data overview (MOVIA)
The data from Movia gathers bus travel times for a set of in-
terconnected links in Copenhagen. Attributes are illustrated
below.
DateTime
LineDirectionLinkOrder
LinkRef
LinkName
LinkTravelTime
2017-01-01 03:07:06
15
28002->28000
Bella Center St. (28002) - Bella Center, Indgang Vest (28000)
52
2017-01-01 03:08:49
16
28000->2747
Bella Center, Indgang Vest (28000) - Vandrerhjem (2747)
82
2017-01-01 03:10:14
17
2747->1220
Vandrerhjem (2747) - Artillerivej (1220)
85
2017-01-01 03:11:39
18
1220->1221
Artillerivej (1220) - Sluseholmen (1221)
56
2017-01-01 03:13:17
19
1221->1222
Sluseholmen (1221) - Badehavnsgade (1222)
64
2017-01-01 03:14:48
20
1222->1223
Badehavnsgade (1222) - Mozarts Plads (1223)
68
2017-01-01 03:16:52
21
1223->1225
Mozarts Plads (1223) - Sjaelor St. (1225)
99
2017-01-01 03:18:20
22
1225->2676
Sjaelor St. (1225) - Sankt AnnÃ˛e Gymnasium (2676)
37
Table 8: Movia data attributes
As an example, the ﬁrst record indicates that on 2017-
01-01 at 03:07:06, the travel time to traverse the link, Bella
Center St. (28002) - Bella Center, Indgang Vest (28000), was
52 seconds.
Next ﬁgure shows those links in a map. Each blue
circle represents a bus stop point. We decided to focus in
a subsample of the data. Thus, only connected links under
the red line are considered in this study.
Intuitively, it would make sense to use a multi-output
approach to model those links concurrently, as what hap-
pened in the previous link directly inﬂuences what will
happen in the next one.
Thus, the main goal is to examine whether modeling
multiple links together in a deep neural network improves
travel time predictions over modeling them independently.
==PAGE:15==
15
Figure 32: Bus links
4.9
Single-output deep learning approach (MOVIA)
This section presents an algorithm that makes use of an
LSTM architecture in order to make travel time predictions
for each link separately.
The architecture used for each link is the same as the one
shown in ﬁgure 27. However, the input vector fed is a batch
of one dimensional time series sequences of length equal to
20 lags.
The procedure is encapsulated in Algorithm 4, where
we use data for 7 interconnected bus links. We start by
grouping the data by links. Having done this, we iterate
over the links, generate predictive features, extract train and
test sets, initialize our single-output (independent) LSTM
model, train it, test it and evaluate its performance on the
current link.
Algorithm 4 Movia: Independent LSTMs
Input: Data for 7 consecutive bus links in CPH
Past observations of travel times (lags).
Output:
Travel time prediction one step ahead for each link
independently.
1: procedure
2:
Group data by links
3:
for link in links do
4:
Generate features
5:
Extract train and test sets
6:
Initialize Independent LSTM model
7:
Train model with SGD and BackProp
8:
Test model
9:
Compute RMSE
10:
end for
11: end procedure
4.10
Multi-output deep learning approach (MOVIA)
Similarly, we use the LSTM architecture presented in ﬁgure
29 for making multi-output travel time predictions. Instead
of using 3 LSTM bocks, we use 7, since predictions are made
simultaneously for seven consecutive links.
The set of steps are outlined in Algorithm 5. We ﬁrst
group the data by links. Once we’ve done this, we loop over
the links, generate features and extract train and test sets.
Then, we are in a position to feed all these inputs into our
connected LSTM model, which we ultimately train, test and
evaluate performance-wise.
Algorithm 5 Movia: Connected LSTMs
Input: Data for 7 consecutive bus links in CPH
Past observations of travel times (lags).
Output:
Multi-output travel time prediction one step ahead.
1: procedure
2:
Group data by links
3:
for link in links do
4:
Generate features
5:
Extract train and test sets
6:
end for
7:
Initialize Connected LSTM model
8:
Train model with SGD and BackProp
9:
Test model
10:
Compute RMSE
11: end procedure
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The main goal of this study is to explore whether modeling
multiple correlated ODs together in a deep neural network
improves predictions over modeling them independently.
To begin with, we try out different deep nets and evalu-
ate their performance. As mentioned before, CNNs excel in
capturing spatial correlations, while LSTMs shine at tasks
that involve ﬁnding patterns in temporal dependencies.
Convolutional LSTMs, on their side, are a mix of the pre-
vious two.
The aim is to ﬁnd out which deep neural network of
those three suits best the current problem we are trying to
solve. Considering the temporal relationship of travel de-
mand, one would say an LSTM is more suitable than a CNN.
In order to proof that, we implement them independently
and make predictions using the sliding window approach.
Figure 33: Sliding window approach. Single-output CNN vs
Single-output LSTM vs Single-output Conv LSTM. Origin,
Manhattan. Destination, Newark Liberty International air-
port.
Figure 33 shows RMSE for travel demand predictions
made at Newark Liberty International Airport. As already
==PAGE:16==
16
indicated, models are re-trained and errors are reported
every 5 days. As expected, LSTM outperforms CNN and
the combination lays somewhere in the middle. Errors vary
within the range 1.4 to 2, being the travel demand to Newark
in the spectrum 0 to 25. Errors go up and down randomly
through time, which can be due to weather, a special event,
an incident, or any other source of noise.
Figure 34: Sliding window approach. Single-output CNN vs
Single-output LSTM vs Single-output Conv LSTM. Origin,
Manhattan. Destination, John F. Kennedy airport.
In addition, ﬁgure 34 shows travel demand predictions
made at John F. Kennedy Airport. Once again, LSTMs sur-
pass the rest of the models performance-wise. It is important
to note that travel demand to JFK ranges from 0 to 50, errors
varying in the range 3 to 5.5.
Figure 35: Sliding window strategy. Single-output CNN vs
Single-output LSTM vs Single-output Conv LSTM. Origin,
Manhattan. Destination, LaGuardia airport.
Ultimately, ﬁgure 35 shows predictions made at La-
Guardia Airport, where LSTMs exceed once again. Errors
vary within the range 4.5 to 9, being the travel demand to
LaGuardia in the spectrum 0 to 90.
To make results more clear, instead of computing the
error at each 5 day step, we stack all the predictions and
compute a single value error for the various approaches.
Outcomes are shown in table 9, which deﬁnitely conﬁrm
what we had seen previously.
EWR
JFK
LGA
Convolutional Network
RMSE
2.118
4.486
6.268
Long short term memory network
RMSE
1.814
3.903
5.325
CNN and LSTM combined
RMSE
1.988
4.338
5.854
Table 9: RMSE on stacked predictions from sliding window
approach. CNN vs LSTM vs CNN-LSTM. Origin, Manhat-
tan. Destinations, 3 airports in NYC.
Up to this point, we have proofed LSTMs work best
when modeling temporal relationships of travel demand.
Hence, these are the neural networks we are going to be
focusing on at next steps. There are several ways in which
they can be trained, as demonstrated at the beginning of the
study. One is forcing the output to be the input shifted by
one time step (see ﬁgure 12). The other one is to take the last
element of the input to the recurrent net, shift if by one time
step and use that as our desired output (see ﬁgure 13). This
second approach is usually used in RNNs that predict the
next character in a sequence.
Figure 36 shows RMSE for travel demand predictions
made at Newark Liberty International Airport. The neural
network used is a single-output LSTM, with two different
training approaches: many-to-one and many-to-many. As it
can be observed, the latter is better performance-wise for
this particular scenario.
Figure 36: Sliding window approach. Single-output LSTM.
Many-to-one vs Many-to-many. Origin, Manhattan. Desti-
nation, Newark Liberty International Airport.
In addition, ﬁgure 37 shows travel demand predictions
made at John F. Kennedy Airport. Performance is very
similar for both approaches, in this case. However, many-
to-many approach fails to model travel demand at last time
steps.
Figure 37: Sliding window approach. Single-output LSTM.
Many-to-one vs Many-to-many. Origin, Manhattan. Desti-
nation, John F. Kennedy airport.
Ultimately, ﬁgure 38 shows predictions made at La-
Guardia Airport. This scenario clearly shows, many-to-one
approach outperforms many-to-many when modeling travel
demand through time.
==PAGE:17==
17
Figure 38: Sliding window approach. Single-output LSTM.
Many-to-one vs Many-to-many. Origin, Manhattan. Desti-
nation, LaGuardia airport.
So as to make results more interpretable, rather than
reporting the error at a 5 day step, we concatenate all the
predictions and report a single value error for the various
approaches. Results are shown in table 10.
EWR
JFK
LGA
Many-to-one LSTM
RMSE
1.814
3.903
5.325
Many-to-many LSTM
RMSE
1.671
3.991
6.475
Table 10: RMSE on stacked predictions from sliding window
approach. Single-output LSTM. Many-to-one vs Many-to
many. Origin, Manhattan. Destinations, 3 airports in NYC.
This table just certiﬁes what we had seen in the previous
ﬁgures. Many-to-one approach models travel demand more
accurately at John F. Kennedy and LaGuardia airports, while
many-to-many does better at Newark Liberty. Henceforth,
we focus on building a multi-output LSTM network trained
with a many-to-one approach.
Before diving into that task, we run into a hyper-
parameter optimization step.
Loss value represents the difference between what our
network predicts and what is known to be true. Thus, it
implies how well or bad our models are behaving after
each iteration of the optimization. Ideally, we expect the
reduction of loss after each iteration, since the network
keeps on learning. Hence, the lower the loss, the better the
model (unless the model has over-ﬁtted the training data).
The loss is calculated on the validation set. The network
used for ﬁnding the optimal hyper-parameters is a single-
output LSTM neural network (the one that worked best so
far). We explore a space of hyper-parameters in order to pick
those that lead to the lowest MSE. Lines in ﬁgure 33 show
how the loss evolves after each iteration. In the backdrop we
see the original data ﬂuctuates a bit due to a large learning
rate. TensorBoard allows us to smooth the data in order to
see the trend line more clearly.
Figure
39:
Hyper-parameter
optimization
by
Random
Search. Single-output LSTM. Loss (MSE) at each mini-batch
iteration per epoch.
Table 11 links lines in ﬁgure 39 to their correspon-
dent hyper-parameters and loss value at last epoch’s last
mini-batch iteration. They all have a very similar behavior
performance-wise: loss decreases progressively as the net-
work continues to learn. However, the lowest MSE (0.05263)
is achieved with a hidden size of 120 and a learning rate of
6E-04. Thus, those are the hyper-parameters that we pick
and will work with from this point on.
Hyper-Parameters
Loss at last step
hidden size: 260, learning rate: 7E-05
0.08349
hidden size: 300, learning rate: 4E-04
0.07928
hidden size: 300, learning rate: 1E-04
0.07738
hidden size: 250, learning rate: 1E-04
0.07158
hidden size: 100, learning rate: 4E-05
0.06791
hidden size: 120, learning rate: 6E-04
0.05263
Table
11:
Hyper-parameter
optimization.
Single-output
LSTM. Loss (MSE) at last epoch’s last mini batch iteration.
Now we are in the position to build our multi-output
models and examine whether modeling multiple correlated
ODs together in an LSTM boosts predictions over modeling
them separately.
The architecture used for a multi-output LSTM has been
already presented in ﬁgure 29. In addition, we use linear re-
gression and support vector regression as a baseline, so that
we have models we can compare our LSTMs’ performance
to.
Figure 40 shows RMSE for predictions made by those
three models at Newark Liberty International airport. Not
only we show performance through time for single-output
models, but for multi-output ones as well. Likewise, ﬁgures
41 and 42 present RMSEs for travel demand predictions
made at John F. Kennedy and LaGuardia airports.
==PAGE:18==
18
Figure 40: Sliding window approach. Single-output vs
Multi-output. Origin, Manhattan. Destination, Newark Lib-
erty International Airport.
Figure 41: Sliding window approach. Single-output vs
Multi-output.
Origin,
Manhattan.
Destination,
John
F.
Kennedy airport.
Figure 42: Sliding window approach. Single-output vs
Multi-output. Origin, Manhattan. Destination, LaGuardia
airport.
It is hard to infer from the ﬁgures above whether multi-
output models are doing better than single-output ones.
Thus, we chain all predictions together and present a single
value error for the different approaches. Results are shown
in table 12.
EWR
JFK
LGA
LSTM
LReg
SVR
LSTM
LReg
SVR
LSTM
LReg
SVR
Single Output
RMSE
1.814
1.805
1.861
3.903
3.852
3.917
5.325
5.287
5.470
Multi Output
RMSE
1.768
1.796
1.813
3.805
3.819
3.862
5.283
5.327
5.513
Table 12: RMSE on stacked predictions from sliding win-
dow approach. Single-output approaches vs Multi-output
approaches. Origin, Manhattan. Destinations, 3 airports in
NYC.
With regard to single-output models, linear regression
performs slightly better, followed very closely by LSTM and
SVR. We initially expected LSTMs to surpass the rest of the
models, though. The main reason might be the data we feed
the models with. After removing the trend from the original
series, we end up with a very noisy signal, being the signal-
to-noise-ratio (measure that compares the level of desired
signal to the level of background noise) a value very close
to zero. That means, the signal we are trying to predict is
basically noise.
Interestingly, multi-output LSTMs do better than single-
output LSTMs. Not only that, multi-output LSTMs beat
single-output linear regression models, although differences
in performance are small.
To conclude, we explore the space of origins in NYC and
use the predictive single-output and multi-output LSTM
models built before so as to forecast travel demand at
the three airports. Remarkably, multi-output models always
perform slightly better than single-output ones. Results are
shown in table 13. Each row in the table is the result of a
unique OD by varying the origin.
EWR
JFK
LGA
Multi-Output
Single-Output
Multi-Output
Single-Output
Multi-Output
Single-Output
0.400
0.408
0.709
0.726
0.889
0.897
0.496
0.514
0.889
0.914
1.299
1.386
1.083
1.126
1.991
2.031
2.285
2.379
0.932
0.942
1.916
1.958
2.444
2.610
1.766
1.831
3.803
3.907
5.275
5.382
0.692
0.694
1.822
1.858
2.287
2.442
0.708
0.730
1.968
2.015
2.604
2.772
1.092
1.118
2.672
2.791
4.165
4.578
0.866
0.876
1.978
2.038
2.412
2.619
0.689
0.689
2.232
2.291
3.187
3.457
0.524
0.533
1.461
1.478
1.831
1.944
0.404
0.407
1.544
1.572
2.010
2.135
0.511
0.523
1.709
1.714
2.260
2.403
Table 13: RMSE on stacked predictions from space ex-
ploration approach, Single-output LSTM vs Multi-output
LSTM. Origins, 13 zones in Manhattan. Destinations, 3
airports in NYC.
Lastly, we have applied those models to the dataset
introduced before from Movia. The goal here is to ex-
plore whether modeling 7 consecutive links together im-
proves predictions over modeling them separately. Intu-
itively, modeling relationships among the links could help
since what happened in the previous link directly affects
what is going to happen in the next one. Table 13 shows
travel time RMSEs for each link.
MOVIA
Multi-Output LSTM
Single-Output LSTM
Single-Output LReg
Single-Output SVR
RMSE
36.962
38.861
33.642
38.484
20.849
21.467
20.474
21.078
22.167
22.0240
21.347
22.134
46.812
47.036
41.658
48.316
29.524
27.651
22.691
27.154
15.683
15.283
15.378
15.412
14.698
14.664
14.684
14.848
Table 14: Movia data. RMSE on travel time predictions in 7
interconnected bus links.
We can conclude single-output linear regression beats
both, single-output SVR and LSTM for every link. In ad-
dition, multi-output LSTM does not always perform better
than single-output LSTM, as it did in the case of the NYC
taxi data set. This might be due to the fact that correlation
between each link is not high, as it was in the case of the
NYC taxi data.
==PAGE:19==
19
6
CONCLUSION
This study begins by comparing whether a convolutional
network, a recurrent network or a convolutional network
followed by an recurrent network is more suitable for pre-
dicting travel demand between ODs. Results show recurrent
networks surpass convolutional networks performance-
wise, which makes perfect sense, since they are capable of
capturing temporal dependencies.
In order to develop a robust recurrent neural network,
we had to consider the selection of the number of layers,
the number of neurons in the hidden layer, the learning rate
and the number of epochs for model training, carefully. For
example, if we consider an insufﬁcient number of neurons
in the hidden layer, the neural network cannot reﬂect non-
linearity within the training data. Conversely, if we consider
too many neurons, the neural network has an over-ﬁtting
problem, and hence, this leads a lack of generalizability. In
this study, we use random search in order to ﬁgure out what
the optimal values for the learning rate and hidden size
are. The rest of hyper-parameters are set by a trial-and-error
method.
Finally, multi-output predictive models were developed
and their performances of travel demand and travel time
were evaluated through a comparison with single-output
predictive models. We found out that modeling highly
correlated inputs concurrently in an LSTM neural network,
does result in improved predictions. However, those im-
provements in model’s performance are of small difference.
In summary, both the LSTM model and the Linear Re-
gression model are good enough to predict travel demand
and travel time in this study. However, we initially expected
LSTMs to outperform the rest of the models. The main
reason why this does not happen might be the data we
feed the models with. After removing the trend from the
original series, we end up having a very noisy signal, being
the signal-to-noise ratio (measure that compares the level of
desired signal to the level of background noise) a value very
close to zero. Having a signal which is basically noise might
be preventing the LSTM from modeling it successfully.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
To begin with, I would like to thank Francisco Camara
Pereira for the supervision of this work, his guidance has
been a valuable input for this thesis. I would like to make a
special mention to Filipe Rodrigues who has made available
his support towards the completion of this thesis.
I am forever thankful to the Technical University of
Denmark for giving me the chance to make a career change
and allow me to dive into the exciting ﬁelds of Machine
learning and Software development.
Furthermore, I would like to show my appreciation to
three wonderful individuals, Adrian Zucco, Nacho Candela
and Dhanesh Budhrani who gave me the necessary distrac-
tions from my research.
Finally, my deep and sincere gratitude to my family for
their continuous and unparalleled love, help and support. I
am grateful to my brother for always being there for me as
a friend. I am forever thankful to my parents for giving me
the opportunities and experiences that have made me who I
am. They encouraged me to explore ambitious directions in
life and seek my own destiny. This journey would not have
been possible if not for them, and I dedicate this milestone
to them.
REFERENCES
[1] Bachmann, C., Abdulhai, B., Roorda, M.J., Moshiri, B., 2013. A
comparative assessment of multi-sensor data fusion techniques for
freeway trafﬁc speed estimation using microsimulation modeling.
[2] Boto-Giralda, D., Diaz-Pernas, F.J., Gonzalez-Ortega, D., Diez-
Higuera, J.F., Anton Rodriguez, M., Martinez-Zarzuela, M., Torre-
Diez, I., 2010. Wavelet-based denoising for trafﬁc volume time
series forecasting with self-organizing neural networks.
[3] Toque, F., Come, E., El Mahrsi, M.K., Oukhellou, L., 2016. Fore-
casting dynamic public transport origin-destination matrices with
long-short term memory recurrent neural networks.
[4] Yu, B., Lam, W.H., Tam, M.L., 2011. Bus arrival time prediction at
bus stop with multiple routes.
[5] Zhang, N., Zhang, Y., Lu, H., 2011. Seasonal autoregressive in-
tegrated moving average and support vector machine models:
prediction of short-term trafﬁc ﬂow on freeways.
[6] Antoniou, C., Koutsopoulos, H.N., Yannis, G., 2013. Dynamic data-
driven local trafﬁc state estimation and prediction.
[7] Chan, K.Y., Dillon, T.S., Singh, J., Chang, E., 2012. Neural-network-
based models for shortterm trafﬁc ﬂow forecasting using a hybrid
exponential smoothing and levenbergâ ˘A¸Smarquardt algorithm.
[8] Fei, X., Lu, C.C., Liu, K., 2011. A Bayesian dynamic linear model
approach for real-time short-term freeway travel time prediction.
[9] Yang, H., Leung, C.W., Wong, S.C., Bell, M.G., 2010b. Equilibria of
bilateral taxi customer searching and meeting on networks.
[10] LeCun, Y., Haffner, P., Bottou, L., Bengio, Y., 1999. Object recogni-
tion with gradient-based learning.
[11] Williams, R.J., Zipser, D., 1989. A learning algorithm for continu-
ally running fully recurrent neural networks.
[12] Hochreiter, S., Schmidhuber, J., 1997. Long short-term memory.
[13] Wang, J., Gu, Q., Wu, J., Liu, G., Xiong, Z., 2016a. Trafﬁc speed
prediction and congestion source exploration: A deep learning
method.
[14] James Bergstra, Yoshua Bengio, 2012. Random Search for Hyper-
Parameter Optimization.
[15] Sergey Ioffe, Christian Szegedy, 2015. Batch Normalization: Ac-
celerating Deep Network Training by Reducing Internal Covariate
Shift
[16] Sepp Hochreiter, JÃijrgen Schmidhuber, 1997. Long Short-term
Memory.
[17] Ma, X., Tao, Z., Wang, Y., Yu, H., Wang, Y., 2015. Long short-term
memory neural network for trafﬁc speed prediction using remote
microwave sensor data.
[18] Wu, Y., Tan, H., 2016. Short-term trafﬁc ﬂow forecasting with
spatial-temporal correlation in a hybrid deep learning framework.
[19] Zhang, J., Zheng, Y., Qi, D., 2016. Deep spatio-temporal residual
networks for citywide crowd ﬂows prediction.
[20] Shi, X., Chen, Z., Wang, H., Yeung, D.Y., Wong, W.K., Woo, W.c.,
2015. Convolutional lstm network: A machine learning approach
for precipitation nowcasting, in: Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems.
==PAGE:20==
20
APPENDIX A
SOURCE CODE FOR INDEPENDENT LSTM MODEL
c l a s s LstmModel :
def
__init__ ( self , name ,
config ) :
s e l f . name = name
s e l f . config = config
s e l f . add_placeholders ( )
def add_placeholders ( s e l f ) :
" " "
i n i t i a l i z e s
placeholders
" " "
with
t f . variable_scope ( s e l f . config . name + " _placeholders " ) :
s e l f . input_placeholder = t f . placeholder ( t f . float32 ,
[None ,
s e l f . config . seq_len ,
1] ,
" input " )
s e l f . dropout_placeholder = t f . placeholder ( t f . float32 , None ,
" dropout " )
i f
s e l f . name i s
" independent " :
s e l f . target_placeholder = t f . placeholder ( t f . float32 ,
[None ,
1 ,
1] ,
" target " )
def add_LSTM_layer ( s e l f ) :
" " "
defines an LSTM layer
" " "
with
t f . variable_scope ( s e l f . config . name + " _lstm_layers " ) :
onecell = t f . contrib . rnn . GRUCell ( s e l f . config . s t a t e _ s i z e )
onecell = t f . contrib . rnn . DropoutWrapper ( onecell ,
output_keep_prob= s e l f . dropout_placeholder )
m u l t i c e l l = t f . contrib . rnn . MultiRNNCell ( [ onecell ]
*
s e l f . config . num_layers ,
s t a t e _ i s _ t u p l e =False )
outputs ,
_ = t f . nn . dynamic_rnn ( multicell ,
s e l f . input_placeholder ,
dtype= t f . f l o a t 3 2 )
return
outputs
def add_dense_layer ( self ,
_input ,
hidden_size ,
out_size ) :
" " "
defines
fully
connected
layer
" " "
weight = t f . Variable ( t f . truncated_normal ( [ hidden_size ,
out_size ] ,
stddev =0.01))
bias = t f . Variable ( t f . constant ( 0 . 1 ,
shape =[ out_size ] ) )
return
t f . matmul( _input ,
weight ) + bias
def
cost ( s e l f ) :
" " "
defines
loss
function
" " "
mse = t f . reduce_mean ( t f .pow( t f . subtract ( s e l f . model ,
s e l f . target_placeholder ) ,
2 . 0 ) )
return mse
def optimize ( s e l f ) :
" " "
defines
optimizer
" " "
optimizer = t f . t r a i n . RMSPropOptimizer ( s e l f . config . learning_rate )
return
optimizer . minimize ( s e l f . cost )
def model ( s e l f ) :
" " "
defines model
" " "
out = s e l f . add_LSTM_layer ( )
i f
s e l f . name i s
" independent " :
out = out [ : ,
out . shape [ 1 ]
1 ,
: ]
out = s e l f . add_dense_layer ( out ,
s e l f . config . state_size ,
1)
return out
def
batch_train_generator ( self , X, y ) :
" " "
mini
batch
generator
" " "
for
i
in range ( len (X) // s e l f . config . batch_size ) :
batch_X = X[ i : i + s e l f . config . batch_size ,
: ,
: ]
batch_y = y [ i : i + s e l f . config . batch_size ,
: ]
yield batch_X ,
batch_y
def
t r a i n ( self , X, y ) :
" " "
t r a i n model
" " "
s e l f . optimize
s e l f . sess = t f . Session ( )
s e l f . sess . run ( t f . g l o b a l _ v a r i a b l e s _ i n i t i a l i z e r ( ) )
for epoch in range ( s e l f . config . num_epochs ) :
gen_train = s e l f . batch_train_generator (X, y )
for
batch
in range ( len (X) // s e l f . config . batch_size ) :
batch_X ,
batch_y = next ( gen_train )
_ = s e l f . sess . run ( s e l f . optimize ,
feed_dict ={
s e l f . input_placeholder :
batch_X . reshape ( 1 ,
s e l f . config . seq_len ,
1) ,
s e l f . target_placeholder :
batch_y . reshape ( 1 ,
1 ,
1) ,
s e l f . dropout_placeholder :
s e l f . config . dropout_train
} )
def
predict ( self , X ) :
" " " make predictions
" " "
i f
s e l f . model i s None :
r a i s e
RuntimeError ( " Model i s
not
i n i t i a l i z e d . " )
preds = s e l f . sess . run ( s e l f . model ,
feed_dict ={
s e l f . input_placeholder : X. reshape ( 1 ,
s e l f . config . seq_len ,
1) ,
s e l f . dropout_placeholder :
s e l f . config . dropout_eval
} )
return preds
==PAGE:21==
21
APPENDIX B
SOURCE CODE FOR CONNECTED LSTM MODEL
c l a s s
ConnectedLstmModel ( ) :
def
__init__ ( self ,
config ,
submodels ) :
s e l f . config = config
s e l f . submodels = submodels ;
s e l f . add_placeholders ( )
s e l f . optimize
s e l f . model
def add_placeholders ( s e l f ) :
" " "
i n i t i a l i z e
placeholders
" " "
s e l f . target_placeholder =
t f . placeholder ( t f . float32 ,
[None ,
len ( s e l f . submodels ) ] ,
" target " )
def
cost ( s e l f ) :
" " "
define
loss
function
" " "
mse = t f . reduce_mean ( t f .pow( t f . subtract ( s e l f . model ,
s e l f . target_placeholder ) ,
2 . 0 ) )
return mse
def optimize ( s e l f ) :
" " "
define
optimizer
" " "
optimizer = t f . t r a i n . RMSPropOptimizer ( s e l f . config . learning_rate )
return
optimizer . minimize ( s e l f . cost )
def add_dense_layer ( self ,
input ,
hidden_size ,
out_size ) :
" " "
define
fully
connected
layer
" " "
weight = t f . Variable ( t f . truncated_normal ( [ hidden_size ,
out_size ] ,
stddev =0.01))
bias = t f . Variable ( t f . constant ( 0 . 1 ,
shape =[ out_size ] ) )
return
t f . matmul( input ,
weight ) + bias
def model ( s e l f ) :
" " "
define model
" " "
merged_output = t f . concat ( [m. model for m in
s e l f . submodels ] ,
2)
out = merged_output [ : ,
merged_output . shape [ 1 ]
1 ,
: ]
prediction = s e l f . add_dense_layer ( out ,
i n t ( merged_output . get_shape ( ) [
2 ] ) ,
i n t ( s e l f . target_placeholder . get_shape ( ) [ 1 ] ) )
return
prediction
def
batch_train_generator ( self , X, y ) :
" " "
mini
batch
generator
" " "
for
i
in range ( len (X) // s e l f . config . batch_size ) :
batch_X = X[ i : i + s e l f . config . batch_size
*
s e l f . config . seq_len ,
: ]
batch_y = y [ i : i + s e l f . config . batch_size ,
: ]
yield batch_X ,
batch_y
def
t r a i n ( self , X, y ) :
" " "
t r a i n model
" " "
s e l f . sess = t f . Session ( )
s e l f . sess . run ( t f . g l o b a l _ v a r i a b l e s _ i n i t i a l i z e r ( ) )
for epoch in range ( s e l f . config . num_epochs ) :
# mini batch
generator
for
training
gen_train = s e l f . batch_train_generator (X, y )
for
batch
in range ( len (X) // s e l f . config . batch_size ) :
batch_X ,
batch_y = next ( gen_train )
feed_dict ={}
for
i
in range ( len ( s e l f . submodels ) ) :
feed_dict [ s e l f . submodels [ i ] . input_placeholder ] = batch_X [ : , i ] . reshape ( 1 ,
s e l f . config . seq_len ,
1)
feed_dict [ s e l f . submodels [ i ] . dropout_placeholder ] = s e l f . config . dropout_train
feed_dict [ s e l f . target_placeholder ] = batch_y
_ = s e l f . sess . run ( s e l f . optimize ,
feed_dict=feed_dict )
def
predict ( self , X ) :
" " " make predictions
" " "
i f
s e l f . model i s None :
r a i s e
RuntimeError ( " Model i s
not
i n i t i a l i z e d . " )
feed_dict ={}
for
i
in range ( len ( s e l f . submodels ) ) :
feed_dict [ s e l f . submodels [ i ] . input_placeholder ] = X [ : , i ] . reshape ( 1 ,
s e l f . config . seq_len ,
1)
feed_dict [ s e l f . submodels [ i ] . dropout_placeholder ] = s e l f . config . dropout_eval
preds = s e l f . sess . run ( s e l f . model ,
feed_dict=feed_dict )
return preds
