==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
on
Microengineering and Monitoring Oxygen Tension in Perfusable 3D Microtumor Models
written at the
Technical University of Denmark
Microengineering and Monitoring Oxygen
Tension in Perfusable 3D Microtumor
Models
Author:
Milan Finn Wesseler
Student-ID s151924
Supervisor:
Niels Bent Larsen
Copenhagen, August 16, 2017
This Master Project on “Microengineering and Monitoring Oxygen Tension in Perfusable 3D
Microtumor Models” was conducted at the Technical University of Denmark, Department of Micro-
and Nanotechnology, in Spring 2017. The work took place in the research group of Niels Bent Larsen,
PolyCell.
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Introduction
3
2
Theoretical Background
9
2.1
Oxygen Sensitive Dye Complexes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
State Transitions in Phosphorescent Oxygen Sensors . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.1
Common State Transitions in Phosphorescent Oxygen Sensors . . .
11
2.2.2
Triplet-Triplet Annihilation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.3
Physical Deactivation of Singlet Oxygen
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.4
Other factors inﬂuencing phosphorescence lifetimes
. . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
Non-linear Fluorescence Quenching and the Stern-Volmer Relationship
. .
15
2.3.1
Negative Curvature in Stern-Volmer Plots
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.2
Positive Curvature in Stern-Volmer Plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4
Confocal Laser Scanning Phosphorescent Lifetime Imaging Microscopy
. .
18
2.4.1
Phosphorescent Lifetime Imaging Microscopy
. . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4.2
Time-correlated single photon counting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.4.3
Detector Saturation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.5
Diﬀusive Transport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.5.1
Einstein-Smoluchowski Diﬀusion Equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3
Materials & Methods
27
3.1
Printing of Scaﬀolds
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Hydrogel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3
Phosphorescent Beads and Hydrogel Incorporation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4
Cell Culturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.5
Microscopy Incubator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.6
Optics and Setup of Microscope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.7
Image Analysis Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Method Development
35
4.1
Background Noise and Tails of Decay Traces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2
Lifetime Distribution at Low Excitation Energies and Count Rates . . . . .
37
4.3
Detector Saturation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3.1
Saturation Correction: Compensation for Counting Loss
. . . . . .
45
4.4
Pixel Grouping versus Single Pixel Fit
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.5
Fitting Procedures for Lifetime Extraction - CPOx Orange . . . . . . . . .
50
4.6
Fitting Procedure for Lifetime Extraction - CPOx Red . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.7
Bead-selective Excitation and 3D Imaging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.8
Conclusion of Method Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5
Results
58
5.1
Oxygen Calibration Curve for CPOx Beads Orange . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.1.1
Stern-Volmer Plot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.1.2
Discussion of and Conclusion on Calibration of CPOx Beads Orange 59
5.2
Oxygen Calibration Curve for CPOx Beads Red . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.2.1
Stern-Volmer Plot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.2.2
Discussion of and Conclusion on Calibration of CPOx Beads Red
.
62
i
==PAGE:3==
5.3
Proof of Concept Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.3.1
Cells in Polysyterne and PEGDA Wells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6
Discussion
65
7
Conclusion
67
8
Outlook
69
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Oxygen monitoring with high spatial resolution in 3D cell culture microenvironments are
crucial for manifold organ-on-a-chip and disease models. This thesis presents a method
established for real-time, non-invasive optical oxygen monitoring in 3D tissue cultures
with high spatial resolution. This was achieved by the incorporation of phosphorescent
microprobes into hydrogels and 3D tissue culture environments and the use of phospho-
rescent lifetime imaging microsopy. Probe embedding and measurement procedures were
optimised and analysis methods developed. The use of confocal laser scanning microscopy
allowed 3D imaging with high spatial resolution and in connection with time-correlated
single photon counting, excellent time resolution. The use of oxygen sensitive phospho-
rescent probes enables optical measurements in dense tissue cultures with low background
due to the long lived phosphorescent signal and the incorporation of oxygen sensitive dyes
into microparticles cell culture integration without cell toxicity. Measurement conﬁgura-
tions were thoroughly tested, inﬂuences on lifetimes investigated and analysis procedures
developed.
This resulted in robust measurement and analysis procedures, calibration
curves as well as Stern-Volmer relations for a Rhutenium-phenantroline and Platinum-
porphin based compound. In addition, general feasibility of 3D oxygen monitoring in cell
cultures inside 3D printed cell culture scaﬀolds was shown.
1
==PAGE:5==
List of Abbreviations
FLIM
Fluorescence Lifetime Imaging Microscopy
GelMA
Gelatine Methacrylate
LSM
Laser Scanning Microscopy
MLCT
Metal to Ligand Charge Transfer
PEGDA
Poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate
PLIM
Phosphorescence Lifetime Imaging Microscopy
TCSPC
Time-Correlated Single Photon Counting
2
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
Oxygen monitoring is a crucial aspects in a wide range of biomedical applications that
include live cells. In cell cultures and biological assays, it is in important aspect for un-
derstanding physiology, pathophysiology and responses to a wide range of stimulie [1][2].
In microﬂuidic setups with thin cell layers, a variety of oxygen monitoring and control
solutions have been developed [3]. 3D tissue culture models increasingly aim to closely
monitor and control oxygen tension spatially, to recreate physiological conditions and
thus stimulate cell diﬀerentiation and responses [4][5]. In addition, for tumor models the
creation of oxygen gradients is of particular interest as solid tumors commonly consist
of layers of diﬀerent oxygenation [6] that react diﬀerently to chemotherapeutics [7] and
radiation[8] treatments. However, techniques for the real-time 3D oxygen monitoring in
cellular microenvironments that exhibit high accuracy and spatial resolution that do not
perturb cell culture systems are still needed.
Optical oxygen solutions are of particular interest as they allow real-time monitoring
without the need to physically disturb or penetrate cell cultures and as they typically do
not consume oxygen [9][10]. Here, in contrast to intensity based solutions, ﬂuorescence
or phosphorescence lifetime microscopy (FLIM/PLIM) do not require precise sensor cal-
ibrations and are independent of dye concentration. In addition, PLIM based sensors
come with the advantage of low background signal, as cell cultures and hydrogels often
do exhibit auto-ﬂuorescence but little long-lived phosphorescence [11]. They are actively
explored and oxygen monitoring with wide-ﬁeld [12] and laser scanning microscopy (LSM)
systems with single [13] and two photon excitation has been shown [14].
Optical phosphorescent oxygen sensors can be dissolved [13] or incorporated in micro-
probes [15] and nanoprobes [16]. Incorporation in probes comes with the advantage of
very low to non detectable cell toxicity and increased signal intensities inside 3D tissue
cultures [17].
Phosphorescent oxygen probes in combination with phosphorescent lifetime confocal
laser scanning based system are of particular interest as they oﬀer 3D mapping capa-
bilities, high spatial resolution, low pixel-crosstalk and promise accurate recording of
phosphorescent decay traces for lifetime determination.
3
==PAGE:7==
Introduction to Sensing Technology and Application
The main aim of this project was to establish an oxygen sensing technology that enables
accurate, real-time, non-invasive 3D oxygen monitoring in 3D tissue cultures.
The basic experimental approach is shown in ﬁgure ??. 3D cell culture scaﬀolds with
microﬂuidic channels are 3D printed using stereolithography. Then, cells and Phospho-
rescent microbeads are suspended in a hydrogel and incorporated into the scaﬀold. The
scaﬀold can then be placed onto a laser scanning microscope with phosphorescent lifetime
recording capabilities and a phosphorescent decay trace can be recorded. 3D pinted cell
culture scaﬀolds with integrated microﬂuidic channels, serving as nutrient and oxygen
supply channels. Cells and phosphorescent microbeads are suspended in a hydrogel and
incorporated into the scaﬀold. The scaﬀold can then be placed onto a laser scanning mi-
croscope with phosphorescent lifetime recording capabilities and a phosphorescent decay
trace can be recorded for each pixel, shown in ﬁgure 1.0.2.
Figure 1.0.1: Principle setup and approach for the oxygen monitoring system. For expla-
nations see text.
The phosphorescent decay curves acquired for each pixel can then be ﬁtted using diﬀer-
ent models with exponential decay, prinpciple shown in ﬁgure 1.0.2. The phosphorescent
lifetime, in principle, is deﬁned as the time it takes for a photon count to decay to 1/e of
its initial intensity.
4
==PAGE:8==
Figure 1.0.2: Principle of lifetime analysis. Decay curves from each pixel are ﬁtted with
an exponential decaying function. The phosphorescent lifetime is deﬁned as the time it
takes for the phosphorescent count (or intensity) to decay to 1/e of its initial value.
The measurement of images can then be repeated in horizontal focal planes to acquire
z-stack images, depicted in ﬁgure 1.0.3. The principle of confocal microscopy, incorpo-
rating a pin-hole in the detection path, allows for a strong reduction of light from other
planes than the one in focus.
5
==PAGE:9==
(a)
Figure 1.0.3: Principle of 3D imaging by z-stacks of focal planes.
Confocal imaging,
incorporating a pin-hole into the detection part, enables the strong reduction of light
from out of focus planes.
3D cell culture scaﬀolds were printed using established capabilities and technologies
for printing biocompatible PEGDA scaﬀolds. Pixel sizes down to 10.8x10.8 µm allow the
creation of detailed microﬂuidic networks. The scaﬀolds allow diﬀusion and are fairly
transparent. Homogenous distribution of beads was one challenge to be addressed.
Main Goals and Challenges
Especially the combination of LSM systems with phosphorescent microbeads comes with
manifold challenges and no successful 3D oxygen mapping based on phosphorescent miro-
probes for extracellular oxygen monitoring has - to the best of my knowledge - been
presented in literature. This challenge is addressed in this project.
High excitation light densities inﬂuence the photochemistry in beads and lead to manifold
eﬀects on lifetimes. Quick detector saturation typical for single photon counters leave nar-
row margins for count rates that are suﬃciently low to not distort lifetime measurements
through counting losses but suﬃciently high for consistent data processing at reasonable
recording times. As many factors inﬂuence phosphorescent lifetimes and commonly decays
consist of several contributors with diﬀerent decay constants, measured phosphorescent
lifetimes are usually rather to be seen as extracted parameters. Thus, extracted lifetimes
often are not universally valid for the dominant state transition of the used ﬂuorophore
but rather representative for entire set of experimental inﬂuences. The main goal in the
development of a oxygen monitoring system was therefore to achieve consistency.
To
achieve this, however, a detailed analysis of inﬂuences on lifetimes has been necessary.
For this purpose, the ﬁrst step was to set up and optimise an environment with very
stable temperature and precisely controllable gas composition. This was realised in form
of a microscopy incubator, optimised to also host microﬂuidic scaﬀolds presented above.
At the host department, the work with phosphorescence lifetime imaging was a new path
6
==PAGE:10==
to be taken. PLIM measurements of microbeads for oxygen monitoring with laser scanning
microscopes resulted in mumerous open questions and challenges that neither literature
reviews nor corespondance with experts at both manufacturers of the used beads and
microscopy systems could be easily addressed. Additionally, the experimental setup had
to be repaired and controlled environments had to be created.
It was therefor a highly interesting path with promising applications at its end to be
explored.
Oxygen sensing: An Overview
The measurement of oxygen in gas and solution is of great interest in manifold diverse
industries and applications. In pollution control and optimisation, gas sensors are used to
analysis exhausts from automobile engines, cement and steel factories. Chemical processes
in production facilities are controlled and optimised and safety critical oxygen levels to
decrease the risk of exploisons are monitored with oxygen sensors. Additionally, in food
processing plants, biotechnology companies and the pharmaceutical industry, oxygen sen-
sors give critical insights in biochemical processes and the state and metabolism of cell
cultures [18].
The selection of the preferable oxygen sensor depends on many aspects: whether oxygen
in gas phase or solution is measured, which working temperature is required, which level
of selectivity and sensitivity is needed and whether response-time is of importance. Addi-
tionally, it has to be considered whether long term stability is required and if a potential
inﬂuence of a sensor on its environment is considered critical for the application.
The focus of this report is on oxygen sensors for cell culture environments, or more specif-
ically on dissolved optical oxygen sensors for the latter. However, as a ﬁrst step, the
three main non-optical means for the determination of oxygen tension in cell cultures are
introduced to guide through the reasoning on why the subsequently explored method was
chosen. These most prominent non-optical means are Winkler titration, electroanalytical
methods, often with Clark style electrodes, as well as pressure based methods [18]. Win-
kler titration beneﬁts from precision but does not enable continuous oxygen monitoring.
Clark style electrodes for the electrochemical detection of oxygen are precise, have a wide
range of working temperatures and can be used in liquids and gases [19]. However, they
consume oxygen in the measurement process, which leads to a more alakaline environment
and deposition of a silver chloride coating on the anode, which reduces the reaction area
over time. Additionally, they are not easily integrable in closed cell culture environments.
Optical oxygen sensing methods based on the measurement of ﬂuorescent or phosphores-
cent quenching, on the other hand, usually show no or very limited oxygen consumption
while exhibiting high accuracy and allow real-time oxygen sensing, i.e. oxygen sensing
during ongoing cell culture without the need to open and thereby disturb samples. Lu-
minescent oxygen sensitive compounds can be used either as solubles directly dissolved
in analyte solutions or incorporated in oxygen permeable membranes on ﬁber tips [20] or
in nano- or microbeads [17][21]. In addition, various coating and photostabilizers allow
direct, long-term contact with cell culture without exhibiting cell-toxicity. In the form
of micro- and nanobeads, these sensors allow easy integration into 3D cell cultures for
non-invasive extra and intracellular oxygen measurements [10].
7
==PAGE:11==
Overview over Content
In chapter 2, the theoretical fundamentals for phosphorescent lifetime analysis are intro-
duced. In a ﬁrst step, the structure and atomic state transitions of the used dyes are
presented. In a second step, their most important state transitions in typical sensing
evironments and factors inﬂuencing their phosphorescent lifetimes are introduced. In a
third step, inﬂuences on lifetimes are set into the context of lifetime analysis in ranges of
physiological oxygen ranges, with non-linear quenching and the Stern-Volmer relationship.
In a fourth part, the technology for acquiring PLIM images with single photon counters
are introduced and some of the challenges discussed. In the last part of the theoretical
introduction, diﬀusion and convection is brieﬂy presented and important estimations dis-
cussed.
In chapter 3, the used materials and methods are described. Methods for 3D printing
of cell culture scaﬀolds, phosphorescent bead integration in hydrogels and cell culturing
procedures are included. The optimised microscope incubator, the optical setup, the mi-
croscopy system and the standard analysis software are introduced.
Chapter 4 presents the iterative process of establishing both measurement and analyti-
cal methods for oxygen monitoring using phosphorescent microbeads with the used LSM
based PLIM setup. Here, results are discussed at the end of each chapter to guide through
the process.
In chapter 5, results acquired using the developed methods are presented. These include
calibration curves for both used phosphorescent microbead types and feasbility studies
of PEGDA transparency, cell experiments and dyanmic oxygen gradient measurements.
Chapter 6 discusses the results and sets them into context. It is kept concise, as the major
part of the project - the method development - is discussed thoroughly in each chapter in
the context of the according measurements. Chapter 7 concludes this project and chapter
8 gives an outlook.
8
==PAGE:12==
2
Theoretical Background
In this section, the main theoretical background for the phenomena and technologies rel-
evant for this project are described. These are phosphorescent oxygen sensors and their
state transitions, Phosphorescent Lifetime Imaging Microscopy and molecular transport
mechanisms in 3D cell culture environments.
2.1
Oxygen Sensitive Dye Complexes
For this project, commercially available microbeads (CPOx Orange and Red, ibidi GmbH,
Planegg, Germany) containing oxygen sensitive dye complexes based on phosphorescent
quenching were chosen. Their physical and chemical properties as well as their application
in cell culture systems are explored in the following chapters.
The oxygen sensitive dye complexes based on Ruthenium-Phenanthroline (CPOx Orange)
and Platinum-Porphyrine (CPOx Red) derivates contained in the used polystyrene mi-
crobeads are presented in the following sections.
Ruthenium based dye complex
The explored Ruthenium based phosphorescent oxygen sensitive microbeads contain Tris(4,7-
diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline)ruthenium(II) [Ru(dip)3]2+ [21] as central oxygen sensitive
compound. Its structure as well as absorption and emission spectra are shown in ﬁgure
2.1.1a and 2.1.1b, respectively.
(a)
(b)
Figure
2.1.1:
(a)
Molecular
Structure
of
Tris(4,7-diphenyl-1,10-
phenanthroline)ruthenium(II) [Ru(dip)3]2+ from [22].
(b) Excitation (black line)
and emission (orange line) spectra of [Ru(dip)3]2+ adapted from [23].
9
==PAGE:13==
Intense Metal-to-ligand charge-transfer (MLCT) absorptions have been studied in de-
tail for many complexes consisting of 1,10-Phenanthroline-Ruthenium(II) [Ru(Phen)3]2+
as central element [24][25]. These d-π∗MLCT transitions have shown to exhibit high
quantum yields close to unity for [Ru(Phen)3]2+ [26][24] and similar compounds such as
Tris(2,2’-bipyridine)Ruthenium(II) [27] as well as at least 0.5 for [Ru(dip)3]2+ [28].
In literature for sensor applications, the transition from upper excited states to singlet
excited and from singlet excited to triplet excited states through intersystem crossing is
commonly described as diﬀerent processes [11][29]. Emission from excited singlet states is
here called ﬂuorescence. Emission from excited triplet states, that exhibit parallel spin to
their coupled ground state electron, is termed phosphorescence. However, publications on
the electronic state transitions suggest that strong spin-orbit coupling render clear spin
labelling erroneous and thus oppose the clear labels of ﬂuorescence and phosphorescence.
The description of vibrational relaxations from an upper excited to an emitting state fol-
lowed by a luminescent decay is suggested [26]. This further supports high quantum yields
not only into upper excited or excited singlet states 1MLCT but also to the long-lived
emitting state, as noted often referred to as the excited triplet state or 3MLCT [27].
Furthermore, it is suggested that high degrees of conjugation, as found in the used dye
complexes incorporating phenanthroline and the attached phenyl groups, stabilize the long
lived excited 3MLCT state by interligand electron transfer and reduce non-radiative decay
[27][30]. The longevity of the dye complex in increased by the phenanthroline and phenyl
groups by shielding the metal-to-ligand bonds with the surrounding ligands. Shielding
strongly decreases chemical cross reactions that would lead to unwanted byproducts and
potentially disrupt the functionality of the dye complex [31].
Platinum based dye complex
The second explored phosphorescent microbeads contain 5,10,15,20-Tetrakis(pentaﬂuorophenyl)-
21H,23H-porphin Platinum(II) as central oxygen sensing compound [21]. The structure
is shown in ﬁgure 2.1.2.
Figure 2.1.2:
Molecular Structure of 5,10,15,20-Tetrakis(pentaﬂuorophenyl)-21H,23H-
porphin Platinum(II) from [32].
10
==PAGE:14==
Little research has been published on this dye complex, especially compared to the
Ruthenium-phenanthroline complex described above. Metal-to-ligand charge-transfer ab-
sorptions as well as stabilizations of the MLCT triplet state through conjugation and
long term stability through shielding of the central metal-to-ligand bonds are expected.
However no detailed publications could be found on this.
2.2
State Transitions in Phosphorescent Oxygen Sensors
This section described in more detail the electronic states such as singlet and triplet
MLCT states in the context of common state transitions in phosphorescence quenching
based oxygen sensors. For simplicity and clarity, henceforth the terms ground and excited
singlet and triplet states are used without naming the exact character of the states (e.g.
MLCT state).
The discussion of common state transitions is followed by a discussion of phenomena
dependent on dye and oxygen concentration as well as photon ﬂux. In a last step, sensor
matrix stability and singlet oxygen quenching will be touched upon.
2.2.1
Common State Transitions in Phosphorescent Oxygen Sensors
The main state transitions relevant to any phosphorescent oxygen sensor are shown in
ﬁgure 2.2.1, blue arrows. The cascade starts with a photon exciting a ﬂuorophore from
its singlet electronic ground DS0 to some vibrational level of its singlet electronic excited
state DS1. The subsequent relaxation processes are now manifold and characterized by
diﬀerent state lifetimes. The quickest relaxation process is internal conversion from higher
vibrational states to the vibrational ground state of the electronic excited state DS1, which
occurs in the order of 10−12 s. From there, three main state transitions can occur: either
ﬂuorescent or non-radiative decay occur to the singlet electronic ground state DS0, with
ﬂuorescence lifetime typically in the order of 10−8 s or isc crossing to a higher vibrational
state of the excited triplet state DT1. The latter transition, a non-radiative intersystem
crossing between two states with equal vibrational energies but diﬀerent multiplicities,
usually has a much lower probability to occur than the decay to DS0. However, its oc-
currence can be greatly enhanced by the introduction of speciﬁc atoms with high atomic
mass resulting in nearly equal probabilities to decay to DS0. From the excited triplet state
DT1, phosphorescence with lifetimes of around 10−6 s to several seconds, non-radiative
relaxation, or physical deactivation by molecular oxygen (called quenching) can occur.
Here quenching is the central mechanism for oxygen sensing. With increasing oxygen
concentration, bimolecular quenching rates for oxygen increase, leading to a shortening
of the measured average lifetime as well as a decrease in intensity and lifetime of a phos-
phorescent dye [29][11].
The processes described below will always inﬂuence the distribution of state transitions
found in an actual system. The aim is usually to decrease those inﬂuences to dominantly
observe the state transitions described above. The following processes are ordered by
their expected relevance for the investigated system.
11
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.2.1: Extended Jablonski Diagram with states and state transitions for oxygen
quenching sensitive dye. DS0 represents the ground state, DS1 the excited singlet state,
DT1 the excited triplet state and DT2 the second excited triplet state of the dye. OT0
represents the ground triplet and OS1 the excited singlet state of Oxygen. Blue arrows
represent transitions commonly used to describe phosphorescent dyes sensitive to oxygen
quenching, with rate constants for absorption (ka), ﬂuorescence (kf), phosphorescence
(kp), bimolecular quenching (kq) and internal conversion (kfIC and kpIC; radiationless).
Orange arrows represent additional transitions relevant for the investigated dyes and mea-
surement conditions, with reverse intersystem crossing leading to delayed ﬂuorescence
(kdf), triplet-triplet annihilation (ktt), physical deactivation of oxygen (kOiSC and kpO),
chemical consumption of singlet oxygen (kcd) and diﬀusional equilibrium constant of oxy-
gen concentration between sensor and bulk (kd). Dashed lines are considered of minor
inﬂuence in the investigated system, with second excited triplet state absorption (kaT)
and deactivation (kt2IC) and singlet-oxygen-sensitized delayed ﬂuorescence (kSOSDF). The
ﬁgure is adapted from [29].
2.2.2
Triplet-Triplet Annihilation
Triplet-triplet annihilation, see ﬁgure 2.2.1 orange arrows in center part (ktt), is a bimolec-
ular quenching process involving two dye molecules in their excited triplet state DT1. As
indicated, the collision of two dye molecules in the excited triplet state leads to the exci-
tation of one molecule to an excited singlet state DS1 while at the same time leading to a
relaxation of the other to the dyes ground state DS0. In so-called up-conversion system,
this eﬀect is wanted and enables the emission of light with shorter wavelengths [33]. The
long lifetimes of the used phosphorescent dyes of around τ = 5 µs and τ = 40 µs are in the
range of compounds speciﬁcally used for up-conversion systems [34]. In phosphorescent
lifetime based sensor systems, however, it is an unwanted inﬂuence. It shortens extracted
phosphorescent lifetimes by reducing the triplet-state population in the course of a decay
trace and thus renders the latter not independent of the excited triplet state population
anymore.
As its occurrence is proportional to the amount of dye molecules in close proximity present
in the excited triplet state, it is directly dependent on dye concentration and excitation
light intensities. Therefore, the most eﬃcient way for its reduction are both the decrease
of dye concentration in sensor matrices as well as the decrease of excitation light inten-
sities [29]. In laser scanning microscopy systems, the light intensity in the focal spot is
12
==PAGE:16==
high, creating a challenge for the use of this technique explained in several later sections.
The dependence of lifetime on dye concentration and excitation light intensities are shown
in ﬁgure 2.2.2 for the dye Al(HPhNPF)3 in a Cytop A matrix at 20◦C and 0% O2 [29].
The dye concentration of the used CPOx Beads Red is within the range of the presented
dye concentrations. However, the lifetime of Al(HPhNPF)3 in Cytop A is roughly 4 or-
ders of magnitude longer than for the dyes presented above and the photon ﬂux about 80
times lower than measured for this system, presented in section 3. Literature about these
eﬀects on the used dye complexes would evidently be favourable but was not available. It
is therefore a matter of investigation how strongl these eﬀects are in the presented sensors.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.2.2: (b) Dependence of lifetime on dye concentration in phosphorescent oxygen
sensors based on Al(HPhNPF)3 in Cytop A matrix at a photon ﬂux of 660 µmol m−2s−1
at 20◦C and 0% O2. For comparison, phosphorescent microbeads (CPOx Red) used for
this project are speciﬁed to have a dye concentration <0.1% w/w dye in polystyrene
matrix. (b) Dependence of lifetime on photon ﬂux at a dye concentration of 0.2% w/w of
Al(HPhNPF)3 in Cytop A matrix at 20◦C and 0% O2. For comparison, energy densities
of about 40.5 mmol m−2s−1 are used as minimum excitation photon ﬂux in the setup used
in this work. Graphs reproduced from Lehner et al. [29].
2.2.3
Physical Deactivation of Singlet Oxygen
In contrast to most other molecules, the ground state of oxygen is its triplet state 3Σ−
g ,
not its reactive singlet state 1∆g [35]. As singlet oxygen is reactive with many organic
compounds, the aim in phosphorescent oxygen sensors is to strongly reduce its lifetime
to prevent photobleaching, cell toxicity and positive curvature in Stern-Volmer plots, as
explained in section 2.3.2. Polystyrene matrices, which were used as dye matrices in the
used sensors, were not found to be highly reactive neither for chemical nor physical de-
activation of singlet oxygen (corresponding to low kcd) in ﬁgure 2.2.1). An eﬀective way
to strongly decrease the lifetime of singlet oxygen and thus limit its detrimental eﬀects,
was found to be the addition of 1,4-diazabicyclooctane. The latter strongly reduces the
lifetime of singlet oxygen by physical deactivation to non-detectable trace levels [36].
Hence, physical deactivation is expected to be the main relaxation process for singlet
oxygen (ﬁgure 2.2.1, kOp). Thus, chemical consumption with its detrimental side eﬀects
and its potential eﬀects on lifetimes is expected to be decreased, explained below.
13
==PAGE:17==
The used beads therefore consist of a polystyrene matrix containing 1,4-diazabicyclooctane
alongside the described dye complexes.
2.2.4
Other factors inﬂuencing phosphorescence lifetimes
Temperature is reported to inﬂuence lifetime measurements [17][37], shown for PtPFPP
loaded microbeads (CPOx Red) in ﬁgure 2.2.3a, inset. No published data of the temper-
ature range for cell measurement of 37◦C was available but only approximate values from
the manufacturer of a measurement system designed for the used beads employing a diﬀer-
ent technique[38]. Experiments were therefore always conducted at approximately 37◦C,
using the optimised microscope incubator described in section 3.5 to reduce the inﬂuence
of temperature. pH values as well as albumin and carbohydrate content were shown
to not signiﬁcantly inﬂuence measurements under relevant physiological conditions, shown
in ﬁgure 2.3.1. These measurements were performed in a previous stage with a diﬀerent
measurement technique, but there is no reason to expect that this would change using
confocal PLIM microscopy, as these factors have largely to to with no penetration of the
mentioned substances into the beads and no inﬂuence of oxygen diﬀusion into the latter.
14
==PAGE:18==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 2.2.3: (a) Lifetime of PtPFPP containing polystyrene microbeads for oxygen con-
centrations between 0 and 300% of normal air saturation at 23◦C for desalted water. Inset
showing lifetime dependence of temperature. Fit was done using adapted Stern-Volmer
equation described in section 2.3. (b) Inﬂuence of pH value, (c) of albumin and (d) of
carbohydrate content in solutions on the phosphorescence lifetime of dye incorporated in
coated microbeads. Graphs reproduced from Schmaelzlin et al. [17].
In addition to the described phenomena above, for intensity based measurements de-
pletion of the dye ground state is critical. However, it is not considered relevant for
lifetime based measurements [29] and thus not further presented here.
2.3
Non-linear Fluorescence Quenching and the Stern-Volmer
Relationship
In the analysis of phosphorescent lifetimes and their correlation with oxygen concentra-
tions, two main physical relations are observed and analysed through ﬁtting procedures.
One is the relation between phosphorescent lifetimes and oxygen concentrations, intro-
15
==PAGE:19==
duced in the form of the Stern-Volmer relation in this chapter. The other is the relation
of measured photon counts with time, ﬁtted to retrieve a phosphorescent lifetime or more
accurately an extracted parameter often called phosphorescent lifetime. This relation is
mainly explained in section 4.5.
The Stern-Volmer equation[39] was published in 1919 by Stern and Volmer:
τ0
τ = 1 + Ksv · [O2].
(2.1)
Here, τ0 is the ﬂuorescence or phosphorescence lifetime at 0% Oxygen, τ the ﬂu-
orescence or phosphorescence lifetime at the oxygen concentration [O2], and Ksv the
empirically determined quencher constant for a speciﬁc set of experimental parameters
inﬂuencing the lifetime (see previous section).
In this model, a single dye population with one single quencher constant is considered,
leading to a linear relation between oxygen tensions and the ratio of phosphorescence life-
times. However, this does not reﬂect many actual situations where either multiple dyes
are used or a single species of dye complexes shows diﬀerent accessibility to quenchers
[29][39]. For microbeads with incorporated dyes, in principle an unlimited number of
dye populations with diﬀerent quencher accessibilities could be assumed. Previous work
showed that that for phosphorescent micro- and nanobeads used in ﬂuorescent wide-ﬁeld
microscopes and a specialised read-out system for the used CPOx beads [38], two dye
populations - one accessible to quencher, a second that is not - leads to reasonably good
approximations of the physical situation [15][17]. Whether this is also valid for the use
of ﬂuorescent microbeads in laser scanning microscopes had to be veriﬁed. Based on two
fractions, a two-term Stern-Volmer model with dye fractions f1 and f2 and quenching
constants KSV 1 and KSV 2, respectively, can be established:
τ0
τ =

f1
1 + KSV 1 · [Q] +
f2
1 + KSV 2 · [Q]
−1
.
(2.2)
As the quencher constant for the population nearly inaccessible to a quencher has a
quencher constant close to zero and additionally as f2 = 1 −f1, the simpler adapted
Stern-Volmer equation follows:
τ0
τ =

f
1 + KSV · [Q] + 1 −f
−1
.
(2.3)
The resulting values for the fraction f and the quencher constant KSV are obtained by ﬁt-
ting the experimental calibration data, shown in sections 5.1 and 5.2 for beads containing
the Ruthenium-Phenanthroline complex and Platinum-Porphyrin complex, respectively.
A range of eﬀects can lead to changed slopes as well as negative [40][41] or positive
curvature [41][29] in Stern-Volmer plots, as shown in ﬁgure 2.3.1. As many of these eﬀects
are not mutually exclusive, a Stern-Volmer plot of a sensor calibration only represent the
relation of lifetime and oxygen tension for the set of experimental parameters, such as
photon ﬂux, temperature and dye concentration used during the calibration. The degree of
positive and negative curvature indicate which of the eﬀects explained below are dominant.
The curvature can however change with changed experimental parameters.
16
==PAGE:20==
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.3.1: Non-linear ﬂuorescence quenching: Examples of negative (a) and positive (b)
curvature in Stern-Volmer plots. (a) Stern-Volmer plot of two-term model with fraction fa
of dye fully accessible to quencher [Q] and fraction fb with reduced or no access to quencher.
Quenching constants Ka and Kb. Blue solid line: fa = 0.5 accessible, fb = 0.5 not accessible
to quencher. Green dashed line: fa = 0.5 accessible, fb = 0.5 with reduced accessibility
by factor 10. Red dashed line: Full dye population accessible to quencher. Reproduced
from [40, Chapter 8.8.1]. (b) Stern-Volmer plot of selected organic compounds, quenched
by oxygen. Points represent experimental data, solid lines theoretical calculations based
on diﬀusion limited quenching. Reproduced from [41].
2.3.1
Negative Curvature in Stern-Volmer Plots
Negative curvature in Stern-Volmer plots is explained by diﬀerent phenomena in literature:
the varying accessibility of dye to quenchers introduced above is expected to be the
dominant reason for negative curvature for the used beads (ﬁgure 2.3.1a. For very low
oxygen tensions, accessible and inaccessible dye fractions to oxygen will naturally have
similar decay constants. For higher oxygen tensions however, the dye fraction accessible
to O2 will be increasingly quenched and thus the later part of the photon decay trace
will be dominated by the inaccessible fraction. For increasing oxygen concentrations, this
leads to a decrease in slope in Stern-Volmer plots or a decrease in the steepness of the
slope in regular plots of lifetime vs. oxygen tension [40]. In addition, negative curvature
are associated with a decrease of kq (KSV = kq · τ0) due to photochemical compound
formation or with a change in absorption and emission spectra of the ﬂuorophore due to
multiple ﬂuorescing states [41].
2.3.2
Positive Curvature in Stern-Volmer Plots
Positive or upward curvature in Stern-Volmer plots (ﬁgure 2.3.1b) is associated with sev-
eral phenomena and explained with diﬀerent theories.
17
==PAGE:21==
One common theory is based on the hypothesis that static quenching gets more pro-
nounced at higher quencher concentrations. Static quenching is the molecular association
of quencher within a sphere of action of a ﬂuorophore, forming a complex that leads to a
fast relaxation of the ﬂuorophore [41].
Another explanation for positive curvature is the photoconsumption of the quencher,
in the case oxygen.
Given suﬃciently rapid triplet oxygen quenching processes, this
quenching reaction becomes diﬀusion limited and quencher concentrations around the
ﬂuorophores do not correspond to bulk triplet oxygen concentrations. A diﬀusional equi-
librium is formed. The photoconsumption is said to be caused by the highly reactive
singlet-oxygen involving in chemical reactions, eﬀectively removing oxygen from the sys-
tem. The preferred reaction for oxygen sensors, as described in section 2.2, would be the
return of singlet oxygen to its triplet ground state by a singlet oxygen quencher, making
triplet oxygen available as a phosphorescence quencher again. The singlet oxygen reaction
rate is directly proportional to the amount of singlet-oxygen and thus to the amount of
ﬂuorophores in the excited triplet state. This depends on the incident photon ﬂux and
the dye concentration [29].
A similar eﬀect in situations without chemical consumption of singlet oxygen is its accu-
mulation and thus the depletion of the triplet oxygen ground state. This equally leads
to an unavailability of triplet oxygen as ﬂuorescence quencher. It can especially occur
when no or little eﬀective singlet oxygen quenchers are present or during measurements
of very low oxygen concentrations. This can result in the situation, that one triplet state
oxygen may have to quench several tenths to thousands of excited ﬂuorophores. With re-
laxation times of singlet-oxygen in polystyrene matrices without added fast singlet oxygen
quenchers of approximately 30 µs and lifetimes observed for the used dyes, each triplet-
oxygen could thus in average quench only one to two excited triplet-state ﬂuorophores
[36][29]. This is not expected to be pronounced here, as eﬃcient singlet-oxygen quenchers
are contained in the polystyrene matrices and measurements are not aimed at so-called
ultratrace regions (around 10 to 50 ppmv O2).
Furthermore, the depletion of the ground state is an important factor for intensity
based measurements with high excitation light intensities found for example during laser
scanning microscopy. However, this is not relevant for lifetime based measurements and
thus not further discussed here [11].
2.4
Confocal Laser Scanning Phosphorescent Lifetime Imaging
Microscopy
An overview of advantages, possibilities and challenges of confocal laser scanning time-
domain phosphorescence lifetime imaging is given in table 2.4.1. The consequences of the
most important eﬀects are discussed in the following subsections.
18
==PAGE:22==
Confocal Laser Scanning Time-domain Phosphorescence Lifetime Imaging
Advantages
Challenges
Confocal Microscopy
Enables 3D imaging (Light collection from
single focal plane, z-stacks)
Low speed due to pixel by pixel scanning
(Exception is spinning disc microscope)
Improved contrast (compared to wide-ﬁeld
microscopy)
Limited number of excitation wavelengths
(lasers) available
Possibility to increase resolution compared
to wide-ﬁeld (only transmitting airy disc)
Commonly higher price and complexity
than wide-ﬁeld
Laser Scanning
Low (or no) scattered light from
surrounding pixels
High energy densities (detrimental for
dyes and samples & inﬂuence on lifetime)
No photobleaching in non-irradiated areas
Time-Correlated Single Photon Counting
Enabling precise time-domain measurements
Commonly low saturation thresholds
Table 2.4.1: Main advantages, possibilities and challenges connected to confocal laser
scanning time-domain phosphorescence lifetime imaging [42][43][44][45].
2.4.1
Phosphorescent Lifetime Imaging Microscopy
Fluorescence Lifetime Imaing Microscopy (FLIM) measures ﬂuorescence decay times.
This is in contrast to conventional ﬂuorescence intensity microscopy - both laser scan-
ning and wide-ﬁeld - where image intensities are inﬂuenced by spatial dye distributions.
Thus, a theoretical independence of dye concentration is achieved and signals depend
solely on potential changes in microenvironment across the sample inﬂuencing the ﬂuo-
rophores. In addition, as ﬂuorescence lifetimes are usually at least two orders of magnitude
shorter then phosphorescent lifetimes, phosphorescent lifetime imaging of dyes in organic
solutions or scaﬀolds often comes with the beneﬁt of lower background signals, as many
organic compounds emit auto-ﬂuorescence but no or little phosphorescence. Technical so-
lutions can be divided into time-domain and frequency-domain, wide-ﬁeld and (confocal)
point-scanning, and analog and photon counting techniques as well as further by whether
time-gating is achieved with single or multiple time channels and whether measurements
are done sequentially or simultaneously [45]. Virtually all combinations are possible and
naturally come with speciﬁc advantages and drawbacks.
The system used in this project and thus relevant here is based on time-domain, confocal
point-scanning and single photon counting. It allows simultaneous recording into multiple
number of time channels.
To create 3D maps of oxygen tensions, such a phosphorescence lifetime imaging mi-
croscopy (PLIM) based on confocal laser scanning microscopy in combination with time-
correlated single photon counting can be used with phosphorescent oxygen sensors based
on the dyes and state transition principles described in sections 2.1 and 2.2.
The basic principle behind this time-domain based lifetime determination is fairly straight-
forward: a laser is used to excite dye molecules suﬃciently long to guarantee buildup of
a population of excited triplet state dye molecules, compare ﬁgure 2.2.1 DT1, throughout
a laser-on period Ton, depicted in ﬁgure 2.4.1. The higher the quantum yield for this
state and ﬂuorophore at the given experimental conditions, described in section 2.1, the
19
==PAGE:23==
better. During this period, ﬂuorescence can be recorded in parallel. The laser is then
switched oﬀand a photon counter records a phosphorescence decay trace consisting of
single photon events. The ﬂuorescent signals from dye as well as autoﬂuorescence from
other components decay one to several orders of magnitudes faster and thus fully decay
before the phosphorescent measurement is started in the laser oﬀphase, depicted by Toff
in ﬁgure 2.4.1.
This measurement procedure is done pixel by pixel, shown in ﬁgure 2.4.1b. A single scan
over the pixels of an image is called a frame and photon distributions of a certain pixel
from consecutively recorded frames are simply combined to a single one. Thus, recording
several frames increases the photon counts for each pixel and thus improves the curve
ﬁt done to determine the ﬂuorescent and phosphorescent lifetimes. Additionally, images
(each containing of several frames) can be recorded in Z-Stacks, leading to full 3D oxygen
maps of volumes containing oxygen sensitive probes [45].
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.4.1: (a) Processes in parallel Fluorescence and Phosphorescence Lifetime Imaging
Microscopy (FLIM/PLIM) in a single image pixel with time Tpxl: Laser excitation (blue,
for simplicity 4 pulses depicted) during Ton enables measurement of ﬂuorescence (green)
and build-up of excited triplet state resulting in phosphorescence (red). In laser-oﬀperiod
Toff, phosphorescence (red) measured while ﬂuorescence (green) has already decayed and
thus does not disturb the signal. (b) Example of photon distribution over 4x4 pixel image
of ﬂuorescence (green) and phosphorescence decay traces (red). Reproduced from [46].
One of the numerous challenges here is the penetration into samples for the suﬃcient
recording of photon events. Even though time domain measurements, as described above,
are in general independent of dye concentrations and signal intensities, they do depend on
a suﬃcient number of photon event for reasonable accurate curve ﬁtting, thus rendering
them in this way signal intensity dependent. The simplest measure is to increase the
number of frames recorded - which naturally comes with practical limits and is not indef-
initely possible for measurements of oxygen tension dynamics over time. Other measures
20
==PAGE:24==
to increase count rates include increasing excitation intensities, increasing pin-hole sizes
(decreasing resolution), optimising the optical setup or using higher dye densities, how-
ever most of these come with challenges described in sections 2.2, 2.3 and in the results
section.
2.4.2
Time-correlated single photon counting
For the recording of ﬂuorescent decay curves with high time resolution, in general the
potentially most intuitive aim would be to record decay traces after one excitation over
time with detectors with suﬃciently short dead-times. The dead-time is the time after
recording a photon event until the detector unit is ready to record a new photon event.
However, in the case of typical count rates from cell samples after only one excitation
pulse, the probability to receive even a single photon is often signiﬁcantly lower than
one. Additionally, combined detector and processing unit dead-times for single channel
photon detector systems (∼10−7s) are often in the order of or exceed ﬂuorescent lifetimes
(∼10−9s to 10−7s), thus making it naturally impossible to record whole photon decay
curves after a single excitation, even if photon events (intensities) were high enough [44].
Time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) overcomes both of these problems. As
shown in ﬁgure 2.4.2, signals from several (N) periods are combined into a single pho-
ton distribution of a ﬂuorescence decay. The precise time measurement of the incident
photons is achieved with parallel pulsed reference signals from a second laser source. As
much less than one photon is measured per measurement period N but many periods are
combined, neither low count rates nor photon loss due to detector saturation are severe
problems anymore [44].
21
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.4.2: Principle of time-correlated single photon counting. A photon distribution
of the ﬂuorescent decay curve is built up by combining detector signals from N periods or
N excitation pulses. The time recording is achieved by parallel pulsed reference signals
[44].
During phosphorescence lifetime measurements, the previously discussed triplet state
buildup phase through a period of pulsed excitation, can be used to measure ﬂuorescence,
where the detector dead-time related signal loss does not pose a problem. However, during
the phosphorescence measurement itself, the dead-time related counting loss does pose a
signiﬁcant problem and is therefore discussed in theory in the separate section 2.4.3 as
well as in the results in section 4.3.
2.4.3
Detector Saturation
The detector here is not only the detector element itself but all electronics necessary to
translate a physical photon event into a digital event in the photon trace on the computer.
Counting loss is caused by the inability of the detector to record two photon events during
its dead-time period. This leads to recorded count rates below the incident event rates
and increases extracted lifetimes, as discussed below. The phenomenon of photon pile-up
is only observed in FLIM measurements and thus only brieﬂy described. It describes the
eﬀect of several photons arriving in one laser excitation pulse period, thus commonly also
resulting in photon loss. However, in addition to photon losses, which would not be very
critical for FLIM measurements, it distorts the averaged lifetimes towards shorter values.
The speciﬁed data concerning the detector channels from the manufacturer [46] are a
dead-time of td = 100 ns, leading to a theoretically saturated count rate of 10 MHz and
highest useful count rates of 5 MHz to 8 MHz, said to exhibit small systematic errors in
lifetime measurements. However, when measurements aim at extracting consistent life-
times in phosphorescent lifetime imaging, the eﬀect of counting loss severely increases and
must be analised in more detail.
22
==PAGE:26==
For an introductory comparison, a Poisson distribution is presented describing the prob-
ability for two or more incident photons X arriving during one detector dead-time period
of 0.1 µs for an expected incident event rate of λ p = F(X > 1, λ) = 1 −e−λ · (Σ1
X=0
λX
X! ).
For an expected photon incident rate of 5 MHz or 5/µs and thus an expected number
of events per dead-time of λ = 0.5, the probability for two or more incident photons
would be 9%. The probability at an event rate of 1 MHz is 0.47%. This would indicate
non-negligible photon counting losses for 5 MHz, but rather small ones for 1 MHz.
This estimation however, is far from the observed values in actual single-photon counters.
The recorded count rate rr at an incident rate ri and a detector dead-time td can be
estimated through [44]:
rr =
ri
1 + ri · td
(2.4)
This yields vastly diﬀerent counting losses then expected simply considering detector
dead-time and Poisson distributions, and indicates that event and count rates considered
feasible for microscopy come with severe counting loss in the beginning of phosphorescent
photon decay traces. Counting losses for a dead time td = 100 ns are shown for event
rates between 0.05 MHz and 10 MHz in ﬁgure 2.4.3a
23
==PAGE:27==
(a)
Incident Rate in MHz
0.05
0.1
0.3
0.5
1
3
5
10
Counting Loss in %
0.5
1
2.9
4.8
9.1
23.1
33.4
50
(b)
Figure 2.4.3: (a) Recorded count rate in relation to detector count rate (photon event
rate) in units of reciprocal dead-time. Graph reproduced from [44]. (b) Estimation of
counting loss in % at photon event rates between 0.05 MHz and 10 MHz at detector dead
times of td = 100 ns, based on equation 2.4.
The strong inﬂuence of counting loss on phosphorescent lifetime measurements is easily
understood looking at photon decay traces, presented in the results section 4.3.
Various solutions to decrease detector saturation are possible.
First, the incident
photon rate can be reduced by decreased excitation power, the use of smaller pin-holes or
the incorporation of optical ﬁlters. Second, eﬀective detector dead-time can be decreased,
thus saturated count rates increased and thereby count loss reduced by incorporating
multiple, parallel detection channels[47]. For the DCS120 microscope system used in the
current studies four parallel channels with a saturated count rate of 40 MHz instead of
the current 10 MHz is commercially available [48].
Furthermore, when it comes to signal processing and analysis compensatory approaches
can be explored. Diﬀerent solutions are presented in the results section 4.3.
2.5
Diﬀusive Transport
Diﬀusion is the main mass transport mechanism in the cell culture environments with em-
beded cells and oxygen sensing probes, in this project consisting of cross-linked Gelatin
24
==PAGE:28==
Methacrylate hydrogels as scaﬀolds. Diﬀusion was historically approached from a phe-
nomenological perspective in Fick’s laws [49] as well as based on random walk (Brownian
motion) in the Einstein-Smoluchowski diﬀusion equation[50]. The latter is used for very
rough estimations of mean diﬀusion times of oxygen and comparisons with experimental
results, introduced here.
2.5.1
Einstein-Smoluchowski Diﬀusion Equation
The Einstein-Smoluchowski diﬀusion equation is based on the theory of brownian motion
(random walk) and both derivations of Einstein and Smoluchowski lead mathematically
to the same equation. However, the diﬀusion coeﬃcient in Einsteins derivation is deﬁned
as constant while Smoluchowski’s derivation deﬁnes a diﬀusion coeﬃcient that is to some
extent conecentration-dependent, both discussed in [51]. For a one dimensional treatment
and given a reference point or source of the diﬀusive quantity in the origin at x=0, the
diﬀusion equation is:
< x2 > = 2Dt or
t = < x2 >
2D
,
(2.5)
with < x > being the mean squared displacement of the diﬀusive quantity, D the
diﬀusion coeﬃcient and t the time. It is important to note, that the diﬀusive quantity
is not replenished, i.e. not to be compared with a microﬂuidic or a water to air surface
with continuous new suppply of diﬀusive quantity. The mean displacement of diﬀusive
quantities can be roughly estimated to follow a normal distribution, shown in ﬁgure 2.5.1
for the diﬀusion in one dimension.
Figure 2.5.1: Rough estimation of fraction of O2 molecules (normal distribution) over
their mean displacement < x > in water for diﬀerent time points. Start point would be
a point source of O2 with delta function at < x >= 0 for t = 0. Estimation based on
Einstein-Smoluchowski diﬀusion equation 2.5 and diﬀusion coeﬃcient of 2.1 · 10−9m2/s
[52].
25
==PAGE:29==
As mentioned before, this estimation is not to be taken as exact bases for experimen-
tal results. The derivations of the diﬀusion equation from Einstein and Smulocholwski
already yield diﬀerent results in theory than observed in experiments [51]. In addition,
oxygen diﬀusion through PEGDA and GelMA, presented in sections 3.23.1, is not equal to
that in water and thus would lead to diﬀerent diﬀusion coeﬃcients than the one used for
the plot of estimated values. Furthermore, the estimated point source of non-replenished
diﬀusive quantity and diﬀusion in two dimensions does not correspond to the experimental
situation presented in the results section. Nevertheless, this approximation gives rough
but valuable estimations on diﬀusion times, found to be in the right orders of magnitudes
in experiments and therefore of use when approximating times for oxygen tensions to
equilibrate.
26
==PAGE:30==
3
Materials & Methods
The ﬁve topics of this section are: printing of cell culture scaﬀolds, phosphorescent bead
integration into hydrogels, cell culturing, microcopy incubator and its optimisation as well
as the microscopy setup, including key aspects of the measurement control and analysis
software.
3.1
Printing of Scaﬀolds
The scaﬀolds for the perfused and non-perfused 3D cell culture environments were printed
with a stereolithographic 3D printer developed in the research group of Niels Bent Larsen
(PolyCell, DTU Nanotech, Denmark), following principles similar to the ones described
in [53]. For structures with solid volumes of roughly up to to 500 mm3, a total printing
solution of 2.4 ml was prepared. The printing solution is an aqueous solution with 12
mg/ml Quinoline Yellow (Sigma Aldrich, Munich, Germany), 200 mg/ml Poly(Ethylene
Glycol) Diacrylate (PEGDA) (average Mn 700, Sigma Aldrich, Munich, Germany) and 5
mg/ml Lithium Phenyl-2,4,6-trimethylbenzoylphosphinate (LAP) in Milli Q (synthesised
based on protocol [54]).
The PEGDA structures were printed on round coverglasses with 20 mm diameter that
were treated by an acrylate-silane based on [55] to covalent bind PEGDA to the glass
support.
3D scaﬀolds were designed using 3D computer-aided design (CAD) software (Invenctor
2016 Professional, Autodesk Inc., San Rafael/CA, USA). The 3D designs were then sliced
with a step size of 20 µm in vertical (z) direction (in reference to the printing plane (xy)),
and each slice was projected onto a reservoir with the described PEGDA solution by
means of a digital light processing (DLP) chip. This consists of a micromirror array to
project the xy slices onto the printing area with a resolution of 1920x1080 pixel and pixel
sizes of around 10.8x10.8 µm2.
The 3D printed cell scaﬀolds serve as microﬂuidic networks and/or oxygen diﬀusable
scaﬀold. Cells are not incorporated in the latter directly, as this would lead to quick
sedimentation. Instead, they are incorporated within hydrogels, described in the next
section.
3.2
Hydrogel
Cells were integrated in 3D printed environments for 3D cell cultures within a hydrogel,
Gelatin Methacrylate (GelMA). This was prepared by members of the group based on [56].
Experiments were conducted with 5% w/v (50 mg/ml GelMA in PBS), 10% w/v (100
mg/ml GelMA in PBS) and 20% w/v (200 mg/ml GelMA in PBS). A ﬁnal concentration
of 5% was found to be most suitable for cell culture, showing little cell sedimentation
and suﬃciently low crosslinking for cells to migrate. Stock solution of 10% or 20% were
ﬁltered with ﬁlters with a pore size of 0.45µm to remove bacteria and other contaminants.
At room temperature, GelMA is highly viscous due to physical bonding, more precisely
hydrogen bonding and chain entanglement, described in [56]. When heated to around 25◦
and above [56], it changes conformation to a less viscous liquid. The addition of 0.1% w/v
LAP as photoinitiator enables the establishment of chemical bonds between methacrylate
groups when exposed to UV light (330-380 nm, max. at 365 nm, 18 mW/cm2). for 2 min.
Thereafter, heating of the gel to above 25◦C does not change its phase to become a liquid
27
==PAGE:31==
anymore.
For the creation of hydrogels with embedded cells and phosphorescent beads, GelMA is
heated to around 37◦C, thoroughly mixed through pipetting with cell and bead solutions
and then cured as described with UV light. Neither the concentration of LAP nor the
UV were found to lead to signiﬁcant cell death.
3.3
Phosphorescent Beads and Hydrogel Incorporation
The phosphorescent beads with brand name CPOx Orange and CPOx Red, a core part of
the oxygen measurement system, were purchased from ibidi GmbH (Planegg, Germany).
They contain as a core component <0.1% w/w of the oxygen sensitive compounds Tris(4,7-
diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline) Ruthenium(II) (CPOx Orange) or 5,10,15,20-Tetrakis(pentaﬂuorophenyl)
21H,23H-porphin Platinum(II) (CPOx Red) as well as <0.1% of the singlet oxygen quencher
1,4-diazabicyclooctane in a polystyrene matrix. The microbeads exhibit an average ra-
dius of 50µm and are coated with BSA. Neither cross reactivity with other compounds
was found to inﬂuence the lifetimes of the oxygen sensitive dye nor pH or carbohydrate
changes in important physiological ranges [17], presented in section 2.2.4. Absorption and
emission spectra as well as lifetimes given and acquired for frequency modulation methods
are shown for both dye complexes in ﬁgure 3.3.1a and 3.3.1b.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.3.1: Data for CPOx Orange (a) and CPOx Red (b) based on measurements
with ibidi Opal frequency-modulation based lifetime measurement system (Ibidi GmbH,
Planegg, Germany) [21].
The beads are supplied as a suspension in PBS at 5 mg/ml which is said to corre-
spond to 67 beads/µL. Storage is suggested at 4◦C to avoid clumping, mainly caused by
the BSA coating on the beads’ surfaces. Pipetting was found to be the most eﬀective way
to disassociate aggregates of beads that tend to form at the bottom of the storage vial.
In addition a ﬂoating layer at the top is observed, enhanced during sonication. Sonica-
tion was recommended by the manufacturer to disassociate aggregated beads but was not
28
==PAGE:32==
found to be superior to simple pipetting but rather the opposite. To avoid an adhesion of
beads on the outer pipet surface potentially being disposed and to dissolve beads from the
bottom of the storage vial, it was found to be best to use uncoated standard eppendorf
pipette tips and pipette approximately 10 times before the extraction of solution with
beads for further experiments.
For measurements at 0% dissolved oxygen, either a microscopy stage incubator was
used (pure Nitrogen supply) or sodium sulﬁte (Na2SO3) (Sigma Aldrich, Munich, Ger-
many) was added to solutions of Beads in PBS or into reservoirs with cured Beads incor-
porated in GelMA to consume any oxygen present. The equation for a reaction of sodium
sulﬁte with oxygen is 2 Na2SO3 + O2 →2 Na2SO4 and in theory 2(126g/moleNa2SO3)
32g/moleO2
= 7.88
parts of sodium sulﬁte have to be added to consume each part of oxygen [57]. With an
estimated oxygen content of 9.04 mg/L oxygen in water at 20◦C during preparation, 760
mmHg atmospheric pressure with a salinity of 0.9% [58], at least 72.32 mg/L had to be
added. As no crossreactivity with the oxygen sensitive dye is expected to take place and
calibration containers were meant to be used for longer with potential small leaks, this
amount was increased by a factor of 10.
3.4
Cell Culturing
The colon colorectal adenocarcinomal cell line HT-29 was used for cell experiments. It
was ﬁrst isolated in 1964 from a caucasian female, is used to study diﬀerent aspects of
human cancer in general and attracted attention for its ability to express several char-
acteristics from e.g. mucus producing cell and enterocytes - two mature cell types in
the intestine. They are able to form monolayers with tight junctions, proliferate in hy-
drogels, form tumor spheroids and form apical brush borders [59]. The doubling time
in the presence of fetal bovine serum (FBS) is typically 1 day, without FBS it was re-
ported to be 3-4 days [60]. The cells were chosen as they are suited as a model cancer
cell, as experience have been acquired incorporating them into GelMA hydrogels in the
group and elsewhere, as they are robust and have a short doubling time. The medium
solution for cell culturing contained 89% Dulbeccos Modiﬁed Eagle’s Medium with high
glucose content (D5796, Sigma Aldrich, Munich, Germany), 10% fetal bovine serum and
1% penicillin-streptomycin (P4333, Sigma Aldrich, Munich, Germany) to reduce infec-
tion.
For the purpose of studying tumor oxygenation, HT-29 cells were embedded into GelMA
hydrogels, see section 3.2, with a ﬁnal concentration of 5% GelMA and for oxygen moni-
toring, the phosphorescent microbeads described in section 3.3 were added.
3.5
Microscopy Incubator
A microscope stage incubator was adapted and optimised. This was ﬁrst to establish
controlled measurement conditions to calibrate the phosphorescent CPOx microbeads.
No data on lifetimes and lifetime dynamics for the used beads was available in literature
and the speciﬁcation from the manufacturer were said to be only valid for this precise
system. Additionally, the aim was to allow cell culturing with real-time oxygen imaging
and microﬂuidic connections to 3D printed cell culture chips, see section 3.1.
29
==PAGE:33==
Gas Mixing and Humidiﬁcation
Gas mixing was realised by ﬁve 1179A Mass-Flo analog, elastomer-sealed gas ﬂow con-
trollers (MKS Instruments, Andover, USA) that were calibrated manually for Air (two),
N2 (two) and CO2 (one), correction factors from manual did not work suﬃciently well
and accurate gas control was necessary for lifetime calibrations. Figure 3.5.1b shows the
used calibration setup. The procedure was straight forwards: the time was measured to
ﬁll a 10 ml tube, a ﬂow rate and a correction factor were calculated. Ten ﬁnal measure-
ment for each ﬂow controller were taken at diﬀerent ﬂow rates and a maximum standard
deviation of approximately 1% at ﬂow rates of up to 10 sccm was measured. The ranges
after calibration are 0 - 41 sccm for Air, 0 to 56 sccm N2 and 0 to 32 sccm for CO2. The
error is speciﬁed to be ±1% for the range of 2 to 100% of the calibrated full scale.
As a next step, the gas is heated by a metal wire spiral (3m length, 1.5mm in diameter)
and humidiﬁed using a frit, both placed in a water bath at 50◦C to compensate for heat
loss in gas tubes and ineﬃcient heating.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.5.1: (a) Combined 1179A gas ﬂow controller. 2 controller for air, 2 for nitrogen
and 1 for CO2 (c) Calibration setup used to ﬁnd correction factors for gas ﬂow controllers.
10 ml tube was ﬁlled with diﬀerent ﬂow rates, times was stop and thereby ﬂow rates
determines.
Temperature Control and Microﬂuidic Integration
The microscopy chamber itself is heated using a ITC-4 Temperature Controller (Oxford
Instruments, Abingdon, UK) and temperature in the chamber is measured with two sen-
sors in parallel using a Fluke 52 II Dual Input Thermometer (Fluke Inc., Everett, USA).
A polymer holder was designed and 3D printed to meet several requirements. It enables
convenient microﬂuidic tubing integration and exchanges, decouples culture dished from
direct contact with the heated aluminum incubator frame, thereby avoiding strong tem-
perature gradients and allows suﬃciently tight sealing to enable calibration measurements
and cell culturing without microﬂuidic connections. The temperature curve after enabling
the heater is ﬁrst steep, then ﬂattens to a plateau and can be kept constant within ±0.5◦C
- in principle for unlimited time. As culture dishes are only in distant connection with the
30
==PAGE:34==
aluminium incubator housing through parts of the polymer holder, temperature gradient
are not expected to be steep in the dishes. The two point temperature measurements are
however not spatially exact enough to conﬁrm this.
Figure 3.5.2: Microscopy incubator with 3D printed holder for up to four 35 mm petri
dishes and 16 inlets (right) for tubes for microﬂuidic perfusion connections.
The incubator was used for 48h hours cell culture experiments and showed no impair-
ment of visibility through the bottom at any point in time. Condensation was conﬁned
to the top and did not drop to the bottom. Gas mixtures of 5% CO2 and 95% Air could
be set and no impairment in cell proliferation compared to samples in regular incubators
was observed.
3.6
Optics and Setup of Microscope
The microscopy setup used was a combination of an inverted microscope, Zeiss Observer
Z1 (Carl Zeiss Microscopy GmbH, Jena, Germany) with a DCS-120 confocal FLIM scan-
ning system (Becker & Hickl GmbH, Berlin, Germany), including two lasers with 405nm
and 473nm for ﬂuorescence excitation and a Simple-Tau computer system for measure-
ment control and read-out.
The 473 nm laser was employed for exciting both CPOx
Orange and CPOx Red microbeads.
Objective
For the microscopy setup, an inﬁnity corrected, 5x Zeiss Fluar lens (440125-0000, Carl
Zeiss Microscopy GmbH, Jena, Germany) with a numerical aperture of 0.25, a working
distance of 12.5 mm and 90% transmittance at 600nm was used. An object plane of
approximately 2.84 mm x 2.84 mm can be scanned. A focal plane shift of up to 4.3 mm
31
==PAGE:35==
into samples can be achieved with the microscopy incubator conﬁguration described in
section 3.5. At this depth, chromatic abberations may arise.
The focal spot size for an aberration free system with uniform illumination can be
estimated through Spot size = 1.22·λexcitation
NAlense
[61]. Thus the diﬀraction limited spot size of
the beam with the used lens can be estimated to be minimum spot size = 1.22·473nm
0.25
=
2.31µm. This is relevant for energy densities discussed in the next section.
Laser power
The laser power were determined to allow comparison between experiments and with exci-
tation energy dependent eﬀects on phosphorescent lifetimes found in literature, presented
in sections 2.2 and 2.3. The measurements were done with a photodiode power and energy
sensor PM100D (Thorlabs, Newton, USA) and results are shown in table 3.6.1. The laser
power could be changed electrically and with an optical attenuator.
Laser 473 nm
20MHz
50MHz
80MHz
Min. Opt.
Max. Opt.
Min. Opt.
Max. Opt.
Min. Opt.
Max Opt.
Min. Elec.
0.045µW
2.65µW
0.048µW
3.2µW
0.048µW
2.03µW
Max. Elec.
0.74µW
98µW
1.54µW
205µW
2.2µW
295µW
Laser 400 nm
20MHz
50 MHz
80MHz
Min. Opt.
Max. Opt.
Min. Opt.
Max. Opt.
Min. Opt.
Max Opt.
Min. Elec.
0.02µW
0.21µW
0.02µW
0.65µW
0.03µW
0.55µW
Max. Elec.
0.25µW
14.67µW
0.59µW
35.5µW
0.91µW
54.4µW
Table 3.6.1: Min. Elec. and Max. Elec. are the minimum and maximum electric laser
power settings that can be adjusted in the control software for the PLIM setup. 0% and
100% Opt. stands for the optical attenuation of the lasers set manually on the DCS-120
unit of the PLIM setup.
In addition, the values for minimum electrical power at 20 MHz for optical attenu-
ator settings between 0% and 100% were recorded. These were the power ranges most
frequently used for the experiments. Energy density approximation were calculated for
these settings, using the estimated minimum spot size of 2.31 µm, estimation in previ-
ous section. Additionally, a conversion approximation of 1W · m−2 ≈5 µmole photons
·m−2 · s−1) was used, though this factor depends on the light source [62][29].
32
==PAGE:36==
Optical Attenuation
Power
in nW
Intensity
in kW ·m−2
Energy Density
in mmoles ·m−2 · s−1
0
45
10.7
5.4
10
53
12.6
6.3
20
66
15.7
7.9
30
77
18.3
9.2
40
99
32.6
11.8
50
131
31.2
15.6
60
182
43.3
21.7
70
278
66.2
33.1
80
417
99.3
49.6
90
705
167.9
84.0
100
1360
323.8
161.9
Max
2661
633.6
316.8
Table 3.6.2: Calibration measurement of laser set to a minimum electrical power and 20
MHz repetition rate. Resulting optical powers for optical attenuator settings between 0
and 100 and a max value that is reach when fully opening the optical attenuator. For
each point three measurements were taken. Standard deviation not displayed as it was
below 2 nW and thus considered of minor importance here.
Optical Filter
Optical ﬁlters can be ﬂexibly introduced into the DCS-120 measurement system. To ﬁlter
excitation light, a long-pass ﬁlter HQ485LP (Becker & Hickl, Berlin, Germany) blocking
transmission of wavelengths below 485 nm was used.
To reduce auto-ﬂuorescence of
sorrounding materials, a band-pass ﬁlter HQ620/60m (Becker & Hickl, Berlin, Germany)
with high transmittance for wavelengths between 590nm and 650nm was integrated. For
the measurement of CPOx Beads Red, this was removed as their emission maximum is
stated to be at 650 nm. No suitable ﬁlter was available for this situation, however with a
main interest in phosphorescence, this was not of great necessity anyway as luminescence
from other sources in other wavelength regimes mainly decays quickly and thus does not
strongly aﬀect measurements.
3.7
Image Analysis Software
The software coming with Becker & Hickl’s DCS-120 confocal FLIM scanning system,
SPCImage, enables lifetime ﬁtting of ﬂuorescence and phosphorescence decay curves as
well as intensity based representation of images. For the analysis of phosphorescent sig-
nals, the signal from the laser-on time from the main excitation laser is disregarded and
only the decay trace in the laser-oﬀperiod is displayed. Fits can be done for single pix-
els and groups of pixels selected manually. Masks can be saved and reused, however no
intensity based selection of pixel or grouping of pixels into areas of high intensities can
be done, here corresponding to a selection of beads. This has to be done manually. The
ﬁtting process is described in section 4.5. The challenge with this system when trying to
achieve consistent lifetime measurements is that incident photon rates above 0.3 MHz al-
ready saturate the detection channels suﬃciently for the lifetime to be skewed, see section
33
==PAGE:37==
2.4.3. Incident photon rates below 0.1 MHz lead to poor ﬁtting results unless measure-
ment times for each frame are acquired for at least 20-30 minutes. This would however
render the scanning method for a whole 3D volume impractical due too long scanning
times. Neither during measurements nor during image analysis, automatic correction for
pixel saturation is applied, making measurements challenging for samples with high dye
concentrations. In biological samples with dissolved dyes at low concentration saturation
and with an interest mainly in microscopic structure analysis, this only posses a minor
challenge. However with any kind of nano- or microbead based sensor probes and the
need for consistent lifetime data, this proved to be a major drawback. Therefore, the
software is mainly used for the export of raw data not for the actual image analysis and
the development of an own image analysis and lifetime calculation method was developed,
presented in section 4.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.7.1: (a) Microscopy setup: Zeiss Observer Z1 (Carl Zeiss Microscopy GmbH,
Jena, Germany) with motorised stage for 3D image acquisition via z-stacks. DCS-120
PLIM setup containing optical pathways for excitation light (incl. optical attenuator)
and measured light (incl. ﬁlters, pin-hole detectors). Computer and control units for
lasers, galvano scanner and detectors. (b) Control software for plim measurement (left)
and SPCImage for image analysis (right).
34
==PAGE:38==
4
Method Development
In this section, the method development necessary to extract reproducible and consistent
lifetimes with the above presented microscopy system is described. The process was of
an iterative nature and physical as well as eﬀects stemming from data analysis or system
component limitations were investigated. Eight main steps can be summarised:
1. Potential long lasting decay components and noise were analysed and noise levels
for optional noise subtraction and cut-oﬀlevels were extracted.
2. Lifetime distributions were analysed by their spatial dependence and dependence
on count rates.
3. Detector saturation was characterised and diﬀerent approaches for compensation
are discussed.
4. Diﬀerent pixel grouping procedures were analysed with a focus on achieving low
bead to bead variations for the ﬁnal method.
5. Fitting procedures for lifetime extraction for the CPOx Beads Orange were tested
with a focus on cosistency, i.e. low bead to bead variation.
6. Fitting procedures for CPOx Bead Red were tested with equal focus.
7. Bead-selective excitation and 3D Imaging are shortly discussed.
8. In a brief conclusion, the chosen methods are summarised.
The ﬁrst steps of the method development only feature CPOx Beads Orange, as the
CPOx Beads Red were only received on the very end of the Master project. Due to their
longer lifetime and higher ratio of dynamic range to absolute lifetime, they showed to
be promising candidates however. Aspects such as dye distribution, detector saturation
and grouping procedures are expected to not behave much diﬀerently with the latter.
However, the decay trace and thus the ﬁtting procedure for the lifetime extraction is
potentially diﬀerent than for the CPOx Orange, touched upon in section 4.5.
Introductory Remarks
Fitting Procedures
In the data analysis process, a number of diﬀerent ﬁtting procedures to diﬀerent kinds of
data sets are presented and mentioned here to avoid confusion.
The ﬁrst ﬁtting process that is always required - both for calibrations and the measure-
ment of unknown oxygen tensions - is the ﬁt of a curve to measured photon decay traces
- photon counts over time. This is done to extract a phosphorescent lifetime.
The second one is needed for calibration measurements. It is the ﬁt of the adapted Stern-
Volmer equation (see section 2.3) to a set of calibration measurements - lifetimes over
oxygen concentrations.
The resulting relation is used in the reverse process of actual
measurements of unknown oxygen tensions, relating extracted lifetimes to oxygen con-
centrations.
35
==PAGE:39==
The third one is only used for some analytical approaches. When ﬁtting is performed to
the photon decay traces of single pixels instead of a whole group of pixels representing a
microbead, a big number of extracted lifetimes with large standard deviation results. Dif-
ferent distributions (e.g. standard distribution) can then be ﬁtted to the set of lifetimes
to determine most suitable approach to extract a single lifetime parameter for a bead.
In addition, data ﬁtting was sometimes done to ﬁnd trends in data or show that none
could be found, to estimate levels of eﬀects or model expected instrumental, physical or
chemical inﬂuences.
Fitting procedures were done both with SPCImage, the image anlysis software from the
PLIM system manufacturer, and Matlab.
Oxygen Tensions
All measurements are acquired at approximately 37◦C in PBS or Medium surrounding
hydrogels, printed cell scaﬀolds or cell cultures with embedded phosphorescent beads, see
3. As reference, saturated oxygen measurement were done at 37◦C with ambient air and
supply of only air from the gas mixer. As expected, results do not show any statistical
signiﬁcant diﬀerence. These reference measurements are henceforth said to correspond to
21% mol/mol oxygen in air.
From literature, at a temperature of 37◦C and an atmospheric pressure of 760 mmHg, an
oxygen concentration of 6.7 mg/L oxygen in water with 0.9% salinity can be expected[58]
at ambient oxygen.
Standard Measurement Setup and Parameters
In the ﬁnal experiments, most of the setup and measurement parameters were kept equal.
Thus, a standard set is described here and only deviations from this norm are discussed.
4.1
Background Noise and Tails of Decay Traces
To check for long lifetime components in decay traces and measure the background noise
for the system, wide variations of measurements could be done to recreate diﬀerent mea-
surement and specimen conditions. It was chosen to measure tails of decay traces and
system noise under calibration conditions, which exhibits higher noise than measurements
without samples. The samples consisted of CPOx beads dissolved in GelMA, cured in
petri dishes and covered by PBS. Measurements were taken with highest optical atten-
uation and lowest laser power levels, corresponding to approximately 45 nW. The ﬁlter
conﬁgurations for CPOx Beads Orange and Red as well as sample preparation and mi-
croscopy incubator setup are described above.
The main diﬀerence to regular measurements was the long pixel time. The phosphorescent
recording time was set to approximately 25 times the expected phosphorescent lifetime
and signals were analised for noise in an interval of 80 to 120µs after the start of each
phosphorescence recording. The initial phosphorescence is theoretically expected to have
decayed to a level of 8 · 10−7 of the initial intensity by then. Several measurements of
diﬀerent beads, resolutions and power levels were compared. Additionally, inﬂuences in
the room were observed. The computer monitors showed no observable diﬀerence, any
other light sources showed a strong however and therefore had to be turned of at any
point during the experiments.
36
==PAGE:40==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.1.1: (a) Measurement of CPOx Beads Orange over laser-oﬀperiod of approxi-
mately 128µs, corresponding to around 25 times its expected lifetime. (b) Zoomed decay
trace, 40 µs span between 80 and 120 µs. Sum of signal from 3 independent measurements
and 3 independent beads. Linear ﬁt resulting in 351 (CI95 = 315; 368) average counts per
bin and a slope of s = 0.47 (CI95 = -0.6873;+1.637) or 0.13% of the resulting average
counts. Test for randomness results in rejection of hypothesis of oscillations or consistent
up or downward trends [63]. No long lived decays could be identiﬁed.
Figure ?? shows the decay trace of a single microbead, the pixel time was set to approx-
imately 25 times its expected lifetime to investigate long lasting components and noise.
Figure 4.1.1b shows a zoomed decay trace from 80 µs to 120 µs for the summed data of
3 images each with three beads (thus, decay trace from 9 beads in total).
This ﬁrst of all yielded the result of no signﬁcant detectable long lived decay com-
ponents, the remaining signal for beads only stems from noise.
The results for aver-
age noise were used to calculate the average noise n per pixel, frame and microsec-
ond, n = 0.0018/(pixel · frame · µs) and a cutoﬀvalue c (3.5 times average noise) of
c = 0.0064/(pixel · frame · µs). This was implemented in the analysis software for noise
reduction and signal cutoﬀ. In weaker signals, this lead to lower noise especially in the
tail of decay curves and improved results for decay analysis with shifted starts of ﬁts, ex-
plained in 4.3. However, in the ﬁnal version of the analysis procedure, it was disregarded
again as it did not improve results without shifted curve ﬁts.
Noise in areas without beads showed same signal magnitude and no identiﬁable trends.
4.2
Lifetime Distribution at Low Excitation Energies and Count
Rates
The second step was to investigate the distribution of intensities and lifetimes over the
area of the phosphorescent microbeads, check for normality in a pool of lifetime distribu-
tions and investigate the relation between intensities and resulting lifetimes.
For this investigation, it was important to strongly reduce the eﬀects of sensor saturation
to observe lifetime distributions based only on the beads intrinsic properties and exclude
the quickly appearing eﬀect of skewing due to detector saturation, described in 4.3.
37
==PAGE:41==
The measurements were acquired at minimum laser power, highest optical attenuation of
the laser and 20 MHz repetition rate, resulting in an average power on the sample of 45
nW (see table 3.6.1 for laser power) during the excitation period (see Ton in 2.4.1). A
pin-hole size of 1 was chosen to achieve fairly high spatial resolution with little light from
other planes and neighbouring pixels. The image was acquired for 1770 frames in 77 min
to collect suﬃcient photon events for pixelwise ﬁtting.
The spatial intensity distribution is shown in ﬁgure 4.2.1a. As a general trend, there
is a visible gradient from higher intensities in the center of the beads to lower intensities
at the borders. Additionally, small areas of low intensity can be observed in diﬀerent
regions of the beads. Higher count rates in the center are reasonable as, given the beads
are spheres, the center regions are thicker and thus more dye molecules are available for
photon emission. Spots of low intensities are expected to originate from low dye concen-
trations. The ﬂuctuation of beads intensity is expected to originate from slightly shifted
distributions vertical to the imaging plane, also observed during focusing of the group
of beads. Maximum count rates in the beginning of decay traces of approximately 0.11
photons/µs or 0.11 MHz were measured, thus negligible detector saturation is expected
(see in theory in 2.4.3 and in results 4.3).
The spatial lifetime distribution is shown in ﬁgure 4.2.1b. No signiﬁcant trend in
spatial distribution could be observed at this point and is further discussed below. The
ﬁt is done with a mono-exponential with SPCImage (Becker & Hickl GmbH, Berlin, Ger-
many). Further discussion of ﬁtting procedures follow in 4.5.
The distribution of lifetimes, not spatially but from grouped pixels from the beads
seen in 4.2.1b, is shown in form of a histogram with a ﬁt of a normal density function in
ﬁgure 4.2.1c. The distribution is shifted towards shorter lifetimes relative to the ﬁt, thus
we can see that a normal distribution is not fully given. The mean and median lifetime
from this distribution are τmean = 5384 ns and τmedian = 5358 ns. The relation between
those mean and median values from single pixels compared to results from grouped ﬁts
are discussed in section 4.5.
The relation between count rates and lifetimes, or in other words of pixel intensities
and lifetimes, is shown in ﬁgure 4.2.1d. No strong relation between lifetimes and pixel
intensities can be observed here. This also agreement with the observations of spatial
intensity and lifetime distributions: While clear intensity distributions can be observed
with gradients from center to to borders, lifetime distributions do not clearly follow this
trend.
A linear ﬁt was done with the model f(x) = a · x + b, with a resulting R2-Value of 0.0128.
therefore no signiﬁcant correlation between photon counts and lifetimes is concluded at
this combination of excitation energy and count rate. This analysis was done for ﬁve
measurements of diﬀerent beads at 0%, 5.25%, 10.5%, 15.75% and 21% oxygen saturation
with R2-Values ranging from 0.0106 to 0.0185 resulted. The trendline in the diﬀerent
measurements always has a small, negative slope and which increases in steepness for in-
creasing oxygen tensions, however the signiﬁcance for all cases is far too small to deduce
any eﬀect from it.
In conclusion, the data indicates that pixel intensities at low count rates do not have
a signiﬁcant impact on their lifetime. Additionally, dye seems to be fairly homogenously
distributed over the area of the beads and ﬂuctuations don’t seem to strongly inﬂuence
lifetime changes.
38
==PAGE:42==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.2.1: (a) Spatial intensity and (b) lifetime distribution over area of phosphorescent
microbeads. (c) Distribution of lifetimes over grouped pixels from beads shown in (b) with
ﬁt of normal distribution in red. (d) Scatter plot of lifetimes over photon counts per pixel
with linear ﬁt in red, done to investigate trend in data.
39
==PAGE:43==
4.3
Detector Saturation
In this section, an investigation of detector saturation and its eﬀects on lifetimes are pre-
sented and potential solutions for compensation are discussed. A theoretical introduction
is given in section 2.4.3.
As shown in the previous section and expected from spheric microbeads with fairly ho-
mogenous dye distribution, in 2 dimensional images, the center of the used microbeads
exhibits higher count rates than the outer parts.
To avoid oxygen dependent eﬀects, microbeads in GelMA covered with Natrium Sulﬁte
in PBS with fully consumed oxygen, described in section 3.2, were used.
Figure 4.3.1 shows phosphorescent intensity and lifetime images, acquired at three diﬀer-
ent photon energy densities. It is apparent in these images, that an increase in photon
energy density results in an increase in lifetime and that the eﬀect is most pronounced in
the center of the beads, where intensities are highest.
The next step was to analyse scatter plots (lifetime vs. maximum counts/pixel) to
conﬁrm the results above and decay traces (photon counts vs. time) to investigate whether
the observed increase in extracted lifetimes was dominated by detector saturation or stem-
ming from other phenomena. Additionally, the aim was to analyse the magnitude of the
observed eﬀects and get insights into the correlation between excitation energies and elon-
gation of lifetimes under otherwise equal conditions. Figure 4.3.2 shows scatter plots of
lifetime vs. photon count per pixel and µs (ﬁrst microsecond of each pixel).
It is remarked here, that a protective foil that increased scatter in the microscopy in-
cubator was removed before acquiring the measurement in ﬁgure 4.3.2c at on optical
attenuator setting of 60. This lead to a count rate increase at equal excitation energy and
measurement parameters.
These scatter plots conﬁrm the correlation between lifetimes and photon counts per
pixel and µs. In addition, they give ﬁrst insights into the magnitude of the eﬀect at
diﬀerent count rates and how strong correlations - if any identiﬁable - are. The identiﬁed
trends and test statistics are given in ﬁgure 4.3.2.
In addition to this correlation of lifetimes vs. pixels with diﬀerent count rates, time traces
were analysed. Here, insights on the origin of the elongation of lifetimes with counts could
be gained and correctional measures could be investigated, shown in ﬁgure 4.3.3.
Here, the detector saturation or counting loss can be well observed. The data points at
the beginning of the decay (highest intensity) clearly lay below the ﬁtted line while for
lower excitation intensities this is not the case. In theory, at 1.1 MHz count rate (ﬁgure
4.3.3, black squares), a minimum counting loss of 9.9 % is expected. Experiments at
higher count rates showed ever increased saturation.
Saturation Correction: Shift of Start Point of Fit
For correction of detector saturation two approaches were investigated. The ﬁrst one was
to start the analysis to count rates of the decay trace where little saturation is expected.
This was tested for diﬀerent shifts in µs for the data sets from ﬁgure 4.3.3b with maximum
count rates of 0.1 MHz and 1.1 MHz. The resulting lifetimes and their 95% conﬁdence
from the ﬁt are shown in table 4.3.1.
40
==PAGE:44==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 4.3.1: Phosphorescence intensity and lifetime images of CPOx Orange microbeads
acquired under deoxygenated conditions and at an intensity, maximum count rate per
pixel and optical attenuator setting of (a & b) 10.7 kWm−2, 0.22 MHz and 20, (c & d)
43.3 kWm−2, 1 MHz and 60 and (e & f) 99.3 kWm−2, 1.1 MHz and 80. The increase
in intensity and lifetime at the center of the microbeads is apparent. Samples were all
measured in a range of intensities between 10.7 kWm−2 to 323.8 kWm−2 to verify that the
observed behaviour was not connected to sample variations or limited to a single sample.
41
==PAGE:45==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.3.2: Scatter plots of lifetime vs. photon count per pixel and µs (ﬁrst µs in decay
trace) with trend line of linear ﬁt with model f(x) = ax + b. Excitation energy, slope
a with conﬁdence bounds, R2-value and maximum count rate of (a) 10.7 kWm−2, a =
-186.3 (-471.4, 98.77), R2 = 1.08 · 10−3 and 0.22 MHz, (b) 32.6 kWm−2, 485.9 (338.1,
633.8), R2 = 1.9 · 10−2 and 0.39 MHz (c) 43.3 kWm−2 a = 1509 (1482, 1536), R2=0.78
and 1.0 MHz as well as (d) 99.3 kWm−2, a = 1921 (1892, 1951), R2 = 0.86 and 1.1 MHz.
42
==PAGE:46==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.3.3: Decay traces with mono-exponential ﬁts (red line) for three diﬀerent exci-
tation intensities in measurements of the same single phosphorescent microbead. Decay
was recorded for a pixel time of approximately 25 µs, for visualisation of saturation in the
beginning of the decayt trace only initial 10 µs shown here. Decay traces were summed
over the area of a bead, described in section 4.4. (a) Logarithmic and (b) nonlogarithmic
plot of counts per bin over time in µs for three excitation energies. For higher excitation
energies (black squares), in the beginning of the decay trace a deviation from the single
exponential ﬁt is apparent. The extracted lifetimes from lowest to highest excitation en-
ergies are τ0.1MHz = 5.52 µs, τ0.4MHz = 5.70 µs and τ1.1MHz = 6.76 µs with maximum
approximate errors of σ = ±0.08. Details on ﬁtting procedures and error calculations are
presented in section 4.5.
43
==PAGE:47==
Max. Count Rate
of 0.1 MHz
Max. Count Rate
of 1.1 MHz
Shift in µs
Lifetime in µs with 95% Conﬁdence Bounds from Fit
0
5.52 (± 0.007)
6.69 (± 0.008)
1
5.64 (± 0.008)
6.60 (± 0.007)
2
5.71 (± 0.052)
6.53 (± 0.006)
3
5.80 (± 0.059)
6.47 (± 0.005)
5
5.96 (±0.013)
6.40 (± 0.003)
10
6.31 (± 0.127)
6.37 (± 0.028)
15
7.06 (± 0.345)
6.45 (± 0.070)
30
8.52 (± 2.009)
6.68 (± 0.276)
Table 4.3.1: Extracted lifetimes from mono-exponential ﬁts with diﬀerent start points.
Two measurements with diﬀerent excitation energies resulting in maximum counting rates
of 0.1 MHz and 1.1 MHz were used. Decay traces consist of the summed decay traces
from pixels of single phosphorescent microbead, same bead used for comparison. It is
apparent, that in the case of 0.1 MHz maximum count rate, lifetimes as well as 95%
conﬁdence bounds from the ﬁt increase for a shifted start of the ﬁt. The increase can
not be explained solely by the increased uncertainty of the ﬁt. In the case of 1.1 MHz
maximum count rate, ﬁrst a decrease, followed by an increase in lifetimes is observed.
Extracted lifetimes for both datasets closest at 10µs shift.
Table 4.3.1 shows that for maximum count rates of 0.1 MHz with low expected count-
ing loss, a shift in the start of mono-exponential ﬁts increases the extracted lifetime and
comes with higher 95% conﬁdence bounds. For maximum count rates of 1.1 MHz, a de-
crease of extracted lifetimes up to 10 µs shift with a later increase is lifetimes is observed.
The same general behaviour was observed in all data sets for wide range of count rates.
As decay traces are inﬂuenced by physical, chemical, hardware and data processing related
eﬀects, diﬀerent causes can be found for the diﬀerent trends caused by shifting the start
of mono-exponential ﬁts. It is important to remember that a decay trace deviating from a
mono-exponential decay does not necessarily point towards an error. Decay traces usually
stem from diﬀerent decay components and some inﬂuences on lifetimes are dependent on
the amount of excited dye molecules in their triplet state. These relations are explained
in section 2.3 and analysed in section 4.5.
Data sets with low count rates and counting loss:
An initial increase in lifetimes for shifts of the start of mono-exponential ﬁt is expected
to stem from decay components with shorter lifetimes. This is further analysed in 4.5
and therefore only mentioned here. An increase of lifetimes towards the rear part of de-
cay traces, connected with a strong increase of conﬁdence bounds of the ﬁt is expected
stem from the following: As signal decreases, the inﬂuence of the tail of decay curves
with strong noise increases. As observable in ﬁgure 4.1.1 for the CPOx Beads Orange,
starting at around 40 µs the decay trace practically only consists of noise and already
at 20 µs the strong inﬂuence of it becomes apparent. This is no surprise. Considering
the phosphorescent lifetime of 5.3 µs speciﬁed from the manufacturer of the CPOx beads
Orange with an ibidi Opal system [38] under deoxynated conditions, a signal intensity of
2.3% from the initial initial intensity is expected.
44
==PAGE:48==
Data sets with high count rates and counting loss:
An initial decrease in lifetime can be understood easily, looking at the decay traces in ﬁg-
ure 4.3.3 and considering the deﬁnition of lifetimes, being the time it takes for an intensity
to decay to 1/e of its initial value. As counting loss decreases with a decrease in incident
photons, the fraction of counted vs. incident photons becomes higher until it approaches
1. Thus, the decay in the beginning of decay traces appears less steep than in later parts
with lower rates of incident photons. Thus, the time it takes for the count rate to decrease
to 1/e of its initial value is prolonged. In logarithmic plots, this can be observed as a
characteristic counter-clockwise tip of the mono-exponential ﬁt. Shifts of the start of the
ﬁt decrease the lifetime initially as saturated areas are increasingly avoided, however at
some point the eﬀects stemming from noise described for low intensity measurements also
set in here.
In conclusion, this the of the start point of the ﬁt was not found to be a suitable mea-
sure to correct for increases in lifetime with count rates. Many data sets with diﬀerent
levels of saturation and diﬀerent oxygen saturations was reviewed. Firstly, no signiﬁcant
increase in conﬁdence bounds or bead to bead variations of extracted lifetimes at ﬁxed
oxygen concentrations could be tolerated. For meaningful oxygen measurements in cell
cultures, bead to bead variations under controlled conditions of σ = ±0.03µs correspond-
ing to approximately σ = ±1% O2 were targeted. This interbead variation is commonly
exceeded starting at shifts of 2 to 3 µs. Secondly, a shift in the start of a ﬁt would need to
be applied too all calibrations and consecutive data analysis to guarantee comparability.
As shown in table 4.3.1 even shifts of single microseconds already lead to strong changes
in extracted lifetimes.
4.3.1
Saturation Correction: Compensation for Counting Loss
A second approach for saturation correction is to compensate for counting loss by multi-
plication with a count rate dependent factor that increases the count rate in dependence
of the expected count rate.
Data sets for a wide range of count rates were analysed, expected count losses esti-
mated and functions for corrections ﬁtted. However, the retrieved factors exhibited a big
spread. This can also be observed in ﬁgure 4.3.2. One of the problems in an analytical
approximation of a count rate dependent correction factor from experimental data is also,
that meaningful results should be obtained for single or pixels. However, counts from
single pixels are very low, especially when analysing counting loss at count rates of 0.8
MHz or 0.8 counts per Pixel and µs and lower.
Based on approximations presented in section 2.4.3, for the maximum count rates in
ﬁgures 4.3.2a and 4.3.2b, minimum counting losses of already 2% and 3.4% would be ex-
pected. However, no trends and no factors for counting loss correction could be calculated
based on this data at lower count rates and even the data for higher count rates showed
signiﬁcant spread.
45
==PAGE:49==
Conclusion on Detector Saturation
The measurement and calculation of count rate dependent correction factors (correction
function) in connection with an an increase of detection channels to a number of four is ex-
pected to be suﬃcient to increase both speed and consistency of measurements suﬃciently
to acquire image planes in approximately 40 to 60 seconds with standard deviations of
σ = ±1% O2. This estimation will become more apparent in section 4.5. Four and eight
parallel detection channels are readily available for the used system, said to increase the
saturated count rate by a factor of 4 and 8, respectively and up to 16 channel systems
have been shown experimentally [48].
4.4
Pixel Grouping versus Single Pixel Fit
In this section, an analysis of single pixel ﬁts and diﬀerent grouping mechanisms is anal-
ysed to show best approached for obtaining reproducible and consistent lifetimes mea-
surements with phosphorescent microbeads.
The data analysis can in principle be grouped into four diﬀerent procedures:
1. Decay traces of single pixels can be analysed and then sorted into groups for each
microbead. Diﬀerent distributions can be ﬁtted to the obtained group of lifetimes
to check for most suiting average values. Mean or median values are not necessarily
best candidates representing the distribution but easily retrievable parameters that
can be analysed for their consistency.
2. Decay traces of pixels can be grouped, also called binned, with their adjacent pixels,
shown in ﬁgure 4.4.1. Then procedures as described in 1 follow to extract a single
lifetime parameter per microbead.
3. Decay traces of all pixels in a microbead can be grouped and the resulting decay
trace can be analysed. Here one extracted lifetime parameter is acquired per bead
through ﬁtting.
4. A combination of procedure 2 and 3 can be applied: Binning is applied in SPCImage,
data is grouped by microbeads and then a ﬁt is done for each bead.
Figure 4.4.1 shows the pixel grouping procedure implemented in SPCImage.
The
grouping procedure does not reduce the number of pixels in each image. It sums the
photon decay traces surrounding a pixels to its own decay trace. This increases the number
of counts in each pixel by an average factor of 9, 25 or 49 and thus usually decreases the
conﬁdence bounds of ﬁt parameters of exponential ﬁts.
However, it also reduces the
sharpness of images and groups larger areas of an image, potentially leading to pixel
cross-talk or a loss of information. For the purpose of consistent oxygen measurement
with microbeads, the central goal of this thesis, the loss in single pixel information is of
minor importance. However, bead cross-talk should be kept low. In 2D images, bead
cross-talk can reduce spatial oxygen tension resolution.
In 3D imaging, high binning
factors can lead to an addition of signals from other image planes into beads of the focal
plane.
With the objective described in section 3.6 and the zoom factor from 0 to 10 that can
46
==PAGE:50==
be set in the measurement control software - changing the area that is scanned with
the galvano scanner of the microscope without a change in numbers of image pixels - a
microbead spans between approximately 5 and 45 pixels in its diagonal or 19 to 1600
pixels in total in an image. Thus, at a zoom level of 0, grouping with 48 adjascent pixels
is not considered suitable. However, for zoom level 10 it can very well be.
Besides this binning procedure presented, SPCImage does not provide any automatic
intensity based grouping procedures. Beads could only be grouped manually in a lengthy
procedure for each single beach and image, thus this was not considered to be a viable
option.
Figure 4.4.1: Grouping procedure available in SPCImage, in the latter called binning.
Even though resolution decreases with this averaging procedure, photon counts in each
pixels decay trace are signiﬁcantly increased and thus the spread of mono-exponential
ﬁts is reduced. In FLIM and PLIM microscopy images, grouping or binning leads to a
decrease in sharpness but also a signiﬁcant decrease in noise [46].
For this analytical comparison, 10 images of three diﬀerent groups of 5 to 6 beads were
acquired without changing any measurement parameters. The images where acquired with
100 frames or in 4:20 min each and at the lowest laser power and highest optical attenu-
ation possible, resulting in 45 nW (see table 3.6.1 for laser power) during the excitation
period (see Ton in 2.4.1). The laser-on time Ton was approximately Ton = 13 µs and the
laser-oﬀtime in which the phosphorescent decay trace was measured approximately 26 µ
s. The pin-hole was set to 1.
At this stage of the analysis, a mono-exponential decay was ﬁtted to decay traces. The
optimisation of the ﬁtting procedure for decay traces is discussed below in section 4.5.
The three grouping procedures introduced above, explained in a little more detail are:
Procedure 1: Single Pixel Fit Followed by Averaging In this procedure, photon
decay traces for single pixels are ﬁtted with a mono-exponential decay and then averages
were calculated for each bead.
The ﬁtting procedure to decay traces can be done both in Matlab and in SPCImage,
however in Matlab the procedure was slower and resulted in slightly higher ﬁnal bead to
bead variations. Grouping into microbeads and averaging was done in Matlab only, the
functionality is not available in SPCImage as described earlier.
47
==PAGE:51==
Procedure 2: Pixel Analysis with Binning of Factor 1, 2 and 3 followed
by Fit and Averaging This procedure follows same course as procedure one, with the
diﬀerence that the ﬁrst step is to choose a binning factor in SPCImage between 1 and
3 followed by decay trace ﬁtting. The distributions of lifetimes for each bead resembled
the one shown in ﬁgure 4.2.1c, not exactly following a normal distribution but rather
being skewed towards longer lifetimes. Mean and median were chosen at this point to
extract a single lifetime parameter per bead to check for bead to bead and measurement
to measurement variation.
Procedure 3: Pixel Grouping into Microbeads Followed by Fit In this pro-
cedure, raw data from SPCImage is imported into Matlab and a 3D matrix containing
a decay trace for each image pixel is created. Then, pixels are grouped into microbeads
with empirically determined thresholds, summed into one decay trace for each microbead
and ﬁtted. One lifetime parameter for each bead and measurement is extracted.
Pocedure 4: Pixel Binning and Grouping into Microbeads Followed by Fit
This procedure is very similar to procedure 3. The only diﬀerence is, that raw data is
binned in SPCImage before export.
Table 4.4.1 shows the results of the analysis of grouping procedures for a set of 10
images of 6 beads. Bead to bead variations as well as image to image variations were
analysed. Most important here was consistency of results, i.e. low measurement to mea-
surement as well as low bead to bead variations. Very low bead to bead variations in
single measurements with high measurement to measurement variations, to name one ex-
ample, were of no use.
Showing all single results would not be feasible here, therefore the values considered most
important are picked out. Independent of the grouping procedure, for each of the 10
images, a mean lifetime of the 6 beads as well as bead to bead variations in the form of a
standard deviation were calculated. In addition, to analyse measurement to measurement
variations, means and standard deviations for single beads, the 6-bead-means and the 6-
beads standard deviation were calculated. Presented below are the overall mean of the 6
images and its standard deviation. Additionally, the mean and standard deviation of the
standard deviations from each image are shown. To take means of standard deviations
of means and standard deviations might ﬁrst seem surprising. However, it was chosen as
a measure to 1. show measurement to measurement variations (σmeans) and 2. to show
averaged inter bead variations (Meanσ.
Results of procedures 1 to 4 are discussed based on the results in table 4.4.1:
Procedure 1 was disregarded. It could provide detailed information about spatial
distribution of lifetimes when acquiring a large number of frames. A minimum of around
1000 frames (corresponding to 43 min. acquisition time) was required to reach ﬁnal bead
to bead variations of 0.03 µs to 0.04 µs. However, for oxygen monitoring in cell culture
systems, this would not be feasible, especially considering that this would be just for a
single image of a whole group of images neeed for a 3D image in form of a z-stack. Acqui-
sitions with lower frame numbers, of 80 to 100 (or approximately 3:30 min to 4.20 min),
lead to bead to bead variations of 4 µs to 5 µs. therefore, procedure 1 was disregarded
for ﬁnal applications and only used if detailed analysis with very high spatial resolution
48
==PAGE:52==
Procedure
Binning
Meanmeans in ns
σmeans in ns
Meanσ in ns
σσ in ns
1
0
Mean
10431
1108
4284
196
Median
10355
1182
4578
168
2
1
Mean
4592
235
48
32
Median
4526
174
38
18
2
Mean
4571
171
50
44
Median
4472
89
31
15
3
Mean
4687
174
51
30
Median
4524
70
32
10
3
0
4532
20
42
12
4
1
4531
18
40
12
2
4531
17
41
13
3
4531
17
41
11
Table 4.4.1: Analysis of grouping procedures 1 to 4. Central measure for measurement to
measurement variation (variation between means) is σmeans and central measure for bead
to bead variations is the Meanσ.
was needed and time was not a concern.
Procedure 2 delivered relatively low bead to bead variations (Meanσ) but measure-
ment to measurement variations σmeans was relatively high. Procedure 2 was therefore
disregarded.
Procedure 3 and 4 both delivered similar results. Measurement to measurement
variations σmeans were between 17 and 20 ns and bead to bead variations Meanσ between
40 and 42 ns.
These methods were also tested with variations in frame numbers of 5, 20, 40, 60, 80,
100, 160, 320, 640. In addition, measurements from very long exposures, that had been
acquired for detailed spatial analysis were also tested. In the set of measurements with
5 to 640 frames, for frame numbers from 5 to 80, the bead to bead variations decreased
from about 120 ns (5 frames) to 36 ns (40 frames) to about 32 ns (80 frames). With
40 frames, about 2 to 3·104 photon counts were acquired per bead. With 80 frames this
approximately doubled (in general no strong photobleaching observed).
The analysis of these four methods yielded the following results in conclusion:
• Lifetime analysis with grouping and ﬁtting in SPCImage resulted in the lowest stan-
dard deviations from the diﬀerent procedures for some measurements, however very
large inconsistency and was therefore disregarded. Applied grouping here meant,
that each pixels decay trace was summed with the decay traces of the surrounding
square of 3x3, 5x5 or 7x7 neighbouring pixels, yielding an average increase in counts
by a factor of 9, 25 and 49 respectively.
• Grouping of larger amounts of pixels than 3x3 in SPCImage without prior bead
selection were not found suitable, also because microbeads sometimes are within
very few pixels from each other and thus this could lead to strong cross-talk between
beads.
49
==PAGE:53==
• The most consistent results with low bead to bead variations could be achieved by
a combination of two grouping procedures: In SPCImage, each pixel was grouped
with a 3x3 raster described above. Then, a threshold of 0.2 of the maximum count
rate was applied to the image to create a mask to separate and select microbeads
and sum the decay traces of their corresponding pixels. This grouped decay trace
was then ﬁtted using a mono-exponential model in Matlab.
• The acquisition of 80 to 100 frames at lowest power settings was found to be suf-
ﬁcient for measurements with the targeted bead to bead variation in lifetimes of
approximately 0.03µs.
• Bead to bead variations were found to be higher than measurement to measurement
variations, pin-pointing towards potential optimisations in decay trace ﬁtting pro-
cedures to account for diﬀerences between decays in individual beads (e.g. fraction
of dye accessible and inaccessible to quencher).
In conclusion, the presented grouping procedures naturally all decrease the information
on intrabead variation and potential diﬀerences in environment at diﬀerent sides of the
microbeads - with 50 µm diameter potentially present in cell cultures. However, they
also vastly increase consistency and reproducibility of measurements. As the ﬁnal goal is
to achieve low bead to bead variation and not to investigate dye distributions or oxygen
distributions on the order of few µm, the described procedure were valuable to achieve
this.
Procedure 3 and 4 with a diﬀerence in binning were both found suitable. It was decided
to use procedure 4.1 (binning factor 1). Compared to Procedure 3 without binning, this
yielded lower measurement to measurement and bead to bead variations observed also in
other data sets. Higher binning factors 1. did not improve results signiﬁcantly and 2.
were thought to be problematic with low zoom factors (bead to bead cross-talk, explained
above).
Even though an approximate lower limit of photon counts per bead to reach bead to bead
variations below 40 ns were found, the number of acquired frames at diﬀerent zoom levels
and excitation energies is to be further optimised. Especially with higher saturated count
limits, it is expected that the lower limit of acquired frames can be signﬁcantly decreased.
4.5
Fitting Procedures for Lifetime Extraction - CPOx Orange
In this section, decay curves were more carefully analysed. The ﬁnal aim was to ﬁnd the
most robust decay function for ﬁtting that leads to the lowest possible bead to bead and
measurement to measurement variations for a given oxygen concentration. Additionally,
insights into diﬀerent decay components that result in the overlaid observed decay trace
were seeked after.
Naturally, the ﬁnal procedure was meant to represent observed decay traces and the dy-
namic range of measurements at physiological oxygen concentrations was targeted to be
as high as reasonably possible. However, eﬀorts to reﬂect the observed decay traces best
did not necessarily coincide with most robust and reproducible ﬁtting process.
The starting point for the optimisation of ﬁtting functions that best represent the
observed decay traces were the previously used mono-exponential decay that showed a
50
==PAGE:54==
relatively high consistency and robustness.
Another idea originated from the expected fractions of dye with diﬀerent accessibility to
oxygen (quencher). Under deoxygenated conditions, dye molecules were expected to ex-
hibit similar lifetimes and thus the decay was expected to follow a single decay constant.
Under the inﬂuence of oxygen, a superposition of dye fraction with shorter lifetimes that
were accessible to quencher and others with longer lifetime less or inaccessible to quencher
were expected. For a two fraction approximation, this would result in a biexponential
function with one ﬁxed decay parameter for the inaccessible fraction and another one to
be approximated in a ﬁt.
Additionally, corespondence with employees of Becker & Hickl and Colibri Photonics that
also test the use of CPOx beads in PLIM systems resulted in further ideas for ﬁtting func-
tions. However, no robust and reproducible approach could be named yet. One was the
use of a stretched exponential ﬁt (see equation 4.1), also suggested in literature [64], where
the stretching factor was said to represent the accessible dye fraction. The other was to
use biexponential decay, similar to the idea with the diﬀerent dye fractions, but rather
ﬁt the data with a biexponential to retrieve to decay parameters from which a weighted
lifetime could be calculated.
Fit with Mono-Exponential Decay Function
The ﬁt with mono-exponential decay functions was optimised early on in the analysis.
Best results were achieved by ﬁrst deﬁning resonable boundaries and start values. For
that, observed lifetimes were used to deﬁne approximate lower and upper bounds for the
lifetime of 3 µs and 8 µs and starting points for the amplitude at the ﬁrst bin of the
decay. Secondly, ﬁtting using Least Absolute Residuals (LAR in Matlab [65]) was found
most robust. This method ﬁts a curve that reduces the absolute diﬀerence of residuals,
the standard implementation in Matlab is one that reduces the squared diﬀerences. LAR
gives less weight to extreme values.
Fit with Stretched Exponential Decay Function
The ﬁrst adapted ﬁt to be tested was a data ﬁt with a stretched exponential function
f(x) = a · exp(−b · xβ).
(4.1)
Cai et al. have shown for a Platinum-Porphyrin based dye in polysterene ﬁlm, that the
stretching factor β decreased with increasing oxygen tensions [64]. Under deoxygenated
conditions β = 1 was observed (all dye fractions equally non-quenched). This approach
was also suggested by the manufacturer of the beads (Schmaelzlin, Colibri Photonics,
personal communication).
Figure 4.5.1 shows the comparison of stretched and monoexponential ﬁt for a decay
trace of a single bead under deoxygenated conditions (10 mM N2SO4 in PBS solution
added). Measurement parameters were: excitation energy 45 nW, Pin-Hole size 1, 1770
frames.
51
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.5.1: Comparison of mono- and stretched exponential decay ﬁt to decay trace
from single phosphorescent microbead under deoxygenated conditions. Mono-exponential
ﬁt resulted in a lifetime of τmono = 5.58µs and stretched exponential ﬁt with model 4.1
in a lifetime of τstretched = 4.63µs and a fraction of β = 0.93. Bead to bead variation for
mono-exponential ﬁt σmono = 36ns and for stretched exponential ﬁt σstretched = 71ns. An
implemented oﬀset for both ﬁtting procedures slightly changed lifetimes and fraction in
stretched exponential but increased bead to bead variation. Binning factor of 1 applied
(see ﬁgure 4.4.1), increased the counts per bin by approximately a factor of 9.
The stretched exponential ﬁt in ﬁgure 4.5.1 has a higher R2-value and seemed to rep-
resent the decay curve better than a monoexponential ﬁt in many data sets.
In addition, a ﬁt for 21% oxygen saturation is presented. For this, an arbitrarily chosen
decay from the data set with 10 images, presented in table 4.4.1, was chosen. Figure 4.5.2
shows the comparison of mono-exponential and stretched exponential ﬁt.
52
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.5.2: Comparison of mono- and stretched exponential decay ﬁt to decay trace
from single phosphorescent microbead under 21% O2. Mono-exponential ﬁt resulted in
a lifetime of τmono = 4.50µs and stretched exponential ﬁt with model 4.1 in a lifetime of
τstretched = 3.91µs and a fraction of β = 0.94. Averaged bead to bead variation for mono-
exponential ﬁt Meanσ = 40 ns and measurement to measurement variation σmeans = 18
ns (compare table 4.4.1).
Averaged bead to bead variation for stretched exponential
ﬁt Meanσ = 98ns and measurement to measurement variation σmeans = 49 ns.
An
implemented oﬀset for both ﬁtting procedures slightly changed lifetimes and fraction in
stretched exponential but increased bead to bead variation. Binning factor of 1 applied
(see ﬁgure 4.4.1), increased the counts per bin by approximately a factor of 9.
Expecially the beginning of the decay traces, exhibiting a steeper slope than the mono-
exponential ﬁt, was better met with a stretched exponential. In the ﬁrst few microseconds
a fast decaying component seems to be present.
However, the fractionation that was targeted to be accounted for with this ﬁtting function
did not agree with observations. For 0% oxygen the fraction was neither close to one nor
was the fraction from 21% oxygen lower. In this regard, no insights could be gained with
this implementation of a stretched exponential ﬁt.
In addition to a single stretched exponential decay, a combination of stretched exponen-
tial and mono-exponentials were used. These models come with the additional challenge,
that the correlation between extracted decay constants and decay processes is often dif-
ﬁcult [64]. Additionally, these models did not decrease bead to bead or measurement to
measurement variations compared to a simple stretched exponential ﬁt.
In conclusion, the stretched exponential analysis did lead to ﬁts that matched the ob-
served decays more closely than a mono-exponential ﬁt. However, stretched exponential
ﬁtting lead to higher bead to bead and measurement to measurement variations than
single exponential ﬁts. As the priority for this project was high consistency and repro-
ducibility of results, a stretched exponential ﬁt was disregarded at this point even though
it seemed to represent the physical processes better than a mono-exponential one.
53
==PAGE:57==
Fit with Biexponential Decay Function with Two Unbound Decay Constants
The ﬁrst option analysed was a bi-exponential model with non-ﬁxed parameters. A single
lifetime was then extracted by weighting the two extracted decay components with the
amplitudes of their exponential term. R2-values were 1 or close to 1 in all ﬁtted data sets.
However, bead to bead variation were high and the physical meaning of two non-ﬁxed
parameters questionable. Thus, the ﬁt with two non-ﬁxed parameters was not pursued
and details are omitted here.
Fit with Biexponential Decay Function with One Fixed Decay Constant
The second option was based on the idea of fractionation, with an approximation of a
non-quenched and a quenched fraction of dye. Here, the decay constant of one term was
ﬁxed to the value measured at 0% oxygen and the other was non-ﬁxed. This lead to low
R2 values, the exponential to be ﬁtted exhibited very low amplitudes and high bead to
bead and measurement to measurement variations resulted.
Third, diﬀerent decay parameters were tried to best match the observed decay trace. A
model with one decay constant ﬁxed at 3.2 µs accounted well for the observable fast decay
that was not well accounted for by a mono-exponential ﬁt. It is not known which decay
process could be root cause for this initial steeper decay. Triplet-triplet annihilation might
be one explanation [66], as it would be expected more pronounced at the beginning of
decay traces with high triplet state populations.
Conclusion on Decay Models
In conclusion, the analysis of diﬀerent decay models found in literature and tested here,
indicates that the model best representing the observed decay was a stretched-exponential
with oﬀset. If targeting the extraction of lifetimes that correspond best to the actual decay,
the optimisation of this could be an approach worth investigating.
4.6
Fitting Procedure for Lifetime Extraction - CPOx Red
The CPOx Reds Platinum-Phorphyrine dye complex exhibits much longer decay times
and a bigger dynamic range than the CPOx Orange. Decay times are given with 20 µs
to 57 µs for the Ibidi Opal system [38].
For this dye too, thorough analysis of diﬀerent ﬁtting procedures was conducted. Mono-,
stretched and bi-exponentials were again candidates to be analysed. The analysis is kept
shorter here, for more background please consult section 4.5 on the CPOx Orange.
Figure 4.6.1 shows a comparison of mono-, stretched and bi-exponential ﬁts to a decay
trace of a single bead under 21% oxygen.
Measurement parameters were: excitation
energy 45 nW, pin-hole 1, count rate of approximately 0.3 MHz.
54
==PAGE:58==
Figure 4.6.1: Comparison of mono-, stretched and bi-exponential ﬁt to decay trace from
single phosphorescent microbead under 21% O2. Resulting lifetimes are τmono = 26.6 µs,
τstretched = 8.8 µs and τbi = 24.8 µs. Fitting parameters and discussion of models described
in text. Binning factor of 1 applied (see ﬁgure 4.4.1), meaning real photon count per bin
by approximately a factor of 9 lower.
Fitting procedures were compared for data sets measured at 0%, 5.25%, 10.5%, 15.75%
and 21%. Bead to bead variations were calculated for each technique. Results are shown
in table 4.6.1.
02 in %
Exponential Fit
Mean in ns
σ in ns
0
Mono
62529
67
Stretched
51688
1601
Bi
62517
37
5.25
Mono
36673
390
Stretched
22807
752
Bi
35608
122
10.5
Mono
31671
324
Stretched
15004
525
Bi
30278
208
15.75
Mono
29509
178
Stretched
12803
472
Bi
27648
431
21
Mono
8771
161
Stretched
24795
141
Bi
25415
186
Table 4.6.1: Extracted lifetimes and standard deviations for mono- streteched and bi-
exponential ﬁts. Each standard deviation is based on the measurement of 3 to 4 beads
and measurements were acquired with high frame numbers.
55
==PAGE:59==
Mono-Exponential Fit
From ﬁgure 4.6.1 it is apparent, that a mono-exponential ﬁt does not closely reﬂect the
measured decay proﬁle at 100% oxygen. It exhibits an R2 = 0.9898 and RMSE = 1554
here. It did however, reﬂect the decay at 0 % oxygen more closely. This agrees with
the approximation of accessible and inaccessible dye fractions explained above, that are
indistinguishable at 0% oxygen (no quenching) and thus tend towards a single decay
constant there. In table 4.6.1 can be seen, that bead to bead variation is relatively low.
Stretched Exponential Fit
The stretched exponential relatively relatively closely reﬂects the variation in that data,
shown for 21% oxygen in ﬁgure 4.6.1 with an R2=0.9999. It exhibits however fairly strong
bead to bead variations, shown in table 4.6.1. Additionally, the fraction does not decrease
from 1 with increasing oxygen tensions, thus the fractionation of accessible and inaccissble
dye fraction is not easily explainable with this model.
Bi-Exponential Fit with One Fixed Decay Constant
The presented bi-exponential ﬁt closely reﬂects the variation in the data for all oxygen
levels, shown for 21% oxygen in ﬁgure 4.6.1 with an R2=1. It additionally exhibits low
bead to bead variations, shown in table 4.6.1 and was very robust and consistent.
This presented bi-exponential contains one ﬁxed therm and was optimised in diﬀerent
iterations. The ﬁnal equation for the model is:
f(x) = a · exp(−(1/52.0µs) · x) + b · exp(−(1/c) · x).
(4.2)
The lifetime for a mono-exponential decay at 0% was τ = 62.5 ± 0.07µs, this however
missed to explain some faster decay process, visible in the beginning of the decay trace. In
a bi-exponential model, this was also not suitable as a value for the ﬁxed decay constant.
Instead, experimentally the best suitable value was found to be 52.0 µs. With this, as
seen in table 4.6.1, as for the mono-exponential ﬁt, a lifetime of τ = 62.5±0.04µs resulted
from the ﬁt.
A possible explanation for this variation could be, that the approximation of accessible
and inaccessible fractions does not closely reﬂect the decay here, as in reality not only
dye fractions inaccessible to quencher are expected but also those less accessible and even
sites that contain trapped quenchers and thus have an opposing inﬂuence [64]. Thus, the
second term with a decay constant of λ = 1/(52.0µs) might reﬂect this situation better
than it would be if estimated a fully non-quenched second fraction. Other inﬂuences such
as triplet-triplet annihilation adding faster decay components could also be part of the
explanation.
Conclusion on Decay Models
The presented bi-exponential ﬁtting model with ﬁxed term was chosen for further analy-
sis. It was most robust, produced consistent results with low bead to bead variations and
additionally best explained the variations in the data for all measured oxygen concentra-
tions.
56
==PAGE:60==
4.7
Bead-selective Excitation and 3D Imaging
One problem in the acquisition of decay traces for single beads with suﬃcient signal was
the detection time. This could be drastically reduced with the possibility to selectively
excite areas with a minimum signal intensity. This functionality can be found for many
laser scanning microscope, however it is unfortunately not integrated in the used system.
An intensity based grouping mechanism after the acquisition of images was explained
above for the purpose of bead selection. This disregards pixels and microbeads with in-
tensities lower than factor of 0.2 of the maximum intensity. This was used in sliced 3D
images to disregard beads from other planes.
In preliminary scripts, the signal from images of diﬀerent planes were analysed in conjunc-
tion to group signal from equal beads recorded in diﬀerent imaging planes. Additionally,
based on the averaged intensity of all beads in a plane, beads were grouped into the plane
where they showed the comparably highest intesnity. This is however still at a preliminary
level and need more experimental data. Therefore, it is not further presented here.
4.8
Conclusion of Method Development
In the course of this method development for an unexplored combination of phospho-
rescent microbeads in PLIM with LSM, two measurement techniques for CPOx Beads
Orange and Red could be established.
Noise, spatial dye distribution, correlation between extracted lifetime and count rates,
detector saturation and decay models were analysed and optimised. This resulted in both
guidelines for measurement procedures and manifold scripts to analyse for diﬀerent dis-
tribution and parameters, most importantly to extract lifetimes.
In the next step, these results were used to record and analyse calibration curves for
CPOx Beads Orange and Red.
In the ﬁnal method, pixels are ﬁrst grouped with a binning factor of 1 - adding the signal
from the 8 adjacent pixels to each pixel in the image. Then, pixels are grouped by phos-
phorecent microbeads, with a bead selection based on intensity distributions. In a last
step, grouped decay traces are analysed with a mono-exponential decay for CPOx Beads
Orange and a bi-exponential decay with ﬁxed term for CPOx Beads Red.
The Matlab script for the ﬁnal analysis of CPOx Bead Red and Orange is contained
in the appendix.
57
==PAGE:61==
5
Results
5.1
Oxygen Calibration Curve for CPOx Beads Orange
The methods developed in the course of this project for the CPOx Beads Orange, de-
scribed in section 4, were applied to acquire calibration curves.
Two images with 100 frames and 6 beads each were taken at 0%, 5.25%, 10.5%, 15.75%
and 21% oxygen saturation. The excitation energy was set to 34 nW, pin-hole size was
set to 1 and like for all other experiments, the microscopy incubator was maintained at
37◦C for the whole measurement.
Figure 5.1.1 shows the calibration curve for these measurements. The two-term Stern-
Volmer model explains the variation in the data to some extent and quenched dye fraction
f as well as quencher constant KSV = kq · τ0 are close to the the results for CPOx Beads
Red (see ﬁgure 5.2.1). A linear ﬁt explains variation in data to a lesser degree (R2 =
0.9779). The mono-exponential ﬁt, however robust, is not representing a two fraction
model and might lead to a limited agreement with the two-term Stern-Volmer model.
Figure 5.1.1: Calibration curve for CPOx Beads Orange with ﬁt of two-term Stern-
Volmer model τ = τ0 ·

f
1+KSV ·[O2] + (1 −f)

, explained in section 2.3.
Resulting ﬁt
parameters with 95% conﬁdence bounds are: fraction f = 0.6376 (−0.41; 0.041) and
KSV = 0.0349 (−0.035; 0.034).
Model explains variations in data to some extent, however it is apparent that the
agreement is limited. This might be related to the mono-exponential ﬁt of decay traces
that do not account for two fractions of dye but delivered most consistent results. Esti-
mated fraction and quencher constants KSV = kq · τ0 are however in close proximity to
results for CPOx Red (see ﬁgure 5.2.1).
5.1.1
Stern-Volmer Plot
The data set presented in the previous section was used to create a Stern-Volmer plot and
ﬁt this with a two-term Stern-Volmer. This is shown in ﬁgure 5.1.2. This is in limited
agreement with the model and linear ﬁts lead to similar R2-values (R2 = 0.9922).
58
==PAGE:62==
Figure 5.1.2: Stern-Volmer plot for CPOx Beads Orange with ﬁt of two-term Stern-
Volmer model τ0/τ = ·

f
1+KSV ·[O2] + (1 −f)
−1
, explained in section 2.3. Resulting ﬁt
parameters with 95% conﬁdence bounds are: fraction f = 0.6376 (−0.040; 0.041) and
KSV = 0.0349 (−0.034; 0.035).
Model explains variations in data to a limited extent. This might be connected to the
applied mono-exponential ﬁt of decay traces that does not account for fractionation but
was found to deliver most robust results.
The observed negative curvature is expected to dominantly stem from fractionation, ex-
plained in section 2.3.1. Other inﬂuence that lead to positive curvature such as triplet-
triplet annihilation are also expected to be present considering the high excitation energy
densities in LSM and the high concentration of dye in the microbeads [29].
5.1.2
Discussion of and Conclusion on Calibration of CPOx Beads Orange
In conclusion, the variation in the data was explained to a limited extend by a two-term
Stern-Volmer model, based on the concept of dye fractionation with an accessible and an
inaccessible fraction. The limited agreement with the model might stem from the fact,
that decay traces were ﬁtted with mono-exponential decays due to most robust results,
that however not necessarily represent the underlying physics best. The agreement with
the model is higher for CPOx Beads Red presented in the next section.
Calibrations should be repeated with more parallel detector channels, if possible, that
reduce detector saturation and saturation correction in the analysis. It would also be
meaningful to further look into the decay analysis. A ﬁt model containing fractionation
might lead to a better agreement with the two-term Stern-Volmer model. Additionally,
a variety of other more sophisticated models for the relation of lifetimes and oxygen
concentrations and Stern-Volmer reations can be found [41][64] that might agree better
with the measurement data.
5.2
Oxygen Calibration Curve for CPOx Beads Red
The methods developed in the course of this project for the CPOx Beads Red, described
in section 4, were applied to acquire the presented calibration curve.
59
==PAGE:63==
Images were acquired with a relatively large number of frames, between 350 and 1000.
One image was acquired for each data oxygen concentration. Count rates were between
0.05 MHz to 0.06 MHz and excitation was done with a laser at 473 nm even though this
corresponds to an approximate minimum in the absorption spectrum (see ﬁgure 3.3.1b).
The pixel time was set to 320 µs. This could be reduced, however in these early steps of
experiments with CPOx Red the tail of the decay curve was of interest as well.
In the analysis, the applied procedures were: binning with factor 1 in SPCImage, grouping
of pixel decay traces by microbeads, decay trace analysis with optimised bi-exponential
decay with ﬁxed parameter at τ = 52.0µs.
Figure 5.2.1 show the lifetime vs. oxygen concentration plot for the CPOx Beads Red.
The two-term Stern-Volmer model explained in section 2.3 explained variations in the
data well. Model ﬁt parameters are given in the ﬁgure. The deviation at 21% oxygen is
expected to either stem from an experiment at 21% oxygen with diﬀerent parameters or
error in other data points. Due to time constraints, receiving the CPOx beads Red in the
very end of the project, only one data set could be acquired and presented here.
The fraction f = 0.6546 of quenched dye molecules resulting from the ﬁt of the two-term
Stern-Volmer equation is about 0.05 lower than reported in the analysis through frequency
modulation methods for the microbeads [17]. This is not surprising as it is emphasised
that diﬀerent measurement and anlytical procedures often result in diﬀerent lifetimes,
fractions of quenched and unquenched dye molecules and KSV -values.
A possible explanation for a slightly lower value could also be, that the bi-exponential
model for the decay trace ﬁt consists of a ﬁxed parameters that might account for an
average fraction of non-quenched and partly quenched dye molecules, thus decreasing the
extracted fully quenched fraction to some degree.
60
==PAGE:64==
Figure 5.2.1: Calibration curve for CPOx Beads Red with ﬁt of two-term Stern-Volmer
model τ
= τ0 ·

f
1+KSV ·[O2] + (1 −f)

, explained in section 2.3.
Resulting ﬁt pa-
rameters with 95% conﬁdence bounds are: fraction f = 0.6546 (−0.027; 0.048) and
KSV = 0.3658 (−0.061; 0.060).
Model explains most variations in data well.
Devia-
tion at 21% oxygen expected either due to error in measurement at 21% O2 or due to
measurement errors in other data points.
Single measurement of three to four beads
each. Bead to bead variation corresponds to standard deviation. Estimated fraction and
quencher constants KSV = kq ·τ0 in close proximity to results for CPOx Orange (see ﬁgure
5.1.1).
The small measurement errors might increase in later measurements with less frames
and more beads. Nevertheless, the results clearly indicate that the method will have high
predictive potential and low error margins, predicting oxygen concentrations with high
consistency and reproducibility.
The most interesting region for oxygen monitoring in 3D organ-on-a-chip and disease
models is approximately in the range of 1 % to 13 %, the range of normoxic conditions
found in most body tissue and organs [3]. For the study of cancer, still lower oxygen
tensions are often of interest for disease modelling [7] The higher steepness of the slope
in the calibration indicates an advantage for the determination of oxygen tensions from
measured lifetimes.
5.2.1
Stern-Volmer Plot
The two-term Stern-Volmer model was ﬁt to the set of measurement data described in
the previous section and is shown in a Stern-Volmer plot in ﬁgure 5.2.2.
The observed negative curvature is thought to be dominated by the inﬂuence of fraction-
ation, described in section 2.3.1 and shown in ﬁgure 2.3.1a. Additional causes of negative
curvature such as photochemical compound formation, leading to a decrease in KSV can
also very well be present.
Even though the negative curvature is pronounced, also inﬂuences that usually cause pos-
itive curvature can very well be superimposed, explained in section 2.3.2. Triplet-triplet
61
==PAGE:65==
annihilation is expected to be present due to high excitation energy densities present in
LSM [29]. The inﬂuence of excitation energy densities and connected triplet-triplet anni-
hilation could not be investigated properly yet, especially with lower detector saturation
and optimised measurement parameters this could be an insightful set of experiments
though.
Figure 5.2.2: Stern-Volmer plot for CPOx Beads Red with ﬁt of two-term Stern-Volmer
model τ0/τ = ·

f
1+KSV ·[O2] + (1 −f)
−1
, explained in section 2.3.
Resulting ﬁt pa-
rameters with 95% conﬁdence bounds are: fraction f = 0.6584 (−0.025; 0.025) and
KSV = 0.3518 (−0.075; 0.075).
Model explains most variations in data well.
Devia-
tion at 21% oxygen expected either due to error in measurement at 21% O2 or due to
measurement errors in other data points. Single measurement of three to four beads each.
Bead to bead variation corresponds to standard deviation.
5.2.2
Discussion of and Conclusion on Calibration of CPOx Beads Red
In conclusion the measurement procedures, even though to still be further optimised,
showed high agreement with models found in literature and promise high predictive value
for oxygen monitoring applications. It is remarked here again, that it would not be correct
to claim, that because of robust ﬁts and good agreement with a two-term Stern-Volmer
model, the extracted lifetimes and fractions are universally correct for the compound under
investigation. Certainly hints towards photophysical process and decays are gained, but
a full characterisation of decays requires more sophisticated experimental techniques to
isolate inﬂuences and in depth knowledge on the latter.
Bead to bead variations for error estimations ﬁrst have to be established for the ﬁnal
measurement procedure. Nevertheless, the high steepness of the slope at the lower halv
of measured oxygen tensions promises high predictive power for oxygen tensions when
measuring lifetimes.
62
==PAGE:66==
5.3
Proof of Concept Studies
5.3.1
Cells in Polysyterne and PEGDA Wells
In this section, two experiment showing the general feasibility of the developed sensing
method in cell cultures are brieﬂy presented.
Figure 5.3.1 shows a schematic of the
experiments. 3D printed PEGDA wells with an inner diameter of 2 mm as well standard
96-well plates were used as scaﬀolds for the incorporation of hydrogel suspension. The
suspensions contained a concentration of 20 mio HT-29 cells/ml, 5% w/v GelMA and 0.2
mg/ml CPOx Beads Orange in Medium (composition described in section 3.4).
(a)
Figure 5.3.1: Schematic of experiments with HT-29 mammalian cancer cells suspended
alongside with CPOx Beads Orange in GelMA hydrogel, incorporated in Polystyrene and
PEGDA wells.
Results
Two sets experiments were run. One resulted in full sedimentation of cells to the bottom of
the well. The second appearing to exhibit some degree of sedimentation, however images
400 µm into the cell culture from the bottom of the well were taken.
Experimental
procedure was not optimised, thus count rates were not increased to get approximate
ideas on reduction in count rate imaging into further depths of tissue cultures.
Count rates decreased from 4500 counts per pixel at z = 0 µm to 500 counts per pixel
at z = 400 µm. A total number of 60 frames was acquired, binning factor set to 1, zoom
factor 2 and excitation intensity was set to 10.7 kWm−2. As images were acquired with
low count per pixel lifetime results in ﬁgure 5.3.2 no expected to be reliable.
63
==PAGE:67==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.3.2: (a) Lifetime image calculated with Matlab script attached in appendix
for CPOx Beads Orange and corresponding to intensity image at z = 0 in (b) of cell
experiment with 20 cells/ml (HT-29), 5% w/v GelMA and 0.2 mg/ml CPOx Beads Orange
in Medium. Images taken at (b) z = 0 mm, (c) z = 2 mm and (d) z = 4 mm from bottom
of well.
Conclusion
The intended cell measurements showed problems with sedimentation and measurements
were not taken with optimised measurement procedures, thus not leading to conclusive
results on oxygen tension.
However, it could be seen that for the lowest excitation intensity, microbeads from upper
image planes are still visible.
Even though a preliminar result, this indicates general
feasibility. Average excitation intensity can in principle be increase by a factor of over
6000.
64
==PAGE:68==
6
Discussion
In this section, the results of the ﬁnal developed method for spatially resolved oxygen
sensing in 3D tissue environments are discussed and set into context with other solutions
presented in literature. Discussions of single aspects of the method development, in par-
ticular disregarded steps, can be found on the end of each section.
The aim of this project was to establish a measurement technique for the 3D monitor-
ing of oxygen in 3D tissue cultures with high spatial resolution and accuracy. This was
achieved by the use of laser scanning microscopy with one-photon excitation for
excitation and time-correlated single photon counting for the recording of phospho-
rescence lifetime. Oxygen tension is quantiﬁed by measuring the degree of quenching of
phosphorescent microbeads. These main aspects are discussed below in the context
of other systems and methodes.
Microscopy Techniques
Potential microscopy techniques for the measurement of 3D resolved ﬂuorescence and
phosphorescent signals are confocal laser scanning microscopy (LSM), spinning disc con-
focal microscopy and temporal focusing wide-ﬁeld microscopy.
Temporal focusing wide-ﬁeld microscopy has the advantages of high image acquisition
speeds and low energy density, limiting adverse eﬀect to cell samples compared to laser
scanning techniques. However, it exhibits low excitation energy densities and thus limited
penetration depths into dense tissues. It was not found to be suitable for imaging 3D cell
culture environments [67].
Spinning disc confocal microscopy allows 3D resolved ﬂuorescence imaging at much en-
hanced imaging speeds compared to LSMs due to thousands of simulatneous illuminations
through pin-holes on spinning discs [68]. This technique also enables ﬂuorescence lifetime
imaging and thus oxygen monitoring with ﬂuorescence based probes [69]. However, the
problem of strong background ﬂuorescence renders FLIM measurements less suitable for
measurements in dense 3D tissue cultures and the successful measurement of phosphores-
cence lifetimes has not been presented with these system. This was reported to be due to
an incompatibility of fast spinning disc and long phosphorescent lifetimes [67].
LSM on the other hand allows phosphorescent lifetime measurements for arbitrary phos-
phorescence lifetimes, imaging in 3D with high spatial resolution and sample penetration
of several hundred micrometer. Oxygen monitoring has been shown with single and two-
photon excitation and dissolved dyes [13] as well as phosphorescent probes encorporated
in dendrimer macromolecules [16]. The advantages of two-photon excitation are an in-
crease in penetration depth and a reduction of adverse eﬀects on cells due to typically
longer excitation wavelengths. However, disadvantages include typically lower excitation
cross-sections compared to single-photon excitation and system integration is more chal-
lenging [14].
Whether cell toxicity with the methodoly developed in this thesis poses a problem in ﬁnal
cell experiments has to evaluated. The system was typically used with excitation intensi-
ties of 10.7 kWm−2 that were increased to a maximum of 80 kWm−2 for cell culture mea-
surements at depths of 350 µm. The high dye concentration in the used phosphorescent
probes allows low excitation intensities and thus low adverse eﬀects on cells. Certainly,
the exploration of two-photon excitation in combination with phosphorescent microsen-
65
==PAGE:69==
sors could be of interest, however it is not expected to be necessary for the targetted
applications.
Intensity vs. Time Domain Measurements
Oxygen monitoring with phosphorescent probes based on intensity and lifetimes mea-
surements have been presented in literature. In intensity based measurements, oxygen
sensitive and insensitive dyes can be co-incorporated into oxygen sensors that allow ra-
tiometric measurements with limited need for calibration [15]. However, high ﬂuorescent
background signal in dense 3D tissue cultures is a severe problem. No solutions with a
comparable accuracy to lifetime based methods could be found in literature.
Lifetime based methods employing frequency modulation can strongly ﬁlter ﬂuorescent
background signals [70][38], however, no frequency modulation based system allowing the
measurement of phosphorescent probes in 3D could be found. Lifetime based solutions
recording phosphorescent decay traces after excitation have been presented with two-
photon excited phosphorescence and nanoprobes [71], however no exact calibration plots
and data on measurement accuracy could be extracted from the provided data. In addi-
tion, measurements only to depths of 240 µm into tissue were realised.
Time-correlated photon counting measurements require sophisticated equipment and single-
photon counters suﬀer from low saturated count rates. However, the combination of very
high temporal resolution of TCSPC systems with large microbeads enabling relatively
high grouped counts at low pixel intensities enable oxygen measurement accuracy with
suﬃcient spatial resolution limited mainly by the size of the beads.
Phosphorescent Probes
Oxygen sensitive phosphorescent probes for 3D oxygen mapping have been shown in
solution [13], in the form of nanoprobes [16] and in size ranges of the used microbeads. The
incorporation of dye into probes strongly reduces cell toxicity and allows the integration
into long term tissue culture systems, thus probe based solution were the method of choise
for this project. Even though the used probe size of 50 µm eﬀectively limits the spatial
resolution and homogenous distribution, this also turned out to be an advantage. Pixel
of a microbead could be grouped and thus the signal enhanced.
66
==PAGE:70==
7
Conclusion
The ﬁrst aim of this project was to create a tightly temperature and gas controlled en-
vironment as a basis for all further experiments that can host 3D printed microﬂuidic
3D cell culture systems. This was successfully achieved with the optimised microscopy
incubator which showed high temperature stability with maximum ﬂuctuations of ±0.5◦C
and gas tightness. No diﬀerence in oxygen could be measured between deoxygenated con-
ditions with N2SO4 in solution and pure N2 supplied to the incubator. In addition, in
the calibration of the gas controllers, a maximum standard deviation of approximately
1% was measured. The microscopy incubator also allowed cell culture incubation and
microscopy was not impaired due to condensation at any point, tested for a maximum of
48h.
The targeted non-invasiveness of the measurement method was achieved. Microbeads
could be incorporated along with cells into hydrogels and 3D printed cell culture scaf-
folds.
The spatial resolution of oxygen monitoring was limited by the size of the beads as signals
were grouped for each bead. For the currently explored application this spatial resolution
was suﬃcient both in focal planes and for 3D images in z-stacks.
The goal of real-time oxygen monitoring was met to some degree. The time used for
the recording of images with CPOx Orange Sensors was currently between about 130
and 260s. Fast dynamical processes can therefor not be resolved at this point in time.
However, the development of oxygen gradients in cell cultures over longer time spans can
very well be monitored. Additionally, given that cells can be cultured in the microscopy
incubator and imaging routines can be programmed, time spans in the development of a
tissue culture can be recorded at regular timepoints.
The goal of robust and consistent measurements was partly achieved. The results for
CPOx Beads Red look promising when it comes to bead to bead variations and the
potential for oxygen prediction from measured lifetimes. However, as those were only re-
ceived in the very end of the project, further measurements ﬁrst have to conﬁrm the small
bead to bead variations under a established set of reasonable measurement conditions.
The CPOx Bead Orange Exhibited 95% conﬁdence intervals in calibration measurements
that corresponded to approximately ±1% −1.5% conﬁdence intervals for the prediction
of O2 from lifetimes.
Detector saturation and the ﬁt with single exponential ﬁt were
challenges and could not be resolved to a satisfactory degree yet.
Preliminary compensation approaches for detector saturation by multiplication of correc-
tion factors lacked precise characterisation of counting loss. Shifting of start of curve ﬁts
clearly indicated that decays were not characterised by single decay constant but changed
over time and thus shifting changed results signiﬁcantly. Additionally, the inﬂuence of
noise at later time points in decay traces increased signiﬁcantly. It could clearly be seen
that detector saturation lead to progressively longer lifetimes and clearly set in at count
rates of 0.3 MHz. This does not mean it is not present at lower count rates. The increase
in lifetime in the regime was however observed to be small and for practical reasons a
further reduction was not applicable. Measurement times would have been extended too
much.
The developed grouping procedures increased decay counts to a large extent and enabled
the measurement of decay traces with the above mentioned 95% intervals in the also men-
tioned 130s to 260s. For measurements with 50 frames or 130s, the measurements 95%
67
==PAGE:71==
conﬁdence interval was up to 1.8%.
The ﬁtting procedure for the CPOx Beads Red indicated high agreement with fractiona-
tion models and lead to consistent ﬁtting results in all acquired data sets. The dominant
inﬂuence for curvature in Stern-Volmer plots seems to stem from the mentioned fractiona-
tion and other inﬂuences such as triplet-triplet annihilation are expected to be present due
to high excitation intensities in LSM but are not observed to pose a problem in form of
changing lifetimes for changing excitation intensities. The ﬁtting procedure for the CPOx
Orange was not equally robust and did not seem to reﬂect the physical decay processes
well. Especially in the ﬁrst few microseconds of decay traces, for count rates of about
0.2 MHz and below, a faster decay process than explained by a mono-exponential ﬁt was
observed. For higher count rates, the opposite was the case, however this is expected to
stem from detector saturation.
The incorporation of microbeads into 3D tissue scaﬀolds and the measurement of oxygen
tension in the latter could partly be achieved. In the two cell experiments that could be
conducted to date, sedimentation of cells and microbeads strongly occured in one case
and was suspected in the other other. In addition, homogenous suspension of microbeads
in GelMA was still inconsistent. However, as the suspension of beads in GelMA only
could be achieved well consistently when adhering to mixing, the problem of incropora-
tion might resolve without further opmtimisations. In addition, preliminary tests could
show the transparency of PEGDA and thus the general feasibility of imaging in PEGDA
scaﬀolds.
Imaging in 3D could be shown for up to 400 m into cell cultures, however this is not
expected to be the maximum depth. In the conducted cell experiment with less sedi-
mentation, excitation power was kept constant during z-stacking and in the second cell
experiments, complete sedimentation of cell and beads was observed.
In conclusion, the main objectives of this project could be met and the fundamentals
of a novel and useful method for real-time oxygen monitoring in 3D tissue cultures with
high spatial resolutions were established.
68
==PAGE:72==
8
Outlook
Technical optimisation of the developed technology are manifold. To address the major
drawback of high counting loss already at very low excitation intensities, the incorpo-
ration of parallel detector channels alongside with the establishment of a counting loss
compensation would be of great use. The characterisation of the counting loss and thereby
the calculation of correction factors is expected to be achieved by the used of photodiode
pulse at low repetition rates with oﬀset factors to simulate poisson distributed photon
event at average event rates.
Furthermore, the ﬁtting procedure for the CPOx Bead Orange will be tried to be optimised
and measurement parameters for the CPOx Beads Red will be established. In parallel,
experiments with microﬂuidic systems to characterise the time responses, optimise 3D
imaging and ﬁnd optimal count rates for diﬀerent zoom levels are to be established.
In addition, experiments with highly perfused 3D tissue culture platforms are planned.
In a more general perspective, a further optimised oxygen monitoring system based
on the presented methods could be of great interest for the development of microﬂuidic
platforms for cell assays, organ-on-a-chip systems and 3D cancer models. 3D printing
technologies enable the engineering of oxygen content with high spatial resolution, however
the consumption of cells in scaﬀolds often not known. Thus insights would be of great
help. The incorporation of additional ﬂuorescent or phosphorescent dye compounds into
beads or 3D tissue culture for the parallel monitoring of diﬀerent parameters could be
explored and the parallel FLIM recording, being a byproduct of PLIM in the used system,
could potentially be exploited.
In addition, the application in other ﬁelds such as food processing and chemical process
optimisation could be explored.
69
==PAGE:73==
References
[1] R. J. Fleischaker and A. J. Sinskey, “Oxygen demand and supply in cell culture,”
Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 193–197, 1981.
[2] A. P. Vollmer, R. F. Probstein, R. Gilbert, and T. Thorsen, “Development of an
integrated microﬂuidic platform for dynamic oxygen sensing and delivery in a ﬂowing
medium,” Lab on a Chip, vol. 5, no. 10, pp. 1059–1066, 2005.
[3] M. D. Brennan, M. L. Rexius-Hall, L. J. Elgass, and D. T. Eddington, “Oxygen
control with microﬂuidics,” Lab on a Chip, vol. 14, no. 22, pp. 4305–4318, 2014.
[4] L.-T. Cheah, Y.-H. Dou, A.-M. L. Seymour, C. E. Dyer, S. J. Haswell, J. D. Wad-
hawan, and J. Greenman, “Microﬂuidic perfusion system for maintaining viable heart
tissue with real-time electrochemical monitoring of reactive oxygen species,” Lab on
a Chip, vol. 10, no. 20, pp. 2720–2726, 2010.
[5] M. L. Rexius-Hall, G. Mauleon, A. B. Malik, J. Rehman, and D. T. Eddington,
“Microﬂuidic platform generates oxygen landscapes for localized hypoxic activation,”
Lab on a chip, vol. 14, no. 24, pp. 4688–4695, 2014.
[6] D. R. Grimes, C. Kelly, K. Bloch, and M. Partridge, “A method for estimating the
oxygen consumption rate in multicellular tumour spheroids,” Journal of The Royal
Society Interface, vol. 11, no. 92, p. 20131124, 2014.
[7] R. Grigoryan, N. Keshelava, C. Anderson, and C. P. Reynolds, “In vitro testing
of chemosensitivity in physiological hypoxia,” Chemosensitivity: Volume 1 In Vitro
Assays, pp. 87–100, 2005.
[8] R. A. Gatenby, H. B. Kessler, J. S. Rosenblum, L. R. Coia, P. J. Moldofsky, W. H.
Hartz, and G. J. Broder, “Oxygen distribution in squamous cell carcinoma metas-
tases and its relationship to outcome of radiation therapy,” International Journal of
Radiation Oncology* Biology* Physics, vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 831–838, 1988.
[9] Platinum Metals Review, vol. 41, no. 3, 1997.
[10] X.-d. Wang and O. S. Wolfbeis, “Optical methods for sensing and imaging oxygen:
materials, spectroscopies and applications,” Chemical Society Reviews, vol. 43, no. 10,
pp. 3666–3761, 2014.
[11] M. Quaranta, S. M. Borisov, and I. Klimant, “Indicators for optical oxygen sensors,”
Bioanalytical Reviews, vol. 4, pp. 115–157, Dec 2012.
[12] H. Choi, D. S. Tzeranis, J. W. Cha, P. Cl´emenceau, S. J. de Jong, L. K. van Geest,
J. H. Moon, I. V. Yannas, and P. T. So, “3d-resolved ﬂuorescence and phospho-
rescence lifetime imaging using temporal focusing wide-ﬁeld two-photon excitation,”
Optics express, vol. 20, no. 24, pp. 26219–26235, 2012.
[13] M. Yu, F. Li, Z. Chen, H. Hu, C. Zhan, H. Yang, and C. Huang, “Laser scan-
ning up-conversion luminescence microscopy for imaging cells labeled with rare-earth
nanophosphors,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 81, no. 3, pp. 930–935, 2009.
70
==PAGE:74==
[14] E. G. Mik, T. G. van Leeuwen, N. J. Raat, and C. Ince, “Quantitative determina-
tion of localized tissue oxygen concentration in vivo by two-photon excitation phos-
phorescence lifetime measurements,” Journal of applied physiology, vol. 97, no. 5,
pp. 1962–1969, 2004.
[15] M. A. Acosta, P. Ymele-Leki, Y. V. Kostov, and J. B. Leach, “Fluorescent mi-
croparticles for sensing cell microenvironment oxygen levels within 3d scaﬀolds,”
Biomaterials, vol. 30, no. 17, pp. 3068–3074, 2009.
[16] S. Sakadˇzi´c, E. Roussakis, M. A. Yaseen, E. T. Mandeville, V. J. Srinivasan, K. Arai,
S. Ruvinskaya, A. Devor, E. H. Lo, S. A. Vinogradov, et al., “Two-photon high-
resolution measurement of partial pressure of oxygen in cerebral vasculature and
tissue,” Nature methods, vol. 7, no. 9, pp. 755–759, 2010.
[17] E. Schm¨alzlin, J. T. van Dongen, I. Klimant, B. Marmod´ee, M. Steup, J. Fisahn,
P. Geigenberger, and H.-G. L¨ohmannsr¨oben, “An optical multifrequency phase-
modulation method using microbeads for measuring intracellular oxygen concentra-
tions in plants,” Biophysical Journal, vol. 89, no. 2, pp. 1339 – 1345, 2005.
[18] R. Ramamoorthy, P. K. Dutta, and S. A. Akbar, “Oxygen sensors: Materials, meth-
ods, designs and applications,” Journal of Materials Science, vol. 38, pp. 4271–4282,
Nov 2003.
[19] J. W. Severinghaus and A. F. Bradley, “Electrodes for blood po2 and pco2 determi-
nation,” Journal of Applied Physiology, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 515–520, 1958.
[20] M. E. Lippitsch, J. Pusterhofer, M. J. Leiner, and O. S. Wolfbeis, “Fibre-optic oxy-
gen sensor with the ﬂuorescence decay time as the information carrier,” Analytica
Chimica Acta, vol. 205, pp. 1 – 6, 1988.
[21] “Instructions for oxygen sensing CPOx Beads.” http://ibidi.com/fileadmin/
products/cells_reagents/R_741XX_CPOx_NanO2/IN_741XX_CPOx.pdf. Accessed:
2017-02-27.
[22] B. M. Goldstein, J. K. Barton, and H. M. Berman, “Crystal and molecular struc-
ture of a chiral-speciﬁc dna-binding agent: tris (4, 7-diphenyl-1, 10-phenanthroline)
ruthenium (ii),” Inorganic Chemistry, vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 842–847, 1986.
[23] S. B. Pieper, S. P. Mestas, K. L. Lear, Z. Zhong, and K. F. Reardon, “Phosphores-
cence characteristics of ruthenium complex as an optical transducer for biosensors,”
Applied Physics Letters, vol. 92, no. 8, p. 081915, 2008.
[24] G. A. Crosby, “Spectroscopic investigations of excited states of transition-metal com-
plexes,” Accounts of Chemical Research, vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 231–238, 1975.
[25] Y. J. Chang, X. Xu, T. Yabe, S. C. Yu, D. R. Anderson, L. K. Orman, and J. B.
Hopkins, “Picosecond raman measurements of electron transfer in the metal-to-ligand
charge-transfer excited states of (1,10-phenanthroline)ruthenium(ii) complexes,” The
Journal of Physical Chemistry, vol. 94, no. 2, pp. 729–736, 1990.
71
==PAGE:75==
[26] J. Demas and D. Taylor, “On the” intersystem crossing” yields in ruthenium (ii) and
osmium (ii) photosensitizers,” Inorganic Chemistry, vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 3177–3179,
1979.
[27] A. T. Yeh, C. V. Shank, and J. K. McCusker, “Ultrafast electron localization dynam-
ics following photo-induced charge transfer,” Science, vol. 289, no. 5481, pp. 935–938,
2000.
[28] K. A. Kneas, W. Xu, J. Demas, and B. DeGraﬀ, “Oxygen sensors based on lumines-
cence quenching: interactions of tris (4, 7-diphenyl-1, 10-phenanthroline) ruthenium
(ii) chloride and pyrene with polymer supports,” Applied spectroscopy, vol. 51, no. 9,
pp. 1346–1351, 1997.
[29] P. Lehner, C. Staudinger, S. M. Borisov, J. Regensburger, and I. Klimant, “Intrinsic
artefacts in optical oxygen sensors—how reliable are our measurements?,” Chemistry
– A European Journal, vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 3978–3986, 2015.
[30] N. H. Damrauer and J. K. McCusker, “Ultrafast dynamics in the metal-to-ligand
charge transfer excited-state evolution of [ru(4,4‘-diphenyl-2,2‘-bipyridine)3]2+,” The
Journal of Physical Chemistry A, vol. 103, no. 42, pp. 8440–8446, 1999.
[31] H. J. Bolink, L. Cappelli, E. Coronado, M. Gr¨atzel, E. Ort´ı, R. D. Costa, P. M.
Viruela, and M. K. Nazeeruddin, “Stable single-layer light-emitting electrochemi-
cal cell using 4, 7-diphenyl-1, 10-phenanthroline-bis (2-phenylpyridine) iridium (iii)
hexaﬂuorophosphate,” Journal of the American Chemical Society, vol. 128, no. 46,
pp. 14786–14787, 2006.
[32] “Lookchem look for chemicals Dissolved Oxygen Solubility Tables.” http://www.
lookchem.com/cas-109/109781-47-7.html. Accessed: 2017-07-02.
[33] R. S. Khnayzer, J. Blumhoﬀ, J. A. Harrington, A. Haefele, F. Deng, and F. N. Castel-
lano, “Upconversion-powered photoelectrochemistry,” Chem. Commun., vol. 48,
pp. 209–211, 2012.
[34] J. Zhao, S. Ji, and H. Guo, “Triplet-triplet annihilation based upconversion: from
triplet sensitizers and triplet acceptors to upconversion quantum yields,” RSC Adv.,
vol. 1, pp. 937–950, 2011.
[35] C. S. Foote, “Photosensitized oxygenations and the role of singlet oxygen,” Accounts
of Chemical Research, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 104–110, 1968.
[36] B. Enko, S. M. Borisov, J. Regensburger, W. B¨aumler, G. Gescheidt, and I. Klimant,
“Singlet oxygen-induced photodegradation of the polymers and dyes in optical sens-
ing materials and the eﬀect of stabilizers on these processes,” The Journal of Physical
Chemistry A, vol. 117, no. 36, pp. 8873–8882, 2013. PMID: 23964784.
[37] T. Sajoto, P. I. Djurovich, A. B. Tamayo, J. Oxgaard, W. A. Goddard, and M. E.
Thompson, “Temperature dependence of blue phosphorescent cyclometalated ir(iii)
complexes,” Journal of the American Chemical Society, vol. 131, no. 28, pp. 9813–
9822, 2009. PMID: 19537720.
72
==PAGE:76==
[38] “ibidi
gmbh
Opal
Optical
O2
Measurement
Sys-
tem.”
http://ibidi.com/optical-oxygen-measurement/
139-ibidi-opal-optical-o2-measurement-system.html. Accessed: 2017-08-04.
[39] E. Carraway, J. Demas, and B. DeGraﬀ, “Luminescence quenching mechanism for
microheterogeneous systems,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 63, no. 4, pp. 332–336, 1991.
[40] J. Lakowicz, Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy. Springer US, 2007.
[41] J. Keizer, “Nonlinear ﬂuorescence quenching and the origin of positive curvature
in stern-volmer plots,” Journal of the American Chemical Society, vol. 105, no. 6,
pp. 1494–1498, 1983.
[42] S. W. Paddock, “Confocal laser scanning microscopy,” Biotechniques, vol. 27,
pp. 992–1007, 1999.
[43] “Olympus microscopy resource center: Introduction to confocal microscopy.” http:
//www.olympusmicro.com/primer/techniques/confocal/confocalintro.html.
Accessed: 2017-07-15.
[44] W. Becker, Advanced time-correlated single photon counting techniques, vol. 81.
Springer Science & Business Media, 2005.
[45] W. BECKER, “Fluorescence lifetime imaging – techniques and applications,” Journal
of Microscopy, vol. 247, no. 2, pp. 119–136, 2012.
[46] “Dcs-120 confocal scanning ﬂim systems.” http://www.becker-hickl.de/pdf/
dcs-hb-6ed-24.pdf, 2015. Accessed: 2017-07-06.
[47] W. Becker and A. Bergmann, “Multi-dimensional time-correlated single photon
counting,” in Proc. of SPIE Vol, vol. 6372, pp. 637201–1, 2006.
[48] “Becker & hickl Four Channel TCSPC Power Package.” http://becker-hickl.com/
spc154.htm. Accessed: 2017-07-23.
[49] A. Paul, T. Laurila, V. Vuorinen, and S. V. Divinski, Fick’s Laws of Diﬀusion,
pp. 115–139. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2014.
[50] J. Philibert, “One and a half century of diﬀusion: Fick, einstein, before and beyond,”
Diﬀusion Fundamentals, vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 1–19, 2006.
[51] M. Islam, “Einstein–smoluchowski diﬀusion equation: a discussion,” Physica Scripta,
vol. 70, no. 2-3, p. 120, 2004.
[52] “Physiology web Diﬀusion Time Calculator.” http://www.physiologyweb.com/
calculators/diffusion_time_calculator.html. Accessed: 2017-08-03.
[53] A. P. Zhang, X. Qu, P. Soman, K. C. Hribar, J. W. Lee, S. Chen, and S. He,
“Rapid fabrication of complex 3d extracellular microenvironments by dynamic optical
projection stereolithography,” Advanced Materials, vol. 24, no. 31, pp. 4266–4270,
2012.
73
==PAGE:77==
[54] B.
D.
Fairbanks,
M.
P.
Schwartz,
C.
N.
Bowman,
and
K.
S.
Anseth,
“Photoinitiated polymerization of peg-diacrylate with lithium phenyl-2, 4, 6-
trimethylbenzoylphosphinate: polymerization rate and cytocompatibility,” Bioma-
terials, vol. 30, no. 35, pp. 6702–6707, 2009.
[55] V. L. Tsang, A. A. Chen, L. M. Cho, K. D. Jadin, R. L. Sah, S. DeLong, J. L. West,
and S. N. Bhatia, “Fabrication of 3d hepatic tissues by additive photopatterning of
cellular hydrogels,” The FASEB Journal, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 790–801, 2007.
[56] A. I. Van Den Bulcke, B. Bogdanov, N. De Rooze, E. H. Schacht, M. Cornelissen, and
H. Berghmans, “Structural and rheological properties of methacrylamide modiﬁed
gelatin hydrogels,” Biomacromolecules, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 31–38, 2000.
[57] “Selection guide for oxygen scavengers.” http://www.subsport.eu/wp-content/
uploads/2012/05/alternative-to-hydrtazine-USA-2001-k.pdf.
Accessed:
2017-05-23.
[58] “U.s. geological survey Dissolved Oxygen Solubility Tables.” https://water.usgs.
gov/software/DOTABLES/. Accessed: 2017-05-28.
[59] D. Mart´ınez-Maqueda, B. Miralles, and I. Recio, HT29 Cell Line, pp. 113–124. Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 2015.
[60] M.-E. Forgue-Laﬁtte, A.-M. Coudray, B. Br´eant, and J. Meˇster, “Proliferation of the
human colon carcinoma cell line ht29: Autocrine growth and deregulated expression
of the c-myc oncogene,” Cancer Research, vol. 49, no. 23, pp. 6566–6571, 1989.
[61] “Laser scanning microscopy tutorial.” https://www.thorlabs.com/tutorials.
cfm?tabID=8ed9f76d-3bbd-4e6c-b2f5-f6a89a2c4fc9. Accessed: 2017-06-03.
[62] “Environmental growth chambers Lighting Radiation Conversion.” http://www.
egc.com/useful_info_lighting.php. Accessed: 2017-05-03.
[63] “Mathworks matlab runstest - Run test for Randomness.” https://se.mathworks.
com/help/stats/runstest.html. Accessed: 2017-08-03.
[64] Y. Cai, A. Smith, J. Shinar, and R. Shinar, “Data analysis and aging in phospho-
rescent oxygen-based sensors,” Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, vol. 146, no. 1,
pp. 14–22, 2010.
[65] “Mathworks least-squares ﬁtting.” http://se.mathworks.com/help/curvefit/
least-squares-fitting.html. Accessed: 2017-08-06.
[66] J. Zhao, S. Ji, and H. Guo, “Triplet–triplet annihilation based upconversion: from
triplet sensitizers and triplet acceptors to upconversion quantum yields,” Rsc Ad-
vances, vol. 1, no. 6, pp. 937–950, 2011.
[67] H. Choi, D. S. Tzeranis, J. W. Cha, P. Cl´emenceau, S. J. de Jong, L. K. van Geest,
J. H. Moon, I. V. Yannas, and P. T. So, “3d-resolved ﬂuorescence and phospho-
rescence lifetime imaging using temporal focusing wide-ﬁeld two-photon excitation,”
Optics express, vol. 20, no. 24, pp. 26219–26235, 2012.
74
==PAGE:78==
[68] E. Wang, C. Babbey, and K. W. Dunn, “Performance comparison between the high-
speed yokogawa spinning disc confocal system and single-point scanning confocal
systems,” Journal of microscopy, vol. 218, no. 2, pp. 148–159, 2005.
[69] C. Buranachai, D. Kamiyama, A. Chiba, B. D. Williams, and R. M. Clegg, “Rapid
frequency-domain ﬂim spinning disk confocal microscope: Lifetime resolution, image
improvement and wavelet analysis,” Journal of Fluorescence, vol. 18, pp. 929–942,
Sep 2008.
[70] C. Ast, E. Schm¨alzlin, H.-G. L¨ohmannsr¨oben, and J. T. Van Dongen, “Optical oxygen
micro-and nanosensors for plant applications,” Sensors, vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 7015–7032,
2012.
[71] O. S. Finikova, A. Y. Lebedev, A. Aprelev, T. Troxler, F. Gao, C. Garnacho, S. Muro,
R. M. Hochstrasser, and S. A. Vinogradov, “Oxygen microscopy by two-photon-
excited phosphorescence,” ChemPhysChem, vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 1673–1679, 2008.
75
