==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REGULATION 
AND RISK 
MANAGEMENT 
OF DRINKING 
WATER 
QUALITY 
MIRIAM ANNA SULERZ 
S151834 
 
 
MASTER THESIS 
 
SUPERVISORS: 
MARTIN RYGAARD 
STEFFEN FOSS HANSEN 
 
DENMARK, 16TH OF AUGUST 2017 
How can a recommended level of drinking water minerals be        
established in the future? 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
 
ii 
 
ABSTRACT 
Clean drinking water treatment is probably the most pressing need, which needs to be satisfied 
every day, all around the world. Countries rich in water use their ground- or surface water, while 
other places need to rely on alternative sources of poorer quality. As such, the provision of clean 
drinking water often involves highly advanced technology and factors like climate change 
amplify this change. The technology in use is constantly developing and removes minerals 
efficiently from the water, decreasing the number of essential nutrients for a healthy life.  
Meanwhile, the legislative entities on European level do not plan to secure a minimum amount 
of minerals in drinking water, which would be necessary for a change in the overall water supply 
system. Current facilities have basic remineralization steps at work, but legal and mechanical 
framework limits in order to prevent harm and distribution problems.  
This thesis investigates a possibility to derive a value range beneficial for human health. Using 
risk-benefit and uncertainty analyses, a foundation can be established for decision-makers. The 
risk-benefit analysis on calcium was conducted qualitatively and quantitatively. It analyzed 
epidemiological studies and quantified the monetary values of the potential diseases caused by 
an inadequate calcium intake with the DALY and VSL approach. Results indicate that the 
prevention of an inadequate intake in Denmark could save approximately 3 million Euros. A 
minimum threshold that is beneficial for health aspects should be established at a calcium 
amount range between 39.5 – 79 mg/l in the European context.   
Unit now, many uncertainties influence this range. The nature of most uncertainties connected 
to medical issues is in the natural sciences, where measurements due to systematic errors can 
easily differ from the true value and convey unavoidable variability. In other cases, the 
identification of potential limits of knowledge can be mitigated by more in-depth research, 
which would help to understand or even eliminate the arising uncertainties.   
The future of water treatment will become even more thorough in removing minerals, as this is 
the immediate health threat, on which technologies focus. Insufficient remineralization is a 
point, about which most people are not conscious. Even though there is not enough awareness 
yet; this does not implicate the mineral manipulation will stay unnoticed. Policy-makers will 
certainly be willing to take action to protect the public from the insufficient mineral intake, and a 
risk-benefit analysis is a starting point to derive the necessary information for all minerals.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
 
 
iii 
 
TABLE OF CONTENT 
Abstract 
ii 
List of Tables 
iv 
List of Figures 
iv 
1. 
Introduction 
1 
1.1. 
Problem definition 
1 
1.2. 
ContextualiSation 
1 
1.3. 
Research Approach 
2 
1.4. 
Thesis Structure 
3 
1.5. 
Methodology 
4 
2. 
EU drinking Water Framework Directive 
7 
3. 
Water Treatment facilities 
9 
3.1. 
Central Softening in Copenhagen, Denmark 
9 
3.2. 
OASEN, The Netherlands 
12 
3.3. 
Groundwater Replenishment System (GWRS) in Orange County, USA 
15 
3.4. 
Desalination in Sorek, Israel 
16 
3.5. 
New Goreangab Water Reclamation Plant (NGWRP), Namibia 
19 
4. 
Mineral Intake from Drinking water 
23 
4.1. 
Remineralisation 
25 
4.2. 
Minimum Amounts 
26 
5. 
Risk-Benefit Analysis (RBA) 
28 
5.1. 
Definition and measurement 
29 
6. 
Calcium 
31 
6.1. 
Calcium Intake 
31 
6.2. 
Water related 
31 
6.3. 
Diseases correlated with Inadequate Calcium INTAKE 
32 
6.4. 
Other Effects of Calcium in Drinking Water 
38 
6.5. 
Quantitative Benefit Analysis 
40 
7. 
Uncertainty Analysis 
43 
7.1. 
Definition and measurement 
43 
7.2. 
Uncertainties in the setting of a minimum value for minerals 
43 
8. 
Discussion 
47 
8.1. 
Policy making, water treatment and implications on human health 
47 
8.2. 
Findings 
48 
8.3. 
Pros and cons of RBA, DALY, and VSL 
49 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
 
 
iv 
 
9. 
Conclusion and recommendations 
52 
9.1. 
Conclusion 
52 
9.2. 
Recommendations 
53 
Bibliography 
55 
Appendix 
68 
 
LIST OF TABLES 
Table 1 Allowed amounts of minerals following European Directive 98/83 
8 
Table 2 Water quality values for the different treatment plants 
12 
Table 3 Summary of ideal mineral 1. RDA, 2. AI, 3. RNI and 4. UL values 
24 
Table 4 Potential intakes of minerals from drinking water in Brøndby, Denmark and Sorek, 
Israel 
25 
Table 5 Fortification potential suggested by Flynn et al. (2003) and Richardson (2007) 
27 
Table 6 Costs of society for diseases caused by a calcium deficit 
41 
Table 7 Costs of society for diseases caused by calcium excess 
42 
Table 8 Uncertainty matrix to support the decision-making process of implementing a 
minimum value for minerals 
44 
 
Appendix Table 1 Water quality Oasen, the Netherlands 
68 
Appendix Table 2 Water quality Desalination plant Sorek, Israel 
69 
Appendix Table 3 Role of mineral in the human body and its possibility to cause toxicity 
70 
Appendix Table 4 Suggested mineral content found in literature 
73 
 
 
LIST OF FIGURES 
Figure 1 Process description of Softening with a NaOH alkali reagent 
11 
Figure 2 Process description of the Oasen treatment plant to achieve impeccable quality 
13 
Figure 3 Process description of the GWRP and the major AWPF processes 
16 
Figure 4 Process description of the Sorek Desalination Plant 
19 
Figure 5 Process description of the NGWRP and its multi-barrier approach 
21 
Figure 6 Three approaches to determine the value of a statistical life 
51 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
 
 
1 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
1.1. PROBLEM DEFINITION 
The future of water is a constant challenge and an important topic, which is even an urgent 
matter in the United Nations sustainable development goals (United Nations, 2015). Especially 
now, in the context of an ever increasing world population and growing pressure due to climate 
change, the urgency gets apparent. While some regions get supplied by natural groundwater or 
surface water other areas are urged to find alternative water sources or refine the water 
treatment. The most innovative and advanced solutions nowadays manipulate the mineral 
content of water to make it safe for drinking. This process removes, not only the unwanted but 
also essential minerals. Therefore, adding minerals for different reasons has become common 
practice and water is being remineralized. The problem with remineralization is the assessment 
of consequences that is inaccurate resulting in lack of standardized values. The targeted 
amounts of minerals are safe for humans, however, there is a need to explore potential 
possibilities in order to secure the basic requirements of minerals are unexplored. 
This thesis investigates the potential of remineralization with the focus on human health and the 
interaction with drinking water minerals, as this topic is widely underestimated and overlooked. 
Up until now, existing guidelines include maximum values, which take the known and assumed 
risks on human health of excess consumption under consideration. However, regulations for a 
minimum or recommended level of the mineral composition are missing and therefore partially 
also neglect the positive attributes of the minerals.  
1.2. CONTEXTUALISATION 
As water is the essential source of life, a safe and abundant supply of water is of great interest to 
many instances. The regular assessment of the Millennium Development Goals revealed that 783 
million people used in 2010 unimproved sources to meet their drinking-water needs (Hutton, 
2013). Furthermore, water is undisputable linked directly, or indirectly, across all industries: 
From the known industries of the beverage, agriculture, and food processing, to the 
manufacturing of electricity, consumer goods or developing welfare. The essential role of water 
counteracts with its limited accessibility. Approximately 97% of the earth’s water is salty and 
unsuitable for direct consumption, leaving only 3% as fresh water with two-thirds frozen in ice 
caps and glaciers. Therefore, we assume that only 1% of the earth’s water is available for 
drinking and other usage. In addition, the scarce water resources are very unequally distributed. 
As a result, there is an urge to follow up on treatment methods that go beyond purifying ground 
or surface-water. The security of water intended for human consumption is dependent on clean 
water standards, disinfection treatments, and regular monitoring (Tarver, 2008). 
As from the 15th July 1980, the European Union pass the first Council Directive 80/778/EEC 
related to the quality of water intended for human consumption, which was repealed by the 
Council Directive 98/83/EC of 3 November 1998 (The Council of the European Union, 1998). 
This Directive sets the essential quality standards on a European level. It supervises a total of 48 
microbiological, chemical and indicator parameters. According to the Directive, consumers need 
to be regularly informed and countries’ monitoring-results are reported to the European 
Commission every three years. The foundations to set the quality standards in the Directive are 
the World Health Organization's drinking water guidelines and the Commission's Scientific 
Advisory Committee. In the process of adapting the Directive in the country’s legislation, the 
member states have freedom to include additional substances, which are important to the 
==PAGE:6==
 
 
 
 
2 
 
countries’ context or standards. However, lowering the standards is not permitted (The Council 
of the European Union, 1998, 2016). 
According to Whelton et al. (2007) research has focused for more than 100 years on securing 
drinking water and optimizing the treatment to remove acute and chronic health threats. The 
industrial progression towards membrane technology reached the point that almost all 
undesirable compounds and pathogens can be eliminated to avoid any risk (López-Roldán et al., 
2016; Ribera et al., 2014). In surface water traces of endocrine disrupting compounds are found, 
such as hormones, pharmaceuticals, illicit and noncontrolled drugs, personal care products and 
fuel additives. Those are challenging compounds that circulate in the water cycle (Houtman, 
2010). 
Pesticides in drinking water are limited at 0.1 μg/l for individual compounds and 0.5 μg/l for the 
sum of pesticides, set by the EU (The Council of the European Union, 1998). Still, for other 
emerging compounds, there is no standardization. Potential reasons for that might be a safe 
uptake or incomplete accurate toxicity data at specific concentrations. To put it in another way, 
there is a lack of necessary toxicity data to derive conclusions about the relevance and long-term 
effects (Mons et al., 2013). The number of chemicals is emerging and the database of the 
European Chemical Agency includes 15986 different substances and information from 60631 
dossiers (ECHA, 2017). Regulatory toxicologists are assessing new chemicals in drinking water, 
but often neglect to revert and connect the exposure reference doses to corresponding health-
related optimal values for drinking water. This procedure leads to insecurities in the combined 
use of chemicals (Dieter, 2014). 
Consumers have the fallacy to believe that water is poorly monitored because it is supplied at a 
very low cost. The change of taste in some countries transmits the feeling that water is unsafe to 
drink. Literature sets a focus on the connection between the perception of water and the well-
being of the consumer, as existing research indicates a strong link between taste and consumer 
health. Human ability to sense differences in water quality or detect off-tastes is at values well 
below those shown by drinking water taste standards (Whelton et al., 2007). Due to the 
deficiency of information flow and the standardized fresh taste, many consumers believe that 
bottled mineral water inherits therapeutic properties compared to tap water. Unjustified, as no 
research proves this point (World Health Organization, 2005).  
With the increase of safe drinking water in some parts of the world, the limits of research 
regarding the consequences of eliminating minerals that affect taste and health become 
apparent. The literature research conducted for this thesis concludes a research gap for setting 
an optimal mineral content for improved health and taste in tap water. For instance, membrane 
filtration of ground, surface, or sea water by reverse osmosis results in permeate, which is 
almost mineral-free. The intentions to add minerals afterwards are primarily complied with 
legal standards and enhancing chemical stability. Additionally, it improves the taste of drinking 
water made from permeate (Vingerhoeds et al., 2016).  
By now, the challenge for remineralization is to fulfill mechanical practicability, compliance with 
the legal framework, no harm to the distribution system and benefits for health. Thus, the 
potential of water consumption in all dimensions should be maximized. Particularly, the health 
aspect is of critical interest and will be investigated by using a wholesome approach.  
1.3. RESEARCH APPROACH  
The topic of remineralization gains importance but is still under-examined regarding its full 
potential in public health. This lack of attention is significant and should make the technological 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
 
 
3 
 
effort bigger and more holistic. The trend to use alternative sources like waste- or sea water will 
intensify due to the scarcity of traditional clean sources like ground- and surface water. Funded 
research will provide beneficial effects to the society as drinking water is a substantial part of 
daily nutrition and can prevent diseases connected with an inadequate intake of minerals 
associated with a lack of minerals. Therefore, the purpose underlying in this research states:  
How can a recommended level of drinking water minerals 
be established in the future? 
The following research questions guide the research and methodology: 
 What are current water quality criteria in Europe suggesting and how are they 
established at the moment?  
 How is water treatment conducted in different parts of the world using 
alternative sources and how are the minerals manipulated? 
 How do drinking water minerals affect human health? Are there minimum or 
maximum values, which are beneficial or dangerous?  
 What kind of uncertainty relates to benefits or risks from drinking water 
minerals and how can be dealt with them in the decision-making process? 
1.4. THESIS STRUCTURE 
In order to contextualize this problem, an elaboration on the current regulations and how they 
have been established will be displayed (see chapter 2). This chapter focuses on the European 
context and introduces the guidelines applied in the European framework and their 
development. Next, five innovative examples from around the world are showcased and 
discussed in chapter 3. Under the context of manipulating minerals, a potential case of softening, 
groundwater 
treatment, 
groundwater 
replenishment 
through 
wastewater 
treatment, 
desalination and wastewater reclamation are introduced. For every plant, a brief overview of the 
background is given as well as the development process and purpose of the treatment. The 
treated volume and the legal framework put the facility into perspective. The process 
description provides further details about the single steps and finally, the water quality of the 
drinking water is evaluated. The mineral composition varies in the cases, but in the after-
treatment phase of reverse osmosis, water needs to be fed with minerals. Based on this, the 
interplay between minerals and human health is investigated, especially focusing on 
correlations (see chapter 4). Regarding the relationship between health and minerals, the 
recommended daily intakes for a healthy adult person is considered. On this basis, the 
percentage of the daily intake through drinking water is calculated. 
Hereafter, a detailed analysis of risks, benefits, and uncertainties is conducted with calcium, a 
mineral which is well-discussed in the general public Calcium is a substantial mineral for a 
healthy and balanced life and is the leading contributor to water hardness. The main focus of the 
analysis is the implication on human health from a medical perspective. The consequences of 
inadequate intake, both in a deficient or excessive way, are of special interest. Some additional 
effects useful for an ideal calcium level are discussed as well.  
Finally, recommendations for a guideline including a value range of a mineral composition are 
presented. Further research and recommendations will be provided to established optimal level 
of drinking water minerals.   
==PAGE:8==
 
 
 
 
4 
 
1.5. METHODOLOGY 
The purpose of this research is to investigate drivers for the establishment of a required 
minimum value of minerals in drinking water. This chapter will explain the methodology used in 
this research. After determining a suitable research method, the qualitative and quantitative 
data were collected to answer the research questions. Furthermore, the analysis conducted will 
be introduced and presented in detail. 
RESEARCH STRATEGY 
The literature research applied the search strategy of pearl growing (Schlosser, Wendt, 
Bhavnani, & Nail-Chiwetalu, 2006) by starting with publications of known health organizations, 
e.g. World Health Organization, to gain insights on the most recent developments. The research 
is intensified by searching about more specific topics, such as the European Directive or the 
treatment facilities. This is followed by a risk-benefit analysis, explaining the framework used in 
this thesis. Hereafter, the findings of the extensive literature research about calcium are mainly 
carried out in the US National Library of Medicine, and the web of science are presented. The 
main results are afterwards discussed in the following section. Finally, conclusions will be drawn 
on behalf of the drinking water treatment opportunities and future development, including 
recommendations for ranges of amounts.   
MINERAL INTAKE FROM DRINKING WATER 
In this part, data is used to calculate the potential percentual intake of a mineral through 
drinking water. The water mineral content is taken from Brøndby, Denmark and Sorek, Israel. 
Two scenarios are assumed, where the recommended daily water intake is dependent on the 
population group and is fulfilled solely from one of the waterworks. The other aspect necessary 
for the scenarios is the mineral intake suggested by scientific proof. The absolute amount found 
in the water of Brøndby and Sorek is multiplied with the recommended amount of water. The 
gathered data about the mineral intake is necessary to conduct calculations how much tap water 
can contribute to our daily mineral intake. In this case, data about mineral intake could not be 
obtained from one source and leads to the reason, why standardized requirements for all 
minerals cannot be set. The data differs into one of the following: 1. Recommended Daily 
Allowances (RDA) (National Institutes of Health, 2011), 2. Adequate Intakes (AI) (National 
Institutes of Health, 2005), 3. Recommended Nutrient Intakes (RNI) (World Health 
Organization, 2004) or 4. Tolerable Upper Intake Levels (UL) (National Institutes of Health, 
2011). The research focused on finding the RNI first, followed by AI and RDA and lastly a UL, as 
this seems the most appropriate order to set a healthy intake of a mineral.  
RISK-BENEFIT ANALYSIS 
The decision to conduct a thorough risk-benefit analysis seems appropriate for the topic of 
health, as the controversy and some of the multiple layers can be mirrored. Through the 
consideration and comparison of the risks and benefits, the worthiness of the acceptance of risk 
can be evaluated.  
In the analysis, the health risks are determined and combined with the probability of the 
outbreak. Initially, a qualitative discussion gives some insights into the topic and is then 
followed by a monetary quantification. Positive and negative consequences will be 
demonstrated that come along with a deficiency or an excess of a mineral as well as long-lasting 
effects combined with the costs of society. The costs imposed on society are the expected 
interference on the quality of life and a statistical monetary value of life (Braathen, 2012). The 
combination measures the social benefits and indicates if the risk is worth reducing with the 
hinge of an improved health or reduced risk.  
==PAGE:9==
 
 
 
 
5 
 
The risk can be seen from different perspectives, and qualitative data is derived from the 
literature and associated studies. Therefore, the medical side, a statistical risk, is considered. 
Even though the quantitative data assigned to the harms is discussable, the method seems more 
suitable than a commonly used cost benefit analysis in order to fulfill the comparison. 
Those findings are summed up in the risk-benefit analysis assessing on the one side the 
probability of acute and chronic diseases caused by with deficient and excessive intake levels. 
Furthermore, the costs that are occurring are obtained in terms of treatment and disability-
adjusted life in comparison to a healthy life. On the other side, the benefits that are taken into 
consideration show the proportion of daily needs and intake through tap water consumption 
and to some extent the benefits are the avoidance of the risks.  
Risk-benefit analysis depends heavily on the individual conduction of the analysis. The 
perceived risk varies according to the interest of the stakeholder. It is different for the 
consumers and the water companies. Additionally, the acceptance of risks varies and should be 
distinguished if a risk is taken voluntarily or the exposure is forced. 
The quantification or monetarization of the diseases happens through a calculation based on the 
disability adjusted life years (DALY) (World Health Organization, 2017b) and the value of a 
statistical life (VSL) (European Commission, 2015). The values for DALY of Denmark are taken 
from the global health estimates from the year 2016 published by WHO (World Health 
Organization, 2016)  and summarized in Table 6 and Table 7. These values are combined with 
the average VSL for the European context (Braathen, 2012). This value €3,210,120 is divided by 
92, the years of life expectancy used in the set-up of the DALY. The result represents how much a 
healthy life is worth, namely €34,893. This result multiplied with the DALY accounts for a value 
that estimates how much human capital in monetary terms is lost, due to an illness, potentially 
caused by calcium in any terms.   
UNCERTAINTY ANALYSIS 
This analysis inherits many uncertainties of different nature, various locations and having 
varying levels of severity and impact. This analysis and the whole process is framed by the 
uncertainties, which show the points that should better be understood as potential research 
topics or cannot be changed due to their nature. A central area for the uncertainties lies within 
the effects of minerals on human health and the uncertainties in quantifying any risks caused by 
the minerals. Especially the consequences of an inadequate intake of minerals are often 
ambiguous, and this makes an important aspect. 
Therefore, the application of a proper investigation accounts for the uncertainties. Leading to 
the conclusion and as a result, a recommendation where the range of an optimal mineral level 
should be set. For the decision-making process, all necessary information is taken into 
consideration to consolidate a reliable output. 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE UNCERTAINTY MATRIX 
The main structure of the matrix is borrowed from Walker et al. (2003), but some adaptations 
were conducted to customize it for this given case. For instance, this applies to the included 
initial parameters or technical uncertainty targeting mathematical models and variables, which 
are not necessary for this case. Same accounts for the scenario uncertainty, which describes 
uncertainties regarding a scenario analysis. 
The location of uncertainty is an identification of where uncertainty reveals itself within the 
whole model complex.  
==PAGE:10==
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Context - is the determination of the boundaries of the system, which are to investigate. It 
narrows and targets the shares of the real world that are inside the system. 
Model structure - is connected to the conceptual model and relates e.g. to the variables and 
their relationships that are chosen.   
Inputs - to the model are linked with the description of the reference system, which is often 
the status quo, and the forces that are driving changes in this system.  
Model outcome - is the gathered uncertainty associated with the model results of interest 
to the policy-maker. 
The level is the manifestation of progression from knowing to not knowing.  
Statistical uncertainty - is any uncertainty that can be described adequately in statistical 
terms and what is usually referred to as ‘‘uncertainty’’ in the natural sciences. 
Recognized ignorance - is fundamental uncertainty about the studied mechanisms and 
functional relationships. Further division includes reducible ignorance and irreducible 
ignorance.  
Nature determines the imperfection on the analysis due to our knowledge or to the inherent 
variability of the described phenomena. 
Epistemic uncertainty – is the uncertainty due to the limitation of our knowledge, which 
may be superseded by more research and empirical efforts. 
Variability uncertainty – is the uncertainty due to unavoidable variability, which is mainly 
applicable to human and natural systems, regarding changes in social, economic, and 
technological matters. 
 
==PAGE:11==
 
 
 
 
7 
 
2. EU DRINKING WATER FRAMEWORK DIRECTIVE  
The Directive 98/83/EC regulates the quality of water intended for human consumption. That 
includes all water in its original state or after treatment, intended for drinking, cooking, food 
preparation or other domestic purposes. It also comprises all water used in any food-production 
for the manufacture, processing, preservation or marketing of products or substances intended 
for human consumption. The Directive excludes natural mineral waters and waters used in 
medical products. The aim of the Directive is to protect human health from the adverse effects of 
any contamination of water, ensuring that it is wholesome and clean (The Council of the 
European Union, 1998). 
The Directives in the framework of water reflect the increasing demand by citizens and 
environmental organizations for cleaner rivers and lakes, groundwater, and coastal beaches. 
Questionnaires in the recent years amongst 25-member states of the European Union show that 
amid the five main environmental issues nearly half of the respondents of the survey are 
worried about water pollution (47%). Some of the individual countries have results going up to 
71% (European Commission, 2016). 
The European water legislation began by setting standards for rivers and lakes used for drinking 
water abstraction in 1975 and resulted in the first Directive in 1980 with binding quality targets 
for drinking water (European Commission, 2016).  
“The task [setting a binding Directive] was difficult since there are still many unknown 
factors, toxicological and physiological as well as technological, but an important step 
has now been taken. From their perspective, the Directive inherited a great lack of 
information concerning the qualitative and quantitative relationships from the 
physiological and metabolic point of view between the uptake of minerals and other 
essential elements with food and drinking water.” (Smeets & Amavis, 1981) 
Furthermore, a concern was the uncertainties attributed to the interplay of concentrations, 
which individually or cooperatively contemplated decide about injuriousness or protection 
(Smeets & Amavis, 1981). 
Decision-making in the European Union is in need of a coalition-building and cannot be shaped 
by just one member state, which is also the case for the development of the drinking water 
directive  (Börzel, 2002). Therefore, after some years of practice, the Commission proposes in 
November 1998 the adaptation to a new Drinking Water Directive, revising the quality 
standards and, where necessary, make them stricter (European Commission, 2016). 
In the process, the European Water Policy had to address the increasing awareness of citizens 
and other involved parties for their water, and this is why the new European Water Policy was 
developed in an open culmination process involving all interested parties and members of 
various stakeholder groups  (European Commission, 2016). It was necessary to generate an 
appropriately flexible and transparent legal framework to address failure and meet the 
standards to safeguard and promote the sustainable use of water. The water intended for human 
consumption focusing on compliance with essential quality and health parameters, but giving 
member states the freedom to add additional parameters if needed  (The Council of the 
European Union, 1998). 
The leading aims of the Directive, according to the European Commission (2017) are: 
 
Guarantee that drinking water quality is measured through standards based on the latest 
scientific evidence; 
==PAGE:12==
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
An efficient and effective monitoring, assessment, and implementation of drinking water 
quality; 
 
Provide the consumers with adequate, timely and appropriate information; 
 
Contribute to the broader EU water and health policy;  
Paragraph 15 states that at present insufficient evidence on which to base parametric values for 
endocrine-disrupting chemicals is existing, yet there is increasing concern regarding the 
potential impact on human and wildlife of the effects of substances harmful to health (The 
Council of the European Union, 1998). 
For 2017, the revision of the overall Directive and the necessary Impact Assessment is planned. 
Already in December 2016 an evaluation of the drinking water Directive 98/83/EC was 
published. The main issues addressed in the assessment are that the quality standards and 
values have not been reviewed since 1998. Therefore, some might not be relevant anymore to 
fully match emerging pressures, latest scientific knowledge and changing pollution pressure. 
Furthermore, the promotion of a Risk-Based Assessment and the establishment of Water Safety 
Plans for acting according to the precautionary principle and prevent potential risks to drinking 
water is planned. Nonetheless, imprecise definitions regarding the availability of appropriate 
and up-to-date information to consumers are amendable. The request is automated reporting 
and that the usage of products and materials in contact with drinking water needs EU 
harmonized standards (European Commission, 2017). 
The topic of health is addressed in the evaluation concerning the establishment of direct causal 
and statistical relations between drinking water quality and human health impacts. A specific 
indicator ‘Population at Potential Drinking Water Health Risk’ is in discussion to be used in 
order to make the population group aware, which could potentially suffer from health problems 
because of drinking water quality. It includes the potential lack of minerals, but also intolerances 
and other limitations due to previous conditions (European Commission, 2017). 
The allowed amounts mentioned in the European Directive 98/83 are summed up in Table 1. 
The values have been selected well below daily recommended intakes or values, which can be 
potentially dangerous (The Council of the European Union, 1998). 
TABLE 1 ALLOWED AMOUNTS OF MINERALS FOLLOWING EUROPEAN DIRECTIVE 98/83 (THE COUNCIL OF THE 
EUROPEAN UNION, 1998) 
Chemical Analysis 
Unit 
EU Directive 
98/83 
Chemical Analysis 
Unit 
EU Directive 
98/83 
Calcium  
mg/l 
- 
Arsenic 
mg/l 
0.01 
Chloride 
mg/l 
250 
Chromium 
mg/l 
0.05 
Fluoride 
mg/l 
1.5 
Copper 
mg/l 
2 
Iron 
mg/l 
0.2 
Nickel 
mg/l 
0.02 
Magnesium  
mg/l 
- 
Selenium 
mg/l 
0.01 
Manganese 
mg/l 
0.05 
Zinc 
mg/l 
- 
Phosphorus 
mg/l 
- 
Potassium  
mg/l 
- 
Sodium 
mg/l 
200 
 
 
==PAGE:13==
 
 
 
 
9 
 
3. WATER TREATMENT FACILITIES  
The freshwater supplies in the world are finite and start to be very scarce in some regions and 
have been scarce ever since in other areas. Pollution and over-usage are the results, but 
advanced reuse systems have a role to play in securing some of the water supplies into the 
future. Much has been done, and some pilot and innovative projects are either operating or 
under design. The tackled areas are nanofiltration processes, using membrane pores 3,000 times 
finer than a human hair, to remove microbes, bacteria, and other matter from water. These 
technologies can be used for desalination but also for indirect wastewater reuse. 
The technology to produce safe water quality is getting more available; regulators, water 
professionals, and the community are slowly taking changes to alternative water sources into 
consideration. The indirect potable reuse or desalination can be seen as a practical way of 
increasing our decreasing fresh water supplies (Law, 2003). Those treatments manipulate the 
mineral content considerably. Therefore, the right after-treatment in terms of technology and 
knowledge needs to be available. On the one hand, the highly corrosive demineralized water 
needs to be stabilized by addition of lime and alkalinity, and on the other side, health benefits 
can refine the added content. For this, some waters are back-blended with source water to 
increase the mineral content and reduce corrosion (Cotruvo et al., 2010). 
Treatment and stabilization practices should ensure that the overall process does not 
significantly reduce total intake of nutrients such as calcium and magnesium below 
recommended values. Based on local circumstances, water suppliers and public health 
authorities may wish to keep some freedom to further modify final drinking-water composition 
in regards to the overall mineral nutrition (World Health Organization, 2011).  
In the following, five current examples of implemented innovations are chosen to illustrate what 
kind of treatment is possible and conducted, how big the effort is and what kind of mineral 
manipulation is done in different circumstances and areas. 
3.1. CENTRAL SOFTENING IN COPENHAGEN, DENMARK 
BACKGROUND 
For the case of softening drinking water, the facilities of HOFOR located in Copenhagen, 
Denmark are chosen. The source for drinking water in Copenhagen is groundwater, abstracted 
from chalk aquifers resulting in water between 17 and 30 dH in the inner city of Copenhagen 
(including Frederiksberg), which means hard to very hard water by Danish definition of 
hardness (Frederiksberg Forsyning, 2017; HOFOR, 2016a). The definition of hardness is in 
Denmark 10 mg dissolved calcium carbonate per liter equals 1 dH.   
Hardness is commonly used as an expression of the concentration of calcium (Ca2+) and 
magnesium (Mg2+) (Winther, Linde, & Winther, 2010). The circumstance that the groundwater 
is abstracted from the chalk aquifer, like in Copenhagen, supports the fact that a lot of dissolved 
limestone is found in this water.  
Hard water is an inconvenience especially for consumers due to extra expenses and time to 
remove scale or replace broken household appliances (HOFOR, 2016a). There are not just visual 
effects of the hard water, but also increased energy consumptions like Van der Bruggen, 
Goossens, Everard, Stemgee, & Rogge (2009) investigated. They estimated an increase of energy 
consumption by 10 percent per 1 mm scaling (Valbjørn, 2017). For the suppliers, the main effect 
is the included corrosion, as over time the general distribution system clogs from scaling and 
needs to be replaced at a high cost.  
==PAGE:14==
 
 
 
 
10 
 
DEVELOPMENT 
The risks of hard water are widely discussed, and studies disagree when it comes to the results. 
Research conducted in the 1970s and 1980s concluded that an optimum composition of drinking 
water should aim for a minimization of lead and copper to prevent corrosion of asbestos cement 
and scaling as well as it may cause a threat to public health. Secondly, the uncontrolled usage of 
Point-of-use or Point-of-entry home softening devices without proper maintenance will lead to 
poor microbiological water quality, especially when no persistent disinfectant is used during 
distribution and could increase the corrosion potential of the water. Those appliances may seem 
like the solution to the consumer but could cause a risk to public health. Based on those reasons 
the Netherlands decided in the late 1970s on a nationwide central softening and draws positive 
experience from it (Hofman, Kramer, Van Der Hoek, Nederlof, & Groenendijk, 2006). 
On the other hand, a report by COWI concludes that softer water can cause poorer health 
because it will have fewer minerals like calcium, magnesium, and fluoride and can lead in the 
worst case to several cardiac and vascular diseases. It noted that more investigations on the 
health effects should be conducted (COWI A/S, 2011; Lemke, 2017). 
The pilot for this big development will be installed at the municipal waterworks in Brøndby 
during spring 2017 by HOFOR using the pellet reactor method (PRM) (HOFOR, 2016). With this 
technology, calcium (Ca2+) and bicarbonate (HCO−3) are removed from the water through the 
addition of sodium hydroxide (NaOH). Calcium carbonate will set on the surface of sand grains 
(Valbjørn, 2017). 
PURPOSE 
Additional reasons for softening can be categorized into environmental, social, and aesthetical 
reasons, such as reduction of energy and thus carbon dioxide through the absence of scale or 
chemicals in washing detergents or home softening devices. The reuse of the pellet waste stream 
account for environmental aspects. Additional costs for softening will be carried by the 
consumer but assumed to be outweighed by the savings of maintenance and replacement of 
water equipment or extra detergent. The aesthetics inherit the user convenience and comfort, as 
hard laundry can be prevented and a better taste and no film formation will happen. (Hofman et 
al., 2006) 
The thesis of Valbjørn (2017) investigated the formation of scale and consumption of energy 
with Danish drinking water. Calculated results showed a reduction of approximately 85% and 
savings due to a reduction in descaling and replacement of appliances, but no distinct effects of 
the energy consumption caused by scaling.  
AMOUNTS 
The vision of HOFOR for 2024 foresees a treatment of central softening in the greater area of 
Copenhagen. The treatment potential up to date is approximately 53 million cubic meters of 
drinking water each year. This amount is necessary to supply around one million inhabitants of 
the capital region, but those numbers will adapt to the change of amounts. The pilot project in 
Brøndby is the first installation and treats a smaller volume (HOFOR, 2016b). 
REGULATIONS 
HOFOR states that Copenhagen’s tap water is amongst the most heavily controlled in Denmark 
and ensures a consistently high quality. The laws follow the European Directive 98/83/EC, but 
also the ISO 22000 standards. During the current aeration and filtration, the water is tested for 
bacterial contamination in the waterworks, but also within the pipe network on the way out to 
the consumer (HOFOR, 2016b).  
==PAGE:15==
 
 
 
 
11 
 
PROCESS DESCRIPTION 
For the central softening of water HOFOR (Greater Copenhagen Utility), in collaboration with 
VCS Denmark and the Technical University of Denmark, has developed a Calcium Removal Plant. 
The Pilot project in Brøndby is going to be implemented in spring 2017. Promised 
improvements from HOFOR on the consumer side are: 
 
no calcium carbonate sedimentation 
 
a reduction of household detergents 
 
a decrease in the amount of phosphorus discharged to wastewater treatment plants 
 
FIGURE 1 PROCESS DESCRIPTION OF SOFTENING WITH A NAOH ALKALI REAGENT (VAN DER BRUGGEN ET AL. 
2009)  
In the process, untreated, hard water enters at the bottom of a pellet reactor with an alkali 
reagent like NaOH, Ca(OH)2 or Na2CO3, but in the case of Copenhagen, NaOH is used. After the 
introduction, the precipitation on the fine sand begins and is encouraged through the upwards 
flow. The grains thus grow and settle at the bottom of the tank when they are too big. Then they 
are replaced with clean sand as a hook for further precipitation. In this process the pH increases 
and can lead to further precipitations of manganese, iron (Van der Bruggen et al., 2009), copper 
and lead (Hofman et al., 2006).  
Before introducing the water to the distribution system, it passes through a sand filter to clean 
the decalcified water (Van der Bruggen et al. 2009). The whole process does not contain any 
steps of disinfection. To manage a system without this, awareness for the risk of after growth 
and specific substances, which inherit growth potential and the risk of corrosion, should be paid. 
The advantages not to include disinfection is the saving in investment, the avoidance of 
potentially dangerous by-products, no chlorine taste and no corrosion caused by disinfectant 
chemicals (Hilbert, Albrechtsen, & Andersen, 2010). 
Investigations show that in order to avoid the pellets ending up as waste products they can be 
part of a circular economy with several potential reuses in Denmark. It might include glass 
production, supplements to chicken feed, soil pH adjustment in agriculture and reuse in the 
softening process itself as seeding material. All depending on the quality of the input and thus 
outflow water (Tang, Lopato, Nyberg Kornholt, & Albrechtsen, 2017). 
WATER QUALITY 
In the current water quality results in Table 2, obtained from the Brøndby commune, no 
softening is applied, and all the values are well below the European Directive requirements, but 
maintain the high amounts of calcium. The comparable few steps of treatment stress the already 
good quality of water in Copenhagen but also maintain the natural character of the water.  
In theory and from the softening in the Netherlands some parallels can be seen.  The water 
quality parameters, which are essential for the compliance with the European Directive have 
been investigated by Hofman et al. (2006). As the softening should be conducted through the 
pellet softener, most of the magnesium remains in the treated water. It is planned to use NaOH 
Untreated water 
Coagulation/ 
Flocculation with 
NaOH 
Sedimentation of 
Sand grains 
Sand Filtration 
Decalcified 
water 
==PAGE:16==
 
 
 
 
12 
 
in the pellet softening process, which will like in Waternet (Leiden, Netherlands), increase the 
amount of Na, Cl and pH and decrease Ca, TH, HCO3-, Cu and Pb (Hofman et al., 2006). 
TABLE 2 WATER QUALITY VALUES FOR THE DIFFERENT TREATMENT PLANTS (GWRS, 2015; HOFOR, 2015; 
APPENDIX TABLE 1; APPENDIX TABLE 2) 
Chemical 
Analysis 
Unit 
EU 
Directive 
98/83 
Softening in 
Brøndby, 
Denmark 
Oasen, the 
Netherlands 
GWRS in 
Orange 
County, USA 
Desalination in 
Sorek, Israel 
Calcium  
mg/l 
 
120 
23.6 
11.1 
36.7 
Chloride 
mg/l 
250 
120 
70 
10.6 
13 
Fluoride 
mg/l 
1.5 
0.51 
0.08 
<0.1 
0.1 
Iron 
mg/l 
0.2 
0.013 
<0.1 
1.1 
0.006 
Magnesium  
mg/l 
 
23 
14.9 
<0.5 
<1 
Manganese 
mg/l 
0.05 
0.005 
<0.005 
<1 
<0.003 
Phosphorus 
mg/l 
 
0.01 
 
<0.01 
 
Potassium  
mg/l 
 
5.4 
 
0.9 
<1 
Sodium 
mg/l 
200 
57 
96 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Arsenic 
mg/l 
0.01 
<0.001 
<0.005 
<1 
<0.002 
Chromium 
mg/l 
0.05 
<0.001 
<0.005 
<1 
<0.003 
Copper 
mg/l 
2 
<0.001 
<0.005 
<1 
<0.003 
Nickel 
mg/l 
0.02 
0.014 
<0.01 
<1 
<0.003 
Selenium 
mg/l 
0.01 
<0.001 
<1 
<1 
<0.002 
Zinc 
mg/l 
 
0.015 
 
0.18 
0.006 
 
3.2. OASEN, THE NETHERLANDS 
BACKGROUND 
The cases of impeccable drinking water quality are the facilities of Oasen, located in the 
Netherlands, where over 60% of the water supply is produced from groundwater. Benefits of the 
groundwater are a good hygienic and consistent quality compared to surface water or 
wastewater. Groundwater recharge is, therefore, even more, a topic, which can be tackled 
natural or artificial through dune and riverbank filtration (RBF). The pumping of river bank 
filtrate boosts the infiltration of river water compared to the unmodified situation (de Vet, van 
Genuchten, van Loosdrecht, & van Dijk, 2009). 
Oasen is a surface groundwater company. Groundwater is a blend of surface water and 
rainwater that has soaked between 15 to 100 meters into the ground. Oasen is primarily 
abstracting the river bank filtrate of the river Lek and purifies it to drinking water of high 
quality. It is a publicly owned company, where the shareholders are municipalities in South 
Holland distributing the treated water to their residents. The revenue is reinvested in further 
improvement of the drinking water supply. The system includes seven drinking water 
purification plants, nine pump stations, and a water tower (Oasen, 2016a). 
DEVELOPMENT 
The securing of safe drinking water was an early topic for the Netherlands, and therefore the 
Council founded the Goudse Waterleiding Maatschappij (Water Pipe Company of Gouda), which 
==PAGE:17==
 
 
 
 
13 
 
started the supply of water on 3 December 1883 to its first 165 households connected to the 
pipeline network (Oasen, 2016a). The expansion of the company made enormous progress, and 
Oasen has the aspiration to be on top of the development to supply perfect water. Therefore, a 
new treatment scheme is envisioned. A reverse osmosis membrane system will be built to 
provide a barrier for chloride and organic micro pollutants. The first plant to implement the new 
concept is Hooge Boom, located in Kamerik, treating with the conventional treatment 2.6 million 
m3 (van der Laan, 2016). 
PURPOSE 
The five core values of Oasen are public health through pristine water, customer-orientation in 
their services, social responsibility to the entire system, sustainability of health, environment 
and the company and transparency of the working processes (Oasen, 2016b). These are the 
motivations to improve the system and make it even more safe and pleasant for the consumer. 
The raw water consists of a mixture of two water types: polder water and river bank filtrate. The 
composition varies as polder water has a low redox level and is responsible for the larger part of 
the macro-contaminants methane, ammonium, and iron, while river bank filtrate accounts for 
the manganese content of raw water (de Vet et al., 2009). 
AMOUNTS 
In 2015 Oasen supplied almost 46 billion cubic meters of purified water to around 760,000 
people (van Luijt et al., 2015) and 7,500 companies a year (Oasen, 2016a). 
REGULATIONS 
The water from the Oasen facilities is subject to the European Directive 98/83/EC. Anyhow, the 
water of the future reverse osmosis treatment of excellent drinking quality needs to be 
remineralized to compily with Dutch law. For the final remineralization step research and 
refinement are happening, but so far calcium, magnesium, oxygen, and bicarbonate are added, 
CO2 and methane are stripped. The optimal result described by van der Laan is described as:  
 
Product water quality in compliance with the following standards: Total Hardness: 1 
mmol/l (minimum value by law);  
 
Significant reduction in the growth potential compared to current water;  
 
Flawless and robust technology, defined as the best outcome of the Failure Modes, 
Effects, and Criticality Analysis (FMECA);  
 
Sustainable, defined as the lowest impact calculated by life cycle analysis;  
 
At a reasonable cost, calculated as total-cost-of-ownership over 30 years.  
PROCESS DESCRIPTION 
The water which Oasen pumps up is primarily surface water which has soaked into the ground 
through riverbanks. It is naturally filtered but still, needs treatment before being suitable to 
distribute to the customers. The following treatment steps are conducted:  
 
FIGURE 2 PROCESS DESCRIPTION OF THE OASEN TREATMENT PLANT TO ACHIEVE IMPECCABLE QUALITY 
Ground-
water 
Aeration 
Sand  
filtration 
Water  
softening 
Active 
carbon 
filtration 
UV disin-
fection 
Remineral-
isation 
Drink-
ing 
water 
==PAGE:18==
 
 
 
 
14 
 
The conventional treatment consists of six steps. Aeration is necessary, as water that is deep 
underground and pumped up by Oasen contains almost no oxygen. A solid amount of oxygen is 
required throughout the further treatment, as oxidization removes various substances from the 
water. One of the beneficial side effects of the aeration is the stripping of other gases like CO2 
and methane.  
Sand filtration is used to remove dirt, iron, and manganese converts ammonia and ensures 
reliable bacteriological water. The long time span underground guarantees that all harmful 
bacteria in the water are killed, which is why it is already reliable in the first place. 
Water softening with pellet reactors is conducted, where the system dispenses milk of lime or 
acid soda which causes calcium to deposit on grains of sand. This system is very similar to the 
system, which should be applied in Brøndby, Denmark.  
Active carbon filtration is like sand filtration with the difference of the material used in the 
filters. This filtration step removes the leftovers and traces of substances such as bentazone, 
mineral oil, polyaromatic hydrocarbons and drug residue.  
UV disinfection is an additional safety precaution in the purification process, during which the 
powerful ultraviolet light emitted by the lamps kills any remaining bacteria in the water by 
preventing them from reproducing (Oasen, 2016). 
To be up-to-date with the developments in the water industry and as Oasen envisions a 
treatment scheme which is a step ahead of these future challenges. The consideration is done, to 
complete the treatment process with the use of dense reverse osmosis (RO) membranes. This 
would upgrade the facility and ensure the elimination of organic micropollutants, such as traces 
of medicines, pesticides, and industrial by-products. In particular, the RO provides a barrier for 
chloride and organic micro-pollutants. The product water of RO requires post-treatment to 
improve the SI and taste and to comply with the legal standards for drinking water under Dutch 
law (van der Laan, 2016). 
In the so-called remineralization step, calcium (through marble filter, membrane calcite reactor 
or the addition of calcium chloride), magnesium (through magnesium chloride or granular 
dolomite filtration), bicarbonate and oxygen need to be added to the water, while CO2 and 
methane are stripped. The water produced has an ultra-low growth potential for bacteria, 
providing a natural limitation on bacterial growth during distribution to customers (van der 
Laan, 2016). 
WATER QUALITY 
Table 2 shows the difference in treatment between the two cases of Copenhagen and Oasen 
without reverse osmosis. The treatment stresses impeccable quality and a central softening is 
applied. This can be seen through lower values of calcium, chloride, fluoride, and magnesium 
than in Copenhagen. The content of metals in the water is kept very small and was removed in 
the process steps of filtration. The remineralization at this point adds calcium, chloride, 
magnesium bicarbonate and oxygen, without this step the values would be even lower. An 
additional reverse osmosis, would not just decrease the number of unwanted residues, but 
would also reduce the number of wanted minerals even further.  
 
==PAGE:19==
 
 
 
 
15 
 
3.3. GROUNDWATER REPLENISHMENT SYSTEM (GWRS) IN ORANGE 
COUNTY, USA 
BACKGROUND 
The chosen example for potable water reuse example with reverse osmosis is the Groundwater 
Replenishment System (GWRS), located in Orange County, California. It is an indirect potable 
reuse system meaning that a groundwater replenishment or discharge to surface water 
reservoirs takes place prior the actual usage. The treatment facility provides purified recycled 
wastewater for aquifer recharge and for injection into area aquifers to prevent seawater 
intrusion (TrojanUV Solutions, 2010). The primary benefit of the GWRS is, as the name already 
suggests, to replenish the Orange County Groundwater Basin, as the groundwater level in 
California constantly descents and reached a very critical level. The Orange County Water 
District (OCWD) uses for the stabilization and ideally a reverse trend a combination of flows 
from the Santa Ana River, GWRS water, and imported water (Markus, Patel, & Dunivin, 2012). 
DEVELOPMENT 
More than a decade ago the OCWD and the Orange County Sanitation District (OCSD) joined 
forces, worked on the visionary evolution of a plant and became operational in January 2008 
(Deshmukh & Wehner, 2008). The system is the Advanced Water Purification Facility (AWPF), 
which features the purification treatment processes and pumping stations, an intrusion barrier, 
basins, both with numerous groundwater monitoring wells and two industrial customers, 
receiving the surplus water (GWRS, 2015). 
PURPOSE 
Up until now, it is one of the largest indirect potable reuse projects to treat and reuse 
wastewater, which was previously without treatment discharged into the ocean. Due to the 
facility, it is now cleaned to a safe level, and roughly half of the water from the GWR System is 
injected into Orange County’s seawater intrusion barrier. The remaining water is piped to 
recharge lakes nearby, where the water will percolate into the aquifers of the Orange County 
groundwater basin (Deshmukh & Wehner, 2008). In the long run, this water protects against 
drought and is meant to make a step towards a sustainable water cycle (TrojanUV Solutions, 
2010). The development and planning of the facility have been committed thoroughly and use 
the latest technologies. It removes pharmaceuticals, pesticides and other harmful contaminants 
before it is pumped to recharge basins, where it naturally filters into the groundwater basin to 
replenishing scarce drinking water supplies (Markus et al., 2012). 
AMOUNTS 
The wastewater is filtered secondary effluent from the nearby OCSD treatment plant. The GWRS 
began operation in May 2015, allowing the AWPF to produce in 2015 a total of approximately 
114 million m³. According to OCWD, this is enough water to meet the needs of almost 850,000 
residents (Orange County Water District, 2017). Instead of direct use, the purified recycled 
water is used to prevent seawater intrusion, replenish the basin, and supply industrial users 
(GWRS, 2015). 
REGULATIONS 
The rules followed by GWRP, are stated in the California Code of Regulations (CCR) in Title 22 
regulating the water recycling Criteria (California Department of Public Health, 2014). The 
regulations specify the groundwater recharge with recycled water by setting a requirement for a 
minimum underground retention time of two months, pathogen reduction credits for up to six 
months of underground travel, and no distance requirement (GWRS, 2015). 
==PAGE:20==
 
 
 
 
16 
 
PROCESS DESCRIPTION 
The major AWPF processes include microfiltration (MF), reverse osmosis (RO), advanced 
oxidation and disinfection consisting of hydrogen peroxide addition and ultraviolet light 
exposure (UV/AOP), followed by decarbonization and lime stabilization (GWRS, 2015): 
 
FIGURE 3 PROCESS DESCRIPTION OF THE GWRP AND THE MAJOR AWPF PROCESSES 
MF will be used to dismiss suspended and colloidal solids including bacteria and protozoa from 
the OCSD secondary effluent. The MF feed water will be supplied with sodium hypochlorite to 
curtail MF membrane fouling. The MF filtrate serves as the inflow to RO and will pass through 
polypropylene wound cartridge filters before RO treatment. MF reject streams will be injected to 
OCSD’s Plant for treatment, as those are the most polluted flows (Deshmukh & Wehner, 2008). 
The RO process will dismiss most dissolved contaminants and minerals. This treatment will 
reduce constituents with a molecular weight above 100 like dissolved organics, pesticides, total 
dissolved solids, pharmaceuticals, silica, and viruses. For the pH reduction and carbonate scaling 
control sulfuric acid will be added to the RO feed water. To prevent membrane fouling a 
threshold inhibitor or antiscalant will be introduced. The outflow will be directed to UV 
treatment, but the product water is low in mineral content. The treated discharge will be 
released into the ocean (Deshmukh & Wehner, 2008). 
Ultraviolet light in the UV treatment is used to permeate the cell walls of microorganisms, 
preventing replication, and inducing cell death. UV picks up where RO leaves off with bacterial 
and viral inactivation and increases removal efficiency. Through the addition of hydrogen 
peroxide, UV-photolysis and the hydroxyl radicals oxidize organic compounds. Affected are low 
molecular weight organics like the carcinogenic N-nitroso dimethylamine and others, for a more 
efficient removal from water. UV product water will undergo additional chemical treatment 
before groundwater injection and recharge. The product water has a corrosive nature, which is 
mitigated through the addition of lime (Deshmukh & Wehner, 2008). 
WATER QUALITY 
Referring to Table 2 the amount of drinking water minerals in the GWRS facility is considerably 
different than in Brøndby and Oasen. This is happening due to the reverse osmosis and the 
removal of constituents with a molecular weight above 100. It is impressive how thoroughly all 
minerals and residues are removed to make the water safe to use and pump back into 
groundwater as all values (except iron and zinc) are lower than in the previous treatment 
examples. Therefore, the lime and decarbonisation, in the end, add minerals, but everything else 
is reduced. In particular, the low content of calcium, chloride, fluoride, and magnesium stick out, 
but this will be discussed more in detail in chapter 4 Mineral Intake from Drinking water.  
 
3.4. DESALINATION IN SOREK, ISRAEL 
The development of the seawater desalination has been rapid, and its technology is still in the 
optimization. In some areas, like in Israel, Australia, or other arid areas, the alternatives are 
Waste 
Water 
Micro-
filtration 
Reverse 
Osmosis 
Advanced 
oxidation 
Disinfection 
Decarbon-
isation & 
lime 
stabilisation 
Drink-
ing 
water 
==PAGE:21==
 
 
 
 
17 
 
much riskier and more costly. The emphasis is set on lowering the price, leading to increase the 
possibilities of up-scaling and make it more accessible for everyone. The price is tackled through 
smart monitoring to avoid losses through leakages, intelligent irrigation with precise systems 
and an awareness of water stress (Henley, 2013). 
BACKGROUND 
The chosen case for a seawater reverse osmosis desalination plant is Sorek, located about 15km 
south of Tel Aviv, Israel. The water situation in the whole Middle East is characterized by a hot 
and dry climate and therefore severely limited natural resources. Therefore, desalination 
facilities are essential to sustain potable water supplies in the state of Israel, since they 
supplement a level of water that meets existing national drinking water demands. Desalinated 
drinking water allows countries to close the gap between national water supply and the demand 
(Tenne, 2010). 
The progress to produce clean drinking water from the sea in a cheap way and at a large scale is 
not only attractive for Israel. It can help everyone without access to enough clean water which is 
due to change of climate and growing world population and increasing number of people 
(Talbot, 2015). 
DEVELOPMENT 
In 1999, the Israeli government started a long-term, large-scale Sea Water Reverse Osmosis 
(SWRO) desalination program, with the aim to develop a solution to counteract the growing 
demands on Israel’s scarce water resources and to ease the drought conditions created over the 
years (Tenne, 2010). 
The cost-efficient solutions in Israel and furthermost in Sorek is because of a carefully conducted  
risk allocation. Additionally, innovative technological designs like large diameter (40.6 cm) 
membrane elements and vertical arrangement of membrane pressure vessels were 
implemented. To control the costs of the energy consumption, an energy recovery system and a 
self-generating supply system are part of the innovation (Lokiec, 2011). 
The plant in Sorek became operational in October 2013 and is the fourth desalination plant in 
Israel, accounting altogether for 40 percent of the national water supply in 2014 (Talbot, 2015). 
The desalination is a joint venture between IDE Technologies and Hutchison Water International 
Holdings (Denver, Rand, & Christensen, 2011). 
PURPOSE 
The water from desalination is used for human consumption. Domestic and industrial 
wastewater, which is treated in Israel, is mostly reused for agricultural and landscaping 
irrigation (Research Office Legislative Council Secretariat, 2015). 
The introduction of the desalinated water into the national water grid was expected to increase 
the reliability of the water supply to all consumer sectors. Furthermore, it avoids curtailing 
economic activities due to water shortages and enables reducing water withdrawals from the 
country's overdrawn natural storage bodies of potable water. Those are namely the Sea of 
Galilee and the two most important aquifers, which were heavily exploited in the years before 
desalination was introduced. It helps to avoid their further degradation by saline water 
intrusion, some of it irreversible, and, eventually, raising their levels to safe hydrological values 
(Research Office Legislative Council Secretariat, 2015). 
==PAGE:22==
 
 
 
 
18 
 
The feed water is sucked with a slow velocity of 0.15 m/s from two open sea intake heads 
located around 1.15 km offshore. The concentrated feed water will be discharged back to the sea 
at a depth of 20 m and 1.85 km off-shore to enhance a quick brine dilution (Lokiec, 2011). 
AMOUNTS 
The plant in Sorek has a seawater treatment capacity of 624,000 m3 per day, making it the 
largest seawater desalination plant in the world. In 2014 the plant provided 20 percent of the 
water consumed by the country’s households, showing which potential desalination has in the 
countries drinking water supply system (Talbot, 2015). 
The winning concept for the construction of the biggest desalination plant is to have two plants 
able to function separately from and independently of one another. Most subsystems will be 
double, which can be associated with the advantage of a flexible and eventually lower 
production rate. It leads to the possibility to maintain parts without shutting down any 
additional equipment. Furthermore, it goes along with the option to control the energy recovery 
system. This helps through constant monitoring to utilize the variable tariff electricity cost in a 
smart way (Egozy & Faigon, 2013; Lokiec, 2011). 
REGULATIONS 
The laws in Israel determining the sanitary quality of drinking water are namely the Public 
Health Regulations from 2013 (Israel Ministry of Health, 2013a). They are meant to be a binding 
foundation to ensure the health of consumer using the water for drinking, cooking and all other 
kinds of domestic consumption. The regulations of the European Union, the US Environmental 
Protection Agency as well as with the guidelines of the World Health Organization provide a 
basis for the customized policy. The applied guidelines include tests for over 150 components 
(microbial, an organic, volatile organic micro pollutants, pesticides, chemical substances with 
organoplastic effect, radioactive substances and others) (Israel Ministry of Health, 2013b). 
One focus point of the water distributed to the consumer is, according to the Research Office 
Legislative Council Secretariat, reduced hardness. With this scaling rates of domestic and 
industrial equipment and appliances are lowered, consumption of detergents and scale-cleaning 
chemicals are reduced, and the quality of laundering and dishwashing improved. The values for 
the water vary between 250 and 350 ppm, seasonal exceeding even 600 ppm of CaCO3. In Israel, 
the practice of central softening is applied to 30% of its water consumption, earlier by ion 
exchangers and now through reverse osmosis.  The hardness is still causing the replacement of 
110,000 solar water heaters annually at the cost of approximately 60 million US$. (Research 
Office Legislative Council Secretariat, 2015) 
PROCESS DESCRIPTION 
The main desalination occurs through reverse osmosis, and hence the water requires a pre-
treatment primarily for the filtration of undesired particles. This comprises a pre-filtration 
process including flocculation, a dual media gravity filtration using gravel, quartz sand and 
anthracite media, low-pressure feed booster pumps and micro safety filters. After the reverse 
osmosis the water is remineralized and disinfected to meet the requirements and compensate 
the low mineral content (Lokiec, 2011): 
 
==PAGE:23==
 
 
 
 
19 
 
 
FIGURE 4 PROCESS DESCRIPTION OF THE SOREK DESALINATION PLANT 
The water is supplied to the RO section by the feed pumping center, which comprises both the 
high-pressure pumps and energy recovery systems. The RO membranes operate with a changing 
pressure due to temperature variations and fluctuations of seawater salinity. To utilize the 
advantage of the pressure center concept production happens at low recovery yields, resulting 
in lower osmotic pressures. This leads to production at lower permeate fluxes through the entire 
available membrane area (Lokiec, 2011). The operator selects the most efficient combination of 
equipment units to run in parallel as a full SWRO system allocating the type and number of high 
pressure pumps to run simultaneously together with the most efficient number of membrane 
racks (Egozy & Faigon, 2013). 
The design of the RO system comprises multiple stages. The first stage seawater desalination 
process, complemented by additional RO stages for further boron and chloride ion removal from 
the desalinated water. A focal point has been placed on the optimization of the RO banks' 
arrangement and the installment of 40.6 cm membrane elements in vertical pressure vessels. 
(Lokiec, 2011) 
Membrane filtration of ground, surface, or sea water by reverse osmosis results in permeate, 
which is almost free from minerals. Minerals may be added afterward, not only to comply with 
(legal) standards and to enhance chemical stability but also to improve the taste of drinking 
water made from permeates. Taste properties of drinking water are significantly determined 
positively by cations and negatively by anions, but the topic of effects of RO treatment on the 
taste properties are scarce in the public domain (Vingerhoeds et al., 2016). So far, the post-
treatment includes the re-hardening and disinfection of the permeate stream, bringing the water 
quality to the levels required. The post-treatment incorporates limestone treatment, followed by 
final disinfection (Lokiec, 2011). 
WATER QUALITY 
The earlier discussed Table 2 also inherits values for the desalination plant, and the notable 
comparison should be made between the GWRS and the desalination plant as in both cases 
reserves osmosis is applied.  The differences in the process are the steps for remineralization, as 
in Orange County an advanced oxidation and lime stabilization adds the minerals. In Sorek the 
process is called differently, but re-hardening through limestone treatment can be specified. 
Nonetheless, the amount of calcium is considerably, and the amount of chloride is a little higher. 
The content of iron is lower than in other treatments, but many other minerals cannot be 
compared as just values less than a specific amount is noted.  
 
3.5. NEW GOREANGAB WATER RECLAMATION PLANT (NGWRP), 
NAMIBIA 
BACKGROUND 
The case for potable water reuse example without reverse osmosis is the New Goreangab Water 
Reclamation Plant (NGWRP), located in Windhoek, Namibia. The direct potable reuse (DPR) 
Sea water 
Flocculation 
Dual media 
gravity filter 
Reverse 
Osmosis 
Remineral-
isation 
Disnin-
fection 
Drink-
ing 
water 
==PAGE:24==
 
 
 
 
20 
 
does not make an additional circulation through infiltration in environmental buffers like 
ground- or surface water. The city of Windhoek is water stressed, and several severe droughts 
mean that DPR is necessary and reliable for its sustained development. Therefore the city 
develops and establishes this solution for longer than 48 years (Lahnsteiner, Van Rensburg, & 
Esterhuizen, 2017). 
The surrounding of Central Namibia is suffering from low and uncertain rainfall, high 
evaporation, and little runoff. As surface water within 500 km of the city had been exploited, and 
groundwater was utilized to the maximum, the only seasonal independent supply of water could 
be guaranteed through wastewater reclamation (Law, 2003). 
DEVELOPMENT 
The water scarcity in Namibia is a challenge tackled the first time over 48 years ago, but in 1994 
the city council of Windhoek approved an integrated water demand management program to 
channel the developments (Haarhoff & Van der Merwe, 1996). The New Goreangab Water 
Reclamation Plant started operating in May 2002 (Lahnsteiner & Lempert, 2007). 
The president of the Republic of Namibia called out a national emergency in June 2016: The 
main reservoirs are almost empty, and according to models the water supply is only secured 
until December 2016 (Lahnsteiner et al., 2017). In March 2017, the dams were surprisingly filed 
more than in the years before and temporarily released the water stress, but not solve the 
situation in the long run (The Namibian, 2017).  
Since the beginning of potable reuse in 1968, there has been no outbreak of diseases, which can 
be connected to the consumption of reclaimed water. Within this context, it should also be 
mentioned that the NGWPR is an advancement of the conventional Old Goreangab WRP (without 
ozone and membrane filtration), which was operating from 1968 to 2002 (Lahnsteiner et al., 
2017). 
PURPOSE 
At the beginning of the operation, raw water fed to the NGWRP was made up of 50% secondary 
effluent and 50% surface runoff water from the Goreangab Dam. In the meantime, the 
proportion of secondary effluent increased to 90% secondary effluent, as the quality of 
Goreangab Dam water has worsened. Water from the Goreangab Dam is currently only 
abstracted for treatment in the Old Goreangab Water Reclamation Plant  and used for irrigation: 
5,000m3/d (Lahnsteiner & Lempert, 2007). 
AMOUNTS 
The facility is intended to treat up to 5,000 m³/d of industrial wastewater for reuse and 
irrigation. It aims at complying with Namibia’s updated national water regulations (Veolia Water 
Solutions & Technologies, 2014). The annual requirement of the city is 5.5 million m³ of water 
and almost a quarter, approximately 1.8 million m3, of the total water demand is supplied by the 
NGWRP (Lahnsteiner & Lempert, 2007). 
REGULATIONS 
Regulations for DPR reflect the growing interests of using this as an alternative source. The 
guidelines formulated in Australia, the US, and South Africa address issues such as source 
control, hazard identification and risk assessment. Furthermore, it specifies the identification, 
validation of control measures, verification, and quality assurance. The stress existing case 
studies, public perception, and acceptance, regulatory and legal considerations.  (Lahnsteiner et 
al., 2017)  
==PAGE:25==
 
 
 
 
21 
 
The final product quality must comply with values, which were based on WHO Guidelines, Rand 
Water, Potable Water Quality Criteria and the Namibian Guidelines for Group A water 
(Lahnsteiner & Lempert, 2007). Updated Namibian drinking water quality standards were 
drafted in 2012, but have yet to be implemented. As part of their latest DPR project, the City of 
Windhoek has conducted a review of the standards, monitoring requirements and final water 
quality requirements to implement any changes required at the NGWRP (Lahnsteiner et al., 
2017). 
PROCESS DESCRIPTION 
The NGWPR has a multiple barrier approach. It means that the treatment processes ensure that 
at least two or more-unit processes are provided to remove each crucial contaminant that could 
be harmful to the human body or aesthetically unpleasant. For example, five barriers have been 
included for organic substances, enhanced coagulation, ozonation, biologically active carbon 
(BAC), granular active carbon (GAC) adsorption and ultrafiltration. This secures that the 
removal in the distributed water was satisfactory (Lahnsteiner & Lempert, 2007):  
 
 
FIGURE 5 PROCESS DESCRIPTION OF THE NGWRP AND ITS MULTI-BARRIER APPROACH 
An essential management barrier is the strict division of domestic and industrial used water, as 
only domestic sewage is employed for potable reclamation. Another central non-treatment 
barrier is the extensive monitoring of the reclaimed water quality and the blending of the 
recycled water with other fresh water, as only blended water is distributed to consumers. Apart 
from diluting the dissolved solids in the reclaimed water, blending provides the dilution of the 
effluent organic matter  (Lahnsteiner et al., 2017). 
The NGWRP incorporates the following established and new treatment processes (du Pisan & 
Menge, 2013; Law, 2003; WABAG, 2002): 
 
Powdered activated carbon (PAC), acid, polymers (dosed if the adsorption capacity of 
the GAC is too small or the organic load of the reclamation plant inlet is too high) 
 
Pre-Ozonation (for Fe and Mn) 
 
Coagulation/flocculation 
 
Dissolved air flotation (DAF) 
 
Rapid sand/Anthracite filtration 
 
Ozonation 
 
Biological activated carbon (BAC) filtration/adsorption 
 
Granular activated carbon (GAC) filtration/adsorption 
 
Membrane ultrafiltration 
 
Chlorination/stabilization 
 
Distribution 
==PAGE:26==
 
 
 
 
22 
 
PAC is a powdered activated carbon, dosed to adsorb organic matter, which is responsible for 
bad smells and tastes. In the Pre-Ozonation ozone is dosed into the influent or raw water to 
oxidize and break down long-chain organics to facilitate removal of DOC in the DAF process and 
have short-chain organics available as nutrients to the biological growth in the BAC. The 
organisms used in the BAC feed on the organic material made available from the previous step 
and physically remove these organics from the water. In the membrane, ultrafiltration treated 
reclaimed water is forced under pressure through the filter walls, which then retain all 
suspended matter larger than their pore size (du Pisan & Menge, 2013; Lahnsteiner & Lempert, 
2007). 
WATER QUALITY 
As Table 2 shows, no data is available for the NGWRP. The water quality values could not be 
obtained from any of the authorities or local responsibilities and therefore, cannot be compared 
to the other examples. Nonetheless, this is another example of the reuse of wastewater, which in 
theory has the potential to be efficient and use the multi barrier approach to remove the 
unwanted constitutes other than with reverse osmosis.  
 
==PAGE:27==
 
 
 
 
23 
 
4. MINERAL INTAKE FROM DRINKING WATER  
In order to complete a risk-benefit analysis, an evaluation of the importance of minerals in the 
human body was conducted. Therefore, research on most of the minerals found in drinking 
water was made to give an overview of the proven or estimated functions of minerals in humans. 
The role of minerals in human bodies is well studied, but many uncertainties regarding the 
toxicities and nutritional value exist. The Appendix Table 3 evaluates the role on the potential 
toxicity of all essential minerals regularly found in drinking water.  
All information on the functions can be understood as the benefits individual minerals have. 
These elements are necessary for a healthy life, maintain the fluxes and keep the processes 
going. All deviations on a balanced intake can result in a potential risk of diseases. 
Underconsumption leads to a poor execution of the function in human bodies and 
overconsumption carries a risk of toxic effects. However, experiments on people and the 
deliberate exposure to an unhealthy intake is questionable from the ethical perspective and 
making knowingly investigations on the topic of deficiency and excess difficult. Nonetheless, 
situations with special circumstances, which are already existing, can be identified and 
investigated. Data on essential minerals like calcium, fluoride, iodine, iron, magnesium, 
manganese and zinc is better accessible and shows that toxicity levels cannot be determined by 
absolute numbers, but vary throughout the population. For the minerals chloride, iron, 
manganese, potassium, sodium, and zinc the World Health Organization found that values found 
in drinking-water are not of health concern and therefore not toxic to human (World Health 
Organization, 2017a). Anyhow, as Table 3 shows, the European Directive 98/83 suggests 
maximum values, for chloride, iron, manganese, and sodium, which are not justified based on 
toxicity but taste, appearance and other characteristics (The Council of the European Union, 
1998).  
Minerals like calcium, iodine, manganese, phosphorus, and potassium have toxicities which can 
have serious consequences but are dependent on the group of exposure. Other minerals like 
copper, fluoride, iron, magnesium, selenium, and zinc have rather mild toxicities and are not 
seriously harmful to humans at levels found in drinking water. Some minerals to be mentioned 
specifically are arsenic, selenium, chromium, and nickel. Arsenic is a mineral, which has no 
biological function, but animal data suggest a need. No data proves this point and also 
uncertainties regarding the toxic levels exist (World Health Organization, 2017a). Selenium is 
supposedly toxic and can cause poisoning in humans and animals (Tinggi, 2003). Chromium is 
potentially carcinogenic. Therefore a level should be set to protect the entire population (Sun, 
Brocato, & Costa, 2015). Another potentially dangerous mineral is nickel forming free radicals in 
tissues (Das, Das, & Dhundasi, 2008). See Appendix Table 3 for more details. 
To have a rough estimation of how much drinking water can contribute to mineral intake on 
daily level Table 4 was derived and sums up the potential intakes of minerals, if the 
recommended daily consumption of water is taken from Brøndby, Denmark and Sorek, Israel. 
For the calculations of the daily intake of minerals through drinking water from the tap, the 
properties of the waterworks in Brøndby and Sorek are taken and combined with mineral data 
from Table 3. The gathered data is distinguishable into 1. Recommended Daily Allowances 
(RDA), 2. Adequate Intakes (AI), 3. Recommended Nutrient Intakes (RNI) or 4. Tolerable Upper 
Intake Levels (UL) and the methodology is described in section 1.5.  
All levels and limits are taking the total intake from food, water, and supplements into 
consideration. In these terms RDAs, AIs and RNIs can be seen as goals for personal intake. As 
believed to cover the needs of all individuals of a group, it is difficult to derive the range of 
==PAGE:28==
 
 
 
 
24 
 
individuals covered by sufficient data and trustworthy sources. RDAs are set to meet the needs 
of 97 to 98 percent of all persons in a group. The UL represents a level of daily nutrient intake, 
which is likely to be safe to uptake but surpasses the recommended amounts (National Institutes 
of Health, 2011). 
The central assumption, in this case, is that the whole recommended water intake is made from 
tap water and equals the actual consumption. Very probably, this does not represent the reality, 
but rather a hypothetical scenario to explore the full potential of drinking water. This 
assumption is made aligned to the recommended intakes throughout this thesis, as this case can 
be considered the ideal constellation. In any case, adjustments pleasing everyone and more close 
to reality are difficult to make, as every person has different habits and needs. Different 
groupings of people by age, as their need of mineral, vary over a lifespan, are summed up in 
Table 3.  
TABLE 3 SUMMARY OF IDEAL MINERAL 1. RDA, 2. AI, 3. RNI AND 4. UL VALUES (NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF 
HEALTH, 2005, 2011; THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, 1998; WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION, 
2004)  
 
The following calculations in Table 4 represent the percentage of daily RDA/AI/RNI/UL based 
on the intake through water. In other words, it gives in indication how much mineral can be 
uptaken in the case all water is taken from the source of the waterworks, has the mineral 
content provided by the waterworks and contributes to the percentage stated in Table 3 to the 
daily RDA/AI/RNI/UL. In this calculation, the other sources of mineral intake are neglected, and 
just drinking water is considered. The focus on water is based on the fact that drinking water has 
the potential to reach many peoples,  dietary habits and the sources for food varies throughout 
the population. No other tool is as wide-reaching as tap water. Calculations represent the ideal 
case, and a reduction of this amount consequently leads to a decrease in the daily intake of the 
mineral. 
 
 
Parameter 
H2O 2 
[l] 
Ca 3 
[mg/l] 
Cl 2 
[mg/l] 
F 1 
[mg/l] 
Mg 3 
[mg/l] 
Mn 1 
[mg/l] 
Ni 4 
[mg/l] 
Na 2 
[mg/l] 
Zn 3 
[mg/l] 
EU Directive 
98/83 
 
- 
250 
1.5 
- 
0.05 
0.02 
200 
- 
Female 10–18 
years 
2.3 
1300 
2300 
3 
220 
1.6 
1 
1500 
4.3 
Males 10–18 
years 
3.3 
1300 
2300 
3 
230 
1.9 
1 
1500 
5.1 
Females 19–50 
years 
2.7 
1000 
2300 
3 
220 
1.8 
1 
1500 
3 
Females 51–65 
years 
2.7 
1300 
2000 
3 
220 
1.8 
1 
1300 
3 
Males 19–65 
years 
3.7 
1000 
2300 
4 
260 
2.3 
1 
1500 
4.2 
Female 65+ 
years 
2.7 
1300 
1800 
3 
190 
1.8 
1 
1200 
3 
Males 65+ 
years 
3.7 
1300 
1800 
4 
224 
2.3 
1 
1200 
4.2 
==PAGE:29==
 
 
 
 
25 
 
TABLE 4 POTENTIAL INTAKES OF MINERALS FROM DRINKING WATER IN BRØNDBY, DENMARK AND SOREK, 
ISRAEL 
Parameter 
 
 
Ca 3  
Cl 2  
F 1  
Mg 3  Mn 1  
Ni 4  
Na 2  
Zn 3  
Mineral 
Content 
Brøndby, Denmark  mg/l 
120.0 
120.0 
0.5 
23.0 
0.005 
0.014 
57.0 
0.015 
Sorek, Israel 
mg/l 
36.7 
13.0 
0.1 
1.0 
0.003 
0.003 
10.0 
0.006 
Female 10–18 
years 
Brøndby, Denmark  % 
21.2 
12.0 
39.1 
24.0 
0.7 
3.2 
8.7 
0.8 
Sorek, Israel 
% 
6.5 
1.3 
7.7 
1.0 
0.4 
0.7 
1.5 
0.3 
Males 10–18 
years 
Brøndby, Denmark  % 
30.5 
17.2 
56.1 
33.0 
0.9 
4.6 
12.5 
1.0 
Sorek, Israel 
% 
9.3 
1.9 
11.0 
1.4 
0.5 
1.0 
2.2 
0.4 
Females 19–50 
years 
Brøndby, Denmark  % 
32.4 
14.1 
45.9 
28.2 
0.8 
3.8 
10.3 
1.4 
Sorek, Israel 
% 
9.9 
1.5 
9.0 
1.2 
0.5 
0.8 
1.8 
0.5 
Females 51–65 
years 
Brøndby, Denmark  % 
24.9 
16.2 
45.9 
28.2 
0.8 
3.8 
11.8 
1.4 
Sorek, Israel 
% 
7.6 
1.8 
9.0 
1.2 
0.5 
0.8 
2.1 
0.5 
Males 19–65 
years 
Brøndby, Denmark  % 
44.4 
19.3 
47.2 
32.7 
0.8 
5.2 
14.1 
1.3 
Sorek, Israel 
% 
13.6 
2.1 
9.3 
1.4 
0.5 
1.1 
2.5 
0.5 
Female 65+ 
years 
Brøndby, Denmark  % 
24.9 
18.0 
45.9 
32.7 
0.8 
3.8 
12.8 
1.4 
Sorek, Israel 
% 
7.6 
2.0 
9.0 
1.4 
0.5 
0.8 
2.3 
0.5 
Males 65+ 
years 
Brøndby, Denmark  % 
34.2 
24.7 
47.2 
38.0 
0.8 
5.2 
17.6 
1.3 
Sorek, Israel 
% 
10.4 
2.7 
9.3 
1.7 
0.5 
1.1 
3.1 
0.5 
 
The findings and calculations in Table 4 suggest that in the case of the recommended water 
consumption solely from Brøndby waterworks the uptake of fluoride, calcium, and magnesium 
can be around a quarter to half of the recommended daily intake. Especially fluoride sticks out 
with a delivery of around 50% of its recommended daily allowance. Calcium and magnesium, 
responsible for the hardness of water, have the potential to make up a large quantity of the daily 
recommended intake, namely calcium between 21 and 44 percent and magnesium 24 to 38 
percent. 
For the desalination plant in Sorek, Israel the daily fulfillment of needs are recognizable lower. 
Comparing it with the most influential minerals from Copenhagen fluoride and calcium make 
correspondingly maximum 11 and 14 percent of the recommended daily allowance respectively 
recommended nutrient intake. The role of magnesium is almost neglectable with around 1-2 
percent of the RNI. 
4.1. REMINERALISATION 
The process of remineralization gains more importance as the world turns to the use of 
alternative water sources, and studies in countries, where this is already taking place are 
conducted. A recent nationwide study from Israel, where 75% of tap water consumption is 
desalinated water, identified a significant decrease in serum magnesium levels and increase in 
all-cause mortality. This study looked at areas served by desalinated water compared to non-
desalinated water areas and highlighted the potential adverse cardiovascular health effects of 
not remineralizing desalinated water (Naser et al., 2017). 
Same accounts for the coastal communities of Bangladesh, where due to seawater intrusion in 
the groundwater, a promotion for rainwater consumption amongst the population is made. But 
==PAGE:30==
 
 
 
 
26 
 
the use of low-mineral rainwater increases the trend of losing minerals during food preparation 
and drinking and cause substantial loss of cations. Calcium concentrations of vegetables increase 
when hard water is used for cooking but decrease when soft water is used (Naser et al., 2017). 
Studies of Imran et al. (2006) and Rygaard, Arvin, Bath, & Binning, (2011) investigate on the 
optimal drinking water composition and sea water blends, from different water sources as an 
option. They conclude that mixing water will affect its corrosive potential, which needs to be 
investigated for the individual trade-offs of corrosion response and water quality. For example, 
increased alkalinity leads to corrosion of copper and lead pipes and reduces the release of iron 
corrosion products from pipes and increasing sulfates reduces lead but increased iron release 
(Imran et al., 2006). 
Enrichments with calcium and fluoride are used for the design of optimal drinking water for 
caries control in populations, especially from desalinated sea- and brackish water. The model 
could also be used for optimizing drinking water from groundwater resources in countries 
where water fluoridation is common. Bruvo et al. (2008) suggest an ideal 170 milligrams of 
calcium for each milligram of fluoride and the use of both ions combined whenever possible. 
Even though high concentrations of calcium are unwanted, a supply of drinking water with 0.75 
mg/L fluoride and 90 mg/L of calcium should be set. It will result in a substantial reduction in 
DMF-S at a moderate concentration of both ions in the supply of drinking water (Bruvo et al., 
2008). 
An extensive assessment in Denmark by Rygaard et al. (2011), taking mainly the economic 
benefits into consideration, points out the advantages from a reduction of the mineral content in 
hard water. The aspired hardness is less than 200 mg/l as CaCO3 and with a total dissolved 
solids content below 500 mg/l containing around 0.8 mg/l fluoride and 20 mg/l magnesium 
(Rygaard et al., 2011). 
Many communities permit or require the addition of fluoride to drinking water (Rygaard et al., 
2011). Cotruvo (2006) investigated that there are examples of mandated addition of iodide to 
drinking water in parts of Russia, and forming iron chelates in water in some regions of Brazil. 
The fortification can be tackled at many sources like bottled water and beverages or dietary 
mineral supplements, but their use would also be a matter of consumer choice. Because of the 
widespread exposure to tap water in almost all households around the globe, fortification of tap 
water remains a preferred tool in many regions (Cotruvo, 2006). 
4.2. MINIMUM AMOUNTS 
The European Communities (2006) have the Directive 2002/46/EC on food supplements, which 
contains insights applicable for this work and the supplementation of drinking water. 
Nonetheless, the bioavailability of the minerals in water needs to be investigated when it comes 
to the adaptation. This would also have the same difficulties like in food supplements as it is 
increasingly difficult to develop accurate assessments of the pattern of overall diets. Diets of 
peoples and cultures vary across the regions of the EU, among population groups, age and over 
time.  
Fundamental research in the field of supplementation of food is conducted by Flynn et al. 
(2003). Their results suggest that at least 15% EU Recommended Daily Allowance per serving 
can be added safely to foods in Europe for most micronutrients. Rasmussen, Andersen, Dragsted, 
& Larsen (2006) specify for the Danish context that not all foods can or will be fortified, but in 
agreement with Flynn about half of the Danish diet consists of foods, which are potentially 
fortifiable. Flynn et al. (2003) identified three categories of micronutrients, in which they could 
==PAGE:31==
 
 
 
 
27 
 
be added safely to foods at levels (per serving, e. g., 100 kcal). For minerals found in drinking 
water only the second or third category applies. The second category suggests a safe addition of 
between 50 and 100 % of the European Commission Recommended Daily Intake (EC RDA) for 
copper, iodine and selenium apply. The third category suggests between 10 and 40 % of the EC 
RDA for iron, zinc, calcium, phosphorus, and magnesium is safe.  
Another research by Richardson (2007) commissioned by the European Federation of 
Associations of Health Product Manufacturers dealt with the Population Safety Index and 
categorized minerals based on this. This category allocates selenium and phosphorus to a small 
risk to exceed the upper limit and iron, iodine, copper, calcium, and zinc to a potential risk of 
exceeding the upper limit and suggests a maximum level for food supplements.  
TABLE 5 FORTIFICATION POTENTIAL SUGGESTED BY FLYNN ET AL. (2003) AND RICHARDSON (2007) 
Source 
Fortification possible 
Fortification needless 
Flynn et al. (2003) 
Selenium  
Copper 
Iodine 
Iron 
Zinc 
Calcium 
Phosphorus 
Magnesium 
Richardson (2007) 
Selenium 
Phosphorus 
Iron 
Zinc 
Calcium 
Iodine 
Copper 
 
Only from these two examples, and much more exist, it becomes again apparent that the 
specification of the need of minerals cannot be solved in a final matter with thorough 
investigations. The findings vary depending on the model on which the research is based, and 
results must be verified multiple times. In Table 5 those two approaches are compared and show 
the similarities and differences between those studies. An agreement is a potential fortification 
of selenium, as the potential of deficiency exists. On the other hand, any addition of iron, zinc, 
and calcium is not necessary, as the threat of overconsumption is present and vice versa that the 
consumption of the public is satisfactory. 
 
==PAGE:32==
 
 
 
 
28 
 
5. RISK-BENEFIT ANALYSIS (RBA)  
The Risk-Benefit Analysis (RBA) is a method, drawn from many disciplines and has the purpose 
to bring the risks and benefits of an activity into relation to each other and acknowledge the 
wholesomeness. This approach is useful in many disciplines, but especially when it comes to 
health and medicine and public policy making it finds usage. It helps decision makers to 
determine whether the level of risk inherent in an activity is worth it and if the benefits make a 
risk acceptable or not  (Karatzas, 2013; O’Brien, 2002). 
The distinction between a Cost Benefit Analysis (CBA) and an RBA is the human element. The 
CBA is mainly mathematical adding up the benefits and subtracting the costs. This can be done 
for most cases and with items and products, where no human interaction is involved. As soon as 
it comes to the involvement of a quantification of the value of a life, giving up certain rights or 
freedoms, limiting the quality of one’s life the mathematical approach does not reflect the 
bilateralism (Karatzas, 2013). The method of RBA can be considered as a rational decision-
making tool. It attempts to take into account the willingness of risks and benefits and adds the 
risk associated with the occurrence of costs and benefits to the analysis. For most cases, the 
reference of comparison is the situation where no action is taken, and it remains the same. The 
other situations are the new circumstances with the consideration of the changes for the better 
and the worse  (Wheatley, 2010). 
As soon as human values are at risk, one cannot simply subtract costs from benefits but need to 
bring in ethical considerations. Ethical concerns should not be quickly surrendered, but 
safeguarded. So even if benefits are great, when certain members of society are not willing to 
make the trade-off, some consideration should be done. Especially questions if it is essential to 
trade one’s intrinsic worth or ideal of humanity for certain benefits is crucial (Karatzas, 2013). 
In the 1980s the Code of Ethics of the American Society of Civil Engineers said:  
Engineers shall hold paramount the safety, health, and welfare of the public in the 
performance of their professional duties. Some might have asked the question: How safe 
is safe enough? And which risks are acceptable, which are not, and why? But what is a 
risk or a risk factor? (Sagoff, 1985)  
Risks are not just economic, environmental or systemic, but there are also societal or ethical 
risks, which can have an impact on research direction but are overseen in many cases (Karatzas, 
2013). This thesis focuses on the health risks, which can be based on the societal direction.  
A risk factor is defined by the World Health Organization as any attribute, characteristic or 
exposure of an individual that increases the likelihood of developing a disease or injury (World 
Health Organization, 2014b). Secondly, the perception of risk is multidimensional, and it is 
important to be transparent about the risk. An example is a voluntary risk, which is perceived as 
more acceptable than an involuntary risk connected to the same probability of an adverse 
incident. The validation of these psychological attributes contributes to our judgment about 
acceptable and not acceptable risks (O’Brien, 2002). Many people expect purity in their drinking 
water as it is an essential element of life. That is a reason the awareness of drinking water from 
the tap is attributed with an involuntary risk. It is expected to eliminate all risks of drinking 
water contamination (Putnam & Wiener, 1995). 
The distinction of risks can be regarding their nature. The determination of a statistical risk 
happens through analysis of previous studies and available data, and projected risk is calculated 
==PAGE:33==
 
 
 
 
29 
 
using models based on data. Perceived risk is sensed intuitively by individuals, and the 
revelation of real future risk happens during the implementation of a project (Wheatley, 2010). 
For the analysis, a general approximation and evaluation of risks and benefits are required, 
setting the focus to the trade-offs between the good sides and downsides. In health-care related 
assessments, it is important to mirror the quality losses and lost life years to measure reductions 
in the quality and quantity of life. And furthermore, costs associated with the proposed activity 
are quantified carefully to quantify the reduced or avoided risks. (O’Brien, 2002) 
For completing a proper assessment an estimation of the risk, risk perception, risk– benefit 
analysis, and risk management to a finale made up of lists of many risks need to be done 
(O’Brien, 2002). For the wholeness of an RBA the importance of objective, quantitative 
measurement of risk, along with an explicit description of uncertainty and assumptions has to be 
taken into account (Parascandola, 2002). Especially in the estimation of an exposure-outcome 
model many factors are uncertain. This will be discussed in an additional uncertainty matrix.  
5.1. DEFINITION AND MEASUREMENT  
For the evaluation and quantification of the risk probability, a literature research is conducted to 
get insights about diseases, which can occur with an inadequate intake in deficient and excessive 
terms. The evaluation chosen for this thesis is the metrics of disability adjusted life years 
(DALY). The DALY follows an egalitarian principle as it uses the same ideal life expectancy 
throughout the world, without involving factors interfering with health like race, socioeconomic 
status, or occupation and only distinguishes in a country between gender and age (World Health 
Organization, 2014a). 
The definition the World Health Organization used is:  
One DALY can be thought of as one lost year of healthy life. The sum of these DALYs 
across the population, or the burden of disease, can be thought of as a measurement of 
the gap between current health status and an ideal health situation where the entire 
population lives to an advanced age, free of disease and disability (World Health 
Organization, 2014a).  
DALY sums up the Years of Life Lost (YLL) and the Years Lost due to Disability (YLD). The YLL 
depending on the cause of death, age and sex calculated from the number of deaths multiplied by 
the standard life expectancy at the age at which the death occurs. The calculation of YLD takes 
the duration, the disability weight, and the number of incident cases into consideration and 
multiplies them. An updated way takes the number of prevalent cases and the severity of the 
disease into account. Social value weights like age-weighting and discounting were used in the 
original GBD 1990, but are neglected in recent measurements (World Health Organization, 
2014). 
The DALY is combined with the Value of a Statistical Life (VSL) in Europe. In this RBA case, the 
amount is the cost of society or the social costs. The basis for the calculation of the DALY is an 
expected life of 92 years. This is also used to derive from the VSL the amount how much a human 
life year is worth (Department of Health Statistics and Information Systems WHO, 2013). 
Especially the VSL is a tool, which has some benefits, but also negative aspects. Those will be 
further discussed in the Discussion chapter.  
Measuring public’s health is a topic, which can be debated from different perspectives. The 
decision for this measurement neglects some other analysis approaches and relies on DALY even 
though this is no perfect measure, but a good fit for this research. Always a question to be 
==PAGE:34==
 
 
 
 
30 
 
debated is whether economic analyses should be based on trials or models. The DALY simplifies 
the estimation of probability and severity, it is included, but different severity levels are all 
summed up in one outcome. Additional, lost life years either with actual death or disability-wise 
adjusted years are taken into consideration and in this case to not consider added life years 
(Drummond, 1997). In other words, in older populations, current methods overstate the cost-
effectiveness of interventions which extend life compared to interventions which improve the 
quality of life (Meltzer, 1997). 
Another option would multiply the probability of the disease with the treatment costs of the 
disease, but this is not conducted as the expenses of treatment vary a lot on the individual 
circumstances of severity, place, age, and other illnesses. The estimates do not provide a wide-
ranging measure of the actual economic burden. It is not taking indirect costs connected to the 
disease-related disability, productivity loss and pain into consideration. Furthermore, 
unquantifiable emotional issues like the suffering of the patient and impacted family and friends 
are not reflected (Thacker et al., 2006). 
Further costs not considered, are the cost of technology implementation, as it is primarily 
assumed that the treatment plants will have facilities already existing, which can remineralize 
the water and add minerals. The only costs, in this case, would be the expenses for the mineral. 
For calcium, the amount added per liter is so small that basing an assessment is not necessary.  
The combination of risks and costs measures the social benefits by the DALYs of the diseases of a 
mineral deficiency or an excess. These are multiplied with the VSL broken down for a healthy 
year of life. The balance of costs and benefits advises if the particular risk is worth reducing as it 
hinges on an improved health or a reduced risk (Sagoff, 1985). 
 
==PAGE:35==
 
 
 
 
31 
 
6. CALCIUM 
This chapter discusses the different outcomes regarding overdosing and leakage of calcium. It is 
relevant as an adjusting of the mineral content of calcium can have those implications and other 
arguments to modify the content of calcium are mentioned. At the minimum, these are 
considerations necessary to set a target amount in the remineralisation process and judge on the 
risks associated with a change in a lower or higher amount of calcium. For a final decision on a 
large scale, this research should be extended and checked. It is supposed that no epidemiological 
study can provide a definitive answer about the exposure–disease association, as they inherit 
small systematic errors and studies vary in design and different population groups. For the 
determination of a potential human health risk epidemiological data is needed, but in this case, 
interpretations based on the results should be made with caution and take as many information 
as possible into consideration. Taking many into account allows a more definitive conclusion 
(Cotruvo & Bartram, 2009). 
6.1. CALCIUM INTAKE  
One of the most discussed and an important mineral found in drinking water is calcium, and it 
plays a vital role in human health. Almost 99% of the calcium present in the body is bound in 
bones, where it inherits a structural function, forming a structure responsible for stiffness. The 
remaining 1% is found in soft tissue and body fluids being involved in blood clotting, muscle 
contraction, and neurotransmitter secretion (Cotruvo, 2006; Theobald, 2005). 
Studies in the UK investigated on the population group at risk and came to the finding that 
teenagers (both genders) consume about 80% of their RNI. But 10–20% of the teenagers are 
consuming less than the lower reference nutrient intake (LRNI). The LRNI is considered being 
enough for people with low requirements and therefore being inadequate for most individuals 
with a normal lifestyle. This trend continues for women aging until 24 where 8% have an intake 
even below the LRNI. This might be alarming as those nutrition habits keep on during adulthood. 
The sufficient intake is required to build up a healthy bone formation, which is called peak bone 
mass (PBM) and prevents different illnesses in older years (Theobald, 2005). 
Inadequate intake of calcium is an issue around the world, even considering national differences 
in their RDA and RNI. In developing countries, most children and almost all adults consume less 
than needed, and in developed countries, this is the case for most adults (Cotruvo, 2006). 
The bioavailability of calcium is an important topic, and quantification depends on the method of 
calculating and making conclusions must be done with caution. The most popular supplier of 
calcium to humans is milk as it provides large amounts of calcium and components such as 
lactose and phosphorus (Ross, Taylor, Yaktine, & Del Valle, 2011). These attributes may be 
beneficial for calcium absorption and mineral retention. This is discussed in many studies, but 
Guéguen & Pointillart (2000) found that a variety of methods could not prove that the calcium in 
milk is more efficiently absorbed than most calcium salts. Some of the studies mentioned in this 
chapter take milk as the subject of a calcium source, which happens to be not exact. Because milk 
contains many minerals, the effects cannot be separated from each other and can be caused by 
the interplay of many aspects. 
6.2. WATER RELATED 
A source of calcium is water and as reported following the European Directive tap water may 
contain between 1 to 160 mg calcium per liter and can contribute to 4% of total daily calcium 
intake in some parts of Europe (Nerbrand et al., 2003). In the US and Canada consumption of 
==PAGE:36==
 
 
 
 
32 
 
water can make up to 40% of the recommended daily intake of calcium (Morr et al., 2006). But 
in other parts of the world, where the water distribution is not controlled, or water shortages 
occur the situation is different. For instance, in Bangladesh, where groundwater shortage leads 
to seawater intrusion in the aquifers, the usage of rainwater, which is very low in mineral 
content, was promoted. The analysis of this case shows that caution should be paid to potential 
unintended health consequences when water as a mineral-rich source is cut, especially in 
locations where a general low or borderline intake of elements like calcium, magnesium, sodium, 
and potassium occurs (Naser et al., 2017). A recent study by Hoque & Butler (2016) supports 
these results by suggesting the intake can be up to half of the daily recommended intake through 
2 liters of drinking water in some regions in Asia. 
 A study in Poland among 19-26 years old students showed that with the given mineral 
conditions in Warsaw the average consumption of water (for drinking or meal preparation) 
contributed with 68,3 mg/l to 112 mg/l to approximately 9.8% to their daily diet of calcium 
(Januszko et al., 2012). 
Regarding the bioavailability of drinking water, human studies indicate that calcium from water 
is as effectively absorbed as from other sources. Findings of Böhmer, Müller, & Resch (2000) 
stated that water, rich in calcium content, could be an effective alternative to common calcium 
supplementation. The bioavailability of calcium dissolved in water is comparable or even better 
than absorption from milk and dairy products. They even question current RDAs and advertise 
new guidelines with values up to 1500 mg/d. 
6.3. DISEASES CORRELATED WITH INADEQUATE CALCIUM INTAKE 
As mentioned earlier the association between a disease and a mineral is never certain, as the 
methodology can differ, systematic errors can occur, or other circumstances can influence the 
results. Calcium has significant importance in bone structure, muscle contraction, nerve impulse 
transmission, blood clotting and cell signaling. Correlation between calcium and different 
conditions, therefore, are connected to those mechanisms and will be further elaborated. The 
chronic diseases to be mentioned are osteoporosis, colorectal and breast cancer, cardiovascular 
disease, weight management, hypercalcemia and calcium stone formation (Cotruvo, 2006; 
Theobald, 2005). Most of these disorders have treatments, but not cures (World Health 
Organization, 2011). 
World Health Organization (2011) states about the excess intake of calcium that to a great 
extent, individuals are protected from excess intakes of calcium. This happens through a tightly 
regulated intestinal absorption, elimination mechanism and the action of 1,25- dihydroxy 
vitamin D, the hormonally active form of vitamin D. When more calcium than needed is 
absorbed, the excess is excreted by the kidney in healthy people who do not have renal 
impairment.  
OSTEOPOROSIS 
WHO defines osteoporosis as a disease characterized by low bone mass and micro-architectural 
deterioration of bone tissue, leading to enhanced bone fragility and a consequent increase in 
fracture risk (World Health Organization, 1994). Affected people are four times more likely to 
get a fracture than people with an optimal healthy bone density. The reasons osteoporosis is 
associated with morbidity and heavy implications are severe fractures in the neck or hips, very 
costly for the system as it is estimated it causes costs in the UK around 1.9 billion Euro (Russell, 
Dennison, & Cooper, 2003). It is believed that worldwide 1 in 3 women and 1 in 5 men aged over 
50 suffer from osteoporosis fractures with increasing number at a higher age. This results in 
==PAGE:37==
 
 
 
 
33 
 
approximately 75 million affected people in Europe, USA, and Japan. Osteoporosis is worldwide 
causing more than 8.9 million fractures with more than 1.6 million hip fractures connected to it 
annually (International Osteoporosis Foundation, n.d.). 
Bone calcium loss can also happen to healthy young adults when the output from the body 
regularly exceeds the net absorption from the intestine. It starts to emerge from around the mid-
thirties. But in general, it is hard, to extrapolate data for bone mass density in younger subjects 
to their future risk of osteoporosis (Prentice et al., 2003). Factors influencing the age-related 
loss of bone are amongst other things gender, immobility, thinness, and cigarette and alcohol 
consumption (Office of the Surgeon General (US), 2004). Also, ethnicity has an effect as it is 
much more uncommon amongst the e.g. African-Caribbean population (De Laet et al., 1997). 
The analysis of the influence of calcium on the risk of osteoporosis and fractures has been 
followed up by many researchers and controversial debates. At very low calcium intakes it is 
mobilized from the skeleton to provide calcium plasma. High intakes of milk and dairy products 
in adolescence have been shown to be associated with higher bone mass density in later life 
(Valimaki et al., 1994; Welten, Kemper, Post, & van Staveren, 1995). It is difficult to make 
conclusions on an acceptable consumption of calcium separated from effects of other minerals 
present in milk. Most studies on this topic suggest an ongoing high intake or supplementation 
and no occasional exaggeration. (Dawson-Hughes et al., 2000; Mackerras & Lumley, 1997)  
There are indications that an inadequate intake of calcium in adolescence can increase the risk 
of developing Osteoporosis later in life. This is especially alarming concerning the fact that the 
average age of the population is increasing and therefore also the economic burden caused by 
osteoporosis. A deficiency may lead to consequences in bone mass, and therefore, particularly 
for the younger part of the population, an optimized consumption would mean a precaution for 
later life. Some evidence is available that an increased calcium intake, to a level of the reference 
nutrient intake (RNI) in age groups, may withhold age-linked bone mass loss (Theobald, 2005). 
Studies on calcium supplementation on age-related bone loss establish a connection between 
the prolonged use of a calcium supplement and a reduction of bone loss. Postmenopausal 
women are the group at most risk (Aloia et al., 1994; Jackson & Mysiw, 2014; I.R. Reid, Ames, 
Evans, Gamble, & Sharpe, 1993). In any case, adding to the amount of over 1000 mg/day (Storm 
et al., 1998), the timing of intake following the menopause appears to be important (Devine et 
al., 1997; Recker et al., 1996). It is most efficient in late-postmenopausal women, explaining 
some discrepancies in the reasoning of different studies (Cashman, 2002). 
Another association may be suggested between calcium intake and the actual probability to 
suffer from a fraction. Some suggest a non-significant trend towards a reduced risk following 
calcium supplementation (Grant et al., 2005), while others suggest no effect on fracture risk, but 
the numbers of actual fractures were few (Shea et al., 2002). Further research is required to 
determine the influence of calcium on the risk of fractures.  
CANCER 
A protective connection at high intakes of calcium and colorectal cancer is carried by moderately 
consistent evidence and studies conducted in the last 20 years (Flood et al., 2005; McCullough et 
al., 2003; Sellers et al., 1998; Wu et al., 2002). The studies suggest a reduction of colorectal 
cancer risk by 15 to 40% when the calcium intake (from food and/or supplements) is above 800 
mg/day for women and above 1000 mg/day for both genders.  
Chiu, Tsai, Chen, Wu, & Yang (2011) conducted a study to report an effect modification by Ca 
intake from drinking water in the association between nitrate nitrogen (NO3-N) exposure and 
==PAGE:38==
 
 
 
 
34 
 
risk of colon cancer mortality. The main finding is that an elevated risk was found among those 
with low Ca intake from drinking water. 
On the other hand, an inverse association between and excessive calcium intake and the risk of 
colorectal cancer is supported by primarily animal studies with ambiguous results. Studies can 
be found suggesting that calcium exerts tumor antibodies effects. Some do not support the 
hypothesis that calcium prevents colorectal neoplasia (Bergsma-Kadijk et al., 1996). Others 
conclude that a higher consumption of milk and calcium is associated with a lower risk of 
colorectal cancer (Cho et al., 2004). Some findings do not constitute sufficient evidence to 
recommend the general use of calcium supplements to prevent colorectal cancer (Weingarten, 
Zalmanovici, & Yaphe, 2005). 
The complexity of epidemiological becomes clear when the results of the studies are reviewed 
more detailed concerning, the source, the kind of protection, the bioavailability, or the location 
of protection. The kind of calcium intake plays an important role as calcium supplementation 
may have a more pronounced antineoplastic effect on advanced colorectal lesions than on other 
types of polyps. Those injuries are assumed to be associated with the outbreak of colorectal 
cancer (Wallace et al., 2004). The effects are also dependent on the nutrition as it is concluded 
that a fat-reduced diet may facilitate greater protection against colon cancer. As calcium binds 
free fatty acids, free bile acids, and phosphates (De Stefani et al., 1997). Furthermore, it is noted 
by Wu et al. (2002) that different degrees of protection is dependent on the location of cancer in 
the colon and the greatest protection is achieved in distal sides. Various studies investigate on 
different matters, Wu et al. (2002) published that a reduced risk of cancer is connected to an 
intake of 700 mg calcium. Whereas Wallace et al. (2004) report that for precaution the optimal 
daily amount is around 1200 mg.  
Additional to the well investigated colorectal cancer, case-control studies suggest an inverse 
association between calcium intake and the risk of breast cancer. Data obtained by Knekt et al. 
(1996) propose a protective effect, dietary or habitual, associated with consumption of milk that 
overwhelms the associations between different other factors and risk of breast cancer. Support 
for this finding is delivered from Shin et al. (2002). They found no association between intake of 
dairy products and breast cancer in postmenopausal women, but among premenopausal 
women. High intakes of low-fat dairy foods were associated with reduced risk of breast cancer. 
In both cases, the primary source of calcium was milk and dairy products. This makes it hard to 
make a distinction whether the positive effects are caused by individual effects of calcium or by 
some other bioactive compound present in milk or its interaction of multiple compounds 
(Theobald, 2005). 
Another consideration related to prostate cancer is controversially discussed. Epidemiological 
studies in different countries and different teams came to the association that high intakes of 
calcium, dairy foods or both induce the risk of developing prostate cancer (Chan et al., 2001; 
Kesse et al., 2006; Mitrou et al., 2007; Rodriguez et al., 2003). Others concluded that a weak 
correlation, no correlation, or a negative correlation between calcium intake and prostate cancer 
risk exists (Chan et al., 2000; Kristal, Stanford, Cohen, Wicklund, & Patterson, 1999; Vlajinac, 
Marinkovic, Ilic, & Kocev, 1997). All studies suggest further research with more advanced 
methods, as the difficulties occur to separate the effects of calcium from the ones of dairy 
products.  
CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE 
The associations between cardiovascular mortality and hardness of water related to the calcium 
and magnesium content in water and were debated in the past heavily. Research longing back to 
==PAGE:39==
 
 
 
 
35 
 
1970 indicates a connection between people in areas distributes with hard water and being less 
affected by cardiovascular diseases (Crawford, Gardner, & Morris, 1971; Ferrandiz et al., 2004; 
Lacey & Shaper, 1984; Pocock et al., 1980). Other recent studies suggest that calcium content in 
water could be a factor in the complexity of relationships and importance of cardiovascular risk 
factors, this was not found for the minerals in the diet (Nerbrand, Agréus, Lenner, Nyberg, & 
Svärdsudd, 2003b). This ambiguity is represented in the revision of epidemiological studies of 
Monarca et al. (2006). They concluded that many but not all found an inverse relation, but 
information supports the hypothesis. Thus, not removing magnesium and calcium from drinking 
water, or in certain situations increasing the intake from water, may be beneficial, especially for 
populations with an insufficient dietary intake of the minerals. 
Low dietary intakes of calcium have been associated with higher blood pressure and increased 
risk of hypertension. Meta-analyses findings suggest an inverse connection between calcium and 
blood pressure, as experiments with calcium supplements cause reductions in systolic and small 
reductions in diastolic blood pressure (Allender et al., 1996; Bucher et al., 1996; Griffith et al., 
1999). 
The effects of calcium intake have been shown to be inversely associated with risk of 
cardiovascular disease in epidemiological studies. A high intake of calcium (≥ 1000 mg/day) 
may benefit lipoprotein profiles (Denke, Fox, & Schulte, 1993; Ian R. Reid et al., 2002; L. Wang, 
Manson, & Sesso, 2012). Calcium has the attribute to bind saturated fatty acids and bile acids in 
the digestive tract, causing fat excretion in feces and freeing it from unnecessary fat in the 
gastrointestinal tract. It is also necessary for muscle contraction and relaxation, therefore also 
for heart contraction and all features like the vascular tone and blood pressure regulation. 
Elevated blood pressure is the main cause of many cardiovascular diseases, and modest 
reductions reduce rates of morbidity and mortality from stroke and coronary heart disease 
significantly (Theobald, 2005). In 2002, heart disease was among the leading causes of 
premature death measured by years of potential life lost (YPLL) before age 75 years in the U.S. 
(Thacker et al., 2006). Recently also WHO inferred that there is a weak protection against 
cardiovascular mortality (Cotruvo & Bartram, 2009). 
PREECLAMPSIA AND HYPERTENSION 
Increased calcium intakes are through several studies connected to a risk of hypertension and 
lower blood pressure (Allender et al., 1996; Bucher et al., 1996; McCarron & Reusser, 1999; L. 
Wang, Manson, Buring, Lee, & Sesso, 2008). However, authors of an extensive and systematic 
review of the research published on the associations between calcium supplementation and 
blood pressure reduction derive a weak connection and explain it with the poor quality of trials 
and therefore due to bias. They request better quality and larger and longer duration trials to 
assess the effect of calcium supplementation on blood pressure and cardiovascular outcomes 
(Dickinson et al., 2006). 
For preeclampsia, pregnant women are at risk and organizations recommend calcium 
fortification with 1,500 to 2,000 mg calcium during pregnancy for women with low calcium 
intakes. The World Health Organization (2013) suggests in populations where calcium intake is 
low, calcium supplementation as part of the antenatal care is recommended for the prevention 
of preeclampsia among pregnant women. In particular with a strong recommendation among 
those at higher risk of hypertension. 
WEIGHT MANAGEMENT 
The evidence of different epidemiological studies points to an inverse association between 
calcium intake and body weight, percentage body fat and total body fat. Studies targeting adults 
==PAGE:40==
 
 
 
 
36 
 
suggest that calcium has the potential to influence 3 to 10% of the body weight and helps to lose 
weight over time (Davies et al., 2000; Heaney, 2003). The target groups for these investigations 
are children and their long-term development (Carruth & Skinner, 2001; Skinner et al., 2003) 
and weight changes of overweight adults (Davies et al., 2000; Vergnaud et al., 2008; Zemel et al., 
2005; Zemel et al., 2000). For the trails, dairy products like yogurt or milk have been used as a 
source of calcium, but the specific mechanism could not be identified. Further research is 
required to endorse the role of calcium in weight management and to verify the mechanism as 
just assumptions are made about the ability of fat synthesis and fat breakdown (Zemel et al., 
2005). 
CARIES 
Another commonly associated connection of calcium is an adequate intake inversely with caries 
and periodontitis. The lifetime costs estimated in 2003 for cavities were for anterior teeth, 
premolars and molars €1,594, €1,879, and €1,949 respectively (Dental Data, 2004). Costs, 
which can be potentially saved, if a healthy calcium intake makes a difference. 
Studies investigating on this matter are preferably undertaken in Denmark, as the 
characteristics and properties of the groundwater aquifers vary regionally, but the 
circumstances are apart from this similar. Findings from Bruvo et al. (2008) showed that the 
fluoride concentration is usually much higher in Danish drinking water than in the aqueous 
environment of the dental tissues. Fluoride from the water has under these circumstances 
protective properties against caries. They speculate that calcium from drinking water favors 
remineralization and reduces demineralization in early caries lesions. Another effect may be the 
diffusion of calcium into plaque and provide extra binding sites for fluoride. The prerequisite of 
these positive happenings is the concentration of free calcium. It must be higher in drinking 
water than in saliva. Calculations and data show that the average concentration of free calcium 
in Danish drinking water is four times and in some areas more than seven times higher than in 
human saliva. Protective effects and remineralization related to the mineral uptakes were 
suggested to occur upon frequent exposure to such drinking water (Bruvo et al., 2008). 
The study is using Mills (1937) pioneer research among 75 cities in the US, having the highest 
drinking water hardness as an indirect measure of high calcium concentrations. It associates this 
to the lowest decayed, missing, and filled surfaces (DMF-S). Same accounts for the results of 
Glass, Rothman, Espinal, Velez, & Smith (1973), as they investigated in 2 isolated villages in 
Colombia, South America, and identified calcium as caries-protective in drinking water.  
Another study is examining gender differences in tooth loss influenced by caries risk and 
sources of dietary calcium intake. The results showed that dietary calcium intake, particular 
calcium from dairy products, seems to protect against loss of teeth in adult men and women and 
differences can be drawn from caries risk between genders (Adegboye et al., 2013). 
ATOPIC DERMATITIS 
Atopic dermatitis is a long-term, relapsing inflammatory skin disease characterized by dry and 
itchy skin, rashes on the face, inside the elbows, behind the knees and on hands and feet. The 
disease outbreak is most common in babies and children (NIH, 2014). In addition to genetic 
factors, exogenous skin stressors can limit skin barrier function and increase the risk. The causes 
and development of atopic dermatitis are incompletely understood, but both primary skin 
barrier abnormality and immune dysregulation can result in an outbreak (Weidinger & Novak, 
2012). An alternative factor standing out can be climatic conditions, such as low ambient 
humidity, low temperature, and a reduction in UV irradiation, as they negatively affect the skin 
barrier and increase the risk of eczema (NIH, 2014).  
==PAGE:41==
 
 
 
 
37 
 
Another suggested explanation for eczema relative to hard water is that increased soap usage in 
hard water results in metal or soap salt residues on the skin (or on clothes) that are not easily 
rinsed off and that leads to contact irritation (World Health Organization, 2011). Additional to 
this water is known to be a skin-irritant, and hard water might increase this effect (T. S. Wang & 
Tsai, 2014). 
Based on these assumptions Engebretsen et al. (2016), conducted a study investigating in 
Denmark, where the winter is cold, the ambient humidity is low and few hours of sunlight are 
normal. The subjects of interest are the most vulnerable target group: newborns. Although 
children, which were born in the fall and winter had an increased occurrence, being exposed to 
hard domestic water and having a fall/winter birth did not have a synergistic effect. In 
conclusion, a dose-response relationship between local water hardness and the risk of atopic 
dermatitis within the first 18 months of life was shown.  
A study of McNally et al. (1998) investigated on water hardness as a cause of atopic eczema. It is 
known to be a risk factor, but actual causes are unknown. The research dealt with 
schoolchildren and concluded that chlorine has a minor significance, but exposure to hard water 
in the home may increase the risk of eczema in children of primary-school age (McNally et al., 
1998). 
HYPOCALCAEMIA 
The excessive accumulation of body calcium in blood or tissues is virtually unknown, but the 
option exists and bears the risk of several diseases. The accumulation of calcium occurs because 
of either increased mobilization of calcium from bone or decreased glomerular filtration in the 
kidneys. To result in a serious condition more than one mechanism is usually involved.  
A local failure of this system emerges in the deposition of calcium salts. This can cause severe 
damage in case of circulating calcium stones and the deposition of calcium salts in many tissues 
including the heart and kidneys. General disturbance of the calcium control mechanisms can 
result in hypercalcemia, an enriched blood calcium concentration. The symptoms can vary from 
anorexia and nausea to vomiting, muscle weakness, generalized itchiness and excessive thirst 
and urination. Depending on the heaviness of the onset of the condition confusion or stupor may 
occur and is followed by Kidney failure if no treatment is given (Theobald, 2005). 
CALCIUM STONE FORMATION 
The deposition of calcium salts most commonly occurs in the kidneys. The statistic says that 
between 1 and 5% of the population in the developed world suffer from kidney stones at some 
point. The most common type of stones contains calcium. The probability for men with 
occurrence being 50% greater than in women (Theobald, 2005). The calcium stone formation is 
initiated by nanobacteria disease, diet, and other factors stimulate stone growth (Ciftcioglu et al., 
1999). Dietary calcium, in this case, from not oxalate- rich food like fruits and vegetables 
decreases the risk and can, depending on the kind of mineral, prevent stone formation. A high 
intake of oxalate and animal protein calcium increases the risk (Curhan et al., 2004). Also, 
supplements have been suggested in trials to increase the risk, conceivably because the calcium 
was consumed as a bolus with no addition of food or because the recipients already reached the 
upper daily limit (World Health Organization, 2011). 
Sialolithiasis or salivary stones are another form of calcium deposition, occurring in the mouth 
or neck region. Since the residues of sialolithiasis are comprised mainly of calcium phosphate 
salts, Schroder et al. (2015) tested the hypothesis that drinking water calcium levels and other 
elements in drinking water could play a role in sialolithiasis. In Denmark, 5.5 cases per 100,000 
==PAGE:42==
 
 
 
 
38 
 
citizens of hospital-admitted sialolithiasis were registered. Strong relations were found between 
the incidence of sialolithiasis and the drinking water concentration of calcium and magnesium. 
Therefore, the minerals may play a significant role in sialolithiasis and may serve as a 
precondition for the disease. These findings are of interest because many countries have started 
large-scale desalination programs of drinking water (Schroder et al., 2015). 
When comparing these observations with those of other studies, the incidence and municipality 
variation of hospital-admitted sialolithiasis were higher in Denmark than in the UK and 
Germany. This might be of concern, as in the municipalities with the highest calcium levels in 
drinking water, the contribution may up to 40% of the average intake among Danes. This value 
is much less in the western municipalities (Schroder et al., 2015). 
6.4. OTHER EFFECTS OF CALCIUM IN DRINKING WATER 
For completing the pictures of analysis and open the restricted view on health, some other 
aspects regarding other properties of calcium should be mentioned. The features of health are 
the leading arguments for a funded remineralization, the other characteristics of calcium are 
reasons why softening is suggested.  
The main properties, which play in role in deciding on a hardness level are according to Rygaard, 
Arvin, Bath, & Binning (2011) corrosion of appliances. The high mineral content of water affects 
the lifetime of household appliances such as water heaters, kettles, washing machines and dish 
washers (Ragan, Young, & Makela, 2000). But also of the distribution devices and especially the 
piping system is profoundly affected by the salinity of the water flowing through (Characklis, 
2004).  
Furthermore, the soap consumption and dosage of any detergent is related to the hardness of 
water and increases with the level. It is an additional monetary effort and harmful for the 
environment (Rygaard, Arvin, & Binning, 2010). A visual side effect of hard water and other 
factors, such as pH and alkalinity is scale deposition. This occurs not just in the water 
distribution system but also in heated water applications where insoluble metal carbonates are 
formed. The coating of surfaces presumably reduces the efficiency of heat exchangers (World 
Health Organization, 2011).  
A concern is the acceptance of the citizens of the locations impacted by softening and some 
chemical treatment. Denmark has a long tradition of a great basin of unpolluted groundwater, 
which is with a minor treatment at drinking water quality. The change to softened water and the 
chemical process of removing minerals, might lead to skepticism in Copenhagen’s population 
and lead to an increased consumption of bottled water (Rygaard et al., 2011).  
Other than this the additional costs of soft water production and possible remineralization need 
to be carried by the population through an increased water price. The production costs are 
funded on analysis and feasibility studies of different alternatives (Marsden Jacob Associates, 
2007). The necessity of remineralization has to be proven in the ordinary process as potential 
health effects are dependent on a few minerals that can be reintroduced when needed (Birnhack 
& Lahav, 2007). Lastly, CO2 emissions through the additional step in water treatment should be 
considered as life cycle assessments show that electricity consumption in dominating the 
environmental impact of water production (Munoz & Fernandez-Alba, 2008). 
Harrison (2006) addresses the distinct difference between naturally soft water and softened 
water and stresses that conclusions drawn from any natural soft or hard water cannot be 
==PAGE:43==
 
 
 
 
39 
 
conveyed, as the properties of softened water are very different. This is a rather new topic, and 
more research needs to be conducted on the manipulated mineral content of softened water.  
A positive example of a softening project is found in the Netherlands, where the operators report 
on the benefits of softening water quality and the ability to control corrosion in water systems in 
the Netherlands. A minimum hardness of 1.0 mmol/L is foreseen from the operators (Hofman et 
al., 2006). In this context, the possibility of remineralization of beverages is discussed with their 
technical feasibility at low cost and that calcium-fortified beverages are already available. 
Considerable factors are consumer taste preferences as they are especially for water an 
important limiting factor (Cotruvo, 2006). 
The following paragraphs will elaborate on the features of corrosion caused by calcium and the 
taste implications. 
TASTE OF CALCIUM 
The latest technologies allow membrane filtration of ground, surface, or sea water by reverse 
osmosis results in permeate, which is almost free of all undesirable compounds and pathogens. 
It removes all contaminants at the molecular level but is therefore also almost free from 
minerals, and negative taste effects can be expected (MacRae & Geelhoed, 1992; Marcussen, 
Holm, & Hansen, 2013). Although many people expect their drinking water to be flavorless, 
natural and processed drinking waters have flavors due to minerals and organics, which are 
considered natural, fresh or good in the individual's gusto. Consumer surveys about the taste of 
water are an important factor to evaluate the satisfaction with water and many associates the 
taste to the properties of the water to its quality. Surveys show that most of the people choose 
bottled water because of taste and just a minor percentage because of safety reasons (Dietrich, 
2006). 
The motivation to add minerals afterward is not only to comply with legal standards and to 
enhance chemical stability, but also to improve the taste of drinking water made from 
permeates. The taste of water is influenced by nature and the concentrations of added minerals 
and in turn its acceptance by consumers (Vingerhoeds et al., 2016). Factors, which are 
increasing the acceptability are personal experiences, memory, and external stimuli. 
Physiological factors include biochemistry, physical body factors, health, and external factors 
such as humidity, temperature. Some of them can be influenced by the drinking water 
distributor (Dietrich, 2006). 
So far, remineralization is commonly used for reducing the corrosion-aggressiveness of water, 
but nowadays public health related arguments and taste improvement gain more importance. 
The results of studies and trial about the taste are interesting to consider in these points and its 
effects on the consumers. Most investigations come to the results that remineralization of water 
after reverse osmosis can improve drinking quality and its acceptability significantly. In general, 
the amount of total dissolved solids is correlated with the perception of the freshness of the 
water. The lower the content of TDS the more taste panels perceived the water towards bitter, 
dry, and rough sensations. Perceived freshness of the water is correlated positively with calcium 
concentration. In this study by Vingerhoeds et al. (2016) magnesium was not associated with 
any sensory attributes. Taste properties of drinking water are largely determined by cations like 
K, Na, Ca, Mg, etc., whereas anions like Cl, NO3-, SO4 2-, etc. tend to modify its taste intensity 
(Marcussen et al., 2013). Minerals in regular drinking water are present at levels around the 
sensory threshold levels and are thus weakly perceptible. However, the mineral content of 
permeate water is a central adjustable factor and needs to be regulated when the ambition is to 
produce high-quality drinking water (Vingerhoeds et al., 2016). 
==PAGE:44==
 
 
 
 
40 
 
Drinking water can be a major source of micronutrients such as copper or other metals. 
Although, a copper concentration exceeding about 4 mg/l gastrointestinal upset, are detectable 
through bad taste, and even toxicity can occur (Olivares, Araya, Pizarro, & Uauy, 2001; Pizarro et 
al., 1999). Another noticeable factor is the conditioning for specific chemicals. It is the case in the 
US, where the water is precautionary disinfected with chlorine and some people do not consider 
water safe to drink unless it has a residual chlorine odor (Piriou, Mackey, Suffet, & Bruchet, 
2004).  
CORROSION 
A very deterministic problem caused by excessively hard and soft water is corrosion. Not 
chemically stabilized soft water has great potential to cause corrosion of metal on surfaces and 
pipes. It can dissolve metals into the water, subsequently resulting in the presence of certain 
heavy metals, such as cadmium, copper, lead, and zinc, in drinking-water (National Research 
Council, 1977).  
The outcome of corrosion can eventually constitute a threat to health from leachates such as 
lead, copper and other metals and reduced lifespan of the distribution network and appliances 
using water (World Health Organization, 2011). 
Ragan, Young, & Makela (2000) investigated on devices, which are most affected by salinity in 
residential water supplies in Colorado, where the salinity ranges from 100 to 3600 mg/L. Not all 
appliances, but dishwashers, water heaters, garbage disposers, water softeners and evaporative 
coolers showed statistically significant reductions in service life with increasing salinity and 
inherited evitable costs.  
To minimize the potential for corrosion the use of stainless steel and polymer materials is 
steadily growing in drinking water installations. In Denmark, the national distribution network 
is primarily built from PE, PVC, cast iron and smaller amounts of cement based materials and 
steel, but in other parts of Europe, copper pipes are still widely used, whereas the use of hot dip 
galvanized steel pipes is decreasing. In domestic water installations, the use of stainless steel 
and polymer materials gains popularity, and almost all new installations use these materials 
(Hilbert et al., 2010).  
The current evaluation of pipe material is based on geographical areas of typical water types and 
component approval testing (Hilbert et al., 2010). 
6.5. QUANTITATIVE BENEFIT ANALYSIS 
For the quantitative analysis of the benefits of calcium, the beforehand described risks are 
monetized using the disability adjusted life years (DALY) as a tool to measure the impairments. 
For this, the DALY of Denmark was taken from the global health estimates 2016 published by 
WHO (World Health Organization, 2016). This value was multiplied by the annual rate 
(€34,893) of the average European for the Value of Statistical Life (VSL) (€3,210,120) 
(European Commission, 2015) assuming the 92 years of life expectancy used in the set-up of the 
DALY (World Health Organization, 2017b). This is e.g. for Osteoporosis and bone health with a 
DALY of 27.9 the calculation: €3,210,120 / 92 years * 27.9 years = €973,504. This equals the 
costs of society. Important to notice is the fact that the costs should be interpreted as avoidable 
costs if the deficit or excess not occur.  
The separation was conducted between the repercussions of deficient and excessive intake of 
calcium and sums up the costs, which can be caused by the disease. The distinction of excess and 
deficit in quantitative terms is not an easy task, as literature debates about it. As seen in Table 3 
==PAGE:45==
 
 
 
 
41 
 
the WHO recommends values between 1,000 and 1,300 mg/day for almost all age groups. Also, 
most other current guidelines recommend that older adults and the elderly (one of the most 
vulnerable groups) strive for a total calcium intake of 1,000 to 1,300 mg/day to prevent 
osteoporosis and fractures  (Daly & Ebeling, 2010). Intakes above 1,300 mg/day start being an 
excess and everything below 1,000 mg/day is theoretically already a deficit. This point is 
controversially found in the literature, as above 1000 mg/day reduction of bone loss in 
postmenopausal women (Storm et al., 1998), reduction of colorectal cancer risk for both 
genders (Flood et al., 2005; McCullough et al., 2003; Sellers et al., 1998; Wu et al., 2002), reduced 
risk of cardiovascular disease (Denke et al., 1993; Ian R. Reid et al., 2002; L. Wang et al., 2012) 
and 3% weight loss (Davies et al., 2000) can occur, but an increase of prostate cancer risk above 
600 mg/day (Chan et al., 2000) was also recorded. Therefore, the categorization of deficit 
includes all diseases from which calcium can protect and excess includes the diseases calcium 
can cause. 
The creation of the tables does not go without assumptions, as the direct translation from the 
diseases and their probability to an amount in Euros is not possible. In this case, the ambiguity of 
illness was solved through the addition of both tables as in regard to cardiovascular diseases. 
Furthermore, all diseases-mentioned above were added to the calculations, even though the 
joints are questionable and not entirely proven by science (e.g. breast cancer and kidney stones). 
The obtained DALYs are the closest to the actual diseases, but sometimes very general and 
include more effects than just the ones potentially caused by a wrong calcium consumption (e.g. 
hypocalcemia and carries). The assumptions are not considered misleading as it implies a worst-
case scenario and maybe increases the severity of diseases but can be justified with a decent 
precautionary principle.   
TABLE 6 COSTS OF SOCIETY FOR DISEASES CAUSED BY A CALCIUM DEFICIT 
Diseases caused by a 
calcium deficit 
DALY Denmark 
Name in DALY 
Cost 
of 
DALY/ 
Cost of society in 
Euro 
Osteoporosis and bone 
health 
27.9 
Other musculoskeletal 
disorders 
973,504 
Colon and rectum cancer 
48.4 
Colon and rectum 
cancers 
1,688,802 
Breast cancer 
40.8 
Breast cancer 
1,423,618 
Cardiovascular disease 
341.6 
Cardiovascular diseases 
11,919,315 
Preeclampsia 
0.5 
Maternal conditions 
17,446 
Weight Management 
- 
Not mentioned 
- 
Carries 
3 
Other oral disorders 
104,678 
Kidney stones 
15.1 
Kidney disease 
526,878 
 
 
Sum 
16,654,242 
 
 
 
==PAGE:46==
 
 
 
 
42 
 
TABLE 7 COSTS OF SOCIETY FOR DISEASES CAUSED BY CALCIUM EXCESS 
Diseases caused 
by a calcium 
excess 
DALY Denmark 
Name in DALY 
Cost 
of 
DALY/ 
Cost of society in 
Euro 
Prostate cancer 
22.1 
Prostate Cancer 
771,127 
Cardiovascular 
disease 
341.6 
Cardiovascular diseases 
11,919,315 
Hypertension 
and blood 
pressure 
regulation 
(5.8) 
Hypertensive heart 
disease, but sub category 
of CVD 
- 
Atopic 
dermatitis 
11.6 
Skin diseases 
404,754 
Hypocalcaemia 
0.7 
Other nutritional 
deficiencies 
24,425 
Calcium stone 
formation 
15.1 
Kidney diseases  
526,878 
 
 
Sum 
13,646,499 
 
These findings symbolize the scenarios of increased or decreased calcium amounts in the Danish 
tap water. The different sums of deficit 16,654,242 Euro and excess 13,646,499 Euro indicate 
that it is monetary wise more beneficial to avoid a deficit of calcium, which means that a 
minimum amount of calcium in drinking water would support this argumentation and secure a 
lower limit of intake if potable water is consumed.  
 
==PAGE:47==
 
 
 
 
43 
 
7. UNCERTAINTY ANALYSIS 
The results of the RBA are subject to considerable uncertainties, particularly those related to 
health impacts, and future water production costs. A decision-making process will benefit from 
an improved understanding of these issues (Rygaard et al., 2011). 
An uncertainty analysis (UA) is a tool used to account for uncertainties by identifying and 
categorizing them. They are often considered as problems in the data derivation. The UA is used 
as a recognition of uncertainties, as they exist in practically all policy-making and decision-
making situations. The analysis can supplement policy analysis, environmental and human risk 
assessment, environmental impact assessment, cost-benefit analysis or a risk-benefit analysis. 
Uncertainties can be categorized into different dimensions, characteristics, magnitudes, and 
means of dealing with them (Walker et al., 2003). 
A range of different approaches to UA exist, and in this thesis, the method presented in Walker et 
al., (2003) is used. It provides a conceptual framework for a wholesome analysis of uncertainties 
to achieve a good overview of consequences and scenarios (Walker et al., 2003). 
As the first step of a UA, a boundary should be set to level out how much certainty is needed to 
follow up on an activity or, on the contrary, to restrict it. In doing so, the distinction between the 
modelers’ view and the decision makers’ view should be made. For the modeler, the focuses lie 
on the gathered uncertainties associated with the outcomes and how they influence any 
conclusion. A particular security should be guaranteed to support the decision-making. For the 
decision- or policy maker, the result must consider the effort, long-term goals and how valuable 
they are. Right now, the decisions about environmental impacts or population’s health are 
weighted against economic costs and benefits. In this case, the decision support is conducted 
from the modelers’ side and might be used from a decision-making perspective at some point 
(Walker et al., 2003).  
7.1. DEFINITION AND MEASUREMENT  
Uncertainty cannot simply be explained by the absence of knowledge, but can also occur when a 
lot of information is available. This might be unsatisfactory knowledge, which can be 
characterized in three sorts: inexactness, unreliability, and the border with ignorance 
(Funtowicz & Ravetz, 1990).  
Walker et al. (2003) define the general definition of uncertainty as Any deviation from the 
unachievable ideal of completely deterministic knowledge of the relevant system. In their 
introduction to the conceptual basis for uncertainty management they propose to distinguish 
uncertainties in three dimensions namely: 
Location - where the uncertainty manifests itself within the model complex,  
Level - how the uncertainty manifests itself along the spectrum between deterministic 
knowledge and total ignorance, 
Nature - whether the uncertainty is due to the imperfection of our knowledge or is due to the 
inherent variability of the phenomena being described. 
7.2. UNCERTAINTIES IN THE SETTING OF A MINIMUM VALUE FOR 
MINERALS 
For the collection of the uncertainties, they suggest incorporating uncertainties based on the 
three dimensions of a matrix. The matrix provides the framework for classification, reporting, 
==PAGE:48==
 
 
 
 
44 
 
and helps to visualize the working points to all involves parties like analysts, stakeholders, and 
decision-makers. 
Understanding the various dimensions of uncertainty helps in identifying, articulating, 
and prioritizing critical uncertainties, which is a crucial step to an adequate 
acknowledgment and treatment of uncertainty in decision support endeavors and more 
focused research on complex, inherently uncertain, policy issues (Walker et al., 2003). 
The summarized uncertainties which add to the findings are displayed below in Table 8 and 
discussed in the following paragraph.  
TABLE 8 UNCERTAINTY MATRIX TO SUPPORT THE DECISION-MAKING PROCESS OF IMPLEMENTING A MINIMUM 
VALUE FOR MINERALS 
Location 
 
Level 
Nature 
 
Statistical 
uncertainty 
Recognized 
ignorance 
Epistemic 
uncertainty 
Variability 
uncertainty 
Context 
Development of 
water sources 
 
x 
x 
 
Legislation 
 
x 
x 
 
Focus on health 
 
x 
x 
 
Decision for DALY 
and VSL 
x 
 
x 
 
Model 
structure  
DALY, YLL and YDL 
methodology 
x 
 
x 
 
Individual needs of 
minerals  
x 
 
 
x 
Actual toxicity 
levels and levels of 
disease break-out 
x 
 
 
x 
Intake of water, 
Variance from ideal 
case 
 
x 
x 
 
Exposure-Outcome 
x 
 
 
x 
Inputs 
Other sources of 
mineral intake 
 
x 
 
x 
Change of water 
properties  
 
x 
x 
 
Model 
outcome 
Levels of disease 
break-out 
x 
 
 
x 
Perception of 
people 
 
x 
 
x 
 
For the holistic analysis of risks and benefits, those aspects need to be considered, which remain 
uncertain and are points for further investigation or acceptance. The categorization is based on 
the location of context, model structure, inputs, and model outcome. A further division factor is 
the level to identify and understand the uncertainty, which may vary from not knowing, knowing 
to literally ignoring.  The last classification of the uncertainty refers to its nature, which can be 
==PAGE:49==
 
 
 
 
45 
 
epistemic, due to the limitation of our knowledge, or variability, due to the foundation in human 
and natural systems.  
CONTEXT 
The context identifies the system’s boundaries and describes the conditions and circumstances. 
It is framing the issue regarding economic, environmental, political, social, and technological 
situations: 
 
Development of water sources – The question of the technology used in the future and 
how can differences in regional standardized treatment methods be overcome, is 
undetermined.  
 
Legislation – The decision- and policy-making process is time consuming. The setting of 
minimum standards may be influenced by many factors and follows a process with 
multiple steps which need to be taken. 
 
Focus on health – Other aspects which can potentially support a decision in any of the 
suggested directions, are predominantly neglected in this analysis.  
 
Decision for DALY and VSL – The properties of these methods set the focus of the 
analysis.  
All decisions are based on recognized ignorance and epistemic uncertainty, based on the 
mechanisms and functional relationships, knowingly taken. Those uncertainties deal with 
the imperfection of knowledge and made decisions, which neglect other aspects. These 
points can be further elaborated, investigated or may shift the focus to achieve a better 
understanding.  
MODEL STRUCTURE 
The model structure connects to a lack of sufficient knowledge of the system and applied 
modeling. It includes the current behaviors, the future evolution and can be caused by any 
interrelations of its input, variables and output:  
 
DALY, YLL and YDL methodology – The method inherits many assumptions and specific 
angles. It is known to be not very specific and might be too general to include all groups 
of population. 
 
Individual needs of minerals – The values can be determined in a rough range, but the 
actual requirements are dependent on personal living circumstances, conditions and 
vary throughout population groups. 
 
Actual toxicity levels–  The uncertainties regarding different toxicity levels for groups at 
risks and the levels of disease break-out are dependent on many individual 
circumstances.  
 
Intake of water, Variance from ideal case – The amount of drinking water varies and can 
fall below or exceed the recommended consumption of water. Therefore, estimates of 
the mineral intake are not accurate. 
 
Exposure-Outcome – What outcome is caused by the minerals cannot be determined 
immediately but is dependent on composition of water, bioavailability of the mineral, 
and the medical history of the consumer. 
In this category, the uncertainties are related to the health related issues, the main topic of 
the model, thus, measurement and statistical uncertainties apply. Variability uncertainty 
dominates the individual needs, toxicity levels, disease break-out and the exposure-outcome, 
as the implications on health are rather inherent and originate in the natural system. The 
methodology inherits statistical uncertainties, due to the system and the inability to reflect 
==PAGE:50==
 
 
 
 
46 
 
the true values. Only the uncertainty reagding water intake might be reduced due to more 
research and considerations of more factors in the derivation of data. To make more 
accurate propositions, the ignorance can be contracted with more data generation. 
INPUT 
Input links external driving forces with the description of the reference system, which is often 
the status quo. It includes driving forces that produce changes in the system and system data, 
which drive the model. Typically, this it is generated by a lack of the properties or the 
weaknesses of the description of choice.   
 
Other sources of mineral intake – The mineral intake happens not just through water, 
but also nutrition in the form of food. Its content and value varies daily and can collide 
with the intake of water.  
 
Change of water properties  – The properties of water can change due to the chemically 
manipulated water. This can include organoleptic properties but can also go beyond.   
The driving forces or system data are the mechanisms, which can interrupt and change the 
system. This means that other sources of mineral intake can reduce the importance of 
remineralization of water. It can be investigated more thoroughly for the particular places, 
but the unpredictable variations will remain. The change of properties can have an essential 
role in the acceptance of tap water and is another mechanism, which can be investigated and 
mitigated through more research and experience. 
MODEL OUTCOME 
Model outcome gathers the uncertainty associated with the model results. It reflects the 
outcomes of interest and can be seen as a prediction error. It is the discrepancy between the true 
value of an outcome and the predicted value.  
 
Levels of disease break-out – The levels are mainly unknown, due to measuring issues 
and uncertain factors related to human science. Therefore, all decisions taken can have 
consequences, which at this point, no one can foresee.  
 
Perception of people – The perception of tap water can change, due to the customs of 
people and the forced adaptation. Even though changes in behavior  can happen, they are 
very  unpredictable. 
For the model outcome, the interesting aspects are related to human and health. Therefore, 
they are again statistically uncertain and inherent variability. The nature lies in human 
systems, individual needs and circumstances. The perception of people is a known and an 
important factor when it comes to the acceptance of changes. The ignorance can be reduced 
as further research will increase the understanding of populations’ needs, but as long as 
humans are involved, always some uncertainties will remain.  
 
==PAGE:51==
 
 
 
 
47 
 
8. DISCUSSION 
Many controversies and points for discussion were mentioned previously. In this part, some of 
the issues will be elaborated further, and an attempt will be made to answer the question:   
How can a recommended level of drinking water minerals be 
established in the future? 
The remineralization of drinking water is an enrichment with minerals and be a tool to provide 
sufficient calcium and other minerals to the world public in their total diet. Potentially this is a 
cost effective, widespread, policy following and desirable method.  
Some policy and methodological aspects have to be taken into consideration when attempting to 
answer this question.  
8.1. POLICY MAKING, WATER TREATMENT AND IMPLICATIONS ON 
HUMAN HEALTH 
The first point to keep in mind is that the maximum values for drinking water minerals in 
Europe are based on toxicity, taste, or aesthetical amounts to avoid any negative implications 
caused by drinking water. The regular check-up on the minerals allows, in theory, to comply 
with new findings of science and research. The set regulations must be suitable for many 
different circumstances and living conditions, which make any changes on European level hard 
to carry through. From the regulatory perspective, an innovation like binding minimum values 
requests much more scientific proof of the favorable implications, the insufficient intake and the 
need to be viable for the European countries. Therefore, just excellent reasoning would justify a 
decision to install and put minimum values of essential minerals in the European legislation into 
practice. 
Another feature to have in mind is that technology has a vast impact on how water treatments 
are conducted in the different parts of the world. Comparing the examples from Brøndby and 
Oasen with Orange County and Sorek show the important differences in mineral content. The 
changes of mineral content allow waterworks to clear the water, not only by reverse osmosis but 
also multiple barriers are very efficient. The monitoring of the water quality in combination with 
the treatment steps indicate the influence any remineralization has on the mineral content 
delivered to the consumer. So far, the suppliers have the maximum values and safeguard them, 
but also a binding minimum value for facilities, which already have the processes in place, is 
feasible and will not require much effort to fulfill.  
The third aspect of the analysis is the effects on human health. For this, calcium was analyzed in 
detail regarding the potential diseases of over- and under consumption. This way of doing was 
applied through the summary of potential costs the society has to carry. Summing up the tables 
the conclusion can be made that avoiding a deficiency of calcium is more profitable than 
avoiding an excess. This is also supported by the literature review, as more studies, which stress 
the protective features of calcium than on the topic of calcium causing diseases were found. And 
even if the diseases and probabilities were not illustrated accurate, the trend becomes apparent. 
Neglected aspects are the other properties, which play a role in the decision-making, like any 
mechanical changes in the distribution system or water treatment facilities. For a more thorough 
analysis, those aspects have to be included.  
Anyhow, the ambiguity of any epidemiological findings becomes apparent as the results are very 
controversial, point out different aspects and set their focuses on other characteristics. It shows 
how wide the influences of calcium can reach. Potentially some groups are at a greater risk to 
==PAGE:52==
 
 
 
 
48 
 
suffer from insufficient intake of calcium than others. The range set for an optimal amount must 
be satisfactory for all population groups.  
A point, which should be on the agenda, is the unclear connection between drinking water 
calcium and the overall intake from other sources. The intake is just partly covered by water, but 
the local amounts in drinking water play a significant role. Especially when it comes to such an 
important mineral as calcium, some say that fortification might be needless (Flynn et al., 2003; 
Richardson, 2007), consideration should be made anyway. Conclusion making for a well-studies 
mineral like calcium is already complicated, much more research is needed for other minerals.  
Finally, it is of vital importance to keep the uncertainties regarding the changes in mind. The 
uncertainties include many aspects of health, which are either due to measurements, not an 
accurate representation or due to human science a factor, which will always inherit uncertain 
aspects. Other issues including the future changes and developments can be identified, and the 
risks reduced, due to more research, investigations or simply experience with the new systems.  
Often are the factors, which can be identified and reduced due to more work choices of the 
framework of this thesis, human behavior or mechanical issues.  
8.2. FINDINGS 
Along the way, the current water quality criteria in Europe, different treatment methods and the 
minerals manipulation, health implications and their critical amounts and uncertainties related 
to benefits or risks from drinking water minerals were illustrated and discussed. But the 
research question of How can an optimal/recommended level of drinking water 
minerals be established in the future? has yet to be answered. 
The establishment of a minimum amount of minerals is a complicated matter, as there will be no 
absolute right way to do so. The approach to combine a thorough literature review and with a 
quantification method, which is, in this case, risk-benefit analysis, is advisable, but it is more an 
elaboration and not the ultimate method. The quality of outcome highly depends on the 
availability of data and as this is a significant uncertainty in this context. For now, it was a big 
challenge to find a way to embrace and deal with it. Many assumptions and inclusions were 
done, as it is in this context better to choose a conservative and therefore safe approach and in 
doubt, to include all sides to draw a complete picture.  
The findings obtained can be used as a first step towards a decision making for or against a 
minimum standard. It should not be neglected that drinking water distributed to almost all 
household in Europe has a strong voice and is a powerful tool to influence the mineral intake. 
Therefore, in regions in which the people suffer from malnutrition, the amounts of minerals in 
the body should be monitored to identify deficits. Additionally, the findings in chapter 4.2 agreed 
that a fortification of selenium is possible and eventually further research would also verify if 
this is also possible with copper, iodine, and phosphorus.  
In the case of calcium, the value of 120 mg/l in Brøndby contributed in the ideal case in average 
to 30.3 % to the desired intake, in Sorek the amount of 36.7 mg/l to approximately 9.3 %. As the 
RBA showed the trend to aim for the avoidance of deficiency would save the society a sum of 
about 3 million Euros. Therefore, a minimum value securing at least 10 % up until 20 % should 
be a good starting point. This translates into calcium values of 39.5 – 79 mg/l at a decreased 
level of water hardness in the Danish context.  
Fortification with minerals can achieve the most success as a combination of the 
abovementioned approaches depending on each society’s needs and habits. One element, which 
==PAGE:53==
 
 
 
 
49 
 
accounts for almost all measures and changes, is the education of the people and medical and 
public health communities about nutritional needs and benefits. The knowledge of the 
composition of consumed foods water and beverages is essential to make informed choices and 
draws the attention to under- and over-consumption of minerals for individuals and in 
particular circumstances, as this is the basis to create false assumptions about e.g. the danger of 
drinking tap water. 
8.3. PROS AND CONS OF RBA, DALY, AND VSL 
The findings in this thesis are based on RBA, and it is important to have the fact that the 
methodology neglects some aspects of accuracy and details but highlights others.  
As applied in this thesis, RBA helps to reflect on the qualitative and quantitative benefits and 
threats of calcium. It is a tool to assess not just the economic and environmental aspects, but also 
take societal and ethical risks as valuable points to make decisions, and hence RBA is considered 
a useful tool for focus-setting on all aspects of health and make this a point to consider in 
decision-making.  
A methodological disadvantage of the RBA is that the analysis of the risks and benefits require 
data, which is based on calculations of the probabilities of risk levels. Data availability is, 
therefore, a concern when calculating risk and obtaining this information. It is necessary to 
consult available data and historical studies, but in any case, uncertainties remain. Missing or 
lacking information on the risk associated with certain activities, is a major issue. Especially, if 
the conduction and quantification of health aspects of minerals are the first of its kind, it will not 
be easy to calculate an accurate risk level. The association with certain outcomes or the 
perceived risk, which has some major limitations, is hard to grasp. The revision of the RBA has to 
happen on a regular basis as risks, and perceived risks change over time (Wheatley, 2010).  
These concerns are present in this thesis, as the findings regarding health vary in its final 
judgment and the epidemiological studies come to very different conclusions. Any conclusions, 
drawn from the qualitative data, inherent uncertainties and are very dependent on the context 
of the study. For this work, it is a major issue, as just tendencies can be reflected. The judgment 
on the validity of studies and literature cannot be made in this amount of time, without prior 
knowledge. Even the smallest systematic variations can lead to very different results and 
conclusions of the studies. While analyzing calcium, it became apparent that literature supports 
almost every argument and the ambiguity of research came through.  
Apart from this, the choice of risk-benefit analysis supported the aim to weight between risks 
and benefits in cases, where the monetary aspect is not the focus. Especially when it comes to 
health is a pure cost-benefit analysis not adequate to reflect the multiple layers and light up the 
additional value of human perception (Karatzas, 2013; O’Brien, 2002). For a holistic 
investigation, it was beneficial to include a qualitative analysis as well as a quantitative analysis. 
Just the combination of both gave a picture about the uncertainty of diseases, affected people, 
regional differences, and severity.  
Small cross check-ups on other minerals revealed that the amount of information on calcium is 
outstandingly thorough and well covered. This is not the case for many other minerals, and 
therefore a decision making for other minerals based on a risk-benefit analysis might be difficult. 
Calcium is an essential mineral in the human body, and therefore many investigations have been 
conducted, but at no point, a judgment about the quality of literature was made. Without the in 
depth expertise, at what stage the research comes to very different conclusions about specific 
==PAGE:54==
 
 
 
 
50 
 
diseases, no exclusion can be done. Publications of epidemiological studies, with the same 
subject but various methods, focuses and findings leave questions open if a final decision can be 
drawn.  
It can be assumed at this point that this ambiguity is also the case for all other minerals, which 
have not been discussed in this thesis. The other minerals which should be investigated are the 
ones, which have essential roles in the human body or might tend to be of low intake through 
other sources. 
For the conduction of the RBA, the quantification tool of DALY is used and is consequently a key 
parameter. The measure of DALY as an indicator is consistent with a long line of work on fused 
indicators of non-fatal health outcomes and premature mortality and sums up a long 
development process. In order to compare DALYs by cause, age, sex, and region with other 
indicators. (Murray, 1994) 
The set of value choices for the DALY like the duration of life lost, the value of life lived at 
different ages, comparison of the time lived with a disability with the time lost due to mortality 
were adapted over time. The values have been finally selected to make it comparable to a wide 
range of environments and reflect a broad consensus among those practicing into national 
public health. A major advantage according to Murray (1994) is the inclusion of the time lived 
with a disability. The current global burden of disease due to disability shows that worldwide, 
about an eighth of life expectancy was associated with living with disability in 2013 (The Lancet, 
2015). This represents the chosen health implications well, as some have a potentially fatal 
outcome, but not all of them are as severe that they could be adequately measured with 
potential life years lost.  
Therefore, DALY is on the one side an excellent choice, but problematic on the other side. The 
necessary generalization and the missing accurate data on some specific diseases make the 
results blurry. In the case of the diseases of calcium, most of them do not have an exact 
equivalent in the DALY database like in the case, with kidney stones or calcium stone formation. 
In combination with other diseases, they sum up to one category kidney diseases, which includes 
both conditions.  
Furthermore, the DALY is not suitable to reflect the benefits in more detail, as it is unsuitable to 
take into account the potential life years added. For the showcasing of more comprehensive 
benefits, another tool has to be selected. 
Another important assumption made is that the probability of disease outbreak is not accounted 
again, but just included in the DALY value. It seems that the possibility to suffer from a disease is 
equal. It is, of course, a major limitation and should be elaborated further for a strong argument 
for a guideline formulation. The risk quantification of the disease potential in the RBA should 
weight the medical findings, which thus need to be more credible and convincing. 
Another essential element of RBA that is still a highly contentious subject in economic research 
is the value of statistical life (VSL). Putting a price on life is a widely discussed and researched 
topic. Having first encounters with the monetarization of human life shocks many, but 
government authorities may make those considerations in their decision-making process. This 
might be the case when for example a weighting must be conducted to close a health-threatening 
factory and quantify the job supply situation against any other decision regarding traffic, 
environment, and health. For this reason, VSL is perceived as a possible way to measure the 
economic implications of risk reduction.  
==PAGE:55==
 
 
 
 
51 
 
The utility associated with risk reduction must compensate the discomfort associated with the 
cost of reduction, so cost-benefit analyses are conducted.  
Nonetheless, the differences in pricing a life are questionable and vary from 2,660 to 20,000,000 
USD how Braathen (2012) at the OECD found out reviewing all, 1,095 values from 92 different 
studies. There are many ways to address the topic and derive an amount, in general, the 
methods used to determine the value of statistical life can be divided into three broad categories. 
These different approaches are summarized in Figure 6 and contain the cost of indemnisation or 
cost of compensation, the human capital and the willingness to pay or accept (WTP) (Braathen, 
2012). 
 
FIGURE 6 THREE APPROACHES TO DETERMINE THE VALUE OF A STATISTICAL LIFE (BOITEUX & BAUMSTARK, 
2001) 
For the European context, the VSL is derived by investigating individuals' WTP for a lower risk 
of mortality, divided by the risk reduction. As such, the VSL method does not measure the value 
of a life per se. Instead, it puts a monetary value on the willingness to accept slightly higher or 
lower levels of risk. The value of 3.6 million USD is the mean value founded on the OECD’s 
literature review and primary analysis. The average adult VSL for the EU is in the proposed 
range of 1.8 million to 5.4 million USD (Braathen, 2012). 
Another critique of the VSL is equal to DALY as it is considered constant across a lifetime and can 
cause conflicting results according to the demographics of the population found. There are years, 
which might be worth more than others, but also with this not necessarily everyone agrees. 
In this thesis, the choice was made to use DALY and VSL in combination as a general attempt to 
provide a measure of the quality of life through the combination of a measuring and monetary 
approach. It is not the most accurate, but the trend becomes evident and is the suitable choice in 
the wide range of measurements.  
 
 
==PAGE:56==
 
 
 
 
52 
 
9. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
9.1. CONCLUSION 
In order to conclude the potential guideline for a minimum value in the European context, a legal 
framework was initially elaborated. Notably, as the legislative decision-making is a lengthy 
process, any innovations and pioneering should not be expected on this stage. So far, no attempt 
to tackle a minimum amount as a precautionary measure is undertaken, but consequences from 
decreasing mineral content are mitigated. The key factor for changes must be either conscious or 
unconscious and pressured from research, the public or single countries. This can bring the 
policy-makers into the momentum of amending the legislation. However, the step of policy-
making is crucial to generate any change in the water supply system and to overcome any 
resistance evolving from water distributors.  
The increasing diversity in current treatment practices shows that the technology is developing 
faster than legal institutions. Thus, maintaining up-to-date guidelines is important to prevent 
control loss. The advanced technology used worldwide currently is mainly influenced by scarcity 
pressure and the need of alternative water sources. Most of the presented cases have some 
remineralization in place, which could be adjusted to a standardized level that consider health-
related implications. 
Regarding the health and mineral interplay, the currently dominating ambiguity in scientific 
findings prevents a definite recommendation. Nevertheless, drinking water has the potential to 
cover a recognizable amount of the mineral need. The investigated mineral in this research was 
calcium and the influenced factors focused on human health, but also displayed organoleptic and 
mechanical characteristics. Without further validation, neither the deficit nor excess intake can 
be disregarded. The conducted qualitative and quantitative risk-benefit analysis suggests an 
emphasis on the insufficient intake of calcium. With a difference of 3 million Euros, the 
prevention of the deficit seems to be more profitable.  
Even if the proper intake through tap water cannot be determined for every person in Europe, it 
can be the tool to achieve a minimum amount of calcium. The amount in distributed drinking 
water is suggested between 39.5 – 79 mg/l. This range is a fair compromise for the benefits of 
health and can incorporate mechanical and economic impacts.   
By regulating the content of minerals in minimum and maximum ranges, the natural 
composition of water is imitated as the complex processes remove many minerals. Many 
changes of technology are unnoticed by the public due to lack of information about water 
treatment. Therefore, any decrease in the mineral content through an additional reverse 
osmosis treatment or softening of water has an impact on the daily intake of various minerals. It 
is questionable whether this raises or supports certain reluctance in attitude and mind. Also, it is 
to be determined whether people will focus their opinion on the obviously noticeable benefits 
regarding less corrosion and scaling.  
Despite the European decision-makers might be unwilling and hesitant in establishing a 
minimum guideline so far, there is still lack of pressure. The concept of minimum guidelines is 
not there yet, but the emerging technologies will change this attitude. Necessary steps to protect 
and help the public from under consumption can be expected. 
==PAGE:57==
 
 
 
 
53 
 
9.2. RECOMMENDATIONS 
This research has given suggestions on optimal mineral level ranges. However, some additional 
questions can be discussed and for further elaboration. As such, the following recommendations 
support further research. 
Recommendation 1: Conduct an RBA on other minerals  
Selenium is a suitable mineral and a fortification can improve the general intake level. The 
possibility of a fortification technology has to be explored, as the remineralization with calcium 
is widely spread and not common for selenium or other minerals (e.g. copper, iodine, and 
phosphorus). 
Recommendation 2: Verify the implications of mineral intake 
Regarding the benefits, studies must be conducted to investigate the evidence of assets and 
whether an increased intake carries negative implications. It helps to investigate, in controlled 
dietary or clinical studies, short or long-term effect of daily mineral intake increase in deficient 
population or risk groups.  
Recommendation 3: Add quantification of benefits 
Furthermore, the quality and reliability of RBA can improve with quantifiable benefits: The 
added life years and other benefits considered on the other side of the risks to make a holistic 
calculation.  
Recommendation 4: Sound results from studies 
Ideally research provides definite answers from epidemiological, nutritional, and biochemical 
studies. Regarding the conducted literature research, it is difficult to draw conclusions with 
certainty and without ambiguity of results.  
Recommendation 5: Research about mineral interplay 
If the remineralization process includes fortification methods of more than one mineral, the 
question of optimal combinations and of different minerals remains unanswered.  
Recommendation 6: Questioning and specification of recommended values 
Values, such as RNI/RDA/AI/UL require verification to proceed in future decisions. Health 
organizations should be transparent on how those values were derived. The values should vary 
throughout regions and have not been quantified in particular for the European context. Same 
accounts for the average intake of minerals through other sources and its uptake efficiency 
through the water.  
Recommendation 7: Research on effects of manipulated mineral content of water 
Another aspect of the investigation could be the technological aspects, starting with the 
differentiation of naturally soft water and technologically softened water. Natural soft water 
inherits different properties than  controlled technological water that preserves  positive aspects 
while avoiding negative ones. Studies on different water type consumptions show interesting 
results and add substantial value to this discussion. Mineral manipulation through softening, 
desalination or simply nanofiltration always includes chemical treatment and might change the 
water. It will then differ in the experience from almost untreated natural water. Especially in 
==PAGE:58==
 
 
 
 
54 
 
Denmark a drastic change from very hard water to softened water will bring changes, not just on 
the monetary side.  
Recommendation 8: Gain better understanding of inputs for RBA 
The results of the RBA depend on precise data to have a valuable and useful output. Many 
uncertainties regarding the actual health impacts as well as additional costs (e.g. future water 
productions) do exist. More knowledge about these topics can make the results more feasible.  
Recommendation 9: Open communication of water distributors and public:  
The awareness of the mineral composition of consumed foods and beverages is essential to 
make informed choices. This missing information is a significant aspect in any doubt about 
drinking water from the tap.  
 
 
==PAGE:59==
 
 
 
 
55 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 
 
Adegboye, A. R. A., Christensen, L. B., Holm-Pedersen, P., Avlund, K., Boucher, B. J., & Heitmann, B. 
L. (2013). Intakes of calcium, vitamin D, and dairy servings and dental plaque in older 
Danish adults. Nutrition Journal, 12(1), 61. https://doi.org/10.1186/1475-2891-12-61 
Allender, P. S., Cutler, J. A., Follmann, D., Cappuccio, F. P., Pryer, J., & Elliott, P. (1996). Dietary 
calcium and blood pressure: a meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Annals of 
Internal Medicine, 124(9), 825–831. 
Aloia, J. F., Vaswani, A., Yeh, J. K., Ross, P. L., Flaster, E., & Dilmanian, F. A. (1994). Calcium 
supplementation with and without hormone replacement therapy to prevent 
postmenopausal bone loss. Annals of Internal Medicine, 120(2), 97–103. 
American Thyroid Association. (2015). Iodine Deficiency. Retrieved June 20, 2017, from 
https://www.thyroid.org/iodine-deficiency/ 
Battarbee, H. D., & Meneely, G. R. (1978). The toxicity of salt. CRC Critical Reviews in Toxicology, 
5(4), 355–376. 
Bergsma-Kadijk, J. A., van’t Veer, P., Kampman, E., & Burema, J. (1996). Calcium does not protect 
against colorectal neoplasia. Epidemiology, 7, 590–597. 
Birnhack, L., & Lahav, O. (2007). A new post-treatment process for attaining Ca2+, Mg2+, SO42- 
and alkalinity criteria in desalinated water. Water Research, 41(17), 3989–3997. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2007.06.007 
Böhmer, H., Müller, H., & Resch, K. L. (2000). Calcium supplementation with calcium-rich mineral 
waters: a systematic review and meta-analysis of its bioavailability. Osteoporosis 
International : A Journal Established as Result of Cooperation between the European 
Foundation for Osteoporosis and the National Osteoporosis Foundation of the USA, 11(11), 
938–943. https://doi.org/10.1007/s001980070032 
Boiteux, M., & Baumstark, L. (2001). Transports: choix des investissements et coût des 
nuisances, 323. 
Borges, M. (2013). Iron deficiency and toxicity. Retrieved June 20, 2017, from 
http://drhoffman.com/article/iron-deficiency-and-toxicity-3/ 
Börzel, T. A. (2002). Pace-Setting, Foot-Dragging, and Fence-Sitting: Member State Responses to 
Europeanization. JCMS, 40(2), 193–214. 
Braathen, N.-A. (2012). The value of a statistical life: a meta-analysis. Paris. 
Bruvo, M., Ekstrand, K., Arvin, E., Spliid, H., Moe, D., Kirkeby, S., & Bardow, A. (2008). Optimal 
Drinking Water Composition for Caries Control in Populations. International and American 
Association for Dental Research, 87(4), 340–343. 
Bucher, H. C., Cook, R. J., Guyatt, G. H., Lang, J. D., Cook, D. J., Hatala, R., & Hunt, D. L. (1996). 
Effects of dietary calcium supplementation on blood pressure. A meta-analysis of 
randomized controlled trials. JAMA, 275(13), 1016–1022. 
California Department of Public Health. (2014). Regulations Related to Recycled Water. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.waterboards.ca.gov/drinking_water/certlic/drinkingwater/documents/lawbo
ok/RWregulations_20140618.pdf 
==PAGE:60==
 
 
 
 
56 
 
Carruth, B. R., & Skinner, J. D. (2001). The role of dietary calcium and other nutrients in 
moderating body fat in preschool children. International Journal of Obesity and Related 
Metabolic Disorders : Journal of the International Association for the Study of Obesity, 
25(4), 559–566. 
Cashman, K. D. (2002). Calcium intake, calcium bioavailability and bone health. The British 
Journal of Nutrition, 87 Suppl 2, S169-77. https://doi.org/10.1079/BJNBJN/2002534 
Chan, J. M., Pietinen, P., Virtanen, M., Malila, N., Tangrea, J., Albanes, D., & Virtamo, J. (2000). Diet 
and prostate cancer risk in a cohort of smokers, with a specific focus on calcium and 
phosphorus (Finland). Cancer Causes & Control : CCC, 11(9), 859–867. 
Chan, J. M., Stampfer, M. J., Ma, J., Gann, P. H., Gaziano, J. M., & Giovannucci, E. L. (2001). Dairy 
products, calcium, and prostate cancer risk in the Physicians’ Health Study. The American 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 74(4), 549–554. 
Characklis, G. W. (2004). Economic decision making in the use of membrane desalination for 
brackish supplies. Journal of the American Water Resources Association, 40(3), 615–630. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1752-1688.2004.tb04447.x 
Chiu, H.-F., Tsai, S.-S., Chen, P.-S., Wu, T.-N., & Yang, C.-Y. (2011). Does calcium in drinking water 
modify the association between nitrate in drinking water and risk of death from colon 
cancer? Journal of Water and Health, 9(3), 498–506. https://doi.org/10.2166/wh.2011.006 
Cho, E., Smith-Warner, S. A., Spiegelman, D., Beeson, W. L., van den Brandt, P. A., Colditz, G. A., … 
Hunter, D. J. (2004). Dairy foods, calcium, and colorectal cancer: a pooled analysis of 10 
cohort studies. Journal of the National Cancer Institute, 96(13), 1015–1022. 
Ciftcioglu, N., Bjorklund, M., Kuorikoski, K., Bergstrom, K., & Kajander, E. O. (1999). 
Nanobacteria: an infectious cause for kidney stone formation. Kidney International, 56(5), 
1893–1898. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1523-1755.1999.00755.x 
Cotruvo, J. (2006). Health Aspects of Calcium and Magnesium in Drinking Water. Water 
Conditioning & Purification, 33(6), 40–45. 
Cotruvo, J., & Bartram, J. (2009). Calcium and Magnesium in Drinking-water. Geneva: WHO 
Press. 
Cotruvo, J., Fawell, J., Cunliffe, D., Voutchkov, N., Payment, P., & Lattemann, S. (2010). 
Desalination Technology: Health and Environmental Impacts. Taylor and Francis Group. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://197.14.51.10:81/pmb/CHIMIE/Traitement/Desalination 
Technology Health and Environmental Impacts.pdf 
COWI A/S. (2011). Central blødgøring af drikkevand. Miljøministeriet, Naturstyrelsen. 
Crawford, M. D., Gardner, M. J., & Morris, J. N. (1971). Changes in water hardness and local death-
rates. Lancet (London, England), 2(7720), 327–329. 
Curhan, G. C., Willett, W. C., Knight, E. L., & Stampfer, M. J. (2004). Dietary factors and the risk of 
incident kidney stones in younger women: Nurses’  Health Study II. Archives of Internal 
Medicine, 164(8), 885–891. https://doi.org/10.1001/archinte.164.8.885 
Daly, R. M., & Ebeling, P. R. (2010). Is Excess Calcium Harmful to Health? Nutrients, 2(5), 505–
522. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu2050505 
Das, K. K., Das, S. N., & Dhundasi, S. A. (2008). Nickel, its adverse health effects & oxidative stress. 
The Indian Journal of Medical Research, 128(4), 412–425. 
Davies, K. M., Heaney, R. P., Recker, R. R., Lappe, J. M., Barger-Lux, M. J., Rafferty, K., & Hinders, S. 
(2000). Calcium intake and body weight. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and 
==PAGE:61==
 
 
 
 
57 
 
Metabolism, 85(12), 4635–4638. https://doi.org/10.1210/jcem.85.12.7063 
Dawson-Hughes, B., Harris, S. S., Krall, E. A., & Dallal, G. E. (2000). Effect of withdrawal of calcium 
and vitamin D supplements on bone mass in elderly men and women. The American 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 72(3), 745–750. 
De Laet, C. E., van Hout, B. A., Burger, H., Hofman, A., & Pols, H. A. (1997). Bone density and risk 
of hip fracture in men and women: cross sectional analysis. BMJ (Clinical Research Ed.), 
315(7102), 221–225. 
De Stefani, E., Mendilaharsu, M., Deneo-Pellegrini, H., & Ronco, A. (1997). Influence of dietary 
levels of fat, cholesterol, and calcium on colorectal cancer. Nutrition and Cancer, 29(1), 83–
89. https://doi.org/10.1080/01635589709514606 
de Vet, W. W. J. M., van Genuchten, C. C. A., van Loosdrecht, M. C. M., & van Dijk, J. C. (2009). 
Water Quality and Treatment of River Bank Filtrate. Drinking Water Engineering and 
Science Discussions, 2, 1–20. 
Denke, M. A., Fox, M. M., & Schulte, M. C. (1993). Short-term dietary calcium fortification 
increases fecal saturated fat content and reduces serum lipids in men. The Journal of 
Nutrition, 123(6), 1047–1053. 
Dental Data. (2004). Estimating Lifetime Costs of a Cavity. Delta Dental, (June). 
Denver, G., Rand, I., & Christensen, L. (2011). Sorek Desalination secures US$400mn in project 
financing. 
Pump 
Industry 
Analyst, 
2011(5), 
2. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1359-
6128(11)70171-9 
Department of Health Statistics and Information Systems WHO. (2013). WHO methods and data 
sources for global burden of disease estimates 2000-2011. Global Health Estimates 
Technical 
Paper 
WHO/HIS/HSI/GHE/2013.4, 
(November), 
81. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.who.int/healthinfo/statistics/GlobalDALYmethods_2000_2011.pdf?ua=1 
Deshmukh, S., & Wehner, M. P. (2008). The Groundwater Replenishment System : The First Year. 
Devine, A., Dick, I. M., Heal, S. J., Criddle, R. A., & Prince, R. L. (1997). A 4-year follow-up study of 
the effects of calcium supplementation on bone density in elderly postmenopausal women. 
Osteoporosis International : A Journal Established as Result of Cooperation between the 
European Foundation for Osteoporosis and the National Osteoporosis Foundation of the 
USA, 7(1), 23–28. 
Dickinson, H. O., Nicolson, D. J., Cook, J. V, Campbell, F., Beyer, F. R., Ford, G. A., & Mason, J. (2006). 
Calcium supplementation for the management of primary hypertension in adults. The 
Cochrane 
Database 
of 
Systematic 
Reviews, 
(2), 
CD004639. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD004639.pub2 
Dieter, H. H. (2014). Health related guide values for drinking-water since 1993 as guidance to 
assess presence of new analytes in drinking-water. International Journal of Hygiene and 
Environmental Health, 217(2–3), 117–132. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2013.05.001 
Dietrich, A. M. (2006). Aesthetic issues for drinking water. Journal of W, 4, 11–16. 
https://doi.org/10.2166/wh.2005.034 
Drummond, M. F. (1997). Book Review: Cost-effectiveness in health and medicine. Edited by 
Marthe R. Gold, Joanna E. Siegel, Louise B. Russell and Milton C. Weinstein. Oxford 
University Press, Oxford and New York, 1996. ISBN 0-19-510824-8. Health Economics, 6, 
545–546. 
du Pisan, P., & Menge, J. G. (2013). Direct potable reclamation in Windhoek: a critical review of 
==PAGE:62==
 
 
 
 
58 
 
the design philosophy of new Goreangab drinking water reclamation plant. Water Science 
& Technology, 13(2), 214–226. https://doi.org/10.2166/ws.2013.009 
ECHA. 
(2017). 
Registered 
substances. 
Retrieved 
July 
5, 
2017, 
from 
https://echa.europa.eu/information-on-chemicals/registered-substances 
Egozy, Y., & Faigon, M. (2013). The operation principle of the Hadera seawater desalination 
plant and advantages of the pressure center design. The International Desalination 
Association World Congress on Desalination and Water Reuse 2013 / Tianjin, China REF: 
Engebretsen, K. A., Bager, P., Wohlfahrt, J., Skov, L., Zachariae, C., Nybo Andersen, A. M., … 
Pontoppidan Thyssen, J. (2016). Prevalence of atopic dermatitis in infants by domestic 
water hardness and season of birth: Cohort study. Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology, 139(5), 1568–1574.e1. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2016.11.021 
European Commission. (2015). Tool #27 Impacts on health. Retrieved June 13, 2017, from 
http://ec.europa.eu/smart-regulation/guidelines/tool_27_en.htm 
European Commission. (2016). Introduction to the new EU Water Framework Directive. 
Retrieved 
May 
1, 
2017, 
from 
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/water/water-
framework/info/intro_en.htm 
European 
Commission. 
(2017). 
Drinking 
Water. 
Retrieved 
May 
5, 
2017, 
from 
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/water/water-drink/index_en.html 
European Communities. (2006). Discussion Paper on the setting of maximum and minimum 
amounts for vitamins and minerals in foodstuffs. Health & Consumer Protection Dictorate-
General, 6–14. 
Ferrandiz, J., Abellan, J. J., Gomez-Rubio, V., Lopez-Quilez, A., Sanmartin, P., Abellan, C., … Ocana, 
R. (2004). Spatial analysis of the relationship between mortality from cardiovascular and 
cerebrovascular disease and drinking water hardness. Environmental Health Perspectives, 
112(9), 1037–1044. 
Flood, A., Peters, U., Chatterjee, N., Lacey, J. V. J., Schairer, C., & Schatzkin, A. (2005). Calcium from 
diet and supplements is associated with reduced risk of colorectal cancer in a prospective 
cohort of women. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev., 14(1), 126–132. 
Flynn, A., Moreiras, O., Stehle, P., Fletcher, R. J., Muller, D. J. G., & Rolland, V. (2003). Vitamins and 
minerals: a model for safe addition to foods. European Journal of Nutrition, 42(2), 118–130. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00394-003-0391-9 
Frederiksberg Forsyning. (2017). Vandet på Frederiksberg er hårdt. Retrieved from 
http://www.frb-forsyning.dk/Default.aspx?ID=1937 
Funtowicz, S. O., & Ravetz, J. R. (1990). Uncertainty and Quality in Science for Policy. Dordrecht: 
Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Glass, R. L., Rothman, K. J., Espinal, F., Velez, H., & Smith, N. J. (1973). The prevalence of human 
dental caries and water-borne trace metals. Archives of Oral Biology, 18(9), 1099–1104. 
Grant, A. M., Avenell, A., Campbell, M. K., McDonald, A. M., MacLennan, G. S., McPherson, G. C., … 
Wallace, W. A. (2005). Oral vitamin D3 and calcium for secondary prevention of low-
trauma fractures in elderly people (Randomised Evaluation of Calcium Or vitamin D, 
RECORD): a randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet (London, England), 365(9471), 
1621–1628. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(05)63013-9 
Griffith, L. E., Guyatt, G. H., Cook, R. J., Bucher, H. C., & Cook, D. J. (1999). The influence of dietary 
and nondietary calcium supplementation on blood pressure: an updated meta-analysis of 
==PAGE:63==
 
 
 
 
59 
 
randomized controlled trials. American Journal of Hypertension, 12(1 Pt 1), 84–92. 
Guéguen, L., & Pointillart, A. (2000). The Bioavailability of Dietary Calcium The Bioavailability of 
Dietary Calcium. Journal of the American College of Nutrition, 19(2), 119–136. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/07315724.2000.10718083 
GWRS. (2015). 2015 Annual Report. 
Haarhoff, J., & Van der Merwe, B. (1996). 25 years of Wastewater Reclamation in Windhoek, 
Namibia. Water Science & Technology, 33(10–11), 25–35. 
Harrison, J. F. (2006). Why naturally soft and softened water are not the same - International 
Symposium on Health Aspects of Calcium and Magnesium in Drinking Water. Water 
Conditioning 
& 
Purification, 
June, 
/www.wcponline.com. 
Retrieved 
from 
www.wcponline.com 
Heaney, R. P. (2003). Normalizing calcium intake: projected population effects for body weight. 
The Journal of Nutrition, 133(1), 268S–270S. 
Henley, W. (2013, July 22). The new water technologies that could save the planet. The Guardian. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/new-water-
technologies-save-planet 
Hilbert, L. R., Albrechtsen, H.-J., & Andersen, A. (2010). Effect of material and water quality on 
disinfection and risks of corrosion. 
Hofman, J., Kramer, O., Van Der Hoek, J. P., Nederlof, M., & Groenendijk, M. (2006). Twenty years 
of experience with central softening in The Netherlands: Water quality – Environmental 
benefits – Costs. 
HOFOR. (2015). Vandkvalitet i Brøndby Kommune. 
HOFOR. 
(2016a). 
Vandets 
hårdhed. 
Retrieved 
April 
4, 
2017, 
from 
http://www.hofor.dk/vand/vandets-haardhed/4/ 
HOFOR. (2016b). World-Class Water – Straight from the Tap. Copenhagen. 
Hoque, M. A., & Butler, A. P. (2016). Medical Hydrogeology of Asian Deltas: Status of 
Groundwater Toxicants and Nutrients, and Implications for Human Health. International 
Journal 
of 
Environmental 
Research 
and 
Public 
Health, 
13(1), 
81. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph13010081 
Houtman, C. J. (2010). Emerging contaminants in surface waters and their relevance for the 
production of drinking water in Europe. Journal of Integrative Environmental Sciences, 1–
25. https://doi.org/10.1080/1943815X.2010.511648 
Hutton, G. (2013). Global costs and benefits of reaching universal coverage of sanitation and 
drinking-water 
supply. 
Journal 
of 
Water 
and 
Health, 
11.1. 
https://doi.org/10.2166/wh.2012.105 
Imran, S. A., Dietz, J. D., Mutoti, G., Xiao, W., Taylor, J. S., & Desai, V. (2006). Optimizing source 
water blends for corrosion and residual control in distribution systems. Journal American 
Water Works Association, 98(5), 107–115. 
International Osteoporosis Foundation. (n.d.). Facts and statistics about Osteoporosis. Retrieved 
June 8, 2017, from https://www.iofbonehealth.org/facts-statistics 
Israel Ministry of Health. (2013a). Public Health Regulations 2013 the Sanitary Quality of 
Drinking Water and Drinking Water Facilities, (7262), 1–34. 
==PAGE:64==
 
 
 
 
60 
 
Israel Ministry of Health. (2013b). The Tools for Assuring the Quality of Drinking Water. 
Retrieved 
August 
8, 
2017, 
from 
https://www.health.gov.il/English/Topics/EnviroHealth/drinking_water/quality_assuranc
e/Pages/process.aspx 
Jackson, R. D., & Mysiw, W. J. (2014). Insights into the epidemiology of postmenopausal 
osteoporosis: the Women’s Health Initiative. Seminars in Reproductive Medicine, 32(6), 
454–462. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0034-1384629 
Januszko, O., Madej, D., Postaleniec, E., Brzozowska, A., Pietruszka, B., & Kałuża, J. (2012). 
Spozycie skladnikow mineralnych z woda pitna przez mlode kobiety - Minerals intake from 
drinking water by young women. Rocz Panstw Zakl Hig, 63(1), 43–50. 
Karatzas, I. (European C. (2013). Research, Risk-Benefit Analyses and Ethical Issues. 
Kesse, E., Bertrais, S., Astorg, P., Jaouen, A., Arnault, N., Galan, P., & Hercberg, S. (2006). Dairy 
products, calcium and phosphorus intake, and the risk of prostate cancer: results of the 
French prospective SU.VI.MAX (Supplementation en Vitamines et Mineraux Antioxydants) 
study. The British Journal of Nutrition, 95(3), 539–545. 
Knekt, P., Järvinen, R., Seppänen, R., Pukkala, E., & Aromaa, A. (1996, March). Intake of dairy 
products and the risk of breast cancer. British Journal of Cancer. 
Kristal, A. R., Stanford, J. L., Cohen, J. H., Wicklund, K., & Patterson, R. E. (1999). Vitamin and 
mineral supplement use is associated with reduced risk of prostate cancer. Cancer 
Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention : A Publication of the American Association for 
Cancer Research, Cosponsored by the American Society of Preventive Oncology, 8(10), 
887–892. 
Lacey, R. F., & Shaper, A. G. (1984). Changes in water hardness and cardiovascular death rates. 
International Journal of Epidemiology, 13(1), 18–24. 
Lahnsteiner, J., & Lempert, G. (2007). Water management in Windhoek, Namibia. Water Science 
& Technology, 55(1–2), 441–448. https://doi.org/10.2166/wst.2007.022 
Lahnsteiner, J., Van Rensburg, P., & Esterhuizen, J. (2017). Direct potable reuse - a feasible water 
management 
option. 
Journal 
of 
Water 
Reuse 
and 
Desalination, 
1–15. 
https://doi.org/10.2166/wrd.2017.172 
Law, I. B. (2003). Advances Reuse - From Windhoek to Singapore and Beyond. Water, (May), 31–
36. 
Lemke, T. (2017). Storkøbenhavn får mindre kalk i drikkevandet. Retrieved April 3, 2017, from 
https://www.bolius.dk/storkoebenhavn-faar-mindre-kalk-i-drikkevandet-28713/ 
Leung, A. M., & Braverman, L. E. (2014). Consequences of excess iodine. Nature Reviews. 
Endocrinology, 10(3), 136–142. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrendo.2013.251 
Lokiec, F. (2011). Sorek 150 Million M3/Year Seawater Desalination Facility Build, Operate and 
Transfer (BOT) Project, 1, 1–15. Retrieved from http://www.ide-tech.com/wp-
content/uploads/2013/09/Sorek-150-Million-m3year-Seawater-Desalination-Facility-
Build-Operate-and-Transfer-BOT-Project.pdf 
López-Roldán, R., Rubalcaba, A., Martin-Alonso, J., González, S., Martí, V., & Cortina, J. L. (2016). 
Assessment of the water chemical quality improvement based on human health risk 
indexes: Application to a drinking water treatment plant incorporating membrane 
technologies. 
Science 
of 
the 
Total 
Environment, 
540, 
334–343. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2015.04.045 
==PAGE:65==
 
 
 
 
61 
 
Mackerras, D., & Lumley, T. (1997). First- and second-year effects in trials of calcium 
supplementation on the loss of bone density in postmenopausal women. Bone, 21(6), 527–
533. 
MacRae, A. W., & Geelhoed, E. N. (1992). Preference can be more powerful than detection of 
oddity as a test of discriminability. Perception & Psychophysics, 51(2), 179–181. 
Marcussen, H., Holm, P. E., & Hansen, H. C. B. (2013). Composition, Flavor, Chemical Foodsafety, 
and Consumer Preferences of Bottled Water. Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and 
Food Safety, 12(4), 333–352. https://doi.org/10.1111/1541-4337.12015 
Markus, M., Patel, M., & Dunivin, W. (2012). Groundwater Replenishment System, Orange 
County, California. Guidelines for Water Reuse, 30–32. 
McCarron, D. A., & Reusser, M. E. (1999). Finding consensus in the dietary calcium-blood 
pressure debate. Journal of the American College of Nutrition, 18(5 Suppl), 398S–405S. 
McCullough, M. L., Robertson, A. S., Rodriguez, C., Jacobs, E. J., Chao, A., Carolyn, J., … Thun, M. J. 
(2003). Calcium, vitamin D, dairy products, and risk of colorectal cancer in the Cancer 
Prevention Study II Nutrition Cohort (United States). Cancer Causes Control, 14(1), 1–12. 
McNally, N. J., Williams, H. C., Phillips, D. R., Smallman-Raynor, M., Lewis, S., Venn, A., & Britton, J. 
(1998). Atopic eczema and domestic water hardness. Lancet (London, England), 
352(9127), 527–531. 
Meltzer, D. (1997). Accounting for future costs in medical cost-effectiveness analysis. Journal of 
Health Economics, 16(1), 33–64. 
Mills, C. A. (1937). Factors Affecting the Incidence of Dental Caries in Population Groups. Journal 
of Dental Research, 16(5), 417–430. https://doi.org/10.1177/00220345370160050601 
Minnesota Department of Health. (2015). Copper in Drinking Water. Retrieved June 20, 2017, 
from http://www.health.state.mn.us/divs/eh/water/factsheet/com/copper.html 
Mitrou, P. N., Albanes, D., Weinstein, S. J., Pietinen, P., Taylor, P. R., Virtamo, J., & Leitzmann, M. F. 
(2007). A prospective study of dietary calcium, dairy products and prostate cancer risk 
(Finland). 
International 
Journal 
of 
Cancer, 
120(11), 
2466–2473. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/ijc.22553 
Monarca, S., Donato, F., Zerbini, I., Calderon, R. L., & Craun, G. F. (2006). Review of 
epidemiological studies on drinking water hardness and cardiovascular diseases. European 
Journal of Cardiovascular Prevention and Rehabilitation : Official Journal of the European 
Society of Cardiology, Working Groups on Epidemiology & Prevention and Cardiac 
Rehabilitation 
and 
Exercise 
Physiology, 
13(4), 
495–506. 
https://doi.org/10.1097/01.hjr.0000214608.99113.5c 
Mons, M. N., Heringa, M. B., van Genderen, J., Puijker, L. M., Brand, W., van Leeuwen, C. J., … van 
der Kooij, D. (2013). Use of the Threshold of Toxicological Concern (TTC) approach for 
deriving target values for drinking water contaminants. Water Research, 47(4), 1666–
1678. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2012.12.025 
Morr, S., Cuartas, E., Alwattar, B., & Lane, J. M. (2006). How much calcium is in your drinking 
water? A survey of calcium concentrations in bottled and tap water and their significance 
for medical treatment and drug administration. HSS Journal, 2(2), 130–135. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11420-006-9000-9 
Munoz, I., & Fernandez-Alba, A. R. (2008). Reducing the environmental impacts of reverse 
osmosis desalination by using brackish groundwater resources. Water Research, 42(3), 
801–811. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2007.08.021 
==PAGE:66==
 
 
 
 
62 
 
Murray, C. J. L. (1994). Quantifying the burden of disease: the technical basis for disability-
adjusted life years. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 72(3), 429–445. 
Naser, A. M., Martorell, R., Narayan, K. M. V., & Clasen, T. F. (2017). First Do No Harm: The Need 
to Explore Potential Adverse Health Implications of Drinking Rainwater. Environmental 
Science & Technology, acs.est.7b01886. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.7b01886 
National Institutes of Health. (2005). Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs): Electrolytes and Water. 
Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine, National Academies. Retrieved from 
http://www.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=10925 
National Institutes of Health. (2011). Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs): Elements Nutrient. Food 
and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine, National Academies. 
National Institutes of Health. (2016). Magnesium. Retrieved June 20, 2017, from 
https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Magnesium-HealthProfessional/) 
National Research Council. (1977). Drinking Water and Health. Washington, DC: The National 
Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/1780 
Nerbrand, C., Agréus, L., Lenner, R. A., Nyberg, P., & Svärdsudd, K. (2003a). The influence of 
calcium and magnesium in drinking water and diet on cardiovascular risk factors in 
individuals living in hard and soft water areas with differences in cardiovascular mortality. 
BMC Public Health, 3, 21. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-3-21 
Nerbrand, C., Agréus, L., Lenner, R. A., Nyberg, P., & Svärdsudd, K. (2003b). The influence of 
calcium and magnesium in drinking water and diet water areas with differences in 
cardiovascular mortality, 3, 1–9. 
NIH. (2014). What Is Atopic Dermatitis? Fast Facts: An Easy-to-Read Series of Publications for 
the 
Public. 
Retrieved 
June 
8, 
2017, 
from 
https://www.niams.nih.gov/health_info/atopic_dermatitis/atopic_dermatitis_ff.asp 
O’Brien, B. J. (2002). Book Review: Risk-Benefit Analysis. The New England Journal of Medicine, 
346(14), 1099–1100. 
O’Neal, S. L., & Zheng, W. (2015). Manganese Toxicity Upon Overexposure: a Decade in Review. 
Current Environmental Health Reports, 2(3), 315–328. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40572-
015-0056-x 
Oasen. (2016). History of oasen. Retrieved March 27, 2017, from https://www.oasen.nl/about-
oasen/history-oasen 
Oasen. 
(2016). 
Our 
mission 
and 
vision. 
Retrieved 
March 
27, 
2017, 
from 
https://www.oasen.nl/about-oasen/our-mission-and-vision 
Oasen. 
(2016). 
Producing 
drinking 
water. 
Retrieved 
March 
27, 
2017, 
from 
https://www.oasen.nl/about-oasen/producing-drinking-water 
Office of the Surgeon General (US). (2004). Bone Health and Osteoporosis: A Report of the 
Surgeon 
General. 
Rockville 
(MD). 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK45503/ 
Olivares, M., Araya, M., Pizarro, F., & Uauy, R. (2001). Nausea threshold in apparently healthy 
individuals who drink fluids containing graded concentrations of copper. Regulatory 
Toxicology 
and 
Pharmacology : 
RTP, 
33(3), 
271–275. 
https://doi.org/10.1006/rtph.2000.1440 
Orange 
County 
Water 
District. 
(2017). 
About 
GWRS. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.ocwd.com/gwrs/about-gwrs/ 
==PAGE:67==
 
 
 
 
63 
 
Overstreet, N. (2015). Symptoms Potassium Overdose. Retrieved June 20, 2017, from 
http://www.livestrong.com/article/24690-symptoms-potassium-overdose/) 
Parascandola, M. (2002). Risk-Benefit Analysis. Second Edition. American Journal of 
Epidemiology, 156(5), 488–489. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwf079 
Piriou, P., Mackey, E. D., Suffet, I. H., & Bruchet, A. (2004). Chlorinous flavor perception in 
drinking water. Water Science and Technology : A Journal of the International Association 
on Water Pollution Research, 49(9), 321–328. 
Pizarro, F., Olivares, M., Uauy, R., Contreras, P., Rebelo, A., & Gidi, V. (1999). Acute 
gastrointestinal effects of graded levels of copper in drinking water. Environmental Health 
Perspectives, 
107(2), 
117–121. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1566323/ 
Plum, L. M., Rink, L., & Haase, H. (2010). The Essential Toxin: Impact of Zinc on Human Health. 
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 7(4), 1342–1365. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph7041342 
Pocock, S. J., Shaper, A. G., Cook, D. G., Packham, R. F., Lacey, R. F., Powell, P., & Russell, P. F. 
(1980). British Regional Heart Study: geographic variations in cardiovascular mortality, 
and the role of water quality. British Medical Journal, 280(6226), 1243–1249. Retrieved 
from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1601548/ 
Prentice, A., Bonjour, J.-P., Branca, F., Cooper, C., Flynn, A., Garabedian, M., … Weber, P. (2003). 
PASSCLAIM - Bone health and osteoporosis. European Journal of Nutrition, 42, 1–1. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00394-003-1103-1 
Putnam, S. W., & Wiener, J. B. (1995). Seeking Safe Drinking Water. Havard University Press. 
Retrieved from http://www.waterandhealth.org/drinkingwater/12749.html 
Ragan, G. E., Young, R. A., & Makela, J. (2000). New evidence on the economic benefits of 
controlling salinity in domestic water supplies. Water Resources Research, 36(4), 1087–
1095. 
Rasmussen, S. E., Andersen, N. L., Dragsted, L. O., & Larsen, J. C. (2006). A safe strategy for 
addition of vitamins and minerals to foods. European Journal of Nutrition, 45(3), 123–135. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00394-005-0580-9 
Razzaque, M. S. (2011). Phosphate toxicity: new insights into an old problem. Clinical Science 
(London, England : 1979), 120(3), 91–97. https://doi.org/10.1042/CS20100377 
Recker, R. R., Hinders, S., Davies, K. M., Heaney, R. P., Stegman, M. R., Lappe, J. M., & Kimmel, D. B. 
(1996). Correcting calcium nutritional deficiency prevents spine fractures in elderly 
women. Journal of Bone and Mineral Research : The Official Journal of the American Society 
for 
Bone 
and 
Mineral 
Research, 
11(12), 
1961–1966. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.5650111218 
Reid, I. R., Ames, R. W., Evans, M. C., Gamble, G. D., & Sharpe, S. J. (1993). Effect of calcium 
supplementation on bone loss in postmenopausal women. The New England Journal of 
Medicine, 328(7), 460–464. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJM199302183280702 
Reid, I. R., Mason, B., Horne, A., Ames, R., Clearwater, J., Bava, U., … Gamble, G. D. (2002). Effects 
of calcium supplementation on serum lipid concentrations in normal older women: a 
randomized controlled trial. The American Journal of Medicine, 112(5), 343–347. 
Research Office Legislative Council Secretariat. (2015). Seawater desalination in Israel. 
Ribera, G., Clarens, F., Martínez-lladó, X., Jubany, I., Martí, V., & Rovira, M. (2014). Life cycle and 
==PAGE:68==
 
 
 
 
64 
 
human health risk assessments as tools for decision making in the design and 
implementation of nano filtration in drinking water treatment plants. Science of the Total 
Environment, The, 466–467, 377–386. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.06.085 
Richardson, D. P. (2007). Risk management of vitamins and minerals: a risk categorisation 
model for the setting of maximum levels in food supplements and fortified foods. Food 
Science and Technology Bulletin: Functional Foods, 4(6), 51–66. 
Rodriguez, C., McCullough, M. L., Mondul, A. M., Jacobs, E. J., Fakhrabadi-Shokoohi, D., 
Giovannucci, E. L., … Calle, E. E. (2003). Calcium, dairy products, and risk of prostate cancer 
in a prospective cohort of United States men. Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & 
Prevention : A Publication of the American Association for Cancer Research, Cosponsored 
by the American Society of Preventive Oncology, 12(7), 597–603. 
Ross, A. C., Taylor, C. L., Yaktine, A. L., & Del Valle, H. B. (Eds.). (2011). Dietary Reference Intakes 
for Calcium and Vitamin D. Washington (DC). https://doi.org/10.17226/13050 
Russell, A. S., Dennison, E., & Cooper, C. (2003). Epidemiology and public health impact of 
osteoporosis. In S. A. New & J.-P. Banjour (Eds.), Nutritional Aspects of Bone Health (pp. 
13–24). The Royal Society of Chemistry. https://doi.org/10.1039/9781847551559-00013 
Rygaard, M., Arvin, E., Bath, A., & Binning, P. J. (2011). Designing water supplies: Optimizing 
drinking water composition for maximum economic benefit. Water Research, 45(12), 
3712–3722. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2011.04.025 
Rygaard, M., Arvin, E., & Binning, P. J. (2010). Indirect economic impacts in water supplies 
augmented with desalinated water. Water Science & Technology Water Supply, 10(4). 
Sagoff, M. (1985). Risk-Benefit Analysis in Decisions Concerning Public Safety and Health. 
Kendall/Hunt. 
Schlosser, R. W., Wendt, O., Bhavnani, S., & Nail-Chiwetalu, B. (2006). Use of information-seeking 
strategies for developing systematic reviews and engaging in evidence-based practice: the 
application of traditional and comprehensive Pearl Growing. A review. International 
Journal 
of 
Language 
& 
Communication 
Disorders, 
41(5), 
567–582. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/13682820600742190 
Schroder, S., Homoe, P., Wagner, N., Vataire, A.-L., Lundager Madsen, H. E., & Bardow, A. (2015). 
Does drinking water influence hospital-admitted sialolithiasis on an epidemiological level 
in Denmark? BMJ Open, 5(4), e007385–e007385. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2014-
007385 
Sellers, T. A., Bazyk, A. E., Bostick, R. M., Kushi, L. H., Olson, J. E., Anderson, K. E., … Folsom, A. R. 
(1998). Diet and risk of colon cancer in a large prospective study of older women: an 
analysis stratified on family history (Iowa, United States). Cancer Causes Control, 9(4), 
357–367. 
Shea, B., Wells, G., Cranney, A., Zytaruk, N., Robinson, V., Griffith, L., … Guyatt, G. (2002). Meta-
analyses of therapies for postmenopausal osteoporosis. VII. Meta-analysis of calcium 
supplementation for the prevention of postmenopausal osteoporosis. Endocrine Reviews, 
23(4), 552–559. https://doi.org/10.1210/er.2001-7002 
Shin, M.-H., Holmes, M. D., Hankinson, S. E., Wu, K., Colditz, G. A., & Willett, W. C. (2002). Intake of 
dairy products, calcium, and vitamin d and risk of breast cancer. Journal of the National 
Cancer Institute, 94(17), 1301–1311. 
Skinner, J. D., Bounds, W., Carruth, B. R., & Ziegler, P. (2003). Longitudinal calcium intake is 
negatively related to children’s body fat indexes. Journal of the American Dietetic 
==PAGE:69==
 
 
 
 
65 
 
Association, 103(12), 1626–1631. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jada.2003.09.018 
Smeets, J., & Amavis, R. (1981). European Communities Directive relating to the Quality of Water 
intended for Human Consumption. Water, Air and Soil Pollution, 15, 483–502. 
Storm, D., Eslin, R., Porter, E. S., Musgrave, K., Vereault, D., Patton, C., … Rosen, C. J. (1998). 
Calcium supplementation prevents seasonal bone loss and changes in biochemical markers 
of bone turnover in elderly New England women: a randomized placebo-controlled trial. 
The 
Journal 
of 
Clinical 
Endocrinology 
and 
Metabolism, 
83(11), 
3817–3825. 
https://doi.org/10.1210/jcem.83.11.5289 
Sun, H., Brocato, J., & Costa, M. (2015). Oral Chromium Exposure and Toxicity. Current 
Environmental Health Reports, 2(3), 295–303. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40572-015-
0054-z 
Talbot, D. (2015). The world’s largest and cheapest reverse-osmosis desalination plant is up and 
running 
in 
Israel. 
MIT 
Technology 
Review, 
(March/April). 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.technologyreview.com/s/534996/megascale-desalination/ 
Tang, C., Lopato, L., Nyberg Kornholt, S., & Albrechtsen, H.-J. (2017). Possibilities for reuse of 
calcium carbonate pellets from drinking water softening. Abstract Proceedings, 11th annua, 
22–24. 
Tarver, T. (2008). “Just Add Water”: Regulating and Protecting the Most Common Ingredient. 
Journal of Food Science, 73(1). https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1750-3841.2007.00611.x 
Tenne, A. (2010). Sea Water Desalination in Israel: Planning, coping with difficulties, and 
economic aspects of long-term risks. Israel Water Authority, Ministry of Infrastructure …, 
(October), 
1–13. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://water.gov.il/Hebrew/Planning-and-
Development/Desalination/Documents/Desalination-in-Israel.pdf 
Thacker, S. B., Stroup, D. F., Carande-Kulis, V., Marks, J. S., Rov, K., & Gerberding, J. L. (2006). 
Measuring the Public’s Health. Public Health Reports, 121(February), 14–22. 
The Council of the European Union. (1998). Council Directive 98/83/EC of 3rd November 1998 
on the quality of water intended for human consumption. Official Journal of the European 
Union, 330, 32–54. 
The Council of the European Union. (2016). The Directive Overview. Retrieved April 28, 2017, 
from http://ec.europa.eu/environment/water/water-drink/legislation_en.html 
The Lancet. (2015). The Global Burden of Diseases: living with disability. The Lancet. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)01096-X 
The Namibian. (2017). Water scarcity not ended by rise in dam levels. Retrieved August 8, 2017, 
from 
http://www.namibian.com.na/161867/archive-read/Water-scarcity-not-ended-by-
rise-in-dam-levels 
Theobald, H. E. (2005). Dietary calcium and health. British Nutrient Foundation, 30, 237–277. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-3010.2005.00514.x 
Tinggi, U. (2003). Essentiality and toxicity of selenium and its status in Australia: A review. 
Toxicology Letters, 137(1–2), 103–110. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-4274(02)00384-3 
TrojanUV Solutions. Case study: The Groundwater Replenishment System (2010). 
United Nations. (2015). Sustainable Development Goals. Retrieved July 16, 2017, from 
http://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainable-development-goals/ 
Valbjørn, I. L. (2017). Measuring the experienced effects in households due to changed drinking 
==PAGE:70==
 
 
 
 
66 
 
water composition by softening. 
Valimaki, M. J., Karkkainen, M., Lamberg-Allardt, C., Laitinen, K., Alhava, E., Heikkinen, J., … 
Seppanen, R. (1994). Exercise, smoking, and calcium intake during adolescence and early 
adulthood as determinants of peak bone mass. Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns Study 
Group. BMJ (Clinical Research Ed.), 309(6949), 230–235. 
Van der Bruggen, B., Goossens, H., Everard, P. A., Stemgee, K., & Rogge, W. (2009). Cost-benefit 
analysis of central softening for production of drinking water. Journal of Environmental 
Management, 91(2), 541–549. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2009.09.024 
van der Laan, H. (2016). Search for the optimal remineralisation technology - Summary. 
van Luijt, J., Jong-Bechis, M., Vermaat, A., van Willigen, A., & van Zijl-van Manen, G. (2015). Oasen 
drinkwater - Jaarverslag 2015. Gouda. 
Veolia Water Solutions & Technologies. (2014). Veolia installs wastewater plant in Windhoek, 
Namibia. 
Membrane 
Technology, 
(October), 
5. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0958-
2118(14)70208-3 
Vergnaud, A.-C., Peneau, S., Chat-Yung, S., Kesse, E., Czernichow, S., Galan, P., … Bertrais, S. 
(2008). Dairy consumption and 6-y changes in body weight and waist circumference in 
middle-aged French adults. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 88(5), 1248–1255. 
Vingerhoeds, M. H., Nijenhuis-de Vries, M. A., Ruepert, N., van der Laan, H., Bredie, W. L. P., & 
Kremer, S. (2016). Sensory quality of drinking water produced by reverse osmosis 
membrane filtration followed by remineralisation. Water Research, 94, 42–51. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2016.02.043 
Vlajinac, H. D., Marinkovic, J. M., Ilic, M. D., & Kocev, N. I. (1997). Diet and prostate cancer: a case-
control study. European Journal of Cancer (Oxford, England : 1990), 33(1), 101–107. 
WABAG. (2002). Windhoek Goreangab, Water Reclamation Plant, Namibia. Retrieved March 26, 
2017, 
from 
http://www.wabag.com/wabag-projects/windhoek-goreangab-water-
reclamation-plant/ 
Wallace, K., Baron, J. A., Cole, B. F., Sandler, R. S., Karagas, M. R., Beach, M. A., … Snover, D. C. 
(2004). Effect of calcium supplementation on the risk of large bowel polyps. Journal of the 
National Cancer Institute, 96(12), 921–925. 
Wang, L., Manson, J. E., Buring, J. E., Lee, I.-M., & Sesso, H. D. (2008). Dietary intake of dairy 
products, calcium, and vitamin D and the risk of hypertension in middle-aged and older 
women. 
Hypertension 
(Dallas, 
Tex. : 
1979), 
51(4), 
1073–1079. 
https://doi.org/10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.107.107821 
Wang, L., Manson, J. E., & Sesso, H. D. (2012). Calcium Intake and Risk of Cardiovascular Disease: 
A Review of Prospective Studies and Randomized Clinical Trials. American Journal of 
Cardiovascular Drugs, 12(2), 105–116. https://doi.org/10.2165/11595400-000000000-
00000 
Wang, T. S., & Tsai, T. F. (2014). Cutaneous irritancy of water. Revision Environmental Health, 
29, 217–220. 
Weidinger, S., & Novak, N. (2012). Atopic dermatitis. The Lancet, 387(10023), 1109–1122. 
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00149-X 
Weingarten, M. A., Zalmanovici, A., & Yaphe, J. (2005). Dietary calcium supplementation for 
preventing colorectal cancer and adenomatous polyps. The Cochrane Database of 
Systematic Reviews, (3), CD003548. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD003548.pub3 
==PAGE:71==
 
 
 
 
67 
 
Welten, D. C., Kemper, H. C., Post, G. B., & van Staveren, W. A. (1995). A meta-analysis of the effect 
of calcium intake on bone mass in young and middle aged females and males. The Journal of 
Nutrition, 125(11), 2802–2813. 
Wheatley, D. (2010). Risk benefit analysis (RBA). Retrieved May 11, 2017, from 
http://www.cbabuilder.co.uk/CBA6.html 
Whelton, A. J., Dietrich, A. M., Burlingame, G. A., Schechs, M., & Duncan, S. E. (2007). Minerals in 
drinking water: impacts on taste and importance to consumer health. Water Science & 
Technology, 55(5), 283–291. https://doi.org/10.2166/wst.2007.190 
Winther, L., Linde, J. J., & Winther, H. (2010). Vandforsyningsteknik. (5th Edition, Ed.). 
Polyteknisk Forlag. 
World Health Organization. (1994). No Assessment of fracture risk and its application to 
screening for postmenopausal osteoporosis: report of a WHO study group. Geneva. 
World Health Organization. (2004). Vitamin and mineral requirements in human nutrition. 
World Health Organization (2nd editio). Bangkok. https://doi.org/92 4 154612 3 
World Health Organization. (2005). The potential health benefits of bottled water. 
World Health Organization. (2011). Hardness in Drinking-water - Background document for 
development of WHO Guidelines for Drinking-water Quality. 
World Health Organization. (2013). Guideline: Calcium supplementation in pregnant women. 
Geneva. 
World Health Organization. (2014). Disability weights, discounting and age weighting of DALYs. 
Retrieved 
May 
25, 
2017, 
from 
http://www.who.int/healthinfo/global_burden_disease/daly_disability_weight/en/ 
World Health Organization. (2014). Metrics: Disability-Adjusted Life Year (DALY). Retrieved 
May 
11, 
2017, 
from 
http://www.who.int/healthinfo/global_burden_disease/metrics_daly/en/ 
World Health Organization. (2014). Risk Factor. Retrieved May 11, 2017, from 
http://www.who.int/topics/risk_factors/en/ 
World Health Organization. (2016). Global Health Estimates 2016 Summary Tables. Geneva. 
Retrieved from http://www.who.int/healthinfo/global_burden_disease/en/ 
World Health Organization. (2017a). Guidelines for Drinking-water Quality (4th editio). Geneva. 
World Health Organization. (2017b). WHO methods and data sources for global burden of 
disease estimates 2000-2015. Global Health Estimates Technical Paper WHO, (3), 90. 
Retrieved from http://www.who.int/gho/mortality_burden_disease/en/index.html 
Wu, K., Willett, W. C., Fuchs, C. S., Colditz, G. A., & Giovannucci, E. L. (2002). Calcium intake and 
risk of colon cancer in women and men. Journal of the National Cancer Institute, 94(6), 
437–446. 
Zemel, M. B., Richards, J., Mathis, S., Milstead, A., Gebhardt, L., & Silva, E. (2005). Dairy 
augmentation of total and central fat loss in obese subjects. International Journal of Obesity 
(2005), 29(4), 391–397. https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.ijo.0802880 
Zemel, M. B., Shi, H., Greer, B., Dirienzo, D., & Zemel, P. C. (2000). Regulation of adiposity by 
dietary calcium. FASEB Journal : Official Publication of the Federation of American Societies 
for Experimental Biology, 14(9), 1132–1138. 
 
==PAGE:72==
 
 
 
 
68 
 
APPENDIX  
Water quality  
APPENDIX TABLE 1 WATER QUALITY OASEN, THE NETHERLANDS RECEIVED FROM RUUD KOLPA, RESEARCH 
DEPARTMENT, OASEN DRINKWATER 
 
 
==PAGE:73==
 
 
 
 
69 
 
APPENDIX TABLE 2 WATER QUALITY DESALINATION PLANT SOREK, ISRAEL RECEIVED FROM LIHY GERSZON 
ELI, HEAD OF PUBLIC INQUIRIES, THE GOVERNMENTAL AUTHORITY FOR WATER AND SEWAGE 
 
==PAGE:74==
 
 
 
 
70 
 
 
APPENDIX TABLE 3 ROLE OF MINERAL IN THE HUMAN BODY AND ITS POSSIBILITY TO CAUSE TOXICITY 
Parameter 
Role of minerals in human 
body 
 
Possibility of health concern 
Arsenic 
No 
biological 
function 
in 
humans although animal data 
indicate 
a 
requirement. 
(World Health Organization, 
2017a) 
There remains considerable uncertainty over 
the actual risks, and available data on mode of 
action does not provide a biological basis for 
using either linear or nonlinear extrapolation. 
In view of the practical difficulties in 
removing arsenic from drinking-water, as well 
as the practical quantification limit in the 
region of 1–10 µg/l, the guideline value of 10 
µg/l is retained and designated as provisional. 
(World Health Organization, 2017a) 
Calcium 
An essential role in blood 
clotting, muscle contraction, 
nerve transmission and bone 
and tooth formation. (World 
Health Organization, 2017a) 
Diseases 
associated 
with 
calcium 
overconsumption 
are 
Prostate 
cancer, 
Cardiovascular disease, Hypertension and 
blood pressure regulation, Atopic dermatitis. 
Hypercalcemia and Calcium stone formation. 
(Cotruvo, 2006; Theobald, 2005) 
Chloride 
Together 
with 
sodium, 
maintains 
fluid 
volume 
outside of cells and thus 
normal cell function. (World 
Health Organization, 2017a) 
Not of health concern at levels found in 
drinking-water.  
Chloride toxicity has not been observed in 
humans except in the special case of impaired 
sodium 
chloride 
metabolism, 
e.g. 
in 
congestive heart failure. Little is known about 
the effect of prolonged intake of large 
amounts of chloride in the diet. (World Health 
Organization, 2017a) 
Chromium 
Helps to maintain healthy 
blood glucose levels. (World 
Health Organization, 2017a) 
There are no adequate toxicity studies 
available to provide a basis for an NOAEL. The 
carcinogenic potential of oral exposure to 
Cr(VI) in human is supported by several new 
studies discussed in this review. However, 
due to the extracellular reduction of Cr(VI) to 
Cr(III) in the gastrointestinal system, oral 
exposure results in a lower amount of Cr(VI).  
Any amount of Cr(VI) entering cells has the 
potential 
to 
initiate 
tumor 
formation. 
Therefore, Cr levels in drinking water must be 
set at levels that protect the entire population. 
(Sun et al., 2015) 
Copper 
Component of enzymes in iron 
metabolism. (World Health 
Organization, 2017a) 
Overconsumption 
of 
copper 
can 
cause 
adverse health effects, including vomiting, 
diarrhea, stomach cramps, and nausea. It has 
also been associated with liver damage and 
kidney disease. (Minnesota Department of 
==PAGE:75==
 
 
 
 
71 
 
Health, 2015) 
Fluoride 
Inhibits the initiation and 
progression of dental caries 
and 
stimulates 
new 
bone 
formation. 
(World 
Health 
Organization, 2017a) 
The protective effects of fluoride increase 
with concentration up to about 2 mg of 
fluoride per liter of drinking-water; the 
minimum level of fluoride in drinking-water 
required to produce it is approximately 0.5 
mg/l. However, fluoride can also have an 
adverse effect on tooth enamel and may give 
rise to mild dental fluorosis (prevalence: 12–
33%) 
at 
drinking-water 
concentrations 
between 0.9 and 1.2 mg/l, depending on 
drinking water intake and exposure to 
fluoride from other sources. (World Health 
Organization, 2017a) 
Iodine 
Component of the thyroid 
hormones; 
and 
prevents 
goiter, hypothyroidism and 
mental retardation in infants 
and children whose mothers 
were iodine deficient during 
pregnancy. (American Thyroid 
Association, 2015) 
Although excess iodine exposure generally 
does not result in any apparent clinical 
consequences, thyroid dysfunction can occur 
in vulnerable patients with specific risk 
factors, including those with pre-existing 
thyroid disease, the elderly, fetuses, and 
neonates. (Leung & Braverman, 2014) 
Iron 
Component of hemoglobin and 
numerous enzymes prevents 
microcytic 
hypochromic 
anemia. An essential element 
in 
human 
nutrition, 
particularly in the iron(II) 
oxidation state. (World Health 
Organization, 2017a) 
Not of health concern at levels found in 
drinking-water. (World Health Organization, 
2017a) 
Iron overload may cause hemosiderosis, a 
condition characterized by large deposits of 
the iron storage protein hemosiderin in the 
liver and other tissues. (Borges, 2013) 
Magnesium 
Magnesium is a cofactor in 
more 
than 
300 
enzyme 
systems that regulate diverse 
biochemical reactions in the 
body, 
including 
protein 
synthesis, muscle and nerve 
function, 
blood 
glucose 
control, and blood pressure 
regulation. (National Institutes 
of Health, 2016) 
Too much magnesium from food does not 
pose a health risk to healthy individuals 
because the kidneys eliminate excess amounts 
in the urine. However, high doses of 
magnesium from dietary supplements or 
medications often result in diarrhea that can 
be accompanied by nausea and abdominal 
cramping. (National Institutes of Health, 
2016) 
Manganese 
An 
essential 
element 
for 
humans and other animals; 
Involved in the formation of 
bone as well as in enzymes 
involved 
in 
amino 
acid, 
cholesterol, and carbohydrate 
metabolism. 
Several 
epidemiological studies have 
Not of health concern at levels commonly 
causing acceptability problems in drinking-
water. (World Health Organization, 2017a) 
Manganese toxicity has been associated with 
dopaminergic dysfunction. Evidence from 
humans indicates that individual factors such 
as age, gender, ethnicity, genetics, and pre-
existing 
medical 
conditions 
can 
have 
==PAGE:76==
 
 
 
 
72 
 
suggested 
that 
soluble 
manganese is associated with 
adverse effects on learning in 
children. 
These 
findings 
remain to be confirmed, and 
the association has yet to be 
demonstrated 
as 
causal. 
(World Health Organization, 
2017a) 
profound impacts on toxicities. (O’Neal & 
Zheng, 2015) 
Nickel 
No 
biological 
function 
in 
humans has been identified. 
May serve as a cofactor of 
metalloenzymes and facilitate 
iron absorption or metabolism 
in 
microorganisms. 
(World 
Health Organization, 2017a) 
Nickel is a known haematotoxic, immunotoxic, 
neurotoxic, genotoxic, reproductive toxic, 
pulmonary toxic, nephrotoxic, hepatotoxic, 
and carcinogenic agent. It exposure causes the 
formation of free radicals in various tissues in 
both human and animals which lead to 
different 
modifications 
to 
DNA 
bases, 
enhanced lipid peroxidation, and altered 
calcium and sulfhydryl homeostasis. (Das et 
al., 2008) 
Phosphorus 
Maintenance of pH storage 
and transfer of energy and 
nucleotide 
synthesis.  
Impaired phosphorus balance 
can affect the functionality of 
almost every human system, 
including musculoskeletal and 
cardiovascular 
systems, 
ultimately 
leading 
to 
an 
increase in morbidity and 
mortality 
of 
the 
affected 
patients. 
(World 
Health 
Organization, 2017a) 
Acute 
phosphate 
toxicity 
can 
provoke 
hypocalcemia 
and 
associated 
symptoms 
including 
tetany, 
hypotension, 
and 
tachycardia. Moderate phosphate toxicity that 
takes longer to develop can lead to the 
deposition of calcium phosphate crystals in 
various 
tissues, 
including 
often 
fatal 
cardiovascular calcification. (Razzaque, 2011) 
Potassium 
Maintains 
fluid 
volume 
inside/outside of cells and 
thus normal cell function; acts 
to blunt the rise in blood 
pressure in response to excess 
sodium intake and decrease 
markers of bone turnover and 
recurrence of kidney stones. 
(World Health Organization, 
2017a) 
Occurs in drinking-water at concentrations 
well below those of health concern. (World 
Health Organization, 2017a) 
Potassium may cause some health effects in 
individuals in high-risk groups. Symptoms of 
can be hypocalcaemia include decreased 
blood pressure, stomach cramps, diarrhea, 
vomiting, irritability, and fatigue. (Overstreet, 
2015) 
Selenium 
Defense 
against 
oxidative 
stress 
and 
regulation 
of 
thyroid hormone action and 
the reduction and oxidation 
status of Vitamin C and other 
molecules. 
(World 
Health 
Selenium is also very toxic and can cause 
poisoning in humans and animals (Tinggi, 
2003). 
==PAGE:77==
 
 
 
 
73 
 
 
 
APPENDIX TABLE 4 SUGGESTED MINERAL CONTENT FOUND IN LITERATURE 
Parameter 
Suggested value/range 
Calcium 
90 mg/l (Bruvo et al., 2008) 
< 200 mg/l as CaCO3 (Rygaard et al., 2011) 
Fortification needless (Flynn et al., 2003; 
Richardson, 2007) 
Chloride 
 
Chromium 
 
Copper 
Fortification possible (Flynn et al., 2003) 
Fortification needless (Richardson, 2007) 
Fluoride 
0.75 mg/l (Bruvo et al., 2008) 0.8 mg/l 
(Rygaard et al., 2011) 
Iodine 
Fortification possible (Flynn et al., 2003) 
Fortification needless (Richardson, 2007) 
Iron 
Fortification needless (Flynn et al., 2003; 
Richardson, 2007) 
Magnesium 
20 mg/l (Rygaard et al., 2011) 
Fortification needless (Flynn et al., 2003) 
Manganese 
 
Phosphorus 
Fortification possible (Richardson, 2007) 
Fortification needless (Flynn et al., 2003) 
Potassium 
 
Selenium 
Fortification possible (Flynn et al., 2003; 
Richardson, 2007) 
Sodium 
 
Zinc 
Fortification needless (Flynn et al., 2003; 
Richardson, 2007) 
 
 
Organization, 2017a) 
Sodium 
Maintains 
fluid 
volume 
outside of cells and thus 
normal cell function. (World 
Health Organization, 2017a) 
Not of health concern at levels found in 
drinking-water. (World Health Organization, 
2017a) 
In addition, most studies of chronic sodium 
excess have dealt with the elusive subject of 
essential hypertension. Interpretations of data 
have been challenging, and conflicting reports 
have occurred. (Battarbee & Meneely, 1978) 
Zinc 
Component 
of 
multiple 
enzymes 
and 
proteins; 
involved in the regulation of 
gene 
expression. 
(World 
Health Organization, 2017a) 
Not of health concern at levels found in 
drinking-water. (World Health Organization, 
2017a) 
Zinc is considered to be relatively non-toxic to 
humans. (Plum, Rink, & Haase, 2010) 
