==PAGE:1==
 
Master Thesis Project 
 
 
 
               The 7th of July, 2017 
 
 
Implementation of Robust Design in Table-Top Robot Arms 
 
 
In collaboration with Universal Robots A/S 
 
Written by 
Andreas Daniel Bruun Nørballe S112980  
 
Carlos Alonso Perez S151292 
 
Academic supervisor: Tobias Eifler 
Industrial supervisors: Henrik Tilitz Hansen & Mikkel Johansen Vraa 
 
This report contains Proprietary Information and shall not be shared with or distributed to any 3rd party 
without prior permission from Universal Robots A/S.  
 
 
              
 
==PAGE:2==
I 
==PAGE:3==
II 
ABSTRACT 
This report details the Master Thesis Project written by Carlos Alonso Perez and Andreas 
Nørballe entitled: 
Implementation of Robust Design in Table-Top Robots Arms 
This project is built around a lighthouse case study that seeks to identify and show a path 
through the use of examples, to implement Robust Design and the Variation Management 
Framework at Universal Robots.  
The project is motivated by a desire for Universal Robots to reduce the functional variance of 
the robot and to increase robot’s accuracy. This is desired, in part because of the benefits of 
reduced rework, increased predictability, and increased yield. And in part because increasing the 
robot’s accuracy enables it to solve certain tasks that makes it more valuable. 
However, this is not a straightforward Robust Design project. The process is complicated by the 
interactions between the robot’s mechanics and the calibration method used to adjust the 
kinematic model. As such, this project deals with the intersection of Robust Mechanical Design 
and Robotics. This is done through the problem formulation: 
“How to, in a meaningful way, introduce robust design principles and help light a path to better 
managing variation through design at Universal Robots?” 
This is done by breaking down the question and attempting to answer two separate but 
interdependent sub-questions: 
(1) What parameters and how do these affect the location of one robot connection point 
(Top or Bottom) relative to the other? 
(2) Building on the findings on part one; how is this relatable to the calibration and what 
does this mean for the accuracy of the robot? 
Through analyses, modelling, experimental work, and collaborative work the project is built and 
investigated from this first sub-question through to the second, which helps answering the 
overarching problem formulation.  
The product of this thesis is consisting of the following: 
• 
A comprehensive model to investigate the effect of parameter changes and thereby a 
tool to evaluate designs 
• 
A set of good practices, rule of thumbs, and inspirational studies to use in future design 
of parts. Examples of this are a 
o Analytical and empirical results to investigate observations found using the 
model 
o Detailed investigation of sensitivity of a key parameter used in the calibration 
o Different strategies to reduce functional variance in the robot 
As such, by showing a path and developing examples, Universal Robots will be able to utilize 
the methods, the findings, and the conclusions within this report to introduce robust design and 
achieve better variation management of the robot. 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
III 
 
==PAGE:5==
IV 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
This Master Thesis is written as the final submission for the M. 
Sc. Engineering (Design & Innovation) program. It documents 
the project of: 
Implementation of Robust Design in Table-Top Robot Arms 
The Thesis has been made at DTU in collaboration with 
Universal Robots A/S. 
We would like to thank our academic supervisor from DTU 
Tobias Eifler and industrial supervisors Henrik Tillitz Hansen 
and Mikkel Johansen Vraa for the support and counselling 
during this project, which will be the final for us at DTU. 
Additionally, we would like to thank Universal Robots A/S for 
the opportunity to collaborate and for enabling this project.  
Moreover, we would like to thank Rune Søe-Knudsen for 
teaching us more about robotics than we could have imagined 
and Srinivasa Murthy Boorla for his assistance in how to 
approach the tolerance chain analysis for the robot arm. 
Finally, we would like to thank all our co-workers at Universal 
Robots for the supporting environment and all the interesting 
conversations regarding all engineering and non-engineering 
related things. 
 
DTU MEK 2017 
Andreas Nørballe & Carlos Alonso Perez 
Design & Innovation 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
V 
 
==PAGE:7==
VI 
 
 
TABLES OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION .......................................................................... 1 
2. THE PROJECT .............................................................................. 2 
2.1 
Universal Robots .............................................................................. 2 
2.1.1 Company Motivation for the Project .................................................... 3 
2.2 
Academic Purpose of the Project ...................................................... 3 
2.2.1 Learning Goals ................................................................................. 3 
2.2.2 Project span .................................................................................... 4 
2.3 
Problem Definition ........................................................................... 4 
2.3.1 Project Scope .................................................................................. 4 
3. THEORY & METHODOLOGY ......................................................... 7 
3.1 
Robust design Theory & Methodology .............................................. 7 
3.1.1 Variation Management Framework (VMF) ............................................. 7 
3.1.2 Basic Concepts Related to VMF ........................................................... 8 
3.1.3 VMF Formats ................................................................................... 9 
3.1.4 Methods and tools used through the Robust Design Sequence .............. 10 
3.1.5 Adaptations of the Quantitative Methods ........................................... 14 
3.2 
Robotics and Calibration Theory ..................................................... 16 
3.2.1 Kinematic Model ............................................................................. 16 
3.2.2 Denavit-Hartenberg Parameters ....................................................... 16 
3.2.3 Calibration Process ......................................................................... 17 
3.2.4 Dual Robot Calibration (DRC) ........................................................... 17 
4. PART 1: MECHANICAL INVESTIGATION & EVALUATION ........... 23 
4.1 
Key Characteristic Flowdown ......................................................... 23 
4.1.1 Coordinate systems used ................................................................. 25 
4.2 
System & Interface Clarity ............................................................. 26 
4.3 
Tolerance Chain Analysis ................................................................ 29 
4.3.1 Sub-assemblies .............................................................................. 29 
4.3.2 Sub-systems ................................................................................. 32 
4.4 
Sensitivity Analysis ........................................................................ 36 
4.4.2 Sensitivity values in controlling the angle between parts ...................... 40 
4.4.3 Contribution analysis ...................................................................... 42 
4.5 
Conclusions for the Mechanical Investigation and Evaluation ......... 43 
5. PART 2: EFFECTS OF VARIATION IN THE CALIBRATION ........... 44 
5.1 
Mechanical impact on the Common Normal .................................... 45 
5.1.1 Extended Key Characteristics Flowdown ............................................ 45 
5.1.2 Simplified Scenarios for studying the change in the Common Normal. ... 47 
5.1.3 Transfer from Design Parameter to Functional Requirement ................. 48 
5.1.4 Sensitivity Analysis ......................................................................... 49 
5.1.5 Mechanical Impact on the Common Normal Conclusions ...................... 56 
5.2 
Analysis of Dual Robot Calibration Data ......................................... 57 
==PAGE:8==
VII 
 
 
5.2.1 Historical Data ............................................................................... 57 
5.2.2 Analysis of Experiment .................................................................... 59 
5.2.3 Dual Robot Calibration Data Conclusions ........................................... 63 
5.3 
Conclusions for Effects of Variations in the Calibration .................. 64 
6. CONCLUSION ............................................................................ 65 
7. LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK ........................................... 66 
7.1 
Limitations ..................................................................................... 66 
7.2 
Future Work ................................................................................... 66 
8. APPENDIXES ............................................................................ 68 
9. LIST OF FIGURES AND TABLES ................................................. 69 
9.1 
Figures ........................................................................................... 69 
9.2 
Tables ............................................................................................ 71 
==PAGE:9==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 1 OF 71 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
This Thesis represents the last 5 months’ work and development of analyses and insights. A lot of 
thought and time have gone into realizing how robust design and the Variation Management 
Framework could be implemented and used at Universal Robots (UR) and in their products.  
The purpose of this report is therefore to present a lighthouse case study on how to possibly do this, 
going forward, and examples of the theory applied at UR. As a company’s product portfolio is ever 
changing and developments naturally will, and should happen, knowing how to use robust design 
will help achieve the potential of better products at lower costs. This report consists of primarily 
analysis and explanations of how the theory is used. As such, this should be seen as something in 
between an illustrative and exploratory case study. 
Hopefully, this can be the foundation for future robust design work, illustrate opportunities of 
improvements, and make the unfamiliar subject of robust design more familiar to the case company. 
The findings within this thesis and the Tolerance and Sensitivity Analysis Model should not be 
considered exhaustive and conclusions are meant to create inspiration and guidance for follow-up 
projects. As such, this thesis and the accompanying model can be described as a first step towards 
developing a set of “best practices” in robust design for Universal Robots. 
The scope of the project was very wide in the beginning. During the projects progression scope of the 
project was narrowed through the wishes of the company and the available resources. During the 
project, the thesis was delimited to deal exclusively with the mechanical design as it relates to the 
calibration process at UR, and thereby vastly simplifying the robotics aspect. This was later expanded 
to show how some simplified robotics aspects, such as the robot kinematics could be connected to 
robust design.  
Therefore, the report is separated into two major investigations a “Part 1: Mechanical Investigation & 
Evaluation” and a “Part 2: Effects of Variation in the Calibration”. In order to create a common 
understanding two theory and methodology parts are also present. One related to Robust Design and 
another related to Robotics and UR’s calibration procedure. 
The first part is more conventional in terms of robust design. It uses the fact that the robot finds an 
error between its actual position and the position it should be at and therefore tries to map the 
potential physical sources of variation. However, the first part disregards that the calibration is able 
to measure and calibrate some of this variation. While, the second part deals with how imprecise 
mechanical parts affect the calibration performance and thereby change the accuracy of the robots. 
Each part can respectively be said to answer the two questions, which relates to the calibration 
procedure: 
(1) What parameters and how do these affect the location of one robot connection point (Top or 
Bottom) relative to the other? 
(2) Building on the findings on part one; how is this relatable to the calibration and what does 
this mean for the accuracy of the robot? 
==PAGE:10==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 2 OF 71 
2. 
THE PROJECT 
2.1 
Universal Robots 
Universal Robots (UR) was founded in 2005 with the goal of making light, easy, cheap, and safe 
industrial robots available for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs). In 2009 UR launched the first 
product, the UR5. A product that would change the market for light industrial robot arms. In 2015 
UR was acquired by Teradyne for DKK 1,9 billion. Teradyne employs approximately 3800 people 
worldwide. 
In recent years UR has experienced exponential growth (as seen in Figure 2-1). In 2016 UR had a 
revenue of DKK 650 million and an EBIT of DKK 4,2 million. 
 
Figure 2-1: UR turnover from 2012 to 2016 [thousand DKK]. Source: www.Proff.dk 
The features that make a UR robot special are that it is a flexible industrial robot that can be 
programmed easily and does not require a security fence. The UR robots do not require a security 
fence because of its advanced force control. This same force control enables the robot to apply forces 
during an operation and more importantly it enables the robot’s compliant control mode. This allows 
the programmer to physically move the robot to its desired locations.  
Today the company sells three different robots as seen in Figure 2-2. The primary difference between 
the three robots are the lifting capacity (3, 5, and 10 [kg]) and the work radius (500, 850, and 1300 
[mm]) of each of the robots. Typical tasks the robots are programmed for are polishing, gluing, and 
screwing applications requiring uniform product quality, as well as pick-and-place or other assembly 
operations. 
 
Figure 2-2: Universal Robots’ three different products. Source: www.Universal-Robots.com 
==PAGE:11==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 3 OF 71 
2.1.1 
Company Motivation for the Project  
As the sales increases so does the production volume, the amount of sourced parts, and the number of 
suppliers. In to order ensure the quality of the product, functional variance must be kept low. This 
can be achieved through either reducing Production Variance through methods such as Six Sigma or 
reducing Design Sensitivity through methods such as Robust Design. As the volume and the number 
of suppliers increases, the production variance will become increasingly difficult to control. This 
makes Robust Design the apparent and economical approach to maintain product quality and 
performance. 
As such, Robust Design can help UR to reduce Scrap, Rework, & Repair (SRR), allow an increase in 
tolerance windows, increased predictability, and increased yield. UR hopes to implement Robust 
Design to obtain some of these benefits while the company grows.  
Additionally, introducing Robust Design should improve the robot’s accuracy, which increases its 
ability to perform certain tasks. Thereby the introduction of Robust Design will help to keep both the 
customer satisfaction high and the costs of non-quality low. 
2.2 
Academic Purpose of the Project 
2.2.1 
Learning Goals 
In the DTU Study database the Master Thesis is described as ”[…] the final assignment of the 
programme. The objective of the Master thesis is to give students the opportunity to apply knowledge 
they have acquired in an independent way on a larger project that concludes with a written report. 
The thesis must document skills in applying scientific theories and methodologies to a clearly defined 
academic topic.” 
From the same text the following overarching learning objectives for a graduate of the MSc Eng. 
programme from DTU is given. A graduate from DTU 
• 
can identify and reflect on technical scientific issues and understand the interaction between 
the various components that make up an issue 
• 
can, on the basis of a clear academic profile, apply elements of current research at 
international level to develop ideas and solve problems 
• 
masters technical scientific methodologies, theories and tools, and has the capacity to take a 
holistic view of and delimit a complex, open issue, see it in a broader academic and societal 
perspective and, on this basis, propose a variety of possible actions 
• 
can, via analysis and modelling, develop relevant models, systems and processes for solving 
technological problems 
• 
can communicate and mediate research-based knowledge both orally and in writing 
• 
is familiar with and can seek out leading international research within his/her specialist area. 
• 
can work independently and reflect on own learning, academic development and 
specialization 
• 
masters technical problem-solving at a high level through project work, and has the capacity 
to work with and manage all phases of a project – including preparation of timetables, 
design, solution and documentation 
The subject of this thesis is “Robust Design”, which primarily deals with the analysis or development 
of a product using state of the art methodologies. This leverages some of the competencies a Master 
of Science in Engineering (Design and Innovation) should possess. This can be seen from the Study 
Database where, i.a. things in the competence profile section, it states that a M.Sc. Eng. (Design & 
Innovation) is able to: 
==PAGE:12==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 4 OF 71 
• 
understand and apply knowledge within a technological domain 
• 
understand and apply knowledge about natural sciences and technological principles 
• 
retrieve and apply leading international research within his/her specialist area 
• 
understand and critically assess knowledge in the professional field—both internally and in 
partnership with external players 
• 
plan, manage and execute interdisciplinary development projects 
• 
develop relevant models, systems and processes for solving technological problems 
2.2.2 
Project span 
This Master Thesis is set at 30 ECTS-points, which is equivalent to 18 weeks of full-time studies 
(based on 3 week full-time studies for every 5 points). None the less, there has been used 
considerably more time and energy in the project, which have been running during the period of the 
7th of February until the 7th of July 2017. 
This project has been conducted in collaboration with and primarily at Universal Robots in Odense. It 
has been conducted with the primary purpose of creating a lighthouse case that creates the foundation 
for the Variation Management Framework and future Robust Design work at Universal Robots. 
This project is a combination of theoretical studies, analysis, experimental work, modelling, and 
documentation. 
2.3 
Problem Definition 
The main purpose of the report is to investigate ways to introduce Robust Design in Universal 
Robots’ products and implement the Variation Management Framework (VMF). This is complicated 
significantly by the nature of the calibration process. To solve this the problem has therefore been 
defined as: 
“How to, in a meaningful way, introduce robust design principles and help light a path to better 
managing variation through design at Universal Robots” 
This question is sought answered by looking into two separate but interdependent sub questions: 
1. What parameters and how do these affect the location of one robot connection point (Top 
or Bottom) relative to the other? 
2. Building on the findings on part one; how is this relatable to the calibration and what 
does this mean for the accuracy of the robot? 
How these parts are scoped in the project is described in the next section. 
2.3.1 
Project Scope 
There are many aspects surrounding the product. To give a better overview of these, some are shown 
for illustrative purposes in Figure 2-3. The nature of industrial robots makes it difficult to isolate a 
single aspect from the rest without making any considerations and simplifications. As dealing with 
all aspects in one project would be too complex and incomprehensible the project must be scoped and 
broken down. This is done by using the two sub-questions defined above. This significantly reduces 
the complexity and makes the task at hand more manageable. Additionally, it helps create deeper 
insights into the product. This section seeks to describe how the separation of parts is intended along 
with the overall considerations and simplifications made. 
==PAGE:13==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 5 OF 71 
 
Figure 2-3: Excerption of relevant product aspects 
Due to the product being a robot, essentially a programmable device, the repeatability and accuracy 
of the robot is highly dependent on its sensors and software algorithms. These however, rely on the 
ability to predict and model the robot’s mechanics. As such, the mechanical aspect is very much 
integrated with the electronics and the software aspect.  
These aspects are connected through calibration processes, where the robot seeks to identify the 
variation created during production. This is done through the creation of a kinematic model. This 
model tries, as closely as possible to, match the robot’s actual movement with the desired movement. 
Essentially, this increases the robot’s self-awareness.  
In Figure 2-4 the production process at UR can be seen. Overall, there are three major calibration and 
self-test steps that impacts the robot’s self-awareness and interconnects the mechanical with the 
robotics domain through different software algorithms. As such, if the robot’s mechanical design is 
not predictable then the mechanics could influence the kinematic model in unpredicted manners. The 
concepts behind this is described in greater detail in Robotics and Calibration Theory. 
 
Figure 2-4: Production sequence at Universal Robots in Odense 
By disregarding large parts of this production process this project is significantly simplified. The 
project is therefore focused on the mechanical design and its relation to the Dual Robot Calibration 
(DRC). 
The DRC will have a large effect on the final performance of the product. Therefore, this 
investigation will use the DRC as point of departure.  
The DRC is conducted by putting two robots into a closed kinematic chain. The two robots are 
connected through two “connectors” called Horse and Bone. They are attached as rigid connectors 
between the two robots’ Tool Connection Points (TCPs) and Bases. As such, two rigid links that 
include the top joints and bottom joints of both robots are created. This is displayed in Figure 2-5.  
These end-links are critical in order to obtain a good calibration and while the rest of the robot can be 
accurately estimated, these end-links cannot be calibrated with high accuracy. This is because it is 
difficult for the software to accurately estimate where one robot ends and the next begin when 
variations are present. Therefore, this project will focus solely on these end-links and thereby 
Joints Assembly
•Assembly of 
joints thorugh 
manual and 
automated 
processes
Joints Self-
Test
•Automated self-
test to identify 
encoders location 
and verify 
functionality.
Final 
Assembly
•Manual assembly 
of joints with 
arms and other 
joints
36h Test
•Self running test 
to verify 
functionality of 
system
Dual Robot 
Calibration
•Automated 
calibration and 
final definition of 
kinematic model
==PAGE:14==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 6 OF 71 
disregard the middle part of the robot. This leads to an assumption that variance and uncertainty in 
the “middle part” can be accurately estimated and calibrated.  
Furthermore, in order to simplify the problem further it is assumed that all variance introduced in the 
production and assembly can be identified in the mechanical design. As such, an undesirable 
torqueing pattern is assumed to be controlled by the mating interface. Influences such as temperature, 
stresses, deformation, gravity, and other noise factors are also completely disregarded in this project. 
 
 
Figure 2-5: Mechanical systems of interest. Top: Disregarding the “middle part”. Left: Top end-link with the two robot tools and the 
connector (bone). Right: Bottom end-link with the two robot bases and the connector (horse). 
Finally, this investigation will focus solely on the UR3 model. The UR3 is Universal Robots smallest 
robot and the most recent addition to the product assortment. Since there is component sharing and 
reused working principles across the robot the findings regarding the end-links might be relevant and 
relatable to the entire robot. 
Assertions, assumptions, and scoping were discussed and, in part, found through collaboration with 
the company. Overall, this scoping helps make the system simpler, more manageable, and easier to 
understand and communicate. 
==PAGE:15==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 7 OF 71 
3. 
THEORY & METHODOLOGY 
This part explains the theory and methodology used in the project. This concerns both the robust 
design aspects and the robotics and calibration aspects, which is used for as the foundation for 
building the models and making assumptions.  
3.1 
Robust design Theory & Methodology 
The relevant Robust Design (RD) theory and methodologies explained in this section are shown 
within the Robust Design Process (seen in Figure 3-1). As seen in the RD methods diagram are not 
covering the Geometrical Tolerances domain (GD&T/GPS), therefore some adaptations and slight 
modifications of the typical methodologies have been done to better cover this domain in the analysis 
of the product of interest and can be explained in Adaptations of the Quantitative Methods. 
 
Figure 3-1: Robust Design Sequence 
The following methodology has been used to analyze a system already in production, and it provides 
a set of useful outcomes in order to understand the actual performance. But this methodology can 
also advantageously be applied during the design process. 
The source for most of this material is the DTU Robust Design course material. 
3.1.1 
Variation Management Framework (VMF) 
The VMF is a four quadrants framework consisting of three main quadrants and a trade-off quadrant. 
It creates a link all the way from the customer domain through the functional and physical domain to 
the process domains. It is a useful framework to investigate the deployment through the different 
domains. As such, it is very suitable to communicate robust design and variation at both engineering 
and management levels. Its main purposes are: 
• 
To clearly show and deploy the Customer Attributes (CAs) 
• 
To document and highlight relationships within the whole system surrounding the product. 
• 
To investigate variation cost trade-offs, showing other strategies than merely parameter 
optimization 
• 
Work as an overarching concept for robust design 
The domains in which VMF creates links are displayed an explained in Figure 3-2. 
==PAGE:16==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 8 OF 71 
 
Figure 3-2: Domains of the VMF1 
3.1.2 
Basic Concepts Related to VMF 
This is a quick introduction to and overview of the basic concepts. Some of these are explained in 
more detail in section 3.1.4. 
3.1.2.1 Key Characteristic (KC) 
Key Characteristics (KC) are product requirements and attributes that demand attention because they 
are critical for performance, safety, or regulations and they are at risk of not being achieved due to 
process variations2. 
The key characteristics flowdown is what describes the relationships between the 4 different 
domains: Customer, functional, design, and process domains. 
3.1.2.2 Transfer Function 
The transfer function defines the link between the different domains of the VMF. In Figure 3-3 an 
example of a generic transfer function is shown. This function relates one Functional Requirement 
(FR) to one Design Parameter (DP). 
 
 
Figure 3-3: Example of transfer function linking one DP to one FR 
                                                      
1 Suh N.P.,1990. The Principles of design. New York: Oxford Press 
2 Whitney D. E., 2004. Key Characteristics. Lecture slides: https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mechanical-engineering/2-875-mechanical-assembly-and-its-role-in-
product-development-fall-2004/lecture-notes/class_kcs_04.pdf 
==PAGE:17==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 9 OF 71 
3.1.2.3 Robustness 
Robustness is focused on ensuring that a product performs consistently despite foreseeable variation. 
In Figure 3-3 it is displayed how robustness is increased in the right graph compared to that of the 
left graph. This can be seen as they both the same possible variation of DP but the impact on the FR 
is decreased when Robustness is increased. 
3.1.2.4 Axiomatic Design 
Axiomatic design is a principle based on fulfilling the two axioms of design (visualized in Figure 
3-4): 
• 
Axiom 1: The Independence Axiom: Maintain the independence of functional requirements 
(FRs) 
• 
Axiom 2: The Information Axiom: Minimize the information content on the design. 
 
Figure 3-4: Representation of the infringement of the two axioms 
Trying to fulfill the two axioms can help lead to a less complex system and easier control of each FR. 
3.1.2.5 Design Clarity 
Design Clarity is a concept inspired by the words of James Skakoon: “The design is not done when 
you can’t add anything more to it, the design is done when you can’t take anything else away”. 
Design Clarity is achieved by using the tool System Clarity and Interface Clarity. 
Some effects of having design clarity properly implemented during design are: 
• 
Simpler and unambiguous interfaces 
• 
Easier to prove that they will work, and fewer prototype iterations will be required. 
• 
Fewer tolerance stack-ups 
• 
Simpler drawings 
• 
Simpler part measurements 
3.1.3 
VMF Formats 
The VMF is a framework and it comprises several models. Therefore, it can also be presented in 
many different manners both graphically and written: 
• 
It can be constituted by a set of coherent matrices that show the relations and dependencies 
between the four domains of interest as it is shown in Figure 3-5. 
==PAGE:18==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 10 OF 71 
 
Figure 3-5: VMF domains connected by Design Matrices 
• 
It can also be graphically presented showing the Transfer Function to display how the 
variation of one single parameter is translated into the different domains as it is observed in 
Figure 3-6. 
 
Figure 3-6: VMF domains connected by Transfer Functions 
• 
It can be deployed for a specific parameter or for the whole set of parameters integrated in 
the system.  
• 
It can be focused on one specific quadrant or involving the whole set of domains. 
3.1.4 
Methods and tools used through the Robust Design Sequence 
In these following sections the RD tools relating to the basic concepts are expanded and explained in 
more detail. The tools can roughly be separated into qualitative and quantitative method 
Qualitative Methods 
• 
Key Characteristic (KC) flowdown: Used to map the relations and interactions between the 
parameters through the four domains. 
• 
System Clarity and Interface Clarity: Used to analyze the physical domain to look for 
missing or unintended constraints 
Quantitative Methods 
==PAGE:19==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 11 OF 71 
• 
Tolerance Chain Analysis (TCA): Used for giving quantifying the relations between DPs 
and FRs through a dimensional analysis. 
• 
Sensitivity Analysis: Used for finding out the most critical relations between the different 
domains in the VMF. 
3.1.4.1 Key Characteristic Flowdown 
The KC Flowdown can be described as a 5-step approach3 which will motivate the whole process to 
build the VMF: 
1. Identify customer level KCs and acceptable variation  
2. Flow identified KCs down to feature level  
3. Identify capability of achieving feature level KCs  
4. Identify what customer requirements are at risk  
5. Act! Improve either the robustness of the design or the production process  
In Figure 3-7 this process is shown and in Figure 3-8 a simple example showing this methodology 
can be seen. 
 
Figure 3-7: KC Flowdown integrated in the RD process. 
 
Figure 3-8: Example of KC Flowdown from a system FR domain to the DP domain. 
3.1.4.2 Design Clarity 
System Clarity 
                                                      
3 Modified from Thornton, A.C., 1996. Key Characteristics. Association for Manufacturing Excellence 
==PAGE:20==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 12 OF 71 
System Clarity is the systematic analysis of an assembly in terms of visualizing the intended Degrees 
of Freedom (DoF) and required constraints between parts. System Clarity is usually used motivated 
by identifying design errors when the mobility or geometry of the system is crucial for achieving a 
proper functionality. This analysis can be conducted through a 5-step procedure4: 
1. System Structure: Represent each part as a bubble and draw a line for each physical contact 
between parts (Identification of Physical Connections).  
2. Design Intent: Reflect on the overall product’s Functionality by visualizing the Intended 
DoFs for the part to function, then identify the relevant Bodies that exist.  
3. Load paths: For each of the translational DoFs, draw a line between the bubbles 
(Constraints).  
4. Identify Loops: For each of the translational DoFs, identify loops (Potential Over-
constraints).  
5. Evaluation: Evaluate the identified loops (intended vs. undesirable Load Paths)  
 
 
Figure 3-9: Representation of a generic bubble diagram used for the System Clarity analysis. 
Interface Clarity 
Interface clarity is an analysis of how the parts interface with each other. The analysis uses the load 
paths and constraints identified through the System Clarity analysis as a basis. As such, it compares 
the intended degrees of freedom that should be locked to maintain the functionality against the actual 
number features constraining the movement in every degree of freedom. It also takes a closer look at 
how the constraining features are designed and if they are ambiguous in term of how and exactly 
where the constraints are happening. 
For the product analyzed in this project, after an overview of the interfaces are found in the systems 
analyzed and realizing the repetition of the same type of functional surfaces a systematic way of 
analyzing the over constraints was created and shown in Figure 3-10. 
                                                      
4 Eifler, T., 2017. DTU Robust Design Course Material 
==PAGE:21==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 13 OF 71 
 
Figure 3-10: Interfaces found in the System of interest analyzed in this report. 
The Interface Clarity method can be considered both a qualitative and quantitative method depending 
on the way it is used. It can e.g. be quantitative if it is used to score and compare designs and it can 
be qualitative when it is used to develop deeper insights into the product and the design thinking. In 
this report, the method is used in the latter manner. 
3.1.4.3 Tolerance Chain Analysis 
When a well-defined KC Flowdown to connect FRs with DPs is developed it is quite relevant to 
implement a Tolerance Chain Analysis (TCA) in order to see if the DPs’ tolerances and chains could 
create potential variations which could create unwanted effects on the FRs.  
Traditional methods used for the TCA are based on collecting the dimensional tolerances of a chain 
to create a stack-up that shows: 
• 
Worst Case Scenario (WCS): The tolerance stack-ups are calculated for the worst possible 
scenario created by the current tolerance windows specified on the system. 
• 
Root Sum Square (RSS) analysis: The RSS method works on a statistical approach. It 
assumes that most of the components fall to the mid of the tolerance zone rather than at the 
extreme end5 
3.1.4.4 Sensitivity Analysis 
After knowing which DPs have an influence on the FRs the sensitivity analysis is used to quantify 
what influence a variation in a DP could have on the FRs. Once these are found it is then possible to 
define the most sensitive parameters. For a sensitive parameter, this can be used to either implement 
appropriate controls of the DP or modify the design to reduce the sensitivity. This will help to 
increase predictability of the system performance. The sensitivity of a FR to the change of DP can be 
calculated in several ways, two of the most common are shown in Figure 3-11. 
                                                      
5 http://www.brighthubengineering.com/machine-design/56403-assembly-tolerance-stack-up-analysis-using-the-rss-method/ 
==PAGE:22==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 14 OF 71 
 
Figure 3-11: Sensitivity Definitions and its Representation on a Transfer Function. 
3.1.5 
Adaptations of the Quantitative Methods 
3.1.5.1 Tolerance Chain Analysis (Considering Geometrical Tolerances) 
After developing the KC Flowdown for the product it was realized that a standard TCA based on 
dimensional tolerances would not give any relevant insight and that the main focus of the analysis 
should be on the geometrical tolerances defined as FRs. Due to the fact that there is little literature in 
this area and that the most relevant method found is still under research6. It was decided to create a 
simplified but representative method to analyze the influences of geometrical tolerance specifications 
(such as parallelism and concentricity) in the stack-up assemblies. 
The methodology is based on the following steps: 
1. Selecting the parts stack-up of interest 
2. Setting as FRs to keep the relative position of the whole stack-up close to the 
nominal position 
3. Creating a Datum system between interfaces that allows to analyze the influence of 
the variations between datums to the whole stack-up of interest. 
4. Gather the dimensional and geometrical tolerances that can create variation between 
datums. 
5. Create the WCS based on the superposition principle for the different directions of 
interest. 
In Appendix 4-F the full deployment of this methodology applied on the product analyzed in this 
thesis can be found.  
                                                      
6 Armillotta A., 2016. Tolerance Analysis Considering form errors in planar datum features 
==PAGE:23==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 15 OF 71 
 
Figure 3-12: Representation of the datum system used for the TCA 
 
It is advantageous to have a simple method that accounts for the potential variations related both 
dimensional and geometrical tolerances. It is useful for comparing the potential impact of the 
tolerances selected. But it has a large set of simplifications that make the approach purely indicative 
and difficult to provide statistical models. Statistical models are useful in order to study the 
probabilities of having certain scenarios in real life. Therefore, it is limited to the creation of WCS. 
Some of the main simplifications applied are: 
• 
The maximum angle that could be created by a geometrical tolerance is calculated as the  
tan-1(Size of Tolerance Window / Diameter) 
• 
This maximum variation in angle is assumed to be located at only one interface  
• 
Variations in angles are assumed to be rotated around the center point of the part 
• 
All the angles created by variations will be stacked on the same direction 
3.1.5.2 Sensitivity Analysis (Considering all Geometrical Tolerances) 
Although in Robust Design the traditional sensitivity analysis is done between FRs and DPs in this 
report it has been also carried out with tolerances thanks to the model created that implements the 
TCA explained in the previous section. 
 
 
==PAGE:24==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 16 OF 71 
 
3.2 
Robotics and Calibration Theory 
As we are dealing with a cyber physical system, some relevant theory on robotics must be introduced 
in order to be able to understand in which way the physical domain (in which RD uses to deal) 
interacts with the controlling system7. 
3.2.1 
Kinematic Model 
In order to be able to operate a robot arm with any accuracy the arm needs some sort of kinematic 
model that relates its actuator movements to the movement of its tool.  
This leads to two important concepts in robotics for industrial robot arms: Forward kinematics and 
inverse kinematics. 
The forward kinematics refers to using the kinematics equations of a robot to calculate the position of 
the TCP (or end-effector). In the UR robots, the location of the TCP is then calculated by using the 
rotation of each robot joint. The inverse kinematics is the reverse process of the forward kinematics. 
It refers to using the kinematic equations to calculate the needed setting for each actuator in order to 
achieve a certain position of the end-effector. In the case of the UR robots, the angles of each joint 
are calculated based on a desired position of the TCP. 
Therefore, an exact kinematic model is needed in order to precisely determine the TCP’s location in 
space. This “global accuracy” is required for instance to: 
• 
follow a drawing 
• 
precisely reach set coordinates in space 
• 
accurately move in a straight line 
• 
be able to interchange robots and just copy the programming 
A robot’s kinematic model can be built in many ways, at UR the Denavit-Hartenberg parameters are 
used. 
3.2.2 
Denavit-Hartenberg Parameters  
Denavit-Hartenberg parameters (DHPs) is a convention to represent the kinematics of robot. They are 
used to create a mathematical model of robot arms by describing each actuator relative to each other 
through the use of 4 DoF (2 translational and 2 rotational) per joint. In UR’s robot arms with 6 
rotational joints 24 parameters are needed (6 joints with 4 parameters). The parameters in the DH 
notation are used to create a transformation from an origin location (e.g. the mount of the base) to a 
final location (e.g. the TCP). This can be extended through an additional joint to include a tool. A 
simplified representation of a UR robot can be seen in Figure 3-13. 
The DHPs can be described as: 
• 
Each transformation uses 4 parameters: 2 translational and 2 rotational (d, a, θ, α) 
• 
Each transformation happens from joint to joint 
• 
The transformations can be combined 
                                                      
7Berger, Christoph et. al. 2015. Characterization of Cyber-Physical Sensor Systems 
==PAGE:25==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 17 OF 71 
More detailed theory about DH transformations can be found in: 
• 
Appendix 3-A: DH Transformations 
 
Figure 3-13: Representation of a UR robotic arm and its joints. Source: Søe-Knudsen, R., 2014. New methods for kinematic modelling and 
calibration of robots. 
3.2.3 
Calibration Process 
As the real world is full of variations a system will never have the exact nominal values it is designed 
with. Therefore, a calibration is something commonly implemented on cyber physical systems. This 
is done as control systems usually rely on knowing its inaccuracies. A calibration process will focus 
on defining an accurate kinematic model. 
The 4 steps of a general calibration process are (1) modelling, (2) measuring, (3) identification and 
(4) correction.  
As the calibration done at UR is a relatively new and innovative method with some limitations it is 
described in more detail in the following section. 
3.2.4 
Dual Robot Calibration (DRC) 
The DRC is a relative new and revolutionary method to calibrate robotic arms. It was developed at 
UR with the main aim of creating a simple, cheap, and robust calibration process. 
The dual robot calibration method is characterized by seeking to identify DHPs that constitutes 
kinematic model by using two robots connected in a closed chain.  
The method it is based on readings of the robot joints’ angular sensors, which enables it to compare 
the forward kinematics calculation of each robot’s Tool Center Point with respect to each other. Each 
set of 12 joint angles is unique, because the robots are physically connected, so one robot joint angle 
can only change, if at least one of the other robot is changed, since they are rigidly connected. 
A comic strip of this interaction is shown in Figure 3-14. 
==PAGE:26==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 18 OF 71 
 
Figure 3-14: Simple explanation of the DRC process 
3.2.4.1 Process 
As the DRC is a calibration process it is based on the four previously mentioned calibration steps. 
Because of its innovative character and its relevance for this project the DRC process is explained in 
more detail. To calibrate, the two robots move through several different positions until they have 
captured enough information to calculate a calibration. The movement through the different positions 
is driven by one robot defined as Master, and followed by the other robot defined as Slave. This is 
possible because of the UR robots’ compliant mode.  
 
Figure 3-15 DRC Set up formed by two robots and two connectors.  
The stepwise process the calibration goes through is described in a simplified manner below: 
1. Creation of a closed physical chain: By using two connectors (Horse and Bone) the two 
robots are fixed together thus creating a closed kinematic chain with 12 DOF (2 x 6 rotation 
joints). 
==PAGE:27==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 19 OF 71 
2. Error Registration for Calibration: The connected robots will be moving through a large 
set of positions. In each position, the (12) joint angles are read, and by applying forward 
kinematics using the default DHPs values, a location and rotation of both robots TCPs are 
estimated. As the TCPs are locked together in a kinematic chain there should be no positional 
difference. Therefore, the difference in position and rotation between that estimation and the 
expected is registered as the Error (see Figure 3-16). 
 
Figure 3-16: Representation of the closed kinematic chain and the calibration error. Source: Søe-Knudsen, R., 2014. New methods for 
kinematic modelling and calibration of robots. 
3. Error Minimization and DHP correction: An algorithm uses the registered errors to solve 
a minimization problem. It solves for the optimal change on DHPs that will result in the 
smallest error. The DHPs are scaled (described further in section 3.2.4.3) using a known 
distance in the system. We call these new parameters the corrected DHPs. 
4. Control Error Calculation: Using the corrected DHPs the error of the of joint angles is 
recalculated using the forward. 
5. Calibration Check: In order to achieve a successful calibration there are implemented an 
algorithmic and physical check. If a valid calibration is achieved the corrected DHPs will be 
saved in the robots’ kinematic model. 
a. Algorithm Checks: 
i. The Control Error calculated using the corrected DHPs must be within 
certain limits to have a successful calibration. 
ii. The kinematic model uses a known a reference distance to check the if an 
accurate scaling of the model was applied. 
b. Physical Check: In the last step of the DRC process the kinematic chain is opened 
and the bone is removed. Then the robots are programmed to be positioned TCP 
against TCP with a gap of 2,5 [mm]. The calibration will be successful if the gap is 
within a ±0,5 [mm] limit. This check it done by an operator using Go No-Go gauges. 
6. Output Data: After completing the calibration the software will provide a set of data: 
a. Statistics of the Calibration & Control errors registered through the different 
positions. 
b. The estimated value of the reference distance 
c. The difference between the corrected and default DHP (∆DHP).  
 
  
 
Figure 3-17: Default DH parameters for a UR5 and an example of Corrected DH Parameters after Calibration 
The corrected DHP values can be said to be equal to the nominal DHPs’ values plus the ∆DHPs. 
==PAGE:28==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 20 OF 71 
3.2.4.2 Dual Robot Calibration Limitations 
Although this process is an innovative and smart solution it has some limitations, which is 
commented by Søe-Knudsen8 “[…] some parts have been manufactured with a much higher 
accuracy than the one we expect to achieve with our calibration method, because of our limitations”. 
Some of them are: 
• 
The limited resolution of the angular sensors. 
• 
The algorithm does not consider some factors 
o Effect of external forces, such as, gravity 
o Effect of internal stresses because of the closed chain 
o Expansion due to temperature 
In Figure 3-18, the parameters that will constitute the kinematic model found during the DRC are 
partially shown. Some of the values will be constants (these are marked with red color). Those 
constant parameters are relying on accurate physical dimensions. In the real world, every dimension 
will have some variation. This could be able to create an unwanted result in the DRC. The constant 
parameter whose variation could create the largest influence is the at. This is explained in the next 
section. 
 
 
Figure 3-18: Representation of the transformations done from joint to joint in the closed kinematic chain formed by two robots and two 
connectors. 
                                                      
8 Søe-Knudsen, R., 2014. New Methods for Kinematic Modelling and Calibration of Robots 
==PAGE:29==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 21 OF 71 
3.2.4.3 Scaling the Dual Robot Calibration 
In creating the kinematic model, the DRC is able to accurately establish the relationships between 
each joint in the entire closed kinematic chained (as explained in the previous part). However, while 
relationships are determined the size is not. Therefore, these need to be scaled in order to get a model 
that resembles reality. To do this a known distance is required. 
In the calibration of the UR3, this known distance used is the length of the common normal (at) 
created between the two robots’ TCP axes. In Figure 3-19 a representation of the CN used for scaling 
in the DRC set-up is shown.  
 
Figure 3-19 Representation of the CN between the tool axis. Source: Søe-Knudsen, R., 2014. New methods for kinematic modelling and 
calibration of robots. 
This scaling distance is assumed to be a fixed length. However, since some variation will always be 
present this parameter will vary as it shown the example in Figure 3-20.  
By using the Bone’s CN to scale the entire kinematic model for the closed chain, the Horse’s CN, 
whose relationship is also established during the DRC, can be used verify that the scaling distance 
found is accurate. Because the bone and the horse are machined parts with tight tolerances these are 
assumed to be very close to their nominal value. Therefore, if this reference distance is within a 
certain limit then the kinematic model’s scaling is verified.  
==PAGE:30==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 22 OF 71 
 
Figure 3-20 2D representation to illustrate how certain physical variation (e.g. Angularity between gear and tool) affects to the CN length 
3.2.4.4 Mathematical Definition of the Common Normal 
The common normal is defined as being the length of the vector between the two robots’ rotation 
axes where the vector is normal to both axes. This vector is per its definition the shortest distance 
between the two axes. The mathematical definition can be written as 
𝑑𝑅#,%&'(, 𝑅),%&'(
=  𝐴𝐶 ∙ 𝑅#,%&'(× 𝑅),%&'(
𝑅#,%&'(× 𝑅),%&'(
 
𝑊ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒 
 𝑅#,%&'( & 𝑅),%&'( 𝑎𝑟𝑒 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑣𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑠 𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑜𝑡𝑠@𝑎𝑥𝑒𝑠, 
 𝑎𝑛𝑑  𝐴𝐶 𝑖𝑠 𝑎 𝑣𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟 𝑏𝑒𝑡𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑛 𝑡𝑤𝑜 𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑠 𝑜𝑛 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑜𝑡𝑠@ 𝑎𝑥𝑒𝑠 
 
==PAGE:31==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 23 OF 71 
4. 
PART 1: MECHANICAL INVESTIGATION & EVALUATION 
This mechanical investigation and evaluation uses the robust design sequence previously explained. 
All the models created and analyses conducted in this section are an integral part of the Variation 
Management Framework (VMF). This part seeks to the answer the sub-question previously set forth: 
(1) What parameters and how do these affect the location of one robot connection point 
(Top or Bottom) relative to the other? 
This analysis starts with the key characteristics (KC) flowdown in order to identify the key 
characteristics of the system, which is a central part of the VMF. The KC flowdowns looks at how 
key Customer Attributes (CAs) are related to Functional Requirements (FRs), and how they are 
related to Design Parameters (DPs). A detailed exploration of the CAs is out of the scope of this 
project, and as such they have just been used to illustrate some context and how they could be used.  
After the KC flowdown a more detailed analysis of the product is conducted. This consists of 
mapping the System Clarity, the Interface Clarity, the Tolerance Chain as it relates to the FRs, and a 
Sensitivity analysis. The goals of these mappings are to highlight weaknesses in the design, things 
that the designer should try to be more aware of in the future, along with better illustrated 
connections, trade-offs, and design consequences.  
The end goal of this part is not only to answer the above question but also to create a case study with 
all the basic elements necessary to obtain meaningful insights regarding the mechanical design of the 
robots presently and create a foundation for future development and expansion. 
Appendixes presented in this part 
• 
Appendix 4-A: KC flowdown 
• 
Appendix 4-B: Trigonometry Transformation through the Connectors 
• 
Appendix 4-C: Systems clarity 
• 
Appendix 4-D: Interface clarity 
• 
Appendix 4-E: Step-by-step guide of tolerance chain analysis 
• 
Appendix 4-F: Tolerance chains analysis 
• 
Appendix 4-G: Notes for the technical drawings 
• 
Appendix 4-H: Sensitivities 
• 
Appendix 4-I: Sensitivities flowdown 
• 
Appendix 4-J: Contribution analysis 
4.1 
Key Characteristic Flowdown 
To help visualize and understand the deployment of customer attributes, functional requirements, and 
design parameters a hierarchy of the Key Characteristics (KC) has been used. This flowdown can be 
seen in Figure 4-1. 
==PAGE:32==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 24 OF 71 
 
Figure 4-1: General KC Flowdown. The orange boxes are top-level CAs, grey boxes top-level FRs, yellow boxes mid-level FRs, and the 
black boxes represent the further break down that is presented in this report. The highlighted flowdown represents this part of the report. 
The KC flowdown starts at “Best in class robots” and flows down through to “Robust Kinematic 
Model” and to represent “Robust Mechanics” (dealt with here in part 1) and “Good Calibration” 
(dealt with in part 2).  
Focused on the mid-level FR of having Robust Mechanics the KC Flowdown is expanded going from 
a System Level FR down to the DPs and Tolerances. This flowdown is created by following the 
methodology explained in the “Robust design Theory & Methodology” section. In Figure 4-2 the 
flowdown from Robust Mechanics to the DP and Tolerance Framework can be seen. The complete 
KC flowdown with all the dependencies from Subsystem level to Tolerance level can be seen in 
Appendix 4-A. 
 
Figure 4-2: KC Flowdown developed from the System FR: Robust Mechanics 
The KC flowdown shows that the robust mechanics, as it relates to the DR calibration, can be split up 
into “Precise & predictable” subsystems and “middle part”. As stated in the scope, the middle part is 
disregarded in this analysis. This leaves precise and predictable subsystems consisting of two sub-
systems (SSs): (1) The Bottom SS being base-horse-base subsystem and (2) the Top SS being the 
tool-bone-tool subsystem. Each of these two sub-systems consists of three subassemblies (SAs) and 
each subassembly consists of the individual parts.  
The requirements to the SSs can be described as a minimal relative displacement between the Point at 
Datum 2 and Point at Datum 1 as shown in Figure 4-3. This displacement can be split into minimal 
displacement in the radial direction (∆r) and in the axial direction (∆z). Interestingly enough, these 
FRs can flowdown from the system level as being the relative (unwanted) displacement between the 
==PAGE:33==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 25 OF 71 
two end points of either the system, sub-system, sub-assembly, or part level. As such, this is exactly 
how the FRs are set for the SAs. 
The coordinate system used for the analyses is explained in greater detailed in the following 
subsection. 
 
 
Figure 4-3: Point at Datum 2 (also referred to as the origin point of Robot 2) and point at Datum 1 (also referred to as the origin point for 
robot 1) along with the z and r direction for datum 2 for base-horse-base sub-system (left) and tool-bone-tool sub-system (right) 
Currently, UR has not set any specific FRs and therefore neither target nor specification limits for the 
SAs and SSs. Therefore, is the development of this KC flowdown and the desired target is set from 
scratch during this project. This is done in collaboration with UR.  
4.1.1 
Coordinate systems used 
Because each subsystem consists of two identically specified robot subassemblies and a connector 
assembly the analysis can be simplified. This is done in such a way that the same analysis and radial 
coordinate system is used for both of the robots, while a Cartesian coordinate system is used for the 
connectors.  
By using a radial coordinate 4 degree of freedom (DoF) system and in the same configuration for 
both robots the models and analyses created can be significantly simplified.  The coordinate system 
used for each SA can be seen in Figure 4-4. 
r 
z 
==PAGE:34==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 26 OF 71 
 
Figure 4-4: Representation of the SA coordinate system defined.  
The coordinate systems are defined in such a manner that the relationship between the SAs systems 
are direct. This means that the: 
• 
robot’s z-axis is a concentric with connector’s z-axis 
• 
robot’s r-axis can be concentric with either the connector’s x-axis, y-axis, or any axis in the 
xy plane 
As observed the connectors have one coordinate system for each robot that is attached. Therefore, a 
transformation between this coordinate systems has been defined by using trigonometry, more details 
can be found in Appendix 4-B 
4.2 
System & Interface Clarity 
To investigate the two chosen subsystems the System Clarity method is used to describe the parts 
interrelations in the two different subsystems. These relationships are then used as a basis for 
investigating the Interface Clarity. This helps us better understand the relationship and interfaces 
between the individual parts. The overall purpose is to find over-constraints and ambiguities in the 
system and between parts that can create uncertainty and geometric variances.  
==PAGE:35==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 27 OF 71 
 
Figure 4-5: Example of how interface ambiguity can influence the assembly 
The following sections regarding system clarity and interface clarity will focus on the key takeaways 
from the models. For more detail please refer to the section 3.1.4.2 for theory and Appendix 4-C and 
Appendix 4-D for results. 
4.2.1.1 System Clarity 
The full models for system clarity can be seen in Appendix 4-C. The analysis for the subsystems was 
done using the fact that the two robots has the same structure. As such, the sub-assembly of one robot 
and its connection to the connector has been separately investigated but this is representative of both 
robots. 
The overall conclusion from the system clarity models is that there is a good practice. In general, 
there is a clear and singular load or functional path. However, there is one significant closed loop in 
both the Top SS and the Bottom SS, which can be seen in Figure 4-6. This loop is caused by the use 
of counter-sunk (CS) screws. A loop is when there are two load paths instead of a single. Thus, over-
constrained, it will be uncertain which exactly controls the DoFs. 
The Flange Tool-Gear Flange interface in the tool and the Flange-Base interface in the base locks all 
DoFs. As such, the position in the z-direction and the rotation around Rr are controlled by this 
interface. By introducing the CS Screws and thereby creating a “closed loop” a potential influence 
constraining the z-displacement and the Rr-rotation between the two parts is also introduced.  
 
Figure 4-6: Excerpt of the System Clarity analysis, showing a loop in the Flange Tool-Gear Flange connection (tool) because of countersunk 
screws. 
This “closed loop” is naturally, along with all other interfaces, investigated further in the Interface 
Clarity. 
Example of ambiguity consequence
Part w/ambiguous 
surface and variation 
(within tolerances)
Part w/ambigous surface 
but no variation (mated 
w/two screws) 
Left screw 
torqued first
Right screw 
torqued first
Significantly larger angle – possibly 
problems with attaching left screw
Larger angle than 
w/o surface
Mating two 
ambiguous surfaces 
leads to uncertainty 
and increasing the 
possibility of 
variation introduced 
by processes.
In this case whether 
the torquing patter 
has a significant 
impact on the 
parallelism of the two 
parts.
This impact could 
have been completely 
avoided.
==PAGE:36==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 28 OF 71 
4.2.1.2 Interface Clarity 
The interface clarity is a natural continuation of the system clarity. It investigates the interfaces of all 
matting parts by looking at how they are constrained in the z-, r-, Rr-, and Rz-direction. A summary 
of the interface clarity investigation can be seen in Figure 4-7 and in its entirety in Appendix 4-D.  
 
Figure 4-7: Summary of the Interface Clarity for the Top Subsystem. 
The interface clarity generally, shows interfaces that are correctly constrained. However, most 
interfaces contain interface ambiguities created by large contact surfaces. Besides the many 
ambiguities, the analysis also reveals over constrains in the Flange Tool-Gear Flange interface (in the 
Tool SA), see Figure 4-8, and the Flange-Base interface (in the Base SA). This underlines one of the 
findings from the System Clarity regarding the countersunk (CS) screws. It shows that these 
interfaces are over constrained and likely could be unpredictable in terms of robustness. A deeper 
investigation into this reveals that the CS screws are meant to create interference between the Flange 
and the Base in the base and likewise between the Flange Tool and Gear Flange in the tool but that 
there is a possibility of clearance between the Flange and the Base in the base. This is investigated 
further in the tolerance chain analyses. 
 
Figure 4-8: Flange Tool-Gear Flange interface in the Tool SA. 
==PAGE:37==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 29 OF 71 
4.3 
Tolerance Chain Analysis 
This analysis follows the method presented in the methodology part. The sub-systems are broken 
down as described in the KC flowdown with each sub-system broken down into sub-assemblies and 
thereafter parts as observed in Figure 4-4. The whole procedure can be found in Appendix 4-E. 
The Tolerance Chain Analysis is developed with the goal of investigating the mechanical 
components and the relationship to the overall requirements. This includes looking at what 
contributes to the worst-case scenarios (WCSs) and how the WCSs might look. The sub-system level 
WCSs is created as a combination of different WCSs of the sub-assembly level. As such, each sub-
assembly is studied separately at first to gain insights into each sub-assembly. Afterwards, this 
knowledge is used to identify to sub-systems’ WCSs. As such, these scenarios are used to find the 
values of the sub-assemblies WCS and then compile them in different configurations to model the 
total sub-system WCS in relation to the FRs. This is shown in detail in Appendix 4-F.  
Additionally, during the creation of these tolerance models several notes regarding missing details or 
ambiguous interpretation in the technical drawings was noted. These notes can be found in Appendix 
4-G. 
In order to investigate the possible WCSs the following considerations have been made: 
• 
∆α can create a contribution on ∆r (or ∆x/∆y) and ∆z these are called ∆α_r and ∆α_z 
• 
A tight fit between a shaft and hole can limit or introduce angularity 
• 
The direction of the variations has a relevance 
• 
The geometric translation of the variations when the subassemblies is compiled into the 
subsystem  
4.3.1 
Sub-assemblies 
The FRs for each sub-assembly can be seen in Table 4-i and a graphical representation of the FRs can 
be seen in Figure 4-9 and Figure 4-10. These FRs were found on the basis of the KC flowdown. They 
are set at 0 as this would facilitate the best calibration as described in KC Flowdown. 
Table 4-i: FRs for the sub-assemblies (∆α in connectors can appear around the x-axis, y-axis, or any combination thereof) 
End-effector SA FRs (Tool / Base SAs) 
Connector SA FRs (Bone/Horse) 
∆r = 0 
∆x = 0 
∆z = 0 
∆y = 0 
∆α = 0 
∆z = 0 
 
∆α = 0 
==PAGE:38==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 30 OF 71 
4.3.1.1 End-effector: Tool and Base SA 
 
Figure 4-9: Generic representation of the FR variation in end robot subassembly. 
The WCS tolerances for the three parameters shown in Figure 4-9 are found and shown in Table 4-ii. 
The ∆r value also contains the fit between the tool/bone and base/horse. A key component here is the 
angle and the displacement in the end point of the sub-assembly due to this angle (as seen in Figure 
4-9(right)). This angle is found by using the parallelism tolerance (where available) or the tolerance 
window in the z-direction (whatever is smallest) along with the diameter of the interface.  
Table 4-ii: WCS tolerances for the robot sub-assemblies in question. 
WCS 
∆r 
∆z 
∆α 
∆α_r 
∆α_z 
Tool 
0,324mm 
0,45mm (0,63%) 0,67° 
0,476mm 
-0,002mm 
Base 
0,217mm 
0,63 
mm 
(0,52%) 
0,53° 
0,779mm 
-0,003mm 
 
From the WCS table it is possible to see that due to the angle the displacement in the r-direction 
(∆α_r) is quite a bit larger than ∆r consisting of radial and concentricity tolerances. In order to better 
understand what is happening the contribution from the individual parts is investigated in both the 
tool (see Table 4-iii) and the base (see Table 4-iv). 
Table 4-iii: Closer look at the tool: Angle and r-displacement due to angle 
Part 
Angle name 
α % contribution 
∆α_r % contribution 
Bracket 
α1 
6,0% 
0% 
Gear 
α2a 
23,8% 
0% 
Gear 
α2b 
66,9% 
21% 
Flange tool 
α3 
3,3% 
79% 
==PAGE:39==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 31 OF 71 
Table 4-iv: Closer look at the base: Angle and r-displacement due to angle 
Part 
Angle name 
α % contribution 
∆α_r % contribution 
Gear plate 
α1 
2,7% 
0% 
Gear 
α2 
72,1% 
1% 
Flange 
α3 
18,0% 
6% 
Base 
α4 
7,2% 
93% 
 
In the tool and the base, the largest angle contributions come from the gear. This is due to the fact 
that the gears’ lack a specification of parallelism and, in general, the specification of the interfaces 
along with their tolerances. Additionally, the Tool SA’s gear has two separate measurements going 
from the bracket interface to the flange tool interface, which further increase the uncertainty and 
possible variation between the two interfaces. For both of the two gears it can be said that the 
technical drawing is not properly specified as the critical dimensions used in the above analysis only 
have general tolerances. 
In the Base SA’s second largest contributor to the angle, the flange, there is actually two different 
parameters that create this angle. Half of stems from the parallelism of flange’s interfaces. The other 
half stems from the countersunk (CS) screws, which was identified as a possible issue in the System 
& Interface Clarity section. The CS screws in both the tool and the base are intended to create a 
complete contact surface between the Gear-Flange Tool and the Flange-Base by forcing these toward 
each-other and creating a preload. But in the case of the Base there is a possibility that these will 
create an angle of 0,047°. 
When looking at the ∆α_r the largest contributors are the Flange Tool and the Base for the tool and 
base SAs respectively. This is due to two things: (1) These parts have largest height of the SAs and 
thereby create a long rotation arm, and (2) because of the way the model is built: The model is built 
in such a manner that the angle accumulates and transfers to the next part. This means that the angle 
used to calculate the displacement is going to be largest for the last part (as it is accumulated) and 
while the first part might create an angle, this angle does not have any ∆α_r (this is one of the 
simplifications of the models).  
Finally, looking close at the radial and concentricity tolerances it is realized that the largest 
contribution of ∆r actually comes from concentricity tolerances (see Table 4-v). Additionally, these 
concentricity tolerances could actually contribute to ∆α_r. 
Table 4-v: Contribution to ∆r 
RSS 
∆r 
∆r from radial 
tolerances 
∆r from 
concentricity 
Tool 
0,172mm 
0,114mm 
0,210mm 
Base 
0,157mm 
0,0915mm 
0,125mm 
 
==PAGE:40==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 32 OF 71 
4.3.1.2 Connector: Bone and horse 
The analysis of the connectors is fairly simple as it only contains the horse and bone parts 
themselves. As previously mentioned the radial fits between the end-effectors and connectors are 
already accounted for in the previous section. That being said there were some challenges due to the 
way that the connectors are specified. Some of these notes are listed in Appendix 4-G. In Figure 4-10 
the variations observed in the connectors are generically represented. 
 
Figure 4-10: Generic representation of the FR variation in the bone/horse subassembly. 
Using the diameters of the interfaces and the angularity specifications the maximum possible angle is 
found. The ∆z and ∆y are found by using trigonometry and the nominal angle of the connectors. This 
is unnecessary for the bone since it has a 90° angle but necessary for the horse’s 75° angle. The 
variations for the connector SAs can be seen in Table 4-vi. 
Table 4-vi: Variation in the connectors. 
Connector SA 
α 
∆z 
∆y 
∆x 
Bone 
0,045° 
0,050 
0,050 
0,050 
Horse 
0,026° 
0,629 
0,483 
0,050 
 
The angles found are fairly small compared to that of the end-effectors. However, the tolerances for 
the horse is somewhat comparable to the entire base SA. These tolerances, in many ways, shows the 
need for the DRC to have an accurate bone and horse width (dimension in the connectors x-
direction). The large ∆z and ∆y are likely unintended and due to incomplete specification or 
interpretation of the horse technical drawing. 
4.3.2 
Sub-systems 
The setup for the sub-systems are trickier than that of the sub-assemblies. Due to the bone and horse 
everything need to be in a Cartesian coordinate system. However, as earlier described the interesting 
thing is how much a robot deviate from its original position in the different tolerance scenarios. This 
means that by making the Point at Datum 1 (top of Robot 1) it is possible to implement the WCS and 
see how much the Robot 2 moves from the Point at Datum 2 (the nominal position of Robot 2 in 
terms of its own r-direction and z-direction displacement). The WCSs are therefore found by 
==PAGE:41==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 33 OF 71 
converting Robot 1’s displacement into displacements in Cartesian coordinates with the Point at 
Datum 1 as the origin point. The displacements in the connectors are added utilizing the same 
Cartesian coordinate system. Then Robot 2’s displacements are then projected into the Cartesian 
coordinates and also added.  
Finally, this accumulated tally of displacements, which is in Cartesian coordinates based on Robot 1 
and the Point at Datum 1, is converted into Robot 2 coordinates (displacement from Point at Datum 
2). This is done in two steps: First, the system is rotated either 75° for the horse or 90° for the bone, 
secondly the new x and y displacements are combined using the Pythagoras theorem into the Robot 
2’s ∆r. The results of the total sub-system WCSs represents: 1) The largest Robot 2 ∆r, and 2) the 
largest Robot 2 ∆z. 
The results are displayed in Table 4-vii. Note that WCSs for ∆r and ∆z are two entirely different 
scenarios.  
Table 4-vii: WCS calculated for each Subsystem FR (Real Value & Simplified Value) 
Subsystem (SS) 
FR 
Displacement 
Top 
Robot 2 ∆r 
3,393mm 
Robot 2 ∆z 
1,635mm 
Bottom 
Robot 2 ∆r 
3,845mm 
Robot 2 ∆z 
3,323mm 
 
In order to make the top and bottom SS more comparable the same setup was used for both. The 
contributors can be seen in Table 4-viii. 
 
 
==PAGE:42==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 34 OF 71 
 
Table 4-viii: Composition of and contributors to the Worst-Case Scenarios ∆r and ∆z 
WCS for Robot 2 ∆r 
WCS for Robot 2 ∆z 
Angle 
effect 
in 
Robot 1 
The displacement due to 
rotational offset (around 
the y-axis) in robot 1 (see 
End-effector SA) 
Angle 
effect 
in 
Robot 1 
The displacement due to 
rotational offset (around 
the y-axis) in robot 1 (see 
End-effector SA) 
Concentricity 
in 
Robot 1 
The 
displacement 
from 
concentricity in robot 1 
Concentricity 
in 
Robot 1 
The 
displacement 
from 
concentricity in robot 1 
Angle effect in the 
connector 
The displacement due to 
rotational offset (around 
the 
y-axis) 
in 
the 
connector. 
Angle effect in the 
connector 
The displacement due to 
rotational offset (around 
the 
x-axis) 
in 
the 
connector. 
Angle 
effect 
in 
Robot 2 
The displacement due to 
rotational offset (in the 
worst direction) in robot 2 
(see End-effector SA) 
Tolerances in the 
connector 
The displacement due to 
tolerances 
in 
the 
connector. 
Concentricity 
in 
Robot 2 
The 
displacement 
from 
concentricity in robot 2 
Angle 
offset 
in 
Robot 2 
The displacement due to 
rotational offset (around 
the y-axis) in robot 1 (see 
End-effector SA) 
 
 
Tolerances in Robot 
2 
The displacement because 
of fits and concentricity in 
robot 2. 
  
In order to better understand the results some simplified visualizations are used. This will more easily 
facilitate further analysis and can been seen in Figure 4-11 and Figure 4-12. 
==PAGE:43==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 35 OF 71 
4.3.2.1 Worst case ∆r Scenario 
 
Figure 4-11: Simplified WCS for ∆r in Subsystems. Top SS without variation (top left), Top SS with variation (bottom left), Bottom SS 
without variation (top right), Bottom SS with variation (bottom right), and Geometrical representation of the simplified WCS (bottom 
center). 
From the results in Table 4-vii, it is seen that the Bottom SS has a slightly larger displacement in ∆r 
than the Top SS. This is primarily due to a larger ∆α_r in the base, which is the case for both robots. 
As such, the angle and subsequent displacement created by the robots are the largest contributor to 
the displacement in this scenario. 
==PAGE:44==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 36 OF 71 
4.3.2.2 Worst Case ∆z Scenario 
 
 
Figure 4-12: Simplified WCS for ∆z in the subsystems. 
In the Figure 4-12, the offset angle seems significant and on a closer look in the model (see Appendix 
4-F) it can be seen that the accumulated ∆α will actually be 1,39° for the Top SS and 1,09° for the 
Bottom SS. This indicates that the angles could be an issue and therefore should be better specified.  
4.4 
Sensitivity Analysis 
To find the different sensitivities, the different design parameters and tolerances are systematically 
changed in the model presented in the TCA. This is done with two approaches:  
1. Changing the DPs individually and capturing the FR change at the WCSs 
a. All tolerances are present in the system 
b. A single DP’s nominal is changed by 1% 
c. The change in the FRs in the WCSs are captured  
d. This change in FR is divided by the change in DP and the sensitivity is found  
e. The DP is changed back to its original value 
f. This is repeated systematically for all the DPs.  
2. Changing the tolerance windows for each DP individually and capturing the FR change 
a. All the DPs’ tolerances are set to be 0 (meaning that every single part has no 
variation) 
==PAGE:45==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 37 OF 71 
i. The FRs in the WCSs are now 0 
b. Then a tolerance window for a single parameter is created. 
c. The resulting change in FRs in the WCSs are captured 
d. The change in FRs is divided by the tolerance inserted to find the sensitivity 
e. Once the data is captured the tolerances are set to 0 again. 
f. This is systematically repeated for each DP’s tolerance 
This model assumes that Robot 2 has no variance. This is done in order to avoid duplicating the 
variation thereby only investigate the sensitivities for each individual parameter.  
4.4.1.1 The Sensitivity Values 
Some off the most sensitive parameters in the Top SS can be seen in Table 4-ix and in the Bottom SS 
in Table 4-x. All sensitivities can be found in Appendix 4-H. 
Table 4-ix: Sensitivities of the Top SS 
Part 
DP 
Sens. for WCS ∆r 
[mm/mm] 
Sens. for WCS ∆z 
[mm/mm] 
Sens. for WCS ∆α 
[degs/mm] 
Bracket 
Parallelism btw. interfaces 
7,895 
3,617 
2,010 
Bracket 
Height btw. interfaces 
0,920 
1,000 
0,000 
Gear 
Height btw. bracket interface 
and measurement point 
0,917 
1,000 
0,000 
Gear 
Height btw. measurement point 
and flange tool interface 
0,926 
1,003 
0,000 
Gear 
Parallelism btw. bracket 
interface and measurement 
point 
6,290 
2,844 
1,607 
Gear 
Parallelism btw. measurement 
point and flange tool interface 
4,190 
1,435 
1,128 
Flange tool 
Height btw. gear interface and 
measurement point 
0,921 
1,011 
0,000 
Flange tool 
Height btw. measurement point 
and bone interface 
0,930 
1,011 
0,000 
Flange tool 
Parallelism btw. interfaces 
because of CS screws 
4,015 
0,787 
1,128 
Bone 
Height btw. interface and center 
0,932 
1,012 
0,000 
Bone 
Angularity at surface 
3,187 
0,625 
0,895 
Bone 
Angle btw. interfaces 
-1,545 
-0,075 
1,000 
==PAGE:46==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 38 OF 71 
 
Table 4-x: Sensitivities of the Bottom SS 
Part 
DP 
Sens. for WCS ∆r 
[mm/mm] 
Sens. for WCS ∆z 
[mm/mm] 
Sens. for WCS ∆α 
[degs/mm] 
Gear plate 
Height btw. interfaces 
1,121 
0,612 
0,000 
Gear 
Parallelism btw. interfaces 
4,827 
4,306 
0,955 
Gear 
Height btw. interfaces 
1,156 
0,612 
0,000 
Flange 
Parallelism btw. interfaces 
4,750 
4,190 
0,955 
Flange 
Height btw. interfaces 
1,133 
0,618 
0,000 
Flange 
Parallelism btw. interfaces 
because of CS screws 
4,750 
4,190 
0,955 
Base 
Parallelism btw. interfaces 
3,201 
2,256 
0,760 
Base 
Height btw. flange interface and 
measurement point 
1,104 
0,620 
0,000 
Base 
Height btw. measurement point 
and horse interface 
1,232 
0,620 
0,000 
Horse 
Distance from surface to center 
1,216 
0,621 
0,000 
Horse 
Angularity at surface 
2,194 
1,546 
0,521 
Horse 
Angle btw. interfaces 
-1,295 
1,614 
1,000 
 
4.4.1.2 Observations & analysis of sensitivity values 
From the above table, it can be observed that variation in the parallelism tolerances, and thereby the 
creation of unexpected angles, account for the largest sensitivity values. 
In the Top SS WCS ∆z, the heights in the system has a larger impact than their own change 
(sensitivities larger than 1). However, for the same parameters the sensitivities are smaller than their 
own change in the WCS ∆r (sensitivities smaller than 1). This is very likely due to the way the model 
is created and the sensitivities are found. The sensitivities are found by creating a positive tolerance 
or larger DP. Therefore, this phenomenon would likely swap the ∆r and ∆z sensitivity values if the 
tolerances were negative or the DPs were smaller instead of larger. It does, however, indicate a 
relationship that is not completely direct, which is likely due to unexpected angles in the system. The 
largest impact to ∆α in the Top SS is the parallelism of the bracket. This is likely due to the small 
diameter of the bracket’s interface.  
==PAGE:47==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 39 OF 71 
In the Bottom SS parallelism tolerances are seen to have the largest sensitivities for though they are 
all smaller than that of the Top SS parallelism tolerances. This is likely because of larger diameter. 
The height DPs of the Bottom SS seem to have a similar relationship as the Top SS. However, in the 
Bottom SS the WCS ∆r is larger than 1 and the WCS ∆z is smaller. This is possibly due to the 75° 
angle in horse and the way this variation is translate from Robot 1 into the displacement of Robot 2. 
4.4.1.3 Breakdown of sensitivity chain 
In part to verify these sensitivities but also to better understand them, an investigation into the 
flowdown and connections of sensitivities in the Top SS was made. This flowdown of the Top SS 
sensitivities can be seen in Appendix 4-I. An example from this is shown in Table 4-xi. This 
particular example refers to the sensitivity of the parallelism between the bracket’s interfaces in the 
Top SS, which was the largest of all sensitivity values found.  
Table 4-xi: Ratio between variation in input parameter and variation in output parameter. In the first ratio, the overall ration between ∆r 
and parallelism is seen. The second ration is between change in α and that of parallelism, third that of ∆α_r and ∆α, and finally ∆r and 
∆α_r. These numbers are obtained from the model by inputting the change in parallelism and observing the 3 outputs (∆α, ∆α_r, & ∆r). 
 
Parallelism 
Change in DP 
∆α 
∆α_r 
WCS  ∆r 
Change in FR 
Original 
0,02 
0,675 
0,636 
3,432 
New 
0,03 
0,695 
0,658 
3,512 
Ratios 
In total: 7,9 
2,0 
1,1 
3,6 
 
In the above example the breakdown of the parameter from input to final output is seen. This 
relationship is tested by individually investigating each step and ratio as an input/output set. The 
result and the chain from parameter to FR is visualized in Figure 4-13. 
 
Figure 4-13: Comparison between a) Total sensitivity of parallelism for ∆r b) partial sensitivity of parallelism for ∆r 
It is seen that the total sensitivity value in Table 4-xi (7,9) is approximate to that of Table 4-ix (7,9). 
Overall, this is useful as it allows a complex system to be broken down and delimited. Additionally, 
this type of breakdown can be used to generate more insights. 
Looking closer into this breakdown it can be seen that in the ∆α/parallelism and ∆r/∆α_r ratios are 
significantly higher than the ∆α_r/∆α ratio. This means that reducing either of these inputs could 
reduce the total variation. The first ratio (∆α/parallelism) is probably caused by the small diameter of 
the bracket interface to the gear. This diameter is about 40% of that of the Gear-Flange Tool 
interface. The last ratio (∆r/∆α_r) is likely due to the stack-up of parts and their accumulated height. 
==PAGE:48==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 40 OF 71 
This means that the heights (or lengths) of each part that are attached in the chain will create a 
displacement. The longer the height, the larger the result, and thereby the ∆r in this case.  
4.4.2 
Sensitivity values in controlling the angle between parts 
In this section, it is investigated whether locking the rotation around r (Rr) using a shaft/hole fit or 
surface/surface fit is more sensitive to the creation of unwanted angles. This is done because it was 
found in the sensitivity analysis that the creation of angles has a relatively large effect on the ∆r and 
∆z in the. In Figure 4-15 a comparison of the sensitivity between the two types of fit is seen. Two 
comparisons are made: One of a part with a diameter of 60mm and one of 30 mm. Both are assumed 
to have a H6/h6 fit. In Figure 4-14 a schematic showing the principle difference in the two fits can be 
seen. 
 
Figure 4-14: Schematic showing the principle of the fits. Left: Surfaces controlling the Rr, right: Shaft/hole fit controlling the Rr. 
 
Figure 4-15: Comparison between methods of locking Rr. Left: A graph showing possible angle vs. the parallelism tolerance. Right: A 
graph showing the possible angle vs. the height of the part. 
In Figure 4-15(right), it can be seen that the sensitivity for the fits decreases as the diameter becomes 
larger. However, the sensitivity for the Ø30 fit with a height of 30mm is 3,8 (approx. the same for 
Ø60), while the sensitivity for the Ø30 is 1 and for the Ø60 it is 1,9 when parallelism is controlling 
the max possible angle. This value is constant for all heights and parallelism variations (it can be seen 
as the graph is linear). As such, the shaft/hole fit is more sensitive. 
However, from the two graphs in Figure 4-15, it can be seen that if a requirement of a max angle of 
0,2° exists then the Ø30 part must have a parallelism tolerance of less than 0,1mm or an interface 
DoF lock
in r & Rr
DoF lock
in r & Rr
DoF lock
in z
DoF lock
in z & Rr
DoF lock
in z & Rr
DoF lock
in r
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
0,8
0,9
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
Angle [degrees]
Variation in parallelism [mm]
Controlling angle w/surface 
Angle (Ø60)
Angle (Ø30)
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
0,8
0,9
0
10
20
30
Angle [degrees]
Interface height [mm]
Controlling angle with fits
Angle (Ø60H6/h6)
Angle (Ø30H6/h6)
==PAGE:49==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 41 OF 71 
height larger than 7,5mm. In turn, the Ø60 part must have a parallelism of less than 0,2mm or a 
height of more than 10mm. These relationships are shown with more detail and additional 
configurations in Figure 4-16. 
 
Figure 4-16: Relationship between diameter and maximum possible angle in 6 different cases: 3 where the parallelism is the controlling 
factor and 3 where the fit is the controlling factor. A simplification is that holes have a constant tolerance of [0; +0,015mm] and shafts has a 
tolerance of [ -0,015mm; 0]. 
Figure 4-16 also shows that if you have a part with a height of 20 [mm] and a diameter of 20 [mm] 
then the maximum possible angle will be smaller if a shaft/hole fit is used as to control Rr rather than 
two surfaces with a parallelism of 0,05 [mm]. But for a part with 10 [mm] height and a diameter of 
40mm, controlling the Rr using two surfaces that have a parallelism tolerance of 0,1 [mm] would 
allow a smaller possible max angle than using a shaft/hole fit. As such, the choice is very dependent 
on the production capabilities and the part geometry. Furthermore, by increasing the value of the 
diameter responsible for the creation of angle it is possible to reduce the sensitivity of the parallelism 
tolerance. This can be seen to be the case in Figure 4-15(left). In fact, by approximately doubling the 
diameter from Ø30 to Ø60 the sensitivity is reduced by more than half 
While the sensitivity of controlling the angle using fits is higher than that of using the surface (or 
point contacts) it is important to note 3 things:  
1. The tolerances of the fits might be tighter and more easily obtained. Therefore, while the 
sensitivity might be higher the overall variance could be smaller. 
2. Controlling the angle with fits is dependent on two individual tolerances. Because the fit will 
always have a shaft and a hole that are unrelated geometries (produced independently) there 
will likely never be a perfect or “near perfect” fit. 
3. Without knowing the production variance of both it hard to say anything definitive. 
However, in the event that two parts have to mate and the diameter must be small but the 
height can be relatively large it might be relevant to investigate how the interfaces locks 
rotation around r (the Rr-direction) and thereby what would minimize ∆α in the case of 
different variation scenarios. 
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
0,8
0,9
1
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
Max angle [degrees]
Diameter [mm]
Controlling angle with a surface or fit
Parallelism of 0,05
Parallelism of 0,1
Parallelism of 0,2
Height of 5mm
Height of 10mm
Height of 20mm
==PAGE:50==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 42 OF 71 
In order to obtain interface clarity one type of the two controls should be clearly chosen. Otherwise 
ambiguity will be created, which could lower the predictability of the interface. 
4.4.3 
Contribution analysis  
Using the highly sensitive parameters found in the sensitivity analysis and finding DPs with high 
contribution to tolerance chains the parameters with the highest contribution to the SS are found. This 
is done by multiplying the sensitivity with the tolerance window. The most influencing parameters 
from each SS in the WCS ∆z and ∆r can be seen in Table 4-xii. The contribution analysis for 
additional parameters can be seen in Appendix 4-J. 
Table 4-xii: Contribution analysis of the most sensitive parameters 
Subsystem 
WCS 
Part 
DP 
Sens. 
Tolerance 
window [mm] 
Contribution 
[mm] 
Top 
WCSr ∆r 
Gear Parallelism btw. measurement 
point and flange tool interface 
4,19 
0,4 
1,68 
WCSz ∆z 
Gear Parallelism btw. measurement 
point and flange tool interface 
1,43 
0,4 
0,57 
Bottom 
WCSr ∆r 
Gear Parallelism btw. interfaces 
4,83 
0,4 
1,93 
WCSz ∆z 
Gear Parallelism btw. interfaces 
4,31 
0,4 
1,72 
 
In Table 4-xii, it is seen that the parallelism tolerances of the gear have the largest contribution to the 
WCS ∆r and ∆z. This is not surprising as they had the highest sensitivity and largest contribution to 
both the z-tolerance and α-tolerance chains. However, there could have been a possibility of these 
having a smaller sensitivity, which might have highlighted other parameters. 
4.4.3.1 Introduction of a parallelism tolerance in gear 
In the contribution analysis, sensitivity analysis, and tolerance chains it was seen that the Gear in the 
Tool SA had a significant possible angle. As such, it would be relevant to know what the reduction of 
the angle contribution could be if a parallelism tolerance was introduced. This is presented in Table 
4-xiii. 
Table 4-xiii: Reduction of possible angle in the gear by introduction of reasonable parallelism tolerance. 
 
In Table 4-xiii it is shown how the contribution of the angle is reduced and the resulting impact. In 
Appendix 4-J the whole set of contributions investigated can be found. Furthermore, as a result of 
conducting these analyses some relevant observations regarding the technical drawings and 
tolerances were found. These observations are noted in Appendix 4-G. 
Value
Max 
Angle
delta_alfa 
Contribution 
WCS 
delta_R
WCS 
delta_Z
Gear 02 - Parallelism Analysis
66,87%
9,17%
3,432394
1,774893
1,48005
1,024363
Original Tol 
Window
New Tol 
Window
0,2
0,02
0,451139
0,022557
==PAGE:51==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 43 OF 71 
4.5 
Conclusions for the Mechanical Investigation and Evaluation 
The most relevant requirements identified for the system were precise and predictable subsystems 
between the two robots in the DRC, which translated into minimal variation in ∆z and ∆r. Through 
the tolerance analysis it was found that unwanted angles could appear in the system, in some case, 
because of lack of specified parallelism tolerances. This is the case for the gears. But in the case of 
the Flange-Base interface in the Base SA this could occur because of counter-sunk screws. These 
angles have a potential significant effect on the system and the relationship between the two robots. 
The interface clarity analysis showed accurate constraints but many ambiguous contact surfaces. 
However, in some instances the need for large contact surface might be prevalent and a trade-off will 
need to made. A trade-off between robustness, rigidity of the interface, and cost of manufacturing. 
Highlighting that there are large ambiguous contact surfaces does therefore not necessarily mean that 
it is the wrong choice but rather that the decision should be made in awareness of the possible 
consequences. As such, an effort into investigating or creating alternative interfaces could be made 
with the objective of obtaining a suitable compromise. The only over-constraint identified in the 
interface clarity analysis was the CS screws. 
The previous sections should help provide some guidance on how to identify sensitive parameters 
and focus the variation control on these.  
A large drawback of this sensitivity and tolerance chain analysis is that it fails to address the 
likelihood of certain variations to happen and thereby the importance. For instance, is the likelihood 
for 1mm change in part height, length, or diameter the same it is for 1mm parallelism or 
concentricity. The answer is probably not. But the quantification of this data is very difficult and time 
consuming and out of the scope of this project. It could, however, be considered going forward. 
Especially, as parallelism is identified as having the largest sensitivity values and thereby influence 
in the system. 
This entire investigation also shows that the nature of the SSs and the chosen FRs makes the 
parameters quite coupled. This would be very hard to uncouple as there exists a geometrical 
dependency between the FRs. However, there might be an opportunity to decrease the sensitivity and 
to changes in the individual parameters. While the relationship between the FRs does not change 
depending on whether looking at the Top SS or Bottom SS, the sensitivities change. As such, 
opportunities might exist for optimizing the design. An exploratory case was made for this regarding 
how the parts interfaces and other such explorations will be shown in Part 2. 
Finally, the framework created for better managing the variation in this investigation might help to 
create better mechanical design. But it has the inherent limitation that it does not directly deal with 
effect of the calibration. Therefore, a closer look at the calibration and the effect of the robotics must 
be made. That is the purpose of Part 2. 
==PAGE:52==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 44 OF 71 
5. 
PART 2: EFFECTS OF VARIATION IN THE CALIBRATION 
The aim of this part is to provide insights that directly relates and connects the Robot Kinematics 
with the mechanical design. From the Robust Design point of view this part is quite interesting as it 
seeks to link the final robot performance with sources of variation, such as the ambiguous and the 
over-constrained interfaces. As such, this is an attempt to directly connect the mechanical design to 
the post calibration Robot Performance. Additionally, it is an attempt to also identify why the 
calibrations might fail, which adds the cost of scrap, rework, and repair (SRR). 
This part builds upon the knowledge and the models created in part 1. Therefore, utilizing the 
understanding of the product’s mechanics, the goal is to create insights and a deeper understanding of 
the Dual Robot Calibration (DRC). To develop this part a deeper immersion in the robotics domain 
(and thereby calibration method) is needed. 
The top-level KC flowdown represented in Figure 5-1 (which was first introduced in Figure 4-1) 
highlights the focus on achieving a good calibration. It should be recognized that this FR is based on 
the robotics domain but is also dependent on the mechanical analysis. 
 
Figure 5-1: Top Level KC Flowdown. Highlighted the relevant FRs for this part. 
The central questions sought answered in this part is: 
(2) Building on the findings on part one; how is this relatable to the calibration and 
what does this mean for the accuracy of the robot? 
This question is investigated throughout this part in two different sections:  “Mechanical impact on 
the Common Normal”, which seeks to cover an extended tolerance and sensitivity model that 
includes the scaling of the robot, and “Analysis of Dual Robot Calibration Data” that seeks to use 
historical data and a small experiment to better connect the theoretical analysis and findings with 
actual changes in Denavit-Hartenberg parameters (DHPs) of the UR3 robots. 
Appendixes presented in this part 
• 
Appendix 5-A: Excel model regarding common normal 
• 
Appendix 5-B: Results from Sensitivity Analysis 
• 
Appendix 5-C: Histograms for all Robots 
• 
Appendix 5-D: Description of Experiment 
• 
Appendix 5-E: Results of the Experiment (Excel)  
Integration between 
mechanical and robotic 
domains 
==PAGE:53==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 45 OF 71 
5.1 
Mechanical impact on the Common Normal 
This part seeks to extend the model found in the “Part 1: Mechanical Investigation & Evaluation”. As 
such, the first step is to refocus the KC flowdown, setup new model scenarios, extend the model 
using these scenarios, and finally analyze the sensitivities of the common normal.  
This investigation is primarily focused on the common normal as a simplified way and as a 
lighthouse case study to investigate the overall mechanical impact on the kinematic model and 
provide a basis for future expansion of the model and its considerations. 
The following sections of the report seeks to build a VMF for the subsystems that is solely focused 
on the CN to include a small but integral part of the mechanics/robotics interactions. As such, many 
of the tools used here are the same as Part 1. Therefore, they will not be described in the same depth 
as in Part 1. This means for details on the subassemblies (SAs), the subsystems (SSs), the original 
development of the KC flowdown, and the creation of the sensitivity model please refer to Part 1. 
Additionally, for more knowledge regarding the theory used please refer to the “Robotics and 
Calibration Theory”. 
5.1.1 
Extended Key Characteristics Flowdown 
Using the theory regarding the DRC and focusing on the FR “Good Calibration” the KC Flowdown 
is expanded and refocused as shown in Figure 5-2. It can be seen how the breakdown of the System 
Level FRs flowdown into the individual parts, which highlights their interdependencies. 
The geometrical analysis for the middle part of the robot is, as it was in Part 1, disregarded due a 
repeated statement from UR that DRC is able to successfully calibrate all variations in the middle 
part. This means that the physical variations in the middle part should not create any unexpected 
performance after the calibration, and therefore not be prioritized for investigation in the same 
manner as the subsystems. 
In this section, the focus will be exclusively on the geometrical study of keeping an accurate length 
of the CN the Top and Bottom SS. This refers to the CN of the rotation axes of each robot. The FRs 
related to the DH estimation in the subsystems are disregarded in this analysis but will be addressed 
superficially in “Analysis of Dual Robot Calibration Data”. 
The SA-level FRs (angle and displacements) are similar to the FRs used in Part 1. This means that 
the tolerance chain analysis (TCA) and sensitivity analysis model from the previous part can be 
reused and expanded.  
 
==PAGE:54==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 46 OF 71 
 
Figure 5-2: KC Flowdown through System, Subsystem and Subassembly levels, to achieve a robust kinematic model through the DRC. 
5.1.1.1 Considerations for the Top and Bottom Subsystem Common Normal 
Some considerations must be addressed before the mechanical study can be conducted. These 
considerations are concerning the DRC. As mentioned previously, this part relies on the TCA created 
and studied in Part 1. However, it differs in terms of the SS FR definition. Part 1 SS FRs were WCSs 
for ∆z and ∆r.  In this part, the key characteristic functional requirement is the length of the Common 
Normal (CN) for each subsystem. Therefore, a new definition relating the SA FRs with the CN is 
required. Please refer to the Theory for a detailed definition of the Common Normal. 
In order to ensure an accurate calibration UR has set an arbitrary limit for this FR in the Bottom SS. 
It is possible to convert this into a limit for the FR of the Top SS, which is shown in Table 5-i. For 
the UR3 robot the following can be said: 
Calibration will not be successful if the resulting reference distance in the kinematic 
model created through the DRC differs on more than 0.3 mm from the nominal 
reference distance. 
By knowing the specification limits in the reference distance, the Bottom SS CN, the limits for the 
scaling distance, the Top SS CN, can be defined based on how the system is scaled during the DRC 
(explained in section 3.2.4). In order to find this, the scalar between the two distances is simply 
multiplied to the upper and lower specification limit (USL and LSL). This USL and LSL represent 
the maximum variation allowed when scaling the reference distance. The limits for the Top and 
Bottom SSs’ FR are defined and displayed in Table 5-i. 
 
Table 5-i: Definition of CN length limits. 
Subsystem 
Nominal CN 
Max Change in 
CN 
Minimum CN  
Maximum CN 
Top (Scaling) 
200 mm 
+/- 0,261 mm 
199,739 mm 
200,261 mm 
Bottom 
(Reference) 
230 mm 
+/- 0,300 mm 
229,700 mm 
230,300 mm 
 
==PAGE:55==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 47 OF 71 
5.1.2 
Simplified Scenarios for studying the change in the Common Normal. 
In this section, the simplified scenarios for studying the change in the CN are presented along with 
the considerations for their definition and limitations. General considerations from the model used in 
Part 1 are applied. Moreover, for expanding the model some extra considerations, and their related 
limitations, are applied and gathered together in Table 5-ii.  
Table 5-ii. Considerations and limitations of the change in CN Length study 
CONSIDERATIONS 
LIMITATIONS 
Robot 2 and its attachment to the connectors 
are assumed as perfect, relying on the nominal 
values  
More variation could appear by the physical 
variations in Robot 2, this could either 
increase or decrease the FR 
Robot 1 and the connectors have all their 
variations in maximum possible condition in the 
direction that will create the largest variation in 
CN. E.g.: The SS geometry makes the unexpected 
angle around the axis (x) and direction (negative) 
that creates the largest impact in the CN length 
Probabilities of having the variations like that 
although possible, it is unlikely, but statistical 
models 
to 
know 
the 
determine 
the 
probabilities of having the defined scenario or 
a fraction thereof could be made with a 
Monte-Carlo simulation model. However, this 
is out of the scope of this project. 
The CN length is calculated as the minimum 
distance between the two robots’ rotational axes 
attached to the connectors. The way the model 
calculates the position of these rotational axis is 
simplified to be dependent on a point and an 
angle. 
The accuracy of the model is directly 
dependent on the definition used for creating 
the rotational axes of the two robots and for 
calculating the CN length. 
 
The calculation of the CN is dependent on the design parameters between the rotation axes in the end 
joints. These variation influences the length of the CN. This is somewhat similar to Part 1 and as 
previously mentioned expands the previous model, which can be seen in Appendix 5-A. It has been 
investigated how different combinations of physical variations could affect the CN. The scenario 
chosen for the study of the common normal is setup up as described in Table 5-iii. 
Table 5-iii: The effects on the scenario for the common normal 
Scenario for ∆CN 
Angle effect in Robot 1 
The displacement due to rotational offset (around the y-axis) in 
robot 1 (see End-effector SA) 
Concentricity in Robot 1 
The displacement from concentricity in robot 1 
Angle effect in the connector 
The displacement due to rotational offset (around the y-axis) in 
the connector. 
No variation in Robot 2 
Robot 2 is assumed perfect and therefore has nominal values. 
 
==PAGE:56==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 48 OF 71 
The simplified scenarios for studying the change in CN are graphically shown in Figure 5-3 
 
Figure 5-3: Simplfied graphical representation of the scenarios for studying the change in CN. 
5.1.3 
Transfer from Design Parameter to Functional Requirement 
Using the above defined scenario all potential variations have been introduced in their maximum 
condition and possibly worst direction in an attempt to calculate the maximum possible change in the 
CN. In Table 5-iv the changes are shown for each SS. This is compared to the limits defined (details 
can be found in Appendix 5-A). 
Table 5-iv Results for CN Length calculation in the simplified scenarios with the maximum variations. 
Subsystem 
Expected CN length 
Resulting CN length 
∆CN 
Successful DRC 
Top 
200,000 [mm] 
201,029 [mm] 
1,029 [mm] 
NO 
Bottom 
230,000 [mm] 
231,777 [mm] 
1,777 [mm] 
NO 
 
The data shows that it is possible in the given scenario to have an unsuccessful DRC between due to 
the variations allowed in the current design specifications. These results are opposite to the results 
==PAGE:57==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 49 OF 71 
from the study in Part 1, the Bottom SS presents a larger variation than the Top SS. In order to better 
understand and explain these results Sensitivity and Contribution analyses are conducted in the 
following sections.  
5.1.4 
Sensitivity Analysis 
This analysis seeks to quantify the relationship of potential variations on the CN. This is done by 
using the previously defined simplified scenarios and extending the sensitivity model created for Part 
1. The analysis is conducted in the same manner as Part 1 (see section 4.4) where the different design 
parameters and tolerances are systematically changed in the model. All the results from the analysis 
can be seen in Appendix 5-B. 
5.1.4.1 Presentation of Sensitivity Results 
First, the above defined scenario with all potential variations in their maximum condition is used. 
Each DP is then changed and the sensitivity is captured. The most relevant sensitivities found in the 
Bottom SS can be seen in Table 5-v and in the Top SS in Table 5-vi. 
Table 5-v Excerption of the sensitivity analysis for DPs affecting the CN length in the Bottom Subsystem. 
Part 
 Parameter 
S CN Base 
Gear 
Ø at flange interface 
-0,021 
Flange 
Height btw. interfaces 
0,007 
Flange 
Ø at gear interface 
-0,005 
Base 
Height btw. flange interface and measurement 
point 
0,008 
Base 
Height btw. measurement point and horse interface 
0,008 
Horse 
Distance btw. robots 
1,000 
Horse 
Distance from surface to center 
0,012 
Horse 
Angle between interfaces 
-0,012 
 
 
 
==PAGE:58==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 50 OF 71 
 
Table 5-vi Excerption of the sensitivity analysis for DPs affecting the CN length in the Top Subsystem. 
Part 
  Parameter 
S CN Bone 
S CN Base 
Gear 
Height btw. measurement point and flange tool 
interface 
0,003 
0,003 
Gear 
Ø at Flange tool interface 
-0,012 
-0,013 
Flange tool 
Height btw. gear interface and measurement point 
0,011 
0,012 
Flange tool 
Height btw. measurement point and bone 
interface 
0,011 
0,012 
Bone 
Height btw. interface and center 
0,012 
0,014 
Bone 
Distance btw robots 
1,000 
1,150 
Bone 
Angle btw. interfaces 
-0,008 
-0,010 
Gear 
Ø at bracket interface 
-0,008 
-0,009 
 
Second, the sensitivity analysis is conducted by setting all variation to 0, changing the individual 
tolerances, and capturing the resulting change in FR. This is done in the same way as in Part 1. The 
most relevant sensitivities found in the Bottom SS can be seen in Table 5-vii and in the Top SS in 
Table 5-viii. 
Table 5-vii Excerption of the sensitivity analysis for tolerances affecting the CN length in the Bottom Subsystem. 
Part 
  
S CN Base 
Gear 
Parallelism btw. interfaces 
3,097 
Flange 
Parallelism between interfaces 
2,977 
Flange 
Concentricity btw. interfaces 
0,500 
Flange 
Parallelism between interfaces because of CS screws 
2,977 
Base 
Parallelism between interfaces 
1,253 
Horse 
Angularity at surface 
0,858 
 
 
 
==PAGE:59==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 51 OF 71 
 
Table 5-viii Excerption of the sensitivity analysis for tolerances affecting the CN length in the Top Subsystem 
Part 
  
S CN Bone 
S CN Base 
Gear 
Parallelism btw. measurement point and flange tool 
interface 
1,436 
1,651 
Flange tool 
Parallelism btw. interfaces 
0,788 
0,906 
Flange tool 
Concentricity btw. interfaces 
0,500 
0,575 
Bone 
Angularity at surface 
0,625 
0,719 
 
As explained in the Theory Part, one CN is used for scaling and the other as a reference distance. 
Because the CNs have different nominal lengths the sensitivity ratio cannot be directly compared. 
This is because if the bone is used to scale the system then it would use a denominator of 200 [mm], 
while if the horse is used for scaling then it would use a denominator of 230 [mm]. So, if the Top CN 
was used for scaling and it had a variation of 1,00 [mm] then the scaling of the Bottom CN would 
result in a 1,15 [mm] variation (230[mm] divided 200 [mm]). The opposite would be true if the 
Bottom CN was used as scaling. In that case a 1,00 [mm] variation in the Bottom CN would result in 
a 0,87 [mm] change (200[mm] divided 230 [mm]) in the top CN. 
As such, the sensitivities for the CN are compared using a common baseline. These baseline 
sensitivity ratios are displayed in the last column of Table 5-vi and Table 5-viii. The chosen baseline 
is that of the reference distance, the Bottom SS CN. As such, the Bone sensitivities has been 
multiplied by 1,15 so that the value can be compared. 
 
Figure 5-4. Graphical Representation of the most sensitive parameters for scaling the robot’s kinematic model during DRC. 
Having the sensitivities of both SS represented under the same baseline we are able to compare them. 
This helps to identify which subsystem should be used to scale the kinematic model of the robot. This 
comparison is graphically represented in Figure 5-4 and it can be concluded that using the Top SS 
CN as scaling distance is more robust. 
5.1.4.2 Analysis of Sensitivities 
In Table 5-v and Table 5-vi, it can be seen that the largest sensitivities belong to the connectors. 
Their sensitivity ratios are equal to 1, which is expected. This is because they are directly connected 
to the CN lengths. Therefore, a change in the bone or horse width of 1 [mm] will lead to an CN 
change of 1 [mm].  
==PAGE:60==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 52 OF 71 
Because there are DPs with smaller positive sensitivities there might exist an opportunity to lower the 
sensitivity of the SS by changing these DPs in a negative direction and vice-versa for the negative 
sensitivities. This is investigated further in Evaluation of Design Choices. 
The three most sensitive parameters identified in Table 5-viii are shown in Figure 5-5 as a function of 
how the variation in the parallelism tolerance changes the CN length. The transfer function between 
the DP and the FR is linear, meaning the sensitivity is constant for each DP. A steeper line indicates a 
higher sensitivity. The colored dots represent the current Tolerance Limits and the dashed line show 
the limit for the FR.  
 
Figure 5-5: Effect of the size of 3 high sensitive DP´s tolerances over the change in the Top SS CN Length. 
In Figure 5-5, it can be seen that the least sensitive parameter has the tightest tolerance, while the 
most sensitive parameter has the loosest tolerance. It also shows that a robot in the DRC within 
specification limits could cause the calibration to fail just because of the possible variation on a 
single parameter. 
As such, to be able to identify the most relevant parameters to control a contribution table for each 
SS has been created. These tables are similar to the one presented in Part 1. The table is based on the 
product between sensitivity ratios and the tolerance window. In Table 5-ix and Table 5-x the 
parameters with higher sensitivity are evaluated. 
 
 
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
1,4
1,6
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
0,8
0,9
1
∆CN [mm]
Size of the parallelism  tolerance window [mm]
Gear parallelism
Flange tool parallelism
Bone parallelism
∆CN limit
==PAGE:61==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 53 OF 71 
 
Table 5-ix Contribution for tolerances affecting the CN length in Bottom Subsystem 
DP# 
Part 
Design Parameter 
Sensitivity 
Tolerance 
window 
Contribution 
6 
Gear 
Parallelism btw. interfaces 
3,097 
0,400 
1,239 
8 
Flange 
Parallelism between interfaces 
2,977 
0,100 
0,298 
12 
Base 
Height btw. flange interface and 
measurement point 
1,253 
0,100 
0,125 
24 
Horse 
Angle between interfaces 
0,858 
0,050 
0,043 
19 
Horse 
Distance btw robots 
1,000 
0,050 
0,050 
 
Table 5-x Contributions for tolerances affecting the CN length in Top Subsystem 
DP# 
Part 
Design Parameter 
Sensitivity 
Tolerance 
window 
Contribution 
8 
Gear 
Parallelism btw. measurement 
point and flange tool interface 1,436 
0,400 
0,574 
12 
Flange tool 
Parallelism btw. interfaces 
0,788 
0,020 
0,016 
18 
Bone 
Angularity at surface 
0,625 
0,050 
0,031 
25 
Bone 
Distance btw robots 
1,000 
0,050 
0,050 
 
Moreover, the contribution value is not only an evaluation number, it is also the approximate value of 
the change in CN length produced by the maximum variation possible with the current tolerances 
defined. A remarkable highlight is that the angle created by the maximum tolerance in the Bottom 
SS’s “Gear-Parallelism btw. interfaces” (DP#6) creates a change in the CN length of approximately 
1,239 [mm], which is more than 4 times the CN limit of 0,300 [mm]. 
The main observation of this analysis is that angles between functional surfaces, created by the 
unexpected variations, have the largest potential impact on the change in CN Length. In the next 
section strategies to reduce the sensitivity (and therefore the impact) of these variations are evaluated.  
5.1.4.3 Evaluation of Design Choices 
Angles have been identified as the most influencing parameters in the creation of a change in the CN 
Length. This finding makes relevant to evaluate of how the variation of certain parameters affects to 
the CN Length when unwanted angles are present in the subsystems. The following evaluations are 
based on scenarios where the only variation acting is the maximum possible angle found between the 
==PAGE:62==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 54 OF 71 
gear’s functional surfaces in the Bottom SS. This was chosen because it creates the largest impact in 
the change of CN Length as demonstrated in the previous section. 
The first parameter evaluated is the Base Height. In Figure 5-6 it is displayed how the change in CN 
length, as well as the FRs from Part 1 (∆z and ∆r), are affected when the height of the base is 
changed. By observing the graph, it can be concluded that for the three FRs studied, their change is 
larger when the base height is larger. This means that the larger the Base Height is the larger the 
change of the 3 FRs are. 
 
 
Figure 5-6: Effect of changing base Height on the change of CN Length in the Bottom SS and FRs defined in Part 1, 
The following parameters evaluated belong to the connector, in Figure 5-7 the main DPs that 
influence the creation of the CN, in the evaluated scenario, are graphically represented. 
 
Figure 5-7: Representation of the analyzed parameters in the connector (Bone example). 
 
In Figure 5-8, it is displayed the change in CN Length when the angle alfa (α) is modified. It is 
observed that the larger the angle is the smaller the effect on the CN is. This means that larger angles 
between functional surfaces in the connectors will make the CN length less sensitive to variations 
that introduce angles in the SS of interest. 
Moreover, this evaluation is also presented for the scenario where all the maximum variations 
analyzed in previous sections are affecting the system. The results show a similar distribution which 
makes this evaluation more representative. 
0
0,5
1
1,5
2
2,5
3
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Change of the FRs [mm]
Base height [mm]
WCSr r
WCSz z
CN Base
==PAGE:63==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 55 OF 71 
 
Figure 5-8: Effect of changing angle (α) in horse in the change of the CN length. The red line 
represents the current alfa horse. 
In Figure 5-9, it is represented how changes in Depth (D) parameter influence the CN length. It is 
observed how a larger depth will create a larger change in the CN length. This means that increasing 
the Depth of the connectors, the CN length becomes more sensitive to the variations that introduce 
unwanted angles in the SS. Furthermore, this evaluation has been done for different angles. Looking 
at the results for the different angles selected it is observed what it was concluded in the previous 
evaluation: Larger alfa angle will reduce the CN sensitivity to the variations studied in this section 
(angles). 
 
Figure 5-9: Change of CN at scenario case variable depth (DP#22). The scenario in this case is maximum angle at Gear-Flange interface. 
Although this evaluation has been done using the models created for the Bottom Subsystem, the 
observations made can be also applied for the Top SS due to the geometrical similarities between 
both SS. Therefore, it can be concluded that in terms of reducing the sensitivity of the CN to possible 
angular variations: smaller heights in parts, smaller depths and larger angles in connectors will be 
preferred. This conclusion resembles the observation made in the sensitivity analysis section: The CN 
length is more sensitive in the Bottom SS than in the Top SS.  
0
0,5
1
1,5
2
2,5
0
50
100
150
200
∆CN length [mm]
Horse α (nominal at 75°) [degrees °]
All variation
Variation in gear only
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
1,4
1,6
1,8
2
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
∆CN [mm] 
Depth (distance from surface to crossing of axis)(nominal at 75) [mm]
∆CN at 75° (nom)
∆CN at 90°
∆CN at 105°
==PAGE:64==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 56 OF 71 
Drawing direct conclusions about selecting optimal DPs for the connectors is limited because it is 
needed to consider all the influences of the analyzed parameters to other “requirements” of the DRC 
such as: 
• 
Having a calibration set up optimal for avoiding singularities during the calibration. 
• 
Having a calibration set up that allows the robot to move through enough positions to assure 
a successful calibration. 
• 
Having parts that are actually possible to manufacture. 
5.1.5 
Mechanical Impact on the Common Normal Conclusions 
Variations that can introduce angles in the subsystem should be controlled as they have the potential 
to create a large impact in the change of CN Length and thereby in the DRC performance, as the 
Robot is scaled incorrectly. 
It has been demonstrated that using the Top SS CN as the scaling distance will increase the 
robustness of the DRC rather than using the Bottom SS as for scaling. 
There are more optimal values for some DPs than the currently selected in regards to the sensitivity 
of the CN Length. Although, there are other requirements in the system, which could conflict with 
the selection of the optimal parameters. Therefore, even though there is potential for design 
improvements several considerations must be made before any DP can be optimized. 
==PAGE:65==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 57 OF 71 
 
5.2 
Analysis of Dual Robot Calibration Data 
The purpose of this section is to develop understanding and insight into and surrounding the analysis 
presented earlier. This is done by investigating some data regarding the robotics domain. This also 
seek to address some limitations related to the lack of knowledge on how exactly a real-world robot’s 
physical variations affect the kinematic model and what actually is found during the DRC. As 
obtaining an incorrect kinematic model might result in either an unsuccessful calibration or unwanted 
robot performance, which respectively adds rework costs or creates customer dissatisfaction. 
This section is split into two subsections. The first is regarding some historical data of the resulting 
∆DHPs from the calibration of 1220 UR3s. The second subsection is regarding a small experiment 
done at Universal Robots with the calibration of two UR3s. The idea of the experiment was to 
introduce variation in the Top and Bottom SSs and see how the variation was captured by the DRC 
and used in the kinematic model.   
The aim of these two subsections is to increase the insights into the calibration and the creation of the 
kinematic model.  
5.2.1 
Historical Data 
The historical data investigated in this section, is the ∆DHP values found during the calibration of 
1220 UR3 robots. Histograms of this data can be seen in Figure 5-10.The data from UR10 and UR5 
robots was also gathered but only briefly looked at as this project does not deal with any other data 
from or analyses of these two variants. 
 
Figure 5-10: Histograms from UR3 Kinematic Model Settings. The rows show the 4 different ∆DH Parameters while the 6 columns show the 
data from each of the six joints (n=1220). 
In the figure, three things stand out: The mean of the wrist3 joint’s (joint5) and the variation of the 
base joint’s (joint0) d-value, the variation in the parallel joints’ (shoulder’s (joint1), elbow’s (joint2), 
and wrist1’s (joint3)) values, and the base joint’s (joint0) α-value. 
The connection between the values can be seen in Figure 5-11, where some of the parameters 
adjusted during the DRC are written in black color. 
==PAGE:66==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 58 OF 71 
 
Figure 5-11: Closed Kinematic Chain Transformation used in the DRC and the DH parameters partially displayed. The parallel joints are 
represented through the Shoulder-Wrist2 transformation. 
5.2.1.1 The ∆d-value 
Looking at the histogram for the ∆d-value for wrist3 (d joint5 (row 3, column 6)) it can be seen that 
the mean value is 0,545[mm], the minimum value is 0,210 [mm], and the maximum value is 0,900 
[mm]. The d-value represents the distance from the wrist2 axis to the TCP. Since the minimum value 
is 0,210 [mm] this means that, at least in the eyes of the DRC and kinematic model, the robot is 
always found to be larger than nominal. This variation cannot be explained using the tolerance model 
where the Tool SA’s WCS ∆z (which is what this ∆DHP should represent) is ±0,45 [mm]. The Top 
SS WCS ∆z is 1,463 [mm]. However, if this observation was directly related to the tolerance chain 
the distribution shown should be symmetrical around 0. As such, this strongly suggests that there are 
influences, which cannot be explained from the models. Additionally, while the Base joint’s ∆d-value 
(d joint0 (row 3, column 1)) might be more symmetrical it has a quite large interval of [-0,7; 1,3] 
[mm]. Overall, this does suggest that these parameters are sensitive to variations (because of the large 
variation), which also happens to be the conclusion of Part 1 and the previous section. 
A similar though smaller shift is also noticeable in the data from the UR5s and UR10s (see Appendix 
5-C). However, in the UR10 the shift is largest in the base joint. This is interesting because the UR10 
uses the Horse CN rather than the Bone CN for the scaling. If these shifts are related to the method of 
finding the scaling distance of the robots, it could indicate a more systemic issue with the DRC. 
Finally, if the calibration procedure systematically results in an increased value and this is incorrect it 
could have an influence on the robots’ precision. Though, the procedure of having a manual gauge 
check at the end of the calibration should catch this (see section 3.2.4.1). 
5.2.1.2 The parallel joints 
A look at the data for the parallel joints (joint 1 to 3 (columns 2 through 4)) show very high ∆d-
values. The values are in the interval of [-2,3; 2,2] [km]. However, when these three values are 
summed the interval is [-1,4; 1,0] [mm] with an average 0,072 [mm] indicating a more realistic mean 
==PAGE:67==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 59 OF 71 
and variation. This can be seen as a reminder that the DHPs represents a mathematical model and not 
necessarily a direct representation of the physical system. But that the purpose of the model is a 
representation of the chain from the Base to the TCP. 
5.2.1.3 The base joint’s α-value 
The Base joint’s α-value has an average of 0,023 [°] and an interval of [-0,32; 0,54] [°]. This value is 
the difference between the Base’s and Shoulder’s rotation axis. As such, it is difficult to say where 
the variation is occurring. From the TCA, the maximum angle in the Base SAs is 0,51°, which is in 
line with this but suggest additional variation and (currently) unexplainable interactions. The key 
question then becomes whether this variation is captured correctly and offsets the actual variation in 
the joint or if this is an issue in the Bottom SS. Since the α-value for the wrist3 (joint5) is fixed at 0 it 
is not possible to see if this also is the case for the Top SS. 
5.2.1.4 Overall remarks on the historical data 
The parameters from the 1220 UR3s suggest that there are unknown factors and noise in play, which 
cannot be explained by the data or the mechanical investigation conducted in Part 1 or the first 
section of Part 2. Therefore, it is clear that the DRC captures some variations in the physical parts. 
While the previous mechanical models help to understand how and where this variation is, 
understanding how exactly this is propagated through the kinematic model and whether or not the 
model’s parameters are somewhat coupled is unclear. 
What is clear, is that the ∆d-value for wrist3 (joint5) is at least 0,21 [mm] and maximum 0,90 [mm] 
larger than the nominal for all UR3s. A similar shift exists in the tool for the UR5 and in the base for 
UR10. These joints are used to create the CN used for scaling and could possible indicate an 
unknown factor in the DRC. Additionally, the base's alpha value ranges from -0,32° to 0,54°, where 
some insights can be obtained from the TCA but an expanded model of the TCA that includes more 
of the middle part of the robot is needed to otherwise explain this variation. 
Finally, an unknown that perhaps also should be addressed is how repeatable the process of the DRC 
actually is: How close will the ∆DHPs values of the DRC be for a robot calibrated multiple times. 
In Figure 5-11 the key data points in investigated can be seen. In the next subsection, a small 
experiment will be described from where the relationships between variation and key data points are 
sought to be extrapolated. 
5.2.2 
Analysis of Experiment 
This subsection is regarding a small experiment done at Universal Robots with the UR3. The idea of 
the experiment was to introduce variation in the Top and Bottom SSs and see how the variation was 
captured by the DRC and saved in the kinematic model. 
The aim of this small experiment to help bridge the knowledge gap between the robotic and 
mechanical domains’ relationship. In essence, the experiment seeks to introduce fairly simple and 
controlled physical variations between the robots’ connection points and connectors into the DRC-
setup and gather the resulting calibration data. This data is then used to correlate the introduced 
physical variation and subsequent DHP corrections. A more detailed description of the experiment 
can be seen in Appendix 5-D. 
==PAGE:68==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 60 OF 71 
5.2.2.1 Experiment Set Up 
Beforehand a handful of selected scenarios was chosen to be investigated. In order to reduce external 
influences, the setup was the same in every run. This means that the two robots, the two connectors 
(Bone & Horse), and the robots configuration for the DRC are the same in every run. 
Table 5-xi Summary of the experiment runs 
Run  
Subsystem 
affected 
Physical 
variation 
introduced 
Intent 
Successful 
DRC? 
Physical 
control 
2 
Baseline 
None 
To create a baseline 
for comparison 
Yes 
Go 
(2.5mm) 
3 
Top 
1.5 mm offset between 
tool and bone  
To simulate ∆d1,t 
Yes 
No-go 
(4.2mm) 
7 
Top 
3 mm offset between tool 
and bone 
To simulate ∆d1,t 
Yes 
No-go 
(4.5mm) 
4 
Top 
≈4° angularity between 
tool-bone (around x-axis) 
To simulate change in 
CN length (at) 
No 
 
5 
Top 
≈2° angularity between 
tool-bone (around x-axis) 
To simulate change in 
CN length (at) 
Yes 
Go (6mm) 
6 
Top 
≈2° angularity between 
tool-bone (around y-axis) 
Angularity w/o change 
in CN length  
Yes 
Go 
(2.5mm) 
8 
Top 
≈1° Angularity around z-
axis 
To simulate ∆θ1,t 
Yes 
Go 
(2.5mm) 
9-13 
Bottom 
Same type of variations as 
run #3, #4, #5, #6, & #7 
Same as run #3, #4, #5, 
#6, & #7 but in the 
base 
No 
 
 
An overview of the different experiment runs is shown in Table 5-xi. This highlights the variations 
introduced, the intent of the run, whether the robots were able to successfully calibrate, and whether 
the final physical check was a go or no-go (and the distance of this check). The requirement to the 
physical check is 2,5 [mm] ±0,5 [mm]. The six different runs from which data was gathered and 
analyzed are shown in Figure 5-12. Unfortunately, the data from unsuccessful runs could not be 
collected at the time. 
==PAGE:69==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 61 OF 71 
 
Figure 5-12: Visualization of the physical variations in the analyzed runs (blue-bone / grey-Tool). 
5.2.2.2 Results & Analysis 
The set of DH corrections for the robots in each run that succeed was collected. The runs and the 
relevant parameters of the runs that showed variations are shown in Table 5-xii. The data that was 
able to be extracted from the experiment can be seen in Appendix 5-E. This table uses the run #2, a 
baseline run conducted w/o variation, as the reference run. As such, the values shown are the 
difference between the ∆DHPs of the analyzed run and the ∆DHP obtained for the reference run. 
Table 5-xii: Difference in Corrected DHPs in the analyzed runs having run #2 as the reference. 
 
After interpreting and analyzing the data some observations and conclusions have been made and 
collected in Table 5-xiii. 
 
 
Run #
∆a4 (m) 
∆d0 (m) 
∆d5 (m) 
∆α4 (rad) 
∆a_base (m) ∆α_horse (rad) ∆α_bone (rad) 
2
Master
Slave
3
Master
-8,65E-06
1,69E-04
1,39E-03
2,90E-05
Slave
-8,56E-06
1,50E-04
2,74E-04
6,68E-05
5
Master
-1,04E-05
3,17E-04
3,34E-03
1,18E-05
Slave
2,38E-06
3,09E-04
2,52E-04
-7,19E-05
6
Master
-2,09E-06
2,44E-04
1,24E-03
1,76E-05
Slave
-4,11E-06
2,33E-04
-1,24E-03
-6,87E-06
7
Master
-8,09E-06
-1,47E-04
2,12E-03
1,76E-05
Slave
-3,78E-06
-1,46E-04
-3,05E-04
-4,76E-05
8
Master
-4,95E-06
-2,80E-05
-7,61E-05
7,03E-06
Slave
-9,66E-06
-3,01E-05
-1,52E-04
-6,66E-05
0,004270
0,001430
-0,032770
-0,002930
0,000190
-0,000152
-0,000309
-0,000185
0,000180
0,000045
0,000020
0,000010
-0,000080
0,000000
-0,000020
==PAGE:70==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 62 OF 71 
Table 5-xiii: Set of observations and conclusions resulting from the experiment conducted 
Observation 
Analysis 
Every run (#9-13) of the experiment, in which 
variations were introduced in the Bottom SS failed 
the DRC. 
During the experiment, the DRC seemed to be 
more sensitive to variations introduced in the 
Bottom SS as the variations introduced were no 
larger than those of the Top SS.   
Run #4 failed because of the large difference 
between the expected and the calculated 
reference distance (ab) 
Having an angle around the Bone y-axis can cause 
the DRC to fail because of its influence on scaling. 
Run #5 was close to suffer the same failure as run 
#4, and it has the largest difference in reference 
distance 
registered 
on 
a 
successful 
run 
(<0.3[mm]). Some significant influences are 
observed in a4 and d5.  
The same can be said here as above. Additionally, 
having an angle, between the tool and the bone, 
larger than 2º will be quite likely to lead into an 
unsuccessful DRC for this set of robots.  
Run #3 passed the software check but failed on 
the physical go/no-go check. Subtracting the 1.5 
mm that was added physically to the Tool length, 
would have created a gap of 2.7 [mm], which 
would have led to a successful DRC. Looking at d5 
the 1.5 [mm] added physical variation can be 
identified as corrected by the DRC but only by 
1,39 [mm].  
While the DRC does identify some of the introduce 
variation and allocates it to DH parameter d5 that 
allocation is approximately 7% off. Furthermore, an 
allocation of 18% of the variation is added to the 
wrong robot.  
Run #7 also passed the software check but failed 
on the go no-go check with a gap of 4,5 [mm]. 
Subtracting the 3 [mm] added physical variation 
from the gap would have been equal to 1.5 [mm], 
which still means an unsuccessful DRC. Moreover, 
this time d5 only corrected by 2,15 [mm].  
There is not necessarily a 1:1 correlation between 
length variations in the tool and the correction in 
d5 parameter. This is likely because of the 
assumptions used in the calibration algorithm. 
 
Run #6 passed both checks. The angle did not 
influence on the CN (scaling distance). A z-offset 
was identified on d5, which might make sense for 
one robot. But the value seems to be duplicated 
to the other robot.  
Also, a change approximate to that introduced in 
the bone was identified by the DRC (recognized 
α_bone to be 1,88°). However, α_horse also 
seemed to be larger for some reason.  
The DRC should not allow these robots to pass the 
calibration because if that angle was in the Tool 
mount it will create an important performance 
error, which could lead to customer dissatisfaction. 
This run also showed that the DRC could not 
recognize which robot has the variation in the Top 
SS.  
The α_horse and α_bone could possibly be used as 
an indicator of this. 
Run #8 passed both checks and did not provide 
any significant insight when looking at the 
calibration data. 
Apparently angles around the rotational axis do not 
influence the performance of the DRC.  
 
==PAGE:71==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 63 OF 71 
5.2.2.3 Discussion on the experiment 
It is clear that the variation introduced has more often than not, a close corresponding effect on the 
DHPs. However, the size of the effect is not consistently equal with the introduced variation. 
Additionally, there are instances of where the DRC interprets the variation inaccurately. 
As run 5 in the experiment is directly related to the common normal it seemed only fitting to enter 
the variation created into the Tolerance and Sensitivity Model built to study the variation and 
common normal. When this offset of approximately 1,5 [mm] is entered into the model the change to 
the CN in the Top SS is found to be -0,88 [mm]. The value found in the experiment is approximately 
35% of that. While this shows some limitations of the model it also highlights the unknowns in the 
DRC process. Where the model only captures the effect of that single variation, the DRC creates a 
complex mathematical problem that is solved through weighing and minimization algorithms. There 
are likely a multitude of interdependencies and interactions. So how the variation and the outcome of 
the DRC algorithms actually affects the final ∆DHP values, is a question for another project. 
In the previous subsection regarding historical data the question of process repeatability was raised. 
In run 9 to 13 it was not possible to calibrate the robot. This is especially interesting when 
considering that run 13 was without variation and in theory is the exact same as run 14. The only 
difference with run 14 is that the robots were detached from and reattached to the connectors and the 
robots’ memory was wiped. A closer look at run 1, 2, and 14 (which all are without introduced 
variation) also shows that there are noticeable differences. 
5.2.3 
Dual Robot Calibration Data Conclusions 
As the analysis of the historical data and the experiment are somewhat restricted and 
incomprehensive the conclusions should merely be an indication. Therefore, further investigation and 
more comprehensive analyses should be made into some of these – the three most interesting 
conclusions being: 
1. The repeatability of the DRC and how the possible variations translate into robot 
performance 
2. The shift of the nominal distance between the scaling CN and the robot’s previous joint. This 
refers to the ∆d-value in Wrist3 for the UR3 and UR5, and in the Base for UR10. 
3. How a variation exactly could propagate through the Kinematic Model. 
Although it is difficult to specify and exactly predict how physical variations produce unwanted 
performance of the DRC it is shown that it can occur. As such, the following was observed: 
• 
The performance of the DRC is more sensitive to physical variations appearing in the Bottom 
SS than in the Top SS. 
• 
Variations that create angles have a more significant influence on the success of the DRC 
• 
A lack of robustness in the DRC process is observed 
The lack of robustness was specifically seen in run 6, where the variation introduced in one robot 
affected the kinematic model of the other robot through the DRC process. 
These three points matches the conclusions of the sensitivity analysis conducted of two subsystems’ 
CNs very closely. As such, this should light the way for future work if these issues are prioritized.  
In order to achieve a higher accuracy and precision a review and study with a more critical approach 
to the faith in the precision of the production and in the ability of the DRC must be conducted. 
However, it must also be realized that some trade-offs must be made as some parts are going to be 
more precisely manufactured than the calibration can capture, and vice-versa. This could unearth 
some issues if the parts are not that precise or if the calibration captures some noise. Therefore, 
==PAGE:72==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 64 OF 71 
improvements could be made to the process by developing some performance indicators. This could 
i.e. be done by building and correlating data over time to better understand the consequences physical 
variations in the robots. Once this data is established it could be used as heuristics to identify less 
than optimal performing robots. 
5.3 
Conclusions for Effects of Variations in the Calibration 
In part 2 it was seen how the model created in part one could be expanded and related to the 
calibration. The expansion of the model directly led to the identification of highly sensitive 
parameters related to the DRC. It was shown that these could be reduced through parameter 
optimization. 
From the expanded model, it could also be seen that some of the issues regarding angles identified in 
part 1 were also present. This was seen both in the tolerance analysis and in the DRC experiments. 
Additionally, it was seen in experiment run #6 that the DRC did not accurately capture all variation 
into the two robots’ kinematic models. In this case some variation was identified and both robots 
were calibrated to compensate for that. However, the DRC did not correctly capture this variation 
that exist in the one robot. But it calibrated both robots to include a variation that did not exist, which 
could lead to some performance inaccuracies of both robots. This increases the relevance of the 
findings made in Part 1 and the beginning of Part 2, as the DRC might find inaccuracies in the parts 
and calibrate the robots incorrectly. 
Finally, there are some relationships and unknowns that has not been explained by the models 
created. This was shown in the data for 1220 UR3 robots where the ∆d-value consistently is larger 
than expected without any explanations found in the models. By comparing this finding with the 
DRC data from UR5 and UR10 robots a hint of unknown influences in all robots could be seen. 
==PAGE:73==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 65 OF 71 
6. 
CONCLUSION 
The main conclusion of the work conducted during this project is the need to control the impact of 
unwanted variations due to angles that can appear in the system. These angles, between mating parts, 
have a large contribution to variation in the Subsystems analyzed.  
In Part 1: Mechanical Investigation & Evaluation, the impact of angles is demonstrated by the study 
of the variation of the relative position of the Subsystems. The importance of this observation is 
further realized in Part 2: Effects of Variation in the Calibration. Here analytical and empirical results 
demonstrate that these possible angles can have a significant effect on the calibration. It was shown 
that having angles in certain directions could lead to a failed calibration or an inaccurate robot. 
In the analytical studies conducted in Part 2 it is observed that the CN length of the Bottom 
Subsystem is more sensitive to variations than the CN of the Top Subsystem. This can be also 
observed and contrasted in the experiment conducted, where all the same physical variations 
introduced in the Bottom Subsystem likely had an amplified effect that resulted in failed calibrations.  
Strategies to reduce different parameters’ sensitivity were studied in both Part 1 and 2. From a study 
of the connectors it is concluded that the current set-up for the DRC could be optimized. 
Additionally, both parts also showed that the angles issue could be addressed through more robust 
design.  
Through the analyses and to incorporate robust design in UR’s products this project provides: 
• 
A comprehensive model to investigate the effect of parameter changes and thereby a tool to 
evaluate designs 
• 
A set of good practices, rule of thumb, and inspiration studies to have into account in future 
design of parts including but not limited to: 
o The smaller the heights the better 
o The larger the diameters the better 
o Contact points should be as separated as possible 
 
Due to the nature of this project being a lighthouse case study, it is now up to Universal Robots to 
utilize the methods, the findings, and the conclusions within this report to in an appropriate manner. 
More robust products could as such be achieved by using the suggestions presented in Future Work. 
==PAGE:74==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 66 OF 71 
7. 
LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
In this part, the limitations surrounding the analysis and the models are reviewed. This is followed by 
suggestions for relevant future work, which could help create important value to UR. This would 
build on the first steps taken in this project to implement the Robust Design and the VMF. As such, 
UR could continue and improve the work presented through the case study in this report. 
7.1 
Limitations 
There are a number of limitations in the analysis and models presented in this report that are 
important to reiterate, review, and consider going forward. These include the following 5 limitations: 
(1) The studies and analysis carried out during this project were focused on one product (UR3 G3) 
among the company’s portfolio. Although the different robots have similar geometries they vary 
from product to product and therefore, the results and conclusions might also vary. 
(2) The middle part of the robot was disregarded during the studies and analysis conducted, as well as 
some organs inside the joints such as brakes, encoders, etc. 
(3) The VMF was not extensively implemented for the process domain meaning that some potential 
variations introduced during assembly or coming from the manufacturing process capabilities might 
be disregarded.  
(4) Only a few Robotic Domain considerations are presented in the current models. Although some 
additional data analysis and experiments were conducted in order to bridge the gap between the 
variations on DPs and DHPs, the results of this work are somewhat limited. This is largely due to a 
knowledge gap regarding this connection, and between the knowledge domains. 
(5) The Tolerance and Sensitivity Model used to make the analyses shown in this report, was created 
using some simplifications that could limit the reliability of the results obtained. The simplifications 
used are: 
• 
The model is only based on WCS tolerances because of the nature of the variations. 
• 
Angles are stacked together in the same direction to create an absolute worst case 
• 
The Gears’ inner part is disregarded and the model is only considering specifications as 
observed in the gears’ assembly drawing 
• 
All external influences are completely disregarded 
7.2 
Future Work 
As this is an exploratory case the tools and the first step needed to implement Robust Design at 
Universal Robots are provided. In order to gain the full benefits of Robust Design future work is 
needed. The idea should be to move the mechanical design decisions towards being evaluated 
through the eyes of Robust Design both in terms of qualitative and quantitative evaluation. 
Mechanical Engineers should become more familiar with the tools and practices presented in this 
project. In order to successfully achieve this formalized Robust Design processes, evaluation gates, 
and training should be considered. 
This project could be leveraged right away by looking into the conclusions made in this report. This 
includes a closer study into the gears, which could easily be included in the Tolerance and Sensitivity 
Model presented in this report. Doing that could lead to obtaining some Robust Design benefits. 
However, to take as much advantage as possible from this project UR should seek to expand the 
work done. This includes expanding and doing additional verifications of the different models within 
==PAGE:75==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 67 OF 71 
this report. One of the most central being the relationship from the DPs to the DHPs to the FRs. This 
could also help clarify for mechanical engineers how exactly the design of parts affects the robotics, 
a knowledge gap which could require some attention. 
Additionally, verifying the assumptions and reducing the limitations of the model would lead to a 
more representative and reliable model. Once this has been obtained it should be fairly 
straightforward to expand the model to investigate the Top and Bottom Subsystem design of the 
UR5, UR10, and possible future robot designs. 
The models can be validated by conducting physical checks where the relevant parameters are 
measured in real life and inputted into the models to check if the actual performance of the robot 
matches what the models predict. With the models validated they could be sought implemented for 
the whole robot in order to increase the overall robustness of the entire system. Higher robustness is 
going to enable better kinematics and fewer quality related issues. Additionally, it would allow for 
better comprehension of the deployment of functions and their quantifiable relationships throughout 
the system. 
By creating updated models for the whole family of robots and reducing the knowledge gap between 
mechanics and robotics there is an opportunity to include additional software and electronic 
considerations. This could significantly cut down the limitations of the. These upgraded models will 
still have some limitations and room for improvement that could be reduced, for instance, by: 
• 
Introduce external influences into the models. 
• 
Implement advanced methods for geometrical tolerances chain analysis 
• 
Introduce a DP / DHP relation interface. 
Finally, quantification of how repeatability the DRC is and how predictable outcomes of the DRC are 
could also help better understand the robustness of the process. This could lead to new insights, better 
integration and coherence of the mechanical and software Key Characteristics (KC). Then a better 
understanding of possible trade-offs between the two domains can be made. 
As robots becomes more advanced and the cyber-physical systems more integrated a necessity for 
managing and understanding the complexity in the design will become ever more prevalent.  
==PAGE:76==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 68 OF 71 
8. 
APPENDIXES 
• 
Appendix 3-A: DH Transformations 
• 
Appendix 4-A: KC flowdown 
• 
Appendix 4-B: Trigonometry Transformation through the Connectors 
• 
Appendix 4-C: Systems clarity 
• 
Appendix 4-D: Interface clarity 
• 
Appendix 4-E: Step-by-step guide of tolerance chain analysis 
• 
Appendix 4-F: Tolerance chains analysis 
• 
Appendix 4-G: Notes for the technical drawings 
• 
Appendix 4-H: Sensitivities 
• 
Appendix 4-I: Sensitivities flowdown 
• 
Appendix 4-J: Contribution analysis 
• 
Appendix 5-A: Excel model regarding common normal 
• 
Appendix 5-B: Results from Sensitivity Analysis 
• 
Appendix 5-C: Histograms for all Robots 
• 
Appendix 5-D: Description of Experiment 
• 
Appendix 5-E: Results of the Experiment (Excel) 
 
 
==PAGE:77==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 69 OF 71 
9. 
LIST OF FIGURES AND TABLES 
9.1 
Figures 
Figure 2-1: UR turnover from 2012 to 2016 [thousand DKK]. Source: www.Proff.dk ....................................... 2 
Figure 2-2: Universal Robots’ three different products. Source: www.Universal-Robots.com ............................ 2 
Figure 2-3: Excerption of relevant product aspects .......................................................................................... 5 
Figure 2-4: Production sequence at Universal Robots in Odense ...................................................................... 5 
Figure 2-5: Mechanical systems of interest. Top: Disregarding the “middle part”. Left: Top end-link with the 
two robot tools and the connector (bone). Right: Bottom end-link with the two robot bases and the 
connector (horse). .................................................................................................................................. 6 
Figure 3-1: Robust Design Sequence ............................................................................................................... 7 
Figure 3-2: Domains of the VMF ...................................................................................................................... 8 
Figure 3-3: Example of transfer function linking one DP to one FR ................................................................... 8 
Figure 3-4: Representation of the infringement of the two axioms ................................................................... 9 
Figure 3-5: VMF domains connected by Design Matrices ................................................................................ 10 
Figure 3-6: VMF domains connected by Transfer Functions ............................................................................ 10 
Figure 3-7: KC Flowdown integrated in the RD process. ................................................................................. 11 
Figure 3-8: Example of KC Flowdown from a system FR domain to the DP domain. ....................................... 11 
Figure 3-9: Representation of a generic bubble diagram used for the System Clarity analysis. ...................... 12 
Figure 3-10: Interfaces found in the System of interest analyzed in this report. ............................................ 13 
Figure 3-11: Sensitivity Definitions and its Representation on a Transfer Function. ........................................ 14 
Figure 3-12: Representation of the datum system used for the TCA .............................................................. 15 
Figure 3-13: Representation of a UR robotic arm and its joints. Source: Søe-Knudsen, R., 2014. New methods 
for kinematic modelling and calibration of robots. ................................................................................. 17 
Figure 3-14: Simple explanation of the DRC process ...................................................................................... 18 
Figure 3-15 DRC Set up formed by two robots and two connectors. ............................................................... 18 
Figure 3-16: Representation of the closed kinematic chain and the calibration error. Source: Søe-Knudsen, R., 
2014. New methods for kinematic modelling and calibration of robots. ................................................. 19 
Figure 3-17: Default DH parameters for a UR5 and an example of Corrected DH Parameters after Calibration
 ............................................................................................................................................................. 19 
Figure 3-18: Representation of the transformations done from joint to joint in the closed kinematic chain 
formed by two robots and two connectors. ............................................................................................ 20 
Figure 3-19 Representation of the CN between the tool axis. Source: Søe-Knudsen, R., 2014. New methods 
for kinematic modelling and calibration of robots. ................................................................................. 21 
Figure 3-20 2D representation to illustrate how certain physical variation (e.g. Angularity between gear and 
tool) affects to the CN length ................................................................................................................ 22 
Figure 4-1: General KC Flowdown. The orange boxes are top-level CAs, grey boxes top-level FRs, yellow boxes 
mid-level FRs, and the black boxes represent the further break down that is presented in this report. The 
highlighted flowdown represents this part of the report. ....................................................................... 24 
==PAGE:78==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 70 OF 71 
Figure 4-2: KC Flowdown developed from the System FR: Robust Mechanics ................................................. 24 
Figure 4-3: Point at Datum 2 (also referred to as the origin point of Robot 2) and point at Datum 1 (also 
referred to as the origin point for robot 1) along with the z and r direction for datum 2 for base-horse-
base sub-system (left) and tool-bone-tool sub-system (right) ............................................................... 25 
Figure 4-4: Representation of the SA coordinate system defined. .................................................................. 26 
Figure 4-5: Example of how interface ambiguity can influence the assembly ................................................. 27 
Figure 4-6: Excerpt of the System Clarity analysis, showing a loop in the Flange Tool-Gear Flange connection 
(tool) because of countersunk screws. .................................................................................................. 27 
Figure 4-7: Summary of the Interface Clarity for the Top Subsystem. ........................................................... 28 
Figure 4-8: Flange Tool-Gear Flange interface in the Tool SA. ........................................................................ 28 
Figure 4-9: Generic representation of the FR variation in end robot subassembly. ......................................... 30 
Figure 4-10: Generic representation of the FR variation in the bone/horse subassembly. ............................... 32 
Figure 4-11: Simplified WCS for ∆r in Subsystems. Top SS without variation (top left), Top SS with variation 
(bottom left), Bottom SS without variation (top right), Bottom SS with variation (bottom right), and 
Geometrical representation of the simplified WCS (bottom center). ...................................................... 35 
Figure 4-12: Simplified WCS for ∆z in the subsystems. .................................................................................. 36 
Figure 4-13: Comparison between a) Total sensitivity of parallelism for ∆r b) partial sensitivity of parallelism 
for ∆r .................................................................................................................................................... 39 
Figure 4-14: Schematic showing the principle of the fits. Left: Surfaces controlling the Rr, right: Shaft/hole fit 
controlling the Rr. ................................................................................................................................. 40 
Figure 4-15: Comparison between methods of locking Rr. Left: A graph showing possible angle vs. the 
parallelism tolerance. Right: A graph showing the possible angle vs. the height of the part. ................. 40 
Figure 4-16: Relationship between diameter and maximum possible angle in 6 different cases: 3 where the 
parallelism is the controlling factor and 3 where the fit is the controlling factor. A simplification is that 
holes have a constant tolerance of [0; +0,015mm] and shafts has a tolerance of [ -0,015mm; 0]. ...... 41 
Figure 5-1: Top Level KC Flowdown. Highlighted the relevant FRs for this part. ............................................. 44 
Figure 5-2: KC Flowdown through System, Subsystem and Subassembly levels, to achieve a robust kinematic 
model through the DRC. ....................................................................................................................... 46 
Figure 5-3: Simplfied graphical representation of the scenarios for studying the change in CN. ..................... 48 
Figure 5-4. Graphical Representation of the most sensitive parameters for scaling the robot’s kinematic model 
during DRC. .......................................................................................................................................... 51 
Figure 5-5: Effect of the size of 3 high sensitive DP´s tolerances over the change in the Top SS CN Length. . 52 
Figure 5-6: Effect of changing base Height on the change of CN Length in the Bottom SS and FRs defined in 
Part 1, .................................................................................................................................................. 54 
Figure 5-7: Representation of the analyzed parameters in the connector (Bone example). ............................ 54 
Figure 5-8: Effect of changing angle (α) in horse in the change of the CN length. The red line represents the 
current alfa horse. ................................................................................................................................ 55 
Figure 5-9: Change of CN at scenario case variable depth (DP#22). The scenario in this case is maximum 
angle at Gear-Flange interface. ............................................................................................................. 55 
Figure 5-10: Histograms from UR3 Kinematic Model Settings. The rows show the 4 different ∆DH Parameters 
while the 6 columns show the data from each of the six joints (n=1220). ............................................. 57 
==PAGE:79==
ROBUST DESIGN IN TABLE-TOP ROBOT ARMS 
 ANDREAS NØRBALLE & CARLOS ALONSO PEREZ 
PAGE 71 OF 71 
Figure 5-11: Closed Kinematic Chain Transformation used in the DRC and the DH parameters partially 
displayed. The parallel joints are represented through the Shoulder-Wrist2 transformation. ................. 58 
Figure 5-12: Visualization of the physical variations in the analyzed runs (blue-bone / grey-Tool). ................ 61 
9.2 
Tables 
Table 4-i: FRs for the sub-assemblies (∆α in connectors can appear around the x-axis, y-axis, or any 
combination thereof) ............................................................................................................................. 29 
Table 4-ii: WCS tolerances for the robot sub-assemblies in question. ............................................................ 30 
Table 4-iii: Closer look at the tool: Angle and r-displacement due to angle .................................................... 30 
Table 4-iv: Closer look at the base: Angle and r-displacement due to angle ................................................... 31 
Table 4-v: Contribution to ∆r ......................................................................................................................... 31 
Table 4-vi: Variation in the connectors. ......................................................................................................... 32 
Table 4-vii: WCS calculated for each Subsystem FR (Real Value & Simplified Value) ...................................... 33 
Table 4-viii: Composition of and contributors to the Worst-Case Scenarios ∆r and ∆z .................................... 34 
Table 4-ix: Sensitivities of the Top SS ........................................................................................................... 37 
Table 4-x: Sensitivities of the Bottom SS ....................................................................................................... 38 
Table 4-xi: Ratio between variation in input parameter and variation in output parameter. In the first ratio, 
the overall ration between ∆r and parallelism is seen. The second ration is between change in α and that 
of parallelism, third that of ∆α_r and ∆α, and finally ∆r and ∆α_r. These numbers are obtained from the 
model by inputting the change in parallelism and observing the 3 outputs (∆α, ∆α_r, & ∆r). ................ 39 
Table 4-xii: Contribution analysis of the most sensitive parameters ............................................................... 42 
Table 4-xiii: Reduction of possible angle in the gear by introduction of reasonable parallelism tolerance. ...... 42 
Table 5-i: Definition of CN length limits. ........................................................................................................ 46 
Table 5-ii. Considerations and limitations of the change in CN Length study .................................................. 47 
Table 5-iii: The effects on the scenario for the common normal ..................................................................... 47 
Table 5-iv Results for CN Length calculation in the simplified scenarios with the maximum variations. .......... 48 
Table 5-v Excerption of the sensitivity analysis for DPs affecting the CN length in the Bottom Subsystem. .... 49 
Table 5-vi Excerption of the sensitivity analysis for DPs affecting the CN length in the Top Subsystem. ......... 50 
Table 5-vii Excerption of the sensitivity analysis for tolerances affecting the CN length in the Bottom 
Subsystem. ........................................................................................................................................... 50 
Table 5-viii Excerption of the sensitivity analysis for tolerances affecting the CN length in the Top Subsystem
 ............................................................................................................................................................. 51 
Table 5-ix Contribution for tolerances affecting the CN length in Bottom Subsystem ...................................... 53 
Table 5-x Contributions for tolerances affecting the CN length in Top Subsystem .......................................... 53 
Table 5-xi Summary of the experiment runs .................................................................................................. 60 
Table 5-xii: Difference in Corrected DHPs in the analyzed runs having run #2 as the reference. .................... 61 
Table 5-xiii: Set of observations and conclusions resulting from the experiment conducted ........................... 62 
 
