==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Electrical Engineering
Drone control in 3D using Brain-Computer
Interface (BCI)
Author:
Andrei Chiuzbaian
Advisor:
Associate Professor Sadasivan Puthusserypady
Co-advisor:
Researcher Ph.D Jakob Jakobsen
August, 2017
==PAGE:2==
Drone control in 3D using Brain-Computer Interface (BCI)
Author:
Andrei Chiuzbaian (s142214)
Advisor:
Sadasivan Puthusserypady, Associate Professor at the Department of Electrical Engi-
neering, Technical University of Denmark.
Co-advisor:
Jakob Jakobsen, Researcher Ph.D at National Space Institute, DTU Space.
DTU Electrical Engineering
Biomedical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Øresteds Plads, Building 349
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
Tel: +45 4525 3886
studieadministration@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period: January 2017- August 2017
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science in Electrical Engineering (M.S.E.E.)
Field: Biomedical Engineering
Class: Open Source
Remarks: This paper is submitted as partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for graduation
in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights: ©Andrei Chiuzbaian, 2017
Andrei Chiuzbaian
Date
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) constitutes the bridge between the human brain and an
external application. By monitoring the encephalic activity a BCI system can translate
speciﬁc changes in the brain signals into control commands in order to control an external
device or software.
Worldwide, millions of people are locked in a wheelchair due to neuromuscular disor-
ders or spinal cord injuries. These individuals are deprived of trivial social activities like
interacting or playing games with other people. Such activities are crucial for personal
development and can have a great impact on the quality of their lives.
The scope of this project was to design and develop an electroencephalography (EEG)-
based BCI system that would allow disabled and healthy individuals alike to control a
drone in a 3D physical environment only by using their thoughts.
The BCI system implemented in this thesis is based on Steady-State Visual Evoked
Potentials (SSVEP). These are distinct brain wave patterns detected by the BCI system
whenever the user is gazing at a repetitive visual stimulus presented on a computer screen.
In order to stimulate the SSVEPs, a visual interface was developed. The interface was
designed to be user-friendly and highly customizable. Several experimental trials were
conducted in order to investigate, which stimulation frequencies are better for evoking
the SSVEPs. The data was ﬁltered with an 8th order Butterworth bandpass ﬁlter and
the FFT spectral analysis was performed in order to detect and classify the SSVEPs.
Four distinct SSVEPs were detected and used as control commands by the BCI system
in order to move the drone in four directions. The BCI system was tested in a simulation
scenario, where the control commands were used to control the behavior of four LEDs.
The performance of the BCI system was evaluated using standard metrics and resulted
in an average Information Transfer Ratio (ITR) of 10 bits/min. and a Positive Predictive
Value (PPV) of 92.5%.
==PAGE:4==
Resum´e
Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) udgør broen mellem den menneskelige hjerne og en ek-
stern anvendelse. Ved at m˚ale den encefaliske aktivitet kan et BCI system oversætte
speciﬁkke ændringer i hjernesignalerne til kontrolkommandoer med henblik p˚aat styre et
eksternt apparat eller software.
Over hele verden er millioner af mennesker fastl˚ast i en kørestol p˚agrund af neuro-
muskulære lidelser eller rygmarvsskader.
Disse individer er frataget trivielle sociale
aktiviteter som at interagere og spille spil med andre mennesker. Aktiviteter, som er
afgørende for personlig udvikling og som kan have en stor indﬂydelse p˚aderes livskvalitet.
Form˚alet med dette projekt var at designe og udvikle et electroencephalography(EEG)-
baseret BCI system, som kunne gøre det muligt for handicappede s˚avel som sunde indi-
vider at styre en drone i et 3D fysisk miljøalene ved tankens brug.
BCI systemet implementeret i denne afhandling er baseret p˚aSteady-State Visual Evoked
Potentials (SSVEP). Disse er distinkte hjernebølgemønstre detekteret af BCI systemet
hver gang brugeren stirrer p˚agentagne visuelle stimuli p˚aen computer skærm. For at
stimulere SSVEP‘erne blev et visuelt interface udviklet. Interfacet blev designet til at
være brugervenligt og meget tilpasningsmuligt. Flere prøvetests blev gennemført for at
undersøge hvilke stimulationsfrekvenser der bedst kunne fremkalde SSVEP‘erne. Dataen
blev sorteret med et 8 ordens Butterworth bandpass og FFT-spektralanalysen blev udført
med henblik p˚aat opdage og klassiﬁcere SSVEP‘erne.
Fire distinkte SSVEP‘er blev
opdaget og brugt som kontrolkommandoer for BCI systemet, s˚adronen kunne styres i
ﬁre retninger. BCI systemet blev testet i et simuleringsscenarie, hvor kontrolkommando-
erne blev brugt til at styre bevægelserne af ﬁre LED.
BCI systemets ydeevne blev evalueret ved brug af standard m˚alevidenskab og resulterede
i en gennemsnitlig Information Transfer Ratio (ITR) p˚a 10 bits/min og en Positive Pre-
dictive Value (PPV) p˚a 92.5%.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This paper on drone control in 3D with BCI has been conducted at the Department of
Electrical Engineering in the Biomedical Engineering Section as a partial requirement
for acquiring the M.Sc.
in Electrical Engineering with a focus on Space Technology
at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The project was initiated in January
2017 and was accomplished in August 2017 at the Department of Electrical Engineering
in collaboration with the National Space Institute, DTU Space.
The work has been
supervised by the main supervisor, Sadasivan Puthusserypady1, and co-supervisor Jakob
Jakobsen2. The total workload represents 30 ECTS (European Credit Transfer System)
and comprises of developing a BCI system that enables paraplegics and other motor-
impaired patients to explore the world around them and experience a degree of freedom
despite their incapacitated status.
Lyngby, August-2017
1Associate Professor at DTU, Department of Electrical Engineering.
2Researcher at DTU Space, National Space Institute.
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I wish to thank, ﬁrst and foremost, my Professor Sadasivan Puthusserypady who made
this amazing topic possible and supported me through all the diﬃcult periods I have
been through.
Secondly, I would like to thank my co-supervisor Jakob Jakobsen and his student, Mikkel
Bugge for developing an interface between the BCI and the drone and contributing with
inspiring ideas.
I am indebted to my many colleagues from Biomedical Engineering department who
supported me and assisted me through the duration of the project. I would also like to
thank all the volunteers who have participated in the experimental work done during this
project. Special thanks to my colleagues, Jonas Hem Rossing and Cecilie Saskia Lochet
Jakobsen for the tremendous support and help oﬀered during the thesis and for sharing
the same passion for BCI-controlled drones.
Finally, I would like to express my gratitude for the moral support and patience exerted
by my family and friends during the writing of this thesis.
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Main Aims and Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Thesis Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Medical Background
4
2.1
Nervous System Organization and Units
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Nerve Anatomy and Physiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Brain Anatomy and Physiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Visual System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Electroencephalography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Brain Computer Interface (BCI)
13
3.1
Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
BCI Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Taxonomy of BCI Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
BCI Paradigms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.5
Steady state visually evoked potentials (SSVEPs) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Problem Statement
19
4.1
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5
Materials and Methods
22
5.1
Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.1.1
Neuroheadset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
5.1.2
Hardware
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.1.3
Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2
Data Acquisition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2.1
SSVEP Stimulation Unit: Visual Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2.2
Experimental Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2.3
Experimental Trials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2.4
Real-time BCI system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.3
Signal processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6
Results
45
7
Conclusion
49
8
Future Work
51
Appendix A Code Repository
52
References
71
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
2.1
Basic components of a typical neuron.
The neuron consists of the cell
body, the dendrites and the axons.
From: Eberly College of Science,
Human Body: Form & Function.
Copyright ©2017 The Pennsylvania
State University.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Diagram of a chemical synapse showing voltage-gated Ca2+ channels, voltage-
gated Na+ channels, and voltage-gated K+ channels in the presynaptic
membrane. From [2]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Lateral section of a human brain and the cerebral hemispheres: frontal,
parietal, temporal and occipital lobes. Furthermore, the position of the
cerebellum and the brain stem can be seen. From: Brain Anatomy - Lobes
of the brain. Copyright ©The University of Queensland. . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
The visual system including eyes, the connecting pathways through to the
visual cortex and other parts of the brain. From [3]. . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
The international 10-20 system seen from left (A) and above the head (B)
together with the location and nomenclature of the international 10-20
system of electrode placement. From [4]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1
General structure of a typical EEG-based BCI system.Raw data from users
is recorded and processed. Desired features are then extracted and classi-
ﬁed as control signals which are being used to actuate an external device.
From [6]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Concept of an SSVEP-based BCI system. On the right side, the Fast-
Fourier Transform of an 7 Hz signal together with its harmonics at 14
respectively 21 Hz. From: [12]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
==PAGE:10==
LIST OF FIGURES
5.1
The Easycap model used during the implementation of the BCI system
(left side) and the electrodes placement map (right side). The red color
corresponds to the reference electrodes, green color to the electrodes used
in the EEG data recording and rest of the electrodes, which were not being
used, are marked with gray color. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2
The Arduino board and the LED circuit used in the evaluation process of
the BCI system. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.3
The waveform generator and the LED used in the calibration process of
the BCI system. In this example, the LED was powered by the waveform
generator with a supply voltage of approx. 3.5V. The signal generated is
a periodic signal (square wave) with a duty cycle of 50% and a frequency
of 10 Hz. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.4
The ON (white) and OFF (black) states of a visual stimulus. For simulat-
ing a 10 Hz signal, each state will be displayed on the screen for a period
of 50 ms in a rapid succession until the execution of the program is ended.
33
5.5
The visual interface used in the stimulation process of the SSVEPs. The
white triangles represent the visual stimuli used for evoking the SSVEPs.
The distances between each visual stimuli and their size are marked with
red color. The area marked by the gray rectangle represents the area where
a 3rd party software window would be overlaid in order to display the video
stream. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.6
The experimental setup used during the EEG data recordings. The subject
was placed comfortably in an armchair at a distance of 60 cm from the
computer screen. A laptop was used in order to process the EEG data
recorded from channels O1 and O2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.7
The SSVEPs detected by the BCI system. The frequency response of each
SSVEP is oﬀset-ed to left from their stimulation frequency. . . . . . . . .
38
5.8
The modiﬁed version of the visual interface used as SSVEP stimulator in
the real-time BCI system. Each arrow corresponds to a speciﬁc command
that will be used to actuate the drone in 3D space.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.9
The magnitude and frequency threshold levels for each SSVEP. . . . . . .
41
5.10 The frequency response of a 4th order Butterworth bandpass ﬁlter used to
remove the noise and ﬁlter the EEG data.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
==PAGE:11==
LIST OF FIGURES
6.1
The stimuli sequence used during the evaluation process of the BCI system. 45
6.2
The results obtained during the evaluation process of the BCI system.
The table illustrates the results obtained from each subject and the mean
average values for the elapsed time, the number of output commands and
the ITR. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.3
The Information Transfer Rate (ITR) achieved by each subject during the
evaluation process of the BCI system. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
==PAGE:12==
List of Tables
2.1
The diﬀerent types of oscillatory patterns identiﬁed in EEG recordings
together with their speciﬁc frequency range and location. . . . . . . . . .
12
5.1
The equipment used for the EEG recordings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2
The hardware conﬁguration of the laptop.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.3
The technical speciﬁcations of the screen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.4
The hardware conﬁguration of the PC. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.5
The software packages used in the implementation of the BCI system. . .
30
5.6
The On-Screen Display settings of the computer screen. . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.7
The SSVEPs detected by the BCI system and their stimulation frequencies. 38
5.8
The control commands and their corresponding stimulation frequency. . .
41
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
“Disability should never be a barrier in one‘s success.”
Stephen Hawking.
Worldwide, hundreds of millions of people suﬀer from some form of disability according
to 2011 WHO‘s world report on disability [1]. This global estimation is on the rise due to
population aging and a rapid spread of chronic diseases. Many of these people suﬀer from
neuromuscular disorders such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), spinal cord injury,
brainstem stroke and many other disorders responsible for causing the loss of voluntary
muscle control. Such people are often locked in a wheelchair unable to move their limbs
or go anywhere they would like to go by themselves. They have to face great barriers
in the modern society due to their disabilities, being deprived of trivial activities like
interacting or playing games with other people, activities that are crucial for personal
development and have a great impact on the quality of life. Over the last few years, the
state of the art technology known as the Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) is becoming
more and more accessible to the wider public and it is our moral responsibility to use such
technologies in order to lift these barriers and give disabled people a chance to regain a
normal life.
1
==PAGE:14==
1.2 Hypothesis
1.2
Hypothesis
By presenting visual stimuli, evoked brain signals can be recorded from a subject oc-
cipital region using a non-invasive technique known as an electroencephalogram (EEG).
The recorded signals can be then interpreted and used as command signals for remotely
controlling an external device. Six diﬀerent visual stimuli having distinctive ﬂickering
frequencies will be displayed on a computer screen where each of them corresponds to a
dimension in 3D physical space. By gazing at one of the stimuli a subject will be able
to move an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) in that particular direction in 3D physical
space.
1.3
Main Aims and Objectives
• Using non-invasive techniques like electroencephalography (EEG), the scope of this
project is to extend the concept of a BCI for non-medical applications.
• By presenting visual stimuli, evoked brain signals can be recorded from an individ-
ual with the help of such non-invasive techniques.
• From these signals, certain features or patterns can be interpreted as commands and
used for controlling an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV/drone) allowing the subject
to control the UAV in 3D physical space only by using the brain signals.
The main objective of this project is to design the signal acquisition, feature extraction
and classiﬁcation parts of such a BCI system.
2
==PAGE:15==
1.4 Thesis Outline
1.4
Thesis Outline
Chapter 2: Medical Background
In this chapter we provide theoretical background required for understanding the med-
ical part involved in a BCI system. Aspects like nervous system physiology and brain
anatomy were covered in this chapter together with a brief explanation of what electroen-
cephalography is and how it is done.
Chapter 3: Brain-Computer Interface (BCI)
In this chapter basic understanding about brain-computer interfaces is provided. We
present the general structure of an EEG-based BCI system and continue with the classi-
ﬁcation of BCI systems.
Chapter 4: Problem Statement
In this chapter we discuss the problem statement along with related work done in the
drone-control with BCI ﬁeld.
Chapter 5: Materials and Methods
This chapter serves as an overview of the equipment involved in implementing the BCI
system covered in this thesis. A brief description about the signal processing steps in-
volved in the implementation of the BCI system was covered at the end of the chapter.
Chapter 6: Results
This chapter concludes with the results achieved during the evaluation process of the
BCI system covered in this thesis.
Chapter 7: Conclusion
This chapter summarizes the work done during the implementation of the BCI system
covered in this thesis.
Chapter 8: Future Work
In this chapter we provide details about what improvements can be done in the future
work in order to improve the robustness of the BCI system.
3
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 2
Medical Background
This chapter covers the theoretical background required for the reader to better under-
stand the medical aspects involved in an EEG-based BCI paradigm. Aspects like nervous
system physiology and brains anatomy were covered in this chapter together with a brief
explanation of what electroencephalography is and how it is done in a laboratory/clinical
environment.
2.1
Nervous System Organization and Units
Every human action from thinking, feeling, moving to being aware of the world require
activity from the nervous system. Anatomically speaking, the nervous system can be
divided into two main units, the CNS (Central Nervous System) which consists of the
brain and the spinal cord, and PNS (Peripheral Nervous System) which connects the brain
and spinal cord with peripheral structures. Together these two systems are responsible
for coordination of voluntary and involuntary actions of human body and provide general
functions like sensory, integrative and motor.
2.1.1
Nerve Anatomy and Physiology
Nervous tissue can be found in the brain, spinal cord and nerves and is characterized by
its ability to conduct electrical signals known as action potentials. The nervous tissue
consists of two principal types of cells, neurons which are responsible for its conductive
ability and neuroglia which protect the nervous system and supply metabolic support.
4
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Nervous System Organization and Units
Neurons
Neurons, also known as nerve cells, are the functional cells of the nervous system. Just
as an electrical wiring system transports electricity throughout a city, neurons transport
electrical signals throughout the body.
Although they vary considerably in size and
shape, neurons share common features between them. A neuron (illustrated in 2.1) is
composed of three distinct parts: a cell body, an axon, and dendrites. The cell body
contains the nucleus which is the home of all general cell functions. The axons are long
eﬀerent processes that project from the cell body and carry electrical signals away from
the cell. Dendrites are much shorter than axons and have multiple branches at their
ends. They are responsible for carrying electrical signals towards the cell body which
represents the main source of information for the neuron. Both axons and dendrites
serve as intercommunication lines between neurons and form synapses with one another
at interconnection points between them.
Every time one of the neuron’s dendrite is
stimulated by another neuron’s axon, the stimulus is transmitted to the neuron’s cell
body under the form of an electric impulse or action potential.
Figure 2.1: Basic components of a typical neuron. The neuron consists of the cell body,
the dendrites and the axons. From: Eberly College of Science, Human Body: Form &
Function. Copyright ©2017 The Pennsylvania State University.
5
==PAGE:18==
2.1 Nervous System Organization and Units
Action Potentials
Action potentials are abrupt, pulsating changes that are generated and propagated by
ion channels found in the neuron’s cell membrane.
More speciﬁcally, sodium (Na+),
potassium (K+) and calcium (Ca+) channels allow the generation of action potentials.
The frequency and pattern of action potentials constitute the “code“ used by neurons to
transfer information from one location to another. Action potentials are characterized in
three diﬀerent phases: the resting (or polarized state), depolarization and repolarization
state. During the resting phase, the membrane potential is roughly -90 mV and represents
the undisturbed period of the action potential in which the nerve is not transmitting any
impulses. The resting phase of the membrane potential continues until some event causes
the membrane to increase its permeability to Na+. Depolarization phase is characterized
by a rapid change in polarity of the resting membrane potential. During this phase,
the membrane suddenly becomes permeable to Na+ ions.
The rapid inﬂow of Na+
ions produces local electric currents that travel through the adjacent cell membrane,
causing the Na+ channels to open.
In the repolarization phase, the polarity of the
resting membrane potential is reestablished by the closure of Na+ and opening of the
K+ channels. A diagram of a chemical synapse is illustrated in the Fig. 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Diagram of a chemical synapse showing voltage-gated Ca2+ channels, voltage-
gated Na+ channels, and voltage-gated K+ channels in the presynaptic membrane.
From [2].
.
6
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Brain Anatomy and Physiology
With the help of action potentials, the brain is able to send out commands throughout the
nervous system and its intricate network of neurons in order to obtain muscles reaction
that can result in, for example, moving an arm or a leg.
Neuroglia
Neuroglia or glial cells are the major supporting cells in the CNS, greatly outnumber-
ing the number of neurons. With unique structural and functional characteristic, CNS
neuroglia splits into four types: astrocytes, microglial cells, ependymal cells, and oligo-
dendrocytes. Together, they act as a permeability barrier between the blood and the
neurons, producing cerebrospinal ﬂuid, forming myelin and carrying out phagocytosis.
PNS neuroglia called Schwann cells produces the myelin sheath around neuronal axons,
which is a fatty layer that insulates the axon increasing the saltatory conduction of the
neuron.
2.2
Brain Anatomy and Physiology
Located at the center of human nervous system lays the encephalon, in common terms
known as the brain. Containing more than 100 billion neurons interconnected with each
other, the brain controls most of the activities of the human body such as feeling, think-
ing talking and moving. The brain is enclosed and protected by, the skull bones of the
head.
The human brain can be divided into three major portions: the brain stem, the cerebel-
lum, and the cerebrum. The brain stem connects the spinal cord to the rest of the brain
and it’s responsible for the regulation of life-sustaining activities such as breathing and
heartbeat. The cerebellum is attached to the brain stem and plays a crucial part in body
movement, coordination, and balance. Last but not least, the cerebrum accounts for the
largest part of the human brain and it’s the part that most people think of when the
term brain is mentioned. The cerebrum consists of two large masses called the left and
the right cerebral hemispheres, which are essentially mirror images of each other. The
outer layer of the cerebrum, the cerebral cortex is divided into four pairs of lobes (as it
can be seent in Fig. 2.3) named after the skull bones they underlie:
7
==PAGE:20==
2.2 Brain Anatomy and Physiology
The frontal lobe extends from the frontal pole to the central sulcus and it’s re-
sponsible for voluntary motor function, motivation, aggression, the sense of smell and
mood. The frontal lobe consists of two regions, the prefrontal cortex which is involved in
personality and decision making, and the motor cortex which is involved in actions like
planning and control.
The parietal lobe lies behind the central sulcus, posterior to the frontal lobe, being
responsible for the interpretation and integration of sensory information.
The temporal lobe originates below the lateral sulcus and merges with the parietal
and occipital lobes. It has an important role in memory, processing sensory input into
derived meanings, language comprehension, and emotion association.
The occipital lobe lies posterior to the temporal and parietal lobes and acts as the
visual processing center of the brain, containing the anatomical region of the visual cortex.
Simulation of the visual cortex causes the experience of bright lights or phosphenes in
the visual ﬁeld. Located superior from the visual cortex is the visual association cortex
which is required for gnostic visual functions such as the experience of colors, motion,
patterns, perception, and location in three-dimensional (3D) space.
Figure 2.3: Lateral section of a human brain and the cerebral hemispheres: frontal,
parietal, temporal and occipital lobes. Furthermore, the position of the cerebellum and
the brain stem can be seen. From: Brain Anatomy - Lobes of the brain. Copyright ©The
University of Queensland.
8
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Visual System
In this project, the main focus lies on BCI systems based on SSVEP or Steady State
Visual Evoked Potentials. The most important part of the brain studied in the case of
SSVEP BCI-based paradigms, is the occipital region, speciﬁcally the visual cortex.
2.3
Visual System
The visual system, illustrated in Fig. 2.4, is the part of the CNS which gives organisms
the ability to process visual details and perceive the physical environment around them,
by detecting and interpreting information carried by the visible light. The visual system
consists mainly of eyes and connecting pathways through to the visual cortex. The eyes
are responsible for detecting light and converting it into electrochemical impulses. The
light reﬂected from objects in the environment travels to our eyes in waves of photons.
Together, the cornea and lens refract the light into a small image and cast it on the retina.
The retina consists of a large number of photoreceptor cells which contain particular
protein molecules called opsins. Here, the two types of opsins, namely rod opsins, and
cone opsins convert the image into electrical pulses.
Figure 2.4: The visual system including eyes, the connecting pathways through to the
visual cortex and other parts of the brain. From [3].
9
==PAGE:22==
2.4 Electroencephalography
The optic nerve then carries these pulses throughout the optic canal to the chiasm.
Located at the base of the hypothalamus, the chiasm is the place where the optic nerves
from both eyes meet and cross each other. At this point, the information coming from
both eyes is combined and then splits according to the visual ﬁeld. Information from the
right visual ﬁeld travels in the left optic tract while the information from the left visual
ﬁeld travels in the right optic tract, with a small region in the center of the ﬁeld of view
being processed redundantly by both halves of the brain. Each optic tract terminates in
the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN), located in the thalamus. Next, the neurons of the
LGN carry the visual image to the primary visual cortex (V1) which is located at the
posterior end of the brain, in the occipital lobe. Visual information then ﬂows through
a cortical hierarchy (V2, V3, V4, and V5) where neurons are arranged to be responsive
to progressively more complex functions like detecting lines, edges, or particular orienta-
tions or directions of movement of edges.
Basic knowledge about the human’s visual system were covered in this chapter as it
plays an important part in the SSVEP-based BCI paradigm covered in this paper.
2.4
Electroencephalography
Tested for the ﬁrst time in 1875 and introduced to humans in 1924, electroencephalog-
raphy (EEG) is an electrophysiological technique used for recording and interpreting the
electrical activity of the brain. Although there are other methods to study brain func-
tion, like magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), positron emission tomography (PET), and
magnetoencephalography (MEG), EEG is the most popular technique used nowadays.
This is due to the fact that EEG is a noninvasive technique, it is portable, inexpensive
compared with the other methods and it has a high temporal resolution with high record-
ing sampling rates. The drawback of EEG is mainly it’s low spatial resolution on the
scalp (due to the layers of skin and bone that ﬁll the gap between the recording electrode
and the cerebral cortex), and it’s poor signal-to-noise ratio, which requires sophisticated
data analysis.
There are several types of EEG devices available for recording brain activity, from
consumer-oriented to clinical and even research tailored, but they all share the same
10
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Electroencephalography
principle, namely an array of recording electrodes placed in speciﬁc positions on the
scalp. To ensure a standardized reproducibility of electrodes position, the 10-20 system
was created. The 10-20 system of electrode placement is an internationally used method
to describe the placement of electrodes at speciﬁc intervals along the head. Each elec-
trode site has one letter to identify the lobe, along with a number or letter to identify
the hemispheric location it’s placed on top on. There are four reference electrodes placed
at certain locations on the skull: two electrodes placed behind the left and right ear
(mastoid bones), one above the nose (nasion) and one at the back of the head (inion).
The rest of the electrodes are positioned as shown in Fig. 2.5, at 10% and 20% intervals
in relation to the distance from nasion to inion (front to back) and from the left mastoid
to the right mastoid (left to right), thus the name “10” and “20”.
Figure 2.5: The international 10-20 system seen from left (A) and above the head (B)
together with the location and nomenclature of the international 10-20 system of electrode
placement. From [4].
One of the key components responsible for recording good EEG signals is the type of
electrodes used, with so-called silver or silver chloride electrodes being the best available
on the market. In EEG, each electrode is individually connected to an ampliﬁer and as
the signals recorded are very small in amplitude they need to be ampliﬁed before they can
be analyzed. Since most brain waves oscillate between 0,5 Hz and 70 Hz, a bandpass ﬁlter
is usually applied on the data recorded and in some cases a notch ﬁlter can be applied
11
==PAGE:24==
2.4 Electroencephalography
in order to remove the electromagnetic noise generated by the power lines interference,
which in Europe occurs at 50 Hz.
There are certain oscillatory patterns or rhythms that can be identiﬁed in EEG record-
ings and used in order to interpret someones mental state. These rhythms are deﬁned by
their oscillation frequency presented in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1: The diﬀerent types of oscillatory patterns identiﬁed in EEG recordings together
with their speciﬁc frequency range and location.
Band
Frequency [Hz]
Location
Delta(δ)
<4
Frontally (adults) / Posteriorly (children)
Theta(θ)
4-7
Limbic area
Mu(µ)
8-12
Sensorimotor cortex
Alpha(α)
8-15
Posterior cortical area
Beta(β)
16-31
Frontal regions
Gamma(γ)
>32
Somatosensory cortex
12
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
Brain Computer Interface (BCI)
The aim of this chapter is to provide basic understanding about brain-computer interfaces,
referred to as BCIs. An overview about the framework of the system is provided together
with a list of diﬀerent types of BCI systems used in modern applications.
3.1
Deﬁnition
Until recently, the dream of being able to control the environment around us was in the
realm of science ﬁction. A Brain Computer Interface or BCI is a system that provides
a direct communication pathway between brain and an external device by translating
the electrical activity recorded at speciﬁc regions of the brain into control signals. These
control signals can be used in various applications like video game, moving a robotic
prosthesis or motion of a wheel chair etc. One of the main goal is to enable completely
paralyzed patients to interact with their environment. The term brain computer interface
was mentioned for the ﬁrst time in scientiﬁc literature around 1970’s and since then many
breakthroughs have been done in the ﬁeld of BCI systems due to the advancements in
technology done over the past decades [5].
13
==PAGE:26==
3.2 BCI Framework
3.2
BCI Framework
In a BCI system, the ﬁrst step is to extract the data from the brain activity. The most
widely used and consumer-oriented method is encephalography (EEG) as this method is
non-invasive for the human body. Other methods such as intracranial electroencephalog-
raphy (iEEG) and electrocorticography (ECoG) exist but these methods are invasive and
require a brain surgery in order to have the recording electrodes placed directly on the
surface of the cerebral cortex. Once the extraction of the data has been completed, an
A/D converter digitizes the data and sends it to the preprocessing unit. The preprocess-
ing unit removes the noise from the signal by applying diﬀerent ﬁlter techniques. Once
the data has been ﬁltered, distinct features reﬂecting users intent are extracted with the
use of feature extraction algorithms. The features resulted are then passed through a
classiﬁcation algorithm which classiﬁes each feature into a distinct signal. These control
signals are used to manipulate an external device according to the users intent. Most BCI
models have a video or an audio feedback incorporated which will inform the user once
the action intended has been executed. A typical EEG-based BCI setup is illustrated in
the Fig. 3.1.
Figure 3.1: General structure of a typical EEG-based BCI system.Raw data from users
is recorded and processed. Desired features are then extracted and classiﬁed as control
signals which are being used to actuate an external device. From [6].
14
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Taxonomy of BCI Systems
3.3
Taxonomy of BCI Systems
There are certain characteristics that diﬀerentiate BCI systems from each other. In the
previous section we have discussed brieﬂy about (invasive and non-invasive) techniques
used for recording EEG data. Depending on their design, BCI systems can be furthermore
divided into exogenous or endogenous systems, synchronous or asynchronous systems, and
online or oﬄine systems:
Exogenous or Endogenous
Exogenous BCI systems rely on sensory organs like eyes and ears to transmit the message
to the brain and therefore activity in this regions is needed. A good example would be the
Steady State Visual Evoked Potential (SSVEP)-based BCI system like the one covered
in this thesis, in which the visual system plays an important part in carrying out the
signal from the eyes to the occipital region. In contrast, endogenous BCI systems are not
relying on external stimuli to evoke certain brain signals and they are using the brain‘s
rhythms and other potentials in order to command an external application. This means
that the users will have to learn the skill of producing speciﬁc patterns and they rely
solely on the feedback provided by the BCI system in order to do so. Motor imagery
(MI) is the most common mental task used to evoke such brain patterns that can be
reliable enough to be produced and distinguished [7].
Synchronous or Asynchronous
Synchronous or cue-paced BCI systems are analyzing brain signals during predeﬁned
time windows. If there are signals recorded outside the predeﬁned time window, they
will be discarded. In this way users are allowed to send control commands only during
speciﬁc intervals that have been predeﬁned by the BCI system. The main feature of a
synchronous BCI system is that both the beginning and the end of the mental activity
that will be performed is known in advance and can be associated to a start and end point
in the data recorded. The downside however is that it will limit the user from performing
mental tasks outside the predeﬁned time intervals. Asynchronous BCI systems on the
other hand are always active, recording and processing the signal in real time no matter
when the user performs a task. They oﬀer a more natural approach of a human-machine
15
==PAGE:28==
3.4 BCI Paradigms
interaction than synchronous BCI systems and are able to detect EEG signals arising
from both the idling state and the active state of a user. This trait comes with a price
as asynchronous BCI systems are usually more complex and computational demanding
than synchronous BCI systems [4].
Online or Oﬄine
Finally, BCI systems can be either oﬄine or online systems. Oﬄine systems are used for
theoretical simulation of an actual BCI system in order to facilitate the examination of
diﬀerent BCI parameters like EEG signal components, the electrode positions, and many
others. Online systems, on the other hand, require the signal acquisition and processing
to be done in real-time and they are the only BCI systems able to facilitate direct control
over an external application.
3.4
BCI Paradigms
According to [7], EEG-based BCI systems can be divided into four categories (paradigms),
depending on the mental activity that is performed. The ﬁrst two categories are using
the so-called evoked inputs (as their name suggests), while the latter two are based on
spontaneous inputs.
• Visual evoked potentials (VEPs): represent the electrical activity recorded
from the visual cortex as a result of a visual stimulus.
The waveform of these
potentials can be extracted from the EEG.
• P300 evoked potentials: can be described as an evoked potential elicited in
the process of decision making due to unexpected visual, auditory or somatosen-
sory stimuli. The EEG signal is typically measured by the electrodes covering the
parietal lobe.
16
==PAGE:29==
3.5 Steady state visually evoked potentials (SSVEPs)
• Slow cortical potentials (SCPs): are represented by the gradual changes in the
membrane potentials of cortical dendrites that can last from one to several seconds.
Positive SCPs are related to the decreased activity in neurons, whereas negative
SCPs are associated with neuronal activity [16].
• Sensorimotor rhythms: are a combination of µ and β rhythms represented by
the oscillations in the brain activity localized in the µ and β bands. Sensorimotor
rhythms are associated with MI brain patterns which are deﬁned as a dynamic state
during which an individual mentally simulates a given action without performing
any movement[19].
If a BCI system is a combination of any of the mentioned paradigms, we say the BCI
system is a hybrid system.
3.5
Steady state visually evoked potentials (SSVEPs)
In previous sections, we have described the main paradigms used in modern BCI applica-
tions. The current section seeks to provide a brief explanation about how SSVEP-based
BCI paradigms work, how SSVEP stimuli are elicited, how can they be measured, and
how they can be classiﬁed.
SSVEPs are signals that have natural responses to visual stimulation at speciﬁc frequen-
cies. They are elicited by presenting repetitive visual stimuli (ﬂickers) with a constant
frequency on the central retina. During visual stimulation, increases in the EEG power
spectrum at the frequency of stimulation can be measured over the occipital cortex.
An SSVEP manifests as a sinusoidal oscillatory waveform consisting of the same fun-
damental frequency as the ﬂickering frequency, its harmonics and subharmonics.
The
SSVEPs can be evoked via light emitting diodes (LEDs) or a computer monitor and can
be characterized by diﬀerent properties like color and shape which aﬀect the strength of
their response. Due to the fact that SSVEPs frequency characteristic varies from normal
brain activity, their responses can be detected quite robustly. The strongest response is
17
==PAGE:30==
3.5 Steady state visually evoked potentials (SSVEPs)
measurable for stimulation frequencies in the range of 5-20 Hz [8] [9] [10] [11] [7]. By
using ﬂickering lights with diﬀerent frequencies, a multi-class BCI system based on a
SSVEP paradigm was implemented in this project. The concept is illustrated in Fig. 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Concept of an SSVEP-based BCI system.
On the right side, the Fast-
Fourier Transform of an 7 Hz signal together with its harmonics at 14 respectively 21 Hz.
From: [12].
18
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 4
Problem Statement
A crucial element lost in the context of a neurodegenerative disease is the possibility of
freely explore and interact with the world around us. Those with a lack of motor skills
will beneﬁt enormously from devices that can augment their mobility.
The work presented in this paper focuses on developing a brain-controlled assistive system
able to aid both healthy and motor impaired individuals in exploring the world around
them via a computer and through the use of their thoughts. By using the potential of a
noninvasive SSVEP-based BCI system, the users can control a ﬂying robot (also known as
UAV or drone) in three-dimensional (3D) physical space. Over the video stream received
from a video camera mounted on the drone, users can experience a degree of freedom
while controlling the drone in 3D space.
The concept can be extended furthermore, where users are able to use the camera to
take photos or record videos and serves as a framework for investigating a multidimen-
sional control of a device in 3D physical space through the means of a non-invasive
SSVEP-based BCI system.
4.1
Related Work
There has been a lot of work in this direction during the past few years where researchers
have tried innovative solutions for developing a user-friendly and easy to use assistive
systems for controlling a drone. In 2012, Yipeng et al. [13] designed a BCI system meant
19
==PAGE:32==
4.1 Related Work
for augmenting mobility and perceptibility of disabled people by using a consumer ori-
ented EEG headset known as Emotiv EPOC for the purpose of controlling an AR drone.
Equipped with two video cameras, one in the front and one on the bottom, the AR drone
was able to provide video feedback back to the user. By using this aﬀordable system, the
authors main goal was to aid handicapped people by oﬀering them a large range of en-
tertaining activities such as playing games, taking photos or exploring the world around
them. Using the amplitude of ﬁltered brain signals as features that reﬂect ERD/ERS by
means of quantiﬁcation of diﬀerent temporal-spatial patterns, three MI brain activities
could be detected. In their control strategies, the MI signals acquired from thinking left,
thinking right and thinking push combined with the artifact signals from eye blinking and
tooth clenching represented the repertoire of actions a person could use in order to control
the AR drone. Although the system comes as an aﬀordable solution for those who want
to control a drone with their minds, the control strategy used is very counter-intuitive
taking way too much time for the user before he/she could smoothly control the AR drone
in real time. Furthermore, two of the MI commands used by the user to control the drone
are almost indistinguishable from each other. In another study, by LaFleur et al. [14], the
author sets a paradigm for controlling a quadcopter in 3D space with non-invasive BCI
by using only MI commands. For using metrics suitable for such an asynchronous BCI,
the authors had to use a modiﬁed ITR (Information Transfer Rate) in order to evaluate
the performance of the system. The secondary objective proposed by the authors was
to examine the diﬀerences and the impact a real world BCI application has compared
with a 2D virtual cursor task. After the paradigm was set, ﬁve human candidates were
chosen and trained to modulate their sensorimotor rhythms in order to control an AR
drone remotely. Visual feedback was provided by a frontal camera mounted on the drone.
The study consisted of three phases: training and calibration, experimental task phase
and experimental control phase. In the ﬁrst phase, subjects were exposed to 1D and 2D
cursor movement using only MI brain signals. In order to qualify for the next phase,
subjects had to acquire and demonstrate the ability to correctly select 70% or more of
the valid targets. For the next step, subjects were trained furthermore by controlling a
virtual helicopter and if they were successful they were allowed to ﬂy an enhanced virtual
simulator of the real AR drone in order to prepare for the ﬁnal step. In total, subjects
have spent an average of 5 h and 20 min. of virtual training over an average of 3 months
before they were allowed to practice with the real drone. In the ﬁnal test, subjects were
20
==PAGE:33==
4.1 Related Work
asked to pilot the AR drone safely through suspended-foam rings. In order to minimize
artifacts, subjects were visually monitored for inappropriate eye blinking or muscle ac-
tivity. As a result, trained subjects were able to accurately acquire up to 90.5% of all
valid targets presented. In order to test the paradigm against the conventional methods,
the authors have tested a keyboard control paradigm where subjects were able to achieve
a group weighted average of 12 rings / 4 min. by using a keyboard to control the drone,
while the BCI group was able to achieve 3.1 rings / 4 min. , thus giving their BCI system
the ability to acquire 25.8% of the rings that were acquired via keyboard control. Even
though the paradigm demonstrated a high success rate in controlling a drone with a BCI,
it requires a lot of training hours for the subjects before they are able to ﬂy the drone in
the real world. Worth mentioning here that during the experimental control phase the
AR drone had a constant forward speed and therefore the paradigm suggested by the
authors has only 5 MI commands used to control the drone with no possibility of con-
trolling the forward velocity resulting in a partially BCI controlled drone. Last but not
least, the MI signal acquisition process is susceptible to artifacts like inappropriate eye
blinking and muscle activity that may interfere with the control signal. A diﬀerent setup
was suggested by Byung et al. [15], where a hybrid interface was used. In this case study,
the drone was controlled by using a low-cost EEG headset together with an eye tracking
device. The wearable hybrid interface is able to control the drone in 8 directions. Similar
with previous studies, a frontal camera was mounted on the drone in order to provide
video feedback to the user. Subjects used this hybrid interface to navigate along pre-set
target locations and the ﬂight performance was then evaluated by comparing the results
with a keyboard-based interface. Classifying multi-class BCI is not easy and therefore
a simple approach was used by the author by using a two-class BCI (due to simplicity)
combined with the eye tracking device which oﬀers omnidirectional controllability in 2D
space. Brain signals were processed in real-time in order to classify two mental states:
intentional concentration and non-concentration states. To separate the two states, a
Common Spatial Pattern (CSP) algorithm had to be used.
The novelty of this work is in achieving a user-friendly, fully independent, multiclass
SSVEP-based BCI system that would allow a user to control a drone in 3D physical
space only by using his/hers EEG signals.
21
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 5
Materials and Methods
5.1
Equipment
The following section serves as an overview of the equipment involved in implementing
the BCI system covered in this paper. As the system comprises in a bundle of diﬀerent
hardware and software tools, the section was broken down into three categories.
5.1.1
Neuroheadset
The ﬁrst step done in any BCI system is the recording of the encephalic activity. Most
of the time this will be done either with an EEG headset or an EEG cap (rather than
plain electrodes mounted on the scalp) as these two methods have the electrodes built-
in, which keeps them ﬁxed in the same position on the scalp. The ﬁrst EEG system
considered for the purpose of this project was a Guger Technologies (g.tech) located in
the Acoustics department in DTU building 354. This system is used for clinical and
research purposes. Although it has superior signal recording quality over a commercial
headset, the g.tech EEG system is very bulky and requires a full repertoire of appliances
and a wired connection to a desktop PC in order to be able to record EEG signals. Taking
in consideration that the BCI system covered in this thesis requires a user to control the
drone outdoor while being connected to the EEG system at all times, the idea of using
such a system has been discarded as the system was not portable. With portability as
a requirement, the only suitable option would be a commercial EEG headset since most
commercial EEG headsets do not require any external hardware other than the headpiece
22
==PAGE:35==
5.1 Equipment
itself. An EEG system suited for this task is the Emotiv EPOC neuroheadset developed
by the Emotiv Inc. The system has been provided by the main supervisor, Assoc. Prof.
Sadasivan Puthusserypady.
The Emotiv EPOC neuroheadset is a consumer-oriented
EEG headset equipped with 16 electrodes which are used for recording the EEG signals.
The data transfer is done wireless via Bluetooth and as there are no cables involved,
the users can freely move in the environment while wearing the headset. During the
experimental activity with the Emotiv EPOC neuroheadset, a major ﬂaw in the design
of the system has been discovered. The two electrodes (O1 and O2) which are supposed
to be the main electrodes used in any SSVEP paradigms were not placed on the scalp
in their optimal position according to the 10-20 international standard. Instead of being
placed over the visual cortex area, the electrodes were located anterior and above this
region. As a consequence, the data recorded from these two channels was not reﬂecting
the real activity evoked by the visual cortex and therefore the design of the system had to
be changed. The solution was to ﬁnd a modiﬁed EEG system that could ﬁx the electrodes
position problem. Luckily such system could be provided by DTU Compute and it uses
the same circuitry found on the Emotiv EPOC neuroheadset but with a custom-made
EEG recording cap that has the electrodes positioned according to the 10-20 international
standard.
Easycap
The modular EEG recording cap was developed by the German company Easycap. The
cap comes equipped with 14 recording electrodes and 2 reference electrodes (CMS and
DRL). The common mode sense (CMS) is an active electrode and acts as an absolute
voltage reference. The driven right leg (DRL) is a passive electrode that acts as a feedback
noise cancellation. Together, these two reference electrodes form a feedback loop. All 16
electrodes are AgCl electrodes able to provide a superior EEG signal recording quality
over the gold-plated electrodes used in the Emotiv EPOC’s original design. In order to
lower the impedance and increase the signal conductivity, a highly conductive electrolyte
gel had to be applied in between the subject skin and the electrodes. The Easycap model
used during the experimental work together with the electrodes placement map can be
seen in Fig. 5.1
23
==PAGE:36==
5.1 Equipment
Figure 5.1: The Easycap model used during the implementation of the BCI system (left
side) and the electrodes placement map (right side). The red color corresponds to the
reference electrodes, green color to the electrodes used in the EEG data recording and
rest of the electrodes, which were not being used, are marked with gray color.
As mentioned in the Section 5.1.1 the data acquisition and ﬁltering was done by the
Emotiv EPOCH’s hardware system. The data is recorded and sampled by the system
with a sampling rate of 128 Hz and a 50 Hz digital notch ﬁlter is applied over the data in
order to remove any EM interference emitted by the power lines. Due to the low amplitude
of the brain waves, the raw signals are ampliﬁed before they can be recorded. Afterward,
the ﬁltered data is transmitted wireless to a laptop where further signal processing will
be done.
Table 5.1: The equipment used for the EEG recordings.
Component
Description
Easycap
EEG cap with 14 + 2 (CMS/DRL) electrodes
Electrolyte gel
For lowering impedances between the skin and the electrodes
Emotiv transmitter
The Bluetooth transmitter from Emotiv EPOC neuroheadset
Emotiv dongle
USB receiver used to connect the transmitter with a computer
24
==PAGE:37==
5.1 Equipment
5.1.2
Hardware
This section provides a short description of the hardware devices used in the implemen-
tation of the BCI system covered in this thesis.
For operations like data acquisition, signal processing, feature extraction, classiﬁcation,
plotting the data and as a feedback tool, a personal laptop was used. The laptop was
preferred over a desktop computer due to its portability. The laptop’s hardware speciﬁ-
cation can be seen in Table 5.2.
Table 5.2: The hardware conﬁguration of the laptop.
Model:
Lenovo Z510
Processor:
Intel Core i7-4702MQ @ 2.20 GHz
RAM:
6 GB DDR3
Video adapter:
NVIDIA GeForce GT 740M, 2 GB GDDR3
USB ports:
2 x USB 3.0 & 1 x USB 2.0
In the chapter 3.5 we have explained how SSVEPs can be elicited by an LED or by a
visual stimulus displayed on a computer screen. In the BCI system presented in this
thesis, a computer screen was preferred.
By using this method we could implement
(code) a user-friendly interface that was fully customizable. Characteristics like shape,
size, color, and stimulation frequencies were fully adjustable and could be modiﬁed at
any given time during the calibration process just by changing a few variables in the
code. According to many articles found in the scientiﬁc literature, the most important
feature when choosing a digital screen for a SSVEP-based BCI system is the refresh
rate of the screen. In [16] the authors explain how for any refresh rate frequency lower
than 120 Hz there were artifacts produced in the power spectrum of the EEG signal
recorded. These artifacts stand out in the form of additional peaks that are not located
at the stimulated frequency or its harmonics. Another important aspect when choosing a
screen is the screen technology. There are three technologies used for building commercial
screens: Cathode Ray Tube (CRT), Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) and Light Emitting
Diode (LCD). In [8] the authors have compared these three technologies. The results
have shown that screens using LED display have the lowest response time. The response
time, also known as rising and descending time represents the time it takes for a pixel to
25
==PAGE:38==
5.1 Equipment
change its state (from on-oﬀor from white-black). During rising and descending edge of
a pixel, the ﬂicker waveform is not a standard pulse and that will cause artifacts in the
EEG power spectrum. This means that a lower response time will produce lower artifacts
in the power spectrum which will eventually be indistinguishable from the background
noise. Taking into consideration all the constraints mentioned above we have chosen the
BenQ XL2420T as the ideal screen for displaying the visual interface. The screen was
provided by DTU Biomedical Engineering department. The product speciﬁcations can
be seen in the Table 5.3.
Table 5.3: The technical speciﬁcations of the screen.
Model:
BenQ XL2420T
Screen size:
24“
Resolution (max.):
1920 x 1080
Refresh rate:
120 Hz
Response time:
1 ms
Brightness:
350 cd/m2
Native Contrast:
1000:1
In order to work at a refresh rate of 120 Hz, the screen needed to be connected to a video
card that was able to perform at such a high refresh rate. Furthermore, the monitor
and the video card needed to be connected to each other through a dual link DVI (DVI-
D) cable as it’s the only type of cable able to support such a high refresh rate. The
personal laptop couldn’t be used for this purpose as it doesn’t have the video card or the
type of connectors required. Even if the laptop would have been suited for this purpose,
running the visual interface together with all the other software used for data recording
and processing would slow down the entire system. To suit the requirements mentioned
above, a desktop computer was provided by DTU Biomedical Engineering department
and connected to the screen in order to achieve a refresh rate of 120 Hz. The hardware
speciﬁcations of the computer used in the implementation of this project are presented
in the Table 5.4.
26
==PAGE:39==
5.1 Equipment
Table 5.4: The hardware conﬁguration of the PC.
Model:
Dell Precision T3600
Processor:
Intel Xeon CPU E5-1620 @ 3.60 GHz
RAM:
32 GB DDR3
Video adapter:
NVIDIA GeForce GTX 680, 4 GB GDDR5
Display connector:
Dual Link DVI-I
A Arduino hardware platform was used in order to translate the output signals sent
from the laptop into control commands that would actuate the drone in 3D space. For
demonstration purposes, since ﬂying the drone indoor was not possible, we have designed
a small LED circuit with four LEDs. The setup can be seen in the Fig. 5.2
Figure 5.2: The Arduino board and the LED circuit used in the evaluation process of the
BCI system.
It is worth mentioning that during the development of this project a waveform gen-
erator together with a bright-white LED were used in order to assess the ﬁdelity of
the visual interface. This was done by comparing the results recorded from a stimulus
displayed on the computer screen with the results from a ﬂickering light produced by the
LED. The setup can be seen in the Fig. 5.3.
27
==PAGE:40==
5.1 Equipment
Figure 5.3: The waveform generator and the LED used in the calibration process of the
BCI system. In this example, the LED was powered by the waveform generator with a
supply voltage of approx. 3.5V. The signal generated is a periodic signal (square wave)
with a duty cycle of 50% and a frequency of 10 Hz.
5.1.3
Software
During the development of the BCI system covered in this thesis, a variety of software
tools were used, each of them brieﬂy described in the following section. The operating
system and the main platform used to run all the software tools was Microsoft Win-
dows 10.
For the EEG data visualization, we used Emotiv TestBench. This is a free software
provided by Emotiv and can be downloaded from their oﬃcial website. This testbench
tool was mainly used for monitoring the connection between the Emotiv neuroheadset
and the computer. The software comes equipped with other useful perks like displaying
the electrodes impedance, signal quality and the battery level of the EEG equipment. It
is worth mentioning that the Emotiv TestBench can only display the EEG signals and
has no function implemented for recording or processing the data. Although we tried
to access it, the data received by the dongle is encrypted and needs to be decrypted in
order to be further analyzed. For this reason, a decryption script was created by DTU
Compute which needed to be modiﬁed in order to suit the requirements of this project.
28
==PAGE:41==
5.1 Equipment
The script for data acquisition and decryption was implemented in Python. The main
functionality of the script was to acquire the raw EEG data in real time.
For more advanced operations like signal processing, feature extraction and classiﬁca-
tion of the data, we choose the MATLAB as a computing environment. A copy of the
software was made available by DTU under a student license. The same software was
used for tasks like plotting the EEG data and providing feedback to the subjects.
In order to transfer the EEG data from Python to MATLAB, an open source software
found on GitHub was used. Lab Streaming Layer (LSL) creates a virtual lab network
where inlet and outlet functions carry out data packages from one software to another.
The packages are sent sample-by-sample and synchronized by the LSL‘s built-in clock to
make sure there is a continuous stream of data between the two software. With many
other features it has, for the BCI system described in this thesis, LSL was only used for
the purpose mentioned above.
For the stimulation of the SSVEPs, a visual interface was implemented.
The inter-
face was programmed in C# using the programming environment Microsoft Visual
Studio. The software can be downloaded free of charge from Microsoft oﬃcial website.
The main reason for choosing this IDE was for it’s graphical (GUI) class library known
as Windows Forms which enables easy implementation of graphical content.
Finally, a short code or sketch was written in Arduino IDE and used to control the
behavior of the four LEDs.
29
==PAGE:42==
5.2 Data Acquisition
Table 5.5: The software packages used in the implementation of the BCI system.
Software
Description
Microsoft Windows 10 Pro N (64-bit)
Operating system
Emotiv TestBench
Console for EEG monitoring from Emotiv
Python 2.7
Programming language implemented in Spyder 3
MATLAB R2017a
Numerical computing programming environment
Lab Streaming Layer
Open source streaming software
Microsoft Visual Studio
(Community Edition 2017)
IDE for Windows Forms (C#)
Arduino IDE
Set of C/C++ functions used by Arduino
5.2
Data Acquisition
This section describes the steps done in order to achieve a real-time BCI system. The
section starts with an overview of the visual interface used in the SSVEPs stimulation
process.
Next, we provide a short description of the entire recording procedure and
the setup behind. We continue afterward with a discussion about the experimental trials
performed in order to be able to measure and classify the SSVEPs and ﬁnalize the chapter
with an overview of the real-time system used as a control scheme in order to move the
drone in 3D space.
5.2.1
SSVEP Stimulation Unit: Visual Interface
In order to stimulate the SSVEPs, we have developed a visual interface that will act as
a visual stimulation unit. Without having any prior knowledge in building such an ap-
plication, we have designed the graphical content according to the work done in previous
SSVEP-based articles. As mentioned in 3.5, the amplitude and phase responses of the
SSVEPs are highly susceptible to the visual stimuli characteristics and can have a great
impact on the performance of the BCI system. We have therefore developed a highly
adjustable visual interface that can be modiﬁed/adjusted at any given time according to
the experimental setup conducted.
The visual interface consists of six distinct ﬂickering ﬁelds, referred to as visual stimuli.
30
==PAGE:43==
5.2 Data Acquisition
The visual stimuli are displayed on a plain background with an area of 1916 x 1053 pixels.
Each stimulus will be oscillating between two states (on/oﬀ) at certain time intervals.
Each stimulus represents one of the six directions in 3D space the drone can be actuated:
up, down, forward, backward, left and right.
Stimulus Shape: For making the entire application more user-friendly, the visual stim-
uli are designed to have the shape of an isosceles triangle. Depending on their orientation
on the computer screen, the visual stimuli will mimic an arrow pointing that particular
direction, making it more intuitive for the users to control the drone in 3D space. In
Anna Duszyk et al. [17], authors have demonstrated that the shape of the visual stimuli
does not aﬀect the detection of the SSVEPs and therefore the shape was chosen to ﬁt
the needs of our project.
Stimulus Texture: The texture of the visual stimuli was decided according to a study
conducted by Brandon Allison et al. [18] where authors demonstrated that plain visual
stimuli performed better than checker-box visual stimuli. Since the study was performed
on a small number of subjects, we have decided to test the author’s statement. In our
results, the plain visual stimuli performed better than the checker box stimuli.
Stimulus Color: Jordi Bieger et al. [19] and Teng Cao et al. [20] have demonstrated
that high color contrast SSVEP applications like a white visual stimulus ﬂickering on
a black background had higher chances to evoke a SSVEP compared with all the other
colors tested in their study. Since a digital screen will be used for displaying the visual
interface, choosing a speciﬁc color for the stimuli is done by changing the individual val-
ues in the RGB color model of the pixels. For achieving the highest SSVEP magnitude
response, we have decided to use the brightest white (R: 255, G: 255, B: 255) as dominant
color for the visual stimuli and the darkest black (R: 0, G: 0, B: 0) as dominant color for
the interface background. In Anna Duszyk et al. the authors claim that ”high-intensity
stimulus evokes the strongest response of sensory systems” [17]. A higher luminance con-
trast (known as Michelson luminance contrast), will elicit a higher SSVEPs magnitude
response. In order to achieve the highest luminance contrast possible, a few changes had
to be made in the On Screen Display (OSD) menu of the computer screen. The OSD
settings can be seen in Table 5.6
31
==PAGE:44==
5.2 Data Acquisition
Table 5.6: The On-Screen Display settings of the computer screen.
Settings
Values
Brightness:
100 (max)
Contrast:
100 (max)
Sharpness:
10 (max)
Black Equilizer:
0 (min)
Color temperature:
R: 100 / G: 100 / B: 100
Stimulus Size: The size and the distance between the visual stimuli are crucial factors in
designing the visual interface. According to the scientiﬁc literature, the distance between
any two ﬂickering ﬁelds has to be at least one time larger than the size of the ﬂickering
ﬁeld itself. Moreover, when gazing at any of the ﬂickering stimuli, the stimulus has to
be placed in a central position inside the FOV in order for the SSVEP to be evoked.
The macula is a region of the retina which deﬁnes the boundaries between central and
peripheral vision. If the FOV is represented by a 360◦imaginary circle around the viewer,
then the macular vision will be represented by an arc with 18◦opening angle. The area
covered is situated in front of the user’s eyes, with 9◦angle covered by the left eye and
9◦angle covered by the right eye. In the experimental work, we set the line of sight
(the distance between users retina and the computer screen) at 60 cm. The distance was
set in order to make sure the entire screen area will be situated inside the user’s FOV
and there will be no unwanted muscle artifacts introduced otherwise by involuntary head
movements. The ﬁnal size of the visual stimuli was chosen according to three criteria:
the distance between each stimulus had to be at least one time larger than the size of the
stimulus, the stimulus size must not exceed the left and right boundaries of the macular
vision, and the total surface area of each visual stimulus should be large enough to evoke
the desired SSVEPs.
The surface area of the stimulus was computed with the same
formula used for computing the area of a classic isosceles triangle.
A = bhb
2 ,
(5.1)
where b = 6.43 cm (243 px) and hb = 3.36 cm (127 px). The eﬀective surface area of
each individual visual stimuli is approx. 10 cm2 or 15.430 px.
32
==PAGE:45==
5.2 Data Acquisition
Stimulus Frequency: The ﬂickering behavior of each visual stimulus is controlled by
a digital timer programmed in the code that will switch the stimulus between on and oﬀ
states (white/black triangles) at speciﬁc time intervals. The values are set in milliseconds
and represent 1/2 of the signal period that is being simulated. The relation between the
period T of a signal and it’s oscillation frequency f is given by the formula
T = 1
f
(5.2)
An example of how a 10 Hz signal sequence would be interpreted by the ﬂickering stimuli
is illustrated in the Fig. 5.4
Figure 5.4: The ON (white) and OFF (black) states of a visual stimulus. For simulating
a 10 Hz signal, each state will be displayed on the screen for a period of 50 ms in a rapid
succession until the execution of the program is ended.
Extra Features: During the implementation of the visual interface, a speciﬁc area was
allocated inside the graphical content. The area was design so so that a separate window
from a 3rd party software could be overlaid in that space. The window would act as
a feedback mechanism and provide a live video stream recorded by the video camera
mounted on the drone. Such functionality could not be hard-coded in the visual interface
as it requires heavy computational power. This will drastically slow down the entire
interface and aﬀect the timers used for controlling the stimulation frequency of the visual
stimuli.
33
==PAGE:46==
5.2 Data Acquisition
In addition, an On/Oﬀbutton was implemented at the bottom right corner of the visual
interface so that users can start/stop the execution of the program. A capture with the
visual interface is illustrated in Fig. 5.8
Figure 5.5: The visual interface used in the stimulation process of the SSVEPs. The
white triangles represent the visual stimuli used for evoking the SSVEPs. The distances
between each visual stimuli and their size are marked with red color. The area marked
by the gray rectangle represents the area where a 3rd party software window would be
overlaid in order to display the video stream.
5.2.2
Experimental Protocol
The experimental tasks performed during this project have been conducted at the Tech-
nical University of Denmark, Biomedical Engineering Department, building 349. The
room provided was partly isolated phonic to reduce noises. Important to mention here
that one side of the room was covered by 3 m high windows which had no sunshades. As
a result, all experiments conducted had to be performed during daytime in a fully lighted
room which may have aﬀected the quality of the recordings.
34
==PAGE:47==
5.2 Data Acquisition
In total two studies were carried out.
The ﬁrst study comprised in a set of experi-
mental trials which was performed on three subjects. In the second study, a total of ten
subjects participated in the tests in order to evaluate the real-time BCI system. All the
subjects that have participated in the experiments were healthy individuals with normal
or corrected to normal vision (wearing contact lenses) and none of them suﬀered from
epilepsy. The subjects participated as volunteers.
Each subject was sited comfortably in an armchair with their forearms placed ﬂat at
90◦on the chair arms and their feet resting ﬂat on the ground.
During the recordings, the computer screen running the SSVEP stimulator was placed on
an adjustable table at approx. 1 m above the ground and 60 cm away from the subject
eyes. The EEG cap was placed on the subject’s head and secured with a Velcro strap
across the chin. A laptop was used for recording the EEG data from channels O1 and
O2, and to provide feedback to the subject. The data collected by the EEG cap was
sent via Bluetooth to a USB dongle that was connected with a USB cable to the laptop.
A picture of the experimental setup and the position of the electrodes used for EEG
recordings can be seen in Fig. 5.6
Figure 5.6: The experimental setup used during the EEG data recordings. The subject
was placed comfortably in an armchair at a distance of 60 cm from the computer screen.
A laptop was used in order to process the EEG data recorded from channels O1 and O2.
35
==PAGE:48==
5.2 Data Acquisition
5.2.3
Experimental Trials
The experimental trials were performed on three subjects. Each subject was instructed
to gaze at one speciﬁc stimulus during a 10 s time lapse (epoch). At the end of each
time lapse, the EEG data was processed and analyzed. For evoking the SSVEPs we used
the visual interface described in Section 5.2.1. Only one visual stimulus was displayed on
the screen. The stimulus was placed in the center of the screen and locked to a speciﬁc
stimulation frequency. The stimulation frequency was changed after each trial until a
SSVEP was detected. Once a SSVEP was detected its detection was improved until it
could be classiﬁed as a potential command for the real-time application.
In order to be able to quantify and qualify a SSVEP, a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT)
algorithm was applied to the EEG data. The FFT analysis converts the original signal
from its time domain into frequency domain. In the frequency domain, each frequency
component of the EEG signal will be displayed as a peak in 2D, represented by its fre-
quency on the x-axis and its magnitude on the y-axis. If we look at the FFT spectral
analysis, a potential SSVEP should be evoked at the exact same frequency as the ﬂick-
ering frequency of the visual stimulus.
The power of a SSVEP is represented by its
magnitude response. In this thesis, the magnitude response of the SSVEPs are displayed
in µV2 but the values are not represented by the real ones. These values are unknown
due to the internal signal ampliﬁcation performed inside the EEG hardware system 5.1.1.
The FFT algorithm and the FFT spectral analysis of the data were performed in Matlab.
In the SSVEP-based BCI articles, there are speciﬁc stimulation frequencies used for
evoking SSVEP and some of them perform better than others. According to Pablo F.
Diez et al. [21] a SSVEP can be evoked in three frequency bands, low (4-12 Hz), medium
(12-30 Hz) and high (>30 Hz). Generally speaking, a SSVEP evoked by a low frequency
will have a higher magnitude response than a SSVEP evoked by medium or high fre-
quencies. On the other hand, using low and medium frequencies for evoking SSVEPs can
cause photosensitivity epileptic seizures and visual fatigue. In the same study, the au-
thors explain how choosing a high-frequency simulation scheme for evoking the SSVEPs
can reduce and even eliminate visual fatigue. Therefore, we have decided to test the same
four stimulation frequencies used in their study namely, 37, 38, 39 and 40 Hz and measure
36
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Data Acquisition
their SSVEPs. Several trials were performed in order to test these four frequencies but
none of them was able to evoke a SSVEP.
In the next step we decided to perform a set of experimental trials testing a wider range
of frequencies that were picked up in a random fashion from each frequency band. After
performing numerous trials we have noticed that the only SSVEPs detected were in the
lower frequency band (4-12 Hz). We believe this is a limitation imposed by the commer-
cial EEG system used in our experiments, which was not designed nor homologated as
an EEG headset suitable for detecting SSVEPs, especially in the higher frequency bands.
The most peculiar phenomena noticed in the results was that each SSVEP detected was
evoked at diﬀerent frequency than its stimulation frequency. For example, a 10 Hz stim-
ulation frequency will elicit a SSVEP response at 8.25 Hz.
In order to make sure this frequency oﬀset was not the result of any signal process-
ing delays introduced by the hardware or software components used in our BCI system,
we made a comparison between the SSVEP evoked by the visual stimulus used in our
application and the SSVEP evoked by a LED ﬂicker 5.1.2. Both stimuli were placed
at the same distance away from the subject and stimulated with the same frequency of
10 Hz. In the FFT spectral analysis both SSVEPs were occurring at the same exact
frequency of 8.25 Hz which was oﬀset-ed with 1.15 Hz to the left from the stimulation
frequency. The same SSVEP was evoked for any stimulation frequency in the range of
9-11 Hz. We could not explain this behaviour and we assumed there might be certain
brainwaves in the lower frequency bands (alpha, theta and mu) that are getting stimu-
lated and ampliﬁed by a speciﬁc range of frequencies.
We prepared another set of experimental trials in which we tested the entire spectrum of
frequencies between 1 and 12 Hz with a step value of 0.5 Hz. At the end of the trials we
manage to detect and identify four distinct SSVEPs. Like in the previous example each of
the four SSVEPs was evoked at a lower frequency compared to its stimulation frequency.
The oﬀset value was diﬀerent for each of them but it remained constant throughout the
recordings. Furthermore, the four SSVEPs detected are user-independent which means
the SSVEP was evoked at the same frequency for all three subjects involved in the ex-
perimental trials. We decided to narrow down the stimulation frequency range for each
37
==PAGE:50==
5.2 Data Acquisition
of the four SSVEPs and ﬁnd out the exact stimulation frequency at which the SSVEP
will have the highest magnitude response. The four SSVEPs detected by the BCI system
and their stimulation frequencies are illustrated in the Fig. 5.7
Figure 5.7: The SSVEPs detected by the BCI system. The frequency response of each
SSVEP is oﬀset-ed to left from their stimulation frequency.
The four stimulation frequencies and their correspondent SSVEP values can be seen in
Table. 5.7. These stimulation frequencies were classiﬁed for evoking SSVEPs and used
in the implementation of the real-time BCI system.
Table 5.7: The SSVEPs detected by the BCI system and their stimulation frequencies.
Stimulation frequency [Hz]
SSVEP frequency [Hz]
Frequency oﬀset [Hz]
5.3
4.85
0.45
7
6.65
0.35
9.4
8.25
1.15
13.5
10.95
2.55
38
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Data Acquisition
5.2.4
Real-time BCI system
As we mentioned at the beginning of this thesis in the Hypothesis Section 1.2, in order
to achieve full control over a drone in 3 dimensions, six distinct control commands are
needed. These commands were supposed to move the drone in both ways on each of the
3D axes, up/down, forward/backward and left/right. Since the EEG equipment used in
this project was unable to pick up more than four distinct SSVEPs, we had to re-conﬁgure
both the visual interface described in Section 5.2.1 and the control scheme that will be
used in order to control the drone. The number of visual stimuli displayed by the visual
interface was reduced to four. Each of these four stimuli will be used in the real-time
BCI system as control commands for lifting the drone (up arrow), lowering the drone
(down arrow), moving the drone forward (left arrow) and turning the drone clockwise
(right arrow). By using a combination of rotation and translation (“turn right then go
forward“) commands we can cover 2 dimensions still be able to achieve full control over
the drone in 3D space. The modiﬁed version of the visual interface used in the real-time
BCI system can be seen in the Fig. 5.8
Figure 5.8: The modiﬁed version of the visual interface used as SSVEP stimulator in the
real-time BCI system. Each arrow corresponds to a speciﬁc command that will be used
to actuate the drone in 3D space.
39
==PAGE:52==
5.2 Data Acquisition
Each individual visual stimulus was stimulated with one of the four stimulation frequen-
cies mentioned in the Table 5.7. By gazing at one of the stimuli, its SSVEP will be
evoked. Since we know the frequency values at which each SSVEP will occur, we can
set a threshold on the magnitude axis that will send an output command to the drone,
whenever the SSVEP’s peak values are above that threshold.
The last step done in order to achieve a real-time BCI system was to divide the EEG data
stream into a succession of time lapses. Each time lapse was set to 2 s intervals during
which the EEG data was recorded. At the end of each time lapse, the data recorded
was ﬁltered, processed, and classiﬁed into one of the four commands. By reducing the
recording time of the EEG data to 2 s, the SSVEPs evoked will have a much lower magni-
tude response and their maximum peak values will occur each time at a slightly diﬀerent
frequency. These small frequency variations can be anywhere between 0.1 - 0.3 Hz from
their initial value mentioned in the Table 5.7. As a result, a threshold technique was
applied over the FFT data that will allow the detection of a SSVEP only when it occurs
within a certain frequency range and above a certain magnitude level. The same thresh-
old technique was applied on both channels, O1 and O2 to increase the overall accurracy
of the BCI system. The SSVEP will be detected only if it’s peak value is detected in the
data recorded from both channels.
The frequency threshold was set individually for each SSVEP between a minimum and
maximum value that were marking the range of frequencies in which the SSVEP was
occurring during the experimental trials. The magnitude threshold level was set high
enough to make sure the noises in the signal will not trigger a False Positive detec-
tion. The magnitude and frequency threshold levels for each SSVEP is illustrated in the
Fig. 5.9.
40
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Data Acquisition
Figure 5.9: The magnitude and frequency threshold levels for each SSVEP.
At the end of each time lapse, the SSVEP detected will be translated into one of the four
control commands used in order to control the drone. If none of the SSVEPs was detected,
a ”idle” message was sent as an output command. In the Table 5.8 it is illustrated which
stimulation frequency corresponds to which command.
Table 5.8: The control commands and their corresponding stimulation frequency.
Stimulus frequency [Hz]
Command
7
Take-oﬀ
9.4
Land
13.5
Forward
5.3
Right turn
41
==PAGE:54==
5.3 Signal processing
The control commands were sent through a serial connection from the laptop to an Ar-
duino board. The Arduino board translates the control commands received from the BCI
system into actuation commands that will move the drone. In the test trials performed
during this thesis, in order to evaluate the performance of the BCI system, we used an
LED circuit connected to the Arduino board. This setup was used in order to assess the
detection rate of the SSVEPs, since ﬂying a drone indoor is not allowed. The LED circuit
comprises in four LED’s that have the same shape (triangle) and orientation in 2D space
like the visual stimuli used in the visual interface.
Depending on the visual stimulus the subject was gazing, if the SSVEP was detected
by the BCI system, a command was sent to the Arduino board that will turn on its
correspondent LED. For example, if the subject was gazing at the stimulus on the left
side of the screen and the SSVEP was detected, the left LED will turn on. Additionally,
a vocal message conﬁrming the detection of the SSVEP will be provided to the subject
as a feedback mechanism. The vocal message will point out which of the four SSVEPs
was detected, by spelling the direction the drone was suppose to move. A picture with
the Arduino board and the LED circuit is illustrated in Fig. 5.2.
5.3
Signal processing
This section provides a description of the signal processing steps involved in the imple-
mentation of the BCI system.
Division of the EEG data into time lapses
The raw EEG data extracted from channels O1 and O2 was sampled at 128 Hz. The 10 s
time lapses used during the experimental trials were reduced to 2 s in order to achieve a
low response time that was required in the implementation of the real-time BCI system.
Each time lapse comprises of 256 diﬀerent measurements of the EEG signal. The time
lapses were recorded and processed individually one at a time in a chronological succes-
sion without any overlapping.
42
==PAGE:55==
5.3 Signal processing
Filtering and normalization of the EEG data
During the ﬁrst experimental trials, in the FFT spectral analysis performed over the
EEG data recorded, we observed a noise that was persistent throughout the recordings.
The noise was occurring in the low-frequency range (0-2) Hz mainly due to the DC com-
ponent of the signal, but a large portion of the noise was present at around 15 Hz. The
magnitude value of the noise was higher than the peak value of the SSVEPs and the
classiﬁcation of the SSVEPs could not be performed. In order to remove the noise from
the, a 4th order Butterworth bandpass ﬁlter was applied over the EEG data. The lower
cut-oﬀfrequency of the ﬁlter was set to 2 Hz and the higher cut-oﬀfrequency to 15 Hz. In
order to avoid any phase distortion, we used the filtfilt function which ﬁlters the data
both ways (forward and backward) resulting in a ﬁltering of 8th order. The frequency
response of the Butterworth ﬁlter used in the implementation of the BCI system covered
in this thesis is illustrated in the Fig. 5.10.
Figure 5.10: The frequency response of a 4th order Butterworth bandpass ﬁlter used to
remove the noise and ﬁlter the EEG data.
The next step after ﬁltering the raw EEG data was to normalize the signals by using the
43
==PAGE:56==
5.3 Signal processing
zero-mean and unit variance techniques. This step was necessary in order to avoid any
speciﬁc variable dominating the others.
Feature detection
For the feature detection of the SSVEPs, we used the FFT algorithm. The FFT cuts the
spectrum in half, resulting in a two-sided spectrum. In order to compute the single-sided
spectrum we used the absolute value abs(fft) function. Next, we used the fftshift
function in order to rearrange the FFT output and shift the zero-frequency component
of the signal to the center of the spectrum. The last step done in the feature detection
process was to set the magnitude and frequency thresholds for each SSVEP. By using a
threshold technique we manually set speciﬁc threshold levels for each distinct SSVEP on
both magnitude and frequency axis.
Classiﬁcation
During the execution of the program, if the peak value of an SSVEP is within the
speciﬁed detection area, the program will generate an output command. The output
command generated will be used as control signal for moving a drone or turning an LED
on. In the implementation of the BCI system covered in this thesis, we used ﬁve classes.
Four classes was represented by the four commands used to move the drone and the ﬁfth
class is represented by the idle command that will keep the drone hovering in the same
position without changing its direction.
44
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 6
Results
This chapter presents the results obtained during the evaluation process of the BCI sys-
tem covered in this thesis. The evaluation consisted of test trials conducted at the end of
this project in order to assess the performance of the BCI system. The information was
acquired from 10 subjects, using the experimental setup described in the Section 5.2.2.
In the test trials conducted, we created a ﬁctional scenario in which each subject will
have to use the BCI system in order to control the drone on a pre-deﬁned path. The
command sequence used during the test trials is illustrated in the Fig. 6.1.
Figure 6.1: The stimuli sequence used during the evaluation process of the BCI system.
Each subject was instructed to gaze at one speciﬁc stimulus at a time. Once the detection
of the SSVEP occurred, he/she was instructed to change their gaze at the next stimulus
in the sequence. We designed the sequence so that each stimulus will be repeated twice.
45
==PAGE:58==
By comparing the information obtained from the test trials with the output message
displayed in the command window of the Matlab software, we can classify the commands
as Correct (C), Incorrect (I) or Not Detected (ND).
For evaluating the performance of the BCI system we used the Information Transfer
Rate. In this thesis, the ITR was calculated as suggested in Pablo F. Diez et al. in [21].
ITR = (1 −pµ)[log2N + (1 −pe)log2(1 −pe) + pelog2(
pe
N −1)]
(6.1)
In the equation 6.2, N represents the number of stimuli (in our case N =4). pµ represents
the probability of undeﬁned cases and is deﬁned by the following equation:
pu = ND/(C + I + ND)
(6.2)
pe represents the probability of incorrect detected cases and is deﬁned by the following
equation:
pe = I/(C + I + ND)
(6.3)
The ITR in 6.2 will be expressed in bits/command. In order to obtain the result in
bits/min. we have to multiply this value with the detection speed of the BCI system
which in our case is 20 commands/min.
Another metric we used in order to evaluate the performance of the BCI system was
the Positive Predictive Value (PPV). The PPV represents the proportion of SSVEP de-
tections that are correct detections. The PPV can be calculated by using the following
equation:
PPV = TP/TP + FP
(6.4)
In the Table 6.2 we present the results obtained from all subjects who participated in the
evaluation process of the BCI system. The table shows the elapsed time, the number of
output commands sent by the BCI system to the drone and the ITR achieved by each
subject.
46
==PAGE:59==
Figure 6.2: The results obtained during the evaluation process of the BCI system. The
table illustrates the results obtained from each subject and the mean average values for
the elapsed time, the number of output commands and the ITR.
47
==PAGE:60==
In the Fig 6.3 we illustrated the ITR achieved by each subject during the evaluation
process of the BCI system.
Figure 6.3: The Information Transfer Rate (ITR) achieved by each subject during the
evaluation process of the BCI system.
It is important to emphasize here that the results achieved can vary drastically depending
on the user‘s concentration and focus on the stimulus. Furthermore, human variables like
tiredness and visual fatigue play a crucial role in the detection rate of the SSVEPs. We
have noticed a signiﬁcant drop in the detection rate of the SSVEPs if the subject was
spending more than 2-3 minutes staring at the visual stimuli. This is a result of using
low-frequency stimuli for evoking the SSVEPs. It is highly recommended that users take
a break every 2 min. in order to avoid drowsiness.
48
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
The goal of this project was to develop a user-friendly BCI system that will allow impaired
people to control a drone in 3D space with the use of their thoughts. The application
was meant to enhance the quality of life of such individuals by allowing them to interact
with the environment around them. The system is based on a SSVEP model in which
visual stimuli are being used in order to evoke certain patterns in the encephalic activity.
By using an EEG headset we translated these patterns into control commands and used
them to actuate a drone.
In order to have full control over the drone in 3D space, we designed a 6-class BCI
system that would move the drone in each of the six directions: up/down, forward/back-
ward, left/right. Due to the limitations of the EEG equipment the system was reduced
to a 4-class BCI system which is able to move the drone in the following directions: up,
down, forward and right. By using a combination of “turn right then go forward“ com-
mands we compensated for the lack of left/right strafe movements.
For the detection and classiﬁcation of the SSVEPs, we used the FFT spectral analy-
sis. The analysis is performed in real time over a succession of time lapses. The time
lapses are divided into 2 s intervals and processed individually. First, the data is normal-
ized and then ﬁltered by a Butterworth bandpass ﬁlter. Next, the FFT is applied over the
data and through a thresholding technique the SSVEPs are classiﬁed depending on their
frequency and magnitude response. If any of the four SSVEPs was detected, a speciﬁc
output command was sent through a USB cable to an Arduino board that will actuate
49
==PAGE:62==
the drone. In this project, for safety reasons, an LED circuit was used in order to test the
detection rate of the SSVEPs. It is important for the reader to understand that there is
literally no diﬀerence between the signal Arduino sends to an LED and the signal it sends
to a drone, which in practice means that if a user is able to turn a speciﬁc LED on, he/she
can evoke the same command that will result in a drone moving forward for example. A
test with the real drone will be performed as soon as the drone will be available for ﬂying.
Finally, the BCI system was tested on ten subjects in order to evaluate the performance
of the BCI system. We used the Information Transfer Rate (ITR) and the Positive Pre-
dictive Value (PPV) as measure units. The BCI system was able to achieve an average
accuracy of 92.5% and an average ITR of 10 bits/min.
Taking into consideration the limitations imposed by the commercial neuroheadset used
in our project, we were still able to fulﬁll our goal and deliver a BCI system which in a
supervised scenario can be used to control a drone in 3D space.
50
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 8
Future Work
In the development of the BCI system covered in this thesis, we used a commercial-
oriented EEG neuroheadset due to its portability and price.
Although the device is
rated on the market as a premium device, it will never perform as good as a clinical or
research-oriented neuroheadset. We recommend that in the future work an investigation
is performed in order to evaluate which type of neuroheadset is more suited in case of a
SSVEP-based BCI system.
The EEG recordings and tests performed during this project were conducted in fully-
lighted room during the daytime. For a better SSVEP detection and thus a better BCI
system accuracy it is desired that all EEG measurements and tests are performed in a
dark room.
51
==PAGE:64==
Appendix A
Code Repository
We attached below all the codes used in the implementation process of the BCI system.
We used a Python script for decrypting the EEG data. For the most important taskks
like signal processing, data analysis and plotting the data we used Matlab. The visual
interface used for evoking the SSVEPs was designed in Visual Studio using C#. Finally,
a small sketch was written in Arduino in order to control the behaviour of an LED circuit.
Matlab Code
clear all
close all
clc
%% −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−RECEIVING DATA −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
s=serial('COM3','BAUDRATE',9600);
fopen(s);
% instantiate the library
disp('Loading the library...');
lib = lsl loadlib();
52
==PAGE:65==
% Initial values
Fs = 128;
% Sampling frequency [Hz]
Ts = 10;
% Time lapse [s]
T = Fs*Ts;
% Time domain
Fc low = 2;
% Lower cutt−off frequency
[Hz]
Fc high = 15;
% Higher cutt−off frequency [Hz]
% Butterworth Filter (band−pass)
% Cutt−off frequencies must be between
% 0.0 < Wn < 1.0 (1.0 = 1/2 sampling rate)
Wn low = Fc low/(Fs/2);
Wn high = Fc high/(Fs/2);
[b,a] = butter(4,[Wn low Wn high]); % 4th order Butterworth bandpass filter
% h = fvtool(b,a); % for displaying the frequency response of the filter
% resolve a stream...
disp('Resolving an EEG stream...');
result = {};
while isempty(result)
result = lsl resolve byprop(lib,'type','EEG');
end
% create a new inlet
disp('Opening an inlet...');
inlet = lsl inlet(result{1});
disp('Now receiving data...');
%% −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−PRE−PROCESSING DATA −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
i = 1;
while true
% get data from the inlet
[vec, ts] = inlet.pull sample();
EEG(i,1) = vec(1); % channel O1
53
==PAGE:66==
EEG(i,2) = vec(5); % channel O2
i = i+1;
% Epoch duration
if size(EEG,1) == Fs*2 % 2 s time lipses
% Raw signals from channels O1 & O2
O1 = EEG(:,1);
O2 = EEG(:,2);
% Zero−mean signals (centered at 0)
O1 = O1 −mean(O1(:));
O2 = O2 −mean(O2(:));
% unit−variance the signals (standardized units)
O1 = O1/std(O1(:));
O2 = O2/std(O2(:));
% Apply the filter described by "b" and "a" coefficients
y O1 = filtfilt(b, a, O1);
y O2 = filtfilt(b, a, O2);
% Apply the FFT on the filtered data
f = linspace(−Fs/2, Fs/2 −1/Fs, T); % Creates a linear space
O1 = fftshift(abs(fft(y O1, T)));
O2 = fftshift(abs(fft(y O2, T)));
%{
%% −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−PLOTTING RESULTS −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
% Channel O1
subplot(2,1,1);
plot(f,O1.ˆ2);
set(gca,'XMinorTick','on','YMinorTick','on', 'XTick',
[1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20])
grid on
grid minor
xlim([0 20]);
ylabel('O1');
% Channel O2
54
==PAGE:67==
subplot(2,1,2);
plot(f,O2.ˆ2);
set(gca,'XMinorTick','on','YMinorTick','on', 'XTick',
[1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20])
grid on
grid minor
xlim([0 20]);
ylabel('O2');
%}
%% −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−FEATURE EXTRACTION −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
% Channel O1 −Max.frequency & Max. magnitude
i = 1;
while i <= length(O1)
if O1(i,1) == max(O1)
Max place O1 = i; % Position of max. magnitude
end
i = i + 1;
end
Max frequency O1 = f(Max place O1);
Max magnitude O1 = max(O1); % Magnitude [dB]
% Channel O2 −Max.frequency & Max. magnitude
i = 1;
while i <= length(O2)
if O2(i,1) == max(O2)
Max place O2 = i; % Position of max. magnitude
end
i = i + 1;
end
Max frequency O2 = f(Max place O2);
Max magnitude O2 = max(O2); % Magnitude [dB]
%% −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−CLASSIFICATION −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
Min magnitude = 30; % MAGNITUDE THRESHOLD [uVˆ2]
55
==PAGE:68==
% Thresholds for the detection are for each SSVEP
% 6.65 Hz SSVEP (UP arrow)
if
((6.6 <= Max frequency O1) && (Max frequency O1 <= 6.8) &&
max(O1) >= Min magnitude) && ((6.6 <= Max frequency O2) &&
(Max frequency O2 <= 6.8) && max(O2) >= Min magnitude)
disp '[UP] DRONE −−−> UP';
disp(['[O1] F max = ' num2str(Max frequency O1)]);
disp(['[O2] F max = ' num2str(Max frequency O2)]);
disp(['[O1] M max = ' num2str(Max magnitude O1)]);
disp(['[O2] M max = ' num2str(Max magnitude O2)]);
[v,w] = audioread('forward.wav');
sound(v,w);
fwrite(s,1); % for controlling the LEDs
% fwrite(s,'<E055H1000>'); % for controlling the drone
% 8.25 Hz SSVEP (DOWN arrow)
elseif ((8.2 <= Max frequency O1) && (Max frequency O1 <= 8.5) &&
max(O1) >= Min magnitude) && ((8.2 <= Max frequency O2) &&
(Max frequency O2 <= 8.5) && max(O2) >= Min magnitude)
disp '[DOWN] DRONE −−−> DOWN';
disp(['[O1] F max = ' num2str(Max frequency O1)]);
disp(['[O2] F max = ' num2str(Max frequency O2)]);
disp(['[O1] M max = ' num2str(Max magnitude O1)]);
disp(['[O2] M max = ' num2str(Max magnitude O2)]);
[v,w] = audioread('backward.wav');
sound(v,w);
fwrite(s,3);
% fwrite(s,'<E045H1000>');
% 10.95 SSVEP(LEFT arrow)
elseif ((10.9 <= Max frequency O1) && (Max frequency O1 <= 11.3) &&
max(O1) >= Min magnitude) && ((10.9 <= Max frequency O2) &&
(Max frequency O2 <= 11.3) && max(O2) >= Min magnitude)
disp '[LEFT] DRONE −−−> FORWARD';
disp(['[O1] F max = ' num2str(Max frequency O1)]);
disp(['[O2] F max = ' num2str(Max frequency O2)]);
disp(['[O1] M max = ' num2str(Max magnitude O1)]);
56
==PAGE:69==
disp(['[O2] M max = ' num2str(Max magnitude O2)]);
[v,w] = audioread('left.wav');
sound(v,w);
fwrite(s,2);
% fwrite(s,'<R045H1000>');
% 5.15 Hz SSVEP (RIGHT arrow)
elseif ((5 <= Max frequency O1) && (Max frequency O1 <= 5.3) &&
max(O1) >= Min magnitude) && ((5 <= Max frequency O2) &&
(Max frequency O2 <= 5.3) && max(O2) >= Min magnitude)
disp '[RIGHT] DRONE −−−> RIGHT TURN';
disp(['[O1] F max = ' num2str(Max frequency O1)]);
disp(['[O2] F max = ' num2str(Max frequency O2)]);
disp(['[O1] M max = ' num2str(Max magnitude O1)]);
disp(['[O2] M max = ' num2str(Max magnitude O2)]);
[v,w] = audioread('right.wav');
sound(v,w);
fwrite(s,4);
% fwrite(s,'<R055H1000>');
% IDLE...
else
disp 'DRONE = IDLE'
% fwrite(s,'<M000>'); % Idle command that keeps drone in place
end
i = 1;
clear EEG
end
end
57
==PAGE:70==
Python Script
# coding: utf−8
# In[1]:
import time
import sys
import ctypes
import os
from ctypes import *
from numpy import *
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import matplotlib.patches as patches
import threading
import datetime
import numpy
import scipy.fftpack
import scipy
import collections
import numpy
# load your emokit python package
sys.path.append('C:/Users/Qzby/Desktop/MSc Thesis/Emotiv/emokit−master/python')
from emokit.emotiv import Emotiv
from pylsl import StreamInfo, StreamOutlet
# first create a new stream info (here we set the name to BioSemi,
# the content−type to EEG, 8 channels, 100 Hz, and float−valued data) The
# last value would be the serial number of the device or some other more or
# less locally unique identifier for the stream as far as available (you
# could also omit it but interrupted connections wouldn't auto−recover)
info = StreamInfo('Emotive', 'EEG', 14, 128, 'float32', 'myuid34234')
# next make an outlet
outlet = StreamOutlet(info)
# define all electrodes and used electrodes (electrodes) in the Emotiv headset
58
==PAGE:71==
all electrodes = ['AF3','AF4','F3','F4', 'F7', 'F8', 'FC5', 'FC6', 'T7','T8',
'P7', 'P8', 'O2', 'O1']
electrodes = all electrodes
# In[2]:
tt = 99999
eeg = collections.OrderedDict()
for i in all electrodes:
eeg[i] = []
data = numpy.zeros(shape=(14,128*tt))
def column(matrix, i):
return [row[i] for row in matrix]
# In[]
# Input:
#eeg: a dictionary with electrodes as keys and EEG data as values
#tt: total time in seconds to run the code, we need it to stop the
#loop for collecting Emotiv EPOC data
# Output:
#returns eeg
def foo(eeg, tt):
j = 0
print ('foo starts at ', str(datetime.datetime.now()))
sf = 128.0 #sampling frequency default at 128Hz
c = 0 #initalize c, c is used to count data points taken
stop = 0 #intialize stop, used to stop emokit decoding
rva = 1.0/sf+1.0/sf*0.1−1.0/sf*0.04
validate timer = 0
if
name
== "
main
":
with Emotiv(display output=False, verbose=True) as headset:
while stop == 0:
packet = headset.dequeue()
next call = time.time()
starttime = time.time()
59
==PAGE:72==
if packet is not None:
print ('starting...........')
while c < tt * sf:
#load eeg data into dicitonary
for k in electrodes:
eeg[k].append(packet.sensors[k]['value'])
data[0][j] = eeg['AF3'][j]
data[1][j] = eeg['AF4'][j]
data[2][j] = eeg['F3'][j]
data[3][j] = eeg['F4'][j]
data[4][j] = eeg['F7'][j]
data[5][j] = eeg['F8'][j]
data[6][j] = eeg['FC5'][j]
data[7][j] = eeg['FC6'][j]
data[8][j] = eeg['T7'][j]
data[9][j] = eeg['T8'][j]
data[10][j] = eeg['P7'][j]
data[11][j] = eeg['P8'][j]
data[12][j] = eeg['O1'][j]
data[13][j] = eeg['O2'][j]
dataSend = column(data,j)
j = j+1
outlet.push sample(dataSend)
# outlet.push sample(eeg)
c = c + 1
if c == tt * sf:
print (c)
# this is for debugging
if validate timer == 1:
print(datetime.datetime.now())
# sleep till the period ends
time.sleep(rva)
# define streamming frequect = sampling frequency
# (I dont know what is the equivilent for Matlab's Timer callback in Python,
# so i manually calculated period)
60
==PAGE:73==
# next call = time.time() + 1.0/sf
# print('b2',c,next call, time.time())
# time.sleep(next call −time.time())
# print('A',c,next call, time.time())
stop = 1
endtime = time.time()
print('total runtime', endtime −starttime)
################################ Main ######################################
#create EEG dictionary for storing EEG data
# In[]
EEG = collections.OrderedDict()
for i in all electrodes:
EEG[i] = []
EEG = foo(EEG, tt)
61
==PAGE:74==
Visual Interface Code
using System;
using System.Collections.Generic;
using System.ComponentModel;
using System.Data;
using System.Drawing;
using System.Linq;
using System.Text;
using System.Threading.Tasks;
using System.Timers;
using System.Windows.Forms;
namespace Andrei Thesis
{
public partial class Form1 : Form
{
System.Resources.ResourceManager rm;
static Image whiteup = Andrei Thesis.Properties.Resources.white up;
static Image whitedown = Andrei Thesis.Properties.Resources.white down;
static Image blackup = Andrei Thesis.Properties.Resources.black up;
static Image blackdown = Andrei Thesis.Properties.Resources.black down;
static Image whiteright = Andrei Thesis.Properties.Resources.white right;
static Image whiteleft = Andrei Thesis.Properties.Resources.white left;
static Image blackright = Andrei Thesis.Properties.Resources.black right;
static Image blackleft = Andrei Thesis.Properties.Resources.black left;
static System.Windows.Forms.Timer tTakeOff = new System.Windows.Forms.Timer();
static System.Windows.Forms.Timer tLand = new System.Windows.Forms.Timer();
static System.Windows.Forms.Timer tUp = new System.Windows.Forms.Timer();
static System.Windows.Forms.Timer tDown = new System.Windows.Forms.Timer();
static System.Windows.Forms.Timer tLeft = new System.Windows.Forms.Timer();
static System.Windows.Forms.Timer tRight = new System.Windows.Forms.Timer();
static PictureBox takeoff;
static PictureBox land;
static PictureBox up;
static PictureBox down;
static PictureBox left;
static PictureBox right;
62
==PAGE:75==
static Button onOff;
static Boolean isRunning = false;
public Form1()
{
InitializeComponent();
//Initialize Picture Boxes
up = pictureUp;
down = pictureDown;
left = pictureLeft;
right = pictureRight;
onOff = buttonStart;
//Attach the method to the EventHandler
tUp.Tick += new EventHandler(changeUp);
tDown.Tick += new EventHandler(changeDown);
tLeft.Tick += new EventHandler(changeLeft);
tRight.Tick += new EventHandler(changeRight);
//Set the time interval for each picture in ms/2
// The values represent represent 1/2 stimulation period
tUp.Interval = 71; //
142 ms => 7 Hz
tDown.Interval = 53; // 106 ms => 9.4 Hz
tLeft.Interval = 37; // 74 ms => 13.5 Hz
tRight.Interval = 94; // 188 ms => 5.3 Hz
}
private static void changeUp(Object myobj, EventArgs e)
{
if (up.Image.Equals(whiteup))
{
up.Image = blackup;
}
else
{
up.Image = whiteup;
63
==PAGE:76==
}
}
private static void changeDown(Object myobj, EventArgs e)
{
if (down.Image.Equals(whitedown))
{
down.Image = blackdown;
}
else
{
down.Image = whitedown;
}
}
private static void changeLeft(Object myobj, EventArgs e)
{
if (left.Image.Equals(whiteleft))
{
left.Image = blackleft;
}
else
{
left.Image = whiteleft;
}
}
private static void changeRight(Object myobj, EventArgs e)
{
if (right.Image.Equals(whiteright))
{
right.Image = blackright;
}
else
{
right.Image = whiteright;
}
}
private void Form1 Load(object sender, EventArgs e)
{
}
64
==PAGE:77==
private void buttonStart Click(object sender, EventArgs e)
{
if (onOff.Text.Equals("Turn On"))
{
onOff.Text = "Turn Off";
tUp.Start();
tDown.Start();
tLeft.Start();
tRight.Start();
}
else {
onOff.Text = "Turn On";
tUp.Stop();
tDown.Stop();
tLeft.Stop();
tRight.Stop();
up.Image = whiteup;
down.Image = whitedown;
left.Image = whiteleft;
right.Image = whiteright;
}
}
private void pictureUp Click(object sender, EventArgs e)
{
}
private void label2 Click(object sender, EventArgs e)
{
}
private void pictureTakeOff Click(object sender, EventArgs e)
{
}
private void label10 Click(object sender, EventArgs e)
{
65
==PAGE:78==
}
private void label6 Click(object sender, EventArgs e)
{
}
private void label9 Click(object sender, EventArgs e)
{
}
}
}
Arduino Code
void setup()
{
Serial.begin(9600);
pinMode(13,OUTPUT);
pinMode(12,OUTPUT);
pinMode(11,OUTPUT);
pinMode(10,OUTPUT);
}
void loop(){
static unsigned long TimeInterval = 2000;
unsigned long CurrentTime = millis();
static unsigned long OnTimeLED1 = CurrentTime;
static unsigned long OnTimeLED2 = CurrentTime;
static unsigned long OnTimeLED3 = CurrentTime;
static unsigned long OnTimeLED4 = CurrentTime;
static bool bIsLED1On = false;
static bool bIsLED2On = false;
66
==PAGE:79==
static bool bIsLED3On = false;
static bool bIsLED4On = false;
if ( bIsLED1On && ( (unsigned long)(CurrentTime −OnTimeLED1 >= TimeInterval) ) )
{
digitalWrite(13, 0);
bIsLED1On = false;
}
if ( bIsLED2On && ( (unsigned long)(CurrentTime −OnTimeLED2 >= TimeInterval) ) )
{
digitalWrite(12, 0);
bIsLED2On = false;
}
if ( bIsLED3On && ( (unsigned long)(CurrentTime −OnTimeLED3 >= TimeInterval) ) )
{
digitalWrite(11, 0);
bIsLED3On = false;
}
if ( bIsLED4On && ( (unsigned long)(CurrentTime −OnTimeLED4 >= TimeInterval) ) )
{
digitalWrite(10, 0);
bIsLED4On = false;
}
if(Serial.available()>0)
{
int b = Serial.read();
if(b==1){
//switch on the led
bIsLED1On = true;
OnTimeLED1 = millis();
digitalWrite(13,1); }
67
==PAGE:80==
if(b==2){
//switch on the led
bIsLED2On = true;
OnTimeLED2 = millis();
digitalWrite(12,1); }
if(b==3){
//switch on the led
bIsLED3On = true;
OnTimeLED3 = millis();
digitalWrite(11,1); }
if(b==4){
//switch on the led
bIsLED4On = true;
OnTimeLED4 = millis();
digitalWrite(10,1); }
}
}
68
==PAGE:81==
References
[1] J. R. Wolpaw, N. Birbaumer, D. J. McFarland, G. Pfurtscheller, and T. M. Vaughan,
“Brain-computer interfaces for communication and control,” Clinical Neurophysiol-
ogy, vol. 113, no. 6, pp. 767 – 791, 2002. 1
[2] J. B. Reece, Urry, Cain, Wasserman, Minorsky, and Jackson, “Campbell biology,”
Pearson Education Inc., 2008. , 6
[3] H. Gray, “Anatomy of the human body,” pp. 1821 – 1865, 1918. , 9
[4] A. E. Hassanien and A. T. Azar, Brain-Computer Interfaces: Current Trends and
Applications.
Springer, 2015, vol. 74. , 11, 16
[5] J. Shih, J. Krusienski, and J. R. Wolpaw, “Brain-computer interfaces in medicine,”
Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research, vol. 87, no. 3, pp. 268–279,
2012. 13
[6] V. Gandhia, G. Prasadb, D. Coyleb, L. Beherac, and T. M. McGinnityd, “Evaluat-
ing quantum neural network ﬁltered motor imagery brain-computer interface using
multiple classiﬁcation techniques,” Neurocomputing, vol. 170, no. 25, pp. 161–167,
2015. , 14
[7] A. T. Chan, J. C. Quiroz, S. Dascalu, and F. C. Harris, “An overview of brain
computer interfaces,” International Society for Computers and their Applications,
2015. 15, 16, 18
[8] Z. Wu, Y. Lai, Y. Xia, D. Wu, and D. Yao, “Stimulator selection in ssvep-based
bci,” Medical Engineering and Physics, vol. 30, no. 6, pp. 1079–1088, 2008. 18, 25
69
==PAGE:82==
REFERENCES
[9] A. D. et al., “Towards an optimization of stimulus parameters for brain-computer
interfaces based on steady state visual evoked potentials,” Clinical Neurophysiology,
vol. 9, 2014. 18
[10] G. R. M. Putz, C. B. Reinhold Scherer, and G. Pfurtscheller, “Steady-state visual
evoked potential (ssvep)-based communication: impact of harmonic frequency com-
ponents,” Journal of Neural Engineering, vol. 2, pp. 123–130, 2005. 18
[11] P. Horki, T. S. Escalante, C. Neuper, and G. M. Putz, “Combined motor imagery
and ssvep based bci control of a 2 dof artiﬁcial upper limb,” International Federation
for Medical and Biological Engineering, no. 49, pp. 567–577, 2011. 18
[12] A. Materka and P. Poryzala, “A robust asynchronous ssvep braincomputer interface
based on cluster analysis of canonical correlation coeﬃcients,” Human-Computer
Systems Interaction, vol. 300, pp. 3–14, 2014. , 18
[13] Y. Yu, D. He, W. Hua, S. Li, Y. Qi, Y. Wang, and G. Pan, “Flyingbuddy2: A brain-
controlled assistant for the handicapped,” Association for Computing Machinery,
pp. 669–670, 2012. 19
[14] K. LaFleur, K. Cassady, A. Doud, K. Shades, E. Rogin, and B. He, “Quadcopter
control in three-dimensional space using a noninvasive motor imagery-based brain-
computer interface,” Journal of Neural Engineering, vol. 10, 2013. 20
[15] J.-S. Lin and Z. Y. Jiang, “Implementing remote presence using quadcopter control
by a non-invasive bci device,” Computer Science and Information Technology, vol. 3,
no. 4, pp. 122–126, 2015. 21
[16] S. K. Andersen and M. M. MG’Oller, “Driving steady-state visual evoked potentials
at arbitrary frequencies using temporal interpolation of stimulus presentation,” BMC
Neuroscience, vol. 16, no. 95, 2015. 25
[17] A. D. et al., “Towards an optimization of stimulus parameters for brain-computer
interfaces based on steady state visual evoked potentials,” Plos One, vol. 9, no. 11,
2014. 31
70
==PAGE:83==
REFERENCES
[18] B. Allison, I. Sugiarto, B. Graimann, and A. Graser, “Display optimization in ssvep
bci,” 2015. 31
[19] J. Bieger, G. Garcia-Molina, and D. Zhu, “Eﬀects of stimulation properties in steady-
state visual evoked potential based brain-computer interfaces,” International Con-
ference of the IEEE EMBS, no. 34, pp. 3345–3348, 2010. 31
[20] T. Cao, F. Wan, P. U. Mak, P.-I. Mak, M. I. Vai, and Y. Hu, “Flashing color on the
performance of ssvep-based braincomputer interfaces,” International Conference of
the IEEE EMBS, no. 34, pp. 1819–1822, 2012. 31
[21] P. F. Diez, S. M. T. Muller, V. A. Mut, E. Laciar, E. Avila, T. F. B. Filho, and M. S.
Filho, “Commanding a robotic wheelchair with a high-frequency steady-state visual
evoked potential based brain-computer interface,” Medical Engineering
Physics,
vol. 35, pp. 1155–1164, 2013. 36, 46
71
