==PAGE:1==
Data Retrieval and Privilege
Escalation Methods on
Embedded Systems
Master Thesis
Muhammed Alper Cinar
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
Master of Science in Engineering
Computer Science and Engineering
Data Retrieval and Privilege Escalation Methods on Embedded Systems
Master Thesis
Muhammed Alper Cinar
s136318@student.dtu.dk
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
DTU Compute
Richard Petersens Plads
Building 303b
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
DENMARK
Tel. +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Embedded Systems are everywhere in this post-modern society. The risk of being the
targets for security related attacks are huge, and the consequences for those can be
very signiﬁcant and harmful.
For this purpose, we show which attack methods are used in order to retrieve
conﬁdential data and moreover to gain privilege rights in order to take control of
systems.
The methods are performed by communicating with the embedded interfaces,
JTAG and UART, and also with the help of advanced hardware and software based
tools.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Sammenfatning
Indlejrede systemer beﬁnder sig alle steder i dette post-moderne samfund. Risikoen
for sikkerhedsmæssige angreb på disse enheder er store, og konsekvenserne kan være
ret vigtige og skadelige.
Til dette formål viser vi hvilke angrebsmetoder, der bruges for at besidde vigtige
informationer, samt hvordan der opnås administratorrettigheder for at tage systemer
under kontrol.
Metoderne realiseres ved at kommunikere med indlejrede JTAG og UART porte
på disse systemer ved hjælp af avancerede hardware og software baserede værktøjer.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁllment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, September 10, 2017
Muhammed Alper Cinar
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank my supervisor, Christian W. Probst, for his instructions and
advice.
I would like to thank Claus Brian Nielsen, Senior Manager at Price Waterhouse
Corporation, for supporting with hardware devices and tools for realizing the demon-
stration part of the thesis.
I would like to thank Ole Schultz, Professor at DTU Ballerup, for helping with
connecting and communicating with electronics.
I would like to thank Lars Møller, Engineering Assistant at DTU Ballerup, for
giving me tips and tricks regarding oﬀensive security and attack methods on embedded
systems.
As last but not least, I would like to thank my family for their enormous support and
encouragement.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary
i
Sammenfatning
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgments
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Personal Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Project Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.5
Report Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
The Basics of Embedded Systems
5
2.1
Hardware Peripherals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Central-Processing-Unit (CPU) and The Instruction Set Archi-
tecture (ISA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Memory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.3
I/O Interfaces On Chip
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.4
Interrupts and Exceptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.5
Timers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Operating System Kernels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1
The System Startup and Boot-Loading Phase . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.2
Kernel Loading in Linux . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.3
Kernel Loading in Windows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Boundary-Scan/JTAG
13
3.1
The Basics of Boundary-Scan Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.1
TAP Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.2
The Instruction Register . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.3
The Data Registers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.4
Daisy-Chaining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
MIPS EJTAG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.1
Introduction to MIPS EJTAG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
3.2.2
Debug Exception and Debug Mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.3
Hardware Breakpoints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.4
EJTAG Memory Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.5
Important Flags
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
The Power of JTAG debugging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3.1
Dumping Flash Content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3.2
Re-Programming and Replacing Firmware . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3.3
Modifying Bootloader . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3.4
Modifying Program Execution from RAM . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4
Securing Embedded Systems from Boundary-Scan/JTAG Debugging
23
4
Data Retrieval and Privilege Escalation Methods
27
4.1
Attack Vectors and Methods through UART and JTAG Interfaces
27
4.1.1
Method 1: Access Root Shell and Take System Control through
UART . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.2
Method 2: Extract Filesystem and Kernel Program from Firmware
through JTAG
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.3
Method 3: Privilege Escalation by Single-User-Mode . . . . .
28
4.1.4
Method 4: Privilege Escalation by Normal-User-Mode . . . .
29
4.1.5
Adaption of the Methods in Real-Case Scenarios . . . . . . .
30
4.1.6
General Requirements for Applying the Methods . . . . . . .
31
4.1.7
Other Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Other Methods for Tampering Embedded Systems
. . . . . . . . .
33
4.2.1
De-Soldering Flash Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2.2
Intercept the Communication using Logic Analyzer . . . . . .
33
5
Demonstration
35
5.1
Printed-Circuit-Board (PCB) Overview of Linksys-WRT54GL . . .
35
5.2
Communication with Linksys-WRT54GL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2.1
Interacting the BusPirate with OpenOCD . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2.2
Console Communication through UART Interface . . . . . . .
42
5.2.3
Boundary-Scan/JTAG Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3
Firmware Extraction and Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3.1
Dumping the Flash Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3.2
Filesystem Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.3.3
Analysis of the Kernel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.4
Privilege Escalation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.4.1
Bootloader Modiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.5
Spying Virus Program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6
Discussion
61
6.1
JTAG Debugging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.2
Security Attempts for JTAG Debugging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.3
The Choice for Linksys Router
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.4
The Methods for Compromising Embedded Systems
. . . . . . . .
63
==PAGE:13==
Contents
xi
7
Conclusion
65
Bibliography
67
==PAGE:14==
xii
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In this very beginning Introduction Chapter, we will introduce the readers to the
motivation of the project, the goals that will be tried to get achieved, the personal
motivation, the project deﬁnition, and furthermore a brief overview of the structure
of the project.
1.1
Project Motivation
Embedded Systems are installed and used everywhere in todays’ world. In a private
house, mobile phones, televisions, internet routers, satellite receivers, refrigerators,
washing machines, microwave ovens, and many more devices, but also at public places
and industries, embedded systems are used to solve speciﬁc problems.
The term "Embedded Systems" relies in that the systems do contain specialized
hardware components, which are speciﬁc to the problems it has to solve. For instance,
USB ﬂash drives are very simple systems. They do not contain a CPU, a graphics
processor, a display screen, etc. but considered as an embedded system. It mainly
has a ﬂash storage that when connected to a computer, the content of the ﬂash, can
be read from and written on it. It has solely the function for easily transmitting data
from diﬀerent entities using USB ports.
A lot of embedded systems do process conﬁdential data belonging to users, such
as credit card numbers, pictures, documents, and so on. This is one of the reasons
for why some of those systems are targeted by attackers, people with bad intentions.
Their intentions can be, for instance, gaining money by using the obtained credit
card numbers. It can also be for identity fraud, using the target system to do illegal
activities on behalf of the actual users of the system, or spying the activities of the
users. An attacker can thus have several bad intentions to attack those systems.
1.2
Goals
We will show attack scenarios and methods targeted on embedded systems for data
retrieving and privilege escalation using Boundary-Scan/JTAG debugging from an
attackers’ perspective. We will introduce the standard for Boundary-Scan/JTAG
testing, and show how this is implemented and used on MIPS processors.
We will introduce standards for securing the Boundary-Scan/JTAG Interface.
==PAGE:16==
2
1 Introduction
We will also develop general methods for how the attacks will be performed on
embedded systems.
We will apply the developed methods on a Linksys router, having a processing-unit
with MIPS architecture, and store a spying virus program to show how eﬀective these
attack methods are.
1.3
Personal Motivation
Working with JTAG debugging is challenging for me as a Computer Science student
since I have only worked with debugging binary programs at software level.
This project introduces how an electronic device gets connected with cables to an
embedded system for initiating serial communication with the commands processed
from us.
Furthermore, it introduces how early at the very low layer (regarding the Operating
Systems Abstraction Layers), in the system startup phase, we can take control and
manipulate with the program execution of embedded systems.
This then introduces a lot of diﬀerent abilities for me among others for vulnerability
analysis, both at low - but also at high level in the abstraction layers’ model. It gives
me ability to do forensics analysis and code review of ﬁrmwares, and generally how
in-circuit serial programming and debugging works from the hardware - and up to the
software level.
1.4
Project Deﬁnition
Boundary-Scan/JTAG does have some variations which are implemented on diﬀerent
devices. We will focus on the MIPS EJTAG implementation because MIPS is a
popular architecture used in various embedded systems, and also because it is similar
to many other Boundary-Scan/JTAG implementations.
We will work with a Linksys-WRT54GL router for demonstrating the attack
methods because this is what has been supported from our instructors. This router
is however been appropriate because the Boundary-Scan/JTAG as well as UART
interface has been easy to spot. Also, the router, is having a Linux based ﬁrmware
kernel, which is appropriate in regards to the purpose of the project, because it is
widely implemented and chosen as the main ﬁrmware kernels on embedded systems.
1.5
Report Outline
In the following, we give a description of the individual chapters.
• Chapter 2 introduces the basic concepts of embedded systems. In order to
understand how embedded systems operate and in order to apply the attack
methods, one has to understand the processing-units and which architectures
support it, moreover which memories are used and how to operate with other
==PAGE:17==
1.5 Report Outline
3
entities, I/O interfaces to realize the possibilities that exist for communicating
with these devices, and furthermore which hardware controllers and protection
mechanisms exist for securing these systems.
• Chapter 3 introduces the basics of the Boundary-Scan/JTAG architecture and
likewise gives an example of a MIPS EJTAG solution in order to give a picture
of how this Boundary-Scan test access port is taken advantage of doing JTAG
debugging, where the CPU’s execution is single-stepped and the attacker is
doing tremendous manipulations.
• Chapter 4 introduces methods that can be applied generally on embedded systems
in order to take advantage of retrieving conﬁdential data and furthermore gaining
privilege access.
• Chapter 5 introduces a Linksys-WRT54GL router, having MIPS EJTAG embed-
ded and a Linux-based ﬁrmware implemented, in order to apply the methods
from previous chapter. Furthermore, when having applied the methods and
gaining access to the system, we show how this can be exploited to store a spying
virus program.
• Chapter 6 is the Discussion, where we discuss several aspects of the choices,
decisions, and strategies that have been chosen.
• Chapter 7 is the Conclusion of the project, containing what has been looked at
and what has been achieved from the project.
==PAGE:18==
4
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
The Basics of
Embedded Systems
This chapter introduces readers to embedded systems. We give an overview of the
hardware peripherals that are embedded on these systems. We do also present how
operating system kernels are designed and how they are processed from the startup
phase to the actual operating phase.
2.1
Hardware Peripherals
In this section, we explain some of the components of embedded systems, because
it is necessary to know the essential design-structure and the hardware peripherals
that are used commonly within these systems in order to be able to look for security
concerns that can be used to achieve conﬁdential information and privilege access.
2.1.1
Central-Processing-Unit (CPU) and The Instruction Set
Architecture (ISA)
The huge variety of embedded applications do as a consequence lead to an enormous
amount of diﬀerent processors that are used. They range from small, slow, inexpensive,
low-power devices to high-performance, special-purpose devices.
Instruction set architectures (ISA) are instruction sets (such as Intel, MIPS, RISC)
that a processor (CPU) understands, whereas a CPU as a physical device must not
be confused with ISA. The same type of ISA can be used within diﬀerent CPUs. The
advantage of having same ISA is for instance being able to execute binaries in several
diﬀerent processors instead of developing a new executable with same functionality on
another processor [1].
2.1.2
Memory
The design- and choice of memory types has a subtle importance to the functionality
for embedded systems, since they are the hardware devices that interact with other
devices mostly.
Embedded Systems do need to access data that is stored onto memory even after
the power is turned oﬀ. There are several reasons for that but one, which is the
==PAGE:20==
6
2 The Basics of Embedded Systems
most important, is to store the ﬁrmware. The intention of the ﬁrmware is to be
non-modiﬁable and to be accessed and loaded by the system for each time the power
of the system is turned on. The ﬁrmware of a router is for instance used to set up the
necessary modules such as wireless Internet service so that users can connect to the
router with wireless connection.
EEPROM (Electrically-Erasable Programmable ROM) makes it possible to write
to the ROM. The write time is typically much longer than the read time, and the
number of writes is limited during the lifetime of the device. Generally EEPROM is
used as ﬂash memory, which is used to store the ﬁrmware and user data that needs to
persist when the power is turned oﬀ.
The Flash memory is the most used non-volatile memory, but they present some
challenges for their use-cases. Typically, ﬂash memories have reasonably fast read
times, but not as fast as SRAM or DRAM, which means that frequently accessed
data will typically have to be moved from the Flash to RAM before being used by a
program. Some parts of the ﬁrmware, the kernel (operating system) for instance, is
being loaded onto the RAM at system boot up in order to provide a faster way to
service the users. [2, 1]
2.1.3
I/O Interfaces On Chip
Processors on Embedded Systems typically include a number of I/O (input/output)
interfaces on chip (exposed as pins of the chip), which is used for communicating with
external devices. For instance, a serial I/O port can be used to transfer data from
and to an external monitor for communicating with it [1].
General-Purpose Input/Output
General-Purpose Input/Output or better known as GPIO, is a set of logic pins on an
integrated circuit. Embedded applications use GPIO for programming the behavior of
sensors and digital motors as examples.
In many designs, GPIO pins may be conﬁgured to be of type "output", which
enables the pin to be programmed and controlled by a software application. This is
useful for directly programming external physical devices that are connected to these
pins.
GPIO pins can also be conﬁgured as "input" pins, in which case software programs
can be written to react to devices with externally provided voltage levels [1].
Serial Interfaces
Serial interfaces are used to transfer data in "bits" serially, in which sending serially in
this context means sending data bits one at a time, between the embedded system
and an external device. There are a lot of diﬀerent standards for serial interfaces
describing the standard usage of each port, where some of them are used for speciﬁc
purposes and some are the evolved technologies for the predecessors.
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Hardware Peripherals
7
Figure 2.1: Model of RS-232 with DB-25 connector as deﬁned in the EIA standard.
An old but persistent serial interface is the RS-232, standardized by the Electronics
Industries Association (EIA). The standard deﬁnes the electrical characteristics and
timing of signals, the meaning of signals, and the physical size and pinout of connectors.
Figure 2.1 shows the DB-25 model of RS-232, which is described in the EIA standard.
An RS-232 serial port has been once a standard feature of computers, used for
connections to modems, printers, mice, data storage, and other peripherals. By time
however, other serial interfaces taken basis of the design of RS-232 has replaced it,
such as RS-422 and RS-485, with better transmission speed, longer maximum cable
length, lower voltage swing and some other features that have been optimized as well.
Today, the modern computers, USB (Universal Serial Bus) is the largest used serial
communication medium, however the RS-232 are still used in industrial machines and
other devices where a short-range, point-to-point, low-speed wired data connection is
adequate [3, 1].
USB
The USB was designed to standardize the connection of computer peripherals (key-
boards, disk drives, network adapters, digital cameras, printers, and many others) to
general-purpose computers. It has as intended replaced a variety of earlier interfaces
used for serial- and parallel communication.
In general, there are three formats of USB’s with diﬀerent sizes; the standard-, the
mini- and micro USB, where the standard is primarily used for desktop computers
and portable devices, the mini which is generally used on cameras, and the micro,
which is today used generally on modern smart phones.
One of the most used functionality of the USB technology is in combination with
ﬂash drive a convenient way of transmitting data from one device to another due to
its small and portable size which by the way doesn’t require additional power source
to work. The term "USB" is typically in colloquialism used to indicate this type of
technology, thus "USB with ﬂash drive" [1, 4, 5].
Security issues with USB Flash drives
USB ﬂash drives can also be used to store a kernel/operating system and be mounted
in run-time without having a processing-unit and RAM memory embedded on it. A
==PAGE:22==
8
2 The Basics of Embedded Systems
user can thus interact with the operating system on a USB Flash drive by using the
resources of the computer that the USB ﬂash drive is connected to. The boot-loaders
of many general-purpose computers and embedded-systems allow a storage medium
to be mounted, and this can have several security issues. An evil person having access
to a computer provided in public places or for example after having stolen a computer
from another person, can do illegal interaction with the underlying system and for
example fraud as being the regular user of the computer.
USB ﬂash devices have also heavily been used for spreading malicious software,
for instance in large enterprises. There has been issues with Windows operating sys-
tems auto-running executables and infecting the connected computers with malicious
contents.
In order to prevent an attacker from accessing and controlling the bootloader, there
are hardware-based lockers, such as a "bit-locker", which encrypts the user-interaction
at the boot-loading phase when the computer/embedded-system start so that a person
who doesn’t have access to the decryption key, cannot resume using the resources of
the system.
There are however alternative solutions attackers can use in order to bypass bit-
lockers, which are for instance using JTAG debugging and UART connection, which
will be introduced in detail in Chapter 4 [1, 5].
UART (Universal Asynchronous Receiver/Transmitter)
UART is a hardware interface consisting of I/O pins for providing asynchronous serial
communication in which the data format and transmission speeds are conﬁgurable. It
is very common that UART interface is included in embedded systems, in which it is
typically used to provide a console to the user to interact with the system. In regards
to security testing, it is of huge importance to use the UART because it might output
any kind of diagnostic information for the tester [1, 6].
JTAG (Joint Test Access Group)
Another serial interface that is widely implemented in embedded processors is known
as JTAG (Joint Test Access Group), or more formerly as the IEEE 1149.1 standard
test access port and boundary-scan architecture. The reason for why such an interface
has been implemented, has been to solve the diﬃculty of testing the status of circuits
using electrical probes in integrated circuits and on PCBs (Printed Circuit Boards).
JTAG is then implemented to provide the testers to read or write to a set of pins that
are embedded in the circuits in order to get status value (by reading) or to modify
(writing) the value of those pins.
The JTAG port is today widely used to provide a debug interface to embedded
processors, enabling a debugging environment to examine and control the state of
an embedded processor. The JTAG port is used, for instance, to read out the state
of processor registers, to set breakpoints in a program, and to single step through a
program [7].
In Chapter 3, we look more in depth to the functionality of the JTAG interface.
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Hardware Peripherals
9
Parallel Interfaces
A parallel interface/port is in a way similar to serial interfaces since it is also used for
establishing communication between diﬀerent devices. The name refers to the way
the data is transmitted. Parallel interfaces, as opposed to the serial, sends multiple
bits of data at once.
It may seem intuitive that parallel interfaces are delivering data with higher
performance than serial interfaces, because more wires are used for the interconnection.
However, this is not necessarily the case. A signiﬁcant challenge with parallel interfaces
have been maintaining synchrony across the multiple wires. This becomes more diﬃcult
as the physical length of the interconnection increases. This fact, combined with the
requirement for bulkier cables and more I/O pins has resulted in many traditionally
parallel interfaces being replaced by serial interfaces.
2.1.4
Interrupts and Exceptions
An interrupt is a mechanism for pausing execution of whatever a processor is currently
doing and executing a pre-deﬁned code, an interrupt handler context-switches to.
Three kinds of events may trigger an interrupt. One is a hardware interrupt, where
some electronic alerting signals are sent to the processor from an external device/in-
terface, which is either a part of the embedded system itself such as I/O interfaces or
external peripherals. Hardware interrupts are unlike software interrupts asynchronous,
which means that an interrupt can occur in the middle of an instruction execution, in
which this property also is for noticing that special attention must be taken care.
The other interrupt type is software interrupt, where a program that is currently
executed by the processor raises an interrupt in order to stop the execution.
The third, which might also be considered as software interrupts, is known as a
trap or an exception, where an exceptional condition happens in the current program
execution that cannot be handled within program logic itself and therefore must be
context-switched to the processor handler [1].
2.1.5
Timers
WatchDog Timer
Embedded systems may have a hardware device called "Watchdog Timer". This timer
has an important role because it is used to indicate a hardware or software failure.
The CPU in usual cases resets this timer continuously to indicate that it is working
as expected; and in case where the CPU doesn’t reset the timer, the timer will elapse
and generate a timeout signal, which will transition the system into a safe state and
restore to the normal operation mode [1, 8].
==PAGE:24==
10
2 The Basics of Embedded Systems
2.2
Operating System Kernels
In this section, we will introduce the readers the startup phase of embedded systems
and how operating system kernels are processed.
2.2.1
The System Startup and Boot-Loading Phase
The system startup phase can be separated in three stages basically.
1. The BIOS initialization.
2. The Boot-loading.
3. The Kernel/Operating System Access.
When turning on the embedded system, the BIOS (Basic Input/Output System)
or the UEFI (Uniﬁed Extensible Firmware Interface), which is more common on
embedded devices replacing the BIOS, initializes the hardware peripherals, such as
the memory, Input/Output interfaces, and probably some hardware controllers. The
system control then passes from the BIOS (or UEFI) to the bootloader, when the
initial hard disk and its geometries are recognized. This hard disk contains a part
of memory that is called the "Master Boot Record" (MBR), which is loaded in the
main memory (RAM). The bootloader that resides at the beginning of this MBR then
takes the control and resumes with the boot-process.
The bootloader then according to the options given, loads the kernel and a ﬁlesystem
onto the RAM. Depending on the kernel/operating system, either a temporary- or an
actual ﬁlesystem is mounted. The temporary ﬁlesystem contains a process, which is
called "the mother of all other processes", since it is the ﬁrst and initial process. This
process, for instance, in Linux based kernels called "init", which executes the necessary
processes such as services for user-roles and drivers for character- and block devices.
This temporary ﬁlesystem is then remounted and the actual ﬁlesystem containing user
programs and data is mounted.
The temporary ﬁlesystem is intended mostly to secure the access of the actual
ﬁlesystem. The initial program before mounting the actual ﬁlesystem, requires that
users type a password that permits access.
In some ﬁrmware-design, the bootloader might directly mount the actual ﬁlesystem,
especially when user-roles and their corresponding privileges do not matter such as in
RTOS (Real-Time Operating Systems).
The role and function of diﬀerent bootloaders are more or less the same with minor
diﬀerences. They serve to load the kernel/operating system onto the RAM where the
user can interact with the device afterwards. We will give examples of how kernels
are loaded onto the RAM, in which we will primarily take basis on Linux (since it is
used widely for many diﬀerent kinds of embedded systems), but also how Windows
based kernels are starting in operating mode [9].
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Operating System Kernels
11
2.2.2
Kernel Loading in Linux
There are three ways to pass options to the Linux Kernel (adapted from the initial
GNU Project) and thus control its behaviour:
• When building the kernel
• When starting the kernel. Parameters are passed to the kernel when it is invoked
from the bootloader.
• At run-time, by writing to ﬁles in the /proc and/or /sys directories.
Some of the typical and necessary parameters passed to the kernel for security and
privilege roles are the followings:
• init=, the initial program (mother of all processes) that should be run. If no
value is given, the default init is running.
• root=, the actual ﬁlesystem that has to be mounted when init loads all child
processes.
• initrd=, the value given to initrd is specifying the initial and temporary ﬁlesys-
tem that will be mounted. It primarily is intended for init, if it needs to access
data residing on this ﬁle-system. It may also be omitted with the noinitrd
parameter instead.
• ro or rw, mount the ﬁlesystem speciﬁed with the root= parameter as read-only
(RO) or as read and write (RW).
The parameter sequence passing to the kernel has therefore an important impact on
how the kernel should be run and function. A modiﬁcation to this sequence may
compromise the way that the kernel is intended to be run [10, 11].
Run-Levels of Linux Kernel
In Linux, the initial program init that gets launched from the boot-process, looks at
the /etc/inittab ﬁle in order to determine how the Linux kernel should be run. The
diﬀerent options for running Linux kernel are listed as follows:
• 0, indicating halt.
• 1, single-user mode.
• 2, multi-user mode without NFS (Network File-System).
• 3, full multi-user mode.
• 4, unused
• 5, full multi-user mode with X Windows Server.
• 6, reboot.
==PAGE:26==
12
2 The Basics of Embedded Systems
The typical run-level of Linux kernel is 3, where the standard ﬁlesystem is mounted,
and the users can access the ﬁles within the ﬁlesystem they have privileges to. The
single-user mode is only intended for administrator (root) access. The user will be
able to access and edit every ﬁle in the ﬁlesystem.
The run-level can also be speciﬁed from the command sequence when the boot-
loader is passing to the kernel, and thus omitting the init to look for the inittab ﬁle.
This option may also, according to the kernel, spawn another console, if for instance
the single-user mode parameter 1 is given. This will give the user administrator
privileges for the mounted ﬁlesystem [9, 11].
2.2.3
Kernel Loading in Windows
Windows based kernels do also similar to Linux based kernels, have option parameters
passed on it. Typically, in Windows there is a ﬁle called "boot.ini" (or something
similar in other kernel versions) that contains these parameters, in which the the
bootloader boots up the kernel according to that.
Similar to the "Single-User" mode in Linux, does Windows have a "Safe" mode,
which allows the user to become root and have access to the ﬁles and applications
only privileged for the root user.
In order to run the safe mode option, the following commands sequence can be
given:
/SAFEBOOT:MINIMAL(ALTERNATESHELL) /SOS /BOOTLOG
This sequence contains three parameters, in which the SAFEBOOT: MINIMAL (ALTERNATESHELL)
speciﬁes that the kernel should load a command prompt with safe mode, the SOS
for displaying the device drivers, and the BOOTLOG for showing the boot information
outputted to the screen. The kernel will spawn a command prompt (similar to the
shell in Linux) with administrator/root privileges if these options are passed to the
kernel in the startup phase.
Note that in some Windows kernels these options can be diﬀerent in names, however
typically for both Windows Desktop Computers, - Servers (for instance, Windows
NT), and Windows Mobile PC (typically used in embedded systems), the options and
their corresponding functionality is more or less the same with a subtle diﬀerence
that some extra options can exist if the kernel supports drivers for other hardware
peripherals [12, 13].
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3
Boundary-Scan/JTAG
Boundary-Scan (formally known as IEEE/ANSI Standard 1149.1-1990 [14]) is a tech-
nique primarily used for testing the behavior of integrated circuits, which consists in
computers, micro-controllers, and basically everything that resides in technology.
Boundary-Scan is also commonly referred to as JTAG (Joint Test Access Group),
since the standard is actually based on the work developed by the team of JTAG [15].
We will in this paper use both terms, Boundary-Scan for when describing the
internal functions of the protocol, the signals and the state machine, and we will use
the JTAG term when looking into the higher-level aspects of the protocol, for instance
in kernel debugging in the demonstration part.
3.1
The Basics of Boundary-Scan Architecture
The basic architecture of the Boundary-Scan is illustrated in ﬁgure 3.1. The ﬁrst four
pins TDI (Test Data Input), TDO (Test Data Output), TMS (Test Mode Select),
TCK (Test Clock) and the ﬁfth optional pin TRST* (Test Reset) consist of the input-
and output signals; and together with the Data Register (DR) and Instruction Register
(IR) form the Test Access Port (TAP). The signals are explained as follows:
• TCK: the input shift clock. Data is sampled at TMS and TDI on the rising
edge of TCK. Data is output on TDO on the falling edge of TCK.
• TMS: the input mode select, which is used to navigate through the TAP
Controller’s state machine.
• TDI: the input. Data is shifted to the Instruction Register or the Data Register
through TDI and sampled on the rising edge of TCK.
• TDO: the output. Data is output from the Instruction Register or the Data
Register and shifted out TDO on the falling edge of TCK.
• TRST*: the asynchronous input reset signal, resetting the TAP state machine.
This pin is not required for the Boundary-Scan communication to work.
3.1.1
TAP Controller
The TAP Controller is a synchronous ﬁnite state machine with a state diagram
containing 16 states, which is shown in Figure 3.2. The primary purpose of the TAP
==PAGE:28==
14
3 Boundary-Scan/JTAG
Figure 3.1: Illustration of the architecture of boundary-scan.
Controller is to select which of the two shift registers, the Instruction Register or the
Data Register, to connect between TDI and TDO. In general, the Instruction Register
is used to select which Data Register to scan.
The numbers labeled on the arrows indicate the transition paths between states in
relation to the value of TMS. A transition between states only occurs on a rising edge
of TCK or asynchronously with the assertion of TRST* signal if it is set up [14, 7, 16].
Reset of the TAP
An assertion of TRST* will always bring the current state of the TAP state-machine
to the starting state, which is the Test-Logic-Reset state. Another way to bring the
current state to the starting state, is to held TMS high with 5 synchronous clock
cycles of TCK. These two methods do only reset the state of the Boundary-Scan TAP
but not the overall operation of the CPU nor the other hardware peripherals. [14, 7,
16].
IR- and DR Scan
In addition to the reset of test logic, there are also two other important operations the
state-machine controls, the IR (Instruction Register) and DR (Data Register) Scan.
==PAGE:29==
3.1 The Basics of Boundary-Scan Architecture
15
Figure 3.2: The state diagram of the JTAG TAP [7, page 13].
In a scan operation, the data (transmitted by the user through the connected JTAG
programmer) is sampled at TDI on the rising edge of TCK, and is output on TDO on
the falling edge of TCK.
The IR is transitioned to the Shift-IR state during the Instruction Register Scan,
and likewise the DR is transitioned to the Shift-DR state during the Data Register
Scan operation.
3.1.2
The Instruction Register
The Instruction Register deﬁnes the operation of the Boundary-Scan Data Registers
and is composed of a shift rank and a parallel hold rank. The shift rank is loaded in
parallel at Capture-IR, shifted between TDI and TDO at Shift-IR, and the contents
of the shift rank are transferred to the hold rank at Update-IR.
Each Instruction Register cell comprises a shift register ﬂip-ﬂop and a parallel
output latch such that the shift registers hold new instruction bits moving through
the Instruction Register. The latches hold the current instruction in place while
any shifting is done. This prevents "shift ripple" from being observed at the register
parallel hold outputs during shifting.
The minimum size of the instruction register is two cells, and the size of the register
must match the size of the instruction code.
The instructions latched into the Instruction Register deﬁne the test mode to be
entered and the test data register to be accessed [14, 7, 17].
==PAGE:30==
16
3 Boundary-Scan/JTAG
Instructions
In order to use the functionality of JTAG, one has to shift instructions to the Instruction
Register. There are some required instructions that JTAG TAP must include and
implement according to the standard IEEE 1149. These are Bypass, Sample, Preload,
and Extest instructions, and some optional instructions such as Idcode. The deﬁnitions
of some of these instructions are given as follows [14, 7, 17]:
• Bypass: causes Bypass Register (one of the mandatory data-registers speciﬁed in
Section 3.1.3) to be placed between TDI and TDO, whose purpose is to produce
a short one-bit shift path through a component, and ensure this component to
operate as normally.
• Idcode: places the Device Identiﬁcation Register (an optional Data register
speciﬁed in Section 3.1.3) between TDI and TDO which contains an identiﬁcation
code of the chip (if included by chip manufacturer) that is tested.
• Sample: the ﬁrst instruction that targets the Boundary Register (most important
Data register speciﬁed in details in Section 3.1.3) between TDI and TDO.
3.1.3
The Data Registers
The test logic architecture contains a minimum of two test Data registers - the Bypass
and Boundary-Scan registers. In addition the Device Identiﬁcation Register is typically
also included even though it is not mandatory. Furthermore, based on the design
choice, a lot of other optional Data registers can be added.
In Figure 3.1, the Bypass, Boundary, and optional test data registers are illustrated
as a set of shift-register based elements connected in parallel between a common serial
input and a common serial output. Selection of the register that forms the serial path
at a given time is controlled from the Instruction Register [14, 7].
The Bypass Register
The Bypass Register provides a single-bit serial connection through the circuit when
none of the other test data registers is selected. This register, for instance, is used to
allow test data to ﬂow through a particular device to other components in a product
without aﬀecting the normal operation of the particular component [14, 7].
The Boundary Register(s)
The Boundary Register - the most important data registers that allow testing of board
interconnections (the indiviual hardware peripherals connected to the JTAG TAP),
detecting typical production defects such as opens, shorts, etc. It also allows access to
the inputs and outputs of components when testing their system logic or sampling of
signals ﬂowing through the system inputs and outputs [14, 7].
==PAGE:31==
3.1 The Basics of Boundary-Scan Architecture
17
Figure 3.3: An illustration showing how daisy-chaining works [7, page 33].
The Device-Identiﬁcation Register
The Device-Identiﬁcation Register is an optional test data register that allows the
manufacturer, part number, and variant of a component to be determined [14, 7].
3.1.4
Daisy-Chaining
The Boundary-Scan/JTAG can be "daisy-chained", meaning that several chips on
a single board is connected to each other such that only a single JTAG interface is
provided. Each of the individual TAP controllers can then be interacted through the
same interface. An illustration of such a design can be seen in Figure 3.3. Basically,
the TMS and TCK is a direct input signal to each chip, while the TDO of one chip is
connected to the TDI of another using their common serial shift path of the Boundary
Register.
An important property of simple chains, because of TCK and TMS being their
common input signals, every TAP of every IC in the chain is always in the same state.
This means that a single TAP FSM (ﬁnite state-machine) is suﬃcient to keep track of
the state of the entire chain [7].
==PAGE:32==
18
3 Boundary-Scan/JTAG
3.2
MIPS EJTAG
Each integrated circuit design, which embeds the JTAG interface, might have diﬀerent
forms of JTAG, specialized generally for the core chip (CPU). The CPUs, ARM-,
Intel and MIPS, have diﬀerences of their JTAG support regarding for example the
Instructions that are passed to the Instruction Register, the support of debugging
registers etc., however they generally fulﬁll as a minimum the requirements speciﬁed
in the IEEE 1149 standard [14, 7, 18, 19, 20].
3.2.1
Introduction to MIPS EJTAG
The MIPS architecture has historically provided a set of primitives for debugging
software and systems that is consistent with the "RISC" philosophy of integrated
hardware/software architecture, providing functionality at a minimum cost in silicon.
The base philosophy of integrated MIPS32/MIPS64 Instruction Set Architecture (ISA)
and MIPS16 "Application Speciﬁc Extension" (ASE), includes:
• A breakpoint instruction, BREAK, whose execution causes a speciﬁc exception.
• A set of trap instructions, whose execution causes a speciﬁc exception when
certain register value criteria are satisﬁed.
• A pair of optional Watch registers that can be programmed to cause a spe-
ciﬁc exception on a load, store, or instruction fetch access to a speciﬁc 64-bit
doubleword in virtual memory.
• An optional TLB-based (Translation Lookaside Buﬀer that is optimizing the
time taken to access a physical memory by using virtual memory address space
which works as an address translation cache) MMU that can be programmed to
trap on any access, or more speciﬁcally, on any store to a page of memory.
A processor or system-on-a-chip implementing EJTAG can be tied into a JTAG scan
chain and comprehensively debugged using an external EJTAG probe connected to
the system’s JTAG TAP interface.
EJTAG uses the ﬁve-pin interface deﬁned in the [14], which forms the TAP (Test
Access Port). The ﬁve pins (TRST*, TCK, TMS, TDI and TDO) can be reused to
limit pin count if the TAP is on-chip for some other purpose.
The size of the EJTAG Address and Data Registers depends on the speciﬁc
implementation, but usually they are at least 32 bits. The size of the Device ID,
Implementation-, and EJTAG Control Registers is 32 bits; these registers allow the
user to debug setup and provide important status information during the debug session
[18].
==PAGE:33==
3.2 MIPS EJTAG
19
3.2.2
Debug Exception and Debug Mode
EJTAG allows a MIPS processor in debug mode to reference instructions or data that
are not resident on the system under test. This EJTAG memory is mapped to the
processor as if it were virtual memory in the kseg3 segment, and references to it are
converted into transactions on the TAP interface. Both instructions and data can be
accessed in EJTAG memory, which allows debugging of systems without requiring
the presence of a ROM monitor or debugger scratch-pad RAM. It also provides a
communications channel between debug software executing on the processor and an
external debugging agent.
The EJTAG probe polls the EJTAG Control Register through the TAP, and a bit
in this register indicated when a processor access is pending. The physical address of
the transaction is then available in the EJTAG Address Register, and the transaction
size and read/write indication are available in the EJTAG Control Register. The
EJTAG Data Register is then accessed either to get data from a write or to provide
data for a read. Finally, the EJTAG Control Register is updated to indicate that the
processor access is done [18].
3.2.3
Hardware Breakpoints
EJTAG deﬁnes various types of hardware breakpoints for interrupting the CPU at
certain transactions on the CPU buses. The debug exception happens before the bus
transaction causing the exception alters any memory or CPU state, e.g., a fetched
instruction with a break is not executed, or a data load/store transaction is not allowed
to change the register ﬁle or the memory.
Hardware data breakpoints allows breaks on load/store operations.
EJTAG
implements two kinds of breaks [18]:
• Instruction breaks, in which a break may be set on an instruction fetch from a
speciﬁc virtual address.
• Data breaks, in which a break may be set on a load/store reference from a
speciﬁc virtual address, which additionally can be qualiﬁed by a data value.
3.2.4
EJTAG Memory Addresses
In the kseg memory space there is an optional and unmapped debug segment dseg
(EJTAG memory area) that appears in the address range 0xFFFF FFFF FF20 0000
to 0xFFFF FFFF FF3F FFFF.
The dseg segment can be separated into two other sub-segments:
• dmseg with memory address range from 0xFFFF FFFF FF20 0000 to 0xFFFF
FFFF FF2F FFFF.
The dmseg segment is used when the probe services the memory segment.
==PAGE:34==
20
3 Boundary-Scan/JTAG
• drseg with memory address range from 0xFFFF FFFF FF30 0000 to 0xFFFF
FFFF FF3F FFFF
The drseg segment is used when the memory-mapped debug registers are accessed.
There are no physical address for the dseg segment for itself, because it is serviced
exclusively by the EJTAG features. The lower 21 bits of the virtual address select the
appropriate reference in either EJTAG memory or registers. References are not mapped
through the TLB, nor do the accesses appear on the external system memory interface.
The CPU stalls its execution and the program counter jumps to the beginning of
dmseg segment when a debug exception happens, and it is waiting for an action by
EJTAG probe programmer. The instruction from the programmer is then executed
by the CPU, where the program counter is augmented to the address 0xFFFF FFFF
FF20 0001.
This is thus allowing the debugger to single-step the program execution and likewise
also gives the possibility to control the system logic afterwards [18, 21].
3.2.5
Important Flags
PNnW
This ﬂag indicates read- or write status of a pending processor access, which can be
explained as follows:
• 0: Read processor access
• 1: Write processor access
The processor might, for instance, read the value of a register and store it in the
appropriate address of the dmseg, and the programmer can load this value and output
it to the end-user via the programmer. This process can also be reverted such that
the CPU can read from the dmseg and store in a register.
PrAcc
This ﬂag points out a pending processor access and controls ﬁnishing of a pending
processor access, where the values indicate:
• 0: No pending processor access
• 1: Pending processor access
The CPU will stop the access of the dmseg segment if this ﬂag is set to 0, and
otherwise if the ﬂag is set to 1, while the CPU already is pending for access, it will
be ignored. The PrAcc can thus be used to ﬁgure out which action has to be taken
when debugging through the EJTAG probe, whether the output from CPU should be
parsed or the input should be given from the EJTAG programmer [18, 21].
==PAGE:35==
3.3 The Power of JTAG debugging
21
3.3
The Power of JTAG debugging
The Boundary-Scan/JTAG TAP besides telling the behavior of the individual I/O
pins connected within an integrated circuit, does also present a very powerful way to
communicate with the hardware peripherals through their I/O pins embedded on the
JTAG chain. The program execution of the CPU in the chain can be single-stepped by
shifting speciﬁc instruction in to the instruction register, which then causes a hardware
breakpoint.
The debugging property when halting the CPU execution at boot-time do give a
tremendous privilege level to the debugger (either the security tester or the evil guy, a
hacker/attacker). In the followings, we will give a description of these properties.
3.3.1
Dumping Flash Content
The read-only-memory storage medium, for instance the ﬂash storage, can be easily
dumped. These ﬂash storages usually contain the ﬁrmware of the embedded system.
This ﬁrmware when having dumped it, can be further extracted, such that the
ﬁlesystem(s), the kernel and probably some other conﬁgurations and memory sections
can be obtained. The ﬁlesystem is storing data that belongs to the users of the
embedded systems. Those data can contain very conﬁdential information, for instance
personal data and credit card numbers. The kernel can be used in order to look for
privilege escalation on the embedded system, in which the binary programs compiled
within it, can be analyzed whether they have vulnerabilities that can be exploited.
Other statically hardcoded strings can be read in order to determine how the kernel is
built, for instance which parameters the kernel requires to operate in speciﬁc formats
[22, 23].
3.3.2
Re-Programming and Replacing Firmware
The ﬁrmware can easily be re-programmed with modiﬁcations that gives an attacker
privileges for system control. The modiﬁcations are applied within the kernel program
itself, in which the regular users do not even detect some changes and they do not
even have opportunity for disabling it unless they replace the ﬁrmware. Typically,
embedded systems do gives the users ability to update the ﬁrmware through a user
interface. This service can also be deleted in the kernel program; in which the users
only will have the option to replace the ﬂash storage or ﬁnd an alternative way
to delete the ﬁrmware, for example by JTAG debugging. This modiﬁcation of the
ﬁrmware is considered as the most dangerous malware. In some cases, the term used
for identifying such malware, is rootkit, because the malware resides in the kernel
program and is invisible for the users at the userland application level. However,
because the JTAG debugging oﬀers more than just modifying the kernel program,
what can be done with JTAG debugging is considered more dangerous [22, 23].
==PAGE:36==
22
3 Boundary-Scan/JTAG
3.3.3
Modifying Bootloader
The usual execution process of the bootloader can be modiﬁed in order to load the
kernel with higher privileges for the attacker. The bootloader can also be replaced
if it doesn’t have options that an attacker can use in order to control the execution
of the kernel with another bootloader that is intended for compromising the kernel
program [22, 23].
3.3.4
Modifying Program Execution from RAM
JTAG debugging can be performed in the early system startup phase, where the CPU
loads the ﬁrmware onto the RAM. Basically, the entire process can be compromised.
The RAM address space and the values stored on these can be modiﬁed on run-time,
which is used to basically bypass some restrictions that prevents the attacker for
having access to the system control [23, 24].
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Securing Embedded Systems from Boundary-Scan/JTAG Debugging
23
Figure 3.4: The new design of the JTAG state machine where ﬁve new states are
added to provide key authentication.
3.4
Securing Embedded Systems from
Boundary-Scan/JTAG Debugging
There are some techniques to secure the embedded systems against JTAG debugging,
which is both at hardware and at software level. The typical mitigation technique for
preventing the JTAG TAP to be accessed from a programmer device, is by blowing
fuses. Those fuses may be implemented when the manufacturers have tested and
veriﬁed the device, otherwise they do not themselves have possibility to use the
interface unless they use some physical de-soldering techniques.
In 2014, a standardized paper [25] containing some methods for eliminating these
attack-scenarios through the JTAG interface, is published.
The ﬁrst method applies security to the JTAG interface, which is modeled in Figure
3.4. The access to instruction- and data registers is restricted until an access token is
fed to unlock the TAP controller. In the Figure, we can see that, the state-machine
of the JTAG has been edited such that there are ﬁve new states s0, s1, s2, s3 and
s4 that have been added. The TAP controller will not let the states, where the data
register DR and the instruction register IR resides, accessed, unless the TAP controller
successfully enters the correct pattern and coming through the newly added states. In
this case, the secure key (1 1 1 1 1) must be provided/transmitted by the user; and
==PAGE:38==
24
3 Boundary-Scan/JTAG
if a wrong key is entered, the current state will be transitioned to the s4 state, where
it will disconnect the TDI and TDO by feeding a ﬁxed value to TDO. Note also that
once the TAP goes to the lock state, it cannot be reset back to factory state, thus
preventing the possibility for applying brute-force method by the attackers [25].
The other method explained in the same paper is securing the PCB itself, where it
obfuscates the signals of the PCB traces. Figure 3.5 shows a model which introduces
the design-solution to this alternative method.
The idea of this method is to beneﬁt from dummy ICs (integrated-circuits) such that
the input to the actual IC is randomized. The output of the real ICs is transmitted to
another dummy IC in a daisy-chained circuit. The dummy ICs serves three purposes,
which can be listed as follows [25]:
1. It scrambles the traces based on a scrambling function implemented in the
dummy logic. The dummy device is resistant to reverse-engineering due to
presence of secure JTAG that prevents access to internal design without proper
authentication (which has been introduced previously as the ﬁrst method for
securing the JTAG interface itself).
2. It provides dummy outputs that are mixed with real traces to confuse the attacker.
The dummy traces are driven by random logic and counters to obfuscate the
data, address and clock signals. Furthermore, the dummy traces are drawn in
the same way as the real data and clock signals to obfuscate the real signals.
3. It implements secure JTAG therefore the access to real chips is also secured
even if they implement unsecured JTAG. In order to reverse-engineer the real
chips, the attackers need to unlock the JTAG of two dummy chips (D0 and D1),
where each of them may have diﬀerent security keys.
==PAGE:39==
3.4 Securing Embedded Systems from Boundary-Scan/JTAG Debugging
25
Figure 3.5: Alternative solution to securing JTAG Port by introducing obfuscation
methods on the PCB traces.
==PAGE:40==
26
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4
Data Retrieval and
Privilege Escalation
Methods
This chapter introduces methods on data retrieval and privilege escalation in order to
adapt it to various embedded systems.
The adaption and formalization of these methods are based on the background
knowledge achieved from the Chapters 2 and 3.
4.1
Attack Vectors and Methods through UART and
JTAG Interfaces
JTAG debugging is used to retrieve conﬁdential data that is in combination with the
UART interface further taken advantage for interacting with the underlying system
as a root user.
4.1.1
Method 1: Access Root Shell and Take System Control
through UART
In some embedded systems where there are no diﬀerent user-levels, there are only a
single user and that is the root. If this system provides UART console then everyone
using UART connection is easily becoming root unless there is a password requirement.
Figure 4.1 illustrates this method using a ﬂow graph. Starting with having a
successful UART connection, the attacker can access root shell and take the system
control, indicated with the red selected state, if there isn’t any password requirement.
If, however, there is the password requirement and the attacker doesn’t know it, the
next methods, indicated with the path to the green selected ﬁeld, can be applied in
order to retrieve this password.
4.1.2
Method 2: Extract Filesystem and Kernel Program from
Firmware through JTAG
In cases where the UART communication requires password for accessing the shell of
root, the JTAG port can be used to extract the ﬁrmware, and from this the ﬁlesystem
==PAGE:42==
28
4 Data Retrieval and Privilege Escalation Methods
Figure 4.1: Illustration of method 1.
Figure 4.2: Illustration of method 2.
and the kernel program can be obtained.
Figure 4.2 illustrates Method 2 as a ﬂow graph, in which the attacker can use
the obtained ﬁlesystem to further retrieve user speciﬁc data, indicated with one of
the two red-selected states, such as passwords, pictures, identity logs and much more
depending on how much the embedded systems log the user interaction.
The kernel program can be used in order to retrieve static information (indicated
with the other red-selected state taking the path "Extraction" from "Raw Firmware"
to "Kernel Program") that is hardcoded in the binary, which can be very useful in
JTAG debugging, for instance, for memory modiﬁcation that will give the attacker
privilege access, which is taught in Methods 3 and 4.
4.1.3
Method 3: Privilege Escalation by Single-User-Mode
The JTAG interface, once the attacker is able to halt the test logic, is giving the
attacker access to almost everything within the logic of the system. In this method,
we will demonstrate a powerful method an attacker can use in order to gain system
control. This method is illustrated in Figure 4.3.
This method uses the technique of modifying the boot parameters (in bootloading
phase) that are passed to the kernel before it is loaded into the RAM in order to run in
Single-User-Mode. The memory addresses where the parameters are residing have to
be obtained and the value be changed in the debugging phase. This information can
either be obtained statically (indicated with the green-selected states area obtained
from the extracted kernel program from Method 2) or dynamically (illustrated with
the path "Dynamic Analysis" from "Bootloading Phase" state), where the attacker has
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Attack Vectors and Methods through UART and JTAG Interfaces
29
Figure 4.3: Illustration of method 3.
to analyze the program execution ﬂow and identify where these boot parameters are
stored in the RAM address space.
Once the addresses are found and the content modiﬁed either statically or dynami-
cally, the attacker then follows the state from "Kernel Single-User-Mode", where the
ﬁlesystem is mounted and attacker has got root access. This ﬁnal state is marked
with orange color (indicating that there is still some actions to be taken for reaching
the goal), because it requires the UART connection from Method 1 for the user to
have a shell prompt.
4.1.4
Method 4: Privilege Escalation by Normal-User-Mode
This method resembles Method 3 in which the diﬀerence is that instead of modifying
the boot parameters of the kernel for running it in Single-User-Mode, the program
execution ﬂow is normally executed, and once the kernel has been loaded and is run in
Normal-User-Mode, where the temporary ﬁlesystem is mounted and the program ﬂow
asks for password for mounting the actual ﬁlesystem, the privilege is bypassed in three
diﬀerent ways. These ways are illustrated in Figure 4.4 and described as follows:
• The privilege access requirement function is statically analyzed and to do so
the kernel program, obtained from Method 2, is analyzed for retrieving the
names of function symbols and addresses in order to understand the function
logic. This further requires the attacker to disassemble the binary into the
underlying assembly language which is diﬀerent across architectures, and replace
instructions that will bypass the privilege access requirement. This path is
illustrated in the ﬁgure such that the subpath "Static Information Retrieval" is
taken from state "Temporary Filesystem Mounted" and into the state "Kernel
Program" selected with green color.
==PAGE:44==
30
4 Data Retrieval and Privilege Escalation Methods
Figure 4.4: Illustration of method 4.
• The privilege access requirement function is dynamically analyzed in the de-
bugging phase, which also like the static method requires the attacker to have
a solid understanding of the assembly language instructions of the underlying
architecture. This is illustrated in Figure 4.4 as the second path "Dynamic Anal-
ysis" taken from state "Temporary Filesystem Mounted" into "Privilege Function
Memory Address Retrieved" state and the function logic is then bypassed with
modiﬁcations using assembly instructions in the given memory address value.
• The ﬁle containing privilege access information, residing on the temporary
ﬁlesystem (obtained in Method 2), is read and decrypted due to weak hash
algorithm. The password is thus obtained and used with UART communication
such that the attacker has access to system control. This is illustrated as the
third path "Read File" from the state "Temporary Filesystem Mounted" into
"File Access" state.
4.1.5
Adaption of the Methods in Real-Case Scenarios
The methods are listed hierarchically from 1 to 4 such that Method 1 is the very ﬁrst
thing an attacker has to do because it is both the quickest regarding time and also
the one that requires smallest experience.
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Attack Vectors and Methods through UART and JTAG Interfaces
31
Method 1 does only require the attacker has an understanding of how to connect
a device programmer that can communicate over UART. It is also a very fast process
since once you establish the connection with wires and setting the power on to the
embedded system, the information is passed between the programmer to the system
and vice versa relatively quick.
Method 2, however, requires the user to have an understanding of how to connect a
device programmer to the JTAG port and establish a communication with the system.
The communication of these entities do not ﬂow directly as in UART, and the attacker
needs to have a program (like OpenOCD, refer to Section 5.2.3) that automates the
communication process.
It also requires the attacker to understand the speciﬁc commands and the target
JTAG TAP the system is built of.
The time for extracting the ﬁrmware is very long because JTAG communication is
typically very slow. The communication is, however, relatively easy, since the attacker
does only need to specify the address of the ﬂash and the size of how much shall be
dumped.
Method 3 is considered to be more diﬃcult and requires more experience since the
attacker does perform static analysis of the dumped ﬁrmware and the kernel program.
It otherwise requires the attacker to perform dynamic analysis of the execution process
of the target system. Depending on the experience of the attacker, the amount of
time used for performing this attack method can vary a lot, however for a beginner,
this is considered to be very time-consuming.
Method 4 as mentioned previously, reminds very much of the previous method,
however it requires more time and experience for the attacker, because the logic and
functions of the kernel program is being analyzed statically and/or dynamically, and a
great amount of assembly instructions are patched to the execution in order to bypass
privilege requirements.
4.1.6
General Requirements for Applying the Methods
Regarding the dynamic analysis and debugging the CPU execution, the attacker needs
to have a solid understanding of the architecture the CPU is supporting, which can,
for instance, be Intel, MIPS, or ARM architectures. The attacker thus needs to have
an understanding of the instructions that are passed to the CPU at assembly program
level, registers and diﬀerent entities the CPU operates with.
The attacker does also need to have a solid understanding of the binary format;
how it is assembled and what sections it consists of for retrieving information about
boot parameters and function symbols.
==PAGE:46==
32
4 Data Retrieval and Privilege Escalation Methods
4.1.7
Other Methods
The above mentioned methods are ways to retrieve user data and privilege escalation
in a way that the actual users of the system don’t even detect someone has done
something.
There are certainly other methods that can be applied if the requirement of
detecting the system compromise is not required. One of the easiest way to gain access
to the system control is to delete the ﬁle content the privilege function is accessing
data from. Once this is deleted, the attacker will have access but the actual user does
also get informed the compromise. This will probably lead to the user not interacting
with the system and the spying virus program demonstrated in Chapter 5 will in a
real-case scenario not be possible.
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Other Methods for Tampering Embedded Systems
33
4.2
Other Methods for Tampering Embedded
Systems
In this section, we will introduce some alternative methods that can be useful for
when considering security in embedded systems.
4.2.1
De-Soldering Flash Storage
Embedded systems does not always have debugger interfaces such as JTAG TAPs
and other serial interfaces such as UART, which can be used to interact with the
device and for instance dump the memory of ROM (Read-Only Memory) such as
ﬂash devices. This is the reason why such devices can be directly de-soldered and
the content can be copied to another medium, erased or replaced with other contents.
In fact, this method of de-soldering is often a much quicker way compared to JTAG
debugging to obtain the ﬁrmware of an embedded system.
The approach after de-soldering the ROM is to connect it to a ROM reader/pro-
grammer in which the process of dumping is often called "snarﬁng" [26].
4.2.2
Intercept the Communication using Logic Analyzer
A Logic Analyzer is an electronic instrument that makes it possible to intercept and
parse the output of signals (typically for serial- and parallel interface protocols) that
are transmitted on digitals systems. The output can be used to view the machine
codes of JTAG TAPs for example. It might also output traces of higher level such as
state-machine of the protocol and assembly language, depending on the ﬁrmware of
the Logic Analyzer and the support of the digital system that is analyzed.
Logic Analyzers are also beneﬁcial in order to see the timing relationships between
several signals on the digital system.
In order to analyze a speciﬁc signal/bus, another tool, commonly known as "Bus
Analyzer", is beneﬁcial to be used instead. It is essentially the same as a Logic
Analyzer, however is targeted on a speciﬁc architecture for a speciﬁc protocol, which
shows higher-level data and also ﬁlters out irrelevant data compared to standard
Logic Analyzers which are intended for general-purpose usage targeting many diﬀerent
protocols and architectures. Bus Analyzers are thus generally proprietary hardware
devices that companies are using in order to test, debug and verify some logic for their
own produced systems [27].
==PAGE:48==
34
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 5
Demonstration
In this chapter, we will look at an embedded system, a Linksys-WRT54GL router,
and identify each component, hardware- as well as software that are used, moreover
we will analyze which I/O exist and how we can use it to gain privilege access and
furthermore exceptional data that is private for the embedded system.
We will adapt the methods from Chapter 4 in order to obtain critical data and get
privilege access to this Linksys router.
5.1
Printed-Circuit-Board (PCB) Overview of
Linksys-WRT54GL
The "Linksys WRT54GL" router is analyzed by having looked into the printed circuit
board and identiﬁed the chips that are embedded on it, moreover which I/O interfaces
are used for communicating with it.
In ﬁgure 5.1, the readers can see the design and layout of this router. The chip
selected with a blue border is a "Winbond W9412G6KH" which is a CMOS Double
Data Rate Synchronous Dynamic Random Access Memory (DDR SDRAM) and
organized as 2M words × 4 banks × 16 bits, i.e. 16 Megabytes of memory size
[28].
The green selected area speciﬁes the chip "MXIC (Macronix) MX29LV320EBTI-
70", which is a Flash Memory (non-volatile storage medium) with a capability of 4
Megabytes storage size. The device operates over a voltage range of 2.7 V to 3.6 V
using a 3 V power supply input [29].
The area that is selected with red borders is where the core of the router resides,
i.e. the Central-Processing-Unit (CPU), which is a "Broadcom BCM5352EL" chip that
integrates a 32-bit MIPS-architecture processor, IEEE 802.11 b/g wireless and ﬁve-port
Ethernet switch, and an SDRAM Controller. For the purpose of this demonstration,
we are only looking at the capability of the processing-unit. The information that
is worth to notice is that the MIPS32 CPU supports a 200-MHz clock frequency
with 16 KB instruction cache, 8 KB data cache, 256 B prefetch cache and a Memory
Management Unit (MMU).[30].
The white-selected areas belong to the serial communication interfaces, UART
and JTAG. The UART interface is the one with a smaller border and with 2 × 5 pin
headers, while the JTAG interface is the wider one with 2 × 6 pin headers. Figure
5.2 shows how the pin headers of the UART interface has to be interpreted.
==PAGE:50==
36
5 Demonstration
Figure 5.1: Printed-Circuit-Board layout and design of Linksys WRT54GL.
Figure 5.2: Schematic showing the pins headers for the UART serial interface.
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Printed-Circuit-Board (PCB) Overview of Linksys-WRT54GL
37
The ﬁrst two headers (labeled with 3.3V) are used to connect to input voltages,
however since our router communicates with a chip (the BusPirate explained in Section
5.2.2) that is connected to our computer through USB cable it won’t be necessary to
interact with these headers.
The next two headers (ttyS0 (TX) and ttyS1 (TX)) are the data coming from
a serial device into the target system; in this case our Linksys router. TX is also
known as the "input" header for the UART interface, while the RX is used for the
opposite purpose and known as the "output" header. The output of the target system
is transmitted to the input of the serial device that is being communicated with.
The reason why there are two of the TX and RX is due to the fact that the target
system allows the test-user to connect to diﬀerent serial devices; one that is labeled
with S0 and the other with S1. The two headers labeled with NC stand for "No-
Current" and, thus, doesn’t have any eﬀect for our demonstration (refer to section
5.2.2). The last two headers are reserved for the ground signals labeled with GND [2, 31].
The JTAG/Boundary-Scan interface can similar to the UART interface be inter-
preted. Figure 5.3 shows the schematic for the JTAG interface. All the pins on the
left side are reserved for the ground signal while the other pins on the right side are
reserved for speciﬁc purposes in which if one of them gets wrong signal, the JTAG
communication will not work. The ﬁrst pin (having the unique rectangular form and
labeled with SRST) is for the system reset functionality. Our router has a hardware
reset button in which if the user presses this button in some seconds, the router
initiates reset signal; and then it resets the whole router which works like getting
the power plug oﬀand on. In similar way to the reset button, the TRST allows the
user to programmatically reset the router. The next is the TDI, which is the input
pin, and the one next is the TDO, which is the output pin. The next to TDO is the
test-mode-select pin labeled with TMS. The one above that is the TCK, which is the
clock signal used in between the serial JTAG device and the router. We then ﬁnally
have the optional pin abbreviated with TRST which stands for "TAP Reset", which is
for the purpose for resetting the TAP controller. We will in our demonstration not
use this pin for any purpose.
==PAGE:52==
38
5 Demonstration
Figure 5.3: Schematic showing the pins headers for the JTAG serial interface.
5.2
Communication with Linksys-WRT54GL
Now having analyzed the Linksys router and detected the UART and JTAG interfaces
we can interact with the router.
5.2.1
Interacting the BusPirate with OpenOCD
In order to communicate with the Linksys router through JTAG, we will be using a
device called "BusPirate". This device has similar JTAG interface to the router — it
does also support other serial communications — that convert the inputs from USB
into a proper serial bit-rate that lets us interact with the router’s Broadcom CPU.
The BusPirate is shown in Figure 5.4.
The required signals of JTAG communication are the TDI, TDO, TMS, and TCK.
We thus connect the pins from the BusPirate to the JTAG interface of the Linksys
router in the following ways. The MISO connects to MOSI, which means that the input
from the BusPirate goes to the output of the router, and likewise the MOSI connects
to MISO. The CS (mode select signal) labeled pin of the BusPirate goes to TMS, the
CLK (clock signal) connects to the TCK. The software reset pin labeled as AUX of the
BusPirate gets connected to the SRST pin. Finally, it is important to remember that
ground signals should also be connected. A picture of the connected wires with colors
can be seen in Figure 5.5 [32].
The "OpenOCD" ("Open On-Chip-Debugger") [33] is an open source software that
among others lets us communicate the BusPirate with the Linksys router through
JTAG. In order to let the BusPirate communicate with the Linksys router, we have
to conﬁgure two conﬁg ﬁles; one belonging to the BusPirate and the other one to the
router.
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Communication with Linksys-WRT54GL
39
Figure 5.4: BusPirate that enables the debugger to halt and debug the CPU of target
system.
Figure 5.5: The connection of pins between the BusPirate and the JTAG interface of
the Linksys router.
Figure 5.6 shows a very basic and minimal — due to our needs — conﬁguration
for the BusPirate that the OpenOCD requires.
The ﬁrst line indicates that the BusPirate port is the one located at the path
dev/ttyUSB0. Notice that the name ttyUSB0 is automatically given by the Linux
system of the computer that is connected to the BusPirate since the BusPirate is
connected with a USB-cable to the computer.
Line 3 indicates that the speed of the BusPirate should be normal.
Voltage
regulator is disabled. The pins are conﬁgured in "normal" mode and not "open-drain"
mode. The pullup state is also disabled.
We do ﬁnally specify that hardware reset "trst" and software reset "srst" should
be enabled in the communication phase.
==PAGE:54==
40
5 Demonstration
1
buspirate_port /dev/ttyUSB0
2
3
buspirate_speed normal
4
5
buspirate_vreg 0
6
7
buspirate_mode normal
8
9
buspirate_pullup 0
10
11
reset_config trst_and_srst
Figure 5.6: Conﬁguration settings for the BusPirate required by the OpenOCD.
1
source [find target/bcm5352e.cfg]
2
3
set partition_list {
4
CFE
{ Bootloader
0x1c000000 0x00040000 }
5
firmware { Kernel+rootfs 0x1c040000 0x003b0000 }
6
nvram
{ Config space
0x1c3f0000 0x00010000 }
7
}
8
9
set _FLASHNAME @_CHIPNAME.flash
10
flash bank @_FLASHNAME cfi 0x1c000000 0x00400000 2 2 @_TARGETNAME
Figure 5.7: Conﬁguration settings for the Linksys-WRT54GL required by the
OpenOCD.
Similarly to the BusPirate, we do also specify a conﬁguration ﬁle for the router,
which content is given in Figure 5.7.
The ﬁrst line indicates that a target conﬁguration ﬁle speciﬁcally written for the
"Broadcom CPU (BCM5352E)" is referenced. In Figure 5.8 this conﬁguration can be
seen. The conﬁguration for this BCM5352E can brieﬂy be described as follows. The
OpenOCD requires that every chip that has to be communicated with shall deﬁne a
Test Access Port (TAP) which is the speciﬁcation for our JTAG interface ports. We
deﬁne our TAP to have an instruction register (IR) length to have 8 bits (speciﬁed
with the irlen ﬂag). The ﬂag ircapture is the bit pattern loaded by the TAP into
the JTAG shift register having a value of 0x1. The irmask ﬂag is used with the
ircapture ﬂag to verify that instruction scans work correctly. We then have the ﬂag
expected-id (also known as "IDCODE") that has a hexadecimal value of 0x0535217f
representing a unique number (32 bits) for the TAP device in order to identify the
device in the scanning process.
We then specify the target TAP to be regarded as a "MIPS" with little endian
==PAGE:55==
5.2 Communication with Linksys-WRT54GL
41
1
set _CHIPNAME bcm5352e
2
set _CPUID 0x0535217f
3
4
jtag newtap @_CHIPNAME cpu -irlen 8 -ircapture 0x1 -irmask 0x1f
-expected-id @_CPUID
,→
5
6
set _TARGETNAME @_CHIPNAME.cpu
7
target create @_TARGETNAME mips_m4k -endian little -chain-position
@_TARGETNAME
,→
8
9
@_TARGETNAME configure -event gdb-attach {
10
reset
11
halt
12
}
Figure 5.8: Conﬁguration settings for the Broadcom BCM5352E CPU of the Linksys-
WRT54GL used for the OpenOCD JTAG communcation.
architecture.
We do, ﬁnally, beneﬁt us from OpenOCD’s support for debugging with "GNU
Debugger (gdb)" such that OpenOCD opens a listener port for "GDB server" that
we remote-connect to. Once we connect to the server, the "Reset Halt" event gets
triggered which, then, lets the debugging take aﬀect [34].
We now look back to the board conﬁguration again shown in Figure 5.7. The Flash
device, the "Macronix MX29LV320EBTI-70", is deﬁned such that the partition list is
stated where the "Bootloader (CFE)" is residing at address 0x1c000000 with a size of
0x40000 bits in hexadecimal notation (32 KB). The kernel with the root ﬁlesystem
("rootfs") appended is directly following the bootloader and is attached next to it with
a size of 0x3b0000 bits (483 KB). The last partition embedded next to the kernel is
the "nvram", which is conﬁguration setting for the bootloader and the kernel. This
information is actually also produced in the bootloading process. Refer to the actual
demonstration at section 5.2.2.
In order to start a JTAG communication (assuming that every necessary OpenOCD
binaries, additional libraries etc. are installed and conﬁgured) we issue the following
Linux command:
sudo openocd -f interface=buspirate.cfg -f board=linksys-wrt54gl.cfg
-f target-src=bcm5352.cfg -c "init"
,→
We are performing the demonstration in a Linux machine and we run the OpenOCD
software in sudo (super-user mode for privilege acquiring) with the three conﬁguration
ﬁles mentioned above and with a "c" ﬂag indicating the connection to be initialized
[33, 34].
==PAGE:56==
42
5 Demonstration
Figure 5.9: Figure showing the USB-to-Serial converter chip connected to the target
system’s UART interface.
5.2.2
Console Communication through UART Interface
It can be very useful to setup a way of reading the output/behaviour of the target
system in the debugging phase. UART is providing the attacker to interact with the
target system in console/terminal mode. In Linux this communication supporting
terminal mode is a device that is commonly known as /dev/ttys0 (or serial device 1).
The bootloader does in many cases allow the user to specify what the communication
device will be. It typically either is /dev/ttys0, /dev/USB0 (or /dev/ACM0 in some
other linux distributions) which is a USB device [35].
In this demonstration, we will be using the UART interface because the Linksys
target router supports it and, also, because it is very simple to setup using a USB-to-
Serial Converter device.
Figure 5.9 shows how such a device is used to connect to the UART interface.
Basically, the UART interface requires three pins to be set up: TX, RX and the ground.
TX is the pin used to transfer the inputs from the chip to the output pin RX of the
target system’s UART interface.
The USB-to-Serial Converter device converts the inputs the attacker are typing
from the keyboard into the router through the UART communication. Figure 5.10
shows such a device that is used for this purpose.
The target system, once the serial connection is successfully established, outputs
important information regarding the bootloader software, how the RAM is overloaded,
i.e. which address space is reserved for the bootloader, the kernel, the ﬁlesystem and
possibly other information as well. The target system that is analyzed here does, for
instance, output various information.
Figure 5.11 shows how data is placed on the RAM. The CFE (the bootloader
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Communication with Linksys-WRT54GL
43
Figure 5.10: USB-to-Serial Converter used to interact with the router in terminal
mode.
Total memory used by CFE:
0x80300000 - 0x803A4010 (671760)
Initialized Data:
0x80339E70 - 0x8033C630 (10176)
BSS Area:
0x8033C630 - 0x8033E010 (6624)
Local Heap:
0x8033E010 - 0x803A2010 (409600)
Stack Area:
0x803A2010 - 0x803A4010 (8192)
Text (code) segment:
0x80300000 - 0x80339E70 (237168)
Boot area (physical):
0x003A5000 - 0x003E5000
Relocation Factor:
I:00000000 - D:00000000
Figure 5.11: Output of the blocks with addresses placed in RAM in the bootloading
process.
program) consists of 671760 bytes injected onto the RAM within the virtual address
space between 0x80300000 and 0x803A4010.
The Initialized Data segment is basically variables that have a value, i.e. they
are initialized variables in contrary to BSS segment that also stores variables but they
do not get initialized.
We then have Local Heap which is the segment used for dynamic memory alloca-
tion on run-time, i.e. while the kernel is running.
The Stack is, contrary to the heap segment, the opposite. It is also used for
memory allocation but at compile-time. The size of the stack for memory allocation
is determined when the kernel is built and, thus, cannot be modiﬁed when the kernel
is running [36].
Furthermore, Figure 5.12 shows a list of partitions residing on the ﬂash medium.
Basically, we can see that the CFE is the ﬁrst memory block residing between address
0x000000000000 and 0x000000040000.
The next block stated as linux in the output, is actually the kernel program.
The block rootfs is the actual ﬁlesystem of the root.
The last block nvram, which stands for "Non-volatile Random Access Memory",
==PAGE:58==
44
5 Demonstration
Creating 4 MTD partitions on "Physically mapped flash":
0x000000000000-0x000000040000 : "cfe"
0x000000040000-0x0000003f0000 : "linux"
0x00000011b000-0x0000003f0000 : "rootfs"
0x0000003f0000-0x000000400000 : "nvram"
Figure 5.12: Output of the sections residing in the Flash which will be mapped into
the RAM at boot-time.
is a non-volatile storage used for conﬁguration data for the bootloader. The reason
for why it is suﬃxed "Random Access Memory" is because it is writeable storage
embedded into the RAM when the system powers on and it is modiﬁed while residing
on the RAM and copied back onto the ROM storage medium afterwards.
Another important output that we are shown is as follows:
Kernel command line: root=/dev/mtdblock2 console=ttys0,115200
This information tells us that the bootloader is loading the kernel onto the RAM with
the following parameters:
• root=/dev/mtdblock2, which is the actual ﬁlesystem that gets mounted when
privilege access has acquired.
• console=ttys0,115200, is specifying that the console for interacting with the
kernel should be the serial device ttys0 with a bit-rate of 115200.
This kernel boot-parameters are very important information for the attacker for ap-
plying the methods from Chapter 4.
Besides given information about the boot process, the UART, as explained in
Chapter 2 in Section 2.1.3, is used to communicate with the embedded system through
a shell. The Method 1 from Chapter 4 is referring to this. We have connection to
the router through UART, however, in order to have root privileges, we have to type
a correct password. In order to do so, we ﬁrst need to gain the root password from
either Method 2 or 3, which are demonstrated in Sections 5.3.2 and 5.4.1 [37].
5.2.3
Boundary-Scan/JTAG Communication
In order to demonstrate the power of Boundary-Scan debugging, we will show how we
can interact with this Linksys router by halting it in the boot-loading phase.
We will be using the "GNU Debugger" (or better known as gdb) with the multi-
architecture variant (due to the computer that is used for debugging has an Intel
architecture while the Broadcom chip is MIPS architecture) in order to communicate
with the router. OpenOCD launches "gdbserver" which is a server that listens on
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Communication with Linksys-WRT54GL
45
"gdb" connections so that CPUs with other architectures are able to debug the target
system remotely. Once the gdb connection is established, we issue the monitor halt
command which then tries to halt the CPU before the boot-loader ﬁnishes mounting
the ﬁlesystem of the kernel loaded onto the RAM. The trial of halting the CPU at
boot-time can be quite challenging since these bootloaders used in embedded systems
can be very quick ﬁnishing their jobs.
The other challenge is the WatchDog Timer hardware, which resets the process of
the CPU and frees up the RAM when a speciﬁc time has elapsed and, thus, prevents
us from performing debugging. In Section 5.2.3, we show how such a WatchDog Timer
is bypassed.
The remote gdb connection will after a successful halt (when preventions such as
WatchDog Timer is disabled) output the address of the program counter/instruction
pointer (the virtual address of RAM that the CPU is stopped at and the address
of the instruction that will be executed next unless the pointer is modiﬁed to point
somewhere else). The output of such a halt is as the following:
target halted in MIPS32 mode due to debug-request, pc: 0x80327498
The multi-architecture variant of gdb provides several options for debugging other
architectures. Here, the endian is set to "little" (values stored in virtual RAM addresses
is reversed unlike the Big Endian style), and the architecture is set to "mips".
The registers and their values at the CPU break for 32-bit MIPS architecture is,
thus, outputted as follows (Figure 5.13) using the info registers command of gdb.
Disabling the WatchDog Timer
In Chapter 2, we have described how the WatchDog Timer operates. We have primarily
two ways to bypass the WatchDog Timer, either by physically damaging it without
aﬀecting the rest of the circuit or by disabling it on run-time, i.e. while the router is
running, by modifying the conﬁguration ﬁle.
The conﬁguration for the WatchDog timer consists of an integer value and does
determine how often the reset of the system should be speciﬁed with this integer value,
and if this value gets changed to a greater integer, it assigns more time for debugging
the target system using JTAG. However, the timer can also be completely disabled
from the conﬁguration setting.
In this Linksys router, the NVRAM section on the ﬂash storage contains the
conﬁgurations. The value for resetting the CPU is edited as follows:
uci set watchdog-timer=0
uci commit
This way we have disabled the WatchDog timer and can, thus, perform JTAG
debugging without being disturbed from it. The uci is a program which edits and
operates with the NVRAM memory.
==PAGE:60==
46
5 Demonstration
zero
at
v0
v1
a0
a1
a2
a3
,→
R0
00000000 80340000 00000000 8018834c 00000019 00000000 1000fc01
ffff00ff
,→
t0
t1
t2
t3
t4
t5
t6
t7
,→
R8
80159fe0 0000fc00 00000000 80e0c5bc 00000030 00000006 19999999
00000000
,→
s0
s1
s2
s3
s4
s5
s6
s7
,→
R16
803a3ce8 803a3e03 803a3dd0 0000003a 00000014 00000014 00000014
00000014
,→
t8
t9
k0
k1
gp
sp
s8
ra
,→
R24
01000000 00000000 00004000 80303244 80341e70 803a3cc0 00000000
80315928
,→
status
lo
hi badvaddr
cause
pc
00400000 00000000 00000001 00000000 00008000 80327498
fcsr
fir
00000000 00000000
Figure 5.13: The structure of the registers of the MIPS 32-bit architecture of the
Linksys Broadcom CPU.
5.3
Firmware Extraction and Analysis
In this section we will adapt Method 2 from Chapter 4 in order to show which
capabilities an attacker has when compromising the ﬁrmware containing the ﬁlesystem
and the kernel.
5.3.1
Dumping the Flash Storage
It is possible to dump the content of the Flash storage when having halted the CPU.
Basically, we are informed about the physical address of where the ﬁrmware is stored
and also the size of it. This, we can use to dump the ﬁrmware easily.
The command that we issue in gdb in order to dump the Flash content is as follows:
(gdb) monitor dump_image dump_kernel_rootfs.bin 0x1c000000 0x003b0000
Notice that we are dumping 0x3b0000 bits, i.e. approximately 483 KB. We do only
dump the "kernel" and "rootfs" and not the bootloader ("CFE") nor the conﬁguration
space "nvram", since only these will be looked into for the demonstration part. The
process is very slow and can take several hours with BusPirate device that provides a
clock frequency of 100 KHz. The dump rate has been 0,019 KB/s and it has taken
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Firmware Extraction and Analysis
47
DECIMAL
HEXADECIMAL
DESCRIPTION
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
0
0x0
BIN-Header, board ID: W54G, hardware
version: 4702, firmware version: 4.30.30, build date: 2015-06-23
,→
32
0x20
TRX firmware header, little endian,
image size: 3538944 bytes, CRC32: 0x26862432, flags: 0x0, version:
1, header size: 28 bytes, loader offset: 0x1C, linux kernel
offset: 0xBC2DC, rootfs offset: 0x0
,→
,→
,→
60
0x3C
gzip compressed data, maximum
compression, has original file name: "piggy", from Unix, last
modified: 2015-06-23 03:40:36
,→
,→
770812
0xBC2FC
Squashfs filesystem, little endian,
non-standard signature, version 3.0, size: 2762845 bytes, 539
inodes, blocksize: 65536 bytes, created: 2015-06-23 07:05:01
,→
,→
Figure 5.14: Output of binwalk of the dumped ﬁrmware.
around 7 hours.
The ﬁrst thing we do right after is identifying the type of the dumped data by
using the Linux file command:
file -i fw.bin
fw.bin: application/octet-stream; charset=binary
The file command points out that it is an unknown binary. The content type of the
binary ﬁrmware must therefore be analyzed manually.
There are some Linux utilities speciﬁcally for ﬁrmware analysis, such as binwalk1
that crawls the binary ﬁle to detect blocks or sections of memory that can be speciﬁc
headers for identifying the binary, ﬁlesystem (typically compressed), speciﬁc data
blocks etc. It is very useful tool that lets the attacker quickly get an overview of what
is included in - and what type of ﬁrmware it is.
We use the binwalk command and get the result, which can be seen in Figure
5.14. The output of binwalk reveals that the ﬁrmware that we have dumped can be
separated into 4 blocks/sections. The ﬁrst block is the header of the board that we
are testing on, which is a W54G, hardware version 4702, ﬁrmware version 4.30.30 and
the build date of 2015-06-23.
The next block is also a header, which speciﬁes that it contains a TRX ﬁrmware
header which further tells us in regards to the next data block (kernel and rootfs
residing in) that the architecture of the kernel is little-endian and it is based on a
1An open-source tool named "Firmware Analysis Tool" developed by the team devttys0.
https://github.com/devttys0/binwalk
==PAGE:62==
48
5 Demonstration
DECIMAL
HEXADECIMAL
DESCRIPTION
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1415040
0x159780
Linux kernel version "2.4.20 (zls@sw1)
(gcc version 3.2.3 with Broadcom modifications) #44 Tue Jun 23
11:40:26 HKT 2015"
,→
,→
1472716
0x1678CC
CRC32 polynomial table, little endian
1520303
0x1732AF
Copyright string: "Copyright 1995-1998
Mark Adler "
,→
Figure 5.15: Output of binwalk issued on the decompressed kernel.
Linux system. Likewise in the same data block, the rootfs (the actual ﬁlesystem
that gets mounted with root privileges) is also appended.
The next block is a gzip compressed data where we get additional info that it
should have an original ﬁle name of "piggy". This actually reveals, when further
searching on the Internet, that "piggy" is the source name of vmlinux. On Linux
systems, the vmlinux is a statically linked executable ﬁle that contains the kernel in
one of the object ﬁles that is supported by Linux. The vmlinux ﬁle might be required
for kernel debugging, symbol table generation or other operations, but it must be
made bootable before being used as an operating system kernel by adding a multiboot
header, bootsector, and setup routines [38]. In fact, as pointed out previously, the
"rootfs" ﬁlesystem is also contained in this "gzip" compressed data together with the
kernel. This compressed data can be reissued with binwalk to further get detailed
information since binwalk has limitation of information providing when some data
block is compressed.
The next block is the ﬁlesystem which is a Squashfs ﬁlesystem and little endian
like the kernel architecture itself. We also get additional info about the ﬁlesystem
that it consists of 539 inodes, having a size of 2762845 bytes and a block size of
65536 bytes.
The next thing that is obvious to do is to look at what the gzip compresssed block
section contains. The Linux utility dd is a great tool to extract the block section
which can be performed as follows:
dd if=fw.bin bs=1 skip=60 of=kernel.gz
Note that the start of the section is given using the skip option with an oﬀset of 60
bytes. The size is not necessary because it doesn’t aﬀect our purpose of extracting
the gzip compressed block section.
The binwalk can then be reissued on the extracted block (after decompressing the
kernel.gz with Gunzip decompression algorithms into kernel). Figure 5.15 shows
the result of this binwalk output.
The binwalk reveals a lot of important details of the extracted block section. We
have a Linux kernel with version 2.4.20 compiled GNU GCC version 3.2.3 with
Broadcom modifications. This GCC compiler with the Broadcom variant might be
==PAGE:63==
5.3 Firmware Extraction and Analysis
49
typically developed for such embedded systems using a Broadcom CPU, wireless-, and
ethernet functionality.
The CRC32 is an indication of the Cyclic Redundacy Check for error correction of
raw data that could be compromised.
Now that we have obtained both the kernel and ﬁlesystem, we will ﬁrst have to
look at the ﬁlesystem SquashFS and then into other details such as the kernel and
bootloader. It is, also, worth analyzing special ﬁles such as passwords, binaries and
other similar ﬁles. This is, by the way, also very useful in Forensics analysis.
5.3.2
Filesystem Analysis
In order to analyze the ﬁlesystem, we start by extracting the SquashFS ﬁlesystem
from the ﬁrmware as follows:
dd if=fw.bin bs=1 skip=770812 of=fs.squashfs
In order to be able to mount the extracted SquashFS into proper Linux ﬁlesystem
context, we will be using another Linux utility named unsquashfs2. The following
command is applied for the retrival of the mounted ﬁlesystem:
./unsquashfs_all.sh fs.squashfs ./
The output of this ﬁlesystem can be outputted with the ls Linux command as such:
bin
dev
etc
lib
mnt
proc
root
sbin
tmp
tmp1
usr
var
www
SquashFS is a compressed (typically with LZMA - or GZIP compression algorithms)
read-only ﬁlesystem, which is licensed under GPL (GNU General Public License).
SquashFS is intented to be used in embedded systems since it is a read-only ﬁlesystem
and designed as block-device memory systems where low overhead is needed [39, 40].
Basically, the important part of the SquashFS ﬁlesystem for the sake of the attacker
would be to analyze the userland binaries, scripts and conﬁguration ﬁles contained
in the ﬁlesystem. This way, the attacker will be able to see what vulnerabilities
and important changes exist in which the associated kernel of the embedded device
is running in executive mode such as cron jobs, which are programs running on
background when device gets booted[23].
It is, after retrieving access to the ﬁlesystem or kernel, thus, important to have
knowledge about the analyzed system. For instance, Linux and Windows based
ﬁlesystems and kernels are totally diﬀerent. This Linksys-WRT54GL router is run-
ning on Linux, in which the attacker is required to have an understanding of how
its ﬁlesystem is structured, which commands should be used to obtain information
regarding conﬁguration ﬁles, secret privileges, and so on and so forth.
2A
tool
that
is
a
part
of
the
Firmware
Modiﬁcation
Toolkit
developed
by
Google.
https://code.google.com/archive/p/ﬁrmware-mod-kit/
==PAGE:64==
50
5 Demonstration
The bin directory contains standard built-in binaries which are not that important
for our motivation.
The dev directory contains information regarding devices and drivers.
The etc contains conﬁguration ﬁles regarding users, their roles and privileges,
network hosts and ip-addresses that are known to the system, the services that runs
when the kernel boots up, etc.
The lib directory contains shared libraries like the .dll ﬁles in Windows.
The proc contains a list of the running processes, both kernel and userland
processes.
Since we are looking at a raw ﬁlesystem, proc will have no content.
However, if we looked at this directory on a running kernel, this couldn’t be empty
even in an embedded system with almost none resources. At least, the init, which is
the base process, would have been running.
The root directory is reserved for the root user which is intended to have ﬁles and
programs privileged for the root user. However, in this ﬁlesystem there are none ﬁles
included within it.
The sbin directory generally contains system-administrative tools.
The var or tmp contains temporary ﬁles that can be related to run-time events for
speciﬁc programs, read-/write edits of ﬁles, etc. These directories can be important
to get an overview of what the system has been used for quite recently.
The usr directory, which might be the most important directory for analysis,
contains almost everything that are speciﬁc for the user. It contains user-speciﬁc
programs, conﬁgurations, scripts and much more .
There are also a directory such as www in this embedded device which contains the
web interface of the Linksys router [41, 42].
The obvious data analysis of the ﬁlesystem for privilege escalation is to search for
important strings, such as "password", "root", "access", and so on.
Root Access by Re-Writing the Filesystem
The extracted ﬁlesystem contains passwords for user logins. In Linux, this is typically
included in the /etc/passwd ﬁle. The output of this ﬁle is given as follows in the
extracted ﬁlesystem:
root:$6$dFRr301y$IY89LXupdfgF4gfdalpc6fc7sI8OjjfGIQoDh4UWTCYQeQfukO1xra
jRPsFoZvSQ654GL9EJBMaUwQxn3sRUerB0:16942:0:99999:7:::
alper:$sdf94Gh78HGNgh765ghfAlpwmc03f95fHd0aDbm0cAlpoQxnmAlmvowcVkaA03oc
asdsIs204jvSkadpamcrgffvdaso45waDf:16911:0:99999:7:::
The ﬁrst entry belongs to the root, while the other to alper, which is a user with less
privileges than the root.
There is basically two options to gain access to root login. The ﬁrst option is to
crack the encryption/hashing algorithm, and the other is to delete and modify this
/etc/passwd ﬁle. The ﬁrst option requires analysis to detect the used algorithm and to
==PAGE:65==
5.3 Firmware Extraction and Analysis
51
evaluate if it can be cracked. In fact, if the password is very typical, the corresponding
hash value may be contained in large databases. These databases can then be queried
for a match. There are online services such as hashkiller.co.uk which provides services
for these intentions.
The other option is actually by deleting the hash entry which then gives us access
surely. Such a deletion is illustrated as follows:
root::16942:0:99999:7:::
We have applied this modiﬁcation in a ﬁle in which the ﬁlesystem is extracted from
the ﬂash storage. There is, then, a need to re-write this ﬁlesystem in the place for
the old one on the ﬂash storage. The process is quite simply using JTAG connection,
since we know the size of the ﬁlesystem and the address space where to write on the
ﬂash. The following command shows how this re-writing is applied:
(gdb) monitor mwb 0x1c000000 dump_kernel_rootfs.bin
We use the "mwb" command to write the content of "dump_kernel_rootfs" onto the
ﬂash starting from address "0x1c000000". Once this is applied, we achieve access as
root without a password.
Vulnerability analysis of protocols
The most typical methods that attackers use in order to achieve privilege access to
large enterprises as well as minor companies is by doing vulnerability analysis of the
network protocols that are installed. With this motivation, we will show how such
vulnerability analysis can be adapted on an extracted ﬁlesystem. Attackers, that
perform network vulnerability analysis, do not have access to the binary program of
the protocol unless they detect the type and version of the protocol in which they
later can obtain a copy of the program. In many cases, unless the protocols have some
obfuscation methods, identifying this information is quite easy with popular network
scanner tools like "nmap"3. This tool is beyond to identify the type and version of the
protocols, used also to detect some other properties that are later used in exploitation
process. This style of vulnerability analysis and exploitation purpose is considered
as black-box, since the attackers do not have access to the raw source code of the
protocols nor the conﬁguration ﬁles residing on the ﬁlesystems [43, 44].
The binary programs for the network protocols that are installed on the router is
located in /usr/bin, which are, for instance, httpd, tftpd, openssl, and many more.
The attacker can now, after having identiﬁed the programs, ﬁnd out the type and
versions of them. This information can actually be very useful because there are several
websites4 oﬀering exploit codes that exploits the vulnerabilities of protocols that an
3nmap - Network Mapper. Website: nmap.org
4A lot of similar sites to www.exploit-db.com which contain several exploit codes targeted speciﬁc
application og speciﬁc architectures
==PAGE:66==
52
5 Demonstration
attacker can use if the programs are not patched and thus contains vulnerabilities.
We do analyze as an example the httpd in order to get more info about it such as
what kind of a server it is and which version it uses. The binary program httpd is a
Apache HTTP Server program[45] which is using the http protocol. The program is
installed on a Linksys ﬁrmware version 4.30.30. This information can be used in order
to search for vulnerabilities. It is out of the scope and focus of this project to look for
existing vulnerabilities, however, the readers should know that an attacker might look
for that in a real-case scenario if he is interested in exploiting network protocols such
as the httpd in this case.
We do, however, demonstrate how an attacker himself would assess with vulnera-
bility discovery himself instead of looking for what other hackers have done previously.
The approach for that is to understand how the binary program is built and how it
functions.
Issuing the file command at the httpd, we get the followings:
httpd: ELF 32-bit LSB executable, MIPS, MIPS-I version 1 (SYSV),
dynamically linked, interpreter /lib/ld-uClibc.so.0, stripped
,→
We get known that this httpd is an executable targeted on a MIPS architecture, linked
dynamically and stripped, which is an optimization that removes the symbol table
(function headers with addresses) from the binary both for performance but also for
securing against reverse engineers.
We do have several options from this point; such as issuing the strings command
to quickly get an overview of what strings are hard-coded in the executable ﬁle. An-
other option would be to reverse engineer the executable in which we will demonstrate
brieﬂy in the next.
In order to reverse engineer a binary program, the ﬁrst thing an attacker has
to do is to get a static information about the executable. We afterwards run the
mipsel-linux-gnu-readelf linux command with the -a option in order to ﬁnd
information about how the executable is built. The output of the command is shown
as follows:
ELF Header:
Magic:
7f 45 4c 46 01 01 01 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
Class:
ELF32
Data:
2’s complement, little endian
Version:
1 (current)
OS/ABI:
UNIX - System V
ABI Version:
0
Type:
EXEC (Executable file)
Machine:
MIPS R3000
Version:
0x1
==PAGE:67==
5.3 Firmware Extraction and Analysis
53
Entry point address:
0x406f10
Start of program headers:
52 (bytes into file)
Start of section headers:
621668 (bytes into file)
Flags:
0x5, noreorder, cpic, mips1
Size of this header:
52 (bytes)
Size of program headers:
32 (bytes)
Number of program headers:
6
Size of section headers:
40 (bytes)
Number of section headers:
24
Section header string table index: 23
This output contains how the httpd ELF ﬁle built, and also, the entry point address
of the .text section for the start of the reverse engineering process.
The Program headers, which are everything related to structures and objects re-
quired for the executable to run, are outputted as such:
Program Headers:
Type
Offset
VirtAddr
PhysAddr
FileSiz MemSiz
Flg Align
PHDR
0x000034 0x00400034 0x00400034 0x000c0 0x000c0 R E 0x4
INTERP
0x0000f4 0x004000f4 0x004000f4 0x00014 0x00014 R
0x1
[Requesting program interpreter: /lib/ld-uClibc.so.0]
REGINFO
0x000108 0x00400108 0x00400108 0x00018 0x00018 R
0x4
LOAD
0x000000 0x00400000 0x00400000 0x8c5f0 0x8c5f0 R E 0x1000
LOAD
0x08d000 0x10000000 0x10000000 0x067d0 0x0e360 RW
0x1000
DYNAMIC
0x000120 0x00400120 0x00400120 0x0607c 0x0607c RWE 0x4
The sections header, containing function symbols, are outputted as follows:
Symbol table ’.dynsym’ contains 668 entries:
Num:
Value
Size Type
Bind
Vis
Ndx Name
0: 00000000
0 NOTYPE
LOCAL
DEFAULT
UND
1: 10000000
0 NOTYPE
GLOBAL DEFAULT
11 _fdata
2: 1000dd50
0 SECTION GLOBAL DEFAULT
ABS _gp_disp
3: 00000001
0 SECTION GLOBAL DEFAULT
ABS _DYNAMIC_LINKING
4: 00400120
0 OBJECT
GLOBAL DEFAULT
ABS _DYNAMIC
5: 1000dd50
0 NOTYPE
GLOBAL DEFAULT
ABS _gp
6: 00406220
0 NOTYPE
GLOBAL DEFAULT
8 _ftext
7: 10005d40
0 OBJECT
GLOBAL DEFAULT
12 __RLD_MAP
8: 100067d0
0 NOTYPE
GLOBAL DEFAULT
ABS __bss_start
9: 0040ec18
0 FUNC
GLOBAL DEFAULT
8 main
10: 00446fa0
0 FUNC
GLOBAL DEFAULT
8 getservbyname
11: 100067d0
0 NOTYPE
GLOBAL DEFAULT
ABS _edata
12: 10005d60
0 OBJECT
GLOBAL DEFAULT
ABS _GLOBAL_OFFSET_TABLE_
13: 1000e360
0 NOTYPE
GLOBAL DEFAULT
ABS _end
14: 100067d0
0 NOTYPE
GLOBAL DEFAULT
ABS _fbss
15: 00410b98
0 FUNC
GLOBAL DEFAULT
8 legal_gw_netmask
==PAGE:68==
54
5 Demonstration
16: 0044ceec
0 FUNC
GLOBAL DEFAULT
8 system_reset
17: 0047b77c
0 FUNC
GLOBAL DEFAULT
8 get_port_option
18: 00406ef0
0 FUNC
GLOBAL DEFAULT
UND BIO_new_socket
19: 00406ee0
0 FUNC
GLOBAL DEFAULT
UND free
20: 0047b1b0
0 FUNC
GLOBAL DEFAULT
8 do_setup_wizard
21: 0041e890
0 FUNC
GLOBAL DEFAULT
8 do_upgrade_cgi
...
These symbols are deﬁnitely the most important part of the ELF header in order to get
a quick overview of the purpose of the ELF ﬁle is since it contains function/method
names, where the executable ﬁle is built of.
Now having a clue about the executable, the ELF ﬁle can be reverse engineered.
The tools are typically a disassembler and a debugger, in which the former is to get
the assembly language of the compiled executable, and the second, the debugger for
actually going through the program by single stepping, jumping to function calls,
reading diﬀerent sections such as the stack and the heap etc.
A great tool that is used for disassembling, which also supports MIPS 32-bit
architectures, is objdump or the MIPS variant mipsel-linux-gnu-objdump. As a
demonstration with the httpd executable, it would be used as follows:
mipsel-linux-gnu-objdump -b binary -m mips:isa32 -D -Mgpr-names=3
2,cp0-names=mips32,cp0-names=mips32,hwr-names=mips32,reg-names=mips32
httpd
,→
A sample output of this disassembly would be seen as follows:
httpd:
file format binary
Disassembly of section .data:
00000000 <.data>:
0:
464c457f
c1
0x4c457f
4:
00010101
0x10101
...
10:
00080002
srl
zero,t0,0x0
14:
00000001
movf
zero,zero,fcc0
18:
00406f10
0x406f10
1c:
00000034
teq
zero,zero
20:
00097c64
0x97c64
24:
00000005
0x5
28:
00200034
teq
at,zero
2c:
00280006
srlv
zero,t0,at
30:
00170018
mult
zero,s7
34:
00000006
srlv
zero,zero,zero
There are some instructions the attacker must pay special attention to, which are
instructions like syscall, which calls functions and helps the debugger to navigate
==PAGE:69==
5.3 Firmware Extraction and Analysis
55
...
001977f0: 0000 0000 0000 0000 3c36 3e4e 4554 343a
........<6>NET4:
00197800: 2055 6e69 7820 646f 6d61 696e 2073 6f63
Unix domain soc
00197810: 6b65 7473 2031 2e30 2f53 4d50 2066 6f72
kets 1.0/SMP for
00197820: 204c 696e 7578 204e 4554 342e 3000 0000
Linux NET4.0...
00197830: 726f 6f74 3d2f 6465 762f 6d74 6462 6c6f
root=/dev/mtdblo
00197840: 636b 3220 636f 6e73 6f6c 653d 7474 7953
ck2 console=ttyS
00197850: 302c 3131 3532 3030 0000 0000 0000 0000
0,115200........
...
Figure 5.16: The dump of kernel in ASCII hexadecimal characters showing the boot
parameters.
where in the process he is in the debugging phase.
The GNU Debugger, IDA Pro, and Radare2 are deﬁnitely very useful debugger
tools in which one of them at least have to be used for debugging the executable.
The above described procedure can be very useful in order to have a great under-
standing of the purpose and the functionality of the binary programs in order to detect
vulnerabilities and exploit them, which leads to privilege escalation and data retrieval.
We will not go into the actual debugging of the executable since it is out of the scope
of the project, however, we will debug the CPU execution of the Linksys-router itself
in Section 5.4.1 [24].
5.3.3
Analysis of the Kernel
The extracted kernel (achieved from Section 5.3.1) is analyzed to provide us informa-
tion that will be used for privilege escalation in section 5.4.1.
We use the Linux strings command and identify important strings that are
hardcoded in the kernel. One of the important strings that are outputted is the
boot-parameters that the boot-loader is using in order to mount the kernel in speciﬁc
format. Figure 5.16 shows how the boot-parameters are hardcoded in the kernel.
The kernel can be further analyzed, for instance, by looking speciﬁcally at which
functions exist in the symbol table, we can ﬁnd out the overall purpose of the kernel.
It reminds of the techniques we have provided for the httpd analysis in Section (5.3.2).
The kernel can ,moreover, once made bootable (requires setting up the necessary
boot-loading headers, boot-sectors etc.) be run, for instance, in a virtual environment
and can be analyzed as in a sandbox-style.
==PAGE:70==
56
5 Demonstration
5.4
Privilege Escalation
This section is containing the core of the demonstration since we will show how to
gain root privileges of Linksys router through JTAG debugging.
5.4.1
Bootloader Modiﬁcation
We will demonstrate that when having access to a JTAG interface and having the
ability to halt the CPU at boot-time an attacker can have a tremendous power re-
garding having access to the kernel with root priviliges. We will adapt Method 3 from
Chapter 4.
We have from section 5.3.3 seen the boot-parameters hardcoded in the kernel. In
order to have access as root, the boot-parameters in the kernel can actually be modiﬁed
before the kernel gets loaded onto the RAM. An easy way to gain this privilege, the
boot-parameter can be modiﬁed to include a "space" and a "1" character at the end of
the console=ttys0,115200 argument. This way the kernel gets booted in single-user
mode which is the same as having root privileges.
The path that is followed from Figure 4.3 is the transition "Static Information
Retrieval" from state "Bootloading Phase" because we use the static information, the
boot parameters that is statically obtained from the kernel analysis.
The diﬃcult part is to ﬁnd the address of memory where the boot-parameters are
stored. The way that we have achieved this has been to scan the entire virtual address
space where the kernel gets mounted. Figure 5.17 shows the boot-parameters are
stored at addresses beginning from 0x8020d80c in hexadecimal characters represented
in ASCII.
In order to modify the boot-parameters by appending the "space" 1 characters,
we issue the following command in gdb:
(gdb) set *(unsigned int*) 0x8020d864 = 0x00003120
The character 20 is the "space" character represented in hexadecimal format in ASCII
character-sets while the "31" decimal character is "1" in ASCII. The reason why the
characters are written in reversed order is due to the MIPS architecture being in
Little-Endian format.
The execution of the CPU is then resumed after the modiﬁcation of the boot-
parameters. The UART console spawns a root shell automatically indicating that
the kernel has been successfully loaded in single-user mode. The output of the id
command is thus as follows:
uid=0(root) gid=0(root)
This process is illustrated in the same Figure 4.3, where the transition from Kernel
Single-User-Mode goes to Actual Filesystem Mounted and then further to achiev-
==PAGE:71==
5.4 Privilege Escalation
57
...
0x8020d80c:
0x696e5520
0x6f642078
0x6e69616d
0x636f7320
,→
0x8020d81c:
0x7374656b
0x302e3120
0x504d532f
0x726f6620
,→
0x8020d82c:
0x6e694c20
0x4e207875
0x2e345445
0x000a2e30
,→
0x8020d83c:
0x746f6f72
0x65642f3d
0x746d2f76
0x6f6c6264
,→
0x8020d84c:
0x20326b63
0x736e6f63
0x3d656c6f
0x53797474
,→
0x8020d85c:
0x31312c30
0x30303235
0x00000000
0x00000000
,→
0x8020d86c:
0x00000000
0x00000000
0x00000000
0x00000000
,→
...
Figure 5.17: Output of memory addresses containing the boot-parameters.
ing the system control through UART which is modeled as the System-Control
state.
==PAGE:72==
58
5 Demonstration
5.5
Spying Virus Program
The root-privilege to the router has been gained as explained in section 5.4.1. An
attacker can thus do pretty much everything, however, it might be of more interest
for an attacker to have access to the router remotely. We will look at which services
is running on the router per default. We issue the netstat command to ﬁnd out the
network listeners and get following result:
Active Internet connections (only servers)
Proto Recv-Q Send-Q Local Address
Foreign Address
State
PID/Program name
,→
tcp
0
0 0.0.0.0:80
0.0.0.0:*
LISTEN
998/uhttpd
,→
tcp
0
0 0.0.0.0:53
0.0.0.0:*
LISTEN
1021/dnsmasq
,→
tcp
0
0 0.0.0.0:22
0.0.0.0:*
LISTEN
989/dropbear
,→
netstat: /proc/net/tcp6: No such file or directory
udp
0
0 0.0.0.0:53
0.0.0.0:*
1021/dnsmasq
,→
udp
0
0 0.0.0.0:67
0.0.0.0:*
1021/dnsmasq
,→
The TCP ports 80, 53 and 22 are open and listening on incomming request. The port
22 is typically used for SSH (Secure Shell), which will give the attacker an interface of
a shell which will be very eﬀective in regards to remote-controlling the router. The
port 22 is used by a process called dropbear, which is actually a light-weight open
source SSH service [46].
The public key of our machine generated with for instance RSA (Rivest-Shamir-Adleman
Assymetric Cryptosystem) is then stored into the trusted keys in the conﬁguration for
dropbear in the router and then we access the remote shell of the router easily and
remotely from anywhere in the world.
We now install and use Tcpdump into the router’s application space which is a
program that captures network packets coming in and out of a network interface that
we specify. Tcpdump is used for our purpose for spying all network interactions the
users connected to the router are performing. The Tcpdump is used as follows:
tcpdump -i eth0 -s 65535 -w service_tcpdump_out.pcap &
We specify the interface that has to be spied on to be eth0. The option -s 65535 is
snapshot length which is set because of the Wireshark program requiring a speciﬁc
format from Tcpdump to be able to interpret the output. Wireshark is one of the
most popular tools to analyze network packets. The output of the Tcpdump is saved
in a ﬁle called service_tcpdump_out.pcap and the command is run in background
with the & symbol.
==PAGE:73==
5.5 Spying Virus Program
59
Figure 5.18: Internet interaction of a user visiting "dtu.dk" webpage parsed in Wire-
shark.
The virus that we will demonstrate will ﬁrstly be run as a service, which means
that once the kernel is loaded into the RAM, the init program will load the services
together with ours. In order to do so, we save the command of Tcpdump in a ﬁle for
instance SPY and issue the command: service SPY enable && service SPY start.
The output of the SPY program can then be copied over SSH (using SCP - secure
copy) into our machine. In order to demonstrate the spying virus program, we connect
to the router from a device and request the http page "dtu.dk". The output is parsed
in Wireshark as follows given in Figure 5.18.
The Wireshark reveals basically everything captured from the Tcpdump what the
user has performed in the Internet. We will not go into the details of the packets that
have been captured because it is out of the scope of this demonstration, however, we
have successfully shown that once the CPU is halted and the Boundary-Scan interface
is set up for JTAG debugging, the attacker can do tremendous things.
==PAGE:74==
60
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
The reason why we have chosen to focus on retrieving conﬁdential data and gain
privilege acccess of embedded systems is simply because it is often what attackers
intentions and focuses are at. For instance, a lot of embedded systems do process
credit card transactions where some (generally old systems) store this information on
the ﬂash storages. This information can be retrieved once the user has established
a proper JTAG connection with it and applied the methods we have described in
Chapter 4.
6.1
JTAG Debugging
The motivation for showing attack vectors and methods through JTAG on embedded
systems is due to the fact that those systems often support JTAG interfaces where some
of them have very low security policies and, thus, are exposed to being compromised.
They also very often provide UART interfaces which are primarily together with
JTAG, intended for failure diagnostics.
Debugging and communicating through JTAG takes a lot of time. As mentioned
in Section 5.3.1, it has taken approximately 7 hours to dump 483 KB of data from the
ﬂash storage with 100 KHz of clock frequency supported from BusPirate. There are
other proprietary devices that provides faster clock frequencies which speed up the
communication but not with a subtle diﬀerence. The reason for JTAG communication
being generally slow relies in the design of the JTAG TAP itself because when execut-
ing one JTAG instruction, the input signal is transmitted through all boundary-scan
registers and also other TAPs in a daisy-chain; and this communication is transmitted
serially.
In many occasions, ﬁnding the JTAG interface on an embedded system can be quite
often, especially for debuggers that aren’t having experience of analyzing electronic
circuits, very diﬃcult. Luckily, there are some tools, such as JTAGulator1, that helps
identifying these interfaces.
There are a lot of hardware devices that provide JTAG communication, however,
the reason why we have chosen to work with the BusPirate by DangerousPrototypes.com
is because it ﬁrst of all is open source, in which there are a lot of developers working
simultaneously and providing continuously updated functionality for it. It supports
1Website: grandideastudio.com/jtagulator/
==PAGE:76==
62
6 Discussion
besides JTAG, a lot of other serial communications such as UART, SPI, I2C etc.
Another reason is because it is quite cheap compared to other proprietary devices.
There are also other tools that are very popular and is targeted speciﬁcally for
JTAG, such as XJTAG2, that supports a lot of diﬀerent architectures and embedded
devices where the communication is applied from the proprietary software developed
by XJTAG itself. The BusPirate in the other hand does however require a software
program, such as OpenOCD, in order to interact through JTAG with an embedded
device. XJTAG and similar proprietary devices are, however, very expensive.
There are also, beside the Boundary-Scan/JTAG protocol, other in-circuit serial
programming (ICSP) methods and protocols, however, JTAG is the most widely
implemented since it is standardized by the IEEE committee. A lot of embedded
systems do use their own implemented protocols which, by the way, is for securing
against JTAG debugging and compromises by attackers. Those systems are, therefore,
more secure; and in order to compromise them, the protocol communications have to
be analyzed and understood in which they, then, can be tried to used in the same way
as JTAG debugging.
6.2
Security Attempts for JTAG Debugging
As explained in Section 3.4, there are security strategies that can be applied to the
JTAG interface. The one method, which is embedding hardware fuses, is hard resetting
the system in which the contents of the ﬂash storage get erased. This implementation
does even restrict the actual designers of the system to perform JTAG debugging
themselves after the implementation of those fuses because the idea is to perform
testings through JTAG interfaces only at the pre-release phase before mass production.
Another method, which is in same Section explained, is the use of obfuscation
method which is also standardized by the IEEE committee. The Boundary-Scan/JTAG
is very slow normally, and the adaption of this obfuscation method, introducing more
states to the TAP state machine for authentication through input keys, makes the
process much slower.
Another issue is that hardware designers are generally not strong in obfuscation
and cryptography solutions for adapting this technique to the embedded systems.
The ﬁrms, in which keeping their systems proprietary, wont either adapt pre-installed
JTAG technologies with enhanced security since the community of attackers will
typically also be following these setups once this newly adapted technology is popular
and is considered to be used by many ﬁrms and companies.
These issues are reasons for why a lot of embedded systems do not get secured
their JTAG TAPs. [25, 47].
2Website: xjtag.com
==PAGE:77==
6.3 The Choice for Linksys Router
63
6.3
The Choice for Linksys Router
Embedded Systems come in various diﬀerent formats; and they are often very spe-
cialized devices which target some speciﬁc exercises. This is the reason why they
often have limited resources, both regarding the processing-unit but also regarding
the memory.
Linux is the most widely used open-source operating system and does provide
distributions for many diﬀerent purposes. There are very lightweight distributions
which almost do contain the compiled kernel itself without graphics, disk partition,
and many other diﬀerent manager software.
This is the reason why a lot of embedded system engineers choose Linux as the
operating system. This reason has also motivated us to look for an embedded device
— the Linksys-WRT54GL router — that has Linux installed as its operating system.
Besides that, this router has also pre-conﬁgured OpenOCD conﬁgurations which
has helped us to successfully communicate with the JTAG TAP and perform JTAG
debugging.
6.4
The Methods for Compromising Embedded
Systems
Regarding the methods for data retrieval and privilege escalation that we have modeled;
we have used ﬂow graphs to present the process of each method such that a security
analyst will understand the steps that an attacker will follow in a real-case scenario.
We have labeled states to indicate at which step the process is at, and likewise we
have given names of each transition between the states to easily understand the steps
that are taken.
We have shown the methods regarding what can be done with JTAG debugging
both at the very beginning when the JTAG communication is established but also at
the very last phase. We have provided Method 1 in order to indicate that the UART
connection can easily be used to gain root access unless there are other user modes
and password requirements of the kernel.
The Method 2 is used to indicate that in the very beginning, an attacker can
beneﬁt from statically analyzing the ﬁrmware that resides on the ﬂash storage, and
this can then be used to help when applying the other methods in order to gain
privilege access.
The Method 3 is illustrating that either the kernel program can be statically or
dynamically analyzed to gain privilege access at the bootloading phase.
The method 4 is indicating that an attacker can also use techniques at the kernel
loading phase where by static and/or dynamic analysis methods in order to retrieve
privilege access.
The methods are structured hierarchically in which the ﬁrst method is the quickest
and with the least experience required due to time and architecture, debugging and
programming understanding. It is, thus, a way to indicate that Method 1 can be used,
and if this doesn’t work, the method 2 can be applied, and so on and so forth. The
intention is to help the security tester to develop mitigation techniques in that order.
==PAGE:78==
64
6 Discussion
There are certainly other methods that can be applied, for instance, directly
compromising the target system by physically damaging it. This is, for instance,
regarding damaging hardware protections such as the WatchDog timer or directly
de-soldering the ﬂash storages. These techniques can be very eﬀective and also quicker,
however, in cases where the interest is to hide the compromise from the users of the
target system, these methods will not be appropriate.
Another issue is that a lot of ﬁrmware designers provide source code of the ﬁrmware
in which the attackers can use white-box analysis techniques to compromise the target
system. The source code can be used to built the binary itself where dynamic analysis
methods can be applied, such as, fuzzy-logic methods which provide vulnerability
analysis methods within each function and data structures of the code.
The Methods 1, 2, and 3 are applied on the Linksys router. The method 4 due to
time restrictions have not been completed. It requires analysis of the kernel program
in very detail in order to compromise and bypass privilege-access functions, and to do
so, a great amount of time is needed. We have however illustrated the method and
explained the theoretical idea of it.
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
In this project, we have got a better understanding of embedded systems regarding
the architectures, hardware controllers and input/output interfaces that are embedded
on those.
We have seen how ﬁrmware are designed and stored onto ﬂash storages and fur-
thermore how ﬁlesystems and kernels are operated within those.
We have got deeper understanding of how UART interfaces are used to interact
with the system through a shell prompt and we have seen how Boundary-Scan/JTAG
is intended to be used for and how we have taken advantage of this property for
debugging and modifying the execution of the kernel program.
We have furthermore developed methods for data retrieval and privilege escalation
which can be used within various systems. We have seen how these methods are
applied in practice where ﬁlesystem and kernel are extracted and used to modify the
boot process of the Linksys-WRT54GL router.
We have understood how an attacker, in a real case scenario, has opportunity for
attempting to attacking embedded systems through UART and JTAG interfaces.
We have ﬁnally presented standardized paper that designers of embedded systems
have to defend against this JTAG debugging.
==PAGE:80==
66
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
[1]
Seshia Lee. Introduction to Embedded Systems. A Cyber-Physical Systems Ap-
proach. LeeShia.org, 2011. isbn: 978-0-557-70857-4 (cited on pages 5–9).
[2]
Givargis Vahid. Embedded System Design - A uniﬁed Hardware/Software Intro-
duction. John Wiles & Sons, Inc., 2002 (cited on pages 6, 37).
[3]
"Jan Axelson". Serial Port Complete. Lakeview Research, 2007. isbn: 978-1-931-
44806-2 (cited on page 7).
[4]
Mark Casey. Frequently Asked Questions About USB Flash Drives. 2016. url:
https://www.lifewire.com/usb-flash-drives-2640401 (visited on Au-
gust 20, 2017) (cited on page 7).
[5]
D.Pham, A.Syed, A.Mohammad, M.Halgamuge. Threat analysis of portable hack
tools from USB storage devices and protection solutions. School of Computing and
Mathematics, Charles Sturt University, Study Centre Melbourne, Victoria 3000,
Australia and Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Department
of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, The University of Melbourne, Victoria
3010, Australia, June 2010 (cited on pages 7, 8).
[6]
J. E. McNamara" "C.G. Bell J.C. Mudge. Computer Engineering: A DEC View
of Hardware Systems Design. Digital Press, 2014 (cited on page 8).
[7]
Kenneth P. Parker. The Boundary-Scan Handbook. Springer, 2016. isbn: 978-3-
319-01173-8 (cited on pages 8, 14–18).
[8]
Michael" "Murphy Niall Barr. Watchdog Timers. Embedded Systems Program-
ming, 2013 (cited on page 9).
[9]
Æ. Frisch. Essential System Administration. O’Reilly Media, 2002 (cited on
pages 10, 12).
[10]
Greg Kroah-Hartman. Linux Kernel in a Nutshell. O’Reilly Media, 2009 (cited
on page 11).
[11]
The Linux System Administrator’s Guide. GNU Free Documentation License,
2004 (cited on pages 11, 12).
[12]
Microsoft Technet. Bootsect Command-Line Options. 2009. url: https://
technet.microsoft.com/en-us/library/cc749177(WS.10).aspx (visited on
August 15, 2017) (cited on page 12).
[13]
Microsoft Technet. Boot Conﬁguration Data Editor Frequently Asked Questions.
2009. url: https://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/library/cc721886(v=
ws.10).aspx (visited on August 16, 2017) (cited on page 12).
==PAGE:82==
68
Bibliography
[14]
Test Technology Standards Committee of the IEEE Computer Society. IEEE
Standard Test Access Port and Boundary-Scan Architecture. February 1990
(cited on pages 13–18).
[15]
corelis.com. url: http://www.corelis.com/education/What-Is-JTAG.htm
(visited on June 1, 2017) (cited on page 13).
[16]
Silicon Labs. Programming Flash through the JTAG Interface. Silicon Labs Inc.,
2003 (cited on page 14).
[17]
B.Bennetts. IEEE 1149.1 JTAG and Boundary Scan Tutorial. Scanworks, 2012
(cited on pages 15, 16).
[18]
Mips Technologies. EJTAG Speciﬁcation. 2005 (cited on pages 18–20).
[19]
R.Johnson, S.Christie. JTAG 101 - IEEE 1149.x and Software Debug. Intel,
2009 (cited on page 18).
[20]
ARM. ARM Debug Interface Architecture Speciﬁcation. ARM Lmtd., 2013 (cited
on page 18).
[21]
Dominic Rath. OpenOCD Mips Targets. url: http://openocd.org/doc-
release / doxygen / targetmips . html (visited on July 9, 2017) (cited on
page 20).
[22]
Jeong Wook. Reverse Engineering Flash Memory for Fun and Beneﬁt. 2014. url:
https://recon.cx/2014/slides/Reverse%5C%20Engineering%5C%20Flash%
5C%20Memory%5C%20for%5C%20Fun%5C%20And%5C%20Benefit.pdf (visited on
June 1, 2017) (cited on pages 21, 22).
[23]
/dev/ttyS0. Embedded Device Hacking. url: http://www.devttys0.com/
(visited on June 11, 2017) (cited on pages 21, 22, 49).
[24]
J. Ericsson. The Art of Exploitation. No Starch Press, 2008 (cited on pages 22,
55).
[25]
S.Bhunia S.Ghosh A.Basak. How Secure Are Printed Circuit Boards Against
Trojan Attacks? University of South Florida, Case Western Reserve University.
url: ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6878437/ (visited on August 20, 2017)
(cited on pages 23, 24, 62).
[26]
Transparent C. Memory Ic. (Visited on August 15, 2017) (cited on page 33).
[27]
Joe Grand. Tools of the Hardware Hacking Trade. Grand Idea Studio, Inc. url:
http://www.grandideastudio.com/wp-content/uploads/tools_of_the_
hardware_hacking_trade_slides.pdf (visited on August 20, 2017) (cited on
page 33).
[28]
Winbond. W9412G6KH. url: https://www.winbond.com/resource-files/
w9412g6kh_a03.pdf (visited on August 9, 2017) (cited on page 35).
[29]
Macronix. MX29LV320E T/B. Macronix Internation Co., LTD. url: http://
www.macronix.com/Lists/Datasheet/Attachments/4946/MX29LV320E%20T-
B,%203V,%2032Mb,%20v1.3.pdf (visited on August 9, 2017) (cited on page 35).
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
69
[30]
Broadcom. BCM5352EL. url: https : / / www . broadcom . com / products /
wireless/wireless-lan-infrastructure/bcm5352e (visited on August 9,
2017) (cited on page 35).
[31]
ByteEnable. The Consolidated Hacking Guide For The Linksys WRT54GL. Jan-
uary 2006. url: https://www.cse.buffalo.edu/~bina/cse321/fall2014/
xinu/wrt54gl.pdf (visited on July 9, 2017) (cited on page 37).
[32]
Dangerous Prototypes. Bus Pirate I/O Pin Descriptions. url: http://dangerousprototypes.
com/docs/Bus_Pirate_I/O_Pin_Descriptions (visited on July 9, 2017) (cited
on page 38).
[33]
Dominic Rath. Open On-Chip-Debugger. url: http://openocd.org/ (visited
on July 9, 2017) (cited on pages 38, 41).
[34]
Dominic Rath. OpenOCD TAP-Declaration. url: http://openocd.org/doc/
html/TAP-Declaration.html (visited on July 9, 2017) (cited on page 41).
[35]
Kroah-Hartman Corbet Rubini. Linux Device Drivers. O’Reilly Media, 2005.
isbn: 0-596-00590-3 (cited on page 42).
[36]
Tool Interface Standard (TIS). Executable and Linking Format (ELF) Speciﬁca-
tion. May 1995. url: http://refspecs.linuxbase.org/elf/elf.pdf (visited
on August 8, 2017) (cited on page 43).
[37]
Lichtenberg. Common Firmware Environment (CFE) Functional Speciﬁcation.
Broadcom Corporation, 2004. url: http://melbourne.wireless.org.au/
files/wrt54/cfe.pdf (visited on August 10, 2017) (cited on page 44).
[38]
linfo.org. Vmlinuz Deﬁnition. Bellevue Linux Users Group. url: http://www.
linfo.org/vmlinuz.html (visited on June 9, 2017) (cited on page 48).
[39]
Sourceforge.net. SquashFS. url: http://squashfs.sourceforge.net/ (visited
on June 11, 2017) (cited on page 49).
[40]
Marco Cecchetti Artemiy I. Pavlov. SquashFS HOWTO. Sourceforge.net. url:
http://www.tldp.org/HOWTO/html_single/SquashFS-HOWTO/ (visited on
June 11, 2017) (cited on page 49).
[41]
William Shotts. The Linux Command Line. No Starch Press, 2012. isbn: 978-1-
59327-389-7 (cited on page 50).
[42]
Linode.com. Linux Users and Groups. url: http://www.tldp.org/LDP/intro-
linux/html/sect_03_01.html (visited on June 13, 2017) (cited on page 50).
[43]
Sergey Bratus. Hacker Curriculum. url: https://www.computer.org/csdl/
mags/ds/2007/10/mds2007100002.html (visited on August 1, 2017) (cited on
page 51).
[44]
David M. Hafele. The Diﬀerent Shades of Ethical Hacking. url: https://www.
sans.org/reading-room/whitepapers/hackers/shades-ethical-hacking-
black-white-gray-1390 (visited on August 1, 2017) (cited on page 51).
[45]
Apache. HTTP Server Project. url: https://httpd.apache.org/ (visited on
August 1, 2017) (cited on page 52).
==PAGE:84==
70
Bibliography
[46]
Matt Johnston. Dropbear SSH. url: https://matt.ucc.asn.au/dropbear/
dropbear.html (visited on August 1, 2017) (cited on page 58).
[47]
R.Karri K.Rosenfeld. Attacks and Defenses for JTAG? url: http://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/document/5342392/ (visited on August 20, 2017) (cited on page 62).
[48]
Microsemi. NAND Flash Interface Design Example. url: https://www.microsemi.
com/document-portal/doc_view/129988-ac328-nand-flash-interface-
design-example-app-note (visited on June 7, 2017).
[49]
F. Novak A. Biasizzo. JTAG Security Extension Using Locking Mechanism. Jozef
Stefan Institute. url: http://trudevice.com/Workshop/program/22%20A.
%20Biasizzo%20-2-%20TRUDEVICE_2013.pdf (visited on August 15, 2017).
[50]
OpenWRT. The Boot Process. url: https : / / wiki . openwrt . org / doc /
techref/process.boot (visited on August 8, 2017).
