==PAGE:1==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Master thesis project
Instructors: Ekkart Kindler and Hubert Baumeister
Value based testing
Investigating Test Strategies for Web Applications
Atli Hreinsson
s152370
2017
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1. Introduction
6
2. Background and related work
9
2.1. Software Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2. Six types of testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3. Value of testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4. Value based management of testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3. The case software
16
3.1. CORE portal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2. Technical information about CORE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4. Research approach
23
4.1. Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2. Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3. Risk-based testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4. Requirement-based testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.5. Current methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.6. Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.7. Threat to validity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5. Risk-based testing
27
5.1. Available data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2. Data collection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3. Analyzing the data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.3.1.
Number of faults . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.3.2.
Number of faults by components
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3.3.
Layers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3.4.
Eﬀort to ﬁx the faults
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3.5.
Severity of faults
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.4. Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4.1.
Number of faults . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4.2.
Number of faults in each component
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.4.3.
Eﬀort to ﬁx the faults
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.4.4.
Severity of faults
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.4.5.
Layers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.5. conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
2
==PAGE:3==
6. Requirement-based testing
41
6.1. Value based on number of users . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.1.1.
Results from analyzing user log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.2. Value based on stakeholders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.2.1.
Result from questionnaire
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.3. Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7. Current testing methods
48
7.1. Observation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.2. Available documentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.3. Informal interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.4. Current testing of CORE portal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.4.1.
How the system is tested . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.4.2.
What is not tested
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.5. Test Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.5.1.
Unit tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.5.2.
Integration tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7.5.3.
User acceptance tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7.6. fault management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7.7. Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
8. Strategy
53
8.1. Test Policy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
8.1.1.
Jasmine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
8.1.2.
Protractor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
8.1.3.
Test suit example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
8.2. Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
9. Conclusion
63
A. Questionnaire
66
3
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
In software projects with monolithic architecture, dependencies between diﬀerent
components of the software can become complex, especially when the software has
been developed by many developers over an extended period. When developers
do not fully understand all dependencies, there is a risk that when they change
the code, defects appear in places though unrelated by the developer. The defects
become a problem if they cause a failure that prevents users from using the software
as intended.
There are in general two solutions for this problem; Change the
architecture of the software to have a collection of loosely coupled components
making dependencies between components more transparent or test the software
in such way that these defects can be found and ﬁxed before encountered by the
end user. Both solutions are costly as they require development resources. The
study described in this report is focused on how the risk of failures caused by this
kind of defects can be lowered cost-eﬀectively with a value-based management of
testing.
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my beautiful ﬁancée Bjarney and son Ivar, without whose
encouragement this undertaken would not have been possible.
I would also like to thank professors Ekkart Kindler and Hubert Baumeister for
their help and guidance during this study
==PAGE:6==
1. Introduction
Over the last decade’s software has become more and more vital in the banking
industry.
Therefore, reducing the cost of software development and improving
software quality is becoming an important objective when running a bank. In
Nordea, Scandinavia’s biggest bank, a software named CORE has been developed
internally to document and handle operational risk. In 2015, there was a severe
failure in one of the software’s most important component which is used to report
incidents that happen within the bank. The failure prevented employees from being
able to submit and save incidents that they had documented using the software,
resulting in loss of critical documentation. With over 3000 incidents reported in the
software annually, it can be estimated that dozens of incident could not be reported
in the two days it took to ﬁx the failure. The failure happened right after the
software had been updated with a new release, but since no recent improvements
had been made in the component that failed, it was unexpected. When failures like
these are detected, the underlying cause has to be investigated, ﬁxed and ﬁnally a
new software release is made. These kinds of failures have high direct cost because
they require the development team to postpone all development of new features
to concentrate on ﬁxing the underlying cause of failure. The intangible cost is in
the form of a risk that employees which perceive the software to be unreliable and
stop using it.
CORE was developed to support people working with operational risk in Nordea.
Before the software was created, documentation about how operational risk should
be assessed and handled was managed using Microsoft Excel. Using Excel had
resulted in a bad documentation of operational risks and risks being assessed dif-
ferently by diﬀerent persons. The vision was to create software that would ensure
that the same procedures would always be used to identify and evaluate operational
risks in Nordea. Further by using the software all data gathered on operational risk
in Nordea would be stored in one common repository. With all data in one place,
a comprehensive reporting on operational risk in Nordea could be used to increase
risk awareness in the bank which would ultimately decrease loss due to operational
risk. Once the software had been developed the main issue was to get the people
that work with operational risk to start using the software. Even though manage-
ment had seen the direct beneﬁt from the reporting capabilities, employees who
were directly involved with the processes were skeptic about using the software.
For this reason, the quality of the software is paramount. With high quality, it
should be an easier task to get more people to start using the software. It has
6
==PAGE:7==
been determined by the management of the software that the attribute of quality
users are most concerned about is reliability. If people perceive the software to
be unreliable, they are more reluctant to start using it. There are many available
methods to increase reliability, but it has to be done with minimum resources.
The issue is that available resources are depended on how important the software
is considered to the upper management of the bank, and the importance of the
software is closely linked to how many are using the software. In other words,
to get more people to use the software, higher quality is needed, and to increase
quality, more users, are required. This leaves the management of the software
with one option, that is, to try to improve the quality using existing resources.
The ﬁrst step in approaching solution is to answer the question: Why are failures
appearing in random places? To answer this question, previous failures, current
methods to prevent failures and the architecture of the software is investigated.
Once understanding of the failures has been established the next question is: How
can it be ensured that the software works as it should after releases?
One way to ensure that the CORE software works as it should after releases would
be testing all features of the software end to end in a real-world situation before it is
released regardless of where the most recent changes have been made. But testing
all features before every release would be costly as the development methodology
used promotes frequent releases. Further, the CORE software has many compo-
nents which each has a number of features. With frequent releases and a high
number of features in the software, testing would require an unreasonably high
amount of eﬀort in the long run. The third question outlined in this introduction
is: Can management of testing be done in such way that it minimizes the risk of
severe failure in a cost-eﬀective way?
The proposed solution is to prioritize which order testing of features is developed
based on their value. An example would be if one component of the software is
used by the highest number of users, features in that component would have a high
priority of being tested. By prioritizing tests for the most valuable features to be
developed ﬁrst, the risk of high-cost failures can be lowered to a more acceptable
rate in less time.
Further, areas, where the risk of failure is high, should be
considered when managing how the features should be tested.
To be able to
proceed with this solution, risk areas have to be identiﬁed and value of features
assessed. The objective of this study is to provide a strategy that ensures that
failures like described above, are avoided in a cost-eﬀective way.
7
==PAGE:8==
The report is structured in the following way:
– Chapter 2: Testing methods are discussed along with how value-based
management of testing can be used to minimize testing cost
– Chapter 3: A brief overview is given on what the CORE software is used
for and what technologies were used to develop it.
– Chapter 4: Describes the methodology used to decide what information
should be gathered, how it is done and what it is used for
– Chapter 5: Previously reported faults are examined to ﬁnd areas in the
code of the software that have high risk of failure
– Chapter 6: Value of individual components is assessed to ﬁnd a starting
point for prioritizing which order testing of features should be devel-
oped.
– Chapter 7: Current testing methods of the software are explored to ﬁnd
where improvements can be made.
– Chapter 8: A solution which could protect CORE from severe failures
in a cost-eﬀective way is proposed
The last chapter provides a conclusion of the ﬁndings were the three questions in
this introduction are answered.
8
==PAGE:9==
2. Background and related work
The purpose of this chapter is to review what software reliability is, how testing
is used to increase it and ﬁnally how value-based management of testing can be
used to do testing in a cost-eﬀective way. In the introduction, it is implied that if
CORE had higher quality, it would be easier to get more people to start using it.
But how does software quality relate to software failures? In the quality standard
ISO 9124, characteristics of software quality are listed as below[1]:
– Functionality
– Reliability
– Usability
– Eﬃciency
– Maintainability
– Portability
The characteristic of software quality that is concerned with failures is reliability.
As mentioned in the introduction, the people managing the software development
has stressed that the software should have high reliability. Institute of Electri-
cal and Electronics Engineers(IEEE) deﬁnes software reliability as follows: “The
ability of a system or component to perform its required functions under stated
conditions for a speciﬁed period of time” [2]. Reliability can be measured by how
often there is a failure in the software and how severe the failures are. A software
which has frequent failures is considered unreliable. A higher reliability can then
be achieved by preventing failures from happening. To understand why failures
occur in software, the diﬀerence between failures and faults has to be clariﬁed.
In the IEEE Standard Computer Dictionary, failures and faults are deﬁned as
follows:
– Failure: The inability of a system or component to perform its required
functions within speciﬁed performance requirements.
– Fault: An incorrect step, process, or data deﬁnition in a computer
program. Note: This deﬁnition is used primarily by the fault tolerance
discipline. In common usage, the terms “error” and “bug” are used to
express this meaning.
9
==PAGE:10==
Generally, a fault is caused by mistake made while writing the software code.
When a code that contains faults is executed, the faults may become visible, and
a failure is observed[3]. With this said, it can be derived that even though there
are faults in the application, it does not necessarily mean that the application will
have a failure. In this project, the focus is on minimizing the frequency of failures
in CORE. But to avoid failures from happening, faults have to be either ﬁxed
before they cause failures or prevented from being created in the ﬁrst place. There
are two main activates used in the software development process to minimize the
number faults. These activities are fault prevention and fault detection[4]. The
objective of fault prevention is to identify the cause of faults and prevent them
from recurring. Measures taken to prevent recurring fault can provide cost savings
compared to the cost of ﬁxing the fault later in the development process. But most
fault prevention methods consume time which means less time is spent developing
new features. Given that not all faults will result in a failure, fault prevention
has to be managed to keep time, cost and quality in balance [4]. The other main
activity to minimize the number of faults is fault detection, which implies ﬁnding
and ﬁxing the fault before it results in a failure observed by an end user. This
method is commonly referred to as software testing. According to IEEE, software
testing is deﬁned as “an activity in which a system or component is executed under
speciﬁc condition, the results are observed or recorded, and an evaluation is made
of some aspect of the system or component”[2]. In the following sections, software
testing is examined in more detail
2.1. Software Testing
Software testing is done to ensure that the software under test is in line with the
requirement of the client. Software testing is carried out in a systematic manner
with the intent of ﬁnding faults or variations from the requirements [5]. Testing
processes can be divided broadly into two processes; veriﬁcation and validation.
In IEEE standard glossary for software engineering the processes are deﬁned as
follows [6]:
Veriﬁcation: The process of determining whether or not the products of a given
phase of the software development cycle fulﬁll the requirements established during
the previous phase
Validation: The process of evaluating software at the end of the software devel-
opment process to ensure compliance with software requirements.
10
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.1 shows where these diﬀerent processes are used in a simpliﬁed version of
the software development process.
Fig. 2.1: Software testing cycles
With veriﬁcation, developers can detect inconsistencies with the speciﬁcation in
early stage of the development. If inconsistencies are discovered early, the devel-
opers can avoid writing code that is unusable because of a mistake made early in
the development process. Validation is typically done before a new version of the
software is released, and all newly developed features have been veriﬁed indepen-
dently. Validation should ensure that all features of the software work as requested
by the customer. There are various strategies used when selecting what to test
and how testing should be performed. These strategies are, e.g., depended on how
much resources are available and what quality is required of the software. In agile
development, software testing is done through the whole development phase. Tests
are done both with automatic testing scripts and manually by testers.
Software testing can be divided into two classes from the view of the one designing
the tests. That is black box and white box testing [7]. In IEEE standard glossary
for software engineering the two classes are deﬁned as follows[6]:
Black box testing(also known as functional testing): Testing that ignores the
internal mechanism of a system or component and focuses solely on the outputs
generated in response to selected inputs and execution conditions.
White box testing (also known as structural testing): Testing that takes into
account the internal mechanism of a system or component. Types include branch
testing, path testing, statement testing.
In black box testing, the tester does not have access to the source code of the
software. Tests are done by putting input into the software and examining the
output. The tests are based on requirements of the software, that is, the tester
knows what output the software should give when certain input is used. White
11
==PAGE:12==
box testing is done with access to the source code. White box testing is commonly
done by the developers of the software which know how the code looks like. In the
context of veriﬁcation and validation discussed above, black box testing is usually
used for validation and what white box testing in veriﬁcation [8].
2.2. Six types of testing
There are typically several types of testing used in software development projects.
Each of these testing types has a speciﬁc purpose. There are two main things to
have in mind when examining these types of testing, that is how much access does
the tester has to the code(black box or white box testing) and how many lines of
code are examined with individual tests. To provide context for chapters later in
this report, the following six types of testing chosen to be covered:
Unit Testing is categorized as white box testing as it requires access to the
source code. It is used when testing single units of the system in isolation from
other units [5]. A unit can be for example a function, class, procedure or a method
[9]. The developer commonly creates unit tests during the development process.
Unit tests are done to verify if the code works as intended at a low structural level
and therefore usually examines only a few lines of code in individual tests.
Integration testing falls under both white and black box testing as it requires
access to the source code but still, tests can be made without access to the whole
source code. Integration testing is when software components, hardware compo-
nents, or both are combined and tested with the goal of detecting faults in the
interactions between individual units[6]. The tester which usually is the software
developer tests if units work together when integrated into larger groups. Individ-
ual integration tests usually cover more lines of code than unit tests.
System testing falls under black box testing. System testing is used to test the
complete system end to end to evaluate if the system is compliant with the speciﬁed
requirements of the system[2]. The testers, which usually are stakeholders of the
software, test the system on a high level which means that individual tests usually
cover large bits of code. System testing includes several non-functional aspects
like stress tests, performance testing, and usability testing. System tests are most
eﬀective when done from an independent perspective, that is, not the developer
[3].
12
==PAGE:13==
Acceptance testing falls under black box testing. Acceptance testing is a formal
testing done to enable a user, customer, or other authorized entity to determine
whether a system or component should be accepted [6]. Like in system testing,
tests are done by the stakeholders and users of the software on a high level. There-
fore individual tests usually cover large bits of code.
End to End testing fall under black box testing. End to end testing is done to
ﬁnd out if features of the software work as indented when an end user is interacting
with the software. The entire software is tested in a real-world scenario, where
databases, deepened applications and network is connected. It is usually carried
out after system testing and before acceptance testing. End-to-end testing can be
used to ensure that that integrated components of the software function together
as expected[10]. Individual end to end tests usually cover large bits of code.
Regression testing falls both under white and black box testing. Regression
testing is done to verify that changes have not caused any unexpected faults and
if the system still complies with its requirements after changes[6].
Regression
testing can be done by using previously introduced testing types, that is, e.g.,
running unit tests before and after changes have made to the code too check
for regression.
Regression tests are typically run several times throughout the
development process[3].
2.3. Value of testing
As diﬀerent testing types are used in various stages in the development process, it is
appropriate to look into the cost of faults depending on where in the development
process it was found.
In the book Principles of quality cost, Jim Campenella
breaks down the cost of reliability ensuring software quality into the following:
formula[11]:
Cquality = Cconformance + Cnonconfomance
The conformance costs are resources spent on prevention and detection of faults.
Conformance costs include time spent on developing tests, executing tests, code
reviews and other methods that ensure the quality of the code.
The non-conformance cost is divided into internal and external failures. Internal
failure cost includes all expense that follows when a test fails to run. This cost is
lowest when the developer discovers the fault during the unit or integration testing.
Then the cost is in the form of time spent by the developer ﬁxing the problem.
13
==PAGE:14==
When either unit or integration testing does not discover the fault, the process gets
longer. At this stage, the code containing the undiscovered fault is usually merged
with the development source code of the software. The development source code is
then used to build the software in a testing environment. System and acceptance
testing are typically done in the testing environment. Now the developer that
has made a mistake when writing the code is not necessarily the one discovering
the fault. When a fault is found, it is reported, and a developer is assigned to
ﬁnd and ﬁx it. When the fault has been ﬁxed, the code that was ﬁxed is merged
again to the development source code. Finally, the one who reported the fault
has to verify if the fault has been ﬁxed. External failure costs occur when the
customer discovers the fault or failure in the production environment. External
failure usually has the highest cost as it requires all the same steps as when a
fault is found in the testing environment but with additional expenses. These
additional costs include technical support, more expensive releasing process, and
reputation’s loss. From this, it can be concluded that early detection of faults
is much less costly. However, not all faults can be found in the early stages, in
particular, those that are depended on the surrounding context [12].
2.4. Value based management of testing
The reason for considering value-based management of testing is explained as fol-
lows in the book Value based software engineering (Ramler, Biﬄ, and Grünbacher,
2006, p225):
Testing is one of the most resource-intensive activities in software
development and consumes between 30% and 50% of the total devel-
opment cost according to many studies. Testing is however often not
organized to maximize business value and not aligned with a project’s
mission. Path, branch, instruction, mutation, scenario, or requirement
testing usually treat all aspects of the software testing as equally im-
portant, while in practice 80% of the value often comes from 20% of
the software.
In other words, the same eﬀort is used to test all features of the software regardless
of which features have the highest value. Value-based test management proposes
to organize the testing eﬀort in such way that high-value features have more impor-
tance and the focus is on the most worthwhile testing targets. This can be done by
recognizing where the stakeholders deem the value to be, what quality aspects are
14
==PAGE:15==
most important and what features have the most risk. Developers and the project
manager of the software have to consider how the testing activities can contribute
to the software’s value by supplying system functionality and performance. The
quality aspects can diﬀer substantially between software, e.g., software supporting
medical devices is required to have very high reliability while software supporting
consumer electronics has to be developed in a fast way, and testing is only done to
ensure requirements are met. Time and resources allocated for testing should be
depended on what kind of quality aspects the software has and what the desired
level of quality is. The main practices used to support value based testing are
following[12]:
– Requirement-based testing: The requirements specify what solution the
stakeholder is looking for.
Therefore it is important to organize the
testing in such way that it tests if these demands are met. An important
aspect of Requirement-based testing is prioritization of what should be
tested, that is, features are not equally important, and testing eﬀort
should be prioritized to develop tests for the most important features
ﬁrst.
– Risk-based testing: Areas of risks have to be identiﬁed to organize where
resources should be allocated for testing. If certain features have a higher
probability of failure, they need to be tested more thoroughly. An ex-
ample of a feature with higher probability would be if it were developed
by an inexperienced person or with a new programming language.
– Iterative and concurrent testing: Testing eﬀorts should be able to adapt
to changing requirements or risk areas.
– Stakeholders involvement in testing: Developers and testers should work
together. The absence of direct interaction can lead to misunderstand-
ings, information loss, and conﬂicts.
Decisions made when planning how to test are often designed from a purely tech-
nical viewpoint. The result can be that testing does not provide the information
which is valued most. The main practices of value-based testing will be used as a
reference in this study.
15
==PAGE:16==
3. The case software
CORE software was developed by Nordea to support people working with opera-
tional risk. Nordea is one of the biggest banks in northern Europe and has over
30 thousand employees[13]. Nordea has recognized the importance of managing
operational risks as the operational risks in banks has been increasing with rapid
technological innovation and globalization [14]. Basel Committee Banking Super-
vision deﬁnes Operational risk as following[15]:
“the risk of direct or indirect loss resulting from inadequate or failed
internal processes, people, and systems or from external events”
As part of the plan to counter the increase in operational risks, it was decided to
develop an internal software solution. This solution is the CORE system. The
following section will give an introduction to what kind of components the system
has, how incidents are reported and lastly what technologies are used to develop
the software.
3.1. CORE portal
CORE is the abbreviation of Combined Operational Risk Environment. CORE is
a web-based software solution with a collection of components that have been de-
veloped to support procedures performed to both assess risks and mitigate them.
The software is only used by internal stakeholders at Nordea. Users have diﬀer-
ent roles depending on their involvement in operational risk assessments and risk
mitigation. These roles are divided into administrators, operational risk handling
persons and regular user. Operational risk handling persons are users working with
operational risk on a daily basis. They are responsible for supporting regular users
as they are experts in the procedures which CORE is used to for. Operational risk
handling persons use the application through the workﬂow of various procedures.
The ﬁrst component of CORE portal was implemented in 2007 to support product
approval processes in Nordea’s Markets division, and then quickly after, a compo-
nent which is used to report incidents within the bank was implemented. Today,
CORE consists of 12 components. Figure 3.1 shows the front page of the software
which has a tab for each of the components
16
==PAGE:17==
Fig. 3.1: Screenshot of CORE’s home page
It does not contribute to this report to discuss individual components in any detail.
It was chosen to describe the ﬁve most valuable components to provide the reader
of this report some picture of what the CORE software is used for. A list of the
most valuable components is obtained in chapter 6. Below is a short description
of what ﬁve most valuable components of CORE are used for:
Quality & Risk Analysis (QRA): QRA is a process used in Nordea to identify
and assess risks that can occur when there is a change implemented in the bank.
The aim is to ensure disciplined change management by formalizing the process
in CORE. The component is used during all stages of the QRA process which
typically ends with delivering actions that have been agreed on into the follow-up
component. Figure 3.2 shows an overview page in the QRA component.
Fig. 3.2: Screen shot of QRA overview page in CORE
17
==PAGE:18==
Control Monitoring Environment (CME): At Nordea, controls are used to
be proactive and identify risks before they mature. An example of control is when
an employee is assigned to check if certain trades were done correctly at the end of
each day. The component oﬀers a framework for these controls. Users can create
controls, sign oﬀthat the control has been done periodically and register ﬁndings
when the results of the check are unsound. Figure 3.3 shows the CME start page.
Fig. 3.3: Screen shot of CME start page in CORE
Business Continuity Management (BCM): The BCM component is used to
store and manage Nordea’s business continuity plans. Business continuity plans
are used to have an eﬀective response to threats such as natural disasters or data
breaches. Figure 3.4 shows what the user is presented with when accessing the
BCM component.
18
==PAGE:19==
Fig. 3.4: Screen shot of BCM start page in CORE
Risk Self Assessment (RSA): The RSA component is used to store and organize
data that has been gathered in risk self-assessments performed in most of Nordea’s
units. Risk self-assessment is the process of identifying, recording and assessing
potential risks. The component provides the ability to analyze data from these
assessments, that was previously stored in many excel ﬁles.
Fig. 3.5: Screen shot of product start page in CORE
19
==PAGE:20==
Incidents: Whenever an incident happens in Nordea, it should be reported in the
Incidents component of CORE. The primary goal of the incident component is to
ensure data quality, ﬁnding actions to prevent incidents to reoccur and to provide a
learning loop. An incident reporting is typically done by the aﬀected stakeholders
who populate required ﬁelds when reporting an incident in the system.
Once
the aﬀected stakeholder has submitted the incident, an operational risk handling
person is assigned to it. The risk processing person investigates the incident to
ﬁnd out what has happened and who are aﬀected by it. Once the risk handling
person has ﬁnished the investigation, he adds all relevant units and individuals as
stakeholders to the incident. The risk processing person then uses the application
to send emails out to the stakeholders requesting that they should review the
content and make comments if necessary. Figure 3.6 shows Incident start page.
Fig. 3.6: Screen shot of Incident start page in CORE
3.2. Technical information about CORE
CORE is a Java-based web application with a monolithic architecture. In mono-
lithic architecture, all functionally and components are interwoven. That means
that from the programmers perspective CORE is one application while the users
could perceive it as a portal to many applications. The advantage of monolithic ar-
chitecture is that the communications between components are simpler, e.g., when
an incident from the Incident component is linked to a business continuity plan
from the BCM component. The drawback is that developers need to understand
how all the pieces of the system ﬁt together which gets complicated with large
applications like CORE. With frequent changes in the development team, this un-
derstanding can be lacking. The fact that CORE has a monolithic architecture
could very well be the underlying reason for why failures appear in unexpected
places after releases. Without a full understanding of dependencies, development
of one component could cause faults in other depended components. Changing
the architecture in ways such as all components would be independent of each
20
==PAGE:21==
other could solve the underlying issue. Unfortunately, resources to change the
architecture are not available.
CORE has a three-tier architecture pattern, that is, it has three layers. These
layers are presentation, logic and data layer. There is no clear line between these
layers but to understand how to prevent failures; it is beneﬁcial to have a way
to categories where in the code faults are appearing. Figure 3.7 shows the main
technologies that have been used in CORE’s development.
Fig. 3.7: Shows what technologies are used in each layer
There are three main JavaScript based frameworks used in the presentation layer.
These are jquery, AngularJS, and Bootstrap. Initially, jQuery was used for all com-
ponents, but later on, developers started using Bootstrap and AngularJS for the
new versions of components. The result is that CORE has two layouts, one old and
the other new. Components with the new layout are not necessarily the ones who
have been developed most recently as the priority of improving the presentation
layer has been lower in some components than the need for other improvements.
The Java-based spring MVC framework is used in the business layer. The Spring
Web MVC framework provides Model-View-Controller architecture and compo-
nents that can be used to develop web applications. Model-View-Controller archi-
21
==PAGE:22==
tecture provides a guideline to divide the application into interconnected parts to
separate internal representations of information from the ways that information is
presented to the user [16].
SQL programming language is used to communicate with the database in the data
layer. Data is stored in an object-relational database which uses Oracle manage-
ment system.
22
==PAGE:23==
4. Research approach
In this chapter, it is described how the study was conducted. The chapter starts
by introducing what the objectives are and what methods were used gather data
needed to create a strategy which would minimize risk of costly failures in a cost-
eﬀective way.
4.1. Objective
To provide context to the objective, the issue is restated as follows: Unexpected
faults have caused failures in vital features of the CORE following new version
releases of the software. The object of this study is to ﬁnd a cost-eﬀective way to
lower the risk of failure in critical features after new version releases. As discussed
in the introduction, to decrease the risk of failures, faults causing failures will have
to be either prevented from being made or detected and ﬁxed before they result
in a failure. The contribution of this study will be in the form of a strategy which
would minimize risk of costly failures in a cost-eﬀective way.
4.2. Methodology
To ﬁnd a solution to the problem, value based management of testing approach is
taken. Value based management of testing is thought to be ﬁtting as it is focused
on resource utilization. The following practices used in value based testing are
introduced in chapter 2:
– Requirement-based testing
– Risk-based testing
– Iterative and concurrent testing
– Stakeholders involvement in testing
The two main practices which are used in this study are Risk-based testing and
23
==PAGE:24==
Requirement-based testing. Stakeholder involvement in testing practice is in use
to some extent, and Iterative and concurrent testing practice will be utilized as a
guideline when designing the new strategy.
To proceed with the practice of Requirement-based testing, the most valuable
features of the software have to be deﬁned. Deﬁning the most critical features
can be diﬃcult As CORE has a high number of features. To provide a starting
point for this task, an investigation on which components of the software are most
valuable. The result of this investigation provides knowledge of which components
are likely to contain the most valuable features.
To proceed with Risk-based testing, risk areas where the software is vulnerable
to failures have to be identiﬁed. An investigation of where faults have previously
been found is made to ﬁnd these risk areas
In addition to practices used for value-based testing, a review of what methods are
currently used to prevent failures is done. Considering current methods provides
insights on where improvement can be made.
Once results have been obtained from all investigations, they are combined into one
conclusion. The new strategy is created based on that conclusion. The strategy
is presented as instruction on how Nordea should proceed with testing. These
instructions will have a concrete example of how the testing can be done. The
following sections explain how investigations were performed separately.
4.3. Risk-based testing
The investigation is done by quantitative analyses of two sources of data. Data
was acquired from both the fault reporting system and version system used by
the developers. Faults had only be reported if they were found in the production
environment, which was acceptable as if the faults had been found in acceptance
environment it could have been ﬁxed before it resulted in costly failure in the pro-
duction environment. Chapter 5 provides detailed description of what information
the data contained, how it was processed ending with a discussion of the result.
4.4. Requirement-based testing
Assessment of which components were most valuable is made by investigating how
many users are using each component and what stakeholders of the software think
24
==PAGE:25==
are the most valuable components. To ﬁnd out what components stakeholders
think are most valuable, a questionnaire was sent to them via email. To ensure
proper participation, the questionnaire only had two important questions. Ques-
tion one asked the person to provide in which order they thought components
should be placed, based on their value. The second question asked the person
to explain why he though the component placed number one was most valuable.
Chapter 6 provides a detailed description of how the information was obtained and
what the results of the investigation were.
4.5. Current methods
To ensure comprehensive and well-developed understanding of what is currently
done to prevent failures, data from diﬀerent sources was gathered. The data was
gathered by doing the following activities:
– Reading available documentation about current testing methods
– Building knowledge by analyzing the systems source code
– Observing how developers test the code on daily basis as well as before
releases
– Exploring ﬂaws in current system by performing unstructured interviews
with developers
Nordea requires that each software project keeps documentation of how their sys-
tem is tested. However, the documentation for CORE had not been updated for
several years, and the information was limited to be only answering required ques-
tions from IT management division. The document provided a starting point for
the complete review of current methods. Although the available documentation
provided information about which technologies were used when testing, inspection
of the code was done to investigate to what extent these technologies were being
used. The observation was used to see when and how developers try to prevent
faults from being implemented into the source code. Finally, all remaining miss-
ing knowledge was gathered by informal interviews with the developers of CORE.
Chapter 7 describes how the information was collected and what the results of the
investigation were.
25
==PAGE:26==
4.6. Solution
Once data has been gathered and analyzed in chapters 6, 5 and 7, a strategy
is proposed based on the ﬁndings. The strategy outlines how testing should be
improved and in what order test cases should be developed. Further it will suggest
which technologies should be used and how the test should be structured.
4.7. Threat to validity
According to Runeson and Host, validity should be address in all phases of the
study [17]. A valid study should provide evidence that the results are not concluded
from the author’s opinion and are based on data [18]. In this study, the validity
of results from the questionnaire was considered the biggest threat. The author
could be biased towards components that he had been most involved with and
imply that they were most valuable.
To counter this, the list of components
provided in the questionnaire was randomized. Another threat to the validity of
the questionnaire’s result was the small sample size, as the questionnaire was only
answered by 12 persons. The sample size could not be increased as there was
a limited number of people that have been involved with all components of the
system.
26
==PAGE:27==
5. Risk-based testing
Areas of risks have to be identiﬁed to organize where resources should be allocated
for testing. Risk areas can be identiﬁed by investigating where the software has
a high potential of containing a fault.
The purpose of the study described in
this chapter is to ﬁnd out if faults are indeed appearing in components where
there has not been any recent development and to identify risk areas based on
two dimensions, that is, which layer could be considered a risk area and which
component. The chapter starts by stating what information is available, then how
it is collected, for what purpose it is collected and then how it is analyzed. When
the data has been analyzed, results are discussed, and a conclusion is drawn based
on the purpose of the study.
5.1. Available data
Information about faults that have been detected can be found in two diﬀerent
sources. One of these sources is an issue tracking application called JIRA, and the
other is a version control system used by the developers.
faults that have been found by either developers or users are reported in the JIRA
system. In total there have been 649 faults reported in the system with data dating
back to October 2011. There was not away capture older data which means that
there is no data on faults reported from the start of the project in 2007 to October
2011. Information provided about each fault then depends on how much eﬀort
the person reporting it has put into it. The JIRA system oﬀers the reporter to
populate the following ﬁelds when reporting a fault;
– An identiﬁcation code
– A small summary of the fault, where the reporter explains what aﬀect
the fault has on the software.
– Priority of ﬁxing the fault have (Not classiﬁed, Low, High, Highest)
– A detailed description of the fault
– Status of ﬁxing the fault (to do, in process, done, won’t ﬁx)
27
==PAGE:28==
– Who is assigned to ﬁx the fault
– Who reported the fault
– Story points indicating how complex it is to ﬁx the fault
– Date ﬁelds (created, last updated, resolved)
– Which component the fault found in
– Which environment the fault found in (development, production)
The quality of the data increases the more new they are. All faults are reported
to be found in the production environment, which indicates that faults found in
development and acceptance environment are not reported in the system. Ap-
proximately 13% of the reported faults are populated with story points. Summary
and detailed descriptions mostly have insuﬃcient information, with most records
consisting of only a few words. The overall completeness of the data is considered
low, but it gives a good indicator of the numbers of faults found.
The developers use a version control system to track changes in the code and to
prevent version conﬂicts. The system is also used to ensure quality by requiring
developers to get their code changes approved by other team members before they
are committed to the source code. In order for team members to understand what
they have been asked to approve, the one committing code changes is required to
write a note explaining the changes. The one committing also has an option to
connect the particular code change to a fault reported in the JIRA system. By
cross-referencing faults from the JIRA system to a commit in the version control
system, more details can be found about individual faults. From this data, the
faulty code can be located in the code base and severity evaluated. In total there
were 61 faults documented. Of those 61, 24 had corresponding JIRA faults. The
code changes were made during a period spanning from August 2015 to April
2017.
5.2. Data collection
The JIRA system has a feature to export the complete list of all reported faults
in several formats. Microsoft Excel format was chosen as it was thought optimal
format to process the information. In the version system, code changes made to
ﬁx faults were identiﬁed by inspecting what message the developer had written
28
==PAGE:29==
when committing. For every code change found, seven attributes were recorded.
The attributes were recorded with the following questions in mind:
– Who committed the code changes?
– What message did the developer give?
– What date was the commit made?
– How many lines of code were changed, added or removed?
– How severe was the fault?
– In what programming languages were most lines of code changed?
– Which component of CORE was the fault found in?
These attributes were documented into an excel ﬁle like data from the JIRA sys-
tem. When possible, JIRA fault identiﬁcation code and date were recorded as
well. Name of developer and the message he wrote were only recorded to have a
unique identiﬁer for each fault, and the data was not used for analyses.
5.3. Analyzing the data
The following sub sections explain how the data is analyzed to generate information
used to assess which parts of the code are considered risk areas. To ﬁnd areas of
risk, the source code has to be split into areas. In this study, the area of code is
deﬁned in two dimensions; code that belongs to diﬀerent architectural layers and
code belonging to diﬀerent components of the system.
5.3.1. Number of faults
The purpose of analyzing how many faults there have been reported is to un-
derstand if faults are getting more or less frequent and what factors have been
aﬀecting the numbers. Only data from the JIRA system is used when analyz-
ing how many faults have been discovered. Using data gathered from the version
control system could result in double counting as there was almost impossible to
identify if the all the faults found in there had been reported in JIRA or not. The
list of faults derived from the JIRA system is split into both yearly and quarterly
29
==PAGE:30==
total numbers. With only three months of data available in the years 2011 and
2017, ﬁve whole years can be used to analyze based on yearly numbers. When
analyzing the number of faults reported quarterly, data from Q1 2015 to Q2 2017
is used. This period is chosen as from Q1 2015 the development team has mostly
contained the same persons.
5.3.2. Number of faults by components
To analyze if any component is more prone to faults than others, the number
of reported faults in each component is compared to the size of the code in the
respective component. The size of the code is measured in how many kilobytes are
used to store the code for each component in the total code base. The comparison
is made by calculating the correlation between the size of code and the number of
faults using formula 1
Correl(X, Y ) =
P(x −x)(y −y)
pP(x −x)2 P(y −y)2
(1)
Where x is a vector with number of faults by components and y is a vector of the
size of codes for each component.
5.3.3. Layers
The software has a layered architecture as discussed in Chapter 3. The layers are
the presentation, business, and data layer. Many faults are spread over more than
one of these layers, but for simpliﬁcation, each fault is assigned to no more than
one layer.
Diﬀerent technologies and programming languages are used in each
layer. The programming language which the code changes are done in is used to
identify which layer they belong to. The programming language and the layer that
they are used in are the following:
– Java - Business layer
– JavaScript - Presentation layer
– Java Server Pages - Presentation layer
– HTML - Presentation layer
30
==PAGE:31==
– XML - Data layer
– SQL - Data layer
The assumption is made that faults originate from the layer where most code
changes were made to ﬁx the fault. To analyze if any layer of the software is
more prone to faults than others, the number of reported faults in each layer is
compared to the size of the code in the respective layer. The comparison is made
by calculating the correlation between the size of code and the number of faults
using formula 1
5.3.4. Eﬀort to ﬁx the faults
To assess how much eﬀort was required when ﬁxing each fault, lines changed in
the code are counted and categorized by which layer the changes were made in.
This is possible due to how the version system keeps track of all changes made
to the code. When inspecting a code change, the code is presented with coloring
that indicates what has been changed. Lines that have been either removed or
added are highlighted with diﬀerent colors. If any changes are made to a line, the
version system will track it as a new line and shows the line before changes as a
removed line. Counting all highlighted lines would result in double counting, but
counting only based on one color would result in not counting when new lines have
been added or removed. The way to ensure that there is no double counting is
to review code changes in such detail that when two highlighted lines involve the
same change, they will be counted as one. The downside of this method is that
inspection of each fault will take more time which can result in fewer faults being
inspected overall. Despite the downside, it is decided to examine the code in detail
to have a higher quality of data. The time spent on each line in code varies widely
and thus only counting how many lines have been changed is a simpliﬁcation. This,
however, was the only available metric to give some indication of the eﬀort it took
to ﬁx the fault.
5.3.5. Severity of faults
Faults were categorized into the three levels based on their severity. These cate-
gories are the following:
31
==PAGE:32==
– Severe: The fault was blocking the application from working
– Major: The fault was disrupting processes in the application
– Minor: The fault had been reported or noticed by developer but was
not disrupting processes
When developers reported faults in the JIRA system, they could specify how much
priority they thought ﬁxing the fault had. When possible, faults with the highest
priority were cross-referenced with faults found in the version system to determine
if the fault was severe or major.
This was done by inspecting the code that
had been changed with author’s knowledge of the application’s functions. When
ﬁxing the fault had either high, low, lowest or not classiﬁed priority, the fault was
considered a minor fault. To analyze if any component of the software is more
prone to major faults than others, the number of reported major faults in each
component is compared to the number of total reported faults in each component.
The comparison is made by calculating the correlation between the two sets of
numbers by using formula 1
5.4. Results
5.4.1. Number of faults
In the year 2012, 213 faults were reported in the JIRA system which is approx-
imately four times the number of faults reported in 2016. Figure 5.1 shows how
the number of reported faults has been on a yearly basis.
32
==PAGE:33==
Fig. 5.1: Number of reported faults in the years 2012-2016. The red line shows the linear trend
through the years
From looking at the ﬁgure, the trend suggests that there are fewer faults reported
each year. There could be many reasons for why the faults are getting rarer. The
biggest decrease in numbers was between the years 2012 and 2013, with 46% fewer
faults reported in 2013 than the year before.
One of the reasons for the high
number of faults in 2012 was discovered in a conversation with a former developer
of the application. When developers started using the JIRA system, they had to
migrate from the previously used issue tracking solution. When developers were
migrating from the old system, a large number of faults were being reported by
few developers on the same days, with, e.g., 23 faults reported at most in one
day. This discovery suggests that the number of faults in 2012 does not only con-
tain faults discovered in 2012, but also all previously discovered unresolved faults
from the old issue tracking solution. The second biggest decrease in how many
faults were reported was between the years 2014 and 2015, with approximately
40% fewer faults in 2015 than the year before. One possible explanation for this
is that in the year 2015 there was a complete replacement of developers in the
development team. The reason for the decrease could then either be because dis-
covered faults were not reported in the same way or the new developers wrote
less faulty code. In 2016, the development team implemented a new process into
the development called code review. The new process required developers to do
a systematic examination of the code before it is committed to the code used in
the testing environment. Faults discovered in the code review are ﬁxed right away
without reporting it. The numbers suggest that this procedure helps to decrease
the number of faults as there 15% fewer faults in 2016 than 2015 and the only
notable change in the development process was adding the code review step.
33
==PAGE:34==
One could argue that the trend that is shown in 5.1 is typical in a software devel-
opment project with most faults discovered early and then less once the software
becomes more mature. But it is important to note that a number of faults discov-
ered in the ﬁrst ﬁve years of development are not available and the software had
already become more mature in 2012 when developers started to use the JIRA
system to report faults. There were 52 faults reported in 2016, which equals to
having one fault discovered in the production environment every week. Figure 5.2
shows the number of reported faults each quarter from 2015.
Fig. 5.2: Number of reported faults by quarters in the period Q1 2015 - Q2 2017. The red line
shows the linear trend through all quarters
There are on average 15 faults reported each quarter with the standard deviation
of ﬁve. In the ﬁrst quarter of 2017, 18 faults have been reported. By looking at the
trend line, it is predicted that the number of faults in 2017 will be approximately
the same as in 2016.
5.4.2. Number of faults in each component
To ﬁnd out if any component could be considered a risk area based on being more
prone to error than others, the numbers of reported faults in each component is
compared to the size of the code in the respective component. The proportion of
total reported faults in each component and the proportion size of the component’s
code is presented in ﬁgures 5.3 and 5.4.
34
==PAGE:35==
Fig. 5.3: The proportion each component has of
total reported faults
Fig. 5.4: The proportion each component has in
the total size of the CORE system
Calculating the correlation between these two sets of numbers gives correlation
coeﬃcient of 0.91. According to James Evans[19], correlation coeﬃcient values
over 0,8 have very high correlation. This high correlation coeﬃcient indicates that
even though technologies diﬀer between components, developers are as likely to
make faults in every component.
The proportion of total faults reported in each component 2016 is presented in
ﬁgure 5.5
35
==PAGE:36==
Fig. 5.5: The proportion each component has of total reported faults in 2016
It can be seen from the ﬁgure that 30% of faults in 2016 originated from the
Incident component. This is thought interesting as there had not been any de-
velopment in the incident component in 2016.
This suggests either that these
faults were so minor that they were discovered late or that development in other
components was causing faults in the component.
5.4.3. Eﬀort to ﬁx the faults
To assess how much eﬀort was needed to ﬁx faults in each layer, the number of
lines changed to ﬁx the faults were counted. Figure 5.6 shows an average number
of lines modiﬁed, categorized by the ﬁle extensions used to store the systems source
code.
36
==PAGE:37==
Fig. 5.6: Shows how many lines were changed on average by layer
This categorization is based on method presented in 5.3.3. It is assumed that there
is a high correlation between how many lines needed to be changed and how much
eﬀort it took to ﬁx the fault. It is concluded that faults found in the presentation
layer require most eﬀort to be ﬁxed.
5.4.4. Severity of faults
The severity of faults is not documented in the JIRA system which makes it hard
to assess if the fault had caused severe failure in the system. However, every fault
was assigned with how much priority ﬁxing the fault had. Figure 5.7 shows the
proportion each priority level had of total faults
37
==PAGE:38==
Fig. 5.7: Shows the proportion each priority level had of total faults
As discussed in section 5.3.5, severity is divided into three categories; minor, major
and severe. By inspecting faults with these categories in mind, it is concluded
that faults with high, low, lowest or not classiﬁed priority have minor severity.
11% of the total reported faults had top priority to be ﬁxed. These faults are
then inspected individually to determine whether they were major or severe. Two
of the 72 faults examined are identiﬁed to have been severe.
Both faults had
blocked one component from working and had required an emergency release of
the CORE software. These faults were both reported in 2015. It is concluded
that to diﬀerentiate severe faults from major and minor, persons reporting faults
need to change how they rate priority of ﬁx. A large number of highest priority
faults had poor documentation which made it diﬃcult to assess why they had
been major or severe. The 70 remaining most top priority faults are considered to
have major severity rating. To assess if any component was more prone to major
faults than others, the correlation between total numbers of faults reported in
each component and number of major faults in each component is calculated. The
correlation coeﬃcient between these two data sets is 0,88. This high correlation
coeﬃcient indicates that no one components are more prone to major faults than
others.
38
==PAGE:39==
5.4.5. Layers
As discussed in section 5.3.3, faults are categorized to be originating from three
diﬀerent layers of the application architecture. The categorization was based on
which programming language was used when ﬁxing the faults. Only data from
gathered from the version system is used as JIRA only captures which components
the fault was found in. Figure 5.8 shows the proportion each
Fig. 5.8: The proportion of which layer the faults were found in
Approximately half of all faults were ﬁxed by changing lines in a programming
language primarily used in the presentation layer.
To assess if any layer was
more prone to faults than others, the correlation between total numbers of faults
reported in each layer and the total size of each layer is calculated with formula
1. The correlation coeﬃcient between these two data sets is 0,74. When two data
sets have correlation coeﬃcient between 0,60-0,79, they are considered strongly
correlated [19]. But still, there is not high correlation which suggests that faults
are slightly more likely to be originating from the presentation layer. Further, this
indicates that fewer faults originating from the presentation layer are detected
before they reach the production environment. The reasons could be either that
developers are less likely to make mistakes using the language used in the other
layers or the current testing method is better at detecting faults in the logic and
data layers.
39
==PAGE:40==
5.5. conclusion
The purpose of the study described in this chapter was to ﬁnd out if faults are
indeed appearing in components where there has not been any recent development
and to identify risk areas based on two dimensions, that is, which layer could be
considered a risk area and which component. Findings described in section 5.4.2 re-
veal that faults are being discovered in components of the software where there has
not been any recent development. The ﬁnding re-enforces previously mentioned
theory that due to the complex monolithic architecture of CORE, development
in one component is having unexpected consequences in other components. Re-
sults from sections 5.4.2 and 5.4.4 reveal that when the size of the component is
taken into consideration, no component is more likely to contain faults than other.
Findings from sections 5.4.3 and 5.4.5 reveal that faults are slightly more likely to
originate from the presentation layer and most eﬀort is required when ﬁxing faults
discovered in that layer.
40
==PAGE:41==
6. Requirement-based testing
As presented in section 2.4, requirement prioritization is an important aspect of
requirement based testing. Management of testing should be organized in such
way that testing of high priority requirements is developed before others. The
CORE software has many components which each has its high priority require-
ments. Therefore prioritization of requirements in CORE has to be done on two
levels, that is, which components have a high priority to be tested and then which
requirements within that component have priority to be tested. The purpose of
the study described in this chapter is to identify in which order testing of com-
ponents should be prioritized. The order is solely based on how much value each
component has. The value is only assessed in comparison of the components, that
is, some components are more valuable than others. There are two methods used
to determine the value of the components. One is by investigating how many users
are using each component. It is assumed that a high number of users indicates
high value. But information about how many utilize each component is not suf-
ﬁcient as failures in some components can be easier to work around than others.
Further, some components need to maintain a higher reputation of reliability than
others. The method used to obtain the missing qualitative data was by sending a
questionnaire to stakeholders and developers of the system. The following sections
explain how the data was acquired and what results they provided. The follow-
up component is excluded from the study as it is a support component which
can’t be used without the others. All components are dependent on the follow-up
component, which means that if any component is to be tested, it requires the
follow-up component to be tested as well. Further, a dialog with one of the stake-
holders during the study revealed that the Audit and Product components are
being decommissioned in the near future. For this reason, these two components
are excluded from the study.
6.1. Value based on number of users
It is assumed that a high number of users indicates high value. To enrich the
result, not only number of distinct users was collected but also how often these
users were visiting the component. The data was acquired from usage log tables
in the database of the software. An SQL script was made to extract how many
41
==PAGE:42==
times user accessed CORE, for how long period he used CORE when accessing and
which component he used in the system. The script ensured that developers were
not counted in total numbers as the developers were not using the components.
The data spanned over the year of 2016.
6.1.1. Results from analyzing user log
In total there were 6442 distinct users of the CORE software in 2016. Figure 6.1
shows that approximately 3500 of these users visited the Incident component.
Fig. 6.1: Shows number of persons that used CORE in 2016 by component
When looking at the ﬁgure, it can be seen that fewest users use the RSA component
by far, in fact, only 55 persons used the component in 2016. But this number does
necessarily represent the importance of the RSA component. What if these 55 users
are using the component to more extent than 1000 users of the BCM component?
Would then a failure in the RSA component be more severely aﬀecting the daily
work of 55 persons? The number of distinct days users accessed each component
used to assess to what existent users are using them. Figure 6.2 shows how many
distinct days an average users accessed each component.
42
==PAGE:43==
Fig. 6.2: Shows average number of distinct days, persons used CORE
The numbers are somewhat aﬀected by the large number of users that only ac-
cessed components once, e.g., by accidentally clicking on the wrong tab in CORE
homepage or the user could simply have been exploring the software. However ex-
cluding those who only visited once would be unfair to components like Incident,
where users only have to visit once to report the incident. It is assumed that all
components are equally aﬀected by users randomly accessing them without using
them. When inspecting ﬁgure 6.2, it can be seen that users of the CME compo-
nent use it most frequently. Therefore it could be argued that failure in the CME
component would cause high damage as the failure is likely to aﬀect the daily work
of those persons. Another interesting result of looking into the number of days
used is that even though fewest persons use the RSA component, it is used more
frequently by those persons than all the other components except CME. The next
section describes the other approach used to assess the value of components.
6.2. Value based on stakeholders
Data was gathered by sending a questionnaire with one close-ended and one open-
ended questions to stakeholders and developers of the system. The questionnaire
which was sent can be found in Appendix. Close-ended questions limit the respon-
dent to the set of alternatives being oﬀered while open-ended questions allow the
respondent to supply their own answer[20]. The close-ended question was used to
ensure that the result would give a deﬁnite order of components based on value.
43
==PAGE:44==
The open-ended question was used to collect qualitative data that could support
ﬁndings from the closed-ended question and the study in the previous section.
Even though CORE has a high number of users, it is very rare that individual
users use more than two of the software’s components. The number of persons
that have experience with all components of the software is therefore limited. The
questionnaire was sent to 12 persons through email. Four of them were develop-
ers, and the remaining were stakeholders that had been involved in the project
for several years, some from the beginning. The developer’s opinions are thought
relevant as the developers are exposed to all the components and are responsible
for supporting them. Respondents were presented with the background of why the
questionnaire was being conducted. The closed-ended question asked the respon-
dent in which order they would put components, based on their value. A list of
the systems component was provided with the question. The follow-up, Product
and Audit components were excluded from the list as discussed at the beginning
of this chapter. The open-ended question asked the respondent to explain why he
thought the component placed in the ﬁrst place was most valuable. All persons
that received the questionnaire responded. The quality of the answers from the
open-ended question exceeded expectation as all respondent explained in detail
why they thought one component was more valuable than other.
6.2.1. Result from questionnaire
Once all persons had responded to the questionnaire, data were collected into an
excel ﬁle. Each component got scoring based on where they were placed in the
order provided by the respondent. The Component placed in the ﬁrst place got
scoring of eight; second place got scoring of seven and so on. Once all component
had been scored, the diﬀerent scoring from respondents was then summed up and
components then sorted by the total score. The opinion of individual developers
and stakeholders were considered equally valuable and therefore had the same
weight. The results are presented in table 6.1
44
==PAGE:45==
Place
Developers
Stakeholders
Total
1
QRA
Incident
Incident
2
CME
QRA
QRA
3
Incident
BCM
CME
4
RSA
CME
RSA
5
BCM
RSA
BCM
6
Risk model
Risk Model
Risk Model
7
Organizations
Learning Centre
Learning Centre
8
Learning Centre
Organizations
Organizations
Table 6.1: Results from questionnaire
As seen from the table, the Incident component is considered to have the highest
value according to the total scoring based on respondent’s order of components.
In fact, Incident scored considerably higher than others when the responses from
developers are excluded. The developers place QRA, CME, and Incident compo-
nents as somewhat equally valuable while stakeholders put the top three with a
much more decisive diﬀerence. An interesting side product of this questionnaire
realized the inconsistency of what the developers think is most valuable compared
to what stakeholders think. Results from question two further re-enforce that Inci-
dent component is considered the most valuable one. Following are several answers
that are considered most relevant to provide insights on prioritization
Incident tool is used by the largest group of employees and problems
will immediately be visible to them and raise questions/concerns – not
good for our reputation - Stakeholder
The value of CME is that unit’s work ﬂow is documented, and as such
it disturbs the daily work, but it hardly causes bigger damage/risks.
Incidents, however, or the RSA or the QRA will give a risk-based value
to mitigate existing or future risks and thereby prevent direct ﬁnancial
losses, reputation risk or even regulatory consequences - Stakeholder
Incidents enable full support of the incident handling process. Core
provides some important features in the incident handling process; easy
to interact with stakeholders, easy to create mitigating actions and with
an automatic follow-up - Stakeholder
There is nothing like CME elsewhere! CME has many daily users, and
business processes outside BRIS are dependent on CME - Developer
45
==PAGE:46==
CME is by far the best tool to evidence that controls have been per-
formed and to keep the working procedures linked to the controls. Also,
this was a perfect tool with auditors and regulators to show strong gov-
ernance structure - Stakeholder
The open-ended questions were somewhat aﬀected by the background of the ques-
tionnaire. Some respondents explained why they thought the components were
more vulnerable to failures than others. Even though QRA component had the
second highest score from the closed end question, it was hardly mentioned in the
open-ended question. It is probably due to the fact it was placed most often in
second place, and the open-ended question was only directed towards the compo-
nent chosen in ﬁrst place. It was thought interesting that one stakeholder believed
that failure in the CME component would hardly cause any large damage as it is
mainly used for documentation which could be done elsewhere while the failure
would be resolved. This contradicts the argument in section 6.1 that failure in the
CME component would cause high damage based on how frequently people use
it.
6.3. Conclusion
The purpose of the study described in this chapter was to identify in which order
testing of components should be prioritized. The order was based on the value
of the components, that is, the component with highest value should be tested
ﬁrst. The value was determined by how many were using each component and the
opinion of persons heavily involved with the CORE software. Combining results
from number of users in section 6.1 and stakeholders opinion in section 6.2.1 with
equal weight gives a list of which order testing of components should be prioritized.
This list is shown in table 6.2:
46
==PAGE:47==
Place
Component
1
Incident
2
QRA
3
CME
4
BCM
5
RSA
6/7
Risk model
6/7
Learning Centre
8
Organizations
Table 6.2: The order of components based on value
The results from both methods used to assess the value of components put the
top three most valuable components in the same order.
The BCM and RSA
components had the same combined score but do the fact BCM has for more
users; it was put in place four. The Risk Model and Learning Centre components
also had the same combined score but the data did not convincingly reveal which
component should have been placed in six and seven and therefore they shared
those places. For this reason, it is recommended that this list should be reassessed
once the order has come to test component in place six.
47
==PAGE:48==
7. Current testing methods
Before proposing a solution to prevent faults that cause failures from going un-
detected into the production environment, current methods that are used have to
be explored. The proposed solution has to consider why current methods are not
suﬃcient. The purpose of this chapter is to get an overview of how the CORE
system is currently tested.
This chapter explains how data was gathered and
analyzed. It starts by summarizing what information is acquired from diﬀerent
sources separately. The data is then combined into a description of current testing
and architecture of the application. In the end, ﬂaws in the current system are
discussed.
7.1. Observation
Observation is used to see what individual developers are doing to detect errors.
All developers use the same two methods to detect faults before committing their
code changes to the development source code. First, they run unit tests, and then
if no unit test has failed, the code changes are inspected by a fellow developer in
the team. If the developer approves the changes, the code is merged into the de-
velopment source code. The ﬁnal step of fault detection is done in user acceptance
testing (UAT). In UAT, the initial request for improvement or change is sent to
stakeholders in the form of a ticket made in the request system JIRA. When a
relevant stakeholder has tested the new features, he communicates his result via
emails, through JIRA system or directly. If stakeholders approve that their re-
quest for change has been made the right way, all testing is done, and the code is
committed to the production source code in the next release. The UAT process
ensures that each new feature is only tested by one person. Integration testing was
previously a part of the testing process, but due to lack of maintenance, developers
have not been able to run integration tests for the past six months.
48
==PAGE:49==
7.2. Available documentation
Nordea has three documents that can be analyzed for this study. These documents
are the following: Nordea’s test policy, Nordea’s test strategy and a document
with the master test plan for the CORE software. The test policy document has a
description of the principles that developers should follow when testing applications
and what information is required for each software project.
The test strategy
document deﬁnes the outline and standards on how testing activities are to be
conducted within Nordea software development. The master test plan contains
the information which is required to be compliant with Nordea’s testing policy.
7.3. Informal interviews
The remaining data that could not be acquired by observation or from the docu-
mentation was gathered by informal interviews with the developers. Whenever a
question came up while inspecting the documentation, the author approached the
developers with the question. This unstructured method was necessary as test-
ing documentation has not been updated properly and knowledge of many of the
changes is only stored in the developer’s minds.
7.4. Current testing of CORE portal
Once data is collected from diﬀerent sources, a holistic picture of current test-
ing methods can be created. The following section will explain how the system
is tested, what is not being tested and then an explanation how diﬀerent test
processes are performed.
7.4.1. How the system is tested
Most of the testing is done with automated tests during the build process. There
are two layers of automated tests, plus one layer of manual User acceptance testing
(UAT), with the UAT being a part of the ﬁnal sign-oﬀprior to preparing for a
release.
49
==PAGE:50==
7.4.2. What is not tested
When the current testing framework was created, a holistic approach was taken
when decided what to test and what not to test. The parts that are not testes
could be described as lowest and highest level of the code. The lowest levels of the
system code base, the so-called POJOs are not being tested given the fact that
these are only containers for values used by the inner functions of the system. On
the high level of the software code base, the individual features of the application
are not being tested end to end. The UAT testing only covers part of the system
that has recently been developed, and the purpose of that testing is only to ensure
that the new features are working correctly. However per ﬁndings in Chapter 5,
due to the high complexity of the software, features can break in components that
have not been recently developed. With UAT only covering recently developed
components, there are no comprehensive tests done on the whole system to ensure
that all features work as they should.
CORE is mainly depending directly on
only one external system, an outgoing mail-server, enabling sending of periodic
emails.
During automatic test phases, only the generation of emails is tested,
while the sending of emails is speciﬁcally disabled to save load on the mail server.
The sending of mail is then tested in the acceptance environment during UAT
testing.
7.5. Test Process
The development team uses a subset of agile development methodology called
scrum. When using scrum, a series of short development phases called sprints are
deﬁned. In each sprint team members agree to complete tasks that they believe
they can ﬁnish during the sprint [21]. The sprints typically have a duration of three
weeks in the development of the CORE software. The testing documentation states
that after each sprint user acceptance tests should always be performed. This has
however not always been done.
7.5.1. Unit tests
As mentioned in chapter 2, unit tests are used to test the inner workings of the
application, without aﬀecting or depending on the outside world. The development
team maintains the unit tests during the development of new features, an extension
50
==PAGE:51==
of existing features or ﬁxing of bugs. The inner workings that are being tested
are calculations, execution of business rules, manual manipulation of data, etc.
The aim is to have the unit tests cover just enough to unveil any unforeseen
consequences of a given change elsewhere in the system.
7.5.2. Integration tests
As mentioned in chapter 2, integration tests validates the functionality from be-
ginning to end. It is the process of testing integration of systems and packages,
testing interfaces towards the external world. The purpose of the integration test
is to investigate how well the system cooperates with both external and internal
functions and systems. The integration tests cover individual processes, but not
the whole life cycle of the process. The aim is that integration between items
should be covered and tested thoroughly.
7.5.3. User acceptance tests
The user acceptance test (UAT) is the formal testing for the business partners to
verify that the development of features is done according to their requirements and
wishes. Business themselves provides the process for testing during the UAT as well
as the assignment of resources for execution. The UAT follows the agile approach
taken by the development team and usually takes place during the last three days
of each sprint.
All features and improvements that were delivered during the
sprint should be tested along with any closely related functionality. The business
partners communicate directly to developers when faults are found.
7.6. fault management
All faults that are logged in production are registered in JIRA for prioritization in
the following sprint. If the fault found in production is severe, the sprint can be
declared void and all resources assigned to ﬁxing the fault to bring the application
to release phase as soon as possible. Reported faults are automatically prioritized
for the following sprint unless they are ﬁxed within the sprint when they were
51
==PAGE:52==
detected. The person reporting the fault is responsible for providing enough in-
formation in the JIRA fault ticket for the development team to locate and ﬁx the
fault.
7.7. Conclusion
Testing through the presentation layer is currently only done when new features
are user acceptance tested. Section 7.4.2 reveals that there are no comprehensive
tests done to ensure that all features in the system work as they should before
new releases. The conclusion is that if improvement in one component causes an
unexpected fault in a component that is not being improved, it will not be detected
unless it causes failure in the production environment.
52
==PAGE:53==
8. Strategy
In this chapter a possible solution to the issue brought up in the introduction
is discussed. The possible solution is delivered in strategy presented with three
recommendation supplemented with test policy. As stated in the Introduction,
The issue with CORE portal is that unexpected faults have caused severe failures
shortly after new version releases. In previous chapters, the issue is investigated
along with gathering information that could be used to create a test strategy based
on value-based management of testing. At this point it might be good to recap on
some of the ﬁndings in this study:
– The system has a monolithic architecture (Chapter 3)
– faults appear in components that have not recently been in development
which makes them unexpected (Chapter 5)
– Over half of all reported faults originate from the presentation layer
(Chapter 5)
– Components are not all equally important (Chapter 6)
– Unit, integration and acceptance tests have been used to detect faults
(Chapter 7)
– All unit tests are run regularly by developers during the development
process as regression testing(Chapter 7)
– There is no system testing or end to end testing done in the software
(Chapter 7)
– Acceptance testing is only done on newly developed features (Chapter
7)
– There are no dedicated test resources available (Chapter 7)
From the ﬁndings, it is concluded that without actions, faults are likely to continue
to appear in unexpected places, because of the high complexity of dependencies
between components. Further, there is evidence that current regression testing,
used to ensure that further changes, does not discover critical faults. This means
that either the architecture of the system has to be changed in such way that
dependencies between components would be made clear and simple or testing has
to be improved in such way it detects more of the unexpected faults caused by
53
==PAGE:54==
unknown dependencies. Changing the architecture is considered out of scope as
it requires more amount of resources that are available. However, improvement of
testing can be an ongoing project done parallel to the development of the system.
Naturally, improving testing also requires extra resources, but by using value-based
approach, existing resources could be utilized to improve the testing gradually over
a period. The value-based approach is used to determine two things; How should
testing be improved and how can the improvement be done in a cost-eﬀective way.
Risk-based testing proposed that features or areas with higher probability of failure
should be tested more thoroughly. Chapter 5 seeks to ﬁnd areas of risk based on
two dimensions, which layer of the software is risky and which component is risky.
The results show that the majority of faults have been found in the presentation
layer, and therefore testing should be improved in that layer. When looking for
risky components, the result suggests that faults appear in random places, which
means that all components are considered risk areas. Given that testing has to be
done in a cost-eﬀective way, it has to cover as much risk area with least eﬀort.
Based on results from chapter 6, it is recommended that the vital features of the
software are tested end to end before above the presentation layer before every
release.
An example of a vital feature of the CORE system is the ability to report incidents.
Testing that feature end to end above the presentation layer would mean that
a real-world scenario is created were incident is created and then information
validated. As mentioned in chapter 2, an end to end testing provides high coverage
of lines of code with relatively low eﬀort compared to testing types like unit testing
and integration testing. Further End-to-end testing is considered optional because
it can be used to ensure that that integrated components of the CORE software
function as expected. But even though the end to end testing will provide high
coverage with less eﬀort, it still will take many hours to test all vital features of
CORE. Further, because there are frequent releases of updates in the software,
tests have to be done multiple times every year. The second recommendation is
as follows:
The end to end testing should be automated.
Once end to end test cases are automated, they can be run with little eﬀort be-
fore every release or even more often, making sure that all vital features work as
intended. Still, developing automated test will take a lot of time using only ex-
isting resources which means that the risk of failure due to unexpected faults will
decrease slowly. The third recommendation is based on requirement based testing
and should ensure that the cost of failure is lowered fast in a cost-eﬀective way.
54
==PAGE:55==
The development of the automated test cases should be prioritized based on the
value of each vital features of the software.
By prioritizing tests to be developed ﬁrst for the most valuable features, the risk
of high-cost failures can be lowered to a more acceptable rate in less time. It is
assumed that there is a high correlation between the value of a feature and the cost
of failure in that feature. Figure 8.1 illustrates the diﬀerence between prioritizing
on value and systematically testing all features.
Fig. 8.1: Shows how risk can be lowered in less time with prioritization
The ﬁgure is based on the assumption that 80% of the value of CORE is in 20%
of it’s features. The assumption is based on a study that was made on internal
applications at Standish Group which showed that only 20% of features were used
frequently or always [22]. The actions that should be taken to proceed with the
recommendation are as follows:
1. Vital features of each component are identiﬁed by the respective product
owner
2. The product owner creates a test case in JIRA system to test the identiﬁed
features
3. Once product owner has created appropriate test cases, he rates them based
on their value
4. Developer of the software improves the test cases using coding insights
55
==PAGE:56==
5. Test cases from all components are sorted based on the rating given by the
product owner and the value of the component
6. Test cases are automated by the development team in the order established
in step 5
7. All test cases that have been automated are run at least before every release
The development team should spend all extra time on hand automating these
test cases. Step 6 ensures that the risk of costly failure is cost-eﬀectively lowered
to more acceptable rate. The following sections explain in more detail how to
proceed.
8.1. Test Policy
Chapter 6 gives the starting point of the test case prioritization, that is, the highest
value components have been identiﬁed. The components were then arraigned in an
order based on their value. The order components based on value is presented in
table 6.2. From the table, it can be seen that the Incident component is considered
to have the highest value.
Therefore features in the incident component have
top priority to be tested end to end before new releases of the software. Still,
the features within each component have to be identiﬁed. As documentation of
CORE’s requirements is largely missing, product owner of each component will
have to identify the features of the respective component.
Once features have
been identiﬁed, the product owner should create test cases that are used to verify
if the features can fulﬁll what is required of them. Each test case that is designed
should be rated by the product owner based on the value of the feature it is
testing. The numbers one, two and three should be used to rate, with one being
high value, two medium value and three low value. The rating of each test case
is then linked to the rating of each component. Table 8.2 shows how test cases
could be documented. Each rating consists of two numbers, that is, the rating of
the component before the dot and rating of the requirement after the dot.
56
==PAGE:57==
Fig. 8.2: Shows an example of what attributes test cases should have
When creating test case the aim should be to keep it simple, e.g., can an Inci-
dent be reported in CORE?. More detailed test cases require a higher number of
test which then results in more time spent developing and maintaining the tests.
The test cases are sorted based on the rating given by the product owner and
the value of the component. When automating the test cases, all cases with high
and medium rating should be automated in the highest value component before
automating cases in the second most valuable component. There are countless
options available for documentation of the test cases. The options are narrowed
down to one simple and one complex solution. The simple one is using a shared
excel ﬁle while the complex is to use a functionality of the JIRA system specially
designed to document test cases. The advantage of using excel is that the docu-
mentation can be made very simple and training on how to document would not
be time-consuming. The disadvantage is that developers and the product own-
ers would need to adhere to a strict policy that would ensure that, once a new
function has been implemented, they would locate the document and document a
new test case. The main advantage of using JIRA is that all new requests for new
functions or changes to existing ones are currently requested through the system.
The developer or the product owner can create the appropriate test case and di-
rectly link it with that request. Further, faults are also reported in the system
which makes it possible to link faults found while running tests to the test cases.
The disadvantage of using JIRA is it requires more training to start using than
using excel. It is concluded that JIRA should be used to document test cases due
to the beneﬁts of having one integrated system to deal with new requests, test
57
==PAGE:58==
cases and faults found while testing. Even though it requires more initial train-
ing to use JIRA, developers and the product owners are considered more likely to
maintain test cases if they are documented in the same place as new requirements
and faults. All test cases should be run before every new release of the system.
The development team uses agile development methods, which promotes frequent
releases with small updates. Once test cases have been created for a high amount
of the systems requirements, it will become time-consuming to execute all the test
manually before every release. For this reason, the tests should be automated. By
automating the tests, developers won’t have to do repetitive testing of the same
features before each release.
To automate the tests, framework and tools are needed. The framework is required
to provide structure around the tests, while tools are required to locate web ele-
ments, assert if tests pass and to run the tests. There are many options available
when considering frameworks, but as the objective is to ﬁnd a cost-eﬀective to
solve the issue, only open source frameworks are considered. There are two widely
used open source frameworks considered, Jasmine and Mocha. The main diﬀerence
between these frameworks is that Mocha has a built-in test runner while Jasmine
does not. Another notable diﬀerence is that Jasmine has nice ﬂuent syntax for as-
sertions built-in while Mocha does not. The development team is currently using
Jasmine for front-end testing and are using a test runner named Karma to run
the test. Jasmine is considered a better option since the developers are familiar
with it and the same test runner can be used for diﬀerent testing processes. To
create a real-world scenario that mimics how a user would test functions, tests are
done through the web browser. It means that a tool is needed to communicate
with the browser. Just as with the frameworks only tools that do not require a
paid license are considered. The two options that were considered most feasible
were Selenium and Protractor. Both tools provide a library of functions that can
be used to run tests against applications through a browser, interacting with it
as a user would.
As mentioned in chapter 3, AngularJS, Junit and Bootstrap
technologies are used in CORE’s user interface, diﬀerent depending on compo-
nents. It can be cumbersome to use Selenium to create tests against applications
that use AngularJS technology as AngluarJS pages are loaded asynchronously. It
means that when Selenium is used to locate an element on a page which is not
fully loaded, the test can break. This can be worked around by using commands
to wait speciﬁc time between executions. The problem with that workaround is
deciding for how long the execution should be halted. If halted too long, the tests
get slow, if halted to short, the test can break when there is no fault. Protractor is
a wrapper(built on) around Selenium, specially designed to test applications that
use AngularJS technology. Protractor provides a function called waitforAngular
that automatically executes the next step in the tests the moment the web page
58
==PAGE:59==
ﬁnishes pending tasks. The drawback is that Protractor does not work well with
non-angular pages, which about half of CORE’s pages are. However, the drawback
can be overcome by turning oﬀthe function of protractor used to control how the
tests are executed based on how the page loads. Unfortunately turning oﬀthat
function has to be a global change aﬀecting all tests, which means that AngularJS
and non AngluarJs components have to be tested separately. Given results from
Chapter 6, that Incident is the ﬁrst component to be tested and the fact that
the component uses angularJS, it is recommended that Protractor should be used.
The advantage of having less brittle tests in angluarJS components is considered
to out weight the disadvantage of having two test suites. The following sections
explain how the framework and tools should be used.
8.1.1. Jasmine
The Jasmine framework has two important terms - suite and spec. A spec is a test
case; specs are created by calling Jasmine global function “it”. The ﬁrst parameter
represents the title of the spec while the second is the function to be tested. Specs
are contained by suites which can contain one or more specs. Suites are created
with a call to Jasmine global function “describe”. The ﬁrst parameter represents
the title of the test suite while the second is the function that implements the test
suite [23]. The code below shows an example of simple Jasmine suite with one
spec.
In order to make to make it easy for anyone with adequate coding skills to improve
or add test cases, naming of test suites and specs has to be carefully decided. It
is recommended that spec’s names should always describe what is tested in such
way that anyone can understand given basic context.
59
==PAGE:60==
8.1.2. Protractor
Protractor is a software testing framework for web applications. It provides a test
domain-speciﬁc language to write test in JavaScript. Protractor is built on top of
Selenium, which uses native events and browser-speciﬁc drivers to interact with a
web application as a user would [24]. The framework has a number of functions
that can be used to develop automated against web applications.These functions
provide methods to locate elements in a page and interact with them. The code
below shows an example of two diﬀerent methods that can be used to locate web
elements;
Both lines of code above can be used to locate the “Report incident” bottom pre-
sented in ﬁgure 8.3. The main diﬀerence is that the latter one could be considered
more brittle. If it is decided to change what the user sees to, e.g., “Report INC”,
the latter one would fail while the one using the identiﬁcation of the element would
not. By using identiﬁcations, tests are protected from minor changes in spelling
or when there are duplicates of words within the same page.
Fig. 8.3: Screenshot of Incident component frontpage
Developers of tests should always try to locate elements by their ID’s, and when
elements have not been given ID’s in the code, they should add proper ids to the
source code. By sticking with that rule, tests would only need to maintain when
the function being tested is changed.
60
==PAGE:61==
8.1.3. Test suit example
As mentioned above, the Incident component is considered to be the most valuable
component. The improved tests should therefore ﬁrst be implemented on that
component.
An example has been made to illustrate how the new test suites
should look like. The test suite below can be used to verify if it is possible to
report an incident without ﬁlling in required ﬁelds and then check if it can be
reported by ﬁlling in information for all required ﬁelds.
The ﬁrst test(“it”) in the suite(“describe”) is done to check if the user can navigate
to the incident reporting page. The second test is done to check if the incident
can be submitted without adding any information. The third test checks if the
user can submit the incident after ﬁlling out the required information. If, e.g.,
the incident can be submitted without ﬁlling in the required ﬁelds, the test fails.
By running this simple test script before the release, developers can be sure that
this vital functions of the incident component are usable after the release. There
could be many possible failures that this simple test would miss, e.g., can the date
ﬁeld be populated with a string of characters? But a higher number of tests is
required to cover most of the possible failures. Still, the test ensures that if a
user tries to report an incident, he will have to ﬁll in required ﬁelds and he will
be able to submit it. The component is therefore capable of fulﬁlling one of its
core requirement, that is, provide a way to document the incident. Once tests
for reporting incidents have been fully developed, tests for incident processing and
61
==PAGE:62==
access control should be developed. By testing all possible permutation of actions,
more tests are needed which makes maintenance harder. If the vital functions of
the component work, then less critical failures that the tests miss can be ﬁxed in
next release.
8.2. Summary
The solution presented in this chapter aims to solve the issue presented in the in-
troduction in a cost-eﬀective way. The cost-eﬀective part of the solution is achieved
by prioritizing which order test cases should be automated. The prioritizing en-
sures that the most vital functions of the system are protected against failures
before less important functions. By using this method, the risk of costly failure is
lowered to more acceptable rate in less time.
As per results in chapter 6 it is recommended that test cases for the Incident com-
ponent should be developed as soon as possible. It can be argued that, if a solution
like this had been implemented before the severe failure discussed in the introduc-
tion happened, it could have been discovered in the acceptance environment. The
cost of the failure would have been considerably less if it had been identiﬁed in the
acceptance environment like explained in section 2.3
62
==PAGE:63==
9. Conclusion
At the beginning of this report, three questions are asked. The ﬁrst is: Why do
failures appear in unexpected places? Chapter 5 reveals that defects causing failures
are indeed appearing in random places.
It is considered unexpected if defects
appear in areas of the code where there has not been any recent development. The
most likely explanation to this is that due to the complex monolithic architecture
of CORE, changes made in one area of the code can aﬀect other areas in ways
developers don’t expect.
The second question is: How can it be ensured that the software works as it should
after releases? The solution proposed in the introduction is to test features of the
software end to end before every release. But still, testing all features before every
release is considered too expensive as resources for developing the CORE software
are limited, which leads to the ﬁnal question: Can management of testing be done
in such way that it minimizes the risk of severe failure in a cost-eﬀective way?
The objective of the study described in this report is based on the ﬁnal question.
The object of this study was to ﬁnd a cost-eﬀective way to lower the risk of failure
in critical functions after new version releases. A strategy to minimize the risk
of severe failures in a cost-eﬀective way is laid out in chapter 8. The strategy
is composed using information and results from all previous chapters. Based on
results from chapters 5 and 7, it is recommended that in addition to current testing
methods, features should be tested end to end through the presentation layer.
Testing features through the presentation layer could be used to ensure that they
work in a real-world scenario. The cost-eﬀective part of the strategy is obtained by
prioritizing which order automated test cases are developed based on their value.
By prioritizing tests to be ﬁrst developed for the most valuable features, the risk of
high-cost failures can be lowered to a more acceptable rate in less time than without
prioritizing. Chapter 6 gives the starting point of the test case prioritization, that
is, the highest value components have been identiﬁed. With prioritization of which
order component should ﬁrst be tested, it is recommended that the new strategy is
implemented as soon as possible. With severe failures being rather rare, it is hard
to measure the eﬀectiveness of the strategy. However, If the development team
would start documenting defects found in the testing environment, the eﬀectiveness
could be measured by the number of defects discovered when doing end to end
testing.
63
==PAGE:64==
Bibliography
[1]
H.-W. Jung, S.-G. Kim, and C.-S. Chung, “Measuring software product qual-
ity: A survey of iso/iec 9126,” IEEE Software, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 88–92, Sep.
2004, issn: 0740-7459. doi: 10.1109/MS.2004.1331309.
[2]
A. Geraci, F. Katki, L. McMonegal, B. Meyer, J. Lane, P. Wilson, J. Radatz,
M. Yee, H. Porteous, and F. Springsteel, Ieee standard computer dictionary:
Compilation of ieee standard computer glossaries. IEEE Press, 1991.
[3]
A. Bertolino, “Software testing,” SWEBOK, p. 69, 2001.
[4]
B.Dhanalaxmi, D. Naidu, and Dr.K.Anuradha, “A review on software fault
detection and prevention mechanism in software development activities,”
2015.
[5]
S. Eklund and H. Fernlund, Programkonstruktion med kvalitet: Projekthanter-
ing och iso 9000. Studentlitteratur, 1998.
[6]
IEEE, “Ieee standard glossary of software engineering terminology,” 1990.
[7]
P. Runeson, C. Andersson, T. Thelin, A. Andrews, and T. Berling, “What do
we know about defect detection methods?[software testing],” IEEE software,
vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 82–90, 2006.
[8]
L. Williams, “Testing overview and black-box testing techniques,” Retrieved
Agustus, vol. 12, p. 2015, 2006.
[9]
K. Nørmark, “Object-oriented programming in c#-for c programmers, 2007b,”
URL http://www. cs. aau.-dk/˜ normark/oop-07/html/notes/theme-index.
html,
[10]
Why end to end testing is necessary and how to perform it? Accessed: 2017-
08-22. [Online]. Available: http://www.softwaretestinghelp.com/what-
is-end-to-end-testing/.
[11]
J. Campanella, “Principles of quality costs: Principles, implementation, and
use,” in ASQ World Conference on Quality and Improvement Proceedings,
American Society for Quality, 1999, p. 507.
[12]
R. Ramler, S. Biﬄ, and P. Grünbacher, “Value-based management of soft-
ware testing,” in Value-based software engineering, Springer, 2006, pp. 225–
244.
[13]
Nordea, Who are we? Accessed: 2017-06-12. [Online]. Available: https://
www.nordea.com/en/about-nordea/who-we-are/.
64
==PAGE:65==
[14]
A. S. Chernobai, S. T. Rachev, and F. J. Fabozzi, Operational risk: A guide
to basel ii capital requirements, models, and analysis. John Wiley & Sons,
2008, vol. 180.
[15]
B. Committee et al., “Principles for the sound management of operational
risk,” Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements Communica-
tions, 2011.
[16]
Gui architectures, Accessed: 2017-05-13. [Online]. Available: https://martinfowler.
com/eaaDev/uiArchs.html.
[17]
P. Runeson and M. Höst, “Guidelines for conducting and reporting case
study research in software engineering,” Empirical software engineering, vol.
14, no. 2, p. 131, 2009.
[18]
A. K. Shenton, “Strategies for ensuring trustworthiness in qualitative re-
search projects,” Education for information, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 63–75, 2004.
[19]
J. D. Evans, Straightforward statistics for the behavioral sciences. Brooks/-
Cole, 1996.
[20]
U. Reja, K. L. Manfreda, V. Hlebec, and V. Vehovar, “Open-ended vs. close-
ended questions in web questionnaires,” Developments in applied statistics,
vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 159–177, 2003.
[21]
L. Rising and N. S. Janoﬀ, “The scrum software development process for
small teams,” IEEE software, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 26–32, 2000.
[22]
Are 64% of features really rarely or never used? Accessed: 2017-06-18. [On-
line]. Available: https://www.mountaingoatsoftware.com/blog/are-64-
of-features-really-rarely-or-never-used.
[23]
Jasmine web page, https://jasmine.github.io/, Accessed: 2017-08-14.
[24]
Protractor web page, Accessed: 2017-09-02. [Online]. Available: http://www.
protractortest.org.
65
==PAGE:66==
A. Questionnaire
1. Please write the order of what you think are the most valuable components in
CORE using numbers? E.g. if you think Audit is the most important component,
you would write 1. And so on. There is no need to write the whole order, but
more will give be better picture. Audit, Product and Follow up components have
been excluded from the list as they are not considered relevant.
– Incident
– QRA
– BCM
– RSA
– Risk Model
– CME
– Learning Centre
– Organization
Question 2. Why do you think the component you wrote 1. Is most valuable?
Background In my thesis project I’ve been investigating how we could ﬁnd faults
in the code before they escalate into a severe failures. In other words, we want
all processes to work as they should after new releases. However, currently when
we make new releases, only processes where new features have been developed are
tested. This means that if we for example have only been developing in CME but
for some reason Incident component stops working, no one will notice until the
error is in the production environment and a user complains.
One solution to this problem is to make automated “process” tests that checks
whether all processes work as they should before we release changes to the pro-
duction environment. The problem with this solution is that it is time consuming
to develop tests. Therefore I have decided to go for a value based approach. We
should start by developing tests for the most valuable processes/components. In
order to assess the value I have made an analyses of how many and how often
users are using diﬀerent components of CORE. However that does only give half
66
==PAGE:67==
of the picture. Some processes are more critical than other. Therefore I made this
questioner to supplement my analyses.
67
