==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
Location decision for a production facility 
Special view to factory location factors in Chile 
 
 
 
 
Author: 
Víctor Antona García (s150947) 
 
Supervisor: 
Zaza Nadja Lee Herbert-Hansen 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
September 2017 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
2 
 
Executive Summary 
During the last decade, the development of emerging economies and improvements in 
their infrastructure and education have increased manufacturing costs, changing the 
global manufacturing  spectrum. Recent studies show that International location 
decisions are no longer solely based on costs and that the location factors might change 
over time, pushing companies to re-evaluate their factory locations. Thus, there is a 
need of reviewing the way these processes are carried out and studying the factors 
involved in it.  
Addressing the Research Gap and Assisting Practitioners 
Although International location decisions (ILD) have been already studied by several 
authors, there is still limitations assessing these processes and understanding the 
dynamics of their location factors. Most of the studies referred to this topic have been 
carried out from a Western perspective, leaving Latin American firms without scientific 
studies or similar case studies to base their ILD’s. This thesis addresses this gap in 
research by identifying the most important location factors and their relative weight 
from a Chilean viewpoint, and proposing a model guide to be followed by other 
companies facing  ILD processes. 
Literature Review and Case Study 
The gap in research have been addressed through an extensive literature review with 
over 100 sources, and a quantitative analysis based on a framework tool and a Delphi 
process.  The case firm is an existing Chilean company facing the dilemma of reviewing 
its production line configuration and its location.  
Insights to the Framework tool and Delphi process. 
The presented tool turns a qualitative analysis into a quantitative approach. If the 
company properly evaluates its needs and objectives, this framework is very helpful to 
obtain the optimal level of insourcing/outsourcing in a manufacturing process. On the 
other hand, although it is very time consuming, the Delphi method is extremely useful 
in developing a consensus on subjective issues such as evaluating the importance of 
location factors. The results of the Delphi present similar results to other studies 
assessed in the same topic. 
Conclusion 
Although the model guide can be highly useful for companies facing future ILD’s, the 
location factors cannot be directly extrapolated from one case study to another. 
However, location factors such as Cost, Infrastructure and Economic factors seem to be 
relevant in any case. In addition, the analysis and evaluation of the case firm shows that 
their current configuration is not optimal, and proposes to insource part of their 
manufacturing process and place it in Quilpué, Valparaiso (Chile).  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
3 
 
Table of content 
 
Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................... 2 
Article ............................................................................................................................................ 4 
Acknowledgement ....................................................................................................................... 47 
Appendix ..................................................................................................................................... 48 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
4 
 
Article 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
5 
 
Location decision for a production facility 
Special view to factory location factors in Chile 
 
Víctor Antona García*, Zaza Nadja Lee Herbert Hansen** 
 
Technical University of Denmark, Management Engineering, 2800, Kgs. Lyngby, 
Denmark 
 
*) E-mail: s150947@student.dtu.dk, Tel: +34699669416 
**) E-mail: znlh@dtu.dk, Tel: +4545254440 
 
ABSTRACT 
Purpose – International location decisions (ILD) are extremely complex processes 
where firms need to evaluate a nearly infinite  number of alternatives in order to choose 
the most appropriate one for their best interest. Negative consequences can arise if 
companies do not consider all of the relevant factors in choosing an optimal location or 
if they make the decision based on rule of thumb. Thus, the purpose of this thesis is to 
carry out an ILD case to be used as a model guide for other companies and identify and 
rate the importance of the location factors from a Chilean viewpoint. 
Design/methodology/approach – A literature research is carried out to get the 
contextual factors of the ILD processes and their factors. Moreover, it includes 
contextual information about: risk and benefits of outsourcing, the used framework tool 
and Delphi processes. The master thesis addresses the proposed research questions 
through a case study approach. A framework tool and a Delphi method have been also 
used as part of the methodology. The data collection of the Delphi process is conducted 
mainly by face-to-face interviews.  
Findings – This study evaluates Motivations, Scoping and Current situation of the case 
company as the first three steps of the ILD process. In addition, it identifies the main 
contextual factors to be considered by the case firm to evaluate the level of 
insourcing/outsourcing of their manufacturing process.   
Research implications – This master thesis addresses the gap in research of evaluating 
an ILD process and the location factors involved in it, from a Chilean perspective. It 
identifies and rates the most important location factors that have to be considered in an 
ILD process by using a Delphi method. Furthermore, it uses a helpful framework tool to 
determine firms’ level of insourcing/outsourcing in their manufacturing line based on 
their needs and objectives.  
Practical implications – The ILD step-by-step process proposed for the case firm can 
be used as a model guide for other Chilean companies addressing new ILD’s with the 
purpose of avoiding misguided decisions that can affect Chilean firms’ performance.  
Originality/value – The proposed framework tool had been never used to identify the 
degree of insourcing/outsourcing in a firm’s production line based on their needs and 
objectives. In addition, previous studies have rated location factors, but it has always 
been from a Western perspective. This paper identifies and analyzes this factors from a 
Chilean perspective, which can help to Chilean firms in future ILD’s.  
Keywords: International location decisions, Outsourcing or insourcing, Delphi method. 
==PAGE:6==
6 
 
1. Introduction 
Increasing connectivity, transport improvements and the continuous progress in the IT 
area have made it easier for firms to plan, coordinate, report and communicate activities  
between countries (Mol, 2007). These technological advances have greatly increased the 
number of available manufacturing strategies for companies. In fact, thirty years ago, a 
new tendency began of delegating manufacturing operations to external companies in 
foreign locations (Outsourcing) in order to focus especially on the core business and 
reduce manufacturing costs (Burkholder, 2006). 
Organizations frequently selected to low labour cost countries to design and produce 
better products at lower cost (Jansson, 2005). Thereby, Asian countries, mainly India 
and China, became the “factory of the world”, producing all kinds of consumers for 
foreign firms (Kennedy and Clark, 2006). However, even though outsourcing offers 
many benefits and advantages, it also introduces some serious risks that have to be 
considered. Wu et al. (2008) stress the belief that outsourcing might cause security or 
intellectual property rights issues or misappropriation of trade secrets, while Olson and 
Wu, (2008) emphasize a drop in quality and responsiveness or an unexpected growth in 
raw material, labour and transportation costs. These facts diver firms from their 
objective of cost minimization, and force them to review both their manufacturing 
strategy and the location of their facilities, while also taking into account impacts on 
profitability, total cost or customer value (Ellram et al., 2013). 
Therefore, in recent years, many authors have stressed the importance of other factors 
apart from costs, such as: proximity to demand, market size or supplier availability, 
among others, when analyzing an international location decision (Au et al., 2006; Bocci 
and Rocco, 2015; Brush et al., 1999; Chan, 2011). The increasing relevance of these 
factors elevates the complexity of these decisions, expanding the number of viable 
alternatives to locate part of a production process. The high level of difficulty of these 
decision processes has triggered many failures among firms, mainly caused by both a 
lack of diligence in the process and an underestimation of key factors (Gray et al., 
2013). In order to create a solution to this extended problem, many researchers have 
focused on analyzing which factors affect organizations in their manufacturing 
strategies and international location decisions (ILD) (De Meirleir, 2008; Hayter, 1997; 
Jungthirapanich and Benjamin, 1995; MacCarthy and Atthirawong, 2003). Furthermore, 
throughout the years, diverse frameworks have been developed to facilitate the decision-
making process and assure that no relevant factors are overlooked in deciding the best 
alternative possible for the firm (Pongpanich, 2000).  
Nevertheless, even though there are already many publications addressing this dilemma 
and the importance of factors involved in the decision (Arauzo-Carod et al., 2010; Au et 
al., 2006; Bocci and Rocco, 2015; Brush et al., 1999; Chan, 2011; De Meirleir, 2008; 
Hayter, 1997; Jungthirapanich and Benjamin, 1995; MacCarthy and Atthirawong, 2003; 
Pongpanich, 2000; Porter and Rivkin, 2012; Yurimoto and Masui, 1995), the 
documentation on how firms get from their initial motives to arrive at a location 
decision is still scarce, and is even more limited regarding empirical studies.  
Furthermore, most of the literature has been investigated from either a Western or Asian 
perspective, leaving a gap in research in this field covering other viewpoints such as 
Latin America. 
Even though the geographical location may be unfavorable compared to Asia, Moreira 
(2007) believes that manufacturing is also an important factor in Latin American 
==PAGE:7==
7 
 
economies. In recent decades, there has been a quick growth in the South American 
manufacturing industry, mostly due to changes in trade tariffs (such as the NAFTA 
agreement), that have considerably increased the global relevance of the region (Loria, 
2011). Within Latin America, Chile in particular is a success story. It has experienced 
economic growth due to an increase in manufacturing exports (Siliverstovs and Herzer, 
2006) and it is the only Latin American country that shares with China a pattern of 
establishing links with international capital (Devlin et al., 2006). However, there is not a 
scientific database or reliable case studies based on Chilean industry that companies can 
use to weigh both quantitative and qualitative factors to face international location 
decision processes.   
Therefore, this master thesis seeks to address this gap in research in location decision in 
Chilean industry while addressing the following research questions (RQ): 
RQ1: How should a Chilean company assess an ILD?  
RQ2: Which factors should be considered and how should be weighted? 
This study addresses the research questions through the case study of an existing firm 
that, for confidential reasons, would be called ChileBoards.  
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 outlines the literature review, presents the 
definitions of key terms and both the location decision topic and the case study 
theoretical background. Section 3 describes the research methodology and Section 4 
describe the research findings related to the case firm, which are analyzed in Section 5. 
The results are presented in Section 6 while, Section 7 presents the implications for 
theory and practice resulting from the case study analysis. Finally, Section 8 provides a 
conclusion,  challenges and suggestions for further research. 
2. Literature Review 
The objective of the literature review in this thesis is to present a proper understanding 
of the context around location decision processes and the factors involved in that 
decision so as to be able to come up with new insights based on a framework tool and a 
Delphi study.  
In this chapter, a frame of reference is established in order to lay out the theoretical 
background of this research. First, definitions of the key terms are provided in section 
2.1. Afterwards, section 2.2. and 2.3. describe the location decision process and the 
main factors that must be considered. The upcoming sections are focused on the case 
study: section 2.4. presents the Chilean manufacture panorama, 2.5. a brief review and 
advantages and disadvantages of outsourcing, section 2.6. summarizes how the 
framework tool works and, finally, section 2.7. describes the Delphi method. 
2.1. Definition of Central Terms 
Some of the terms used in academic research can refer to different meanings or 
definitions. This might produce misunderstandings for the reader. Therefore, it is 
necessary to define the key terms used along the paper so as to make it easier to read 
and understand. The table below shows definitions for those concepts and their 
references.  
 
 
==PAGE:8==
8 
 
Table 1: Summary of  key concepts. 
CONCEPT 
DEFINITION 
REFERENCE 
Location Decision 
Analyze different alternatives to place a production facility and choose 
the most appropriate one based on different factors. 
(Pongpanich, 2000) 
Location Factor 
An advantage which is gained when an economic activity takes place at 
a particular point or at several such points rather than elsewhere 
(Weber, 1929) 
Manufacturing 
strategy 
Company plan derived directly from the business nature and from the 
market conditions. It specifies what operations must accomplish for the 
business to succeed. 
(Schroeder et al., 1986). 
Outsourcing 
To delegate manufacturing operations to foreign locations to take 
advantage of factors such as cheap labour costs or looser regulations. 
(Stamm, 2005) 
Insourcing 
Allocation or reallocation of resources internally within the same 
organization, even if the allocation is in different geographical locations. 
(Schniederjans et al., 2015), 
Offshoring 
Move the manufacturing process to a foreign country. The organization 
still keeps control and ownership of the factory 
(Lewin and Peeters, 2006). 
 
Reshoring 
Moving back the production factory from a foreign country (offshoring) 
to the company’s home country 
(Ellram et al., 2013). 
2.2. The International Location Decision Process 
2.2.1. The process 
An ILD process consists of seven phases (Andersson et al., 2013): Initiation and 
Motivations, Scoping, Current situation, Analytical process, Evaluation, Final location 
and Post-assessment.  
 
Figure 1. Phases of the IDL process.  
2.2.2. Motivations 
Initiating a new international location process entails high complexity and, hence, it is 
usually carried out with a specific purpose (Sule, 2008). Dunning and Lundan (2008) 
establish four main factors that motivates to initiate an international location decision 
process: resource seeking, market seeking, efficiency seeking and strategic asset 
seeking. On the other hand, Kodali and Routroy (2006) believe that the main reasons 
can be simplified in either increasing the company’s competitiveness or getting closer to 
the customers. Other authors (Caves, 1996; Viswanadham and Kameshwaran, 2007) 
propose other factors that mostly complement and support the reasons mentioned above. 
Moreover, these decisions are commonly proposed, initiated and made by firms at its 
strategic level (Sule, 2008; Bellgran et al. 2013). 
Motivations 
Scoping 
Current 
situation 
Analytical 
process 
Evaluation 
Final 
decision 
==PAGE:9==
9 
 
2.2.3. Scoping 
The objective of an international location process is to come up with a new alternative 
that gives an organization more advantages over the current configuration (Immelt, 
2012). For this purpose, it is essential to compare the potential alternatives (Kinkel and 
Maloca, 2009), not only from a cost perspective (Bellgran et al. 2013). One of the main 
issues is that firms’ analysis, when generating possible alternatives, is not sufficiently in 
depth, reducing the alternatives, in most cases, to those linked somehow to the company 
(Kinkel and Maloca, 2009).  
In order to anticipate these potential problems, reduce failures and produce an accurate 
analysis, in this phase, companies need to design their project plan and organize the 
execution of the process. Firms, at this point, must also decide who will be in charge of 
the ILD process. The creation of a group/team is acknowledged as a very important 
stage of the project by several companies (MacCarthy and Atthirawong, 2003). 
Christodoulou et al. (2007) believe that there is need for a multidisciplinary team to 
assess appropriately this challenge, but in most cases, firms construct non-cross 
functional groups, thereby losing the benefits of diverse teams (Bruch et al., 2014).  
2.2.4. Current situation and Analytical process 
This stage is the real starting point of the process. Firms must start by gathering data on 
their current situation in order to run the analysis. Dymsza (1972) believes that the 
difficulty of collecting quality information, due to the availability and reliability of the 
data in some countries, increases the complexity of this phase.  
As explained below in section 2.3., a vast number of companies underrate the 
importance of qualitative factors during the data gathering process because they cannot 
be easily measured in the upcoming analysis (Bruch et al., 2014). This tendency usually 
causes difficulties when it comes to running the chosen facility (Gray et al., 2013).  
The other big challenge during the analytical process is the number of stakeholders. 
Bellgran et al. (2013) sustain that while a high number of stakeholders can complicate 
the process due to conflict of interest, reducing the number in addition can decrease the 
effectiveness of the decision. Some authors (Bellgran et al., 2013; McIvor, 2013) 
maintain that, due to the complexity of the analysis, many companies evaluate their 
alternatives based mainly on general practice or experience.  
2.2.5. Evaluation and Final decision  
Once all the data has been collected, the evaluation process must be assessed 
incorporating: knowledge, experience, company objectives and targets such as benefits, 
equity or costs (Chan, 2011). Arauzo-Carod et al. (2010) point out that several 
organizations base this decision simply on costs, but Viswanadham and Kameshwaran 
(2007) argue that many others utilize a multi-criteria tool rating and scoring factors to 
come up with a final ranking. 
In any case, regardless of the methodology used by the firm, the final decision is always 
the responsibility of the organizational level (Bruch et al., 2014; Steenhuis and De 
Brujin, 2004). However, even though this decision affects the firm in many aspects such 
as responsiveness to demand, lead time, production costs or quality (Kodali and 
Routroy, 2006), in most cases the final decision is still based on instinct or past 
experience (Bruch et al., 2014; Steenhuis and De Brujin, 2004). Furthermore, the top 
==PAGE:10==
10 
 
levels of organizations usually do not consider the consequences of the decision on 
operational capabilities, which can result in a wrong choice (Bellgran et al., 2013). 
Thus, Hoffman and Schniederjans (1994) stress the necessity of recognizing internal 
strengths and weaknesses before making the final decision.  
An international location decision is a very challenging process. There is a need to 
reduce an extremely complex process into a simple decision, often based on not very 
well-founded information or assumptions (Dymsza, 1972). However, even though firms 
usually intend to compensate for this gap with experience and instinct, they should take 
into account the advantages and disadvantages of many pivotal factors (Montibeller and 
Yoshizaki, 2011). 
2.2.6.  Post-assessment 
The success of an international location decision is defined by how the selected 
alternative is able to fulfill the company’s objectives (Jungthirapanich and Benjamin, 
1995). The post-assessment phase allows companies to measure the effects of the final 
decision and analyze if the decision is directing the company towards its goals or not. 
Although the importance of this phase is obvious, not many companies evaluate their 
final decision due to the complexity of acquiring the economic information required 
(Porter and Rivkin, 2012).  
In addition, it is usually years from when the final decision is made until the 
manufacturing process begins and then takes even more time to measure, collect and 
analyze the required data to evaluate that decision (De Meirleir, 2008). However, 
despite this, companies usually do not put much effort into this phase. They should 
continuously review their location decision to maintain competitiveness by studying the 
outcomes and evaluating changes in their goals over time (Kalantari, 2013). 
2.3. Factors 
Every country or region offers a diverse range of advantages and disadvantages for 
companies regarding their production strategy. The immensity of location possibilities 
requires firms to utilize location factors to contrast, evaluate and choose an optimal 
location based on their requirements and necessities. Jungthirapanich and Benjamin 
(1995) show in their research that, in general, international location decisions were 
based on a very limited number of quantitative factors, mainly transportation and labour 
costs. However, recent studies stress that much more quantitative and qualitative factors 
should be involved in the process (Bellgran et al., 2013).  
Nevertheless, Bruch et al. (2014) point out that the majority of firms prioritize 
quantitative factors over qualitative ones, which has negative repercussions on the 
profitability of the chosen location. Moreover, those companies that are not giving 
relevance to factors such as: language, politics or culture,  usually experience 
difficulties in running the factory (Brush et al., 1999). Another common mistake among 
manufacturing firms is to study these factors from a static perspective, without 
considering that they might change in the long-run (Tate et al., 2014). In fact, these 
factors do vary over time and many authors emphasize the high value in monitoring 
their dynamic nature (Kinkel and Maloca, 2009; Porter and Rivkin, 2012). On the other 
hand, even though considering more factors leads to a more complete analysis, it 
increases considerably the process complexity (Kodali and Routroy, 2006). 
==PAGE:11==
11 
 
An exhaustive literature review has been carried out to identify the group of factors and 
sub-factors that are potentially relevant in ILD’s. As this case study is located in South 
America and most of the previous studies were taken from a Western perspective, every 
factor found in the literature has been included. The factors presented are classified and 
divided under twelve headings and cover operational, strategic, economic, political, 
social and cultural categories.  
Nevertheless, all these factors and sub-factors are not always relevant for companies. 
Each firm will set different priorities to each factor before making a final decision. 
Stevenson (1996) agrees that companies should only take into account some factors, 
depending on the type or size of the business, location of the parent company, suppliers, 
main markets etc. However, the existent literature does not show a clear link between a 
specific type of business and sub-group of factors, hence, the whole list of factors and 
sub-factors have been the subject of a Delphi process. The list is presented in the table 
below. 
 
==PAGE:12==
12 
 
Table 2: Literature review of factors of location decisions. 
FACTORS 
DEFINITION 
REFERENCES 
Costs 
Fixed costs; transportation costs; wage rates and trends in wages; energy costs; other 
manufacturing costs; land cost; construction/leasing costs and other factors (e.g. R&D 
costs, transaction and management costs etc.). 
(Au et al., 2006; Atthirawong and MacCarthy, 2000; Badri et al., 1995; Brush et al., 1999; 
Hayter, 1997; MacCarthy and Atthirawong, 2003; Pongpanich, 2000; Porter and Rivkin, 2012;  
Ulgado, 1996;  Vos, 1997;  Yurimoto and Masui, 1995) 
Infrastructure 
Development of modes of transportation (airports, railroads, roads and seaports); 
quality and reliability of transportation; quality and reliability of utilities (e.g. water 
supply, waste treatment, power supply, etc.) and telecommunication systems. 
(Arauzo-Carod et al., 2010; Atthirawong and MacCarthy, 2000; Au et al., 2006; Bocci and 
Rocco, 2015; Brush et al., 1999; Chan, 2011; De Meirleir, 2008; Hayter, 1997; Jungthirapanich 
and Benjamin, 1995; MacCarthy and Atthirawong, 2003; Pongpanich, 2000; Ulgado, 1996;  
Vos, 1997; Yang and Lee, 1997; Yurimoto and Masui, 1995) 
Labour characteristics 
Quality and availability of labour force, unemployment rates, labour unions, work 
motivation and labour turnover, workforce management. 
(Au et al., 2006; Atthirawong and MacCarthy, 2000;  Brush et al., 1999; De Meirleir, 2008; 
Hayter, 1997; Jungthirapanich and Benjamin, 1995; MacCarthy and Atthirawong, 2003; 
Pongpanich, 2000; Porter and Rivkin, 2012; Schmenner, 1982; Ulgado, 1996; Vereecke and 
Dierdonck, 2002; Vos, 1997; Yang and Lee, 1997;  Yurimoto and Masui, 1995) 
Government and 
political factors 
Government stability; government structure; consistency of government policies; and 
attitude of government to inward investment. 
(Au et al., 2006; Atthirawong and MacCarthy, 2000; Badri et al., 1995; Brush et al., 1999; 
Chan, 2011; De Meirleir, 2008; Hayter, 1997; Jungthirapanich and Benjamin, 1995; MacCarthy 
and Atthirawong, 2003; Pongpanich, 2000; Porter and Rivkin, 2012;  Vereecke and Dierdonck, 
2002; Yurimoto and Masui, 1995) 
Legal and regulatory 
framework 
Compensation laws; insurance laws; environmental regulations; industrial relations 
laws; legal system; bureaucratic red tape; requirements for setting up local 
corporations; regulations concerning joint ventures and mergers and regulations on 
transfer of earnings out of country rate. 
(Au et al., 2006; Atthirawong and MacCarthy, 2000; Brush et al., 1999; Chan, 2011; De 
Meirleir, 2008; Hayter, 1997; Jungthirapanich and Benjamin, 1995; MacCarthy and 
Atthirawong, 2003; Pongpanich, 2000; Porter and Rivkin, 2012;  Yurimoto and Masui, 1995) 
Economics 
Tax structure and incentives, financial incentives, custom fees, inflation, business 
climate, country’s debt and GDP/GNP growth. 
(Atthirawong and MacCarthy, 2000; Badri et al., 1995; Brush et al., 1999; Chan, 2011; De 
Meirleir, 2008; Jungthirapanich and Benjamin, 1995; MacCarthy and Atthirawong, 2003; 
Pongpanich, 2000; Porter and Rivkin, 2012; Ulgado, 1996; Watts, 1987; Yang and Lee, 1997;  
Yurimoto and Masui, 1995) 
==PAGE:13==
13 
 
Markets and customer 
Proximity to demand; size of market that can be served/potential customer expenditure; 
responsiveness and delivery time to markets; population trends and nature and variance 
of demand. 
(Au et al., 2006; Atthirawong and MacCarthy, 2000; Badri et al., 1995; Brush et al., 1999; 
Hayter, 1997; MacCarthy and Atthirawong, 2003; Pongpanich, 2000; Porter and Rivkin, 2012; 
Vereecke and Dierdonck, 2002; Yang and Lee, 1997; Yurimoto and Masui, 1995) 
Suppliers and resources 
Proximity to supplier or resources; Quality of suppliers; alternative suppliers; 
competition for suppliers; nature of supply process (reliability of the system) and speed 
and responsiveness of suppliers. 
(Au et al., 2006; Atthirawong and MacCarthy, 2000;  Badri et al., 1995; Brush et al., 1999; 
Hayter, 1997; MacCarthy and Atthirawong, 2003; Pongpanich, 2000; Porter and Rivkin, 2012; 
Vereecke and Dierdonck, 2002; Yang and Lee, 1997;  Yurimoto and Masui, 1995) 
Proximity to parent 
company’s facilities 
Close to parent company. 
(Atthirawong and MacCarthy, 2000; Brush et al., 1999; MacCarthy and Atthirawong, 2003; 
Tong, 1979) 
Proximity to 
competition 
Competitors’ geographical location. 
(Atthirawong and MacCarthy, 2000; Badri et al., 1995; MacCarthy and Atthirawong, 2003; 
Vereecke and Dierdonck, 2002; Yang and Lee, 1997) 
Quality of life 
Quality of environment; climate, schools, churches, hospitals, education system and 
standard of living. 
(Atthirawong and MacCarthy, 2000; Brush et al., 1999; Hayter, 1997;  MacCarthy and 
Atthirawong, 2003; Schmenner, 1982;  Tong, 1979; Ulgado, 1996; Vereecke and Dierdonck, 
2002; Watts, 1987; Yang and Lee, 1997; Yurimoto and Masui, 1995) 
Characteristics of a 
specific location 
Availability of space for future expansion; attitude of local community to a location; 
physical conditions (e.g. weather, close to other businesses, parking, appearance, 
accessibility by customers etc.). 
(Atthirawong and MacCarthy, 2000; Badri et al., 1995;  Brush et al., 1999; Hayter, 1997; 
MacCarthy and Atthirawong, 2003; Yang and Lee, 1997) 
==PAGE:14==
14 
 
2.4. Outsourcing: Benefits and Risks 
As globalization grew, many organizations started to modify their manufacturing 
structure, locating part of their operations in low-labour cost countries to reduce 
expenses (Stamm, 2005; Jansson, 2005; Mol, 2007; Mullin, 1996). In this scenario, 
Asian countries, mainly India and China, are known as the most common countries to 
outsource to (Matteo, 2003). Their large population generate an enormous amount of 
cheap labour that creates a huge comparative advantage (Devlin et al., 2006). As the 
Asian countries became members of the World Trade Organization (WTO), the logistics 
industry has been improved and the outsourcing demand has increased considerably 
(Agarwal and Wu, 2004). 
During the last decade, not only industries with simple manufacturing processes, such 
as fashion, are looking for cheap labour costs, but in fact, an increasing amount of 
organizations are relying on “outsourcing countries” to manufacture high technology 
products (Kennedy and Clark, 2006; Li et al., 2012; Olson and Wu, 2008; Chen et al., 
2014). Nevertheless, each firm considers a particular criteria to define its manufacturing 
strategy, depending on some of the factors mentioned in Section 2.3. Many publications 
have been assessed to study the tradeoffs of outsourcing and it is paramount for 
companies to analyze them in detail before making a decision. 
  
Table 3: Literature review of advantages of outsourcing. 
ADVANTAGES 
DEFINITION 
REFERENCES 
Cost reduction 
Lower overhead costs due to lower labour costs and 
reduction of an initial investment. 
(Al-Mutairi 
and 
Al-Hammad, 
2015; 
Burkholder, 2006; Fan, 2000; Gonzalez et al., 
2006; Khan et al. 2003; Lynch, 2004; Wu et 
al. 2008; Zhu et al., 2001) 
Headcount reduction  
Outsourcing reduces the amount of personnel needed 
in-house. 
(Al-Mutairi 
and 
Al-Hammad, 
2015; 
Burkholder, 2006; Gonzalez et al., 2006; 
Khan et al. 2003) 
Focus on core business 
Outsourcing some processes allows the company to 
keep a focus on key activities.  
(Al-Mutairi 
and 
Al-Hammad, 
2015; 
Burkholder, 
2006; 
Khan 
et al. 
2003; 
Weerakkody et al., 2003;Wu et al., 2008) 
Access to greater expertise 
Outsource 
companies 
provide 
expertise 
and 
knowledge to organizations in some areas that 
otherwise would not be affordable.  
(Al-Mutairi 
and 
Al-Hammad, 
2015;  
Burkholder, 2006; Ketler and Walstrom, 
1993; Wu et al., 2008) 
Economies of scale 
Large contractors can use their size to access 
sophisticated equipment or shared services, or get 
price breaks on supplies and services. 
(Al-Mutairi and Al-Hammad, 2015; Ketler 
and 
Walstrom, 
1993; 
Rochester 
and 
Rochester, 1995) 
Flexibility 
Adapting to changing business conditions and 
technology, or dealing with rapid business expansion 
or economic uncertainty. Continuous access to the 
latest technology and replacement of obsolete 
systems.  
(Al-Mutairi 
and 
Al-Hammad, 
2015; 
Burkholder, 2006; Claver et al., 2002; 
Kakabadse and Kakabadse, 2000; Wu et al., 
2008) 
 
 
 
==PAGE:15==
15 
 
Table 4: Literature review of disadvantages of outsourcing. 
DISADVANTAGES 
DEFINITION 
REFERENCES 
Unexpected costs 
Some costs are considered during the decision 
process. Examples: higher than expected outsourcing 
costs due to low vendor estimates, or contract 
misunderstanding, higher tax liability, etc. 
(Al-Mutairi and Al-Hammad, 2015; Khan et 
al., 2003; Olson and Wu, 2008) 
Hidden costs 
Such as salaries for outsource personnel and the 
supplier’s overhead charges. The reasons why they 
seem to go away is that many outsource firms are not 
providing employee benefits. 
(Khan et al., 2003; Gonzalez et al. 2006; ; 
Olson and Wu, 2008; Wu et al. 2008) 
Potential 
violations 
of 
intellectual property rights 
Intellectual property rights issues may create 
unexpected costs and risks, threat to security or 
confidentiality. 
(Al-Mutairi and Al-Hammad, 2015; Khan et 
al. 2003; Olson and Wu, 2008; Wu et al. 
2008) 
Low morale   
Low morale of permanent employees 
(Antonucci et al., 1998; Beaumont and Costa, 
2003; Gupta and Gupta, 1992; Lankford and 
Parsa, 1999) 
Loss 
of 
control 
over 
production 
or 
critical 
functions 
Loss 
of 
control 
over 
vertically 
integrated 
organizations. 
Diminished control over sensitive material. Loss of 
control over quality, production rates, takt times or 
disaster recovery. 
(Al-Mutairi 
and 
Al-Hammad, 
2015; 
Blumberg, 1998; Lankford and Parsa, 1999; 
Olson and Wu, 2008; Razzaque and Sheng, 
1998)  
Dependency 
on 
the 
supplier 
Outsourcing makes companies dependent on their 
suppliers (contracts, decisions, prices, etc.)  
(Antonucci et al., 1998; Beaumont and Costa, 
2003; Gupta and Gupta, 1992; Pagnoncelli, 
1993) 
Poor transportation and IT 
infrastructure 
Many “low-cost countries” do not have the required 
infrastructure. Most suppliers have ineffective 
transportation networks, poor transportation tools, 
old-designed warehousing facilities, lack of qualified 
staff, and lack of IT capability. These issues produce 
lead-time delays. 
(Hertzell, 2001; Kadar and Huang, 2002; 
Kerr, 2005; Olson and Wu, 2008; Trunick, 
2003) 
2.5. Manufacturing Industry in Chile  
Several authors (De Ferranti et al., 2002; Blum and Leamer, 2004; Lederman & 
Maloney, 2003; Easterly & Levine, 2003) have studied how the manufacturing industry 
can influence the development of Latin American countries. Even though the 
geographical location may be unfavourable compared to Asian countries, some changes 
in government policies, such as the NAFTA agreement, have stimulated the 
manufacturing industry in these countries over the last three decades (Moreira, 2007; 
Loria, 2011). Moreover, De Ferranti et al. (2002) point out that other countries with a 
natural-resource abundance such as Canada, Australia or Sweden are good precedents of 
how manufacturing can be a pivotal element to a lead into a “knowledge economy”. 
Although Lederman and Maloney (2003) agree that, at that time, those countries were in 
better conditions to succeed than Latin American countries are now. 
==PAGE:16==
16 
 
It is generally accepted that, among Latin American countries, Chile is a success story. 
Throughout the last four decades, Chile has experienced economic growth due to an 
increase in manufacturing exports (Siliverstovs and Herzer, 2006). This growth was 
especially noticeable after the economic restructuring in 1974 (Laban and Larrain, 
1995), when Chile eliminated most of its import restrictions and reduced considerably 
import taxes to stimulate a more liberalized trade market (Bergoeing et al., 2002).  In 
fact, Chile is the only Latin American country that shares with China a pattern of 
establishing links with international capital, including a high proportion of Foreign 
Direct Investment (FDI) in its capital account (Devlin et al., 2006). Camhi et al. (1997) 
believe that the entry of new firms into the Chilean market is the main reason for 
Chilean economic growth, while Bergoeing et al. (2002) argue that it is mainly 
influenced by technological innovation. 
The Chilean economy has become very dynamic and open to foreign markets (Navarro 
and Soto, 2006) and has not only enhanced its exportation panorama, but has developed 
its entire manufacturing scene as well. Overall, the Chilean manufacturing sector grew 
at an average annual rate of 2,8% after trade liberalization, mostly due to the reshuffling 
of resources within the economy (about 2%) (Pavcnik, 2002). 
However, Chile’s prosperity is still linked to copper extraction (40% of its exports) 
(Moreira & Blyde, 2006) and it still finds it difficult to export more industrialized 
natural resource products (Claro, 2004). Since Chile is a resource-abundant country, it is 
no surprise that almost half of its plants produce natural-resource-intensive products. 
But sectors not based on natural resources are also important: apparel, textiles, metal 
products, printing, plastics, nonelectrical machinery, and other chemical products 
(Lopez and Suedekum, 2009).  
Chile is a small country where most of the economic activity takes place in a 
geographically limited area. Its centralized structure has promoted fast development in 
manufacturing over the last 10 years in the more populated areas, while poorer regions 
have scarcely grown (Almeida and Fernandes, 2013). The large abundance of natural 
resources has determined, in part, that most plants are located in regions where natural 
resources are widely available. Also the supremacy of Region metropolitana, where the 
capital (Santiago) is located, accounts for almost 60% of the total number of 
establishments operating in the manufacturing sector and hosts most of the more 
sophisticated plants (Lopez and Suedekum, 2009). About 20% of Chilean plants are 
solely focused on exportation. 
During the last decade, the Chilean government has invested a significant amount of 
resources in developing several instruments to increase  productivity in small firms 
(Alvarez and Crespi, 2003). However, even though Chilean small firms represent more 
than 70% of improvements in total employment, they only generate 1.5% of the exports 
and about 17% of total sales (Alvarez and Crespi. 2003). Thus, although recent research 
shows that industrial activity, especially for small and medium businesses, has been 
highly promoted by public institutions (Cabrera et. al, 2002), most of the government 
subsidies are given to medium-big companies instead of small companies (Almeida and 
Fernandes, 2013). 
2.6. Framework 
This thesis proposes a theoretical framework, based on the contextual factors found 
through the literature review, to decide the optimal production strategy for the case 
company. This tool allows for consideration of both qualitative and quantitative factors 
==PAGE:17==
17 
 
to determine the optimal solution for firms. The tool is based on Cross (2000) and 
Herbert-Hansen et al. (2017). 
For the analysis, the main factors presented in Section 2.4. will be weighted according 
to their perceived relative importance. Table 5 shows the tool structure.  
 
Table 5: Framework tool.  
 
CF1 
(C) 
CF2 
(C) 
CF3 
(C) 
CF4 
(C) 
CF5 
(C) 
CF6 
(C) 
CF7 
(C) 
OUTSOURCED 
OR 
INSOURCING 
ABSOLUTE 
WEIGHT 
RELATIVE 
WEIGHT 
CF1 (R) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CF2 (R) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CF3 (R) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CF4 (R) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CF5 (R) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CF6 (R) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CF7 (R) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The factors are displayed both in rows (R) and columns (C), to be compared and ranked.  
If factor R is considered more relevant than factor C, then the gap in the figure is filled 
with a ‘1’, while if it is considered less important, then, the value is ‘0’. If both factors 
are equally relevant, the value is ‘0.5’. Once this process has finished and all the factors 
have been compared together, the total value of every row is summarized in the 
Absolute weight column. From there, the Relative weight column is calculated to obtain 
the relative percentage of importance. The comparison between factors must be assessed 
by top managers or those employees in charge of the organization strategy.  
Furthermore, each factor should ideally point towards either an Outsourcing or 
Insourcing strategy. If the contextual factor points towards an outsourced production, 
for the purpose of the quantitative analysis, then, it receives a ‘-1’, while if it is pointing 
towards an insourced production, it receives a ‘+1’. Factors with an ambiguous result 
receive a ‘0’. The degree of local production is then calculated based on the formula 
presented below: 
 
                                                                               
 
                         
The result of this formula is a number between 0 and 100%. 0% means that outsourcing 
is, without hesitation, the optimal strategy for the firm, while 100% indicates that an in-
house strategy would be the optimal alternative. This framework should then be 
validated and further detailed using a case study. 
2.7. Delphi Method 
The Delphi method was created by the RAND Corporation in the 1950s to estimate 
from a group of military chiefs the possible effects of an atomic bomb (Benson et al., 
==PAGE:18==
18 
 
1982). Thanks to this, they invented a new tool for gathering more reliable information 
using a panel of experts (Dalkey and Helmer, 1963). In the beginning, this method was 
used when judgmental information was required. The respondents would give their 
feedback opinion from a list of directed questions, which avoided direct confrontation 
between the experts (Rowe et al., 1991).  
Since then, this technique has been continuously improved for use in a wide range of 
situations and topics, such as: forecasting (Lynch et al. 1994), strategic planning, 
operations and production management (Ray and Sahu, 1990), supply chain strategy 
(Harland et al., 1999), facilities management (Green and Price, 2000) or factory location 
planning (Azani and Khorramshahgol, 1990).    
3. Methodology 
As mentioned in the introduction, this thesis uses as methodology a case study approach 
to answer the proposed research questions (Vissak, 2010). A case study is not only a 
research strategy, Yin and Campbell (2003) locate this methodology alongside 
experiments, surveys or histories as a valid approach to knowledge. Moreover, the 
author defines a case study as a strategy to study a certain topic in its context, 
integrating theory with empirical practices. 
Firstly, in this chapter, the case firm is introduced in section 3.1.. Section 3.2. describes 
how an extensive literature review has been carried out in order to properly 
contextualize the ILD topic. Finally, Section 3.3. describes how the Delphi process was 
implemented to obtain the required information missing in the existing literature. 
3.1. Case Firm 
The case company, ChileBoards, is offering the ultimate surfboard technology in Chile 
and, at the moment, it is the only Chilean firm in the market offering automated 
manufactured surfboards. Its uniqueness, along with the surf industry expansion in 
Chile, is stimulating sales growth exponentially. Because ChileBoards is a recently 
formed company (2012), they decided to begin outsourcing their production to a low-
cost country such as China, while their headquarters and warehouse remain in Viña del 
Mar, Chile.  
Its sales are mainly centralized in Chile, but occasionally they also distribute their 
products to Europe and other South American countries. ChileBoards customers are 
concentrated in Santiago, with around 70% of their sales in this region. Another 15% of 
sales are located in the Valparaiso region, while the rest are mostly distributed over the 
rest of the country. 
The firm focuses on offering high quality products to satisfy their customers. Their 
customer service has improved over the years, offering product replacements or free 
repair in the case of early failures. Although their core product is their surfboards, the 
product portfolio is very broad, including other categories apart from surfboards such as 
leashes, fins or surfboard covers. From November 2017 they intend to offer t-shirts and 
caps as well.  
Their fast sales growth has motivated the company to review their production 
configuration. This organization is an existing example of a firm confronting a factory 
location decision. Therefore, it is an ideal case to investigate the research questions 
proposed in this paper.  
==PAGE:19==
19 
 
3.2. Literature Review 
The purpose of the literature review in this paper is to obtain a wide understanding of 
factory location processes and be able to generate new insights that can be applied to a 
real case study. Hence, three main topics have been reviewed: a) international location 
decision process focused on the factors involved in the process, b) manufacturing in 
Chile and c) outsourcing: risks and benefits. Besides these three, some information 
about Delphi processes and the previously explained framework tool have been 
included. As Rowley and Slack (2004) explain, the literature review process can be 
assessed dividing it into two phases: literature search and actual review, which has 
been done for each mentioned topics. 
The search for and collecting of data (Literature search) was mainly done through the 
Technical University of Denmark (DTU) database DTU Findit and Google Scholar. 
This information gathering includes papers, books, master thesis and other written 
material found in both platforms with search keywords such as: “international location 
decision”, “insourcing”, “outsourcing”, “offshoring”, “factory location process”, 
“location decision factors”,  “industry in South America”, “manufacturing in Chile”, 
“Delphi process”, etc.  
Afterwards, in the actual review, each source was analysed to discard those not 
containing valuable information. However, during this process, some more useful 
references were found due to the Citation pearl growing phenomena (Rowley and 
Slack, 2004). This concept consists of acquiring more helpful sources from the 
previously found article references. Thus, these new articles were added to the 
references and passed through the same analysis process as the others until no more 
valuable literature came up.  
3.3. Delphi Method 
The Delphi method provides a consensual viewpoint from a group of selected experts 
through a structured and iterative process. It is commonly used to identify factors that 
may impact on a topic or area, such as decision-making issues (Ray and Sahu, 1990). 
This technique was developed in the 50s (Benson et al., 1982), and since then, it has 
been commonly used for several aims: forecasting, planning, supply chain strategies, or 
in productivity management areas (Harland et al., 1999; Lynch et al., 1994; Ray and 
Sahu 1990).  
Because normal surveys usually do not count on expert responders, and as only one 
expert opinion may be too narrow as a viewpoint of a topic, the Delphi method works 
with a carefully selected group of experts to achieve more accurate results. The main 
difference with this approach compared to others, is that it avoids contact between the 
group members to decrease the pressure of dominant individuals during the process 
(Azani and Khorramshahgol, 1990). The Delphi approach does not use a group of 
experts selected randomly, as they must have knowledge or expertise in the case topic. 
Tavana et al. (1996) believe that this technique needs to meet three requirements: 
 No contact information among the group of experts. 
 A well-formulated questionnaire to obtain valuable responses. 
 Ask for feedback. 
==PAGE:20==
20 
 
Once the expert panel has been selected and the questionnaire formulated, the experts 
are individually interviewed in order to analyze both their survey responses and their 
comments. Then, these responses are analyzed and summarized, sometimes through 
statistical reports. The results are sent to the experts and the process is repeated as many 
times as needed until consensus or clear results are obtained. Finally, the conclusions 
are presented and, in the case where a full consensus is not achieved, the Delphi method 
allows for a variety of opinions to be reported (Green and Price, 2000).  
In this case study, the available literature does not provide for the most important 
factors in an ILD process within a Chilean industry context specifically. Because most 
of the articles refer to Western companies, it was necessary to carry out a Delphi 
process to find the relevant missing information. The panel was composed of experts 
from all the areas involved: industry, academia and government. The aim of this process 
was to collect opinions from professionals with an extensive knowledge or experience 
in making manufacturing location decisions in Chile, and the factors involved in that 
decision. 
The 
selection 
process 
was 
completely confidential and anonymous. 
The sample size of a Delphi study is usually 
from ten to eighteen experts (Okoli and 
Pawlowski, 2004). This could be considered 
small compared to other questionnaire 
surveys, but it must be stressed that a Delphi 
study 
is 
not 
a 
conventional 
survey. 
Additionally, the study topic is very specific: 
“Factors involved in an international location 
decision in Chile”, and the number of experts 
found locally is not as high as would be 
desired. Therefore, it was considered that a 
group of 10 experts would be sufficiently 
broad and experienced to obtain the required 
information. 
A total of 30 panellists were first selected to 
participate in the survey. The first approach 
made to the experts was by e-mail in March 
2017. They were asked to join the process 
with a brief introduction to the thesis, the 
context and the purpose of the survey. The 
questionnaire was formulated to be answered either in a face-to-face interview or online 
using the platform Google Forms. Reminders were sent to those who had not responded 
until finally 10 experts agreed to participate.  
The first round of the questionnaire was assessed in May 2017. The information was 
mainly gathered in face-to-face interviews. The experts were introduced in depth to the 
research questions and the case study. Then they were asked to give their opinions on 
the topic without restrictions and, afterwards, more detailed questions were addressed to 
make sure that all the required information was obtained. When the first round of 
responses was finished, the answers were analyzed unifying terminology and comparing 
results to see the level of consensus among the experts.  
The second round was carried out in June 2017. The results from the first round were 
presented individually to the panellists to obtain some feedback and comments, or in 
MARCH 2017 
MAY 2017 
JUNE 2017 
JULY 2017 
CONTACT 
 
By email 
 
First  contact to 30 experts 
FIRST ROUND 
 
Face to face 
 
 
First responses 
SECOND ROUND 
 
Face to face 
 
Feedback, comments and consesus 
THIRD ROUND 
 
By Goolge forms 
 
Final comments and rank the factors 
CONTACT 
FIRST ROUND 
SECOND ROUND 
THIRD ROUND 
Table 6: Delphi process timeline. 
==PAGE:21==
21 
 
case they wanted to rectify their opinion. They were also asked to pick only five factors 
based on the first round results and to explain why.  
In the Third round, the panellists were asked in July 2017 to rank factors and sub-
factors on a scale from 1 to 5 regarding their importance. Because all responses were 
similar, it was not necessary to have another round.  
4. Findings 
This chapter presents the information gathered from the case firm while following the 
structure for ILD processes  presented in the literature review.  
4.1. Motivations of the Case Firm for a New ILD  
 
Figure 2. Motivations. 
After the unexpected rapid growth of the company, the top managers are considering 
new alternatives to speed up the lead time, reduce responsiveness time to demand and 
increase control over production. They have experienced big losses in sales in the past 
due to a slow response to unexpected changes over demand. Moreover, they want to 
have more control over the production process to be able to adjust production rates and 
easily make small changes to their models. On the other hand, the firm stresses that, 
since their first year of sales, the transportation cost from China to Chile has increased 
by nearly 300%. These are the motives that lead the case firm to review their ILD 
process.  
4.2. Scoping  
 
Figure 3. Scoping. 
As mentioned in the introduction, even though the number of manufacturing strategies 
and possible locations are almost infinite, companies usually reduce the alternatives to 
those somehow linked to the company. Instead, this process contemplates all the 
alternatives possible to obtain the optimal configuration.  
Scoping the possible alternatives, the case firm can: a) keep outsourcing their 
production with either their current supplier or in a new location or b) can take control 
of production by opening their own production line either in Chile or another country 
(“Offshoring”). Nevertheless, the CEO admitted that they do not have enough resources 
to set-up a new factory in a foreign country, which reduces the insourcing alternatives to 
a production plant in Chile. In any case, as the number of possible locations is still too 
big, it is necessary to analyse the current situation of the firm.  
Motivations 
Scoping 
Current 
situation 
Analytical 
process 
Evaluation 
Final 
decision 
Motivations 
Scoping 
Current 
situation 
Analytical 
process 
Evaluation 
Final 
decision 
==PAGE:22==
22 
 
4.3. Current Situation of the Case Firm 
 
Figure 4. Current situation. 
4.3.1. Current International Location Decision 
The current manufacturing strategy was implemented four years ago, after an 
insufficiently-in-depth location decision process. Five years ago, the firm came up with 
their surfboard designs and began to look for suppliers capable of manufacturing their 
products at lower cost while maintaining good quality levels. Although the target 
market was Chile, the South American country did not have any factory producing these 
types of surfboards. On the other hand, the start-up did not want to risk opening their 
own factory due to the uncertainty of the demand and lack of resources. Therefore, the 
company started to look for firms producing similar products in other countries. The 
organization found that there was an Australian company offering similar products and 
that they were getting the surfboards from a supplier in China. The firm consequently 
contacted the Chinese supplier and asked for a prototype. After approving quality and 
manufacturing costs of the prototype, the firm decided to base their supplier in China. 
4.3.2. ChileBoards configuration 
Presently, the company procures their products already manufactured from a Chinese 
supplier. It also uses a warehouse facility to store the stock, located in Valparaiso 
(Chile). From the warehouse, the products are distributed throughout the country, either 
to their outlets or directly to the customer (online sales). 
4.3.3. ChileBoards manufacturing strategy 
 
 
The current manufacturing strategy consists of ordering batches every three months 
from their Chinese supplier, who needs 30 days to complete the order. Then the batch is 
sent to Valparaiso in a shipping container, which takes approximately 30 days more. 
Once in Chile, the container is sent to the company warehouse facility. At the 
warehouse, an operator takes the boards and other products out of their plastic wrap and 
places them on storage racks.  
Before an order is sent, the operator carries out a quality control test. Those boards that 
meet the quality requirements get two stickers, one on each side of the product. Boards 
with small defects (aesthetic defects) are put aside to be sold at discount and those with 
more serious defects are directly rejected and thrown away. After passing the quality 
control, the operator boxes the boards along with fins and leash and loads them into a 
distributor’s truck.  
4.3.4. Warehouse and Transportation 
The warehouse facility is rented, but all warehouse operations are managed by company 
operatives, consequently they have absolute control over this part of the process.  
However, logistics are run by contracted third party providers. A Chilean distributor is 
in charge of transportation from the Chinese production facility to the firm warehouse in 
Valparaiso (Chile). They pick up the batch, put it in a container and place it in the ship. 
Motivations 
Scoping 
Current 
situation 
Analytical 
process 
Evaluation 
Final 
decision 
==PAGE:23==
23 
 
Once in Chile, the same company is responsible of unloading the container from the 
vessel and delivering it to the storage facility.  
The case company has two distributors more to bring the products to their customers. 
One of them is in charge of carrying the products to the sale points that the firm has 
throughout the country, mainly Pichilemu, Valparaiso and Santiago. The other 
transportation firm is responsible for distributing the online sales directly to customers 
all over the country.  
4.3.5. ChileBoards characteristics 
The next table summarizes the main characteristics of the case company related to 
supplying, storing and distributing operations of finished goods in Chile. 
 
 
Table 7: Summary of the case company main characteristics.  
CONCEPT 
MEASURE 
VALUE 
Supply chain 
configuration 
Number of suppliers 
1 
Number of warehouses 
1 
Number of final customers 
400/500 per year 
Frequency of orders 
Each 3 months 
Number of items per batch 
160 
Lead times 
(LT) 
Order Lead time (OLTactual) 
2 months 
From supplier to warehouse (transportation LT) 
1 months 
From warehouse to customer 
24h 
Product 
characteristics 
Number of sales a Year 
400/500 
Number of product categories (specify boards, 
leashes, etc.) 
4 boards 
2 covers 
2 leashes 
Costs 
Manufacturing cost per board 
375DKK 
Shipping costs 
130 DKK per board 
Distribution costs 
100 DKK per board 
Holding cost 
70 boards month – 26.250DKK 
Warehousing costs 
930DKK per month 
 
 
 
==PAGE:24==
24 
 
5. Case Study Analysis 
5.1. Analytical Process  
 
Figure 5. Analytical process. 
5.1.1. Quantitative analysis to decide  the manufacturing  configuration 
In order to obtain the optimal strategy, the different alternatives must be analyzed and 
compared. As mentioned above, the two main possibilities for a company are: 
outsourcing or insourcing. Because a new location decision is the responsibility of the 
company’s top management, this framework was implemented in collaboration with the 
case firm’s CEO. From the outsourcing advantages and disadvantages described in the 
literature review, the CEO was asked to choose the most important ones for his 
company.  Table 8 shows the factors and the remarks related to the case firm and 
whether or if they support outsourcing, insourcing or have been excluded. 
 
Table 8: Factors affecting the company’s manufacturing configuration.  
FACTORS 
REMARKS 
INSOURCING OR 
OUTSOURCING 
Cost reduction 
Hesitation about a high initial investment. 
OUTSOURCING (CF1) 
Headcount reduction 
This business is not labour intensive. 
EXCLUDED 
Focus on core 
business 
Insourcing production would require focusing on new 
areas. 
OUTSOURCING (CF2) 
Access to greater 
expertise 
At the moment they do not have the expertise to 
develop their own production line. 
OUTSOURCING (CF3) 
Economies of scale 
Access to sophisticated equipment to manufacture the 
surfboards and lower costs for supplies. 
OUTSOURCING (CF4) 
Flexibility 
Continuous technology upgrade is not needed due to 
the nature of the business. Moreover, no dramatic 
changes are expected in this market 
EXCLUDED 
Unexpected costs 
The company did not experience any unexpected 
costs with their current supplier. 
EXCLUDED 
Hidden costs 
The company did not experience any hidden costs 
with their current supplier. 
EXCLUDED 
Potential violations of 
intellectual property 
rights 
The company’s surfboard designs are their 
competitive advantage. If the supplier sells them to 
somebody else, they would lose their lead. 
INSOURCING (CF5) 
Motivations 
Scoping 
Current 
situation 
Analytical 
process 
Evaluation 
Final 
decision 
==PAGE:25==
25 
 
Lower morale 
The firm is not concerned about this. 
EXCLUDED 
Loss of control over 
the production or 
critical functions 
The company would like to have greater control over 
quality, production rates and  takt times 
INSOURCING (CF6) 
Dependency on the 
supplier 
Their production totally depends on one supplier. 
Changes in product quality, production fees or any 
other mishap would be hard to resolve. 
INSOURCING (CF7) 
Poor transportation 
and IT infrastructure 
The firm is making sure to choose the right suppliers 
in this area. 
EXCLUDED 
Considering the selected factors, a quantitative analysis has been carried out based on 
the framework shown in Section 2.7. to discover which strategy is most appropriate. 
Table 9 summarizes the pair-wise-comparison done by the management, how they point 
towards outsourcing or insourcing and the final relative weight of each factor (from the 
qualitative analysis). 
 
Table 9: Quantitative analysis. 
 
CF1 
CF2 
CF3 
CF4 
CF5 
CF6 
CF7 
OUTSOURCING 
OR INSOURCING 
ABSOLUTE 
WEIGHT 
RELATIVE 
WEIGHT 
CF1 
 
0.5 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
-1 
0.5 
2 
CF2 
0.5 
 
0 
0 
0 
0.5 
0.5 
-1 
1.5 
7 
CF3 
1 
1 
 
0.5 
0.5 
1 
1 
-1 
5 
24 
CF4 
1 
1 
0.5 
 
1 
0.5 
0.5 
-1 
4.5 
21 
CF5 
1 
1 
0.5 
0 
 
0.5 
0.5 
1 
3.5 
17 
CF6 
1 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
0.5 
 
0 
1 
2.5 
12 
CF7 
1 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
0.5 
1 
 
1 
3.5 
17 
 
The relative weight is used to calculate the degree of insourcing for the current analysis 
of the case firm. The quantitative model yields 45% for insourcing. The degree of 
insourcing is shown on the conceptual scale in Figure 6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
100% 
Insourcing 
0% Insourcing 
100% 
Position of Case 
firm   45% 
Figure 6. Optimal configuration visualized.  
==PAGE:26==
26 
 
This result suggests that 45% of the manufacturing process should be produced in-
house, while acquiring the remainder from suppliers. Therefore, items that are not the 
core business of the firm and which would require extra machinery should be 
outsourced, such as leashes, covers, fins, t-shirts and caps. As well as some essential 
items for board manufacture: EPS blanks, EVA rubber rails, fin screws or plywood 
stickers. This solely leaves surfboard manufacture and assembly for an in-house 
process.  
5.1.2.  Delphi method results 
The Delphi process has been assessed to compensate for the deficiency of literature in 
similar cases. The objective of the Delphi process is to narrow down to five, the number 
of location factors to be considered .  
In the first round of the questionnaire the panellists received a summary of the master 
thesis topic and were asked, in open question format, which factors they considered the 
most important. They all agreed that some factors might differ depending on the 
business. After specifying the case firm context, the interviews show that Proximity to 
demand is crucial for all the panellists, and Transport costs are also extremely 
important.  
Afterwards, the panellists were asked to look at the list of factors shown in Section 2.3. 
and to add any that they considered important. Seven out of the thirteen proposed 
factors were mentioned by less than 40% of the expert panel. It should be pointed out 
that many experts mentioned Labour characteristics as pivotal in some cases, however, 
for this business it is not relevant.  
To conclude, the panellists were asked to specify the most relevant sub-factors from 
among those mentioned in the previous questions. Within Infrastructure, most of the 
experts referred to Development of modes of transportation and Quality of modes of 
transportation, while in the economic factor they stressed the importance of Tax 
benefits,  Custom fees, and, for this particular case, Financial incentives. Most of the 
experts mentioned Speed and responsiveness of suppliers for Suppliers and resources, 
and around 50% added Amount of alternative suppliers. In Proximity to markets all 
panellists stressed the importance of proximity to demand in order to speed up 
Responsiveness and Delivery time. The opinions were more diverse regarding Cost. 
Most of them emphasized Transport costs, but they added Wages, Fixed costs and 
Inventory too.  
In the second round of interviews, whose purpose was to reach a consensus and reduce 
the number of factors to five, those factors mentioned by less than the twenty percent 
(20%) of the experts were removed, which reduced it to only eight. The experts agreed 
that Characteristics of a specific location and Government and political factors are 
important, but not as relevant as the others, so they were discarded. On the other hand, 
Legal and regulatory framework was mentioned while always referring to the sub-factor 
Environmental issues, which is, indeed, a crucial factor for some businesses. However, 
because surfboard production does not generate high pollution levels, this factor was 
rejected. Therefore, the final five factors left to consider are: 
 Costs 
 Infrastructure 
 Market and customers 
 Suppliers and resources 
 Economic factors 
==PAGE:27==
27 
 
For the third round, the interviewees were asked to rate these five factors from 1 to 5 
regarding their importance for this particular case, with 5 being extremely important and 
1 barely important. The results are shown in the figure below.  
 
Figure 7. Rating of the factors by the experts 
Moreover, the panellists were also asked to rate the sub-factors. In order to reduce the 
complexity of the decision, they were only asked about those sub-factors that were 
mentioned already in Round 1. 
 
 
Figure 8. Cost sub-factors. 
Most of panellists stressed the importance of Labour costs (wages), however, this 
particular business is not labour intensive, which reduced its relative importance over 
transportation costs.  
 
 
 
Figure 9. Infrastructure sub-factors. 
       
 
 
 
Figure 10. Economic sub-factors. 
 
   
   
 
Figure 11. Suppliers and resources sub-factors. 
With regard to Market and customers, both factors: Responsiveness and delivery time 
and Proximity to demand were ranked at 5.  
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Economics 
Suppliers and resources 
Markets and customer 
Infrastructure 
Costs 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Transportation 
Wages 
Fixed costs 
Inventory 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Existence of modes of transportation 
Quality of transportation 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Alternative suppliers 
Speed and responsiveness of suppliers 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Custom dutties 
Financial incentives 
Taxes 
==PAGE:28==
28 
 
5.2. Evaluation 
 
Figure 12. Evaluation. 
As the Delphi process is completed, it is possible to narrow down the number of 
alternatives. The importance of sub-factors such as: Transportation costs, 
Responsiveness and delivery time make it clear that the current manufacturing location 
is not the most favourable. Furthermore, any other outsourcing location away from the 
American continent would be dismissed for the same reason. Moreover, the firm’s 
limited resources makes it unviable to build a new factory in a foreign country. 
Therefore, and while also being supported by the framework, the factory should be 
placed in Chile. 
5.2.1. Evaluation at national level: Chile 
With a length of more than 4.000 km from North to South (Google maps, 2017), Chile 
contains many possibilities for factory location. Chile is divided into fifteen regions, 
and the factors selected in the Delphi process would help to reduce the areas where 
potentially locate the factory to only one of them. 
Costs 
Although the location decision process is now within a country, still there are 
cost differences depending on the region. Inventory, Wages and Fixed costs do 
not present big differences, but Transport cost does, and it is worth analyzing the 
variations up and down the country. Because most of the firm’s sales are in 
Santiago, the transport costs have been measured using the distance between the 
capitals of the regions and Santiago (main selling point). The table gives the 
shipping cost for one surfboard from the studied regions to Santiago. 
 
Table 10: Transport cost from the studied regions to Santiago. 
REGION 
CAPITAL 
COST 
(DKK) 
Arica 
Arica 
285 
Tarapaca 
Iquique 
285 
Antofagasta 
Antofagasta 
230 
Atacama 
Copiapó 
200 
Coquimbo 
La Serena 
155 
Valparaiso 
Valparaiso 
120 
Metropolitana 
Santiago 
120 
O’Higgins 
Rancagua 
150 
Maule 
Talca 
180 
Bio-bio 
Concepción 
192 
Araucanía 
Temuco 
202 
Los Ríos 
Valdivia 
202 
Los Lagos 
Puerto Montt 
214 
Aysen 
Coyhaique 
445 
Magallanes 
Punta Arenas 
470 
Motivations 
Scoping 
Current 
situation 
Analytical 
process 
Evaluation 
Final 
decision 
==PAGE:29==
29 
 
Transport costs increase by up to 400% in the southern regions and more than 
double in the northern ones. However, Coquimbo, Valparaiso, Metropolitana 
and O’Higgins present similar costs. 
Infrastructure 
Although Chile offers good infrastructure throughout the country, its imposing 
nature in some parts of the country complicates connectivity to some areas. The 
next graph shows an infrastructure index of the regions, being measured as a 
coefficient of the length of paved roads divided by the surface of the region 
 
Table 11: Infrastructure index of the studied regions.  
REGION 
PAVED 
ROADS 
(km) 
SURFACE 
(km2) 
INDEX 
(1/km) 
Arica 
431 
16873 
0,026 
Tarapacá 
989 
42225 
0,023 
Antofagasta 
1767 
126050 
0,014 
Atacama 
1000 
75176 
0.013 
Coquimbo 
1244 
40579 
0,031 
Valparaiso 
1087 
16396 
0,066 
Metropolitana 
1110 
15403 
0,072 
O’Higgins 
1080 
16387 
0.066 
Maule 
1410 
30296 
0047 
Bío-bío 
1953 
37068 
0,053 
Araucanía 
1395 
31842 
0.044 
Los Ríos 
591 
18429 
0.032 
Los Lagos 
1263 
48583 
0,026 
Aysén 
220 
108494 
0,002 
Magallanes 
26 
132291 
0,0001 
The chart shows that some of the regions have a very low percentage of paved 
roads per square meter, which reduces the connectivity of the area.  
Markets and customer 
In order to demonstrate proximity to demand and responsiveness, the next table 
shows the shipping times from the capitals of the regions to Santiago, where 
70% of the sales are made. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:30==
30 
 
Table 12: Shipping times from the studied regions to Santiago. 
REGION 
CAPITAL 
SHIPPING 
TIME (days) 
Arica 
Arica 
3 
Tarapaca 
Iquique 
3 
Antofagasta 
Antofagasta 
2 
Atacama 
Copiapó 
1 
Coquimbo 
La Serena 
1 
Valparaiso 
Valparaiso 
1 
Metropolitana 
Santiago 
1 
O’Higgins 
Rancagua 
1 
Maule 
Talca 
1 
Bio-bio 
Concepción 
1 
Araucanía 
Temuco 
1 
Los Ríos 
Valdivia 
1 
Los Lagos 
Puerto Montt 
1 
Aysen 
Coyhaique 
10 
Magallanes 
Punta Arenas 
12 
The shipping times are reasonably low from all areas close to the ports besides 
Chacabuco and Punta Arenas, which are considerably higher. 
Suppliers and resources 
Based on the current firm’s configuration, it is safe to assume that most supplies 
such as leashes, covers, fins, the EPS blanks, EVA rubber rails, fin screws, 
plywood stickers, etc. would come from foreign countries. Therefore, as the 
experts consider Accessibility to diverse suppliers and Fast response as 
important, the factory should be located relatively close to both a main shipping 
port and a border crossing. The figure below shows a Chilean map divided into 
regions showing all its ports and border crossings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                  
 
 
Border crossings 
Ports 
Figure 13. Chilean map including border crossings and ports. 
==PAGE:31==
31 
 
As the graph illustrates, there are nine main ports and twenty three main border 
crossings throughout Chile. In order to reduce time and costs, the potential 
alternatives should be located close to both ports and border crossings. The next 
figure highlights the regions that meet the requirements.   
 
 
Economic Factors 
The Chilean government offers subsidies to develop companies that to some 
extent improve somehow the national economy. However, there are not many 
differences between regions. With regard to taxes, the company would notice a 
huge reduction in custom duties by having part of the production line within 
Chile. However, there is no difference between regions either.  
 
Based on the presented evaluation of the regions, the ones that have lowest transport 
costs, higher infrastructure index, lower shipping times, and are close to both a main 
shipping port and a crossing borders are Valparaiso and Santiago. Valparaiso is closer 
to the potential suppliers (ports and shipping borders), which would reduce transport 
costs, while Santiago is closer to the main sales outlets. However, after showing these 
results to three of the experts, they pointed that locating the factory in Santiago might 
increase land prices or rental costs, and transport times due to traffic jams. Moreover, 
Valparaiso has the advantage of being close to two international ports. Therefore, as 
shown in the figure below, Valparaiso is the selected region to locate the factory.  
 
 
 
Figure 14. Chilean regions that have at least one port and one crossing border. 
==PAGE:32==
32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 15. The selected region.Valparaiso. 
5.2.2. Evaluation at regional level: Valparaiso 
 
Figure 16. The final decision. 
A region is still a large area with many possibilities where to locate a factory. Thus, a 
new evaluation process would be carried out at a regional level. As Valparaiso has 36 
communes organized in 7 provinces, the same reasoning is followed to reduce the areas 
where potentially locate the factory.  
Wages are practically the same in all communes, while Transportation costs are slightly 
higher in those communes that are further from both suppliers (port) and demand (main 
outlets). Moreover, some communes are mostly dedicated to agriculture, hence, they do 
not count with appropriate Infrastructures to hold production factory. The remaining 
communes do not present relevant differences regarding Market and customers and 
Suppliers and resources. The Economical Factors still make no differentiations 
between communes. Additionally, some communes focus on areas such as fishing or 
rural tourism, hence, they are also discarded. The next figure shows the final scenario in 
the Valparaiso region.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 17. Map of Valparaiso divided into its communes. 
Motivations 
Scoping 
Current 
situation 
Analytical 
process 
Evaluation 
Final 
decision 
Communes with higher transport costs 
Communes dedicated to agriculture 
Communes dedicated to wine growing 
Communes dedicated to fishing and rural tourism 
Pre-selected communes 
==PAGE:33==
33 
 
Although the remaining communes offer similar advantages, the commune of Quilpué 
has the lowest land prices between these regions and is located close to the highway. 
Therefore, it is considered as the best alternative to locate the factory. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. Discussion and Recommendations 
6.1. Discussion 
The main objective of this thesis is to design an ILD structure that can be used by 
Chilean companies. As well as, to provide a list of rated location factors to evaluate and 
make the decision process easier. However, the Delphi process has shown that these 
factors are strongly linked to the nature of the business, which makes it very difficult to 
extrapolate exactly the same values for other cases. Nevertheless, there  are some 
similarities to other researches, as shown in the next graph.  
 
 
 
Figure 19. Graphic comparison of the Delphi process results with other researches. 
For MacCarthy  and Atthirawong (2003), Cost and Infrastructure are respectively in 
first and second place of importance, and Economic factors are still among the five most 
important. Touray and Schmidt (2016) also consider Cost  as the most important factor, 
and classify Infrastructure and Markets and customers as second and third respectively, 
while Economics is also ranked among the five most important factors. Suppliers and 
resources is not included among the more important factors in the two other studies, 
which give Economic factors more weight than in this Delphi process. Although Labour 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Cost 
Infrastructure 
Economics 
Markets 
Suppliers 
MacCarthy  and 
Atthirawong 
(2003) 
Touray and 
Schmidt (2016)  
Delphi 
Figure 18. The selected commune. Quilpué. 
==PAGE:34==
34 
 
characteristics are relevant for both papers, they are not considered extremely relevant 
for this case study. Also, within the Latin American context, Government and political 
factors fall in importance compared to MacCarthy  and Atthirawong work (2003). Other 
authors, Tate et al. (2014), rank Cost as the most relevant and point out the importance 
of Labour characteristics.  
Therefore, based on these results,  it is valid to state that Cost, Infrastructure and 
Economic factors are relevant regardless of the context, and Labour characteristics 
should be taken into account for firms that require a high qualification or a large number 
of workers. For small Chilean companies with a target market centred in Chile, the 
experts consider  Markets and customers and Suppliers and resources also as very 
important. 
Furthermore, the sub-factors almost match with Touray and Schmidt (2016)  and 
MacCarthy  and Atthirawong (2003) studies. Both studies consider Wage rates and 
Transportation cost as first and second in importance, while the Chilean experts 
consider it the other way around by a small difference for this particular case. For 
Infrastructure, Economic factors and Markets and customers, the main sub-factors are 
the same for the experts as for the other studies. Finally, Quality of suppliers was not 
mentioned by the expert panel, but MacCarthy  and Atthirawong (2003) find it an 
important sub-factor apart from Speed and Responsiveness of suppliers and Alternative 
suppliers. 
Based on these results, it is safe to state that a small Chilean company could base a new 
ILD process on the presented methodology and utilize the factors chosen by the ten 
experts. However, it should also consider Labour characteristics  as an important factor 
and accordingly adjust the rate of the factors to the firm’s characteristics and objectives.  
6.2. Recommendations 
In regard of the case study, the current case firm’s setup, it is clearly not an optimal 
strategy. The framework tool shows that a 100% outsourcing configuration does not 
match with the objectives of the organization. The company should outsource those 
items that are not the key products and would require of extra machinery, such as 
leashes, covers, fins, t-shirts and caps. As well, some other items needed for the 
production of the boards should be outsourced: EPS blanks, EVA rubber rails, fin 
screws, plywood or stickers. Leaving only the surfboard manufacture and assembling 
for an in-house process.  
Additionally, based on the capital limitation of the company and the Delphi process 
evaluation, it is recommended to move the production line to Valparaiso (Chile). Within 
the chosen region, the evaluation specifically suggests the commune of Quilpué. Figure 
20 summarizes the final recommendation. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As further steps, the firm should calculate sales estimations based on past years to 
determine the size of the factory and potential layout. Then, they should look for a site 
or pre-built factory that meets their requirements.  
Moreover, the firm should carry out an economic analysis to calculate total costs of this 
new configuration. In the case of a lack of capital to invest in a new factory, some 
panellists suggested during the interviews to substitute the Chinese supplier with a new 
one in an American country such as USA, Mexico, Costa Rica, Peru or Brazil. 
7. Contribution 
This chapter has been divided into two sections: Contribution to theory and 
Contribution to the practical case. The contribution to theory section includes a 
summary of the general contribution, limitations and extensions of the provided 
theoretical framework and Delphi process, while contribution to the practical case 
contains a discussion of the results concerning the case study. 
7.1. Contribution to Theory 
The key contribution to theory of this master thesis is the utilization of contextual 
factors 
and 
a 
framework 
tool 
to 
determine 
the 
appropriate 
degree 
of 
insourcing/outsourcing for a firm. Furthermore, it provides a set of factors that should 
be taken into account when assessing an ILD process within a Chilean context. Thus, 
this thesis contributes to ILD management in many ways: 
 Identification of the key contextual factors in evaluating the optimal degree of 
insourcing/outsourcing. 
 A 
quantitative 
analysis 
to 
determine 
the 
optimal 
degree 
of 
insourcing/outsourcing. 
 Development of a decision making framework useful for practitioners when 
assessing their manufacturing configuration. 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
Insource the production of 
surfboards. 
Affects to all three levels of 
the company 
Move the in-house 
production to Quilpué. 
Affects to all three levels of 
the company 
 
 
High initial investment. 
 
Necessity to focus on new business areas. 
 
Possible reductions of economies of scale. 
 
Lower transport costs. 
 
Lower Order times. 
 
Lower taxes and inventory costs. 
 
Higher production costs. 
 
More workers and higher wages. 
RISKS & BENEFITS 
RISKS & BENEFITS 
WHAT WOULD IT TAKE TO IMPLEMENT IT? 
 
 
Estimate future sales 
 
Calculate size factory 
and layout based on 
sale estimations. 
 
Estimate 
costs 
of 
necessary machinery 
and materials. 
 
Estimate total costs. 
 
Greater control on critical functions. 
 
More independence on suppliers. 
 
Reduction of potential violations of IP rights. 
Figure 20. Recommendations summary. 
==PAGE:36==
36 
 
 Identification and ranking of key factors for an International Location Decision 
in Chile. 
7.1.1. Framework tool 
This research shows that the provided framework, based on Cross (2000) and Herbert-
Hansen et al. (2017), can be used to present a holistic view on a manufacturing 
configuration focused on insourcing and outsourcing. The tool turns a qualitative 
analysis into a quantitative approach giving a percentage between 0% and 100%. It uses 
contextual factors and compares them directly with the firm’ current context, and it is 
not based on rule of thumb or a single variable, which is quite common in these 
circumstances. The primary difference from general research is that this framework 
utilizes only those contextual factors that the firm considers relevant to its particular 
case, giving the optimal configuration for a particular situation.  
On the other hand, one of the main disadvantages of the presented framework is the 
contextual approach itself. If the factors that the company, usually the CEO, considers 
more important are not really the most substantial, the configuration obtained would be 
erroneous. As all factors are dependent on the context in which the company operates, 
the rating of the contextual factors plays a huge role in the final decision. Hence, to 
unravel the true contextual conditions; it is crucial that the firm is completely clear as to 
their needs. 
7.1.2. The Delphi process 
As mentioned in the literature, the Delphi process method can be utilized in multiple 
situations. This thesis supports other papers such as MacCarthy  and Atthirawong 
(2003), which carried out this method in order to understand and examine the critical 
factors involved in ILD’s. Moreover, it has been proposed to rate the location factors 
depending on their importance. However, the nature of the methodology is very time-
consuming as it usually needs at least 3 rounds of interviews/questionnaires to reach a 
consensus. Additionally, the results cannot be extrapolated to other cases as a general 
rule, as the rating of the factors is linked to a particular type or size of business or the 
location of the parent company. Nevertheless, the Delphi process is extremely helpful in 
developing a consensus on subjective issues when: there are no similar cases to compare 
the factors and when the CEO is not experienced enough to evaluate the factors. 
7.2. Contribution to the practical cases 
This paper carries out a new international location process for a Chilean company. The 
process goes step by step to find the best alternative for the firm. The thesis contains an 
evaluation of the current company strategy, a framework tool that integrates seven 
contextual factors to identify the optimal insourcing/outsourcing level and a Delphi 
process to analyze and narrow down the number of viable alternatives. In order to 
analyze similar cases, the following is the proposed procedure: 
 
==PAGE:37==
37 
 
 
Figure 21. Model guide to carry out a ILD process. 
8. Conclusion 
During the last decade, globalization has caused changes in global equilibrium as 
emerging countries have developed from low production cost to highly skilled and 
savvy manufacturing experts increasing production costs. Therefore, companies are 
beginning to re-evaluate and give more importance to their manufacturing strategies 
when it comes to international location decisions. However, the literature review shows 
that many international location decisions in small-medium companies are based on rule 
of thumb or on uni-dimensional analysis.  
Although in recent years, some experts have carried out studies about ILD processes 
and the factors involved, there was no research work on this field so far from a South 
American perspective, and even less, from a Chilean viewpoint. This gap in research 
could lead companies in this region to misguided decisions. Hence, there was a clear 
need to address this topic in order to create a model guide which could be followed in 
future cases. In order to fill this gap, this master thesis proposed these two research 
questions (RQ): 
RQ1: How should a Chilean company assess an ILD?  
RQ2: Which factors should be considered and how should be weighted? 
In order to respond the proposed RQ’s, this thesis studied the international location 
decisions (ILD) processes in Chilean industry through a case study approach, to 
improve the understanding of the process itself from a Chilean viewpoint. The case firm 
is an existing Chilean company that intends to review its production configuration and 
==PAGE:38==
38 
 
the location of its manufacturing line. In addition, with the purpose of responding the 
second RQ, and due to the lack of literature in this area, a Delphi process was carried 
out to identify and classify the main factors that the company should consider for the 
process. 
The results of the Delphi method were similar to those presented in other studies carried 
out in other parts of the world (MacCarthy  and Atthirawong, 2003; Touray and 
Schmidt, 2016). Additionally, the framework tool showed that the case firm’s current 
manufacturing footprint is unfavourable. The objectives of the case company and other 
facts such as high transport costs or long order times support the idea of insourcing part 
of its production line and moving it to Quilpué, Valparaiso (Chile).  
From a theoretical viewpoint, three contributions should be particularly mentioned: a) 
the utilized framework is an useful tool to analyze a firm’s optimal manufacturing 
configurations based on their objectives, b) the Delphi process is a helpful method to 
reach consensus on subjective issues such as relevant location factors for ILD’s, but it is 
very time consuming, and c) even though location factors cannot be directly 
extrapolated from one case study to another, the location factors and recommendations 
presented in this thesis can be taken into consideration by other Chilean firms. 
As the Delphi study has shown, the importance of the location factors varies depending 
on the nature and size of the company. Therefore, as future research, it is suggested a 
classification of the factors’ relative importance depending on the size or nature of the 
firm. This information would save a lot of time to companies when evaluating which 
factors they should take into consideration. On the other hand, continuous advances in 
innovation make that the importance of the factors vary over time, hence, location 
factors should be continually reviewed in future investigations. 
 
 
==PAGE:39==
39 
 
9. References 
Agarwal, J. and Wu, T., 2004. China's entry to WTO: global marketing issues, 
impact, and implications for China. International Marketing Review, 21(3), pp.279-
300. 
Al-Mutairi, A.O. and Al-Hammad, A., Advantages and Disadvantages of 
Maintenance Outsourcing in Manufacturing Companies: With Special References to 
Jubail Industrial City–KSA. European Journal of Business and Management, 7(20). 
Almeida, R. and Fernandes, A.M., 2013. Explaining local manufacturing growth in 
Chile: the advantages of sectoral diversity. Applied Economics, 45(16), pp.2201-
2213. 
Alvarez, R. and Crespi, G., 2003. Determinants of technical efficiency in small 
firms. Small business economics, 20(3), pp.233-244. 
Andersson, C., Bellgran, M., Bruch, J., Rösiö, C., Wiktorsson, M. and Windmark, 
C., 2013. Production Location Handbook: Forming Your Strategic Manufacturing 
Footprint. 
Antonucci, Y.L., Lordi, F.C. and Tucker III, J.J., 1998. The pros and cons of IT 
outsourcing. Journal of Accountancy, 185(6), p.26. 
Arauzo‐Carod, J.M., Liviano‐Solis, D. and Manjón‐Antolín, M., 2010. Empirical 
studies in industrial location: an assessment of their methods and results. Journal of 
Regional Science, 50(3), pp.685-711. 
Atthirawong, W. and MacCarthy, B., 2000. Factors affecting international 
location/allocation decisions: can we structure them?. In Proceedings of the 5th 
International Manufacturing Research Symposium, pp. 1-8. 
Atthirawong, W. and MacCarthy, B., 2001. Identification of the location pattern of 
manufacturing plants in Thailand. In Proceedings of the 6th International 
Manufacturing Research Symposium, Cambridge, UK, pp. 1-13. 
Au, K.F., Wong, W.K. and Zeng, X.H., 2006. Decision model for country site 
selection of overseas clothing plants. The International Journal of Advanced 
Manufacturing Technology, 29(3-4), pp.408-417. 
Azani, H. and Khorramshahgol, R., 1990. Analytic Delphi Method (ADM): A 
strategic decision making model applied to location planning. Engineering Costs 
and Production Economics, 20(1), pp.23-28. 
Badri, M.A., Davis, D. and Davis, D., 1995. A study of measuring the critical 
factors of quality management. International Journal of Quality & Reliability 
Management, 12(2), pp.36-53. 
Beaumont, N. and Costa, C., 2003. Information technology outsourcing in Australia. 
In Advanced Topics in Information Resources Management, Volume 2 (pp. 192-
219). IGI Global. 
Beaumont, N. and Sohal, A., 2004. Outsourcing in Australia. International Journal 
of Operations & Production Management, 24(7), pp.688-700. 
Bellgran, M., Bruch, J., Rösiö, C. and Wiktorsson, M., 2013. Decision support for 
production localization: Process, activities and localization factors. In 20th EurOMA 
==PAGE:40==
40 
 
conference, Operations Management at the Heart of Recovery, 7th-12th June 2013, 
Dublin, Ireland. 
Benson, P.G., Hill, A.V. and Hoffman, T.R., 1982. Manufacturing systems of the 
future: A Delphi study. Production & Inventory Management Journal, 23(3), pp.87-
105. 
Bergoeing, R., Kehoe, P.J., Kehoe, T.J. and Soto, R., 2002. A decade lost and 
found: Mexico and Chile in the 1980s. Review of Economic Dynamics, 5(1), pp.166-
205. 
Blum, B. and Leamer, E., 2004. Can FTAA suspend the law of gravity and give 
America’s higher growth and better income distributions. Integrating the Americas: 
FTAA and Beyond, pp.539-72. 
Blumberg, D.F., 1998. Strategic assessment of outsourcing and downsizing in the 
service market. Managing Service Quality: An International Journal, 8(1), pp.5-18. 
Bocci, C. and Rocco, E., 2015. Modelling the location decisions of manufacturing 
firms with a spatial point process approach. Journal of Applied Statistics, 43(7), 
pp.1226-1239. 
Bruch, J., Wiktorsson, M. and Bellgran, M., 2014. On the production location 
decision: a case study on process and criteria. International Journal of 
Manufacturing Research 5, 9(1), pp.74-91. 
Brush, T.H., Marutan, C.A. and Karnani, A., 1999. The plant location decision in 
multinational manufacturing firms: an empirical analysis of international business 
and manufacturing strategy perspectives. Production and Operations 
Management, 8(2), pp.109-132. 
Burkholder, N.C., 2006. Outsourcing: The definitive view, applications, and 
implications. John Wiley & Sons. 
Cabrera, A., de la Cuadra, S., Galetovic, A. and Sanhueza, R., 2002. Las pyme: 
quiénes son, cómo son y qué hacer con ellas. Santiago de Chile, Sociedad de 
Fomento Fabril. 
Camhi, A., Engel, E. and Micco, A., 1997. Dinámica de empleo y productividad en 
manufactura: Evidencia micro y consecuencias macro (No. 19). 
Caves, R.E., 1996. Multinational enterprise and economic analysis. Cambridge 
university press. 
Chan, Y., 2011. Economic methods of analysis. In Location theory and decision 
analysis (pp. 17-82). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 
Chen, L., Olhager, J. and Tang, O., 2014. Manufacturing facility location and 
sustainability: A literature review and research agenda. International Journal of 
Production Economics, 149, pp.154-163. 
Christodoulou, P., Fleet, D., Hanson, P., Phaal, R., Probert, D. and Shi, Y., 2007. 
Making the right things in the right places–A structured approach to developing and 
exploiting “manufacturing footprint” strategy. Institute for Manufacturing, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. 
Claro Edwards, S., 2004. Oportunidades y desafíos para Chile de la apertura 
económica en China. 
==PAGE:41==
41 
 
Claver, E., González, R., Gascó, J. and Llopis, J., 2002. Information systems 
outsourcing: reasons, reservations and success factors. Logistics Information 
Management, 15(4), pp.294-308. 
Cross, N., 2000. Engineering design methods: strategies for product design (3d) 
Wiley. 
Dalkey, N. and Helmer, O., 1963. An experimental application of the Delphi 
method to the use of experts. Management science, 9(3), pp.458-467. 
De Meirleir, M., 2008. Location, location, location: a plant location and site 
selection guide. The Haworth Press, Taylor and Francis Group, New York. 
De Ferranti, D., Perry, G.E., Lederman, D. and Maloney, W.E., 2002. From natural 
resources to the knowledge economy: trade and job quality. Washington, DC: 
World Bank. 
Devlin, R., Estevadeordal, A. and Rodríguez-Clare, A., 2006. The Emergence of 
china: Opportunities and challenges for latin america and the caribbean. IDB. 
Dunning, J.H. and Lundan, S.M., 2008. Multinational enterprises and the global 
economy. Edward Elgar Publishing. 
Dymsza, W.A., 1972. Multinational business strategy. Thunderbird International 
Business Review, 14(2), pp.21-22. 
Easterly, W. and Levine, R., 2003. Tropics, germs, and crops: how endowments 
influence economic development. Journal of monetary economics, 50(1), pp.3-39. 
Ellram, L.M., 2013. Offshoring, reshoring and the manufacturing location 
decision. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 49(2), pp.3-5. 
Ellram, L.M., Tate, W.L. and Petersen, K.J., 2013. Offshoring and reshoring: an 
update on the manufacturing location decision. Journal of Supply Chain 
Management, 49(2), pp.14-22. 
Estrategia Regional de Desarrollo. 2017. Gobierno regional de Valparaso. 
[ONLINE] Available at: http://www.gorevalparaiso.cl/estrategia.php. [Accessed 23 
August 2017]. 
Fan, Y., 2000. Strategic outsourcing: evidence from British companies. Marketing 
Intelligence & Planning, 18(4), pp.213-219. 
Gonzalez, R., Gasco, J. and Llopis, J., 2006. Information systems outsourcing: A 
literature analysis. Information & Management, 43(7), pp.821-834. 
Google maps. 2017. Google maps. [ONLINE] Available 
at: https://www.google.cl/maps. [Accessed 9 August 2017]. 
Gray, J.V., Skowronski, K., Esenduran, G. and Johnny Rungtusanatham, M., 2013. 
The reshoring phenomenon: what supply chain academics ought to know and should 
do. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 49(2), pp.27-33. 
Green, A. and Price, I., 2000. Whither FM? A Delphi study of the profession and the 
industry. Facilities, 18(7/8), pp.281-293. 
Gupta, U.G. and Gupta, A., 1992. Outsourcing the IS function: Is it necessary for 
your organization?. Information systems management, 9(3), pp.44-47. 
==PAGE:42==
42 
 
Harland, C.M., Lamming, R.C. and Cousins, P.D., 1999. Developing the concept of 
supply strategy. International Journal of Operations & Production 
Management, 19(7), pp.650-674. 
Hayter, R., 1997. The dynamics of industrial location: the factory, the firm and the 
production system. Wiley. 
Herbert-Hansen, Z.N.L., Larsen, S.B., Nielsen, A., Groth, A., Gregersen, N. and 
Ghosh, A., 2017. Combining or Separating Forward and Reverse 
Logistics. International Journal of Logistics Management. 
Hertzell, S., 2001. China’s evolving logistics landscape. McKincey & Company, 
Greater China. 
Hoffman, J.J. and Schniederjans, M.J., 1994. A two-stage model for structuring 
global facility site selection decisions: the case of the brewing 
industry. International Journal of Operations & Production Management, 14(4), 
pp.79-96. 
Immelt, J.R., 2012. The CEO of general electric on sparking an American 
manufacturing renewal. Human Resource Management International Digest, 20(6). 
Jansson, H., 2005. Internationalization Processes in the New EU:: Market Growth, 
Relocation, and Outsourcing. In the 7 th Annual Conference on European 
Integration, Mölle, May 24-27, 2005, organized by the Swedish Network for 
European Studies in Economics and Business (SNEE). (pp. 1-19). 
Jungthirapanich, C. and Benjamin, C.O., 1995. A knowledge-based decision support 
system for locating a manufacturing facility. IIE transactions, 27(6), pp.789-799. 
Kadar, M. and Huang, D., 2002, September. The Third Party Logistics Market in 
China: Opportunities and Challenges. In CLM 2002 Conference, San Francisco, 
September (Vol. 30). 
Kakabadse, N. and Kakabadse, A., 2000. Critical review–outsourcing: a paradigm 
shift. Journal of management development, 19(8), pp.670-728. 
Kalantari, A.H., 2013. Facility Location Selection for Global Manufacturing. 
Kennedy, G. and Clark, D., 2006. Outsourcing to China–Risks and 
benefits. Computer Law & Security Review, 22(3), pp.250-253. 
Kerr, J., 2005. 10 key challenges for the Chinese logistics industry. Logistics 
management. 
Ketler, K. and Walstrom, J., 1993. The outsourcing decision. International journal 
of information management, 13(6), pp.449-459. 
Khan, N., Currie, W.L., Weerakkody, V. and Desai, B., 2003, January. Evaluating 
offshore IT outsourcing in India: supplier and customer. In System Sciences, 2003. 
Proceedings of the 36th Annual Hawaii International Conference on (pp. 10-pp). 
IEEE. 
Kinkel, S. and Maloca, S., 2009. Drivers and antecedents of manufacturing 
offshoring and backshoring—A German perspective. Journal of Purchasing and 
Supply Management, 15(3), pp.154-165. 
==PAGE:43==
43 
 
Kodali, R. and Routroy, S., 2006. Decision framework for selection of facilities 
location in competitive supply chain. Journal of Advanced Manufacturing 
Systems, 5(01), pp.89-110. 
Labán, R. and Larraín, F., 1995. Continuity, change, and the political economy of 
transition in Chile. In Reform, recovery, and growth: Latin America and the Middle 
East (pp. 115-148). University of Chicago Press. 
Lankford, W.M. and Parsa, F., 1999. Outsourcing: a primer. Management 
Decision, 37(4), pp.310-316. 
Lederman, D. and Maloney, W., 2003. Trade structure and growth. World Bank 
Policy Research Working Paper N 3025. The World Bank, Washington, DC, USA. 
Lewin, A.Y. and Peeters, C., 2006. Offshoring work: business hype or the onset of 
fundamental transformation?. Long Range Planning, 39(3), pp.221-239. 
Li, H., Li, L., Wu, B. and Xiong, Y., 2012. The end of cheap Chinese labor. The 
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(4), pp.57-74. 
Lopez, R.A. and Suedekum, J., 2009. Vertical industry relations, spillovers, and 
productivity: Evidence from Chilean plants. Journal of Regional Science, 49(4), 
pp.721-747. 
Loria, K., 2011. South America for growth and diversity. World Pumps, 2011(11), 
pp.20-23. 
Lynch, C.F., 2004. Why outsource?. Supply Chain Management Review, Vol. 8, No. 
7 (Oct. 2004), pp. 44-51. 
Lynch, M.E., Imada, S.J. and Bookbinder, J.H., 1994. The future of logistics in 
Canada: a Delphi-based forecast. Logistics and Transportation Review, 30(1), p.95. 
MacCarthy, B.L. and Atthirawong, W., 2003. Factors affecting location decisions in 
international operations–a Delphi study. International Journal of Operations & 
Production Management, 23(7), pp.794-818. 
Matteo, M.D., 2003. Sourcing in China In today's economic climate, sourcing in 
China can help firms cut costs. China Business Review, 30(5), pp.30-33. 
McIvor, R., 2013. Understanding the manufacturing location decision: the case for 
the transaction cost and capability perspectives. Journal of Supply Chain 
Management, 49(2), pp.23-26. 
Mol, M.J., 2007. Outsourcing: design, process and performance. Outsourcing: 
design, process and performance. Cambridge University Press. 
Montibeller, G. and Yoshizaki, H., 2011, April. A framework for locating logistic 
facilities with multi-criteria decision analysis. In International Conference on 
Evolutionary Multi-Criterion Optimization (pp. 505-519). Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg. 
Moreira, M.M., 2007. Fear of China: is there a future for manufacturing in Latin 
America?. World Development, 35(3), pp.355-376. 
Moreira, M.M. and Blyde, J.S., 2006. Chile's integration strategy: is there room for 
improvement? (Working Paper ITD= Documento de Trabajo ITD; n. 21) (Vol. 21). 
BID-INTAL. 
==PAGE:44==
44 
 
Mullin, R., 1996. Managing the outsourced enterprise. Journal of Business 
Strategy, 17(4), pp.28-36. 
Navarro, L. and Soto, R., 2006. Procyclical Productivity in 
Manufacturing. Cuadernos de economía, 43(127), pp.193-220. 
Okoli, C. and Pawlowski, S.D., 2004. The Delphi method as a research tool: an 
example, design considerations and applications. Information & management, 42(1), 
pp.15-29. 
Olson, D.L. and Wu, D. eds., 2008. New frontiers in enterprise risk management. 
Springer Science & Business Media. 
Pagnoncelli, D., 1993. Managed outsourcing: a strategy for a competitive company 
in the 1990s. Management Decision, 31(7). 
Pavcnik, N., 2002. Trade liberalization, exit, and productivity improvements: 
Evidence from Chilean plants. The Review of Economic Studies, 69(1), pp.245-276. 
Pongpanich, C., 2000. Manufacturing location decisions: choosing the right location 
for international manufacturing facilities. University of Cambridge Institute of 
Manufacturing. 
Porter, M.E. and Rivkin, J.W., 2012. Choosing the United States. 
Ray, P.K. and Sahu, S., 1990. Productivity management in India: A Delphi 
study. International Journal of Operations & Production Management, 10(5), 
pp.25-51. 
Razzaque, M.A. and Sheng, C.C., 1998. Outsourcing of logistics functions: a 
literature survey. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics 
Management, 28(2), pp.89-107. 
Red caminera de Chile. Ministerio de obras públicas. 2017. Red caminera de Chile. 
Ministerio de obras públicas. [ONLINE] Available at: http://www.mapas.mop.cl/. 
[Accessed 26 July 2017]. 
Rochester, J.H. and Rochester, H., 1995, September. Advantages and disadvantages 
of outsourcing. In Professional Communication Conference, 1995. IPCC'95 
Proceedings. Smooth sailing to the Future., IEEE International (pp. 77-82). IEEE. 
Rowe, G., Wright, G. and Bolger, F., 1991. Delphi: a reevaluation of research and 
theory. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 39(3), pp.235-251. 
Rowley, J. and Slack, F., 2004. Conducting a literature review. Management 
Research News, 27(6), pp.31-39. 
Schmenner, R.W., 1982. Making business location decisions. Prentice Hall. 
Schniederjans, M.J., Schniederjans, A.M. and Schniederjans, D.G., 
2015. Outsourcing and insourcing in an international context. Routledge. 
Schroeder, R.G., Anderson, J.C. and Cleveland, G., 1986. The content of 
manufacturing strategy: an empirical study. Journal of operations management, 6(3-
4), pp.405-415. 
Servicios de impuestos internos. 2017. Servicios de impuestos internos. [ONLINE] 
Available at: http://www.sii.cl/portales/reavaluo_no_edificados/2015/planos/index.html. 
[Accessed 24 August 2017]. 
==PAGE:45==
45 
 
Siliverstovs, B. and Herzer, D., 2006. Export-led growth hypothesis: evidence for 
Chile. Applied Economics Letters, 13(5), pp.319-324. 
Stamm, D.J., 2005. Outsourcing paradoxes. Industrial Engineer, 37(2), pp.22-23. 
Steenhuis, H.J. and De Bruijn, E.J., 2004. Exploring knowledge transfer within 
manufacturing networks and codified information characteristics: the hidden 
dangers of inaccurate information. International journal of technology transfer and 
commercialisation, 3(4), pp.433-453. 
Sule, D.R., 2008. Manufacturing facilities: location, planning, and design. CRC 
press. 
Tate, W.L., Ellram, L.M., Schoenherr, T. and Petersen, K.J., 2014. Global 
competitive conditions driving the manufacturing location decision. Business 
Horizons, 57(3), pp.381-390. 
Tavana, M., Kennedy, D.T. and Joglekar, P., 1996. A group decision support 
framework for consensus ranking of technical manager candidates. Omega, 24(5), 
pp.523-538. 
Tong, H.M., 1979. Plant Location Decisions of Foreign Manufacturing Investors in 
the US. UMI Research Press. 
Trunick, P.A., 2003. Logisitics link are critical in China. Transportation & 
Distribution, 44(8), pp.50-50. 
Touray, E. and Schmidt, A.S.T.,2016. International location decisions in Danish 
manufacturing firms. Comprehension and improvement through literature review 
and empirical study. Thesis version 1. DTU Department of Management 
Engineering. 
Turbus. 2017. Turbus. [ONLINE] Available 
at: https://www.turbus.cl/wtbus/indexCompra.jsf. [Accessed 26 July 2017]. 
Ulgado, F.M., 1996. Location characteristics of manufacturing investments in the 
US: A comparison of American and foreign-based firms. MIR: Management 
International Review, pp.7-26. 
Vereecke, A. and Van Dierdonck, R., 2002. The strategic role of the plant: testing 
Ferdows’s model. International Journal of Operations & Production 
Management, 22(5), pp.492-514. 
Vissak, T., 2010. Recommendations for using the case study method in international 
business research. The Qualitative Report, 15(2), p.370. 
Viswanadham, N. and Kameshwaran, S., 2007, September. A decision framework 
for location selection in global supply chains. In Automation Science and 
Engineering, 2007. CASE 2007. IEEE International Conference on (pp. 704-709). 
IEEE. 
Vos, B., 1997. Redesigning international manufacturing and logistics 
structures. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics 
Management, 27(7), pp.377-394. 
Watts, H.D., 1987. Industrial geography. Prentice Hall. 
Weber, A. and Friedrich, C.J., 1929. Alfred Weber's theory of the location of 
industries. 
==PAGE:46==
46 
 
Weerakkody, V., Currie, W.L. and Ekanayake, Y., 2003. Re-engineering business 
processes through application service providers: Challenges, issues and 
complexities. Business Process Management Journal, 9(6), pp.776-794. 
Wu, D. and Olson, D.L., 2008. Information technology outsourcing risk: Trends in 
China. In New Frontiers in Enterprise Risk Management (pp. 223-236). Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg. 
Yang, J. and Lee, H., 1997. An AHP decision model for facility location 
selection. Facilities, 15(9/10), pp.241-254. 
Yin, R.K. and Campbell, D.T., 2003. Case Study Research: Design and Methods 
Thousand Oaks Sage Publications. Politics of Education Association Bulletin. 
Yurimoto, S. and Masui, T., 1995. Design of a decision support system for overseas 
plant location in the EC. International Journal of Production Economics, 41(1-3), 
pp.411-418. 
Zhu, Z., Hsu, K. and Lillie, J., 2001. Outsourcing–a strategic move: the process and 
the ingredients for success. Management decision, 39(5), pp.373-378. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
47 
 
Acknowledgement 
Zaza Nadja Lee Herbert-Hansen, my DTU supervisor, thank you for helpful feedback 
throughout the process. 
Gonzalo Améstica, supervisor at Universidad Técnica Santa María, thank you for help 
contacting the experts for the Delphi process and your comments when elaborating the 
interviews. 
Thank you to the case company, CEO and employees, for the opportunity of doing a 
master thesis with them and being so welcoming and supportive. 
All respondents of the Delphi process, I really appreciate your valuable time. It has been 
crucial in the contributions of this master thesis. 
Finally, I want to thank my parents for their unconditional support and always believe in 
me. 
 
 
==PAGE:48==
48 
 
Appendix 
A1. Delphi Method 
The text posted to contact the experts was typed in Spanish as the potential panellists 
were all Spanish speakers. The original text in Spanish is given below. 
“Estimado profesor, 
Soy Víctor Antona García. Soy un alumno de intercambio que se encuentra realizando 
su proyecto de tesis en la USM en colaboración con la Univesidad Técnica de 
Dinamarca (DTU).  
El proyecto consiste en estudiar y analizar los factores influyentes para una empresa a la 
hora de decidir dónde ubicar su fábrica (ya sea por medio de proveedores o como 
dueños de la misma) en la industria chilena. Con esta información se pretende estudiar 
un caso particular de una empresa real chilena que está teniendo un rápido crecimiento. 
Además, el artículo de investigación proporcionará información que puede ser relevante 
para futuras empresas chilenas que se vean en esa situación. 
Le escribo este mail porque estoy realizando un proceso Delphi para seleccionar cuales 
son los factores más importantes en este proceso, y me gustaría saber si usted podría 
colaborar como entendido de la materia. He visto su perfil en Internet y me parece que 
su perfil es idóneo para este proceso. 
El proceso es totalmente anónimo y le estaría realmente agradecido si decidiera a 
colaborar. Para ello, me gustaría poder juntarme con usted para realizarle un pequeño 
cuestionario. Estoy 100% disponible de horario y a su entera disposición. En caso de 
que considere que conoce la materia lo suficiente, pero que no tiene tiempo para una 
reunión, le podría enviar el cuestionario por mail. 
Disculpe las molestias y espero que pueda ayudarme. 
Un cordial saludo. Victor.” 
The translation is written below. 
“Dear Professor, 
My name is Víctor Antona García, and I am an exchange student doing a master thesis 
at USM in collaboration with the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). 
The project consists of studying and analyzing the factors influencing an international 
location decision (either through suppliers or as owners) within a Chilean industry 
context. With this information we intend to study a particular case of an existing 
Chilean company that is experiencing fast growth. In addition, the research article will 
provide information that may be relevant to future Chilean companies that are in the 
same situation. 
I am sending this mail because I am doing a Delphi process to select which are the most 
important factors in this process, and I would like to know if you could collaborate as an 
expert on the subject. I have seen your profile on the Internet and I think your profile is 
suitable for this process. 
The process is completely anonymous and I would be really grateful if you decide to 
collaborate. I would like to have a meeting with you and complete a small 
questionnaire. I am 100% available. In the case where you consider that you have the 
==PAGE:49==
49 
 
expertise and knowledge to participate, but do not have time for a meeting, you could 
answer the questionnaire by mail. 
Sorry for the inconvenience and I hope you can help me. 
Kind regards. Victor.” 
The rest of the information related to the Delphi process is presented in English, even 
though it was carried out in Spanish.   
A1.1. Round 1 
During the first round of interviews the panellists were introduced to the topic with the 
following text.  
“This instrument is part of a research study that focuses on documenting and analyzing 
the decision-making process that determines factory locations. Although there is 
currently a considerable amount of literature on this subject, most of it refers to 
companies or industries located in North America or Europe. The purpose of this 
research is to study part of this process in the Chilean manufacturing industry, in order 
to understand and enrich the decision-making process with the intention of improving 
the quality of the final decision. 
The thesis focuses on the study of the key factors that the decision makers usually 
analyze when comparing the different alternatives. However, it is not only about what 
factors are usually taken into account, but the weight they should be given within the 
decision. 
This study focuses within the context of a new business, entrepreneurship or small 
business (average sales volume) that require manufacturing in order for its products or 
services. 
The information obtained in this process will be applied to an existing company. The 
company is Chilean and is dedicated to selling surfboards, one of the few that exists in 
the country. The company is three years old, in its first year it sold 400 boards, and the 
numbers grew rapidly.” 
After this introduction, the experts were asked the following questions.  
“Within this framework, what factors do you consider most important when making this 
decision in a Chilean company? Why?” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
Logistic or transport cost 
Proximity to demand 
Lead Time 
Setup Cost 
Availability of qualified labour cost 
Goverment Support 
Wages 
Tax benefits 
Factors 
==PAGE:50==
50 
 
 
“Identify from the list presented the factors that you believe would be relevant to the 
given context up to a maximum of 6. You can choose fewer if you wish, or add any 
extra where necessary. 
 
 
“Within each factor that you have mentioned, could you indicate at least one of the sub-
factors that are most relevant? Why?” 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
   
 
 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
Costs 
Infrastructure 
Markets and customer 
Proximity to competition 
Legal and regulatory framework 
Government and political factors 
Factors  
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
Existence of modes of transportation 
Quality of transportation 
Infrastructure  
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
Transportation 
Wages 
Fixed costs 
Inventary 
Cost 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
Government stability 
Goverment and political 
==PAGE:51==
51 
 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
Alternative suppliers 
Speed and responsiveness of suppliers 
Suppliers and resources 
                       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       
 
Graphics of those factors mentioned by less than 20% of the expert panel have been 
excluded.  
A1.2. Round 2 
Round 2 had the purpose of reaching a consensus between the five most important 
factors. The previous results were shown individually to panellists, who agreed to 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
Customs 
Financial incentives 
Taxes 
Economic 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
Security 
Social and cultural 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
Enviromental issues 
Legal and regulatory 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
Proximity to demand 
Responsiveness and delivery time 
Markets and customers 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
Possibilities of expansion 
Physical conditions 
Characteristics of a specific location 
==PAGE:52==
52 
 
choose the 5 factors mostly mentioned in Round 1. Consequently, the following was the 
final list. 
  Cost 
 Infrastructure 
 Proximity to demand  
 Proximity to suppliers 
 Economic factors 
A1.3. Round 3 
In Round 3, the panellists were mailed to rank the selected factors and sub-factors from 
1 to 5.  
“Dear expert, 
After reaching a consensus about those factor that the case firm should take into 
account, I ask you to please rank those factors and their consequential sub-factors from 
1 to 5, being 1 Scarcely relevant and 5 Extremely relevant.  
Thank you for your help, kind regards.” 
As the standard deviation in the responses was very low, it was not necessary to carry 
out another round. The final results are shown in the next graphs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Transportation 
Wages 
Fixed costs 
Inventary 
Costs 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Existence of modes of transportation 
Quality of transportation 
Infrastructure 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Custom dutties 
Financial incentives 
Taxes 
Economic  
==PAGE:53==
53 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Alternative suppliers 
Speed and responsiveness of suppliers 
Suppliers and resources 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Proximity to demand 
Responsiveness and delivery time 
Markets and customers 
