==PAGE:1==
Network Analysis of dementia related
neurodegenerative diseases
Emil Tosti
s113481
Abstract
The cases of Alzheimer’s (AD), Parkinson’s (PD) and Huntington’s disease (HD)
are on the rise world wide[1–3]. But as of yet there is no cure for any of these dis-
eases, and treatment is limited to minimizing the associated symptoms[4,7,29,37,41,49,51]
Through the integration several publicly available datasets, this thesis aimed to build
ﬁrst order protein-protein interaction networks using the InWeb_InBioMap[10] tool.
Then through a Gene Ontology (GO) analysis, and the use of meta data identify any
underlying biological processes, based on networks selected from each disease. Sev-
eral networks of interest was fund for each disease, but in AD and HD it proved hard
explain the direction of regulation for the GO processes associated. Mainly due to
a lack in overlap in diﬀerentially expressed genes, within the integrated datasets. A
overlap was however found between AD and HD related to cognition, which was down
regulated in HD. Despite the regulatory direction not being apparent the associated
GO processes did reveal some of the underlying biology, which might be useful as an
added layer of meta data, in future research.
==PAGE:2==
CONTENTS
Contents
1
Scope of the project
3
2
Theory
3
3
The Use Of Arrays In Expression Analysis
3
3.1
Array technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
4
Protein-Protein Interaction Networks
4
4.1
PPI Experimental data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4.2
Gene level versus Network level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4.3
Meta data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4.3.1
Gene Ontology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
5
Dementia
7
6
Alzheimer’s
8
6.1
Symptoms of Alzheimer’s disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
6.2
Biological Mechanisms of Alzheimer’s disease . . . . . . . . .
9
6.3
Treatment of Alzheimer’s disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
7
Parkinson’s disease
11
7.1
Symptoms of Parkinson’s disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
7.2
Biological Mechanisms of Parkinson’s Disease
. . . . . . . .
14
7.3
Treatment of Parkinson’s Disease
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
8
Huntington’s Disease
16
8.1
Symptoms of Huntington’s disease
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
8.2
Biological mechanisms of Huntington’s disease . . . . . . . .
18
8.3
Treatment of Huntington’s Disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
9
Methods And Materials
19
9.1
Quality Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
9.2
arrayQualityMetrics In R . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
9.3
Principal Component Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
1
==PAGE:3==
CONTENTS
9.4
Normalization Of Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
9.5
Within-Array normalization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
9.6
Differential Gene Expression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
9.7
Integration of multiple studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
9.8
SystemsSignificance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
10 Results
26
10.1 Final data selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
10.2 QC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
10.3 Data integration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
10.4 Regulatory vote
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
10.5 Network generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
11 Discussion
36
2
==PAGE:4==
3
THE USE OF ARRAYS IN EXPRESSION ANALYSIS
Scope of the project
The scope of this project an analytical study of protein-protein interaction network in the
light of experimental data mainly focusing on Alzheimers, Huntingtons and Parkinsons, in
order to determine overlapping and unique features within the respective disease networks.
The amount of dementia cases worldwide are on the rise[1–3], with diseases such as Alzheimer’s,
Parkinson’s and Huntington’s disease being some of the main contributors to this trend[1,3,3–9].
The scope of this thesis is to:
1. Collect public available data, from array studies
2. Preform quality control, to ensure a high level of validity, and exclude possible bias
3. Preform diﬀerential expression analysis, and rank genes within respective data sets
4. Integrate the data across the experiments, thereby possibly obtaining a new ranking
within the given disease
5. Benchmark the integrated and non-integrated data against a text mining list of genes
6. Use the integrated list, to construct ﬁrst order networks using the InWeb_InBioMap[10]
tool
7. Through the use of meta-data, map additional information onto the signiﬁcant net-
works, in order to select networks of interest
8. Preform a gene ontology enrichment analysis on the selected networks, in order to
classify the underlying biology
The reason for integrating several datasets is seeking to further strengthen the resulting
rankings, and signiﬁcance level. This was done, as outlined above, by benchmarking the
ranking against a list of genes obtained though text-mining, for all three diseases. The
goal thereafter is though the use of protein-protein interaction networks to show some
underling biology, in a easy to understand context, despite the high dimensional nature of
the data.
Theory
The Use Of Arrays In Expression Analysis
One of the most popular ways of studying cellular systems, in both healthy and diseased
people, is the use of gene expression data, giving the possibility of a genome wide analy-
sis[11,12]. Common for these array types are that they contain several thousand diﬀerent
measurement targets[13,14], thereby enabling the user to take a snapshot of the expression
level of a given protein, in a give tissue sample at a certain condition. This facilitates one
of the key uses of arrays, through the comparison of expression levels of samples from sick
and healthy individuals, signiﬁcant diﬀerences of the genes expressed can be determined.
3
==PAGE:5==
4
PROTEIN-PROTEIN INTERACTION NETWORKS
Since the invention of microarrays in the early 1990’s the amount of public data available,
has been growing vastly more substantial, and only continues to do so. An example of
this it the ArrayExpress data-bank hosted by EMBL-EBI which, as of April 2017, host
above 2 million arrays that are within the public domain. Despite there being some level
of curation done to the data, there is still the possibility of bias as a result of diﬀerence in
protocol, handling and kits when working with arrays. This problem is not unknown to
the scientiﬁc community[15,16].
3.1
Array technology
In general therms an array is a two dimensional substrate/surface, onto which are immo-
bilized known oligonucleotides, probes, are fused, and from which a signal can be read
using specialized scanners[11,13,14]. The ﬁrst format of arrays used "spotting" to deposit
the probes, however this method could produce arrays with high level of variance in signal,
since it was, amongst other problems, hard to ensure a uniform amount of probes being
deposited in each spot[13]. Since then the technology has developed further with into many
directions, however two general modes of action i used either: A one channel approach,
where a single tagged sample is tested on one array, or a two channel approach where two
diﬀerently tagged samples are measured on a single array. Aﬀymetrix (one channel) uses
in situ syntheses, to build their probes, having between 11-19 duplicates of each probe
on the a array[13,14]. The latter is furthermore the technology of all the arrays in used
for analysis in this thesis, as can be seen in table 3. The company Agilent (two channel)
uses high deﬁnition ink-jet technology in order to deposit nucleotides on the surface of the
array slide, thereby building the probe[13].
Protein-Protein Interaction Networks
The use of protein-protein interactions (PPI), and the resulting PPI-networks, has become
a strong tool in biology when wanting to asses things on a higher level than gene level.
This has become possible through the increasing amount of high-throughput data being
produced since the start of the new millennium, with several thousand interactions being
tested across hundreds of proteins in a single study[10,12,17–19]. As mentioned in the pre-
ceding section 3, one of the most used forms of study of diseases, are through the use of
genomic expression data. This type of data is at often the starting point of a network
based analysis, in order to ﬁnd proteins of interest and use these too form the foundation
onto which the networks are build. This is not to say that is the only use for the gene
expression data, as it can provide an extra level of weight to a PPI networks, as meta-data.
This section will therefore provide an overview over some of the methods for mapping PPI,
how meta-data can provide further depths to the analysis.
4
==PAGE:6==
4
PROTEIN-PROTEIN INTERACTION NETWORKS
4.1
PPI Experimental data
There are several methods that can detect PPI, which can decode as many niches, within
PPI, however there are in general two main methods for generating PPI data: The Two-
hybrid, and Aﬃnity puriﬁcation coupled with Mass Spectrometry (AP/MS)
Two Hybrid System
The two-hybrid experiments uses transcriptional activation of a reporter gene as a mea-
sure of interaction, between two proteins. The method utilizes the nature of site-speciﬁc
transcriptional activators, consisting of a DNA-binding domain and an activation domain,
and since theses do not need to be covalently bonded, they can be be activated by the
interaction of two proteins[20,21]. Therefore when studying the interaction between protein
X and Y, one needs to have a DNA-binding domain added, and the other a transcription
activation domain added[20,21]. This method is mainly carried out in yeast (Yeast Two-
Hybrid/Y2H), but there is mammalian platforms available (eg. CAPPIA)[20,21]. However
since this method relies on transcription, search space is limited to proteins that fold, and
stay in a stable form within the nucleus. And do not need posttranslational modiﬁcation
in order too bind. This might not happen thereby inhibiting the interaction, and the sub-
sequent detection of some proteins for which the nucleus is not their natural sub-cellular
location[20].
Affinity Purification and Mass Spectrometry
This method diﬀers from the Two-hybrid by being conducted in vitro. Since proteins are
sampled form their natural environment (in vivo), they can be found bound together in
complexes, where the Two-Hybrid only shows single interactions. The general mode of ac-
tion in an AP/MS is ﬁst bind a single protein, often refereed to as bait, to a column, which
is then washed with a sample containing the a complex, the prey, that in turn binds to
the immobilized column bait[20]. When all non-relevant/non-binding proteins have been
washed out, the retained complexes can then be eluted from the column and collected
to be used in the further needed analysis, since only the bait is known at this point[20].
These complexes are then broken down into smaller fragments, by enzymatic digestion
which then can analysed via MS, in which the mass-to-charge ratio is used to determine
the observed molecule[22,23]. This information can then be used in order to reconstruct,
each protein in the complex.
As mentioned in the start of this section there are several diﬀerent methods with which
interactions can be determined, however since this is not the focus of this thesis, it will not
be elaborated further upon. The important thing is however that studies mapping these
PPI are being conducted and with more and more of this data being publicly available it
5
==PAGE:7==
4
PROTEIN-PROTEIN INTERACTION NETWORKS
is now possible to build networks with a higher level of certainty though the integration
of this aforementioned data, despite the messy nature of PPI data[10].
4.2
Gene level versus Network level
Figure 1: The general framework of a Protein-Protein
Interaction network. Going form expressed genes in the
top, onto selected genes through diﬀerential expression
analysis.
Which is in turn used as seed proteins (blue,
green, red) in the network
When exploring the diﬀerential gene ex-
pressions of a disease this is but a snap-
shot of what is happening in that instant
within the given organism.
However this
only gives an idea how a single compo-
nent within the system is functioning at
that time. The constant interplay between
proteins play a central role in the progres-
sion of a disease.
This interplay is how-
ever not shown when only gene expression
is used, therefore by utilizing known PPI,
a biological network can be constructed.
There are several tools that can be used
in order to do this, however in this the-
sis InWeb_InBioMap[10] was used.
Li
et al.[10] showed that this method preform
better relative to other methods with the
same function, originating the bigger size
of knowledge base InWeb_InBioMap draws
from. Assuming that the gene expression
data used has been undergone quality con-
trol, a selection of proteins can be used as
seed proteins for a network.. An stylized example of this process can be seen in ﬁgure 1,
where the expressed genes are at the top, which undergo selection by way of diﬀerential
expression analysis; three signiﬁcantly diﬀerentially expressed proteins are then selected
and used as seed protein for the resulting PPI-network. From this a additional information
level can be obtained, since the scope has changed from gene-view up to a systematic-view.
4.3
Meta data
Onto the generated networks it is now possible to map additional data, if available. This
addition of meta data to the network can help identify clusters, or sections, within larger
networks through direction of regulation (up/down), and biological functions amongst
other.
Network generation thereby take high dimensional data and maps it onto a low dimensional
platform, and by the use of meta-data retain a high level of information, thereby enhancing
the understanding of the underlying biological mechanisms.
6
==PAGE:8==
5
DEMENTIA
In cluster
not in cluster
Row total
With Annotation
a
b
a+b
Without Annotation
c
d
c+d
Column total
a+c
b+d
a+b+c+d (n)
Table 1: An example of a contingency table, the extra row and column is added for easy read
4.3.1
Gene Ontology
Gene Ontology (GO) is a hierarchical selection of terms, assigned by the Gene Ontology
Consortium to known genes[24–26]. These terms are divided into three top levels: molecular
function, biological process, and cellular component, under which is a further division into
more and more speciﬁc terms happens[24–26]. This is useful, since this might explain the
process, function or which sub-cellular component a cluster might have. Several GO-terms
can be assigned to a gene, these can be the same across several genes[24]. This can be used
in the context of a cluster, to determine if any GO-terms are overrepresented, compared
to a random sample.
Enrichment analysis
This is done through the use of Fisher’s exact test, where a two by two contingency table
is constructed, an extra row and column is added for easy reading, as seen in table ??, but
is not needed for the calculation as seen in equation 1, where p is a p-value, determining
if the term is enriched or not[27].
p = (a + b)! · (c + d)! · (a + c)!·!(b + d)!
a! · b! · c! · d!
(1)
Dementia
Dementia is not a malady, but rather a the diagnosis/syndrome used to describe the
cognitive impairment resulting from a variety neurological degenerative diseases (NDD)
or trauma to the brain.
Common for all these are that the patients show decline in
cognitive functions such as: memory, emotional understanding, reasoning, and a growing
dependency on others to preform everyday activities[1–3,7]. The World Health Organization
(WHO) lists three stages of dementia: Early, Middle and Late stage, as can be seen below
in table 2[3]:
Some of the symptoms seen in dementia are also seen in depression,
and therefore some of dementia patients are in the early stages miss-diagnosed as having
depression[2]. However one of the distinctions that can be made is that where depression
is commonly treatable, dementia is not[1].
7
==PAGE:9==
6
ALZHEIMER’S
Table 2: Stage division of dementia as deﬁned by WHO, and some examples of the symptoms
associated with these stages[3]
Early Stage
Middle Stage
Late Stage
Forgetfulness
Forgetting names
Oblivious to time and place
Getting lost in known places
loss of short term memory
Not recognizing relatives
Losing track of time
Communication diﬃculties
High need of assisted care
Assistance with personal care
Diﬃculty walking
Behavioural changes
Aggressive behaviour
Alzheimer’s
In 1907 Dr. Alois Alzheimer published a paper describing the cognitive decay of a 51
year old woman, along with the post mortem autopsy of the patients brain showing, what
he called, senile plaques (SP) and neuroﬁbrillary tangles (NFT)[5,6,9,28,29]. This discovery
lead to a collogue of Alzheimer’s, three years late, in 1910, referring to these symptoms as
Alzheimer’s disease (AD).
A general consensus is that the cases of AD are on the rise and will continue to do so,
accounting for the majority of dementia cases[1,3–9]. Despite of the disease being known for
over a century, the causes of AD are still being explored and understood,[1,3,7–9]. There are
in general two types of AD: familial AD (fAD) which is linked to a genetic predisposition
within a subject[7,9,29]. Sporadic AD, refereed to as AD and the main focus, of the two,
in this thesis. The latter accounting for the majority of AD case and with onset later in
life, compared to fAD[4,7,9,29].
6.1
Symptoms of Alzheimer’s disease
Position(s)
Description
Length
1 – 17
Signal peptide
17
18 – 770
Amyloid beta A4 protein
753
18 – 687
Soluble APP-alpha
670
18 – 671
Soluble APP-beta
654
18 – 286
N-APP
269
672 – 770
C99
99
672 – 713
Beta-amyloid protein 42
42
672 – 711
Beta-amyloid protein 40
40
688 – 770
C83
83
688 – 713
P3(42)
26
688 – 711
P3(40)
24
691 – 770
C80
80
712 – 770 Gamma-secretase C-terminal fragment 59
59
714 – 770 Gamma-secretase C-terminal fragment 57
57
721 – 770 Gamma-secretase C-terminal fragment 50
50
740 – 770
C31
31
Figure 2: ﬁgure
Cleavage sites of α-,β-, and γ-secretase on the membrane
bound protein, Amyloid beta A4 Protein and the asscosi-
taed sites as deﬁnde by uniprot [30].
The Aβ40/42 frag-
ment, which is linked to the progression of AD and for-
mation of senile plaques is shown in red.
Since there as of yet exists no deﬁnitive
biomarkers for AD the only way to un-
ambiguously diagnose AD is to examine
the brain though biopsy or autopsy[4,7,31].
The only commonly agreed upon sign of
AD is;
the presence of SP and NFT
within the brain, these being composed
of amyloid-β (Aβ) and tau-protein respec-
tively[4–9,29,31–33].
The use of biomarkers
is still not a deﬁnitive diagnostic tool both
because the invasive nature of the lumbar
puncture for the extraction of cerebrospinal
ﬂuid (CSF) needed for the analysis[7,31]. As
is was seen in the preceding section 5, there
are several stages in which a patient can be,
8
==PAGE:10==
6
ALZHEIMER’S
and therefore there are diﬀerent symptoms depended on which stage the patient is in. As
logic prescribes: in later stages, sever symptoms become. Being a NDD, AD aﬀects the
behaviour of the aﬀected patients in several ways.
Episodic memory decline, sporadic linguistic and attention problems, along with the abil-
ity to perceive spatial relations, are reported to be some of the earliest sings of AD[4,7,29].
However motor functions, the ability to preform daily activities, and the long-term memory
dose not see to manifest in the early stages of the disease[4,7,29]. Over time the cognitive
functions of the patient deteriorates; leading to the subject becoming, easily agitated or
aggressive along with the loss of critical thinking, and long-term memory.[4,5,7,29] Inability
to preform basic daily activities such as; bathing, and dressing will also become an issue for
the AD patient[4,5,7,29]. A person suﬀering from the late stages of AD is therefore highly
dependent on either their personal network, or the society to take care of them.
Despite there not being a proven relation between cognitive decline rate and mortality,
due to the lack of knowledge about the speciﬁc disease onset[7], there has been studies
into the relation between level of education and cognitive decline rate, where it has been
found that: with a higher educational level of a patient the decline rate seems to be faster,
when at ﬁrst the disease manifests[7,34,35]. This might be linked to the greater number
of neurological synapses a person of higher education possibly possesses, making them
able to withstand more extensive damage[7]. The subsequent decline and appearance of
symptoms might therefore seem faster simply due to this higher level of damage[34].
Lastly one of the more apparent types of symptoms, along with visible SP and NFT, the
decrease in overall brain volume following the death of neurons throughout the brain[36].
6.2
Biological Mechanisms of Alzheimer’s disease
There are many hypothesis linked to AD, but as stated previous, there is still no deﬁni-
tive answer to what causes AD onset. The best known is the deposits of SP and NFT
within the brain of AD patients, which was already described by Dr. Alois Alzheimer
in 1907[4–9,28,29,31–33]. He did however not know the mechanisms leading to the SP and
NFT occurring within the brain, which among other mechanisms will be explained in this
section.
Genotype as a risk factor
The early onset of fAD, often starting midlife has consistently been linked to mutations
in three genes amyloid precursor protein (APP) and the presenilins 1/2 (PS1 and PS2),
located on chromosome 21, 14 and 1 respectively[4,29].
Common for them i that they
all inﬂuence the production of Aβ, more speciﬁc the type Aβ42, leading to a, relative to
normal, abundance of the aforementioned protein residue[4,29]. The function of Aβ42 will
be elaborated upon further down, as the role of the three genes in disease progression is
the same in both types of Alzheimer’s. It is however worth noting that one of the reasons
for people with downs syndrome develop dementia/AD during their lifetime is due to them
9
==PAGE:11==
6
ALZHEIMER’S
having an extra chromosome 21, and therefore an extra copy of the APP gene.[4,8,29].
The genotype of the gene apolipoprotein E (AopE), has through several studies, been show
to increase the risk of developing AD[7,29]. More speciﬁc being homozygous of the allele
ε4 has been linked to a higher risk of developing fAD/AD[7,29].
The role of Amyloid-β
The general hypothesis regarding the development of AD puts the accumulation of Aβ
and tau in the centre, through aggregation of the two proteins into SP and NFT respec-
tively[4–9,29,31–33]. However this is a complex process that involves several genes and steps;
starting with the membrane bound protein APP[4,8] seen in ﬁgure 2. Despite the bio-
logical function of APP being somewhat unknown, the genetic and processing of APP in
relation to AD is relativity well documented[4–9,29,31–33]. APP is a approximately 300kb
long gene, that produces the Amyloid beta A4 protein (AβPP: Uniprot ID: P05067) of
which the major isoform has a length of 770 amino acids[4,8]. The protein is attributed
several functions ranging from neuronal adhesion to transcriptional regulation[4,8]. The
majority of AβPP is located as the extracellular N-terminal part (Amino acid: 18-699),
which undergo processing by diﬀerent secretase’s of which three will be touch upon in this
section. The end result is several fragments of diﬀerent length, which seems to aﬀect if
AD develops or not[4,5,29,31]. The three secretase’s are: α-, β- and γ-secretase, and it is
the sequence in which these cleave AβPP, that determines the product, both in name and
size[8,9], as seen in ﬁgure 2.
α-secretase cleaving, widely recognised, as a non pathogenic processing of AβPP, leads
to a 670 aa N-terminal (position: 18-687) and a C terminal 83 aa (C83: position: 688-
770) fragment being produced[4,8,9,30]. The relative small C83 is then further cleaved by
γ-secretase, to produce one of two P3 peptides (length 24 or 26 aa)[4,9,30]. More relevant
for AD is when AβPP undergo processing by β-secretase as the ﬁrst step. In that case a
the protein is cleaved at a position closer to the N-terminal end, subsequently producing
a shorter soluble fragment of 754 aa (position: 18-671) and a longer anchored fragment if
99 aa (C99, position: 672-770)[4,9,30]. It is the consecutive processing of the C99 fragment,
by γ-secretase that leads to the formation of either Aβ40 or Aβ42, of which the latter has
been shown to be less abundant in healthy individuals[4,8,9,29,33]. Aβ42 peptides seems to
be more prone to sticking together, relative to the Aβ40 variant[4,5,9].
With aggregation happing outside the cell, it can therefore disrupt inter-neuron commu-
nication[8,29] and thereby impairing cognitive function. It is generally accepted that the
processing of AβPP by β- and γ-secretase leads to the production of Aβ42, and the sub-
sequent SP formation, is one of the propelling factors in the development and progression
of AD[4–9,29,31–33].
10
==PAGE:12==
7
PARKINSON’S DISEASE
The role of tau
The formation of SP is however only one of the major symptoms when assessing AD,
post-mortem, NFT being the second deﬁnitive manifestation of AD[4–9,28,29,31–33]. NFT
is accumulation of a hyperphosphorylated isoform of the microtubule-associated protein
tau[5,8,9,29]. In normal conditions tau is one of the key elements holding in stabilising the
tubular polymers within the axon, with phosphorylation and dephosphorylation happening
at the relative same rate[9,29]. It is as of yet not known what triggers the hyperphospho-
rylation of tau, but it is suggested that the formation of Aβ42 might act as this[5,29].
It has been observed, in some patients, that the formation of SP and NFT form in in-
dependent spatial distributed patterns[5]. And when tested tau showed a negative eﬀect
on Aβ aggregation, despite being positively upregulated by Aβ [5]. This might both an-
swer why there is diﬀerence in spatial distribution and why it seems that Aβ induce tau
hyperphosphorylation. Opposite Aβ aggregation, tau collects inside the neurons, thereby
impairing the function of the neurons which in some cases might lead to apoptosis[29]
6.3
Treatment of Alzheimer’s disease
Although many of the underlying aspects of AD progression and development are known,
there is as of yet no treatment of AD, the main therapeutic approach is symptomatic
treatment of AD. This is not only done through pharmacological intervention but also
patient care, the latter very high cost but essential in the late stages of AD, since the
independence of the patient severely decline[4,5,7,29]. Some of the early studies into AD
showed a decline in cholinergic neurons within the brain, in sites with SP and NFT, in
AD patients[7,29]. Giving rise to the ﬁrst treatment strategies being acetylcholinesterase
inhibitors (AChEIs), but this only gives a at best moderate therapeutic eﬀect on AD
progression[7,29].
Parkinson’s disease
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a idiopathic movement disorder characterized by the loss of
dopamine producing cells within the sustancia negra (SN) which in most cases are spo-
radic[37–42]. In the general population a 1 % risk in all adults above the age of 60-75 is
seen[37,38,42]. A few genes are known to directly cause PD, which are elaborated upon in
section 7.2, the majority of PD cases develop sporadically[37–41]. PD is deﬁned by a set of
motor traits which is referred to as parkinsonism[37].
It was in the 1817 publication "An essay on the shaking palsy" by James Parkinson, out-
lined the classic understanding of PD being; resting tremors, slowed movement and limb
rigidity[37–39,41–43], it took over a 130 years before the loss dopamine producing neurons in
PD was discovered[37].
11
==PAGE:13==
7
PARKINSON’S DISEASE
7.1
Symptoms of Parkinson’s disease
Figure 3: Historical depiction of a pa-
tient with Parkinson disease, in which
the eﬀect on the patients posture can be
seen. Source: Reproduced from Gowers:
A Manual of Diseases of the Nervous
System.
London: J. & A. Churchill;
1886[44]
The bets known hallmarks of PD is the four motor
function symptoms: Resting tremors, Bradykinesia,
Rigidity and Balance problems[37–39,41–43,45].
Resting tremors might be the one symptoms often
associated with PD, being seen in 80% of PD pa-
tients[37]. The tremors regularly start as an unin-
tentionally pill-rolling movement of the ﬁngers, and
from there progresses to aﬀecting the rest of the
limb, and subsequently the other arm and hand[37].
Bradykinesia or the slowness of movement, aﬀect-
ing every daily activity involving movement, in late
cases forcing the patients to be aware of every move-
ment (akinesia)[37].
Rigidity is described as a sensation resistance to
movement of the patient when in a relaxed state,
and the subsequent movements being "cog wheel"-
like[37]. Lastly the loss of balance and eﬀect on pos-
ture as can which was depicted as early as 1886, as
seen in ﬁgure 3. For a deﬁnitive diagnosis one of
the recognized tools is UK Parkinson Disease So-
ciety Brain Bank criteria for PD[46], a selection of which can be seen in list below.
12
==PAGE:14==
7
PARKINSON’S DISEASE
Excerpts from the UK Parkinson Disease Society Brain
Bank criteria for Parkinson’s disease[46]
1. Diagnosis of Parkinsonian syndrome
Bradykinesia slowness of initiation of voluntary movement with progressive
reduction in speed and amplitude of repetitive actions
(a)
And at least one of the following:
(b)
muscular rigidity
(c)
4–6 Hz rest tremor
(d)
postural instability not caused by primary visual, vestibular, cerebellar
or proprioceptive dysfunction
2. Exclusion criteria for Parkinson’s disease
(a)
History of repeated strokes with stepwise progression of Parkinsonian
features.
(b)
History of repeated head injury.
(c)
Neuroleptic treatment at onset of symptoms
(d)
...
3. Supportive prospective positive criteria for Parkinson’s disease.
Three or more required for diagnosis of deﬁnite Parkinson’s dis-
ease
(a)
Unilateral onset.
(b)
Rest tremor present. Progressive disorder.
(c)
Persistent asymmetry aﬀecting the side of onset most.
(d)
Excellent response (70–100%) to levodopa.
(e)
...
In the list above "..." indicates further points. Not mentioned prior, and wroth noting
is the response to levodopa, which is a precursor to dopamine, used in the treatment of
PD[37,39–41,43,45–47].
Being a NDD, there are naturally cognitive eﬀects to having PD,
though the prevalence of dementia i PD patients is not precisely know, and not all PD pa-
tients will progress into an AD like dementia[37,39,43]. It is therefore needed to distinguish
between the diﬀerences in cognitive impairment from AD, when looking at PD demen-
tia (PDD). In PDD shot term memory is lost, as in AD, however recognition, and recall
memory is retained in PD patients to larger extend compared to AD patients[43]. Further
13
==PAGE:15==
7
PARKINSON’S DISEASE
seen is a decline in control of executive function, the processes that regulate in situa-
tion working memory, planing, timing, reasoning and inhibited impulse control, which can
lead to pathological gambling, hypersexuality, compulsive shopping, and - eating amongst
other[39].
7.2
Biological Mechanisms of Parkinson’s Disease
Many roads can lead to the onset of PD, not only through genotype, but also environmental
exposure can play a key role in the PD development[5,37,40–42,48], of which pesticides and
herbicides are the most often mentioned[37,43]. Non-idiopathic or autosomal PD several
genes has been suggested over the years, some of which are dominant and some of which
are recessive.
Genetics as cause for Parkinson’s Disease
With the rise of the omics-sciences, the identiﬁcation of PD related genes has been discov-
ered, several of which has being highly associated with autosomal PD, some being dominant
and others being recessive genes, along with several possible contributing genes[37,40,48].
Autosomal Dominant Genes
The ﬁrst discovered gene associated with PD was α-Synuclein (SNCA)[37,40,48], in which a
mutation within the gene resulting in a change of aa53 from alanine to a threonine[37]. It
was soon thereafter discovered that SNCA was the main component in the hallmark cyto-
plasmic inclusion body, Lewy Body (LB)[37,40,48]. The gene got attention after duplication,
and triplication of the entire SNCA gene was found to induce PD, whit earlier onset in
the case of triplication[37,40]. It is therefore hypothesised that the biochemical change due
to a amino acid mutation or overexpression of the gene is the cause for LB formation[37].
However SNCA mutations are extremely rare and the majority of PD cases are thought
to be due to a mutation in the leucine-rich repeat kinase-2 (LRRK2) gene[37,40]. Despite
accounting for high percentage of familiar PD cases the precise function of LRRK2 and
how mutation eﬀects the gene in relation to PD is not known[37,40].
Autosomal Recessive Genes
Mutations within the parkin gene (PARK2), producing the PRKN protein was originally
though to account for 50 percent of the young-onset familiar PD, and 10 percent of spo-
radic young-onset cases, however recent studies show that these number are much lower;
in the 2-8 percent range[40]. Studies suggest that in order to be at risk of juvenile PD,
as a result of a mutation to PARK2, a homozygous mutation needs to occur, since some
PD patients over the age of 50 show a mutation to a single PARK2 alleles[40]. PRKN is
E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase, and as such tags other proteins for degradation, and it has
14
==PAGE:16==
7
PARKINSON’S DISEASE
been suggested that it is loss of proper function, or solubility that might be the reason
behind familiar PD caused by PARK2 mutations[40]. A younger hypothesis pits PRKN
and PINK1 together, the latter being a protein that protects against dysfunctional mito-
chondria, and phosphorylates PRKN, which in turn ubiquitinates other surface proteins
on the dysfunctional mitochondria, thereby tagging them for degradation[37]. This func-
tion is however not utilized in the mutated versions of the two proteins, which in turn lets
the dysfunctional mitochondria produce toxic oxygen radicals, that in turn damages the
cell[40].
Loss of Dopaminergic Neurons
A
B
Figure 4:
A: The chemical structure of
dopamine. B: The chemical structure of Lev-
odopa, a precursor to dopamine
The death of dopaminergic neurons and LB aggre-
gated from SNCA in the cytoplasm are hallmarks of
PD[37–42]. The majority of the PD linked genes are
expressed throughout the CNS and in some cases
other tissues[37] it is however broadly recognized
that dopamine producing neurons are especially vul-
nerable[37–40,48].
Dopamine neurons show features
might explain their increased risk of degradation:
spontaneous bursting activity leading to unusually
high energy demand along with high calcium inﬂux
and subsequent mitochondrial oxidative stress[37].
Furthermore SNCA has been shown to inhibit pro-
teasome activity further lowering the clearance of eg
dysfunctional mitochondria[37,38,48].
7.3
Treatment of Parkinson’s Disease
As mentioned in section 7.1, the primary treatment of PD is the administration of Lev-
odopa (L-dopa), which is a precursor to Dopamine[37,41], the structure of both can be
seen in ﬁgure 4. L-dopa is able to cross the blood-brain barrier, and is thereafter con-
verted into dopamine, thereby substituting what would have been produced by the lost
neurones[37,41]. 50 percent of patients treated with L-dopa will after a period of 5-year or
longer, tend to have a decline in motor symptoms , gait, posture, and balance despite op-
timal treatment[37,41]. There is also the use of Dopamine agonists, where the is no need to
for them to undergo metabolic change, as is the case with L-dopa[37,41]. These drugs treat
the same symptoms as L-dopa, however not to the same extend, and has been linked to
the development of impulse disorders[37,41]. A somewhat opposite way of treating the lack
of dopamine in PD patients is by levelling out the relative amount between acetylcholine
and dopamine within the system[41].
15
==PAGE:17==
8
HUNTINGTON’S DISEASE
Huntington’s Disease
When describing Huntington’s disease (HD), one apparent feature separates HD from AD
and PD, that it is a purely autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disease[49–57]. And can
therefore be diagnosed with simple gene test.
HD is characterised by a mutation in the Huntingtin protein (htt) gene, with the result
being a elongation of CAG repeats within 5’-terminal of the gene, located at chromosome
arm 4p16.3. leading to a mutated version of the normal protein (mhtt)[49–53,55]. This
extension of the gene results in the production of HHT with a expanded polyglutamine
(polyQ) tract, with a CAG-repeat number of above 39 for HD patients, the normal being
fewer than 27 repeats[49–53,55,56]. Despite the number of CAG repeats are decisive in for
the development of HD, it dose provide any information as to the onset of HD. There are
in general two types of HD early onset, also called juvenile HD with an onset before the
age of 30, and "normal" which is referred to as HD with an onset from 35-50 in most
cases[50,51,55]. These two types have diﬀerent symptoms which will be discussed in section
8.1
The hereditary nature if the disease, only around 10% of HD occurs with no family history
of the disease, this might however be due to an generational elongation of people with
CAG-repeat lengths in the 27-36 range[50] or by the father wit a CAG-repeat number in
the range 36-39[49,50]. There is furthermore been shown an inverse relation between the
number og triplet repeats and the age of onset of HD, but with it often being in the 4th
decade[49–51,53,56,57], with symptoms worsening over the next 15-30 years of life, ending in
death[49,50,57]
Huntingtin
It is well known what biological makers are present in HD, given its autosomal nature,
more speciﬁc the deviation from the normal number of CAG repeats htt the gene. htt is
a 3144 aa big protein. htt is found throughout the brain and body, and in several sub-
cellular locations but most abundantly in the CNS and in testes[49–51,56]. Subsequently
the htt serves many functions, and has an array of interaction partners, and plays a role
in, amongst other, transcription regulation, and protein transport[49,50,56]. Studies suggest
that the N-terminal 17 aa, preceding the expanded polyQ of mhtt, is a key region in aggre-
gation, the toxicity, and localisation of htt [49]. Despite this, it is not yet deﬁnitely known
if it is due to a loss of normal function, or the subsequently toxicity arising from the mu-
tation of htt [49,50]. Tt is has been shown that the embryos of htt-gene knock-out mice, die
around day 7-10[49,50,55], indicating the importance of htt in embryonic development and
by inferencer the importance of htt altogether. Furthermore when examining the subcel-
lular location of htt and mhtt mouse model has shown htt to be more soluble cytoplasmic
protein compared to mhtt, which tends to be localized around the nucleus[49,51].
16
==PAGE:18==
8
HUNTINGTON’S DISEASE
8.1
Symptoms of Huntington’s disease
The symptoms of HD was ﬁrst described by George Huntington, in 1872 where he noted
three things: the hereditary nature of the disease, a higher frequency of psychological
disorders, and the manifestation of symptoms in late life[49]. Amongst these are however
not the most prevalent symptom: Chorea (Greek for "dance")[49–56]. This symptom is
manifested as brief involuntary, abnormal, unpredictable and spasmodic movements which
can originates in any part of the patients body[49–51]. Chorea are not to be confused with
the tremors described for PD in section 7.1, as they often do not, early on, aﬀect the
patients everyday life.
However with disease progression, the chorea severity increases
leading to the patients falling, and loss of respiratory control leading to asphyxiation
resulting in admission to e.g. nursing homes[49–51]. In most cases of juvenile HD chorea
is not seen, but a progression into akineto-rigid parkinsonism, eﬀecting the posture of the
patient, is seen along with dementia, psychiatric disorders and seizures[50,51].
As aforementioned, psychiatric diseases are often seen in HD patients[49–51]. These range
from alcohol abuse to apathy, and all the way to sexual disorders[50,51]. A considerable
psychiatric illnesses associated with HD is depression, and furthermore a, relative to non
HD population, high risk of suicide[49–51].
Patients suﬀering from a NDD, as previous described, all suﬀer from some kind of cognitive
impairment, leading to dementia, with a more predominant loss of attentiveness and motor-
functions. This is also the case in HD but to a much lesser extent to e.g. AD[49–51]. Before
the clinical onset of HD all the symptoms mentioned above can be observed to a greater
or lesser extent, with near HD patients having more pronounced symptoms[49].
Neuropathology of Huntington’s disease
The neurodegenerative nature of HD becomes apparent when examining the post mortem
brains of HD patients, in which a substantial loss of volume can be detected with the naked
eye, relative to a non-disease brain[49–51,53]. The area most aﬀected in HD is the striatum,
in which consist of several diﬀerent parts however it seems not to be a speciﬁc area within
the striatum, but the type of neurons which mainly populate the aﬀected areas, more
speciﬁc the medium sized spiny neurons SN, of which up to 90% degrade in late stage
HD[49,50,53,56]. SN can further be divided into two subtypes based on the dopaminergic
receptor they express, and they way they eﬀect movement in a patient[49,50].
• SN1: dopaminergic D1 receptors, and a neuropeptide; substance P, furthermore it
has been suggested when activated SN1 facilitates movement[49,50]
• SN2: dopaminergic D2 receptors, and a neuropeptide; met-enkephalin, and holds
the opposite function of inhibiting unwanted movements[49,50]
The two types of neurons do however not degenerate simultaneously, with SN2 being the
ﬁrst one destroyed[49,50,53]. The early damage of SN2 can therefore explain, to some extent,
17
==PAGE:19==
8
HUNTINGTON’S DISEASE
the chorea seen in the early stages of HD, and the subsequent damage to SN1 is linked to
the rigidity, and slow movements in the late stages of HD[49].
Another apparent change to brain is; the aggregation of mhtt, within all cellular compart-
ments of neurons[49,50,53,56]. Despite mouse models showing that this happens in the early
stages of the disease, and was therefore thought to be a central part of disease progres-
sion[49]. What role and the toxicity of mhtt aggregates seems to be a dividing area in
HD research, with one side saying it has an degenerative eﬀect on neurons, another saying
that mhtt has a protective aﬀect, and lastly that it has no toxic eﬀect whatsoever[49,51].
Rodent models with mhtt expression conﬁned to single brain regions was used in test-
ing the cell-autonomous nature of HD, by comparing them to models with a ubiquitous
expression of mhtt [49]. These studies showed that when conﬁned to a speciﬁc brain re-
gion the aggregation did aﬀect motor skills og induced neurodegeneration, however not
to a signiﬁcant degree[49]. In contrast, when mhtt models expressing aggregates globally
throughout the brain, movement deﬁcits, and neurodegeneration where observed, suggest-
ing that a general, not a cell-autonomous, expression of mhtt is plays a key factor in HD
progression[49,50].
8.2
Biological mechanisms of Huntington’s disease
Besides aggregation as described above, three more mechanisms will be elaborated upon,
the ﬁrst is excitotoxicity - neuron damage and/or death as result of excess receptor acti-
vation, second; faulty transcriptional regulation, and thirdly; mitochondrial dysfunction.
Excitotoxicity
The level of glutamate in HD is though to be higher due to lowered uptake from neuroglia
within the striatum, resulting in a excess calcium uptake N-Methyl-D-Aspartate Receptors
(NMDAr)[49,50]. However studies has shown that the location of the aﬀected NMDAr has
more to say that the activation of the receptor itself, with non synaptic NMDAr activation
being excitotoxi[49–51].
Transcriptional Dysregulation
Through the use of per-symptomatic mouse models, it has been shown that a change in
transcriptional function is an early occurring neuropathological event in HD[49–51]. Genes
overrepresented in the stratum, relative to other brain regions, has been shown to be
negatively eﬀected[49–51]. Subsequently genes encoding receptors, enzymes and proteins
involved with neurotransmission, along with stress response was found, in both mouse
models and post mortem HD patient brains, to be inﬂuenced, with the two being down-
and upregulated respectively[49–51].
18
==PAGE:20==
9
METHODS AND MATERIALS
Mitocondrial effects
Weight loss in HD patients is commonly observed, despite no change in energy intake
indicating an eﬀect on mitochondria[49–51,53,56]. A decrease in activity of mitochondrial
respiratory chain complexes II-IV, as well as interaction between fragments of mhtt and
the transition pore controlling the permissibility of calcium has occurred both in mouse
models and in post mortem HD brains[49,57].
8.3
Treatment of Huntington’s Disease
Even though HD has been a known disease for over 140 years, there has yet to been found
a cure, and symptomatic treatment is limited[49,51]. As it may be apparent from section
8.1 there are three symptomatic areas that can be addressed; movement, psychiatric,
and cognition.
Chorea and psychiatric symptoms are often treated together, with the
use of antipsychotics[49,58]. The ﬁrst treatment for HD induced chorea is Tetrabenazine,
however the side eﬀects of this type of treatment are amongst other depression, hence the
aforementioned use of antipsychotics, even though they impair intentional movement and
cognitive processing to some extent[49,58]. However a diagnosis of HD is still in all practical
aspects a death sentence with the current level of understanding.
Methods And Materials
One aspect is the analysis of the data read from array probes, another and as impor-
tant aspect is assuring that the arrays compared are even comparable, but also that the
conﬁdence of one group of arrays do not water down the signiﬁcance level of the others.
Table 3: Overview of the array studies used for the thesis
ID
Last update
Array(s)
Tissue
Alzheimer’s disease
E-GEOD-36980
07.10.17
A-AFFY-141
Hippocampus
E-GEOD-48350
06.09.17
A-AFFY-44
Hippocampus
E-GEOD-84422
12.09.16
A-AFFY-33A/B
Hippocampus
Parkinson’s disease
E-GEOD-8397
27.03.12
A-AFFY-33A/B
Substantia Nigra
E-GEOD-54282
22.08.16
A-GEOD-17047
Substantia Nigra
Huntington’s disease
E-GEOD-3790
27.03.12
A- AFFY-33A/B
Caudate Nucleus
19
==PAGE:21==
9
METHODS AND MATERIALS
Array Express
All the data used in this thesis can ve seen in table 3, and where all obtained from the public
available database ArrayExpress: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/, which holds
over two million arrays. That there where used ﬁve diﬀerent array types, the; A-AFFY-33
- Aﬀymetrix GeneChip Human Genome HG-U133A/B being a two chip analysis platform.
Figure 5: PCA plot of E-GEOD-3970, before
normalization, here there are already two distinct
groups on the second principal component
Figure 6: PCA plot of E-GEOD-3970 after rma
normalization. It is here clear that there is an
separation on the ﬁrst and the second princi-
pal component. Further assessment of the data
showed that the separation is due to a bias cor-
responding to the three tissue types used in the
study
For all calculations within this thesis the
statistical environment R[59] was used and
the packages provided by Bioconductor[60].
9.1
Quality Control
In order to determine the quality of the
data, an in-house QC pipeline was used
which draws upon the package "arrayQual-
ityMetrics"[61] (ACM), and for the normal-
ization, cleaning and diﬀerential expres-
sion the "limma"[62] within Bioconductor.
Which was used to normalize and calculate
the diﬀerential gene expression of the data.
The underling assumption is that: most of
the data is not diﬀerently expressed, and
the overall trend seen in the data should
therefore be alike.
If the data do not adhere to this bias might
arise through sample preparation, limits
to the platform used, sample-site (tissue)
amongst other and it therefore a remnant
of a systematic ﬂaw, and not a underly-
ing biological trend[63,64] This is addressed
through data normalization.
Before this is done the overall quality of the
data needs to be assessed:
9.2
arrayQualityMetrics
In
R
However before normalization of the data
begins, all the arrays are run though the R
package "arrayQualityMetrics"[61], that on
a array level produces a comprehensive report of the quality metrics of the data. Two
20
==PAGE:22==
9
METHODS AND MATERIALS
distinct reports are generated, one based on the raw data, and one in which the data
is normalized. The ﬁrst is often used in order to catch biases within the experimental
procedures used in order to generate the data, and detect possible outliers, the latter
being used in order to evaluate if a sub-selection of the data is needed[61]. As an example
all available tissue types of the experiment E-GEOD-3790 run on the A-AFFY-33A array
is used. One of the simplest methods of detecting outliers are is through examination of
a boxplot of the signal intensity for each array in the given study, since as stated earlier
these should be of similar proportions, since the general underlying signal should in relative
terms be the same. An example of can be ﬁgure 7, being raw data and ﬁgure 8 which is
the same data after rma normalization, where it can be seen that the boxes align in the
latter of the two ﬁgures.
9.3
Principal Component Analysis
One of the strong and easy to comprehend, tools used by ACM is the Principal Component
Analysis (PCA), which by taking the possible correlated parameters in the data, and
transforming them into linearly uncorrelated variables named principal components (PC),
of which the ﬁrst (PC1) tries to capture the most variance seen in the data, the second one -
the second most variance and so on[65]. PCA often used in order to cut down on parameters
used in eg a machine learning model, however when applying the method to array data is
to se if there is an underlying bias within the data, or as it will be used to in the results
to validated that there is a separation between two groups of data. Remembering the
underlying assumption of a general equal overall expression when comparing all genes on
the arrays, there should not be a distinguishable separation within the PCA-plots, when
the array is represented by all genes at once. Otherwise this might indicate some form of
bias as mentioned above. That is the case in ﬁgure 5 and 6, which are PCA plots of all
arrays in E-GEOD-3790, before and after rma normalization. It is apparent in ﬁgure 5
two separate groups are formed on PC2, and in ﬁgure 6 where two are formed along PC1
and third emerges along PC2. Further examination of the data, and PCA plot, shows that
there is a tissue based bias in the data, suggesting that each distinct type of tissue might
be better analysed separately.
9.4
Normalization Of Data
Depending on the type of array several steps is normalization can be preformed.
• Cleaning and transformation
• Within-array normalization
• Between-array Normalization
Cleaning, transformation, and Between-Array normalization This is
done using the rma function in the "aﬀy" library in R which apply three steps to the
given data. First background correction is done by assuming the probe-matches seen are
21
==PAGE:23==
9
METHODS AND MATERIALS
a convolution of a exponential distributed set of perfect matches between probe and RNA
(X), and a normal distributed background (Y). Which then dictates that the background
on an array is B(X + Y ) = E(X|X + Y ), given that all values of X are positive, Y must
be larger than 0[66,67], which can then be subtracted from the X+Y. Then the data is
normalizes using quantile normalization[68]. The result thereof can be seen in ﬁgure 7, and
8 showing the raw and rma normalized data respectively. Lastly the probes summarizes
and transforms into log2 through log2
 case
control

, also called the fold-change (FC).
9.5
Within-Array normalization
This done for two-channel arrays, in order to account for things such as diﬀerence in: label
fusion, emission response, and spacial diﬀerence of emission intensities. This will however
not be elaborated upon in this thesis, since it is not relevant for the types of arrays used.
9.6
Differential Gene Expression
As the name implies the main goal of diﬀerential gene expression is to say with some certain
level of signiﬁcance, what is the diﬀerence in expression between two samples. That could
be two diﬀerent treatments in-between, or as in the case of the analysis within this thesis
a case and a control.
In order to extract the diﬀerential expression from the case/control studies the "limma"
package is used, which takes and ﬁts the data to a linear model[62]. The method uses two
matrices; a design-matrix which holds the array names, and a contrast-matrix in which
holds the factors describing the arrays in the design matrix. This in all instances‚ in this
thesis, case and control. These are along with the clean, normalized and transformed data
given to the lmFit function, which then is ﬁts the data to a linear model[62]. The same
underlying assumption as before governs the error here; that it follows a normal distribu-
tion, which then allows for a P-value to be computed, using an empirical Bayes method to
probe-wise shrinking the sample variances towards a common value and augmenting the
degrees of freedom for the individual variances[69]. Afterwards the data is sorted/ranked
using calling on the "topTable" function, this in turn calculates the false-discovery-rate by
use of the function "p.adjust", based on the false-discovery-rate put forward by Benjamini
and Hochberg[70].
The resulting output is a ranked matrix, containing the calculated values can be seen
in table 4, note that some of the columns are not shown on purpose, since they had no
relevance for the analysis conducted on the thesis. Furthermore the "Gene" column is the
given probe name translated into Ensembl identiﬁers.
22
==PAGE:24==
9
METHODS AND MATERIALS
Figure 7: Boxplot of the intensities of E-
GEOD-3790 before normalization.
All *-
signs are and indication of a ﬂagged array
that might be an outlier
Figure 8: Boxplot of the intensities of E-
GEOD-3790 after rma normalization. All *-
signs are and indication of a ﬂagged array
that might be an outlier
23
==PAGE:25==
9
METHODS AND MATERIALS
Table 4:
Example of the resulting data structure when doing diﬀerential gene expression using the "limma"
library using the functions: "rma","lmFit","eBayes" and "topTable" [62]. Some of the columns are not shown, since
they where not used in the analysis.
Gene
logFC
...
...
P.Value
adj.P.Val
...
ENSG00000124120
0.622399880985555
...
...
2.47111152590413e-07
0.005327230544963
...
ENSG00000132386
0.922954889833269
...
...
5.41037552613524e-07
0.005327230544963
...
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
9.7
Integration of multiple studies
As is the case in this thesis there are several datasets describing the same disease, and
the hope is that through the integration of these a higher level of information might be
obtained.
This is done by the calculation of the arithmetic mean (A) of the p-values of the inputted
datasets. In a continuous setting, these p-values are uniformly distributed in the interval
form [0, 1]. Under the assumption that the dataset is from independent experiments, the
distribution of these can then be examined under the same null-hypothesis. The general
formula for A is given in equation 2, where Xi is any real number, and n is the number of
numbers in the set given.
A = 1
n
n
X
i=1
Xi
(2)
A = 1
α·
n
X
i=1
αiXi
(3)
α· =
n
X
i=1
αi
(4)
The function used to integrate the datasets in this thesis a sightly diﬀerent version seen
in equation 3 and 4. The function used works in several steps: All the data ﬁles are read,
the p-values found in the ﬁle. Then a weight for each data ﬁle is calculated, after which a
weight (ai) for each input value (p-value) is calculated. Finally, for each item a ﬁnal score
is calculated using equation 3. Ranking is then done on the basis of the new item’s scores
in the data ﬁles. If the input data sets are not identical in their ranking of signiﬁcant
genes, the resulting "new" dataset will rerank the proteins based on the newly calculated
p-values.
Benchmarking in relation to text mining
Furthermore an in-house text mining tool generate a list of protein-ID’s that where asso-
ciated whit the three given diseases. This list could then be used as a benchmark for how
well the dataset integration and subsequent reranking had gone. The pseudocode for this
can be seen below in algorithm 1
24
==PAGE:26==
9
METHODS AND MATERIALS
Algorithm 1: Pseudocode of the benchmarking algorithm used to benchmark the
datasets, before and after integration
Input: Ranked dataset X, and a unranked benchmarkﬁle, Y
Output: A plot showing how well the dataset is ranked, relative to the
benchmarkﬁle
1 while Not at the end of X do
2
Initialize a data-array, Z, of the lenght of X;
3
for Each element of X, denoted Xi do
4
if Xi is in Y then
5
Zi = Zi−1 + 1
6
else
7
Zi = Zi−1
8
end
9
end
10 end
11 Plot all elements of Z
9.8
SystemsSignificance
In order to asses the signiﬁcance of the ﬁrst order networks constructed using the integrated
datasets and the InWeb_InBioMap tool[10], an tool called SystemsSigniﬁcance (SS) was
used. SS uses a stochastic approach to determine the signiﬁcance, by randomly, shuﬄing
and resampling within the dataset. The whole process is outlined in the list below:
1.
Construct a ﬁrst order PPI-network based on input from the dataset
2.
Find the p-value of the seed protein
3.
Determine if all other nodes in the network has an a p-value in the dataset, if not
discard them, thereby minimizing th eﬀective size of the network
4.
Calculate the combined p-value using ﬁshers product test as seen in equation 5[71,72],
for the neighbourhood
5.
The method then randomly samples an equivalent size network from data and re-
iterates the steps above. If the random combined p-value is better than the ﬁrst
obtained p-value add one to a counter.
6.
Continue up until N iterations, and divide the counter with N. The resulting counter
is the score of the ﬁrst order network.
7.
Repeat all steps for all the proteins in the dataset
25
==PAGE:27==
10
RESULTS
8.
Output a list raking the seed proteins based on the scores calculated
χ2
2k −2ln
k
X
i=1
ln pi
(5)
Results
Table 5: Tissue composition within the studies listed in table 3
Alzheimers
Parkinsons
Huntingtons
E-GEOD-36980
E-GEOD-48350
E-GEOD-84422
E-GEOD-54282
E-GEOD-8397
E-GEOD-3790
SUM
Amygdala
x
1
Anterior Cingulate
x
1
caudate nucleus
x
x
1
cerebellum
x
0
Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex
x
1
entorhinal cortex
x
1
frontal cortex
x
1
frontal lobe
x
0
Frontal Pole
x
1
hippocampus
x
x
x
3
Inferior Frontal Gyrus
x
1
Inferior Temporal Gyrus
x
1
middle temporal gyrus
x
1
nucleus accumbens
x
1
Occipital Visual Cortex
x
1
Parahippocampal Gyrus
x
1
postcentral gyrus
x
1
posterior cingulate cortex
x
1
precentral gyrus
x
1
prefrontal cortex
x
x
2
putamen
x
x
2
substantia nigra
x
x
2
superior frontal gyrus
x
1
Superior Parietal Lobule
x
1
superior temporal gyrus
x
1
temporal cortex
x
1
Temporal Pole
x
1
Associative striatum
0
10.1
Final data selection
The data used in the thesis are all listed in table 3, however in order to have a good basis
for comparison, and a minimization of potential bias within the data a further sub-selection
was needed, based on tissue. As it is apparent in table 5, fore each of the multi-dataset
diseases (AD and PD) only one tissue type en each was seen throughout; these being
Hippocampus and Substantia Nigra in AD and PD respectively.
10.2
QC
For each of the studies the diﬀerential expression and p-values where calculated, in total
producing nine expression datasets. However the data from A-AFFY-33A/B platforms
26
==PAGE:28==
10
RESULTS
where merged into one for: E-GEOD-84422, E-GEOD-3790, and E-GEOD-54282, since
each of the two platforms (A/B) had diﬀerent probes but was analysed with the same
tissue samples in within each of the respective studies.
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage of ranked items
Percentage of benchmark set (PARKINSON_S_DISEASE_GSproteins_2017−07−25.txt)
PD_All_rank_sum.tab
E−GEOD−8397_Full_Uniprot.txt
E−GEOD−54282_Full_Uniprot.txt
PD_All_rank_sum.tab
E−GEOD−8397_Full_Uniprot.txt
E−GEOD−54282_Full_Uniprot.txt
Figure 9: Benchmark-plot of the PD datasets listed in table3, and the integrated data (black
fat line). Here E-GEOD-8397, out-preforms the integrated dataset in the majority of the ranking.
However the integrated dataset still preforms better in the top ranked of the data. Note that both
axes are normalized into percentage of the data covered
27
==PAGE:29==
10
RESULTS
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage of ranked items
Percentage of benchmark set (ALZHEIMER_S_DISEASE_GSproteins_2017−07−25.txt)
ALZ_all_rank_sum.tab
E−GEOD−36980.txt
E−GEOD−84422.txt
E−GEOD−48350.txt
ALZ_all_rank_sum.tab
E−GEOD−36980.txt
E−GEOD−84422.txt
E−GEOD−48350.txt
Figure 10: Benchmark-plot of the AD datasets listed in table3, and the integrated data (black fat
line). Note that E-GEOD-48350 (Yellow) seems to be better at benchmarking in the mid-ranking,
However in the top 10 percent the integrated dataset seems to be better. Note that both axes are
normalized into percentage of the data covered
10.3
Data integration
All tissue speciﬁc datasets where integrated into one single dataset, for both AD and
PD. In the hopes of boosting the signiﬁcance of the data, though a better ranking of the
diﬀerentially expressed gene in both diseases. This might not seem to be the case when
looking a ﬁgure 9 and 10 showing the benchmark-plots for PD and AD respectively, the
thick black line being the integrated dataset. There are two prominent feature shared
between the two, ﬁrst the integrated dataset seems not to give a better ranking, and one
of the original datasets seems to dominate the trend of the plot. These being E-GEOD-
28
==PAGE:30==
10
RESULTS
8397 for PD in ﬁgure 9 and E-GEOD-48350 for AD in ﬁgure 10. However this is not as
big a problem as one might think, since only the top 100 genes will be used to generate
the networks, and in both cases the top percentage benchmarked seem to beneﬁt from the
data integration.
10.4
Regulatory vote
In order to map the direction of regulation (up or down) for a proteins within a subsequent
network, a consensus between the original datasets was calculated, using a voting system.
The main idea was that not any one of the datasets would overrule the other, by being
heavily regulated in ether direction.
By only determining if the regulation is up or down, and casting a vote in that direction the
hope was to get a more objective and overall picture of the regulation. The computation
to do this is in itself not complicated, if the voting gene is down regulated cast a vote of
-1, if it is upregulated cast a vote of 1 and then sum all the votes in order to determine
the consensus of the datasets. This results in a voting/consensus range in from [−n, n],
n being the number of datasets being compared. This furthermore provides an, easy to
interpret visual style when mapped, as meta data onto a network. Some decisions needs to
be taken i order for it to work, the central being: on which criteria are the voters selected
from the non-voters. A god candidate would normally be all proteins with a FDR-adjusted
P-value or the "normal" P-value under threshold α =< 0.05. However this could not be
done for two out of three AD datasets and one of the two PD datasets. Since this would
result in only 10 and 1 gene being deemed voters in two of the AD data sets, and only 15
in one of the PD data sets. Therefore another strategy for sub-selecting a voting set was
needed.
This was done by using the same argument as used in the QC process - that if when
looking at all the data in a PCA plot there should be no big separation of the data. On
the other hand if a subset of the data is plotted, case versus control, and a separation is
seen on the PCA plot, then there is a distinguishable diﬀerence between case and control
in that subset.
29
==PAGE:31==
10
RESULTS
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
−8
−4
0
4
−5
0
5
PC1
PC2
stage
G
G
definite AD
normal
E−GEOD−84422 A−AFFY−33
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
−2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
−4
0
4
PC1
PC2
stage
G
G
definite AD
normal
E−GEOD−84422 A−AFFY−34
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
−5
0
5
−20
−10
0
10
20
PC1
PC2
stage
G
G
definite AD
normal
E−GEOD−48350
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
−4
−2
0
2
4
−5
0
5
PC1
PC2
stage
G
G
definite AD
normal
E−GEOD−36890
Figure 11: Figures showing a separation between case (deﬁnite AD) and normal, for a subset of
the top 500 most diﬀerential expressed proteins in the three AD, datasets. Note that E-GEOD-
84422 A-AFFY-33/34 are a merged into one dataset in all other situations
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
−3
0
3
6
−10
0
10
20
PC1
PC2
d_stage
G
G
normal
PD
E−GEOD−8397 A−AFFY−33
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
−2
0
2
−10
0
10
PC1
PC2
d_stage
G
G
normal
PD
E−GEOD−8397 A−AFFY−34
G
G
G
G
G
G
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
−5
0
5
PC1
PC2
d_stage
G
G
normal
PD
E−GEOD−54282
Figure 12: Figures showing a separation between case (PD) and normal, for a subset of the top
500 most diﬀerential expressed proteins in the two, datasets. Note that E-GEOD-8397 A-AFFY-
33/34 are a merged into one dataset in all other situations
The result of this is seen in ﬁgure 11 for AD and ﬁgure 12 for PD, with the title of each plot
being the study from which they originated, based of the top 500 most signiﬁcant genes in
each study. As the ﬁgures show there is a separation within all studies. The groups overlap
30
==PAGE:32==
10
RESULTS
a bit in E-GEOD-84422 A-AFFY-33/34, however not in a such an way so to be unseparable.
432
29
414
30
9
48
414
E−GEOD−84422
E−GEOD−36980
E−GEOD−48350
Figure 13: Venn diagram of the overlap between
the top 500 genes in the AD datasets
482
482
18
E−GEOD−83997
E−GEOD−54282
Figure 14: Venn diagram of the overlap between
the top 500 genes in the PD datasets
In the case of E-GEOD-48350 the point-
clouds do intermingle a bit, but a further
look into the expression dataset for this
study show that of the three datasets in AD
this on had a signiﬁcant FDR adjusted P-
value ( α =< 0.05) for over 3000 genes, and
was the best preforming dataset in bench-
marking (ﬁgure 10). This let to a lenient
evaluation of that speciﬁc dataset.
The
PCA plots for PD, all had nice separation.
As a measure of voting-right the evalua-
tion on based on the PCA-plot where there-
fore chosen, with the top 500 genes as ba-
sis. Several subset sizes where tried (600,
800, 1000), with the aim of getting a high a
subset as possible, but when using over 500
the point-clouds in the PCA plots began to
overlap in both diseases (data not shown).
After running the regulatory vote program,
on the ﬁrst 500 proteins in each dataset for
the two diseases, the output was two values:
(1) the summed votes, (2) the number of
datasets voting for each protein. Mapping
this meta-data onto the networks presented
an unforeseen problem with the overlap in
the top 500 proteins in the datasets: Namely that it was marginal, which become evident
when examination the Venn diagrams in ﬁgure 13 and 14.
Which poses a substantial
problem when using this as a visual mapping of meta-data component. Since there simply
was a lack of information to take an informed choice when evaluating the networks
10.5
Network generation
The integrated lists were then passed to SS and thereafter to the InWeb_InBioMap tool in
order to pull all ﬁrst order networks seeded around each gene within the datasets. Further
evaluation using the described meta-data, was troublesome due to the lack of consensus
as described above.
Also throughout all diseases there was a general trend of the nodes having a high degree, as
might be expected in brain tissue since signal propagation needs to be insured, in order for
normal function to upheld, but it made it diﬃcult to ﬁnd smaller sub-clusters of interest.
Not all network which made it to the GO-enrichment analysis is showed, however the
31
==PAGE:33==
10
RESULTS
results thereof can all be found in the supplementary material.
Network style
The style used for feature mapping of the meta-data was used universally in the three
diseases, build around three core selections all mapping on the node:
Shape Shape is directly linked to the direction of regulation: Upregulated is shown by a
hexagon, down-regulated a downward facing arrow.
Node ﬁll colour The node colour is in a continuous shading, from light to dark, com-
plementary to the sum of votes in one single direction a node has gotten for AD and
PD. In HD it is linked to the calculated FC, since only one dataset was used.
Border colour The border colour is associated if the protein was on the text mining list,
a red boarder, and if os if it was over the threshold for signiﬁcance resulting in a
blue border
Figure 15: Subselection of a network constructed from the seed protein HOMER1. Tow proteins
within this cluster are upregulated, as indicated by the hexagonal shape and the green colour, and
one with an downward arrow indicating down regulation, the depth of colour indicating number
of votes. All coloured nodes have one vote, besides the PIN1, which have two conﬂicting vote
resulting in the white colour
32
==PAGE:34==
10
RESULTS
AD networks
Figure 15 show a subselection of a cluster found within a network seeded around the protein
HOMER1. There is no general consensus as to how the cluster is regulated. Despite
this the GO-enrichment analysis showed a interesting result, a selection of this seen in
ﬁgure 16. Here it becomes apparent that the cluster is associated with a wide range of
behavioural and cognitive processes.
Figure 16: Selection of enriched GO-terms, from a GO-term enrichment analysis, showing an
enrichment of several behavioural processes, indicating that the cluster seen in ﬁgure 15 is related
to this
The enrichment analysis also showed connection to synaptic membrane assembly and
synaptic signalling (not shown) along with regulatory functions.
The majority of the
AD network for which a GO-enrichment analysis was made showed enrichment in exocy-
tosis, hinting towards them being relevant as gatekeeper proteins in the synaptic pathway.
Surprisingly non of the known players seemed to be present in the selected networks. The
full GO-enrichment search for the selected proteins can be found in the supplementary
material.
33
==PAGE:35==
10
RESULTS
Figure 17: Sub-selected cluster from the ﬁrst order network seeded around VMAT2. Notewor-
thy is that there seems to be an consensus around this network being down regulated in relative
terms to what has been seen in other PD networks
Figure 18: Sub-selected cluster from the ﬁrst order network seeded around KLC3
PD Networks
The same general problem with consensus between the networks in AD arises in PD,
mainly that it is hard to ﬁnd any. This can most likely be traced back to the lacking over-
lap. The case is furthermore with the PD networks that they all seem to give the same
general picture when undergoing GO-enrichment analysis for all but one network selected:
that they are involved in secretion, and signalling of neurotransmitters, transport of ionic
compounds, exocytosis and regulation of these functions.
The a lack of regulatory information once again made it problematic to single out any one
clusters from the constructed networks. Only in the sub-cluster construed from VMAT2,
seen in ﬁgure 17, is there any mention of dopaminergic related GO-terms, form the enrich-
ment analysis, and with a relative low signiﬁcance, compared to the other enriched terms
found - which followed the before mentioned trend, despite dopamine loss is a central part
of PD.
A sub-selected cluster from the network seeded around KLC3, seen in ﬁgure 18, was the
only one of the selected that diﬀered in general GO-enrichment terms found. The overall
function of this cluster being organelle localization, and cellular and membrane component
organization, rather than transport regulation. But the lack of regulatory information did
again make it hard to determine the eﬀect PD might have on these processes
34
==PAGE:36==
10
RESULTS
−2
−1
0
1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
E−GEOD−3790
N = 4979   Bandwidth = 0.05265
Density
Figure 19: Density plot of FC for all FDR adjusted genes in E-GEOD-3790. From this is can be
concluded that a god FC mapping range would be from -1.5 to -1 is down regulated, to 1 to -0.5
is slightly down regulated, 0.5 to 1 is slightly up-regulated and above 1 is up-regulated
Figure 20: Sub-selected cluster from the ﬁrst order network seeded around QIK.
Figure 21: Sub-selected cluster from the ﬁrst order network seeded around HOMER2
35
==PAGE:37==
11
DISCUSSION
HD Networks
The HD networks diﬀers from the two others by being based of on single dataset, thereby
enabling the possibility of FC to be mapped onto the networks. A density-plot of the
signiﬁcant genes FC, was made in order to evaluate the relevant range in which the con-
tinuous FC mapping should span, which can be seen in ﬁgure 19. The density plot is for
all FDR adjusted genes in the dataset α < 0.05. Based on this a god FC mapping range
would be from -1.5 to -1 is down regulated, to 1 to -0.5 is slightly down regulated, 0.5 to
1 is slightly up-regulated and above 1 is up-regulated. The use of only one dataset also
eliminated the consensus vote and the need for an overlap of datasets in order to get a
mapping of regulatory direction, which in turn meant that the regulation for more proteins
where seen in the network. The result thereof was greater diversity in the GO-enrichment
analysis, compared to PD. The sub-cluster shown in ﬁgure 20, from the network obtained
from QIK, showed a regulatory eﬀect on RNA, having enrichment for eﬀecting negative
regulation of RNA splicing, and processing in general, as a result of the cluster being up-
regulated. In order to determine if this is a remnant of the samples being post mortem or
if this is due to HD further investigations needs to be done. Another sub-cluster is the one
seen in ﬁgure 21, is analogous to the sub-cluster from HOMER1 found in AD (ﬁgure 15),
with the addition of three extra nodes. As would be anticipated the GO-enriched terms
are also the overlapping. But compared to AD an extra dimension is added though the
clear indication of the cluster being distinctly down-regulated in HD. There are three up-
regulated proteins in the cluster, however these did not inﬂuence the enrichment analysis,
of the cognitive processes similar between the two clusters, a further examination of the
GO-analysis showed.
Discussion
When looking at all three diseases one factor about time of clinical diagnosis is apparent:
in most cases the disease is only discovered when the patient becomes symptomatic, after
which neurological damage has occurred, to a greater or lesser extend. The analysis done
above are all based on post mortem patients, which might further distort the "normal"
state, since death is by any means as far from normal one can get. but the might oﬀer an
insight into the which mechanisms are regulated in diseases.
The integration did not provide any apparent additional insight into how the diseases
worked. Mainly due to the overlap of signiﬁcant genes being marginal, in the terms of
deciding the regulation. When comparing the number of gene used, for mapping, in HD
versus AD/PD it becomes apparent that, ratio between these are approximately 10:1
in favour of HD. This might furthermore give an explanation as to why the overlap in
AD/PD was so marginal in the respective dataset. The networks did however provide
some information as to which systems seem to be aﬀected, despite not showing how.
In the PD it might have been expected that some GO terms tied to movement was seen,
36
==PAGE:38==
11
DISCUSSION
however this was not the case. An other tendency arose, that the systems aﬀected in
these patients are tied into the transportation of neurotransmitters, and the maintenance,
regulation and localization of synaptic receptors. This might suggest that an impairment
of these processes resulting in a divergence from normal function in PD might be analogous
to that seen in HD. In which the type of dopamine receptors dictates tissue death. Another
possibility could be that a receptor over-stimulation might enable a cascade of reaction
leading to an excitotoxic result. But this was not easy to determine since the level of
regulatory information was lacking.
The same was case for the AD analysis, that the addition of more data did not improve
regulatory transparency signiﬁcantly, however combined with the HD analysis one cluster
fund in both might reveal a shared target, for treatment of cognitive aspects of both
diseases, such as leaning and behaviour. Opposite to PD, one of the selected networks in
AD did hit one of the hallmarks if AD in the GO-enrichment analysis. Whit cognitive,
and learning associated terms being enriched, even though no regulatory direction could
be directly showed. The data at hand could only be determined the regulation in HD and
not AD. Since no other apparent overlap was fund between the two there was no basis
inferring that they might be similar regulated. Depending on a consensus in regulation
for AD and HD, several further studies might be conducted. If additional data show they
concur on regulatory direction, and it not being a result of the sample being taken post
mortem could indicate that this cluster play a role, across both diseases and tissue type.
For both AD and PD it is somewhat problematic to give an conclusion as to what eﬀect the
two diseases are exhibiting on the systems found in the analysis, given the lack of consensus,
and thereby information provided integration of datasets. However the processes found
associated with the networks could still provide information that can be used in further
research, as a mapping option within networks generated from other data. Lastly it was
surprising that one of the "known-players" form each disease where found, but this can
also be a remnant from the lack of regulatory information
Outlook
With more and more studies trying to ﬁnd biomarkers for diagnostic purposes, within
NDD, the hope is to be able to discover these disease at there onset or even before in
order too gain insight into which processes are compromised before patients start to show
cognitive symptoms. This analysis has only been based on array data, and the amount of
RNAseq data beginning to be public available, a dual analysis using both types of data
be done. Boarding the data-source might also enable future analysis to be more selective
in minimum data quality - thereby ascertaining a higher level of conﬁdence, and a clearer
picture as to how the given disease progresses.
37
==PAGE:39==
11
DISCUSSION
Acknowledgements
I would like to thanks Rasmus Wernersson, Thomas S. Jensen for the opportunity and the
resources they allocated by letting me write at Intomics R⃝A/S. A thanks to Carsten Friis
Rundsten and Bent Petersen for their supervision during the thesis period. Lastly i want
to thanks the staﬀat Intomics R⃝A/S, for their help in all matters related to my thesis
38
==PAGE:40==
REFERENCES
References
[1] A. Burns and S. Iliﬀe. Dementia. BMJ, 338(feb05 1):b75–b75, 2009. URL http:
//www.bmj.com/cgi/doi/10.1136/bmj.b75.
[2] Amos D. Korczyn and Ilan Halperin. Depression and dementia. Journal of the Neu-
rological Sciences, 283(1-2):139–142, 2009. ISSN 0022510X. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.
02.346. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.2009.02.346.
[3] WHO.
Media centre Dementia, 2012.
URL http://www.who.int/mediacentre/
factsheets/fs362/en/.
[4] H H Goebel, J Bohl, and W Müller-Forell. Neurodegenerative Diseases, volume 11.
2014. ISBN 9781447163794. doi: 10.1016/B978-141602597-9.10026-2.
[5] Richard A. Armstrong. Review article What causes alzheimer’s disease? Folia Neu-
ropathologica, 3(3):169–188, 2013. ISSN 1641-4640. doi: 10.5114/fn.2013.37702. URL
http://www.termedia.pl/doi/10.5114/fn.2013.37702.
[6] R A Crowther. Structural aspects of pathology in Alzheimer ’ s disease. 1096:1–9,
1991.
[7] Jessica J. Jalbert, Lori A. Daiello, and Kate L. Lapane. Dementia of the Alzheimer
type.
Epidemiologic Reviews, 30(1):15–34, 2008.
ISSN 0193936X.
doi: 10.1093/
epirev/mxn008.
[8] Jitin Bali, Saoussen Ben Halima, Boas Felmy, Zoe Goodger, Sebastian Zurbriggen,
Lawrence Rajendran, and Lawrence Rajendran. Cellular basis of Alzheimer ’ s disease.
1(6):13–16, 2017.
[9] Verena H. Finder. Alzheimer’s disease: A general introduction and pathomechanism.
Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 22(SUPPL. 3), 2010. ISSN 13872877. doi: 10.3233/
JAD-2010-100975.
[10] Taibo Li, Rasmus Wernersson, Rasmus B Hansen, Heiko Horn, Johnathan Mercer,
Greg Slodkowicz, Christopher T Workman, Olga Rigina, Kristoﬀer Rapacki, Hans H
Stærfeldt, Søren Brunak, Thomas S Jensen, and Kasper Lage. A scored human protein
– protein interaction network to catalyze genomic interpretation. (November), 2016.
doi: 10.1038/nmeth.4083.
[11] Ursula Bilitewski. DNA Microarrays: An Introduction to the Technology. In Methods
in Molecular Biology, chapter 1. 2009.
[12] Kanthida Kusonmano. Gene Expression Analysis Through Network Biology: Bioin-
formatics Approaches. pages 15–32. 2016. doi: 10.1007/10_2016_44. URL http:
//link.springer.com/10.1007/10{_}2016{_}44.
39
==PAGE:41==
REFERENCES
[13] Dov Stekel. Microarry Bioinformatics. Cambridge University Press, UK, 2003. ISBN
0-521-52587-X.
[14] Herbert Auer, David L. Newsom, and Karl Kornacker. Expression Proﬁling Using
Aﬀymetrix GeneChip Microarrays. In Microchip Methods in Diagnostics, vol. 509.
2009.
[15] Aron C Eklund and Zoltan Szallasi.
Correction of technical bias in clin-
ical
microarray
data
improves
concordance
with
known
biological
informa-
tion.
Genome biology,
9(2):R26,
2008.
ISSN 1465-6914.
doi:
10.1186/
gb-2008-9-2-r26. URL http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?
artid=2374720{&}tool=pmcentrez{&}rendertype=abstract.
[16] Lev Klebanov, Andreas Scherer, Xuxin Liu, Joel Parker, Cheng Fan, Charles M.
Perou, J. S. Marron, Khurram Shahzad, Anshu Sinha, Farhana Latif, Mario C Deng,
Huixiao Hong, Leming Shi, James C Fuscoe, Federico Goodsaid, Donna Mendrick,
Weida Tong, Wynn L. Walker, Frank R. Sharp, Adjusting Batch Eﬀects, Empiri-
cal Bayes Methods, Tzu-Ming Ming Chu, Wenjun Bao, Russell S. Thomas, Russell D.
Wolﬁnger, Jianying Li, Pierre R Bushel, Tzu-Ming Ming Chu, Russell D. Wolﬁnger,
Martin Schumacher, Frank Staedtler, Wendell D. Jones, Andreas Scherer, Jianying
Li, Pierre R Bushel, Tzu-Ming Ming Chu, Russell D. Wolﬁnger, John A. Coller, Wal-
ter Liggett, Jean Lozach, Anne Bergstrom Lucas, Ron L. Peterson, Marc L. Salit,
Danielle Thierry-Mieg, Jean Thierry-Mieg, Russell D. Wolﬁnger, Nysia I. George,
James J. Chen, Michael J. Boedigheimer, JeﬀW. Chou, J. Christopher Corton, Jen-
nifer Fostel, Raegan O’Lone, P. Scott Pine, John Quackenbush, Karol L. Thompson,
Russell D. Wolﬁnger, Naomi Altman, and Andreas Scherer. Batch Eﬀect Estima-
tion of Microarray Platforms with Analysis of Variance.
Batch Eﬀects and Noise
in Microarray Experiments: Sources and Solutions, 2004(Frueh 2006):51–60, 2009.
ISSN 9780470685983. doi: 10.1002/9780470685983. URL http://doi.wiley.com/
10.1002/9780470685983http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/9780470685983.ch12.
[17] Jingyu Hou.
Reliability of Protein Interactions.
In New Approaches of Protein
Function Prediction from Protein Interaction Networks, chapter 2, pages 21–35. El-
sevier, 2017. ISBN 9780128098141. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-809814-1.00002-9. URL
http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/B9780128098141000029.
[18] Jean-François Rual, Kavitha Venkatesan, Tong Hao, Tomoko Hirozane-Kishikawa,
Amélie Dricot, Ning Li, Gabriel F. Berriz, Francis D. Gibbons, Matija Dreze, Nono
Ayivi-Guedehoussou, Niels Klitgord, Christophe Simon, Mike Boxem, Stuart Milstein,
Jennifer Rosenberg, Debra S. Goldberg, Lan V. Zhang, Sharyl L. Wong, Giovanni
Franklin, Siming Li, Joanna S. Albala, Janghoo Lim, Carlene Fraughton, Estelle
Llamosas, Sebiha Cevik, Camille Bex, Philippe Lamesch, Robert S. Sikorski, Jean
Vandenhaute, Huda Y. Zoghbi, Alex Smolyar, Stephanie Bosak, Reynaldo Sequerra,
Lynn Doucette-Stamm, Michael E. Cusick, David E. Hill, Frederick P. Roth, and
40
==PAGE:42==
REFERENCES
Marc Vidal. A protein network of one’s own proteins. Nature, 437(7062):1173–1178,
2005. ISSN 0028-0836. doi: 10.1038/nature04209. URL http://www.nature.com/
doifinder/10.1038/nature04209.
[19] Joaquín Goñi, Francisco J Esteban, Nieves de Mendizábal, Jorge Sepulcre, Sergio
Ardanza-Trevijano, Ion Agirrezabal, and Pablo Villoslada. A computational analysis
of protein-protein interaction networks in neurodegenerative diseases. BMC Systems
Biology, 2(1):52, 2008. ISSN 1752-0509. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-2-52. URL http:
//bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1752-0509-2-52.
[20] Eric M.; Fields Phizicky Stanley. Protein-protein interactions: Methods for detection
and analysis. Microbiological Review, 59(1):94–123, 1995.
[21] Andrea Fiebitz and Dominique Vanhecke. High-Throughput Mammalian Two-Hybrid
Screening for Protein–Protein Interactions Using Transfected Cell Arrays (CAP-
PIA).
pages 165–183. 2011.
doi:
10.1007/978-1-61779-043-0_11.
URL http:
//link.springer.com/10.1007/978-1-61779-043-0{_}11.
[22] Tzong-Hsien Lee, Marie-Isabel Aguilar, Hae Ryoun Park, Lisa Montoya Cockrell,
Yuhong Du, Andrea Kasinski, Jonathan Havel, Jing Zhao, Francisca Reyes-Turcu,
Keith D. Wilkinson, and Haian Fu. Molecular Biomethods Handbok. Second edition,
2008. ISBN 9781603273701.
[23] Joseph A. Loo and Catherine S. Kaddis. Direct Characterization of Protein Complexes
by Electrospray Ionization Mass Spectrometry and Ion Mobility Analysis. In Mass
Spectrometry of Protein Interactions, pages 1–23. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken,
NJ, USA, dec 2006. doi: 10.1002/9780470146330.ch1. URL http://doi.wiley.com/
10.1002/9780470146330.ch1.
[24] Tim Beissbarth.
[18] Interpreting Experimental Results Using Gene Ontologies.
Methods in Enzymology, 411(06):340–352, 2006.
ISSN 00766879.
doi:
10.1016/
S0076-6879(06)11018-6.
[25] Michael Ashburner, Catherine A. Ball, Judith A. Blake, David Botstein, Heather
Butler, J. Michael Cherry, Allan P. Davis, Kara Dolinski, Selina S. Dwight, Janan T.
Eppig, Midori A. Harris, David P. Hill, Laurie Issel-Tarver, Andrew Kasarskis,
Suzanna Lewis, John C. Matese, Joel E. Richardson, Martin Ringwald, Gerald M.
Rubin, and Gavin Sherlock.
Gene Ontology: tool for the uniﬁcation of biology.
Nature Genetics, 25(1):25–29, 2000.
ISSN 1061-4036.
doi: 10.1038/75556.
URL
http://www.nature.com/doifinder/10.1038/75556.
[26] Louis du Plessis, Nives Škunca, and Christophe Dessimoz. The what, where, how and
why of gene ontology-A primer for bioinformaticians. Brieﬁngs in Bioinformatics, 12
(6):723–735, 2011. ISSN 14675463. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbr002.
41
==PAGE:43==
REFERENCES
[27] R. A. Fisher. On the Interpretation of χ 2 from Contingency Tables, and the Cal-
culation of P.
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 85(1):87, jan 1922.
ISSN
09528385. doi: 10.2307/2340521. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/2340521?
origin=crossref.
[28] Martin Strassnig and Mary Ganguli. About a peculiar disease of the cerebral cortex.
By Alois Alzheimer, 1907. Psychiatry, (412):30–33, 2005. ISSN 0893-0341.
[29] Alena V. Savonenko, Tatiana Melnikova, Tong Li, Donald L. Price, and Philip C.
Wong. Alzheimer Disease. Neurobiology of Brain Disorders, pages 321–338, 2015.
doi:
10.1016/B978-0-12-398270-4.00021-5.
URL http://linkinghub.elsevier.
com/retrieve/pii/B9780123982704000215.
[30] P05067 (A4_HUMAN), 2017. URL http://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/P05067.
[31] Alison L. Baird, Sarah Westwood, and Simon Lovestone.
Blood-based proteomic
biomarkers of Alzheimer’s disease pathology. Frontiers in Neurology, 6(NOV), 2015.
ISSN 16642295. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2015.00236.
[32] Dietmar Rudolf Thal, Christine Von Arnim, W. Sue T Griﬃn, Haruyasu Yamaguchi,
Robert E. Mrak, Johannes Attems, and Ajeet Rijal Upadhaya. Pathology of clinical
and preclinical alzheimer’s disease.
European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical
Neuroscience, 263(SUPPL.2), 2013. ISSN 09401334. doi: 10.1007/s00406-013-0449-5.
[33] Michael T. Heneka. Inﬂammation in Alzheimer’s disease. Clinical Neuroscience Re-
search, 6(5):247–260, 2006. ISSN 15662772. doi: 10.1016/j.cnr.2006.09.005.
[34] RS Wilson.
Education and the course of cognitive decline in Alzheimer disease.
Neurology, 63(7), 2004. ISSN 00283878. URL http://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/
2275528053.
[35] ROSS ANDEL, CHERYL VIGEN, WENDY J. MACK, LINDA J. CLARK, and
MARGARET GATZ. The eﬀect of education and occupational complexity on rate of
cognitive decline in Alzheimer’s patients. Journal of the International Neuropsycholog-
ical Society, 12(01):147–152, 2006. ISSN 1355-6177. doi: 10.1017/S1355617706060206.
URL http://www.journals.cambridge.org/abstract{_}S1355617706060206.
[36] Alberto Serrano-pozo, Matthew P Frosch, Eliezer Masliah, and Bradley T Hyman.
Neuropathological Alterations in Alzheimer Disease. pages 1–24, 2011.
[37] Thomas Gasser, Thomas Wichmann, and Mahlon R. DeLong.
Parkinson Dis-
ease and Other Synucleinopathies.
Elsevier Inc., 2014.
ISBN 9780123982803.
doi:
10.1016/B978-0-12-398270-4.00019-7.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-12-398270-4.00019-7.
[38] S. Fahn and Mark Cookson. Parkinson’s Disease and Related Disorders, 2009.
42
==PAGE:44==
REFERENCES
[39] Ergun Uc Nandakumar S. Narayanan, Robert L. Rodnitzky. Prefrontal dopamine
signaling and cognitive symptoms of Parkinson’s Disease. Rev Neurosci, 24(3), 2013.
doi: 10.1515/revneuro-2013-0004.Prefrontal.
[40] Jill S. Goldman and Stanley Fahn. Genetics of Parkinson Disease and Related Dis-
eases. Elsevier Inc., ﬁfth edit edition, 2015. ISBN 9780124105294. doi: 10.1016/
B978-0-12-410529-4.00068-1.
URL http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/B9780124105294000681.
[41] Hong Yuan, Zhen-Wen Zhang, Li-Wu Liang, Quan Shen, Xiang-Dang Wang,
Su-Mei Ren, Hong-Jie Ma, Shu-Jun Jiao, and Ping Liu.
Treatment strategies
for Parkinson’s disease.
Neuroscience Bulletin, 26(1):66–76, 2010.
ISSN 1673-
7067. doi: 10.1007/s12264-010-0302-z. URL http://link.springer.com/10.1007/
s12264-010-0302-z.
[42] Brigit E Riley, Shyra J Gardai, Dorothea Emig-agius, Marina Bessarabova, Alexan-
der E Ivliev, JeﬀAlexander, William Wallace, Glenda M Halliday, J William
Langston, Scott Braxton, Ted Yednock, Thomas Shaler, and Jennifer A Johnston.
Systems-Based Analyses of Brain Regions Functionally Impacted in Parkinson ’ s
Disease Reveals Underlying Causal Mechanisms. 9(8), 2014. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0102909.
[43] Patricia
Kavanagh
and
Karen
Marder.
Dementia.
In
Parkinson’s
Dis-
ease
and
Nonmotor
Dysfunction,
chapter
4.
2013.
ISBN
978-1-60761-428-
9.
doi:
10.1007/978-1-60761-429-6.
URL http://link.springer.com/10.1007/
978-1-60761-429-6.
[44] W. R. Gowers.
A Manual of Diseases of the Nervous System.
The Journal of
Nervous and Mental Disease, 14(2):123–125, feb 1887.
ISSN 0022-3018.
doi: 10.
1097/00005053-188702000-00011. URL http://content.wkhealth.com/linkback/
openurl?sid=WKPTLP:landingpage{&}an=00005053-188702000-00011.
[45] Delaram Safarpour and Allison W Willis. Clinical Epidemiology, Evaluation, and
Management of Dementia in Parkinson Disease.
American journal of Alzheimer’s
disease and other dementias, 31(7):585–594, 2016. ISSN 1938-2731. doi: 10.1177/
1533317516653823. URL http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27295974.
[46] Carl E Clarke, Smitaa Patel, Natalie Ives, Caroline E Rick, Rebecca Woolley, Keith
Wheatley, Marion F Walker, Shihua Zhu, Rebecca Kandiyali, Guiqing Yao, and
Catherine M Sackley. Clinical eﬀectiveness and cost-eﬀectiveness of physiotherapy
and occupational therapy versus no therapy in mild to moderate Parkinson’s disease:
a large pragmatic randomised controlled trial (PD REHAB). Health technology as-
sessment (Winchester, England), 20(63):1–96, 2016. ISSN 2046-4924. doi: 10.3310/
hta20630.
URL http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27580669{%}5Cnhttp://
www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=PMC5018686.
43
==PAGE:45==
REFERENCES
[47] Gráinne C. O’Keeﬀe, Andrew W. Michell, and Roger A. Barker. Biomarkers in hunt-
ington’s and Parkinson’s disease. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1180:
97–110, 2009. ISSN 00778923. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04943.x.
[48] Philip A Robinson. Protein stability and aggregation in Parkinson’s disease. The
Biochemical journal, 413(1):1–13, 2008. ISSN 1470-8728. doi: 10.1042/BJ20080295.
URL http://www.biochemj.org/content/413/1/1.abstract.
[49] Matthew P. Parsons and Lynn A. Raymond.
Huntington Disease.
Elsevier Inc.,
2015. ISBN 9780123982704. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-398270-4.00020-3. URL http:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/B9780123982704000203.
[50] Emmanuel Roze.
Huntington’s disease and striatal signaling.
Frontiers in Neu-
roanatomy, 5(August):1–16, 2011.
ISSN 16625129.
doi:
10.3389/fnana.2011.
00055.
URL http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fnana.2011.
00055/abstract.
[51] Emmanuel Roze, Cecilia Bonnet, Sandrine Betuing, and Jocelyne Caboche. Hunting-
ton ’ s Disease. Diseases of DNA Repair, pages 45–63, 2010.
[52] James F. Gusella and Marcy E. MacDonald. Huntington’s disease. Seminars in Cell
Biology, 6(1):21–28, 1995. ISSN 10434682. doi: 10.1016/1043-4682(95)90011-X.
[53] Jean Paul G Vonsattel, Christian Keller, and Etty Paola Cortes Ramirez. Hunting-
ton’s disease - neuropathology, volume 100.
Elsevier B.V., 1 edition, 2011.
ISBN
9780444520142.
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-52014-2.00004-5.
URL http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/B978-0-444-52014-2.00004-5.
[54] Jing Yang, Ke Chen, Qianqian Wei, Yongping Chen, Bei Cao, Jean-Marc Burgunder,
and Hui-Fang Shang. Clinical and genetic characteristics in patients with Huntington’s
disease from China. Neurological research, 6412(November):1–5, 2016. ISSN 1743-
1328. doi: 10.1080/01616412.2016.1214555. URL http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/27483361.
[55] L Mangiarini, K Sathasivam, and G P Bates. Molecular pathology of Huntington’s
disease: Animal models and nuclear mechanisms. Neuroscientist, 5(6):383–391, 1999.
ISSN 10738584.
[56] George H. Sack. Mitochondrial matters in Huntington disease. Journal of Bioen-
ergetics and Biomembranes, 42(3):189–191, 2010.
ISSN 0145479X.
doi: 10.1007/
s10863-010-9291-x.
[57] Maria Damiano, Laurie Galvan, Nicole Déglon, and Emmanuel Brouillet. Biochimica
et Biophysica Acta Mitochondria in Huntington ’ s disease. BBA - Molecular Basis
of Disease, 1802(1):52–61, 2010. ISSN 0925-4439. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2009.07.012.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbadis.2009.07.012.
44
==PAGE:46==
REFERENCES
[58] Aleksandar Videnovic. Treatment of huntington disease. Current Treatment Options
in Neurology, 15(4):424–438, 2013. ISSN 10928480. doi: 10.1007/s11940-013-0219-8.
[59] R Core Computing. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Team, 2017.
URL https://www.r-project.org/.
[60] Huber, W., Carey, V J., Gentleman, R., Anders, S., Carlson, M., Carvalho, B S.,
Bravo, H C., Davis, S., Gatto, L., Girke, T., Gottardo, R., Hahne, F., Hansen,
K D., Irizarry, R A., Lawrence, M., Love, M I., MacDonald, J., Obenchain, V.,
Ole’s, A K., Pag‘es, H., Reyes, A., Shannon, P., Smyth, G K., Tenenbaum, D.,
Waldron, L., Morgan, and M. Orchestrating high-throughput genomic analysis with
Bioconductor. Nature Methods, 12(2):115–121, 2015. URL http://www.nature.com/
nmeth/journal/v12/n2/full/nmeth.3252.html.
[61] Audrey Kauﬀmann and Wolfgang Huber. Introduction : microarray quality assess-
ment with arrayQualityMetrics. (ii):1–7, 2013.
[62] Gordon K Smyth, Matthew Ritchie, and Natalie Thorne. Linear Models for Microar-
ray and RNA-Seq Data User ’ s Guide. R, (September), 2015. ISSN 0305-1048. doi:
10.1093/nar/gkv007.
[63] Dov Stekel. Detaection of Diﬀerential Gene Expression. In Microarray Bioinformatics,
chapter 7. Cambridge University Press, UK, 2003.
[64] Xiaogang Wu, Mohammad Al Hasan, and Jake Yue Chen. Pathway and network anal-
ysis in proteomics. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 362:44–52, 2014. ISSN 00225193.
doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2014.05.031.
[65] René Vidal, Yi Ma, and S. Shankar Sastry. Generalized Principal Component Analysis,
volume 40. 2016. ISBN 9780387878102. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-87811-9_2.
[66] R. A. Irizarry. Exploration, normalization, and summaries of high density oligonu-
cleotide array probe level data. Biostatistics, 4(2):249–264, 2003. ISSN 14654644. doi:
10.1093/biostatistics/4.2.249.
URL https://academic.oup.com/biostatistics/
article-lookup/doi/10.1093/biostatistics/4.2.249.
[67] Rafael A. Irizarry, Benjamin M. Bolstad, Francois Collin, Leslie M. Cope, Bridget
Hobbs, and Terence P. Speed. Summaries of Aﬀymetrix GeneChip probe level data.
Nucleic acids research, 31(4):e15, 2003. ISSN 13624962. doi: 10.1093/nar/gng015.
[68] B M Bolstad, R A Irizarry, M Astrand, and T P Speed. A comparison of normalization
methods for high density oligonucleotide array data based on variance and bias. Bioin-
formatics (Oxford, England), 19(2):185–93, jan 2003. ISSN 1367-4803. doi: 10.1093/
bioinformatics/19.2.185. URL http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12538238.
[69] Gordon K Smyth. Linear Models and Empirical Bayes Methods for Assessing Dif-
ferential Expression in Microarray Experiments Linear Models and Empirical Bayes
45
==PAGE:47==
REFERENCES
Methods for Assessing Diﬀerential Expression in Microarray Experiments. Statistical
Applications in Genetics and Molecular Biology, 3(1):1–26, 2004. ISSN 1544-6115.
doi: 10.2202/1544-6115.1027.
[70] Yoav Benjamini and Yosef Hochberg. Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical
and powerful approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society
Series B, 57:298–300, 1995.
[71] Zhaochen Dong, Wei Yu, and Wangli Xu. A modiﬁed combined p-value multiple test.
9655(March), 2017. doi: 10.1080/00949655.2014.931958. URL http://dx.doi.org/
10.1080/00949655.2014.931958.
[72] M F Brilhante. Combining p -Values and Random p -Values. (Dm):1–6, 2010.
46
