==PAGE:1==
THESIS
SEPTEMBER 2017
Katarzyna Stefanczyk, s145168
DTU
Design of low rise dwellings as part of a 
sustainable village concept. 
==PAGE:2==
MSc | Master Thesis
“Design of low rise dwellings as a part of sustainable 
village concept.”
MSc in Architectural Engineering
Author: Katarzyna Stefanczyk | s145168
Supervisor: Prof. Svend Svendsen
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Table of Contents
1.
Abstract
I
2.
Acknowledgments
II
3.
List of figures
III
4.
List of tables
V
5.
Introduction
1
5.1 
Project background.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1
5.2	
New vision.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 8
5.3	
Project aim. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   9
6.
State of the art
11
6.1	
ReGen Village.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 11
6.2	
Karise Permatopia .  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 13
6.3 
The ecovillage at Currumbin . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 14
6.4	
Helsinge Haveby – village of tomorrow . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 16
6.5	
The mini CO2 houses in Nyborg .  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 18
7.
Methodology
20
7.1 
Metrics for daylight condition assessment.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 20
7.1.1	Daylight factor .  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 20
7.1.2 Useful daylight illuminances .  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 21
7.1.3 Daylight Autonomy . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 21
7.2 
Daylight - visual comfort analysis.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 21
7.3 
Danish regulations .  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 22
7.3.1	Daylight . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 22
7.3.2	Energy performance . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 22
7.3.3	Indoor climate .  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 22
7.3.4 Active House Specification. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 23
7.4 
Simulation process and model description.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 24
7.4.1 Simulation process.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 24
7.4.2 Building specification. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 25
7.4.3	Windows design.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 25
7.4.4 Occupancy schedule.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 27
7.4.5	Weather data.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 28
7.5 
Community .  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 31
7.6	
Plot.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 32
==PAGE:4==
7.7	
Water. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 32
7.8	
Materials and waste. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 34
7.9	
Energy.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 39
8.
Design of low rise dwellings as a part of sustainable village concept
45
8.1	
Concept design.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 45
8.2	
Shading. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 48
8.3 
Building design - overview of the selected building..  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  . 50
8.3.1 Sun path investigation and basic information on project.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  . 50
8.4	
Windows and daylight performance. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 53
8.4.1	Case 1.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 54
8.4.2	Case 2.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 57
8.4.3	Case 3.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 63
8.5	
Thermal performance. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 67
8.6	
Winter garden.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 69
8.7 
Green house . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 72
9.
Results
76
10.
Conclusions
81
11.
Bibliography
83
==PAGE:5==
| I
1.
Abstract
Eco village has always been associated with isolated from the world area, always outside of 
the cities, occupied by people with different and at the same time incomprehensible approach 
to life, but nowadays it completely changed. In 1991 Robert Gilman worked out the definition 
of eco village, which was defined as: tailored to human needs, satisfying the needs of the set­
tlement, where human activity is in harmony with nature and in a way that supports healthy 
human development and can be successfully continued in an indefinite future. All these sub-
points fully define the modern village, which model has been technologically advanced and 
modernized.
Nowadays to create a concept of ecovillage within your society, it does not have to be a com­
plete renunciation of life in an isolated area. Thanks to the development of technology and 
the increase of people’s awareness of sustainability, the ecovillage has acquired a completely 
different meaning. It is an increasingly popular alternative to living in a city, mass urbanization 
and rising land process. 
This concept of sustainable development has bigger factor of change in today`s world than 
ever.
In this thesis, the concept of ecovillage, was deeply investigated. To understand it, several 
state-of-the-arts have been studied, resulting in design of new ecovillage, set directly in nature 
with locally based farming community, creating self-sustain social clusters rather than row 
building with lack of daylight and uncomfortable indoor climate. 
The aim of presented case study based on simulation and investigation, was to examine the 
daylight performance of selected building with different scenarios. The selected building was 
tested for the performance according to orientation, shading of surrounding buildings, day­
light renovation etc., in order to obtain the best optimized solution and investigate, which of 
the factors have a major influence. 
==PAGE:6==
| II
2.
Acknowledgments
I would like to extend my sincerest thanks and appreciation to Prof. Svend Svendsen, my 
advisor for his guidance, background knowledge, constructive feedback and coordinating my 
project.
I would like to extend my gratitude to the all of the colleagues in the Department of DEIC at 
Velux A/S for support in terms of daylight performance and integrated design. 
A special thanks is also extended to Nicolas Roy and Peter Foldbjerg, head of VELUX Knowl­
edge Center for Daylight, Energy and Indoor Climate, for giving me an opportunity to partici­
pate in Daylight Symposium 2017. I have wholeheartedly enjoyed the challenge of being a 
coordinator of the event, meeting inspiring and passionate people in the field of Daylighting.
Gratitude is extended to Jakob Strømann from Henning Larsen Architects and an architect at 
Velux A/S - Lone Feifer for early advices on my project.
Finally, special recognition goes to my fiance, for his constant support and patience during 
my pursuit of the Master Degree in Architectural Engineering, who inspired me and provided 
constant encouragement during the entire process.
==PAGE:7==
| III
3.
List of figures
Figure 1:  Emissions from houses and buildings, source: Healthy home barometer 2017, p. 9-11	
3
Figure 2:  Energy consumption by sectors in the world 1990-2001, source: International Energy Agency, 
reported in World Resources Institute, Earthtrends, www.earthtrends.wri.org	
4
Figure 3:  Energy consumption by sectors in Europe 1990-2001, source: International Energy Agency,
reported in World Resources Institute, Earthtrends, www.earthtrends.wri.org	
4
Figure 4: 66% of our environmental impact is directly related to home activities, consumption of energy 
and food ingestion, source: http://www.effekt.dk/regenvillages/	
5
Figure 5: Energy consumption in selected cities in high-come, industrialized economies, source: 
UN-HABITAT, global urban observatory 2008.	
5
Figure 6: Greenhouse gas emission by sector, source: http://www.effekt.dk/work#/regenvillages/	
6
Figure 7: Share of freshwater by sector, 2014, source: Food and Agriculture Organization, 
AQUASTAT data. 	
7
Figure 8: Hunger problem, source: own elaboration	
7
Figure 9: Distance produce travelled to Chicago Market, source: Leopold Center for 
sustainable Agriculture.	
8
Figure 10: ReGen Village visualisation, source: http://www.effekt.dk	
11
Figure 11: ReGen Village infographics, source: http://www.effekt.dk	
12
Figure 12: Permatopia sketches, source: http://www.permatopia.dk	
13
Figure 13: Permatopia sketches, source: http://www.permatopia.dk	
14
Figure 14: The ecovillage in Currumbin, source: https://theecovillage.com.au	
14
Figure 15: Currumbin Ecovillage, Australia, source: https://theecovillage.com.au	
15
Figure 16:  Helsinge Haveby - village of tomorrow, source: http://www.effekt.dk/work#/hno/	
16
Figure 17:  Helsinge Haveby - village of tomorrow, source: http://www.effekt.dk/work#/hno/	
17
Figure 18: Drawing showing the values measured by the daylight factor method, reading at 
the same time internal and external illuminance levels (source: P. A. Andersen et al, Daylight, 
Energy and Indoor climate basic book, 2014, site 70.)	
20
Figure 19:  Energy framework, Building Regulations.	
22
Figure 20: Active House Specification (source: www.activehouse.info)	
23
Figure 21: Materials - CEILING, reflectance: 70%, source: Velux Daylight Visualizer	
24
Figure 22: Materials - FLOOR, reflectance: 30%, source: Velux Daylight Visualizer	
24
Figure 23: Materials - WALL, reflectance: 50%, source: Velux Daylight Visualizer	
24
Figure 24: Daylight factor vs distance from window wall, source: P. A. Andersen et al, Daylight, 
Energy and Indoor climate basic book, 2014	
26
Figure 25: Energy balance, source: P. A. Andersen et al, Daylight, Energy and Indoor climate 
basic book, 2014	
26
Figure 26:  Visual representation of hourly schedule of a day for different age groups.	
27
Figure 27:  Visual representation of wind case study, for Dec - Feb (left corner), 
March - May (right corner), June - Aug (Left bottom), Sept - Nov (right bottom).	
29
==PAGE:8==
| IV
Figure 28: 3d and 2d representation of sun path diagram for Copenhagen, DK.	
30
Figure 29:  Solar gain due to season, source: Bokalders, V. (2010). How to design healthy, efficient 
and sustainable buildings. USA: Earthscan	
41
Figure 30:  The orientation of rooms, source: Podrecznik projektowania architektonicznego  
E. Neufert, wyd. Arkady	
42
Figure 31:  Advantage of passive solar heat, (A) south facing window, (B) Indirect gain,
 (C) solar walls, (D) constructio of heavy walls connected with glazing outside, source:
 Bokalders, V. (2010). How to design healthy, efficient and sustainable buildings. USA: Earthscan 	
43
Figure 32:  Representation of shape and inhabitants proposal for different typologies.	
45
Figure 33:  Stages of the design, own elaboration.	
46
Figure 34:  Sun plan of the village, own elaboration.	
47
Figure 35:  Development in various scales and stages.	
47
Figure 36:  Visual representation for eco village design.	
48
Figure 37:  Visual representation of sun path case study for a cluster. 
* Building selected with the black square, it is the building selected for the further investigation.	
49
Figure 38:  Visual representation of investigated typology number I.	
50
Figure 39:  Basic floor plan for typology I [m], before setting up the windows.	
51
Figure 40:  Sun plan of the village, in orange -building chosen for investigation	
51
Figure 41:  Visual representation of sun path case study investigating shading for the selected building.	
52
Figure 42:  Demend for unlight within different areas.	
53
Figure 43: Daylight factor pre-evaluation with Velux Daylight Visualizer	
55
Figure 44: Daylight factor evaluation for zone 1 with Velux Daylight Visualizer	
56
Figure 45: Daylight factor evaluation for zone 2 with Velux Daylight Visualizer	
56
Figure 46: Comparison of daylight along the depth of the room using different types of 
windows, (source: P. A. Andersen et al, Daylight, Energy and Indoor climate basic book, 2014)	
57
Figure 47: Daylight factor evaluation with Velux Daylight Visualizer	
59
Figure 48: Daylight factor evaluation with Velux Daylight Visualizer, zone 1	
60
Figure 49: Overview for the sensor point file , zone 1.	
60
Figure 50: Overview for the illuminance rendering for the worst scenario in December, 
overcast sky at 12:00 , zone 1.	
61
Figure 52: Daylight autonomy (DA) simulation after implementation of roof windows using 
Daysim, including 0.5m offset of walls.	
61
Figure 51: Overview for luminance simulation during 21st of June at 12:00, zone 1.	
61
Figure 53: The Useful Daylight Indices for the Lighting Zone DA<100	
62
Figure 54: The Useful Daylight Indices for the Lighting Zone DA100-2000	
62
Figure 55: The Useful Daylight Indices for the Lighting Zone DA>2000	
62
Figure 56: New arrangement of windows	
63
Figure 57: Daylight factor evaluation with Velux Daylight Visualizer	
64
Figure 58: Overview for the illuminance rendering for the worst scenario in December, 
overcast sky at 12:00 , zone 1.	
65
==PAGE:9==
| V
Figure 60: Overview for the illuminance rendering for the worst scenario in December, 
overcast sky at 12:00 , zone 1.	
65
Figure 59: Overview for luminance simulation during 21st of June at 12:00, zone 1.	
65
Figure 61: Overview for luminance simulation during 21st of June at 12:00, zone 1.	
65
Figure 62: Visual representation of two roof windows linings in the building.	
67
Figure 63:  Different variations of winter house design, source: www.solarux.com	
69
Figure 64:  Example of designed shading in the winter garden, source: www.solarux.com	
69
Figure 65: Ventilation in the winter garden, source: www.solarux.com	
70
Figure 66: Heating in the winter garden, source: www.solarux.com	
70
Figure 68: Winter garden -  according to the year.	
71
Figure 67: Automation of the winter garden, source: www.solarux.com	
71
Figure 69: Winter garden as an integrated part of eco village concept.	
72
Figure 70: Sustainable village concept - green house.	
73
Figure 71:  Co-working space by Selgascano, http://www.selgascano.net/	
73
Figure 72: Overview for the windows.	
74
Figure 73: Facade view / South-West	
75
Figure 74: Facade view / South-East	
75
Figure 75: Facade view / North-East	
75
Figure 76: Facade view / North-West	
75
Figure 77: Overview of the results, conducted using different tools.	
79
Figure 78: Overview of the glazing to floor ration according to the facades, DF generated 
from Velux Daylight Visualizer tool.	
79
Figure 80: Results of Daylight Factor > 2%, according to glazing to floor ratio, conducted in 
Daylight Visualizer tool.	
80
Figure 81: Results of Daylight Factor according to glazing to floor ratio, conducted in 
Diva for Rhino tool.	
80
Figure 82: Results of Daylight Autonomy according to glazing to floor ratio, conducted in 
Diva for Rhino tool.	
80
Figure 79: Results of Daylight Factor according to glazing to floor ratio, conducted in 
Daylight Visualizer tool.	
80
==PAGE:10==
| V
4.	 List of tables
Table 1: Project information, own elaboration, source: effekt.dk	
12
Table 2: Project information, own elaboration, source: effekt.dk	
17
Table 3: Project information, own elaboration, 
source: http://www.realdaniabyogbyg.org/projects/the-minico2-houses	
18
Table 4: Strategies for water conservation, 
source: Rough guide to sustainability 3rd edition Brian Edwards, 2010, site 119	
33
Table 5: The principles for water conservation, s
ource: Rough guide to sustainability 3rd edition brian Edwards, 2010, site 120	
34
Table 6: Comparison of embodied energy construction materials, 
source: Rough guide to sustainability 3rd edition Brian Edwards, 2010, site 130	
34
Table 7: Choice made on embodied material energy, 
source: Rough guide to sustainability 3rd edition Brian Edwards, 2010, site 130	
35
Table 8: Three phases of the building material life cycle	
38
Table 9: Use of PV technologies, 
source: Rough guide to sustainability 3rd edition brian Edwards, 2010, site 97	
41
Table 10: Project information, zones.	
51
Table 11: Daylight levels evaluated by Velux Daylight Visualizer using zones.	
55
==PAGE:11==
| VI
CHAPTER
1
INTRODUCTION
==PAGE:12==
| 1
5.	 Introduction
5.1	 Project background
Human activity has always had an impact on the environment. Progress has required to use a 
lot of resources, but often current needs have been met with ill-considered or environmental 
damage. An attempt to counteraction this unfavourable tendency is the concept of sustain­
able development. Sustainability has a major importance to the environment but also plays 
important role in a public health and economy. 
The idea of sustainability in architecture is the design, construction and operation of thinking 
about tomorrow. The goal of sustainable construction is to meet social needs, preserve mar­
ket competitiveness and environmental friendliness. Environmental aspect covers protection 
of natural resources, reduction of CO2 emissions, low environmental impact and use of local 
materials containing secondary raw materials and the last one, which is an economic aspect 
affordable and competitive investment costs in the life cycle of a building investment with a 
clear return on investment index. Social aspect - healthy and user-friendly and environmen­
tally friendly.
The concept of “sustainable architecture” is subordinated to sustainable construction, form­
ing an integral part of it. Without building project prepared in accordance with the principles 
of sustainable architecture the whole concept to meet the challenges of sustainable con­
struction is unrealistic. Sustainable architecture projects must be comfortable to use but also 
economical and environmentally friendly.
The sustainable development is a set of ecological actions, which with each coming year in­
creasingly interferes with social life. The main interest is focus on cities, houses and its facili­
ties. Waste segregation, ecological products, renewable energy sources - these and similar 
concepts appear in our environment more and more often. Life according to sustainable or 
eco rules is fashionable, healthy, cost effective and provides a guarantee of living in harmony 
with mother earth.
This concept of sustainable development has become a very powerful factor of change in 
today’s world.
Due to increasing awareness of sustainability the innovating ecovillage design was developed 
as a new filed of knowledge, offering edible landscaping, new model facilitates off-the-grid, 
Environmental aspect + Social aspect + Economic Aspect = Sustainability
==PAGE:13==
| 2
self-sustaining communal neighbourhoods and strives for a little or no carbon energy based 
consumption. It developed a new approach to sustainable architecture that foster both in­
novative design and low energy architecture. By revealing how our lives can be powered by 
nature, adapt to the rhythm of seasons.
Eco-villages, which have already been created or are still in the development phase, have 
emerged from the need to create a community that will bring a very little harmful impact 
on the environment, where people will be able to feel back to their roots, break away from 
the stressful life in a city where each individual is anonymous. It is a strong movement and at 
the same time an alternative for mass urbanization and rising land prices. There is a need to 
build a community where each of the inhabitants will be able to become part of a big project, 
where everybody could be a part of system producing food locally for the residents of the 
village and many other activities for the same desire - to create a better environment, where 
they want to live. Many ecovillages are socially motivated, subdivided into clusters at the 
same time creating a cosy little community creating more interaction between houses. This 
new integration of social live with settlement in harmony with nature will lead to a new kind 
of holistic design – Integrated Ecovillage Design.
“WE FIND A WAY TO HARNESS THE FORCE OF THE SUN AND WIND TO SUSTAIN OUR 
LIVES AND THESE FORCES HAVE SHAPED THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT”
“ Towards zero energy architecture” Mary Guzowski 2010
“A NEW STUDY BY ANALYSIS INSTITUTE YOUGOV, MADE FOR THE HOMEOWNERS 
KNOWLEDGE DATABASE, BOLIUS, SHOWS THAT EVERY FIFTH PERSON LIVING IN 
THE CITY TODAY, PLAN TO LIVE IN THE COUNTRYSIDE IN 2030 – CALLING FOR A 
BETTER, MORE HEALTHY LIVING ENVIRONMENT, MORE COMMUNITY AND AFFORD­
ABLE HOMES”
YouGov for BOLIUS, http://www.effekt.dk/hno/
==PAGE:14==
| 3
ECOVILLAGE 
Approach to the design and architecture significantly changed the direction in response to 
the global challenges, and adopted more sustainable and holistic solution, which has made 
easily affordable design of grater performance standards nowadays.
In today’s world, where energy consumption contributes, the most to the carbon emission, 
the most important thing is to show people and to understand, which sectors have the great­
est share in the above mentioned actions, so that we can begin to act as quickly as possible 
and apply the right actions. We need to understand that the most important and the most 
influential factor here is a human factor. If we act responsibly as soon as possible, we can 
dramatically reduce those numbers that are constantly growing. 
The motivations underlying the creation of a new ecovillage-based community are presented 
below. By carrying out the investigation, you will be able to accumulate knowledge that will 
allow us to consciously design the village, based on the knowledge provided below.
ENERGY CONSUMPTION + CO2 EMISSION
 It is important to highlight that almost 36% of Europe’s total CO2 emissions come from build­
ings and homes.
36%
+
of Europe`s total CO2 emis­
sions are emitted by homes 
and buildings
110 million 
is the number of single-family 
houses in Europe
Figure 1:  Emissions from houses and buildings, source: Healthy home barometer 2017, p. 9-11
==PAGE:15==
| 4
From 1990 to 2001, energy consumption increased by 36%, of which more than 27% be­
longed to the residential sector.
19%
37%
20%
6%
4%
8%
6%
28%
32%
20%
5%
2%
8%
5%
World 1990
World 2001
+ 36%
Residential
Industry
Figure 2:  Energy consumption by sectors in the world 1990-2001, source: International Energy Agency, re­
ported in World Resources Institute, Earthtrends, www.earthtrends.wri.org
19%
37%
20%
6%
4%
8%
6%
28%
32%
20%
5%
2%
8%
5%
Europe 1990
Europe 2001
+ 55%
Other transport
Agriculture
Figure 3:  Energy consumption by sectors in Europe 1990-2001, source: International Energy Agency, reported 
in World Resources Institute, Earthtrends, www.earthtrends.wri.org
24%
35%
20%
4%
3%
9%
5%
27%
32%
19%
6%
3%
9%
4%
Road transport
Commercial and Public
services
Other
==PAGE:16==
| 5
66%
Figure 4: 66% of our environmental impact is directly related to home activities, consumption of energy and 
food ingestion, source: http://www.effekt.dk/regenvillages/
Within this 27% is all energy used for household activities. Another very important fact is the 
environmental impact - 66% is directly linked to the residential sector, more detailed to all 
home activities, consumption of energy or food ingestion. 
110 million is the number stands for the amount of single-family houses, located just in Eu­
rope area. Taking into account, fact that 36% of total CO2 emissions is emitted by buildings 
becomes a fact more and more understandable. In Europe, total energy consumption has 
increased by 55% in 11 years, with the largest increase for residential sector, from 23.8% 
raised to 27%.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Tokyo
New York
Seoul
Greater London
Singapore
Berlin
Bologna
Industry
Buildings
Transport
Figure 5: Energy consumption in selected cities in high-come, industrialized economies, source: UN-HABITAT, 
global urban observatory 2008.
The most of the energy is used to provide commercial and residential buildings with hot 
water and with artificial light. Transport together with industry follow as the second and the 
greatest consumers of energy, the only exception is Singapore. This city became much more 
energy efficient with urban mobility (source: “State of the world`s cities 2008/9, Energy con­
sumption in cities”).
==PAGE:17==
| 6
At a time when the world population is growing at a surprisingly fast pace, all the pressure 
lies with the farmers to find a new field that can be used for cultivation.
30% of all greenhouse gas emissions is emitted by farming, making it the largest emitter of 
greenhouse gasses in the world. Besides that fact, the more dangerous is fertilizer - that dou­
ble the nitrogen and phosphorous in our environment contaminating our soil and what is the 
worst our drinking water.
“FOOD PRODUCTION TAKES UP ALMOST HALF OF THE PLANET`S LAND SURFACE 
AND THREATENS TO CONSUME THE FERTILE LAND STILL REMAINS, SCIENTISTS 
WARN.”
James Owen for National Geographic, December 9, 2005
FARMING + FOOD PRODUCTION
Cities struggles with densification, the whole world population increased by roughly 80 mil­
lion each year (source: http://www.worldometers.info/water/).
Ecovillage will became a pioneer in self-sustain place in food. We want it to be a place de­
scribed as a “Human settlement in harmony with nature”. Farming is the most common 
cause for deforestation Facts are unfortunately frightening, over 40% of the Earth’s land sur­
face area is used for farmland, area used for crop production is an equivalent number to 
a size of South America. By contrast, data collected by the United Nations Food and Agri­
culture Organization show that the total area of farmlands increased by 12.4 million acres 
a year within 10 years, from 1992 till 2002 (source: http://news.nationalgeographic.com/
news/2005/12/1209_051209_crops_map.html)
Figure 6: Greenhouse gas emission by sector, source: http://www.effekt.dk/work#/regenvillages/
==PAGE:18==
| 7
One third of the world food is wasted every year, while more than 700 million people are 
starving, which makes 1 in 7 people in the world suffers from hunger and at the same time 
makes hunger the greatest danger to health worldwide. (source: http://www.fao.org/hun­
ger/en/).
WATER
69% of global water is used for farming, 20% for industry and 10% for farming use (http://
www.worldometers.info/water/, United Nations). Other eating habits and change the style 
being largely affects the water consumption per capita. Wasteful and unsustainable farm­
ing is the most powerful driver of deforestation. Approximately 40% of the world’s food is 
currently cultivated in artificially irrigated areas (http://www.globalagriculture.org/report-
topics/water.html).
1 IN 7 
PEOPLE IN THE 
WORLD IS SUFFER FROM HUNGER
Figure 8: Hunger problem, source: own 
elaboration
0
20
40
60
80
100
South Asia
Middle East and North Africa
South Africa
Latin America
East Asia and Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Domestic
Industry
Agriculture
Figure 7: Share of freshwater by sector, 2014, source: Food and Agriculture Organization, AQUASTAT data. 
“BY 2050, FEEDING A PLANET OF 9 BILLION PEOPLE WILL REQUIRE AN 
ESTIMATED 50 PERCENT INCREASE IN AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION 
AND A 15 PERCENT INCREASE IN WATER WITHDRAWALS”
source: http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/er.h2o.fwag.zs
==PAGE:19==
| 8
TRANSPORT
On average vegetables travel 2 400 km from farm to appear on a consumer`s plate, causing 
an extra 12% emissions to transportation (source: A Publication of ATTRA - National Sustain­
able Agriculture Information Service, “Food miles”)
Figure 9: Distance produce travelled to Chicago Market, source: Leopold Center for sustainable Agriculture.
5.2	 New vision
To achieve a new level of sustainability in architecture we need to focus more than ever, not 
on technologies we are eager to use, but on a vision, itself. There are lots of environmental 
and architectural strategies, but it is not enough. There is a high demand to envision new 
concept that will merge not only principles, performance and ecological design, but show 
from the beginning to the end people how you should live and behave so your house will be 
energy efficient and your surroundings will bring only the benefits and positive impact. 
And here comes the idea of Sustainable ecovillage, a new concept that will become a place 
where all the inhabitants will be able to self feed themselves from the fresh vegetables and 
fruit, moreover development of this off grid place will provide much less demand for elec­
tricity. Eco village is a place where all the technologies are integrated to create one toned 
whole piece, to take the most out of nature, but not to destroy it - in such a way as to leave 
as little CO2 footprint as possible. It is a vision of a home that will “work for us”, producing 
“ALL ENERGY IS SOLAR ENERGY, STORED IN DIFFERENT FORMS. 
EVERY TWO MINUTES THE SUN GIVES THE EARTH MORE ENERGY 
THAN IS USED ANNUALY WORLD-WIDE. IT IS THE ONLY RENEWA­
BLE RESOURCE WITH THE CAPACITY TO PROVIDE ALL THE ENERGY 
WE NEED ON A GLOBAL LEVEL.”
Bruce Mau, Massive Change.
==PAGE:20==
| 9
clean energy, ecological healthy food and, first of all, water for daily consumption. Ecovillage 
is a vision of a “community-based farming” where every citizen can experience fundamen­
tal activities that integrate people, produce food and eat at one table for centuries. So the 
inhabitant does not have to continue strive for more human connection, and therefore is a 
part of the concept of sustainable village. Using aquaponic farming systems we can reduce 
land use by 98%, leaving the natural landscapes untouched. The aquaponics guarantee 100% 
organic food production with 10 times faster growing up to ground farming, at the same time 
decreasing water consumption by 90%. Because all food will be locally produced next step is 
to eliminate food transportation by enabling farm-to-table (source: Challenges of sustainable 
and commercial aquaponics, open source article from sustainability 2015, http://bioponica.
net/aquaponics-scientific-article/)
It is a new vision for creating the village that does not deplete the environment but restores 
it by closed circuit eco system, where everything is happening on site, no nitrogen and phos­
phorus are emitted to the surrounding environment.
5.3	 Project aim
The aim of this thesis is to design a part of sustainable village concept based on conducted 
research with strong focus on daylight in buildings with implementation of integrated glazing 
areas.  This project aims to be a solution, considered as a green answer to arising problem of 
living in the city – mass urbanization and rising land prices.
==PAGE:21==
| 10
CHAPTER
2
STATE-OF-THE-ART
==PAGE:22==
| 11
6.	 State of the art
6.1	 ReGen Village
ReGen Village - short for regenerative, it`s a Danish architectural studio project focused on 
development a place outside the city to live for people looking for an environmentally sus­
tainable alternatives to the city. It is going to be an innovative ecovillage, where families will 
be self-feed from local “door-step organic food production”. Village will be off-grid and could 
power all houses on a site.
Figure 10: ReGen Village visualisation, source: http://www.effekt.dk
The project responds to growing problems of housing shortage, food crisis, growing CO2 
emission, urbanization and increasing growth of population growth. It is a respond to all the 
critical issues present all over the world nowadays. The main focus architects put on sustain­
ability and circular economy, the output of one system is an input for the other one and all 
the systems are harness to create a self-sustain village. Lots of innovative technologies were 
used in a project, such as:
• Energy positive homes
•	 Renewable energy
•	 Energy storage
• Door-step food production
• Vertical farming (aqaponics / aeroponics)
•	 Water management
• Waste to resource system
==PAGE:23==
| 12
ReGen village is a place where every technology that is used is integrated with another sys­
tem to create one whole – that is the main feature, which makes village so special. This is an 
alternative for people who are looking for a quiet place where they can produce variety of 
healthy food and contribute to a better climate, but at the same time do not feel isolated, 
while living outside of the city. Inhabitants will create and at the same time take care of the 
community in the village, of their own place of living and sometimes the production of food. 
It is really simple concept, inventors try to focus on all the common problems that come 
together with “living in the house”. Starting with heating, cooling, energy and ending up on 
food production. ReGen village consists of homes that works for you, producing all the most 
important features, crucial to get by. Helping with more sustainable distribution of people 
to decreased density in the big cities, all over the world through the reduce dependency of 
householders on sources providing in the big cities only.
With collaboration of Dutch and Danish architects first ReGen Eco village will be deployed 
in Almere, in Netherlands, later this year. Future plan is to implement ReGen village in Den­
mark, Germany and Norway with continuation in different countries all over the world, which 
are in particular exposed to the global crisis.
Figure 11: ReGen Village infographics, source: http://www.effekt.dk
Table 1: Project information, own elaboration, source: effekt.dk
ReGen Village
Masterplan, residentail, agriculture
Almere, Netherlands
2016
Ongoing
15 500 m2
ReGen Villages Holding B.V.
James Ehrlich
PROJECT NAME
TYPOLOGY
LOCATION
YEAR
STATUS
SIZE
CLIENT
COLLABORATORS	
	
==PAGE:24==
| 13
6.2	 Karise Permatopia 
Karise Permatopia is a visionary ecovillage near Copenhagen, offers to over 90 houses agri­
cultural facilities, sustainable housing solutions, latest renewable energy solutions and ac­
cess to a highly developed farming community. From 2018 after development of new train 
directions, it will only take 50 minutes to get to Copenhagen and walking distance to reach 
the destination. The demographic is evenly spread with 40% for families with children, 30% 
for middle age, 20% for young people without children and remains 10% for elderly. Anyone 
can take advantage of what the village offers. The modern cottages offered by the village can 
be rented out and using for housing or purchase, the earliest in September.
Everything in Permatopia starting with food production and ending at the management of 
wastewater is fully in 100% sustainable. Sustainable solutions for heating, electricity, waste, 
and wastewater make the village raise the quality of life by not contributing to negative en­
vironmental perception. In addition, it is very important that costs are significantly reduce 
due to growing organic vegetables and fruits, at the same time making people aware of costs 
connected with typical food transportation. 
This modern ecovillage near Copenhagen consists of 90 organic terrace houses. Beside of 
houses, inhabitants can expect a full range of such facilities and services like farm shop, café, 
pool with shared electric cars and lots of different communal facilities. Everything is inspired 
by sustainable and eco approach. A very important factor in the village is the combination of 
professionals and residents when it comes to gardening. From top to main care of the com­
mon garden from which all the fruits and vegetables will be delivered to the local store is 
entrusted to professional farmers who are also part of the community. Farming must supply 
the entire village with enough vegetables and fruits to be self-sufficient in food production.
Figure 12: Permatopia sketches, source: http://www.permatopia.dk
==PAGE:25==
| 14
Figure 13: Permatopia sketches, source: http://www.permatopia.dk
6.3	 The ecovillage at Currumbin 
Currumbin is a lovely coastal suburb based on the Gold Coast, Queensland in Australia. Great 
weather conditions throughout the year in Australia, allowing for the creation of a perfect 
home using the ecovillage concept. The 207 acre site was an award winning for the best sus­
tainable community place in Queensland and The world`s best environmental development 
together with 33 different awards. Currumbin eco village consist of over 300 inhabitants and 
is still growing. Besides of ordinary residential housing village is equipped in such a facilities 
like playgrounds, local café, community hall and so forth. Thanks to the additional common 
space, residents can enjoy relaxing time in their sustainable village, through birthday parties, 
wine tasting, active sports activities like yoga or dance training. Common social visions bring 
the people together to form one great family, where no one remains an anonymous as in a 
big city.
Figure 14: The ecovillage in Currumbin,  
 
 
source: https://theecovillage.com.au
==PAGE:26==
| 15
 Most of the inhabitants have their own gardens, located in front of the house, where they 
cherish various kinds of vegetables and fruits. Up until now, a common garden has not been 
established in the village yet, where anyone can contribute to the production of on-site food, 
but the first plans already establish a special common area that will allow everybody living 
in the village to join activities in the garden and the walk-in of the food organic production. 
Beside the cafes and library the village also has its own swimming pool, the pool uses Envi­
roSwim technology, which makes it very cheap and safe to use it. Waste recycling strategies 
Reduce, Reuse and Recycling (RRR) are commonly used in the village. The Currumbin eco vil­
lage can boast of 100% water self-sufficiency. Some of the houses use rainwater and some of 
them are connected to the waterfall that collect water, recycle and then water is back around 
the village. To build your own house in this wonderful place you need to meet the code build­
ing regulations for sustainable buildings, which instead help to improve the quality of life and 
reduce the energy bills to minimum.
Figure 15: Currumbin Ecovillage, Australia, source: https://theecovillage.com.au
Currumbin Eco Village facts:
•	 Energy is required to be generated on site via roof mounted photo voltaic solar panels 
and each home feeds into the electrical grid during the day and pulls power from the 
grid at night. Most homes use very little net energy, or get a rebate from their energy 
retailer, typically if they have over 1.5 kw of solar PV. [source: https://theecovillage.com.
au/about/]
•	 Utilities: Gas (reticulated LPG) to all homes. Reticulated underground electricity grid con­
nected power supply to all lots is augmented with on Lot generation by photovoltaic 
panels. Water Tanks for all potable water supply. [source: https://theecovillage.com.au/
about/]
==PAGE:27==
| 16
•	 Water: The Ecovillage is ‘off-the-grid’ for water. It achieves water self-sufficiency, with 
household water tanks mandated for residential supply. Most have over 43,500 litres of 
storage. Waste water is treated on site with Class A+ water recycled back to all homes in 
the first 2 stages for toilet flushing and yard usage. [source: https://theecovillage.com.
au/about/]
•	 Productivity: Productive streetscaping, landscaping design and strategies on lots and 
over much of The Ecovillage site with dedicated agricultural areas including farming allot­
ments, orchard areas and woodlots. [source: https://theecovillage.com.au/about/]
6.4	 Helsinge Haveby – village of tomorrow 
The main purpose of creating such a place is to show people that they can live the same and 
benefit from the same services and attractions that the city offers them, except one that will 
be a completely new life that has so far been untested, focused on sustainable development 
and on the people needs. Village of tomorrow is the place that was created after the trans­
formation of agricultural fields into the space ready for habitation of 700 future inhabitants. 
It is also a place that is an alternative to all people for whom the crowded city is too much 
and at the same time they cannot imagine life in the countryside, but despite all of this they 
are still willing to live outside the city, if such a place can offer them everything they need.
Figure 16:  Helsinge Haveby - village of tomorrow, source: http://www.effekt.dk/work#/hno/
==PAGE:28==
| 17
The project directly responds to today’s people’s needs to find alternative for cities and sig­
nificantly increase life quality for people living outside the city. So far, people living in the city 
had the most privilege because of the place, where they live, but soon it will change. Because 
people are becoming increasingly aware of the environment and healthy lifestyle so they are 
looking for an innovative solution that allows them to live in such a place but without giving 
up what the city offers them.
Figure 17:  Helsinge Haveby - village of tomorrow, source: http://www.effekt.dk/work#/hno/
Village of tomorrow it is a winning project made by Danish Effekt architectural studio with 
collaboration of karrens+brands, Atkins, CFBO for Gribskov Kommune. The village consists of 
several social clusters that are fully integrated with the surrounding natural area. 
The main purpose of the village is to integrate the inhabitants, so most areas are shared, 
regardless of whether it is a vegetable garden or a meeting place. Each of the inhabitants is 
responsible for the place in which they live. Another idea was to create a place that allows 
you to grow vegetables and fruit, so most food products will be harvested from local crops. 
Another very important element is car sharing, each of the residents have an access to elec­
tric cars, of course, the cost is shared with other residents of the village.
Table 2: Project information, own elaboration, source: effekt.dk
Helsinge Haveby
Masterplan, residential
Helsinge, Denmark
2016
1 st prize
700 000 m2
Gribskov Kommune
karrens+brands, Atkins, CFBO
PROJECT NAME
TYPOLOGY
LOCATION
YEAR
STATUS
SIZE
CLIENT
COLLABORATORS	
	
==PAGE:29==
| 18
6.5	 The mini CO2 houses in Nyborg
The purpose of this project was to design and build 6 different family houses with the focus 
on reducing the CO2 footprint. As a result a compact and functional house with the smallest 
possible building envelope relative to volume was built. The project was focus on the follow­
ing: 
Table 3: Project information, own elaboration, source: http://
www.realdaniabyogbyg.org/projects/the-minico2-houses
UP CYCLE HOUSE
ADAPTABLE HOUSE
MAINTENANCE FREE HOUSE
==PAGE:30==
| 19
CHAPTER
3
METHODOLOGY
==PAGE:31==
| 20
7.	 Methodology
7.1	 Metrics for daylight condition assessment
7.1.1	 Daylight factor
Daylight factor (DF) is the amount of daylight available in room on a specific work plane com­
pared to the amount of daylight available outside under overcast sky condition, expresses 
in percentage (source: Architectural physics: Lighting, Hopkins, R. G., 1963). Daylight factor 
simulations are usually used for optimization of daylight condition in the design, sometimes 
within very early stage of design or during its final stage. It is one of the most common metric 
for assessment of daylight condition, which comparing to climate based simulation not re­
quired a professional approach and extensive knowledge in simulation tools. Unfortunately 
due to the fact that daylight factor simulations are covered using CIE standard overcast sky, 
factors like location of building, so at the same time also an orientation, change in climate 
over a year and realistic sky and sun conditions are not considered. Taking into account build­
ing with different rooms situated on different orientation it will not provide us with realistic 
potential of daylight for this particular case (source: The Useful Daylight Illuminance Para­
digm: A Replacement for Daylight Factors, John Mardaljevic and Azza Nabil).
Daylight factor is still using in different standards, for instance: British standard, Code of prac­
tice for daylighting. Daylight factor need to be very carefully optimised due to tendency of 
resulting in visual discomfort and therml discomfort. At higher level DF means that the space 
is considered well day lit, at the level of 5% or more, more likely will not be in need of using 
additional artificial light source over the time in the day. Daylight factor of 2%, will still need 
an additional source of light, however the space is considered as day lit (source: CIBSE, code 
for lighting, Oxford: Chartered Institution of building services engineers, source: http://www.
cibse.org/).
Figure 18: Drawing showing the values 
measured by the daylight factor method, 
reading at the same time internal and 
external illuminance levels (source: P. 
A. Andersen et al, Daylight, Energy and 
Indoor climate basic book, 2014, site 70.)
==PAGE:32==
| 21
7.1.2	 Useful daylight illuminances 
“Useful daylight illuminance (UDI) is a daylight availability metric that corresponds to the per­
centage of the occupied time when a target range of illuminance at a point in a space is met 
by daylight” (source: P. A. Andersen et al, Daylight, Energy and Indoor climate basic book, 
2014, page 74). Too much daylight illuminances at point can cause a visual discomfort, ther­
mal discomfort or both factors at once, whereas low level of daylight illuminances can make 
daily tasks be unworkable or will cause a lot of discomfort in their performance, depending 
on the usability of the room. Thus it is important to take into consideration following values. 
Method of daylight illuminances classified level of lux between 100 – 2000 as a potential for 
use of daylight. Daylight illuminances below 100 lux value are considered as insufficient ei­
ther to be the only source or to contribute significantly to artificial light. Raised up to the level 
of 100 to 500 lux, it states as effective source of illumination or in conjunction with the arti­
ficial light. Daylight illuminances between the range of 500 to 2000 lux are perceived either 
as desirable or at least tolerable and higher than 2000 lux are more likely to produce visual 
and thermal discomfort (source: The Useful Daylight Illuminance Paradigm: A Replacement 
for Daylight Factors, John Mardaljevic and Azza Nabil).
7.1.3	 Daylight Autonomy
“Daylight autonomy (DA) is a daylight availability metric that corresponds to the percentage 
of the occupied time when the target illuminance at a point in a space is met by daylight” (P. 
A. Andersen et al, Daylight, Energy and Indoor climate basic book, 2014). The specific level 
for Daylight autonomy assessment can be room oriented and found in guidelines (IESNA 
Lighting Handbook)
7.2	 Daylight - visual comfort analysis
Glare control is one of the few parameters using as an indicator for describing a visual com­
fort. A good daylight design will provide in the space a high quality glare free light, whereas a 
poor daylight design will effect in inefficient daylight level or very high level of daylight with 
a contribution of likely high level of glare. Glare can occur when the eye is forced to adapt 
rapidly to a wide range of light levels. “Glare from daylight may be caused by several potential 
sources such as the sun, bright sky and clouds, and surfaces reflecting the sun. (source: P. A. 
Andersen et al, Daylight, Energy and Indoor climate basic book, 2014). We can distinguish 
methods that are capable of use in daylight conditions: Daylight glare index (DGI) and day­
light glare probability (DGP). 
==PAGE:33==
| 22
Furthermore, it was not the aim of this project to carry the visual discomfort analysis, which 
was neglected and assumed that user will be in possession of appropriate shading systems 
to control visual comfort.
7.3	 Danish regulations
7.3.1	 Daylight 
There are very few restrictions when it comes to the daylight evaluation in Danish Building 
Regulations. For offices, as a minimum DF of 2% is required in the working plane to fulfil the 
regulations. In paragraph 7.2.4 Building class 2020 under the (6) section, it is stated: “Dwell­
ings, student accommodations, hotels, etc. In building class 2020 must have a glazed area of 
at least 15% of the floor area in habitable rooms and kitchen/family rooms if the light trans­
mittance of the glazing is higher than 0.75. If the light transmittance is lower, the glazed area 
must be increased correspondingly.”
7.3.2	 Energy performance 
Over a time energy building regulations were changed significantly in order to fulfil require­
ment for building a low energy house. In 2010, an energy performance framework for stand­
ard buildings (Class 2010), and two optional frameworks for low-energy buildings (Class 2015 
and Class 2020) were introduced in the Danish Building Code (DEA, 2013) (source: Method 
for design of low-energy type houses based on simulations of indoor environment and en­
ergy use, Lies Vanhoutteghem).
In the section 7.2.4.2 with the title of “Energy performance framework for dwellings, (…) in 
building class 2020 it is stated that building can be assumed as 2020 class building only if the 
total demand for energy supply for heating, ventilation, cooling and domestic hot water per 
m2 of heated floor area does not exceed 20 kWh/m2 per year.
7.3.3	 Indoor climate
It has been defined strategies for rooms in residential buildings constructed in accordance 
with energy classes 2015 and 2020, the indoor temperature should not exceed 26°C for more 
Figure 19:  Energy framework, Building Regulations.
==PAGE:34==
| 23
than 100 hours and 27°C for more than 25 hours during the year (DEA, 2013).
7.3.4	 Active House Specification
The specifications focus on providing guidelines to constructing an Active House: a building 
that creates healthier and more comfortable lives for its occupants without impacting nega­
tively on the climate – moving us towards a cleaner, healthier and safer world. Active House 
is a vision of buildings that create healthier and more comfortable lives for their occupants 
without impacting negatively on the climate – moving us towards a cleaner, healthier and 
safer world. The Active House vision defines highly ambitious long-term goals for the future 
building stock. The purpose of the vision is to unite interested parties based on a balanced 
and holistic approach to building design and performance, and to facilitate cooperation on 
such activities as building projects, product development, research initiatives and perfor­
mance targets that can move us further towards the vision. The Active House principles pro­
pose a target framework for how to design and renovate buildings that contribute positively 
to human health and well-being by focusing on the indoor and outdoor environment and 
the use of renewable energy. An Active House is evaluated on the basis of the interaction 
between energy consumption, indoor climate conditions and impact on the environment. 
In the Comfort section one of the subfactor is Daylight factor, described as “Adequate light­
ing and especially well-designed daylight penetration provide an array of health benefits 
to people in buildings. High levels of daylight and an optimal view out of the building posi­
tively influence people’s mood and well-being. In an Active House it is thus important that 
the building allows for optimal daylight and attractive views to the outside” (source: Active 
House specification, www.activehouse.info).
Figure 20: Active House Specification 
(source: www.activehouse.info)
==PAGE:35==
| 24
7.4	 Simulation process and model description
7.4.1	 Simulation process
The daylight assessment of presented case study was conducted using two different pro­
grammes.  First for preliminary daylight factor calculations – Velux Daylight Visualizer 2.8.4 by 
Luxion, which allows to make informed decisions on building design and provide an accurate 
level of daylight in the rooms using one step simulation. VELUX Daylight Visualizer is a profes­
sional and validated simulation tool for the analysis of daylight conditions in buildings. It is 
the most commonly known performance indicator for assessment of daylight performance in 
the building.  Following values have been used of internal reflectance of surfaces:
Final analysis of daylight were conducted using radiance based tool called Daysim. The spatial 
distribution of daylight was evaluated using a sensor point mesh created on a work plane at 
0.85 height, which correspond to a standard table height within the offset of the wall equals 
50 cm. Distance from wall is very important, giving us a chance to avoid unreasonable results 
coming from too small distance from the walls and windows – so illuminance value could be 
extremely small considering walls, whereas it could be obtained very high values of illumi­
nance considering windows. Another important factor is fact that people are usually not able 
to doing their daily activities so close in distance to wall either to windows.
Sensor points placed on a work plane can get more accurate results, each point corresponds 
to a given value, and the more points and denser sensor point mesh is the more accurate and 
precise results will appear. Unfortunately the more points we will assign to the work plane, 
the longer simulation time will be, so for larger projects, you should optimize distance be­
tween the sensor point mesh to achieve reasonable time to accomplish simulations.
Energy performance and indoor comfort simulations were carried out using VELUX Energy 
and Indoor Climate Visualizer and IDA ICE,  which are used to evaluate the performance of 
Figure 21: Materials - CEILING, reflectance: 70%, 
source: Velux Daylight Visualizer
Figure 22: Materials - FLOOR, reflectance: 30%, 
source: Velux Daylight Visualizer
Figure 23: Materials - WALL, reflectance: 50%, 
source: Velux Daylight Visualizer
==PAGE:36==
| 25
single-family houses with respect to energy, ventilation and indoor climate. It is based on a 
recognized and validated simulation engine to provide accurate and reliable results and al­
lows for hourly calculation of heating demand and operative temperatures inside the build­
ing. 
7.4.2	 Building specification
Entire input data need for calculation was strictly chosen according to the standard practice 
in Denmark and is represented in the table below.
The surface dimensions used for calculation assume construction thicknesses of 0.5 m for 
walls and 0.5 m for roofs (source: The cost efficiency of improved roof windows in two
well-lit nearly zero-energy houses in Copenhagen, Gunnlaug Cecilie et al., 2017). All the 
rooms height are equal 2.5 m in all zones.
7.4.3	 Windows design
The first rule for a good window design is to design it in the most optimised way for letting 
the most of the daylight in, preferably decreased the use of artificial light to minimum, how­
ever at the same time predict of overheating or any other visual discomfort.  There are a lot 
of ways to properly position the windows so that the design is the best when it comes to 
daylight performance. There are also many tools to help you choose the proper size of the 
window in the early stage of design, as well as point-by-point guidelines following the best 
practice. It is really important at the beginning to realize that size, orientation and glazing 
properties have very strong relationship between them, at the same time creating also a link 
Heating set point (°C)
Venting set point (°C) 
Infiltration rate (h-1) 
Maximum venting rate (h-1) 
Mechanical ventilation rate (h-1) 
Efficiency of heat recovery (-)
Internal loads, including lighting (W/m2)
U value for wall (W/m2K)
U value for roof (W/m2K)
U value for floor (W/m2K)
20
23
0.05
3
0.6
0.9
5
0.1
0.08
0.09
==PAGE:37==
| 26
with cooling and heating demand for house. 
To obtain sufficient daylight and good quality of indoor climate, the thermal properties be­
come very important matter, especially in relation to roof windows, when we do not want to 
compromise on the amount of daylit space inside the building.
 U values for windows oriented North should be low, so range of choosing qualified windows 
will be higher and there will be significantly more flexible choice on glazing to floor ratio 
taking into account condition to use high g-values in North oriented zones to reduce space 
heating demand When using a low U values for windows on the North side there is very 
small probablility tohave a negative impact on heating demand when using large floor to 
ceiling (source: Impact of façade window design on energy, daylighting and thermal comfort 
in nearly zero-energy houses, Vanhoutteghem et al., 2015).
In order to optimize window design on South oriented rooms, it is necessary to implement 
a proper shading system and very carefully design dimensions of glazing. If the window will 
have a high light transmittance, there is a wider choice for g values than when it comes to 
low value of light transmittance. “For high light transmittances and low U values, the choice 
of g-value from the perspective of space heating demand corresponds well with the g value 
Figure 24: Daylight factor vs distance from window wall, source: P. A. Andersen et al, Daylight, 
Energy and Indoor climate basic book, 2014
Figure 25: Energy balance, source: P. A. Andersen et al, Daylight, Energy and Indoor climate 
basic book, 2014
==PAGE:38==
| 27
for prevention of overheating by use of solar-coated products with close to ideal daylight effi­
ciency” (source: Impact of façade window design on energy, daylighting and thermal comfort 
in nearly zero-energy houses, Vanhoutteghem et al., 2015). Additionally, there is a change to 
use lower floor to window glazing ratio not compromising on daylight when windows have a 
high light transmittance (17-25%). The perfect fit for Southern zones are then products with 
low U values and extremely high g value to prevent overheating in the room. It is recom­
mended to distribute the glazing-to-floor ratio evenly over different facades to create better 
thermal environment and at the same time the better distribution of daylight.
Permanent solar shading glazing products with a proper daylight efficiency could be an at­
tractive solution to prevent overheating on south oriented rooms as an alternative choice for 
dynamic shading device.
7.4.4	 Occupancy schedule
Based on Danish statistic few occupancy schedule have been crated for the use in the simula­
tions programme. It is important whether residents stay at home or outside for the simula­
tion process. Because daily routine generally depends on the age, it was decided to divide it 
into few groups representing by elderly people, working adults having children, students or 
young couples, youth up to 18 years old. Following diagrams represent occupancy schedule 
following, for youth up to 18 years old, young couples and students, adults with children and 
elderly people.
Figure 26:  Visual representation of hourly schedule of a day for different age groups. Starting withe the top 
graph: or youth up to 18 years old, young couples and students, adults with children and elderly people
0:00
8:00
8:00
8:00
10:00
16:00
17:00
18:00
16:00
0:00
0:00
0:00
0:00
0:00
0:00
0:00
==PAGE:39==
| 28
7.4.5	 Weather data
The project is located in the northern part of Europe with latitude 55,6° and longitude 12,7° 
around area of Copenhagen, Denmark. Energy Plus weather data from the US Department 
of energy was used for the calculations. Additionally as an introduction for the project the 
summary of a climate data, developed with the Ecotect weather tool was conducted, to pro­
vide a general introduction to a coastal climate with small seasonal temperature amplitudes, 
relative humidity, solar radiation and also wind case study providing information of wind 
speed and prevailing wind direction. Using Ecotect solar tool, basic analysis are provided for 
case study, including visual representation of seasonal condition for solar access and varied 
diurnal at the site. In the following chapters will be provided a detailed sun path study case 
with shading simulation in order to customize window’s design.
==PAGE:40==
WIND CASE STUDY
PROJECT LOCATION:
COPENHAGEN, DENMARK
LATITUDE: 55,6°
LONGITUDE: 12,7°
Figure 27:  Visual representation of wind case study, for Dec - Feb (left corner), March - May (right corner), June - Aug (Left bottom), Sept - Nov (right bottom).
==PAGE:41==
| 30
Visual 3d and 2d representation of sun path diagram 
Figure 28: 3d and 2d representation of sun path 
diagram for Copenhagen, DK.
==PAGE:42==
| 31
7.5	 Community
Community is a linked by social ties, the collective of people belonging to a cer­
tain social and interconnected environment (source: https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Spo%C5%82eczno%C5%9B%C4%87). The most popular community is the one gathering peo­
ple because of a common area of residence, for instance the local community. 
One of the forms of housing gaining that has more and more supporters, mainly among 
young people but not only is the co-housing, which consists in sharing with other residents 
of the common zone. Spaces should be designed to encourage the integration of residents 
and to allow residents to manage their own development and contribution to building up a 
common community.
The purpose of such an operation is to activate the inhabitants, by dedicating activities that 
serve the good of the whole community. The purpose is to create a space that will activate 
the inhabitants and help to spread the cord between them. Examples of such spaces may 
be carpentry workshops or cycling workshops, which will integrate the inhabitants, but also 
serve the common initiative. An example of common space in ecovillage is the shared open 
garden where each of the inhabitants can receive their own part of the crop.
The proximity of nature has not only positive effects on the quality of air in the city, but also 
improves our well-being and positively affects our health. Creation of a greenhouse in a com­
munity is not only a great way to activate the inhabitants, but also a very good way of spend­
ing free time with children. In addition, the cultivation of vegetables or fruits can only bring 
about positive effects, such as significantly contributing to household savings and improving 
health.
Another very important element of common shared space is to create a place that will allow 
remote work without the need to go through a dozen or so kilometres every day to get to 
your destination.
Housing co-operatives or cooperatives are voluntary associations of residents of a given com­
munity, aiming at satisfying the housing needs of the community members and their families. 
(source: https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sp%C3%B3%C5%82dzielnia_mieszkaniowa). 
This is a great alternative for people who would like to take a walk in the life of a community, 
but unfortunately, they do not have the time to do their part in the greenhouse, for example, 
but would like to take advantage of the opportunity to grow organic vegetables and fruits. In 
this case, one of the responsibilities of a community of individuals will be to find the person 
who will be responsible for the tasks in question to fully satisfy the community.
==PAGE:43==
| 32
Social mix is a very relevant element in every community. It is important there are not only 
young people in the community, but also families with children, the elderly or persons with 
lower or higher income. Studies have shown that people living in income-based societies do 
not show negative characteristics typical for low-income groups (source: http://fundacjab­
lisko.pl/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/Mikslokatorski_Fundacja-Blisko_net.pdf). It is impor­
tant to keep the harmony and integration between the various social groups so that each one 
can benefit from another social group and be complementary.
7.6	 Plot
It is a very important element of a given community to commit to its proper terrain. It is 
important that the area in which the future of the community will be formed is to be able to 
afford space with vast possibilities. Urban communication is a very important element. Trains 
and buses that are close to the community will be a key transport for residents. In addition, 
as a common initiative, car sharing becomes very helpful, meaning having a few electric cars 
to accommodate all the residents. It is also important to draw attention to such key elements 
like schools, kindergardens and other amenities that will not be provided in the community.
7.7	 Water
One of the sources we should take care the most of is water. We need to pay a special atten­
tion to the water consumption when we begin to design future buildings. Exactly as buildings 
are responsible for nearly half the energy consumption, buildings are responsible for half the 
consumption of water. This means that the role of engineers and architects becomes key to 
reducing water consumption and discharging to make it more sustainable.
In spite of this, that many buildings may not have much space on the site to arrange reed 
beds that will help with the organic matter in wastewater  there are many others water-
saving solutions that could be use on a site (source: http://www.reedbeds.co.uk/page/what-
is-a-reed-bed-or-a-constructed-wetland.php). 
Water consumption in Denmark in 2009 was around 114 l per day. Between 1994 and 2009 
household consumption decreased from 50 to 41 m3 per person. The main reason for such 
a significant reduction was not only the higher awareness of environment within consumers 
but also because of exchange of toilets and showers installations together with rise in the 
“WATER IMPACTS DIRECTLY ON HEALTH AND FOOD PRODUCTION 
MAKES A LINK BETWEEN FUEL, POVERTY, AND HEALTH..”
Source: “Rough guide to sustainability 3rd edition Brian Edwards”, 2010, pp. 115
==PAGE:44==
| 33
water price (source:  DANVA:Water in figures. DANVA’s Benchmarking and Water Statistics 
2010, retrieved on April 16, 2012).
The one of the simplest method for harvesting the domestic water is to collect the rain water 
from the roof tops. Rain water collected from the roof top could be the main source for toilet 
flushing. Sometimes if it is not too air polluted could be also be used as a water provided for 
green areas and garden irrigation on a site. 
Assuming that about 200 liters of water is consumed by the average resident, about 600 lit­
ers per day is the demand of one household. Taking into consideration the above data and 
Denmark’s rainfall pattern, the storage tank of 200,000 l capacity will easily meet household 
demand over a year. Main water supply still will be required for many other activities like coo­
ing etc. But having several sources that provide us with water will reduce our overall need for 
water due to recycling. Unfortunately, beside all those positive aspects of having a tank in the 
basement, there are few cons that you must face before start to use it. First of all, the whole 
investment can be costly in terms of construction. Rain water collector of such a capacity will 
be heavy and will take most of the space, that could be used for different purpose, it its also 
Table 4: Strategies for water conservation, source: Rough guide to 
sustainability 3rd edition Brian Edwards, 2010, site 119
==PAGE:45==
| 34
only allowed in the basements that can be constructed for storage (Source: Rough guide to 
sustainability 3rd edition Brian Edwards, 2010, p. 121).
Easily method to start taking the most of usage of the water is to divide it into potable and 
non-potable water, then you can easily distinguish, which water can be reused and recycled 
without any further health problems or additional cost. This method used low flush and dual 
flush toilets to achieve the best result. For households the best practice is to use a dual flush 
toilets, depending on the need, this can easily reduce consumption of water up to 40 %.
The other solution is to use renewable technologies within the process of cleaning water us­
ing, for example, solar energy or wind energy to pump the water. 
7.8	 Materials and waste
Basically there are three main factors we need to consider while selecting building materials: 
embodied energy, performance over a lifetime, appearance and salvage-ability.
Brick offers many benefits when it comes to sustainable architecture. Aluminum used in eco 
house project in Australia is for ease of recycling and buildability.
The concept of embodied energy is one of the guidelines on which you can make a choice, 
which of the green and sustainable materials is the best to use for eco building. 
Table 5: The principles for water conservation, source: Rough 
guide to sustainability 3rd edition brian Edwards, 2010, site 120
Table 6: Comparison of embodied energy construction materials, 
source: Rough guide to sustainability 3rd edition Brian Edwards, 
2010, site 130
==PAGE:46==
| 35
The embodied energy is, for example, the energy used during extraction, transportation or 
manufacture of the material. Other equally important factors are ie.  cost of transportation of 
bulky materials i.e. stone or concrete products or very high energy processing costs connect­
ed with such a materials like Aluminium. Moreover, it also gives a detailed information cover­
ing renewable energy products like PV panels, which have very high embodied coefficient.
Embodied energy it is just a one of factor influencing selection of proper materials for con­
struction. Air, water pollution and scarcity of future supplies are among the most common 
ones’ considering, but also another factors like damage to the visual, ecological and cultural 
landscape are very important. Indeed, one of the main source of global water pollution is 
a building sector, with highlight on manufacture of materials and the construction process. 
Considering the resources needed for future generation, it is crucial to distinguished that 
according to the “Principles and practice of sustainable architectural design” in European 
directory of sustainable and energy efficient buildings, (p. 61) there are long term supplies of 
Table 7: Choice made on embodied material energy, source: Rough guide to 
sustainability 3rd edition Brian Edwards, 2010, site 130
==PAGE:47==
| 36
still in a long-term supply for future generation will lead to an architectural style creating and 
giving a big potential for highly energy efficient and resources friendly buildings.
Low energy house requires proper building materials to ensure adequate thermal insula­
tion of external walls. That experience has shown heavy buildings often require less energy 
than light construction, because of availability to store heat until the excess heat is required 
(source: Bokalders, V. (2010). How to design healthy, efficient and sustainable buildings. USA: 
Earthscan.). The greatest heat loss is a result from the fact that it penetrates through the 
walls and roof of the house, so you need to take care of them properly careful insulation thick 
layer of thermal insulation. 
Certainly house with external walls, with single layer, will not be an energy efficient house- 
unless they are made of unusual materials such as Styrofoam blocks. 
Standard wall insulation is a polystyrene or mineral wool thickness of 170 mm, more and 
more designers and investors are persuaded to use insulation layer thickness up to 200 mm 
and larger. The heated air inside the house has a tendency to float, so even more important 
is the insulation of the roof, because hot air rises towards him. The roof insulation - 200 mm 
of insulation must be considered as a minimum, but it is still also too little. 250 mm layer of 
roof insulation is a now virtually standard, in passive homes layer is used twice as thick. Heat 
transfer coefficient for external walls must not exceed 0.2 W/(m2K) for the walls, roof, and 
floor, 1.0 W/(m2K) for windows and 1.2 W/(m2K) for external doors. In practice, the basic 
standard walls are insulated with a layer of 220-240 cm of insulation, the higher category, its 
thickness reaches 40 cm. 
At home energy-saving, insulation thickness of external walls must be 200 mm or more. Also 
on the ground, floor should be insulated with a layer of similar thickness. 
According to the designing of HOUSE FOR LIFE is still very low value. The project assume fol­
lowing values: 
- walls, U= 0,10 W/m2K, 395 mm insulation 
- roof, U= 0,07 W/m2K, 540 mm insulation 
- ground level, U= 0,07 W/m2K, 500 mm insulation 
Concepts of houses with very low heat demand often assume that they will be made in the 
technology backbone - it facilitates the use of very thick insulation. 
U values are adjusted by a certain factor for a heavy walls, there always exist a possibility to 
add to the enveloped of the building a thin layer of heat-storing material to make a construc­
tion much more super-insulated and reduce energy requirements. 
Insulation is not enough to protect your home against heat loss if it is not properly positioned.
The biggest challenge for today’s engineers and architects is hot to design for waste reduc­
==PAGE:48==
| 37
tion, which means the right choice of material not because of manufacture or extraction pro­
cess but taking into account recycle content, as it the least demanding process considering 
energy demand.
Aluminium and Cooper
Both commonly recycled materials, over 2/3 of new cooper consisting of recycled old cooper 
(source: Rough guide to sustainability). Aluminium (40% is recycled) is currently cheap and 
abundant material, whereas cooper (75% is recycled) is relatively expensive and there are 
limits to the world supply.  
Structural steel
Can be reused as a new structural member or by recycling old steel at the foundry. Alu­
minium has similar advantages, but the crucial factor is very high embodied manufacturing 
energy costs for both materials.
Structural concrete
This specific material can be recycled into form of high quality aggregate, unfortunately, cost 
and dust Released during the recycling process are highly unrecommended. Worth to high­
light is that concrete is a very lasting material and give a range of benefits. Concrete normally 
doesn’t normally require a finish, so there are fewer health risks. Very important matter is to 
specify a locally produced concrete products, so transportation and embodied energy would 
be significantly reduced.
Timber construction
Timber construction is state as the one of the best environmental option. Unfortunately, be­
cause of its properties, it has very limited application for a wide range of buildings where size, 
height, climatic factors and the most important – fire risk, reduce timer´s application in the 
construction market. In the projects, where timber is a commonly used material – in smaller 
projects like housing, it provides a considerable potential for reuse. As a material with high 
energy content, after use it can be burned as a fuel or allowed to compost. Timber waste 
forms a large percentage of typical construction skips because of amount of on-site cutting 
normally employed.
Brick construction
The brick construction is one of the healthiest, most durable materials that can last for years 
without the need to care for it having the same satisfactory appearance. This particular ma­
terial can be easily recycled and repair within using phase. The individual brick can also be 
reused when the building is dismantled but only when mortar rather than cement was ap­
plied.  If the mortar joint is stronger than the brick, the only option for recycling is a low-grade 
==PAGE:49==
| 38
aggregate. Although the embodied energy component of bricks is relatively high, their ability 
to provide high thermal mass, structural support, and maintenance free finish and recycling 
means the whole bricks rarely end up in landfill (although brick waste does). 
Waste disposal is a word wide problem, first of all, they reduce the availability of new re­
sources and additionally wastes release methane contributing to the global warming and 
pollute water, soil, and air.
Recycling is a very important operation, one of the most important process for all waste 
generated from construction, which are responsible for one third of the waste that goes to 
landfills.
Nowadays there are 4 main responsible concerning waste, that we need to be aware of.
1. DESIGN OUT WASTE. The simplest example of this is to design in such a way as to indicate 
the design that will allow to prepare blocks ready to go so that there is no need to cut the 
material resulting from the modification. The need for that will increase and become more 
important when prefabrication increases.
2. SPECIFY REUSED, RECYCLED OR RECLAIMED MATERIALS. Architects and architectural en­
gineers can have a significant role in the development of this department, they could specify 
recycled materials and greatly influence the recycled market. Unfortunately, before we de­
cide on the materials we need to answer some very important questions. In spite of the fact 
that the materials could definitely reduce costs, this can also significantly contribute to the 
complexity of site operations.
3. DISSAMBLE. A very important element of the whole life cycle of a building is at the very 
end, it is a dismantled building and we need to pay a special attention to this phase so that it 
could be easily proceed. This requires an additional work regarding the decision only of type 
fixing using in construction process and type of finish given to materials. “By bolting rather 
Table 8: Three phases of the building material life cycle
==PAGE:50==
| 39
than welding steel junctions, by screwing rather than by nailing timber and by using lime 
rather than cement mortar, and the wholesomeness of recycling is opened up with little extra 
design thought” (source: Rough guide to sustainability 3rd edition Brian Edwards, 2010, site 
142)
4. Buildings flexible and capable of reuse at the end of their functional life, economical life 
of building is shorter than construction availability, so very important task is to design in such 
a way that instead of demolish building we can easily redesigned it for reuse. Contributing 
to a significant reduction of wastes, but also help to maintain visual continuity and cultural 
continuity of particular site.
The four R, was created for architects to help them in a design phase of environmentally 
friendly community. Reduce a demand for non-renewable resources and fossil fuels, water, 
minerals and agriculture land.
Reuse. Design in a functional way, so it can be easily reuse instead of demolish, even though 
if there is no chance for reuse the whole building, construction should be designed in a way 
that the elements of construction can be reuse. Reusing the whole building offers uncount­
able amount of environmental benefits. 
There are several factors, of which the building will have a larger probability to reuse:
• Good use of natural light and ventilation
• Does not contain toxic materials
• Is well constructed, preferably using “natural” materials
• Attractive spaces and character
• Culturally valued
• Access to renewable resources (wind / sun)
•	 Daylit spaces 
• Natural ventilation = indoor comfort 
• Well served by infrastructure (public transport, utilities etc)
Recycle involves reuse of the useful parts of material by extraction and remanufacture. It is 
very important to investigate a recycled potential of material, options for reuse and recycling 
and to consider environmental pollution cause by recycling process of a particular material.
Recover. Architects are now involved not only in a design phase but also in advising when the 
site is chosen for a specific project. The aim is to use the perfect spot so the pollution will be 
at a minimum stage concerning travelling to work and so forth, also it is important to take 
care of a polluted land with special treatment so can be reused.
7.9	 Energy
==PAGE:51==
| 40
When starting a building design, architects have to make very important decisions regarding 
the orientation of the building, the size of the windows, the depth or the solid. These are the 
decisions that can be made at a very early stage of design, and which are of great importance 
for energy consumption, given the fact that the newly developed buildings will be a long-
lived investment. Buildings that are not designed to interchange technologies that will allow 
them to use renewable sources and fossil fuels, will face an uncertain future. Global reserves 
of fossil fuels are around: 25 years, natural gas (40 years), coal (200 years) and coal sands 
(300 years) (source: Rough guide to sustainability 3rd edition brian Edwards, 2010, site 86). 
To make the most of alternative resources like wind, solar and geothermal, and special design 
need to be applied at the very early design stage.
Nowadays, it is easy to observe a trend showing an increase in the demand for electricity 
consumption and decreasing numbers for energy for heating. In Denmark, electricity con­
sumption in housing rose by around 10 per cent since 1975, at the same time the energy 
consumption for heating decreased by 65 per cent.
Very often there is a solution using “wasted energy”, which comes from gas or coal at the 
power station for district heating. In Denmark, around 60 per cent of houses are using a 
district heating from combined heat and power (CPH) plants reduce at the same time CO2 
emission per unit of power to around 1.8. The mechanism is very simple, CPH relies on the 
distribution of waste heat through very tight pipes, which are usually located under the road .
Electrical energy is essential in households, so there is an opportunity for buildings to be able 
to generate electricity using alternative sources like solar or wind. Renewable resources can 
be used as energy for cooling, heating or ventilation. Photovoltaic panels appear here as a 
solution for such a dilemma, converting directly sunlight into direct current. The total energy 
of sun exceeds the global demand for energy, but the problem is at the moment when it is 
necessary to properly interweave design, accumulate energy and use it neatly. Difficulties ap­
pear early in the design phase, so the advantage of renewable energy sites for development 
has to be very carefully selected with access to renewable supplies like wind, sun or water. It 
is important to consider available resources and the method of exploitation.
A south facing slope, proper orientation of building and location on a site, always guarantee 
a benefit in the form of generating energy through a large amount of sunlight. Solar power is 
commonly use in household as a provider for heating, lighting or ventilation using PV panels 
to generate electricity or to heat up water collectors mounted at the top of the roof. Interest­
ing fact is that almost 20 per cent of all solar panels are produced by larges oil companies 
like BP or Shell. Passive solar energy can be very effective using the south face of the building 
==PAGE:52==
| 41
with atria or floor to ceiling windows with ducting of the heated air to the colder part of the 
building, thus providing enough energy to meet about 40 per cent of primary energy needs 
for a typical household. For the best performance, heat needs to be kept in a building of high 
thermal capacity, air tight and well insulated.
Orientation of building on east-west axis for the best potential daylight (gives long north 
and south elevations). Height for stack-effect ventilation. Solar control by means of external 
screens and internal blinds, use thermal capacity to moderate temperatures.
A very important feature is the orientation of the building. Suggesting proper orientation of 
the building is very important from the point of energy efficiency. Through increasing the 
surface envelope of the south side of the house, proper positioning of the object relative 
to the world, including the zoning of rooms or the visibility of glazing on the south side can 
greatly reduce the cost of heating, hence the subsequent use of the house. There are many 
structural solutions to ensure energy efficiency of passive solar heating system, for instance 
on the south facade are designed large windows and various outbuildings glass, glazed halls 
and terraces. Well-designed can act as solar collectors directly heating the air in the house.
Even through the most modern windows passes through more heat than the walls. However, 
in contrast to the opaque walls, windows allow you to reach the sunlight into the interior of 
the house. Therefore, you should think about it, that there were mainly from the south. From 
the east and west from solar heat, gains are not as big as from the sun in the morning and in 
the evening is below the horizon. On the north elevation, the best is to resign of the many 
Table 9: Use of PV technologies, source: Rough guide to sustain­
ability 3rd edition brian Edwards, 2010, site 97
Figure 29:  Solar gain due to season, source: 
Bokalders, V. (2010). How to design healthy, 
efficient and sustainable buildings. USA: 
Earthscan
==PAGE:53==
| 42
windows because here the benefits of sun exposure cannot count and increased heat loss, it 
is also worth to remember about shutters or blinds, which during the day prevent overheat­
ing of the room and during the night protect against the loss of energy. 
Practically unending and the largest source of energy is the sun. To use the sun as a source of 
heating for your home, you need to situate the building so that as long as the sun fell on the 
greatest part of it, while the opposite wall with a lot less surface area will be located to the 
north - where profits from the sun does not occur. 
Of course, often due to the shape and location of the plot is not possible, that the highest 
elevation was located on the south side. A deviation of 15 degrees does not have a noticeable 
effect on the amount of heat reaching the home. 
Arrangement of rooms
From the north, the size and number of glass must be reduced to a minimum. On the south 
side, at least part of the rooms have to be exposed to south, mainly living room and dining 
room, the mainly habitable and living spaces. From the north, there are only those rooms 
of the auxiliary function - for example, storage, dressing room, technical room, garage- as to 
create a buffer zone. The buffer zone creates rooms with temperature lower than 16°C. They 
create so called zone, protected other rooms from fast cooling.
Speaking of buffer zone, worth mentioning is the temperature zones. In homes with divi­
sions, there is a clear differentiation of the temperature and there is a risk of overheating the 
southern zone while northern areas need reheating. To ensure comfort, then fans should be 
used to enforce the flow of air from the area exposed to the sun to shady, but this solution is 
not preferred because of the power consumption and fan noise. 
The inner space of the house should be primarily functional, but if you want to pay less for 
heating, it is taken to ensure that at the same time is consistent with the principles of zon­
Figure 30:  The orientation of rooms, source: 
Podrecznik projektowania architektonicznego 
E. Neufert, wyd. Arkady
==PAGE:54==
| 43
ing- the building should be separated the three zones where the temperature will be: in the 
first 16 °C and less (should there be utility rooms), the second from 18 to 20 °C (bedrooms, 
kitchen), and the third from 20 to 22 °C (living room, bathroom), grouping - the room at the 
same required temperature should be located next to each other or one above the other. 
orientation - the location of the areas of the world should allow them for direct entry of sun­
light, so when using it, the sun helped to maintain thermal comfort. If there is a need to re­
duce the heat losses, there is also a need to reduce the heated volume. There is a possibility 
to apply different range of temperature for different zones, so the division the construction 
into the temperature zones according to the daylight factor, orientation etc. has to be done.
Passive solar heating
The most important thing is to build with material accumulated heat. The heat in the room is 
needed not only when the sun shines. It is important to house the heat accumulated, 
because otherwise after sunset or even in cloudy weather at home immediately there would 
be a deficit of heat. In the houses made of brick, the heat accumulators are walls, floor, and 
ceiling. A particularly important role is played by the wall opposite the south-facing windows. 
It should ensure that the right materials were accumulated heat, for example, solid brick, 
concrete or stone - and it’s also in the homes of wood or skeletal. When the sun no longer 
directly penetrate into the house, the wall becomes a heater - it will radiate heat stored in 
it. If it is solid, it is enough even for a few hours of heating. The easiest way to obtain the 
free heat directly from the sun are south facing windows. The other ways such a using glass 
on the south façade, installing a heavy heat-regulating mass, designing for easily distributed 
heat and regulating of the solar radiation with usage of deciduous trees or blinds (Bokalders, 
V. (2010). How to design healthy, efficient and sustainable buildings. USA: Earthscan.).
Figure 31:  Advantage of passive solar heat, (A) south 
facing window, (B) Indirect gain, (C) solar walls, (D) 
constructio of heavy walls connected with glazing 
outside, source: Bokalders, V. (2010). How to design 
healthy, efficient and sustainable buildings. USA: 
Earthscan 
==PAGE:55==
| 44
CHAPTER
4
SUSTAINABILITY 
VILLAGE /
CASE STUDY
==PAGE:56==
| 45
8.	 Design of low rise dwellings as a part of sustainable village concept
8.1	 Concept design
For the purposes of the work, the following assumption was made, it was assumed that there 
are no existing residential properties in neighbourhood of the house, in connection with, 
there are no shadows and other obstacles which would have affected or interfere with access 
to the daylight, referring to that fact, it was decided to neglect the study on profile of shad­
ows with details, only sun path case study was provided for an investigation. The essential 
elements necessary to carry out a proper analysis of the building location and orientation are 
annual sunlight, area condition, and correlation with other residences, prevailing winds and 
the climate zone.
The goal of creating a new concept of housing is to create an ecovillage with low raised dwell­
ings. Each of the homes in the ecovillage has its own private winter garden with possibility 
of extension, where all kinds of vegetables and fruit are available throughout the year. This 
place is an extension of the house, breaking a barrier between interior and the exterior en­
vironment, giving an inhabitant a chance to spend outdoor time being indoors, which is par­
ticularly important for Nordic climate, where are rather tough summers and winters, limiting 
outdoor time and thus a winter garden is a space that you could use throughout the whole 
year. Besides of a private space, where everyone can grow their own food, there is also a 
common green house, created for a purpose of social integration, growing more sophisticat­
ed kinds of vegetables and fruits, which is conducted by professionals. This space act not only 
as a food hub and a weekend market, where everyone can purchase organic products, but 
also its extension- is a space, where people can work remotely being surrounded by nature, 
reducing transportation time, air pollution and because of high level of daylight and perfect 
indoor climate it makes the work space more efficient and comfortable. During the process 
of a concept design of ecovillage, it was decided to create 3 different typologies of building, 
each with special purpose and with specially integrated winter garden and windows accord­
ing to the orientation. First building with flat roof of the total area of 140m2  was designed 
with special purpose for elderly people, second building with two slope roof with the total 
area of 225m2 and with the possibility of expanding the space almost doubling the area (sec­
ond floor/attic) for young couples expecting a baby and the last building with the total area 
of 170m2 downstairs and additional 50m2 distributed over a loft feature just below the roof.
Typology  I
Typology  II
Typology  III
Figure 32:  Representa­
tion of shape and inhabit­
ants proposal for different 
typologies.
==PAGE:57==
| 46
Winter garden, is inseparable part of the process of creating Ecovillage. First of all, it allows 
for growing food by owner, but also allows to let more light into the building, and last but not 
least combine a self sustaining village with semi urban living in the most perfect way.
Winter garden can also act as a common space. Integrating atrium or winter garden with 
building is a nice idea not only to open up the roof for more daylight in case of atrium but also 
to add ventilation to the building and remove the barrier which separates us from nature, 
this particular strategy allows us to feel very strongly connected with nature and external 
environment, especially in winter when there is a very limited time we could spend outdoor 
and at the same time we feel separated from the environment. The main idea was to design 
an open space plan inside buildings for easy communication between different spaces and to 
distribute daylight evenly for the whole space and provide as much daylight as it is possible, 
reducing use of artificial light to minimum. 
Design of ecovillage was started with the analysis of typical row house estate, where all the 
buildings being placed next to each other sharing adjacent walls in common are losing the 
spirit of community, inhabitants become totally strangers for each other. The aim of ecovil­
lage is to integrate between the inhabitants and also control the placement of appropriate 
social groups in appropriate homes by creating a purpose-oriented social mix. 
At the beginning of the design, there is a need to get rid of the typical row lines and change 
it into clusters. By breaking barriers between the lines, we break barriers between the inhab­
itants, depriving them of an isolated private area, we encourage them to social integration. 
Depending on the size of the community and area, the cluster will contain different numbers 
of houses. In this particular example it was decided to arrange 12 houses as one cluster creat­
ing a social mix of elderly people, families with children and young couples 
Each of the homes has been placed in the sun plan to highlight the private space and specially 
separated by buildings a common space to show the social integration with other residents. 
Each building adopts a different deviation from the south to investigate the influence of ori­
entation on designed buildings, but at the same time to take advantage of the sun in the
Figure 33:  Stages of the design, own elaboration.
BREAK THE ROW HOUSES 
LINE
CREATE SMALLER COMMU­
NITY
CREATE SOCIAL CLUSTERS
+
=
==PAGE:58==
| 47
Very flexible design allows for the creation of different sizes of communities consisting of dif­
ferent typologies depending on the area to be developed. In this case as a sample of the vil­
lage, a cluster of 12 homes, 3 different types, was created. Depending on the size of terrain, 
Various distances are acceptable between homes until they comply with building standards.
Development can be fulfilled with different scales and different flexibility, starting with village 
consists of one building to several clusters. 
Figure 35:  Development in various scales and stages.
Figure 34:  Sun plan of the village, own elaboration.
winter garden. Special attention was paid to the West side of the circle, where the heaviest 
winds are expected.
The picture below represents the proposal for a design of a cluster, which is a part of eco 
village. For this particular case, the centrally located area is split between green house (ca 
300m2), place for electric cars (320m2)), green house extended to the co-working space 
(300m2), few aquaponic systems (each of 40m2) located in front of green houses and special
==PAGE:59==
| 48
8.2	 Shading
To investigate the problem of shading from neighboring building and from the buildings that 
were proposed as a development in the central part of the cluster, depending on the posi­
tion of the sun - a sun path study was conducted. Using Ecotect solar tool, basic analysis are 
provided for case study, including visual representation of seasonal condition for solar access 
and varied diurnal at the site. Low daily access to solar radiation causing at very limited ac­
cess to daylight. All the solar studies were carried on with taking into account the extreme 
dates of solstices and equinoxes (December 21st, March/September 21st, June 21st at 9 am, 
noon and 3 pm). Distance between buildings is about 25 - 30 m. In the further part of the 
work a more accurate analysis of the selected building has been carried out, depending on 
the season we can see different interaction between sun and a building, this allows to cus­
tomize window`s design. Building selected with the black square, it is the building selected 
for the further investigation.
area between green houses designated for common dinners or morning lunch (distance be­
tween green houses is 20m). Each of the houses spread around the circle  has an its semi-
private area in front and in the back of the house (ca 350m2) in the front  and ca 300m2 in 
the back , which various from house to house). The radius of the inner circle is ca 120m. The 
spacing between  the buildings is around 26-30 m.
Figure 36:  Visual representation for eco village design.
Electric cars spot
Aquaponics system
Common area
Green house
Green house with separated 
space for working remotely
==PAGE:60==
SUN PATH CASE STUDY 1
PROJECT LOCATION:
COPENHAGEN, DENMARK
LATITUDE: 55,6°
LONGITUDE: 12,7°
DECEMBER
JUNE
MARCH / SEPTEMBER
/ SELECTED CLUSTER_ECOVILLAGE 1
9:00 AM
12:00
3:00 PM
Figure 37:  Visual representation of sun path case study for a cluster. * Building selected with the black square, it is the building selected for the further investigation.
==PAGE:61==
| 50
8.3	 Building design - overview of the selected building.
Within one cluster we can distinguished 4 the same types of homes of 3 different typologies, 
which makes a community of 12 houses gathered around one common area, aimed at creat­
ing a social mix, but at the same time give an opportunity to find your place within your social 
group. Each of the houses is placed facing different orientation. All the builidngs were de­
signed using the same methodology as a guideline, the same properties were used for all of 
the buildings and the same strategies were involved for overheating and sustainable design.
For this special case, for the further investigation, it was decided to choose one of the flat 
building, a house occupied by elderly people, oriented 30° from South from typology I. The 
building has 120 m2 distributed over open floor plan on the ground floor for easy communi­
cation between different zones and integrated with the building - winter house, that has ad­
ditionally space of 20 m2. Building was design as a simple quadratic shape with winter garden 
as an add on. The principal in here is to design in a way to let in the adequate amount of light, 
distributed simultaneously over the whole space taking into account position of the sun over 
the seasons, needs of the residence and energy together with visual optimization. 
+
=
Elderly couple
Integrated winter garden
TYPOLOGY I
Ecovillage concept
120 m2
20 m2
140 m2
8.3.1	 Sun path investigation and basic information on project
On the sun path case study (page 49) we can easily notice there are no shadow interrup­
tions that come from other buildings, the only time that will be possible any disturbance its 
winter period in the morning and then again in the afternoon. On the next page, all useful 
information on design was provided. Additionally for the sun interaction with the building 
throughout the whole year, the sun path case study was provided presents sun at its extreme 
position over the year. This investigation was conducted to obtain the best possible design 
through the process of setting up windows.
Figure 38:  Visual representation of investigated typology number I.
==PAGE:62==
Bed room
Toilet
Main area
Winter garden
Figure 39:  Basic floor plan for typology I [m], before setting up the windows.
Figure 40:  Sun plan of the village, in orange -building chosen for investigation
Zone 1
Zone 2
Zone 3
Zone 4
Total
Main area
Bed room
Toilet
Winter garden
75 m2
35 m2
90 m2
21 m2
140 m2
Table 10: Project information, zones.
==PAGE:63==
SUN PATH CASE STUDY
PROJECT LOCATION:
COPENHAGEN, DENMARK
LATITUDE: 55,6°
LONGITUDE: 12,7°
DECEMBER
JUNE
MARCH / SEPTEMBER
/ TYPOLOGY I
9:00 AM
12:00
3:00 PM
Figure 41:  Visual representation of sun path case study investigating shading for the selected building.
==PAGE:64==
| 53
8.4	 Windows and daylight performance
As we should always consider daylight as a primary source of light in the building through­
out 3 different cases, the improvement of daylighting in the house have been studied. Roof 
windows with considerably high thermal properties can bring enough light to the home and 
make indoor climate comfortable. Moreover there is a strong link between windows` design 
parameters and their effect on daylighting and thermal indoor environment (source: Impact 
of façade window design on energy, daylighting and thermal comfort in nearly zero-energy 
houses, Vanhoutteghem L. et al, 2015) which couldn’t be neglected. It has been proven that 
using properly designed dimensions of windows together with ideal solar-control coating (g-
value as close to half of the light transmittance of the glazing as possible) can prevent over­
heating, even in rooms exposed to intense sunlight (source: The cost efficiency of improved 
roof windows in two well-lit nearly zero-energy houses in Copenhagen, Energy and Buildings, 
G.C.J. Skarning, C.A. Hviid, S. Svendsen, 2017).
Following the statement choosing on dimensions of windows and setting up the windows 
procedure was precisely planned. At the beginning, the house plan was divided into 3 rooms. 
Bed room, bathroom and master room, which is a multifunctional space that meet the func­
tions of living room as well as kitchen and dining room, so it is the most demanding area 
according to daylight performance. Additionally, as an optional choice is the possibility to 
have the extra space, acts also as a winter garden (see chapter 8.3). To set up windows for 
a particular floor plan, first of all it was decided, which of the spaces need the best daylight 
performance according to the tasks, which will be performed in the particular space and how 
much light they will need to be feasible. 
So for each space, which needs to be daylit it was decided on individual daylight levels need­
ed for different activities, and with connection to this, the proper glazing area was distin­
guished in the simulation process and the corresponding parameters have been selected for 
orientation and additionally as the last, solar control coating was implemented. It is crucial 
to remember to apply as high g factor as it is possible for the north oriented glazing. Another 
very important aspect was the attention to the facade windows that provided the correct 
Figure 42:  Demend for unlight within different 
areas.
==PAGE:65==
| 54
level of light at 4 to 5m, without leading to overheating caused by oversized windows, of 
course it depends on a few other factors, but it is a common practice for windows design. 
Three different scenarios were conducted using Velux Daylight Visualizer as a tool for pre­
liminary evaluation of daylight performance in the building. Both scenarios were carried out 
using the same materials properties, commonly used for simulation in Scandinavian and us­
ing the same percentage target of glazing to floor ration of 15%. In the first scenario only 
facade windows were investigated. The window area amounts to 15% of the floor area and 
windows to be spread evenly are placed on four facades. After preliminary simulations in 
Velux Daylight Visualizer, it was clearly visible, which spaces in the building were left with 
insufficient level of daylight. During the second scenario, different approach was adopted. 
The aim was to stick to the same target of glazing to floor ratio of 15%, but improve daylight 
performance through the process of adding roof windows as a substitution for some of the 
facade windows, which have been selected as the most inefficient for given conditions. Third 
scenario presents the best one according to the daylight performance with additionally used 
roof and facade windows, resulting in 23% of glazing to floor ratio. In all cases the same win­
dows with the same performance have been used. All simulations were conducted with no 
additional shading devices and neglected possible obstacles around building. For first, sec­
ond  and third scenario special work planes have been created with the 0.5 m perimeter from 
the walls around the work plane for more accurate results. For all the simulations following 
values were used: for facade windows U-value=0.5 and transmittance of 0.7, g=0.5 and for 
roof windows transmittance of 0.7 and U-value of 0.58.
8.4.1	 Case 1
The first scenario depicts 12 windows arranged over four facades. On the north-eastern fa­
çade there are only 2 windows with the total size of 2.146 m2, on the southeastern facade 
there are 2 windows, one designed for the hall (total area of 1.502 m2 ) and the second one as 
a window for morning sunshine in the bed room of  total area equals to 1.322 m2, the south-
western facade is the one with the highest amount of glazing, having double wing glazing 
doors with total area of 6.574 m2, which in the further investigation will act as a link with the 
winter garden and additionally small windows in the bed room giving a desire privacy on the 
north-wester facade (0.87 m2) there are also 2 windows of total area 2.146 m2 in the main 
area and one floor to ceiling window allowed for nice view and a little bit more daylight in 
the bed room (1.814 m2). All the windows are place at 85 cm height, which corresponds to a 
standard table height so we can obtain a better view to the outside and more daylight, which 
covers working areas. Only windows in the bed room are placed at 2 m to ensure a privacy 
for residents. The total glazing area in the main room equals 12.114 m2 thus the glazing to 
floor ratio is 16% and in the bed room, where the glazing area reached 5.329 m2  the glazing 
to floor ratio is equal 15%. As a result, both zones could be considered as daylit, but artificial 
==PAGE:66==
| 55
Average daylight factor
Median daylight factor
Minimum daylight factor
Maximum daylight factor
Above value of 2
Above value of 3
3.22
2.61
0.80
15.99
64 %
38.84 %
Calculation on zones / zone 2
Average daylight factor
Median daylight factor
Minimum daylight factor
Maximum daylight factor
Above value of 2
Above value of 3
2.76
1.85
0.08
19.97
46 %
30.78 %
Calculation on zones / zone 1
Figure 43: Daylight factor pre-evaluation with Velux Daylight Visualizer
Table 11: Daylight levels evaluated by Velux Daylight Visualizer using zones.
ZONE 1
ZONE 2
lighting still be needed for visual tasks, moreover residents are elderly people with special 
need. The higher daylight factor, the more daylight is available in the room. It is easily notice­
able, that in some spaces in the building, where there is a negligible level of light, need to be 
improved. The daylight parameters in the zones are presented in the figure below.
==PAGE:67==
| 56
Figure 44: Daylight factor evaluation for zone 1 with Velux Daylight Visualizer
Figure 45: Daylight factor evaluation for zone 2 with Velux Daylight Visualizer
4 %
4 %
==PAGE:68==
| 57
8.4.2	 Case 2
The second scenario depicts also 12 windows arranged over the four facades and roof to en­
sure plenty of natural light and additionally creating a source for natural ventilation. 
Roof windows provide not only a wider variation of light levels (source: Johnsen K., Dubois 
M., Grau K., Assessment of daylight quality in simple rooms, 2006), but also taking into ac­
count the same condition, the roof windows are capable to provide a particular space with 
twice as much daylight as facade windows (source: P. A. Andersen et al, Daylight, Energy and 
Indoor climate basic book, 2014)
On the north-eastern façade there is only one window, so the area was reduced to obtain 
the total size of 1.07 m2, on the southeastern facade there are still 2 windows, one for the 
hall (total area of 1.502 m2 ) and the second one as a window for morning sunshine in the 
bed room of  total area equals to 1.322 m2, the south-western facade is still the one with the 
highest amount of glazing, although the double glazing doors were reduced to one wing with 
total area of 3.2 m2, which in the further investigation will act as a link with the winter garden 
and additionally all the small windows in the bed room were reduced, but there is one roof 
window of total area equals 1 m2 giving the same level of privacy, but at the same time pro­
vide twice more daylight in the room and one floor to ceiling window allowed for nice view 
and a little bit more daylight in the bed room (1.814 m2). On the north-western facade there 
are still 2 windows of total area 2.146 m2  in the main area. All the windows are place at 85 cm 
height, which corresponds to a standard table height so we can obtain a better view to the 
outside and more daylight, which covers working areas. As a substitution for reduced glaz­
ing area, four new roof windows have been placed over the zone 2 and zone 1 also a small 
Figure 46: Comparison of daylight along the depth of the room using different 
types of windows, (source: P. A. Andersen et al, Daylight, Energy and Indoor 
climate basic book, 2014)
==PAGE:69==
| 58
roof window was placed in the toilet ensuring additional ventilation and source of light of 
total area of 0.64m2. Over the main area 2 additional windows have been added, one located 
centrally over the hall of the area equals 1.872m2  and the other one located centrally in the 
kitchen with the total area of 2.25m2 . When implementing a new design for windows, special 
attention was paid to adjust linings in a way that the distribution of the daylight will be at the 
highest level.
The total glazing area in the main room after renovation equals 11,879 m2 , which give us a 
number slightly lower than 12.114 m2 (area of glazing used previously) thus the glazing to 
floor ratio is around 16% and in the bed room, where the glazing area reached 5.329 m2  now 
after substitution the area is 5.459 m2. 
Main room area - zone nr. 1 doubled the target previously reached by daylight factor from 
2.76 to 5.08, mainly because of the roof windows that are very efficient and flexible source 
of daylight. Although the glazing area was slightly reduced, but the primary role here is the 
appropriate setting up the windows, additionally to this simulation to obtain more accurate 
results, the sensor point file was created for each zone with 50 cm offset of the wall, using 
plug in for sketchup su2ds, allow for export the sensor point files. Zone 1 could be now be 
consider as very strong daylit space, with minimum use of additional source of light over the 
day, but at the same time this level of daylight can lead to visual discomfort and overheat­
ing, when the adequate actions would not be taken. In the zone 2, it can be easily observed 
a slightly improvement form 3.22 to 3.96, additionally one window was implemented in the 
toilet, thus the daylight factor obtained in this room is 2.5, which can provide with well lit 
space for the daylight hours, of course there will be still a need for use an artificial light, but 
not in such a high demand. The daylight parameters in the zones are presented in the figure 
below.
==PAGE:70==
| 59
Average daylight factor
Median daylight factor
Minimum daylight factor
Maximum daylight factor
Above value of 2
Above value of 3
3.96
3.65
0.60
15.73
75 %
59.35 %
Calculation on zones / zone 2
Using work plane
Average daylight factor
Median daylight factor
Minimum daylight factor
Maximum daylight factor
Above value of 2
Above value of 3
5.08
4.74
0.66
18.15
86 %
73.90 %
Calculation on zones / zone 1
Using work plane
Average daylight factor
Median daylight factor
Minimum daylight factor
Maximum daylight factor
Above value of 2
Above value of 3
2.50
2.42
0.99
3.64
71 %
27.32 %
Calculation on zones / zone 3
Figure 47: Daylight factor evaluation with Velux Daylight Visualizer
ZONE 1
ZONE 2
==PAGE:71==
| 60
Average daylight factor
Median daylight factor
Minimum daylight factor
Maximum daylight factor
Above value of 2
Above value of 3
5.71
5.35
0.91
14.72
89.10 %
77.73 %
Calculation on zones / zone 1
Using sensor points
Figure 48: Daylight factor evaluation with Velux Daylight Visualizer, zone 1
Figure 49: Overview for the sensor point file , zone 1.
==PAGE:72==
| 61
Figure 50: Overview for the illuminance rendering for the 
worst scenario in December, overcast sky at 12:00 , zone 
1.
Figure 51: Overview for luminance simulation during 
21st of June at 12:00, zone 1.
Figure 52: Daylight autonomy (DA) simulation after imple­
mentation of roof windows using Daysim, including 0.5m 
offset of walls.
Daylight autonomy simulation in Daysim for the zone 1 shown that 57% of all illuminance 
sensors have a daylight factor of 2% or higher, which is slightly lower that results for simula­
tions conducted in Velux daylight visualizer. For the whole work plane 37% of all illuminance 
sensors have a daylight factor of 2% or higher. The daylight autonomy for all core work plane 
sensors lie between 1% and 83%. Continuous Daylight Autonomy (DA) Analysis: The mean 
continuous daylight autonomy is 60% for active occupant behavior. The percentage of sen­
sors with a DA_MAX > 5% is 18% for active occupant behavior.
==PAGE:73==
| 62
Figure 53: The Useful Daylight Indices for the 
Lighting Zone DA<100
Figure 54: The Useful Daylight Indices for the 
Lighting Zone DA100-2000
Figure 55: The Useful Daylight Indices for the 
Lighting Zone DA>2000
==PAGE:74==
| 63
8.4.3	 Case 3
Finally the third scenario depicts also 12 windows arranged over four facades and roof to im­
prove daylight conditions from the previous case. The simulations have been also conducted 
using DIVA for Rhino, to obtain the most accurate results, was evaluated based on a sensor 
point grid with positioned 0.85 m, grid covered only useful floor space in the house. Addition­
ally, daylighting simulations was also conducted for the second scenario to have an optimal 
comparison between cases. For improvement daylight performance it was decided to set up 
3 more windows of total area equals 5.314 m2, thus the new glazing to floor ratio is 23%. 
Figure 56: New arrangement of windows
2.25 m2
1.56 m2
1.50 m2
In the new arrangement of the windows on the north-eastern façade we can observed one 
facade window of total area 1.56 m2  and the other one equals 1.50 m2 , on the southeastern 
facade there are still 2 windows, one designed for the hall (total rea of 1.502 m2 ) and the 
second one as a window for morning sunshine in the bed room of  total area equals to 1.322 
m2, the south-western facade was left with no further changes. On the north-western facade 
there are still 2 windows of total area 2.146 m2  in the main area. All the windows are place 
at 85 cm height. As an addition for the roof windows a new roof window was placed over the 
zone 1 with the total area of 2.25 m2 . The total glazing area in the main room after renova­
tion equals 16.704 m2 , thus the glazing to floor ratio is around 23% . The daylight parameters 
in the zones are presented in the figure below.
==PAGE:75==
| 64
Average daylight factor
Median daylight factor
Minimum daylight factor
Maximum daylight factor
Above value of 2
Above value of 3
8.16
7.71
1.12
24.96
97 %
91.04 %
Calculation on zones / zone 1
Using work plane
Figure 57: Daylight factor evaluation with Velux Daylight Visualizer
==PAGE:76==
| 65
Figure 58: Overview for the illuminance rendering for the 
worst scenario in December, overcast sky at 12:00 , zone 
1.
Figure 59: Overview for luminance simulation during 
21st of June at 12:00, zone 1.
Figure 60: Overview for the illuminance rendering for the 
worst scenario in December, overcast sky at 12:00 , zone 
1.
Figure 61: Overview for luminance simulation during 
21st of June at 12:00, zone 1.
==PAGE:77==
| 66
Using Diva for Rhino simulations were conducted with the division for the zones. After im­
porting model from sketch up, all the materials were assigned to a chosen material from the 
preliminary defined list. Following results have been obtained. 
For previous case, simulations have been conducted with following results: Daylight Factor 
(DF) Analysis: 47% of all illuminance sensors have a daylight factor of 2% or higher. The mean 
daylight autonomy is 50% for active occupant behaviour. The percentage of the space with 
a daylight autonomy larger than 50% is 58% for active occupant behaviour. Continuous Day­
light Autonomy (DA) Analysis: The mean continuous daylight autonomy is 68% for active oc­
cupant behaviour. The percentage of sensors with a DA_MAX > 5% is 26% for active occupant 
behaviour.
Useful Daylight Illuminance (UDI): The percentage of the space with a UDI<100-2000lux larg­
er than 50% is 88% for active occupant behaviour. For the new arrangement of windows 
the following results were obtained: 64% of the floor area for the new layout of windows is 
considerate daylit, (DA300lux[50%])=64%. The mean daylight autonomy is 55% for active oc­
cupant behaviour. The percentage of the space with a daylight autonomy larger than 50% is 
64% for active occupant behaviour. Continuous Daylight Autonomy (DA) Analysis: The mean 
continuous daylight autonomy is 72% for active occupant behavior. The percentage of sen­
sors with a DA_MAX > 5% is 31% for active occupant behaviour. Useful Daylight Illuminance 
(UDI): The percentage of the space with a UDI<100-2000lux larger than 50% is 91% for ac­
tive occupant behaviour. Daylight Factor (DF) Analysis: 53% of all illuminance sensors have a 
daylight factor of 2% or higher.
It has been proven that using properly designed dimensions of windows together with ideal 
solar-control coating (g-value as close to half of the light transmittance of the glazing as pos­
sible) can prevent overheating, even in rooms exposed to intense sunlight (source: The cost 
efficiency of improved roof windows in two well-lit nearly zero-energy houses in Copenha­
gen, Energy and Buildings, G.C.J. Skarning, C.A. Hviid, S. Svendsen, 2017). Due to the special 
attention given to the solar control using dynamic solar shading, solar coatings with the g 
value equals half of the transmittance value and cooling by natural stack ventilation through­
out the use of roof windows the overheating is not anymore, a problem. Furthermore, the 
aim of this case was to distribute glazing evenly over the south and north facing façade, in 
contrast to the commonly used practice. 
It is recommended to use solar solar-control coating as an alternative to dynamically con­
trolled solar shading in south-oriented rooms and windows with high g-value for the north-
oriented rooms (Method for design of low-energy type houses based on simulations of in­
door environment and energy use, Lies Vanhoutteghem, 2014).
==PAGE:78==
| 67
From the conducted studies on the comparison between using the solar-control coating and 
dynamic external shading was revealed that the glazing with adequate solar-control coating 
could be much more user-friendly, cost-effective and more efficient solution in contrast to 
dynamically controlled external shading mechanism, very appreciate in particular in the win­
dows, which are directed towards the southern orientation (Method for design of low-ener­
gy type houses based on simulations of indoor environment and energy use, Lies Vanhout­
teghem, 2014). The most popular of solar control coatings is a 70/35 solar control coating 
which maintains the unit’s light transmission at 70% for a natural appearance whilst reducing 
the G factor of the glass unit to 35%. Following up the methodology to avoid overheating 
for windows oriented to South, the solar-control coating have been used, whereas for north 
sided windows, dynamically controlled external shading mechanism. It was assumed that all 
the additional heat gains that would have been able to reach the dwelling, while leaving the 
appropriate type of sun blinds down, was considered minor, so it was neglected during the 
case. 
It is also crucial to mention, that when implementing a new design for windows, special at­
tention was paid to adjust linings in a way that the distribution of the daylight will be at the 
highest level. Below it is a visual representation of roof windows linings, flat roof on the right 
and installed on the kerb, NW- oriented second type of window.
8.5	 Thermal performance
As an addition for daylight study the energy calculation was conducted for the building. Dur­
ing simulations, the heating threshold point was set at 20˚C, whereas the venting was set 
to start when zone temperatures exceed 23˚C. In Danish homes the mechanical cooling is 
usually not installed, which is a common practice for buildings and electricity and lighting 
Figure 62: Visual representation of two roof windows linings in the building.
71,5 °
25 °
==PAGE:79==
| 68
are not the part of the requirement for described target of energy use. Summing up, for the 
residential buildings in Denmark, the main factor defining energy use is only a space heating 
demand. For the new target, valid from 2020, the annual energy target is no more than 20 
kWh/m2. Conducted simulations shown that for the studied case, it is approximately 15 kWh/
m2 fulfilling at the same time the requirements for 2020 buildings. 
To have a comfortable indoor climate without overheating no more than 100 hours, where 
the operative temperature exceeds 26˚C should be allowed, otherwise it states for overheat­
ing of the space. This 3-zone model do not have critical zones, the sufficient daylight is hardly 
to achieve and the building is an open plan space. With a standard maximum air change rate 
for venting of 3 h-1 all zones met the standard for thermal comfort the total number of hours 
with operative temperature above 26 ˚C was found based on the evaluation of results and 
few hours are exceeding the threshold, which states for 0.11% of the year, by achieve the 
satisfying level of daylighting and thermal comfort criteria.
Figure 63: 3 zones, mod­
eled in IDA ICE sotware. The 
bottom part is the main part 
of the building, represents 
the only one facade with 
designed external shadings 
system.
==PAGE:80==
| 69
8.6	 Winter garden
The winter garden integrated with building it is the perfect place to create a hub for growing 
food and extended family life throughout the whole year, in any kind of weather. Because this 
space acts as a climate buffer, its the amazing link between interior and exterior, providing 
interior with fresh air and additional energy comes from sun. Different kinds of design and 
adaptation with building is giving a whole range of opportunities. 
Figure 64:  Different variations of winter house design, source: www.solarux.com
In the winter garden, very important is an appropriate shading system and ventilation, for the 
reason that even thermally insulated huge glazing spaces such as winter garden can lead to 
overheating, so it is strongly advised to use high performance shading system. The solution 
for this could be an integrated shading system in the form of exterior awnings, interior roll­
ers, pleated blind, sun blinds and so forth,  manually controlled or automatic. An advance of 
the exterior shading, is to catch the sun`s rays before they actually hit the glazing face, giving 
the better performance. 
Figure 65:  Example of designed shading in the winter garden, source: 
www.solarux.com
==PAGE:81==
| 70
Additionally there should be an option for ventilation. Glazed, openable door or folding doors 
are always ready to ventilate the area. Adjustable mechanical ventilators, could be placed in 
the lower area of openable doors or windows, providing with the fresh air in any kind of 
weather. Skylights integrated in the roof, controlled by sensors according to rain, position of 
sun, wind or the temperature, as well as the rest of opening elements, provide a feeling of 
the indoor comfort. 
During harsh winters, there could be also a slightly demand on heating, which could be pro­
vided with radiators as well as underfloor heating/convection systems can easily be integrat­
ed into the winter garden space. During extremely hot summers in rather hot climates there 
will be also a need for air-conditioning, that will turn on automatically after exceeding in the 
room specific limit of temperature (source: www.solarlux.com)  
Figure 66: Ventilation in the winter garden, source: www.solarux.com
Figure 67: Heating in the winter garden, source: www.solarux.com
==PAGE:82==
| 71
In the selected type of building, the winter garden is oriented towards the south west direc­
tion, which means that it will provide an amazing visual experience in the form of the sunset, 
but also because of the extreme south we need to provide an adequate shading and venti­
lation to prevent overheating. On the picture below, it can be easily observed, how winter 
garden can improve living conditions for much of the year, without using an energy input.
All openable and shadings elements are controlled automatically, programmed to adequate­
ly control the indoor climate regardless of whether residents are present at home or not.
Figure 68: Automation of the winter garden, source: www.solarux.com
Figure 69: Winter garden -  according to the year.
==PAGE:83==
| 72
On the picture below, it can be observed, how the winter garden can be used as a food hub, 
for sustain, self-growing of vegetables and fruits. Depending on how many people are living 
in the building, different size of winter garden is desire to be fully capable of family dining. 
8.7	 Green house
As previously mentioned besides of a private space, where everyone can grow their own 
food, there is also a large common green house, created for a purpose of social integration, 
growing more sophisticated kinds of vegetables and fruits, which is conducted by profes­
sionals. This space act not only as a food hub and a weekend market, where everyone can 
purchase organic products, but also its extension is a space, where people can work remotely 
being surrounded by nature, reducing transportation time, air pollution and because of high 
level of daylight and perfect indoor climate it makes the work space more efficient and com­
fortable. Moreover, inside the green house, you can find plenty of place provided for leisure 
and social events, you can read a book down there or having a dinner with friends.
Figure 70: Winter garden as an integrated part of eco village concept.
==PAGE:84==
| 73
Figure 71: Sustainable village concept - green house.
Green house with separated 
space for working remotely
Figure 72:  Co-working space by Selgas­
cano, http://www.selgascano.net/
Green house as a common 
area
==PAGE:85==
| 74
Figure 73: Overview for the windows.
Facade windows
Area: 2.15 m2
Roof windows
Area: 2.25 m2
Facade windows
Area: 1.56 m2
Facade window
Area: 1.50 m2
Roof window
Area: 1.88 m2
Roof window
Area: 0.64 m2
Facade window
Area: 1.50 m2
Facade window
Area: 1.32m2
Roof window
Area: 1 m2
Facade window
Area: 1.32m2
Facade window
Area: 1.80 m2
Facade window
Area: 3.2 m2
==PAGE:86==
| 75
Figure 74: Facade view / South-West
Figure 75: Facade view / South-East
Figure 76: Facade view / North-East
Figure 77: Facade view / North-West
==PAGE:87==
| 76
9.
Results
The examined building is considered as a rather compact shape with the possibility of rea-
sonable distribution of windows, to result in the best daylight performance.
The building dimensions used for simulation purpose were following: internal height of 2.5m, 
wall thickness of 0.5m, ceiling thickness of 0.5 m. No external obstruction were taking 
into account except neighbourhood buildings. Additionally, the neighbourhood buildings 
were modelled as obstructions for daylight simulations and were taken into consideration 
when simulating a daylight performance. 
Surface reflectance for simulations was set as a 70% for ceiling, 30% for floor and 50% for 
walls and 0.35% for obstructions and additionally 0.1% for area around the building. Glazing 
area in the building was set to 70% of light transmittance with U-value equlas 0.5 W/m2K
Space heating demand and operative temperatures were simulated using IDA ICE, while day­
lighting performance were simulated using 3 different tools, such as Velux Daylight Visualizer 
for preliminary assessment of daylight conditions, further on, during more advanced stage- 
Daysim and Diva for Rhino were used.
Depending on the investigating stage, zones were side lit from 12 in the first stage and up 
to 14 windows in the last stage, concerning also roof windows. Always taking into account a 
proper off set from walls and windows (0.5m), while using a sensor point grid, situated 0.85m 
above floor (typical table height) to get the most accurate and optimal results. 
 
==PAGE:88==
| 77
The second case, was enriched with an additional 4 roof windows and thus deprived of 4 
facade windows, giving in total the glazing area equals 17.978 m2, which is about 16% of glaz­
ing to floor area ratio. Not enough that the arrangement of windows meets the 15% glazing 
to floor ratio, the results are almost twice improved as a result of the use of additional roof 
windows in places previously marked as unexposed to daylight. 
Windows placed on the NE side have the lowest percentage glazing to floor ratio, which is 
nearly 0.9%, opposed to the SW face, which is the one with the highest ratio, reached up 
to 3.8%. The side of building oriented towards NW gathered almost 3.7m2 of glazing, which 
is 3.1% glazing to floor area (figure 78). The effect of rearrangement results in the average 
factor of 5.71% for zone 1, which in comparison to previous case (2.76%) is quite a good, 
doubled score for almost the same in total glazing to floor ratio, obtained only through other 
windows layout and additional usage of roof windows. For zone 2, the results are slightly 
different. We exchanged two 0.435m2 widows for one roof window with a 1m2 area, thus 
achieving a daylight factor of 3.96% and a DF above value of 2 being 75%, with 64% being the 
case in the earlier case and 3.22% for the daylight factor.
We have achieved with this approach a well-lit main area with an average of 5.71% and a 
median DF of 5.35, indicating that during the daylight there will be no need for additional 
lighting at all. In addition, the results obtained from the simulation performed in the Daysim 
program show that 67% of all illuminanace sensors have a DF of 2% of higher. It is a slightly 
lower result, then the one obtainable with the Velux Daylight Visualizer tool. Simulations 
conducted for the illuminance level within the main area shown, for the worst scenario in 
December with overcast sky, there are areas achieving around 200lux, which is considered as 
the minimum level for tasks and activities for residential rooms, but it is enough for comfort­
able moving around the area with no need for artificial light. 
Using Diva for Rhino tool DF analysis shown that 47% of all illuminance sensors have a day­
light factor of 2% or higher. It is slightly low result, where the preferable value of 2% DF is in 
50% of the space. The mean DF is 2.8%. Simulating the DA in Diva for Rhino the results is a 
percentage of floor area for which the DA for specified threshold value of illuminance was 
achieved through at least 50% of occupied time. The occupied time means hours during the 
day when occupants are present specified in the occupancy schedule file 
 Daylight Autonomy (DA) Analysis: The mean daylight autonomy is 50% for active occupant 
behaviour. The percentage of the space with a daylight autonomy larger than 50% is 58% for 
active occupant behaviour, Daylit Area (DA300lux[50%])=58%, means that the 58% of area 
==PAGE:89==
| 78
is considered daylit, since the target of 300 lux is sufficient for interior with some demand 
for visual activity. Preferably result is to have at least 300 lux in 75% of the space for 50% of 
hours, to be sufficient for daylighting in the building.
Using the UDI method for daylight simulation in Diva for Rhino, the daylight levels in a room 
are assessed based on the percentage of evaluated room floor area for which the UDI are 
achieved for at least 50% of time. Useful Daylight Illuminance (UDI): The percentage of the 
space with a UDI<100-2000lux larger than 50% is 88% for active occupant behaviour. The 
recommendation is 80% of occupancy hours (source: P. A. Andersen et al, Daylight, Energy 
and Indoor climate basic book, 2014). 
Continuous Daylight Autonomy (DA) Analysis: The mean continuous daylight autonomy is 
68% for active occupant behaviour, this value is slightly higher than the mean value for DA, 
since it is getting a partial credit for the areas that are below the target illuminance, so it is 
higher than the mean of DA.  The percentage of sensors with a DA_MAX > 5% is 26% for ac­
tive occupant behaviour, means that the sensor is having an illuminance level which is 10 
times then target illuminance, so it is kind of a benchmark for uncomfortable high level of 
illuminance, for that point. Basically the results of 26%, means that 26% of sensors are receiv­
ing the DA max greater than 5% at a time, it is an indication, where it could be a liability for 
glare.
In the last case, with a contrast to commonly known practice form guidelines it was decided 
to almost evenly distribute the windows over NE and SW façade creating balance and pre­
vent to overheating additionally using the proper solar control coating. This time the NE side 
is occupied by almost 3.04% glazing to floor ratio, whereas the SW façade is having slightly 
higher value of 3.9% glazing to floor ration, creating a balance between 2 opposite sited, de­
creasing at the same time the liability for glare. The SE oriented façade has a total of 2.824m2 
and NW façade almost 3.707m2, creating the value of 3.01% glazing to floor ratio. Window 
distribution all over 4 facades is quite even and always above 3%, except the SE façade which 
has 2.3% of glazing to floor ratio. The total of 8m2 of roof windows, giving 6.7% glazing to 
floor ratio. The difference of glazing are used in the case 2 is 2.575m2 for façade windows and 
for 2.25 m2 roof windows and results in 8.16% of Daylight factor and 97% for DF above 2%. 
Using Diva for Rhino tool, the following results have been obtained. 64% of the floor area for 
the new arrangement of windows is considerate daylit, (DA300lux[50%])=64%. The mean 
daylight autonomy is 55% for active occupant behaviour. The percentage of the space with 
a daylight autonomy larger than 50% is 64% for active occupant behaviour. Continuous Day­
light Autonomy (DA) Analysis: The mean continuous daylight autonomy is 72% for active oc­
cupant behaviour. The percentage of sensors with a DA_MAX > 5% is 31% for active occupant 
behaviour, which means that 31% of the area jest exposed to the glare effect. Useful Daylight 
==PAGE:90==
| 79
Illuminance (UDI): The percentage of the space with a UDI<100-2000lux larger than 50% is 
91% for active occupant behaviour, which fulfil the recommendation of 88%. Daylight Factor 
(DF) Analysis: 53% of all illuminance sensors have a daylight factor of 2% or higher, which is 
the preferable value to having a well daylit space. Additionally taking into account last case, 
the energy simulation was conducted. Simulations shown that for the studied case, it is ap­
proximately 15 kWh/m2 fulfilling at the same time the requirements for 2020 buildings. The 
most popular of solar control coatings is a 70/35 solar control coating To avoid overheating 
for windows oriented to South, East, West and for roof windows the solar-control coating 
have been used, it was decided to use 70/35 solar coating (Pilkington Suncool 70/35), which 
maintains the unit’s light transmission at 70% for a natural appearance whilst reducing the 
G factor of the glass unit to 35%, whereas for north sided windows, dynamically controlled 
external shading mechanism. It was assumed that all the additional heat gains that would 
have been able to reach the dwelling, while leaving the appropriate type of sun blinds down, 
was considered as minor, so it was neglected during the case.
Figure 78: Overview of the results, conducted using different tools.
Figure 79: Overview of the glazing to floor ration according to the facades, DF 
generated from Velux Daylight Visualizer tool.
==PAGE:91==
| 80
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
120%
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
DF
DF > 2% VS GLAZING TO FLOOR RATIO
DF>2
Glazing
to floor
ratio
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Case 2
Case 3
DF
DF VS GLAZING TO FLOOR RATIO
DF
Glazing
to floor
ratio
Figure 81: Results of Daylight Factor > 2%, according to 
glazing to floor ratio, conducted in Daylight Visualizer 
tool.
Figure 82: Results of Daylight Factor according to glazing to floor ratio, con­
ducted in Diva for Rhino tool.
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
0.00%
10.00%
20.00%
30.00%
40.00%
50.00%
60.00%
70.00%
80.00%
90.00%
100.00%
Case 2
Case 3
DA
DA
Glazing
to floor
ratio
Figure 83: Results of Daylight Autonomy according to glazing to floor ratio, con­
ducted in Diva for Rhino tool.
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
DF
DF VS GLAZING TO FLOOR RATIO
DF
Glazing
to floor
ratio
Figure 80: Results of Daylight Factor according to 
glazing to floor ratio, conducted in Daylight Visual­
izer tool.
==PAGE:92==
| 81
10. Conclusions
This project represents an innovating ecovillage design that was developed as a green answer 
to arising problem of living in the city – mass urbanization and rising land prices, offering ed­
ible landscaping and a new model facilitates off-the-grid, self-sustaining communal neigh­
bourhood and strives for a little or no carbon energy based consumption. It developed a new 
approach to sustainable architecture that foster both innovative and low energy design.
Despite this significant increase in awareness of sustainability and holistic approach, report­
edly 76% of Europeans need to turn on electrical lighting during daytime hours (Healthy 
Home Barometer). It calls for an immediate action to change this phenomenon.
The results of this work show that to obtain the best daylight performance in the building 
there is no longer a need to compromise on the good quality indoor climate or satisfying 
thermal performance. With adequate daylight strategies and applying new innovating think­
ing, it is easily achievable to get almost two times better results of the daylight performance 
while staying at the same level of glazing-to-floor-ratio. Today’s technical solutions merge 
with forward-thinking design give you countless possibilities to get your desired result. 
This work shows that the creation of the previously described life path is strictly linked to the 
holistic approach. To achieve a new level of sustainability in architecture we need to focus 
more than ever, not only on technologies we are eager to use, but on a vision and holistic 
approach, itself. There are lots of environmental and architectural strategies, but it is not 
enough. There is a high demand to envision new concept that will merge not only principles, 
performance and ecological design, but show from the beginning to the end people how 
you should live and behave so your house will be energy efficient and your surroundings will 
bring only the benefits and positive impact.
One of the crucial issues that should be taken into account is the daylight performance, 
which was the main topic of this thesis. It is very important matter to show how this factor 
can change and influence your everyday life.
It is also very important to mention that design of an eco village is a process of integrated 
design. The good indoor climate and energy performance of the building are very important 
matter comes in a line with daylight performance, which should also be taken into considera­
tion and can be considered as topic to be profoundly study in the further investigation.
The focus of daylight performance is one of the visible aspects of a sustainable approach to 
architecture giving innumerable benefits through indoor comfort to visual satisfaction, while 
positively impacting on ever day life. It is one of the crucial issue that should be taken into 
==PAGE:93==
| 82
account, while designing a new, better and sustainable architecture. By 2030 about 60 per 
cent of the world’s population will live in cities, so this might be the last chance to develop 
and spread the concept of the eco village and take advantage of the opportunity that our 
developing sustainable conscious gives us, to change an isolated, indoor and deprived of 
daylight - a big city life and start a new sustainable way, in harmony with nature because as 
we all know, there is only one planet, for which we are all responsible.
==PAGE:94==
| 83
11. Bibliography
1.
A Publication of ATTRA - National Sustainable Agriculture Information Service,
“Food miles”
2.
Active House specification, www.activehouse.info
3.
Bokalders, V. (2010). How to design healthy, efficient and sustainable buildings.
USA: Earthscan
4.
Bokalders, V. (2010). How to design healthy, efficient and sustainable buildings.
USA: Earthscan
5.
Brian Edwards, 2010, Rough guide to sustainability 3rd edition
6.
Bruce Mau, Massive Change.
7.
Challenges of sustainable and commercial aquaponics, open source article from
sustainability 2015, http://bioponica.net/aquaponics-scientific-article/
8.
CIBSE, code for lighting, Oxford: Chartered Institution of building services engi
neers, source: http://www.cibse.org/
9.
Danish Building Regulations, 2015, http://bygningsreglementet.dk/english/0/40
10.
DANVA: Water in figures. DANVA’s Benchmarking and Water Statistics 2010, re
trieved on April 16, 2012
11.
DEA, 2013
12.
E. Neufert, Podrecznik projektowania architektonicznego  , wyd. Arkady
13.
European directory of sustainable and energy efficient buildings, 1999
14.
Food and Agriculture Organization, AQUASTAT data
15.
G.C.J. Skarning, C.A. Hviid, S. Svendsen, 2017, The cost efficiency of improved
roof windows in two well-lit nearly zero-energy houses in Copenhagen, Energy
and Buildings,
16.
Healthy home barometer 2017
17.
Hopkins, R. G., 1963, Architectural physics: Lighting,
18.
http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/er.h2o.fwag.zs
19.
http://fundacjablisko.pl/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/Mikslokatorski_Fundacja-
Blisko_net.pdf
20.
http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2005/12/1209_051209_crops_map.
html
21.
http://www.earthtrends.wri.org
22.
http://www.effekt.dk/work#/hno/
23.
http://www.effekt.dk/work#/regenvillages/
24.
http://www.fao.org/hunger/en/
25.
http://www.fao.org/hunger/en/
26.
http://www.globalagriculture.org/report-topics/water.html
27.
http://www.permatopia.dk
==PAGE:95==
| 84
28.
http://www.realdaniabyogbyg.org/projects/the-minico2-houses
29.
http://www.reedbeds.co.uk/page/what-is-a-reed-bed-or-a-constructed-wetland.
php
30.
http://www.solarlux.com
31.
http://www.worldometers.info/water/
32.
http://www.worldometers.info/water/, United Nations
33.
https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sp%C3%B3%C5%82dzielnia_mieszkaniowa
34.
https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spo%C5%82eczno%C5%9B%C4%87
35.
https://theecovillage.com.au
36.
https://theecovillage.com.au/about/
37.
John Mardaljevic and Azza Nabil, The Useful Daylight Illuminance Paradigm: A Re
placement for Daylight Factors
38.
Johnsen K., Dubois M., Grau K., Assessment of daylight quality in simple rooms,
2006
39.
Leopold Center for sustainable Agriculture
40.
Lies Vanhoutteghem, 2014, Method for design of low-energy type houses based
on simulations of indoor environment and energy use.
41.
P. A. Andersen et al, Daylight, Energy and Indoor climate basic book, 2014
42.
State of the world`s cities 2008/9, Energy consumption in cities
43.
UN-HABITAT, global urban observatory 2008.
44.
Vanhoutteghem et al., 2015, Impact of façade window design on energy, daylight
ing and thermal comfort in nearly zero-energy houses,).
45.
Velux Daylight Visualizer, software by Velux 2014.
==PAGE:96==
SEPTEMBER 2017
“No matter what people tell you, words 
and ideas can change the world”
