==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
3D Printing of Bio-inspired Surfaces
Macarena Méndez Ribó (s151841)
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Section of Manufacturing Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Produktionstorvet
Building 427A
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone (+45) 45 25 19 60
www.mek.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In this thesis report, the intersection of bio-inspired surfaces and additive manu-
facturing is investigated, with the aim of determining the feasibility and viability of
leveraging 3D printing technologies to rapidly prototype surfaces that mirror those
found in nature. While both of these arenas are heavily researched, the overlap of
the two is an area filled with endless potential, ranging from the medical industry
to product design and much more. The ability to rapidly and inexpensively repro-
duce bio-inspired surfaces using conventional 3D printing at micro scale would thus
serve to enable the scientific community to conduct optimisation of 3D surface model
designs and printing process parameters. This would allow for improved forecasting
of surface properties before investment in nano-fabrication takes place. However, as
biological surfaces display divergent and numerous features, this report utilises the
gecko toes, known for their dry adhesion properties, as a case study and a basis for
investigation. As a point of departure, a literature geometry based on the gecko toe
is used as a benchmark.
With reference to the research consulted in the duration of this project, this report
identifies multihierarchical structures, feature geometry, feature density, and manu-
facturing methods used as the key determinants of how well 3D printing can emulate
the intricate features of the gecko’s toes. In this regard, Stereolithography (SLA)
and Direct Light Processing (DLP) are characterised via experiments involving trans-
lating a simplification of the gecko toes features derived from literature (literature
sample) into a CAD model, and thereafter printing the model while manipulating
different process parameters. In this particular case, DLP was found to outperform
SLA in relation to features sizes, tolerances and other qualitative and quantitative
criteria. As such, this thesis focuses on DLP as the most promising manufacturing
method for the purpose of this project’s aim. Based on conducting a wettability test
(water drop angle measurement), it was determined that smaller and more intricate
designs showed better wettability properties compared with the simplified literature
geometry. This is indicative of that the simplification of bio-inspired surfaces is likely
detrimental to the emergent properties of the replicated geometry. Hence, the capa-
bilities of 3D printing geometries to print smaller, denser an more complex surface
features should enable a closer match between synthetic bio-surfaces and real ones.
==PAGE:4==
ii
Abstract
In the culminations of this project’s experimental stage, it was found that repro-
ducing the features of the gecko toe is both feasible and viable using conventional 3D
printing methods. Despite these methods being cheaper and simpler than previous
methods used, the resulting samples were of the same scale and displayed improved
surface quality. This is of note, as it hints at the possibility of 3D printed bio-surfaces
becoming commercially viable in the years to come. Owing to these results, there is
a strong indication that, contingent on improvements to the DLP machine and the
removal of error sources, it would likely be possible to reach the minimum theoretical
feature size 7.6 µm. Hence, further investigation ought to be directed to achieving
a better alignment between DLP technology and the small scale printing of complex
bio-inspired surfaces.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master Thesis project was completed in the Department of Mechanical En-
gineering at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in order to fulfil the degree
requirements for a Master of Science in Materials and Manufacturing Engineering.
The project was conducted between April 1st and September 22nd of 2017 under
the supervision of Aminul Islam, Senior Researcher, and the co-supervision of Ali
Davoudinejad, Postdoc.
Kongens Lyngby, September 22, 2017
Macarena Méndez Ribó (s151841)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor and Senior Researcher Aminul Islam for his
constant support and input during the time of this thesis. Specially I want to thank
him for handing me the first research paper I read about bio-inspired surfaces, a
field completely unknown for me by which I ended up completely fascinated. Special
thanks to Postdoc Ali Davoudinejad, for hosting me as an apprentice and teaching
me the ropes with the DLP - our endless conversations and crazy theories about
the behaviour of the (now less) unpredictable DLP during this project were both
enjoyable and exciting.
I want to thank Researcher David Bue Pedersen and PhD student Sebastian Aa-
gaard Andersen, their passion for the additive manufacturing universe has inspired
me to move forward and increase my curiosity in this field.
I also want to thank my friends, Ricardo, Nawal, Daniella and Patrick, I could
have not done it without you.
Last but not least I want to thank my family, I wouldn’t be here without their
constant support and love. Miriam, thank you for believing in me.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
List of Abbreviations
ix
1
Introduction
1
2
State of the Art
3
2.1
Bio-inspired surfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Manufacturing methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Project scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Theoretical Background
27
3.1
Manufacturing processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Sample characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3
Sample testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4
Methodology
41
4.1
Design considerations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.2
3D Print . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3
Post-processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.4
Qualitative observations and quantitative analysis
. . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.5
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5
SLA printings
47
5.1
First batch
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2
Second batch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6
DTU DLP v2
55
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6.1
Previous work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2
First DoE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.3
Second DoE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
6.4
Design of intricate bio-inspired designs and validation
. . . . . . . . .
80
7
Summary, conclusions and outlook
91
7.1
Summary and conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
7.2
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
A
95
List of Figures
95
List of Tables
98
B Form 2 specifications
99
B.1
Technical specifications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
B.2
Design recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
B.3
Tough Resin specifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
C DLP v2 Manual
103
C.1
Setting up the projector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
C.2
Machine calibration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
C.3
Step-by-step printing procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
D Alicona Specifications
109
E DoE 1
111
F DoE 2 results
117
G Bio-designs
127
Bibliography
131
==PAGE:11==
List of Abbreviations
2PSL
Two-step Photolithography and Soft Lithography
3DPMDT 3D Printed Master and Dip-Transfer
µCP
Microcontact Printing
µTM
Microtransfer Moulding
AFM
Atomic Force Microscope
AM
Additive Manufacturing
BD
Bio-design
CAD
Computer-Aided Design
CNC
Computer Numerical Control
CW
Creation Workshop
DLP
Digital Light Processing
DLW
Direct Laser Writing
DMD
Digital Micromirror Device
DoE
Design of Experiments
ET
Exposure time
FDM
Fused Deposition Manufacturing
IPA
Isopropyl Alcohol
IPA
Isopropyl alcohol or isopropanol.
LCD
Liquid Crystal Display
LDOF Limited Depth of Field
LOM
Laminated Object Manufacturing
LS
Literature Sample
LT
Layer thickness
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
MIMIC Micromoulding in Capillaries
MJM
Multi-Jet Modelling
NFSL Near-Field Phase Shift Lithography
PDMS Polydimethylsiloxane
PGMEA Propylene Glycol Monomethyl Ether Acetate
PI
Projector initial power
PP
Projector power
PTFE Polytetrafluoroethylene
PU or PUR Polyurethane
RP
Rapid Prototyping
SAMIM Solvent-assisted micromoulding
SEM
Scanning Electron Microscopy
SLM
Spatial Light Modulators
SLS
Selective Laser Sintering
TPA
Two-Photon Absorption
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Throughout time, biological organisms have evolved to survive the demands of
various unique environments and phenomena. Over the last few centuries, this ca-
pability of nature to evolve and adapt to the environment has been an object of
fascination for human beings. Today, by emulating nature in engineering design, hu-
mans can capitalise on the successful adaptations that took organisms millennia to
develop in order to overcome engineering problems subject to similar environments.
This approach to innovation, where design is inspired by nature, is often referred to
as biomimicry and has lead to numerous developments and inventions such as: ship
architecture, inspired by the shape of fish; sonar, inspired by the ability of the whales
or dolphins to communicate underwater; and Velcro (hook-and-loop fastener) used
for varied applications worldwide, inspired by burdock burrs [1].
On a smaller scale, nano- and micro-structured surfaces in nature are found to
play a key role in the behaviour of the biological organisms and their surrounding
environments. A few examples include the superhydrophobicity of the lotus leaf, the
adhesion of the gecko, and the mechanical strength of human teeth. These examples
have drawn the attention of scientists and engineers due to their potential for applica-
tion in all sorts of disciplines such as self-cleaning fabrics, dry-adhesive tapes, cutting
tools, and cosmetics—just to name a few [2].
Due to technological advances in nanotechnology, it has become possible to repro-
duce these functional surfaces, moving from structure to form (i.e. from macro-scale
towards micro-scale and finally, toward the nano-scale) [3]. Nevertheless, as scale is
reduced, the manufacturing difficulties and limitations increase which are the main
restrictions limiting the commercial production of such surfaces. Although there are
several bio-inspired surfaces on the market today such as lotus leaf inspired fabrics,
when closely studied with scanning electron microscopy, these surfaces still lack the
ideal structure of the natural lotus leaf. Accordingly, they are far from achieving
the same behaviour demonstrated by the natural lotus leaf. This is especially true
for complex geometric surfaces such as the hierarchical structures found in geckos,
human teeth, spider silk, and so forth. These geometries are the main focus amongst
bio-inspired specimens currently under intense research and development by scientists
and engineers [2, 3].
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
On the other hand, addressing the ineffectiveness of the analytic and numerical
approaches in this field is also imperative.
For the most part, the field currently
consists of greatly simplified models.
If in the future, a deeper understanding of
the surface-medium interaction is accomplished by means of numerical methods and
analytic theory development, more accurate modelling systems could be developed.
Such models have the potential to streamline the research and design which is now
accomplished on a trial-and-error experimentation basis [4, 5].
The two most common nanofabrication methods used in this field include fabri-
cation by conventional photolithography and fabrication by novel soft lithography.
Photolithographic approaches are well established for production, especially for mi-
croelectronics. Nevertheless, outside of the microelectronic industry, it is considered
exorbitantly overpriced and largely unavailable.
Soft lithography applications, on
the other hand, are the right choice in regard to newer applications, such as biology,
chemistry, medicine, and biomimetics as is the present case. Here, the goal is to seek
a cost-effective and convenient method, specifically within research and academia,
which ultimately enables nanoscience in the laboratory setting [6]. While soft lithog-
raphy is the most appropriate method for biomimetic fabrication, it still requires the
use of photolithography to create the master for the masks or moulds used during the
process [7], alongside a deep understanding and expertise in the field. Another lim-
itation found in this procedure is that these methods generally produce 2D or 2½D
features and when 3D features are desired, the soft lithography approach becomes
increasingly complex [8].
Despite all the research done in this area, studies have not yet addressed the use
of full 3D printed functional surfaces.
However, there have been attempts to use
the technology to generate millimetre-scale features [9]. Knowing that conventional
high resolution 3D printing methods like Stereolithography (SLA) and Direct Light
Processing (DLP) are capable of printing at microscale with a minimum pixel size
of 7.6 µm, it should be feasible to reproduce microfeatures with simple or complex
geometries. This could be achieved without the need for arduous nanomanufacturing
methods or expertise since 3D printing is a one (maximum two) step procedure and
it does not require a complex set-up infrastructure. Assuming similar relationships
exist between the surface behaviour of given microscale features and the same features
but at the nanoscale, this method of ‘micro-rapid prototyping’ could be used to test
varied geometries conveniently on the microscale before proceeding with the final
nanomanufacturing approach.
To fulfil the goal of this thesis, the principles and lower limitations of the 3D
printer (DLP) will be studied and challenged. To do so, a gecko toe-inspired surface
will be developed with this approach since gecko toes have been reproduced in multiple
nanomanufacturing settings [5].
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
State of the Art
This chapter presents the academic literature review that was conducted by the
author of this thesis in order to define an appropriate experimental method. The
review is structured as a synthesis of general concepts relevant to the field, followed
by more specific topics related to the nature of this project. For further comprehension
of the structure of the literature review, Figure 2.10 at the end of this chapter shows
an outlined summary.
2.1
Bio-inspired surfaces
Since the beginning of times, biological organisms have fought for survival. Only
the strongest and the most prepared for the adversity of the environment prevail. In
many cases, survival is due to their surfaces which are adapted to the media that
surrounds them. These surfaces are tailored in such a way that the combination of
different parameters and strategies make them unique. These characteristics amal-
gamate different materials with contrasting geometries and sizes, alongside other
remarkable physical and chemical approaches.
The combination of these leads to
what is called functional surfaces [2] which can exhibit properties such as adhesion,
self-cleaning, superhydrophobicity, exceptional optical effects, among many others.
In order to better understand this concept, however, it is beneficial to explain a
broader concept, biomimetics, as will be done in the subsequent section.
2.1.1
Biomimetics: history, terminology and trends
The notion of solving problems by learning from nature is as old as the history of
humankind itself. For instance, inspired by silk cocoons, the Chinese tried to imitate
and manufacture artificial silk as far back as 1000 BC [10], although it was not until
the nineteenth century that Count Hilaire de Chardonnet patented the first artifi-
cial silk [11]. This field has been referred to as Bionics, Biomimetics, Biogenesis,
Biomimicry or Bioinspiration, and the terms are occasionally used interchangeably.
Therefore, it is imperative to note that each of these names have their own conno-
tations, and it is challenging to find a consensus between authors as to the exact
==PAGE:16==
4
2 State of the Art
definitions and differentiation between them [10, 12, 13].
The clearest difference
would be with the term Bionics, which refers to the implementation of a function
found in nature (e.g. dolphins’ sonar) or as the Etymology Dictionary defines as “the
study of electronic systems which function in the manner of organic systems” while
the other terms aims to imitate biological structures.
The term biomimetics, first coined by Otto Schmitt in 1969 [14], is derived from the
two Greek words: bios, meaning life and mimesis, meaning reproduction or imitation.
This subject involves biologists, chemists, engineers, physicists, and others [10], and
has thrived into a relatively young multidisciplinary branch of science representing
the research, imitation, and application of nature’s approaches [12]. In order to give
consistency to the terminology used within this report, biomimetics will be defined in
accordance with the book Potentials and Trends in Biomimetics [4]. In light of this
definition, within the pages of this report the term biomimetic is used interchangeably
with bio-inspired.
“Biomimetics is the attempt to learn from nature; it deals with the development of
innovations on the basis of investigation of natural, evolutionarily optimised biological
structures, functions, processes, and systems.”
The enthusiasm within the scientific community about this topic is reflected by the
increasing quasi-exponential trend of biomimetics publications, as shown in Figure
2.1 where the data was extracted from the web portal ‘Science Direct’ [15] since the
word was first coined.
2014
2306
2013
2321
2012
1928
2011
1803
2010
1686
2009
1414
2008
1378
2007
1247
2006
1176
2005
994
2004
716
2003
671
2002
480
2001
474
2000
357
1999
392
1998
399
1997
348
1996
413
1995
474
1994
273
2768
2552
2306
2321
1928
1803
1686
1414
1378
1247
1176
994
716
671
480
474
357
392
399
348
413
474
273
213
221
213
179
163
129
91
83
70
72
80
69
63
51
64
52
37
14
15
1
6
1
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
2016
2015
2014
2013
2012
2011
2010
2009
2008
2007
2006
2005
2004
2003
2002
2001
2000
1999
1998
1997
1996
1995
1994
1993
1992
1991
1990
1989
1988
1987
1986
1985
1984
1983
1982
1981
1980
1979
1978
1977
1976
1975
1974
1973
1972
Number of articles
Exponential trend
Figure 2.1: Trend on published articles about biomimetics.
This exponential trend can be traced back to the divergence of biomimetics into
three main branches [4]: functional morphology, bionics, and nanobiometics. Func-
tional morphology, the oldest branch whose origins are found before the scientific
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Bio-inspired surfaces
5
observations, is focused on the relationship between shape and functionality which
serves as the basis for technical solutions. The second branch, Bionics, was described
previously. Lastly, Nanobiometics is the most recent branch where biomimetics is
brought to the micro- and/or nano-scale. The latter branch is considered the most
dynamic since it tackles the problems found in the first branch by virtue of nan-
otechnology breakthroughs in medicine, functional surfaces, neurobiomimetics, and
so forth. Additionally, it was not until the development of particular material charac-
terisation methods (imaging techniques), specifically in the middle of the twentieth
century with the invention of the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) [16] which
enabled the examination of the nano-scale features that form the functional surfaces
in order to mimic them.
As such, this paper will be focused on functional surfaces that possess arranged
micro/nano features which, owing to the current technology, are reproducible [5, 17].
A review of the current technologies investigated, as related to the topic of this thesis
will be explained further in Section 2.2.
2.1.2
Bio-inspired functional surfaces
Malshe et al. [2] describe some of the most relevant functional surfaces with an
integrated approach, which converges all these attributes in to what is referred to as
Nature’s Tool Box. Here, all the design parameters combine resulting in diverse func-
tionalities. Table 2.1 shows a list of the most influential design parameters observed,
and whose interdependence leads to different surface functionalities.
Table 2.1: Nature’s Toolbox list of parameters [18].
Parameter
Description
Texture and topography
Features with in different geometries and sizes
leading to periodic morphologies.
Scale
Arrangement and dimension of the features.
Chemistry
Chemical and material properties of the sur-
faces and subsurfaces.
Sensory system
Mechanism in charge of controlling the reac-
tion to the environment.
Complementary subsurface
Subsurface which provides a template for the
main features and serves as side backplane.
Shapes at multiple scales
Hierarchically arranged patterns.
Parameter integration
Interaction of the above parameters to achieve
surface functionality.
==PAGE:18==
6
2 State of the Art
2.1.3
Types of functional surfaces
The combination and integration of the design parameters of the Nature’s Tool-
box results in remarkable characteristics and applications. This section summarises
some of the most common bio-inspired functional surfaces that are currently under
profound research. Apart from the described surfaces, there are many others which
exhibit outstanding faculties such as: energy scavenging (photosynthesis), hardness
and toughness (human tooth), sensing external stimuli (leaflets of the plant Mimosa
pudica).
For the sake of brevity, these examples are not explained in-depth here.
However, further information can be found in the full article regarding this topic [2].
Adhesion
Adhesion is the ability of some small creatures to attach to walls and ceilings with
their legs due to the configuration of their terminals which have numerous micro-
and/or nano-scale fibres packed in a small area. When these fibres contact other
surfaces, attractive Van der Waals forces result that support the weight of the animal.
The most popular case is the Gecko adhesion system, a dry-adhesion strategy that
allows the gecko to walk over smooth and rough vertical walls and ceilings. Some
applications are: dry adhesion gecko tapes and climbing gloves.
Super-hydrophobicity
The combination of small features generating Van der Waals forces and specific
chemical compositions can result in super-hydrophobicity where the solid/water inter-
face is significantly reduced. The resultant cohesive forces cause a solid/water contact
angle between 90o-180o for low wettability fluids and 180o for a perfectly non-wetting
surface leaving a droplet of water practically spherical (Cassie’s law, further explained
in Section 3.3.1). A prime example of this phenomenon is the lotus leaf which exhibits
super-hydrophobicity at contact angles exceeding 150o [19]. Some applications are:
water repellent fibres and medical devices.
Optical engineering
Nature has developed various means for displaying colours: the most common be-
ing pigmentation. Nevertheless, it has other strategies to display bright or changing
colours. In the case of iridescent surfaces, colourful appearances are generated from
the interaction of the light with architectural structures. Consequently, depending on
the light’s angle of incidence or the viewer perspective, changes in iridescent colours
can occur. Iridescent surfaces can even produce colours which cannot otherwise be
found in nature, such as the iridescent blue colour seen in peacock feathers and Mor-
pho butterflies. These intricate structures can also often achieve super-hydrophobicity.
Some applications are: anti-glare surfaces for electro-optical devices, and development
of structural colours.
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Bio-inspired surfaces
7
Optical tuning
Aside from the optical engineering mentioned before, optical tuning is another
optical phenomenon often seen in nature.
It is the ability for certain animals to
change the colour of their skin in response to their surroundings (e.g. the chameleon).
This ability is due to the light-reflecting chromotophore cells that make up the surface
of the animal which, with a combination of blood pressure and pigments, are able to
reproduce all kinds of colours. One application is: surface self-adaptation mechanisms
with super-tough characteristics [20].
Antibiofouling
Commonly known as self-cleaning surfaces, some animal species possess the an-
tibiofouling ability to prevent the growth of microorganisms on their skin. This is due
to hierarchical surface structures which trap pockets of air in between small features,
effectively minimising the surface area for microorganisms to grow. This functional
surface also comes hand-in-hand with super-hydrophobicity. It is generally found in
fish, sharks, or other aquatic creatures. Some applications are: antimicrobial surfaces
used for boats, bathroom stalls, swimsuits, and so on.
All of these functional surfaces and the examples provided have one parameter in
common: their unique functionalities are enabled by hierarchical structures, either in
layers or small geometries, which are arranged in specific patterns and sizes.
2.1.4
Focus area
Due to time and resource availability, the present project will be focused on repro-
duction of the hierarchical structures, investigating changes in size, geometry, pattern
and distribution of the small features that enable adhesion and super-hydrophobicity
(and hence, self-cleaning or antibiofouling).
Multi-scale hierarchical structures
The key to achieving a functional surface with adhesion, and therefore, super-
hydrophobicity and self cleaning, is reported to be by virtue of hierarchical surface
structures which increase the compliance between surfaces with different levels of
roughness without concessions on the adhesive strength [5, 21]. Although the success
of these structures has been proven, few articles have been published reporting the
effect of different feature designs due largely to the required complex manufactur-
ing methods. Multi-scale hierarchical structures deal with micro- and nano-features
that are difficult to reproduce artificially. There are also journals demonstrating how
multi-scale hierarchical structures do not have a positive impact on the adhesion of
planar surfaces. Nevertheless, its relevance may come into play when stiff materials or
rough substrates are used [22]. Consequently, there is a need to continue the study of
==PAGE:20==
8
2 State of the Art
multi-scale hierarchies at different levels. The most common cases studied are gecko
toes and placoid scales (shark scales), but specifically the former, given that once dry
adhesion is achieved, super-hydrophobicity and self cleaning are also accomplished.
In relevant research papers, despite being used in similar contexts, the term hier-
archical is often used to refer to different elements of a surface structure. For instance,
referring to hierarchical as in different levels, or in different sizes, and so on. During
the research the author has estimated that most of the surfaces are, in their own way,
regularly arranged or hierarchically disposed. With this in mind, from this point on
and for the sake of consistency and clarity for the reader, the term hierarchical will
be used to refer to surfaces with two or more levels of structures to differentiate them
from single layer structures.
Gecko toes
The ability of the gecko to scurry across all kinds of surfaces, smooth or rough, at
any angle (vertical walls and ceilings) has been traced to the multi-scale hierarchical
structures of the gecko toe. Figure 2.2, presents the different levels of features found
in a gecko toe. From macro- to nano-scale, each toe has more than 10 lamellae, each
of which is covered in thousands of setae, and 100-1000 keratinous spatulae on each
setae [2, 23, 24].
Figure 2.2: Gecko toe configuration at its different levels. (a) Gecko at macro-scale. (b)
Lamellae structure of the toe. (c & d) Setae arrays. (e) Spatulae fibres at the tip of the
setae. Credits: (a) Edward Ramirez; (b) Tim Sullivan and Joel Thorson; (c) Tim Astrop;
(d) Tim Sullivan; (e) Tim Sullivan.
Because these spatulae are concentrated so densely, they achieve significant con-
tact with surfaces resulting in extremely high Van der Waals forces, and thus, molec-
ular adhesion. This allows the gecko toes to support a few times the animal’s own
weight, or 10 N of adhesive force with 100 mm2 of pad area [2]. This adhesion is seen
among different animal species (specifically insects), yet the gecko is the one that
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Bio-inspired surfaces
9
draws the most scientific attention. Naturally, the amount of end-fibres or spatulae
on a given animal increases with its weight. Because of this, geckos are the species
with highest density of fibres studied to date [25].
The attachment and detachment mechanisms of the gecko toe are still a matter of
study. Theoretical reports attribute the role of hierarchical structures in increasing
the effective adhesion energy during detachment from a rough surface by increasing
the elastic deformation energy [23]. Yu Tian et al. explain the mechanisms of adhesion
and friction [26], strongly related to the step intervals (∼20 ms between steps), and
force direction: adhesive forces in ceilings (i.e.
force normal to the surface) and
frictional forces on walls (i.e. shear forces to the surface). Table 2.2 displays the
gecko’s list of parameters using the aforementioned Nature’s Toolbox, in order to
characterise its main features.
Table 2.2: Nature’s Toolbox list of parameters for gecko toes.
Parameter
Characteristics
Texture/topography
Lamellar skin with arranged setal array and
spatula fibre ends.
Scale
Setae: 5000 setae/mm2, length: 30-130 µm,
diameter: 4-6 µm. Spatulae: 100-1000 spatu-
lae/seta, length: 0.2-0.5 µm.
Sensory system
Van der Waals interactions generated by each
of the contacting fibres (spatulae).
Complementary surface
Fibre stiffness, i.e. β-keratinous setae.
Shapes at multiple scales
Three hierarchical level spring system: Setal
array supported on the lamellar skin (act as
soft spring) and spatulae standing on setae.
Integration of parameters
Adhesion,
super-hydrophobicity
and
self-
cleaning.
The main limitation when reproducing the gecko toe artificially is the inability to
produce long lasting nano-structures. Ali Dhinojwala et al. from the University of
Akron and Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute report achieving higher adhesive forces
than the gecko using a carbon-nanotube carpet. Nevertheless, the work was only
demonstrated on the nano-scale instead of centimetre-scale like the real gecko toe
[27]. Another successful adhesive method which mimicked the gecko toe is the gecko
tape made by Geim et al. [28], which demonstrated good attachment and detachment
performance but still reported problems related with durability and production.
These reports demonstrate the need for deeper investigation into the geometry and
==PAGE:22==
10
2 State of the Art
composition of the gecko toe. Moreover, research regarding biological factors which
are still unable to be reproduced with artificial materials (e.g. self-healing), should
be continued [24]. Another issue to tackle is that there exists a paradox phenomenon
where, depending on the situation, fibres can demonstrate adhesion or anti-adhesion.
This is where super-hydrophobicity comes into play, wherein, artificial surfaces can
only perform well when tailored for an environment with specific, constant parameters,
whereas gecko toe pads can maintain their function given various environments [29].
2.2
Manufacturing methods
To develop a foundation for this thesis, it is fundamental to be aware of the current
technology used to replicate bio-inspired surfaces from the most basic (photolithog-
raphy and soft lithography) to the most innovative among biomimetic functional
surfaces for gecko toe replication. Accordingly, in the present section, several micro-
manufacturing methods are briefly introduced beginning with 3D printing and the
importance of rapid prototyping, followed by a more detailed description of the 3D
printing techniques.
2.2.1
Micro-fabrication strategies
Photolithography
Photolithography is a micro-manufacturing approach in which a pattern is trans-
ferred onto a film or substrate. It involves light exposure of a photoresist through a
mask projecting the image or desired pattern, to the smooth wafer. With a negative
photoresist, the exposed areas are hardened whereas the unexposed is later washed
away by a solution bath (such as acid in wet approaches or a plasma oxygen ions in
dry settings). With a positive photoresist the light exposed areas become soluble [30].
The main application of photolithography is to create silicon wafers with integrated
circuits which are used in all kind of electronic devices such as sensors, smart phones,
and so on [31].
This process involves multiple steps which are summarised in Figure 2.3. The main
disadvantages to photolithography are that: the complexity of the process makes it
prohibitively expensive (especially in cases which do not involve mass production);
it is limited to use with specific materials; the geometries are also limited to flat 2D
structures; and it requires high-tech equipment plus a cleanroom environment.
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Manufacturing methods
11
oxide
substrate
a) Prepare wafer
oxide
substrate
b) Apply photoresist (PR)
PR
oxide
substrate
c) Align photomask
PR
Cr
Glass
oxide
substrate
d) Expose to UV light
PR
Cr
Glass
oxide
substrate
e) Develop and remove 
    PR exposed to UV light
PR
oxide
substrate
f) Etch exposed oxide
PR
oxide
substrate
g) Remove remaining PR
Figure 2.3: Simplified photolithography process by dry etching using a negative photoresist.
Illustration adapted from Photolithography dry etching process. Credit: Cmglee.
Soft Lithography
Soft lithography is an alternative, non-photolithographic strategy based on self-
assembly and replica moulding, as well as low-cost micro-fabrication methods. All
techniques within this method have a similar approach where a patterned elastomer
is used as a stamp, mould, or mask (instead of a rigid photomask), typically made of
Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) reproducing micropatterns or microstructures. Once
the mask is developed, multiple copies of the patterned featured can be defined us-
ing different soft lithographic approaches [8, 32]. Figure 2.4 shows the development
process of the PDMS mask, which can be divided in two main steps: (1) the master
development by photolithography and (2) the PDMS replica mould [33].
The main advantages of soft lithography are that it counteracts the limitations
found in photolithography. Soft lithography is cost-effective and less time consuming.
Additionally, it eliminates the need of a clean room, multiple materials can be used,
and it is not limited to 2D structure fabrication [6, 33].
Nonetheless, an initial
investment of at least 200$ USD for the master is needed to develop the PDMS mask
[34] if the manufacturer lacks of the technology or expertise needed to make the
master. However, outsourcing or not, photolithography is unavoidable.
==PAGE:24==
12
2 State of the Art
Si or Glass
SU-8 Photoresist
i) Pouring and spinning of photoresist
a) Master development
Si or Glass
ii) Baking
iii) UV light exposing and developing
Mask
Si or Glass
b) PDMS generation
Si or Glass
i) Placement of rods for inlet and suction
Rods
Si or Glass
ii) PDMS pouring over the master
PDMS
PDMS polymer resin
iii) Thermal curing and releasing of PDMS
PDMS
Final mold
Figure 2.4: (a) SU-8 photoresist-based master pattern development. (b) Subsequent PDMS
replica mould generation [33].
There are six demonstrated soft lithograpic techniques: microcontact printing
(µCP), replica moulding (REM), microtransfer moulding (µTM), micromoulding in
capillaries (MIMIC), solvent-assisted micromoulding (SAMIM), and Near-Field Phase
Shift Lithography (NFSL). Figure 2.5 shows the schematic of three of these procedures.
The most common approach found in the literature to manufacture gecko toes is REM.
Instead of a rigid mould, replica moulding (Figure 2.5, b) consists of an elastomeric
mould (typically PDMS) that is used to obtain the desired pattern. The prepolymer
is applied over the PDMS and afterwards, the mould is slightly compressed. This
applied force enables the creation of complex geometries that would be difficult or
nearly impossible to reproduce by other means including photolithography. After the
PDMS is pulled off, the desired geometry is revealed [33].
Manufacturing of adhesive surfaces, bio-inspired by gecko toes
Although it is now agreed that the adhesive properties of the gecko toe are due
to the topography, many natural features are still unable to be replicated such as
self-healing [4]. Nevertheless, research conclusions have been made as to which de-
sign parameters should be considered when designing and manufacturing gecko toe
surfaces. According to the hierarchical bioinspired adhesive surfaces manufacturing
methods review by D. Brodoceanu et al. [5], the critical design parameters are:
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Manufacturing methods
13
PDMS
Ink
i) Inking of the stamp with thiol solution
ii) Stamp dry
PDMS
Si
Gold
iii) Contact of thiol solution 
 
 
 
to substrate
PDMS
iv) Transmission of thiol solution 
 
     to substrate
Si
Gold
vi) Etch
Si
Gold
a) µCP
PDMS
i) Prepolymer moulding
ii) Cure and peel-off
b) REM
Prepolymer
Prepolymer
PDMS
i) Prepolymer pouring
iii) Placement on substrate
iv) Curing and removal of PDMS
c) µTM
Prepolymer
PDMS
ii) Removal of the prepolymer 
excess, by scratching or blowing
PDMS
Figure 2.5:
Schematic illustrations of soft lithographic techniques for (a) microcontact
printing (µCP), (b) replica moulding (REM), and (c) microtransfer moulding (µTM) [33].
• Fibre aspect ratio. Modulus decreases drastically compared with the bulk ma-
terial when it has a high aspect ratio. The aspect ratio is limited by the manu-
facturing process and clumping propensity.
• Fibre end shape. It has been proven that the tip of the fibres has a significant
influence on the adhesion performance (e.g. reducing the tip radius or increasing
length). An example of good performance is mushroom-shaped fibres which
improve stress distribution within the contact area [35], with a pull-off force of
almost 20 times higher than simple cylinder patterned surfaces.
• Inclined fibres.
Angled fibres have been reported to show anisotropic shear
adhesion, which is desirable for adhesives under shear stresses.
• Environmental factors. Depending on the surface (i.e. roughness), the artificial
adhesive is going to have better or worse performance. As mentioned before,
multi-hierarchical surfaces may have increased performance with higher levels
of roughness, whereas a single-hierarchical level has proven to achieve higher
pull-off forces in planar surfaces [22].
==PAGE:26==
14
2 State of the Art
As mentioned, the ‘simplest’ and most common method to fabricate hierarchical
structures is soft lithography [5, 8, 22] (specifically REM). Nevertheless, due to the
increased interest in functional surfaces there are also many other innovative methods
which have mimicked the gecko behaviour. These approaches, with their roots in
photolithograpy and soft lithography, are summarised in the mentioned review by D.
Brodoceanu et al. [5].
In order to complete the objective of the present work while maintaining brevity,
only three of the fabrication methods will be reviewed. These methods will be chosen
by the material (only polymer-based structures) and the best performance in adhesion
tests (normal and shear forces). Moreover, only the reported articles made with regu-
lar geometrical structures (non-fibre based methods) will be considered. Afterwards,
one of the reviewed structures will be reproduced and printed using the conventional
3D printing methods discussed in Section 2.2.2.
Two-step photolithography and soft lithography (2PSL)
Manufacturing process and material: Performed by Christian Greiner et al. [22],
this method is a combination of the previously described photolithography and soft
lithography (REM) methods. The structures were made out of PDMS, moulded out of
a master made of SU-8 with hierarchical holes. It is called two-step photolithography
because, in order to obtain the two hierarchical levels, two masks with two differ-
ent diameters are required. The first step is developing the second layer of pillars
with a mask containing smaller diameter holes using a thin SU-8 layer, accordingly,
the second step is developing the first array of pillars with increased diameter and
photoresist thickness. Afterwards, PDMS is poured in the master, hardened, and
demoulded resulting in the desired geometry. Two types of surfaces were created:
one-level pillar and two-level pillars. The process and resulting surface texture can
be seen in Figure 2.6. The base pillars have a diameter of 50 µm and an aspect ratio
(λ) of 4 while the top pillars have a diameter of 10 µm and a λ = 0.5, 1 and 2.
1) Coating photoresist, soft bake
2) Masked irradiation
3) Coating new photoresist layer
4) 2    masked irradiation
5) Development
6) Soft molding, demolding
nd
SU-8
Si wafer
Mask
Figure 2.6: PDMS hierarchical gecko setae using photolithography and soft lithography
(REM) [22].
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Manufacturing methods
15
Test and results: Normal adhesion tests were performed with a spherical inden-
ter with a bigger radius than the pillar surface and at different preloads comparing
single-level pillars with two-level pillars. Surprisingly, and in contrast with theoretical
studies [36] supporting the positive effect of multi-hierarchical structures on adhesion,
the pillars with only one level performed better than the multi-hierarchical structures.
This can be explained because the one-level surface has a higher packing density
(22.67%) than the two-level surface (5.15%). Another reason is the misalignment of
the second level with the first one due to the manufacturing method ‘sectioning’ the
smaller pillars. Another insight found with this experiment was that the adhesion
(single pillar and multi-hierarchical) increases with increasing λ attributed to a higher
energy-dissipation when it is pulled off. Another test performed was the wettability
of the surface, measuring contact angles and comparing also to a flat PDMS surface;
in this case, the hierarchical structure performed better with a contact angle of 160◦
compared with flat and one-level surface with 108◦and 139◦, respectively.
3D Direct Laser Writing (DLW)
Manufacturing process and material: Carried out by M. Röhrig et al. [37], the
3D Direct Laser Writing approach is considered the first rapid prototyping method
to achieve nano-scale.
It is based on Two-Photon Absorption (TPA), capable of
fabricating 3D nanostructures using an IP-G 780 photoresist. TPA is a process where
two photons are absorbed simultaneously by an atom, ion, or molecule, promoting
an electron from a lower energy state to a higher energy level [38]. In this case, the
DLW process was carried out by the 3D printer Photonic Professional GT developed
by Nanoscribe GmbH [39]. It has an ultra-fast laser whose beam is tightly focused on
the photoresist which is completely transparent for the laser, since the energy of the
one-photon falls under the absorption level of the material of the chosen wavelength.
Nevertheless, the focal point has enough intensity so that the photoresist is exposed
by multi-photon absorption, polymerising locally [37, 40].
To proceed for the manufacturing of gecko structures, sample preparation is nec-
essary. A thin layer of SU-8 is deposited over a coverslip to facilitate the bonding
of the micro-features to the surface. The SU-8 is then flood-exposed to reveal the
SU-8. Afterwards, the IP-G 780 is dispensed and soft baked to keep it in place and
another soft flood-exposure is applied. Then the sample is placed in the Nanoscribe,
and the geometry specified to the software in a stereolithographic format (.stl) where
it is sliced, almost like a conventional 3D printer (Section 2.2.2). The main difference
is that, depending on the desired geometry, it may be necessary to manually ‘write’
the structures. Once in the building plate, the laser ‘writes’ and exposes the features
in the IP-G 780. Finally, the unexposed regions are washed away using a bath of
Propylene glycol monomethyl ether acetate (PGMEA) before the print is developed
(see Figure 2.7 for a schematic explanation). The surfaces vary between the ranges
of 16 to 24 µm height in base pillars, and 1 to 3 µm for the tips (further details
regarding the dimensions can be found in the article).
==PAGE:28==
16
2 State of the Art
1) SU-8 coating and soft bake
2) Flood exposure
3) IP-G 780 dispensing and soft bake,          
    post-exposure bake SU-8
4) Exposure by multi-photon absortion
5) Development
SU-8
Coverslip
IP-G 780
Inverse microscope
Figure 2.7: Gecko inspired array of pillars made using 3D Direct Laser Writing with an
acrylic-based negative resist [37].
One of the main advantages of DLW is the flexibility with regard to materials,
since the only requirements are that they have at least two components, a monomer
and a photoinitiator [40]. Consequently, it was possible to use a material as stiff
(EIP −G780 = 4 GPa) as the gecko hairs, which are in the range of EGecko = 1 - 4 GPa.
In contrast, other conventional manufacturing approaches with photolithography or
soft-lithography are limited to soft materials to facilitate the demoulding process
(SU-8 and PDMS) whose drawbacks are that they tend to break when demoulded.
Test and results: With this approach, several gecko arrays were printed varying
λ, tip shape, inclination, and up to two hierarchical levels. Figure 2.8 corresponds to
the two-level structures with mushroom tips (for a detailed description of the features
studied, refer to the scientific paper [37]). Normal adhesion tests were performed at
different preloads using a conventional Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) because the
Nanoscribe posses a small building area. After the adhesion tests, the results showed
that the mushroom-shaped tips had better adhesive properties due to the increased
contact area. In addition, it was determined that the mushroom-shaped tips also
performed better for all preloads.
The main limitations of DLW are that, despite being described as rapid prototyp-
ing, the process has several steps in addition to the printing time (∼10 hours) plus
a high learning curve which is unlike the ‘plug and play’ nature of conventional 3D
printing. When the article was published in 2012, the machine was in its first version;
nowadays, the resolution has improved to nearly 50 nm and the writing areas have
grown. Before the building area was 90 x 90 um2 rendering the surface too small
to measure shear forces with AFM (H. Hölscher, co-author of the article, personal
communication, April 26, 2017).
Conventional 3D printed master and dip-transfer process (3DPMDT)
Manufacturing process and material: Developed by Murphy et al. [9], this tech-
nique incorporates the design parameter of mushroom-shaped fibres because widened
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Manufacturing methods
17
tips enable an important increase in adhesion. In addition, they reduce space be-
tween pillars allowing more tip fibres to be formed and thus, increased tip density
and contact points. Moreover, it gives the fibres space to bend when force is applied
preventing them from collapsing and forming clusters, a phenomenon commonly seen
in carbon fibre or nano-hair surfaces [41, 42].
In this approach, three structures were manufactured using three different tech-
niques spanning from micron-scale to millimetre-scale : the first one describes micro-
scale hierarchy surfaces; the second one macro-scale hierarchy; and the third one is
a three-level hierarchy (as a combination of the previous two). For the purpose and
brevity of this thesis, only the second one will be addressed since it combines the first
approach with 3D printing. Moreover, the third is discarded as it was not possible to
characterise the surface by the authors due to the fibres collapsing. For a complete
description of the three techniques, refer to the article [9].
This process fabricates macro-scale base fibres by first creating a master template
with conventional 3D printing using the Invision HR printer from 3D Systems, which
is based on the Multi-Jet Modelling printer technology (MJM) discussed in detail in
Section 2.2.2. The master is then moulded with silicone rubber to create a negative
template of the surface. Once demoulded, the silicone mould is used to replicate the
base geometry using polymers. In this case, polyurethane (PU or PUR) is used for
both the base and tips. The dip-transfer process is used for the tips, wherein, the
base fibres are dipped in a liquid PU. After coating, the wetted fibres are placed on
an etched silicon mould or a soft silicone elastomer mould where capillary forces draw
the liquid into the cavities, and after 24 hours of curing, the silicon mould is etched
away with XeF2 or demoulded in the case of the soft mould. The base fibres have a
diameter of 300 µm and 600 µm in the fibre and mushroom edge respectively, with a
height of 1.2 mm. The top fibres have a diameter of 50 µm and 110 µm in the fibre
and mushroom edge respectively, with a height of 100 µm.
1) 3D printed moulded base fibers 
dipped in PU layer
2) PU retained by the tips
3) Fiber array placed onto an etched
Si mould
4) PU cured and Si mould etched
away with dry etching
Si mould
Figure 2.8: Gecko microfibres manufactured with a combination of 3D printing and dip-
transfer [9].
Test and results: To characterise these surfaces, four different sample designs were
==PAGE:30==
18
2 State of the Art
manufactured to compare to each other: one flat surface; one with micro tips (at a
single level); one with macro tips (at a single level); and a two-level hierarchical
surface as a combination of the last two (the micro features atop the macro features).
With this approach, indentation tests were performed to measure adhesion with a 12
mm hemispherical indenter.
Test results indicated that the two-level structures show higher adhesion, specif-
ically at higher preloads. The reason for this is that, as the hemispherical inden-
ter pressures the surface, the features deform allowing more fibres to contact the
hemisphere, increasing the contact area and thus, the adhesion force. This is true
specifically for the two-level structures, which have increased compliance (in contrast
to the flat surface). Aside from the adhesion, a comprehensive study between the
indenter and the sample was carried out. Using the indentation depth data collected
from indentation tests, the two-level structure outperformed the other three surfaces
again in terms of dissipated energy, effective work of adhesion, and relative contact
areas. Lastly, a study of repeatability for the surface adhesion was performed because
this ability is highly desired for adhesive applications. For this test, the single and
double-level surfaces were indented 100 times in the same area. Surprisingly, both
surfaces displayed a similar behaviour showing that the hierarchical structures have
little effect on the repeatability. After this test, it was discovered that pausing the
test for 3 hours to recover the shape of the structures had no positive effect on the
adhesion because the features were irreversibly damaged. For an in-depth description
of the tests, refer to the article [9]).
Summary
In this section, different micro-manufacturing methods have been addressed. From
the most ‘generic’ to more ‘specific’ in order to fabricate gecko-inspired functional sur-
faces. This was done to understand the intricacies and limitations of these kinds of
manufacturing methods, and how they have been tailored to create gecko surfaces. It
has been proven that it is still under investigation, and there are still gaps to under-
stand on how this features behave in terms of material, geometry and manufacturing
approach.
From the review article by Malshe et al. [5], three approaches were selected and
described.
The first one, Two-step photolithography and soft lithography (2PSL)
was selected due to its ‘simplicity’ in its manufacturing mode, since it is one of the
first ones approaching multi-hierarchical structures and tackles a mixture between
photolithography and soft lithography (considered as ‘conventional’ approaches for
functional surfaces). The second, 3D Direct Laser Writing (DLW) was chosen due
its novel method of manufacture and the ability to ‘print’ more complex 3D features.
Lastly, Conventional 3D printed master and dip-transfer process (3DPMDT) which
mixes 3D printing with the micro approach ‘dip-transfer’, the main interest in this
approach is the mixture of macro and micro features obtaining remarkable adhesive
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Manufacturing methods
19
forces (Table 2.4), supporting the hypothesis that it will be possible to obtain adhesion
at larger scales.
In the Tables 2.3 and 2.4, a review comparison between these techniques is made
contrasting their geometries, material and mechanical behaviour.
Based on these
tables, one of these approaches will be chosen to be 3D printed (resized for the 3D
printer resolution) and compared with its original to assess its performance. Accord-
ingly, designs proposed from the author will also be printed and compared with the
‘Literature Sample’ (referred as such from now on).
Table 2.3: General characteristics for the two-level hierarchical structures of 2PSL, DLW
and 3DPMDT.
Manufacturing
approach
Material
Young’s
Modulus
(bulk)
Mushroom
tips
Reference
2PSL
PDMS
1.43 MPa
No
[22]
DLW
IP-G 780
4 GPa
Yes
[37]
3DPMDT
PU
3 MPa
Yes
[9]
Table 2.4: Testing conditions and results of adhesion strength.
Manufacturing
approach
Preload
Contact
area
[mm2]
Aspect ra-
tio (λ)
Pull-off
force
[mN]
Adhesion
strength
[kPa]
2PSL
2.75
0.37*
2
0.8
2.15
DLW
6.75·10−3
3 · 10−4*
4.8
0.11·10−3
0.37
3DPMDT
355
16
4
575
36**
Looking at the tables, it is conspicuous the differences between the three ap-
proaches. Their Young’s Modulus differ greatly from each other. Surprisingly, DLW
has the higher modulus (in the range of gecko toes), and it is the approach with the
poorest adhesion performance (0.37 kPa against 2.15 and 36 kPa found in 2PSL and
3DPMDT, respectively). This can be explained for the small contact area, achieved
given that its surface geometry didn’t have compliance in the second level.
*Calculated contact area from the pull-off force and adhesion strength.
**Calculated adhesion strength from the contact area of the sample given in the literature (16
mm2).
==PAGE:32==
20
2 State of the Art
Overall, it can be seen how 3DPMDT has the best adhesion performance; it is
explained by the increased contact area (16 m2), combined with the aspect ratio and
better compliance due to the mushroom-shaped tips. The mushroom tips in the base
and end fibres allow higher density of terminal tips and higher contact area for each
terminal.
All things considered, 3DPMDT will be chosen as Literature Sample (LS) as a
guidance to assess the performance of the proposed design and manufacture approach
with 3D printing.
2.2.2
3D printing
Rapid Prototyping (RP) is defined as the group of techniques capable of manu-
facture, in a short period of time, models of a product before it is commercialised.
Nowadays, with the increasing technology it is even possible to create final/functional
parts using these technologies [43]. The most recent technology is known as Additive
Manufacturing (AM), commonly known as 3D printing, which is rapidly increasing
towards mass production and mass customization [44]. The main principle of 3D print-
ing is to build a part from a CAD model and manufacture it layer by layer. Compared
to other rapid prototyping technologies that need further dimensional study, tooling
or process planning in general [43], 3D printing is a simplification of this process able
to produce highly complex geometries from CAD files. The 3D printing work-flow is
outlined in Figure 2.9.
3D CAD model
.stl file
(mesh)
Slicing software
Layer slices
Gcode (tool path)
Process parameters
AM process
SLA
DLP
FDM
MJ
SLS
...
3D object
Figure 2.9: Generalised work-flow of Additive Manufacturing Process [45].
There are numerous of methods regarding 3D printing, from professional print-
ers to domestic printers. The most common technologies of 3D printing or AM are
Fused Deposition Modelling (FDM), Stereolithography (SLA), Digital Light Process-
ing (DLP), Material Jetting (MJ), Electron Beam Melting (EBM), Selective Laser
Sintering (SLS) and Laminated Object Manufacturing (LOM). Even though these
technologies have been widely investigated and developed, and can reach tight toler-
ances, their precision does not only depends on the machine specifications [46]. In
order to obtain the highest resolutions and mechanical properties there are several
factors to take into account to achieve the best quality; these are: building direction,
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Manufacturing methods
21
due to the anisotropy and voids created during the manufacturing process; process
parameters such as temperature, speed, layer thickness, filling percentage, etc.; ma-
chine accuracy or resolution; and CAD file resolution—the CAD models are meshed
in triangles in stereolithography, i.e.
‘.stl’ files.
Controlling these parameters are
limited to the user, specially for commercial devices. Normally, commercial printers
only allow the user to choose the layer thickness, percentage of support material (if
needed) and pre-set velocities [47].
The layer thickness defines the vertical resolution of the final part, since the thinner
the layer, the higher the resemblance to the original part. The horizontal resolution
depends more on the type of machine being used, alongside the material is able to
print with, which is the main limitation for the nature of this project. Given the
extremely small features that will be printed, these machines are also differentiated
by the way they create the layers and how they bond with one another. Moreover,
the technology and material chosen to create the part will determine the building
time, mechanical properties, accuracy and possible post-processing [43].
These are the main reasons why parts built with AM lack consistency and repeata-
bility in comparison with Subtracting Manufacturing (SM), CNC machining which
achieve higher quality because of its predictability and homogeneity [43]. Neverthe-
less, 3D printing is able to manufacture extremely complex geometries not achievable
with SM, the most simple example would be a hollow sphere.
3D printing approaches review
In the following table, a review of the mentioned AM methods can be seen, with a
brief description and the corresponding material, resolution, post-processing method,
advantages and disadvantages.
Note that the resolution in the table is the minimum feature achievable in the
XY plane, the resolutions stated are an average found in commercial 3D printers. In
addition to the described methods, EBM behaves similarly to SLS [60], which utilises
metals. This is not covered within the scope of this report, since the thesis is focused
on plastic materials.
As demonstrated, the approaches with higher resolutions are SLA, DLP and MJ.
It is important to address that these resolutions are given by commercial printers.
As mentioned before, the more control the user has with the machine, the higher the
achievable resolution. In this case, SLA and DLP will be the approaches investigated.
The SLA is the commercial Form 2 [54] and the DLP is a home-built printer [61]
which has a higher theoretical resolution than the commercial DLPs.
Although commercial 3D printing methods are not capable of producing the
nanofeatures achievable with micro/nano-manufacturing approaches (without taking
==PAGE:34==
22
2 State of the Art
Table 2.5: Review and comparison of the existing AM approaches.
Material
Resolution
Post-
processing
Pros
Cons
Ref.
FDM: Solid filament material is supplied by a nozzle, which melts the plastic, depositing it over the
building plate layer by layer. The molten material hardens after extrusion, allowing layers to bind
and reducing inaccuracies.
Thermoplastic.
127 µm.
Optional
sanding
or
acetone
bath.
Cheap.
Accessible.
User friendly.
Material availability
Low resolution.
Slow.
[48]
[49]
[50]
[51]
SLA: A concentrated laser beam solidifies (crosslink) a liquid photopolymer as it goes along, layer
by layer. It uses two galvanometers to aim the laser beam. The resolution is given by the laser spot
size.
Photopolymer.
50 µm.
Solvent
bath
and
post-
curing.
Fast.
User friendly.
Accuracy.
Post-processing.
Toxic material.
Expensive material.
Limited materials.
Slow.
[51]
[48]
[52]
[53]
[54]
DLP: Same working principle as SLA, this time with a digital projector flashing a single image of
each layer at once. Each layer is also broke down into square pixels, called voxels.
Photopolymer.
15 µm.
Solvent
bath
and
post-
curing.
Faster than
SLA.
User friendly.
Accuracy.
Post-processing.
Toxic material.
Expensive material.
Limited materials.
Small build size.
[51]
[48]
[52]
[55]
into account the described Nanoscribe), given that some machines can achieve down
to 50 µm, it is possible to achieve micro-sized surfaces. To do so, a further study
of the SLA and DLP will be carried out, assessing the limitations and possibilities
of these approaches. These will be further explained in Section 3.1, where the basic
principles of photopolymerization and the chosen technologies (SLA and DLP) will
be thoroughly explored.
The importance of rapid prototyping
Product development is an iterative process in which, without prototyping, the
probability of failure after testing the part is 30%, with prototyping it is reduced to
as much as 5% [62]. Therefore, prototyping reduces the risk of costly iterations (in
regard to tool manufacturing and time). Needless to say, prototyping mainly benefits
products with a high level of uncertainty, e.g. new technologies and state of the art
products. The parts for which the costs of failures are low, or the technology is well
known, will not be as influenced by this cost-risk. Accordingly, due to shorter cycles
==PAGE:35==
2.2 Manufacturing methods
23
Table 2.6: Review and comparison of the existing AM approaches (continuation).
Material
Resolution
Post-
processing
Pros
Cons
Ref.
MJ: The liquid material is pushed through a nozzle where it is broken into droplets, shaping the
part layer by layer. It has a UV lamp to crosslink the polymer, binding the layers together.
Liquid pho-
topolymer.
44 µm.
Solvent
bath
and
post-
curing.
User friendly.
Accuracy.
Wax support
material that is
melted away.
Post-processing.
Toxic material.
Expensive material.
Slower printing
times.
Poor surface
finish.
[56]
[51][57]
[48]
[48]
SLS: Powdered material is deposited in a thin layer onto the building plate, a laser selectively
sinterizes the powder; once the layer is ’drawn’ another layer is deposited on top of the solidified
one.
Powdered
materials
(polymers,
metals,
ceramics
and
com-
posites).
127 µm.
Powder
cleaning.
Optional
polishing.
No support
needed.
Excellent
mechanical
properties.
Parts with
surface porosity.
Expensive and
big machinery.
Not user
friendly.
Rough surface
finish.
[58]
[48] [59]
in the manufacturing process, a point with more products per decade with higher
demand has been reached. Additionally, the higher the complexity of these products,
the higher the probability of failure occurring [63].
This could be extrapolated to nanomanufacturing processes where, throughout
this literature review, it has been proven that, in regard to functional surfaces, they
are still under deep investigation. There are numerous of techniques to create these
surfaces yet, there are still expensive compared to conventional manufacturing meth-
ods. Furthermore, there are still questions to be answered about the working princi-
ples of the functional surfaces found in nature. Consequently, there is still a need for
mathematical models and iterative experimentation [4].
As mentioned, soft lithography is a cost-effective manufacturing method compared
with photolithography; nevertheless, it still requires a considerable investment. When
the manufactured geometry is known in regard to application and performance, soft
lithography is the ‘right’ choice. On the contrary, when the iterative design strategy
of ‘trial and error’ is necessary, the cost is substantially higher—due to the need of
photo-lithographic masks of different sizes and geometries. Hence, there is a need for
a further cost-effective approaches to rapid prototyping in this field.
==PAGE:36==
24
2 State of the Art
2.2.3
Summary
Throughout this chapter relevant information derived from the literature has been
condensed. This information has ranged from the ‘general’ (i.e. biomimetics) towards
the more ‘specific’ areas, such as different manufacturing approaches and limitations.
This literature review forms the foundations of this thesis and will be built upon
throughout the report. For the purpose of clarity the flowchart seen in Figure 2.10
summarises the areas tackled during this chapter.
LITERATURE REVIEW SUMMARY
General introduction
Types of functional surfaces
Design parameters Nature s Toolbox 
Focus Area
Biomimetics
Bio-inspired surfaces
Texture/topography
Scale
Chemistry
Sensory system
Complementary 
subsurface
Shapes at multiple 
scales
Integration of 
parameters
Adhesion
Super-hydrophobicity
Self cleaning
Hydrodynamics and 
antibiofouling
Optics
Sensorial response
Hardness and 
toughness
Energy scavenging
... 
Gecko toes 
Manufacturing methods
Multiscale hierarchical 
structures
Microfabrication strategies
3D printing
Review
Availability
Materials
Limitations
RESEARCH GAP
Types
Materials
Performance
Limitations
Figure 2.10: Literature review summary flowchart.
2.3
Project scope
During the research about functional surfaces and manufacturing approaches using
the gecko toes as a case study, it has been discovered that there is a gap of consis-
==PAGE:37==
2.3 Project scope
25
tency in the manufacturing processes. It is still under thorough research and many
designs and experiments are subjected under an iterative process of ‘trial and error’,
mainly due to the unavailability of the right geometry and material for the surfaces.
This leads to a waste of a considerable amount of resources. On that basis, a rapid
prototyping method is needed and proposed using conventional 3D printing, where,
under the hypothesis that if microscale surfaces are achievable with this approach,
it will be possible to experiment with more designs, increasing the complexity and
experimenting with critical parameters, such as density of fibres, inclination angles,
and so forth.
“One particular challenge in science and technology is the implementation of such
structural hierarchies in artificial materials from the molecular level over mesoscopic
length scales (nm and µm) to macroscopic dimensions with highest possible precision,
but with the least effort and costs [64].”
2.3.1
Problem statement
In light of the lack of a cost-effective rapid prototyping method for
functional surfaces, will it be possible to fabricate micro-features using
a conventional 3D printing approach (DLP or SLA) which could then
be used to forecast the surface behaviour of similar features at even
smaller micro- or nano- scales, thus enabling faster optimised design
iterations?
Accordingly, to best answer this question, the following tasks were carried out:
• Research and understand bio-inspired surface behaviour, and identify current
manufacturing approaches.
• Classify and compare additive manufacturing methods, extending the knowl-
edge toward SLA and DLP approaches.
• Construct a sensible methodology by choosing the relevant tools to best as-
sess the feasibility of SLA and DLP to print bio-inspired surfaces, given the
constraints of this project.
• Analyse, compare and interpret the data to determine the tolerances and capa-
bilities of each machine, choosing the optimal parameters.
• Increase the bio-inspired surface design complexity and validate its behaviour
by comparison with the initial simplified design.
==PAGE:38==
26
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3
Theoretical
Background
This chapter tackles the working principles of the chosen manufacturing methods,
followed by the machinery used to characterise the samples and, finally, the principles
of the sample testing. Thus, this chapter is tailored to follow the methodology outline
of the thesis (Chapter 4).
3.1
Manufacturing processes
As mentioned, the approaches used to manufacture the gecko surfaces will be SLA
and DLP (which is a variation of the SLA process). Both of these work under the
same principle, where a light source is focused on a liquid photopolymer which is
cured layer by layer in a process called photopolymerization.
In this section, the photopolymerization process will be explained as well as a
more in-depth study of SLA and DLP. These two configurations can also be referred
to as Vector scan and Mask projection, respectively. Other configurations within the
photopolymerization processes are the Two-photon approaches (discussed in Section
2.2 p. 17) and Material Jetting, briefly introduced in Section 2.2.2.
3.1.1
Photopolymerization process
In what follows, the curing process will be explained including the material in-
volved and an overview of the chemical process. This explanation relies on material
from the books: Photoinitiators for Polymer Synthesis: Scope, Reactivity and Effi-
ciency, Chapters 1 and 2 [65]; Additive Manufacturing Technologies, Chapter 4 [66];
and Photoinitiated crosslinking polymerisation [67].
UV curing or photopolymerization is a process where a resin (i.e. multifunctional
monomer and oligomer matrix) is transformed into a crosslinked polymer by a chain
==PAGE:40==
28
3 Theoretical Background
reaction initiated by reactive species (photoinitiator consisting of free radicals or ions),
achieved by UV irradiation. The reason for the photoinitiator is that most monomers
or oligomers do not produce initiating species with high yield to react with UV light.
Thus, the photoinitiator needs to be added to the formulation [67]. Depending on
the photopolymer, they can react also to other ranges of wavelengths (visible light)
[66]. Figure 3.1 shows the basic curing process.
Photoinitiator
Oligomer
Monomer
Liquid Photopolymer
Crosslinked Photopolymer
UV source
Figure 3.1: Photopolymeric reaction.
Materials
The photopolymer materials used in AM processes will be those which stop the
crosslinking process in the areas where there is no light. There are different sources
which cause the polymer curing, such as gamma rays, X-rays, electron beam, and
visible light. In the case of SLA and DLP, the UV and visible light are the most used.
Thermoplastic materials have a branched or linear molecular structure, which
allow them to be melted and solidified repeatedly. For crosslinked polymers, they do
not melt exhibiting less creep and stress relaxation as a result. There are two types of
photopolymer chemistry: free-radical (acrylates) and cationic (epoxy and vinylether).
The first resin created for stereolithography was acrylated based resins, which had
high reactivity (fast reaction when exposed to UV light). However, they created weak
ans inaccurate parts due to its high shrinkage rate (5 - 20%), warping and curling
[66]. Thus, nowadays it is rarely used on its own and it is a component of the epoxy
based resins. Epoxy resins, on the other hand, have low shrinkage (1 - 2%) and less
tendency to curl and warp.
Photopolymer chemistry
Photopolymerization is an exothermic reaction (for example, in acrylates the heat
reaction is around 85 kJ/mol).
Despite this high heat, it is necessary to have a
catalyst to start the reaction. This catalyst is the aforementioned photoinitiator.
==PAGE:41==
3.1 Manufacturing processes
29
In Figure 3.2, an example of a free-radical polymerization process is shown. For
example in a SLA process the laser, when focused on the photopolymer, for every two
photons (on average), one free-radical will be created (free-radical formation). The
radical causes the polymerization of 1,000 monomers (initiation and propagation).
The longer the polymer chains the better, yielding higher molecular weights. Poly-
merization is terminated by (1) recombination, when two polymer chains merge once
two radicals join; (2) disproportionation, when one radical is cancelled by another rad-
ical without joining; and (3) occlusion, which occurs when free radicals are ‘trapped’
in a solidified polymer, where the reaction is possible but due to the lack of space for
mobility within the polymer network, it prevents the radicals from reacting with the
monomer. The cationic polymerization follows the same structure as the free-radical
polymerization. In this case, instead of a free-radical, a cation is generated by the
laser. The main advantage of the photopolymerization process is that the reaction is
temperature independent; thus, the process stops if the light source is removed [61].
Free-radical
formation
Initiation
Propagation
Termination
P-I
-I•
I•+M      I-M•
I-M•   I -M-M…M•
I-M-M...-M-I
P-I  Photoinitiator
-I•  Free radical
M  Monomer
Figure 3.2: Free-radical polymerization process [66].
3.1.2
Stereolithography
The principle followed in stereolithography (SLA), is to solidify the liquid pho-
topolymer resin by focusing a UV laser beam, or enough wavelength to trigger the
photoinitiators and crosslink the polymer. The process follows the same work-flow
depicted if Figure 2.9. The solid part rests on the building plate or platform, which
is dipped in the vat containing the photopolymer.
There are two possible printer configurations, top-down and bottoms-up:
Top-down: The build platform is submerged in the vat and the laser is focused
on the surface of the vat, when one layer is done then the building plate moves down
allowing a thin layer of resin on top of the solidified part ready for the next layer.
There are different mechanisms to help the new liquid resin layer cover the surface,
moving the vat down and up or using a swiper, which pushes the resin evenly over
the cured part. In this configuration, the light source comes from above the vat.
Bottoms-up: The building platform is dipped in the resin reaching the bottom of
==PAGE:42==
30
3 Theoretical Background
the vat, leaving a gap between the bottom and platform equal to the layer thickness
of the part. Once the layer is solidified, the vat is lifted up allowing liquid resin to
fill the gap for the next layer. In this case, the cured part remains slightly ‘attached’
on the vat; thus, other mechanisms to push the resin in between the part and the
vat are used: sliding the vat, peeling the vat, or using a membrane and vertical force;
after the part is peeled off, the vat can be swiped or tilted to ensure the resin covers
all the surface. In this configuration the light source is placed below the vat.
The main advantage for bottoms-up versus top-down is that the former requires
less resin in the vat than the latter, given that top-down requires an amount of resin
equal to the height of the part being printed. On the other hand, top-down config-
uration, does not require a detachment mechanism once a layer is cured, preventing
the part from additional stresses. Figure 3.3 shows a diagram of the top-down SLA
configuration.
Vat
Cured part
z
Galvanometer mirrors
xy
Laser source
Building plate
Recoating
blade
Support
material
Laser beam
Figure 3.3: Top-down SLA.
3.1.2.1
Form 2
Form 2 (Figure 3.4) is a commercial SLA 3D printer, the latest printer made by
the company Formlabs. The optical engine incorporates a 250 mW precision laser
(405 nm violet), guided by a custom-built galvanometers. The building configuration
is bottoms-up where, to separate the part from the bottom, the vat slides horizontally
to the right and then the building plate moves up. While the part is up, a flat slider
spreads the resin over the surface and the part is moved down, leaving the next layer
ready to be cured.
The material used in the Form 2 is a resin formulated specifically for the Formlabs
machines. There are numerous options of resins, each of which possesses different
==PAGE:43==
3.1 Manufacturing processes
31
properties and colours, depending on the user’s needs. They come in containers that
are attached to the machine and with a mechanism that refills the vat when the resin
levels are low.
Figure 3.4:
Form 2 SLA
3D printer [54].
The software used for printing is also specifically made
for Formlabs machines called PreForm. It allows the user
to slice the part for printing and customise the printing
process. The changeable parameters are the layer thick-
ness and the support structure.
The other parameters
are fixed, and depend on the type of material used (some
resins will require more or less laser intensity). Nonethe-
less, the user cannot alter or view these values.
The printing process is rather simple.
Once the G-
code has been generated, after slicing the part with the
user’s preferences, the machine is just one click away from
starting to print. After the print is done, a post-process
of cleaning the part from residual liquid resin and post-
curing in a UV chamber is needed to fully cure the part
and increase the strength and performance of the part.
The minimum theoretical feature size in the XY direction is 140 µm (laser spot size,
see specifications of Form 2 in Appendix B). Formlabs also facilitates a design guide
with the minimum recommended features (Appendix B), which are surprisingly ‘large’
and, in theory, not feasible for the purpose of this thesis. Additionally, as mentioned
before, the machine is rather limited in terms of parameter customization. However,
this machine will be the subject of the experiments to prove its limitations and use
it as a comparison with the DLP.
3.1.3
Direct Light Processing
The general terminology for this printing strategy is Mask Projector, developed
in the early 90’s where, using different dynamic masks approaches, a bitmap is pro-
jected onto a resin. This dynamic masks can be Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) screens,
(SLM), or Digital Micromirror Device (DMD), which is the dynamic mask used in
DLP projector. Both DLP and DMD are a registered trademarks of Texas Instru-
ments Inc. Building upon SLA, Direct Light Processing 3D printing, follows the same
working principle as SLA. Instead of a laser, this approach uses a DLP projector to
cure the resin. The main advantage of DLP over other AM approaches is the building
time, since the cross section (layer) of the part is cured simultaneously, contrary to
other approaches where the curing or printing follows a vector scan path [66]. DLP
printers can have bottoms-up (Figure 3.5) and top-down configurations.
==PAGE:44==
32
3 Theoretical Background
Vat
Cured part
z
Building plate
Support
material
Projector
Transparent bottom
Liquid resin
Figure 3.5: Bottoms-up DLP.
The Digital Light Processing is a display device used in projectors and television
displays using optical micro-electro-mechanical technology operated by a DMD (Fig-
ure 3.6). Originally this was developed by Texas Instruments, which is also the only
manufacturer of this technology.
Figure 3.6: Digital Micromirror Device by Texas Instruments [68].
As a dynamic mask, DMD modulates the light with an array of micromirrors
that switch the light in each single pixel on and off. The arrays of micromirrors are
anchored on the top of the circuit, which controls their positions at around 10o to
-10o for the on-off position to 0o as ‘standby’ mode. The main advantages of the DMD
over the LCD screen is that DMD can achieve smaller pixel sizes and a narrower gap
between pixels, allowing higher resolutions and better uniform intensity. Additionally,
its ultra-flat aluminium mirrors enable higher UV illumination efficiency [69].
==PAGE:45==
3.1 Manufacturing processes
33
3.1.3.1
DTU DLP
Figure 3.7:
DLP v1 set-
up [70].
The DLP developed in DTU is a machine, which was
a result of several internal projects and upgrades. The
first project started in autumn 2013 as a diploma thesis
carried out by Karl-Emil Nielsen, with the development
and construction of a DLP platform focusing on the forces
involved in the printing process. The second was a contin-
uation built upon the previous one [70]. This first version
(referred as DLP v1 henceforth), used a commercial DLP
for AV projection, leading to a somewhat heterogeneous
light distribution. Due to this, the part struggled attach-
ing to attach to the building plate. Additional challenges
found in the printing process include peeling mechanism
and artefacts in the printings due to residual light. Nev-
ertheless, the authors addressed critical sources of error
and the main areas that needed further investigation in or-
der to obtain quality printings using DLP. These involved
a homogeneous light source, vat detachment mechanism,
UV exposure time, and resin behaviour.
Figure 3.8: DTU DLP v2
set-up.
The next big upgrade came in 2015 with the Master
Thesis carried out by Anders Ravn Jørgensen [61], where
the most influential process parameters in DLP are ad-
dressed (referred to as DTU DLP v2 henceforth). The
machine was developed in order to give the user the free-
dom to perform upgrades. It also uses an open source
slicer and G-code generator named Creation Workshop
(CW), which is also adjustable, to allow the user more
control over the machine. One of the main changes in
the system was the installation of a Texas Instrument
based DLP projector (LightCrafter) increasing the accu-
racy and precision, decreasing the pixel size and leading
to the quadrupling of the pixel density. A benchmark was
performed as a comparison with other commercial DLP
machines (EnvisionTEC Prefactory system) with satisfac-
tory results. Additionally, the importance of the vat coat-
ing was demonstrated in order to have a non-stick surface
and use a ‘peeling’ separation mechanism between part
and vat.
In this project, increasing the quality of the
projector was proposed, as well as using a better mate-
rial changeover. Research in to the resin used and other
options for the non-stick vat procedure (membrane) was
proposed subsequently. Figure 3.8 shows the set-up for the DTU DLP v2.
==PAGE:46==
34
3 Theoretical Background
Projector: Since this project was over, several changes were made. The most influen-
tial is that DTU acquired a high-end projector known as LUXBEAM Rapid System
by Visitech (Figure 3.9), which is equipped with a projection lens to enhance the
image in terms of field curvature, distortion and obtain a homogeneous image. The
lens has a magnification of x1, keeping the native image size of the DMD at a focal
distance from the Front Lens to the image plane of 71.35 mm [71]. This projector
has a DMD which quadruples the array of micromirrors (more than four million mi-
cromirrors), increasing the resolution from 912x1140 array [72] to 2560x1600 array
[73].
Figure 3.9: LUXBEAM RS WQ projector [74] and equipped Projection Lens LRS-10 P/N
6501980 [71]
One of the most important parameters on the projector is the DMD chipset [72],
which displays the build envelope and resolution of the machine. The DMD that
the LUXBEAM uses belongs to the DLP9000 Family of DMD by Texas Instruments.
Specifically made for applications such as 3D printing, 3D Imaging Microscopes and
many other industrial, optical and medical applications. As mentioned before its res-
olution is 2560x1600 Array with >4M micromirrors with a pitch of 7.56 µm. Overall,
the image size is 20.736x11.664 mm ([71]). With this pixel size, it would be theoret-
ically possible to achieve feature sizes of around 10 µm, if the right parameters are
found.
Material: The material used for this project is a black resin Industrial Blend (by
the brand Fun To Do). Industrial Blend is a resin developed for industrial applica-
tions that require hardness (75 shore D), and high and low temperatures resistance
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Sample characterization
35
(tested for -45oC to 225oC). According to the website, the curing times are found
to be 0.5 s for a 0.02 mm layer thickness, with a standard DLP projector at a light
source around 240 Watts. The reactivity range is given as being between 225 nm to
415 nm [75].
Membrane: The membrane is the element that keeps the printed part from stick-
ing to the vat surface. Moreover, it is a key factor for the printing quality. The
membrane material is Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), known for its anti-stick and
water repellent properties (coefficient of friction between 0.05 and 0.10, one of the
lowest). One of the main limitations found in PTFE is the tendency to creep, hence,
its long-term performance decreases significantly with the printings; rendering it nec-
essary to frequently change the membrane.
Given that this is an in-house device, it is still under experimentation and con-
stant upgrades. This means that the specifications of the machine have not properly
been benchmarked, and as such this project will further study the DTU DLP v2 ca-
pabilities. Nevertheless, in the early stages of the experimentation, the exposure time
(controllable from CW) has been considered optimal due to previous research carried
out by Ali Davoudinejad, co-supervisor of this project and Postdoc in the section of
Manufacturing Engineering at DTU.
Taking into account the projector specifications and Ali Davoudinejad’s work,
this thesis will experiment with the projector intensity and layer thickness in order
to obtain the best parameters for a high resolution bio-inspired surface. This will be
further explained in Chapter 4, where the LS will be printed, measured and finally
its design improved with more intricate and smaller features. A step-by-step manual
of how to operate the DTU DLP v2 can be found in Appendix C.
3.2
Sample characterization
This section describes the devices and software used to characterise the samples
printed with the Form 2 and DTU DLP v2.
3.2.1
DeMeet 220
DeMeet 220 is a coordinate measuring machine, with video and multisensor mea-
suring applications used in precision engineering, medical, plastics and electronics
industries. The measurements can be carried out in contactless 2D and 3D measure-
ments with a probe performed without risk of damaging the sample. The magnifica-
tion can be changed from 40x to x400. As the illumination system is key to obtaining
accurate measurements, the DeMeet 220 is equipped with a set of backlight, coaxial
light and segmented ringlight LED based illumination [77].
==PAGE:48==
36
3 Theoretical Background
Figure 3.10: DeMeet 220
[76].
The DeMeet software, Approve for DeMeet, enables
an interactive and intuitive environment to perform the
measurements as well as the possibility of building a mea-
suring program to automate and optimise the measuring
task. Nevertheless, for this project DeMeet will be used
as a primary ‘visual’ tool to obtain a quick appreciation of
the part’s quality, since the parts will be measured more
accurately with the software SPIP (Section 3.2.2.1).
3.2.2
Alicona Infinite Focus
Figure 3.11: Alicona Infi-
nite Focus [78].
The Alicona Infinite Focus is a measuring device based
on the Focus-Variation technology.
This technology is
able to measure surface roughness and micro 3D fea-
tures using vertical scanning and a small limited depth of
field (LDOF). The latter is the ability to emphasise one
plane of the object, being that one on focus with sharp
edges. LDOF enables a high resolution measurement of
the surface topography alongside colour information using
variation of focus in combination with vertical scanning.
This is achieved by a white light from LED source go-
ing through a set of optical lenses searching for a focus
position on the sample to measure [78].
The light beam is transmitted through a semi-
transparent light splitting mirror and an optical lens before the beam strikes the
surface. Depending on the topography of the sample, the light is reflected in different
directions when it contacts the surface. In the case of a surface with diffuse reflective
properties, the beam of light will be scattered in only on direction. On the contrary,
if the sample has specular reflection, it will be scattered in multiple directions. The
scattered light returning to the objective is then collected by a light-sensitive sensor
located behind the mirror.
To fully obtain a focused image of the whole sample, the optics raster the surface
alongside the optical axis and in XY stage planar direction, stitching together all the
data collected and processed by the sensor. This creates a 3D image with true colour
image and full depth of field.
Focus-Variation technology allows for repeat measurements on samples with a lo-
cal roughness of 9 nm at a cutting wavelength of 2 µm. This is why is the most
suitable tool to obtain high resolution 3D images and to obtain accurate measure-
ments with high repeatability (technical specifications can be found in Appendix D).
The samples to measure are within the boundaries established in the technical speci-
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Sample testing
37
fications. Ergo, the samples will be analysed with this tool, a non-invasive technique
that preserves the original characteristics of the samples.
3.2.2.1
Image analysis software SPIP
The scannings and data exported with Alicona will be processed with the software
SPIP™, a powerful tool to analyse and process microscopy images in 3D and 2D at
micro- and nanoscale. It provides numerous options. It is possible to clean the images
taken from possible noise, enhancing the data to have a better visualisation, towards
more accurate measurements than the in-built measurement systems found in Alicona
and Lext. SPIP™
supports data from many microscope sources, such as scanning
probe microscopes (AFM, SNOM, STM, etc), electron microscopes such as (TEM
and SEM), confocal microscopes, optical microscopes and so on [79].
Aside from visual examination of the 3D scans, the samples will be measured using
the Particle & Pore analysis Module. As it will be seen in Chapter 4, the sample used
as case of study (LS) has rounded features following a continuous regular pattern.
Hence, the author determined that the most feasible way to measure heights and
diameters, was to use this module. Its purpose is to detect and quantify features such
as pores, particles, grains, defects, cells, pillars and so on.
3.3
Sample testing
According to the literature, the main approach used to validate the samples adhe-
sion force is by measuring the pull-off forces with a hemispherical indenter [22]. The
radius of the hemisphere is much larger than the gecko surface, acting as a ‘rough
surface’. The indenter is then placed on the sample, steadily increasing the pressure
(preload). The fibres displacement and preload are recorded, by dividing the displace-
ment by the apparent contact area, the pull-off forces are obtained. This experiment
is carried out at different preloads to study the effect of the gecko geometries (hierar-
chical structures, aspect ratio, inclination angle, etc.) on the dry adhesion.
Due to the equipment limitations of this thesis, this test was not possible to carry
out. At first, an AFM was considered, but the structures were too big to measure with
AFM and only noise would be seen. Same applies with the use of a dynamometer,
whose scale was too big to detect any displacement.
A different method of validation was thus chosen. When Geckos have their toes
dry and a droplet is suspended over the surface it will experience a ‘lotus-effect’ or
super-hydrophobicity, known as Cassie regime. Nevertheless, when soaking the toe
on water, the water spreads the toe surface entering in the opposite state, the Wenzel
regime [80]. Both regimes are illustrated in Figure 3.12.
==PAGE:50==
38
3 Theoretical Background
Figure 3.12: Opposite wetting regimes Cassie (A) and Wenzel (B) in the same toe pad.
The transition was induced by soaking the pad in water for 30 minutes [80].
3.3.1
Wenzel and Cassie-Baxter’s relationships for wettability
Wettability is the tendency of a liquid to spread across a surface, generally char-
acterised by measuring the contact angles between a droplet and a surface, which
is determined by the cohesive and adhesive forces. When the contact angle is less
than 90o, the surface is considered hydrophilic, with high adhesiveness (adhesiveness
as strong solid-liquid interaction) and high wettability. In contrast, when the angle
surpasses 90o the surface is known as hydrophobic, with poor adhesiveness and low
wettability (Figure 3.13).
θ ≥ 150º
90° ≤ θ < 150°
0° ≤ θ < 90°
θ = 0º
Figure 3.13: Different states of wettability of a drop of a generic liquid. From low wetta-
bility (left) to high wettability (right).
For flat surfaces, the wettability is mainly a liquid-solid surface energy measure-
ment (relative to the gas-solid surface energy). Nevertheless, similar to the adhesion
behaviour of the gecko toe (Section 2.1.4), micro- and nanostructures play a key role
for the bio-inspired surface wettability, disregarding the chemical composition [81].
This phenomenon is explained with a comprehensive understanding of non-ideal
rough solid surfaces, where two wetting situations come into play (1) the homogeneous
wetting regime and (2) the heterogeneous wetting regime. Both of which depend on
the topography of the surface. A thorough study of these cases are explained in the
paper Wetting on Hydrophobic Rough Surfaces: To Be Heterogeneous or Not To Be
by Abraham Marmur [82].
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Sample testing
39
The homogeneous wetting regime is the scenario where a droplet completely fills
the grooves of the surface roughness (Figure 3.14 A). Homogeneous in this scenario
means that there is a pure solid-liquid interaction described by the Wenzel model,
defined by Equation (3.1). The homogeneous wetting regime yields the Wenzel ap-
parent contact angle, θW to the roughness ratio, r (ratio between true area of contact
of the solid surface to the nominal area) and the Young contact angle, θY defined for
an ideal surface (i.e. rigid, flat, polished, chemically homogeneous and stable surface).
cos θW = r cos θY
(3.1)
This equation reasons that, assuming a hydrophobic surface (θY > π/2), as the
roughness of the surface increases, the contact angle also increases, hence the hy-
drophobicity is augmented as well.
The scenario when the liquid do not penetrate the ‘grooves’, leaving air pockets
underneath the droplet (Figure 3.14 B), the droplet is known to be in an heteroge-
neous wetting regime. In this case, the Cassie-Baxter model (i.e. Cassie’s law) is
applied, described by Equation (3.2). Where θCB is the apparent Cassie-Baxter con-
tact angle.A new variables are introduced, the fraction of the projected area of the
solid surface wet by the liquid f and rf being the roughness ratio of the wet area.
Note that, it f = 1 and rf = r, the Cassie-Baxter regime turns into Wenzel regime.
cos θCB = rff cos θY + f −1
(3.2)
A
B
θCB
θW
Figure 3.14: (A) Homogeneous wetting regime, Wenzel model. (B) Heterogeneous wetting
regime, Cassie-Baxter model.
For the gecko toes case-study, a Cassie-Baxter regime is the desired state for the
samples to be printed. Nevertheless, to achieve this state of energy, the minimum
size features should be much smaller than the droplet size. The DLP used for this
project is theoretically capable of printing features of 7.6 µm minimum. However, due
to its sources of error, the machine has not been optimised to obtain such small sizes
yet. Hence, it is expected to obtain certain degree of high hydrophobicity from the
==PAGE:52==
40
3 Theoretical Background
manufactured sampled, but at this scales, obtaining super-hydrophobicity is nearly
impossible.
All things considered, it is still a feasible comparative tool to assess the quality of
the bio-inspired surfaces in terms of wettability and influence of different geometries
on the surface.
3.3.1.1
Contact angles measurement
The method used to measure contact angles is known as ‘Sessile drop technique’.
In order to measure the static contact angles, a contact angle goniometer from Ramé-
hart instrument co. Model 200 [83] is used . The setup of this device is seen in Figure
3.15 A, the optical setup captures the profile of a liquid over a solid sample. Using
an image processor software, DROPImage [83] (Figure 3.15 B) the angles between
liquid-solid and liquid-vapor interfaces are measured (i.e. contact angles).
Figure 3.15: (A) Ramé-hart Model 200 Standard Contact Angle Goniometer [83] and (B)
DROPImage standard visualisation and measurement software of contact angles.
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 4
Methodology
This thesis aims to seek the possibility of conventional 3D printing bio-inspired
surfaces using gecko-toe geometries as case-study, using rapid prototyping strategies
before approaching other micro- or nanomanufacturing methods. Since the geometri-
cal influence of these surfaces is not fully understood, by means of rapid prototyping,
resources will be saved. The author is fully aware that the rules applied at nanoscale
(such as Van der Walls forces) are difficult if not impossible to achieve at higher
scales. Nevertheless, at certain microscales it is possible to achieve dry adhesion and
thus superhydrophobicity. These microscales are in the range this project is aiming
for by choosing the ‘Literature Sample’ (LS) [9] as initial design where adhesion was
achieved.
Surface designs
SLA
Fibers and walls
3D Print
Process parameters
DLP
LS
Layer thickness
Build plate
location
Intensity
Layer thickness
Exposure time
Post-processing
Qualitative
observations
Optical
microscope
&
Demeet
Quantitative
analysis
Alicona
&
SPIP Particle
analysis
Satisfactory 
results?
YES
NO
Satisfactory 
results?
YES
NO
Increase design complexity
Change parameters / Find sources of error
Validation
Contact angle
Figure 4.1: Iterative experimental process for bio-inspired surfaces.
In this chapter, it is described step by step the procedure followed by the author
in order to achieve a successful LS sample. As mentioned in the previous chapter, two
==PAGE:54==
42
4 Methodology
machines were used. Form 2 (SLA) and DTU DLP v2. The former was the first one
tested and discarded at early stages due to its poor resolution quality, the latter is
the key element of this thesis and special attention will be given due to its promising
performance.
Hence, this chapter will briefly explain the work-flow followed with
the SLA and DLP in general, from the design towards the final validation (Figure
4.1). All the tools used during the experimental process were previously described in
Chapter 4.
The experimental methodology flowchart, is subdivided in two groups (1) SLA
experiments and (2) DLP experiments. Due to Form2 limited quality — in terms of
micro-feature printing capabilities, the experimental procedure ended in early stages
without completing the whole iterative process. Qualitative observations were enough
to discard this approach for 3D printing for bio-inspired surfaces. Nevertheless, its
results are worth mentioning and also serves as point of comparison between both
SLA and DLP approaches.
4.1
Design considerations
As a recapitulation, resolution in a printer is given by both, vertical (Z) resolution
and horizontal (XY) resolution. However, Z resolution depends on the ‘motion setup’
(e.g. stepper motor) installed on the machine whereas the XY depends on the printing
technique. In SLA is given by laser spot and in DLP is given by the pixel size of the
DMD. XY resolution is more determinant for the purpose of this work since it is more
influential when defining the minimum feature size. Bio-inspired surfaces require the
reproduction of small features with relatively high aspect ratio, thus the Z direction
will not be that determinant although it will be key element to achieve the nominal
heights.
Form2 SLA
The first designs aim to test the minimum feature size to assess if this machine
will be suitable for bio-inspired printed samples. In Appendix B.2, there are design
considerations from the Form2 manufacturers, documenting minimum feature sizes
to obtain optimal quality. These minimum recommendations fall far from the laser
spot size (140 µm), for example, the minimum supported wall thickness is 0.4 mm.
However, Form 2 is a desktop printer whose purpose is for users who will likely print
higher scale features. For this reason, Form2 will be tested to estimate how much the
printer deviates from the nominal values.
==PAGE:55==
4.2 3D Print
43
DTU DLP v2
DTU DLP v2 can achieve smaller features in comparison with the ideal minimum
resolution achievable by Form2. As mentioned, the DMD equipped in the projector
has a pixel size of 7.6 µm. This would be the theoretical minimum achievable feature.
However, as it will seen in Chapter 6, the resolution has other sources of influence
such as, resin, working parameters, cleaning process and membrane.
Unlike Form2, the DLP was under testing during the early stages of this thesis.
The work was performed by postdoc and co-supervisor of this project Ali Davoudine-
jad, where testing samples were designed to evaluate the machine limitations and
whose results revealed that the LS would be feasible to print [84].
4.2
3D Print
Considering the two different approaches, SLA and DLP, with different setups (1)
commercial printer with limited options for the user for the former and (2) home-
built printer with complete freedom of choice among all the parameters that affect
the printing for the latter; the parameter experimentation will be different for each
approach.
Form2 SLA
The closed environment of the Form2 slicer software, PreForm, only allows the
user to choose the layer thickness. It is assumed that the laser speed is predefined
and the laser power it depends on the material used, which will be the resin Tough
V2 (Appendix B.3). Other than that, as it will be seen in the following chapter, the
sample location on the building plate also affects the quality and will be taken into
account.
DTU DLP v2
The home-built printer gives the user more freedom in terms of ‘playing’ with all
parameters. For this work, the chosen parameters are the projector intensity, the
layer thickness and the exposure time. To assess the influence of the parameters in
the sample variance, a Design of Experiments (DoE) will be carried out.
Ideally, a DoE will establish validation, reliability and replicability of the manu-
facture method. However, due to time restrictions and mentioned unpredictability of
the machine, replicability was not evaluated. The aim of the DoE is to find the pa-
rameters giving the highest resolution (closer to nominal values). The chosen starting
parameters were chosen by co-supervisor Ali Davoudinejad based on previous work
findings.
==PAGE:56==
44
4 Methodology
4.3
Post-processing
3D printing of photopolymers requires a post-processing with two main steps, part
cleaning and post-curing. Both approaches SLA and DLP, followed the same proce-
dure to keep consistency in the manufacturing chain. The process goes as follows:
1. Detachment of the parts from building plate. With the help of a putty-knife, the
samples should be easily detachable. However, due to the sizes of the samples
extra care should be taken.
2. As seen in Figure 4.2 (1), the samples after printing are covered in uncured
resin. To remove the slug, the samples are rinsed in a bath of isopropyl alcohol
(IPA) which dissolves the resin revealing the features, Figure 4.2 (2).
3. The IPA is not enough to remove all the resin from the sample, thus further
cleaning is needed with an ultrasonic chamber — two cycles of 4 minutes for
each sample, Figure 4.2 (3).
4. The parts come out wet with IPA — and probably with resin particles in the
remaining liquid. Furthermore, the fibres with high aspect ratio will stick to-
gether if they are not dried, Figure 4.2 (4). Pressurised air is thus used to dry
the sample. Extra care must be taken to avoid fibre deformation.
5. Post-cure the sample in a UV-chamber for 30 minutes, Figure 4.2 (5). When
printing photopolymers, the parts come out as ‘green parts’ (i.e.
not fully
cured), a post-curing step is needed to achieve optimal mechanical properties
in the samples.
Figure 4.2 (6) shows a final cured sample, as it can be seen some of the fibres are
collapsed or broken showing the importance of the cleaning process. Nevertheless,
sometimes the geometry of the sample — such as high aspect ratio features, will tend
to bend regardless of the care taken.
4.4
Qualitative observations and quantitative analysis
Due to the unpredictable nature of 3D printing, not all the sample will be eligible
for quantitative analysis nor for final validation. Hence, samples will be observed
under the microscope (optical and Demeet) to determine if the samples meet all the
conditions for the following analysis steps.
For the SLA printings, visual examination was enough to determine that Form2
is not suitable for 3D printing of bio-inspired surfaces. For the DTU DLP v2, qual-
itative observation was a key step to further understand the parameter impact on
==PAGE:57==
4.5 Validation
45
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Figure 4.2: Post-processing of samples after printing.
the final printings. As mentioned, a DoE was carried out meaning that during these
experiments the parameters or printer conditions must remain according to the plan.
In the case the part does not pass the minimum requirements to be quantitatively
examined — e.g. part detached from building platform or no visible microfeatures,
a remedial action analysis study is conducted. For this analysis, failure observations
are registered and a corrective action is made in order to find the source of error.
The quantitative analysis will be carried out by taking 3D images with Alicona and
examined by SPIP image metrology software. Alicona Infinite Focus working principle
prevents from measuring features under overhangs, limiting the measurement of every
part of the sample. Due to the part geometry of the LS (Literature Sample) the
Particle and Pore analysis module is the right tool to determine feature heights,
diameters and roundness.
After collecting all the measured data, the best printing parameters are chosen in
terms of part resolution and precision throughout an statistical analysis.
4.5
Validation
With the right parameters chosen, more intricate gecko-feature surfaces are de-
signed and printed. For the new designs, there will be only a qualitatively study to
verify the structured had been successfully printed. To validate and study the effect
of micro-features in terms of surface hydrophobicity, all the samples (LS and new
designs) will be tested measuring the contact angles and compared with each other
(Section 6.4.3).
==PAGE:58==
46
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 5
SLA printings
This chapter studies the printing quality of the SLA printer Form2 and its fea-
sibility to print bio-inspired surfaces. Although the manufacturers provide a design
guide in their website (Appendix B.2) it was decided to study the behaviour of the
printer at extreme conditions. To do so, test samples were printed aiming to study
the accuracy of the machine at minimum diameters, minimum layer thickness and in
different areas of the building plates that — as it will be proven, the printing location
has an impact on the printing outcome.
In total, two batches of four samples each were printed. The first batch aims to
study the behaviour of the machine when printing fibre-like geometries, with increas-
ing aspect ratios. The second batch, as a consequence of the first batch results, aimed
to study the behaviour of the laser at different locations of the building plate when
printing 140 µm thin-wall test samples.
5.1
First batch
5.1.1
Sample design
Due to the nature of this work, the first batch printed aimed to mimic the simplest
fibre geometry, i.e. vertical pillars, where different aspect ratios (λ) were tested at
increasing diameters (⊘). The chosen λ are within the range found in the gecko toes,
between 5 and 20. Figure 5.1 shows the geometry of the test sample, it is divided
in four quadrants, each with a different aspect ratio - labelled as h1, h2, h3 and h4.
Four samples were printed in total, each of which with increased diameters, starting
from the laser spot diameter, 140 µm up to 220 µm. Table 5.1 shows the dimensions
of the samples to be printed.
5.1.2
Printing procedure and post-processing
As mentioned, the printing process with Form2 is as simple as ‘plug and play’. As
first batch, no attention was placed on the building plate location. The thickness was
set to the minimum, 50 µm. The printing time was 1 hour with a total of 128 layers.
==PAGE:60==
48
5 SLA printings
h1
h2
h4
h3
1000 mm
2 mm
1000 mm
Figure 5.1: Fibre-like test sample design.
Table 5.1: Fibre-like test sample dimensions.
Sample 1
Sample 2
Sample 3
Sample 4
⊘140 µm
⊘175 µm
⊘200 µm
⊘220 µm
λ
Heights [µm]
5
h1
700
875
1000
1100
10
h2
1400
1750
2000
2200
15
h3
2100
2625
3000
3300
20
h4
2800
3500
4000
4400
During the cleaning process, as seen in Figure 4.2 (6), the high aspect ratio fibres
bent during the drying step, and other remained merged due to undried IPA. This
shows the importance of a good drying-phase balance.
5.1.3
Results and discussion
This batch was subjected to a qualitative analysis, by observation with Demeet
imaging microscope, a small quantitative study was performed by measuring with
Demeet and processing the images with image analysis software ImageJ. Figure 5.2
shows the first batch, right after the post-curing process.
Figure 5.2: First batch after post-curing.
A preliminary visual observation is enough to see some clumping in the high
aspect ratios fibres (h4 and h3 quadrants). According to the design considerations
(Appendix B), for vertical-wire geometries the optimal diameters are set from 0.3
==PAGE:61==
5.1 First batch
49
to 1.5 mm, with heights of 7 to 30 mm respectively (maximum aspect ratios of 20 -
23). Considering that the diameters used are underneath the recommended by the
manufacturers, the collapsed pillars are expected.
When observed under the microscope Demeet, and after taking some measure-
ments it can be seen that the nominal values are far from the nominal. For a better
understanding of the machine behaviour, Figure 5.3 and 5.4 shows sample 1 with the
minimum values and sample 4 with the highest values.
500 μm
500 μm
500 μm
500 μm
SIDE
TOP
500 μm
500 μm
500 μm
500 μm
h1
h2
h3
h4
h1
h2
h3
h4
SAMPLE 1
Figure 5.3: Demeet images of sample 1.
SIDE
500 μm
500 μm
500 μm
500 μm
TOP
500 μm
500 μm
500 μm
500 μm
h1
h2
h3
h4
h1
h2
h3
h4
SAMPLE 4
Figure 5.4: Demeet images of sample 4.
In both samples it can be seen how the fibres are ordered within the quadrant, as
λ increases, the fibres start clamping. Specially it is visible in sample 1 quadrant h3.
==PAGE:62==
50
5 SLA printings
In the sample 4 — since the diameter is higher, the fibres are more stable until h4,
where the fibres collapse or bend.
The average diameters in sample 1 is 190 µm — 35% increase over the nominal
diameter (140 µm), meaning that the ideal resolution is far from reachable for this
kind of geometry. In the sample 4, the nominal diameter is set to be 220 µm and
in reality, the diameter has an average of 214 µm; thus, there is a decrease of 3%
from the nominal, meaning the real values are within a 97% confidence interval of
the measured diameters.
As λ increases, there is a decrease in the diameter and
roundness. This behaviour is seen in all samples where — in spite of the nominal
radius, fibres from quadrants h3 and h4 tend to reduce their radius gradually from
base to tips. In both samples 1 and 4, h4 (quadrant with higher aspect ratios) have
almost the same average values, 170 µm.
Figure 5.5:
Staircase ef-
fect on high aspect ratio fi-
bres.
Aside from the clear layer effect, as the aspect ratio
increases the layers begin to misalign, creating a stair-
case effect (Figure 5.5) — which should not happen in
straight features. This behaviour is traced to be due to
(1) the laser and (2) the peeling process. As previously ex-
plained (Section 3.1.2), the laser is pointed towards two
galvanometers directing the light to the correct coordi-
nates on a XY scanning mirror, which focuses the light
upward to the bottom of the vat and cures the resin. This
scanning mirror might deform the laser as it moves at dif-
ferent points of the vat, reason why none of the fibres have
a clear round shape — they are rather oblong. Since the
machine used is a commercial desktop printer, it is not
expected from the Form2 to have an accurate light or
path corrector as the laser rasters the surface. As for the
peeling process, when the laser cures a layer, the vat is
horizontally moved to detach the part from the surface
and print the next layer. This peeling approach might
be too aggressive for smaller scales and type of features
(fibre-like). The horizontal motion likely deforms the fi-
bre so when the laser cures the same spot in the following
layer, it is offset from the previous cured spot.
The decrease diameter at the top of the fibres is likely related to the explained
staircase effect, if the fibre moves from its original position from layer to layer, some
spots might not even have enough support in the previous layer or had been cured in
an unsupported spot.
==PAGE:63==
5.2 Second batch
51
5.2
Second batch
5.2.1
Sample design
Considering the behaviour of the printer with fibre-like samples, it was decided
to study the behaviour of the printings with thin-wall samples placed at different
coordinates of the building plate. Moreover, when printing a thin-wall sample, it will
be possible to see the behaviour of the laser ‘writing’ a continuous path, instead of a
single dot per layer. Figure 5.6 depicts the geometry of the second batch printed with
Form2. This time, the aspect ratio is kept constant λ ≃6, with a height and thickness
of 800 µm and 140 µm respectively. The walls are rotated 45o each quadrant.
1000 mm
2 mm
1000 mm
Figure 5.6: 140 µm thin-wall test sample design.
5.2.2
Printing procedure and post-processing
Figure 5.7:
Location of the sec-
ond batch samples across the build-
ing plate.
The printing process and post-curing followed
the same steps as the first batch. Nevertheless,
this time the samples were placed at different lo-
cations of the building plate, Figure 5.7 shows
where the samples were located on the build-
ing plate, to study the behaviour of the laser
across the whole building plate.
Each sample
has a small dent on the side closer to the edge to
identify them with the coordinates, north, south,
west, east and centre of the platform.
==PAGE:64==
52
5 SLA printings
5.2.3
Results and discussion
Following the same assessing process as the previous batch, a qualitative analysis
by observation with Demeet imaging microscope was performed. Thereafter, a small
quantitative study by measuring with Demeet was carried out. Figure 5.8 shows the
second batch, right after the post-curing process. Figure 5.9 depicts the batch viewed
with Demeet, schematised with their printing position.
Figure 5.8: Second batch after post-curing.
FRONT
WIPER SIDE
NORTH
SOUTH
CENTER
WEST
EAST
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
Detail A
Detail B
Detail C
Figure 5.9: SLA printings placed in different locations of the building plate, with nominal
wall thickness 140 µm. Pictures taken with measuring microscope Demeet.
During this campaign — due to the small aspect ratio, all the walls remained
vertical without collapsing (broken features were due to the damage made by tweezers)
==PAGE:65==
5.2 Second batch
53
during the cleaning process. Nevertheless, when observed with Demeet (Figure 5.9,
specially in the center sample), it is noticeable the repercussions of bad cleaning.
When the sample is not completely dried, some IPA will remain between the features.
This remaining IPA has uncured resin particles, that will finish curing during the 30
minutes of post-curing.
The majority of the samples have a satisfactory straight thin-walls printed. Now,
looking closely to the second quadrant (45o positive inclination), there is a double-
wall effect. This supports the theory of the laser instability due to poor galvanometer
and XY mirror installation, which cannot correct the distorted laser diameter with
precision. Figure 5.10 shows a simplified reasoning (exaggerated) of the laser diameter
variation, explaining the double-thickness wall effect. Depending on the angle between
scanning mirror,vat, and laser path, the diameter will distort into an oval shape.
Figure 5.10: Simplified scheme explaining the reason of the differences in wall thicknesses.
Figure 5.11: Path followed by laser.
In quadrant 2 the path will have
the minimum thickness.
Thus, the
correction algorithm make a double
wall to compensate, making it thicker
than the other walls.
The effect of the oval shape is drawn in Fig-
ure 5.11, which is in agreement with Figure 5.9,
where quadrant 2 reveals a double wall, with a
thickness of 90 µm each thin-wall. This result
is most likely due to the Form 2 correcting the
diameter error, and performing a secondary path
to achieve the nominal value. Unfortunately, a
full reason behind this behaviour is beyond scope
of this thesis and the author’s field of expertise.
The average wall thickness is 209 µm, 49%
higher than the nominal thickness. Figure 5.12
shows the average thickness per zone (each zone
with a different shade of blue and green) and
quadrant (labelled as N1, N2, N3... and so forth)
of 10 data points per quadrant. As seen in the graph, there is a big difference among
all thicknesses in just one sample, ranging from 150 µm up to 306 µm. The biggest
peaks, seen in quadrants N2, S2, E2 and C2 agree with the double-wall features. Note
that this behaviour is not seen at the western part of the building plate with similar
dimension values, meaning that this area is the most reliable to print on.
==PAGE:66==
54
5 SLA printings
This variance in wall thicknesses means that Form2 is not able to reproduce such
small features with consistency. Taking this into consideration, a reliable minimum
feature size is within the range of 200 - 300 µm. This result is in disagreement with
the manufacturers website, which assures that Form2 is able to reliably produce XY
geometries of 150 µm [85].
Figure 5.12: Wall thicknesses measurements. Measurements taken with measuring micro-
scope Demeet.
5.3
Summary
In this section, the limitations of the desktop SLA 3D printer Form2 have been
assessed. Although it can be said that the machine is capable of printing high resolu-
tion features for small parts, it is not reliable when the dimensions are below 300 µm.
Aside from the geometric limitations, it is paramount to address the influence of the
part location on the building plate (west) to obtain better quality printings. Further
studies of this printer will give a full understanding of the machine behaviour. The
author proposes to carry out the same study with different materials, which is also
suspected to be of influence in order to obtain higher qualities. All things considered,
Form2 is a high-performance printer.
Nevertheless, it is not suitable for printing
bio-inspired surfaces.
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 6
DTU DLP v2
This chapter studies the printing capabilities of the home-built DLP at DTU
(DTU DLP v2) and its feasibility to print bio-inspired surfaces. As mentioned in
Section 4.1, this work carries on with the project started by Ali Davoudinejad [84],
within the context of bio-inspired gecko-toe surfaces.
The chapter is divided in four sections, the first with a summary of the previous
work, followed by two factorial design of experiments (DoE). The first DoE was an
initial contact with the DLP whose results and insights lead to the second DoE.
The fourth and last part relates the redesign, printing and validation of the samples
with best parameters and thus the highest quality. Each part shows the results and
discussion of the experiments.
6.1
Previous work
Figure 6.1: Isometric view
of
preliminary
testing
of
DTU DLP v2 [84].
The preliminary tests performed with the DLP aimed
to characterise its printing quality and limitations.
To
do so, a sensitivity analysis prior to a final experimen-
tal plan was carried out to find a proper range of values.
After finding the most optimal values, a factorial DoE
was executed on a test sample with varying aspect ratios
(Figure 6.1).
The features are separated 250 µm with
each other and have ranges of 3:4 aspect ratio and 1:2 for
height, the base plate is 12x12x2 mm, with a maximum
feature height of 2 mm.
The three factorial levels studied in the DoE were (1)
the projector power (PP), (2) layer thickness (LT) and
(3) exposure time (ET), Table 6.1 shows the experimental
conditions for the DoE. Eight parts were printed (22) with two replicates, with a total
of 16 samples printed.
==PAGE:68==
56
6 DTU DLP v2
Table 6.1: Experimental conditions of the preliminary DoE [84].
Parameters
Level 1
Level 2
Layer thickness [µm]
21
24
Projector power [-]
16
18
Exposure time [s]
2.3
2.6
Figure 6.2:
Test sample
with higher quality, LT=21
µm, ET=2.6 s and PI=18.
[84].
The results revealed the influence of exposure time
and light intensity for the horizontal quality of the fea-
tures. The smallest feature achieved was a 100x100 µm
cube. Figure 6.2 shows the part with the best printing
quality, whose parameters were the smallest LT (21 µm),
and the highest PI and ET (18 and 2.6 s respectively).
These results, due to their satisfactory outcome, will
be used as a starting point for the forthcoming experi-
ments with the bio-inspired design. The aim of the ex-
periments will be to achieve even higher resolution and
smaller features.
6.2
First DoE
This section reports the first DoE continuing the work of Ali Davoudinejad. The
goal is to find the optimal parameters to produce the bio-inspired surface selected
in Section 2.2.1, from the manufacturing approach: Conventional 3D printed master
and dip-transfer process (3DPMDT) [9] referred as Literature Sample (LS), using the
same geometry and dimensions from the article.
6.2.1
Literature Sample design
Figure
6.3:
Gecko-toe
surface manufactured with
3DPMDT [9].
The bio-inspired surface selected (Figure 6.3), is a two-
level hierarchical structure with mushroom shape with a
total of nine mushroom-shaped tips on top. The small
tips — even though the contact area by themselves is
small, the addition of all the tips together ensures a higher
area of contact (working principle of the gecko-toe). With
the addition of a secondary level, the effective compliance
and conformation is increased.
Moreover, spring-based
models have shown higher forces of addition and energy
storage than the surfaces with only one structure-level [9].
Figure 6.4, shows a drawing of the LS. The size of the
base is the maximum possible for the DMD, 18x12 mm.
==PAGE:69==
6.2 First DoE
57
There is an array of 23x15 fibres (345 big pillars) with 9 tips (small pillars) on each
fibre, a total of 3105 tips. Each tip has a mushroom shape with a diameter of 100
µm.
Figure 6.4: LS dimensions.
For the reader’s better understanding, Figure 6.5 shows the nomenclature used
during the description of the experiments.
Nomenclature
Tip: (a) Tip-end  (b) Tip-body
Fibre: (c)  Fibre-end   (d)  Fibre-body
a
b
c
d
Figure 6.5: Nomenclature used to describe the features in LS.
==PAGE:70==
58
6 DTU DLP v2
6.2.2
Trial printing and DoE 1 plan
Before deciding which levels will be studied, a trial printing was made to evaluate
the DLP capabilities. The initial parameters with better outcome described in Section
6.1 were used, Figure 6.2 with LT: 21 µm, ET: 2.6 s and PI: 18. The printing steps
are described in Appendix C and the post-processing is described in Section 4.3. At
the beginning of every layer, the projector has to be set to a higher power to ensure
attachment to the building plate. The projector initial power (PI) is set to the input
value 50 during the first two layers, with an exposure time of 15 seconds each.
Figures 6.6 and 6.7 show the resulting printing of the LS trial.
Although no
full fibres or pillars were printed, it was satisfactory to find indications of the micro-
features, specially the signs of the pillar tips. The part was printed four times, all of
which with the same outcome.
Figure 6.6: Top view of the LS trial printing. Parameters: LT: 21 µm, ET: 2.6 s and PI:
18.
Figure 6.7: Side view of LS trial printing. Parameters: LT: 21 µm, ET: 2.6 s and PI: 18.
This behaviour was traced to be due to the membrane. The membrane is a key
factor for the peeling of the part from the vat, but due to the PTFE tendency to
creep, it doesn’t remain tight enough and the cured resin does not detach properly
merging the layers together. Due to this, the features look ‘sunken’ in the base.
Accordingly, the membrane was replaced for a PTFE of 0.1 mm thickness (the
previous was 0.127 mm). Once changed the membrane, the part was printed again
with the same parameters. Figures 6.8 and 6.9 show the trial LS printing. This time,
all the features were successfully printed.
==PAGE:71==
6.2 First DoE
59
Figure 6.8: Top view of the LS trial printing after membrane change. Parameters: LT=21
µm, ET=2.6 s and PI=18.
Figure 6.9: Side view of LS trial printing after membrane change. Parameters: LT: 21 µm,
ET: 2.6 s and PI: 18.
Looking at Figure 6.8 right, merged tips can be seen. It is likely a sign of either
overexposure or residual resin after cleaning. The side view of the LS surface (Figure
6.9), specifically the tip-end and fibre-end, clearly shows the mushroom shapes. When
compared with the original LS (Figure 6.3), it can be said that the quality of the
geometry and surface has being improved.
With this trial it was established the
importance of the membrane in order to obtain features. Due to the success of the
printings, the DoE will remain within the range of the parameters used. Thus, it was
decided to remain ET constant (2.6 s), and plan the DoE using two factors, PI and
LT — each factor with three levels. Table 6.2 shows the first DoE plan.
Table 6.2: Experimental conditions for first DoE.
Factor
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Layer thickness [µm]
15
18
22
Projector power [-]
18
20
23
After demonstrating the DLP is able to print the micro-sized tips, it was decided
to give special attention to their quality. The tips will determine the success of the
experiments — hence, if the fibres are printed without tips, they will be considered
==PAGE:72==
60
6 DTU DLP v2
as not successful printings and will be discarded for further analysis.
Table 6.3 represents the detailed experiments carried out, ordered by date of
printing. Note that the first two experiments are E1_4 and e2_3 which were the
first experiments conducted before establishing the official DoE, after which it was
decided to keep them with the ID given by the program Minitab to avoid confusion.
Table 6.3: Detailed DoE 1.
Date
ID
PP [-]
LT [µm]
14/7
E1_4
23
22
17/7
E1_3
20
22
17/7
E1_1
20
18
17/7
E1_2
23
18
18/7
E1_5
18
15
18/7
E1_6
18
18
19/7
E1_7
18
22
19/7
E1_8
20
15
19/7
E1_9
23
15
19/7
E1_4
23
22
6.2.3
Printings results of DoE 1 and discussion
Originally, it was decided to carry out two runs of experiments.
Nevertheless,
as the experiments were printed, it was observed a clear decrease of quality. The
following images show three of the experiment results, again in order of printing date.
Note that the parameter nomenclature of PP has two values, the first one is the
initial intensity needed to ensure the base attachment to the building plate. The
whole experiment pictures can be found in Appendix E.
The first two printings E1_4 and E1_3 were considered as a success given that
most of the tips were satisfactorily printed (Figure 6.10). Still, it can be seen zones
with less quality than others — with merged or ripped off tips. In experiment E1_1,
the part got stuck on the surface, thus the building plate was sanded ensuring bonding
between sample and stage. However, some of the tips got stuck on the vat. Experi-
ment E1_2 had a similar outcome as E1_1, with an additional brim of residual resin
around the base.
From experiment E1_5 (Figure 6.11) up to the last one, no features were found.
In order to discard sources of failure the membrane was changed, which did not show
improvement of printing quality. Every print from this point up to the last one needed
several trials, since they kept detaching from the building plate. At the very end of
the DoE some signs of features were seen on the fibres. However, as seen in Figure
6.12, the fibres and tips were all merged due to overexposure.
==PAGE:73==
6.2 First DoE
61
Figure 6.10: DoE 1 - ID: E1_4.
Figure 6.11: DoE 1 - ID: E1_5.
Figure 6.12: DoE 1 - ID: E1_8.
==PAGE:74==
62
6 DTU DLP v2
By comparing the input parameters with the output results, there was no consis-
tency. For instance, experiment E1_8 PP was 20, a lower value than E1_4, with a
PP of 23. It is expected to find higher overexposure in samples with equal or higher
PP. Nevertheless, E1_8 showed signs of extreme over-exposure. To ensure that the
output was independent from the input process parameters, experiment E1_4 was
printed again since it was the most successful. Figure 6.13 shows experiment E1_4
at the beginning of the DoE (up) and at the end of the DoE (down).
Figure 6.13: Comparison between first and second print of E1_4.
The second E1_4 had all the tips merged, and the end of the fibres were partially
merged as well. Looking around the base of the part, there was a residual layer of
unwanted cured resin. This was likely due over exposure and too high intensity on the
part. Nevertheless, since these set of parameters were the ones that performed the
best at the beginning and the projector is already working at a right intensity value,
it means the projector intensity is fluctuating. After repeating experiment E1_4, the
quality of the printings fell sharply to such an extent that it did not print at all. At
the beginning of the printings the part ended up stuck on the vat.
The projector is operating at low input levels which are in a threshold of uncer-
tainty.
According to the manufacturers, levels under 400 do not have a linearity
change, meaning that the projector input level and power will have an unpredictable
behaviour. As a consequence, the projector beam may cast more light than the set
input value and illuminates more area than the projected by the DMD, curing un-
wanted zones. Figure 6.14 shows the projector illumination system characterization
curves. For a perfect linear slope the second curve should show a horizontal line in
the range of 400-800 (in this case, with a calculated slope of 0.00019), this is the
interval of confidence, where the values set on the projector should remain constant.
The experiments are running with input levels close to zero (18 - 23 range), the
==PAGE:75==
6.2 First DoE
63
slope increases significantly entering a zone of complete uncertainty, explaining the
unpredictable behaviour of the projector.
Range and linearity - linear mode
Radiant flux [W]
Set value [-]
Slope over range
Slope [-]
Set value [-]
Figure 6.14: Projector characterization curves, courtesy of Visitech.
Under this hypothesis and in order to solve the problem, it was decided to add
neutral density filters to the projector, which will control the amount of light projected
through the resin and avoid light exposure of unwanted regions (residual light). On
top of that, the neutral density filters will allow the projector to operate at higher set
values closer to the confidence zone.
==PAGE:76==
64
6 DTU DLP v2
6.2.4
Neutral density filters results and discussion
Before acquiring the filters, and in order to confirm this hypothesis, the glass of a
regular set of sunglasses with UV 400 protection was placed on the projector. From
the beginning of these ‘cheap glasses’ experiment, it was clear the effect of the UV
blocker. Even though the quality of the prints was unacceptable, there was no trace
of residual light on the part surroundings. After several intensity increments, the
fibres were visible at PP 140 with no signs of residual curing around the part. On
the other hand, the tips go stuck on the vat, which can be reasoned ought to the
sunglasses quality, they are cheap plastic which may distort the smallest features.
Figure 6.15: Experiment with cheap sunglasses.
After seeing the effect of the filter on the printer, three unmounted absorptive
Neutral Density filters (ND) were acquired from Thorlabs, with an optical density of
1.0 (i.e. 10% transmission) and flat absorption coefficient in the visible region of 400
- 650 nm. The filters were mounted on the projector lens with a 3D printed adapter.
Before trying the new filter and to reassure the effect of the filter, experiment
E1_4 was again printed without filter several time. As a result, only one layer of
scattered light stuck on the vat or printings got stuck on the vat during the printing
process was obtained (Figure 6.16).
Figure 6.16: Failed printings with parameters from E1_4, which were successful at the
beginning of the DoE 1.
==PAGE:77==
6.2 First DoE
65
One filter experiment
The first step after placing the filter was searching for new process parameters.
The first input parameters were PP: 500/400 and LT: 22, showing too much over-
exposure. Therefore, the input value was reduced down to PP: 100/70 and LT: 22
(Figure 6.17) where the part was printed showing fibres with tips (although they were
small bumps), the heights of the fibres were too small but the tops were not merged
— they were clear defined circles. Several input intensity values were tried in the
range of 20 to 100, being the best ones between 50 to 90 with no significant changes.
Figure 6.17: Experiment with one filter.
Due to small fibre heights, it was decided to change the membrane vat, as it
was mentioned it has a strong influence on the parts’ height and printing quality
(specially the former). Figure 6.18 shows the part printed with the new membrane
with same parameters as Figure 6.17. As expected, the heights of the features have
increased. Nevertheless, it can be seen that the surface shows over-exposure quality,
even though it has the same parameters as the previous one. This is a big indicator
that the projector is still operating at low and unpredictable values.
Figure 6.18: Experiment with one filter and new membrane.
Although the part quality is still low compared to the results obtained in E1_4,
these experiments are a good signal of the positive influence of the filters.
==PAGE:78==
66
6 DTU DLP v2
Three filters experiment
After the previous results, two more filters were added. Unfortunately, three filters
blocked too much the light. A range of values between 400 - 800 we tried with no
success, the part kept attaching to the vat surface meaning the intensity was too low.
It was decided not to increase the intensity higher than 800, since it could burn out
the light source at such high values. Thus, one filter was removed to operate with
lower values.
Even though three filters blocked the light too much, the first layer printed (the
one stuck on the vat), showed no residual light in the surroundings.
Two filters experiment
New parameters were found. The most satisfactory (Figure 6.19) was found to be
at PP: 500/230 with a LT: 18, with clearly defined fibres and tips with no signs of
overexposure. Therefore, the intensity has a correct input.
Figure 6.19: Experiment with two filters.
Figure 6.20: Experiment with two filters and exposure time increased.
Since there were areas with no fibres, it was decided to increase the exposure time
(ET), which has been at 2.3 s and remained untouched during all the experiments.
Figure 6.20 shows the resulting print when the exposure time was increased up to 3.5
==PAGE:79==
6.3 Second DoE
67
s. If looked closely, the tips were more defined than the previous one, moreover, all
the surface had tips.
6.2.5
Conclusion
With this section the capabilities of the DTU DLP v2 have been tested, where
it has been proven that the DTU DLP v2 can print and outperform the geometrical
and surface quality of the bio-inspired surface manufactured with a much higher
complexity approach (3DPMDT [9]). Nevertheless, after several incongruities in the
output results of the printings, it was traced the necessity to increase the input power
values of the projector to ensure a stable behaviour. In this experimental stage, no
quantitative analysis was carried out due to the poor quality of the parts and lack of
parameter consistency. Hence, only qualitative observations with Demeet microscope
were made.
It has been demonstrated the impact of the ND filters on the projector, regarding
the quality of the printings. Although it was not possible to set the input values in
the region of certainty (400 - 800), it was possible to increase the intensity from a
range of 18 - 23 up to 230, which if looking at the ‘Slope over Range’ graph (Figure
6.14) has a lower slope closer to the certainty region, therefore there will be more
stability on the projector. Due to this findings, it was also disclosed the influence of
the exposure time to obtain finer features over the projector intensity.
The next DoE will be carried out with two factors, layer thickness and exposure
time, increasing the exposure time and decreasing layer thickness. The intensity will
remain constant with input levels of PP: 500/230.
Table 6.4: Level distribution of DoE 2.
Factor
Level 1
Level 2
ET [s]
3.5
4
LT [µm]
15
18
Due to the printings quality and projector constant behaviour, two runs of ex-
periments will be carried out to assess the repeatably and variance of the input
parameters.
6.3
Second DoE
6.3.1
DoE 2 plan
For the second design of experiments, the surface design remained the same, as
well as the cleaning process.
The input parameters are shown in Table 6.4.
As
==PAGE:80==
68
6 DTU DLP v2
mentioned, the projector power is kept constant since no significant changes were
noticed in the previous experiment and the exposure time showed more influence on
the printing quality. Table 6.5 shows in detail the printing experiments, again ordered
by the date of printing. This time, the date and identification label of the sample are
in concordance. Before the experiments, the membrane was again changed to avoid
additional sources of error.
The projector power was set as 230 with an initial power input value of 500 for
the first two layers, with an exposure time of 15 seconds each layer.
Table 6.5: Detailed DoE 2.
Date
ID
LT [µm]
ET [s]
3/8
e2_1
15
3.5
3/8
e2_2
18
3.5
4/8
e2_3
15
4.0
4/8
e2_4
18
4.0
4/8
e2_5
15
3.5
4/8
e2_6
18
3.5
4/8
e2_7
15
4.0
4/8
e2_8
18
4.0
6.3.2
Imaging and measurement method
All the experiments had satisfactory quality, with visible tips under the microscope.
Consequently, all samples were eligible for further examination using Alicona Infinite
Focus followed by a a particle analysis with metrology software SPIP.
Sampling and measurement criteria
For a consistent measurement procedure and due to the samples layout, a strati-
fied sampling was carried out. The numerous amount of tips on the surface and the
observable variance of quality across one sample, are likely to add too much variance
and error in the results. Hence, each sample was divided into nine stratum, each
of which subjected to a randomised sampling. With this approach, the representa-
tiveness of the sample is improved reducing error, leading to a weighted mean with
reduced variability of a simple random sampling with an arithmetic mean. Figure
6.21 shows a map with the stratum distribution, each with a identification label to
facilitate the location of each sample region.
Six pictures were taken of each stratum. Two at x10 magnification (Figure 6.22)
where 9 fibres are captured at once in each, and four at x20 magnification (Figure
6.23).
==PAGE:81==
6.3 Second DoE
69
TL
TC
TR
CL
CC
CR
BL
BC
BR
TL: Top-left
TC: Top-center
TR: Top-tight
CL: Center-left
CC: Center-center
CR: Center-right
BL: Bottom-left
BC: Bottom-center
BR: Bottom-right
Figure 6.21: Stratified sampling map on LS.
Figure 6.22: Image taken with Alicona at x10 magnification and processed with SPIP.
Figure 6.23: Image taken with Alicona at x20 magnification and processed with SPIP.
As it can be seen from Figures 6.22 and 6.23, Alicona does not detect undercuts.
Due to this limitation, the bodies of the fibres and tips were not able to be measured.
To do the measurement of the bodies, a SEM was intended to be used. However, due
==PAGE:82==
70
6 DTU DLP v2
to its unavailability during the time this thesis was written, measurement of the bodies
was left for future work. Figure 6.24 shows the features that were measured, with
labelled names for better understanding. Depending on the picture magnification,
different measurements were taken:
• x10 Magnification: Height of the fibres (big pillars).
Nine data points per
picture, total of eighteen data points per stratum, and 162 data points per
sample.
• x20 Magnification: Height, diameter and roundness of the tips (smaller pillars).
Nine data points were take per picture, a total of 36 data points per stratum,
and 324 data points per sample.
HF
DT
HT
HF: Height of fibre-end & fibre-body.
DT: Diameter of tip-end.
HT: Height of tip-end & tip-body.
Figure 6.24: Features measured to characterise the Literature Sample.
The most critical features were the tips of the fibres, that was the reason why
more attention was placed on these features, which will define the precision of the
DLP and the capabilities to print bio-inspired surfaces.
Particle analysis
Each image taken was subjected to a particle analysis, a SPIP measurement mod-
ule. Before measuring, each image had to be levelled and calibrated to avoid mea-
surement errors. Particle & Pore Analysis was found to be the most appropiate tool
to measure the mentioned features due to its circular geometries, SPIP easily detects
them by thresholding the desired object. It is possible to calculate up to 60 parame-
ters — for this purpose, only diameter, height and roundness were taken into account.
Figures 6.25 and 6.26 show the particle detection and measurements calculation for
the fibres and tips respectively.
Finally, all the data points were processed with OriginLab, a data analysis and
graphing software. With the heights (both fibres and tips), the vertical (Z) resolution
==PAGE:83==
6.3 Second DoE
71
Figure 6.25: Example of fibres particle analysis and calculated measurements with SPIP.
Figure 6.26: Example of tips particle analysis and calculated measurements with SPIP.
of the DLP was analysed, as well as the membrane influence. With the diameter and
roundness of the tips, the horizontal (XY) resolution was assessed. Table 6.6 shows
the nominal values of these features.
Table 6.6: Nominal values of measured features.
Feature
ID
Nominal
Height of fibres
HT
1200 [µm]
Height of tips
HT
100 [µm]
Diameter of tips
DT
110 [µm]
Ideal
Real
Roundness of tips
RT
1
0.8561 - 0.9015
Special attention has to be paid to the roundness. In a perfect circle the ideal
roundness is 1 (in a scale from 0 to 1, being 1 a perfect circle). In reality, since the
projected mask in the DLP is a pixel-based imaging system, in reality there will never
be a perfect circle but pixelised circles. Hence, to calculate the real roundness that
==PAGE:84==
72
6 DTU DLP v2
the projector is casting, SPIP was used to process an image with the two possible
circles the DMD will ideally cast. Each pixel is 7.6 µm, and the nominal diameter is
110 µm; hence, the circles will have a diameter of 14,5 pixels. The DMD has only on
or off positions, since the behaviour of the DMD is not fully understood, two possible
circles are assumed as ideal, 14 pixel circle or 15 pixel circle (Figure 6.27). After
analysing the image with SPIP particle analysis, the boundary ideal roundnesses are
obtained, 0.8561 and 0.9015 for the 14 and 15 pixel diameters circles respectively.
14 pixels
15 pixels
Figure 6.27: Circles with 14 and 15 pixel diameter with 0.8561 and 0.9015 roundnesses
respectively.
6.3.3
Printings results of DoE 2 and discussion
When processing the data, several discrepancies were found between qualitative
and quantitative results. Here are presented in two groups (1) the qualitative results,
with a comparative study between the best and worst results among all the samples;
and (2) the quantitative results where the results are plotted in box charts, since it
was concluded it was the best statistical plot that best represents the data distribu-
tion. Appendix F shows all the results recorded of every sample (qualitatively and
quantitatively).
6.3.3.1
Qualitative results
Before analysing the samples under the microscope, it was observed a sink mark
in almost all samples (Figure 6.28). The sink mark was the same shape in all the
samples, at first it was thought to be due to the membrane wearing off. Nevertheless,
as it will be seen in Section 6.4.2, after the membrane was changed those sink marks
appeared again, meaning that that area is subjected to overexposure. Thus, the light
in the DMD is not uniform across the image field.
As seen in sample E2_1 (Figure 6.29, left), the lower values in ET and LT (3.5 s
and 15 µm, respectively), showed signs of overexposure with merged tips or oversized
==PAGE:85==
6.3 Second DoE
73
Figure 6.28: Sink mark in sample E2_3.
tip diameter. If it is compared with sample E2_2, with same ET but higher LT (18
µm), it is observed an opposite phenomenon, underexposure with smaller tips than
the nominal.
300 µm 
TL
TC
CC
CL
BC
BL
TR
CR
BR
TL
TC
CC
CL
BC
BL
TR
CR
BR
300 µm 
E2_1
E2_2
LT : 15 µm
ET : 3.5 s
LT : 15 µm
ET : 3.5 s
Figure 6.29: Comparison between E2_1 and E2_2 tips.
This behaviour is seen (in less extent) in samples E2_3 and E2_4 (Figure 6.30).
This behaviour is most likely due to that at thinner layers the resin does not need
that much exposure time, given that the transmission of light takes less time in a
thinner medium than in the thicker one. Nevertheless, there are other factors that
might influence this behaviour. According to this reasoning, E2_3 should show signs
of even higher overexposure than E2_1, since a same thickness layer is being exposed
==PAGE:86==
74
6 DTU DLP v2
to light 0.5 s more than E2_1. This incongruity can be also be explained with the
projector inconsistency, even though it is operating at higher values than in DoE 1,
there is still some instability. This same behaviour is also seen in the second round
when comparing E2_5 with E2_6, and E2_7 with E2_8, showing concordance in
the results.
TL
TC
CC
CL
BC
BL
TR
CR
BR
300 µm 
TL
TC
CC
CL
BC
BL
TR
CR
BR
300 µm 
LT : 15 µm
ET : 4 s
LT : 18 µm
ET : 4 s
E2_3
E2_4
Figure 6.30: Comparison between E2_1 and E2_2 tips.
By looking at the samples individually of Figures 6.29 and 6.30, it is also noticeable
how quality varies just in one sample. None of the samples showed an even quality
of tips, all of the samples had overexposure areas, specially in the stratums BL, CL,
CR and TR.
Special attention has to be paid to sample E2_4, where the tips show the highest
quality in which the DMD voxels can be seen on the surface of the fibre and tips.
Looking closely to Figure 6.31 detail (a), the edges of the fibre can be seen defined
by a pixelated circle, the ideal shape expected from the DMD. In some areas of the
fibre the quality is so refined that it is possible to see single cured pixels, Figure 6.31
detail (b). This quality is observed in greater extent in sample E2_4 and E_8 (both
with ET: 4s and LT: 18 µm), in a much smaller proportion E2_3 and E2_7 have
some features with pixelated features. If the tips are compared and overlapped with
the ideal 14 and 15 pixel circles seen in Figure 6.27 it can be seen how they match,
specially the 15 pixel where the match is close to ‘perfection’.
==PAGE:87==
6.3 Second DoE
75
a
a
b
b
Figure 6.31: Pixelated features showing
high quality of printings.
14 pixels
15 pixels
Figure 6.32:
Comparison between tip
shape and pixelated ideal circle.
When the image was processed with SPIP, by identifying the pixel boundaries with
their grey-scale information, it was possible to measure each pixel (Figure 6.33). The
pixels on the edge of the tip had an average of 5.96 µm, smaller than the theoretical
minimum achievable feature 7.6 µm. These pixels are not fully cured, most likely
due to a combination of scattered light on the edges and resin shrinkage (0.5% of
shrinkage according to the manufacturers). The pixels found in the centre of the tips
have an average of 7.34 µm, even smaller than the theoretical value. However, the
quality of these pictures is not the optimal to obtain reliable measurements. Hence,
SEM images are recommended to obtain high-quality pictures that define the pixel
size with precision.
7.4562 µm 
Figure 6.33: SPIP measurement of pixelated tip.
==PAGE:88==
76
6 DTU DLP v2
6.3.3.2
Quantitative results
After collecting and processing the 486 data points, they were classified by height
of fibres, height of tips, diameter of tips and roundness of tips. The first analysis
collected was an average of the different zones (Figure 6.21), divided among the
four measurement categories, these can be seen in Appendix F. The most notorious
outcome from this result was, as seen in the pictures, how the quality of features
(Figures 6.29 and 6.30) varies across the surface.
When the data was processed
without differentiated zones and plotted with box plots, the statistical distribution
was better represented alongside noticeable trends among the samples.
The heights of the fibres and tips are subjected to higher variability. Looking
at Figure 6.34 there is a trend where the samples with smaller layer thickness, 15
µm (E2_1, E2_3 and their homologous in parameters E2_5 and E2_7 respectively)
are closer to the nominal value, 1200 µm. If the samples are grouped according to
the exposure time (e.g. E2_1 and E2_2) the drop in height is even clearer. This
behaviour can be explained because, as mentioned in the qualitative analysis, the
samples with smaller layer thickness are subjected to overexposure. Meaning that 15
µm layers are more cured, thus they are less likely prompt to deformation when the
part detaches from the vat. The overexposure phenomenon, even though is negative
for the tip quality is surprisingly positive for the height of the fibres and tips (Figure
6.35).
E2_1 & E2_5
   LT: 15 µm
   ET: 3.5 s
E2_2 & E2_6
   LT: 18 µm
   ET: 3.5 s
E2_3 & E2_7
   LT: 15 µm
   ET: 4.0 s
E2_4 & E2_8
   LT: 18 µm
   ET: 4.0 s
Figure 6.34: Box plot of the fibre’s height.
Another noticeable behaviour when looking at the heights of the fibres and tips,
is the mentioned creep of the membrane. The first printing (E2_1) shows a close-to-
==PAGE:89==
6.3 Second DoE
77
nominal height, in fibre and tips (specially the former). As the printings progress, the
quality decreases and the behaviour of the membrane is more unpredictable. This is
seen distinctively in the samples E2_4 and E2_6, being the latter with an average of
fibre height of 936 µm in height, and a standard deviation of 88 µm. E2_4, although
its mean is closer to the nominal the deviation is even higher (104 µm). These two
peaks, demonstrate that the DLP is still operating with sources of error, and is in
need of further improvement — since all the printings were fabricated under the same
circumstances.
The box plot of height tips (Figure 6.35), confirms this variable behaviour as the
samples are printed. Starting with a steady behaviour, the heights vary in great extent
— again being E2_4 and E2_6 the samples with higher deviation and variability.
E2_1 & E2_5
   LT: 15 µm
   ET: 3.5 s
E2_2 & E2_6
   LT: 18 µm
   ET: 3.5 s
E2_3 & E2_7
   LT: 15 µm
   ET: 4.0 s
E2_4 & E2_8
   LT: 18 µm
   ET: 4.0 s
Figure 6.35: Box plot of the tip’s height.
When looking at the box plot of the diameter and roundness (Figures 6.36 and
6.37), a more steady behaviour is seen. These results are in concordance with the
qualitative discussion, where the sample with better quality is sample E2_4 and its
replicate E2_8. The samples with 15 µm (E2_1, E2_3 and their replicates) — as
seen in the qualitative analysis, have signs of overexposure with higher diameter value
in all cases. On the other hand, the samples with 18 µm layer thickness are either
underexposed (E2_2 and E2_6) or closer to the nominal value. Sample E2_4 mean
of 109.9, one micron under the nominal.
The higher XY quality of the tips on the samples with higher layer thickness is also
in agreement with the qualitative analysis discussion when looking at the roundness
box plot (Figure 6.37). Nevertheless, roundness has to be interpreted alongside the
==PAGE:90==
78
6 DTU DLP v2
E2_1 & E2_5
   LT: 15 µm
   ET: 3.5 s
E2_2 & E2_6
   LT: 18 µm
   ET: 3.5 s
E2_3 & E2_7
   LT: 15 µm
   ET: 4.0 s
E2_4 & E2_8
   LT: 18 µm
   ET: 4.0 s
Figure 6.36: Box plot of the tip’s diameter.
E2_1 & E2_5
   LT: 15 µm
   ET: 3.5 s
E2_2 & E2_6
   LT: 18 µm
   ET: 3.5 s
E2_3 & E2_7
   LT: 15 µm
   ET: 4.0 s
E2_4 & E2_8
   LT: 18 µm
   ET: 4.0 s
Figure 6.37: Box plot of the tip’s roundness.
diameter measurements and the visual analysis. Looking at the roundness plot, E2_2
and E2_6 are within the range of the ideal roundness. Nevertheless, these samples
have a smaller diameter due to underexposure. Again E2_4 and E2_8 are the samples
with the best results in terms of roundness.
==PAGE:91==
6.3 Second DoE
79
6.3.3.3
Conclusion
From the beginning of the experiments, it was demonstrated the DTU DLP v2
capabilities to print micro-features (Figure 6.9, Section 6.2.2). After identifying the
sources of error and variability in the printings the overall quality was improved.
Considering the observed impact of the membrane degradation on sample height, a
better membrane mechanism will be favourable, which is already under development.
A proposal to study its behaviour is to benchmark different membrane thicknesses
from various manufacturers, all under the same printing parameters.
All things considered, it can be said that the behaviour of the printer in the XY
direction is subjected to less variability than the Z direction, being all the samples
within a range of ±9µm and the best one (E2_4) just one micron under the nominal.
Proving that the projector is more stable than the beginning of these experiments
and the neutral density filters play a key role in the horizontal quality of the print-
ings. Nevertheless, there are still certain inconsistencies such as the sample E2_2
having much more under exposure than sample E2_6, when both of them have same
parameters. As said before, the ideal condition for the projector is to operate it at
the range of 400 to 800 input value. In order to increase the input value, a third
neutral density filter with less optical density than the other two is recommended.
The variability observed in all samples surface — with overexposure areas, merged
tips or perfect tips in just one sample, also confirms that the projector does not cast
a uniform light. For a better quality and repeatably of the printer, it is suggested a
thorough investigation of the lens-set’s behaviour to find the source of instability.
Once the membrane mechanism has been changed and the projector has been
stabilised, the quality of the printings will most likely show an improvement and less
variability. Nevertheless, another similar study as the one presented in this document
is prescribed in order to find a new set of optimal parameters. To ensure more relia-
bility in the results, the new DoE should include the following factors at wider range
of levels (more than two): layer thickness, projector intensity, membrane thickness
and exposure time. Moreover, the new experiments should have more replicates than
the present study (only two in this case) to further characterise the repeatability of
the DLP.
According to the samples final quality, it was decided to print the samples of the
following section with the parameters with better XY resolution found in samples
E2_4 and E2_8, ET: 4 s and LT: 18 µm. If the adhesion tests were carried out, the
height of the features will be a factor to take into consideration. However, due to
the nature of the validation test (contact angle measurements), the XY resolution is
more influential in terms of wettability.
==PAGE:92==
80
6 DTU DLP v2
6.4
Design of intricate bio-inspired designs and
validation
The final step of this thesis is the design of more intricate gecko-surfaces, referred
as bio-design (BD) from now on. Followed by the measurement of the contact angles
of the BD and LS to compare and validate the surfaces. Due to the complexity of the
BD samples and the restricted time of this thesis, they could not be subjected to the
same thorough quantitative and qualitative analysis. Hence, it was assumed that the
parameters which gave the best XY quality, will also give the best quality for the BD
samples. The goal of the contact angle test is to verify if the DTU DLP v2 will be
able to print higher complexity features than the LS, alongside to study the influence
of more intricate geometries in term of wettability.
6.4.1
Bio-inspired designs
The BD designs targeted the capability of the DLP DTU v2 to print a surface
beyond the 2½D features seen in most of the bio-inspired surfaces in the literature.
To do so, more intricate designs were created, with curved lines and smaller features.
Thus, the following two designs were printed. These designs, although they are not
mimicking the original gecko-toe-hair, they are designed with curved lofted-boss and
tilted tips, which are more prompt to be found in nature instead of orthogonal 2½D
features. The dimensions can be seen in Appendix G.
Bio-design 1
Figure 6.38: Bio-design 1 detailed view.
The base-plate is the same as the LS sample with a reduction of one millimetre
(18x12x2 mm) to reduce printing times.
The fibre density has been increased to
26 rows and 41 columns, a total of 1066 fibres. The amount of tips has also been
incremented from 9 to 15, having in total 15990 points of contact, increasing the
compliance with a neighbour surface.
Instead of mushroom shaped tips, the tips
are rounded and inclined 70o. The fibre body is slightly inclined, with a wider base
==PAGE:93==
6.4 Design of intricate bio-inspired designs and validation
81
narrowing towards the neck widening with a mushroom in the fibre-end. The height
of the fibre is 900 µm, and the tips are 100 µm with a diameter of 50 µm each.
Bio-design 2
This sample, pushed forward the capabilities of the DLP. Due to the design intri-
cacies, the base-plate had to be reduced to 7x7x2 mm, since the file was 2 MB causing
constant crashes on the slicer software. With a total of 19x19 fibres (361), each fi-
bre has 19 tips with three semi-spherical ‘bumps’ per tip. The fibre-base has been
widened, whereas it thinners in the neck at 200 µm, widening again at the fibre-end,
with an overall height of 500 µm also slightly inclined. The tips, have a circular base
that stretches and flattens in the end. Three ‘bumps’ of 15.2 µm diameter are added
at the end of each tip to increase the points of contact and hence, the compliance.
Figure 6.39: Bio-design 2 detailed view.
6.4.2
Printing results and discussion
In total, seven samples were printed, four of them were BD previously mentioned
(two of each). On top of the mentioned bio-designs, two other designs were printed
made by co-supervisor Ali Davoudinejad. These designs have a ‘poppy’ flower shape,
with a high aspect ratio and a thin and slim base ending in a multi-tip curved end. For
better understanding, the samples designed by the author will be referred as BDM1
and BDM2, the samples designed by Ali Davoudinejad will be referred as BDA 1 and
BDA 2.
The process parameters for all printings are the most successful parameters seen in
the DoE 2 in terms of XY quality. With a layer thickness of 18 µm, an exposure time
of 4 s and a projector intensity of 230 (with an intensity of 500 for the first two layers).
This time, the resin was changed to red colour (same brand and properties). The red
pigmentation blocks better the UV blue light, refining the horizontal quality since it
does not scatter the light as much as the black pigment [86]. The cleaning process
was the same followed in previous campaigns. To examine the samples, pictures with
==PAGE:94==
82
6 DTU DLP v2
200 µm
BDA 1 
200 µm
100 µm
20 µm
500 µm
Figure 6.40: Printed sample of BDA 1.
Alicona were taken of each print. Due to the parts intricacies and Alicona limitations,
no dimensional measurements were made. Hence, only visual characterization was
carried out. For future endeavours, SEM pictures will allow the part measurement to
fully analyse the samples.
The first sample printed was the BDA 1. The fibres’ slenderness produced some
of them to collapse in the cleaning process (Figure 6.40 bottom). Moreover, the lack
of stiffness produced most of them to stick the tips one with another (Figure 6.40 top
right). The tips of the fibres were too close in the original CAD, in the outer ring of
the tip there are some individual features although they were merged due to residual
IPA (Figure 6.40 middle left). Others (Figure 6.40 middle right) were merged by the
==PAGE:95==
6.4 Design of intricate bio-inspired designs and validation
83
DMD casting a continuous light, given that the separation gap of features was less
than the minimum pixel size.
200 µm
50 µm
20 µm
100 µm
BDA 2 
500 µm
Figure 6.41: Printed sample of BDA 2.
Similar behaviour can be seen in BDA 2 (6.41), with more collapsed fibres and no
individual features seen. Due to this two samples the following bio-designs (BDM 1
and 2) were designed with more robust base.
In BDM 1 (Figure 6.42) no collapsed fibres were spotted, due to the widened base
and smaller aspect ratio they maintained an orderly position. Looking closer to the
tips (Figure 6.42 middle left and right), it can be seen how the outer ring of tips are
independent tips. Nevertheless, the tips in the centre are merged by the edges. This
==PAGE:96==
84
6 DTU DLP v2
200 µm
50 µm
20 µm
100 µm
BDM 1 
500 µm
Figure 6.42: Printed sample of BDM 1.
behaviour is a combination between features too close and residual IPA on the tips.
In short, gaps between fibres collects the residual IPA which is subjected to capillary
forces, leading to the impossibility of fully clean these gaps.
BDM 2 — which pushed the DLP capabilities even further (Figure 6.43), had the
fibres too close which caused merged fibres. The tips had a random outcome, not
being able to differentiate the tips. No traces of the small ‘bumps’ were seen either,
a reasonable result given that the height of the bumps was smaller than the layer
thickness. A positive outcome of this print and also a behaviour seen in the previous
designs, is the visualisation of the pixels. In Figure 6.43 middle right, it is visible
groups of minimum four pixels. This means that, when the post-processing process
==PAGE:97==
6.4 Design of intricate bio-inspired designs and validation
85
is fixed and refined, it will most likely be possible to print closer to the pixel size.
100 µm
50 µm
20 µm
50 µm
BDM 2 
500 µm
Figure 6.43: Printed sample of BDM 2.
Both, BDM 1 and BDM 2, showed the same sunken marks seen in Figure 6.28,
demonstrating that the membrane was not responsible of this phenomenon. Thus, the
projector is likely to be projecting with more intensity in that area. Looking at Figure
6.42 bottom and Figure 6.43 top right, it is noticeable a phenomenon already seen in
the LS design. The mushroom-end of the fibre, instead of finishing with a chamfer
(original CAD design) it ends with a fillet. In Figure 6.44 two opposite behaviours
are seen, a ‘cup’ effect from the middle to the top of the fibre, and a ‘staircase’ effect
from the middle to the bottom.
This was traced to be most likely due to the projector and the material used. Fig-
==PAGE:98==
86
6 DTU DLP v2
ure 6.45 details an explanation of this phenomenon. Briefly put, when the projector
cures a structure that narrows down from the building plate, the following layers will
have a support — creating a ‘staircase’. On the contrary — if the structure widens up
as the layers increase, the projector is curing micro-overhangs. These overhangs do
not have the support of the previous layer, thus curing more than the layer thickness
stipulated. The material is also key in these behaviour, considering it allows the light
scatter or cure beyond the limits.
50 µm
Figure 6.44: Cup and staircase effect observed in sample BDM 2.
Building plate
DMD
Liquid resin
‘Cup-staircase’ effect
Cured resin
Residual light
Figure 6.45: Explanation of the cup-staircase effect.
6.4.3
Contact angle measurements
In order to validate the printed surfaces as functional surfaces. A wettability test
by measuring the contact angles was carried out in samples E2_4, BDA 1, BDA
2, BDM 1, BDM 2 and a flat surface printed with the same material as a point of
reference. The water used for this test was Milli-Q™ultra-pure water. A droplet of
==PAGE:99==
6.4 Design of intricate bio-inspired designs and validation
87
2 µl was suspended on every surface, letting it rest for one minute to stabilise the
droplet. The test was carried out three times for each surface, taking 10 measurements
per droplet.
6.4.3.1
Results and discussion
The obtained results can be seen in Figure 6.46. As it can be seen, BDA 2 is
not among the results.
This is because it was not possible to suspend a droplet
over this surface, the tips were not dense enough and all the deposited droplets were
immediately drained into the fibres. The droplet in a flat surface has, as expected, a
high wettability regime with an average contact angle of 67.33o. When the droplet is
suspended over the sample E2_4, it is immediate the wettability decrease with 95.85o,
thus entering into a hydrophobic state with a Cassie state, where the droplet remains
at the top of the fibres. BDA 1 reached a slightly higher hydrophobicity, nevertheless,
it took several attempts to keep the droplet on the surface — since most of the
droplets ended draining into the fibres. If a higher robustness and independent tips
are achieved with this design, it will most likely gain in hydrophobicity.
Surfaces BDM 1 and BDM 2 are the surfaces with higher hydrophobicity with
119.44o and 116.89o respectively, close to superhydrophobicity. Having the former
higher contact angle since it has more independent tips. These results are in agree-
ment with the literature, considering these surfaces have smaller features providing
more roughness to the medium. As seen in Chapter 3 Section 3.3.1, according to both
Wenzel and Cassie equations for wettability (Equations 3.1 and 3.2), as the roughness
of the surface increases the contact angle also increases, hence the hydrophobicity is
augmented as well.
One phenomenon seen in all samples was that, if the sample is tilted or turned
upside down, the droplet remains on its place (Figure 6.47).
This is known as a
petal effect, the opposite scenario of the lotus effect [87]. As mentioned in Section
3.3 Figure 3.12, the gecko-toe behaves as a lotus in terms of superhydrophobicity if a
droplet is suspended on the toe. Thus, the droplet will roll off if the surface is tilted
(i.e. the self-cleaning phenomenon).
Flower petals and some leaves have a superhydrophobicity behaviour where the
droplets remain in the surface almost spherical. Nevertheless - as see in Figure 6.47
right, the droplets do not roll off the surface. This is because the surface has a high
adhesive force with the water due to higher size micro-fibres when compared with the
lotus leaves micro-features. Considering a two-level hierarchy in the petal and the
lotus, the former is in a Cassie state with the higher size features, whereas it is in a
Wenzel state with the smaller second-level features (i.e. the second level features, the
smaller, are impregnated in water) increasing the adhesion force. On the contrary, the
lotus has even smaller nano-fibres which creates a ‘pure’ Cassie state in all levels. The
gaps between nano-features have air pockets and the droplet remains suspended on
==PAGE:100==
88
6 DTU DLP v2
BDA 1 
FLAT SURFACE
BDM 1 
BDM 2 
E2_4
67.33º
95.86º
101.66º
119.44º
116.89º
Figure 6.46: Contact angle measurements of printed samples.
a heterogeneous surface of air and solid. The heterogeneous surface lowers extremely
the adhesion forces, causing the droplets to roll off instead of remaining in place like
the petal.
Hence, all samples due to their second-level tip size keeps the water in a hydropho-
bic state under a petal effect. Even though this is not the expected results, obtaining
surfaces close to superhydrophobicity is considered a step forward to success. Taking
==PAGE:101==
6.4 Design of intricate bio-inspired designs and validation
89
into account that the differences in the designs have an agreement with the output
measurements, the features behave according to the theory. If smaller and refined
features are achieved, it might be possible to achieve a full Cassie state and thus, a
rapid prototyping method to compare geometry behaviours.
PETAL EFFECT
Figure 6.47: Observed petal effect.
==PAGE:102==
90
==PAGE:103==
CHAPTER 7
Summary, conclusions
and outlook
7.1
Summary and conclusions
A comprehensive study of bio-inspired functional surfaces was carried out, using
the gecko-toes geometries as a case study. The existing manufacturing methods were
analysed in order to find a new approach to manufacturing these surfaces. In this
thesis, the use of additive manufacturing as a rapid prototyping method (SLA and
DLP) is proposed to study the behaviour of different designs, before approaching the
nano-manufacturing stage. By using rapid prototyping, it will ostensibly be possible
to reduce the iterative design process of these surfaces minimising time and resources.
After discarding the commercial SLA Form2 as a possible manufacturing method,
it was possible to achieve the same geometries fabricated with a more complex ap-
proach [9] using the DLP DTU v2 printer. The manufacturing times are compara-
tively reduced, increasing the possibility of experimenting with different designs in
one day; moreover, the surface quality is also increased with tolerances in the range
of ±9 µm, with a possible reduced tolerance window of of ±1 µm if the sources of
error are fixed. In order to fully characterise the DLP, two design of experiments
were carried out:
The first DoE, aimed to study the influence of the projector intensity and layer
thickness in the printing process through a qualitative examination. From the be-
ginning it was demonstrated that the machine is able to print the functional surface
extracted from the literature (LS). It also aided with identifying the main sources of
error of the DLP (projector and membrane). By knowing these errors, it was possible
to further control the process and obtain higher quality features. Accordingly, two
neutral density filter were installed, increasing the horizontal resolution of the features.
As a side project, a better membrane mechanism was designed to overcome the creep
behaviour of the membrane, which was proven than affect the vertical resolution of
the features.
==PAGE:104==
92
7 Summary, conclusions and outlook
The second DoE carried out aimed to better understand the influence of layer
thickness and exposure time.
These results were qualitatively and quantitatively
processed.
Again the influence of the membrane was certainly responsible of the
height quality of the features. The horizontal quality of the tips were traced to be
strongly related with the combination of exposure time and layer thickness, a LT
of 18 µm with a ET of 4 s demonstrated to be a optimal combination to obtain
high resolution features, where individual pixels can be seen under the microscope.
It should be noted that this represents this project’s most significant and valuable
achievement, since no evidence was uncovered indicating that other researchers have
thus far been able to achieve equivalently small features using DLP as a method. In
this regard, and despite any limitations of this thesis project, it can be argued that
this accomplishment serves as the differentiating factor of this report and may set the
stage for further work and research.
To further push the printer capabilities, more intricate bio-inspired surfaces were
designed and printed. The resulting samples were not as defined as the micro fea-
tures of the LS. This was due to the post-processing, where IPA impregnated with
residual resin remained in between the smallest features due to capillary forces. How-
ever, after performing contact angle measurements in all samples, the new bio-design
surfaces had higher hydrophobicity than the simplified LS, reaching angles close to
superhydrophobicity (119o). These results were in agreement with the theory, where
a higher rugosity and feature-density surface will have higher hydrophobicity.
The results obtained demonstrated the capabilities of the DLP to print bio-inspired
surfaces. Nevertheless, higher understanding of the influence of the parameters and
the elimination of the sources of error are key for a more stable process.
7.2
Outlook
Although the effectiveness of the DTU DLP v2 has been demonstrated, there is
still a room for improvement in both hardware stability and process performance.
Both of which will require further study and experimental procedures.
Regarding the hardware stability, if the projector is equipped with a neutral den-
sity filter with higher degree of transmittance, it will be able to operate within the
recommended threshold of 400 to 800 intensity input values. Moreover, a further
understanding of the lens behaviour will allow to identify the reasons of the differ-
ent intensities seen across the surface in one sample. Lastly, a better installation
mechanism is imperative to obtain a smooth tight membrane — which is already
under development parallel to this work). Once the new membrane mechanism is
implemented to the printer, it is recommended to run experiments to study the creep
rate after a certain amount of printing replications alongside the influence of the
membrane thickness.
==PAGE:105==
7.2 Outlook
93
After repairing the hardware sources of error, another sensitivity and design of
experiments is paramount to be carried out. In the next campaign of experiments,
more factors have to be taken into account in combination with one another, such
as (1) exposure time, (2) projector intensity, (3) layer thickness and (4) material.
All of which, with more than two factor levels and several replicates to achieve high
statistical significance and sensitivity. By doing this, it will be able to obtain com-
plete characterization of the machine, obtaining more reliable benchmark values such
tolerances, repeatability etc. Moreover, there is the need of a more thorough post-
processing method — specifically regarding the drying step. It has been proven the
negative impact of residual IPA on the samples, which merges the smallest features.
Once the errors are fixed and the impact of parameters are fully understood, the DLP
DTU v2 will most likely to be able to print close to the minimum feature size 7.6 µm.
In regard of printing functional surfaces — once the process is completely con-
trolled, it will be possible to print more complex designs. If new materials are tested
(such as rubber-like resins), adhesion will be possible to achieve. Nevertheless, a pull-
off forces device will be needed to measure that data and obtain a comprehensive
validation method of the samples.
Overall, the possibility of using an in-house built DLP to rapid prototype work-
ing functional surfaces has been demonstrated. With the mentioned improvements,
it can be said that with further investigation ought to be directed to achieving a
better alignment between DLP technology and the small scale printing of complex
bio-inspired surfaces, it will be possible to add additive manufacturing as a rapid
prototyping approach prior to micro- or nano- manufacturing methods.
==PAGE:106==
94
==PAGE:107==
APPENDIX A
List of Figures
2.1
Trend on published articles about biomimetics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Gecko toe configuration at its different levels. (a) Gecko at macro-scale. (b) Lamellae
structure of the toe. (c & d) Setae arrays. (e) Spatulae fibres at the tip of the setae.
Credits: (a) Edward Ramirez; (b) Tim Sullivan and Joel Thorson; (c) Tim Astrop; (d)
Tim Sullivan; (e) Tim Sullivan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Simplified photolithography process by dry etching using a negative photoresist. Illus-
tration adapted from Photolithography dry etching process. Credit: Cmglee.
. . . . . .
11
2.4
(a) SU-8 photoresist-based master pattern development. (b) Subsequent PDMS replica
mould generation [33].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Schematic illustrations of soft lithographic techniques for (a) microcontact printing (µCP),
(b) replica moulding (REM), and (c) microtransfer moulding (µTM) [33]. . . . . . . . .
13
2.6
PDMS hierarchical gecko setae using photolithography and soft lithography (REM) [22].
14
2.7
Gecko inspired array of pillars made using 3D Direct Laser Writing with an acrylic-based
negative resist [37].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.8
Gecko microfibres manufactured with a combination of 3D printing and dip-transfer [9].
17
2.9
Generalised work-flow of Additive Manufacturing Process [45]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.10
Literature review summary flowchart. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1
Photopolymeric reaction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2
Free-radical polymerization process [66].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3
Top-down SLA.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.4
Form 2 SLA 3D printer [54]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.5
Bottoms-up DLP. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.6
Digital Micromirror Device by Texas Instruments [68].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.7
DLP v1 set-up [70]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.8
DTU DLP v2 set-up. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.9
LUXBEAM RS WQ projector [74] and equipped Projection Lens LRS-10 P/N 6501980
[71] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.10
DeMeet 220 [76]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.11
Alicona Infinite Focus [78]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.12
Opposite wetting regimes Cassie (A) and Wenzel (B) in the same toe pad. The transition
was induced by soaking the pad in water for 30 minutes [80].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.13
Different states of wettability of a drop of a generic liquid. From low wettability (left)
to high wettability (right). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.14
(A) Homogeneous wetting regime, Wenzel model.
(B) Heterogeneous wetting regime,
Cassie-Baxter model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
==PAGE:108==
96
List of Figures
3.15
(A) Ramé-hart Model 200 Standard Contact Angle Goniometer [83] and (B) DROPImage
standard visualisation and measurement software of contact angles. . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.1
Iterative experimental process for bio-inspired surfaces. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2
Post-processing of samples after printing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.1
Fibre-like test sample design. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.2
First batch after post-curing.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.3
Demeet images of sample 1.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.4
Demeet images of sample 4.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.5
Staircase effect on high aspect ratio fibres. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.6
140 µm thin-wall test sample design.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.7
Location of the second batch samples across the building plate.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.8
Second batch after post-curing.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.9
SLA printings placed in different locations of the building plate, with nominal wall
thickness 140 µm. Pictures taken with measuring microscope Demeet. . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.10
Simplified scheme explaining the reason of the differences in wall thicknesses. . . . . . .
53
5.11
Path followed by laser. In quadrant 2 the path will have the minimum thickness. Thus,
the correction algorithm make a double wall to compensate, making it thicker than the
other walls. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.12
Wall thicknesses measurements. Measurements taken with measuring microscope Demeet. 54
6.1
Isometric view of preliminary testing of DTU DLP v2 [84]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2
Test sample with higher quality, LT=21 µm, ET=2.6 s and PI=18. [84].
. . . . . . . .
56
6.3
Gecko-toe surface manufactured with 3DPMDT [9]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.4
LS dimensions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.5
Nomenclature used to describe the features in LS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.6
Top view of the LS trial printing. Parameters: LT: 21 µm, ET: 2.6 s and PI: 18. . . . .
58
6.7
Side view of LS trial printing. Parameters: LT: 21 µm, ET: 2.6 s and PI: 18. . . . . . .
58
6.8
Top view of the LS trial printing after membrane change.
Parameters: LT=21 µm,
ET=2.6 s and PI=18. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.9
Side view of LS trial printing after membrane change. Parameters: LT: 21 µm, ET: 2.6
s and PI: 18. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.10
DoE 1 - ID: E1_4.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.11
DoE 1 - ID: E1_5.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.12
DoE 1 - ID: E1_8.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.13
Comparison between first and second print of E1_4.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.14
Projector characterization curves, courtesy of Visitech.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.15
Experiment with cheap sunglasses.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6.16
Failed printings with parameters from E1_4, which were successful at the beginning of
the DoE 1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6.17
Experiment with one filter. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.18
Experiment with one filter and new membrane.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.19
Experiment with two filters.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.20
Experiment with two filters and exposure time increased. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.21
Stratified sampling map on LS.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6.22
Image taken with Alicona at x10 magnification and processed with SPIP. . . . . . . . .
69
6.23
Image taken with Alicona at x20 magnification and processed with SPIP. . . . . . . . .
69
6.24
Features measured to characterise the Literature Sample. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.25
Example of fibres particle analysis and calculated measurements with SPIP.
. . . . . .
71
6.26
Example of tips particle analysis and calculated measurements with SPIP.
. . . . . . .
71
6.27
Circles with 14 and 15 pixel diameter with 0.8561 and 0.9015 roundnesses respectively.
72
6.28
Sink mark in sample E2_3. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.29
Comparison between E2_1 and E2_2 tips. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.30
Comparison between E2_1 and E2_2 tips. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
==PAGE:109==
List of Figures
97
6.31
Pixelated features showing high quality of printings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
6.32
Comparison between tip shape and pixelated ideal circle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
6.33
SPIP measurement of pixelated tip. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
6.34
Box plot of the fibre’s height.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
6.35
Box plot of the tip’s height.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
6.36
Box plot of the tip’s diameter. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
6.37
Box plot of the tip’s roundness.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
6.38
Bio-design 1 detailed view. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
6.39
Bio-design 2 detailed view. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
6.40
Printed sample of BDA 1.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
6.41
Printed sample of BDA 2.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
6.42
Printed sample of BDM 1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
6.43
Printed sample of BDM 2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
6.44
Cup and staircase effect observed in sample BDM 2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
6.45
Explanation of the cup-staircase effect. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
6.46
Contact angle measurements of printed samples. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
6.47
Observed petal effect. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
C.1
Most relevant features when handling the DLP v2.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
103
C.2
CW main screen.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
105
C.3
Manual G-code commands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
107
C.4
Slicing profile configuration screen.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
107
E.1
DoE 1 - ID: e1_4. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
111
E.2
DoE 1 - ID: e1_3. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
111
E.3
DoE 1 - ID: e1_1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
112
E.4
DoE 1 - ID: e1_2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
112
E.5
DoE 1 - ID: e1_5. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
112
E.6
DoE 1 - ID: e1_6. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
113
E.7
DoE 1 - ID: e1_7. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
113
E.8
DoE 1 - ID: e1_8. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
114
E.9
DoE 1 - ID: e1_9. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
114
E.10 DoE 1 - ID: e1_4 second run to test the projector behaviour.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
115
F.1
Qualitative and quantitative results of sample E2_1.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
118
F.2
Qualitative and quantitative results of sample E2_2.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
119
F.3
Qualitative and quantitative results of sample E2_3.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
120
F.4
Qualitative and quantitative results of sample E2_4.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
121
F.5
Qualitative and quantitative results of sample E2_5.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
122
F.6
Qualitative and quantitative results of sample E2_6.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
123
F.7
Qualitative and quantitative results of sample E2_7.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
124
F.8
Qualitative and quantitative results of sample E2_8.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
125
G.1
Drawings of bio-design 1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
128
G.2
Drawings of bio-design 2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
129
==PAGE:110==
List of Tables
2.1
Nature’s Toolbox list of parameters [18].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Nature’s Toolbox list of parameters for gecko toes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
General characteristics for the two-level hierarchical structures of 2PSL, DLW and 3DP-
MDT. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4
Testing conditions and results of adhesion strength. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.5
Review and comparison of the existing AM approaches. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.6
Review and comparison of the existing AM approaches (continuation).
. . . . . . . . .
23
5.1
Fibre-like test sample dimensions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.1
Experimental conditions of the preliminary DoE [84]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.2
Experimental conditions for first DoE.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.3
Detailed DoE 1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.4
Level distribution of DoE 2.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
6.5
Detailed DoE 2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
6.6
Nominal values of measured features. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
B.1
Form 2 technical specifications.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
B.2
Form 2 design recommendations for minimum feature size. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
100
B.3
Material specifications for Tough Resin SLA 3D printer Form 2. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
101
D.1
Alicona Infinite Focus - Technical Specifications [78] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
109
D.2
Alicona Infinite Focus - Measurement limitations and resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . .
110
==PAGE:111==
APPENDIXB
Form 2 specifications
In this chapter, technical specifications, design specifications and material specifications used in
the experiments are addressed. All the data has been acquired from the Formlabs website [54].
B.1
Technical specifications
Table B.1: Form 2 technical specifications.
Hardware
Dimensions
35 x 33 x 52 cm
Weight
13 kg
Operating Temperature
Auto-heats to 35%
Temperature Control
Self-heating Resin Tank
Power Requirements
100 - 240 V
1.5 A
50/60 Hz
65 W
Laser Specifications
EN 60825-1:2007 certified
Class 1 Laser Product
405nm violet laser
250 mW laser
Connectivity
WiFi, Ethernet and USB
Optical Path
Protected
Printer Control
Interactive Touch-screen with Push-button
Printing Properties
Technology
Stereolithography (SLA)
Peel Mechanism
Sliding Peel Process with wiper
Resin Fill System
Automated
Build Volume
145 x 145 x 175 mm
Layer Thickness (Axis Resolution)
25, 50, 100 microns
Laser Spot size
140 microns
Supports
Auto-Generated
Easy Removable
==PAGE:112==
100
B Form 2 specifications
B.2
Design recommendations
In order to have the best quality on the parts printed with Form 2, Formlabs suggests the
following minimum features:
Table B.2: Form 2 design recommendations for minimum feature size.
Feature
Design Recommendation
Minimum Supported Wall Thickness: 0.4 mm
Minimum Unsupported Wall Thickness: 0.6 mm
Maximum Unsupported Overhang Length: 1.0 mm
Maximum Horizontal Support Span/Bridge: 21 mm
Minimum Vertical-Wire Diameter: 0.3 mm (7 mm tall)
to 1.5 mm (30 mm tall)
Minimum Embossed Detail: 0.1 mm
Minimum Engraved Detail: 0.4 mm
Minimum Clearance: 0.5 mm
Minimum Hole Diameter: 0.5 mm
Minimum Drain Hole Diameter: 3.5 mm
Note that small features such as walls, overhangs and wires require extra care in the cleaning
process as they may absorb isopropyl alcohol (IPA) and swell leading to deformation of the part.
==PAGE:113==
B.3 Tough Resin specifications
101
B.3
Tough Resin specifications
Tough Resin produces high quality prints that simulate ABS injection moulded components
while at room temperature and is specifically designed to work with the Formlabs printers.Material
properties can vary with part geometry, orientation, print settings, and temperature.
Table B.3: Material specifications for Tough Resin SLA 3D printer Form 2.
Green1
Post-Cured2
Mechanical Properties
Ultimate Tensile Strength
34.7 MPa
55.7 MPa
Young’s Modulus
1.7 MPa
2.7 GPa
Elongation at Break
42 %
24 %
Fexural Strength at 5% Strain
20.8 MPa
60.6 MPa
Flexural Modulus
0.6 GPa
1.6 GPa
Notched IZOD
32.6 J/m
38 J/m
Thermal Properties
Heat Deflection Temp. @ 1.8 MPa
32.8 oC
45.9 oC
Heat Deflection Temp. @ 0.45 MPa
40.4 oC
48.5 oC
Thermal Expansion (23 - 50 oC)
159.7 µm/m/oC
119.4 µm/m/oC
1Data was obtained from green parts, printed using Form 2, 100 µm, Tough settings, without
additional treatments.
2Data was obtained from parts printed using Form 2, 100 µm, Tough settings and post-cured
with 2.5 mW/cm2 of 405 nm LED light for 120 minutes at 60oC.
==PAGE:114==
102
==PAGE:115==
APPENDIXC
DLP v2 Manual
DLP v2 is a home build Direct Light Processing 3D Printer, described in Section 3.1.3.1. Oper-
ating this machine is fairly simple. Although not as intuitive as other commercial devices (such as
Form 2 printer, which can be considered plug-and-play), the operating mode if followed step by step
it can be considered as a user-friendly machine. Operating the machine has three defined blocks: (1)
setting up the projector, (2) machine calibration, and (3) printing procedure. Figure C.1 shows the
key elements of the DLP v2.
Figure C.1: Most relevant features when handling the DLP v2.
WARNING: In the case the vat or building plate need to be touched, remember to use safety
gloves since resin remains might be over these surfaces.
Once done touching these parts of the
machine, take off the gloves; do not touch the computer or projector if you have been in
contact with uncured resin.
==PAGE:116==
104
C DLP v2 Manual
C.1
Setting up the projector
The first step of the printing process is to start the projector. This is carried out with a set of
commands written on the Command prompt of the computer (with a Windows operating system).
Note that the projector must be connected by HDMI and USB to the computer. These commands
go as follows:
1. Locate in the Command prompt the directory where the start-up application i2c\_cmd.exe is:
DirectoryName\Projector\Software\wq\bin. The cd or cd.. commands might be needed to
navigate into a directory or navigate to an external directory (respectively) from the default
directory; for further inquiries of how to use the Command prompt, Google is your friend.
2. To initiate the projector, the follow commands must be entered sequentially:
• i2c_cmd.exe init hdmi
• i2c_cmd.exe upload test_static.txt 0
• i2c_cmd.exe start
3. If everything has been done correctly, a light beam will come out of the projector with the
maximum image size. Now, to set the light intensity the following command must be used,
for example lets set the amplitude with a level of 20:
• i2c_cmd.exe setamplitude 20
• This is an example of amplitude; thus, make sure that before starting the Creation
Workshop software the light level is set to zero: i2c_cmd.exe setamplitude 0
4. Now the projector is ready for printing. Nevertheless, the following commands are useful to
have into account:
• i2c_cmd.exe stop
Stops the projector. To restart the projector, step 1 must be fol-
lowed.
• i2c_cmd.exe help
Shows the read me file, with extra information about the Software
program and useful commands.
• i2c_cmd.exe boardtem
Shows the temperature and connectivity of the system.
If the projector needs to be focused, it is recommended to have a picture or drawing with the
image size of the DMD (20.736x11.664 mm) with a 1 mm circle in the middle, and open the image for
the projector to cast. Set the projector with a desired intensity and place a piece of paper over the
vat (without resin) and carefully turn the projector Lens Barrel axially until a defined and focused
image is obtained. Remember to set the light amplitude back to zero afterwards.
C.2
Machine calibration
Unfortunately, the present version does not have an automatised calibration system. Thus, every
time Creation Works is opened, restarted, or when the user consider there is a reason to re-calibrate,
the machine must be calibrated.
To do so, it is important to be familiarised with the software
Creation Workshop (CW), since the complete operation of the machine will be carried out with this
software (except the projector intensity).
Creation Workshop is an open source Slicer and host controller developed by Envision Labs [88]
for SLA/DLP printers, although it also host FDM, CNC 3D and Laser Cutter printers. Figure C.2
gives an overview of the CW environment and key features the user should be familiarised with,
==PAGE:117==
C.2 Machine calibration
105
stressing the ones that will be used for DLP v2. For further and detailed tutorial of how to use
CW, refer to the unofficial yet complete manual for DLP printers created by user bongoboy23 for
www.instructables.com [89].
Figure C.2: CW main screen.
1. Load part. When the part is loaded, it will appear in the 3D environment (10).
2. Save part.
3. Turn on and off the machine (the machine will not move nor print if this button is not
activated).
4. Slice part. When the slice button is pressed, a message with ’Print ready’ will appear in the
top left side of the window, alongside the estimated printing time. Also, the slice view (7)
will be available.
5. With these three buttons, the printing job can be started, paused or stopped.
6. In the 3D view, the part can be seen, moved and modified (10 & 11).
7. Once the part has been sliced, in this window the part can be seen slice by slice as a preview
of the layers that will be cured over the vat; in addition, the number of total layers will be
displayed.
8. The control window is where the machine can be manually controlled, entering the pertinent
G-codes.
9. The configuration window allow the user to control the resin and slicing profiles.
10. The 3D model will appear withing the build boundaries, note that if the part is bigger than
the building environment, the walls will appear in red.
11. Options to obtain general information about the part being printed, to move and rotate it in
the building plate, resize and mirror.
To calibrate the machine, the Control window (Figure C.3) is used in manual mode (note the
Manual G-code button must be turned on to be able to see the Manual G-code commands option).
Before entering any code, fill the vat with the desired amount of resin (normally a 5 mm depth of
resin is enough). Afterwards, the lockable spherical joint must be open, since when the sphere is
==PAGE:118==
106
C DLP v2 Manual
’free’ it allows the buildplate to be gently lowered down until it touches the surfaces, leaving the
building plate perfectly aligned with the vat, ready to be set as zero. To do so, the user must be
familiar with basic G-code commands, these are:
• G90
Set machine to use absolute coordinates.
• G91
Set machine to use relative coordinates.
• G92 X0 Y0 Z0
Set machine position (this example sets the absolute zero coordinate).
• G1 Xstep Ystep Fspeed
Moves the axis X and Y (in mm) with a certain feed (mm/min);
e.g: G1 X5 Y5 F1001, will move 5 mm at a speed of 100 mm/min (recommended speed).
• G28 Home machine.
After the sphere hatch is open, as mentioned before, the platform must be lowered down until
it touches the surface. When the building plate is touching2 the surface the sphere will be ’loose’
(confirm touching the sphere, if it moves, it is touching the surface).
To lower it down, set the
machine in relative coordinates and move down is small steps (recommended to lower it down in 5
mm steps for safety). Once the machine is touching the surface, elevate the platform in small steps
of 0.1 mm touching the sphere in every step until the sphere is blocked. Once blocked, the machine
is ready to set the zero and the hatch must be closed. Thus, the sequence will be:
• G91
• G1 X-5 Y-5 F100
Enough times until touching surface, and sphere is loose.
• G1 X0.1 Y0.1 F100
After which, the user must check the sphere. Repeat enough times until
the sphere is blocked from manual motion.
• G92 X0 Y0 Z0
Machine is calibrated and ready to print.
C.3
Step-by-step printing procedure
1.
Once calibrated, the machine will be ready to print. However, if the user need to change the
printing parameters it will be necessary to enter the Configure window (Figure C.4). This window
allows to configure the machine and the slicing profile. For the machine configuration, it must be
left untouched since it is already set for the current machine. The slicing profile has the parameters
shown in Figure C.4, and the only one that will be changed, for the purpose of this thesis will be
the slice thickness.
Note that every time this page is changed, the slicing button (number 4 in
Figure C.2) must be pressed to re-slice. Moreover, it is recommended to press this button
before starting any printing to avoid machine failure, with or without changes in the
Configure window.
2.
Once the slices have been calculated, the machine is ready to print. BUT, before pressing
play, it is necessary to set the initial amplitude of the projector (since this step is not linked with
the software). The first two layers must be set to a higher intensity level than the intensity desired
1Note that, depending if it is in absolute or relative coordinates the axis will move up or down. If
the machine is in absolute coordinates, the platform will move 5 mm above the zero. If the machine
is in relative coordinates, the machine will move up 5 mm from the current position (to move down,
a negative symbol will be needed).
2Note that this part of the printer must be kept clear of resin, since in this stage is necessary to
handle the printer and the computer altogether and will avoid possible resin contamination. Thus,
this part must not be touched with gloves and in case of contamination must be cleaned immediately.
==PAGE:119==
C.3 Step-by-step printing procedure
107
Figure C.3: Manual G-code commands.
Figure C.4: Slicing profile configuration screen.
for the whole part, ensuring the part attachment to the building plate. An example of this sequence
would be:
• i2c_cmd.exe setamplitude 500
Press ’play’ button (number 5 in Figure C.2), immidiately
==PAGE:120==
108
C DLP v2 Manual
the projector will start casting light; wait until the projector irradiates the first two layers.
• i2c_cmd.exe setamplitude 230
After the second layer is done, use this command while the
build plate is lifting.
During the machine printing process, a ’POP’ sound must be heard, which will be proof that
the part is detaching from the vat membrane. This noise will be louder the first layers (since they
are curing higher cross sections) and will gently decrease as the intensity is reduced and features are
created; nevertheless, paying attention a slight ’pop’ might be audible.
In the case that the user notices the part is not attached to the surface, the printing must be
restarted, to do so press the ’stop’ button (number 5 in Figure C.2) and set the projector amplitude
to zero. And follow the next steps.
3.
Once the printing is over, the build plate will lift over the vat for the building plate to be
removed, detached from the part and cleaned. However, extra lifting might be necessary to ensure
a secure removal. It is recommended to lift the plate 30 mm from the finished position, thus the
following code must be entered:
• G91
• G1 X30 Y30 F100
To remove the platform put on gloves and turn it clockwise, 27/28 turns will be enough to
detach; it is recommended to count the number of turns to pay special attention to the grip when
getting closer to turn 27, avoiding possible loss of grip of the platform and consequential fall over
the vat filled with resin. Once the platform has been released from the printed part and properly
cleaned with isopropanol, screw it back again to its original place.
4.
If the machine is going to be used again for the same or different printing, make sure that
there is no residual cured resin attached on the membrane; this is easily checked by putting on a
glove and gently touching the surface of the vat with the hand. If a cured part is felt, scraping the
surface smoothly with the finger will release the artefact; if the part refuses to detach, a putty knife
(again, gently) is recommended.
Once the vat surface is clear of artefacts, the machine is ready to reprint. Following the previous
steps with a slight chenge, the build plate must be send to the zero position, to do so enter the
Gcode:
• G90
• G1 X0 Y0 F0 As the platform lowers down, keep one hand in the ’Emergency stop’ button, to
avoid possible fatal errors, e.g. the machine can continue its vertical path and break the glass
under the vat flooding the projector with resin. This is the worst case scenario, but one must
keep in mind this is a ’home-build’ system and anything can happen.
5.
When the printing jobs are done for the day, stop the projector with the command i2c_cmd.
exe stop, close CW, and unplug the DLP v2 and projector wires. Remove carefully the vat and
empty it on the resin bottle (using a strainer to filter out remains of cured resin). Afterwards, clean
thoroughly the vat with isopropanol and put it back to its place.
==PAGE:121==
APPENDIXD
Alicona Specifications
Table D.1: Alicona Infinite Focus - Technical Specifications [78]
Objective
magnifica-
tion
2.5x
5x
10x
20x
50x
100x
Numerical aperture
0.075
0.15
0.3
0.4
0.6
0.8
Working distance [mm]
808
23.5
17.5
19.0
11
4.5
Lateral
measurement
range [mm]
5.63
2.82
1.62
0.81
0.32
0.16
Lateral
measurement
range [mm‘2]
31.7
7.95
2.62
0.66
0.10
0.03
Measurement point dis-
tance [mm]
3.52
1.76
0.88
0.44
0.18
0.09
Calculated lateral opti-
cal limiting resolution
[µm]
4.35
2018
1.09
0.82
0.54
0.41
Finest
lateral
topo-
graphic
resolution
[µm]
7.04
3051
1.76
0.88
0.64
0.44
Measurement
noise
[nm]
800
120
30
10
3
1
Vertical
resolution
[nm]
2300
410
100
50
20
10
Vertical
measurement
range [mm]
8
22.5
16.5
18
10
4
Vertical scanning speed
[µm/s]
3000
3000
1000-
3000
500-3000
200-2000
100-1000
Measurement speed
≤1.7 million measurement points/sec
==PAGE:122==
110
D Alicona Specifications
Table D.2: Alicona Infinite Focus - Measurement limitations and resolution
Objective magnifica-
tion
2.5x
5x
10x
20x
50x
100x
Min.
measurable
height [µm]
2.3
0.41
0.1
0.05
0.02
0.01
Max.
measurable
height [mm]
8
22.5
16.5
18
10
4
Height
step
accu-
racy - 1 mm [%]
n.a.
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
Max.
measurable
area [mm2]
10000
10000
10000
10000
39.65
990
Max.
measurable
profile length [mm]
100
Min.
measurable
roughness
-
Ra
[µm]
7
1.2
0.3
0.15
0.06
0.03
Min.
measurable
roughness - Sa [µm]
305
0.6
0.15
0.075
0.03
0.015
Min.
measurable
radius [µm]
20
10
5
3
2
1
Min.
measurable
wedge angle [o]
20
Min.
measurable
slope angle [o]
87
==PAGE:123==
APPENDIXE
DoE 1
The following pictures show all the printings carried out using the parameters established bu
the first design of experiments (DoE).
Figure E.1: DoE 1 - ID: e1_4.
Figure E.2: DoE 1 - ID: e1_3.
==PAGE:124==
112
E DoE 1
Figure E.3: DoE 1 - ID: e1_1.
Figure E.4: DoE 1 - ID: e1_2.
Figure E.5: DoE 1 - ID: e1_5.
==PAGE:125==
E DoE 1
113
Figure E.6: DoE 1 - ID: e1_6.
Figure E.7: DoE 1 - ID: e1_7.
==PAGE:126==
114
E DoE 1
Figure E.8: DoE 1 - ID: e1_8.
Figure E.9: DoE 1 - ID: e1_9.
==PAGE:127==
E DoE 1
115
Figure E.10: DoE 1 - ID: e1_4 second run to test the projector behaviour.
==PAGE:128==
116
==PAGE:129==
APPENDIXF
DoE 2 results
This appendix has ta full compilation of the processed results from the second design of ex-
periments (DoE 2). The results are presented with pictures of the different stratum. Next to the
sample ’map’ there is a detailed view of individual fibers showing the most representative tips of
each stratum, some of them with detailed view of single tips.
Underneath the pictures (referred as qualitative analysis), there are bar diagrams of the different
parameters measured describing the average behaviour of these features across the stratum. The
red-dashed line represents the nominal value.
==PAGE:130==
118
F DoE 2 results
300 µm 
600 µm 
600 µm 
TC
TL
TR
CC
CL
CR
BC
BL
BR
E2_1
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 15 µm
ET : 3.5 s
E2_1
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 15 µm
ET : 3.5 s
E2_1
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 15 µm
ET : 3.5 s
E2_1
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 15 µm
ET : 3.5 s
TL
TC
CC
CL
BC
BL
TR
CR
BR
E2_1
600 µm 
110
1200
100
0,8561
0,9015
Figure F.1: Qualitative and quantitative results of sample E2_1.
==PAGE:131==
F DoE 2 results
119
TC
TL
TR
CC
CL
CR
BC
BL
BR
E2_2
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 18 µm
ET : 3.5 s
E2_2
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 18 µm
ET : 3.5 s
E2_2
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 18 µm
ET : 3.5 s
E2_2
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 18 µm
ET : 3.5 s
TL
TC
CC
CL
BC
BL
TR
CR
BR
E2_2
110
1200
100
0,8561
0,9015
300 µm 
600 µm 
600 µm 
600 µm 
Figure F.2: Qualitative and quantitative results of sample E2_2.
==PAGE:132==
120
F DoE 2 results
TC
TL
TR
CC
CL
CR
BC
BL
BR
E2_3
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 15 µm
ET : 4 s
E2_3
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 15 µm
ET : 4 s
E2_3
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 15 µm
ET : 4 s
E2_3
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 15 µm
ET : 4 s
TL
TC
CC
CL
BC
BL
TR
CR
BR
E2_3
110
1200
100
0,8561
0,9015
300 µm 
600 µm 
600 µm 
600 µm 
Figure F.3: Qualitative and quantitative results of sample E2_3.
==PAGE:133==
F DoE 2 results
121
TC
TL
TR
CC
CL
CR
BC
BL
BR
E2_4
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 18 µm
ET : 4 s
E2_4
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 18 µm
ET : 4 s
E2_4
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 18 µm
ET : 4 s
E2_4
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 18 µm
ET : 4 s
TL
TC
CC
CL
BC
BL
TR
CR
BR
E2_4
150 µm 
150 µm 
150 µm 
110
1200
100
0,8561
0,9015
300 µm 
600 µm 
600 µm 
600 µm 
Figure F.4: Qualitative and quantitative results of sample E2_4.
==PAGE:134==
122
F DoE 2 results
TC
TL
TR
CC
CL
CR
BC
BL
BR
E2_5
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 15 µm
ET : 3.5 s
E2_5
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 15 µm
ET : 3.5 s
E2_5
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 15 µm
ET : 3.5 s
E2_5
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 15 µm
ET : 3.5 s
TL
TC
CC
CL
BC
BL
TR
CR
BR
E2_5
110
1200
100
0,8561
0,9015
300 µm 
600 µm 
600 µm 
600 µm 
Figure F.5: Qualitative and quantitative results of sample E2_5.
==PAGE:135==
F DoE 2 results
123
TC
TL
TR
CC
CL
CR
BC
BL
BR
E2_6
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 18 µm
ET : 3.5 s
E2_6
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 18 µm
ET : 3.5 s
E2_6
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 18 µm
ET : 3.5 s
E2_6
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 18 µm
ET : 3.5 s
TL
TC
CC
CL
BC
BL
TR
CR
BR
E2_6
150 µm 
110
1200
100
0,8561
0,9015
300 µm 
600 µm 
600 µm 
600 µm 
Figure F.6: Qualitative and quantitative results of sample E2_6.
==PAGE:136==
124
F DoE 2 results
TC
TL
TR
CC
CL
CR
BC
BL
BR
E2_7
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 15 µm
ET : 4 s
E2_7
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 15 µm
ET : 4 s
E2_7
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 15 µm
ET : 4 s
E2_7
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 15 µm
ET : 4 s
TL
TC
CC
CL
BC
BL
TR
CR
BR
E2_7
150 µm 
110
1200
100
0,8561
0,9015
300 µm 
600 µm 
600 µm 
600 µm 
Figure F.7: Qualitative and quantitative results of sample E2_7.
==PAGE:137==
F DoE 2 results
125
TC
TL
TR
CC
CL
CR
BC
BL
BR
E2_8
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 15 µm
ET : 4 s
E2_8
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 15 µm
ET : 4 s
E2_8
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 15 µm
ET : 4 s
E2_8
PP0: 500
PP : 230
LT : 15 µm
ET : 4 s
TL
TC
CC
CL
BC
BL
TR
CR
BR
E2_8
110
1200
100
0,8561
0,9015
300 µm 
600 µm 
600 µm 
600 µm 
Figure F.8: Qualitative and quantitative results of sample E2_8.
==PAGE:138==
126
==PAGE:139==
APPENDIXG
Bio-designs
Drawings of the bio-inspired designs 1 and 2.
==PAGE:140==
128
G Bio-designs








$





'(7$,/$
6&$/(
62/,':25.6(GXFDWLRQDO3URGXFW)RU,QVWUXFWLRQDO8VH2QO\
BD 1
SCALE 100 : 1
Figure G.1: Drawings of bio-design 1.
==PAGE:141==
G Bio-designs
129




&



%
)
)


5
'(7$,/%
6&$/(
'(7$,/&
6&$/(
6(&7,21))
6&$/(
BD 2
SCALE 100 : 1
Figure G.2: Drawings of bio-design 2.
==PAGE:142==
130
==PAGE:143==
Bibliography
[1]
J. F. Vincent, O. A. Bogatyreva, N. R. Bogatyrev, A. Bowyer, and A.-K. Pahl, “Biomimetics:
its practice and theory,” Journal of The Royal Society Interface, volume 3, number 9, 2006.
[Online]. Available: http://rsif.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/3/9/471.
[2]
A. Malshe, K. Rajurkar, A. Samant, H. N. Hansen, S. Bapat, and W. Jiang, “Bio-inspired
functional surfaces for advanced applications,” CIRP Annals - Manufacturing Technology,
volume 62, pages 607–628, 2013. doi: 10.1016/j.cirp.2013.05.008.
[3]
A. von Gleich, C. Pade, U. Petschow, and E. Pissarskoi, “Introduction,” in Potentials and
Trends in Biomimetics, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010, ch. 1, pages 9–
11. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-05246-0{\_}1. [Online]. Available: http://link.springer.com/
10.1007/978-3-642-05246-0_1.
[4]
——, “Trends in Biomimetics,” in Potentials and Trends in Biomimetics, Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010, ch. 2, pages 13–32. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-05246-0{\_}2.
[Online]. Available: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-642-05246-0_2.
[5]
Brodoceanu D, C. T. Bauer, E. Kroner, E. Arzt, and T. Kraus, “Hierarchical bioinspired
adhesive surfaces—a review,” Bioinspir. Biomim, 2016. doi: 10.1088/1748-3190/11/5/051001.
[Online]. Available: http://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-3190/11/5/051001/
meta.
[6]
D. Lipomi, R. Martinez, and L. Cademartiri, “Soft Lithographic Approaches to Nanofabri-
cation,” Polymer Science:A Comprehensive Reference, volume 7, pages 211–231, 2012. doi:
10.1016/B978-0-444-53349-4.00180-1. [Online]. Available: https://gmwgroup.harvard.
edu/pubs/pdf/1152.pdf.
[7]
Y. Xia and G. M. Whitesides, “Soft Lithography,” Angewandte Chemie International Edition,
volume 37, number 5, pages 550–575, March 1998, issn: 1433-7851. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)
1521 - 3773(19980316 ) 37 : 5<550 :: AID - ANIE550 > 3 . 0 . CO ; 2 - G. [Online]. Available: http :
//doi.wiley.com/10.1002/%28SICI%291521-3773%2819980316%2937%3A5%3C550%3A%3AAID-
ANIE550%3E3.0.CO%3B2-G.
[8]
Y. Lvov, J. Shi, and F. Hua, “Nanoassembly for Polymer Electronics,” Encyclopedia of
Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, volume 6, number 1, pages 23–51, 2004. [Online]. Avail-
able: http://www.fulviofrisone.com/attachments/article/462/ENN-Vol%206.pdf.
[9]
M. P. Murphy, S. Kim, and M. Sitti, “Enhanced Adhesion by Gecko-Inspired Hierarchical
Fibrillar Adhesives,” ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, volume 1, number 4, pages 849–
855, April 2009, issn: 1944-8244. doi: 10.1021/am8002439. [Online]. Available: http://pubs.
acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/am8002439.
[10]
B. Bhushan, “Biomimetics: lessons from nature–an overview,” Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, volume 367,
number 1893, 2009. [Online]. Available: http://rsta.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/
367/1893/1445.
[11]
Time-Life Books., Inventive genius. Time-Life Books, 1991, page 52, isbn: 0809476991.
==PAGE:144==
132
Bibliography
[12]
Y. Bar-Cohen, “Biomimetics: mimicking and inspired-by biology,” Y. Bar-Cohen, Ed., Interna-
tional Society for Optics and Photonics, May 2005, page 1. doi: 10.1117/12.597436. [Online].
Available: http://proceedings.spiedigitallibrary.org/proceeding.aspx?doi=10.1117/12.
597436.
[13]
G. Zan and Q. Wu, “Biomimetic and Bioinspired Synthesis of Nanomaterials/Nanostructures,”
Advanced Materials, volume 28, number 11, pages 2099–2147, March 2016, issn: 09359648.
doi: 10.1002/adma.201503215. [Online]. Available: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/adma.
201503215.
[14]
O. Schmitt, “Some Interesting Useful Biomimetic Transforms,” in Proceedings of the Third
International Biophysics Congress, Boston, MA, USA, 1969, page 297.
[15]
ScienceDirect.com | Science, health and medical journals, full text articles and books. [Online].
Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/.
[16]
Y. Tian, D. Tao, N. Pesika, J. Wan, Y. Meng, and X. Zhang, “Flexible Control and Coupling
of Adhesion and Friction of Gecko Setal Array During Sliding,” Tribology Online, volume 10,
number 2, pages 106–114, 2015.
[17]
Y.-S. Jheng and Y.-C. Lee, “Fabrication of micro/nano hierarchical structures with analysis
on the surface mechanics,” Applied Surface Science, number 384, pages 393–399, 2016.
[18]
J. Giannatsis, K. Sofos, V. Canellidis, D. Karalekas, and V. Dedoussis, “Investigating the
influence of build parameters on the mechanical properties of FDM parts,” Innovative Devel-
opments in Virtual and Physical Prototyping - Proceedings of the 5th International Conference
on Advanced Research and Rapid Prototyping, pages 525–529, 2012.
[19]
C.-H. Lim, S.-Y. Han, J.-D. Eo, K. Kim, and W.-B. Kim, “Superhydrophobic hierarchical struc-
tures produced through novel low-cost stamp fabrication and hot embossing of thermoplastic
film,” Journal of Mechanical Science and Technology, volume 29, number 12, pages 5107–5111,
2015.
[20]
A. Voevodin and J. Zabinski, “Supertough wear-resistant coatings with ‘chameleon’ surface
adaptation,” Thin Solid Films, volume 370, number 1-2, pages 223–231, Jul. 2000, issn:
00406090. doi: 10.1016/S0040-6090(00)00917-2. [Online]. Available: http://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0040609000009172.
[21]
B. Bhushan, Y. Chae Jung, F. Yong Chae Jung, A. Solga, Z. Cerman, B. F. Striffler, B. June
Zhang, J. Park, K. J. Kim, M. Nosonovsky, K.-Y. Yeh, K.-H. Cho, Y.-H. Yeh, B. Bhushan
Bioinspir Biomim, H. S. Grewal, I.-J. Cho, and E.-S. Yoon, “The role of bio-inspired hierar-
chical structures in wetting,” Bioinspir. Biomim, volume 10, 2015.
[22]
C. Greiner, E. Arzt, and A. del Campo, “Hierarchical Gecko-Like Adhesives,” Advanced Mate-
rials, volume 21, number 4, pages 479–482, January 2009, issn: 09359648. doi: 10.1002/adma.
200801548. [Online]. Available: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/adma.200801548.
[23]
Y. Tian, J. Wan, N. Pesika, and M. Zhou, “Bridging nanocontacts to macroscale gecko adhesion
by sliding soft lamellar skin supported setal array,” Scientific Reports, volume 3, number 1382,
2013.
[24]
K. Autumn, “How Gecko Toes Stick,” American Scientist, volume 94, number 2, page 124,
2006, issn: 0003-0996. doi: 10.1511/2006.58.987. [Online]. Available: http://www.americanscientist.
org/issues/feature/2006/2/how-gecko-toes-stick.
[25]
H. Gao, X. Wang, H. Yao, S. Gorb, and E. Arzt, “Mechanics of hierarchical adhesion structures
of geckos,” Mechanics of Materials, volume 37, number 2, pages 275–285, 2005, issn: 01676636.
doi: 10.1016/j.mechmat.2004.03.008. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0167663604000833.
[26]
Y. Tian, N. Pesika, H. Zeng, K. Rosenberg, B. Zhao, P. Mcguiggan, K. Autumn, and J. Is-
raelachvili, “Adhesion and friction in gecko toe attachment and detachment,” [Online]. Avail-
able: http://www.pnas.org/content/103/51/19320.full.pdf.
==PAGE:145==
Bibliography
133
[27]
L. Ge, S. Sethi, L. Ci, P. M. Ajayan, and A. Dhinojwala, “Carbon nanotube-based synthetic
gecko tapes.,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of Amer-
ica, volume 104, number 26, pages 10 792–5, Jun. 2007, issn: 1091-6490. doi: 10.1073/pnas.
0703505104. [Online]. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17578915%20http:
//www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=PMC1904109.
[28]
A. K. Geim, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva, K. S. Novoselov, A. A. Zhukov, and S. Y.
Shapoval, “Microfabricated adhesive mimicking gecko foot-hair,” Nature Materials, volume 2,
number 7, pages 461–463, Jul. 2003, issn: 14761122. doi: 10.1038/nmat917. [Online]. Available:
http://www.nature.com/doifinder/10.1038/nmat917.
[29]
A. Y. Stark, S. Subarajan, D. Jain, P. H. Niewiarowski, and A. Dhinojwala, “Superhydropho-
bicity of the gecko toe pad: biological optimization versus laboratory maximization,” Philosoph-
ical Transactions of the Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering
Sciences, volume 374, number 2073, 2016. [Online]. Available: http://rsta.royalsocietypublishing.
org/content/374/2073/20160184.
[30]
Photolithography | Its Importance in Semiconductor Manufacturing -. [Online]. Available:
https://www.waferworld.com/photolithography- its- importance- in- semiconductor-
manufacturing/.
[31]
H. J. Levinson, “Overview of Lithography,” in Principles of Lithography, 2nd edition, Belling-
ham, Washington USA: SPIE—The International Society for Optical Engineering, 2005, ch. 1.
doi: 10.1117/3.601520.
[32]
Y. Xia and G. M. Whitesides, “SOFT LITHOGRAPHY,” Annual Review of Materials Science,
volume 28, number 1, pages 153–184, August 1998, issn: 0084-6600. doi: 10.1146/annurev.
matsci.28.1.153. [Online]. Available: http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/10.1146/annurev.
matsci.28.1.153.
[33]
A. Flores and M. R., “Soft Lithographic Fabrication of Micro Optic and Guided Wave Devices,”
in Lithography, InTech, February 2010. doi: 10.5772/8185. [Online]. Available: http://www.
intechopen.com/books/lithography/soft- lithographic- fabrication- of- micro- optic-
and-guided-wave-devices.
[34]
Shop for microcontact printing stamps — RMS. [Online]. Available: https://researchmicrostamps.
com/shop-online.
[35]
A. Spuskanyuk, R. McMeeking, V. Deshpande, and E. Arzt, “The effect of shape on the
adhesion of fibrillar surfaces,” Acta Biomaterialia, volume 4, number 6, pages 1669–1676,
2008, issn: 17427061. doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2008.05.026. [Online]. Available: http://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1742706108001645.
[36]
S. Hu, H. Jiang, Z. Xia, and X. Gao, “Friction and Adhesion of Hierarchical Carbon Nanotube
Structures for Biomimetic Dry Adhesives: Multiscale Modeling,” ACS Applied Materials &
Interfaces, volume 2, number 9, pages 2570–2578, Sep. 2010, issn: 1944-8244. doi: 10.1021/
am100409s. [Online]. Available: http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/am100409s.
[37]
M. Röhrig, M. Thiel, M. Worgull, and H. Hölscher, “3D Direct Laser Writing of Nano-
and Microstructured Hierarchical Gecko-Mimicking Surfaces,” Small, volume 8, number 19,
pages 3009–3015, October 2012, issn: 16136810. doi: 10 . 1002 / smll . 201200308. [Online].
Available: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/smll.201200308.
[38]
Two-photon absorption. [Online]. Available: http://simphotek.com/bckg/bckg.tpa.html.
[39]
3D printing on the micrometer scale - Nanoscribe GmbH. [Online]. Available: http://www.
nanoscribe.de/en/.
[40]
A. Selimis, V. Mironov, and M. Farsari, “Direct laser writing: Principles and materials for
scaffold 3D printing,” Microelectronic Engineering, volume 132, pages 83–89, January 2015,
issn: 01679317. doi: 10.1016/j.mee.2014.10.001. [Online]. Available: http://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S016793171400433X.
==PAGE:146==
134
Bibliography
[41]
Z. Rong, Y. Zhou, B. Chen, J. Robertson, W. Federle, S. Hofmann, U. Steiner, and P. Goldberg-
Oppenheimer, “Bio-Inspired Hierarchical Polymer Fiber-Carbon Nanotube Adhesives,” Ad-
vanced Materials, volume 26, number 9, pages 1456–1461, March 2014, issn: 09359648. doi:
10 . 1002 / adma . 201304601. [Online]. Available: http : / / doi . wiley . com / 10 . 1002 / adma .
201304601.
[42]
A. Yoke, Y. Ho, L. P. Yeo, Y. C. Lam, and I. Rodríguez, “Fabrication and Analysis of Gecko-
Inspired Hierarchical Polymer Nanosetae,” volume 5, number 3, 1897. doi: 10.1021/nn103191q.
[Online]. Available: http://pubs.acs.org/doi/pdf/10.1021/nn103191q.
[43]
B. Mueller, “Additive Manufacturing Technologies,” in, 2, volume 32, 2012.
[44]
O. Keles, C. Wayne, and B. Keith, “Article information : Effect of build orientation on the
mechanical reliability of 3D printed ABS,” 2017.
[45]
T. Campbell, C. Williams, O. Ivanova, and B. Garrett, “Could 3D Printing Change the
World?” : Atlantic Council of United States, Wash‐ ington, DC, Tech. Rep., 2011. [Online].
Available: http://www.atlanticcouncil.org/images/files/publication_pdfs/403/101711_
ACUS_3DPrinting.PDF.
[46]
G. Julien, “Method for characterization and enhancement of 3D printing by binder jetting
applied to the textures quality,” Assembly Automation, volume 37, number 2, 2017.
[47]
PreForm Software: One-Click Print – Formlabs. [Online]. Available: https://formlabs.com/
tools/preform/?utm_content=main-nav.
[48]
PolyJet | 3D Printing Solutions | Stratasys Direct Manufacturing. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.stratasysdirect.com/solutions/polyjet/.
[49]
FAQs - What is FDM Technology | Stratasys. [Online]. Available: http://www.stratasys.
com/3d-printers/technologies/fdm-technology/faqs.
[50]
What Resolution Can 3D Printers Print? | All3DP. [Online]. Available: https://all3dp.com/
3d-printer-resolution/.
[51]
E. Taneva, B. Kusnoto, and C. A. Evans, “3D Scanning, Imaging, and Printing in Orthodon-
tics,” in Issues in Contemporary Orthodontics, InTech, Sep. 2015. doi: 10.5772/60010. [Online].
Available: http://www.intechopen.com/books/issues-in-contemporary-orthodontics/3d-
scanning-imaging-and-printing-in-orthodontics.
[52]
3D Printing Technology Comparison: SLA vs. DLP – Formlabs. [Online]. Available: https:
//formlabs.com/blog/3d-printing-technology-comparison-sla-dlp/.
[53]
J. P. Partanen, “Fabrication of Parts Containing Small Features using Stereolithography,” 3D
Systems, [Online]. Available: https://sffsymposium.engr.utexas.edu/Manuscripts/1996/
1996-09-Partanen.pdf.
[54]
Form 2 Desktop SLA 3D Printer – Formlabs. [Online]. Available: https://formlabs.com/3d-
printers/form-2/.
[55]
“Add-Line Manual,” 2017. [Online]. Available: http://www.addifab.com/products/add-line-
manual/.
[56]
Y. G. Huseini, S. Patanwala, B. Bognet, and A. W. K. Ma, “Rapid Prototyping Journal Inkjet
and inkjet-based 3D printing: connecting fluid properties and printing performance&quot;
Inkjet and inkjet-based 3D printing: connecting fluid properties and printing performance,”
Rapid Prototyping Journal Rapid Prototyping Journal Iss Rapid Prototyping Journal, volume
23, number 3, 2017.
[57]
Z.-X. Low, Y. T. Chua, B. M. Ray, D. Mattia, I. Saxley Metcalfe, and D. A. Patterson, “Per-
spective on 3D printing of separation membranes and comparison to related unconventional
fabrication techniques,” 2016. doi: 10 . 1016 / j . memsci . 2016 . 10 . 006. [Online]. Available:
www.elsevier.com/locate/memsci.
[58]
Sinterización selectiva por láser | 3D Systems. [Online]. Available: https://es.3dsystems.
com/on-demand-manufacturing/selective-laser-sintering.
==PAGE:147==
Bibliography
135
[59]
C. R. Deckard, Method and apparatus for producing parts by selective sintering, 1986. [Online].
Available: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO1&Sect2=HITOFF&d=
PALL&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsrchnum.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&s1=4863538.PN.&OS=PN/
4863538&RS=PN/4863538.
[60]
W. J. Sames, K. A. Unocic, R. R. Dehoff, T. Lolla, and S. S. Babu, “Thermal effects on mi-
crostructural heterogeneity of Inconel 718 materials fabricated by electron beam melting,”
2017. doi: 10 . 1557 / jmr . 2014 . 140. [Online]. Available: https : / / www . cambridge . org /
core/services/aop-cambridge-core/content/view/B58A1C9056224B73AC4F88EC9C21D07F/
S088429141400140Xa.pdf/thermal_effects_on_microstructural_heterogeneity_of_inconel_
718_materials_fabricated_by_electron_beam_melting.pdf.
[61]
A. R. Jørgensen, “Design and Development of an Improved Direct Light Processing (DLP)
Platform for Precision Additive Manufacturing.,” PhD thesis, Technical University of Den-
mark, 2015. [Online]. Available: http://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/2292737775.
[62]
Ulrich and Eppinger, Product Design and Development, 2011.
[63]
M. Greulich, M. Greul, and T. Pintat, “Fast, functional prototypes via multiphase jet solidifica-
tion,” Rapid Prototyping Journal, volume 1, number 1, pages 20–25, March 1995, issn: 1355-
2546. doi: 10.1108/13552549510146649. [Online]. Available: http://www.emeraldinsight.
com/doi/10.1108/13552549510146649.
[64]
N. Vogel, M. Retsch, C.-A. Fustin, A. del Campo, and U. Jonas, “Advances in Colloidal
Assembly: The Design of Structure and Hierarchy in Two and Three Dimensions,” Chemical
Reviews, volume 115, number 13, pages 6265–6311, Jul. 2015, issn: 0009-2665. doi: 10.1021/
cr400081d. [Online]. Available: http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/cr400081d.
[65]
“Photopolymerization and Photo-Cross-Linking,” in Photoinitiators for Polymer Synthesis,
Weinheim, Germany: Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, December 2012, pages 3–9.
doi: 10.1002/9783527648245.ch1. [Online]. Available: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/
9783527648245.ch1.
[66]
I. Gibson, D. W. Rosen, and B. Stucker, “Photopolymerization Processes,” in Additive Man-
ufacturing Technologies, Boston, MA: Springer US, 2010, pages 78–119. doi: 10.1007/978-1-
4419-1120-9{\_}4. [Online]. Available: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-1-4419-
1120-9_4.
[67]
C. Decker, “Photoinitiated crosslinking polymerisation,” Progress in Polymer Science, vol-
ume 21, number 4, pages 593–650, January 1996, issn: 00796700. doi: 10.1016/0079-6700(95)
00027-5. [Online]. Available: http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/0079670095000275.
[68]
P. Nelson, “Geometric Optics for DLP ®,” 2013. [Online]. Available: http://www.ti.com/lit/
an/dlpa044/dlpa044.pdf.
[69]
C. Sun, N. Fang, D. Wu, and X. Zhang, “Projection micro-stereolithography using digital
micro-mirror dynamic mask,” Sensors and Actuators A: Physical, volume 121, number 1,
pages 113–120, May 2005, issn: 09244247. doi: 10 . 1016 / j . sna . 2004 . 12 . 011. [Online].
Available: http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0924424704008672.
[70]
K.-E. Nielse, “Development, construction and verification of an additive manufacturing plat-
form based upon UVinitiated photo polymerization,” PhD thesis, Technical University of
Denmark, 2014.
[71]
Visitech, “Projection Lens LRS-10 P/N 6501980,”
[72]
Texas Instruments, DLP4500 0.45 WXGA DMD, 2013. [Online]. Available: http://www.ti.
com/lit/ds/dlps028b/dlps028b.pdf.
[73]
DLP9000 DLP® 0.90 WQXGA Type A DMD | TI.com. [Online]. Available: http://www.ti.
com/product/DLP9000.
[74]
LUXBEAM Rapid System. [Online]. Available: https://visitech.no/en/products/luxbeam-
rapid-system.
==PAGE:148==
136
Bibliography
[75]
Fun To Do - Our 3D Resin Blends. [Online]. Available: http://www.funtodo.net/our-3d-
resin-blends.html.
[76]
Schut Geometrical Metrology. [Online]. Available: http://www.schut.com/Products/DeMeet/
index_Machines.htm.
[77]
DeMeet-220/DeMeet 3D CNC coordinate measuring machinesnt. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.aurotek.com.tw/EN/DeMeet-220.
[78]
Alicona – That’s metrology: InfiniteFocus. [Online]. Available: http://www.alicona.com/
products/infinitefocus/.
[79]
SPIP - Analytical software for microscopy | Imagemetrology. [Online]. Available: https://www.
imagemet.com/products/spip/.
[80]
A. Y. Stark, T. W. Sullivan, and P. H. Niewiarowski, “The effect of surface water and wetting
on gecko adhesion,” Journal of Experimental Biology, volume 215, number 17, 2012. doi:
10.1242/jeb.070912. [Online]. Available: http://jeb.biologists.org/content/215/17/3080.
[81]
E. Y. K. Ng and Y. Luo, Bio-Inspired Surfaces and Applications. WORLD SCIENTIFIC,
August 2016, isbn: 978-981-4704-48-9. doi: 10.1142/9712. [Online]. Available: http://www.
worldscientific.com/worldscibooks/10.1142/9712.
[82]
A. Marmur*, “Wetting on Hydrophobic Rough Surfaces: To Be Heterogeneous or Not To
Be?,” 2003. doi: 10.1021/LA0344682. [Online]. Available: http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.
1021/la0344682.
[83]
ramé-hart Contact Angle Goniometer Model 200. [Online]. Available: http://www.ramehart.
com/200.htm.
[84]
A. Davoudinejad, D. B. Pedersen, and G. Tosello, “Evaluation of polymer micro parts produced
by additive manufacturing processes by using vat photopolymerization method,” Dimensional
Accuracy and Surface Finish in Additive Manufacturing, 2017.
[85]
What Does Resolution Mean in 3D Printing? Pt. 2 | Formlabs. [Online]. Available: https:
//formlabs.com/blog/horizontal-resolution-meaning-3d-printing/.
[86]
K. W. Priesum and A. K. Jessen, “3D printing by vat photopolymerization method and surface
roughness, geometrical analyses of the process,” Technical University of Denmark, Kogens
Lyngby, Tech. Rep., 2017, page 28.
[87]
L. Feng, Y. Zhang, J. Xi, Y. Zhu, N. Wang, F. Xia, and L. Jiang, “Petal Effect:  A Superhy-
drophobic State with High Adhesive Force,” Langmuir, volume 24, number 8, pages 4114–4119,
April 2008, issn: 0743-7463. doi: 10.1021/la703821h. [Online]. Available: http://pubs.acs.
org/doi/abs/10.1021/la703821h.
[88]
Envision Labs - Creation Workshop. [Online]. Available: http://www.envisionlabs.net/.
[89]
How to Use Creation Workshop V1.0.0.75 for DLP Printers: 8 Steps. [Online]. Available:
http://www.instructables.com/id/How- to- Use- Creation- Workshop- V10075- for- DLP-
Printe/.
