==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
 
 
Rafael Domingues Fragoso Rodrigues  
 
 
 
Onboarding processes in temporary 
organizations 
 
 
Master Thesis - DTU Engineering Management 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 2007 
 
==PAGE:2==
2 
 
 
Rafael Domingues Fragoso Rodrigues 
 
 
 
Onboarding processes in temporary 
organizations 
 
 
Master’s Thesis, November 2007 
 
 
 
Supervisor:  
Joana Geraldi 
Associate Professor at the Department of Management Engineering, DTU 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU – Technical University of Denmark, Kgs Lyngby - 2017 
==PAGE:3==
3 
 
Onboarding processes in temporary organizations 
 
 
This report was prepared by: 
Rafael Domingues Fragoso Rodrigues 
 
 
Supervisor: 
Joana Geraldi 
Associate Professor at the Department of Management Engineering – DTU 
 
 
DTU Management Engineering 
Engineering Systems Division 
Technical University of Denmark 
Building 424, Produktionstorvet 
2800 Kgs Lyngby – Denmark 
Tel: (+45) 45 25 48 00 
 
 
 
Project Period:  
August 6th,  2017 – November 6th, 2017 
ECTS:   
 
30 
Education:  
 
MSc 
Field:   
 
Management Engineering 
Class:   
 
Regular 30 ECTS Master’s Thesis 
Remarks:  
 This report is submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements 
for graduation in the Engineering Management Master 
programme at the Technical University of Denmark. 
 
==PAGE:4==
4 
 
Abstract 
This study is an investigation about the routine of the Project Manager at the initial stages of a 
project. We present the classical way that Project Managers move from one project to the next 
and draw a parallel with workers from other fields that move from one company to another. 
Based on the theory about the Onboarding process that address this move between jobs and 
that projects are temporary organizations, we present a hypothesis that Project Managers 
perform Onboarding in Projects. Following a literature review on Onboarding and on projects as 
temporary organizations, we set out to interview Project Managers based on the ACTA method. 
The context of the study was international, with Project Managers investigated in Denmark and 
Brazil. The methodology intends to verify our hypothesis by comparing the factors of the 
Onboarding process to the findings of the Project Managers’ interviews. Our findings present 
evidence confirming our hypothesis with minor differences between theory and findings. These 
findings present a new perspective on the Onboarding process. A set of recommendations are 
presented for future research. 
 
Keywords: Onboarding, projects, project manager, temporary organizations 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
5 
 
Table of Contents 
Abstract ......................................................................................................................................... 4 
List of figures ................................................................................................................................. 6 
1. 
Introduction .......................................................................................................................... 7 
2. 
Literature review ................................................................................................................... 8 
2.1. 
Onboarding.................................................................................................................... 8 
2.1.1. 
Employee characteristics....................................................................................... 9 
2.1.2. 
Employee Behaviors ............................................................................................ 10 
2.1.3. 
Organizational Efforts.......................................................................................... 10 
2.1.4. 
Adjustment .......................................................................................................... 10 
2.1.5. 
Outcomes ............................................................................................................ 11 
2.2. 
Nature of Projects ....................................................................................................... 11 
3. 
Methodology ....................................................................................................................... 13 
4. 
Results and Data Analysis .................................................................................................... 14 
4.1. 
Overview of the respondents ...................................................................................... 14 
4.2. 
Starting a project ......................................................................................................... 15 
4.3. 
Simulation Interview ................................................................................................... 16 
4.3.1. 
Assessment .......................................................................................................... 16 
4.3.2. 
Actions ................................................................................................................. 17 
4.3.3. 
Cues ..................................................................................................................... 18 
4.3.4. 
Mistakes .............................................................................................................. 19 
4.3.5. 
Information and Guidance .................................................................................. 20 
4.3.6. 
Previous Projects ................................................................................................. 21 
4.3.7. 
Skills ..................................................................................................................... 21 
4.4. 
Knowledge Audit ......................................................................................................... 22 
4.4.1. 
Big Picture ........................................................................................................... 22 
4.4.2. 
Job Smart ............................................................................................................. 23 
4.4.3. 
Anomalies ............................................................................................................ 24 
5. 
Conclusion ........................................................................................................................... 26 
6. 
Recommendations .............................................................................................................. 28 
7. 
References ........................................................................................................................... 29 
8. 
Appendices .......................................................................................................................... 31 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
6 
 
List of figures 
Figure 1 - A summary process model of socialization ................................................................... 9 
Figure 2 - A model of Onboarding in Projects ............................................................................. 14 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
7 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Empirical evidence suggests that Project Managers move from one project to the next, either in 
the same organization or shifting to a new company. Switching from one project to the next is a 
classical way of moving jobs and the routine of a project manager is particularly marked by these 
changes between projects or jobs. On the current business environment, as organizations and 
work activities, in general, are increasingly being arranged as projects, successfully starting new 
projects became a core skill.  
However, the process of successfully starting projects is complex, there are a collection of 
information, variables, and key aspects that a Project Manager must consider the big picture of 
the project is clear and there is confidence in proceeding to the following phases.  
Furthermore, as soon as being assigned to a project, the Project Manager, is often placed under 
pressure to deliver fast results, consequently, less experienced project managers could skip 
important initial steps or miss important details failing in gathering essential information to 
understand, make sense and assimilate the project in a proper way. The lack of focus at the 
initial phase of a project will most certainly have an impact at later stages where issues and 
problems will emerge when the cost and difficulty to solve are higher. 
If moving from one project to the next is a continuous process, it is also a challenge to acquire 
key understanding about the project before there are confidence and clarity about it. So, how 
Project Managers get informed and familiarized with these many variables to be performing 
their tasks and achieving their goals at the moment?  
Organizations faced this issue when hiring new employees and developed activities, processes, 
and programs to acclimate these new workers into the organization. This set of practices was 
studied and is known as Onboarding. 
Through the Onboarding process, new employees gain the necessary knowledge, abilities, and 
behaviors to become effective organizational members. Organizations use activities such as 
formal training, meetings, lectures, orientation programs, socialization activities and mentorship 
opportunities to introduce newcomers to their new positions.  
Besides being performed from both the individual new hired and the organization, the literature 
about Onboarding tends to present findings from an organizational perspective or emphasizing 
organizational efforts. It is also important to point out that Onboarding focus at the new worker 
entering standing (or fixed) organizations.  
We suggest that the Onboarding process can be observed from a different perspective: from the 
Project Manager perspective onboarding in new projects (temporary organizations).  
Empirical evidence indicates that Project Managers with completely different backgrounds, from 
different organizations of distinct fields, present similar characteristics and approaches when 
entering and starting in new projects. We argue that these traits and attitudes are characteristics 
of what can be called Onboarding in projects. 
Based on the Onboarding process, the aim of this study is to collect information among Project 
Managers about their experiences when entering/starting new projects and identify these 
potential traits and attitudes in order to answer the research question: Project Managers 
perform Onboarding when entering new projects? 
 
==PAGE:8==
8 
 
2. Literature review 
2.1. Onboarding 
Onboarding is defined in numerous ways by different authors. According to Bauer (2011), refers 
to a set of processes that aids new employees to change from being newcomers in an 
organization into becoming accustomed workers and part of the team. Where the organization 
helps them to acquire the knowledge, skills, and behaviors they need to succeed. The 
Onboarding process depends on efforts from both employees and organization (Bauer, 2010). 
The hiring and allocation of new employees is just the beginning of a complex business process, 
which aims at the fast and smooth adaptation of human resources to the company towards the 
achievement of their full competency. 
In a similar way, Tarquinio (2006) defines Onboarding as a process involving: forms 
management, tasks management, and socialization in the company culture, arguing that is 
important for companies to incorporate these three components in their strategies to achieve 
optimal Return on Investment from their Onboarding process. 
For Dai (2007), Onboarding seems to be a process more focused managerial level employees 
with the same goal to prepare these professionals to succeed in their job as quickly as possible. 
The process is an initial orientation that aims to help new hires gather the knowledge, skills, and 
behaviors they need to adjust to social and performance aspects of their new jobs quickly and 
smoothly. However, onboarding is much more than initial orientation.  
Some companies seem to entrust on effective Onboarding as an investment in employee 
retention, morale, and productivity. While other companies understand the importance of 
Onboarding in different ways, often mistaking their existing initial orientation programs for an 
adaptation process (Bauer, 2010).  
Wheeler (2009) indicated key goals for the Onboarding Process:  
 
help new hires feel they are part of a larger organization and they are important;  
 
help new employees get up to act more quickly; 
 
transmit the culture of the organization so that decisions made are more in line with 
accepted practices;    
However, to achieve these goals and be successful, the Onboarding process must rely on some 
factors. Bauer (2011) arranged these factors into three categories: (figure 1) 
 
New employee characteristics - individual differences between new workers, 
ranging from their background to personality traits.  
 
New employee behaviors - the specific actions carried out by newcomers as they 
take an active role in the socialization process.  
 
Organizational efforts - activities that facilitate the process of acclimating a new 
worker through activities such as orientation or mentoring programs. 
==PAGE:9==
9 
 
 
Figure 1 - A summary process model of socialization 
These three categories will lead to the Adjustment of the employee. The Adjustment is a 
transitional phase that indicates how well a new hire is performing from being an organizational 
outsider to an organizational insider. 
This model (figure 1) will serve as the basis for our investigation. It was chosen for its easiness 
and comprehensible configuration. Based on the model we will address in the literature the 
topics in each balloon and then compare with our findings. 
2.1.1. Employee characteristics 
(Saks & Ashforth) 1996  presented an indication that workers with certain personality attributes 
and experiences adapt to an organization more rapidly.  
Using the model of socialization from figure 1 as a reference, concerning employee 
characteristics, attributes such as the proactive personality naturally encourage workers to 
apply actions such as information seeking that accelerate the Onboarding process, hence 
helping them to adjust more efficiently and become full-operative organizational members. 
(Bauer & Erdogan, 2011) 
Other personality attributes like extraversion and openness are also linked to Onboarding 
success. Proactive new hires that are open to new knowledge and experiences show increased 
levels of adaptation and are more prone to seek out information and relationships with 
colleagues. (Kammeyer-Mueller & Wanberg, 2003) 
Expertise levels influence the onboarding process as well, more experienced professionals tend 
to adjust to a new organization distinctively than a novice or a recent graduate on a first 
employment. Experienced employees can examine past episodes that aid them in adapting to 
their new job environments. (Beyer & Hannah, 2002) 
We will use these employee characteristics to find in our research similar traits that may help 
Project Managers to adapt to new projects more rapidly. 
==PAGE:10==
10 
 
2.1.2. Employee Behaviors 
Regarding employee behaviors, information seeking happens when newcomers inquire their 
colleagues and supervisors in an effort to acquire information about their new work and the 
organizational standards, procedures, and rules.  
When actively pursuing information, workers can reduce uncertainties about their new roles 
and organizations, and comprehend their new working surroundings. New employees also 
search for information by monitoring their environment or checking the company website or a 
manual. (Bauer & Erdogan, 2011) 
To Wanberg & Kammeyer-Mueller, 2000, feedback seeking applies to new workers efforts to 
measure how to perform in their new organization. Newcomers may question colleagues or 
superiors for feedback on how properly they are performing or if certain practices are 
appropriate in the organizational context. In seeking this feedback, new hires can incorporate 
the assessment and adapt their attitude appropriately, therefore, blending into the 
organization. 
Ashford & Black, 1996 research shows that relationship building is a key part of Onboarding. It 
is the process of creating comradeship with colleagues and superiors. This can be attained 
commonly by chatting with co-workers during lunches or breaks or formally through company 
organized events.  
Based on these behaviors, we will investigate potential attitudes and approaches taken at the 
start of a project in search for indications of information seeking, feedback seeking and 
relationship practices. 
2.1.3. Organizational Efforts 
Organizations devote considerable resources and time into orientation and training of new 
personnel and they have different ways of promoting socialization activities for the assimilation 
of these workers. A number of activities such as formal orientation programs, recruitment 
strategies, socialization tactics and mentorship opportunities are provided by the organizations. 
However, we will not address the organizational efforts on the literature review, since we are 
focusing on the Project Manager (the individual) perspective and not the organization 
approaches. 
2.1.4. Adjustment 
As mentioned, the adjustment is a transitional phase. It could be used as an indicator of the 
performance of newcomers or how adequate they are adjusting to their new jobs. 
There are numerous possible adjustment indicators that could show success for new hires, 
research has given more attention to four main variables (Bauer & Erdogan, 2011):  
 
Role clarity - Clear understanding about the requirements and tasks of the job 
 
Self-efficacy - How confident in performing their jobs 
 
Acceptance by peers - The nature of the relationships with other employees 
 
Knowledge of the organizational culture - Information about the company’s goals, 
values and culture 
During our research, we will probe for signs of role-clarity, self-efficacy, acceptance by peers and 
knowledge of the organizational culture to gather evidence that an Onboarding process is 
happening. 
==PAGE:11==
11 
 
2.1.5. Outcomes 
Research has identified a wide number of important outcomes to both individuals and 
organizations. Bauer (2011), mention job satisfaction, organizational commitment, turn over 
and performance. 
Since the aim of this report is sole to investigate if Project Managers are performing Onboarding 
when starting new projects, we will not address nor measure the outcomes of the process.  
Furthermore, measuring the outcomes would require a wider investigation about the impact of 
the Onboarding process past the initial phase, in other words, during the execution and after 
the conclusion of the projects. 
2.2. Nature of Projects 
A project can be defined as a temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product or 
service (PMI, 2013). A project consists of a unique set of processes consisting of coordinated and 
controlled activities with start and end dates, performed to achieve project objectives 
(“Vejledning i projektledelse Guidance on project management,” 2012) 
Projects exist around us, beyond the organizational boundaries, surrounding activities in our 
society and even at the individual level. This is called the Project Society, a response to the 
evolving world where being adaptive and quick to respond to the environment where you 
perform became more important than predicting and following a plan. (Jensen et al., 2017) 
 
Using the fundamental concept of “activity” or “what we do”, Jensen et al., argues that every 
activity that we perform, even at a private level, is a project. On the project society, everything 
revolves around the activity: places, schedules, and hierarchy are defined by the projects (or the 
temporary organizations).  
 
Huemann, Keegan, & Turner, 2007 on the temporary nature of a project highlights that since 
projects are temporary organizations, new projects are starting continuously and every time a 
new project is starting the configuration of the organization changes.  Based on these concepts, 
we have more reasons to defend that Project Managers are performing onboarding in every new 
project they start. 
 
Additionally, Huemann, Keegan, & Turner study indicated that a project manager may have to 
manage projects simultaneously impacting in the entire organization. Indeed, Engwall & 
Jerbrant in 2003, studied the common operational issues regarding the management of projects 
simultaneously. Their investigation revealed that the problems revolved around human 
resources and their allocation, a common pattern they defined as “resource allocation 
syndrome”. The study showed that portfolio management was underpowered to handle 
continuing issues regarding prioritization of projects, allocation of personnel and searching for 
resources. The relocation and redistribution of human resources were negatively affecting other 
projects, causing a fire-fighting tendency instead of a proactive behavior.  
 
On the resource demand side, the authors argued that a deficient project scheduling could be 
one of the mechanisms behind resource allocation problems, where project managers are 
planned to move from project to project at certain points of time, however when projects have 
delayed this move was postponed thus causing a cascading effect in all projects.  
 
==PAGE:12==
12 
 
Another issue was that project managers were always trying to request the best personnel to 
their teams and a way to accomplish that was to force the prioritization of their projects. They 
would push their project to a point where priority would be granted and so the ability to request 
the best experts. Project managers were also overprotective of their acquired resources, 
keeping them as busy as possible to avoid the risk of losing them to other projects. The authors 
found that allocation of resources is, in fact, a political and complex process and that the whole 
management system and procedures must be reviewed from its roots. 
The allocation of human resources also depends on the identification of the professionals with 
the project. According to Zhu, Tatachari, & Chattopadhyay, 2017, professionals can be drawn to 
an organization because of its perceived prestige. However, during the first few months, this 
perceived prestige can vary for many reasons such as their identification with the company, their 
personal qualifications, the team/group where they are allocated and being assigned to a 
preferred project, influencing the decision to stay in the organization or to seek new 
employment. During these processes, the perceived prestige fluctuates, increasing during initial 
training, decreasing on the adjustment phase and rising and stabilizing as the newcomer settles 
into their first project or assignment. 
A project manager, when assigned to a project, could be drawn to it depending on the prestige 
of this given project. Adding to the other variables, his qualifications and personal identification 
with the nature of this project could influence his Onboarding process on the project. It is 
relevant to understand if the prestige of a project is a characteristic that Project Managers 
consider during the Onboarding process.  
Overall, understanding the nature of projects as temporary organizations are pertinent to 
position the reader about the distinctions between Onboarding in fixed organizations and 
Onboarding in projects (temporary organizations) that is our goal and focus. Even though 
projects are not an island (Engwall & Jerbrant, 2003) this study will not include any analysis of 
the parent (fixed) organization, focusing solely on the projects occurring within them.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:13==
13 
 
3. Methodology 
 
To answer the research question: Project Managers perform Onboarding when entering new 
projects? The methodology proposed was to perform interviews and inquire Project Managers 
about their approach towards new projects, their techniques, and their engagement strategies. 
Therefore, we chose to interview Project Managers with distinct levels of experience and from 
different background and fields of work. 
The method chosen to perform these interviews was the ACTA, Applied Cognitive Task Analysis, 
according to Militello & Hutton, 1998, ACTA is an interview method that helps to extract 
information about the cognitive demands and skills required for a task, that is exactly the kind 
of information we want to extract from the Project Managers.  
Another reason for choosing the ACTA method was its flexibility to be applied since we are 
interviewing Project Managers from different fields and that it provides a clear output. (Laura 
G. Militello & Hutton, 1998) 
The first interview was done by recording the respondent answers in audio. The following 
interviews were organized as a questionnaire and sent to Project Managers in Denmark and 
Brazil. The questionnaire, following the ACTA model, was divided into three approaches, 
however in our case excluding the task diagram and keeping the Knowledge audit and Simulation 
Interview.  
The purpose of the study and questionnaire was presented to the interviewee at the 
Introduction step, followed by a Pre-interview to understand how the interviewee identifies 
himself and his company, and to have complementary information such as years of experience, 
size and number of projects that the respondent usually performs. 
Coming after, on the Simulation interview, we used the Firefighter example to ask the 
respondents what would be the assessment, actions, cues, and errors they could face when they 
start their own projects, and to assess their approach towards starting new projects. 
The subsequent phase was the Knowledge audit, to understand the level of expertise of the 
respondent. The findings of these phases will be then compared to the literature on Onboarding 
the conclusions chapter. 
The number of respondents was 8 in total, four experts, and four novices, selected accordingly 
to the following criteria: declared knowledge in project management, declared experience as a 
project manager, working or have worked for an organization as project manager. 
 
 
==PAGE:14==
14 
 
4. Results and Data Analysis 
 
As noted in the literature, according to Bauer & Erdogan (2011), practitioners perform an 
Onboarding process when entering new organizations. This process is illustrated in their model 
of socialization (figure 1, section 2.1). 
We defend that Project Managers perform a similar process at every new project that is 
initiated, even if unaware of it.  
Each phase of the process, represented as a balloon in the model, presents points that we can 
search for in our research with the Project Managers. The objective of the following investigation 
was to identify underlying characteristics of each of these phases, thus indicating that an 
Onboarding process is occurring.  
In our findings, we encountered potential traits, behaviors, and indications of an adjustment 
step. As a consequence, we elaborated an analogous model (figure 2).  
 
Figure 2 - A model of Onboarding in Projects 
Despite being represented in the figure, it is worth mentioning once more that neither the 
Organizational Efforts nor the Outcomes were in addressed in this study. They are displayed in 
the figure merely to show the resemblance with the model designed by Bauer & Erdogan (2011), 
hence the different colors. 
 
4.1. Overview of the respondents 
The eight professionals that participated in this study came from 8 different companies, from 8 
different fields: Construction, Banking, Rolling Stock, Insurances, Consultancy, Automotive 
industry and Electronic Payments systems. The companies vary in size and revenues from small 
regional companies to large multinational organizations.  
==PAGE:15==
15 
 
Table 1 presents a summary of the information about the respondents and their companies. The 
questionnaires containing the complete information can be found in the Appendix section. 
 
Table 1 - Overview of the respondents 
Two participants a Danish and an Italian, work in companies based in Denmark. The other six 
participants are Brazilian and work in companies based in Brazil.  
The respondents have different levels of expertise, as they have stated their personal view about 
it in experts or novice. They are all Project Managers with specific knowledge in their fields and 
they are all similarly managing projects inside fixed organizations. 
As previously stated, the questionnaire was divided into an introduction, a pre-interview and 
two main parts based on the ACTA model, using the Knowledge Audit and Simulation Interview. 
To better organize our findings, we will cluster the answers based on the self-identification level 
of experience of the participants, presenting the answers together as experts and novice. 
4.2. Starting a project 
The eight respondents were asked about how does a project start on their companies and when 
their participations begin. These questions intended to understand if the respondents had a 
clear vision about the project initiation process of their companies and if they could indicate 
where and when in the process their involvement starts.  
From the experts’ group, respondent B and D pointed that the project starts with a market 
analysis, identification of a market opportunity, improvement of existing products or services or 
a direct request from the client as respondent A indicated. The case of respondent A can be 
explained when you have developed projects for a client in the past, in this case, they seek your 
services for a new project based on a previous good experience. 
Respondent C considered that the project initiates with the elaboration of the project charter. 
Further investigating his response, shows a technical approach to it, focused on the Project 
Management aspect and indicating that he considers that the market analysis, identification of 
==PAGE:16==
16 
 
opportunity or improvements of existing products/services are not part of the project, or under 
his responsibility. 
Furthermore, the four respondents of the expert's group answered that their participation starts 
at, what they indicated at the very beginning of the project.   
On the group of novice Project Managers, respondents E and G mentioned market analysis or 
commercial/sales initiative being how a project starts in their companies. Respondent F, gave a 
technical perspective on the question, citing that the project starts with a request for 
information about resources and time allocation from the project owners. We can assume that 
this information would be used by the project owner to elaborate the scope. Respondent H 
replied that, at his company, the project starts by identifying the type of project, defining the 
goal, schedule, and the project team. 
Respondents F, G, and H stated that their participation on the project begins when they receive 
the scope or a similar document, or the area responsible for the guidelines involves them in the 
project. Respondent E indicated that his participation starts right after the project is “sold”. By 
investigating his further answers, it becomes clear that the situation is similar to the other 
novice, where he receives the scope and start working on the project. 
4.3. Simulation Interview 
4.3.1. Assessment 
The simulation interview is meant to understand the respondent cognitive processes within his 
work environment. The idea is to offer an example scenario so the respondent can reflect upon. 
Hereafter inquire the participant about a new scenario, now based on their own daily work 
experience, analyzing how he would assess, act, get information and what potential errors he 
could make. (L.G. Militello & Hutton, 1998) 
After reflecting upon the firefighters’ scenario. The respondents were asked to perform the 
same reflection, now based on their experiences. So, we asked what was their assessment of 
the project at this initial step? Understanding how they assess the situation of starting a new 
project will again give us valuable insight into their perspective and the initial steps of their 
Onboarding process in a project.  
On the group of the experts, all the respondents had a clear vision about the project at this 
starting phase. They knew what the project was about and what to address, they knew what 
tasks must be performed and how to perform them and they have an awareness about the 
situation. Respondent C indicated that an assessment could not be made at this point, but later 
added that he must gather as much information as possible and, as the potential issues are 
technically related he must keep constant contact with the stakeholders. 
The group of novice Project Managers was also well informed about the projects. They have 
information about what was the project and what was the issue and where to focus.  
4.3.1.1. 
Discussion 
We asked the respondents about the initial phase of the project at their companies and when 
they resume their participation to understand the context of their work as Project Managers 
and have an insight into their experience.  
Considering the research question, comprehending their expertise, help us to contextualize their 
answers in the following steps of the questionnaire using their perspective and identify hidden 
information from other responses to help answer what is sometimes unclear. 
==PAGE:17==
17 
 
In this case, it seems that the novice group Project Managers start in projects when they are 
assigned to and receive information about it. They do not have a pool of projects to choose from, 
so there is no indication that project prestige has an impact on the Onboarding process. In some 
cases, they contribute at this initial phase by providing essential information that will impact the 
course of the project they are going to manage.  
In the expert's group, respondents B and D are involved in the market analysis to identify an 
opportunity. Respondent A is in direct contact with the client from the very beginning. 
Respondent C, due to the uniqueness of his work, (the company must participate and win a 
bidding process in order to sell their products and services.) considers that a project only starts 
after the bidding is won and the project chart is defined. We can assume that in this case there 
are two distinct projects, the first is to elaborate the proposal for the bidding based on all the 
technical information required by the client. The second is the project for delivering the products 
or services agreed on such proposal. 
Respondent C seems to be in line with the ISO 21500 overview of project management concept, 
where market analysis, identification of opportunities and business case are part of the 
organization environment or project environment but not the project itself. 
The question about the assessment aided to the previous question in contextualizing the 
respondents’ own experiences to create a basis for understanding what do they know about the 
project at this initial phase.  
Not only to contextualize, these initial questions were planned to identify potential traits of 
proactiveness, openness, and expertise.  
About assessment, the eight respondents presented their answers explaining what was the 
project (except for respondent B that have already explained in the previous answer) and 
pointed what tasks they had to execute.  
From the expert group, respondents A, B, C, and D, once more, indicated that the establishment 
of relationships with the client, with other departments, with other stakeholders was vital to 
their understanding and assessment of the project at this moment.  
At this very early stage, Project Managers already demonstrate characteristics and behaviors 
that are an indication of them performing Onboarding in their projects. It is important to observe 
that no novice respondent commented about any relation at this point, showing a difference in 
the expertise level between the groups, another characteristic we are trying to identify. 
4.3.2. Actions 
Continuing from the previous subject of the simulation interview, where the respondents 
showed a good vision about the project and knew what to do, we now asked the respondents 
about the actions performed. The intention behind this question was to identify potential 
Onboarding behaviors in these actions.  
The eight respondents, besides acting in different fields, listed actions that continued the line of 
thought of the preceding question about assessment. Respondent A, for example, indicated on 
his assessment, the demand to understand the needs of his client. His action was to meet with 
the client, list his needs, analyze the details and plan for uncertainties. Respondent B addressed 
the challenges of project scheduling, citing that each requirement of the project should be 
followed up to avoid delays and impact on the delivery date, budget, and revenues. 
==PAGE:18==
18 
 
Respondent C also mentioned about documenting the needs of the stakeholders to achieve 
project goals. Respondent D referred to evaluations particular to his field. 
The novice respondents presented a similar approach. Respondent E alluded to the importance 
of reading the contract. Similarly, respondent F mentioned the need of following the technical 
specifications document. Respondent G indicated the need to communicate the client if there is 
a deviation and respondent H had meetings with the stakeholders to gather information. 
4.3.2.1. 
Discussion 
When discussing actions, among different companies, from different fields, in different 
countries and analyzing beyond procedures, it is challenging to imagine a common activity at 
first. It is interesting to observe that almost all respondents mentioned the need for collecting 
information about the project (the needs of the clients). Even those that not explicitly 
mentioned “collect information” cited checking manuals, contracts or technical documents 
about the project.  
Once more we observe proactiveness in the search for information and relationship building and 
there is evidence that concerns about project scheduling are considered at this very initial phase.  
4.3.3. Cues 
Inquiring about the cues was important to verify what information the respondents used to 
define or position the project in a certain direction. Moreover, it was also aimed to identify 
potential traits or behaviors that could be an indicator of an Onboarding process. 
The eight respondents were brief on their answers to this question. From the expert's group, 
respondent A revealed that uncertainties were cues on the project. If there were uncertainties, 
he would describe them in the project or try to reduce the number of uncertainties. To reduce 
uncertainties, he involved his team in the process. 
Respondent B implied that the project was designed and oriented towards the client, so we can 
infer that having information about the client, mentioned on the previous question, is a cue. 
Respondent C did not mention any cues and respondent D indicated that data about the 
country’s economic situation and employment rate are cues on his field. 
Respondents E, F, and G from the novice group expressed that all information about the project 
is either in the statement of work (SOW), the scope, a procedure or a similar document, hence, 
the cues about the project should be in these documents. Respondent G pointed that if 
something in the project was happening differently than stated on these documents it would 
also be a cue to take action. Respondent H mentioned feedback from the client as a cue.  
4.3.3.1. 
Discussion 
We argue that each one of the fields of this study have its own particular cue, sometimes 
technical. Using the example of respondent A, of bringing in his team to discuss and reduce 
uncertainties in the project we observe once more the relationship building behavior, now with 
his team.  
The other respondents recounted the need to pursue information. Interestingly, respondent H 
pointed that having feedback from the client is a cue. However, in this case, the feedback 
received was about the project. 
==PAGE:19==
19 
 
4.3.4. Mistakes 
Investigate what mistakes could potentially happen was paramount to observe how the 
respondents externalize their expertise. It was relevant to compare the answers of the expert's 
group with the novice group to observe potential differences in the expertise level. 
On the novice group, respondent E mentioned that to miss deadlines are problematic. 
Respondent F pointed to an interesting issue that can be considered a challenge for some less 
experienced project managers, that is being sometimes timid about asking for guidance. We 
understand that this has happened in general to everyone at some point in our life and it seems 
to happen with project managers at the beginning of their career. Additionally, respondent F 
mentioned that hiding issues, instead of communicating them right away was another mistake 
that novices usually make. Delaying this communication is potentially harmful because the issue 
can escalate to a point of no solution jeopardizing the entire project. 
On the same line of thought, respondent G commented that the accumulation of not accounted 
deviation could account for a huge delay of weeks at the end of the project. Respondent H 
noticed the importance of involving the stakeholders besides collecting information to set up 
the scope and perform the financial studies. 
Respondent H cited that failing in gathering the required info, setting up the scope, performing 
financial accountancy and involving stakeholders are errors. 
From the expert's group, respondent A, alluded to uncertainties, that a novice may not account 
for all of them for not having a proper view of the project, time and cost. Interestingly 
respondent A brought up the idea of challenging the client, as in pointing details about the 
project that a client is not aware of but would benefit from knowing to make better decisions. 
We recognize that this practice would require a well-built relation with a client and is certainly 
aligned to more experienced Project Managers. 
Expert respondent B, noticed that poorly defined business requirements would lead to a poor 
project delivery. He also pointed that underestimating impacts and acting late could escalate to 
a point of jeopardizing the project. Respondent B revealed that the excess of pressure, 
particularly when unnecessary, could have an impact on the project by turning the work 
environment unproductive. We argue that a less experienced Project Manager may not have a 
proper view of the project and could use excessive pressure when it was not required, disturbing 
the project team. 
Respondent C reported as a mistake starting the project with an unclear scope and without the 
approval of the project charter and respondent D said that failing to consider variables or 
regulation that can impact on the insurance policy is a fault. 
4.3.4.1. 
Discussion 
At this topic, interestingly, some of the novice Project Managers respondents were aware and 
mentioned some of the potential mistakes that were also addressed by their experts’ 
counterparts, showing once more that a level of expertise is always present. 
All the eight respondents (except respondent E) mentioned some form of failure in collecting 
the necessary information or not accounting for an information, uncertainty, requirement, 
variable as a mistake.  
We defend that even with less experience it is possible to foresee some mistakes. The 
respondents were aware of the consequences for not having the necessary data. Unclear scopes, 
==PAGE:20==
20 
 
requirements, unaccounted uncertainties, and variables would inevitably lead to problems 
further ahead in the project creating a domino effect. To successfully Onboard in a project, the 
pursuit of information is a never-ceasing behavior throughout the project and crucial at this 
stage. Furthermore, we recognize the importance of involving the stakeholders as early as 
possible as indicated by one of the respondents. 
4.3.5. Information and Guidance 
Since the pursuit of information is extremely important and usually when searching for 
information it is also essential to look for guidance, we asked the participants where and how 
do they seek for information and guidance. 
The respondents from the group of novice Project Managers revealed that they seek information 
and/or guidance from other project managers, immediate superiors or project owners, and data 
specifications or manuals. Respondent E mentioned that he would seek technical personnel 
when he needed this specific information. Respondent G recounted that a pool of information 
on the company’s network containing all the information about the project is accessible to all 
project managers. He also stated that at the initial phase there are meetings with other areas in 
order to align the goals. Respondent H cited that feedback from users was a source of 
information. In this case, we suggest that this feedback came from previous versions of the 
product/service developed. 
Respondent A, an expert, disclosed that when he needs information and guidance he goes to 
the subcontractors as they are specialists in their fields. As they are a team that regularly 
performs together they already have built a trust on each other.  
Respondent B searched for information among other stakeholders, pointing out that usually, the 
commercial area was most likely the one to have the data required. Respondent D mentioned a 
company policy of having meetings with Project Managers before initiating any project as a place 
to seek information and guidance and also on specific publications of the area. Respondent C 
was the only one to mention the PMbok as a source for information and guidance. 
4.3.5.1. 
Discussion 
Some of the respondents had a more intuitive and informal approach to the questions while 
some had a more technical and formal. Nevertheless, we still see similarities when respondents 
cited to seek guidance in manuals or publications. 
Respondent H once more, noticed the importance of feedback from users, though it is feedback 
about the project, not the Project Manager. 
Respondent A sought information and guidance from the subcontractors. On this case, they 
have been performing together as a team on the project, there is a confidence already built and 
they are specialists in their fields. Similarly, novice respondent E looks for specific information 
from the technical personnel because he relies on their information. We observe that in the first 
case, there is a relationship already developed between the Project Manager and the 
stakeholders, we can argue that his expertise aided in this development. On the second case, 
there is a process of building a relationship. In both cases, the Project Managers are accepted 
by their peers. 
Similarly to the previous questions, all respondents (except C) spoke of some form of 
information seeking, either with the project team, superiors or clients. We argue that the 
process of searching for guidance is fundamental for Project Managers to gain clarity about their 
roles in the project.  
==PAGE:21==
21 
 
4.3.6. Previous Projects 
The next topic approached the importance of previous projects for the current project. All 
respondents stated that previous projects are very important. From the novice group, 
respondent E added that a previous project may be related to the current one. Respondent F 
affirmed that previous projects may be used as guidance, likewise, respondent G mentioned 
that previous projects not only are a reference but also activities undertaken on previous 
projects could justify actions and procedures on a current project. Respondent H pointed to the 
importance of auto-evaluation, in this case as a learning curve for the Project Manager. 
Respondents from the expert group approached this question, in the same way, pointing out 
that past experiences could hold information about risks, problems, successes and could be 
brought to a new project. 
4.3.6.1. 
Discussion 
We observed that all the respondents (except respondent D and E) mentioned some form of 
lessons learned from previous projects. To successfully onboard in a current project we argue 
that is essential for a Project Manager to look back to previous projects and lessons learned to 
identify successful techniques or risks, therefore, being aware of potential problems. This topic 
is related to the pursuit for information already mentioned in the previous questions and also a 
part of the Project Manager’s quest for role clarity in the project. 
4.3.7. Skills 
On the last topic of the Simulation Interview, to investigate potential skills that could be 
particularly useful in the Onboarding process, we inquired the participants about what abilities 
a Project Manager should have at the initial phase of a project. 
Respondents from the novice group provided basic answers such as being unambiguous, do not 
forget tasks or mentioned specific knowledge from their fields. Respondent G pointed that 
comprehension skills were important to understand the clients’ requirements. 
The respondents from the expert group presented more thoughtful answers to the question. 
Respondent A revealed that by being a generalist, like many other project managers, he has 
some knowledge about every activity on the project, but when it comes to the execution of task 
itself, then he must delegate.  
Respondent B added that the Project Manager should be the “safe haven”, work close to the 
stakeholders and know how to manage the people in the project. Respondent C listed some 
interesting skills e.g. construction of teams, communication, negotiation, decision-making. 
Respondent D pointed out critical sense and the ability to analyze all scenarios. 
4.3.7.1. 
Discussion 
Novice respondents provided more direct answers, in general mentioning some of the same 
skills as the experts. We argue that for a successful onboarding process in a project, a Project 
Manager must have comprehension and communication skills. Furthermore, it is important to 
know how to put a team together to work together towards a goal and know how to delegate 
activities. This question was intended to provide common answers related to the Onboarding 
characteristics, instead, we observe that each Project Manager listed a different skill, as a 
consequence, we argue that having expertise in their respective field is a common trait among 
them. 
==PAGE:22==
22 
 
4.4. Knowledge Audit 
The knowledge audit, part of the ACTA interview method, was applied to identify the way the 
expertise of the participants was used and is meant to capture the most important aspect of it. 
At this part, we also intend to observe the indicators of adjustment. 
We employed a set of probes designed to describe types of domain knowledge and skills, in this 
case, the probes were: Big Picture, Job Smart, and Anomalies. Usually, experienced Project 
Managers onboard in projects without thinking about the steps or actions they perform, it is 
second nature, like riding a bike where you do not think about applying force to the pedal every 
time you do it. It was important to inquire about the Big Picture of a project, identify its relations 
to the onboarding on the project and the level of knowledge the Project Manager has about the 
entire project at the very initial phase, complementing the search for information and clarity 
from the previous chapter. 
Equally, for the Job Smart probe, experts Project Managers may have techniques that they use 
to facilitate their work on the project, it can be a sophisticated system or a simple particular 
ritual, it is important to identify this information and understand how it is performed.  
Lastly, the Anomalies, are related to deviations that Project Managers when using their 
experience or skill set can identify early in the project, and by doing so, they avoid the need to 
return to a previous step or repeat a task. In relation to the onboarding process, this probe and 
the previous, Job Smart, could show the level of self-efficacy of the Project Manager on the 
onboarding process. 
After each probe question, we also inquired how a less experienced Project Manager would have 
conducted the situation, what potential errors a novice would have committed and why it could 
be difficult for him to manage it. 
4.4.1. Big Picture 
At this phase, we questioned the participants about the importance of having the big picture 
about the project at the initial phase. 
All respondents said it was important to have a Big Picture about the project. Respondent E from 
the novice group added that knowing the technical, logistics and financial aspects of the project 
would enable you to understand every aspect of the project. Respondent F inferred that it could 
be difficult for a less experienced Project Manager to have a big picture of the project, however, 
added that analyzing previous projects could provide information and give some insight into the 
big picture of a new project.  
Respondent G noticed that requirements about the project could sometimes be unclear, 
therefore it was important to have meetings with stakeholders to have the big picture and the 
right picture of the project. Respondent H pointed that the gathering of information and writing 
of the scope would help you to get the big picture of the project. Moreover, he suggested that 
a less experienced project manager could make the mistake of letting the project take shape 
without having raised the necessary aspects of it. 
Respondent A, from the experienced group, revealed that is crucial to have the big picture very 
early in the project so there is awareness of all the required efforts to make the project. In the 
case, the project does not evolve over time thus it is very important to have the big picture from 
the beginning in order to include everything in the proposal to the client. Additionally, 
respondent A revealed that having the big picture is essential as, in the initial phase, there are 
many professionals allocated to the project, however, when the project reaches a point where 
==PAGE:23==
23 
 
its successful outcome can be seen, he gradually reduces the number of people working on this 
project.  
Respondent B mentioned that understanding the big picture is not only fundamental for the 
Project Manager but for every player in the project as they may provide valuable insight and 
contributions that might not have been perceived without that understanding. Moreover, he 
affirmed that having the big picture increases the level of participation and feeling of ownership 
of all stakeholders that will contribute to more information exchange.  
Respondent C pointed that the most important concept of having the big picture in the initial 
phase of the project is to have a clear comprehension of its main goal. Furthermore, respondent 
C pointed that the complexity of a project is a challenge for less experienced Project Managers 
to get the big picture. 
Respondent D indicated that having the big picture early on helps to identify potential errors at 
every step of the project. Moreover, less experienced project managers tend to focus too much 
on a phase and not that much on another. 
4.4.1.1. 
Discussion 
The goal of the Big Picture probe is to comprehend the level of knowledge the Project Managers 
have about the project since the initial phase. We argue that having a big picture of the project 
can demonstrate the level of clarity a Project Manager possesses, not only about the project but 
also about his role in it.  
4.4.2. Job Smart 
For the Job Smart probe, we inquired the interviewees about any practices or procedures they 
might have and use at the beginning of a project.  
Respondent E from the novice group mentioned that drawing in a board the different tasks to 
be performed and ranking them from their priority was a useful technique. Respondent F said 
that checking previous projects was a good tool.  
Respondent G had a different approach, he stated that organizing the requirements of the 
projects as “custom” and “standard” and then indicating the amount of effort needed in each 
one would help to identify critical points at a very early stage. Respondent H said that he has no 
practices and uses the procedures defined by the company. 
On the expert's group, respondent A revealed that the procedure is to use the software MS 
Project to map the different projects to visualize when projects will be running simultaneously. 
By being a good visual tool, MS Project is also helpful in the financial aspect as you can easily set 
milestones related to billing a client.  
Respondent B similarly to other respondents, detailed that he attempts to apply a standard 
visual procedure on every project by drawing the service/product expectation and validating the 
design with the stakeholders before proceeding to the detailing of the following steps. As this 
procedure is visual, it facilitates the identification of forgotten conditions. This method has 
proven to be the most practical among other experimented. 
Respondent C introduced a technical perspective to this topic reporting that as a practice, 
carefully reading the contract, technical specifications of the project and taking note of the 
relevant points facilitates the understanding of the purpose and scope of the project. He 
mentioned having developed this procedure when faced with obstacles during the execution of 
similar projects in the past.  
==PAGE:24==
24 
 
Respondent D brought up the networking practice. Having a good network and a good 
relationship with stakeholders could help you to get unrestricted access to information about 
the project that may be limited to others. 
4.4.2.1. 
Discussion 
We observed that four respondents, two experts, and two novices mentioned using some form 
of visual tool, either by a software or by a more practical approach such as drawing on a board. 
Respondents C from the expert's group cited practices particular to his fields and respondent D 
pointed out to the networking practice and specifically revealed that having a good relationship 
with stakeholders (being accepted by your peers) could help you to get information that would 
be inaccessible otherwise. 
Respondent F mentioned the practice of checking previous projects. Only respondent H had no 
practice of his own. We claim that the level of confidence in doing their jobs contributes to a 
Project Manager developing a practice.  
The Job Smarts question intended to investigate if the respondents have created some form of 
self-developed practice indicating a good level of confidence about himself and towards the 
project. We argue that when a Project Manager develops a practice that facilitates his work on 
the project this is an indicator of self-efficacy.   
4.4.3. Anomalies 
We asked the participants if they could describe a project where they detected a deviation from 
the norm or perceived that something was wrong with the project and how they were able to 
observe such deviation. 
The respondents from the novice group could not to provide resourceful examples of a situation 
where they had spotted a deviation on their projects, except for respondent G that detailed a 
case where all requirements of the project were considered “custom” or “standard” but after 
investigation with stakeholders it was identified that this extremism did not apply. We defend 
that this example can be understood as detecting a deviation, as it seemed strange to the Project 
Manager that the entirety of requirements was arranged as one kind. 
Differently, all the respondents from the expert group presented examples of deviations that 
were detected at an early stage of the project. Respondent A revealed that in some cases having 
a broader knowledge about the project or components of the project e.g. technical aspects or 
costs could give an insight into deviations.  
Respondent B stated that participating in projects with more experienced players were key to 
develop a better understanding of the project and potential deviations, especially from human 
variables that are hard to identify and control but are the ones with the higher level of impact 
on the project. Similarly, respondent C suggested that meetings with the project technical team 
can be helpful to spot deviations at early stages of the project. 
Respondent D, given the uniqueness of his work where misconduct occurs, pointed that the 
analysis of data and the investigation with professionals from the field create awareness about 
potential deviations, in this case, frauds. 
4.4.3.1. 
Discussion 
In this topic, we observed a difference between the groups of respondents. The more 
experienced Project Managers not only provided examples but also revealed how they were 
able to foresee the deviations. We argue that for this topic, the level of experience is essential. 
==PAGE:25==
25 
 
We observed that in some cases there is a link between the ability to spot deviation and the 
development of practices cited in the Job Smart topic. Since Project Managers have faced 
deviations in previous projects they acquire the necessary knowledge to develop practices that 
could support them in indicating potential anomalies in the following projects. 
 
 
==PAGE:26==
26 
 
5. Conclusion 
 
The present study was designed to determine if Project Managers perform Onboarding in 
projects. Based on the literature about Onboarding of employees in new organizations we 
speculated if the same approach could be made for the Onboarding of Project Managers in new 
Projects. 
Such speculation is supported by the empirical evidence that Project Managers with completely 
different backgrounds, from different organizations of distinct fields, tend to have a similar 
approach to the start a project. Even if this approach is particular to his work, it is possible to 
identify common traits and behaviors among them. We argued that these traits could be 
characteristics of an Onboarding process occurring in projects. 
To support this hypothesis, this study set out with the aim of investigating the practices at the 
initial phase of a project of eight Project Managers with different education, different levels of 
expertise, different nationalities, from eight different organizations, varying in size, field and 
country, comparing our findings with the literature on Onboarding. 
As mentioned in the literature review, traditional Onboarding refers to a set of processes that 
aids new employees to move from being newcomers in an organization into becoming 
accustomed workers, part of the team and successful in their jobs as quickly as possible. These 
processes were illustrated in a model listing employee characteristics, behaviors and indicators 
of an adjustment by the Project Managers.  
The interviews in this study sought to identify if Project Managers hold the characteristics listed 
in the model such as proactiveness, openness, expertise and if they displayed the behaviors 
portrayed like information seeking, feedback seeking and relationship building.  
Additionally, this paper aimed to determine if the collection of these characteristics and 
behaviors present indicators that the Project Managers are adjusted to the project. Indicators 
such as role-clarity, self-efficacy, and acceptance by peers. 
Firstly, this study there is evidence to support that being proactive is a common characteristic 
to all participants. Both novice and experts Project Managers demonstrated a proactive 
characteristic in certain situations as during the start of a project in aiding other departments to 
identify project opportunities or in searching for information. 
There are also signs of openness when some participants mention that they receive information 
and knowledge during the very initial phase of the project and when looking for guidance. 
Although it can be argued that during the initial phase, this information received is part of a 
procedure, the same cannot be said when the Project Manager seeks guidance. Especially when 
looking for guidance, the Project Manager must be open to receive knowledge and experience 
from his guide. 
On the expertise level, this study confirmed that experience has a crucial role in the determining 
the actions of the participants. On the question about mistakes, all participants showed 
knowledge about possible mistakes its causes consequences. Another finding, despite being 
expected, is that more experienced Project Managers approach situations and act differently 
from novice ones. On the questions about assessment and anomalies, experts Project Managers 
presented points that were not even considered by their novice counterpart. 
==PAGE:27==
27 
 
Secondly, regarding the behaviors, the most obvious finding to emerge from the analysis is that 
information seeking is a common characteristic for all the participants. All of the Project 
Managers declared more than once and in almost all questions, engaging in the pursuit of 
information. This result was expected since information seeking is a never-ceasing activity 
inherent to projects. 
Another important finding was that relationship building is more common among experts 
Project Managers thought it was cited by some novices. Relationship building was mentioned 
by experts as part of their jobs since the assessment question as in building a relationship with 
clients, stakeholders and team members. Relationship building is vital to get an understanding 
about the project at the initial phases and build trust. Interestingly, one participant revealed 
that failure in building relationships could restrict the area of work of a Project Manager. 
This study did not detect any evidence about feedback seeking. Though there is a quote to 
feedback from one respondent, it was feedback about the project delivered and not about the 
Project Manager and his performance. 
Thirdly, this study has identified the indicators for adjustment: project and role clarity. All 
respondents mentioned the importance of having project and role clarity. Seeking information 
is a behavior that contributes to this. Participants mentioned that having clarity about the 
project consequently leads to clarity about their roles. Different justifications were made by the 
Project Managers, all indicative that indeed they seek project and role clarity. 
Regarding indicators of self-efficacy, this paper has shown that the participants were confident 
enough in performing their jobs that all but one participant developed a practice to facilitate 
their work. The relevance of this finding is supported by the literature that states that self-
efficacy refers to how confident employees are in performing their jobs.  
The results of this study did not show any evidence of a Project Manager seeking acceptance by 
peers or stakeholders. However, we argue that participating in meetings and establishing 
successful relationships with clients, team members, other departments, and stakeholders, in 
general, is an indication that you are being accepted by them.  
Taken together, the literature on onboarding and these results support our hypothesis that 
Project Managers are indeed performing Onboarding in projects.  
The Onboarding process in a project may not include all the exact same factors listed in BAUER 
CITE study. Nevertheless, there are much more similarities than contrasts. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:28==
28 
 
6. Recommendations 
 
This research revealed that Project Managers perform Onboarding when starting new projects 
as new hires perform Onboarding when entering new organizations. 
During this study we limited the research to the Project Manager point of view, therefore we 
did not address the entire model of socialization (figure 1 on chapter x).  
As a suggestion, further research could deal with the variables of the organizational efforts, in 
this case, we suggest focusing on only one company instead of many different fields. Another 
interesting study could be carried out addressing the outcomes of the Onboarding in projects 
process.  
Furthermore, studies dedicated to specific fields such as IT or consultancy could be carried out 
to identify particular characteristics of the Onboarding in projects process of these areas. 
In short, this study provided a different view on the Onboarding process, giving a new 
perspective to it and opening the possibilities for further research. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:29==
29 
 
7. References 
 
Ashford, S. J., & Black, J. S. (1996). Proactivity during organizational entry: The role of desire for 
control. Journal of Applied Psychology, 81(2), 199–214. https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-
9010.81.2.199 
Bauer, T. N. (2010). Onboarding New Employees : Maximizing Success. SHRM Foundation’s 
Effective Practice Guidelines Series. 
Bauer, T. N., & Erdogan, B. (2011). Organizational socialization: The effective onboarding of 
new employees. APA Handbook of Industrial and Organizational Psychology, Vol 3: 
Maintaining, Expanding, and Contracting the Organization., (December 2015), 51–64. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/12171-002 
Beyer, J. M., & Hannah, D. R. (2002). Building on the Past: Enacting Established Personal 
Identities in a New Work Setting. Organization Science, 13(6), 636–652. 
https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.13.6.636.495 
Dai, G., & De Meuse, K. P. (2007). A review of onboarding literature. Lominger Limited, Inc., 1–
9. Retrieved from http://boardoptions.com/onboardingevidence.pdf 
Engwall, M., & Jerbrant, A. (2003). The resource allocation syndrome : the prime challenge of 
multi-project management ?, 21, 403–409. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0263-
7863(02)00113-8 
Huemann, M., Keegan, A., & Turner, J. R. (2007). Human resource management in the project-
oriented company: A review. International Journal of Project Management, 25(3), 315–
323. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijproman.2006.10.001 
Jensen, A., Geraldi, J., Thuesen, C., Jensen, A. F., Society, T. P., Senior, H., & Thuesen, C. (2017). 
Being, doing and leading in the project society Being, doing and leading in the project 
society, 1–18. 
Kammeyer-Mueller, J. D., & Wanberg, C. R. (2003). Unwrapping the organizational entry 
process: Disentangling multiple antecedents and their pathways to adjustment. Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 88(5), 779–794. https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.88.5.779 
Militello, L. G., & Hutton, R. J. (1998). Applied cognitive task analysis ( ACTA ): a practitioner ’ s 
toolkit for understanding cognitive task demands. Ergonomics, 41(11), 1618–1641. 
Militello, L. G., & Hutton, R. J. B. (1998). Applied cognitive task analysis (ACTA): a practitioner ’ 
s toolkit for understanding cognitive task demands. Ergonomics, 41(11), 1618–1641. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/001401398186108 
PMI, P. M. I. (2013). Conhecimento em Gerenciamento de Projetos. 
Saks, A. M., & Ashforth, B. E. (1996). Proactive Socialization and Behavioral Self-Management. 
Journal of Vocational Behavior, 48(3), 301–323. https://doi.org/10.1006/jvbe.1996.0026 
Tarquinio, M. (2006). Onboarding Benchmark Report. The Onboarding Benchmark Report, 
(August). 
Vejledning I projektledelse Guidance on project management. (2012). Iso 21500. 
Wanberg, C. R., & Kammeyer-Mueller, J. D. (2000). Predictors and outcomes of proactivity in 
the socialization process. Journal of Applied Psychology, 85(3), 373–385. 
https://doi.org/10.1037//0021-9010.85.3.373 
==PAGE:30==
30 
 
Wheeler, S. C., & DeMarree, K. G. (2009). Multiple Mechanisms of Prime-to-Behavior Effects. 
Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 3(4), 566–581. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1751-9004.2009.00187.x 
Zhu, J., Tatachari, S., & Chattopadhyay, P. (2017). NEWCOMER IDENTIFICATION : TRENDS, 
ANTECEDENTS, MODERATORS, AND CONSEQUENCES Hong Kong University of Science 
and Technology Indian Institute of Management Udaipur, 60(3), 855–879. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:31==
31 
 
8. Appendices 
 
Interviews and Questionnaires  
Respondent A 
 
==PAGE:32==
32 
 
==PAGE:33==
33 
 
==PAGE:34==
34 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
35 
 
Respondent B 
==PAGE:36==
36 
 
==PAGE:37==
37 
 
==PAGE:38==
38 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:39==
39 
 
Respondent C 
 
==PAGE:40==
40 
 
==PAGE:41==
41 
 
==PAGE:42==
42 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:43==
43 
 
Respondent D 
 
==PAGE:44==
44 
 
==PAGE:45==
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:46==
46 
 
Respondent E 
 
==PAGE:47==
47 
 
==PAGE:48==
48 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:49==
49 
 
Respondent F 
 
==PAGE:50==
50 
 
==PAGE:51==
51 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:52==
52 
 
Respondent G 
 
==PAGE:53==
53 
 
==PAGE:54==
54 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:55==
55 
 
Respondent H 
 
==PAGE:56==
56 
 
==PAGE:57==
57 
 
 
