==PAGE:1==
Kongens Lyngby 2017
Fire safety- and bearing capacity model of super-
structures concerning storey residential construc-
tions from the period 1950-1980
Brandsikrings- og bæreevnemodel ved overbygning på eksisterende etage-
boligbyggeri fra perioden 1950-1980
Marie Rask Jensen, s113800
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Civil Engineering
Brovej, building 118,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 1700
byg@byg.dtu.dk
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The project deals with construction of three leveled superstructures onto existing
apartment buildings speciﬁc for the period of 1950 to 1980 built in Denmark.
Generally, the buildings of choice reﬂects the most common building techniques
used throughout the period.
This thesis provides a thorough analysis of the existing state of the three con-
structions. That is, the three constructions have been analyzed through a reg-
istration based upon the available archive material. Moreover, the registration
is extended by a carrying capacity- and ﬁre analysis. The output is a concise
overview of the residual capacity potential sustained by the respective buildings.
The result of the residual capacity analysis grounds the basis of the proposed
design solutions. Providing, in each case, a three leveled superstructure on the
existing three-storey house. In addition, the superstructures are executed using
a wood module construction, aligned with Scandi Byg’s construction processes.
This solution minimizes inconveniences towards the existing residents, which is
one of the goals of this project.
Speciﬁcally the outcome of this project is a preliminary investigation along with
a construction proposal of three diﬀerent three leveled superstructures, provid-
ing:
• Stability analysis of the three existing constructions.
• Residual capacity analysis of the three existing constructions.
• Fire analysis of the existing constructions.
==PAGE:4==
ii
Summary (English)
• Carrying capacity calculations of the wood modules, used in the super-
structures.
• Carrying capacity calculations of the force transfer construction, between
the new and existing building components.
• The existing bearing structures are controlled with respect to the greater
weight provided by the superstructures.
• Thorough ﬁre analysis of the entire building after the expansion.
The carrying capacity calculations provides an analysis of the supporting struc-
tures of both the superstructures as well as the existing construction. Addition-
ally, the constructions are secured for ﬁre performance of applicable require-
ments, with a ﬁre strategy of the new properties, where the existing building
plus the superstructure is analyzed as a single construction.
In conclusion, simple 3D models for the designed superstructures, of the three
investigated houses, have been prepared. In addition, three diﬀerent methods for
connecting an elevator to the existing building are illustrated. The 3D models
oﬀers a visual overview of all of the above aspects, which are highlighted in the
project, and how they play together as one entity.
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Målet for denne afhandling er at undersøge tre konkrete etageboligbyggerier fra
perioden 1950-1980 i Danmark. Bygningerne repræsenterer de mest anvendte
forskellige bygningsmetoder for perioden.
Afhandlingen indeholder en grundig analyse af de eksisterende forhold for tre
ejendomme. Ejendommene er analyseret gennem registrering baseret på tilgæn-
gelig eksisterende arkivmateriale.
Ud fra registreringen er der udarbejdet en kontrol af bæreevne forlænget af en
brandanalyse for de eksisterende forhold. Udfaldet heraf er konkretiseret i et
overblik over eventuel restbæreevne af de eksisterende forhold for de respektive
tre ejendomme.
Analysen af restbæreevne skaber grundlag for design udfaldet af overbygninger-
ne. Her er der tale om en tre etagers overbygning for hver af de tre eksisterende
tre-etagers ejendomme. Overbygningerne er konstrueret af træ-modulbyggeri ba-
seret på Scandi Byg’s byggeprincipper. Ved benyttelse af modulbyggeri mind-
skes desuden gener for de eksisterende beboere, der er et af hovedmålene for
udformningen af overbygningen.
Produktet af dette projekt indeholder de indledende undersøgelser, samt et pro-
duktforslag til konstruering af tre forskellige tre-etagers overbygninger, beståen-
de af:
• Stabilitetsanalyse af de tre eksisterende konstruktioner.
==PAGE:6==
iv
• Restbæreevneanalyse af de eksisterende forhold for de tre ejendomme.
• Brandanalyse for de eksisterende forhold for de undersøgte ejendomme.
• Bæreevneberegninger af træmoduler anvendt i overbygningen.
• Bæreevneanalyse for overførelsessystem mellem eksisterende konstruktio-
ner og konstruktioner i overbygningen.
• De eksisterende konstruktioner tjekkes for den øgede lastpåvirkning fra
overbygningen.
• Gennemgående brandanalyse for bygningerne efter udførelse af overbyg-
ningen.
Bæreevneberegningerne analyserer de bærende elementer i både overbygninger-
ne og de eksisterende bebyggelser. I tilknytning til bæreevneberegningerne, er
de bærende konstruktioner i såvel overbygningen som i det eksisterende byggeri
blevet gennemregnet og sikret for opfyldelse af gældende brandkrav. Hertil fo-
religger en brandstrategi for den samlede nye ejendom, hvor eksisterende samt
overbygningen er analyseret som én samlet konstruktion.
Afslutningsvis er der udarbejdet simple 3D-modeller for de valgte overbygninger.
Hertil er der ligeledes illustreret tre forskellige metoder for kobling af elevator
til det eksisterende byggeri. 3D-modellerne giver et godt overblik over alle de
ovenstående aspekter, der er belyst i projektet og hvordan de spiller sammen
som en helhed.
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the Department of Civil Engineering at the
Technical University of Denmark. It is the graduation project of the M.Sc. in
Civil Engineering. Conducted by Marie Rask Jensen and corresponds to 32.5
ECTS credits.
Lyngby, 25-October-2017
Marie Rask Jensen, s113800
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Søren Peter Bjarløv, Associate Profes-
sor BYG-DTU, and Finn Larsen, Senior Engineer Rambøll A/S, for guidiance
throughout the process.
I would also like to thank Horst G. Günther, Technical Manager Scandi Byg
A/S, for showing me around one of their factories, and to tell about the basic
principles of their product.
Also a special thanks to Anders Rask Jensen, Electrucal contractor, for building
technical guidance, and Mikkel Rømer & Stine Elnegaard for proofreading of this
thesis.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Related work and Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Metods & process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Literature studies
9
2.1
Building methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Fire regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Case studies
23
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Load combinations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
House 1, traditional building
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3.1
Registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3.2
Structural calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4
House 2, insitu cast concrete
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.4.1
Registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.4.2
Structural calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
3.5
House 3, concrete elements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
3.5.1
Registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
3.5.2
Structural calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
3.6
Fire
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
3.7
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
4
Concept development
85
4.1
Building style and material options . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
4.2
Module systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
4.3
Fire safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
4.3.1
Elevators
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
4.4
Building Regulations 2015 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
5
Static veriﬁcation
97
5.1
House 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
5.2
House 2 & House 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
5.2.1
Structural system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
5.2.2
Calculations of the superstructure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
5.2.3
Energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
5.2.4
Transfer system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
5.2.5
Existing building parts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
5.3
Elevators
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
6
Fire strategy
113
6.1
Fire analysis of House 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
6.1.1
Fire Safety pre-ﬂashover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
6.1.2
Fire Safety post-ﬂashover, Structural ﬁre Safety . . . . . . 117
6.2
Fire analysis of House 2 and House 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
6.2.1
Description of the buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
6.2.2
Fire Safety pre-ﬂashover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
6.2.3
Fire Safety post-ﬂashover, Structural ﬁre Safety . . . . . . 135
7
Final concept
139
7.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139
7.2
House 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
7.3
House 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
7.4
House 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
8
Discussion
153
9
Conclusion
157
9.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 160
Dictionary
161
Bibliography
163
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In the following chapter, the issues of this thesis will be introduced. In speciﬁc,
the chapter clariﬁes why this subject is important to elucidate. Likewise, the
working method and process will be reviewed.
1.1
Problem deﬁnition
Renovation work covers many diﬀerent issues and opportunities. Building styles
and material usage have changed over time, as well as the optimization of the
constructions bearing systems. Thus, diﬀerent issues and possibilities will be
encountered depending on the time period at hand. In this thesis, it has been
decided to look into constructions built in Denmark from the period 1950-1980.
Renovation requires an analytical and computational review of the existing
building to provide a clear picture of its complexity. Likewise, it is important
to consider what methods and techniques, that was used during the period. In
order to illuminate this area and create a functional perspective of the build-
ing habits throughout the period, the analysis will focus on three individual
three-storey buildings located around the country.
In particular, the analysis will carry out calculations of the bearing structures
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
in the buildings, and the residual capacity will be documented. In addition,
there will be a review of existing ﬁre measures as well as a review of their ﬁt in
modern ﬁre requirements.
The purpose of the above described analysis is to compile a theoretical building
model for the period. The aim of the model is the possibility of expanding the
existing construction vertically. Therefore, the three analyzed properties repre-
sents three diﬀerent construction practices, that were used during the period.
Based on analysis of each case study, this thesis provides a solution consisting
of a three leveled superstructure build upon the existing constructions. This is
followed by an upgrade of the ﬁre safety of the properties, ensuring that both the
existing and new construction complies with current ﬁre requirements. Likewise,
the diﬀerent possibilities to incorporate elevators to the existing buildings will
be reﬂected, as well as utilization of them in relation to ﬁre.
To make a delimitation, no calculations will be made in relation to the energy
perspectives of the properties. Similarly, no detailed design proposals are made
for the superstructures, however an overall design solution will be illustrated.
The focus points of this dissertation are thus carrying capacity and ﬁre condi-
tions.
1.2
Motivation
351.936 apartment buildings was constructed throughout Denmark during the
period of 1950 to 1980, accounting for an entire 17 percent of all apartment
buildings existing in Denmark [sta17]. The big cities in Denmark are growing
vastly, demanding a need of aﬀordable urban apartments. Since many of these
buildings are already present in the dense city environment, it makes sense to
explore the opportunities of extending these constructions with modern super-
structures.
Renovation is exciting as it deals with the preservation of everyone’s history.
There are diﬀerent positions on older constructions versus new, however in spite
of various opinions one cannot ignore existing buildings, and their inﬂuence on
the building styles throughout the country.
Teaching of building habits in relation to older buildings, are limited or op-
tional. Whereas methods, materials, and the techniques of modern buildings are
required. Learning about today’s building style and requirements creates the
basis for working with renovation. But knowledge of old drawings and building
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Related work and Contribution
3
habits, from the time of construction, is also a necessity. A renovation project
is not just about how building requirements are met, but it also aﬀects how to
preserve, reuse, and reinforce the existing building in the best way possible.
The market potential within renovation for engineers is large.
Most of the
properties in inner Copenhagen consist of constructions from the period 1850-
1950, but areas around Copenhagen and similar cities consist mainly of buildings
from the following period of 1950-1980, which is the period to be considered in
this thesis. The interesting part of this period is, that it represent a of transition
period from traditional constructions to newer constructions consisting mainly
of concrete in terms of insitu or elements. The traditional construction methods
has been used throughout decades, where it has been optimized and improved.
Contrary the new construction methods have been less explored and are not yet
fully optimized. Thus, while focusing on a relatively short time period, it still
contains signiﬁcantly diﬀerent building concepts within the period, which are
interesting to compare and investigate for their various possibilities.
Similarly, constructions from this period are characterized by the fact, that
they are not always built in ﬁve to six ﬂoors, lower constructions are often used
spanning only three to four ﬂoors. During renovation of constructions built in
the previous period 1850-1950, utilization of the attics are often investigated.
However, the investigated period in this thesis 1950-1980 opens up the possibility
of adding superstructures of several ﬂoors. Thus existing buildings can be used
for urban renewal and house more people in the light of growing population.
1.3
Related work and Contribution
Traditional masonry techniques used for multileveled apartment constructions
have already been subject to analysis regarding the creation of superstructures.
R. Jensen [Jen15b] cataloged the residual bearing capacity of typical masonry
buildings built during 1850 to 1950. The thesis concludes that the main par-
tition walls are severely overloaded, however that residual capacity is found in
the facades. It is established, that using the masonry buildings for multileveled
superstructures are unfeasible, but inclusion of the attics is possible. The over-
loaded partition walls in masonry buildings are supported by B. Clausen et
al. [Ing]. Moreover, M. Therese et al. [Hal16] provides a thorough investigation
of the multilevel superstructure potential, of masonry apartment buildings built
in 1850-1950.
Their research indicates that special designed superstructures
might be possible to some extent. However, they struggle towards ﬁnding the
complete residual capacity needed. Thus, further research is needed.
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
As the preceding research has shown masonry apartment buildings, from the
period of 1850 to 1950, sustain great potential for attic inclusion. However,
multileveled superstructures are more complex. This thesis investigates typical
apartment buildings from the following period of 1950 to 1980. Whilst the pre-
vious period mainly consisted of masonry constructions, this period introduced
concrete techniques. For this reason, this time range is very interesting. First
of all, it makes sense to verify if the masonry buildings of this period follows
the same pattern as the period before. Secondly, as this period introduced con-
crete building techniques, it makes sense to extend the research domain to these
construction types as well. Additionally, this thesis investigates the options for
advancing the existing construction with elevators. It is of high interest to look
at elevator placement, as a standard for this has yet to be evolved [Dam06].
Moreover, as this thesis deals with multileveled buildings spanning more than
three plans, it is required to establish elevators [BR115].
This thesis, provides two actual superstructure proposals, designed and dimen-
sioned using wooden modular blocks, underlying the potential of this techniques.
A. Beim, S. Bjarløv et al. [AB11] compiled an investigation of modular construc-
tion techniques. This article concluded, that the use of wood modular blocks can
be economically beneﬁcial, without compromising the architectural, technical,
or residential satisfaction.
Fire safety in multileveled apartment buildings have become of great interest.
It is public known, that ﬁre safety in apartment buildings is of high importance,
[Chr13] [Ves13].
Naturally, this is of high importance since the human risk
is very high in these areas. This research, does not only analyze the existing
conditions of apartment constructions from this period, it concludes a strategy
for updating the ﬁre safety to modern conditions.
From the discussion follows the main contributions of this research, all regarding
three leveled apartment buildings built in Denmark from 1950 to 1980:
• Extensive literature study comparing the regulations from the period 1950
to 1980 with modern requirements, with focus on ﬁre.
• Registration of the existing constructions, based on archive material and
on site visual inspections.
• Residual capacity investigation of masonry apartment buildings.
• Residual capacity investigation of concrete based apartment buildings.
• Fire safety analysis of the existing apartment buildings.
==PAGE:17==
1.4 Metods & process
5
• Fire safety analysis plus upgrading to comply with modern requirements.
(Post superstructure)
• Analysis of elevator placement in apartment buildings including the new
superstructures. (Post superstructure)
• Dimensioning of wood modular based three leveled superstructures on
existing apartment buildings.
• Multiple apartment layout proposals focusing on designing for families,
students, and disabled people.
• 3D-design proposals of three leveled superstructures on existing apartment
buildings.
1.4
Metods & process
Under the development of this thesis, diﬀerent methods are used that together
will shape the project process. The methods are based on the various steps
through the report, each of which are shaping the basis for the method and
process of the project.
1 Literature study, background studies
First and foremost, the background knowledge concerning the con-
struction and ﬁre laws is acquired for the period. Based on a lit-
erature study consisting of articles, old building laws, etc.
This
background check will be used to provide the necessary knowledge
required to produce realistic refurbishment of the buildings. In addi-
tion, this knowledge is necessary to provide an understanding of- and
a better insight into the technical solutions used during the period.
2 Further analysis, cases studies
With the knowledge from the above method, three diﬀerent cases are
found to represent the period. For each case, material are found in the
associated municipality archives and an exterior view is performed as
supplement to the archive material, to give a better understanding
of the drawing material. All dimensions used in the report are based
on the archive material. Related carrying capacity calculations of
existing conditions are based on the current Danske Standarter. In
continuation of the carrying capacity calculations, a ﬁre analysis is
performed for the existing conditions, based on the current legisla-
tion from the time of construction. The aim of this part, where the
==PAGE:18==
6
Introduction
three cases are investigated, is to create a holistic impression of the
structure and its development during the period.
3 Solution options, concept development
In this method diﬀerent solutions for the superstructures will be pre-
sented and compared.
Based on the results, of the two methods
above, the amount of useful residual capacity of the buildings can be
determined. This knowledge is used to ﬁnd the most optimal solution
for the superstructures. In addition, the impact of the superstructure
on the ﬁre safety is presented.
4 Solution, superstructures
Based on all of the above methods, the ﬁnal solution proposals are
prepared. In addition, carrying capacity calculations are made for
existing as well as the new constructions. Similarly, ﬁre strategies
are prepared for the evacuation and construction of the renovated
buildings. All this ends in 3D models, illustrating the three renovated
properties, with accompanying plan solutions, to visualize the overall
impression.
The project structure is created based on the above 4 methods, which together
form the process of the project. We start broadly to look at the background
for the period.
This knowledge is then made concrete by focusing on three
buildings from the period. Then the project is narrowed once more by focusing
on the residual capacity in the building, for the choice of optimal solution of the
superstructures. Finally, all overheads end up in the development of 3 solutions
for the superstructures, the structure is illustrated in Figure 1.1.
==PAGE:19==
1.4 Metods & process
7
Figure 1.1: Process and method structure, illustrates that the focus are nar-
rowed down and speciﬁed throughout the process.
Used programs
AutoCad: Drawing material
Photoshop: Illustrations and ﬁgures
Sketchup: 3D-modelling
Excel: Calculations
Abaqus: FEM-calculations
Matlab: Static calculations
Latex: Layout
==PAGE:20==
8
Introduction
1.5
Outline
Chapter 2-Background studies
This chapter provides the reader with the building technology and
ﬁre requirements regarding the investigated period 1950-1980. This
information will be used throughout this thesis.
Chapter 3-Case studies
Based on three cases this chapter will present information regarding
diﬀerent types of buildings in the period. The analyses will consist
of registration, bearing capacity control and ﬁre safety control for all
three cases.
Chapter 4-Concept development
The potential for superstructures will now be determined based on
the results found in the privies chapter. Diﬀerent solutions will be
presented and the most optimal related to the investigated studies
will be determined.
Chapter 5-Static veriﬁcation
A static veriﬁcation of the superstructures are documented along with
the most relevant detailed connections.
Chapter 6-Fire strategy
This chapter includes a ﬁre strategy for the three cases, both existing
and new building parts. The ﬁre strategy concerns both pre-ﬂashover
and post-ﬂashover ﬁre safety.
Chapter 7-Final concept
The visual design of the superstructures are presented for all cases.
Likewise, diﬀerent types of apartment decor is shown.
Chapter 8-Discussion
The contribution of this thesis becomes subject to discussion. That is,
this chapter will look at all the diﬀerent aspects there are highlighted
through the thesis.
Chapter 9-Conclusion
The project is rounded up, and future steps are discussed.
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2
Literature studies
To make a scope of the thesis a background study has been made. This part is
base on a literature survey, which includes everything from old articles to old
laws and regulations. It is impotant to emphasize that this is not meant to be a
detail description, but more an introduction and outline for the building methods
and ﬁre regulations/laws regarding the case studies in this thesis. All ﬁre safety
regarding air-raid shelter will be left out.
2.1
Building methods
The following section is primarily based on the references; Register on Danish
building style [Eng17] [oR17], books about older storey buildings construction
and renovation [Eng13] [Eng83] [oJm87] [Bon71] [Gra ] [Jen15b] and handbook
for building industry, material situation and construction [AWH42]
Building standards, laws, and traditions are changed and/or replaced over time.
However, some persists for many years. For this reason, it is of high importance
not only to look at the concerned period between 1950-1980, but also the pre-
ceding time. In fact, sometimes when a law is changed, the new law may still
refer to previous laws. Thus, it is crucial to know the past as it grounds the basis
of future laws. For this reason, the following sections will brieﬂy document the
==PAGE:22==
10
Literature studies
period ranging from 1850 to 1950, if needed a detailed description can be found
in [Jen15b], providing a thorough documentation of building habits during 1850
to 1950. Typical building models throughout the period can be inspected in
Figure 2.1.
During 1850-1890 there was one type of apartment houses which was largely
unique for that period. This construction consisted of: endemic massive brick
facade walls; foundation in tile; pitched roof with tiles, slates, or Copenhagen
roof with zinc; inner walls of timber-framing; horizontal divisions of wood tier
beams; and staircases of wood.
Throughout the consecutive span of 1890-1920 the use of concrete gradually
began to make its mark on the construction industry.
The foundation and
basement walls were cast on site in concrete. Mansard-roof began to emerge as
the preferred roof construction. Moreover, the main partition wall and staircase
walls were switched from timber-framing to massive brick walls. The horizontal
divisions started to obtain iron beams by eg. bays.
In 1920-1940 a new construction type initiated new standards, which ranged
until the material shortage of iron arose due to World War II. This type fea-
tured greater balcony impact since they could replace the back staircase. The
increasing use of balconies, along with the growing appearance of corner win-
dows yielded a high demand for iron in the construction. More ﬂeet roofs started
to appear with cement-based plates and rooﬁng paper. Inner walls began to be
a mixture between masonry and double brick walls, while the ﬂoor partitions
were made of wood tier beams with a predominantly part of iron beams.
By the end of the 1940s, some signiﬁcant changes emerged within Danish con-
struction practices, which formed the basis of the common 1950 buildings. In
the period between 1940-1960 the massive brick walls were gradually replaced
by hollow brick walls with ﬁrm binders.
Especially the gable walls and the
top ﬂoor walls were changed. Also it became more the rule than the avoid-
ance that the inner walls were of masonry. The horizontal divisions were now
made of diﬀerent concrete and tilt designs. Typically reinforced concrete slabs
cast on site or diﬀerent types of hollow-decks. Furthermore, this type of houses
contained only one staircase made of concrete with prefabricated landings. Ar-
chitecturally the biggest change in these houses were the inaugural balconies
that gained considerable ground.
Apartment houses from 1960 and forward diﬀers from all the previous types.
All bearing construction parts now consisted only of concrete. The foundation
and basement walls were still always cast on site.
However, the remaining
building components could consist of either prefabricated concrete elements or
cast on site. The horizontal divisions now began to stretch between the stiﬀening
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Building methods
11
transverse walls instead of the main partition wall as previously. In addition,
the facades were no longer part of the bearing construction. Thus, they could
be made of both light- or heavyweight structures.
The carrying gable walls
are typically constructed of sandwich elements, but can also be found as facing
walls. It is the gable and transitional walls that are the stabilizing walls of the
construction.
(a) Type 1: 1850-1890
(b) Type 2: 1890-1920
(c) Type 3: 1920-1940
(d) Type 4: 1940-1960
(e) Type 5: 1960 and forward
Figure 2.1: Building models used for apartment buildings in Denmark.
Around the 1950s, the work balance between the architect and the engineer be-
gan to change. Previously, it was mainly the architect who were responsible for
residential buildings, but this changed in the 1950s. Before 1950, the buildings
where mainly based on laws, load-bearing tables as well as instructions from
the manufacturer. However, after 1950 a lot of development in the building
industry emerged and the elementary building method started to put its mark
on the industry. This new type of construction required a major initiative by
the engineers. Similarly, the conversion from bearing brick stone facades and
main partition-walls to bearing concrete cross-walls and gable walls inﬂuenced
the entire static system of the structures. Hence, it was necessary to document
the bearing capacity and the stability of the new construction model dealing
==PAGE:24==
12
Literature studies
with concrete elements or concrete cast on site.
LN-BO
The following section is primarily based on an article from the magazine "Arkitek-
ten" from 1963 [Ark63] and a journal about the development of building tech-
nology in Denmark after World War II [Sko ].
In the 1960s there were an increase in housing shortage, which was caused by
the population growth and big settlement in the cities. This resulted in a need
for cheap housing.
Legislative and admitting instances began to look at the possibilities of ra-
tionalization and industrialization of constructions, in the hope of a cheaper
construction industry. However, this insight into the construction was not done
without any protests from the craftsmen. On the other hand, it opened the
doors for standard houses and components. However, industrialization of the
construction industry is not just a change, that can be made from one day to
the other. It requires greater investment in the production equipment than that
of traditional constructions, which means demand for greater sales stability. In
addition, concerns were raised by architects against type houses and mass pro-
duction. However, this did not stop the development and type housing to be
realised.
LN-BO was the ﬁrst and largest real type of a standard storey-construction. The
type house was produced by the pioneering business Larsen & Nielsen, L&N,
in 1962. L&N sold licenses to many diﬀerent countries over the following years,
including Sweden, Germany, England, Malaysia, and Czeko-Slovakia. License
sales occurred for two main reasons: Economy and a common housing type
across countries. Developing a common housing type across countries, did how-
ever not succeed because of diﬀerences in the building regulations and traditions
across the diﬀerent countries.
The standard houses initially consisted of three storey buildings with the loca-
tions in; Rødovre, Espergærde, Odense, Mariager, Slagelse, Holbæk, and Hels-
ingør among others. The market was almost exclusively on Zealand, since the
element factories were located on Zealand. Later on, a factory was made in Jut-
land. The company had capacity for approximately 1400 apartments per year.
Which corresponds to approx. 5% of the construction industry in the country
at that time. That was not enough to make a decisive imprint in the landscapes
appearance, and also not enough to "overthrow" the traditional construction
industry. That said, LN-BO became a successful building style through the 60s
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Building methods
13
and 70s. The concept gave freedom to both the developer and the architect in
choosing of eg. plan solutions. The ﬂexible building system was extended and
now it included solutions for three to eight storey buildings.
This ﬂexible building principal initiated interest of standard housing among the
architects. Since it was suﬃciently ﬂexible to provide an architecturally beau-
tiful result. Signiﬁcant for the period is the well proportioned building lengths
combined with a number of ﬂoors to create strong horizontal lines. Similarly, the
architect began to look at the combination of several buildings on the same site
with diﬀerent sizes. Thus instead of only focusing on the individual house, the
domain was increased to a larger area with more buildings. Hence the typical ar-
chitectural view included: How the area appears in sets, and how constructions
inﬂuences each other, typically with respect towards sharing sunlight between
the buildings.
It was not only the ﬂexible options, that made LN-BO get a stable impression
in the construction industry, other factors had a great impact as well:
• Fixed Price
• Fixed delivery
• Fast and easy dimensioning based on catalogs
• Large modules / components
The large components gave a reduced need for transportation and on site pro-
cessing. Approximately 50% of the work was already been done at the factory.
The wall and facade elements were room sized and door/window frames and
electrical pipes were cast in the concrete at the factory. In addition, the win-
dow glass was also installed at the factory, which made it possible to close the
building quickly, making the system ideal during winter as well. In addition,
the bathrooms were delivered as closed units ready to mount. The bathroom
unit is illustrated on Figure 2.2.
==PAGE:26==
14
Literature studies
Figure 2.2: LN-BO bathroom element, [Ark63].
In general, the industrialization provided several beneﬁts to the construction
marked. However, the automization in construction fabrics had a natural limit
in Denmark. Since Denmark has a relatively small construction market, the
high level of investment required is not feasible. The reason why this type of
housing did not have a greater impact on the market was due to the fact that the
economic gain was not suﬃciently large and could not be directly documented.
This is because the price negotiations in social building cases were drowned
by the Ministry of Housing, which sets the price for the developer. Therefore,
each time L&N started a new case, they would have to document price changes
relative to the previous case, otherwise the developer would get the same price
again. Even-though, the economic gain was not conspicuous, there were social
beneﬁts that could not be overlooked. Societal advantages such as:
• Unskilled jobs at the element factories.
• Quick production and completion.
• Faster fulﬁllment of housing needs.
• Save of building loan rates for the developer (rapid production
rate).
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Fire regulations
15
2.2
Fire regulations
The focus towards ﬁre safety emerged a long time before 1950, that is before
the time-span of this report. In fact, severe attention was brought towards the
subject already in the late eightteen-hundred after Copenhagen was ravaged by
two large ﬁres in 1728 and 1795. The devastating eﬀects of these ﬁres became
a realization of the necessity of greater ﬁre regulations. It was at this point
the ﬁrst regulations and laws concerning ﬁre safety, that developed and more
followed in the years to come.
Fire legislation is in constant change given that building standards change over
time. Even though ﬁre legislation was an upcoming topic already in the 18th
century, the regulations are still not clear in the period of 1950-1980. There-
for, a large part of the decisions were handed over to the estimations of local
authorities, where practical experience played a major role.
Fire regulations and laws was denoted using a special tag system consisting of
up to four parts, available from Equation 2.1 and Table 2.1.
⟨resistance class⟩−⟨object⟩−⟨resistance time⟩−⟨covering class⟩
(2.1)
==PAGE:28==
16
Literature studies
Table 2.1: Variable explanation of the old ﬁre regulation notation, visible from
equation 2.1. Eg.: BS-Wall-30 is a ﬁreproof wall, which can resist
ﬁre for 30 minutes.
Notation
Meaning
⟨resistance class⟩
BS-XX-XX
"Fireproof", made of materials
that under normal conditions
cannot burn
BD-XX-XX
"Fire resistant", materials that
can burn or consist parts
of materials that can burn
⟨object⟩
XX-Object-XX
Describes the object which it
regards, eg. Wall
XX-Door
Door ﬁtted with a door-pump
or other automatic closing
mechanism that slams the door
into "interference"
XX-Door-entrance
Door which is not ﬁtted with an
automatic closing mechanism,
but it must have a closing
mechanism that pulls the
door to close, not necessary
into "interference".
⟨resistance time⟩
XX-XX-Number
The time that the object can
resist ﬂames in a ﬁre test.
In minutes.
⟨covering class⟩
XX-XX-XX-Class-1
Covering that does not give a
bigger contribution to a ﬁre
and smoke development than
pipes and lime plasteron
lath.
XX-XX-XX-Class-2
Covering that does not give a
bigger contribution to a
ﬁre or smoke development
than 22mm pine boards
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Fire regulations
17
Fire legislation is a very comprehensive and complex topic, because it contains
many diﬀerent types of laws and regulations from diﬀerent ministries.
The
ministries associated with ﬁre safety are brieﬂy presented below [fh72].
Ministry of Housing
• Building regulations, exact ﬁre requirements
• Controlled by the Building Inspector
Ministry of Justice
• Fire service laws
• Controlled by the Building Inspector
Ministry of Labour
• Laws for industrial safety
• Controlled by the working environment inspector
Interior Ministry
• Structural civil defence measures.
• Controlled by the building inspector
As presented above, there is a broad range of diﬀerent laws and regulations,
which are enforced by several ministries.
The most essential ﬁre legislation,
regarding the following case studies, is shortly presented below. That is, only
the paragraphs and items with importance towards the case studies will be
listed.
Law on structural civil defence measures in 1950 [byg17]
da-dk: Lov om bygningsmæssige civilforanstaltninger, 27. maj 1950.
• This law focuses on the story partitions. The deck above the base-
ment and the roof deck must both be ﬁreproof to prevent spread of
ﬁre and lay on ﬁreproofed constructions.
Building regulations in 1961 [Bol17]
da-dk: Bygningsreglement for Købstæderne og landet, 1. marts 1961.
• The building regulation provides a more overall insight into ﬁre safety
with speciﬁc claims, but without examples and explanations to com-
ply them. Relevant requirements are listed below:
- There must be a rescue opening in all apartments on each ﬂoor
==PAGE:30==
18
Literature studies
- The staircase must have a minimum width of 1 meter and have at
least 2 meters free hight. Furthermore, the staircase must have ﬁre-
proof walls and ﬂame retardant ceilings and a smoke hatch of 1 m2.
- The ﬁre walls must extend from basement to roof, with maximum
holes of 1/3 of the total length, with maximum size of 1 × 2.2 m2
closed with at least a BSD60 door.
Law on structural civil defence measures in 1962 [byg17]
da-dk: Lov om bygningsmæssige civilforanstaltninger, 16 april. 1962
• This law repeals the corresponding law from 1950. Overall there is no
big diﬀerence, although this edition is more detailed. One addition
is the regulations regarding ﬁre protection of iron.
Building regulations in 1966 [Bol17]
da-dk: Bygningsreglement for Købstæderne og landet, 1. August 1966
• Similar to the law on structural civil defence measures, there is not
a big diﬀerence to the 1960 regulations. Once again it is more de-
tailed than previously, which is indicated by a bigger use of the ﬁre
designations, which deﬁnes precise requirements to the diﬀerent con-
structions. Some relevant examples are given below;
- The distance between buildings must be minimum 2.5 m from neigh-
boring boundaries.
- Staircase constructions must be at least BS30 and apartment doors
BD-door30.
- Doors to basement or attic must be BD-door60 or F-door90.
- Fire cells size must be maximum 150 m2 and with BS60 constructions.
Furthermore, ﬂat division walls must be minimum BS60, F-90 or
BD90 and other partitions BD30.
Executive notice on structures as ﬁreproof story partitions in 1969 [byg17]
da-dk: Bekendtgørelse om godkendelse af konstruktioner som brandsikre
etageadskillelser, 18. august 1969
• This notice contains details regarding the civil law in 1962. It ex-
plains what are meant by the diﬀerent ﬁre designations and how to
fulﬁll them. It establishes that by a ﬁreproof construction it means
a construction of minimum BS60.
Guidance on ﬁre protection of building constructions 1972 [byg17]
da-dk: Vejledning om brandsikring af bygningskonstruktioner, 1 juli 1972
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Fire regulations
19
• The civil defence measures, from this time on wards, will be a part of
the building regulations. One of the changes is that the requirement
of ﬁreproof constructions above top ﬂoor is annulled. A new focus is
the ensemble between the diﬀerent building parts in order to maintain
overall stability and bearing capacity in case of ﬁre. An example of
the new guidance can be seen on Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Fire designations for diﬀerent building parts, [byg17].
Building regulations in 1972 [Bol17]
da-dk: Bygningsreglement 1. Juni 1972
• This regulations is more accurate than the previous editions, but also
with a few additions listed below:
- Some speciﬁc claims for stair design are set; the ground must be 25
cm with a rise of max. 18 cm, however in the basement a ground of
21 cm and a rise below is acceptable.
- The smoke hatch in the staircase must be able to be operated from
the ground level.
- Maximum size for a ﬁre section is set to 600 m2.
- Speciﬁc requirements for the wall covering: On all walls in common
areas Class 1 covering is demanded, for the remaining walls Class 2
is acceptable. Furthermore, all ceilings must be covered by Class 1
material.
==PAGE:32==
20
Literature studies
Fire protection of older buildings in 1976 [Bol76]
da-dk: Brandsikring af ældre ejendomme, Boligministeriet marts 1976
• This law collection corresponds to today’s sample collection (Eksem-
pelsamlingen). It contains descriptions of each designation and ex-
amples to fulﬁll the diﬀerent requirements. To give an example of the
level of detail in the collection, the requirements for rescue openings
and rescue area is presented:
- There are diﬀerent ways to perform a rescue opening. If a side window
is used it must have a min. size of 90 cm×40 cm, in relation a tilt
window requires a minimum size of 55 cm×90 cm. A tilt window can
also be used if the dimensions are 65 cm×80 cm as long as the total
is min. 145 cm and non of the sides are below 55 cm.
- Another important requirement which can be diﬃcult to ﬁgure out
is the claim for a rescue area for the ﬁre service. The area must be
accessible and free for cars, waste containers etc. at any time. The
size of the required area is diﬀerent from ﬁre service to ﬁre service,
because the ﬁre service operates diﬀerent cranes. On Figure 2.4 the
most common areas are shown.
Figure 2.4: Illustrates need for diﬀerent rescue areas, depending on height and
type of rescue service, [Bol76].
A notice on ﬁre protection of residential buildings built in 1900 or later are
released in 1983 (Bekendtgørelse om brandsikring af beboelsesbygninger opført
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Fire regulations
21
år 1900 og senere, 6. maj 1983) [byg17]. This notice applies to all buildings
from the period with retroactive eﬀect.
However, this is not signiﬁcant for
buildings build after 1940 as they are ﬁre protected better than the minimum
requirements determined in the notice due to other legislation. The municipality
should always inspect buildings to approve that all ﬁre measures are in order,
before a new building could be used.
Thereby, the most important laws and regulations have been presented and the
diﬀerence between them where shortly described above. A timeline overview is
shown on Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: Timeline for laws regarding ﬁre regulations through the periode
1950 to 1980.
==PAGE:34==
22
Literature studies
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3
Case studies
In this chapter, three characteristic apartment buildings from the period 1950-
1980 will be presented by a short registry and carrying capacity calculations, in
order to document the residual capacity of the existing buildings.
3.1
Introduction
It has been chosen to focus on three buildings from the period 1950-1980 located
throughout Denmark.
All buildings are constructed with three ﬂoors and a
basement. The houses are determined on the basis of Chapter 2, in which the
most classic building methods of the period are brieﬂy described. The reasoned
behind the choice of buildings has been to represent the various building trends
from this period, which are:
1 Transition from traditional masonry buildings to prefabricatied
2 Usage of insitu cast concrete
3 Introduction of concrete elements
4 Creation of standard housing
==PAGE:36==
24
Case studies
The load-bearing parts of the building range from masonry, hollow deck, and
concrete in the form of insitu or prefabricated elements. The registration of
the diﬀerent buildings will mainly be based on the obtained archive material.
However, they will be accompanied with an exterior view of the building, in
order to create a better overview of the drawing material. This means that
registrations and calculations are based on initial conditions. Thus, potential
modiﬁcations over time are neglected, unless they are suﬃciently documented
in the archive material.
In addition, all calculations are performed based on measurements from the
original drawings, as no measurements are made during this survey. Calculations
regarding staircases, balconies, bays, installations, lintel at windows and doors
will not be made. Calculations are made on a appropriate section of the building,
in relation to the design structure.
The calculations are to be used for the
renovation of the building.
The most signiﬁcant information about the three buildings are listed in Table
3.1.
Table 3.1: Basic information about the three houses analyzed throughout this
theses.
Address
"Type"
Year
Floor
Roof
Walls
Floor
slabs
Idræts alle 8-20,
9800 Hjørring
Transition
housing
1956
3
Fiber
cement
Masonry
Bauma
Akademivej 29-45,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Concrete
elements
/ insitu
1972
3
Rooﬁng
felt
Concrete Concrete
Sydvej 18-24, 3000
Helsingør
LN-BO
1972
3
Built-
up
Concrete Concrete
3.2
Load combinations
There are a great number of diﬀerent load combinations for both Ultimate Limit
State (ULS) and Serviceability Limit State (SLS). This thesis will not be inves-
tigating any SLS load combinations, but only ULS load combinations.
The relevant load combinations varies for each construction. When initiating a
project, it is thus a good idea to look at the diﬀerent load combinations, and
then use the exclusion method to ﬁnd the most critical ones. A brief analysis
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Load combinations
25
of the most common load combinations, which will be used in this thesis, are
listed below.
Primary ﬂoor: Since all ﬂoors have the same design and usage, it is not rele-
vant to look at load combinations for diﬀerent primary ﬂoors.
Dominant load: The four main load groups (permanent, pay, snow, and wind)
can all operate as dominant load, but it is rarely necessary to decide all
of them.
- For the existing construction the roof structures are not checked,
due to the fact that there conditions will change doing a renovation.
Dominant snow load is therefor not relevant for these calculations.
On the other hand it could be relevant for the new building due to
the use of ﬂat roof.
- In terms of dominant payload and permanent load, payloads will be
relevant in the upper ﬂoors and permanent loads in the lower ﬂoors
as the percentage of permanent load increases.
- Wind load is especially interesting for the building after the added
superstructure is build, as the building gets twice as high.
Favour and unfavorable: In addition, the diﬀerent load groups can act in
favour or as an disadvantage for the construction. This is of particular
interest when the stability of the structures are investigated.
Based on this short presentation, it has been decided to look at four diﬀer-
ent load combinations throughout this thesis. It is estimated that these will
be the determining parameters of most relevance regarding this investigation;
when taking into account both the calculations of existing conditions and new
conditions:
STR1 Dominant live load
STR2 Dominant dead load
STR3 Dominant wind (unfavorable)
STR4 Dominant wind (favour)
The diﬀerent load combinations with associated factors are illustrated in Table
3.2. The factors are determined by [mf.16].
==PAGE:38==
26
Case studies
Table 3.2: List of load combinations used through this project, both for the
existing constructions and the superstructure.
Dead load
Live load
Wind load
Gkj
Qk,1
Qk,1
Wk
STR1
Live load leading
1.0 · KF I
1.5 · α,n,1 · KF I
1.5 · α,n,2 · KF I
1.5 · 0.3 · KF I
STR2
Dead load leading
1.2 · KF I
-
-
STR3
Wind load leading
unfavour
1.0 · KF I
1.5 · 0.5 · KF I
1.50 · KF I
STR4
Wind load leading
favour
0.9
-
1.50 · KF I
3.3
House 1, traditional building
The property is from 1956 and located in Hjørring, Northen Jutland. Originally
the building was built as a stand alone construction, however a later connection
was made to a newer building. The surrounding area contains multiple con-
structions built using the same building methods, but with various ﬂoor layouts
and location of staircases.
Figure 3.1: House 1: The red circle marks the investigated building on the
cadastral
3.3.1
Registration
The following section provides a thorough registration of House 1. The regis-
tration is based upon archive material which is compared to the actual state
==PAGE:39==
3.3 House 1, traditional building
27
observed by an external visual inspection, as shown in Figure 3.2. There are
several hundreds of pages of archive material regarding the cadastral, however
not everything is essential for the building and this project. The relevant build-
ing data picked from the archive material is collected in Appendix 3.1. Similarly
the relevant drawings are available from the Prospectus 3.1, and the images from
the external inspection of the building are collected in Prospectus 3.2.
BBR information,[Eje17]
Address: Idræts Alle 8-20, 9800 Hjørring, Hjørring municipality
Year: 1956
Floors: Basement + 3 residential ﬂoors
Cadastral + houseowners’ association: 19k Hjørring Markjorder
(a) Facade north
(b) Facade north, drawing
(c) Facade south, drawing
(d) Facade south
==PAGE:40==
28
Case studies
(e) Gable
(f) Gable, drawing
Figure 3.2: House 1: Photos from visual inspection and drawings from the
archive material, to give an overwiev of the building.
Main structure
The building geometry is a rectangular block with 6 entrances. The basement is
used for bicycles, prams, air-raid shelter, etc. The rest of the ﬂoors are used for
residential purpose. The building is built upon load-bearing facades and a main
partition wall, in which the loads are led down to the foundation. The design
of the apartments are the same through the entire building with the exception
of both ends, where it diﬀers slightly, see Figure 3.3. There are two bearing
partition walls located at the stairwells and otherwise only one main partition
wall.
(a) Floor level
==PAGE:41==
3.3 House 1, traditional building
29
(b) Basement level
Figure 3.3: House 1: Basement and ﬂoor level layout.
Roof
The roof of the building is a pitched roof. The connection between the roof
and bearing walls diﬀers depending on whether it is at the stairways or not,
see Figure 3.4. At the stairways the two bearing partition walls continues all
the way to the roof. For the remaining roof part there is a single truss in the
roof structure, which transfers the load from the roof structure, so that both
the facades and the main partition wall absorbs the load. The most signiﬁcant
height dimensions can be read on Figure 3.4.
The roof cover is made from
eternit-slate with the size 30 cm X 60 cm on both sides.
Figure 3.4: House 1: Elevation drawing with and without the staircase, to
illustrate the continuous walls and the roof layout.
==PAGE:42==
30
Case studies
Horizontal division
The horizontal divisions consists of 10 cm concrete deck above the basement.
In the remaining ﬂoors the divisions are made by 15 cm Bauma-deck. The roof
deck is likewise 15 cm Bauma [51]. Finally, the basement deck above the air-raid
shelter is 20 cm concrete.
Hollow block deck can be made using many diﬀerent types of deck designs,
which is partially fabricated.
Hollow block deck constitute the transition to
elementary building. It is a reinforced concrete deck with embed blocks. A
hollow block deck is usually higher than reinforced concrete deck, but with a
smaller weight and less iron and cement consumption. The blocks are laid in
rows with a tight underside and the grooves on the upper size are provided with
reinforcement and cast with concrete.
Economically, it is better to increase
the block height rather than applying stronger reinforcement. The same block
height is therefore used for the entire deck and any variation of bearing capacity
occurs in the reinforcement.
The construction begins at the facades. Every other row starts with a half block
such that the rows are shifted. The blocks have the dimension of 25 cm x 25
cm. The actual structure of the ﬂoor division can be seen on Figure 3.5 and the
detailed drawing can be seen with explanations and in scale in the prospectus
drawing 3.3.
Figure 3.5: House 1: Detail of the Bauma-deck used as ﬂoor separation within
the building.
Vertical division
The vertical bearing structures consists of facades and main partition walls.
All load bearing walls are solid masonry except at the top ﬂoor of the facades,
which are hollow walls with solid binders. The dimensions of each wall type can
be seen in Table 3.3. Similarly, the dimensions of the remaining non bearing
masonry walls of the building can be seen in the table. There are a few light
division walls of type double-walled walls aswell. The non-bearing masonry walls
supports themselves, whereas the lightweight partitions are carried by the ﬂoor
divisions.
==PAGE:43==
3.3 House 1, traditional building
31
Table 3.3: House 1: Dimensions of the diﬀerent wall types within the building.
Main partition wall
Facade
wall
Gable
wall
Fire
wall
Staircase
wall
Single
Double
Basement
1
Brick
***
1 Brick
1
1/2
Brick
***
1
1/2
Brick
3/4
Brick**
3/4
Brick**
Ground
1 Brick
3/4
Brick **
1
1/2
Brick
1
1/2
Brick
H*
3/4
Brick**
3/4
Brick**
1st
1 Brick
3/4
Brick **
1
1/2
Brick
1
1/2
Brick
H*
3/4
Brick**
3/4
Brick**
2nd
3/4
Brick **
1/2
Brick
1
1/2
Brick
H*
1
1/2
Brick
H*
3/4
Brick**
3/4
Brick**
Roof
0
0
0
30cm
H* wall
3/4
Brick**
1/2
Brick
*H=Hollow , **Wide-Brick , ***Gauged mortar
Foundation
The foundation is a line foundation. There is insuﬃcient material in the archive
collection to determine the dimensions of the foundation, needed to make a
sustainability estimation. Likewise, there is no information about the soil con-
ditions nor any drill samples.
The foundation and its bearing capacity will
therefore not be further investigated in this analysis.
3.3.2
Structural calculations
The bearing capacity of the bearing elements of the existing building will now be
presented. There will not be made any calculations regarding the staircases, bal-
conies, nor the roof. Detailed calculations can be found in Appendix 3.2 to 3.9.
A short presentation of the calculation methods and the results are presented
in this thesis along with a discussion of their inﬂuence on a future renovation.
A section of the ﬂoor layout and measurements used for the calculation are
illustrated in Figure 3.6.
==PAGE:44==
32
Case studies
Figure 3.6: House 1: Existing apartment layout with measurements used for
the calculations.
Calculation values
The general information of the building is given in the registration above. How-
ever, before the calculations can be carried out some essential values must be
determined, [mf.16].
Consequence class: Medium consequence class, CC2
KFI: 1.0
ψ0: 0.5
Terrain category: III
Masonry values: Compression strength normal 2.4 MPa and gauged mortar
5.5 MPa, E-modulus 355 MPa and material partial factor 1.6
As the roof will be changed in case of a renovation, the bearing capacity of the
roof is not determined. However, the roof’s inﬂuence on the other structures is
also excluded from the calculations.
==PAGE:45==
3.3 House 1, traditional building
33
To give a clear insight of how the vertical and horizontal loads are transferred
through the construction and down to the foundation: the load transfer through
the building is illustrated in Figure 3.7.
(a) Vertical static system
(b) Horizontal static system
Figure 3.7: House 1: Static system for the vertical and horizontal loads, to
illustrate the loads way through the building.
Horizontal division
As described in the registration section, the basement deck consists of 10 cm
concrete deck, and the remaining ﬂoors of 15 cm Bauma deck.
The static
conditions for the basement deck are not changed by adding a superstructure and
therefore it is not necessary to demonstrate the ability of the construction. The
same applies to the Bauma decks on the three ﬂoors of the building. However,
as the roof deck is also designed as a Bauma 15, it gives two possibilities for
a renovation solution.
Either the existing deck is used as ﬂoor in the new
construction, or a new deck can be added along with the superstructure. In
order to keep both possibilities open, the carrying capacity of the existing roof
deck must be proven to be suﬃcient for the greater load regarding residential
use.
Since Bauma decks are not used in construction today, it can be diﬃcult to
determine the bearing capacity by today’s calculation methods. This is due to
the fact that hollow-decks not used anymore and therefore calculation methods
have not been developed for current regulations.
==PAGE:46==
34
Case studies
In case of renovation it would be necessary to make tests of the existing decks
in order to document the carrying capacity. However, this is not an option in
this project. Instead, the manufacturer’s data sheets can be used to indicate
the carrying capacity.
The deck stretches across the building over the main partition wall. However, it
is not irrelevant how the connection over the wall is conducted. The connection
not only aﬀects the deck construction, but also the distribution of the load to
the combined walls. Therefore, before the calculations can be made it must be
determined whether the reinforcement is carried over the main partition wall
so that the entire deck works as one large beam or if it acts as two individual
beams. In Figure 3.8 the two possible connections are illustrated along with the
load distribution to the supports in case of equal subjects.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.8: The diﬀerent beam connections above the main partition wall.
Where the beam can be continued over the main partition wall
and function as one long beam (a) or function as two beams (b).
In order to deﬁne whether the Bauma deck belongs to type a or b, Figure 3.8,
the connection above the main partition wall is examined. Based on the man-
ufacturer’s references, the reinforcement bents over the main partition wall as
illustrated in Figure 3.9. Which gives the beam eﬀect according to type (a),
thus the entire beam works as one long beam.
==PAGE:47==
3.3 House 1, traditional building
35
Figure 3.9: Connection detail for Bauma decks, found in old data sheets from
the manufacturer
The bearing capacity tables from the manufacturer relies only on payload. How-
ever, the total load must be used for later calculation of the walls and it is
therefore determined, and can be found in Appendix 3.2. The amount of re-
inforcement in the deck varies throughout the ﬂoor. Therefor it is chosen to
consider four plates and assume that the result for this reﬂects the entire ﬂoor.
The payload consists of:
• A1- residential: 1.5 kN/m2
• Partition walls, < 1.0kN/m: 0.5 kN/m2
• Total payload: 2.0 kN/m2
According to the archive material the reinforcement is tentor-steel. In the bear-
ing capacity table, the maximum span of the deck is determined for the four
cases. On Figure 3.10a an overview of the deck plates above the second ﬂoor
can be seen and on Figure 3.10b the relevant table is shown. On both ﬁgures,
the four investigated plate are marked with respectively; red, blue, green and
orange.
==PAGE:48==
36
Case studies
(a) House 1: Plate distribution, found in
the archive material.
(b) Bearing capacity table for Bauma deck, old data sheet from the manu-
facture.
Figure 3.10: House 1:
Overview of plate distribution above 2ND ﬂoor
and bearing capacity table from "De forenede Teglværker ved
Aarhus" for Bauma deck.
Used to checked the existing decks
with the manufactures recommendation.
==PAGE:49==
3.3 House 1, traditional building
37
On Figure 3.10 it can be seen that plate P308 and P322 have enough bearing
capacity to function as a residential deck. However, plate P301 and P312 does
not sustain enough capacity to function as a residential deck after the renovation.
The check is made by comparing the actual span length in row 2 on Figure 3.10a
with the read value on Figure 3.10b.
Wind
In order to calculate the bearing capacity of the walls and to make a stability
check of the building, the wind load must be determined, [mf.16]. The wind
can either aﬀect the facades or the gables. Wind load on the facades, ie. the
transversely direction of the building, is the most critical. Therefore, only this
situation will be analyzed and the calculations and design values can be seen in
Appendix 3.3. Depending on which calculation is carried out, the correlation
between wind pressure on the wind side and the lee side must be taken into
account. This is the reason for using two diﬀerent values for the ﬁnal wind load.
One for elements and one for the stability check where the correlation is taken
into account.
Table 3.4: House 1: Results for the wind load acting on the facades in the
North direction.
Basic wind velocity
vb
21.5
m/s
Peak velocity pressure
qp
0.53
kN/m2
Characteristic Wind load, stability
wc,s
0.60
kN/m2
Characteristic Wind load, other
wc,o
0.53
kN/m2
Eccentricity
Before determining the vertical bearing elements, an analysis of the diﬀerent
eccentricities that work on the diﬀerent walls must be made. The eccentricities
are determined on basis of [Sta15], where the theory and formulas used will be
summarized brieﬂy below.
The total eccentricity, et, consists of diﬀerent contributions from some of these
the eccentricity in the top of the wall can be determined. Similarly, the residing
and largest eccentricity occurs in the middle third of the wall and this is found
from the top eccentricity and the resisting eccentricity contributions.
==PAGE:50==
38
Case studies
Figure 3.11: Principle for the eccentricity calculations used throughout this
theses, [Sta15].
• e1: Eccentricity occurring for normal forces from the deck resting directly
on the wall.
e1 = t
2 −1
3a1
(3.1)
• e2: Same as e1 just the opposite side
e2 = t
2 −1
2a2
(3.2)
• e3: Consideration of displacement of the center of gravity of the wall in
the upper ﬂoor.
• e5: Consideration of the observed Wall’s deviation from the plan form.
• e6: The transverse inﬂuence, for example from the wind load.
e6 = M
Q
(3.3)
==PAGE:51==
3.3 House 1, traditional building
39
• e0,top: Resulting eccentricity at the top of the wall
e0,top =
1
N1 + N2 + N3
(e1N1 −e2N2 + e3N3)
(3.4)
• et: The greatest resulting eccentricity on the middle third of the wall.
et = 2
3 · e0,top + e5 + e6
(3.5)
Since the eccentricity works diﬀerently for the diﬀerent load-bearing walls, each
situation will be presented below with a detailed drawing of the working eccen-
tricities. In relation to the eccentricity derived from the displacement of the
center of gravity, e3, is set to 10 mm in all cases corresponding to increased
control. Likewise, e5 is set to 10 mm for all cases.
The decks are assembled in such a way, that they work as one individual beam
over the main partition wall, which means that the deck on both sides only adds
one eccentricity. The most critical eccentricity is a triangular stress distribution
corresponding to Equation 3.1. This is illustrated in Figure 3.12a and 3.12b.
For the wall constructions where the deck only depend on one side, the situation
is slightly diﬀerent. These situations are illustrated in Figure 3.12c and 3.12d.
At situation 3.12d, e3 gives a negative value, which makes it most critical if e1
has a uniform stress distribution. Lastly Figure 3.12e illustrates the walls that
do not carry decks, which is eg. gable, ﬁre and ﬂat division walls.
(a) Main partition wall with same thick-
ness.
(b) Main partition wall with varies thick-
ness.
==PAGE:52==
40
Case studies
(c) Exterior
wall
with
same thickness.
(d) Exterior
wall
with
varies thickness.
(e) Inner wall with
same thickness.
Figure 3.12: House 1: Eccentricity situations for the diﬀerent walls.
In Table 3.5 and 3.6, the eccentricity of each examined walls are listed. For the
facade walls, where the wind load has a major inﬂuence on the eccentricity, the
eccentricity is determined for all 4 load cases and the most critical are shown
in the tables. In Appendix 3.4 all calculations of the eccentricities can be seen.
To determine the eccentricity from the wind load, the moment that the wind
causes are determined as:
STR1 : 0.24 kNm
STR2 : 0.00 kNm
STR3 : 0.79 kNm
STR4 : 0.79 kNm
==PAGE:53==
3.3 House 1, traditional building
41
Table 3.5: House 1: Results of the eccentricity calculations regarding the fa-
cades and the main partition wall. *S=Single and D=Dual partition
wall
e1
e3
e5
e6
et
[m]
[m]
[m]
[m]
[m]
S
D
S
D
S
D
S
D
S
D
Facade walls
2ND
0.02
0.02
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.38
0.57
0.402
0.590
1ST
0.10
0.10
0.13
0.13
0.01
0.01
0.04
0.05
0.132
0.136
Ground
0.10
0.10
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.044
0.045
Basement
0.10
0.10
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.035
0.035
Main partition wall
2ND
0.03
0.02
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.029
0.024
1ST
0.04
0.03
0.04
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.036
0.029
Ground
0.04
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.023
0.020
Basement
0.04
0.04
0.01
0.04
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.021
0.036
Table 3.6: House 1: Results from the eccentricity calculations regarding the
non bearing inner walls.
e1
e3
e5
e6
et
[m]
[m]
[m]
[m]
[m]
Staircase walls
2ND
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.010
1ST
0.03
0.04
0.01
0.00
0.032
Ground
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.020
Basement
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.019
Gable, Fire and ﬂat division walls
2ND
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
1ST
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
Ground
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
Basement
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
Vertical division, bearing
The load of the walls are determined at the top of the wall. Eg. at the ﬁrst
ﬂoor, the load from the ﬂoor divisions above and upwards are calculated. The
weight of the relevant ﬂoor is thus included in the consecutive ﬂoor. In other
words, it is only in the calculations of the foundation that the self-weight of the
==PAGE:54==
42
Case studies
basement walls are included. The load and the bearing capacity are determined
per running meter, where the load is based on self-loads, illuminated in the
archive material from the building archive of Hjørring municipality [Hjo17].
The total load can be seen in Appendix 3.5, where the critical load combination
is found.
Similarly, the calculations for the bearing capacity can be seen in
Appendix 3.6 based on Equation 3.6 from [mf.16] formula 8.20 with material
parameters from [13] and [Sta13b].
Rsd =
1
1 +
12fk
Eok · π2
 
hs
td −2et
!2 kt · Ac · fd
(3.6)
The facade walls on the top ﬂoor is not a massive wall, but a cavity wall consist-
ing of 1/2+1/2 brick. However, the two parts are connected with ﬁxed binders,
and the eﬀective width of the wall, can therefor be determined by equation 3.7
from [Sta13b] formula 5.11;
tef =
3q
ktef · t3
1 · t3
2
,
ktef = E1/E2
(3.7)
The bearing capacity is determined for a 1 meter massive wall, without taking
windows and doorways into account.
Stability made by cross-walls has nei-
ther been taken into account, which would give a signiﬁcantly higher carrying
capacity.
The fact that windows and doors are ignored in this analysis increases the
resulting bearing capacity. Vice versa this analysis disregards the existence of
cross walls, evidently decreasing the calculated capacity. Thus the calculations
assuming a massive straight piece for the most critical load explains a realistic
overview of the ratio between load and capacity.
In Table 3.7 to 3.8, the capacity, critical load combination, load, utilization and
residual capacity can be seen for the diﬀerent walls within the building.
==PAGE:55==
3.3 House 1, traditional building
43
Table 3.7: House 1: Results from the bearing capacity check of the bearing
walls, facades and main partition wall.
Load
combi.
Load
Capacity
Residual
capacity
Utilization
[−]
[kN/m]
[kN/m]
[kN/m]
[%]
S
D
S
D
S
D
S
D
Facades
2ND
STR2
9.8
8.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
100
100
1ST
STR1
40.4
37.5
10.1
7.5
0.0
0.0
100
100
Ground
STR2
67.7
63.4
155.1
154.0
87.4
90.6
43.7
42.0
Basement
STR2
96.8
92.5
368.6
367.7
271.8
275.2
26.3
25.2
Main partion wall
2ND
STR1
27.3
8.7
20.4
8.2
0.0
0.0
100
100
1ST
STR1
81.0
26.8
49.6
19.7
0.0
0.0
100
100
Ground
STR1
125.4
43.8
71.6
30.2
0.0
0.0
100
100
Basement
STR1
169.4
62.3
148.6
73.2
0.0
100
85.1
S = Single main partition wall ; D = Double partition wall at the staircases
Table 3.8: House 1: Results from the capacity calculations regarding the non-
bearing inner walls.
Load
combi.
Load
Capacity
Residual
capacity
Utilization
[−]
[kN/m]
[kN/m]
[kN/m]
[%]
Fire walls + Flat sdivision
2ND
STR2
5.2
43.4
38.2
12.0
1ST
STR2
15.6
43.4
27.8
36.0
Ground
STR2
26.0
43.4
17.4
60.0
Basement
STR2
36.5
43.4
6,9
84.1
Staircase walls
2ND
STR2
3.4
10.9
7.5
30.8
1ST
STR1
18.9
17.5
0.0
100
Ground
STR1
33.8
30.0
0.0
100
Basement
STR1
51.4
31.4
0.0
100
Gable walls
2ND
STR2
7.1
23.1
16.0
30.5
1ST
STR2
21.2
23.1
1.9
91.5
Ground
STR2
35.3
23.1
0.0
100
Basement
STR2
52.9
239.5
186.6
22.1
==PAGE:56==
44
Case studies
Foundation
As described previously in Section 3.3.1 the foundation is a line foundation.
However, there is insuﬃcient material to make a full bearing calculation of the
foundation. Therefore, the loads on the foundation are determined in Appendix
3.7, but the bearing capacity cannot be checked. During an actual renovation,
drill samples would be made together with an investigation of the dimensions
and the state of the existing foundations. Taking this into account along with
the loads listed in Table 3.9, a check of the bearing capacity should be made
together with an analysis of the foundation.
Table 3.9: House 1: Total loads on the foundation from all types of walls.
Load combi
Total load
Single
Dual
[-]
[kN/m]
[kN/m]
Facade
STR2
105.6
101.3
Main partition
STR1
175.3
68.1
Staircase
STR1
55.8
Gable
STR2
61.7
Fire and ﬂat division
STR2
45.3
Stability
Before a stability check can be performed, the wind load acting on the diﬀerent
stabilizing walls must be mapped. As a basis, the wind load aﬀects the entire
surface of the facades as a ﬂat load. To be able to check the stability the eﬀects
on each stabilizing wall must be determined. The procedure for this is listed
below:
• The wind load is assembled to line loads acting on each stabilizing wall
• The line load is converted to point loads acting at each deck. The deck
transfers the load to the stabilizing walls.
• The moment that occurs in the wall disk is determined as illustrated in
Figure 3.13. It is important to remember the impact of the overlaying
wall disks. Thus an additional link is added each time we move a ﬂoor
downwards.
==PAGE:57==
3.3 House 1, traditional building
45
When the moment is determined, the moment capacity must be determined
such that the stability can be checked. Determination of the moment capacity
is pointed out below:
• The dead load acting on each wall disk is determined
• Vertical bearing capacity is determined by Equation 3.6 without the area
link. The signiﬁcance of the area is introduced later in the calculations,
so it is not ignored.
• The minimum area is determined by a minimum lenght, as illustrated in
Figure 3.13.
• The eccentricity is determined based on the minimum length.
• The moment capacity is determined and checked by the acting moment.
The stability analysis is made for the wind exposed on the facades. The facades
are more exposed to wind than the gables because of the long facades and the
main partition walls. When the facades are exposed to wind all the transverse
walls will in principle contribute to obtain the wind load. The building consists
of 3/4 stones ﬁre- and ﬂat division walls and 1/2 stones light partition walls.
The calculations can be made either where all walls are taken into account or
only with some of the walls.
==PAGE:58==
46
Case studies
Figure 3.13: Absorption of the wind load in the stabilizing walls. Left, the
total wall plate is illustrate and one ﬂoor marked which red which
is show to the right. To illustrate the loads acting on each ﬂoor.
First a check is made to identify if the ﬁre- and ﬂat division walls obtains the
load equally. In this analysis the ﬂat division walls are found to be the critical
ones because they are the shortest. This check shows that there is not enough
capacity in the ﬂat division walls to distribute half the wind. Therefor a second
check is made, where the ﬁre walls obtain all the load.
This check gives a
maximum utilization of 78% for the most critical ﬁre wall. The stabilizing walls
in the second check are illustrated on Figure 3.14 together with the maximum
load width, which is used for the calculations as the inﬂuence of the gable walls
are ignored.
==PAGE:59==
3.3 House 1, traditional building
47
Figure 3.14: House 1: Red marks the maximum load width used for the sta-
bility calculations, green is the load bearing walls and orange is
the stabilizing walls.
All the calculations for the two checks can be seen in Appendix 3.8 and the
results of the second check is shown in Table 3.10. The check is made for the
three load combinations which consists a contribution from the wind load. Load
combination STR4 is the most critical one and therefor it is this results which
is listed in the table below.
Table 3.10: House 1: Stability check for House 1 using load combination STR4.
MEd
MRd
Utilization
[kNm]
[kNm]
[%]
2ND
75.87
171.84
44.2
1ST
303.47
592.31
51.2
Ground
682.80
870.23
78.5
Basement
929.37
1365.73
68.0
Overview
If the roof deck should be used for residential purposes, it would require tests to
determine if the carrying capacity is suﬃcient. Since the amount of reinforce-
ment varies throughout the deck, it would be diﬃcult to prove that the carrying
capacity is suﬃcient throughout the entire deck. It would therefor be easier to
establish a new deck in connection with the superstructure.
The stability study gives a maximum utilization of almost 79%. Although it is at
the high end, it is assumed that there is suﬃcient stability for a superstructure.
This is because the calculations is very conservative, as the contribution from
the gable walls are not taken into account, which would lower the utilization.
The analysis of the walls are the most comprehensive but also the most essential
component regarding whether a superstructure is realistic without extensive
==PAGE:60==
48
Case studies
renovation of the excising conditions.
The main partition wall is very congested in fact up to 145%. If a superstructure
is to be carried out, no additional load must be applied to the main partition
wall. It is therefore necessary either to provide very long decks that span all the
way across the building, or to set up an intermediate structure that transfers
the load from the superstructure away from the main partition wall and to the
facades. Likewise, the staircase walls are very overloaded and the gable walls are
slightly overloaded. Whereas the ﬁre and ﬂat division walls have a little residual
capacity with a maximum utilization of 84%. However, it is not suﬃcient to
carry a superstructure. Therefore, it depends on the facades, which are already
overloaded in the upper two ﬂoors due to a very high eccentricity from the wind
load. This eccentricity is determined by Equation 3.8. As seen, the eccentricity
depends on the size of the overlaying load N, the superstructure may therefor
work in favor of the existing structure.
e6 = M
N
(3.8)
The optimal relation with the superstructure will occur if the relation in Equa-
tion 3.8 makes zero so the eccentricity from the wind load is repealed. This
optimal situation is calculated in Appendix 3.9 and shown in Table 3.11. It can
be seen, that in this case the capacity increases signiﬁcantly for the two upper
ﬂoors, which are no longer overloaded. But even in this ﬁctitious situation which
illustrates the best possible situation, the maximum utilization is still 98%.
It must therefore be concluded that a superstructure for this building is only
possible if the existing structure is reinforced or a completely new static system
is established to carry the superstructure.
Table 3.11: House 1: Scenario where the eccentricity from the wind load it de-
ployed, compared to excising conditions for House 1. To illustrate
that even in this perfect situation, there is almost non residual
capacity.
Utilization excisting
Utilization e6 = 0
Single
Dual
Single
Dual
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
2ND
980.0
890.0
98.0
90.3
1ST
398.3
500.0
89.2
84.9
Ground
43.7
42.0
37.0
35.1
Basement
26.3
25.2
24.1
22.9
==PAGE:61==
3.4 House 2, insitu cast concrete
49
3.4
House 2, insitu cast concrete
The building was constructed in 1972 and is located in Kgs. Lyngby, Zealand.
This analysis focuses on a single building, however four equivalent buildings
were built at the same location. Two consisting of three ﬂoors, and another two
created with ﬁve ﬂoors and providing an elevator.
Figure 3.15: House 2: The red circle marks the investigated building on the
cadastral.
3.4.1
Registration
Throughout the following section, the collected archive material is compared to
the existing conditions found through an external visual inspection. As shown in
Figure 3.16. There are several hundred pages of archive material regarding the
cadastral, however not everything is essential for this building and this project.
Therefore, the most relevant building data from the archive material is collected
in Appendix 3.10, and the relevant drawings in the Prospectus 3.4. Similarly,
images from the external inspection of the building are collected in Prospectus
3.5. The registration is based on information found in the archive material and
the external inspection.
==PAGE:62==
50
Case studies
BBR information,[Eje17]
Address: Akademivej 29-45, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Lyngby Taarbæk municipality
Year: 1972
Floors: Basement + 3 residential ﬂoors
Cadastral + houseowners’ association: 10af Kgs. Lyngby By
(a) Facade north
(b) Facade north, drawing
(c) Facade south, drawing
(d) Facade south
==PAGE:63==
3.4 House 2, insitu cast concrete
51
(e) Gable
(f) Gable, drawing
Figure 3.16: House 2: Photos from the visual inspection and drawings from
the archive material. To give an inside of how the construction
is designed.
Main structure
The geometry of the building is a rectangular block with nine entrances. Bi-
cycles, prams, air-raid shelters, etc are placed in the basement. The remaining
ﬂoors are used for residential purposes. The transverse inner walls functions as
the bearing walls together with columns in the facade. The load bearing walls
and columns transfers the load to the foundation. The apartments have the
same design throughout the entire building, as seen on Figure 3.17.
(a) Floor level
==PAGE:64==
52
Case studies
(b) Basement level
Figure 3.17: House 2: Basement and ﬂoor level.
Roof
The building has a ﬂat roof top with a 6.5 cm polypropylene plate and covered
with three layers of built-up cladding. The drainage is constructed as internal
drains. The load from the roof is absorbed by all the bearing transverse inner
walls and the columns. Above each staircase there is a cupola skylight window.
Furthermore, the most signiﬁcant height dimensions can be seen on Figure 3.18.
Figure 3.18: House 2: Elevation drawing with heights used in the calculations.
Horizontal division
The horizontal divisions consists of insitu casted concrete slabs. The slabs are
18 cm reinforced concrete, except above the basement where it is only 10 cm
thick. The roof deck is constructed in the same way as the other ﬂoors, that is
a 18 cm thick reinforced concrete slab. The slabs function as a double tensed
plate laying on the inner walls and the columns.
==PAGE:65==
3.4 House 2, insitu cast concrete
53
Vertical division
The vertical bearing structures consists of almost all the inner walls. All the
bearing walls are 15 cm thick on each ﬂoor, and without any reinforcements.
The bearing columns have the same dimensions in the entire height, measuring
200 mm X 450 mm and 200 mm X 840 mm depending on whether they are
located by the balcony side, or at the street side.
The facade elements are non bearing and consists of carpentry elements with
exterior clad of eternit.
Likewise, the gables are non bearing, and they are
constructed with insulated sandwich elements. The few light division walls have
diﬀerent designs depending on whether they are located by kitchen or bathroom.
Foundation
The foundation type is a combination of line and point foundation. The line
foundation is found below the bearing inner walls and the facades. The point
foundation is used below the columns. The documented information concerning
the foundation are minimal.
Similarly the information regarding soil condi-
tions and drill samples are sparse. The bearing capacity of the foundation will
therefore not be subject to further investigation. However, the loads on the
foundation will be determined.
Figure 3.19: House 2: Foundation plan for the house.
3.4.2
Structural calculations
In this section the existing building bearing capacity will be investigated for
House 2. Calculations regarding staircases, balconies, and the roof construction
will not be made.
Due to the fact, that the roof top will be reinforced in
case of a renovation. All the calculations regarding the existing elements for
House 2, can be seen i Appendix 3.11 to 3.20.
In this section the essential
results will be presented along with a presentation of the calculation methods.
Furthermore, the results will be discussed regarding the inﬂuence on a future
==PAGE:66==
54
Case studies
renovation including a superstructure.
On Figure 3.20 the plan structure is
illustrated along with the measurements used for the calculations.
Figure 3.20: House 2: Plan section with measurements used for the calcula-
tions together with the existing room arrangement
Calculation values
From the registration, general information regarding the building was docu-
mented. However, before the calculations can be carried out, some essential
values must be determined. The material parameters are based on the archive
material, found in Appendix 3.10 and [mf.16]. .
Consequence class: Medium consequence class, CC2
KFI: 1.0
ψ0: 0.5
Terrain category: III
Concrete values: Compressive strength 24 MPa and partial coeﬃcient for
concrete cast on site; 1.6 for unreinforced concrete and 1.45 for reinforced
concrete.
Reinforcement values: Compressive strength 235MPa for the columns and
500 for the slabs (Tentor steel), with partial coeﬃcient 1.2.
==PAGE:67==
3.4 House 2, insitu cast concrete
55
The roof’s inﬂuence on the other structures will not be included in the calcu-
lations. This is because the roof is changed in case of a superstructure. The
vertical and horizontal loads are transferred through the construction down to
the foundation as seen on Figure 3.21.
(a) Vertical static system
(b) Horizontal static system
Figure 3.21: House 2: Static system for the vertical and horizontal loads. To
illustrate the loads way through the building.
Horizontal division
The slab structures in this building are reinforced concrete cast on site. The
slab over the basement is 10 cm thick and the remaining slabs are 18 cm thick.
The load on the slab is determined on bases of the presented load combinations,
the calculations can be seen in Appendix 3.11. It serves as a double-sided plate
with an area similar to one apartment. The plate is supported by inner walls
and columns in the facades, see Figure 3.22.
==PAGE:68==
56
Case studies
Figure 3.22: House 2: Static system for deck plates. The system will be mir-
rored for apartments on the left side of the staircases. The purple
rectangles marks the columns.
Due to the complexity of the plate relative to dimensions and support condi-
tions, a common look at the plate, with e.g. modeling of break pattern theory,
will not provide an exact result of the plate. This theory is used in the exist-
ing calculations found in the archive material. In these calculations there are
conduced some assumptions. For example the eﬀect of the columns are ignored.
However, all the assumptions are crafted with a high safe margin. But, in this
project the residual capacity of the existing construction is of high interest,
when implementing a superstructure. It is therefore important to determine
the bearing capacity as precise as possible. So it was chosen to make a FEM
model of the plate, using ABAQUS. This gives a precise calculation of the load
distribution of the supporting walls and columns, as well as the moment force
on the plate. Basic information about the ABAQUS model is listed below:
Mesh: In the ABAQUS model a triangular elements, STRI3, is used. There
are 1582 elements used for the entire plate. The element distribution can
be seen on Figure 3.23a.
Deﬂection and deformation: To see if the supports are deﬁned correctly, the
deformation of the plate have been studied. On Figure 3.23b the deﬂection
can be seen, the blue color marks almost zero deﬂection. On that ﬁgure it
looks like the deﬂection is zero, on the right side of the columns. Therefor,
==PAGE:69==
3.4 House 2, insitu cast concrete
57
Figure 3.23c has been made, here it can be seen that there is a small
deformation on the right side of the column, zero deﬂection at the column
and a large deﬂection on the left side of the column.
(a) Mesh
for
the
deck
plate from ABAQUS
(b) Deﬂection
of
the
plate from ABAQUS
(c) Deformation
of
the
plate
from ABAQUS
Figure 3.23: House 2:
Element sectioning and deformation ﬁgures from
ABAQUS. Shows that the plate deforms as expected and are
maintained at the supports and columns.
Before the result can be drawn from ABAQUS, it is important to check the
model to see if it is modeled properly. This is done by checking the reaction
in one of the columns, by a simple hand calculation. A upper and lower limit
of the reaction is determined, depending on how big an area of the plate the
column carries. The minimum area is marked on Figure 3.24 along with the
maximum area. The reaction is found by multiplying the area with the surface
load acting on the deck. If the model is correctly modeled, the equation will be
fulﬁlled:
Rmin < RABAQUS < Rmax
(3.9)
The results are illustrated below, showing that the conditions are met and the
model is thus approved, and can be used in the following calculations. Related
calculations can be found in Appendix 3.12.
49.8 kN < 52.2 kN < 56.7 kN OK!
==PAGE:70==
58
Case studies
Figure 3.24: House 2: Check of ABAQUS model, there green marks the mini-
mum load the column obtains and the blue marks the maximum
load.
Based on the ABAQUS model, the distribution of the load on the diﬀerent
supports can be found. In Table 3.12 the result is listed. At the bottom two
rows of the table, a check is made to see if the result is as expected. The sum of
the reactions, from ABAQUS, is compared with the total load on the plate. The
calculations for this can be seen in Appendix 3.12. The naming of the diﬀerent
walls and columns can be seen in Figure 3.25.
Table 3.12: House 2: Load distribution from the slab plates to the supporting
walls and columns. The sum of the loads corresponds to the total
load acting on the deck.
Load ABAQUS
Load
[kN]
[kN/m]
Column 1
52.23
-
Column 2
46.11
-
Wall 1
44.98
9.37
Wall 2
58.96
24.56
Wall 3
37.54
12.51
Wall 4
65.98
27.49
Wall 5
59.81
11.08
Wall 6
100.93
7.65
ABAQUS total
466.53
-
Total load
466.53
-
==PAGE:71==
3.4 House 2, insitu cast concrete
59
Since the roof deck is the same construction as the remaining decks, the bearing
capacity is checked to see if it can be approved for usage in relation to a super-
structure. The deck is reinforced in both directions per 200 mm with tendon
steel Ø8. In order to check the capacity, three conditions must be fulﬁlled. Be-
low the three conditions are shown, along with the results and the control. The
moment load comes from the FEM-model and the calculation method is based
on [mf.16] side 190 and can be found in Appendix 3.13.
Reinforcement distance:
s ≤min {2h; 250mm}
⇒
200 ≤min {360mm; 250mm}
OK!
(3.10)
Moment capacity:
|MEd ≤MRd|
⇒
12.16kNm ≤16.63kNm
OK!
(3.11)
Reinforcement degree:
ωmin < ω < ωbal
⇒
0.033 < 0.039 < 0.511
OK!
(3.12)
Wind
Before calculations, regarding the vertical elements, can be performed, the wind
load on the building must be determined. The wind can aﬀect either the facades
or the gables.
In this case the load on the facades will be analyzed.
The
calculations and design values can be found in Appendix 3.14 based on [mf.16].
When the wind load regarding the stability check is determined, the correlation
between the wind pressure on the wind side and the lee side must be taken into
account, this is not the case for the load used to check the elements bearing
capacity.
Table 3.13: House 2: Results for the wind load acting on the facades in the
North direction.
Basic wind velocity
vb
21.5
m/s
Peak velocity pressure
qp
0.51
kN/m2
Characteristic Wind load, stability
wc,s
0.54
kN/m2
Characteristic Wind load, other
wc,o
0.51
kN/m2
==PAGE:72==
60
Case studies
Eccentricity
Before the bearing capacity of the walls and columns can be made, the eccen-
tricity must be determined. The eccentricity is determined in the same way as
described for House 1, in Section 3.3.2, and the theory will therefore not be pre-
sented in this section. In Table 3.14 the eccentricity of both walls and columns
are listed and the calculations are gathered in Appendix 3.15.
Table 3.14: House 2: Eccentricity values for the walls and columns.
e1
e2
e3
e5
et
[m]
[m]
[m]
[m]
[m]
Wall 2
2ND
0.05
0.04
0.01
0.01
0.043
1ST
0.05
0.04
0.01
0.01
0.016
Ground
0.05
0.04
0.01
0.01
0.017
Basement
0.05
0.04
0.01
0.01
0.017
Wall 5
2ND
0.03
-
0.01
0.01
0.027
1ST
0.03
-
0.01
0.01
0.022
Ground
0.03
-
0.01
0.01
0.019
Basement
0.03
-
0.01
0.01
0.018
Column 1
2ND
0.03
-
0.01
0.01
0.032
1ST
0.03
-
0.01
0.01
0.023
Ground
0.03
-
0.01
0.01
0.020
Basement
0.03
-
0.01
0.01
0.019
Column 2
2ND
0.03
-
0.01
0.01
0.032
1ST
0.03
-
0.01
0.01
0.029
Ground
0.03
-
0.01
0.01
0.024
Basement
0.03
-
0.01
0.01
0.022
Vertical division, walls
As described above, the inner walls are the bearing parts for this building, all
150 mm thick. The load from the deck is split out on the diﬀerent walls and
determined in ABAQUS, as described in the privies section. In Table 3.12 the
load from the deck on each bearing wall are listed, and on Figure 3.25 the num-
bering of the walls can be seen. However, the deck is not the only contribution
of load on the walls. Therefor the total load contribution is determined for the
==PAGE:73==
3.4 House 2, insitu cast concrete
61
four diﬀerent load combinations, see the determined loads in Appendix 3.16. In
addition, to the load provided by the deck, additional load is found from the
staircase, facade elements, balconies, and dead load. Depending on the walls
placement and direction it is diﬀerent which loads it takes up.
Wall 1: deck, facades and dead load
Wall 2: deck, staircase and dead load
Wall 3: deck, staircase and dead load
Wall 4: deck, staircase hallway and dead load
Wall 5: deck, facades, balcony and dead load
Wall 6: deck, facades, balcony and dead load
Based on that, the most critical staircase wall, and the most critical facade wall
is wall 2 and 5 respectively. So if these two walls are okay, the rest will be too.
Figure 3.25: House 2: Naming of the bearing walls and columns, used in the
calculations.
The bearing capacity of the walls are checked for unreinforced eccentrics loaded
walls, by the theory described in [Jen12] page 211 onwards. All calculations can
be seen in Appendix 3.17, and the criteria for the bearing capacity check are:
==PAGE:74==
62
Case studies
Check if 2 order eﬀects can be ignored:
Wall 2 : λ ≤λmax
⇒
56.17 ≤86
OK!
(3.13)
Wall 5 : λ ≤λmax
⇒
62.79 ≤86
OK!
(3.14)
Capacity check:
Wall 2 : NEd ≤NRd
⇒
477kN ≤3044kN
OK!
(3.15)
Wall 5 : NEd ≤NRd
⇒
995kN ≤6061kN
OK!
(3.16)
Vertical division, columns
As for the walls, the load on the columns from the deck construction are also
determined in ABAQUS, shown in Table 3.12. Before determining the bearing
capacity of the columns, the columns connections and supports are investigated.
In the archive material, a detail drawing of the columns are found, and it is
illustrated on Figure 3.26 along with the static system for the columns.
(a) Construction of the columns
(b) Static system for the columns
Figure 3.26: House 2: Information about the bearing columns in the facades
which are found in the archive material, compared with static
system for how the columns behave.
==PAGE:75==
3.4 House 2, insitu cast concrete
63
In addition to the load from the deck construction determined in ABAQUS,
the columns are also loaded by the balconies, facades, and by dead load. The
total load impact can be seen in Appendix 3.18. The calculations of the bearing
capacity of the reinforced eccentric loaded columns are based on method one,
described on page 219 of [Jen12]. The calculations can be found in Appendix
3.19 and the result regarding the two columns can be inspected below:
Reinforcement ratio:
Column 1 : 0.002 < ρ < 0.04
⇒
0.002 < 0.010 < 0.04
OK! (3.17)
Column 2 : 0.002 < ρ < 0.04
⇒
0.002 < 0.007 < 0.04
OK! (3.18)
Slenderness ratio, can 2 order eﬀects be ignored:
Column 1 : λ ≤λlim
⇒
45.38 ≤29.04
NOT
OK!
(3.19)
2 order eﬀects must be included
Column 2 : λ ≤λlim
⇒
45.38 ≤45.95
OK!
(3.20)
Normal force:
Column 1 : NEd ≤NRd
⇒
306kN ≤2182kN
OK!
(3.21)
Column 2 : NEd ≤NRd
⇒
215kN ≤4072kN
OK!
(3.22)
Moment capacity:
Column 1 : MEd ≤MRd
⇒
6.82kNm ≤60.09kNm
OK!
(3.23)
Column 2 : MEd ≤MRd
⇒
4.80kNm ≤93.37kNm
OK!
(3.24)
Foundation
As described during the registration, there are two diﬀerent types of foundation
under the building. This is due to the fact, that the building consists of both
bearing walls and columns, which use line and point foundation respectively.
==PAGE:76==
64
Case studies
Corresponding to House 1, there will not be made any calculations of the foun-
dations bearing capacity, due to insuﬃcient information about the foundation
dimensions and the soil conditions. The impact on the various foundations are
determined in Appendix 3.16 and shown in Table 3.15, so the basis is laid for a
future capacity check.
Table 3.15: House 2: Critical load combination together with the critical load
on the foundation. The columns gives the load on the point foun-
dation and the walls the total load on the line foundation.
Load combi.
Total load
[-]
[kN]
Column 1
STR2
321.62
Column 2
STR1
226.38
Wall 2
STR1
509.19
Wall 5
STR2
1060.71
Stability
Although the carrying capacity of all the bearing structures has been individu-
ally reviewed, the total building check is missing. This is demonstrated by doing
a stability study of the building. The stability check is based on [mf.10], where
the resistance to shear forces, tipping, and compressive strength are checked.
The three conditions are listed below with associated explanatory ﬁgures. The
Dead load contribution from the slabs supported at the wall element, q, is not
included in the calculations, this assumption is on the safe side for the stability.
Shear capacity:
H′ ≤µ (N ′
i−1)
;
µ = 0.5
(3.25)
Simple moment capacity:
e ≤1
2b
(3.26)
N ′ ≤c · nmax
;
nmax = 1200kN/m
(3.27)
==PAGE:77==
3.4 House 2, insitu cast concrete
65
(a) Static system and forces of the
wind
load
on
the
stabilizing
walls.
(b) Detail of stability check of one ﬂoor
element, there c is the compression
zone.
Figure 3.27: Background for the stability calculations; Absorption of the wind
load and other loads on the stabilizing walls and how they aﬀects
the wall plate, [mf.10]
The stability study is made for wind load acting on the longitudinal facades.
First the wind load must be determined for the four diﬀerent load cases. These
calculations can be seen in Appendix 3.20. The stabilizing walls in the check
are marked on Figure 3.28 with orange. The shorties wall is the wall which
response to wall 5 in the previous section. It is therefor the most critical when
the absorption of the wind is distributed equally between the walls. The wall
is checked for the three conditions listed above, and the results can be seen
in Table 3.16. Load combination STR4 is the most critical for all cases, and
therefor the one to be shown in the table.
==PAGE:78==
66
Case studies
Figure 3.28: House 2: Stabilizing walls; Red marks the maximum load width,
green the load bearing walls, orange the load and stabilizing walls
and purple the load bearing columns.
Table 3.16: House 2: Stability check results.
H’
µ (N ′i−1)
e
1/2b
N’
c · nmax
Check
[kN]
[kN]
[m]
[m]
[kN]
[kN]
[-]
2ND
6.76
8.16
1.16
2.70
16.33
3696.11
OK
1ST
20.29
40.82
0.93
2.70
81.65
4252.89
OK
Ground
33.82
97.98
0.87
2.70
195.96
4392.08
OK
Basement
46.15
178.17
0.78
2.70
356.34
4616.97
OK
Overview
Capacity check of the deck construction shows that the roof slabs have suﬃ-
cient bearing capacity to be used as deck in a superstructure. The walls have
incredibly high residual capacity with a maximum utilization of approximately
16%. This indicates that the thickness of the walls are not based on the load,
but rather in relation to the minimum requirements for ﬁre and sound protec-
tion. This theory is conﬁrmed by checking the surrounding ﬁve-story buildings
built together with this building. The wall dimensions in these buildings are
also 15 cm, although the load is 40% larger. This residual capacity provides
good opportunities for establishing a superstructure without any changes in the
existing construction.
The situation relating the columns are the same as for the walls; they have a
maximum utilization of approximately 14%. The dimensions of the columns
are equivalent to those in the ﬁve storey surrounding buildings. This means
that the columns have the capacity to carry by a superstructure. But since the
walls have such high residual capacity, it might not be necessary to extend the
columns up in the superstructure. However, this also depends on which facade
solutions are chosen for the superstructure and how it is ﬁxed.
The stability study also shows good results. The maximum utilization is found
==PAGE:79==
3.5 House 3, concrete elements
67
at the top ﬂoor at about 83% for check 1.
However, a superstructure will
work in favor of the construction, and its utilization will therefor be reduced
by establishing a superstructure. The superstructure, on the other hand, will
cause a higher moment due to the increased wind load, which aﬀects check 2
in the stability study. But, as the superstructure also causes greater dead load,
it is assumed that the ratio e = M/N does not change suﬃciently to make the
stability critical. Unlike the ﬁrst two checks, where an increase of the dead load
work in favor of the construction, this is not in favor for check 3. However, with
an utilization of only 7.7% at the existing conditions there is no risk related to
establishing a superstructure.
It can therefore be concluded that the building has suﬃcient bearing- and sta-
bilizing capacity in order to establish a superstructure without changes in the
existing structures conditions. This is only when looking at the capacity. The
requirements for ﬁre safety must also be meet, which will be investigated in
Section 3.6.
3.5
House 3, concrete elements
The building is from 1972 and placed in Helsingør, Zealand. It was built as
an individual building, but with nine equivalent buildings.
The ten buildings
were built in two laps: eight in the ﬁrst, and two buildings in the second. The
investigated building was constructed in the second step along with a four ﬂoored
building. First step consist of ﬁve buildings with four ﬂoors, and three buildings
with eight ﬂoors. The reason that the height of the buildings varies is due to the
inﬂuence of shadows and sunlight.
==PAGE:80==
68
Case studies
Figure 3.29: House 3: The red circle marks the investigated building on the
cadastral.
3.5.1
Registration
The found archive material is compared to the existing conditions observed by
an external visual inspection, as shown in Figure 3.30. There are several hundred
pages of archive material for the cadastral where not everything is essential for
this building and this project. Therefore, the relevant building data from the
archive material is collected in Appendix 3.21 and the relevant drawings in the
Prospectus 3.6. Similarly, images from the external inspection of the building
are collected in Prospectus 3.7. The registration is based on information found
in the archive material and the external inspection.
BBR information,[Eje17]
Address: Sydvej 18-24, 3000 Helsingør, Helsingør municipality
Year: 1972
Floors: Basement + 3 residential ﬂoors
Cadastral + houseowners’ association: 74ad Helsingør common
==PAGE:81==
3.5 House 3, concrete elements
69
(a) Facade north
(b) Facade north, drawing
(c) Facade south, drawing
(d) Facade south
(e) Gable
(f) Gable, drawing
Figure 3.30: House 3: Photos from the visual inspection and drawings from
the archive material. To give any inside of the building design.
==PAGE:82==
70
Case studies
Main structure
The geometry of the building is a rectangular block with 4 entrances.
The
basement is used for bicycles, prams, air-raid shelters etc and all the remaining
ﬂoors are used for residents. The bearing walls consists of the transverse inner
walls and they lead the load to the foundation. The design of the apartments
are the same throughout the entire building as seen on Figure 3.31.
(a) Floor level
(b) Basement level
Figure 3.31: House 3: Basement and ﬂoor layout.
Roof
There is a ﬂat roof top on the building, made out of asphalt, polyhor plate
7.5cm, 1.5 cm wood concrete and 3 layers of rooﬁng felt on the top. All the
bearing transverse inner walls are together of absorbing the load from the roof.
Each staircase have a skylight window as seen on Figure 3.32 together with the
most signiﬁcant dimensions.
==PAGE:83==
3.5 House 3, concrete elements
71
Figure 3.32: House 3: Elevation drawing of House 3, with essential height
measurements used throughout the calculations.
Horizontal division
The horizontal division above the basement is a 8 cm thick concrete plate. The
rest of the horizontal divisions including the roof division is 18 cm perforated
plates reinforced per each 15 cm. The plates function as a single tensed plate
laying on the transverse inner walls.
Vertical division, bearing
All the vertical divisions are constructed as prefabricated elements. The vertical
bearing inner walls consist of 15 cm thick concrete walls without any reinforce-
ment. Except for the gable walls which are 20 cm thick. The facades are not a
part of the bearing structure and they are designed as sandwich elements. The
few light divisions consists of 6.4 cm thick concrete walls.
Foundation
Pile foundation are used as foundation type in this building. In addition to the
other buildings the carrying capacity of the foundation will not be conducted
due to the limitation of information. However, the loads that are transferred to
the foundation will be determined.
==PAGE:84==
72
Case studies
3.5.2
Structural calculations
The capacity of the existing construction will be investigated in this section and
potential residual capacity will be documented. As for the two former buildings
there will not be made any calculations regarding staircases, balconies, and the
roof construction. In Appendix 3.22 to 3.27 the calculations regarding House 3
can be found. Only the essential results will be presented in the report along
with theory if necessary. At last the results impact on a superstructure will be
provided.
Figure 3.33: House 3: Plan section with measurements used for the calcula-
tions together with the existing room arrangement
Calculation values
General information about the building can be found in the previous registration
of the building. Consequence class along with other essential values are listed
below, material parameters is found in the archive material Appendix 3.21 and
[mf.16].
Consequence class: Medium consequence class, CC2
==PAGE:85==
3.5 House 3, concrete elements
73
KFI: 1.0
ψ0: 0.5
Terrain category: III
Concrete values: Compressive strength 24 MPa and partial coeﬃcient for pre-
fabricated elements of unreinforced concrete 1.55.
Figure 3.34 shows the vertical and horizontal loads way through the building.
Inﬂuence from the roof top is not included, while it is changed in case a super-
structure is established.
(a) Vertical static system
(b) Horizontal static system
Figure 3.34: House 3: Static systems for the vertical and horizontal loads, to
illustrate the loads way through the building.
Horizontal division
The deck construction consists of 18 cm prefabricated plates with reinforcement
per 15 cm, except above the basement where the plate is only 8 cm thick. The
load on the plates can be seen in Appendix 3.22, where it is determined for the
ﬁre load combinations and the critical one is used in the subsequent calculations.
The deck is supported by the transverse inner walls as illustrated on Figure 3.35.
==PAGE:86==
74
Case studies
Figure 3.35: House 3: Left, the span direction of the deck plates is marked
with orange and on the right the division of the plates is marked
with red.
In order to make a capacity calculation of the deck plates, to assess if the roof
deck can be used in conjunction with a superstructure, some information about
the structure are necessary.
The design of the tire is not found in the archive material, the same applies
to the reinforcement type and strength. This is due to the fact, that all the
dimensions have been made according to the manufacturer’s reference, which
was standard practice at the time of construction. However, it has not been
possible to ﬁnd information from the manufacturer or load capacity tables, as
the company has changed its name and ownership repeatedly and does not exist
today.
It could be chosen to make some assumptions for the missing data and then
calculate a likely bearing capacity. However, this part is not essential for this
project and therefore omitted.
Wind
Calculations regarding the vertical elements can be performed when the wind
load on the building is determined. The wind load aﬀecting the facades will be
analyzed. The calculations and design values can be found in Appendix 3.23
based on [mf.16]. When the wind load for the stability check is determined, the
correlation between the wind pressure on the wind side and the lee side must be
taken into account, this is not the case for the load used to check the elements
bearing capacity.
==PAGE:87==
3.5 House 3, concrete elements
75
Table 3.17: House 3: Results for the wind load acting on the facades in the
North direction, used for the stability calclations.
Basic wind velocity
vb
21.5
m/s
Peak velocity pressure
qp
0.50
kN/m2
Characteristic Wind load, stability
wc,s
0.53
kN/m2
Characteristic Wind load, other
wc,o
0.50
kN/m2
Eccentricity
Before the bearing capacity of the walls can be made, the eccentricity must be
determined, as done for House 2. The eccentricity is determined in the same
way as described for House 1 and House 2. In Table 3.18 the eccentricity for
the two most critical walls can be found and the calculations are gathered in
Appendix 3.24.
Table 3.18: House 3: Eccentricity values for the walls.
e1
e2
e3
e5
et
[m]
[m]
[m]
[m]
[m]
Wall 1
2ND
0.05
0.04
0.01
0.01
0.014
1ST
0.05
0.04
0.01
0.01
0.016
Ground
0.05
0.04
0.01
0.01
0.017
Basement
0.05
0.04
0.01
0.01
0.017
Wall 2
2ND
0.05
0.04
0.01
0.01
0.019
1ST
0.05
0.04
0.01
0.01
0.018
Ground
0.05
0.04
0.01
0.01
0.017
Basement
0.05
0.04
0.01
0.01
0.017
Vertical division, bearing
As for House 2, the bearing walls are all 15 cm thick and the most critical wall
with and without load from the staircase is located, corresponding to House 2,
the load determination is in Appendix 3.25. The two critical walls are shown
on Figure 3.36 together with load width.
==PAGE:88==
76
Case studies
Figure 3.36: House 3: V1 shows the most critical wall without load exposure
from the staircase and V2 the critical wall with load exposure
from the staircase. In both cases the red marks the load width.
The capacity of the two walls are checked for unreinforced eccentrics loaded
walls by the same theory used at House 2 from [Jen12]. The calculations can
be seen in Appendix 3.26 where the capacity is checked, the results are shown
below;
Check if 2 order eﬀects can be ignored:
Wall 1 : λ ≤λmax
⇒
59.89 ≤86
OK!
(3.28)
Wall 2 : λ ≤λmax
⇒
59.51 ≤86
OK!
(3.29)
Capacity check:
Wall 1 : NEd ≤NRd
⇒
1063kN ≤7530kN
OK!
(3.30)
Wall 2 : NEd ≤NRd
⇒
709kN ≤6545kN
OK!
(3.31)
==PAGE:89==
3.5 House 3, concrete elements
77
Foundation
The registration section informs that the foundation form is pile foundation.
However, the dimension and distance between the piles are not found in the
archive material. The total load on the foundation is therefore determined per
meter, Appendix 3.25, so it can be converted easily into the speciﬁc load on each
pile, when the distance is known. In case of a renovation the existing foundation
conditions will be investigated along with soil conditions. The capacity can, on
basis of that, be investigated for the load shown in Table 3.19.
Table 3.19: House 3: Critical load combination together with the critical load
on the foundation. The load is determined per meter.
Load combi.
Total load
[-]
[kN/m]
Wall 1
STR1
187
Wall 2
STR1
145
Stability
The stability check is made exactly as for House 2 and will therefore only be
presented shortly.
As for House 2 the theory from [mf.10] is used to check
the stability. The check is made for wind acting on the longitudinal facades,
calculations for the wind load can be seen in Appendix 3.27. On Figure 3.37
the stabilizing walls for the calculations are marked with orange together with
the max. load width. The walls are checked for the criteria listed under House
2 and the result can be seen in Table 3.20.
Figure 3.37: House 3: Stabilizing walls; Red marks the maximum load width,
green the load bearing walls and orange the load and stabilizing
walls.
==PAGE:90==
78
Case studies
Table 3.20: House 3: Results for the stability check.
H’
µ (N ′i−1)
e
1/2b
N’
c · nmax
Check
[kN]
[kN]
[m]
[m]
[kN]
[kN]
[-]
2ND
17.42
16.60
1.36
5.90
33.19
10909.47
NOT OK
1ST
52.25
82.98
1.10
5.90
165.95
11564.37
OK
Ground
87.09
199.14
1.02
5.90
398.29
11728.10
OK
Basement
122.26
365.42
1.00
5.90
656.36
11781.67
OK
Overview
As the result for House 3 is very similar to the result of House 2, they are only
shortly discussed. The deck capacity is not checked because of lack of informa-
tion. If there is a desire to use the excising roof deck in the new superstructure,
the capacity must be checked during renovation. The residual capacity of the
walls are very big, as the dimension is determined based on ﬁre requirements
and not load aﬀection. This gives favourable conditions for a superstructure.
The maximum utilization is a bit higher than that of House 2, with a maximum
utilization in check 1 at 105%. However, a superstructure works in favor of
check 1 and the result is therefor not critical.
Overall, the results points to a conclusion, that there are suﬃcient bearing and
stabilizing capacity in order to establish a superstructure without changes in
the existing conditions. If so the ﬁre safety is also suﬃcient for House 3.
3.6
Fire
In Chapter 2 the diﬀerent laws and regulations where introduced and the re-
quirements for the three cases listed. Therefor, the three houses are all checked
to see if they fulﬁll the ﬁre safety regulations. As it was concluded in Chapter
2 the development and tightening of the ﬁre safety regulations throughout the
time period 1950-1980 is not signiﬁcant, although some changes where incorpo-
rated. The law and regulations have been more accurate and the level of details
to prevent ﬁre has been increased. This indicates that all the houses can be
checked equally even though House 1 is build 16 years earlier.
From the Building Regulations in 1961 and forward there is a demand for rescue
openings on each ﬂoor in each apartment. These openings must be placed so
that there is free access for the ﬁre service and they must have a certain size.
==PAGE:91==
3.6 Fire
79
Figure 3.38 shows the rescue openings for the three cases with dimensions to
illustrate that the sizes are fulﬁlled. It should be mentioned that the rescue
windows in all cases are tilt windows, therefor the eﬃcient opening height is
only half of the total height. The openings can all be reached by the ﬁre service
since they are facing the road side of the buildings.
(a) House 1
(b) House 2
(c) House 3
Figure 3.38: Rescue opening marked on one staircase section for each house.
Dimensions for the openings are the same for each apartment in
each staircase section. All the rescue openings fulﬁlls the require-
ments of the construction time.
Likewise, the Building Regulations in 1961 demands that the staircase is at
minimum 1 meter wide with a high of 2 meters and has a smoke hatch (1m2).
Furthermore, there most be free access to open air through a door spanning at
least 0.9x2.0 meters which opens in the escape direction without any lock. All
these requirements are fulﬁlled for the three houses.
The Building Regulations in 1966 required that the buildings must not be placed
closer than 2.5 meters from neighboring boundaries. Another demand is that
the apartment doors must be BD-entredoor-30 and BD-door-60 for the base-
ment. The mentioned regulation is more detailed than the previous ones. The
requirements for the doors are not more strict just more accurate. It is like-
==PAGE:92==
80
Case studies
wise a requirement that a ﬁre cell must maximum be 150 m2 and a ﬁre section
maximum 600 m2. The building divisions are seen at Figure 3.39. Furthermore,
the escape routes are marked with green arrows and the rescue openings with a
purple R.
The horizontal ﬁre divisions consists of the basement deck and the top deck due
to the regulations. But in all three cases the remaining ﬂoors all fulﬁlls the ﬁre
requirements for a ﬁre section, therefor they are marked with a pale red line.
These ﬂoors also represents the horizontal ﬁre division for the ﬁre cells, because
each apartment is a ﬁre cell. That fact can be seen on Figure a,c and e at Figure
3.39, where the ﬁre cells are marked with blue. The vertical ﬁre divisions for
the ﬁre sections are marked with red. Each staircase is a ﬁre section and every
other apartment is a section. All ﬁre cells are below 150 m2 and all ﬁre sections
are below 600 m2 in all the houses due to the requirements.
(a) Vertical ﬁre division for House 1
(b) Horizontal ﬁre division for House 1
==PAGE:93==
3.6 Fire
81
(c) Vertical ﬁre division for House 2
(d) Horizontal ﬁre division for House 2
(e) Vertical ﬁre division for House 3
(f) Horizontal ﬁre division for House 3
Figure 3.39: Vertical and horizontal ﬁre division for the three houses. Pale
line indicates that the part is ﬁre safe but is it not a request at
the time of construction.
Some requirements cannot be checked now, but the buildings are reviewed and
approved at the building time, therefor it can be concluded that these claims
are respected. This concerns eg. electrical installations in staircases and it must
be possible to open the smoke hatch from the ground level.
All requirements for constructional parts are listed in Table 3.21. All the ﬁre
walls goes through the whole building, and the holes in the basements are closed
with BS-door-60 as required for all three houses. For the vertical bearing con-
==PAGE:94==
82
Case studies
struction walls such as: staircases, ﬂat divisions, ﬁre, and main partition the
minimum dimensions for all cases are checked and are suﬃcient.
Table 3.21: Overview of the ﬁre requirements for structural parts for the 3
houses is fulﬁll for the requirements at the construction time.
Horizontal
divisions
House 1
House 2
House 3
Roof
Floors
Type
Bauma 15cm
Reinforced
concrete 18cm
Larsen
&
Nielsen 18cm
Requirement
1950 →
√BS-*B-60
√BS-*B-60
√BS-*B-60
Basement
Type
Reinforced
concrete 10cm
Reinforced
concrete 10cm
Reinforced
concrete 8cm
Requirement
1950 →
√BS-*B-60
√BS-*B-60
√BS-*B-60
Vertical di-
visions
House 1 [TI17]
House
2
[BF17]
House
3
[BF17]
Bearing
walls
Type
Masonry min.
1/2 brick
Concrete min.
15cm
Concrete min.
15cm
Requirement
1962 →
√BS-*B-60
√BS-*B-60
√BS-*B-60
*B=Buildingpart
All three houses satisﬁes all the given ﬁre requirements at the construction time.
This was expected because they were all checked by the diﬀerent authorities at
the construction time. In the old building ﬁles there are checklists from the
diﬀerent ﬁre departments presented in Chapter 2 where it can be seen which
requirements were not fulﬁlled, along with a demand to ﬁx this followed up by
an approval that it has been put in order.
3.7
Discussion
In the previous sections, the three cases have been reviewed, both concerning
bearing capacity and ﬁre conditions. Together, the three buildings form the
basis of building practice for the period 1950-1980 as described in Chapter 2.
The residual capacity in House 1 is limited, and thus the possibilities for expan-
sion are also limited. The lack of residual bearing capacity is mainly due to the
==PAGE:95==
3.7 Discussion
83
overloaded main partition wall and the hollow brick wall on the top ﬂoor of the
facades. However, there is also not enough residual capacity in the transverse
walls to contribute to the carrying capacity of any extension. It is therefore
necessary to reinforce the existing structures if a new superstructure becomes a
reality.
This limitation will be a typical problem for all properties built based on the
same principles as for House 1, as well as buildings with a small variation in
construction methods related to House 1. Such a property is actually built in
extension of House 1 a few years later, refered to as House 4.
The diﬀerence between the two house types are the roof construction.
The
diﬀerent constructions for the two houses are listed in Table 3.22. This diﬀerence
is due to further optimizing of the building. While the roof deck in House 1 is
not used.
The diﬀerence between the two buildings does not have a great inﬂuence in
relation to a future renovation. This is due to the fact that the renovation is
governed by the minimum residual bearing capacity in the walls which are the
same for both buildings. The main diﬀerence is that House 4 does not have the
free roof deck as House 1.
Table 3.22: House 1: House 1 could be built in a slightly diﬀerent way (House
4). The table shows that the diﬀerences leis in the roof construc-
tion and the rest of the building is identical for both house types.
House 1
House 4
Roof
Pitched
Trusses
Roof deck
Bauma18
Trusses
Deck
Bauma18
Bauma15
Facade
Masonry
Masonry
Inner walls
Masonry
Masonry
Unlike masonry construction represented by House 1, the result is completely
diﬀerent for concrete constructions. House 2 and 3, which represent cast on site
and element buildings in concrete respectively, both have a very good foundation
for a superstructure. This is because both the bearing capacity and the stability
have suﬃcient residual carrying capacity.
All three houses fulﬁll the existing ﬁre requirements. However, it is not certain
that the ﬁre requirements are still met after the renovation for the existing
building part, this will be investigated and explained later.
==PAGE:96==
84
Case studies
Based on registration and calculations for the three buildings investigated, it
can therefore be concluded that concrete buildings are a much better starting
point structurally and are more suitable for a superstructures than masonry
constructions during the period of concern.
==PAGE:97==
Chapter 4
Concept development
This section will present the considerations, which have provided the basis for
the design choice of the superstructures in the three cases. With the focus on the
materials, building styles, and structural design that will connect the existing
building with the expansion. Likewise, a presentation of the building require-
ments, which must be fulﬁll, are given with particular focus on the ﬁre safety.
4.1
Building style and material options
Before a superstructure design can be created, there are many considerations
that needs to be reviewed. Some of these considerations concern the choice of
materials. Selection of materials can be based on all from environmental- to
technical aspects. Furthermore, one has to explore diﬀerent building styles to
ﬁnd the one, which is best ﬁtted in the concerning case. Diﬀerent aspects for
choice of materials and building style are listed below:
Technical
• Weight
• Fire Resistance
==PAGE:98==
86
Concept development
• Merging with existing part
Practical
• Need for rehousing
• Construction time
• Transportation
• Maintenance
• Availability
Economical
• Construction cost
• Material cost
• Maintenance cost
Environmental
• CO2 ﬁngerprint
• Durability
• Sustainability
• Energy consumption
When constructing a new building, the choice of material can be made more
freely. However, in renovation it is necessary, ﬁrst and foremost, to take the
existing construction into account.
Therefore, the most important aspect is
based on the limited residual capacity, which aﬀects the allowable weight of the
superstructure. However, the weight cannot be too small as it can cause stability
problems due to the increasing wind load. In addition, it is also important to
look at the fact, that there are existing residents in the building. Considerations
about this are not only important regarding out of respect towards the residents,
but also in relation to ﬁnances. Because, it can be an expensive aﬀair, if it is
necessary to have a large and long rehousing of the residents. In short, when
renovating, the choice of materials and building style will therefor mainly be
based on:
• Low weight
• Fire resistance
• Need for rehousing
• Quick construction time on site
==PAGE:99==
4.1 Building style and material options
87
Since the three buildings represent three diﬀerent building methods for the time
period 1950-1980, no common solution can be developed to use for all three
houses. Since they diﬀer on several points, for example the static system. As
Chapter 3 has shown, there is no signiﬁcant residual bearing capacity in House
1. On the other hand, there is a very high residual capacity within House 2 and
3. The demand for low weight of the superstructure is therefor mostly important
for House 1, whereas the demand for fast construction time and low need for
rehousing are essential for all three houses.
One could start by listing various types of building materials together with their
advantages / disadvantages. But the wish for short construction time and low
rehousing are more associated with the building style than the type of material.
Typical building styles can, in rough terms, be divided into three steps;
• Elements
• Surface elements
• Module/box elements
It goes without saying, that when a larger part of the construction phase takes
place on the factory, the smaller time is needed on the site. Thus, a module/box
construction will cause a signiﬁcant lower construction time, than traditional el-
ement construction. In Denmark there are several diﬀerent companies perform-
ing module/box systems, but essential for all of them are that they use wood
for the bearing system. Wood, as a material, ﬁts well with the desire for a low
weight superstructure, on the other hand, wood is not the most optimal choice
regarding ﬁre resistance. Module/box systems are therefor the most suitable
for 3 out of 4 of the desired requirements. It is especially well suited for achiev-
ing a short rehousing and construction time. Whilst, the modules are lifted in
place with a crane and thus removing the need for a scaﬀold. What is more,
as a large part of the workmanship is performed at the factory, the noise on
the construction site is minimizes. Module/box systems in lumber are therefore
rated to be the most optimal building style, for constructing superstructures on
existing residential buildings. The ﬁre resistance will be achieved with covering.
The following section will shortly present the basic of module/box systems, the
technical information will be given in Chapter 5.
==PAGE:100==
88
Concept development
4.2
Module systems
There are several diﬀerent manufacturers of module systems in Denmark, one of
them is Scandi Byg A/S. Scandi Byg A/S has more than 30 years of experience
with module solutions. They have been assisting throughout this project by
answering questions and giving a tour in one of their production halls.
Module systems, as building type, have many advantages in addition to those
presented in the previous section.
Module construction conserves energy re-
sources throughout the entire construction period, due to the eﬃcient production-
line. However, the use of module building systems provides a greater energy
consumption on transport and for the cranes, than traditional construction.
However this consumption is lower than the part which is saved under the pro-
duction phase. The production phase is highly optimized, as materials, tools,
and construction workers are on the same location and thus do not need to be
moved around. Instead the modules are moved through the production hall as a
collection tie. During a tour in one of Scandi Byg’s production halls, the various
production steps were clear. As soon as one step is ﬁnished the modules are
moved to the next, where other workers takes over. In order to preserve business
concepts, it is not allowed to provide pictures from within the production hall.
However, a vague picture of the production-line was granted, and is shown in
Figure 4.1. The main concept of an in-house module production line can be
inspected at Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.1: Picture from Scandi Byg A/S production hall in Løgstør Denmark.
==PAGE:101==
4.2 Module systems
89
Figure 4.2: The steps of a factory based module production can be roughly
divided into 9 steps. Where each step has dedicated workers, in-
creasing eﬃciency.
The production-line illustrates the eﬃciency by the construction process and the
faster construction time. What is more, as the factory can operate regardless
of natural light, the steps can be executed in teams throughout the entire day,
vastly increasing the throughput. In addition, it is easier to ensure the denseness
of the construction, when it is carried out under controlled conditions in the
factory halls, mainly due to:
==PAGE:102==
90
Concept development
• The weather does not aﬀect the production
• The ergonomic conditions, for the workers, are optimal
• The right tools are always available
• The production details are well known
The use of timber as building material is not only an advantage in connection
with the load impact. Unlike all other building materials, wood binds CO2.
That means wood constructions stores a large amount of CO2 and wooden-
constructions are thereby more or less CO2 neutral during the construction
lifetime. The energy consumption of wood production and processing is very
low. Each m3 of lumber, which replaces another material is saving 1.1 ton of
CO2. Likewise, each m3 wood binds about 0.9 ton CO2. A wood based module
consumes approximately 0.33 m3 of lumber per 1 m3 ﬁnished construction. This
yields a saving of 0.66 ton CO2 per m3 construction, [Mod].
Module building systems consists roughly of large squared closed blocks. The
modules can have a maximum size of 5x14 meters, due to transportation as-
pects. But, if the width exceeds 4.2 meters, transportation with a support car
is needed, which increases costs. As shown in the production-line Figure 4.2, all
electricity, kitchen, bathrooms, windows, doors, ect. are installed in the ﬁnished
module. The work distribution is 3/1 between factory and the construction site,
ie. approx. 75% is carried out at the factory.
This might give the impression, that module systems is a mass production,
that have no ﬂexibility, but this is not the case. Because, even though large
parts of the construction process are recycled for each project, it is mainly the
engineering and technical solutions which are being recycled. The dimensions
and design of the modules are made for each project. Hence, there is ample
opportunity for the architects and developers to create an individual project.
This will be seen in the choice of superstructures for the three cases, as they
illustrates diﬀerent design options.
Scandi Byg complies with the Building Regulations, and they are energy-optimized
for low-energy class 2020. The costs for low-energy buildings are marginally
higher, than constructions that only meets the Building Regulations minimum
requirements. But a later renewal of the energy will be more costly, and a patch
solution are rarely as optimal, as if it was done from the start. Therefor Scandi
Byg’s modules are made to reach the 2020 energy requirements.
In order to reach full beneﬁt of module building, it is important to think about
module diversity. That is, if n modules are needed in a project and all n mod-
ules diverge in design the beneﬁt from the production line would be minimal.
==PAGE:103==
4.3 Fire safety
91
Opposing to make n identical modules. This is because the modules are dimen-
sioned from the bottom in each project, the total time consumed per module
thus consists of dimensioning, drawing, and production.
The more identical
modules that are being produced in a project, the shorter time are being used
for dimensioning, creating drawing material, and by the workers who will obtain
familiarity with the product. Hence, the total time consumption will mainly be
the production time. On Figure 4.3 it can be seen, that the time per module is
optimal at around 10 identical modules and on wards.
Figure 4.3: The time and cost per module is optimal when at least 10 identical
modules is produced at the same time.
4.3
Fire safety
Fire protection is an important issue when it comes to renovation.
This is
because when an existing building is extended, it is not enough that the new
building part satisﬁes modern ﬁre requirements, the existing construction must
meet the requirements as well. Since, it has no eﬀect that the upper ﬂoors are
secured if the bottom ﬂoors are not. In other words, the new superstructure
cannot meet the requirements unless the existing part also does. Therefore, it
is important to keep track of the existing ﬁre requirements at the time of the
settlement and what changes that are made in relation to today’s requirements.
The ﬁre requirements from the settlement date are already described in Section
2.2, and in this section they will be compared to the requirements of the Danish
Building Regulations 2015 [BR115].
==PAGE:104==
92
Concept development
Table 4.1: The table compares the modern Danish Building Regulations ﬁre
requirements for a leveled residential buildings, with the regulations
available in the period of 1950 to 1980. From the last column it
is visible if the regulation was the same, partly present, or none
existing
.
§BR15
Description
1950-
1980
3.2.2
pcs
5+6
Buildings with 3 or more ﬂoors, must have an eleva-
tor.
None
5.1 pcs 1
There must be a satisfying safety for ﬁre and ﬁre
spread.
Same
5.1 pcs 2
The ﬁre protection must be maintained throughout
the life of the building.
Same
5.1.1 pcs 1
A building section must be assigned to an usage cat-
egory.
None
5.2
pcs
1+2
Evacuation directly to the free or safe place in the
building.
Same
5.2 pcs 5
Wall and ceiling surfaces in the escape route must
not contribute to ﬁre and smoke development.
Same
5.2 pcs 6
A ﬁre unit must have rescue opening.
Same
5.3
pcs
1+2
The building units must be assembled so that the
overall construction in the ﬁre is not less than the
parts.
Same
5.4
pcs
1+2
Fire installations must be reliable, controlled and
maintained throughout their lifetime.
None
5.4 pcs 13
Building units in usage cat. 4 must have a smoke
alarm that are connected to the power supple and
with backup battery.
None
5.5 pcs 1
Buildings must be constructed so that a ﬁre can be
restricted to the ﬁre unit in which it occurs.
Same
5.5.2 pcs 1
External surfaces and rooﬁng must be carried out in
such way that they do not make a signiﬁcant contri-
bution to spread of ﬁre.
Same
5.5.2 pcs 3
Stairways and elevators must be separated from
other parts of the building.
Partly
5.5.3 pcs 1
Buildings must be placed in such way that there is
no risk of ﬁre spreading to other buildings.
Same
5.6 pcs 1
Fire service must have proper conditions.
Same
5.6.1
pcs
1-3
Unrestricted access to the building for the ﬁre ser-
vice. If pipes can not be run by the stairs riser pipes
must be installed.
Partly
5.6.2 pcs 1
Access roads (stairs) must be have smoke ventilation.
Same
8.8 pcs 2
There must be natural or mechanical ventilation of
the elevator shaft. Machine room must be ventilated.
None
==PAGE:105==
4.3 Fire safety
93
Table 4.1 gives a quick overview of the main diﬀerences between today’s building
regulations and the building regulations present at the time of origin. It is easily
seen, that most of the requirements are the same. The few places where they are
diﬀerent are mainly due to elevator requirements. In Table 4.1, two paragraphs
are marked as partly satisﬁed. This is because, in 5.5.2 pcs 1 the requirement for
elevator stands are missing. In 5.6.1 pcs 1-3, there is an additional requirement
for riser pipes, which is new.
But even though the requirements of the Building Regulations are mainly the
same, it does not mean that the existing building complies with today’s ﬁre
requirements. This is because the diﬀerence is not on the wording about the
presence of adequate ﬁre protection, but in the perception of what adequate
ﬁre protection is.
The industry can be documented in two ways, either as
prescriptive based ﬁre safety, which is based on "Eksempelsamlingen" [oB06] or
as performance based ﬁre safety; which is based on calculations according to
"Information om brandteknisk dimensionering" [oB04].
At the time of construction only documentation, based on prescriptive based ﬁre
safety, was possible. There were not yet evolved enough documentation about
ﬁre development, and therefor there were not yet any calculation models for
performance based ﬁre safety. This indicates, that the measurements required
to fulﬁll ﬁre safety has changed. Due to the fact, what it is possible now to
deviate from the normal standards, if one can document that the ﬁre safety is
still fulﬁlled. Also the perception of prescriptive based ﬁre safety are changed
through time.
Some conditions have not change since 1950-80, for example: The requirement
for 2 independent escape routes, the maximum ﬁre cell size of 150 m2, and the
maximum ﬁre section size of 600 m2, whilst the latter can now be increased by
sprinkler system, it is in its base form unchanged. On the other hand, the ﬁre
designations have changed. The term BD no longer exist, and the term BS has
been changed into a new designation system. The new system is more advanced
and contains a lot of new designations. The new terms and changes relative to
origin are described in DBI [DBI08]. Table 4.2 shows the comparison between
new and origin designations.
Fire protection of the existing building relative to modern requirements, will be
documented with the ﬁre safety of the new building in the Chapter 6. However,
as described above, one of the major changes are found in the requirements,
which follows when the building goes from three to a six leveled building. This
doubles the requirement of 60 minutes ﬁre resistance to 120 minutes. It also
requires, that it is necessary to establish an elevator in the building. Therefore,
a further description of elevators will be presented in the next section.
==PAGE:106==
94
Concept development
Table 4.2: In ﬁre safety speciﬁc designations are used. The table compares the
new and origin designations, to illustrate how the old designations
can be transformed to the current designations.
1950-1980
Today
Materials
Inﬂammable
A2-s1,d0
Class A
B-s1,d0
Class B
D-s2,d2
Carring parts,
non-separating
BS-60
R60 A2-s1,d0
BD-60
R60
Carring and
separate building parts
BS-60
REI60 A2-s1,d0
BD-60
REI60
Non carring and
separate building parts
BS-60
EI60 A2-s1,d0
BD-60
EI60
F-60
E60
Doors
BS-60
EI2 60-C A2-s1.d0
BD-60
EI2 60-C
F-60
E60-C
4.3.1
Elevators
Elevators in both existing and new buildings have many advantages. In existing
buildings where several ﬂoors are added, elevators will ﬁrst and foremost be
established due to comfort requirements.
The Building Regulations require
elevators in all storey buildings greater than three ﬂoors. But lifts have many
other advantages. They increase the value of the building, improve accessibility,
and increase the attractiveness of both tenants and buyers. Furthermore, they
provide a safer process in the building over stairs, and opens the possibility of
elderly residents to stay longer.
A lift can either be shut down under ﬁre or dimensioned for use in case of ﬁre.
Being able to use the elevator in case of ﬁre has many diﬀerent advantages for
the ﬁre protection depending on the layout and eﬀect. It can be used as a service
elevator and/or for evacuation of the residents in case of ﬁre.
In residential buildings, like the ones which are investigated in this report, the
number of people within the buildings are limited relative to eg. an oﬃce build-
ing. It is in these cases advantageous to use the elevator only as a service lift,
as it avoids conﬂict between the rescue service and the residents. This allows
residents to evacuate down the stairs and the rescue workers can be transported
up through the elevator. This prevents crossings in the elevators and on the
==PAGE:107==
4.4 Building Regulations 2015
95
stairs so that the rescue service can act undisturbed by the residents. As an ad-
dition to the above mentioned, the elevator can be used to transport people who
are not able to get out of the building by themselves. There may be situations
where it is necessary to use the elevator for evacuation, even though it is not a
part of the ﬁre strategy. Such a case may be that the ﬁre blocks the staircase of
the upper ﬂoor, and the elevator can hereby transport the occupants past the
ﬁre to safety. Since there is no 100% guarantee of where a ﬁre occurs and how
it is spread, you can come in situations where it is necessary to deviate from the
desired ﬁre strategy.
In each case, studied in the previous chapter, elevators will be installed inside or
outside the building, which are dimensioned according to the number of users.
It is chosen to locate the elevators in three diﬀerent ways for the three cases, to
give an overview of the beneﬁts of the diﬀerent solutions. In all cases elevators
are placed with dimensions, so they can be used as both service elevator and for
evacuation, if the related conditions allows it.
The size of the elevator shafts are dimensioned so that the four largest producers
of elevators in Denmark can be used. The four investigated producers are KONE
[A/S17], OTIS [Com17], Schindler [Sch17] and Thyssenkrupp [Thy17]. From
each company, the selection of lifts and data sheets has been collected i Appendix
4.1 to 4.4. All the four companies have each one model that they recommend
for existing construction. The models are available in diﬀerent sizes as needed.
4.4
Building Regulations 2015
When an extension is made, the output will be a combination of existing and
new constructions. Therefore, there are diﬀerent laws and regulations that apply
to the diﬀerent parts of the building. If no signiﬁcant renovation or modiﬁcation
of use is made on the existing building, this part must not comply with today’s
requirements, but instead from the demands of the building origin. However,
when doing any intervention, it is a good idea to upgrade the existing parts to
new standards, as far as possible. In addition, all new units passing through the
existing building as the elevator, must comply with applicable requirements.
Several parts of the building regulation deals with the building as one unit. This
is reﬂected in the ﬁre protection as an example. It does not matter that the three
top ﬂoors meets the ﬁre regulations, if the three bottom ﬂoors does not. Fur-
thermore, a superstructure will aﬀect the excising bearing parts of the building,
and they must therefor also be checked for present requirements. Therefore, it is
important to connect new and old together, so that the new part exceeds all ex-
==PAGE:108==
96
Concept development
isting laws and the existing part also complies with the requirements to a certain
extent, such that the building in one can meet the demands. The relevant ﬁre
requirements for the buildings investigated, in this report, are described in the
previous section, so they will not be presented here. Other relevant requirements
will be brieﬂy described, based on the Danish Building Regulations [BR115]. Al-
though the entire building regulations are not described, the remaining parts
must also be observed. As this thesis does not concern the energy perspectives
of the building, these regulations will not be described.
BR15: 3. Building layout
• 3.2.1 pcs 2+4: The access to the building units and the elevator must
be in level. Doors must have a minimum width of 0.77 meter.
• 3.2.2 pcs 1+3+4: The common access routes shall be minimum 1.3
meter width. Staircases must have a minimum width of 1 meter and
a free height of 2.1 meter, with a maximum increase of 18 cm and a
ground of 25 cm.
• 3.2.3 pcs 1: Stairways must be provided with a railing or other pro-
tection.
• 3.3.1 pcs 2+5: A residential must contain a living space, a kitchen
and a bath/WC-room. The free room height must be minimum 2.5
meters.
BR15: 4. Structures
• 4.1 pcs 2: Building structures must be dimensioned for static and
dynamic impacts.
• 4.2 pcs 1-4: Dimensioning must be based on Eurocodes with associ-
ated Danish annexes.
BR15: 8. Installations
• 8.8 pcs 2: There must be natural or mechanical ventilation of the
elevator shaft. The machine room must be ventilated as well.
• The elevator must as a minimum meet the requirements for energy
class B.
How the requirements from the Danish Building Regulations are fulﬁlled will
be described in the following chapters.
In which, the documentation of the
solutions will be carried out and the ﬁnal solutions will be presented. In case of
a rebuilding, the provisions may be adjusted if an application for dispensation
are made. Due to the fact, that a fulﬁllment of the requirements will implicate
a major intervention in the existing structure, all the requirements will as far as
possible, be fulﬁlled without any dispensations, and if dispensation is necessary
an explanation will be given in why.
==PAGE:109==
Chapter 5
Static veriﬁcation
Throughout this chapter the static veriﬁcation of the superstructures will be pre-
sented.
Additionally, this chapter will present some reinforcement solutions,
regarding lack of residual bearing capacity in House 1, such that a superstruc-
ture can be carried out. For House 2 and 3 the residual bearing capacity is not
an issue. In both cases one solution are determined, wherein the modules of
the superstructures are designed and calculated. The modules structure are the
same in both cases, therefore the calculations for House 2 and 3 will be presented
together.
5.1
House 1
As concluded in the previous chapter, this type of building does not have suﬃ-
cient residual bearing capacity, for a superstructure, without a major interven-
tion. For this reason, a resolute resolution will not be elaborated or prepared in
this case. Instead, a solution will be described, on how the bearing problems can
be solved by a more circumstanced renovation, if this is desired.
==PAGE:110==
98
Static veriﬁcation
Reinforcement of fully loaded facade wall
The problem, regarding the lack of residual bearing capacity in the facades, is
solely due to the cavity wall on the top ﬂoor. This wall has a signiﬁcantly lower
carrying capacity, than the remaining ﬂoors.
Furthermore, it creates a high
eccentricity on the underlying ﬂoor.
Therefore, in order to place a superstructure directly on the existing structure,
it is necessary to reinforce the upper part of the facades. This can be done by
eg. making internal cross-reinforcements, of the hollow wall on the 2ND ﬂoor
and the massive wall on the 1ST ﬂoor. The reinforcement can be established in
connection with an internal re-insulation. Since it is a rather major intervention,
it is important that the gain is maximized. By incorporation the reinforcement
in a post-insulation of the facades, it is not only the carrying capacity account
that is increased, but also on the energy account. Such reinforcement can be
established by using steel Z-proﬁles as outlined in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Cross-reinforcement sketch of a hollow brick wall using Z-proﬁles
built together with an inner re-insulation.
Another solution for making a superstructure possible is not to use the exist-
ing static system. But, to establish a new static system outside the existing
structure. The support system could consist of columns, that could either be
established throughout the entire height or supported at each ﬂoor separation,
==PAGE:111==
5.1 House 1
99
depending on the design. Similarly, to the previous solution this can be hidden,
in an external post-insulation and thereby provide an energy improvement as
well. This solution will however cause the existing windows to be moved out,
to ﬁt the new facades.
Transfer system
Although the facades are reinforced and have suﬃcient load bearing capacity for
a superstructure, the whole problem is not resolved. This is proportional to the
already overloaded main partition wall. It is important that this is not loaded
further, i.e. all new weights must be led to the facades. As the building is more
than 11 meters wide, it requires large horizontal division structures to be able to
span all the way. Another solution is to establish an inter-construction between
the existing construction and new construction that moves all the load from the
new construction to the facades. Thereby, it is not necessary for the horizontal
divisions to span the entire width of the building.
This can be solved by using a steel grid or beam system, that spans between the
facades. The grid/ beam system takes up the load from the superstructure and
transports it further to the facades. This solution requires a fairly large grid/
beam system, but similarly the dimension on the remaining horizontal divisions
can be signiﬁcantly reduced.
The solution which is most advantageous, most be determined in relation to the
materials, construction time, price, etc. such that the most optimal solution is
found. This matter is not subject to discussion in this thesis
Superstructure
The fact that the existing static system does not have suﬃcient residual bearing
capacity, to support an superstructure, is not in itself a negative factor.
It
provides greater freedom in relation to the visual design and choice of materials.
This is because that there is no existing inner walls that needs to be continued
to accommodate the new load. As described above, it can be chosen to reinforce
the existing facades, this introduces a limitation of the possibilities as it will not
be possible to supersede the existing plane. But if it is chosen to produce a
completely new static system, there are no restrictions to establish a diﬀerent
ﬂoor plan than the existing one. However, account must be taken towards, for
for example shadows in relation to the existing construction etc. Thereby, the
bearing obstacles contributes a greater ﬂexibility in relation to the architectural
==PAGE:112==
100
Static veriﬁcation
design of the superstructure. This opens better opportunities to make the new
apartments optimal, for all types of residents, handicapped, old people, or other
groups with reduced mobility. As only the facades are being continued and the
decor is therefore not locked by existing inner walls.
The expansion can be
made by everything from individual elements to surface elements or even large
modular/box systems. An example of how such an extension could be designed
will be presented later in the report.
5.2
House 2 & House 3
The superstructures for House 2 and 3 are based on Scandi Byg A/S model
system. However, they cannot give any structural engineering material on the
modules or detail drawings, as it does not comply to company policies. However,
they have some basic guidelines, that they follow when designing models:
• A module can span a maximum size of 4.2 m x 14 m (exceptional cases
5x14m).
• A module must be a square.
• The bearing span is on the short side.
• It should use structural timber C24, if necessary Kerto-beams for extra
capacity.
• A module weights about 12-17 ton.
• A module must have a timber frame with bars per 400 mm or 600 mm.
• Fire safety is obtained by use of ﬁre gypsum.
• Staircases are ordered externally, same goes for elevators and galleries.
• Module divisions are optimally placed at apartment divisions.
• Any facade types can be used.
• Keep the design simple.
Based on the guidelines, a design for each critical building part in the modules
are determined. As for the existing building parts, the parts of the superstruc-
tures are controlled by the four load combinations. Furthermore, the modules
are checked for ﬁre in the next chapter. The module parts are designed for the
==PAGE:113==
5.2 House 2 & House 3
101
two houses, the essential results are presented. The elements in the modules are
proportioned along with a transfer systems between the existing construction
and the new construction. The connections between the new and old build-
ing parts will be described, however the connections within the superstructure
will not, since if the superstructure is actually executed, these connections will
be conducted according to Scandi Byg’s procedures. Data sheets for the used
materials can be found in Appendix 5.1 to 5.4.
5.2.1
Structural system
First of all, the ﬂoors in the superstructure must be divided into modules that
meet the requirements listed above. A solution has been chosen for House 2 with
three identical ﬂoors and for House 3 with varying ﬂoor plans. The background
for these choices and the layout of the superstructure will be presented together
with the design and ﬂoor plans in Chapter 7. This chapter will only cover the
control of the bearing capacity.
House 2 consists of nine entrances, but only three of these will be lead up into
the superstructure. The property can therefore be divided into three identical
sections. The section is illustrated in Figure 5.2, where the module layout is
marked with pink on top of the existing ﬂoor plan. It is seen, that the new
ﬂoor plans get a smaller area as a gallery is established. While this building is
over 12 m wide and therefore could not comply with the desired length of the
modules, it is chosen to involve some of the staircases for apartments instead,
which also provides an optimal solution for large-format modules. The division
consists of three diﬀerent module sizes marked in Figure 5.2, their dimensions
are shown in Table 5.1. The reason for module 1a and 1b is due to diﬀerent
decor, however the modules have the same size.
==PAGE:114==
102
Static veriﬁcation
Figure 5.2: House 2: Module division of ﬂoor four to six.
Pink marks the
size and division of the modules. There are three diﬀerent sized
modules, however one of them will have two diﬀerent inner layouts
and are therefore markt as 1a and 1 b.
House 3 consists of four entrances, each entrances is designed in the same way
for the superstructure, thus the property consists of four equal sections.
In
contrast, the layout of the ﬂoor plan for the three ﬂoors varies. In Figure 5.3
the layout is shown for each ﬂoor, where the modules are marked on top of the
existing plan. There are six diﬀerent sizes of modules for the three ﬂoors which
are listed in Table 5.1.
(a) 4TH ﬂoor
(b) 5TH ﬂoor
(c) 6TH ﬂoor
Figure 5.3: House 3: Division of modules for ﬂoor four to six. Where pink
marks the size and division of the modules. Six module sizes are
used in total for all three ﬂoors.
==PAGE:115==
5.2 House 2 & House 3
103
Table 5.1: House 2 & 3: Dimensions for the modules.
House 2
House 3
Module
1
2
3
1
2
3
4
5
6
Length
[m]
11.5
7.0
6.0
8.1
9.2
10.4
8.1
8.0
8.0
Width
[m]
3.0
3.5
4.2
3.0
4.2
4.2
4.2
3.3
2.3
When adding a superstructure to the existing buildings, the consequence class
changes from medium to high, CC3. This means that KFI is 1.1 in the new
calculations for both House 2 and House 3.
5.2.2
Calculations of the superstructure
Roof construction
The new roof constructions will be identical for both the houses. There will be
used ﬂat rooﬁng with a slope of 1:40. The calculated load acting on the roof
can be seen in Appendix 5.5 for House 2, and Appendix 5.6 for House 3. Even
though, that the load combination STR1 have the highest total load, it is load
combination STR2 that are the most critical one. Because the conversion factor
for the strength of the wood depends on type of load acting on the construc-
tion. STR2 load combination is for dominating dead load, which have a lower
conversion factor than load combination STR1.
There are two types of roof construction for House 3, because some of the roof
are used as balconies by the upper ﬂoor. A sectional drawing of the two roof
tops can be seen in the Prospectus 5.1 and 5.2.
The beams in the roof construction must be checked for three conditions, the
calculations for House 2 can be seen in Appendix 5.7 and in Appendix 5.8 for
House 3. Only the results will be presented below, where the deﬂection are the
most critical:
Shear check:
House 2 : τd ≤kv · fv,d
⇒
0.22 ≤1.78
OK!
(5.1)
House 3 : τd ≤kv · fv,d
⇒
0.50 ≤1.78
OK!
(5.2)
==PAGE:116==
104
Static veriﬁcation
Stress check:
House 2 : σd ≤fm,d
⇒
3.12 ≤10.66
OK!
(5.3)
House 3 : σd ≤fm,d
⇒
5.62 ≤10.66
OK!
(5.4)
Deformation check:
House 2 : ug ≤
l
600
⇒
2.93 ≤6.98
OK!
(5.5)
House 3 : ug ≤
l
600
⇒
1.29 ≤5.50
OK!
(5.6)
Horizontal division
Besides the roof construction the horizontal divisions for the superstructures
consists of the ceiling and the ﬂoor construction. The construction is the same
for the two houses. The ﬂoor construction is the bearing part and the ceiling
is non-bearing, however the ceiling contributes to the ﬁre protection. Sectional
drawings for both can be seen on drawing 5.3 and 5.4 in the Prospectus. Fur-
thermore, the load from the ceiling are determined in Appendix 5.11.
The load acting on the ﬂoor construction can be seen in Appendix 5.9 for House
2 and Appendix 5.10 for House 3. The bearing beams in the ﬂoor are checked
for the load in Appendix 5.12 and 5.13 for House 2 and House 3 respectively.
The results will be presented below where the deﬂection are the most critical
like the roof calculations:
Shear check:
House 2 : τd ≤kv · fv,d
⇒
0.65 ≤2.37
OK!
(5.7)
House 3 : τd ≤kv · fv,d
⇒
0.65 ≤2.37
OK!
(5.8)
Stress check:
House 2 : σd ≤fm,d
⇒
11.05 ≤14.23
OK!
(5.9)
House 3 : σd ≤fm,d
⇒
11.15 ≤14.23
OK!
(5.10)
==PAGE:117==
5.2 House 2 & House 3
105
Deformation check:
House 2 : ug ≤
l
600
⇒
6.35 ≤6.98
OK!
(5.11)
House 3 : ug ≤
l
600
⇒
6.44 ≤7.00
OK!
(5.12)
Vertical divisions
As the height of the building changes the wind load changes as well. The new
wind load is determined for the facades and the gables, and can be inspected in
Appendix 5.14 and Appendix 5.15 for House 2 and House 3.
The vertical divisions consists of non-bearing inner walls, bearing inner walls
and exterior walls. A sectional drawing of all three structures can be seen in
the Prospectus 5.5 to 5.7.
The bearing columns in the inner walls works as central loaded and the columns
in the exterior walls as laterally loaded. Therefore, there are one more check
for the bearing capacity of the exterior walls.
A column have a strong axis
and weak axis, however the columns are secured in the weak axis by the plate
material ﬁxed to the columns. The load acting on the bearing walls can be
found in Appendix 5.16 and 5.18 for House 2 and Appendix 5.17 and 5.19 for
House 3. Furthermore, the calculations can be viewed in Appendix 5.20 and
5.22 and Appendix 5.21 and 5.23, only the results are show below. The reason
why the utilization is so small, is because the ﬁre requirement are more critical.
Utilization check, Inner walls:
House 2 :
σc,d
kc,y · fcd
≤1
⇒
0.06 ≤1
OK!
(5.13)
House 3 :
σc,d
kc,y · fcd
≤1
⇒
0.07 ≤1
OK!
(5.14)
Utilization check, exterior walls:
House 2 :
σc,d
kc,y · fcd
≤1
⇒
0.04 ≤1
OK!
(5.15)
House 3 :
σc,d
kc,y · fcd
≤1
⇒
0.04 ≤1
OK!
(5.16)
==PAGE:118==
106
Static veriﬁcation
Transverse load check, exterior walls:
House 2 :
σc,d
kc,y · fcd
+ σm,y,d
fm,y,d
≤1
⇒
0.06 ≤1
OK!
(5.17)
House 3 :
σc,d
kc,y · fcd
+ σm,y,d
fm,y,d
≤1
⇒
0.06 ≤1
OK!
(5.18)
5.2.3
Energy
As described at the start of this thesis, this project will not investigate energy
conditions. However, in order to ensure that the modules have a realistic amount
of insulation and correct design, the exterior wall and the roof top are checked for
minimum thermal conductivity requirements, see Appendix 5.24. In Table 5.2,
the U-values for the constructions are shown together with the corresponding
minimum requirements:
Table 5.2: House 2 and 3: U-values for the diﬀerent outer building parts used
in the tree modules for the superstructure in both cases. All the
parts more than fulﬁlls the requirements.
Determined value
Building Regulations

W/m2K


W/m2K

Facades
0.15
0.30
Roof
0.13
0.20
Roof Balcony
0.13
0.20
5.2.4
Transfer system
To transfer the load form the superstructure to the existing bearing walls, a
transfer system needs to be constructed.
In both cases it is therefor chosen
to use steel beams, which are placed between the existing roof and the new
superstructure. The existing roofs are preserved and will function as ﬁre-section
between the 3TH and 4Th ﬂoor.
The connection between the modules and the steel beams are investigated, along
with the connection between the existing roof and the steel beams. Both con-
nections can be seen in scale with explanations in the Prospectus, drawing 5.8
and 5.10 for House 2 and 5.9 and 5.11 for House 3.
==PAGE:119==
5.2 House 2 & House 3
107
The modules have to be insured against overturning and sliding. Therefore a
steel plate connected to the steel beams and the modules are applied, to establish
vertical anchorage. Horizontally the superstructure is secured by a threaded rod,
attached to the existing roof construction spanning all the way up to the new
rooftop. The steel beams will be connected to the existing building by use of
glue anchors.
Four continuous beams are used for House 2 and ﬁve for House 3 as seen in
Figure 5.4, where the beams are marked with red on top of the existing ﬂoor
plan. For House 2 the third beam is subject to the greatest load, and in House
3 the fourth beam is the most critical. Both systems can be seen i scale in the
Prospectus 5.12 and 5.13.
(a) House 2
(b) House 3
Figure 5.4: House 2 and 3: Systems used to transfer the load from the su-
perstructure to the bearing walls in the existing buildings. The
systems are carried out by steel beams, which are mark with red.
The load acting on the two beams are determined and can be found in Appendix
5.25 for House 2 and Appendix 5.26 for House 3. The most critical beam for both
houses is created in Matlab. Here the critical reaction, moment, and deﬂection
are found. The results for beam 3 in House 2 can be seen on Figure 5.5 and for
beam 4 in House 3, Figure 5.6 are shown.
==PAGE:120==
108
Static veriﬁcation
(a) Static system
(b) Moment curve
(c) Deﬂection curve
Figure 5.5: House 2: The critical steel beam is calculated in Matlab and the
results regarding the static system, deﬂection, and moment are
illustrated.
==PAGE:121==
5.2 House 2 & House 3
109
(a) Static system
(b) Moment curve
(c) Deﬂection curve
Figure 5.6: House 3: The critical steel beam is calculated in Matlab and the
results regarding the static system, deﬂection, and moment are
illustrated.
When the diﬀerent exposes are determined in Matlab, they are checked with
the bearing capacity for the steel beams. The moment and deﬂection capacity
are checked. The reaction is used to determine the size of the plate beneath the
steel beams regarding the pressure capacity. All the calculations can be seen in
Appendix 5.27 for House 2 and Appendix 5.28 for House 3. Below the check
for moment and deﬂection are presented. It is readily seen that the deﬂection is
the most critical criteria. For House 2 HEB260 beams are used for the system
and in House 3 HEB160 beams.
Moment check:
House 2 :
Md
Wel,y
≤
fy
γM0
⇒
131.9 ≤213.6
OK!
(5.19)
==PAGE:122==
110
Static veriﬁcation
House 3 :
Md
Wel,y
≤
fy
γM0
⇒
137.1 ≤213.6
OK!
(5.20)
Deﬂection check:
House 2 : µn ≤
l
400
⇒
11.0 ≤15.0
OK!
(5.21)
House 3 : µn ≤
l
400
⇒
8.7 ≤9.4
OK!
(5.22)
5.2.5
Existing building parts
The load on the bearing inner walls for both houses are changed when adding a
superstructure, due to the increased load. Therefore the walls most be checked
for the new load. The calculations can be seen in Appendix 5.29 and 5.30. The
most critical wall for House 2 is wall 3 and in House 3 wall 1. The result are
illustrated in Table 5.3. The bearing capacity before and after the superstructure
diﬀers slightly, because of the change in eccentricity. For House 2 the three
upper ﬂoors weights approximately 44% of the total weight of the lower ﬂoors.
In House 3 the ratio is 35%. The diﬀerence occurs, since House 3 consists of
varying ﬂoor plans with a smaller area.
Table 5.3: House 2 and 3: Critical walls in both houses are checked after
adding a superstructure. The table shows that the utilization is far
away form critical even after the superstructure is added.
Existing conditions
New conditions
Load
Capacity
Utilisation
Load
Capacity
Utilization
[kN]
[kN]
[%]
[kN]
[kN]
[%]
House 2
Wall 5
995.4
6061.3
16
1788
6280
28
House 3
Wall 1
1063.3
7530.1
14
1675
7524
22
5.3
Elevators
As described in the previous section, a suitable elevator from each of the four
largest manufacturers in Denmark have been collected. Although the elevator
==PAGE:123==
5.3 Elevators
111
solution is diﬀerent for the three properties, the requirements for them are the
same. The buildings belongs to the category low and mid rise buildings, which
means that the speed must not exceed 1.6 m/s. Furthermore, if an elevator is
used as a ﬁre ﬁghter lift it must have a minimum size of 1.2m x 1.4 m and must
take a minimum load of 630 kg. However, if used for evacuation the size should
be at least 1.1 m x 2.1 m and a sustain a load of 1000 kg.
In House 1, the lifts are built outside the property connected to a gallery. There
are 2 lifts for the entire property. These elevators can be used as both ﬁre ﬁghter
lifts and evacuation lifts.
For House 2 an elevator is established per three entrances. That is, three eleva-
tors are set up for the building. The lifts are established in an independent ﬁre
section inside the property and they can therefore be used both as ﬁre ﬁghter
lifts and evacuation lifts.
For House 3, an elevator is established in each of the existing four entrances. The
lifts are established in connection to the stairs, which means that the ﬁre section
of the staircase and the ﬁre section of the elevator is connected. Therefore, the
elevators in House 3 must not be used for rescue service or evacuation in case
of ﬁre.
For convenience, the same size of elevator are used for all three houses, although
House 3 could use a smaller elevator as it should not be used in case of ﬁre. Data
for the selected elevators are listed in Table 5.4.
Table 5.4: Technical data for the elevators found in the data sheets.
Open
width
Persons
Car
WxDxH
Shaft
WxD
Max
height
Max
speed
Load
[m]
[Pers.]
[m]
[m]
[m]
[m/s]
[kg]
KONE
MonoSpace500
0.9
13
1.1x2.2x2.3
1.6x2.5
55
1.0
1000
OTIS
Gen2Life
0.9
13
1.1x2.1x2.2
1.6x2.4
50
1.0
1020
Thyssenkrupp
Synergy Blue
0.9
13
1.1x2.2x2.2
1.6x2.4
45
1.0
1000
Schindler
Schindler 3300
0.9
15
1.2x2.1x2.1
1.7x2.5
45
1.0
1125
All the elevator models is shipped in a self-supporting shaft, but this shaft is not
ﬁreproof. A ﬁreproof shaft must therefore be established around the lifts to en-
sure, that the requirements for the ﬁre section is fulﬁlled. At the same time, the
==PAGE:124==
112
Static veriﬁcation
new lifts in House 2 and 3 breaks the existing load-bearing walls. The elevator
shaft therefore overtakes the load from the existing ﬂoor separations. Due to the
design of the transfer system, the elevator shafts do not receive any load from
the superstructures. The load impact on the elevator shafts are therefore less
than for the existing walls. Which means that a shaft of 150 mm concrete walls
will have the suﬃcient carrying capacity and no check is necessary. To meet the
requirements of a REI120 ﬁre section, the walls must be at least 150 mm thick
with a minimum of 25 mm cover layer according to [Sta13a]. The shafts are
thereby made of 15 mm thick concrete walls with two layers of reinforcement
with a 25 mm cover layer. In order to obtain the load from the existing ﬂoor
separation, consoles to carrying the slabs are established, as illustrated in Figure
5.7, the connection can be seen in scale and with explanations on Prospectus
5.14.
Figure 5.7: House 2 & 3: Connection between existing deck construction and
the new elevator shaft. Used because the elevator takes up some
of the existing bearing walls.
==PAGE:125==
Chapter 6
Fire strategy
This section will include an overall ﬁre safety strategy, and a structural ﬁre
safety determination for each of the cases. The section will be split into two
main parts.
The ﬁrst part is concerning the pre-ﬂashover phase, which has the overall pur-
pose of documenting the safety of people doing a potential evacuation. This is
satisﬁed by investigating the evacuation time in conjunction with the critical
time for smoke inhalation and lack of visibility.
The second part of this chapter is intended for the post-ﬂashover phase, which
has the overall purpose of documenting the structural ﬁre safety. This is satisﬁed
by investigating the bearing capacity and the accidental load, at the time of the
resistance class.
6.1
Fire analysis of House 1
Since House 1 did not provide enough residual capacity to sustain a superstruc-
ture, no speciﬁc solution was designed. Hence, the ﬁre strategy cannot conclude
a detailed analysis. Thus, there will not be made any calculations regarding the
ﬁre safety strategy of House 1.
==PAGE:126==
114
Fire strategy
However, an example of diﬀerent ﬂoor plan solutions have been drafted together
with a design solution of a superstructure. This will be presented in the next
chapter. On the basis of this example a short analysis of a possible ﬁre strategy,
will now be presented.
The renovated building is a rectangular building with six ﬂoors, a total height of
approximately 20 meters, and a height of about 16.5 meters to the ﬂoor in the
top ﬂoor. The design of the building is created to comply with the guidelines
for prescriptive based ﬁre safety. The access to the building is through a gallery
with three staircases and two elevators, as seen in Figure 6.1.
(a) Illustration of the front of House 1 with the superstructure
(b) Illustration of the bag of House 1 with the superstructure
Figure 6.1: House 1:
Drawings of the building after the superstructure is
added, clariﬁes the placement of the staircases, elevators and bal-
conies.
6.1.1
Fire Safety pre-ﬂashover
The aim of the pre-ﬂashover ﬁre strategy is to guarantee the safety of the people
in case of a ﬁre incident. The whole building has one usage category, which is
Category 4. This is because the building is used at night for sleeping, and that
the residents have knowledge upon location and utilization of the ﬁre exits.
==PAGE:127==
6.1 Fire analysis of House 1
115
There is no increased risk of ﬁre, as the height to the upper ﬂoor is less than 22
meters. Therefore, the buildings ﬁre strategy can be based on the "Eksempel-
samlingen" [oB06]. However, if you look at the ﬁre load, of the building, it is like
any other residential building. There are many kitchens that can increase the
risk of ﬁre, as well as a lot of ﬂammable materials in form of clothes, furniture,
etc.
The requirements for the building is determined in a combination of the Building
regulations of 2015 [BR115], SBI guidelines [Aag08] and "Eksempelsamlingen"
[oB06]. Due to the fact, that the building is designed as prescriptive based and
therefore works as a traditional construction in relation to ﬁre. To fulﬁll this
some overall guidelines must be met:
• There is two independent ﬁre exits. In this case the gallery and the bal-
conies are available for the lower ﬂoors, while the top ﬂoors has rescue
openings.
• There is no ﬁre section above 600 m2.
• There is no room/ ﬁre compartment over 150 m2.
• There is under 25 meters to the nearest escape route.
• Escape routes is at least 1.3 meters wide.
• Doors are at least 0.77 meters wide in the ﬁre compartments and 1.2
meters for the staircases.
• Doors combined to the escape routes opens in direction of the escape.
• Each ﬁre unit/compartment has a rescue opening.
• Each ﬁre unit must have at minimum one smoke alarm, that are connected
to the power supply and with backup battery..
The overall ﬁre strategy is a complete evacuation. Taking place through the
gallery and the staircases. The elevators will be dimension, so that they can be
used for evacuation of eg. disabled residents. Furthermore, they will be used
as a service elevator for the rescue service. The elevators will have a secured
power supply. After the evacuation is completed, the meeting point will be on
the south/ west side of the building on the parking lot.
An example of ﬁre sectioning of the building is illustrated on Figure 6.2, for scale
see Prospectus 6.1. The blue color indicates ﬁre compartments, red visualizes
ﬁre sections.
Each ﬁre section must fulﬁll REI120 A2-s1-d0 building parts,
==PAGE:128==
116
Fire strategy
except on the top ﬂoor where REI60 is suﬃcient. In this case it concerns the
gallery, elevators, vertical ﬁre walls, and horizontal ﬁre sections. Furthermore,
the ﬁre components are divided by at least EI60 building parts.
Beside the
ﬁre sectioning there is some other passive ﬁre initiatives. The elevators will be
pressurized, this is not a necessity for the staircases, as they are placed in open
air.
It can be seen on Figure 6.2 that there is at most 13 meters to the exit of a
one-plan apartment and 24 meters for a two-plan apartment. The rest of the
evacuation to the ground goes through the three staircases and if necessary the
two elevators connected to the gallery. Each apartment has one rescue opening,
which is either a balcony or a window on the south side of the building. Fur-
thermore, the ﬁgure shows that each apartment function as a ﬁre compartment
and each two apartments have vertical ﬁre section separations, together with
the basement division and the four ﬂoor divisions.
(a) Vertical ﬁre separations of House 1 and marks of escape routes
(b) Horizontal ﬁre separations of House 1
Figure 6.2: House 1: Fire section and ﬁre compartment divisions together with
location of exit routes and rescue openings.
==PAGE:129==
6.1 Fire analysis of House 1
117
The building is placed in connection with another building, therefor there is a
risk of ﬁre spreading between the two buildings. In case of renovation, it is thus
important to ensure ﬁre spreading between the building parts. Besides that one
building, there is a great distance to the surrounding buildings and they are
therefor not a high risk for ﬁre spreading.
Existing conditions contains access roads on three sides of the building.
In
relation to the renovation, there will be established a road on the south side of
the building, such that the balconies and rescue openings can be accessed, by
the rescue service. The road will be at minimum 2.8 meters wide so it can be
access by the rescue services lifts, see Figure 6.3.
Figure 6.3: House 1: The red lines marks the existing roads and the blue
line marks the road that will be conducted in connection with the
renovation to make access for the rescue service on each side of
the building.
6.1.2
Fire Safety post-ﬂashover, Structural ﬁre Safety
The post-ﬂashover ﬁre safety regards the structural ﬁre safety.
As there is
not taken any choice regarding the building parts of the superstructure, the
structural ﬁre safety will not be investigated. Therefore, only the structural ﬁre
safety of the existing construction will be presented.
Horizontal ﬁre division
The existing horizontal ﬁre section divisions consists of Bauma 15cm
and reinforced concrete 10cm, which fulﬁlls the ﬁre requirements,
from the building time which was BS60. By using the conversion
==PAGE:130==
118
Fire strategy
from DBI [DBI08] BS60 fulﬁlls modern requirements for REI60 A2-
s1,d0 building parts. However, the requirement after the superstruc-
ture is added is REI120 A2-s1,d0. Therefor the existing horizontal
construction most be wrapped in ﬁre protection, if they should work
as ﬁre section divisions. This could be done with PAROC FPS plates
[Par17], which can be connected to the existing deck, or any other
ﬁre protection.
Fire walls
The ﬁre walls consists of 3/4 wide brick stones spanning the entire
height. At the building time they fulﬁlled the requirements of BS60
for ﬁre section walls. However, after the superstructure is added the
walls most fulﬁll the requirements for REI120 A2-s1,d0. According
"Murefagets oplysningsråd" a massive masonry wall with a thickness
of 170mm can withstand ﬁre in 120 minutes, which relates to a 3/4
brick.
The covering must be checked to see if it fulﬁlls A2-s1,d0
otherwise it must be rectiﬁed.
Apartment partition walls
The ﬂat division walls also consists of 3/4 wide brick stones. But un-
like the ﬁre walls, they function as separation of the ﬁre cells instead
of the ﬁre sections. Therefore, the walls must fulﬁll EI60 require-
ment, however as they already satisﬁes REI120, this requirement is
fulﬁlled with no further investigation.
The diﬀerent ﬁre divisions have been presented. As described the ﬁre cell di-
visions fulﬁlls today’s requirements, however the ﬁre section division does not
in all cases. As seen in the previous section on Figure 6.2, it is chosen not to
use the existing ﬂoor divisions as ﬁre section. Since it requires an extensive
intervention compared to the ﬁre walls, in order to upgrade the ﬁre safety spec-
tra. Both horizontal and vertical divisions are not necessary to remain under
the requirement of maximum 600 m2 per section. The chosen solution to make
the existing construction fulﬁll modern structural ﬁre regulations, is therefor to
reinforce the basement deck for ﬁre, along with checking the covering of the ﬁre
walls, and update them if necessary.
The ﬁre section separation for the superstructure can be performed in several
diﬀerent ways. However the ﬁre sections must never exceed 600 m2. As the
existing ﬁre sections is almost 600 m2, there must be a full ﬁre division between
the two building parts. Furthermore, the ﬁre cells must not exceed 150m2.
==PAGE:131==
6.2 Fire analysis of House 2 and House 3
119
6.2
Fire analysis of House 2 and House 3
The ﬁre safety for House 2 and House 3 will be presented together. This is
because a major part of the ﬁre safety is identical within the two cases, hence
repetition is avoided.
6.2.1
Description of the buildings
House 2 has a total height of approximately 21 meters, and an eﬀective height
of about 17.5 meters to the ﬂoor on the top ﬂoor. House 3 has a total height
of approximately 20 meters, and an eﬀective height to the top ﬂoor at about 17
meters. Both buildings are designed as rectangles with six ﬂoors. In both cases,
the existing building contains the three lower ﬂoors, and the new superstructure
contains the three upper ﬂoors. The superstructure for House 2 has the same
design on each ﬂoor, whereas House 3 varies at each ﬂoor.
(a) Illustration of the front of House 2 with the superstructure
(b) Illustration of the bag of House 2 with the superstructure
Figure 6.4: House 2:
Drawings of the building after the superstructure is
added, where the access to the staircases are shown and the place-
ment of the elevators and balconies.
==PAGE:132==
120
Fire strategy
(a) Illustration of the front of House 3 with the superstructure
(b) Illustration of the bag of House 3 with the superstructure
Figure 6.5: House 3:
Drawings of the building after the superstructure is
added, where the access to the staircases along with placement
of the balconies. The elevators are hidden within the building.
Access to House 2 is provided through the existing staircases on the lower three
ﬂoors. From there, each third staircase is continued up to the new upper ﬂoors
along with new elevators. That gives three staircases and three elevators to the
upper ﬂoors, connected with a gallery to the apartments see Figure 6.4. For
House 3 all of the existing staircases are continued up to the new levels, and a
elevator is connected to each staircase inside the building, see Figure 6.5. An
emergency plan for the two buildings, where the procedure for evacuation and
emergency call are shown, can be seen in Appendix 6.1 and 6.2, this plan will
be located on ground ﬂoor in each staircase in both buildings.
The superstructures are designed such that they fulﬁll the requirements for
prescriptive based ﬁre safety according to the "Eksempel samling" [oB06] and
Building regulations [BR115]. However, the ﬁre safety will be checked for perfor-
mance based scenarios to ensure satisfying ﬁre protection for the entire building,
regarding the existing parts and the superstructures. As described in Section
4.3, the ﬁre safety of the existing building part and the new building part are
related. Therefore, the buildings are treated as one connected building in these
==PAGE:133==
6.2 Fire analysis of House 2 and House 3
121
sections, and not as an existing and new building part.
6.2.2
Fire Safety pre-ﬂashover
As mentioned in the overall introduction the aim of this part, is to guarantee
the safety of the people in case of a ﬁre incident. This is done by setting up a
ﬁre safety strategy for the buildings. The performance based check is made for
three diﬀerent ﬁre scenarios per house.
6.2.2.1
Principles for ﬁre safety
The overall principles of the ﬁre safety will be listed along with corresponding
drawings and assumptions.
Categories of usage
The buildings have the same usage category, which is Category 4. The category
is provided on, that the buildings are used doing night for sleeping purposes,
and that the residents have knowledge upon location and utilization of the ﬁre
exits. It is assumed that all people in the building are in position to reach safety
by themselves.
Risks and ﬁre load
The buildings and their usage are not expected to present a greater risk of ﬁre
than other buildings with the same usage, as both buildings are less than 22
meters high. Characteristic for buildings in Category 4 is that they are used for
living purpose in one form or another, in this case apartments. Which entails
a certain proportion of kitchens in the properties, increasing the risk of ﬁre.
The ﬁre load in apartments are relatively high. Which comes from furniture,
electrical appliances, clothing and other ﬂammable materials.
Reasons for the ﬁre technical dimensioning
The superstructures can be deﬁned as prescriptive based traditional construc-
tions, while they fulﬁll requirements determined by the Building regulations of
2015 [BR115], SBI guidelines [Aag08] and the "Eksempelsamlingen" [oB06].
• There are at minimum one staircase for escape and one rescue opening or
balcony. 1
1It is okay that there is only one staircase according to the "Eksempelsamling" [oB06]
chapter 2
==PAGE:134==
122
Fire strategy
• Each ﬁre section is maximum 600 m2.
• There is no room/ﬁre compartment over 150 m2.
• There is under 25 metes to the nearest escape route.
• Escape routes are at least 1.3 meters wide.
• Doors are at least 0.77 meters wide in the ﬁre compartments, and 1.2
meters for the staircases. All doors opens in the direction of escape.
• At minimum one rescue opening in each apartment, while there are under
10 persons per apartment.
The performance based check of the buildings cannot be assimilated as a tradi-
tional construction, therefor the ﬁre safety will be documented by "Information
om brandteknisk dimensionering" [oB04].
Fire strategy
The overall ﬁre strategy is a complete evacuation to terrain in the open. Within
House 2 it will take place through the staircase for the three lower ﬂoors, and
the gallery and staircases for the three upper ﬂoors. The evacuation of House
3 will take place through the staircases for all six ﬂoors.
The elevators will
function as service elevators for the rescue service and evacuation of disabled
residents within House 2. However, the elevator are designed for evacuation if it
becomes necessary in the case, that a staircase is blocked, since there is only one
stairway for escape for House 2. However, in House 3 the elevator is connected
to the staircase and can therefore not comply as a ﬁre section by it self. It will
therefor be shot down in case of ﬁre.
Fire protection
The ﬁre protection will as described earlier be based on the building regulations
2015 [BR115], "Eksempelsamling" [oB06] and "Information om brandteknisk
dimensionering" [oB04]. The ﬁre installations will provide a basis for the level
of safety.
BR15: 5.1 pcs. 1 to 2
– Satisfying security against ﬁre and ﬁre spread to other buildings.
– Safe opportunity for rescuing of people and for extinguishing work.
– Fire safety must be maintained throughout the life of the building.
BR15: 5.2 pcs. 1 to 7
==PAGE:135==
6.2 Fire analysis of House 2 and House 3
123
– Evacuation to the ground in the open, using escape routes that are
easy to identify, reach and use.
– Wall-, ceiling- and ﬂoor-coverings in escape routes must not con-
tribute to ﬁre and smoke development during the evacuation period.
– Each ﬁre device must have a rescue opening.
BR15: 5.3 pcs. 1 to 3
– Building parts must be assembled so that the overall construction is
not inferior than the individual part and to avoid spreading of ﬁre.
BR15: 5.4 pcs. 1+2+13
– Fire installations must be checked and maintained throughout their
lifetime.
– Each apartment must be equipped with smoke alarm system, con-
nected to the power supply and with battery backup. Multi-storey
apartments must have at least one alarm per ﬂoor.
BR15: 5.5 pcs. 1
– Spread ﬁre to other ﬁre devices must be prevented during the evac-
uation time.
BR15: 5.6 pcs. 1
– The rescue service must have proper conditions.
Evacuation
In the case of ﬁre there will be a total evacuation.
Although the staircases
is regarded as a safe place, meaning that the residents achieves safety when
reaching the staircases.
Besides the staircases, there will be a rescue opening in each apartment and in
multi-storey apartments one on each ﬂoor. Which can be used for evacuation
by the rescue service if necessary. The evacuation will be as described above.
When the evacuation is completed, the meeting point will be on the parking
lot north of the building for House 2 and in the playground area north of the
building for House 3.
Fire sectioning
The ﬁre sectioning of both houses are illustrated on drawing 6.2 and 6.3 in
the Prospectus. Containing corresponding explanations for the diﬀerent ﬂoor
designs and the whole building.
With limited explanations the vertical and
==PAGE:136==
124
Fire strategy
horizontal sectioning on the 4TH ﬂoor of House 2 is shown on Figure 6.6. Sim-
ilarly the vertical and the horizontal sectioning on the 4TH ﬂoor of House 3 is
shown on Figure 6.7. Blue indicates ﬁre compartments and red visualizes the
ﬁre sections. Furthermore, the purple R marks the the rescue openings.
(a) Vertical ﬁre separations of House 2 4TH ﬂoor and marks of escape routes
(b) Horizontal ﬁre separations of
House 2
Figure 6.6: House 2: Fire section and ﬁre compartments along with location
of exit routes and rescue openings.
==PAGE:137==
6.2 Fire analysis of House 2 and House 3
125
(a) Vertical ﬁre separations of House 3 4TH ﬂoor and marks of escape routes
(b) Horizontal ﬁre separations of House 3
Figure 6.7: House 3: Fire section and ﬁre compartments for House 3 along
with location of exit routes and rescue openings.
6.2.2.2
Location of the building on the site
Both House 2 and House 3 is a part of a group of buildings placed on one large
site, thus there is a risk of ﬁre spreading to the surrounding buildings, which
must be investigated.
During the renovation, the existing facades can be refurbished, if desired. But
the existing facades can also be preserved. The new facades from Cembrit are
==PAGE:138==
126
Fire strategy
of non-combustible material, A2, s1-d0 Appendix 5.1. To assess the necessary
distances for surrounding buildings as well as the common boundary, account
must be taken of the most critical facade cladding, which are the existing facades.
As no description of their ﬁre properties is within the archive material, they are
considered to be inferior to facade covering than Class 1, K1 10 B-s1,d0. This
gives the following minimum distances for location of the property;
• 5 meters to common boundary, road, or path.
• 10 meters to other buildings.
House 2 is located along with four other buildings. Four of the buildings are
located in a square, giving some critical distance at the corners. Here the min-
imum distance is about 6 meters. Therefore, it must be checked whether the
existing facades comply with K1 10 B-s1,d0. If this is the case, a distance down
to 5 meters is approved. If not, the existing facades must be refurbished to-
gether with the superstructure, or an application for dispensation for a smaller
distance than 10 meters must be made. The location of the properties is shown
in Figure 6.8
Figure 6.8: House 2: The red circle marks the investigated building and the
shortest distance the the neighbor building as 6 meters.
Unlike House 2, House 3 certainly meets the requirements. There are 10 build-
ings on the same cadastral, the smallest distance between two buildings is 19
meters as marked in Figure 6.9 where the site plan for House 3 is illustrated.
==PAGE:139==
6.2 Fire analysis of House 2 and House 3
127
Figure 6.9: House 3: The red circle marks the investigated building with the
shortest distance to the neighbor bulding as 19 meters.
6.2.2.3
Background for the ﬁre safety design
Acceptance criteria for personal safety
The performance based check of the two buildings concerns two main criteria,
one for visibility and one for the smoke layer height. The criteria is determined
based on "Information om brandteknisk dimensionering" [oB04], and shortly
described below.
The visibility criteria in Equation 6.1 is checked with the evacuation time by
Equation 6.2 and 6.3.
tvisibility =
3
r
D
L
3V ∆Heff
D0α
(6.1)
tevac = ta + tr+d + ttr + tq
(6.2)
tevac < tvisibility
(6.3)
The smoke layer may not exceed Equation 6.4.
z = (1.6 + 0.1H)
(6.4)
==PAGE:140==
128
Fire strategy
The empirical formulas are valid if the following criteria are met:
0.2 ≤z
H ≤1.0
(6.5)
0.9 ≤Afloor
H2
≤14
(6.6)
If the two criteria is met, the time to the critical smoke layer can be determined
with the empirical Equation 6.7. Even-though the criteria is met or not the
smoke layer can be determined theoretically by Equation 6.8.
tsmoke,empi = A
H2
H



4
3



˙Q



1
3



exp




1.11 −z
H
0.28




(6.7)
tsmoke,theo =





 
z
H
!


−2
3



−1




· 3A
2 · kv · ˙Q



1
3



· H



2
3



(6.8)
tsmoke,empi > tevac
and/or
tsmoke,theo > tevac
(6.9)
The time needed for the smoke layer to reach the criteria is checked with regards
to the evacuation time. The smoke layer increases diﬀerent in the ﬁrst phase
of ﬁre, the growing phase, within the second phase the smoke formation is
conceived as steady. However doing this study, it is assumed that the ﬁre in all
cases are steady, since this gives the most conservative calculations.
==PAGE:141==
6.2 Fire analysis of House 2 and House 3
129
6.2.2.4
Fire safety design
Dimension strategy
The two buildings are dimensioned for performance based conditions. The di-
mension strategy is to look at three diﬀerent cases of ﬁre for each building:
House 2:
– Scenario 1: If ﬁre blocks the middle staircase.
– Scenario 2: Fire in a kitchen.
– Scenario 3: Fire in multistory apartment, kitchen.
House 3:
– Scenario 1: Total evacuation.
– Scenario 2: Fire in kitchen.
– Scenario 3: Fire in multistory apartment, kitchen.
The scenarios are determined on the background of illuminating the following
cases: illustrating quick smoke ﬁlling, blocking one evacuation route, and hidden
propagation. The burning materiel is based on the furniture, machines, and
decorations in the building. All the scenarios has a realistic chance to happen,
while all the burning part is easy to ignite.
Physical description of the design ﬁre
The furniture of the buildings may mostly be ﬂammable materials, thus the ﬁre
cases are assumed to spread by an average speed. Therefore, the growth rate
for all cases, for both houses, are set to medium. This gives a α-value equal to
0.012, from table 4.1.1 in Formula ﬁnder [Ben14]. The occupant densities are set
to 0.05 persons per square meter for both houses. Which gives 5 persons for each
100 m2. For each scenario the item causing the ﬁre is determined together with
its heat release rate, which is based on experiments from [Swe93] and [Spe08]:
House 2:
– Scenario 1: Only evacuation time, so not important.
– Scenario 2: Coﬀee maker, Q = 40kW, polystyrene.
– Scenario 3: Coﬀee maker, Q = 40kW, polystyrene.
House 3:
==PAGE:142==
130
Fire strategy
– Scenario 1: Only evacuation time, so not important.
– Scenario 2: Coﬀee maker, Q = 40kW, polystyrene.
– Scenario 3: Coﬀee maker, Q = 40kW, polystyrene.
Critical position of the ﬁre
The placement of the ﬁres in the ﬁre scenarios are based on the longest dis-
tance to the escape route, and when eﬀecting most people. The scenarios are
illustrated on drawing 6.4 and 6.5 in the Prospectus with corresponding expla-
nations. As an example, scenario 2 for House 2 is illustrated on Figure 6.10.
Figure 6.10: House 2: Illustration of ﬁre scenario 2.
Dimensioning (Performance based)
The scenarios have been calculated and the results have been analyzed. The
input values and calculations are in Appendix 6.3 and 6.4 for House 2 and 3
respectively. Below the results of the diﬀerent cases are listed in Table 6.1 and
==PAGE:143==
6.2 Fire analysis of House 2 and House 3
131
6.2. The reaction time for each scenario are from Formula ﬁnder [Ben14] table
13.1.2.
Table 6.1: House 2: Evacuation and time to critical conditions for the three in-
vestigated scenarios. Shows that scenario 3 reach critical conditions
before the residents have reach to a safe place.
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
time [min]
Check
time [min]
Check
time [min]
Check
tevac
34.44
OK
0.77
OK
2.05
OK
tvisibility
-
-
1.51
OK
1.91
NOT OK
tsmoke,empi
-
-
0.79
OK
-
-
tsmoke,theo
-
-
1,18
OK
2.35
OK
Table 6.2: House 3: Evacuation and time to critical conditions for the three
investigated scenarios. Non of the scenarios reach critical conditions
before the residents have reach to safe place.
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
time [min]
Check
time [min]
Check
time [min]
Check
tevac
15.85
OK
0.76
OK
2.80
OK
tvisibility
-
-
1.56
OK
1.88
OK
tsmoke,empi
-
-
0.87
OK
-
-
tsmoke,theo
-
-
1.30
OK
2.26
OK
The reason why scenario 1 is only checked for total evacuation time, is because
it is only a check to see if a suﬃcient number of staircases have been established.
It is seen for both houses that the total evacuation, to the outside, is satisfying.
The main part of the evacuation period is caused by queue formation at the exit
door. In House 2 the evacuation consists of about four times as many people per
staircase than for that of House 3. The queue formation is therefore greater for
House 2, and causes a bigger total evacuation time, even-though the evacuation
distance is almost the same for both buildings.
Scenario 2 for both houses deals with a kitchen based ﬁre in a one-leveled apart-
ment. It is seen that the evacuation time out of the apartment is completed
before critical conditions arise for both houses.
The reason for disregarding
pre-movement time is due to the fact that, the scenario deals exclusively with
the accident apartment, and it is expected that people within the apartment
react immediately in the event of a ﬁre. Therefore, the calculation does not
take people, in the aﬀected apartment, that do not respond to the ﬁre alarm
or visible ﬁre into account. The safety for people that do not react cannot be
==PAGE:144==
132
Fire strategy
fulﬁlled no matter which ﬁre measures that are conducted in the building.
Scenario 3 deals with ﬁre in the kitchen, similar to scenario 2, but in this case
in a two-level apartment. It is seen that the evacuation is not completed before
critical conditions arise, when an exit is only existing in the bottom ﬂoor. This
is solved by establishing exit on both ﬂoors of the apartments. In this way, the
evacuation time becomes similar to that in scenario 2, thus it can be completed
before critical conditions occur.
6.2.2.5
Passive ﬁre safety
The passive ﬁre safety is carried out together with the establishment of the
building. Passive ﬁre safety is active all the time, if there is a ﬁre or not.
Fire sections
The ﬁre sections are carried out using REI120 A2-s1,d0 building parts on all
ﬂoors, except for the top ﬂoor where REI60 A2-s1,d0 is acceptable. The ﬁre
compartments/cells are divided by EI60 building parts. Furthermore, doors to
ﬁre sections are at least EI60. The sectioning of the two buildings can be seen in
the Prospectus 6.2 and 6.3. The staircases must be conducted using minimum
R30 A2-s1,d0 building parts.
Other passive ﬁre safety precautions
Besides the ﬁre sections and compartments, there is some other passive ﬁre
initiatives for both buildings listen below:
• Pressurized staircases.
• Pressurized elevators.
• Signs and marks for evacuation on ground ﬂoor.
• The doors to the staircases and exit doors will be 1.5 meters wide and the
apartment doors 1.2 meter.
6.2.2.6
Active ﬁre safety
The active ﬁre safety is the safety that are activated in case of a ﬁre. This can
be diﬀerent through the building on each ﬂoor.
==PAGE:145==
6.2 Fire analysis of House 2 and House 3
133
Active ﬁre protection systems
All apartments in both houses are provided with a smoke alarm system, accord-
ing to the Building Regulations 2015.
6.2.2.7
Access of the rescue service
There will be established access roads around the whole building in both cases,
such that the rescue service have access to all exits and rescue openings within 40
meters. The roads will be at minimum 2.8 meters wide. In front of the building
there will be a ﬁre rescue area 4 meters wide, with a distance of 10 meters to the
building. The roads and rescue area for both houses are illustrated on Figure
6.11 and 6.12.
Figure 6.11: House 2: The red lines marks the existing roads and the blue
line marks the road that will be conducted in connection with
the renovation.
So the rescue service has access to all rescue
openings.
==PAGE:146==
134
Fire strategy
Figure 6.12: House 3: The red lines marks the existing roads and the blue
line marks the road that will be conducted in connection with
the renovation. To fulﬁll access to all rescue openings for the
rescue service.
In the basement of both buildings, there will be a safe ﬁre service room. This
room will also function as the operation room for the diﬀerent ﬁre systems in
the building, including the elevators.
6.2.2.8
Operation and Maintenance
According to the Building Regulations 2015 [BR115] the ﬁre technical systems
most be performed such that they are reliable and can be easily controlled and
maintained throughout the buildings lifetime.
There will be regular inspections once a year according to DBI recommendations,
[DBI]. These controls will be documented by control schemes, which will be
saved for three years. This includes the elevators.
The caretaker will be responsible for the maintenance and operation of all the
ﬁre systems and other conditions that eﬀects the ﬁre safety. This is in order, such
that there is one to contact always, if concerns arises. It is also the caretakers
responsibility, that all test will be made and documented.
Besides the ﬁre
systems, there are other parts of the ﬁre safety, which most be checked. This
could be, as an example, that the access to the operation room most be clear
==PAGE:147==
6.2 Fire analysis of House 2 and House 3
135
at any time. The evacuation routes and exit doors most never be blocked and
always be easy to reach.
All this will make the operation and maintenance of the ﬁre safety of the building
eﬀective and structured. The necessary documents will be made and the ﬁre
safety will be met, at all time.
6.2.3
Fire Safety post-ﬂashover, Structural ﬁre Safety
The structural ﬁre safety of the buildings will be investigated. This is done by
checking critical elements in both buildings. The check consists of comparing
the reduced bearing capacity after a ﬁre incident, with the reduced accident
load of a ﬁre.
6.2.3.1
Critical elements
The main structure elements in both houses are the bearing inner walls and
slabs. The most critical elements for the existing buildings and the superstruc-
tures are checked for ﬁre accident.
The reduced accidental load, in case of ﬁre, is determined by Equation 6.10:
Ed = Gconstruction + Gother + ψ1.1 · Q + Ad
(6.10)
Where Ad in this case is 0 and the partial coeﬃcient ψ1.1 = 0.3 for this case
[mf.16].
Resistance class
The load bearing elements most have a ﬁre sustainability for at minimum
REI120 and be covered by A2-s1,d0 material.
In the archive material it is
determined, that the cover material of the existing walls in both houses is in-
ﬂammable, which corresponds to A2-s1,d0. For the superstructure ﬁre gypsum
is used as covering material, which fulﬁll the requirements for A2-s1,d0 materi-
als, see data sheet in Appendix 5.3.
The walls that separates the ﬁre compartments/ cells must be separated by
EI60. However these walls are also the bearing walls, so they will be checked as
bearing elements.
==PAGE:148==
136
Fire strategy
Critical elements of the superstructure
In the previous chapter the bearing capacity of all the bearing elements in the
superstructure are checked. However, they need to be checked in case of ﬁre as
well. This is done by checking the reduced bearing capacity in case of ﬁre, with
the accidental load determined by Equation 6.10.
When checking the constructions for ﬁre dimensioning, the conversion factor
for strength is higher. This is because that ﬁre dimensioning allows for a 20%
quantile, where otherwise a 5% quantile is required.
The reduced cross-section is based on the same terms for all the carrying parts
of the super structure, beams as well as columns. It is determined by calcu-
lating the reduced cross-section after ﬁre inﬂuence of 120 minutes. The burned
depth,dchar,n , in case of ﬁre is determined plus 7 mm, which take the weakened
part of the wood into account, according to [mf.16] page 315. When the reduced
cross-sections are determined, the bearing parts are checked as in Chapter 5.
However, the deformation of the bearing beams are not relevant when looking
at the ﬁre dimension. On the other hand, the weak axis must be checked in the
column calculation. This is due to the fact, that the weak axis is not ﬁxed in
case of ﬁre, since the plate material is burned away.
The calculations determines how much ﬁre protection, that are necessary to
fulﬁll the ﬁre requirement of REI120. The ﬁre protection consists of a diﬀerent
number of ﬁre gypsum plates. All the calculation can be found in Appendix 5.7,
5.12, 5.20 and 5.22 for House 2 and Appendix 5.8, 5.13, 5.21 and 5.23 for House
3. In Table 6.3 the ﬁre protection for the diﬀerent constructions can be seen.
In Appendix 5.4 the diﬀerent types of gypsum screws can be seen, depending of
the number of layers. That is, for four layers of ﬁre gypsum, there are used at
minimum 3.9x70mm screws.
Table 6.3: House 2 & 3: List of ﬁre protection used of the wood structures in
the superstructure. Where the most comprehensive is four layers
of ﬁre gypsum.
Fire gypsum
[layers]
Roof
2
Ceiling/Floor
3
Non-bearing
inner walls
1
Bearing
inner walls
4
Exterior walls
4
==PAGE:149==
6.2 Fire analysis of House 2 and House 3
137
Critical elements in the existing building part
The critical wall in House 2 is made by concrete casted on site and concrete
elements in House 3. The critical wall for House 2 is wall ﬁve and in House
3 it is wall one. Both walls are checked for the new increased load from the
superstructure in Chapter 5.
Fire resistance is checked by table values from Eurocode 2.2 DS/EN 1992-1-2
[Sta13a]. The minimum dimension for load-bearing walls is determined by Table
5.4 in [Sta13a] for REI120. In order to be able to read the dimension, the degree
of utilization of the wall must be determined for accidental load. However, since
the utilization is suﬃciently small for ordinary load, this is used as it is on the
safe side. In both cases, µfi < 0.35, which gives a minimum thickness of the
bearing walls of 150 millimeters. The existing walls therefore have suﬃcient ﬁre
resistance to REI120.
It is not enough to check the bearing walls, the slabs must also be checked for
ﬁre. The ﬁre resistance is corresponding to the walls checked by table values
from Eurocode 2.2 [Sta13a]. The minimum thickness is determined by Table
5.8 for REI120 to be 120 millimeters. Both in House 2 and 3 the existing slabs
is 180 millimeters thick, thereby the ﬁre resistance for 120 minutes is fulﬁlled.
However, this requirement sets a demand for a minimum reinforcement cover
layer of 25 mm. There are no detail drawings, concerning the reinforcements
placement in the deck construction, available in the archive material for both
houses. So the reinforcements placement must be checked.
But the basement deck, in both cases, is only 100 mm thick and it must therefor
be subject to reinforcement regarding ﬁre. The reinforcement can be done in
diﬀerent ways, but one way is to place ﬁre protection in the bottom of the deck.
Fire protection of 30 mm CONLIT 150 Hvid vlies from Rockwool can be used
connected to the existing deck with concrete-adhesive, [Bra].
==PAGE:150==
138
Fire strategy
==PAGE:151==
Chapter 7
Final concept
In this chapter, the ﬁnal solution for the three superstructures will be presented.
Thus it concludes all of the previous discussions into an actual product.
7.1
Introduction
In the previous sections, the technical description of the superstructures are
described. This section will focus on the design and architectonic parts of the
construction. In relation to this, a 3D model have been prepared for the three
buildings using SketchUp. Likewise, diﬀerent solutions for plan division have
been prepared in AutoCad.
The building regulations ensure accessibility to a certain extent, corresponding
to quality level C [Jen15a]. It is desirable to meet quality level B for the super-
structures, so that they can be used by people with disabilities. This yields some
diﬀerent requirements for the layout of the buildings. Eg. the passage widths
must be at minimum 1.5 meters, where the building regulations only demands
1.0 meter. All the requirements are described in SBI 249 [Jen15a], and they are
fulﬁlled for quality level B in all three cases.
==PAGE:152==
140
Final concept
When the design of the superstructures are to be determined, there is an inﬁnite
sea of possibilities, depending on what the developer wants from the superstruc-
ture. It has been chosen to make three diﬀerent solutions, illustrating three
diﬀerent focus points. This shows that the design of the superstructures are not
limited, even-though it has to be established on existing buildings.
House 1 has no signiﬁcant residual bearing capacity, therefore a major conversion
is necessary to establish a superstructure. It is therefore important, that the
existing residents beneﬁt from the renovation.
Therefore, the focus for the
solution proposal is to increase comfort, as well as providing additional square
meters for the existing residents as well as new residents.
On the other hand, House 2 has high residual capacity. Which opens up for
other opportunities than those of House 1.
The solution proposal has been
prepared, so that the existing residents are disturbed at a minimum. Similarly,
the three new ﬂoors will have the same design. This solution is therefore the
simplest of the three, but provides a high level of utilization of square meters
and a eﬃcent module division.
In House 3 the residual capacity is similar to that of House 2. The solution have
taken the main focus on giving the residents the pleasure of large balconies. This
solution therefore contains displaced plans that create a balcony environment
for the new apartments.
This concludes the main goals of the superstructure design. The goals are visible
from tabel 7.1.
Table 7.1: The main design goals of the three renewal projects are listed below.
Main focus goal of the renewal
House 1
To maximize the entire construction potential.
House 2
To minimize disturbance of the existing residents.
House 3
To create attractive balconies with great sunlight.
==PAGE:153==
7.2 House 1
141
7.2
House 1
The building has no residual capacity for sustaining a superstructure, thus an
intervention in the existing conditions are necessary, in order to establish a su-
perstructure. As previously described, no concrete solution has been developed
for this property, but rather a description of how a superstructure can be made
possible and carried out. When the renovation handles interventions in existing
conditions, the ﬁnal solution must beneﬁt the entire building, including existing
residents. It must therefor introduce some beneﬁts for the residents, so that
they will participate in a renovation. In order to weigh up the genes they are
subjected to, during the reconstruction.
There is no room inside the building optimal to establish an elevator, it was
therefor decided to establish a new gallery with elevators and staircases. The
new entrance to the apartments will take place through the existing bathroom.
The new bathrooms will then be placed in the existing staircase which is abol-
ished. In addition, the kitchens will be renewed with a bay with dining area.
The bays have an added advantage, as they create small private spaces, which
can be used as balconies. The gallery is 4.5 meters deep at the indentation,
which adds extra shade to the room on the north facade. The ﬂoor plans will
be presented in the next section, but due to the shadow eﬀect, the room on the
north side is not ﬁtted as a living room, it will therefor only be used as hallway
or bedroom. Depending on whether internal or external reinforcement of the
existing structures is used, internal or external re-insulation is established.
The superstructure thus contains ﬁve major improvements to the existing con-
ditions, and hence towards the existing residents:
• Elevators
• Added square meters, 15m2 per apartment
• New and bigger bathrooms
• New dining area in the kitchen
• Re-insulation
The overall design of House 1, with a new superstructure is presented by Figure
7.1, where the existing facades are remained.
Additional illustrations of the
building can be found in Prospectus 7.1. Solutions where the existing facade is
preserved and renovated are shown.
==PAGE:154==
142
Final concept
(a) The existing building front.
(b) New front of the building with internal reinforcement
==PAGE:155==
7.2 House 1
143
(c) New back side of the building with internal reinforcement
(d) Illustration of the new balcony environment
Figure 7.1: House 1: Presentation of the 3D model of House 1. There the zoom
at the end illustrates the new balcony and gallery environment.
Plan design
According to the layout of the ﬂoor plans, diﬀerent proposals have been de-
veloped. All the proposals ﬁts in the existing bearing system with the main
partition wall. The apartment sizes are ranging from 84m2 to 168 m2 divided
on either 1 or 2 ﬂoors. The placement of bathroom and kitchen room are ﬁxed
for practical perspectives regarding water and installations. They are placed
at same spot in both the new and the existing construction. The spacing of
==PAGE:156==
144
Final concept
the rest of the rooms by internal partitions can vary in the apartments. Hence,
the residents are therefor provided the opportunity of designing the apartment
speciﬁcally to there need and desire, to a certain extend. On Figure 7.2 diﬀer-
ent designs of apartments are illustrated for diﬀerent types of residents. Which
shows that the building can be attractive for both students and people with
reduced mobility. Furthermore, the two-storey apartments is particularly useful
for families with children. The number of available apartments after the ren-
ovation are summed up in Table 7.2, if the distribution is to use student and
disable apartments on 4TH ﬂoor and family apartments on 5TH and 6TH ﬂoor.
Table 7.2: House 1: Available number of the diﬀerent apartments sizes, after
a superstructure is conducted
Apartment type
Number
Existing
36
New, Disable
6
New, Student
6
New, Family
12
On the plan for disabled people a sketchy decor is illustrated, to visualize that
the necessary maneuver area is available.
The planing is designed to fulﬁll
quality level B for availability by SBI 249 [Jen15a]. All the ﬂoor plans can be
seen in the Prospectus 7.2 in scale.
(a) Disable people, design and areas,
1 bedroom, 84 m2
(b) Student apartment, design and areas,
1 bedroom 84 m2
==PAGE:157==
7.3 House 2
145
(c) Family apartment, two-story design, 3
bedrooms 168 m2
(d) Family apartment, two-story areas, 3
bedrooms 168 m2
Figure 7.2: House 1: Design proposals for diﬀerent ﬂoor plans with area mea-
surements.
7.3
House 2
Contrary to House 1, the desire, in this case, is to aﬀect the existing residents
as little as possible. Therefor, it have been chosen only to extend three of the
existing staircases to the superstructure together with three elevators. With this
solution, only every third entrance will be aﬀected by the renovation. The dis-
advantage to this solution, is that the existing apartments in the other entrances
will not have access to an elevator. However, all apartments in the superstruc-
ture will be connected to the elevators, hence the requirement for an elevator in
buildings greater than three levels are fulﬁlled. The superstructure consists of
modules based on Scandi Byg’s principles, as described in the previous chapters.
However, there are some parts of the structure that is ordered externally; this
concerns the elevators, shaft, staircases, and the gallery construction.
On Figure 7.3 the overall design solution for House 2 is presented with exist-
ing facades remained. More illustrations of the building can be found in the
Prospectus 7.3.
In addition, Prospectus 7.3 provides illustrations where the
facades are renovated as well. Beside the facades, it could also be relevant to
extend the existing balconies.
==PAGE:158==
146
Final concept
(a) Existing building, backside
(b) New backside of the building
(c) New front of the building
==PAGE:159==
7.3 House 2
147
(d) Illustration of the new gallery environment
Figure 7.3: House 2: Presentation of the 3D model. Sub-ﬁgure d illustrates
the connection for the gallery, staircases and elevators.
Plan design
As previously seen in House 1, diﬀerent ﬂoor plans have been developed for the
superstructure. The only change in the existing building part, is in the three
apartments where the elevator shafts are created. The elevators takes up most of
the existing living room in the aﬀected apartments. Therefore, the new division
of the apartment is a bit diﬀerent as seen on Figure 7.4, where the elevator takes
7.5 m2 of the existing apartment.
The apartments size of the superstructure are ranging from 51 m2 to 135 m2
divided on either 1 or 2 leveled apartments. Kitchen and bathrooms have a
ﬁxed placement, at the same place as in the existing apartments. This is due to
practical perspectives for water and installations.
==PAGE:160==
148
Final concept
(a) Existing apartment
(b) New apartment with elevator
Figure 7.4: House 2: Change of apartment layout in the existing building part
when adding elevators.
On Figure 7.5 the solutions for the diﬀerent types of apartments are illustrated.
The two-leveled apartments are placed on the 5TH and 6TH ﬂoor by the en-
trances without a staircase or elevator. Studio apartments are placed on every
new ﬂoors, in the apartments connected to the elevators or staircases. The dis-
ability apartments are spanning the rest of the 4TH ﬂoor. This three types of
apartments, makes the building attractive for everyone from students, disable
people, to families with children. All the planes are made, such as they ﬁt into
the module division of the superstructure. The number of available apartments
after the renovation are summed up in Table 7.3.
Table 7.3: House 2: Available number of the diﬀerent apartments sizes, after
a superstructure is conducted.
Apartment type
Number
Existing
54
New, Disable
12
New, Student
6
New, Family
18
To mark the necessary maneuver area in the apartments for disable people, a
sketchy decor is illustrated. All plans can be seen in the Prospectus 7.4.
==PAGE:161==
7.4 House 3
149
(a) Disable people, design and areas,
1 bedroom, 67 m2
(b) Student apartment, design and areas,
1 bedroom 51 m2
(c) Family apartment, two-story design, 3
bedrooms 135 m2
(d) Family apartment, two-story areas, 3
bedrooms 135 m2
Figure 7.5: House 2: Design proposals for diﬀerent ﬂoor plans with area mea-
surements for the superstructure.
7.4
House 3
The solution for House 3 provides varying ﬂoor plans, in order to create great
balconies. All the staircases, in the existing building, are extended up to the
superstructure together with the new elevators. The new elevators are placed
inside the building in extension of the staircases, and can be used by all six
ﬂoors. The superstructure consists of Scandi Byg’s modules. However, there
is some part of the structure, that will be ordered externally, this concerns
the elevators, shaft, and staircases. Information has been gathered from four
diﬀerent elevator companies, see Chapter 5.
The design of the building, can be seen on Figure 7.6, where the existing facades
==PAGE:162==
150
Final concept
are remained. For more illustrations and illustrations with renovated facades
refer Prospectus 7.5.
(a) Existing building, backside
(b) New backside of the building
(c) New front of the building
==PAGE:163==
7.4 House 3
151
(d) Illustration of the new balcony environment
Figure 7.6: House 3: Presentation of the 3D model. Sub-ﬁgure (d) presents
the new balcony environment created by the shifted plan layouts.
Plan design
The addition of elevators, changes every apartment in the existing part of the
building. While it is placed half/half in each apartment. The new ﬂoor plans,
in the existing part of the building, are illustrated on Figure 7.7, where it can be
seen that the new elevators takes 3.5 m2 in each apartment. It can be seen, that
in all of the right apartments, the two chambers are replaced by one bedroom
instead. However, the left apartments get a bit smaller living rooms.
(a) Dimensions
(b) Room decor
Figure 7.7: House 3: Change of apartment layout when adding elevators. The
elevator takes up a bit of place in each apartment.
For the superstructure there are two diﬀerent types of apartment designs. In a
size range from 74 m2 to 129 m2 on one or two leveled apartments. In consider-
ation of the water and installation extension to the superstructure, the kitchen
==PAGE:164==
152
Final concept
and bathroom are placed in the same location as in the existing building part.
Where the two-leveled apartments are placed on the 5TH and 6TH ﬂoor. The
apartments for students and disable people are placed on the 4TH ﬂoor of the
building. The number of available apartments after the renovation are summed
up in Table 7.4.
Table 7.4: House 3: Available number of the diﬀerent apartments sizes, after
a superstructure is conducted.
Apartment type
Number
Existing
24
New, Disable
4
New, Student
4
New, Family
8
The solution for the diﬀerent apartment types can be seen on Figure 7.8. As
for House 1 and 2, the maneuver area are marked in the apartments for disable
people, all the plans can be seen in scale on Prospectus 7.6. All the planes are
made, such that they ﬁt into the module division of the superstructure.
(a) Disable people & Student, design and areas, 1 bedroom, 74 m2
(b) Family apartment, two-story design, 3
bedrooms 129 m2
(c) Family apartment, two-story areas, 3
bedrooms 129 m2
Figure 7.8: House 3: Design proposals for diﬀerent ﬂoor plans.
==PAGE:165==
Chapter 8
Discussion
Throughout this thesis, several aspects have been aﬀected. The results for which
will now be discussed. The main aspect, during the preparation of creating a
superstructure, is the residual capacity analysis. It can be discussed whether
just three buildings are enough to establish a realistic picture of the building
styles, habits, and potential for the period. However, the three houses of choice
are located under three diﬀerent building methods, concerning the period. They
present three diﬀerent types of bearing material, as well as three diﬀerent static
systems. So even-though, this thesis narrows its focus on three properties, they
together create a nice framework of the period of construction due to their
diversity.
House 1, which represents traditional constructions, starts out with overloaded
existing conditions, and thus no useful residual capacity is left for the superstruc-
ture. However, the fact that the result yields overload of the main partition wall
and the outer walls, does not give rise to concern. Since, the assumption that
the existing roof is disregarded when removed, during a potential renovation,
makes the result of the facades appear more critical. In addition, the property
has existed for more than 60 years, without any negligence of any form, which
may indicate that today’s calculations underestimate the strengths of existing
masonry.
Masonry/ traditional construction techniques have been used for many years.
==PAGE:166==
154
Discussion
Therefore, it has been possible to optimize the construction potential, whilst
minimizing the amount of bearing force. Thus, there is no residual capacity to
exploit, when establishing a new superstructure. As concrete construction has
just initiated its way into the market, it is a new and therefore not optimized
technique, providing that the properties have large volumes of residual capacity.
Since it is clear, that it would be irresponsible to build to the capacity limit,
when using a new construction method like concrete.
One other reason for the high residual capacity in concrete structures, is due
to the fact that the smallest dimension is determined by rewarding ﬁre require-
ments at the time of construction, and not after critical load capacity. Which
is substantiated by the results of the ﬁre investigation. This is seen, because
the diﬀerence between ﬁre protection, of the period of 1950-1980 compared with
today, is not conspicuous. Hence, there is no major changes to be made in the
existing conditions, to upgrade them to fulﬁll modern requirements. For this
reason, the majority of the ﬁre analysis, in this thesis, concerns the superstruc-
ture and overall ﬁre conditions of the properties.
By a closer inspection of masonry vs.
concrete, the results are not up to a
major discussion. Concrete constructions from the period 1950-1980 are more
open regarding a superstructure than masonry buildings.
The result of the
traditional masonry construction, House 1, is so critical, that it can be discussed
whether it is ever economically feasible to establish a superstructure. This is
due to the fact that, in order for a superstructure to be realized, the bearing
system must be highly reinforced; or the superstructure must be worn by a new
bearing system. No matter what solution is followed, this will greatly aﬀect the
existing construction and its residents. That is, in addition to the cost of the
actual renovation, a signiﬁcant cost for rehousing or reimbursing of the existing
residents is unavoidable. It is estimated that the total cost vs. the gain will not
be beneﬁcial. Which also forms the basis for the absence of a concrete solution
for House 1 in this research.
The main diﬀerence between the two concrete buildings is, the slabs of House 2
are a double-sided plate, which means that all sides are bearing. This is not the
case for House 3. In the third house only the transverse inner walls function as
bearing parts. In addition, there columns are established in the facades of House
2. However, despite the diﬀerence in the static system, the results of the two
properties are almost identical. If the construction consists of concrete elements
or cast on site, it has a high residual capacity. This creates a good foundation for
a superstructure, which can thus be done without any intervention in existing
conditions. With the choice of modular construction, as building concept for
the superstructure, the need for refurbishment is also reduced/ eliminated. This
is due to the short construction process on the site, and that the construction is
carried out without scaﬀold to the detriment of existing residents. Additionally,
==PAGE:167==
155
the most important parts of the building are manufactured at the factory, so
the noise levels are also minimal when building with modules.
It is therefore important to discuss and consider the various options for choice of
superstructure. Of course, it can always be discussed whether modular construc-
tion is the most optimal solution for the superstructure. As the modules consist
of wooden elements.
This creates a conﬂict in relation to ﬁre optimization,
where other types of materials would be signiﬁcantly better. On the other hand
modular construction, as mentioned above, is particularly advantageous when
taking into account the existing residents. The existing buildings also creates a
limit to exploit the full potential of modular constructions, as the modules must
be adapted to the existing conditions, in which staircase investment in existing
properties is important. With existing staircases in the middle of the property,
as was the case of House 2, it is very diﬃcult to get the modules to ﬁt around.
Which is also one of the reasons why not all of the stairs are continued in the
solution to this case.
The design of the chosen solution proposal is also up for discussion.
These
solutions could be designed at many diﬀerent ways and it is not necessarily, the
most optimal solution implemented in this project. This is because of the focus
on making three diﬀerent solutions with diﬀerent forecasting points. This focus
was chosen to show the wide range of options available when refurbishing, despite
the fact that the solution must be established within the framework of existing
structures. In addition, the construction of lifts to the existing properties are
also established diﬀerently for the three properties.
Depending on what the
desire for the elevator is, it can be established in diﬀerent ways, below the
various conditions for the possibilities, illustrated in this thesis, are collected;
House 1: The elevators are established outside of the existing building, two elevators
for the entire property. Therefore, no square meters of the property is
included. In this solution, the elevator is available for all residents, both
existing and new. In addition, it is not associated with stairs and can
therefore be dimensioned to evacuate in case of ﬁre, if desired and used as
rescue lifts for the rescue crew.
House 2: There is an elevator in every third entrance, inside the property. Thus,
quadratic meters are revoked in a few of the existing apartments. Likewise,
this does not mean that all existing residents are in favor of the elevator,
but all new apartments have access to the lifts. The lifts are established in
a separate ﬁre department, and can therefore also be used for evacuation
and rescue in case of ﬁre.
House 3: In each entrance an elevator is connected to the existing staircase. Thus,
quadratic meters are included in all existing apartments, on the other
==PAGE:168==
156
Discussion
hand, all existing as well as new residents gets the pleasure of the elevator.
As the elevator is established in continuation of the staircase, they are
connected to each-others ﬁre sections and the lifts will therefore not be
able, to be used for ﬁre either as evacuation or rescue.
In order to make the most out of the module building potential, it has a great
inﬂuence how many diﬀerent modules are used and how much redundancy they
provide. As illustrated in Figure 4.3, it is seen that you want to get at least 10
identical modules, in order to achieve highest proﬁt. In Table 8.1, the number
of modules, for the selected solution for House 2 and 3 are shown. The ﬁrst row
shows the number of modules required for a single solution, in the second row
the number of modules required for an solution covering the entire cadastral is
shown. The table shows that, as described in the report, the one-plan solution
used in House 2 is somewhat more optimal than the shifted plan solution used
in House 3, if only the number of modules in the existing properties are viewed.
However, it should be said that House 2 is nine entrances long, whereas House 3
is only four entrances long. The reason behind why the second row is shown, ie.
the entire cadastral, is to show how large the potential for superstructures are in
these types of properties. It is not a coincidence that these properties coexists
with other buildings on the same cadastral. In fact, it is actually characteristic
for buildings from this period. For House 2 there are two blocks of three ﬂoors
more on the cadastral and around House 3 there are six blocks with four ﬂoors.
The solution proposals could be transferred to these properties with only small
change due to diﬀerent number of entrances.
Table 8.1: Number of modules used for the diﬀerent solutions for House 2 &
House 3. The numbers are shown for only the investigated building
and the sum for all relevant buildings within the cadastral.
House 2
House 3
Modules
1a
1b
2
3
1
2
3
4
5
6
Investigated house
36
36
18
18
24
8
8
8
4
4
Whole cadastral
80
80
40
40
126
42
42
42
21
21
==PAGE:169==
Chapter 9
Conclusion
In order to classify the apartment buildings constructed in Denmark during the
period of 1950-1980, basic knowledge about this period have been presented.
This knowledge have been supported by three concrete properties.
Each of
which represents diﬀerent construction techniques used in the period. That is
masonry, insitu, and concrete elements. To illuminate the underlying techniques,
the three buildings have been subject to thorough investigation, in the form of:
• On site visual inspection of the construction
• Collection- and analysis of the available archive material
• In depth residual capacity investigations
• Concise ﬁre analysis of the existing construction
This exploration grounded the engineering framework for extending the existing
buildings with modern superstructures. It was readily concluded, that concrete
based constructions provided great potential for superstructures, whereas the
traditional masonry constructions did not. Masonry apartment constructions
are simply so optimized, that there is no residual capacity left.
==PAGE:170==
158
Conclusion
This paper brieﬂy touched upon some of the measurements available for reinforc-
ing the existing construction, in order to provide the bearing capacity needed by
the masonry constructions in order to support superstructures. However, this
would require a major renovation of the existing building, making the creation
of superstructures unfeasible. Contrary, the concrete constructions, from the
period, sustain a surprisingly high residual capacity. Thus, this type of build-
ings provides optimal conditions for designing and creation of superstructures.
This thesis documented the creation of three leveled superstructures. The super-
structures was created using lightweight materials, allowing the entire extension
to be created without interference or reinforcement of the existing load bear-
ing system. What is more, the superstructures was created with three diﬀerent
design goals, underlining the ﬂexibility:
• To enhance the existing construction potential as much as possible.
• To minimize the nuisance towards the existing residents.
• To optimize and create attractive balconies.
Based on the ﬁre analysis and legislation, it can be concluded that the ﬁre safety,
during 1950-1980 compared with today, have not undertaken major changes for
this types of buildings.
This was reﬂected by ﬁreprooﬁng of the properties,
which were not critical. All properties meet the criteria from the time of con-
struction and can easily be upgraded to present requirements, regarding six
storey apartment buildings, without major intervention. The biggest challenge
in relation to ﬁre safety was thus to get the wooden modules in the superstruc-
ture to meet the requirements.
The ﬁre protection varies from structure to
structure, however the most comprehensive assessment consists of four layers of
ﬁre gypsum. However, the ﬁre analyses does not only concern post ﬂash-over
ﬁre safety. A pre ﬂash-over ﬁre safety analysis have been conducted as well.
In addition, three diﬀerent ﬁre scenarios have been studied, to check if the ﬁre
safety based on prescriptive based ﬁre safety is suﬃcient. The results shows that
the overall evacuation of the buildings is not critical, however the evacuation
from the aﬀected ﬁre cell is. If the residents in the aﬀected ﬁre cell does not
react upon ﬁre immediately, they will not get to a safe place within the building
before critical conditions occurs. However this is a normal result for apartment
buildings, because of the relatively high amount of ﬂammable material leading
the ﬁre to spread fast.
Nowadays regulations requires the presence of elevators in apartment construc-
tions above three ﬂoors. Therefore, the problem of establishing elevators in the
existing properties has been investigated. Elevators can be designed in a variety
of ways depending on the features desired by the lifts. Likewise, the solution
==PAGE:171==
159
depends signiﬁcantly on the design of the superstructure, as well as the layout of
the existing construction. Since it is not useful to establish lifts in eg. a kitchen
or bath, as this will result in a challenge relocating these rooms.
As mentioned, this thesis chose to construct the superstructures using lightweight
wooden modules. However, it is important to understand that these modules is
not a stock product, and they do not determine the ﬂoor plan. In fact, when
extending an existing construction horizontally most of the ﬂoor layout is prede-
termined. Hence, a major task is given of maximizing the module redundancy,
whilst satisfying the existing conditions. This task would be smaller when con-
structing a new building. Since the engineers are able to adjust all parameters
as needed. This is however not possible in the domain of refurbishing.
As said, the existing construction of the building locks some parameters regard-
ing the design of a potential superstructure. Thereby it is not said, that it is
not possible to mix architectonic design and renovation. In all three cases, sim-
ple 3D models have been prepared for the selected solution. Ascertaining that
the possibilities for designing of superstructure are many, despite the fact that
the framework from the existing buildings must be respected. In addition, this
thesis presented multiple proposals for apartment layouts, illustrating that the
design of the building does not impose any restrictions towards its residents.
The apartment layout was designed for students, disabled people, and families.
Since, all the solution proposals dealt with three-leveled superstructures built
on three leveled buildings, this thesis managed to double the amount of square
meters. In other words, twice as many apartments could be created, if the same
divisions was used.
However, as it is desired that larger multileveled apart-
ments should provide comfort for families, the resulting apartment potential of
this solution provided 2/3 of the existing.
Generally, it can be concluded that similar masonry apartment constructions
from the relevant period provides no direct potential for sustaining superstruc-
tures. However, concrete-, element-, and insitu constructions have a great po-
tential for superstructures. This yields better options and possibilities towards
urban renewal using existing buildings. Additionally, constructions of this type
often coexists in clusters, which means that several buildings could be expanded
using the same solution, maximizing the beneﬁts of the modular building tech-
niques.
==PAGE:172==
160
Conclusion
9.1
Future work
This project provides the basis for creating superstructures on existing apart-
ment buildings built in Denmark during the period of 1950-1980, with main
focus on bearing capacity and ﬁre safety. However, these conditions are not the
only ones, that are relevant and interesting regarding this subject. Topics that
are not highlighted in this project and which could be intriguing to dive into
could be:
• To perform samples of existing bearing structures. That is, do they match
the calculation results or are the strength of the existing constructions
underestimated/ overestimated?
• To look into the existing foundation. Does it have suﬃcient bearing ca-
pacity for a superstructure. If not, how can these be enhanced optimally?
• To investigate the energy conditions of the existing buildings. How is it
possible to make an energy upgrade of the existing building in connection
with a superstructure?
==PAGE:173==
Dictionary
In the preparation of this thesis there have been situations where there is no
direct translation of Danish terms. Therefore, a glossary has been drawn up
so that there is no doubt about the meaning of the diﬀerent translations along
with a list of abbreviation used in the thesis.
Dictionary
Air-raid shelter
Cadastral
Firm binders
Flat division
Hollow brick wall
Hollow-block deck
Houseowners’ association
Main partition wall
Payload
Plywood panel
Residual capacity
Separator
Soft pads
Storey-standard house
Unreinforced
3/4 Brick
Sikringsrum
Matrikel
Faste binder
Lejligheds skel
Hulmur
Hulstensdæk
Ejerlav
Hovedskille væg
Nyttelast
Krydsﬁner plade
Restbæreevne
Afstandsliste
Bløde brikker
Etage typehus
Uarmeret
Bredsten
==PAGE:174==
162
Dictionary
Abbreviation
BD
BS
FEM
LN-BO
SLS
ULS
Branddrøj
Brandsikker
Finite element method
Larsen & Nielsen typehus
Serviceability Limit State
Ultimate Limit State
==PAGE:175==
Bibliography
[51]
Hulstensdæk,
334.1.
http://danskbyggeskik.dk/soeg/
bibliotek?k=bauma, 1951.
[13]
Statiske beregninger af ældre murværk. Teknologisk institut, http:
//www.mur-tag.dk/index.php?id=629, 2013.
[Aag08]
Niels-Jørgen Aagaard. SBI gudelines on building regulations. Statens
Byggeforskningsinstitut, 2008.
[AB11]
Claus Bech-Danielsen et al. Anne Beim, Søren Peter Bjarløv. Blev
de billige boliger bedre. https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/
2389413117, 2011.
[Ark63]
Tidsskrifter
Arkitekten
1963.
Etage-typehuse.
http:
//www.danskbyggeskik.dk/pdf/get.action;jsessionid=
96479109B635568060C07EDF685420BF?pdf.id=1743, 1963.
[A/S17]
KONE A/S. Kone elevator. http://www.kone.dk/, 2017.
[AWH42] Civilingeniør
Niels
Steensen
Arkitekt
Willy
Hansen,
Akritekt
Eske Kristensen. Hfb, håndbog for bygnings-industrien, materiale-
situationen og byggeriet. Nyt Nordisk Forlag, 1942.
[Ben14]
Hjalte Bengtsson.
Fire-Safety Engineering,formula ﬁnder.
Poly-
teknisk Forlag, 2014.
[BF17]
BETONELEMENT-FORENINGEN. Betonportalen. http://www.
betonportal.dk/bind2/6_5.htm, 2017.
==PAGE:176==
164
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Bol76]
Boligministeriet.
Brandsikring af ældre ejendomme.
http:
//www.danskbyggeskik.dk/pdf/get.action;jsessionid=
52A045EFF927B1734C73E5C4A666B365?pdf.id=1513, 1976.
[Bol17]
Boligministeriet.
Tidligere
bygningsreglementer.
http://
bygningsreglementet.dk/tidligerebygreg/0/40, 2017.
[Bon71]
H. Bonnesen.
Husbygningsteknik.
Den polytekniske Læreanstalt,
1971. 4. udg.
[BR115]
BR15. Kapitel 5. Brandforhold. Bygningsreglement 2015, 2015.
[Bra]
Rockwool
a/s.
http://www.rockwool.dk/
produkter/brandsikring/brandsikring-af-beton/
bransikring-af-betonhuldaek/. besøgt d. 28.09.2017.
[byg17]
Dansk
byggeskik.
Byggelovgivning.
http://www.
danskbyggeskik.dk/pdf/showBySourceType.action?
sourceType.identity=CONSTRUCTIONLAW, 2017.
[Chr13]
Jørgen
Hegner
Christiansen.
Fokus
på
større
brand-
sikkerhed
i
etagebyggeri.
https://ing.dk/artikel/
fokus-paa-stoerre-brandsikkerhed-i-etagebyggeri-156977,
2013.
[Com17]
Otis Elevator Company. Otis. http://www.otis.com/site/dk/
Pages/default.aspx, 2017.
[Dam06]
Thomas
Damm.
Mini
eevatorer
er
fremti-
den.
http://www.dagensbyggeri.dk/artikel/
9978-mini-elevatorer-er-fremtiden, 2006.
[DBI]
Dbi-inspektion.
http://www.dbi-net.dk/
inspektion-af-brandsikring/. besøgt d. 06.01.2016.
[DBI08]
DBI. De nye europæiske brandklasser. http://www.dbi-net.dk/
files/pdf/proevning/europaeiske_brandklasser2008.
pdf, 2008.
[Eje17]
Ejendomsdata. Ois. https://www.ois.dk/, 2017.
[Eng83]
Jesper Engelmark. Københavnsk etageboligbyggeri 1850-1900. SBI -
Rapport 142 - Statens byggeforskningsinstitut 1983, 1983.
[Eng13]
Jesper Engelmark. Dansk byggeskik, etagebyggeriet gennem 150år.
Grundejernes Investerinsfond og Realdania, 2013.
[Eng17]
Jesper
Engelmark.
Dansk
byggeskik.
http://www.
danskbyggeskik.dk, 2017.
==PAGE:177==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
165
[fh72]
Instituttet
for
husbygning.
Bygningsbrandlovgivning,
forelæs-
ningsnotat nr. 18. http://www.danskbyggeskik.dk/pdf/get.
action?pdf.id=1571, 1972.
[Gra ]
Frits Gravesen.
Træk af byggeriets udvikling 1920-77, ifh nr. 148.
http://www.byg.dtu.dk/Publikationer/IFH, -.
[Hal16]
Malin Therese & Mia Halberg.
Rooftop expansion for housing in
copenhagen - a vision for the future. http://findit.dtu.dk/
en/catalog/2341981708, 2016.
[Hjo17]
Hjoerring.
Hjoerring
byggesags
arkiv.
https://public.
filarkiv.dk, 2017.
[Ing]
Daniel B. Clausen & Nichlas Ingdam.
Udnyttelse af eksisterende
københavnske bytage.
[Jen12]
Bjarne Chr. Jensen. Betonkonstruktioner efter ds/en 192-1-1. Nyt
Teknisk Forlag, 2012. Edition 2.
[Jen15a]
Lone SIgbrand & Philip Henrik Jensen. Sbi 249 tilgængelige boliger
- indretning. Statens Byggeforskningsinstitut, 2015. Edition 1.
[Jen15b]
Marie Rask Jensen. Byggeteknisk gennemgang af renoveringsarbejde
i konstruktioner fra perioden 1850 til 1950. http://findit.dtu.
dk/en/catalog/2292737898, 2015.
[mf.10]
Jesper Frøbert Jensen mf. Betonelementbyrreriets statik. Polyteknisk
Forlag, 2010. Edition 1.
[mf.16]
Gunnar Mohr mf. Teknisk ståbi. Nyt Teknisk Forlag, 2016. Number
24.
[Mod]
Scandi
byg
a/s.
http://www.scandibyg.dk/
baeredygtighed/dk/forside.aspx. besøgt d. 06.04.2017.
[oB04]
Erhvervs og Boligstyrelsen.
Information om brandteknisk dimen-
sionering. Paperjam ApS, 2004.
[oB06]
Erhvervs og Boligstyrelsen. Eksempelsamlingen om brandsikring af
byggeri. Energi styrelsen, 2006.
[oJm87]
Skaarup og Jespersen mf. Ældre etageejendomme, byggeskik og ren-
overing. Boligstyrelsen, 1987.
[oR17]
GI Bedre Boliger og Realdania. Danske bygningsmodeller. http:
//www.danskebygningsmodeller.dk/, 2017.
==PAGE:178==
166
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Par17]
Paroc.
Brandsikring,
betondæk.
http://www.paroc.dk/
loesninger-og-produkter/loesninger/brandsikring/
betond%C3%A6k, 2017.
[Sch17]
Schindler.
Schindler
elevator.
http://www.schindler.
com/dk/internet/da/home.html?gclid=CP7C2_
yTlNACFcJJcgodHjcN1Q#, 2017.
[Sko ]
Knud Erik Skouby. Larsen & nielasen 1951-78, ifh nr. 152. http:
//www.byg.dtu.dk/Publikationer/IFH, -.
[Spe08]
Mike Spearpoint. Fire Engineering Design Guide. New Zealand Cen-
tre for Advanced Engineering, 3. edition, 2008.
[Sta13a]
Dansk Standard.
Eurocode 2 - betonkonstruktioner - del 1-2:
Generelle regler - brandteknisk dimensionering. Danmarks Tekniske
Informationscenter, 2013. Edition 2.
[Sta13b]
Dansk Standard.
Eurocode 6 - murværkskonstruktioner - del 1-
1: Generelle regler for armeret og uarmeret murværk.
Danmarks
Tekniske Informationscenter, 2013. Edition 3.
[Sta15]
Dansk Standard. Supplerende vejledning for murværk i forbindelse
med brug af eurocode 6.
Danmarks Tekniske Informationscenter,
2015. Edition 1.
[sta17]
Dansk statestik.
Bygninger efter opførelsesår.
http://www.
statistikbanken.dk/BYGB60, 2017.
[Swe93]
Lund University Sweden. Initial Fires. Department of Fire Safety
Engineering, 1993.
[Thy17]
Thyssenkrupp.
Thyssenkrupp
elevator.
http://www.
thyssenkrupp-elevator.dk/, 2017.
[TI17]
Murværk Teknologisk Institut.
Muro – murerfagets oplysningsråd.
http://tidsskrift.dansketegl.dk/sites/default/
files/publikation/Brand.pdf, 2017.
[Ves13]
Anders B. Vestegaard.
Projekt brandsikre ejendomme.
http://
www.dbi-net.dk/projekt-brandsikre-ejendomme/, 2013.
==PAGE:179==
==PAGE:180==
==PAGE:181==
==PAGE:182==
==PAGE:183==
==PAGE:184==
Appendix 3.1 – Archive material House 1 
 
 
 
==PAGE:185==
 
 
 
==PAGE:186==
Appendix 3.2 - Load on decks in House 1: Idræts Alle 8-20, 9800 Hjørring
All floors 15 cm Bauma
Parameters
Kfi
1
Area
Load type
Material
Symbol Characteristic value 
[kN/m^2]
D1
Construction deadload
g_str
Roof deck
Bauma 15 + Plaster
2,25
1 pcs
Other Deadloads
g_oth
Installations+ceiling
0,20
Live load
q
A3 - Attic
0,50
D2
Construction deadload
g_c,str
Floor decks
Bauma 15
1,85
2 pcs
Other Deadloads
g_c,oth
Plaster
0,50
Joists+Floorboards
0,50
Installations+ceiling
0,20
Live load
q
Partition wall, <1.0 kN/m
0,50
A1 - Residential
1,50
D3
Construction deadload
g_c,str
Basement deck
Concrete, 100mm
2,30
1 pcs
Other Deadloads
g_c,oth
1 1/2 cm Wear layer
0,50
Live load
Partition wall, <1.0 kN/m
0,50
A1 - Basement
1,50
==PAGE:187==
Appendix 3.3-Wind load on the facades House 1
Direction
Nord
K_fi
1
Terrain category
III
Roughness length
z_0
0,3 m
Building height (hele højden) z
12,5 m
Air density
ρ
1,25 kg/m^3
Wind velocity
v_b,0
24 m/s
Directional factor
c_dir
0,894427 N
Season factor
c_season
1 max
Basic wind velocity
v_b
21,46625 m/s
Terrain factor
k_r
0,22
Peak velocity pressure
q_p
534,36 N/m^2
0,5344 kN/m^2
ca. aflæsning
q_p
0,6 kN/m^2 
OK!
Pressure coefficient
Depth
d
11,19 m
H/d ratio
h/d=z/d
1,12
Width
b
87,00 m
min b or 2h
e
24,96
Pressure coefficient, E
c=E
-0,51
Pressure coefficient, D
c=D
0,8
Correlation factor
ρ
0,854
Pressure coefficient, A
c=A
-1,20
Pressure coefficient, B
c=B
-0,80
Vindlast
q
0,60 kN/m^2
Characteristic windload
w_k,stabil
0,60 kN/m^2
Characteristic windload, othew_k,other
0,5344 kN/m^2
Til excentricitets beregningerne
M
STR1
0,24
STR2
0,00
STR3
0,79
STR4
0,79
Til stabilitets beregningerne
W_k
W_d
kN/m2
kN/m2
STR1
0,60
0,27
STR2
0,60
0,00
STR3
0,60
0,89
STR4
0,60
0,89
==PAGE:188==
Appendix 3.4 - Eccentricity for House 1
Main partition, single
Wall at floor
2nd floor
1st floor
Ground floor Basement
Thickness [m]
0,168
0,228
0,228
0,228
e1
[m]
0,03
0,04
0,04
0,04
e3
[m]
0,00
0,04
0,01
0,01
N1
[kN/m]
23,0
43,5
43,5
43,5
N3
[kN/m]
0,0
31,7
86,9
142,1
e_0,top
[m]
0,028
0,04
0,02
0,02
e5
[m]
0,01
0,01
0,01
0,01
et
[m]
0,029
0,036
0,023
0,021
Facade, single partition wall, STR1
Wall at floor
2nd floor
1st floor
Ground floor Basement
Thickness [m]
0,1
0,350
0,350
0,350
e1
[m]
0,023
0,095
0,095
0,095
e3
[m]
0,014
0,11696426
0,01
0,01
N1
[kN/m]
3,9
12,9
12,9
12,9
N3
[kN/m]
0,0
15,7
46,2
76,8
e_0,top
[m]
0,023
0,11
0,03
0,02
e5
[m]
0,01
0,01
0,01
0,01
e6
[m]
0,06
0,01
0,00
0,00
et
[m]
0,086
0,090
0,033
0,027
Facade, single partition wall, STR2
Wall at floor
2nd floor
1st floor
Ground floor Basement
Thickness [m]
0,1
0,350
0,350
0,350
e1
[m]
0,023
0,095
0,095
0,095
e3
[m]
0,01403574
0,11696426
0,01
0,01
N1
[kN/m]
2,8
7,8
7,8
7,8
N3
[kN/m]
0,0
16,9
45,9
74,9
e_0,top
[m]
0,023
0,11
0,02
0,02
e5
[m]
0,01
0,01
0,01
0,01
e6
[m]
0,00
0,00
0,00
0,00
et
[m]
0,025
0,083
0,025
0,022
Facade, single partition wall, STR3
Wall at floor
2nd floor
1st floor
Ground floor Basement
Thickness [m]
0,13607147
0,350
0,350
0,350
e1
[m]
0,023
0,095
0,095
0,095
e3
[m]
0,01403574
0,11696426
0,01
0,01
N1
[kN/m]
3,1
9,7
9,7
9,7
N3
[kN/m]
0,0
14,9
42,2
69,6
e_0,top
[m]
0,023
0,11
0,03
0,02
e5
[m]
0,01
0,01
0,01
0,01
e6
[m]
0,25
0,03
0,02
0,01
et
[m]
0,279
0,114
0,042
0,034
==PAGE:189==
Konsekvensklasse
CC2
KFI
1
ψ0 (A)
0,5
Floors (excl. basement and attic)
3
Loads partition wall
W,p1
Characteristic value Load width [m]
Second floor
N1
[kN/m^2]
Single wall
Dual wall
D1
g_str
2,25
7,18
1,83
g_oth
0,2
7,18
1,83
q
0,5
7,18
1,83
W,deadload
g_w,3/4
3,1
1,4
g_w,1/2
2
1,4
Load combinations
Single wall
Dual wall
Leading Live load
STR1
[kN/m]
27,32
8,65
Leading Dead load
STR2
[kN/m]
26,32
8,73
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
24,63
7,96
Leadning wind, favourable STR4
[kN/m]
19,74
6,55
W,p2
Characteristic value Load width [m]
First floor
N1
[kN/m^2]
Single wall
Dual wall
D2
g_str
1,85
7,18
1,83
g_oth
1,2
7,18
1,83
q
2
7,18
1,83
N3
W,deadload
g_w,1
4,2
1,40
g_w,3/4
3,1
2,80
1,40
g_w,1/2
2
2,80
D1
g_str
2,25
7,18
1,83
g_oth
0,2
7,18
1,83
q
0,5
7,18
1,83
Load combinations
Single wall
Dual wall
Leading Live load
STR1
[kN/m]
80,99
26,84
Leading Dead load
STR2
[kN/m]
64,87
23,99
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
67,53
23,42
Leadning wind, favourable STR4
[kN/m]
48,65
17,99
Appendix 3.5 - Load on walls House 1
==PAGE:190==
W,p3
Characteristic value Load width [m]
Ground floor
[kN/m^2]
Single wall
Dual wall
N1
D2
g_str
1,85
7,18
1,83
g_oth
1,2
7,18
1,83
q
2
7,18
1,83
N3
W,deadload
g_w,1
4,2
4,2
g_w,3/4
3,1
2,8
4,2
g_w,1/2
2
2,8
D1
g_str
2,25
7,18
1,83
g_oth
0,2
7,18
1,83
q
0,5
7,18
1,83
D2
g_str
1,85
7,18
1,83
αn=0,75
g_oth
1,2
7,18
1,83
q
2
7,18
1,83
Load combinations
Single wall
Dual wall
Leading Live load
STR1
[kN/m]
125,43
43,84
Leading Dead load
STR2
[kN/m]
105,27
41,09
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
111,97
40,41
Leadning wind, favourable STR4
[kN/m]
78,95
30,82
W,p4
Characteristic value Load width [m]
Basement
[kN/m^2]
Single wall
Dual wall
N1
D2
g_str
1,85
7,18
1,83
g_oth
1,2
7,18
1,83
q
2
7,18
1,83
N3
W,deadload
g_w,1
4,2
7
1,4
g_w,3/4
3,1
2,8
5,6
g_w,1/2
2
2,8
D1
g_str
2,25
7,18
1,83
g_oth
0,2
7,18
1,83
q
0,5
7,18
1,83
D2 *2
g_str
1,85
7,18
1,83
αn=0,667
g_oth
1,2
7,18
1,83
q
2
7,18
1,83
Load combinations
Single wall
Dual wall
Leading Live load
STR1
[kN/m]
169,44
62,26
Leading Dead load
STR2
[kN/m]
145,67
60,05
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
156,40
58,95
Leadning wind, favourable STR4
[kN/m]
109,25
45,04
==PAGE:191==
Loads facade
W,1
Characteristic value Load width [m]
Second floor
N1
[kN/m^2]
Single wall
Dual wall
D1
g_str
2,25
2,14
1,83
g_oth
0,2
2,14
1,83
q
0,5
2,14
1,83
W,deadload
g_w,H
4,2
1,4
1,4
Load combinations
Single wall
Dual wall
Leading Live load
STR1
[kN/m]
9,78
8,79
Leading Dead load
STR2
[kN/m]
9,81
8,90
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
8,98
8,10
Leadning wind, favourable STR4
[kN/m]
7,36
6,68
W,2
Characteristic value Load width [m]
First floor
N1
[kN/m^2]
Single wall
Dual wall
D2
g_str
1,85
2,14
1,83
g_oth
1,2
2,14
1,83
q
2
2,14
1,83
N3
W,deadload
g_w_1 1/2H
4,2
2,8
2,8
g_w_1 1/2
6,3
1,4
1,4
D1
g_str
2,25
2,1
1,8
g_oth
0,2
2,1
1,8
q
0,5
2,1
1,8
Load combinations
Single wall
Dual wall
Leading Live load
STR1
[kN/m]
40,35
37,48
Leading Dead load
STR2
[kN/m]
38,80
36,76
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
36,34
34,06
Leadning wind, favourable STR4
[kN/m]
29,10
27,57
W,3
Characteristic value Load width [m]
Ground floor
[kN/m^2]
Single wall
Dual wall
N1
D2
g_str
1,85
2,14
1,83
g_oth
1,2
2,14
1,83
q
2
2,14
1,83
N3
W,deadload
g_w_1 1/2H
4,2
2,8
2,8
g_w_1 1/2
6,3
4,2
4,2
D1
g_str
2,25
2,14
1,83
g_oth
0,2
2,14
1,83
q
0,5
2,14
1,83
D2
g_str
1,85
2,14
1,83
αn=0,75
g_oth
1,2
2,14
1,83
q
2
2,14
1,83
Load combinations
Single wall
Dual wall
Leading Live load
STR1
[kN/m]
67,72
63,44
Leading Dead load
STR2
[kN/m]
67,79
64,61
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
63,71
60,01
Leadning wind, favourable STR4
[kN/m]
50,85
48,46
==PAGE:192==
W,4
Characteristic value Load width [m]
Basement
[kN/m^2]
Single wall
Dual wall
N1
D2
g_str
1,85
2,14
1,83
g_oth
1,2
2,14
1,83
q
2
2,14
1,83
N3
W,deadload
g_w_1 1/2H
4,2
2,8
2,8
g_w_1 1/2
6,3
7
7
D1
g_str
2,25
2,14
1,83
g_oth
0,2
2,14
1,83
q
0,5
2,14
1,83
D2 *2
g_str
1,85
2,14
1,83
αn=0,667
g_oth
1,2
2,14
1,83
q
2
2,14
1,83
Load combinations
Single wall
Dual wall
Leading Live load
STR1
[kN/m]
94,95
89,28
Leading Dead load
STR2
[kN/m]
96,79
92,47
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
91,08
85,97
Leadning wind, favourable STR4
[kN/m]
66,72
64,34
Loads fire and flatdivision walls
FW,1
Characteristic value Load height [m]
Second floor
N3
[kN/m^2]
g_w_3/4
3,1
1,4
Load combinations
Leading Live load
STR1
[kN/m]
4,34
Leading Dead load
STR2
[kN/m]
5,21
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
4,34
Leadning wind, favourable STR4
[kN/m]
3,91
FW,2
Characteristic value Load height [m]
First floor
N3
[kN/m^2]
g_w_3/4
3,1
4,2
Load combinations
Leading Live load
[kN/m]
13,02
Leading Dead load
[kN/m]
15,62
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
13,02
Leadning wind, favourable STR4
[kN/m]
11,72
FW,3
Characteristic value Load height [m]
Ground floor
N3
[kN/m^2]
g_w_3/4
3,1
7
Load combinations
Leading Live load
[kN/m]
21,70
Leading Dead load
[kN/m]
26,04
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
21,70
Leadning wind, favourable STR4
[kN/m]
19,53
==PAGE:193==
FW,4
Characteristic value Load height [m]
Basement floor
N3
[kN/m^2]
g_w_3/4
3,1
9,8
Load combinations
Leading Live load
[kN/m]
30,38
Leading Dead load
[kN/m]
36,46
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
30,38
Leadning wind, favourable STR4
[kN/m]
27,34
Loads gable walls
GW,1
Characteristic value Load height [m]
Second floor
N3
[kN/m^2]
g_w_1 1/2H
4,2
1,4
Load combinations
Leading Live load
STR1
[kN/m]
5,88
Leading Dead load
STR2
[kN/m]
7,06
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
5,88
Leadning wind, favourable STR4
[kN/m]
5,29
GW,2
Characteristic value Load height [m]
First floor
N3
[kN/m^2]
g_w_1 1/2H
4,2
4,2
Load combinations
Leading Live load
[kN/m]
17,64
Leading Dead load
[kN/m]
21,17
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
17,64
Leadning wind, favourable STR4
[kN/m]
15,88
GW,3
Characteristic value Load height [m]
Ground floor
N3
[kN/m^2]
g_w_1 1/2H
4,2
7
Load combinations
Leading Live load
[kN/m]
29,40
Leading Dead load
[kN/m]
35,28
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
29,40
Leadning wind, favourable STR4
[kN/m]
26,46
GW,4
Characteristic value Load height [m]
Basement floor
N3
[kN/m^2]
g_w_1 1/2H
4,2
8,4
g_w_1 1/2
6,3
1,4
Load combinations
Leading Live load
[kN/m]
44,10
Leading Dead load
[kN/m]
52,92
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
44,10
Leadning wind, favourable STR4
[kN/m]
39,69
==PAGE:194==
Loads staircase walls
SW,1
Characteristic value Load width [m]
Second floor
N3
[kN/m^2]
D1
g_w_1/2
2,00
1,40
g_oth
0,00
0,00
q
0,00
0,00
Load combinations
Leading Live load
STR1
[kN/m]
2,8
Leading Dead load
STR2
[kN/m]
3,36
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
2,8
Leadning wind, favourable STR4
[kN/m]
2,52
SW,2
Characteristic value Load width [m]
First floor
N1
[kN/m^2]
D2
g_str
2,35
1,31
g_oth
0
0
q_A4
3
1,31
N3
W,deadload
g_w_ 1/2
2
2,8
g_w_3/4
3,1
1,4
Load combinations
Leading Live load
STR1
[kN/m]
18,91
Leading Dead load
STR2
[kN/m]
15,62
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
15,97
Leadning wind, favourable STR4
[kN/m]
11,72
SW,3
Characteristic value Load width [m]
Ground floor
N1
[kN/m^2]
D2
g_str
2,35
1,31
g_oth
0
1,31
q_A4
3
1,31
N3
g_str
2,35
1,31
g_oth
0
1,31
q_A4
3
1,31
W,deadload
g_w_3/4
3,1
4,2
g_w_ 1/2
2
1,4
Load combinations
Leading Live load
STR1
[kN/m]
33,77
Leading Dead load
STR2
[kN/m]
26,37
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
27,87
Leadning wind, favourable STR4
[kN/m]
19,78
==PAGE:195==
SW,4
Characteristic value Load width [m]
Basement
N1
[kN/m^2]
D2
g_str
2,35
1,31
g_oth
0
1,31
q_A4
3
1,31
N3
gang*2
g_str
2,35
1,31
g_oth
0
1,31
q_A4
3
1,31
W,deadload
g_w_3/4
3,1
7
g_w_ 1/2
2
1,4
Load combinations
Leading Live load
[kN/m]
51,42
Leading Dead load
[kN/m]
40,48
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
42,58
Leadning wind, favourable STR4
[kN/m]
30,36
==PAGE:196==
Appendix 3.6 - Bearing capacity walls House 1
Konsekvensklasse
CC2
KFI
1
ψ0 (A)
0,5
Floors (excl. basement and attic)
3
Partition wall
ENKEL
Basement: 1 brick (Bastard mørtel) 
Dimension of masonry
Thickness, td
228 mm
Length, l
1000 mm
Column længde (masonry), hs
2060 mm
Compressive strength, fk
5,5 MPa
E-modulus, E0k
355 MPa
Partial coefficient, γm
1,87 -
Permissible compressive strength, fd
2,94 MPa
Thickness upper storey, t0
228 mm
Eccentricitie, et
21 mm
kt
0,9 -
Carrying capacity, Rsd
148574 N
Carrying capacity, Rsd
148,57 kN
Ground floor: 1 brick
Dimension of masonry
Thickness, td
228 mm
Length, l
1000 mm
Column længde (masonry), hs
2800 mm
Compressive strength, fk
2,4 MPa
E-modulus, E0k
355 MPa
Partial coefficient, γm
1,87 -
Permissible compressive strength, fd
1,28 MPa
Thickness upper storey, t0
228 mm
Eccentricitie, et
23 mm
kt
0,9 -
Carrying capacity, Rsd
71571 N
Carrying capacity, Rsd
71,57 kN
==PAGE:197==
First floor: 1 brick
Dimension of masonry
Thickness, td
228 mm
Length, l
1000 mm
Column længde (masonry), hs
2800 mm
Compressive strength, fk
2,4 MPa
E-modulus, E0k
355 MPa
Partial coefficient, γm
1,87 -
Permissible compressive strength, fd
1,28 MPa
Thickness upper storey, t0
168 mm
Eccentricitie, et
36 mm
kt
0,9 -
Carrying capacity, Rsd
49556 N
Carrying capacity, Rsd
49,56 kN
Second floor: 3/4 brick
Dimension of masonry
Thickness, td
168 mm
Length, l
1000 mm
Column længde (masonry), hs
2800 mm
Compressive strength, fk
2,4 MPa
E-modulus, E0k
355 MPa
Partial coefficient, γm
1,87 -
Permissible compressive strength, fd
1,28 MPa
Thickness upper storey, t0
0 mm
Eccentricitie, et
29 mm
kt
0,9 -
Carrying capacity, Rsd
20414 N
Carrying capacity, Rsd
20,41 kN
==PAGE:198==
DOBBELT
Basement: 1 brick
Dimension of masonry
Thickness, td
228 mm
Length, l
1000 mm
Column længde (masonry), hs
2060 mm
Compressive strength, fk
2,4 MPa
E-modulus, E0k
355 MPa
Partial coefficient, γm
1,87 -
Permissible compressive strength, fd
1,28 MPa
Thickness upper storey, t0
168 mm
Eccentricitie, et
36 mm
kt
0,9 -
Carrying capacity, Rsd
73167 N
Carrying capacity, Rsd
73,17 kN
Ground floor: 3/4 brick
Dimension of masonry
Thickness, td
168 mm
Length, l
1000 mm
Column længde (masonry), hs
2800 mm
Compressive strength, fk
2,4 MPa
E-modulus, E0k
355 MPa
Partial coefficient, γm
1,87 -
Permissible compressive strength, fd
1,28 MPa
Thickness upper storey, t0
168 mm
Eccentricitie, et
20 mm
kt
0,9 -
Carrying capacity, Rsd
30204 N
Carrying capacity, Rsd
30,20 kN
==PAGE:199==
first floor: 3/4 brick
Dimension of masonry
Thickness, td
168 mm
Length, l
1000 mm
Column længde (masonry), hs
2800 mm
Compressive strength, fk
2,4 MPa
E-modulus, E0k
355 MPa
Partial coefficient, γm
1,87 -
Permissible compressive strength, fd
1,28 MPa
Thickness upper storey, t0
128 mm
Eccentricitie, et
29 mm
kt
0,9 -
Carrying capacity, Rsd
19749 N
Carrying capacity, Rsd
19,75 kN
Second floor: 1/2 brick
Dimension of masonry
Thickness, td
128 mm
Length, l
1000 mm
Column længde (masonry), hs
2800 mm
Compressive strength, fk
2,4 MPa
E-modulus, E0k
355 MPa
Partial coefficient, γm
1,87 -
Permissible compressive strength, fd
1,28 MPa
Thickness upper storey, t0
0 mm
Eccentricitie, et
24 mm
kt
0,9 -
Carrying capacity, Rsd
8218 N
Carrying capacity, Rsd
8,22 kN
Facade wall
SINGLE
Basement: 1 1/2 brick (Bastard mørtel) 
Dimension of masonry
Thickness, td
350 mm
Length, l
1000 mm
Column længde (masonry), hs
2060 mm
Compressive strength, fk
5,5 MPa
E-modulus, E0k
355 MPa
Partial coefficient, γm
1,87 -
Permissible compressive strength, fd
2,94 MPa
==PAGE:200==
Thickness upper storey, t0
350 mm
Eccentricitie, et
35 mm
kt
0,9 -
Carrying capacity, Rsd
368585 N
Carrying capacity, Rsd
368,59 kN
Ground floor: 1 1/2 brick
Dimension of masonry
Thickness, td
350 mm
Length, l
1000 mm
Column længde (masonry), hs
2800 mm
Compressive strength, fk
2,4 MPa
E-modulus, E0k
355 MPa
Partial coefficient, γm
1,87 -
Permissible compressive strength, fd
1,28 MPa
Thickness upper storey, t0
350 mm
Eccentricitie, et
44 mm
kt
0,9 -
Carrying capacity, Rsd
155072 N
Carrying capacity, Rsd
155,07 kN
First floor: 1 1/2 brick
Dimension of masonry
Thickness, td
350 mm
Length, l
1000 mm
Column længde (masonry), hs
2800 mm
Compressive strength, fk
2,4 MPa
E-modulus, E0k
355 MPa
Partial coefficient, γm
1,87 -
Permissible compressive strength, fd
1,28 MPa
Thickness upper storey, t0
350 mm
Eccentricitie, et
132 mm
kt
0,9 -
Carrying capacity, Rsd
10130 N
Carrying capacity, Rsd
10 kN
==PAGE:201==
Second floor: 1 1/2 cavity wall with brick binder
Dimension of masonry
Thickness, td
136 mm
Length, l
1000 mm
Column længde (masonry), hs
2800 mm
Compressive strength, fk
2,4 MPa
E-modulus, E0k
355 MPa
Partial coefficient, γm
1,87 -
Permissible compressive strength, fd
1,28 MPa
Thickness upper storey, t0
0 mm
Eccentricitie, et
402 mm
kt
0,9 -
Carrying capacity, Rsd
-674106 N
Carrying capacity, Rsd
-674,11 kN
DOUBLE
Basement: 1 1/2 brick (Bastard mørtel)
Dimension of masonry
Thickness, td
350 mm
Length, l
1000 mm
Column længde (masonry), hs
2060 mm
Compressive strength, fk
5,5 MPa
E-modulus, E0k
355 MPa
Partial coefficient, γm
1,87 -
Permissible compressive strength, fd
2,94 MPa
Thickness upper storey, t0
350 mm
Eccentricitie, et
35 mm
kt
0,9 -
Carrying capacity, Rsd
367676 N
Carrying capacity, Rsd
367,68 kN
==PAGE:202==
Ground floor: 1 1/2 brick
Dimension of masonry
Thickness, td
350 mm
Length, l
1000 mm
Column længde (masonry), hs
2800 mm
Compressive strength, fk
2,4 MPa
E-modulus, E0k
355 MPa
Partial coefficient, γm
1,87 -
Permissible compressive strength, fd
1,28 MPa
Thickness upper storey, t0
350 mm
Eccentricitie, et
45 mm
kt
0,9 -
Carrying capacity, Rsd
153959 N
Carrying capacity, Rsd
153,96 kN
First floor: 1 1/2 brick
Dimension of masonry
Thickness, td
350 mm
Length, l
1000 mm
Column længde (masonry), hs
2800 mm
Compressive strength, fk
2,4 MPa
E-modulus, E0k
355 MPa
Partial coefficient, γm
1,87 -
Permissible compressive strength, fd
1,28 MPa
Thickness upper storey, t0
350 mm
Eccentricitie, et
136 mm
kt
0,9 -
Carrying capacity, Rsd
7497 N
Carrying capacity, Rsd
7,50 kN
==PAGE:203==
Second floor: 1 1/2 cavity wall with brick binder
Dimension of masonry
Thickness, td
136 mm
Length, l
1000 mm
Column længde (masonry), hs
2800 mm
Compressive strength, fk
2,4 MPa
E-modulus, E0k
355 MPa
Partial coefficient, γm
1,87 -
Permissible compressive strength, fd
1,28 MPa
Thickness upper storey, t0
0 mm
Eccentricitie, et
590 mm
kt
0,9 -
Carrying capacity, Rsd
-1137803 N
Carrying capacity, Rsd
-1137,80 kN
Fire and flat division walls
All floors: 3/4 brick
Dimension of masonry
Thickness, td
168 mm
Length, l
1000 mm
Column længde (masonry), hs
2800 mm
Compressive strength, fk
2,4 MPa
E-modulus, E0k
355 MPa
Partial coefficient, γm
1,87 -
Permissible compressive strength, fd
1,28 MPa
Thickness upper storey, t0
168 mm
Eccentricitie, et
10 mm
kt
0,9 -
Carrying capacity, Rsd
43366 N
Carrying capacity, Rsd
43,37 kN
==PAGE:204==
Gable walls
Basement floor: 1 1/2 brick
Dimension of masonry
Thickness, td
350 mm
Length, l
1000 mm
Column længde (masonry), hs
2800 mm
Compressive strength, fk
2,4 MPa
E-modulus, E0k
355 MPa
Partial coefficient, γm
1,87 -
Permissible compressive strength, fd
1,28 MPa
Thickness upper storey, t0
350 mm
Eccentricitie, et
10 mm
kt
0,9 -
Carrying capacity, Rsd
239467 N
Carrying capacity, Rsd
239,47 kN
Second/first/ground floor: 1 1/2 cavity wall with brick binder
Dimension of masonry
Thickness, td
136 mm
Length, l
1000 mm
Column længde (masonry), hs
2800 mm
Compressive strength, fk
2,4 MPa
E-modulus, E0k
355 MPa
Partial coefficient, γm
1,87 -
Permissible compressive strength, fd
1,28 MPa
Thickness upper storey, t0
108 mm
Eccentricitie, et
10 mm
kt
0,9 -
Carrying capacity, Rsd
23145 N
Carrying capacity, Rsd
23,14 kN
==PAGE:205==
Staircase walls
Basement: 3/4 brick
Dimension of masonry
Thickness, td
168 mm
Length, l
1000 mm
Column længde (masonry), hs
2800 mm
Compressive strength, fk
2,4 MPa
E-modulus, E0k
355 MPa
Partial coefficient, γm
1,87 -
Permissible compressive strength, fd
1,28 MPa
Thickness upper storey, t0
168 mm
Eccentricitie, et
19 mm
kt
0,9 -
Carrying capacity, Rsd
31414 N
Carrying capacity, Rsd
31,41 kN
Ground floors: 3/4 brick
Dimension of masonry
Thickness, td
168 mm
Length, l
1000 mm
Column længde (masonry), hs
2800 mm
Compressive strength, fk
2,4 MPa
E-modulus, E0k
355 MPa
Partial coefficient, γm
1,87 -
Permissible compressive strength, fd
1,28 MPa
Thickness upper storey, t0
168 mm
Eccentricitie, et
20 mm
kt
0,9 -
Carrying capacity, Rsd
29960 N
Carrying capacity, Rsd
29,96 kN
==PAGE:206==
First floors: 3/4 brick
Dimension of masonry
Thickness, td
168 mm
Length, l
1000 mm
Column længde (masonry), hs
2800 mm
Compressive strength, fk
2,4 MPa
E-modulus, E0k
355 MPa
Partial coefficient, γm
1,87 -
Permissible compressive strength, fd
1,28 MPa
Thickness upper storey, t0
168 mm
Eccentricitie, et
32 mm
kt
0,9 -
Carrying capacity, Rsd
17499 N
Carrying capacity, Rsd
17,50 kN
Second floor: 1/2 brick
Dimension of masonry
Thickness, td
108 mm
Length, l
1000 mm
Column længde (masonry), hs
2800 mm
Compressive strength, fk
2,4 MPa
E-modulus, E0k
355 MPa
Partial coefficient, γm
1,87 -
Permissible compressive strength, fd
1,28 MPa
Thickness upper storey, t0
168 mm
Eccentricitie, et
10 mm
kt
0,9 -
Carrying capacity, Rsd
10904 N
Carrying capacity, Rsd
10,90 kN
==PAGE:207==
Appendix 3.7: Funddation load
Single
Dual
Main partition wall
basement wall load
Leading Live load
STR1
[kN/m]
169,4
62,3
Leading Dead load
STR2
[kN/m]
145,7
60,0
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
156,4
58,9
Leadning wind, favourable STR4
[kN/m]
109,3
45,0
W,deadload
g_w_1brick
4,2
1,4
1,4
Leading Live load
STR1
[kN/m]
175,3
68,1
Leading Dead load
STR2
[kN/m]
151,5
65,9
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
162,3
64,8
Leadning wind, favourable STR4
[kN/m]
115,1
50,9
Facade
basement wall load
Leading Live load
STR1
[kN/m]
95,0
89,3
Leading Dead load
STR2
[kN/m]
96,8
92,5
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
91,1
86,0
Leadning wind, favourable STR4
[kN/m]
66,7
64,3
W,deadload
g_w_1 1/2b
6,30
1,4
1,4
Leading Live load
STR1
[kN/m]
103,8
98,1
Leading Dead load
STR2
[kN/m]
105,6
101,3
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
99,9
94,8
Leadning wind, favourable STR4
[kN/m]
72,6
73,2
Staircase
basement wall load
Leading Live load
STR1
[kN/m]
51,4
Leading Dead load
STR2
[kN/m]
40,5
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
42,6
Leadning wind, favourable STR4
[kN/m]
30,4
W,deadload
g_w_3/4bri
3,10
1,4
Leading Live load
STR1
[kN/m]
55,8
Leading Dead load
STR2
[kN/m]
44,8
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
46,9
Leadning wind, favourable STR4
[kN/m]
34,7
Gable
basement wall load
Leading Live load
STR1
[kN/m]
44,1
Leading Dead load
STR2
[kN/m]
52,9
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
44,1
Leadning wind, favourable STR4
[kN/m]
39,7
W,deadload
g_w_1 1/2b
6,30
1,4
Leading Live load
STR1
[kN/m]
52,9
Leading Dead load
STR2
[kN/m]
61,7
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
52,9
Leadning wind, favourable STR4
[kN/m]
48,5
==PAGE:208==
Appendix 3.8: Stability check
W_k
W_d
kN/m2
kN/m2
STR1
0,60
0,27
STR2
0,60
0,00
STR3
0,60
0,89
STR4
0,60
0,89
E_0,k
355
f_k
2,4
f_d
1,28
walls
load width Length
k_t
0,9
fire wall, tjek 2
21,65
11,75 m
g_3/4wall
3,10 kN/m2
flat division, tjek 1
7,22
3,84 m
Check 1 with flat division
q_w,d
h
W_d
M_Ed
G_d
t_eff
R,s_sd
L_min
e
M_Rd
Check
kN/m
m
kN
kNm
kN
m
MPa
m
m
kNm
%
STR1
1,94
2,80
2,71
7,59
11,10
0,168
0,35
0,188
1,824
20,23
37,5
STR3
6,45
2,80
9,03
25,29
11,10
0,168
0,35
0,188
1,824
20,23
125,0
STR4
6,45
2,80
9,03
25,29
9,99
0,168
0,35
0,169
1,833
18,31
138,2
STR1
1,94
2,80
5,42
30,35
44,38
0,168
0,35
0,751
1,542
68,44
44,3
STR3
6,45
2,80
18,06
101,16
44,38
0,168
0,35
0,751
1,542
68,44
147,8
STR4
6,45
2,80
18,06
101,16
39,95
0,168
0,35
0,676
1,580
63,10
160,3
STR1
1,94
2,80
5,42
68,28
77,67
0,168
0,35
1,314
1,260
97,90
69,7
STR3
6,45
2,80
18,06
227,60
77,67
0,168
0,35
1,314
1,260
97,90
232,5
STR4
6,45
2,80
18,06
227,60
69,90
0,168
0,35
1,183
1,326
92,70
245,5
STR1
1,94
1,40
4,06
92,94
105,41
0,168
0,74
0,853
1,491
157,15
59,1
STR3
6,45
1,40
13,55
309,79
105,41
0,168
0,74
0,853
1,491
157,15
197,1
STR4
6,45
1,40
13,55
309,79
94,87
0,168
0,74
0,768
1,534
145,49
212,9
Second floor
First floor
Ground floor
Basement
==PAGE:209==
Check 2 without flat division but for fire walls
q_w,d
h
W_d
M_Ed
G_d
t_eff
R,s_sd
L_min
e
M_Rd
Check
kN/m
m
kN
kNm
kN
m
MPa
m
m
kNm
%
STR1
5,81
2,80
8,13
22,76
34,00
0,168
0,35
0,575
5,587
189,95
12,0
STR3
19,35
2,80
27,10
75,87
34,00
0,168
0,35
0,575
5,587
189,95
39,9
STR4
19,35
2,80
27,10
75,87
30,60
0,168
0,35
0,518
5,616
171,84
44,2
STR1
5,81
2,80
16,26
91,04
135,99
0,168
0,35
2,301
4,725
642,48
14,2
STR3
19,35
2,80
54,19
303,47
135,99
0,168
0,35
2,301
4,725
642,48
47,2
STR4
19,35
2,80
54,19
303,47
122,39
0,168
0,35
2,071
4,840
592,31
51,2
STR1
5,81
2,80
16,26
204,84
237,98
0,168
0,35
4,026
3,862
919,01
22,3
STR3
19,35
2,80
54,19
682,80
237,98
0,168
0,35
4,026
3,862
919,01
74,3
STR4
19,35
2,80
54,19
682,80
214,18
0,168
0,35
3,624
4,063
870,23
78,5
STR1
5,81
1,40
12,19
278,81
322,97
0,168
0,74
2,614
4,568
1475,26
18,9
STR3
19,35
1,40
40,64
929,37
322,97
0,168
0,74
2,614
4,568
1475,26
63,0
STR4
19,35
1,40
40,64
929,37
290,67
0,168
0,74
2,353
4,699
1365,73
68,0
Basement
Second floor
First floor
Ground floor
==PAGE:210==
Appendi 3.9 - Results without windload affecting the building
Load
Carrying capacity Utilization
Load
Carrying capacity Utilization
Basement
169,4
148,6
114,0
62,3
73,2
85,1
Ground floor
125,4
71,6
175,3
43,8
30,2
145,1
1st floor
81,0
49,6
163,4
26,8
19,7
135,9
2nd floor
27,3
20,4
133,8
8,6
8,2
105,2
Load
Carrying capacity Utilization
Load
Carrying capacity Utilization
Basement
96,8
401,8
24,1
92,5
403,7
22,9
Ground floor
67,7
182,9
37,0
64,6
184,3
35,1
1st floor
40,4
45,2
89,2
37,5
44,2
84,9
2nd floor
9,8
10,0
98,0
8,9
9,9
90,3
Load
Carrying capacity Utilization
Basement
36,5
43,4
84,1
Ground floor
26,0
43,4
60,0
1st floor
15,6
43,4
36,0
2nd floor
5,2
43,4
12,0
Load
Carrying capacity Utilization
Basement
52,9
239,5
22,1
Ground floor
35,3
21,8
161,8
1st floor
21,2
21,8
97,1
2nd floor
7,1
21,8
32,4
Load
Carrying capacity Utilization
Basement
51,4
31,4
163,7
Ground floor
33,8
30,0
112,7
1st floor
18,9
17,5
108,1
2nd floor
3,4
10,9
30,8
Staircase_wall
Fire + flat division
Gable wall
Double
partition wall
Single
Facade wall
Single
Double
==PAGE:211==
Apendix 3.10 – Archive material House 2 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:212==
Appendix 3.11: Load on deck House 2
Parameters
Kfi
1
Area
Load type
Material
Symbol
Characteristic value 
[kN/m^2]
D1
Construction deadload
g_str
Roof deck
Reinforced concrete 18cm
4,30
Other Deadloads
g_oth
D2
Construction deadload
g_str
Floor decks
Reinforced concrete 18cm
4,30
Other Deadloads
Floor+ceiling+installations
0,50
Live load
Partition wall, <1.0 kN/m
0,50
A1- Residential
1,50
D3
Construction deadload
g_str
Basement deck
Reinforced concrete 10cm
2,40
Other Deadloads
Floor
0,50
Live load
Partition wall, <1.0 kN/m
0,50
A1- Basement
1,50
Load combinations, floor decks
D2
D1
D3
Leading Live load
STR1
[kN/m2]
7,8
4,30
5,9
Leading Dead load
STR2
[kN/m2]
5,8
5,16
3,48
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m2]
6,3
4,3
4,40
Leadning wind, favourable
STR4
[kN/m2]
4,3
3,87
2,61
All floors 18 cm reinforced concrete, basement 10cm
==PAGE:213==
Appendix 3.12: ABAQUS control and results
Control of model
l1
3,5
l2
2,2
l3
5,1
A_øvre
7,27 mm2
R_øvre
56,69 kN
A_nedre
6,38 mm2
R_nedre
49,76 kN
R_Abaqus
52,23 kN
Tjek
R_nedre<R_Abaqus<R_øvre
OK
Results
Lodret reaktioner (RF)
Total
466533,6 N
Columns
knot 1
S2
46108,9 N
knot 5
S1
52232,9 N
Supports
Knot2-10 V1
44979,71 N
Knot10-9 V2
58955,82 N
Knot9-8
V3
37537,44 N
Knot8-7
V4
65979,12 N
Knot7-6
V5
59811,38 N
Knot4-3
V6
100928,8 N
466534,1
0,4995 ok!!!
Momenter
max
min
m_xx
SM1
-
-10636,4 Nm
Knot
738
825
m_xy
SM3
8023,5
-8038,51
Large column
Knot
84
68
m_yy
SM2
-
-12163,8 Nm
Knot
8
79
==PAGE:214==
Appendix 3.13: Bearing capacity deck House 2
Teknisk Ståbi s. 190
Bearing capacity floor deck
Armering ens i begge retninger, pArmeret med T8 pr200 i begge retninger
m_yx=m_yy=m_xx=m´_yx=m´_xx=m´_yy
Tjekker kun bøjning ej vridning, da bøjning er kritisk
Partial koefficienter
γ_S
1,2 -
f_yk
500 Mpa
f_yd
416,7 MPa
γ_c
1,45 -
f_ck
24 MPa
f_cd
16,6 MPa
E_s
210000 Mpa
ε_yd
0,0020 -
ω_min
0,033 -
ω_bal
0,511 -
ω_max
1,108
Kontrol armeringsafstand
TS side 191
s≤min(2h,250mm)
200 OK
Bæreevne
A_s
0,251 mm2/mm
b
1 mm
d
162 mm
ω
0,0391
μ
0,0383
m_x
16633,33 Nmm/mm
16,63 kNm/m
Armeringsgrad kontrol
ω_min<ω<ω_bal
OK!!!
==PAGE:215==
Appendix 3.14: Wind load
Direction
Nord
K_fi
1
Terrain category
III
Roughness length
z_0
0,3 m
Building height (hele højden)
z
11,1 m
Air density
ρ
1,25 kg/m^3
Wind velocity
v_b,0
24 m/s
Directional factor
c_dir
0,89 N
Season factor
c_season
1 max
Basic wind velocity
v_b
21,46625 m/s
Terrain factor
k_r
0,22
Peak velocity pressure
q_p
511,93 N/m^2
0,51 kN/m^2
Check
q_p
0,6 kN/m^2 
OK!
Pressure coefficient
Depth
d
13,3 m
H/d ratio
h/d=z/d
0,83
Width
b
108,00 m
min b or 2h
e
22,20
Pressure coefficient, E
c=E
-0,46
Pressure coefficient, D
c=D
0,78
Correlation factor
ρ
0,850
Pressure coefficient, A
c=A
-1,20
Pressure coefficient, B
c=B
-0,80
Wind load
q
0,54 kN/m^2
Characteristic windload
w_k,stabil
0,54 kN/m^2
Characteristic windload, other
w_k,other
0,51 kN/m^2
Stability
W_k
W_d
kN/m2
kN/m2
STR1
0,54
0,24
STR2
0,54
0,00
STR3
0,54
0,81
STR4
0,54
0,81
==PAGE:216==
Appendix 3.15: Excentricities
Column1
Column2
Wall at floor
2nd floor
1st floor
Ground
Basement
Wall at floor
2nd floor
1st floor
Ground
Basement
Thickness [m]
0,2
0,2
0,2
0,2
Thickness [m]
0,2
0,2
0,2
0,2
e1
[m]
0,03
0,03
0,03
0,03
e1
[m]
0,03
0,03
0,03
0,03
e3
[m]
0,01
0,01
0,01
0,01
e3
[m]
0,01
0,01
0,01
0,01
N1
[kN/m]
28,8
52,2
52,2
52,2
N1
[kN/m]
25,4
46,1
46,1
46,1
N3
[kN/m]
0,0
74,4
172,3
270,2
N3
[kN/m]
0,0
13,4
47,5
81,5
e_0,top
[m]
0,033
0,020
0,015
0,014
e_0,top
[m]
0,033
0,028
0,021
0,018
e5
[m]
0,01
0,01
0,01
0,01
e5
[m]
0,01
0,01
0,01
0,01
et
[m]
0,032
0,023
0,020
0,019
et
[m]
0,032
0,029
0,024
0,022
Wall2
Wall5
Wall at floor
2nd floor
1st floor
Ground
Basement
Wall at floor
2nd floor
1st floor
Ground
Basement
Thickness [m]
0,15
0,15
0,15
0,15
Thickness [m]
0,15
0,15
0,15
0,15
e1
[m]
0,05
0,05
0,05
0,05
e1
[m]
0,03
0,03
0,03
0,03
e2
[m]
0,0375
0,0375
0,0375
0,0375
e3
[m]
0,01
0,01
0,01
0,01
e3
[m]
0,01
0,01
0,01
0,01
N1
[kN/m]
65,9
176,7
176,7
176,7
N1
[kN/m]
32,5
59,0
59,0
59,0
N3
[kN/m]
0
177,32
531,30
885,29
N2
[kN/m]
0
50,8
50,8
50,8
e_0,top
[m]
0,025
0,017
0,014
0,012
N3
[kN/m]
0,0
56,7
190,6
324,6
e5
[m]
0,01
0,01
0,01
0,01
e_0,top
[m]
0,050
0,010
0,010
0,010
et
[m]
0,027
0,022
0,019
0,018
e5
[m]
0,01
0,01
0,01
0,01
et
[m]
0,043
0,016
0,017
0,017
==PAGE:217==
Appendix 3.16: Load on walls and foundation
h
2,8 m
Length
Total load, deck
Load
Width, floors Width, basement
m
kN
kN/m
m
m
W1
4,8
44,98
9,37
0,15
0,15
W2
2,4
58,96
24,56
0,15
0,15
W3
3
37,54
12,51
0,15
0,15
W4
2,4
65,98
27,49
0,15
0,15
W5
5,4
59,81
11,08
0,15
0,15
W6
13,2
100,93
7,65
0,15
0,15
Loads, wall 2
STR1
Value
Load length
Load width
Load height
Load
[kN/m2]/[kN/m3] m
m
m
kN
Deck, pr floor both sides
7,8 -
-
58,96
Roof, deck
4,30 -
-
32,50
Deadload, pr floor
24
2,4
0,15
2,8
24,19
Staircase
-
-
-
-
18,4
Staircase, A4
3,0
2,4
3 -
21,6
Foundation
24
2,4
0,7
0,8
32,26
Total load basement floor
476,94
Load foundation
509,19
STR2
Value
Load length
Load width
Load height
Load
[kN/m2]/[kN/m3] m
m
m
kN
Deck, pr floor
5,76 -
-
43,54
Roof
4,30 -
-
32,50
Deadload, pr floor
24
2,4
0,15
2,8
29,03
Staircase
-
-
-
-
18,4
3
2,4
3 -
21,6
Foundation
24
2,4
0,7
0,8
38,71
Total load basement floor
455,58
Load foundation
502,03
==PAGE:218==
Loads, Wall 5
STR1
Value
Load length
Load width
Load height
Load
[kN/m2]/[kN/m3] m
m
m
kN
Deck, pr floor both sides
7,8 -
-
119,62
Balcony, pr floor both sides
8,3
1,2
3,6
35,86
Roof, deck
4,30 -
-
65,95
Facade, pr floor
0,25 -
3,6
2,8
2,52
Deadload, pr floor
24
5,4
0,15
2,8
54,43
Foundation
24
5,4
0,6
0,7
54,43
Total load basement floor(bunden af huset)
757,67
Load foundation
812,10
STR2
Value
Load length
Load width
Load height
Load
[kN/m2]/[kN/m3] m
m
m
kN
Deck, pr floor
5,76 -
-
176,67
Balcony, pr floor
8,3
1,2
3,6
35,86
Roof
4,30 -
-
65,95
Facade, pr floor
0,25 -
3,6
2,8
2,52
Deadload, pr floor
24
5,4
0,15
2,8
54,43
Foundation
24
5,4
0,6
0,7
54,432
Total load basement floor(bunden af huset)
995,39
Load foundation
1060,71
==PAGE:219==
Appendix 3.17: Bearing capacity walls
Excentrisk belastet, wall 2
l_w
2,8 m
β
0,87 -
l_0
2,43 m
Betonbog side213-215
h_w
0,15 m
f_ck
24 Mpa
γc
1,6 -
f_cd
15,00 MPa
e
17 mm
φ
0,56
min
0,78
Bæreevne pr. meter
N_Rd
1268,22 kN/m
N_Rd_w2
3043,74 kN
λ_max
86 Standart værdi s211BB
i
43,30
λ
56,17
λ<λ_max
OK
Ej 2.ordens med
Excentrisk belastet, wall 5
l_w
2,8 m
β
0,97 -
l_0
2,72 m
Betonbog side213-215
h_w
0,15 m
f_ck
24 Mpa
γc
1,6 -
f_cd
15,00 MPa
e
18 mm
φ
0,50
min
0,76
Bæreevne pr. meter
N_Rd
1122,47 kN/m
N_Rd_w5
6061,33 kN
λ_max
86
i
43,30
λ
62,79
λ<λ_max
OK
Ej 2.ordens med
==PAGE:220==
Appendix 3.18: Loads on Column
Floor height
2,8 m
Free height,pr. floor
2,62 m
n
3
α_n
0,667
Colmn 1
Column 2
Cross section
mmxmm
200x450
200x840
length
mm
450
840
width
mm
200
200
Area
mm2
90000
168000
Loads, Colmn 1
STR1
Value
Load length
Load width
Load height Load
[kN/m2]/[kN/m3] m
m
m
kN
Deck, pr floor
7,8 -
-
52,23
Balcony, pr floor
8,3
1,2
3,0
29,88
Roof deck
4,30 -
-
28,80
Facade, pr floor
0,25 -
3
2,8
2,1
Deadload, pr floor
24
0,45
0,2
2,8
6,05
Foundation
23
1
1
0,6
13,8
Total load basement floor(bunden af huset)
305,63
Load foundation
319,43
STR2
Value
Load length
Load width
Load height Load
[kN/m2]/[kN/m3] m
m
m
kN
Deck, pr floor
5,76 -
-
38,57
Balcony, pr floor
8,3
1,2
3,0
35,856
Roof, deck
5,16 -
-
34,55
Facade, pr floor
0,25 -
3
2,8
2,52
Deadload, pr floor
24
0,45
0,2
2,8
7,26
Foundation
23
1
1
0,6
16,56
Total load basement floor(bunden af huset)
301,75
Load foundation
321,62
==PAGE:221==
Loads, Colmn 2
STR1
Value
Load length
Load width
Load height Load
[kN/m2]/[kN/m3] m
m
m
kN
Deck, pr floor
7,8 -
-
46,11
Balcony, pr floor
0
0
0,0
0
Roof deck
4,30 -
-
25,42
Facade, pr floor
0,25 -
3
2,8
2,1
Deadload, pr floor
24
0,84
0,2
2,8
11,29
Foundation
23
0,9
0,9
0,6
11,18
Total load basement floor(bunden af huset)
215,20
Load foundation
226,38
STR2
Value
Load length
Load width
Load height Load
[kN/m2]/[kN/m3] m
m
m
kN
Deck, pr floor
5,76 -
-
34,05
Balcony, pr floor
0
0
0,0
0
Roof,deck
5,16 -
-
30,50
Facade, pr floor
0,25 -
3
2,8
2,52
Deadload, pr floor
24
0,84
0,2
2,8
13,55
Foundation
23
0,9
0,9
0,6
13,41
Total load basement floor(bunden af huset)
206,75
Load foundation
220,17
==PAGE:222==
Reinforcement ratio
ø
14
Number reinforcement
6
Clamps, ø pr. 200mm
7
A_sc
923,6 mm2
A_c
90000 mm2
ρ
0,010 -
Tjek
0,002<ρ <0,04
OK!
Slenderness ratio
I
300000000 mm4
i
57,74 mm
λ
45,38 -
ω
0,12
N_ed
305,63 kN
A
0,7
B
1,11
C
0,7
λlim
29,04 lavere så søjlevirkning medregnes
Carrying capacity, BB s226
γc
1,45 -
f_ck
24 MPa
f_cd
16,6 MPa
γS
1,2 -
f_yk
235 Mpa
f_yd
195,8 MPa
E_s
200000 MPa
E_cm
MPa
ε_yd
0,0010
ε_cu
0,0035
E_cm
33000 MPa
E_cd
22759 MPa
A_sc
923,6 mm2
M_0Ed
5,864 kNm
d
166 mm
h_i
410 mm
ϕef
2,14
Ks
0
k_1
1,095
n
0,205
k2
0,0548
Kc
0,2222
EsIs
7,7631E+12 Nmm^2
EI
1,51724E+12 Nmm^2
Appendix 3.19: Bearing capacit column
Column 1, BB s226 excentrisk belastede søjle
==PAGE:223==
N_cr
2181,48 kN
OK!!
M_Ed
6,82 kNm
F_s
90,44 kN
F_c
396,06 kN
x
149,56 mm
M_Rd
60,09 OK!!
s111BB+124BB
Reinforcement ratio
ø
14
Number reinforcement
8
Clamps, ø pr. 200mm
7
A_sc
1231,5 mm2
A_c
168000 mm2
ρ
0,007 -
Tjek
0,002<ρ <0,04
OK!
Slenderness ratio
I
560000000 mm4
i
57,74 mm
λ
45,38 -
ω
0,09
N_ed
215,20 kN
A
0,7
B
1,08
C
0,7
λlim
45,95 højere så ingen søjlevirkning medrenes
Carrying capacity, BB s226
γc
1,45 -
f_ck
24 MPa
f_cd
16,6 MPa
γS
1,2 -
f_yk
235 Mpa
f_yd
195,8 MPa
E_s
200000 MPa
E_cm
MPa
ε_yd
0,0010
ε_cu
0,0035
E_cm
33000 MPa
E_cd
22759 MPa
A_sc
1231,5 mm2
M_0Ed
4,796 kNm
udensøjlevirking
d
166 mm
h_i
800 mm
Column 2, BB s226 excentrisk belastede søjle
==PAGE:224==
ϕef
2,14
Ks
0
k_1
1,095
n
0,077
k2
0,0207
Kc
0,2222
EsIs
3,94081E+13 Nmm^2
EI
2,83218E+12 Nmm^2
N_cr
4072,10 kN
OK!!
M_Ed
kNm
med søjlevirknin
F_s
120,58 kN
F_c
335,79 kN
x
126,80 mm
M_Rd
93,37 OK!!
s111BB+124BB
==PAGE:225==
Appendix 3.20: Stability
W_k
W_d
load width
Length
tager lige meget vind
g_wall
24 kN/m3
kN/m2
kN/m2
wall 5, tjek 1
6,00
5,40 m
n_max
1200 kN/m
STR1
0,54
0,24
wall 6, tjek 2
12
13,2 m
my
0,5
STR2
0,54
0,00
STR3
0,54
0,81
STR4
0,54
0,81
q_w,d
h
W_d
G_d
t_eff
G'
W'
M'
e
c
kN/m
m
kN
kN
m
kN
kN
kNm
m
m
STR1
1,45
2,80
2,03
18,14
0,15
18,14
2,03
5,68
0,313
4,77
STR3
4,83
2,80
6,76
18,14
0,15
18,14
6,76
18,94
1,044
3,31
STR4
4,83
2,80
6,76
16,33
0,15
16,33
6,76
18,94
1,160
3,08
STR1
1,45
2,80
4,06
72,58
0,15
90,72
6,09
22,73
0,251
4,90
STR3
4,83
2,80
13,53
72,58
0,15
90,72
20,29
75,77
0,835
3,73
STR4
4,83
2,80
13,53
65,32
0,15
81,65
20,29
75,77
0,928
3,54
STR1
1,45
2,80
4,06
127,01
0,15
217,73
10,15
51,14
0,235
4,93
STR3
4,83
2,80
13,53
127,01
0,15
217,73
33,82
170,47
0,783
3,83
STR4
4,83
2,80
13,53
114,31
0,15
195,96
33,82
170,47
0,870
3,66
STR1
1,45
2,30
3,70
178,20
0,15
395,93
13,84
82,98
0,210
4,98
STR3
4,83
2,30
12,32
178,20
0,15
395,93
46,15
276,61
0,699
4,00
STR4
4,83
2,30
12,32
160,38
0,15
356,34
46,15
276,61
0,776
3,85
Second
First
Ground
Basement
==PAGE:226==
H´ < my*N´(i-1e<1/2*b
N´<c*n_max
-
-
-
STR1
9,07
2,7
5728,35
STR3
9,07
2,7
3974,50
STR4
8,16
2,7
3696,11
STR1
45,36
2,7
5878,68
STR3
45,36
2,7
4475,60
STR4
40,82
2,7
4252,89
STR1
108,86
2,7
5916,26
STR3
108,86
2,7
4600,88
STR4
97,98
2,7
4392,08
STR1
197,96
2,7
5976,98
STR3
197,96
2,7
4803,27
STR4
178,17
2,7
4616,97
Ground
Basement
First
Second
==PAGE:227==
Appendix 3.21 – Archive material House 3 
 
==PAGE:228==
 
 
==PAGE:229==
Appendix 3.22: Load on deck House 3
All floors 18 cm perforated plates, reinforced pr 15cm
Parameters
Kfi
1
Area
Load type
Material
Symbol
Characteristic value 
[kN/m^2]
D1
Construction deadload
g_str
Roof deck
Perforated plate
2,85
Other Deadloads
g_oth
Installations+ceiling
0,20
D2
Construction deadload
g_str
Floor decks
Perforated plate
2,85
Other Deadloads
Floor
0,25
Installations+ceiling
0,20
Live load
Partition wall, 6 cm concrete
1,50
A1- Residential
1,50
D3
Construction deadload
g_str
Basement deck
Concrete 8cm
1,92
Other Deadloads
leca concrete
1,00
Live load
Partition wall, 6cm concrete
1,50
A1- Basement
1,50
Load combinations
D1
D2
D3
Leading live load
STR1
[kN/m2]
3,05
7,80
7,42
Leading dead load
STR2
[kN/m2]
3,66
3,96
3,50
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m2]
3,05
7,43
5,17
Leading wind, favourable STR4
[kN/m2]
2,75
2,97
2,63
==PAGE:230==
Appendix 3.23: Windload
Direction
Syd
K_fi
1
Terrain category
III
Roughness length
z_0
0,3 m
Building height (hele højden) z
10,4 m
Air density
ρ
1,25 kg/m^3
Wind velocity
v_b,0
24 m/s
Directional factor
c_dir
0,89 N
Season factor
c_season
1 max
Basic wind velocity
v_b
21,47 m/s
Terrain factor
k_r
0,22
Peak velocity pressure
q_p
499,61 N/m^2
0,50 kN/m^2
Check
q_p
0,57 kN/m^2 
OK!
Pressure coefficient
Depth
d
11,82 m
H/d ratio
h/d=z/d
0,88
Width
b
67,60 m
min b or 2h
e
20,80
Pressure coefficient, E
c=E
-0,47
Pressure coefficient, D
c=D
0,78
Correlation factor
ρ
0,850
Pressure coefficient, A
c=A
-1,20
Pressure coefficient, B
c=B
-0,80
Windload
q
0,53 kN/m^2
Characteristic windload
w_k,stabil
0,53 kN/m^2
Characteristic windload, other w_k,other
0,50 kN/m^2
Stability
W_k
W_d
kN/m2
kN/m2
STR1
0,53
0,24
STR2
0,53
0,00
STR3
0,53
0,80
STR4
0,53
0,80
==PAGE:231==
Appendix 3.24: Excentricities
Wall1
Wall at floor
2nd floor
1st floor
Ground floor Basement
Thickness [m]
0,15
0,15
0,15
0,15
e1
[m]
0,05
0,05
0,05
0,05
e2
[m]
0,0375
0,0375
0,0375
0,0375
e3
[m]
0,01
0,01
0,01
0,01
N1
[kN/m]
41,0
104,9
104,9
104,9
N2
[kN/m]
41,04
90,96
90,96
90,96
N3
[kN/m]
0,0
180,5
474,7
769,0
e_0,top
[m]
0,006
0,010
0,010
0,010
e5
[m]
0,01
0,01
0,01
0,01
et
[m]
0,014
0,016
0,017
0,017
Wall2
Wall at floor
2nd floor
1st floor
Ground floor Basement
Thickness [m]
0,15
0,15
0,15
0,15
e1
[m]
0,05
0,05
0,05
0,05
e2
[m]
0,0375
0,0375
0,0375
0,0375
e3
[m]
0,01
0,01
0,01
0,01
N1
[kN/m]
26,4
67,4
67,4
67,4
N2
[kN/m]
19,18
49,80
49,80
49,80
N3
[kN/m]
0,0
123,4
318,5
513,6
e_0,top
[m]
0,013
0,011
0,011
0,011
e5
[m]
0,01
0,01
0,01
0,01
et
[m]
0,019
0,018
0,017
0,017
==PAGE:232==
Appendix 3.25: Load on walls and foundation
Normal væg 15cm uarmeret beton
L1
4,5 m
Konsekvens
CC2
L2
3,9 m
KFI
1
L3
3,3 m
ψ0 (A)
0,5
L4
2,4 m
Floors (excl
3
t, floor
t,basement h,floor
h,basement
m
m
m
m
m
W1
0,15
0,15
2,6
2,65
5,98
W2
0,15
0,15
2,6
2,65
5,24
Balcone set to deck.
Ej højde for etagereduktionsfaktoren
Wall 1
Value
Load length Load width Load height Load
STR1
[kN/m2][kN/m3] [m]
[m]
[m]
[kN]
Deck, pr floor, left
7,80
2,25
5,98 -
104,95
Deck pr floor, right
7,80
1,95
5,98 -
90,96
Roof, left
3,05
2,25
5,98 -
41,04
Roof, right
3,05
2,25
5,98 -
41,04
Deadload
24
5,98
0,15
10,45
224,97
facade, left
24
2,25
0,16
10,45
90,29
facade, right
24
1,95
0,16
10,45
78,25
Total load
1063,30
Wall 1
Value
Load length Load width Load height Load
STR2
[kN/m2][kN/m3] [m]
[m]
[m]
[kN]
Deck, pr floor, left
3,96
2,25
5,98 -
53,28
Deck pr floor, right
3,96
1,95
5,98 -
46,18
Roof, left
3,66
2,25
5,98 -
49,25
Roof, right
3,66
2,25
5,98 -
49,25
Deadload
24
5,98
0,15
10,45
224,97
facade, left
24
2,25
0,16
10,45
90,29
facade, right
24
1,95
0,16
10,45
78,25
Total load
396,87
==PAGE:233==
Wall 2
Value
Load length Load width Load height Load
STR1
[kN/m2][kN/m3] [m]
[m]
[m]
[kN]
Deck, pr floor, left
7,80
1,65
5,24 -
67,44
Roof, left
3,05
1,65
5,24 -
26,37
Roof, right
3,05
1,2
5,24 -
19,18
Staircase
3,42
1,2
5,24 -
21,50
Staircase, A4
3,0
1,2
5,24 -
18,86
Deadload
24
5,24
0,15
10,45
197,13
facade, left
24
1,65
0,16
10,45
66,21
facade, right
24
1,2
0,16
10,45
48,15
Total load
708,76
Wall 2
Value
Load length Load width Load height Load
STR2
[kN/m2][kN/m3] [m]
[m]
[m]
[kN]
Deck, pr floor, left
3,96
1,65
5,24 -
34,24
Roof, left
3,66
1,65
5,24 -
31,64
Roof, right
3,66
1,2
5,24 -
23,01
Staircase
3,42
1,2
5,24 -
21,50
Staircase, A4
3,0
1,2
5,24 -
18,86
Deadload
24
5,24
0,15
10,45
197,13
facade, left
24
1,65
0,16
10,45
66,21
facade, right
24
1,2
0,16
10,45
48,15
Total load
608,58
==PAGE:234==
Appendix 3.26: Bearing capacity walls
Excentrisk belastet, wall 1
kældervæg
l_w
2,65 m
β
0,98 -
l_0
2,59 m
h_w
0,15 m
f_ck
24 Mpa
γc
1,55 -
f_cd
15,48 MPa
e
17 mm
φ
0,54
min
0,78
Bæreevne pr. meter
N_Rd
1259,22 kN/m
N_Rd_w2
7530,14 kN
λ_max
86
i
43,30
λ
59,89
λ<λ_max
OK
Excentrisk belastet, wall 2
kældervæg
l_w
2,65 m
β
0,97 -
l_0
2,58 m
h_w
0,15 m
f_ck
24 Mpa
γc
1,55 -
f_cd
15,48 MPa
e
17 mm
φ
0,54
min
0,77
Bæreevne pr. meter
N_Rd
1249,00 kN/m
N_Rd_w2
6544,76 kN
λ_max
86
i
43,30
λ
59,51
λ<λ_max
OK
==PAGE:235==
Appendix 3.27: Stability
W_k
W_d
kN/m2
kN/m2
STR1
0,53
0,24
STR2
0,53
0,00
STR3
0,53
0,80
STR4
0,53
0,80
load width Length tager lige meget vind
g_wall
24 kN/m3
Fire walls, tjek 1
16,80
11,82 m
n_max
1200 kN/m
my
0,5
N'
q_w,d h
W_d G_d
t_eff
G'
kN/m
m
kN
kN
m
kN
STR1
4,02
2,60
5,23
36,88
0,15
36,88
STR3
13,40
2,60 17,42
36,88
0,15
36,88
STR4
13,40
2,60 17,42
33,19
0,15
33,19
STR1
4,02
2,60 10,45
147,51
0,15
184,39
STR3
13,40
2,60 34,83
147,51
0,15
184,39
STR4
13,40
2,60 34,83
132,76
0,15
165,95
STR1
4,02
2,60 10,45
258,15
0,15
442,54
STR3
13,40
2,60 34,83
258,15
0,15
442,54
STR4
13,40
2,60 34,83
232,33
0,15
398,29
STR1
4,02
2,65 10,55
369,49
0,15
812,03
STR3
13,40
2,65 35,17
369,49
0,15
812,03
STR4
13,40
2,65 35,17
332,54
0,15
730,83
H'
W'
M'
e
c
H´ < my*N´(i-1)
e<1/2*b
N´<c*n_max
kN
kNm
m
m
-
-
-
5,23
13,59
0,368 11,08
18,44
5,9
13299,88
17,42
45,28
1,228
9,36
18,44
5,9
11236,92
17,42
45,28
1,364
9,09
16,60
5,9
10909,47
15,68
54,34
0,295 11,23
92,20
5,9
13476,70
52,25 181,14
0,982
9,86
92,20
5,9
11826,34
52,25 181,14
1,092
9,64
82,98
5,9
11564,37
26,13 122,27
0,276 11,27
221,27
5,9
13520,91
87,09 407,56
0,921
9,98
221,27
5,9
11973,69
87,09 407,56
1,023
9,77
199,14
5,9
11728,10
36,68 219,46
0,270 11,28
406,02
5,9
13535,37
122,26 731,54
0,901 10,02
406,02
5,9
12021,90
122,26 731,54
1,001
9,82
365,42
5,9
11781,67
Second floor
First floor
Ground floor
Basement
Basement
Second floor
First floor
Ground floor
==PAGE:236==
==PAGE:237==
Appendix 4.1 - Data sheet from KONE
==PAGE:238==
==PAGE:239==
Appendix 4.2 - Data sheet OTIS
==PAGE:240==
==PAGE:241==
Appendix 4.3 - Data sheet Schindler
==PAGE:242==
==PAGE:243==
Appendix 4.4 - Data sheet Thyssenkrupp
==PAGE:244==
==PAGE:245==
==PAGE:246==
==PAGE:247==
Cembrit Solid fremstilles som rektangulære plader i 
to formater – 1192x2500 mm og 1192x3050 mm, 
pladetykkelsen er 8 mm.
Materiale
Cembrit Solid består af cement, mineralsk filler, 
PVA- og cellulosefibre.
Farveægthed
Fibercement er et naturmateriale, og nuanceforskelle 
kan forekomme som følge af de farveforskelle, der er 
i råvarerne. Dette har ingen indflydelse på holdbar­
heden af pladerne. For at minimere nuanceforskelle 
anbefales det, at plader, som skal monteres på den 
samme facade, tages fra samme produktion. 
Med tiden vil farver forandres som en konsekvens af 
påvirkninger fra UV lys og miljøet generelt. Cembrit 
Solid plader vil dog i høj grad bibeholde farve og glans.
I henhold til den Europæiske standard EN 20105 
- A02 vil farverne, efter 3.000 timers QUV test, 
bevare trin 4-5 efter farveægthedsskemaet. Dette 
betyder, at farven beholder sin nuance, og at en evt. 
forandring i farvedybden vil blive kategoriseret som 
knap synlig (jf. skemaet).
Skala til klassificering af ændring
Tilbehør
Til Cembrit Solid er der udviklet en komplet serie af 
tilbehør, som sikrer en simpel montage og et perfekt 
resultat med en meget lang holdbarhed. Pladerne 
kan leveres projektspecifikt på fixmål med alle 
skårne kanter forseglet. Ved tilskæring på bygge-
plads skal alle skårne kanter forsegles med Cembrit 
kantforsegler.
Farveægthed
Materialer
5
Ingen forandring
4
Ubetydelig forandring i farve-
dybde. Knap synlig
3
Tab af farvedybde. Synlig 
2
Øget forandring
1
Stor forandring
Cembrit Solid er en gennemfarvet fibercementplade med en fulddækkende overflade­
maling. Pladen er meget farveægte og leveres altid med skårne og forseglede kanter.
Cembrit Solid
128 – August 2016	
cembrit.dk
Cembrit 
Sohngaardsholmsvej 2
9000 Aalborg, Danmark
Tel. 	+45 99 37 22 22
Fax 	+45 98 12 00 75
info@cembrit.dk
3050 mm
2500 mm
1192 mm
1192 mm
Appendix 5.1
==PAGE:248==
Produktdata Cembrit Solid
128 – August 2016	
cembrit.dk
Cembrit 
Sohngaardsholmsvej 2
9000 Aalborg, Denmark
Tel. 	+45 99 37 22 22
Fax 	+45 98 12 00 75
info@cembrit.dk
Dimensioner
Standard bredde
mm
1192
1192
Standard længde
mm
2500
3050
Pladetykkelse
mm
8,0
8,0
Egenskaber
Densitet, tør
kg/m3
1700
1700
Vægt
kg/m2
14,6
14,6
kg/plade
43,8
53,4
Mekaniske egenskaber
Elasticitetsmodul
E-modul med fiberretningen, tør
GPa
8
8
E-modul på tværs af fiberretningen, tør
GPa
7
7
Bøjningsstyrke
Med fiberretningen, tør
MPa
24
24
På tværs af fiberretningen, tør
MPa
18
18
Termiske egenskaber
Basis varmeledningsevne
W/m °C
0,4
0,4
Varmeudvidelseskoeficient
mm/m °C
0,008
0,008
Anvendelsestemperatur
°C
Max. 80
Max. 80
Hygroskopiske egenskaber
Vandabsorption (våd til tør)
%
12,0
12,0
Våd-tør-våd (maks.)
mm/m
3
3
Vanddampstransmission (23ºC - 0/99% RH)
Diffusionstæthed
ng/m2 s Pa
200
200
Dampdiffusionsmodstand
Gpa s m2/kg
5,0
5,0
Tolerancer (jvf. EN 12467)
Pladetykkelse
mm
ca. 0,8
ca. 0,8
Længde
mm
ca. 3
ca. 3
Bredde
mm
ca. 2
ca. 2
Brandegenskaber
Brandklasse
EN 13501
A2, s1-d0
A2, s1-d0
==PAGE:249==
Appendix 5.2
==PAGE:250==
15,4 mm
50 mm ±10
Protect F
Brandtekniske egenskaber
Euroklasse A2-s1,d0 tilsvarer: (overflade klasse In I)
Fugtpåvirkning
Diffusionsmodstand (s/m)
3,0–4,5 x 103
Længdeudvidelse RF 40–90 % mm/m
0,4
Diffusionsmodstandsfaktor (μ)
10
Termiske egenskaber
Varmemodstand (m2 · °C/W)
0,07
λ (Varmepåvirkning) W/(m*K)
0,25
Længdeudvidelseskoefficient 25 x 10-6 (ved temp. >50°C
25 x 10–6
Tæthed
Luftgennemgang m/s Pa
0,2 x 10–6
Tolerancer og styrke
Tykkelse (mm)
15,4
Tolerance (mm)
±0,4
Bredde (mm)
900 / 1200
Tolerance (mm)
 +0 / –3
Længde (mm)
*
Tolerance (mm)
+0 / –4
Afvigelser fra vinkelrethed pr. 600 mm pladebredde (mm)
1,0 
Vægt (kg/m2)
12,7
Tolerance (kg/m2)
+0,3 / -0,2
Elasticitetsmodul
På langs (GPa)
2,5
På tværs (GPa)
2,0
Bøjningsstyrke
På langs (MPa)
6,2
På tværs (MPa)
2,4
Gyproc GFE 15 PROTECT® F Ergo
Gyproc GF 15 PROTECT® F
Produktbeskrivelse
900 og 1200 mm bred Brandgipsplade med overflade af karton og 
glasfiberarmeret gipskerne. Pladen yder bedre brandmodstand end en 
almindelig gipsplade, da den bliver siddende på konstruktionen i læn­
gere tid. Pladen fungerer som fastholdelse af isolering (også granulat) 
i såvel vandrette som lodrette konstruktioner.
Anvendelsesområde
Gyproc GFE 15 Protect F Ergo og Gyproc GF 15 Protect F anvendes 
primært i konstruktioner med høje brandkrav som beklædning på 
bærende træskeletvægge i fleretageshuse, etagedæk, skaktvægge, in­
dervægge og som indvendig beklædning på bærende og ikke bærende 
stålskelet ydervægge.
Kantudførelse
Pladen har kartonbeklædt, forsænkede langkant og savet, ret kort­
kant. Langkantenes forsænkning er beregnet for samlingspartling til 
jævn overflade.
Montering
Gyproc GFE 15 Protect F Ergo og Gyproc GF 15 Protect F monteres
i 1 - 3 lag på underlag af stål eller træprofiler.
Gyproc A/S
Hareskovvej 12 • 4400 Kalundborg
Tlf.: 59 57 03 30 • www.gyproc.dk • e-mail: info@gyproc.com
apr16. ©Gyproc.
Gyproc A/S tager forbehold for evt. ændringer eller trykfejl.
Produktdatablad
* Se produktkatalog eller www.gyproc.dk for aktuelle længder.
Kortkant
Langkant
Appendix 5.3
==PAGE:251==
letter arbejdet...
letter arbejdet...
Appendix 5.4
==PAGE:252==
Appendix 5.5: Load roof, House 2
Parameters
Kfi
1,1
CC3
Beam distance/ load width
0,4 m
Length
4,19 m
Height
295 mm
Width
45 mm
Load type
Material
Symbol
Characteristic value
[kN/m2]
Construction deadload
g_str
C24 beams
0,06 kN pr m
Other Deadoads
g_oth
Asphalt paper, 7mm
0,07
Isolation, 400mm
0,8
Installations
0,5
Fire Gypsum, 2x15mm
0,254
Imposed loads
q_s
snow
0,8
Load combinations
Leading live load
STR1
[kN/m]
0,934
Leading dead load
STR2
[kN/m]
0,931
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
0,78
Leadinf wind, favourable
STR4
[kN/m]
0,63
Accidental load, fire
STR5
[kN/m]
0,71
Moment, max
[kNm]
2,04
Moment, fire
[kNm]
1,54
Reaktion, max
[kN]
1,95
Reaktion, fire
[kN]
1,48
==PAGE:253==
Appendix 5.6: Load roof, House 3
Parameters
Kfi, CC3
1,1
CC3
Beam distance/ load width
0,4 m
Length
3,3 m
Height
295 mm
Width
45 mm
ψ1
0,3
Load type
Material
Symbol
Characteristic value
[kN/m2]
Construction deadload
g_str
C24 beams
0,06 kN pr m
Other Deadoads
g_oth
Strøger+trægulv
0,13
Asphalt paper, 7mm
0,07
Isolation, 400mm
0,8
Installations
0,5
Fire Gypsum, 3x15mm
0,381
Imposed loads
snow
q_s
0,8
Payload
q_k
2,5
Load combinations
Leading live load
STR1
[kN/m]
2,70
Leading dead load
STR2
[kN/m]
1,06
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
1,71
Leadinf wind, favourable
STR4
[kN/m]
0,73
Accidental load, fire
STR5
[kN/m]
1,56
Moment, max
[kNm]
3,67
Moment, fire
[kNm]
2,12
Reaktion, max
[kN]
4,45
Reaktion, fire
[kN]
2,57
==PAGE:254==
Appendix 5.7: Capacity roof, House 2
Material parameters
k_d_P-last
[-]
0,444
k_fi_fire
[-]
1,25
f_vd
[Mpa]
1,78
f_vd,fire
[Mpa]
5
f_c90d
[Mpa]
1,11
f_c90d,fire
[Mpa]
3,13
f_md
[Mpa]
10,66
f_md,fire
[Mpa]
30,00
E-modul
[Mpa]
11000
moment of resistance
W
[mm^3]
652688
I
[mm^4]
96271406
Control
Forskydning
k_v
1 -
τ_d
0,22 MPa
k_v*f_v,d
1,78 Mpa
Kontrol
12,40 %
OK
Spænding
σ_d
3,12 Mpa
(σ_d < f_m_d)
Kontrol
29,3 %
OK
Nedbøjning
l/600
6,98 mm
u_g
2,93 mm
5/384·G·l⁴/(E·I)
42,0 %
OK
Control Fire REI60, A2,s1-d0
t_ch
61,6 min
t_a
77,23 min
d_char,n
0 mm
d_f
7 mm
h
288 mm
b
31 mm
W
428544 [mm^3]
I
61710336 [mm^4]
Forskydning
k_v
1 -
τ_d
0,25 MPa
k_v*f_v,d
5,00 Mpa
Kontrol
4,96 %
OK
Spænding
σ_d
3,60 Mpa
(σ_d < f_m_d)
Kontrol
12,0 %
OK
==PAGE:255==
Appendix 5.8: Capacity roof, House 3
Material parameters
k_d
[-]
0,593
k_fi_fire
[-]
1,25
f_vd
[Mpa]
1,78
f_vd,fire
[Mpa]
5
f_c90d
[Mpa]
1,11
f_c90d,fire
[Mpa]
3,13
f_md
[Mpa]
10,66
f_md,fire
[Mpa]
30,00
E-modul
[Mpa]
11000
moment of resistance
W
[mm^3]
652688
I
[mm^4]
96271406
Control
Forskydning
k_v
1 -
τ_d
0,50 MPa
k_v*f_v,d
1,78 Mpa
Kontrol
28,30 %
OK
Spænding
σ_d
5,62 Mpa
(σ_d < f_m_d)
Kontrol
52,8 %
OK
Nedbøjning
l/600
5,50 mm
u_g
1,29 mm
5/384·G·l⁴/(E·I)
23,5 %
OK
Control Fire REI120, A2,s1-d0
t_ch
61,6 min
t_a
77,23 min
d_char,n
0 mm
d_f
7 mm
h
288 mm
b
31 mm
W
428544 [mm^3]
I
61710336 [mm^4]
Forskydning
k_v
1 -
τ_d
0,43 MPa
k_v*f_v,d
5,00 Mpa
Kontrol
8,63 %
OK
Spænding
σ_d
4,94 Mpa
(σ_d < f_m_d)
Kontrol
16,5 %
OK
==PAGE:256==
Appendix 5.9: Load floor, House 2
Parameters
Kfi, CC3
1,1
CC3
Beam distance/ load width
0,4 m
Length
4,19 m
Height
245 mm
Width
70 mm
ψ1
0,3
Load type
Material
Symbol
Characteristic value
[kN/m2]
Construction deadload
g_str
C24 beams
0,07 kN pr m
Other Deadoads
g_oth
Wooden flooring, 15mm
0,15
Insulation, 100mm
0,2
0
0
Imposed loads
Payload
q_k
1,5
Partitions
1,0kN/m
0,5
Load combinations
Leading live load
STR1
[kN/m]
3,53
Leading dead load
STR2
[kN/m]
0,28
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
1,88
Leadinf wind, favourable
STR4
[kN/m]
0,19
Accidental load, fire
STR5
[kN/m]
0,81
Moment, max
[kNm]
7,74
Moment, fire
[kNm]
1,78
Reaktion, max
[kN]
7,39
Reaktion, fire
[kN]
1,70
==PAGE:257==
Appendix 5.10: Load floor, House 3
Parameters
Kfi, CC3
1,1
Beam distance/ load width
0,4 m
Length
4,2 m
Height
245 mm
Width
70 mm
ψ1
0,3
Load type
Material
Symbol
Characteristic value
[kN/m2]
Construction deadload
g_str
C24 beams
0,07 kN pr m
Other Deadoads
g_oth
Wooden flooring, 15mm
0,17
Insulation, 100mm
0,2
0
0
Imposed loads
Payload
q_k
1,5
Partitions
1,0kN/m
0,5
Load combinations
Leading live load
STR1
[kN/m]
3,54
Leading dead load
STR2
[kN/m]
0,29
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
1,89
Leadinf wind, favourable
STR4
[kN/m]
0,20
Accidental load, fire
STR5
[kN/m]
0,82
Moment, max
[kNm]
7,81
Moment, fire
[kNm]
1,81
Reaktion, max
[kN]
7,44
Reaktion, fire
[kN]
1,72
==PAGE:258==
Appendix 5.11: Ceiling
Nedefra og op
2x15
Brand gips
45x45
reglar med isolering
1x12
plade lukning, krydsfiner
Parameters
Kfi
1,1
ψ1
0,3
Load type
Material
Symbol
Characteristic value
[kN/m2]
Construction deadload
g_str
C24 beams
0,02 kN pr m
Other Deadoads
g_oth
Krydsfiner
0,06
Isolation, 45mm
0,09
Installations
0,5
Fire Gypsum, 3x15mm
0,381
Imposed loads
Payload
q_k
0
Load combinations
Leading live load
STR1
[kN/m2]
1,15
Leading dead load
STR2
[kN/m2]
1,39
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m2]
1,15
Leadinf wind, favourable
STR4
[kN/m2]
0,94
Accidental load, fire
STR5
[kN/m2]
1,05
==PAGE:259==
Appendix 5.12: Capacity floor, House 2
Material parameters
k_d
[-]
0,593
k_fi_fire
[-]
1,25
f_vd
[Mpa]
2,37
f_vd,fire
[Mpa]
5
f_c90d
[Mpa]
1,48
f_c90d,fire
[Mpa]
3,13
f_md
[Mpa]
14,23
f_md,fire
[Mpa]
30,00
E-modul
[Mpa]
11000
moment of resistance
W
[mm^3]
700292
Inertimoment
I
[mm^4]
85785729
Control
Forskydning
k_v
1 -
τ_d
0,65 MPa
k_v*f_v,d
2,37 Mpa
Kontrol
27,26 %
OK
Spænding
σ_d
11,05 Mpa
(σ_d < f_m_d)
Kontrol
77,6 %
OK
Nedbøjning
l/600
6,98 mm
u_n
6,35 mm
5/384·G·l⁴/(E·I)
91,0 %
OK
Control Fire REI120, A2,s1-d0
3xbrandgips
2xkrydsfiner
t_ch
95,2
18,59
113,79 min
t_a
110,83
28,28
139,11 min
d_char,n
0,00 mm
d_ef
7,00 mm
h_ef
238 mm
b_ef
56 mm
W_fire
528677 mm^3
I
62912603 [mm^4]
Forskydning
k_v
1 -
τ_d
0,19 MPa
k_v*f_v,d
5,00 Mpa
Kontrol
3,82 %
OK
Spænding
σ_d
3,36 Mpa
(σ_d < f_m_d)
Kontrol
11,2 %
OK
==PAGE:260==
Appendix 5.13: Capacity floor, House 3
Material parameters
k_d
[-]
0,593
k_fi_fire
[-]
1,25
f_vd
[Mpa]
2,37
f_vd,fire
[Mpa]
5,00
f_c90d
[Mpa]
1,48
f_c90d,fire
[Mpa]
3,13
f_md
[Mpa]
14,23
f_md,fire
[Mpa]
30,00
E-modul
[Mpa]
11000
moment of resistance
W
[mm^3]
700292
I
[mm^4]
85785729
Control
Forskydning
k_v
1 -
τ_d
0,65 MPa
k_v*f_v,d
2,37 Mpa
Kontrol
27,43 %
OK
Spænding
σ_d
11,15 Mpa
(σ_d < f_m_d)
Kontrol
78,4 %
OK
Nedbøjning
l/600
7,00 mm
u_n
6,44 mm
5/384·G·l⁴/(E·I)
92,0 %
OK
Control Fire REI120, A2,s1-d0
3xbrandgip2xkrydsfiner
t_ch
95,2
18,59
113,79 min
t_a
110,83
28,28
139,11 min
d_char,n
0,00 mm
d_ef
7,00 mm
h_ef
238 mm
b_ef
56 mm
W_fire
528677 mm^3
I
62912603 [mm^4]
Forskydning
k_v
1 -
τ_d
0,19 MPa
k_v*f_v,d
5,00 Mpa
Kontrol
3,88 %
OK
Spænding
σ_d
3,42 Mpa
(σ_d < f_m_d)
Kontrol
11,4 %
OK
==PAGE:261==
Appendix 5.14: Wind load, House 2
Wind Gable
Direction
vest
K_fi
1,1
Terrain category
III
Roughness length
z_0
0,3 m
Building height (hele højden) z
20,9 m
Air density
ρ
1,25 kg/m^3
Wind velocity
v_b,0
24 m/s
Directional factor
c_dir
1,00 N
Season factor
c_season
1 max
Basic wind velocity
v_b
24,00 m/s
Terrain factor
k_r
0,22
Peak velocity pressure
q_p
796,91 N/m^2
0,80 kN/m^2
ca. aflæsning
q_p
0,80 kN/m^2 
OK!
Pressure coefficient
Depth, max
d
108,00 m
H/d ratio
h/d=z/d
0,19
Width
b
13,30 m
min b or 2h
e
13,30
Pressure coefficient, E
c=E
-0,30
Pressure coefficient, D
c=D
0,70
Correlation factor
ρ
0,85
Pressure coefficient, A
c=A
-1,20
Pressure coefficient, B
c=B
-0,80
Vindlast
q
0,68 kN/m^2
Characteristic windload
w_k,stabil
0,68 kN/m^2
Characteristic windload, other w_k,other
0,80 kN/m^2
Til stabilitets beregningerne
W_k
W_d
for eksisterende forhold
kN/m2
kN/m2
STR1
0,68
0,30
STR2
0,68
0,00
STR3
0,68
1,02
STR4
0,68
1,02
==PAGE:262==
Appendix 5.15: Wind load, House 3
Direction
vest
K_fi
1,1
Terrain category
III
Roughness length
z_0
0,3 m
Building height (hele højden) z
20,2 m
Air density
ρ
1,25 kg/m^3
Wind velocity
v_b,0
24 m/s
Directional factor
c_dir
1,00 N
Season factor
c_season
1 max
Basic wind velocity
v_b
24,00 m/s
Terrain factor
k_r
0,22
Peak velocity pressure
q_p
788,12 N/m^2
0,79 kN/m^2
ca. aflæsning
q_p
0,80 kN/m^2 
OK!
Pressure coefficient
Depth, max
d
67,6 m
H/d ratio
h/d=z/d
0,30
Width
b
11,82 m
min b or 2h
e
11,82
Pressure coefficient, E
c=E
-0,31
Pressure coefficient, D
c=D
0,71
Correlation factor
ρ
0,85
Pressure coefficient, A
c=A
-1,20
Pressure coefficient, B
c=B
-0,80
Vindlast
q
0,68 kN/m^2
Characteristic windload
w_k,stabil
0,68 kN/m^2
Characteristic windload, other w_k,other
0,79 kN/m^2
Til stabilitets beregningerne
W_k
W_d
for eksisterende forhold
kN/m2
kN/m2
STR1
0,68
0,31
STR2
0,68
0,00
STR3
0,68
1,02
STR4
0,68
1,02
==PAGE:263==
Appendix 5.16: Load bearing inner walls, House 2
Kritisk; indervæg modul 4, lang side. REI120
Krydsfiner 12mm, reglar med iso, 2xbrandgips
Parameters
Kfi, CC3
1,1
Load width, floors
2,09 m
column distance
0,4 m
Height
2,8 m
length, columns
195 mm
Width, columns
70 mm
ψ1
0,3
Load type
Material
Symbol
Characteristic value
[kN/m2]
Construction deadload
g_str
C24 beams
0,32 kN
Other Deadoads
g_oth
Krydsfiner
0,058
Isolation, 195mm
0,04
Fire Gypsum, 4x15mm
0,508
Roof
1 floor
Floors
2 floors
Load combinations
Leading live load
STR1
[kN/m]
22,66
Leading dead load
STR2
[kN/m]
8,76
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
17,69
Leadinf wind, favourable
STR4
[kN/m]
6,18
Accidental load, fire
STR5
[kN/m]
9,38
Aksial last
kN
9,1
Aksial last fire
kN
3,8
==PAGE:264==
Appendix 5.17: Load bearing inne walls, House 3
Kritisk; indervæg modul 4, lang side. REI120
Krydsfiner 12mm, reglar med iso, 2xbrandgips
Parameters
Kfi, CC3
1,1
Load width, floors
2,1 m
column distance
0,4 m
Height
2,8 m
length, columns
195 mm
Width, columns
70 mm
ψ1
0,3
Load type
Material
Symbol
Characteristic value
[kN/m2]
Construction deadload
g_str
C24 beams
0,32 kN
Other Deadoads
g_oth
Krydsfiner
0,058
Isolation, 195mm
0,04
Fire Gypsum, 4x15mm
0,508
Roof
1 floor
Floors
2 floors
Load combinations
Leading live load
STR1
[kN/m]
22,83
Leading dead load
STR2
[kN/m]
8,90
Leading wind load
STR3
[kN/m]
17,84
Leadinf wind, favourable
STR4
[kN/m]
6,28
Accidental load, fire
STR5
[kN/m]
9,49
Aksial last
kN
9,1
Aksial last fire
kN
3,8
Anvendelsesklasse 1
==PAGE:265==
Appendix 5.18: Load exterior walls, House 2
Kritisk; facade i tværmodul ved trappeopgang lang side. tværbelastet søjle
REI120
Facade elementer, hulrum, vindspærre, Bærende skelet+iso 295mm, dampspære, 
45skelet +iso+instalationer, gips 3 lag brand gips
Anvendes til alle ydersider, os dem der ikke er bærerende. Pga, energikrav
Parameters
Kfi, CC3
1,1
Load width, floors
2,1 m
column distance
0,4 m
Height
2,8 m
length, columns
295 mm
Width, columns
70 mm
ψ1
0,3
Load type
Material
Symbol
Characteristic value
[kN/m2]
Construction deadload
g_str
C24 beams, 295+70
0,60 kN
Other Deadoads
g_oth
Facade
0,146
Isolation, 295mm+45
0,07
Fire Gypsum, 4x15mm
0,508
Roof
1 floor
Floors
2 floors
Load combinations
Leading live load
STR1
[kN/m]
25,56
Leading dead load STR2
[kN/m]
12,80
Leading wind load STR3
[kN/m]
20,59
Leadinf wind, favouSTR4
[kN/m]
8,93
Accidental load, fireSTR5
[kN/m]
12,44
Aksial last
kN
10,2
Aksial last fire
kN
5,0
Anvendelsesklasse 1
Tvær last vind
kN/m
0,41
==PAGE:266==
Appendix 5.19: Load exterior walls, House 3
Kritisk; gavl modul 4 lang side. Andvendes os til yder lang side modul 5 og 6, tværbelastet søjle
REI120
Facade elementer, hulrum, vindspærre, Bærende skelet+iso 295mm, dampspære, 
45skelet +iso+instalationer, gips 2 lag brand gips
Da gavlene er bæreende og facaderne ikke er, bestemmes gavlen og anvendes for alle facader. 
Parameters
Kfi, CC3
1,1
Load width, floors
2,1 m
column distance
0,4 m
Height
2,8 m
length, columns
295 mm
Width, columns
70 mm
ψ1
0,3
Load type
Material
Symbol
Characteristic value
[kN/m2]
Construction deadload
g_str
C24 beams, 295+70
0,60 kN
Other Deadoads
g_oth
Facade
0,146
Isolation, 295mm+45
0,07
Fire Gypsum, 4x15mm
0,508
Roof
1 floor
Floors
2 floors
Load combinations
Leading live load
STR1
[kN/m]
25,72
Leading dead load STR2
[kN/m]
12,93
Leading wind load STR3
[kN/m]
20,73
Leadinf wind, favouSTR4
[kN/m]
9,03
Accidental load, fireSTR5
[kN/m]
12,55
Aksial last
kN
10,3
Aksial last fire
kN
5,0
Anvendelsesklasse 1
Tvær last vind
kN/m
0,41
==PAGE:267==
Appendix 5.20: Capacity bearing inner walls, House 2
Material parameters, simpelt undestøttet i begge retninger ellers ændre l værdier
k_d
[-]
0,593
k_fi_fire
[-]
1,25
f_cd
[Mpa]
12,5
f_cd,fire
[Mpa]
26,3
l_sy
[m]
2,8
l_sz
[m]
2,8
k_rel
[-]
0,059
λ_rel,y
[-]
0,847179
λ_rel,z
[-]
2,36
Control
σ_c,d
0,66 Mpa
k_c,y
0,834 -
y
0,06 <1
OK
Control Fire REI120, A2,s1-d0
t_ch
128,8 min
t_a
144,43 min
d_char,n
5,46 mm
d_ef
12,46 mm
h_ef
182,54 mm
b_ef
45 mm
σ_c,d
0,46 Mpa
λ_rel,y
0,91 [-]
λ_rel,z
3,66 [-]
k_c,y
0,758 -
k_c,z
0,070 -
y
0,02 <1
OK
z
0,25 <1
OK
==PAGE:268==
Appendix 5.21: Capacity bearing inne walls, House 3
Material parameters, simpelt undestøttet i begge retninger ellers ændre l værdier
k_d
[-]
0,593
k_fi_fire
[-]
1,25
f_cd
[Mpa]
12,5
f_cd,fire
[Mpa]
26,3
l_sy
[m]
2,8
l_sz
[m]
2,8
k_rel
[-]
0,059
λ_rel,y
[-]
0,85
λ_rel,z
[-]
2,36
Control
σ_c,d
0,67 Mpa
k_c,y
0,795 -
y
0,07 <1
OK
Control Fire REI120, A2,s1-d0
t_ch
128,8 min
t_a
144,43 min
d_char,n
5,46 mm
d_ef
12,46 mm
h_ef
182,54 mm
b_ef
45 mm
σ_c,d
0,46 Mpa
λ_rel,y
0,91 [-]
λ_rel,z
3,66 [-]
k_c,y
0,758 -
k_c,z
0,070 -
y
0,02 <1
OK
z
0,25 <1
OK
==PAGE:269==
Appendix 5.22: Capacity exterior walls, House 2
Material parameters, simpelt undestøttet i begge retninger ellers ændre l værdier
k_d
[-]
0,593
k_fi_fire
[-]
1,25
f_cd
[Mpa]
12,5
f_cd,fire
[Mpa]
26,3
l_sy
[m]
2,8
l_sz
[m]
2,8
k_rel
[-]
0,059 Tabel 7.15
λ_rel,y
[-]
0,56
λ_rel,z
[-]
2,36
Control
Central belastet
σ_c,d
0,50 Mpa
k_c,y
0,932 -
y
0,04 <1
OK
Tværbelastet
W_y
[mm^3]
1015291,67
σ_m,y,d
[Mpa]
0,39
f_m,y,d
[Mpa]
30
k_m
0,7 side 296 TS bunden
k_h
1,272 Tabel 7.5
0,06 <1
OK
Control Fire
t_ch
128,8 min
t_a
144,43 min
d_char,n
5,46 mm
d_ef
12,46 mm
h_ef
289,54 mm
b_ef
45,08 mm
Central belastet
σ_c,d
0,38 Mpa
λ_rel,y_fire
0,57 [-]
λ_rel,z_fire
3,66 [-]
k_c,y
0,928 -
Tabel side 301 TS
k_c,z
0,070 -
Tabel side 301 TS
y
0,02 <1
OK
z
0,21 <1
OK
Tværbelastet
W_y
[mm^3]
629868,4
W_z
[mm^3]
98067,5
σ_m,y,d
[Mpa]
0,63
f_m,y,d
[Mpa]
30,00
f_m,z,d
[Mpa]
30,00
k_m
0,7 side 296 TS bunden
k_h
1 Tabel 7.5
0,04 <1
OK
0,22 <1
OK
Kipning
l_ef
3099 mm
λ_rel,m
1,34
k_rel,m
0,064 Tabel 7.10
k_crit
0,55 Tabel 7.9
0,21 <1
OK
==PAGE:270==
Appendix 5.23: Capacity exterior walls, House 3
Material parameters, simpelt undestøttet i begge retninger ellers ændre l værdier
k_d
[-]
0,593
k_fi_fire
[-]
1,25
f_cd
[Mpa]
12,5
f_cd,fire
[Mpa]
26,3
l_sy
[m]
2,8
l_sz
[m]
2,8
k_rel
[-]
0,059 Tabel 7.15
λ_rel,y
[-]
0,56
λ_rel,z
[-]
2,36
Control
Central belastet
σ_c,d
0,50 Mpa
k_c,y
0,932 -
Tabel side 301 TS
y
0,04 <1
OK
Tværbelastet
W_y
[mm^3]
1015291,67
σ_m,y,d
[Mpa]
0,40
f_m,y,d
[Mpa]
30
k_m
0,7 side 296 TS bunden
k_h
1,272 Tabel 7.5
0,06 <1
OK
Control Fire
t_ch
128,8 min
t_a
144,43 min
d_char,n
5,46 mm
d_ef
12,46 mm
h_ef
289,54 mm
b_ef
45,08 mm
Central belastet
σ_c,d
0,38 Mpa
λ_rel,y_fire
0,57 [-]
λ_rel,z_fire
3,66 [-]
k_c,y
0,928 -
Tabel side 301 TS
k_c,z
0,070 -
Tabel side 301 TS
y
0,02 <1
OK
z
0,21 <1
OK
Tværbelastet
W_y
[mm^3]
629868,4
W_z
[mm^3]
98067,5
σ_m,y,d
[Mpa]
0,64
σ_m,z,d
[Mpa]
0,00
f_m,y,d
[Mpa]
30
f_m,z,d
[Mpa]
30,00
k_m
0,7 side 296 TS bunden
k_h
1 Tabel 7.5
0,04 <1
OK
0,22 <1
OK
Kipning
l_ef
3099 mm
λ_rel,m
1,34
k_rel,m
0,064 Tabel 7.10
k_crit
0,55 Tabel 7.9
0,21 <1
OK
==PAGE:271==
Appendix 5.24
==PAGE:272==
==PAGE:273==
==PAGE:274==
==PAGE:275==
Appendix 5.25: Load transfer system, House 2
Beregninger i matlab for moment mm. 
Knude
Load widthLoad
Line load
[kN]
[kN/m]
Beam 3
Q
25,6
P1
71,1
P2
142,2
P3
80,1
P4
151,2
Parameters
P1
P3
Kfi, CC3
1,1
Load width, floors
1,5 m
1,7625 m
column distance
0,4 m
Height
2,8 m
length, columns
295 mm
Width, columns
70 mm
Load type
Material
Symbol
Characteristic value
[kN/m2]
Construction deadload
g_str
C24 beams, 295+70
0,60 kN
Other Deadoads
g_oth
Facade
0,146
Isolation, 295mm+45
0,07
Fire Gypsum, 4x15mm
0,508
Roof
1 floor
Floors
2 floors
Load combinations
pr løbende meter ikke per søjle endnu!!
Leading live load
STR1
[kN/m]
18,52 P1
20,87 P3
==PAGE:276==
Appendix 5.26: Loads transfer system, House 3
Beregninger i matlab for moment mm.
Knude
Load widthLoad
Load fire
[kN]
[kN]
Beam 2.1
1
2,713
75,8
34,0
2
2,713
142,8
59,8
3
2,713
67,0
25,8
Beam 2.2
1
2,713
67,0
25,8
2
2,713
142,8
59,8
3
2,713
151,6
68,1
4
2,713
142,8
59,8
5
2,713
67,0
25,8
kN/m
Beam 3+4 Laod w, 3 Load 3
load,w altaload w, 4
Load 4
Line,load
1
2,70
75,5
1,6
1,344
50,1
2
2,70
142,1
1,6
1,344
120,8
21,9
3
2,70
66,7
1,6
1,344
70,7
21,9
4
2,70
66,7
1,6
1,344
70,7
21,9
5
2,70
142,1
1,6
1,344
120,8
6
2,70
150,9
1,6
1,344
100,2
7
2,70
142,1
1,6
1,344
120,8
21,9
8
2,70
66,7
1,6
1,344
70,7
21,9
9
2,70
66,7
1,6
1,344
70,7
21,9
10
2,70
142,1
1,6
1,344
120,8
11
2,70
150,9
1,6
1,344
100,2
12
2,70
142,1
1,6
1,344
120,8
21,9
13
2,70
66,7
1,6
1,344
70,7
21,9
14
2,70
66,7
1,6
1,344
70,7
21,9
15
2,70
142,1
1,6
1,344
120,8
16
2,70
150,9
1,6
1,344
100,2
17
2,70
142,1
1,6
1,344
120,8
21,9
18
2,70
66,7
1,6
1,344
70,7
21,9
19
2,70
66,7
1,6
1,344
70,7
21,9
20
2,70
142,1
1,6
1,344
120,8
21
2,70
75,5
1,6
1,344
50,1
==PAGE:277==
Appendix 5.27: Capacity tranfer system, House 2
Moment og spænding
Understøtning regnes som simpelt understøttet
Moment, Md
Matlab
151,7 kNm
Spænding
Md/Wel,y
131,9 MPa
Bæreevne
fy/γM0
213,6 MPa
Ok < 1
0,62
Kontrol
OK
Nedbøjning
Maksimalt tilladte nedbøjning
l/400
15,0 mm
Nedbøjning fra Nyttelast, un
Matlab
11,0 mm
Ok < 1
0,73
Kontrol
Plade under bjælke
t
20 mm
l
260 mm
b
150 mm
Bjælke
Profil
HEB 260
Antal
1
Egenvægt, g
kN/m
E-modul
210000 MPa
Stålstyrke
S235
fy - S235
235 MPa
Partialkoefficient, γM0
1,1
Inertimoment, I
149200000 mm4
Modstandsmoment, Wel,y
1150000 mm3
Højde, h
260 mm
Bredde, b
260 mm
Spændvidde, l
m
Tryk
Max reaktion
Matlab
327504,7 N
Tryk under plade v. væg, σd
Rd1/(l·b)
8,40 MPa
f_ck
24 MPa
gamma_c
1,55 -
f_cd
15,48 MPa
Bæreevne
0,54
Kontrol
OK
==PAGE:278==
Appendix 5.28: Capacity transfer system, House 3
Moment og spænding
Understøtning regnes som simpelt understøttet
Moment, Md
Matlab
42,6 kNm
Spænding
Md/Wel,y
137,1 MPa
Bæreevne
fy/γM0
213,6 MPa
Ok < 1
0,64
Kontrol
OK
Nedbøjning
Maksimalt tilladte nedbøjning
l/400
9,4 mm
Nedbøjning fra Nyttelast, un
Matlab
8,7 mm
Ok < 1
0,93 mm
Kontrol
Plade under bjælke
t
20 mm
l
160 mm
b
150 mm
Bjælke
Profil
HEB 160
Antal
1
Egenvægt, g
kN/m
E-modul
210000 MPa
Stålstyrke
S235
fy - S235
235 MPa
Partialkoefficient, γM0
1,1
Inertimoment, I
24900000 mm4
Modstandsmoment, Wel,y
311000 mm3
Højde, h
160 mm
Bredde, b
160 mm
Spændvidde, l
m
Tryk
Max reaktion
Matlab
157683,9 N
Tryk under plade v. væg, σd
Rd1/(l·b)
6,57 MPa
f_ck
24 MPa
gamma_c
1,55 -
f_cd
15,48 MPa
Bæreevne
The moment 
0,42
Kontrol
OK
==PAGE:279==
Appendix 5.29: Capacity existing walls, House 2
Normal væg 15cm uarmeret beton. Søjler anvendes ikke i overbygningen.
h
2,8 m
Length
Total load, deck Load
Width, floorWidth, basement
m
kN
kN/m
m
m
W1
4,8
44,98
9,37
0,15
0,15
W2
2,4
58,96
24,56
0,15
0,15
W3
3
37,54
12,51
0,15
0,15
W4
2,4
65,98
27,49
0,15
0,15
W5
5,4
59,81
11,08
0,15
0,15
W6
13,2
100,93
7,65
0,15
0,15
væg 2  tjekkes ikke da den ikke før noget væstenligt mere last. 5 tjekkes (kritiske)
STR2
Value
Load length
Load width Load height Load
[kN/m2]/[km
m
m
kN
Deck, pr floor
5,76 -
-
176,67
Balcony, pr floor
8,3
1,2
3,6
35,86
Roof
4,30 -
-
65,94
Facade, pr floor
0,25 -
3,6
2,8
2,52
Deadload, pr floor
24
5,4
0,15
2,8
54,43
Foundation
24
5,4
0,6
0,7
54,432
Total load, existing
1088,32
Load foundation, existing
1153,64
New load, superstructure
655,01
Dead load, steel
44,64
Total Load
1787,97
Wall5
Wall at floor
2nd floor
1st floor
Ground
Basement
Thickness
[m]
0,15
0,15
0,15
0,15
e1
[m]
0,03
0,03
0,03
0,03
e3
[m]
0,01
0,01
0,01
0,01
N1
[kN/m]
65,9
176,7
176,7
176,7
N3
[kN/m]
655,01
832,32
2496,33
3505,33
e_0,top
[m]
0,011
0,013
0,011
0,011
e5
[m]
0,01
0,01
0,01
0,01
et
[m]
0,018
0,018
0,017
0,017
Excentrisk belastet, wall 5
l_w
2,8 m
β
0,97 -
l_0
2,72 m
Betonbog side213-215
h_w
0,15 m
f_ck
24 Mpa
γc
1,6 -
f_cd
15,00 MPa
e
17 mm
φ
0,52
min
0,77
==PAGE:280==
Bæreevne pr. meter
N_Rd
1162,96 kN/m
N_Rd_w5
6279,96 kN
λ_max
86
i
43,30
λ
62,79
λ<λ_max
OK
Ej 2.ordens med
Load
Carrying capacit Utilization
kN
kN
%
Walls
W5
1787,97
6279,96
0,28 μ_fi
Pælefundering
Load uden egenvægt
Wall 5
331,11 kN/m
Brandberegninger
DS/EN 1992-1-2+AC:2013
==PAGE:281==
Appendix 5.30: Capacity existing walls, House 3
Normal væg 15cm uarmeret beton
L1
4,5 m
Konsekvens
CC3
L2
3,9 m
KFI
1,1
L3
3,3 m
ψ0 (A)
0,5
L4
2,4 m
Floors (excl
6
t, floor
t,basement h,floor
h,basement 391,8096
m
m
m
m
m
W1
0,15
0,15
2,6
2,65
5,98
W2
0,15
0,15
2,6
2,65
5,24
Balcone set to deck.
Egenlasten af stål er ganget med 2 fordi der ligger stål under hvert modul også
For væg 1 og 2 ligger 3 stålbjælker af. Kritsik reaktion fra matlab er anvendt ganget med 3.
Wall 1
Value
Load length Load width Load height Load
STR1
[kN/m2][kN/m3] [m]
[m]
[m]
[kN]
Deck, pr floor, left
7,80
2,25
5,98 -
104,95
Deck pr floor, right
7,80
1,95
5,98 -
90,96
Roof, left
3,66
2,25
5,98 -
49,25
Roof, right
3,66
2,25
5,98 -
49,25
Deadload
24
5,98
0,15
10,45
224,97
facade, left
24
2,25
0,16
10,45
90,29
facade, right
24
1,95
0,16
10,45
78,25
Total load, existing
1187,68
New load, superstructure
473,05
Egenlast, steel
13,99
Total load
1674,73
Wall1
Wall at floor
2nd floor
1st floor
Ground flooBasement
Thickness
[m]
0,15
0,15
0,15
0,15
e1
[m]
0,05
0,05
0,05
0,05
e2
[m]
0,0375
0,0375
0,0375
0,0375
e3
[m]
0,01
0,01
0,01
0,01
N1
[kN/m]
41,0
104,9
104,9
104,9
N2
[kN/m]
41,04
90,96
90,96
90,96
N3
[kN/m]
487,0
667,5
961,8
1256,1
e_0,top
[m]
0,009
0,010
0,010
0,010
e5
[m]
0,01
0,01
0,01
0,01
et
[m]
0,016
0,017
0,017
0,017
==PAGE:282==
Excentrisk belastet, wall 1
kældervæg
l_w
2,65 m
β
0,98 -
l_0
2,59 m
h_w
0,15 m
f_ck
24 Mpa
γc
1,55 -
f_cd
15,48 MPa
e
16,61 mm
φ
0,54
min
0,78
Bæreevne pr. meter
N_Rd
1258,22 kN/m
N_Rd_w2
7524,14 kN
λ_max
86
i
43,30
λ
59,89
λ<λ_max
OK
Load
Carrying capUtilization
kN
kN
%
Walls
W1
1674,73
7524,14
0,22 μ_fi
W2
1276,70
6544,76
0,20
Pælefundering
Load uden egenvægt
wall1
289,41 kN/m
wall2
253,01 kN/m
==PAGE:283==
==PAGE:284==
==PAGE:285==
==PAGE:286==
Appendix 6.3: Evacuation calculations, House 2
Scenario 1: Scenario 2: Scenario 3:
D/L
-
2
2
V
-
188,44
376,88
ΔHeff
-
27
27
Dm
-
0,34
0,34
α
-
0,012
0,012
H (room)
-
2,8
2,8
H (extra)
-
0
0
H (building)
-
2,8
2,8
Afloor 
-
67,3
134,6
Q
-
40
40
α 
-
-
-
k 
-
0,064
0,064
ta
3
3
3
trd
5
5
5
Ltr1
11,42
11,77
12,94
Ltr2
36 -
2,8
Ltr3
39 -
-
D0
0,05
0,05
0,05
G (length)
280
280
280
R (height)
180
180
180
D0
0,05
0,05
0,05
N_room
108
2
4
N_total
216
216
216
==PAGE:287==
Scenario 1
lejlighed + gennem dør
gang + gennem dør
ta
3
[min]
ta
3
[min]
trd
5
[min]
trd
5
[min]
tpre
8
[min]
tpre
0
[min]
Ltr
11,42
[m]
Ltr
36
[m]
D0
0,05
[pers./m2]
D0
0,05
[pers./m2]
G (length)
0
[mm]
G (length)
0
[mm]
R (height)
0
[mm]
R (height)
0
[mm]
Type
Corridors or doorways
[-]
Type
Corridors or doorways
[-]
kt
84
[-]
kt
84,00
[-]
S
72,8
[m/min]
S
72,8
[m/min]
ttr
0,16
[min]
ttr
0,49
[min]
D0
0,05
[pers./m2]
D0
0,05
[pers./m2]
Type
Corridors or doorways
[-]
Type
Corridors or doorways
[-]
kt
84
[-]
kt
84,00
[-]
S
72,8
[m/min]
S
72,8
[m/min]
N
4
[people]
N
36
[people]
Fs
3,64
[pers./min/m]
Fs
3,64
[pers./min/m]
W
1,1
[m]
W
2,1
[m]
B
0,3
[m]
B
0,3
[m]
We
0,8
[m]
We
1,8
[m]
Fa
2,9
[pers./min]
Fa
6,6
[pers./min]
tq
1,37
[min]
tq
5,49
[min]
tevac
9,53
[min]
tevac
5,99
[min]
RSET
Premovement time
Travel time
Queuing time
Evacuation time
RSET
Premovement time
Travel time
Queuing time
Evacuation time
==PAGE:288==
Ned af trappen (fra toppen) + gennem dør
ta
3
[min]
trd
5
[min]
tpre
0
[min]
Ltr
39
[m]
D0
0,05
[pers./m2]
G (length)
280
[mm]
R (height)
180
[mm]
Type
Stairs
[-]
kt
64,61
[-]
S
63,7
[m/min]
ttr
0,61
[min]
D0
0,05
[pers./m2]
Type
Corridors or doorways
[-]
kt
84
[-]
S
72,8
[m/min]
N
120
[people]
Fs
3,64
[pers./min/m]
W
2,1
[m]
B
0,3
[m]
We
1,8
[m]
Fa
6,6
[pers./min]
tq
18,31
[min]
tevac
18,92
[min]
ttotal
34,44
[min]
RSET
Premovement time
Travel time
Queuing time
Evacuation time
==PAGE:289==
Scenario 2
For lejligheden
Ud af lejlighed
D/L
2
[dB/m]
V
188,44
[m3]
ta
3
[min]
ΔHeff
27
[kJ/g]
trd
5
[min]
Dm
0,34
[dBm2/g]
tpre
8
[min]
D0
3,4
[m2/g]
α
0,012
[kW/s2]
Ltr
11,77
[m]
t
90,78
[s]
D0
0,05
[pers./m2]
t
1,51
[min]
G (length)
0
[m]
R (height)
0
[m]
Type
Corridors or doorways
[-]
H (room)
2,8
[m]
kt
84
[-]
H (extra)
0
[m]
S
72,8
[m/min]
H (building
2,8
[m]
ttr
0,16
[min]
Afloor 
67,3
[m2]
Q
40
[kW]
D0
0,05
[pers./m2]
α 
0
[kW/s2]
Type
Corridors or doorways
[-]
k 
0,064
[-]
kt
84
[-]
z
1,88
[m]
S
72,8
[m/min]
z/H
0,671
[-]
N
2
[people]
Afloor/H2
8,58
[-]
Fs
3,64
[pers./min/m]
Atrium crit
Yes
[-]
W
1,2
[m]
B
0,3
[m]
t
47,4
[s]
We
0,9
[m]
t
0,79
[min]
Fa
3,3
[pers./min]
tq
0,61
[min]
t
70,6
[s]
t
1,18
[min]
tevac
8,77
[min]
tevac-premovem
0,77
[min]
RSET
Premovement time
Travel time
Queuing time
Evacuation time
Steady, empirical
ASET, visibility
ASET, smoke layer height (SLH)
Steady, theoretical
==PAGE:290==
Scenario 3
Hen til trappen + gennem dør
D/L
2
[dB/m]
V
376,88
[m3]
ta
3
[min]
ΔHeff
27
[kJ/g]
trd
5
[min]
Dm
0,34
[dBm2/g]
tpre
8
[min]
D0
3,4
[m2/g]
α
0,012
[kW/s2]
Ltr
12,94
[m]
t
114,38
[s]
D0
0,05
[pers./m2]
t
1,91
[min]
G (length)
280
[m]
R (height)
180
[m]
Type
Corridors or doorways
[-]
H (room)
2,8
[m]
kt
84
[-]
H (extra)
0
[m]
S
72,8
[m/min]
H (building
2,8
[m]
ttr
0,18
[min]
Afloor 
134,6
[m2]
Q
40
[kW]
D0
0,05
[pers./m2]
α 
0
[kW/s2]
Type
Corridors or doorways
[-]
k 
0,064
[-]
kt
84
[-]
z
1,88
[m]
S
72,8
[m/min]
z/H
0,671
[-]
N
2
[people]
Afloor/H2
17,17
[-]
Fs
3,64
[pers./min/m]
Atrium crit
NO!
[-]
W
1,2
[m]
B
0,3
[m]
t
141,2
[s]
We
0,9
[m]
t
2,35
[min]
Fa
3,3
[pers./min]
tq
0,61
[min]
tevac
8,79
[min]
Evacuation time
ASET, visibility
ASET, smoke layer height (SLH)
Steady, theoretical
RSET
Premovement time
Travel time
Queuing time
==PAGE:291==
Ned af trappen (fra toppen) + gennem dør
ta
3
[min]
trd
5
[min]
tpre
0
[min]
Ltr
2,8
[m]
D0
0,05
[pers./m2]
G (length)
280
[m]
R (height)
180
[m]
Type
Stairs
[-]
kt
64,61
[-]
S
63,7
[m/min]
ttr
0,04
[min]
D0
0,05
[pers./m2]
Type
Corridors or doorways
[-]
kt
84
[-]
S
72,8
[m/min]
N
4
[people]
Fs
3,64
pers./min/m]
W
1,2
[m]
B
0,3
[m]
We
0,9
[m]
Fa
3,3
[pers./min]
tq
1,22
[min]
tevac
1,26
[min]
ttotal
10,05
[min]
ttotal
2,05
[min]
Ej ok, etablere udgang på begge etager, så ens som scenarie 2 så ok.
RSET
Premovement time
Travel time
Queuing time
Evacuation time
==PAGE:292==
Appendix 6.4: Evacuation calculations, House 3
Scenario 1: Scenario 2: Scenario 3:
D/L
-
2
2
V
-
207,48
361,76
ΔHeff
-
27
27
Dm
-
0,34
0,34
α
-
0,012
0,012
H (room)
-
2,8
2,8
H (extra)
-
0
0
H (building)
-
2,8
2,8
Afloor 
-
74,1
129,2
Q
-
40
40
α 
-
-
-
k 
-
0,064
0,064
ta
3
3
3
trd
5
5
5
Ltr1
10,63
10,63
23,3
Ltr2
62,88 -
2,8
Ltr3
-
-
-
D0
0,05
0,05
0,05
G (length)
280
280
280
R (height)
180
180
180
D0
0,05
0,05
0,05
N_room
24
2
4
N_total
96
96
96
==PAGE:293==
Scenario 1
lejlighed + gennem dør
Ned af trappen (fra toppen) + gennem dør
ta
3
[min]
ta
3
[min]
trd
5
[min]
trd
5
[min]
tpre
8
[min]
tpre
0
[min]
Ltr
10,63
[m]
Ltr
62,88
[m]
D0
0,05
[pers./m2]
D0
0,05
[pers./m2]
G (length)
0
[m]
G (length)
280
[m]
R (height)
0
[m]
R (height)
180
[m]
Type
Corridors or doorways
[-]
Type
Stairs
[-]
kt
84
[-]
kt
64,61
[-]
S
72,8
[m/min]
S
63,7
[m/min]
ttr
0,15
[min]
ttr
0,99
[min]
D0
0,05
[pers./m2]
D0
0,05
[pers./m2]
Type
Corridors or doorways
[-]
Type
Corridors or doorways
[-]
kt
84
[-]
kt
84
[-]
S
72,8
[m/min]
S
72,8
[m/min]
N
4
[people]
N
24
[people]
Fs
3,64
[pers./min/m]
Fs
3,64
[pers./min/m]
W
1,2
[m]
W
1,5
[m]
B
0,3
[m]
B
0,3
[m]
We
0,9
[m]
We
1,2
[m]
Fa
3,3
[pers./min]
Fa
4,4
[pers./min]
tq
1,22
[min]
tq
5,49
[min]
tevac
9,37
[min]
tevac
6,48
[min]
ttotal
15,85
[min]
RSET
Premovement time
Travel time
Queuing time
Evacuation time
RSET
Premovement time
Travel time
Queuing time
Evacuation time
==PAGE:294==
Scenario 2
For lejligheden
Ud af lejlighed
D/L
2
[dB/m]
V
207,48
[m3]
ta
3
[min]
ΔHeff
27
[kJ/g]
trd
5
[min]
Dm
0,34
[dBm2/g]
tpre
8
[min]
D0
3,4
[m2/g]
α
0,012
[kW/s2]
Ltr
10,63
[m]
t
93,74
[s]
D0
0,05
[pers./m2]
t
1,56
[min]
G (length)
0
[m]
R (height)
0
[m]
Type
Corridors or doorways
[-]
H (room)
2,8
[m]
kt
84
[-]
H (extra)
0
[m]
S
72,8
[m/min]
H (building
2,8
[m]
ttr
0,15
[min]
Afloor 
74,1
[m2]
Q
40
[kW]
D0
0,05
[pers./m2]
α 
0
[kW/s2]
Type
Corridors or doorways
[-]
k 
0,064
[-]
kt
84
[-]
z
1,88
[m]
S
72,8
[m/min]
z/H
0,671
[-]
N
2
[people]
Afloor/H2
9,45
[-]
Fs
3,64
[pers./min/m]
Atrium crit
Yes
[-]
W
1,2
[m]
B
0,3
[m]
t
52,2
[s]
We
0,9
[m]
t
0,87
[min]
Fa
3,3
[pers./min]
tq
0,61
[min]
t
77,8
[s]
t
1,30
[min]
tevac
8,76
[min]
tevac
0,76
[min]
Steady, empirical
ASET, visibility
ASET, smoke layer height (SLH)
Steady, theoretical
RSET
Premovement time
Travel time
Queuing time
Evacuation time
==PAGE:295==
Scenario 3
Hen til trappen + gennem dør
D/L
2
[dB/m]
V
361,76
[m3]
ta
3
[min]
ΔHeff
27
[kJ/g]
trd
5
[min]
Dm
0,34
[dBm2/g]
tpre
8
[min]
D0
3,4
[m2/g]
α
0,012
[kW/s2]
Ltr
23,3
[m]
t
112,83
[s]
D0
0,05
[pers./m2]
t
1,88
[min]
G (length)
280
[m]
R (height)
180
[m]
Type
Corridors or doorways
[-]
H (room)
2,8
[m]
kt
84
[-]
H (extra)
0
[m]
S
72,8
[m/min]
H (building
2,8
[m]
ttr
0,32
[min]
Afloor 
129,2
[m2]
Q
40
[kW]
D0
0,05
[pers./m2]
α 
0
[kW/s2]
Type
Corridors or doorways
[-]
k 
0,064
[-]
kt
84
[-]
z
1,88
[m]
S
72,8
[m/min]
z/H
0,671
[-]
N
4
[people]
Afloor/H2
16,48
[-]
Fs
3,64
[pers./min/m]
Atrium crit
NO!
[-]
W
1,2
[m]
B
0,3
[m]
t
135,6
[s]
We
0,9
[m]
t
2,26
[min]
Fa
3,3
[pers./min]
tq
1,22
[min]
tevac
9,54
[min]
Evacuation time
ASET, visibility
ASET, smoke layer height (SLH)
Steady, theoretical
RSET
Premovement time
Travel time
Queuing time
==PAGE:296==
Ned af trappen (fra toppen) + gennem dør
ta
3
[min]
trd
5
[min]
tpre
0
[min]
Ltr
2,8
[m]
D0
0,05
[pers./m2]
G (length)
280
[m]
R (height)
180
[m]
Type
Stairs
[-]
kt
64,61
[-]
S
63,7
[m/min]
ttr
0,04
[min]
D0
0,05
[pers./m2]
Type
Corridors or doorways
[-]
kt
84
[-]
S
72,8
[m/min]
N
4
[people]
Fs
3,64
pers./min/m]
W
1,2
[m]
B
0,3
[m]
We
0,9
[m]
Fa
3,3
[pers./min]
tq
1,22
[min]
tevac
1,26
[min]
ttotal
10,80
[min]
ttotal
2,80
[min]
Ej ok, etablere udgang på begge etager. Derved samme senarie som scenarie 2 og derfor okay.
RSET
Premovement time
Travel time
Queuing time
Evacuation time
==PAGE:297==
==PAGE:298==
==PAGE:299==
==PAGE:300==
==PAGE:301==
==PAGE:302==
Drawing 3.1 - Archive material House 1: Idræts Alle 8-20, 9800 Hjørring
==PAGE:303==
==PAGE:304==
—— —f  
/  s
n rrrn xiTuT : ^ ^
f
e
 
,
’t r
^
r
/  /  >. / - / /
I
/  /  
/  /
a
Y
/, •  
•
:
A V  
/  /  > 
33£2
\
i 
7  
| •
----- 1 & ¥ 0  f
 
—
•
i
!
»
r
n n r n n i m
n u j a i i i r ^ ^  
l u n i u z n m
i i.n.iiuvii
 -
T
i*_*_
nnut
3303, 3203, SlØS
<b
■ 
/  •' / S  r
-*4
i Tmrr r nrTTyrtrrrrT
73
' 
/  f  >
B204-, &/04- 
y
S ø j- /e  r : ø  7 p  r, 3<?> j - 
/
i J i
4 $  - * 4
f*~ 
 r<-
 
3 £ iT —
/ /
--H 
YåÆ
r t
O
 -
-  r 
 ■
i
{ 
i 
s
—
4
$
d d
t
i w
!^L
; ^  i 
^
■: •
-
 4f i ■.■ -_4 ^—
-
tø  
: 
|
. i 
I
» . 
"
1 
7. 
\ 
$
$  f 4  ! 
i
. / /  /    
/  
i /  •
s  s
H*- 
& & Y & S
—i
i
; 
i
4
 spj
T - T - y
£ 4 <
/
/
/
4 i
n] ;
%
f*
1
1
i
r l i LJl-J
20 k -
.
. 
/ / . ■’. 
/  / / - ' .  
* /  / \  
'/
/
,  
/  /  a
B 2
0
‘7  o g r  3
 / 0
 7 - v * f ø r e &
 
>5 O /?  - 3
S O  *SjSP7 & t 7  C ? r r r > € > r & S  
s f * &  £ /  4
 
f& >
^
: - =
i
± ‘ i
|
1!
\v
-
32.2- M2S>
/  
J 
/  . r \
' .•' /
V " . ■ /
£(in 
-H /<?!-*-
& S & rr7  ' te  r; f
o
r
J ^sf. S2. 
ø +
j e r r ? :  r c / r y t f / e r s ?  y + $ £ J P !  
m m  -  
BRIX-PEDERSEN & KAMP JØRGENSEN
raadgivende civilingtniører 
Bispensgade 9, Aalborg, Telf. 6301
A r  £2 e \/d te  r*r ? <es fro  S / ’& S ., M J & rr* / v
Maal
Sag. 
Dato : / -  YcJ ~~ £ * * *
wéammmmmm
Tegn. nr.
9
ET 643 - By 6301
==PAGE:305==
==PAGE:306==
==PAGE:307==
==PAGE:308==
==PAGE:309==
Drawing 3.2 – Pictures from viewing House 1: Idræts Alle 8-20, 9800 
Hjørring 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:310==
Floorboards, 1''
Joist per. 600mm, 2'' * 2''
Korkbrikker, 100*100*10 mm
Plaster
Bauma block
Reinforcement  Ø14
All measurements are in millimeters. The dimensions given on existing drawings have been used,
Otherwise, standard dimensions from the period are used
==PAGE:311==
Drawing 3.4 - Archive material House 2: Akademivej 29-45 2800 Kgs. Lyngby
==PAGE:312==
==PAGE:313==
==PAGE:314==
==PAGE:315==
==PAGE:316==
==PAGE:317==
==PAGE:318==
==PAGE:319==
==PAGE:320==
Drawing 3.5 – Pictures from viewing House 2: Akademivej 29-45, 2800 Kgs. 
Lyngby 
  
  
 
==PAGE:321==
 
 
==PAGE:322==
Drawing 3.6 - Archive mateiral House 3: Sydvej 18-24, 3000 Helsingør
==PAGE:323==
==PAGE:324==
==PAGE:325==
==PAGE:326==
==PAGE:327==
Drawing 3.7 – Pictures from viewing House 3: Sydvej 18-24, 3000 Helsingør 
 
 
 
==PAGE:328==
==PAGE:329==
-
Fall 1:40
==PAGE:330==
-
Fall 1:40
==PAGE:331==
-
==PAGE:332==
-
==PAGE:333==
-
==PAGE:334==
-
==PAGE:335==
-
==PAGE:336==
-
==PAGE:337==
-
==PAGE:338==
-
==PAGE:339==
-
==PAGE:340==
-
==PAGE:341==
-
==PAGE:342==
-
==PAGE:343==
==PAGE:344==
-
==PAGE:345==
-
==PAGE:346==
-
==PAGE:347==
-
==PAGE:348==
-
==PAGE:349==
==PAGE:350==
 
Drawing 7.1 Illustrations House 1 
 
First - Existing conditions 
Second - With Superstructure 
Third – With superstructure and renovated facades 
==PAGE:351==
 
  
                 
 
 
==PAGE:352==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:353==
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:354==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:355==
 
 
==PAGE:356==
-
==PAGE:357==
 
Drawing 7.3 Illustrations House 2 
 
First - Existing conditions 
Second - With Superstructure 
Third – With superstructure and renovated facades 
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:358==
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:359==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:360==
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:361==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:362==
 
 
==PAGE:363==
-
==PAGE:364==
 
Drawing 7.3 Illustrations House 3 
 
First - Existing conditions 
Second - With Superstructure 
Third – With superstructure and renovated facades 
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:365==
 
  
          
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:366==
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:367==
 
 
==PAGE:368==
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:369==
==PAGE:370==
-
