==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
System design of an X-band radiome-
ter and implementation of selected
building blocks
Rasmus Simling Kristensen (s123789)
Kongens Lyngby, November 2017
Supervisor: Sten Schmidl Søbjærg (DTU Space)
==PAGE:2==
b
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The present thesis documents the design of a Total Power Radiometer at X-band, with
a center frequency of 10.69 GHz and a bandwidth of 100 MHz. The radiometer is to be
used by students in an educational context. Focus in the design process is to make the
radiometer simple and relatively low-cost to make it possible to produce a handful of
identical instruments. The instrument is based on the super-heterodyne principle, and
the X-band signal is down-converted to an intermediate frequency of 250 MHz.
The image rejection ﬁlter of the radiometer is designed and implemented as a 15th order
stepped impedance low-pass ﬁlter at X-band, as it is shown in the thesis that it is not
feasible to implement the ﬁlter as a stub ﬁlter at X-band.
The power detection is designed using a tunnel diode, and two isolators are used in the
RF chain.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master’s thesis was prepared at DTU Space (the National Space Institute) at the
Technical University of Denmark, in partial fulﬁlment of the requirements for acquiring
the Master of Science in Engineering degree within the ﬁeld of Wireless Engineering.
The work was carried out under the supervision of Sten Schmidl Søbjærg of DTU Space.
I wish to thank Sten Schmidt Søbjærg for his supervision during the project, and Bo
Brændstrup for his help manufacturing the ﬁlter.
Kongens Lyngby, November 1, 2017
Rasmus Simling Kristensen (s123789)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Purpose of the radiometer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Radiometer Principles and Architecture
3
2.1
Brightness temperature and antenna temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
What is a radiometer? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Radiometer resolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Choice of radiometer architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5
Block diagram of the radiometer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Choice of operating frequency
7
3.1
Frequency allocation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4
Individual components
9
4.1
Antenna . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
Low Noise Ampliﬁer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.3
Isolators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.4
Image-rejection ﬁlter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.4.1
Choice of ﬁlter speciﬁcations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.4.2
Design of ﬁlter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.4.2.1
Design of the ﬁlter as a stubﬁlter . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.4.2.2
Design of the ﬁlter as a stepped impedance ﬁlter
. . . .
20
4.4.2.3
Second version of the stepped impedance ﬁlter . . . . . .
24
4.4.3
The ﬁnal properties of the image rejection ﬁlter . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.5
RF ampliﬁer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.6
Down conversion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.6.1
Oscillator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.6.2
Mixer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.7
Band selection ﬁlter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.7.0.1
Filter design using ideal components . . . . . . . . . . .
35
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
4.7.0.2
Practical ﬁlter using available components . . . . . . . .
36
4.8
IF-ampliﬁers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.9
Detector diode
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.10 Low frequency ampliﬁer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.11 Integrator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
Conclusion
45
Bibliography
47
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The present thesis documents the system design of an X-band radiometer, as well as
the implementation of the image-ﬁlter at X-band. The thesis start with a short section
of a few of the most important radiometer principles and the choice of the radiometer
architecture to use for the radiometer designed in this thesis. Thereafter follows a short
discussion on the choice of the exact frequency to design the radiometer for. Then follows
the main part of the thesis which concerns the speciﬁc building blocks that make up the
radiometer. The largest focus is on the image rejection ﬁlter that has been implemented.
Finally, the conclusion sums up the work.
1.1
Purpose of the radiometer
The end goal is that the radiometer designed in this thesis, in the future (when it has
been fully build and tested by another student) is to be used as an educational aid for
learning students at introductory courses on radar and radiometer technology at the
Technical University of Denmark. The radiometer will be used in teaching situations
and for student projects, to illustrate fundamental properties of radiometers, their use
and functions, as well as some of the geophysical properties that can be measured using
radiometers.
One idea is to have the students set up small experiments to illustrate the use of radiome-
ters. An example could be having the students go outdoors and measure the brightness
temperature of relatively dry soil from a hole dug in the ground. After taking a couple
of radiometer readings, they water the soil thoroughly and take a new series of readings.
This would illustrate the use of radiometers for measurements of soil moisture (like the
SMOS satellite developed by ESA).
The instrument could also be used for teaching the students the importance of using
well calibrated instruments. The students could calibrate the instrument once and then
take several measurements during a short period of time.
Using this data, the stu-
dents will be able to see the drift in the radiometer, thus underlining the need to be
careful in using well calibrated instruments and following the calibration practice of the
instrument used. The calibration scheme for the radiometer is not included in this thesis.
As a result of the intended uses of the radiometer as mentioned above, the two practi-
cal considerations listed below will be taken into account when designing the radiometer:
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
• As the radiometer is designed to be an educational aid, it may well be needed to
produce several instruments to have enough for a full class of students divided into
groups. When increasing the number of instruments, the costs and simplicity of
the instrument becomes important. It is important to design the radiometer as
simple as possible and to keep costs down at a reasonable level in order to make
it possible to build several identical instruments at a later stage.
• The radiometer will be battery driven in order to ensure mobility in connection
with measurement experiments outdoors etc. Depending on the power consump-
tion, the battery can either be a cluster of conventional single use batteries (e.g.
alkaline AA cells or 9V cells) or a rechargeable battery pack. For this reason, it
is preferred to be able to power the instrument from just a few diﬀerent voltages,
and avoid components requiring much external circuitry. Design of a power supply
for the radiometer is not the focus in this thesis.
As mentioned above, the instrument is to be used by students in their learning process.
The focus when designing the radiometer is to design a simple and relatively low-cost
functioning radiometer that can be taken in the ﬁeld to do experiments.
The technical capabilities of the instrument are not the main focus point, as the purpose
of the radiometer is to function as an educational aid. It is not needed for the radiometer
to be very precise, as it’s role is to aid in educational situations and help illustrate what
a radiometer is and how it functions. The radiometer is not designed to be measuring
while in motion, but rather sat on a stand on held still by the operator. This gives us the
luxury of being able to do longer integrations than usual, which increases the resolution
of the instrument. Stability of the instrument is also not the main concern, as it is being
used as an illustrative aid in educational situations.
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
Radiometer Principles and
Architecture
2.1
Brightness temperature and antenna
temperature
All objects warmer that the absolute zero radiate electromagnetic radiation. The radi-
ated power of an object depends on the temperature of the object as well as the emissivity
of the object - the emissivity of an object is determined by the material properties of
the material of which the object consists. The emissivity is a unitless number between
0 and 1. A perfect microwave absorber has an emissivity of one and behaves like like
a black body - on the other hand is a polished silver plate having an emissivity of zero
and being a perfect reﬂector. The brightness temperature of an object is the physical
temperature of a black body that would emit the same power as the object emits.
The relation between emissivity ϵ, brightness temperature TB, and physical temperature
T is given as:
TB = ϵ · T
(2.1)
As can be seen from the equation above, the brightness temperature of a black body
(which has an emissivity of one) is equal to its physical temperature (given that the
black body is in thermal equilibrium). The brightness temperature of a grey body with
an emissivity of less than one will always be lower than the physical temperature of the
grey body.
In a fashion similar to the brightness temperature (which as described above is the phys-
ical temperature of a black body that would emit the same power as the observed grey
body), we have an antenna temperature which is deﬁned as the physical temperature
of a resistor termination that would output the same power as the receiving antenna of
the radiometer.
==PAGE:12==
4
2 Radiometer Principles and Architecture
2.2
What is a radiometer?
A radiometer is an instrument that uses a directive antenna to illuminate an object
(typically an area on the ground if the radiometer is used for earth measurements from
satellites or aeroplanes). The antenna picks up the radiated power and feeds this into
a radiometer receiver. The job of the receiver circuitry is to accurately determine the
antenna temperature. From calibrations made before the measurement is taken, it is
possible to convert the measured antenna temperature into the brightness temperature
of the object or area illuminated. A radiometer can thus be seen as a calibrated mi-
crowave receiver.
As most other instruments, measurements performed by radiometers have a noise com-
ponent masking the true reading. In order to increase the precision of the instrument,
the radiometer integrates the measured signal over a certain integration time. Because
the noise is a stochastic process it will even out when integrated over time, thus the
contribution of the (unwanted) noise signal to the radiometer measurement decreases as
integration time increases. Typical integration times for moving radiometers monitoring
the earth from a satellite orbit or an aeroplane is in the order of milliseconds. Stationary
radiometers such as the one designed in this thesis, have the luxury of not moving - they
can therefore use longer integration times of few seconds.
2.3
Radiometer resolution
As stated above, the radiometer antenna is pointed towards an object emitting a certain
brightness temperature TB. The radiation is received by the radiometer antenna which
as a result output an antenna temperature TA. Because of noise in the radiometer, there
will be a noise contribution to the signal, having the noise temperature TN (which is
typically several rimes larger than the antenna temperature we wish to measure). In
addition to the mentioned antenna and noise temperatures TA and TN, the power P
measured at the output of the radiometer depends on the bandwidth of the radiometer
B and the total gain of the radiometer G, as well as Boltzmann’s constant k. From [1]
the relation is given as:
P = k · B · G · (TA + TN)
(2.2)
As mentioned in the paragraph above, the received signal is integrated to even out the
stochastic noise contribution. The resolution of the radiometer thus depends on the
integration time τ, as well as antenna and noise temperatures TA and TN, and the used
bandwidth B. Notice that the resolution does not depend on the gain of the radiometer.
From [1] we have the basic resolution given as:
∆T = TA + TN
√
B · τ
(2.3)
==PAGE:13==
2.4 Choice of radiometer architecture
5
2.4
Choice of radiometer architecture
As mentioned in Chapter 1, one of the considerations to take into account when deciding
on the architecture on which to base the radiometer to be designed, is simplicity and
low cost. With these considerations, it is obvious to look in the direction if the ’Total
Power Radiometer’, the simplest radiometer architecture. As can be seen Figure 2.1,
the total power radiometer is basically an ampliﬁer, band selection, power detector and
an integrator.
Figure 2.1: Diagram of the Total Power Radiometer. Figure from [1].
I ﬁrst hoped to design the radiometer as a direct receiver, but because of the relative
high RF frequency of the X-band used, it was not realistic to implement the sharp band
selection ﬁlter at this frequency. Instead I turned to the super-heterodyne approach
of down-converting the RF signal to an intermediate frequency using a mixer and an
oscillator. This makes the design of the sharp band selection ﬁlter more manageable, as
it is at a lot lower frequency.
2.5
Block diagram of the radiometer
The block diagram of the super-heterodyne total power radiometer designed is shown
in Figure 2.2. The diagram takes outset from the maximum -88 dBm expected power
available from the antenna, as predicted by Eq. 2.2, assuming TA = 300 Kelvin, the
total noise ﬁgure of the radiometer NF = 5 dB, which leads to a noise temperature
TN = 648 Kelvin. The individual building blocks of the block diagram are speciﬁed in
Chapter 4.
==PAGE:14==
6
2 Radiometer Principles and Architecture
Figure 2.2: Block diagram of the radiometer. G denotes gain of the stage, NF is noise
factor, P is oscillator output power and S is detector diode sensitivity. The
power levels and voltages on the connections between the building blocks
are the maximum value at the given location in the system.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 3
Choice of operating
frequency
The task of the present thesis is to design a radiometer at X-band. X-band is chosen as
an X-band antenna to be used for the radiometer already exists at DTU. Using a lower
frequency band would make it easier to construct the electronics, but unfortunately the
physical size of the antenna would make it too large to handle with ease. Furthermore,
the availability of reasonably priced commercial microwave components at X-band helps
to lower the price for the instrument.
3.1
Frequency allocation
Figure 3.1: Segment of the Danish Frequency Allocation Plan [2]. Notice the white
space on the left indicating ”No active use” in the frequency band of
10.680-10.700 GHz.
The X-band extends from 8 GHz to 12 GHz, but for the purpose of this radiometer only
100 MHz of spectrum is needed. The question is which 100 MHz of the X-band spec-
==PAGE:16==
8
3 Choice of operating frequency
trum to use? As the electromagnetic spectrum is a natural resource, its use is heavily
regulated worldwide. In the Danish frequency allocation plan all allowed uses of the elec-
tromagnetic spectrum are recorded and described. A tiny part of the X-band spectrum
is reserved exclusively for radio astronomy, space research and passive earth observation
satellites (that must be satellite borne radiometers for the purpose of meteorology et
cetera). No transmission is allowed in this band, which makes it perfect to use for this
radiometer - as there should be no chance of interference from (legal) active sources such
as radars, radio links and other communication services.
The bandwidth of this radiometer is 100 MHz, but the protected spectrum is only 20
MHz wide - so I have to make use of the adjacent spectrum too. When checking with the
Danish registry of transmission permits ([3]), I found that there are no active permits
for transmission in the 100 MHz band centered around the protected band. The closest
active transmission permissions were, as can be seen in Figure 3.2, for the frequency of
10.63 GHz, which is 60 MHz from the center point of the protected band.
Figure 3.2: Segment of the Danish transmission permits for the frequency range 11.5
GHz to 10.5 GHz. The list is sorted descending, so there are no interfering
transmitters registered.
As there are no registered sources of interference, I deem it is possible to center the 100
MHz radiometer bandwidth around the protected band. The center frequency of the
radiometer is thus 10.69 GHz and the bandwidth is 100 MHz - so the frequency band
for the radiometer is 10.64 GHz to 10.74 GHz.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 4
Individual components
The radiometer consists of several building blocks, as shown in the block diagram (Figure
2.2). In the following I will go through the diﬀerent blocks one by one and discuss their
purpose/function, their speciﬁcations, design, et cetera.
4.1
Antenna
As mentioned previously in Chapter , the radiometer designed in this thesis is being
designed for an existing antenna at DTU Space. This antenna is a standard gain horn
at X-band.
Because the antenna is given, and because I do not have the exact antenna speciﬁcations
- very little considerations are given to the antenna here.
From a practical standpoint, the antenna needs to be connected to the Low Noise Ampli-
ﬁer - this might be through a coaxial cable. The antenna most likely has a rectangular
metallic wave-guide carrying the received signal from the antenna aperture to the ter-
minal of the antenna. The physical internal dimensions of this wave-guide determines
the lower cut-oﬀfrequency of the antenna, as waves with a frequency below cut-oﬀcan-
not propagate in the wave-guide and on to the Low Noise Ampliﬁer. The wave-guide
will need to terminate in a SMA connector or similar, to allow for connection to the
radiometer receiver.
4.2
Low Noise Ampliﬁer
The ﬁrst component of the receiver is the Low Noise Ampliﬁer (LNA). A low noise
ampliﬁer is, as the name implies, made speciﬁcally to have a low noise ﬁgure. From the
Friis noise equation for cascaded stages ([4], p. 505) in Eq. 4.1, the noise ﬁgure of the
ﬁrst stages is added directly to the total noise ﬁgure of the system.
Fcas = F1 + F2 −1
G1
+ F3 −1
G1· G2
+ · · ·
(4.1)
As the radiometer is essentially a precision receiver with a goal of accurately measuring
the power of a weak signal, it is very important to be careful to introduce as little extra
noise to the system as possible - the introduced noise cannot be separated from the
==PAGE:18==
10
4 Individual components
received stochastic signal in any way once introduced.
As the LNA for this radiometer, I have chosen the HMC564LC4 manufactured by Ana-
log Devices (formerly Hittide), which functions in the frequency range 7 GHz to 14 GHz,
has a noise ﬁgure of 1.8 dB and 17 dB gain. The ampliﬁer is self-biased, runs on a +3V
single supply and is matched to the system impedance of 50Ωat RF input and output,
making it simple and convenient to employ in this system. Just four external bypass
capacitors on the power supply are necessary for the ampliﬁer to function.
Figure 4.1: Package layout including the four necessary external bypass capacitors.
Layout from the datasheet [5].
In this design, I have chosen to place the LNA directly on the antenna. As described,
this help keep the overall system noise ﬁgure as low as possible - but it also has a draw-
back.
From Section 3.1, I know that part of the frequency band used by this radiometer is
reserved for radio astronomy and nobody is transmitting in this part of the spectrum.
The antenna does however pick op signal in a much, much wider frequency range - and
there is always a possibility of somebody operating an active device nearby (for instance
a radar). If a high power signal from a transmitter in the vicinity of the antenna is
received and fed to the LNA, there is a possibility of saturating the LNA (as per the
datasheet, the maximum RF input power level is +5 dBm, [5]). A way to avoid this
problem would be to place a ﬁlter between the antenna and the LNA, making sure only
==PAGE:19==
4.3 Isolators
11
the necessary part of the spectrum is passed through to the LNA - this approach does
however degrade the noise ﬁgure of the total system as the ﬁlter contributes noise at the
critical position in the beginning of the cascaded stages.
As this radiometer is to be used on the ground where it is accessible, I make the trade-
oﬀto optimise with regards to noise and not use a ﬁlter in front of the LNA. Had the
radiometer been intended to me mounted on a satellite costing a fortune to launch and
out of reach once put in service - a higher degree of contingency planning would have
been in order.
4.3
Isolators
An isolator is a passive microwave device that passes RF energy from input port to out-
put port, but does not allow reﬂected RF energy to pass the other way from the output
port back to the input port. The isolator is constructed as a circulator, where one of
the three ports is terminated in a load perfectly matched to 50Ω, as sketched in Figure
4.2 (a).
Figure 4.2: An isolator is a circulator in which one of the three ports is terminated in
a perfectly matched 50Ωload.
Isolators are quite expensive to purchase, but despite this I have chosen to use two iso-
lators at the RF side of the radiometer (before down-conversion takes place), as can be
seen in the block diagram in Figure 2.2. Isolators have some very useful properties, that
are depended upon in this radiometer design to ensure the stability and reliability of the
system.
They do, as mentioned, isolate the input port from reﬂected signal sent backwards into
==PAGE:20==
12
4 Individual components
the output of the component driving the input port of the isolator - and they also ensure
that the ampliﬁers are looking into a matched load (as opposed to directly into a ﬁlter
that may not be matched to 50Ω). If the isolators are not used, there is a possibility that
the ampliﬁers may become unstable and start to oscillate, which renders the radiometer
unusable. By employing isolators on the output of the two RF ampliﬁers, these causes
of the problem are eliminated.
For this radiometer design, I have chosen to use the PE0803 Isolator manufactured by
Pasternack Enterprises Inc. This particular isolator has typically 20 dB isolation in the
frequency range 7 GHz to 12.4 GHz, and an insertion loss of 0.4 dB [6].
4.4
Image-rejection ﬁlter
The Image-Rejection Filter (IF-Filter) is connected on the output of the RF LNA. The
purpose of the IF-Filter is to reject the image frequency that folds into the desired
channel during the down-conversion in the mixer. Once the down-conversion has been
performed, the desired signal and the image signal merges and is not to be separated
again - thus a need arises for a ﬁlter to remove the image signal before the down-
conversion occurs.
4.4.1
Choice of ﬁlter speciﬁcations
As per the frequency plan, the center frequency of the desired channel is 10.69 GHz
and the system bandwidth is 100 MHz - the desired channel therefore spans the fre-
quency band of 10.64 GHz - 10.74 GHz.
During the down-conversion, the signal is
down-converted to an intermediate center frequency of 250 MHz - to achieve this the
local oscillator frequency will have to be 250 MHz away from the center frequency of the
channel to be down-converted.
Two choices exist here, as the local oscillator frequency can be located 250 MHz above
or 250 MHz below the channel center frequency of 10.69 GHz. If the local oscillator
frequency is located above the channel center frequency, the image center frequency will
be located further above the channel center frequency at a distance of two times the
intermediate center frequency of 250 MHz. In the opposite case where the local oscilla-
tor frequency is located below the channel center frequency, the image center frequency
will be located further below the channel center frequency at a distance of two times the
intermediate frequency of 250 MHz. It is clear that the choice of whether to locate the
local oscillator frequency above or below the channel center frequency determines the
location of the image frequency - and thus determine the type of ﬁlter to use to reject
the image frequency.
In the case where the image frequency band is above the desired channel frequency
band, a low-pass ﬁlter is naturally needed to pass the desired channel but reject the
==PAGE:21==
4.4 Image-rejection ﬁlter
13
image channel. Vice verca in the other case where the image frequency band is below
the desired channel frequency band, a high-pass ﬁlter is needed in this case to pass the
desired channel but reject the image channel.
I decided to employ a low-pass ﬁlter to reject the image frequency.
From the con-
siderations above, the local oscillator has to be located at a higher frequency than the
channel center frequency in order to locate the image frequency band above the desired
channel frequency band, and make low-pass ﬁltering a feasible option. The desired chan-
nel has a frequency band of 10.64 GHz to 10.74 GHz, and the intermediate frequency is
250 MHz. The local oscillator thus need to produce a signal with a frequency of 10.94
GHz. This locates the image center frequency at 11.19 GHz - and as a result the image
channel frequency band becomes 11.14 GHz - 11.24 GHz. Please refer to Figure 4.3 for
a graphical overview of the situation.
Figure 4.3: Overview of the two options for local oscillator frequency location, causing
low-pass and high-pass ﬁltering alternatives for image frequency rejection.
There may potentially be signal present at the image frequency (eg. originating from
active sources such as communication systems, radar system etc.), which can be much
stronger than the weak passive signals the radiometer receiver is build to pick up. To
make sure that the image frequency signal does not contribute signiﬁcantly to the in-
termediate signal after down-conversion, I decided to specify the image rejection ﬁlter
to attenuate the image frequency by 50 dB. This is a lot of attenuation which is most
likely not be achievable using a single ﬁlter stage - thus more cascaded ﬁlter stages will
probably be needed to meet the 50 dB attenuation requirement.
==PAGE:22==
14
4 Individual components
Due to the high requirements of attenuation, a low-pass ﬁlter with a sharp roll-oﬀ
characteristic is needed. Therefore the Chebyshev ﬁlter characteristic is preferred, as it
has a steeper roll-oﬀthan the Butterworth (maximally ﬂat) ﬁlter characteristic for an
equivalent ﬁlter order ([4], Fig. 8.21). The larger ripple that is allowed in the passband,
the sharper the roll-oﬀof the ﬁlter becomes. As the ﬁlter is positioned after the LNA,
the passband insertion loss of the ﬁlter does not contribute nearly as much to the total
noise ﬁgure of the system, as it would have done had been positioned before the LNA.
From this consideration, I accept a rather high ripple of 3 dB in the passband, in or-
der to sharpen the roll-oﬀcharacteristics of the ﬁlter. Figure 4.4 contains a graph of
attenuation versus fractional bandwidth for diﬀerent orders of the 3 dB Chebyshev ﬁlter.
To ﬁnd the required ﬁlter order, I use the insertion loss method. As I want to meet
the 50 dB attenuation requirement over the full image frequency band, I calculate the
most conservative fractional bandwidth of the the ﬁlter, by placing the 3 dB corner
frequency of the ﬁlter at the high edge of the desired channel (at 10.74 GHz) and the
insertion loss speciﬁcation to be taken at the low edge of the image frequency channel
(at 11.14 GHz). The fractional bandwidth thus becomes
Fractional bandwidth =
 ω
ωc
 −1 =
11.14GHz
10.74GHz
 −1 = 0.037
(4.2)
From ﬁgure 4.4 it is clear that the requirement for 50 dB attenuation cannot be met
using a single ﬁlter stage even at the high order of 15. It is clear that it is necessary to
cascade two ﬁlter stages, and therefore the attenuation requirement halves to 25 dB per
ﬁlter. The Chebyshev ﬁlter characteristic has the property that for odd ﬁlter orders it
will be matched to the characteristic impedance both at the source and the load, whereas
there for even ﬁlter orders will be an impedance mismatch at the load that will need to
be corrected using an impedance transformer. For this reason, I will not consider using
an even order ﬁlter. From the graph in ﬁgure 4.4, the attenuation at the fractional band-
width of 0.037 calculated above is read oﬀas around 24 dB for a ﬁlter of 13th order, and
29 dB for a ﬁlter of 15th order. This speciﬁes the image rejection ﬁlter to be a cascaded
two stage 3 dB ripple Chebyshev ﬁlter of 15th order. The total attenuation of the cas-
caded ﬁlters adds up to 58 dB, which gives an 8 dB buﬀer for the design and production.
4.4.2
Design of ﬁlter
As mentioned above, the image rejection ﬁlter to be designed is a cascaded two stage 3
dB ripple Chebyshev ﬁlter of 15th order. As the two stages are to be identical, I will
only design and implement a single stage in this thesis. From ([7], p. 102) we ﬁnd the
element values for the low-pass prototype of a 15th order 3 dB ripple Chebyshev ﬁlter
as given in table 4.1.
==PAGE:23==
4.4 Image-rejection ﬁlter
15
Figure 4.4: 3 dB ripple Chebyshev ﬁlter characteristics for order N=1 to N=15. Filter
attenuation versus fractional bandwidth | ω
ωc| −1. Figure from [7].
g1
g2
g3
g4
g5
g6
g7
g8
3.5493
0.7795
4.6928
0.8170
4.7689
0.8227
4.7847
0.8238
g9
g10
g11
g12
g13
g14
g15
g16
4.7847
0.8227
4.7689
0.8170
4.6928
0.7795
3.5493
1.000
Table 4.1: Element values for the low-pass prototype of a 15th order 3 dB ripple Cheby-
shev ﬁlter. From [7].
4.4.2.1
Design of the ﬁlter as a stubﬁlter
I decided to design the 15th order 3dB ripple Chebyshev low-pass ﬁlter as a stubﬁlter.
The design procedure takes outset from the low-pass prototype coeﬃcients in table 4.1,
which constitutes a circuit representation of the ﬁlter normalized by the characteristic
impedance, that is Z0 = 1. From there, the ﬁlter circuit prototype is transformed to
==PAGE:24==
16
4 Individual components
a physical layout of series short circuit stubs and parallel open circuit stubs, using the
Richards Transformation ([4], ﬁg. 8.34) - see ﬁgure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Graphical representation of the Richard Transformation used to transform
the low-pass circuit prototype to a physical layout using short circuit series
stubs and open circuit parallel stubs. Figure from [4] ﬁg. 8.34.
The series short circuit stubs are not physically realizable in a usual PCB realization of
the design. In order to convert the series short circuit stubs to parallel open circuit stops
(which are easy to manufacture on PCB), we make use of the Kuroda identities ([4], ﬁg.
8.35). The Kuroda identities helps by creating an equivalence between a unit element of
series characteristic impedance transmission line in series with a short circuit series stub,
and an open circuit parallel stub in series with a unit element of transmission line with
a characteristic impedance diﬀerent from the characteristic impedance - see an example
in ﬁgure 4.6.
By adding a redundant unit element of characteristic impedance transmission line at
one end of the ﬁlter, this series transmission line section can be moved in through the
ﬁlter using repeated application of the Kuroda Identity. For a 15th order ﬁlter this is
a very tedious process requiring numerous transformations using the Kuroda Identity.
As the ﬁlter is of odd order (15th order), there is a center element. By choosing the
low-pass prototype to be of the Norton equivalent conﬁguration (starting with a series
inductance), we achieve that the center element (g8) is a shunt capacitance - which is
transformed to an open circuit parallel stub when applying the Richards Transform. By
choosing this representation of the low-pass prototype, we avoid a number of applications
of the Kuroda Transform, as the center element of the ﬁlter is directly transformed to
a realizable open circuit parallel stub. Another property of the equal ripple Chebyshev
ﬁlter topology, is that the ﬁlter is symmetrical across the center element. We thus only
==PAGE:25==
4.4 Image-rejection ﬁlter
17
need to perform the Richards Transformation and repeated application of the Kuroda
Identity to one half of the ﬁlter - the other half will then be a mirror of the ﬁrsh half.
Figure 4.6: Graphical representation of an example of the application of the Kuroda
Identity to transform all short circuit series stubs in the ﬁlter to realizable
open circuit parallel stubs. Figure from [4] ﬁg. 8.35.
Even with these considerations, the vast amount of transformations needed to make the
ﬁlter realizable on a usual PCB makes it a tedious task that is not repeated in this thesis.
Once the job is complete, the ﬁlter needs to be impedance scaled from the normalized
impedance of Z0 = 1 to the system impedance of Z0 = 50Ω, and the unit element lengths
speciﬁed as λ
8-length at the center frequency and the chosen PCB substrate on which
the ﬁlter is to be manufactured. The ﬁnal physical ﬁlter design of stub ﬁlter is as shown
in ﬁgure 4.8.
After designing the image rejection low-pass ﬁlter as a 15th order Chebyshev stubﬁlter,
I realised the topology is in no way realizable at as high a frequency as the needed 10.69
GHz. The reason is the series transmission line section of an electric length of λ
8. At
the common and inexpensive FR4 substrate (ϵr = 4.33 and height h = 1.5 mm), the
wavelength at 10.69 GHz is just 15.360 mm. As the sections are all to have an electric
length of
λ
8, the section length is just
15.360
8
= 1.921 mm. This very small length is
the distance between the middle points of the parallel open circuit transmission lines.
The ﬁrst two open circuit parallel transmission lines has a characteristic impedance of
6.610 Ωand 23.250 Ωrespectively. On the given FR4 substrate, these low characteristic
impedances corresponds to a line width of 37.351 mm and 8.672 mm respectively - and
these two lines are supposed to be alongside each other with a separation of 1.921 mm
between their center points.
==PAGE:26==
18
4 Individual components
Figure 4.7: The physical implementation of the designed stub ﬁlter is impossible to
realize, as the width of the parallel transmission lines make them short
each other out. Please notice that the sketch is not to scale. (a) shows
the conﬁguration of the three transmission lines, as well as the two nodes
(red and blue). (b) show the conﬁguration in a successful (much lower
frequency) case where the length of the transmission lines are much longer
than the widths. (c) sketches the situation at the too high design frequency
of 10.69 GHz, where the parallel transmission lines short each other out.
A simple sketch of the situation reveals that this is impossible to realize in practice, as
the low impedance of the open circuit parallel transmission line stubs means that the
lines are going to short each other out. Please refer to ﬁgure 4.7 for a sketch of the issue.
As the line lengths of λ
8 are a function of the design frequency, and the widths of the
lines to achieve a given characteristic impedance are not (the widths are only aﬀected
by the substrate properties) - this means that there is an upper frequency limit to when
a ﬁlter implementation using the stub ﬁlter is feasible. For this particular design, the
limit is very much lower than the needed 10.69 GHz.
I therefore have no choice but to scrap this design approach and redesign the ﬁlter using
a diﬀerent ﬁlter implementation.
==PAGE:27==
4.4 Image-rejection ﬁlter
19
Figure 4.8: The design of the image rejection low-pass ﬁlter as a stub ﬁlter using
λ
8-length transmission lines. The impedances mentioned refer to the char-
acteristic impedance of the indicated transmission line sections.
==PAGE:28==
20
4 Individual components
4.4.2.2
Design of the ﬁlter as a stepped impedance ﬁlter
As mentioned in the previous section, it was not possible to employ a the stub ﬁlter
topology for the low-pass image rejection ﬁlter at the desired frequency of 10.69 GHz
due to the physical dimensions of the transmission lines involved. To overcome this prob-
lem, I took a diﬀerent approach and decided to design the ﬁlter as a stepped impedance
ﬁlter. This type of ﬁlter gives me control over the characteristic impedances of the lines
involved, and the physical layout of a stepped impedance ﬁlter eliminates the problems
of very wide lines overlapping each other.
A stepped impedance ﬁlter is designed using the same set of low-pass prototype coeﬃ-
cients as used in the previous attempt (the coeﬃcients are listed in Table 4.4) as the ﬁlter
is still a 15th order 3dB ripple Chebyshev ﬁlter - it is only the physical implementation
of this ﬁlter characteristic that changes. The low-pass prototype used for this imple-
mentation is however diﬀerent from the previous one, in that I here deﬁne it as starting
with a shunt capacitor (the Thévenin equivalent representation). As the name implies,
a stepped impedance ﬁlter utilizes a series connection of transmission lines alternating
between a high and a low characteristic impedance. Contrary to the stub ﬁlter where all
line segments were an eight of a wavelength, the length of the transmission lines in the
stepped impedance ﬁlter varies - but the characteristic impedance of the high and low
impedance line segments is free to be chosen by the designer, which is a great advantage
in this case because this allows me to avoid too low characteristic impedances (which
results in very wide lines that are impractical), and too high characteristic impedance
lines (which results in very narrow lines that may be diﬃcult to manufacture).
From ([4] p. 424) we get the design equations of the line lengths of the segments in the
stepped impedance ﬁlter as:
Series inductor : βl = L· R0
Zh
(4.3)
Shunt capacitor : βl = C· Zl
R0
(4.4)
Where βl are the electric lengths of the line segments in the stepped impedance ﬁlter
replacing the shunt capacitors of the low-pass prototype with wide transmission lines,
and replacing the series inductors of the low-pass prototype with narrow transmission
lines. R0 is the system impedance (50Ω) and C and L are the normalized capacitance
and inductance coeﬃcients from the low pass prototype listed in Table 4.4. As can be
seen from the equations above, the high and low characteristic impedances Zh and Zl can
be chosen to take values that are practical to realize on a PCB - but the ﬁlter generally
functions best when the ratio of the high and low characteristic impedances is as high
as possible ([4], p. 424).
When manufacturing ﬁlters on PCB in-house at DTU Space, the minimum line width
is 0.2 mm. Thus, I need to limit the characteristic impedance of the narrow lines Zh to
a value low enough to ensure that the line width does not get narrower than 0.2 mm
==PAGE:29==
4.4 Image-rejection ﬁlter
21
on the chosen substrate. The line width for a given characteristic impedance depends
on the relative permittivity ϵr and the thickness h of the substrate on which the line is
printed - a larger permittivity makes a line of ﬁxed characteristic impedance narrower,
whereas an increased substrate thickness makes a line of ﬁxed characteristic impedance
wider. To be sure to meet the manufacturing requirements on minimum line width, I
therefore need to decide on a substrate to use for the production of the ﬁlter. As the
radiometer is a precision receiver that is greatly aﬀected by noise, it is a priority to use
a substrate with a low loss. Taking the observations on the eﬀect of permittivity and
substrate thickness on line width into account, an ideal substrate to use for this applica-
tion should have low loss, low permittivity and large thickness. The last two parameters
(low permittivity and large thickness) maximises the characteristic impedance Zh to use
for the narrow sections of the stepped impedance ﬁlter, while still staying within the
manufacturing constraint of minimum 0.2 mm line width.
From the selection of substrates available to me at the DTU Space workshop, I choose
to use the Rogers RT/duroid 5880 substrate in the thickest version available (62 mil,
1.5748 mm). This substrate has a very low loss tangent (tanδ) of 0.0009, and a low
dielectric constant (relative permittivity, ϵr) of 2.20 ([8] p. 8). The 62 mil version was
the thickest one available to me (it is also produced in a 125 mil version at the factory).
The loss and the dielectric constant of the Rogers RT/duroid 5880 substrate is very low
compared to the readily available and inexpensive FR4 from Bungard Elektronik, which
has a dielectric constant of ϵr = 5.4 and a loss tangent of tanδ = 0.035 [9].
Section
Coeﬃcient
Impedance
Electrical length
1
3.5493 (C)
10Ω
40.67◦
2
0.7795 (L)
140Ω
15.95◦
3
4.6938 (C)
10Ω
53.79◦
4
0.8170 (L)
140Ω
16.72◦
5
4.7689 (C)
10Ω
54.65◦
6
0.8227 (L)
140Ω
16.83◦
7
4.7847 (C)
10Ω
54.83◦
8
0.8238 (L)
140Ω
16.86◦
9
4.7847 (C)
10Ω
54.83◦
10
0.8227 (L)
140Ω
16.83◦
11
4.7689 (C)
10Ω
54.65◦
12
0.8170 (L)
140Ω
16.72◦
13
4.6938 (C)
10Ω
53.79◦
14
0.7795 (L)
140Ω
15.95◦
15
3.5493 (C)
10Ω
40.67◦
Table 4.2: Characteristic impedance and electrical length of the transmission line sec-
tions used in the stepped impedance image rejection ﬁlter.
==PAGE:30==
22
4 Individual components
Using the simple PUFF 2.1 microwave CAD program developed at Caltech [10] with the
Rogers RT/duroid 5880 substrate values, I decide to ﬁx the characteristic impedance for
the narrow sections of the stepped impedance ﬁlter at Zh = 140Ω. This characteristic
impedance gives a line width of 0.595 mm, which is wide enough to keep a good distance
to the 0.2 mm manufacturing limit and wide enough to make sure that manufacturing
tolerances does not make a large proportional impact on the line width - yet has a rel-
atively high characteristic line impedance of 140 Ω. For comparison, a 140 Ωline using
the FR4 substrate with a thickness of 1.5 mm would have given a line width of 0.227 mm
(which would be too close to the limit of 0.2 mm and a lower impedance would have to
be used). The characteristic impedance of the wide sections of the stepped impedance
ﬁlter was chosen as Zl = 10Ω, which results in a line width of 35.662 mm.
Using the chosen values of Zh = 140Ωand Zl = 10Ω, as well as the design equations of
Eq. (4.3) and Eq. (4.4) and the low-pass prototype coeﬃcients of Table 4.4, I am able
to calculate the electrical lengths of the line segments in the ﬁlter, as listed in Table 4.2.
A full simulation of a single stage of the stepped impedance ﬁlter was carried out using
the characteristic impedances and electrical line lengths in Table 4.2 in the PUFF 2.1
CAD program. The substrate parameters were set to match the chosen Rogers RT/-
duroid 5880 substrate with a thickness of 62 mil.
The simulation result of the S21
parameters came out as expected. As can be seen from the resultant graph shown in
Figure 4.9 (a), the insertion loss at passband (10.64 GHz to 10.74 GHz) is less than
1 dB (half a division in the graph grid), and the rejection at the frequency in the im-
age channel closest to the passband (at 11.14 GHz) is greater that 26 dB. This satisﬁes
the requirements of a total image channel rejection of 50 dB for two cascaded ﬁlter stages.
Figure 4.9: Simulation results of the S21-parameter of one stage of the stepped
impedance ﬁlter. (a) shows the S21 graph for the ﬁlter using PUFF 2.1
simulation software, and (b) shows the S21 graph for the ﬁlter as simulated
using the ADS schematic simulation function.
==PAGE:31==
4.4 Image-rejection ﬁlter
23
To generate the artwork layout ﬁle to send to the workshop for production, the ﬁlter de-
sign was simulated and the artwork layout generated using the CAD software Advanced
Design System (ADS) by Keysight Technologies [11]. The design was constructed and
simulated in ADS using the schematics function of ADS. The general shape of the sim-
ulation result graph from ADS agreeds with the result obtained by simulation using
PUFF 2.1 - please refer to the simulation graph in Figure 4.9 (b). The ADS simula-
tion however has a passband insertion loss between 0.967 dB and 2.074 dB (the three
leftmost markers on the graph in Figure 4.9 (b)), and an image channel rejection in
the range 24.611 dB to 28.953 dB (the three rightmost marker points). This simulation
thus predicts a bit worse performance of the ﬁlter compared to the PUFF 2.1 simulation.
Figure 4.10: Measurement of the S21-parameter of the manufactured stepped
impedance ﬁlter. As can be seen, the ﬁlter has the correct steep cut-
oﬀedge and the required suppression in the stopband. This cutoﬀedge
is unfortunately downshifted by a very large amount (upwards of 2 GHz),
making it unﬁt for use in the radiometer.
The proposed stepped ﬁlter design was sent to production at the DTU Space in-house
workshop.
At either end of the ﬁlter artwork, a short length of 50 Ωcharacteristic
impedance transmission line was added to allow space for the connection center pin of
the SMA connectors to solder onto. After production, I measured the ﬁlter on an Agilent
Fieldfox NA9918A Vector Network Analyser (VNA). As can be seen from the measured
S21 graph in Figure 4.10, the ﬁlter has the correct low-pass characteristic with a very
sharp cut-oﬀand around 35 dB suppression at a frequency distance of 400 MHz above
a corner frequency with an insertion loss of roughly 3 dB. This is the characteristic
needed for the image rejecting ﬁlter, and the characteristic I have designed the ﬁlter
to have. The sharp edge of the ﬁlter response is however - as can be clearly seen from
the graph in Figure 4.10 - shifted down in frequency by a very signiﬁcant amount of
==PAGE:32==
24
4 Individual components
more than 2 GHz. This is very unpleasant surprise, as the simulations carried out us-
ing both PUFF 2.1 and ADS not only were in agreement but also predicted the sharp
transition edge from passband to stopband to be located at around 11 GHz. Due to the
frequency oﬀset of the measurements relative to the simulation, the manufactured ﬁlter
is of no use in the radiometer system, and it will have to be redesigned to ﬁt the purpose.
4.4.2.3
Second version of the stepped impedance ﬁlter
After looking into the large discrepancies between the simulations and the measurements
of the manufactured ﬁlter, I found the Momentum simulation engine built into ADS to
yield far better results than the schematic simulator. Momentum works by meshing the
used artwork (the physical layout of the ﬁlter) into multiple smaller sections, and in this
case it turns out that simulations done using this approach are much more accurate. A
simulation of the ﬁrst iteration of the stepped impedance ﬁlter using Momentum pre-
dicted a frequency response very close to the one measured from the manufactured ﬁlter
using the VNA - i.e. the Momentum simulation had nearly the same frequency oﬀset
as the measured ﬁlter. Please refer to the ADS Momentum simulation in Figure 4.11
which is very similar to the measured frequency response of the ﬁlter seen in Figure
4.10. The A and B markers in the simulation graph has nearly the same attenuation
as the A and B markers in the measured graph, and they are separated by 400 MHz in
both cases. The graph of the simulated result is however shifted 120 MHz upwards in
frequency compared to the measured result, which is indicated by the marker in Figure
4.11.
This assured me that the Momentum simulation engine is accurate enough to rely on
when tuning the stepped impedance ﬁlter to the correct frequency before manufacturing
a second ﬁlter.
The second version of the stepped impedance ﬁlter took outset from the ﬁrst manufac-
tured version which I then tweaked using the Momentum simulator of ADS to position
the cut-oﬀedge of the ﬁlter characteristic at the right frequency. As the ﬁlter char-
acteristic of the ﬁrst version was shifted down in frequency, it seemed logical that the
dimensions of the ﬁlter had to be decreased a little to shift the characteristic of the ﬁlter
back up in frequency. After the tedious iterative process of simulations, I settled on the
best result I could reach and ended up with the simulated frequency response showed in
Figure 4.12.
As can be seen from Figure 4.12, the insertion loss in the pass band is around 2.2 dB,
while the rejection in the image channel is around 21 dB. This is the best result I could
reach through the iterative design process using ADS simulations - but from this pre-
diction it does not seem likely that I will be able to reach 50 dB attenuation of the
image channel by employing two cascaded stages of this ﬁlter. Depending on how the
actual ﬁlter performs on the VNA after manufacturing, I may have to make a choice
==PAGE:33==
4.4 Image-rejection ﬁlter
25
to loosen the requirements for the attenuation, or upgrade to a solution using three
cascaded stages (which will however increase the insertion losses and thus also the total
combined noise factor of the image rejection ﬁlter).
Figure 4.11: ADS Momentum simulation of the ﬁrst version of the stepped impedance
ﬁlter. This simulation result is in agreement with the measured response
- only is the simulated graph shifted 120 MHz upwards in frequency com-
pared to the measured response (as indicated by the markers).
As mentioned above, the physical size of this second version of the ﬁlter has been de-
creased a bit. For illustration, the layout artwork of the two ﬁlter versions are compared
side by side in Figure 4.13. The side lengths of the black squares are 50 mm for both
layouts, so the relative size can be judged from the ﬁgure. After having the ﬁrst version
of the ﬁlter manufactured, I learned that the SMA connector center pin needs a bit more
space on the 50 Ωtransmission line that acts as a solder pad for the connector - the
length of this line has therefore been extended a bit in the second version. All lengths
and widths of the individual sections of the ﬁlter are noted in Figure 4.14.
==PAGE:34==
26
4 Individual components
Figure 4.12: Simulation of the S21-parameter of the second version of the stepped
impedance ﬁlter. As can be seen, the ﬁlter has approximately 2.2 dB
insertion loss at the passband, while the rejection of the image channel
is around 21 dB. The two groups of markers mark the center, right edge
and left edge of the desired channel and the image channel respectively.
Figure 4.13: Comparison of they physical size of the artwork layout of the two versions
of the stub ﬁlter. (a) is the ﬁrst version, and (b) is the second and ﬁnal
version. The side lengths of the black squares are 50 mm for both layouts.
==PAGE:35==
4.4 Image-rejection ﬁlter
27
Figure 4.14: The physical dimensions of the implemented ﬁlter..
==PAGE:36==
28
4 Individual components
Figure 4.15: Measured frequency response of the ﬁnal (second) version of the stepped
impedance ﬁlter. (a) is the response from DC to 13 GHz and (b) is the
response in the range 10.5 GHz to 11.5 GHz. The green and red vertical
lines indicate the desired channel and the image channel respectively. The
maximum insertion loss in the desired channel is 6 dB and the minimum
attenuation in the image channel is 41 dB - this makes for a minimum of
35 dB attenuation of the image channel relative to the desired channel.
==PAGE:37==
4.4 Image-rejection ﬁlter
29
When the ﬁnal (second) version of the ﬁlter had been manufactured, I naturally mea-
sured its frequency response using the Agilent Fieldfox NA9918A VNA. The response
has been plotted in the graphs in Figure 4.15. The upper graph (a) depicts the fre-
quency response in the range from DC to 13 GHz. As can be seen, the general shape of
this graph is in close agreement with the response predicted by ADS simulation (shown
in Figure 4.12). The lower graph (b) is the same data plotted in the range 10.5 GHz
to 11.5 GHz, which is where the transition from pass band to stopband occurs. The
vertical green lines in the ﬁgure indicates the outer edges of the desired channel (10.64
GHz - 10.74 GHz). As can be seen from the graph, the maximum insertion loss in the
passband is around 6 dB, which is a lot. The vertical red lines indicate the outer edges
of the undesired image chanel (at 11.14 GHz - 11.24 GHz). The minimum attenuation
in this band is around 41 dB, which is quite a bit more than the 21 dB predicted by the
ADS simulation. For a single stage of this ﬁlter, the minimum suppression of the image
frequency channel relative to the desired channel is 35 dB.
4.4.3
The ﬁnal properties of the image rejection ﬁlter
The high insertion loss of 6 dB of a single stage of the designed ﬁlter is acceptable be-
cause I have the LNA with a high gain of 17 dB in front of the image rejection ﬁlter. The
contribution of the ﬁlter insertion loss to the total noise ﬁgure of the system is therefore
limited by the high gain of the LNA stage before the ﬁlter ([4], p. 505). Had the ﬁlter
been used as a pre-selection ﬁlter before the LNA, this high insertion loss of 6 dB would
have been totally unacceptable as it would then contribute 6 dB directly to the overall
noise ﬁgure of the system.
The minimum attenuation of the image channel relative to the desired channel of 35 dB,
does not meet the requirement of 50 dB set forth previously in this section on the image
rejection ﬁlter. I now have to make a decision on whether to meet the requirement of
attenuation by cascade two of the designed stepped impedance ﬁlter stages - or loosen
the requirement of image frequency attenuation. The main disadvantage of cascading
two ﬁlter stages is the degradation of the overall system noise ﬁgure.
As mentioned, the total noise factor Fcas of a cascaded system is dominated by the noise
factor of the ﬁrst components in the cascade. This is in equation form given as ([4], p.
505):
Fcas = F1 + F2 −1
G1
+ F3 −1
G1· G2
+ · · ·
(4.5)
Where F1, F2, F3 are the noise factors and G1, G2, G3 are the power gains of the ﬁrst,
second and third component respectively in the cascade. As it is a passive component,
the noise ﬁgure of the ﬁlter is equal to the insertion loss of the ﬁlter - the noise ﬁgure
of a single stage of the designed ﬁlter is therefore NF = 6dB. As the noise factor is
the noise ﬁgure in linear scale, the noise ﬁgure of 6 dB corresponds to a noise factor of
F = 10
6dB
10 = 3.98. As the gain of a passive component having 6 dB insertion loss is
==PAGE:38==
30
4 Individual components
-6dB, the linear scale gain of a ﬁlter stage is G = 10
−6dB
10
= 0.25.
Using Eq. 4.5 above, we can now calculate the noise ﬁgure of the system consisting of
the LNA cascaded with one or two of the designed image rejection ﬁlters (we exclude
the isolator from this calculation, as is is insigniﬁcant). The LNA has a typical gain
of 17 dB and a noise ﬁgure of 1.8 dB, as mentioned in Section 4.2. In linear scale this
corresponds to GLNA = 10
17dB
10
= 50.12 and FLNA = 10
1.8dB
10
= 1.51.
The total noise ﬁgure of the system of the LNA and a single ﬁlter stage becomes:
F = 1.51 + 3.98 −1
50.12
= 1.57 →NF = 1.96dB
(4.6)
The total noise ﬁgure of the system of the LNA and two cascaded single ﬁlter stages
becomes:
F = 1.51 + 3.98 −1
50.12
+
3.98 −1
50.12· 0.25 = 1.81 →NF = 2.57dB
(4.7)
As can be seen in the system block diagram in Figure 2.2, the component after the
image rejection ﬁlter is an isolator. These passive components generally have very low
insertion loss, and therefore their contribution to the noise ﬁgure of the overall system
can rightfully be neglected. Other components even further down the cascade also does
not contribute signiﬁcantly to the overall noise ﬁgure of the system due to the high gain
being accumulated. From the calculations above, we can see that the cost in noise ﬁgure
of adding the second image rejection ﬁlter stage is just 0.6 dB. This is a satisfying price
to pay for the extra protection against unwanted signals in the image channel, and I
therefore decided to use two cascaded ﬁlter stages as the image rejection ﬁlter.
Figure 4.16: The implemented and manufactured single stage image rejection ﬁlter,
next to a Danish One Crown coin for size comparison.
==PAGE:39==
4.5 RF ampliﬁer
31
The implemented single stage of the proposed two stage ﬁlter is depicted in Figure 4.16
next to a Danish One Crown coin for size comparison. The ﬁnal speciﬁcations of the
designed two stage image rejection ﬁlter are:
• Low-pass ﬁlter with desired passband channel in the range (10.64 GHz - 10.74
GHz) and rejected image frequency channel in the range (11.14 GHz - 11.24 GHz).
• Minimum 70 dB attenuation of the undesired image frequency channel.
• Insertion loss of maximum 12 dB in the desired channel.
• Noise ﬁgure of the total ﬁlter is 12 dB - the combined noise ﬁgure when cascaded
with the LNA is 2.57 dB.
4.5
RF ampliﬁer
After the high insertion loss of the image rejection ﬁlter, some more ampliﬁcation is
needed before the signal is down-converted in the mixer. At this stage in the radiometer
the noise ﬁgure of the ampliﬁer does not signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the total noise ﬁgure of
the system. This allows me to choose an ampliﬁer with high gain but a bit worse noise
ﬁgure compared with a LNA.
Figure 4.17: Package layout including the necessary external bypass capacitors. Lay-
out from the datasheet [12].
==PAGE:40==
32
4 Individual components
In order to keep the system simple, I use the HMC608LC4 9.5 GHz - 11.5 GHz ampliﬁer
manufactured by Analog Devices. This ampliﬁer is driven from a 5V supply, and per the
datasheet ([12]), requires just a few external bypass capacitors on the power supply (see
the diagram in Figure 4.17. The gain of the ampliﬁer is 29.5 dB and the noise ﬁgure is
6 dB. The ampliﬁer is operated in high gain mode, by connecting the Vpd pin to ground
- and should be biased with 2.6V on the Vgg pin.
4.6
Down conversion
As mentioned in Section 2, the radiometer is build using the super-heterodyne principle
that implies down-conversion. The down-conversion means using a local oscillator and a
mixer to mix the received signal down from RF frequency to a much lower intermediate
frequency. In this case I have chosen the IF-frequency to be 250 MHz, in order to loosen
the requirements of the band-selection ﬁlter and allow for that ﬁlter to be constructed
using lumped components. The local oscillator needs to be placed at the right frequency
and provide an adequate output power level for the mixer to satisfyingly mix the RF
signal down to the IF-frequency.
4.6.1
Oscillator
Figure 4.18: The relationship between tuning voltage and frequency of oscillation.
From the datasheet [13].
==PAGE:41==
4.6 Down conversion
33
As shown in Figure 4.3, in order to employ a low-pass ﬁlter as the image-rejection ﬁlter,
the local oscillator frequency is positioned at a distance equal to the IF-frequency of 250
MHz above the center RF-frequency of 10.69 GHz. The local oscillator thus needs a
frequency of fLO = 10.69GHz + 250MHz = 10.94GHz.
An oscillator capable of delivering this frequency is the HMC1164 Voltage Controlled
Oscillator manufactured by Analog Devices. This oscillator is tunable in the range 10.38
GHz to 11.30 GHz, which includes the frequency of 10.94 GHz needed for the down con-
version here. The output power of the oscillator is 8 dBm typically, and the relationship
between tuning voltage and frequency of oscillation is shown in Figure 4.18. From the
graph it is seen that the tuning voltage to reach the required oscillation frequency of
10.94 GHz is around 7.7 V - the exact value depends on the temperature and has to be
found experimentally when implementing the device.
Figure 4.19: Package layout of the HMC1164 Voltage Controlled Oscillator. Layout
from the datasheet [13].
4.6.2
Mixer
The mixer accepts the RF-frequency signal as well as the local oscillator (LO-frequency)
signal, and mix these to produce the desired IF-frequency output. As mentioned in
Section 4.6.1 on the Oscillator, the output power of the oscillator is 8 dBm. This power
==PAGE:42==
34
4 Individual components
level is a bit on the low side for most mixers - the one used in this radiometer needs to
be able to function properly from this LO input power level.
From the requirement of being able to run oﬀa 8 dBm LO-input, the 5 GHz to 12
GHz HMC220B Passive Mixer manufactured by Analog Devices is chosen. This is a
very simple passive mixer having the needed baluns and 50Ωterminal matching on chip
making it usable with unbalanced inputs - ad it operates with LO input power down to
7 dBm. The conversion gain is -9 dB. The noise ﬁgure of the mixer does not signiﬁcantly
inﬂuence the total system noise ﬁgure as the mixer is located so far down the cascaded
stages. The very simple pin-out layout of the package is shown in 4.20.
Figure 4.20: Package layout of the HMC220B Passive Mixer.
Layout from the
datasheet [14].
4.7
Band selection ﬁlter
After the down-conversion by the mixer, the signal is down-converted to a frequency
of 250 MHz. The bandwidth of the radiometer is 100 MHz - the band 10.64 GHz to
10.74 GHz which is down-converted to the band 200 MHz to 300 MHz. In order to
select the band and make sure all the power received by the radiometer receiver stems
from this band, a sharp band selection ﬁlter is required. A major reason to base the
radiometer on the super-heterodyne principle, is the convenience of designing the band
selection ﬁlter at the lower intermediate frequency as opposed to RF frequency - the
intermediate frequency of 250 MHz makes it much simpler to realize a sharp band selec-
tion ﬁlter as opposed to at the RF frequency at X-band. As mentioned in [15] (p. 6),
circuit theory is valid when the physical dimensions of a system is small compared to
the wavelength. At a frequency of 300 MHz, the highest frequency in the passband of
the band selection ﬁlter, the free space wavelength is around a meter. By keeping the
physical dimensions of the band selection ﬁlter small in comparison to a meter, I will be
able to justify the use of lumped components for this ﬁlter. Using lumped components
is a big advantage with regards to both complexity of design and required physical space.
==PAGE:43==
4.7 Band selection ﬁlter
35
4.7.0.1
Filter design using ideal components
To be able to select the desired frequency band while rejecting the out of band signal, a
very steep ﬁlter is needed - this is an argument for using the Chebyshev (equal ripple)
ﬁlter characteristic. There may be unwanted signal present at both higher and lower
frequency than the desired band, thus ﬁlter has to be of the band-pass type. At the
position of the band selection ﬁlter quite far down the cascaded sequence of components,
the insertion loss of the ﬁlter does not signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the total noise ﬁgure of the
system - but as the insertion loss of the ﬁlter naturally lowers the signal power level, I
choose to keep the insertion loss low by designing for a very low ripple level of just 0.01
dB. This decision results in a higher order of the ﬁlter to reach the same slopes, than
what would have been necessary by accepting a larger ripple level - but as the ﬁlter is
constructed using lumped components this is only a minor nuisance that I accept. Based
on these thoughts, I decide to design the ﬁlter as a 15th order Chebyshev 0.01 dB ripple
band-pass ﬁlter. The ﬁlter coeﬃcients for the low-pass prototype are found in ([7], p.
102) and are tabulated in Table 4.3.
g1
g2
g3
g4
g5
g6
g7
g8
0.8320
1.4600
1.8520
1.7684
1.9897
1.8272
2.0216
1.8394
g9
g10
g11
g12
g13
g14
g15
g16
2.0216
1.8272
1.9897
1.7684
1.8520
1.4600
0.8320
1.000
Table 4.3: Element values for the low-pass prototype of a 15th order 0.01 dB ripple
Chebyshev ﬁlter. From [7].
Figure 4.21: Transformations from low-pass prototype to to band-pass. From [4] p.
414, extended by me to include impedance scaling.
==PAGE:44==
36
4 Individual components
I choose the low-pass prototype representation starting and ending with a shunt capaci-
tor, to get as few components in the pass signal path (7 inductors versus eight inductors
with the other possible representation). From [4] (p. 414), I ﬁnd the low-pass to band-
pass transformations, which I have extended to include impedance scaling (hence the
included R0 = 50Ωterm). These transformations are shown in Figure 4.21. Using the
transformations the ﬁlter is designed and simulated using ADS Schematic simulator.
The frequency response is plotted in Figure 4.22 (a).
The passband of the ﬁlter is ω1 = 200 MHz to ω2 = 300 MHz. The center frequency ω0
is chosen as the geometric mean of the cut-oﬀfrequencies - and the fractional bandwidth
∆is then found as:
ω0 = √ω1· ω2 =
√
200MHz· 300MHz = 244.95MHz
(4.8)
∆= ω2 −ω1
ω0
= 300MHz −200MHz
244.95MHz
= 0.4082 = 40.82%
(4.9)
4.7.0.2
Practical ﬁlter using available components
Most of the needed component values are not standard values, and thus they may be
nearly impossible to obtain. Some of the component values may therefore be approxi-
mated by the use of a combination of two accessible components of diﬀerent values - i.e.
two inductors in series or two capacitors in parallel. In Figure 4.22 (b), the frequency
response of the ﬁlter is plotted for the case when using only accessible component values.
Figure 4.22: Simulated frequency response for (a) the case of calculated component
values, and (b) for the case of available component values.
==PAGE:45==
4.7 Band selection ﬁlter
37
As can be seen from the ﬁgure, the insertion loss is very small (around 0.1 dB) when sim-
ulating using lossless components. There is however also some resistance in the windings
of the inductors, which will contribute to the insertion loss. By including these resis-
tances in the simulations, we arrive at the practical band selection ﬁlter. The frequency
response of the designed band-pass ﬁlter is shown in Figure 4.24 - as can be seen the
insertion loss is around 1.5 dB for most part of the passband. The schematic is shown
in Figure ??, and the associated component list is available in Tables 4.4 and 4.5 (all
components are available through the supplier Farnell).
As can be seen in the component speciﬁcation tables, the many of the components have
tolerances of ± 2-5%. In order to get the ﬁlter properly tuned to the passband designed
for, it is advised to pick the components after a measurement using capacitance meter
or inductance meter. This way, it is possible to pick the components that have an actual
value very close to the rated value needed, and the individual components that deviates
from the rating can be sorted out.
Capacitors
Symbol
Component
Value
Tolerance
C1,C22
KEMET - CBR06C240FAGAC
24pF
1%
C2,C23
AVX - ML03512R5BAT2A
2.5pF
±0.1pF
C3,C21
AVX - ML03V13R6BAT2A
3.6pF
± 0.1pF
C4,C7,C10,C13,C16,C19
KEMET - CBR04C560F1GAC
56pF
1%
C5,C9,C12,C15,C20
AVX - 04023J2R9BBSTR
2.9pF
±0.1pF
C6,C18
MULTICORP - MCHH15N3R0B500LT
3pF
±0.1pF
C8,C17
KEMET - CBR04C759B5GAC
7.5pF
±0.1pF
C11,C14
MULTICORP - MCRF15N8R2B500CT
8.2pF
±0.1pF
Table 4.4: Component speciﬁcations for the capacitors used in the band select ﬁlter.
Inductors
Symbol
Component
Value
Tolerance
Resistance
L1,L20
COILCRAFT - 0805HQ-16NXGLB
16nH
2%
0.06Ω
L2,L11,L18
COILCRAFT - 0805HQ-6N2XJLB
6.2nH
5%
0.035Ω
L3,L19
COILCRAFT - 0805LS-111XGLB
110nH
2%
0.05Ω
L4,L17
COILCRAFT - 0603CT-7N2XGLU
7.2nH
2%
0.047Ω
L5,L7,L10,L13,L16
COILCRAFT - 0402AF-141XJLU
140nH
5%
0.26Ω
L6,L15
COILCRAFT - 0201DS-6N7XJEU
6.7nH
5%
0.15Ω
L8,L14
COILCRAFT - 0201DS-5N4XJEU
5.4nH
5%
0.13Ω
L9,L12
COILCRAFT - 0403HQ-6N6XJLU
6.6nH
5%
0.046Ω
Table 4.5: Component speciﬁcations for the inductors used in the band select ﬁlter.
==PAGE:46==
38
4 Individual components
Figure 4.23: Simulated frequency response for the case of realistic component values,
including resistance in the inductors.
Figure 4.24: Schematic of the designed band selection ﬁlter.
Speciﬁcations for the
components are listed in Tables 4.4 and 4.5.
==PAGE:47==
4.8 IF-ampliﬁers
39
4.8
IF-ampliﬁers
The intermediate frequency ampliﬁers are used after down-conversion to amplify the
signal to a power level of around -25 dBm, to ensure a good signal to noise ratio at
the tunnel detector diode. For this radiometer design, a total of around 40 dB gain is
necessary at the intermediate frequency to reach this power level. These 40 dB gain will
be equally distributed between two identical 20 dB ampliﬁers - the 1 MHz to 2.7 GHz
AD8353 ampliﬁer manufactured by Analog Devices is used. This ampliﬁer has a ﬁxed
gain of 19.5 dB at the IF frequency of 250 MHz, and runs of a single 5V power supply.
The two ampliﬁers are cascaded as shown in Figure 4.25 to achieve the desired 40 dB gain.
Figure 4.25: Package layout of the two cascaded AD8353 1 MHz - 2.7 GHz IF ampliﬁer
stages. Layout from the datasheet [16].
Figure 4.26: Gain vs. frequency at varying temperatures for the AD8353 1 MHz - 2.7
GHz IF ampliﬁer driven by a 5V power supply. [16].
==PAGE:48==
40
4 Individual components
The ampliﬁers are relatively stable with temperature, as can be seen from the plot of
gain vs. frequency at varying temperatures in Figure 4.26. As mentioned above, the
ampliﬁer has around 19.5 dB gain at the IF frequency of 250 MHz, the gain of the two
cascaded stages thus becomes 39 dB. This is close enough to the desired 40 dB gain to
be acceptable.
4.9
Detector diode
The purpose of the radiometer is to measure the received power - to do this, a detector
diode is needed to rectify the IF frequency signal. The detector diode is having a ’square
law’ characteristic. This square law property is very convenient when measuring power,
as it ensures that the rectiﬁed voltage is proportional to the power of the IF signal (as
power is voltage squared). The square law characteristic does only extends to up to
around -25 dBm power input - this is the reason the radiometer is designed to have the
maximum power at the detector input of just below this level.
Figure 4.27: Characteristic for the MTD-0208N tunnel diode at 5 GHz for diﬀerent
loads - the characteristics for the MTD-1002N diode used in this radiome-
ter will be similar. I believe there is a misspelling in the diagram, as the
second axis label ”Output Power (V)” should have read ”Output Voltage
(V)”. [17].
I have chosen to use the MTD-1002N 0.1 GHz - 2 GHz detector tunnel diode manufac-
tured by MACOM. This tunnel diode has a sensitivity of 700 mV/mW when loaded with
10kΩ, 200Ωoutput impedance, and is has a negative output polarity. With inspiration
from [18], I use the detector diode is a zero bias conﬁguration as shown in Figure 4.28,
==PAGE:49==
4.10 Low frequency ampliﬁer
41
and I choose to load the diode with a 10kΩresistor to make sure the sensitivity is as
rated. The output is to be connected to an operational ampliﬁer having a very large
input impedance, so this will not signiﬁcantly shift the 10kΩloading - the output voltage
with -27 dBm input power is 1.39 mV.
Figure 4.28: The MTD-1002N tunnel diode used in zero bias conﬁguration, and loaded
with 10kΩ. [17].
4.10
Low frequency ampliﬁer
After the rectiﬁcation of the signal in the detector, the maximum output voltage is 1.84
mV. To be able to measure this accurately, this signal needs to be ampliﬁed. This is
done using a an operational ampliﬁer, the AD828 manufactured by Analog Devices, [19].
This operational ampliﬁer has been chosen, as it has a large Gain-Bandwidth-Product
of 100 MHz.
As the detector diode has a negative output voltage, it makes sense to use the opera-
tional ampliﬁer in an inverting conﬁguration. To achieve a maximum voltage of just
below 10 V, the gain should be 5000. This gives a maximum output voltage of 9.2V.
Even though the signal has been rectiﬁed, is is still a time varying signal.
The gain A of an inverting operating ampliﬁer is given as the ratio between the input
and the feedback resistor [20], in the conﬁguration shown in 4.29. The resistors can be
chosen as R1 = 100Ωand R2 = 500kΩto give the desired gain of 5000:
G = −R2
R1
= −500kΩ
100Ω= −5000
(4.10)
==PAGE:50==
42
4 Individual components
Figure 4.29: Inverting operational ampliﬁer conﬁguration. [20].
4.11
Integrator
Finally, the received signal is integrated to give an average of the stochastic signal - the
resolution of the radiometer is directly dependent on the integration time. The best way
to perform the integration would be to feed the signal to a high speed analog-to-digital
converter (ADC) and save the resultant data using an Arduino, Raspberry Pi or similar
micro-controller. This would allow the data to be processed in a computer after the mea-
surements, and as an educational tool the integration time could be varied by varying
the number of samples used.
The choice of ADC, micro-controller etc. is outside the scope of this thesis.
Figure 4.30: Operational ampliﬁer conﬁgured as an integrator. [20].
Another approach would be to use an operational ampliﬁer conﬁgured as an integrator
using a capacitor, and set the integration time as the RC time constant. The operational
ampliﬁer used for the low frequency ampliﬁer is a dual device - so the second operational
ampliﬁer in the package can be used for the integrator circuit. For the integrator to
==PAGE:51==
4.11 Integrator
43
function it needs to be AC coupled (i.e. a large capacitor in series with the input).
The time constant τ of the integrator is given as the product of the resistance and the
capacitance. As the radiometer is stationary during the measurements (it is not mounted
on a satellite or an aeroplane, there are no strict limits on the integration time. To set
τ to 1 second, the components could take the values R = 10kΩand C = 100µF, which
results in a time constant of 1 second tau = R· C = 10kΩ· 100µF = 1s.
==PAGE:52==
44
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
In this thesis a super-heterodyne total power radiometer at the frequency of 10.69 GHz
and 100 MHz bandwidth has been designed. The focus has been on designing the ra-
diometer using relatively inexpensive components and utilizing the simplest methods
possible to design a radiometer - this is the reason the preferred architecture was the
total power radiometer.
The image rejection ﬁlter at X-band has been designed and implemented as a Chebyshev
3dB ripple stepped impedance ﬁlter of 15th order. The ﬁlter functions well and has the
required steep roll-oﬀ- but is does unfortunately suﬀer from high insertion loss of 6
dB. In order to get the desired amount of attenuation of the image frequency, it was
necessary to cascade two such ﬁlters which raises the insertion loss from the image ﬁlter
to 12 dB.
I can conclude that attempting to design stub ﬁlters at high frequency is a lost cause.
The line width of a transmission line of a ﬁxed characteristic impedance depends on
the substrate material properties, but not on the design frequency. Transmission line
lengths used in the stub ﬁlter are Λ
8 long, but as the width of the line does not scale with
frequency like the length does - for high frequencies the line widths become much, much
larger than the line lengths - and as a result they short each other out as they overlap
on the physical substrate.
Because of the generous amount of integration time available when using the radiometer
in a ﬁxed position (i.e. not moving), the resolution of the designed radiometer becomes
good. The worst case resolution (when assuming a total noise ﬁgure of 5 dB which is
more than the design gives us on paper - but it is good practise to account for some extra
losses in the ﬁrst part of the radiometer), when using the suggested 1 second integration
time is:
∆T = TA + TN
√
B · τ
= 300K + 648K
√
100MHz · 1s = 0.0948K
(5.1)
If we instead use a shorter integration time of 10µs, which is more common in radiome-
ters, the resolution is just below 1K:
∆T = TA + TN
√
B · τ
=
300K + 648K
√100MHz · 10µs = 0.948K
(5.2)
==PAGE:54==
46
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
[1]
D. Le Vine N. Skou. Microwave Radiometer Systems, Design and Analysis. Second
Edition. Artech House, 2006.
[2]
Energistyrelsen. Den Danske Frekvensallokeringstabel 2015.
https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Tele/den_grafiske_frekvensplan.
pdf.
[3]
Energistyrelsen. Frekvensregisteret.
https://frekvensregister.ens.dk/Search/Search.aspx.
[4]
D.M. Pozar. Microwave Engineering. 4th. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2012.
[5]
Analog Devices Inc. Datasheet - HMC564LC4 LNA.
http://www.analog.com/media/en/technical-documentation/data-sheets/
HMC564LC4.pdf.
[6]
Pasternack Enterprises Inc. Datasheet - PE8303 Isolator.
https://www.pasternack.com/images/ProductPDF/PE8303.pdf.
[7]
L. Young E.M.T. Jones G.L. Matthaei. Microwave Filters, Impedance-Matching
Networks, and Coupling Structures. Artech House, 1980.
[8]
Rogers Corporation. Product Selector Guide.
http://www.rogerscorp.com/documents/2532/acs/ACS-Product-Selector-
Guide-and-Standard-Thicknesses-and-Tolerances.pdf.
[9]
Bungard Elektronik. Techniches Daten Original Bungard fotobeschichtetes Basis-
material FR4.
http://www.bungard.de/downloads/IPC4101D.pdf.
[10]
Caltech, Department of Electrical Engineering. PUFF 2.1 Computer Aided Design
for Microwave Integrated Circuits.
http://mmic.caltech.edu/puff.html.
[11]
Keysight Technologies. Advanced Design System (ADS).
http://www.keysight.com/en/pc-1297113/advanced-design-system-ads.
[12]
Analog Devices Inc. Datasheet - HMC608LC4 RF Ampliﬁer.
http://www.analog.com/media/en/technical-documentation/data-sheets/
hmc608.pdf.
[13]
Analog Devices Inc. Datasheet - HMC1164 Voltage Controlled Oscillator.
http://www.analog.com/media/en/technical-documentation/data-sheets/
HMC1164.pdf.
==PAGE:56==
48
Bibliography
[14]
Analog Devices Inc. Datasheet - HMC220B Mixer.
http://www.analog.com/media/en/technical-documentation/data-sheets/
HMC220B.pdf.
[15]
Constantine A. Balanis. Advanced Engineering Electromagnetics. Second Edition.
Wiley, 2012.
[16]
Analog Devices Inc. Datasheet - AD8353 IF Ampliﬁer.
http://www.analog.com/media/en/technical-documentation/data-sheets/
AD8353.pdf.
[17]
MACOM. MTD-xxxx Series, Broadband Tunnel Diode Detectors.
https://cdn.macom.com/datasheets/MTD-xxxx20Series.pdf.
[18]
V. Giordano, C. Fluhr, B. Dubois and E. Rubiola. Characterization of Zero-Bias
Microwave Diode Power Detectors at Cryogenic Temperature. Review of Scientiﬁc
Instruments. 2016.
[19]
Analog Devices Inc. Datasheet - AD828 Operational Ampliﬁer.
http://www.analog.com/media/en/technical-documentation/data-sheets/
AD828.pdf.
[20]
A.R. Hambley. Electrical Engineering Principles and Applications. Edited by 5th.
Pearson, 2011.
[21]
M.I. Skolnik. Introduction to Radar Systems. Third Edition. McGraw-Hill, 2000.
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
49
==PAGE:58==
DTU Space
National Space Institute
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej
Building 328
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 9500
www.space.dtu.dk
