==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis, January 2018
Floating Concrete Foundation with
Textile Fiber Bag
Student:
Katrine Oline Aavitsland Lund, s123904
Supervisor:
Kristian Dahl Hertz
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
‘Climate change is now forcing itself upon us: a new reality that cannot be ignored.
The predicted sea level rise and greater ﬂuctuations in river discharge compel us to
look far into the future, to widen our scope and to anticipate developments further
ahead.’ [28]
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
MSc thesis
This report was prepared by:
Katrine Oline Aavitsland Lund
Supervisor:
Kristian Dahl Hertz,Professor, DTU-BYG
DTU Civil Engineering
Structural Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 4525 1700
Project period:
1 August 2017- 1 January 2018
ECTS:
30
Education:
MSc
Field:
Structural Engineering
Class:
No conﬁdentiality
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulﬁllment of the requirements
for graduation in the above education at the Technical University
of Denmark.
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis is submitted as a partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for the degree
of Master of Science in Civil Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark.
The thesis is written for the project Floating concrete foundations with external ﬁber
reinforcement, the title of the present thesis is more descriptive with regards to the
innovative technology investigated in the project. The project is credited to 30 ECTS
points, carried out under supervision of Professor at DTU, Kristian Dahl Hertz. The
theme of the project was suggested by the author, however, small adjustments have
been made during the process in collaboration between the author and the supervisor.
I would like to thank Kristian Dahl Hertz for excellent guidance and partner of dis-
cussion. Furthermore, I would like to thank Emilie Duedahl, Kristine Vestorp Larsen
and Sebastian Andreasen for correction of grammar and being a set of second eyes.
Kgs. Lyngby Friday 29th December, 2017
Katrine Oline Aavitsland Lund (s123904)
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Abstract
The world is facing great environmental changes, the rising sea level is threatening
communities, ﬂoods are prevalent and slum communities are living in conjunction with
water. As a consequence hereof, we are in the near future forced to rethink the way
we live with water. The technology of ﬂoating structures today mainly consist of large
pre-cast elements which requires heavy machinery for transport and installation, skilled
labor and factories for production and casting. This poses as a challenge considering
employment of ﬂoating structures in developing countries and remote areas.
As a solution, this thesis presents a new concept with an objective to increase the
simplicity and availability of ﬂoating structures in industrial, as well as developing
countries. The concept deals with the application of a textile ﬁber bag composed of
textile ﬁber reinforcement and fabric formwork in order to successfully replace steel re-
inforcement and conventional timber formwork. Additionally, a new casting technique
is investigated where the cast is carried out directly in water, remarkably simplifying
the process.
The aim of the thesis is to render probable the application of the textile ﬁber bag when
employed as a ﬂoating foundation, as well as the casting technique. This is treated
through a set of theoretical and experimental investigations dealing with diﬀerent as-
pects of the concept. The investigations are carried out with an aim to comply with a
set of prerequisites created for the design, that is simplicity, sustainability, modularity,
ﬂexibility and adaptability.
First oﬀan investigation assessing a historical and theoretical study of the constituent
materials of the textile ﬁber bag is conducted in order to create a greater understanding
to conduct further investigations and discussions. On the basis hereof, the required
technical properties of the constituent materials are determined. Next, an optimal
design of a ﬂoating foundation is developed based on the prerequisites stated. The
casting technique is treated through an experimental investigation where a prototype
is created and a cast is conducted simulating a real cast situation. Lastly, three con-
ceptual preliminary designs are developed with an emphasis on the immense potential,
possibilities and simplicity of the concept.
The application of a ﬂoating foundation with a textile ﬁber bag was rendered prob-
able through several theoretical investigations. Carbon ﬁber with styrene-butadiene
rubber resin and high tenacity woven polypropylene geotextile was proven suitable
as textile reinforcement and fabric formwork respectively. Additionally, through the
experimental investigation it was proven probable to conduct a cast directly in water
with minimal equipment.
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Table of Content
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Method of investigation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theoretical Background
4
2.1
Fabric formwork . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Textile reinforced concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Floating structures: From past to present . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Reﬂection upon further development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Textile Fiber Bag
11
3.1
Requirements of fabric formwork
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Requirements of textile reinforcement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Restraining method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Floating Foundation with Textile Fiber Bag
18
4.1
Prerequisites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Design forces
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4
Cross section analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.5
Plastic analysis of arched corners and bottom
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.6
Formwork . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.7
Connections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.8
Template . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.9
Summary and reﬂections upon solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Production Process
35
5.1
Production
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Transport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3
Cast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.4
Maintenance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6
Experimental Investigation
45
7
Conceptual Designs
49
7.1
Relative movements and connection systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.2
Rigid platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
==PAGE:12==
7.3
Modular housing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7.4
Floating bridge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7.5
Reﬂection upon solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
8
Discussion
58
8.1
Design development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
8.2
Conceptual development and potential
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
9
Conclusion
63
10 Further work
65
11 Appendices
67
A Solidian technical data sheet
68
B Design forces
73
C Moment capacity about x-axis
75
D Moment capacity about y-axis
79
E Shear capacity
82
F Normal reinforced concrete
86
G Limiting impact load
89
H Formwork
94
I
TenCate Miraﬁ® HP-Series Technical Data Sheet
97
J
Dimensions template
100
K Weight and buoyancy TRF foundation
103
L Weight and buoyancy equivalent foundation
108
M CO2 emission
111
N Volume ﬂoating elements
113
O Conceptual designs
117
12 References
120
==PAGE:13==
1 Introduction
DTU Civil Engineering
1 | Introduction
The world is in a continuously changing state where general needs vary and unantici-
pated occurrences alternate the way we live and the dynamics of our communities. As
of now, structures are static components in a dynamic world, where the constructions
are immobile while serving its purpose. The rising sea level is threatening communities
and cities, ﬂoods are prevalent, slums are existing in conjunction with water. These
are severe issues the world is facing that are in need of improvement and development.
There is an increasing focus hereof, though there is still a pressing need for research
within this ﬁeld. As a result, the motivation level to ﬁnd alternative solutions to the
static structures are growing for both architects and engineers due to the environmen-
tal changes. We can choose whether to continue to keep the water out or to develop
solutions that take advantage of the environmental changes, while we are ﬁghting them.
The technologies employed today are mainly consisting of large pre-cast elements re-
quiring heavy machinery for transport and installation, and skilled labor for produc-
tion. Consequently, this poses as a challenge considering development in developing
countries and remote areas.
On the basis hereof, this thesis aims to render probable and develop a tangible solution
to produce ﬂoating concrete foundations, enhancing the eﬃciency, availability and
simplicity concerning production, cast, cost and time. The new concept of the textile
ﬁber bag is developed through this thesis with the aim to bring these factors into a new
innovative product of which may enter the construction market as a better alternative
to already existing technologies. The textile ﬁber bag will serve as a stepping stone
for ﬂoating structures as a standard construction method breaking the constraints the
seaside is providing for a innovative sustainable future.
1.1
Concept
The objective of the concept is to create a textile ﬁber bag that successfully replace
steel reinforcement and conventional timber formwork. Investigations are conducted
carefully studying the diﬀerent aspects and challenges of the employment of the textile
ﬁber bag. This is accomplished through historical, technical, conceptual and experi-
mental analyses.
The concept of the textile ﬁber bag is employed in the design of a ﬂoating foundation
with an objective to create a sustainable and durable design with a high structural
and material eﬃciency.
The simplicity of the production process and the minimal
Page 1
==PAGE:14==
1 Introduction
DTU Civil Engineering
required maintenance allows for a vast area of application. The ﬂoating foundations are
employed in the development of modular structures providing buoyancy and stability.
The modular designs include a rigid platform, modular housing and a ﬂoating bridge
with an aim to display the extensive potential and possibilities of the construction
technique of the textile ﬁber bag and the ﬂoating foundation. The casting process
is developed acquiring a simple process conceivable to ordinary people independent
of the availability of resources. The cast of textile ﬁber bag elements is conducted
directly in water requiring minimal heavy machinery and transportation, this is one of
the fundamental aspects of the concept investigated in this thesis.
The concept is developed based on an operational and a theoretical baseline, and their
inter-dependencies with an emphasis on a sustainable, simplistic potential and prospec-
tive development. The technical baseline includes the material composition, technical
properties and requirements, design and ﬁnally the strength of the ﬁnal design. The
operational baseline considers a set of prerequisites creating a frame for the design, the
functionality, applicability and the proﬁtability of the concept.
1.2
Method of investigation
The thesis is structured around six main investigations in order to render probable and
emphasize the potential and possibilities of the application of a ﬂoating foundation
with a textile ﬁber bag, cast directly in water. That is, a theoretical and historical
background assessment of the constituent materials and technologies, a study of the
textile ﬁber bag, and an investigation of the application of a ﬂoating foundation with
a textile ﬁber bag. The design is speciﬁed through multiple analyses culminating in a
ﬁnal detailed design. The production process is assessed, followed by an experimental
investigation considering the casting method. Finally three conceptual preliminary
modular designs are developed. The method of investigation is further elaborated in
the following.
First oﬀan investigation assessing a theoretical and historical background of fabric
formwork, ﬁber reinforcement and ﬂoating structures is conducted. A greater under-
standing is hereof obtained for further investigation and discussion and prospective
shortcomings are illuminated.
Secondly, the textile ﬁber bag is introduced. The constituent materials are assessed
based on the knowledge attained from the previous investigation. A set of requirements
are established regarding the technical properties and characteristics of the materials.
These are created in order to illuminate the required properties to complete the objec-
tive of eﬀectively replacing steel reinforcement and traditional timber formwork.
Next, the textile ﬁber bag is assigned an application, that is a ﬂoating foundation.
A set of prerequisites are established in order to create a solid baseline for the foun-
dation and for further development, and to create a set of boundaries regarding the
design. The prerequisites deﬁned are sustainability, simplicity, modularity, ﬂexibility
Page 2
==PAGE:15==
1 Introduction
DTU Civil Engineering
and adaptability. Thorough investigations assessing the critical aspects and challenges
regarding the replacement of steel reinforcement and conventional formwork are con-
ducted, whereof speciﬁc suitable materials are selected and customized in order to
optimally utilize the characteristics of the individual materials. The shape and design
of the ﬂoating foundation are developed based on the prerequisites, whereof a cross
section analysis is conducted to determine the required dimensions and load bearing
capacity.
Subsequent to the technical design of the composite material, the textile ﬁber bag, its
constituents and the shape and dimensions of the foundation, is the production process
evaluated. The primary focus is on the construction phase, namely the optimization of
the transportation and casting when employing the textile ﬁber bag. The production
process is simpliﬁed to the greatest extent possible in order to provide an opportunity
of employment for all people at all locations and increase availability.
An experimental investigation is performed whereof a prototype is produced in order
to create an experience of practical operation. The objective is to carry out the casting
procedure of the ﬂoating foundation with similar conditions. Consequently unforeseen
complications concerning the ﬂow system and geometrical challenges will elucidate.
Lastly a chapter developing three modular designs are assessed. Relative movements
and connection systems between ﬂoating bodies are introduced, hereof three conceptual
preliminary designs are developed. The designs are developed with an emphasis on
the conceptual design and the prerequisites, in addition, they are derived in order to
prove the immense potential of the application of the textile ﬁber bag and the ﬂoating
foundation.
Page 3
==PAGE:16==
2 Theoretical Background
DTU Civil Engineering
2 | Theoretical Background
Prior to development, it is important to establish a general view of existing techniques
and products in the market of fabric formwork, textile ﬁber reinforcement and ﬂoating
structures. This is done in order to further investigate and discuss how to build upon
the possibilities, take advantage of their individual characteristics and pinpoint possible
shortcomings, when developing a new tangible solution for production and casting of
ﬂoating structures worldwide.
This chapter will introduce how the components are employed today and brieﬂy how
they developed. Finally, a section is presented where it is reﬂected upon the importance
of understanding the function, potential and history of the components in order to
optimally utilize their characteristics in the development of a new solution and to
further expand and improve the concept of ﬂoating structures.
2.1
Fabric formwork
Throughout history, the concept of casting concrete in fabric, that is the technology
of fabric formwork, has emerged in various forms over time. The main techniques and
application areas are presented in the following.
Fabric formwork has been developed and researched through over a century where the
area of application is vast, and motivational factors for employment vary. Initially,
the main motivation for development of fabric formwork was time and cost reduction.
Additionally, simplicity regarding labor was considered a major advantage as skilled
labor was no longer a requirement. Until the early 1900s, fabric formwork was entirely
utilitarian, it was considered a simple and cost-eﬀective strategy [27]. In the following
years the limitless possibilities of the fabric formwork was investigated, mostly by
architects whom found the opportunities regarding shape and surface ﬁnish intriguing.
Figure 1b illustrates freeform concrete which is achieved by the employment of fabric
formwork consequently proving the vast area of application.
Practical application
allows for more complex shapes, structural eﬃciency and conﬁgurations, in addition
to exceptional physical beauty.
Page 4
==PAGE:17==
2 Theoretical Background
DTU Civil Engineering
(a) Filter-eﬀect
(b) Free form
Figure 1: Eﬀects of fabric formwork
There are two main advantages motivating engineers and architects to continue ex-
ploring the possibilities of this technology. Firstly, the extensive reduction of material,
both formwork and concrete. Techniques of employment can make the fabric form-
work conform to precise structural requirements resulting in a signiﬁcant reduction in
materials [31]. Consequently, a large reduction of cost with regards to transportation,
labor, storage and dead weight follows. Additionally, a reduced amount of embodied
energy, and greenhouse gases are obtained which results in a more sustainable design.
Secondly, the permeability and porosity of the fabric membrane can have a great ad-
vantage on the concrete surface. The hydrostatic pressure induced by the concrete
creates a ﬁlter eﬀect, reducing air-voids, blowholes and access bleed water improving
the water-cement ratio at the surface [20]. Figure 1a illustrates the ﬁlter-eﬀect.
Currently, the concept of fabric formwork is a technology mainly exploited by archi-
tects. Engineers have shown interest regarding optimizing shape increasing the struc-
tural eﬃciency, minimizing waste material and improving the surface quality. There is
great potential in the technical and operational advantages fabric formwork can imply,
whereof the present thesis aims to investigate further opportunities and advantages
related to the concept.
The employment of fabric formwork requires a certain amount of framing and bracing
providing the desired shape of the element which is addressed in the following.
2.1.1
Unno Reinforced Concrete
The Japanese architect Kenzo Unno invented a fabric formwork method for in-situ cast
concrete walls called Unno reinforced concrete, henceforth abbreviated URC [30]. The
Page 5
==PAGE:18==
2 Theoretical Background
DTU Civil Engineering
methods are based on implementing simple systems oﬀering people an opportunity to
build houses for themselves without heavy machinery or skilled labor. There are several
systems developed, including the frame method and the quilt point method, henceforth
abbreviated QPM [30]. These two methods will be elaborated in the following.
The QPM produced walls are cast in fabric formwork restrained by individual quilt
points. The points are implemented by form-ties equipped with washers on the outside
of the formwork [30]. Figure 2a shows how a quilt-point method restrained wall is cast,
Figure 2b presents a ﬁnished design.
(a) Casting of QPM wall
(b) QPM wall ﬁnish
Figure 2: Quilt-point method
The frame method is carried out by introducing an external frame or bracing where
the fabric formwork is placed inside. Figure 3a display the casting of a frame method
restricted wall, and Figure 3b presents a ﬁnished design.
(a) Casting of frame method wall
(b) Frame method wall ﬁnish
Figure 3: Frame method
Page 6
==PAGE:19==
2 Theoretical Background
DTU Civil Engineering
The QPM and frame method compose important focus points regarding fabric form-
work. It is a sustainable concept with a zero waste construction where the restraining
is either reused or an integrated component in the structure. There are no required
skilled labor, providing an opportunity for all communities to bring the system into
use without compromising the quality. This may be areas exposed to nature disasters,
slums or remote areas where a quick, simple, durable and tangible solution is necessary.
This displays the potential in developing a simplistic and aﬀordable design of which
can be adapted to various applications.
2.2
Textile reinforced concrete
Textile reinforced concrete, henceforth abbreviated TRC, is a reinforcing concept that
has emerged the recent years. The building construction industry is in need of sustain-
able materials and solutions, where TRC has the potential to become this solution.
TRC is a composite material consisting of ﬁne grained concrete and multiaxial textile
fabric. The fabric is typically produced with ﬁbers of high tensile strength and neg-
ligible elongation, it is made corrosion resistant by employing ﬁber as alkali-resistant
glass ﬁber and carbon ﬁber among others[7]. These high performance ﬁbers provides
the opportunity to completely replacing steel reinforcement, in addition to providing
a great sustainable potential with regards to the input and output in addition to the
durability[36].
Figure 4: Lightweight and sustainable design with TRC
TRC has the capability to transform and extend the design possibilities as we know it,
additionally, the corrosion damage and the cost related to rehabilitation and mainte-
nance are a part of the past. Research exploring diﬀerent aspects of the TRC, such as
production, structural functionality, applicability and design present several promising
attributes. For instance a higher structural eﬃciency, thinner and lighter design as a
result of a minimal cover layer and optimal shape. Additionally, the reinforcement is
suitable for structures exposed to high chloride stresses such as maritime structures.
In conclusion, by employing TRC there are enhanced strength properties, low trans-
portation cost and a simple installation, which with advantage can be utilized in ﬂoat-
Page 7
==PAGE:20==
2 Theoretical Background
DTU Civil Engineering
ing structures. However, despite the revealed favorable attributes, it has yet to reach its
recognition due to a lack of available design tools, standards and long-term behavior.
2.3
Floating structures: From past to present
The development of ﬂoating structures is an old concept, people have been living in
conjunction with water for centuries. The technology originates in the early application
of ﬂoating boat bridges and villages in Cambodia, Vietnam, Indonesia and China.
The technique was very basic, some villages mostly existed of small boats, while other
dwellings appeared as normal houses. The Inca tribe the Uros, has been, and is still
living on big rafts made of totora reeds [35].
The contemporary history of ﬂoating houses originates in the Netherlands, where the
houseboat was introduced in 1918. Floating houses have in the last decade been intro-
duced in western Europe, they are normal houses built on ﬂoating foundations. The
International Marine Flotation System INC, abbreviated IMFS, has been developing
ﬂoating techniques over 30 years [16]. The foundations are based on a reinforced con-
crete shell with a core of expanded polystyrene, abbreviated EPS. The foundations are
produced as large pre-cast elements, whereof they are transported to the construction
site. It is evident that skilled labor and factories are crucial for employment and in-
stallation of these elements. The method is called the IMS-method and has been, and
still is applied all over the world. Figure 5a shows the placing of one foundation into
the water where heavy machinery is required. A complete installation of a ﬂoating
foundations by the IMS-method is presented in Figure 5b.
(a) Transport into water
(b) Finished foundation
Figure 5: IMS-method based foundations
Koen Olthuis, a dutch architect and founder of Waterstudio.NL has contributed greatly
to the development and research within ﬂoating structures and raised awareness to the
sustainable advantages and possibilities [29]. The projects vary from large ﬂoating
’trees’ with the aim to create high density green spots in a city, large hotels and
Page 8
==PAGE:21==
2 Theoretical Background
DTU Civil Engineering
resorts, and private ﬂoating islands. A new technology is applied hereof, constructing
a ﬂoating foundation as a hollow concrete box constructed by sandwich elements. The
sandwich elements consist of an external reinforced concrete layer, an EPS layer and
an internal reinforced concrete layer.
(a) Sea Tree
(b) Floating villa
Figure 6: Waterstudio projects
It is evident that the concept of building on, and with water is a technology that has
slowly developed through thousands of years, but is yet to reach a stepping stone into
the construction market as a standardized construction method. Even though an in-
creased focus has arisen, the majority of the projects are very expensive, time consum-
ing and environmentally unsustainable. This is posing as a challenge with regards to
expanding and advocate the concept of building with and on water worldwide. Hence,
an increased focus on developing a tangible, sustainable, aﬀordable, available and ﬂex-
ible solution is necessary. The aim is to break the boundary the sea sets for urban
development and restricting its further development, not only for industrial countries,
but developing countries as well. This is essential for an innovative sustainable future.
2.4
Reﬂection upon further development
This chapter has presented three concepts that have been developed through thousands
of years, that is, fabric formwork, textile reinforced concrete and ﬂoating structures.
The respective techniques acquire particular qualities and objectives.
Raising the question of how to expand the concept of ﬂoating structures worldwide,
some solutions are: A sustainable design and process, aﬀordability and simplicity.
The majority of the world does not have resources and capital to engage in expensive
projects or have access to skilled labor or factories. By treating these challenges a
solid foundation is established for developing a new innovative product and production
process.
Page 9
==PAGE:22==
2 Theoretical Background
DTU Civil Engineering
A secondary set of solutions are: Aesthetics and modularity, providing an opportunity
to expand and retract structures at will. The second set of answers will vary greatly
depending on application area and location and may be adjusted for the particular
function.
Based on the introduced techniques and concepts presented in this chapter, it is evi-
dent that there are already developed technologies with great potential. The current
technology can meet the demands for creating innovative sustainable products and
techniques when utilizing their individual advantages and attributes and combining
them. The following chapter will investigate how the individual characteristic prop-
erties of these components can be connected to create a new design giving rise to
additional and new possibilities for ﬂoating structures.
Page 10
==PAGE:23==
3 Textile Fiber Bag
DTU Civil Engineering
3 | Textile Fiber Bag
Based on the theory, technology and concepts presented in the previous chapter, a new
concept is introduced, the textile ﬁber bag, henceforth abbreviated TFB. The TFB acts
as both reinforcement and formwork. The employment of a TFB allows for casting
directly in water with minimal or no external framing or bracing.
The present chapter develops a set of framing requirements for a general design of
the TFB. The characteristic advantages of the individual components are utilized and
combined, culminating in a textile ﬁber bag eﬀectively replacing steel reinforcement
and conventional timber formwork. Figure 7 illustrates a section of a TFB element,
constructed by an external fabric formwork, with an inside layer of textile reinforcement
joined with a continuous connection.
Figure 7: Textile ﬁber bag element
The reinforcement is ﬂexible conforming to the shape of the formwork and the underly-
ing surface structure of the concrete. When employing the continuous connection this
yields an outer circular segment of the cross section. This is preferred in lieu of a planar
textile reinforcement composition in order to obtain a higher utilization of the cross
section. A greater distance between the extreme ﬁbers of the tensile reinforcement,
and the concrete compression zone results in an increased structural eﬃciency.
Page 11
==PAGE:24==
3 Textile Fiber Bag
DTU Civil Engineering
The required technical properties of the constituent materials vary depending on appli-
cation area and surrounding environment, but there are certain general requirements
that consistently must be met. These requirements are addressed in the following.
3.1
Requirements of fabric formwork
Fabric formwork is applied as a ﬂexible, sustainable, strong, lightweight and aﬀordable
alternative to conventional formwork and method of casting concrete. Today, almost
all textiles used as formwork have initially been developed for other purposes, such as
garment, screen fabric and geotextiles. As a consequence, there has not been conducted
thorough research on the speciﬁc technical properties desired for the actual purpose
of the fabric formwork. This section will elucidate the most important properties of
the fabric formwork acting as a constituent material of the TFB, of which the cast is
performed directly in water.
Fabric formwork is exposed to a formwork pressure induced due to the pressure dif-
ference between water and concrete. The induced pressure has a hydrostatic pressure
distribution normal to the formwork and relative to the height of the pour. The mag-
nitude of the resulting tensile stresses determine certain required technical properties
of the formwork.
There is a vast variety of textile compositions and properties relating to fabric form-
work. This yields a range of permeability, strength and elastic properties aﬀecting the
resulting properties of the cast element. The most decisive variables are listed below.
 Elastic modulus
 Creep modulus
 Permeability
The listed properties are addressed in the following where the desirable attributes in
relation to the application as a constituent material of the TFB is the primary focus.
Subsequently, a brief study of existing materials with desired properties is conducted.
3.1.1
Elastic modulus
The elastic modulus of the formwork material is a property of high importance. A low
elastic modulus can result in a large variation in geometry of the cross section along
the depth of the element resulting in a large ﬂuctuation in strain between the top
and bottom cast. Thus, an increase resulting formwork pressure acting on the surface,
requires an increase in elastic modulus.
The interaction between the fabric formwork, concrete and the textile reinforcement is
dependent on the elastic modulus. In order to attain the necessary cover layer and grip
between the concrete and textile reinforcement in order to utilize their characteristic
Page 12
==PAGE:25==
3 Textile Fiber Bag
DTU Civil Engineering
attributes, a certain relation between the elastic modulus of the fabric formwork and
textile reinforcement is necessary. The elastic modulus of the reinforcement must be
less than the one of the fabric formwork.
3.1.2
Creep modulus
Certain fabrics continue to elongate after concrete is cast, typically under damped or
wet environments when exposed to sustained tension[15]. This results in a varying
cross section and possibly cracking in concrete. Thus, it is crucial to maintain control
over the conﬁguration with a minimal creep modulus to limit formwork deformation
during casting and curing.
3.1.3
Permeability
The permeability of the fabric membrane determines the quality of the surface layer
of the concrete. An ideal permeability requires a fabric structure where the passage of
water and air bubbles are allowed, but the ﬂow of cement past is restricted[3]. This
passage of water takes place immediately after cast while the hydrostatic pressure is
still high. As a result the surface will obtain a low water to cement ratio, with a
following increased durability and strength of the cured concrete, typically 10% - 15%
higher[8].
A TFB element can be produced both with water resistant concrete as well as porous
light weight concrete which is not resistant to water. As a result, the element might re-
quire a waterproof external surface or coating. Thus, the permeability of the formwork
varies depending on the concrete in addition to application, however, the formwork
must always have suﬃcient coarseness to preserve the cement paste inside the form-
work.
3.1.4
Existing materials
The following section presents materials with properties in line with the requirements
stated. An example is geotextiles, they are strong, lightweight and aﬀordable materials
which aqcuire attributes desirable to the application in question. They are typically
employed in association with soil by being permeable fabrics with the ability to ﬁl-
ter, reinforce, separate and drain[26]. Figure 8a presents a high strength geotextile
employed for a concrete retaining wall.
There are several diﬀerent materials and weaving aﬀecting the ﬁnal properties of the
textile, consequently it is possible to customize the composition to suit the application.
Woven and non-woven textiles acquire diﬀerent characteristics. Woven geotextiles have
low porosity and high strength, while non-woven geotextiles are made of synthetics,
Page 13
==PAGE:26==
3 Textile Fiber Bag
DTU Civil Engineering
frequently used for ﬁlter and separation with a lower strength and elastic modulus [2].
Hence, properties of a woven geotextile are most suitable for the textile formwork.
(a) Geotextile concrete retaining wall
(b) Polypropylene geotextile
Figure 8: Geotextiles
A woven polypropylene geotextile possess desirable properties with regards to strength,
stiﬀness and creep modulus. It is produced with substantial tensile strength and coore-
sponding low strain. Polypropylene beneﬁts from being insensitive to water, which may
cause other materials to stretch. Appendix I presents a technical data sheet of two
diﬀerent high tenacity woven polypropylene geotextile applicable for the application in
question [22].
In conclusion a suitable material for the application as a component in the textile ﬁber
bag is a woven polypropylene geotextile.
3.2
Requirements of textile reinforcement
Textile reinforced concrete is economically and functionally superior to steel reinforced
concrete. It requires a minimal concrete layer resulting in a lighter and more slender
design, there is minimal to no costs related to rehabilitation and maintenance and
an increased durability is obtained. When employed as a constituent material in the
textile ﬁber bag, there are certain parameters with a great inﬂuence on the resulting
capacity of the cast. These parameters are listed below, and studied in the following.
 Elastic modulus
 Grip
 Impregnation material
Page 14
==PAGE:27==
3 Textile Fiber Bag
DTU Civil Engineering
3.2.1
Elastic modulus
The elastic modulus of the textile reinforcement is a critical attribute with a great in-
ﬂuence on the ﬁnal strength of the element of which it is applied. The elastic modulus
must be greater for textile reinforcement than for concrete in order to allow absorption
of the induced tensile stresses in the concrete. Additionally, it is desirable to design
a normal reinforced cross section, that is, a cross section where the reinforcement and
concrete reach their limiting values simultaneously. Hence, the balance between the
cross sectional area per meter, the yield strength and elastic modulus of the reinforce-
ment and the concrete must fulﬁll the requirement of a normal reinforced cross section
is fulﬁlled. This generates a safe and economical design.
3.2.2
Grip
The textile ﬁber bag is designed where the formwork and reinforcement are alongside
each other. As a consequence hereof, there is one decisive requirement regarding the
transfer of forces between the concrete and reinforcement, namely that the concrete
must penetrate the textile reinforcement creating a grip transferring the forces. There
are two main parameters aﬀecting this, the relation between the elastic modulus of
the formwork and the textile reinforcement, in addition to the grid of the textile rein-
forcement. Additionally the textile reinforcement must acquire a grid with openings
allowing the concrete to ﬂow through.
To summarize, obtaining a greater strain in the formwork than the textile reinforce-
ment, while applying a textile reinforcement with a coarse grid allows the concrete to
ﬂow through the grid. This creates a grip between the concrete and textile resulting
in a textile reinforcement successfully acting as tensile reinforcement replacing steel
reinforcement.
3.2.3
Impregnation material
Textile ﬁber reinforcement is a composite material, with the constituent materials
ﬁber and resin. The ﬁnal physical property and performance are dominated by the
ﬁber properties. The resin serves two main purposes. Firstly, it holds reinforcement
together while helping it conform to the desired shape, in the absence of a resin,
the reinforcement fabric is shapeless and can easily be separated. Secondly, the resin
contributes transferring the mechanical loads from individual ﬁbers or ﬁber bundles
across the entire part [37]. The bonding behavior is optimally customized with a most
favorable combination of ﬁber and resin.
Page 15
==PAGE:28==
3 Textile Fiber Bag
DTU Civil Engineering
3.2.4
Existing material
Existing material acquiring similar properties as elaborated in the previous is studied
in the following section. Carbon and alkali resistant glass ﬁber, abbreviated AR glass
ﬁber, are frequently applied as textile ﬁber reinforcement. With a high strength to
weight ratio and elastic modulus they are desirable for the application in question.
Epoxy and Styrene-butadiene rubber, abbreviated SBR, resins are frequently used as
impregnation material. Appendix A presents technical data sheets with the charac-
teristic tensile strengths, elastic modulus and cross sectional area for diﬀerent textile
reinforcements from Solidian [1] with a combination of carbon ﬁber with epoxy, carbon
ﬁber with SBR, AR glass ﬁber with epoxy and AR glass and SBR with varying cross
sectional area.
(a) Free-form textile reinforcement
(b) Stiﬀtextile reinforcement
Figure 9: Textile reinforcement
Table 1 presents the intervals of tensile strengths and elastic modulus. The tensile
strength of carbon ﬁber with SBR resin is not presented, but assumed to be similar to
epoxy resin [19].
Fiber
Resin
Elastic modulus
Tensile strength
[GPa]
[MPa]
Carbon
Epoxy
200-250
1900-2400
SBR
200-250
-
Glass
Epoxy
60-70
1100-1200
SBR
60-70
1200-1700
Table 1: Properties textile reinforcement
An additional decisive property for the concept in question is the ﬂexibility of the
reinforcement. Epoxy resin produces a stiﬀcomposition, while the SBR resin yields
a ﬂexible composition.
The objective of the TFB is to produce an adaptable and
aﬀordable solution, hence, it is desirable to produce a bag that can be compacted. On
Page 16
==PAGE:29==
3 Textile Fiber Bag
DTU Civil Engineering
the bases hereof, it may be concluded that carbon ﬁber with SBR coating is the most
suitable solution.
3.3
Restraining method
Casting an element applying fabric formwork requires a strong connection able to
sustain extensive forces induced by the wet concrete. In the present thesis, two con-
nections are treated based on the systems developed by Kenzo Unno, the QPM and
the Frame method. There is one fundamental diﬀerence between URC and the concept
in question, that is the implementation of minimal or no external framing. With QPM
and Frame method, the walls are connected and restrained by external frames. The
connections in the present design are integrated in the formwork through sewing, either
continuous or in points. As a result the wall ﬁnish will acquire a similar expression as
the URC walls.
The connection is implemented by sewing of high strength ﬁber yarn, the yarn is
exposed to great forces as a result of the resulting formwork pressure. The chosen
material must therefore acquire a high strength, able to withstand the induced forces.
The inter-laying fabric formwork represents the joining of the fabric formwork and the
connecting yarn. As a consequence of the induced forces in the yarn, the inter-laying
formwork is equally exposed to these forces. If the strength properties of the yarn are
greater than for the formwork, the ladder must be reinforced in the joining section in
order to avoid damage.
A general design for the textile ﬁber bag was derived in the present chapter. The
characteristic advantages of the fabric formwork and the textile reinforcement were
studied in order to create a set of requirements and guidelines for the design. The
requirements emphasize on obtaining a high utilization of the constituents characteris-
tics, this knowledge is important when designing a ﬂoating foundation employing the
textile ﬁber bag, which is treated in the next chapter.
Page 17
==PAGE:30==
4 Floating Foundation with Textile Fiber Bag
DTU Civil Engineering
4 |
Floating Foundation with Tex-
tile Fiber Bag
The following section will assess a speciﬁc technical design for a ﬂoating foundation with
a TFB. The foundation is cast in a TFB, whereof its material properties and dimensions
are established on the basis of a set of prerequisites and boundary conditions.
In
the previous section, the concept of the TFB was introduced, where an assessment
of considerations and requirements regarding an optimal utilization of the individual
properties of the constituent materials was conducted. The result will be investigated
further where speciﬁc material properties are assigned.
The objective is to render
probable the application of a textile ﬁber bag replacing reinforcement and formwork
completely.
4.1
Prerequisites
A set of prerequisites are established in order to create a set of boundaries regarding
the design of a ﬂoating foundation. They are set up to provide a solid baseline for
further development and to increase the possibility of expanding the concept of the
TFB worldwide.
A Sustainable design and process, the TFB foundation is designed with minimal ma-
terial consumption and high structural eﬃciency resulting in a lightweight construction
that minimizes CO2 emissions regarding transport and optimizes the resistance of the
foundation. Additionally, the TFB ﬂoating foundation is an innovative sustainable
solution to the environmental challenges the world is facing.
Simplicity, the design should be constructed with minimal necessary external framing
during cast and the casting process should not depend on skilled labor. Additionally,
essential technical solutions for the foundation should be composed in a simplistic
manner applicable for ordinary people. This will increase the possibility of applying
the concept in areas where resources are limited, as well as for individual purposes.
Modularity, the possibility of expansion and retraction as desired. This increases
both ﬂexibility and adaptability of the design.
Flexibility and Adaptability, the foundation should be produced in such a manner
that the consumer may adapt the function of the foundation as desired. This also
provides an opportunity to add modules to existing constructions. Furthermore, these
Page 18
==PAGE:31==
4 Floating Foundation with Textile Fiber Bag
DTU Civil Engineering
possibilities should be impartial to the location of the construction site. In order to
create an adaptable design, the shape should be able to coordinate with other elements
and to ﬁt into new locations. An adaptable design also provides an opportunity to
adapt to the dynamics of our societies, as the need changes, the structures can serve
as a ﬂexible components planning for change.
Furthermore, a point of reference regarding the shape and size of the foundation is
decided. It is chosen to a 20 ft container, which in addition to creating a point of
reference of the design, enables an easy arrangement in case of transportation by
standard transport facilities. Hereof it is optimized to obtain a material, production
and structural eﬃcient product, in addition it is optimized to be space eﬃcient in the
greatest extent possible. By maintaining a relative large in-plane area, the foundation
can be employed as residence, storage, installations and other purposes of the ﬁnal
structure. The dimensions of a 20 ft container are illustrated in Figure 10.
6090 mm
2600 mm
2440 mm
Figure 10: Dimensions 20 ft container
In conclusion, the prerequisites should be met in order to create an adequate design
with great potential that meets the imminent challenges resulting from environmental
changes. Furthermore, the environmental changes can possibly disrupt the way the
construction industry function today, creating a pressing need for new solutions.
4.2
Design
The following section evaluates the shape and size of the foundation. A design study
is conducted which to the greatest extent possible generates a solution meeting the
prerequisites stated.
First oﬀ, the shape of the foundation is assessed in order to
obtain a strong, material eﬃcient design.
Arched shapes are very eﬃcient when carrying their load, resulting in pure compres-
sion. Three common arches employed in constructions are the catenary, parabolic and
circular arch, which result in pure compression when exposed to diﬀerent loading con-
ditions. The catenary curve with load distributed along the arch axis, parabolic where
subjected to uniform load on a horizontal projection and ﬁnally circular arches when
exposed to uniform normal pressure, commonly known as hydrostatic loading [10].
Page 19
==PAGE:32==
4 Floating Foundation with Textile Fiber Bag
DTU Civil Engineering
Based on the modularity and adaptability prerequisite, it may be concluded that a
shape which is adaptable and able to ﬁt into a new location is desirable. These are
typically rectangular shapes. On the contrary, circular arches are an obvious solution
for an aﬀordable, lightweight construction.
A point of reference was presented in the previous section in order to create a set of
boundary conditions for the design. A solution resulting in a composition with the most
desirable advantages from both rectangular and circular shapes are constructed. The
in-plane composition is a combination of circular arches and planar sections, presented
in Figure 11.
The short edges are constructed as circular arches where R = L =
H = 1220 mm, in other words a complete half circle. Employing half circular corners
reduced the planar length of the long side to 3650 mm, consequently reducing the
induced moment with regards to the initial length of 6090 mm.
A planar bottom will result in great forces when exposed to hydrostatic pressure at a
depth of 2600 mm. A solution resulting in pure compression is to construct a cylindrical
shaped bottom, again utilizing the beneﬁts of arches. The cylindrical shaped bottom
have the same dimensions as the corners with a radius of 1220 mm. The bottom corner
between the cylindrical bottom and vertical corner creates a quarter sphere, this is a
shape able to withstand great radial pressure. The design is illustrated in Figure 11.
Figure 11: Foundation dimensions
To achieve stability and a stronger and more robust foundation, two vertical walls are
integrated in the foundation. These walls are placed at the joint between the arched
corner and the vertical wall acting as supports for the wall section, arched corner and
bottom.
Page 20
==PAGE:33==
4 Floating Foundation with Textile Fiber Bag
DTU Civil Engineering
4.3
Design forces
The following section derives the greatest moment and shear force acting on the planar
wall section, circular corner and the cylindrical bottom based on the constructed design
in the previous section.
The maximum moment acting on the planar wall section is conservatively determined
by means of a lower bound solution, the strip method. A structural model is con-
structed for transferring the forces through the wall section where the planar wall
section is conservatively treated as simple supported along three edges, see Figure 12.
The maximum moment is found to be MEd = 11.4 kN m at mid span, and maximum
shear force to VEd = 25.1 kN at the support. See Appendix B for calculations.
Figure 12: Strip method wall section
The circular corner and cylindrical bottom of the foundation is loaded in pure compres-
sion when exposed to hydrostatic pressure. It is known that concrete can withstand
excessive compression forces, which implies that the dimensions of the cross section
are decided based on the production limitations, not the compression capacity. On
the basis hereof, it is concluded that the circular arches acquire suﬃcient load bearing
capacity when the cross section is composed equal to the planar wall.
4.4
Cross section analysis
The cross section is designed in the following section based on the design moment and
shear forces derived previously. The wall section is analyzed for bending about x-, and
y-axis. It is evident that the greatest moment occurs with bending about the weak
Page 21
==PAGE:34==
4 Floating Foundation with Textile Fiber Bag
DTU Civil Engineering
axis, that is the y-axis, see Figure 13. As stated in the previous, the cylindrical corner
and bottom are able to resist excessive forces when exposed to hydrostatic pressure.
As a result, an investigation of the bearing capacity of the arched elements exposed to
hydrostatic loading is not considered necessary.
Floating structures are at risk of collision, thus, it is considered necessary to derive the
limiting impact load. This load is derived by means of a plastic analysis of the circular
corner and cylindrical bottom. The planar wall section is not investigated for impact
load as it is presumed shielded by surrounding elements.
First oﬀ, a cross section analysis is conducted in order to derive the load bearing
capacity of the cross section when exposed to hydrostatic loading, subsequently the
limiting impact load for the circular corner and bottom is derived.
4.4.1
Load bearing capacity cross section
The load bearing capacity of the cross section is derived for bending about x-, and y-
axis. The material properties and the cross sectional area of the textile reinforcement
per meter are presented in Table 2. Carbon ﬁber textile reinforcement with SBR resin
is applied as tensile reinforcement. The cross sectional area is determined as a result
of the following investigation in order to obtain suﬃcient bearing capacity.
Table 2: Strength of concrete and reinforcement
fck
f carbon
yk
Econcrete
Ecarbon
Acarbon
[MPa]
[MPa]
[GPa]
[GPa]
mm2/m
20
2000
18
200
140
Firstly, bending about x-axis is considered. The moment capacity is derived per tube,
subsequently the capacity per running meter is found. For detailed calculations see
Appendix C. Figure 13 illustrates the cross section and parameters necessary to estab-
lish the moment bearing capacity of the cross section, Table 3 presents the individual
cross section parameters.
Table 3: Cross section parameters x-axis
w
hc
hr
θc
s
R
CGc
CGf
Ac
As
d
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[°]
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[mm2]
[mm2]
[mm]
300
50
50
52.8
321.7
250
15.6
29.8
3908.1
45
32.6
Page 22
==PAGE:35==
4 Floating Foundation with Textile Fiber Bag
DTU Civil Engineering
Figure 13: Cross section capacity x-axis
Where w is the width of one tube, hc is the height of the circular segment, hr is the
height of the rectangular segment, θc is the degrees of the circular segment, s is the arch
length, d is the height of the compression zone from the top of the cross section, CGc
and CGf is the center of gravity of the concrete and ﬁber reinforcement respectively
and R is the radius of the circular arched segment. As and Ac are the tensile textile
reinforcement and area of the concrete compression zone per tube respectively.
The textile reinforcement of circular segment in tension is assumed active. The moment
capacity of the wall per meter is found to MRd.x = 26.2 kN m m−1.
The moment capacity for bending about the weak axis, y-axis, is considered in the
following. The critical section is located at the vertical connection point between the
tubes. This implies that the contribution from the top circular concrete section can
not be guaranteed, hence, this segment is neglected in the further calculations. The
concrete compression zone is situated in the rectangular segment of the cross section.
The textile reinforcement is assumed active. For detailed calculations see Appendix D.
Figure 14 illustrates the cross section under consideration and the neglected concrete
section and Table 4 presents the correlated parameters. The resulting moment capacity
is found to MRd.y = 14.7 kN m m−1
Figure 14: Cross section capacity y-axis
Page 23
==PAGE:36==
4 Floating Foundation with Textile Fiber Bag
DTU Civil Engineering
Table 4: Cross section parameters y-axis
l
hc
hr
CGc
CGf
d
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
1000
50
50
7.36
29.8
18.4
The shear capacity of the cross section without considering the reinforcement as shear
reinforcement is found to VRd.y = 49.5 kN m−1 for the weak axis and VRd.x = 82.6 kN m−1
for the strong axis. Detailed calculations are found in Appendix E. It is evident that
the cross section shear capacity is suﬃcient.
The cross section is checked for normal reinforcement where the following requirement
must be fulﬁlled, ϵyd < ϵf < ϵuk.
See Appendix F for calculations, it is normal
reinforced, both for bending about x-, and y-axis.
Table 5: Design forces and bearing capacity per meter
MRd.x
MRd.y
VRd.y
VRd.x
MEd
VEd
[kN m m−1]
[kN m m−1]
[kN m−1]
[kN m−1]
[kN m m−1]
[kN m−1]
26.2
14.7
49.5
82.6
11.4
25.1
The cross section has been design with a suﬃcient load bearing capacity able to sustain
the maximum induced forces.
4.5
Plastic analysis of arched corners and bottom
The application area of the ﬂoating foundation give rise to several impact risks. Con-
sequently, the circular arched corner and bottom of the ﬂoating foundation must be
analyzed when exposed to skew loading. A plastic analysis is conducted in the follow-
ing section considering in-plane failure in order to obtain the limit load [6]. The limit
load is the load the structure can resist before full failure due to yielding of elements.
Two situations with diﬀerent sets of boundary conditions are studied in the present
section. The ﬁrst one being corner segment of the foundation, it is considered ﬁxed
at the supports due to the supporting joining walls in both horizontal and vertical
direction. The second situation is the cylindrical bottom which at mid-span only is
supported by the vertical wall, therefore it is considered hinged. The static systems
are presented in Figure 15, hereof plastic analysis are conducted.
Page 24
==PAGE:37==
4 Floating Foundation with Textile Fiber Bag
DTU Civil Engineering
Figure 15: Static system arches
For the analysis in question, an idealized elasto-plastic stress strain relation is assumed
for all members [17]. A corresponding diagram is called the Prandtl diagram and is
illustrated in Figure 16.
σ
σy
ǫ
α
α
Unloading path
Figure 16: Prandtl Diagram
The arch in question is supported horizontally by the wall and the hydrostatic pres-
sure, and vertically by the integrated wall, thus it is considered ﬁxed at the supports.
The static system is illustrated in Figure 15a. This generates a three times statically
indeterminate structure. The force distribution of a statically indeterminate structure
is determined by the engineer, any moment distribution is possible as long as equilib-
rium is fulﬁlled and the structure is able to sustain the induced forces. In the case of
failure when exposed to asymmetric loads, the arch exhibits the mechanism of sideways
displacement. The design moment diagram and failure mechanism of the circular arch
is presented in Figure 17. It is evident that four plastic hinges leads to failure of the
system, as a consequence hereof the design moment diagram is a combination of four
moment diagrams.
The maximum possible bending moments at the plastic hinges are conservatively con-
sidered equal to the moment capacity of the cross section for bending about the weak
axis MRd.y = My = 14.7 kN m m−1. This was derived in the previous section, and
assumed to be constant along the arch.
Figure 17 illustrates the plastic moment distribution, location of plastic hinges and the
direction of the moments.
Page 25
==PAGE:38==
4 Floating Foundation with Textile Fiber Bag
DTU Civil Engineering
Plim
My
My
H
H
Va
Vb
My
My
a
b
l
Moment-diagram
due to thrust force H
Moment diagram
due to limit load P
Yield moment
at supports
A
B
C
D
My
My
My
My
c
Figure 17: Design diagram of the hingeless arch, mechanism of failure, and bending
moment diagram in plastic state
Based on an elastic analysis of the arch, it is evident that the two ﬁrst plastic hinges
are located at support A and B respectively. The hingeless arch is transformed into
a two-hinged arch subsequent to the formation of the two ﬁrst plastic hinges. The
Page 26
==PAGE:39==
4 Floating Foundation with Textile Fiber Bag
DTU Civil Engineering
plastic hinges at the supports are caused by loading until yield moments are reached,
see equation 1.
MA = MB = My
(1)
A load increment is supplied and the third plastic hinge is developed at position C. The
bending moment acting in the third plastic hinge is a combination of three moments,
one moment due to the limiting impact load, see Equation 2, the second one due to
the thrust force, see Equation 3 and lastly the moment at support A, see Equation 1.
M 0
C = Plim · ab
l
(2)
M H
C = H · yc
(3)
MH = M 0
C −M H
C −MA · 2
3 + MB · 1
3
(4)
where the lengths a, b and l are illustrated in Figure 17. The arch is now statically
determinate subsequent to the formation of three plastic hinges, the formation of the
fourth plastic hinge will transform the static system into a mechanism leading to
failure. The fourth plastic hinge appears at position D, where the bending moment is
a combination of three moments, Equation 5, Equation 6 and Equation 1.
M 0
D = M 0
D · c
b
(5)
M H
D = H · yd
(6)
MD = M 0
D −M H
D + MB · 2
3 −MA · 1
3
(7)
where the lengths c, b and l are illustrated in Figure 17. The equation system is solved
for the limit impact load and thrust force and presented in Table 6.
The bottom of the foundation is not supported by a vertical support, which is provided
by the vertical wall for the corner arch analyzed in the previous. Consequently, it can
not be considered as ﬁxed supported. Thus, a plastic analysis is conducted in order
to derive the limiting load and thrust force for a two hinged arch, the static system is
illustrated in Figure 15b. The procedure is similar as for the ﬁxed arch, for detailed
calculations for both the hinges and ﬁxed arch see Appendix G. The limiting impact
load and thrust force for the two hinged arch is presented in Table 6.
Page 27
==PAGE:40==
4 Floating Foundation with Textile Fiber Bag
DTU Civil Engineering
Table 6: Limiting impact loads
Static system
Impact load
Thrust force
[kN]
[kN]
Fixed
128.5
37.1
Hinged
96.4
27.8
The derived limiting impact load based on a plastic analysis is considered suﬃcient for
the ﬂoating foundation.
4.6
Formwork
As stated in the previous it is crucial to adjust the material parameters according
to the resulting pressure acting on the formwork.
The hydrostatic pressure has a
counteractive eﬀect in relation to the concrete pressure, however, the resultant pressure
is still excessive. Figure 18 illustrates the elongation of the textile formwork when
concrete is cast. The unit weight of the concrete has been carefully chosen to adjust
the resulting formwork pressure according to the material properties of the formwork.
Formwork pressure
Formwork before cast
Formwork after cast
Figure 18: Resulting pressure at textile formwork
The maximum resulting formwork pressure is found to 20.38 kN/m2. See Appendix H
for calculations.
A suitable fabric is evaluated by considering the strain of a section with a lineload
of 20.38 kN m−1. The material in question must be able to resist the forces obtaining
minimal strain, while simultaneously acquiring suﬃcient strain to create a grip between
concrete and reinforcement. Additionally, the permeability and creep modulus of the
material is addressed. The elastic modulus of a suitable fabric formwork is treated in
the following.
Page 28
==PAGE:41==
4 Floating Foundation with Textile Fiber Bag
DTU Civil Engineering
4.6.1
Elastic modulus
A geotextile with woven high tenacity polypropylene yarns provide a textile fabric with
a substantial tensile strength at low strain. There are several diﬀerent compositions
of the geotextile with varying elastic modulus, ultimate tensile strength and opening
widths.
The TenCate Miraﬁ® HP-Series are geotextiles produced by woven high-
performance polypropylene. Table 7 presents an interval of ultimate tensile strengths
and strains of the TenCate Miraﬁ® HP-Series [22]. For complete technical data sheet
for HP-770 and HP-270 see Appendix I.
Table 7: Technical properties MiraﬁHP-770 and HP-270
Mechanical Property
Unit
Minimum average value
HP-770
HP-270
Tensile strength at ultimate
[kN m−1]
105.1
35.9
Tensile strength at 2% strain
[kN m−1]
22.8
7.4
Tensile strength at 5% strain
[kN m−1]
52.5
18.6
Tensile strength at 10% strain
[kN m−1]
96.3.0
-
At the location of maximum resulting formwork pressure an elongation of 10 mm per
tube is considered suﬃcient with regards to a cover layer, corresponding to a strain
of approximately 3%. Thus, it is evident that TenCate Miraﬁ® HP-Series provides a
material with suitable properties considering the elastic modulus.
4.6.2
Permeability and creep modulus
The permeability of the formwork is crucial with regards to restricting the passage
of cement which allows for an improved concrete surface by allowing the passage of
liquid increasing the water cement ratio. When considering geotextiles this property
is referred to as drainage. There are two main requirements for the drainage of the
geotextile, that is that the pore openings in the ﬁlter must be smaller than the a
maximum speciﬁed value depending on the concrete to retain the cement. Addition-
ally, the ﬁlter must acquire a suﬃcient permeability to allow a relatively free ﬂow of
water through it. Miraﬁ® geotextile is produced with a great focus on these tech-
niques rendering a suitable geotextile which can be customized for optimal ﬁltration
and retention[21]. Additionally, the composition of the Miraﬁ® geotextile provides
excellent creep resistance suitable to the application in question.
Page 29
==PAGE:42==
4 Floating Foundation with Textile Fiber Bag
DTU Civil Engineering
4.7
Connections
The following section provides a design and technical properties for the connection
assembling the formwork and textile reinforcement layers.
The connection is subjected to great forces due to the resulting formwork pressure. In
the previous section the maximum resulting pressure on the formwork was derived to
pmax = 20.38 kN/m2. The induced pressure when considering a section of the formwork
exposed to the maximum resulting formwork pressure is illustrated in Figure 19. It re-
sults in a force of P = 6.1 kN m−1 acting on the connection ﬁber yarn. See Appendix H
for calculations.
Figure 19: Resulting force at connection between textile formwork
The connection is integrated by sewing, the thread itself must be able to sustain
the induced forces.
Furthermore, the textile formwork must be able to resist the
accumulated forces in the actual overlapping of the thread and fabric. A twisted carbon
ﬁber yarn with the technical properties as listed in Table 8 is applied. The yarn is
twisted to obtain a more round cross section yielding a softer joining of materials.
Calculations considering the strength of the yarn is found in Appendix H. It is evident
that the textile formwork is the critical segment of the connection, as the carbon ﬁber
yarn acquires a very high tensile strength.
Table 8: Technical properties carbon ﬁber yarn
Cross sectional area
Tensile strength
Elastic modulus
Required area per meter
[mm2]
[MPa]
[GPa]
[mm2/m]
0.045
2000
200
3.1
Due to the high concentration of forces acting on the formwork in the connection, it is
necessary to implement reinforced segments in the fabric formwork. There are several
reinforcing systems applicable of which two are presented in the following.
Page 30
==PAGE:43==
4 Floating Foundation with Textile Fiber Bag
DTU Civil Engineering
The ﬁrst system is constructed by folding the formwork two times increasing the cross
sectional area four times. The second system is composed by weaving of carbon ﬁber
as an integrated part in the formwork in the connection, as a result the carbon yarn
will only transfer forces to the reinforcing carbon ﬁber segment in the formwork. The
tensile strength and elastic modulus are consequently signiﬁcantly increased in this
segment. The second system is illustrated in Figure 20, and applied in the present
design.
Carbon ﬁber reinforcement
Polypropylene textile formwork
Carbon ﬁber thread
max 3 mm
Max opening 0.85 mm
Figure 20: Reinforced section in sewing connection
The number of stitches and distance between them are reliant on two parameters,
namely the tensile capacity of the carbon yarn, and the inﬂuence it has on the textile
formwork and reinforcement. It is crucial that the carbon yarn only catches the carbon
reinforced segment, and it must have a maximum width of 3 mm in order to avoid
leaking of cement paste due to the fact that the force transferred from the yarn will
pull the carbon reinforcement together creating a small gap. The maximum opening
size in the textile formwork is 0.85 mm [24], this is considered acceptable with regards
to leaking. The opening acceptable before concrete starts leaking is dependent on the
concrete mix and slump. This aspect is not treated in this thesis, thus, a maximum
distance of 3 mm is assumed.
Based on the maximum forces acting on the connecting yarn and interlaying formwork,
a connection system was generated.
Page 31
==PAGE:44==
4 Floating Foundation with Textile Fiber Bag
DTU Civil Engineering
4.8
Template
In order to obtain a simple design and production it is beneﬁcial to simplify the process
and design as much as possible. Creating a template for the foundation provides a
plausible simpliﬁcation relating to production of the textile ﬁber bag. A template is
constructed for the textile formwork and ﬁber reinforcement. It is composed of two
separate segments, subsequently sewn together. The dimensions of the template are
derived in Appendix J.
Figure 21: Template for TFB
Figure 21 illustrates the external and internal layer of the two component TFB. The
individual bags are assembled by glue, hereafter they are joined by sewing in the
reinforced segment of the formwork.
Page 32
==PAGE:45==
4 Floating Foundation with Textile Fiber Bag
DTU Civil Engineering
Figure 22: Assemble of template internal layer
The design is composed by cylindrical and planar segment, the cylindrical corner side,
bottom and planar wall are relatively simple to assemble, while the spherical corners
are more complicated. There are several diﬀerent solutions on how to construct the
assemble, whereof Figure 21 presents one. The quarter sphere is assembled by three
rounded shapes illustrated in the ﬁgure as ’Sperical corner asseble’. The assemble of
the internal layer template is illustrated in Figure 22 where the lines represents the
joining sides of the template.
4.9
Summary and reﬂections upon solution
A short summary of solutions and materials are presented in the following in addition
to the ﬁnal buoyancy of the foundation, subsequently possible alternative compositions
are discussed.
The shape is determined in order to meet the prerequisites in the greatest extent pos-
sible, a circular arched bottom and corner is constructed to sustain hydrostatic loading
and a middle rectangular corner to increase adaptability and in-plane area. The form-
work is produced with a woven polypropylene geotextile with suitable permeability,
creep modulus and elastic modulus. As a result, a suﬃcient cover layer and a relative
uniform cross section along the depth of the cast is achieved. The textile ﬁber rein-
Page 33
==PAGE:46==
4 Floating Foundation with Textile Fiber Bag
DTU Civil Engineering
forcement is composed of carbon ﬁber with SBR resin, this yields a ﬂexible textile able
to conform to the shape of the fabric formwork and concrete. The cross section is based
on the URC, frame method with vertical pipes, where the restriction is achieved by
sewing of high strength carbon ﬁber yarn. To maintain a strong connection and mini-
mize inﬂicted damage in the formwork a reinforced section is implemented by weaving
carbon ﬁber in the formwork. Figure 23 presents the ﬁnal design of the TFB ﬂoating
foundation and a section of the TFB wall. The ﬁnal buoyancy of the foundation is
found to 21.036 × 103 kg, the calculations are found in Appendix K.
(a) Textile ﬁber bag element
(b) Floating foundation
Figure 23: Final design
It is evident that the greatest induced moment is located at the planar wall spanning
between the vertical stabilizing walls. Thus, it could be beneﬁcial to cast the foundation
with horizontal pipes increasing the moment capacity at this span.
The strain at the top section of the foundation is modest, indicating that a cover layer
and optimal grip might not be guaranteed at the top of the foundation. A solution
guaranteeing an optimal grip is to adapt the length of the textile reinforcement between
the connection, creating a slightly shorter segment ensuring a cover layer and grip.
Regardless, a small grip is always present based on the coarse grid of the textile, the
concrete will penetrate the reinforcement, with a minimal cover layer at the top.
A design has been derived for the TFB ﬂoating foundation based on a set of prereq-
uisites stated in the beginning of the chapter. The next chapter aims to investigate
the production process primary focusing on the beneﬁts and challenges concerning the
transport and cast.
Page 34
==PAGE:47==
5 Production Process
DTU Civil Engineering
5 | Production Process
An energy and time eﬃcient production process is a central requirement with regards
to creating a sustainable and aﬀordable product. The following will treat the produc-
tion process of a ﬂoating modular platform supported by several ﬂoating foundation
elements which was designed in the previous section.
A production process can be generalized as material and immaterial inputs, creating
a speciﬁc output. The objective is to optimize the process, implying a decrease of the
material and immaterial input without a reduction of quality concerning the output.
This optimization is conducted based on the prerequisites stated in the previous section.
There are several phases to a production process, the main phases are illustrated
in Figure 24. This section will retain the primary focus on the optimization of the
construction phase, mainly the transportation and cast. Undoubtedly, these phases
will contribute to major advantages and possibilities, in addition to illustrating the
immense potential of the construction techniques considering the textile ﬁber bag.
Figure 24: Production process main phases and sub-phases
The maintenance is not a phase included in a general production process, but is men-
tioned due to great advantages relating to the application of the TFB. The assemble
phase is considered in the next chapter where three general assemble designs are de-
rived. First oﬀ, the production phase is assessed.
5.1
Production
The production of the textile ﬁber bag is executed at a factory, whereof it is transported
to the construction site. It is of great importance that the TFB is sewn by competent
Page 35
==PAGE:48==
5 Production Process
DTU Civil Engineering
employees. A high quality should be the main focus in order to make sure that the bag
will not leak or break when the foundation is cast. If this occurs, the cast can not be
completed due to the fact that the foundation is a continuous cast, if one tear appears
during cast, all concrete is lost.
5.2
Transport
The following section emphasizes the sustainable beneﬁts related to a lightweight con-
struction in relation to transport. The transport of the TFB foundations includes car-
riage of the TFBs, concrete and required equipment for the cast by trailer or ship where
weight is the decisive factor regarding CO2 emissions. The TFB is very lightweight and
may be considerably compressed, the design of textile reinforcement decreases the self-
weight and material consumption considerably as minimal cover layer is required while
a structural eﬃcient design is obtained. Consequently, the transportation eﬃciency
is signiﬁcantly increased with regards to sustainability, availability and aﬀordability.
Table 9 presents the total weight of the textile ﬁber bag and the concrete, as well as
the total weight of the foundation and suppressed water, the calculations are seen in
Appendix K.
Table 9: Weight TFB foundation and supressed water
Weight concrete
[kg]
13.460 × 103
Weight textile ﬁber bag
[kg]
64
Total weight foundation
[kg]
13.523 × 103
Weight suppressed water
[kg]
34.559 × 103
In order to create a point of reference for comparison, an equivalent foundation is
treated in the following. Simpliﬁed calculations are conducted to obtain the weight
of the equivalent foundation, that is a steel bar reinforced concrete foundation with
the outer dimensions as a 20 ft container. The weight of the foundation and weight of
suppressed water are presented in Table 10. The calculations are seen in Appendix L
[5].
Table 10: Weight equivalent foundation and supressed water
Weight steel reinforced foundation
[kg]
29.698 × 103
Weight suppressed water
[kg]
42.588 × 103
It should be noted that these are simpliﬁed calculations, the current technologies of
ﬂoating foundations are more advanced. In spite of this, the weight is considered to be
a suﬃcient point of reference for comparison. Common technologies add EPS between
Page 36
==PAGE:49==
5 Production Process
DTU Civil Engineering
two concrete plates, or as a core in a concrete slab to increase the buoyancy. In terms
of ability to sustain imposed loads and buoyancy this is very eﬀective, regardless, when
considering material consumption and sustainability it is not beneﬁcial.
5.2.1
CO2 Emissions
The CO2 emissions from transport of the pre-cast elements and textile ﬁber foundations
are mainly dependent on weight and volume of the cargo. Undoubtedly, it is possible
to transport a considerably larger amount of TFBs than pre-cast elements for the
equivalent foundation. However, it is also necessary to transport the concrete for the
cast. For simplicity only the weight of the foundation is taken into account.
The weight of a steel reinforced foundation is presented in Table 10, and the weight of
a textile ﬁber foundation is found in Table 9. A weight reduction of 16.238 × 103 kg is
obtained by applying the TFB, this is a considerable reduction in material consumption
and weight for transportation.
The CO2 emission is derived for a cargo of ten steel reinforced-, and ﬁber reinforced
foundations individually. Table 11 presents the weight of the cargoes and the resulting
CO2 emission. There are numerous variables that will impact the emission, including
tire pressure, individual driving styles, weather and so on. The emission derived is an
average shipment emission under average conditions[11].
Table 11: Weight of ten equivalent-, and TFB foundations
Foundation
Distance
Weight
CO2 emission
[km]
[kg]
[kg]
Textile ﬁber foundation
100
135.234 × 103
1.516 × 103
Steel reinforced foundation
100
296.983 × 103
3.330 × 103
The CO2 emission from transporting ten textile ﬁber reinforcements is 54.5 % less than
from ten steel reinforced foundations which is a substantial decrease, see calculations
in Appendix M. In conclusion, by employing a TFB foundation instead of a steel
reinforced foundation a sustainable and aﬀordable transportation phase is achieved.
5.3
Cast
The casting process is one of the fundamental aspects of the concept. Performing a cast
directly in water excludes the need for cranes and other heavy machinery for transport
of the ﬁnished element and casting. There are many challenges relating to pouring
concrete directly in water, the two dominating being buoyancy, and maintaining a
speciﬁc shape.
Page 37
==PAGE:50==
5 Production Process
DTU Civil Engineering
The following section treats the challenges concerning the bracing and maintaining a
desired shape, and obtaining a suﬃcient buoyancy during cast. The objective is to
design a tangible solution for the bracing and ﬂoating elements, henceforth referred
to as pontoons. Consequently an increase of ﬂexibility and adaptability of the casting
process, and increase of time eﬃciency is obtained. Additionally, the simplicity of the
procedure is greatly increased creating new possibilities regarding the location of the
cast. As a result of the excluded need for skilled labor and machinery and the simple
transportation, there are no limits to where the production can be conducted.
5.3.1
Bracing and pontoons
First of, all essential requirements for the bracing and pontoon are deﬁned. The pon-
toons are to be made of a light material increasing the sustainability and ﬂexibility
with regards to transport. It must be possible to reuse all elements subsequent to
cast and curing. Firstly, the material applied for the pontoons is introduced and the
required buoyancy investigated.
Polyvinyl chloride, abbreviated PVC, is a synthetic plastic polymer that comes in two
basic forms, ﬂexible and rigid. In its pure of the material is very brittle, but an addition
of plasticizes makes it ﬂexible [34]. PVC fabrics are often reinforced with polyester for
support which makes it very resistant to tearing and breaking, and it provides a high
tensile strength. PVC fabrics with polyester support can develop into very compact,
distended forms which are able to sustain great forces making it desirable with regards
to sustaining high pressure [13].
It is used for inﬂatable boats, kayaks, river rafts
among other purposes. PVC is considered an applicable material for pontoons based
on the desirable technical properties with regards to the requirements.
The required volume of the pontoons are considered in the following. To obtain a
buoyant body a suﬃcient upthrust is necessary. Archimedes principle states that the
buoyancy force acting on an object is equal to the weight of the water that it displaces
[32]. Consequently, the weight of the foundation must be less or equal to the buoyancy
force. The total weight of one TFB foundation is presented in Table 9. The required
air volume of the pontoons are derived by means of Archimedes principle to 12.283 m3,
for calculations see Appendix N.
Bracing is a fundamental requirement when speciﬁc shapes are desired, shapes that are
not vertical. Thus, an analysis of the shape is conducted in order to decide the location
of the bracing. The shape of the foundation can be treated as two individual segments,
a vertical and a cylindrical. It is known that the vertical cast does not require bracing,
while the cylindrical must be ﬁxed at the boundaries.
In fabric formwork, a catenary curve is automatically generated when concrete is
poured into the formwork, hereof it deﬂects between the restraining points [4]. This
characteristic quality is illustrated in Figure 25. Figure 25b shows how a concrete pour
generates this curve when dispensed between four ﬁxed points. A catenary curve can
Page 38
==PAGE:51==
5 Production Process
DTU Civil Engineering
be approximated by a circular curve when cast with a small sag, a tendency which is
clearly illustrated in Figure 25 presenting both a small and large sag. It is evident that
Figure 25a has a more circular shape than Figure 25b.
(a) Deﬂection of membrane into catenary curves
(b) Concrete pour
Figure 25: Catenary curves in fabric formwork
The bracing is constructed in two levels, one at the very top of the foundation, and
the second at a depth 1400 mm, that is, the depth where the circular bottom begins.
When implementing the bracing above the intended circular curve the self weight of
the concrete will naturally form a catenary curve. In order to obtain a perfect circular
shape at the bottom of the foundation, additional bracing is necessary. Regardless,
this will not be included in the present design as the sag is considered small and the
bottom is assumed to conform into a circular shape.
The bracing is constructed as a two component material where the core consists of a
inﬂated PVC tube, and the shell is a steel structure. A combination of their attributes
creates a bracing where the steel provides a strong shell able to resist the induced
stresses, and the internal PVC tube increases stability and provides buoyancy. The
required dimension of the bracing in order to sustain the induced stresses is not treated
further in the present thesis, however it calls for additional analyses.
Figure 26b
illustrates the bracing and its dimensions. It is identical at both layers as presented in
Figure 26a.
Page 39
==PAGE:52==
5 Production Process
DTU Civil Engineering
(a) Foundation section
(b) Bracing dimension
Based on the required volume the dimensions of the ﬂoating elements and the bracing
are derived. Detailed calculations are found in Appendix N. Both bracing and ﬂoater
have a circular cross section. Table 12 presents the radius and volume of the elements.
Table 12: Buoyancy
Section
Radius
Volume
[mm]
[m3]
Corner bracing
50
0.045
Middle bracing
50
0.089
Floating element
550
14.222
Total
-
14.582
Buoyancy force
[kN]
137.970
The weight of the foundation and the buoyancy force provided from the pontoon and
bracing are found to 120.307 kN and 142.824 kN respectively. This results in a safety
margin of 22.517 kN which is considered suﬃcient.
The design and the location of the pontoon are derived in the following based on the
prerequisites regarding simplicity and ﬂexibility stated previously.
The pontoon is
composed of one continuous element shaped in the same manner as the foundation, it
is placed directly above the foundation. The weight of the foundation will act at the
center-line of the pontoon inducing only a vertical force as illustrated in Figure 27b. If
the center-line of the pontoon is shifted with regards to the resulting force due to the
weight of the foundation, an induced moment resulting in a rotation of the pontoon
will occur, this is illustrated in Figure 27a.
Page 40
==PAGE:53==
5 Production Process
DTU Civil Engineering
Figure 27: Location of pontoon
The foundation is cast through two inlets which are implemented at the corner arch
of the pontoon. The concrete pump is connected to the TFB while supported and
stabilized by the pontoon. Figure 28 presents the foundation with both bracing and
the ﬂoating element from all angles.
Figure 28: Foundation with pontoon and bracing
Page 41
==PAGE:54==
5 Production Process
DTU Civil Engineering
The composition of the bracing, and the required volume and shape of the pontoon
has been derived in the present section. The connection system between the pontoon
and the ﬁber bag are assessed in the following section.
5.3.2
Connection between pontoon and TFB
A connection between the pontoon and the foundation is considered in the follow-
ing. The objective is to design a connection with a uncomplicated connection and
disconnection system. Creating a simplistic design limits the required skilled labor
and machinery while increasing the ﬂexibility of the design in accordance to the set
prerequisites. The pontoon can easily be dislocated from the hardened element, and
attached to the next cast.
Constructing a continuous connection, eliminates the risk of obtaining an uneven edge
at the foundation. The uneven edges will occur if the connection is linked at points
along the edge. The self weight of the concrete would create a sag between the points,
and a considerable greater force acting at the connection points. Figure 29 illustrates
the edges of the foundation walls when the selfweight acts on the two diﬀerent connec-
tions.
Figure 29: Continuous and point connection
The connection mechanism applied to obtain a continuous connection is illustrated
in Figure 30.
It is a ’click mechanism’ consisting of two steel tubes, one which is
connected with the ﬁber bag, and one with the pontoon. The external tube open and
close around the internal tube along the edge of the foundation. This connection will
not be studied further in the present thesis, however, it requires further investigations.
Page 42
==PAGE:55==
5 Production Process
DTU Civil Engineering
Figure 30: Connection mechanism
Figure 31a presents the ﬂoater with the click connection, and two inlets for the concrete
pump. When cast, tubes are inserted through the pontoon, hereof it is attached to
the ﬁber bag.
Subsequently, the TFB is ﬁlled with concrete until fully distended.
Figure 31b presents the foundation after cast while hardening. It is attached to the
pontoon, the bracing is still in position to maintain the shape.
(a) Pontoon with connection
(b) Foudation with bracing and pontoon
Figure 31: Final design for casting
The next section bring the advantages relating to the maintenance into focus.
5.4
Maintenance
The requirement for maintenance and rehabilitation of the foundation is evaluated. By
applying textile ﬁber reinforcement the need for maintenance, and surface protection
Page 43
==PAGE:56==
5 Production Process
DTU Civil Engineering
covers are excluded. A higher durability and service life are achieved, while mainte-
nance and rehabilitation costs are eliminated as a result of the non-corroding textile
reinforced concrete.
The present chapter has conducted an investigation of the production process of the
TFB ﬂoating foundation.
A system has been created to meet the requirement for
bracing and buoyancy.
The solutions are developed in line with the prerequisites
deﬁned previously in the thesis.
A detailed design for a TFB ﬂoating foundation including the technical properties and
load bearing capacity has been developed through several investigations throughout the
thesis, ﬁnally culminating in the solution at hand. There are certain challenges that
does not illuminate through a theoretical analysis, on the basis hereof an experimental
investigation is conducted in the following chapter.
Page 44
==PAGE:57==
6 Experimental Investigation
DTU Civil Engineering
6 | Experimental Investigation
The following section assesses an experimental investigation based on the resulting de-
sign derived through the previous chapters. Prototypes are produced in order to create
a better understanding of the ﬂow system, casting and production process. Unantic-
ipated complications might arise in practice, complications which are not discovered
through the theoretical investigations. Consequently, this experimental investigation
aims to pinpoint diﬃculties and geometrical complexity of the casting process.
The experimental investigation is conducted by developing a prototype with similar
design as derived in the previous sections.
The prototype is produced with a few
characteristic diﬀerences with regards to the design developed in the previous chapter.
The vertical walls are excluded, and the QPM is employed in order to restrain the
formwork membrane.
These diﬀerences are present due to production limitations.
Nonetheless, the prototype is considered suitable with regards to the investigation in
question. Figure 32 presents the template used for the internal and external layer of
the TFB of which a scale
1
20 is applied. The template is modiﬁed in order to operate
as the new design, without the vertical walls.
Figure 32: Template for TFB
Page 45
==PAGE:58==
6 Experimental Investigation
DTU Civil Engineering
The production process consists of ﬁve main phases, that is; the production of a tem-
plate with the URC quilt point restraint, implementing bracing, ﬁnding a suitable
liquid resembling concrete, creating a set-up for the cast, and lastly casting the proto-
type.
The prototype is produced in a coarse, semi elastic fabric. The surface of the fabric is
important, owing to a decrease of ﬂow-ability during cast if a high friction surface is
employed. The restraining method is executed by connecting thin steel threads with a
speciﬁc length at a speciﬁc distance at the fabric. Figure 33 illustrates the ﬁrst phase
of the development of a prototype, the template and restraining method.
Figure 33: Phase 1
The QPM based prototype requires additional restraining bracing to achieve the spec-
iﬁed design. The bracing is placed at the top of the foundation, and above the circular
bottom as derived in the previous chapter. Circular steel restraints are implemented
at the corners and bottom. The bracing is enforced in the design externally, and con-
nected by means of point connections at the hand of needles. Figure 34 presents the
top, side and bottom view of the bracing and connection.
Page 46
==PAGE:59==
6 Experimental Investigation
DTU Civil Engineering
Figure 34: Phase 2
Knauf Uniﬂott is applied to resemble concrete, the density and slump are suitable with
regards to a cast which require a high ﬂow-ability. It is a gypsum-based material where
the setting time is greater than for a normal gypsum material [18]. This is advantageous
as it can be time consuming to cast the textile ﬁber bag without a pump, consequently,
the risk of hardening in certain sections of the cast before completion must be avoided.
The ability of the fabric to absorb water from the mix is investigated by pouring a
small amount on a piece of fabric. A high absorption ability can possibly become a
problem if the water is absorbed leaving the mix dry and disintegrated. Figure 35
presents a mix of Knauf Uniﬂott and the set up of the absorption assessment. The
absorption ability was considered adequate.
Figure 35: Phase 3
The aim is to investigate the ability to conform into a speciﬁc shape by a minimal
amount of restrictions. The setup must resemble that of a TFB cast in water, regard-
less, the gypsum can not harden in water. Thus, the resulting setup is constructed as
presented in Figure 36, suspended from restrained boundaries at the top.
Page 47
==PAGE:60==
6 Experimental Investigation
DTU Civil Engineering
Figure 36: Phase 4
Figure 37 presents the cured prototype. It is evident that the point connection creates
minor irregularities on the external phase and at the top section as expected, see
Figure 37a and Figure 37b.
There are no complications with regards to shape or
distending the TFB.
(a) Isometric view
(b) Side view
(c) Top view
(d) Bottom view
Figure 37: Prototype
In conclusion, there are no unforeseen complications regarding a cast in a suspended
TFB. It must be noted that this cannot be fully concluded based on the prototype,
as there are signiﬁcant distinction of material properties, and casting environment.
However, it is a very good indication on whether problems will arise regarding shape
and ﬂow.
Page 48
==PAGE:61==
7 Conceptual Designs
DTU Civil Engineering
7 | Conceptual Designs
The rising sea level threatens communities and forces us to explore new innovative
techniques and solutions for building with water. The ﬂoating TFB foundation have
the potential to become a future solution to the environmental challenges, such as a
housing solution for countries as the Netherlands where one third of the country lies
below sea level. With the lowest point being 6.2 m below sea level, the Netherlands
are today preventing ﬂooding by complicated drainage system, canals and pumping
stations among other initiatives [33].
A TFB ﬂoating platform can be employed in developing countries for easy housing
opportunities as well, storage of freshwater and medicine in case of crises, such as
ﬂooding. It is easy to transport, cast and assemble while ﬂexible and adaptable re-
garding location and function, additionally a high quality and durability are achieved.
These qualities are crucial in areas with limited resources and skilled labor.
The objective of this chapter is to present three tangible solutions to a modular con-
structions with an emphasis on a conceptual preliminary design with a basis on the
prerequisites created previously. The solutions are derived only considering the verti-
cal imposed loads, wave structure interaction, hydro-elastic response among other load
considerations are not assessed. Preliminary designs are derived with the objective to
present the possibilities and potential of the TFB, on the basis hereof, it is consid-
ered acceptable to only consider the vertical loads. Furthermore, a brief introduction
to relative movements and forces between ﬂoating bodies and connection systems is
presented.
(a) Platform
(b) Floating Bridge
(c) Modular housing
Figure 38: Conceptual designs
Figure 38 presents the three conceptual designs evaluated in the following. First oﬀ,
relative movement and connection systems are assessed.
Page 49
==PAGE:62==
7 Conceptual Designs
DTU Civil Engineering
7.1
Relative movements and connection systems
When creating a design incorporating several components, it is crucial to evaluate
the function of the connection joining the elements. There are numerous connection
systems allowing or prohibiting relative movements.
Restriction of movements can
result in considerable forces acting on the joint [23]. Figure 39 illustrates two ﬂoating
bodies and their relative movements treated in this chapter. There are more possible
relative movements and forces,however, they are not assessed as they are considered
prevented by the mooring system applied. The mooring system is not investigated
further in this thesis.
Relative
Relative
sway
Relative
heave
Relative
roll
surge
Relative
pitch
Figure 39: Relative movements
The diﬀerent connection systems are brieﬂy elaborated in the following.
7.1.1
Flexible connection
A ﬂexible connection is used when no restrictions are necessary. This is not considered
a structural connection, for example transport of electricity or bridges.
A ﬂexible
connection is frequently used for components with intermediate distance between them.
7.1.2
Vertical free connection
Structural ﬂoating bodies are exposed to considerable uneven vertical loads as a con-
sequence of waves and imposed live loads. With a vertical free connection a great
decrease in internal forces follows. Hereof, the connection system and ﬂoating body
can be constructed considerably lighter than with a ﬁxed connection. The vertical free
connection can only be used when there is no demand for the individual elements to
stay at the same horizontal level. The connection system can be used for elements
with both intermediate distance and no distance between them.
Page 50
==PAGE:63==
7 Conceptual Designs
DTU Civil Engineering
7.1.3
Hinged connection
A hinged connection is used when relative heave, sway and surge are restricted and
relative pitch is free. This connection is a pure normal and shear force connection,
there are no induced moments.
7.1.4
Rigid connection
A rigid connection is used when no relative movements are allowed. As a consequence,
the assembly of elements move as a rigid body with a very high stability. It is important
to note that the body must be designed to resist great internal forces when a rigid
connection system is employed.
A basic understanding of the connection systems and relative movements have been
established in this section.
The following sections treats the development of three
conceptual, preliminary designs of modular elements.
7.2
Rigid platform
A preliminary design is derived for a ﬂoating rigid platform. The function is versa-
tile ranging from ﬂoating villas and restaurants, to freshwater and medical storage in
developing countries or areas exposed to nature disasters. With a simple and ﬂex-
ible production process requiring minimal skilled labor and equipment it is suitable
for industrial as well as developing countries and remote areas. The platform may be
assembled to larger platforms, however, the connection system is not treated in this
section. The design of the platform is assessed in the following, the preliminary mod-
ular design is a very general design where no speciﬁc application area of connection
system is assigned.
7.2.1
Design
The dimensions and magnitude of buoyancy created by a number of TFB foundations
are chosen based on the application of the platform and the required buoyancy. The
present design treats a platform without a speciﬁc function, the dimensions are cho-
sen in order to produce a versatile design with an in-plane area applicable for most
functions. The dimensions 10 m × 15 m are chosen, it is supported by ﬁve foundations
yielding a buoyancy of 940 kN excluding the selfweight of the deck. The buoyancy may
be adjusted by adding more TFB foundations. The connection system between the
TFB foundation and the deck is ﬁxed in order to obtain a high stability.
The volume inside the hollow foundation can be used for storage and installations or
other desired functions. Figure 40 illutrates the rigid platform with a solid slab and a
slightly faded slab to illustrate the supporting foundations.
Page 51
==PAGE:64==
7 Conceptual Designs
DTU Civil Engineering
(a) Solid
(b) Transparent
Figure 40: Rigid platform
There are several applicable compositions for the slab in the present design. The op-
timal solution varies depending on the resources available, function and location of
construction site. As mentioned, a speciﬁc design is not derived, in order to empha-
size the high adaptability and ﬂexibility of the design. The boundaries regarding the
composition of the slab are appointed by the maximum induced moment and shear at
the largest span.
The greatest span between two foundations is 7.6 m. A design load of 7 kN/m2 corre-
sponding to the design load of a house and the selfweight of the slab when assumed
to 2.5 kN/m2, is applied and considered applicable for a range of application areas
[14]. The slab is ﬁxed along the boundary of the foundation, resulting in a maximum
moment and shear force of −33.3 kN m m−1 and 26.5 kN m−1 respectively. Thus, the
slab must be constructed in accordance to the maximum induced moment and shear
force.
The present section has derived a general design for a stiﬀplatform, the function is
highly versatile, and the production process is not deﬁnite. A speciﬁc design is not
derived, with an aim of emphasizing the ﬂexibility and adaptability of the conceptual
design. The following section presents a more explicit design, deriving a composition
with a distinct function.
7.3
Modular housing
In the majority of the world, the density of people in cities are increasing. As a con-
sequence hereof, the necessity of additional housing is increasing. There is a limit
approaching regarding the expansion of residential area, on the basis hereof it is con-
cluded that it is beneﬁcial to investigate the available water area surrounding the
cities.
A modular housing solution on the harbor side or in canals is presented in this section.
The elements are located close to land resulting in a solution excluding the need for
Page 52
==PAGE:65==
7 Conceptual Designs
DTU Civil Engineering
boat transportation, resulting in an increase of the availability of the solution. The
present section derives a detailed design with a speciﬁc application, additionally the
connection system and design of the slab is assessed.
7.3.1
Design
Each modular element is supported by three foundations, yielding a buoyancy of
564 kN. If a higher buoyancy is required an additional foundation is implemented.
The in-plane area must be applicable for housing, where dimensions of 12 m × 6.1 m
are considered suﬃcient.
There are implemented openings in the slab allowing for
usage of the inside of the hollow foundation.
A hinged connection system is achieved by connecting a hinged plate between the
modules allowing relative pitch. The system acts both as a connection system allowing
people to move between the modules and connecting them. By applying a hinged
connection the internal forces are considerably reduced, and the modules can freely
move vertically in relation to each other with varying vertical imposed loads due to
application and turbulent water. Furthermore the slabs are ﬁxed along the edge of the
foundation at the opening to create a high stability of the module.
Figure 41: Modular housing
Based on the application area a design load of 4.5 kN/m2 corresponding to the de-
sign load of a residential house is applied. The selfweight of the slab is assumed to
2.5 kN/m2. The greatest span between the rigid connection system joining slabs is 4 m.
The induced moment at the ﬁxed support is −9.3 kN m m−1, at mid-span 4.7 kN m m−1
and ﬁnally the greatest induced shear force at the support is 14.0 kN m−1
The slab design assessed is based on achieving a high ﬂexibility and simplicity. When
casting vertical TFB elements, the resulting hydrostatic formwork pressure results in a
varying cross section which is a problem when the element is employed horizontally, this
is treated in the following. The deck is 6.1 m wide, resulting in a formwork pressure
Page 53
==PAGE:66==
7 Conceptual Designs
DTU Civil Engineering
at the bottom of 47.1 kN/m2.
To attain minimal strain a high elastic modulus is
required, TenCate MiraﬁHP Series can be adapted to the objective in question, which
is to achieve an uniform cross section. A strain of approximately 4% is achieved by
applying HP770 [25] when exposed to a lineload of 47.1 kN m−1, calculations are seen
in Appendix O.
There are two possibilities to obtain an uniform cross section, ﬁrst oﬀto modify the
spacing between the connections in the formwork accounting for the elongation due to
the ﬂuctuating resulting formwork pressure. The second is to produce a formwork with
a linear increasing elastic modulus along the depth of the cast. Further studies are not
conducted in this thesis, however it is necessary in order to create a perfect uniform
cross section when casting in fabric formwork exposed to hydrostatic pressure.
A preliminary design for a modular housing system has been derived. It is a ﬂexible
simplistic system where the buoyancy may be adapted to its purpose, several modules
may be applied for one residence as there are connections allowing free movement
between them. The production is simple where all elements are cast in water with
TFB.
7.4
Floating bridge
Developing countries are in need of development and simple ﬂexible solutions as a result
of limited skilled labor resources. Hence, an increased focus on the topic is essential.
A ﬂoating bridge can serve as a connection between heavily populated communities
where conventional bridges are not suitable due to soft soil or deep waters, or at remote
locations where transportation is challenging and factories are non-existing.
The technology today is mostly applicable for areas with a high accessibility of equip-
ment and skilled labor. Reinforcement cages, formwork and cranes among other ma-
chinery are predominantly necessary in order to produce such a construction.
A preliminary design is derived for a ﬂoating bridge supported by separate ﬂoating
TFB foundations. The foundations act as pontoons spaced along the length of the
bridge.
First oﬀone of the current dominating technologies is brieﬂy introduced.
Floating bridges are today predominately constructed as concrete pontoons consisting
of an external ﬁber concrete with steel reinforcement and a core of EPS. The pontoons
are produced in modules of standard sizes, hereof they are transported and assembled
with the required connection.
The design of the bridge, the composition of a slab employing a TFB, the joints
connecting the slabs, and ﬁnally the connection system are considered in the following
section.
Page 54
==PAGE:67==
7 Conceptual Designs
DTU Civil Engineering
7.4.1
Design
As stated in the previous, the conceptual designs are constructed on the bases of the
prerequisites stated for the design of the TFB foundation. Maintaining a consistency
through the production process results in an increased simplicity of the project. On
the bases hereof, the slabs are designed and cast with a TFB, in the same manner as
the ﬂoating foundation.
The bridge is composed of two separate bridges each consisting of one lane, it is arched
shaped in order to sustain forces due to the current. Only one of the two bridges is
considered in the design as they are identical. The width of one lane is 4 m where
the design load for bridges with one lane is 8.5 kN m−1 [9]. The self weight of the
slab is not included, the detailing of the slab is not treated in this thesis, however,
the selfweight of the slab is assumed to be 2.5 kN/m2. One foundation provides a
buoyancy of 188 kN, yielding a required distance of 5 m between the center-line of the
foundations. Calculations are seen in Appendix O.
The 5 m spanning slabs are cast in TFB directly in water. To obtain a plane wall the
cast is carried out by ﬁxing one side of the TFB and pouring vertically in water. The
hydrostatic pressure causes one problem regarding the resulting slightly varying cross
section. On the basis hereof a new solution is suggested, the casting is implemented
by taking advantage of the characteristics of fabric formwork conforming to catenary
curves when cast suspended between two ﬁxed boundaries. The cast has a small sag
implying that the resulting curve can be approximated by a circular arch. Figure 42
illustrated one slab element.
Figure 42: Arched slab
The connections between the slabs and the ﬂoating foundations are rigid to prevent
all relative movements and obtain a high stability.
Consequently great forces are
induced in the elements. Regardless, the present investigation only treats the vertical
imposed loads due to traﬃc and self weight. This is considered suﬃcient in order to
render possible the application of conceptual design. Figure 43a illustrates the rigid
connection system.
In order to obtain a rigid connection between two TFB arched slabs, small high pressure
PVC pipes which can resist the concrete pressure are implemented into the TFB, see
Page 55
==PAGE:68==
7 Conceptual Designs
DTU Civil Engineering
Figure 43a. Subsequent to the setting of the concrete, the pipes are removed resulting
in holes along the edge of the slab. A ﬁxed connection is obtained by implementing
angled reinforcement bars in the holes, they are to be placed, ﬁlled and joined with the
adjecent slab creating ﬁxed ends. The joint is placed in a form joining the slabs to the
ﬂoating foundation. Lastly, the road is equalized by applying a shear resistant ﬁlling
with a top high strength coating resulting in a strong sandwich element. The sandwich
system increases the capacity of the bridge up to ten times [12], see Figure 43b.
(a) Fixed connection
(b) System arch
Figure 43: Floating bridge system
Figure 44 illustrates a 100 m long ﬂoating bridge, and Figure 45 illustrates a segment
of the sandwich arch system, the shear ﬁlling is not included in the illustration.
Figure 44: Floating Bridge
Page 56
==PAGE:69==
7 Conceptual Designs
DTU Civil Engineering
Figure 45: Floating Bridge with arched slabs
A ﬂoating bridge composed of ﬂoating TFB foundations is ﬂexible and adaptable with
a simplistic production process. The length can be adjusted and adapted to the desired
location. Generally, the TFB foundation can be optimized for its function, implying
that there are possibilities to adapt dimensions and materials. This will optimally
utilize the material composition creating a higher buoyancy, stronger connection, a
more structural and material eﬃcient element, among other advantages.
7.5
Reﬂection upon solutions
Three preliminary designs have been developed in order to render probable the appli-
cation of the ﬂoating foundation with TFB emphasizing the potential and advantages
of employing the simplistic technique of the TFB. The ﬂexible and adaptable design,
in addition to the simple and sustainable production process draws attention to the
many possibilities and the immense potential.
The dimensions, buoyancy and load bearing capacity of the foundation can be adapted
to optimally utilize the characteristics of the components depending on the application.
Such as creating a circular foundation reducing the total weight of the foundation to
obtain a higher buoyancy, or creating a larger internal volume of the foundation in
order to employ the area for residency. This customization was not treated, suggesting
that the design can be further optimized enhancing the eﬃciency according to the
application.
The three designs were derived with diﬀerent focus points. First oﬀa general design
of a rigid platform was derived with an emphasis on the versatility and possibilities of
the TFB ﬂoating platform. Secondly, a more detailed design is derived with a more
speciﬁed function where the beneﬁts of the ﬂexibility and modularity are highlighted.
Finally, a detailed design of a ﬂoating bridge is constructed. The design is derived
with an emphasis on the adaptability and vast potential of the TFB. The arched slab
elements and implemented connections present the opportunity to adapt the individual
elements to certain boundary conditions. The vast range of application of the derived
conceptual designs proves the extensive versatility and potential of the TFB.
Page 57
==PAGE:70==
8 Discussion
DTU Civil Engineering
8 | Discussion
The following discussion is structured around the design development including the
technical aspects, and the conceptual development containing the proﬁtability and po-
tential of the concept. The approach is linked to existing technologies available on
the market and how the new concept of the TFB pushes the technology of ﬂoating
structures further to increase simplicity and ﬂexibility. Hence, this discussion allows
for a further comprehensive understanding and research of the objective of the thesis.
Namely, to render probable the application of the textile ﬁber bag and the accompa-
nying casting technique.
8.1
Design development
Firstly, the method for deriving the resistance of the foundation is addressed. The
design forces are determined conservatively by means of a lower bound method, the
strip method. The load bearing capacity of the foundation when exposed to hydrostatic
pressure is derived for bending about the weak-, and strong axis at ultimate limit state.
The limiting impact load of the circular arched bottom and corner are derived by means
of a plastic analysis where the moment capacity of the cross section is conservatively
appointed that of bending about the weak axis. Based on the analyses speciﬁed, the
foundation is considered to acquire a suﬃcient load bearing capacity. The analyses
are derived in plastic state implying that the actual strength of the material is derived
allowing to obtain the strength when the elastic behavior is surpassed. As a result, a
structural and material eﬃcient cross section is achieved, consequently a sustainable
design is obtained.
The planar wall is not investigated when exposed to skew loading, this is based on
the assumption that it is shielded by surrounding elements. The bottom and corner of
the foundation are considered more exposed to impact than the planar walls. These
assumptions are considered legitimate based on the conceptual designs composed with
a relative large distance between both the planar walls of the adjacent foundation and
the edge of the construction. If a modular element is composed where the planar wall
is vulnerable to impact load, it should be designed based on a speciﬁed limit impact
load.
The design forces of the foundation are derived by means of a lower bound method,
another method rendering a more accurate estimation of the design forces and required
load bearing capacity is a numerical analysis. Conducting a numerical analysis provides
Page 58
==PAGE:71==
8 Discussion
DTU Civil Engineering
an opportunity to create a more material eﬃcient structure by applying less conserva-
tive assumptions. However, it also requires hand-calculated validations, in addition to
development of a numerical model which results in an overall time consuming process.
Based on the objective to prove the possibility of applying the TFB, it is considered
important to incorporate as many aspects of the concept as possible. There are several
challenges requiring thorough and large numbers of investigations, whereof the dimen-
sions of the cross section and the resulting load bearing capacity are considered easily
adjusted in addition to being a relatively basic analysis. Consequently, it is considered
beneﬁcial to conduct simple static calculations in comparison to a numerical analysis
in order to include other more particular challenges.
The shape and size of the foundation were determined with the reference point of a
20 ft container. This was decided in order to establish boundaries for the foundation
while maintaining the outer dimensions of this standardized measure, in addition en-
abling an easy arrangement in case of transportation by standard transport facilities.
Furthermore, the idea is to employ it as a room of the ﬁnal construction. There are
challenges regarding constructing a material and structural eﬃcient element, while
simultaneously maintaining an in-plane area large and deep enough to employ as a res-
idence room. The circular arched bottom and corners are not space eﬃcient, however
these are very resistant to hydrostatic pressure resulting in a slender material eﬃcient,
sustainable structure.
In order to either create an optimal pressure resistant and material eﬃcient foundation,
or a foundation with high in-plane area for residential purposes the dimensions can be
adjusted to either one. For instance, by creating a complete circular foundation for
increased resistance to hydrostatic pressure and reduced material consumption, or by
increasing the dimension boundaries of the 20 ft container and develop a foundation
with suﬃcient in-plane area for residency. In spite of these opportunities to fully opti-
mize for one function, the foundation was developed as an optimal combination of both
a space and resistance in order to provide ﬂexibility and adaptability as described in
the prerequisites of the concept. If the room is to be employed as residency, the design
allows for the circular bottom to be equalized and the walls extended by additional
elements as a part of the modular construction.
An experimental investigation was conducted in order to create a greater understand-
ing of how the casting technique functions when put into practice, moreover possible
geometrical challenges will elucidate, as well as irregularities at the surface. A proto-
type similar to the developed design was created, however there were certain variance
such as the restraining method and the exclusion of the vertical supporting walls. Fur-
thermore, the casting was conducted without water while suspended mainly from the
vertical walls. However, the selfweight of the gypsum is signiﬁcantly lower than con-
crete resembling the resulting formwork pressure. These variances are not considered
to weaken the credibility of the result of the investigation, this is based on the fact
that the main design is identical, in addition the diﬀerent restraining methods will
have minimal inﬂuence on the ﬂow of the liquid through the system.
Page 59
==PAGE:72==
8 Discussion
DTU Civil Engineering
8.2
Conceptual development and potential
The thesis emphasizes the potential and possibilities of the application of the TFB and
the ensuing casting technique. It is crucial to discuss the proﬁtability of the project
to provide a holistic approach to the concept. Raising the question of whether it is
proﬁtable to employ the TFB, motivates for a discussion that is crucial to reﬂect upon
when developing the product. It raises further questions such as why this concept is
more advantageous to already existing concepts, and why investors should invest time
and money in developing the concept and how the consumers will beneﬁt from it.
To summarize, the prerequisites creating the baseline of the concept are sustainability,
simplicity, modularity, ﬂexibility and adaptability. These prerequisites and how they
contribute to the motivation of employing and bringing the concept into the construc-
tion market today are treated in the following by discussing each with respects to
inter-dependencies.
The sustainability of the concept goes beyond only the design and composition and
touches a larger scale of the motivational aspects. That is, how to promote the tech-
nology of building on and with water in order to adapt to the environmental changes
and the rising sea level. Creating a technology that exposes a possibility to rethink the
way we live, allowing us to relieve space beyond the sea limit in order to create new
innovative sustainable solutions and alternatives to adapt to climate changes. Hence,
this thesis is based on the fact that the climate is changing and the need for new
methods to adapt to these changes is non-arguable. For this reason, it is highly argued
that sustainability and reducing material consumption is of high priority.
The simplicity is one of the primary focus points of the design and technique. It is de-
veloped with simple technical solutions with an objective to obtain tangible production
process without heavy machinery and skilled labor. Regardless, the foundation, mod-
ular elements and connection systems are designed with a possibility for customization
in order to render a more eﬃcient design, mainly with regards to reducing material
consumption. Although a customization of elements may to some extent be inconsis-
tent with the simplicity of the concept. This is seen when recognizing an opportunity
to customize and design elements and foundations as desired, resulting in a decreased
simplicity of the production process. Nevertheless, the customization of the product
yields a material eﬃcient product when optimally constructed with the required load
bearing capacity and function.
Now the concept is considered developed completely in line with the simplicity pre-
requisite. Consequently, the opportunity of customization is excluded, implying an
entirely standardized product and casting method. There are several additional ad-
vantages related to a complete standardization of the concept resulting in a greater
availability, reliability and aﬀordability. Essentially, these advantages are consequences
of large-scale operations, which possibly renders a more cost eﬀective concept. A mass
production with standardized units will improve the eﬃciency and lead time, since
no customization is possible. Another advantage of mass production is the possibility
Page 60
==PAGE:73==
8 Discussion
DTU Civil Engineering
to produce to stock, which will ensure that the delivery time is reduced. Thus, mass
production makes the product less adaptable though more reliable for the costumer.
To conclude, it can be argued that a standardized product and process is beneﬁcial,
regardless, the ﬂexibility and adaptability of the design when allowing customization
recognize the limitless possibilities of the TFB and ﬂoating foundation. The potential
is immense, and application area vast.
The ﬂexibility and adaptability is a large part of the concept, but to some extent
contradicting to certain aspects of the simplicity prerequisite as mentioned previously.
These two prerequisites are associated to all aspects of the concept, that is the textile
ﬁber bag as a singular concept, the TFB ﬂoating foundation, the casting technique and
the modular elements which are the base of the following discussion. The thesis mainly
focuses on the TFB when utilized as a ﬂoating foundation, nevertheless the TFB is
not limited to a speciﬁc application. The employment of the TFB and the casting
method can be expanded to other purposes, such as houses, arched elements utilizing
the catenary curve obtained by the selfweight of the concrete which was introduced in
the design of the ﬂoating bridge, or larger hollow foundations to for example marine
research among many others. The concept of the TFB and the vast possibilities related
to it and the casting method was carefully chosen to be limited to the speciﬁc function
of a ﬂoating foundation in order to render plausible the application and make it more
relatable to both investors and consumers.
As seen, the TFB concept is innovative and diﬀers from already existing technologies.
Today, a large amount of the technologies have been optimized and improved for in-
dustrial countries and their infrastructure, however, the ﬂexibility of the TFB concept
has great potential. The composition of textile reinforcement and fabric formwork are
especially suited for marine structures providing freedom from corrosion in contrast
to steel reinforcement. The cost and time related to maintenance and rehabilitation
of corrosion damaged steel reinforcement are excluded completely. In addition, it ren-
ders a lightweight and slender construction resulting in a sustainable and aesthetic
design. The transportation and casting phase of the production process are ﬂexible
and simplistic with minimal requirement for heavy machinery, material and resources.
Furthermore, it is possible to produce a package with all the necessary elements to
conduct a cast and transport it to the desired location increasing the availability of
the product.
Two techniques applied today are brieﬂy refreshed, the ﬁrst one is composed of a
solid plate with a shell of reinforced concrete and a core of EPS. The second is a
hollow foundation where three layer walls and bottom are composed of an external and
internal layer of concrete with a middle layer of EPS. Both techniques are consisting
of pre-cast elements transported to dock and into water subsequently. The application
of the TFB and existing technologies in developing, as well as industrial countries is
addressed in the following.
Considering construction projects in remote areas or developing countries where access
to machinery, factories and resources is limited. The technologies existing today are
Page 61
==PAGE:74==
8 Discussion
DTU Civil Engineering
challenging to employ in such areas, as it is not proﬁtable to transport a precast
element a stretched distance followed by an installation and lowering into water. The
simplistic design and technique of the TFB excluding the need for traditional formwork
and heavy steel reinforcement provides an easy transport and casting process. The
only requirement for the construction site is water, and access to concrete. The TFB,
pontoons and bracing can be transported by plane, helicopter, horse, ship or any
other transport method without taking up much space.
These advantages provide
opportunities to perform marine construction projects in areas not currently possible.
On the contrary, considering production in industrial countries where there are no lim-
itations on access to machinery and factories for pre-cast elements, it can be discussed
whether it is beneﬁcial to employ the TFB as substitute of existing technologies. Fac-
tories conducting large-scale production of pre-cast foundation elements are simple,
aﬀordable and available in these areas.
Due to vast research and usage, the tech-
nologies have been optimized over time yielding the most eﬃcient way to complete a
production process in these speciﬁc areas. The production process of the TFB ﬂoating
foundation was consciously chosen not to be optimized for a speciﬁc location due to
the prerequisite of ﬂexibility and adaptability, however, it is optimized for a general
use applicable for all locations.
Today, in most cases the majority of construction
companies will choose conventional methods. Regardless, the TFB technology has the
potential to disrupt already existing casting methods used in industrial countries, but
this can only be proven by further experimental and theoretical research.
Page 62
==PAGE:75==
9 Conclusion
DTU Civil Engineering
9 | Conclusion
The thesis has addressed the possibility to create a new concept with the objective to
improve and expand the use of ﬂoating structures as we know it. The concept is con-
sidering the application of a textile ﬁber bag to eﬀectively replace steel reinforcement
and conventional timber formwork, of which it has through several investigations been
rendered probable. A ﬂoating foundation with a textile ﬁber bag has been developed
in order to make it relatable for the consumer and investor in addition to supporting
the probability of the application of the textile ﬁber bag. Furthermore, the technology
of casting a ﬂoating TFB foundation directly in water has been rendered probable
through both an experimental and a theoretical approach. This conclusion will be
structured around the main ﬁndings obtained through the thesis, ﬁnally culminating
in a conclusion on a probable application of a ﬂoating foundation with a textile ﬁber
bag.
The constituent materials of the textile ﬁber bag are fabric formwork made of high
tenacity polypropylene geotextile, and textile ﬁber reinforcement of carbon ﬁber with
SBR coating. The connection between the internal and external layer is carried out
by high strength twisted carbon ﬁber yarn. The bearing capacity of the composite
material is proven suﬃcient through cross section analysis, additionally the limiting
impact load for the bottom and corner of the foundation was derived through a plastic
analysis, where the limiting load is concluded to be of suﬃcient magnitude.
The
formwork is proven suﬃcient through an analysis of the resulting formwork pressure
acting on the connection, as well as complying with the maximum allowable strain.
In conclusion, it has been proven probable to apply the textile ﬁber bag successfully
acting as reinforcement and formwork.
The casting procedure has been investigated through development of a suitable brac-
ing structure and creating a pontoon providing suﬃcient support and buoyancy for the
cast to act as a ﬂoating body. Additionally, an experimental investigation was con-
ducted producing a prototype acting as the textile ﬁber bag while the casting procedure
was carried out. The objective of the experimental investigation was to elucidate any
unforeseen challenges or complexities regarding the geometry or ﬂow system of the
concrete during cast. Based on the investigation there are no evidence on complicating
factors indicating challenges regarding the cast. However, further experimental inves-
tigations are essential to display the actual behavior of the cast due to the incoherent
relation between the technical properties of the theoretical design and the prototype.
Nevertheless, there is a strong indication of the behavior of the system, thus, as a result
it is concluded that it is of high probability that the casting procedure is conceivable.
Page 63
==PAGE:76==
9 Conclusion
DTU Civil Engineering
Three preliminary designs were developed with an emphasis on the prerequisites stated
early in the thesis. The objective is to present the possibilities and proﬁtability of
applying the ﬂoating foundation with a textile ﬁber bag and the casting method.
A rigid platform, a modular housing solution and a ﬂoating bridge were composed
where the ﬂexible, simple and innovative design shows great potential improving, or
replacing existing technology. The possibility to employ the design in remote areas
and developing countries proves the promising future of the application of the textile
ﬁber bag and the casting method.
To summarize, through several analyses it has been proven probable to apply the textile
ﬁber bag as a replacement of reinforcement and formwork for a ﬂoating foundation.
The potential and possibilities of the concept is substantial and acquires a possibility
to revolutionize, advocate, simplify and advance the technology of ﬂoating structures
and the production process.
Page 64
==PAGE:77==
10 Further work
DTU Civil Engineering
10 | Further work
The following chapter provides a baseline for further studies and investigations for fur-
ther development of the textile ﬁber bag, the ﬂoating foundation applying the textile
ﬁber bag, and the casting technique. The study maintains an emphasis on the prerequi-
sites created for the concept as they are considered important for further development.
The chapter is structured around three main focus points, ﬁrstly the textile ﬁber bag is
considered. Further studies improving the composition of the fabric, fusing the textile
reinforcement and the fabric formwork into a single layer fabric. Secondly the TFB
ﬂoating foundation is considered whereof the weight of the foundation is reduced by
implementing a core of foam concrete in the elements. Finally, the casting method is
assessed.
The potential of the textile ﬁber bag is immense, and there are certain aspects of the
design with a possibility to increase the simplicity further. Conducting further investi-
gations implementing the textile ﬁber reinforcement as an integrated part of the fabric
formwork will decrease the complexity of the production process signiﬁcantly. Eventu-
ally a production of a single layer formwork with the structural performance of textile
ﬁber reinforcement, and the permeability of the formwork geotextile is possible. In or-
der to transfer induced tensile stresses, a grip between the concrete and reinforcement
must be established. The fusion of reinforcement and formwork can create challenges
regarding obtaining an optimal grip, however, there are more complex fabric composi-
tion that can meet this requirement. First oﬀ, creating a fabric with an internal side
with a coarse composition slightly shifted out from the fabric. It is still an integrated
part, but a three dimensional pattern that enable the cement to ﬂow through the re-
inforcement. This allows the reinforcement and the subsequent mechanical properties
to manifest where required. Furthermore, another opportunity to create a grip is to
develop a fabric with controlled ﬁltration and permeability allowing a small amount of
water resistant cement to penetrate the fabric creating a grip. The penetration must
acquire a rate of ﬂow in accordance with the rate of setting of the concrete, ensuring
that the concrete has hardened when the required amount of concrete has escaped.
These are two examples of how the textile ﬁber bag can further improve by further
investigation.
Reducing the weight of the TFB ﬂoating foundation results in a higher buoyancy of
the foundation.
This can be achieved through diﬀerent approaches optimizing the
structural and material eﬃciency with regards to a speciﬁc application area. How-
ever, the following considers a reduction in weight without redesigning the foundation.
Implementing a core of foam concrete in the circular cross section reduces the weight
Page 65
==PAGE:78==
10 Further work
DTU Civil Engineering
signiﬁcantly, it is integrated by a separate pipe system, for instance as illustrated in
Figure 46. The separate pipe system is made of a waterproof fabric in order to separate
the concrete and foam concrete. The foam concrete is cast ﬁrst, whereof the concrete
is cast subsequent to hardening of the foam concrete. This will result in a lightweight
construction where the foam concrete also acts as ﬁre and sound insulation.
Figure 46: Wall segment with foam concrete core
Further investigations should include a down-scaled experimental study of the casting
method. The investigation is conducted with an identical design and material proper-
ties, this will result in a more accurate result and indication on potential complications.
Investigations of the textile ﬁber bag as a singular concept with other application areas
should also be further investigated, as the potential and ﬂexibility of the textile ﬁber
bag is extensive.
Suggestions for further research has been presented in this section. Undoubtedly there
are many other investigations that should be conducted due to the fact that the concept
is a product and technique in development.
Page 66
==PAGE:79==
11 Appendices
DTU Civil Engineering
11 | Appendices
Page 67
==PAGE:80==
A Solidian technical data sheet
DTU Civil Engineering
A | Solidian technical data sheet
The following Appendix presents the Technical Data Sheet belonging to the Textile
ﬁber reinforcement from Solidian.
Page 68
==PAGE:81==
A Solidian technical data sheet
DTU Civil Engineering
TECHNISCHES DATENBLATT
     
Fasermaterial
Fiber material
Tränkungsmaterial
Impregnation material
Form
Shape
Abmessungen
Dimensions
Kenndaten / specifications
Längsrichtung/ longitudinal
Querrichtung / transversal
Achsabstand Strang 
Axial distance
Faserquerschnittsfläche (Bewehrung)
Cross section area of the reinforcement
Faserquerschnittsfläche (Strang)
Cross section area of the strands
Garnzugfestigkeit 
Tensile strength of the roving 
Mittel
avg.
Min.
min.
Max
[mm²]
[mm]
[mm²/m]
1,81
Epoxidharz
epoxy resin
Mattenware 
panel
[m]
1,81
5,0 x 1,2 (Länge = Längsrichtung x Breite = Querrichtung)
5.0 x 1.2 (Length = longitudinal x width = transversal)
85
85
21
21
Abbildung
Figure
Material / material
Carbon 
carbon
solidian GRID Q85/85‐CCE‐21
TECHNICAL DATA SHEET
3.000
2.900
3.300
3.550
Bruchspannung
Tensile strength 
[N/mm²]
[MPa]
> 4.000
> 4.000
solidian GmbH
Sigmaringer Straße 150
72458 Albstadt / Germany
Phone +49 7431 10 31 37
Fax +49 7431 10 63 137
info@solidian.com
www.solidian.com
Max.
max.
Version / version: 170726GN
Datum / date: 26.07.2017
Änderungen vorbehalten / subject to change without notice
Hinweise / information
Verarbeitungstemperaturen und Beständigkeiten beachten, nur durch unterwiesenes Fachpersonal verarbeiten, geeignete Betonmischungen verwenden, mit 
Schutzhandschuhen und ‐brillen arbeiten. Bitte ggf. weitere Schutzmaßnahmen beachten! 
Consider working temperatures and resistance, installation only by trained staff, use suitable concrete mixtures, wear safety gloves and goggles. Please, consider additional 
protective measures.
1) Der charakteristische Wert wurde auf Basis von DIN EN 1990 aus experimentellen Untersuchungen an Rovingzugversuchen abgeleitet. Die hier angegebenen Werte
 stellen Werte für die statische Kurzzeitfestigkeit bei Raumtemperatur (20°C) dar; Einflüsse aus Dauerhaftigkeit, Dauerstandlasten, zyklischen Beanspruchungen, usw. 
sind hier nicht berücksichtigt. 
2)  The characteristic value was derived on the basis of DIN EN 1990 from experimental studies of roving tests. The values provided here represent short‐term static tensile 
strength; the influences of durability, long‐term loads, cyclic stresses etc. are not taken into consideration.  
Textilbetonbauteile unterliegen zur Zeit keinen bauaufsichtlichen Zulassungen (Normen, Richtlinien usw.). Bei tragenden Bauteilen sind Baubehörden, Prüfstatiker, 
Gutachter usw. hinzuzuziehen und länderspezifische Regelungen zu beachten (z.B. Zustimmungen im Einzelfall).
Textile concrete components are currently not subject to any building authority approvals (standards, guidelines etc.). In the case of structural  building sites, 
building authorities must be consulted with test stators, experts etc. and country‐specific regulations must be observed (e.g. approvals of specific cases).
4.050
4.400
2.500
2.500
205.000
Bruchspannung (Charakteristischer Wert)1)
Tensile strength (characteristic value) 2)
E‐Modul
Young's modulus
[MPa]
Es wird empfohlen diese Werte im Betonbauteil (vor Ort im Fertigteilwerk) zu überprüfen, um individuelle Einflüsse aus der Betonmischung zu erfassen. 
It is recommended to check these values in the concrete component (on site the prefabricated concrete plant ) in order to detect individual 
influences from the concrete mix.
220.000
solidian GmbH
Sigmaringer Straße 150
72458 Albstadt / Germany
Phone +49 7431 10 31 37
Fax +49 7431 10 63 137
info@solidian.com
www.solidian.com
Page 69
==PAGE:82==
A Solidian technical data sheet
DTU Civil Engineering
TECHNISCHES DATENBLATT
TECHNICAL DATA SHEET
 
Fasermaterial
Fiber material
Tränkungsmaterial
Impregnation material
Form
Shape
Abmessungen
Dimensions
Kenndaten / Specifications
Längsrichtung/ longitudinal
Querrichtung / transversal
Achsabstand Strang 
Axial distance
Faserquerschnittsfläche (Bewehrung)
Cross section area of reinforcement
Faserquerschnittsfläche (Strang)
Cross section area of strands
Garnzugfestigkeit 
Tensile strength of the roving 
Mittel
avg.
Min.
min.
Max
>1.500
21
[mm²/m]
87
87
[mm²]
1,85
1,85
1.500
solidian GRID Q87/87‐AAE‐21
Abbildung
Figure
AR‐Glas
AR‐glass
Material / material
[mm]
21
Epoxidharz
epoxy resin
Mattenware 
panel
[m]
5,0 x 1,2 (Länge = Längsrichtung x Breite = Querrichtung)
5.0 x 1.2 (Length = longitudinal x width = transversal)
1.580
1.300
1.400
>1.500
[N/mm²]
[MPa]
Bruchspannung
Tensile strength 
solidian GmbH
Sigmaringer Straße 150
72458 Albstadt / Germany
Phone +49 7431 10 31 37
Fax +49 7431 10 63 137
info@solidian.com
www.solidian.com
Max.
max.
Version / version: 170726GN
Datum / date: 26.07.2017
E‐Modul
Young's modulus
Bruchspannung (Charakteristischer Wert)1)
1.200
1.100
Tensile strength (characteristic value) 2)
72.000
Textilbetonbauteile unterliegen zur Zeit keinen bauaufsichtlichen Zulassungen (Normen, Richtlinien usw.). Bei tragenden Bauteilen sind Baubehörden, Prüfstatiker,
 Gutachter usw. hinzuzuziehen und länderspezifische Regelungen zu beachten (z.B. Zustimmungen im Einzelfall).
[MPa]
Änderungen vorbehalten / subject to change without notice
2)  The characteristic value was derived on the basis of DIN EN 1990 from experimental studies of roving tests. The values provided here represent short‐term static tensile 
strength; the influences of durability, long‐term loads, cyclic stresses etc. are not taken into consideration.  
Textile concrete components are currently not subject to any building authority approvals (standards, guidelines etc.). In the case of structural  building sites, 
building authorities must be consulted with test stators, experts etc. and country‐specific regulations must be observed (e.g. approvals of specific cases).
Es wird empfohlen diese Werte im Betonbauteil (vor Ort im Fertigteilwerk) zu überprüfen, um individuelle Einflüsse aus der Betonmischung zu erfassen. 
Verarbeitungstemperaturen und Beständigkeiten beachten, nur durch unterwiesenes Fachpersonal verarbeiten, geeignete Betonmischungen verwenden, mit
Schutzhandschuhen und ‐brillen arbeiten. Bitte ggf. weitere Schutzmaßnahmen beachten! 
1) Der charakteristische Wert wurde auf Basis von DIN EN 1990 aus experimentellen Untersuchungen an Rovingzugversuchen abgeleitet. Die hier angegebenen Werte
stellen Werte für die statische Kurzzeitfestigkeit bei Raumtemperatur (20°C) dar; Einflüsse aus Dauerhaftigkeit, Dauerstandlasten, zyklischen Beanspruchungen, usw.
sind hier nicht berücksichtigt. 
It is recommended to check these values in the concrete component (on site the prefabricated concrete plant ) in order to detect individual 
influences from the concrete mix.
Hinweise / information
72.000
1.750
1.850
Consider working temperatures and resistance, installation only by trained staff, use suitable concrete mixtures, wear safety gloves and goggles. Please, consider
additional protective measures.
solidian GmbH
Sigmaringer Straße 150
72458 Albstadt / Germany
Phone +49 7431 10 31 37
Fax +49 7431 10 63 137
info@solidian.com
www.solidian.com
Page 70
==PAGE:83==
A Solidian technical data sheet
DTU Civil Engineering
TECHNISCHES DATENBLATT
TECHNICAL DATA SHEET
Fasermaterial
Fiber material
Tränkungsmaterial
Impregnation material
Form
Shape
Abmessungen
Dimensions
Kenndaten / Specifications
Längsrichtung/ longitudinal
Querrichtung / transversal
Achsabstand Strang 
Axial distance
Faserquerschnittsfläche (Bewehrung)
Cross section area of reinforcement
Faserquerschnittsfläche (Strang)
Cross section area of strands
Garnzugfestigkeit 
Tensile strength of the roving 
Mittel
avg.
Min.
min.
Max
> 4.000
> 4.000
[N/mm²]
[MPa]
Bruchspannung
Tensile strength 
5,42
2.500
2.800
2.200
2.000
solidian GRID Q142/142‐CCE‐38
Abbildung
Figure
Carbon 
carbon
Material / material
Epoxidharz
epoxy resin
Mattenware 
panel
[m]
5,0 x 1,2 (Länge = Längsrichtung x Breite = Querrichtung)
5.0 x 1.2 (Length = longitudinal x width = transversal)
[mm]
38
38
[mm²/m]
142
142
[mm²]
5,42
solidian GmbH
Sigmaringer Straße 150
72458 Albstadt / Germany
Phone +49 7431 10 31 37
Fax +49 7431 10 63 137
info@solidian.com
www.solidian.com
Max.
max.
Version / version: 170726GN
Datum / date: 26.07.2017
Hinweise / information
3.300
3.500
E‐Modul
Young's modulus
180.000
180.000
[MPa]
Es wird empfohlen diese Werte im Betonbauteil (vor Ort im Fertigteilwerk) zu überprüfen, um individuelle Einflüsse aus der Betonmischung zu erfassen. 
It is recommended to check these values in the concrete component (on site the prefabricated concrete plant ) in order to detect individual 
influences from the concrete mix.
Textilbetonbauteile unterliegen zur Zeit keinen bauaufsichtlichen Zulassungen (Normen, Richtlinien usw.). Bei tragenden Bauteilen sind Baubehörden, Prüfstatiker,
Gutachter usw. hinzuzuziehen und länderspezifische Regelungen zu beachten (z.B. Zustimmungen im Einzelfall).
Bruchspannung (Charakteristischer Wert)1)
2.200
2.200
Tensile strength (characteristic value) 2)
Textile concrete components are currently not subject to any building authority approvals (standards, guidelines etc.). In the case of structural building sites, 
building  authorities must be consulted with test stators, experts etc. and country‐specific regulations must be observed (e.g. approvals of specific cases).
Verarbeitungstemperaturen und Beständigkeiten beachten, nur durch unterwiesenes Fachpersonal verarbeiten, geeignete Betonmischungen verwenden, mit 
Schutzhandschuhen und ‐brillen arbeiten. Bitte ggf. weitere Schutzmaßnahmen beachten! 
2)  The characteristic value was derived on the basis of DIN EN 1990 from experimental studies of roving tests. The values provided here represent short‐term static tensile 
strength; the influences of durability, long‐term loads, cyclic stresses etc. are not taken into consideration.  
Consider working temperatures and resistance, installation only by trained staff, use suitable concrete mixtures, wear safety gloves and goggles. Please, consider
additional protective measures.
Änderungen vorbehalten / subject to change without notice
1) Der charakteristische Wert wurde auf Basis von DIN EN 1990 aus experimentellen Untersuchungen an Rovingzugversuchen abgeleitet. Die hier angegebenen Werte
stellen Werte für die statische Kurzzeitfestigkeit bei Raumtemperatur (20°C) dar; Einflüsse aus Dauerhaftigkeit, Dauerstandlasten, zyklischen Beanspruchungen, usw. 
sind hier nicht berücksichtigt. 
solidian GmbH
Sigmaringer Straße 150
72458 Albstadt / Germany
Phone +49 7431 10 31 37
Fax +49 7431 10 63 137
info@solidian.com
www.solidian.com
Page 71
==PAGE:84==
A Solidian technical data sheet
DTU Civil Engineering
TECHNISCHES DATENBLATT
TECHNICAL DATA SHEET
 
Fasermaterial
Fiber material
Tränkungsmaterial
Impregnation material
Form
Shape
Abmessungen
Dimensions
Kenndaten / Specifications
Längsrichtung/ longitudinal
Querrichtung / transversal
Achsabstand Strang 
Axial distance
Faserquerschnittsfläche (Bewehrung)
Cross section area of reinforcement
Faserquerschnittsfläche (Strang)
Cross section area of strands
Garnzugfestigkeit 
Tensile strength of the roving 
Mittel
avg.
Min.
min.
Max
[N/mm²]
[MPa]
>1.500
>1.500
1.300
1.350
Bruchspannung
Tensile strength 
5.0 x 1.2 (Length = longitudinal x width = transversal)
[mm]
25
25
[mm²/m]
145
145
[mm²]
3,69
3,69
1.500
1.500
solidian GRID Q145/145‐AAE‐25
Abbildung
Figure
Material / material
AR‐Glas
AR‐glass
Epoxidharz
epoxy resin
Mattenware 
panel
[m]
5,0 x 1,2 (Länge = Längsrichtung x Breite = Querrichtung)
solidian GmbH
Sigmaringer Straße 150
72458 Albstadt / Germany
Phone +49 7431 10 31 37
Fax +49 7431 10 63 137
info@solidian.com
www.solidian.com
Max.
max.
Version / version: 170726GN
Datum / date: 26.07.2017
Es wird empfohlen diese Werte im Betonbauteil (vor Ort im Fertigteilwerk) zu überprüfen, um individuelle Einflüsse aus der Betonmischung zu erfassen. 
E‐Modul
Young's modulus
72.000
72.000
Hinweise / information
[MPa]
Bruchspannung (Charakteristischer Wert)1)
1.200
1.100
Tensile strength (characteristic value) 2)
1.650
1.750
Textilbetonbauteile unterliegen zur Zeit keinen bauaufsichtlichen Zulassungen (Normen, Richtlinien usw.). Bei tragenden Bauteilen sind Baubehörden, Prüfstatiker,
Gutachter usw. hinzuzuziehen und länderspezifische Regelungen zu beachten (z.B. Zustimmungen im Einzelfall).
Verarbeitungstemperaturen und Beständigkeiten beachten, nur durch unterwiesenes Fachpersonal verarbeiten, geeignete Betonmischungen verwenden, mit 
Schutzhandschuhen und ‐brillen arbeiten. Bitte ggf. weitere Schutzmaßnahmen beachten! 
1) Der charakteristische Wert wurde auf Basis von DIN EN 1990 aus experimentellen Untersuchungen an Rovingzugversuchen abgeleitet. Die hier angegebenen Werte
 stellen Werte für die statische Kurzzeitfestigkeit bei Raumtemperatur (20°C) dar; Einflüsse aus Dauerhaftigkeit, Dauerstandlasten, zyklischen Beanspruchungen, usw.
sind hier nicht berücksichtigt. 
Textile concrete components are currently not subject to any building authority approvals (standards, guidelines etc.). In the case of structural building sites, 
building authorities must be consulted with test stators, experts etc. and country‐specific regulations must be observed (e.g. approvals of specific cases).
2)  The characteristic value was derived on the basis of DIN EN 1990 from experimental studies of roving tests. The values provided here represent short‐term static tensile 
strength; the influences of durability, long‐term loads, cyclic stresses etc. are not taken into consideration.  
Änderungen vorbehalten / subject to change without notice
It is recommended to check these values in the concrete component (on site the prefabricated concrete plant ) in order to detect individual 
influences from the concrete mix.
Consider working temperatures and resistance, installation only by trained staff, use suitable concrete mixtures, wear safety gloves and goggles. Please, consider 
additional protective measures.
solidian GmbH
Sigmaringer Straße 150
72458 Albstadt / Germany
Phone +49 7431 10 31 37
Fax +49 7431 10 63 137
info@solidian.com
www.solidian.com
Page 72
==PAGE:85==
B Design forces
DTU Civil Engineering
B | Design forces
The following appendix assesses the derivation of the design forces of the ﬂoating
foundation when exposed to hydrostatic pressure.
Page 73
==PAGE:86==
Appendix -
Design forces
The maximum moments acting on the wall section of the foundation are derived 
in the following. The lower bound method, the strip method is applied. The 
planar wall is considered. The pressure is considered as a UDL with a magnitude 
as the average value of the hydrostatic pressure. 
Span
≔
Ls
3650 mm
mm
mm
mm
Pressure 
≔
qbottom
=
⋅
1400 mm
mm
mm
mm 9.81 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m3
0.014 MPa
MPa
MPa
MPa
≔
P
=
―――
qbottom
2
0.007 MPa
MPa
MPa
MPa
＝
P
P1
Critical moment mid-span
≔
MM
=
⋅
⋅
―
1
8
P Ls
2
11.436 ―――
⋅
kN
kN
kN
kN m
m
Shear support
≔
VS
=
⋅
⋅
―
1
2
qbottom Ls
25.065 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m
Figure 1: Strip method one way slab
Page 1 of 1
B Design forces
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 74
==PAGE:87==
C Moment capacity about x-axis
DTU Civil Engineering
C | Moment capacity about x-axis
The following appendix conducts a cross section analysis in ultimate limit state deriving
the ultimate moment and shear capacity for bending about x-axis.
Page 75
==PAGE:88==
Appendix -
Bearing capacity wall section, about x-axis
The bearing capacity per meter of the wall is derived when subjected to a 
moment about x-axis in Figure 1.
Figure 1: Wall cross section, bending about x-axis
Radius circular segment
≔
R
250 mm
mm
mm
mm
Height circular segment
≔
hc
50 mm
mm
mm
mm
Height cross section
≔
h
150 mm
mm
mm
mm
Height effective cross section
≔
he
100 mm
mm
mm
mm
Width one circular segment
≔
a
300 mm
mm
mm
mm
Number of segments per 
meter
≔
n
=
――
1 m
a
3.333
Concrete compression 
strength 
≔
fcd
―――
20 MPa
MPa
MPa
MPa
1.45
Fiber yield strength 
≔
fyd
――――
2000 MPa
MPa
MPa
MPa
1.2
The paramters are illustrated in Figure 2
Page 1 of 3
C Moment capacity about x-axis
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 76
==PAGE:89==
Figure 2: Cross section parameters, bending about x-axis
The circular segment of the concrete vary depending on the depth of the 
compression zone. It is solved by applying equirlibrium. 
. 
＝
⋅
As fyd
⋅
Ac fcd
Where 
＝
Ac
⋅
n ⎛
⎜⎝
−
⋅
R2 acos⎛
⎜⎝
―――
((
−
R
x))
R
⎞
⎟⎠
⋅
((
−
R
x))
‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾
−
⋅
⋅
2 R x
x2 ⎞
⎟⎠
Depth compression zone 
concrete
≔
x
⋅
0.8 32.6 mm
mm
mm
mm
Concrete in compression 
area per meter
≔
Ac
⋅
n ⎛
⎜⎝
−
⋅
R2 acos⎛
⎜⎝
―――
((
−
R
x))
R
⎞
⎟⎠
⋅
((
−
R
x))
‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾
−
⋅
⋅
2 R x
x2 ⎞
⎟⎠
=
Ac
13027.127 mm
mm
mm
mm2
Degrees compression circular 
segment
≔
θcd
=
⋅
2 acos⎛
⎜⎝
――
−
R
x
R
⎞
⎟⎠
52.808 deg
deg
deg
deg
≔
θcd2
=
――
θcd
2
0.461
The center of gravity of the concrete in compression are derived
≔
cgc
=
−
R
――――――
⋅
⋅
4 R sin⎛⎝θcd2⎞⎠
3
⋅
3 ⎛⎝
−
θcd
sin⎛⎝θcd⎞⎠⎞⎠
15.6 mm
mm
mm
mm
Degrees of circular segment
≔
θfd
73.74 deg
deg
deg
deg
≔
θfd2
=
――
θfd
2
0.644 rad
rad
rad
rad
Arch length circular segment
≔
sf
=
⋅
R θfd
321.751 mm
mm
mm
mm
Page 2 of 3
C Moment capacity about x-axis
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 77
==PAGE:90==
Area textile reinforcement 
per meter
≔
Af
=
⋅
140 mm
mm
mm
mm ⎛⎝
⋅
⋅
n sf 0.001⎞⎠
150.151 mm
mm
mm
mm2
The tensile textile reinfrocement are assumed active. The center of gravity for the 
circular segment of the fiber reinforcement are found
≔
cgf
=
−
R
――――――
⋅
⋅
4 R sin⎛⎝θfd2⎞⎠
3
⋅
3 ⎛⎝
−
θfd
sin⎛⎝θfd⎞⎠⎞⎠
29.818 mm
mm
mm
mm
Internal moment arm
≔
z
=
−
−
h
cgc
cgf
104.582 mm
mm
mm
mm
Finally, the moment bearing 
capacity is found to
≔
MRd
=
⋅
⋅
Af fyd z
26.172
⋅
kN
kN
kN
kN m
Page 3 of 3
C Moment capacity about x-axis
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 78
==PAGE:91==
D Moment capacity about y-axis
DTU Civil Engineering
D | Moment capacity about y-axis
The following appendix presents a cross section analysis in ultimate limit state deriving
the ultimate moment and shear capacity for bending about y-axis.
Page 79
==PAGE:92==
Appendix -
Bearing capacity wall section, about y-axis
The bearing capacity is derived per running meter of the wall for bending 
about y-axis, as illustrated in Figure 1. The top circular section of the cross 
section is neglected as its contributiont cannot be guaranteed. Thus, a 
conservative calculation is conducted. 
Figure 1: Wall section considered
Radius circular segment
≔
R
250 mm
mm
mm
mm
Height circular segment
≔
hc
50 mm
mm
mm
mm
Height cross section
≔
h
150 mm
mm
mm
mm
Height effective cross section
≔
he
100 mm
mm
mm
mm
Width one circular segment
≔
a
300 mm
mm
mm
mm
Degrees of circular segment
≔
θfd
73.74 deg
deg
deg
deg
≔
θfd2
=
――
θfd
2
0.644 rad
rad
rad
rad
Arch length circular segment
≔
sf
=
⋅
R θfd
321.751 mm
mm
mm
mm
Concrete compression 
strength 
≔
fcd
―――
20 MPa
MPa
MPa
MPa
1.45
Fiber yield strength 
≔
fyd
――――
2000 MPa
MPa
MPa
MPa
1.2
Cross sectional area fiber per 
meter
≔
Af
⋅
140 mm
mm
mm
mm 0.001
Page 1 of 2
D Moment capacity about y-axis
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 80
==PAGE:93==
The tensile textile reinfrocement are assumed active. The center of gravity for the 
circular segment of the fiber reinforcement are found
≔
cgf
=
−
R
――――――
⋅
⋅
4 R sin⎛⎝θfd2⎞⎠
3
⋅
3 ⎛⎝
−
θfd
sin⎛⎝θfd⎞⎠⎞⎠
29.818 mm
mm
mm
mm
The depth of the concrete compression zone is found by means of equilibrium 
considerations
. 
＝
⋅
⋅
⋅
Af n sf fyd
⋅
⋅
⋅
n a x fcd
The equation of equilibrium is solved, whereof the depth of compression zone is 
found to 
≔
x
⋅
0.8 18.4 mm
mm
mm
mm
The area of concrete in 
compression
≔
Ac
=
⋅
x 1 m
⎛⎝
⋅
1.472 104 ⎞⎠mm
mm
mm
mm2
Internal moment arm
≔
z
=
−
−
he
―
x
2
cgf
62.822 mm
mm
mm
mm
Finally, the moment bearing 
capacity is found to
≔
MRd
=
⋅
⋅
Af fyd z
14.658 ―――
⋅
kN
kN
kN
kN m
m
Page 2 of 2
D Moment capacity about y-axis
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 81
==PAGE:94==
E Shear capacity
DTU Civil Engineering
E | Shear capacity
The shear capacity of the TFB wall is derived in the following Appendix.
Page 82
==PAGE:95==
Appendix -
Shear capacity for cross section without shear reinforcement
The shear reinforcement of the cross section is investigated for both x-axis and y-
axis. It is considered without shear reinforcement, deriving a conservative result. 
The shear capacity is derived in accordance to Eurocode 2, DS/EN 1992-1-1.
Figure 1: Wall section, bending about x-axis
Figure 2: Wall section, bending about y-axis
Elastic modulus carbon fiber
≔
Ef
200 GPa
GPa
GPa
GPa
Elastic modulus concrete
≔
Ec
18 GPa
GPa
GPa
GPa
Yield strength fiber
≔
fyd
=
――――
2000 MPa
MPa
MPa
MPa
1.2
⎛⎝
⋅
1.7 103 ⎞⎠MPa
MPa
MPa
MPa
Partial coefficient reinforced 
concrete
≔
γc
1.45
Charakteristic compression 
strength concrete
≔
fck
20 MPa
Design compression strength 
concrete
≔
fcd
=
――
fck
γc
13.8
MPa
Cross sectional area tensile 
reinforcement per meter
≔
Afl
150 mm
mm
mm
mm2
Page 1 of 3
E Shear capacity
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 83
==PAGE:96==
Center of gravity 
compression zone, figure 1
≔
cgc1
15.6 mm
mm
mm
mm
Center of gravity 
compression zone, Figure 2
≔
cgc2
=
――――
18.4 mm
mm
mm
mm
2
9.2 mm
mm
mm
mm
Center of gravity fiber 
reinforcement
≔
cgf
29.818 mm
mm
mm
mm
Distance from top fiber to center of gravity fiber reinforcent 
Figure 1
≔
d1
=
−
150 mm
mm
mm
mm
cgf
120.2 mm
mm
mm
mm
Figure 2
≔
d2
=
−
100 mm
mm
mm
mm
cgf
70.2 mm
mm
mm
mm
Concidering shear capacity 
per meter, smallest width of 
cross section
≔
bw
1000 mm
mm
mm
mm
Concrete stress from from 
normal force, prestress or 
load
≔
σcp
=
⋅
0.2 fcd
2.8
MPa
≔
k
=
min
⎛
⎜
⎝
,
+
1
‾‾‾‾‾
――
200
1000
2
⎞
⎟
⎠
1.4
≔
ρl1
=
min
⎛
⎜
⎝
,
――
Afl
⋅
bw d1
0.02
⎞
⎟
⎠
⋅
1.2 10−3
≔
ρl2
=
min
⎛
⎜
⎝
,
――
Afl
⋅
bw d2
0.02
⎞
⎟
⎠
⋅
2.1 10−3
≔
VRd11
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
⎛
⎜
⎜⎝
+
⋅
⋅
――
0.18
γc
k ⎛⎝
⋅
⋅
100 ρl1 fck⎞⎠
―
1
3
⋅
0.15 σcp
⎞
⎟
⎟⎠
bw d1 MPa
MPa
MPa
MPa
79 kN
kN
kN
kN
≔
VRd12
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
⎛
⎜
⎜⎝
+
⋅
⋅
――
0.051
γc
k
―
3
2
‾‾‾
fck
⋅
0.15 σcp
⎞
⎟
⎟⎠
bw d1 MPa
MPa
MPa
MPa
82.6 kN
kN
kN
kN
Page 2 of 3
E Shear capacity
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 84
==PAGE:97==
The shear capacity for bending about x-axis is thus found to
≔
VRd1
=
max⎛⎝
,
VRd11 VRd12⎞⎠
82.6 kN
kN
kN
kN
≔
VRd21
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
⎛
⎜
⎜⎝
+
⋅
⋅
――
0.18
γc
k ⎛⎝
⋅
⋅
100 ρl2 fck⎞⎠
―
1
3
⋅
0.15 σcp
⎞
⎟
⎟⎠
bw d2 MPa
MPa
MPa
MPa
49.5 kN
kN
kN
kN
≔
VRd22
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
⎛
⎜
⎜⎝
+
⋅
⋅
――
0.051
γc
k
―
3
2
‾‾‾
fck
⋅
0.15 σcp
⎞
⎟
⎟⎠
bw d2 MPa
MPa
MPa
MPa
48.3 kN
kN
kN
kN
The shear capacity for bending about y-axis is thus found to
≔
VRd2
=
max⎛⎝
,
VRd21 VRd22⎞⎠
49.5 kN
kN
kN
kN
Page 3 of 3
E Shear capacity
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 85
==PAGE:98==
F Normal reinforced concrete
DTU Civil Engineering
F | Normal reinforced concrete
A normal reinforced cross section is investigated in the following Appendix.
Page 86
==PAGE:99==
Appendix -
Normal reinforced cross section
The reinforcement ratio of the cross section is investigated, if it is normal, under or 
over reinforcemed. 
The requirement for normal reinforced cross section are
There are different conditions for bending about x-, and y-axis. Both situations are 
illustrated in Figure 1 and 2 respectively.
<
<
εyd
εf
εuk
Figure 1: Wall section, bending about x-axis
Figure 2: Wall section, bending about y-axis
Ultimate compressive strain 
concrete
≔
εcu3
⋅
3.5 10−3
Elastic modulus carbon fiber
≔
Ef
200 GPa
GPa
GPa
GPa
Elastic modulus concrete
≔
Ec
18 GPa
GPa
GPa
GPa
Yield strength fiber
≔
fyd
=
――――
2000 MPa
MPa
MPa
MPa
1.2
⎛⎝
⋅
1.667 103 ⎞⎠MPa
MPa
MPa
MPa
Compression strength 
concrete
≔
fcd
―――
20 MPa
MPa
MPa
MPa
1.45
Page 1 of 2
F Normal reinforced concrete
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 87
==PAGE:100==
Center of gravity 
compression zone, figure 1
≔
cgc1
15.6 mm
mm
mm
mm
Center of gravity 
compression zone, Figure 2
≔
cgc2
=
――――
18.4 mm
mm
mm
mm
2
9.2 mm
mm
mm
mm
Center of gravity fiber 
reinforcement
≔
cgf
29.818 mm
mm
mm
mm
Distance from top fiber to center of gravity fiber reinforcent 
Figure 1
≔
d1
=
−
150 mm
mm
mm
mm
cgf
120.182 mm
mm
mm
mm
Figure 2
≔
d2
=
−
100 mm
mm
mm
mm
cgf
70.182 mm
mm
mm
mm
The yield strain of the reinforcement 
≔
εyd
=
――
fyd
Ef
0.008
Strain in reinforcement for 
bending about x-axis
≔
εf1
=
⋅
εcu3
⎛
⎜
⎝
―――
−
d1
cgc1
cgc1
⎞
⎟
⎠
0.023
Strain in reinforcement for 
bending about x-axis
≔
εf2
=
⋅
εcu3
⎛
⎜
⎝
―――
−
d2
cgc2
cgc2
⎞
⎟
⎠
0.023
Characteristic ultimate strain 
reinforcement
≔
εuk
⋅
5 10−2
Moment about x axis, Figure 1
=
<
<
εyd
εf1
εuk
1
OK
Moment about y-axis, Figure 2
=
<
<
εyd
εf2
εuk
1
OK
Page 2 of 2
F Normal reinforced concrete
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 88
==PAGE:101==
G Limiting impact load
DTU Civil Engineering
G | Limiting impact load
The following appendix assesses the derivation of the limiting impact load and thrust
force by means of a plastic analysis for hinged and ﬁxed circular arched element. The
hinged element is considered as the circular arched bottom of the ﬂoating foundation,
and the ﬁxed is considered as the circular arched corner of the ﬂoating foundation.
Page 89
==PAGE:102==
Appendix -
Plastic analysis hinges and fixed arch
The limiting impact load is derived for the corner element and bottom element 
considered as a fixed and hinged arch respectively. The static system is presented in 
Figure 1. First off the fixed element is considered. 
Figure 1: Fixed and hinged circular arched elements. 
Figure 2 present the location of the plastic hinges and the resulting moment 
diagram 
Parameters
Width of arch 
≔
l
2440 mm
mm
mm
mm
Distance to point a
≔
a
=
⋅
―
1
4
l
610 mm
mm
mm
mm
Distance to point d
≔
d
=
⋅
―
3
4
l
⎛⎝
⋅
1.83 103 ⎞⎠mm
mm
mm
mm
Distance to point c
≔
c
=
⋅
―
1
4
l
610 mm
mm
mm
mm
Moment capacity of the cross 
section
≔
My
14.7 ―――
⋅
kN
kN
kN
kN m
m
Height arch
≔
f
1220 mm
mm
mm
mm
Radius arch
≔
R
1220 mm
mm
mm
mm
The height at the arch as a 
function of x
≔
y((x))
‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾
−
R2
⎛
⎜⎝
−
―
l
2
x⎞
⎟⎠
2
Page 1 of 4
G Limiting impact load
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 90
==PAGE:103==
Plastic analysis fixed arch
The plastic analysis of a fixed arch results in a three times statically indeterminate 
system, implying that four plastic hinges leads to failure
The two plastic hinges are 
loacted at the supports, giving
≔
MA
My
≔
MB
My
Figure 2: Moment diagram and plastic hinges
The third plastic hinge is loacted at position C, the yield moment is given by
＝
＝
MC
−
−
M0C
MHC
MA
My
where 
is the moment due to the impact load 
, and 
is the 
M0C
Plim
MHC
moment due to the thrust force. The individual moments are defined in the 
following
Page 2 of 4
G Limiting impact load
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 91
==PAGE:104==
≔
M0C⎛⎝Plim⎞⎠
⋅
Plim
⎛
⎜⎝
――
⋅
a d
l
⎞
⎟⎠
≔
MHC((H))
⋅
H y((a))
Resulting in a plastic hinge at point C given by
＝
＝
MC
+
−
−
M0C⎛⎝Plim⎞⎠
MHC((H))
⋅
MA ―
2
3
⋅
MB ―
1
3
My
The fourth plastic hinge is loacated at point D. It is given by the following equation
＝
＝
MD
+
−
M0D
MHD
MB
My
where 
is the moment due to the impact load 
, and 
is the moment 
M0D
Plim
MHD
due to the thrust force. The individual moments are defined in the following
＝
M0D⎛⎝Plim⎞⎠
⋅
M0C ―
c
d
＝
MHD((H))
⋅
H y((c))
The final plastic moment acting at point D is given by
＝
MD
−
+
−
M0D⎛⎝Plim⎞⎠
MHD((H))
⋅
MB ―
2
3
⋅
MA ―
1
3
The system is solved for 
and 
by 
Plim
H
＝
MD
MC
The resulting limiting impact load and thrust force if found to
Limiting impact load
≔
Plim
128.52 kN
kN
kN
kN
Thrust force
≔
H
37.1 kN
kN
kN
kN
Page 3 of 4
G Limiting impact load
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 92
==PAGE:105==
Plastic analysis hinged arch
A plastic analysis is conducted for a hinged arch whereof the limiting impact load 
and thrust force is derived. The arch is one time statically indeterminate, implying 
that two plastic hinges are generated leading to failure. 
The first plastic hinge is located in position C, given by
＝
＝
MC
−
M0C
MHC
My
The individual moments are defined in the following
＝
M0C⎛⎝Plim⎞⎠
――
⋅
a b
2
＝
MHC((H))
⋅
H y((a))
The second plastic hinge is located at point D, given by 
＝
＝
MD
−
M0D
MHD
−My
The individual moments are defined in the following
＝
M0D⎛⎝Plim⎞⎠
⋅
M0C ―
c
d
＝
MHD((H))
⋅
H y((c))
The final limiting impact load and thrust force is solved by 
＝
MD
MC
Limiting impact load
≔
Plim
96.4 kN
kN
kN
kN
Thrust force
≔
H
27.8 kN
kN
kN
kN
Page 4 of 4
G Limiting impact load
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 93
==PAGE:106==
H Formwork
DTU Civil Engineering
H | Formwork
The following appendix assesses the detailing of the formwork. The sewed connection
of carbon ﬁber yarn is investigated.
Page 94
==PAGE:107==
Appendix -
Formwork detailing
The detailing of the formwork and the connection is considered in the following. 
The maximum formwork pressure given by the resulting 
formworkpressure at the greatest depth of the foundation
Unit weight concrete
≔
ρc
=
⋅
1800 ――
kg
kg
kg
kg
m3
g
17.652 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m3
Unit weight water
≔
ρw
9.81 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m3
Greatest depth of foundation
≔
d
2600 mm
mm
mm
mm
Maximum resuting formwork 
pressure
≔
pmax
=
⋅
⎛⎝
−
ρc
ρw⎞⎠d
20.4 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
The sewing thread connection the two texile formwork fabric are subjected to a 
force 
≔
P
=
⋅
pmax 300 mm
mm
mm
mm
6.1 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m
A carbon yarn with the following technical properties is used
NB: no actual thread was found, thus, the values are assumed values
Page 1 of 2
H Formwork
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 95
==PAGE:108==
Diameter yarn
≔
d
0.24 mm
mm
mm
mm
Cross sectional area yarn
≔
A
=
⋅
π ⎛
⎜⎝
―
d
2
⎞
⎟⎠
2
0.045 mm
mm
mm
mm2
Design yield strength carbon 
fiber yarn
≔
fyd
2000 MPa
MPa
MPa
MPa
Elsatic modulus carbon fiber 
yarn
≔
E
200 GPa
GPa
GPa
GPa
Total required cros sectional 
area carbon yarn
≔
Amin
=
――
P
fyd
3.058 ――
mm
mm
mm
mm2
m
Required number of stiches 
per meter
≔
n
=
――
Amin
A
67.605 ―
1
m
The maximum pressure acting on the fabric formwork was derived. Additionally 
was the connection investigated when the sewing is employed by means of 
carbon fiber yarn. The required cross sectional area of the carbon fiber yarn per 
meter, and number of stiches per meter was derived as well. 
Page 2 of 2
H Formwork
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 96
==PAGE:109==
I TenCate Miraﬁ® HP-Series Technical Data Sheet
DTU Civil Engineering
I | TenCate Miraﬁ® HP-Series Tech-
nical Data Sheet
The following Appendix presents the Technical Data Sheet belonging to the woven
polypropylene geotextile from TenCate Miraﬁ®.
Page 97
==PAGE:110==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
365 South Holland Drive 
Tel   706 693 2226 
 
Fax 706 693 4400 
Pendergrass, GA 30567 
Tel   888 795 0808 
 
www.tencate.com 
 
FGS000117 
ETQR35 
TENCATE GEOSYNTHETICS 
Americas 
GAI-LAP-25-97 
 
 
 
 
Mirafi® HP270 geotextile is composed of high-tenacity polypropylene yarns, which are 
woven into a network such that the yarns retain their relative position.  Mirafi® HP270 
geotextile is inert to biological degradation and resistant to naturally encountered chemicals, 
alkalis, and acids. 
 
TenCate Geosynthetics Americas Laboratories are accredited by Geosynthetic 
Accreditation Institute – Laboratory Accreditation Program (GAI-LAP).  NTPEP Listed 
 
Mechanical Properties 
Test Method 
Unit 
Minimum Average 
Roll Value 
MD 
CD 
Tensile Strength (at ultimate) 
ASTM D4595 
lbs/ft (kN/m) 
2640 (38.5) 
2460 (35.9) 
Tensile Strength (at 2% strain) 
ASTM D4595 
lbs/ft (kN/m) 
504 (7.4) 
600 (8.8) 
Tensile Strength (at 5% strain) 
ASTM D4595 
lbs/ft (kN/m) 
1272 (18.6) 
1440 (21.0) 
 
 
 
Minimum Roll Value 
Flow Rate 
ASTM D4491 
gal/min/ft2 
(l/min/m2) 
40 (1630) 
Permittivity 
ASTM D4491 
sec-1 
0.6 
 
 
 
Maximum Opening Size 
Apparent Opening Size (AOS)  
ASTM D4751 
U.S. Sieve (mm) 
30 (0.60) 
 
 
 
Typical Test Value 
Pore Size 0951 
ASTM D6767 
microns 
386 
Pore Size 0501 
ASTM D6767 
microns 
295 
 
 
 
Minimum Test Value 
Factory Sewn Seam 
ASTM D4884 
lbs/ft (kN/m) 
1260 (18.4) 
UV Resistance (at 500 hours) 
ASTM D4355 
% strength 
retained 
80 
 
1 Based on Third Party Testing 
 
Physical Properties 
Unit 
Roll Size 
Roll Dimensions (width x length) 
ft (m) 
15 x 300 
(4.5 x 91)  
17 x 375 
(5.2 x 114) 
Roll Area 
yd2 (m2) 
500 (418) 
708 (592) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer:  TenCate assumes no liability for the accuracy or completeness of this information or for the ultimate use by the purchaser.  TenCate 
disclaims any and all express, implied, or statutory standards, warranties or guarantees, including without limitation any implied warranty as to 
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose or arising from a course of dealing or usage of trade as to any equipment, materials, or information 
furnished herewith.  This document should not be construed as engineering advice. 
 
Mirafi® is a registered trademark of Nicolon Corporation.                                                          Copyright © 2015 Nicolon Corporation.  All Rights Reserved. 
Mirafi® HP270 
I TenCate Miraﬁ® HP-Series Technical Data Sheet
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 98
==PAGE:111==
 
365 South Holland Drive 
Tel   706 693 2226  
Fax 706 693 4400 
Pendergrass, GA 30567 
Tel   888 795 0808  
www.tencate.com 
FGS000813 
ETQR3 
TENCATE GEOSYNTHETICS 
Americas 
GAI-LAP-25-97 
 
 
Mirafi® HP770 
 
Mirafi® HP770 geotextile is composed of high-tenacity polypropylene yarns, which are woven 
into a network such that the yarns retain their relative position.  Mirafi® HP770 geotextile is inert 
to biological degradation and resistant to naturally encountered chemicals, alkalis, and acids. 
 
TenCate Geosynthetics Americas is accredited by Geosynthetic Accreditation Institute – 
Laboratory Accreditation Program (GAI-LAP).    
 
Mechanical Properties 
Test Method 
Unit 
Minimum Average  
Roll Value 
MD 
CD 
Tensile Strength (at ultimate) 
ASTM D4595 
lbs/ft (kN/m) 
7200 (105.1)  
5760 (84.0) 
Tensile Strength (at 2% strain) 
ASTM D4595 
lbs/ft (kN/m) 
1370 (20.0) 
1560 (22.8) 
Tensile Strength (at 5% strain) 
ASTM D4595 
lbs/ft (kN/m) 
3600 (52.5) 
3600 (52.5) 
Tensile Strength (at 10% strain) 
ASTM D4595 
lbs/ft (kN/m) 
 6600 (96.3) 
Achieves 
Ultimate prior to 
10% 
 
 
 
Minimum Roll Value 
Flow Rate 
ASTM D4491 
gal/min/ft2 (l/min/m2) 
65 (2648) 
Permittivity 
ASTM D4491 
sec-1 
0.9 
 
Maximum Opening Size 
Apparent Opening Size (AOS) 
ASTM D4751 
U.S. Sieve (mm) 
20 (0.85) 
 
Minimum Test Value 
Factory Sewn Seam 
ASTM D4884 
lbs/ft (kN/m) 
3000 (43.8) 
UV Resistance (at 500 hours) 
ASTM D4355 
% strength retained 
80 
 
 
Physical Properties 
Unit 
Roll Size / Weight 
Roll Dimensions (width x width) 
ft (m) 
15 x 300 (4.5 x 91) 
Roll Area 
yd2 (m2) 
500 (418) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer:  TenCate assumes no liability for the accuracy or completeness of this information or for the ultimate use by the purchaser.  TenCate disclaims any 
and all express, implied, or statutory standards, warranties or guarantees, including without limitation any implied warranty as to merchantability or fitness for a 
particular purpose or arising from a course of dealing or usage of trade as to any equipment, materials, or information furnished herewith.  This document should 
not be construed as engineering advice. 
 
 
Mirafi® is a registered trademark of Nicolon Corporation.                                                                    Copyright © 2015 Nicolon Corporation.  All Rights Reserved. 
 
I TenCate Miraﬁ® HP-Series Technical Data Sheet
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 99
==PAGE:112==
J Dimensions template
DTU Civil Engineering
J | Dimensions template
The following Appendix assesses the derivation of the dimensions of the template for
the textile ﬁber bag.
Page 100
==PAGE:113==
Appendix -
Dimensions Template
The dimensions of the template are derived in the following. It is composed by 
an internal and external bag. The wall has a thickness of 150mm.
Thickness wall
≔
t
150 mm
mm
mm
mm
Dimensions foundation
Length 
≔
L
6050 mm
mm
mm
mm
Width 
≔
W
2440 mm
mm
mm
mm
Height
≔
H
2600 mm
mm
mm
mm
Arch radius corner
≔
Rc
1200 mm
mm
mm
mm
Arch radius bottom
≔
Rb
1200 mm
mm
mm
mm
Figure 1: Template 
Page 1 of 2
J Dimensions template
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 101
==PAGE:114==
Dimensions external layer
Length wall
≔
L1
=
−
L
⋅
2 Rc
3650 mm
mm
mm
mm
Arch length 
≔
s
=
―――
⋅
⋅
2 π Rc
4
1885 mm
mm
mm
mm
Total length template
≔
Lf
=
+
L1
⋅
2 s
7420 mm
mm
mm
mm
Vertical straight length 
≔
Hf
=
−
H
Rc
1400 mm
mm
mm
mm
Length circular corner 
sefments
≔
lc
=
⋅
s 2
3770 mm
mm
mm
mm
Width circular segment 
≔
wc
=
―
s
3
628 mm
mm
mm
mm
Dimensions internal layer
Arch inner radius
≔
Rci
=
−
Rc
t
1050 mm
mm
mm
mm
Arch length 
≔
si
=
―――
⋅
⋅
2 π Rci
4
1649 mm
mm
mm
mm
Total length template
≔
Lf1
=
+
L1
⋅
2 si
6949 mm
mm
mm
mm
Length circular corner 
segments
≔
lci
=
⋅
si 2
3299 mm
mm
mm
mm
Width circular segment 
≔
wci
=
―
si
3
550 mm
mm
mm
mm
Page 2 of 2
J Dimensions template
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 102
==PAGE:115==
K Weight and buoyancy TRF foundation
DTU Civil Engineering
K | Weight and buoyancy TRF foun-
dation
The following Appendix assesses the derivation of the weight and buoyancy of the TFB
foundation.
Page 103
==PAGE:116==
Appendix -
Weight foundation and supressed water and resulting buoyancy force
The total weight of one foundation is calculated
Total cross sectional area 
concrete*
≔
At
1712129.5 mm
mm
mm
mm2
Cross sectional area straight 
wall*
≔
Al
431019.5 mm
mm
mm
mm2
Cross sectional area 
supporting wall*
≔
As
284249.8 mm
mm
mm
mm2
Height part 1**
≔
h1
1400 mm
mm
mm
mm
Radius circular element
≔
r
1220 mm
mm
mm
mm
≔
ri
=
−
r
150 mm
mm
mm
mm
1070 mm
mm
mm
mm
Length half circle bottom
≔
c
=
―――
⋅
⋅
2 π r
2
3.833 m
Figure 1: Dimensions and parts on foundation
* from Autodesk Inventor, Figure 2
** Figure 1
Page 1 of 4
K Weight and buoyancy TRF foundation
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 104
==PAGE:117==
Figure 2: Cross sectional area, derived from inventor
The foundation is devided into 4 parts
Part 1 : From top and down 1400 mm
Part 2 : Cylindrical bottom
Part 3 : Quarter circles (corners)
Part 4 : Wall
=
⋅
――
⋅
π r2
2
150 mm
mm
mm
mm
0.351 m3
Volume part 1
≔
V1
=
⋅
At h1
2.397 m3
Volume part 2
≔
V2
=
⋅
Al c
1.652 m3
Volume part 3
≔
V3
=
――――――
−
⋅
―
4
3
π r3
⋅
―
4
3
π ri
3
2
1.237 m3
Volume part 4
≔
V4
=
⋅
⎛
⎜
⎝
+
⋅
As h1
⋅
――
⋅
π r2
2
150 mm
mm
mm
mm
⎞
⎟
⎠
2
1.497 m3
Total volume
≔
Vconcrete.tot
=
+
+
+
V1
V2
V3
V4
6.784 m3
Page 2 of 4
K Weight and buoyancy TRF foundation
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 105
==PAGE:118==
The area of the textile fiber bag and weight
Surface area one straight 
'pipe' *
≔
Ap
434363.2 mm
mm
mm
mm2
Surface area circular 'pipe' 
bottom *
≔
Apb
1216104.4 mm
mm
mm
mm2
Surface area half circle 
(corner)
≔
Ao
=
―――
⋅
⋅
4 π r2
2
9.352 m2
≔
Ai
=
―――
⋅
⋅
4 π ri
2
2
7.194 m2
Number of straight 'pipes' *
≔
ns
+
+
⋅
12 2
⋅
12 2
⋅
7 2
Number of circular 'pipes' *
≔
nc
12
Tota surface area textile 
fiber bag 
≔
Astraight
=
⋅
⋅
Ap ns 2
53.861 m2
≔
Acircular
=
⋅
⋅
Apb nc 2
29.187 m2
≔
Acorner
=
+
Ao
Ai
16.546 m2
≔
Atot
=
+
+
Astraight
Acircular
Acorner
99.593 m2
Unit weight concrete
≔
ρc
1800 ――
kg
kg
kg
kg
m3
Weight textile fiber bag per m2
Volume carbon 
reinforcement per m^2
≔
Vcf
=
―――――――
⋅
140 mm
mm
mm
mm2 1000 mm
mm
mm
mm
m2
⎛⎝
⋅
1.4 105 ⎞⎠――
mm
mm
mm
mm3
m2
Unit weight carbon 
reinforcement
≔
ρcf
0.5 ――
kg
kg
kg
kg
m3
Page 3 of 4
K Weight and buoyancy TRF foundation
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 106
==PAGE:119==
Weight polypropylene per 
m2***
≔
Wpp
=
―――
242 kg
kg
kg
kg
418 m2
0.579 ――
kg
kg
kg
kg
m2
Weight carbon fiber 
reinforcement per m2
≔
Wcf
=
⋅
ρcf Vcf
⎛⎝⋅
7 10−5⎞⎠――
kg
kg
kg
kg
m2
Total weight fiber bag
≔
Wtf.tot
=
⋅
⎛⎝
+
Wpp
Wcf⎞⎠Atot
0.064 ton
ton
ton
ton
Total weight concrete
≔
Wcon.tot
=
⋅
Vconcrete.tot ρc
13.46 ton
ton
ton
ton
Total weight foundation
≔
Wfoundation
=
+
Wtf.tot
Wcon.tot
13.523 ton
ton
ton
ton
Weight supressed water
In-plane area foundation 
≔
Ain.plane
⎛⎝
+
⋅
3650 mm
mm
mm
mm 2440 mm
mm
mm
mm
⋅
π r2 ⎞⎠
Volume part 1
≔
V1
=
⋅
Ain.plane h1
19.015 m3
Volume part 2
≔
V2
=
―――
⋅
⋅
―
4
3
π r3
2
3.803 m3
Volume part 3
≔
V3
=
⋅
――
⋅
π r2
2
3650 mm
mm
mm
mm
8.534 m3
Total volume supressed 
water
≔
Vwater.tot
=
+
+
V1
V2
V3
31.351 m3
Unit weight water
≔
ρw
1000 ――
kg
kg
kg
kg
m3
Total weight supressed 
water
≔
Wwater
=
⋅
Vwater.tot ρw
34.559 ton
ton
ton
ton
Thus, the foundation can 
carry a weight of
≔
P
=
−
Wwater
Wfoundation
21.036 ton
ton
ton
ton
≔
PkN
=
⋅
P g
187.142 kN
kN
kN
kN
*** REF Mirafi® HP-Series Woven Polypropylene Geotextiles, Appendix XX
Page 4 of 4
K Weight and buoyancy TRF foundation
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 107
==PAGE:120==
L Weight and buoyancy equivalent foundation
DTU Civil Engineering
L | Weight and buoyancy equivalent
foundation
The following Appendix assesses the derivation of the weight and buoyancy of the
equivalent steel reinforced foundation.
Page 108
==PAGE:121==
Appendix -
Equivalent foundation, weight and buoyancy
The weight of an equivalent steel reinforced foundation are derived. The 
dimensions are of a 20ft container. A cover layer of 40mm are assumed. The 
wall must be equally designed for compression and tension in both sides. 
The minimum thickness of a concrete wall below water table are 200mm. 
Unit weight reinforced 
concrete
≔
ρrf.c
2500 ――
kg
kg
kg
kg
m3
Unit weight water
≔
ρw
1000 ――
kg
kg
kg
kg
m3
Volume concrete
Long wall
≔
V1
⋅
⋅
⋅
2400 mm
mm
mm
mm 6090 mm
mm
mm
mm 200 mm
mm
mm
mm 2
Short wall
≔
V2
⋅
⋅
⋅
2040 mm
mm
mm
mm 2400 mm
mm
mm
mm 200 mm
mm
mm
mm 2
Bottom
≔
V3
⋅
⋅
6090 mm
mm
mm
mm 2440 mm
mm
mm
mm 200 mm
mm
mm
mm
Page 1 of 2
L Weight and buoyancy equivalent foundation
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 109
==PAGE:122==
Total volume
≔
Vtot
=
+
+
V1
V2
V3
10.777 m3
Total weight 
≔
W
=
⋅
Vtot ρrf.c
29.698 ton
ton
ton
ton
Volume supressed water
≔
Vwater
⋅
⋅
6090 mm
mm
mm
mm 2440 mm
mm
mm
mm 2600 mm
mm
mm
mm
Weight supressed water
≔
Wwater
=
⋅
Vwater ρw
42.588 ton
ton
ton
ton
The foundation can carry a 
weight of
≔
P
=
−
Wwater
W
12.89 ton
ton
ton
ton
≔
PkN
=
⋅
P g
114.671 kN
kN
kN
kN
This is not completely correct due to the fact that many factories are producing 
foundations with polystyrene foam plates between concrete elements. The weight 
of the foundation is appoximatly correct, but the polystyrene will create updrift as 
a consequence of the low unit weight. This meaning that the foundation will be 
able to carry more weight.
When concidering the sustainebility of the production, and material 
consumption, the textile fiber foundation is a considerably better alternative. 
Page 2 of 2
L Weight and buoyancy equivalent foundation
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 110
==PAGE:123==
M CO2 emission
DTU Civil Engineering
M | CO2 emission
The following Appendix assesses the derivation of the CO2 emission during trans-
port.
Page 111
==PAGE:124==
Appendix -
CO2 Emission
The CO2 emission from transporting 10 foundations of textile reinforced 
and steel reinforced foundations are derived. It is only investigated based 
in the weight of the foundations, not the volume. The distance of 
shipments is assumed to 100km.
Weight steel reinforced 
foundations
≔
Wsteel
=
⋅
29.698 ton
ton
ton
ton 10
296.98 ton
ton
ton
ton
Weight fiber reinforced 
foundations
≔
Wfiber
=
⋅
13.523 ton
ton
ton
ton 10
135.23 ton
ton
ton
ton
CO2 emissions steel 
reinforced foundations
≔
co2steel
3330 kg
kg
kg
kg
CO2 emissions fiber 
reinforced foundations
≔
co2fiber
1516 kg
kg
kg
kg
=
⋅
――――――
−
co2steel
co2fiber
co2steel
100
54.474
The CO2 emissions are derived from a Freight Emissions Calculator 
(http://www.freightemissionscalculator.com/). 
The CO2 emission from transporting the textile fiber foundation are 54.5 % 
less than the steel reinforced foundation. This is a considrable decrease. 
Page 1 of 1
M CO2 emission
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 112
==PAGE:125==
N Volume ﬂoating elements
DTU Civil Engineering
N | Volume ﬂoating elements
The following Appendix assesses the derivation of the required volume of the ﬂoating
elements to obtain a buoyant body during cast.
Page 113
==PAGE:126==
Appendix  -
Dimensions and volume of floaters
The floating element must create bouyancy for the weight of the foundation. These 
floates are both acting as bracing and floating elements holding the foundation as it 
hardenes. 
Unit weight concrete
≔
ρc
1800 ――
kg
kg
kg
kg
m3
Unit weight water
≔
ρw
1000 ――
kg
kg
kg
kg
m3
Unit weight air
≔
ρa
1.225 ――
kg
kg
kg
kg
m3
Weight of foundation
≔
W
13.523 ton
ton
ton
ton
≔
WkN
=
⋅
W g
120.3 kN
kN
kN
kN
Dimensions floating elements
Radius inner corner
≔
r
1120 mm
mm
mm
mm
Radius outer corner
≔
ro
1220 mm
mm
mm
mm
Length middle section
≔
L
3450 mm
mm
mm
mm
Width 
≔
W
2240 mm
mm
mm
mm
Circumference middle 
element
≔
cmiddle
=
+
⋅
W 2
⋅
L 2
11.4 m
Circumference corner 
element
≔
ccorner
=
+
W
⋅
π r
5.8 m
There is a total downward force 
.
≔
Pdown
=
WkN
120.3 kN
kN
kN
kN
Archimedes' principle says that the upwards buoyant force on an object is equal 
to the weight of the water that it displaces. 
Thus, the amount of supressed water are derived in order to obtain the 
buoyancy force necessary.
Page 1 of 3
N Volume ﬂoating elements
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 114
==PAGE:127==
Assume a cubic meter of water is supresses by a cubic meter of air. The 
following applies to this situation
≔
∆W
=
−
ρw
ρa
998.8 ――
kg
kg
kg
kg
m3
Thus, by supressing 
water by a floating element, it is able to sustain a downward 
1 m3
force of 
, this is equal to 
=
∆W
998.8 ――
kg
kg
kg
kg
m3
≔
∆WkN
=
⋅
∆W g
9.8 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m3
Required amount of 
supressed air
≔
Vair.req
=
―――
Pdown
∆WkN
12.3 m3
The required amount of supressed air are devided into 'bracing' elements, 
and floating elements. The 'bracing' elements are circular tubes composed of 
strong PVC fabric. This is enough pressure to sustain the pressure from the 
concrete foundation and maintain the shape. The remaining air are composed 
in two inflatable elements, one on each side of the foundation. 
The volume of the bracing elements are derived. First top bracing 
Radius circular element
≔
rt.m
50 mm
mm
mm
mm
≔
rt.c
50 mm
mm
mm
mm
Area circular element corner
≔
At.c
=
⋅
π rt.c
2
⎛⎝
⋅
7.9 103 ⎞⎠mm
mm
mm
mm2
Area circular element middle
≔
At.m
=
⋅
π rt.m
2
⎛⎝
⋅
7.9 103 ⎞⎠mm
mm
mm
mm2
Volume corner bracing
≔
Vcorner
=
⋅
At.c ccorner
⎛⎝
⋅
4.5 10−2⎞⎠m3
Volume middle bracing
≔
Vmiddle
=
⋅
At.m cmiddle
⎛⎝
⋅
8.9 10−2⎞⎠m3
Total volume top bracing
≔
Vt
=
+
⋅
⋅
At.c 2 ccorner
⋅
At.m cmiddle
0.2 m3
The volume of the bracing elements are derived. Bottom bracing
Radius circular element
≔
rb.m
50 mm
mm
mm
mm
≔
rb.c
50 mm
mm
mm
mm
Page 2 of 3
N Volume ﬂoating elements
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 115
==PAGE:128==
Area circular element corner
≔
Ab.c
=
⋅
π rb.c
2
⎛⎝
⋅
7.9 103 ⎞⎠mm
mm
mm
mm2
Area circular element middle
≔
Ab.m
=
⋅
π rb.m
2
⎛⎝
⋅
7.9 103 ⎞⎠mm
mm
mm
mm2
Total volume top bracing
≔
Vb
=
+
⋅
⋅
Ab.c 2 ccorner
⋅
Ab.m cmiddle
0.2 m3
Total volume bracing 
elements
≔
Vtot.bracing
=
+
Vb
Vt
0.4 m3
Pontoon
≔
Vfloaters
=
――――――
−
Vair.req
Vtot.bracing
2
6 m3
Radius pontoon
≔
rfloater
550 mm
mm
mm
mm
Cross sectional area pontoon
≔
Afloater
=
⋅
π rfloater
2
1 m2
Circumference pontoon
≔
Lfloater
=
+
⋅
3650 mm
mm
mm
mm 2
⎛⎝
⋅
⋅
2 π ro⎞⎠
15 m
Total volume pontoon
≔
V1.floater
=
⋅
Afloater Lfloater
14.2 m3
The total volume of the bracing elements and pontoon is displayed below. 
≔
Vtotal.elements
=
+
V1.floater
Vtot.bracing
14.6 m3
>
=
Vair.req
12.3 m3
The buoyancy force obtained 
from the pontoon and 
bracing elements. 
≔
Pup
=
⋅
∆WkN Vtotal.elements
142.8 kN
kN
kN
kN
Page 3 of 3
N Volume ﬂoating elements
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 116
==PAGE:129==
O Conceptual designs
DTU Civil Engineering
O | Conceptual designs
The following Appendix assesses the development of the preliminary designs, the ﬂoat-
ing bridge and the modular housing.
Page 117
==PAGE:130==
Appendix -
Conceptual designs
The following appendix treats the design of the preliminary modular designs. 
First off the floating bridge is assessed, nest the modular housing solution is 
treated. 
Floating Bridge
The TFB floating foundations are applied in a design of a floating bridge. It is designed 
as a pontoon bridge where the floating foundations are point supports for the arched 
spanning bridge. 
In the present design, stability is acheived by the interconnections between the 
foundations and the abutment. First, the load acting on the bridge must be derived in 
order to derive the number of floating foundations necessary. 
Load and span between foundations
Selfweight slab, approximate
≔
qSL
2.5 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
Design load, UDL system
≔
qt
8.5 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
Total design load foundations
≔
qtot
=
+
qSL
qt
11 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
Foundation buoyancy
≔
Qf
188 kN
kN
kN
kN
Each foundation can sustain
≔
A1f
=
――
Qf
qtot
17.09 m2
Width road
≔
w
4 m
Length road per foundation
≔
l
=
――
A1f
w
4.27 m
=
―
l
2
2.14 m
≔
l
5 m
Page 1 of 3
O Conceptual designs
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 118
==PAGE:131==
Length of bridge
≔
Lb
100 m
Required amount of 
pontoons
≔
n
=
―
Lb
l
20
Forces acting in connection and on slab
Moment at support
≔
Msup
=
⋅
⋅
――
−1
12
⎛⎝
⋅
qtot w⎞⎠l2
−91.67
⋅
kN
kN
kN
kN m
≔
Mmid
=
⋅
⋅
―
1
24
⎛⎝
⋅
qtot w⎞⎠l2
45.83
⋅
kN
kN
kN
kN m
Moment at mid-span
≔
VRd
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
―
1
2
qtot w l
110 kN
kN
kN
kN
Shear at support
Modular housing
The maximum induced forces are treated in the following, additionally are the resulting 
formwork pressure derived. 
Design load house
≔
qh
4.5 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
Thickness slab
≔
t
150 mm
mm
mm
mm
Unit weight slab
≔
ρc
=
⋅
1800 ――
kg
kg
kg
kg
m3
g
17.65 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m3
Unit weight water
≔
ρw
=
⋅
1000 ――
kg
kg
kg
kg
m3
g
9.81 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m3
Selfweight slab
≔
qsw
=
⋅
t ρc
2.65 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
qsw
2.5 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
Total imposed load
≔
qtot
=
+
qh
qsw
7 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
Span length 
≔
l
=
――
12 m
3
4 m
Width element
≔
w
6 m
Page 2 of 3
O Conceptual designs
DTU Civil Engineering
Page 119
==PAGE:132==
12 References
DTU Civil Engineering
12 | References
[1] solidian - leading in construction with non-metallic reinforcement - solidian.
[2] Major Diﬀerences Between Woven and Non-Woven Geotextiles — Maxwell Supply
Blog, 2016.
[3] Julie BA Brennan, Remo Pedreschi, Pete Walker, and Martin Ansell. The poten-
tial of advanced textiles for fabric formwork.
[4] J. B. Calvert. The Catenary, 2000.
[5] The Constructor Civil Engineering Home. Minimum thickness of structural con-
crete members.
[6] MZ Cohn and M Abdel-Rohman. Analysis up to collapse of elasto-plastic arches.
Computers & Structures, 6(6):511–517, 1976.
[7] Manfred Curbach and Frank Jesse. High-performance textile-reinforced concrete.
Structural engineering international, 9(4):289–291, 1999.
[8] Russ Miller Johnson Eleanor D’Aponte, Alexander Lawton. Fabric Formwork for
Architectural Concrete Structures. Norwich University, 2009.
[9] CEN Eurocode. 1: Actions on structures, part 2: Traﬃc loads on bridges. Brussels:
European Standard EN, 2:2003, 1991.
[10] Theodore V Galambos. Guide to stability design criteria for metal structures.
John Wiley & Sons, 1998.
[11] EA Logistics GrEAn. Freight emissions calculator, 2017. [Online; accessed 19-
November-2017].
[12] Kristian Dahl Hertz. Bridges, 2017.
[13] BoatsToGo Inc. PVC Fabric Tech Specs.
[14] NAHB Research Center Inc. Residential Structural Design Guide. 2000.
[15] Terry S Ingold. Geotextiles and geomembranes handbook. Elsevier, 2013.
[16] Inc International Marine Floatation Systems.
International Marine Floatation
Systems.
[17] Igor A Karnovsky. Theory of arched structures: strength, stability, vibration.
Springer Science & Business Media, 2011.
Page 120
==PAGE:133==
12 References
DTU Civil Engineering
[18] Knauf. Knauf uniﬂott, 2017. [Online; accessed 25-November-2017].
[19] C Kulas. Actual applications and potential of textile-reinforced concrete.
[20] AM Manelius. FABRIC FORMWORK: Investigations into Formwork Tectonics
and Stereogeneity in Architectural Constructions.
PhD thesis, Ph. D. Thesis,
Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts Schools of Architecture, Design and Conser-
vation, School of Architecture, 2012.
[21] Miraﬁ. geotextile ﬁlter design, application, and product selection guide.
[22] TenCate Miraﬁ. TenCate MiraﬁHP-Series.
[23] ScienceDirect (Online service) and International Ship & Oﬀshore Structures
Congress. Marine structures. Elsevier Applied Science, 1988.
[24] TenCate. MiraﬁHP-Series Woven Polypropylene Geotextiles for Stabilization and
Soil Reinforcement Applications.
[25] Tencate.
DEFINING, UNDERSTANDING, AND QUANTIFYING SEPARA-
TION & REINFORCEMENT. 2010.
[26] TenCateTM. Geosynthetics the diﬀerence we make. TenCateTM Geosynthetics
North America – The World Leader, 2008.
[27] Diederik Veenendaal, Mark West, and Philippe Block. History and overview of fab-
ric formwork: using fabrics for concrete casting. Structural Concrete, 12(3):164–
177, 2011.
[28] C Veerman, M Stive, et al. Working together with water. a living land builds for
its future. Report, Delta Committee, 2008.
[29] Waterstudio.NL. Waterstudio - vision.
[30] Mark
West.
Kenzo
unno,
fabric
formed
walls.
Winnipeg,
University
of
Manitoba,
Available
from
http://www.
umanitoba.
ca/cast building/assets/downloads/PDFS/Fabric For
mwork/Kenzo Unno
Article. pdf, 2008.
[31] Mark West and RONNIE Araya. Fabric formwork for concrete structures and ar-
chitecture. In Int. Conf. Textile Composites and Inﬂatable Structures, Barcelona,
Spain, pages 5–7, 2009.
[32] Wikipedia. Archimedes’ principle — wikipedia, the free encyclopedia, 2017. [On-
line; accessed 25-November-2017].
[33] Wikipedia. Flood control in the netherlands — wikipedia, the free encyclopedia,
2017. [Online; accessed 25-November-2017].
[34] Wikipedia. Polyvinyl chloride — wikipedia, the free encyclopedia, 2017. [Online;
accessed 25-November-2017].
Page 121
==PAGE:134==
12 References
DTU Civil Engineering
[35] Wikipedia. Uru people — wikipedia, the free encyclopedia, 2017. [Online; accessed
19-November-2017].
[36] Natalie Williams Portal.
Usability of Textile Reinforced Concrete: Structural
Performance, Durability and Sustainability. Chalmers University of Technology,
2015.
[37] P Yu, H He, C Jiang, D Wang, Y Jia, L Zhou, and DM Jia. Reinforcing styrene bu-
tadiene rubber with lignin-novolac epoxy resin networks. Express Polymer Letters,
9(1), 2015.
Page 122
