==PAGE:1==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Implementation of Cryptographic
Access Control Using FUSE and
MediaWiki
Jonas Frejvald Edske, s123622
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The goal for this thesis is to implement a secure online file sharing tool, in which
users are able to distribute access rights, to their files. We want to explore the field
of cryptographic access control, in order to see if it can be used in practice.
The system will use FUSE as a virtual file system, where the user can create and
edit files like in a normal file system. All files have cryptographic key associated to
them, which are kept in a special data structure called a key ring. These keys will be
used to share the files. The storage server is uses a MediaWiki backend, which, while
unconventional for file storage, will prove useful with a number of necessary features.
In order to share files, users can create smaller key rings only containing information
about the files they want to share. Users will upload these and share the information
for that key ring with other users. This means that no matter how many files a user
wants to share and no matter how large they are, the amount of data that must be
transmitted from one user to another is constant. The advantage is that conventional
communications means like Email can be used to transfer an arbitrary number of files
of any size.
The implementation of this system will be fully documented in regards to require-
ments, design and implementation.
The end result will be analysed regarding its
robustness and a threat analysis will also be conducted.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Resumé
Målet for denne afhandling er at implementere et online fildelingssystem, hvor brugere
kan uddele forskellige adgangs rettigheder til deres filer. Vi vil undersøge mulighed-
erne inden for kryptografisk adgangs kontrol, for at se om det er muligt at gøre i
praksis.
Systemet kommer til at bruge FUSE til at lave et virtuelt filsystem, hvor brugere
kan skabe og ændre filer, nøjagtigt som i et normalt filsystem. Alle filer kommer til at
have tilknyttet kryptografiske nøgler, der bliver opbevaret i en data struktur, kaldet
en nøglering.
Disse nøgler vil så blive brugt til at dele filerne.
Lagringsserveren
kommer til at benytte en MediaWiki backend, der måske ikke er et oplagt første
valg, men skal vise sig at indeholde nogle vigtige verktøjer.
For at dele filer kan
brugerene lave mindre nøgle ringe, der indeholder information om netop de filer, der
skal deles. Ideen er at disse også kan blive uploadet, og brugerene kan så dele den
nøgle information, som den nøglering har fået tildelt, med andre. Det betyder at
uanset hvor mange filer en bruger ønsker at dele, og uanset hvor store de er, så er det
den samme mængde data der skal sendes fra en bruger til en anden. Fordelen er at
det bliver muligt at bruge mere almindelige former for kommunication, som Email,
til at sende filer i et hvilket som helst antal eller størrelse.
Implementationen vil blive dokumenteret med hensyn til, systemkrav, design og
implementeringen. Slut resultatet bliver analyseret for robusthed og sikkerhed.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. degree in Engineering.
This thesis deals with secure online file sharing and was done in the period of Au-
gust 1st 2017 to January 1st 2018. It was supervised by associate professor Christian
D. Jensen.
Kongens Lyngby , 01-January-2018
Jonas Frejvald Edske
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor, Christian D. Jensen, for giving me the opportu-
nity to work on this project and for the helpful advice and insight provided during
the development, of this thesis.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Resumé
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Secure Online File Sharing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Contributions of this Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory
5
2.1
Cryptography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Conventional Access Control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Cryptographic Access Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Client Side File System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5
Storage Server
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.6
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Requirements
21
3.1
System Requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Application Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Cryptographic Requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4
Use Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Design
33
4.1
Overall System Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
File System Operations Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Key Ring Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.4
Client-Server Interaction Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.5
Cryptography Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
4.6
System Integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Implementation
47
5.1
Implementation Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2
File System Operations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.3
Key Ring Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.4
Client-Server Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.5
Cryptographic Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.6
File Sharing Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6
Discussion
69
6.1
Retrospective Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6.2
Robustness Check
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.3
Threat and Attack Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
6.4
Performance Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
6.5
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
7
Conclusion
77
A Appendix
79
A.1 User Guide
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
A.2 Test Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
A.3 Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
Bibliography
99
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Files on a computer is probably the most core common component spread across
all operating systems. It is what separates everything from your scientific papers
to video editing software. It is all stored on a hard drive and regardless of what
technology is used, the principal remains the same. In UNIX systems everything is
actually considered a file, even directories. There are files everywhere, and we have
always had a need to share them with others, be it submitting collaborative work, or
sharing a newly edited video with your friends.
File sharing is on the surface a simple matter: I have a file, that I want my friend
to access. But as one starts to look into ways of carrying out the actual sharing of
the file, problems start to emerge. It could be sent attached in an otherwise empty
E-mail, but there are some rather heavy size limitations. An FTP server is not really
something everyone uses and while Dropbox is certainly spreading its dominance, one
is still required to have an account and log in to share files.
This ”problem” with Dropbox persists in many other file mainstream sharing/sync-
ing services where an account is required in order to share your files. From a users
point of view this is both inconvenient and somewhat unnecessary. This is not to say
that the middle man is unwanted, since the files would need to be stored somewhere,
but simply that it is desired to find a way to give users the opportunity to share files
more freely.
Ideally we want a file sharing solution that seamlessly shares files without having
to interact with a third party, i.e. all operations from the user are made entirely
within user space. It should not be possible for the file server or anyone with control
over it, to access the contents of the files. If modifications are made illegally it should
not affect the user experience in any way.
1.1
Secure Online File Sharing
To build a secure file sharing service in the cloud, we need several components each
responsible for a different aspect of the system. The first being a client application,
where the user can create and edit files, as he is used to. When working the file
system, the user is able to share individual files, and receive shared files from other
users. In order for users to access files from anywhere in the world, there needs to
be a storage server somewhere in the cloud.
This server must store the files and
handle requests from users such that they can get them. If the file sharing is to work
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
properly, it is desired to have a from of access control implemented, within the sharing
mechanism. This ensures that users have more control over their files, lessening the
risk of them being misused. If the sharing is to be secure some cryptographic functions
are needed, in order to prevent attackers from stealing files from the server. It should
also be possible to ensure users that files have not been tampered with, meaning the
content is authentic.
In order for users to share files more directly and removing control of the files from
the storage server, it would be desired to have the file systems to be as decentralised
as possible. This would mean the complete removal of the concept of users. The
system would however need to have a way to distinguish ”owners” of a file, or at least
have restrictions on who can share it, the so called ”right to delegate”. It would be
desirable for users of the file sharing system, to not have to register anywhere, or in
any other way interact with the storage server to share files. A user would then only
have to rely on conventional communication means like E-mail to share the files.
A thing that would make this truly different from conventional file sharing systems,
would be to get rid of the fixed structure of shared files. Normally when a folder is
shared, all files and sub folders will keep that same structure. It would be really
special if it was possible for users to be in complete control of how their files should
be organised, even if they do not directly own them.
It would also be desired for the storage server to handle revisions of files. This
would allow users to verify files and ensure they get a correct version, each time a
file is requested. In relation to the decentralisation, it would be desired for the file
server not having to trust the clients at all. The file system should therefore have a
mechanism in place that allows it to keep track of what files it has on the server.
Existing file sharing solutions come in all different shapes and sizes, all built for
different purposes. Dropbox is probably the most well known and used by many. It
is relatively secure[Dro] and files are shared through a link, which can be Emailed to
other users. While this is a centralised idea, the aspect of near instant synchronisation
is a nice feature. This is much the same way that Google Drive, another well known
solution, functions.
EncFS[Gou] is a file system that encrypts files in its source directory using a
volume key. It is scalable and cross platform, but does seem to have some security
concerns[Hor]. EncFS encrypts files and stores them in the same structure as the
unencrypted one. Is possible to use with Dropbox or Google Drive
GMailFS[Jon] uses GMail servers to store files using a library called libgmail
written in Python. There is a problem in that using this system actually violates
Googles terms of service and may disable accounts using it.
WikipediaFS[Blo] is a file system that allows users to view and edit Wikipedia
articles as if they were real files. Unfortunately it has not been maintained for about
ten years. An alternative to this could be WikiroFS[Lou] written in Ruby.
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Contributions of this Thesis
3
1.2
Contributions of this Thesis
This thesis will focus on the implementation of an online file storage system that
uses a MediaWiki backend to store the files. All files on the remote server are to
be encrypted and can be shared using cryptographic access control. The client file
system will be constructed using FUSE and will have a key ring associated to it.
This will be a data structure containing information about files that are present in
the system, allowing them to be synchronised with the MediaWiki server. Effort will
also be made into creating a way of sharing files with other users as well as restricting
access rights to shared files.
1.3
Thesis Outline
The remainder of this thesis will be divided into the following chapters:
Theory In the Theory chapter we shall describe the technologies we are going to use,
in more detail. The technologies that we cover are: Cryptography, conventional
access control, cryptographic access control and file systems. In the end we will
have a glossary to wrap up the technical terms used in this thesis.
Requirements In the Requirements chapter we shall define what requirements we
see in order for this project to work properly.
We will define some overall
functional requirements, and some more specifically for each functionality, where
we also specify their responsibility in the system. We shall also define use cases
for each functionality.
Design In the Design chapter we shall go through process of prototyping the appli-
cation. We shall describe how the different components of the system interacts
with each other and present sequence diagrams for all use cases.
Implementation In the Implementation chapter we describe how the implementa-
tion has been carried out shining some light on what libraries were used and
the actual workings of each functionality.
Discussion In the discussion we shall comment on the choices made in the creation
of the system and analyse the threats able to harm or disable the system. We
shall also comment of the results of the tests made and attempt to identify what
more can be done on this project in the future.
Conclusion In the conclusion we wrap up the project to reflect on what we have
learned and achieved, as well as determine weather we have met the goals sat-
isfactory.
==PAGE:16==
4
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
This section is meant to introduce the tools and technologies used in the development
of this project. It will help us get an understanding what what can and cannot be
done, such that the end product will function as intended. We will go through the
topic of cryptography, various forms of access control FUSE and MediaWiki. At the
end of the section there will be a glossary that briefly covers the core technical terms
we will be using throughout this thesis.
2.1
Cryptography
In system security cryptography is a very important topic, which ensures safe com-
munication between parties. A message, referred to as a plaintext, is encrypted into
a ciphertext according to a specific set of rules defined in a cipher. In order to carry
out the encryption the cipher is using a key specifically made for that cipher. One
very important aspect of cryptography is that only the key is to be kept secret, and
everything else about a ciphers workings should be public. This is referred to as Ker-
ckhoffs’s principle and ensures that a cryptosystem can remain secure even though
every detail about it is known. It allows for thorough testing of the cryptosystem
before it is released, such that any weaknesses are found before they can be exploited.
A ciphers security is therefore tied to the strength of the key, where a longer key
usually means more security. The security strength of a given cipher is measured in
bits, representing how many operations one has to make in order to find the key.
2.1.1
Symmetric Cryptography
Symmetric key cryptography relies on using the same key to both encrypt and de-
crypt messages. As a result of this the algorithm used is also the same, only the
decryption process is reversed. As an example take the Caesar cipher where each
letter in the message is shifted a number of places forward in the alphabet to encrypt
and backwards to decrypt.
For every channel of communication there will be a different key, all users in a
system would share a key between them for their transmissions. This means that in a
system of n users there would be n2 keys. There are two types of symmetric ciphers
namely stream and block ciphers.
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Theory
2.1.1.1
Stream Ciphers
Stream ciphers uses a key to generate a pseudo random key stream, to encrypt a
cipher text much like a one-time pad, where digits in the key are applied to digits in
the plaintext. Opposed to the one-time pad however, the stream key is only pseudo
random and thus not completely secure.
They are known to for their speed and
simplicity of implementation in hardware and are especially effective when the length
on messages is unknown. In practice this means that messages require no padding in
order to be properly encrypted.
2.1.1.2
Block Ciphers
Block ciphers use a key to encrypt messages, split into blocks of a fixed size. If the
length of a message is not a multiple of the block size, the last block requires padding
to fill out the remaining bits. The key is applied to each block individually resulting in
a ciphertext when done. A block cipher will also have to choose a mode of operation,
that can provide some additional advantages depending on what is used.
2.1.1.3
AES
The Advanced Encryption Standard [Sta01] is perhaps the most widespread symmet-
ric cipher. AES performs all its operation on a two-dimensional array called the State,
containing four rows of Nb bytes where Nb is the block length divided by 32. It has
a fixed block size of 128 bits (meaning Nb = 4), and keys can be of lengths 128, 192
and 256 bits. Depending on the key size the each block will go through a number of
rounds, 10, 12 and 14 respectively. Each round has four transformations that we will
look into now.
SubBytes
The SubBytes transformation is a substitution of bytes in the State, according to a
substitution table called an S-Box. It is constructed in such way that it is invertible,
such that it can also be used for decryption. For instance the byte 0x55 maps to 0xed
and vice versa.
ShiftRows
In the ShiftRows transformation the last three columns in the State is shifted with
different offsets. The first row is not shifted. Each byte in the new state is given by:
S
′
s,c = Sr,(c+shift(r,Nb)) mod Nb for 0 < r < 4 and 0 ≤c < Nb,
where the value shift(r, Nb) is dependent on the row number such that shift(1, 4) =
1, shift(2, 4) = 2 and shift(3, 4) = 3 since Nb = 4.
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Cryptography
7
MixColumns
The MixColumns transformation operates on the State by treating each column as
a four term polynomial. Each of them are multiplied, modulo x4 + 1, with a fixed
polynomial given by:
a(x) = 03x3 + 01x2 + 01x + 02
This is done through matrix multiplication.
AddRoundKey
The last transformation is the AddRoundKey and is done through XOR. Each round
uses a different round key.
2.1.1.4
Modes of Operation
Algorithms such as AES need a mode of operation to work. This tells the algorithm
what it should do with each block as it is encrypting them. Depending on the mode
this can drastically change how hard the algorithm is to break.
Electronic Codebook (ECB)
The electronic code book mode has its name form old code books that were used, to
translate cryptographic messages. It simply consists of doing absolutely nothing to
the blocks other than encrypting them. This has a major disadvantage since identical
plaintext blocks will also be identical after encryption. For larger messages this means
code breakers can more easily determine the key, thus breaking the encryption. An
error in both encryption and decryption will only result in one corrupted block since
all blocks are completely independent. For this reason all operations can be done in
parallel, but despite this, it is not a recommended mode to use.
Cipher Block Chaining (CBC)
In cipher block chaining mode each block is used to help encrypt the next one. The
way this works is by performing an XOR operation on a plaintext, before the encryp-
tion, with the previous cipher text. This of course means that the first block will not
have a ciphertext to use, thus a so called initialisation vector(IV) is used. Because
every block is dependent on the previous one encryption cannot be done in parallel.
This also means that any error in the plaintext will corrupt the whole message.
Decryption is done be performing the XOR operation after the decryption. The
first block will use the IV and the rest will use the previous ciphertext, so if the wrong
IV is used only the first block will be wrong, and since each block is not dependant
on other blocks being decrypted this can be done in parallel. An error in a ciphertext
block will only result in two corrupt blocks and leave the rest fine.
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Theory
Cipher Feedback (CFB)
The cipher feedback mode is closely resembles the CBC, but here the initialisation
vector is what is encrypted and afterwards the XOR operation is performed with the
plaintext. This gives the cipher text that is then sent to the next block as input
for encryption. Every block is dependant on the previous one and thus encryption
cannot be done parallel. Furthermore errors in the IV or a plaintext block will throw
off all remaining encryptions.
Decryption is done by adding the cipher text after the decryption operation, per-
forming the XOR operation, as well as sending the ciphertext as input to the next
block. This means that all blocks are independent and decryption can be done in
parallel and losing some ciphertext data only means two blocks are corrupted.
Output Feedback (OFB)
In output feedback mode the operations for encryption and decryption are identical,
only swapping the position of the plaintext and cipher text. The operation starts with
encrypting the IV and send the result as input to the next block. The plaintext is
then used in an XOR operation, to give the ciphertext. While the operations cannot
be done in parallel it is important to note that the encryption/decryption operations
can be done, before any of the XOR operations. It is also worth noting that only
an error in the IV will ruin the entire operation, errors in either a plaintext or a
ciphertext, will only corrupt its counterpart.
Counter (CTR)
Counter mode replaces the IV with a nonce and a counter. Theses will together be
encrypted and hereafter XORed with the plaintext, to give the cipher text. Both
encryption and decryption operations are identical. All blocks are independent so
all operations can be done in parallel. Errors in either plaintext or cipher text will
only affect their own block, but errors in the counter would corrupted all subsequent
blocks. The requirement for the counter is that it should simply be able to produce a
sequence that is guaranteed not to loop, but otherwise it can really be any function.
2.1.2
Asymmetric Cryptography
Asymmetric encryption is often also referred to as public key encryption, since it
uses two keys a public and a private. These are created in pairs and thus have to
be used together. The idea is the messages are encrypted with a public key, and
decrypted with the private key. Generally asymmetric cryptography is not used for
regular transmission, as it is significantly slower, but is instead used to transmit
shared secrets to create a secure channel. In a system of n users there would be n
key pairs.
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Cryptography
9
2.1.2.1
RSA
The most used public key cipher is probably the RSA[RSA78], named after its inven-
tors Ronald Rivest, Adi Shamir and Loenard Adleman. It bases its security on a basic
property for all integers, called prime factorisation. The public key is the product
of two large primes, and if these are found through prime factoring the number, the
encryption is broken. We shall cover the process of key creation below.
Key Creation
1. Pick two huge prime numbers p and q.
2. Calculate their product n = pq.
3. Pick the private exponent d such that it satisfies gcd(d, (p−1)(q−1)) = 1 where
gcd is the greatest common divisor.
4. Then calculate the public exponente, the multiplicative inverse of d modulo
(p −1)(q −1), giving us ed ≡1 mod (p −1)(q −1).
Encryption and Decryption
When encrypting a message m one needs the public key consisting of n and e. The
ciphertext c is then given by:
c = me mod n
For decryption of the ciphertext c the private key d is needed, and the plaintext is
given by:
m = cd mod n
Signing and Verification
Another use of RSA is the creation of digital signatures.
A common problem in
security is that people lie over the internet about who they are, thus tricking their
victim into thinking they are communicating with someone else. To help mitigate
this, the origins of a message can be confirmed by verifying its signature.
A signature is made by performing an encryption operation on a hash of the
message using the private key. This creates a signature that is sent along with the
message. Even though the signature can be read by anyone in possession of the public
key, it does not reveal anything about the message(in theory). When a message is
received the hash is calculated and compared against the now verified signature. If
they match the message can be accepted as authentic, if not it would be discarded.
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Theory
2.1.3
Hash Functions
Hash functions are one-way cryptographic algorithms that take an input of arbitrary
size and returns a string of a fixed size, depending on the algorithm. It is called one-
way cryptography because the original message is never meant to be computed from
the hash. In fact if this is possible a so called pre-image is found, and the algorithm
is considered weak. The pre-image is one of three attacks a hash function must me
resistant against, the other two being second pre-image, and collision. More formally
we can define the three attacks as follows:
Pre-image Given a hash h it should be computationally infeasible to find any mes-
sage m such that h = hash(m).
Second pre-image Given an input m1 it should be computationally infeasible to
find another input m2 such that hash(m1) = hash(m2).
Collision It should be computationally infeasible to find two different messages m1
and m2 such that hash(m1) = hash(m2).
MD5
The first hash function we are going to cover is the Messsage Digest 5, which outputs
a sting of 128 bits. It was invented by Ronald Rivest in 1991 and quickly became
popular and was implemented in many applications, but already in 1996 a collision
attack was found[Pre10]. This was not enough to deem it broken, but in 2004 crypt-
analysis methods were so advanced that finding collisions was considered easy. Later
the algorithm was considered completely broken.
SHA-1
The Secure Hash Algorithm 1 has been in use since 1995, and outputs a string of 160
bits. The algorithm has been theoretically broken since 2005 meaning that an attack
exists, we just lack the computing power to carry it out. Back then the complexity
was 269, but it was improved to be between 260 and 265. In 2017 the first actual
collision was found[Ste+17].
SHA-2
The Secure Hash Algorithm 2 is a whole family of algorithms that are able to suit a
wider range of needs. It was first published in 2001 as a successor to the SHA-1. The
outputs come in lengths of 224, 256, 384, 512, 512/244, 512/256 bits. Obviously there
have been attempts to break this algorithm as well, however they have not proven as
efficient yet. Only 24 out of 64 rounds have been broken in regards to collisions, and
43 of 64 for pre-images[Pre10].
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Conventional Access Control
11
SHA-3
The secure Hash algorithm 3 is the newest member to the SHA family. It is funda-
mentally different than the MD5 as well as the rest of the SHA, because of its use of
”sponge construction” [Ber+12]. Its output sizes are 244, 256, 384, 512 as well as an
option to have arbitrary sizes. It is not meant to replace the SHA-2 yet as it is not
broken.
2.2
Conventional Access Control
Access control is by no means a new concept. The lock and key being perhaps the
single most widespread form of access control in human history. Simply put a lock on
something that is to be protected and distribute keys to the people that are allowed
access. This concept relies on trusting the key holders not to lose or redistribute
their keys. Over time more advanced systems have been created to allow for a more
flexible setup with for example master keys able to unlock all locks in the system. In
a more modern setting smart cards have somewhat replaced the conventional metal
key and in the digital world we have personal keys in the form of passwords.
Now these forms of access control are all ways of carrying out the access control
policies present in the system. Defining these policies set the the boundaries for what
users can and cannot do and should translate to the infrastructure of the system
of users. We shall now look at some different ways of doing so, each with their own
strengths and weaknesses. These concepts are described in greater detail by Samarati
and de Vimercati[SV00].
2.2.1
Access Control Matrix
The access control matrix is a rather basic method of modelling a systems policies.
It takes basis in the users identities and the objects they can access, coupling them
together. This means there will be a rule for each combination of user and object in
the system, determining who can access what in each situation. In table 2.1 is shown
an example with three users and three files.
This gives freedom to tailor access control policies to the exact needs of the system,
making it incredibly flexible. It has the downside of not scaling too well, as huge
matrices are borderline impossible to manage, at least manually. When implementing
an access control matrix one often go for either an access control list or a capabilities
list.
Each method optimises for least amount of rows, to reduce the number of
operations, when things change. The rows in the example below are capability lists,
and the columns are access control lists.
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Theory
File 1
File 2
File 3
File 4
Alice
rw
r
Bob
rw
rw
Charlie
rw
r
rw
Dave
r
r
rw
Table 2.1: Access Control Matrix.
This type of access control is what is defined as discretionary, because it is the
owners that distribute the access rights to their files, at their own discretion. It does
however have a rather significant security flaw, in that there is nothing stopping a user
from writing sensitive information to a file that anyone can read. An example given
in [SV00] section 3, presents a manager with a sensitive file called Market, containing
information about products and prices. An employee, who does not have access to
the file, can create a program, that the manager opens, which will write the contents
of Market to a file that the employee does have access to. Thus without directly being
in contact with the file, the employee is still able to extract the contents of the file.
2.2.2
Mandatory Access Control
In mandatory access control it is a central authority that grants users access, to the
available resources. The most common form is know as multilevel security policy
that is based on classifications of subject and objects. The subjects are the acting
entities that can request objects. The classification is also known as an access class
and consist of two parts namely a security level, and a category. The security level is
a hierarchically ordered set such as Unclassified(U), Confidential(C), Secret(S) and
Top Secret(TS) where U < C < S < TS. The category is unordered and describes
a function or area of competence such as Army, Navy and Air Force for a military
system. These classifications can be written as a security lattice as shown below.
Figure 2.1: A Secrecy Based Security Lattice.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Conventional Access Control
13
In order to secure confidentiality in this system two rules must be followed, these
rules are designated No-read-up and No-write-down. They ensure that no subject
can request an object on a higher security level, and no object may be written to an
object of a lower level. Given the example of information leak from previous it is clear
the this is now prevented since the sensitive file cannot be written to a lower level.
There may come a need for subjects to move down the lattice perhaps for a doctor to
give an order to a nurse. That subject is then declassified such that he does to take
any sensitive information with him, upholding the rules.
In order to secure integrity we need a different set of security levels, to model
if entities are trusted or not.
Taking the example with the Market file, there is
nothing in the previous security system that prevents the program from messing up
the file itself. It could copy contents from a completely untrusted source and write
it into Market. To prevent this the security levels for integrity are presented as a
hierarchically ordered set Unknown(U), Important(I) and Crucial (C) and U where
U < I < C. As before two rules are to be upheld, No-write-up and No-read-down.
These rules would indeed prevent anyone from writing untrusted information into a
trusted file.
2.2.3
Role Based Access Control
In this type of access control all users are assigned to a role, that has a certain set of
access rights associated to it. In a company or corporation, this can be very advan-
tageous since everyone will have some from of role already (marketing, management,
production etc.). The clear strength is that only the role has to be updated, whenever
changes are made. It can often be mapped directly from the already existing hierar-
chy in an organisation. An example can be seen in figure 2.2 below. It is important
to find that balance in the number of roles, in the access control system. Too many
roles means that not much advantage is gained, since changing some access rights
would mean changing a lot of roles, like in the access control matrix. Too few roles
means some people can gain access to files or resources they should not have. For this
reason role based access control will be difficult to scale if the users are too distinct.
Figure 2.2: Role Based Access Control.
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Theory
2.3
Cryptographic Access Control
Cryptographic access control is a paradigm that seems very well suited for distributed
systems, since everything is centred around cryptographic keys and distributing them
to the correct people. The variation we will be considering in this thesis is one that
has three keys per file, a symmetric encryption key, a private key for signing and a
public key for verification. It is based on the work of Harrington and Jensen[HJ03].
Files on the server are encrypted and signed so only users with possession of the
symmetric key and the verification key, can read a file. A user with the signing key
will also have writing access to the file.
What separates cryptographic access control from the forms of access control
mentioned so far, is that there are no notion of users, at least form the servers
perspective. Since access is granted based on the possession of keys, when a server
is presented with a request for a file, it will use the keys provided to find and verify
the correct revision of that file. This means that someone without writing rights to
a certain file, will never be able to mess it up for others.
The server neither knows or cares about who makes a request, it is up to the users
of the system to handle the keys properly. The security policies of such a system
is merged, with the cryptographic layer that would normally exist in parallel. Its
security lies in the strength of the ciphers and keys, used to encrypt and sign the
files.
2.3.1
Key Rings
The core concept of cryptographic access control is the key ring. This is a file that
stores the cryptographic keys of a given set of files. Each file system will therefore
have its own key ring, that stores the keys for those files that exists in it. It will
therefore also contain a reference to the local file, as well as a reference to the file on
the server. This makes sure every file is properly handled both locally and remotely.
An example of a key ring containing files and other key rings can be seen below in
figure 2.3. A key ring can contain both regular files but also other key rings. This is
needed to share files.
Figure 2.3: Example of a key ring containing both files and key rings.
==PAGE:27==
2.4 Client Side File System
15
2.3.2
File Sharing
Since a key ring is just a simple file, it can be uploaded to the server as well, where
it will have cryptographic keys and a server location associated to it. So in order to
share any number of files, one only needs to share the key information of a shared
keyring. A shared keyring is created by defining what files should be shared and with
what rights. When the keyring is added to the file system, it too will have its own
key information, just like any other file. So the user can send this information to his
friend, who will put it into his own key ring. Then his application can download the
shared key ring and then the files that it contains.
Since files shared can be key rings, it would be possible to construct a hierarchy
of file access much like in role based access control. In fact possession of a key ring
is much like being assigned to a role, and can even inherit access rights from other
key rings as well. Adding users and files is far easier than removing them, meaning
it would be most beneficial in an additive environment, where data may be changed
but not removed. Adding a user to the hierarchy would be done by simply giving the
key ring associated with the apropitate role in the hierarchy. Removing a user would
require all files that user has access to, to have new keys and be re-encrypted.
2.4
Client Side File System
FUSE is an abbreviation for File System in Userspace, a UNIX based software inter-
face, used to create file systems without modifying the kernel. It works by having a
file system running in userspace that uses the FUSE module to bridge between kernel-
and userspace. The typical way a file system works, is that a user performs an action
on a file and the operating system handles it. The two places for the user and the
operative system works have been given the names userspace and kernelspace. The
userspace is where the user can work and run his applications. If the user needs the
operating system to do something, a system call will be sent down to kernelspace.
Here the operating system runs its services and schedules CPU time to the running
processes. The kernel is crucial to an operating system, and errors could mean the
system becomes unstable.
2.4.1
FUSE Workings
A file system developed with fuse is a binary file that links to the FUSE libraries.
The framework allows custom definition of file system operation and carries them
out. These custom file operations exists in a so called Virtual File System, within the
kernel and everything the user does is handled by FUSE. We can take the figure below
as an example of a file system operation call. The hello program is an example from
the github page[FUSa]. As we can see an ls command is issued in the mount point
and sent to the virtual file system and handed over to FUSE. From here it is sent to
the program where it is handled and the result is sent back to the mount point.
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Theory
Figure 2.4: A system call in FUSE.
2.4.2
FUSE Operations
Here is a list of the FUSE operations available for implementation[FUSb].
getattr gets attributes of a file.
readlink reads the target of a symbolic link.
getdir reads the content of a directory.
mknod and unlink creates and deletes files respectively.
mkdir and rmdir creates and deletes directories respectively.
rename renames a file.
symlink creates a symbolic link to a file.
link creates a hard link to a file.
chmod changes permission bits for a file.
chown changes owner and group for a file.
truncate changes the size of a file.
utime changes access and modification time for a file.
open opens a file.
read reads the content of an open file
write writes data to an open file.
statfs gets file system statistics
flush represents fulsh-cached data.
release is called when the file system is done working with the file.
fsync synchronises file content.
getxattr setxattr, listxattr and removexattr gets, sets, list and removes ex-
tended attributes.
==PAGE:29==
2.5 Storage Server
17
2.5
Storage Server
MediaWiki is a free to use open source software used by the Wikimedia Foundation
for the Wikipedia project and many others[Fou]. The source code is written in PHP
and uses MySQL to handle database queries. MediaWiki enjoys frequent updates
and an active community constantly improving its performance. The installation is
quite simple and can be done on both Windows, MAC OS and Linux. The only
requirements for installing is to have a database server such as MySQL, PHP and a
web server such as Apache. For an even easier installation one can use XAMPP[XAM]
a program that handles all three.
Since MediaWiki is open source there are extensions that can be installed as well
to the wiki, further enhancing its capabilities. Like with all third party software one
should be careful not to install a harmful extension, that can pose a security risk.
2.5.1
Usage
When MediaWiki is installed, no client is provided as it in entirely a web based
application. By default the installed wiki can be found at localhost but can be changed
later in the LocalSettings.php file. This file is generated during setup and can be
tweaked later to accommodate the needs of the wiki.
It is important to note that the purpose we are applying to a wiki server is far
from conventional. A wiki is meant to be viewed in a browser, and edited by it users.
From the servers point of view we are going to uploaded a bunch of files and then
never use them in any articles. Also a wiki does not handle conflicts, and even though
we are not aiming to recreate a git repository, it is still something to keep in mind.
Doing things on a wiki requires tokens [Wikb], they are simple strings of characters
that the server uses make sure everything is in order. There are different kinds of
tokens, but for this project we are only interested in two, the login and the csrf(cross-
site request forgery) tokens. The login token pretty much says it all, it is used in
the login process. The csrf token is used when we want to change files i.e. upload
something, in which case it is referred to as an edit token.
2.5.2
MediaWiki API
The MediaWiki API[Wika] is what gives an application access to all the functional-
ities of a wiki. The API is a REST service that uses URLs as commands sent over
HTTP. Some of the most important parameters are action used to tell the API
what command is to be called. The parameter titles used when an article or file
is accessed and format is used to dictate how the response should be written. The
commands themselves have to be stringed together by setting the values of specific
parameters, much like using a command line tool from a terminal. When a command
is called the API will either return the result, or give an error depending on what is
wrong. The functionalities we would like to use are presented below.
==PAGE:30==
18
2 Theory
• Login
• Download File
• Upload File
• Get revision of file
Login
The login function using the API is a multi step process [Wikc]. The action param-
eter itself is called clientlogin and expects a username and password as well as a
login token. A return URL is also required, but can be set to any site, as it will not be
relevant. Naturally the login starts with the user requesting this login token, which
is done like this:
<WikiLink>/api?action=query&meta=tokens&type=login&format=xml
This will result in a login token, that is then used in the clientlogin like this:
<WikiLink>/api?action=clientlogin&loginreturnurl=<URL>&logintoken=
<LoginToken>&username=<UserName>&password=<PassWord>&format=xml
Now the user is logged in, but in order for him to be able to do anything he needs a
csrf token which is retrieved in the same fashion as the login token:
<WikiLink>/api?action=query&meta=tokens&type=csrf&format=xml
Download File
While there is no direct command to download a file, however it is possible to get a
file by requesting its path on the server like this.
<WikiLink>/api?action=query&prop=imageinfos&titles=File:<FileName>&iiprop=url
&format=xml
This results in a direct link to the file that can be used to download the file in question.
Upload File
A file can be uploaded with a single command, it requires the csrf token obtained
after login.
<WikiLink>/api?action=upload&ignorewarnings=1&filename=<FileName>
&file=<LocalFilePath>&token=<CSRFToken>&format=xml
The ignorewarnings allows files to be overwritten, otherwise the upload would be
rejected if a file with that name already exists.
==PAGE:31==
2.6 Glossary
19
Get Revision of File
All revisions of file are saved on the server, these can be retrieved with the following
command. <WikiLink>/api?action=query&ignorewarnings=1&filename=File:<FileName>&
file=<LocalFilePath>&token=<ReceivedCSRFToken>&format=xml
The command results in a list of all revision urls related to that given file.
2.6
Glossary
FUSE The abbreviation for the File System in Userspace framework, we will be
using to construct the file system.
Key ring A data structure containing information about what keys a file is en-
crypted with and where it is located on the server. It is used by the file system
to handle the files it contains.
Shared key ring A key ring containing information about files that have been
shared. The information is extracted from the file system key ring described
above.
Shared key ring information When a key ring is shared, that files information is
put in a new key ring. This file is what is sent to others, when sharing files.
Mount point The place where the file system exists and the user can work on the
files, within it.
Key When referring to a key in this project, it is a cryptographic key, used in either
encryption of a file or to create a signature.
Signature When a file is encrypted with a private key, we say it is signed. The
result is a digital signature that can be verified with a public key.
==PAGE:32==
20
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3
Requirements
Now that we have a problem statement in place and some theory to help solve this,
we can begin defining what requirements the system should have. We will start by
outlining the rough requirements for the functionalities of the system, where we we will
also state what entities in the system are responsible for which functionalities. Then
we will dig deeper into the the functionalities of the application, going through their
individual requirements. Then we shall define what cryptographic requirements we
see fit, and finally create some use cases for an overview of the functional requirements.
3.1
System Requirements
The system as a whole should consist of an application to handle all file system
operations as well as the connection to the MediaWiki server, that acts as remote
storage. The MediaWiki server is not to have any control over the files whatsoever,
as they are all to be encrypted. Since the server cannot handle file conflicts, we will
not be considering this to be a requirement, for out system. The system will also
have to contain a file sharing mechanism that enables users to specify which files
should be shared with what access rights. This part is not required to be tied in with
the file system, but can be its own separate program that can use some of the same
functionalities.
More generally about the usage of the system, it is required that a user does not
have to be registered anywhere, both on the server or any other third party, as this
system should be as decentralised as possible. Furthermore the user should any user
can mount a file system anywhere on his machine that he has access to and should
be able to mount multiple systems at once.
The user will constantly be needing the newest version of the files shared with
him. It is therefore required that the system has te ability to do this, before a file
is overwritten. The MediaWiki server will have no way of notifying users of changes,
since it does not know or care which users are in possession of which files. It must
then be the clients responsibility to check if a newer version exists sometime before
the user overwrites his files.
==PAGE:34==
22
3 Requirements
3.2
Application Requirements
In order to operate the the application a user should either have FUSE installed on
the machine, or have root access. This is needed in order to unmount the application,
which is done by using a FUSE command called fusermount or the UNIX command
umount requiring root access. Both of these options takes the absolute path to the
mount point as argument.
In the following sections we shall go through the requirements for each component
of the application. They are split into three parts: The file system requirements for
the functionalities within the file system itself, the key ring requirements for how keys
should be handled and the MediaWiki requirements for how the wiki should be set
up and how it should behave.
3.2.1
File System Requirements
An overall requirement for the file system is that it should be entirely up to the user
to choose how files and folders are structured. It should not matter that the system
contains shared files, he should still be able to place any file anywhere in the file
system, without compromising the file system it originated from. The file system is
responsible for handling all file operations that the user performs. Their requirements
are described in the following.
Mounting the File System
Mounting the file system requires two things, a source folder and a mount point. The
source folder may already contain files and folders, but they are not to be considered
a part of it, and thus added to the key ring before they are modified by the user. An
existing key ring can of course be present, but if a key ring is not detected, as in a
new system, a keyring should be created in the root directory.
Creating a New File
When a new file is created a fresh set of keys should be created as well. These should
be written to the corresponding keyring, under the file name given to the file by the
user. A newly created and thus empty file is not required to be uploaded.
Adding a File
Adding a file is a little different than creating a new one, since the added file will
contain something. When a file is added it is required that news keys are created and
written to the key ring. The file should then be encrypted and a hash of the file is
created and signed with the private key. The encrypted file is then uploaded together
with the signature.
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Application Requirements
23
Renaming a File
Renaming a file should make the application find the entry in the corresponding
keyring, and change its path to the new name. Moving a file to a different folder will
count as renaming it.
Reading a File
When a file is read by the user it is required that the file is the newest version. It is
therefore required for the application to check if a newer version exists and download
it, if it finds one. This requirement is to minimise the risk of users overwriting changes
form other users.
Changing a File
When a user makes a change to an file its information should be read from its cor-
responding key ring.
Then the file is encrypted and a hash of the file is created
and signed with the private key. The file should then be uploaded along with the
signature, creating a new version of it on the server.
3.2.2
Key Ring Requirements
The key ring should be an XML file on the users machine and exist in the root
directory of the file system. This is to keep the system as decentralised as possible,
where all operations can be done locally. It should act as an inventory list for the file
system, containing information about what keys each file has, and where it can be
found on the server. In the following we will define the requirements for the actions
of creating keys sharing files and revocation.
Key Handling
The keys used in this project must consists of a symmetric key, a public and private
key. The symmetric key should be used for encryption and decryption, the private
key should be used to create a digital signature of a file and the public key should be
used to verify signatures. It is required that all keys are created and used together,
meaning that if one key of a file is to be replaced, then all of the keys for this file
must be replaced.
All files also have some additional information besides keys tied to them. This is
the files name on the remote server and its direct link. It is required that each file on
the server has its own unique name and thus a unique link.
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Requirements
Sharing a File
Sharing files should be done in part by a separate program. When this program is
run it should ask the user to define which files should be shared and with what access
rights. Before a file is shared there would need to be a check of ownership of the file,
by verifying the existence of a private key. A user that has been trusted with writing
privileges should also be able to share it. After this the program should read the
information of these files, in the corresponding key ring and create a new key ring,
in a specified location. If an access right is given as read, it is required that only the
symmetric key and public key is written to the new key ring and if it is write access
the private key should be given as well. The newly created key ring should then be
added to the file system, like all other files. The newly added key ring would then
have its own keys and server location, which is what the user needs, in order to share
the files. The application must therefore write this information to a key ring that is
not uploaded.
Acquiring a Shared File
When a file has been shared the user will need a way to get it into The file system of
other users. This is done by sending the information key ring created when the files
key ring was uploaded. This is not meant to be done by the application, as we do not
have a notion of users, and thus no information about where the file should be sent.
The file will therefore have to be received by conventional communication methods
like E-Mail or other forms of messaging systems.
Once the file has been received it should be loaded into the appropriate key ring,
by the file sharing program mentioned previously. Once the shared key ring is in
the file system key ring, the application will handle the rest, and the files will be
downloaded next time the file system is mounted.
Revocation of Access Rights
Since the server does not know which users have what files, the application cannot
tell it to remove files from their key rings. Even if that was possible it would not
make a difference in terms of security. This is because we assume all files that come
into possession of a user can be made into a local copy, elsewhere on the machine.
So once a version of a file has been shared, the application might as well let that
user keep that version of it. The way the application can restrict access to files, is
by removing the ability to access future versions of them. For this to be done, it is
required to create new keys and share the file again with this new information. It is
not required for the file to be moved to a different location on the server.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Application Requirements
25
3.2.3
MediaWiki Requirements
Here the requirements for the MediaWiki server will be described both in regards to
setting up the wiki, storing files and actions performed with the server. If the wiki is
meant to be open it is not required to create a user on the wiki, but for this project
we have chosen to create one to get as close as possible to a real life scenario. For
simplistic purposes the user name and password, in this project, is just ”WikiUser”
and ”password1234”.
It has later been learned that MediaWiki servers default to a maximum file size
of 100 MB. If this project is to be any useful in the real world, it is important that
this size is changed in the wiki settings as well.
LocalSettings Requirements
When the wiki is installed on a machine, a file called LocalSettings.php is created.
This file is required to contain the appropriate settings for making the project work.
The first thing that is required is allowing uploads, so that the wiki will actually
accept files. Next the appropriate file types will have to be allowed in order for the
wiki to accept them. Since the uploaded files are encrypted, this file type would have
to match this.
File Storage
The wiki is required to store encrypted files and make new revisions as they are
updated. It is required that all revisions are kept at all times, to ensure files are
available to the users. Stored files should also have the signature associated to them,
such that they can be verified.
Logging In
When the file system is mounted on the users machine it starts by logging in to the
wiki, so that the application can upload files. It is required that the login process
is successful and provides the application with the ability to upload files, from this
point on. The application should only be required to log in while mounting the file
system.
Upload File
When uploading a file it is required that the file is encrypted with the symmetric key
of that file, and that a signature is created as well. A file may be uploaded with a
wrong signature, but it is not required for the server to take action against this since
it cannot verify files itself.
==PAGE:38==
26
3 Requirements
Download File
Files downloaded should always be of the newest correct version. By correct version
we mean that it is required for files to be verified on their signature. If a file is not
verified the next revision will be attempted. It is required that there must exist at
least one verifiable file revision for all users who have had access to that given file.
3.3
Cryptographic Requirements
Without cryptography we could not achieve the desired level of security, so it is
important that we carefully specify what we define as security. This section will deal
with this and introduce the concepts we will consider.
In general the three main components in system security are confidentiality, in-
tegrity and availability, but for this project we shall also consider non-repudiation,
authenticity and authorisation. Each of these concepts will be investigated for their
impact in this project.
3.3.1
Confidentiality
Confidentiality is the protection against information disclosure to any unauthorised
party. This is handled by encrypting the information such that it is only readable, to
those who has the correct key. This concept is very important in this project, as we
want to ensure the users that no one else knows the contents of their files. It required
that no matter how many files are stolen form the server, it should not be possible
to view their contents, without having possession of the appropriate keys.
3.3.2
Integrity
Integrity is the protection of information such that it is not modified by an unautho-
rised party. More specifically if such a modification should take place, it would be
detected and the information discarded as invalid. This is done by creating a digital
signature of a file such that other parties can verify it and know the information has
not been tampered with. In this project it is required that all files have a digital
signature tied to them, such that they can be verified.
3.3.3
Availability
Availability is the protection of information such that it is available, when requested
by a user. While technically not something that can be solved with cryptography it
is considered a requirement in the same context as the other concepts. It is usually
handled by having some form of back ups or a set of protocols designed to mitigate
denial of service attacks.
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Cryptographic Requirements
27
Some times when availability is threatened it is because of a hardware failure, some
server maintenance or maybe even natural disasters. When an attacker is involved it
is known as the aforementioned denial of service attack (DoS), where it is attempted
to make the server unresponsive by flooding it with requests. The mentioned protocol
could be to shut off clients making frequent requests, but with enough coordination
the attack will still succeed. This is not something this project should deal with and
we will not consider this a requirement of the application we are building.
3.3.4
Authorization
Authorization is an access control concept in which an identified user is verified to
perform a certain action, if he indeed is allowed to do so. Users without access or
permission to perform the action should be denied. This project does not revolve the
identity of a user however, but rather the keys he is in possession of. This gives the
requirement that any user with only possession of a public key for a file, should not
suddenly be able to sign it. By this we mean that we will not require the application
to stop an unauthorized writing operation, but it should be able to detect the ones
that are encountered.
3.3.5
Authenticity
Authenticity is ensuring that transactions in a system are genuine and that all parties
truly are who they claim to be. However authentication is not a requirement in this
project since the storage server does not need to trust the clients it serves.
The
authenticity is required when sending shared key rings such that they do not end up
in the possession of an unintended user. It is not a requirement for this project to
provide a secure communication protocol, but one is needed in order for the files to
stay safe.
3.3.6
Non-repudiation
Non-repudiation refers not so much to protection of data, but more on users inability
to deny their involvement in a transaction. Since we do not deal with the concept of
users the only transactions we can apply this to is when files are shared and a keyring
is obtained by a user. Any user that receives a key ring, giving them access to a set of
files, should be able to enjoy its full functionality. If any transaction of a file sharing
was deemed a mistake, the access rights can only be revoked, without any retroactive
effects.
==PAGE:40==
28
3 Requirements
3.4
Use Cases
We shall now present some use cases for some of the functionalities described in this
section. This will make it easier for us to formalise them when designing the system.
It will also help in the testing phase, to see if the functionalities are working as
intended.
3.4.1
Mounting the File System
The only precondition for this is that the mount point must be empty. The result is
that the file system is mounted and there is a connection to the server, to allow the
user to upload files.
1. The user starts the application with paths to the source directory srcdir and
the mount point mntpnt.
2. The application logs in to the wiki.
3. The application checks if a key ring kr exists in srcdir, and creates one if not.
4. The application reads through the key ring kr verifying, downloading and de-
crypting all files in it.
5. If it discovers a shared key ring, it will open it and download the files within
and write the information to the key ring kr.
6. When it is done, it will mount the file system in the mount point mntpnt and
hand the control over to FUSE.
3.4.2
Creating a File
The precondition is that the file system is mounted. The result is that the empty file
is created with, possibly, a new name that will be in the corresponding key ring along
with the key information.
1. The user creates a new file f somewhere in the mount point.
2. The application creates a fresh set of keys: A symmetric key and a public/pri-
vate key pair.
3. The user is given the option of naming the file, but this can be ignored.
4. The files corresponding keys are put in a new entry for the file in the key ring.
==PAGE:41==
3.4 Use Cases
29
3.4.3
Adding a File
The precondition is that the file system is mounted and the user has a non empty file
somewhere on his machine. The result is that the file is uploaded to the server and
its key information is added to the corresponding key ring.
1. The user either copy/paste or drags a file f, to the mount point
2. The application creates a fresh set of keys: A symmetric key and a public/pri-
vate key pair.
3. This information is put in a new entry for the file f in the key ring.
4. The application checks if the file exists on the server, and creates new unique
server name servn since it is new and does not have one. The name is then
added to the keyring.
5. The file is encrypted and signature s is generated.
6. The file is uploaded to the server as servn along with the signature s.
7. After the file is uploaded its link on the server is retrieved and written to the
key ring.
3.4.4
Reading a File
The precondition for this is that the file system is mounted and that a file exists
within it. The result is that the user reads the newest verified version of the file.
1. The user selects a file f he wishes to open.
2. The application finds the file f on the server and checks if it is newer than the
local version.
3. If this turns out to be true the application tries to verify it.
4. If the verification fails it will try earlier revisions until it succeeds.
5. The verified revision will then be downloaded and decrypted overwriting the
requested file.
6. The file is opened and the user can now see its contents.
==PAGE:42==
30
3 Requirements
3.4.5
Changing a File
The precondition for this is that the file system is mounted and that a file exists within
it. The result is that the file is uploaded in encrypted form and with a signature.
1. The user makes a change in a file f and saves it.
2. The application retrieves the key information from the key ring.
3. The application finds the server name servn in the corresponding key ring. If
the file is new and does not have one, a server name will be created and written
to the key ring.
4. The file is encrypted and a signature s is created.
5. The file is uploaded to the server as servn along with the signature s.
3.4.6
Sharing a File
The precondition for this is that there exists files in the file system that the user wants
to share. While it is not required that the file system is mounted, at the beginning of
the operation it must be mounted before a shared key ring is added to it. The result
is that a key ring is created, containing all the information of the shared keys.
1. A user wishes to share one or more files f with someone.
2. The user selects the file system key ring kr that corresponds to the selected files
and picks a destination and name for the shared key ring shkr.
3. The user then specifies, in the sharing program, the files f he wishes to share
along with the access rights a they should have.
4. The sharing program finds the selected files within the key ring kr, for each file
fi it writes the appropriate keys for read and write access.
5. The new key ring shkr will appear in the selected destination, under the given
name, with a tag to indicate it is a shared key ring.
6. The user puts the new key ring shkr into his own file system, where it is added
to the file system key ring kr and uploaded to the server.
7. Another key ring keyinfo is created containing the key information, of the now
shared key ring shkr.
8. The user sends this file keyinfo to the people he wants to share the files f with.
==PAGE:43==
3.4 Use Cases
31
3.4.7
Acquiring a Shared File
The precondition is that the user has received a file containing the key information
of a shared key ring. The result is that the information is written to that users file
system key ring, such that the shared files are downloaded when the file system is
mounted again.
1. A user receives file keyinfo containing key information a shared key shkr from
a friend.
2. The user specifies, in the sharing program, which key ring kr the key information
of shkr should be loaded into.
3. The key information is now present in the users key ring kr.
4. The user mounts the file system and it starts to download the files in the key
ring kr.
5. The application finds the shared key ring shkr while reading through the file
systems own key ring kr.
6. The shared key ring shkr is verified and downloaded and the application now
reads through it.
7. For each file fi it will verify and download them into the root directory of the
file system.
8. The file system is mounted and the user is now in possession of the shared files
f, with the given access rights a.
3.4.8
Revocation of Access Rights
The precondition for this is that the user has some files, which access rights he wishes
to revoke. It is also required that the file system is mounted either before or during
the procedure before the keyring is added to the file system.
1. A user wishes to revoke some access rights a of some shared files f.
2. The user selects the file system key ring kr that corresponds to the files f and
picks a name and destination for the shared key ring shkr.
3. The user then specifies, in the file sharing program, which files f should be
revoked, and what their new access rights a* should be.
4. For each file a new set of keys is created and they are written to the key ring
kr.
5. Each file is then encrypted and uploaded together with a signature of the file.
==PAGE:44==
32
3 Requirements
6. The newly created keys are also written to a keyring in the selected destination
under the given name.
7. The newly generated keyring is put in to the file system, where a key ring
keyinfo containing a single entry is created.
8. This new key ring keyinfo can then be shared with those who have not had their
access rights revoked.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4
Design
In this chapter we shall describe how the requirements are to be met by the application.
We will explain what methods and techniques the different functionalities will be using
in order to work as intended. We shall first see how the system as a whole shall be
designed, where it will be clear which entities are connected and communicating.
We shall see how the file system operations are to be incorporated and how key
rings are going to be structured. Then we shall see how the communication between
the application and the server is handled as well as how the cryptography in the
application will work. Lastly we shall see the use cases realised in the form of sequence
diagrams to help in the implementation later.
4.1
Overall System Design
In this section we will define the different components in the system and how they
relate to each other in terms of usage and communication. Each component in the
system has a different function, but we can see them working in a certain hierarchy.
In the figure below we see each component and their relation to other components.
Figure 4.1: Overview of the system.
==PAGE:46==
34
4 Design
The top row is the main components of the system, consisting of the MediaWiki
Server, the Client Application and the File Sharing Program. These represent the
core functionalities of the system that the user will work with. The Client Application
is used to control the file system and connect to the MediaWiki Server and the File
Sharing Program is used, when files are to be shared between users. The outgoing
arrows show what parts of the system are used by which component. A full drawn
arrow indicates a functionality and the dashed arrow indicates a data connection.
The four functionality components are as follows:
File System Operations This is the main part of the application and represents
the file system that the user is working on. It is connected to the other com-
ponents because they are relied on, in order for the file system to work as
intended.
Key Ring The key ring is used to let the file system know what files it contains, and
what keys it has associated to each file. It is used to read and write keys for all
files, making sure the file system gets the right information.
Cryptography This component handles everything the system needs in terms of
cryptography. It creates new keys when they are needed, and encrypts files
before they are sent to the server. It also handles creation of hashes and signa-
tures.
Client-Server Interaction This is where the connection to the storage server is
created and used by the file system. It handles upload and download operations
and checks if a file name on the server is available.
4.2
File System Operations Design
In this section we shall define how the functionalities of the application shall be
realised in regards to the FUSE operations, shown in section 2.4.2. All functionalities
of the application must be placed within one of these functions, such that they can
be carried out by the file system.
Operations like creating, renaming and reading files, should go in mknod, rename
and read respectively. Once the file system has carried out the appropriate operation
on the file, the functionality for the application will take over for the rest of the given
operation. Except in the read operation, where the file is downloaded before it is
read, so the applications functionality must happen first.
For encrypting and uploading files we need to use an operation that is called when
the file system is completely done with the file, such that it is safe to use. This is
the release operation, which is called when a file is no longer being written to, or
has any references open. When a file is written to, and thus released, it will not be
indicated weather or not this file is new or not, so a check will be made to see if it
has a server name in the key ring.
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Key Ring Design
35
4.3
Key Ring Design
The key rings are an essential part of this project and serves as an inventory list, for
the file system. It will be written in a mark-up language where each file will have its
own entry, with subsequent data about keys and server information. Each entry will
have to carry a unique identification attribute, such that they can actually be found.
The entries will be identified by the files absolute path on the system, as these are
easy monitor for changes and guaranteed to be unique. Another method using the
inode number was considered, but from what could be gathered this would change
when the application is reinitialised rendering them unreliable.
The key ring will need a top element where its children are the files. Each file
element will contain an attribute with the path to the file on the machine. They
will also have a child element, which have attributes containing the rest of the data,
namely the symmetric key and IV, the public/private key pair and the server file
name and direct path.
<keyring>
<file path="path/to/file">
<data symmkey="symmetricKey" iv="IV" pubkey="publicKey" prikey="
privateKey" servername="uniqueName" serverpath="link/on/server">
</data>
</file>
</keyring>
Listing 4.1: Key Ring Structure.
It is important to note that the files in the key ring can be both data files and
other key rings. There is no limit for how many nested key rings one can have, or if
one key ring is present in multiple other key rings.
The key ring is meant to be used, whenever a file in the system is accessed in
some way. The values of a file entry can change, with the exception of the server
name and server path. Once a file is on the server it will stay in the same place. Key
information change when a file is revoked and the path of the file, when ever it is
moved or renamed.
4.4
Client-Server Interaction Design
This section will deal with the design of the functionalities used in the communica-
tion, between the file system and the MediaWiki server. First we shall see how the
connection to the server is created. Then we will investigate exactly how encrypted
files are handled, by the server as well as the signature. Lastly we shall see how the
unique file names are handled.
==PAGE:48==
36
4 Design
4.4.1
Creating the Connection
The connection is created by the application and in order do this and maintaining
it, it shall use the tokens described earlier in section 2.5.2. When the file system is
mounted the application will request a login token such that the wiki will allow it
to be logged in. It receives this together with a session cookie, giving the server an
idea of which clients have received which tokens. Now the log in can be done using
the credentials built in to the application along with the token and session cookie.
When the login is done the application will request an edit token and the connection
is considered to be established.
While the file system is mounted the session cookie and the edit token are stored
to be used in upload of files. Note that it is not necessary to keep the login token.
When the file system is unmounted all tokens are discarded, and new ones will be
requested upon a new mount.
4.4.2
Uploading Files
Files are uploaded in an encrypted state, disallowing use of their original file extension.
This is because the file type no longer match the actual data in the file, and the server
will not accept them, just like they cannot be read normally by their usual editor. To
tackle this we need to use a universal file format that the server will accept, regardless
of what type a file originally was. In order to determine what type to use a file
command was run on an encrypted file, which showed that the file was just ”data”.
We have therefore chosen the type .bin representing a binary file and thus the format
of the encrypted file.
When it comes to uploading the signature MediaWiki offer to upload files with a
comment. This is intended to be used when editing articles, to let others know what
was changed or fixed. We will intend to use it as a place to store the signature. Each
revision of a file will have its own independent comment, which cannot be changed.
4.4.3
Unique File Names
The file names will be made of base 64 encoded strings of length 24. They are ensured
to be unique by having a check made if a file with that name already exists. While
we say file names are required to be unique, this is only in regards to performance
and general sanity. In theory all files in every file system could share the same file on
the server. Since all files are signed and verified all users would get their correct file,
in the correct version. They would need to attempt thousands of files before reaching
the right one, so in practice it is no where near feasible.
==PAGE:49==
4.5 Cryptography Design
37
4.5
Cryptography Design
The theory and requirements for the cryptographic functions have been laid out, so
now we are ready to chose what algorithms to use, and how strong we would like
the keys to be. It is important that the choice of cipher and key length meets the
cryptographic standards of today. To determine what standard is used and what key
length is considered safe we look at the recommendations of NIST[NIS].
Functionality
Cipher
Key Length
File Encryption
AES-CBC
256
File Decryption
AES-CBC
256
File Hashing
SHA-256
-
Signature Handling
RSA
2048
Table 4.1: Chosen algorithms and key lengths.
In the table above the choices for cryptographic operations are outlined. The AES
algorithm has been chosen, since it is the NIST standard and the key length of 256
bits is supposed to be sufficient until 2030. For hashing we have chosen SHA-256 as
it is still secure enough to be considered standard. For signature handling we have
chosen RSA with a key length of 2048. RSA is the NIST standard and the key length
will also be sufficient until 2030.
In the provided recommendation there are also time lines for how long a key should
be used, called cryptoperiod. Naturally the longer a key is used the less secure it will
be and when a cryptoperiod ends the key must be destroyed. For the types of keys we
use the cryptoperiods are around 2 years. Automatic renewal of keys is not something
we will focus on in this project, but it can be done manually by the user by revoking
a file, thus creating new keys.
4.6
System Integration
In this section we will provide sequence diagrams for the functionalities described in
the requirements section. This is to show how information is expected to flow in the
system.
4.6.1
Mounting the File System
1: Start The user starts the client application with the source directory and mount
point specified.
2: getSession and 3 The application logs in and receives a session cookie.
4: getEditToken and 5 The application retrieves an edit token, using the cookie.
==PAGE:50==
38
4 Design
6: initialiseKeyRing and 7 The application checks for an existing key ring, and
generates one if it does not exist.
8: initFileSystem and 15 All files present in the file system key ring will be down-
loaded. If a shared key ring is encountered it will be downloaded and the files
within as well.
9: verifyFile and 10 Each file is verified and the correct version is retrieved.
11: download and 12 The verified file is downloaded.
13: decryptFile and 14 The downloaded file is decrypted into its location in the
file system.
16: fuseMain Control of the file system is handed over to FUSE, and it is now
mounted.
Figure 4.2: Sequence diagram for mounting the file system.
==PAGE:51==
4.6 System Integration
39
4.6.2
Creating a File
1: Create File The user takes the file from its location on his machine and outs it,
into the file system.
2: mknod and 3 The file system handles the file and it appears in the specified
location.
4: writeKeys and 7 The file system tells the key ring to create new keys for that
given file.
5: generateKeys and 6 The keys are generated and stored in the requested key
ring.
Figure 4.3: Sequence diagram for creating a new file in the file system.
4.6.3
Adding a File
1: Add File The user takes the file from its location on his machine and puts it,
into the file system.
2: mknod and 3 The file system handles the file and it appears in the specified
location.
4 writeKeys and 7 The file system tells the key ring to create new keys for that
given file.
==PAGE:52==
40
4 Design
5 generateKeys and 6 The keys are generated and stored in the requested key
ring.
8: read ServerName and 11 The file system requests the files name on the server.
9 CheckServerName and 10 The file is brand new, so a new server name is cre-
ated.
The name is then checked on the server that no file with that name
already exists.
12 readKeys and 13 The keys of the file are read from the key ring. The read key
information is the symmetric key, the IV and the private key.
14 encryptFile and 15 The file is encrypted with its associated symmetric key.
16: createSignature and 17 A hash of the file is generated and signed using the
private key. This results in a digital signature of the file.
18: uploadFile and 19 The file is uploaded to the server under its previously des-
ignated server name. The uploaded file will also have its signature attached to
it on the server.
20: setFilePath and 23 The path on the server is requested by the file system to
be written to the key ring.
22: getFilePath and 22 The server name is found in the key ring and the file path
is requested from the server.
==PAGE:53==
4.6 System Integration
41
Figure 4.4: Sequence diagram for adding a file to the file system.
4.6.4
Reading a File
1: Read File Opens a file in the file system, in order to read its contents.
2: read and 11 The file system prepares to read the file.
3: readKeys and 4 The keys for that particular file are read from the key ring.
==PAGE:54==
42
4 Design
5: verifyFile and 6 The file is verified to the correct version.
7: dowload and 8 The verified file is downloaded.
9: decryptFile and 10 The file is decrypted into its place in the file system, where
after it is read.
Figure 4.5: Sequence diagram for reading a file.
4.6.5
Changing a File
1: Change File The user makes a change in a file and saves it.
2: write and 3 The file system writes the changes to the file and releases it.
4: read ServerName and 5 The file system requests the files name on the server.
6: readKeys and 7 The keys of the file are read from the key ring. The read key
information is the symmetric key, the IV and the private key.
8 encryptFile and 9 The file is encrypted with its associated symmetric key.
10: createSignature and 11 A hash of the file is generated and signed using the
private key. This results in a digital signature of the file.
==PAGE:55==
4.6 System Integration
43
12: uploadFile and 13 The file is uploaded to the server under its server name.
The uploaded file will also have its signature attached to it on the server.
Figure 4.6: Sequence diagram for changing a file.
4.6.6
Sharing a File
1: Share File The user wants to share a set of files, with some access rights, and
starts the file sharing program.
2: readFileInfo and 3 The files information is read according to the given access
rights.
4: writeSharedFile and 5 The gathered file information is written to a key ring
in the specified destination.
6: addFile The key ring is added to the file system like any other file would be.
7: writeSharedKey and 8 After the file is encrypted and uploaded, the generated
file information is written into a new key ring, with just that one entry.
==PAGE:56==
44
4 Design
Figure 4.7: Sequence diagram for sharing a file.
4.6.7
Acquire a Shared File
1: Load File The file sharing program is started, specifying the shared key ring
information, and the key ring it should be loaded into.
2: readFileNode and 3 The single file entry of the shared key ring is read.
4: addNode and 5 The read node is added to the file system key ring.
==PAGE:57==
4.6 System Integration
45
Figure 4.8: Sequence diagram for acquiring a shared file.
4.6.8
Revocation of Access Rights
1: Revoke File The user wants o revoke access rights of some files, and starts the
file sharing program.
2: writeKeys and 5 For each file the program prepares to generate cryptographic
keys and write them to the new key ring.
3: generateKeys and 4 The keys are generated and stored in the requested key
ring.
6: readFileInfo and 7 The files information is read according to the given access
rights.
8: writeSharedFile and 9 The gathered file information is written to a key ring
in the specified destination.
10: addFile The key ring is added to the file system like any other file would be.
11: writeSharedKey and 12 After the file is encrypted and uploaded, the gener-
ated file information is written into a new key ring, with just that one entry.
==PAGE:58==
46
4 Design
Figure 4.9: Sequence diagram for revoking file access rights.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 5
Implementation
In this chapter we will go through how the functionalities of the system have been
implemented. We intend to go through what libraries we have used, to solve the tasks
we faced and how they allow the problems to be approached. We will go through the
functionalities discussed thus far and see how they are implemented. Each will be
shown either with the full code or snippets highlighting the most interesting parts.
Those functions that are not fully shown in this chapter can be seen in the designated
appendix.
We will first see an overview of the implementation, identifying which functionali-
ties require which libraries. Then we will see how each of the operations discussed in
the design section have been implemented, showing what decisions had to be made
in order for the system to work as intended.
Some functionalities have failed to be implemented, in the system correctly. This is
the symmetric key generation function, which means symmetric encryption operates
with a fixed key. This function have been shown to work separately within a testing
environment, but the application crashes when reading data produced by it. We will
show how it should have been implemented, for the system to work correctly and
explain why it could not work properly within the system.
5.1
Implementation Overview
The implementation can be seen as the combination of three things, the client system,
where user interactions are made, the libraries handling these interactions and the
storage server which stores the files and deals with requests form the libraries. The
Client system consists of the client application and the file sharing program. The
client application is where the user can access and modify the files in his file system
and the file sharing program creates keys rings that can be shared. It can also load
shared key information in order to complete a sharing process.
In the libraries we have FUSE for handling the virtual file system and MXML
for hndling the key ring operations.
The cryptographic functions are handled by
OpenSSL libraries and the HTTP connection to the storage server is handled by the
cURL library.
The storage server consists of the MediaWiki API handling requests from the
users and the MySQL data base in which the files are stored and retrieved from.
==PAGE:60==
48
5 Implementation
Figure 5.1: Overview of the implementation.
5.2
File System Operations
The file system is based on a FUSE tutorial with an associated example called Big
Brother File System (BBFS)[Pfe]. It has been modified to no longer log file system
calls, while retaining all other functionalities.
It allows itself to be mounted in a
specific directory, through params.h and mirrors it in the given mount point. The
struct defined in params.h can be seen here.
1 struct cs_state {
2 char *rootdir;
3 };
4 #define CS_DATA ((struct cs_state *) fuse_get_context()->private_data)
5
6 #endif
Listing 5.1: The struct used to enable a custom source directory.
The file system operations make use of a function called fullpath that takes the
relative path of the given file and produces the absolute path. These are named as
path and fpath respectively.
An important part of the implementation of the file system operation is that we
need to be able to control which files the rest of the system operations are performed
on. Obviously the systems functionalities only need to handle the files that the user
creates and uses, but the file system uses a lot of other files, in order to work. To
counter this we have set up safety checks that makes the application ignore unwanted
files, which can all be identified on their extension. In this section we will only be
showing the parts of each operation relevant to the key ring and not the actual file
system operation. The full code is shown in Appendix A.3.1.
It was not possible to implement the read function as we intended, since it is not
quite possible to overwrite a file that is already being read. It created a lot of errors
==PAGE:61==
5.2 File System Operations
49
when working with the file and the changes were not uploaded properly. This means
that files are only downloaded to the newest version when the file system is initialised.
5.2.1
FUSE Main
The main function is where the application sets itself up so its ready to work. The
session cookie and edit token are retrieved and the arguments of the application are
handled. At first the application checks for an existing key ring, creating one if that
is not the case. Then the files in the file system are initialised, by initFileSystem
which downloads all files present within the key ring. In the function fuse_main
the virtual file system is created, where the two last arguments represent the custom
data it uses. The bb_oper variable is a struct containing references to the FUSE
operations and coupling them with the functions present in the FUSE code. This
tells FUSE functions are actually implemented and what to do with the system calls
it receives, i.e. if a rename function is not referenced, then files cannot be renamed
etc. The bb_data is the user data we give to FUSE, and it contains the root directory
to the file system as defined in the params.h.
1 char *root = (char *) malloc(32);
2 strcpy(root,cs_data->rootdir);
3 keyring = strcat(root,"/key.ring");
4 if( access(keyring, F_OK ) == -1 ){
5
initkeyring(keyring);
6 }
7 //download files and shared keyrings
8 initFileSystem(keyring, keyring, cs_data->rootdir);
9
10 // turn over control to FUSE
11 fprintf(stderr, "about to call fuse_main\n");
12 fuse_stat = fuse_main(argc, argv, &cs_oper, cs_data);
13 fprintf(stderr, "fuse_main returned %d\n", fuse_stat);
Listing 5.2: The FUSE main function.
5.2.2
Mknod
When a file is created it is first checked if it is not a trash file or a goutsputstream,
used when writing to a file. The rest is very simple as the writeKeys method is called
with the fpath and the key ring location, to start the key creation process for that
file in that key ring.
1 ext = strchr(path, '.');
2 if(ext == NULL){
3
writeKeys(keyring,fpath);
4 }else if((strstr(ext, ".Trash-") == NULL) && (strstr(ext,".goutputstream")
== NULL) && (strstr(ext, ".sharedinfo") == NULL)){
5
writeKeys(keyring,fpath);
6 }
==PAGE:62==
50
5 Implementation
Listing 5.3: Creating a file.
5.2.3
Rename
In the rename operation we are working working with two paths, the old and the new
one. The only thing that need to be checked is that the file in question is not a trash
file, both its original name and the new one.
1 ext = strchr(path,'.');
2 newext = strchr(newpath, '.');
3 if(ext == NULL){
4
keyrename(keyring, fpath, fnewpath);
5 }else if((strstr(ext, ".Trash-") == NULL) && (strstr(newext, ".Trash-") ==
NULL)){
6
keyrename(keyring, fpath, fnewpath);
7 }
Listing 5.4: Rename file.
5.2.4
Release
Release is the function with the most action in it since it is here all cryptographic
functions are used and the upload is issued. It start by reading the keys from the
keyring, and encrypt the file. The encrypted file is placed outside of the file system,
in the tmp folder, to not mix encrypted and plaintext files. Then is checks if the file
is already on the server, by checking if the servername field in the keyring is empty.
If it is this is a new file it uses the same function, but tell it to create a new server
name, by passing the file extension in the third argument. Then the hash of the file
is created and signed. The encrypted file is then uploaded along with the signature.
If a new server name was created the files path on the server is written to the key
ring as well
At the end it checks if the file is a shared key ring identified by the ”_SHAREKEY.xml”
tag. If this is the case it needs to also write the key information to a new file that
the user can then share with others. This file will have the extension .share and the
if statement in the beginning is preventing the application from adding it to the file
system as well thus creating an infinite loop, of shared files.
1 ext = strchr(path,'.');
2 if(ext != NULL){
3
if((strstr(ext, ".Trash-") == NULL) && (strstr(ext,".goutputstream") ==
NULL) &&
4
(strstr(ext, ".ring") == NULL)
&& (strstr(ext,".gitignore") == NULL) &&
5
(strstr(ext, ".~lock") == NULL) && (strstr(ext, ".share") == NULL)){
6
7
struct cryptoKEYS keys = readKeys(keyring, fpath);
==PAGE:63==
5.3 Key Ring Operations
51
8
encryptFile(fpath, keys.symmK, keys.IV);
9
10
servername = readServerName(keyring,path,0);
11
12
if(servername == NULL){
13
servername = readServerName(keyring,fpath,1);
14
char *digest = digest_message(fpath);
15
unsigned char *signature = signFile(keys.privateK,digest);
16
upload("/tmp/cryptfile.bin", servername, cookie, token, signature);
17
setServerPath(keyring, fpath, ext);
18
}
19
else{
20
char *digest = digest_message(fpath);
21
unsigned char *signature = signFile(keys.privateK,digest);
22
upload("/tmp/cryptfile.bin", servername, cookie, token, signature);
23
}
24
25
//check if the file is a shared key ring
26
sharefilepath = strtok(fpath,"\\");
27
if(strstr(path, "_SHAREKEY.xml") != NULL){
28
writeSharedKey(sharefilepath , keyring);
29
}
30
}
31 }
Listing 5.5: Releaseing a file.
5.3
Key Ring Operations
For the key ring operation we needed a way to handle XML files and found Mini-
XML[Swea], a small library to do just this. It can do much more than is needed for
this project, but the key rings are not that complex. This project uses the version
2.10, however a newer version 2.11 has since been released in October[Sweb]. The
interesting thing about this library is that everything is handled as a node of type
mxml_node_t and weather or not this node represents a large XML file with hundreds
of children nodes, or a small data node with a few attributes, they will all belong to
this one type.
While we do use cryptographic libraries for generation of key, we have still chosen
to include the code in this section, since it is also very much related to the key
ring. There exists a problem with actually using some of the generated keys, more
specifically the symmetric ones. When trying to do anything with them after they
have been created, the application will crash and will have to be re-started. After
unsuccessful attempts to fix this we have taken symmetric key generation out of the
project, such that files are encrypted with a fixed key. This is obviously not ideal,
but we still intend to show the functions as they should have been implemented.
The key generation operations will make use of custom defined structs to store
information. For AES we use a struct of type AESkeys, containing the key and IV
==PAGE:64==
52
5 Implementation
and for RSA we use a struct of type RSAkeys containing the public and private key.
To handle keys read from the key ring we use a struct storing all key information for
a file, it has the type cryptoKEYS. Only the key generation functions are shown in
full, all other functions can be found in Appendix A.3.4.
5.3.1
Generate AES Keys
To generate an AES key the function first generates a random password and salt
using RAND_bytes and specifies which cipher the key is generated for. The random
bytes are then used in the EVP_BytesToKey function to give the symmetric key
and IV. The keys are then being written to their respective variables in the struct of
type aesKEYS. Unfortunately when the application attempts read the variables in the
struct it crashes.
1 struct aesKEYS genAES(){
2
char databuffer[16];
3
char saltbuffer[8];
4
int written;
5
const EVP_CIPHER *cipher;
6
const EVP_MD *dgst = NULL;
7
unsigned char key[EVP_MAX_KEY_LENGTH], iv[EVP_MAX_IV_LENGTH];
8
9
//Create random password
10
written = RAND_bytes(databuffer, sizeof(databuffer));
11
RAND_seed(databuffer, written);
12
const char *password = databuffer;
13
RAND_bytes(saltbuffer, sizeof(saltbuffer));
14
const unsigned char *salt = saltbuffer;
15
struct aesKEYS aeskeys;
16
aeskeys.symmK = (char *)malloc(32);
17
aeskeys.IV
= (char *)malloc(16);
18
19
OpenSSL_add_all_algorithms();
20
21
//Pick cipher and digest funtion
22
cipher = EVP_get_cipherbyname("aes-256-cbc");
23
dgst = EVP_get_digestbyname("sha256");
24
25
//Create the key
26
EVP_BytesToKey(cipher, dgst, salt,
27
(unsigned char *) password,
28
strlen(password), 10, key, iv);
29
30
memcpy(aeskeys.symmK, key, sizeof(key));
31
memcpy(aeskeys.IV, iv, sizeof(iv));
32
33
return aeskeys;
34 }
Listing 5.6: Generate AES key and IV.
==PAGE:65==
5.3 Key Ring Operations
53
5.3.2
Generate RSA Keys
To create the RSA key pair we use a function called RSA_generate_key. The vari-
ables KEY_LENGTH and PUB_EXP, representing the key length and the public
exponent are defined as 2048 and 3 respectively. After the keys have been created
they need to be written to variables and to do this we use a BIO, one for each key.
The RSA key pair is put into the BIO and read into the return variables.
1 struct rsaKEYS genRSA(){
2
struct rsaKEYS keys;
3
size_t pri_len,pub_len;
4
char *pri_key ,*pub_key; //Key return variables
5
6
BIO *pri = BIO_new(BIO_s_mem());
7
BIO *pub = BIO_new(BIO_s_mem());
8
9
//Generate keypair
10
RSA *keypair = RSA_generate_key(KEY_LENGTH , PUB_EXP, NULL, NULL);
11
12
//Write keypair to BIO
13
PEM_write_bio_RSAPrivateKey(pri, keypair, NULL, NULL, 0, NULL, NULL);
14
PEM_write_bio_RSAPublicKey(pub, keypair);
15
16
pri_len = BIO_pending(pri);
17
pub_len = BIO_pending(pub);
18
pri_key = (char*)malloc(pri_len + 1);
19
pub_key = (char*)malloc(pub_len + 1);
20
21
//Read form BIO and put data into return variables
22
BIO_read(pri, pri_key, pri_len);
23
BIO_read(pub, pub_key, pub_len);
24
keys.publicK = pub_key;
25
keys.privateK = pri_key;
26
27
RSA_free(keypair);
28
BIO_free_all(pub);
29
BIO_free_all(pri);
30
31
return keys;
32 }
Listing 5.7: Generate RSA key pair.
5.3.3
Reading and Writing
Each time the key ring is accessed by MXML it needs to be read such that it can be
handled and we can perform operations on the data. Reading is done with a function
called mxmlLoadFile, and we will use this every time something has to be accessed
from the key ring. When writing changes to the key ring we use a similar method
called mxmlSaveFile, where the top node of the XML file is given. An example of this
can be seen here, where fp is a file pointer and tree is a node of type mxml_node_t.
==PAGE:66==
54
5 Implementation
The first argument in the load function is used when merging multiple XML files,
something not needed in this project.
1 fp = fopen(keyfile, "r");
2 tree = mxmlLoadFile(NULL, fp, MXML_NO_CALLBACK);
3 fclose(fp);
4
5 fp = fopen(keyfile, "w");
6 mxmlSaveFile(tree, fp, MXML_NO_CALLBACK);
7 fclose(fp);
Listing 5.8: Load and save files.
5.3.4
Accessing and Manipulating Data
When a file has been loaded into a node, the application needs to look through it for
the data it requires. Most key ring operations are performed on single entries, and
to find them we use the mxmlFindElement. It takes a parent node, a top node and
specific information about the contents of the node to be found. As an example this
function call finds the file entry with the path identifier path.
1
file = mxmlFindElement(tree, tree, "file",
2
"path", path, MXML_DESCEND);
Listing 5.9: Find an element.
The first argument of the function is the parent node, so replacing the tree node,
with the file node we just extracted we can look for data within this specific file entry.
As an example we see here how the data node is found and key data is extracted
using mxmlElementGetAttr.
1 data = mxmlFindElement(file, tree, "data",
2
NULL, NULL, MXML_DESCEND);
3
4 keys.publicK = (char *)mxmlElementGetAttr(data, "pubkey");
5 keys.privateK = (char *)mxmlElementGetAttr(data, "prikey");
6 keys.symmK = (char *)mxmlElementGetAttr(data, "symmkey");
7 keys.IV = (char *)mxmlElementGetAttr(data, "iv");
Listing 5.10: Read data from node.
When data is to be written to the key ring weather it is to create a new attribute or
overwrite an existing one, we use mxmlElementSetAttrf. This function allows writing
a variable instead of a fixed string. As an example we can look at how file data is
written to a file system key ring, from a shared key ring, during the initialisation of
the file system in the function. Here a data node is created with the file node as its
parent and each attribute is given a name and a value.
1 data = mxmlNewElement(file, "data");
2 mxmlElementSetAttrf(data,"symmkey","%s",symmkey);
==PAGE:67==
5.3 Key Ring Operations
55
3 mxmlElementSetAttrf(data,"iv","%s",iv);
4 mxmlElementSetAttrf(data,"pubkey","%s",pubkey);
5 mxmlElementSetAttrf(data,"prikey","%s",prikey);
6 mxmlElementSetAttrf(data,"servername","%s",servername);
7 mxmlElementSetAttrf(data,"serverpath","%s",serverpath);
Listing 5.11: Write data to node.
It is also possible to delete nodes from the tree, by calling mxmlDelete(node). It
Will remove the specific node and its children from the XML file. This function will
only be used to clear old revoked files, to make room for the new ones.
5.3.5
Initialise File System
Now that we have seen examples on how data in the key ring is gathered and changed,
we can now look at some of the more interesting functions the key ring is using. We
start with the function initFileSystem used just before the file system is mounted.
It is called with three arguments, the file system key ring, the current open key ring,
and the root directory. The current open key ring is meant to change, when a shared
keyring is encountered while reading through the files. The first argument is meant
to be static, such that the application knows which is the ”master” key ring.
It works by running through every file entry with a for loop, where mxmlFindElement
is used to get the next element.
1 for (node = mxmlFindElement(tree, tree,"file",NULL, NULL,MXML_DESCEND);
2 node != NULL;
3 node = mxmlFindElement(node, tree,"file",NULL, NULL,MXML_DESCEND)){
Listing 5.12: For loop in MXML.
Each entry found in this for loop will have its information extracted and the
application will start to download files.
The application will need to make some
checks to make sure the correct files are downloaded and decrypted in the correct
places. First the file will be downloaded into a temporary file, ready for decryption.
The application will then need to know if a file exists within the file system key ring,
in which case it should be decrypted into its path. If this is not the case, the file
consists only of a file name, and is part of a shared key ring, in which case it must
determine if the file already is a part of the file system. The application handles each
file individually and such does not remember if a file already exists. If the file does
exists, it would have been handled by the first case. Lastly it needs to check if the
file is a key ring, in which case a recursive call is made, changing the current key ring,
to the shared one just encountered.
1 download("/tmp/cryptfile.bin", serverpath);
2 //check if the file is already a part of the file system and decrypt it
3 if((strstr(localpath,rootdir) != NULL)){
4
decryptFile(localpath,symmk,iv);
5
writeInitKeys(masterkey, localpath, symmk, iv, pubk, prik, servername ,
serverpath);
==PAGE:68==
56
5 Implementation
6
7 }else if(fileInKeyRing(masterkey,serverpath) == 0){
8
//then local path is only a name and file is in a shared key ring
9
decryptFile(strcat(rootdir, localpath),symmk,iv);
10
writeInitKeys(masterkey, rootdir, symmk, iv, pubk, prik, servername,
serverpath);
11 }
12
13 if(strstr(localpath,"_SHAREKEY.xml") != NULL){
14
//the file is a shared key ring
15
decryptFile(strcat(rootdir, localpath),symmk,iv);
16
initFileSystem(masterkey, rootdir, root);
17 }
Listing 5.13: Checking files when initialising the file system.
The function fileInKeyRing is another for loop that runs through the file system
key ring, looking for a data node with the given server path as an attribute. We could
have used other attributes like the private key, but this is guaranteed to be unique.
5.3.6
Read Server Name
Before a file is uploaded the application would check if it had a server name associated
to it and if it had, the file would be uploaded. The last argument of this function
is a flag to tell the function weather or not to return the server name it has read
immediately or try to create a new one. As we saw in the release function, the
server name can be NULL upon the first return of the read function or it can actually
contain something, in which case the file is uploaded. If it is NULL the function is
called again, this time with the flag set to 1. This tells the function to start creating
a new server name and write it to the key ring.
1 if(flag != 0 && serverName == NULL){
2
serverName = random64();
3
mxmlElementSetAttrf(node,"servername", "%s", serverName);
4
5
fp = fopen(keyfile,"w");
6
mxmlSaveFile(tree, fp, MXML_NO_CALLBACK);
7
fclose(fp);
8
return serverName;
9 }else{
10
return serverName;
11 }
Listing 5.14: Reading the server name.
The server name itself is created by using a random function that creates a random
name and checks if it is available. The random name is encoded in base 64, but it
uses ”änd ”+” as the two special characters, which are not usable in URLs. Because
of this names containing these characters are discarded, and a new name, is tried.
1 char *random64(){
==PAGE:69==
5.4 Client-Server Operations
57
2
unsigned char databuffer[18];
3
unsigned char *encodedData = (char *) malloc(50);
4
do{
5
RAND_bytes(databuffer, sizeof(databuffer));
6
EVP_EncodeBlock(encodedData , databuffer , 18);
7
}while(getfilePath(strcat(encodedData ,".bin"))!=NULL || (strstr(
encodedData ,"/") != NULL) || (strstr(encodedData ,"+") != NULL));
8
9
return encodedData;
10 }
Listing 5.15: Find a unique server name.
5.4
Client-Server Operations
To create the HTTP connection to the MediaWiki server we have chosen to use the
cURL library, libcurl[CUR], an open source project that also serves as a command line
tool. The newest version is 7.57.0, but the virtual machine this project is developed
on is Ubuntu xenial, thus restraining us to version 7.47.0. With the exception of
download all functionalities are carried out using multipart-form post. In the version
we are using this is done through a function called formadd, which in the newest
version has been deprecated.
The cURL library comes with an interface called ”easy”. It provides functions
to construct HTTP requests in a clear and simple manner. All requests consists of
three main parts, the initialisation the setup and the execution. In the initialisation
the Curl handle is defined and initialised, along with other needed variables and data
structures. Then data is added to the request, the URL is set and it is defined how
response data should be handled. Lastly the the request is carried out and a response
code is given, to indicate weather the request was successful or not. It is also in this
part the response information is extracted.
The formadd function uses a struct called curl_httppost to hold the parameters
of the POST request. These parameters consists of a name part and a value part, like
in any POST URL. Most of the times we will use a simple content type that expects
a simple text value, like a command parameter or a user name. When uploading we
will use a file content type to indicate that this parameter is to be read as a file.
5.4.1
Response Handling
To get the response from the server we implement a write back function called
write_callback_func. We also need one for downloading files. They are very simple
and can be seen in the listing below.
1 size_t static write_callback_func(void *buffer, size_t size, size_t nmemb,
void *userp){
2
userp += strlen(userp);
// Skipping to first unpopulated char
==PAGE:70==
58
5 Implementation
3
memcpy(userp, buffer, nmemb);
// Populating it.
4
return nmemb;
5 }
6
7 size_t write_data(void *ptr, size_t size, size_t nmemb, void *stream){
8
size_t written = fwrite(ptr, size, nmemb, (FILE *)stream);
9
return written;
10 }
Listing 5.16: Write back funtions to get server response and file data.
When a response is received from the server, information needs to be extracted.
To do this the response is passed in the argument xml that is searched for certain key
words, depending on what type the response is, given by the argument type.
1 char *extractXML(const char *xml, const char *type){
2
char
*pointer ,*result,*tail;
3
size_t length;
4
/* advance the pointer to the = character, and skip the " -> +1 */
5
if(type == "url"){
6
pointer = strstr(xml, "url=") + strlen("url=") + 1;
7
}else if(type == "token"){
8
pointer = strstr(xml, "token=") + strlen("token=") + 1;
9
}else if(type == "session"){
10
pointer = strstr(xml, "session") + strlen("session") + 1;
11
}else if(type == "iurl"){
12
pointer = strstr(xml, "ii url=") + strlen("ii url=") + 1;
13
}
14
result
= NULL;
15
if (pointer == NULL)
16
return NULL;
17
18
length = 0;
19
tail = strchr(pointer, ' ');
20
if (tail == NULL)
21
return NULL;
22
/* -1 skip the trailing " */
23
length = tail - pointer - 1;
24
if (length > 0){
25
result = malloc(1 + length);
26
if (result == NULL)
27
return NULL;
28
result[length] = '\0';
29
memcpy(result, pointer, length);
30
}
31
return result;
32 }
Listing 5.17: Extracting information from server response.
==PAGE:71==
5.4 Client-Server Operations
59
5.4.2
Log In Procedure
When logging in three functions, getSession, clientLogin and getEditToken are
called. The first two functions are called in direct sequence of each other, returning
a session cookie, used in requesting an edit token.
Get Login Token
In the first function the login token is fetched from the server along with the session
cookie. The return value is the result of clientLogin. The cookie and token are
extracted from the response using the response handler extractXML. A snippet of
the function can be seen below. It shows how the request is constructed and how
the response data is defined. The variables post and last are the structs of type
curl_httppost, mentioned previously.
1
/* Now specify the POST data */
2
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "action",
3
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "query", CURLFORM_END);
4
5
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "format",
6
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "xml", CURLFORM_END);
7
8
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "meta",
9
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "tokens", CURLFORM_END);
10
11
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "type",
12
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "login", CURLFORM_END);
13
14
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_URL , "localhost/wikimedia/api.php");
15
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_HTTPPOST , post);
16
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_HEADER , 1L);
17
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_WRITEFUNCTION , write_callback_func);
18
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_WRITEDATA , response);
Listing 5.18: Get log in token and initiate clientLogin.
Log In
To perform the actual login we have the function clientLogin, that takes the login
token and the session cookie from the previous call as arguments. It is carried out in
much the same way as the previous function and returns the session cookie.
1
/* Now specify the POST data */
2
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "action",
3
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "clientlogin", CURLFORM_END);
4
5
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "format",
6
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "xml", CURLFORM_END);
7
8
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "loginreturnurl",
9
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "http://example.org", CURLFORM_END);
==PAGE:72==
60
5 Implementation
10
11
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "logintoken",
12
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , token, CURLFORM_END);
13
14
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "username",
15
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "WikiUser", CURLFORM_END);
16
17
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "password",
18
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "password1234", CURLFORM_END);
19
20
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_URL , "localhost/wikimedia/api.php");
21
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_COOKIE , cookie);
22
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_HEADER , 1L);
23
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_HTTPPOST , post);
24
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_WRITEFUNCTION , write_callback_func);
25
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_WRITEDATA , response);
Listing 5.19: Log in to the wiki with username and password.
Get Edit Token
Now that the session has been established and the user is logged in, an edit token can
be requested. Notice that the type of token has changed to indicate an edit token is
needed.
1
/* Now specify the POST data */
2
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "action",
3
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "query", CURLFORM_END);
4
5
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "format",
6
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "xml", CURLFORM_END);
7
8
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "meta",
9
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "tokens", CURLFORM_END);
10
11
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "type",
12
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "csrf", CURLFORM_END);
13
14
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_URL , "localhost/wikimedia/api.php");
15
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_COOKIE , cookie);
16
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_HEADER , 1L);
17
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_HTTPPOST , post);
18
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_WRITEFUNCTION , write_callback_func);
19
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_WRITEDATA , response);
Listing 5.20: Request an edit token.
5.4.3
Upload
The upload function uploads a file in a given path to the server, under the specified
server name. It also needs a session cookie and an edit token, retrieved during login
==PAGE:73==
5.4 Client-Server Operations
61
and a signature of the file. The field ignorewarnings has the value 1, which allows
files to be overwritten on the server. Also notice the field file taking a file path as
value, to tell cURL where the file is to be read from.
1
2
/* Add simple name/content section */
3
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "action",
4
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "upload", CURLFORM_END);
5
6
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME ,"format",
7
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "xml", CURLFORM_END);
8
9
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "ignorewarnings",
10
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "1", CURLFORM_END);
11
12
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "filename",
13
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , serverName, CURLFORM_END);
14
15
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "comment",
16
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , comment, CURLFORM_END);
17
18
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "token",
19
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , token, CURLFORM_END);
20
21
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "file",
22
CURLFORM_FILE , localPath, CURLFORM_END);
23
24
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_URL , "localhost/wikimedia/api.php");
25
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_COOKIE , cookie);
26
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_HTTPPOST , post);
27
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_WRITEFUNCTION , write_callback_func);
28
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_WRITEDATA , response);
Listing 5.21: Upload a file to a location on the server.
5.4.4
Download
The download procedure is a simple GET request, that takes a local path and a server
location as arguments. It downloads the file in the server location into the specified
path.
The URL is set using the server location argument and the pagefile is the
temporary file outside the file system, waiting to be decrypted.
1
/* set URL to get here */
2
curl_easy_setopt(curl_handle , CURLOPT_URL , serverPath);
3
4
/* Switch on full protocol/debug output while testing */
5
curl_easy_setopt(curl_handle , CURLOPT_VERBOSE , 0L);
6
7
/* disable progress meter, set to 0L to enable and disable debug output */
8
curl_easy_setopt(curl_handle , CURLOPT_NOPROGRESS , 1L);
9
10
/* send all data to this function
*/
==PAGE:74==
62
5 Implementation
11
curl_easy_setopt(curl_handle , CURLOPT_WRITEFUNCTION , write_data);
12
13
if(pagefile) {
14
15
/* write the page body to this file handle */
16
curl_easy_setopt(curl_handle , CURLOPT_WRITEDATA , pagefile);
Listing 5.22: Download a file to a certain location.
5.4.5
Get File Path
This function is used to get the direct path of a file on the server. The checkfile
variable is the server name with the string ”File:” concatenated in the front, to give
the correct format of a file request. The location of the file on the server is extracted
with the extractXML function, but it is only called if there actually is a URL in the
response. To do this we look for the string missing=””, and simply return NULL if
it exists. If it does not contain that string the extraction can be called to look for the
path.
1
//Set request parameters
2
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME ,
3
"action",CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "query", CURLFORM_END);
4
5
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME ,
6
"format",CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "xml", CURLFORM_END);
7
8
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME ,
9
"prop",CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "imageinfo", CURLFORM_END);
10
11
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME ,
12
"titles",CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , checkfile, CURLFORM_END);
13
14
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME ,
15
"iiprop",CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "url", CURLFORM_END);
16
17
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_URL , "localhost/wikimedia/api.php");
18
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_HTTPPOST , post);
19
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_WRITEFUNCTION , write_callback_func);
20
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_WRITEDATA , response);
Listing 5.23: Request the file path through a filename.
5.5
Cryptographic Operations
For the cryptographic functions we have chosen to use OpenSSL[Ope], as it is rather
popular and contains single interface for cryptographic functions. This interface is
called EVP and is used in all cryptographic functions.
The signing hashing and
signing function are not used as shown here, since they cause errors when using their
==PAGE:75==
5.5 Cryptographic Operations
63
respective results. They are shown as they were intended to work, but in reality they
just return fixed data. Code not shown here can be seen in appendix A.3.4
5.5.1
Encrypt/Decrypt File
In order to handle encryption properly we have created two small functions responsible
for creating the FILE objects used by the actual encryption function and setting
the encryption flag.
They are not really that interesting, but can be seen in the
Appendix. All decrypted files go to a temporary file ”/tmp/cryptfile.bin” before they
are uploaded.
The encryption function itself can be seen here, where the first two arguments are
files objects and as their names indicates are input and output. The last argument is
the flag to tell the function if the operation is encryption or decryption, this will be
indicated in 1 or 0 respectively. The function works by first setting up the cipher in
the context handle EVP_CIPHER_CTX, in this case we use AES in CBC mode with
key length of 256 bits. Then the keys are added to the context and the encryption is
carried out.
1 int do_crypt(FILE *in, FILE *out, unsigned char key[], unsigned char iv[],
int do_encrypt){
2
/* Allow enough space in output buffer for additional block */
3
unsigned char inbuf[1024], outbuf[1024 + EVP_MAX_BLOCK_LENGTH];
4
int inlen, outlen;
5
EVP_CIPHER_CTX ctx;
6
7
/* Don't set key or IV right away; we want to check lengths */
8
EVP_CIPHER_CTX_init(&ctx);
9
EVP_CipherInit_ex(&ctx, EVP_aes_256_cbc(), NULL, NULL, NULL,
10
do_encrypt);
11
OPENSSL_assert(EVP_CIPHER_CTX_key_length(&ctx) == 32);
12
OPENSSL_assert(EVP_CIPHER_CTX_iv_length(&ctx) == 16);
13
14
/* Now we can set key and IV */
15
EVP_CipherInit_ex(&ctx, NULL, NULL, key, iv, do_encrypt);
16
17
for(;;){
18
inlen = fread(inbuf, 1, 1024, in);
19
if(inlen <= 0) break;
20
if(!EVP_CipherUpdate(&ctx, outbuf, &outlen, inbuf, inlen)){
21
/* Error */
22
EVP_CIPHER_CTX_cleanup(&ctx);
23
return 0;
24
}
25
fwrite(outbuf, 1, outlen, out);
26
}
27
if(!EVP_CipherFinal_ex(&ctx, outbuf, &outlen)){
28
/* Error */
29
EVP_CIPHER_CTX_cleanup(&ctx);
30
return 0;
31
}
32
fwrite(outbuf, 1, outlen, out);
==PAGE:76==
64
5 Implementation
33
34
EVP_CIPHER_CTX_cleanup(&ctx);
35
return 1;
36 }
Listing 5.24: Symmetric encryption function.
5.5.2
Create Hash of File
This file takes a char pointer meant to contain the file to be hashed. The function
work by first initialising the EVP context mdctx and then setting up the hashing
algorithm, in this case SHA-256. Then the message is added and it is hashed. It is
in the for loop that we attempt to write out the hash to a variable to work with, but
reading it causes the application to crash.
1 unsigned char *digest_message(const unsigned char *message){
2
unsigned char md_value[EVP_MAX_MD_SIZE];
3
unsigned int digest_len;
4
EVP_MD_CTX *mdctx;
5
6
mdctx = EVP_MD_CTX_create();
7
EVP_DigestInit_ex(mdctx, EVP_sha256(), NULL)
8
EVP_DigestUpdate(mdctx, message, strlen(message));
9
EVP_DigestFinal_ex(mdctx, md_value, &digest_len);
10
11
unsigned char *digest = malloc(digest_len);
12
for(int i=0; i<digest_len; ++i) {sprintf(digest, "%s%02x", digest,
md_value[i]);}
13
14
EVP_MD_CTX_destroy(mdctx);
15
16
return digest;
17 }
Listing 5.25: Create hash of a message.
5.5.3
Create Signature
As with the encryption function, we have created two small functions to set up the
keys they can also be seen in the Appendix for this sub section.
To create a signature we use the private key in the form of a EVP_PKEY and
the previously created hash of the file. The signature is created and written to the
variable sign, which is then encoded to base 64 using EVP_EncodeBlock. The result
of this is a variable sig which is then returned.
1 unsigned char *sign(EVP_PKEY *key, unsigned char *msg){
2
EVP_PKEY_CTX *ctx;
3
unsigned char *sig = (char *)malloc(EVP_MAX_MD_SIZE);
4
unsigned char *sign;
==PAGE:77==
5.5 Cryptographic Operations
65
5
size_t mdlen = 32, siglen;
6
ctx = EVP_PKEY_CTX_new(key, NULL);
7
if(!ctx){sig = "ERROR"; return sig;}
8
if(EVP_PKEY_sign_init(ctx) <= 0){sig = "ERROR"; return sig;}
9
if(EVP_PKEY_CTX_set_rsa_padding(ctx, RSA_PKCS1_PADDING) <= 0){sig = "ERROR
"; return sig;}
10
if(EVP_PKEY_CTX_set_signature_md(ctx, EVP_sha256()) <= 0){sig = "ERROR";
return sig;}
11
12
/* Determine buffer length */
13
if(EVP_PKEY_sign(ctx, NULL, &siglen, msg, mdlen) <= 0){sig = "ERROR";
return sig;}
14
15
sign = malloc(siglen);
16
17
if(!sign){sig = "ERROR"; return sig;}
18
/* malloc failure */
19
20
if(EVP_PKEY_sign(ctx, sign, &siglen, msg, mdlen) <= 0){sig = "ERROR";
return sig;}
21
22
/* Signature is siglen bytes written to buffer sig */
23
EVP_PKEY_free(key);
24
EVP_cleanup();
25
26
EVP_EncodeBlock(sig, sign, siglen);
27
28
return sig;
29 }
Listing 5.26: Signing a hash of a file.
5.5.4
Verify Signature
To verify the signature we use the public key in the form of a EVP_PKEY. The sig-
nature and its length have both been extracted from the struct and put in separately.
The last argument is the original hash of the file, used in comparison with the verified
version. It works by first decoding the signature from the server, and then performing
the verification operation. The return value is a number, where 1 indicates successful
verification, 0 for failure and smaller than 0 for other types of error.
1 int verify(EVP_PKEY *verify_key, unsigned char *sig, unsigned char *md){
2
EVP_PKEY_CTX *ctx;
3
unsigned char *verifysig = (char *)malloc(EVP_MAX_MD_SIZE);
4
5
EVP_DecodeBlock(verifysig, sig, sizeof(sig));
6
7
ctx = EVP_PKEY_CTX_new(verify_key, NULL);
8
if (!ctx){return 2;}
9
if (EVP_PKEY_verify_init(ctx) <= 0){return 3;}
10
if (EVP_PKEY_CTX_set_rsa_padding(ctx, RSA_PKCS1_PADDING) <= 0){return 4;}
11
if (EVP_PKEY_CTX_set_signature_md(ctx, EVP_sha256()) <= 0){return 5;}
==PAGE:78==
66
5 Implementation
12
13
/* Perform operation */
14
int ret = EVP_PKEY_verify(ctx, verifysig, 256, md, 32);
15
16
EVP_PKEY_free(verify_key);
17
return ret;
18 }
Listing 5.27: Verify the signature.
5.6
File Sharing Operations
The file sharing operations are carried out in their own separate program using only
one function from the key ring operations, namely to generate keys. The program
takes different arguments based on which operation should be used. The first three
are the operation type, the file system key ring and the shared key ring. Then the
share and revoke function would also require the paths of the files to be shared, along
with the access rights.
Each file and access rights is given as a single string like
this <PathToFile>:<AccessRight>. The full code for these functions can be seen in
Appendix A.3.5
5.6.1
Share Files
The share operation loads the key ring into the mxml_node_t variable tree and then
runs through the files in the argument list and separates the file path and the access
right. It then attempts to locate the file in the key ring, such that the program does
not attempt to share a file which does not exists. Then it checks if there is a private
key, to ensure that the sharing operation is actually permitted, before proceeding.
Then it is simply a matter of copying all information from that entry into an entry in
the shared key ring. The rest of the file sharing process is handled by the file system,
in the release operation.
1 fp = fopen(keyfile, "r");
2 tree = mxmlLoadFile(NULL, fp,MXML_TEXT_CALLBACK);
3 fclose(fp);
4
5 for (int i = 4; i < arrlen; i++){
6
p = strtok(filerights[i], ":");
7
strcpy(filepath, p);
8
p = strtok(NULL, ":");
9
strcpy(right, p);
10
11
filename = basename(filepath);
12
node = mxmlFindElement(tree, tree, "file",
13
"path", filepath,
14
MXML_DESCEND);
15
node = mxmlFindElement(node,tree,"data",NULL,NULL,MXML_DESCEND);
==PAGE:79==
5.6 File Sharing Operations
67
16
if(node != NULL){ //the file exsists
17
privkey = mxmlElementGetAttr(node,"prikey"):
18
if(strcmp(prikey, "") != ""){ //the private key exists so sharing is
allowed
Listing 5.28: Share file.
5.6.2
Acquire Shared Files
When a key ring has been shared a file is produced, containing the information of
the shared key ring. When this file is received by the user he can use the file sharing
program to load it into his own file system key ring. The program simply loads the
two key files and adds the entry from the shared key file, into the file system key ring.
The operation is quite simple so it will be included in full length here.
1 void loadSharedKey(char *keyfile, const char *loadfile){
2
FILE *fp;
3
mxml_node_t *keytree ,*keynode ,*loadtree ,*loadnode;
4
5
fp = fopen(keyfile, "r");
6
keytree = mxmlLoadFile(NULL, fp,MXML_TEXT_CALLBACK);
7
fclose(fp);
8
9
keynode = mxmlFindElement(keytree, keytree,
10
"keyring",
11
NULL, NULL,
12
MXML_DESCEND);
13
14
fp = fopen(loadfile, "r");
15
loadtree = mxmlLoadFile(NULL, fp,MXML_TEXT_CALLBACK);
16
fclose(fp);
17
18
loadnode = mxmlFindElement(loadtree, loadtree,
19
"file",
20
NULL, NULL,
21
MXML_DESCEND);
22
23
mxmlAdd(keynode, MXML_ADD_AFTER , NULL, loadnode);
24
25
fp = fopen(keyfile, "w");
26
mxmlSaveFile(keytree, fp, MXML_NO_CALLBACK);
27
fclose(fp);
28 }
Listing 5.29: Load a shared key file into a file system key ring.
5.6.3
Revocation Of Access Rights
The revocation function is almost identical to the sharing operation, since the result
is also quite identical. Before copying the key information from the key ring, into
==PAGE:80==
68
5 Implementation
the new key ring, it creates new keys for the file. Because the creation of new keys
is done one file at a time, it also means the key ring will have to be loaded again at
each file. When the information is copied it will be the new keys and the file will be
inaccessible to those with the old shared key ring. A revoked file would have to be
changed and re-uploaded in order for the action to take effect. It is also important
to note that the key ring this operation produces would have to be shared like any
other, in order for users to actually get the changes.
1 for (int i = 4; i < arrlen; i++){
2
p = strtok(filerights[i], ":");
3
strcpy(filepath, p);
4
p = strtok(NULL, ":");
5
strcpy(right, p);
6
7
writeKeys(keyfile,fielpath);
8
9
fp = fopen(keyfile, "r");
10
tree = mxmlLoadFile(NULL, fp,MXML_TEXT_CALLBACK);
11
fclose(fp);
12
13
filename = basename(filepath);
14
node = mxmlFindElement(tree, tree, "file",
15
"path", filepath,
16
MXML_DESCEND);
17
node = mxmlFindElement(node,tree,"data",NULL,NULL,MXML_DESCEND);
18
if(node != NULL){ //copying information
19
privkey = mxmlElementGetAttr(node,"prikey");
20
if(strcmp(prikey, "") != ""){ //the private key exists so revoking is
allowed
Listing 5.30: Revocation of access rights.
Once the files have been revoked and the new shared key ring information have been
received bt those who still have access, the old files will have to be removed from
their file system key rings. This is necessary in order for the old key information
to be properly replaced, so that the application uses the correct key information, to
handle the files.
The delete function simply reads through the specified key ring,
deleting files with the specified paths.
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
In this chapter we will reflect on the project and what we could have done differently.
We shall conduct a robustness check of the entire system, in order to see how it reacts
to users performing a task wrong or doing steps in the wrong order. We will then look
at the performance of the system, which, while not a requirement, is still of somewhat
importance. We will also analyse what security risks that exists for the application
and the storage server and what steps could be taken to mitigate them. Lastly we
will take a look at what could be done in the future, if this project was to be taken
further from its current state.
6.1
Retrospective Analysis
Looking back at the development process it is clear that some things could have been
done differently. The cryptographic processes were not incorporated soon enough, for
us to realise the problems with the data they produced. When designing the writing
functions for the keys rings we started out with simple dummy data, to see that
created files would properly trigger this functionality. We could have moved directly
to creation of actual keys sooner, such that the issues with creating symmetric keys
might have been discovered in time to fix it.
The development of the cryptographic functions was pushed back, since we en-
countered trouble with the file system and connection to the wiki early in the project.
Early on the FUSE code would crash with some vague ”permission denied” errors,
which turned out to be simple error handling we missed, when removing the logging
rationalities of BBFS. We should have realised sooner what the problem was thus
saving development time. We also encountered issues with the WikiMedia server and
getting it to work properly. It was not clear from the API documentation that a
session cookie was needed, but was found out by intercepting an analysing packets.
When thiat had been sorted, we looked towards getting files uploaded which is re-
quired to be in multipart/form-post format. Because we did not have the newest
cURL version, it was a little trickier to work with since we had to figure out what
the old standard for creating this type of request was.
In the later stages of the project it became clear that there was little time to
implement the signing and verification features, as well as a proper hashing function.
The access control mechanism would end up relying on some features that we had to
rush through development, in order to meet the time requirement. We feel that we
==PAGE:82==
70
6 Discussion
have a great understanding of how to take the project further, had we had more time,
in order to get the final functionalities in place. It would have been nice to be able to
show an example function verifying a file, but we tried to get the signatures to work
properly instead. We could have realised sooner that the effort would be to no avail
and focused more on the actual verification.
Overall we regret that we were unable to show the full potential of the access
control and only got to work with it for so little time, compared to the full development
time. The project was simply not quite suited for concurrent development of features,
as the FUSE and MediWiki components had to be finished, before file sharing and
then later access control could be implemented. We can only blame ourselves for the
missteps and wrong turns we have taken in this project, but knowing this about the
project may provide some understating as well of how we ended up where we did.
6.2
Robustness Check
This check is meant as an analysis of how the system handles unusual operations
from the user. We will go through some ways a user might operate out side of normal
protocol to see if the system can be broken or caused to crash.
The user might
disregard steps in certain processes thus performing a task wrongly, or changing data
he should not have. This is not meant to reflect a malicious user actively trying to
compromise any thing, but simply a clumsy or forgetful one. It is not at all uncommon
to find users like this, so it is advantageous to be prepared for them.
6.2.1
File System
If we start out easy a user may try to see if the system can handle some obscure file
extension or if he can move shared files around without messing up other users file
structure. While the file system can handle any file type, files with multiple extension
like file.doc.txt will fail and cause the system to crash. The file system is only meant
to handle the normal file structure of a name and an extension. As for trying to
mess up the structure of shared files in other users directories, this is not possible.
A path to a file is only known and handled locally, such that all files are completely
independent when they are shared.
A file may be rejected by the wiki server if it is too large, by default the maximum
size is 100 MB. This can be changed in the settings of the wiki, but it is definitely
something to consider that the maximum file seize is fixed. Upon learning this the
limit was set to 2GB in the project. In a real world scenario this limit could be set
much higher, since the wiki would be running on a server rack and not just a single
machine.
The file system has a hard time handling multiple files at a time, but this has
more to do with the performance of FUSE than with the user. It is not something
we have considered during the development, but important to mention since the user
==PAGE:83==
6.2 Robustness Check
71
experience will not be as smooth as it could be. The file system can also upload a file
multiple times, as it is called on release, which happens multiple times whenever a
file is written to. It does not change anything in regards to functionality, but would
cut performance significantly on larger files.
6.2.2
Key Ring
The key rings are obviously a very important part of the system and should not be
changed by the user manually. A user would be able to fabricate keys and make an
entry in the key ring without hurting the system. If an entry is in the correct format,
the application will not treat it any differently than if it was created automatically.
Things will start to go wrong if the user starts to delete data form the key ring.
Missing data is not handled by the application and the best solution would be to
delete the entire entry and add the file again. It could be desirable to somehow hide
or in other way prevent the user from manually editing the key rings.
6.2.3
File Sharing
When sharing files the resulting key ring have the form ”<Name>_SHAREKEY.xml”,
to indicate to the file system that it is no regular file and special actions needs to be
taken. Changing the name parts makes no difference but the rest would mean that
the key ring is not shared properly and is just uploaded as a regular file. A key ring
is only considered shared, if its key information is produced in a new single entry key
ring. The file system is only able to distinguish regular files and key rings, by the
SHAREKEY tag, so files renamed to this will be treated as such. A user should not
attempt to make regular files look like key rings, but he should be able to overwrite
them, with another key ring. This is what enables sharing more files after a key ring
has initially been shared. It is allowed to create a key ring containing more entries and
updating an existing one, to this newer version. Each time a file system is initialised
all files are downloaded including the shared key rings, so if one of them has been
updated to contain more files they will also be downloaded.
Once a file has been shared with a user, he is able to re-share it as long as he
has write access and thus the private key. There might come situations where it is
desired, to have a more fine grained definition of ownership, so it is only the user who
created the file that can also share it. However, that would not quite be within the
scope of cryptographic access control, as we would need some values in the key ring
to determine if a file is shareable for a given user. If files needs no be shared without
fear of them ending in the wrong hands and thus compromised, it would be possible
to share them as an archive. If files are shared this way they would be handled as
the receiving users own files when they are extracted, meaning that user would have
his own version of them with their own keys. The files in the archive would not be
synchronised, only the archive itself. By doing this files can be shared without giving
the recipient any means to compromise the original files.
==PAGE:84==
72
6 Discussion
6.3
Threat and Attack Analysis
We will now consider what threats and attacks the system as a whole can face and
what actions can be taken both by the developer, a system administrator managing
this solution and the end user. We have seen that the threat of crime over the internet
and attacks on various organisations and services, is not going to go away any time
soon. It is therefore safe to assume that if this system were to be put into a real life
solution for people to use, someone would attempt to harm it or in other ways disrupt
its functionality.
All attacks and threats will be rated in likelihood and severity, on a scale of low,
medium and high.
6.3.1
Man in the Middle Attacks
This type of attack is when an attacker is able to intercept communication between
two parties, in this case the user and the MediaWiki server.
Once the attacker
has intercepted a message there are several types of attacks, each with a different
outcome, but they all stem from this common precondition. In the following we will
analyse what happens if an attacker performs certain action with the intercepted
communication, to get an idea of how it would affect the system. We assume that all
man in the middle attacks are of high likelihood rating.
Eavesdropping
Eavesdropping is simply listening in on the communication, in an attempt to learn
new information. An attacker would perhaps be interested in the files uploaded by a
user, an d want to learn it contents. This is not possible since the file is encrypted
before it is uploaded. An attacker would have to break the encryption before getting
anything out of this type of attack. It is therefore given a low impact rating.
Replay Attack
When an attacker has intercepted enough information he can send it to the server
again, at a later time. Since the information is correct, the server will think it is a
genuine user and accept it. The attacker could intercept a file upload transmission
and attempt to replay it to the server, in order to overwrite the file. The MediaWiki
server is resilient to this however, since files are uploaded with an edit token, which
the server has generated for that session, and given to the user. A replay attack is
only possible if it is done within the same session as another user, as it it not possible
to create a new session with used messages alone. This attack is given a low impact
rating.
==PAGE:85==
6.3 Threat and Attack Analysis
73
Modification Attack
An attacker could also have the ability to change whatever is in an intercepted message.
This can be anything from the uploaded file to the tokens. If the file is changed a
user would not be able to verify it properly, since their hash value would be different.
This is not so good, but an attacker would have to keep doing it for every new upload,
in order for the file to be completely unusable. An attacker could also modify the
tokens sent by either the user or the server. If it is done to a login token, the user
will not have a connection to the server and all files will be rejected, until the system
file system is mounted again. Doing it with the edit token would mean that specific
upload would not be valid, but otherwise not affect anything else. This is given a
medium impact rating.
Deletion Attack
An attacker can simply choose not to forward the message to the server, completely
shutting out the user. If messages are deleted during the log in phase, when the file
system is being mounted, the user will never experience an established connection and
must restart the application. This could also be considered adenial of service attack,
only for a single user. If the deleted messages are upload files, the user will not see
the effect until he tries to download that file again, where the uploaded content will
be missing. This is given a medium impact rating.
Fabrication Attack
An attacker can also create messages himself in order to make the server think it
is communicating with a genuine user. The structure and order of which messages
are sent, can be learned by analysing the traffic from other transactions. Then the
attacker can create a connection to the server and start uploading spoof files. These
files would never be downloaded by normal users however, since they would not be
verified correctly and discarded. This is given a low impact rating.
6.3.2
Obtaining a Keyring
While we will not consider each vulnerability that may allow an attacker to get access
to another person computer, we will consider the consequences if it ever happened.
If an attacker is able to get hold of another users key ring they would have complete
control over the files in that users file system. This includes files that he has created
himself and those that ware shared with him. The attacker would retain control over
the users computer to also keep having access to the files, since a user could discover
the compromise, and revoke all the files. Once this happens, if the attacker cannot
gain access to the key ring again, the user will be in control of the files again. It is
still very bad for an attacker to learn the contents of files, so it is given a high impact
rating, but a low likelihood rating.
==PAGE:86==
74
6 Discussion
6.3.3
Denial of Service Attack
An attacker or in this case a group of attackers, can organise a take down of the servers
functions by flooding it with requests. The server will be so busy handling these that
a genuine user will experience long waiting time before the server responds, if it ever
does. An attacker could also make use of some of the man in the middle attacks to
upload so many spoof files that it takes long for a file to be verified. A way to prevent
attacks like these is to shut down connections making frequent or repeated requests,
but if a group is very organised an attack could be automated. Getting thousands of
computers to perform the same tasks could make the server unresponsive, or leave a
file with too many revisions to verify in time. We would consider MediaWiki servers
to be somewhat resilient against frequent requests, since they usually handle a lot
of traffic, so the impact rating is set to medium and the likelihood is also set to a
medium rating.
6.3.4
Unauthorised Access to the MediaWiki Server
The MediaWiki server is protected by a username and password, in order to prevent
adversaries from taking complete control of it, thus preventing it from performing its
service properly. A person with access to the server would be able to see all files, in
encrypted form, and also delete them. The password should obviously be very strong,
such that it will not be possible to guess.
An attacker could also gain physical access to the server room, in which case
he could destroy it and the files it stores. If no backup is in place, the files of all
users would be lost. The server would be protected against this so it is given a low
likelihood score, bu t due to the severity of the attack, it is given a high impact score.
6.4
Performance Testing
This project is being tested on a Ubuntu xenial virtual machine, running in Virtual
Box version 5.1.30 r118389. Its specifications can be viewed here:
CPU Intel i5 3570 3.4 GHz. The machine has 2 cores available.
Memory 4 GB.
HDD 20 GB.
We will be testing system functionalities such as adding a file, but also of the
individual sub functions like encryption. All results are measured in CPU time. The
system functionalities we will test are listed as follows.
• Mounting the file system.
• Creating a file.
==PAGE:87==
6.5 Future Work
75
• Adding a file.
• Renaming a file.
• Sharing files.
We would also like to test some of the cryptographic functions separately, to give
an idea of their performance outside of the application. The functions we will be
testing are listed below.
• Generate keys.
• Encrypt file.
• Decrypt file.
• Generate a hash
• Sign a hash.
• Verify signature.
6.5
Future Work
If this project were to be taken further than what has already been done, we would
like to make some suggestions to what features we think are missing. We will cover
the features that were originally going to be implement, as well as some that would
just improve the overall user experience and functionality.
6.5.1
Unimplemented Features
The first unimplemented feature is, getting the newly generated symmetric keys to be
written to the key ring. As the application is now we can generate the keys but only
have them printed to the console, as something goes wrong when they are transferred
to a variable. The hashing and signing functions are not quite operational either. We
would like to see the actual file as input in the hash function, such that an actual
digital signature of the file can be created.
We would also like to see the implementation of the file verification feature and
by extent of that, the proper file hashing function. The application needs to ask
the server for all revisions of the given file, and then check each of them if it is the
correct version. This idea would require the application to download each revision,
as they are tried for verification. This poses a rather large burden on the bandwidth
so it would be desirable to have the MediaWiki server do the verification, so only the
verified file would be sent.
Lastly files are not updated to the newest version when they are read. This was
due to a conflict within FUSE that would not allow writes properly on already open
==PAGE:88==
76
6 Discussion
files. It is possible that a rework is needed of how files are to be updated, but it seems
unlikely that it can be done automatically without the user first selecting the file.
6.5.2
Key Expiration
We mentioned in the theory section regarding cryptography ”CITE” that crypto-
graphic keys should be changed every few years.
This is not something that has
been given much thought, in this project, but if it were to be truly useful an actual
expiration date on cryptographic keys would be desirable. It would have to be in the
form of a time stamp, present in the file system key ring, i.e. not meant to go in
any shared key rings. The way the system is constructed now keys are only accessed
when the files are, so keys would have to be checked here as well.
6.5.3
Direct Key Sharing
As for sharing files, we would like to see that the file sharing program, could be
incorporated in the client application. It is unclear if this is possible at all, if a file
operation could be made to actually make it work as the program does. It would
definitely be an improvement on the file sharing experience, as it requires many steps.
A compromise in this could be a graphic interface, where a window opens and files
are selected by clicking on them, instead of typing their path.
As the application is now it relies on an already established secure connection, like
an encrypted Email, to transfer the shared key ring information. In the future we
would like to see a built in transfer method within the system itself. It could either
create a secure connection directly or encrypt the shared key information, such that
it could be transferred over any connection, secure or not.
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
In this project we have faced the task of creating a decentralised file sharing service,
using FUSE and MediaWiki. We have focused on sharing files, using cryptographic
access control such that different privileges depend on what keys a user have for the
shared files. While we have faced some obstacles that have lead to some features not
working as intended or unimplemented, the core functionality have been established.
We have provided documentation for the processes of designing and implementing
a client application and a file sharing program. We started by explaining some theory
behind the technologies that were going to be used and defining what requirements
we saw was needed if the project was going to be successful. Then we outlined how
the system should be designed, in order to fulfil the requirements and the overall
problem statement. Then we presented the actual implemented code where it was
made clear how the functionalities actually worked. Some functions were explained
as how they were intended to work, as they were forced to operate differently due
to implementation errors. We have also discussed the state of the system as a whole
and conducted analysis of the threats and stability of the system.
The result of the project is only a proof of concept and should not be seen as an
end product, ready for use. There is still a lot to be done, both in terms of security
and overall user experience. This has been very interesting to work with and has
really challenged our problem solving abilities to the fullest.
==PAGE:90==
78
==PAGE:91==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
A.1
User Guide
This guide will serve as an introduction to the features of the client application. We
will show its functionalities and how they are performed properly.
There are two binaries to consider, csfs and keyshare. The former is the client
application which handles all file system operations and the latter is the file sharing
program.
A.1.1
Mounting a File System
In order to mount a file system and use the client application, simply start it in a termi-
nal. It should be given two arguments, a source directory and a mount point. The com-
mand line could look like this: ./csfs /home/user/source/ /home/user/mountpoint.
This will create a virtual file system, mirroring the folder ”source” in the folder
”mountpoint”. This will create a new tab in the side bar with the name of the mount
point.
Figure A.1: A file system mounted for the first time.
==PAGE:92==
80
A Appendix
Selecting this will go to the now mounted file system and should, when mounted
first time, look like the above. It is important to note that the original source folder
is not the file system and files put here will not be handled, they must be put in the
mount point.
A.1.2
Working the File System
From here it is possible to drag and drop the files you want in the file system and
they will appear as they normally would. It is also possible to create new files, by
selecting New Document>Empty Document in the right click context menu, as you
normally would. Editing files, creating folders and moving things around is done just
like in your regular file system.
A.1.3
Sharing Files
When you want to share files it is time to use the file sharing program called keyshare.
It has different modes depending on what operation should be done.
These are
”share”, ”load”, ”revoke” and ”delete”. The mode is always the first argument, then
the path to the file system key ring you are working on and then the shared key ring.
Next comes the files that are to be handled, this part is not needed in the ”load”
mode. When deleting only the file system key ring should be specified, followed by
the files to be deleted.
When sharing you must specify what access rights a file should be shared with,
r for read and w for write.
It should be placed at the end of the file path like
this /File/Path:w. In the example below we have created two files, space.jpg and
HelloWorld.txt. They have been shared with read and write access rights respec-
tively, to a key ring called sharedFile. This will produce a key ring called ”shared-
Files_KEYSHARE.xml”, which has ben put into the file system. That has produced
another file called ”sharedFiles_KEYSHARE.xml.share”, which you can send to a
friend, to share the files space.jpg and HelloWorld.txt.
==PAGE:93==
A.1 User Guide
81
Figure A.2: Two files with their shared key ring and its information file.
When a friend has received the file ”sharedFiles_KEYSHARE.xml.share, it must
be loaded into his file system key ring. This is done by the load mode, which takes
the paths of the file system key ring and the shared information file. When the file
system is mounted the shared files will appear in its mount point. In the example
below we see that another user has received the shared key rings information and has
loaded them in to his file system key ring.
Figure A.3: Two files with their shared key ring and its information file.
Revocation is done in the exact same way as sharing, just remember to use the
delete mode, before loading the shared key ring information.
If the old files and
shared key ring is not deleted, the files will not be revoked properly.
==PAGE:94==
82
A Appendix
A.2
Test Results
A.2.1
Mounting the File System
The test is performed on a file system with an existing empty key ring. It was run 5
times with an average of around 12 ms.
A.2.2
Create a File
The test is performed in an empty file system, so the file is the first to be created.
The test was run 5 times with an average of around 70 ms.
A.2.3
Adding a File
The file is a 190 MB image and is added into an otherwise empty file system. The
test was run 3 times with an average of around 794 ms.
A.2.4
Renaming a File
This test was performed both in an other wise empty file system. The test was run 5
times with an average of around 0.3 ms.
A.2.5
Share a File
This test was done by sharing two files in an otherwise empty file system, one with
read and one with write access. The test was run 5 times with an average of around
0.4 ms.
A.2.6
Generate Keys
Instead of writing the keys to variables, causing errors, they were just printed to the
console. The test was run 5 times with an average of around 158 ms
A.2.7
Encrypt File
The test was run on a 84 MB file 5 times with an average of 318 ms.
A.2.8
Decrypt File
The test was run on the encrypted 84 MB file 5 times with an average of 0.1 ms.
==PAGE:95==
A.3 Code
83
A.2.9
Generate a Hash
The test was run 5 times with an average > 0.1 ms.
A.2.10
Sign a Hash
This test was run on an already generated hash, where cryptographic keys have also
been read but not initialised. The test was run 5 times with an average of around 1.5
ms.
A.2.11
Verify a Signature
This test was run on an already generated signature, where cryptographic keys have
also been read but not initialised. The test was run 5 times with an average of around
1.5 ms.
A.3
Code
A.3.1
File System Operations
FUSE Main
1 int main(int argc, char *argv[]){
2
//set session information
3
cookie = getSession();
4
token = getEditToken(cookie);
5
6
umask(0);
7
int fuse_stat;
8
struct cs_state *cs_data;
9
10
//Don't run FUSE as root
11
if ((getuid() == 0) || (geteuid() == 0)) {
12
fprintf(stderr, "Running CSFS as root opens unnacceptable security holes
\n");
13
return 1;
14
}
15
16
// See which version of fuse we're running
17
fprintf(stderr, "Fuse library version %d.%d\n", FUSE_MAJOR_VERSION ,
FUSE_MINOR_VERSION);
18
19
//Check that arguments are legal
20
if ((argc < 3) || (argv[argc -2][0] == '-') || (argv[argc -1][0] == '-'))
21
cs_usage();
22
23
cs_data = malloc(sizeof(struct cs_state));
24
if (cs_data == NULL) {
==PAGE:96==
84
A Appendix
25
perror("main calloc");
26
abort();
27
}
28
29
// Pull the rootdir out of the argument list and save it in my
30
// internal data
31
cs_data->rootdir = realpath(argv[argc-2], NULL);
32
argv[argc-2] = argv[argc-1];
33
argv[argc-1] = NULL;
34
argc--;
35
36
char *root = (char *) malloc(32);
37
strcpy(root,cs_data->rootdir);
38
keyring = strcat(root,"/key.ring");
39
if( access( keyring, F_OK ) == -1 ){
40
initkeyring(keyring);
41
}
42
43
initFileSystem(keyring, keyring, cs_data->rootdir);
44
//load shared keyrings
45
46
//turn over control to fuse
47
fprintf(stderr, "about to call fuse_main\n");
48
fuse_stat = fuse_main(argc, argv, &cs_oper, cs_data);
49
fprintf(stderr, "fuse_main returned %d\n", fuse_stat);
50
51
return fuse_stat;
52 }
Listing A.1: FUSE Main function.
Mknod
1 int cs_mknod(const char *path, mode_t mode, dev_t dev)
2 {
3
int retstat = 0;
4
const char *ext = malloc(8);
5
char *sharefilepath = malloc(32);
6
char fpath[PATH_MAX];
7
cs_fullpath(fpath, path);
8
// On Linux this could just be 'mknod(path, mode, dev)' but this
9
// tries to be be more portable by honoring the quote in the Linux
10
// mknod man page stating the only portable use of mknod() is to
11
// make a fifo, but saying it should never actually be used for
12
// that.
13
if (S_ISREG(mode)) {
14
retstat = open(fpath, O_CREAT | O_EXCL | O_WRONLY, mode);
15
if (retstat >= 0)
16
retstat = close(retstat);
17
} else
18
if (S_ISFIFO(mode))
19
retstat = mkfifo(fpath, mode);
20
else
==PAGE:97==
A.3 Code
85
21
retstat = mknod(fpath, mode, dev);
22
23
if (retstat < 0)
24
retstat = -errno;
25
26
//create fresh keys
27
//get filepath to store in keyring after upload
28
//write fileinformation to keyring
29
ext = strchr(path, '.');
30
printf("mknod: %s\n",ext);
31
if(ext == NULL){
32
writeKeys(keyring,fpath);
33
}else if((strstr(ext, ".Trash-") == NULL) && (strstr(ext,".goutputstream")
== NULL) && (strstr(ext, ".sharedinfo") == NULL)){
34
writeKeys(keyring,fpath);
35
}
36
return retstat;
37
38 }
Listing A.2: Creating a file.
Rename
1 int cs_rename(const char *path, const char *newpath){
2
int retstat = 0;
3
const char *ext = malloc(8);
4
const char *newext = malloc(8);
5
char fpath[PATH_MAX];
6
char fnewpath[PATH_MAX];
7
8
cs_fullpath(fpath, path);
9
cs_fullpath(fnewpath, newpath);
10
11
retstat = rename(fpath, fnewpath);
12
13
if (retstat < 0)
14
retstat = -errno;
15
16
ext = strchr(path,'.');
17
newext = strchr(newpath, '.');
18
if(ext == NULL){
19
keyrename(keyring, fpath, fnewpath);
20
}else if((strstr(ext, ".Trash-") == NULL) && (strstr(newext, ".Trash-") ==
NULL)){
21
keyrename(keyring, fpath, fnewpath);
22
}
23
return retstat;
24 }
Listing A.3: Renaming a file.
==PAGE:98==
86
A Appendix
Release
1 int cs_release(const char *path, struct fuse_file_info *fi){
2
int retstat = 0;
3
char *ext;
4
char *servername;
5
char *sharefilepath = malloc(32);
6
char fpath[PATH_MAX];
7
printf("%s", path);
8
cs_fullpath(fpath, path);
9
// We need to close the file.
Had we allocated any resources
10
// (buffers etc) we'd need to free them here as well.
11
retstat = close(fi->fh);
12
if (retstat < 0)
13
retstat = -errno;
14
15
ext = strchr(path,'.');
16
if(ext != NULL){
17
if((strstr(ext, ".Trash-") == NULL) && (strstr(ext,".goutputstream") ==
NULL) &&
18
(strstr(ext, ".ring") == NULL)
&& (strstr(ext,".gitignore") == NULL) &&
19
(strstr(ext, ".~lock") == NULL) && (strstr(ext, ".share") == NULL)){
20
21
struct cryptoKEYS keys = readKeys(keyring, fpath);
22
encryptFile(fpath, keys.symmK, keys.IV);
23
24
servername = readServerName(keyring,path,0);
25
26
if(servername == NULL){
27
servername = readServerName(keyring,fpath ,1);
28
char *digest = digest_message(fpath);
29
unsigned char *signature = signFile(keys.privateK,digest);
30
upload("/tmp/cryptfile.bin", servername, cookie, token, signature);
31
setServerPath(keyring, fpath, ext);
32
}
33
else{
34
char *digest = digest_message(fpath);
35
unsigned char *signature = signFile(keys.privateK,digest);
36
upload("/tmp/cryptfile.bin", servername, cookie, token, signature);
37
}
38
39
//check if the file is a shared key ring
40
sharefilepath = strtok(fpath,"\\");
41
if(strstr(path, "_SHAREKEY.xml") != NULL){
42
writeSharedKey(sharefilepath , keyring);
43
}
44
}
45
}
46
return retstat;
47 }
Listing A.4: Releasing a file.
==PAGE:99==
A.3 Code
87
A.3.2
Key Ring Operations
Read Keys
1 struct cryptoKEYS readKeys(const char *keyfile, const char *path){
2
FILE *fp;
3
mxml_node_t *tree,*file,*data;
4
struct cryptoKEYS keys;
5
6
fp = fopen(keyfile, "r");
7
tree = mxmlLoadFile(NULL, fp,MXML_NO_CALLBACK);
8
fclose(fp);
9
//check if path already exists
10
//if it is null it means mknod was called by write
11
file = mxmlFindElement(tree, tree, NULL,"path", path,MXML_DESCEND);
12
13
data = mxmlFindElement(file, tree, "data",NULL, NULL,MXML_DESCEND);
14
15
keys.publicK = (char *)mxmlElementGetAttr(data, "pubkey");
16
keys.privateK = (char *)mxmlElementGetAttr(data, "prikey");
17
keys.symmK = (char *)mxmlElementGetAttr(data, "symmkey");
18
keys.IV = (char *)mxmlElementGetAttr(data, "iv");
19
20
return keys;
21 }
Listing A.5: Read keys from key ring.
Write Keys
1 int writeKeys(const char *keyfile, const char *localpath){
2
3
FILE *fp;
4
mxml_node_t *tree;
5
mxml_node_t *keyring;
6
mxml_node_t *file;
7
mxml_node_t *data;
8
mxml_node_t *node;
9
10
char *pub_key;
11
char *pri_key;
12
13
fp = fopen(keyfile, "r");
14
tree = mxmlLoadFile(NULL, fp,MXML_NO_CALLBACK);
15
fclose(fp);
16
//check if path already exists
17
//if its null it means mknod was called by write
18
node = mxmlFindElement(tree, tree, NULL,
19
"path", localpath,
20
MXML_DESCEND);
21
if(node == NULL){
22
struct rsaKEYS rsakeys = genRSA();
==PAGE:100==
88
A Appendix
23
struct aesKEYS aeskeys = genAES();
24
25
keyring = mxmlFindElement(tree, tree, "keyring",
26
NULL, NULL,
27
MXML_DESCEND);
28
29
file = mxmlNewElement(keyring, "file");
30
mxmlElementSetAttrf(file,"path","%s",localpath);
31
32
33
data = mxmlNewElement(file, "data");
34
mxmlElementSetAttr(data,"symmkey","03762
ec24a14cf7513775f25b25c05186093ca68a29d026301ebaa14b9ff8ce8");
35
mxmlElementSetAttrf(data,"iv","80739b43edd09ba6665002101f7453ad");
36
mxmlElementSetAttrf(data,"pubkey","%s", rsakeys.publicK);
37
mxmlElementSetAttrf(data,"prikey","%s", rsakeys.privateK);
38
39
fp = fopen(keyfile, "w");
40
mxmlSaveFile(tree, fp, MXML_NO_CALLBACK);
41
fclose(fp);
42
}
43
44
return 0;
45
46 }
Listing A.6: Write keys to key ring.
Read Server Name
1
char *readServerName(const char *keyfile, const char *path, int flag){
2
FILE *fp;
3
char *serverName;
4
mxml_node_t *tree;
5
mxml_node_t *node;
6
fp = fopen(keyfile, "r");
7
tree = mxmlLoadFile(NULL, fp,MXML_TEXT_CALLBACK);
8
fclose(fp);
9
node = mxmlFindElement(tree, tree, "file",
10
"path", path,
11
MXML_DESCEND);
12
13
node = mxmlFindElement(node,tree,"data",NULL,NULL,MXML_DESCEND);
14
serverName = (char *) mxmlElementGetAttr(node,"servername");
15
//if flag is 0, serverName will return right away
16
if(flag != 0 && serverName == NULL){
17
serverName = random64();
18
mxmlElementSetAttrf(node,"servername", "%s", serverName);
19
20
fp = fopen(keyfile,"w");
21
mxmlSaveFile(tree, fp, MXML_NO_CALLBACK);
22
fclose(fp);
23
return serverName;
==PAGE:101==
A.3 Code
89
24
}else{
25
return serverName;
26
}
27
28
}
Listing A.7: Reading the servername from the key ring.
Initialise File System
1 void initFileSystem(const char *masterkey, const char *keyfile, const char *
root){
2
FILE *fp;
3
mxml_node_t *tree;
4
mxml_node_t *node;
5
6
const char *localpath ,*symmk,*iv,*pubk,*prik,*servername ,*serverpath;
7
8
fp = fopen(keyfile, "r");
9
tree = mxmlLoadFile(NULL, fp,MXML_TEXT_CALLBACK);
10
fclose(fp);
11
for (node = mxmlFindElement(tree, tree,
12
"file",
13
NULL, NULL,
14
MXML_DESCEND);
15
node != NULL;
16
node = mxmlFindElement(node, tree,
17
"file",
18
NULL, NULL,
19
MXML_DESCEND))
20
{
21
char *rootdir = malloc(128);
22
strcpy(rootdir,root);
23
strcat(rootdir, "/");
24
localpath = mxmlElementGetAttr(node, "path");
25
node = mxmlFindElement(node,tree,"data",NULL,NULL,MXML_DESCEND);
26
27
symmk = mxmlElementGetAttr(node, "symmkey");
28
iv = mxmlElementGetAttr(node, "iv");
29
pubk = mxmlElementGetAttr(node, "pubkey");
30
prik = mxmlElementGetAttr(node, "prikey");
31
servername = mxmlElementGetAttr(node, "servername");
32
serverpath = mxmlElementGetAttr(node, "serverpath");
33
34
//check if the file is already a part of the file system and download it
35
if((strstr(localpath,rootdir) != NULL)){
36
download("/tmp/cryptfile.bin", serverpath);
37
decryptFile(localpath,symmk,iv);
38
writeInitKeys(masterkey, localpath, symmk, iv, pubk, prik, servername,
serverpath);
39
40
//then local path is only a name
41
//must check if previously downloaded
==PAGE:102==
90
A Appendix
42
}else if(fileInKeyRing(masterkey,serverpath) == 0){
43
download("/tmp/cryptfile.bin", serverpath);
44
decryptFile(strcat(rootdir, localpath),symmk,iv);
45
writeInitKeys(masterkey, rootdir, symmk, iv, pubk, prik, servername ,
serverpath);
46
}
47
48
//check if file is keyring
49
if(strstr(localpath,"_SHAREKEY.xml") != NULL){
50
download("/tmp/cryptfile.bin", serverpath);
51
decryptFile(strcat(rootdir, localpath),symmk,iv);
52
initFileSystem(masterkey, rootdir, root);
53
}
54
}
55 }
Listing A.8: Initialise the file system.
A.3.3
Client-Server Interaction
Get Login Token
1 char *getSession(){
2
CURL *curl;
3
CURLcode res;
4
struct curl_httppost *post = NULL;
5
struct curl_httppost *last = NULL;
6
char *xml = (char *) malloc(1024);
7
char *token = (char *) malloc(512);
8
char *session = (char *) malloc(512);
9
10
curl = curl_easy_init();
11
12
if(curl){
13
14
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "action",
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "query", CURLFORM_END);
15
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "format",
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "xml", CURLFORM_END);
16
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "meta",
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "tokens", CURLFORM_END);
17
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "type",
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "login", CURLFORM_END);
18
19
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_URL , "localhost/wikimedia/api.php");
20
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_HTTPPOST , post);
21
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_HEADER , 1L);
22
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_WRITEFUNCTION , write_callback_func);
23
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_WRITEDATA , xml);
24
25
26
res = curl_easy_perform(curl);
==PAGE:103==
A.3 Code
91
27
28
if(res != CURLE_OK)
29
fprintf(stderr, "curl_easy_perform() failed: %s\n",
30
curl_easy_strerror(res));
31
32
session = extractXML(xml, "session");
33
token = extractXML(xml,"token");
34
35
curl_easy_cleanup(curl);
36
curl_formfree(post);
37
}
38
curl_global_cleanup();
39
40
return clientLogin(token, session);
41 }
Listing A.9: Get login token and session cookie.
Log In
1 char *clientLogin(const char *token, const char *session){
2
3
CURL *curl;
4
CURLcode res;
5
struct curl_httppost *post = NULL;
6
struct curl_httppost *last = NULL;
7
8
char cookie[512];
9
sprintf(cookie," my_wiki_session=%s", session);
10
11
12
char *retURL = (char *) malloc(512);
13
char *response = (char *) malloc(1024);
14
char *newsession = (char *) malloc(512);
15
16
17
curl = curl_easy_init();
18
19
if(curl) {
20
21
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "action",
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "clientlogin", CURLFORM_END);
22
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "format",
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "xml", CURLFORM_END);
23
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "loginreturnurl",
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "http://example.org", CURLFORM_END);
24
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "logintoken",
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , token, CURLFORM_END);
25
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "username",
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "WikiUser", CURLFORM_END);
26
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "password",
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "password1234", CURLFORM_END);
27
==PAGE:104==
92
A Appendix
28
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_URL , "localhost/wikimedia/api.php");
29
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_COOKIE , cookie);
30
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_HEADER , 1L);
31
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_HTTPPOST , post);
32
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_WRITEFUNCTION , write_callback_func);
33
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_WRITEDATA , response);
34
35
res = curl_easy_perform(curl);
36
// Check for errors
37
if(res != CURLE_OK)
38
fprintf(stderr, "curl_easy_perform() failed: %s\n",
39
curl_easy_strerror(res));
40
41
// always cleanup
42
curl_easy_cleanup(curl);
43
44
curl_formfree(post);
45
}
46
curl_global_cleanup();
47
newsession = extractXML(response, "session");
48
return newsession;
49 }
Listing A.10: Log in function.
Get Edit Token
1 char *getEditToken(const char *newcookie){
2
3
CURL *curl;
4
CURLcode res;
5
struct curl_httppost *post = NULL;
6
struct curl_httppost *last = NULL;
7
char *response = (char *) malloc(4096);
8
char *token = (char *) malloc(512);
9
char *session = (char *) malloc(512);
10
11
char cookie[1024];
12
sprintf(cookie,"my_wiki_UserName=WikiUser; my_wiki_session=%s;
my_wikiUserID=1", newcookie);
13
14
curl = curl_easy_init();
15
16
if(curl){
17
/* Now specify the POST data */
18
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "action",
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "query", CURLFORM_END);
19
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "format",
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "xml", CURLFORM_END);
20
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "meta",
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "tokens", CURLFORM_END);
21
curl_formadd(&post, &last, CURLFORM_COPYNAME , "type",
CURLFORM_COPYCONTENTS , "csrf", CURLFORM_END);
==PAGE:105==
A.3 Code
93
22
23
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_URL , "localhost/wikimedia/api.php");
24
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_COOKIE , cookie);
25
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_HEADER , 1L);
26
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_HTTPPOST , post);
27
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_WRITEFUNCTION , write_callback_func);
28
curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_WRITEDATA , response);
29
30
res = curl_easy_perform(curl);
31
// Check for errors
32
if(res != CURLE_OK)
33
fprintf(stderr, "curl_easy_perform() failed: %s\n",
34
curl_easy_strerror(res));
35
36
curl_easy_cleanup(curl);
37
38
curl_formfree(post);
39
}
40
token = extractXML(response, "token");
41
return token;
42 }
Listing A.11: Get the edit token after loggin in.
A.3.4
Cryptographic Operations
Encryption and Decryption
1 int encryptFile(const char *path, const char *symmK, const char *IV){
2
FILE *fp = fopen(path, "r");
3
FILE *crfp = fopen("/tmp/cryptfile.bin", "w");
4
unsigned char key[64];
5
unsigned char iv[32];
6
7
strcpy(key,symmK);
8
strcpy(iv,IV);
9
do_crypt(fp, crfp, 1, key, iv);
10
fclose(fp);
11
fclose(crfp);
12 }
13
14 int decryptFile(const char *path, const char *symmK, const char *IV){
15
FILE *fp = fopen(path, "w");
16
FILE *crfp = fopen("/tmp/cryptfile.bin", "r");
17
unsigned char key[64];
18
unsigned char iv[32];
19
20
strcpy(key,symmK);
21
strcpy(iv,IV);
22
do_crypt(crfp, fp, 0, key, iv);
23
fclose(fp);
24
fclose(crfp);
==PAGE:106==
94
A Appendix
25 }
Listing A.12: Set up keys for encryption and decryption.
Signing and Verification
1 unsigned char *signFile(unsigned char *privateKey , unsigned char *file){
2
//private key is made from string to EVP key
3
BIO *pr_bio = BIO_new(BIO_s_mem());
4
EVP_PKEY *pr_key = NULL;
5
BIO_puts(pr_bio, privateKey);
6
pr_key = PEM_read_bio_PrivateKey(pr_bio, &pr_key, 0, NULL);
7
8
return sign(pr_key, file);
9 }
10
11 int verifyFile(unsigned char *publicKey, unsigned char *signature, size_t
siglen, unsigned char *file){
12
//public key is made from string to EVP key
13
BIO *pu_bio = BIO_new(BIO_s_mem());
14
EVP_PKEY *pu_key = NULL;
15
BIO_puts(pu_bio, publicKey);
16
pu_key = PEM_read_bio_PUBKEY(pu_bio, &pu_key, 0, NULL);
17
18
return verify(pu_key, signature, file);
19 }
Listing A.13: Set up keys for signing and verification.
A.3.5
File Sharing Operations
Share file
1 void shareKeyFile(char *keyfile, char *loadfile, char *filerights[], int
arrlen){
2
FILE *fp;
3
mxml_node_t *tree,*node,*xml,*keyring ,*file,*data;
4
5
char *filepath = malloc(32);
6
char *right = malloc(32);
7
char *filename = malloc(32);
8
char *p;
9
10
const char *symmkey,iv,*pubkey,*privkey ,*servername ,*serverpath;
11
12
xml = mxmlNewXML("1.0");
13
keyring = mxmlNewElement(xml,"keyring");
14
15
fp = fopen(keyfile, "r");
16
tree = mxmlLoadFile(NULL, fp,MXML_TEXT_CALLBACK);
==PAGE:107==
A.3 Code
95
17
fclose(fp);
18
19
for (int i = 4; i < arrlen; i++){
20
p = strtok(filerights[i], ":");
21
strcpy(filepath, p);
22
p = strtok(NULL, ":");
23
strcpy(right, p);
24
25
filename = basename(filepath);
26
node = mxmlFindElement(tree, tree, "file","path", filepath,MXML_DESCEND)
;
27
node = mxmlFindElement(node,tree,"data",NULL,NULL,MXML_DESCEND);
28
if(node != NULL){
29
privkey = mxmlElementGetAttr(node, "prikey");
30
if(strcmp(privkey,"") != 0){
31
32
file = mxmlNewElement(keyring, "file");
33
34
mxmlElementSetAttrf(file,"path", "%s", filename);
35
data = mxmlNewElement(file, "data");
36
37
symmkey = mxmlElementGetAttr(node, "symmkey");
38
mxmlElementSetAttrf(data, "symmkey", "%s", symmkey);
39
40
iv = mxmlElementGetAttr(node, "iv");
41
mxmlElementSetAttrf(data, "iv", "%s", iv);
42
43
pubkey = mxmlElementGetAttr(node, "pubkey");
44
mxmlElementSetAttrf(data, "pubkey", "%s", pubkey);
45
46
if(strcmp("w",right) == 0){
47
mxmlElementSetAttrf(data, "prikey", "%s", privkey);
48
49
}else{
50
mxmlElementSetAttrf(data, "prikey", "%s", "");
51
}
52
53
servername = mxmlElementGetAttr(node, "servername");
54
mxmlElementSetAttrf(data, "servername", "%s", servername);
55
56
57
serverpath = mxmlElementGetAttr(node, "serverpath");
58
mxmlElementSetAttrf(data, "serverpath", "%s", serverpath);
59
60
}
61
}
62
}
63
strcat(loadfile,"_SHAREKEY.xml");
64
fp = fopen(loadfile, "w");
65
mxmlSaveFile(xml, fp, MXML_NO_CALLBACK);
66
fclose(fp);
67 }
Listing A.14: Share file.
==PAGE:108==
96
A Appendix
Revocation of Access Rights
1 void revokeFiles(char *keyfile, char *loadfile, char *filerights[], int
arrlen){
2
FILE *fp;
3
mxml_node_t *tree,*node,*xml,*keyring ,*file,*data;
4
5
char *filepath = malloc(32);
6
char *right = malloc(32);
7
char *filename = malloc(32);
8
char *p;
9
10
const char *symmkey,iv,*pubkey,*privkey ,*servername ,*serverpath;
11
12
xml = mxmlNewXML("1.0");
13
keyring = mxmlNewElement(xml,"keyring");
14
15
for (int i = 4; i < arrlen; i++){
16
p = strtok(filerights[i], ":");
17
strcpy(filepath, p);
18
p = strtok(NULL, ":");
19
strcpy(right, p);
20
21
writeKeys(keyfile,filepath);
22
//the load has to be done for each file because
23
//it changes after each wrrite keys call
24
fp = fopen(keyfile, "r");
25
tree = mxmlLoadFile(NULL, fp,MXML_TEXT_CALLBACK);
26
fclose(fp);
27
28
filename = basename(filepath);
29
node = mxmlFindElement(tree, tree, "file",
30
"path", filepath,
31
MXML_DESCEND);
32
node = mxmlFindElement(node,tree,"data",NULL,NULL,MXML_DESCEND);
33
if(node != NULL){
34
privkey = mxmlElementGetAttr(node, "prikey");
35
if(strcmp(privkey,"") != 0){
36
file = mxmlNewElement(keyring, "file");
37
38
mxmlElementSetAttrf(file,"path", "%s", filename);
39
40
data = mxmlNewElement(file, "data");
41
42
43
symmkey = mxmlElementGetAttr(node, "symmkey");
44
mxmlElementSetAttrf(data, "symmkey", "%s", symmkey);
45
46
iv = mxmlElementGetAttr(node, "iv");
47
mxmlElementSetAttrf(data, "iv", "%s", iv);
48
49
pubkey = mxmlElementGetAttr(node, "pubkey");
50
mxmlElementSetAttrf(data, "pubkey", "%s", pubkey);
51
52
if(strcmp("w",right) == 0){
==PAGE:109==
A.3 Code
97
53
privkey = mxmlElementGetAttr(node, "prikey");
54
mxmlElementSetAttrf(data, "prikey", "%s", privkey);
55
56
}else{
57
mxmlElementSetAttrf(data, "prikey", "%s", "");
58
}
59
60
servername = mxmlElementGetAttr(node, "servername");
61
mxmlElementSetAttrf(data, "servername", "%s", servername);
62
63
64
serverpath = mxmlElementGetAttr(node, "serverpath");
65
mxmlElementSetAttrf(data, "serverpath", "%s", serverpath);
66
67
}
68
}
69
}
70
strcat(loadfile,"_SHAREKEY.xml");
71
fp = fopen(loadfile, "w");
72
mxmlSaveFile(xml, fp, MXML_NO_CALLBACK);
73
fclose(fp);
74 }
Listing A.15: Revoke access rights of files.
==PAGE:110==
98
==PAGE:111==
Bibliography
[Ber+12]
Guido Bertoni et al. “Keccak implementation overview”. In: URL: http://keccak.
neokeon. org/Keccak-implementation-3.2. pdf (2012) (cited on page 11).
[Blo]
Mathieu Blondel. WikipediaFS. url: http://wikipediafs.sourceforge.
net/ (cited on page 2).
[CUR]
CURL. url: https://curl.haxx.se/download.html (cited on page 57).
[Dro]
Dropbox. url: https://www.dropbox.com/help/security/safe-to-
use (cited on page 2).
[Fou]
Wikimedia Foundation. Media Wiki. url: https://www.mediawiki.org/
wiki/MediaWiki (cited on page 17).
[FUSa]
FUSE. url: https://github.com/libfuse/libfuse (cited on page 15).
[FUSb]
FUSE. url: https : / / libfuse . github . io / doxygen / structfuse _
_operations.html (cited on page 16).
[Gou]
Valient Gough. EncFS. url: https://github.com/vgough/encfs (cited
on page 2).
[HJ03]
Anthony Harrington and Christian Jensen. “Cryptographic Access Control
in a Distributed File System”. In: Proceedings of the Eighth ACM Sympo-
sium on Access Control Models and Technologies. SACMAT ’03. Como,
Italy: ACM, 2003, pages 158–165. isbn: 1-58113-681-1. doi: 10.1145/
775412.775432. url: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/775412.775432
(cited on page 14).
[Hor]
Taylor Hornby. url: https://defuse.ca/audits/encfs.htm (cited on
page 2).
[Jon]
Richard Jones. GMailFS. url: http://sr71.net/projects/gmailfs/
(cited on page 2).
[Lou]
Daniel Loureiro. WikiroFS. url: https://github.com/loureirorg/
wikirofs (cited on page 2).
[NIS]
NIST. url: http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/
NIST.SP.800-57pt1r4.pdf (cited on page 37).
[Ope]
OpenSSL. url: https://www.openssl.org/ (cited on page 62).
==PAGE:112==
100
Bibliography
[Pfe]
Joseph J. Pfeiffer. url: https://www.cs.nmsu.edu/~pfeiffer/fuse-
tutorial/ (cited on page 48).
[Pre10]
Bart Preneel. “The First 30 Years of Cryptographic Hash Functions and
the NIST SHA-3 Competition.” In: CT-RSA. Volume 10. Springer. 2010,
pages 1–14 (cited on page 10).
[RSA78]
Ronald L Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Leonard Adleman. “A method for ob-
taining digital signatures and public-key cryptosystems”. In: Communica-
tions of the ACM 21.2 (1978), pages 120–126 (cited on page 9).
[Sta01]
NIST-FIPS Standard. “Announcing the advanced encryption standard
(AES)”. In: Federal Information Processing Standards Publication 197
(2001), pages 1–51 (cited on page 6).
[Ste+17]
Marc Stevens et al. “The first collision for full SHA-1.” In: IACR Cryptol-
ogy ePrint Archive 2017 (2017), page 190 (cited on page 10).
[SV00]
Pierangela Samarati and Sabrina Capitani de Vimercati. “Access control:
Policies, models, and mechanisms”. In: International School on Founda-
tions of Security Analysis and Design. Springer. 2000, pages 137–196 (cited
on pages 11, 12).
[Swea]
Michael Sweet. url: http://michaelrsweet.github.io/mxml/mxml.
html (cited on page 51).
[Sweb]
Michael Sweet. url: https://github.com/michaelrsweet/mxml/releases/
tag/v2.11 (cited on page 51).
[Wika]
WikiAPI. url: https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/API:Main_page
(cited on page 17).
[Wikb]
Wikimedia. url: https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/API:Tokens (cited
on page 17).
[Wikc]
Wikimedia. url: https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/API:Login (cited
on page 18).
[XAM]
XAMPP. url: https://www.apachefriends.org/index.html (cited on
page 17).
