==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Investigating the interplay of hydrogen
evolution and electrochemical CO2
reduction using in-situ mass spectrometry
Nikolaj Rørbæk Knøsgaard (s123406)
Supervisors:
Peter Christian Kjærgaard Vesborg (Associate
professor)
Søren Bertelsen Scott (PhD student)
Daniel Bøndergaard Trimarco (PhD)
January 1, 2018
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis is submitted in partial fulﬁllment of the Master’s degree in Physics and
Nanotechnology at the Technical University of Denmark. The work of this project was
performed in the period August 1st 2017 to January 1st 2018 in the Surface Physics and
Catalysis (SurfCat) research group at the DTU Department of Physics with associate
professor Peter Vesborg, PhD student Søren Scott and PhD Daniel Trimarco as supervi-
sors.
Working with this project has been a both challenging and rewarding experience and
it has given me the opportunity to immerse in many diﬀerent areas within physics,
chemistry and engineering. I have had the pleasure of working with and learning from
many excellent researchers at SurfCat. I especially want to thank my supervisor Søren
Scott. His curiosity and wide knowledge is both admirable and motivational, and I am
thankful for getting the chance to work closely with him during this entire project.
Also, I am thankful for the guidance provided by Daniel Trimarco, Peter Vesborg, Ib
Chorkendorﬀand the rest of the CO2RR- and EC-MS group members who have advised
me at the weekly meetings.
Unless otherwise noted, the work presented in this thesis was done by myself.
Nikolaj Rørbæk Knøsgaard
January 1, 2018
i
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Copper is a promising candidate as electrocatalyst for the electrochemical reduction
of CO2 to more valuable chemicals and fuels. At the potentials required to run the
reduction of CO2, evolution of hydrogen will be a competing simultaneous reaction,
though adsorption of H might also be an important intermediate in CO2 reduction.
This study investigates the dynamics during hydrogen evolution on polycrystalline Cu
under conditions relevant to CO2 reduction using electrochemical measurements combined
with in-situ mass spectrometry (EC-MS).
Cu exhibits the phenomenon of anodic desorption of hydrogen which appears anodic of
the HER region. The amount of hydrogen desorbed anodically corresponds to 1-10% of a
monolayer. Contamination by other metals was ruled out as an explanation using XPS.
A pH-study of the potentials at which adsorption and desorption of hydrogen happens
has been performed, suggesting that the anodic hydrogen desorption happens when the
dominating adsorbate on the surface changes from H to OH which causes molecular
hydrogen to be released.
To further characterize the potential-dependent state of the surface, transient currents
upon introduction of CO were measured. A positive transient current was measured
at cathodic and anodic potentials, but not at intermediate potentials coinciding with
the potential range of the adsorbate change from the pH-study of anodic hydrogen
desorption.
The insight presented here of the copper surface dynamics during hydrogen evolution
and CO adsorption is relevant for the further understanding of and research in reduction
mechanisms of CO2.
iii
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Res´ume
Kobber er en lovende kandidat som elektrokatalysator for den elektrokemiske reduktion
af CO2 til mere værdifulde kemikalier og brændstoﬀer. Ved de potentialer, der er krævet
for at køre reduktionen af CO2, er brintudvikling en konkurrerende, sideløbende reaktion,
dog er adsorption af H et muligt vigtigt step undervejs i CO2 reduktionen.
Dette studie undersøger dynamikken under brintudvikling p˚a polykrystallinsk Cu ved
forhold relevante for CO2 reduktion ved brug af elektrokemiske m˚alinger kombineret med
in-situ massespektrometri (EC-MS).
Cu udviser fænomenet med anodisk desorption af brint, hvilket sker anodisk for brin-
tudviklingsomr˚adet. Mængden af hydrogen, der desorberer anodisk, svarer til 1-10% af
et monolag. Forurening fra andre metaller er udelukket som ˚arsag ved brug af XPS.
Et pH-studie er udført af potentialerne hvor adsorption og desorption af brint foreg˚ar,
hvilket viser at det anodiske desorption af brint sker n˚ar den dominerende adsorbat p˚a
overﬂaden skifter fra at være H til OH, hvilket resulterer i frigørelse af brintmolekyler.
Som en videre karakterisering af den potentiale-afhængige tilstand for overﬂaden er
den midlertidige strøm ved indførelse af CO blevet m˚alt. En positiv, midlertidig strøm
er blevet m˚alt ved katodiske og anodiske potentialer, men ikke i ved mellemliggende
potentialer, der falder sammen med potentiale-intervallet for skiftet af adsorbater fra
pH-studiet af anodisk brint desorption.
Det præsenterede indblik af dynamikken p˚a kobberoverﬂaden under brintudvikling samt
adsorption af CO er relevant for den videre forst˚aelse og forskning af mekanismerne for
CO2 reduktion.
v
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
1.1
Carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere as function of time
. . . .
3
1.2
World population and energy consumption from 1820-2010
. . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Energy use per capita vs. GDP per capita in 1973 and 2013 . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Total primary energy supply by fuel and region in 1971 and 2015 and energy
consumption by sector in 1971 and 2015 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.5
Sankey diagram for United states in 2016 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.6
Total public energy research, development and demonstration budget . . . .
9
1.7
Research grants bookmarked for energy research in Denmark . . . . . . . .
9
1.8
Schematic of the basic principle of catalysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.9
Possible reaction pathways for the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to various
products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.10 Pourbaix diagram for Cu
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.1
Schematic of three-electrode electrochemical cell and potential scale for refer-
ence potentials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2
Sketch of the electrochemistry ﬂow cell used in the EC-MS setup . . . . . .
19
2.3
Picture and schematics of the sniﬀer membrane chip . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.4
Schematic of the working principle of a QMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.5
Example of mass spectrum and mass-time plot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.6
Picture of the EC-MS setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.7
Schematic of the control system of the EC-MS setup . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.8
Demonstration of carrier gas change and gas pulse injections. . . . . . . . .
24
3.1
Picture of Cu samples before and after mechanical polishing . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Cyclic voltammetry of platinum in Ar-purged electrolyte . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3
OCV measurement of platinum while purging with H2 . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4
Cyclic voltammetry of platinum in H2-purged electrolyte . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.5
Mounting of the sniﬀer chip in the EC-MS setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.6
Breath and drop test of sniﬀer chip . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.7
Mounting of working electrode in EC-cell
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.8
CV’s of Cu after exposure to air
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.9
Demonstration of isolating the primary and secondary hydrogen peaks . . .
32
3.10 Quantiﬁcation measurement of hydrogen signal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.11 Internal calibration results for quantiﬁcation of hydrogen. . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.12 Principle of XPS and the universal curve
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1
Introduction of the anodic hydrogen desorption phenomenon
. . . . . . . .
38
4.2
Experiment showing that the secondary hydrogen is an electrochemical feature 38
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
List of Figures
4.3
Experimental data and integrated data showing the isolation of primary and
secondary hydrogen peaks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.4
Experimental data for adsorption of hydrogen on Cu superimposed on Pour-
baix diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.5
Sketch of the mechanisms of primary and secondary hydrogen . . . . . . . .
43
4.6
Estimation of roughness factor for pc-Cu
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.7
XPS survey and detailed spectra for Cu samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.8
Depth proﬁles for Cu samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.9
XPS detailed spectra for various sputtering depths for the Cu2p 3/2 peak of
sample 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.10 XPS detailed spectra for various sputtering depths for the Cu2p 3/2 peak of
sample 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.11 XPS detailed spectra for various sputtering depths for the K2p peaks of sample 3 47
4.12 CV and mass-time plot for carrier change from He to CO . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.13 Experimental data for CO pulses at constant potentials
. . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.14 Experimental data for CO pulses at constant potentials
. . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.15 EC-MS plot of a CO pulse and the drop in current caused by this. The
duration of the CO pulse matches the duration of the current drop, though
the MS data is ≈10 s delayed. The CO pulse also cause the hydrogen signal
to drop. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.16 Subtraction of water background in hydrogen signal
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.17 Demonstration of ethylene production at cathodic potentials while pulsing CO 53
4.18 Integrated drop in current vs. potential for CO pulses . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.1
Sketch of the geometry of Cu single crystals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.2
Design of new EC-cell and parts for single crystal studies
. . . . . . . . . .
56
B.1
Project plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
C.1
Data from pH-study of anodic hydrogen desorption in pH= 7.8 . . . . . . .
65
C.2
Data from pH-study of anodic hydrogen desorption in pH= 9 and pH= 12 .
66
D.1 Pt CV’s in carbonate buﬀer and perchloric acid.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
==PAGE:11==
List of Abbreviations
CA Chronoamperometry
CE Counter electrode
CO2RR CO2 reduction reaction
CORR CO reduction reaction
CP Chronopotentiometry
CV Cyclic voltammetry
EC Electrochemistry/electrochemical
FE Faradeic eﬃciency
HER Hydrogen evolution reaction
MFC Mass ﬂow control
MS Mass spectrometry
OCV Open circuit coltage
OER Oxygen evolution reaction
ORR Oxygen reduction reaction
PEIS Potentiostatic Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy
PC Pressure control
Pc-Cu Polycrystalline copper
QMS Quadropole mass spectrometer
RE Reference electrode
RHE Reversible hydrogen electrode
SEM Secondary electron multiplier
SHE Standard hydrogen electrode
TPES Total primary energy supply
WE Working electrode
ix
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
iii
Res´ume
v
List of Figures
vii
List of Abbreviations
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation: The energy transition challenge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Catalysis and electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.3
Electrochemistry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2
EC-MS setup
17
2.1
Three-electrode electrochemical cell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2
Sniﬀer chip
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3
Mass spectrometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.4
Control of the EC-MS setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Experimental details
25
3.1
Cleaning and preparation procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
Electrolyte preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3
Calibration of reference electrode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.4
Mounting of chip and initial tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.5
Mounting of working electrode and EC-cell
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.6
EC-MS measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.7
Quantiﬁcation of MS signal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.8
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4
Results
37
4.1
Anodic hydrogen desorption - an electrochemical feature . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
pH study of anodic hydrogen desorption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3
Comparison of sample preparation methods using XPS . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.4
Potential dependence of CO poisoning on Cu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5
Outlook and further studies
55
5.1
Design of new ﬂow cell for single crystal studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
xi
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
5.2
Other ideas for further studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6
Conclusion
59
A Learning objectives
61
B Project plan
63
C Data from pH-study
65
D Platinum experiments in carbonate buﬀer
67
E Work drawings for single crystal mount design
69
Bibliography
73
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
This thesis sums up the work of the project titled ”Investigating the interplay of hydrogen
evolution and electrochemical CO2 reduction using in-situ mass spectrometry”. Three key
terms can be extracted from this title:
Electrochemical CO2 reduction is the overall goal and vision of turning carbon
dioxide into more valuable products like hydrocarbons, alcohols or other chemicals and
thus reducing the emission of CO2 to the atmosphere. The term electrochemical relates
to the fact that electrical energy, preferably in form of excessive renewable electricity, is
needed to drive the CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR).
Hydrogen evolution is more speciﬁcally what has been investigated in this project.
The overall reaction mechanisms of CO2 reduction are very complex, but one common
thing is that for most of the desired products from CO2RR hydrogen is needed. There-
fore, it is relevant to study how the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) interplays with
CO2RR.
In-situ mass spectrometry is the primary experimental technique used during this
project. The so-called EC-MS setup combines electrochemical (EC) techniques with
in-situ mass spectrometry (MS) and facilitates real time analysis of products from elec-
trochemical reactions.
This project has been designed as an open project where the goal has been to in-
vestigate as much as possible about what happens on the surface of a copper electrode
during hydrogen evolution and under conditions relevant for CO2RR. More speciﬁcally,
the phenomenon of anodic hydrogen desorption has been investigated and the relevance
to CO2 reduction discussed.
The project strategy has been reviewed and changed as new results were found. This
has caused some unexpected changes of strategy, and therefore I have had the pleasure
of being thrown into new areas of immersion and thus enhanced the overall learning
experience throughout this project.
The learning objectives and initial project plan are included in appendices A and B.
I have chosen to write this thesis with the more classical structure made up of in-
troduction, theory, methods, results, discussion and conclusion, since I think this gives
the reader a better overview of the project and thus a better reading experience.
This chapter presents an overall motivation for a sustainable future and why CO2
reduction is important in that context. The basic theory of electrochemistry, electrocatal-
ysis and catalysis in general will be presented along with an introduction to literature on
CO2 reduction.
In chapter 2, the EC-MS setup will be introduced by describing what happens the
major components starting from the electrode and electrolyte in the electrochemical
1
==PAGE:16==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
cell to the products diﬀusing through the sniﬀer chip and ﬁnally ending in the mass
spectrometer.
Chapter 3 elaborates on the experimental details and considerations using a chronolog-
ical approach. The experimental procedure all the way from cleaning and preparation of
equipment and samples, through mounting the parts in the EC-MS setup and to the
actual electrochemical measurements will be described.
The main results and discussion thereof is presented in chapter 4. The electrochemical
feature of anodic hydrogen desorption on copper is introduced along with a pH-study
of the potentials for adsorption and desorption of hydrogen. The possible inﬂuence of
contaminations from other metals is investigated using XPS. Finally, using CO adsorption
and poisoning, the potential-dependent state of the surface is further analysed and its
relevance to CO2 reduction is discussed.
Chapter 5 functions as an outlook and ideas for further studies relevant for this project.
Some of these ideas have already been initialized and the work so far will be presented.
Finally, chapter 6 concludes on the speciﬁc results of this project as well as on the
project in general.
==PAGE:17==
1.1. MOTIVATION: THE ENERGY TRANSITION CHALLENGE
3
1.1
Motivation: The energy transition challenge
One of the major engineering challenges of the 21st century is to ensure an energy
transition from a fossil fuel based energy market to one founded on renewable and
sustainable energy technologies. [1, 2, 3, 4]. Numerous approaches to motivate for the
need of this transition exists, and this will be a review of the diﬀerent arguments that
have worked the best to motivate myself.
Figure 1.1 Carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere in ppm as function of time [5]. The
current level is highest in more than 800,000 years.
One of the most used explanations is the increasing emissions of carbon dioxide and
other green house gasses (GHG). Figure 1.1 shows the atmospheric concentrations of
CO2 for the past 800,000 years [5]. This kind of data is often co-plotted with the highly
correlated average temperature of the earth. This makes a solid argument for reducing
the emissions of CO2 and other GHG, but I think that the CO2 concentration itself
makes a point. The current level of slightly more than 400 ppm is the highest ever
measured. Without going into details about what the increasing CO2 levels might cause
of concerns, it should be clear that a concentration being the highest in more than
800,000 years and where the main increase has happened over the past 100 years should
be a deﬁnite warning. Another clear point to extract from this ﬁgure is that the growth
in concentration from 1950 to 2015 seems to follow an exponential increasing curve.
Obviously, this trend cannot continue forever but the question is how long time before
the growth decreases and what we can do to decelerate it?
The reasoning of the increasing temperature and CO2 concentration in the atmosphere
does not directly show the need of a energy transition since the coupling of CO2 con-
centration and energy consumption is yet to be discussed. Figure 1.2 tells a diﬀerent
but related story about the need of energy transition [6]. It is the story of the total
population of the world and the total energy consumption of the world from 1820-2010.
During the 18th and 19th centuries, the industrial revolution with its massive changes in
agriculture, fertilization, mass production and transportation facilitated a large growth
in human population and thereby also an increase in energy consumption. The increase
in energy consumption is partly explained by population growth and partly by the energy
consuming technological inventions. According to the World Bank the population growth
peaked in 1969 with a growth rate of 2.11 %, though the population is still in growth
==PAGE:18==
4
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
at 1.18 % per year [7]. The latest projections by the United Nations report a world
population of 9.8 billions in 2050 and 11.2 billions in 2100 [8]. The current (2015) level of
total primary energy supply (TPES, deﬁned as the sum of energy production and imports
subtracting exports and storage changes) is 13647 Mtoe (million tons of oil equivalent)
corresponding to a consumption of 18.1 TW. According to the World Energy Outlook
2017 by the International Energy Agency (IEA) [9] the TPES is going to increase by 30
% until 2040, which is equivalent of adding another China and India to today’s global
energy demand.
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.2 (a) World population in billions from 1820-2010. (b) World energy consumption
in EJ per year from 1820-2010. Both the population and energy consumption have increased
drastically in the 20th century. Figures taken from [6]
The growth in population does not solely explain the increase in global energy demands,
another parameter to account for is economic growth. All countries strive for economical
growth which seems to be highly correlated to energy consumption. Figure 1.3 shows
the energy use per capita in tons of oil equivalent vs. GDP per capita in USD for the
years of 1973 and 2013. The size of the points is scaled accordingly to the populations of
the countries, and 4 countries have been pointed out for reference: China, India, USA
and Denmark. Figures like these are often showed with Human Development Index
(HDI) instead of GDP. HDI is a measure of how developed a country is in terms of
economy, education, life expectancy, fertility, health and a lot of other factors, but a
single parameter like GDP can be used to tell the story in a simpler way.
In 1973, China and India were both way low in terms of energy use and GDP while
USA was amongst the top countries in GDP and the very highest in energy use per
capita. Denmark, as a personal reference, is solid in terms of GDP and quite high in
energy use as well. Generally, an increase in GDP will cost a lot in energy use since
almost all countries follow the same curve. The two biggest populations of the world,
China and India, are also two of the fastest growing economics. As they develop their
economy it will deﬁnitely reﬂect on the global energy use. By looking at the graph for
2013, it is seen that both USA and Denmark have increased somewhat in GDP while
decreasing their energy use per capita. India has developed quite a lot in GDP without
increasing the energy use per capita by a lot since they are following the lower part of
the curve. China, on the other hand, has experienced a rapid development in economy
while also almost tripled the energy use per capita and thus clearly been a major part of
the increase in global energy use. The question for the future is then; Will China and
India, as they grow their economy, follow the path directly towards the state of USA, or
will they follow a less steep path towards the state of Denmark?
Previously, the total primary energy supply has been introduced without stating what
==PAGE:19==
1.1. MOTIVATION: THE ENERGY TRANSITION CHALLENGE
5
Figure 1.3 Energy use per capita in tonnes of oil equivalent vs. GDP per capita in USD for
selected countries in 1973 and 2013. The size of the dots are scaled by population. The countries
are seen to follow the same increasing curve and thus growth in GDP costs energy. Figures taken
from [10].
sources and geographical regions it comes from. Figure 1.4 shows the shares of TPES
by fuel (top) and by region (mid) and the ﬁnal consumption by sector (bottom) in
1971 and 2015, in order to illustrate the sources we get the energy from and where we
geographically use it. From 1971 to 2015 the share of oil has dropped from 44 % to 32 %
but the total share of fossil fuels (oil, coal and natural gas) has only dropped from 86
% to 82 % and this drop in fossil fuels is almost entirely covered by an increase in the
share of nuclear energy. When it comes to the geographical regions, the OECD countries
accounted for almost 2/3 of the TPES in 1971, but as discussed earlier the siutation now
is that China, India and the other non-OECD asian countries today account for 35 %
while the OECD has a share of 39 %.
In the bottom of the ﬁgure, the ﬁnal consumption by sector is shown for 1971 and 2015.
Note how 4263 Mtoe or about 1/3 of the TPES in 2015 is lost in conversion of energy.
The interesting point is that the picture is almost identical in 1971 and 2015. The share
of transportation has increased from 23 to 29 % and residential electricity and heat has
decreased from 24 to 22 %, while the other sectors hold their shares with industry as the
major part.
The overall point is that we are using more and more energy but the way we use it is
more or less the same as 50 years ago, and this is where the term of energy transition
enters the picture. The problem is not really that we are using increasing amounts of
energy on a global base, the problem is the sources of where we get the energy. If we
can make the transition to renewable energy sources the problem of increasing energy
demands will vanish since the potential of renewables is large.
Another interesting thing to discuss is the coupling between energy sources and emissions
of GHG. According to the IEA [11], the 82% fossil fuel share of TPES in 2015 contributed
with 99% of the total CO2 emissions with coal being the top contributor with a share of
45%.
So where in the energy system is the need for an energy transition largest? Figure
1.5 is a so-called Sankey diagram for the United States in 2016 that illustrates the energy
ﬂow from the various sources like oil, coal, natural gas, renewables etc. to the end users
of transportation, industry, commercial and residential. The total consumption of 97.3
Quads corresponds to 103 EJ.
It is noteworthy that the energy from nuclear and renewable sources (solar, wind, hydro
and geothermal) almost entirely goes to electricity generation which is divided evenly
between industrial, commercial and residential use. Only a very small fraction of the
==PAGE:20==
6
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
electricity (< 1%) is used for transportation. In the ideal future, all fossil fuel shares
are reduced. In a thought experiment with USA as example we can imagine that all
fossil fuel sources are removed from the Sankey diagram but the total consumption is
conserved, thus the green, black and light blue ﬂows are removed and replaced by the
other energy sources. Natural gas is used for electricity generation (36%), for heating
and a small fraction for transportation. This means that natural gas could relatively easy
be replaced by renewable sources. The same goes for coal since almost all of the coal is
used for electricity generation (92%). The real issue is that oil (petroleum) is primarily
used for transportation (72%) and this part cannot directly be replaced by renewable
energy sources since these almost entirely produce electricity. There are basically two
ways to solve this problem. One way is to electrify the entire transportation sector and
then produce the electricity using renewables. The other way is to use electricity from
renewable sources to produce fuels for transportation, e.g. by reducing CO2 to valuable
fuel products.
No matter how the energy transition is carried out in the future one thing is sure:
The only way to speed up the transition is by investments in research and development
of renewable energy sources and technologies. Figure 1.6(a) shows the shares of the
total public energy RD&D budget by technology between 1974 and 2015. The share of
renewable energy sources has increased a lot since 1974 and makes up in the order of
20% in 2015. The same goes for research in energy eﬃciency which also makes up about
20% in 2015. One of the most remarkable things is that nuclear energy represented
more than 70% of the public energy RD&D budgets in 1974 while in 2015 the share is
decreased to a little more than 20%.
Figure 1.6(b) shows the total poublic energy RD&D budgets for selected countries in
2005 and 2014. First of all, the total budget has increased from about 12 billion USD
to almost 18 billion USD in the 9 years, an increase of about 50 percent. Countries
like USA, Germany and Korea have made large relative increases in their public energy
RD&D budgets and thus helped to drive the energy transition.
The amount of money invested in energy research and development is a politically
sensitive subject. Political parties have diﬀerent opinions on how the public ﬁnances
should be distributed. Figure 1.7 shows data for energy research grants in Denmark from
diﬀerent foundations and research programs in the years 2010-2018. The total grants
has dropped from 1100 millions DKK in 2010 to a little more than 500 millions DKK in
2018. The reason for this is complex and a mixture of many political decisions, but it is
noteworthy to mention that the Danish government elected in 2015 has vowed to keep
increasing the research grants until 2020.
The energy transition requires a lot of scientiﬁc and technological research and develop-
ment as well as ambitious political visions, and this mixture of technology and politics is
both frustrating and interesting.
The energy transition is a long process and as long as there are fossil fuel resources we
are most likely going to use them and we might never completely stop using fossil fuels.
Therefore it is important to investigate how we can reduce the emissions of CO2 and
other green house gasses to the atmosphere. The overall motivation for this project is
electrochemical reduction of CO2 to more energy-valuable products, which is one way to
reduce the emissions and simultaneously produce usable fuel. There are many possible
pathways for the reduction of CO2 but one common denominator for all of these is
catalysis.
==PAGE:21==
1.1. MOTIVATION: THE ENERGY TRANSITION CHALLENGE
7
Figure 1.4 (Top) Total primary energy supply by fuel in 1971 and 2015. (Mid) Total primary
energy supply by region in 1971 and 2015. (Bottom) Energy consumption by sector in 1971 and
2015. [12].
==PAGE:22==
8
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 1.5 Sankey diagram for United states in 2016 showing the energy ﬂow from sources to
end users. Figure from [13].
==PAGE:23==
1.1. MOTIVATION: THE ENERGY TRANSITION CHALLENGE
9
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.6 (a) Total public energy research, development and demonstration (RDD) budget by
technology. (b) Total public energy RDD for selected countries in 2005 and 2014
Figure 1.7 Research grants bookmarked for energy research in Denmark. Data from [14]
==PAGE:24==
10
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 1.8 Schematic of the basic principle of catalysis. The black curve shows the energy
barrier for a thought chemical reaction with no catalyst present, the red curve shows the energy
barrier with a reduced activation energy due to the presence of a catalyst [16].
1.2
Catalysis and electrocatalytic reduction of CO2
Catalysis is the increase of chemical reaction rates caused by an additional substance (the
catalyst) that is not itself consumed in the chemical reaction. Figure 1.8 shows the basic
principle of catalysis in the form of an energy diagram of a thought chemical reaction.
The black curve shows the energy landscape for the reaction without any catalysts with
the corresponding activation energy, Ea. With presence of a catalyst the energy diagram
might change to the red curve and thus lowering the activation energy of the reaction.
The perfect catalyst will reduce Ea to zero and thus make the reaction downhill in energy
all the way.
Catalysis is typically divided in the subtypes of heterogeneous catalysis if the catalyst and
chemical reactants are in diﬀerent phases (gas, solid, liquid) and homogeneous catalysis if
they are in the same phase. Often, biocatalysis using enzymes as catalysts is considered
as its own subtype [15].
One example of heterogeneous catalysis is electrocatalysis, which is the base of this
project. In electrocatalysis, metal surfaces or nanoparticles consisting of various metals
are used to catalyse an electrochemical reaction.
Much of the current research of electrochemical reduction of CO2 is based on the studies
by Hori et al. [17, 18, 19]. Hori’s studies of electrochemical reduction of CO2 at metal
electrodes sum up on a lot of research within the area. One of the conclusions is that
the various metal electrodes can be categorised depending on the product distribution
of CO2RR. In table 1.1, selected faradaic eﬃciencies for CO2RR products on various
metal electrodes have been reprinted from [19]. The metal are categorised after their
main product, where the metals in the ﬁrst group (Pb, Hg, Tl, In, Sn, Cd, Bi) have
high selectivity towards HCOO−, the second group (Au, Ag, Zn, Pd, Ga) primarily
produces CO and for the fourth group (Ni, Fe, Pt, Ti) almost all of the current is used
for hydrogen evolution. Only Cu shows a signiﬁcant faradaic eﬃciency for higher order
CO2RR products like methane, ethane, ethanol and propanol, which motivates that Cu
is an interesting candidate for electrochemical reduction of CO2. It is also notable that
for most metals, including Cu, a signiﬁcant amount of the current is used for hydrogen
evolution and this is an argument for the importance of understanding the mechanisms
of HER at Cu surfaces since this will indeed be a reaction happening simultaneously
with the reduction of CO2.
==PAGE:25==
1.2. CATALYSIS AND ELECTROCATALYTIC REDUCTION OF CO2
11
Faradaic Eﬃciencies (%)
Metal electrode
HCOO−
CO
H2
CH4
C2H4
EtOH
PrOH
Pb
97.4
0.0
5.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Hg
99.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Tl
95.1
0.0
6.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
In
94.9
2.1
3.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Sn
88.4
7.1
4.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Cd
78.4
13.9
9.4
1.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
Bi
77.0
-
-
-
-
-
-
Au
0.7
87.1
10.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Ag
0.8
81.5
12.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Zn
6.1
79.4
9.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Pd
2.8
28.3
26.2
2.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
Ga
0.0
23.2
79.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Cu
9.4
1.3
20.5
33.3
25.5
5.7
3.0
Ni
1.4
0.0
88.9
1.8
0.1
0.0
0.0
Fe
0.0
0.0
94.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Pt
0.1
0.0
95.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Ti
0.0
-
99.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Table 1.1 Table of selected faradaic eﬃciencies for CO2RR products on various metal electrodes.
Data from [19].
Even though it has been known for many years that metals can catalyse the elec-
trochemical reduction of CO2, the exact mechanisms that causes the reactions to happen
are still not completely understood, and numerous studies have been conducted on this
subject [17, 20, 21]. The proposed mechanisms from [21] have been reprinted in Figure
1.9. (a) shows the pathway to CO and further to CH4 (blue arrows), to CH3OH (black
arrows) and to HCOO−(orange arrows). (b) shows the pathway to ethylene (grey
arrows) and to ethanol (green arrows). (c) shows an alternative pathway to HCOO−
using insertion of CO2 into the metal-H bond (purple arrows). Species in black are
adsorbed to a metal surface while the red species are products or reactants from the
solution. Potentials are given vs. RHE and RDS specify the rate determining step of the
certain mechanisms.
One point to extract from the ﬁgure is that most pathways to higher order products like
methane, methanol, ethane and ethanol seems to go through adsorption of CO to the
surface, thus justifying that in many circumstances CO reduction is investigated rather
than CO2 reduction to simplify the complex problem a bit.
Another point is that hydrogen is a key player in almost all products, and it is therefore
of high relevance to investigate the inﬂuence of hydrogen evolution on CO2 reduction.
==PAGE:26==
12
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 1.9 Possible reaction pathways for the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to various
products. a) pathways to CO, CH4 (blue arrows), CH3OH (black arrows) and HCOO−(orange
arrows). b) pathways to ethylene (grey arrows) and ethanol (green arrows). c) pathway of CO2
insertion to metal-H bond resulting in formate (purple arrows). Potentials are reported vs. RHE
and RDS point out rate determining steps. Figure from [21].
==PAGE:27==
1.3. ELECTROCHEMISTRY
13
1.3
Electrochemistry
Electrochemistry is the study of the relationship between electricity and chemical change.
It is the borderland between physics and chemistry where the outcome of the reactions
is either electricity as a result of chemical change or where electricity is used to drive a
chemical change. Electrochemical measurements involve charge being transferred between
two electrodes using an electrolyte as the charge-carrying media. During a reaction, one
electrode is oxidising and the other is reducing. Therefore, the electrochemical reactions
are redox reactions. A general redox reaction can be written as
A + B →A+ + B−,
(1.1)
which can be divided into half-reactions
A →A+ + e−
(oxidation)
(1.2)
B + e−→B−
(reduction)
(1.3)
Two relevant examples are the reduction of protons to molecular hydrogen also known as
the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), and the oxidation of water to molecular oxygen
also known as oxygen evolution reaction (OER):
2(H+ + e−) →H2(g)
(HER)
(1.4)
2H2O →4(H+ + e−) + O2(g)
(OER)
(1.5)
By deﬁnition, the electrode where the oxidation (loss of electrons) takes place is called
the anode while the electrode where the reduction (gain of electrons) takes place is
called the cathode. By measuring the current between the anode and cathode while
simultaneously controlling the electrical potential between them, it is possible to study
the electrochemical properties of certain redox reactions.
When studying electrochemical properties of redox reactions, it can often be an advantage
to study one half-reaction (either the oxidation or reduction) at a time. This can be
done by using a three-electrode setup consisting of a working electrode (WE), a counter
electrode (CE) and a reference electrode (RE). The electrode where the reaction of
interest is taking place is the WE while the other half-reaction is happening on the CE.
The potential between the WE and CE is controlled by the RE, which has a known
potential relative to the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE). RHE is a derived type of
the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE), which is based on the half-reaction
2H+(aq) + 2e−→H2(g),
(1.6)
occurring at a platinised platinum electrode. The reduction potential for this reaction is
deﬁned by the Nernst equation relating the reduction potential to the standard electrode
potential, temperature and activities. The Nernst equation is derived from standard
thermodynamics stating that the change in Gibbs free energy, ∆G, is related to the free
energy change under standard conditions, ∆G⊖, by:
∆G = ∆G⊖+ RT ln Q,
(1.7)
where R is the gas constant, T is the absolute temperature and Q is the reaction quotient.
The electrochemical potential, E, is then deﬁned as the decrease in Gibbs free energy
per charge transferred ∆G = −nFE, with n being the number of electrons transferred
and F is Faraday’s constant. The Nernst equation then reads
Ered = E⊖
red −RT
nF ln Q = E⊖
red −RT
nF ln
 Y
i
avi
i
!
.
(1.8)
==PAGE:28==
14
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Here ai are activities of the components in the reaction with stoichiometric coeﬃcients
vi. The activities are with respect to the standard state which is a concentration of 1
M for solutes and a pressure of 1 bar for gasses. For the SHE, the standard electrode
potential, E⊖
red, is deﬁned to be zero, thus the Nernst equation yields
Ered = 0 −RT
2F ln
 
pH2/1bar
[H+]2
!
(1.9)
The SHE is deﬁned at unit activity of both H2 and H+ equivalent to a pressure of 1 bar
and pH of zero. Thus, the potential of the electrodes in the electrolyte is pH-dependent
on the SHE scale. The RHE is deﬁned as an electrode under unit activity of H2 but
under the same activity of H+ as the actual electrolyte being used. The relationship
between SHE and RHE is then
ERHE = ESHE + RT
F ln[H+]
= ESHE −RT ln(10)
F
pH = ESHE −59[mV] · pH
(1.10)
In electrochemistry, Pourbaix diagrams (also known as potential-pH diagrams) are often
used to describe an aqueous electrochemical system depending on the electrochemical
potential and pH, and the Pourbaix diagram for copper will be used to interpret some of
the main results in this project.
A Pourbaix diagram maps out the stable phases of a component in an aqueous electro-
chemical system, where the phase boundaries between dominating chemical states are
marked by lines. The similarities to a standard phase diagram in thermodynamics are
thus clear.
Figure 1.10 shows a general Pourbaix-diagram for the copper-water system [22]. It is
produced by considering the relative stabilities of the diﬀerent substances of the system.
The substances are divided into solid substances (Cu, Cu2O and CuO) and dissolved
substances (Cu+, Cu2+, HCuO−
2 and CuO2−
2 ). The system can transform between these
substances by the following reactions:
Two dissolved substances:
(1) Cu2+ + 2H2O ⇌HCuO−
2 + 3H+
(2) Cu2+ + 2H2O ⇌CuO2−
2
+ 4H+
(3) HCuO−
2 ⇌CuO2−
2
+ H+
(4) Cu+ ⇌Cu2+ + e−
(5) Cu+ + 2H2O ⇌HCuO−
2 + 3H+ + e−
(6) Cu+ + 2H2O ⇌CuO2−
2
+ 4H+ + e−
Two solid substances:
(7) 2Cu + H2O ⇌Cu2O + 2H+ + 2e−
(8) Cu + H2O ⇌CuO + 2H+ + 2e−
(9) Cu2O + H2O ⇌2CuO + 2H+ + 2e−
==PAGE:29==
1.3. ELECTROCHEMISTRY
15
One solid and one dissolved substance:
(10) 2Cu+ + H2O ⇌Cu2O + 2H+
(11) Cu2+ + H2O ⇌CuO + 2H+
(12) CuO + H2O ⇌HCuO−
2 + H+
(13) CuO + H2O ⇌CuO2−
2
+ 2H+
(14) Cu ⇌Cu+ + e−
(15) Cu ⇌Cu2+ + 2e−
(16) Cu + 2H2O ⇌HCuO−
2 + 3H+ + 2e−
(17) Cu + 2H2O ⇌CuO2−
2
+ 4H+ + 2e−
(18) Cu2O + 2H+ ⇌2Cu2+ + H2O + 2e−
(19) Cu2O + 3H2O ⇌2HCuO−
2 + 4H+ + 2e−
(20) Cu2O + 3H2O ⇌2CuO2−
2
+ 6H+ + 2e−
(21) Cu+ + H2O ⇌CuO + 2H+ + e−
Equilibrium equations depending on either pH, the potential or both can be written
for all the reactions using the Nernst equation and experimental data for equilibrium
constants, and these equations are plotted as the numbered lines in the diagram in Figure
1.10. The labelled regions are thus regions dominated by one species.
The Pourbaix diagram for Cu can be divided in four main regions. For E > 0.3V and
pH < 4 the Cu is corroding. In the area of CuO the Cu is passivated by the oxide and to
the right of this the Cu is once again corroding. In the lower part of the diagram where
pure Cu is the dominating species the system is immune.
Figure 1.10 Pourbaix diagram for the copper-water system showing the potential-pH phase
diagram of electrochemically dominating species [22].
==PAGE:30==
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 2
EC-MS setup
This chapter aims to describe the electrochemistry and mass spectrometry setup, referred
to as the EC-MS setup, which has been the main experimental tool during this project.
The setup basically consists of three main parts: First of all the electrochemical cell
where the reactions of interest are taking place. The products from the electrochemical
reactions are then passing through the second part, which is the so-called sniﬀer chip.
This chip is acting as an interface membrane between the ambient conditions in the
electrochemical cell and the vacuum on the other side of the sniﬀer chip, where the
products are passing through to the last part which is the mass spectrometer. These
three main parts will be described individually in the following sections, as well as the
combined setup and control system will be presented.
2.1
Three-electrode electrochemical cell
By using a three-electrode setup it is possible to study one half-reaction at a time, unlike
the classical two-electrode setup with an anode and a cathode. A schematic of the
three-electrode setup is shown in Figure 2.1. It consists of a reference electrode (RE), a
counter electrode (CE) and a working electrode (WE), which is the electrode of interest.
The working electrode may act as both a anode and a cathode, depending on the direction
of the current. The working principle of the setup is that the voltage is measured between
the reference and the working electrodes, while the current is measured between the
counter and the working electrodes. The voltage and the current is controlled externally
by a potentiostat which controls the voltage between WE and RE by applying a current
between CE and WE. The CE, in principle, works as an inﬁnite supply of electrons for
the electrochemical reactions occurring at the WE. The electrical connection between the
electrodes is ensured by having all three electrodes in contact with an ionic conductive
medium called the electrolyte. The electrolyte is typically an acidic or alkaline solution.
In the EC-MS setup, a silver/silver chloride (Ag/AgCl) reference electrode has been used.
This electrode functions as a redox electrode with equilibrium between silver and the
salt silver chloride, following the reactions:
Ag+ + e−⇌Ag(s)
AgCl(s) ⇌Ag+ + Cl−
(2.1)
or as the overall reaction
AgCl(s) + e−⇌Ag(s) + Cl−
(2.2)
17
==PAGE:32==
18
CHAPTER 2. EC-MS SETUP
Figure 2.1 (Left) Schematic of a three-electrode electrochemical cell. The potentiostat controls
the voltage between reference and working electrodes by applying a current between counter and
working electrodes. (Right) Potential scale of RHE, SHE and Ag/AgCl reference electrode.
The standard electrode potential versus SHE at 25◦C is 0.196 V [23]. Figure 2.1 (right)
shows the potential scales of RHE, SHE and the Ag/AgCl reference electrode.
In Figure 2.2 a sketch of the three-electrode electrochemistry ﬂow cell used in the
EC-MS setup. The 5 mm diameter working electrode is mounted in a PTFE u-cup with
connection to a RDE-stick to ensure electrical contact to the WE. The RDE stick is then
mounted in the ﬂow cell, and the ﬂow cell is mounted on top of the sniﬀer chip with a
≈100µm PTFE spacer in between. This gives a working volume between the WE and
the sniﬀer chip of ≈2µL.
When doing electrochemistry there is a long list of possible experimental techniques.
During this project the most frequently used techniques are cyclic voltammetry (CV),
chronopotentiometry (CP) and chronoamperometry (CA):
Cyclic voltammetry is a measurement of the current while linearly scanning the
potential between an anodic limit and a cathodic limit in cycles. The results are typically
presented in an IV-plot showing the current (I) as a function of the potential (V).
Chronopotentiometry means measuring the chronological variations in the potential,
implied that the current is held constant. This gives a time-plot of the voltage.
Chronoamperometry is thus the opposite of CP, that is measuring the chronological
variations of the current at constant potential.
Electrochemical techniques as a stand-alone experimental procedure can be useful to
quantify the electrical features of an electrochemical reaction, but it does not give any
insight in the product distribution and rates of the reactions, and therefore electrochem-
istry is often combined with a product determinative technique like mass spectrometry.
The combination of electrochemical measurements and mass spectrometry results is a
very useful experimental method for studying electrochemical reactions.
==PAGE:33==
2.2. SNIFFER CHIP
19
Figure 2.2 Sketch of the electrochemistry ﬂow cell used in the EC-MS setup. (a) shows the
assembly of the WE, u-cup and RDE-stick into the cell. (b) shows the mounting of the sniﬀer
chip and the ﬂow cell. (c) shows the cross section of the ﬂow cell. Edited from [24].
2.2
Sniﬀer chip
The microfabricated sniﬀer membrane chip is developed at DTU by Daniel Trimarco,
Peter Vesborg et al. [25]. The chip is working as the interface between the ambient
pressure of ≈1 bar inside the EC-cell and the vacuum conditions in the MS with a
pressure of < 10−6 mbar. The pressure diﬀerence across the chip is thus more than 9
orders of magnitude. In Figure 2.3 a picture and schematic drawings of the sniﬀer chip
is shown. The chip in (a) has dimensions of 15.00 × 15.00 × 0.86 mm. In (c) the working
principle of the sniﬀer chip is shown. Gaseous products from the electrochemistry cell
diﬀuse through the porous membrane at the top of chip to a sampling volume underneath
the porous structure. From the sampling volume an inert carrier gas and the products
are ﬂowing through a capillary to the MS.
The design and working principle of the sniﬀer chip is based on some important design
parameters sketched in (b) [24]:
Reservoir channel (blue) Carrier gas ﬂows downstream from here and thus serves as
a well-deﬁned reservoir of carrier gas. The volume should be small enough to quickly
update the gas composition. Typical parameters are a pressure of ∼1 bar and ﬂow rate
of 1 −10 ml/s ensured by mass ﬂow controllers (MFC) and pressure controllers (PC).
Inlet channels (yellow) ensures that no back-diﬀusion of products from the sampling
volume to the carrier gas reservoir. This is done by designing the inlet channels with a
suﬃcient small cross sectional area though big enough to avoid creating a pressure drop
too big.
Permeable membrane establishes a stable gas-liquid interface. This is ensured by
making a porous, hydrophobic membrane since most electrolytes are aqueous solutions,
==PAGE:34==
20
CHAPTER 2. EC-MS SETUP
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.3 (a) Picture of the 15.00 × 15.00 × 0.86 mm sniﬀer chip. (b) Schematic of the gas
ﬂow system in the chip. (c) Schematic of the working principle of the sniﬀer chip.
thus making a water meniscus across the membrane by surface tension. The time constant
for products diﬀusing through this membrane should be small compared to other time
constants of transport through the liquid and other parts of the chip. The membrane is
designed with a diameter of 7 mm with 2.5 µm pores spread of 10 µm apart.
Sampling volume works as an equilibration zone between the gas-liquid interface and
the vacuum in the MS. The equilibration time constant should be small relative to any
other time constants. The residence time for products in the sampling volume should be
small compared to the transport time constant in the liquid to ensure a good sampling
of products. The theoretical residence time is 1.7 s.
Micro capillary (green) is designed to induce the pressure drop from 1 bar in the
sampling volume to < 10−6 mbar in the MS.
==PAGE:35==
2.3. MASS SPECTROMETRY
21
Figure 2.4 Working principle of the QMS. Gaseous products enters from the left and are ionized
by a electron impact ionizer. The ions are passing through the quadropoles working as a mass
ﬁlter by alternating the electrical ﬁeld and the desired ions are then detected.
2.3
Mass spectrometry
Once the gaseous products have diﬀused through the electrolyte and the sniﬀer chip they
are detected using mass spectrometry. The EC-MS setup uses a quadropole mass spec-
trometer (QMS). The working principle of such QMS is sketched in Figure 2.4. Starting
from the left, the gas passes through an electron impact ionizer which is basically a
beam of accelerated electrons. These electrons will ionize the gas atoms by knocking
out electrons from the electron cloud surrounding the atoms, thus creating positively
charged ions. The ions are then passing through a quadropole mass analyzer, which
consists of four electrical rods creating an oscillating electrical ﬁeld ensuring that only
ions with the desired mass per charge ratio, m
z , make it all the way through the analyzer.
After this mass ﬁltering, the ions reach the detector which is usually a secondary electron
multiplier (SEM). In the SEM the incoming ions will create a cascade of electrons making
the detection of a current easier.
When doing mass spectrometry there is typically two diﬀerent measuring techniques. One
method is a mass spectrum scan where all masses in a range are measured subsequently
in a short time range, and the results may be plotted as MS signal vs. m
z ratio as shown
in Figure 2.5 (left). By specifying a list of masses of interest, a chronological development
of these masses can be measured, thus measuring only the speciﬁed masses but for a
long time range. Such a measurement is shown in a mass-time plot in Figure 2.5 (right).
At ∼60 s a person exhales directly onto the chip resulting in an increase in CO2 signal
and at ∼125 s a water drop is placed on the chip resulting in increasing signals from He
(the carrier gas) and water.
2.4
Control of the EC-MS setup
In Figure 2.6 a picture of the EC-MS setup in function is shown. Inserted is a zoomed
picture of the electrochemical ﬂow cell where the inlet and outlet of electrolyte is shown
along with the connection to the reference and counter electrodes. On top of the cell
the working electrode is connected through the RDE stick with an alligator clip. The
==PAGE:36==
22
CHAPTER 2. EC-MS SETUP
Figure 2.5 (Left) Mass spectrum plot of sniﬀer chip exposed to air. (Right) Mass-time plot of
certain masses. At ≈60 s a person exhales directly onto the chip resulting in an increase in CO2
signal and at ≈125 s a water drop is placed on the chip resulting in increasing signals from He
(the carrier gas) and water [26].
cell is mounted onto the sniﬀer chip on the round metallic interface block. Carrier gas
ﬂows into the interface block and the chip from both sides, and ﬂows through to the
mass spectrometer on the back side of the interface block. On the bigger picture, the
ﬂow controllers of carrier gasses are seen to the left and a buﬀer volume is seen to the right.
A schematic diagram of the control system is shown in Figure 2.7 with the sniﬀer
chip in the bottom center. All the valves, mass ﬂow controls (MFC) and pressure controls
(PC) are controlled using LabView. In unused state, valves 1 and 2 are open and all
others are closed. Once the sniﬀer chip is mounted valve 5 can be opened to let the
atmospheric pressure before valve 5 equilibrate with the much lower pressure in the
buﬀer volume. As the ratio between these volumes are 1/1000 the pressure in the buﬀer
will be ≈1 mbar. The buﬀer volume is pumped down to ≈0.1 mbar through valve 2
before the gate at valve 3/4 is opened. The diﬀerence between pumping through valve
2 and 3/4 is that the pipe at valve 3/4 is much bigger resulting in a faster pumping
speed. When the pressure in the buﬀer volume approaches high vacuum valve 3/4 is
closed again, and the inlet to the QMS through valve 13 can be opened. Valve 5 is then
closed and there is vacuum all the way up to the interface at the sniﬀer chip. A carrier
gas can be ﬂown to the chip by using one of the mass ﬂow controls and opening of valve
6,7 and 8. The pressure of the pipe in which the carrier gas is ﬂown is controlled by the
two pressure controls at valve 6 and 8, and will be set to 1 bar. Valve 7 is in fact a 6-way
valve, which means that a column of gas can be loaded to the spiral pipe and then ﬂown
to the chip. When the experiments are ﬁnished, the gas ﬂow is stopped and valve 6,7,8
and 13 are closed, and the buﬀer volume is pumped down through valve 2.
In the EC-MS setup it is possible to use more than one carrier gas. The most common
choice throughout this project has been He due to its inert nature but the design of the
setup makes it possible to switch to another gas. This can basically be done in two ways;
either as a short-term pulse or as an actual carrier gas change. The sample electrode
will always be in local equilibrium with the carrier gas partial pressure due to diﬀusion
through the chip to the electrode. This can be utilised to study how the electrode reacts
when exposed to other gasses than the argon used to deaerate the electrolyte.
When changing to another carrier gas, the most eﬃcient way to do this is to close the
gas inlets to the chip at valve 6 and 7 in order to hold a pressure of 1 bar in the sampling
==PAGE:37==
2.4. CONTROL OF THE EC-MS SETUP
23
Figure 2.6 Picture of the EC-MS setup with zoom on the electrochemical ﬂow cell. Inlet and
outlet of electrolyte is seen as well as the connections to WE, RE and CE. The carrier gas inlets
are seen on both sides of the cell and the ﬂow to MS behind the cell.
volume. The ﬂow of carrier gas is then stopped and the tubes all the way from valve
9-12 through valve 8 up to valve 1 are then pumped down through the buﬀer volume
and the turbo pump. The same tubes are then ﬁlled again up to 1 bar with the new
carrier gas, and the ﬂow can be reactivated by opening valves 6 and 7. This will give a
complete change in carrier gas within a short time range.
It is also possible to expose the electrode to a short term pulse of another gas through
the carrier gas inlet system and diﬀusion through the chip. This is done by using the
6-way valve (valve 7) in the EC-MS gas ﬂow system. The spiral column can be ﬁlled
up with a gas (other than the carrier gas), and by turning the 6-way valve this column
of gas will pass by the chip in a short time range. The time range of the pulse can be
varied by changing the ﬂow speed of the carrier gas.
Figure 2.7 Schematic of the control system of the EC-MS setup with the sniﬀer chip in bottom
center. All valves, MFC’s and PC’s are controlled using LabView.
==PAGE:38==
24
CHAPTER 2. EC-MS SETUP
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.8 Demonstration of carrier gas change and gas pulse injections. (a) shows a carrier
gas change from He to CO. (b) shows pulsed injections of CO.
Throughout this project it has been studied how the Cu electrode reacts when exposed
to CO through the electrolyte. This has been done both by short term pulses and by
changing the carrier gas from He to CO. In Figure 2.8 a carrier gas change and pulse is
shown. In (a) He is used as carrier gas until 1200 s where it is changed to CO. Note that
both N2 and CO have a molar mass of 28 which means that before 1200 s the mass 28
signal (grey) consists mainly of a background of N2 while after the change it corresponds
to the CO carrier gas. The same goes for ﬁgure 2.8 (b) where the pulses at 7300, 7700
and 8100 s corresponds to an injection of CO to the carrier gas stream.
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 3
Experimental details
The purpose of this chapter is to describe and outline the experimental procedures and
considerations during this project. The chapter will more or less follow the natural
chronological order of an experimental sequence, starting from cleaning of equipment and
preparation of samples to mounting of the sniﬀer chip, sample and cell, continuing to
the actual experimental measurements and ending with quantiﬁcation and interpretation
of data. This chapter will not contain any concluding results, thus the reader may skip
to chapter 4 for the results.
3.1
Cleaning and preparation procedures
To enhance the quality and accuracy of electrochemical studies of metal surfaces it is of
great importance to have clean equipment and samples since small contaminations can
result in unreliable measurements.
The ﬁrst preparation step for the experimental measurements is to clean all glassware,
EC cell and mounting parts for the EC cell. This is typically done by placing the diﬀerent
parts in a piranha solution, which is a 3:1 mixture of sulfuric acid, H2SO4, and hydrogen
peroxide, H2O2. Piranha is a strongly corrosive and oxidising solution and will dissolve
all organic compounds.
Occasionally, the various glassware and EC parts have been used to study other metals
than copper, e.g. platinum. Since platinum cannot be removed by piranha, aqua regia
(also known as royal water) solution has been used to clean all parts previously in contact
with platinum. Aqua regia is a 1:3 mixture of nitric acid, HNO3, and hydrochloric acid,
HCl, and is named so due to its ability to dissolve noble metals like platinum and gold.
The preparation procedure for the polycrystalline copper samples used in this project
consists of a mechanical polishing followed by a rinsing in Milli-Q water. The polishing
is done by using a 0.3 µm alumina oxide polish on a cloth designated for copper samples,
and is performed immediately prior to electrochemical measurements. The purpose of the
polishing is to remove oxide layers and rough structures on the copper surface. Figure
3.1 shows examples of a polished and non-polished copper sample. The non-polished
sample has a signiﬁcant oxide layer after long time of air exposure.
25
==PAGE:40==
26
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
Figure 3.1 Picture of two copper samples before and after mechanical polishing demonstrating
the oxide removal eﬀect of polishing.
3.2
Electrolyte preparation
The main part of the electrochemical experiments carried out during this project have
been in either a 0.1 M KOH solution or a 1.0 M carbonate buﬀer. The KOH solution is
prepared using 99.995 % suprapur pellets of potassium hydroxide hydrate from Sigma-
Aldrich and ultrapure Milli-Q water. When choosing an electrolyte it must be considered
whether it should be basic or acidic, depending on which electrode is being used and the
reactions being investigated. Furthermore, the concentration should be quite high to
ensure a better electric conductivity of the electrolyte. Since the electrolyte is in contact
with the sniﬀer chip in the EC-MS setup, another consideration must be made, namely
the durability/stability of the membrane in the chip. In high concentration alkaline
media, the porous membrane of the chip will be etched causing liquid to breach through
the chip. For a 0.1 M KOH solution (pH=13) the time it takes to breach the chip is
in the order of 1 hour, and it is assumed that the etch eﬀect is proportional with the
basic concentration. A unit decrease in pH thus increases the time before breaching by a
factor of 10.
The increase of stability of the sniﬀer chip is the main motivation for using a carbonate
buﬀer as electrolyte. The buﬀer can be prepared by equilibrating a 1.0 M KOH solution
with gaseous CO2 at 1 bar. This will acidify the solution and lower the pH from 14 to
≈7.8. The solution is then titrated to the wanted pH value by adding more 1.0 M KOH.
The carbonate buﬀer is a quite complex system of chemical reactions and equilibrations,
and can be described by the following reaction scheme and equations:
H2O ⇌H+ + OH−
xy = Kw = 10−14[M]2
(3.1a)
CO2(aq) ⇌CO2(g)
p
d = Kh = 29.6[bar/M]
(3.1b)
CO2(aq) + H2O ⇌H2CO3
a
d = Keq = 1.7 · 10−3
(3.1c)
H2CO3 ⇌HCO−
3 + H+
bx
a = Ka1 = 10−3.6[M]
(3.1d)
HCO−
3 ⇌CO2−
3
+ H+
cx
b = Ka2 = 10−10.3[M]
(3.1e)
X
i
zici = 0
s + x −y −b −2c = 0
(3.1f)
where the symbols used are deﬁned by:
cK+ = s, cH+ = x, cOH−= y, pCO2(g) = p, cH2CO3 = a, cHCO−
3 = b, cCO2−
3
= c, cCO2(aq) = d
(3.2)
Equation (3.1a) is the dissociation of water, (3.1b) is the equilibrium of carbon dioxide
in gaseous and aqueous forms, (3.1c) is the forming of carbonic acid from water and
==PAGE:41==
3.3. CALIBRATION OF REFERENCE ELECTRODE
27
CO2, (3.1d) and (3.1e) is the ﬁrst and second deprotonation of carbonic acid and (3.1f)
is the bookkeeping of all electrical charges summing to zero.
The equation system consists of six equations and eight variables, thus two degrees of
freedom are included. With the introduced preparation method, the most obvious choice
is setting the concentration of potassium and the partial pressure of CO2 (s and p). The
desired output of the equations is typically x or the pH-value calculated by pH = −log x,
and by substituting the other variables in the equation system, one equation in x, s and
p can be found:
s + x −Kw
x −Ka1x + 2Ka1Ka2
x2
· Keqp
Kh
= 0
(3.3)
Another approach is to collect the concentrations of all carbon species in one variable:
E = a + b + c + d
(3.4)
Equation (3.3) can then be rewritten as
s + x −Kw
x −
KeqKa1x + 2KeqKa2Ka1
x2 + Keqx2 + KeqKa1x + KeqKa2Ka1
E = 0
(3.5)
In the lab, a solution of 1.0 M KOH is prepared. This will per deﬁnition have s = 1
and E1 = 0. A speciﬁed amount of this solution is then equilibrated with 1 bar CO2
by purging. Solving (3.3) and (3.5) yields pH = −log x = 7.84 and E2 = 1.03 M. The
desired carbonate buﬀer are then made by mixing right amounts of the two solutions.
For a carbonate buﬀer at pH = 12, E is found to be 0.5 M. The following then holds:
V1E1 + V2E2 = (V1 + V2)E3
(3.6)
⇔V1 = E2 −E3
E3 −E1
V2,
(3.7)
where subscript 1 corresponds to the 1.0 M KOH solution, subscript 2 corresponds to
the CO2 saturated solution and 3 to the mixture of the two. Thus, to reach a pH of 12,
100 mL of CO2 saturated KOH must be mixed with 106 mL 1.0 M KOH.
3.3
Calibration of reference electrode
Once the electrolyte is prepared, the next step is to calibrate the reference electrode to
RHE in the speciﬁc electrolyte. This is typically done in a two-compartment electro-
chemical cell where the counter and working electrode is placed in one compartment and
the reference electrode in the other. The two compartments have electrical contact but
no electrolyte ﬂow between them. Platinum wires are used for both CE and WE since
the RHE is deﬁned for platinum electrodes.
The ﬁrst step of the reference electrode calibration procedure is to do cyclic voltammetry
of the platinum wires in the electrolyte. The electrolyte is being purged by Ar to deaerate
the electrolyte. Figure 3.2 shows the CV-plot with the sharp negative peak at ∼−1.4 V
as the most prominent feature corresponding to hydrogen evolution on platinum.
The next step is a open circuit voltage measurement while the purging is changed from
Ar to H2. This is shown in Figure 3.3 where the change is spotted at ∼12 s. The open
circuit voltage in H2 saturated electrolyte is the deﬁnition of the zero-point on RHE
potential scale. Thus, the shift in potential between the reference electrode and the RHE
scale can be read oﬀas the steady state value of the open circuit voltage.
Another way to get the potential shift of the reference electrode is to perform another
==PAGE:42==
28
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
cyclic voltammetry, this time in H2-purged electrolyte. The CV is done with a very
narrow voltage range of ±10 mV relative to the OCV and is shown in Figure 3.4. The
true calibration value can then be read oﬀat 0.0 mA to be ∆VRE vs. RHE = 1.385 V.
Obviously, this method of reference electrode calibration has been repeated for ev-
ery time a new electrolyte is prepared. The calibration results will not be speciﬁed for
every calibration since all electrochemical measurements are presented with voltages
relative to the RHE scale and the calibration has thus only been used to shift the
measured voltages to the correct scale.
Figure 3.2 Cyclic voltammetry of platinum in Ar-purged 0.1 M KOH electrolyte. The sharp
HER peak at ≈−1.4 V will be used for calibration.
Figure 3.3 Open circuit voltage as function of time for platinum wires in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte.
At ∼12 s, H2 starts to be purged instead of Ar causing the OCV to drop to ≈−1.385 V.
==PAGE:43==
3.4. MOUNTING OF CHIP AND INITIAL TESTS
29
Figure 3.4 Cyclic voltammetry of platinum in H2-purged 0.1 M KOH electrolyte. The voltage
value of ≈−1.385 V at zero current is the calibration value.
Figure 3.5 Mounting of the sniﬀer chip in the EC-MS setup. At ﬁrst, viton o-rings are placed on
top of the gas channel inlets and the chip is placed on the o-rings. Finally, the chip is constrained
to the interface block.
3.4
Mounting of chip and initial tests
The initialization of the EC-MS setup starts with mounting a sniﬀer chip in the interface
block. This mounting is shown in Figure 3.5. At ﬁrst, four o-rings are placed in the
interface block. Secondly, the sniﬀer chip is placed upon the o-rings and ﬁnally the chip
is pressed down on the o-rings. Once the chip is mounted and the gas pipes are pumped
down, the valve inlet to the mass spectrometer can be opened. To check whether the chip
has any defects and whether the mounting is leak tight two initial tests are carried out.
These test are referred to as ”breath test” and ”drop test”. A mass-time plot showing
such tests can be seen in Figure 3.6. A breath test is performed at t ≈150 s by exhaling
directly onto the chip. The data from the MS will reveal if the time response is oﬀsince
the breath test should give a sharp peak in mass 44 corresponding to an increase in CO2.
The drop test is carried out by placing a water droplet on the chip covering the entire
membrane. By monitoring the MS output it is possible to check if the o-rings are leak
tight or if the chip has any defects or cracks in the gas channels and capillaries. In Figure
3.6 the drop test starts at 200 s. Once the droplet is placed on the chip the He signal
(the carrier gas) is increasing to nearly the level of nitrogen previous to the droplet, while
==PAGE:44==
30
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
Figure 3.6 Mass-time plot of initial breath and drop tests after mounting of chip. At 150 s the
chip is being exhaled on and at 200 s the chip is covered by a water drop. The breath test checks
the time response of the chip while the drop test can check for possible leaks.
also the water and hydrogen levels are increasing. This is due to the fact that with the
droplet on the chip, the MS is simply measuring what is in the droplet. The increase in
hydrogen signal is due to a high background in mass 2 from water. Another important
thing to ensure is that the oxygen and nitrogen levels are suﬃciently decreasing to make
sure that no leaks are present in the chip. As a rule of thumb, the chip is approved if
the oxygen level drops to ≈0.5 nA.
3.5
Mounting of working electrode and EC-cell
After the Cu working electrode has been prepared by mechanical polishing it is ready to
be mounted to the RDE stick and in the EC cell, and the diﬀerent steps of the mounting
is shown in Figure 3.7. The Cu electrode is fastened to the RDE-stick in the u-cup using
a teﬂon mounting block. The RDE-stick, u-cup and electrode is mounted in the EC-cell
and ﬁnally adjusted for the edges of the EC-cell, u-cup and electrode surface to ﬂush. It
is quite important that the edges ﬂush perfectly to ensure that the electrolyte volume
underneath the electrode is small resulting in a short transport time of the products
through the electrolyte. An optical microscope is used in order to get the edges to ﬂush
properly.
When the electrode is mounted in the EC-cell, the cell is mounted on top of the sniﬀer
chip and fastened to the interface block, and the inlet of electrolyte is attached to the
cell. Electrolyte is ﬂown immediately through the cell and the glass pipes for reference
and counter electrodes as well as the outlet tube is attached to the cell. The last thing
to do before the setup is ready for use is to connect all the electrodes to the potentiostat.
For all experiments in this project the electrolyte has been de-aerated by purging with
Ar.
==PAGE:45==
3.6. EC-MS MEASUREMENTS
31
Figure 3.7 Mounting of working electrode in EC-cell. Using a teﬂon mounting block the electrode
is mounted in the u-cup to the RDE-stick. The RDE-stick is then mounted in the cell and the
edges of the u-cup and electrode are ﬂushed with the cell.
3.6
EC-MS measurements
Once the sample electrode and EC cell is properly mounted, the actual EC-MS mea-
surements can begin. Even when the Cu samples are freshly polished there will be a
signiﬁcant oxide layer after only a short time of air exposure. To get rid of this the
ﬁrst experimental procedure is to reduce the initial oxide layer in order to get a more
well-deﬁned surface. This is typically done by cyclic voltammetry until the electrode
produces stable CV-curves. As an example of this, Figure 3.8 shows the ﬁrst cycle after
the sample has been exposed to air along with a cycle after the CV’s have stabilized.
Note the large reduction current in the ﬁrst cycle and how this peak comes at a diﬀer-
ent voltage than the reduction peaks in the latter cycle. This suggest that the oxide
produced after air exposure is diﬀerent than the oxide produced electrochemically. The
hydrogen production during this ﬁrst cycle is also signiﬁcantly larger than during later
cycles which tells that the oxide from air exposure facilitates a larger hydrogen production.
Once the initial oxide layer is reduced and the CV’s have stabilised, the actual measure-
ments can start. This project speciﬁcally studies the phenomenon of anodic hydrogen
desorption on copper which appears when scanning from a cathodic potential in the
HER region to anodic potentials. Slightly anodic of the zero point on RHE scale, the MS
plot will reveal a peak in the hydrogen signal just after the peak from HER. The peak in
hydrogen corresponding to HER is referred to as cathodic or primary hydrogen peak
while the other is referred to as the anodic or secondary hydrogen peak. The desorption
of the secondary hydrogen happens at a potential of ≈0.1 V vs. RHE.
Experiments can be made where either the primary or the secondary hydrogen peak
is isolated by changing the cathodic and anodic potential limits of the cyclic potential
scans. Figure 3.9 (a) illustrates the change of potential limits. By decreasing the anodic
limit to below ≈0.1 V vs. RHE the primary hydrogen peak can thus be isolated, while
the secondary peak can be isolated by increasing the cathodic limit to a point cathodic
of the HER region. Figure 3.9 (a) and (b) shows what the MS data looks like when
the primary (blue) and secondary peaks (red), respectively, are isolated. The potential
at which the primary peak is isolated tells something about when the adsorption of
hydrogen to the Cu surface starts while the potential at which the secondary peak is
isolated reveals when the hydrogen is desorbed from the surface.
==PAGE:46==
32
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
Figure 3.8 (Bottom) Cu CV’s of ﬁrst and ﬁfth cycles after air exposure with scan rate of 20mV/s.
(Top) Corresponding hydrogen MS data. The ﬁrst cycle causes a large hydrogen production and
a large reduction peak compared to later cycles.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.9 (a) shows the isolation of the primary hydrogen peak with MS data for hydrogen
in the top plot and potential and current in the bottom plot. (b) shows the similar plots for
isolation of the secondary hydrogen peak.
==PAGE:47==
3.7. QUANTIFICATION OF MS SIGNAL
33
3.7
Quantiﬁcation of MS signal
It is of great interest to be able to quantify the signal from mass spectrometry in terms
of the number of molecules produced at the electrode surface. This can be done by
comparing the current measured by the potentiostat to the MS signal. By assuming
that all the current from the electrode is used to produce one product then a calibration
factor, Fcal, can be deﬁned by:
R Ieldt
nF
Fcal =
Z
IQMSdt,
(3.8)
where n is the number of electrons used to electrochemically produce the desired product,
F is Faraday’s constant, Iel is the current measured by the potentiostat and IQMS is the
current signal from the QMS. The easiest way to quantify the MS signal is by making
several CP measurements, thus holding the current constant at diﬀerent values. This
should result in a more or less constant signal from the QMS as well and make the
integration and calibration straightforward.
In Figure 3.10, an example of a quantiﬁcation of the QMS signal for hydrogen is
presented, showing the raw EC data for measurements with constant currents in the
range 10-80 µA along with the corresponding MS data. The grey shaded areas are
the steady state time ranges used for integration. Note that the hydrogen signals are
constant for all values of the current but the potential is decreasing, especially for the
higher currents.
In 3.11 (a), the integrated steady state QMS signals are shown as a function of the
integrated electrode currents along with a linear ﬁt. The slope of the line is the best
estimate of the calibration factor, Fcal. The fact that the line does not go through origo
suggests that some of the current is used to produce some other product than hydrogen
or that the hydrogen production is nonlinear at low currents.
In (b), the calibration factor is used to quantify an actual measurement of the anodic
hydrogen. For reference, 30 pmol corresponds to 6% of a monolayer on a Cu(111) surface,
suggesting that the anodic hydrogen is indeed a sub-monolayer feature. Since this project
is mainly studying hydrogen evolution, the only calibration carried out is for hydrogen.
In principle, similar calibrations could have been completed for e.g. oxygen evolution,
CO oxidation to CO2 or CO reduction to methane or ethylene.
==PAGE:48==
34
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
Figure 3.10 Quantiﬁcation of mass spectrometry data showing the EC-MS data for hydrogen
evolution at constant currents with steady states used for integration marked in grey.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.11 Quantiﬁcation of hydrogen. (a) shows the integrated QMS signal as a function of
the total electrode charge passed the electrode along with a linear ﬁt. The slope are the best
estimate of a calibration factor (b) shows the calibration factor used to quantify the anodic
hydrogen peaks during potential scans.
3.8
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)
XPS is a very surface sensitive and quantitative method used for measuring composition,
chemical state and electronic state of the various elements in a material. The basic
concept of XPS is sketched in Figure 3.12 (a). X-rays are irradiated onto the sample
causing electrons to be excited. The kinetic energy of the escaped electrons are then
measured using an energy analyser. The kinetic energy can then be expressed as
Ekin = hν −EB −Φ
(3.9)
where hν is the energy of the incoming x-rays, EB is the binding energy of the electron
and Φ is the work function of the material (the amount of energy needed to remove the
==PAGE:49==
3.8. X-RAY PHOTOELECTRON SPECTROSCOPY (XPS)
35
least bound electron). The surface sensitivity is ensured by choosing the energy of the
x-rays such that the mean free path of the electrons are minimized, as per Figure 3.12
(b). If the electrons have energies in the range from 10 to 1000 eV, then the mean free
path is in the order of 10 ˚A or less, corresponding to only a few atomic layers.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.12 (a) shows the principle of XPS measurements. X-rays are used to emit electrons
from the material with a kinetic energy to be measured. (b) shows the so-called universal curve
for various materials. The mean free path as a function of electron energy has a minimum at
energies of 50-100 eV [27].
The electron density as function of binding energy is unique for the diﬀerent elements,
thus making it possible to measure which elements and how much there is of those ele-
ments in the surface. Additionally, small changes in the binding energy reﬂects chemical
changes of the elements.
XPS can be used to make a wide-range survey of binding energies.
This method
is very useful if it is uncertain which elements might be in the surface, thus making it
useful for a history-study of a sample.
Another way of utilizing the features of XPS is to combine it with a sputtering method.
This has been done by alternating between XPS and sputtering by Ar atoms, thus
making a depth proﬁle of the samples. By using data for the sputter yield of various
elements it can be estimated how long time it takes to sputter a certain distance, and
this is used to estimate the sputter depth into the sample. This makes it possible to
determine the atomic composition as a function of depth of the sample.
The atomic composition of the sample surface can be calculated by
Cx =
Ixk
Sx · 100%
PN
i=1
Ii
Si
(3.10)
where Ixk = SxkNxFhν is the concentration of element x in the surface, Fhν is the number
of detected electrons, Sxk is the sensitivity factor of the analyzer which is a function of
the emission cross section of subshell level k in element x, the inelastic mean free path of
an electron emitted from level k travelling through the material and the transmission
function of the analyzer. In the denominator, i refers to one subshell in any of the N
observed elements.
==PAGE:50==
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 4
Results
The purpose of this chapter is to present and discuss the main results of this project. In
general, the aim of this project has been to investigate what happens on the surface of
Cu electrodes under conditions relevant to electrochemical reduction of CO2 and the
simultaneous production of hydrogen using in-situ mass spectrometry.
First of all, the phenomenon of anodic hydrogen desorption on copper surfaces will be
introduced along with results establishing that it is indeed an electrochemical feature.
Secondly, a pH study of the anodic hydrogen will be presented, including a discussion of
the relevance to CO2 reduction. Next, the method of x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
(XPS) will be used to rule out any inﬂuence of possible contaminations and to perform a
depth proﬁling of the samples. Finally, a study of CO-adsorption on Cu will be analyzed
and compared with the pH study of anodic hydrogen.
4.1
Anodic hydrogen desorption - an electrochemical
feature
The phenomenon of anodic hydrogen desorption has previously been introduced in section
3.6 as a feature appearing in the mass 2 signal from the mass spectrometer when doing
cyclic voltammetry. Figure 4.1 shows the MS signal for H2. In (a) it is plotted vs. time
with a subplot of the potential (black) and current density (red). In (b) the same data is
plotted vs. potential. These plots show that when scanning cathodic (down to -0.25 V
vs. RHE) this gives a peak in the MS data from HER and while scanning anodic another
peak is seen just anodic of 0 V vs. RHE.
In order to investigate this feature a bit more and show that it is in fact an electrochemical
feature, the following simple experiments were conducted:
1. Scan cathodic to a potential in the HER range and hold the potential for 1 min.
Then scan anodic to a potential where no hydrogen is produced but not anodic
enough to release the anodic hydrogen, and then once again hold the potential
for diﬀerent time durations. This potential range of no hydrogen evolution nor
desorption will be referred to as intermediate potentials. Finally, scan anodic to
desorb the anodic hydrogen.
2. Scan cathodic to the HER region, but without holding the potential, and then scan
anodic to the intermediate potential and hold for a given time before scanning
anodic to desorb the hydrogen.
The results of this experiment is shown in Figure 4.2 where the MS data and potential
are co-plotted vs. time. The length of the pauses at the intermediate potential and the
37
==PAGE:52==
38
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.1 Anodic hydrogen desorption phenomenon during CV of scan rate 50 mV/s. (a)
shows the time plot of H2 ﬂux along with the potential and current. The primary and secondary
hydrogen peaks appear at cathodic and anodic potentials, respectively. (b) shows the same data
vs. potential.
Figure 4.2 H2 ﬂux and potential vs. time. The secondary hydrogen is indeed an electrochemical
feature and not a time delay, and the amount of secondary hydrogen is independent of amount of
primary hydrogen produced.
integration values of the anodic hydrogen peaks are stated in the ﬁgure.
The conclusion from this is that the anodic hydrogen desorption is indeed an electro-
chemical feature since after holding at intermediate potentials for 1, 2 and 5 minutes,
the secondary hydrogen peak appears at the following anodic scan. Also, the amount of
hydrogen desorbed as secondary hydrogen seems independent of the amount of primary
hydrogen produced from the HER and of the time pausing at an intermediate potential.
==PAGE:53==
4.2. PH STUDY OF ANODIC HYDROGEN DESORPTION
39
4.2
pH study of anodic hydrogen desorption
In section 3.6, an example of how either the primary, cathodic hydrogen peak or the
secondary, anodic peak can be isolated was shown. This type of experiment is the basis
of this section where a pH-study of the anodic hydrogen is presented. The experiments
of isolating the primary and secondary hydrogen peaks are carried out as follows:
The ﬁgure to the right illustrates the principle of
the experiment. CV’s are performed in the potential
range between 0.45 V and -0.25 V vs. RHE with scan
rate of 20 mV/s. By increasing the cathodic limit
gradually while holding the anodic limit constant, the
primary hydrogen peak from HER can be reduced
until it vanishes and the secondary peak is isolated.
Likewise, by decreasing the anodic limit the secondary
peak will be reduced and ﬁnally the primary peak
will be isolated. For every set of potential limits three
CV’s are completed.
By performing these experiments, the potentials at which the primary and secondary
peaks are isolated can be identiﬁed. The potential where the primary peak is isolated
tells something about when the anodic desorption starts, while the potential where the
secondary is isolated tells when the mechanism that creates the secondary hydrogen starts.
The pH-study has been performed by preparing 1.0 M carbonate buﬀer solutions at
pH-values of 7.8, 9, 10.5 and 12, as well as a 0.1 M KOH electrolyte at pH 13.
In the left column of Figure 4.3 the hydrogen MS data from the experiments at pH 10.5
and 13 is shown. The primary hydrogen peaks are shown in blue and the secondary peaks
in red. With time, the cathodic or anodic limit is increased or decreased, respectively,
and for every set of limits three CV’s are completed. The right column shows the
corresponding integrated signal for the primary (blue) and secondary (red) peaks as well
as the sum of these two (green) as a function of the lower (cathodic) potential limit in
rows 1+3 and upper (anodic) potential limit in rows 2+4.
By looking at when the integrated signals for the primary hydrogen in rows 1 and
3 approaches background level it is possible to determine the potential at which the
secondary hydrogen peaks are isolated. As seen in Figures 4.3 (b) and (f), the primary
hydrogen peak from cathodic hydrogen evolution ﬁrst exceeds the background level
when the cathodic potential limit is between -0.15 and -0.2 V vs RHE while ﬁgure (d)
and (h) yields that the secondary hydrogen peaks vanishes between 0.05 and 0.10 V
vs. RHE. The ﬁrst measure tells when the HER begins and when the adsorption of the
secondary hydrogen starts while the second measure tells when the desorption of the
second hydrogen begins.
Another measure to identify is when the integrated signal of the secondary hydrogen
reaches its maximum level, corresponding to the potential where the desorption has
ﬁnished. Figure (b) and (d) show that this happens in the range between 0.30 and 0.40
V vs RHE. These type of experiments have been completed for 5 diﬀerent pH-values and
the remaining data can be found in appendix C.
The interpretation of these experiments relies on the Pourbaix diagram for the water-
copper system studying adsorptions of hydroxyl and hydrogen on Cu(111) surfaces
presented in [28]. Superimposed on the classical Pourbaix-diagram from [22] are calcula-
==PAGE:54==
40
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Figure 4.3 The left column shows the hydrogen ﬂux vs. time for experiments isolating the primary
and secondary hydrogen peaks at pH 10.5 and 13. The right column shows the corresponding
integrated signals vs. potential limit. The potentials for isolation of the primary and secondary
peaks can be identiﬁed. The annotations in the left column note the potential limits (lower or
upper).
==PAGE:55==
4.2. PH STUDY OF ANODIC HYDROGEN DESORPTION
41
tions of adsorption of hydroxyl following the reaction:
H2Oads + OH−(aq) ⇌OHads + H2O(l) + e−
(4.1)
and adsorption of hydrogen following the reaction:
H2Oads + H+(aq) + e−⇌Hads + H2O(l).
(4.2)
Since H+ and OH−are in equilibrium with liquid water, these reactions become
H2Oads ⇌OHads + H+(aq) + e−,
(4.3)
H2Oads + e−⇌Hads + OH−(aq).
(4.4)
As an example, the equilibrium potential of the reaction in (4.4) follows from the Nernst
equation and may be expressed as
E = E⊖−RT ln 10
F
log
 θH
θH2O

−RT ln 10
F
pH,
(4.5)
where θ denotes the fractional coverage of the certain species. On the SHE scale, E⊖
can be written as
E⊖
SHE =
1
2µ⊖
H2(g) −µ⊖
Hads + µ⊖
H2Oads −µ⊖
H2O(l)
F
(4.6)
=
−∆G⊖
Hads
F
(4.7)
since µ⊖
H+ +µ⊖
e−= 1
2µ⊖
H2(g) and µ⊖
H+ +µ⊖
OH−= µ⊖
H2O(l). By using that θH2O = 1−θH−θOH
and insertion of thermodynamical data in the expression for E⊖, this will give an equation
for the potential depending on pH and coverages of species, forming straight lines in the
Pourbaix-diagram. The standard chemical potentials, µ⊖, for the adsorbed species are
derived from literature thermodynamic data on the reversible chemisorption of these
species at the electrode-electrolyte interface or, if not available, at the metal-gas interface.
From [28] this yields the following equations:
H-H2O transition: E = 0.03[V] −0.059[V] log

θH
1 −θH −θOH

−0.059[V]pH
(4.8)
OH-H2O transition: E = 0.09[V] + 0.059[V] log

θOH
1 −θH −θOH

−0.059[V]pH
(4.9)
These calculations are based on the assumption that each species is adsorbed in the form
of a neutral 2D layer covalently bonded to the surface and that the adsorption in the
aqueous solution happens on a hydrated surface by displacement of water molecules from
a dense ﬁrst layer on the surface. This implies that no free sites are present on the surface.
The Pourbaix-diagram of Cu with equilibrium lines separating regions corresponding
to adsorption of H, OH and H2O is shown in Figure 4.4, and according to [28], the
transition from half a monolayer of OH adsorbed to half a monolayer of H adsorbed
takes place in a very narrow potential range in the same order as the uncertainty of the
H adsorption from water, thus making the range of H2O questionable.
The experimentally identiﬁed potentials for adsorption and desorption from the pH-study
of anodic hydrogen have been co-plotted on the diagram. As seen in the ﬁgure, the line
corresponding to 99% coverage of H and 1% of H2O lies just above the experimental
==PAGE:56==
42
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
data for the potential where HER begins and the adsorption of the secondary hydrogen
begins. Also, the desorption of the anodic hydrogen happens in the same range as the
surface according to the calculations changes from being covered with H to being covered
with OH. This is very interesting since it gives a possible explanation of the mechanisms
that causes the secondary hydrogen to be desorbed at anodic potentials.
The proposed mechanism has been sketched in Figure 4.5.
In (a), the mechanism
for the primary hydrogen (HER) is shown. The copper surface is covered with adsorbed
H, and these adsorbates react with protons from water dissociation in the electrolyte to
form molecular hydrogen.
In Figure 4.5(b), the adsorbed H atoms react with water molecules. The adsorbed H
atom and one of the H atoms from the water molecule go together to form molecular
hydrogen, which is the secondary hydrogen. The Cu surface ends up being covered with
OH in this reaction that happens at slightly anodic potentials vs. RHE. The fact that
the two highlighted protons form molecular hydrogen instead of becoming H+ ions in
the electrolyte is still a mystery.
Figure 4.4 The experimentally identiﬁed potentials for adsorption and desorption of hydrogen
on Cu superimposed on the Pourbaix diagram from [28].
Since the Pourbaix diagram is for a Cu(111) surface and the experiments are car-
ried out on a polycrystalline Cu electrode, it is relevant to estimate the roughness factor
of the polycrystalline surface. Figure 4.6 (a) shows a CV for a well-deﬁned Cu(111)
surface [29], while (b) shows the CV for the polycrystalline Cu electrode. By integrating
the same feature, in this case the reduction peak from Cu2O to Cu, in the two plots,
it is possible to estimate a roughness factor since the reduction peak is assumed to be
proportional to the surface area. This calculation gives a roughness factor of 3.9.
The amount of hydrogen desorbed as secondary hydrogen has previously been reported
to be in the order of 20-30 pmol. Assuming a perfect Cu(111) surface this corresponds to
4-6% of a monolayer. If considering the roughness factor of 3.9, the secondary hydrogen
corresponds to 1-1.5% of a monolayer.
==PAGE:57==
4.2. PH STUDY OF ANODIC HYDROGEN DESORPTION
43
Figure 4.5 Sketch of the mechanisms for primary and secondary hydrogen. (a) shows the
mechanism of primary hydrogen where protons react with adsorbed H atoms to form molecular
H2. (b) shows the mechanism of secondary hydrogen where water molecule react with adsorbed
H atoms to form molecular H2 and OH is adsorbed to the surface.
The fact that the experimental data using the polycrystalline electrode matches the
calculated Pourbaix-diagram of a Cu(111) surface gives motivation to investigate the
phenomenon of anodic hydrogen on well-deﬁned single crystal surfaces rather than poly-
crystalline. This study was outside of the time horizon of this project, though the initial
steps of re-designing components for the EC-MS setup have been initialized and can be
seen in chapter 5.
Knowing that the Cu surface will be covered with either adsorbed OH or H can be of
fundamental interest in the theoretical research of electrochemical CO2 reduction, since
it is important to know that the Cu surface seems to be covered with adsorbed H in the
potential region of CO2RR. Many theoretical studies of CO2RR on Cu assumes a clean
Cu surface and the adsorbed H might have inﬂuence on the energetics of the adsorption
energies relevant to CO2RR [30].
Besides being relevant for further studies of CO2RR this result also presents an interesting
fundamental feature of Cu as well as demonstrate the strength of the EC-MS setup.
==PAGE:58==
44
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.6 (a) shows a CV for Cu(111) from literature [29]. (b) shows the experimental CV for
polycrystalline Cu. Both are with scan rates of 20 mV/s. By integrating the same feature, a
roughness factor of 3.9 for the polycrystalline Cu sample can be found.
4.3
Comparison of sample preparation methods using
XPS
In order to rule out any inﬂuence of contaminations to the phenomenon of anodic hydrogen
desorption on copper electrodes, a study using x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)
was conducted. For three polycrystalline Cu samples, a XPS-survey and a depth proﬁle
have been measured. The three samples had been prepared in the following ways:
1 Mechanically polished for 20 min.
2 Mechanically polished for 20 min. and electrochemically reduced at -5 mA for 30
min.
3 No preparation (exposed to air for > 2 weeks)
The reason for the relatively long polishing time was to get rid of rough structures from
a previous electropolishing of sample 1 and 2. These three preparation methods are
chosen in order to span the most frequent states that the samples have been in during
and in between experiments.
First of all, a wide range survey investigating binding energies from 0 to 1350 eV was
performed for all samples, in order to look for potential contaminations. The survey for
sample 1 is shown in Figure 4.7 (a) where all XPS peaks are identiﬁed. The peaks in the
range of 600-700 eV are Auger peaks caused naturally by relaxation of the holes created
by emission of photoelectrons. Figure 4.7 (b) shows detailed spectra of the Cu2p 3/2,
C1s and O1s peaks with a background line used for integration. The survey shows that
besides the expected oxygen and carbon on the surface no contaminations from other
metals like Pt and Au were found.
Subsequently, a depth proﬁle measurement using Ar
sputtering was performed for the three samples, and the corresponding proﬁles are shown
in Figure 4.8. The atomic composition are calculated for detailed scans of Cu2p, O1s and
C1s peaks using a Shirley background subtraction. The depth proﬁles for sample 1 and
2 look qualitatively the same with the Cu level rising to near maximum within 10 nm
while the oxygen level decreases. The carbon is seen to disappear within the ﬁrst 2 nm,
suggesting that the carbon is really only at the surface. The main diﬀerence between
these two proﬁles is that Cu reaches a higher level for the electrochemically reduced
sample, which seems to be reasonable since oxide has been removed elecrochemically.
==PAGE:59==
4.3. COMPARISON OF SAMPLE PREPARATION METHODS USING XPS
45
(a) Survey (sample 1)
(b) Detailed spectra with background line for subtraction
Figure 4.7 (a) shows the XPS survey for sample 1 with peak annotations of Cu, C and O. (b)
shows the detailed spectra for the Cu2p 3/2, C1s and O1s peaks with a background line used for
subtraction.
Figure 4.8 Depth proﬁles for sample 1-3, respectively. Sample 1 and 2 looks qualitatively the
same though the Cu level in 2 is higher. In 3 the oxygen level decreases slowly due to the thick
oxide layer formed by air exposure.
The depth proﬁle for sample 3 is quite diﬀerent from the others. The sample had been
left to oxidise in air for some weeks and this is clearly seen in the depth proﬁle. The
oxygen level near the surface is higher than for the other two samples and it does not
decrease as fast. For the other samples, the oxygen level decreases to ≈10% while for
sample 3 it is still more than 30% when 45 nm into the sample. Also, the survey for
sample 3 showed that some potassium was present, which most likely comes from the
electrolyte during the last experiment in KOH. The potassium level is almost constant
at ≈10%.
==PAGE:60==
46
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.9 XPS detailed spectra for various sputtering depths for the Cu2p 3/2 peak of sample
1. A small shift in binding energies is observed which could be due to chemical shift from diﬀerent
oxides.
A further investigation of the Cu2p 3/2 peaks for sample 1 and 3 as well as the K2p peak
for sample 3 is shown in Figure 4.9, 4.10 and 4.11 where detailed spectra are plotted for
the various sputtering levels. For sample 1 the center of the Cu2p 3/2 peak is seen to
shift from 930.3 eV to 930.9 eV. According to [31] the binding energy for CuO is 1.3 ± 0.4
eV larger than for Cu2O. The FWHM’s of the peak is estimated to be 2.9 eV for CuO
and 1.2 eV for Cu2O thus it is diﬃcult to see a clear transition between the two oxides.
The observation of potassium in sample 3 was a surprise but Figure 4.11 shows that the
K2p peaks are present all the way through the sputtering.
Two things are concluded from these XPS results. First of all, there were no signs of
contaminations of the Cu samples within the detection limit of XPS which is about
0.1-1% for most elements and down to 0.01% for heavy elements in a lighter elements
matrix [32]. Secondly it has been demonstrated that the methods of mechanical polishing
and electrochemical reduction are less eﬃcient than expected to remove oxide from the
samples since there is still in the order of 10% oxygen in the bulk. The reason for this
could be grain boundaries in the polycrystalline Cu allowing for oxygen to enter the bulk.
==PAGE:61==
4.3. COMPARISON OF SAMPLE PREPARATION METHODS USING XPS
47
Figure 4.10 XPS detailed spectra for various sputtering depths for the Cu2p 3/2 peak of sample
3. A small shift in binding energies is observed which could be due to chemical shift from diﬀerent
oxides.
Figure 4.11 XPS detailed spectra for various sputtering depths for the K2p peaks of sample 3.
The peaks are present for all sputtering depths thus indicating potassium in the bulk.
==PAGE:62==
48
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4.4
Potential dependence of CO poisoning on Cu
As a further investigation of what happens on the surface of polycrystalline copper
electrodes, experiments exploiting the possibilities of changing between carrier gasses in
the EC-MS setup were performed. CO is known for its ability to stick to most metals,
especially on under-coordinated sites such as steps and kinks [33], and the idea with
changing the carrier gas to CO was that it might interfere with the adsorption/desorption
of hydrogen on Cu. One idea was that equilibrating the Cu surface with CO through
the sniﬀer chip might completely shut down for the anodic hydrogen desorption. Also, if
holding the potential between the HER region and the anodic desorption region it might
be possible to observe an exchange of the adsorbed hydrogen with CO. These were some
of the thoughts motivating these experiments.
First of all, a change of carrier gas from He to CO while cycling between -0.45 V
and +0.95 V vs. RHE in a 1.0 M carbonate buﬀer electrolyte at pH= 11 was made. It
has been reported that for Cu this should result in a deactivation in the HER region
[18, 34]. Figure 4.12 shows the cyclic voltammograms (a) and mass-time plot (b) for two
cycles using He as carrier gas and two cycles using CO as carrier gas. In the CV, there
are two major things to point out. One is that the ﬁrst oxidation peak for Cu at ≈0.55
V vs. RHE becomes signiﬁcantly bigger in CO while the second oxidation at ≈0.80
V vs. RHE becomes slightly bigger, thus indicating that the CO facilitates a better
oxidation of Cu. It is also noted that it does not look like just an increase in surface
area since other features in the CV’s do not change correspondingly. Another thing is, as
predicted, the deactivation in the HER region between -0.25 and -0.50 V vs. RHE where
the absolute current is smaller in CO compared to He. This deactivation is also seen in
the mass-time plot in Figure 4.12 (b) where the hydrogen peaks are seen to decrease a
bit when changing to CO. Interestingly, the secondary hydrogen peak (appearing as a
shoulder to the primary peak) does not seem to be qualitatively aﬀected by the presence
of CO.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.12 (a) shows CV’s for Cu when either He or CO is used as carrier gas. (b) shows the
corresponding mass-time plot. The CO is seen to facilitate a larger oxidation of the Cu and
decrease the activity of hydrogen evolution.
One may notice that the voltammogram in Figure 4.12 is tilted and seems to be lying on a
linear background. The hypothesis is that this is an eﬀect of the carbonate buﬀer, though
==PAGE:63==
4.4. POTENTIAL DEPENDENCE OF CO POISONING ON CU
49
the speciﬁc reason remains unknown. Control experiments on a more well-understood
platinum surface in both the EC-MS setup and in a two-compartment EC-cell were
performed, and they also showed a tilt in the voltammogram, concluding that it is not
an eﬀect from the EC-MS setup. The eﬀects of ohmic drop or presence of oxygen have
also been ruled out, thus leaving the electrolyte choice of the carbonate buﬀer as the
most apparent source of the tilt. Similar experiments with Pt in other electrolytes (KOH
and HClO4) did not cause this tilt. The results from these experiments are shown in
appendix D.
Exposing the Cu surface to CO can also be used to study displacement currents and
potentials of zero charge [35, 36, 37]. In electrochemistry, the interface between the
electrode and electrolyte is generally charged, which is supported by the observation
of the Cu surface to transition from being covered with positively charged H-ions to
negatively charged OH-ions. The EC-MS setup gives a unique possibility to study these
displacement currents induced by adsorption of CO since the transport time through
the membrane chip and electrolyte is suﬃciently small. These considerations open up
for experiments, where the basic principle is to hold a constant potential at diﬀerent
potentials while dosing a CO pulse through the membrane chip. These experiments were
also performed in a 1.0 M carbonate buﬀer electrolyte at pH= 11. Similar experiments
have been done on a Pt electrode, where a small displacement current was observed
when adsorbed hydrogen is exchanged with CO.
The experiments were carried out by making cycles consisting of a linear scan from the
anodic limit to cathodic limit, holding constant potential at cathodic limit and pulsing
CO after a while. Once the pulse is over another linear scan to the anodic limit is made
to complete the cycle. The scan to the anodic limit works as an initialization of the
surface between the cycles in order to have a similar surface for every pulse of CO. As
initialization, two diﬀerent anodic limits were considered; scanning past both oxidation
peaks to a potential of +0.95 V vs. RHE and scanning to a potential of +0.40 V vs. RHE
just at the limit of oxidising currents (see Figure 4.12 (a) for reference to potentials).
The diﬀerent experiments will be referred to as experiment 1, 2 and 3:
1 Scanning anodic to 0.95 V vs. RHE between cycles of holding constant potential
while pulsing CO.
2 Scanning anodic to 0.40 V vs. RHE between cycles of holding constant potential
while pulsing CO.
3 Same as 2 but holding at more cathodic potentials to reduce CO electrochemically.
The cathodic limit was varied from -0.40 V to +0.40 V vs. RHE and the results are
shown in Figure 4.13 for anodic limit of +0.95 V and Figure 4.14 for anodic limit of
+0.40 V. The subplots to the right zoom in on the current measured at the time of the
CO pulse.
==PAGE:64==
50
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.13 MS signal, potential and current vs. time for experiment with injection of CO
pulses while holding the potential constant and going anodic between cycles. The three plots to
the right are showing examples a zoomed view of the current. The CO causes a drop in current
at cathodic and anodic potentials but not at intermediate potentials. (Experiment 1)
Figure 4.14 Same as above but without going anodic between the cycles. The observation of
the CO causing the current to drop is similar.(Experiment 2)
==PAGE:65==
4.4. POTENTIAL DEPENDENCE OF CO POISONING ON CU
51
Figure 4.15 EC-MS plot of a CO pulse and the drop in current caused by this. The duration of
the CO pulse matches the duration of the current drop, though the MS data is ≈10 s delayed.
The CO pulse also cause the hydrogen signal to drop.
In all experiments, the following observations were made: When holding at cathodic
potentials and pulsing CO, the absolute value of the current drops until the pulse is over,
probably due to a temporary CO-poisoning of the surface. The same feature is observed
when holding at anodic potentials but there is a certain intermediate potential range
where this decrease in current does not happen. This is pointed out with the subplots of
the current, where the decrease in current is observed at -0.40 V and +0.30 V vs. RHE
but not at -0.10 V vs. RHE.
Figure 4.15 shows the CO and H2 MS data and current vs. time for the pulse at +0.3 V
from Figure 4.13 to give a better view of what happens when the current drops. The
drop in current seems to have the same shape and duration as the CO pulse though it is
shifted ≈10 s due to the time response of the MS.
At cathodic potentials hydrogen atoms are adsorbed to the Cu and molecular hydrogen
is produced from HER causing a cathodic current. When CO is introduced in the system,
the hypothesis is that CO might exchange with H on the surface following the reaction:
H∗+ CO →CO∗+ H+ + e−
(4.10)
This could explain the observation of a more positive current when the system is exposed
to CO. In the mass-time plots in Figure 4.13 and 4.14 a drop in the hydrogen signal is
seen when a pulse of CO is injected, but this might just be due to the change in the
background for the water signal caused by the CO. In order to justify whether the drop
in the hydrogen signal is caused by H-CO exchange or by the decrease in water signal,
a plot of the hydrogen signal with a subtraction of the water background is shown in
Figure 4.16 (a) for the two last CO pulses of Figure 4.13. In (b) a zoom is shown of the
CO pulse at t=9740 s at a potential where no hydrogen is produced. Both the original
signal and the corrected signal is plotted. It is seen that the drop in water signal does
not totally account for the drop in hydrogen signal, thus indicating that the CO aﬀects
the hydrogen signal.
By going more cathodic than -0.4 V vs. RHE it was possible to observe products of
CO-reduction, namely some ethylene produced at potentials of -0.45 and -0.50 V vs.
RHE as shown in Figure 4.17. The ﬁrst pulse of CO works as a reference point since the
CO pulses also give a signal at the same mass as ethylene (m
z = 26). The following two
pulses introduced while holding the potential at -0.45 V shows that ethylene is indeed
being produced while the last pulse at a potential of -0.50 V yields an even larger peak in
==PAGE:66==
52
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.16 (a) shows the MS data from Figure 4.10 where the water background has been
subtracted from the hydrogen signal. (b) shows a zoomed plot of the original hydrogen signal and
the signal without the water background when the CO pulse is injected. When the background
is subtracted the signal is negative due to the CO.
the ethylene signal. Thus the onset of ethylene production is at ≈−0.45 V vs. RHE. It
should be noted that only gaseous products are detected in the EC-MS setup, thus there
will be liquid products from the CO reduction remaining in the electrolyte. To analyse
the liquid products the EC-MS method could be combined with a chromatographic
method such as headspace GC and/or nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy
[38].
The current drops have been integrated (the area between the red current lines and black
dashed background lines) for all potentials, and the results are shown in Figure 4.18
where Exp. 1 corresponds to Figure 4.13, Exp. 2 to Figure 4.14 and Exp. 3 to Figure
4.17. This ﬁgure emphasizes that that there is a potential range from ≈−0.2 V to ≈−0.1
V vs. RHE where CO does not aﬀect the current. Also, the size of the current drop
is independent of initialization method since Exp. 1 and 2 show current drops of same size.
By comparing this result to the result from the pH-study of the anodic hydrogen
desorption, it is interestingly noted that the potential where the integrated current has
its minimum falls right on the transition from adsorbed hydrogen to adsorbed OH in the
Pourbaix diagram in Figure 4.4.
This leads to the following interpretation of the results from the CO experiments: At
potentials cathodic of ≈−0.2 V. vs. RHE the surface is covered with H but the potential
is strong enough to bind CO weakly, resulting in a more positive current. This could
be explained by the hypothesis of the reaction in (4.10) to happen. In the intermediate
range from ≈−0.2 V to ≈−0.1 V vs. RHE the surface is also covered by H but the
potential is not strong enough to bind CO. Finally, at potentials anodic of ≈−0.1 V
vs. RHE the surface is covered by OH and it is once again possible to adsorb CO. The
reason for this to cause a more positive current is yet to be explained.
Besides complementing the results from the pH-study this observation might contribute
to the further understanding of how and why Cu catalyses the reduction of CO2, since
adsorption of CO is an intermediate in most product pathways and knowledge of the
potential dependence of CO-adsorption is therefore of relevance to the studies of CO2RR.
==PAGE:67==
4.4. POTENTIAL DEPENDENCE OF CO POISONING ON CU
53
Figure 4.17 Demonstration of ethylene production at cathodic potentials while pulsing CO.
The ﬁrst peak in the ethylene signal works as reference. The next two are for a potential of -0.45
V vs. RHE and the last one is for -0.50 V vs. RHE. (Experiment 3)
Figure 4.18 Integrated drop in current following injection of CO pulses vs. potential. At
intermediate potentials between ≈−0.2 and ≈−0.1 V vs. RHE the CO does not cause a drop in
current.
==PAGE:68==
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 5
Outlook and further studies
This chapter aims to describe and discuss ideas for further studies involving the phe-
nomenon of anodic hydrogen desorption in particular and CO2 reduction in general. The
ﬁrst section describes the process of designing a new electrochemical ﬂow cell for single
crystal studies. The preliminary steps for this part has already been taken as part of this
project and the design and work drawings will be presented here. The other sections
involve ideas for further experiments for a thorough understanding of the phenomenon,
though they have not been possible to complete during the limited time of a master
project.
5.1
Design of new ﬂow cell for single crystal studies
Following the pH-study of the anodic hydrogen desorption the need for performing
single crystal studies was enhanced and the preparations for these studies began. The
major issue was that the in-house single crystals are of another geometry than the
polycrystalline Cu samples. Instead of having the simple rod geometry with a diameter
of 5 mm and height of 4 mm, the Cu single crystals have a hat-shaped geometry as
presented in ﬁgure 5.1. This geometry is not ﬁt for a conventional mounting in a u-cup
as described earlier and a new mounting method is thus needed. The design process of
the new mounting method was based on the same principle of a u-cup mounted in the
EC-cell, and the ﬁnalised proposal was a u-cup split in two parts to secure a leak tight
mount in the EC-cell. The proposal design is seen in ﬁgure 5.2 where the single crystal
mount is seen apart in (1) and combined in (2). In (3), the single crystal is mounted in
the EC-cell and this represent the ﬁnal view of the mount.
The mount is composed by an outer and inner cup, a RDE stick, a nut and the single
crystal. The inner cup is slided onto the RDE stick and held ﬁrmly by the nut. The
single crystal is then placed in the inner cup with contact to the RDE stick and ﬁnally
the outer cup is used to constrain the single crystal in line. Once the single crystal is
mounted to the RDE stick it can be mounted in the EC-cell. The EC-cell itself is similar
to the one previously used, though the internal dimensions have been altered to ﬁt the
new mounting system of the single crystal.
The current state of the process of realising single crystal studies is that the new parts
(EC-cell, inner and outer cup) have been ordered at the workshop and the order is in
queue to be completed. The work drawings of the parts can be seen in appendix E. Due
to large demands on workshop services it unfortunately has not been possible to actually
complete any single crystal experiments. The idea is to investigate diﬀerent single crystal
surfaces like (100) (110) and (111) by studying the phenomenon of anodic hydrogen
desorption and more general mechanisms of CO2 reduction on these electrodes.
55
==PAGE:70==
56
CHAPTER 5. OUTLOOK AND FURTHER STUDIES
Figure 5.1 Sketch outlining the geometry of Cu single crystals. A = 8 mm, B = 6 mm, C = 2.8
mm, D = 1.5 mm.
Figure 5.2 Design of new EC-cell and parts for single crystal studies. (1) shows the assembly
of the RDE-stick and single crystal using an inner and outer cup. (2) shows the single crystal
mounted to the RDE-stick.
(3) shows the ﬁnal view of the single crystal mounted in the
re-designed EC-cell.
==PAGE:71==
5.2. OTHER IDEAS FOR FURTHER STUDIES
57
5.2
Other ideas for further studies
Besides the studies on single crystal electrodes it would be interesting to use a surface
area determination method to have a more quantitative measure of the surface of the
polycrystalline Cu samples. Since this kind of sample will have a relatively small surface
area compared to porous structure, the BET-method probably wont be the best candidate
[39]. Other useful methods could be microscopical techniques like electron microscopy or
scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) [40]. These methods would also make it possible
to determine surface structures and thus estimate the ratio of steps to facets relevant for
the studies of adsorption/desorption on the surface.
Another interesting method to use is under-potential deposition (UPD) of Pb on the
surface. UPD is a technique where a species (e.g. Pb) is electrodeposited at a potential
less negative than the equilibrium potential for the reduction of this metal, where the
equilibrium potential is the potential at which it will adsorb to itself. The under-potential
deposition can then be used to study the potential at which it is favourable to deposit
onto another material than itself. This method could also be used to gain insight in
the surface morphology of the surface since steps, kinks and facets will have diﬀerent
deposition potentials and the total coverage of Pb can be used to estimate surface area
[41].
This method would also facilitate measurements of blocking of sites and maybe making it
possible to study the Cu surface with the sites causing the secondary hydrogen blocked.
Finally, it would be of great interest to use the knowledge of what happens on the
Cu surface gained during this project, i.e. that the surface changes from being covered
with OH to H, to conduct theoretical studies of the role of hydrogen in CO2 reduction.
Using density function theory (DFT) it would be possible to study the energetics of
CO2RR on a Cu surface covered with hydrogen instead of a clean Cu surface.
==PAGE:72==
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
By utilising the electrochemistry and mass spectrometry (EC-MS) setup throughout this
project it has been concluded that polycrystalline copper electrodes show an interesting
feature of anodic hydrogen desorption, referred to as secondary hydrogen, which appears
in the mass spectrometry data when scanning anodic from the hydrogen evolution region.
This feature is indeed an electrochemical feature and it is independent of the amount of
hydrogen produced during HER. The amount of hydrogen desorbed at anodic potentials
corresponds to 1-10% of a monolayer.
The secondary hydrogen has been investigated further by conducting a pH-study of the
phenomenon. By altering the cathodic and anodic limits of the potential cycles it is
possible to isolate either the primary or secondary hydrogen peak and the potentials at
which this happens has been identiﬁed for diﬀerent pH-values. These experimental results
have been compared with the Pourbaix-diagram for the copper-water electrochemical
system, and this concludes that the desorption of secondary hydrogen happens when
the Cu surface changes from being covered with adsorbed H atoms to being covered
with adsorbed OH molecules. The adsorbed H atoms reacts with water molecules in
the electrolyte to form molecular hydrogen and the remaining hydroxyl group from the
water molecule adsorbs to the surface.
As an intermediate from the EC-MS experiments an XPS study of the Cu samples
was conducted to rule out the inﬂuence of possible contaminations. Wide range surveys
of three Cu samples prepared in diﬀerent ways were completed and they showed no
contaminations from other metals within the detection limit of XPS. Depth proﬁles
were produced by alternating between XPS and sputtering and they showed that for
samples prepared by mechanical polishing or electrochemical reduction, the Cu surfaces
are covered with an initial oxide layer but 10 nm into the sample the atomic composition
reaches a steady state of ≈90% Cu and ≈10% O. For a Cu sample exposed to air for
weeks the depth proﬁle yields a much higher and slower decreasing oxygen level.
The polycrystalline copper electrodes and the secondary hydrogen feature were fur-
ther investigated by injecting pulses of CO through the membrane chip to the electrode.
By holding the potential constant at diﬀerent levels while pulsing CO it was observed that
at cathodic and anodic potentials the CO causes the current to drop, but at intermediate
potentials the current does not react to the CO. This potential dependence of the current
drop was compared with the pH-study of adsorption and desorption potentials, thus
concluding that the potential range where CO does not cause the current to drop is the
same range where the Cu surface changes from being covered with H atoms to being
covered with OH. This opens up for the interpretation that at anodic potentials the
59
==PAGE:74==
60
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSION
surface is covered with OH and it is possible to temporarily adsorb CO. At cathodic
potentials the surface is covered with H atoms but if the potential is strong enough it is
possible to adsorb CO while for less negative potentials it is not possible.
The experiments and corresponding results open up for future studies of the mechanisms.
Especially studies on single crystals are of great interest, and the initial preparations for
such studies have been started as part of this project. The engineering work of designing
and optimizing components for the setup has been an intriguing task and a motivating
factor for the further investigations.
The results of this project present insight to the dynamics on the surface of a Cu
electrode, and these ﬁndings might be relevant for the further understanding and re-
search of electrochemical reduction of CO2 since Cu is a promising candidate for this.
Knowledge of what happens on the surface could be a input to the theoretical studies
and calculations of the energetics of CO2 reduction.
==PAGE:75==
Appendix A
Learning objectives
Throughout the M.Sc. project Investigating the interplay of hydrogen evolution and elec-
trochemical CO2 reduction using in-situ mass spectrometry the overall learning objective
is to study physical and nanotechnological principles behind sustainable en-
ergy technology with the purpose of generating fundamental understanding
of energy-related components and processes.
To achieve this overall objective the project will be based on these personal learning
objectives
• Produce publishable results through experimental work and research.
• Use thorough literature study as a basis for understanding and explaining experi-
mental results, and to describe the current state of the research ﬁeld.
• Communicate experimental results and literature ﬁndings to supervisors and other
faculty members both orally at group meeting and in writing through reports.
• Use aspects of project management to control and plan the time spend on diﬀerent
activities in order to optimize the ﬁnal output.
• Work individually and in collaboration with supervisors to perform research at
international level.
By completing these personal learning objectives, I will be able to fulﬁll the generic
learning objectives, which state that a graduate of the M.Sc. program from DTU:
• can identify and reﬂect on technical scientiﬁc issues and understand the interaction
between the various components that make up an issue
• can, on the basis of a clear academic proﬁle, apply elements of current research at
international level to develop ideas and solve problems
• masters technical scientiﬁc methodologies, theories and tools, and has the capacity
to take a holistic view of and delimit a complex, open issue, see it in a broader
academic and societal perspective and, on this basis, propose a variety of possible
actions
• can, via analysis and modelling, develop relevant models, systems and processes
for solving technological problems
• can communicate and mediate research-based knowledge both orally and in writing
61
==PAGE:76==
62
APPENDIX A. LEARNING OBJECTIVES
• is familiar with and can seek out leading international research within his/her
specialist area.
• can work independently and reﬂect on own learning, academic development and
specialization
• masters technical problem-solving at a high level through project work, and has the
capacity to work with and manage all phases of a project âĂŞ including preparation
of timetables, design, solution and documentation
==PAGE:77==
Appendix B
Project plan
Figure B.1 Project plan
63
==PAGE:78==
==PAGE:79==
Appendix C
Data from pH-study
The remaining data from the pH-study of the anodic hydrogen desorption is shown in
Figure C.1 for pH= 7.8 and Figure C.2 for pH= 9 and pH= 12.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure C.1 Data from pH-study of anodic hydrogen desorption in pH= 7.8
65
==PAGE:80==
66
APPENDIX C. DATA FROM PH-STUDY
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Figure C.2 Data from pH-study of anodic hydrogen desorption in pH= 9 and pH= 12
==PAGE:81==
Appendix D
Platinum experiments in carbonate
buﬀer
Figure D.1 (a) shows CV’s for four diﬀerent experiments. The black curve is a plain CV
for Pt in the EC-MS setup with the same carbonate buﬀer at pH= 11 as used in section
4.4. The red curve is for the same measurements but while ﬂushing electrolyte through
the EC-cell and the blue curve is for the Pt electrode exposed to oxygen through the
carrier gas. The magenta curve is for the same Pt electrode but in a two-compartment
cell and thus not in the EC-MS setup. These CV’s show a similar tilt as for the Cu
electrode, and thus pH-change, oxygen and the EC-MS setup itself can be ruled out as
reasons for the tilt.
Figure D.1 (b) shows EC-MS from another Pt-experiment in a 1.0 M HClO4 electrolyte
[26]. Note that the CV in the bottom is ﬂat, and the same is the case for Pt in KOH
electrolytes (not shown here). These arguments point to the carbonate buﬀer as the
reason for the tilt.
(a) Carbonate buﬀer
(b) Perchloric acid
Figure D.1 CV’s for Pt in (a) carbonate buﬀer and (b) perchloric acid.
67
==PAGE:82==
==PAGE:83==
Appendix E
Work drawings for single crystal
mount design
The following pages show the work drawings of the designed parts for single crystal
measurements.
69
==PAGE:84==
A-A ( 5 : 1 )
A
A
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
6
6
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
Flow_cell
Nikolaj Kn¡sgaard
20-11-2017
Designed by
Checked by
Approved by
Date
1 / 1 
Edition
Sheet
Date
P10,00
11,00
27,50
1,00
15,50
11,80
5,00
5,00
P3,20
40,00
11,73
1,08
12,00
0,99
15,00
R3,75
2,20
4,00
0,50 X 45,00
0,20 X 45,00
0,50 X 45,00
1,00
0,24
14,00 max
1/4-28 UNF - 2B - 10,00Z
P3,10 THRU
X P7,50
4,60
0,50
==PAGE:85==
A-A ( 10 : 1 )
A
A
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
6
6
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
inner_ucup
Nikolaj Kn¡sgaard
20-11-2017
Designed by
Checked by
Approved by
Date
1 / 1 
Edition
Sheet
Date
7,25
9,00
8,00
4,30
1,15
==PAGE:86==
A-A ( 10 : 1 )
A
A
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
6
6
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
outer_ucup
Nikolaj Kn¡sgaard
20-11-2017
Designed by
Checked by
Approved by
Date
1 / 1 
Edition
Sheet
Date
5,00
10,00
6,00
9,00
0,80
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
[1]
James P Dorian, Herman T Franssen, and Dale R Simbeck. Global challenges in
energy. Energy Policy, 34(15):1984–1991, 2006.
[2]
Jack H Lunsford. Catalytic conversion of methane to more useful chemicals and
fuels: a challenge for the 21st century. Catalysis Today, 63(2):165–174, 2000.
[3]
Michael J Holmes and Jacob N Hacker. Climate change, thermal comfort and
energy: Meeting the design challenges of the 21st century. Energy and Buildings,
39(7):802–814, 2007.
[4]
John P Holdren. The Energy Innovation Imperative: Addressing Oil Dependence,
Climate Change, and Other 21st Century Energy Challenges. Innovations: Technol-
ogy, Governance, Globalization, 1(2):3–23, 2006.
[5]
United States Environmental Protection Agency. Climate Change Indicators.
[6]
Gail Tverberg. World Energy Consumption Since 1820 in Charts.
[7]
The World Bank. World Bank Open Data, https://data.worldbank.org/.
[8]
United Nations. World Population Prospects 2017.
[9]
International Energy Agency (IEA). World Energy Outlook 2017. 2017.
[10] Gapminder. www.gapminder.org.
[11] International Energy Agency. CO2 emissions from fuel combustion: Overview. 2017.
[12] International Energy Agency. World energy balances: Overview. 2017.
[13] Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. ﬂowcharts.llnl.gov.
[14] Energi forsynings-og klimaministeriet. Flere penge til fremtidens energiforskning.
[15] I. Chorkendorﬀand J.W. Niemantsverdriet. Concepts of Modern Catalysis and
Kinetics. Wiley, 2nd editio edition, 2007.
[16] Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catalysis.
[17] Yoshio Hori, Akira Murata, and Ryutaro Takahashi. Formation of hydrocarbons
in the electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide at a copper electrode in aque-
ous solution. Journal of the Chemical Society, Faraday Transactions 1: Physical
Chemistry in Condensed Phases, 85(8):2309, 1989.
73
==PAGE:88==
74
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[18] Yoshio Hori, Akira Murata, and Yuzuru Yoshinami. Adsorption of CO, intermediately
formed in electrochemical reduction of CO2, at a copper electrode. Journal of the
Chemical Society, Faraday Transactions, 87(1):125, 1991.
[19] Y Hori. Electrochemical CO 2 Reduction on Metal Electrodes. Modern Aspects of
Electrochemistry, (42):89–189, 2008.
[20] Kendra P Kuhl, Toru Hatsukade, Etosha R Cave, David N Abram, Jakob Kibsgaard,
and Thomas F Jaramillo. Electrocatalytic Conversion of Carbon Dioxide to Methane
and Methanol on Transition Metal Surfaces. Journal of the American Chemical
Society, 136(40):14107–14113, 2014.
[21] Ruud Kortlever, Jing Shen, Klaas Jan P. Schouten, Federico Calle-Vallejo, and
Marc T.M. Koper.
Catalysts and Reaction Pathways for the Electrochemical
Reduction of Carbon Dioxide. Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters, 6(20):4073–
4082, 2015.
[22] Marcel Pourbaix.
Atlas of electrochemical equilibria.
National Association of
Corrosion Engineers, 1974.
[23] R G Bates, J B Macaskill, and Roger G Bates. Standard Potential of the Silver-Silver
Chloride Electrode. Pure and Applied Chemistry, 50:1701–1706, 1978.
[24] Daniel B. Trimarco. Real-time detection of sub-monolayer desorption phenomena
during electrochemical reactions: Instrument development and applications. PhD
Thesis, (August), 2017.
[25] Daniel B. Trimarco, Thomas Pedersen, Ole Hansen, Ib Chorkendorﬀ, and Peter C K
Vesborg. Fast and sensitive method for detecting volatile species in liquids. Review
of Scientiﬁc Instruments, 86(7), 2015.
[26] Daniel B Trimarco, Soren B Scott, Anil H Thilsted, and Jesper Y Pan. Enabling
real-time detection of electrochemical desorption phenomena with sub-monolayer
sensitivity. pages 1–25.
[27] G A Somorjai. Chemistry in two dimensions: surfaces. George Fisher Baker non-
resident lectureship in chemistry at Cornell University. Cornell University Press,
1981.
[28] Elie Protopopoﬀand Philippe Marcus. Potential-pH diagrams for hydroxyl and
hydrogen adsorbed on a copper surface. Electrochimica Acta, 51(3):408–417, 2005.
[29] Youn Geun Kim, Jack Hess Baricuatro, Alnald Javier, John Mathew Gregoire, and
Manuel P. Soriaga. The evolution of the polycrystalline copper surface, ﬁrst to
Cu(111) and then to Cu(100), at a ﬁxed CO2RR potential: A study by operando
EC-STM. Langmuir, 30(50):15053–15056, 2014.
[30] Andrew A. Peterson, Frank Abild-Pedersen, Felix Studt, Jan Rossmeisl, Jens K.
Nørskov, N. S. Lewis, D. G. Nocera, Y. Hori, K. Kikuchi, A. Murata, S. Suzuki,
Y. Hori, A. Murata, R. Takahashi, S. Suzuki, J. J. Kim, D. P. Summers, K. W. Frese
Jr, R. L. Cook, R. C. MacDuﬀ, A. F. Sammells, D. W. DeWulf, T. Jin, A. J. Bard,
Y. Hori, A. Murata, R. Takahashi, Y. Hori, H. Wakebe, T. Tsukamoto, O. Koga,
H. De Jes´us-Cardona, C. del Moral, C. R. Cabrera, C. Delacourt, P. L. Ridgway,
J. B. Kerr, J. Newman, M. Gattrell, N. Gupta, A. Co, M. J. Janik, C. D. Taylor,
M. Neurock, L. Blum, D. A. Huckaby, N. Marzari, R. Car, T. Zhang, A. B. Ander-
son, M. T. M. Koper, A. Roudgar, A. Groß, Y.-H. Fang, Z.-P. Liu, C. Adriaanse,
==PAGE:89==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
75
M. Sulpizi, J. VandeVondele, M. Sprik, G.-C. Wang, L. Jiang, Y. Morikawa, J. Naka-
mura, Z.-S. Cai, Y.-M. Pan, X.-Z. Zhao, C. T. Au, M. D. Chen, N. Schumacher,
K. Andersson, L. Grabow, M. Mavrikakis, J. Nerlov, I. Chorkendorﬀ, A. A. Gokhale,
J. A. Dumesic, M. Mavrikakis, J. Rossmeisl, E. Sk´ulason, M. E. Bj¨orketun, V. Trip-
kovic, J. K. Nørskov, J. K. Nørskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir, L. Lindqvist,
J. R. Kitchin, T. Bligaard, H. Jonsson, V. Tripkovic, E. Sk´ulason, S. Siahrostami,
J. Nørskov, and J. Rossmeisl. How copper catalyzes the electroreduction of carbon
dioxide into hydrocarbon fuels. Energy & Environmental Science, 3(9):1311, 2010.
[31] N. S. Mcintyre and M. G. Cook. X-Ray Photoelectron Studies on Some Oxides and
Hydroxides of Cobalt, Nickel, and Copper. Analytical Chemistry, 47(13):2208–2213,
1975.
[32] Alexander G Shard. Detection limits in XPS for more than 6000 binary systems
using Al and Mg Kα X-rays. Surface and Interface Analysis, 46(3):175–185, 2014.
[33] F. Abild-Pedersen and M. P. Andersson. CO adsorption energies on metals with
correction for high coordination adsorption sites - A density functional study. Surface
Science, 601(7):1747–1753, 2007.
[34] R. M. Torres S´anchez, A. M. Castro Luna, and J. O. Zerbino. CO adsorption on
copper in alkaline electrolytes: An electrochemical and ellipsometric study. Journal
of Colloid and Interface Science, 264(1):114–120, 2003.
[35] J. Clavilier, R. Albalat, R. Gomez, J. M. Orts, J. M. Feliu, and A. Aldaz. Study
of the charge displacement at constant potential during CO adsorption on Pt(110)
and Pt(111) electrodes in contact with a perchloric acid solution.
Journal of
Electroanalytical Chemistry, 330(1-2):489–497, 1992.
[36] E. Gileadi, S. D. Argade, and J. O’M. Bockris. The Potential of Zero Charge of
Platinum and Its pH Dependence. The Journal of Physical Chemistry, 70(6):2044–
2046, 1966.
[37] Aneta Lukomska and Jerzy Sobkowski. Potential of zero charge of monocrystalline
copper electrodes in perchlorate solutions. Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry,
567(1):95–102, 2004.
[38] Erlend Bertheussen, Younes Abghoui, Zarko P. Jovanov, Ana Soﬁa Varela, Ifan E.L.
Stephens, and Ib Chorkendorﬀ. Quantiﬁcation of liquid products from the elec-
troreduction of CO2and CO using static headspace-gas chromatography and nuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Catalysis Today, 288:54–62, 2017.
[39] J H D E Boer. The BET-Method. In Surface Area Determination, pages 7–24.
Butterworth-Heinemann, 1970.
[40] G Beurton and P Bussi`ere. Low Surface Area Determination. In Surface Area
Determination, pages 217–226. Butterworth-Heinemann, 1970.
[41] Gessie M. Brisard, Entissar Zenati, Hubert A. Gasteiger, Nenad M. Markovic, and
Philip N. Ross. Underpotential Deposition of Lead on Copper(111): A Study Using
a Single-Crystal Rotating Ring Disk Electrode and ex Situ Low-Energy Electron
Difrraction and Auger Electron Spectroscopy. Langmuir, 11(6):2221–2230, 1995.
