==PAGE:1==
Aiding system for choosing a
movie using Decision Making
Theories
Mathias Lyngman, Nichlas Petersen, Mikael Kofod
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract (English)
This thesis investigates diﬀerent methods of helping groups of adolescences age
12-19 make a decision about which movie to watch. Research indicates that
adolescents cannot bear the responsibility of deciding which movie to watch in
a group setting. Therefore, they need assistance to make the decision.
This thesis looks into preference aggregation, a subsection of social choice the-
ory, to ﬁnd rules that can determine a group’s collective preference from their
individual preferences. The thesis also examines the area of multi criteria deci-
sion making, as a tool. However, it is shown that this tool may not be suited for
the job, as it is designed for more critical decisions which can have more severe
consequences.
The paper goes into detail with three speciﬁc preference aggregation rules, the
Kemeny-Young rule, the Ranked Pairs rule and the Schulze rule. All three rules
are investigated theoretically and includes a possible implementation in order
to compare empirical test results.
Lastly a conclusion is made based on the empirical test results and an empiri-
cal experiment to suggest which rule is more suited for making a group based
decision in accordance with the audience.
==PAGE:4==
Abstract (Danish)
Denne afhandling undersøger forskellige metoder til at hjælpe grupper af unge
i alderen fra 12-19 med beslutningstagningen i forbindelse med at arrangere en
tur til biografen. Undersøgelser antyder at unge ikke vil stå med ansvaret for at
tage beslutningen om hvilken ﬁlm gruppen skal ind og se. De har derfor brug
for hjælp med at tage en beslutning
I denne afhandling undersøges præference aggregering, en undersektion af soci-
al valg teori, for at ﬁnde præference aggregerings regler der kan bestemme en
gruppes kollektive præference fra deres individuelle præferencer. Udover det vil
multi criteria decision making også blive undersøgt. Dette værktøj viser sig dog
at være designet til at tage mere kritiske beslutninger der har større konsekven-
ser som følge.
Afhandlingen beskriver de tre præference aggregerings regler Kemeny-Young,
Ranked Pairs og Schulze i detaljer. Alle tre regler bliver undersøgt teoretisk og
en mulig implementation vil blive præsenteret for at sammenligne empiriske test
resultater.
Afhandlingen afsluttes ved at konkludere på hvilken præference aggregering re-
gel der kan anbefales til at vælge ﬁlm for målgruppen. Anbefalingen er baseret
på empiriske test resultater samt et emperisk experiment.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute, the Department of Applied Math-
ematics and Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in ful-
ﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc. in Computer Science and
Engineering.
Lyngby, 01-January-2018
Mathias Lyngman, Nichlas Petersen, Mikael Kofod
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our supervisor Thomas Bolander for his precious guid-
ance and full support while working on this project, and for giving us the op-
portunity to work on this subject.
We would also like to thank Stèphane Salzinger from Nordisk Film for providing
us with the opportunity to work on this project.
Next we would like to thank our fellow colleagues Michelle Søgaard Nielsen and
Kathrine Thorup Hagedorn for helping us conduct the empiric experiment of
our implementation.
Lastly we would like to thank our family, friends and girlfriends for their strong
support during the entire process of the project.
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The Basic Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Project Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Literature review
8
2.1
Preference Aggregation within Social Choice . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Social Choice
11
3.1
Preference Aggregation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Condorcet’s Observations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.1
Condorcet’s Paradox . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.2
Condorcet Criterion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Arrow’s Axioms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
Gibbard–Satterthwaite Theorem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5
Independence of Clones
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Algorithms
23
4.1
Preference Aggregation Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.1
The Kemeny-Young Rule
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.1.2
The Ranked Pairs Rule
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.3
The Schulze Rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Multi Criteria Decision Making . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.2.1
Analytic Hierarchical Process (AHP) . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2.2
Conclusion on AHP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5
Implementation / Design
52
5.1
User Interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.2
Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
vi
5.2.1
Communication Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.2.2
Network Topology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.3
Algorithmic Datastructures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.3.1
Adjacency matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.3.2
Adjacency list . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6
Test
60
6.1
Empirical Performance Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.1.1
Java Memory Issue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.1.2
’Fairness’ in Performance Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.1.3
Preference Aggregation Rule Benchmarking . . . . . . . .
63
6.2
Empirical Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6.2.1
Description of the Experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6.2.2
Evaluation of results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
7
Discussion and future work
76
7.1
’Fairness’
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
7.2
Implementation Improvements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
8
Conclusion
79
A Mathematical Calculations
81
A.1 Multi Criteria Decision Making - Calculations . . . . . . . . . . .
81
B Test results
86
B.1
Analytic test results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
B.2
Empirical Experiment - Test Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
B.2.1
Sukkertoppen test results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
B.2.2
Frydenhøj test results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
C Test precaution
97
C.1 Garbage Collector
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
C.2 Memory Detection Precision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
Bibliography
99
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Introduction
Groups of friends at the adolescent stage in life ﬁnd it relatively diﬃcult to
arrange the event of going to the cinema. The issues associated with the ar-
rangement of such trip is simply too much of a responsibility for the current
youth to take upon their shoulders. They ﬁnd this negative constraint to be
more of a burden, than the satisfaction received from watching a movie with
their friend in the cinema. Thus, the trip to the cinema often ends up being
canceled because no single individual is willing to carry the burden of taking
responsibility.
Nordisk Film A/S wishes to aid the adolescent by relieving their shoulders from
a part of this responsibility and ease the process of organizing a cinema event,
by providing a tool that can help them. This will make burdensome problems
such as deciding which friends should join, when everybody have time, exactly
what movie to watch and which cinema to watch it in, eﬀortless. Currently,
the only existing tools to help with such problems are very generic scheduling
application. Therefore, the intention is to investigate, analyze and conclude on
how to tailor a system for the speciﬁc needs of this audience.
The idea is to provide a tool that eases the decisive steps of the process by
==PAGE:10==
1.1 Introduction
2
contributing with intelligent suggestions that ﬁt the entirety of the group. This
intelligent suggestion is based on every individual’s personal preferences and
aims to satisfy as many group members as possible.
In order to deﬁne intelligent suggestions we will look into social choice theory,
more speciﬁcally preference aggregation to investigate if this can be used as a
suitable solution. Furthermore, we will also examine the area of decision making
where multi criteria decision making looks to be a heavy contender against the
previously mentioned ﬁeld of study. Throughout this paper we will present our
research results as well as experiments regarding each diﬀerent ﬁeld of study,
such that an objectively correct conclusion is reached.
==PAGE:11==
1.2 The Basic Model
3
1.2
The Basic Model
In order to better grasp preference aggregation and how it can be applied, this
section will serve as an introduction to the terminology used within the ﬁeld of
subject. An example is given to illustrate how preference aggregation is used
to reach consensus within a group. However, the theoretical obstacles which
preference aggregation suﬀer by are also presented. This is done by slightly
modifying the ﬁrst example and showing this will lead to disagreement within
the same group.
Every single individual has their own personal opinion. These opinions origi-
nates from experiences one has been through as well as the knowledge, interests
and tastes one has acquired during life. This will always be diﬀerent from one
person to another.
It is due to this problem, of having diﬀerent opinions or preferences, that reach-
ing a consensus within a group can be problematic. How to aggregate the pref-
erences of individuals and reach a conclusion which satisﬁes a suﬃcient amount
of the participants is the core of this dilemma.
A part of social choice theory is the analysis of preference aggregation. Prefer-
ence aggregation is a model to be used in order to aggregate several individuals
preferences over two or more alternatives and reach a collective preference or-
dering.
Consider a situation with a small set of persons (individuals) N = {Alice, Bob,
Charlie}.
Each of them have to choose which movie (alternative) to watch
amongst a set of movies consisting of Lord of the Rings (LOTR) and Harry
Potter (HP) such that X = {LOTR, HP}.
Each person cast their vote (individual’s preference ordering) by following the
principles of ranked voting [Tideman, 2006] which uses an ordinal scale. The
votes are aggregated to a collective preference ordering and in this example it is
done by applying Borda Count [Black, 1976] as the preference aggregation rule.
We use the speciﬁc Borda Count rule saying that the least preferred alternative
receives 1 point, the second least preferred alternatives receives 2 points, and so
on up to the alternative with the highest mark.
Individual (Voter)
Preference Ordering
Alice
LOTR ≻HP
Bob
LOTR ≻HP
Charlie
HP ≻LOTR
Table 1.1: Preference ordering of each individual over 2 alternatives.
==PAGE:12==
1.2 The Basic Model
4
By aggregating the votes which is illustrated in Table 1.1 it is now possible to
calculate the score given to each alternative from the Borda Count rule.
On Table 1.2 it can be observed that the score received is LOTR = 5∧HP = 4.
Therefore, the most preferred movie to be watched by the majority of the group
is LOTR.
Alternative (Movie)
Borda Score
Lord of the Rings (LOTR)
(2 · 2) + (1 · 1) = 5
Harry Potter (HP)
(1 · 2) + (2 · 1) = 4
Table 1.2: Calculating the score each alternative receives by applying the
Borda Count rule.
This seems relatively simple on the surface, however, many obstacles occur when
digging deeper into the situation.
Lets extend the example from Table 1.1 by adding an extra movie, Star Wars
(SW), such that X = {LOTR, HP, SW}.
Again the three individuals from the set N = {Alice, Bob, Charlie} have to cast
a vote for which movie to watch. This is done by placing a preference ordering
over all of the alternatives from the new set X = {LOTR, HP, SW}.
Individual (Voter)
Preference Ordering
Alice
LOTR ≻HP ≻SW
Bob
SW ≻LOTR ≻HP
Charlie
HP ≻SW ≻LOTR
Table 1.3: Preference ordering of each individual over 3 alternatives.
Now, we aggregate the votes illustrated in Table 1.3 and can derive the scores.
Alternative (Movie)
Borda Score
Lord of the Rings (LOTR)
(1 · 3) + (1 · 2) + (1 · 1) = 6
Harry Potter (HP)
(1 · 3) + (1 · 2) + (1 · 1) = 6
Star Wars (SW)
(1 · 3) + (1 · 2) + (1 · 1) = 6
Table 1.4: Calculating the score all 3 alternatives receives by applying the
Borda Count rule.
As can be seen in Table 1.4 all alternatives receives a total score equal to each
==PAGE:13==
1.2 The Basic Model
5
other. This means that when we aggregate all individuals preference ordering the
output is indecisive as the collective preference ordering is LOTR ≈HP ≈SW.
Thus, no movie is preferred over another as the collective preference ordering
ended with a tie between the alternatives.
A tie between alternatives is the situation where the collective preference order-
ing is indiﬀerent between them i.e. HP ≈SW. Preference aggregation rules
do have the inconvenience of suﬀering from ties. This is a problematic situa-
tion that can occur for any rule when there are n ≥2 individuals who have
to cast a vote on x ≥3 alternatives. However, as the size of individuals and
the size of alternatives increases the probability of a tie occurring approaches 0
[Tangian, 2000].
Seen in the bigger picture, the questions then lies in: Can you avoid this situa-
tion? Or is it an inevitable outcome of aggregating the will of individuals.
==PAGE:14==
1.3 Project Outline
6
1.3
Project Outline
In this paper we will present and investigate diﬀerent tools that can help groups
of adolescents make a choice, about which movie to watch when going to the
cinema. We start by looking at preference aggregation, a subsection of Social
choice theory. Here we describe why we focus on using ranked voting, and that
the ranked voting must uphold completeness and transitivity.
M. Condorcet was one of the early researchers in the preference aggregation
area. He was a supporter of the idea of using pairwise majority voting. We
describe the Condorcet paradox that says that even though all voters have a
rational preference ordering, the collective preference ordering of a group can
be irrational. This leads to the problem of cycles in the collective preference
ordering. Condorcet also described a criterion that preference aggregation rules
using pairwise majority voting should uphold, called the Condorcet criterion.
This criterion says that if an alternative gets the majority of the votes in a head
to head comparison against each of the every other alternative, that alternative
should be the winner of the election.
K.J. Arrow is an inﬂuential researcher within social theory. He stipulated that
no preference aggregation rule under ranked voting could satisfy the ﬁve axioms
Universial Domain, Ordering, Weak Pareto, Independence of Irrelevant Alterna-
tives and Non-Dictatorship. This is known as Arrow’s Impossibility Theorem.
Therefore, any preference aggregation rule must break at least one of these ﬁve
axioms.
Following Arrows Impossibility Theorem, we look into The Gibbard-Satterthwaite
Theorem, which gives us an idea of which axiom could be the best to relax. The
theorem says that no preference aggregation rule, following the assumptions of
Arrow, is strategy proof unless it is a dictatorship. From this theorem we come
to the conclusion that the axiom Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives is the
most suitable axiom to omit or relax. After this we describe the Independence
of Clones criterion as a possible relaxation of the Independence of Irrelevant
Alternatives axiom. This criterion deals with similar alternatives in an election.
Rules that meet this criterion is unaﬀected by having clone alternatives.
The paper describes the three rules, the Kemeny-Young rule, the Ranked Pairs
rule, and the Schulze rule in depth. These are investigated due to being potential
preference aggregation rules to be used within the our domain.
The paper goes into detail with which axioms the rules comply with. A possible
implementation is also presented in order to compare empirical test results. This
investigation will help in the decision of suggesting the most suitable rule for
our domain.
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Project Outline
7
Multi Criteria Decision Making is a diﬀerent ﬁeld of study that can help a group
make a decision about which movie to watch, based on a set of criteria. The pa-
per goes into detail with a speciﬁc framework in multi criteria decision making
called Analytical Hierarchical Process (AHP). This framework creates a hier-
archical decomposition of the criteria, and allows for diﬀerent weighting of the
diﬀerent criteria depending on how important they are for the individual/group
using AHP.
After we have presented the diﬀerent ﬁeld of studies we include suggestions of
possible design patterns.
We present a possible user ﬂow for the application which is made in accordance
with research regarding the audience. Afterwards, an investigation of the un-
derlying system architecture and communication security is presented. Here, it
is shown how these choices can negatively or positively aﬀect the application.
Based on our implementations of the preference aggregation rules we perform
benchmark tests to determine which rule is the most scalable. After the bench-
mark tests the paper describes a empiric experiment performed on a mid-
dleschool as well as highschool. This experiment gives us an indication of which
preference aggregation rule delivers the most satisﬁable result according to user
expectations.
The test section is followed by a discussion.
Here the philosophical concept
of fairness is discussed, followed by a description of improvements that can be
made to the current implementation.
Lastly the paper will conclude on why we choose preference aggregation over
Multi Criteria Decision Making, and which preference aggregation rule per-
formed the best based on our tests and experiments.
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 2
Literature review
2.1
Preference Aggregation within Social Choice
Social choice theory is a broad subject which we dig deeper into by speciﬁcally
investigating a part of it, namely preference aggregation. In 2006 N. Tideman
wrote a book about collective decisions and voting [Tideman, 2006] which nicely
covers many of the subareas within preference aggregation. Beside the general
knowledge which is shared he also explains how diﬀerent electoral systems such
as approval, plurality, range and ranked can be used to replace each other to
gain certain beneﬁts, however, also followed by certain disadvantages.
As we have chosen to continue the investigation with ordinal preferences, we
must study the speciﬁc undesirable properties which are followed by this.
M. Condorcet lived in an era far prior to current time, but is known for his
prominent insight regarding majority voting. In 1785 Condorcet published a
paper [Condorcet, 1785] in which he explains the situation now known as Con-
dorcet’s Paradox. This paradox shows the problematic case of how the collective
preference ordering can be irrational even when the preference orderings of each
individual is rational.
The essence of the paradox is a common, yet, undesirable property of prefer-
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Preference Aggregation within Social Choice
9
ence aggregation in its entirety. Though, A. S. Tangian proved that with the
increase of individuals the likelihood of a Condorcet paradox occurring reaches
zero [Tangian, 2000].
K. J. Arrow approached his research in a diﬀerent manner. He also investigated
preference aggregation rules using ordinal preferences but in a more general
sense and did not exclude other possibility than majority voting. In 1950 he
published an article [Arrow, 1950] in which he deﬁnes certain axioms that a
preference aggregation rule should comply with in order to be satisﬁable. This
axiomatic approach is known as Arrows Impossibility Theorem. A few years
later, more speciﬁcally in 1963, he published another article [Arrow, 2012] where
he speciﬁed the formulation of certain axioms to avoid misunderstandings which
had erupted from the ﬁrst version of the formulated axioms.
Many others have used Arrow’s research as the foundation of their own studies.
A. Gibbard and M. A. Satterthwaite, each released a publication independent
of each other in [Gibbard, 1973] and [Satterthwaite, 1975] respectively. These
papers in conjunction proved a very important relation between K. J. Arrow’s
axioms. This relation is known as the Gibbard-Satterthwaite Theorem and shows
that no preference aggregation rule can be strategyproof if there are more than
2 alternatives unless there is a dictator.
Stanford University also published an educational site in late 2013 [List, 2013]
where many subjects under social choice are discussed and explained. This oﬀers
a very well understanding of but not limited to the notations used as well as
how to relax each of the axioms presented by K. J. Arrow in order to reach a
satisﬁable rule.
J. G. Kemeny published a book in [Kemeny, 1959] where he explains how dis-
tance can be used in a preference aggregation rule called the Kemeny rule. This
rule is often seen as the most fair of all as it calculates all possible outcomes.
H. P. Young and A. Levenglic further investigated diﬀerent properties regarding
the Kemeny rule and discovered more strengths than was described by the J. G.
Kemeny. These discoveries were published in a paper in [Young and Levenglick, 1978]
and the result of this was that the rule changed name to the Kemeny-Young
method.
N. Tideman, who wrote one of the aforementioned books, also released a paper
in [Tideman, 1987] in which he relaxes a speciﬁc axiom and reaches a subdomain
Independence of Clones. He also presents a possible preference aggregation rule,
Ranked Pairs, which oﬀers protection against this said subdomain.
Others were intrigued by this discovery by N. Tideman and tried to create
==PAGE:18==
2.1 Preference Aggregation within Social Choice
10
competing algorithms. M. Schulze were one of those and in 2003 he released
a paper [Schulze, 2003] describing what is known as the Schulze Method. He
stated that his preference aggregation rule was a modiﬁed version of the older
Simpon-Kramer rule which caused a lot of discussion. Thus, he released a new
paper in [Schulze, 2011] where all claims against his method were shown not to
be true. He also discusses how to improve the time complexity of his preference
aggregation rule by applying the algorithm more known as Floyd-Warshall which
was published in [Floyd, 1962].
We also investigated Multi criteria decision making to determine if this possible
contender to preference aggregation would be a more suitable choice.
Within this ﬁeld T. L. Saaty is very well known and the creator of the An-
alytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) MCDM method which he ﬁrst described in
[Saaty, 1977]. Here he showed how a versatile mathematical framework could
be used by groups to determine the best solution to a given problem.
However, in 1983 V. Belton and T. Gear found a deﬁciency within the AHP
framework which resulted in that the ranking of the alternatives became re-
versed if an almost identical alternative was introduced. Though, they contin-
ued to investigate the matters and also suggest a possible correction in order to
bypass the problem [Belton and Gear, 1983].
After a few years in 1994 T. L. Saaty wrote a new paper [Saaty, 1994] in which
he accepts the correction and describes how this should be implemented. The
new framework that evolved from this was called the Ideal Mode AHP.
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 3
Social Choice
3.1
Preference Aggregation
Social choice theory is the study of how to analyze and aggregate the input of
individuals into a collective output. The input can be of many types such as,
but not limited to opinions, preferences or votes. However, a major obstacle
is how to determine if a speciﬁc output is more satisfactory than a diﬀerent
aggregated output.
There exists a plethora of preference aggregation rules known in current time. A
major diﬀerence between them is which electoral system they are based upon.
The four cornerstones of electoral systems are plurality, approval, range and
ranked. This paper builds its knowledge on ranked voting systems and inves-
tigates certain positive as well as negative properties which is followed by this
choice. This paper will not go into the details of the other electoral systems.
However, if the readers interests is peaked Nicolaus Tidemann has explained all
of these in his book [Tideman, 2006].
Ranked (or preferential) electoral systems have been chosen due to the usage of
ordinal numbers.
This means we can vote on several alternatives and that an order can be created
==PAGE:20==
3.1 Preference Aggregation
12
amongst these. It is not necessary to know whether an alternatives is (explic-
itly) 3 times more preferred than another, however, it is merely necessary to
know they are indeed more preferred. This way it is also easier to compare the
preferences of individuals as no subjectively deﬁned quantiﬁer is used.
To understand the basic model of preference aggregation lets consider a set
N = {1, 2, . . . , n} of individuals where n ≥2 and let X = {x, y, z, . . . } be a
set of alternatives. Each individual i has a preference ordering Ri over all the
alternatives. Meaning that it is a complete and transitive binary relation on X.
For any x, y ∈X, xRiy means that individual i weakly prefers x over y (x ⪰y),
where as yPiz means that individual i strictly prefers y over z (y ≻z). It it
also possible for individual i to be indiﬀerent between two alternatives x and z,
and if so, that is written as xIiz (x ≈z).
We deﬁne Completeness as that it must be true that, there always exists a
binary relation, regardless of direction, between any two alternatives x and y
from the set of alternatives X.
Definition 3.1 Completeness
∀x, y ∈X : (xRy ∨yRx)
We deﬁne Transitivity as that is must be true that, if there is a binary relation
between x and y as well as y and z, then there must be a binary relation
between x and z. This must hold for any three alternatives x, y, z from the set
of alternatives X
Definition 3.2 Transitivity
∀x, y, z ∈X : (xRy ∧yRz) =⇒xRz
The combined preference orderings for all individuals, (R1, R2, . . . , Rn) is a tuple
of size n and is called a proﬁle. In order to reach to the social preference relation
R, a preference aggregation rule F must be applied to each proﬁle such that
R = F(R1, R2, . . . , Rn) [List, 2013].
This notation is the fundamentals of the basic model in Section 1.2 which is
used to discuss how preference aggregation rules work. Meaning, this is used to
describe how to reach an outcome for a collective organism by aggregation the
preference orderings from a set of individuals over a set of alternatives.
However, even if the speciﬁc implementation of a preference aggregation rule
can be diﬀerent from each other, they must contain certain properties. These
==PAGE:21==
3.1 Preference Aggregation
13
properties will be investigated throughout the remainder of Chapter 3 starting
with Condorcet who primarily studied the aspects majority voting.
==PAGE:22==
3.2 Condorcet’s Observations
14
3.2
Condorcet’s Observations
Social choice theory is an extensive area which have been examined assiduously
and theorized upon for many years. Marquis de Condorcet (1743–1794) was a
french scholar who seemingly liked to write in paradoxes, which many did not
understand at that time. This is allegedly what led his work go mostly unno-
ticed until the twentieth century where his work was rediscovered.
He investigated a speciﬁc preference aggregation rule, namely majority vot-
ing.
He also examined how this could be applied in a situation with more
than 2 candidates and advocated pairwise majority voting as the method to be
used. In current time he is mostly known for two observations from his essay
[Condorcet, 1785] in which he formulates the Condorcet’s Jury Theorem as well
as Condorcet’s Paradox [List, 2013].
3.2.1
Condorcet’s Paradox
Condorcet’s Paradox is the observation that, even if the preferences of each
individual are rational (complete and transitive), the majority of aggregated
preferences in a group setting can still be irrational.
Nevertheless, to show an example of the paradox lets recall the example on Table
1.3. The amount of individuals, alternatives and their preference orderings still
hold. However, as we now are investing majority lets change the used preference
aggregation rule. The new rule to be used will be pairwise majority voting as
advocated by Condorcet himself.
Pairwise majority voting is a preference aggregation rule which compares each
alternative to every other in a pairwise comparison in order to determine which
alternative is the most preferred. After all pairwise comparisons are completed
it is possible to investigate which alternative wins the majority of the pairwise
comparisons.
On Table 1.3 we can see that 2
3 individuals preferred LOTR ≻HP as well as 2
3
individuals who favored HP ≻SW. However, there were also 2
3 that preferred
SW ≻LOTR. This means the collective preference ordering is
SW ≻LOTR ≻HP ≻SW
hence, we have a cycle which breaks the expectations of transitivity and we call
this a Condorcet cycle. Therefore, there is no alternative which is preferred by
the majority and choosing a winning alternative becomes troublesome. Thus, it
is shown that it is indeed possible for the collective organism to have irrational
preferences even if each individual has completely rational preferences.
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Condorcet’s Observations
15
3.2.2
Condorcet Criterion
A Condorcet winner is deﬁned as an alternative that is preferred over all other
alternatives when compared pairwise to every other alternative.
In other words the Condorcet winner exists in the resulting set where, for each
proﬁle (R1, R2, . . . , Rn), F(R1, R2, . . . , Rn) contains every alternative in X that
is more preferred over all other alternatives in pairwise majority voting. How-
ever, it is possible produce the empty set as shown in Section 3.2.1 [List, 2013].
Regardless of which speciﬁc preference aggregation rule is used the Condorcet
winner will always be the same. This means that diﬀerent rules can identify
this alternative. Any preference aggregation rule which identiﬁes and chooses
the Condorcet winner satisﬁes the Condorcet criterion. The Condorcet criterion
states that the rule must always choose the Condorcet winner as the winning
alternative if it exists.
To show how this work and how to identify the Condorcet winner lets consider
a set of alternatives X = {LOTR, HP, SW} and a set of individuals such that
N = {1, . . . , 20}. The preference ordering of each individual is shown on Table
3.1.
Amount of Votes
Preference Ordering
9
SW ≻HP ≻LOTR
8
LOTR ≻HP ≻SW
3
HP ≻SW ≻LOTR
Table 3.1: Preference ordering of each individual in order to show a Condorcet
winner
From the amount of votes and preference orderings on Table 3.1 we can now
construct a matrix consisting of the number of voters who prefer one alterna-
tive to another. From this matrix a pairwise comparison can be made for all
alternatives.
LOTR
HP
SW
LOTR
−
8
8
HP
12
−
11
SW
12
9
−
Table 3.2: Matrix that shows the pairwise winners (marked green) for each
alternative against another
==PAGE:24==
3.2 Condorcet’s Observations
16
From the matrix on Table 3.2 it is given that both HP and SW are preferred
over LOTR by 12 individuals each. Hence we can now exclude LOTR from the
situation as the criteria for being a Condorcet winner is broken. By pairwise
comparing HP and SW we see that 9 individuals prefer SW ≻HP, however,
11 individuals prefer HP ≻SW. Thus, HP is preferred over SW as well as
LOTR which means that HP is a Condorcet winner by deﬁnition.
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Arrow’s Axioms
17
3.3
Arrow’s Axioms
Kenneth Arrow (1921-2017) was a joint winner of the Nobel Memorial Price in
Economics in 1972. He had a more generic view on preference aggregation in
its entirety than his predecessors.
He investigated several preference aggregations rules in conjunction with ordinal
preferences in order to validate their properties. The validation depended on
whether or not these rules would satisfy 5 axioms. This investigation proved
that, if there are n individuals (n ≥2) who have to choose amongst x alterna-
tives (x ≥3), then there exists no preference aggregation rule that would satisfy
all 5 axioms.
Therefore, it can be boiled down to a choice of what axiom to be removed or
relaxed in order to create a preference aggregation rule which closely approxi-
mates a satisﬁable rule. The result of this proof is called Arrow’s Impossibility
Theorem [List, 2013, Arrow, 1950, Arrow, 2012].
We will start out by formally presenting the 5 axioms from Arrow’s Impossibility
Theorem after which we will explain them informally in order to better grasp
the essentials and discuss them further.
• Universal Domain: The domain of F is the set of all admissible proﬁles
which consists of every individual’s complete and transitive preference
orderings.
• Ordering: The social preference relation R must be complete and transi-
tive for any proﬁle (R1, R2, . . . , Rn) in the domain of F.
• Weak Pareto: For any proﬁle (R1, R2, . . . , Rn) in the domain of F if for
all i ∈N xPiy, then xPy.
• Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives: For any two proﬁles (R1, R2, . . . , Rn)
and (R
′
1, R
′
2, . . . , R
′
n) in the domain of F and any x, y ∈X, if for all i ∈N
the ranking between x and y in Ri is identical to the ranking of x and y
in R
′
i, then xRy if and only if xR
′y.
• Non-Dictatorship: There does not exist an individual i ∈N such that, for
all (R1, R2, . . . , Rn) in the domain of F and all x, y ∈X, that xPiy =⇒
xPy
Universal Domain says that the preference aggregation rule must be able to
account for all combinations of preference orderings of the entire set of alterna-
tives.
==PAGE:26==
3.3 Arrow’s Axioms
18
Ordering states that the preference aggregation rule must produce a rational
ordering of the alternatives, never a cycle.
The Weak Pareto principle is that the collective preference ordering must adhere
to the will of all individuals meaning that, if every individual prefers SW ≻HP
then so must the collective preference ordering.
Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives (IIA), is controversial in the sense that
the addition or subtraction of an alternative should not change the existing pref-
erence ordering between any other alternatives. To better grasp this, consider
a situation with the set of 3 alternatives such that X = {LOTR, HP, SW}
and that the collective preference ordering is LOTR ≻HP ⪰SW.
Then
by removing the alternative HP, the same ordering between LOTR and SW
(LOTR ≻SW) must still hold.
Non-Dictatorship says that the collective preference ordering must not be dic-
tated by one single individual and disregard the preference orderings of other
individuals.
Looking at each of the 5 condition separately do not make them seem relatively
strict but rather reasonable. They ask that a satisfying preference aggregation
rule to be deterministic and always reach an admissible collective preference
ordering as stated by Universal Domain and Ordering, that it will comply with
certain social and democratic values such as deﬁned by Weak Pareto as well as
IIA, and that it does not violate the most undemocratic value of all as described
by Non-Dictatorship.
However, if looked at in conjunction with each other, they exclude the possibil-
ity of always reaching a satisfying result. This was proved by Arrow himself who
said that "... the supposition that there is a social welfare function satisfying
those conditions leads to a contradiction" [Arrow, 1950]. Where a social welfare
function refers to a preference aggregation rule and conditions refers to all 5
axioms from the theorem.
This means that a rule must either completely remove or relax at minimum one
axiom. If possible, it is far more preferable to relax the domain of an axiom
as we still comply with a subset of the axiom. This will result in a preference
aggregation rule which is closer to be satisfying than one which simply removes
an axiom from the equation.
It is feasible to relax any of the 5 axioms, however, this will not be shown within
this paper. Nevertheless, if the reader’s curiosity is peaked, examples of relax-
ations is shown in [List, 2013].
Therefore, it becomes a discussion on which
axiom to relax, how to relax it and which consequences this will cause.
However, with this information presented we cannot yet justify a decision on
exactly which axiom to relax. Thus, before concluding we must further inves-
tigate their individual importance as well as any interdependencies which can
==PAGE:27==
3.4 Gibbard–Satterthwaite Theorem
19
alleviate this decision.
3.4
Gibbard–Satterthwaite Theorem
The Gibbard-Satterthwaite Theorem is the result of Allan Gibbard and Mark Sat-
terthwaite independent publications [Gibbard, 1973] and [Satterthwaite, 1975]
respectively.
Their conjunctive work states that for any voting scheme with 3 or more alter-
natives that uses ordinal preferences, there exist no preference aggregation rule
that is strategy-proof unless it is a dictator-ship.
Where strategy-proofnes requires that there does not exist a proﬁle (R1, R2, . . . , Rn)
in the domain of F which allows F to be manipulated by some individual i ∈N.
The deﬁnition of manipulation is that if individual i submits an insincere pref-
erence ordering R
′
i (R
′
i ̸= Ri) the winner is an alternative y
′ who i strictly
prefers to y according to the sincere preference ordering Ri. However, if i had
submitted the sincere preference ordering Ri the winning alternative would in
reality have been y [List, 2013].
This is an important discovery in the search of which axiom to relax. Having a
preference aggregation rule which allows for a dictator seem to break the most
important democratic values of all. Nevertheless, if the Non-Dictatorship ax-
iom is satisﬁed and the amount of alternatives is allowed to be above 3, the rule
cannot completely defend against strategic manipulation.
Therefore, the best outcome would be the result of relaxing an axiom which
addresses manipulation. This would ensure that the preference aggregation rule
only be weak against a single subdomain (according to the domains of the ax-
ioms) due to not relaxing other axioms as well.
Since IIA addresses strategic manipulation it becomes a clear advantage to re-
lax over other axioms, in order to not create any unnecessary vulnerabilities
[List, 2013]. With this knowledge it is possible to conclude that IIA is the cho-
sen axiom to be relaxed.
Relaxation of an axiom in this case means that a smaller subset of the domain
will be created. This subset of vulnerabilities will be defended against, however,
depending on the subset speciﬁc vulnerabilities will still exist. Due to this it is
possible to defend against the most common or the most important vulnerabili-
ties while disregarding those of less priority. Thus, a preference aggregation rule
can still accomplish a certain level of defense against strategic manipulation.
==PAGE:28==
3.5 Independence of Clones
20
3.5
Independence of Clones
Last section we looked at Gibbard-Satterthwaite Theorem and came to the con-
clusion that IIA would be the best axiom to omit or relax. A relaxed version
of the axiom was introduced by Nicolaus Tideman called the Independence of
Clones (IC) criterion [Tideman, 1987]. This criterion is a subset of IIA, such
that IC ⊂IIA. N. Tideman deﬁnes clones as follows:
Definition 3.3 Clones: A set of clones S is a subset of the set of alternatives.
S consist of 2 or more alternatives, where no alternative outside of S is ranked
as tied with an element in S or ranked between two elements of S, by any voter
[Tideman, 1987].
To show an example where clones are present we add a clone alternative Star
Trek (ST) to our example introduced in Section 1.2 Table 1.3. In Table 3.3 we
have a set of clones S = {SW, ST}, as no voter have ranked any alternatives
outside the set as tied or between the elements in the set S.
Number of votes
Preference order
1
ST ≻SW ≻LOTR ≻HP
2
HP ≻ST ≻SW ≻LORT
1
LOTR ≻HP ≻SW ≻ST
Table 3.3: Vote results with clones
Independence of clones takes on the problem of clones in strategic nominations.
Strategic nominations is to manipulate with a election, by manipulating with
the set of alternatives in the election.
There are diﬀerent cases of clone manipulation. Depending on the voting system,
the cases can aﬀect the clones in a positive way, by increasing the clones chances
of winning by adding more. Voting systems can also have a negative eﬀect on
the clones when more clones are added. Lastly the addition of clones can have
an eﬀect on other alternatives changing the winner form one alternative outside
of the set of clones, to another alternative outside the set of clones.
A case where adding clones have a negative eﬀect on the clone alternatives is
vote-splitting or spoiling. An example of a system that contain this vulnerability
is the plurality system [Tideman, 2006]. In this systems the voter can only vote
for their favorite alternative, so by having similar alternatives, these alternatives
risk splitting the votes between them. This also means that the system tends
to go towards a two party system, like we see in USA with the democrats and
==PAGE:29==
3.5 Independence of Clones
21
the republicans.
A scenario where this could become relevant for our application is if 6 boys
and 3 girls wants to go to the movie together. There are 3 action movies and
one romantic. The boys would much prefer to watch an action movie, but the
votes are split between the 3 selections, so they get 2 votes each. Meanwhile the
girls all wants to see the romantic movie and votes for this option. This means
that the romantic movie will win with 3 votes vs the 2 votes that all the action
movies gets. As the majority would rather see an action movie than a romantic
one, the result of this preference aggregation is not satisfactory.
A case where adding a clone alternatives can help the chances for the clone
alternatives of winning is referred to as teaming. Borda count [Black, 1976] is
an example of a voting system with this weakness. In Borda count you give the
alternatives points, so to have a clone alternative ranked just below yourself,
will give you a bigger margin to the other alternatives.
To give an example of this we look at a choice between two movies LOTR and
SW. The result of the vote is as follows:
Number of votes
Preference order
6
LOTR ≻SW
4
SW ≻LORT
Table 3.4: Borda count result with no clone
Following Borda count, LOTR gets 6 · 2 + 4 · 1 = 16 points and SW gets
4 · 2 + 6 · 1 = 14 points, meaning that LOTR wins.
If we add a similar candidate to SW, ST, that is considered inferior to SW by
all voters, we get the following result:
Number of votes
Preference order
6
LOTR ≻SW ≻ST
4
SW ≻ST ≻LORT
Table 3.5: Borda count result with clone
All the voters that votes for LOTR as their ﬁrst choice will still have SW as
their second choice, and all the voters that voted for SW as their ﬁrst choice will
put ST as their second choice as ST is similar to SW. Following Borda count,
LOTR will now have 6 · 3 + 4 · 1 = 22 points, and SW will have 6 · 2 + 4 · 3 = 24
points, meaning that SW is now the winner because of the clone. As LOTR is
a Condorcet winner in this example, it would not be satisfactory that SW is
chosen.
==PAGE:30==
3.5 Independence of Clones
22
The result in that a voting rule that is independent of clones must be that the
outcome the election is unaﬀected if a clone alternative is added to or removed
from the election. That is to say, the voting rule must hold the following two
conditions, when a set of clone alternatives are participating in an preference
aggregation:
• When a member of the set of clones wins, some member in the set of clones
must win when the winning member is removed from the set of clones.
• When an alternative outside the set of clones wins, that alternative must
win when any number of clones has been removed as alternatives.
It would be preferable that our application satisﬁes the IC criterion. Often we
will have several movies that are of similar genre, and we do not want the result
of our preference aggregation rule to be skewed because of this.
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 4
Algorithms
In this section the preference aggregation rules Kemeny-Young, Ranked Pairs
and Schulze will be introduced, followed by the Multi Criteria Decision Mak-
ing framework Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP). The preference aggregation
rules will be described in terms of their general procedure, time complexity and
how they could be implemented. For Multi Critieria Decision Making it will be
explained why we found this area interesting and why we did not continue our
research within this area.
4.1
Preference Aggregation Rules
In this section we will be looking for a potential preference aggregation rule to
use in our application. We will describe rules that comply with the Condorcet
criterion. This means that the rules must use pairwise majority voting to deter-
mine the winner. The rules we investigate will all use ranked voting as described
in 3.1. This gives us a better picture of the voters preferences making us able
to give a more precise movie suggestion.
All the rules we are looking at satisﬁes the 4 axioms besides IIA. However, the
rules will relax or omit the IIA axiom in compliance Gibbard-Satterthwaite’s
Theorem described in section 3.4.
==PAGE:32==
4.1 Preference Aggregation Rules
24
It must be noted that the pseudo code in the following sections are designed
by ourselves. The time complexity calculations follows theoretical articles when
possible. However, to disregard ambiguity in the papers the presented pseudo
code is used determine the exact time complexity.
4.1.1
The Kemeny-Young Rule
The ﬁrst voting rule we will look at is the Kemeny-Young rule.
This rule
was described by John G. Kemeny in his book Mathematics without Numbers
[Kemeny, 1959]. Later Young observed that the rule is a Condorcet method
[Young and Levenglick, 1978]. The rule tries to maximize fairness by picking
the ranking of alternatives that most voters agree with in an election. However,
rule does not satisfy the IIA, nor the relaxed domain IC [Tideman, 1987].
4.1.1.1
General Procedure
The Kemeny-Young rule calculates a score for every possible ranking of alter-
natives, where a ranking is a strict preference ordering of the alternatives. The
score is given according to how many voters agree with the ranking.
We say that a voter agrees with a ranking if they have the same binary relation
between two alternatives. That is to say if we have a ranking x ≻z ≻y a voter
have voted x ≻y ≻z, then the voter agrees on the binary relation x ≻y and
x ≻z but not on y ≻z.
The rule calculates the pairwise agreement between a ranking r and a vote v.
For any two alternatives i and j, we can deﬁne the function δi,j(r, v) = 1, if r
and v both agree on the ranking of i and j, and is 0 if they disagree. The total
number of pairwise agreements between a ranking r and a vote v is given by:
X
i,j
δi,j(r, v)
To ﬁnd the total score of a ranking r, this must be done for all voters, giving
us:
score =
X
v
X
i,j
δi,j(r, v)
This score is calculated for all possible rankings for the alternatives, and the
winning ranking is the one with the highest score [Conitzer et al., 2006].
==PAGE:33==
4.1 Preference Aggregation Rules
25
4.1.1.2
Pseudo Code
In Section 4.1.1.1 we show a mathematical formula for calculating the score for
each ranking. The formula is a little naive, in that the votes are recounted each
time a new score is calculated.
Instead of recounting the votes each time a score is calculated, we will deﬁne
a matrix A[i, j], where i and j are the alternatives. This matrix consists of all
ordered pairs (i, j) ∈X × X, where X is the set of alternatives.
Each ordered pair is awarded points equal to the amount of voters who agree
with the relational pair.
A relational pair is be understood as the speciﬁc binary relation on the ordered
pair (i, j) which states that iPj. The term relational pair will be used through-
out the remainder of this paper.
Pseudo code of each relational pair receiving points is shown in Algorithm 1.
Afterwards, the pairwise comparison matrix A[i, j] is fully generated. It can be
used to determine the amount of voters who agree with a relational pair in a
lookup.
Algorithm 1 Pairwise Comparison Matrix
Input : votes, votes contains all the preference orderings of the individuals.
Output : A[i, j], where i and j are alternatives, gives the number of voters
who prefer i to j.
procedure Generate Pairwise Comparison Matrix
for i from 1 to |votes| do
for j from 1 to |vote[i]| do
for k from j + 1 to |vote[i]| do
A[vote[i][j]][vote[i][k]] ←A[vote[i][j]][vote[i][k]] + 1
end for
end for
end for
end procedure
Algorithm 2 takes the A[i, j] matrix as input and generates all possible rankings
of alternatives.
The A[i, j] matrix is then used to determine the amount of
voters who agree with a relational pair derived from the ranking. The sum of
voters who agree with each relational pair is the score of the ranking.
==PAGE:34==
4.1 Preference Aggregation Rules
26
Algorithm 2 Kemeny-Young Rule
Input : A[i, j], the number of voters who prefer alternative i to alternative j.
Output : scores, a list of all possible rankings of alternatives with their asso-
ciated ranking score.
procedure Scoring of all possible rankings of alternatives
for all possible rankings of alternatives do
for i from 1 to |ranking| do
for j from i + 1 to |ranking| do
sum ←sum + A[ranking[i], ranking[j]]
end for
end for
scores[ranking] ←sum
end for
Sort the ranking scores in ascending order.
end procedure
4.1.1.3
Time Complexity
In a preference ordering of n alternatives, the number of unordered pairs with
distinct elements {i, j} ∈X × X, where i ̸= j can be calculated by
n2 −n
2
.
Thus, the calculation is equal to the amount of pairwise comparisons which
must be examined in a preference ordering. This must be done for all votes vn
in the proﬁle E, where E = (v1, v2, . . . , vn) and where each v is a preference
ordering of the alternatives n. This is necessary in order to generate the pairwise
comparison matrix described in Algorithm 1. This results in a time complexity
of
O

|E| · n2 −n
2

⇒O(|E| · n2).
To score all possible rankings for a set of alternatives the Kemeny-Young rule
will have to generate n! rankings, where n is the number of alternatives. The
score for each ranking is determined by the sum of voters who agree with each
relational pair derived from the ranking. The score for each relational pair can
be derived from the A[i, j] matrix. The time complexity of scoring all possible
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Preference Aggregation Rules
27
rankings for a set of alternatives is
O

n! · n2 −n
2

⇒O
 n! · n2
.
This is the same as inputting the relational pair to the A[i, j] matrix, as the
related cell contains the amount of pairwise agreements. Therefore, it is deter-
mined that the Kemeny-Young rule has a time complexity of
O
 |E| · n2 + n! · n2
.
However, as the other factors become insigniﬁcant compared to n!·n2, they can
be seen as minuscule. Thus, the time complexity can be said to be
O(n! · n2).
This makes the algorithm relatively ineﬀective as the set of alternatives in-
creases. It is also proven that The Kemeny-Young rule is NP-Hard as shown in
[Bartholdi et al., 1989].
4.1.1.4
Example
To give an example of how the rule works, we will use the example intro-
duced in the introduction section 1.2 where we have a set of alternatives X =
{LOTR, HP, SW}. A movie club of N = {1, ..., 19} individuals have to choose
which of the 3 alternatives in X they are going to watch. Each club member
ranks the movies depending on which one they would rather see, and the results
looks as follows:
Number of votes
Preference order
6
HP ≻LOTR ≻SW
4
LOTR ≻HP ≻SW
4
SW ≻HP ≻LOTR
5
LOTR ≻SW ≻HP
Table 4.1: Vote results for Kemeny-Young example
The movie club wants to use the Kemeny-Young rule to determine which movie
they are going to watch. They therefore start by making a pairwise comparison
matrix:
==PAGE:36==
4.1 Preference Aggregation Rules
28
A[∗, LOTR]
A[∗, HP]
A[∗, SW]
A[LOTR, ∗]
-
9
15
A[HP, ∗]
10
-
10
A[SW, ∗]
4
9
-
Table 4.2: Pairwise comparison matrix Kemeny-Young example
Now they have to calculate the score of all possible rankings of the alternative.
They start by looking at the ranking LOTR ≻HP ≻SW:
9 agrees that LOTR ≻HP
15 agrees that LOTR ≻SW
10 agrees that HP ≻SW
This means that the ranking LOTR ≻HP ≻SW receives a ranking score of
9 + 15 + 10 = 34. The rest of the scores are calculated the same way, and the
result can be seen in Table 4.3:
Rank 1
Rank 2
Rank 3
Score
LOTR
HP
SW
34
LOTR
SW
HP
33
HP
LOTR
SW
35
HP
SW
LOTR
24
SW
LOTR
HP
28
SW
HP
LOTR
23
Table 4.3: Scores for all rankings of the alternatives
Looking at Table 4.3, it is clear to see that HP ≻LOTR ≻SW is the winning
ranking with a score of 35, and the movie club will therefore be watching Harry
Potter (HP).
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Preference Aggregation Rules
29
4.1.2
The Ranked Pairs Rule
In Section 4.1.1 we looked at the Kemeny-Young rule that at ﬁrst glance looks
to have potential, but have a time complexity that is NP-hard. In this section
we will look at the Ranked pairs voting rule. The rule was proposed by Nicolaus
Tideman in 1987 [Tideman, 1987], with one of its main attributes being that it
is independent of clones.
4.1.2.1
General Procedure
The Ranked Pairs voting rule can be split it up into 4 steps:
1. Pairwise Comparison
2. Sort Pairwise Winner List
3. Locking
4. Finding the Winner
These steps will now be explained in more detail, followed by a pseudo code
description of how the rule can be implemented.
Lastly an example will be
presented.
1. Pairwise Comparison: The matrix A[i, j] described in Section 4.1.1.2 is re-
used here. By applying the irreﬂexive relation ’greater than’ upon the elements
of the A[i, j] matrix, we can determine the pairwise winner of two two distinct
relational pairs which includes the same two alternatives. The pairwise winners
are added to the Pairwise Winner List.
2. Sort Pairwise Winner List: The list is sorted descending in accordance
to the amount of voters who agree with a speciﬁc relational pair. For instance
if A[i, j] ≻A[k, l], then A[i, j] is above A[k, l] in the Pairwise Winners List.
3. Locking: In this step the acyclic graph s is generated. The graph consists
of nodes which represents an alternative and edges which are represented with
the ’locked’ relational pair. The edge is directed from the winning alternative
to the losing alternative.
When adding a ’locked’ relational pair to the graph s, the relational pair must
not create a cycle in the graph. If the relational pair does create a cycle in the
graph, it will not be locked but discarded. The order of which a relational pair
is ’locked’ is determined by the order of the sorted Pairwise Winner List.
==PAGE:38==
4.1 Preference Aggregation Rules
30
4. Finding the Winner: From graph s, the collective preference ordering can
be derived. This is done by ordering the nodes by the amount of outgoing edges.
The collective preference ordering is identical to the ordering of the nodes. The
node with the largest amount of outgoing edges is the most preferred alternative
and the node with the smallest amount of outgoing edges is the least preferred
alternative..
4.1.2.2
Pseudo Code
The pseudo code in Algorithm 3 describes a possible implementation for the
Ranked Pairs rule. The Pairwise Comparison Procedure performs the function-
ality described in Section 4.1.2.1 Step 1.
The sorting described in 4.1.2.1 Step 2 which occurs in the Sort Pairwise Winner
List Procedure can be arbitrarily chosen. The one in use for this algorithm is
Mergesort [Oracle, 2017b].
The ’locking’ speciﬁed in 4.1.2.1 Step 3 where the graph s is generated, is initi-
ated. This can be observed in Algorithm 3 Locking Procedure.
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Preference Aggregation Rules
31
Algorithm 3 Ranked Pairs algorithm
Input : A[i, j], the number of voters who prefer alternative i to alternative j.
Output : s, the directed acyclic graph. This graph contains the relationship
between the alternatives.
procedure Pairwise Comparison
for i from 1 to |alternatives| do
for j from i + 1 to |alternatives| do
if A[i, j] > A[j, i] then
p ←[i, j]
end if
end for
end for
end procedure
procedure Sort Pairwise Winner List
Sort each pair of p, by the largest strength of victory ﬁrst to smallest last.
end procedure
procedure Locking
for i from 1 to |p| do
s ←s ∪p[i]
▷Adding edge p[i] to graph s
if s contains a graph cycle then
s ←s ∩p[i]
▷Removing edge p[i] from graph s
end if
end for
end procedure
4.1.2.3
Time Complexity
Note that we were unable to ﬁnd articles that describes the precise theoreti-
cal time complexity of the Ranked Pairs rule. Therefore the time complexity
described in this paper is derived solely from our own implementation 1 of the
rule. As described in Section 4.1.1.3 the generation of the pairwise comparison
matrix has a time complexity of
O

|E| · n2 −n
2

⇒O(|E| · n2).
As mentioned in the Section 4.1.2.1 Ranked Pairs consist of 4 steps. The ﬁrst
1Follow the readme ﬁle, included in the project zip ﬁle, to ﬁnd the implementation.
==PAGE:40==
4.1 Preference Aggregation Rules
32
step of the Ranked Pairs rule is the pairwise comparison. In this step n2 ordered
pairs will be examined, where n is the amount of alternatives. By only examining
the unordered pairs with distinct elements, the time complexity of determining
the pairwise winners is
O
n2 −n
2

⇒O(n2).
The second step of the Ranked Pairs rule is performs a sorting of the pairwise
winner list. This is done with Mergesort which has a time complexity of
O (n · log(n)) .
The third step of the Ranked Pairs rule is Locking. In order to ’lock’ a relational
pair, the related edge must not create any cycles within the graph. DFS is used
to determine whether the graph contains any cycles after adding an edge. The
graph will contain at most n2−n
2
edges. The time complexity of DFS is O(e+n)
where e is the amount of edges.
This means that the third step will have a time complexity of
O
n2 −n
2
·
n2 −n
2
+ n

⇔O
n4 + n2 −2n3
4
+ n3 −n2
2

⇔O
n4 −n2
4

⇒O(n4)
The fourth step is determining the collective preference ordering. This is done
by examining each node and ordering them by the amount of outgoing edges.
This sorting is done by using Mergesort. The complexity of this is
O(n · log(n))
In total the rule will have a time complexity of
O
 |E| · n2 + n2 + n · log(n) + n4 + n · log(n)

However, as all other factors beside n4 are relative insigniﬁcant it can be said
that the time complexity of the Ranked Pairs rule is
O(n4)
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Preference Aggregation Rules
33
4.1.2.4
Example
To give an example of how Ranked Pairs works, we expand on the example
introduced in Section 1.2. Consider an scenario where a movie club of N =
{1, ..., 31} individuals that have to choose which movie to watch from a set of
5 movie alternatives X = {LOTR, HP, SW, The Lion king (LK), Fight Club
(FC)}. The group have placed their votes and the results is as show in table
4.4:
Number of votes
Preference order
6
HP ≻SW ≻LOTR ≻FC ≻LK
9
LK ≻LOTR ≻HP ≻FC ≻SW
4
LOTR ≻HP ≻SW ≻LK ≻FC
4
SW ≻LOTR ≻HP ≻LK ≻FC
8
LOTR ≻FC ≻SW ≻LK ≻HP
Table 4.4: Vote results for Ranked Pairs example
Having generated the pairwise comparison matrix, the group now makes the
pairwise comparison. Taking LOTR vs HP as an example A[LOTR, HP] = 25
and A[HP, LOTR] = 6 making LOTR the winner of this pairwise comparison.
The result of all the pairwise comparisons can be seen in table 4.5 where cells
marked with green is the winner of the pairwise comparison:
A[∗, LOTR]
A[∗, HP]
A[∗, SW]
A[∗, LK]
A[∗, FC]
A[LOTR, ∗]
-
25
21
22
31
A[HP, ∗]
6
-
19
14
23
A[SW, ∗]
10
12
-
22
14
A[LK, ∗]
9
17
9
-
17
A[FC, ∗]
0
8
17
14
-
Table 4.5: Pairwise comparison Ranked Pairs example
The next step is adding the winning relations along with their votes counts to
a list. This list of pairwise winners is sorted, starting with the relation with the
highest vote count:
==PAGE:42==
4.1 Preference Aggregation Rules
34
Pairwise comparison
Votes
Position
A[LOTR, FC]
31
1
A[LOTR, HP]
25
2
A[HP, FC]
23
3
A[LOTR, LK]
22
4
A[SW, LK]
22
5
A[LOTR, SW]
21
6
A[HP, SW]
19
7
A[LK, HP]
17
8
A[LK, FC]
17
9
A[FC, SW]
17
10
Table 4.6: Sorted pairwise winner list
Going though the list from top to bottom the relations are locked.
Position 1: The pair gives us the ranking:
LOTR ≻FC
Position 2: HP is added to the ranking. HP is less prefered than LOTR and
is therefore added behind LOTR in the ranking:
LOTR ≻FC ≻HP
From now on, when we change the ranking or add new alternatives, we need to
make sure that previous relations are not been broken, creating cycles.
Position 3: This position gives us information about the relation between HP
and FC. It changes the ordering of the two alternatives:
LOTR ≻HP ≻FC
The procedure shown is continued untill we reach position 8.
Position 8: Once we have reached position 8 the ranking looks as follows:
LOTR ≻HP ≻FC ≻SW ≻LK
On position 8 the pair A[LK, HP] needs to be added to the ranking.
This
creates a cycle, as we have already had the relations A[HP, SW] in position 7
and A[SW, LK] in position 5, and adding A[LK, HP] would create HP ≻SW
≻LK ≻HP. It is therefore discarded.
Once we have reached the end of the list we have the ﬁnal ranking that looks
as follows:
LOTR ≻HP ≻SW ≻LK ≻FC
From the ranking we can see that the winner of the election is LOTR.
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Preference Aggregation Rules
35
4.1.3
The Schulze Rule
Last section we looked at the voting rule Ranked Pairs, that has a time com-
plexity of O(n4) and satisﬁes the IC criteria. Now we will look at a similar
voting rule called The Schulze voting rule, that like Ranked Pairs satisfy the IC
criteria.
The Schulze voting rule is relatively new, developed in 1997 by Markus Schulze
[Schulze, 2003], but have already started seeing use by many private organiza-
tions such as The Pirate Party of Sweden, the Wikimedia Foundation and the
Debian project [Schulze, 2011].
4.1.3.1
General Procedure
The rule can be divided up into 3 steps.
Each step in the rule will be ex-
plained, followed by a pseudo code section that describes how the rule can be
implemented. Then the complexity of the rule will be discussed followed by an
example that shows the rule in action.
1. Pairwise Comparison
2. Strength of the Strongest Path
3. Find the Winner.
1. Pairwise Comparison: This step is similar to Step 1 described in 4.1.2.1
as the A[i, j] matrix is re-used. The diﬀerences are that pairwise winners as
well as pairwise losers are added in an Initiated Strongest Path Matrix T. T
consist of all relational pairs between the alternatives. All relational pairs which
are pairwise winners will receive a value according to the amount of voters who
agree with the relational pair. All pairwise losers will receive a value of 0.
2. Strength of the Strongest Path: In this step the graph s is generated.
The graph consists of nodes which represents an alternative and edges which
represent a relational pair. The edge e is directed from the winning alternative
to the losing alternative. In cases where a pairwise tie occurs (which means
A[i, j] ≈A[j, i]) an edge is created in both directions. The value associated
with an edge can be calculated in diﬀerent ways:
1. You can take the margin of the amount of voters who prefer the winning
alternative over the losing alternative such that e = A[a, b] −A[b, a].
==PAGE:44==
4.1 Preference Aggregation Rules
36
2. You can take the ratio of the amount of voters who prefer the winning
alternative over the losing alternative such that e = A[a,b]
A[b,a].
3. You can use the amount of voters who prefer the winning alternative such
that e = A[a, b].
4. You can use the amount of voters who prefer the losing alternative such
that e = A[b, a].
In the following sections, we use option 3, the value of the winning alternative.
Once the graph is generated, the strength of the strongest paths between each
of the alternatives is calculated. We deﬁne a path as follows:
Going from alternative x to alternative y a path is a sequence of alternatives
c(1), . . . , c(n), where c(1) = x, c(n) = y, 2 ≤n < ∞and for all i = 1, . . . , (n−1) :
c(i) ̸= c(i + 1)
We deﬁne the strength of a path c(1), . . . , c(n) to be the weakest link (WL)
among the edges on the path:
WL = min{A[c(i), c(i + 1)] | i = 1, . . . , (n −1)}
The strength of the strongest path is found using the function T[a, b].
The
function is deﬁned as follows:
T[a, b] = max{WL | c(1), . . . , c(n) is a path from a to b}
3. Finding the Winner is the last step. A relation ab is added to the set of
binary relations R if they satisfy the following:
ab ∈R :⇔T[a, b] ≻T[b, a]
We deﬁne the set of winners S as follows:
S := {a ∈X | ∀b ∈X \ {a} : ba /∈R} is the set of winners [Schulze, 2011].
4.1.3.2
Pseudo Code
The pseudo code in Algorithm 4 and 5 describes a possible implementation for
the Schulze rule. The Pairwise Comparison Procedure performs the functional-
ity described in Section 4.1.3.1 Step 1.
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Preference Aggregation Rules
37
Algorithm 4 Pairwise Comparison
Input : A[i, j], the number of voters who prefer alternative i to alternative j.
Output : T[i, j], Initiated Strongest Path Matrix T[i, j] from alternative i to
alternative j.
procedure Pairwise Comparison
for i from 1 to |alternatives| do
for j from 1 to |alternatives| do
if A[i, j] > A[j, i] then
T[i, j] ←A[i, j]
else
T[i, j] ←0
end if
end for
end for
end procedure
The second step in Section 4.1.3.1 is Strength of the Strongest Path. In this
step the dynamic programming algorithm Floyd-Warshall [Floyd, 1962] is used
to calculate the strength of the strongest path between all nodes. This is done by
continuously improving an estimate on the strongest path between the nodes,
until the strongest path is reached. The end result of this is the Completed
Strongest Path Matrix T ′, which contains the strength of the strongest path
between all nodes. This is shown in Floyd-Warshall Procedure in Algorithm 5
==PAGE:46==
4.1 Preference Aggregation Rules
38
Algorithm 5 Floyd-Warshall
Input : T[i, j], Initiated Strongest Path Matrix T[i, j] from alternative i to
alternative j.
Output : T ′[i, j], the Completed Strength of the Strongest Path Matrix from
alternative i to alternative j.
procedure Floyd-Warshall
for i from 1 to |alternatives| do
for j from 1 to |alternatives| do
if i ̸= j then
for k from 1 to |alternatives| do
if i ̸= k ∧j ̸= k then
T[j, k] ←max(T[j, k], min(T[j, i], T[i, k]))
end if
end for
end if
end for
end for
end procedure
4.1.3.3
Time Complexity
As described in Section 4.1.1.3 the generation of the pairwise comparison matrix
has a time complexity of
O

|E| · n2 −n
2

⇒O(|E| · n2).
The ﬁrst step in the Schulze rule is the pairwise comparison. As we saw in
Section 4.1.2.3 this step has a time complexity of
O
n2 −n
2

⇒O(n2).
The second step is done by using the Floyd-Warshall algorithm. M. Schulze
states that Floyd-Warshall has a complexity of O(n3) [Schulze, 2011]. This can
be seen by observing Algorithm 5 as the Floyd-Warshall Procedure has a triple
nested for loop, where each loop runs through all the alternatives.
==PAGE:47==
4.1 Preference Aggregation Rules
39
The third step is determining the collective preference ordering. This is done by
examining the set of binary relations R to determine the amount of strongest
paths originating from an alternative. The alternative with the largest amount
of strongest paths originating from itself is the most preferred alternative and
the alternative with the smallest amount of strongest paths originating from
itself is the least preferred alternative. This sorting is done by using Mergesort.
The complexity of this is
O
n2 −n
2
+ n · log(n)

⇒O(n2)
Therefore, the complete time complexity of the Schulze rule is
O
 |E| · n2 + n2 + n3 + n2
.
Here it can be seen that the heaviest computational part is calculating the
strength of the strongest path. As the other factors become relatively insignif-
icant compared to that step, it can be said that the time complexity of the
Schulze rule is
O(n3).
This matches the time complexity described in M. Schulzes paper [Schulze, 2011].
4.1.3.4
Example
To show how the Schulze voting system works, we use the same example as in
the Ranked Pairs example Section 4.1.2.4. We therefore have the same voting
results as shown in Table 4.4. The pairwise comparison winners are therefore
also the same as Table 4.5.
Now the movie group generates a directed graph to be able calculate the strength
of the strongest paths for the alternatives. To generate the graph they link the
diﬀerent alternatives as described in Section 4.1.3.1 step 2 by applying option 3
as edge values.
Taking LOTR vs HP as an example, LOTR is the winner and the edge, directed
from LOTR to HP, receives the value A[LOTR, HP] = 25.
The completed
directed graph for the example will look as seen in Figure 4.1:
==PAGE:48==
4.1 Preference Aggregation Rules
40
LOTR
HP
SW
LK
FC
25
21
22
31
19
17
23
22
17
17
Figure 4.1: Directed graph Schulze example
The strength of the strongest path can now be determined for all alternatives.
Taking LOTR to HP, there are four unique paths going from LOTR to HP. The
paths can be seen in Table 4.7:
Path
Weakest Link
(LOTR,HP)
min(25) = 25
(LOTR,SW,LK,HP)
min(21, 22, 17) = 17
(LOTR,LK,HP)
min(22, 17) = 17
(LOTR,FC,SW,LK,HP
min(31, 17, 22, 17) = 17
Table 4.7: Weakest Link values for all unique paths originating from LOTR
leading to HP
The strength of the strongest path T[LOTR,HP] is therefore max(25, 17, 17, 17) =
25. The strongest paths between all alternatives can be seen in Table 4.8 below:
==PAGE:49==
4.1 Preference Aggregation Rules
41
T[∗, LOTR]
T[∗, HP]
T[∗, SW]
T[∗, LK]
T[∗, FC]
T[LOTR, ∗]
-
25
21
22
31
T[HP, ∗]
0
-
19
19
23
T[SW, ∗]
0
17
-
22
17
T[LK, ∗]
0
17
17
-
17
T[FC, ∗]
0
17
17
17
-
Table 4.8: Strength of the strongest paths comparison
Now it is determined which relations are part of the binary relation set R. As
an example the relation (HP, SW) is part of R since T[HP, SW] ≻T[SW, HP].
All the winning relations are marked green in Table 4.8. The relational set
R = {(LOTR, HP), (LOTR, SW), (LOTR, LK), (LOTR, FC),
(HP, SW), (HP, LK), (HP, FC), (SW, LK)}.
To ﬁnd the set of winners S we now look at alternatives, where the alternative
a ∈S if and only if ba /∈R for all b ∈X \ {a}.
In our example the only
alternative in the set S = {LOTR}.
The collective preference ordering of the movies are
LOTR ≻HP ≻SW ≻LK ≈FC.
This ordering of the lower ranked alternatives are determined by removing the
relations containing the winner from R. When this is done a new ’winner’ of
position two in the ranking can be determined. This process is continued until
all alternatives are ranked. In this example the alternatives LK and FC are
tied, as none of them have a winning relation in R.
M. Schulze suggests tie breaking by picking a random ballot, and using its order-
ing of the tied alternatives to determine the winner of the tiebreak [Schulze, 2003].
Should the random ballot contain a tie between the alternatives, another ballot
is picked to break the tie. If you run out of ballots and 2 alternatives are still
tied, they are randomly ranked.
==PAGE:50==
4.2 Multi Criteria Decision Making
42
4.2
Multi Criteria Decision Making
At this point we have presented 3 diﬀerent preference aggregation rules which
can be used in order to recommend the most preferred movie to a group.
Though, to stray away from the path of preference aggregation rules one ﬁnds
Multi Criteria Decision Making to be a strong and versatile contender. Multi
Criteria Decision Making is used to select between several possible alternatives,
which is the essential problem of arranging a cinema trip. We therefore intend
to research, analyze and conclude whether Multi Criteria Decision Making is
more suited to be used than preference aggregation.
Multi Criteria Decision Making (MCDM) tries to aid in this selection process
by including a number of criteria which may or may not be conﬂicting with each
other. Conﬂicting criteria could be two variables whose relation vary inversely,
meaning that, as one variable increases the other decreases. In this sense they
are conﬂicting as one cannot achieve a high value in both but must choose
between them. An example of two conﬂicting variables (however, not inverse) is
the quality of the seats and price of the cinema ticket. The buyer wants a high
quality of seats as well as low price for the ticket, although, due to the relation
between the variables this is nigh impossible as the price increases if the quality
does.
Furthermore, linguistic expressions are used to compare two criteria in order
to make it easier for unskilled personnel for use. These expressions are then
converted to numerical values which can be used in a mathematical framework
in order to objectively determine the outcome. This is especially helpful such
that a result can be based on mathematics instead of being based purely on
opinion.
The exact notation and usage of the linguistic expressions will be
explained later in Table 4.9.
There exists a plethora of MCDM methods which can be used to determine
which alternative is the most prominent according to certain criteria. We have
decided to investigate one, namely Analytical Hierarchical Process (AHP), in or-
der to determine whether or this could be used to solve the problem of this paper.
AHP was chosen over other MCDM methods due to the large accessibility of re-
search on the area which supports the robustness and group application of the
technique [Majumder, 2015, Saaty, 1977, Belton and Gear, 1983, Saaty, 1994,
Triantaphyllou, 2000, Triantaphyllou and Mann, 1995, Lai et al., 2002, Saaty and Peniwati, 2013].
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Multi Criteria Decision Making
43
4.2.1
Analytic Hierarchical Process (AHP)
Analytic Hierarchical Process, also known as AHP, is a multi criteria decis-
ing making framework and was ﬁrst introduced by Thomas L. Saaty in 1977
[Saaty, 1977]. However, in 1983 Belton and Gear observed a deﬁciency in the de-
cision making framework which reversed the ranking of the current alternatives
if an almost identical alternative was introduced [Belton and Gear, 1983]. They
also suggested a method to correct this behavior and in 1994 Saaty [Saaty, 1994]
accepted this suggestion to correct the deﬁciency. This new AHP framework was
called Ideal Mode AHP. However, Saaty’s work did not stop there, he continued
to study diﬀerent ways of applying AHP and in 2013 published a paper on how
it could be used in a group setting [Saaty and Peniwati, 2013].
In order to explain the functionally of the Ideal Mode AHP approach, we will
start out by outlining the general procedure after which we will explain each
step in further detail.
1. Alternatives are known from start (or deﬁned near the start).
2. Deﬁne the criteria by creating the decision hierarchy.
3. Weigh all alternatives to each criteria and calculate the respective eigen-
vectors.
4. Weigh all criteria against each other and calculate the eigenvector.
5. Create the decision matrix and determine the priority of the diﬀerent
alternatives.
We must assume that the amount of alternatives are ﬁnite in order to use
AHP as a decision support tool.
We also assume that all alternatives have
been deﬁned beforehand and therefore are known at the start of the process
[Triantaphyllou, 2000].
To determine the criteria the main problem is decomposed into sub problems.
These sub problems are further decomposed and this process is to be repeated
until the level of granularity reaches an adequate degree. This will in the end
create a hierarchy where the root element is the main problem (or goal) and
the parents to the leaf nodes are the criteria of which the alternatives must
be compared against.
To illustrate this comparison, the leaf nodes are the
alternatives which each must be connected to every criteria.
==PAGE:52==
4.2 Multi Criteria Decision Making
44
Arrange Cinema Trip
Practical
Technical
Genre
Playtime
Seat Comfort
Travel Time
Price
Lord of the Rings
Harry Potter
Star Wars
Figure 4.2: Example of a decision hierarchy after it has been through the entire
process of problem decomposition
As can be seen in Figure 4.2 the main problem to be solved within this paper is
Arrange Cinema Trip and this is therefore the root element. Technical as well
as Practical are the sub-problems found after decomposing their parent node.
The second deepest level (parents to leaf nodes) is the end result of the iterative
approach of decomposing the main problem. Hence, these are the criteria of
which an alternative must be weighed against.
Afterwards, as the criteria have been deﬁned, the next step is to deﬁne the qual-
ity of each alternative. In general it is a diﬃcult task to compare and quantify
the quality of diﬀerent elements. Therefore AHP has taken the approach of
determining the relative importance of two elements against a single criteria.
This pairwise comparison allows looking at a subset of the entire system at a
time, which makes it tangible to work with.
In order for the comparison to be used within a mathematical model, numerical
values are required. Due to this, a numerical value is connected to a linguistic
expression used for the comparison. These connections are illustrated in Table
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Multi Criteria Decision Making
45
4.9. This oﬀers people the possibility of working with words, while allowing the
underlying framework to work with numerical values.
Intensity of
Importance
Deﬁnition
Explanation
1
Equal importance
Two activities contribute equally
to the objective
3
Moderate importance
Experience
and
judgment
slightly favor one activity over
another
5
Strong importance
Experience
and
judgment
strongly favor one activity over
another
7
Very
strong
or
demon-
strated importance
An
activity
is
favored
very
strongly over another; its dom-
inance is demonstrated in prac-
tice
9
Extreme importance
The evidence favoring one activ-
ity over another is of highest pos-
sible order of aﬃrmation
2,4,6,8
For compromise between
the above values
Sometimes one needs to inter-
polate a compromise judgment
numerically because there is no
good word to describe it
Reciprocals
of above
If activity i has one of
the above nonzero num-
bers assigned to it when
compared to activity j,
then j has the reciprocal
value when compared with
i
A
comparison
mandated
by
choosing the smaller element as
the unit to estimate the larger
one as a multiple of that unit
Rationals
Ratios arising from the
scale
If consistency were forced by ob-
taining n numerical values to
span the matrix
1.1-1.9
For tied activities
When elements are close and
nearly distinguishable; moderate
is 1.3 and extreme is 1.9
Table 4.9: Scale of Relative Importances used to assign numerical values to
judgments made by comparing two elements [Saaty, 1994]
When all the alternatives have been weighed against each criteria it is possible
to create the matrices we need for further mathematical manipulation.
==PAGE:54==
4.2 Multi Criteria Decision Making
46
Now lets say we have M number of possible alternatives and that N number
of criteria have been deduced earlier from the decision hierarchy. For simplicity
we use a small set for M. Recall the example on Table 1.3, here we say that
M = {LOTR, HP, SW}.
These acronyms stand for the movies Lord of the
Rings, Harry Potter and Star Wars respectively.
We can deduct that we need N amounts of judgment matrices of M × M size.
Here we choose that N = {Genre, Playtime, Seat Comfort, Travel Time, Price}.
These will be the judgment matrices that deﬁne the relative importance of two
alternatives against a single decision criteria. These can be seen starting from
Table 4.10 through to Table 4.14.
A single judgment matrix where all criteria are weighed against each other
in a pairwise comparison is also needed.
This matrix does not contain any
information regarding the possible alternatives and therefore has the dimensions
of N × N. This matrix can be observed on Table 4.15.
Genre
LOTR
HP
SW
LOTR
1
3
9
HP
1/3
1
5
SW
1/9
1/5
1
Table 4.10: Judgment matrix for all possible alternatives against the decision
criteria: Genre
Playtime
LOTR
HP
SW
LOTR
1
5
7
HP
1/5
1
1/2
SW
1/7
2
1
Table 4.11: Judgment matrix for all possible alternatives against the decision
criteria: Playtime
Seat Comfort
LOTR
HP
SW
LOTR
1
1/3
5
HP
3
1
4
SW
1/5
1/4
1
Table 4.12: Judgment matrix for all possible alternatives against the decision
criteria: Seat Comfort
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Multi Criteria Decision Making
47
Travel Time
LOTR
HP
SW
LOTR
1
5
5
HP
1/5
1
1/9
SW
1/5
9
1
Table 4.13: Judgment matrix for all possible alternatives against the decision
criteria: Travel Time
Price
LOTR
HP
SW
LOTR
1
1
3
HP
1
1
1/2
SW
1/3
2
1
Table 4.14: Judgment matrix for all possible alternatives against the decision
criteria: Price
Genre
Playtime
Seat Comfort
Travel Time
Price
Genre
1
5
7
1/3
9
Playtime
1/5
1
5
3
5
Seat Comfort
1/7
1/5
1
2
7
Travel Time
3
1/3
1/2
1
5
Price
1/9
1/5
1/7
1/5
1
Table 4.15: Judgment matrix for each criteria against another to conclude on
the relative importance according to each other
At this point it is now possible to calculate the eigenvector, also called priority
vector, for each of the matrices. This is done by multiplying all elements in a
row with each other and taking the n-th root, where n is the number of elements
in a row. To normalize the eigenvalues, each element is divided with the sum of
all the elements.
All mathematical calculations for matrices and vectors in this example can be
seen in Appendix A.1. In order to keep the example clean the tables only contain
3 signiﬁcant digits after the decimal, however, the calculations have been carried
out with more digits after the decimal.
==PAGE:56==
4.2 Multi Criteria Decision Making
48
Genre
0.672
0.265
0.063
Playtime
0.469
0.238
0.292
Seat Comfort
0.251
0.272
0.477
Travel Time
0.405
0.199
0.395
Price
0.375
0.298
0.328
Table 4.16: Priority vectors (eigenvectors) determined from the respective
judgment matrices from Table 4.10 through to Table 4.14
Weights
0.237
0.218
0.203
0.201
0.141
Table 4.17: Priority vector determined from the matrix seen on Table 4.15
where the relative importance of each criteria is pairwised com-
pared to all other criteria
The N amount of priority vectors which can be observed on Table 4.16 are
created from the matrices that pairwise weigh the alternatives against a criteria.
These will be used as the columns in a new matrix we name the decision matrix.
The last priority vector, shown on Table 4.17 is made from weighing the criteria
against each other and will now be used as the relative importance of each
criteria.
We can now create the decision matrix of order M ×N, however, we also include
an extra row for the weight of each criteria as a visual illustration. The decision
matrix is a concatenation of all previously calculated priority vectors. Meaning
that each of the priority vectors is used as the columns in the decision matrix.
This is illustrated in Table 4.18.
Genre
Playtime
Seat Comfort
Travel Time
Price
(0.237)
(0.218)
(0.203)
(0.201)
(0.141)
LOTR
0.672
0.469
0.251
0.405
0.375
HP
0.265
0.238
0.272
0.199
0.298
SW
0.063
0.292
0.477
0.395
0.328
Table 4.18: Decision matrix which is the concatenation of all the previously
calculated priority vectors (including an extra illustrative row for
each columns weight)
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Multi Criteria Decision Making
49
Though, in order to gain a more valuable result, the values of each column
are divided with the maximum element in that column. This will increase the
spread of the values and decrease the possibility of an erroneous result which is
described in detail in the article of Belton and Gear [Belton and Gear, 1983] and
in the article by Saaty [Saaty, 1994]. This new decision matrix can be observed
at Table 4.19.
Genre
Playtime
Seat Comfort
Travel Time
Price
(0.237)
(0.218)
(0.203)
(0.201)
(0.141)
LOTR
1
1
0.527
1
1
HP
0.395
0.508
0.570
0.492
0.794
SW
0.094
0.623
1
0.975
0.874
Table 4.19: New decision matrix where all elements in each column have been
divided with their respective columns maximum entry
Now, as the ﬁnal decision matrix is complete, it is possible to calculate the last
priority vector which give us a preferential result of all the alternatives. This
vector will rank the alternatives from best to worst based on the information
from all the judgment matrices. Table 4.20 shows the ﬁnal priority vector where
an extra column has been added to show which alternative relates to which value.
Priorities
LOTR
0.904
HP
0.531
SW
0.680
Table 4.20: The ﬁnal priority vector which shows the preferential result of all
alternatives
Here, it can be observed that the movie series LOTR is highly ranked above the
two other alternatives and therefore a clear winner. The two other alternatives
are closer to each other but SW is still ranked higher than HP. This means that
the preferential result of all the alternatives is:
Lord of the Rings (LOTR) ≻Harry Potter (HP) ≻Star Wars (SW)
4.2.2
Conclusion on AHP
Having to make a choice between several possible alternatives is an inevitable
scenario. It can therefore become a necessity to compare the alternatives against
==PAGE:58==
4.2 Multi Criteria Decision Making
50
diﬀerent criteria, such as, which cinema oﬀers the most preferred genre as well
as being relatively quick to get to and all for a modest price.
AHP oﬀers a solution to quantify and compare units with have no direct relation.
This can make even obscure information more tangible to work with.
AHP is also a relatively ﬂexible framework. It has previously been used by a
group of six engineers to determine which Multi-Media Authorizing System was
the most optimal choice [Lai et al., 2002]. It has also been used in the building
industry to determine the impact urbanization has on water [Majumder, 2015].
Both experiments were carried out in a group setting which AHP strongly sup-
ports as shown by Saaty himself in [Saaty and Peniwati, 2013]. Besides these,
the example in Section 4.2.1 shows how AHP is applicable in determining the
most prominent movie according to several established criteria. This was done
without any need for speciﬁc adaptions as the framework in itself is ﬂexible
enough to allow this.
However, MCDM frameworks are decision support tools. They merely aid in
the process of making a decision, they cannot do this autonomously without
any human interaction.
Therefore manual work is to be completed in or-
der to increase the precision of the result.
AHP in its entirety is a frame-
work that enables discussion amongst group members and allows for deeper
understanding of the subject [Triantaphyllou and Mann, 1995, Lai et al., 2002,
Saaty and Peniwati, 2013].
In a study by Nordisk Film [Film, 2016] it was concluded that the adolescent
did not want to take on responsibility or spend too much eﬀort into arranging
a trip to the cinema.
In order for AHP to suggest the most suitable movie a suﬃcient amount of
criteria must be created. The more detailed and describing the criteria are, the
more criteria the alternatives are compared against.
Afterwards the relative
importance of each alternative is determined in a pairwise comparison against
each criteria. In addition to this it is required to perform a pairwise comparison
of each criteria against each other. This is both a time and energy consum-
ing process which is crucial to the entire process. Nevertheless, every step is
necessary in order to determine the most optimal alternative.
Whether to implement and use AHP as an MCDM method for this project can
be summarized to the speciﬁc problem of: Precision versus Convenience.
It is possible to create the system such that the users have to do less work
in order to reach a movie recommendation. Criteria can be made static and
determining the relative importance can be done via a smaller scale than the
one shown on Table 4.9. However, the recommended movie might not be the
optimal for the group movie due to the limitations created in order to make it
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Multi Criteria Decision Making
51
more convenient to use.
In the end it would not be an ideal movie recommendation without putting
eﬀort into the process. All of the procedural steps are not negligible and does
heavily aﬀect the resulting outcome. Due to these restrictions we do not believe
AHP to be a suitable solution for the audience which this project has as a target
group.
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 5
Implementation / Design
This chapter will stray away from the heavy theoretical as well as technical
details of preference aggregation rules.
More speciﬁcally, the choices taken regarding the ﬂow of the system will be
explained. This will be followed by a brief examination of how the underlying
system architecture and the communication can negatively aﬀect the system
Furthermore, an investigation of how to optimize the implementation by chang-
ing the datastructure used to represent the graph.
==PAGE:61==
5.1 User Interactions
53
5.1
User Interactions
The project is considered to be that of a cold start problem1. Thus, we have
decided to design the system to more actively engage the user and require a
certain amount of user interaction. Although, this interaction should be kept to
a moderate level as to not complicate the process for the user and not become
a deterring factor.
The system should be designed to enable a group to decide upon which movie
to watch together as well as the location of the cinema and the starting time of
the movie. These three features were deemed as an absolute necessity for the
minimum viable product.
With this in mind the total workﬂow and user interactions were split into three
iterations and a ﬁnal presentation of the results. A conclusion must have been
reached at the previous iteration before it is possible to proceed to the next.
The ﬂow has been created to be in accordance with the priority of the audience,
whom prioritize fellowship and solidarity far higher than much else [Film, 2016].
Thus, the group must ﬁrst decide on (1) when to meet up, followed by (2) which
movie to watch and end with (3) which cinema to go to. The general steps of
this ﬂow can then be written as:
1 Each user chooses a set of dates.
2 Each user chooses a set of movies, ﬁltrated to ﬁt the most preferred dates.
3 Each user chooses a set of cinemas, ﬁltrated to ﬁt the most preferred
movies and dates/time.
4 The most preferred movie as well as dates/time and cinema is presented.
Now, as the general ﬂow has been established it is possible to dig into further
details of exactly how the system should be utilized.
In the ﬁrst iteration (1) the users must input which days they are available
to join for the cinema. In the second iteration (2) the user must choose their
preference ordering of the movies. This movie list will be ﬁltrated according to
the days deemed best for the group. The third and last iteration (3) the user
must choose their three most preferred choices for cinema as well as speciﬁc time
where the movie is playing. Since the cinema and time are strongly connected
these will be chosen together.
1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cold_start
==PAGE:62==
5.1 User Interactions
54
Figure 5.1: Prototype of third iteration
Figure 5.1 shows a possible design of the third iteration of choosing a time
and cinema. When all votes have been cast the system will start aggregating
the preferences. Which preference aggregation rule to use might be diﬀerent
depending on which iteration step we are at, as a rule can prioritize diﬀerently.
Note: A time limit is necessary in order for the group to continue the process
even if a single individual does not feel inclined to answer. The exact duration
of this time limit should also be further investigated before concluding on the
most ﬁtting time.
==PAGE:63==
5.2 Architecture
55
5.2
Architecture
In Section 3.4 we explained why Indepedenence of Irrelevant Alternatives should
be either removed or relaxed and continued with Section 3.5 which explains the
relaxation of the axiom and how to defend against it. Due to this, the chosen
preference aggregation rules is vulnerable to strategic manipulation. Therefore,
the rule itself must innately oﬀer a certain level of protection against such at-
tacks. However, it is also important that the system implementation as well
as underlying architecture abides by general computer science paradigms. If
not, the innate defensive properties of the preference aggregation rule may be
bypassed in an unwanted manner.
We will not go into the details of all paradigms as that is outside the scope of
this paper. Although, we will explain those we deem necessary to consider.
5.2.1
Communication Security
Every voting scheme (which is not dictatorial) is susceptible to insincere voting.
To keep this at a minimum, it should not be an easy task to accomplish.
Thus, the speciﬁc preference aggregation rule in use must not be known to the
user. Another important aspect is that no user must have access to the votes
cast by another user. The idea is to limit the knowledge of the environment
in order to increase the computational power required to launch a successful
attack. Hiding the underlying implementation to gain more security is frowned
upon within the world of cryptology. However, it does oﬀer an extra layer of
defense.
For further protection against vulnerabilities the system must encrypt outgoing
messages and decrypt incoming messages between all units. This will ensure
that no attacker can passively eavesdrop or actively engage in a Man-in-the-
Middle attack without the use of large processing power.
Exactly which standards to be used for hashing, encrypting and decrypting
should follow the state-of-art guidelines at the current time of creation. This is
important to ensure proper protection as older hashing functions such as MD5
and SHA-1 have been proven to be weak against collision attacks which reduces
the oﬀered security [Knudsen, 2016].
==PAGE:64==
5.2 Architecture
56
5.2.2
Network Topology
The underlying network topology which the system architecture is built upon
is also an important aspect. Many diﬀerent architectures exist which has diﬀer-
ent beneﬁts as well as downsides. We will primarily be discussing client-server
[Coulouris et al., 2005].
The client-server model is the primary choice for this system to be built upon
mainly due to two reasons; persistent data and enhanced security.
Client units have a single communication channel directly to a centralized server.
This means that all communication between clients occur indirectly through the
server and that the processing power of the server can be used.
Therefore, votes cast by user1 and user2 will both be sent to the centralized
server and kept there. The votes will not be shared between user1 and user2.
The problem of directly sharing the votes between users is that the informa-
tion will be available within the memory of the receiving unit. With enough
engineering expertise it is possible to extract this information and apply this
knowledge to cast an insincere vote.
Another important aspect of the client-server model is that the server enables
the possibility of persistent data. Thus, the votes cast by a user can be stored
on the server. This is an improvement to the user experience as users do not
have to be online concurrently in order to cast their votes.
By creating a client-server model the underlying architecture will innately com-
ply with the assumptions that are a necessity to support our chosen preference
aggregation rules.
If the client-server model is used it is also important that the chosen prefer-
ence aggregation rule be capable of scaling. Several groups must be able to use
the system simultaneously without any excessive constraints on the server side.
Hence, we will create a time limit which the preference aggregation rules must
comply with during testing.
==PAGE:65==
5.3 Algorithmic Datastructures
57
5.3
Algorithmic Datastructures
This section will explain our thought process as we optimized our implementa-
tions of the preference aggregation rules.
M. Schulze oﬀers a possible implementation of the Schulze rule which he deﬁnes
within his paper [Schulze, 2011]. However, the authors of Ranked Pairs and
Kemeny-Young did not oﬀer possible implementations of their rules.
Thus,
those two rules are created by ourselves from the knowledge we gained through
research.
After the ﬁrst iterations of benchmark testing, it was noticable that Ranked
Pairs was performing slower than expected. This initiated an investigation of the
implementation in order to detect code sections which could be optimized. The
Ranked Pairs implementation contained several collections where it is examined
whether a given element exists. It requires O(n) time to check if a given element
exist in a list [Oracle, 2017a]. To examine if a given element exist in a set requires
O(1) time2, thus lists were changed to sets. It was possible to change from lists
to sets, because the order in which the elements was stored in the collection was
irrelevant.
The most computationally heavy part of Ranked Pairs is the cycle detection.
The cycle detection part is described in Section 4.1.2. Our cycle detection is
implemented using DFS.
Since the cycle detection is the computationally hardest part of Ranked Pairs, it
must be as eﬃcient as possible. Due to this, it was investigated how to improve
the datastructure of the graph in order to improve the traversal time.
Two datastructures were found. Adjacency matrices and adjacency lists. Both
have their advantages and disadvantages, which will be further discussed in the
following sections.
5.3.1
Adjacency matrix
The matrix is made of a two-dimensional array. Each row and column represents
a node. If the array contains a value of 1 in a cell, it means that an edge exists
from the node represented by the row, to the node represented by the column.
The adjacency matrix has a high memory usage, as it stores all adjacent and
non-adjacent nodes for each node.
2http://bigocheatsheet.com/
==PAGE:66==
5.3 Algorithmic Datastructures
58
This means that to iterate through all adjacent nodes, it is required to iterate
through all adjacent and non-adjacent nodes. This requires O(n) time.
Node0
Node1
Node2
Node0
0
1
1
Node1
1
0
0
Node2
0
0
0
Table 5.1: Arbitrary adjacency matrix
Table 5.1 is an illustration of an adjacency matrix. In order to iterate through
the adjacent nodes of Node1, DFS iterates through Node0, Node1 and Node2
to determine if the node is an adjacent node.
A matrix is eﬃcient for determining if a node has an edge to another node,
as this can be done in O(1) time. This is because the adjacency matrix is a
two-dimensional array.
5.3.2
Adjacency list
The adjacency list is a list of lists. Each index in the parent list represents
a node and the corresponding child list represents the adjacent nodes of that
node.
AdjacencyList[0] = {1, 2}
AdjacencyList[1] = {0}
AdjacencyList[2] = {}
Table 5.2: Adjacency list example
Table 5.2 shows an example of how the adjacency matrix on Table 5.1 can be
presented as a adjacency list.
Adjacency list is eﬃcient for iterating through the adjacent nodes of a node as
the list only contains the adjacent nodes of a node. Compared to adjacency
matrix, where both adjacent and non-adjacent nodes are stored.
Since adjacency list only contains the adjacent nodes of the nodes, it does not
waste memory on storing non-adjacent nodes. This makes adjacency list very
memory eﬃcient for sparse graphs compared to a adjacency matrix.
==PAGE:67==
5.3 Algorithmic Datastructures
59
However, checking if an edge exists from one node to another in an adjacency
list will require O(n) time. This is because each adjacent node will have to be
examined in order to determine if the node is within the list of adjacent nodes.
The graph will be traversed by DFS and DFS uses a systematic procedure which
inspects all nodes. Therefore, the traversal time can be improved by using a
datastructure which limits the amount of nodes that has to be inspected. As
adjacency lists only store the existing adjacent nodes for each node it becomes
the most eﬀect datastructure to use in conjunction with DFS.
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 6
Test
This chapter will touch upon both an empirical performance test as well as an
empirical experiment. The empirical performance test is conducted by testing
our implementation of the three preference aggregation rules: Schulze, Ranked
Pairs and Kemeny-Young. Here, number of operations, runtime and memory
usage is used as the three factors which will be further investigated.
The quality of the results aggregated from the three preference aggregation rules
will also be evaluated. This is done with a empirical experiment where groups
of adolescents will be used in order to evaluate the three rules in a realistic
environment.
6.1
Empirical Performance Test
Each preference aggregation rule will be tested with a set of alternatives. We
will compare how the number of operations, runtime and memory usage of the
preference aggregation rules increases as the set of alternatives increases.
We have implemented our own version of each of the three preference aggregation
rules.
Thus, the test results may be inﬂuenced by this.
All three rules are
implemented in Java. However, some negative eﬀects are included in this choice
as explained in the following section.
==PAGE:69==
6.1 Empirical Performance Test
61
6.1.1
Java Memory Issue
In Java the programmer cannot control the garbage collector.
Hence, the
garbage collector may choose to start at an arbitrary time, which in worst case
can be during a performance test. Therefore, the performance test results can
be deceiving. Section C.1 describes the problem in further details.
However, Java also suﬀers from a problem regarding the precision of a systems
memory usage. Java cannot detect memory usage diﬀerences which are approx-
imately less than 2MB. A further explanation of the problem can be found in
Section C.2.
6.1.2
’Fairness’ in Performance Tests
In order to avoid giving one preference aggregation rule an advantage over an-
other during the performance tests, all proﬁles are random generated. Schulze
is not aﬀected by the proﬁle in use. However, Ranked Pairs is heavily aﬀected
by the proﬁle due to the necessity of detection cycles as described in Section
4.1.2.1. If the proﬁle does not contain any cycles, the entire graph is traversed.
Nevertheless, whenever a cycle is detected the traversal is terminated. Thus, a
proﬁle containing cycles will lead to cut oﬀand therefore a faster traversal of
the graph.
The tests are executed from sets of alternatives ranging from 3 to 500. A test
for a speciﬁc amount of alternatives is conducted a total of 21 times. These
tests are run sequentially in the order of Schulze, Ranked Pairs and Kemeny-
Young. This means that the ﬁrst test starts out executing Schulze 21 times with
a set of 3 alternatives. The same process is completed for Ranked Pairs and
Kemeny-Young (in that order) before the set of alternatives increases. The set
of alternatives will increment by 1 from 3 to 30 as this amount of alternatives is
within a realistic environment [Film, 2017]. Afterwards, the set of alternatives
increment by 10 from 40 to 500 in order to investigate the potential scalability
of the three preference aggregation rules.
This test ﬂow is preferred in order to gain precision as the median value is chosen
as the reference point for number of operations, runtime and memory usage.
This is necessary since the randomization of all proﬁles can lead to skewed results
as well as the java memory problems discussed in Section 6.1.1.
==PAGE:70==
6.1 Empirical Performance Test
62
Figure 6.1: Boxplot representation of
the
runtime
of
Ranked
Pairs with 500 alterna-
tives in ms
Figure 6.2: Boxplot representation of
the
runtime
of
Schulze
with 500 alternatives in
ms
Figure 6.1 shows that the data is positively skewed, as can be seen from the
position of the median value. Figure 6.2 shows how outliers can skew the data
as well. The mean value is vulnerable to skewed data and outliers and may not
express an actual "typical" value. Thus, the median value has been chosen to be
used for the performance tests, in order to gain higher precision of the results.
The pairwise comparison matrix described in Algorithm 2 is used by all three
preference aggregation rules as explained in Section 4.1.1.3, 4.1.2.3 and 4.1.3.3.
The pairwise comparison matrix is generated dynamically in a realistic sce-
nario. As a user has inputted and submitted a vote the procedure is initiated.
This means that unless all users submit their vote concurrently this procedure
becomes insigniﬁcant. Due to these reasons the generation of the pairwise com-
parison matrix is not included in the performance tests.
==PAGE:71==
6.1 Empirical Performance Test
63
6.1.3
Preference Aggregation Rule Benchmarking
In this section the results from the benchmarks of the tree preference aggregation
rules will be presented. All benchmarks have been conducted on the same device.
• Lenovo T440s
• Intel Core i7-4600U 2.1GHz Processor
• 12GB ram
• 500GB SSD
6.1.3.1
Number of operation from 3 to 30 alternatives.
The ﬁrst presented benchmark will be a comparison of the number of operations
used in Schulze, Ranked Pairs and Kemeny-Young. The benchmark will include
sets of alternatives ranging from 3 to 30.
Figure 6.3: Number of operations of Schulze, Ranked Pairs and Kemeny-
Young from Table B.1 in Appendix B illustrated.
(Note The
y-axis is in millions)
==PAGE:72==
6.1 Empirical Performance Test
64
Figure 6.3 is relatively misleading as there seems to be no diﬀerence between
the three rules until 9 alternatives is reached. However, looking at the raw data
from Table B.1 it can be seen that Kemeny-Young is 2 orders of magnitude
larger than Schulze at 6 alternatives, and that the gap increases to 3 orders of
magnitude at 7 alternatives.
In Section 4.1.1.3 it was determined that the time complexity of Kemeny-Young
is factorial to the number of alternatives whereas both Schulze and Ranked Pairs
are polynomial. This explains the fast growth of Kemeny-Young compared to
Schulze and Ranked Pairs.
On Table B.1 it can be observed that at 10 alternatives the number of opera-
tions of Schulze, Ranked Pairs and Kemeny-Young is 855, 242 and 163.296.000
respectively. This shows that Kemeny-Young does not contain the same poten-
tial regarding scalability compared to Schulze and Ranked Pairs.
6.1.3.2
Runtime from 3 to 30 alternatives
Here, the runtime of Schulze, Ranked Pairs and Kemeny-Young will be investi-
gated. The sets of alternatives will range from 3 to 30.
In Section 5.2 it was suggested that the chosen preference aggregation rule ought
to be on a server environment instead of on the client. Thus, scalability becomes
a higher priority as several instances must be able to run concurrently.
Due to this it was deemed necessary to deﬁne a time limit (or threshold) which
must not be passed in order to be deﬁned as acceptable. The chosen time limit
is set to be 0.5 seconds (500ms)
==PAGE:73==
6.1 Empirical Performance Test
65
Figure 6.4: Runtime of Schulze, Ranked Pairs and Kemeny-Young from Table
B.3 in Appendix B illustrated.
Figure 6.4 looks almost identical to that of Figure 6.3. The reasoning behind
this is also similar. It seems that the runtime of all three preference aggregation
rules are similar until 9 alternatives is reached.
However, the illustration is
misleading to the extreme runtime of Kemeny-Young at 10 alternatives.
From table B.3 in Appendix B it can be observed that the runtime of Schulze
and Ranked Pairs is steady at 8ms and Kemeny-Young is ﬂuctuating at approx-
imately 20ms until 8 alternatives is reached. From this point and onwards to 10
alternatives the runtime of Kemeny-Young increases substantionally compared
to Schulze and Ranked Pairs who preserve their runtime of 8ms. The runtime
of Kemeny-Young at 8 alternatives increases to 52ms and at 9 alternatives it
increases to 312ms. These runtimes are both within the limit of acceptable.
However, at 10 alternatives the runtime of Kemeny-Young is approximately 4.5
seconds which is far outside the limits of acceptable.
6.1.3.3
Memory Usage from 3 to 30 alternatives
In this section the observations regarding the memory usage of Schulze, Ranked
Pairs and Kemeny-Young will be discussed. Recall that Section 6.1.1 describes
==PAGE:74==
6.1 Empirical Performance Test
66
certain restrictions and obstacles that are included in Java which may inﬂuence
the benchmark results.
Figure 6.5: Memory usage of Schulze, Ranked Pairs and Kemeny-Young from
Table B.5 in Appendix B illustrated.
The memory usage of Schulze and Ranked Pairs is 1MB for all cases where the
set of alternatives ranges from 3 to 30. A possible explanation for the invariant
results is described in Section 6.1.1. However, observing the memory usage of
Kemeny-Young was not as problematic due to its factorial relation to the number
of alternatives. As can be seen in Table B.5 the memory usage of Kemeny-Young
is 1MB until the set of alternatives increases to 8. At 8 alternatives the memory
usage of Kemeny-Young is 8MB, followed by 70MB at 9 alternatives and ends
with 421MB at 10 alternatives.
We have not set a speciﬁc threshold for the memory usage of an acceptable
preference aggregation rule. However, it must be remembered that we do rec-
ommend to run the application on a server environment. Therefore, factors such
as the speciﬁc hardware in use are delimiters for the chosen rule.
From the benchmarks of the three preference aggregation rules ranging with
alternatives from 3 to 30 it has been determined that Kemeny-Young is deemed
==PAGE:75==
6.1 Empirical Performance Test
67
unacceptable due to passing the limit set for the runtime.
This does not necessarily exclude Kemeny-Young as a possible contender as it
is still acceptable below an amount of 9 alternatives. Thus, other factors such
as theoretical advantages must be included in the comparison to Schulze and
Ranked Pairs.
6.1.3.4
Number of operations from 40 to 500 alternatives
As Kemeny-Young has exceeded the limit of an acceptable runtime, it is excluded
from further benchmarks. The subsequent results will only include Schulze and
Ranked Pairs. These will be benchmarked against sets of alternatives ranging
from 40 to 500 in order to investigate their potential scalability. The tests will
be conducted under the same conditions as the previous benchmarks and as
described Section 6.1.2.
Figure 6.6: Number of operation of Schulze and Ranked Pairs from Table B.2
in Appendix B illustrated. (Note the y-axis is in millions)
Figure 6.6 shows the diﬀerence in number of operations between Schulze and
Ranked Pairs, compared to Figure 6.3 where they seemed almost identical. The
diﬀerence lies in that the slope illustrating the number of operations of Ranked
==PAGE:76==
6.1 Empirical Performance Test
68
Pairs is steeper than the one of Schulze. However, this diﬀerence is to be ex-
pected as the theoretical time complexity of Schulze is O(n3) whereas Ranked
Pairs is O(n4) as explained in Section 4.1.2.3 and 4.1.3.3.
The theoretical time complexity of Ranked Pairs is higher than that of Schulze.
Ranked Pairs executes fewer operations than Schulze until approximately 70 al-
ternatives as can be seen in Table B.2. This can be caused by several factors one
of which is described in Section 6.1.2. Due to this, Ranked Pairs could poten-
tially perform better than Schulze, especially with smaller sets of alternatives.
Figure 6.7 shows the observed number of operations of the Schulze and Ranked
Pairs as well as their theoretical time complexity. When comparing the number
of operations executed by Schulze and Ranked Pairs with their theoretically
time complexity, it is clear that Schulze and Ranked Pairs indeed follow their
theoretically time complexity. In order to show that Ranked Pairs grow with
a tendency of n4, we had to divide n4 by a constant. By trial and error we
found a constant of 60 was suitable for showing that Ranked Pairs grow with
a tendency of n4. For Schulze it was not necessary to multiply or divide n3 by
any constant as it is already close to n3.
Figure 6.7: Comparison of the number of operations and theoretical time com-
plexity of both Schulze and Ranked Pairs. (Note the y-axis is in
millions)
==PAGE:77==
6.1 Empirical Performance Test
69
6.1.3.5
Runtime from 40 to 500 alternatives
This section will further investigate the runtime of Schulze and Ranked Pairs
according to the same criteria as described in Section 6.1.3.2.
Figure 6.8: Runtime of Schulze And Ranked Pairs from Table B.4 in Appendix
B illustrated.
As can be seen on Figure 6.8 Ranked Pairs has an equal or slower runtime than
Schulze throughout all tests up to 500 alternatives.
Table B.4 shows that Ranked Pairs has a runtime of 475ms at 190 alternatives,
which is within the limit of an acceptable time. However, at 200 alternatives
Ranked Pairs surpasses the limit of 500ms with a runtime of 581ms.
At the breaking point of 200 alternatives for Ranked Pairs, Schulze has a runtime
of 39ms. At the end of the tests Schulze ends with a runtime of 474ms at 500
alterntives, which is still within the acceptable limit. This means that the tests
could be continued for Schulze, however, as the investigation was to compare
the three preference aggregation rules this was not pursued further.
This evidently shows that the investigation regarding scalabilty results in Schulze
being superior than that of Ranked Pairs as well as Kemeny-Young in regards
of runtime.
==PAGE:78==
6.1 Empirical Performance Test
70
6.1.3.6
Memory Usage from 40 to 500 alternatives
We just determined that Schulze is the most prominent contender of the three
aggregation rules in regards of runtime. However, this section will investigate
the memory usage of Schulze and Ranked Pairs in order to include these results
in the comparison.
Figure 6.9: Memory usage of Schulze and Ranked Pairs from Table B.6 in
Appendix B illustrated.
Figure 6.9 shows that the memory usage of Schulze is relatively stable and by
inspecting Table B.6 it can be seen that Schulze used approximately 1MB in
all tests. However, the memory usage of Ranked Pairs was completely sporadic
without any speciﬁc relation to the amount of alternatives. A possible explana-
tion for this occurrence has been described in Section 6.1.1.
In order to illustrate the general tendency of the memory usage of Ranked Pairs
in relation to the amount of alternatives, a trend line has been added. From
the trend line it becomes more clear that the general tendency of Ranked Pairs
does increase in relation to the amount of alternatives. Although, relatively to
Schulze it uses a noticeable higher amount of memory, which hurts the overall
scalability in regards to memory usage. Thus, the investigation concludes that
Schulze is the superior preference aggregation rule in relation to memory usage.
In the overall assesment of the three preference aggregation rules in regards of
number of operations, runtime and memory usage, the Schulze rule is deemed to
be the most prominent contender. Schulze is superior or equal to both Ranked
Pairs and Kemeny-Young in runtime and memory usage throughout all test
==PAGE:79==
6.2 Empirical Experiment
71
cases.
However, it is necessary to include theoretical advantages and actual user feed-
back (user satisfaction) to conclude on which exact rule is the most suitable.
Thus, empirical experiments including the audience has been conducted and the
results based on these experiments will be shown in Section 6.2.
6.2
Empirical Experiment
In the empirical performance test, we tested Schulze, Ranked Pairs and Kemeny-
Young with alternatives ranging from 1 to 500 alternatives which is irrelevant
for the users. In a realistic domain the amount of alternatives would most likely
be at a range from 3 to 30 [Film, 2017]. The amount of alternatives is reduced
by several factors, such as the speciﬁc date, which cinema to go to and which
movies the cinema oﬀer etc.
Thus, an empirical experiment is conducted to investigate the user satisfaction
of the three preference aggregation rules in a realistic environment.
6.2.1
Description of the Experiment
The experiment was conducted at two diﬀerent schools in order to investigate
the preference aggregation rules on diﬀerent ages within the age group of the
audience. The ﬁrst experiment was conducted at the highschool Sukkertoppen
on class 1.ø, where the adolescents are around 16 years old. The adolescents
were divided into 5 groups with 5 in each of the groups.
The second experiment was conducted at the middleschool Frydenhøj on class
8.b, where the adolescents were around 14 years of age. This class had less
pupils than the 1.ø class, thus, they were divided into 4 groups with 4 in each
of the groups (one group were 5).
The experiment was carried out by the adolescents answering speciﬁc surveys1.
First, the adolescents individually deﬁned their own preferences of 9 movies.
If necessary, they were allowed to research information regarding the movie.
They were forced to do a strict ordering of the movies due to implementation
limitations. These limitations are explained later in Section 7.2.
Secondly, the groups were formed and had to deﬁne a strict preference ordering
of the movies together.
1Follow the readme ﬁle, included in the project zip ﬁle, to ﬁnd the unanswered and answered
surveys
==PAGE:80==
6.2 Empirical Experiment
72
During the group discussions each individual’s preference orderings was used to
run Schulze, Ranked Pairs and Kemeny-Young. Afterwards, each individual was
asked to grade and explain their level of satisfaction regarding the aggregated
preference ordering of the group and the suggested preference orderings of the
three preference aggregation rules.
6.2.2
Evaluation of results
This section will evaluate the feedback given by the test subjects. The analyze
of the feedback will occur in two sections.
The ﬁrst section will be an evaluation including the Kendall tau distance [Kendall, 1938,
Kendall, 1948]. The Kendall tau distance counts the number of pairwise dis-
agreements between two permutations and uses this to determine their diﬀerence
by expressing it in a normalized value. The Kendall tau distance will be used
in order to determine the relative diﬀerence between the preference ordering of
a group and the suggested preference ordering of Schulze, Ranked Pairs and
Kemeny-Young accordingly.
The second section will be an evaluation regarding whether the test subjects
would watch the movie chosen by each of the three preference aggregation rules.
The evaluations will also include our own observations as possible explanations
to certain results. These will be observations that were not included on writ-
ing, but were observed by following the test subjects during their process of
completing the surveys.
However, it must be stated that these comments merely are observations that
were noticeable by the overseers during the experiments. The sample size of the
experiment is relatively small and can therefore not be used for any conclusive
results.
6.2.2.1
Kendall Tau Distance
This section will present the Kendall tau distance between the preference order-
ings of the groups and the suggested preference orderings of the three preference
aggregation rules.
Table 6.1 and 6.2 contains the average Kendall tau distances for Schulze, Ranked
Pairs and Kemeny-Young. The tables presented are derived from the tables
which can be found in Section B.2.1 and B.2.2 in Appendix B.
==PAGE:81==
6.2 Empirical Experiment
73
Sukkertoppen
Kendall tau distance
Schulze
0.15
Ranked Pairs
0.18
Kemeny-Young
0.16
Table 6.1: The average normalized Kendall tau distances of all groups from
Sukkertoppen, class 1.ø
Frydenhøj
Kendall tau distance
Schulze
0.28
Ranked Pairs
0.33
Kemeny-Young
0.32
Table 6.2: The average normalized Kendall tau distances of all groups from
Frydenhøj, class 8.b
From Table 6.1 and 6.2 it can be observed that the average Kendall tau dis-
tances of the three preference aggregation rules from Frydenhøj middleschool
are generally higher than that of Sukkertoppen highschool.
The least suitable rule for the test subjects in 1.ø is the Ranked Pairs rule with
a Kendall tau distance of 0.18.
Whereas the most suitable rule for the test
subjects in 8.b is the Schulze rule with a Kendall tau distance of 0.28. This
shows that the most suitable rule for the test subjects in 8.b has an ordering
of the movies which is approximately
50% more diﬀerent compared to the
ordering of the movies for the least suitable rule for the test subjects in 1.ø.
The increase in diﬀerence between the preference ordering of the group and the
suggested preference orderings of the preference aggregation rules may possibly
come from the age gap between the test subjects.
It was observed by the overseers of the experiment that the older test subjects
prioritized fellowship and solidarity high, whereas the process was more sporadic
for the younger test subjects. This could possibly show a more direct relation
between the majority (or democratic) properties of the preference aggregation
rules and the older test subjects (Sukkertoppen 1.ø), than the younger test
subjects (Frydenhøj 8.b).
==PAGE:82==
6.2 Empirical Experiment
74
6.2.2.2
Satisfaction
Table 6.3 and 6.4 show how many percentage of the test subjects who would
watch the movie chosen by Group, Schulze, Ranked Pairs and Kemeny-Young.
The results are obtained from the tables in Section B.2.1 and B.2.2 in Appendix
B.
Sukkertoppen
Would Watch Movie
Group
100%
Schulze
100%
Ranked Pairs
92%
Kemeny-Young
96%
Table 6.3: Percentage of how many test subjects at Sukkertoppen 1.ø who
would watch the suggested movie.
Frydenhøj
Would Watch Movie
Group
87.5%
Schulze
87.5%
Ranked Pairs
87.5%
Kemeny-Young
81.25%
Table 6.4: Percentage of how many test subjects at Frydenhøj 8.b who would
watch the suggested movie.
The general tendency between the results of Sukkertoppen 1.ø and Frydenhøj
8.b in Section 6.2.2.1, also applies to these satisfaction results.
The older test subjects (Sukkertoppen 1.ø) generally seem more satisﬁed with
the suggested movie of the group, Schulze, Ranked Pairs and Kemeny-Young
compared to the younger test subjects (Frydenhøj 8.b).
This supports the comments from Section 6.2.2.1 which states that preference
aggregation rules are relatively more suitable for the older spectrum of the
audience in the experiment.
It can also be observed from Table 6.3 and 6.4 that the test subjects are equally
or more satisﬁed with the suggested movie of the group compared to all three
preference aggregation rules. Only the movies suggested by Schulze matches
the user satisfaction of the movies suggested by the group in both experiments.
This might indicate that Schulze is superior to the other preference aggregation
rule in regards to user satisfaction.
==PAGE:83==
6.2 Empirical Experiment
75
Having no preference aggregation rule which oﬀers a more satisfying result than
what the group can derive on their own might imply that the ﬁnal application
must oﬀer other beneﬁcial properties in order to be used by the audience.
==PAGE:84==
Chapter 7
Discussion and future work
In this chapter we will discuss the background behind the areas we have investi-
gated in this paper. This discussion touches upon the more philosophical aspect
behind the thesis. It will also be mentioned how this has impacted the project
by being a positive goal to strive for as well as a detrimental obstacle.
We will also discuss whether or not these choices were correct according to the
knowledge we have obtained at this point. Here, we will disregard the more
philosophical questions and look into which properties or choices that could (or
should) be changed in the future to gain a more relevant end result.
7.1
’Fairness’
Throughout the entirety of Chapter 3 we investigated certain properties that
were deemed necessary in order for a preference aggregation rule to be satisfy-
ing.
However, the question that lies within, is: Why are exactly these speciﬁc prop-
erties deemed necessary, while others are not?
The answer to this question does not exist within literature.
Social choice
theory is a vast ﬁeld of subject. It has been explored throughout many past
==PAGE:85==
7.2 Implementation Improvements
77
centuries and will likely be so many centuries to come. In current time there
exist of plethora of preference aggregation rules belonging to each of the electoral
systems; approval, plurality, range and ranked voting.
Each author’s motivation to investigate a speciﬁc area within social choice theory
may lie within their individual philosophical view of ’fairness’. ’Fairness’ is a
big aspect within social choice theory and many rules are often described as
being more ’fair’ compared to others. However, is there a speciﬁc deﬁnition of
’fairness’ in this sense and if so what is it.
This investigation of ’fairness’ is far outside the scope of this paper, yet, a very
important aspect to be raised.
Due to this philosophical aspect, all preference aggregation rules ought to be
viable contenders and should be investigated. However, this is not a small task
to take up and does not seem possible in reality. Thus, to avoid this problem,
we reduced the ﬁeld of study by establishing certain criteria for the rules.
This paper is based upon the research from Nordisk Film [Film, 2016] who in-
vestigated the important factors behind groups of adolescents when determining
a cinema trip. This investigation concludes that solidarity is the uttermost im-
portant aspect as fellowship weighs higher than personal gain.
Due to this we deemed that preference aggregation rules favoring the will of the
collective (as many as possible) was a high priority. The theory behind the rules
should also be supported by a mathematical background in order to be provable
such that ambiguity and subjective opinions were completely disregarded.
Thus, we decided to further investigate Condorcet methods and assess these in
comparison to our personal understanding and view of ’fairness’. Nevertheless,
we also compare the methods to non-subjective properties such as the level of
compliance with a given set of axioms.
7.2
Implementation Improvements
In Section 5.1 we discussed how iteration (2) should allow for a weak ordering of
the alternatives. The three preference aggregation rules described in this thesis
all supports the use of weak orderings. However, the current iteration of the
prototypes only allow strict orderings of the alternatives.
The reason behind this is that the main focus of the prototype was to determine
the viability of the three rules. Thus, to quickly acquire a functional prototype
==PAGE:86==
7.2 Implementation Improvements
78
to perform the benchmark tests and experiment the necessity of weak orderings
were relatively negligible. A detrimental eﬀect caused by this was that the test
subjects of the experiment were required to strictly order the movies.
Having to order every single movie can become cumbersome in a real life sce-
nario, where there can be more than 20 movies to choose from. It also means
that no two alternatives can be ranked as equals. Some users might want to
express that there are two movies that they would like to see equally.
A later iteration of the prototype should include the possibility of a weak order-
ing of the movies. Nevertheless, this would require changes to the user interface
as well as speciﬁc implementation which will not be discussed within this paper.
It must also be stated that tie breaking within the current iteration of the
prototype occurs by random.
The pairwise comparison matrix described in
Algorithm 4.1.2.2 can contain the same value for the sets where the same to
alternatives are included, such that A[i, j] ≈A[j, i]. In this case it is random
whether alternative i or j is deemed the more preferable alternative.
However, to include all theoretical properties described by the authors of each
preference aggregation rule, the speciﬁc tie breaking method is important. The
speciﬁc method to be applied should be in accordance with the statements of
the authors, often referred to within their paper.
If the reader’s interest is peaked in regards to how tie breaking is dealt with in
Schulze and Ranked Pairs these methods are described in [Schulze, 2011] and
[Tideman, 1987] respectively.
==PAGE:87==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
The problem of this paper is that groups of adolescents ﬁnd the process of
deciding on going to the cinema burdensome. There are too many factors to
include which increases the responsibility of deciding. Thus, the process often
ends with the trip to the cinema being canceled.
Therefore, the purpose of this paper is to investigate whether social choice or
decision making can be used in order to relieve the adolescents of responsibility.
Both social choice and decision making are vast domains combining many diﬀer-
ent ﬁeld of studies. Although not equal, some intersection does occur between
the domains. Preference aggregation, a sub domain to social choice, as well
as MCDM, a sub domain to decision making, both addresses the act of group
decision making.
The result of this investigation lead to preference aggregation being superior to
MCDM, for this speciﬁc purpose. The argumentation behind this is that AHP
(the MCDM method we examined) required too much work from the users in
order to output a reasonable result. Changes could be made to ease the process
of AHP, however, the precision of the end result would be lowered by these
changes.
Thus, we discarded the idea of applying a MCDM method in the application
==PAGE:88==
80
and continued the investigation of preference aggregation. This investigation
lead us into comparing empirical test data as well as empiric experiment data of
three preference aggregation rules; Kemeny-Young, Ranked Pairs and Schulze.
The empiric performance test show that the Kemeny-Young rule has the worst
results of the three rules. Due to the factorial relation to the number of movies.
However, the Kemeny-Young rule does contain certain theoretical properties
which might have made it more suitable for the audience. For this reason, the
Kemeny-Young rule was still included in the investigation to determine whether
the advantages outweighed the disadvantages.
The Ranked Pairs rule and Schulze rule are much closer to each other in regards
to runtime and memory usage. At a realistic amount of movies, which is in
the range of 3 to 30, both the Ranked Pairs rule and Schulze rule are within
the time limit set for being acceptable. Ranked Pairs does use substantially
more memory, however, this is a decision that must be dealt with according to
the hardware that is being used. As the set of movies increases, the Schulze
rule becomes more superior compared to the others. This might show that the
Schulze rule is the most suitable rule in regards to scalability.
The empiric experiment was conducted in order to determine validity and user
satisfaction of the three rules. The analysed data shows that more than 80%
of the test subjects in 8.b from Frydenhøj were satisﬁed with the the output
of the three rules. The test subjects in 1.ø from Sukkertoppen were more than
90% satisﬁed. This might indicate that preference aggregation rules are more
suitable for the older spectrum in the audience. Although the test subjects were
more satisﬁed with the Schulze rule compared to the other two, they were all
close.
It must be stated that the sample size of the empiric experiment was of a small
scale. Therefore, it cannot be used as a conclusive suggestion.
In addition to this, strategic manipulation has been an important aspect through-
out the paper. Theoretically there are certain advantages of having a rule which
is less vulnerable to manipulation. However, the audience is groups of adoles-
cents between 12-19 deciding upon going to the cinema. Therefore, it can be
discussed whether the probability of strategic manipulation to occur is high
enough to require the necessity of countermeasures that simply increase the
complexity of the application.
==PAGE:89==
Appendix A
Mathematical Calculations
A.1
Multi Criteria Decision Making - Calcula-
tions
Each element in a row in Table 4.10 (Genre) multiplied with each other and
taking the n-th root, where n is the amount of elements in a row.
(1 ∗3 ∗9)(1/3) = 3
(1/3) ∗1 ∗5)(1/3) = 1.1856311015
(1/9) ∗(1/5) ∗1)(1/3) = 0.28114422176
The eigenvalues are normalized by dividing each element with the sum of all the
elements.
3/(3 + 1.1856311015 + 0.28114422176) = 0.67162545301
1.1856311015/(3 + 1.1856311015 + 0.28114422176) = 0.26543334188
0.28114422176/(3 + 1.1856311015 + 0.28114422176) = 0.0629412051
==PAGE:90==
A.1 Multi Criteria Decision Making - Calculations
82
The same process is following in the other cases. This is made from Table 4.11
which is the Playtime criteria.
(1 + 5 + 7)(1/3) = 2.35133468772
((1/5) + 1 + (1/2))(1/3) = 1.19348319193
((1/7) + 2 + 1)(1/3) = 1.46478836034
2.35133468772/(2.35133468772 + 1.19348319193 + 1.46478836034) = 0.46936517065
1.19348319193/(2.35133468772 + 1.19348319193 + 1.46478836034) = 0.23823892233
1.46478836034/(2.35133468772 + 1.19348319193 + 1.46478836034) = 0.29239590701
This is made from the Table 4.12 (Seat Comfort)
(1 + (1/3) + 5)(1/3) = 1.85016636764
(3 + 1 + 4)(1/3) = 2
((1/5) + (1/4) + 1)(1/3) = 3.50785979754
1.85016636764/(1.85016636764 + 2 + 3.50785979754) = 0.25144873449
2/(1.85016636764 + 2 + 3.50785979754) = 0.27181202609
3.50785979754/(1.85016636764 + 2 + 3.50785979754) = 0.4767392394
This is made from Table 4.13 (Travel Time)
(1 + 5 + 5)(1/3) = 2.22398009057
((1/5) + 1 + (1/9))(1/3) = 1.09449344768
((1/5) + 9 + 1)(1/3) = 2.16870288525
==PAGE:91==
A.1 Multi Criteria Decision Making - Calculations
83
2.22398009057/(2.22398009057 + 1.09449344768 + 2.16870288525) = 0.40530500915
1.09449344768/(2.22398009057 + 1.09449344768 + 2.16870288525) = 0.19946387052
2.16870288525/(2.22398009057 + 1.09449344768 + 2.16870288525) = 0.39523112031
This is made from Table 4.14 (Price)
(1 + 1 + 3)(1/3) = 1.70997594668
(1 + 1 + (1/2))(1/3) = 1.3572088083
((1/3) + 2 + 1)(1/3) = 1.49380158219
1.70997594668/(1.70997594668 + 1.3572088083 + 1.49380158219) = 0.37491363057
1.3572088083/(1.70997594668 + 1.3572088083 + 1.49380158219) = 0.29756914578
1.49380158219/(1.70997594668 + 1.3572088083 + 1.49380158219) = 0.32751722363
This is made from Table 4.15 (Criteria vs Criteria matrix) which has dif-
ferent dimensions than the previous matrices. However, the procedure of calcu-
lating the eigenvector and normalizing the values is the same.
(1 + 5 + 7 + (1/3) + 9)(1/5) = 1.86118999637
((1/5) + 1 + 5 + 3 + 5)(1/5) = 1.70003424151
((1/7) + (1/5) + 1 + 2 + 7)(1/5) = 1.59561498119
(3 + (1/3) + (1/2) + 1 + 5)(1/5) = 1.57957463894
((1/9) + (1/5) + (1/7) + (1/5) + 1)(1/5) = 1.10587345594
==PAGE:92==
A.1 Multi Criteria Decision Making - Calculations
84
1.86118999637/(1.86118999637 + 1.70003424151 + 1.59561498119 + 1.57957463894
+1.10587345594) = 0.23732744311
1.70003424151/(1.86118999637 + 1.70003424151 + 1.59561498119 + 1.57957463894
+1.10587345594) = 0.21677785746
1.59561498119/(1.86118999637 + 1.70003424151 + 1.59561498119 + 1.57957463894
+1.10587345594) = 0.20346295886
1.57957463894/(1.86118999637 + 1.70003424151 + 1.59561498119 + 1.57957463894
+1.10587345594) = 0.20141759358
1.10587345594/(1.86118999637 + 1.70003424151 + 1.59561498119 + 1.57957463894
+1.10587345594) = 0.14101414697
The decision matrix on Table 4.19 is calculated by dividing each element in
a column with the maximum entry of that column. The numbers used can be
seen on Table 4.18.
0.67162545301/0.67162545301 = 1
0.26543334188/0.67162545301 = 0.39521036716
0.0629412051/0.67162545301 = 0.09371474058
0.46936517065/0.46936517065 = 1
0.23823892233/0.46936517065 = 0.50757690861
0.29239590701/0.46936517065 = 0.62296038414
0.25144873449/0.4767392394 = 0.52743452543
0.27181202609/0.4767392394 = 0.57014821442
0.4767392394/0.4767392394 = 1
0.40530500915/0.40530500915 = 1
0.19946387052/0.40530500915 = 0.49213275438
0.39523112031/0.40530500915 = 0.97514491898
==PAGE:93==
A.1 Multi Criteria Decision Making - Calculations
85
0.37491363057/0.37491363057 = 1
0.29756914578/0.37491363057 = 0.
0.32751722363/0.37491363057 = 0.87358046473
The corresponding eigenvector and ﬁnal preferential results are calculated as
has been previously mentioned. This can be observed on Table 4.20
1 ∗0.23732744311 + 1 ∗0.21677785746
+0.52743452543 ∗0.20346295886 + 1 ∗0.20141759358
+1 ∗0.14101414697 = 0.90385043026
0.39521036716 ∗0.23732744311 + 0.50757690861 ∗0.21677785746
+0.57014821442 ∗0.20346295886 + 0.49213275438 ∗0.20141759358
+0.79370052597 ∗0.14101414697 = 0.53087694109
0.09371474058 ∗0.23732744311 + 0.62296038414 ∗0.21677785746
+1 ∗0.20346295886 + 0.97514491898 ∗0.20141759358
+0.87358046473 ∗0.14101414697 = 0.68034660299
==PAGE:94==
Appendix B
Test results
==PAGE:95==
B.1 Analytic test results
87
B.1
Analytic test results
Alternatives
Ranked Pairs
Schulze
Kemeny-Young
3
10
15
18
4
19
42
144
5
31
90
1200
6
55
165
10800
7
78
273
105840
8
115
420
1128960
9
176
612
13063680
10
242
855
163296000
11
340
1155
12
465
1518
13
624
1950
14
753
2457
15
939
3045
16
1192
3720
17
1501
4488
18
1879
5355
19
2337
6327
20
2680
7410
21
3294
8610
22
3941
9933
23
4518
11385
24
5590
12972
25
6368
14700
26
7617
16575
27
8747
18603
28
9502
20790
29
11864
23142
30
13221
25665
Table B.1: Number of operations of Schulze, Ranked Pairs and Kemeny-Young
from 3 to 30 alternatives. (Kemeny-Young is terminated after 10
alternatives)
==PAGE:96==
B.1 Analytic test results
88
Alternatives Ranked
Pairs
Schulze
40
41180
61620
50
94137
121275
60
204627
210630
70
386378
335685
80
644238
502440
90
1057468
716895
100
1593171
985050
110
2376430
1312905
120
3366494
1706460
130
4536590
2171715
140
6118367
2714670
150
8277225
3341325
160
10395712
4057680
170
13154854
4869735
180
17105742
5783490
190
20843992
6804945
200
25446234
7940100
210
32019356
9194955
220
38316748
10575510
230
44772034
12087765
240
52934015
13737720
250
63326756
15531375
260
74847052
17474730
270
85590432
19573785
280
100280440
21834540
290
115504270
24262995
300
130469671
26865150
310
147926022
29647005
320
169615283
32614560
330
189857786
35773815
340
215508250
39130770
350
247503352
42691425
360
273204056
46461780
370
305505822
50447835
380
341873204
54655590
390
377771598
59091045
400
412888194
63760200
410
462958732
68669055
420
512444520
73823610
430
561078687
79229865
440
610605433
84893820
==PAGE:97==
B.1 Analytic test results
89
450
674638991
90821475
460
727823134
97018830
470
803985837
103491885
480
872967712
110246640
490
940934502
117289095
500
1028892100
124625250
Table B.2: Number of operations of Schulze and Ranked Pairs from 40 to 500
alternatives.
Alternatives
Ranked Pairs
Schulze
Kemeny-Young
3
8
8
14
4
8
8
12
5
8
8
25
6
8
12
16
7
8
8
21
8
8
8
52
9
8
4
312
10
8
8
4612
11
8
8
12
8
8
13
8
8
14
8
8
15
8
8
16
8
8
17
8
8
18
8
8
19
8
8
20
8
8
21
8
8
22
8
8
23
8
8
24
8
8
25
8
8
26
8
8
27
8
8
28
8
8
29
8
8
30
8
4
Table B.3: Runtime in milliseconds of Schulze, Ranked Pairs and Kemeny-
Young from 3 to 30 alternatives. (Kemeny-Young is terminated
after 10 alternatives)
==PAGE:98==
B.1 Analytic test results
90
Alternatives Ranked
Pairs
Schulze
40
15
13
50
19
20
60
20
13
70
28
12
80
28
14
90
44
15
100
57
19
110
77
17
120
98
21
130
139
25
140
197
28
150
197
31
160
217
24
170
296
27
180
402
31
190
475
34
200
581
39
210
709
43
220
858
49
230
1021
55
240
1207
61
250
1423
69
260
1682
79
270
1858
84
280
2205
92
290
2496
101
300
2852
110
310
3171
119
320
3699
131
330
4254
141
340
4701
152
350
5188
167
360
5872
179
370
6394
194
380
7250
209
390
7802
225
400
8754
241
410
9574
259
420
10372
278
430
11482
297
440
12762
321
==PAGE:99==
B.1 Analytic test results
91
450
13883
342
460
15381
374
470
16688
392
480
18246
418
490
19671
448
500
21071
474
Table B.4: Runtime in milliseconds of Schulze and Ranked Pairs from 40 to
500 alternatives.
Alternatives
Ranked Pairs
Schulze
Kemeny-Young
3
1
1
1
4
1
1
1
5
1
1
1
6
1
1
1
7
1
1
1
8
1
1
8
9
1
1
70
10
1
1
421
11
1
1
12
1
1
13
1
1
14
1
1
15
1
1
16
1
1
17
1
1
18
1
1
19
1
1
20
1
1
21
1
1
22
1
1
23
1
1
24
1
1
25
1
1
26
1
1
27
1
1
28
1
1
29
1
1
30
1
1
Table B.5: Memory usage in MB of Schulze, Ranked Pairs and Kemeny-Young
from 3 to 30 alternatives. (Kemeny-Young is terminated after 10
alternatives)
==PAGE:100==
B.1 Analytic test results
92
Alternatives Ranked
Pairs
Schulze
40
1
1
50
2
1
60
3
1
70
4
1
80
6
1
90
9
1
100
11
1
110
14
1
120
18
1
130
15
1
140
18
1
150
23
1
160
28
1
170
33
1
180
39
1
190
14
1
200
3
1
210
12
1
220
21
1
230
17
1
240
13
1
250
24
1
260
17
1
270
26
1
280
18
1
290
18
1
300
23
1
310
22
1
320
20
1
330
19
1
340
17
1
350
12
1
360
23
1
370
23
1
380
22
0
390
24
1
400
22
1
410
29
0
420
30
0
430
24
1
440
28
1
==PAGE:101==
B.1 Analytic test results
93
450
27
1
460
19
1
470
31
1
480
29
1
490
31
1
500
26
1
Table B.6: Memory usage in MB of Schulze and Ranked Pairs from 40 to 500
alternatives.
==PAGE:102==
B.2 Empirical Experiment - Test Results
94
B.2
Empirical Experiment - Test Results
The tables from Table B.7 through to B.15 show the results from the experiment.
The experiment was conducted on the highschool class 1.ø from Sukkertoppen
and the middleschool class 8.b from Frydenhøj.
Each table contain the Kendall tau distance from the suggested movie ordering
of the three preference aggregation rules to the movie ordering of the group.
The Watch Movie column describes if members of the group would want to see
the suggested movie. A value of 1 refers to a member of the group who would
see the suggested movie, a 0 means the opposite and each member’s subjective
answer is comma separated.
B.2.1
Sukkertoppen test results
Kendall Tau
Watch Movie
Group
1,1,1,1,1
Schulze
0.25
1,1,1,1,1
Ranked Pairs
0.25
1,1,1,1,1
Kemeny
0.2222222222
1,1,1,1,1
Table B.7: Group 1 test results from Sukkertopen 1.ø
Kendall Tau
Watch Movie
Group
1,1,1,1,1
Schulze
0.08333333333
1,1,1,1,1
Ranked Pairs
0.1666666667
1,1,1,1,1
Kemeny
0.1111111111
1,1,1,1,1
Table B.8: Group 2 test results from Sukkertopen 1.ø
Kendall Tau
Watch Movie
Group
1,1,1,1,1
Schulze
0.1388888889
1,1,1,1,1
Ranked Pairs
0.1388888889
1,1,1,1,1
Kemeny
0.1388888889
1,1,1,1,1
Table B.9: Group 3 test results from Sukkertopen 1.ø
==PAGE:103==
B.2 Empirical Experiment - Test Results
95
Kendall Tau
Watch Movie
Group
1,1,1,1,1
Schulze
0.2222222222
1,1,1,1,1
Ranked Pairs
0.2222222222
1,1,1,1,1
Kemeny
0.2222222222
1,1,1,1,1
Table B.10: Group 4 test results from Sukkertopen 1.ø
Kendall Tau
Watch Movie
Group
1,1,1,1,1
Schulze
0.05555555556
1,1,1,1,1
Ranked Pairs
0.1388888889
1,0,1,0,1
Kemeny
0.1111111111
1,1,1,0,1
Table B.11: Group 5 test results from Sukkertopen 1.ø
B.2.2
Frydenhøj test results
Kendall Tau
Watch Movie
Group
0,1,1,1
Schulze
0.4722222222
0,1,1,1
Ranked Pairs
0.4166666667
0,1,1,1
Kemeny
0.3888888889
0,1,1,1
Table B.12: Group 1 test results from Frydenhøj 8.b
Kendall Tau
Watch Movie
Group
1,1,1,1
Schulze
0.2777777778
1,1,1,1
Ranked Pairs
0.1388888889
1,1,1,1
Kemeny
0.2222222222
1,1,0,1
Table B.13: Group 2 test results from Frydenhøj 8.b
==PAGE:104==
B.2 Empirical Experiment - Test Results
96
Kendall Tau
Watch Movie
Group
1,1,1,1
Schulze
0.1111111111
0,1,1,1
Ranked Pairs
0.2777777778
1,1,1,1
Kemeny
0.2777777778
0,1,1,1
Table B.14: Group 3 test results from Frydenhøj 8.b
Kendall Tau
Watch Movie
Group
0,1,1,1
Schulze
0.2777777778
1,1,1,1
Ranked Pairs
0.5
0,1,1,1
Kemeny
0.3888888889
1,1,1,1
Table B.15: Group 4 test results from Frydenhøj 8.b
==PAGE:105==
Appendix C
Test precaution
C.1
Garbage Collector
As a test is being executed the garbage collector may arbitrarily start deleting
unused objects. This will give the program more free memory to use. The result
of this is that a performance test with more alternatives can show as using less
memory than the performance test with a fewer amount of alternatives.
In order to avoid that the garbage collector start during a performance test,
certain preventative means were used. The garbage collector is told to run prior
to every test case. However, this does not necessarily mean that the garbage
collector is certain to run or free memory. The System.gc method merely sug-
gests to the Java Virtual Machine to recycle the unused objects [Oracle, 2017c].
It can therefore not be guaranteed that the garbage collector has been executed
or increased the free memory.
It was also investigated if the automatic garbage collector could be terminated.
However, this was not a possibility [Oracle, 2017d].
==PAGE:106==
C.2 Memory Detection Precision
98
C.2
Memory Detection Precision
The memory usage of a preference aggregation rule is calculated as being the
free memory usage before running, subtracted from the memory usage after
running the performance test.
When executing the performance tests, it was noticeable that the memory usage
was 0MB in most cases.
We decided to investigate the matters further but could not ﬁnd an oﬃcial
source discussing the details of this problem. However, we did ﬁnd others with
similar issues.
One of these persons investigated the problem by conduncting an experiment1.
Throughout the experiment it was noticed that Java was not able to detect a
diﬀerence in memory usage unless that diﬀerence was at least 2,5MB.
1https://stackoverﬂow.com/questions/17374743/how-can-i-get-the-memory-that-my-java-
program-uses-via-javas-runtime-api
==PAGE:107==
Bibliography
[Arrow, 1950] Arrow, K. J. (1950). A diﬃculty in the concept of social welfare.
Journal of political economy, 58(4):328–346.
[Arrow, 2012] Arrow, K. J. (2012).
Social choice and individual values, vol-
ume 12. Yale university press.
[Bartholdi et al., 1989] Bartholdi, J., Tovey, C. A., and Trick, M. A. (1989).
Voting schemes for which it can be diﬃcult to tell who won the election.
Social Choice and welfare, 6(2):157–165.
[Belton and Gear, 1983] Belton, V. and Gear, T. (1983). On a short-coming of
saaty’s method of analytic hierarchies. Omega, 11(3):228–230.
[Black, 1976] Black, D. (1976). Partial justiﬁcation of the borda count. Public
Choice, 28(1):1–15.
[Condorcet, 1785] Condorcet, M. d. (1785). Essay on the application of analysis
to the probability of majority decisions. Paris: Imprimerie Royale.
[Conitzer et al., 2006] Conitzer, V., Davenport, A., and Kalagnanam, J. (2006).
Improved bounds for computing kemeny rankings. In AAAI, volume 6, pages
620–626.
[Coulouris et al., 2005] Coulouris, G. F., Dollimore, J., and Kindberg, T.
(2005). Distributed systems: concepts and design. pearson education.
[Film, 2016] Film, N. (2016). Young audience: Workshop. Nordisk Film pro-
prietary & conﬁdential slides.
[Film, 2017] Film, N. (2017). Nordisk ﬁlm biografer. https://www.nfbio.dk.
==PAGE:108==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
100
[Floyd, 1962] Floyd, R. W. (1962). Algorithm 97: shortest path. Communica-
tions of the ACM, 5(6):345.
[Gibbard, 1973] Gibbard, A. (1973). Manipulation of voting schemes: a general
result. Econometrica: journal of the Econometric Society, pages 587–601.
[Kemeny, 1959] Kemeny,
J. G. (1959).
Mathematics without numbers.
Daedalus, 88(4):577–591.
[Kendall, 1938] Kendall, M. G. (1938).
A new measure of rank correlation.
Biometrika, 30(1/2):81–93.
[Kendall, 1948] Kendall, M. G. (1948). Rank correlation methods. Griﬃn.
[Knudsen, 2016] Knudsen, L. R. (2016). Cryptology 1. Lecture Notes.
[Lai et al., 2002] Lai, V. S., Wong, B. K., and Cheung, W. (2002).
Group
decision making in a multiple criteria environment: A case using the ahp in
software selection. European Journal of Operational Research, 137(1):134–
144.
[List, 2013] List, C. (2013). Social choice theory. In Zalta, E. N., editor, The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford
University, winter 2013 edition.
[Majumder, 2015] Majumder, M. (2015). Impact of urbanization on water short-
age in face of climatic aberrations. Springer.
[Oracle, 2017a] Oracle (2017a). Class arraylist. https://docs.oracle.com/
javase/6/docs/api/java/util/ArrayList.html.
[Oracle, 2017b] Oracle (2017b). Class collections. https://docs.oracle.com/
javase/7/docs/api/java/util/Collections.html.
[Oracle, 2017c] Oracle (2017c).
Class system.
https://docs.oracle.com/
javase/7/docs/api/java/lang/System.html.
[Oracle, 2017d] Oracle
(2017d).
Java
garbage
collection
basics.
http://www.oracle.com/webfolder/technetwork/tutorials/obe/java/
gc01/index.html.
[Saaty, 1977] Saaty, T. L. (1977). A scaling method for priorities in hierarchical
structures. Journal of mathematical psychology, 15(3):234–281.
[Saaty, 1994] Saaty, T. L. (1994). How to make a decision: the analytic hierarchy
process. Interfaces, 24(6):19–43.
[Saaty and Peniwati, 2013] Saaty, T. L. and Peniwati, K. (2013). Group deci-
sion making: drawing out and reconciling diﬀerences. RWS publications.
==PAGE:109==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
101
[Satterthwaite, 1975] Satterthwaite, M. A. (1975). Strategy-proofness and ar-
row’s conditions: Existence and correspondence theorems for voting proce-
dures and social welfare functions. Journal of economic theory, 10(2):187–217.
[Schulze, 2003] Schulze, M. (2003). A new monotonic and clone-independent
single-winner election method. Voting matters, 17(1):9–19.
[Schulze, 2011] Schulze, M. (2011). A new monotonic, clone-independent, rever-
sal symmetric, and condorcet-consistent single-winner election method. Social
Choice and Welfare, 36(2):267–303.
[Tangian, 2000] Tangian, A. S. (2000). Unlikelihood of condorcet’s paradox in
a large society. Social Choice and Welfare, 17(2):337–365.
[Tideman, 2006] Tideman, N. (2006). Collective decisions and voting: the po-
tential for public choice. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd.
[Tideman, 1987] Tideman, T. N. (1987). Independence of clones as a criterion
for voting rules. Social Choice and Welfare, 4(3):185–206.
[Triantaphyllou, 2000] Triantaphyllou, E. (2000). Multi-criteria decision making
methods. In Multi-criteria decision making methods: A comparative study,
pages 5–21. Springer.
[Triantaphyllou and Mann, 1995] Triantaphyllou, E. and Mann, S. H. (1995).
Using the analytic hierarchy process for decision making in engineering ap-
plications: some challenges. International Journal of Industrial Engineering:
Applications and Practice, 2(1):35–44.
[Young and Levenglick, 1978] Young, H. P. and Levenglick, A. (1978). A con-
sistent extension of condorcet’s election principle. SIAM Journal on applied
Mathematics, 35(2):285–300.
