==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Master Thesis 
 
Modelling of performance of PV/T Systems 
 
 
 
Ramón Gero Ciudad 
Department of Civil Engineering 
 
 
Supervisors: 
Simon Furbo (Associate professor) 
Mark Dannemand (Postdoc) 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
1 
 
Abstract 
 
The introduction of clean and renewable energy production methods is one of the most important challenges 
nowadays, due to the depletion of fossil fuels and the increasing global pollution. An increase of the profitability 
and efficiency of these energy sources is needed in order to improve their competitiveness. In this sense, solar 
energy is one of the main environmentally compatible renewable energy sources, and it can be used directly in 
the two main forms of energy demand, heat and electricity. 
Recent research has been made in photovoltaic-thermal systems (PV/T), which are a combination of solar thermal 
and photovoltaic devices, being able to generate both electricity and heat simultaneously. One of the main aims 
of this technology is to cool down the PV cells inside the panel, with the consequently improvement of the 
electrical efficiency of the PV module, as well as collecting the absorbed thermal energy for heating purposes. 
Regarding that households are one of the main sources of energy demand, and its energy consumption is composed 
of both heat and electricity, these PV/T systems are a suitable solution in order to supply the energy demand in 
buildings, taking maximum advantage of the available surface in roofs or walls.  
One of the key challenges to integrate this technology in the market is to develop a reliable model of the thermal 
and electrical performance of the PV/T panel, in order to predict its output taking into account the operating 
conditions. 
With this aim, the final objective of this project is to develop well founded models for tested PVT panels in terms 
of cooling, heating and PV operation, as well as evaluating the panel performance for different operating 
conditions and pointing out the advantages of PV/T panels over single PV modules or solar collectors. 
A summary of the main features and advantages of these systems has been developed as an introduction in the 
first chapter of this thesis. Continuedly, a review of the obtained knowledge from previous studies has been 
presented so as to have a wide overview of the already developed work. In the third chapter, a study of the detailed 
characteristics and operating principles of these panels has been presented. 
Based on experimental measurements obtained in the test facilities at Technical University of Denmark (DTU), 
the performance expressions of tested collectors have been found for different operation modes. In terms of 
heating performance, a QDT test method has been used to derive the coefficients for the PVT panel model by a 
Multiple Linear Regression. The results achieved show that the efficiency of the collector without electrical output 
is higher than the efficiency of the collector with connected PV. Regarding the cooling performance, some 
theoretical approaches has been evaluated, as well as a modified QDT model for night conditions and a qualitative 
study of the effect of rain in the panel performance. Moreover, a study of the electrical performance of the module 
has been carried out, checking the temperature dependence of the efficiency. This study discusses the validation 
of all the proposed methods by comparing predicted to measured results. 
As a final point, a wide study of a real solar heating installation currently operating in Denmark has been 
developed. A simulation with Polysun has been performed to evaluate the behavior of a real PV/T installation that 
supplies electricity, space heating and hot water to a Sports Club located in Stenløse. This study is carried out 
with the aim of evaluating the PV/T panel performance in a real application and determining the suitability of this 
kind of technology for common building consumption necessities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
2 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
Firstly, I would like to thank my supervisors Simon Furbo and Mark Dannemand for his great help, constructive 
feedback and advices, and patience. 
Thanks to RACELL Technologies for his assistance and the opportunity of testing their cutting-edge technology. 
My deepest gratitude goes to my parents for their long-distance encouragement and their invaluable support in 
every stage of my life. I am also very grateful to my friends and their daily aid and companionship. 
Moreover, I want to express my gratitude to the relatives who are no longer among us, especially to my beloved 
grandfather Lucio and my dear aunt Juani, who I know that are very proud wherever they are.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
3 
 
Contents 
 
1. 
Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 5 
2. 
State of the art ................................................................................................................................. 6 
3. 
PV/T panel .................................................................................................................................... 11 
3.1. 
Solar collector ....................................................................................................................... 11 
3.2. 
PV Module ............................................................................................................................ 13 
4. 
Method .......................................................................................................................................... 16 
4.1. 
Experimental setup ................................................................................................................ 16 
4.2. 
Measurements ....................................................................................................................... 18 
4.3. 
Characterization models ........................................................................................................ 19 
5. 
Test results .................................................................................................................................... 25 
5.1. 
Heating .................................................................................................................................. 25 
5.2. 
Cooling .................................................................................................................................. 40 
5.3. 
Electricity (PV) ..................................................................................................................... 44 
6. 
Discussion of results ..................................................................................................................... 51 
7. 
Real installation simulation ........................................................................................................... 53 
7.1. 
Description of the installation ............................................................................................... 53 
7.2. 
Simulation results .................................................................................................................. 55 
8. 
Conclusions ................................................................................................................................... 61 
9. 
References ..................................................................................................................................... 62 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
4 
 
Nomenclature 
 
Ti  
 
inlet temperature [°C] 
To  
 
outlet temperature [°C] 
Tm  
 
mean temperature [°C] 
Tamb 
 
ambient temperature [°C] 
Tc 
 
cell temperature [°C] 
𝑇𝑠𝑘𝑦 
 
sky temperature [°C] 
𝑇𝑐𝑁𝑂𝐶𝑇 
normal conditions cell operating 
temperature [°C] 
Gtot 
 
total radiation [W/m2] 
Gd 
 
diffuse radiation [W/m2] 
Cp 
 
specific heat [J/kgK] 
ρ 
 
density [kg/m3] 
𝑉̇  
 
volumetric flow [m3/s] 
𝑄ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑡 
 
heating power [W] 
x 
 
weight concentration [%] 
η 
 
efficiency [-] 
A 
 
total collector area [m2] 
𝐸𝐿 
downwards longwave radiation 
[W/m2] 
Θ 
incident angle of the beam 
irradiance [°] 
U 
 
wind speed [m/s] 
𝐹′(𝜏𝛼)𝑒𝑛 
peak collector efficiency [-] 
𝐾𝜃(𝜃) 
incident 
angle 
modifier         
(Steady State) [-] 
𝐾𝜃𝑏(𝜃) 
incident angle modifier for beam 
irradiance [-] 
𝐾𝜃𝑑 
incident angle modifier for diffuse 
irradiance [-] 
𝑐1 
heat 
loss 
coefficient 
at                   
(Tm - Ta)=0 [W/m2K] 
𝑐2 
temperature dependence on the 
heat loss coefficient [W/m2K2] 
𝑐3 
wind speed dependence on the 
heat loss coefficient [J/m3K] 
𝑐4 
sky temperature dependence on 
the heat loss coefficient [W/m2K] 
𝑐5 
effective 
thermal 
capacity 
[kJ/m2K] 
𝑐6 
wind speed dependence on the 
peak efficiency [s/m] 
𝑑𝑇𝑚
𝑑𝑡 
time derivative of the mean fluid 
temperature [K/s] 
𝑏0 
parameter for the characterization 
of the incident angle modifier of 
the beam irradiance [–] 
𝜎  
Stefan–Boltzmann constant 
[W/m2K4] 
𝜀 
emissivity [-] 
𝛽 
tilt angle [°] 
ℎ𝑐 
convection coefficient [W/m2K] 
ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑓 
reference convection coefficient 
[W/m2K] 
𝑐𝑤𝑖𝑛𝑑 
convection coefficient wind 
dependence [J/m3K] 
𝐼𝑆𝐶 
short circuit current [A] 
FF  
 
fill factor [-] 
𝑉𝑂𝐶 
 
open circuit voltage [V] 
𝑃𝑚 
electrical power for the 
maximum power point [W] 
𝛽𝑟𝑒𝑓 
 
temperature coefficient [K-1] 
γ 
 
Solar radiation coefficient [-] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
5 
 
1. Introduction 
 
In modern times, energy is one of the main factors of human activities, as it is considered a key demand in 
economy nowadays. In fact, the progress of a country is often measured by its energy consumption. 
Regarding this, energy issues will probably be one of the hardest challenges worldwide in future, if it is not 
already. These challenges are composed of increasing energy demand in all its shapes, and consequent increase 
in pollution and scarcity of resources. As energy demand increases, fossil fuels, which are the major used energy 
source, are being depleted at the same rate. Moreover, the use of this kind of non-renewable sources should be 
stopped in order to maintain safety global average temperatures and diminish the climate change effect. 
Regarding this problem, the introduction of clean and renewable energy production methods is one of the main 
solutions, as these environmental-friendly energy sources are promising candidates to fix this critical phenomenon 
our society is facing.  
In order to facilitate the integration of these renewable sources it is necessary to increase the profitability and 
efficiency of these energy production methods, improving their competitiveness.  
In this sense, solar energy is one of the main environmentally compatible renewable energy sources, and it is also 
freely available on earth and virtually unlimited. Moreover, radiation from the Sun can be used directly in the two 
main forms of energy demand, electricity and heat.  
Solar technologies can be classified in two main categories regarding their output energy sort, electricity or heat: 
- 
Photovoltaic systems: convert directly the absorbed radiation into electricity by means of the 
photovoltaic effect. 
 
- 
Solar thermal systems: capture heat from the incident radiation and convert it in thermal energy by 
increasing the temperature of a working fluid. 
The successful use of these solar energy systems is highly dependent on their efficiency, as well as cost and 
reliability. Therefore, the role of researchers that are always pursuing improvements in solar energy efficiency is 
a key factor for the integration of these technologies. 
In terms of electrical efficiency in PV cells, the electrical output of a PV module is affected by its temperature. 
As an example, 1 K increase of the operating temperature of the cell will have as a consequence a reduction 
between 0.25% and 0.5% in the produced power. 
Another type of solar energy system can be considered from the merging of above mentioned technologies. These 
photovoltaic-thermal systems (PV/T) are a combination of solar thermal and photovoltaic devices, being able to 
generate both electricity and heat simultaneously. This means that PV/T systems have a multifunctional design, 
being also used for thermal insulation when they are building integrated. 
One of the main aims of this technology is to cool down the PV cells inside the panel, with the consequently 
improvement of the electrical efficiency of the PV module, as well as collecting the absorbed thermal energy for 
heating purposes. 
One of the main sources of energy demand are households, constituting about 30% of total Danish final energy 
consumption, and its energy consumption is composed of both heat and electricity demand (A total of 83% of the 
final energy consumption of households is spent on heating, and the remaining 17% on household appliances).  
Regarding this, these PV/T systems are a suitable solution in order to supply the energy demand in buildings, 
taking maximum advantage of the available surface in roofs or walls.  
One of the key challenges to integrate this technology in the market is to develop reliable models for performance 
prediction of the PV/T panel. This is the aim of European standards and The Solar Keymark, which serve as 
guideline and rule for the standardization and characterization of solar collectors. 
==PAGE:8==
6 
 
2. State of the art 
 
There is an extensive literature about PV/T collectors and their performance in terms of thermal and electrical 
output since 1980. However, it has not been widely implemented in commercial terms due to many uncertainties, 
besides high costs. In the last years a renovated interest in this kind of technology has raised, most of it due to the 
extensive research that has been made in order to improve the efficiency and lower costs of these installations. 
The aim of this project is to give a clearer view of the advantages of these systems in order to facilitate a path for 
the commercialization of PV/T panels. In this chapter a summary of the obtained knowledge from previous studies 
will be presented so as to have a wide overview of the already developed work. 
Many of these research projects were aimed to model the PVT panels operation and predict the performance of 
different kinds of designs. Some of the main discussion topics are the model parameters, the difference between 
cover and uncovered PV/T collectors, optimum flow rates and absorber geometry, conductivity between all the 
parts of the panel and design types.  
These issues are extensively discussed in the review of the technology made by Charalambous in 2007 [1]. This 
study pointed out that coverless collectors produces the largest total exergy, adding both electrical and thermal 
output. It tells also that the electrical and thermal performance of normal PV or solar collectors is higher than that 
of a PV/T panel, but the total energy per surface area of two PV/T together is higher than the one collected from 
the set of a PV panel next to a solar collector. Some of the parameters that are identified to affect the PV/T 
performance are flow rate, inlet temperature of the fluid, absorber conductivity and plate geometric design. An 
electrical-to-thermal energy ratio was used from different calculation methodologies in order to compare the 
exergies from electrical and thermal output. It was stated that the more realistic method was the renewable energy 
market based one, with a ratio of 4.24. 
Several concepts and designs for PVT collectors are discussed in the study from Fortuin in 2014 [2]. This work 
presents test results for different improvements in PVT prototypes, as well as future research needs in used 
materials and construction, e.g. temperature resistance of PV components, electrical isolation, new solutions for 
heat transfer improvement between PV and absorber, etc. 
One of the main advantages of these combi panels is the lower temperature achieved in the cell. This issue and 
the influence of the collector fluid temperature on the electrical efficiency improvement have been widely studied 
in recent reports.  
An analytical expression for the temperature dependent electrical efficiency is developed in the work of Shyam 
in 2015 [3]. It considers a deep study of the thermal balances between the different components that form the 
panel in order to calculate the cell temperature. Two different configurations of PVT panels partially covered by 
PV are analysed in this study, one with the module at the lower portion and another at the upper portion, giving 
nearly same results for moderate flow rates.  
This PVT design (partially covered by PV) was also studied by Zakharchenko in 2004 [4], as well as a comparison 
of the performance of different PV technologies and thermal contact materials between absorber and cell in this 
configuration, pointing out the necessity of a special design in order to extract heat from the PV cell efficiently. 
The overview from Hamid in 2014 [5] highlighted the better electrical efficiency achieved by the PV/T panels 
because of the heat extraction from the module. Moreover, an extensive review of the different technologies that 
can be used for each part of the panel is performed in this report, expressing that the combination of liquid and air 
heat collectors covers the limitations of each technology, having the liquid type a better operation with favourable 
weather conditions.   
A historical review is developed by Kumar in 2015 [6], focusing on systems with the main purpose of extracting 
heat from the photovoltaic module, with the resulting efficiency increase. In this report all the attractive features 
of these systems are presented, as well as a wide collection of remarks on previous studies. The limitation of the 
commercial integration of such systems is introduced, considering the reliability of the product and high costs.  
==PAGE:9==
7 
 
In term of solar collector’s performance characterization, the European Standard specifies test methods in order 
to determine the efficiency of solar collectors. This standard includes two different methods, the steady-state and 
the quasi-dynamic tests. 
In term of these standards the study from Fischer and Perers in 2004 [7] gives a wide overview of the different 
models used, describing the different terms of Steady-State and Quasi-dynamic test methods, as well as the 
different conditions that must be fulfilled for both methods. Moreover, coefficient results for both methods are 
presented for different panels, showing that the peak collector efficiency determined by the Steady-State method 
is slightly lower than the quasi-dynamic one, maybe because the incident angle and diffuse radiation fraction were 
greater than the Steady-State limitations for the studied test. 
More conclusions about the differentiation between both models and their compatibility can be extracted from 
Petterson (2015) [8] and Osório (2012) [9]. From Petterson it is presented an approach to solve the compatibility 
problem between both methods. This is made by means of the calculation of QDT missing parameters from the 
Steady-State ones. The study from Osório gives an overview about the optical and thermal characterization of 
solar collectors, as well as explain the Multiple Linear Regression method used for data treatment and QDT 
coefficients determination. Many usual values for model coefficients can be extracted from this work, also for 
different collector technologies and designs. 
A deeper characterization of the Quasi-dynamic method for a PVT panel can be observed in another paper from 
Perers (2012) [10], presenting all the equations needed to determine the required variables and coefficients. This 
report also presents a useful expression for the estimation of cell temperature in PVT operation.  
Although these studies are quite useful in order to understand the different characterization methods, all the test 
method requirements should be extracted from the standard, having a useful guide from the Quality Assurance in 
Solar Heating and Cooling Technology available [11]. The standard covers performance, durability and reliability 
testing of almost all collector types, including PVT collectors in its last revision. However, it does not apply to 
the collector’s electrical components. Currently, there is no single standard that includes the solar PV and solar 
thermal aspects of a PVT system, therefore it has to fulfil two series of standards, EN 12975 for solar thermal 
collectors [45] and IEC 61215 [39] for PV modules. 
Other models can be found and validated, as the dynamic linear model developed by Ciabattoni in 2013 [12] in 
which some non-linear equations are presented in order to characterize the state of different panel variables as 
temperatures of different elements.  
Regarding unglazed collectors in specific, there is a deep evaluation of the performance of these systems in the 
report from Keizer in 2016 [13]. In this paper a description of the experimental test for the Steady-State analysis 
is presented, as well as usual results for the variability of panel performance. It is stated that the present interest 
in these PV/T systems is mainly focused on uncovered panels combined with an installation based in a ground 
source and a heat pump. One of the experimental setups performed in this study have close characteristics to the 
one tested in this project, so it will be very helpful in order to compare results. 
More test results can be extracted from the work of Brottier in 2016 [14], also for an unglazed flat-plate design. 
Using a linear model dependent on the temperature difference with ambient for the thermal efficiency of the 
collector, a coefficient between 10.75 and 16.5 W/Km2 is obtained.  
There is a lot of available literature in this sense, analysing the performance of tested PVT collectors, as the one 
from Fudholi in 2014 [15], from which some assumptions of conductivity and absorptance coefficients can be 
extracted. Moreover, some conclusions about the effect of the mass flow rate of the collector fluid on the PVT 
performance are presented, in terms of both electrical and thermal efficiency. These results are plotted in Figure 
1 for a direct flow absorber with inlet temperatures ranging from 50°C to 40°C and a collector area of 0.65 m2. 
==PAGE:10==
8 
 
 
Figure 1: Changes in direct flow absorber efficiency with mass flow rate under 800 W/m2 of solar radiation [15] 
More uncovered panel results can be deducted from the work of Aste in 2016 [16], having a lower peak collector 
efficiency of 0.46 and a lower heat loss coefficient of 6.43 W/Km2 compared with the results from previously 
mentioned papers. In this paper an uncertainty study is carried out, which can serve as an example for the one that 
will be made in this project. A comparison between a covered and an uncovered PVT water collector is assessed 
in another study from Aste in 2017 [17] under energy yield terms (there is no information about the inlet 
temperature as this changes during the year, having a PVT system embedded in a complex heat installation). This 
yearly overall efficiency is calculated as the useful power output proportion from the total incident solar energy 
yield received by the panels. 
 
Figure 2: Yearly overall PVT efficiency and share for covered and uncovered PVT panels [17] 
The obtained results pointed out the similarity of yearly overall efficiency for both designs, but the different share 
of electrical and thermal performances, having the unglazed panel the highest annual electrical efficiency and a 
slightly higher total yield, as it is extracted from Figure 2. 
==PAGE:11==
9 
 
Another comparison of glazed and unglazed PVT collectors’ performance is made by Kim in 2012 [18], pointing 
out the relative lower thermal energy yield and higher electrical performance in the case of uncovered panels. The 
resulting efficiency curves for both thermal and electrical performance can be observed in Figure 3. 
Figure 3: Glazed and unglazed PVT collectors’ thermal and electrical performance [18] 
This researcher has another report evaluating the experimental performance of an unglazed PVT collector [19]. 
The obtained results are highly comparable with the present study, both in electrical and thermal terms. 
In terms of PVT advantages, several researches are focused on benchmarking these systems’ performance against 
the one from commercial solar collectors. The study from Dupeyrat in 2014 [20] is useful in order to compare the 
characterization curves of separate solar thermal collectors with PVT panels, both covered or uncovered. In this 
sense, the results for unglazed PVT determines a peak collector efficiency of 67% and an electrical efficiency of 
11%, compared with a pure thermal mode peak collector efficiency of 76%, as it is presented in Figure 4. 
Simulation results for two different roof designs, one with PV and PVT and another with PV and solar thermal 
collectors, pointed out the higher total exergy produced by the utilization of PVT panels. 
 
Figure 4: Thermal efficiency measurement results from an unglazed PVT in pure thermal mode, hybrid mode and from a 
commercial thermal collector with selective coating [20] 
Regarding night operation, standard methods’ limitations do not allow to model the panel behaviour below a 
certain level of radiation, so theoretical heat transfer models for convection and radiation losses should be used in 
order to predict the performance. Some convection examples can be obtained from Rabadiya’s work in 2012 [21]. 
==PAGE:12==
10 
 
However, some researches propose the QDT model as suitable also for fluid cooling operation. Perers presented 
a study in 2010 [22] for the validation of a dynamic model for both night and day mode, including a term for 
condensation effect in the QDT model. 
Real applications of PVT systems must be studied also, for example for domestic hot water or space heating fluid 
pre-heating. One demonstration system like this is developed and tested in a report by Rommel [23], with unglazed 
PVT collectors and PV modules to compare efficiencies.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:13==
11 
 
3. PV/T panel 
 
A photovoltaic thermal panel (PV/T) is a collector composed by a PV module in front of a solar thermal collector 
[6]. In this sense, both parts will be studied, as well as characterized, as they are the main components of the 
installation. A scheme of the main elements that make up an unglazed PV/T collector can be observed in Figure 
5. 
 
Figure 5: Sectional view of an unglazed water PVT collector [19] 
 
3.1. Solar collector 
The solar collector is the installation component that receives the incident solar radiation and transfers it to the 
heat transfer fluid that flows inside of the panel. Within this kind of collectors, the flat plate collectors are the 
most widely used in domestic applications because of its price-performance relation. These flat plate collectors 
can be distinguished between glazed and unglazed. The unglazed type is used in this work. 
Uncovered or unglazed collectors are usually low-cost units that produce cost-effective solar thermal energy in a 
wide range of applications, such as water preheating for domestic use, heating of swimming pools and space 
heating [24]. These collectors usually have a higher temperature dependent thermal loss coefficient than glazed 
collectors, so they are used in cases where there is a little difference between ambient and operating fluid 
temperature.  
3.1.1. Elements 
The main components of the unglazed flat plate solar collector (Figure 6) are: 
- 
Absorber plate:  
 
It is the element absorbing the incident radiation and transferring it in form of thermal energy to the fluid 
that flows inside. Most of the absorbers are composed of a metallic plate in which the fluid tubes are 
welded. The path followed by the fluid is designed to maximize the heat transfer between plate and 
liquid. Furthermore, the materials used for this element should have a high thermal conductivity.  
 
Two of the main parameters that determine the thermal performance of an absorber plate are the 
absorptivity and the emissivity. In order to improve the capacity of absorbing short-wave radiation and 
decrease the capacity of emitting long-wave radiation the metallic plate is usually submitted to a 
superficial treatment. 
 
- 
Insulation:  
 
To reduce heat losses to the ambient, an insulating material is placed on the back side and laterals of the 
panel, as they are the opaque parts of the collector. The insulation material must have a low thermal 
conductivity, as well as maintain its properties and avoid degradation with heat.  
 
- 
Case:  
 
It is the component that contains all the other elements, including the PV cell in the case of a PV/T panel. 
Its material must be lightweight and resistant to atmospheric agents. Normally it includes a framework 
to contribute with more stiffness to the structure. 
==PAGE:14==
12 
 
 
Figure 6: Cross section view of a flat-plate solar collector [25] 
3.1.2. Operating principle 
Once all the constituent elements of the collector have been defined, the functioning can be explained in a clearer 
and concise way. Its operation principle is mainly based on the greenhouse effect [26] and it can be summarized 
by: 
- 
The solar radiation falls upon the absorber plate surface, after breaking through the PV cell in the PV/T 
case. 
- 
Between the PV cell encapsulant and the absorber surface there is usually an air chamber so as to lower 
the convection losses from the absorber plate. 
- 
Because of the incident radiation, the absorber surface is heated up, and this energy is transferred by 
conduction to the solar collector fluid. 
- 
Radiation losses emitted by the absorber plate are reduced by the low transmittivity for long-wave 
radiation of the PV encapsulant, as these losses comes from reflected radiation that increases its wave 
length. 
- 
In order to lower back and lateral conduction losses a thermal insulation is added to the panel. 
The useful energy collected from a solar collector depends on inlet and outlet fluid temperatures, flow rate, and 
the specific heat of the fluid at test conditions [25]. It can be obtained from Equation 1. 
   𝑄ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑡= 𝑉̇ 𝜌𝐶𝑝(𝑇𝑜−𝑇𝑖)                                                                 (1) 
The specific heat and density of the propylene glycol/water mixture (which is usually used in these applications) 
depends on the fluid temperature and the glycol proportion [27]. For a concentration x (weight %), they can be 
calculated with Equations 2 and 3. 
𝜌= (996.5 + 152.3 ∗10−2 ∗𝑥−96.6 ∗10−4 ∗𝑥2) + (−1.7 −146.1 ∗10−2 ∗𝑥+ 76.7 ∗10−4 ∗
             𝑥2) ∗10−2 ∗𝑇+ (−38.4 + 62.1 ∗10−2 ∗𝑥−30.8 ∗10−4 ∗𝑥2) ∗10−4 ∗𝑇2  [
𝑘𝑔
𝑚3]               (2) 
𝐶𝑝= (4255.5 −985.5 ∗10−2 ∗𝑥−941.7 ∗10−4 ∗𝑥2) + (−168.9 + 843.5 ∗10−2 ∗𝑥−35.0 ∗
        10−4 ∗𝑥2) ∗10−2 ∗𝑇+ (146.5 −79.3 ∗10−2 ∗𝑥−85.3 ∗10−4 ∗𝑥2) ∗10−4 ∗𝑇2  [
𝐽
𝑘𝑔𝐾]      (3) 
In this sense, knowing the incident global radiation, the thermal efficiency of the solar collector can be calculated 
with Equation 4. 
==PAGE:15==
13 
 
𝜂=
𝑄ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑡
𝐺𝑡𝑜𝑡∗𝐴                                                                        (4) 
In order to characterize the solar collector performance at different conditions it is usually to plot the thermal 
efficiency versus (Tm-Tamb)/G, as the one presented in Figure 7, which comes from a tested flat-plate collector. 
 
Figure 7: Efficiency curves depending on (Tm-Tamb)/G [7] 
 
3.2. PV Module 
A PV module is a commercial element consisting of the electrical association of PV cells following a determined 
series-parallel configuration to obtain the wanted voltage and current levels, and prepared for its external 
installation [28]. In the same way, the modules are associated in between until obtaining the desired output power. 
This ensemble is encapsulated so as to be protected from atmospheric agents and contributing with mechanical 
rigidity and electrical isolation.  
There are different existing PV module types depending on the materials, manufacturing methods and final shape. 
Nowadays monocrystalline silicon is the most used material for these cells, as it presents higher performance and 
duration than any other material [29]. 
3.2.1. Elements 
The main components of the monocrystalline flat PV modules (Figure 8), apart from the cell itself, are: 
- 
Front cover:  
 
Element with a high transmittivity in the short-wave radiation range that can be exploited by the PV cell 
(350 to 1200 nm in silicon cell case), and a low reflectivity to take the maximum advantage from incident 
radiation. This layer must have a good waterproofing and stability to long UV exposure, as well as a low 
thermal resistivity, in order to avoid water leakages that can damage the electrical contacts and contribute 
to lower its lifetime. 
 
- 
Encapsulant:  
 
It is used to give attachment between solar cells and front and back cover. It must be composed of a 
waterproof material, as well as thermal fatigue and abrasion resistive. EVA is the most used material for 
this aim.  
 
 
==PAGE:16==
14 
 
- 
Back cover:  
 
It must present a low thermal resistivity and a good waterproofing, usually composed by a Tedlar layer 
attached to the module surface. 
 
- 
Connectors:  
 
The electrical interconnection ribbons are usually made of aluminium or stainless steel, and they are 
welded with two parallel conductors to increase the electrical carriers’ recollection at both faces of the 
cell.  
 
Figure 8: Components of a typical PV module [28] 
3.2.2. Operating principle 
The electrical production of the PV cell is based on the physical phenomenon called “photovoltaic effect”, which 
basically consists on converting the solar light in electrical energy by means of semiconductor elements 
denominated photovoltaic cells. These cells are composed of pure silicon (one of the more abundant elements in 
nature) with the addition of some impurities from different chemical elements (boron and phosphorus). Each cell 
is capable to generate a current between 2 and 4 Amperes, and a voltage between 0.46 and 0.48 Volts, using the 
light irradiance as energy source [28].  
Part of the incident radiation is lost by reflection and another part is lost by transmission. This transmitted fraction 
pass through the PV cell and is the radiation that can be used in the absorber plate to heat the working fluid. The 
rest of the radiation can make electrons jump from one electronic layer to another, creating an electric current 
proportional to the incident radiation 
3.2.3. Photovoltaic installation 
A grid connected PV installation provides a set of equipment, connections, devices and systems that allow its 
connection to grid and its proper functioning [30]. 
In a photovoltaic installation three main functional blocks can be differentiated (Figure 9): 
- 
Generator: comprised by the PV modules and its structure. 
- 
Inverter: responsible of adapting the electrical output from the module characteristics (DC) to the 
required by the grid (AC). 
- 
Electrical grid and connections 
==PAGE:17==
15 
 
 
Figure 9: Schematic representation of a PV system [28] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:18==
16 
 
4. Method 
 
An experimental setup for testing two different PVT modules has been performed at DTU Byg, with the objective 
of developing a building integrated PVT system and modelling its performance. These two panels have been tested 
at DTU during summer and autumn of 2017, analysing both thermal and electrical performance, checking the 
panel functioning with and without PV output to observe the thermal efficiency and performance differences 
between both states.  
 
4.1. Experimental setup 
Two PVT collectors were installed at building 120 at Technical University of Denmark. These two collectors are 
connected in series, this means that the output from one of them corresponds to the input of the other one. Both 
are located in a roof simulating the final building integrated application, with a tilt angle of 45°. In order to model 
the performance of these modules a test has been performed by the experimental setup that can be observed in 
Figure 10. 
 
Figure 10: Schematic diagram of PVT experimental test setup 
The two PVT panels tested (one of 2 m2 and the other of 3 m2) have a rough surface PV laminate of crystalline 
silicon cells in a 1 mm thickness Teflon layer as encapsulant. Below the laminate the aluminium absorber is 
placed, which geometry is different for both panels. The two panels have differently designed absorbers with 
different channels geometry, both without back insulation. A picture of both panels in the test roof is presented in 
Figure 11. The PVT panels are produced by RACELL Technologies. 
==PAGE:19==
17 
 
 
Figure 11: PVT panels placed in the test roof 
The auxiliary system consists of a working pump providing the necessary energy to flow the fluid, and cooling 
and heating systems to simulate the storage and consumption elements and control the collector inlet temperature. 
For the electrical installation a Micro-Inverter from AEconversion has been used to transform the output DC 
power from the PV to AC for the grid connection. The model used is INV350-60, which data-sheet can be 
observed in Table 1, having a peak power of 350 W and an average efficiency (CEC) of 92.3%. 
Type 
INV350-60 
Input 
Maximum PV Power 
350 W 
 
Maximum DC Voltage 
60 V 
 
Min./Max. Start Voltage 
18 V/ 60 V 
 
MPPT Range 
20 V… 50 V 
 
Maximum DC Current 
11 A 
Output 
Maximum AC Power 
330 W 
 
Nominal Current 
1.4 A 
 
Power Factor 
>0.99 
Efficiency 
Peak Inverter Efficiency 
93.5% 
 
CEC Efficiency 
92.3% 
 
Nominal MPP Efficiency 
99.8% 
Table 1: Inverter data sheet 
Measurements were carried out by having the heat transfer fluid continuously circulating in the collector loop day 
and night by means of a pump set to run 24 hours. The heat transfer fluid is a water/propylene glycol mixture 
(40% glycol). The inlet temperature was controlled by a heating unit and a cooling system, setting it to different 
levels (in an interval from 20°C to 40°C) in order to measure the efficiency at different temperature levels. When 
sunny conditions are present, the fluid temperature is increased as it flows through the PVT panels, transferring 
heat to the heat transfer fluid. During the night heat is lost to the ambient (air, ground and sky) and the fluid 
temperature diminishes as it flows through the collectors.  
Moreover, the first panel (2 m2) is connected to an inverter by a set of wires to measure the produced electricity. 
As this is the only panel electrically connected, the difference in thermal performance for both PV and no-PV 
states has been studied for this panel, being disconnected for the August data set and connected for the remaining 
months (September, October and November). 
With temperature and flow data from the test-rig the performance of the PVT panel has been determined taking 
into account the fluid characteristics and conditions. In order to determine the electrical and thermal efficiency of 
the panels, as well as the night cooling potential, the meteorological conditions should be known also. These 
outdoor conditions of radiation and temperature have been obtained from different sensors situated in the same 
roof, collecting measurements from a pyrgeometer, a pyranometer and an anemometer. Data from the climate 
==PAGE:20==
18 
 
station situated in building 119 roof are also used to compare with the obtained measurements and have a higher 
scope of the suitability of the collected data. 
 
4.2. Measurements 
The system is compound of a set of sensors and instruments to measure the conditions of the system and the 
surroundings. 
4.2.1. Temperature 
The temperature of the fluid is measured both at the inlet and outlet of each PVT panel, and the temperature 
difference across each module from thermocouples. 
The thermocouples used in the setup are Type TT formed by a Copper/Constantan junction, having a measurement 
range from -270 °C to 370 °C and a measuring accuracy of ±1 °C or ±0.75%. 
4.2.2. Flow 
The flow rate is measured on the forward pipe by two different technologies, one ultrasonic and other 
electromagnetic, being the electromagnetic induction sensor more reliable and accurate when measuring a glycol-
water mixture, furthermore the utilized data will come from this meter. The induction sensor is from the HGW 
class from Brunata and presents an accuracy of ±3%. A picture of the flow meter installed in the test facility can 
be observed in Figure 12. 
 
Figure 12: Brunata HGW induction flow meter installed in the test tube 
4.2.3. Wind 
A cup-star sensor from Thies Clima (4.3105) situated in the same roof measures the wind velocity of the 
surroundings, having a measuring range from 0.5 to 35 m/s (offset of 0.5 m/s), with a corresponding electrical 
output from 0 to 4.67 mA. The accuracy of this sensor is ±0.5 m/s or <2% of the measured value. However, as 
this sensor only gave sudden steps of 0.5 m/s as output signal, the wind measurements used in the test will be the 
climate station output multiplied by a factor of 0.2, as this is the average value of the signal from the roof sensor. 
A picture of the construction of the sensor is presented in Figure 13. 
 
Figure 13: Cup-star sensor from Thies Clima (4.3105) 
==PAGE:21==
19 
 
4.2.4. Radiation 
The incident total and diffuse solar radiations are measured on the same roof by means of pyranometers, as well 
as a sensor for the ambient temperature. The pyranometers used are the model CM11 from Kipp&Zonen, one with 
a shadow crown in order not to receive the beam radiation. These pyranometers have a response time of less than 
24 s and an error lower than 10 W/ m2. A sketch of CM11 pyranometer construction can be observed in Figure 
14. 
 
Figure 14: Approximate construction of Kipp&Zonen pyranometer CM11 
Infrared radiation is measured from a pyrgeometer just next to the PVT panels, in order to determine the 
downwards long-wave radiation and the net radiation. This is a CG1 pyrgeometer from Kipp&Zonen, with an 
error lower than 20 W/m2. The expression used to calculate the downwards longwave radiation from the output 
voltage signal can be seen in Equation 5. 
𝐸𝐿=
𝑈𝑒𝑚𝑓
𝑆
+ 5.67 ∗10−8 ∗𝑇𝑏
4                                                        (5) 
Being 𝐸𝐿 the downwards longwave radiation, Uemf the output signal from the pyrgeometer, S the calibration 
factor of the sensor (14.04 μV/W/m2) and Tb the body sensor temperature. In Figure 15 it is shown a picture of 
the used pyrgeometer with its sensitivity. 
 
Figure 15: Pyrgeometer with sensitivity 
 
4.3. Characterization models 
Based on analysis of measurements from August to November, and collecting the useful data for different test 
conditions, the PVT panel parameters for the thermal and electrical model have been determined for both modules.  
In this sense, different models have been used to characterise the collector, using the Steady-state and Quasi-
dynamic test models for the thermal performance, the standard temperature dependent efficiency model for the 
electrical output, and theoretical models for cooling performance at night time. 
==PAGE:22==
20 
 
4.3.1. Heating 
The European Standard specifies test methods in order to determine the efficiency of solar collectors. This 
standard includes two different methods, the steady-state and the quasi-dynamic tests. 
The test conditions and permitted deviations for each method [7] are summarized in Table 2. The minimum 
measurement phase depends on the standard used but it is always above 5 min for both steady-state and quasi-
dynamic tests (ISO 9806-1 [31], ASHRAE 93-77 [32]). 
Parameter 
Steady-state 
Quasi-dynamic 
Value 
Deviation 
Value 
Deviation 
G [W/m2] 
>700 
±50 
300<G<1100 
 
Θ [°] 
<20 
 
 
 
Gd/G [%] 
<30 
 
 
 
Tamb [°C] 
 
±1 
 
 
U [m/s] 
3±1 
 
 
 
Tin [°C] 
 
±0.1 
 
±1 
Table 2: Test conditions and permitted deviations 
For both methods the minimum number of outdoor test days will be between 4 and 5 days, corresponding to 4 
different inlet temperature levels. 
4.3.1.1. 
Steady-state test method model 
The steady-state (STS) model is widely used in testing and simulation. The full instantaneous equation for the 
output power in near normal incidence angle conditions is expressed in Equation 6 [7]. 
𝑄= 𝐹′(𝜏𝛼)𝑒𝑛𝐾𝜃(𝜃)𝐺−𝑐1(𝑇𝑚−𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏) −𝑐2(𝑇𝑚−𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏)2 −𝑐5
𝑑𝑇𝑚
𝑑𝑡                      (6) 
Being 𝐹′(𝜏𝛼)𝑒𝑛 the peak collector efficiency of the collector for total radiation at normal incidence angle 
operation, 𝐾𝜃(𝜃) the incidence angle modifier of the peak collector efficiency coefficient, c1 and c2 the 
temperature-dependent heat losses terms, and c5 the thermal capacitance of the panel. 
As it has been pointed out, this method is only suitable for clear and very stable weather conditions. This limits a 
lot the available outdoor test measurements, especially in a changeful climate as the one in the Copenhagen area. 
4.3.1.2. 
Quasi-dynamic test method model 
In the quasi-dynamic approach some of the terms from the steady-state model are maintained, such as c1 and c2 
terms for the temperature-dependent heat losses and c5 for the effective thermal capacitance of the collector. 
However, the peak collector efficiency is detached into two different parts, one for beam radiation and one for 
diffuse radiation, each one with its incident angle modifier. This separation is necessary for long term performance 
calculation, as the one carried out in this project. Moreover, two terms are added for the wind dependency, one 
regarding the effect on the peak collector efficiency (c6) and another for the influence on temperature-dependent 
heat losses (c3). Finally, a term concerning the heat loss dependency on the long wave “thermal” irradiance is 
added (c4). 
The complete quasi-dynamic model can be expressed in Equation 7 [31]. 
𝑄= 𝐹′(𝜏𝛼)𝑒𝑛𝐾𝜃𝑏(𝜃)𝐺𝑏+ 𝐹′(𝜏𝛼)𝑒𝑛𝐾𝜃𝑑𝐺𝑑−𝑐6𝑢𝐺∗−𝑐2(𝑇𝑚−𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏) −𝑐1(𝑇𝑚−𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏)2 −
                                                   𝑐3𝑢(𝑇𝑚−𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏) + 𝑐4(𝐸𝐿−𝜎𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏
4) −𝑐5
𝑑𝑇𝑚
𝑑𝑡                                       (7) 
Being Equation 8 the simplified model for the incident angle dependence modifier [33]: 
𝐾𝜃𝑏(𝜃) = 1 −𝑏0(
1
𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃−1)                                                          (8) 
This QDT model is stated to cover the characterization of most collector types available, including the unglazed 
here tested. The prescribed average time for the measurement intervals in this method is between 5 and 10 min 
[34]. Regarding the suitability of the model, some terms are mandatory to be used in the collector characterization. 
In this sense, 𝐹′(𝜏𝛼)𝑒𝑛, 𝐾𝜃𝑏(𝜃), 𝐾𝜃𝑑 and coefficients c1 and c5 should be identified.  
==PAGE:23==
21 
 
Moreover, it can be stated that c1 and c2 are active absorber surface area dependent. This means that an 
enlargement of the absorber surface could improve the collector performance [22]. 
4.3.2. Cooling 
In order to model the performance in cooling operation condition theoretical models from literature have been 
used to calculate radiation and convection balances. In addition, a predictive model taking the standard QDT 
method measurements as a basis can be performed. 
Data for night cooling power in the PVT panel has been gathered in order to determine a model that predicts the 
behaviour of the collector at night time. This study is necessary as night time losses are not exactly the same as 
during day time. This is especially important for cost optimized flat solar collector absorbers as the one used in 
the test, where the error can be notable when using night data and different loss parameters are needed for day 
and night. 
4.3.2.1. 
Theoretical model (cooling) 
The model for cooling performance can be calculated taking into account the radiation and convection balances. 
There is a lot of literature in this sense about which coefficients to be used in each heat loss process.  
As a first approach to the desired model, a study of the different losses involved has been carried out. First, the 
radiation losses between the panel and the surroundings are determined by Equation 9. 
𝑄𝑟𝑎𝑑=
1
2 (1 + 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝛽) ∗𝜎∗𝜀∗(𝑇𝑐
4 −𝑇𝑠𝑘𝑦
4) +
1
2 (1 −𝑐𝑜𝑠𝛽) ∗𝜎∗𝜀∗(𝑇𝑐
4 −𝑇𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑
4)     (9) 
Where 𝑇𝑐 is the absolute temperature of the collector surface (which is assumed to be the average temperature of 
the fluid 𝑇𝑚), 𝑇𝑠𝑘𝑦 can be calculated from the long wave downwards radiation obtained from the pyrgeometer, β 
is the tilt angle of the panel, and 𝑇𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑 can be taken as the ambient temperature [35]. In this case an emissivity 
of 0.95 will be assumed for both panels [2].  
In addition, the convection losses must be considered, having a convective heat transfer coefficient that is 
supposed to depend on the wind speed for free air convection [36]. This relation can be observed in Equations 10 
and 11. 
𝑄
𝐴= ℎ𝑐(𝑇𝑐−𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏)                                                                  (10) 
ℎ𝑐= ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑓+ 𝑐𝑤𝑖𝑛𝑑∗𝑣𝑤𝑖𝑛𝑑                                                             (11) 
The value of these coefficients has been a wide discussion in heat transfer research, finding a lot of literature about 
it. Some of the approaches [21] are summarized in Table 3, presenting the evolution of the convection coefficient 
with wind speed in Figure 16. 
 
Jurges 
Watmuff 
Test 
href 
5.7 
2.8 
8.55 
Cwind 
3.8 
3.8 
2.56 
Table 3: Convection coefficients for different approaches from literature 
==PAGE:24==
22 
 
 
Figure 16: Variation of hc with wind speed for the different theoretical models 
As it can be observed, coefficients obtained from different studies differ substantially, revealing that there is a 
high uncertainty in convection losses prediction.  
4.3.2.2. 
Predicted model (QDT) 
Besides the theoretical model, a predictive model taking the standard QDT method measurements as a basis can 
be performed. In this sense, the same QDT method as for daytime will be used. However, as there is no incident 
radiation, the net radiation will take a leading role in the model. The QDT model for night cooling can be observed 
in Equation 12. 
𝑄= 𝑐1 ∗(𝑇𝑚−𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏) + 𝑐3 ∗𝑣𝑤𝑖𝑛𝑑∗(𝑇𝑚−𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏) + 𝑐4(𝐸𝐿−𝜎𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏
4) + 𝑐5
𝑑𝑇𝑚
𝑑𝑡            (12) 
The coefficients for this model can be deducted from experimental data. This process can be done through 
different methods, for example multiple linear regression. 
4.3.3. PV  
One of the main advantages of PVT collectors is the possibility of cooling down the panel through the heat transfer 
to the fluid. This is because the solar cell performance increases with decreasing temperature, mainly due to the 
increase in internal recombination rates when the temperature increases [39]. Therefore, cell operating 
temperature plays a main role in the photovoltaic conversion process. 
The fundamental equation of the PV cell performance is Equation 13 [40]. 
𝑃𝑚= 𝐼𝑚𝑉𝑚= (𝐹𝐹)𝐼𝑆𝐶𝑉𝑂𝐶                                                                (13) 
Where FF is the fill factor, Isc is short circuit current, Voc is open circuit voltage and Pm, Im and Vm are the electrical 
characteristics for the maximum power point of the studied cell I-V curve. When temperature increases both Voc 
and FF decreases significantly. This is due to the domination of the electrical properties of the semi-conductor by 
the thermally excited electrons. However, the Isc increases slightly with increasing temperature. Considering all 
these effects the overall efficiency of the cell presents a linear relation with cell temperature as stated in Equation 
14 [40]. 
𝜂𝑐= 𝜂𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓[1 −𝛽𝑟𝑒𝑓(𝑇𝑐−𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓) + 𝛾𝑙𝑜𝑔10(𝐺𝑡𝑜𝑡)]                                          (14) 
In which coefficients 𝛽𝑟𝑒𝑓 and 𝛾 are material dependent properties that define the efficiency changes with 
temperature and solar radiation. The last one is usually neglected, nevertheless a comparison of models with and 
without that coefficient will be performed. 
==PAGE:25==
23 
 
As it was stated before, one of the main advantages of using PVT instead of only PV panels is the possibility of 
lowering the panel temperature with the working fluid that absorbs heat from the module. A study of this effect 
can be done comparing the efficiency when the collector fluid is running and when it is turned off (only PV 
working). This effect will be studied in theoretical terms, with the calculated model, and with experimental data 
gathered from the ongoing PVT test.  
Regarding the theoretical comparison, the standard for PV cells presents an expression for the equivalent cell 
temperature related to electrical characteristics of the cell as the open-circuit voltage [13]. As this information is 
not available for the tested cells, other sources have to be looked for. In this sense, there are several empiric 
equations to relate weather conditions with the cell temperature in a PV panel [41]. One of these relations [42] 
depends on ambient temperature, irradiance conditions, and normal conditions cell operating temperature 
(𝑇𝑐𝑁𝑂𝐶𝑇), which is usually 45°C for this kind of panel, and can be observed in Equation 15. 
𝑇𝑐= 𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏+
(𝑇𝑐𝑁𝑂𝐶𝑇−20)∗𝐺𝑡𝑜𝑡
800𝑊/𝑚2
                                                             (15) 
However, the most accurate expression for the studied research was the one developed by King [43], which has 
also a term depending on actual wind velocity. The expression is presented in Equation 16. 
𝑇𝑐= 0.943𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏+ 0.028𝐺𝑡𝑜𝑡−1.528𝑣𝑤+ 4.3                                    (16) 
For the case of a PV/T system, a deeper study of the thermal balance can be done in order to calculate theoretically 
the actual cell temperature. One of the methods [3] is summarized in Equations 17 and 18, presenting assumptions 
for the heat transfer coefficient between ambient, cell and absorber, as well as for the absorptivity and 
transmissivity of the module. 
𝑇𝑐= 𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏
(𝛼𝜏)1,𝑒𝑓𝑓𝐺𝑡𝑜𝑡+𝑈𝑡𝑐,𝑎𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏−𝑈𝑡𝑐,𝑝𝑇𝑝)
𝑈𝑡𝑐,𝑎−𝑈𝑡𝑐,𝑝
                                           (17) 
(𝛼𝜏)1,𝑒𝑓𝑓= 𝛼𝑐𝜏𝑔𝛽−𝜂𝑐𝜏𝑔𝛽                                                     (18) 
The assumptions made are 0.9 for the cell absorptivity 𝛼𝑐, 0.95 for the transmissivity 𝜏𝑔, a calculated packing 
factor 𝛽 of 0.923, and an average cell efficiency of 14%, taking the c1 coefficient from the QDT model as the 
overall heat transfer coefficient from cell to the ambient from top surface (𝑈𝑡𝑐,𝑎). It is also assumed that the overall 
heat transfer coefficient from cell to absorber (𝑈𝑡𝑐,𝑝) is equal to the conductance (𝐶𝑏𝑜𝑛𝑑), of 150 W/m2K for a flat 
plate PVT [10]. 
Another method by Bengt Perers is presented in Equation 19, having a correction for the temperature drop from 
the absorber to the cell dependent on the absorbed heat by the working fluid (𝑄𝑎𝑏𝑠). 
𝑇𝑐= 𝑇𝑚+
𝑄𝑎𝑏𝑠
𝐴𝑎𝑏𝑠𝐶𝑏𝑜𝑛𝑑                                                             (19) 
A comparison of all the models will be developed in order to decide which suits better to the actual behaviour of 
the panel. 
The experimental comparison can be developed stopping the flow and gathering the data for the electrical output 
from the PV module. 
4.3.4. Parameter identification (Multiple linear regression) 
Multiple linear regression is the most common form of linear regression analysis.  As a predictive analysis, 
multiple linear regression is used to explain the relationship between one continuous dependent variable and two 
or more independent variables [44].  
This is the analysis that will be used to calculate the different models performed in the report (STS, QDT, cooling, 
PV), taking the generated power (electrical or thermal) as the dependent variable. 
4.3.4.1. 
Method 
The required process in order to obtain suitable results for a regression analysis consists in several phases, from 
the preparation of used data until further corrections made after first approaches of the regression. 
==PAGE:26==
24 
 
4.3.4.1.1. 
Scope of the data 
The first step to perform a multiple variable regression is checking if the data gathered for the regression covers 
a large scope for each studied variable. This required scope depends on the studied variable and its limits for 
normal operation conditions. 
4.3.4.1.2. 
Cross-correlation 
The second step consists on checking the cross-correlation between all the parameters. This means plotting the 
relation between all the input parameters to observe if there is any dependency between them, which will lead to 
wrong results in the multiple regression. 
4.3.4.1.3. 
Outliers removal  
The last step to take in order to get suitable results from the multiple linear regression analysis is the pursuit of 
outliers in gathered data, points that are away from the scope or give too high residuals in the first regression 
approach. These points should be removed from the regression analysis, after a deep reasoning in why to neglect 
them. This process can be done before the first regression approach, eliminating intervals with negative efficiency 
or (Tm-Tamb)/G factor for example, and also afterwards, looking for the comparison between predicted values and 
measured values and checking for points that go far away from the observed profile. 
4.3.4.2. 
Results validation 
Once that all the prerequisites for the regression have been checked to be fulfilled, the data analysis tool from 
Microsoft Excel will be used to obtain the statistics and parameters results.  
One of the most important statistics to consider is the R-squared, which measures the suitability of the model 
adjustment. This coefficient can be calculated as the proportion between the explicated variance and the total 
variance, proportion of the variation in the response variable that is explained by the model, and takes values from 
0 to 1. It determines the percentage of the dependent variable that is explained by the regression model. The closer 
its value is to 1, the better the fit of the regression [44]. But this is not always true, as the residuals must be checked 
also (the response can have a good fit but a high error coming up and down from the desired output). Therefore, 
another result should be studied, the standard error of the model, which is the average error between the predicted 
and the real value for the model output.  
Regarding the individual statistics for each independent variable, the p-value is the probability that the explicated 
variance is equal to the non-explicated variance. In general, if the p-value is lower than 0.05 (common alpha level) 
the regression model is accepted to be significant [44]. Another testing that should be performed to check the 
suitability of each variable is the limit values for the chosen confidence level. If the upper value has a different 
sign from the lower value, that variable should not be used in the regression.  
 
4.4. Uncertainty analysis 
Considering the experimental setup and developed measurements, uncertainty sources in modelling and 
experimental activity model have been verificated. A summary of all the tolerances from setup sensors is presented 
in Table 4. 
Variable 
Error 
G [W/m2] 
±10 (±1%) 
T [°C] 
±1 (±0.75%) 
U [m/s] 
±0.5 (±2%) 
EL [W/m2] 
±20 (±2%) 
V [l/h] 
±3% (±3.24 l/h) 
Table 4: Accuracy and tolerances for all the variables measured 
Taking into account these measurement accuracies and the expression for the thermal output of the collector and 
the final models used, a qualitative study of the final uncertainty of the measured and simulated useful power from 
the panel has been carried out. The composed uncertainty for each model variable has been calculated with the 
rules for propagation of uncertainties for the different operations used in the model (addition, subtraction, 
multiplication and division) [16]. 
==PAGE:27==
25 
 
5. Test results 
 
Collecting measurements from the different sensors that conform the setup, the PV/T panel performance has been 
calculated both in thermal and electrical terms. Based on analysis of these results and gathering the useful data 
for different test conditions, the parameters for both thermal and electrical module performance models have been 
determined for both modules. 
A first study of the suitability of the measurements should be done for all the operation modes, checking the scope 
and rationality of the gathered data in order to make proper regression analysis. 
After checking the appropriateness of used experimental measurements, data analysis will be developed to obtain 
the models for the PV/T panel performance. 
 
5.1. Heating 
Obeying the requirements on the test conditions for the steady state method resulted in very few suitable measuring 
periods. This led to trust in the quasi-dynamic test method for the outdoor performance testing of the studied PVT 
collectors. 
5.1.1. Quasi-dynamic Test Method 
In order to obtain the coefficients for the two panels tested, a multiple linear regression analysis was developed 
for the gathered data. The timestep used was 10 min, as it must be higher than the residence time of the fluid 
inside the absorber, which was calculated to be between 4 and 6 min. Each sample point was obtained with average 
values for 10 min intervals of the studied variables. Some days of the available data was not used in the regression 
so as to use them afterwards for the validation of the model. 
5.1.1.1. 
Scope of the data 
The first step to perform a multiple variable regression is checking if the data gathered for the regression covers 
a large scope for each studied variable. For the QDT model, the main variables that have to be checked are the 
efficiency, radiation (total, beam and diffuse), average fluid temperature and its difference with ambient 
temperature, as well as wind velocity. 
Some of these variables and their relationship with thermal efficiency can be observed in the next graphs to study 
if the required scope is covered for the 2 m2 panel first, and then for the 3 m2. 
 
Figure 17: Thermal efficiency depending on (Tm-Tamb)/G for 2 m2 panel 
From Figure 17 it can be observed that the scope for factor (Tm-Tamb)/G is fully covered from 0 to 0.05 for the 
small panel, which is the usual interval used for characterizing this kind of collectors. 
==PAGE:28==
26 
 
 
Figure 18: Thermal efficiency depending on total incidence radiation for 2 m2 panel 
From Figure 18, the total radiation covers all the range from 300 to 1100 W/m2, and it can be observed that the 
efficiency does not depend directly on radiation level. 
 
Figure 19: Thermal efficiency depending on diffuse radiation proportion from total for 2 m2 panel 
The proportion of diffuse radiation also covers a wide spectre, from 10 to 80% of the total radiation, as it can be 
observed from Figure 19. 
 
Figure 20: Thermal efficiency depending on (Tm-Tamb) for 2 m2 panel 
==PAGE:29==
27 
 
Four levels of inlet temperature have been gathered in the test period, from 20°C to 40°C, and a wide spectre is 
covered for the temperature difference between fluid and ambient, as it can be extracted from Figure 20. 
The same process will be carried out for the 3 m2 panel. It has to be reminded that the input fluid to this panel 
comes directly from the output of the 2 m2 panel. 
 
Figure 21: Thermal efficiency depending on (Tm-Tamb)/G for 3 m2 panel 
In case of the big panel, from Figure 21 it can be observed that the range is limited by a (Tm-Tamb)/G factor of 
0.01. This means that the required scope is not fully covered, and this can lead to wrong results for the multiple 
linear regression analysis. In this sense, only a first approach to calculate an estimation of the model will be done, 
but no further studies will be carried out for this panel, as the conditions are not fulfilled.  
This fact can also be observed from the range of the difference between average fluid temperature and ambient 
temperature (Figure 22), where points below a difference of 5K are not covered. This means that lower inlet 
temperatures would be needed for further studies on this panel. 
 
Figure 22: Thermal efficiency depending on (Tm-Tamb) for 3 m2 panel 
For the other variables the same conclusions as with the 2 m2 panel can be obtained, as the required scope is 
covered for all the remaining variables, total and diffuse radiation.  
5.1.1.2. 
Cross-correlation 
The second step consists on checking the cross-correlation between all the parameters. This means plotting the 
relation between all the input parameters in order to observe if there is any dependency between them, which will 
lead to wrong results in the multiple regression. As a starting point, the results for the small panel will be presented. 
==PAGE:30==
28 
 
 
Figure 23: Diffuse radiation depending on total incident radiation for 2 m2 panel 
Regarding diffuse and total radiation, no direct correlation can be observed in Figure 23, having values for diffuse 
radiation mainly below 400 W/m2. 
Also, the relation between total radiation and the difference between average fluid temperature and ambient 
temperature can be observed in Figure 24. This difference is one of the factors that will be used in the regression 
model, hence it is important to be studied in the cross-correlation check. 
 
Figure 24: Temperature difference between fluid and ambient depending on total incident radiation for 2 m2 panel 
From Figure 24 it can be stated that there is no observable dependency between this temperature difference and 
the total radiation for the small panel. This will lead to reliable results in the regression analysis in this sense. 
This dependency is much higher for the big panel as it will be showed. Results for the 3 m2 panel are presented in 
the next figure. 
==PAGE:31==
29 
 
 
Figure 25: Temperature difference between fluid and ambient depending on total incident radiation for 3 m2 panel 
For the big panel a dependency between total radiation and inlet temperature is present. As it was explained before, 
this can be due to the fact that this inlet temperature for 3 m2 panel comes from the output temperature of 2 m2 
panel, changing its level depending on the radiation. However, it can also be because there are too few days with 
measurements with different inlet temperature, mainly for low temperatures near to ambient conditions. This 
behaviour can be observed for the relation with the temperature difference between ambient and fluid, plotted in 
Figure 25. 
This high correlation between two independent parameters of the regression can lead to non-suitable results for 
the coefficients of the model. Regarding these results and the lack of low (Tm-Tamb)/G factor points for the study, 
the experimental data from this panel (3 m2) should not be used for the multiple linear regression analysis. 
5.1.1.3. 
Outliers removal 
The last step to take in order to get suitable results from the multiple linear regression analysis is the pursuit of 
outliers in the gathered data. These points should be removed from the regression analysis, after a deep reasoning 
in why to neglect them. This process can be done before the first regression approach, eliminating intervals with 
negative efficiency or (Tm-Tamb)/G factor for example, and afterwards, looking for the comparison between 
predicted values and measured values and checking for points that go far away from the observed profile.  
An example of a first regression approach is presented in Figure 26, where a possible outlier can be identified 
from a preliminary multiple regression analysis, plotting predicted and real values for the output power of the 
collector. The x-axis sample number corresponds to the order in time of the gathered 10 min interval points and 
the predicted output is calculated substituting weather and fluid measurements in the obtained model. This can be 
also represented with the residuals and their standard deviation. 
==PAGE:32==
30 
 
 
Figure 26: Example of outlier in a hypothetic first regression approach 
5.1.1.4. 
Multiple Linear Regression 
Now that all the previous steps for the good development of the regression have been performed, the multiple 
linear regression analysis can be carried out with the Microsoft Excel tool (Data Analysis Add-in).  
One of the issues to point out is the necessity of pulling apart days when PV is working and days when it is not, 
as the thermal efficiency model of the collector will not be the same. In case of PV working, the peak collector 
efficiency is supposed to decrease with the same proportion as the electrical efficiency of the panel, beside some 
other variations in heat loss coefficients. This differentiation is only needed for the first panel, as the second is 
never connected to the electric grid. 
Besides that, some of the terms in the original model will be removed in order to obtain better results in the 
regression. This is the case of c6, as it is highly correlated with c3 and the wind effect is already included in that 
term. Considering the uncertainty of wind measurements due to bad functioning of the roof sensor, it is advisable 
to use only one term for wind dependence, to diminish possible errors in the obtained model. 
From a first approach, the statistic results for the whole model and for each independent variable should be 
checked in order to derive the terms that do not fit with the model. With this aim, a first regression analysis with 
all the terms considered in the initial QDT method model was carried out. These results can be observed in Table 
5, showing the obtained values for the coefficients of the independent variables, the standard error for each 
variable, the p-value and the limits for the chosen confidence level (95%). 
  
Coefficients 
Standard Error 
P-value 
Lower 95% 
Upper 95% 
𝐹′(𝜏𝛼)𝑒𝑛 
0.792765 
0.013515 
4.9E-308 
0.76624 
0.819291 
−𝑏0 ∗𝐹′(𝜏𝛼)𝑒𝑛 
0.010826 
0.008848 
0.22145 
-0.00654 
0.028192 
𝐹′(𝜏𝛼)𝑒𝑛𝐾𝜃𝑑 
0.856732 
0.019085 
7.5E-231 
0.819276 
0.894189 
𝑐1 
-11.9444 
2.168912 
4.77E-08 
-16.2012 
-7.68763 
𝑐2 
-0.09253 
0.095731 
0.334034 
-0.28041 
0.095356 
𝑐3 
-9.98954 
1.282471 
1.87E-14 
-12.5066 
-7.47252 
𝑐4 
0.979388 
0.213185 
4.97E-06 
0.560985 
1.397791 
𝑐5 
-47174.9 
1517.509 
3.1E-144 
-50153.3 
-44196.6 
Table 5: Regression results from a first approach with the full model for 2 m2 panel 
In case of the heat loss coefficients, initial regression attempts pointed out that for the c2 coefficient a p-value 
higher than 0.05 is obtained, which can be due to the high correlation between these two terms (c1 and c2), spoiling 
the regression results. Moreover, it is known from literature [26] that in the case of unglazed collectors the 
quadratic term can be neglected as the relation is almost linear. Taking all of this into account, c2 will be neglected 
so as to perform the multiple linear regression calculations. In addition to that, 𝐾𝜃𝑑 is going to be limited to be at 
maximum 1 as it should not be significantly larger than this value for a basically flat PVT. As all the regression 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
200
220
240
260
280
300
Qheat (W/m2)
Sample number
predicted
measured
==PAGE:33==
31 
 
analysis gave an initial value in between 1.1 and 1.2 for 𝐾𝜃𝑑, it is finally stated to be 1 in all the models. Regarding 
again the p-value limitation, the incident angle dependence coefficient (b0) should be removed from the analysis 
as its statistic presents a value higher than the limit 0.05, meaning that this variable is not significant for the model. 
This makes sense as the collector surface is not completely flat, presenting an important roughness. Therefore, the 
final used model will have a single term for the total radiation, as in the Steady-state method. This expression can 
be observed in Equation 20. 
       𝑄= 𝐹′(𝜏𝛼)𝑒𝑛𝐺𝑇−𝑐1(𝑇𝑚−𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏) −𝑐3𝑢(𝑇𝑚−𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏) + 𝑐4(𝐸𝐿−𝜎𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏
4) −𝑐5
𝑑𝑇𝑚
𝑑𝑡          (20)                         
The obtained results can be summarized in the next tables, including the different statistics to evaluate the validity 
of the regression. The expected values for each variable from literature about previous studies of solar collectors 
can be observed in Table 6 [1]. Moreover, graphs plotting measured and predicted values for the output power for 
each model are presented as well, for both the time period used for the analysis and the one used for validation. 
  
Unglazed PVT 
𝐹′(𝜏𝛼)𝑒𝑛 [-] 
0.46-0.67 
𝑐1 [W/m2K] 
4-17 
𝑐3 [-] 
1-9 
𝑐4 [-] 
<1 
𝑐5 [J/m2K] 
5000-30000 
Table 6: Usual coefficient values for unglazed PVT panels 
As the net radiation term is usually neglected in the studied used models, and the signal from the pyrgeometer 
presents some sudden steps compared with the measurements from the climate station, a simple model neglecting 
𝑐4 will be used too, in order to compare in a proper way between panels and operation modes.  
In addition, a study of the dependence of the results in the used time interval to obtain the measurement points 
will be performed. In this sense, the obtained models for 10 min intervals will be compared with 2, 5 and 15 min 
intervals. 2 min intervals results are presented just to observe the effect of not accomplishing the residence time 
limitation. Results can be observed in Table 7 for no-PV operation mode for the simple model (neglecting c4). 
 
2 min 
5 min 
10 min 
15 min 
Adjusted R Square 
0.942153 
0.967147 
0.983085 
0.985701 
Standard Error 
92.64956 
69.70488 
47.61831 
39.58148 
Observations 
1745 
784 
366 
220 
𝐹′(𝜏𝛼)𝑒𝑛 
0.741512 
0.76933 
0.800284 
0.78530 
𝑐1 
-13.80971 
-14.9074 
-15.1507 
-15.7538 
𝑐3 
-3.99814 
-6.9478 
-9.69653 
-6.91862 
𝑐5 
-99019.28 
-44589.8 
-23306.0 
-13103.2 
Table 7: Coefficients obtained for different average time intervals for simple model (no-PV mode of the 2 m2 panel) 
In this case the peak collector efficiencies of the four models are closer, as well as the temperature dependent heat 
loss factors are quite constant between models, having a further result for the 2 min model, because the minimum 
interval is not accomplished for sure, as the residence time of the fluid is higher than 4 min. One should also keep 
in mind that the sensors have a time constant in themselves that may affect the 2 min analysis a bit. In the case of 
wind dependence, for unglazed PVT it is more difficult to get stable parameters, as wind has more influence, so 
the accuracy and local variability is difficult to measure. 
The variability of the thermal capacitance is an issue to discuss, as it may be due to how the different models 
evaluate temperature changes inside the measurement time interval.  
Anyway, a comparison between these obtained effective thermal capacities and the theoretical one from panel 
geometry can be carried out. These theoretical values can be obtained from the weighted component calculation 
method in the official test reports [45]. In this method, only the thermal capacities of certain components are 
included in the calculation, based on their estimated degree of thermal interaction with the heat transfer fluid. 
With data from panel geometry and material densities, the individual component mass can be determined. With 
==PAGE:34==
32 
 
each component specific heat capacities and weighting factors, the total effective thermal capacity of the panel 
can be obtained with Equation 21. 
𝐶= ∑𝑝𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑐𝑖                                                                        (21) 
Component 
Material 
M [kg] 
Cp [kJ/kgK] 
P [-] 
Absorber 
Aluminium 
17.496 
0.9 
1 
Heat transfer fluid 
Water/propylene glycol 
11.52 
3.6 
1 
PV 
Teflon 
0.14 
0.677 
0.014 
Table 8: Component masses, specific heat capacities and weighting factors (according to EN 12975-2) for 2 m2 panel 
From Table 8 it can be extracted all the characteristics for the small panel, obtaining an estimated theoretical 
effective thermal capacity of 28.575 kJ/m2K, closer to 10 min interval values. This makes sense as the one node 
c5 term in the QDT model is only fully applicable in theory when the time resolution in data gets larger than the 
residence time for a fluid particle passing the collector. As it was stated before, the calculated residence time of 
the fluid is between 4 and 6 min. 
The same conclusion can be extracted for the big panel, with a theoretical effective thermal capacity of 9.27 
kJ/m2K, and an experimental c5 of 12.57 kJ/m2K for 10 min time step.  
From now on, the regression analysis will be carried out with 10 min interval data, as this gives the best results in 
terms of theoretical/experimental comparison. 
5.1.1.5. 
Results for 3 m2 Panel 
For this panel, the validity of test conditions has to be considered with care, as there are too few days with 
measurements for different inlet temperatures, as well as the inlet temperature for the collector is highly dependent 
on the global irradiance. Besides that, the scope of the measurements for the heat loss parameter (Tm-Tamb)/G is 
not fully covered, as it was observed in the previous section. Regarding these points, a regression analysis should 
not be carried out for this panel. However, the obtained results will be presented in order to compare between both 
panels. This may be interesting as the absorber characteristics for this collector are different from the other one, 
having lower thermal capacity. Statistics and results from the regression can be observed in Tables 9 and 10 for 
the complete model (with c4). 
Regression Statistics 
Multiple R 
0.987412 
R Square 
0.974983 
Adjusted R Square 
0.971434 
Standard Error 
43.90598 
Observations 
315 
Table 9: Summary output statistics from the regression of 3 m2 panel for complete model 
  
Coefficients 
𝐹′(𝜏𝛼)𝑒𝑛 
0.774435 
𝑐1 
-11.1788 
𝑐3 
-8.23476 
𝑐4 
1.15578 
𝑐5 
-13440.8 
Table 10: Regression results for each coefficient of 3 m2 panel for complete model 
From the obtained results it can be stated that the overall regression is quite accurate, as R square statistic is near 
1. In this case a peak collector efficiency of 0.77 will be achieved. 
If the longwave radiation term is neglected, the results obtained are presented in Table 11. 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
33 
 
  
Coefficients 
𝐹′(𝜏𝛼)𝑒𝑛 
0.723549 
𝑐1 
-12.8634 
𝑐3 
-6.83178 
𝑐5 
-12575.6 
Table 11: Regression results for each coefficient of 3 m2 panel for simple model 
5.1.1.6. 
Results for 2 m2 panel 
In this case, the test conditions are appropriate as the inlet temperature for the collector is independent on the 
global irradiance and is almost constant for a single day, as well as the scope is fully covered for all the variables. 
This should lead to better results for the model and the regression.  
In this case, two different test periods will be analysed, taking firstly the interval where the PV is not connected, 
in which the thermal efficiency would be the higher possible for this collector. The results for this operation mode 
can be observed in Tables 12 and 13.  
Regression Statistics 
Multiple R 
0.993739 
R Square 
0.987517 
Adjusted R Square 
0.984608 
Standard Error 
44.96377 
Observations 
366 
Table 12: Summary output statistics from the regression of 2 m2 Panel in no-PV mode 
  
Coefficients 
𝐹′(𝜏𝛼)𝑒𝑛 
0.855849 
𝑐1 
-13.2352 
𝑐3 
-11.5618 
𝑐4 
1.12848 
𝑐5 
-25006.1 
Table 13: Regression results for each coefficient of 2 m2 panel in no-PV mode 
It can be observed that the overall regression is even more accurate than for the big panel, as R square statistic is 
near 99%, being 97% for the other panel. In this case a peak collector efficiency of 85% will be achieved, far 
higher than the big panel case and closer to the data observed in the literature for this kind of collectors. The 
thermal capacity is also higher, as it could be supposed from the design of the absorber. However, the efficiency 
should be closer for both collectors, and even a bit lower for this panel, as the surface is smaller. These non-
expected results may be due to inappropriate test conditions for the 3 m2 panel.  
The obtained standard error of 44 W/m2 could be too high for standard tests. However, considering the 
measurement conditions and the uncertainty in net radiation and wind sensors, these results can be considered as 
acceptable. 
Coefficient results for the simple model can also be observed in Table 14. 
  
Coefficients 
𝐹′(𝜏𝛼)𝑒𝑛 
0.800285 
𝑐1 
-15.15078 
𝑐3 
-9.69653 
𝑐5 
-23306 
Table 14: Regression results for each coefficient of 2 m2 panel in no-PV mode for simple model 
==PAGE:36==
34 
 
In addition to that, measured and regression predicted values for heat power can be plotted in order to observe the 
suitability of the calculated model. This is shown in Figure 27. Predicted values are calculated substituting 
measured weather data and average fluid temperature in the obtained model. 
 
Figure 27: Measured and predicted heat power for the studied period for 2 m2 panel in no-PV mode 
In this kind of graphs, the sample number corresponds to the order in time of the gathered 10 min interval points. 
The predicted output power seems to follow in an accurate way the real values, although it can be observed a 
higher variation for the measured values. 
 
Figure 28: Relation between measured and predicted heat power for the studied period for 2 m2 panel in no-PV mode 
In Figure 28 the percentage difference between measured and predicted output power can be observed, being 
oscillating between 0.8 and 1.2 for most of the samples, having some peaks that could be considered as outliers. 
The sum of produced energies for measured and predicted power values can be calculated for the whole period, 
obtaining the results stated in Table 15. 
Measured output energy 
Predicted output energy 
44.3 kWh 
44.6 kWh 
Table 15: Measured and predicted total output energy for analysed period 
==PAGE:37==
35 
 
Taking days from late July, which have not been used in the regression analysis, a validation of this model will 
be done comparing predicted and measured thermal output power. Results are presented in Figure 29, showing a 
good correlation taking into account the accuracy of the measurements. 
 
Figure 29: Measured and predicted heat power for the validation period for 2 m2 panel in no-PV mode 
In case of PV working, as the photovoltaic generator is connected, there will be a portion of the irradiance power 
that will be used to generate electricity, so the thermal efficiency will be lower as not all the received power is 
used to heat the fluid. The expected impact in the actual performance would be a lowering of the peak collector 
efficiency of the same proportion as the electrical efficiency of the PV panel.  
Regression Statistics 
Multiple R 
0.992697 
R Square 
0.985446 
Adjusted R Square 
0.98164 
Standard Error 
39.43316 
Observations 
283 
Table 16: Summary output statistics from the regression of 2m2 Panel in PV mode 
  
Coefficients 
𝐹′(𝜏𝛼)𝑒𝑛 
0.687728 
𝑐1 
-7.41052 
𝑐3 
-4.35241 
𝑐4 
1.741413 
𝑐5 
-26581.3 
Table 17: Regression results for each coefficient of 2m2 panel in PV mode 
It can be observed from Tables 16 and 17 that the peak collector efficiency is 16% lower than when the PV 
generator is not working for the complete model. As the average electrical efficiency of the panel is between 14 
and 16%, this means that the obtained results follow what it is expected. Moreover, the coefficient for the 
temperature-dependent heat loss is lower in this case, which is an advantage for PV/T systems, mainly in changing 
weather conditions as the one present in Denmark. 
The same comments can be done for the comparison between simple models in Table 18, as the peak collector 
efficiency is also 16% lower. 
 
 
==PAGE:38==
36 
 
  
Coefficients 
𝐹′(𝜏𝛼)𝑒𝑛 
0.641358 
𝑐1 
-10.5641 
𝑐3 
-7.97748 
𝑐5 
-23816.6 
Table 18: Regression results for each coefficient of 2m2 panel in PV mode for simple model 
Measured and predicted output power can be plotted again in Figure 30. 
 
Figure 30: Measured and predicted heat power for the studied period for 2 m2 panel in PV mode 
The predicted output power is observed to keep following in a quite accurate way the real values, however there 
is a higher volatility in measured results. These predicted values are again calculated substituting measured 
weather data and average fluid temperature in the obtained model. 
 
Figure 31: Relation between measured and predicted heat power for the studied period 
In Figure 31 the percentage difference between measured and predicted output power can be observed, being 
oscillating between 0.8 and 1.2 for most of the samples. The sum of produced energies for measured and predicted 
performance can be calculated for the whole period, obtaining the results stated in Table 19. 
Measured output energy 
Predicted output energy 
28.1 kWh 
28.3 kWh 
Table 19: Measured and predicted total output energy for analysed period 
==PAGE:39==
37 
 
The validation of this model will be done taking days from November that haven’t been used in the regression 
analysis. Results are presented in Figure 32, showing an acceptable accuracy considering the possible 
measurement errors. 
 
Figure 32: Measured and predicted heat power for the validation period for 2 m2 panel in PV mode 
In addition, a graph with the thermal efficiency depending on (Tm-Tamb)/G factor can be obtained for different 
wind speeds in order to compare the performance of each panel and working point. For this plot a Gtot of 800 
W/m2 will be considered, as well as no net radiation and null fluid temperature derivative. Results can be observed 
in Figures 33 and 34. 
 
Figure 33: Efficiency curves depending on wind velocity for 3 m2 and 2 m2 panels in no-PV operation 
Here the difference between both panels can be observed, mainly in peak collector efficiency and temperature-
dependent heat losses. The higher temperature dependent heat losses for the 2 m2 panel is logical in terms of 
theoretical heat transfer mechanisms, as this coefficient is active absorber surface area dependent. However, the 
efficiency should be closer for both collectors, and even a bit lower for the 2 m2 panel, as the surface is smaller. 
This illogical result can be due to the non-suitable test conditions for the 3 m2 panel, which can lead to wrong 
results. 
==PAGE:40==
38 
 
 
Figure 34: Efficiency curves depending on wind velocity for 2 m2 panel in no-PV and PV operation 
In this case the difference between the performance of the panel when the PV is producing electricity and when it 
is not working can be observed, seeing main variances in the peak collector efficiency, as well as in temperature-
dependent heat losses. This lower c1 for PV operation mode can be explained as a balancing with the temperature 
dependent electrical efficiency of the photovoltaic cells. As collector temperature increases, electrical efficiency 
decreases and the remaining solar energy to the absorber is higher. 
5.1.2. Steady State Test Method 
At is was stated before, obeying the requirements on the test conditions for the steady state method resulted in 
very few suitable measuring periods. This led to trust in the quasi-dynamic test methods for the outdoor 
performance testing of the studied PVT collectors. 
Anyway, these few suitable measuring periods lead to some useful points for the steady state method that, without 
being sufficient for a regression analysis, can be used to validate the models obtained from the quasi-dynamic test 
method. In this sense, the obtained points following the above-mentioned test conditions for the steady state 
method have been plotted with the resulting linear functions from the QDT model (10 min interval), as well as 
with the predicted points from the QDT model for the presented conditions. As all the gathered points for the 
steady state are in between 0 and 1 m/s of wind speed, these are the two velocities plotted for the obtained model, 
considering the thermal capacity term to be zero, net radiation to be 80 W/m2 (average value for the obtained 
intervals), and global radiation 800 W/m2. 
==PAGE:41==
39 
 
 
Figure 35: Steady state data and corresponding predicted results from QDT model for 2 m2 panel 
From Figure 35 it can be stated that the QDT model follows in a suitable way the behaviour of the collector, as 
all the measured points are in between the stated limits for the test conditions. Just a little lower efficiency can be 
extracted from steady state points comparing with the predicted ones. This may be due to a twist between optical 
and heat loss parameters if one has too few points for the stationary analysis. 
5.1.3. Uncertainty analysis 
Taking into account the expression for the thermal output of the collector (Equation 1), and the final models used 
for heating (simplified QDT), a qualitative study of the final uncertainty of the measured and simulated useful 
power from the panel has been carried out. 
It must be pointed out that the output uncertainty has been calculated as the maximum one, taking the percentages 
from tolerances for each measured variable and their maximum values in test results. The composed uncertainty 
for each variable has been calculated with the rules for propagation of uncertainties for the different operations 
used in the model (addition, subtraction, multiplication and division) [16]. 
 
Variable 
Range value 
Error [%] 
Input 
V [l/s] 
0.03 
±3% 
To-Ti [K] 
0-10 
±1.4% 
Output 
Q [W/m2] 
100-700 
±3.3% 
Table 20: Uncertainties for input and output variables of measured power 
 
Variable 
Range value 
Error [%] 
Input 
Gtot [W/m2] 
300-1100 
±1% 
Tm-Tamb [K] 
0-20 
±1.7% 
U*(Tm-Tamb) [m*K/s] 
0-20 
±2.64% 
dTm/dt [K/s] 
0-0.015 
±2% 
Output 
Q [W/m2] 
100-700 
±11.2% 
Table 21: Uncertainties for input and output variables of predicted power 
Then, the uncertainty of the residual between measured and predicted output would be of 14.5%, which is slightly 
higher than the average error from the obtained model (14%). A higher error should be considered for the wind 
measurements, as the roof sensor didn’t work properly, and an approximation was carried out with climate station 
data. This lead to the conclusion that the obtained error comes mainly from the uncertainty of the measurements. 
 
==PAGE:42==
40 
 
5.2. Cooling 
Another application for PVT panels, besides fluid heating and electricity production at day time, is night sky 
radiative and ventilation cooling of the fluid. 
In order to model the performance in this operation condition, theoretical models from literature have been used 
to calculate radiation and convection balances. In addition, a predictive model taking the standard QDT method 
measurements as a basis can be performed. 
5.2.1. Theoretical model 
Considering radiation losses, an emissivity of 0.95 has been assumed for both panels, as it was stated in the method 
section. In terms of convection heat transfer, if the stated coefficients from literature are compared with the usual 
values for daytime QDT model, the approach by Test [21] is the one that corresponds better, as it can be observed 
in the results for the standard error between theoretical and measured output power in Table 22. Furthermore, this 
model will be the one used for the graph comparisons. However, it has a lower wind dependent coefficient, which 
may lead to bad fitting of the theoretical output and the measured one for high wind conditions. 
 
Jurges 
Watmuff 
Test 
href [W/m2K] 
5.7 
2.8 
8.55 
Cwind [W*s/m3K] 
3.8 
3.8 
2.56 
SE [W/m2] 
33.031 
66.16 
27.523 
Table 22: Coefficients and standard error results for each model 
It must be pointed out the lack of a term dependent on rain conditions. This is still an unexplored area within solar 
collectors, as there are no previous studies in literature.  
 
Figure 36: Measured and theoretical cooling power for rainy and no-rain days for 3 m2 panel 
As it can be observed from the comparison between theoretical and measured cooling power in Figure 36, the 
main discrepancies appear principally in rainy periods. Regarding this fact, the test periods used for the validation 
of models will correspond only to nights without rain conditions. Anyway, a qualitative vision about this issue 
will be presented. Again, these theoretical and predicted values are calculated with the substitution of weather and 
average fluid temperature data in the used model. 
If only days with no rain are used in the comparison, obtained results for the big panel can be observed in Figure 
37. 
==PAGE:43==
41 
 
 
Figure 37: Measured and theoretical cooling power for no-rain days for 3 m2 panel 
From the presented results it can be stated that the theoretical model follows in a good way the real behaviour of 
the panel at night mode, presenting an average error of 11.8%. 
Carrying out a deeper study of the independent variables evolution, it can be observed from Figure 38 that points 
after sample number 700, where the theoretical output is far lower than the measured one, correspond to high 
wind velocities. As it was stated before, this can be due to the fact that the theoretical coefficient for convection 
wind dependence is too low. However, this result can also have a cause in the used wind measurements, as the 
ratio of 20% of climate station data could be lower than real conditions in the test roof. 
 
Figure 38: Measured and theoretical cooling power with wind speed for 3 m2 panel 
5.2.2. Predicted model (QDT) 
As a complementary study to the theoretical models, as well as to evaluate the consistency with real behaviour, a 
QDT model for both panels has been extracted from a multiple linear regression as the one used for the heating 
model. This was done taking measurements that accomplish the required scope and independency between 
variables. This model for night mode will be the same as the heating one, just removing the term related to the 
incident radiation (Equation 12). 
==PAGE:44==
42 
 
𝑄= 𝑐1 ∗(𝑇𝑚−𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏) + 𝑐3 ∗𝑣𝑤𝑖𝑛𝑑∗(𝑇𝑚−𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏) + 𝑐4(𝐸𝐿−𝜎𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏
4) + 𝑐5
𝑑𝑇𝑚
𝑑𝑡              (12) 
Results for both panels can be summarized in Table 23, presenting the obtained coefficients from the multiple 
regression analysis. The standard error for these models is lower than for the theoretical equations. 
  
3m2 Panel 
2m2 Panel 
Adjusted R square 
0.994083 
0.988483 
Standard error 
14.51505 
23.26180 
𝑐4 
0.946538 
0.954388 
𝑐1 
8.66009 
6.907735 
𝑐3 
11.66865 
5.57925 
𝑐5 
17504.31 
10589.81 
Table 23: Regression results for Cooling QDT model for both panels 
For both panels, c4 term, which can be related with the emissivity, is really close to 0.95. This mean that the 
acquired assumption for the theoretical model (ε=0.95) is justified, as the experimental results follow the same 
behaviour. 
In Figures 39 and 40 it can be observed the comparison between measured and predicted cooling power for both 
panels. As it can be noticed, the behaviour for the big panel is almost perfect, having a 𝑐1 coefficient near to the 
href of Test model. Regarding the small panel, the real output is also followed in an accurate way but with a higher 
standard error, having a c3 closer to the theoretical cwind of Test model. The average error for the predicted output 
is near 10% for both panels. 
 
Figure 39: Measured and predicted cooling power for no-rain days for 3 m2 panel 
==PAGE:45==
43 
 
 
Figure 40: Measured and predicted cooling power for no-rain days for 2 m2 panel 
As a conclusion, it can be stated that the theoretical model satisfies the requirements of the predicted model and 
the measured results, following the actual output in a proper way considering that it does not take into account the 
panel characteristics and the thermal gradient. 
5.2.3. Rain effect 
A qualitative study about the rain effect on collector performance has been developed. It must be pointed out that 
this is still an unexplored area within solar thermal, so no previous research has been found in this sense. From a 
first approach it can be assumed that remaining water after rain would be of such a little amount that only a thin 
layer would remain in the panel surface, having no clue about the remaining period of this film. Moreover, weather 
conditions should be taken into account, as this layer would be evaporated if sun comes back. Also, if the collector 
is operating below the dew point, moisture can stay on the surface and affect performance for longer periods.  
It can be assumed that the performance is mainly affected in convection transfer terms, having a higher c1 
coefficient for rainy periods. This temperature dependent heat loss coefficient would acquire values closer to the 
free water convection one, between 20 and 100 W/m2K. Then, when rain stops, this effect would be reduced 
gradually as the water layer disappears. 
From measurements, a qualitative vision can be developed assuming that c1 is the only model term affected by 
rain. In Figure 41 a plot of precipitation and c1 coefficient variation is presented for rainy days. 
 
Figure 41: Change in temperature dependent heat loss coefficient for rainy days 
==PAGE:46==
44 
 
A similar behaviour of what was expected can be observed, increasing c1 to values between 20 and 40 when 
precipitation is present. This effect is gradually removed until reaching no rain operation values (8.66 W/m2K). 
Further characterization could be made with more sensors and humidity and pressure measurements in the panel 
surface. 
5.2.4. Uncertainty analysis 
Taking into account the expression for the thermal output of the collector (Equation 1), and the theoretical and 
predicted models used for cooling, a qualitative study of the final uncertainty of the measured and simulated useful 
power from the panel has been carried out, as the one made for heating mode. The uncertainties for measured 
power are the same as in the other case, with a maximum of ±3.3%. 
 
Variable 
Range value 
Error [%] 
Input 
NetRad [W/m2] 
0-500 
±2% 
Tm-Tamb [K] 
0-30  
±1.7% 
U*(Tm-Tamb) [m*K/s] 
0-16 
±2.64% 
dTm/dt [K/s] 
0-0.02 
±2% 
Output (theoretical) 
Q [W/m2] 
50-500 
±9% 
Output (predicted) 
Q [W/m2] 
50-500 
±21.3% 
Table 24: Uncertainties for input and output variables of theoretical and predicted power 
Then, the uncertainty of the residual between measured and theoretical output would be of 12.5%, which is slightly 
higher than the average error observed in the studied period (11.8%). A higher error should be considered for the 
wind measurements again, so this uncertainty would be increased. The uncertainty from predicted output 
difference with measurements would be of 24.6%, way higher than the observed average error.  
 
5.3. Electricity (PV) 
The other main component of the PV/T panel is the photovoltaic module, which transforms part of the incident 
radiation in electricity. In a PV/T panel, the remaining energy from the radiation can be used as a heating source. 
This use for the residual energy is an advantage for photovoltaic cells, as heat is removed from them, lowering its 
temperature with the following increasing in their electrical efficiency. 
5.3.1. Predicted model 
Regarding the tested PV/T panel electrical performance, a multiple linear regression has been performed in order 
to obtain the electrical model coefficients for the 2 m2 panel. This was done taking measurements that accomplish 
the required scope and independency between variables. In this sense, a first study of the influence of the 
independent variables (radiation and cell temperature) in the dependent variable is carried out to evaluate the 
suitability of the model. The time step for the studied points is 5 min, in order to have a better accuracy. 
It must be pointed out that the output power obtained from the data-rig corresponds to the AC output from the 
inverter, so the average inverter efficiency (0.923) should be used in order to calculate the DC output from the PV 
module. Moreover, the effective area of the PV cells set is lower than the collector surface, having a ratio APV/Ac 
of 0.936. These two factors will be used to calculate the specific power produced.  
In Figures 42 and 43 it can be observed the relation between electrical output power and total radiation or cell 
temperature difference with reference. This last variable is important to study as it is one of the used terms in the 
electrical performance model. As a first step, the cell temperature will be assumed as the average collector fluid 
temperature. 
==PAGE:47==
45 
 
 
Figure 42: Electrical power output depending on total incident radiation 
 
Figure 43: Electrical power output depending on cell temperature difference with reference times radiation 
As it can be observed from Figure 42, the module follows an almost constant efficiency, which is slightly varied 
with the temperature of the panel. This can be deducted from Figure 43, where the observed line gets flatter when 
the cell temperature increases. The electrical performance model that is going to be evaluated can be summarized 
in Equation 14. 
𝜂𝑐= 𝜂𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓[1 −𝛽𝑟𝑒𝑓(𝑇𝑐−𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓) + 𝛾𝑙𝑜𝑔10(𝐺𝑡𝑜𝑡)]                                          (14) 
Regression results and statistics for the complete model (with 𝛾) can be observed in Tables 25 and 26. 
Regression Statistics 
Multiple R 
0.999422 
R Square 
0.998844 
Adjusted R Square 
0.997061 
Standard Error 
3.417658 
Table 25: Summary output statistics from the regression (complete model) 
==PAGE:48==
46 
 
𝜂𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓 
0.157727 
𝛽𝑟𝑒𝑓 
0.003425 
𝛾 
-0.03282 
Table 26: Obtained model coefficients (complete model) 
The obtained statistics for the whole model and for each variable indicate that the model has an almost perfect 
linear relation, as well as a good correlation with all the independent variables. The comparison between predicted 
and measured output power values is presented in Figure 44. Again, these predicted values are calculated with the 
substitution of weather and average fluid temperature data in the used model. 
 
Figure 44: Measured and predicted electrical power for the studied period (complete model) 
The sum of produced energies for measured and predicted performance can be calculated for the whole period, 
obtaining the results stated in Table 27. 
Measured output energy 
Predicted output energy 
9.123 kWh 
9.127 kWh 
Table 27: Measured and predicted total output energy for analysed period (complete model) 
In spite of the good results for the complete model, studied literature suggests neglecting the gamma coefficient, 
as most of the experimental studies performed in terms of PV electrical performance [46]. Moreover, the negative 
value obtained in the regression for γ is not consistent with the historical experimental tests, in which the value 
for crystalline silicon modules is near 0.12 [47]. Furthermore, a deeper study was performed considering only the 
temperature dependence of electrical efficiency. 
In this sense, for a deep study, it is important to evaluate which is the best estimation for the cell temperature. A 
comparison between the regression results for all the models mentioned to calculate the cell temperature will be 
done. Results can be observed in Table 28. 
 
Tm 
Eq. 15 
Eq. 16 
Eq.17 
Eq.19 
Adjusted R square 
0.997058 
0.997081 
0.997082 
0.997074 
0.997067 
Standard error 
3.426716 
3.392535 
3.391733 
3.40266 
3.41253 
𝜂𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓 
0.14273 
0.147006 
0.147238 
0.144562 
0.144057 
𝛽𝑟𝑒𝑓 
0.005305 
0.00159 
0.001759 
0.004442 
0.003778 
Table 28: Obtained statistics and model coefficients 
Considering the results, better regressions are obtained for the two PV models (Eq. 15 and 16), but the obtained  
𝛽𝑟𝑒𝑓 is far away from usual values. In this sense, the best behaviour is observed for Shyam model (Eq. 17), 
==PAGE:49==
47 
 
obtaining a very common 𝛽𝑟𝑒𝑓 of 0.0044. This equation will be used for cell temperature characterization in PVT 
operation mode from now on. 
If gamma coefficient is neglected and Eq.17 is used for cell temperature estimation, the obtained results are 
presented in Tables 29 and 30. 
Regression Statistics 
Multiple R 
0.999488 
R Square 
0.998856 
Adjusted R Square 
0.997074 
Standard Error 
3.40266 
Table 29: Summary output statistics from the regression (simple model) 
𝜂𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓 
0.144562 
𝛽𝑟𝑒𝑓 
0.004442 
Table 30: Obtained model coefficients (simple model) 
These values are more comparable with the literature [37], as the examples for PVT systems are in between 0.004 
and 0.0063 for 𝛽𝑟𝑒𝑓 . 
A graphic comparison of predicted and actual values for output electric power can be observed in Figure 45, 
having an almost perfect behaviour with no observable variations from complete model results. 
 
Figure 45: Measured and predicted electrical power for the studied period (simple model) 
The sum of produced energies for measured and predicted performance can be calculated for the whole period, 
obtaining the results stated in Table 31. Almost the same total produced energy is obtained for measured and 
calculated results. 
Measured output energy 
Predicted output energy 
9.123 kWh 
9.120 kWh 
Table 31: Measured and predicted total output energy for analysed period (simple model) 
5.3.2. PV cooling effect of heat transfer fluid 
Regarding this observed effect of module temperature in electrical efficiency, an important advantage of using 
PVT is the lowering of panel temperature when the working fluid is flowing and removes heat from the 
photovoltaic cells. A study of this effect has been done comparing between the performance when the collector 
fluid is running and when it is turned off (only PV working). The lowered cell temperature effect has been studied 
==PAGE:50==
48 
 
in theoretical terms, with the already calculated model, and with experimental data gathered from the ongoing 
PVT test.  
Taking this performance model, a theoretical comparison can be developed taking different equations for cell 
temperature calculation. 
As Eq. 16 is usually used to predict the cell temperature of an only PV module, a theoretical prediction of only 
PV case can be developed calculating the predicted output with this estimation. In Figure 46 predicted output 
power for the studied time interval can be observed for both PV and PVT case. Note that for the PVT case the cell 
temperature is taken as the one calculated by Eq. 17, and for the PV case it is taken from Eq. 16, both included in 
the model of 𝛽𝑟𝑒𝑓=0.0044. 
 
Figure 46: Predicted electrical power for the studied period for PV and PVT mode 
An average lowering of 5% in the theoretical electrical efficiency of the PV panel is produced when the working 
fluid is not flowing and, therefore, not substracting heat from the module. 
The sum of produced energies for theoretical PV and PVT mode can be calculated for the whole period, obtaining 
the results stated in Table 32. A total energy 6% higher is obtained when the PV is cooled. 
PV mode output energy 
PVT mode output energy 
8.6 kWh 
9.1 kWh 
Table 32: Measured and predicted total output energy for analysed period 
An experimental comparison can be developed stopping the flow and gathering data for electrical output from the 
PV module. Data was obtained from 5 days in October where the pumps were switched off. The aim of this is 
comparing the electrical efficiency for both modes at similar conditions (ambient temperature and radiation). 
These states are represented by the theoretical PV mode cell temperature (Equation 16), as this is only dependent 
on external conditions. This comparison can be observed in Figure 47. 
==PAGE:51==
49 
 
 
Figure 47: Electrical efficiency depending on theoretical cell temperature for different operation modes  
It can be extracted that, on average, the electrical efficiency for similar conditions in PV mode is lower than when 
the absorber fluid is flowing. A more specific correlation between those two cases can be made with a multiple 
variable regression analysis for these only PV days (taking again the PVT model of Eq. 17 to calculate Tc). 
Obtained results can be summarized in Tables 33 and 34.  
Regression Statistics 
Multiple R 
0.998813 
R Square 
0.997628 
Adjusted R Square 
0.986365 
Standard Error 
5.316642 
Table 33: Summary output statistics from the regression 
𝜂𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓 
0.139739 
𝛽𝑟𝑒𝑓 
0.004689 
Table 34: Obtained model coefficients 
These results point out a similar behaviour on temperature variations (𝛽𝑟𝑒𝑓 almost does not change), and a 
different efficiency at reference temperature. This could mean that the actual cell temperature differs from the 
theoretically calculated one in a different way for the two cases, pointing out the necessity of another cell 
temperature estimation for this operation mode. These results can be observed in Figure 48. If the difference in 
𝜂𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓 is translated in a cell temperature difference, this is on average of a 7.5°C lowering in cell temperature, 
having as an effect a variation of 3.3% in the electrical efficiency. 
==PAGE:52==
50 
 
 
Figure 48: Efficiency comparison between only PV case and PVT for same Tc model (Eq. 17) 
If a multiple variable regression analysis for these only PV days is carried out taking the PV model to calculate 
Tc theoretically (Eq. 16), the obtained results can be summarized in Table 35. 
𝜂𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓 
0.145032 
𝛽𝑟𝑒𝑓 
0.004072 
Table 35: Obtained model coefficients 
This model gives really close results to the PVT mode one, suggesting that this cell temperature estimation is 
more accurate for this operation mode. Furthermore, the same performance model will be used for both operation 
modes, just using different equations for cell temperature estimation (Eq. 16 for PV mode and Eq. 17 for PVT 
mode). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:53==
51 
 
6. Discussion of results 
 
The obtained results can be divided in heating, cooling and electrical performance. For the heating operation 
mode, two different tests have been performed, with and without the PV module operating. Results for this section 
can be summarized in Table 36. 
  
PV 
No-PV 
𝐹′(𝜏𝛼)𝑒𝑛 [-] 
0.641358 
0.800285 
𝑐1 [W/m2K] 
-10.5641 
-15.15078 
𝑐3 [-] 
-7.97748 
-9.69653 
𝑐5 [J/m2K] 
-23816.6 
-23306 
Table 36: Model results for both operation modes for 2 m2 panel 
As it can be observed, the difference in peak collector efficiency is of the same magnitude as the electrical 
efficiency of the module (between 0.14 and 0.16). Moreover, the thermal losses are lower when PV is working, 
maybe due to the temperature dependence of the electrical performance. This is an important advantage for PV/T 
systems, mainly in changing weather conditions and low ambient temperatures. The effective capacitance is 
constant for both modes, as this is a design related parameter. Regarding the wind dependent factor, for unglazed 
PV/T it is more difficult to get stable parameters, as wind has more influence in final performance, and the test 
accuracy and local variability is difficult to measure with the utilized setup. 
In terms of cooling potential, a comparison between theoretical models and the obtained from regression analysis 
has been carried out, having better results for Test coefficients, more comparable with the experimental model. 
However, this theoretical model failed in the prediction of wind influence, which can be due to the observed 
uncertainty in wind measurements from the performed test. Results can be summarized in Table 37. 
 Coefficient 
Experimental 
Coefficient 
Theoretical 
Standard error 
23.26180 
Standard error 
27.523 
𝑐4 
0.954388 
ε 
0.95 
𝑐1 
6.907735 
href 
8.55 
𝑐3 
5.57925 
Cwind 
2.56 
𝑐5 
10589.81 
 
 
Table 37: Cooling model coefficients for theoretical and experimental models for 2 m2 panel 
Regarding the electrical performance, an almost constant efficiency is observed from the gathered data, just 
modified by temperature variations. This effect is also determined in the obtained model, having a reference 
efficiency and a temperature dependent factor for the actual efficiency. Moreover, the performance when the fluid 
is not flowing have been studied in order to point out the advantages of heat absorption from PV cells. Coefficient 
results and standard error can be observed in Table 38, the same for both only-PV mode and PVT mode, just 
varying the cell temperature estimation expression, Eq. 17 for PVT and Eq. 16 for only-PV. 
𝜂𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓 
0.144562 
𝛽𝑟𝑒𝑓 
0.004442 
Table 38: Obtained electrical model coefficients for 2 m2 panel 
This model is quite accurate compared with the thermal one (5% of average error), due to fewer and more reliable 
dependent variables, as well as a more accurate measurement for the output power. 
In order to highlight the advantages from a PVT system compared with usual PV and solar collector systems an 
evaluation of the annual yield of two different installation regarding electrical and thermal output was developed. 
A Polysun simulation in the same location as the real installation studied has been performed, obtaining the total 
annual electrical and thermal energy output for two different scenarios, one with the roof totally covered by PVT, 
and another with solar collectors and PV modules. In both scenarios, the collectors are connected through a closed 
==PAGE:54==
52 
 
loop (as the tested one) that maintains the inlet temperature by means of cooling and heating systems and provides 
the necessary energy to flow the fluid by a working pump. 
One of the compared installations is a 160 m2 roof covered entirely by PVT panels with the characteristics of the 
tested one. The other is the same surface but covered proportionally by PV (74 m2, ηTref = 0.18) and solar collectors 
(86 m2, F’(τα)en = 0.89), with usual characteristics for this kind of panels. The obtained results for electrical and 
thermal annual yields for both systems maintaining the same input temperature of 20 °C is summarized in Figure 
49. 
 
Figure 49: Comparison of an installation of flat plate collectors and PV modules with a PVT assessment with the same 
thermal output on the same roof area. 
As it can be observed, the total thermal output is the same for both installations, as the proportion of solar collectors 
has been set in order to achieve this equality. However, the electrical yield is more than two times higher for the 
PVT assessment, ending up with a higher total yield. These results point out the advantage of PVT systems, which 
can supply a higher total energy output.  
If a comparison in terms of useful exergy is performed, the electrical-to-thermal energy ratio of 4.24 [1] will be 
used, as electrical energy is a form of higher quality than thermal. In this sense, the total exergy yield from the 
PVT installation is 319.8 MWh/year, 83% higher than the one from the separate assessment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:55==
53 
 
7. Real installation simulation 
 
In order to determine the viability of these PVT systems in a real application an actual installation that is supplied 
with these panels will be studied. A simulation with Polysun was performed to evaluate the behavior of a real 
PV/T installation that supplies space heating and hot water demand to a Sports Club located in Stenløse.  
7.1. Description of the installation 
The installation is composed by building integrated PVT collectors, covering a roof with a surface of 175 m2, 
being the total collector area of 160 m2. However, due to some leakages, the active absorber area is 71 m2. A 
picture of the panels in the building roof can be observed in Figure 50. 
 
Figure 50: Building integrated PVT installation in Stenløse 
Regarding that the actual installation is too complex to be implemented and controlled in Polysun, a simplified 
model will be used in order to simulate the functioning of the system in a similar way to the real behaviour. 
In the simplified model, these PVT collectors are connected to an internal spiral heat exchanger in an 850 l buffer 
tank, which supplies water for the space heating. The collectors are also connected to a ground heat storage (e-
tank) via another heat exchanger. This ground storage is formed by two sets of long pipes buried at 0.75 m depth 
along a 300 m2 surface situated outside the building and serves as a heat storage when the temperature level from 
the collectors is not high enough to heat the buffer. The hot water is supplied by a 1500 l tank which is connected 
to the buffer tank. A 26 kW heat pump is used to supply space heating or hot water when it is not enough with the 
collector output power. Moreover, an electric heating element is included in the hot water tank. The cold side of 
the heat pump is connected to the ground storage. Through this connection this side has higher temperatures, 
which leads to higher efficiency of the heat pump.  
The PVT panels parameters obtained in the previous QDT characterization will be used in the simulation. 
However, an assumption will be made in order to introduce the effect of building integrating, assessment that is 
not present in the previous test. The PVT in the collector test is mounted with free air flow on both front and back 
surface, while in the installation the back side is forming a closed room where the losses will be independent of 
the outdoor wind speed.In this sense, a wind dependent factor (c3) of half the one obtained will be used for the 
simulation, as there are no external losses through the back side. 
The used parameters for the PVT performance in the simulation can be observed in Table 39. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:56==
54 
 
  
PVT 
𝐹′(𝜏𝛼)𝑒𝑛 [-] 
0.642 
𝑐1 [W/m2K] 
10.55 
𝑐3 [-] 
4 
𝑐5 [J/m2K] 
23800 
Table 39: PVT parameters for Polysun Simulation 
A summary of all the elements of the installation and their characteristics can be observed in Table 40. 
Element 
Data 
PVT panels 
160 m2 / 30° (71 m2 active) 
Buffer 
850 l 
Hot Water Tank 
1500 l 
Heat Pump 
26 kW 
e-Tank 
1500 m (length) / 75 cm (depth) 
Hot water demand 
50 °C (inlet) / 50 KWh/day 
Space heating demand 
55 °C (inlet) / 9 MWh/year 
Table 40: Installation characteristics 
The sketch diagram of the installation used in Polysun can be observed in Figure 51, where all the connections 
and elements are presented.  
 
Figure 51: Sketch diagram of the installation from Polysun 
The simulation needs some controllers in order to perform properly. Solar collectors have two different loops, one 
for the buffer tank, which is switched on when outflow collector temperature is 10 K higher than tank bottom 
layer temperature, and another for the e-tank, that starts operating when collector cannot supply the tank, but its 
outflow temperature is higher than the e-tank output temperature. The latter mode is limited in order not to achieve 
temperatures higher than 19 °C in the cold side of the heat pump. Both modes are switched by means of a three-
way valve.  
When the buffer tank can’t achieve the required temperature with only the solar collector input, the auxiliary 
heating from the heat pump is turned on, while switching on the ground loop pump in order to supply heat to the 
cold side of the heat pump. 
Moreover, there is a loop to supply the required heat in the hot water tank. This heat is extracted from the top of 
the buffer tank, returning to the bottom of the tank to achieve the demanded temperature. This hot water tank has 
an internal electrical heater just in case it is not enough with the temperature in the buffer tank to achieve the 
demanded temperature. 
==PAGE:57==
55 
 
Both demands, hot water and space heating, are controlled by a pump and a three-way valve so as to maintain the 
setting temperature. 
7.2. Simulation results  
Results obtained from the simulation are presented in Table 41, achieving a total useful solar thermal fraction to 
the system of 34.5 %, supplying 13 MWh thermal energy to the system and 24.6 MWh of electricity from the 
inverter.  
Result 
Element 
Year value 
Solar fraction [%] 
Total 
34.5 
Solar thermal energy to the system [kWh] 
Total 
13009 
To Buffer 
4099 
To e-tank 
8910 
Yield photovoltaics [kWh] 
DC 
25829 
AC 
24565 
Heat generator energy to the system [kWh] 
Total 
24655 
Heat Pump 
12013 
Internal heater 
12642 
Total thermal energy consumption [kWh] 
Total 
27730 
Space heating 
7816 
Hot water 
19914 
Electrical consumption [kWh] 
Total 
17062 
Heat pump 
2456 
Internal heater 
13307 
Pumps 
1299 
Thermal losses [kWh] 
Total 
9934 
Primary energy factor [-] 
eP 
0.62 
Table 41: Summary of simulation results 
The solar fraction is a ratio of the generated solar energy to the total generated energy, which is 34.5% in this 
case. The total solar thermal energy to the system is divided in 4100 kWh to the buffer tank, and 9000 kWh to the 
e-tank. Moreover, the total heat generator energy to the system is also divided in almost half from the heat pump 
and half from the internal electrical heater of the hot water tank. As the combined efficiency of the heat pump is 
much higher than the one of the electrical heater, the electrical consumption of this element is far lower, although 
supplying the same heat to the system. Total thermal losses are split between all the elements (buffer tank, hot 
water tank, circulation, heating radiator, e-tank), finding main sources in circulation. 
The primary energy factor indicates how much primary energy is used to generate a unit of useable thermal energy. 
In this case it is calculated the total electricity consumption from the installation divided by the total thermal 
energy consumption.  
Monthly results can be observed in the next graphs for actual solar thermal energy and fraction to the system, and 
electrical yield. 
==PAGE:58==
56 
 
 
Figure 52: Solar Thermal energy to the system in kWh 
As it can be observed in Figure 52, the solar thermal energy obtained from the PVT panels is useful mainly in 
summer months. Collector output in winter is mainly stored in the ground loop, as the achieved temperatures are 
not enough to supply the buffer tank.  
From Figure 53 it can be extracted that almost all the necessary energy in July was supplied by collectors (81%), 
factor that is continuously decreasing until December.  
 
Figure 53: Fraction of solar energy to the system in percentage 
As it can be extracted from Figure 54, the electrical output is less seasonal, having an almost constant yield for 
summer months.  
From the total 25.8 MWh produced in direct current by the PVT set, only 24.6 MWh is available as output from 
the inverters in alternate current. This is due to the variability of the inverters efficiency, which becomes lower 
when the input DC power is far from the nominal inverter power. 
Regarding that the total electricity consumption of the auxiliary elements is 17 MWh, generated energy from 
photovoltaics is enough to supply the electrical demand, having no data for further electricity consumption of the 
building. With the remaining production a daily demand of 20 kWh could be supplied. 
==PAGE:59==
57 
 
 
Figure 54: Electrical yield from photovoltaics AC output in kWh 
Different operation modes of the tested installation can be observed in the next diagrams in order to give a better 
overview of the system functioning. 
 
Figure 55: Solar loop to buffer tank operation mode 
In Figure 55 it can be observed how the solar thermal output supplies the buffer tank. The collector outlet 
temperature is 71.2 °C, far higher than the medium layer temperature in the buffer, so the solar collector loop 
pump is switched on and the three-way valve directed to the tank. 
In Figure 56 the case is different, as the collector output temperature is not high enough to supply the tank (20.2 
°C), but it is higher than the output of the e-tank, so it can serve to storage heat in the ground loop, as it is shown. 
 
==PAGE:60==
58 
 
 
Figure 56: Solar loop to ground storage operation mode 
When the heat pump is needed to maintain the desired temperature in the buffer tank, the ground loop pump is 
also turned on in order to supply heat at the cold side of the auxiliary heating element, as it can be observed in 
Figure 57. 
 
Figure 57: Ground storage to heat pump cold side and heat pump hot side to buffer tank operation mode 
The demand supply side is composed by the buffer tank that supplies directly to the space heating element, and 
the hot water tank, that can be heated up by recirculating fluid from the buffer, as it is shown in Figure 58. Both 
demands setting temperatures are controlled by a three-way valve that achieves the desired conditions by mixing 
cold and hot sides of the system. 
 
==PAGE:61==
59 
 
 
Figure 58: Hot water and space heating demands supplied by buffer tank 
In addition, real measurements from different elements of the installation will be compared with the simulated 
ones in order to check the suitability of the model. These actual values are only available for October and 
November of this year, then only an average autumn month will be compared. These measurements are presented 
in Table 42, taking the average value between November and October for real measurements and for simulation 
results. It must be pointed out that weather data is not the same for the simulation, which is obtained from average 
historical values for the chosen location, therefore this comparison is only qualitative. 
Result 
Element 
Measurements 
Simulation 
Yield photovoltaics [kWh] 
AC 
737 
786.4 
Heat generator energy to the 
system [kWh] 
Total 
3510 
2769 
Heat Pump to SH 
2640 
1629 
Heat Pump to HWT 
870 
1139 
Total thermal energy 
consumption [kWh] 
Total 
3926 
3563 
Space heating 
1660 
1711 
Hot water 
2266 
1852 
Electrical consumption [kWh] 
Total 
1662 
1621 
Heat pump 
1515 
292 
Internal heater 
147 
1329 
Table 42: Real installation measurements and simulation results for an average autumn month 
On average, these results are quite comparable, observing a switching in electrical consumption from heat pump 
and internal heater. This is mainly due to the lack of direct connection between heat pump and hot water tank in 
the simplified model simulated, although in the real installation it is present, leading to a lower need of internal 
heater supply. Moreover, it can be observed a difference in heat generator energy to the system, maybe due to the 
lack of solar collector heating in the measurements and so, higher needs from auxiliary elements. 
A sensitivity study has been performed in order to show the effect of the variability of some installation features 
in the final performance of the system. This study will be limited to PVT characteristics, as this is the focus of 
this report. Some of the studied parameters are model coefficients, as well as total collector area. The effect in 
solar fraction and solar energy supply, both to the buffer and to the e-Tank, can be observed in the next graphs. 
The variation of each variable is presented as a percentage from the base case value in order to facilitate the 
comparison of each input sensitivity. These base case values were shown in Tables 39 and 40. 
==PAGE:62==
60 
 
 
Figure 59: Sensitivity analysis of Solar fraction 
From Figure 59 it can be extracted the higher variability of solar fraction with the peak collector efficiency (n0), 
followed by the total absorber area, whose effect decrease while the difference with base case increase. The wind 
dependence factor (c3) is also observed to have a big effect in the solar fraction used, being less sensible to c1 and 
c5. 
 
Figure 60: Sensitivity analysis of Solar thermal energy supply both to Buffer tank and e-Tank 
In respect of the total energy provided by PVT, it can be divided in supply to the Buffer or to the ground storage. 
In this sense, it can be observed from Figure 60 that the peak collector efficiency is also the more influencing 
factor for both supplies. The case of the active area follows the same behaviour for the buffer tank supply than for 
the total energy ratio, although its effect is steeper for the energy to the e-Tank, as all the average temperatures 
are increased, not achieving a maximum temperature limit. It can be extracted that the effect of c1 is balanced 
between both contributions. When c1 is decreased, total energy to the buffer is increased but energy to the e-Tank 
is decreased. This may be due to the higher effect of these thermal losses for high collector output, which 
corresponds with solar loop to buffer operation mode, and the more suitable intervals for this mode to the detriment 
of ground storage time steps.  
 
==PAGE:63==
61 
 
8. Conclusions 
 
In this thesis, several aspects of PVT panels have been investigated. This paper analysed the experimental thermal 
and electrical performance of two different unglazed PV/T panels. Regarding heating performance, the lack of 
clear days for the Steady State test lead to focus only in a dynamic model, characterized by the Quasi-dynamic 
Test method from the standard. Considering the characteristics of the panels some assumptions were made, 
obtaining a final simplified collector performance equation presented in Equation 20. 
         𝑄= 𝐹′(𝜏𝛼)𝑒𝑛𝐺𝑇−𝑐1(𝑇𝑚−𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏) −𝑐3𝑢(𝑇𝑚−𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏) + 𝑐4(𝐸𝐿−𝜎𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏
4) −𝑐5
𝑑𝑇𝑚
𝑑𝑡        (20)                         
The panel was tested in two different operation modes, one with only thermal output and the other with electrical 
production also. Variations in obtained coefficients were observed for both states, obtaining a peak collector 
efficiency of 80% when the PV is not working, lowered to 65% when the electrical part was connected. This 
difference in peak collector efficiency is of the same magnitude as the average electrical efficiency, which presents 
values between 14% and 16%. This pointed out that the total reference efficiency of the panel is almost constant 
for both operation modes. However, heat losses were lower for the PVT operation mode, which could be because 
these temperature variations are absorbed by the PV cell electrical performance. 
Cooling performance was characterized, both in theoretical and experimental terms (QDT model). One of the 
theoretical models used (Test) followed in an accurate way the actual panel behaviour, presenting parameter 
values close to the calculated from measurements. The experimental model gave different results than for heating 
operation, pointing out disparate performances at day and night time. However, this characterization was made 
only for days with no rain, as it was observed that rainy intervals gave really far results from the obtained by 
models. This is due to the lack of a model term related to the precipitation effect, which has never been obtained 
in previous research. 
The electrical performance was modelled by a reference electrical efficiency with a cell temperature dependent 
factor. A comparison of electrical performance with and without the cooling effect of the heat transfer fluid flow 
was carried out, both in theoretical and experimental ways. The theoretical way was focused on the way to estimate 
the cell temperature, and the experimental one was studied by stopping the flow some days in order to observe 
differences in performance. For the PV cooling mode, it was found an increase in efficiency of 3.3% for 
experimental data, and 5% for the theoretical approach. The same model was obtained for both modes, just varying 
the equivalent cell temperature expression. 
Summarizing, the unglazed PVT panel presented a peak collector thermal efficiency of about 65%, and an average 
electrical efficiency higher than 15%, resulting in a total energy efficiency above 80%. Comparing the annual 
yield of this system with an assessment of separated PV and solar collectors, the achieved increase in total output 
with PVT panels was proved, obtaining an exergy production 83% higher and an electrical yield more than two 
times higher for the PVT assessment. 
As a final point, a real installation with this kind of panels was simulated in order to evaluate the scope of this 
technology. A solar fraction of 35% of the total consumption was achieved, including heat supply to the central 
tank and to the ground storage. This means that a 35% of the total heat needed is supplied by the PVT panels, 
presenting a total annual yield of 13 MWh. Moreover, the electricity production was enough to cover the 
necessities of auxiliary systems and pumps, producing a total of 25 MWh. Values from the simulation were 
compared with real measurements from the installation for an average autumn month, obtaining close results. In 
addition, a sensitivity analysis was performed so as to evaluate the effect of panel parameters variations on the 
solar contribution to the system. Peak collector efficiency, total collector area and wind dependence factor were 
found to have the highest influence in the final PVT supply. 
While this project pointed out the technical advantages of PVT systems, some additional factors determine the 
applicability of these panels. Aspects of building integration, panel durability, and economic regards play a key 
role in the future development of this technology. Moreover, further research could be made with better test 
conditions and measurements accuracy, being able to provide better results and characterization. 
 
==PAGE:64==
62 
 
9. References 
 
[1]  P. Charalambous, “Photovoltaic thermal (PV/T) collectors: A review,” Applied Thermal Engineering, 2007. 
[2]  S. Fortuin, “Hybrid PV-Thermal collector development: concepts, experiences, results and research needs,” 
Energy Procedia, 2014.  
[3]  Shyam, “Analytical expression of temperature dependent electrical efficiency of N-PVT water collectors 
connected in series,” Solar Energy, 2015.  
[4]  R. Zakharchenko, “Photovoltaic solar panel for a hybrid PV/thermal system,” Solar Energy Materials & 
Solar Cells, 2004.  
[5]  S. A. Hamid, “An overview of photovoltaic thermal combination (PV/T combi) technology,” Renewable 
and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 2014.  
[6]  A. Kumar, “Historical and recent development of photovoltaic thermal (PVT) technologies,” Renewable 
and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 2015.  
[7]  B. P. S. Fischer, “Collector test method under quasi-dynamic conditions according to the European Standard 
EN 12975-2,” Solar Energy, 2004.  
[8]  B. P. U. Petterson, “IMPROVING THE COMPATIBILITY BETWEEN STEADY STATE AND QUASI 
DYNAMIC TESTING FOR NEW COLLECTOR DESIGNS,” 2015. 
[9]  T. Osório, “Testing of solar thermal collectors under transient conditions,” Energy Procedia, 2012.  
[10] B. Perers, “A tool for standardized collector performance calculations including PVT,” Energy Procedia, 
2012.  
[11] Q. A. i. S. H. a. C. Technology, A guide to the standard EN 12975, 22012.  
[12] L. Ciabatonni, “Experimental Validation of a Dynamic Linear Model of Photovoltaic-Thermal Collector,” 
IEEE, 2012.  
[13] C. d. Keizer, “Evaluating the thermal and electrical performance of several uncovered PVT collectors with 
a field test,” Energy Procedia, 2016.  
[14] L. Brottier, “Field test results of an innovative PV/T collector for solar domestic hot water,” Energy 
Procedia , 2016.  
[15] A. Fudholi, “Performance analysis of photovoltaic thermal (PVT) water collectors,” Energy Conversion 
and Management, 2014.  
[16] N. Aste, “Performance monitoring and modeling of an uncovered photovoltaic-thermal (PVT) water 
collector,” Solar Energy, 2016.  
[17] N. Aste, “Water PVT collectors performance comparison,” Energy Procedia, 2017.  
[18] J.-H. Kim, “Comparison of Electrical and Thermal Performances of Glazed and Unglazed PVT Collectors,” 
International Journla of Photoenergy, 2012.  
[19] J.-H. Kim, “The experimental performance of an unglazed PV-thermal collector with a fully wetted 
absorber,” Energy Procedia, 2012.  
==PAGE:65==
63 
 
[20] P. Dupeyrat, “Study of the thermal and electrical performances of PVT solar hot water system,” Energy and 
Buildings , 2014.  
[21] A. Rabadiya, “Comparative Analysis of Wind Loss Coefficient (Wind Heat Transfer Coefficient) for Solar 
Flat Plate Collector,” International Journal of Emerging Technology and Advanced Engineering, vol. 2, 
2012.  
[22] B. Perers, “Validation of a dynamic model for unglazed collectors including condensation. Application for 
standardised testing and simulation in TRNSYS and IDA,” Department of Civil Engineering DTU, 2010. 
[23] M. Rommel, “Application of unglazed PVT collectors for domestic hot water pre-heating in a development 
and testing system,” Energy Procedia, 2014.  
[24] S. A. Kalogirou, Solar Energy Engineering, Academic Press, 2014.  
[25] S. A. Kalogirou, “Solar thermal collectors and applications,” Progress in energy and combustion science, 
2004.  
[26] F. d. Winter, Solar collectors, Energy Storage, and Materials, 1990.  
[27] S. Furbo, Heat Storage for Solar Heating Systems (Educational Note), BYG·DTU U-071, 2005.  
[28] K. Jäger, Solar Energy: Fundamentals, Technology, and Systems, Delft University of Technology, 2014.  
[29] A. McEvoy, Practical Handbook of Photovoltaics, Elsevier, 2012.  
[30] K.-A. W. Harry Wirth, Photovoltaic Modules: Technology and Reliability, Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co, 
2016.  
[31] I. 9806-3, Thermal performance of unglazed liquid heating collectors, 1995.  
[32] A. 93-77, Methods for testing to determine the thermal performance of solar collectors, 1978.  
[33] J. A. Duffie, Solar Engineering of thermal processes, JOHN WILEY & SONS, 1991.  
[34] E. I. D. 9806, Solar Energy-Solar thermal collectors-Test methods, 2012.  
[35] J. R. Howell, Thermal Radiation Heat Transfer, CRC Press, 2011.  
[36] E. Sartori, “Convection coefficient equations for forced air flow over flat surfaces,” Solar Energy, vol. 80, 
2006.  
[37] S. Dubey, “Temperature Dependent Photovoltaic (PV) Efficiency and Its Effect on PV Production in the 
World - A Review,” Energy Procedi, vol. 33, 2013.  
[38] E. Skoplaki, “On the temperature dependence of photovoltaic module electrical performance: A review of 
efficiency/power correlations,” Solar Energy, vol. 83, 2009.  
[39] I. 60904-5, Part 5: Determination of the equivalent cell temperature (ECT) of photovoltaic (PV) devices by 
the open-circuit voltage method, 2011.  
[40] R. Araneo, “Assessment of a practical model to estimate the cell temperature of a photovoltaic module,” 
Energy Environ Eng, 2014.  
[41] E. Skoplaki, “A simple correlation for the operating temperature of photovoltaic modules of arbitrary 
mounting,” Solar Energy, vol. 92, 2008.  
==PAGE:66==
64 
 
[42] D. King, “Photovoltaic array performance model,” in SAND2004, 2004.  
[43] X. Yan, Linear Regression Analysis, 2009.  
[44] M. H. Kutner, Applied Linear Regression Models, McGraw Hill, 2003.  
[45] U.-E. 12975-1:2006+A1:2011, “Thermal solar systems and components - Solar collectors,” 2011. 
[46] D. Evans, “Simplified method for predicting photovoltaic array output,” Solar Energy, 1981.  
[47] G. Notton, “Modelling of a double-glass photovoltaic module using finite differences,” Applied Thermal 
Engineering, 2005.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
