==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Algorithms for Indexing and Top-k search
Spell checking in a search engine
Thea Rasmussen (s113611)
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Nowadays spell checking in search engines is a necessity. For most people spell check-
ers benefit in relation to typical typographical errors in example mishitting keys on
a keyboard (e.g. smartphone keyboards, PC keyboards). However for some people,
spelling is particularly hard and spell checkers are simply a necessity, specifically
when searching in search engines.
The company Nota has created an online library, www.nota.dk, for people with
reading disabilities. Nota wants to improve their spell checker solution in order to
help their users find what they are searching for. The spell checker is currently not
particularly efficient as it is not always able to suggest reasonable alternatives to
misspelled inputs.
This thesis researches state-of-the-art spell checker algorithms, selecting four al-
gorithms and a selection of distance metrics that seem suitable to solve Nota’s spell
checking problems. A dataset of misspelled words is generated from Nota’s log data
and used to test the four spell checker algorithms. Particularly one of the spell check-
ers, TrigramSimilarity, shows great potential, after the algorithm was modified in
order to improve on query search time. A weights module was developed, in which,
it is possible to setup a set of rules that are based on typical spelling errors made by
Danish dyslexics.
Results show that it is possible to raise the quality of the candidate sets, by
applying a set of rules based on misspelling tendencies of Danish dyslexics to the
implemented distance metrics. In order to further improve the solution, more tests
should be made using Nota’s log data and by doing user tests, so that it is possible
to fine-tune the weights.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a masters degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
The work has been carried out in the period of August 1st 2017 to January 1st
2018, with the supervision of Inge Li Gørtz and Phillip Bille.
Kongens Lyngby, December 31, 2017
Thea Rasmussen (s113611)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost I would like to thank my supervisors Inge and Phillip for super-
vising in relation to this thesis. It has been an exciting journey and their knowledge
and expertise have been a big help. During this project they both have broadened
my perspective on datastructures and algorithms, and helped clarify how to approach
the analytical phase when working on such a big project.
I would also like to thank Siamak, Maja Rønne, Michael Carlsson and the rest of
the employees at Nota. It has been a very interesting learning-experience collaborat-
ing with the Nota employees on trying to solve this real-life issue. Furthermore, it has
been great having someone to discuss the technicalities and potential improvements
with. I must also thank Siamak for his guidance, using his expertise and previous
experience as a supervisor, to give excellent inputs on improvements to this thesis.
Last but not least, I should thank co-student Sebastien Demortain for great sup-
port and response. Our friendship is a result of DTU representing an international
community which I love and appreciate.
This project have been a great experience in every way possible.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
State of the Art
5
2.1
Nota . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Dyslexia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Spell Checking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.1
Approximate String Matching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.2
Data Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.3
Algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3.4
Round up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3
Platform
27
3.1
Solr
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Spell Checker Module
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Data
31
4.1
Spell Checker Index
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Misspelled Input
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5
Methodology
35
5.1
Data Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Distance Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.3
Algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.4
Test Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.4.1
Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6
Results
43
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6.1
Algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.1.1
Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.1.2
Semantic Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.2
Distance Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.2.1
Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.2.2
Semantic Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.2.3
Levenshtein vs. Damerau-Levenshtein . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7
Improvements
55
7.1
Weighted Levenshtein distance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7.1.1
Weights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.2
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7.2.1
Weights module
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7.2.2
TrigramSimilarity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.2.3
Test Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7.3.1
Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7.3.2
Semantic Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
8
Discussion
67
8.1
Algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
8.2
Distance metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
8.3
Platform Modifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
8.4
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
9
Conclusion
71
A Test Data
73
B Solr Module
75
C Rule Set
77
Bibliography
79
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In this thesis four spell checker algorithms suitable for application in search engines,
will be implemented and tested on a dataset of misspelled words. The purpose is to
show that it is possible to improve a current spell checker solution in relation to the
quality of the results, applying the knowledge of the spelling tendencies of the search
engine users.
Search engines plays a significant role in almost every persons life on an everyday
basis. Several times a day search engines are used to search for entertainment, general
information or questions i.e. that involve the meaning of life. It is expected that the
machine, the search engine, can either give us an answer or lead us the right way.
Intuitively, when speaking of search engines, the first thing that comes to mind is
Google. Everywhere around us, every time someone enters something in a search
field on a website, in an app or in a computer program, the search inputs is most
likely handled by a search engine. A search engines job is to analyze and thereafter
interpret the inputs, returning the most relevant answers.
A search engine is a retrieval tool which primary job is to index data and support
fast query response by interpreting the search inputs.
This includes dealing with
search inputs that may not necessarily exist in the index, either because related con-
tent simply does not exist or because it is deformed in some way i.e. misspelled.
Dealing with misspelled search inputs plays a big role in a search engine. If the
search engine is not able to analyze or understand the inputs, it will not be able to
suggest any related content. Imagine the Google search engine not being able to list
any URL’s every time a search inputs was misspelled. Analysis of misspelled inputs
is most often dealt with by a spell checker module. Some platforms might not deal
with a lot of misspelled user-inputs and therefore do not need a spell checker, others
deal with misspelled inputs in every query.
Misspelled search inputs can be caused by various factors. Keyboard typograph-
ical errors belong to one of the most common and is a problem that most people can
relate to, be it because the smartphone keyboard is too small or because one is typing
too fast, thereby mishitting keys. Sometimes misspelled inputs can also be caused
by other factors - like not knowing how to spell a word or a name, maybe one have
difficulties not knowing how to spell in general making it even harder to formulate
inputs to a search engine.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
This thesis deals with search inputs on a search engine from a very specific user
segment.
Dyslexia is a definition for people who are struggling with spelling and reading.
Dyslexics are particularly interesting as they, like everybody else, use search engines
everyday, but since struggling with spelling, their search inputs becomes extra chal-
lenging to deal with from a search engine perspective. Furthermore, it is hard to
generalize on dyslexics, as each individual is different and struggle with different
areas of spelling. This thesis will take a look at some of the tendencies of Danish
dyslexics and try to use this knowledge in order to apply it to a search engine spell
checker.
Nota is an online library for people with reading disabilities. 70% of their users are
dyslexic and everyday they deal with thousands of misspelled search queries. Some
of these queries are handled with success by their search platform, a lot are not.
Search engines include several big computational and technical areas; crawling,
indexing, ranking and querying. These areas are broad and it would be impossible to
cover them all in one project. Nota deals with all these areas on an everyday basis in
relation to maintaining their search platform. The scope of this project was narrowed
down to the most important problem for Nota; to improve the search engine query
performance in relation to the quality of the spell checker suggestions. Improving the
quality of the spell checker suggestions will achieve in a better user experience, by
helping their users finding what they are looking for.
This thesis will include a state of the art evaluation of spell checker algorithms
in relation to search engines. It will contain a description of Nota’s data and the
dataset that is used to evaluate the implemented spell checker algorithms. Dealing
with a user segment struggling to spell, can be challenging and therefore there will be
an analysis of the spelling tendencies that this user segment shows. These tendencies
and observations are then transformed into a rule-set, which will be applied to the
spell checker algorithms in order to achieve higher quality search results. Nota have
not given strict requirements on query time performance or memory consumption.
Therefore, besides a focus on higher quality spell checker results, the research will also
focus on maintaining a fast and reasonable query time in relation to Nota’s current
spell checker solution.
During the various stages of this thesis, the implemented solution has taken dif-
ferent directions. Initially a spell checker module was developed in C++, however
later, the implemented project was converted into Java in order to deliver a final and
compiled module that integrates to Nota’s search platform. The components of the
final module will be described in Chapter 7. All relevant details of the final module
can be found in Appendix B.
Time was spent on integrating a spell checker to Nota’s search platform. The API
of the search platform have been studied in detail in order to complete a final product
==PAGE:13==
1 Introduction
3
that could be delivered to Nota. This research will not be included in the thesis, but
a brief elaboration of it can also be found in Appendix B.
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
State of the Art
This thesis came to life when Siamak Amjadi, an IT executive of Nota, reached out
to DTU. Siamak Amjadi expressed that Nota were having difficulties dealing with
misspelled inputs in their search engine; too often the search engine failed to find
related content. Nota was worried that these ’no hits’ would confuse the users and
make the users loose confidence, when the search engine would not succeed in finding
related content. For Nota it is important that the most relevant content is shown to
the users, no matter the spelling error that might appear in the inputs.
Figure 2.1: Searching for ’hary podder’ in Nota’s search engine results in no related
suggestions. The spell checker suggest to replace it with ’harry poder’.
Figure 2.1 shows the result of searching on the misspelled inputs ’hary podder’ in
Nota’s search engine. The spell checker does not find any related content, however it
does suggest a bad alternative (harry poder), clearly not reflecting the meaning of the
misspelled input. ’Poder’ is a Danish word with several meanings and is syntactically
closer to ’podder’ than ’potter’ (one ’d’ can be deleted thereby transforming ’podder’
to ’poder’). Measuring how many deletions are needed in order to tranform one word
into another, reflects wanting to find the similarity between the words. Similarity can
be measured in a ton of ways and this chapter will elaborate on some of the most
popular methods for measuring word similarity.
==PAGE:16==
6
2 State of the Art
Furthermore, this chapter will include the motivation behind this thesis and re-
search the spelling tendencies of Danish dyslexics as well as elaborate on the cutting
edge spell checker techniques.
2.1
Nota
Nota is a Danish company that develops and distributes an online library for people
with reading and spelling disabilities. They have approximately 135.000 members,
with approximately 70% of them being dyslexic. The last 30% consist of visually im-
paired, teachers, physically disabled people etc. Nota belongs to the Danish Ministry
of Culture. Licenses are given to dyslexic or visually impaired students for free as a
part of the free education system in Denmark.
The online library contains audio books, PDF’s and Braille books, with in-house
production of both audio and Braille books. Nota offers an in-app tool that visualizes
the reading experience using live markup features in the PDF’s with simultaneous
audio voice over. This helps ease the reading experience of the users that struggle
with reading or learning how to read. Besides the online library, Nota also functions
as a real library, lending out audio books and other material to blind people, elderly
etc. Nota have approximately 55.000 titles in their online database and the material
is used by an average of 5.000 users a day.
Nota.dk backend
Nota.dk
Android app
iPhone app
Solr search 
engine
…..
Figure 2.2: A graphical interpretation of the structure of Nota.dk. It is roughly
divided into three levels; the back-end, the Solr search platform and
the front-end (apps and website). This project specifically deals with
modifications in the Solr search platform.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Dyslexia
7
Figure 2.2 shows a model of the development structure of Nota.dk. This project
will deal with modifications on the Solr open source search platform, that is, the
search engine of Nota.dk. Chapter 3 describes the basic concepts of Solr and briefly
elaborate on the Solr functionality, indexing structure and standard spell checker
module. The chapter also contains a brief elaboration of the current spell checker
setup of Nota.dk.
Nota.dk’s dataset consists of books in all genres, ranging from children’s books to
books for adults, to teaching material in primary school and high school. Some books
are offered in various languages (e.g. Danish, Swedish, English etc.), indicating that
a spell checker should be able to match on non-Danish words and therefore not only
consider typical Danish misspelling tendencies.
The users of Nota.dk search for book titles, author names, genres etc. Author
names can be hard to spell and book titles do not necessarily need to be semantically
correct.
Furthermore, there is the possibility that the users do typical keyboard
typographical errors. Considering these challenges and the fact that most of Nota.dk’s
users are dyslexic, it makes the search entry logs of Nota very interesting and an
obvious place to extract test data from.
2.2
Dyslexia
Dyslexia is defined as a learning disability with neurological causes (Norman An-
dersen, Kolstrup, and Arendal (2016)). It is unknown exactly how many dyslexics
residents there are in Denmark, but Nota estimate that around 7% of the Danish
population are dyslexic (Nota.dk (2017)). It is near impossible to generalize on the
spelling errors of dyslexic people as each person spells differently. This section will
elaborate on some of the difficulties that Danish dyslexics struggle with.
Elbro (2007) is a Danish compendium and analytical tool about reading difficul-
ties. The book describes, amongst other things, the difficulties that dyslexic people
struggle with and how dyslexia is a problem specifically caused by the difficulties
of analyzing the sound principle of the written language. The sound principle is a
term that describes how the letters in a word represents the sound units of a word.
These sound units are also known as phonemes. Dyslexics struggle to identify these
phonemes and as a consequence have difficulties reading and spelling.
Elbro (2007) describes how dyslexics rely greatly on recognition of words or parts
of the words, making it especially hard to recall how to spell words that a person
have not seen a lot of times like foreign words, author names etc. If a non-dyslexic
person try to spell a word which she has never seen before, the intuition is to spell
by the sounds of the word and the known tendencies of the specific language.
”Dyslexics has difficulty dividing the verbal speech into the language
sounds (phonemes) that form the basis of writing.”
— Carsten Elbro, Det Danske Nationalleksikon
==PAGE:18==
8
2 State of the Art
Dyslexics struggle especially with this as they are not able to recognize the sounds
of the word, leading to consonant- or vowel confusion or omission of letters.
Furthermore, Elbro (2007) also describes how dyslexics struggle with the order
of the letters in a word. This means that a word spelled by a dyslexic person can
contain the correct letters, but they may be completely out of order.
Similar the English language, Danish is full of silent letters that makes it especially
hard for dyslexic people to recognize sounds. Silent ’g’, ’d’ and ’h’ consistently appear
in common Danish words and as these silent letters change the sounds of the words
slightly, it is hard to hear whether or not a letter should appear (even for non-
dyslexics).
The Danish alphabet also contains three extra vowels, æ, ø and å, compared to
the modern English alphabet Wikipedia (2017). These vowels are pronounced with
unique sounds when they are apart, but can sound like various other vowels when put
into words. Originally, these vowels are actually based on combining existing vowels
i.e. æ is a combination of a and e, ø is a combination of o and e and å stems from
double a’s.
The Danish language is a mixture of old Danish words, new Danish words, foreign
words that have been converted into Danish and foreign words that are kept in their
original form. To almost every rule in the Danish language, there exist an exception.
Sprognævn (2007) lists some of the orthographic rules of the Danish language (and
the exceptions). Some can potentially be quite useful if applied in a spell checker;
double consonants appear often, but the consonants j and v can never appear next
to eachother in a Danish word. There is no exceptions to this rule. Some rules are
open to interpretation like; every vowel have an original sound, but can also take the
sound of at least one other vowel.
While talking to Nota’s librarians it has become clear that silent letters and double
consonant words are big obstacles for dyslexic people. As dyslexics are aware that
the Danish written language contains a lot of silent and double consonant letters,
there is a tendency to leave them out or add them where they do not belong. Typical
typographical errors amongst dyslexics also include mixing up consonants or vowels
that sounds like eachother e.g. ’d’ sounds like ’t’, ’i’ sounds like ’y’ or ’x’ and ’z’ being
especially hard to analyze as they are rare in the Danish written language. Chapter 7
defines a set of rules, that represents the difficulties dyslexics struggle with, thereafter
applying them to a spell checker as to test whether these result in better matchings
on misspelled words.
Elbro (2007) describes that, when dyslexics achieve more reading experience they
develop a sort of logo-graphical word recognition, being able to recognize the first
morpheme (the prefix) in a word. This can cause problems, as the first morpheme of
a word does not necessarily have anything to do with the meaning of the word i.e.
’broder’ (brother) and ’broen’ (the bridge), where the first morphene ’bro’ (bridge),
does not result in the two words being related in any way. A positive take on this
is that dyslexic people, with reading experience, might show a tendency to correctly
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Spell Checking
9
spell the first couple of letters in a word.
Many dyslexic people struggle with real-word spelling errors (semantics). The
analysis and research done on dyslexics and real-word errors is a broad subject which
is hard to generalize on. Not much data exists or is accessible on this subject. This
project is dealing with raw inputs which is analyzed word by word and the inputs
does not necessarily make sense semantically (book titles, themes, author names etc.).
This means that there will not be any semantic analysis of the complete input as a
whole, as this is not a part of the scope.
2.3
Spell Checking
Natural language processing is a broad field in computer science. It describes a selec-
tion of problems that all involves the interaction between the human and computer.
One of the sub-fields of natural language processing is spell checking and how to build
efficient and ’intelligent’ spell checkers.
The purpose of a spell checker can roughly be divided into two categories; syntac-
tic or semantic (non-word errors and real-word errors). For look-ups in a database
the user should be supported with a syntactic spell checker, making suggestions on
potential matches in case the user is searching for something in the database, but
does not know how to spell it. The spell checker should be able to suggest closely
related words to the search inputs. Alternatively, when a student is writing a paper,
the student want to use a spell checker that can detect syntactic and semantic errors
in the text. In the latter, spell checking mechanisms are combined such that a spell
checker can support both areas.
Spell checkers can be online or offline. Online spell checkers do all computations
’online’, that is, when the search inputs is given. Offline solutions precompute data,
creating custom indexes, that can be used when the misspelled inputs is given. Offline
spell checkers are often faster than the online, as the original dictionary have been
treated in a way that supports fast and high quality query responses.
Often, when speaking of online and offline spell checkers, the terms exhaustive
and heuristic search are used. Having a dictionary of words and comparing a search
inputs to all words in the dictionary, returning the word that is closests to the inputs,
is a classical example of an exhaustive search in an online spell checker. Heuristics of
a spell checker often refer to the distance metric chosen to select whether two words
are similar or not.
Some spell checkers make use of data-mining i.e. they learn by saving information
about the misspelled inputs, analyzing this, leading the spell checkers to respond
faster or give a better matching to the inputs. Theoretically, using data-mining and
machine-learning seems like a solid way of finding the right words to a misspelled
inputs, but a solution based on these methods requires resources and data that might
not be available at the given situation. Therefore, these methods are still not widely
==PAGE:20==
10
2 State of the Art
used, but it is suspected that companies like Google use data-mining and machine
learning, among other methods, in their ’Did You Mean’ search engine function.
Each spell checker serves a specific purpose and prioritize different areas. Some
spell checkers are built to be really fast, but do not care about space consumption.
Other spell checkers focus on improving the matching quality, alongside storing the
data in a space friendly data structure. Some spell checkers compromise on speed
in order to further improve the matching quality. In this project the main focus is
to achieve good quality matchings, maintaining a fast query time and a reasonable
space consumption.
Research in spell checkers goes more than a century back and because of the
technological evolution taking place in the past, the focus of the research have changed
over the course of the years; now focusing on quality spell checker response and fast
query time. Some of the algorithms discussed in this chapter are old and some even
reflect physical implementation in journal archives.
It should be noted that a spell checker problem greatly depend on the dataset
available and the user inputs. Spell checking in a database of cars versus a database
of books, might not cause the same spell checking problems, likewise research based on
user inputs from people who are not dyslexic cannot necessarily be used to generalize
or conclude on users who are dyslexic.
There exists numerous methods and approaches that can be used to implement a
spell checker. Most methods are looking to reduce the search space when a misspelled
inputs is registered. Some methods focus on creating a spell checker solution that
consumes little space but as a consequence compensates on the query time, whereas
other methods focus completely on the output and therefore do not care about space
(or time). In general there is a clear trade-off between space and time.
A need for fast query response is one thing, but spell checkers also need to return
quality matches. Finding a good matching can be hard and depends on various factors
such as the type of users, their tendencies and the characteristics of the words in the
dictionary. This means that some spell checkers potentially can be more useful than
others, in some cases spell checkers can even be language specific resulting in a good
performance for a specific language.
Spell checkers works by selecting an output which is as close as possible to the
inputs i.e. measuring similarity. How the spell checker measures similarities of the
input varies and therefore spell checker results might be completely different from
one spell checker to another (using the same inputs). Spell checking software often
consist of three basic elements:
• A strategy for measuring similarity between strings i.e. comparing a misspelled
word to a correctly spelled word and giving an estimate of how similar the words
are.
• A strategy for indexing data efficiently. Efficient index involves supporting fast
look-ups in the data structure, but also ensures good search quality matchings.
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Spell Checking
11
• A strategy for fast retrieval of potential candidates, when searching for a mis-
spelled inputs.
The following sections describes the state of the art research within spell checkers
and elaborate on the three basic elements of a spell checker, starting with approximate
string matching methods that enables measuring distance between strings.
2.3.1
Approximate String Matching
Approximate string matching is a technique used for pattern recognition in strings.
These algorithms can conveniently be used to compute similarity scores between
strings. In general, a matching is based on finding patterns in strings and calculating
how much they have in common i.e. how well the matching is. Approximate string
matching methods can be based on completely different pattern recognition concepts
and therefore it is possible that two methods return different similarity scores on
the same inputss. The methods are called approximate because there is no correct
answer to the string matching problem; some answers will be better suited than others
and for some problems it might not be clear, which method are better suited. The
approximate string matching methods gives approximate answers and are therefore
often referred to as fuzzy string searching methods.
The similarity of two strings is measured in percentages and it can be found by
calculating the distance between the two strings.
A distance between strings can
be defined in many ways and the following sections propose various string distance
methods also known as string distance metrics.
The terminology used throughout this section:
a, b
Input strings to the distance metric
n, m
Represents the size of a and b, respectively, that is, n is the number of
letters in a and m is the number of letters in b
i, j
Iterators, where i = [0..n] and j = [0..m]
The methods proposed in the following sections will be referred to as distance
metrics although not all of them fulfill the mathematical requirements of a metric
(specifically the fourth rule of a metric; satisfying triangle inequality).
Levenshtein Distance
One of the most commonly known and practiced approximate string matching meth-
ods is the Levenshtein (1966) distance. It is a string distance metric that measures
the edit distance between two strings by counting the minimum number of inser-
tions, deletions or substitutions needed in order to obtain one from the other. Below,
the three operations; insertion, deletion and substitution have been applied to three
English words.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 State of the Art
bame
→
blame (insertion of l)
knight
→
night (deletion of k)
ethereol
→
ethereal (substitution of o to a)
The Levenshtein distance satisfies the triangle inequality, making it possible to
use it for various geometric purposes. Figure 2.3 exemplifies that the Levenshtein
distance satisfies the triangle inequality.
For the given example each deletion or
insertion operation have a cost of one.
Substitution is based on two operations;
deletion followed by insertion.
sahme
hsmae
shame
2
3
4
Figure 2.3: An example showing that the Levenshtein distance satisfies the triangle
inequality. Any two sides of the triangle are bigger than or equal to the
remaining side.
Equation 2.1 shows the mathematical recursion of the Levenshtein distance. Im-
plementing the recursion, as is, results in exponential running time. In relation to
implementation, the Wagner and Fischer (1974) algorithm is often used as an alter-
native to a direct implementation of the recursion function. This algorithm makes
use of dynamic programming and compute the distance in O(mn) time.
leva,b(i, j) =







max(i, j)
if min(i, j) = 0,
min



leva,b(i −1, j) + 1
leva,b(i, j −1) + 1
leva,b(i −1, j −1) + 1(ai̸=bj)
otherwise.
(2.1)
The edit distance values that the recursive function generates can be visualized
via a nm-matrix. This matrix contains the edit distances between the prefixes of the
first string and the second (so far in the iteration). Table 2.1 show the generated
values when finding the Levenshtein distance between bame and blame.
The Damerau-Levenshtein distance is a modification of the original Levenshtein
distance, first described by Damerau (1964). It includes transpositions of adjacent
letters e.g. nkight →knight in one operation (which requires two operations using
Levenshtein distance). Equation 2.2 shows the recursion function of the Damerau-
Levenshtein distance, where the added element da,b(i −2, j −2) + 1 corresponds to a
transposition.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Spell Checking
13
b
a
m
e
0
1
2
3
4
b
1
0
1
2
3
l
2
1
1
2
3
a
3
2
1
2
3
m
4
3
2
1
2
e
5
4
3
2
1
Table 2.1: Calculating the edit distance between prefixes of each string in an itera-
tive approach results in the following values. The Levenshtein distance
between the two strings is retrieved at position [n, m] = 1.
da,b(i, j) =























max(i, j)
if min(i, j) = 0,
min







da,b(i −1, j) + 1
da,b(i, j −1) + 1
da,b(i −1, j −1) + 1(ai̸=bj)
da,b(i −2, j −2) + 1
if i, j > 1 and ai = bj−1
and ai−1 = bj
min



da,b(i −1, j) + 1
da,b(i, j −1) + 1
da,b(i −1, j −1) + 1(ai̸=bj)
otherwise.
(2.2)
The Damerau-Levenshtein distance can be implemented in a restricted version
that does not allow sub-strings to be edited more than once.
This results in the
distance metric no longer complying with the triangle inequality.
The restricted
Damerau-Levenshtein method also goes by the name of Optimal String-Alignment,
but will be referred to as restricted Damerau-Levenshtein distance in this thesis. The
true Damerau-Levenshtein distance allows that sub-strings are edited more than once
and thereby withholds the triangle inequality.
Figure 2.4 shows an example where the distances between the restricted and
the true Damerau-Levenshtein differ, making it clear that the restricted Damerau-
Levenshtein distance does not satisfy the triangle inequality. The restricted distance
between sahme and hsmae can be expressed by four transformation states (transform-
ing sahme into hsmae) :
{hahme, hshme, hsmme, hsmae}
giving an edit distance of four. Using the true Damerau-Levenshtein distance it would
instead require three transformation steps :
{ashme, hsame, hsmae}
While the true Damerau-Levenshtein method is calculating the edit distance, it keeps
track of visited letters. This information is used to trace back and retrieve a possibly
==PAGE:24==
14
2 State of the Art
sahme
hsmae
shame
1
2
4
Restricted Damerau-Levenshtein
sahme
hsmae
shame
1
2
3
True Damerau-Levenshtein
Figure 2.4: Illustration
of
the
differences
between
the
restricted
Damerau-
Levenshtein distance (left) and the true Damerau-Levenshtein distance
(right). It is possible to see that the restricted Damerau-Levenshtein
distance does not satisfy the triangle inequality as 1 + 2 < 4.
better distance. In the process of finding an edit distance of three between sahme
and hsmae, it initially registers that the first letter ’s’ needs to be substituted by an
’h’. It then registers ’looked for an h’. It can use this information if it bumps into an
’h’ later and possibly decrease the total distance so far (when calculating the matrix
distance values).
Updating and using this information, requires that the entire distance matrix is
kept in memory along with extra variables being maintained and therefore it takes
significantly longer time to compute the true Damerau-Levenshtein distance than the
restricted.
All examples given have applied the same weight (cost) for every operation. It is
possible to modify the Levenshtein distance (and Damerau-Levenshtein), such that
different weights are applied to different operations. A rule set can be setup such that
substituting ’r’ by ’s’ is more expensive, than substituting ’m’ by ’n’. In this project
all three distance metrics will be used for testing.
Jaro-Winkler distance
The Jaro-Winkler distance by Winkler (1990) is, like the Levenshtein distance, a
string distance metric. It predispositions strings that share a common prefix up to a
certain length and it is based on the Jaro (1989) distance which measures similarity of
two strings by counting the number of matching letters. A matching letter is defined
by two letters being equal at the same position in the strings (the same index) or
within a certain range.
Equation 2.3 shows how to compute the Jaro distance, using the number of x
matching letters between a and b within the range of
⌊max(|a|, |b|)
2
⌋
−1
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Spell Checking
15
and t which is half the number of transpositions (within the matching).
djaro =
{ 0
if m = 0,
1
3( x
|a| + x
|b| + x−t
x )
otherwise.
(2.3)
The Jaro–Winkler distance use the Jaro distance but adds a prefix scale. The
Jaro-Winkler distance is defined in Equation 2.4.
dwinkler = djaro + (ℓp(1 −djaro))
(2.4)
Here djaro is the Jaro distance between a and b, ℓis the length of common prefix at
the start of the string up to a maximum of four letters and p is the constant prefix
scaling factor (standard value is p = 0.1).
In order to clarify lets give an example comparing ’shame’ against ’flame’ and
’shallow’. Table 2.2 show the calculations of the Jaro and the Jaro-Winkler distance
of shame - flame and shame - shallow. In both cases transpositions does not appear
and therefore t = 0. The example shows that because ’shame’ and ’shallow’ have a
common prefix of length three, the similarity score between those two and ’shame’
and ’flame’ is actually higher with 77% against 73% respectively. Alarm clocks might
ring, because in this example ’shame’ and ’flame’ is probably the better matching,
but in some cases the Jaro-Winkler distance could be preferred over the Levenshtein
distance, especially in those cases where the first couple of letters are correctly spelled.
It is possible to modify the Jaro-Winkler distance in a few ways. A threshold
value can be applied such that the Winkler ’prefix booster’ is only used if the Jaro
distance exceeds the threshold (e.g. if the Jaro similarity is more than 70%). Setting
a threshold will help boost words that already have a good matching and in the
example given previously would result in ’shame - shallow’ having a similarity score
of 67% instead of 77%.
shame - flame
shame - shallow
Jaro
1
3( 3
5 + 3
5 + 3−0
3 ) ≈0.73
1
3( 3
5 + 3
7 + 3−0
3 ) ≈0.67
Jaro-Winkler
0.73+(0·0.1(1−0.73)) = 0.73
0.67+(3·0.1(1−0.67)) = 0.77
Table 2.2: The table shows the calculations of the Jaro and Jaro-Winkler equa-
tions to find the distance between ’shame’ and ’flame’, and ’shame’ and
’shallow’.
The Jaro-Winkler distance does not satisfy the triangle inequality and is thereby
not considered to be a distance metric in mathematical terms. This means that it
would not be possible to use the metric in a tree or in other data structures where
triangle inequality is a necessity.
The Jaro-Winkler distance is fast to compute, but it might not be in everybodies
interest to use it to measure similarity between strings as it does preference strings
==PAGE:26==
16
2 State of the Art
that match in the beginning. This could explain why this distance is not as widely
used as the edit distance.
The method is most commonly used for surname and
last name comparison and could potentially have a positive effect in a spell checker,
especially considering that the first couple of letters in a string are often not misspelled
(see Section 2.2).
N-grams
The N-grams method is another popular way to compare strings. It divides strings
into n-tuples (2-grams, 3-grams, 4-grams etc.). The n-gram of a string can be either
overlapping or non-overlapping. Creating overlapping tri-gram tuples of the word
’knight’ result in the eight tri-grams
'$$k', '$kn', 'kni','nig', 'igh', 'ght', 'ht$' and 't$$'
For illustration, blank spaces have been filled with $. In relation to natural lan-
guage processing and spell checking mechanisms, the n-gram method can be used
to measure similarity between two strings, by comparing the number of identical
n-grams the strings share.
Doing string matching using a non-overlapping n-gram method, can cause prob-
lems when comparing shorter strings i.e. comparing ’hehlo’ and ’hello’ using a non-
overlapping tri-gram method will result in the following tri-grams
'heh', 'ehl', 'hlo' and 'hel', 'ell', 'llo'
It becomes clear that the two words do not share any tri-grams between them and
thereby a matching in an index would never be found. One simply have to be aware
of this problem and consider what kind of data the index is built on, before selecting
an n-gram method.
The method can be used to compare words, but it is also a popular method used
in semantic word analysis (of written text) i.e. in text editing programs.
Amongst other popular approximate string matching algorithms are Smith and
Waterman (1981) and Needleman and Wunsch (1970), typically used to align protein
sequences, and the Bitmap algorithm described by Dömölki (1968) which is used in
fast string comparison on inputs over small alphabets.
Online spell checkers use approximate string matching metrics to evaluate the
misspelled inputs with every word i.e. using exhaustive search. This is not computa-
tionally efficient and will take at least O(nm) time (n is the dictionary size and m is
the misspelled inputs size), depending on the selected approximate string matching
method. It is possible to optimize on this worst case bound, resulting in a compromise
in either build time, space or matching quality.
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Spell Checking
17
2.3.2
Data Structures
Inverted Index
The concept of a search engine is based on a simple idea; to efficiently index data in
order to support fast queries. Often the data is referred to as documents, were one
document can contain a lot of information. The architecture of the search engine can
be based on a number of indexing data structures such as suffix trees, document-term
matrices, n-gram indexing and the popular method - inverted indexing.
An inverted index is a data structure that stores a key, mapping it to one or
several values. The values of the key represents references to where the key occurs
(i.e. reference to a document or the position the key occurs in). A typical example
are keys represented by unique words in a text where each key maps to the location(s)
of the word in the text. Figure 2.3 shows an example of an inverted index containing
four keys.
Science
→
{Docuemnt 1, Document 2}
Log
→
{Document 3}
Computer
→
{Document 2, Document 3, Document 4}
Electricity
→
{Document 4}
Table 2.3: An example of an inverted index containing the four keys science, log,
computer and electricity. Each of the keys maps to one or several docu-
ments.
An inverted index can be compared to a dictionary were the values of the dic-
tionary consist of sets of mappings and not just one mapping. Inverted indexes are
typically used to do fast full-text searches in search engines and database systems. All
of the proposed algorithms in this paper, use an inverted index to map information.
BK-tree
A Burkhard-Keller-tree is a metric tree that can be used for approximate string
matching.
The tree was first described by Burkhard and Keller (1973) with the
intention of narrowing down the large search space in dictionaries.
The tree is built by picking an arbitrary word in a dictionary as the root. Every
other word in the dictionary is initially compared to this word using a string distance
metric. For now lets assume a distance between two strings is found by counting
the number of insertions, deletions or substitutions necessary for two strings to be
equal (i.e. the edit distance). Each edge from the root to a child node represents the
string distance between the root word to the child word. If two words share the same
distance to the root, the search continues down, recursively, comparing the input
word with the current node until there is room for it to be inserted (until it reaches
a node where the distance between it and the word is not yet represented by an edge).
==PAGE:28==
18
2 State of the Art
shame
flame
home
ethereal
night
knight
scam
blame
2
6
5
3
1
8
3
Figure 2.5: A BK-tree illustrating the insertion of the following set of words {shame,
flame, home, ethereal, night, knight, scam, blame}. ’shame’ is inserted
as the root element and the tree has a height of three.
Figure 2.5 shows the BK-tree of the set of strings {shame, flame, home, ethereal,
night, knight, scam, blame} where ’shame’ was selected as the root element.
Searching in the tree is similar to inserting, although the search method also takes
a tolerance level t as inputs. The tolerance t is used to define a range of which the
search should continue down the tree i.e.
range = [dist −tol, dist + tol]
Searching for potential matches in the tree in Figure 2.5 with the input parameter
’lame’ and tolerance t = 1 will result in the following nodes being visited using the
Levenshtein edit distance:
The search will return the words ’flame’ and ’blame’. The question is; why does
this work? The argument is that all unique distances between any words and the
root, is represented by the children of the root i.e. there will not be any word in the
tree that has a string distance from the root, which is not represented by an edge in
the first level of the tree. Ensuring this rule is withheld, it is also possible to use the
tolerance level to search down the tree, ensuring that all possible relevant words are
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Spell Checking
19
shame
The distance between shame and lame is 2. Search range is [1, 3].
flame
The distance between flame and lame is 1. Search range is [0, 2].
Flame will be added to the results set as the distance is within
the tolerance level.
blame
The distance between blame and lame is 1 and blame will be added
to the result set.
compared.
Burkhard and Keller (1973) discuss the use of several distance metrics to build
and query the tree. Theoretically any real string distance metric that satisfies the
triangle inequality can be used in a BK-tree. Baeza-Yates and Navarro (1998) de-
scribe and test the BK-tree, amongst others, using the Levenshtein distance as a
metric. They also discuss the performance of the tree and evaluate it against fast
online spell checker algorithms. Here, the BK-tree performs well on one and two let-
ter errors (with a search space of 5%-8% of the dictionary and 17%-25% respectively).
Using a BK-tree to find the nearest neighbors of an input can reduce the search
space of a dictionary by large factors. This reduction heavily depend on the toler-
ance level and the search space i.e. the dictionary of words. Worst case performance
using the Levenshtein distance metric is O(n2m), that is, the search algorithm walks
through the entire tree, calculating the edit distance of each value to the inputs of
size m. Much more interesting is the average performance, which depends on the
tolerance and the average string length in the dictionary.
2.3.3
Algorithms
Algorithms using approximate string matching methods and probability
information
This section will describe various state of the art spell checker algorithms, putting
attention to space consumption and query time. When talking about space consump-
tion of a spell checker data structure, it is important to note that in general, the size
of the index is described in relation to the average size of the words in the dictionary.
Furthermore, the focus will be on average case query time performance. Worst case
query time performance can easily be computed i.e. a mapping of words leading to a
comparison of every word in the dictionary on a misspelled inputs. This can be caused
by either poor indexing, or if the words of the dataset are so similar that they are
all mapped to one key in the inverted index. With this in mind the analysis can begin.
The original Soundex algorithm (patented by Russell (1918)) encodes letters to
numbers based on their alphabetical relation. Using Soundex comparison, strings
==PAGE:30==
20
2 State of the Art
can be similar or not similar and thereby the Soundex algorithm does not return a
similarity score, but instead a true or false. After publication, the American Soundex
became a popular method for indexing physical records, passenger lists, death lists
etc.
Soundex belongs to the phonetic algorithm category, despite not being completely
phonetic. It is meant to easily encode surnames into codes of length four (consisting
of one letter and three digits). Despite being easy to encode, the downsides of the
algorithm is that a lot of names will be grouped together, not necessarily being
close in edit distance, resulting in a lot of false hits. A similar concept was used
in the SPEEDCOP project by Pollock and Zamora (1984). Here, each word in the
dictionary were encoded via a set of rules and then inserted into an inverted index. As
the articles states, misspellings of more than one letter would be ’almost’ intractable
and therefore the algorithm seems more useful to spell check singular typographical
errors.
Philips (1990) proposed an algorithm heavily inspired by the Soundex algorithm
called Metaphone. The algorithm is truly a phonemic algorithm that base its encoding
on English pronunciations of the alphabetic letters and it is thereby an improvement
of the original Soundex algorithm which struggled to match relevant words with
eachother caused by the encoding being ’too simple’.
The Metaphone algorithm
is somewhat fixated towards the English language, encoding specific typical letter
combinations like; ’th’ to 0, ’ck’ to ’k’ or ’x’ transformed to ’s’, if it is located in the
beginning of a word. A modification of the Metaphone algorithm was made by the
same author called the Double Metaphone algorithm in the year 2000.
The problem with phonetic algorithms is that they are often language dependent.
As each language use some letters (or letter combinations) more often than others,
rules defined based on one language, can have a negative effect in others. Making
specific encoding rules on the combination of ’mb’ in an algorithm does not make
sense in Danish, as the combination rarely appears and if it does, the ’b’ might not
be silent (as it often is in English).
Phonetex.
Hodge and Austin (2001) describes a somewhat language independent
algorithm called Phonetex, that integrates elements of Soundex and Phonix developed
by Gadd (1990). The algorithm builds an inverted index based on three steps:
• Transform dictionary words into phonetic words.
• Encode the transformed words via Phonetex encoding.
• Insert encoded words into the inverted index, where the encoded word is the
key and the values contains mapping of the original words.
The phonetic transformation consist of a set of rules that applies to the English
and other languages using the Roman alphabet (see Table 2.4). The rules involves
replacing singular letters or combination of letters with another singular letter. The
rules are varying, depending on the letters being a prefix, located in the middle or
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Spell Checking
21
as a suffix of the word. Although Hodge and Austin (2001) claims that Phonetex
is language independent, it is clear from the rule set that some rules are language
dependent like ^kn →n meaning; replace prefix occurrence of kn with n. In the
English language the k is always silent if it is placed before n, whereas in Danish k is
pronounced in a kn-prefix of a word.
^chough →s3
^enough →e83
^laugh →l3
^trough →tA3
^ps →s
^wr →r
^pt →t
^kn →n
^pn →n
^gn →n
^mn →n
^x →z
sc(e|i|y) →s
1. (i|u)gh(¬a) →_ 2. gh →g
+ti(a|o) →s
gn$ →n
ph →f
gns$ →ns
1. c(e|i|y|h) →s 2. c →k
q →k
mb$ →m
+x →ks
Table 2.4: The set of transformation rules that are applied onto the dictionary words
in the Phonetex algorithm. The first row shows examples of converted
inputs. The second row describes transformation rules in the beginning
of an inputs (indicated by ^). The last row contains rules that apply for
any place in the inputs or at the end of the inputs (indicated by $).
Some of the rules shown in Table 2.4 can seem complicated, but by giving examples
they can be easily understood. I.e.
1. (i|u)gh(¬a) →_ 2. gh →g
Rule 1. applies first, that is, transforming the word ’thought’ will result in removing
the ’gh’ as ’u’ comes before ’gh’ and ’gh’ is not followed by ’a’. If ’gh’ was followed by
’a’, then the ’g’ would not be silent and therefore only ’h’ would be removed. Again,
a specific rule based on the English written language.
The Phonetex encoding is based on the Soundex encoding with an expansion
of seven encoding letters, giving a total of 14 replacement letters (see Table 2.5).
Expanding the encoding set results in less false matches, as the encoding becomes
less ’general’.
As the Danish alphabet contains additionally three vowels, these are encoded like
the original Roman vowels with an 0. Encoding values for ’c’, ’q’ and ’x’ are missing
from Table 2.5. This is because all three letters are transformed into other letters,
before in the transformation (q →k and c →s or c →k). All numeric values in the
original word are replaced by blank, meaning they are removed. This also means that
==PAGE:32==
22
2 State of the Art
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
A
B
C
D
aeiouhwy
b
d
f
gj
k
l
m
n
p
r
sz
t
v
Table 2.5: The encoding of each letter in Phonetex. If Danish words were to be
encoded via Phonetex, the vowels æ,ø,å could be encoded like the original
Roman vowels to 0.
encoding serial numbers or ISBN-numbers, does not make sense, as these values will
be reduced down to nothing.
The last step of Phonetex is to index the encoded words. In Hodge and Austin
(2001) each word in the dictionary were cropped down to a size of four and six letters.
Results showed that cropping the words down to the first four letters was the most
efficient. If a word is less than four letters long (after applying the encoding), the
word is padded with zeros. The size of the final index is bound by the number of
words in the dictionary giving a space consumption of O(|dictionary|).
The original search algorithm used for Phonetex consisted of three steps that:
• Search for candidates matching the first 2-4 letters of the inputs.
• The candidates are extracted and sorted by score (matching four letters results
in the highest score), then alphabetically.
• The ten best results are evaluated.
This is a really fast solution as no similarity score has to be calculated between
all candidates and the inputs. The sorting clearly predispositions inputs with good
matchings in the beginning of the input strings and in order to avoid this, the search
algorithm has been modified to sort the result set using the Levenshtein distance.
This will affect the query time and will be tested and discussed in Section 6.
Tri-gram Similarity Measure. C. Angell, E. Freund, and Willett (1983) describe a
spell checker algorithm that use an inverted index of tri-grams. Each tri-gram in the
inverted index, points to one or several words in the original dictionary. Searching
after input a, breaks a into |a| tri-grams, then lookup each tri-gram in the inverted
index. Evaluating the similarity of the inputs and a candidate matching is based on
the number of identical tri-grams between the two words.
score =
2|tri-grams of a ∩tri-grams of b|
total tri-grams of a + total tri-grams of b
(2.5)
A modification of the Dice coefficient (see Equation 2.5) is used as a similarity
score; here the number of tri-grams that intersect are used as the similarity factor.
The potential matchings are then sorted by this similarity score and the word with
the best matching is returned.
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Spell Checking
23
Creating the tri-grams of an input takes O(|a|) time and calculating the Dice
coefficient takes constant time. The search space is bounded by the inputs size and
the number of dictionary words mapped to each tri-gram in the inverted index, that
is, O(nm) where n is the number of elements and m is the average length of the
elements. The study of the algorithm showed satisfactory results on various datasets,
where interestingly, the best results where made on dataset that consisted of typo-
graphical errors.
Section 2.3.1 shows how to construct overlapping tri-grams. The example shows
that the overlapping method create singular letter mappings (the first and the last
tri-gram).
It could be argued whether or not these single letter tri-grams should
be included in the index and when querying in the algorithm. These single letter
tri-grams might result in a lot of unnecessary potential matchings, due to the fact
that all words starting and ending with the same letter as the search input, will be
considered candidates. Comparing the inputs with all of these dictionary words takes
a lot of time and the quality of the matching might be affected either ways. Including
and excluding the singular letter tri-grams is not mentioned in C. Angell, E. Freund,
and Willett (1983), but in this project it will be tested and discussed in Chapter 7.
In general, n-grams algorithms (with modifications) are popular and it is possible
to find various solutions and suggestions online. Morris and Cherry (1975) describe
a solution in which a frequency table of tri-grams is built based on a dictionary. For
each unique word in their dictionary they calculate a score; the likelihood that the
tri-grams in the given word is produced by the same source in the tri-gram table. The
dictionary is then sorted in decreasing order, by this score. Test results show that 23
of 30 misspelled words occurred in top 100 of the sorted list.
Berkel and De Smedt (1988) combines phonetics with tri-gram analysis, using the
phonetic method grapheme-to-phoneme. The algorithm phonetically encodes every
word in the dictionary and then creates an inverted list of tri-grams, mapping to the
original dictionary word. It then uses the same approach as C. Angell, E. Freund,
and Willett (1983), encoding the misspelled inputs via the phonetic function.
Zobel and Dart (1995) compare the original and a modified Soundex algorithm
to the n-gram method (using n-grams from two to four), testing on two datasets;
lexicon of names and a large dictionary of English words. The article concludes that
the n-gram method is easily modifiable and performs much better than the Soundex
algorithm.
Fast Similarity Search. Bocek, Hunt, and Stiller (2007) describe the spell checker
algorithm FastSS (Fast Similarity Search). The algorithm focus on search in large
dictionaries, where linear comparison is too expensive. Like the BK-tree, the purpose
of the algorithm is to narrow down the search space, in order to avoid comparing the
inputs with the entire dictionary.
FastSS generates an inverted index based on a maximal number of k-deletions in
each original word in the dictionary. Table 2.6 shows the 2-deletion neighborhood of
==PAGE:34==
24
2 State of the Art
the word ’smart’.
inputs
1-deletions
2-deletions
smart
mart, sart, smrt, smat,
smar
mat, art, sar, sma, sat,
mrt, srt, smr, smt, mar
Table 2.6: 2-deletion sub-strings of the word smart.
The deletion neighborhood
has size O(mk) where m is the length of the inputs string and k is the
deletion neighborhood value..
For each deletion sub-string of a word, the deleted letter positions are saved,
along with a pointer to the original word. An inverted index of deletion sub-strings is
created by mapping each of the deletion sub-strings to one, or several original words.
The search procedures is as follows; create the k-deletion neighbourhood of the
inputs, lookup each k-deletion sub-string in the inverted index, join the result sets of
original words and sort by the Levenshtein edit distance.
Saving information about the deletion positions come in handy when searching
in the index for the k-deletion strings of the misspelled inputs. The idea is that,
if the deletion positions of the inputs are the same as the deletion positions of the
inverted index, then the edit distance between inputs and dictionary word is equal to
the number of deleted letters. Likewise, Bocek, Hunt, and Stiller (2007) also shows
that if none of the deletion positions are equal, the edit distance of the strings is 2r,
where r is the number of deletions in the strings (should be equal). Knowing this,
search time in the index is reduced down to O(cmk) time where m is the inputs size
and c is the size of the candidates sets. The space consumption is O(nmk+1) where
n is the number of words in the dictionary. The space consumption is bounded by k
but also depends on the average length of the strings m.
Alternatively, Bocek, Hunt, and Stiller (2007) suggest using FastSSwC (Fast Sim-
ilarity Search with Candidates), a modification of FastSS, that uses less memory.
FastSSwC does not store the letter deletion positions in the inverted file, reducing
the space consumption to O(nmk). This affects the search time as it requires that the
edit distance of the O(nk) deletion-strings is calculated for a number of candidates c
which gives a search time of O(cmk).
Despite the modifications suggested by Bocek, Hunt, and Stiller (2007), FastSSwC
still takes up a lot of space. Karch, Luxen, and Sanders (2010) suggest a more com-
plicated modification that ease the memory consumption by introducing hashing and
reduces the elements to integers, maintaining the same low query time. In this thesis
the original optimized version FastSSwC have been implemented and tested.
The noisy channel model is a concept that means to identify the noise in spelling
errors. A misspelled word is put in to the model, which then use language specific
rules and Bayesian probabilities to reduce the noise and find the best possible match-
ing for the word i.e. returning a set of candidate words sorted by their probability
==PAGE:35==
2.3 Spell Checking
25
of matching the inputs. The noisy channel model use a prior probability, like occur-
rence of a word (or popularity), and a probability score called the channel model.
The channel model score can be based on various factors like surrounding letters of
the misspellings, typical language specific errors or keyboard typographical errors.
Kernighan, Church, and Gale (1990) describe a program called correct that use the
noisy channel model where the candidate sets on a misspelled input is found by using
a set of rules based on a weighted version of the Damerau-Levenshtein distance. A
confusion matrix is built in an iterative process, learning from various tests sets of
misspelled data and lastly the confusion matrix is used to calculate the channel model
score of the candidates.
Brill and Moore (2000) suggest an improvement to the error model proposed by
Kernighan, Church, and Gale (1990). Positional information in sub-strings is used to
calculate the probability of edits in the inputs, based on the fact that it is less likely
to misspell in the beginning of a string, compared to the middle or the end. Both
Kernighan, Church, and Gale (1990) and Brill and Moore (2000) require extensive
datasets for testing and analysis in order to build the channel models.
Mays, Damerau, and Mercer (1991) also use probability theory in order to do
semantic spell checking on entire sentences. The algorithm use a word-tri-gram model
where tri-grams of words are built based on large text samples. Information from the
text samples can be used to calculate probabilities that a word does not belong in a
sentence. Islam and Inkpen (2009) is inspired by Mays, Damerau, and Mercer (1991).
This solution uses a modification of the longest common subsequence (consecutive
LCS) to measure similarity between strings, and test the solution up against the
large dataset Google Web 1T 3-gram. The methods are interesting because they are
also able to detect misspelled words, although this is not the primary focus of the
algorithms.
Machine Learning and classification
Whitelaw et al. (2009) use the noisy channel model as a foundation for their spell
checker algorithm. A terms-list is created by extracting crawled web data that con-
tains over ten million tokens and they use a sub-string error model, which is trained
from the candidate data. By training data from the web, they derive user-generated
samples of both misspelled and correctly spelled data.
When the terms-list have been extracted, the Damerau-Levenshtein distance is
used to orthographically group the terms by ’closeness’. The groups are converted
into tries (for fast look-ups). The language model scores are a combination of the
error model scores and n-grams language model data.
Two classifiers are used; a simple classifier comparing the probability of the original
word and the suggested word, and a logistic regression classifier. The authors test
their solution with both artificially created data and human error data and in both
cases the solutions performs well. Their solution on human errors did however perform
==PAGE:36==
26
2 State of the Art
worse than the artificial. The latter is quite interesting, as it shows that the real typed
errors deviated from the artificial and thereby the analysis of the real typed errors
should be extended on.
Li, Duan, and Zhai (2012) state the problems of current spell checker solutions and
mentions two major issues; spelling errors that involves of splitting or concatenating
words and the computational complexity of the string matching methods. Alterna-
tively, the authors propose a generalization of the Hidden Markov Model, that can
be used for correcting several types of spelling errors. The Hidden Markov Model
makes use of an error model, a language model and a web n-gram model. The model
makes it possible to handle both problem cases (splitting or concatenating and the
computation complexity of matching large dictionary data with the search inputs),
and regarding speed it is able to compete with the most general noisy channel models.
Another article, which also addresses the struggles of current spell checkers, is
Weiss (n.d.). The article specifically mentions the drawbacks of using standard spell
checkers, amongst other natural language processing methods, in bots. The author
describes the somewhat illogical sense behind the typical string distance metrics; going
through each letter in two words, comparing them and calculating how many edits
are needed. The author argues that calculating the edit distance, might make sense
as a mathematical approach, but it is clearly not a particularly human approach.
Building a potentially faster and more intuitive approach, he makes use of deep
learning, by feeding neural networks millions of words and training a spell checker
model for hours and days. The test shows good results and potential, but also states
the issue about data.
In order to train a neural network, lots of data is needed,
misspelled and correctly spelled data.
2.3.4
Round up
The last decades there has been a clear tendency towards applying machine learning in
spell checkers. Machine learning and neural networks is currently a trending topic and
applying it in spell checker mechanism can help renew the technology, which currently
is still based on old, but efficient, mathematical and algorithmic approaches.
There is no denying the fact that methods like the Soundex algorithm and the
n-grams data structure are currently still popular solutions integrated into many spell
checkers. Combinations of several good algorithms is also common, where the best
of each method is used in order to achieve better spell checking results.
In this thesis there will be a focus on building offline indexes, testing several
distance metrics in order to achieve good results on the dataset available. As already
stated, algorithms can perform differently depending on the type of dataset they are
implemented on.
Although there is great potential in the machine learning methods proposed in
this chapter, testing these methods requires a much more detailed study of dyslexia
and retrieval of data that does not necessarily exists.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3
Platform
Information retrieval is a broad concept symbolizing a retrieval mechanism that is
able to store, index and query data. A search engine, or a web search engine, is one
of many information retrieval systems that cashes and crawls data on the world wide
web. An information retrieval library can be seen as a core, a set of functions, that
enables and support these features. There exist a lot of information retrieval libraries
i.e. Lemur Project (C and C++), Sphinx (MySQL or PostgreSQL) or Lucene (Java)
and a developer can choose to integrate either of these depending on implementation
language preference, availability of certain features or it being open source software
or not. This chapter will briefly elaborate on the information retrieval system used
by Nota.dk and the spell checker setup they are currently using in this system.
3.1
Solr
Solr is an open source search platform and web application that is built around the
Apache Lucene information retrieval library. The Lucene core works as an engine,
supporting fast indexing, querying, mapping, ranking amongst other things. Solr en-
ables a REST-like API, which makes it easy to integrate to it.
1
{
2
"id": "1mzbf9-worksindex-306361",
3
"item_id": "306361",
4
"tm_field_editions\$title": [
5
"Harry Potter og De Vises Sten"
6
],
7
"im_field_authors": [
8
202624
9
],
10
"tm_field_authors\$name": [
11
"J.K. Rowling"
12
],
13
}
Listing 3.1: A Solr document represented via JSON. The documents in Nota.dk
have a lot more fields than the ones shown in this example.
Solr is written in Java and is very customizable. Customization can be applied by
either tuning parameters or changing default settings, but it is also possible to build
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Platform
custom Java modules that can integrate to Solr.
Indexing. Each object in the Solr search platform is kept as a document, where a doc-
ument can contain one or more fields (in database terminology a document represents
a row and a field represents a column). Listing 3.1 shows an example of extracting
the first Harry Potter book from Nota.dk’s Solr solution (showing only a few fields).
Querying. Queries in Solr are based on tokenizing the query input. This can be done
in various ways, but in Nota.dk’s setup, a query is divided into tokens where one
token represents a word in the input. Inputs that contain special letters (like -, .,
:) are broken into two words, separated by the symbol being used. In the following
chapters the terminology of documents, fields and tokens will be used throughout to
describe Nota.dk’s dataset of books.
Nota.dk implemented their Solr solution about two years ago. The system was
setup and only small modifications have been made since.
As Figure 2.2 shows,
Nota.dk supports a lot of other systems besides their Solr integration and therefore
much time have not been spent on fine-tuning settings or building custom modules
to Solr.
3.2
Spell Checker Module
Solr use the Apache Lucene core, but it also contains Solr-specific objects. Both Solr
and Lucene contains a spell checker module, where Solr make use of some of the
Lucene string distance metrics. The Solr spell checker module enables developers to
easily build custom spell checkers that integrate to it.
The Solr spell checker module ships with four types of spell checker indexes; an
index based, a file based, a direct spell checker and a word breaker spell checker.
The word breaker spell checker is only applied to the input query, where it breaks
and combine words in case of misplaced spaces (in relation to special letters). The
direct spell checker is an online spell checker solution (with some optimization). The
file based spell checker can import static dictionary files. This spell checker is often
used to add a set of dictionary words that are not indexed in Solr i.e. dictionaries of
preferred languages. The index based spell checker is based on already indexed data
in the Solr search platform, that is, the documents the platform contains. All four
methods can be tuned with various parameters and all four of them can be combined
such that they are enabled in one Solr core simultaneously.
The index based spell checker takes the given index from Solr and builds an in-
verted index of n-grams (two-, three- and five-grams depending on the length of each
input). This index can be built when starting up Solr, every time a new document
is inserted or repeatedly via a script within a given time interval (every day, month,
year etc.). The index based spell checker can be setup with various built-in distance
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Spell Checker Module
29
metrics; Levenshtein, Jaro-Winkler or N-grams distance, if not, the Levenshtein dis-
tance is used by default. Nota.dk have enabled the spell checker module with the
following setup:
• A wide variety of fields are used to build the spell checker index; title, author,
genre, teaser text, ISBN amongst others.
• The spell checker module has been setup to only return one spell checker sug-
gestion per token (per word).
• The following two spell checkers are enabled:
– An index based spell checker using the Jaro-Winkler distance.
– A word breaker spell checker breaking up words if special letters are used
in the input query.
Looking at the setup there are some initial ideas for improving the performance of
the spell checker. As was described in Section 2.3.1, the Jaro-Winkler distance metric
adds an advantage to strings that match up to a certain prefix. Here it might be useful
to enable another distance metric that is more general in is distance calculation, like
the Levenshtein distance.
For each distance metric and spell checker type, various parameters can be set
and tuned, such as; minimum prefix (Jaro-Winkler), max inspections, max edits etc.
A much better performance could potentially be achieved with the smallest changes
in the setup.
Open forum discussions of Solr and Lucene spell checkers
Online it is possible to find pros and cons of all four types of spell checkers. Typical
problems that developers seem to deal with are:
• Problems involving maintaining the index based spell checker due to the heav-
iness of rebuilding the index, every time a document is inserted.
• Scaling of the index based spell checker in relation to space consumption prob-
lems.
• The direct spell checker is criticized for performing poorly, dealing with slow
query time and bad quality spell checker suggestions.
• Modules not working from one Solr version to an upgraded Solr version.
The community seem to disagree and it is quite clear that the cons heavily depends
on the data being used to index the spell checkers i.e. the syntax of the data and
the size of the database. In this project there will not be a test of the direct spell
checker, as this can only be modified by tuning parameters and changing settings in
the module.
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Platform
Furthermore, it should be noted that it is possible to fine-tune parameters on all
of the four spell checkers available in Solr. As this project focus on developing a spell
checker specifically for Nota.dk, time have not been spent on fine-tuning parameters
in Solr, although it might be possible to achieve good results by doing so.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4
Data
Nota.dk was able to deliver log data from their search platform. Having log data
available generated by the users of Nota.dk, made it possible to create a test dataset
of misspelled words. Nota did not have years of stored log data available and there-
fore the data was extracted during the project period. It became clear that Nota’s
collaboration was a big help, as it turned out there is not a lot of data available on
misspelled words, especially not by Danish dyslexics. Alternatively it would be nec-
essary to retrieve the empiri by interviews and tests which is a huge workload that
goes beyond the scope of this thesis. This chapter will briefly describe the log data,
how it was analyzed and the final output i.e. a dataset of misspelled words.
4.1
Spell Checker Index
The spell checker index is an index that is built via the standard Solr spell checker
module. The index is based on a selection of fields that contains query potential
information. These are fields like; title, manifestation, teaser text, ISBN-numbers
etc. Each document in the Solr search platform contains this information.
Nota.dk database
# of documents (number of books)
55.840
Spell index
446.408
Avg. length of words
8
Danish dictionary
143.974
Avg. length of words (Danish dict.)
9
Table 4.1: Nota.dk index information. The spell checker index is based on a se-
lection of fields copied from each document in the database. Amongst
these fields are; title, manifestation, teaser text, ISBN etc. All tests are
performed on this dataset.
Table 4.1 shows that the spell checker index contains 446.408 unique words. The
index is not particularly big and it takes just a few seconds to build in Solr, using the
standard spell checker module.
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Data
It should be noted that the index contains some unnecessary information, such
as the ISBN-numbers of the books. These numbers, if searched for, most likely will
be written correctly, but even more likely, are inputs that will never be searched for
unless you are a person who typically use them i.e. a teacher or a librarian (who are
both minorities looking at the overall distribution of users of Nota.dk).
The spell checker index was setup to index isolated terms i.e. tokenizing word by
word. Ideally, if the spell checker algorithm is efficient, this is not a problem, but
with the setup that Nota.dk currently runs, it has become a big problem - especially
when misspelling several words in a search input. As was possible to see from Figure
2.1 in Section 2.1, searching for ’hary podder’ in the database, will not lead to any
Harry Potter books. This is due to the fact that each word is analyzed independently
by the spell checker, resulting in other words getting a better similarity score than
Harry and Potter. Chapter 8 will elaborate on what could potentially be done to fix
a problem like this.
The average size of the spell checker index words have been listed in Table 4.1
as the word size will be relevant in relation to some of the spell checker algorithms.
Specifically for FastSSwC, an average size of eight will affect the space consumption
of the data structure. All initial tests have been performed on the original setup of
the spell checker index.
Use of external dictionaries. As a part of the standard Solr spell checker setup it
is possible to import existing dictionaries and combine them with the indexed data
in Solr. At some point this feature was enabled in Nota.dk’s solution, to include a
Danish dictionary of words. At Nota it was, over a period of time, discussed whether
or not to include the dictionary as a part of the spell checker index.
On one hand, the dyslexic users of the platform might be confused if they input a
series of words that were not misspelled, but where the spell checker would activate,
as the words did not exist in the database. On the other hand, including the Danish
dictionary, could lead to misleading success as the input would be registered as non-
misspelled, but there would not be any hits in the database, resulting in the users
not being suggested any related books.
During this project process, Nota has decided to continue excluding the Danish
dictionary from the spell checker index. Instead, the dictionary has been used to
leave out non-misspelled data when creating the dataset of misspelled words from the
Nota.dk log files.
4.2
Misspelled Input
Nota were able to supply with two sets of log data; a search log that included the
search input, IP-address, time-stamps amongst a lot of other unnecessary information
and a second log which was setup specifically for this project. The latter, called the
system log, logging the input that the user would search for and where the auto-
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Misspelled Input
33
complete functionality was able to contribute to misspelled words inputted in the
search engine.
Each of the logs required cleanup and the search log also had HTTP-URL encoding
that needed to be translated into Unicode. Python was used to clean the log data
and create the final dataset of misspelled words. The following steps were applied to
the log files in order to extract the misspelled input dataset.
• The search log and the system log was received from Nota. The search log
contained data from mid summer 2017 to October. The system log ran for one
and a half week.
• The search log was cleansed.
Everything was stripped down; special letters
removed/converted and everything is converted to lower case.
• The search input was easily extracted from the system log.
• The two sets of log data were merged, an inverted index was created, saving the
unique search inputs and the frequency of it (i.e. how many times the words
was searched for).
• A dataset of misspelled words were created. Every unique word in the inverted
index was looked up in the Nota.dk spell checker index and in the Danish
dictionary; if the key existed, it was not classified as a ’misspelled input’ and it
was removed from the dataset.
• The dataset was sorted by frequency and outputted as text files.
The final
dataset of misspelled words contained 12358 unique words.
A test project was setup in Java using SolrJ (2017), which is a Java API built
to communicate with Solr search platforms. The test-project was used to identify
potential significant outliers, that should not be tested on the implemented spell
checker module. The test case was setup to query a locally running solution of Solr
(copy of Nota.dk) on each term in the misspelled words dataset. The queries that
resulted in empty result sets, meaning no suggestion was found, were subjectively
evaluated; did the input make sense, was it a typical misspelling or maybe lazy
querying.
Table 4.2 shows a selection of input queries that should be left out of the final
dataset of misspelled words. These input queries include missing space typos, laying-
on-the-keyboard typos and one letter (or two) searches. The queries are all singular
occurrences and thereby does not contribute to the general aspect of typical spelling
errors of Nota.dk’s users. The input queries are treated as outlier data and have all
been excluded from the test cases.
Table 4.3 shows the 16 most misspelled singular words.
It does require some
knowledge of Danish writers and popular literature to see that Table 4.3 contains a
lot of relatable content i.e. ’juss’ probably referring to ’Jussi’, ’hc’ to ’H.C. Andersen’
and ’brow’ to ’Dan Brown’.
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Data
e2809cbørnetegningere2809d
-b
4.k
transfusionsmedicinske
b.
ghyyyyyyyyyyhgtdrsasdfgtdrzeasdwwezxgfg....
korrespondancenanalyse
relationsarbejdee2809d
erhvervskreditretlige
managementorganisation
Table 4.2: A selection of singular occurring misspelled inputs. It is not possible to
generalize on the errors and therefore these inputs are treated as outlier
data and will not be included in the final test dataset.
Alternatively inputs like ’ddansk’ is probably referencing the book title ’D’dansk’
and ’matematr’ to the book ’Matematrix’. An example of the final misspelled words
dataset used on the implemented algorithms can be found in Appendix A. It contains
the 200 most popular misspelled inputs (with frequencies).
pæda
follet
matematr
matematri
histo
let´s
hj
brohave
udg
gr
brow
hc
juss
lets
wung
ddansk
Table 4.3: The 16 most popular misspelled inputs found by analyzing the log data.
With some knowledge of Danish and foreign litterature, most of the words
are recognizable .
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 5
Methodology
This chapter will elaborate on the methodology used in this thesis. The chapter will
include a description of the implemented components and the test procedures used
to evaluate the various algorithms and distance metrics.
Figure 5.1 shows the relationships between the implemented components which
can roughly be divided into three sections; data structures, algorithms and distance
metrics. Some of the algorithms use distance metrics in order to build their data
structure and therefor the sections will be described in the following order; data
structures, distance metrics and algorithms. All implementation is made in Java 8
using both custom, standard Java and Apache Lucene objects.
Inverted 
Index
BK-tree
Trigram
Similarity
FastSS
Dice
Levenshtein
Phonetex
Data structures
Algorithms
Distance metrics
Figure 5.1: The relationship between the implemented components. The project
can be divided into three areas; data structures, algorithms and distance
metrics.
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Methodology
5.1
Data Structures
Inverted index. The inverted index data structure has been implemented using Java
Util HashMap. The HashMap takes any generic datatype as key and value and sup-
ports GET and PUT in constant time. It is possible to initialize the hash map, setting
the initial capacity and load factor. None of the algorithms make use of this feature
and thereby default values are used i.e. initial capacity is 16 and the load factor is
0.75%.
BK-tree. The following custom objects and methods were implemented in order to
build the BK-tree datastructure.
• Node
– String word. Each node represents a word in the dictionary and thereby
the node contains a string, which is the word the node maps to.
– HashMap of children. A child of a node is mapped in the hash map by
the edit distance between the child-node and its parent-node i.e. the hash
map takes an Integer as key and a Node as value.
• BK-tree
– add. Input : String word. The public method add, adds a word to the
BK-tree. If the tree does not have a root, the word is added as a root. The
method calls the recursive method addChildNode if a child-node with the
same distance as the input word already exist.
– search. Input : search String, tolerance, current node and a result set.
The Levenshtein distance between the current node and the search string
is calculated.
If the distance is ≤the tolerance, the Levenshtein edit
distance is converted to a similarity score (a range between [0, 1] where
one is the highest possible similarity score) and the node is added to the
result set. A lower and upper tolerance is calculated and the range between
the two is looked up in the current nodes HashMap of child-nodes. For any
child-node that can be found within this range, a new call to the search
method is made, with the child-node as input.
– getSuggestion. Input : search string, number of suggestions and a toler-
ance. This public method calls the search method and find candidates to
the misspelled input. When a set of candidates has been retrieved from the
search, the set is sorted by the similarity scores and only a maximum of
what is allowed to return (within the number of suggestions), is returned.
– getLevenshteinDistance. Input : two strings. A local method that calcu-
lates the Levenshtein distance using the Wagner and Fischer (1974) ap-
proach. It returns an integer value.
==PAGE:47==
5.2 Distance Metrics
37
5.2
Distance Metrics
StringDistanceWrapper. Desclares the method getDistance. All distance metrics im-
plements the StringDistanceWrapper and it enables easy testing of various distance
metrics in the spell checker algorithms.
Levenshtein Distance. The Levenshtein and Damerau-Levenshtein distances are both
implemented using the dynamic programming approach described by Wagner and
Fischer (1974). The Levenshtein class implements the method getDistance, that use
the following approach to calculate the Levenshtein distance and return a similarity
score.
• getDistance. Input : string a and string b.
– Initialize support variables; previous, current and placeholder cost arrays
(same length as string a). This solution saves memory as the entire |a|∗|b|-
matrix does not have to be stored.
– Fill out default row values in the previous array.
– Implements two nested for-loops iterating over first string a, then string b.
For each iteration the edit distance between the prefixes of the first and
the second string are generated (using the evaluation approach shown in
Equation 2.1).
– Return the similarity score of the two strings which is defined by
1 −edit distance
max{|a|, |b|}
which thereby returns a floating point value between [0, 1].
Using the
length of the longest of the two strings, i.e. max{|a|, |b|}, it is ensured
that the value is never < 0.
Restricted Damerau-Levenshtein Distance. The restricted Damerau-Levenshtein dis-
tance use the same approach as the Levenshtein distance, although it needs to consider
the transpositions as well. Equation 2.2 showed that in order to implement transpo-
sitions it is necessary to look two positions (row and column) back in the distance
matrix. Therefore, one extra array needs to store information. Instead of saving the
current and the previous row, the current, previous and previous-previous is saved.
True Damerau-Levenshtein Distance. The true Damerau-Levenshtein needs to keep
information about letter positions and be able to track back at any location in the
edit distance matrix. Therefore no optimization have been applied in the iteration
regarding saving space. The entire |a| ∗|b|-matrix is stored and a HashMap is used
to keep the information of letter positions (using a char as key and an integer as value).
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Methodology
Jaro-Winkler distance. The Jaro-Winkler distance used in this project is a copy of
the Apache Lucene JaroWinklerDistance. As the Jaro-Winkler distance reflects a
normalized score (from zero to one), the only change that has been applied to the
class, is that the distance metric implements the StringDistanceWrapper. It runs in
O(|a| ∗|b|) time (plus some slight overhead).
5.3
Algorithms
TrigramSimilarity. The following methods were implemented in order to build the
TrigramSimilarity spell checker:
• createTriGrams. Input : string. This method creates overlapping tri-grams of
an input word. It is used in the buildIndex method and the search method.
• constructor. Input : a Java Util HashSet of strings i.e. the dictionary of words.
The constructor does the following:
– initialize the index, a Java Util HashMap, where the keys are represented
as strings and the values are kept in a HashSet of strings.
– buildIndex. Input : HashSet of strings. For each word in the hash set,
the tri-grams of the words are created. Each individual tri-gram is then
inserted into the index, mapping to the original word.
• search. Input : search string, accuracy and a string distance wrapper. This
method creates the tri-grams of the search string by calling the createTriGrams
method. For each tri-gram a lookup is made in the index. A set of candidates is
retrieved and for each candidate the distance between the search string and the
candidate is calculated using the string distance wrapper (getDistance method).
The method returns the candidate set.
• getSuggestion. Input : search string, number of suggestions, accuracy and a
string distance wrapper. Use the search method to extract a set of candidates.
When a set of candidates has been retrieved, the set is sorted by the similarity
scores and only a maximum of what is allowed to return (within the number of
suggestions), is returned.
FastSSwC. The following methods were implemented in order to build the FastSSwC
spell checker:
• createDeletionNeighborhood. Input : k-deletion neighborhood value, string rep-
resenting a word and a HashSet of strings. Compute the deletion k-neighborhood
of a string by calling the recursive method deletionNeighborhoodRecurse that
recursively generate the deletion strings and add them to the HashSet. It re-
turns the HashSet of strings.
==PAGE:49==
5.3 Algorithms
39
• writeTempFile. Input : file number and a string path. Write the index to a
psysical file. This method is called when the index have reached a certain size.
• readTempFile. Input : string path. Reads an external file and insert values into
the index.
• constructor. Input : k-deletion value and a HashSet of strings i.e. the dictionary
of words. The constructor calls the initialize method, that does the following :
– initialize the index, a Java Util HashMap, where the keys are represented
as strings and the values are kept in a HashSet of strings.
– buildIndex. Input : k-deletion value and a HashSet of strings. The method
creates the deletion neighborhood of each word in the dictionary. For each
deletion sub-string it is inserted in the index. When the index have reached
a certain size, it is exported to a physical file using the writeTempFile
method. When the deletion neighborhood have been created for all words
in the dictionary, all of the exported files are read using the readTempFile
method. The deletion neighborhood substrings are inserted into the index.
• search. Input : search string, k-deletion neighborhood value and a string dis-
tance wrapper. The methods create the k-deletion neighborhood of the search
string and makes a look-up in the index for each deletion sub-string. If the
deletion sub-string exist in the index, a set of candidates is retrieved and for
each candidate the distance between the search string and the candidate is cal-
culated using the string distance wrapper (getDistance method). The method
returns the candidate set.
• getSuggestion. Input : search string, number of suggestions, k-deletion neigh-
borhood value and a string distance wrapper. Use the search method to extract
a set of candidates. When a set of candidates has been retrieved, the set is
sorted by the similarity scores and only a maximum of what is allowed to re-
turn (within the number of suggestions) is returned.
After initially implementing FastSSwC it became clear that it was not possible to
build the index without running out of memory. This could potentially have been
avoided using a different datatype than a HashMap, that needs to be maintained and
re-indexed continuously when adding values to it. Exporting the indexed data, when
it had reached a certain size, showed to be efficient in relation to the memory con-
sumption when building the index, but also effected the computation time, making
it possible to build the index within a few minutes. If the spell checker were to be
integrated into Solr, this solution would definitely needs to be optimized in relation
to decreasing memory consumption and increasing the computation time.
Phonetex. The following methods have been implemented in order to build the Phone-
tex spell checker:
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Methodology
• transform. Input : string. This method implements the transformation rules.
• encode. Input : string. This method implements the encoding rules.
• constructor. Input : integer code length and a Java Util HashSet of strings i.e.
the dictionary of words. The constructor does the following:
– initialize the index, a Java Util HashMap, where the keys are represented
as strings and the values are kept in a HashSet of strings.
– buildIndex. Input : HashSet of strings. For each word in the hash set
it transforms and encodes a word into a code with the length that was
defined by the code length variable. The code is then inserted into the
index, mapping to the original word.
• search.
Input : search string, minimum code length and a string distance
wrapper. The method transforms and encodes the search string, then generate
the prefix codes from minimum code length up to the actual code length. For
each of these prefix codes a lookup is made in the index. If the code exists in
the index, the candidates mapping to it (and their string distance) is added to
a candidate set. The method returns the candidate set.
• getSuggestion. Input : search string, number of suggestions, minimum code
length and a string distance wrapper. Use the search method to extract a set
of candidates. When a set of candidates has been retrieved, the set is sorted by
the similarity scores and only a maximum of what is allowed to return (within
the number of suggestions) is returned.
Sorting. Each algorithm picks a set of candidates differently, but all depend on a sort-
ing algorithm to return the set of best matchings in sorted order. Sorting the candi-
date sets is done using datatypes from the Apache Lucene Spell module. The datatype
SuggestWord is used to represent a candidate and SugestWordQueue is used to sort
the candidates.
SuggestWord contains information about the string it represents,
the matching score and a word frequency (not used for testing). It also implements
a Comparator, that by default, sort by score, then frequency. SuggestWordQueue
extends from the Java Util PriorityQueue and since SuggestWord implements a com-
parator, it is possible to efficiently sort the candidates by score. PriorityQueue is
based on a heap data structure and enables pop() in O(log(heap size)) time.
A custom datatype and another potentially more efficient sorting datastructure
could have been used, but as this project should produce a ready-to-deliver product,
the spell checker algorithms were implemented using these datatypes, to follow the
standards of Solr modules.
==PAGE:51==
5.4 Test Procedure
41
5.4
Test Procedure
All test cases have been implemented in Java and performed on a Intel(R) Core(TM)
i5-3210M CPU @ 2.50GHz with 12 GB RAM. FastSSwC, was tested on the DTU
Gbar as the spell checker required more memory to build the spell checker, than
was available from the test laptop. It can be assumed that there will be a slight
performance difference in query time, but as this does not play a crucial role in
relation to good quality matchings it is disregarded in the final evaluation.
The test procedure used in this thesis differ from standard procedures, due to the
fact that the dataset generated for tests does not include the correct matchings of
the misspelled words. An ideal dataset would have been generated by testing Dan-
ish dyslexics in spelling and would consist of a mapping between a set of misspelled
words and the correlated correctly spelled words. Such a dataset does not exists and
therefor it is necessary to semantically evaluate the results.
Matching quality. A semantic evaluation will involve analyzing the misspelled words
by using the knowledge of typically used Danish words or inputs in relation to library
searches (writers names, book titles etc.). Furthermore, evaluation will also be based
on considering closely related word-alternatives, and by knowing the functionality of
each distance metrics.
By applying this semantic evaluation it is possible to argue whether the quality
of the candidate sets are good. The evaluation method can be used to analyze any of
the spell checkers and thereby making it possible to compare them to each other.
Empty candidate sets. Some of the spell checkers will struggle to suggest any alter-
natives to a misspelled input. This results in empty candidate sets. Since it is not
possible to evaluate on an empty set, instead the spell checker parameters or distance
metric is analyzed, in order to identify why the spell checker struggled finding any
candidates to the misspelled input.
Query time deviations. Query time deviations does not play a crucial role, but it
does help to give a better understanding of the algorithms and distance metrics. The
query time of a spell checker should show a good average performance and should
not include high deviations from query to query. As each word in a search input
represents a token, each word in a search input of five words will be looked-up in the
spell checker. If one, or several of the words deviate in query time, the total query
time of the search input can sum up to more than a second. This is a long query time
for a spell checker lookup.
The following procedures will be used to test the algorithms:
• The algorithms are tested on the misspelled words dataset described in Section
4.2. The 200 most frequently misspelled words are used for testing.
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Methodology
• For each misspelled word a maximum of 10 candidates are retrieved. These
result sets are referred to as candidate sets.
• The evaluation of the candidate sets will be a two-step evaluation:
– The performance of the algorithms is measured in relation to query time
and memory consumption when building the index.
The memory con-
sumption does not reflect the final size of the data structure, but the re-
quired memory used by the compiler in order to build the data structure.
This is Java specific and test results might have looked different if another
programming language was chosen for implementation.
– The quality of the algorithms and the resulting candidate sets is measured
in relation to matching quality i.e. semantic evaluation.
Nota.dk’s current spell checker solution was tested using the previously mentioned
API SolrJ and required a locally installed backup of Nota.dk’s Solr solution. As the
queries run through the SolrJ API, the query time cannot directly be compared to the
data of the implemented algorithms. The test of the current solution is intended to
give an estimate of an approximate query time limitation, but also to simply evaluate;
what is the current solution able to efficiently spell check, what is it not able to.
BK-tree
Tolerance= 2.
TrigramSimilarity
Minimum similarity score of 0.5
FastSS
Deletion neighborhood = 2
Phonetex
Code length = 4
Nota (Jaro-Winkler)
Threshold = 0.7, scaling factor = 0.1
Table 5.1: The table shows the setup parameters of the algorithms. TrigramSimi-
larity is the only algorithm that has been modified, such that it considers
words with a distance < 0.5 as irrelevant. All other algorithms use de-
fault parameters.
5.4.1
Parameters
Each of the spell checker algorithms have some parameters that should be set, in
order to build the index or to reduce the comparison scope of the result set.
If
these parameters are not set, the index can be inefficient in many ways. Worst case
scenario results in an exhaustive search over the entire spell checker dictionary. The
parameters of the algorithms are shown in Table 5.1. The only modification that has
been added applies to the TrigramSimilarity algorithm. Here, a minimum similarity
score is added as - if not, the candidate sets becomes too large, affecting the query
time significantly, when retrieving the best matchings (sorting the result set).
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 6
Results
This chapter presents the results and observations made from testing the proposed
algorithms and distance metrics from Section 2.3 and Chapter 5. The chapter will
include two main test sections; results when testing the algorithms in their original
form and results testing the various distance metrics using the TrigramSimilarity
spell checker. The test procedure described in Section 5.4 will be used to deduct the
results.
6.1
Algorithms
6.1.1
Performance
Table 6.1 shows the results when testing the spell checker algorithms on the 200 most
popular misspelled words. The table shows that the slowest performing implemented
algorithm is the BK-tree, with an average of 22ms per query. The fastest performing
algorithm is by far FastSScW which outdoes TrigramSimilarity (the second fastest)
with a factor of 10. The spell checker is a good example of an algorithm that makes
compromises in one area, in order to achieve a better performance in another. It
performs exceptionally well in query time, but this is achieved by building a huge
index that consumes a lot of memory and takes a long time to build.
Method
Avg. query
time (ms)
Build Time
(sek)
# of empty
result sets
Memory
Used (mb)
BK-tree
∼22.0
2.47
13
117
TrigramSimilarity
∼5.0
1.72
7
249
FastSS
∼0.6
229.92
10
5980
Phonetex
∼16.0
1.45
-
69
Nota.dk (Jaro-Winkler)
∼25.0
-
7
-
Table 6.1: Results of running each spell checker on the 200 most popular misspelled
words. Nota.dk (Jaro-Winkler) refers to the Solr std. spell checker mod-
ule. Memory consumption and build-time have been left out of the stan-
dard Solr spell checker.
==PAGE:54==
44
6 Results
Only the average search time has been measured on Nota.dk’s current spell checker
solution. This is due to the fact that Nota.dk are running a standardized solution,
using the built-in modules of Solr and Lucene.
It has been assumed that build-
time and the memory used by the standard spell checker data structure is somewhat
reasonable (maybe even optimal) in relation to Solrs demands. Table 6.1 shows that
the average search time is approximately 25ms per misspelled word, indicating that
the upper bound query time performance should be somewhat close to this result.
Table 6.1 also shows information about the number of empty result sets. This
refers to the queries where the spell checkers were not able to suggest any related
candidates when analyzing the misspelled input.
It is not possible to completely
conclude anything without doing a semantic analysis on the result sets, but in relation
to this value two methods does stand out. Firstly, Phonetex achieve returning result
sets to all misspelled word and it achieves reasonable average query time performance.
Secondly, the BK-tree which performs worst considering query time, also have the
highest number of empty result sets.
6.1.2
Semantic Analysis
Empty result sets.
Table 6.2 shows the words that each individual spell checker
struggled to spell check.
Phonetex have been excluded as it was able to return
candidate suggestions for all misspelled words. The table shows that the BK-tree and
FastSSwC was not able to find suggestions to some of the same words. Analyzing
how the spell checkers work, the reason for them struggling with some of the same
words is quite different.
Spell checker
Mispelled words
BK-tree
bc3bclow, superbitchene, svampebog, skabteger,
safarihulen, ponyhjerte, detskøre, tværpro,
bogstavbjerget, dokumentaren-kreative, hc3bcbbe,
jc3bcrgensen, danskundervising.wikispaces.com
TrigramSimilarity
5kl, td, hc3bcbbe, væ, kæ, lø, pæ
FastSSwC
bc3bclow, superbitchene, skabteger, safarihulen,
ponyhjerte, bogstavbjerget, dokumentaren-kreative,
hc3bcbbe, jc3bcrgensen, danskundervising.wikispaces.com
Nota.dk (Jaro-Winkler)
christian.4, muligheder-, chr, d‘dansk,
danskundervising.wikispaces.com, let´s, lets
Table 6.2: The table shows the words that each spell checker was not able to return
a set of candidates on. The words show that there are some tenden-
cies; TrigramSimilarity is struggling with short words and BK-tree and
FastSSwC does have a few words in common.
==PAGE:55==
6.1 Algorithms
45
The BK-tree struggles because of the tolerance parameter. Setting the tolerance
to two means that no words with a distance ≥2 is added to the result set. A poten-
tially good matching to ’bc3bclow’ could be ’babrow’, but as the Levenshtein distance
of the two words is four, ’babrow’ is never added to the result set. As previously dis-
cussed, increasing the tolerance level significantly change the the number of nodes
visited in the tree. Increasing the tolerance to three and four, results in the average
query times of 61ms and 97ms, respectively.
FastSSwC struggle due to completely different reasons, as query time is clearly
not a problem. Instead the limitations of the deletion neighborhood plays a huge role.
As already mentioned the Levenshtein distance between ’bc3bclow’ and ’babrow’ is
four. Assuming that all of these four editations where deletions, it becomes clear why
FastSSwC struggle to find a matching; with a deletion neighborhood factor k = 2,
it will never be possible that any deletion sub-string of ’bc3bclow’ becomes equal to
any of ’babrow’s deletion sub-strings. Why not increase the deletion neighborhood
factor k? - because the memory consumption scales with k.
Table 6.2 shows that TrigramSimilarity struggle finding candidates to shorter
words (mostly of length two). The reason for it struggling with these type of words is
because of the Dice similarity score. Creating overlapping tri-grams of ’kæ’ results in
’k, kæ, æ’. Matching ’kæ’ with ’kære’ (which is the danish word for dear and arguably
a good matching), will result in a similarity score of 4
9 ∼0.44 as the words have two
tri-grams in common and the number of tri-grams are respectively three and six. As
0.44 ≤0.5 the candidate is not included into the set. Why not increase the miminum
similarity score factor? - increasing the minimum similarity score will increase query
time. It can also be argued that, if the similarity score is lower than 50%, then the
candidate is simply not relevant. In this case the candidate is actually relevant, but
the Dice coefficient seems to work against this matching, that is the distance metric
might not be suited in this context.
Lastly, the Nota.dk spell checker seems to struggle with words that contain letters
that are not alphabetical. Time have not been spent on analyzing why it is a problem
for the spell checker to find candidates to these words, but it could be argued that
the spell checker should be able to find matchings to most of the misspelled words it
struggles with.
Matching quality. In order to completely evaluate the spell checkers, the quality of
the candidate sets needs to be evaluated. This section will take a look at some of
the suggestions that each the spell checker makes, analyze why these were the top
suggestions and evaluate if they are good or not.
Beginning with the already mentioned misspelled input ’jc3bcrgensen’. This is
an interesting input, since it, for a Danish reader, is rather intuitive what the word
should spell; Jørgensen which is a popular Danish last name or Jürgensen the name
of a famous writer.
==PAGE:56==
46
6 Results
Table 6.3 shows the candidate sets of TrigramSimilarity, Phonetex and Nota.dk’s
spell checker, which were the methods that were able to suggest candidates to the
input.
TrigramSimlarity and Nota.dk’s spell checker performs well, matching the
input to both Jørgensen and Jürgensen.
Not surprisingly, Phonetex performs not so well on this input. This is due to
the generalization tendency in the phonetic encoding.
The phonetic encoding of
’jc3bcrgensen’ is 4501 (j replaced by 4, c by 5, 3 by 0 and b by 1). This leads to
completely illogical mappings like ’jcaho’ (encoded into 4500) and the even worse
suggestion ’g.k’ (which is also encoded into 4500, as g is also replaced by 4).
Spell checker
jc3bcrgensen spell check candidates
TrigramSimilarity
jørgensen, jürgensen, jorgensen, b8rgense, bcrgen, jensen,
l.jørgensen, joensen, hagensen
Phonetex
jcaho, jquery, g.k, j.k, jk
Nota.dk (Jaro-Winkler)
jørgensen, jürgensen, jorgensen, b8rgensen, b8rgensens,
b8rensen, joensen, bergenseren, l.jørgensen, bergenser
Table 6.3: Candidate sets when querying on the misspelled input ’jc3bcrgensen’.
The candidates are sorted from the left to right, where the leftmost is
the best matching.
There are other misspelled inputs that Phonetex also does not perform well on;
on input ’bac’ the candidate set does not contain ’bach’, ’muscels’ does not contain
’mussels’ or ’muscles’, ’grø’ does not contain ’grød’ (porridge) or ’grøn’ (green), ’jusi’
does not contain ’jussi’ etc.
Another examples is the input ’pitstop’. This is actually not a misspelled word,
but the word did not exist in Nota.dk’s spell checker index or in the Danish dictio-
nary (which was used to sort out correctly spelled words from the misspelled words
dataset). As the word is not misspelled, it is a little harder to evaluate on.
The candidate results by all five spell checkers are shown in Table 6.4. This input
really put an emphasis on the benefits or weaknesses of each spell checker.
The BK-tree actually maps well, suggesting ’pistol’ and ’piston’, as the Leven-
shtein distance between both words and the search input is one. More suggestions
are not added, because there are no words withing an edit distance of two in the spell
checker index.
TrigramSimilarity only suggest ’stop’ as a candidate. Again the Dice coefficient
plays a huge role and it becomes clear that the distance metric is not well suited for
comparison in this spell checker index. ’stop’ might actually be a good suggestion in
this case, but it might also be a bad one (if the searcher was not looking for something
with stop). More suggestions could definitely benefit the result set.
FastSSwC does a great job retrieving a set of candidates. Like the BK-tree, this
method also sorts its candidates by the Levenshtein distance and therefore the two
==PAGE:57==
6.1 Algorithms
47
Spell checker
pitstop spell check candidates
BK-tree
pistol, piston
TrigramSimilarity
stop
FastSSwC
piston, pistol, isotop, kistorp, pistone, klittop, isotope,
pietist
Phonetex
pithon, pitsch, pitsis, potato, potatoes, patursson,
petersson, pituitary, pato, patolog
Nota.dk (Jaro-Winkler)
pitsis, pitsch, pithon, giftstof, postoperativ, postoperative,
hjertestop, stoppard, stopping, stoppede
Table 6.4: Candidate sets when querying on the misspelled input ’pitstop’.
The
candidates are sorted from the left to right, where the leftmost is the
best matching.
best matchings are also ’piston’ and ’pistol’. The result set does not include stop,
because of the deletion neighborhood restrictions.
Both Phonetex and Nota.dk’s spell checker completely fail suggesting anything
close to the input. It could be argued that ’hjertestop’ or ’stoppard’ are potentially
good matchings, but on then again - not really. They both have a preference towards
prefix matches and in this case it does not benefit the results.
Nota.dk’s spell checker in general performs well on the misspelled inputs that are
correctly spelled in the beginning of the word, but there are some cases where the spell
checker fails because of its distance metric. Table 6.5 shows three examples where the
candidates sets does not contain the intuitively best matchings. ’Klappt’ does not
contain ’klappet’ (to clap), ’herry’ does not contain ’harry’ and ’poptterr’ does not
contain ’potter’. Three matches that in most cases have a smaller edit distance than
most of the candidate suggestions, but because the spell checker use the Jaro-Winkler
distance is does not consider them in the top 10 candidate set.
klappt
klare, klara, klage, klang, klampenborg, klarere
herry
herr, sherry, cherry, herre, herrn, her, thierry, henry, herred, herran
poptterr
popper, popøret, poptøsen, popstjerne, poppers, popstar, poppe,
popat, poptøs, poplerne
Table 6.5: The candidate sets returned when spell checking the words ’klappt’,
’herry’ and ’poptterr’ in Nota.dk’s current spell checker solution.
Query time deviations. The BK-tree, TrigramSimilarity and FastSSwC all performs
well with no significant query time deviations. Phonetex, on the other hand, seems
to contains significant deviations. Looking up ’hobi’, ’hanse’ and ’husdyrhold’ are
==PAGE:58==
48
6 Results
examples of deviations, taking respectively 178, 256 and 240 milliseconds to query.
The words prefixes are some that are popular in the danish vocabulary (’hob’ is a
Danish word, Hans is a popular Danish name and ’hus’ meaning house in Danish),
and therefore it is reasonable to assume that these prefixes will be searched for quite
often in Nota.dk’s search engine, adding significantly delay to the query time.
Evaluation. Although the BK-tree and FastSSwC have different reasons for struggling
to find candidates to some specific misspelled words, the overall reason for their
struggles is similar. They are both more efficient when having to deal with misspelled
words that contain no more than two errors. As this tendency of only misspelling
two letters in a word cannot be applied to the users of Nota.dk, the spell checkers
show to be inefficient in relation to Nota.dk’s demands. Furthermore, the weaknesses
of both, slow query time in the BK-tree and FastSSwC taking up a huge amount of
space also play a role.
Despite of Phonetex being able to return candidate sets on almost all misspelled
inputs, the quality of the result sets were not always good because of the simplicity
in the transformation and encoding rule set. It is possible to modify this rule set,
but this will not change the most significant problem; that the spell checker clearly
preference correctly spelled prefixes. The query time performance of Phonetex was
good, but the spell checker did struggle with deviations, that increased the query
time significantly.
TrigramSimilarity showed a good average query time performance and overall
performs the best of the five spell checkers. In some cases it did struggle to find good
candidates because of the Dice distance metric.
6.2
Distance Metrics
Results show that TrigramSimilarity is a fast an efficient spell checker that, despite
struggling with the quality of the result sets, in overall performs well. Unlike the
BK-tree or FastSSwC it is easy to modify according to ones needs. This section will
try to test the algorithm using the various distance metrics proposed in Chapter 2.3.
In principle, any distance metric can be applied to calculate similarity scores, after
the tri-grams of the misspelled input has been looked up in the inverted index. Figure
6.1 shows the distance metrics that will be tested on the TrigramSimilarity algorithm.
6.2.1
Performance
Table 6.6 shows the initial performance results when applying the different distance
metrics to TrigramSimilarity. The table shows that the fastest method is the Dice
coefficient used in the original TrigramSimilarity algorithm. Ironically, this is also the
method which has the highest number of empty result sets. The slowest performing
metric is, with no surprise, the true Damerau-Levenshtein distance. Using the Jaro-
==PAGE:59==
6.2 Distance Metrics
49
Inverted 
Index
Trigram
Similarity
Restricted 
Damerau
Levenshtein
Dice
Levenshtein
Jaro 
Winkler
Data structures
Algorithms
Distance metrics
True
Damerau
Levenshtein
Figure 6.1: The figure shows an overview of the distance metrics that will be tested
on the TrigramSimlarity spell checker algorithm.
Winkler distance also exceeds the previously defined upper bound of ∼25ms in
average per query.
Method
Avg. query
time (ms)
# of empty
result sets
TrigramSimilarity
5.1
7
Trigram Jaro-Winkler
28.785
0
Trigram Levenshtein
17.78
1
Trigram restricted DL
22.105
1
Trigram true DL
72.395
1
Table 6.6: Results when applying various distance metrics to the TrigramSimilar-
ity spell checker.
The slowest performing distance metric is the true
Damerau-Levenshtein and the fastest is the original TrigramSimilarity
using the Dice coefficient.
6.2.2
Semantic Analysis
Table 6.7 shows the result sets when searching for the misspelled input ’follet’ using
the proposed distance metrics. All distance metrics gives somewhat good results;
==PAGE:60==
50
6 Results
’follett’ is close in distance to the input and all methods gives this the best (or shared
best) similarity score. Looking at the result sets it becomes clear that two of the
methods stands out. It could be argued that if ’follett’ is a good matching to ’follet’,
then so is ’fjollet’. Both suggestions requires one edit for them to be equal to the
input, so why not give them the same similarity score.
The Dice coefficient places ’fjollet’ on the second place with a similarity score of
0.71 and the Jaro-Winkler puts ’fjollet’ as the least relevant out of five matches with
a similarity score of 0.96 (which is a high similarity all considered).
Distance metric
Spell checker input : ’follet’
TrigramSimilarity
follett=0.82, follets=0.71, fjollet=0.71, follette=0.67,
folle=0.67
Trigram Jaro-Winkler
follets=0.98, follett=0.98, follette=0.97, folle=0.97,
fjollet=0.96
Trigram Levenshtein
fjollet=0.85, follets=0.85, follett=0.85, collet=0.83
Trigram restricted DL
Trigram true DL
Table 6.7: Result sets when spell checking the input ’follet’. A maximum of five
results are shown (sorted by increasing similarity score from left to right)
and the similarity score has been included.
Another example, where both the Dice coefficient and the Jaro-Winkler distance
seems to struggle, is when querying on the misspelled input ’bc3bclow’. Table 6.8
shows the result sets for all five distance metrics.
For the reader, ’bc3bclow’, is
clearly an input that contains a lot of misspellings. It is hard to guess what the
intention of the input might have been.
The Dice coefficient suggest the candidates ’blow’ and ’clow’. These might not nec-
essarily be bad suggestions, although, more suggestions could have been preferred.
The Jaro-Winkler distance on the other hand, really struggles with this input, retriev-
ing suggestions where some of them are completely illogical i.e. the best matching
being ’bc’.
The Levenshtein and Damerau-Levenshtein distances seems to gives reasonable
matchings, although all of the candidates are given a low similarity score, the distance
metrics returns a set of results where it is possible to chose from the highest ranking
(or most occurring) word.
In the previous examples, there were no differences in the result sets between the
three Levenshtein methods. Table 6.9 shows an examples of a misspelled input that
actually contains a transposition error. Whether or not the input should have spelled
’muscles’ or ’mussels’ is hard to determine without asking the user and therefore it
could benefit the result set if both words, where given the same similarity score, so
that other factors would play a role i.e. occurrences of the words in the database or
ranking of the words.
==PAGE:61==
6.2 Distance Metrics
51
Distance metric
Spell checker input : ’bc3bclow’
TrigramSimilarity
blow=0.5, clow=0.5
Trigram Jaro-Winkler
bc=0.8, below=0.79, bülow=0.79, bcbeck=0.78,
backflow=0.77, b3=0.77, bb=0.77
Trigram Levenshtein
babrow=0.5, babylon=0.5, backflow=0.5, barlow=0.5
Trigram restricted DL
Trigram true DL
Table 6.8: Result sets when spell checking the input ’bc3bclow’. A maximum of five
results are shown (sorted by increasing similarity score from left to right)
and the similarity score has been included.
Distance metric
Spell checker input : ’muscels’
Trigram Levenshtein
mussels=0.85, muskelsp=0.75, dussels=0.71,
musaeus=0.71, muscle=0.71, muscles=0.71
Trigram restricted DL
muscles=0.85, mussels=0.85, muskelsp=0.75
Trigram true DL
Table 6.9: Result sets of the Levenshtein and Damerau-Levenshtein methods when
spell querying for the input ’muscels’. The coloring of the suggested word
’muscles’ have been marked with either green or red, depending on the
score being good or bad.
Table 6.9 shows that the Levenshtein distance returns a similarity score of 0.85 for
’mussels’, but only 0.71 for ’muscles’. It actually suggests that ’muskelsp’ is a better
match than ’muscles’ (’muskelsp’ is not a real word, but somehow this is indexed in
Nota.dk’s spell checker data). The true and restricted Damerau-Levenshtein methods
gives ’muscles’ the same similarity score as ’mussels’. It becomes clear that there are
some actual benefits using the Damerau-Levenshtein methods.
Evaluation. The results show that by using the Levenshtein and Damerau-Levenshtein
distance metrics, it is possible to achieve good quality results, maintaining a rea-
sonable query time performance. The true Damerau-Levenshtein distance metrics
performs well in relation to quality, but does struggle in relation to query time. Jaro-
Winkler is showing a lot of preference towards non-misspelled prefixes.
6.2.3
Levenshtein vs. Damerau-Levenshtein
From the previous test results, it is not possible to clearly deduct whether or not the
misspelled words dataset contains transposition errors. The tests, so far, have only
==PAGE:62==
52
6 Results
included testing on 200 of the most misspelled words. Researching whether there
is a tendency towards transposition errors is interesting since, in case the data con-
tains a lot of transposition errors, better results can be achieved using the Damerau-
Levenshtein distance. On the other hand, as the Damerau-Levenshtein (especially
the true Damerau-Levenshtein) method is more costly in computation time, the Lev-
enshtein distance should be used if the misspelled words dataset does not contain a
lot of transposition errors.
As the Levenshtein and (restricted or true) Damerau-Levenshtein distance mea-
sures insertions, deletions or substitutions in the exact same way, tests can be per-
formed by comparing the result sets of either methods. If the result sets differ, then
it can be assumed that some words were evaluated closer in distance than others,
because it was possible to include one or more transpositions.
Method
Words
Top 10
Top 3
Avg. query
time (ms)
Restricted DL
1000
113
29
23
2000
233
66
21
4000
531
160
21
True DL
1000
134
34
70
2000
260
72
79
4000
604
177
77
Table 6.10: Results from testing the Levenshtein distance to the restricted and
true Damerau-Levenshtein distance, on the test dataset created from
Nota.dk’s log data. The tests include comparison of the top 10 and top
3 suggestions from the result sets.
The TrigramSimilarity algorithm was used to create two result sets and compare
them to each other; one using the Levenshtein distance, the second using either the
restricted or the true Damerau-Levenshtein distance. Each result set is tested against
the misspelled words dataset, which have been divided into smaller sets (ranges from
0 −1000, 1000 −3000, 3000 −7000).
The column Top 10 in Table 6.10 shows the results of testing all values in the
result sets to eachother, where as Top 3 shows the results when testing the top three
suggestions.
The average transposition errors detected when comparing the top 10 results lies
between ∼9 −14% for the restricted and the true Damerau-Levenshtein distance
respectively. Comparing the top three suggestions, it is in all cases ≤5%.
Table 6.11 shows the results when comparing the candidate sets of the restricted
and the true Damerau-Levenshtein distance. The table shows that a minimum num-
ber of candidate sets differ between the two methods. A clear indicator that there is
not much to gain from using the true Damerau-Levenshtein distance metric consid-
==PAGE:63==
6.2 Distance Metrics
53
Words
Top 10
Top 3
Top 1
200
3
1
0
1000
23
6
2
2000
34
6
0
4000
94
20
4
Table 6.11: Results when comparing the candidate sets of the restricted and the
true Damerau-Levenshtein. The results show that rarely does the two
methods differ in the top 3 matches and almost not at all when com-
paring the top candidate.
ering how expensive it is in computation time.
Evaluation. The results show that although the misspelled dataset does not contain
a lot of transpositions errors, there are some cases where it would benefit to use the
restricted Damerau-Levenshtein method.
In overall, transposition errors does not play a significant role in the misspelled
dataset. Tests shows that the true Damerau-Levenshtein distance metric is signifi-
cantly slower than the restricted (about ∼3.5 times slower). As the candidate sets
of the two methods, differ in a minimal amount of cases, it becomes obvious, that if
one of them were to be selected to use in a spell checker, the fastest of the two should
be picked i.e. the restricted Damerau-Levenshtein distance.
==PAGE:64==
54
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 7
Improvements
Chapter 6 showed that the Levenshtein and Damerau-Levenshtein distance metrics
were able to find quality candidates to misspelled input. This chapter focus on ex-
panding the distance metrics such that specific letter weights are used, instead of a
default edit cost of one for each operation. This means that potentially every letter
in the alphabet could have a specific insertion and deletion weight, and every pair of
letters could have a specific substitution or transposition weight. Here the analysis of
the tendencies and patterns in dyslexic peoples way of spelling come in handy. Using
this analysis, it is possible to define a set of rules that can help raise the quality of
the candidates. It is also possible that by applying weights, it can unintentionally
have a negative effect on the spell checker results.
The following sections will describe the analysis, methodology and results of test-
ing a weights module applied to the Levenshtein and Damerau-Levenshtein methods,
using the TrigramSimilarity spell checker.
7.1
Weighted Levenshtein distance
This section describes the argumentation for applying weights to either of the four
edit operations, insertion, deletion, substitution and transposition in the Levenshtein
and Damerau-Levenshtein distance metrics. With the knowledge gained from Section
2.2, it is argued for the following weights setup:
• Levenshtein distance:
– Deletion : cost α. As Nota.dk’s users tend to add double consonant or
silent letters where they do not belong, a deletion setup could benefit the
spell checker.
– Insertion : cost β. Argument is reverse of deletion; as Nota.dk’s users
struggle with double consonant words and silent letters, giving a lower
cost on insertion of the typical letters that are added where they do not
belong, could benefit the spell checker.
– Substitution : cost γ.
Substitution represents combined delete and an
insert; if there are some letters which are often mistaken for eachother the
punishment of replacing those letters should be eased, that is, the cost
==PAGE:66==
56
7 Improvements
should be lowered. Typical substitution errors involves both vowels and
consonants and it can also include typical typos, like pressing o instead of
p or r instead of t.
• Damerau-Levenshtein distance:
– Transposition :
cost δ.
Transpositions are typically fast-typing typos
closely related letters in either words or on the keyboard. Adding weights
could help emphasize transpositions of letters that often appear close to
each other in words i.e. ’n’ and ’g’, ’r’ and ’t’, ’c’ and ’h’ etc.
The variables α, β, γ and δ represents containers that store the rule sets of ei-
ther operation. Equation 7.1 shows an updated version of the Levenshtein recursion
function. Instead of adding the default cost of one for either a deletion, insertion or
substitution, the cost is extracted from the weights module (using α, β or γ). The
equation shows that if either of i or j is zero, the insertion cost is now summed with
the previous cost (row or column).
leva,b(i, j) =











leva,b(i, j −1) + β(bj)
i = 0
leva,b(i −1, j) + β(ai)
j = 0
min



leva,b(i −1, j) + α(bj)
leva,b(i, j −1) + β(ai)
leva,b(i −1, j −1) + γ(ai, bj)(ai̸=bj)
otherwise.
(7.1)
Equation 7.1 shows that insertion and deletion involves around a single letter look-
up. In order to measure an insertion of i.e. ’e’, a mapping of ’e’ to weight w needs
to be created. Substitution and transposition on the other hand, involves around the
relationship between two letters i.e. substituting ’e’ with ’f’ requires mapping either
’e’ to ’f’ or ’f’ to ’e’ to a weight w. In the following sections these mappings will be
referred to as rule sets.
α =
a
1
d
0.9
x
1.2
γ =
a
d
e
a
0
1
0.8
d
1
0
0.9
e
0.8
0.9
0
Table 7.1: The table on the left shows an example of a deletion rule set α. The
table on the right shows an example of a substitution rule set γ. As
substitution is measured by using two letters, the table on the right is
now a |c|×|c|- matrix where |c| is the number of unique letters appearing
in the rule set.
Table 7.1 shows an example of a deletion (left table) and a substitution (right
table) rule set setup. The table α on the left shows that the cost of deleting ’d’ is 0.9
where as the cost of deleting ’x’ is 1.2, indicating that ’d’ is more often inserted where
==PAGE:67==
7.1 Weighted Levenshtein distance
57
it does not belong, compared to ’x’. The table on the right γ shows that substituting
’a’ with ’e’ is very cheap i.e ’a’ and ’e’ are often mistaken for each other.
7.1.1
Weights
Defining a rule set that covers all typical spelling tendencies and were the rules does
not overlap, seems almost impossible. First and foremost, it is hard to define such
a set, but as Nota.dk’s spell checker index is so diverse, containing writers names,
Danish words, English words, it adds another layer of complexity. Creating a rule set
that covers spelling tendencies of each language, how surnames and last names are
typically spelled in those languages is very hard.
Insertion
Substitution
Rule
Weight
Example
Rule
Weight
Example
r
0.9
present-r
a
e
0.75
harry, heritage, typical
English words
h
0.95
hvem, hvad, hvor,
hvalp, hvede, thy
b
p
0.8
spille, knap
l
0.95
hallen, bryllup,
festivalen
c
k
0.8
checke
t
0.9
hatte, filet, kostbar,
egentlig, altså, nødt
c
s
0.75
charme, citron
k
0.95
kokke, møtrikker
d
t
0.75
potter, knytte, stol
m
0.95
glemme, rummet
d
l
0.8
spilde / spille
d
0.9
midt, hvidt, skind,
ridder, finde
d
n
0.8
vender, venner
g
0.95
sagn, ligne but also
væggen, skægget,
hotdoggen
e
æ
0.75
veksle, elske
p
0.95
hopper, cappuchino
e
i
0.9
sidde, spille, pille
e
0.95
Insertion of silent e;
foregår, udemærket
g
v
0.75
savn, hagl
Table 7.2: A section of the first 10 insertion and substitution rules applied in the
weights module. Substitution rules have in general been given a better
weight than insertion, as these rules represent the letters that sound like
eachother.
A rule set, trying to integrate the typical spelling errors of Danish dyslexics with-
out overruling (or breaking) the efficiency of the Levenshtein distance metrics, have
been defined. In other words, the rule set have been made as general as possible,
tweaking the system a little, hopefully being able to show better results.
==PAGE:68==
58
7 Improvements
In order to the define the rule set, the already mentioned Sprognævn (2007) was
studied in detail. As rules have not been applied to every possible combination of
letters, a default cost needs to be defined for each operation. In this case the default
cost of insertion, deletion, substitution and transposition is set to one.
Table 7.2 shows ten insertion and substitution rules applied in the weights module.
All insertion rules have been given a weight ≥0.9. This slight variance from the
default value, adds enough preference to make a difference in the final candidate sets
that are returned, when spell checking on an input that is missing some of the typical
letters. The substitution rules have in general been given a lower weight compared
to insertions, as substitution errors are one of the general struggles in spelling for
dyslexic people. Various weights have been given in the substitution rules, as there
are some letters that are more often mistaken for each other i.e. ’e’ substituting ’i’
does not appear as often as some of the other substitution rules and therefore this
have been given a higher weight.
The final rule set (used for testing) containing
insertion, deletion, substitution and transposition weights can be found in Appendix
C.
7.2
Methodology
This section will elaborate on the methodology used to implement the weights module.
This section contains a description of the test procedures, used to evaluate the module
as well as a description of the changes that were necessary to make, in order to
maintain the good performance of the TrigramSimilarity spell checker.
7.2.1
Weights module
Weight. A custom weight object was implemented. It contains the following variables
and methods:
• Variables :
– charIndex : a HashMap with a Character as key and an Integer as value.
As Table 7.2 showed, several letters can be mapped to other letters (like ’d’
substituting both ’l’ and ’n’). In order to avoid iterating over the matrix on
every look-up, the charIndex is used to map index positions in the matrix.
– matrix : a two dimensional array of floating points. The matrix maps the
letter pairs to eachother
– DEFAULT : a default floating point value (1.0f).
• setWeights. Input : an ArrayList of strings. This method goes through an
array list of strings, where each string represent a rule. For every new letter
that is represented in a rule, the letter is given a unique id (registered in the
charIndex). Then, the rules are registered and the weights matrix is built.
==PAGE:69==
7.2 Methodology
59
• getWeight. Input : char a, char b. The methods makes a look-up for a and b in
the charIndex to extract their unique ID’s. The method then makes a look-up
in the weights matrix and return the weight between the two letters.
Weights. A custom weights object was implemented. It contains the following vari-
ables and methods:
• Variables:
– insertion : a HashMap which has a letter as key and a floating point as
value.
– deletion : a HashMap which has a letter as key and a floating point as
value.
– substitution : a weight object.
– transposition. a weight object.
• getters and setters for each variable.
• createMapping. Input : ArrayList of strings. This method creates the singular
mapping representing either deletions or insertions. The method uses the same
approach as setWeights in the Weight object and it is called by both setInser-
tionWeights and setDeletionWeights method.
Distance metrics. The following modifications have been applied to the Levenshtein
and Damerau-Levenshtein distance metrics:
• They are initialized with a weights variable as a parameter. This enables the
methods to use the weights setup, when calculating the distance matrix values.
• When calculating the values in the distance matrix, the following changes have
been applied:
– As it is possible to see from Equation 7.1, the initial values (i.e. when
i = 0 or j = 0) refers to the insertion weight of the current letter, added
with the previous weight. Table 7.3 shows an example of this summation
(looking at row 0 or column 0).
Table 7.3 shows an example where weighted insertion and substitution
rules have been applied in order to calculate the edit distance between the
inputs ’tre’ and ’tra’. The table on the left shows the distance matrix using
the original un-weighted Levenshtein method, where as the table on the
right shows how the distance matrix looks like, when rule set defined in
Table 7.2 is applied. As it is possible to see from the table on the right, the
edit distance between a blank string and ’tre’, is no longer 3 but instead
2.8. This is because each of the letters ’t’, ’r’ and ’e’ have an insertion cost
of 0.9, 0.9 and 0.95 respectively.
==PAGE:70==
60
7 Improvements
t
r
e
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
t
1.0
0.0
1.0
2.0
r
2.0
1.0
0.0
1.0
a
3.0
2.0
1.0
1.0
t
r
e
0.0
0.9
1.84
2.8
t
0.9
0.0
0.95
1.95
r
1.84
0.95
0.0
1.0
a
2.85
1.95
1.0
0.75
Table 7.3: The distance matrix before (left) and after (right) applying weights.
Specifically in this example the first substitution rule shown in Table
7.2 (’a’ replacing ’e’) is used to achieve an edit distance on 0.75 instead
of 1.
– When calculating the distance metrics in the nested for-loops, the weight
of either type of operation (again see Equation 7.1) are extracted from the
Weights module.
Textual input. In relation to the implementation of the rule set, some observations
were made regarding ’usability’. The rule set setup is defined via external files in
order to easily change the weights while testing. To ease correcting the setup, four
CSV files have been created, representing each of the edit operations.
Deletions and insertions are represented by two values i.e. ’e;0.9’ can represent
either insertion or deletion of ’e’ at a cost of 0.9. Substitutions and transpositions
were initially setup in a format that represents the weights matrix, but this was not
a very user friendly setup. Table 7.4 shows an example of a substitution rule set.
The setup is difficult to read and it becomes quite extensive if one wanted to apply
changes into it. For each substitution pair, two values needs to be changed in the
matrix and it is easy to misplace a value. Letting the user generate this matrix is,
clearly, not a good idea.
a b c d e t
a 0 1 1 1 1 1
b 1 0 1 1 1 1
c 1 1 0 1 1 1
d 1 1 1 0 1 0.5
e 1 1 1 1 0 1
t 1 1 1 0.5 1 0
Table 7.4: The table shows an example of a weighted substitution matrix.
The
setup is difficult to change or read. Mistakes can easily be made and
therefore the format have been changed.
Instead, a three value setup is used to represent a substitution rule i.e. ’a;e;0.8’
meaning substituting ’a’ with ’e’ or ’e’ with ’a’, has a weight of 0.8. The construction
of the substitution matrix is instead done completely in the Java code. This makes
==PAGE:71==
7.2 Methodology
61
the setup much more user friendly and still ensures fast look-up time when extracting
the weights.
7.2.2
TrigramSimilarity
Section 2.3.3 briefly described how implementing the TrigramSimilarity as is, could
potentially cause problems because of the singular letter mappings the overlapping
tri-grams method created.
After applying weights to the Levenshtein distance metrics, it became clear that
the index did indeed need some optimization. A performance test showed that query-
ing for misspelled data was in average about 3 −4 times as slow, but with significant
outliers that took up to 500ms in query time. This primarily involved words that
either started or ended with popular letters (like ’s’, ’d’, ’e’ etc.).
The createTrigrams method was modified, so that it removed most of the single
letter mappings that were causing the query time to increase drastically.
It was
modified in the following way:
• If the word length is ≤2 - apply tri-grams method that including singular letter
mappings.
• If the word length is within the range of [3, 4] - apply tri-grams method (not
including singular).
• If the word length is > 4- apply four-grams method (not including singular).
Removing all single letter mappings will cause problems in relation to short inputs
(i.e. of length ≤2), arguing for the first criteria in the algorithm. An alternative to
single letter indexing the short inputs, could be to simply consider them bad inputs
and discard them from the index, being that it is hard to analyze the meaning of such
short inputs. They could relate to stop words, which if spelled correctly, is removed
from the query input and the indexing data by Solr.
to
two
three
t, to, o
tw, wo, two
th, thr, ree, ee, thre, hree
Table 7.5: The table shows three examples of how inputs are handled in the updated
createTrigrams method. The inputs shows examples of the three types
of input criteria the method implements i.e. inputs of length ≤2, [3, 4]
or > 4.
Furthermore, increasing the n-grams factor leads to a higher expectancy that the
users are spelling correctly, i.e. building five-grams of longer words, it is expected that
at least one sub-string of length five is spelled correctly in the word. This is a strict
demand, especially considering Nota.dk’s user segment and therefore the maximum
==PAGE:72==
62
7 Improvements
n-grams created in the algorithm is four-grams (if the length of a word is > 4). Table
7.5 shows three examples of how inputs are handled by the updated createTrigrams
method.
7.2.3
Test Procedure
The test procedure, in overall, follow the procedure described in Section 5.4, including
an evaluation of query time performance, matching quality of the candidate sets and
query time deviations. In order to test the weights module, the candidate sets are
measured against non-weighted candidate sets, i.e.
the non-weighted Levenshtein
distance.
The results will show both the positive and negative sides of applying
weights to the Levenshtein and Damerau-Levenshtein distances.
In all test cases, the updated TrigramSimilarity spell checker is used, such that
the non-weighted and weighted distance metrics are on the same terms, selecting
candidates on the same set of indexed data. The minimum similarity score parameter
is set to 0.5.
The following procedures will be used to test the weights module:
• The weights module is tested, using the updated TrigramSimilarity spell checker
on the misspelled words dataset, described in Section 4.2. The 200 most fre-
quently misspelled words are used for testing.
• For each misspelled word a maximum of ten candidates are retrieved. These
result sets are referred to as candidate sets.
• The evaluation of the candidate sets will be a two-step evaluation:
– The performance of the algorithms is measured in relation to query time.
– The quality of the algorithms and the resulting candidate sets is mea-
sured in relation to the semantic evaluation. The weights results will be
measured against results using the Levenshtein distance in the updated
TrigramSimlarity spell checker.
7.3
Results
This section presents the results and observations made from testing weighted Leven-
shtein and Damerau-Levenshtein distance metrics applied onto the TrigramSimilarity
spell checker. The section will include a performance test and a semantic evaluation,
using the test procedure described in Section 7.2.3.
7.3.1
Performance
Table 7.6 shows the results of testing the weighted distance metrics using the updated
version of TrigramSimilarity algorithm.
Both the Levenshtein and the restricted
==PAGE:73==
7.3 Results
63
Damerau-Levenshtein methods show a good average query time performance. Despite
optimizations of the index, the true Damerau-Levenshtein distance metrics is still, in
average, too slow in query time performance and it will therefore not be included in
the following analysis.
All three methods succeeds in returning candidate sets for all misspelled words,
indicating that the rule set might give a slight preference to the border cases (the
words with a similarity score around 0.5).
Method
Avg. query
time (ms)
# of empty
result sets
Trigram Levenshtein
16
-
Trigram restricted DL
18
-
Trigram true DL
36
-
Table 7.6: The table show the results when applying the weights module to the
Levenshtein and Damerau-Levenshtein distance methods, testing it on
the updated version of TrigramSimilarity.
7.3.2
Semantic Analysis
Weighted vs. Non-Weighted. Table 7.7 shows the results when comparing the non-
weighted Levenshtein distance to the weighted Levenshtein and restricted Damerau-
Levenshtein distances. Adding the weights to the distance metrics clearly affects the
candidate sets, as almost half of the 200 sets differ within the top 3 candidates.
Method
Words
Top 10
Top 3
Levenshtein
200
139
97
Restricted DL
143
97
Table 7.7: Results from testing the non-weighted Levenshtein distance against
weighted Levenshtein and Damerau-Levenshtein distances on the mis-
spelled words dataset. The tests includes comparisons of the top 10 and
top 3 suggestions from the result sets.
Matching quality. Table 7.7 showed that applying weights made a huge difference in
relation to the candidate sets. The following examples shows some of the changes the
weights affected in relation to the candidate sets.
Table 7.8 shows the candidate sets when querying on the misspelled input ’herry’
using TrigramSimilarity measure. The table shows that the non-weighted Levenshtein
distance struggle to match ’harry’ to ’herry’ with as good a score as ’cherry’. This is
actually an example where the chosen similarity score fails, as it is trying to return
==PAGE:74==
64
7 Improvements
the smallest edit distance possible, in relation to both the input and the candidate.
In these short words, where candidates vary with one letter, the evaluation of the
similarity score plays a huge role. In this case, it results in a better similarity score
between ’cherry’ and ’herry’ because ’cherry’ is longer than ’herry’ giving 1−1
6. As it
is possible to see from the table, the weighted distance metrics are able to return the
better similarity score for ’harry’ and ’sherry’ because of the substitution rule replac-
ing ’a’ with ’e’ has a weight of 0.75 and because it is cheap to insert ’s’ (at a cost of 0.9).
Distance metric
Spell checker input : ’herry’
Non-weighted
Levenshtein
cherry=0.83, sherry=0.83, berry=0.8, derry=0.8,
ferry=0.8, gerry=0.8, harry=0.8
Weighted Levenshtein
harry=0.85, sherry=0.85, cherry=0.83, berry=0.8
Weighted restricted DL
Table 7.8: Result sets when spell checking on input ’herry’ using the Levenshtein
and Damerau-Levenshtein distance metrics. ’Harry’ and ’sherry’ is given
a clear preference in the weighted results compared to the non-weighted.
Table 7.9 shows the candidate sets when querying for the misspelled input ’reste’.
Again, it is possible to see that the non-weighted Levenshtein distance returns a large
set of suggestions, where all of them are given the same similarity score. The weighted
Levenshtein and Damerau-Levenshtein distances gives a better similarity score to the
candidates ’raste’, ’resta’ and ’rette’. This is because of the advantage given towards
substituting ’a’ with ’e’, and ’s’ with ’t’. It is hard to say which word the user in-
tended to write, but it can be concluded that the rules that were defined, based on
the tendencies of Danish dyslexics, are working as intended on the misspelled inputs.
Distance metric
Spell checker input : ’reste’
Non-weighted
Levenshtein
beste=0.8, este=0.8, feste=0.8, geste=0.8, meste=0.8,
neste=0.8, peste=0.8, raste=0.8, rente=0.8, rest=0.8
Weighted Levenshtein
raste=0.85, resta=0.85, rette=0.85, este=0.82,
rest=0.82, riste=0.82, beste=0.8
Weighted restricted DL
raste=0.85, resta=0.85, rette=0.85, erste=0.82,
este=0.82, rest=0.82, riste=0.82, beste=0.8
Table 7.9: Result sets when spell checking on the input ’reste’. All three candidate
sets differ in one way or another. Again, the substitution rules that have
been setup gives a clear reference to some of the candidates.
==PAGE:75==
7.3 Results
65
Distance metric
Spell checker input : ’follet’
Non-weighted
Levenshtein
fjollet=0.85, follets=0.85, follett=0.85, collet=0.83
Weighted Levenshtein
foldet=0.875, follets=0.87, follett=0.87, fjollet=0.857
Weighted restricted DL
Table 7.10: Result sets when spell checking on the input ’follet’.
Table 7.11 and 7.10 show examples where the rule sets can affect the candidate
sets in a possibly negative way. Table 7.11 shows that when querying the misspelled
word ’hobi’, the non-weighted Levenshtein distance returns a candidate set where
all candidates are given the same similarity score. It is hard to figure out what the
intention of the input was; it might be ’hobbit’ or maybe ’gobi’ since ’g’ and ’h’
are positioned closely on the keyboard. The weighted distance metrics gives a clear
advantage to ’hopi’, as there is a substitution rule returning 0.75 in edit distance
when substituting ’b’ with ’p’. The rule sets affect the results, but whether or not it
is in a positive way only the user is able to say.
Table 7.10 is a bit more of a border-case, where a lot of Danish words are close
to the misspelled input which makes it especially hard guessing what originally was
the meaning of the input. Here it is possible to see that the substitution rule stating
that ’l’ and ’d’ are often mistaken for eachother, predisposition the word ’foldet’ over
’follets’, ’follett’ and ’fjollet’. Again, it is hard to determine the best answer, without
having the user to validate the candidates.
Distance metric
Spell checker input : ’hobi’
Non-weighted
Levenshtein
fobi=0.75, gobi=0.75, hob=0.75, hobe=0.75,
hoby=0.75, hoi=0.75
Weighted Levenshtein
hopi=0.81, hobe=0.77, obi=0.77, fobi=0.75, gobi=0.75
Weighted restricted DL
Table 7.11: Result sets when spell checking on the input ’hobi’. The results show
that giving a lower cost of replacing ’b’ with ’p’, clearly gives an advan-
tage towards some words.
Query time deviations. There are some words that both distance metrics struggle
with. These words takes ≥100ms to query. These are words like ’socialtarbejde’,
’desvære’, ’skabteger’, ’safarihulen’ and ’jc3bcrgensen’. Most of the words are longer
than the average string length in the spell checker dictionary and all of them also
either start or end with typical Danish prefixes or suffixes of words i.e. ’s’, ’de’, ’sk’,
’er’, ’en’ etc.
==PAGE:76==
66
7 Improvements
The words adds significant query time to the overall performance and therefore
it should be investigated whether or not it is possible to reduce the query time in
relation to these words. This can be done in several ways, by analyzing the candidate
set the words retrieve (without using the 0.5 lower boundary) and try to optimize the
indexing method based on whatever tendencies the candidates might show.
Evaluation.
The results show that by applying weights to the Levenshtein and
Damerau-Levenshtein distance metrics, it is possible to affect the output of the dis-
tances. By defining a set of rules, the outcome of the distance metrics can be affected,
in relation to these rules. Applying weights to Levenshtein and Damerau-Levenshtein
distance metrics added computation time and therefore precautions should be taken
when using weighted distance metrics in i.e. spell checkers. The original TrigramSim-
ilarity spell checker did not perform well, in relation to query time, when applying
weights and therefore the spell checker indexing method was modified, such that it
became more efficient.
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 8
Discussion
This chapter discusses observations about and potential modifications to the imple-
mented spell checker algorithms and distance metrics. It will also include an elabora-
tion of the changes that were applied to Nota.dk’s Solr platform during the period of
August 2017 to the 1st of January 2018. Last, but not least, the chapter will include
a section describing the potential of this project in relation to future work.
8.1
Algorithms
All four implemented spell checkers had strengths and weaknesses, where the weak-
nesses made it clear, that some of the spell checkers were not suited for spell checking
on Nota.dk’s data. That being said, they could potentially all work well in specific
environments, dealing with a specific type of data. This section will briefly discuss
the weaknesses and strengths of the implemented spell checker algorithms.
The downsides of FastSSwC was obviously the limitations in the deletion neigh-
borhood factor combined with the space consumption. The spell checker suffered from
not being able to spell check words with more than two misspelled letters, which es-
pecially is a problem regarding longer inputs containing a lot of misspelled letters.
Increasing the deletion neighborhood factor will increase the space consumption sig-
nificantly (to recall FastSSwC have a space bound of O(nmk)). This algorithm would
probably show better results on a more homogene dataset, where the average length
of words is smaller than Nota.dk’s and where the data does not deviate so much in
length.
The BK-tree data structure also struggled to deal with inputs that contained more
than two misspellings. The query time was tolerable, but increasing the tolerance to
three or four would increase query time significantly, as this would widen the search
in the tree. The BK-tree spell checker is also the least modifiable of the implemented
spell checkers, as it is hard to find areas to optimize on this data structure. One
might try to use another distance metric, but as mentioned this metric needs to be a
true metric, that is, satisfy the triangle inequality.
Phonetex showed good results in the performance test. It was fast and it was able
to return candidate sets to almost all of the 200 misspelled words. Taking a better
==PAGE:78==
68
8 Discussion
look at the quality of the candidate sets, it became clear that the algorithm did not
quite live up to the expectations of being a language independent spell checker. There
is though a lot of room for improvements, regarding this algorithm. Improvements
can be applied by testing results of various code lengths, changing the transformation
and maybe even the encoding.
The performance test of TrigramSimilarity showed that the algorithm was fast
and efficient. The algorithm is flexible, making it possible to use any kind of string
distance metric or modify the indexing method (which was done is this project). It
explains why it is possible to find so many variations of this algorithm online i.e. the
Solr spell checker that index data using a similar n-grams approach. The n-grams
technique is in overall really effective, as it is both fast, but also able to retrieve good
matching candidates to misspelled input.
8.2
Distance metrics
A modification that was not tested in this project was tuning of the Jaro-Winkler
parameters, applying it to the TrigramSimilarity measure algorithm. Section 2.3.1
mentions that it is possible to tune both the prefix scaling factor and a boosting
threshold in the Jaro-Winkler distance. In relation to the TrigramSimilarity algo-
rithm, the standardized Lucene version of the Jaro-Winkler distance metric did not
perform as well as the Levenshtein distances in relation to average query time. If the
distance metric were to be used in any of the implemented algorithms, some coding
optimization would be required in order to bump up the speed of the distance metric.
Furthermore, it might be worth testing other string distance metrics or similarity
scores in order to achieve better candidate results. Potential distance metrics for
application could be Jaccard similarity or the Hamming distance.
In relation to the Weights module, the tests showed that indeed it was possi-
ble to tune the Levenshtein distance metrics, adding weights that represents typical
misspelling tendencies of Danish dyslexics.
In order to finally evaluate a rule set
of weights, a complete dataset containing both misspelled and correlated correctly
spelled words is necessary. It can be argued, that as each dyslexic spell differently, it
will be impossible to find a perfect rule set and thereby a rule set will go much farther,
by being more general in its way of distributing weights, not assigning weights that
deviate too much. Again, this should be tested on an ideal dataset.
8.3
Platform Modifications
During the period of this project, time was invested in researching the functionally
of Solr and small tweaks were applied to the Solr spell checker, that made it more
efficient.
==PAGE:79==
8.3 Platform Modifications
69
Optimization of the index have been applied during tests and Nota have also in-
formed of a selection of reduced and more relevant set of fields to index. This removes
the unnecessary information, that the spell checker index originally contained.
The flow of the spell checker module is described in detail in the online Solr
documentation. When a spell checker (or several spell checkers) return a candidate
set, the sets are merged and sorted using a comparator. As was described in Chapter
5, this comparator by default sorts/rank the candidate sets by similarity score, then
frequency. The spell checker allows one to setup a parameter that defines how many
candidates should be returned when spell checking misspelled words. Nota had setup
the spell checker to return only one candidate, which would not necessarily return the
best results. I.e. if there are two candidates with the same similarity score, only one
of them is returned and the comparator is never used to finally rank the candidates
by score and frequency. Solr (2017) recommends setting the count parameter to at
least five in order to achieve good spell checker results. When it was realized that
this parameter could make a difference in relation to the quality of the query results,
Nota changed the count parameter from one to ten.
Furthermore, during this process, a concatenation error regarding handling of the
spell checker candidate sets was discovered in a layer between the front-end and Solr.
This was corrected immediately after discovery.
After discussing the content of the indexed data with Nota it became clear that
there is also somewhat lack of information regarding the documents in Solr. This in-
volves around something called ’series title’ like ’Harry Potter’ or ’Sherlock Holmes’.
In some cases these missing series titles will not be a problem, as they appear in the
title of the book or in the teaser description. In other cases, this could be a huge
problem if the information was missing. Nota’s librarians was made aware of this,
but as the problem involves updating a lot of documents, it was not something that
could be immediately fixed.
Last, but not least, some time was spent on trying to setup a specific type of filter
that can be applied when indexing the spell checker data. The ShingleFilterFactory
is able to split both query and index into shingles of a maximum length. A shingle
is a token n-gram i.e. creating shingles of maximum size three on the input ’spell
checker shingle’ results in the following shingles; spell, spell checker, checker, checker
shingle, shingle, spell checker shingle.
Indexing the spell checker index using the
ShingleFilterFactory would address the problem of semantics in relation to inputs
that contain several typigraphical errors.
It would make it possible to index the
teaser text such that the string ’Harry Potter’ is created in the spell checker index
(not only indexing singular tokens). The feature was only successfully applied on the
query input and not on the indexing mechanism and therefore Nota have not been
recommended to use this feature.
==PAGE:80==
70
8 Discussion
8.4
Future Work
Future work could potentially include focus in several areas, which were only touched
lightly upon in this project. One area that could be put research into is modification
of the Phonetex algorithm. Although the authors of Phonetex claimed that this algo-
rithm was a non-language specific algorithm, it clearly defined some transformation
rules that were minded towards letter combinations in the English written language.
As the algorithm was fast at both building the index and retrieving candidates, it
would be interesting setting up a set of transformation rules that were more minded
towards the Danish language or Nota.dk’s spell checker index. The argument against
this, which is also the reason why this approach was not taken, is that by defining a
set of rules in which the indexed data is based on, it is no longer a possibility to tune
this algorithm when the module have been put into production. This is definitely a
downside to the Phonetex algorithm, but if a modification of it shows good results,
then there would be no obvious argument against that.
Nota’s log data was a big help in this project, but the data has a lot potential.
By gathering more data, it would be possible to analyze it, using it to find tendencies
and patterns of the users, that might not yet have been verified in the scientific field
of dyslexic studies. In relation to this thesis, the data could also have been used to
develop a even better and more specific weights rule set. One thing is to use the
theory defined in the literature about dyslexic peoples spelling tendencies, another
thing is to actually use what was learned from the log data.
Regarding improvements to the TrigramSimilarity spell checker, the indexing ap-
proach could be modified. First and foremost both input query data and the index
could be cleaned, such that it did not contain numerical values, special letters etc.
Stripping the data, could potentially improve query time. It might also be possible to
handle long dictionary words in another way, in order to speed up the computation
time, when calculating the edit distance between an input and a candidate.
Furthermore, in order to finally test the solution a user test should be performed.
Clearly, in some cases it is impossible to guess what was the intention of the misspelled
input and therefore tests on the proposed spell checker solution would need to be
performed by a dyslexic on Nota.dk’s search engine.
This project continues after
hand-in and the implementation procedure will be an iterative process, where a spell
checker module is built for Nota, installed in their live Solr solution, tested and
modified over several rounds using feedback from both Nota employees and users.
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
In this thesis various state-of-the-art spell checker algorithms and string distance
metrics was evaluated.
The thesis included a detailed analysis of the misspelling
tendencies of Danish dyslexics, which represents 70% of Nota’s users.
Four spell checker algorithms were implemented and the quality of the candidate
sets of each spell checker was tested and evaluated. Tests were performed using a
dataset of misspelled words extracted from Nota.dk’s log data. Evaluation included
both query time performance, memory consumption and a semantic analysis of the
candidate sets. The spell checker algorithms were evaluated against the current spell
checker solution of Nota.dk. One specific algorithm, TrigramSimilarity, showed to
be more efficient than the current solution, in relation to the quality of the query
response and query time.
The TrigramSimilarity algorithm was tested with various distance metrics and
the Levenshtein, restricted and true Damerau-Levenshtein distance metrics showed
good quality results. A weights module that integrated to the distance metrics, was
implemented. The weights module support a generic setup, that enables the Lev-
enshtein and Damerau-Levenshtein methods to use specific weights when inserting,
deleting, substituting or transposition letters. A set of rules was defined based on the
misspelling tendencies of Nota’s users.
Expanding the distance metrics to use weights, added computation time when
generating the string distance between two words, and therefore improvements to
TrigramSimilarity were applied, lowering the query time of the algorithm.
Tests
showed that adding the weights had beneficial effects on the candidate sets, buffing
the similarity score according to the rule set defined in the weights module - achieving
higher quality search results. By applying modifications to TrigramSimilarity it was
possible to maintain a low query time that was able to compete with Nota’s current
spell checker solution.
Furthermore, tests showed that the true Damerau-Levenshtein was, by far, the
slowest distance metric of the three and that it cannot be recommended for use in
a spell checker that should be able to support fast queries in an environment like Solr.
The proposed solution is based on an algorithm that works on any language, giv-
ing no disadvantage to any type of input. The weights module have been integrated
==PAGE:82==
72
9 Conclusion
into three distance metrics, enabling any spell checker algorithm to use it in order to
improve the quality of the misspelled inputs candidate sets. A custom rule set can be
implemented based on patterns and tendencies that users of any system might have,
making the solution very customizable.
Furthermore, the research that was done in the Solr platform, helped Nota ap-
plying small changes to their solution, resulting in returning better misspelled query
responses.
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX A
Test Data
This appendix contains the test data generated from the Nota search log and system
log data. As a lot of data was extracted, only the most popular misspelled inputs
was used to test the implemented datastructures.
Figure A.1 contains the 200 most popular misspelled words. The list is based on
log data retrieved from Nota over the period 17/Sep/2017 - 08/Oct/2017.
==PAGE:84==
74
A Test Data
jossi,22
skr,25
pædago,29
pra,35
kæree,52
toshiko,22
coconut,25
7klasse,29
amrikabsk,36
prydss,52
spro,22
gamr,25
barara,29
kolori,36
psy,52
dragonia,23
ish,25
dødsyg,29
kaz,36
kolot,52
bc3bclow,23
aqurarian,25
lar,29
videnskablig,37
kri,54
brostrom,23
soci,25
str,29
silsa,37
kvanulf,55
lisbethe,23
maneno,25
tværpro,29
bachlor,37
hellou,56
selfi,23
sprun,25
zom,29
pæd,37
pott,57
bac,23
teor,25
spru,30
pitstop,37
danskundervising.wikispaces.com,57
socialtarbejde,23
bri,25
hæksen,30
vildhe,37
histori,59
grunbog,23
muligheder-,25
sn,30
hjert,37
skamm,59
5kl,23
antb,25
antbo,30
væ,38
spr,60
fagb,23
sh,26
sheff,30
scarry,38
underr,60
peregrines,23
lærli,26
bogstavbjerget,30
kæ,39
hv,60
selmir,23
heksen,løven,26
spont,31
kontex,39
poptterr,64
desvære,23
zla,26
pl,31
vildh,39
mfl,64
superbitchene,23
sel,26
muscels,31
reste,39
herry,65
geofrafi,23
chr,26
grø,31
fø,39
thomass,67
hobi,23
happ,26
sølvb,31
tint,39
6klasse,67
grun,23
dah,26
anderse,31
kla,40
histor,67
svampebog,23
gudbai,26
dokumentaren-kreative,31
legerig,40
lø,68
sedric,23
blanner,26
hje,31
tinti,41
naturteknik,68
jense,24
safarihulen,26
protter,31
scherfig.,41
ste,69
christian.4,24
lackberg,26
boger,31
jc3bcrgensen,41
pæ,70
skykke,24
inklderet,26
sugg,32
blo,42
pæda,73
hanse,24
arbejds,27
jusi,32
ikk,42
matematr,76
skabteger,24
gl,27
drengeen,32
hjer,42
histo,76
trivels,24
dødss,27
hobb,33
foll,42
hj,82
dagb,24
pædagogi,27
stepenie,33
gra,42
udg,85
tovee,24
patientsamtale,27
sigg,33
bjerring,,43
brow,90
folkts,24
ponyhjerte,27
pædag,33
fla,43
juss,91
dre,24
lærning,27
twi,33
5klasse,43
wung,110
matri,24
nielson,27
hc3bcbbe,33
kazu,45
follet,115
tho,24
potsterr,27
kolor,34
hary,47
matematri,116
sch,24
lærlin,28
harru,34
klappt,47
let´s,120
adlerr,24
ondet,28
relatione,34
sta,48
brohave,139
td,24
detskøre,28
rr,34
nikkis,48
gr,159
engelbet,25
lgberg,he,28
kn,34
d`dansk,50
hc,253
husdyrhold,25
jurgensen,28
skammere,35
lorte,51
lets,396
dagbo,25
ll,28
matematix,35
pri,51
ddansk,546
Figure A.1: The 200 most popular misspelled words extracted from the Nota log data..
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIX B
Solr Module
In order for modules to integrate into Solr, it is necessary to include Lucene or Solr
core jars. Since 2007, seven major Solr versions have been released (newest version
7.2.0) where every Solr version contains a specific set of binaries and jars. Building
modules to Solr therefore requires knowledge of the Solr version that the modules
should be integrated to. Nota use Solr version 5.3.1 i.e. the modules developed in
this project are using Solr and Lucene 5.3.1 jars.
The following set of jars have been used to develop the Solr module:
• lucene-analyzers-common
• lucene-core
• lucene-suggest
• solr-core
• solr-solrj
The jars are available at http://archive.apache.org/dist/lucene/solr/ where
older previous versions of Solr can be fetched.
Two modules have been implemented:
• Weighted Levensthein : The weighted Levensthein distance was implemented
as an independent module. This makes it possible to test the distance using the
standard solr spell checker, the TrigramSimilarity spell checker, or any other
spell checker that makes use of a distance metric.
The module can be fetched from github via https://github.com/thegreendeveloper/
WeightedLevensthein. The github link will include a description of how to
built the Distance metric for a specific Solr version.
• Custom Spell Checker : The custom spell checker extends the SolrSpellChecker
class. This makes it possible to use the generic setup in the solconfig.xml. The
module can be fetched from github via https://github.com/thegreendeveloper/
CustomSpellChecker. The github link will include a description of how to built
the spell checker for a specific Solr version.
The modules are currently still in development and meanwhile the github libraries
will be updated until the final module have been integrated into Nota’s solution.
==PAGE:86==
76
==PAGE:87==
APPENDIX C
Rule Set
==PAGE:88==
78
C Rule Set
Rules set
Insertion
Deletion
Substitution
Transpositions
r
0.9 present r
n
0.95
typical dobble consonants, 
hinnanden
a
e
0.75
harry, heritage, typically 
english words
e
r
0.8
Close keys on the keyboard, 
appears often in Danish words
h
0.95
hvem, hvad, hvor, hvalp, hvede,
thy
t
0.95 liter, nettop
b
p
0.8 spille, knap
n
g
0.8 Appears often in Danish words
l
0.95 hallen, bryllup, festivalen
d
0.95
typical dobble consonants 
or silent d (svin / svind, pind)
c
k
0.8 checke
r
t
0.8
Appears often in Danish words,
 close to each other on keyboard
t
0.9
hatte, filet, kostbar, egentlig, 
altså, nødt
l
0.95 balance, polere
c
s
0.75 charme, citron
c
h
0.8 Appears often in Danish names
k
0.95 kokke, møtrikker
m
0.95 typical dobble consonants
d
t
0.75 potter, knytte, stol
m
0.95 glemme, minimummet
f
0.95 defekt
d
l
0.8 spilde / spille
d
0.9 midt, hvidt, skind, ridder, finde
r
0.95
typical dobble consonants, 
wrong present r 
d
n
0.8 vender, venner 
g
0.95
sagn, ligne but also 
væggen, skægget, hotdoggen
k
0.95 cykel
e
æ
0.75 veksle, elske
p
0.95 hopper, cappuchino
e
i
0.9 sidde, spille, pille 
f
0.95 giraffen, kaffe, effekt
g
v
0.8 savn, hagl
r
0.95
vurdere, normal
herre, snurre, føntørrer, større
g
j
0.8 nøgen, bøjen, steg, løg
s
0.95 succes
g
k
0.75 skab, knap, trykke, agt  
e
0.95
Insertion of silent e, foregår, 
udemærket
j
i
0.75 strejke, detalje
v
0.95 selvfølgelig
o
å
0.8 fjolle, måtte
n
0.95 ligner, gavne, ravne
o
å
0.8 kold, tolv, frost, kok
n
0.95 ligner, gavne, ravne
s 
t
0.8 substitution, intention, diskussion
x
z
0.8 foreign words
ø
y
0.8 lykke, sytten, bryllup
å
u
0.8 skummel, huller, muffe, klump
Figure C.1: The final rule set of the weights module..
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
[BD88]
Brigitte van Berkel and Koenraad De Smedt. “Triphone Analysis: A Com-
bined Method for the Correction of Orthographical and Typographical
Errors”. In: Proceedings of the Second Conference on Applied Natural
Language Processing. ANLC ’88. Austin, Texas: Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, 1988, pp. 77–83. doi: 10.3115/974235.974250.
[BHS07]
Thomas Bocek, Ela Hunt, and Burkhard Stiller. Fast Similarity Search
in Large Dictionaries. Tech. rep. University of Zurich, Apr. 2007. url:
http://fastss.csg.uzh.ch/.
[BK73]
W.A. Burkhard and Robert Keller. “Some approaches to best-match file
searching”. In: Communications of the ACM 16 (Apr. 1973), pp. 230–236.
doi: 10.1145/362003.362025.
[BM00]
Eric Brill and Robert C. Moore. “An Improved Error Model for Noisy
Channel Spelling Correction”. In: Proceedings of the 38th Annual Meet-
ing on Association for Computational Linguistics. ACL ’00. Hong Kong:
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2000, pp. 286–293. doi: 10.
3115/1075218.1075255.
[BN98]
R. Baeza-Yates and G. Navarro. “Fast approximate string matching in a
dictionary”. In: Proceedings. String Processing and Information Retrieval:
A South American Symposium (Cat. No.98EX207). Sept. 1998, pp. 14–
22. doi: 10.1109/SPIRE.1998.712978.
[CEW83]
Richard C. Angell, George E. Freund, and Peter Willett. “Automatic
spelling correction using trigram similarity measure”. In: 19 (Dec. 1983),
pp. 255–261. doi: 10.1016/0306-4573(83)90022-5.
[Dam64]
Fred J. Damerau. “A Technique for Computer Detection and Correction
of Spelling Errors”. In: Commun. ACM 7.3 (Mar. 1964), pp. 171–176.
issn: 0001-0782. doi: 10.1145/363958.363994. url: http://doi.acm.
org/10.1145/363958.363994.
[Döm68]
Bálint Dömölki. “A universal compiler system based on production rules”.
In: BIT Numerical Mathematics 8.4 (Dec. 1968), pp. 262–275. issn: 1572-
9125. doi: 10.1007/BF01933436. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF01933436.
==PAGE:90==
80
Bibliography
[Elb07]
Carsten Elbro. “Læsevanskeligheder”. In: Gyldendal, 2007, pp. 70–105.
isbn: 9788702036343.
[Gad90]
T.N. Gadd. “PHONIX: The algorithm”. In: Program 24 (1990), pp. 363–
366.
[HA01]
Victoria Jane Hodge and Jim Austin. An Evaluation of Phonetic Spell
Checkers. Department of Computer Science, University of York, UK, Sept.
2001. url: http://eprints.whiterose.ac.uk/89524/.
[II09]
Aminul Islam and Diana Inkpen. “Real-Word Spelling Correction using
Google Web 1T 3-grams”. In: Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Singapore: Association
for Computational Linguistics, Aug. 2009, pp. 1241–1249. url: http:
//www.aclweb.org/anthology/D/D09/D09-1129.
[Jar89]
Matthew A. Jaro. “Advances in Record-Linkage Methodology as Ap-
plied to Matching the 1985 Census of Tampa, Florida”. In: Journal of
the American Statistical Association 84.406 (1989), pp. 414–420. doi:
10.1080/01621459.1989.10478785.
[KCG90]
Mark D. Kernighan, Kenneth W. Church, and William A. Gale. “A
Spelling Correction Program Based on a Noisy Channel Model”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 13th Conference on Computational Linguistics - Volume
2. COLING ’90. Helsinki, Finland: Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, 1990, pp. 205–210. doi: 10.3115/997939.997975.
[KLS10]
Daniel Karch, Dennis Luxen, and Peter Sanders. “Improved Fast Simi-
larity Search in Dictionaries”. In: String Processing and Information Re-
trieval: 17th International Symposium, SPIRE 2010, Los Cabos, Mex-
ico, October 11-13, 2010. Proceedings. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010,
pp. 173–178. isbn: 978-3-642-16321-0. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-16321-
0_16.
[LDZ12]
Yanen Li, Huizhong Duan, and ChengXiang Zhai. “A Generalized Hidden
Markov Model with Discriminative Training for Query Spelling Correc-
tion”. In: Portland, Oregon, USA: ACM, 2012, pp. 611–620. isbn: 978-1-
4503-1472-5. doi: 10.1145/2348283.2348365.
[Lev66]
VI Levenshtein. “Binary Codes Capable of Correcting Deletions, Inser-
tions and Reversals”. In: Soviet Physics Doklady 10 (1966), p. 707.
[MC75]
R. Morris and L. L. Cherry. “Computer detection of typographical errors”.
In: IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication PC-18.1 (Mar.
1975), pp. 54–56. issn: 0361-1434. doi: 10.1109/TPC.1975.6593963.
[MDM91]
Eric Mays, Fred J. Damerau, and Robert L. Mercer. “Context Based
Spelling Correction”. In: Inf. Process. Manage. 27.5 (Sept. 1991), pp. 517–
522. issn: 0306-4573. doi: 10.1016/0306-4573(91)90066-U.
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
81
[NKA16]
Bertil Norman Andersen, Elisabeth Kolstrup, and Erik Arendal. “Uddan-
nelse og skriftsprogsvanskeligheder”. In: Uddannelse og skriftsprogsvanske-
ligheder - grundbog i lektiologisk pædagogik. Hans Reitzels forlag, 2016,
pp. 11–145. isbn: 9788741259901.
[Not17]
Nota.dk. Antallet af ordblinde. Accessed: 2017-11-07. 2017. url: https:
//nota.dk/services/antallet-af-ordblinde.
[NW70]
Saul B. Needleman and Christian D. Wunsch. “A general method appli-
cable to the search for similarities in the amino acid sequence of two pro-
teins”. In: Journal of Molecular Biology 48.3 (1970), pp. 443–453. issn:
0022-2836. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0022- 2836(70)90057-
4. url: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
0022283670900574.
[Phi90]
Lawrence Philips. “Hanging on the Metaphone”. In: 7.12 (Dec. 1990),
pp. 38–52. issn: 0749-2839.
[PZ84]
Joseph J. Pollock and Antonio Zamora. “Automatic Spelling Correction
in Scientific and Scholarly Text”. In: Commun. ACM 27.4 (Apr. 1984),
pp. 358–368. issn: 0001-0782. doi: 10.1145/358027.358048.
[Rus18]
R.C. Russell. Index. US Patent 1,261,167. Apr. 1918. url: https://www.
google.com/patents/US1261167.
[Sol17a]
Apache Solr. SpellCheckComponent. Accessed: 2017-12-20. 2017. url: https:
//wiki.apache.org/solr/SpellCheckComponent#spellcheck.count.
[Sol17b]
Apache SolrJ. SolrJ. Accessed: 2017-11-27. 2017. url: https://wiki.
apache.org/solr/Solrj.
[Spr07]
Dansk Sprognævn. Sådan staver vi. Accessed: 2017-11-07. 2007. url:
https://dsn.dk/udgivelser/Saadan.staver.vi.pdf/view.
[SW81]
T.F. Smith and M.S. Waterman. “Identification of common molecular
subsequences”. In: Journal of Molecular Biology 147.1 (1981), pp. 195–
197. issn: 0022-2836. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-2836(81)
90087-5. url: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/0022283681900875.
[Wei]
Tal Weiss. Deep Spelling. Accessed: 2017-12-02. url: https://machinelearnings.
co/deep-spelling-9ffef96a24f6.
[WF74]
Robert A. Wagner and Michael J. Fischer. “The String-to-String Correc-
tion Problem”. In: J. ACM 21.1 (Jan. 1974), pp. 168–173. issn: 0004-5411.
doi: 10.1145/321796.321811.
[Whi+09]
Casey Whitelaw et al. “Using the Web for Language Independent Spellcheck-
ing and Autocorrection”. In: Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Volume 2 - Volume 2.
EMNLP ’09. Singapore: Association for Computational Linguistics, 2009,
pp. 890–899. isbn: 978-1-932432-62-6.
==PAGE:92==
82
Bibliography
[Wik17]
Wikipedia. English alphabet. Accessed: 2017-12-13. 2017. url: https:
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/English_alphabet.
[Win90]
William Winkler. “String Comparator Metrics and Enhanced Decision
Rules in the Fellegi-Sunter Model of Record Linkage”. In: (Jan. 1990).
[ZD95]
Justin Zobel and Philip Dart. “Finding Approximate Matches in Large
Lexicons”. In: Softw. Pract. Exper. 25.3 (Mar. 1995), pp. 331–345. issn:
0038-0644. doi: 10.1002/spe.4380250307.
