==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Social Relationship based authentication
for e-Government systems
Proof of concept
Michael Dyrvig - S113003
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis explores the area of Social Relationship based authentication designed
for users who are unable to personally access computer systems. The problem arises
because more and more services run online.
Especially governments are starting
to have most services online and some people are unable to use those services by
themselves, either because they lack the technical skills, they are disabled or simply
unable to read and write. This thesis will explore how a solution could be implemented
to make it easier for those people to access online services, e.g. by the help of a proxy
which must not subsequently be able to masquerade as the person they help.
The thesis explores several aspect of this problem. First, it examines the different
concepts of social relationship based protocols based on related articles on the subject.
Secondly, the thesis will design and implement a proof of concept prototype showing
at high level how a protocol could be implemented as secure as it makes sense for
such an implementation. Finally, the thesis will analyze the solution and point out
which pitfalls there are in such an implementation and discuss which other solutions
there could be used to solve the main pitfalls outside the use of social relationship
based responsibility delegation.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract
i
Contents
ii
1
Introduction
1
2
Abbreviations and definitions
3
3
Analysis
5
3.1
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
User Authentication Protocol based on Social Relationships . . . . . .
6
3.3
Problem analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
System requirements specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4.1
User Requirement definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4.2
User Stories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.5
Design Choices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.5.1
Authentication technique
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.5.2
User Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.5.3
Service platform
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.5.4
Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.5.5
Random secret . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
System Design
20
4.1
Architectural design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.1.1
Interface design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Database design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
AuthService design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4
User Interfaces
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Implementation
27
5.1
Overall Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.1.1
Architectural pattern
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.1.2
Important libraries and services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2
System architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.3
Database Specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
==PAGE:5==
Contents
iii
5.3.1
Application database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3.2
Session Database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.4
REST Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.5
User Interfaces
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.6
AuthService Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6
Test
39
6.1
Approach System testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.2
Test table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7
Discussion
42
7.1
Evaluation of the implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.1.1
Multi factor authentication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.2
Protocol evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.2.1
Availability evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7.2.2
Security Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7.2.3
Privacy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.3
Different solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.3.1
A different approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.4
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
8
Conclusion
52
Bibliography
53
A System Testing
55
A.1 Test Initialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
A.1.1
Clean_DB.SQL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
A.1.2
Init_DB.SQL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
A.2 System Tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
A.2.1
Accessing the landing page
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
A.2.2
Accessing the log in page
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
A.2.3
Successful log in with QU user credential
. . . . . . . . . . . .
59
A.2.4
Failed log in with incorrect credentials . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
A.2.5
Failed log in with blank credentials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A.2.6
Accessing OnBehalf page
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.2.7
Failed service request with no user session . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
A.2.8
Successful service request on behalf of VU . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
A.2.9
Email received for TU on successful request . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.2.10 Failed service request with a QU as VU . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
A.2.11 Failed service request with blank VU or service . . . . . . . . .
67
A.2.12 Accessing Submit secret page . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
A.2.13 Successful secret submission and access completed request page
69
A.2.14 Failed secret submission with no User Session . . . . . . . . . .
71
==PAGE:6==
Contents
iv
A.2.15 Failed secret submission with wrong secret . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
More and more service transactions are moved from being handled in person to be
handled through the internet. This trend is happening in both the private and the
public sector. Many of these services are requiring the the user to authenticate them-
selves to the service provider, which have spawned a number of identity management
systems both private and public hosted.
According to the United Nations e-goverment survey [17] which provides an anal-
ysis of the progress of using e-goverment system. There has been a steep increase in
the amount of countries having adapted e-government system to handle public ser-
vices. In 2013 there were 45 countries with a one-stop platform and only 33 countries
allowed for transactions to happen through the portal. According to the survey in
2016 there were 148 countries providing at least one type of online transaction ser-
vices. Furthermore it is not only governmental services that are expanding, in the
private sector there have also been an increase in the amount on Identity Management
Systems. These systems are working as a single sign on (SSO) authentication service
which other private services then can buy access to. This enables the user to have
one SSO for all his online systems as long as these are using the same SSO service.
These solutions exploit the fact that the users are able to read and write and
by doing that they can use traditional ways for identifying and authenticating them-
selves. However this solution are generally not useful for the part of the population
which are illiteracy. In the developed countries these are a minority but in the less
developed part of the world it is a huge part of the population. According to the
article [16] there were 20 million people who where illiterate in 2002. Those people
are excluded from being able to use a traditional e-government solution, they can
only rely on relatives and friends to help them use the system on behalf of them-
selves. This however might expose the user to attacks like identity theft or social
engineering as well as the availability of the system will be limited to when the vul-
nerable user have access to a friend who he trust to act on behalf of him in the system.
This paper is heavily based of the information gathered in the Phd publication Au-
thentication for E-Government in Developing Countries - With special focus on the
North Africa Countries [7], the paper which aims to create a protocol that can be
used to identify and authenticate a user who is illiterate for an e-government system.
The thesis focuses on solving the issue in a settings of the countries in the northern
part of Africa. The publication does this by designing a protocol where the authen-
==PAGE:8==
1 Introduction
2
tication is based on the vulnerable users social relationship, but the protocol does it
without relying on having a trusted relative to be available by their side, as well as
the protocol will limit the possibility to expose the user for the mentioned attacks.
The thesis manages to identify a protocol and verify it by using the tool OFMC
which is a Open Source Fixed Point tool to verify security in a protocol. The testing
executed in the paper is passed.
This paper aims to examine the different solutions available within social based rela-
tionship protocols to serve the illiterate user group. Then take the protocol specified
in the paper [7] and make a technical analysis of how the protocol can be designed
and implemented. The results will then be tested towards whether the application is
working as intended. Lastly when an implemented proof of concept is presented the
protocol as well as the implementation is discussed and the issues are presented with
possible solutions that could counteract these issues.
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 2
Abbreviations and
definitions
Abbreviations:Arranged alphabetically.
AI Artificial intelligence
BPEL Business Process Execution Language
CSS Cascading Style Sheets
FIDM Federate Identity Management
HTML Hypertext Markup Language
HTTP Hypertext Transfer Protocol
IDM Identity Management
IDMS Identity Management Systems
IPD Identity Provider
MITM Man in the middle
OFMC Open source fixed point model checker
QU Qualified User
REST Representational state transfer
SOAP Simple Object Access Protocol
SP Service Provider
SSL Secure Sockets Layer
SSO Single Sign On
TLS Transport Layer Security
==PAGE:10==
2 Abbreviations and definitions
4
TU Trusted User
UI User Interface
VU Vulnerable User
e-government system
Is the use of digital services that are distributed to the
public from the goverment, with a single user log in for all the services.
HTTPS
Is an adaption of the HTTP protocol where either SSL or TLS is used as
protection. HTTPS using SSL or TLS protection can be used for authentication of
the parties participating in the protocol, encryption of the messages being transferred,
protection against MITM attack and protection against replay attacks using former
https exchanges
Principle of Least privilege
In the theis when the Least privileges is discussed
it is referring to the principal: that every account should have the least amount of
access to be able to perform their business processes. The principle is often referred
to and used when developing access control at both user level as well as process level.
It is part of the OWASP Security by design principle [14].
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 3
Analysis
3.1
Related Work
e-government systems in use
In Denmark a digital e-government systems named
NemID [13] have been used intensively since 2012, in 2012 the government made a
law [3] that states that all mail from the government will be sent through a digital
mail system called E-boks [6], the law states that all citizens above 15 years old have
to use this system unless they have a special reason for being exempt from using it.
One of the reasons to be exempted from using it, is if you have linguistic difficulties.
This however does only allow the user to receive the mail by traditional printed mail
this does not solve the issue of having the user being part of the digital solution. The
only way a user who is illiterate can participate in the digital solution in Denmark
is by giving another user access to act on his behalf in the e-government systems. If
this solution is chosen the user will have access to the digital services through the
person he has signed to act on his behalf.
Illiberally friendly user interfaces
One of the approaches are studies making the
user interface as accessible as possible. By creating user friendly interfaces illiterate
users have been able to use the online services. In the study [10], they tested a user
friendly interface on a random part of the population in Morocco, it showed that the
population was mostly able to use the user interface, however this solution was not
successfully for everybody there was tested and it does set some severe requirement
on how the user interface of a service can be created.
Delegated authority based authentication
Another approach is to use resposi-
blity delegation based protocols. The article [12] discuss a prototype of human to
human delegation in a nomad area. The idea is that by introducing delegation to act
on behalf it could overall make a more secure environment in a nomad society even
though it violate the principle of least privileges. The option to delegate would mean
that users would be less likely to sharing log in secrets and tokens in between them.
In the article [11] they introduce vouching based protocol, which enables the
user to have a special relative authenticate on his behalf, as long as the relative is
prematurely registered as able to do so.
==PAGE:12==
3.2 User Authentication Protocol based on Social Relationships
6
3.2
User Authentication Protocol based on Social
Relationships
The paper [7] which this thesis is heavily based on is not yet published.
During
the thesis project a drafted version of the paper has been used as reference. The
publication has a resume available on the DTU Orbit search engine1. The paper will
have some main contributions summarized below.
The paper is looking at the issue of using e-government systems in the northern
part of Africa. It specifically focuses on the issue that these countries have a higher
amount of the population being illiterate. The paper attempts to analyze how to
make e-goverment system more useful for the user group there is illiterate, the paper
accomplishes this by introducing a new protocol. The protocol proposed in the paper
is designed to work for people who would otherwise not be able to participate in a
e-goverment system without the help of others. The paper specifies it aims to:
verify whether a vulnerable user’s who has a pair of identity and credential but unfamil-
iar with using existing technology can access and benefit from government e-services
as a regular user does. We would also like to investigate whether neglects of vulnerable
users have an impact on the security strengths of existing IDM(Identity management)
protocols.
The protocol which is designed in the paper is illustrated in figure 3.1. The participant
of the protocol is explained below:
Identity Provider (IDP)
The IDP is designed to be an entity on it own since it
can act as a SSO service for several different SP.
Service Provider (SP)
Any online service using the identity management service
provided by the IDP.
Vulnerable User (VU)
The VU is the user who is unable to participate in the
protocol without help. VU have a unique identity in the system, in the paper the
user have a set of credentials (username, password), which are known to the VU and
IDP.
Qualified User (QU)
The QU is known by IDP and have credentials known only
by QU and IDP. The QU have the ability to submit service requests to SP as well as
authenticate to the IDP using a log in.
1http://orbit.dtu.dk/en/publications/authentication-for-egovernment-in-developing-countries–
with-special-focus-on-the-north-africa-countries
==PAGE:13==
3.2 User Authentication Protocol based on Social Relationships
7
Trusted User (TU)
The TU is set up associated to a specific VU in the system.
TU can be any qualified user of the system that are set up as trustee for a VU.
VU
VU
                                              IDP
                                              IDP
2 Reqeust a Serverice on behalf of VU
3 Request User Identity
4 QU Auchentitates
7 Proof Permision by
 submitting secret
VU
VU
TU
TU
1 Request help
6 Tell TK
6 Present Secret TK
5 Send 
Secret TK
Figure 3.1: Protocol from paper [7].
Protocol steps explained:
1. VU requests help from QU to submit a service request to SP
2. QU submits the service request on behalf of VU
3. SP requests the identity for VU to be confirmed
4. IDP authenticates that the request is coming from QU by using QU credentials
5. IDP sends a random time limited secret to a random picked TU associated to
VU
6. TU contacts VU and presents the random secret then VU can tell it to QU
7. QU submits the secret told by VU to confirm the request
==PAGE:14==
3.3 Problem analysis
8
Evaluation
The paper designs a protocol which is evaluated by formalizing it in
the Fixed Point Open Source tool OFMC and verified under some assumption that
it is secure. It is a bit unclear from the draft of the paper how exactly the protocol
is modeled in OFMC, some requirements are given like:
• It is modeled as a general IDM structure, with the addition of a TU.
• TU is modeled as a trusted user.
• TU knows IDP and SP public keys as well as VU.
• Communication from VU to QU is through a secure channel as it is face to face.
However for me to be able to recreate the results from the paper the following
assumptions have also been done:
• The channel between IDP and TU is a secure channel.
• The channel between the TU and VU is a secure channel.
If these assumptions are not included an attack is found by the OFMC.
The results show that when a VU have to pass his credentials to a QU the general
IDM structure is insecure since QU will know VU’s credentials and be able to act as
VU. Where as the protocol using a trusted user passes the test since that is the extra
authentication step.
3.3
Problem analysis
The protocol which will be implemented into a working system is following the specifi-
cation from the paper [7] discussed above. Turning the proposed protocol mentioned
in the paper into a working system the below problem requirements are deducted
from the functionality specified in the paper.
• IDP knows all participants with credentials as authentication properties
• QU knows IDP’s public key
• VU has associated TU’s
• Possibility for QU to request a service on behalf of a VU
• QU has to be authenticated when a service request is created on behalf of a VU
• a random TU associated to VU has to automatically receive secret from the
IDP when a QU is logged in and have requested a service on behalf of a VU
• TU has to be able to deliver the secret to the VU
==PAGE:15==
3.3 Problem analysis
9
• VU has to be able to deliver the secret to QU
• IDP will flag that the authentication is completed first when the secret is re-
ceived from QU
• The secret has to be single use and time limited
• The IDP service has to be able to be offered as a SSO service
• Secure communication channels between VU-to-QU
• QU interactions with the IDP through a user interface accessible through the
internet
• Secret is a random generated secret
• IDP has to work as a SSO service for service providers
Communication between IDP-to-TU and TU-to-VU
From the assumption
created to replicate the OFMC results then secure communication is needed between
IDP-to-TU and TU-to-VU.
Data logging
Actions in the IDP should be captured so that it can be used for
analysis.
Service Provider
The service provider is an external system which will be using
the IDP to handle access control for the VU. Instead of implementing an empty shell
acting as service provider, the service provider has been disregarded in the proof of
concept implementation.
The service provider’s action in a live version of a SSO
is to redirect a session to the IDP and then the IDP handles the log in and send
a user identity to the service provider.
Since there is no service provider in this
implementation the IDP just logs when a successful authentication has occurred for
a VU.
Single sign on system
The IDP is working as a SSO service meaning that the IDP
will provide access control for multiple external systems. Today it is very common
for a service provider to allow access through one or several different SSO’s. Some of
the most famous SSO’s are Google ID, PayPal Access and Facebook.
Common for SSO’s is that when their service is used then the user is either redirect
to a new login page or they have a login page embedded in the system provider’s user
interface.
So the requirement of the interface is that it have to be able to load
standalone or embedded in a service provider’s web page.
==PAGE:16==
3.4 System requirements specification
10
Proof of concepts implementation
The implementation has to act as a proof
of concept for the protocol, meaning that the implementation is not required to be
ready to use as a SSO. Instead it will focus on highlighting the uniqueness of making
a SSO service useful for illiterate users. This means that the focus will be on making
a proof that the communication channels and interfaces needed in such a system are
handled securely.
3.4
System requirements specification
1. Vulnerable user is able to participate with only having the need of a phone
2. Qualified user is able to participate using a computer with access to the
internet. QU trusts the certificate from the IDP.
3. Trusted user is able to participate with only having the need of a phone
4. Relational database, containing:
a) Vulnerable user (Username, associated TU’s)
b) Qualified user (Username, password, E-mail, Phone)
c) Trusted user (Username, password, E-mail, Phone and associated VU’s)
d) Secrets (VU, service, timelimit)
e) Log of requests (QU, VU, TU and request status)
5. IDP - Authentication system
a) User Interface which can be shown in an external website or web applica-
tion
i. Front page
ii. QU login page
iii. Service request on behalf of VU page
iv. Submitting a Secret Page
b) Respond with error for false inputs (Wrong user credentials, non existing
secret etc.)
c) Session handling for a QU when logging in
d) Create unique secret and send it to the TU when a service request on
behalf of a VU is received from a logged in QU
e) Flag a service request as successfully authenticated when the secret send
to TU is returned from QU
f) Create and update system log on received requests
6. Communication
==PAGE:17==
3.4 System requirements specification
11
a) Communication should be as secure as the current industry norm allows
for
b) The implementation have to be user friendly
3.4.1
User Requirement definitions
Based on the analysis of the protocol and the problem specification some non func-
tional system requirements are identified.
Non-functional system requirements
1. It shall be possible to interact with the system 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
2. The system has to take into consideration that it has to be implemented in a
fashion that would work in the real world. Meaning that the system should
adapt to what is being used in the industry today.
3.4.2
User Stories
Vulnerable User perspective:
When a VU has to access a web service which
requires an authentication he will ask any QU to request the service. The VU will
then stay with the QU and deliver the secret received from the TU, and will then
assume the service has been requested successfully.
Qualified User perspective:
A QU will first login to the authentication service
with his personal login credentials and then perform a request on behalf of the VU,
then the QU will wait for the secret to be delivered to him through the VU. When
he has the secret he will input it and get a confirmation that the service request has
been completed.
Trusted User perspective:
The trusted user will receive a secret for a service
request and will then contact VU and deliver the secret.
Authentication Service perspective:
The authentication service receives a log
in request including unique credentials known to the authentication system from a
QU. It will then confirm the log in, thereafter receives a request for a service on
behalf of a VU. The authentication system then creates a random secret and send
the secret to a random TU associated to VU. The authentication service then waits
for receiving the secret from QU, when the secret is received then the authentication
service logs the transaction and return a confirmation message to QU. If no secret is
received from QU then the service will close the process by logging the non completed
transaction.
==PAGE:18==
3.5 Design Choices
12
3.5
Design Choices
To design and implement the system some design choices have to be agreed upon. In
this section I will highlight some of the decisions taken to design a solution based on
the requirements listed in section 3.4.
3.5.1
Authentication technique
In the system the QU will use traditional authentication methods to authenticate
the IDP. Today there is used a lot of different authentication techniques, some worth
mentioning:
• User id and Password
• Biometric authentication, commonly used as face recognition, finger print or
other pattern matching
• Temporary code sent through email or text message
• Token, with codes personal to the user
Since this is a proof of concept implementation for authenticating a VU and the
focus is not on authenticating the QU, the design will only use the most common
authentication technique where the user have a set of credentials: a username and a
password.
3.5.2
User Interface
According to the requirement analysis, there is needs to be a user interface for the
QU user to generate inputs to the system. The user interface is required to have the
four views mentioned in the system requirement.
• Front page (Navigation to the other pages)
• QU login page (Input for QU credentials)
• Service request on behalf of VU page (Input for service description and VU
userid)
• Submitting a Secret Page (Input for secret, output confirmation message)
These views are required to have some inputs and outputs.
Furthermore since the system will be used together with a service provider, a
service provider will need to be able to redirect to the system, which means the user
interface should be able to be shown as a standalone web page. However a service
provider might also want to embed the user interface into their web application, this
means that the user interfaces module also have to be able to be embedded into
another web interface.
==PAGE:19==
3.5 Design Choices
13
3.5.3
Service platform
The authentication system have to hold the functionality explained in the system
requirements 3.4 as well as it have to handle the user interface shown in a web browser.
This can be done on a server running an application handling the programmed logic,
constructing the user interface components and handles the request from the user.
In this case it makes sense to decouple the user interface with the logic of the
system as much as possible since this will make it easier to replace the user interface
if a service provider wants a different user interface solution.
An approach which decouples the user interface and the application logic is to use
a web service application. Then the application needs to be able to respond to a set
of service requests with a set amount of variables as input and output. Then another
decoupled part of the application will handle the user interface generation. There
are different approaches for creating a web service application, in one of the following
subsections the pros and cons of the two most popular web service approaches SOAP
and REST are analyzed.
3.5.4
Communication
In the protocol communication is needed between the parties involved. Furthermore
it is stated in the requirement specification section 3.4 that Communication should
be as secure as the current industry norm allows for. Therefore each of the commu-
nication interfaces are analyzed and a mean of communication to use in the design is
established.
3.5.4.1
VU and QU
The communication is needed to initiate the protocol. VU will ask a QU to perform
a service request on behalf of the VU.
Discussed solution
The communication can be handled verbally which makes it
hard for an attacker to restrict or modify the communication. However it is still
possible for an attacker to listen to the communication. This could be used by an
attacker to submit a different request to the service provider than the one QU is
requesting.
The chance for this to happen is however considered small since the
attack will be rather easy to track as the attacker will have to log in as a QU to
submit the request.
Furthermore according to the paper described in section 3.2 the communication
between the VU and QU is handled verbally and since it is a out of band channel it
is considered secure in the paper.
The communication between VU and QU in this design will based on the analysis
also be done verbally.
==PAGE:20==
3.5 Design Choices
14
3.5.4.2
QU and authentication system
QU have to be using the authentication system’s web interface to request both log
in for QU, requesting services on behalf of VU and to submit the verification secret.
Furthermore the authentication system needs to be able to communicate confirmation
messages and error messages back to QU through the web interface.
Discussed solution
According to the section 3.5.3 it is decided that the authenti-
cation system is implemented as a Web service application. The two most used web
service architectures are therefore discussed below. In the requirement specification
3.4 the communication will be carried out over the internet so the security of the two
web services approaches has to be considered.
• SOAP (Simple Object Access Protocol) [Soap] is a protocol in which you have
to design the structure of the content you want to send. The information is put
into a designed form based XML message. SOAP messages are often transported
using the HTTP protocol. The SOAP have the possibility to be implemented
state-ful which means that the server will hold the state of the client. This
makes it easier to limit the client to a set of actions when they are in a certain
state.
• RESTfull (Representational State Transfer) is not a protocol but instead an ar-
chitectural style designed around resources, REST communicates via the HTTP
protocol and is using the standard HTTP operations GET, PUT, POST and
DELETE. In REST you make operations directed to specific resources often
in the header but resources can also be described in the body. REST allows
for use of different representations XML, JSON or any of the MIME standard
representations. REST is by design stateless which means that the server does
not know which state the client is in at any time. This means that the client
has to be limited in operation by the application design and not by the request
itself.
Since the communication on both protocols are carried out over the internet,
the protocols have to be able to be executed while the confidentiality, integrity and
availability (CIA) properties are ensured. Both web services provide different ways of
securing the content. REST relies on security on the transport layer using HTTPS.
HTTPS provides one way authentication for the QU as well as protection towards
replay attacks and ensures the messages are encrypted on the transport layer.
SOAP also allows for communication through the HTTPS protocol and can there-
fore also allow for the same security mentioned for REST. However SOAP also enables
for the use of WS Security [9], which allows the security to not only be on the trans-
port layer as in REST but also in the application layer.
Compare and contrast
Considering some of the main differences between the two
web service approaches in the respect to this project the following is found:
==PAGE:21==
3.5 Design Choices
15
• SOAP: can be implemented using Business Process Execution Language (BPEL)
which makes it more complex to implement at both client and server level. When
manipulating complex data structures like list and arrays you would often need
to use helper services to perform such operations, while using REST you can
define your own complex objects and use those in the transaction.
• WS-Security: enables an extra security layer on the protocol. This enables
the message exchanged not only to rely on the HTTPS protocol, ensuring that
the data is still secured internally when the server has received the message and
is routing it internally. This is a great feature especially for larger companies
with multiple internal servers running different web services.
• Scalability: REST is stateless which means that messages can be cached. This
makes it very easy to ensure that the server can handle a lot of messages and also
makes it simple to implement a load balance if the load permits it. Furthermore
it is possible to use different data formats which allows for the use of JSON that
has a much lower overhead compared to XML which SOAP is limited to use.
SOAP web services are usually implemented as ongoing interactions and this
makes them much harder to scale since the interactions cannot be cached like
REST.
No need is found for the extra security layer from WS-Security since the web service
is not hosted in a large organization with the need to reroute messages internally,
where it would matter that the message level itself was encrypted. The end to end
security from HTTPS is found to be sufficient.
However both approaches have good reasoning to be used for this implementation.
Since both are considered useful for the implementation, it has been down to pref-
erence for the developer what approach to use. Here REST have been chosen since
then the developer can use the opportunity to get more familiar using REST.
3.5.4.3
Authentication system and TU
The authentication system has to be able to communicate the generated random
secret to a TU. As mentioned in the requirement the TU needs to be able to receive
the secret on his phone.
Discussed solutions
The solutions which have been discussed are e-mail, text
message communication through web application and dedicated Mobile application
for smartphones.
• E-mail: When the secret has been generated it can be send to the TU’s per-
sonal e-mail and he then have easy access and immediately receive the secret.
E-mail is considered a service most people have access to on their phone and
therefore it is effective in delivering the secret immediately. Sending e-mail is
==PAGE:22==
3.5 Design Choices
16
very commonly used in applications which means that most developing plat-
forms have an easy access to libraries used for implementing email sending from
the applicant. E-mails are transported using the SMTP protocol for which en-
cryption is possible and widely used using STARTTLS. However STARTTLS
only provides opportunistic encryption and since the encryption is negotiated
using plain text it is possible for a MITM attack [18]. To deliver encrypted e-
mails the DNSSEC verification have to be enabled and since many MTP servers
does not support DNSSEC yet that cannot be considered for this implementa-
tion. This means that the security of e-mail messages cannot be considered
fully secure. Despite this STARTTLS encrypted emails are commonly used for
an authentication step.
• Text message: Sending the secret as a text message means that the mes-
sage is send over the GSM network. There are commonly used encryption or
weak encryption according to the paper [8], however it is not guaranteed that
all network providers are using encryption especially not in the less developed
countries. Furthermore the GSM protocol only carries out delivering the text
message to the base station of the network provider so even if you have ensured
that you provider only uses the strong authentication standard A5/3 (Kasumi)
[8], the encryption is not necessarily ensured while the message is being trans-
ported from the senders network provider to the receivers provider.The security
is therefore considered low for text messages as the delivery method.
Sending text messages from an application, is often implemented using an ex-
ternal gateway where a service is bought and you pay subscription to be able to
use their SMS gateway. These services have tools to ease the implementation.
Text messages can also be send directly from a GSM modem connected to the
computer.
• Web Application: Having the TU log in to a web application requires TU
to log in through a user interface and then receive the secret over the internet.
This approach can ensure the security of the message as the HTTPS protocol
can be used. However for that approach to work the TU has to be notified
every time he has to log in and receive a secret. This could be done by having
a notification send through e-mail or text message, since the notification does
not have to be secured.
• Smartphone Application: Creating a dedicated application for sharing the
secret could ensure that the TU is notified without requiring the TU to log
in on a web site.
A dedicated application also makes the developer having
the possibility to implement a protocol ensuring that the secret is shared from
the authentication system to the TU securely. So the most secure and agile
solution would be to make a dedicated application, however it does increase the
developing load.
==PAGE:23==
3.5 Design Choices
17
Compare and contrast
When comparing the four discussed implementation ap-
proaches the following key differences are found to be relevant:
• Weak security: As mentioned the secret has to be communicated and text
messeages and e-mail both have weak security.
Both methods are however
widely used by the industry as a step in the authentication of users.
• User simplicity: When implementing an authentication service it is always a
case that the implementation has to be as user friendly as possible. In this case
it is significantly easier for the TU to receive the secret via e-mail, text message
or the smart phone application solution. In all 3 cases the user will just receive
the secret to the phone and no extra action is required, whereas for the log in
to web server solution the TU will have a manual task and authenticate to the
server before receiving the secret.
• User Tools and Availability: All mobile phones are able to receive text
messages, however today it is also considered commonly that a user having a
phone is able to receive e-mail as well as accessing a web page or use a dedicated
application. It is therefore considered that all the discussed methods can be
used for the implementation and since TU has to be a non illiterate user it is
considered that most possible TU’s will all ready have a smart phone.
• Implementation Ease: When it comes to the ease of implementation, e-mail
packages are available in all common programming languages. This makes it
very simple to implement e-mail sending as part of the coding. Text message
sending using gateway services like Twilio2 or ASPSMS3 with packages for
many programming platforms makes it similar to implementing e-mail sending.
Text message sending using a modem is possible by commanding the modem
and feeding it with data.
These commands can be compared to querying a
database.
The command has to be created within the code, then send and
the code then waits to receive either a success or an error message from the
modem.
Having the TU log in to a website to receive the secret could be
implemented as part of the solution. This would however still require a method
of notifying the TU to the solution which means that either text message or
e-mail still have to be implemented as part of the solution. Implementing a
stand alone application will require the most implementation time as this will
be a smart phone application there has to be developed and ready to run on
multiple platforms e.g. IOS and Android.
Since I am implementing a proof of concept it is decided to implement e-mail
service to handle the sharing of the secret. It is however known that the security is
not as high as intended for this type of implementation, however the same solution is
widely used in the industry as method for sharing a key used for authentication. As
2https://www.twilio.com/try-twilio
3https://www.aspsms.com/asp.net/identity/testcredits/
==PAGE:24==
3.5 Design Choices
18
specified in the requirement specification section there is the extra layer of security
that the key is time limited.
This ensures that an old key cannot be used for a
transaction as well as an attacker has to use the secret gained right as he intersects
the information. This makes an attack slightly harder.
3.5.4.4
TU and VU
According to the protocol the TU has to deliver the secret to VU which has to deliver
the secret to QU.
Discussed solution
• Forwarding the message: A very simple solution where TU just directly
forwards the e-mail, this is a simple action for TU. VU will however be unable
to read the forwarded message and would then have to rely on showing the
secret directly to QU. Forwarding the message also have the same security risks
as analyzed earlier for sending e-mails.
• Calling: The second considered solution is to simply have the TU call the VU
and deliver the secret. This would enable the VU to receive the secret and
then deliver it verbally to QU. This approach does make sure that VU will be
able to receive the message, however since the secret has to be generated with
a certain randomness to be considered secure it might be hard to deliver the
secret verbally.
• Dedicated application: The third solution is having a dedicated application
handling the delivery. This would enable for a forward like service where TU
just hits the button and the message is delivered to to the VU in a safe manner.
VU could then share the secret by either showing the secret to QU by using a
text to speech software service which could be build into the application.
Compare and contrast
While the dedicated application will be having the most
secure solution as well as introduce possibilities to implement tools to help out the
VU, it also has the downside that it requires the VU to be able to have and operate
a smart phone. Furthermore having to implement a smart phone application will
introduce more implementation complexity.
Forwarding the e-mail and calling is not giving any limitation to the VU except
that he needs to have a phone.
The downsides of either forwarding or calling is
the security while delivering the message. The security for this operation is however
considered equally good as when the authentication system sends e-mails to the TU.
The same argument is therefore relevant here that the message is a temporary secret as
well as the industry standard is to do authentication steps relying on secrets delivered
through these medias.
Last when calling you also have the social interaction between the TU and VU
where it allows VU to discuss with TU. This can be used as a chance for the e-mail
==PAGE:25==
3.5 Design Choices
19
to hold more complex information like a resume of the service request which would
allow the TU to inform that the service request the VU is authenticating is the service
he wants authenticated. Since calling have the social interaction addition this is the
communication media there will be recommended for the implementation.
3.5.5
Random secret
When the authentication is relying on a generated random secret, the random secret
has to be generated using a method that is unable to be guessed by an attacker. This is
however not that easy as it sounds. Usually programming platforms provides a pseudo
random generator. These are however usually generated following a specific pattern
which theoretically could be recreated. This is however considered out of context
for this implementation as this is a proof of concept implementation showcasing the
protocol.
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 4
System Design
In this chapter the overall system design is presented. each of the participants and
operations are specified and explained individually.
4.1
Architectural design
The architectural design is based on the protocol explained in section 3.2 as well as
the decisions taken in the section 3.5. A diagram of the designed solution is shown
in figure 4.1.
Handled on AuthService servers
VU
VU
QU
QU
TU
TU
2 Request Sevice on behalf of VU
1 Request help
6 Tell TK
3 QU Auchentitates
7 Proof Permision
4 Send TK
5 Present TK
AuthService 
Application
Web interface
Email server
Database
Figure 4.1: Protocol architecture.
Each component in the figure is in this section designed to have the necessary func-
==PAGE:27==
4.1 Architectural design
21
tionality to make the design operate as described in the system requirements given
in the section 3.4.
Vulnerable User
It is required that the VU has access to a phone.
The only
requirement to the phone is that it is able to receive phone calls. The action performed
by VU are part of the process and not part of the designed system.
Qualified User
The QU is required to have access to a device which can access the
internet. This is needed for QU to be able to use the interface from the authentication
system.
Trusted User
The TU is required to have access to a phone which is able to receive
e-mails as well as make calls to VU. It is TU’s process to call VU when TU is receiving
a new secret.
AuthService system
The main system is split into 4 sections:
Web interface Presentation layer from the server rendering the HTML and sending
it to the user. This is also receiving the service requests from the user.
AuthService application Application running on the server handling the logic
needed in the design and control of other components depending on the re-
ceived requests.
E-mail server Handles the creation of the e-mail messages and sends them to the
e-mail address specified.
Database Holds user information on the QU, VU and TU as well as temporary
secrets and a log of what has occurred in the system.
4.1.1
Interface design
The communication interface between the different parties participating in the design
illustrated in figure 4.1 is listed together with the security specified in the analysis in
table 4.1.
==PAGE:28==
4.2 Database design
22
Table 4.1: Communication interfaces.
Communication
parties
Communication
media
Security
VU and QU
Verbally
Security based on verbal communication is
short ranged.
QU and
AuthService
Internet
HTTPS protocol will be used to authenticate the
server for QU and user credentials are used for the
AuthService to authenticate the QU. The credentials
will be send through secure channel created by the
HTTPS protocol.
AuthService
and TU
E-mail
Security is based on having the TK as a time gated
key as well as sending the e-mails authenticated.
TU and VU
Phone Call
Security is based on having the TH as a time gated
key and it is harder to perform modification or
block phone calls compared to messages.
4.2
Database design
The database has to hold information regarding the users of the system including the
credentials for the users who have access to the services. The database will also work
as a log server holding a log of all the requests there have been executed. Last there
will be a database designed to handle user sessions in the system.
The database is designed using the entity - relationship (E-R) data model. An entity
is a distinctable object consisting of attributes.
The relationships in the database are shown as one-to-many (1-n) or many-to-
many (n-n), as seen in the figure 4.2. This is modeled like that to ensure that a VU
can have many connected TU’s and one TU can act as TU for many VU’s.
To reduce redundancy in the database and to ensure to have an effective design,
the database is designed to follow the normalization standard given in [database_book]
to the third normalization form.
==PAGE:29==
4.2 Database design
23
QU & TU
VU
System log
UserName
Shared Secret
Phone Number
Email
UserName
QU
Service 
Requested
Success/Failed
1
n
Temporary Secrets
n
n
n
1
Secret
Timeout
1
1
Figure 4.2: Database diagram.
There are three main entities and a system log in the database. One entity is holding
user information for both QU’s and TU’s. The table holds both QU’s and TU’s since
a user who is QU might become TU for a VU. If both a QU table and a TU table
were created then there were duplicates of the users which would result in having
redundant data and then the third normalization form would no longer be followed.
VU is in an entity alone holding user information for VU. By this design it is also
ensured that it is not possible for a VU to act as TU for another VU. Then there is
a temporary secret entity which holds the secret there is send to a TU regarding a
request on behalf of a VU, as well as a timeout for when the temporary secret is no
longer valid. Last there is an entity working as a database log holding information
regarding the requests there have been started and their current status.
Session database
Since it is decided to use a REST web interface, the system
needs a way to keep track of a user’s state. This is handled in a session. The session
will be updated when the user performs an action and the session will be held in a
session database.
==PAGE:30==
4.3 AuthService design
24
4.3
AuthService design
The AuthService module is designed as three different components. A web frontend
which constructs the user interface, through this the user is able to make a web
service request to the web application. A web application which holds the logic of the
system and defines the actions to be taken depending on the received request. The
last component is an e-mail server used to send e-mails.
Web application
The web application is designed to be able to execute depending
on each of the requests made to the system. The flow diagram of a request is shown
in figure 4.3.
QU accesses the 
user interface
Request QU 
Authentication 
(Password/
Usernam)
Generate TK and 
send it to VU 
associated TU
Awaits TK from QU
Checking TK
Login Attempt
Succesful Login
Denied Access
Cancel the request
TK has Timed out
Wrong TK
Correct TK
Send Success 
message to QU
Store log of the 
exchange
Request QU for a 
service request on 
behalf og a VU
Vaild
Request received
Request received
Request
Invalid
Figure 4.3: Authentication flow diagram.
==PAGE:31==
4.4 User Interfaces
25
The flow shown in figure 4.3 is not strictly following the protocol shown in section 3.2.
Instead of first receiving the service request and then log in, it has been changed in
the design so that the user logs in before submitting a request on behalf of another
user. This does not change the functionality of the protocol since in both solutions the
secret is created when both the request and the successful log in have been completed.
The change has been decided since this makes it harder for an attacker to flood the
system with requests there have to be logged and remembered by the system waiting
for the session to sign in and verify the requests.
The illustrated flow, shows the different functionality the implementation have to
hold. First QU have to be able to authenticate using username and password. Then
QU is able to request a service on behalf of a VU. When the QU is both logged in
and a request is submitted then the system generates a random secret and sends it to
a random TU associated to the VU. The application then waits for the secret to be
received from QU through the user interface. If the correct secret is received within
the time the secret is valid, then the service request is successful and the application
updates the status for the request.
The illustration of the flow shown, show a lean execution of the protocol. However
the landing page for the user need to have navigation to both the login page, the
request on behalf page and the submit a secret page.
So that the user can keep
working with his browser until he receives the secret and can finish the request.
Web frontend
The web frontend will create the user interface for the user. The
web frontend will receive the information on what user interface to create from the
web applications. The user interface is designed in details in section 4.4.
E-mail exchange server
The e-mail exchange server is handling the sending of
the e.mails. The server will be configured to send encrypted e-mails.
4.4
User Interfaces
According to the analysis in section ?? it is mentioned that the user interface will
be embedded into a service provider’s web application and sites. The design of the
user interface is to be shown in a browser and is therefore easy to embed into another
site as a web part. Furthermore it is stated that the QU will submit all his user
input through the user interface. This means that the user interface needs to show
information to the QU as well as have the possibility for QU to submit information
to the system.
The views which are needed for the functionality are found to be:
• Navigation view, from where the user can navigate to the different views.
==PAGE:32==
4.4 User Interfaces
26
• Log in view, where the user can submit log in credentials.
• View where user can submit service request on behalf of VU.
• View where QU can submit the secret to complete the service request.
• View for confirmation message that the secret has been submitted successfully.
The design is created generically such that it can fit into a web part but it can also
be used as a standalone view. This generic view is achieved by implementing the
views so they can be scaled up and down.
The view is build on a general style
template shown in figure 4.4. The grey area has to be part of a global view, the white
changes depending on the functionality for the different local views, last the blue box
is designed as a standard area to deliver error messages to the user e.g. Username or
password is incorrect please try again.
HEADER
Navigation page link
View header
Inputbox
Inputbox
Box Header
Box Header
View meassages
Figure 4.4: General user interface design.
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 5
Implementation
5.1
Overall Architecture
This section explains the architectural model as well as the external frameworks and
services used in the implementation.
5.1.1
Architectural pattern
In the implementation the ASP.NET MVC [1] framework has been used. The Model–
view–controller (MVC) is a software architectural pattern that divides an applica-
tion into three interconnected parts.
The MVC design pattern has been used in
other frameworks than ASP.NET, and there have been created several slightly dif-
ferent versions of the design pattern. In this implementation the design is following
the explanation of the pattern given in the documentation by Microsoft [2]. Using
the MVC pattern helps separating the application in different sections; model (data
model), view (user interface) and controller (input logic). The sections can then be
implemented with a loose coupling in between. This enables the developer to make
changes to one of the sections without depending on the others which helps to man-
age complexity in the implementation as well as making the implementation easier to
understand and use for further development. The loose coupling between each of the
elements also enables for parallel implementation for a bigger implementation team.
This aspect has however not been exploited in this implementation.
The MVC framework used in this application is shown in figure 5.1. It separates
the application into three main components:
• Models: In this application the model layer works as a conceptual separation
between the controller and the view. The model layer specifies the data mod-
eling of the objects used in the implementation. This can both be models like
a user object or a model of for a view. Models are implemented as c# classes
which holds attributes used in the models.
• Views: The component that are passed to the user as responses. The responses
are build using the view files as well as the data in the connected model. The
view files are created using HTML and styled using CSS and Query.
More
information regarding the user interface will be given in section 5.5.
==PAGE:34==
5.1 Overall Architecture
28
• Controllers: The controllers is the component which handles all the user in-
puts. This is where all handling of the logic in the implementation is build, so
dependent on the user input and the model for the request the controller will
execute the logic. Depending of the execution the controller will decide what
view to respond to the user.
View
Model
Controler
User
Figure 5.1: MVC diagram.
In this specific implementation a fourth component is used, named services. Services
are used for implementation of components which can be used from all the controller
classes. In this design the services handles all the database connections and queries as
well as all the communication with the SMTP server and last the user sessions are also
handled by a class in the services component. The service classes are introduced as
an interface between the code and external systems. This makes it simpler to change
out one external system with another, meaning if the SMTP server is changed then
the only code changes will have to be in the service components connecting the code
with the e-mail server, even though the e-mail sending is created in the controller.
5.1.2
Important libraries and services
For the implementation some key programming libraries have been used. The most
important being a database connector library and the ASP.NET core nuget package.
Furthermore an external e-mail service is used to act as SMTP server. Last IIS is
used as launching platform for the web application and HTTPS is configured in the
IIS configurations.
==PAGE:35==
5.2 System architecture
29
MySQL Connector/Net
[5] The library to connect the application with the
database. This library enables the developer to implement a connection from the
application to the database using credentials set up for the application, when con-
nected queries can be created as SQL commands and executed them through the
connection. Last the library supports parameters in queries which are used for all
SQL commands to secure the application towards SQL Injection attacks.
Google SMTP service
To be able to send e-mails a SMTP server have to be
introduced. Instead of setting up a home grown SMTP server an external gateway
has been used. In this case the Google SMTP service is used. In this solution the
free version is used where you are limited to 99 e-mails each 24 hours. The same
feature could be used for a larger scale solution, however the Google account have to
be upgraded to a commercial solution.
Bootstrap
[4] The application is using a layout template created using Bootstrap.
The layout is added to the project by using the Visual Studio package manager.
Bootstrap is designed to help user interface scale efficiently as well as it has a wide
range of standard UI elements there can be used in the implementation.
IIS
Microsoft IIS is a general purpose web server. IIS is used for routing the requests
to the web application.
IIS also has the possibility to enable SSL which is used
to enable HTTPS for the web interface.
The certificate used is a locally created
certificate and is not signed by any signatory authority. The standard browsers will
therefore have to manually add the certificate or the browser’s security has to be
disabled to access the web page. This will only be the case for the proof of concept
solution.
5.2
System architecture
The system architecture is created following the design shown in section 4.1. The
figure 5.2 shows the architecture of the implemented solution and the communication
channels. The grey channels are out of scope for the implementation sections since
these are operated by existing external channels. The blue channels are handled by
the application.
==PAGE:36==
5.3 Database Specification
30
Handled on AuthService servers
AuthService Application
VU
VU
QU
QU
TU
TU
Verbal Connection
Phone Call
Model
Google SMTP
View
Controller
Database
Services
SMTP Request(Email content)
Email
HTTP Request
HTTP Responses
Reads
Updates
Results
SQL Querry
Figure 5.2: System Architecture.
5.3
Database Specification
Two databases have been implemented and deployed on the server, an application
database and a session registry. The databases are modeled in the MySQL workbench
as SQL files and deployed on a MySQL database.
5.3.1
Application database
The application database is modeled as an EER (enhanced entity–relationship) dia-
gram as illustrated in figure 5.3. The database is created to hold all the entities and
relationships shown in the database design section 4.2. The designed database model
however used the many-to-many relationships, which is not possible to model in SQL.
The database has therefore a new entity VU_TU which makes sure that one VU can
have multiple connected TU’s and one TU can be connected to multiple VU’s.
==PAGE:37==
5.3 Database Specification
31
Figure 5.3: EER diagram of the application database .
5.3.2
Session Database
The session database schema is shown in figure 5.4. The session database holds the
user sessions which are build using a token, a user and the log in time. The database
is built as an stand alone database so it is fast to query and can be cleaned using
a batch job on the server running once a day where all the no longer valid sessions
are removed, without allowing the batch job to have credentials to access to the
application database.
Figure 5.4: User session database.
==PAGE:38==
5.4 REST Resources
32
5.4
REST Resources
As mentioned in the section 3.5.4.2 a RESTful web service application is decided to be
used for the implementation as method for the interfacing to the user. As mentioned
as part of the analysis REST is based around Web resources and all requests are made
in the form of HTTP requests.
The implementation resource path hierarchy is shown in table 5.1. The root and
the Index path is for the landing page where the user can navigate to the other
resources. The /Login/login path is used for the user to log in. The /OnBehalf paths
are used for the user to first request a service and then submit the secret.
Table 5.1: This table shows the URL’s of the resources, the associated HTTP verbs
and the corresponding logic for the application..
URI Path
HTTP Method
Application Logic
/Index
GET
Request landing page
/Login/Login
GET
Request login page
/Login/Login
POST
Send login credentials
/OnBehalf/Index
GET
Request page
/OnBehalf/Index
POST
Send VU and service name
/OnBehalf/SubmitSecret
GET
Submit secret page
/OnBehalf/SubmitSecret
POST
Send secret
/OnBehalf/Success
GET
Show service request completed page
5.5
User Interfaces
The user interfaces are implemented by using a Bootstrap template. The template
ensures the styling as well as some scale-able elements that are used creating the
HTML view files.
In the user interface design section 4.4 it was found that five views are needed.
Some of the views have input and some only shows information.
The five views
implemented are:
Home
The view acts as the root page where users enters the user interface. The
view have three hyperlinks for navigating the user to the log in view, the request on
behalf view and/or the submit secret view. The view is shown in figure 5.5.
Log in for QU
Acts as the input for the user’s user credentials. The view has two
input boxes and a submit button. When the button is pressed it will send a post
request with the content of the input boxes in the body of the message. The view is
shown in figure 5.6.
==PAGE:39==
5.5 User Interfaces
33
Figure 5.5: Home view.
Figure 5.6: Login view.
Request on behalf of TU
This view have two input values for the QU to submit
a request on behalf of VU. Similar to the log in view it has two input boxes and a
submit button which will send a POST request with the inputs in the body. The
view is shown in figure 5.7.
Submit Secret
This is the view shown when the user needs to input the secret to
confirm the authentication. The view have one input box and a submit button that
works the same way as the Login and Request on behalf views. The view is shown in
figure 5.8.
Figure 5.7: Request on behalf view.
Figure 5.8: Submit secret view.
==PAGE:40==
5.5 User Interfaces
34
Authentication Confirmation
The view holds a confirmation message that the
correct secret has been received. The view is used when a secret has been submitted
and the authentication has been completed successfully. The view is shown in figure
5.9.
Figure 5.9: Confirmation view.
The area between the view header and the content on the page is containing an error
view which is triggered from the controller to hold an error message for the user as
displayed in figure 5.10. This is used to display error messages to the user.
Figure 5.10: Error view.
==PAGE:41==
5.6 AuthService Application
35
5.6
AuthService Application
The application is created according to the design described in section 4.3. The ap-
plication is designed to handle the user HTTP requests stated in section 5.4. The full
implementation combined is implemented to fully meet the requirements stated in the
requirement specification section 3.4. In this section the logic of the implementation
is described from the view point of receiving one of the inputs that can be received
by the web service.
Navigation page request
The navigation page is in the root of the website and
the user will be navigated here when coming to the application. The root request will
be routed to the HomController.cs Index() function, which will select the navigation
view /Home/Index.cshtml for the HTTPS response. The navigation view has the
layout shown in figure 5.5.
Log in Requests
There are two types of log in requests handled in the system,
a GET request and a POST request. Both requests are handled by the LoginCon-
troller.cs which UML diagram is shown at 5.11.
LoginController
LoginController
Login()
Login(LoginModel)
GennerateRandonToken()
LoginModel
LoginModel
username get() set()
password get() set()
DatabaseConnector
DatabaseConnector
Boolean CheckUserCredentials()
UserSession
UserSession
Add(ApplicationUser)
ApplicationUser
ApplicationUser
Username ()
Time ()
Token ()
Figure 5.11: UML diagram of log in requests.
If a GET /Log in/Log in request is received then it is routed to the LoginCon-
troller.cs Log in() function, which returns the log in view Log in/Log in.cshtml.
If a POST request is received the function Log in(LoginModel) is receiving it.
If
a valid model is received the model has values in the fields required for the Login-
Model in this case the fields username and password need to have a value. They
will have a value if there are content in the input boxes on the view shown in the
figure 5.6. If the model is valid then the function calls the DatabaseConnector.cs
checkUserCredentials(username,password) to verify that the user is actually a QU. If
the user verification turns false the input view is then returned with an error message
==PAGE:42==
5.6 AuthService Application
36
embedded and the user can reenter the valid credentials. If the credentials is a QU,
a session cookie is then created. An user session model ApplicationUser.cs will be
created and the UserSession.cs add(ApplicationUser) is called which creates the user
session. Last the session cookie is appended to the response and the returned view is
set as the navigation view.
Request Service on Behalf Requests
Similar to the log in there are two types
of OnBehalf requests handled in the system, a GET request and a POST request.
Both requests are handled by the OnBehalfController.cs. A UML diagram for the
used functions when handling the secret is shown at 5.12.
OnBehalfController
OnBehalfController
Index()
Index(OnBehalfModel)
GennerateSecretTK()
OnBehalfModel
OnBehalfModel
username get() set()
Service get() set()
DatabaseConnector
DatabaseConnector
StoreRequest(Secret, VU, QU,Service)
List<TUModel> GetTU(VU)
UserSession
UserSession
CheckUserSession(Cookie)
ApplicationUser
ApplicationUser
Username get() set()
Time get() set()
Token  get() set()
TUModel
TUModel
username get() set()
Email get() set()
EmailSender
EmailSender
SendEmailAsync(Email, Subject, Body)
Figure 5.12: UML diagram of OnBehalf requests.
If a GET /OnBehalf/Index request is received it is routed to the OnBehalfCon-
troller.cs Index() function, which checks the user’s sessions using the UserSession.cs
class. If the user session is showing that the user is logged in then the function returns
the on behalf view OnBehalf/Index.cshtml. If the session is invalid then the user gets
a warning to log in before entering data in the on behalf view.
If a POST /OnBehalf/Index request is received it is routed to the Index(OnBehalfModel).
If the model is valid then the function UserSession.cs class is used to check whether
the user have a valid session. The DatabaseConnector.cs searchForVU(VU) is used
to check whether the input in the VU box is a VU existing in the database.
A
random secret is then generated and stored in the database using the storeSecretAn-
dRequest(secret, VU, QU, service). The DatabaseConnector.cs getTU(VU) is used to
receive a list of TU’s who are connected to VU and a random TU is taken from the
list. An e-mail is created for the TU using the e-mail template shown in figure 5.13.
Finally the function will redirect the user to the OnBehalf/SubmitSecret.cshtml view.
==PAGE:43==
5.6 AuthService Application
37
1 <html>
2
<p> Hey [QU] ,</p>
3
<p> &nbsp;</p>
4
<p> A new secret: <strong> [randomSecret] </strong></p>
5
<p> has been requested for the user: <strong> [VU] </strong> &nbsp;</p>
6
<p> Regarding the Service: <strong> [Service] </strong></p>
7
<p> &nbsp;</p>
8
<p> Best regards,</p>
9
<p> The AuthService </p>
10
<p> &nbsp;</p>
11 </html>
Figure 5.13: E-mail template.
Submission of secret requests
Similar to the former mentioned requests there
are two types of submission of secret requests handled in the system, a GET request
and a POST request. Both requests are handled by the OnBehalfController.cs. An
UML diagram for the used functions when handling the secret are shown at 5.14.
OnBehalfController
OnBehalfController
SubmitSecret()
SubmitSecret(SubmitSecretModel)
SubmitSecretModel
SubmitSecretModel
SecretTK get() set()
DatabaseConnector
DatabaseConnector
SecretModel SearchSecret(Secret)
UpdateLog(Secret)
UserSession
UserSession
CheckUserSession(Cookie)
ApplicationUser
ApplicationUser
Username get() set()
Time get() set()
Token  get() set()
SecretModel
SecretModel
timeout get() set()
id get() set()
Figure 5.14: UML diagram of SubmitSecret requests.
If a GET /OnBehalf/SubmitSecret request is received it is routed to the OnBehalf-
Controller.cs SubmitSecret() function. This function checks the user’s sessions using
the UserSession.cs class. If the user session is valid the function then returns to the
submit secret view OnBehalf/SubmitSecret.cshtml. If the session is invalid the user
gets a warning message to log in first.
If a POST /OnBehalf/SubmitSecret request is received it validates the session and
checks whether the secret is a correct secret using the DatabaseConnector.cs searchSe-
cret(secret). If the tests is passed the database is updated and the log will now say that
the request has been confirmed in the status property using the updateLog(timestamp).
Finally the user is redirected to the request completed view OnBehalf/Seccess.cshtml
==PAGE:44==
5.6 AuthService Application
38
Application Initialization
For the initialization of the application the class Startup.cs
has a configuration and an app builder function which is executed. The following
needed services are initialized:
• Cookie Authentication
• MVC services including routing the inputs to the controller actions and routing
root inputs to the /Home/Index action.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 6
Test
In this chapter it is described how the system is tested. The system is implemented as
a proof of concept and not a validated system ready to be launched and more testing
therefore has to be done before using the source code for a validated deployment.
The test which is used for the proof of concept testing is a black box end-to-end
testing approach where the system is fed with all the inputs available for the system
to receive when the system is deployed. The system delta is then analyzed making
sure that the system’s new state is the intended state.
6.1
Approach System testing
The approach is to set the application in a possible system state and then feed in-
tended inputs to the input channels of the system, which in the case of this imple-
mentation is through the user interface. The outcome and the delta of the system is
then read. Finally the outcome and delta is analyzed whether it has transformed the
system into the intended next state. The test verification is carried out using visual
inspection.
Global test initialization
• MySQL database is started.
• The database is reset using the SQL DDL at appendix A.1.1.
• Initialize the MySQL database with users, by running the SQL DDL at appendix
A.1.2.
• Start the AuthService web application.
Test Scenarios
1. Accessing the landing page
2. Accessing the log in page
3. Successful log in with QU user credential
==PAGE:46==
6.1 Approach System testing
40
4. Failed log in with incorrect credentials
5. Failed log in with blank credentials
6. Accessing OnBehalf page
7. Failed service request with no user session
8. Successful service request on behalf of VU
9. Email received by TU when successful service request have been submitted
10. Failed service request with a QU as VU
11. Failed service request with blank VU or service input
12. Accessing submit secret page
13. Successful secret submission and access completed request page
14. Failed secret submission with no User Session
15. Failed secret submission with wrong secret
==PAGE:47==
6.2 Test table
41
6.2
Test table
All the scenarios listed in the table 6.1 is meant to be tested. Each test is documented
with the following:
• Objectives for the test case
• Precondition for the test execution
• System input
• Expected results
• Actual results
The test is passed if the actual result is found to be the same as the expected result.
The table below hold a reference to the test documentation in the appendix.
Table 6.1: System test table.
Input
Test Scenario
Results
Reference
GET /
Accessing the landing page
Passed
A.2.1
Click ”Login for use”
link on landing page
Accessing the log in page
Passed
A.2.2
Click Submit button on log in view
with valid QU user credentials
Successful log in with QU user credential
Passed
A.2.3
Click Submit button on log in view
with fake QU user credentials
Failed log in with incorrect credentials
Passed
A.2.4
Click Submit button on log in view
with no values in the input fields
Failed log in with blank credentials
Passed
A.2.5
Click ”Log in on behalf of user”
link on landing page
Accessing OnBehalf page
Passed
A.2.6
Click Submit button on the Onbehalf view
with out having logged in prior
Failed service request with no user session
Passed
A.2.7
Click Submit button on the Onbehalf view
while having logged in prior to the click
Successful service request on behalf of VU
Passed
A.2.8
Complemted the test scenario:
Successful service request on behalf of VU
Email received for TU on successful request
Passed
A.2.9
Click Submit button on the Onbehalf view
with a QU username in the VU field
Failed service request with a QU as VU
Passed
A.2.10
Click Submit button on the Onbehalf view
with a blank input field
Failed service request with blank VU or service
Passed
A.2.11
Click ”Submit Secret for Service authentication ”
link on landing page
Accessing Submit secret page
Passed
A.2.12
Click Submit button on the submit secret view
with a valid secret in the input field
Successful secret submission and
access completed request page
Passed
A.2.13
Click Submit button on the submit secret view
without having logged in prior to the click
Failed secret submission with no User Session
Passed
A.2.14
Click Submit button on the submit secret view
with some radon string in the input field
Failed secret submission with wrong secret
Passed
A.2.15
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
In this section the implementation is discussed first, then the protocol used for the
implementation proposed in the PhD paper [7] and last alternative solutions to the
problem.
7.1
Evaluation of the implementation
The application is designed and implemented following the proposed protocol and in
the testing section 6, it is shown that the application does handle the communication
needed for implementing the protocol. As a concept the results do not show any
reasons for why the protocol cannot work with an implementation in the real world.
There are however parts of the design choices made in the analysis section which does
not follow the requirements from the paper. The paper assumes that the communica-
tion channels are secured, else the protocol was not found to be secure in the OFMC
testing, as mentioned in the analysis some decisions where against that assumption.
In the following the security of the communication channels is discussed:
• Communication between QU and AuthService is handled through the
internet. AuthService is authenticated for QU using HTTPS and a certificate
and QU is authenticated for AuthService using login credentials as it is stated
in the protocol. For encryption HTTPS is used. This approach is considered
secure in the industry today.
• Communication from AuthService to TU is handled using encrypted e-
mail. The SMTP protocol using STARTTLS can however be attacked using
MITM [18]. However the only sensitive information shared in the e-mail is the
secret and the secret is time limited, so the attacker have to be tapping the
e-mail and use the secret immediately for an attack to occur.
• Communication from TU to QU is handled using a phone call. A phone call
is carried out over the GSM network which is not always encrypted as mentioned
in the analysis section. An attacker might therefore be able to record or listen
in on the phone call. Since the only sensitive information shared over the phone
is the secret and the secret is time limited the attack is less likely to occur.
• Communication from VU to QU is handled verbally.
Verbal communi-
cation is generally considered secure from modification and denial of service
==PAGE:49==
7.2 Protocol evaluation
43
attack. It is however possible for an attacker to listen in on the communication
but the attacker will only gain information regarding that the VU is requesting
a service and he is asking the QU to submit it on behalf of him. An attacker
could however request the service before QU does it and then violate the pro-
tocol as the first secret received by a TU, communicated to the VU and then
submitted will not be the one responding to the request submitted by the QU.
The correct secret will however arrive shortly after.
While these solutions have been found to be working for a proof of concept they are
as mentioned above not necessarily to be considered as flawless secure solutions.
7.1.1
Multi factor authentication
The use of multi factor authentication was not discussed in the analysis as it was not
considered for a proof of concept solution. It is however becoming more and more
industry standard like the danish e-government system NemID [13]. They are using
both user credentials as well as a personal code card for each user.
Usually when implementing multi factor authentication you are implementing
more authentication steps on top of the solution. This is the situation we see with
the NemID solution where user’s credentials are the first step of authentication and
then a personal code sheet with predefined codes is used as the second authentication
step. Other very common solutions used for authentication steps are personal e-mail
or text messages holding a code which have to be inputted to the system as an extra
authentication step, or a personal token which generates codes to be submitted during
log in.
In this application it is rather simple to implement multi factor authentication
for the QU and any of the earlier mentioned methods could be used. It is however
not that easy to do this for the VU since the user suffers from illiteracy and is un
able to use these common authentication steps. Some solutions could however be
implemented, like having a phone application on VU’s phone which does not receive
a code but instead shows a figure or a pattern which VU then needs to tell QU to
input as an extra authentication step. While this would not be enough as a standalone
authentication step it is still introducing an extra step of authentication.
7.2
Protocol evaluation
The protocol is implemented following the design given in the PhD paper discussed
in section 3.2. The scope for the paper is to design a protocol which aims to improve
the availability and security for illiterate users using e-government services, compared
to the processes implemented today. The ultimate goal is to provide an equally good
service for all users both qualified and vulnerable.
==PAGE:50==
7.2 Protocol evaluation
44
7.2.1
Availability evaluation
For the VU to submit a service request in the implemented protocol it is required that
the VU have access to a QU as well as have the associated TU available to receive an
e-mail on his phone and call VU.
In the solution used in Denmark today illiterate users either do not have access to
e-government services or are relying on one or more trustees to act on their behalf.
In both solutions the VU is required to have an available TU. In the implemented
solution the TU is however only required to have access to his e-mail and then call
the VU. He does not need to sit down and submit the actual service request. On
the downside the VU have to have access to a QU as wel but the QU is considered
significantly easier to gain access to since any common user of the system is able to
act as QU.
7.2.2
Security Evaluation
The scope of the protocol is also to improve the security compared to the processes
commonly used today. The processes used for the Danish e-government system Nem
ID where a VU gives another user access to act on his behalf relies solely on the
trust that this user does not exploit the possibility to do something malicious. The
only security in the system today is that it is possible to track the user who acted on
behalf of the VU when the attack occurred.
Attacks on the protocol
In this section the core protocol will be analyzed under
the assumption that the communication channels and the implementation is secure.
The main security issues of the current existing solutions are that the trusted user
are given so much responsibility that he alone can request a service without VU’s
knowledge. In the implemented solution I will argue that this issue has not been
completely solved.
First a successful run of the protocol as it is intended is shown in figure 7.1. Here the
VU initiates the run and he is also called by TU before the server has successfully
registered the service request.
==PAGE:51==
7.2 Protocol evaluation
45
QU
QU
VU
VU
AuthSer
vice
AuthSer
vice
TU
TU
VIral: request
Encrypted service request
Email: TK
Call: TK
VIral: TK
Encrypted Submision of TK
Succes message
Figure 7.1: Sequence diagram for success full execution.
Then consider the successful run of the protocol shown in figure 7.2. Here the VU
does not know that a service request is made by QU on behalf of VU and when TU
receives the secret he does not send it to VU but instead sends it to QU. QU can
now successfully submit the secret to the AuthService and the authentication have
been successful. VU would however not know what has occurred unless he accesses
the logs.
QU
QU
VU
VU
AuthSer
vice
AuthSer
vice
TU
TU
VIral: request
Encrypted service request
Email: TK
Call: TK
VIral: TK
Encrypted Submision of TK
Succes message
Deliver: TK
Figure 7.2: Sequence diagram for attack, red means the message was not delivered,
yellow means a new message is delivered.
As shown above it is possible to stage an attack on the protocol if both QU and
VU want to attack it. Since the idea of QU is that it should be all common users
of the system who should be able to act as QU the security is mainly dependant of
==PAGE:52==
7.2 Protocol evaluation
46
the TU acting trustworthy towards VU. This is the same security issue as mentioned
with the currently used solutions where user’s access control has been delegated to
another user. The implementation does however log all transactions and therefore in
a investigation it is possible to go back and find what user QU was logged in and
what user TU received the secret and did not follow the process.
Misuse of the protocol
The protocol is build around solving the step of authenti-
cating a service request for a VU. The approach in the protocol is a one click solution
and then the user is authenticated. In many cases a service request is however not a
one step solution e.g. using the protocol for changing taxes or using banking services.
First consider doing the service with a one quthentication step solution: In this
case the QU is requested to get VU authentication before accessing the VU tax
information. Otherwise any QU could access any VU tax information at all times.
After the protocol is runned and VU is authenticated VU asks QU to perform some
changes. In this case QU is authenticated to act on behalf of VU and could do any
changes to VU’s taxes setup without VU knowing of it.
This issue could be solved by running the authentication protocol every time a
change is made in the tax system, and then have a specification in in the message
send to TU informing him what service request there has been performed and he
now is allowing. Then TU will have to inform VU of the service he is authenticating
when delivering the secret. This gives VU the option to stop the authentication if the
service is not the one that he requested from the QU.
Changing the protocol like this will however mean that there will be much more
authentication steps needed during a session. Which is a issue for the usability of the
protocol. Imagine if VU need to perform several changes to his taxes, every time a
change is done then the whole protocol have to be executed where TU have to receive
a Email and call VU, these are manual tasks and takes considerable amount of time.
7.2.3
Privacy
Another subject worth mentioning is user privacy since the end goal is to be able to
deliver equal service to both illiterate and non illiterate users. In the current solution
today there are no privacy for the VU towards the TU as the trusted user will be
the one handling all the service requests. In the implemented protocol the TU will
to a less degree know information regarding the service requested since the TU will
only receive a secret and then deliver the secret to VU. The TU will not be directly
involved in the service request but the QU will however be aware of everything VU
is requesting.
Neater the existing solution nor the proposed protocol solves the issue of privacy
for the system. This is however hard to solve, since as long as the illiterate user is
not able to submit a request himself he will have to use a proxy to submit a service
request and the proxy will know what he has submitted. Therefore until the proxy is
an AI agent another person will know what have been submitted.
==PAGE:53==
7.3 Different solutions
47
7.3
Different solutions
Since the master thesis is built around the paper discussed in section 3.2 and the
designed protocol. The analysis does not cover much discussion of other way to solve
the problem of: giving illiteracy users a solution there is closer to the solution of a
common person. The issues found with the solution used today is found to be split
into three different categories:
• Availability The VU does not have access to make service requests at all times
like a common user
• Security The VU does not have the same security as a common user
• Privacy The VU does not have the same privacy as a common user
Common for the current solution and the protocol implemented is that the e-government
system is made available for the VU by having VU using a proxy to submit service
requests on behalf of him. This solution is however also what is found to cause all
three of the above mentioned issues.
7.3.1
A different approach
There have been studies into solving the issue without relying on the use of the proxy
and if no proxy is used then no access control delegation have to be implemented
and the three main issues wont be created.
In the paper [10] they create a user
interface that is suppose to be so simple to operate that even an illiterate user is able
to complete the steps:
• Authenticate to the system as a user
• Submit a user request
The user interface is tested on users in Morocco. In this solution the VU have truly the
same access to the e-government system as a common user and without introducing
the issues which occurs when a proxy user is introduced.
The study does however not show that 100% of the VU’s are able to operate this
system. This still leaves a user group unable to operate the e-government system.
Other possible solutions could also be used to help the illiterate user complete the
two steps.
Authenticate to the system as a user
For the VU himself to be able to perform
the authentication steps the issue with the solutions generally used today is that the
authentication steps are requiring the user to be able to read and write. There are
however means of authenticating which does not involve reading and writing. Some
of these are:
==PAGE:54==
7.4 Future work
48
• Finger print reading
• Face recognition
• Voice recognition
• Personal chip reading
The issue with these authenticating steps are that they are requiring the user to have
access to a device which supports the technologies. Today many of these technologies
are however supported by smart phones so in a near future it would no longer be an
issue to consider.
So assuming a authentication technology is used, which a illiterate user can op-
erate, there is however still the issue of the user not being able to read what he is
requesting when he is authenticating. This could be solved using a text to speak
software on VU’s phone making him able to receive a message telling him what is
being requested.
With this solution VU would not be relying on TU to be able to authenticate,
only himself have access to approve new services for himself and therefore the least
privileges would be respected. VU would however be relying on a machine with both
text to speak software as well as biometric authentication systems. These are however
becoming common technologies in smart phones.
Submit a user request
The approach used in the Morocco study where the user
interface is simplified is not considered since not every user were able to use it.
A different solution for the VU to be able to submit service requests without
relying on another user acting as a proxy is to have a hotline which could be called.
The hotline could then be able to act as QU is acting in the implemented protocol.
That raises however the costs of supporting a government system. Using a hotline is
in general the same as using a QU so it does also introduce some of the same issues
regarding privacy and how does VU really know what he is authenticating.
A more futuristic solution would be to have an AI assistant act as a hotline similar
to iPhone’s Siri or Amazon’s Alexa where they receive vocal requests and can answer.
Even with AI assistants becoming more common it has however not been posible to
find proof that they would be able to handle such a complex and important task as
requesting services on behalf of a user.
7.4
Future work
Since this master thesis is built up around the use of a responsibility delegation based
protocol, and it was stated in the proposal for the thesis that the PhD publication
discussed in section 3.2 and the protocol designed in that paper should be used as
baseline for the thesis. This means that the analysis does not cover a discussion of
ways to solve the problem using other means than responsibility delegation based
==PAGE:55==
7.4 Future work
49
protocols. In this section i will briefly explorer a solution which have an approach
outside the scope analyzed in this thesis.
Using the information found during the thesis an alternative solution could be sug-
gested. The design suggestion is however purely theoretical since no testing have been
conducted.
The design will attempt to solve the issues found for the protocol implemented
in this thesis: giving illiterate users a solution closer to the solution of a common
person.
By using the discussed solutions for a VU to authenticate and request services
a process which solves the problem and only contains the interaction between the
service provider, the AuthService and VU could be designed. The process illustrated
in figure 7.3 does just that.
VU
VU
AuthService
AuthService
1 Call the service center
At Service provider
2 Request User Identity Confirmation
Summary of the request
3 Request user approval of
the requested summary
Figure 7.3: Another protocol approach.
1. The VU calls a service desk at the service provider and have them help request-
ing the services.
2. Every time the service provider needs VU to approve a request, the service
provider routes AuthService to request VU for authentication. The authentica-
tion request contains a summary of the service requested.
3. The AuthService communicates the summary of the request to an application
on the VU’s phone. VU opens the application which starts with a biometric
authentication step, then before the authentication is completed the VU receives
the summary. The summary is delivered by using text to speech software. When
the VU knows what he is authenticating he will have the possibility to approve
or disprove the request by sliding one way or the other.
The above mentioned approach does allow for VU to use the system without
having to approach another user, and under the assumption that the hotline is open
==PAGE:56==
7.4 Future work
50
and that the VU can reach it, this solution gives higher availability compared to
today’s solution.
Regarding the authentication, the solution is suppose to run the authentication
step multiple times during the interaction. Each run should however be done within
seconds. Imagine the execution of a VU wanting to change his tax registrations:
1. The VU contacts the tax office hotline.
2. The office requests the AuthService to have VU approve that they do the service
(access personal tax information)
3. The VU receives the message using text to speech and approves using biometric
authentication
4. The VU then asks the hotline to change a service
5. The office changes the service and again a request is send to the AutheService
requesting VU to authenticate and approve before the service is submitted
6. The VU receives the resume of the service change using text to speech and
approves using biometric authentication
7. The hotline receives a confirmation
As shown a service request is created with no proxy user who have the rights to act
on behalf of the VU. This ensures that the least privileges principal is satisfied which
is the same case as for a common user.
There are however some downsides to this solution compared to the implemented
protocol and what is currently in use today:
• Service desk opening hours and the added cost of having a staff at the service
desk.
Having a higher expense on running the services contradicts one of the main
reasons for implementing e-government services. In most cases one of the rea-
sons the services goes online is to save money. If the service desk solution is
deemed too expensive then the service desk step could be replaced by the solu-
tion from the implemented protocol where a QU is used to submit the service
request. This will be a trade of between availability and privacy for the VU and
the maintenance cost of supporting the system.
• VU has to be familiar with using a smart phone, with text to speech and
biometric authentication functionality.
While it is common in the developed countries to have a smart phone as well as
knowing how to operate it this is not yet the case in some developing countries.
According to the article [15] Lower smart phone prices are driving a digital
==PAGE:57==
7.4 Future work
51
revolution in Africa, allowing mobile phone users to access the internet at un-
precedented levels. smart phones will be more available in the future. There
will however still be users who are not ready to use smart phones. Furthermore
text to speech software might not work that well in all countries.
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
In this thesis the problem to help assisting illiterate people to access e-government
systems, is analyzed with the view of using a social relationship based protocol to
implement a proof of concept solution that can improve the system usability for this
vulnerable user group. A protocol suggested in the paper [7] is used as a baseline
for the design of a prototype that can increase the usability of e-government systems
for the vulnerable user group. The design and implementation of the prototype is
carried out after a technical analysis of the problem to implement the protocol with
the specification and assumptions derived from the baseline paper.
The implementation consists of a web application and some designed processes for the
parties in the protocol to follow. The web application is implemented as a RESTful
web service application with a HTML based web front end from which the users are
able to interact with the implementation. Secondly the implementation is able to use
e-mail services as an interface to the users.
The implementation is tested towards whether it holds the functionality needed for
the designed protocol to be operated as it is designed. The testing is passed.
Finally the solution is discussed, in which some security issues created from the deci-
sion taken in the system design are discussed. More importantly some of the issues
from existing responsibility delegation based protocols are found to also exist in the
protocol which is used as baseline for the implementation. With this in mind some
possible solutions are presented and it is discussed how the problem could be solved
without the usage of a responsibility delegation based protocol. A high level protocol
is presented showing how such a protocol type could be designed.
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
[1]
ASP.NET MVC 5. Microsoft, 2014. url: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-
us/aspnet/mvc/mvc5 (visited on 12/21/2017).
[2]
ASP.NET MVC Overview. Microsoft. url: https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-
us/library/dd381412(v=vs.108).aspx (visited on 12/21/2017).
[3]
Bekendtgørelse af lov om Digital Post fra offentlige afsendere. Finansministeriet.
url: https://www.retsinformation.dk/Forms/R0710.aspx?id=181901
(visited on 12/21/2017).
[4]
Bootstrap. Bootstrap. url: http://getbootstrap.com/ (visited on 12/21/2017).
[5]
Connector/Net. MySQL. url: https://dev.mysql.com/downloads/connector/
net/6.9.html (visited on 12/21/2017).
[6]
E-Boks. e-Boks A/S. url: https://www.e-boks.com/danmark/da/ (visited
on 12/21/2017).
[7]
Othoman Elaswad. “Authentication for E-Government in Developing Countries
- With special focus on the North Africa Countries”. In: (2017). url: Uhttp:
//orbit.dtu.dk/en/publications/authentication- for- egovernment-
in-developing-countries--with-special-focus-on-the-north-africa-
countries(db7e32fe - 0c16 - 4076 - 8e0c - 53409248ba35 ) .html (visited on
12/28/2014).
[8]
Rashid Feroze. “DISSECTING GSM ENCRYPTION AND LOCATION UP-
DATE PROCESS”. In: (2017). url: https://payatu.com/dissecting-gsm-
encryption-location-update-process (visited on 12/17/2017).
[9]
IBM. “WS-Security”. In: (2017). url: https : / / www . ibm . com / support /
knowledgecenter/en/SSMKHH_9.0.0/com.ibm.etools.mft.doc/ac55630_
.htm (visited on 12/17/2017).
[10]
Hind Kabaili Imane Taoufik and Driss Kettani. “Designing an E-Government
Portal Accessible to Illiterate Citizens”. In: (2009). url: https://dl- acm-
org.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/citation.cfm?doid=1328057.1328125 (visited
on 12/17/2017).
[11]
Ronald L. Rivest John Brainard Ari Juels. “Fourth-Factor Authentication: Some-
body You Know”. In: (2013). url: http://www.arijuels.com/wp-content/
uploads/2013/09/BJRS+06.pdf (visited on 12/17/2017).
==PAGE:60==
Bibliography
54
[12]
Christian D. Jensen Naveed Ahmed. “A Mechanism for Identity Delegation
at Authentication Level”. In: (2009). url: https://link.springer.com/
chapter/10.1007/978-3-642-04766-4_11 (visited on 12/17/2017).
[13]
NemID. Nets DanID. url: https : / / www . nemid . nu / dk - en/ (visited on
12/21/2017).
[14]
Security by Design Principles. OWASP. url: https://www.owasp.org/index.
php/Security_by_Design_Principles#Principle_of_Least_privilege
(visited on 12/21/2017).
[15]
Smartphone use has doubled in Africa in two years. Quartz Media. url: https:
//qz.com/748354/smartphone-use-has-more-than-doubled-in-africa-
in-two-years/ (visited on 12/21/2017).
[16]
“THE E-GOVERNMENT HANDBOOK FOR DEVELOPING COUNTRIES”.
In: (2002). url: http://unpan1.un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/
apcity/unpan007462.pdf (visited on 12/19/2017).
[17]
“UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2016”. In: (2016). url:
http://workspace.unpan.org/sites/Internet/Documents/UNPAN97453.
pdf (visited on 12/19/2017).
[18]
Filippo Valsorda. “The Sad State of SMTP Encryption”. In: (2015). url: https:
//blog.filippo.io/the- sad- state- of- smtp- encryption/ (visited on
12/17/2017).
==PAGE:61==
APPENDIX A
System Testing
A.1
Test Initialization
A.1.1
Clean_DB.SQL
1 ------------------------
2 -- Cleaning the database
3
4 USE mydb;
5
6 SET SQL_SAFE_UPDATES = 0;
7
8 delete from log;
9 delete from secretTK;
10 delete from vu_tu;
11 delete from qu_tu;
12 delete from vu;
13 delete from sessionRegistry;
14
15 SET SQL_SAFE_UPDATES = 1;
A.1.2
Init_DB.SQL
1 ------------------------
2 -- Test initialisation
3
4 use mydb;
5
6 -- Insert VU users
7 insert into vu (Username) values ("mcdy"),("ldd");
8
9 -- Insert QU and TU users
10 insert into qu_tu (Username, Password, Email, Phone_Number) values
11 ("mcgu","password","midyr09@gmail.com" ,+4560213351),
12 ("mlmb","password","midyr09@gmail.com" ,+4560213351);
13
14 -- Insert VU connection to TU
15 insert into vu_tu (idvu_tu, VU_username , QU_TU_Username) values
16 (1,"mcdy","mcgu"),
==PAGE:62==
A.1 Test Initialization
56
17 (2,"ldd","mlmb"),
18 (3,"ldd","mcgu");
==PAGE:63==
A.2 System Tests
57
A.2
System Tests
A.2.1
Accessing the landing page
Test Report: Accessing the landing page
Date and time of the test: 30/12 - 2017
Tester: Michael Dyrvig
Objectives for the test case:
Objective of the test is to show that the user, is navigated to the landing page when
a user access the root URI.
Precondition for the test execution:
Global test initialization has been completed
System input:
HTTP GET https://localhost:44342/
Expected results:
Landing page is returned looking as figure shown in the implementation section at
5.5.
Actual results:
When the HTTP Get request is submitted, then navigation biew is returned as show
in the screenshot below A.1
Figure A.1: Landing page test result.
==PAGE:64==
A.2 System Tests
58
A.2.2
Accessing the log in page
Test Report: Accessing the login page
Date and time of the test: 30/12 - 2017
Tester: Michael Dyrvig
Objectives for the test case:
To show that the login page, is navigated to when the link ”Login for use” is clicked
on the landing page.
Precondition for the test execution:
Global test initialization has been completed
The Landing page is currently shown in the browser
System input:
Click on the link ”Login for use” on the system landing page
Expected results:
The browser is navigated to the URL /login/login and the login page is shown in the
browser. 5.6.
Actual results:
When the link is clicked, then login view is returned as show in the screenshot below
A.2
Figure A.2: Login page test result.
==PAGE:65==
A.2 System Tests
59
A.2.3
Successful log in with QU user credential
Test Report: Successful log in with QU user credential
Date and time of the test: 31/12 - 2017
Tester: Michael Dyrvig
Objectives for the test case:
To show that when a log in is attempt is done with correct user credentials, then the
user is logged in and navigated to the landing page.
Precondition for the test execution:
Global test initialization has been completed
The log in page is currently shown in the browser
System input:
The input boxes holds, Username: ”mcgu” Password: ”password” Click on the link
”Submit Request” button on the log in page
Expected results:
The browser is navigated to the root URL / and the landin page is shown in the
browser. 5.5.
Actual results:
When the button is clicked, then the view is navigated to the landing page as show
in the screenshot below A.3
Figure A.3: Successful Log in test result.
==PAGE:66==
A.2 System Tests
60
A.2.4
Failed log in with incorrect credentials
Test Report: Failed log in with incorrect credentials
Date and time of the test: 31/12 - 2017
Tester: Michael Dyrvig
Objectives for the test case:
To show that when a log in is attempted with incorrect user credentials, then the user
is unable to log in and a error message is displayed
Precondition for the test execution:
Global test initialization has been completed
The log in page is currently shown in the browser
System input:
The input boxes holds, Username: ”incorrect user” Password: ”password” Click on
the link ”Submit Request” button on the log in page
Expected results:
The log in page is still shown but an message has become present stating: ”Username
or Password are incorrect”.
Actual results:
When the button is clicked, then a error message comes present stating: ”Username
or Password are incorrect” as show in the screenshot below A.4
Figure A.4: Failed Log in attempt test result.
==PAGE:67==
A.2 System Tests
61
A.2.5
Failed log in with blank credentials
Test Report: Failed log in with blank credentials
Date and time of the test: 31/12 - 2017
Tester: Michael Dyrvig
Objectives for the test case:
To show that when a log in is attempted with blank user credentials, then the user is
unable to log in and a error message is displayed
Precondition for the test execution:
Global test initialization has been completed
The log in page is currently shown in the browser
System input:
The input boxes holds, Username: ”” Password: ”” Click on the link ”Submit Request”
button on the log in page
Expected results:
The log in page is still shown but an message has become present stating: ”The
Username field is required.” and ”The Password field is required.”
Actual results:
When the button is clicked, then a error message comes present stating: ”The User-
name field is required.” and ”The Password field is required.” as show in the screenshot
below A.5
Figure A.5: Failed Log in attempt test result.
==PAGE:68==
A.2 System Tests
62
A.2.6
Accessing OnBehalf page
Test Report: Accessing OnBehalf page
Date and time of the test: 31/12 - 2017
Tester: Michael Dyrvig
Objectives for the test case:
To show that the OnBehalf view, is navigated to when the link ”Login on behalf of
user ” is clicked on the landing page.
Precondition for the test execution:
Global test initialization has been completed
The Landing page is currently shown in the browser
The tester is logged in as a QU
System input:
Click on the link ”Login on behalf of user ” on the system landing page
Expected results:
The browser is navigated to the URL /OnBehalf and the OnBehalf page is shown in
the browser. 5.7.
Actual results:
When the link is clicked, then the on behalf view is returned as show in the screenshot
below A.6
Figure A.6: On behalf view test result.
==PAGE:69==
A.2 System Tests
63
A.2.7
Failed service request with no user session
Test Report: Failed service request with no user session
Date and time of the test: 31/12 - 2017
Tester: Michael Dyrvig
Objectives for the test case:
To show that when a service is requested on behalf of a VU, with a VU and service
filled in while not logged in, then a error is shown
Precondition for the test execution:
Global test initialization has been completed
The On Behalf view is shown in the browser
The tester is logged in as a QU
System input:
The input boxes holds, VU: ”mcdy” Service: ”Test Service” Click on the ”Submit
Request” button on the log in page
Expected results:
An error is shown stating:”Please Log in before Submitting a request”.
Actual results:
When the button is clicked, then an error is shown stating:”Please Log in before
Submitting a request” as show in the screenshot below A.13
Figure A.7: Failed on behalf service request test result.
==PAGE:70==
A.2 System Tests
64
A.2.8
Successful service request on behalf of VU
Test Report: Successful service request on behalf of VU
Date and time of the test: 31/12 - 2017
Tester: Michael Dyrvig
Objectives for the test case:
To show that when a service is requested on behalf of a VU, with a VU and service
filled in while being logged in as a QU, then the view is changed to the submit secret
page
Precondition for the test execution:
Global test initialization has been completed
The On Behalf view is shown in the browser
The tester is logged in as a QU
System input:
The input boxes holds, VU: ”mcdy” Service: ”Test Service” Click on the ”Submit
Request” button on the log in page
Expected results:
The browser is navigated to the URL /OnBehalf/SubmitSecret and the submit secret
page is shown in the browser. 5.8.
Actual results:
When the button is clicked, then the view is navigated to the submit secret page as
show in the screenshot below A.13
Figure A.8: Successful on behalf service request test result.
==PAGE:71==
A.2 System Tests
65
A.2.9
Email received for TU on successful request
Test Report: Email received for TU on successful request
Date and time of the test: 31/12 - 2017
Tester: Michael Dyrvig
Objectives for the test case:
To show that when a service is requested on behalf of a VU, with a VU and service
filled in while being logged in as a QU, then a email is send to on TU associated to
VU
Precondition for the test execution:
Global test initialization has been completed
The On Behalf view is shown in the browser
The tester is logged in as a QU
System input:
The input boxes holds, VU: ”mcdy” Service: ”Test Service” Click on the ”Submit
Request” button on the log in page
Expected results:
An Email is send to TU associated to the VU when the button is clicked, the email
is as shown in the figure 5.13.
Actual results:
When the button is clicked, an Email is send to TU associated to the VU as show in
the screenshot below A.9
Figure A.9: Successful on behalf service request test result.
==PAGE:72==
A.2 System Tests
66
A.2.10
Failed service request with a QU as VU
Test Report: Failed service request with a QU as VU
Date and time of the test: 31/12 - 2017
Tester: Michael Dyrvig
Objectives for the test case:
To show that when a service is requested on behalf of a VU, with a QU filled in as
VU and service filled in while logged in as a QU, then a error is shown
Precondition for the test execution:
Global test initialization has been completed
The On Behalf view is shown in the browser
The tester is logged in as a QU
System input:
The input boxes holds, VU: ”mcgu” Service: ”Test Service” Click on the ”Submit
Request” button on the log in page
Expected results:
An error is shown stating:”VU does not exist in the database.”.
Actual results:
When the button is clicked, then an error is shown stating:”VU does not exist in the
database.” as show in the screenshot below A.10
Figure A.10: Failed on behalf service request test result.
==PAGE:73==
A.2 System Tests
67
A.2.11
Failed service request with blank VU or service
Test Report: Failed service request with blank VU or service
Date and time of the test: 31/12 - 2017
Tester: Michael Dyrvig
Objectives for the test case:
To show that when a service is requested on behalf of a VU, with a empty input box
for VU and service filled in while logged in as a QU, then a error is shown
Precondition for the test execution:
Global test initialization has been completed
The On Behalf view is shown in the browser
The tester is logged in as a QU
System input:
The input boxes holds, VU: ”” Service: ”” Click on the ”Submit Request” button on
the log in page
Expected results:
An error is shown stating:”The VU field is required.” and ”The Service field is re-
quired.”.
Actual results:
When the button is clicked, then an error is shown stating:”The VU field is required.”
and ”The Service field is required.” as show in the screenshot below A.11
Figure A.11: Failed on behalf service request test result.
==PAGE:74==
A.2 System Tests
68
A.2.12
Accessing Submit secret page
Test Report: Accessing Submit secret page
Date and time of the test: 31/12 - 2017
Tester: Michael Dyrvig
Objectives for the test case:
To show that the submit secret view, is navigated to when the link ”Submit Secret
for Service authentication” is clicked on the landing page.
Precondition for the test execution:
Global test initialization has been completed
The Landing page is currently shown in the browser
The tester is logged in as a QU
System input:
Click on the link ”Submit Secret for Service authentication ” on the system landing
page
Expected results:
The browser is navigated to the URL /OnBehalf/SubmitSecret and the submit secret
page is shown in the browser. 5.8.
Actual results:
When the link is clicked, then submit secret view is returned as show in the screenshot
below A.12
Figure A.12: Submit secret view test result.
==PAGE:75==
A.2 System Tests
69
A.2.13
Successful secret submission and access completed
request page
Test Report: Successful secret submission
Date and time of the test: 31/12 - 2017
Tester: Michael Dyrvig
Objectives for the test case:
To show that when a active secret is submitted while being logged in as a QU, then
the view is changed to the Authentication completed page
Precondition for the test execution:
Global test initialization has been completed
The submit secret view is shown in the browser
Have active secret
The tester is logged in as a QU
System input:
The input boxes holds, Secret: [Active secret]
Expected results:
The browser is navigated to the URL /OnBehalf/Success and the submit secret page
is shown in the browser. 5.8.
Actual results:
When the button is clicked, then the view is navigated to the secret submitted page
as show in the screenshot below A.13
Figure A.13: Successful secret submitted test result.
==PAGE:76==
A.2 System Tests
70
==PAGE:77==
A.2 System Tests
71
A.2.14
Failed secret submission with no User Session
Test Report: Failed secret submission with no User Session
Date and time of the test: 31/12 - 2017
Tester: Michael Dyrvig
Objectives for the test case:
To show that when a active secret is submitted while being not being logged in, then
the an error is shown
Precondition for the test execution:
Global test initialization has been completed
The submit secret view is shown in the browser
Have active secret
The tester is logged in as a QU
System input:
The input boxes holds, Secret: [Vlid secret]].
Expected results:
The browser showing an error message stating: ”Please log in before submitting a
request”
Actual results:
When the button is clicked, then an error is shown stating: ”Please log in before
submitting a request” as show in the screenshot below A.14
Figure A.14: Failed secret submitted secret test result.
==PAGE:78==
A.2 System Tests
72
A.2.15
Failed secret submission with wrong secret
Test Report: Failed secret submission with wrong secret
Date and time of the test: 31/12 - 2017
Tester: Michael Dyrvig
Objectives for the test case:
To show that when a invalid secret is submitted while being logged in as a QU, then
the an error is shown
Precondition for the test execution:
Global test initialization has been completed
The submit secret view is shown in the browser
The tester is logged in as a QU
System input:
The input boxes holds, Secret: ”Invalid secret”.
Expected results:
The browser showing an error message stating: ”Secret does not exist”
Actual results:
When the button is clicked, then an error is shown stating: ”Secret does not exist”
as show in the screenshot below A.15
Figure A.15: Failed secret submitted secret test result.
==PAGE:79==
==PAGE:80==
