==PAGE:1==
Seyyid Ibrahim Hâdî Öztoprak
Real-Time Voltage Stability
Assessment based on Voltage
Stability Indices
Master’s Thesis, January 2018
==PAGE:2==
Seyyid Ibrahim Hâdî Öztoprak
Real-Time Voltage Stability
Assessment based on Voltage
Stability Indices
Master’s Thesis, January 2018
==PAGE:3==
Real-Time Voltage Stability Assessment based on Voltage Stability Indices,
Author:
Seyyid Ibrahim Hâdî Öztoprak
Supervisors:
Hjörtur Jóhannsson
Bahtiyar Can Karataş
Department of Electrical Engineering
Centre for Electric Power and Energy (CEE)
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 325
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk
Release date:
January 28, 2018
Class:
1 (Public)
Edition:
1. edition
Comments:
This thesis is part of the requirements to achieve the academic
title Master of Science in Engineering (M.Sc.Eng.) at the Technical
University of Denmark. This thesis represents 30 ECTS points.
Rights:
© Seyyid Ibrahim Hâdî Öztoprak, 2018
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis deals with the implementation of two methods. The ﬁrst method, the Thévenin
equivalent assessment method, is capable of assessing the stability of a power system using
the impedance matching condition. The second method capable of detecting the onset of
voltage instability is called the New LIVES method.
The implemented Thévenin equivalent assessment method is capable of assessing the
stability of a system based on the computed thévenin impedances and the load impedances.
In order to compute the thévenin impedances, an algorithm has been used, that uses a
block-wise partitioning of the admittance matrix based on non-controlled and voltage
controlled nodes in the system. This method uses phasor measurement units to observe
the actual system conditions in real-time. Thus based on the load impedance and the
estimated thévenin impedance it is possible to assess the stability of a given system.
The implemented New LIVES method is capable of detecting early signs of voltage
instability, by analysing the imported active power from a transmission corridor and the
conductance at the bus. The method also uses phasor measurement units to observe the
actual system conditions in real-time. Thereby, the results obtained from the method
enables an early instability warning by determining the onset of voltage instability.
Both implemented methods were tested on a 46-bus system based on the Nordic32 test
system. The used test case is based on PSS/E playback simulations that were fetched
through the SOSPO simulation platform. The test case represented a system with highly
stressed operating conditions with several disturbances to provoke instability. The Thévenin
equivalent assessment method was not capable of assessing the stability of the system due
to the impedance matching condition not being hold, thus voltage stability could not be
detected using this method.
The New LIVES method was partially capable of detecting the onset of voltage instability,
but were found to be quite sensitive for changes in system conditions.
i
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Centre for Electric Power and Energy, Department of
Electrical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark for the purpose of fulﬁlling the
requirements for the Master of Science degree in electrical engineering. The master project
has been conducted from 28th of August 2017 to the 28th of January 2018. The thesis
deals with the implementation of diﬀerent voltage stability assessment methods capable of
detecting voltage instability.
First and foremost, I would like to thank my supervisors Hjörtur Jóhannsson and Bahtiyar
Can Karataş for their help and guidance throughout the project. Thanks to Bahtiyar Can
Karataş for his assistance with the simulation platform.
At last, I would like to thank my family and friends for their support throughout my
studies at DTU.
Lyngby, January 28, 2018
Seyyid Ibrahim Hâdî Öztoprak
ii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Thesis Goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.1
Learning Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Thesis Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
4
2.1
Power System Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Rotor Angle Stability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Frequency Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Voltage Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Classiﬁcation of Voltage Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.2
Voltage Stability Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2.1
Power-ﬂow Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2.2
PV and QV Curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Structure of a Blackout
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.1
Typical Scenario of Voltage Collapse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
AC Transmission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4.1
Transmission Lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4.2
Transformers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4.2.1
Voltage Control of Transformers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
State of the Art in Voltage Stability Assessment
19
3.1
Sensitivities Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Thévenin Equivalent Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
Continuation Power Flow and Optimisation Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
Overview of Presented Voltage Stability Assessment Methods . . . . . . . .
21
4
Voltage Stability Assessment based on Voltage Stability Indices
22
4.1
Classiﬁcation of Voltage Stability Indices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.1.1
System variables based VSI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.1.1
Fast Voltage Stability Index (FVSI) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.2
Voltage Stability Indices based on PMU measurements . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Thévenin Equivalent Using LU Factorisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
New Local Identiﬁcation of Voltage Emergency Situations . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3.1
NLI on a Meshed Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
iii
==PAGE:7==
Contents
5
Implementation of Voltage Stability Indices
33
5.1
Thévenin Equivalent Assessment Method Implementation in MATLAB . . .
33
5.1.1
Initialisation of Assessment Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.1.2
Calculate the Bus Admittance Matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.1.3
Updating the Bus Admittance Matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.1.3.1
Actual and N-1 Operating points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.1.4
Determining Thévenin Impedances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.1.5
Estimate Voltage Stability Indices and Visualise Results . . . . . . .
37
5.2
New LIVES Assessment Method Implementation in MATLAB
. . . . . . .
38
5.2.1
Initialisation of Assessment Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2.2
Computing Moving Average Values of Power and Conductance . . .
39
5.2.3
Calculate the Time Diﬀerences in Power and Conductance and
Determine Steady-state Criterion Limit
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2.4
Compute NLI and Visualise Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.3
Nordic32 Test System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6
Test Results
43
6.1
Thévenin Equivalent method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.2
New LIVES method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7
Conclusion
53
7.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7.2
Evaluation of Learning Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
Bibliography
56
Appendices
59
A SOSPO Simulation Platform
59
A.1 Overview of Simulation Platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
A.2 Nordic32 46-bus Test System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
A.2.1
Test Scenario for the Nordic32 System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.2.1.1
Pre-fault Operating Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.2.1.2
Analysis Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
B Testing MATLAB Functions
68
B.1
Validating the getYbus function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
B.2
Validating the getTheveninEquivalents function . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
C MATLAB
72
C.1
Voltage_stability_assessment_jdbc MATLAB Script
. . . . . . .
72
C.2
db_reader_raw_jdbc MATLAB Script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
C.3
getYbus MATLAB Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
C.4
getTheveninEquivalents MATLAB Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
C.5
Nordic32_prefault_plots MATLAB Script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
C.6
VSI_plots MATLAB Script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
C.7
NLI_plots MATLAB Script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
C.8
test_getTheveninEquivalents MATLAB Script . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
iv
==PAGE:8==
Contents
C.9
radial_system_characteristics MATLAB Script
. . . . . . . . . . 101
C.10 saveTightFigure MATLAB Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
v
==PAGE:9==
Introduction 1
Today’s modern societies are reliant on stable operation of electric power systems for secure
energy consumption. Here, it is the responsibility of system operators to maintain a stable
operation of power systems and identify possible threats that could cause an imbalance
in the system conditions. Moreover system operators should be able to make the right
actions following the occurrence of a contingency or a fault. A series of blackout incidents
related to voltage stability have occurred in many countries, including Denmark. Especially
the year of 2003 was a year with several blackouts worldwide [1, pp. 1922-1924]. These
blackouts revealed how much societies are dependent on energy supply.
To understand the reason for these blackouts, it should be noted that modern power systems
are often operating under very stressful conditions thus making them operate closer to
their limits. There is a continuous increasing power demand, which could further rise in the
near future e.g. with the increasing usage of electrical vehicles. In contemporary with this,
transmission networks are not enlarged as fast due to economic and environmental reasons,
thus relatively few new transmission lines are constructed. Moreover, the increasing usage
of renewable energy sources further stresses networks, as these sources have a ﬂuctuating
power production due to a higher dynamic and stochastic behaviour. As a result, these
ﬂuctuations in power production will have an impact on system stability.
Due to the before mentioned reasons, future power systems should be able to adapt and
withstand these new situations. After analysing the root causes of power system blackouts,
the following conclusions were drawn. The general trend for the blackouts were the absence
of reliable real-time data, no time to take decisive and proper remedial action against
contingencies, a high error rate in ageing equipment, and a lack of properly automated
and coordinated controls to take immediate action to prevent cascading [1, p. 1928].
Although voltage stability assessment and control is not a new issue, it is an topic of focus,
as more power systems are operating closer to their limits. Voltage stability can be analysed
using diﬀerent procedures. Among these are the assessment of the closeness to voltage
instability specially of interest for system operators as it can help system operators to take
correct remedial action in real-time to prevent voltage collapse. The information on the
closeness of voltage instability can be given through Voltage Stability Indices (VSI). These
VSIs can be used oﬄine for analysis and design purposes or in real-time, thus providing
the needed information to take proper operator or automatic remedial actions to prevent
voltage collapse.
1
==PAGE:10==
1. Introduction
Various studies have been made on the traditional VSI and comparisons between these can
be found in [2, 3, 4, 5]. By the recent use of Phasor Measurement Unit (PMU) technology
in power systems, new algorithms are evolving to implement voltage stability monitoring.
These new algorithms use current and voltage phasor measurements provided by the PMUs
to assess stability of a power system.
The Secure Operation of Sustainable Power Systems (SOSPO) project has developed
a simulation platform, which enables real-time stability assessment in order to restore
stability of power systems [6]. In a previous project conducted by the author at DTU [7],
the SOSPO simulation platform was used to analyse a test system. The project serves as
the foundation of this thesis.
1.1
Thesis Goal
The purpose of this thesis is to implement two state of the art research methods for voltage
stability assessment using the SOSPO simulation platform. In order to accomplish this
goal, some objectives are deﬁned which together form the learning objectives for this thesis.
The ﬁrst objective is to study in detail existing methods and ﬁnd a method, which makes it
possible to obtain an index for early detection of voltage instability. The analysed system
consists of several generators and transformers, and therefore it is necessary to identify
which of these that aﬀect the stability of the system.
The second objective is to ﬁnd another state of the art voltage stability assessment method,
which is also based on voltage stability indices and implement algorithms for both voltage
stability assessment methods.
The third objective is to analyse the performance and investigate the applicability of the
two voltage stability assessment methods.
1.1.1
Learning Objectives
After having completed this thesis, the student will be able to:
1. Capture the anatomy of system conditions by performing a detailed system analysis
using Matlab and the SOSPO simulation platform.
2. Understand concepts related to voltage stability, comprising characteristics of
generators, loads and transmission systems.
3. Explain voltage control equipment and their eﬀect during voltage instability.
4. Apply one or more state of the art research methods for voltage stability assessment
in electric power systems.
5. Implement algorithms for these methods in Matlab using the SOSPO simulation
platform.
2
==PAGE:11==
1. Introduction
1.2
Thesis Overview
The chapters and appendices of this thesis is provided here with a short description for
each chapter. The thesis consist of seven chapters and three appendices.
Chapter 2, Background:
This chapter recalls a voltage stability overview based on [8] and [9]. Basic concepts
regarding voltage stability deﬁnitions and classiﬁcation of instabilities will be reviewed.
Moreover, diﬀerent voltage stability analysis methods are also described. The chapter
ends with a description of the derivation of expressions for determining the transmission
line and transformer contributions to the system admittance matrix in terms of complex
voltages and currents.
Chapter 3, State of the Art in Voltage Stability Assessment:
In this chapter, three methods are described, each with its own approach towards performing
voltage stability assessment. The three methods are summarised in Table 3.1 in Section 3.4.
Chapter 4, Voltage Stability Assessment based on Voltage Stability Indices:
This chapter starts with a classiﬁcation of voltage stability indices including an example of
a method that is not suitable for real-time analysis. The chapter is followed by a description
of the two implemented assessment methods, the Thévenin equivalent assessment method
and the New LIVES method.
Chapter 5, Implementation of Voltage Stability Indices:
In this chapter, the implementation and application of the two assessment methods
investigated in Chapter 4 are described.
Chapter 6, Test Results:
This chapter contain the obtained results from testing the implemented methods and a
description of the observations made during test.
Chapter 7, Conclusion:
This chapter concludes the implementation of the two methods and summarises the
observations made throughout the thesis regarding the implemented Thévenin equivalent
assessment method and the New LIVES method. A set of suggestions for future work is
presented, and the chapter ends with an evaluation of the learning objectives presented in
Section 1.1.1.
Appendix A, SOSPO Simulation Platform:
This chapter gives an overview of the SOSPO simulation platform. Moreover, the test case
used for analysis in this thesis are described in this chapter.
Appendix B, Testing MATLAB Functions:
This chapter contains the test and validation of the implemented Matlab functions in
this thesis.
Appendix C, MATLAB:
This chapter contains the source code of the implemented Matlab scripts and functions.
3
==PAGE:12==
Background 2
2.1
Power System Stability
Before deﬁning voltage stability which is the main focus of this thesis, an overall description
of power system stability and its classiﬁcation should be given. The classiﬁcation and
deﬁnition of power system stability is needed in order to understand the various stability
phenomena, their relation to each other and identify the causes of instability. In certain
cases, especially in highly stressed systems during cascading events, one form of instability
may lead to another, and it is often diﬃcult to identify the exact type of instability.
Moreover, instability may not occur as a single type but rather a combination of two or
more. Even so, the classiﬁcation of power system stability is a useful way of understanding
the underlying problem of an instability issue. According to [8, p. 2] the proposed deﬁnition
of power system stability is:
"Power system stability is the ability of an electric power system, for a given
initial operating condition, to regain a state of operating equilibrium after
being subjected to a physical disturbance, with most system variables bounded
so that practically the entire system remains intact."
Power system stability is essentially a single problem, on the other hand it is impractical to
study it as such. As a result of the high dimensionality and complexity of power systems,
simplifying assumptions are made in order to analyse the various forms of instability.
Therefore, classiﬁcation of stability is needed to identify the key factors that contribute to
the instability. The classiﬁcation of stability is based on following considerations [8, p. 3]:
• The physical nature of the resulting type of instability as indicated by the main
system variable in which instability can be observed.
• The size of the disturbance (e.g trip of a generator or a transmission line) considered,
which inﬂuences the method of calculation and prediction of stability.
• The devices, processes, and the time span that must be taken into consideration in
order to assess stability.
Figure 2.1 shows an overview of the main power system stability categories. These are
namely Rotor Angle Stability, Frequency Stability and Voltage Stability.
4
==PAGE:13==
2. Background
Power System Stability
Frequency Stability
Voltage Stability
Rotor Angle Stability
Figure 2.1: Classiﬁcation of power system stability.
2.1.1
Rotor Angle Stability
Rotor angle stability is deﬁned as the ability of interconnected synchronous machines
to remain in synchronism under normal operating conditions and after being subjected
to a disturbance. Maintaining stability depends on the capability to restore/maintain
equilibrium between electrical torque and mechanical torque of each synchronous machine in
the power system. This balance between electrical and mechanical torque can be associated
to the balance between load and generation; total active electrical power generated by
the synchronous machines must be equal to the active power consumed by the loads
(including losses in the system) to maintain a steady frequency. During steady-state, there
is equilibrium between load and generation and the synchronous machines operate at
constant speed. When subjected to a disturbance, an imbalance between the electrical
and mechanical power occurs which will either accelerate or decelerate the rotors of the
synchronous machines. If one generator temporarily operates faster than another generator
in the system, the angular position relative to the remaining generators in the system
will increase [9, p. 20]. The resulting angular diﬀerence results in the slower generator to
relocate some of its load to the faster generator, depending on the power-angle relationship.
As a result, the faster generator will slow down and reduce the speed diﬀerence between the
two generators, and hence the angular separation. A further increase in angular separation
will at some point correspond to the maximum power transfer of a given generator. Beyond
this point an increase in rotor angle will cause a decrease in power transfer and thereby
increase the angular separation between the generators, which can lead to instability. Loss
of synchronism can occur between one machine and the rest of the system or between groups
of machines. Synchronism within groups of machines can be maintained by separating
them from the other groups.
Rotor angle stability can be further expressed by its two sub-categories; Small-signal
stability and Transient stability. These two sub-categories are further described in [8].
2.1.2
Frequency Stability
Frequency stability is the ability of a power system to maintain steady frequency following a
disturbance, which results in an imbalance between consumption and generation. Frequency
stability depends on the ability to maintain/restore equilibrium between system generation
and load. Instability that may occur are in the form of frequency swings. An example of
5
==PAGE:14==
2. Background
frequency instability is the loss of generation, causing the overall frequency of the system
to decrease. Frequency stability issues are in general associated with inadequacies in
equipment responses, poor coordination of control and protection equipment, or insuﬃcient
generation reserve.
2.2
Voltage Stability
As described in [9, p. 27], voltage stability is deﬁned as the ability of a power system
to maintain steady voltages at all busses in the power system after the occurrence of a
disturbance from a given initial operating condition. Voltage stability depends on the
ability of maintaining/restoring equilibrium between load demand and load supply from
the power system. A system enters a state of voltage instability when a disturbance, a
sudden increase in load or a change in system conditions results in an uncontrollable drop in
voltage. According to [10, p. 5] voltage instability stems from the attempt of load dynamics
to restore power consumption beyond the capability of the combined transmission and
generation system.
The main reason for voltage instability is the inability of the power system to meet the
reactive power demand [9, p. 27]. A sudden increase in reactive power demand due to
a progressive and uncontrollable voltage drop, can be supplied by generators through
transmission lines or directly at the load busses by compensators (e.g. shunt capacitors).
In response to a disturbance, power consumed by the loads tends to be restored by the
action of motor slip adjustment, distribution voltage regulators, under load tap changing
transformers (ULTCs) and thermostats [8, p. 5]. As a result, the restored loads increase
the stress on the high voltage network by increasing the reactive power consumption and
causing further voltage reduction. A power system is unstable if the bus voltage magnitude,
for at least one bus, decreases as the reactive power injection increases at the same bus
[9, p. 27]. Instability occurs in the form of a progressive rise or fall of voltages at certain
busses in the system. A possible outcome of this progressive rise or fall in bus voltages
is loss of load in an area due to undervoltage load shedding or tripping of transmission
lines leading to cascading outages. As a result, these cascading outages can cause loss of
synchronism for generators in the system and eventually lead to voltage collapse.
Voltage collapse refers to the process by which the sequence of events related to voltage
instability leads to a blackout or abnormally low voltages in a part of the power system. In
real power systems, various factors contribute to voltage collapse, but the underlying issue
lies in an inherent weakness in the transmission system and power transfer levels. The
principal factors contributing to voltage collapse are the generator reactive power/voltage
control limits, load characteristics, characteristics of reactive compensation devices, and
the action of voltage control devices such as ULTCs [9, p. 960].
2.2.1
Classiﬁcation of Voltage Stability
For analysis purposes, voltage stability can be classiﬁed into following two subcategories in
Figure 2.1:
• Large-disturbance voltage stability: the capability of a system to retain steady voltages
6
==PAGE:15==
2. Background
after large disturbances such as system faults, loss of generation, other contingencies.
This capability is determined by the topology of system and loads, and the interactions
of both continuous and discrete controls and protection systems. The study of interest
may vary from a few seconds to tens of minutes. This type of stability is determined
by examining the non-linear response of the power system over time to capture
the performance and interactions of power system components, such as ULTCs and
motors [8].
• Small-disturbance voltage stability: the ability of the system to maintain steady
voltages after small disturbances such as incremental changes in system load. This
type of instability is determined by the characteristics of continuous and discrete
controls and loads. This means that for small perturbations, the response of the
system voltages can be determined.
As mentioned above, the time frame for voltage stability studies may vary from a few
seconds to tens of minutes. Due to this, voltage stability may be either a short-term or a
long-term phenomenon.
• Short-term voltage stability: is a fast phenomenon with a study period in the order
of several seconds. Short-term voltage stability problems are usually related to the
dynamics of fast acting load components such as induction motors, electronically
controlled loads, and HVDC converters. Analysis requires solution of appropriate
system diﬀerential equations.
• Long-term voltage stability: is slower acting phenomenon with a study period may
extend to several or tens of minutes, and long-term simulations are required for
analysis of system dynamic performance [8]. Long-term voltage stability problems
involves slower acting equipment such as tap-changing transformers, thermostatically
controlled loads, and generator current limiters.
2.2.2
Voltage Stability Analysis
In the following, some common voltage stability analysis methods are reviewed
2.2.2.1
Power-ﬂow Analysis
Power-ﬂow analysis, also called load-ﬂow analysis is commonly used for calculating the
power ﬂows and voltages in a complex power system. The power-ﬂow provides a ’snapshot’
of the current system status. The analysis involves the calculation of power ﬂows and
voltage magnitudes and phase angles at each bus in a power system under balanced
three-phase steady-state conditions. By assuming a balanced system, enables the use
of a single-phase representation of the system. The active and reactive powers are also
determined by solving the power-ﬂow calculations. Based on known information about the
power system, the bus power injections can be calculated using the bus voltages. This is
done by solving non-linear equations to relate the levels of generations/loads to each bus
voltage. The relationship between bus voltages and currents can be represented by the
bus admittance matrix. The bus admittance matrix, expressed in Eq. (2.1) is a ×n matrix
7
==PAGE:16==
2. Background
that contains the constant parameters of transmission facilities, including transformer and
shunt capacitors, and transmission lines.
Ybus =


Y11
Y12
. . .
Y1n
Y21
Y22
. . .
Y2n
...
...
...
...
Yn1
Yn2
. . .
Ynn


(2.1)
Using Ybus, nodal equations for a power system can be written as follows:
˜Ibus = Ybus ˜Vbus
(2.2)
Where ˜Ibus is the vector of currents injected into each bus and ˜Vbus is the vector of bus
voltages. For bus k, the kth current injection in Eq. (2.2) is [9, p. 262]:
Ik =
n
X
m=1
YkmVm
(2.3)
Using the power-ﬂow equations [11, p. 331], the power injections at each bus can be
computed. In order to represent the power-ﬂow equations, four quantities are associated
with each bus: active power P, reactive power Q, voltage magnitude V , and bus voltage
angle θ. By specifying two of the four before mentioned quantities for each bus, leads to
following bus types:
1. Slack bus (V δ): The slack bus (also called swing bus) is a reference bus for which
V ∠δ is speciﬁed (typically 1.0∠0◦pu). Furthermore, the slack bus compensate the
whole system’s power (P and Q) for unknown losses. This is e.g. the power loss,
which depends on the power ﬂow, and therefore is unknown before the power ﬂow
calculation. There can only be one slack bus in a system
2. Load bus (PQ): For this bus type, the injected active and reactive powers are
speciﬁed. PQ busses usually have a load connected, devices which have PQ control
capability, or both.
3. Voltage-controlled bus (PV ): For this bus type, the injected power, P, and voltage
magnitude, V, is known. Practically, these busses have devices which have power
and voltage regulation capability connected. Examples are generators, synchronous
condensers and static var compensators.
The relation between P, Q, V, and I at a given bus are deﬁned by the characteristics
of the devices connected to the busses. This makes the power-ﬂow problem non-linear.
For this reason, power-ﬂow equations have to be solved iteratively using techniques such
as the Gauss-Seidel or Newton-Raphson method. Using the Newton-Raphson method, a
linearised model around a given point can be obtained:
"
∆P
∆Q
#
=


∂P
∂θ
∂P
∂V
∂Q
∂θ
∂Q
∂V


|
{z
}
Jacobian matrix
"
∆θ
∆V
#
(2.4)
where
8
==PAGE:17==
2. Background
• ∆P = incremental change in real power
• ∆Q = incremental change in reactive power
• ∆θ = incremental change in voltage angle
• ∆V = incremental change in voltage magnitude
From Eq. (2.4) it can be seen that system voltage stability is aﬀected by both P and Q.
However, by keeping the active power, P, constant at each operating point, voltage stability
can be evaluated by considering the incremental relationship between Q and V. Based on
these considerations, ∆P in Eq. (2.4) is set to zero. By doing so, following is obtained:
∆Q = JR∆V
(2.5)
Where JR is the reduced Jacobian matrix of the system.
JR = [JQV −JQθJ−1
PθJPV ]
(2.6)
The voltage stability characteristics of the system can be identiﬁed by computing the
eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the reduced Jacobian matrix JR deﬁned in Eq. (2.6). Given
an eigenvalue, λi, of the ith mode of the Q-V response [9, p. 994]:
vi = 1
λi
qi
(2.7)
From Eq. (2.7), it can be seen that the magnitude of each modal voltage variation equals
the inverse of λi times the magnitude of the modal reactive power variation. Thus, the
magnitude of λi determines the degree of stability of the ith modal voltage. The following
are applicable for diﬀerent λi values [9, p. 994]:
• If λi > 0, then the ith modal value of the voltage and the ith modal reactive power
variations are along the same direction, thus indicating a voltage stable system
• If λi < 0, then the ith modal value of the voltage and the ith modal reactive power
variations are along opposite directions, thus indicating a voltage unstable system
• If λi = 0, then the ith modal voltage collapses as a change in modal reactive power
causes inﬁnite change in modal voltage
From this, it can be concluded that the Jacobian matrix enables deﬁning the voltage collapse
point as a system loadability limit, where the minimum magnitude of the eigenvalues of
the power-ﬂow Jacobian matrix is zero.
2.2.2.2
PV and QV Curves
When studying voltage stability, the transmission system characteristics of interest are the
relationships between the receiving end voltage and the transmitted active and reactive
power (V, P and Q). In order to study those relationships, it is useful to analyse the simple
radial system in Figure 2.2. The two-bus system considers a constant voltage source of
magnitude E connected to a load bus through a transmission impedance ZLN represented
by R and X. The receiving end active and reactive power in a two-bus network such as in
Figure 2.2 can be described by the following power-ﬂow equations which assumes a lossless
line.
9
==PAGE:18==
2. Background
R
X
I
ZLD
P,Q ↓
V ∠δ
E∠0
Figure 2.2: Two-bus network.
P = EV
X sin δ
(2.8)
Q = EV cos δ −V 2
X
(2.9)
Where P and Q are the load active and reactive power, V is the load bus voltage and δ
is the phase angle diﬀerence between the load and generator busses. After substituting
the Eqs. (2.8) and (2.9) together and eliminating the phase angle using the trigonometric
identity sin2(x) + cos2(x) = 1, the receiving end voltage can be expressed as [10, p. 22]:
V =
v
u
u
tE2
2 −QX ±
s
E4
4 −X2P 2 −XE2Q
(2.10)
A common way of analysing the voltage stability at a bus in a power system is by
constructing the PV curve for a speciﬁc bus. As PV curves are constructed for individual
busses, a PV curve can help to identify critical busses in the system. A PV curve shows
the voltage at a given bus as a function of the active power consumption on that bus.
Increasing the active power consumption at a given bus will either result in an increase or
decrease in bus voltage, depending on the load angle. This continues until a critical point
is reached, where no more active power can be transferred. This occurs at the nose of
the PV curve, where the derivative dV/dP →−∞. Beyond this point, it is not physically
possible to transfer more active power and the bus voltage for a given active power transfer
starts decreasing.
In Figure 2.3 diﬀerent PV are curves are plotted for diﬀerent load angles. A constant
power factor has been assumed for each curve (Q = P · tan φ).
10
==PAGE:19==
2. Background
0
0.5
1
1.5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Figure 2.3: Normalised PV curves for diﬀerent load angles.
Another characteristics voltage stability analysis is the QV curves. QV curves can help
determining the necessary amount of shunt compensation needed in order to restore an
operating point or obtain a desired voltage [10, p. 39]. Similar to the PV curves, QV curves
have a voltage stability limit. This limit is at the bottom of the curve, where dQ/dV = 0,
see Figure 2.4. The right hand side of this limit is the stable region, since an increase in
reactive power is accompanied by an increase in voltage. On the contrary, the left hand
side is the unstable region since an increase in reactive power represents a decrease in
voltage. This is also one of the instability factors described earlier, that judges a power
system to be unstable if, for at least on bus in the system, the bus voltage magnitude
decreases as the reactive power injection increases at the same bus. The vertical distance
from the point of stability limit to the voltage axis is the reactive power margin. In case
this point is located above the voltage axis, then the reactive power margin is negative so
there is the need of shunt compensation, in order to maintain voltage stability [12].
Figure 2.4: Normalised QV curves [10, p. 39].
In [9, p. 965] it was shown that larger power systems have the same PV characteristics to
those of simple radial systems. This is the main reason why PV curves play an important
role in understanding and interpret voltage stability and are widely used for its analysis.
11
==PAGE:20==
2. Background
As mentioned, a PV curve shows the variation of bus voltages with respect to active power
consumption, and is used to identify the distance to instability by determining the critical
voltage at which instability occurs.
2.3
Structure of a Blackout
In order to prevent power system blackouts, it is important to understand the causes and
mechanisms in the process leading to this. These are illustrated in Figure 2.5 which shows
the sequence of events that can lead to a blackout. In Figure 2.5 the gray boxes denote
the various states of the power system, while the blue boxes denote the events and actions
in between these states.
Large-scale power system blackouts are mostly initiated by a single event, such as loss of
generation or a tripping of a critical line, or multiple related events (such as a fault and a
relay misoperation) that gradually leads to cascading outages and eventual collapse of the
entire system [13, p. 4]. These events can be due to equipment failure, environmentally
caused by e.g. trees or by human errors. Following the initiating event, the system can
sometimes maintain stable operation by a proper operator or automatic remedial actions.
Most systems are designed in such way that stable operation can be maintained for a
single outages, so if proper actions are taken this should not lead to a system blackout.
Depending on the severity of the initial event and in particular during high peak loads, the
system can enter an emergency state. The normal operating conditions can be restored by
making system readjustments, such as generation shifting and increase of spinning power
reserve [14, p. 18]. The time frame for such system readjustments can range from tens of
minutes to hours. In case no action is taken or a second disturbance occurs before new
readjustments is completed, can result in cascading outages and further worsen system
conditions. These cascading outages will at some point aﬀect the system and increase the
impedance between load and generation, which can cause the following forms of instability
[13]:
• Transient Rotor Angle instability: The initial disturbance can lead to deviations
in rotor angles for the generators. If this is followed by a weak electrical coupling
between groups of generators, it may result in a deﬁcit of synchronising torque. Thus
the generators in diﬀerent regions of the system can not keep in synchronism with
each other. This type of instability occurs within a few seconds.
• Oscillatory Small Signal Instability: The weakening of the transmission system
combined with high power transfer levels results in an imbalance between the
mechanical torque and the electromagnetic torque of the generators, leading to
uncontrolled growing electromechanical oscillations between groups of generators.
These electromechanical oscillations will at some point activate protective relays and
trip lines, thereby further splitting the system. This type of instability can take
several seconds to tens of seconds.
• Voltage Instability: Voltage instability may occur in particular during peak load hours.
Transient voltage instability is a fast phenomenon compared to voltage instability,
which can take several minutes.
The listed types of instability can divide the power system into small islands with no
12
==PAGE:21==
2. Background
balance between load and generation. With the occurrence of multitudes of cascading
events, will ultimately lead to a power system blackout. Figure 2.5 shows the sequence of
events leading to a blackout. The gray boxes indicates the states the power system is in
and the blue boxes indicates the events that happen between two states.
Normal State
• Operating within design
parameters
• Possibly a highly loaded
situation
Initiating Event
• Failing equipment
• Tripping of a line due to
fault or overload
System Readjustment
• Operator actions
• Time frame: tens of min-
utes to hours
Proper
Operator or
Automatic
Remedial
Actions
Emergency State
• Stable, but not secure sys-
tem
Second Disturbance
• Before new readjustment is
completed
• Independent of the ﬁrst
disturbance and a low prob-
ability of occurrence
Cascading Outages
• Additional failing equip-
ment
• Gradual degradation of
system conditions
Emergency control action
• Under voltage load shedding
(UVLS)
• Under frequency load shed-
ding (UFLS)
Blackout
• System splits into uncon-
trollable islands
• Large mismatch between
load and generation that
leads to frequency collapse
• Large mismatch of reactive
reserves and load leads to
voltage collapse
Yes
No
Figure 2.5: Sequence of events leading to a blackout. The ﬁgure is based on [14, p. 19], which
was derived from [13] and [15].
13
==PAGE:22==
2. Background
2.3.1
Typical Scenario of Voltage Collapse
When the reactive power demand in a power system increases after the system been being
subjected to a disturbance, the additional demand is met by the reactive power reserves.
The reactive power reserves are carried by the generators and compensators, and in many
cases there are suﬃcient reserves to maintain voltage stability in the system. However, it
is possible, that a sequence of events and system conditions, that the excess reactive power
demand may lead to a voltage collapse, causing partial or total system blackout. A typical
scenario of a voltage collapse is described in the following steps: [9, pp. 974-975].
(I) The power system is experiencing abnormal operating conditions with large generating
units near load centres being out of service. This results in some extra high voltage
(EHV) lines being heavily loaded and reactive power reserves are at a minimum.
(II) The initiating event is the loss of a heavily loaded line which would cause additional
loading on the remaining neighbouring lines. This would further increase the reactive
power loss in the lines. As the absorbed reactive power by a line increases rapidly for
loads above surge impedance loading (SIL), the loss of a heavily loaded line would
mean an extensive reactive power demand in the system. The power delivered by a
transmission line when it is terminated by its characteristic impedance, ZC, with
losses neglected is known as the surge impedance load [9, p. 205].
(III) The extensive reactive power demand causes a considerable reduction of voltage at
nearby load centres. This would result in a load reduction, thereby reducing the
resulting power ﬂow through the EHV lines, which in turn would have a stabilising
eﬀect. The generator automatic voltage regulators (AVR) would at the same time
restore the terminal voltages by increasing excitation. The resulting additional
reactive power ﬂow through the inductances associated with generators, lines and
transformers would cause increased voltage drop across each of these elements.
At this point, the generators would still be within their P-Q capability limits, i.e.,
within the armature and ﬁeld current heating limits. The frequency is regulated by
the speed governors by reducing the MW output.
(IV) The reduced EHV level at the load centres would be reﬂected into the distribution
system, which would set the ULTCs of substation transformers into action. These
would try to restore distribution voltages and loads to pre-fault levels. Each tap
change operation would cause a greater drop in EHV levels as the resulting increase
in load on EHV lines increase the line RI2 and XI2 losses. If the EHV line is loaded
signiﬁcantly above SIL, an increase in MVA line ﬂow would result in numerous
MVArs of line losses.
(V) Due to the tap-changing operation of the ULTCs, the reactive power output of the
generating units would increase. Gradually, the generators throughout the system will
reach their reactive power capability limits, set by the maximum allowable continuous
ﬁeld current. When the ﬁrst generator reaches this limit, the over excitation limiter
(OXL) will be activated and its terminal voltage will drop. The reduced terminal
voltage for a ﬁxed MW output will result in an increase in armature current, which
in turn further limits the reactive power output to keep the armature current within
14
==PAGE:23==
2. Background
acceptable limits. Its share of reactive power loading will be transferred to other
generators in the system, leading to more and more generators being overloaded.
With more and more generators reaching their reactive power capability limits (fewer
generators on excitation control), the system will be much more prone to voltage
instability. This will likely be compounded by the reduced eﬀectiveness of shunt
compensators at low voltages.
This process eventually leads to voltage collapse that can lead to loss of synchronism
of generating units and a major blackout.
2.4
AC Transmission
In this section, transmission line and transformer contributions to the bus admittance
matrix in terms of complex voltages and currents will be reviewed. Equations relevant for
analysis are not derived, but simply presented in this section. A detailed description of the
derivation process can be found in [9, Chp. 6].
2.4.1
Transmission Lines
When analysing an system with diﬀerent system elements, it is convenient to use equivalent
circuits which represent the of the lines only as seen from their respective terminals. A
transmission line is represented by its equivalent π-circuit as shown in Figure 2.6.
˜VS
˜IS
Ze
Y
Y
˜IR
˜VR
Figure 2.6: Equivalent transmission line π-circuit.
Where ˜VS and ˜VR are the sending end and receiving end voltages and ˜IS and ˜IR are
the currents through the sending end and the receiving end of the π-circuit. The shunt
admittance is found by inspecting the current ﬂow and applying KCL to the π-circuit and
is:
Y =
˜IS + ˜IR
˜VS + ˜VR
(2.11)
Applying KVL and rearranging Eq. (2.11), the series impedance Ze is determined:
Ze =
˜V 2
S −˜V 2
R
˜VR ˜IS −˜VS ˜IR
(2.12)
15
==PAGE:24==
2. Background
The line series admittance, Ye, is thereby
Ye = 1
Ze
=
˜VR ˜IS −˜VS ˜IR
˜V 2
S −˜V 2
R
(2.13)
Based on Figure 2.6 and Eqs. (2.11) and (2.13), the transmission line contribution to the
bus admittance matrix is:
YSS = YRR = Ye + Y
(2.14)
YSR = YRS = −Ye
(2.15)
Thus Eqs. (2.14) and (2.15) enables the computation of transmission line contributions to
the admittance matrix based on only currents and voltages.
2.4.2
Transformers
In this section, transformer contributions to the admittance matrix is reviewed. The
transformer type of interest is the two-winding transformer. Figure 2.7 shows the equivalent
circuit of a two-winding transformer used in power ﬂow and stability analysis. The indices
p and s denote the primary and secondary side of the transformer respectively.
¯vp
¯ip
¯Ze
¯is
¯vt
¯vs
p
s
Ideal Transformer
¯n : 1
Figure 2.7: Standard equivalent circuit for a two-winding transformer.
In power-ﬂow analysis, it is possible to further possible reduce the ideal transformer. The
standard equivalent circuit can be reduced to the π-equivalent circuit. The corresponding
admittances for the equivalent π-circuit are found in the same manner as for transmission
lines, based on terminal currents and voltages. Thereafter expressions for the primary and
secondary currents are found. From these currents, the oﬀ-nominal turns ratio can be
calculated. Furthermore, the primary current is used to express the leakage admittance,
Ye. The oﬀ-nominal turns ratio is found as the absolute value of the ratio of the primary
and secondary currents.

¯ip
¯is
 = c
(2.16)
And the leakage admittance is found in the following way:
Ye =
¯ip
c(c¯vp −¯vs)
(2.17)
16
==PAGE:25==
2. Background
¯vp
¯ip
c ¯Ye
c(c −1) ¯Ye
(1 −c) ¯Ye
¯is
¯vs
Figure 2.8: Equivalent π-circuit.
The transformer contribution to the bus admittance matrix is:
YSS = c2Ye
(2.18)
YRR = Ye
(2.19)
YSR = YRS = −cYe
(2.20)
Thus above listed equations enables the computation of transformer contributions to the
admittance matrix based on only currents and voltages.
2.4.2.1
Voltage Control of Transformers
In Section 2.2.2.2 it is shown that the direction of the active power ﬂow along a transmission
line is determined by the angle diﬀerence between the receiving end and sending end voltages,
and the reactive power ﬂow is mainly determined by the magnitude diﬀerence of the same
voltages. The voltage control ability of transformers are necessary to compensate for
varying voltage drops in a power system. Moreover, it is also used to control the reactive
power ﬂow over transmission lines. Transformers can also be used to control the phase
angle, thereby controlling the active power ﬂow. The two most commonly used methods
are tap changing transformers and regulating transformers [16, p. 83]. Only tap changing
transformers will be described in the following.
Tap Changing Transformers
In practice, all power transformers, and the majority of distribution transformers have taps
in one or more winding for changing the the turns ratio. But what makes tap changing
transformers the preferred type, is their ability to control voltages at all levels. There are
two types of tap changing transformers and these are:
1. Oﬀ-load tap changing transformers
2. Under load tap changing (ULTC) transformers
The oﬀ-load tap changing transformer has to be disconnected in order to change its tap
setting. Oﬀ-load tap changers are used in situations in which the transformer’s turn ratio
17
==PAGE:26==
2. Background
is not expected to be changed frequently, but only in cases of load growth or seasonal
changes.
The under load tap changing transformer (ULTC) is used in cases where it is undesirable to
de-energise the transformer to change a tap or when changes in turn ratio may be frequent.
As the name implies, an ULTC transformer can change its taps while being connected,
and is very common in modern power systems. The ULTC transformer can have a built-in
voltage sensing circuitry that ensures constant system voltage by automatically changing
the taps [16, p. 84].
18
==PAGE:27==
State of the Art in Voltage
Stability Assessment 3
In the following, three state of the art methods in voltage stability assessment are described.
The three methods are summarised in Section 3.4.
3.1
Sensitivities Method
The sensitivities method described in [10] and [17] is based on the observability of the
whole system. It focuses on detecting the initiation of voltage instability triggered by a
large disturbance. The method ﬁts a set of algebraic equations to the sampled states,
based on PMU measurements, and calculates sensitivities, that assesses the point where
maximum power will be reached.
As described in Section 2.2.2.1, the voltage stability can be determined by calculating
the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the reduced Jacobian matrix JR deﬁned in Eq. (2.6).
For this reason, the change of sign of the eigenvalues can indicate the transition from an
stable to a unstable point. But the sensitivities method does not calculate the eigenvalues
in order to detect the change in sign. Instead it uses sensitivities involving the inverse
Jacobian matrix. The sensitivities, SQgq, of the generated reactive power, Qg, with respect
to the load reactive power, q, is computed using the following equation.
SQgq = −ϕT
q

ϕT
z
−1 ∇zQg

(3.1)
Figure 3.1 show a ﬂow chart describing the overall structure of the implementation of the
sensitivities method.
Figure 3.1: Flow chart for implementing the sensitivities method at a load bus [17, p. 1].
19
==PAGE:28==
3. State of the Art in Voltage Stability Assessment
3.2
Thévenin Equivalent Method
There are various methods based on the Thévenin equivalent used in voltage stability
analysis. Although there exists multiple methods on the Thévenin equivalent method they
all have similar complexity [17, p. 3]. For this reason, only one of them is described. The
algorithm for this method is based on obtaining Thévenin equivalents for each load bus
using a two-bus representation of the system as shown in Figure 3.2. Figure 3.2 represents
the entire network "seen" from the considered load bus.
Zth
Il
Zl
Eth
P,Q ↓
Vl
Figure 3.2: Equivalent Thévenin circuit
The maximum power transfer to the load in the equivalent Thévenin circuit shown in
Figure 3.2 occurs when the absolute value of the load impedance equals the Thévenin
impedance, i.e. |Zth| = |ZL| [18, p. 2]. The algorithm for this method is described in
[18]. In [19] this method is improved by considering the anticipation of the over excitation
limiter activation. Figure 3.3 show a ﬂow chart describing the overall structure of the
implementation of the Thévenin equivalent method.
Figure 3.3: Flow chart for implementing the Thévenin equivalent method [17, p. 2]
20
==PAGE:29==
3. State of the Art in Voltage Stability Assessment
3.3
Continuation Power Flow and Optimisation Methods
PV curves are one of the ﬁrst and most known method for voltage stability assessment. This
method involves the solving of various power ﬂow equations for each bus until maximum
deliverable power is obtained. Therefore using PV curves for assessing the voltage stability
of a system is known to be more computationally expensive and therefore slower than other
methods. Nevertheless, this method is included here as it is the most known technique and
has useful properties other than speed. Figure 3.4 show a ﬂow chart describing the overall
structure of the implementation of the continuation power ﬂow and optimisation method.
Figure 3.4: Flow chart for implementing the CPF method [17, p. 3]
3.4
Overview of Presented Voltage Stability Assessment
Methods
Table 3.1 summarises the above-mentioned state of the art methods with their characteristics
and the assumptions.
Method
Reference
Assumptions
Characteristics
Sensitivity
[10, 17]
• Full observability of the system
• Suitable for real-time usage
• Does not produce a proximity
measure to instability
• Provides accurate results for
identifying instability conditions
(early warning)
Thévenin
Equivalent
[17, 18, 19,
20]
• Constant Thévenin voltages and
load power factor
• Full observability of the system
• The whole power system seen
from one node is considered as a
Thévenin equivalent estimated from
local measurements
• Does not oﬀer a reliable measure
or distance to instability
• Parellelisation of algorithm is
possible since estimations at each
bus are independant
• Small computational costs
• Linear relationship in algorithm
complexity
• Suitable for real-time usage
Continuation
Power Flow and
Optimisation
[10, 21, 17]
• Full observability of the system
• High computational costs
• Great algorithm complexity
• Not suitable for real-time usage
• Enables boundary tracing and
distance-to-instability measure
Table 3.1: Overview of voltage stability assessment methods described in the previous sections.
21
==PAGE:30==
Voltage Stability
Assessment based on
Voltage Stability Indices 4
4.1
Classiﬁcation of Voltage Stability Indices
In voltage stability assessment, one way of assessing the voltage stability of power systems
is by means of voltage stability indices (VSI). These indices are scalar magnitudes that
can be monitored as system parameters change. System operators can use these VSI to
assess the closeness to voltage instability and thereby take proper remedial actions.
After a literature research on VSIs, it was found out that there is a lack of information
regarding a complete classiﬁcation of these various voltage stability indices. Moreover,
it was also noticed that there were methods that were not suitable for voltage stability
analysis, due to e.g.
unrealistically taken assumptions.
Although some comparisons
between indices can be found in [2]-[5], the overall classiﬁcation regarding characteristics
and diﬀerences were still missing. The overall classiﬁcation in this thesis is based on the
description in [4]. In [4, p. 1] the VSIs are categorised into two groups:
1. Jacobian matrix based VSI
2. System variables based VSI
Jacobian matrix based VSI can calculate the maximum loadability limit or voltage collapse
point and determine the voltage stability margin. The calculation of these require great
computational eﬀorts which makes Jacobian matrix based VSIs not suitable for real-time
assessment. For this reason, the Jacobian matrix based VSIs are not further treated as this
thesis deals with stability indices that can be applied in real-time. On the contrary, VSIs
based on system variables use elements of the bus admittance matrix and some system
variables such as bus voltages and power ﬂow through lines [4, p. 1]. These VSIs require
less computational eﬀorts and are suitable for real-time usage. The disadvantage of these
VSIs is that they can not estimate the voltage collapse point, but can only be used to
identify critical busses and lines.
The classiﬁcation of the VSIs represents the two aspects in voltage stability analysis deﬁned
in [9, p. 977]. These are:
• Proximity to voltage collapse: How close is the system to voltage instability?
• Mechanism of voltage instability: How and why does instability occur (what are the
voltage weak busses and lines)?
22
==PAGE:31==
4. Voltage Stability Assessment based on Voltage Stability Indices
The following sections deals further with the System variables based VSI. Moreover, voltage
stability indices based on PMU measurements will also be treated.
4.1.1
System variables based VSI
As mentioned, System variables based VSIs use direct measurements such as the bus
voltages, power ﬂow through lines, and elements of the bus admittance matrix to assess
the stability of a system. These types of VSIs require less computational eﬀorts and are
suitable for a fast diagnosis of system condition and contingency ranking [4, p. 1]. Moreover,
they are based on the principle of maximum power that can be transmitted to the load bus
in a two-bus system, as the one depicted in Figure 4.1. These indices generally vary from
zero to one and are as mentioned not capable of estimating the voltage stability margin,
but is rather used to determine critical lines or critical busses in a given load level.
System variables based VSI can be further categorised into two groups [5, p. 1]. they
can either be referred to a bus (bus indices) or a line (line stability indices) in a power
system. As mentioned, there are methods of ﬁnding VSIs that are not suitable due to
e.g. unrealistically taken assumptions. An example of this will be given in the following,
ﬁrst starting with describing the method followed by a description of the limitation of the
method.
R
X
I
ZLD
P,Q ↓
V ∠δ
E∠0
Figure 4.1: Two-bus system.
4.1.1.1
Fast Voltage Stability Index (FVSI)
The Fast Voltage Stability Index (FVSI) described in [5, p. 2] uses the concept of power
ﬂow through a line to formulate an index to assess the stability of a system. Starting of by
formulating the current injection.
I = E∠0 −V ∠δ
R + jX
(4.1)
By forming a quadratic equation for the receiving end voltage the roots can be found,
expressed as:
V =

R
X sin δ + cos δ

|E| ±
rh
R
X sin δ + cos δ

|E|
i2 −4

R2
X + X

Q
2
(4.2)
23
==PAGE:32==
4. Voltage Stability Assessment based on Voltage Stability Indices
To obtain reals root for V , the discriminant in Eq. (4.2) has to be greater than or equal to
zero
4|Z|2QX
|E|2(R sin δ + X cos δ)2 ≤1
(4.3)
Assuming that the angle diﬀerence between the two busses in Figure 4.1 is zero (δ ≈0)
leads to the following simpliﬁcation of Eq. (4.3)
FVSI = 4|Z|2Q
|E|2X
(4.4)
Thus Eq. (4.4) is a stability index indicating the weakest line in a system. The highest
FVSI value indicates the most critical line in a system.
This method assumes zero angle diﬀerence between two busses in order to formulate a
stability index. Such an assumption is considered to be unrealistic due to the fact that in
a meshed, dynamic system, there will be a diﬀerence in angle between two busses. Even if
there should be a case in a two-bus system where the angle diﬀerence is approximately
zero, it only requires a small change in system conditions before this assumption is invalid.
Therefore, this method is not considered to be suitable for voltage stability assessment.
4.1.2
Voltage Stability Indices based on PMU measurements
The development of phasor measurement technology along with advances in communica-
tions, computational facilities and networking infrastructure has opened new perspectives
for wide-area monitoring detection, protection and control, thus enabling the development
of new methods for assessing voltage stability [22, p. 1]. This fact makes it possible to build
wide area monitoring systems (WAMSs). WAMSs provides snapshots of power system
variables within one second, thus providing new ways for early detection and prevention of
voltage instability. As stated in [22, p. 1], voltage instability monitoring based on PMU
measurements can be classiﬁed into two categories:
1. Methods based on local measurements
2. Methods based on the observability of the whole region
Methods based on local measurements need few or no information exchange between the
monitoring locations, while methods based on the observability of the whole region oﬀer
the advantage of wide-area monitoring, but requires time-synchronised measurements.
As mentioned methods based on local measurements need few or no information exchange
between the monitoring locations. Most of these methods rely on the thévenin impedance
matching condition or its extensions. These methods are based on the assumption that
voltage instability is closely related to maximum loadability of a transmission system.
Recalling the two-bus system in Figure 4.1, it is known that the transmitted power is
maximum when the voltage drop in the line is equal to the magnitude of V [9, p. 29]. This
happens when the transmission impedance ZLN represented by R and X and the load
impedance ZLD are equal in size, that is:
|ZLN|
|ZLD| = 1
(4.5)
24
==PAGE:33==
4. Voltage Stability Assessment based on Voltage Stability Indices
This relationship can be seen in Figure 4.2, where plots of I, V and P are shown as a
function of ZLN/ZLD. The ﬁgure is derived based on the description from [9, pp. 27-29].
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Figure 4.2: Normalised receiving end voltage, current and power as a function of load demand for
the system of Figure 4.1.
Eq. (4.5) is also valid for the equivalent thévenin circuit shown in Figure 4.3. In this case,
maximum power is transmitted when the absolute value of the thévenin impedance is equal
in size to the magnitude of the load impedance. The impedance Zl is the ratio of the
measured current and voltage (Il and Vl) phasors through PMU. During normal operating
conditions, |Zth| ≪|Zl| and as the system conditions worsen eventually becomes equal at
the point of collapse. Thus the relationship between Zl and Zth can be used as a voltage
stability index (VSI) to assess the distance to voltage instability.
Zth
Il
Zl
Eth
P,Q ↓
Vl
Figure 4.3: Equivalent thévenin circuit at a load bus.
There are diﬀerent methods of calculating the thévenin equivalent for a system to assess the
proximity to instability. Section 4.2 presents a method to compute the thévenin equivalents
for a given system using LU factorisation, which is the method that is implemented in this
thesis. Section 4.3 deals with the second method that is implemented in this thesis. Both
implemented methods are PMU based.
25
==PAGE:34==
4. Voltage Stability Assessment based on Voltage Stability Indices
4.2
Thévenin Equivalent Using LU Factorisation
Thévenin equivalents consist of the equivalent thévenin impedance, Zth and the equivalent
thévenin voltage, Vth such that the equivalent thévenin voltage seen from node i is [20,
p. 2]:
Vth,i = Vi −Zth,iIi
(4.6)
Where Vi is the voltage at node i and Ii is the injected current in the same node. A
node may connect voltage sources, current sources and shunt impedances to the network.
Voltage sources could be terminal voltages of generators equipped with automatic voltage
regulators (AVRs) or internal voltages of manually excited generators. The network is
represented by making a block-wise partitioning of the bus admittance matrix, ordered
according to Schur’s complement such that non-controlled nodes (nc) are assigned lower
indices and voltage-controlled nodes (vc) are assigned higher indices.
"
0
Ivc
#
=
"
Ync
Ylink
YT
link
Yvc
# "
Vnc
Vvc
#
(4.7)
where
• Ync is the admittance for non-controlled nodes
• Yvc is the admittance for voltage-controlled nodes
• Ylink is the admittance containing the links between Ync and Yvc respectively
Loads are represented by their admittance values and added to the diagonal elements of
Ybus, thus no current is injected in nc-nodes. The block matrix Ync represents all system
admittances where all voltage sources have been short-circuited and all current sources are
open-circuited. Thus the thévenin impedance seen from a nc-node is:
Znc = Y−1
nc
(4.8)
Floating nodes with neither a load or a generator connected are also modelled as a
non-controlled node.
The thévenin impedances seen from a vc-node i is computed by injecting a unit test current
at node i and taking the reciprocal of the resulting voltage at node i by solving the inverse
expression in Eq. (4.9) [20, p. 2].
"
Ync
Ylink,(:,i)
Ylink,(i,:)
Yvc,(i,i)
# 

...
Vi|Ii=1

=
"
0
1
#
(4.9)
Zvc,i =V −1
i|Ii=1
(4.10)
The fact that the block matrix Ync in Eq. (4.9) remains the same allow a problem reduction
[23, p. 3]. This is done by performing a LU-decomposition of the block matrix Ync:
Ync = LncUnc
(4.11)
The rows and columns that should be added to Lnc and Unc respectively to form the
factorisation used in solving Eq. (4.9) are found by employing left-looking algorithm for
26
==PAGE:35==
4. Voltage Stability Assessment based on Voltage Stability Indices
decomposition of the remaining rows and columns of Eq. (4.9) [20, p. 2]:
ˆU(:,i) = L−1
nc Ylink(:,i)
(4.12)
ˆLT
(:,i) = (UT
nc)−1Y T
link(:,i)
(4.13)
where has the following form:
ˆL =


1
l21
1
...
...
...
ln1
ln2
. . .
1


and
ˆU =


u11
u12
. . .
u1n
u22
. . .
u2n
...
...
unn


(4.14)
It is normal practice to let the diagonal elements of ˆL to be 1 which means that the thévenin
impedance Zvc,i is given by inverse of the last diagonal element of ˆU(i,i) [23, p. 3]. The
thévenin impedance seen from a vc-node i is the inverse of the ith diagonal element in the
Schur complement (Yeq = Ybus/Ync = Yvc −YT
linkY−1
nc Ylink) of the admittance matrix
in Eq. (4.7) with its nc-nodes eliminated [23, p. 4]. If ˆL is unit diagonal this equivalent
admittance is found as:
Z−1
vc,i = ˆU(i,i) = Yvc(i,i) −ˆL(i,:) ˆU(:,i)
(4.15)
The thévenin equivalents for the non-controlled and voltage-controlled nodes are thus:
Zth,i =
(
Znc,(i,i)
for
i ∈nc
Zvc,(i,i)
for
i ∈vc
(4.16)
4.3
New Local Identiﬁcation of Voltage Emergency
Situations
The New Local Identiﬁcation of Voltage Emergency Situations (New LIVES) is a method
that can monitor long-term voltage instability from phasor measurement units installed at
any transmission bus. The method is a generalisation of the impedance matching condition
on a radially connected load bus as well as the LIVES method presented in [24] and [25],
which is based on under load tap changing transformers (ULTCs). The New LIVES method
focuses on transmission busses further away from the load busses at higher voltage levels to
assess the system conditions. The method uses current and voltage phasor measurements
on a single transmission bus to form an index for early detection of voltage instability.
Moreover, the method is suitable for any transmission bus feeding a weak area of a system
for early detection of voltage instability. As the New LIVES method is a generalisation of
the impedance matching condition and the LIVES method, it is necessary to describe these
two methods to understand the connection between these and the New LIVES method.
Firstly, the impedance matching condition is revisited using a variable admittance, constant
power factor load as seen in the radial lossless system in Figure 4.4. From [9, p. 29] it
is known that maximum power transfer and stability limit occur when the impedance
matching condition hold. Thus the radial system in Figure 4.4 is stable when:
G
p
1 + α2 < 1/X
(4.17)
27
==PAGE:36==
4. Voltage Stability Assessment based on Voltage Stability Indices
Figure 4.4: Radial lossless system [26, p. 1].
The condition in Eq. (4.17) can be monitored by calculating the load impedance based on
current and voltage phasor measurements and estimating the thévenin impedance through
LU factorisation or similar methods. There are however two conditions that are necessary
for Eq. (4.17) to hold, and these are [26, p. 2]:
1. Constant thévenin parameters E and X.
2. Constant load power factor.
This means that the second condition does not hold if the current and voltage measurements
are made at any other point on the radial system, e.g. if the measured voltage is V1 in the
radial system with the intermediate bus in Figure 4.5. In this case the load impedance
seen from the measuring bus is:
Zl = jX2 +
1
G
√
1 + α2
(4.18)
The equivalent thévenin impedance will be equal to jX1, thus the impedance matching
condition for this case is:
|Zl| > X1
(4.19)
Eq. (4.19) will give a wrong indication of the stability condition, as the actual condition is
still Eq. (4.17) where X = X1 + X2. Combining Eqs. (4.17) and (4.19) results in:
|ZL| >
1
G
√
1 + α2 > X > X1
(4.20)
From Eq. (4.20) it can be seen that when the accurate stability condition in Eq. (4.17)
is violated, the stability condition in Eq. (4.19) will still hold, resulting in an incorrect
indication for X2 > 0. So if the measurement point is not exactly on a constant power
factor load bus, the impedance matching monitoring can not give an early indication of
instability [26, p. 2]. This issue in early instability detection worsen when moving further
away from the load bus, i.e. for increasing X2.
The LIVES method, described in [24] and [25], is based on monitoring the distribution
voltage of ULTC transformers. Figure 4.6 is an example of such a system. For this system,
the load power factor remains constant each time the tap ratio, r, is adjusted, and also
when the leakage reactance of the transformer, X2, is taken into consideration. At the
same time, the admittance magnitude as seen from the transmission side V1 increases when
the tap ratio r is decreased [26, p. 2]. Thus assuming a constant thévenin equivalent for
diﬀerent tap adjustments, the conditions for Eq. (4.17) to hold are fulﬁlled. In the LIVES
28
==PAGE:37==
4. Voltage Stability Assessment based on Voltage Stability Indices
Figure 4.5: Radial system with intermediate bus [26, p. 2].
method, the stability condition is monitored by the increase of V2 after a tap decrease
(∆r < 0):
∆V2
∆r < 0
(4.21)
Which is equivalent to the condition of maximum power transfer as an increase in admittance
seen from the primary side of the transformer when ∆r < 0 corresponds to an increase of
consumed power, as P is proportional to V 2
2 (P = V 2G) [26, p. 2].
Figure 4.6: Radial system with an ULTC transformer [26, p. 2].
The LIVES method can be generalised such that it becomes applicable to any bus along a
radial transmission link. This is done in the following steps:
1. The stability condition in Eq. (4.21) is monitored based on the primary transformer
bus, thus assuming available current and voltage (V1 and I1) phasor measurements.
2. The tap ratio r is monitored as an admittance (more speciﬁcally as an conductance
G1) increase seen from the primary.
3. The increase in load bus voltage V2 is monitored as an increase in consumed active
power P.
Thus the stability condition, denoted as New LIVES Index (NLI) becomes:
NLI = ∆P
∆G1
> 0
(4.22)
where
• G1 is the real part of the load admittance at the primary transformer bus and is
calculated as:
G1 = Re{˜I1/ ˜V1}
(4.23)
29
==PAGE:38==
4. Voltage Stability Assessment based on Voltage Stability Indices
Applying the NLI in Eq. (4.22) to the intermediate bus in Figure 4.6 with voltage V1, and
given that the system is lossless, the active power P is the same everywhere in the system,
and the computed conductance G1 is:
G1 =
G
(1 + αGX2)2 + (GX2)2
(4.24)
According to Eq. (4.17) ∆P is increasing with ∆G for:
G2(1 + α2) < 1/(X1 + X2)2
(4.25)
diﬀerentiating Eq. (4.24), ∆G1/∆G > 0 holds for:
G2(1 + α2) < 1/X2
2
(4.26)
From Eq. (4.26), it can be seen that for a continuous increase in conductance, the NLI
is positive until maximum power transfer condition is achieved Eq. (4.17). Beyond this
point, the NLI becomes negative and changes sign once again when the load admittance
reaches the value 1/X2 [26, p. 3]. Thus the stability condition in Eq. (4.22) is suﬃcient
for voltage stability monitoring with the advantage of being monitored anywhere in the
radial lossless system, as long as voltage and current phasor measurements are available
at the point. Eq. (4.22) is a generalisation of both the impedance matching and LIVES
formulations with the advantage of no monitoring of secondary voltage and ULTC tap and
without any thévenin impedance computation methods.
4.3.1
NLI on a Meshed Network
In the previous section, the impedance matching condition together with the LIVES
method was reviewed and used to formulate the NLI for a radial lossless system. This
section deals with the application of NLI on a meshed network with losses where loads are
not necessarily constant admittances.
In the presence of line resistance, the measured active power along a radial system will no
longer be equal to the power consumed by the load, thus P can no longer assumed to be
constant as was done in the previous section, P1 ̸= P. Nevertheless for low values of R/X
ratio the exact stability condition in Eq. (4.22) can be approximated such that:
NLI ≈∆P1
∆G1
> 0
(4.27)
Eq. (4.27) shows that an approximate NLI can be calculated based on the power and
conductance at the measured point. The fact that measured power include losses, the
condition NLI = 0 occur after the exact maximum power transfer condition. This drawback
is counteracted by a property of meshed systems that anticipates the exact instability
condition [26, p. 3].
Considering a weak area of a system that is prone to voltage instability that is fed from a
larger healthy part through a transmission corridor. For such a system it has been shown
in [10, Chp. 7] that in an unstable case involving a load demand increase, the maximum
consumption in the weak area will be reached before the actual stability limit. This is
30
==PAGE:39==
4. Voltage Stability Assessment based on Voltage Stability Indices
shown in the load power space in Figure 4.7. In Figure 4.7 the load demand together with
the consumed active power are shown. The vertical axis represents the sum of active power
in the aﬀected area and the horizontal axis is the sum of load active power in the rest
of the system. The loadability (maximum power transfer) limits are represented by the
dotted curve L, deﬁning the area of solution for consumption to meet demand. The dashed
line D represents the active power demand increase while the solid line is the actual load
consumption. It can be seen that this solid curve reaches the loadability curve at point
C and turning back as there are no solutions outside the loadability curve. But before
reaching point C, it is clear that the consumption in the aﬀected area reaches maximum
at point M, which is before the instability limit at point C. Beyond point M the sum of
active power in the aﬀected area is reduced for further increase in load demand. Thus
before the point of maximum power transfer at least one part of the weak area will start
reducing its active power transfer.
Figure 4.7: Loadability limits in load power space [26, p. 3].
Now considering a weak area is fed through a transmission corridor that deﬁnes a cut-set
between two areas of the system. For such a system, the idea is to only monitor current
and voltage phasors at the receiving busses of a speciﬁed corridor. These busses are called
boundary busses of the weak area. Each boundary bus is monitored independently and
can raise a voltage instability alarm. Each PMU installed at a boundary bus monitors the
bus voltage phasor of the corresponding bus together with the imported current phasors.
The current phasors comprises of all imported currents from the transmission corridor
lines that is connected to the boundary bus. So for bus i the imported current phasor is:
˜Ii = −
X
k∈Ki
˜Iik
(4.28)
where
• Ki is the set of corridor sending busses connected to boundary bus i
From Eq. (4.28), the imported active power Pi and the conductance Gi for the boundary
bus are computed as:
Pi = Re{ ˜Vi ˜I∗
i }
(4.29)
Gi = Re{˜Ii/ ˜Vi}
(4.30)
Thus the NLI can be computed using Eq. (4.27) for boundary bus i.
31
==PAGE:40==
4. Voltage Stability Assessment based on Voltage Stability Indices
In Figure 4.7, it was shown that at least one part of a weak area of a system will start
reducing its active power transfer before the point of maximum power transfer. As the
boundary busses are the interface between the weak and healthy areas, at least one of
these boundary busses will start transferring less power (∆Pi < 0) after point M and
before point C in Figure 4.7. At the same time, as the load demand in the weak are is
not met will result in an increase in conductance seen by all boundary busses. Thus for a
lossless system the condition of Eq. (4.27) will have to occur in at least one boundary bus
before voltage instability. So a suﬃcient stability condition for an early warning of voltage
instability is deﬁned as:
NLIi > 0
for all
i = 1...n
(4.31)
For a system with losses, the NLI is of course not as exact an indicator as in the case of a
radial lossless system. However, it was shown that even for a system with losses, assuming
low R/X ratios and considering the loadability limits in load power space, the obtained
NLIs can provide a reasonable and early approximation of instability conditions, and can
thus serve as an emergency indicator [26, p. 4].
32
==PAGE:41==
Implementation of Voltage
Stability Indices 5
5.1
Thévenin Equivalent Assessment Method
Implementation in MATLAB
The assessment method described in [19] with respect to [20] was implemented in Matlab
and tested with the SOSPO simulation platform. Figure 5.1 shows the program ﬂow of
the implemented method.
5.1.1
Initialisation of Assessment Method
First of all, the network topology of the test system to be analysed is retrieved. The topology
includes information of the busses, generators, loads, transformers, and transmission lines.
After getting the network topology of the test system, next is to subscribe to a Snapshot
Server in order to receive PMU-snapshots from SOSPO simulation platform. The Snapshot
Server and SOSPO simulation platform are further described in Appendix A.
5.1.2
Calculate the Bus Admittance Matrix
Based on the information retrieved from the database and the PMU-snapshots, the bus
admittance matrix is computed. At ﬁrst, the bus admittance matrix consists of admittance
of branches and loads. The transformer and transmission line contribution is computed
based on the theory in Sections 2.4.1 and 2.4.2. The load currents were not provided
from the Snapshot Server, so KCL was applied in order to ﬁnd these, and by knowing the
complex bus voltages, the load admittances were calculated. Moreover, the synchronous
reactance for each generator in the system is also added to the bus admittance matrix, see
Table A.1. This is used to determine the N −1 operating conditions for a manually excited
generator or a generator equipped with an AVR when the OXL is activated. The complete
bus admittance matrix is seen in Eq. (5.1), where N is the number of busses and M is the
number of generators in the system. A function has been implemented in Matlab that
generates the bus admittance matrix of a given test system. The implemented Matlab
function is tested in Appendix B.1 and the Matlab code can be found in Appendix C.3.
Ybus =
"
N × N
N × M
M × N
M × M
#
(5.1)
33
==PAGE:42==
5. Implementation of Voltage Stability Indices
Get network topology
Receive PMU snapshots
Calculate the bus
admittance matrix, Ybus
Identify non-controlled and volt-
age controlled nodes, and make
a block-wise partitioning of Ybus
OXL
activation
Determine Thevenin impdances
Estimate voltage stability
indices and visualise results
Yes
No
Figure 5.1: Implementation of the Thévenin equivalent assessment method.
34
==PAGE:43==
5. Implementation of Voltage Stability Indices
5.1.3
Updating the Bus Admittance Matrix
After the bus admittance matrix is calculated, a block-wise partitioning of the admittance
matrix is performed as described in Section 4.2. This is done by identifying the non-
controlled and the voltage-controlled nodes in the system. However in a dynamic system,
these nc- and vc-nodes can change due to generators reaching their excitation limits. This
means that a vc-node can change to a nc-node during simulation due to generator operating
points. Therefore, it is important to identify the actual and N-1 operating points of the
synchronous machine.
5.1.3.1
Actual and N-1 Operating points
The operating points for the synchronous machine is determined based on the synchronous
machine representation and assuming that power is injected at nodes with constant voltage
magnitudes [14]. From this, the actual and N-1 operating points for a synchronous machine
can be determined. For a generator without an excitation system (manually excited),
the actual operating point is the node of constant voltage seen behind the synchronous
reactance, Xd. For a generator equipped with an AVR and inactive OXL, the actual
operating point is at the generator terminal, Et at Figure 5.2, and the N-1 point is
behind the synchronous reactance. For a generator equipped with an AVR and active
OXL will have a constant ﬁeld current thus the terminal voltage can no longer assumed
to be constant. Instead, the voltage of the internal node, Eq at Figure 5.2, behind the
synchronous reactance is assumed constant. Table 5.1 sums up the before-mentioned
description of the operating points for the synchronous machine.
Figure 5.2: Points of constant voltage magnitude for a synchronous machine dependent on the
excitation control used.
Excitation system
OXL
Actual operating
point
N-1 operating
point
Manually excited
-
Behind Xd
-
AVR with OXL
Active
Behind Xd
-
Inactive
At terminal
Behind Xd
Table 5.1: Actual and N-1 operating points for a synchronous machine.
35
==PAGE:44==
5. Implementation of Voltage Stability Indices
The operating points of the synchronous machine and the change from a vc- to a nc-node
is exempliﬁed in the 5-bus system depicted in Figure 5.3. The system consists of two
generators, both equipped with an excitation system, but only one of the generators (G2)
gets limited by its excitation system, which is the reason why jXd is shown for G2. Thus the
nodes 1 and 4 are voltage-controlled nodes while the remaining busses are non-controlled
nodes.
nc =
h
2
3
5
i
(5.2)
vc =
h
1
4
i
(5.3)
When the generator at bus 4 reaches its limit and the OXL is activated, the point of
constant voltage moves behind the synchronous reactance. This results in a change in the
nc- and vc-nodes such that:
nc =
h
2
3
5
4
i
(5.4)
vc =
h
1
Internal node
i
(5.5)
Figure 5.3: Example 5-bus system with two generators.
The change in vc- and nc-nodes results in a change in the block partitioned admittance
matrix. This change is depicted in Figure 5.4, where the admittance matrix is represented
as in Eq. (4.7). In Figure 5.4, the nc-nodes are blue, the vc-nodes are red, and the white
boxes are the links between these nodes. The grey boxes indicates the parts of Ybus that are
not a part of the admittance matrix. Before OXL activation it can be seen in Figure 5.4a
that the admittance matrix is a 5 × 5 matrix. After OXL activation, the point of constant
voltage moves to the internal node behind the synchronous reactance. Thus node 4 becomes
a nc-nodes and the admittance matrix extends to a 6 × 6 matrix, as seen in Figure 5.4b.
36
==PAGE:45==
5. Implementation of Voltage Stability Indices
(a) Admittance matrix before OXL activa-
tion.
(b) Admittance matrix after OXL activation.
Figure 5.4: Example of how the nc and vc nodes change in the block partitioned admittance matrix
when the operating point of a synchronous machine change.
5.1.4
Determining Thévenin Impedances
The thévenin impedances are computed using the method described in Section 4.2. Based
on this description a Matlab function has been implemented that computes the thévenin
impedances for a given system. The implemented Matlab function is further described in
Section C.4. This Matlab function has been tested on a smaller network and obtained
results have been compared to analytically computed results, see Appendix B.2.
In
Appendix B.2, it was shown that obtained results agree with the analytically computed
results.
5.1.5
Estimate Voltage Stability Indices and Visualise Results
From Eq. (4.5) it is known that maximum power transfer happens when the transmission
impedance and load impedance are equal in size, and for the equivalent thévenin circuit
when the thévenin impedance matches the load impedance. Thus a suﬃcient stability
condition can be formulated as:
VSI = 1 −Zth
Zl
> 0
(5.6)
The reason why the VSI was chosen to be formulated in this way is mainly due to how
the results were desired to be visualised, as Eq. (4.5) in itself is enough as a VSI. If only
Eq. (4.5) should be used as a stability condition it would be formulated as:
VSI = Zth
Zl
< 1
(5.7)
Another approach would be to compute the ratio of the voltages across the thévenin
impedance and load impedance, which would essentially result in the same results.
37
==PAGE:46==
5. Implementation of Voltage Stability Indices
5.2
New LIVES Assessment Method Implementation in
MATLAB
The assessment method described in Section 4.3 was implemented in Matlab and tested
with the SOSPO simulation platform. Figure 5.5 shows the program ﬂow of the implemented
method.
Get network topology
Receive PMU snapshots
Compute moving average values
of the power and conductance
Deﬁne a time interval, ∆T,
and compute the time diﬀer-
ences of power and conduc-
tance to obtain ∆G and ∆P
Is the
steady-state
condition
violated
Store ∆G and ∆P
Discard ∆G and ∆P and
advance to next measurement
Compute moving aver-
age values of ∆G and ∆P
Compute NLI and
visualise results
Yes
No
Figure 5.5: Implementation of the New LIVES assessment method
38
==PAGE:47==
5. Implementation of Voltage Stability Indices
5.2.1
Initialisation of Assessment Method
The initialisation of Assessment Method is the same as for the Thévenin equivalent
assessment method. As the initialisation of the Thévenin equivlent assessment method is
described in Section 5.1.1, it will not be described again in this section.
5.2.2
Computing Moving Average Values of Power and Conductance
A practical diﬃculty related to the real-time computation of NLI is that it is dependant
on the diﬀerences in power and conductance. For this reason, the computed power and
conductances have to be properly deﬁned and ﬁltered to avoid measurement noise, eﬀect
of random variations and short-term dynamics, such as electro-mechanical oscillations
following a disturbance [26, p. 4]. Using Matlab and SOSPO simulation platform, it
was possible to get voltage and current phasors at an interval of ∆t = 100 ms. Based on
the received PMU-snapshots of voltages and currents, the powers and conductances are
calculated at the boundary busses using Eqs. (4.29) and (4.30). With ∆t being 100 ms
and with a 1 s moving window, it was possible to get 10 measurements per second, thus
the moving average window is N = 10. Thereafter the time-series of moving average values
¯G and ¯P of G and P is calculated at each monitored boundary bus as:
¯G(t) = 1
N
N−1
X
i=0
G(t −i∆t)
(5.8)
¯P(t) = 1
N
N−1
X
i=0
P(t −i∆t)
(5.9)
Figure 5.6 illustrates the working principle of a moving measurement. In this example the
moving average window is four. The blue boxes indicates either the new measurements or
the ones from the measurement before and the red boxes indicates the measurements that
will be replaced by the next measurement.
Figure 5.6: Principle of operation of a moving measurement
39
==PAGE:48==
5. Implementation of Voltage Stability Indices
5.2.3
Calculate the Time Diﬀerences in Power and Conductance and
Determine Steady-state Criterion Limit
Based on the computed moving average values of powers and conductances, the time
diﬀerences of these values are calculated. In [26, p. 4] a ∆T of 7 s is proposed in order to
obtain the long-term trend and to avoid transients. The time diﬀerences in power and
conductance are computes as:
∆Gk = ∆G(tk) = ¯G(tk) −¯G(tk −∆T)
(5.10)
∆Pk = ∆P(tk) = ¯P(tk) −¯P(tk −∆T)
(5.11)
In [26, p. 4] a condition is formulated that checks whether the system is in steady-state
or not. It takes the ratio of the time diﬀerence of the conductance and the measured
conductance and checks whether it is greater than or equal to a speciﬁed limit. Whenever
the condition is violated the measurements are discarded and the assessment method moves
on to the next measurement. The condition is as follows:
∆G(t)/G(t −∆T) ≥ϵ
(5.12)
A method of determining a ϵ was not given in [26]. Therefore an appropriate value of ϵ
was found using the Trial and error method by plotting the left hand side of Eq. (5.12)
and performing NLI computations for diﬀerent epsilon values.
5.2.4
Compute NLI and Visualise Results
The computed ∆G and ∆P values that are stored are further ﬁltered by performing an
N-sample moving average as follows:
∆Gk = 1
N
N−1
X
i=0
∆Gk−i
(5.13)
∆P k = 1
N
N−1
X
i=0
∆Pk−i
(5.14)
And the NLI is calculated at every instant, k, using Eq. (4.27):
NLIk = ∆P k
∆Gk
(5.15)
The obtained NLI are further smoothen before visualising the results.
40
==PAGE:49==
5. Implementation of Voltage Stability Indices
5.3
Nordic32 Test System
The implemented Thévenin equivalent assessment method and New LIVES voltage stability
detection method are applied to the IEEE Nordic32 test system, depicted in Figure 5.7.
This test system is described in detail together with operating points and responses in
Appendix A.2.
1011
1012
1013
1014
1021
1022
2031
2032
4011
4012
4021
4022
4031 4032
4041
4042
4043
4044
1041
1042
1043
1044
1045
4045
4046
4047
4051
4061
4062
4063
4071
4072
g21
g22
g2
g3
g1
g4
g6
g5
g10
g9
g12
g15
g20
g19
g11
g8
g7
g14
g13
g17
g18
g16
141
142
143
144
145
North
Central
Southwest
External
Bus Numbering
10XX →130 kV
20XX →220 kV
40XX →400 kV
Figure 5.7: Single line diagram of the IEEE Nordic32 system
The test system is long-term voltage unstable, eventually resulting in the voltage to collapse
at bus 1042. Figure 5.8 gives an overview of the simulation events leading to voltage
collapse at this bus.
41
==PAGE:50==
5. Implementation of Voltage Stability Indices
time
Gradual decline
of voltage
ULTCs try to maintain
constant voltage
Continous decline of
voltage due to ULTC tap
Voltage
collapse
0 s
Simulation start
5 s
Tripping of line 4044-4032
causes oscillations that
dampen after 20 s
OXLs start acting
40 s
70 s
100 s
ULTCs at bus 142-1042
start acting
140 s
Further ULTC tap
results in voltage drop
170 s
The voltage at
bus 1042 collapses
190 s
Figure 5.8: Events leading to voltage collapse at bus 1042
The Nordic32 test system has a transmission corridor (cut-set) consisting of the following
lines: 4031-4041 (two parallel lines), 4032-4044, 4032-4042, 4021-4042. The fact that the
contingency involves the tripping of line 4032-4044, bus 4044 is no longer a boundary bus,
so NLI is computed on the remaining two boundary busses which are 4041 and 4042. Thus
the corresponding set to deﬁne the importing currents of these busses are K4041 = {4031}
and K4042 = {4021, 4032}.
42
==PAGE:51==
Test Results 6
The test case described in Section 5.3 is used in the following sections to test the Thévenin
equivalent method to assess the stability of the system and the New LIVES method to
detect the onset of voltage instability.
6.1
Thévenin Equivalent method
This method described in Section 4.1.2 was used to assess the stability of the system, in
order to assess the stability of the Nordic32 test system presented in Section 5.3. The
method has been tested on busses 1041 and 1042. The reason for analysing these two load
busses is because 1042 is the bus that eventually collapses 165 s after the initial disturbance.
Bus 1041 is a non-controlled bus that is located close to bus 1042. Therefore VSI values
are computed for this bus to see how the it is aﬀected by the nearby generators that get
limited over time. Bus 1041 is also the bus that has the most critical bus voltage level
besides bus 1042.
Figure 6.1 shows the terminal voltages of the ULTC transformers located at the busses of
analysis and their respective sub busses (bus 141 −1041 and 142 −1042). In Figure 6.1a it
can be seen that when the oscillations, caused by the initial disturbance, have been dampen
out, the system enters a short-term steady-state until the ﬁrst generator at T = 40 s get
limited. The system reaches once again steady-state after 15 s due to the generator AVR.
When the generator at bus 1043 (which is the closest generator to bus 1041) get limited, the
voltage drops again and the ULTCs start acting, trying to restore the voltage to pre-fault
levels. When the ULTCs reach the end of their tap range at t = 126 s, a further ULTC tap
results in voltage drop, and thereby contributing in worsen the system conditions. This
gradual decline of voltage due to ULTC tap continues until the end of the analysis period.
The process at which the voltage at bus 1042 collapses has been reviewed in Section A.2.1.2
and therefore it will not be described in this section.
43
==PAGE:52==
6. Test Results
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
1.05
1.1
LV side of TRF at Bus 141
HV side of TRF at Bus 1041
(a) ULTC transformer located at bus 141-1041
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
LV side of TRF at Bus 142
HV side of TRF at Bus 1042
(b) ULTC transformer located at bus 142-1042
Figure 6.1: Terminals voltages of the ULTC transformers
A step towards computing the VSIs to assess the stability of the system is to compute
the load impedances and thévenin impedances. Figure 6.2 shows the characteristics of
load impedance and thévenin impedance as a function of time for busses 1041 and 1042.
It can be seen that the thévenin impedance is close to zero for bus 1041 and equal to
zero for bus 1042 respectively. At the time generators at bus 1042 and 1043 are limited
the thévenin impedance experience a step increases due to the synchronous reactances of
the generators being added to the admittance matrix. As the generator at bus 1043 is
closest to bus 1041, it will have the greatest eﬀect on the thévenin impedance seen from
the load at bus 1041. This can also be seen in Figure 6.2a where the increase in thévenin
impedance happens at the same time the generator at bus 1043 is limited. As mentioned
in Section 4.1.2, maximum power is transmitted when the absolute value of the thévenin
impedance is equal in size to the magnitude of the load impedance. For Figure 6.2, this
means that when the characteristic of the load impedance intersects the characteristic of
the thévenin impedance. When this happens, maximum power transfer is obtained and
the stability criterion deﬁned in Eq. (5.6) is violated. However for this case, neither of the
characteristics for the two busses intersects each other over time, thus maximum power
transfer never occurs for these busses.
44
==PAGE:53==
6. Test Results
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
Zth
Zload
(a) Bus 1041
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
Zth
Zload
(b) Bus 1042
Figure 6.2: Characteristics of load impedance and thévenin impedance as a function of time
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Eth,1041
Eth,1042
Figure 6.3: Thévenin voltage seen from the load at busses 1041 and 1042
45
==PAGE:54==
6. Test Results
In Section 4.3 the conditions that are necessary for the impedance matching condition
to hold was listed, and one of these was the assumption of a constant thévenin voltage.
Figure 6.3 shows the thévenin voltage seen from the load located at busses 1041 and 1042
as a function of time. It can be seen that the thévenin voltages for the two busses are
relatively constant until the generators at busses 1042 and 1043 are limited. After OXL
activation on the generator at bus 1043, the thévenin voltage seen from bus 1041 experience
a gradual decline in voltage over time. The thévenin voltage seen from bus 1042 increases
at ﬁrst and thereafter decreases. This is due to the generator connected at bus 1042 trying
to meet the increased load, bus fail to do so. As |Zl| = V 2
l /Sl, an increase in load results
in an decrease in load impedance, thus the decrease in thévenin voltage. The fact that the
thévenin voltage seen from busses 1041 and 1042 are not constant means that one of the
conditions for the impedance matching condition to hold is violated, thus the impedance
matching condition is not applicable for this test case.
Figure 6.4 shows the VSI characteristics of busses 1041 and 1042. It can be seen that
the two busses are either close to or equal to 1 until the synchronous reactance is added
due to OXL activation. After OXL activation, the VSI experience a steep drop and
thereafter experience a continuous decline in VSI over time. However, the VSI values are
far from violating the stability criterion deﬁned in Eq. (5.6) in Section 5.1.5 even though
the voltage at bus 1042 collapses around 170 s in Figure 6.1b, the VSI value is around 0.6
at that time. The inability of the VSI characteristic to detect instability conform with the
aforementioned regarding the conditions for the impedance matching condition to hold.
Therefore, instability can not be detected for this test case using this method.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
1041
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1042
Figure 6.4: VSI characteristics of busses 1041 and 1042
46
==PAGE:55==
6. Test Results
6.2
New LIVES method
The implemented New LIVES method was tested on the Nordic32 test system.
As
mentioned in Section 5.3, the Nordic32 test system has a transmission corridor consisting
of lines 4031-4041 (two parallel lines), 4032-4042 and 4021-4042. And the corresponding
boundary busses for these lines are busses 4041 and 4042. Figure 6.5 shows the terminal
voltages of the ULTC transformers at the boundary busses. It can be seen in Figure 6.5 that
the ﬁrst voltage drops are pronounced at t = 40 s due to the generator at boundary bus 4041
reaching its limit and its OXL is activated. After this time instant, the voltage decreases
slowly over time, with several drops in voltage at diﬀerent time instants. These voltage
dips are related to the other generators whose OXL are activated over time. Table A.5
shows all the limited generators together with the corresponding time instant the OXL
is activated for the limited generators. In Figure 6.5 the time instant of OXL activation
of the generators located at the boundary busses are marked. The ULTC transformers
(marked in Figure 6.5) located at the boundary busses try to maintain the voltages at an
acceptable level. The voltage level for the two boundary busses never becomes critical over
time.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
1.05
LV side of TRF at Bus 41
HV side of TRF at Bus 4041
(a) ULTC transformer located at bus 41-4041
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
1.05
LV side of TRF at Bus 42
HV side of TRF at Bus 4042
(b) ULTC transformer located at bus 42-4042
Figure 6.5: Terminals voltages of the ULTC transformers at the boundary busses
47
==PAGE:56==
6. Test Results
A step towards computing the voltage stability indicator NLI, is to extract the time-series
of the imported active power and the conductance for the boundary bus by performing a
moving average at each monitored boundary bus. The numerical calculations of active
power and conductance are computed using Eqs. (4.29) and (4.30), and the moving average
values of these are obtained using Eqs. (5.9) and (5.8). If this is implemented correctly,
the characteristics of active power and conductance should be the same for the numerical
calculations and for the moving average values of the numerical calculations. Figures 6.6
and 6.7 shows the computed values of active power and conductance at the boundary
busses over time. It can be seen that the characteristics of the numerical calculations and
the moving average values of the numerical calculations are the same, thus it can be said
to have been implemented correctly.
What should be noted for the characteristics of the active power and conductance is how
they develop over time. As the voltage at the boundary busses decreases over time, the
imported active power slightly decreases. On the other hand, the conductance for the bus
is greatly increased. This is due to the fact that P in Eq. (4.29) is directly proportional to
V , while G is inversely proportional to V in Eq. (4.30). This means that a small change in
voltage can result in an appreciable change in NLI.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
P
G
(a) Numerical calculation
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
P
G
(b) Moving average values of numerical calculations
Figure 6.6: Numerical calculations and moving average values of G and P at the boundary bus
4041 as a function of time
48
==PAGE:57==
6. Test Results
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
P
G
(a) Numerical calculation
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
P
G
(b) Moving average values of numerical calculations
Figure 6.7: Numerical calculations and moving average values of G and P at the boundary bus
4042 as a function of time
The moving average values of power and conductance are as mentioned used to compute
the the time diﬀerences in power and conductance, see Eqs. (5.10) and (5.11). Furthermore,
only values that satisﬁed Eq. (5.12) would be stored and used when calculating the NLI.
A method of determining ϵ in Eq. (5.12) was not provided in [26], so ϵ was found by trial
and error until a value that provided the most satisfying result was found. This is done
by plotting the steady-state evaluation (left hand side of Eq. (5.12)) for diﬀerent time
intervals ∆T. Three plots have been made for each boundary bus for time intervals of
∆T = 3 s, 5 s and 7 s. Figures 6.8 and 6.9 shows the steady-state evaluation as a function
of time. It can be seen that the characteristic of the three plots for the two boundary
busses are the same for diﬀerent time intervals, but with the diﬀerence in amplitudes.
As seen in Figures 6.8 and 6.9 the characteristics varies considerably over time, which
makes it diﬃcult to determine an ϵ value. The reason for these ﬂuctuations in steady-state
evaluation is due to the conductances being greatly aﬀected by a small change in voltage
at the boundary busses. This drawback, will in the end aﬀect the computed NLI, as the
steady-state evaluation determines the measurements that are stored/discarded. The fact
that the characteristics of the three plots for the two boundary busses are the same for
diﬀerent time intervals, means that the found ϵ value for each time interval will result
49
==PAGE:58==
6. Test Results
in the same NLI values. Therefore, it was chosen to proceed with one time interval and
determine ϵ from that. A time interval of ∆T = 7 s was chosen and an ϵ value of 1.25 · 10−3
was found by trial and error.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
-0.01
-0.005
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
4041, 
T=3s
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
-0.01
-0.005
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
4041, 
T=5s
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
-0.01
-0.005
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
4041, 
T=7s
Figure 6.8: Plot of the steady-state evaluation (left hand side of Eq (5.12)) for boundary bus 4041
as a function of time for diﬀerent ∆T values
Figure 6.10 shows the NLI as a function of time for the two boundary busses 4041 and
4042. As it can be seen in Figure 6.5 after the tripping of line 4032-4044 at 5 s the voltage
plot contain electro-mechanical oscillations that dampen out after 20 s. Therefore NLI is
not computed for this time period as the obtained results would not be usable. Instead,
the calculation of NLI starts at t = 20 s. The ﬁrst computed NLI values are just below 0.5,
but quickly drops below zero approximately after 5 s. Thereafter, the NLI shifts from being
50
==PAGE:59==
6. Test Results
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
-0.01
-0.005
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
4042, 
T=3s
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
-0.01
-0.005
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
4042, 
T=5s
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
-0.01
-0.005
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
4042, 
T=7s
Figure 6.9: Plot of the steady-state evaluation (left hand side of Eq (5.12)) for boundary bus 4042
as a function of time for diﬀerent ∆T values
51
==PAGE:60==
6. Test Results
positive and negative over time, but the NLI values are primarily below or close to zero.
In Figure 6.10 it can be seen that the stability condition deﬁned in Eq.(4.31) is violated
several times. However due to ﬂuctuating characteristic for both boundary busses, it
diﬃcult to determine the exact time at which the stability condition is violated. This is
related to the diﬃculty in determining an ϵ value for the steady-state evaluation such that
the correct measurements are stored/discarded. In Figure 6.10 it can be seen that the
NLI values are mainly below or just right above the stability limit, but the exact time
of violation of the stability limit can not be determined from this ﬁgure. In [26, p. 7],
an alarm is raised after the ﬁrst zero crossing which in this case would be around 25 s
for both boundary busses. But when inspecting the voltages at the boundary busses in
Figure 6.5 it can be seen that they are in steady-state. This could give an indication of that
a false alarm has been issued. As the NLI values violates the stability condition deﬁned
in Eq.(4.31) on several occasions over time could indicate that some of these violations
could be a false alarm. These false alarms could be related to the generators that gets
limited over time, thus causing the voltage dips as seen in Figure 6.5. Another time instant
where the stability condition is violated is at time t = 140 s. After this time instant, both
boundary busses are mainly below zero and considering the fact that the boundary busses
are monitored independently, t = 140 s could be a more realistic time for an alarm to be
raised.
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
4041
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
4042
Figure 6.10: NLI throughout as a function of time for ∆T = 7 s and ϵ = 1.25 · 10−3
52
==PAGE:61==
Conclusion 7
The purpose of this thesis was to implement two state of the art research methods for
voltage stability assessment using the SOSPO simulation platform. To achieve the overall
purpose, several objectives were deﬁned. The ﬁrst objective consisted of further study
of existing voltage stability assessment methods and ﬁnd a method that was suitable for
further analysis and implementation. During the study it was found that there is a lack of
information regarding a complete classiﬁcation of the various voltage stability indices. In
addition, there were methods that were simply not suitable for voltage stability assessment
due e.g. unrealistically taken assumptions. An example of such a method was given in
Chapter 4.
However, two methods were found and chosen for further analysis and implementation. The
ﬁrst method was the Thévenin equivalent assessment method. Assessing electrical power
systems based on thévenin impedances is a topic that has been of interest in the recent
years and several methods of determining thévenin impedances to assess system stability
have been formulated. The implemented method of determining thévenin impedances was
based on LU factorisation. These thévenin impedances were used to compute VSIs based
on the impedance matching condition. The impedance matching condition oﬀers a fast and
eﬀective way of assessing system conditions. However, it does not provide a reliable measure
or distance to instability as it only takes the thévenin impedance and load impedance into
account in the computations. But was chosen due to its small computational costs and
suitability for real-time assessment.
The second method that was chosen for further analysis and implementation was the New
LIVES method. This method was a generalisation of both the previous LIVES method
based on an LTC transformer and the impedance matching condition. The method oﬀered
a new way of monitoring voltage stability from a bus based on monitoring the changes
in active power transferred to a weak area and the conductance seen by the bus. The
method oﬀered a simple and fast way of providing an early detection of the onset of voltage
instability, only using bus voltage and current phasor measurements.
The idea behind choosing these two methods was to conduct assessment on a test system
using the Thévenin equivalent method to test whether it is capable of detecting instability
or not, and use this method in combination with the New LIVES method to improve the
situational awareness by providing an early instability warning.
The Thévenin equivalent assessment method and New LIVES method were implemented in
Matlab as a part of the thesis and tested on the Nordic32 test system using the SOSPO
simulation platform. The Nordic32 test system represented a highly stressed system where
the tripping of a transmission line resulted in the voltage to collapse at a bus.
53
==PAGE:62==
7. Conclusion
The testing of the Thévenin assessment equivalent method with the test case showed that
the method was not capable of detecting instability. This was due to the thévenin voltage
not being constant and thus the assumption of constant thévenin voltage for the impedance
matching condition to hold was not satisﬁed.
The testing of the New LIVES method with the test case showed that computed NLI values
were very aﬀected for a slight change in voltage. Furthermore, the diﬃculty in determining
an appropriate ϵ value for the steady-state evaluation was also another challenge in
determining NLI values for this method.
The testing show that the implementation is not capable of detecting instability, but it was
partially capable of detecting early signs of instability. The issue with the early detection
method was that the stability condition was violated several times, and therefore it was
diﬃcult to determine whether the raised alarm was false or not.
7.1
Future Work
Implement the Thévenin equivalent and New LIVES methodology in other
programming languages
In this thesis, the implementation of the Thévenin equivalent assessment method and New
LIVES method was performed in Matlab. In order to implement algorithms that can
perform better and faster, other object oriented programming languages such as C++,
Fortran and Python should be considered for future research.
Measurement considerations
The fact that the algorithms for the New LIVES method were implemented in Matlab,
enabled only a limited number of received snapshots per second. Therefore it could also be
interesting to investigate if a higher measurement sample rate improves the performance
of the New LIVES method in general and in the presence of noise.
Apply the Thévenin equivalent assessment method and New LIVES method-
ology to simulated responses of actual large-scale power systems
The New LIVES methodology has only been tested using oﬄine PSS/E simulations, and
therefore could be tested with a real-time simulator such as RTDS (Real Time digital
Simulator). Using RTDS will give simulation results that are used to generate real-time
PMU snapshots according to the IEEE C37.118 standards [27] and [28].
Evaluation of wind turbine generators
Wind turbines are not included in the Nordic32 test system. In order to have a further
precision in the representation of modern power systems, the investigation of including
asynchronous machines in the test system could be considered for future research. The
synchronous machine representation used in this thesis assumes power is injected at nodes
of constant voltage magnitude. These nodes change depending on the excitation system.
Therefore, a representation of asynchronous machines can also be investigated.
54
==PAGE:63==
7. Conclusion
7.2
Evaluation of Learning Objectives
The learning objectives which were deﬁned in Section 1.1.1 will now be evaluated.
1. Capture the anatomy of system conditions by performing a detailed system analysis
using Matlab and SOSPO simulation platform.
• In Appendix A, SOSPO Simulation Platform, the SOSPO simulation platform
together with Matlab was used to calculate the pre-fault operating conditions
for the test system, identify the events leading to voltage collapse by ﬁnding the
critical busses, and identifying the generators whose OXL are activated during
simulation.
2. Understand concepts related to voltage stability, comprising characteristics of
generators, loads and transmission systems.
• In Chapter 2, Background, the voltage stability problem has been reviewed
including a description of the main factors causing instability. Furthermore in
Section 2.3.1, a typical scenario of voltage instability is covered comprising the
characteristics of various power system components aﬀecting voltage stability.
3. Explain voltage control equipment and their eﬀect during voltage instability
• The obtained understanding of the characteristics of power system components
was used to conduct the detailed system analysis on the Nordic32 test system in
Appendix A.2. Here, voltage control equipment and their eﬀect during voltage
instability have been explained.
4. Apply one or more state of the art research methods for voltage stability assessment
in electric power systems
• Following the description of the two state of the art assessment methods in
voltage stability analysis in Chapter 4, Voltage Stability Assessment based
on Voltage Stability Indices, the implementation and application of these two
methods were described in Chapter 5, Implementation of Voltage Stability
Indices. The results of these were given in Chapter 6, Simulation Results.
5. Implement algorithms for these methods in Matlab using SOSPO simulation
platform
• The algorithms for the implemented assessment methods were made using the
SOSPO simulation platform and Matlab. In Chapter 5, Voltage Stability
Assessment based on Voltage Stability Indices, the implementation of these
algorithms have been described in detail and the associated Matlab code for
the implemented methods can be found in Appendix C, Matlab.
Based on this, it is concluded that all learning objectives have been fulﬁlled.
55
==PAGE:64==
Bibliography
[1]
G Andersson, P Donalek, R Farmer, N Hatziargyriou, I Kamwa, P Kundur,
N Martins, J Paserba, P Pourbeik, J Sanchez-Gasca, R Schulz, A Stankovic,
C Taylor, and V Vittal. Causes of the 2003 major grid blackouts in north america
and europe, and recommended means to improve system dynamic performance. Ieee
Transactions on Power Systems, 20(4):1922–1928, 2005. ISSN 15580679, 08858950.
doi: 10.1109/TPWRS.2005.857942.
[2]
C. Reis and F.P.M. Barbosa. A comparison of voltage stability indices. Melecon 2006
- 2006 Ieee Mediterranean Electrotechnical Conference, pages 1007–1010, 1007–1010,
2006. doi: 10.1109/MELCON.2006.1653269.
[3]
P. Rajalakshmi and M. Rathinakumar. A comparison of transmission line voltage
stability indices. Proceedings of the 2016 Ieee 2nd International Conference on
Advances in Electrical and Electronics, Information, Communication and Bio
Informatics (ieee Aeeicb-2016), pages 44–48, 2016.
[4]
F. Karbalaei, H. Soleymani, and S. Afsharnia. A comparison of voltage collapse
proximity indicators. 2010 9th International Power and Energy Conference, Ipec
2010, pages 5697034, 429–432, 2010. ISSN 19471270, 19471262. doi:
10.1109/IPECON.2010.5697034.
[5]
N. A. M. Ismail, A. A. M. Zin, A. Khairuddin, and S. Khokhar. A comparison of
voltage stability indices. 2014 Ieee 8th International Power Engineering and
Optimization Conference (peoco), pages 30–34, 2014. doi:
10.1109/PEOCO.2014.6814394.
[6]
Hugo Morais, Pieter Vancraeyveld, Allan Henning Birger Pedersen, Morten Lind,
Hjörtur Jóhannsson, and Jacob Østergaard. Sospo-sp: Secure operation of
sustainable power systems simulation platform for real-time system state evaluation
and control. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, pages 2318–2329, 2014.
[7]
Seyyid Ibrahim Hâdî Öztoprak. Software implementation of voltage stability
assessment method, 2017.
[8]
P Kundur, J Paserba, V Ajjarapu, G Andersson, A Bose, C Canizares,
N Hatziargyriou, D Hill, A Stankovic, C Taylor, T Van Cutsem, and V Vittal.
Deﬁnition and classiﬁcation of power system stability. Ieee Transactions on Power
Systems, 19(3):1387–1401, 2004. ISSN 15580679, 08858950.
[9]
P. Kundur and Electric Power Research Institute. Power system stability and control.
McGraw-Hill, 1994. ISBN 007035958x, 9780070359581.
[10] Thierry Van Cutsem and Costas Vournas. Voltage stability of electric power systems.
Springer US, 2008. ISBN 9780387755359.
56
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[11] J. Duncan. Glover, Mulukutla S. Sarma, and Thomas J. Overbye. Power system
analysis and design. Cengage Learning, ﬁfth ed. edition, 2012. ISBN 9781111425791.
[12] Judith Paniagua Ramirez and Jose Horacio Tovar Hernandez. Review of
methodologies for the analysis of voltage stability in power systems. 2013 Ieee
International Autumn Meeting on Power, Electronics and Computing, Ropec 2013,
page 6702758, 2013. doi: 10.1109/ROPEC.2013.6702758.
[13] Pouyan Pourbeik, Prabha S. Kundur, and Carson W. Taylor. The anatomy of a
power grid blackout. Ieee Power and Energy Magazine, 4(5):1687814, 22–29, 2006.
ISSN 15584216, 15407977. doi: 10.1109/MPAE.2006.1687814.
[14] Hjörtur Jóhannsson. Development of Early Warning Methods for Electric Power
Systems. PhD thesis, Technical University of Denmark, Department of Electrical
Engineering, 2011.
[15] N. I. Voropai and D. N. Eﬁmov. Analysis of blackout development mechanisms in
electric power systems. Ieee Pow En, pages 5–11, 2008.
[16] H. Saadat. Power System Analysis. McGraw-Hill series in electrical and computer
engineering. WCB/McGraw-Hill, 1999. ISBN 9780075616344.
[17] Angel Perez, Hjörtur Jóhannsson, Pieter Vancraeyveld, and Jacob Østergaard.
Suitability of voltage stability study methods for real-time assessment. 2013 4th
Ieee/pes Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Europe, Isgt Europe 2013, page 6695383,
2013. doi: 10.1109/ISGTEurope.2013.6695383.
[18] Angel Perez, Hjörtur Jóhannsson, and Jacob Østergaard. Evaluation of
enhancements to thevenin equivalent based methods for real-time voltage stability
assessment. Proceedings of 5th Ieee Pes Innovative Smart Grid Technologies, 2015-
(January):7028805, 2014. doi: 10.1109/isgteurope.2014.7028805.
[19] Angel Perez, Hjörtur Jóhannsson, Jacob Østergaard, Mevludin Glavic, and Thierry
Van Cutsem. Improved thévenin equivalent methods for real-time voltage stability
assessment. Proceedings of 2016 Ieee International Energy Conference, page 7513971,
2016. doi: 10.1109/ENERGYCON.2016.7513971.
[20] Jakob Glarbo Møller, Hjörtur Jóhannsson, and Jacob Østergaard. Super-positioning
of voltage sources for fast assessment of wide-area thévenin equivalents. I E E E
Transactions on Smart Grid, 8(3):1488–1493, 2017. ISSN 19493061, 19493053. doi:
10.1109/TSG.2016.2639559.
[21] Venkataramana Ajjarapu. Computational techniques for voltage stability assessment
and control. Springer, 2011.
[22] Mevludin Glavic and Thierry Van Cutsem. Wide-area detection of voltage instability
from synchronized phasor measurements. part i: Principle. Ieee Transactions on
Power Systems, 24(3):1408–1416, 2009. ISSN 15580679, 08858950. doi:
10.1109/TPWRS.2009.2023271.
57
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography
[23] Stefan Horst Sommer and Hjörtur Jóhannsson. Real-time thevenin impedance
computation. 2013 Ieee Pes Innovative Smart Grid Technologies, page 6497824, 2013.
doi: 10.1109/ISGT.2013.6497824.
[24] Costas D. Vournas and Thierry Van Cutsem. Local identiﬁcation of voltage
emergency situations. Ieee Transactions on Power Systems, 23(3):1239–1248, 2008.
ISSN 15580679, 08858950. doi: 10.1109/TPWRS.2008.926425.
[25] Costas Vournas, Charalambos Lambrou, and Marios Kanatas. Application of local
autonomous protection against voltage instability to ieee test system. Ieee Power and
Energy Society General Meeting, 2016. ISSN 19449933, 19449925.
[26] Costas Vournas, Charalambos Lambrou, and Panagiotis Mandoulidis. Voltage
stability monitoring from a transmission bus pmu. 2017 Ieee Manchester Powertech,
pages 1–1, 1–1, 2017. doi: 10.1109/PTC.2017.7981273.
[27] IEEE Std C37.118.1. IEEE Standard for synchrophasor Measurements for Power
Systems. IEEE, 2011. ISBN 0738168114.
[28] IEEE Std C37.118.2. IEEE Standard for Synchrophasor Data Transfer for Power
Systems. IEEE, 2011. ISBN 9780738168135.
[29] Bahtiyar Can Karataş. Real-time countermeasures securing power system stability
using pmu data. Master’s thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2016.
[30] Task Force 38.02.08. Long term dynamics part 2: A practical assessment of
simulation tools. Technical report, CIGRE, 1995.
[31] Hjörtur Jóhannsson. Assignment 1, ac-transmission characteristics and analysis.
Power System Stability and Control (31750), August 31, 2016.
58
==PAGE:67==
SOSPO Simulation
Platform A
A.1
Overview of Simulation Platform
The SOSPO simulation platform uses synchronised PMU data to assess the stability of
operating points in real time, as depicted in Figure A.1. In this report, oﬄine power
system simulations obtained with PSS/E are used, in order to get a full observation of
system conditions. The Snapshot Server is the main body of the SOSPO software platform
and is responsible for the collection of measurement snapshots and assessment results.
Furthermore, the Snapshot Server is reponsible for the availability of aggregated results
for any other part of the software platform that uses this information, meaning that the
Snapshot Server is accessible by all servers and clients. The snapshot server subscribes
to PMU snapshots, which contain complex bus voltages, complex branch currents and
complex generator currents from the snapshot_simulation_server. As it can be
seen in Figure A.1, the snapshot_simulation_server consists of playback of PSS/E
simulations. The PSS/E playback simulations are used to obtain load ﬂow results, that are
used to generate PMU snapshots of the simulated system according to the IEEE C37.118
standards [27] and [28]. The subscription rate of PMU-snapshots can be speciﬁed to arrive
e.g at a rate of 10 fps (frames per second), or another speciﬁed subscription rate. The
network topology used by the PSS/E simulation has its own database, which is avaible for
all client and server software.
Figure A.1: SOSPO simulation platform [29]
59
==PAGE:68==
A. SOSPO Simulation Platform
A.2
Nordic32 46-bus Test System
The test system used for implementing and testing the assessment methods is based on
the Nordic32 test system. The test system is described in the Cigré report on long term
dynamics in [30], and represents a simpliﬁed version of the Swedish network with external
connections to other Nordic countries. The network consists of four major parts:
• North with basically hydro generation and some load
• Central with much load and rather much thermal power generation
• Southwest with a few thermal units and some load
• External connected to the North. It has a mixture of generation and load
The transmission system is mainly designed for 400 kV, but there are also some regional
systems at 220 kV and 130 kV. Figure A.2 show the single line diagram of the Nordic32
system. From this ﬁgure, it can be seen that the system consists of 46 busses, 22 loads, 22
two-winding transformers, and 22 synchronous machines.
1011
1012
1013
1014
1021
1022
2031
2032
4011
4012
4021
4022
4031 4032
4041
4042
4043
4044
1041
1042
1043
1044
1045
4045
4046
4047
4051
4061
4062
4063
4071
4072
g21
g22
g2
g3
g1
g4
g6
g5
g10
g9
g12
g15
g20
g19
g11
g8
g7
g14
g13
g17
g18
g16
141
142
143
144
145
North
Central
Southwest
External
Bus Numbering
10XX →130 kV
20XX →220 kV
40XX →400 kV
Figure A.2: Single line diagram of the Nordic32 system
60
==PAGE:69==
A. SOSPO Simulation Platform
Two types of generators are used in the Nordic32 system which are:
• GENSAL: Salient pole rotor generator (13 out of 22 generators)
• GENROU: Round rotor generator (9 out of 22 generators)
The GENSAL type generators are located at busses 1012, 1013, 1014, 1021, 1022, 2032,
4011, 4012, 4021, 4031, 4041, 4071, and 4072.
The GENROU type generators are located at busses 1042, 1043, 4042, 4047, 4047, 4051,
4062, 4063, and 4063.
Each generator is equipped with with an excitation system (OXL), an automatic voltage
regulator (AVR), a power system stabiliser (PSS) and a maximum excitation limiter
(MAXEX2). Furthermore, all GENSAL type generators are equipped with the hydro
turbine governor model (HYGOV). The synchronous reactances of the generators were
given in generator base values, thus the system base values of these synchronous reactances
have to be computed. This is done in the following way:
Xd,system base =
MVA base
Generator sizeXd,generator base
(A.1)
Table A.1 show the computed synchronous reactances based on system base. In Table A.1,
generator is abbreviated with "Gen" while system is abbreviated with "Sys". The system
base for the Nordic32 test system is 100 MVA.
Gen #
Bus #
Gen type
Gen size [MVA]
Xd Gen base [pu]
Xd Sys base [pu]
1
1012
GENSAL
800
1.1
0.1375
2
1013
GENSAL
600
1.1
0.18333
3
1014
GENSAL
700
1.1
0.15714
4
1021
GENSAL
600
1.1
0.18333
5
1022
GENSAL
250
1.1
0.44
6
1042
GENROU
400
2.2
0.275
7
1043
GENROU
200
2.2
0.55
8
2032
GENSAL
850
1.1
0.12941
9
4011
GENSAL
1000
1.1
0.11
10
4012
GENSAL
800
1.1
0.1375
11
4021
GENSAL
300
1.1
0.51667
12
4031
GENSAL
350
1.1
0.31429
13
4041
GENSAL
300
1.55
0.36667
14
4042
GENROU
700
2.2
0.31429
15
4047
GENROU
600
2.2
0.36667
16
4047
GENROU
600
2.2
0.36667
17
4051
GENROU
700
2.2
0.31429
18
4062
GENROU
600
2.2
0.31429
19
4063
GENROU
600
2.2
0.31429
20
4063
GENROU
600
2.2
0.31429
21
4071
GENSAL
500
1.1
0.44
22
4072
GENSAL
4500
1.1
0.048889
Table A.1: Synchronous reactances of the generators in the Nordic32 test system
61
==PAGE:70==
A. SOSPO Simulation Platform
Gen base base represents the synchronous reactances that are referred to their own base
and sys base represents the synchronous reactances that are referred to the system base.
Minor modiﬁcations have been made to the Nordic32 system by adding ULTC-transformers
at the busses 1041-1045, which serve at the load busses. Due to this, the busses 141-145
were also added to the topology. Table A.2 gives an overview of the busses with an ULTC
connected together with the tap time for each ULTC.
From Bus
To Bus
Tap Time [s]
41
4041
6
42
4042
7.9
43
4043
6.5
46
4046
7.5
47
4047
6.1
51
4051
7.4
61
4061
6.6
62
4062
7.1
141
1041
8
142
1042
9.3
143
1043
10.1
144
1044
11.2
145
1045
12
Table A.2: Busses where an ULTC is connected in the Nordic32 test system
A.2.1
Test Scenario for the Nordic32 System
In the following, the PSS/E test case used in the analysis is described. This test case is
later used to verify the implementation of the voltage stability assessment method. The
test case is based on Nordic32 system described in the previous section and represents a
highly stressed system. This means that the occurrence of a single disturbance can lead to
instability. In this case, the tripping of a transmission line causes a generator with an AVR
and active OXL to lose synchronism with the rest of the system. The lack of synchronism
ultimately leads to aperiodic small-signal rotor angle instability for the generator and
long-term voltage instability for the system.
A.2.1.1
Pre-fault Operating Conditions
Tables A.3a and A.3b show the active and reactive power injections of the generators
in the system. It can be seen that the majority of the generators are working close to
their respective limits. Generator 22 is the reference bus with its large power reserve and
represents a slack bus.
Tables A.4a and A.4b show the active and reactive power consumption of the loads in the
system during the pre-fault condition, before being subjected to a disturbance.
62
==PAGE:71==
A. SOSPO Simulation Platform
Bus
1012
1013
1014
1021
1022
1042
1043
2032
4011
4012
4021
Generator
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Size [MVA]
800
600
700
600
250
400
200
850
1000
800
300
Pinj [MW]
-600
-300
-550
-400
-200
-380
-170
-750
-654.9
-700
-270
Qinj [Mvar]
-82.5
-68.3
-58.7
-71.1
-125
-160.3
-100
-184.3
-297.2
-100.2
-116.8
(a) Generators 1-11
Bus
4031
4041
4042
4047
4047
4051
4062
4063
4063
4071
4072
Generator
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
Size [MVA]
350
300
700
600
600
700
600
600
600
500
4500
Pinj [MW]
-310
0
-630
-550
-540
-630
-540
-540
-540
-300
-2300
Qinj [Mvar]
-175
-220.2
-350
-217.6
-213.7
-328.8
-34.1
-89.6
-89.6
-68.6
-171.3
(b) Generators 12-22
Table A.3: Power injections for the generators during pre-fault conditions. The injected power is
denoted by negative notation
Bus
41
42
43
46
47
51
61
62
63
141
142
Load
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
P [MW]
540
440
990
700
110
800
500
300
590
700
360
Q [Mvar]
128
138
262
193.7
50
253.2
112.3
80
256.2
32.7
120
(a) Loads at busses 1-11
Bus
143
144
145
1011
1012
1013
1022
2031
2032
4071
4072
Load
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
P [MW]
270
790
730
200
300
100
280
100
200
290
2010
Q [Mvar]
-55.2
108.4
104.7
80
100
40
41
30
50
508
500
(b) Loads at busses 12-22
Table A.4: Load consumption during pre-fault conditions. The load consumption is denoted by
positive notation
A.2.1.2
Analysis Results
The case was analysed over its whole simulation period, which was 190 s. The tripping of
line 4044-4032 at 5 s causes the system to become gradually unstable, eventually leading
to voltage collapse at bus 1042. Figure A.3 show the time line of the simulation events
that leads to voltage collapse of the Nordic32 system.
Figures A.4 and A.5 show the per unit voltage magnitudes of the generator busses. Due to
the tripping of line 4044-4032 causes large oscillations of the voltages. These oscillations
dampen out 20 s after the initial disturbance, and the system reaches a short-term steady-
state, until the ULTCs (under-load tap changing transformers) and OXLs start acting
at 40 s. Beyond this time, the generator bus voltages changes under the eﬀect of the
ULTCs and OXLs. At t = 40 s the ﬁrst generator (G14) gets limited, resulting in the
voltage magnitudes at busses 1042, 1043, 4031, 4041, 4042 to drop. The system reaches
63
==PAGE:72==
A. SOSPO Simulation Platform
time
Gradual decline
of voltage
ULTCs try to maintain
constant voltage
Continous decline of
voltage due to ULTC tap
Voltage
collapse
0 s
Simulation start
5 s
Tripping of line 4044-4032
causes oscillations that
dampen after 20 s
OXLs start acting
40 s
70 s
100 s
ULTCs at bus 142-1042
start acting
140 s
Further ULTC tap
results in voltage drop
170 s
The voltage at
bus 1042 collapses
190 s
Figure A.3: Events leading to voltage collapse at bus 1042
steady-state after 10 s due to the generator AVR. After 65 s, additional three generators (G7
and G13 at t ≈62 and G6 at t ≈62) gets limited, and a further voltage drop is experienced
in the before mentioned busses. This continuous drop in voltage do not stabilise, meaning
that the generators are slowly losing synchronism with the rest of the system. This is
the case for generator, G6, at bus 1042, which loses synchronism and the voltage at the
bus collapses after 170 s. Thus, the system is long-term voltage unstable, and collapses
165 s after the initial tripping of line 4044-4032. From Figures A.4 and A.5 it can be seen
that the central is mostly aﬀected. This makes sense as it is also the central part which is
heavily loaded compared to the other parts of the system.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1012
1013
1014
1021
1022
1042
1043
2032
4011
4012
4021
Figure A.4: Generator bus voltages corresponding to Table A.3a
Figure A.6 show the issue described in Section 2.4.2.1, where the ULTCs try to maintain
constant voltage until reaching their tap limit (at 140 s), after which voltage drop is
pronounced. Figure A.7 show the terminal voltages of the nearby busses of bus 1042.
64
==PAGE:73==
A. SOSPO Simulation Platform
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
1.05
1.1
4031
4041
4042
4047
4047
4051
4062
4063
4063
4071
4072
Figure A.5: Generator bus voltages corresponding to Table A.3b
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
LV side of TRF at Bus 142
HV side of TRF at Bus 1042
Figure A.6: Terminals voltages of the ULTC transformer located at bus 142-1042
65
==PAGE:74==
A. SOSPO Simulation Platform
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
1.05
1.1
LV side of TRF at Bus 141
HV side of TRF at Bus 1041
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
1.05
1.1
LV side of TRF at Bus 143
HV side of TRF at Bus 1043
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
1.05
1.1
LV side of TRF at Bus 144
HV side of TRF at Bus 1044
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
1.05
1.1
LV side of TRF at Bus 145
HV side of TRF at Bus 1045
Figure A.7: Terminals voltages of the ULTC transformer at the neighbouring busses of bus 1042
66
==PAGE:75==
A. SOSPO Simulation Platform
Figure A.8 show the terminal currents of the six generators in the the system that gets
limited as a function of time. The limited generators are listed in Table A.5:
Generator #
Bus #
Time
G14
4042
40 s
G7
1043
62 s
G13
4041
62 s
G6
1042
65 s
G12
4031
140 s
G11
4021
181 s
Table A.5: Limited generators throughout simulation
As a starting point the bus voltages are kept constant by the AVRs until the ﬁeld current
gets limited. After the current is limited, the voltage begin declining. For low system
voltages the reactive demand on the generators can exceed their ﬁeld current limits. This
will activate the generator OXLs and thereby limit the reactive power output, which in
return mean that the terminal voltage is no longer constant. As mentioned earlier, for a
constant ﬁeld current, the point of constant voltage is behind the synchronous reactance,
see Figure 5.2, which means a further increase in network reactance and worsen the voltage
collapse condition.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
G6
G7
G11
G12
G13
G14
Figure A.8: Terminal currents of the six generators with their OXL activated
67
==PAGE:76==
Testing MATLAB
Functions B
B.1
Validating the getYbus function
As mentioned earlier, the admittance matrix, shown in Eq. (2.1), describes the relationship
between injected currents and voltages. So for known bus voltages, the resulting current
injections can be found using Eq. (2.2).
The PMU snapshot of branch currents and calculated currents injections should be
completely identical in size.
This means that the getYbus, which can be found in
Appendix C.3, can be validated by subtracting the calculated current injections from
the PMU snapshots of the branch currents. The results of the subtraction are listed in
Table B.1, where |∆I| is the absolute value of the diﬀerence between the current injections
and branch currents. Values lower than 10−4 are regarded as being zeros. It can be seen
from Table B.1 that |∆I| is equal to zero for all nodes, which conﬁrms the validity of the
getYbus function.
68
==PAGE:77==
B. Testing MATLAB Functions
Bus #
Currents injections [pu]
Branch currents [pu]
|∆I| [pu]
41
0
0
0
42
0
0
0
43
0
0
0
46
0
0
0
47
0
0
0
51
0
0
0
61
0
0
0
62
0
0
0
63
0
0
0
141
0
0
0
142
0
0
0
143
0
0
0
144
0
0
0
145
0
0
0
1011
0
0
0
1012
5.3532 - 0.26366i
5.3532 - 0.26366i
0
1013
2.6661 - 0.22401i
2.6661 - 0.22401i
0
1014
4.7528 + 0.38466i
4.7528 + 0.38466i
0
1021
3.6864 - 0.2262i
3.6864 - 0.2262i
0
1022
1.5955 - 1.6132i
1.5955 - 1.6132i
0
1041
-0.92501 - 0.012772i
-0.92501 - 0.012772i
0
1042
-0.30129 - 4.1131i
-0.30129 - 4.1131i
0
1043
-0.80334 - 1.9025i
-0.80334 - 1.9025i
0
1044
0
0
0
1045
0
0
0
2031
0
0
0
2032
5.6815 - 4.125i
5.6815 - 4.125i
0
4011
6.484 - 2.9425i
6.484 - 2.9425i
0
4012
6.9242 + 0.30133i
6.9242 + 0.30133i
0
4021
1.6163 - 2.4579i
1.6163 - 2.4579i
0
4022
0
0
0
4031
1.4167 - 3.3018i
1.4167 - 3.3018i
0
4032
0
0
0
4041
-3.4195 - 2.4418i
-3.4195 - 2.4418i
0
4042
-1.0276 - 8.0319i
-1.0276 - 8.0319i
0
4043
-1.7887 - 0.78773i
-1.7887 - 0.78773i
0
4044
0
0
0
4045
0
0
0
4046
-0.90408 - 0.38494i
-0.90408 - 0.38494i
0
4047
1.2855 - 11.42i
1.2855 - 11.42i
0
4051
-2.4287 - 7.0893i
-2.4287 - 7.0893i
0
4061
0
0
0
4062
2.865 - 4.5899i
2.865 - 4.5899i
0
4063
5.5396 - 9.4428i
5.5396 - 9.4428i
0
4071
3.019 - 0.41128i
3.019 - 0.41128i
0
4072
22.797 + 1.324i
22.797 + 1.324i
0
Table B.1: The getYbus function is validated by subtracting the current injections with the sum
of branch currents
69
==PAGE:78==
B. Testing MATLAB Functions
B.2
Validating the getTheveninEquivalents function
As described in the previous section, the thévenin impedances are found using the
getTheveninEquivalents function. The function takes the system admittance matrix
and the amount of non-controlled and voltage controlled nodes as input, and its output
is the thévenin impedances in structure array form. To proof the functionality of the
implemented Matlab function, a test has been has been conducted on a smaller network,
see Figure B.1.
Figure B.1: Network used in the testing of the getTheveninEquivalents function. The test
network is from [31]
Thévenin impedances for one voltage controlled node and one non-controlled node will be
calculated. The calculation of the remaining thévenin impedances are not shown as the
same procedure is conducted, but are simply listed in Table B.2.
The Thévenin equivalent for the voltage controlled node, bus bar 1, is:
Zth,BB1 =
 
1
Za + Zb
+
1
Zc + Zd
+
1
Ze + Zf + Zg
!−1
= 0.030065 + 0.38732i
(B.1)
The Thévenin equivalent for the non-controlled node, bus bar 2 is calculated. To begin
with, two of the three parallel lines are added together:
Zeq =
 
1
Zc + Zd
+
1
Ze + Zf + Zg
!−1
(B.2)
Then a delta to star conversion for unbalanced loads is made:
ZA =
ZaZb
Za + Zb + Zeq
ZB =
ZbZeq
Za + Zb + Zeq
ZC =
ZaZeq
Za + Zb + Zeq
(B.3)
The Thévenin equivalent for bus bar 2 is then:
Zth,BB2 =
 1
ZB
+ 1
ZC
−1
+ ZA
= 0.02 + 0.26i
(B.4)
70
==PAGE:79==
B. Testing MATLAB Functions
Table B.2 lists the obtained results from the hand calculations and from the implemented
Matlab function. It can be seen from Table B.2 that there is an agreement between these
two results, thus the validity of the getTheveninEquivalents function is said to be
proven.
Bus #
Node type
Analytical calculations
Matlab function
1
vc
0.03 + 0.39i
0.03 + 0.39i
2
nc
0.02 + 0.26i
0.02 + 0.26i
3
vc
0.03 + 0.39i
0.03 + 0.39i
4
nc
0.02 + 0.27i
0.02 + 0.27i
5
nc
0.027 + 0.33i
0.027 + 0.33i
6
nc
0.027 + 0.32i
0.027 + 0.32i
Table B.2:
The Thévenin equivalents obtained from analytical calculations and from the
getTheveninEquivalents function
Another thing that is tested is the ability of the getTheveninEquivalents function
to work when the non-controlled and voltage controlled nodes change. This has been
tested on the Nordic32, see Figure A.2, test system, where these nodes change due to the
over excitation limiters of the generators in the system being activated. The change of
synchronous machine operating point from a voltage controlled node to a non-controlled
node is described in Section 5.1.3.1.
Before any generator in the system gets limited, the voltage controlled and non-controlled
nodes for the Nordic32 system are:
vcnodes =
"
16
17
18
19
20
22
23
27
28
29
30
32
34
35
40
41
43
44
45
46
#
(B.5)
ncnodes =


1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
21
24
25
26
31
33
36
37
38
39
42


(B.6)
After 70 s simulation, four generators gets limited, thus the new voltage controlled and
non-controlled nodes are:
vcnodes =
"
16
17
18
19
20
27
28
29
30
32
40
41
43
44
45
46
52
53
59
60
#
(B.7)
ncnodes =


1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
21
22
23
24
25
26
31
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
42


(B.8)
Even after the changes in voltage controlled and non-controlled nodes, it was possible
to calculate Thévenin equivalents, thus the getTheveninEquivalents function also
works for changing nodes throughout the simulation. The new voltage controlled nodes
and the nodes that have changed from voltage controlled to non-controlled are marked as
bold in Eqs. (B.6) and (B.8).
71
==PAGE:80==
MATLAB C
C.1
Voltage_stability_assessment_jdbc MATLAB
Script
1 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
2 % This function contain the implementation of the Thevenin equivalent
%
3 % method and the New LIVES method.
%
4 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
5
6 function [] = Voltage_stability_assessment_jdbc()
7
8 format shortG; %
9
10 fprintf(’\n * assessment has launched\n’);
11
12 % Configuration
13 demonstrator_assessment_src_path = ’..’;
14
15 k_snapshot_server_name = ’192.168.0.103’;%’10.59.128.140’;
% the ip adress have to
conform with the virtual machine and have to be checked for every restart
16 k_snapshot_server_port = 55606;
17 k_snapshot_simulation_server_name = k_snapshot_server_name;
18 k_snapshot_simulation_server_port = 55607;
19
20 k_subject_id = ’nordic32_2’;
% the case filen you are
working with
21 k_subject_sub_id = ’<<<none>>>’;
22 k_rate = 3;
% fps_10 (see messages.
proto file for constants)
23
24 k_publication_subject_id = ’demonstrator_matlab_32’;
25 k_no_of_snapshots_to_receive = 1901;
% the assessment is in
principle supposed to run ’forever’, but in this example only a number of snapshots
are assessed.
26 k_no_of_receive_loops = 1;
% the number of received
snapshots are supposed to be ’k_no_of_receive_loops x k_no_of_snapshots_to_receive’
27 k_sleep_between_loops = 0;
% in seconds
28 k_sleep_between_receives = 50;
% in milliseconds
29
30 k_receive_buffer_len = 1048576;
31
32 set_demonstrator_assessment_paths( demonstrator_assessment_src_path );
33
34 % Get network model data for intended assessment:
35 global system_information buses loads generators transformers lines
36
37 mvabase = system_information.mvabase;
38 % Initialise I, V og t for plot
39 % Matrix containing the generator and load bus voltages, load
40 v_gen = []; V_LoadBusses = []; I_LoadBusses = []; Load_matrix = [];
41 % Time vector used for plotting
42 t_vec = [];
43 % Transformer located at bus 1042
72
==PAGE:81==
C. MATLAB
44 v_trfLV = []; v_trfHV = []; BusVoltages = [];
45 % Generators with their OXLs activated
46 I_G6 = []; I_G7 = []; I_G11 = []; I_G12 = []; I_G13 = []; I_G14 = [];
47 % Initialise variables used in determining the NLI
48 % For bus 4041
49 G_4041 = []; P_4041 = []; G_bar_matrix_4041 = []; P_bar_matrix_4041 = [];
50 G_meas_4041 = zeros(1,10); P_meas_4041 = zeros(1,10);
51 G_deltaT_4041 = []; P_deltaT_4041 = [];
52 delta_P_meas_4041 = zeros(1,10); delta_G_meas_4041 = zeros(1,10);
53 NLI_4041 = []; NLI_matrix_4041 = []; %NLI_plot = []; idx_plot = [];
54 ss_cond_matrix_4041 = [];
55 % For bus 4042
56 G_4042 = []; P_4042 = []; G_bar_matrix_4042 = []; P_bar_matrix_4042 = [];
57 G_meas_4042 = zeros(1,10); P_meas_4042 = zeros(1,10);
58 G_deltaT_4042 = []; P_deltaT_4042 = [];
59 delta_P_meas_4042 = zeros(1,10); delta_G_meas_4042 = zeros(1,10);
60 NLI_4042 = []; NLI_matrix_4042 = [];
61 ss_cond_matrix_4042 = [];
62 N
= 10; % Amount of samples per second
63 delta_T
= 5; % Time interval
64 epsilon
= 0.85e-3;
65 % Initialise variables used in determining the MPT
66 Zth_1041 = []; Zth_1042 = [];
67 Eth_1041 = []; Eth_1042 = [];
68 LoadImpedance_1041 = []; LoadImpedance_1042 = [];
69
70
71
72 t0 = 0;
73 first_snapshot_received = 0;
74
function [message] = assess(psse1)
75
currentsGen = [];
76
currentsGen = arrayfun(@(r,i) complex(r,i), psse1.pmu_generator_currents_re,
psse1.pmu_generator_currents_im);
77
voltagesGen = arrayfun(@(r,i) complex(r,i), psse1.pmu_bus_voltages_re(generators
.pb_bus_index), psse1.pmu_bus_voltages_im(generators.pb_bus_index));
78
currentsGen_conj = arrayfun(@(x) conj(x), currentsGen);
79
powersGen = voltagesGen.*currentsGen_conj;
80
81
%% Line currents and voltages
82
% Currents
83
currentsFromTL = []; currentsToTL = [];
84
currentsFromTL = arrayfun(@(r,i) complex(r,i), snapshot.
pmu_branch_currents_from_re(lines.pb_branch_index), snapshot.
pmu_branch_currents_from_im(lines.pb_branch_index));
85
currentsFromTL = currentsFromTL.’;
86
currentsToTL
= arrayfun(@(r,i) complex(r,i), snapshot.
pmu_branch_currents_to_re(lines.pb_branch_index), snapshot.pmu_branch_currents_to_im
(lines.pb_branch_index));
87
currentsToTL
= currentsToTL.’;
88
% Voltages
89
voltagesFromBusTL = arrayfun(@(r,i) complex(r,i), snapshot.pmu_bus_voltages_re(
lines.pb_bus_from_index), snapshot.pmu_bus_voltages_im(lines.pb_bus_from_index));
90
voltagesFromBusTL = voltagesFromBusTL.’;
91
voltagesToBusTL
= arrayfun(@(r,i) complex(r,i), snapshot.pmu_bus_voltages_re(
lines.pb_bus_to_index), snapshot.pmu_bus_voltages_im(lines.pb_bus_to_index));
92
voltagesToBusTL
= voltagesToBusTL.’;
93
94
%% Transformer currents and voltages
95
% Currents
96
currentsFromTrafo = []; currentsToTrafo = [];
97
currentsFromTrafo = arrayfun(@(r,i) complex(r,i), snapshot.
pmu_branch_currents_from_re(transformers.pb_branch_from_index), snapshot.
pmu_branch_currents_from_im(transformers.pb_branch_from_index));
98
currentsFromTrafo = currentsFromTrafo.’;
73
==PAGE:82==
C. MATLAB
99
currentsToTrafo
= arrayfun(@(r,i) complex(r,i), snapshot.
pmu_branch_currents_to_re(transformers.pb_branch_from_index), snapshot.
pmu_branch_currents_to_im(transformers.pb_branch_from_index));
100
currentsToTrafo
= currentsToTrafo.’;
101
% Voltages
102
voltagesFromBusTrafo = arrayfun(@(r,i) complex(r,i), snapshot.
pmu_bus_voltages_re(transformers.pb_bus_from_index), snapshot.pmu_bus_voltages_im(
transformers.pb_bus_from_index));
103
voltagesFromBusTrafo = voltagesFromBusTrafo.’;
104
voltagesToBusTrafo
= arrayfun(@(r,i) complex(r,i), snapshot.
pmu_bus_voltages_re(transformers.pb_bus_to_index), snapshot.pmu_bus_voltages_im(
transformers.pb_bus_to_index));
105
voltagesToBusTrafo
= voltagesToBusTrafo.’;
106
107
%% Finding the load current, load impedance and load consumption
108
% Variable used for finding the load current
109
currentsSum = zeros(length(buses.bus_number),1);
110
111
for k=1:length(lines.bus_number_from)
112
currentsSum(lines.pb_bus_from_index(k)) = currentsSum(lines.
pb_bus_from_index(k))+currentsFromTL(k);
113
currentsSum(lines.pb_bus_to_index(k))
= currentsSum(lines.pb_bus_to_index(
k))+currentsToTL(k);
114
end
115
116
for k=1:length(transformers.bus_number_from) %amount of generators og
transformers
117
currentsSum(transformers.pb_bus_from_index(k)) = currentsSum(transformers.
pb_bus_from_index(k))+currentsFromTrafo(k);
118
currentsSum(transformers.pb_bus_to_index(k)) = currentsSum(transformers.
pb_bus_to_index(k))+currentsToTrafo(k);
119
currentsSum(generators.pb_bus_index(k)) = currentsSum(generators.
pb_bus_index(k))+currentsGen(k);
120
end
121
122
% Finding the relevant indicies for the load current
123
global LoadBusIndices %tempBusVoltages currentsToTrafo
124
[BusNumbers, ~, LoadBusIndices] = intersect(loads.bus_number,buses.bus_number);
125
% Load current
126
LoadCurrent
= -currentsSum(LoadBusIndices);
127
LoadCurrent_conj = arrayfun(@(x) conj(x), LoadCurrent);
128
tempBusVoltages
= (arrayfun(@(r,i) complex(r,i), snapshot.pmu_bus_voltages_re(
buses.pb_bus_index), snapshot.pmu_bus_voltages_im(buses.pb_bus_index))).’;
129
BusVoltages
= [BusVoltages, abs(tempBusVoltages)];
130
LoadBusVoltages
= tempBusVoltages(LoadBusIndices);
131
132
% Load consumption
133
Load = mvabase*arrayfun(@(v,cc) v * cc, LoadBusVoltages, LoadCurrent_conj);
134
Load_matrix = [Load_matrix Load];
135
136
% Load impedance and admittance
137
Loadimpedance = LoadBusVoltages./LoadCurrent;
138
Loadadmittance = 1./Loadimpedance;
139
140
Loadimp_1041 = tempBusVoltages(21)/-currentsToTrafo(18);
141
Loadadm_1041 = 1/Loadimp_1041;
142
Loadimp_1042 = tempBusVoltages(22)/-currentsToTrafo(19);
143
Loadadm_1042 = 1/Loadimp_1042;
144
LoadImpedance_1041 = [LoadImpedance_1041 Loadimp_1041];
145
LoadImpedance_1042 = [LoadImpedance_1042 Loadimp_1042];
146
147
% Storing results in matrix that will be saved
148
tempV_LoadBusses = abs(LoadBusVoltages);
149
V_LoadBusses = [V_LoadBusses tempV_LoadBusses];
150
tempI_LoadBusses = abs(LoadCurrent);
151
I_LoadBusses = [I_LoadBusses tempI_LoadBusses];
74
==PAGE:83==
C. MATLAB
152
153
% branchSum is used to verify the Ybus
154
branchSum = zeros(length(buses.bus_number),1);
155
156
for k=1:length(lines.bus_number_from)
157
branchSum(lines.pb_bus_from_index(k)) = branchSum(lines.pb_bus_from_index(k)
)+currentsFromTL(k);
158
branchSum(lines.pb_bus_to_index(k))
= branchSum(lines.pb_bus_to_index(k))+
currentsToTL(k);
159
end
160
161
for k=1:length(transformers.bus_number_from) %amount of transformers
162
branchSum(transformers.pb_bus_from_index(k)) = branchSum(transformers.
pb_bus_from_index(k))+currentsFromTrafo(k);
163
branchSum(transformers.pb_bus_to_index(k)) = branchSum(transformers.
pb_bus_to_index(k))+currentsToTrafo(k);
164
branchSum(LoadBusIndices(k)) = branchSum(LoadBusIndices(k))+LoadCurrent(k);
165
end
166
167
%% Plots of pre-fault operation conditions
168
t = double(snapshot.seconds_of_century);
169
t_ms = double(snapshot.milliseconds_of_second);
170
t = t+t_ms/1000;
171
if(~first_snapshot_received)
172
t0=t;
173
first_snapshot_received=1;
174
end
175
176
% Time vector
177
t_vec = [t_vec,t];
178
% Generator bus voltages
179
temp = abs(voltagesGen).’;
180
v_gen = [v_gen,temp];
181
% The LV and HV side of the transformers
182
tempTrfLV = abs(voltagesFromBusTrafo); v_trfLV = [v_trfLV, tempTrfLV];
183
tempTrfHV = abs(voltagesToBusTrafo);
v_trfHV = [v_trfHV, tempTrfHV];
184
% Terminal currents of the generators with their OXLs activated
185
tempI_G6
= abs(currentsGen(6));
I_G6
= [I_G6, tempI_G6];
186
tempI_G7
= abs(currentsGen(7));
I_G7
= [I_G7, tempI_G7];
187
tempI_G11 = abs(currentsGen(11)); I_G11 = [I_G11, tempI_G11];
188
tempI_G12 = abs(currentsGen(12)); I_G12 = [I_G12, tempI_G12];
189
tempI_G13 = abs(currentsGen(13)); I_G13 = [I_G13, tempI_G13];
190
tempI_G14 = abs(currentsGen(14)); I_G14 = [I_G14, tempI_G14];
191
i_LimitedGens = [I_G6;I_G7;I_G11;I_G12;I_G13;I_G14];
192
% Saving the results in csv files
193
if no_of_received_snapshots == k_no_of_snapshots_to_receive
194
csvwrite(’Nordic32_results/BusVoltages.csv’,BusVoltages); % Bus voltages
195
csvwrite(’Nordic32_results/Load_matrix.csv’,Load_matrix); % Load
consumptions
196
csvwrite(’Nordic32_results/V_LoadBusses.csv’,V_LoadBusses); % Load bus
voltages
197
csvwrite(’Nordic32_results/I_LoadBusses.csv’,I_LoadBusses); % Load bus
currents
198
csvwrite(’Nordic32_results/time_vec.csv’,t_vec); % time vector
199
csvwrite(’Nordic32_results/v_gen.csv’,v_gen); % matrix containing generator
bus voltages
200
csvwrite(’Nordic32_results/i_LimitedGens.csv’,i_LimitedGens); % matrix
containing generator currents of the limited generators
201
csvwrite(’Nordic32_results/v_trfLV.csv’,v_trfLV); % matrix containing low
voltage side of transformer bus voltages
202
csvwrite(’Nordic32_results/v_trfHV.csv’,v_trfHV); % matrix containing high
voltage side of transformer bus voltages
203
csvwrite(’Nordic32_results/LoadImpedance_1041.csv’,LoadImpedance_1041);
204
csvwrite(’Nordic32_results/LoadImpedance_1042.csv’,LoadImpedance_1042);
205
end
206
75
==PAGE:84==
C. MATLAB
207
%% Calculating Ybus, the Thevenin representation of the system and the MPT
208
209
% Calculating the bus admittance matrix
210
Loadadmittance([10 11])=0;
211
212
Ybus = getYbus(currentsFromTL,currentsToTL,voltagesFromBusTL,voltagesToBusTL,...
213
currentsFromTrafo,currentsToTrafo,voltagesFromBusTrafo,voltagesToBusTrafo,
...
214
Loadadmittance);
215
216
Ybus(21,21) = Ybus(21,21)+Loadadm_1041;
217
Ybus(22,22) = Ybus(22,22)+Loadadm_1042;
218
219
% Validating the getYbus function
220
Inodal = Ybus*tempBusVoltages; % Node currents
221
I_delta = abs(Inodal-branchSum);%<10e-4
222
223
% Vector showing the OXL status of the generators
224
genOEL = snapshot.pmu_generator_oel_status_signals;
225
vc = generators.pb_bus_index;
226
% Brug sort, to outputs (sortering, index) --> index skal bruges her
227
[~, indexGen] = sort([generators.GENSAL_pbvoltageindex; generators.
GENROU_pbvoltageindex]);
228
XdGenBase = [generators.GENSAL_Xd; generators.GENROU_Xd];
229
% Vector containing the synchronous reactance of the generators
230
XdSysBase = zeros(length(generators.pb_bus_index),1);
231
232
for k=1:length(generators.pb_bus_index) % Amount of generators
233
% pu synkron reaktans v rdier for generatorerne. Skal tilfjes til
234
% Ybus diagonalen i
form af ekstra kolonner --> 46+22=68
235
XdSysBase(k) = system_information.mvabase./generators.mvasize(indexGen(k)).*
XdGenBase(indexGen(k));
236
Ybus(length(buses.bus_number)+k,length(buses.bus_number)+k) = 1/(1i*
XdSysBase(k));
237
Ybus(length(buses.bus_number)+k,generators.pb_bus_index(k)) = -1/(1i*
XdSysBase(k));
238
Ybus(generators.pb_bus_index(k),length(buses.bus_number)+k) = -1/(1i*
XdSysBase(k));
239
if genOEL(k) ~= 0
240
vc(k) = length(buses.bus_number)+k;
241
Ybus(generators.pb_bus_index(k),generators.pb_bus_index(k)) = ...
242
Ybus(generators.pb_bus_index(k),generators.pb_bus_index(k))+1/(1i*
XdSysBase(k));
243
end
244
end
245
246
% Determine voltage controlled and non-controlled nodes
247
vc = unique(vc); % vc = voltage controlled nodes, unique removes repeating
elements (sorted)
248
nc = setdiff(buses.pb_bus_index,vc); % nc = non-controlled nodes
249
250
% Thevenin equivalents of the system
251
thevenin_equivalents = getTheveninEquivalents(Ybus,vc,nc);
252
253
if find(nc==21)
254
Zth_1041 = [Zth_1041 thevenin_equivalents.Zth_nc(nc==21)];
255
Zth_1041_act = ( Zth_1041(end)*Loadimp_1041 )/...
256
( Loadimp_1041-Zth_1041(end) );
257
Eth_1041 = [Eth_1041 Zth_1041_act*-currentsToTrafo(18)+tempBusVoltages(21)];
258
end
259
260
if find(vc==22)
261
Zth_1042 = [Zth_1042 0];
262
Zth_1042_act = ( thevenin_equivalents.Zth_vc(vc==22)*Loadimp_1042 )/...
263
( Loadimp_1042-thevenin_equivalents.Zth_vc(vc==22) );
264
Eth_1042 = [Eth_1042 Zth_1042_act*-currentsToTrafo(19)+tempBusVoltages(22)];
76
==PAGE:85==
C. MATLAB
265
elseif find(nc==22)
266
Zth_1042 = [Zth_1042 thevenin_equivalents.Zth_nc(nc==22)];
267
Zth_1042_act = ( Zth_1042(end)*Loadimp_1042 )/...
268
( Loadimp_1042-Zth_1042(end) );
269
Eth_1042 = [Eth_1042 Zth_1042_act*-currentsToTrafo(19)+tempBusVoltages(22)];
270
end
271
272
% Saving the results in csv files
273
if no_of_received_snapshots == k_no_of_snapshots_to_receive
274
csvwrite(’VSI_results/Zth_1041.csv’,Zth_1041);
275
csvwrite(’VSI_results/Zth_1042.csv’,Zth_1042);
276
csvwrite(’VSI_results/Eth_1041.csv’,Eth_1041);
277
csvwrite(’VSI_results/Eth_1042.csv’,Eth_1042);
278
end
279
280
%% Calculation of NLI
281
% Boundary bus 4041
282
I_4041
= -(currentsToTL(31)+currentsToTL(32));
283
I_4041_conj = arrayfun(@(x) conj(x), I_4041);
284
powers
= arrayfun(@(v,cc) v * cc, tempBusVoltages(34), I_4041_conj);
285
temp_P
= real(powers);
286
P_4041
= [P_4041, temp_P];
287
Y
= I_4041./tempBusVoltages(34);
288
temp_G
= real(Y);
289
G_4041
= [G_4041, temp_G];
290
291
t
292
if no_of_received_snapshots < k_no_of_snapshots_to_receive
293
% Tilfjer de seneste fem G v rdier i G_meas
294
G_meas_4041 = [G_meas_4041(:,2:end), temp_G];
295
P_meas_4041 = [P_meas_4041(:,2:end), temp_P];
296
297
G_bar = zeros(size(G_meas_4041,1),1);
298
P_bar = zeros(size(P_meas_4041,1),1);
299
300
if all(G_meas_4041,1)==1
301
% Summerer hver column vector og dividerer med N
302
for i = 1:size(G_meas_4041,1)
303
G_bar(i,1) = sum(G_meas_4041(i,:))/N;
304
P_bar(i,1) = sum(P_meas_4041(i,:))/N;
305
end
306
307
G_bar_matrix_4041 = [G_bar_matrix_4041 G_bar];
308
P_bar_matrix_4041 = [P_bar_matrix_4041 P_bar];
309
310
% F rer G_bar og P_bar v rdierne i G_deltaT og P_deltaT matrix
311
G_deltaT_4041 = [G_deltaT_4041, G_bar];
312
P_deltaT_4041 = [P_deltaT_4041, P_bar];
313
314
% Gemmer de seneste m linger G_deltaT og P_deltaT v rdier ,
315
% svarende til delta_T sekunder
316
if size(G_deltaT_4041,2)>delta_T+1
317
G_deltaT_4041 = G_deltaT_4041(:,2:end);
318
P_deltaT_4041 = P_deltaT_4041(:,2:end);
319
end
320
end
321
if t-t0>20 %Set to 30s as we are not interested in the transient period
322
% Udregner delta_G og delta_P v rdier
323
delta_P = []; delta_G = [];
324
delta_G = G_deltaT_4041(:,end)-G_deltaT_4041(:,end-delta_T);
325
delta_P = P_deltaT_4041(:,end)-P_deltaT_4041(:,end-delta_T);
326
327
rows_cond = find(delta_G./G_4041(:,end-N*delta_T)<epsilon);
328
ss_cond_matrix_4041 = [ss_cond_matrix_4041 delta_G./G_4041(:,end-N*
delta_T)];
329
delta_G(rows_cond) = NaN;
77
==PAGE:86==
C. MATLAB
330
delta_P(rows_cond) = NaN;
331
% Gemmer de seneste N v rdier
332
delta_G_meas_4041 = [delta_G_meas_4041(:,2:end), delta_G];
333
delta_P_meas_4041 = [delta_P_meas_4041(:,2:end), delta_P];
334
335
if all(delta_G_meas_4041,1)==1
336
for i=1:length(delta_G)
337
temp_delta_G = delta_G_meas_4041(i,:);
338
temp_delta_P = delta_P_meas_4041(i,:);
339 %
idx = find( ~isnan(temp_delta_G) );
340
delta_G_mean(i) = sum(temp_delta_G,’omitnan’)/N;%mean(
temp_delta_G(idx) );
341
delta_P_mean(i) = sum(temp_delta_P,’omitnan’)/N;%mean(
temp_delta_P(idx) );
342
NLI_4041(i) = delta_P_mean(i)/delta_G_mean(i);
343
end
344
end
345
346
NLI_matrix_4041 = [NLI_matrix_4041, NLI_4041.’];
347
348
end
349
end
350
351
% Boundary bus 4042
352
I_4042
= -(currentsToTL(27)+currentsToTL(33));
353
I_4042_conj = arrayfun(@(x) conj(x), I_4042);
354
powers
= arrayfun(@(v,cc) v * cc, tempBusVoltages(35), I_4042_conj);
355
temp_P
= real(powers);
356
P_4042
= [P_4042, temp_P];
357
Y
= I_4042./tempBusVoltages(35);
358
temp_G
= real(Y);
359
G_4042
= [G_4042, temp_G];
360
361
if no_of_received_snapshots < k_no_of_snapshots_to_receive
362
% Tilfjer de seneste fem G v rdier i G_meas
363
G_meas_4042 = [G_meas_4042(:,2:end), temp_G];
364
P_meas_4042 = [P_meas_4042(:,2:end), temp_P];
365
366
G_bar = zeros(size(G_meas_4042,1),1);
367
P_bar = zeros(size(P_meas_4042,1),1);
368
369
if all(G_meas_4042,1)==1
370
% Summerer hver column vector og dividerer med N
371
for i = 1:size(G_meas_4042,1)
372
G_bar(i,1) = sum(G_meas_4042(i,:))/N;
373
P_bar(i,1) = sum(P_meas_4042(i,:))/N;
374
end
375
376
G_bar_matrix_4042 = [G_bar_matrix_4042 G_bar];
377
P_bar_matrix_4042 = [P_bar_matrix_4042 P_bar];
378
379
% F rer G_bar og P_bar v rdierne i G_deltaT og P_deltaT matrix
380
G_deltaT_4042 = [G_deltaT_4042, G_bar];
381
P_deltaT_4042 = [P_deltaT_4042, P_bar];
382
383
% Gemmer de seneste m linger G_deltaT og P_deltaT v rdier ,
384
% svarende til delta_T sekunder
385
if size(G_deltaT_4042,2)>delta_T+1
386
G_deltaT_4042 = G_deltaT_4042(:,2:end);
387
P_deltaT_4042 = P_deltaT_4042(:,2:end);
388
end
389
end
390
if t-t0>20 %Set to 30s as we are not interested in the transient period
391
% Udregner delta_G og delta_P v rdier
392
delta_P = []; delta_G = [];
393
delta_G = G_deltaT_4042(:,end)-G_deltaT_4042(:,end-delta_T);
78
==PAGE:87==
C. MATLAB
394
delta_P = P_deltaT_4042(:,end)-P_deltaT_4042(:,end-delta_T);
395
396
rows_cond = find(delta_G./G_4042(:,end-N*delta_T)<epsilon);
397
ss_cond_matrix_4042 = [ss_cond_matrix_4042 delta_G./G_4042(:,end-N*
delta_T)];
398
delta_G(rows_cond) = NaN;
399
delta_P(rows_cond) = NaN;
400
% Gemmer de seneste N v rdier
401
delta_G_meas_4042 = [delta_G_meas_4042(:,2:end), delta_G];
402
delta_P_meas_4042 = [delta_P_meas_4042(:,2:end), delta_P];
403
404
%
NLI = delta_P/delta_G;
405
if all(delta_G_meas_4042,1)==1
406
for i=1:length(delta_G)
407
temp_delta_G = delta_G_meas_4042(i,:);
408
temp_delta_P = delta_P_meas_4042(i,:);
409
idx = find( ~isnan(temp_delta_G) );
410
delta_G_mean(i) = sum(temp_delta_G,’omitnan’)/N;%mean(
temp_delta_G(idx) );
411
delta_P_mean(i) = sum(temp_delta_P,’omitnan’)/N;%mean(
temp_delta_P(idx) );
412
NLI_4042(i) = delta_P_mean(i)/delta_G_mean(i);
413
end
414
end
415
416
NLI_matrix_4042 = [NLI_matrix_4042, NLI_4042.’];
417
418
end
419
end
420
421
422
if no_of_received_snapshots == k_no_of_snapshots_to_receive
423
csvwrite(’NLI_results/G_4041.csv’,G_4041);
424
csvwrite(’NLI_results/P_4041.csv’,P_4041);
425
csvwrite(’NLI_results/G_avg_4041.csv’,G_bar_matrix_4041);
426
csvwrite(’NLI_results/P_avg_4041.csv’,P_bar_matrix_4041);
427
csvwrite(’NLI_results/ss_cond_matrix_4041.csv’,ss_cond_matrix_4041);
428
csvwrite(’NLI_results/NLI_4041.csv’,NLI_matrix_4041);
429
csvwrite(’NLI_results/G_4042.csv’,G_4042);
430
csvwrite(’NLI_results/P_4042.csv’,P_4042);
431
csvwrite(’NLI_results/G_avg_4042.csv’,G_bar_matrix_4042);
432
csvwrite(’NLI_results/P_avg_4042.csv’,P_bar_matrix_4042);
433
csvwrite(’NLI_results/ss_cond_matrix_4042.csv’,ss_cond_matrix_4042);
434
csvwrite(’NLI_results/NLI_4042.csv’,NLI_matrix_4042);
435
end
436
437
% Sender en besked der angiver snapshot nummer i display vinduet
438
message = pb_read_sospo_messages__GenericMessage(); % sending a message request
(type 2)
439
end
440
441 % Connect a socket to the snapshot server
442 socket = udp(k_snapshot_server_name, k_snapshot_server_port );
443 set(socket, ’InputBufferSize’, k_receive_buffer_len );
444 set(socket, ’DatagramTerminateMode’, ’on’);
445 set(socket, ’Timeout’, 120);
446 fopen(socket);
447 fprintf(’\n * assessment has connected to the snapshot server\n’);
448
449 % Setup a halt request for the snapshot server and send it:
450 halt_request = generate_halt_request(k_publication_subject_id, k_subject_id);
451 write_message(socket, halt_request);
452 fprintf(’ * assessment has written halt request for %s to server\n’,
k_publication_subject_id);
453
454 % Read the server’s reply, but do not check the reply:
79
==PAGE:88==
C. MATLAB
455 halt_reply = pb_read_sospo_messages__GenericMessage( read_message(socket) );
456
457 % Setup a publication request for the snapshot server and send it
458 publication_request = generate_publication_request(k_publication_subject_id,
k_subject_id, k_rate);
459 write_message(socket, publication_request);
460 fprintf(’ * assessment has written publication request for %s to server\n’,
k_publication_subject_id);
461
462 % Read the server’s reply
463 publication_reply = pb_read_sospo_messages__GenericMessage( read_message(socket) );
464 publication_port = check_publication_reply( publication_reply );
465 if publication_port < 0
466
fclose(socket);
467
delete(socket);
468
return;
469 end
470
471 % Setup a subscription request for the snapshot server and send it
472 subscription_request = generate_subscription_request(k_subject_id, k_subject_sub_id,
k_rate);
473 write_message(socket, subscription_request);
474 fprintf(’ * assessment has written a subscription request for %s to the server\n’,
k_subject_id);
475
476 % Read the server’s reply
477 subscription_reply = pb_read_sospo_messages__GenericMessage( read_message(socket) );
478 subscription_id = check_subscription_reply( subscription_reply );
479 if subscription_id < 0
480
fclose(socket);
481
delete(socket);
482
return;
483 end
484
485 % Connect the publication socket
486 pub_socket = udp(k_snapshot_server_name, publication_port );
487 set(pub_socket, ’InputBufferSize’, k_receive_buffer_len);
488 set(pub_socket, ’OutputBufferSize’, k_receive_buffer_len);
489 set(pub_socket, ’DatagramTerminateMode’, ’on’);
490 fopen(pub_socket);
491 fprintf(’ * assessment has connected a separate port to the snapshot server for
publication\n’);
492
493 % Connect a socket to the snapshot simulation server
494 sim_socket = udp(k_snapshot_simulation_server_name, k_snapshot_simulation_server_port );
495 set(sim_socket, ’InputBufferSize’, k_receive_buffer_len );
496 set(sim_socket, ’DatagramTerminateMode’, ’on’);
497 fopen(sim_socket);
498 fprintf(’ * assessment has connected to the simulation server\n’);
499
500 % Setup a stop request message for the snapshot simulation server and send it (all
clients and assessments using this server will stop receiving data)
501 stop_request = generate_stop_request(k_subject_id);
502 write_message(sim_socket, stop_request);
503 stop_reply = pb_read_sospo_messages__GenericMessage( read_message(sim_socket) );
504
505 % Setup a start request message for the snapshot simulation server and send it
506 start_request = generate_start_at_request(k_subject_id, 0); % andet argument angiver
hvor i simuleringen man starter
507 write_message(sim_socket, start_request);
508 start_reply = pb_read_sospo_messages__GenericMessage( read_message(sim_socket) );
509 fprintf(’ * assessment has written start request for %s to simulation server\n’,
k_subject_id);
510
511 % No check of the replies on stop and start TBD/TBV!!!
512
80
==PAGE:89==
C. MATLAB
513 % Receive a series of snapshots as Google protocol buffers
514 % We simulate an assessment here by definining a new snapshot and writing it to the
snapshot server.
515 % We print some info every 10 snapshots (for fun).
516 no_of_received_snapshots = 0;
517
518 loop_no = 1;
519
520 fprintf(’\n’);
521
522 while (loop_no <= k_no_of_receive_loops) ...
523
&& (strcmp(get(socket, ’Status’),’open’) == 1)
524
525
last_snapshot_received = 0;
526
527
while (last_snapshot_received == 0) ...
528
&& (strcmp(get(socket, ’Status’),’open’) == 1)
529
530
snapshot_message = pb_read_sospo_messages__GenericMessage( read_message(socket)
);
531
snapshot = snapshot_message.psse1;
532
no_of_received_snapshots = no_of_received_snapshots + 1;
533
534
assessment_snapshot = assess(snapshot);
535
write_message(pub_socket, assessment_snapshot);
536
537
if rem(no_of_received_snapshots-1,10) == 0
538
timestamp = datestr( double(snapshot.seconds_of_century)/86400. + datetime(’
today’), 31);
539
fprintf(’ * snapshot #%d, id=%d\n’, no_of_received_snapshots, snapshot.id);
540
fprintf(’
- timestamp=%s.%d\n’, timestamp, snapshot.milliseconds_of_second
);
541
end
542
543
if (no_of_received_snapshots >= loop_no * k_no_of_snapshots_to_receive)
544
last_snapshot_received = 1;
545
end
546
%
547
pause(k_sleep_between_receives/1000.);
548
end
549
550
% Setup a suspension request and send it:
551
suspend_request = generate_suspend_request(k_subject_id);
552
write_message(sim_socket, suspend_request);
553
fprintf(’\n * assessment has written a suspend request for subject %s to the
simulation server\n’, k_subject_id);
554
555
% Read the server’s reply
556
suspension_reply = pb_read_sospo_messages__GenericMessage( read_message(sim_socket)
);
557
suspended_at = check_suspension_reply( suspension_reply );
558
559
% Sleep a while:
560
pause(k_sleep_between_loops);
561
562
% Setup a suspension request and send it:
563
resume_request = generate_resume_request(k_subject_id);
564
write_message(sim_socket, resume_request);
565
fprintf(’\n * assessment has written a resume request for subject %s to the
simulation server\n\n’, k_subject_id);
566
resume_reply = pb_read_sospo_messages__GenericMessage( read_message(sim_socket) );
567
568
% Increase loop counter:
569
loop_no = loop_no + 1;
570 end
571
81
==PAGE:90==
C. MATLAB
572 % Setup a subscription cancellation request and send it:
573 cancel_request = generate_cancel_request(k_subject_id, subscription_id);
574 write_message(socket, cancel_request);
575 fprintf(’\n * assessment has written a cancellation request for subscription %d for
subject %s to the snapshot server\n’, subscription_id, k_subject_id);
576 % No check of reply on cancellation request
577
578 % Setup a stop request and send it:
579 stop_request = generate_stop_request(k_subject_id);
580 write_message(sim_socket, stop_request);
581 fprintf(’\n * assessment has written a stop request for subject %s to the simulation
server\n’, k_subject_id);
582
583 % Close the connections
584 fclose(socket);
585 delete(socket);
586 fclose(pub_socket);
587 delete(pub_socket);
588 fclose(sim_socket);
589 delete(sim_socket);
590
591 fprintf(’\n * assessment has terminated\n\n’);
592
593 end
594
595 function [] = set_demonstrator_assessment_paths(demonstrator_assessment_src_path)
596 % Add the appropriate paths to the protobuf-matlab and mysql stuff
597 addpath( [ demonstrator_assessment_src_path ’/protobuf_and_matlab/protobuf-matlab/
protobuflib’ ] )
598 addpath( [ demonstrator_assessment_src_path ’/protobuf_and_matlab/
protocol_buffers_interface_definitions_matlab’ ] )
599 addpath( [ demonstrator_assessment_src_path ’/db_utils’ ] )
600 addpath( [ demonstrator_assessment_src_path ’/gpb_utils’ ] )
601 end
82
==PAGE:91==
C. MATLAB
C.2
db_reader_raw_jdbc MATLAB Script
1 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
2 % This M-file return the power system model data from the database in the %
3 % form of seven structs. These are namely: system_information, buses,
%
4 % loads, shunts, generators, transformers, and lines
%
5 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
6 clc; clear;
7
8 addpath(genpath(’func’));
% add the path of functions to be used in the script
9
10 db_schema = ’nordic32_2’;
% case to be investigated
11 db_host_port = ’192.168.56.101:3306’;
% the ip adress have to conform with the virtual
machine and have to be checked for every restart
12 db_user = ’sospo’;
% username of the virtual machine
13 db_password = ’EpuwE13’;
% password of the virtual machine
14
15 global system_information buses loads shunts generators transformers lines
16
17 nodata(1,1) = {’No Data’};
18
19 % Extract host and port number from the db_host_port string:
20 db_host = regexprep(db_host_port, ’:(\d+)$’ , ’’);
21 db_port = cell2mat(textscan(regexprep(db_host_port, ’^[^:]*:’, ’’), ’%d32’));
22
23 % Open database:
24 conn = database(db_schema, db_user, db_password, ’Vendor’, ’MySQL’, ’Server’, db_host, ’
PortNumber’, db_port);
25
26 % -------------------------------------------------------------------------
27 % Get system information:
28 s1 = ’select systemNumber, systemTitle, simulationSystem, rev, MVAbase, xfrrat, nxfrat,
baseFrequency from ’;
29 s2 = db_schema;
30 s3 = ’.SystemInformation where systemNumber > 0’;
31 stmt = [s1 s2 s3];
32
33 curs = exec(conn, stmt);
34 curs = fetch(curs);
35 data = curs.Data;
36 close(curs);
37
38 % NB: No check that the system_information table is empty. It is assumed that there is
always one record in the system_information table.
39
40 system_information.system_number = int64(cell2mat(data(:,1)));
41 system_information.system_title = data(:,2);
42 system_information.simulation_system = map_simulation_system(cell2mat(data(:,3)));
43 system_information.rev = cell2mat(data(:,4));
44 system_information.mvabase = cell2mat(data(:,5));
45 system_information.xfrrat = cell2mat(data(:,6));
46 system_information.nxfrat = cell2mat(data(:,7));
47 system_information.base_frequency = cell2mat(data(:,8));
48
49 % -------------------------------------------------------------------------
50 % Get data for buses:
51 s1 = ’select
busNumber, busName, baseVoltageLevel, typeCode, pbVoltageIndex,
pbFrequencyIndex, shuntAdmittanceActiveComponent,’;
52 s2 = ’ shuntAdmittanceReactiveComponent, areaNumber, zoneNumber, ownerNumber,
busvoltagemagnitude, busvoltagephaseangle, nvhi, nvlo, evhi, evlo from ’;
53 s3 = db_schema;
54 s4 = ’.Bus where busNumber > 0 order by pbVoltageIndex’;
55 stmt = [s1 s2 s3 s4];
56
57 curs = exec(conn,stmt);
58 curs = fetch(curs);
83
==PAGE:92==
C. MATLAB
59 data = curs.Data;
60 close(curs);
61
62 % NB: No check that the bus table is empty. Assumed that there is always at least one
bus
63 % (probably at least two buses as there should also be at least one branch).
64
65 buses.bus_number = int32(cell2mat(data(:,1)));
66 buses.bus_name = data(:,2);
67 buses.base_voltage_level = cell2mat(data(:,3));
68 buses.type_code = arrayfun(@map_psse_bus_type_code, data(:,4));
69 buses.pb_bus_index = int32(cell2mat(data(:,5)) + 1);
70 buses.pb_frequency_index = int32(cell2mat(data(:,6)) + 1);
71 buses.shunt_admittance_active_component = cell2mat(data(:,7));
72 buses.shunt_admittance_reactive_component = cell2mat(data(:,8));
73 buses.area_number = int32(cell2mat(data(:,9)));
74 buses.zone_number = int32(cell2mat(data(:,10)));
75 buses.owner_number = int32(cell2mat(data(:,11)));
76 buses.bus_voltage_magnitude = cell2mat(data(:,12));
77 buses.bus_voltage_phase_angle = cell2mat(data(:,13));
78 buses.nvhi = cell2mat(data(:,14));
79 buses.nvlo = cell2mat(data(:,15));
80 buses.evhi = cell2mat(data(:,16));
81 buses.evlo = cell2mat(data(:,17));
82
83 % -------------------------------------------------------------------------
84 % Get data for loads
85 s1 = ’select busNumber, loadId, loadName, loadStatus, areaNumber, zoneNumber,
constantLoadActivePower, constantLoadReactivePower, ’;
86 s2 = ’constantCurrentLoadActivePower, constantCurrentLoadReactivePower,
constantAdmittanceLoadActivepower, constantAdmittanceLoadReactivepower, ownerNumber,
’;
87 s3 = ’scale, intrpt, pbloadindex from ’;
88 s4 = db_schema;
89 s5 = ’.Load where busNumber > 0 order by pbloadindex’;
90 stmt = [s1 s2 s3 s4 s5];
91
92 curs = exec(conn,stmt);
93 curs = fetch(curs);
94 data = curs.Data;
95 close(curs);
96
97 % NB: Assumed there is at least one load.
98 loads.bus_number = int32(cell2mat(data(:,1)));
99 loads.load_id = int32(cell2mat(data(:,2)));
100 loads.load_name = data(:,3);
101 loads.load_status = arrayfun(@map_service_status, data(:,4));
102 loads.area_number = int32(cell2mat(data(:,5)));
103 loads.zone_number = int32(cell2mat(data(:,6)));
104 loads.constant_load_active_power = cell2mat(data(:,7));
105 loads.constant_load_reactive_power = cell2mat(data(:,8));
106 loads.constant_current_load_active_power = cell2mat(data(:,9));
107 loads.constant_current_load_reactive_power = cell2mat(data(:,10));
108 loads.constant_admittance_load_active_power = cell2mat(data(:,11));
109 loads.constant_admittance_load_reactive_power = cell2mat(data(:,12));
110 loads.owner_number = int32(cell2mat(data(:,13)));
111 loads.scale = int32(cell2mat(data(:,14)));
112 loads.intrpt = int32(cell2mat(data(:,15)));
113 loads.pb_load_index = int32(1 + cell2mat(data(:,16)));
114
115 % -------------------------------------------------------------------------
116 % Get data for shunts:
117 s1 = ’select busNumber, shuntname, shuntid, status, gl, bl from ’;
118 s2 = db_schema;
119 s3 = ’.Shunt where busNumber > 0 order by busNumber, shuntName’;
120 stmt = [s1 s2 s3];
84
==PAGE:93==
C. MATLAB
121
122 curs = exec(conn,stmt);
123 curs = fetch(curs);
124 data = curs.Data;
125 close(curs);
126
127 if (isequal(data, nodata))
128
shunts.bus_number = int32.empty(0,1);
129
shunts.shunt_id = int32.empty(0,1);
130
shunts.shunt_name = cell.empty(0,1);
131
shunts.status = double.empty(0,1);
132
shunts.gl = double.empty(0,1);
133
shunts.bl = double.empty(0,1);
134 else
135
shunts.bus_number = int32(cell2mat(data(:,1)));
136
shunts.shunt_id = int32(cell2mat(data(:,3)));
137
shunts.shunt_name = data(:,2);
138
shunts.status = arrayfun(@map_service_status, data(:,4));
139
shunts.gl = cell2mat(data(:,5));
140
shunts.bl = cell2mat(data(:,6));
141 end
142
143 % -------------------------------------------------------------------------
144 % Get data for generators:
145 s1 = ’select Generator.busNumber, generatorName, generatorId, powerOutputActive,
powerOutputReactive, ’;
146 s2 = ’powerOutputReactiveMaximum, powerOutputReactiveMinimum, regulatedVoltageSetpoint,
busNumberRegulatedVoltage, mvasize, ’;
147 s3 = ’machineImpedanceReal, machineImpedanceImaginary, stepupTransformerImpedanceReal,
stepupTransformerImpedanceImaginary, ’;
148 s4 = ’stepupTransformerOffNominalTurnsRatio, initialMachineStatus, RMPCT,
activePowerOutputMaximum, activePowerOutputMinimum, ’;
149 s5 = ’owner1Number, ownershipFraction1, wmod, wpf, pbgeneratorindex, Bus.pbvoltageindex
from ’;
150 s6 = db_schema;
151 s7 = ’.Generator, ’;
152 s8 = db_schema;
153 s9 = ’.Bus where Generator.busNumber > 0 and Generator.busNumber = Bus.busNumber order
by pbgeneratorindex’;
154 stmt = [s1 s2 s3 s4 s5 s6 s7 s8 s9];
155
156 curs = exec(conn,stmt);
157 curs = fetch(curs);
158 data = curs.Data;
159 close(curs);
160
161 % NB: Assumed there is at least one generator.
162 generators.bus_number = int32(cell2mat(data(:,1)));
163 generators.generator_id = int32(cell2mat(data(:,3)));
164 generators.generator_name = data(:,2);
165 generators.power_output_active = cell2mat(data(:,4));
166 generators.power_output_reactive = cell2mat(data(:,5));
167 generators.power_output_reactive_maximum = cell2mat(data(:,6));
168 generators.power_output_reactive_minimum = cell2mat(data(:,7));
169 generators.regulated_voltage_set_point = cell2mat(data(:,8));
170 generators.bus_number_regulated_voltage = int32(cell2mat(data(:,9)));
171 generators.mvasize = cell2mat(data(:,10));
172 generators.machine_impedance_real = cell2mat(data(:,11));
173 generators.machine_impedance_imaginary = cell2mat(data(:,12));
174 generators.stepup_transformer_impedance_real = cell2mat(data(:,13));
175 generators.stepup_transformer_impedance_imaginary = cell2mat(data(:,14));
176 generators.stepup_transformer_off_nominal_turns_ratio = cell2mat(data(:,15));
177 generators.initial_machine_status = arrayfun(@map_service_status, data(:,16));
178 generators.rmpct = cell2mat(data(:,17));
179 generators.active_power_output_maximum = cell2mat(data(:,18));
180 generators.active_power_output_minimum = cell2mat(data(:,19));
85
==PAGE:94==
C. MATLAB
181 generators.owner_1_number = int32(cell2mat(data(:,20)));
182 generators.ownership_fraction_1 = cell2mat(data(:,21));
183 generators.wmod = arrayfun(@map_wind_machine_control_mode, data(:,22));
184 generators.wpf = cell2mat(data(:,23));
185 generators.pb_generator_index = int32(1 + cell2mat(data(:,24)));
186 generators.pb_bus_index = int32(1 + cell2mat(data(:,25)));
187
188 % -------------------------------------------------------------------------
189 % Get data for transformers:
190 s1 = ’select Branch.busNumberFrom, Branch.busNumberTo, Branch.branchName, Branch.
branchId, Branch.pbCurrentFromIndex, Branch.pbCurrentToIndex, ’;
191 s2 = ’Transformer.transformerControlMode, Transformer.windingDataIOCode, Transformer.
impedanceDataIOCode, ’;
192 s3 = ’Transformer.magnetizingAdmittanceIOCode, Transformer.magnetizingConductance,
Transformer.magnetizingSusceptance, ’;
193 s4 = ’Transformer.nonMeteredEndCode, Transformer.transformerName, ’;
194 s5 = ’Transformer.initialTransformerStatus, Transformer.owner1Number, Transformer.
ownershipFraction1, Transformer.vecgrp, ’;
195 s6 = ’Transformer.impedanceReal, Transformer.impedanceImaginary, Transformer.
winding_1_to_2_basemva, ’;
196 s7 = ’Transformer.winding1OffNominalTurnsRatio, Transformer.winding1NominalVoltage,
Transformer.winding1PhaseShiftAngle, ’;
197 s8 = ’Transformer.winding1RatingA, Transformer.winding1RatingB, Transformer.
winding1RatingC, Transformer.winding1ControlledBusNumber, ’;
198 s9 = ’Transformer.winding1Limit1Upper, Transformer.winding1Limit1Lower, Transformer.
winding1Limit2Upper, Transformer.winding1Limit2Lower, ’;
199 s10 = ’Transformer.winding1NumberOfTapPositions, Transformer.
winding1ImpedanceCorrectionTableNumber, ’;
200 s11 = ’Transformer.winding1LoadDropCompensationImpedanceReal, Transformer.
winding1LoadDropCompensationImpedanceImaginary, Transformer.cnxa1, ’;
201 s12 = ’Transformer.winding2OffNominalTurnsRatio, Transformer.winding2NominalVoltage,
BusFrom.pbVoltageIndex, BusTo.pbVoltageIndex from ’;
202 s13 = ’Branch, Transformer, Bus as BusFrom, Bus as BusTo
where Branch.busNumberFrom =
Transformer.busNumberFrom and Branch.busNumberTo = Transformer.busNumberTo and ’;
203 s14 = ’Branch.branchName = Transformer.branchName and Branch.busNumberFrom > 0 and ’;
204 s15 = ’Transformer.busNumberFrom = BusFrom.busNumber and Transformer.busNumberTo = BusTo
.busNumber order by Branch.pbCurrentFromIndex’;
205 stmt = [s1 s2 s3 s4 s5 s6 s7 s8 s9 s10 s11 s12 s13 s14 s15];
206
207 curs = exec(conn,stmt);
208 curs = fetch(curs);
209 data = curs.Data;
210 close(curs);
211
212 % NB: Assumed there is at least one transformer
213 transformers.bus_number_from = int32(cell2mat(data(:,1)));
214 transformers.bus_number_to = int32(cell2mat(data(:,2)));
215 transformers.branch_name = data(:,3);
216 transformers.branch_id = int32(cell2mat(data(:,4)));
217 transformers.pb_branch_from_index = int32(1 + cell2mat(data(:,5)));
218 % transformers.pb_branch_to_index = int32(1 + cell2mat(data(:,6)));
219 transformers.transformer_control_mode = arrayfun(@map_control_mode, data(:,7));
220 transformers.winding_data_io_code = arrayfun(@map_winding_data_io_code, data(:,8));
221 transformers.impedance_data_io_code = arrayfun(@map_impedance_data_io_code, data(:,9));
222 transformers.magnetizing_admittance_io_code = arrayfun(
@map_magnetizing_admittance_io_code, data(:,10));
223 transformers.magnetizing_conductance = cell2mat(data(:,11));
224 transformers.magnetizing_susceptance = cell2mat(data(:,12));
225 transformers.non_metered_end_code = arrayfun(@map_non_metered_end_code, data(:,13));
226 transformers.transformer_name = data(:,14);
227 transformers.initial_transformer_status = arrayfun(@map_transformer_service_status, data
(:,15));
228 transformers.owner_1_number = int32(cell2mat(data(:,16)));
229 transformers.ownership_fraction_1 = cell2mat(data(:,17));
230 transformers.vecgrp = data(:,18);
231 transformers.impedance_real = cell2mat(data(:,19));
86
==PAGE:95==
C. MATLAB
232 transformers.impedance_imaginary = cell2mat(data(:,20));
233 transformers.winding_1_to_2_basemva = cell2mat(data(:,21));
234 transformers.winding_1_off_nominal_turns_ratio = cell2mat(data(:,22));
235 transformers.winding_1_nominal_voltage = cell2mat(data(:,23));
236 transformers.winding_1_phase_shift_angle = cell2mat(data(:,24));
237 transformers.winding_1_rating_a = cell2mat(data(:,25));
238 transformers.winding_1_rating_b = cell2mat(data(:,26));
239 transformers.winding_1_rating_c = cell2mat(data(:,27));
240 transformers.winding_1_controlled_bus_number = cell2mat(data(:,28));
241 transformers.winding_1_limit_1_upper = cell2mat(data(:,29));
242 transformers.winding_1_limit_1_lower = cell2mat(data(:,30));
243 transformers.winding_1_limit_2_upper = cell2mat(data(:,31));
244 transformers.winding_1_limit_2_lower = cell2mat(data(:,32));
245 transformers.winding_1_number_of_tap_positions = int32(cell2mat(data(:,33)));
246 transformers.winding_1_impedance_correction_table_number = int32(cell2mat(data(:,34)));
247 transformers.winding_1_load_drop_compensation_impedance_real = cell2mat(data(:,35));
248 transformers.winding_1_load_drop_compensation_impedance_imaginary = cell2mat(data(:,36))
;
249 transformers.cnxa1 = cell2mat(data(:,37));
250 transformers.winding_2_off_nominal_turns_ratio = cell2mat(data(:,38));
251 transformers.winding_2_nominal_voltage = cell2mat(data(:,39));
252 transformers.pb_bus_from_index = int32(1 + cell2mat(data(:,40)));
253 transformers.pb_bus_to_index = int32(1 + cell2mat(data(:,41)));
254 % -------------------------------------------------------------------------
255 % Get data for oltc1ts:
256 s1 = ’select OLTC1T.busNumberFrom, OLTC1T.busNumberTo, OLTC1T.branchName, ’;
257 s2 = ’OLTC1T.td, OLTC1T.tc, OLTC1T.tsd, ’;
258 s3 = ’Branch.pbCurrentFromIndex as pbBranchIndex from ’;
259 s4 = db_schema;
260 s5 = ’.OLTC1T, ’;
261 s6 = db_schema;
262 s7 = ’.Branch where OLTC1T.busNumberFrom > 0 and ’;
263 s8 = ’ OLTC1T.busNumberFrom = Branch.busNumberFrom and OLTC1T.busNumberTo = Branch.
busNumberTo and OLTC1T.branchName = Branch.branchName ’;
264 s9 = ’ order by pbBranchIndex’;
265 stmt = [s1 s2 s3 s4 s5 s6 s7 s8 s9];
266 % fprintf(’
db_reader_dyr_jdbc(): sql select stmt for oltc1ts created \n’);
267
268 curs = exec(conn, stmt);
269 curs = fetch(curs);
270 data = curs.Data;
271 close(curs);
272
273 transformers.oltc1ts_bus_number_from = int32(cell2mat(data(:,1)));
274 transformers.oltc1ts_bus_number_to = int32(cell2mat(data(:,2)));
275 transformers.oltc1ts_branch_name = data(:,3);
276 transformers.oltc1ts_td = cell2mat(data(:,4));
277 transformers.oltc1ts_tc = cell2mat(data(:,5));
278 transformers.oltc1ts_tsd = cell2mat(data(:,6));
279 transformers.oltc1ts_pb_branch_index = int32(1 + cell2mat(data(:,7)));
280
281 % -------------------------------------------------------------------------
282 % Get data for lines:
283 s1 = ’select Branch.busNumberFrom, Branch.busNumberTo, Branch.branchName, Branch.
branchId, Branch.pbCurrentFromIndex, Branch.pbCurrentToIndex, ’;
284 s2 = ’Line.resistance, Line.reactance, Line.susceptance, Line.currentRatingA, Line.
currentRatingB, Line.currentRatingC, Line.lineShuntAdmittanceFromReal, ’;
285 s3 = ’Line.lineShuntAdmittanceFromImaginary, Line.lineShuntAdmittanceToReal, Line.
lineShuntAdmittanceToImaginary, Line.initialBranchStatus, Line.met, Line.lineLength,
’;
286 s4 = ’Line.owner1Number, Line.ownershipFraction1, BusFrom.pbVoltageIndex, BusTo.
pbVoltageIndex from ’;
287 s5 = ’Branch, Line, Bus as BusFrom, Bus as BusTo ’;
288 s6 = ’where Branch.busNumberFrom = Line.busNumberFrom and ’;
289 s7 = ’Branch.busNumberTo = Line.busNumberTo and ’;
290 s8 = ’Branch.branchName = Line.branchName and ’;
87
==PAGE:96==
C. MATLAB
291 s9 = ’Branch.busNumberFrom > 0 and ’;
292 s10 = ’Line.busNumberFrom = BusFrom.busNumber and Line.busNumberTo = BusTo.busNumber ’;
293 s11 = ’order by Branch.pbCurrentFromIndex’;
294 stmt = [s1 s2 s3 s4 s5 s6 s7 s8 s9 s10 s11];
295
296 curs = exec(conn,stmt);
297 curs = fetch(curs);
298 data = curs.Data;
299 close(curs);
300
301 % NB: Assumed there is at least one line.
302 lines.bus_number_from = int32(cell2mat(data(:,1)));
303 lines.bus_number_to = int32(cell2mat(data(:,2)));
304 lines.branch_name = data(:,3);
305 lines.branch_id = int32(cell2mat(data(:,4)));
306 lines.pb_branch_index = int32(1 + cell2mat(data(:,5)));
307 % lines.pb_branch_index = int32(1 + cell2mat(data(:,6)));
308 lines.resistance = cell2mat(data(:,7));
309 lines.reactance = cell2mat(data(:,8));
310 lines.susceptance = cell2mat(data(:,9));
311 lines.current_rating_a = cell2mat(data(:,10));
312 lines.current_rating_b = cell2mat(data(:,11));
313 lines.current_rating_c = cell2mat(data(:,12));
314 lines.line_shunt_admittance_from_real = cell2mat(data(:,13));
315 lines.line_shunt_admittance_from_imaginary = cell2mat(data(:,14));
316 lines.line_shunt_admittance_to_real = cell2mat(data(:,15));
317 lines.line_shunt_admittance_to_imaginary = cell2mat(data(:,16));
318 lines.initial_branch_status = arrayfun(@map_service_status, data(:,17));
319 lines.met = int32(cell2mat(data(:,18)));
320 lines.line_length = cell2mat(data(:,19));
321 lines.owner_1_number = int32(cell2mat(data(:,20)));
322 lines.ownership_fraction_1 = cell2mat(data(:,21));
323 lines.pb_bus_from_index = int32(1 + cell2mat(data(:,22)));
324 lines.pb_bus_to_index = int32(1 + cell2mat(data(:,23)));
325
326 % -------------------------------------------------------------------------
327 s1 = ’select GENSAL.Xd, GENSAL.Xq, GENSAL.busNumber, GENSAL.generatorName, Bus.
pbvoltageindex from ’;
328 s2 = db_schema;
329 s3 = ’.GENSAL, ’;
330 s4 = db_schema;
331 s5 = ’.Bus where GENSAL.busNumber > 0 and GENSAL.busNumber = Bus.busNumber order by
busNumber, generatorName’;
332 stmt = [s1 s2 s3 s4 s5];
333
334 curs = exec(conn,stmt);
335 curs = fetch(curs);
336 data = curs.Data;
337 close(curs);
338
339 % NB: Assumed there is at least one generator.
340 generators.GENSAL_Xd = (cell2mat(data(:,1)));
341 generators.GENSAL_Xq = int32(cell2mat(data(:,2)));
342 generators.GENSAL_busNumber = int32(cell2mat(data(:,3)));
343 generators.GENSAL_generatorName = data(:,4);
344 generators.GENSAL_pbvoltageindex = int32(cell2mat(data(:,5)));
345
346
347 s1 = ’select GENSAL.Xd, GENSAL.Xq, GENSAL.busNumber, GENSAL.generatorName, Bus.
pbvoltageindex from ’;
348 s2 = db_schema;
349 s3 = ’.GENSAL, ’;
350 s4 = db_schema;
351 s5 = ’.Bus where GENSAL.busNumber > 0 and GENSAL.busNumber = Bus.busNumber order by
busNumber, generatorName’;
352 stmt = [s1 s2 s3 s4 s5];
88
==PAGE:97==
C. MATLAB
353
354 curs = exec(conn,stmt);
355 curs = fetch(curs);
356 data = curs.Data;
357 close(curs);
358
359 % NB: Assumed there is at least one generator.
360 generators.GENSAL_Xd = (cell2mat(data(:,1)));
361 generators.GENSAL_Xq = int32(cell2mat(data(:,2)));
362 generators.GENSAL_busNumber = int32(cell2mat(data(:,3)));
363 generators.GENSAL_generatorName = data(:,4);
364 generators.GENSAL_pbvoltageindex = int32(cell2mat(data(:,5)));
365
366
367 s1 = ’select GENROU.Xd, GENROU.Xq, GENROU.busNumber, GENROU.generatorName, Bus.
pbvoltageindex from ’;
368 s2 = db_schema;
369 s3 = ’.GENROU, ’;
370 s4 = db_schema;
371 s5 = ’.Bus where GENROU.busNumber > 0 and GENROU.busNumber = Bus.busNumber order by
busNumber, generatorName’;
372 stmt = [s1 s2 s3 s4 s5];
373
374 curs = exec(conn,stmt);
375 curs = fetch(curs);
376 data = curs.Data;
377 close(curs);
378
379 % NB: Assumed there is at least one generator.
380 generators.GENROU_Xd = (cell2mat(data(:,1)));
381 generators.GENROU_Xq = int32(cell2mat(data(:,2)));
382 generators.GENROU_busNumber = int32(cell2mat(data(:,3)));
383 generators.GENROU_generatorName = data(:,4);
384 generators.GENROU_pbvoltageindex = int32(cell2mat(data(:,5)));
385
386
387 % -------------------------------------------------------------------------
388 close(conn);
389 % fprintf(’
db_reader_raw_jdbc(): database closed\n’);
390
391 %end
89
==PAGE:98==
C. MATLAB
C.3
getYbus MATLAB Function
1 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
2 % This function calculates the admittance matrix for a N-bus network
%
3 % Inputs:
%
4 % - Is,Ir,Vs,Vr: line sending end and receiving end currents and voltages %
5 % - ip,is,vp,vs: transformer primary and secondary currents and votlages
%
6 % - Zload: the calculated impedance for loads
%
7 % Output:
%
8 % - Admittance matric, Ybus, for a N-bus system. The calculation of the
%
9 %
Ybus is based on Kundur Chp.6.
%
10 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
11 function [ Ybus ] = getYbus(Is,Ir,Vs,Vr,ip,is,vp,vs,Zload)
12
13 global lines buses transformers LoadBusIndices
14
15 %%% Calculating line impedances
16 fb
= lines.pb_bus_from_index;
% From bus number
17 tb
= lines.pb_bus_to_index;
% To bus number
18 NoLines = length(lines.bus_number_from);% Number of lines
19 nbus
= length(buses.bus_number);
% Number of buses
20 Ybus
= zeros(nbus,nbus);
% Initialise YBus
21
22 for k=1:NoLines
23 Ye(k) = (Vr(k)*Is(k)-Vs(k)*Ir(k))/(Vs(k)^2-Vr(k)^2);
24 Y(k)
= (Is(k)+Ir(k))/(Vs(k)+Vr(k));
25
26 % Off-diagonal elements
27 Ybus(fb(k),tb(k)) = Ybus(fb(k),tb(k))-Ye(k);
28 Ybus(tb(k),fb(k)) = Ybus(tb(k),fb(k))-Ye(k);
29
30 % Diagonal elements
31 Ybus(fb(k),fb(k)) = Ybus(fb(k),fb(k))+Ye(k) + Y(k);
32 Ybus(tb(k),tb(k)) = Ybus(tb(k),tb(k))+Ye(k) + Y(k);
33 end
34
35 %%% Calculating transformer impedances
36 fb
= transformers.pb_bus_from_index;
% From bus number
37 tb
= transformers.pb_bus_to_index;
% To bus number
38 NoTrafo = length(transformers.bus_number_from); % No. of trafo
39 c
= zeros(1,NoTrafo);
40
41 for k=1:NoTrafo
42 c(k)
= abs(ip(k))/abs(is(k));
43 YeTrf(k) = ip(k)/(c(k)*(c(k)*vp(k)-vs(k)));
44
45 % Off-diagonal elements
46 Ybus(fb(k),tb(k)) = Ybus(fb(k),tb(k))-c(k)*YeTrf(k);
47 Ybus(tb(k),fb(k)) = Ybus(tb(k),fb(k))-c(k)*YeTrf(k);
48
49 % Diagonal elements
50 Ybus(fb(k),fb(k)) = Ybus(fb(k),fb(k))+c(k)^2*YeTrf(k);
51 Ybus(tb(k),tb(k)) = Ybus(tb(k),tb(k))+YeTrf(k);
52 end
53
54 %%% Calculating load impedances
55 LoadBus = LoadBusIndices;
56
57 for k=1:length(LoadBus)
58
% Diagonal elements
59
Ybus(LoadBus(k),LoadBus(k)) = Ybus(LoadBus(k),LoadBus(k))+Zload(k);
60 end
61
62 end
90
==PAGE:99==
C. MATLAB
C.4
getTheveninEquivalents MATLAB Function
1 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
2 % This funciton is used to compute the T h venin equivalents
for all
%
3 % nodes of a N-bus system.
%
4 % Inputs:
%
5 % - y_bus: the calculated admittance matrix, which is the output of the
%
6 %
getYbus function
%
7 % - vc_nodes: vector containing the bus indices of all voltage controlled %
8 %
nodes
%
9 % - nc_nodes: vector containing the bus indices for all non-controlled
%
10 %
nodes
%
11 % Output:
%
12 % - theveninEquivalents: a MATLAB struct consisting of all t h venin
%
13 %
equivalents for all nodes in the system
%
14 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
15
16 function [theveninEquivalents] = getTheveninEquivalents(y_bus, vc_nodes, nc_nodes)
17
18 % Making a block-wise partitioning of the admittance matrix
19 Ync = y_bus(nc_nodes,nc_nodes);
20 Ylink = y_bus(nc_nodes,vc_nodes);
21 Ylink_T = y_bus(vc_nodes,nc_nodes);
22 Yvc = y_bus(vc_nodes,vc_nodes);
23
24 % Initialising matrix for later use
25 eye_nc = speye(length(Ync));
26
27 % Returns a column vector. The AMD function removes unnecessary indices
28 p = amd(Ync);
29
30 % LU-decomposition
31 [Lnc,Unc, P] = lu(Ync(p,p),’vector’);
32
33 Unc_T = Unc.’;
34
35 U_hat = Lnc \ Ylink(p(P),:);
36 L_hat_T = Unc_T \ Ylink_T(:,p).’;
37
38 Y_eq = Yvc - L_hat_T.’*U_hat; % Yvc-Ylink_T*Ync^-1*Ylink, where Ync = Lnc*Unc
39 Zth_vc = diag(Y_eq).^-1; % Inverse of the diagonal of Y_eq gives Zth for the vc nodes
40 GTC = speye(size(Y_eq)) - (sparse(1:length(Zth_vc),1:length(Zth_vc),Zth_vc)*Y_eq);
41
42 Z_nc_up = Lnc \ eye_nc(p(P),:);
43 Z_nc_low_T = Unc_T \ eye_nc(:,p).’;
44 Z_nc = (Z_nc_low_T.’*Z_nc_up);
45 Zth_nc = diag(Z_nc);
46
47 Q_ac_vc = -1*Ylink_T * Z_nc;
48 Q_ac_nc = -1 * Z_nc * Ylink;
49
50 theveninEquivalents.GTC
= GTC;
% Grid transformation coefficients matrix
51 theveninEquivalents.Q_ac_vc = Q_ac_vc;
% Matrix that links the thevenin voltage
seen from vc nodes to nc noder (to current injection)
52 theveninEquivalents.Q_ac_nc = Q_ac_nc;
% Matrix that links the thevenin voltage
seen from nc nodes to vc nodes (voltage in the noden)
53 theveninEquivalents.Zth_nc
= full(Zth_nc); % T h venin impedances seen from nc nodes,
ordered according to nc_nodes indices
54 theveninEquivalents.Zth_vc
= full(Zth_vc); % T h venin impedances seen from vc nodes,
ordered according to vc_nodes indices
55 theveninEquivalents.Yeq
= Y_eq;
% Equivalent admittance without nc nodes
56
57 end
91
==PAGE:100==
C. MATLAB
C.5
Nordic32_prefault_plots MATLAB Script
1 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
2 % This script contains the code for the plots made in order to describe
%
3 % the pre-fault conditions of the Nordic32 test system.
%
4 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
5 close all;
6 % Add the path of the csv files
7 addpath(genpath(’Nordic32_results’));
8
9 % Importing simulation results
10 t_vec
= csvread(’time_vec.csv’);
11 v_gen
= csvread(’v_gen.csv’);
12 v_trfHV
= csvread(’v_trfHV.csv’);
13 v_trfLV
= csvread(’v_trfLV.csv’);
14 i_LimitedGens = csvread(’i_LimitedGens.csv’);
15
16 % Pre-fault generator bus voltages plots for the Nordic32 test system
17 figure;
18 hold on; grid on; box on;
19 for k=1:11 % Plot generators 1-11 bus voltages
20
plot(t_vec,v_gen(k,:));
21
xlabel(’Time [s]’); ylabel(’Bus voltage [pu]’);
22
axis([0 200 0.4 1.2]);
23 end
24 legend(’1012’,’1013’,’1014’,’1021’,’1022’,...
25
’1042’,’1043’,’2032’,’4011’,’4012’,’4021’,’Location’,’south’);
26 saveTightFigureWide(gcf,’Nordic32_results/V_Gen_Bus_1_11.pdf’);
27 hold off
28
29 figure;
30 hold on; grid on; box on;
31 for k=12:22 % Plot generators 12-22 bus voltages
32
plot(t_vec,v_gen(k,:));
33
xlabel(’Time [s]’); ylabel(’Bus voltage [pu]’);
34
axis([0 200 0.65 1.1]);
35 end
36 legend(’4031’,’4041’,’4042’,’4047’,’4047’,...
37
’4051’,’4062’, ’4063’,’4063’,’4071’,’4072’,...
38
’Location’,’south’);
39 saveTightFigureWide(gcf,’Nordic32_results/V_Gen_Bus_12_22.pdf’);
40 hold off
41
42 % Pre-fault transformer bus voltages plots for the Nordic32 test system
43 figure;
44 hold on; grid on; box on;
45 plot(t_vec,v_trfLV(18,:)); % Plotting the LV side of the trf at bus 1041
46 plot(t_vec,v_trfHV(18,:)); % Plotting the HV side of the trf at bus 1041
47 xlabel(’Time [s]’); ylabel(’Bus voltage [pu]’);
48 axis([0 200 0.8 1.05]);
49 legend(’LV side of TRF at Bus 141’,’HV side of TRF at Bus 1041’);
50 saveTightFigureWide(gcf,’Nordic32_results/V_plot_trfBB1041.pdf’);
51 hold off
52
53 figure;
54 hold on; grid on; box on;
55 plot(t_vec,v_trfLV(19,:)); % Plotting the LV side of the trf at bus 1042
56 plot(t_vec,v_trfHV(19,:)); % Plotting the HV side of the trf at bus 1042
57 xlabel(’Time [s]’); ylabel(’Bus voltage [pu]’);
58 axis([0 200 0.65 1.1]);
59 legend(’LV side of TRF at Bus 142’,’HV side of TRF at Bus 1042’);
60 saveTightFigureWide(gcf,’Nordic32_results/V_plot_trfBB1042.pdf’);
61 hold off
62
63 figure;
64 hold on; grid on; box on;
92
==PAGE:101==
C. MATLAB
65 plot(t_vec,v_trfLV(20,:)); % Plotting the LV side of the trf at bus 1043
66 plot(t_vec,v_trfHV(20,:)); % Plotting the HV side of the trf at bus 1043
67 xlabel(’Time [s]’); ylabel(’Bus voltage [pu]’);
68 axis([0 200 0.85 1.05]);
69 legend(’LV side of TRF at Bus 143’,’HV side of TRF at Bus 1043’);
70 saveTightFigureWide(gcf,’Nordic32_results/V_plot_trfBB1043.pdf’);
71 hold off
72
73 figure;
74 hold on; grid on; box on;
75 plot(t_vec,v_trfLV(21,:)); % Plotting the LV side of the trf at bus 1044
76 plot(t_vec,v_trfHV(21,:)); % Plotting the HV side of the trf at bus 1044
77 xlabel(’Time [s]’); ylabel(’Bus voltage [pu]’);
78 axis([0 200 0.85 1.05]);
79 legend(’LV side of TRF at Bus 144’,’HV side of TRF at Bus 1044’);
80 saveTightFigureWide(gcf,’Nordic32_results/V_plot_trfBB1044.pdf’);
81 hold off
82
83 figure;
84 hold on; grid on; box on;
85 plot(t_vec,v_trfLV(22,:)); % Plotting the LV side of the trf at bus 1045
86 plot(t_vec,v_trfHV(22,:)); % Plotting the HV side of the trf at bus 1045
87 xlabel(’Time [s]’); ylabel(’Bus voltage [pu]’);
88 axis([0 200 0.85 1.05]);
89 legend(’LV side of TRF at Bus 145’,’HV side of TRF at Bus 1045’);
90 saveTightFigureWide(gcf,’Nordic32_results/V_plot_trfBB1045.pdf’);
91 hold off
92
93 % Plotting the Generator currents of the limited generators
94 figure;
95 hold on; grid on; box on;
96 plot(t_vec,i_LimitedGens(end,:));
97 xlabel(’Time [s]’); ylabel(’Terminal current [pu]’);
98 axis([0 200 7 9.5]);
99 legend(’G14’);
100 saveTightFigureWide(gcf,’Nordic32_results/Igenerators1.pdf’);
101 hold off
102
103 figure;
104 for k=1:5
105
hold on; grid on; box on;
106
% Plotting the Generator currents
107
plot(t_vec,i_LimitedGens(k,:));
108
xlabel(’Time [s]’); ylabel(’Terminal current [pu]’);
109
axis([0 200 2 7.5]);
110 end
111 legend(’G6’,’G7’,’G11’,’G12’,’G13’);
112 saveTightFigureWide(gcf,’Nordic32_results/Igenerators2.pdf’);
113 hold off
93
==PAGE:102==
C. MATLAB
C.6
VSI_plots MATLAB Script
1 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
2 % This script contains the code for the computation of VSI and the plots
%
3 % made in order to describe the VSI method.
%
4 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
5
6 set(0,’DefaultAxesXGrid’,’on’,’DefaultAxesYGrid’,’on’)
7 set(0,’defaulttextinterpreter’,’latex’)
8 set(0,’defaultaxesfontname’,’times’)
9 set(0,’defaultlinelinewidth’,1)
10 set(0,’DefaultAxesFontSize’,14)
11
12 % Add the path of the csv files
13 addpath(genpath(’VSI_results’));
14
15 t_vec
= csvread(’Nordic32_results/time_vec.csv’);
16 Zload_1041
= csvread(’Nordic32_results/LoadImpedance_1041.csv’);
17 Zload_1042
= csvread(’Nordic32_results/LoadImpedance_1042.csv’);
18 Zth_1041
= csvread(’Zth_1041.csv’);
19 Zth_1042
= csvread(’Zth_1042.csv’);
20 Eth_1041
= csvread(’Eth_1041.csv’);
21 Eth_1042
= csvread(’Eth_1042.csv’);
22
23 %% Eth of load seen from Busses 1041 and 1042
24 figure;
25 hold on; grid on; box on;
26 plot(t_vec,abs(Eth_1041),t_vec,abs(Eth_1042));
27 xlabel(’Time [s]’); ylabel(’Voltage [pu]’);
28 axis([0 200 0.55 1.05]);
29 legend(’E_{th,1041}’,’E_{th,1042}’,’Location’,’northeast’)
30 % title(’Z_{th} and Z_{load} at BB1042’)
31 saveTightFigureWide(gcf,’VSI_results/Eth.pdf’);
32 hold off
33
34 %% VSI for Bus 1041
35 Zth_1041_act = zeros(1,length(Zth_1041));
36 VSI_1041
= zeros(1,length(Zth_1041));
37
38 for k = 1:length(Zth_1041)
39
Zth_1041_act(k) = ( Zth_1041(k)*Zload_1041(k) )/...
40
( Zload_1041(k)-Zth_1041(k) );
41
VSI_1041(k) = 1-( abs(Zth_1041_act(k))/abs(Zload_1041(k)) );
42 end
43
44 figure;
45 hold on; grid on; box on;
46 plot(t_vec,VSI_1041);
47 xlabel(’Time [s]’); ylabel(’VSI’);
48 % axis([0 200 0 0.35]);
49 legend(’1041’)
50 % title(’VSI at BB1041’)
51 % saveTightFigureWide(gcf,’VSI_results/VSI_1.pdf’);
52 hold off
53
54 figure;
55 hold on; grid on; box on;
56 plot(t_vec,abs(Zth_1041_act),t_vec,abs(Zload_1041));
57 xlabel(’Time [s]’); ylabel(’Impedance [pu]’);
58 % axis([0 200 0 0.35]);
59 legend(’Z_{th}’,’Z_{load}’,’Location’,’northeast’)
60 % title(’Z_{th} and Z_{load} at BB1041’)
61 % saveTightFigureWide(gcf,’VSI_results/Zth_Zl_1041.pdf’);
62 hold off
63
64 %% VSI for Bus 1042
94
==PAGE:103==
C. MATLAB
65 Zth_1042_act = zeros(1,length(Zth_1042));
66 VSI_1042
= zeros(1,length(Zth_1042));
67
68 for k = 1:length(Zth_1042)
69
Zth_1042_act(k) = ( Zth_1042(k)*Zload_1042(k) )/...
70
( Zload_1042(k)-Zth_1042(k) );
71
VSI_1042(k) = 1-( abs(Zth_1042_act(k))/abs(Zload_1042(k)) );
72 end
73
74 figure;
75 hold on; grid on; box on;
76 plot(t_vec,VSI_1042);
77 xlabel(’Time [s]’); ylabel(’VSI’);
78 % axis([0 200 0.4 1.05]);
79 legend(’1042’)
80 % title(’VSI at BB1042’)
81 % saveTightFigureWide(gcf,’VSI_results/VSI_2.pdf’);
82 hold off
83
84 figure;
85 hold on; grid on; box on;
86 plot(t_vec,abs(Zth_1042_act),t_vec,abs(Zload_1042));
87 xlabel(’Time [s]’); ylabel(’Impedance [pu]’);
88 % axis([0 200 0 0.3]);
89 legend(’Z_{th}’,’Z_{load}’,’Location’,’northeast’)
90 % title(’Z_{th} and Z_{load} at BB1042’)
91 % saveTightFigureWide(gcf,’VSI_results/Zth_Zl_1042.pdf’);
92 hold off
95
==PAGE:104==
C. MATLAB
C.7
NLI_plots MATLAB Script
1 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
2 % This script contains the code for the plots made in order to describe
%
3 % the NLI method.
%
4 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
5
6 set(0,’DefaultAxesXGrid’,’on’,’DefaultAxesYGrid’,’on’)
7 set(0,’defaulttextinterpreter’,’latex’)
8 set(0,’defaultaxesfontname’,’times’)
9 set(0,’defaultlinelinewidth’,1)
10 set(0,’DefaultAxesFontSize’,14)
11
12 % Import csv files
13 % Time vector and busvoltages
14 t_vec
= csvread(’Nordic32_results/time_vec.csv’);
15 BusVoltages
= csvread(’Nordic32_results/BusVoltages.csv’);
16
17 NLI_4041
= csvread(’NLI_results/NLI_4041.csv’);
18 G_4041
= csvread(’NLI_results/G_4041.csv’);
19 P_4041
= csvread(’NLI_results/P_4041.csv’);
20 G_avg_4041
= csvread(’NLI_results/G_avg_4041.csv’);
21 P_avg_4041
= csvread(’NLI_results/P_avg_4041.csv’);
22 ss_cond_4041 = csvread(’NLI_results/ss_cond_matrix_4041.csv’);
23
24 NLI_4042
= csvread(’NLI_results/NLI_4042.csv’);
25 G_4042
= csvread(’NLI_results/G_4042.csv’);
26 P_4042
= csvread(’NLI_results/P_4042.csv’);
27 G_avg_4042
= csvread(’NLI_results/G_avg_4042.csv’);
28 P_avg_4042
= csvread(’NLI_results/P_avg_4042.csv’);
29 ss_cond_4042 = csvread(’NLI_results/ss_cond_matrix_4042.csv’);
30
31 %% Voltage at boundary busses
32 figure;
33 hold on; grid on; box on;
34 plot(t_vec,BusVoltages(1,:)); % Plotting the LV side of the trf at bus 4041
35 plot(t_vec,BusVoltages(34,:)); % Plotting the HV side of the trf at bus 4041
36 xlabel(’Time [s]’); ylabel(’Voltage [pu]’);
37 axis([0 200 0.85 1.05]);
38 legend(’LV side of TRF at Bus 41’,’HV side of TRF at Bus 4041’);
39 text(62, 0.99, ’$\downarrow$ OXL activation at t=62s’)
40 text(94, 0.95, ’$\uparrow$ ULTCs start acting at t=95s’)
41 % saveTightFigureWide(gcf,’NLI_results/V_plot_BB4041.pdf’);
42 hold off
43
44 figure;
45 hold on; grid on; box on;
46 plot(t_vec,BusVoltages(2,:)); % Plotting the LV side of the trf at bus 4042
47 plot(t_vec,BusVoltages(35,:)); % Plotting the HV side of the trf at bus 4042
48 xlabel(’Time [s]’); ylabel(’Voltage [pu]’);
49 axis([0 200 0.85 1.05]);
50 legend(’LV side of TRF at Bus 42’,’HV side of TRF at Bus 4042’);
51 text(39, 0.99, ’$\downarrow$ OXL activation at t=40s’)
52 text(71.5, 0.937, ’$\uparrow$ ULTCs start acting at t=72s’)
53 % saveTightFigureWide(gcf,’NLI_results/V_plot_BB4042.pdf’);
54 hold off
55
56 %% G and P with the average values taken over N
57 %%% For BB4041 %%%
58 for i=1:size(G_avg_4041,1)
59
G_avg_plot_4041(i,:) = [NaN(1,( length(t_vec)-size(G_avg_4041(i,:),2) )), G_avg_4041
(i,:)];
60
G_avg_idx_4041(i,:) = ~any(isnan( G_avg_plot_4041(i,:) ),1);
61 end
62
63 for i=1:size(P_avg_4041,1)
96
==PAGE:105==
C. MATLAB
64
P_avg_plot_4041(i,:) = [NaN(1,( length(t_vec)-size(P_avg_4041(i,:),2) )), P_avg_4041
(i,:)];
65
P_avg_idx_4041(i,:) = ~any(isnan( P_avg_plot_4041(i,:) ),1);
66 end
67
68 figure;
69 hold on; grid on; box on;
70 plot(t_vec,P_4041,t_vec,G_4041)
71 xlabel(’Time [s]’); ylabel(’Power, Conductance [pu]’);
72 axis([0 200 15 21]);
73 legend(’P’,’G’,’Location’,’northeast’)
74 hold off
75 % saveTightFigureWide_legend(gcf,’NLI_results/GP_4041.pdf’);
76
77 figure;
78 hold on; grid on; box on;
79 plot(t_vec(P_avg_idx_4041),P_avg_plot_4041(P_avg_idx_4041),...
80
t_vec(G_avg_idx_4041),G_avg_plot_4041(G_avg_idx_4041))
81 xlabel(’Time [s]’); ylabel(’Power, Conductance [pu]’);
82 axis([0 200 15 21]);
83 legend(’P’,’G’,’Location’,’northeast’)
84 hold off
85 % saveTightFigureWide_legend(gcf,’NLI_results/GP_avg_4041.pdf’);
86
87 %% For BB4042 %%
88 for i=1:size(G_avg_4042,1)
89
G_avg_plot_4042(i,:) = [NaN(1,( length(t_vec)-size(G_avg_4042(i,:),2) )), G_avg_4042
(i,:)];
90
G_avg_idx_4042(i,:) = ~any(isnan( G_avg_plot_4042(i,:) ),1);
91 end
92
93 for i=1:size(P_avg_4042,1)
94
P_avg_plot_4042(i,:) = [NaN(1,( length(t_vec)-size(P_avg_4042(i,:),2) )), P_avg_4042
(i,:)];
95
P_avg_idx_4042(i,:) = ~any(isnan( P_avg_plot_4042(i,:) ),1);
96 end
97
98 figure;
99 hold on; grid on; box on;
100 plot(t_vec,P_4042,t_vec,G_4042)
101 xlabel(’Time [s]’); ylabel(’Power, Conductance [pu]’);
102 axis([0 200 15 22]);
103 legend(’P’,’G’,’Location’,’northeast’)
104 hold off
105 saveTightFigureWide_legend(gcf,’NLI_results/GP_4042.pdf’);
106
107 figure;
108 hold on; grid on; box on;
109 plot(t_vec(P_avg_idx_4042),P_avg_plot_4042(P_avg_idx_4042),...
110
t_vec(G_avg_idx_4042),G_avg_plot_4042(G_avg_idx_4042))
111 xlabel(’Time [s]’); ylabel(’Power, Conductance [pu]’);
112 axis([0 200 15 22]);
113 legend(’P’,’G’,’Location’,’northeast’)
114 hold off
115 saveTightFigureWide_legend(gcf,’NLI_results/GP_avg_4042.pdf’);
116
117 %% Steady state condition plot
118 %%% For BB4041 %%%
119 for i=1:size(NLI_4041,1)
120
ss_cond_plot_4041(i,:) = [NaN(1,( length(t_vec)-size(ss_cond_4041(i,:),2) )),
ss_cond_4041(i,:)];
121
idx_plot_4041(i,:) = ~any(isnan( ss_cond_plot_4041(i,:) ),1);
122 end
123
124 figure;
125 hold on; grid on; box on;
97
==PAGE:106==
C. MATLAB
126 %hline = line([0,200],[1.25e-3,1.25e-3]);
127 %hline.Color = ’r’;
128 plot(t_vec(idx_plot_4041),ss_cond_plot_4041(idx_plot_4041));
129 % plot(t_vec(idx_plot),ss_cond_plot(idx_plot));
130 xlabel(’Time [s]’); ylabel(’Steady-state evaluation’);
131 axis([0 200 -0.01 0.015]);
132 legend(’4041, \DeltaT=3s’,’Location’,’northeast’)
133 hold off
134 saveTightFigureWide(gcf,’NLI_results/SS_4041_deltaT_3.pdf’);
135
136 %%% For BB4042 %%%
137 for i=1:size(NLI_4042,1)
138
ss_cond_plot_4042(i,:) = [NaN(1,( length(t_vec)-size(ss_cond_4042(i,:),2) )),
ss_cond_4042(i,:)];
139
idx_plot_4042(i,:) = ~any(isnan( ss_cond_plot_4042(i,:) ),1);
140 end
141
142 figure;
143 hold on; grid on; box on;
144 % hline = line([0,200],[1.5e-3,1.5e-3]);
145 % hline.Color = ’r’;
146 plot(t_vec(idx_plot_4042),ss_cond_plot_4042(idx_plot_4042));
147 xlabel(’Time [s]’); ylabel(’Steady-state evaluation’);
148 axis([0 200 -0.01 0.015]);
149 legend(’4042, \DeltaT=3s’,’Location’,’northeast’)
150 hold off
151 saveTightFigureWide(gcf,’NLI_results/SS_4042_deltaT_3.pdf’);
152
153 %% NLI calc
154
155 %%% BB4041 %%%
156 for i=1:size(NLI_4041,1)
157
NLI_plot_4041(i,:) = [NaN(1,( length(t_vec)-size(NLI_4041(i,:),2) )), NLI_4041(i,:)
];
158
NLI_idx_4041(i,:) = ~any(isnan( NLI_plot_4041(i,:) ),1);
159 end
160
161 figure;
162 hold on; grid on; box on;
163 plot(t_vec(NLI_idx_4041),smoothdata(NLI_plot_4041(NLI_idx_4041),’movmean’) );
164 % plot(t_vec(NLI_idx_4041),fitobject);
165 xlabel(’Time [s]’); ylabel(’NLI’);
166 % axis([0 200 -1.7 1.4]);
167 legend(’4041’,’Location’,’northeast’)
168 hold off
169 % saveTightFigureWide(gcf,’NLI_results/NLI_4041_epsilon_1.25e-3_deltaT_7.pdf’);
170 saveTightFigureWide(gcf,’NLI_results/NLI_4041.pdf’);
171
172 %%% BB4042 %%%
173 for i=1:size(NLI_4042,1)
174
NLI_plot_4042(i,:) = [NaN(1,( length(t_vec)-size(NLI_4042(i,:),2) )), NLI_4042(i,:)
];
175
NLI_idx_4042(i,:) = ~any(isnan( NLI_plot_4042(i,:) ),1);
176 end
177
178 figure;
179 hold on; grid on; box on;
180 plot(t_vec(NLI_idx_4042),smoothdata(NLI_plot_4042(NLI_idx_4042),’movmean’));
181 xlabel(’Time [s]’); ylabel(’NLI’);
182 % axis([0 200 -1.7 1.4]);
183 legend(’4042’,’Location’,’northeast’)
184 hold off
185 % saveTightFigureWide(gcf,’NLI_results/NLI_4042_epsilon_1.25e-3_deltaT_7.pdf’);
186 saveTightFigureWide(gcf,’NLI_results/NLI_4042.pdf’);
98
==PAGE:107==
C. MATLAB
C.8
test_getTheveninEquivalents MATLAB Script
1 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
2 % This script is written to test the getTheveninEquivalents.m function.
%
3 % The test network is a six bus system, taken from the first assignment
%
4 % hand-out in the Power System Stability and Control course.
%
5 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
6 clear; clc;
7
8 % Line Impedances => Line Admittances
9 Za = 0.04+1j*0.52; Ya=1/Za;
10 Zb = 0.04+1j*0.52; Yb=1/Zb;
11 Zc = 0.04+1j*0.48; Yc=1/Zc;
12 Zd = 0.04+1j*0.60; Yd=1/Zd;
13 Ze = 0.04+1i*0.48; Ye=1/Ze;
14 Zf = 0.04+1j*0.44; Yf=1/Zf;
15 Zg = 0.04+1j*0.52; Yg=1/Zg;
16
17 Ybus =[ Ya+Yc+Ye, -Ya,
0,
-Yc,
0,
-Ye;
18
-Ya,
Ya+Yb, -Yb,
0,
0,
0;
19
0,
-Yb,
Yb+Yd+Yg, -Yd,
-Yg,
0;
20
-Yc,
0,
-Yd,
Yc+Yd, 0,
0;
21
0,
0,
-Yg,
0,
Yf+Yg, -Yf;
22
-Ye,
0,
0,
0,
-Yf,
Ye+Yf;
23 ];
24
25 nc = [2 4 5 6].’; % Non-controlled busses
26 vc = [1 3].’; % Busses with voltage control
27
28 % Thevenin equivalents obtained from the getTheveninEquivalents function
29 theveninEq = getTheveninEquivalents(Ybus, vc, nc);
30
31 % Zth for the vc busses
32 Zth_G1 = (1/(Za+Zb)+1/(Zc+Zd)+1/(Ze+Zf+Zg)).^-1;
33 Zth_G3 = Zth_G1;
34
35 % Zth for BB2
36 Zeq = (1/(Zc+Zd)+1/(Ze+Zf+Zg)).^-1;
37
38 % Delta to star conversion for unbalanced loads
39 Z1 = Za; Z2 = Zb; Z3 = Zeq;
40
41 ZA = (Z1*Z2)/(Z1+Z2+Z3);
42 ZB = (Z2*Z3)/(Z1+Z2+Z3);
43 ZC = (Z1*Z3)/(Z1+Z2+Z3);
44
45 Zth_BB2 = (1/ZB+1/ZC).^-1+ZA;
46
47 % Zth for BB4
48 Zeq = (1/(Za+Zb)+1/(Ze+Zf+Zg)).^-1;
49
50 % Delta to star conversion for unbalanced loads
51 Z1 = Zc; Z2 = Zd; Z3 = Zeq;
52
53 ZA = (Z1*Z2)/(Z1+Z2+Z3);
54 ZB = (Z2*Z3)/(Z1+Z2+Z3);
55 ZC = (Z1*Z3)/(Z1+Z2+Z3);
56
57 Zth_BB4 = (1/ZB+1/ZC).^-1+ZA;
58
59 % Zth for BB5
60 Zeq1 = (1/(Za+Zb)+1/(Zc+Zd)).^-1;
61 Zeq2 = Ze+Zf;
62
63 % Delta to star conversion for unbalanced loads
64 Z1 = Zeq2; Z2 = Zg; Z3 = Zeq1;
99
==PAGE:108==
C. MATLAB
65 ZA = (Z1*Z2)/(Z1+Z2+Z3);
66 ZB = (Z2*Z3)/(Z1+Z2+Z3);
67 ZC = (Z1*Z3)/(Z1+Z2+Z3);
68
69 Zth_BB5 = (1/ZB+1/ZC).^-1+ZA;
70
71 % Zth for BB5
72 Zeq1 = (1/(Za+Zb)+1/(Zc+Zd)).^-1;
73 Zeq2 = Zg+Zf;
74
75 % Delta to star conversion for unbalanced loads
76 Z1 = Ze; Z2 = Zeq2; Z3 = Zeq1;
77 ZA = (Z1*Z2)/(Z1+Z2+Z3);
78 ZB = (Z2*Z3)/(Z1+Z2+Z3);
79 ZC = (Z1*Z3)/(Z1+Z2+Z3);
80
81 Zth_BB6 = (1/ZB+1/ZC).^-1+ZA;
82
83 % Comparison of calculated thevenin impedances
84 Busses = {’Bus 1’;’Bus 2’;’Bus 3’;’Bus 4’;’Bus 5’;’Bus 6’;};
85 Analytical_calculations = [Zth_G1;Zth_BB2;Zth_G3;Zth_BB4;Zth_BB5;Zth_BB6;];
86 Matlab_function = [theveninEq.Zth_vc(1);theveninEq.Zth_nc(1);...
87
theveninEq.Zth_vc(2);theveninEq.Zth_nc(2);theveninEq.Zth_nc(3);...
88
theveninEq.Zth_nc(4)];
89
90 % Display results
91 table(Analytical_calculations,Matlab_function,’Rownames’,Busses)
100
==PAGE:109==
C. MATLAB
C.9
radial_system_characteristics MATLAB Script
1 % STABILITY FIGUR %
2 clear; clc; close all;
3 set(0,’defaulttextinterpreter’,’latex’)
4 set(0,’defaultaxesfontname’,’times’)
5 set(0,’defaultlinelinewidth’,1)
6 set(0,’DefaultAxesFontSize’,12)
7 set(0,’DefaultTextFontSize’,15)
8 set(0,’DefaultAxesXGrid’,’on’,’DefaultAxesYGrid’,’on’)
9
10 cos_phi = 0.95;
11 tan_theta = 10;
12 ES = 1;
13
14 phi = acos(cos_phi);
15 theta = atan(tan_theta);
16
17 Z_LN = 1;
18 Z_LD = 100:-0.1:0.1;
19
20 I = ES./ (sqrt( (Z_LN*cos(theta) + Z_LD*cos(phi)).^2 + (Z_LN*sin(theta)+Z_LD*sin(phi))
.^2 ) );
21 VR = Z_LD.*I;
22 PR = VR.*I.*cos(phi);
23
24
25 figure; hold on; box on;
26
27 plot(Z_LN./Z_LD,I) % I
28
text(2.5,0.9,’$I/I_{SC}$’)
29 plot(Z_LN./Z_LD,VR) % VR
30
text(1.4,0.35,’$V/E$’)
31 plot(Z_LN./Z_LD,PR/0.34)
32
text(2.3,0.65,’$P/P_{MAX}$’)
33
34 plot([1,1],[0,1],’--’,’Color’,’k’)
35 plot([0,2.24807],[0.79885,0.79885],’--’,’Color’,’k’)
36 plot([2.24807,2.24807],[0,0.79885],’--’,’Color’,’k’)
37 plot([0.44751,0.44751],[0,0.79885],’--’,’Color’,’k’)
38
39 text(0.35,0.05,’Normal operation’,’Rotation’,90)
40 text(0.9,0.05,’Critical value’,’Rotation’,90)
41 text(2.15,0.05,’Abnormal operation’,’Rotation’,90)
42
43 xlabel(’$Z_{LN}/Z_{LD}$’)
44 xlim([0,3])
45
46 saveTightFigureWide(gcf,sprintf(’%s\\radial_system_characteristics.pdf’,pwd))
101
==PAGE:110==
C. MATLAB
C.10
saveTightFigure MATLAB Function
1 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
2 % This function saves figure H in file outfilename %
3 % without the white space around it.
%
4 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
5
6 function saveTightFigure(h,outfilename)
7
8 if nargin == 0
9
error(’Not enough input arguments.’)
10 elseif nargin==1
11
outfilename = h;
12
h = gcf;
13 end
14
15 %% save state and set next new figures invisibles
16 dv.f = get(0, ’DefaultFigureVisible’);
17 dv.a = get(0, ’DefaultAxesVisible’);
18 set(0, ’DefaultFigureVisible’, ’on’)
19 set(0, ’DefaultAxesVisible’, ’on’)
20
21 %% copy figure
22 h_to_print = figure;
23 copyobj(get(h,’children’),h_to_print);
24
25 %% put old default visible parameters
26 set(0, ’DefaultFigureVisible’, dv.f)
27 set(0, ’DefaultAxesVisible’, dv.a)
28
29 %% find all the axes in the figure
30 hax = findall(h_to_print, ’type’, ’axes’);
31
32 %% compute the tighest box that includes all axes
33 tighest_box = [Inf Inf -Inf -Inf]; % left bottom right top
34 for i=1:length(hax)
35
set(hax(i), ’units’, ’centimeters’);
36
37
p = get(hax(i), ’position’);
38
ti = get(hax(i), ’tightinset’);
39
40
% get position as left, bottom, right, top
41
p = [p(1) p(2) p(1)+p(3) p(2)+p(4)] + ti.*[-1 -1 1 1];
42
43
tighest_box(1) = min(tighest_box(1), p(1));
44
tighest_box(2) = min(tighest_box(2), p(2));
45
tighest_box(3) = max(tighest_box(3), p(3));
46
tighest_box(4) = max(tighest_box(4), p(4));
47 end
48
49 %% move all axes to left-bottom
50 for i=1:length(hax)
51
if strcmp(get(hax(i),’tag’),’legend’)
52
continue
53
end
54
p = get(hax(i), ’position’);
55
set(hax(i), ’position’, [p(1)-tighest_box(1) p(2)-tighest_box(2) p(3) p(4)]);
56 end
57
58 %% resize figure to fit tightly
59 set(h_to_print, ’units’, ’centimeters’);
60 p = get(h_to_print, ’position’);
61
62 width = tighest_box(3)-tighest_box(1);
63 height =
tighest_box(4)-tighest_box(2);
64 set(h_to_print, ’position’, [p(1) p(2) width height]);
102
==PAGE:111==
C. MATLAB
65
66 %% set papersize
67 set(h_to_print,’PaperUnits’,’centimeters’);
68 %set(h_to_print,’PaperSize’, [width height]);
69 set(h_to_print,’PaperSize’, [2.1*width height]);
70 %set(h_to_print,’PaperPositionMode’, ’manual’);
71 set(h_to_print,’PaperPosition’,[0 0 2*width height]);
72 %set(h_to_print,’PaperPosition’,[0 0 2*width height]);
73
74 %% white background
75 %set(h_to_print, ’Color’, ’w’);
76
77 %% save it
78 saveas(h_to_print,outfilename);
79
80 %% close h_to_print
81 close(h_to_print);
103
==PAGE:112==
Department of Electrical Engineering
Centre for Electric Power and Energy (CEE)
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 325
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk
