==PAGE:1==
                                                                                    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16S rRNA analysis of the gut microbiome 
in Arctic copepods exposed to oil pollution 
and increasing water temperatures 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kamille Elvstrøm Krause 
(s123384) 
 
 
Master Thesis, February 1st 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supervisors: 
DTU BIOINFORMATICS: 
Prof. Thomas Sicheritz-Pontén, Assoc. Prof. Bent Petersen & Senior Reas. Marlene Danner Dalgaard 
DTU AQUA: 
Prof. Torkel Gissel Nielsen 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Bio- and Health Informatics 
Kemitorvet, Building 208 
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark 
Phone +45 45 25 61 61 
info@bioinformatics.dtu.dk 
hwww.bioinformatics.dtu.dk BIO- B.Sc.- 2016 
 
National Institute of Aquatic Resources 
Kemitorvet, Building 202 
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark 
Phone +45 35 88 33 00 
aqua@aqua.dtu.dk 
www.aqua.dtu.dk BIO- B.Sc.- 2016 
==PAGE:3==
3 
 
 
Preface 
This M.Sc. thesis of 35 ECTS credits constitutes the concluding project of my Master of Science in 
Engineering and Biotechnology at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) 
I would like to thank my supervisors Prof. Thomas Sicheritz-Pontén, Assoc. Prof. Bent Petersen for 
giving me the financial possibility of working on a fairly new area of marine science. A huge thank 
you goes to my supervisor Senior Reas. Marlene Danner Dalgaard for the outstanding guidance, 
help and patience in the development of laboratory protocols for the project. I want to thank my 
supervisor Prof. Torkel Gissel Nielsen from DTU Aqua for the possibility of going to Greenland for 
scientific research purposes, and for a high level of moral support. A very special thanks to all the 
people who completely out of their own generosity took time out of their schedules to help me 
navigate a path that was completely unknown to me at the start of this project: Trine Marenda 
Markussen (Marine Biology department at KU), Jacob Bælum (Senior Researcher, Chr. Hansen), 
Lea Benedicte Skov Hansen, Sarah Mak (Geogenetics, KU) and Michał Burdukiewicz (DTU 
Bioinformatics). A thank you goes to Khuong Van Dinh and Kirstine Toxværd for the samples I 
had the chance to work with. A huge thank you to everyone at DTU AQUA and DTU 
BIOINFORMATICS for always being helpful and taking time to answer my questions and to my 
family and friends who have been very patient and supporting all through the process. 
I would really have wished for more time to truly understand the possibilities when working with 
16S rRNA sequence data, as I believe this project still holds further great potential results. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
                            February 1st, 2018 
___________________________________________________________________________                         
Kamille Elvstrøm Krause  
 
                                       Date 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
4 
 
 
Abstract 
While temperatures are rising and polar ice is disappearing, vast amounts of oil resources are 
becoming available for utilization in the Arctic as well as new alternate shipping routes, making it 
important to study the effects of the inevitable future oil pollution in Arctic waters. Copepods 
account for more than 80% of the zooplankton in the ocean and the two investigated 
species Calanus finmarchicus and Calanus glacialis makes up the majority of the copepod 
populations in the Arctic. This makes these two key species in the Artic food web and their success 
extremely important both ecologically and financially, as they make up the food-base for the 
commercial fish stock. Pyrene is a polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) and one of the most 
toxic components in crude oil. In previous studies pyrene has shown to reduce growth and fertility 
and in high concentrations cause mortality in copepods. We know the main intake of pyrene and 
crude oil in copepods happens orally while feeding. Therefore, we find it very interesting to 
investigate the changes in the gut microbiome, to find possible mechanisms leading to the observed 
physiological changes observed on copepods exposed to oil pollution, as these are still completely 
unknown. This study aimed to investigate the effects of increasing temperatures and pyrene (PAH 
in crude oil) concentrations on fecal pellet microbial diversity collected from two separate species 
from a physiology experiment performed in Greenland and the effects of oil-spill response 
technologies and sampling time related to the peak in the Arctic marine phytoplankton spring 
bloom on fecal pellet microbial diversity collected from a physiology experiment performed on 
Svalbard through 16S rRNA analysis. The study concluded that in the experiment from Greenland, 
temperature showed the biggest influence on change in diversity of the fecal pellet microbial 
community, followed by some difference between species. Diversity increased with increasing 
temperatures. In the experiment from Svalbard, the time of sampling related to the peak of the 
Arctic spring bloom had the biggest influence on the diversity of the fecal pellet microbial 
community. The mechanisms for these trends are not known. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
5 
 
 
Resumé 
Mens temperaturen stiger og polarisen forsvinder, bliver store mængder olieressourcer 
tilgængelige for udnyttelse i Arktis, samt nye alternative skibsruter. Dette gør det vigtigt at 
undersøge virkningerne af den uundgåelige fremtidige olieforurening i arktiske farvande. 
Copepods tegner sig for mere end 80% af zooplanktonet i havet, og de to undersøgte arter 
Calanus finmarchicus og Calanus glacialis udgør størstedelen af copepodpopulationerne i 
Arktis. Dette gør, at disse to arter er vigtige i det arktiske food web og deres succes ekstremt 
vigtige, både økologisk og økonomisk, da de udgør fødevarebasen for den kommercielle 
fiskebestand. Pyren er et polycyklisk aromatisk carbonhydrid (PAH) og en af de mest giftige 
komponenter i råolie. I tidligere undersøgelser har pyren vist sig at reducere vækst og 
frugtbarhed og forårsage dødelighed hos copepoder i høje koncentrationer. Vi ved, at det 
primære indtag af pyren og råolie i copepoder sker mundtligt gennem indtagelse af mad. 
Derfor finder vi det meget interessant at undersøge ændringer i tarmmikrobiomet for at finde 
mulige mekanismer, der fører til de observerede fysiologiske ændringer observeret på 
copepoder udsat for olieforurening, da disse stadig er helt ukendte. Denne undersøgelse har 
til formål at undersøge virkningerne af stigende temperaturer og pyren (PAH i råolie) 
koncentrationer på fækal pelletmikrobial diversitet indsamlet fra to separate arter fra et 
fysiologisk eksperiment udført i Grønland og virkningerne af oliespildrespons teknologier, og 
prøveudtagningstid 
relateret 
til 
toppen 
i 
den 
arktiske 
marine 
fytoplankton 
forårsopblomstring på fækal pellet mikrobielle mangfoldighed indsamlet fra et fysiologisk 
eksperiment udført på Svalbard gennem 16S rRNA analyse. Undersøgelsen konkluderede, at 
temperaturen i eksperimentet fra Grønland viste den største indflydelse på forandring i 
mangfoldigheden af fækalt pelletmikrobielle samfund efterfulgt af en vis forskel mellem arter. 
Mangfoldigheden steg med stigende temperaturer. I eksperimentet fra Svalbard havde 
prøvetagningstidspunktet i forbindelse med toppen af den arktiske forårsopblomstring den 
største indflydelse på diversiteten af fækalpelletmikrobielle samfund. Mekanismerne for disse 
tendenser er ikke kendte. 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
6 
 
 
Contents 
Preface ................................................................................................................................................. 3 
Abstract ............................................................................................................................................... 4 
Resumé ................................................................................................................................................ 5 
Contents .............................................................................................................................................. 6 
1 Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 7 
2 Project methodology (results & discussion) - problems and solutions ....................................... 8 
2.1 Fecal pellet sampling ............................................................................................................................. 8 
2.1.1 Greenland .......................................................................................................................................... 8 
2.1.2 Svalbard ............................................................................................................................................ 8 
2.2 Bacterial DNA extraction ...................................................................................................................... 9 
2.3 NGS Sequencing .................................................................................................................................. 10 
2.4 16S rRNA data treatment and analysis ............................................................................................. 12 
2.5 Statistics ................................................................................................................................................ 13 
3 Bibliography .................................................................................................................................. 37 
5 Appendix 1 - Exceeding experiments ....................................... Fejl! Bogmærke er ikke defineret. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
7 
 
 
1 Introduction 
The pristine and fragile marine ecosystem of the Arctic is under pressure from oil exploitation and 
shipping, posing as major ecotoxicological threats that may potentially cause devastating oil 
pollution (Maksoud, 2008; Schmidt, 2013). As temperatures are on the rise and polar ice is 
disappearing, these resources are becoming increasingly available in Arctic waters, while at the 
same time new shipping routes to the north is opening up and increasing the general commercial 
utility of the area (Barata, Calbet, Saiz, Ortiz, & Bayona, 2005; Nørregaard et al., 2014). 
Additionally, the oil industry is pushing to expand their drilling efforts in the Arctic region at an 
equal pace (Maksoud 2008; Schmidt and Rach 2013). Should the development continue on this 
path, pollution caused by oil spills will be somewhat of an inevitability with clean-ups complicated 
by the presence of sea ice while low temperatures cause for long degradation times (Welsh & 
O’Gorman, 2005). Further studies on the effects of such pollution are therefore critical. While the 
direct negative impact on larger animals such as mammals or birds are clearly visible, they are also 
indirectly affected through their food intake over time (ACIA, 2005). 
 
This thesis expands upon two unpublished studies performed at the University of Copenhagen’s 
Arctic station (Qeqertarsuaq, Disko Island, Disko Bay, West Greenland) (Dinh, 2018) and Svalbard 
University Center (Longyearbyen, Svalbard) (Toxværd et al., 2018). From Greenland our data rest 
upon fecal pellets collected at the end of the experiments. These experiments investigated the 
physiological effects on adult female copepods of the species Calanus finmarchicus and Calanus 
glacialis when exposed to different concentrations of PAH pyrene and increased water 
temperatures. The Svalbard study similarly investigated the physiological changes in adult copepod 
females of the species C. glacialis, but as a result of several types of oil spill response technologies 
applied to the surface of the water. From this study fecal pellet samples were taken at the beginning 
and end of the experiments in early and late spring respectively. 
 
According to studies by Grenvald, Nielsen, & Hjorth (2013) the species C. finmarchicus and C. 
glacialis are the two major contributors to the Arctic copepod populations, copepods otherwise 
accounting for more than 80 % of the global oceanic zooplankton (Darnis et al., 2012). As the 
primary food source for most commercial species of fish in the region, they are both economically 
and biological indispensable with C. glacialis in particular being vulnerable to increased 
temperatures as a true Arctic species. With a higher content of lipid compared to the North Atlantic 
C. finmarchicus, the C. glacialis is an important source of nutrients in both quality and quantity for 
most species in the Arctic dependent of oceanic food sources, but as ocean temperature rises in the 
Arctic, the range of C. finmarchicus will expand further north into areas previously dominated by 
C. glacialis (Grenvald et al., 2013). As described and investigated here and in the studies from 
Greenland and Svalbard, rising temperatures and pollution might negatively impact the health of 
copepod species. Should populations collapse, the effects would have the potential to cause ripples 
through the marine pelagic food web with enormous and lasting consequences for the ecological 
and economical state of the region. 
 
Another consequence of the expanding shipping routes and areas available for drilling operations is 
the introduction of Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) to the natural environment (Wolska, 
Mechlińska, Rogowska, & Namieśnik, 2012). Past studies have shown PAHs to be toxic to marine 
animals (Almeda et al., 2013; Barata et al., 2005; Incardona et al., 2015; Jensen, Nielsen, & 
Dahlloef, 2008), causing reduced growth, reduced fecundity and in some cases mortality, in 
particular in early stages of Arctic copepods such as C. glacialis and C. finmarchicus (Barata et al., 
2005; Bellas & Thor, 2007; Grenvald et al., 2013; Hjorth & Nielsen, 2011; Jensen et al., 2008). 
Among the most common PAHs found in crude oil is pyrene (Reddy et al., 2012; Reddy & Quinn, 
==PAGE:8==
8 
 
 
2001), but more than 20 different PAHs have been found in coastal waters affected by oil pollution, 
in mixture causing a additive toxic effect (Barata et al., 2005). From previous studies we recognize 
the main intake of pyrene and crude oil to happen through feeding (Berrojalbiz et al., 2009), and 
oceanic pyrene concentrations can vary from trace level (Annammala, Abdullah, Mokhtar, Joseph, 
& Sakari, 2013) to approximately 2.3 µg L-1 (Reddy & Quinn, 2001)and as high as 115 µg L-1. 
Copepods exposed to oil pollution and increased temperatures have been observed to show 
physiological changes. As the main intake of oil related compounds happens through feeding we 
wanted to investigate the changes in diversity of the fecal pellet microbiome from exposed C. 
finmarchicus and C. glacialis copepods, as this area is still highly unexplored. 
 
The aim of this thesis project was to investigate the changes diversity of the fecal pellet microbiome 
from Arctic copepods C. finmarchicus and C. glacialis exposed to increasing temperature and 
marine pollution caused by oil spills. The diversity of the fecal pellet microbiome was investigated 
through 16S rRNA analysis, with the expectation that increased temperature and exposure to 
pollution would lead to a decrease in diversity of the fecal pellet microbiome and thus an indication 
of the health status of the exposed copepods. 
2 Project methodology (results & discussion) - problems and solutions 
2.1 Fecal pellet sampling 
Even though the fecal pellet sampling was not officially a part of this master thesis project, I would 
still like to include my thoughts on using a standardized collection and washing protocol for 
sampling of copepod fecal pellets for NGS analysis. The protocol I recommend is available in 
Appendix 3. To ensure as little contamination to the samples as possible, all pellets should be rinsed 
in several washing steps after sampling, but without to violent a treatment as the chitin membrane 
might break. Blank samples of the autoclaved, filtered seawater used for the sampling and rinsing 
should be included in the sequencing analysis. Not using a standardized method for all fecal pellet 
sampling can cause contamination of the fecal pellet samples from exposure medium or through 
non-clean sampling equipment. Therefore a standardized method for fecal pellet sampling should 
always be used if possible. 
2.1.1 Greenland 
Due to very restricted laboratory facilities in Greenland as a result of a collapsed roof of the 
laboratory building and the set-up of temporary laboratory containers we did not have the 
possibility of performing sterile sampling of fecal pellets, meaning the washing steps were 
performed immediately prior to the DNA extraction. This could have had an effect on bacterial 
community extracted from the fecal pellet samples as contamination from the surrounding water 
could have occurred. Therefore samples of the seawater the pellets were stored in was included in 
the analysis and shown to have high dissimilarity to all other samples although clustered with the 
samples from Greenland in a separate lower level cluster. (See Figure 3 in Manuscript) 
2.1.2 Svalbard 
The sampling in Svalbard was performed at a high level of laboratory sterility to avoid 
contamination of samples. All pellets were washed twice through transferring them between Petri 
dishes containing 0.2 µm, filtered seawater and all handling was performed under a fume hood, 
wearing gloves, and a mask. The steps taken in Svalbard to assure no contamination of samples 
were at a much higher level than the ones performed in the Greenland study, although I would 
recommend using autoclaved, filtered seawater to ensure sterility and include a third washing step. 
==PAGE:9==
9 
 
 
Further more the Svalbard samples were stored in solution MBL from the QIAamp BiOstic® 
Bacteremia DNA Kit (Carlsbad, CA, United States), which highly limited the possibilities of 
changing the DNA extraction method. This was not recommendable as the QIAamp BiOstic® 
Bacteremia DNA Kit had not been tested on similar samples prior and its efficiency had therefore 
not been verified. 
2.2 Bacterial DNA extraction 
The bacterial DNA extraction method development and final extractions of all samples were 
performed prior to the start of this master thesis project as a 20 ECTS special course at DTU 
Bioinformatics. The report containing the theory, problems, results, discussion and solutions for the 
development process has been included in this thesis for informative purposes as Appendix 4. In 
short the QIAamp BiOstic® Bacteremia DNA Kit (Figure 1) was chosen mainly because of the 
storage method chosen for the Svalbard samples, though with a few alterations to avoid loss of low 
abundant DNA samples, such as replacing the standard kit spin filter column with a Monarch PCR 
Cleanup Column (New England Biolabs), eluting the DNA in a smaller volume and the exclusion 
of the bead steps. As described in the report in Appendix 4 the DNA extraction method was tested 
on test samples of C. finmarchicus fecal pellets from the Materials and Chemistry department at the 
SINTEF/NTNU Sealab in Trondheim, Norway originating from the labs ongoing stock culture of C. 
finmarchicus. Generally the biggest issue to overcome through the development of the DNA 
extraction protocol for copepod fecal pellet samples have been the very small sample size and 
therefore low DNA concentration outputs. This poses high risk of loosing to much DNA during the 
extraction process and other extraction methods better suited for very small sample sizes should be 
considered in the future, for example phenol/chloroform extraction methods, although more safety 
precautions have to be taken using these techniques due to toxicity of solutions. It also needs to be 
considered further if the chitin membrane of the fecal pellets need to be further destroyed during the 
DNA extraction process, either enzymatically or mechanically. 
 
 
Figure 1 
Schematic of the Bacteremia DNA Isolation Kit protocol retrieved from the protocol 
==PAGE:10==
10 
 
 
As a final test of the usability of the DNA extraction method chosen, a test run of the Nextera XT 
Tagmentation and amplification index addition (first part of the DNA Library Prep Kit protocol- 
Reference Guide, Illumina Support) was performed, followed by amplicon cleanup and a Agilent 
2100 Bioanalyzer System assay check to test fragment size (Agilent Technologies Waldbronn, 
Germany, chip: Agilent High Sensitivity DNA kit). Unfortunately it turned out the Nextera XT kit 
reagents had expired and so the test produced zero results. Here an error was made, which turned 
out to have great consequences for the following project process development. Due to time 
constraints of the special course the test was not redone with a new kit. A new kit was successfully 
tested on other samples in the same lab facilities, which was known to have even lower DNA 
concentrations than the lowest DNA concentration samples from this project, and a fatal assumption 
was made that the kit would then also work on the low DNA concentration samples from this 
project. Therefore all samples from both Greenland and Svalbard had DNA extracted using the 
chosen method. When the Nextera XT Tagmentation and amplification index addition was finally 
tested again at the beginning of this thesis project it did not work, the DNA was not fragmented 
when tested on the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer System (Agilent Technologies Waldbronn, Germany, 
chip: Agilent High Sensitivity DNA kit). (See further discussion of sequencing issues below) 
2.3 NGS Sequencing 
The report on the DNA extraction method development (Appendix 4) included a discussion on the 
preferred method for sequencing to get the optimal amount of information out of the samples. The 
report concluded that shotgun metagenomic sequencing was to be preferred over 16S rRNA 
sequencing, offering a much higher resolution and a far more specific taxonomic and functional 
classification of sequences as well as the ability to investigate and find new bacterial genes and 
genomes. The plan was to perform sequencing on the Illumina Hiseq 4000, using the Illumina 
Nextera XT Library Prep kit, and sequencing with a read length of 150 base pairs, paired end reads, 
dual indexing, pooling and running on a full flow cell. But as mentioned in the previous section, the 
Illumina Nextera XT Tagmentation and amplification index addition step did not produce the 
correct fragment size. The fragments were too long. After trials of different samples (both test 
samples and the experimental samples) it was concluded that the samples contained something 
inhibiting the Illumina Tagmentation enzyme from fragmenting the DNA, this was the case for both 
the test samples and the Greenland and Svalbard samples. As it was not possible to test for what 
kind of inhibitor the samples contained due to funding constraints, several methods were tried to 
solve the issue. Firstly, diluting the higher DNA concentration samples from Greenland was tried to 
also dilute the expected inhibitor, this was not successful. Secondly, increasing the concentration of 
the Illumina Tagmentation enzyme in the reaction was tried to overcome the inhibition, but this also 
failed to produce the correct fragment length. It was considered to try and do additional cleanup 
steps with a silica column, but the risk of loosing too much of the DNA in the low concentrations 
samples in the process was considered too great. Due to time constraints of the thesis project period 
it was concluded that the Illumina Nextera XT Library Prep kit was not a possibility for these 
samples. As inhibition was seen of the enzymatic fragmentation, mechanical fragmentation was 
then considered. 
 
Due to lack of equipment for handling mechanical fragmentation at such low sample volume and 
DNA concentrations at the lab facilities at DMAC, DTU, a collaboration was made with phD 
student Sarah Mak from the Gilbert Group at the Centre for GeoGenetics’ lab under Copenhagen 
University. Two samples from the Svalbard experiment was tested on a mechanical fragmentation 
protocol provided by Sarah Mak, but not described in this thesis due to a no sharing policy. They 
contained some of the lowest sample DNA concentrations. The mechanical fragmentation was 
performed on a Covaris M220 Focused-ultrasonicator™ fitted with a M220 Holder XTU Insert 
==PAGE:11==
11 
 
 
microTUBE 15 µl for fragmentation within microTUBE-15 AFA Beads Screw-Cap Cases, which is 
the smallest volume available. The fragment size was subsequently tested on an Agilent 
TapeStation 4200 with software vA.02.01 and High Sensitivity D1000 ScreenTape® (Agilent 
Technologies Waldbronn, Germany) before cleanup and end repair. The resulting fragment size of 
one Svalbard sample was slightly below the approximately 300 pb which would be optimal, but the 
mechanical fragmentation was showed to work (Figure 2,A), while the other Svalbard sample 
showed a very tiny bump at 300 bp, but this was probably due to the sample concentration being too 
low prior to fragmentation (Figure 2,B). So a solution to the problem of Illumina enzymatic 
inhibition in our samples was found by doing mechanical fragmentation. Unfortunately once again 
time constraints did not give enough time to perfect the mechanical fragmentation method while 
also availability at the GeoGenetics lab was very limited. Therefore 16S rRNA sequencing was 
chosen for this project as it had been tested and known to work with our samples. So the inhibition 
of the Illumina tagmentation enzyme did not inhibit any enzymatic reaction in the 16S rRNA 
amplification PCR reactions. 
 
Figure 2 
Fragment size test on an Agilent TapeStation 4200 with software vA.02.01 and High Sensitivity D1000 
ScreenTape® (Agilent Technologies Waldbronn, Germany) before cleanup and end repair. A and B are separate 
samples from the Svalbard experiments. Peak marked with orange line is the desired result. 
 
The preparation of 16S rRNA amplicon fragments were prepared as described by the Illumina 
MiSeq 16S Metagenomic Sequencing Library Preparation protocol (REF), with only very few 
modifications to better accommodate our samples. Due to the very low DNA concentrations in 
some of the samples they could not be measured, meaning normalization of the DNA concentration 
==PAGE:12==
12 
 
 
prior to the first amplicon PCR could not be performed. DNA concentrations were normalized prior 
to sequencing. The sequencing was chosen to be paired-end at 2 × 300 bp using a MiSeq Reagent 
Kit v3 (600-cycle) on the Illumina MiSeq platform. This method is widely used for 16S rRNA data 
and is also what is recommended in the Illumina MiSeq 16S Metagenomic Sequencing Library 
Preparation protocol. 
2.4 16S rRNA data treatment and analysis 
The USEARCH analysis tool (R. C. Edgar, 2013) is one of the most widely used analysis tools for 
16S rRNA sequence data treatment and analysis. The 64-bit version offers search and clustering 
algorithms that especially for large quantities of data are magnitudes faster than BLAST. By 
combining several tasks and algorithms into every command it cuts away a lot of research and 
computing time. As the Illumina Miseq sequence-output was already demultiplexed by the onboard 
computer after the sequencing run, the USEARCH manuals recommend going straight to merging 
the paired end reads. The USEARCH online manuals (R. Edgar, n.d.) supply elaborate explanations 
and arguments for how to treat you data to create an operational taxonomic unit table (OTU table). 
The data produced for this thesis was quite straightforward standard Illumina Miseq data, so 
generally the default parameters of the USEARCH commands were followed unless otherwise 
recommended by the step-by-step manual. After the production of the OTU fasta file and the OTU 
count table, the Quantitative Insights Into Microbial Ecology (QIIME) analysis tool was used to 
annotate the list of OTU’s. QIIME is know for having easy to use Python scripts and easy download 
links to annotation databases such as the Greengenes (16S rRNA OTUs), SILVA (16S/18S rRNA 
OTUs) and UNITE (ITS OTUs). The Greengenes database (DeSantis et al., 2006, release 13_8) was 
chosen for this annotation with the RDP (Ribosomal Database Project) classifier (Wang, Garrity, 
Tiedje, & Cole, 2007) trained against it as recommended by the assign_taxonomy.py script in the 
QIIME scripts description. Rarefaction curves were produced for the OTU tables before and after 
the recommended normalization step in USEARCH (Figure 3). The rarefaction curves of the non-
normalized OTU table (Figure 3A) showed most samples displaying a nice trajectory towards a 
plateau indicating that most of the diversity had been covered. The difference between the raw OTU 
table and the normalized and rarefied OTU table produced with USEARCH shows what big of a 
difference rarefaction makes in data analysis, by removing any biases created by difference in 
sample sizes and non normalized DNA concentrations. Therefore the normalized and rarefied OTU 
table was used for the statistical analyses. 
 
 
Figure 3 
Rarefaction curves of raw OTU table counts (A) and normalized/rarefied OTU table counts (B) 
==PAGE:13==
13 
 
 
2.5 Statistical analyses 
For the analysis of the diversity distributions and the taxonomic distributions in the data the R 
package Vegan (Oksanen et al., 2018) was used.  Due to the very large complexity of and 
differences in the experimental design between the Greenland and Svalbard samples the two 
datasets were for the most part analyzed separately. In the analysis of the Svalbard samples the 
decision was made to eliminate the control samples from the beginning of the experiment. This was 
due to wild copepod species having a very different diet composition of higher variability compared 
to the experimental setup where they were only fed a single algae species. As diet is widely known 
to influence bacterial composition in the gut microbiome of many species, it made no sense to 
include the start of experiment samples with the rest of the experimental samples. If more time had 
been available it would have been interesting to compare the control samples from the start of the 
experiment to the end of the experiment in Svalbard, and the two control groups at the end of the 
experiments between the Svalbard and Greenland population. The Vegan R package provides a 
wide variety of tools for the describing community ecology, even with multivariate analyses. It 
provides basic functions of diversity analysis, community ordination and dissimilarity analysis, but 
can be combined with other packages to give a more detailed and in depth analysis of the data. 
Unfortunately I didn’t have the time to discover all the possibilities of community ecology analysis 
in R, as this covers a very wide range of analysis tools. As I am very new to 16S rRNA sequence 
analysis I chose to focus on more basic statistics and plots. One of the tools I used for testing the 
effects of variables on the Shannon index alpha diversity and the fraction of OTUs belonging to 
pyrene or crude oil degrading genera was linear models. Which found some significant linear 
relationships between variables and the Shannon indices and the fraction of OTUs belonging to 
pyrene or crude oil degrading genera. In creating a linear model for the Shannon indices two models 
were tested: 
lm1 <- Shannon ~ Species * Temperature * Treatment 
and 
lm2 <- Shannon ~ Species * Temperature + Treatment 
The ‘glance’ function in R provided the Akaike information criterion (AIC) and the Bayesian 
information criterion (BIC) values for the two models. The first model (lm1) produced an AIC 
value of 37.56 and a BIC value of 89.10, whereas the second model (lm2) produced an AIC value 
of 29.17 and a BIC value of 51.25. Meaning that the first model was exp((29.17-37.56)/2) = 0.015 
times as probable as the first model to minimize the information loss. This means, according to the 
AIC values of the two models, the second model was significantly more likely to minimize 
information loss. The BIC value also indicates that lm2 is a significantly better fit as ΔBIC > 10 
meaning a very strong evidence against the model with the higher BIC value. So therefore the 
second model was chosen to describe the data. 
 
To compare beta diversity, describing the community diversity between samples based on Bray-
Curtis, different scaling plots were compared: Principal component analysis (PCA) (Figure 4), 
Canonical correspondence analysis (CCA) (Figure 5) and Non-metric multidimensional scaling 
(NMDS) (See Figure 4 in manuscript). Both PCA and CCA make assumptions of linear 
relationships between the data and the underlying latent variables represented by the principal 
components, whereas NMDS does not. As the data produced in the normalized and rarefied OTU 
table of this analysis was not really normally distributed with a very high number of low abundance 
OTUs the NDMS plots for both the Greenland and Svalbard data was chosen to depict the best 
multi dimensional scaling visual. All three scaling techniques show similar orientation of the data. 
 
==PAGE:14==
14 
 
 
 
Figure 4 
Principal component analysis (PCA) plot of the Bray-Curtis distances calculated for the Greenland (A) 
and Svalbard (B) OTU tables respectively 
 
 
Figure 5 
Canonical correspondence analysis (CCA) plot of the Bray-Curtis distances calculated for the 
Greenland (A) and Svalbard (B) OTU tables respectively 
==PAGE:15==
15 
 
 
3 Manuscript 
3.1 Abstract 
With world-wide temperatures increasing and Arctic oil exploitations made possible, it is more than 
ever crucial to investigate the effect of these environmental stressors on fragile Arctic marine 
copepod populations and their physiological responses, as these make up 80% of the Arctic food-
web base. This study aimed to investigate the effects of increasing temperatures and pyrene (PAH 
in crude oil) concentrations on fecal pellet microbial diversity collected from two separate species 
from a physiology experiment performed in Greenland and the effects of oil-spill response 
technologies and sampling time related to the peak in the Arctic marine phytoplankton spring 
bloom on fecal pellet microbial diversity collected from a physiology experiment performed on 
Svalbard through 16S rRNA analysis. The study concluded that in the experiment from Greenland, 
temperature showed the biggest influence on change in diversity of the fecal pellet microbial 
community, followed by some difference between species. Diversity increased with increasing 
temperatures. In the experiment from Svalbard, the time of sampling related to the peak of the 
Arctic spring bloom had the biggest influence on the diversity of the fecal pellet microbial 
community. The mechanisms for these trends are not known. 
3.3 Materials and Methods 
3.3.1 Study species 
In this study, female individuals of two calanoid copepod species, Calanus finmarchicus and 
Calanus glacialis, were investigated for their gut microbiome. C. finmarchicus has generally been 
regarded as a north Atlantic species, but has now moved into Arctic regions due to rising 
temperatures, greatly expanding its range of distribution . In distinction, C. glacialis is a true Arctic 
species, with a solely Arctic distribution. All individuals of the study populations were wild-caught 
in their respective habitat. 
3.3.2 Experimental design and fecal pellet sampling 
Samples were obtained from two separate experiments performed in Greenland and Svalbard both 
investigating the physiological effects on arctic marine copepods exposed to oil, oil-mitigating 
treatments or oil compounds, while the Greenland study also investigated the effects of rising 
temperatures. 
3.3.2.1 Greenland 
The detailed experimental design was as described by Dinh (2018). Wild-caught females from 
Disko Bay, Greenland of the species C. finmarchicus and C. glacialis were exposed to three 
different temperatures (2, 6, and 10 °C) and six different exposure solutions (seawater control, 
acetone solvent control, 1, 10, 100 and 100+ nM pyrene) for 6 days with three replicates for each 
treatment. The samples from the 10 nM pyrene treatment were excluded from this experiment. Dinh 
(2018) explains the reason of choice for concentrations and temperatures (See appendix 2). The 
experiment was performed as described by Dinh (2018). At the end of the exposure experiment, 
when all bottles containing copepods were filtered and the number of fecal pellets had been 
counted, the pellets were sampled using a Pasteur pipette with a rubber bulb. All pellets present in 
the Petri dish were sampled for every experimental unit and numbers were noted. The pellets were 
transferred with a minimum amount of filtered seawater into 2 mL Eppendorf tubes and 
immediately frozen at -80 °C. During handling all Petri dishes and samples were kept on ice. 
==PAGE:16==
16 
 
 
3.3.2.2 Svalbard 
The detailed experimental design was as described by Toxværd et al. (2018). Wild-caught females 
from Isfjorden, Svalbard of the species C. glacialis were exposed to sampled water from eight 
floating mesocosms set up near Sveagruva in Svalbard containing four exposure treatments (control 
(CNTL), Natural attenuation of crude oil (NATT), in-situ burning of crude oil (ISB) and chemical 
dispersion of crude oil (DISP)) with two replicates of each treatment. The water was sampled in 
early spring (March, before peak in spring bloom) and late spring (May, after peak in spring 
bloom), creating two separate laboratory experiments. The two identical experiments were 
performed as described by Toxværd et al. (2018). (See appendix 3). Fecal pellets were sampled on 
day two of the early spring experiment and day one of the late spring experiment only for the 
control treatments and on the last day of both the experiments for all treatments. After counting of 
the fecal pellets, the ones chosen for sampling were transferred with a 100 µL micropipette to a 
Petri dish containing clean 0.2 µm filtered seawater (FSW). This washing step was repeated twice. 
10 pellets from each treatment in replicates of three were transferred with a 100 µL micropipette to 
a 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube containing 150 uL of solution MBL from the QIAamp BiOstic® 
Bacteremia DNA Kit (Carlsbad, CA, United States) with a minimum amount of seawater. They 
were immediately frozen at -20 °C. During handling all Petri dishes and samples were kept on ice. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:17==
17 
 
 
Table 1 
Metadata for the total of 122 samples 
==PAGE:18==
18 
 
 
==PAGE:19==
19 
 
 
 
3.3.3 Bacterial DNA Extraction 
DNA was extracted from all samples using the QIAamp BiOstic® Bacteremia DNA Kit (MO 
BIO/QIAGEN, Carlsbad, CA, United States) with certain alterations to the “Instruction Manual”, 
such as replacing the standard kit spin filter column with a smaller Monarch PCR Cleanup Column 
(New England Biolabs). The Greenland samples were centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 3 min and as 
much seawater as possible was removed without disturbing the fecal pellets. The fecal pellets were 
resuspended with 200 µL autoclaved artificial seawater and transferred to a clean 2 mL Collection 
Tube. Once more the samples were centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 3 min and as much seawater as 
possible was removed. The samples were then washed with 200 µL autoclaved artificial seawater 
and centrifuged at 18,000 x g for 3 min. As much seawater as possible was removed without 
disturbing the pellets. The “BiOstic® Bacteremia DNA Isolation Kit Sample Instruction Manual” 
was then followed from step 2 except for the exclusion of the MicroBead Tubes and the vortexing 
at maximum speed for 10 min. Instead the samples were incubated for lysing in a 2 mL Collection 
Tube. Also the samples were diluted in 2 X 10 µL of Elution Buffer and the extracted DNA was 
stored in 1.5 ml Lo Binding Eppendorf Tubes at -80 °C. The Svalbard samples were only added 300 
µL of solution MBL for lysing as they were already stored in 150 µL MBL. The “BiOstic® 
Bacteremia DNA Isolation Kit Instruction Manual” was then followed from step 2 the same as the 
Greenland samples. Due to very low DNA concentrations, samples could not be measured and 
normalizing the concentration across samples was not possible. 
3.3.4 16S rRNA Illumina sequencing 
Bacterial 16S rRNA gene amplicons were PCR amplified, purified, indexed and sequenced 
according to the Illumina MiSeq 16S Metagenomic Sequencing Library Preparation protocol 
(REF), with a few modifications. The amplicon library was generated using 341F (5´-TCGTC 
GGCAGCGTCAGATGTGTATAAGAGACAGCCTACGGGNGGCWGCAG-3´) and 785R (5´-G 
TCTCGTGGGCTCGGAGATGTGTATAAGAGACAGGACTACHVGGGTATCTAATCC-3´) 
PCR primers as described in the protocol. Illumina adapter overhang sequences are underlined and 
covered ~464 bp of the hyper-variable regions V3 and V4 of the 16S rRNA gene (Klindworth et al., 
2013). An amplicon PCR reaction was prepared according to the protocol, but was performed on a 
96-well Thermo-cycler using the following program: 95 °C5 min (95 °C30 s + 55 °C30 s + 72 °C30 s) × 
25 cycles + 72 °C5 min and cooled to 4 °C. PCR amplicon cleanup was performed according to the 
protocol, but amplicon products were eluted in 22 µl of Buffer EB (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and 
20 µl of supernatant was transferred to a new 96-well PCR plate. Adding of Illumina Nextera XT 
==PAGE:20==
20 
 
 
dual-Index Primers through PCR was performed according to the protocol, but was performed on a 
96-well Thermo-cycler using the following program: 95 °C3 min (95 °C30 s + 55 °C30 s + 72 °C30 s) × 
10 cycles + 72 °C5 min and cooled to 4 °C. The second PCR amplicon cleanup was performed 
according to the protocol, and amplicon products were eluted in Buffer EB (Qiagen, Hilden, 
Germany). DNA quantity was assessed on a Thermo Scientific™ NanoDrop™ spectrophotometer, 
DNA concentrations were calculated in nM and amplicon libraries were pooled in equimolar 
concentrations. The pooled amplicon library was paired-end sequenced at 2 × 300 bp using a MiSeq 
Reagent Kit v3 (600-cycle) on the Illumina MiSeq platform. 
3.3.5 Data treatment and analysis 
The produced demultiplexed 16S rRNA sequences were treated and analyzed using the default 
parameters, unless specified, with USEARCH v10.0.240 64 bit (R. C. Edgar, 2013) and QIIME, 
v1.9.1 (Quantitative Insight into Microbial Ecology) (Caporaso et al., 2010). The fastq_mergepairs 
command in USEARCH was used to merge paired-end reads with the fastq_maxdiffs function set 
to 10 maximum number of mismatches in the alignment. The fastx_truncate command in 
USEARCH was used to strip primers, with stripleft set to 17 bases and stripright set to 21 bases 
according to the forward and reverse PCR primer lengths. The fastq_filter command in USEARCH 
was used to filter the reads with the fastq_trunclen function set to 400 bases and the fastq_maxee 
function set to 1.0, discarding reads with more than one total expected error for all bases in the read 
after truncation. The fastx_uniques command in USEARCH was used to dereplicate the filtered 
reads and the cluster_otus command in USEARCH was used to cluster the unique reads into 
operational taxonomic units (OTU’s) at 97% sequence identity, which also filters out chimeras and 
discards singletons by default. The otutab command in USEARCH was used to create a 97% 
identity OTU table from the merged, but unfiltered reads. The otutab_norm command in 
USEARCH was used to normalize and rarefy the OTU table with the sample_size function set to 
5000, to reduce the effect of the difference in amount of fecal pellet matter DNA was extracted 
from. The RDP (Ribosomal Database Project) classifier (Wang et al., 2007) trained against the 
Greengenes database (DeSantis et al., 2006, release 13_8) was used for taxonomic classification of 
the OTU sequences through the assign_taxonomy.py script in QIIME. The resulting OTU table and 
taxonomic classification file was used in the following ecological and statistical analysis. 
3.3.6 Statistical analyses 
Due to the very large complexity of and differences in the experimental design between Greenland 
and Svalbard the two datasets were for the most part analyzed separately. Also for the Svalbard 
analysis the start control samples were not included in the analysis either due to the difference in a 
complex diet of wild copepods and the uniform diet they received during the experiment. Data 
analysis and visualization were performed using the Vegan (Oksanen et al., 2018) package from R 
v3.4.3 operated through R Studio v1.1.419. For the alpha diversity analysis, the effect of 
experimental variables on Shannon indices was tested through linear models. To compare 
community diversity between samples, or beta diversity, Non-metric multidimensional scaling 
(NMDS) with a stable solution from random starts, axis scaling and species scores based on Bray-
Curtis, sensitive to OTU abundances, distances were performed using the ‘metaMDS’ function in R 
from the OTU abundances. To define the proportion of variance explained by the experimental 
variables, permutational multivariate analysis of variance using Bray-Curtis distance matrices was 
performed in R using the ‘adonis’ function. To calculate the contribution of individual OTUs to the 
overall Bray-Curtis dissimilarity, similarity percentages analyses were performed on the OTU 
abundances with the ‘simper’ function in R. Lastly, the fraction of OTUs belonging to genera 
known to hold capabilities of pyrene or crude oil degradation (Prince, Gramain, & McGenity, 2010) 
was calculated and visualized against the fraction of OTUs not taxonomically classified to genus 
==PAGE:21==
21 
 
 
level and the fraction of OTUs taxonomically classified to genus level, but not known to be pyrene 
or crude oil degrading. The effect of experimental variables on the fraction of OTUs belonging to 
oil degrading genera, were tested through linear models. 
3.4 Results 
3.4.1 General sequence data characterization 
DNA was extracted from arctic copepod fecal pellets produced under controlled experimental 
conditions in Greenland and Svalbard and 16S rRNA sequence libraries were prepared and 
sequenced. The 2x 300 bp Illumina Miseq sequencing produced a total of 21.4 M forward and 
reverse read pairs where 15.4 M read pairs (72.09 %) were successfully merged and a total of 1.7 M 
(8.18 %) of those were found to be unique sequences after merging and quality filtering. After 
clustering of unique reads using a 97 % sequence similarity threshold a total of 2,223 OTU 
sequences were found (Table 1). Thereafter a total of 15.01 M (97.4 %) of the merged, but 
unfiltered reads mapped to the OTUs producing the OTU table. Rarefaction curves1 of the raw and 
normalized/rarefied OTU tables showed most samples displaying a nice trajectory towards a plateau 
indicating that most of the diversity had been covered. 
 
Table 2 
Quality metrics for sequencing data 
 
3.4.2 Phylum distribution analysis 
Approximately 99 % of the bacterial community in all the Greenland samples was represented by 
the top 7 most abundant bacterial phyla and by the top 8 most abundant bacterial phyla in the 
Svalbard samples out of a total of 33 phyla detected through taxonomic assemblage of all samples 
(Figure 1). In particular the phyla Proteobacteria, Cyanobacteria and Bacteroidetes, were very 
predominant in the Greenland samples (Figure 1A,B), whereas only Proteobacteria and 
Bacteroidetes were predominant in the Svalbard samples (Figure 1C). Therefore the phylum 
Cyanobacteria seems to generate an important distinction between the bacterial composition of 
arctic copepod fecal pellets originating from Greenland and Svalbard. At the phylum level all 
samples originating from Greenlandic C. finmarchicus had very similar bacterial communities, and 
were also similar to all samples from Greenlandic C. glacialis, except for the 2 °C, 100+ nM pyrene 
                                               
1 See Figure 3 in method discussion 
==PAGE:22==
22 
 
 
sample from Greenlandic C. glacialis, which had a higher relative abundance of the Cyanobacteria 
phylum. Generally the 2 °C samples from C. glacialis seemed to have a slightly higher relative 
abundance of Cyanobacteria (mean = 36.67 %) compared to the 6 °C (mean = 18.16 %) and 10 °C 
(mean = 15.39 %) samples. 
Within the Greenlandic C. finmarchicus samples a very slight tendency of increasing relative 
abundance of the Bacteroidetes phylum with increasing pyrene concentration was observed. Within 
the Greenlandic C. glacialis samples the relative abundance of Bacteroidetes did not seem to follow 
any pattern. For the C. glacialis samples from Svalbard a general higher relative abundance of the 
Bacteroidetes was observed in the late spring (mean = 24.09 %) compared to early spring (mean = 
11.77 %) samples. The relative abundance of the phylum Proteobacteria remained fairly unchanged 
as the most dominant phylum through all treatments, sampling times, and geographical origin 
between 56.58 % and 92.18 %, with the exception of the 2 °C, 100+ nM pyrene sample from 
Greenlandic C. glacialis, which had a quite low relative abundance of Proteobacteria of 40.79 %. 
In the Greenlandic samples for both species and all temperatures there is an enrichment of the 
phylum Firmicutes in the 100+ nM pyrene samples (>1 %) compared to all other treatments (<0. 
%). This tendency was not observed in the oil containing samples from Svalbard. Across all 
Greenlandic C. finmarchicus samples at least 96.09 % of the OTUs accounted for < 1 % of the total 
abundance, for the Greenlandic C. glacialis samples it was at least 96.27 %. Across all the samples 
from Svalbard at least 96.90 % of the OTUs accounted for < 1 % of the total abundance. 
==PAGE:23==
23 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 
Phylum distribution of the OTUs. Average relative 
abundance of the most abundant prokaryotic phyla associated with A: C. 
finmarchicus samples from Greenland, B: C. glacialis samples from 
Greenland and C: C. glacialis samples from Svalbard, are displayed in 
different colors. For each sample treatment replicates are n = 3.  
 
==PAGE:24==
24 
 
 
  
3.4.3 Copepod fecal microbiome alpha diversity 
The highest taxonomic resolution achievable in our investigation of the effect of pyrene and 
temperature (Greenland) and oil-spill mitigating treatments and time of season (Svalbard) on the 
bacterial composition of fecal pellets of arctic copepod species are at the OTU level. The microbial 
diversity within each sample, also known as the alpha diversity, was analyzed based on Shannon 
diversity indices calculated from the normalized and rarefied OTU table (Figure 2). Through linear 
model analysis it was found that species (P < 0.001) and temperature (P < 0.001) as well as 
species:temperature (P < 0.05) showed a significant relationship with the alpha diversity in the 
samples from Greenland (Figure 2A,B). Treatment of pyrene showed no significant effect on the 
alpha diversity in the Greenland samples. The alpha diversity was found to differ significantly (P < 
001) between species in the Greenland samples where the C. glacialis samples generally seemed to 
have a lower alpha diversity compared to the C. finmarchicus samples, especially comparing the 
samples from 2 °C, and in part also the samples from 10 °C. Far more variance was also observed 
in the C. glacialis samples compared to the C. finmarchicus samples, resulting in a low R2 = 0.5. 
Increasing temperature shows an increasing effect on alpha diversity in both species from 
Greenland. In the samples from Svalbard the alpha diversity was found to be significantly effected 
by both sampling date (P < 0.001), treatment (P < 0.001) and sampling date:treatment (P < 0.05), 
also by linear model analysis (Figure 2C). All oil-spill mitigating treatments showed a significant (P 
< 0.01) relationship with alpha diversity. When treatment was combined with sampling date, only 
the crude oil (natural mitigation) treatment showed a significant relationship (P < 0.01) with alpha 
diversity. Generally the crude oil (natural mitigation) treatment looked to have the biggest effect on 
alpha diversity in early spring, while the chemical dispersant treatment looked to create the biggest 
increase in late spring. The two other oil spill mitigating treatments had far less effect in late spring 
compared to early spring. When looking at the samples taken on Svalbard in early spring the 
samples from both geographical origins seemed to have a similar level of alpha diversity. 
==PAGE:25==
25 
 
 
 
3.4.4 Copepod fecal microbiome beta diversity 
To check whether the fecal pellet bacterial communities of the arctic copepod species correlated 
with the different variables in the experiments, OTU count data was used to construct dissimilarity 
matrices with Bray-Curtis, showing sensitivity to the relative abundance of the OTUs (Bray and 
Curtis, 1957). The total matrix was visualized in a heatmap (Figure 3) showing the dissimilarity 
(light green) and similarity (dark blue) between negative, blank control samples from the initial 16S 
PCR amplification (PCR1.BLANK.1, PCR1.BLANK.2), the DNA extraction protocol 
(MOBIO.BLANK.1, MOBIO.BLANK.2), and the storage seawater from the Greenland samples 
(G.SW.C.1, G.SW.C.2) and all other samples from both the Greenland and Svalbard experiment. As 
expected the negative control samples from the PCR and DNA extraction were clustered together as 
a separate cluster, showing very little similarity to all other samples although they were clustered 
closer to the samples from Svalbard than the ones from Greenland. The negative control seawater 
samples from Greenland were clustered in the overall cluster for the Greenland samples, but still in 
a separate lower level cluster. They showed higher similarity with the Greenland samples than the 
Svalbard samples, as would be expected, but did also show higher similarity with the other negative 
Figure 2 
Variation patterns of 
alpha diversities of the bacterial 
communities associated with A: C. 
finmarchicus samples from Greenland, 
B: C. glacialis samples from 
Greenland and C: C. glacialis samples 
from Svalbard.  
 
==PAGE:26==
26 
 
 
control samples. Generally the negative control samples showed low similarity with the 
experimental samples, but higher similarity with each other and were clustered separately from the 
experimental samples. The 3rd replicate of the Greenlandic, C. glacialis, 10 °C, control treatment 
was clustered together with the negative PCR and DNA extraction samples, but showed no 
similarity with these, while it showed higher similarity with samples from all Greenland 10 °C 
treatments. Generally samples were clustered into overall Svalbard and Greenland sample clusters. 
The Svalbard cluster was then parted into an early and late spring sampling cluster with the samples 
within each cluster showing higher similarity. Svalbard samples were also clustered within 
treatments. The Greenland cluster was in broad terms clustered further down to the three 
experimental temperatures, although the 100+ nM pyrene samples tended to cluster with the 10 °C 
samples independent of species. Some overlap was observed in the 6 °C and 2 °C samples as they 
were clustered closer together compared to the 10 °C samples. Samples within temperature clusters 
were mostly clustered within species, with exceptions in the 6 °C samples. Temperature seemed to 
have a greater effect on clustering similarity than pyrene within the Greenlandic samples. The 
samples from Greenland also showed higher similarity to other samples within their respective 
temperature clusters. So overall the same trends of effects of temperature and species within the 
samples from Greenland and effects of both sampling date and treatment within the samples from 
Svalbard were found with the Bray Curtis distance matrix portrayed in the heatmap as with the 
alpha diversity Shannon indices. 
==PAGE:27==
27 
 
 
 
Figure 3 
Heatmap of Bray-Curtis dissimilarities between samples, clustering according to distance 
 
Another visualization of the Bray-Curtis distances was made with Non-metric multidimensional 
scaling (NMDS) plots for both the Svalbard and Greenland data (Figure 4). A permutation test was 
performed for both datasets and the environmental variables were fitted on to the plots. The model 
behind the NMDS plot for the Greenland samples were tested through a Shepard (stress) plot, 
which showed a non-metric fit, R2 = 0.974 and a linear fit, R2 = 0.894, describing a good fit. The 
model behind the NMDS plot for the Svalbard samples were tested in the same way and showed a 
non-metric fit, R2 = 0.998 and a linear fit, R2 = 0.994, describing an even better fit. The NMDS 
analysis of the Greenland data showed that temperature and treatment was correlated to community 
structure (permutation test, P < 0.001) and so they were fitted on to the NMDS plot (Figure 4A), 
showing scaling of increasing pyrene concentration aligning nicely with the second axis and 
temperature being closest to aligning positively with the first axis. The two control treatments are 
also placed very close together. The NMDS analysis of the Svalbard data showed that only 
==PAGE:28==
28 
 
 
sampling date correlated to the community structure (permutation test, P < 0.001) and so the two 
sampling times were fitted on to the NMDS plot (Figure 4B), where they aligned perfectly with the 
first axis. The Svalbard NMDS plot revealed a clear separation between the two sampling dates, and 
a large effect of sampling time on the bacterial composition of C. glacialis fecal pellets on 
Svalbard, whereas it seems temperature has the biggest effect on the bacterial composition of 
copepod fecal pellets in Greenland. Partitioning of variance (ADONIS) based on the Bray-Curtis 
distance matrices for both the Greenland and Svalbard data showed a clear contribution of both 
species, treatment and temperature (P < 0.001) as well as species:temperature, 
treatment:temperature  (P < 0.001) and species:treatment:temperature (P < 0.01) for the Greenland 
samples and a clear influence of both treatment, sampling date and treatment:sampling date (P < 
0.001) for the Svalbard samples. The ADONIS P-values and R2 are listed in Table 3.  
  
Table 3 
Statistical analysis (ADONIS) of Bray-Curtis beta diversity  
 
 
==PAGE:29==
29 
 
 
 
Figure 4 
Non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) plots for both the Svalbard (A) and Greenland (B) Bray-
Curtis distances 
 
Lastly a similarity percentages (SIMPER) analysis was made for each variable on both the Bray-
Curtis dissimilarity matrices representing the Greenland and Svalbard samples. For the Greenland 
data top seven OTUs explained between 30 and 50 % of the overall change in bacterial community 
structure between all samples. Four out of the top seven OTUs were from the Proteobacteria 
phylum, two OTUs were from the Cyanobacteria phylum and one OTU was from the Bacteroidetes 
phylum. These three phyla were also the ones described in the “phylum distribution analysis” 
section as the dominant phyla in the Greenland samples. For the Svalbard data top eight OTUs 
explained between 46 and 56 % of the overall change in bacterial community structure between all 
samples. Six out of the top eight OTUs were from the Proteobacteria phylum and two OTU’s were 
from the Bacteroidetes phylum. These two phyla were also the ones described in the “phylum 
distribution analysis” section as the dominant phyla in the Svalbard samples (Table 4). 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:30==
30 
 
 
Table 4 
SIMPER analysis of the similarity percentages of OTUs dependent on experimental variables 
  
3.4.5 Occurrence of known oil-degrading genera 
The fraction of OTUs belonging to genera known to hold capabilities of pyrene or crude oil 
degradation was calculated and visualized against the fraction of OTUs not taxonomically classified 
to genus level and the fraction of OTUs taxonomically classified to genus level, but not known to 
be pyrene or crude oil degrading (Figure 5). The relationship of the fraction of OTUs belonging to 
oil degrading genera and the experimental variables were tested with linear models. The fraction in 
the samples from Greenland showed significant linear relationship with species (P < 0.001), 
species:temperature (P < 0.01) and species:100+ nM pyrene (P < 0.05). Once again temperature 
showed to have the biggest influence on bacterial community structure. As shown in Figure 5A the 
fraction of OTUs belonging to oil degrading genera decreases in the 10 °C samples for both species 
and generally tends to be lower in the 100+ nM samples compared to all other treatments. The 
fraction in the samples from Svalbard did not show significant linear relationship with any of the 
experimental variables when tested with the linear model. 
 
==PAGE:31==
31 
 
 
 
3.5 Discussion 
 
This study focused on testing the changes in diversity of the fecal pellet microbial composition of 
arctic copepod species when exposed to pyrene and increasing temperature and crude oil, oil spill 
mitigating treatments and timing compared to the arctic spring bloom in Greenland and Svalbard 
respectively. Out of a total of 33 phyla found across all samples, Proteobacteria, Cyanobacteria 
and Bacteroidetes phyla dominated the samples from Greenland and Proteobacteria and 
Bacteroidetes phyla dominated the samples from Svalbard. Except from the high abundance of the 
Cyanobacteria phylum in the samples from Greenland the Proteobacteria and Bacteroidetes phyla 
are well known to be associated with copepods and other marine eukaryotic microbial host 
organisms. (Almada, 2015; Broderick & Lemaitre, 2012; Freese & Schink, 2011; Gerdts et al., 
2013; Rungrassamee et al., 2013; Skovgaard, Castro-Mejia, Hansen, & Nielsen, 2015; Størdal et al., 
2015; Tang, Turk, & Grossart, 2010). The Cyanobacteria phylum was found to create a clear 
distinction between the fecal pellet microbial composition of copepods from Western Greenland 
and Svalbard, by being close to absent in the Svalbard samples. Members of the Cyanobacteria 
phylum are known as photosynthetic bacteria and it makes very little sense for a photosynthetic 
Figure 5 
The fraction of 
OTUs belonging to genera known to 
hold capabilities of pyrene or crude 
oil degradation visualized against 
the fraction of OTUs not 
taxonomically classified to genus 
level and the fraction of OTUs 
taxonomically classified to genus 
level, but not known to be pyrene or 
crude oil degrading 
==PAGE:32==
32 
 
 
organism to live in a entirely dark environment (DeMott & Moxter, 1991), also no other studies 
have found the Cyanobacteria phylum to be a major contributor to microbiomes of copepods, 
meaning the most likely explanation of their presence in copepod fecal pellets was they were 
ingested by the copepods during the experiment. We battled with a small contamination of green 
algae in our feed algae stock of Rhodomonas salina during the experiment. The contaminant could 
have been a member of the Cyanobacteria phylum. We did not consider this very small 
contamination to be of significance to the output of the physiological experiment or the fecal pellet 
investigation as it was assumed the copepods would prefer Rhodomonas salina as their primary 
food source, but the relatively high abundance of the Cyanobacteria phylum in the samples from 
Greenland suggest that the copepods had been eating members of the Cyanobacteria phylum during 
the physiological experiment. In the samples from Svalbard the Bacteroidetes phylum was more 
abundant in the samples collected in late spring compared to early spring. 
 
The study by Almada (2015) suggested that C. finmarchicus collected in Trondheimfjord has a core 
microbiome common to both active and diapausing individuals, but that each population also held 
distinct flexible microbiomes, which in turn only mounts the evidence of considerable inter-
individual variability in microbiomes in host-associated microbiota. This could be an explanation in 
part of the results of the SIMPER analysis of this study where the same very few OTUs were found 
to describe a large percentage of the variability between the Greenland and Svalbard samples 
respectively. Within the samples from Greenland a linear model analysis of the Shannon indices 
showed significant effects of species and temperature, where the alpha diversity was lower in the 
samples originating from C. glacialis compared to samples originating from C. finmarchicus. 
Compared to alpha diversity found by Almada (2015) in C. finmarchicus in Trondheimfjord the 
alpha diversity found for both species in this study was very low. The alpha diversity for both 
species was also shown to correlate positively with temperature. This result showed an opposite 
effect of temperature stress on copepod fecal pellet microbial community diversity compared to 
what was hypothesized prior to the experiment. This hypothesis was made due to the findings of 
Bestion et al. (2017), who found that climate warming decreased the gut microbiota diversity in the 
common lizard Zootoca vivipara, although their findings were not conclusive. The response of 
copepod gut microbiota to increasing temperatures, need to be investigated further to check for 
more clear correlations. 
 
A linear model analysis of the Svalbard samples showed significant effects of sampling date and 
treatment. The alpha diversity was shown to be lower in the samples collected after the peak of the 
Arctic spring bloom compared to those collected prior to the peak of the spring bloom. The phD 
thesis of Almada (2015) found that the bacterial load of active C. finmarchicus individuals were 
greater than in diapausing individuals, and abundance patterns of many microbial members in the 
flexible microbiome were strongly linked to the presence of food in the gut, which could be an 
indication of why the bacterial community diversity was lower in the samples from Svalbard 
sampled after the peak of the Arctic spring bloom, as individuals were preparing for a low food 
abundance period. Differences in the effect of oil mitigating treatments were also observed to be 
dependent on the sampling time. Sampling prior to the spring bloom resulted in all oil-mitigating 
treatments having a higher alpha diversity than the control, while only the chemical dispersant 
treatment had a noticeable increase in alpha diversity compared to the control. Once again the 
experimental results contradicts the hypothesis of alpha diversity decreasing in fecal pellets of 
copepods treated with oil. Almada (2015) found that regarding the species of C. finmarchicus 
physiological changes within the host could influence abundance and composition patterns of the 
bacterial community. To test for more specific effects of temperature on the fecal pellet microbiota 
of Arctic copepods, a shotgun metagenomic sequencing analysis should be performed to be able to 
==PAGE:33==
33 
 
 
analyze differences between samples regarding functional annotations. A more in-depth analysis of 
the taxonomic classification in this study is needed to comment on the true effects of temperature 
on the fecal pellet microbiota of Arctic copepod species. The effects of crude oil, or oil-related 
compounds on copepod fecal pellet microbial diversity have not been sufficiently tested and were 
only looked at by Størdal et al. (2015) on cultivated C. finmarchicus. Unfortunately they only 
focused on the taxonomic classification, and the distribution of different taxa and did not test the 
diversity changes associated with oil exposure. 
 
The clustering and similarity Bray-Curtis analysis portrayed the same tendencies as the alpha 
diversity analysis with clustering showing most dependency on sampling time > treatment for the 
samples from Svalbard and temperature > species > treatment for the samples from Greenland, 
although the 100+ nM samples of all temperatures showed highest similarity with other 10 °C 
samples irrespective of species. In none of the analyses done on diversity for the samples from 
Greenland did pyrene show an effect on the fecal pellet microbial community structure, but 
temperature seems to describe the biggest changes in diversity through all analyses. The reasons for 
this are unknown. The Svalbard NMDS plot and supportive statistic analysis revealed a clear 
separation between the two sampling dates, and a large effect of sampling time around the Arctic 
spring bloom on the bacterial community structure of C. glacialis fecal pellets from Svalbard, which 
could be explained by the bacterial gut community being dependent on feeding behavior (Almada, 
2015; Gerdts et al., 2013). 
 
One outlier was observed in the clustering of all samples together; the 3rd replicate of the 
Greenlandic, C. glacialis, 10 °C, control treatment was clustered together with the negative PCR 
and DNA extraction samples, but showed no similarity with these, while it showed higher similarity 
with samples from all Greenland 10 °C treatments. This was probably due to the very low amount 
of fecal pellets generally produced in the 10 °C treatments and therefore subsequently a lower 
initial DNA concentration of the sample, as would have been with the negative control samples. 
Even though all sample DNA concentrations are normalized prior to pooling and sequencing, an 
initial very low DNA concentration after DNA extraction will often lead to a low sample depth, 
which can produce biases in the interpretation of the results even after normalization and rarefaction 
of the OTU count matrix. Therefore a large amount of pellets (> 50) per sample would be to aim for 
in future projects. 
 
By investigating the fraction of OTUs belonging to genera known to be pyrene or crude oil 
degrading in each sample and comparing it to the fraction of OTUs belonging no non-pyrene and 
crude oil degrading genera and the fraction of OTUs not annotated to genus level this study 
surprisingly found that only a very small fraction of the found OTUs are known to hold pyrene or 
crude oil degrading capabilities. This was in contrast to the findings of Størdal et al. (2015), who 
found a significantly higher concentration of oil-degrading microorganisms in water containing 
fecal pellets from oil-exposed copepods compared to water containing fecal pellets from non-oil 
exposed copepods. In the samples from Greenland there was a smaller fraction of oil-degrading 
genera in the 10 °C samples for both species and also in the 100+ nM pyrene treated samples. 
Previous studies testing the combined effect of increasing temperature and oil exposure on host 
microbial gut community structure could not be found, and so very little can be said about the 
underlying mechanisms resulting in a lower fraction of oil-degrading genera in very high pyrene 
concentrations and the highest temperature samples, although it seems that when exposed to highly 
stressful environmental pressure the copepod microbiome gets rid of oil-degrading genera. When 
comparing the Svalbard and Greenland samples on the fraction of pyrene and crude oil degrading 
genera there was a higher fraction in the samples from Greenland compared to these genera being 
==PAGE:34==
34 
 
 
close to non-existing in the samples from Svalbard. This could possibly be due to oil degrading 
genera being adopted prior to the study due to natural oil seepage from the bottom of the disco bay 
and therefore a natural occurrence of oil degrading bacteria in the surrounding environment. 
3.6 Conclusion 
Within the experimental variables set for the study in Disko Bay, Greenland, temperature showed 
the greatest effect on Arctic copepod fecal pellet microbial community structure, with increasing 
temperature resulting in an increased diversity. The underlying mechanisms for this were unknown. 
Species did also show a significant effect on Arctic copepod fecal pellet microbial community 
structure, with C. finmarchicus having less change in fecal pellet microbial diversity despite 
environmental stressors, while C. glacialis showed a higher level of diversity increase in fecal pellet 
microbial community structure. Within the experimental variables set for the study in Isfjorden, 
Svalbard, timing of sampling in regards to the peak of the arctic spring bloom showed the greatest 
effect on Arctic copepod fecal pellet microbial community structure, with a significant decrease in 
diversity in samples collected after the peak of the Arctic spring bloom, compared to samples 
collected prior to the peak of the Arctic spring bloom. To investigate the underlying mechanisms 
for the changes observed when exposed to the experimental variables chosen in this study a shotgun 
metagenomic sequencing analysis is needed to be able to study functional annotations and the 
separate functions of different fecal pellet associated microbes. 
 
3.8 References 
 
ACIA. (2005). Arctic Climate Impact Assessment. ACIA overview report. Cambridge University 
Press. Retrieved from http://www.amap.no/documents/doc/arctic-arctic-climate-impact-
assessment/796 
Almada, A. A. (2015). Interactions between calanoid copepod hosts and their associated 
microbiota. Massachusetts Institute of Technology & Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. 
Retrieved from http://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/2319810347 
Almeda, R., Wambaugh, Z., Wang, Z., Hyatt, C., Liu, Z., & Buskey, E. J. (2013). Interactions 
between Zooplankton and Crude Oil: Toxic Effects and Bioaccumulation of Polycyclic 
Aromatic Hydrocarbons. PLoS ONE, 8(6), e67212. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0067212 
Annammala, K. V., Abdullah, M. H., Mokhtar, M. Bin, Joseph, C. G., & Sakari, M. (2013). 
Characterization of Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Tropical Coastal Water of Sabah, Borneo. 
Asian Journal of Chemistry, 25(7). 
Barata, C., Calbet, A., Saiz, E., Ortiz, L., & Bayona, J. M. (2005). Predicting single and mixture 
toxicity of petrogenic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons to the copepod Oithona davisae. 
Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry, 24(11), 2992–2999. https://doi.org/10.1897/05-
189R.1 
Bellas, J., & Thor, P. (2007). Effects of selected PAHs on reproduction and survival of the calanoid 
copepod Acartia tonsa. Ecotoxicology, 16(6), 465–474. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10646-007-
0152-2 
Berrojalbiz, N., Lacorte, S., Calbet, A., Saiz, E., Barata, C., & Dachs, J. (2009). Accumulation and 
Cycling of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Zooplankton. Environmental Science & 
Technology, 43(7), 2295–2301. https://doi.org/10.1021/es8018226 
Bestion, E., Jacob, S., Zinger, L., Di Gesu, L., Richard, M., White, J., & Cote, J. (2017). Climate 
warming reduces gut microbiota diversity in a vertebrate ectotherm. Nature Ecology & 
Evolution, 1(6), 161. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-017-0161 
==PAGE:35==
35 
 
 
Broderick, N. A., & Lemaitre, B. (2012). Gut-associated microbes of Drosophila melanogaster. Gut 
Microbes, 3(4), 307–321. https://doi.org/10.4161/gmic.19896 
Caporaso, J. G., Kuczynski, J., Stombaugh, J., Bittinger, K., Bushman, F. D., Costello, E. K., … 
Knight, R. (2010). QIIME allows analysis of high-throughput community sequencing data. 
Nature Methods, 7(5), 335–336. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.f.303 
Darnis, G., Robert, D., Pomerleau, C., Link, H., Archambault, P., Nelson, R. J., … Fortier, L. 
(2012). Current state and trends in Canadian Arctic marine ecosystems: II. Heterotrophic food 
web, pelagic-benthic coupling, and biodiversity. Climatic Change, 115(1), 179–205. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-012-0483-8 
DeMott, W. R., & Moxter, F. (1991). Foraging Cyanobacteria by Copepods: Responses to 
Chemical Defense and Resource. Ecology, 72(5). Retrieved from 
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/120828303 
DeSantis, T. Z., Hugenholtz, P., Larsen, N., Rojas, M., Brodie, E. L., Keller, K., … Andersen, G. L. 
(2006). Greengenes, a Chimera-Checked 16S rRNA Gene Database and Workbench 
Compatible with ARB. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 72(7), 5069–5072. 
https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.03006-05 
Dinh, K. V. (2018). Extreme temperature and oil contamination shape the relative abundance of 
copepod species in the Arctic. Unpublished. 
Edgar, R. (n.d.). USEARCH manual. Retrieved February 7, 2018, from 
https://www.drive5.com/usearch/manual/uparse_pipeline.html 
Edgar, R. C. (2013). UPARSE: highly accurate OTU sequences from microbial amplicon reads. 
Nature Methods, 10(10), 996–998. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.2604 
Freese, H. M., & Schink, B. (2011). Composition and Stability of the Microbial Community inside 
the Digestive Tract of the Aquatic Crustacean Daphnia magna. Microbial Ecology, 62(4), 882–
894. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00248-011-9886-8 
Gerdts, G., Brandt, P., Kreisel, K., Boersma, M., Schoo, K. L., & Wichels, A. (2013). The 
microbiome of North Sea copepods. Helgoland Marine Research, 67(4), 757–773. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10152-013-0361-4 
Grenvald, J. C., Nielsen, T. G., & Hjorth, M. (2013). Effects of pyrene exposure and temperature on 
early development of two co-existing Arctic copepods. Ecotoxicology, 22(1), 184–198. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10646-012-1016-y 
Hjorth, M., & Nielsen, T. G. (2011). Oil exposure in a warmer Arctic: potential impacts on key 
zooplankton species. Marine Biology, 158(6), 1339–1347. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00227-011-
1653-3 
Incardona, J. P., Carls, M. G., Holland, L., Linbo, T. L., Baldwin, D. H., Myers, M. S., … Scholz, 
N. L. (2015). Very low embryonic crude oil exposures cause lasting cardiac defects in salmon 
and herring. Scientific Reports, 5(1), 13499. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep13499 
Jensen, M. H., Nielsen, T. G., & Dahlloef, I. (2008). Effects of pyrene on grazing and reproduction 
of Calanus finmarchicus and Calanus glacialis from Disko Bay, West Greenland. Aquatic 
Toxicology, 87(2), 99–107. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquatox.2008.01.005 
Klindworth, A., Pruesse, E., Schweer, T., Peplies, J., Quast, C., Horn, M., & Glöckner, F. O. 
(2013). Evaluation of general 16S ribosomal RNA gene PCR primers for classical and next-
generation sequencing-based diversity studies. Nucleic Acids Research, 41(1), e1–e1. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gks808 
Maksoud, J. (2008). R&D efforts target deepwater, arctic. E & P, 81(12), 37. 
Nørregaard, R. D., Nielsen, T. G., Møller, E. F., Strand, J., Espersen, L., & Møhl, M. (2014). 
Evaluating pyrene toxicity on Arctic key copepod species Calanus hyperboreus. 
Ecotoxicology, 23(2), 163–174. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10646-013-1160-z 
Oksanen, J., Blanchet, F. G., Friendly, M., Kindt, R., Legendre, P., McGlinn, D., … Wagner, H. 
==PAGE:36==
36 
 
 
(2018). Vegan: Community Ecology Package. R package version 2.4-6. Retrieved February 7, 
2018, from https://cran.r-project.org/package=vegan 
Prince, R. C., Gramain, A., & McGenity, T. J. (2010). Prokaryotic Hydrocarbon Degraders. In 
Handbook of Hydrocarbon and Lipid Microbiology (pp. 1671–1692). Berlin Heidelberg: 
Springer-Verlag. 
Reddy, C. M., & Quinn, J. G. (2001). The North Cape oil spill: hydrocarbons in Rhode Island 
coastal waters and Point Judith Pond. Marine Environmental Research, 52(5), 445–461. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0141-1136(01)00100-3 
Reddy, C. M., Arey, J. S., Seewald, J. S., Sylva, S. P., Lemkau, K. L., Nelson, R. K., … Camilli, R. 
(2012). Composition and fate of gas and oil released to the water column during the Deepwater 
Horizon oil spill. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(50), 20229–20234. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1101242108 
Rungrassamee, W., Klanchui, A., Chaiyapechara, S., Maibunkaew, S., Tangphatsornruang, S., 
Jiravanichpaisal, P., & Karoonuthaisiri, N. (2013). Bacterial Population in Intestines of the 
Black Tiger Shrimp (Penaeus monodon) under Different Growth Stages. PLoS ONE, 8(4), 
e60802. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0060802 
Schmidt, V. (2013). Conference delineates steady effort to open the Arctic. Offshore Engineer, 
38(1). Retrieved from 
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog?utf8= &locale=en&q=Conference+Delineates+Steady+Effort
+to+Open+the+Arctic 
Skovgaard, A., Castro-Mejia, J. L., Hansen, L. H., & Nielsen, D. S. (2015). Host-Specific and pH-
Dependent Microbiomes of Copepods in an Extensive Rearing System. PLoS ONE, 10(7), 1–
20. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0132516 
Størdal, I. F., Olsen, A. J., Jenssen, B. M., Netzer, R., Hansen, B. H., Altin, D., & Brakstad, O. G. 
(2015). Concentrations of viable oil-degrading microorganisms are increased in feces from 
Calanus finmarchicus feeding in petroleum oil dispersions. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 98(1–2), 
69–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2015.07.011 
Tang, K. W., Turk, V., & Grossart, H.-P. (2010). Linkage between crustacean zooplankton and 
aquatic bacteria. Aquatic Microbial Ecology, 61(3), 261–277. 
https://doi.org/10.3354/ame01424 
Toxværd, K., Pančićb, M., Eidec, H. O., Søreidec, J. E., Lacroixd, C., Flochd, S. Le, … Nielsen, T. 
G. (2018). Effects of oil spill response technologies on the physiological performance of the 
Arctic copepod Calanus glacialis. Unpublished. 
Wang, Q., Garrity, G. M., Tiedje, J. M., & Cole, J. R. (2007). Naive Bayesian Classifier for Rapid 
Assignment of rRNA Sequences into the New Bacterial Taxonomy. Applied and 
Environmental Microbiology, 73(16), 5261–5267. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.00062-07 
Welsh, R., & O’Gorman, K. (2005). High-Stakes National and International Litigation: 
Management Issues. Journal of Petroleum Technology, 57(6), 46–47. 
https://doi.org/10.2118/0605-0046-JPT 
Wolska, L., Mechlińska, A., Rogowska, J., & Namieśnik, J. (2012). Sources and Fate of PAHs and 
PCBs in the Marine Environment. Critical Reviews in Environmental Science and Technology, 
42(11), 1172–1189. https://doi.org/10.1080/10643389.2011.556546 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:37==
37 
 
 
3 Bibliography 
ACIA. (2005). Arctic Climate Impact Assessment. ACIA overview report. Cambridge University 
Press. Retrieved from http://www.amap.no/documents/doc/arctic-arctic-climate-impact-
assessment/796 
Almada, A. A. (2015). Interactions between calanoid copepod hosts and their associated 
microbiota. Massachusetts Institute of Technology & Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. 
Retrieved from http://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/2319810347 
Almeda, R., Wambaugh, Z., Wang, Z., Hyatt, C., Liu, Z., & Buskey, E. J. (2013). Interactions 
between Zooplankton and Crude Oil: Toxic Effects and Bioaccumulation of Polycyclic 
Aromatic Hydrocarbons. PLoS ONE, 8(6), e67212. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0067212 
Annammala, K. V., Abdullah, M. H., Mokhtar, M. Bin, Joseph, C. G., & Sakari, M. (2013). 
Characterization of Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Tropical Coastal Water of Sabah, Borneo. 
Asian Journal of Chemistry, 25(7). 
Barata, C., Calbet, A., Saiz, E., Ortiz, L., & Bayona, J. M. (2005). Predicting single and mixture 
toxicity of petrogenic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons to the copepod Oithona davisae. 
Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry, 24(11), 2992–2999. https://doi.org/10.1897/05-
189R.1 
Bellas, J., & Thor, P. (2007). Effects of selected PAHs on reproduction and survival of the calanoid 
copepod Acartia tonsa. Ecotoxicology, 16(6), 465–474. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10646-007-
0152-2 
Berrojalbiz, N., Lacorte, S., Calbet, A., Saiz, E., Barata, C., & Dachs, J. (2009). Accumulation and 
Cycling of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Zooplankton. Environmental Science & 
Technology, 43(7), 2295–2301. https://doi.org/10.1021/es8018226 
Bestion, E., Jacob, S., Zinger, L., Di Gesu, L., Richard, M., White, J., & Cote, J. (2017). Climate 
warming reduces gut microbiota diversity in a vertebrate ectotherm. Nature Ecology & 
Evolution, 1(6), 161. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-017-0161 
Broderick, N. A., & Lemaitre, B. (2012). Gut-associated microbes of Drosophila melanogaster. Gut 
Microbes, 3(4), 307–321. https://doi.org/10.4161/gmic.19896 
Caporaso, J. G., Kuczynski, J., Stombaugh, J., Bittinger, K., Bushman, F. D., Costello, E. K., … 
Knight, R. (2010). QIIME allows analysis of high-throughput community sequencing data. 
Nature Methods, 7(5), 335–336. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.f.303 
Darnis, G., Robert, D., Pomerleau, C., Link, H., Archambault, P., Nelson, R. J., … Fortier, L. 
(2012). Current state and trends in Canadian Arctic marine ecosystems: II. Heterotrophic food 
web, pelagic-benthic coupling, and biodiversity. Climatic Change, 115(1), 179–205. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-012-0483-8 
DeMott, W. R., & Moxter, F. (1991). Foraging Cyanobacteria by Copepods: Responses to 
Chemical Defense and Resource. Ecology, 72(5). Retrieved from 
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/120828303 
DeSantis, T. Z., Hugenholtz, P., Larsen, N., Rojas, M., Brodie, E. L., Keller, K., … Andersen, G. L. 
(2006). Greengenes, a Chimera-Checked 16S rRNA Gene Database and Workbench 
Compatible with ARB. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 72(7), 5069–5072. 
https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.03006-05 
Dinh, K. V. (2018). Extreme temperature and oil contamination shape the relative abundance of 
copepod species in the Arctic. Unpublished. 
Edgar, R. (n.d.). USEARCH manual. Retrieved February 7, 2018, from 
https://www.drive5.com/usearch/manual/uparse_pipeline.html 
Edgar, R. C. (2013). UPARSE: highly accurate OTU sequences from microbial amplicon reads. 
Nature Methods, 10(10), 996–998. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.2604 
==PAGE:38==
38 
 
 
Freese, H. M., & Schink, B. (2011). Composition and Stability of the Microbial Community inside 
the Digestive Tract of the Aquatic Crustacean Daphnia magna. Microbial Ecology, 62(4), 882–
894. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00248-011-9886-8 
Gerdts, G., Brandt, P., Kreisel, K., Boersma, M., Schoo, K. L., & Wichels, A. (2013). The 
microbiome of North Sea copepods. Helgoland Marine Research, 67(4), 757–773. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10152-013-0361-4 
Grenvald, J. C., Nielsen, T. G., & Hjorth, M. (2013). Effects of pyrene exposure and temperature on 
early development of two co-existing Arctic copepods. Ecotoxicology, 22(1), 184–198. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10646-012-1016-y 
Hjorth, M., & Nielsen, T. G. (2011). Oil exposure in a warmer Arctic: potential impacts on key 
zooplankton species. Marine Biology, 158(6), 1339–1347. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00227-011-
1653-3 
Incardona, J. P., Carls, M. G., Holland, L., Linbo, T. L., Baldwin, D. H., Myers, M. S., … Scholz, 
N. L. (2015). Very low embryonic crude oil exposures cause lasting cardiac defects in salmon 
and herring. Scientific Reports, 5(1), 13499. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep13499 
Jensen, M. H., Nielsen, T. G., & Dahlloef, I. (2008). Effects of pyrene on grazing and reproduction 
of Calanus finmarchicus and Calanus glacialis from Disko Bay, West Greenland. Aquatic 
Toxicology, 87(2), 99–107. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquatox.2008.01.005 
Klindworth, A., Pruesse, E., Schweer, T., Peplies, J., Quast, C., Horn, M., & Glöckner, F. O. 
(2013). Evaluation of general 16S ribosomal RNA gene PCR primers for classical and next-
generation sequencing-based diversity studies. Nucleic Acids Research, 41(1), e1–e1. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gks808 
Maksoud, J. (2008). R&D efforts target deepwater, arctic. E & P, 81(12), 37. 
Nørregaard, R. D., Nielsen, T. G., Møller, E. F., Strand, J., Espersen, L., & Møhl, M. (2014). 
Evaluating pyrene toxicity on Arctic key copepod species Calanus hyperboreus. 
Ecotoxicology, 23(2), 163–174. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10646-013-1160-z 
Oksanen, J., Blanchet, F. G., Friendly, M., Kindt, R., Legendre, P., McGlinn, D., … Wagner, H. 
(2018). Vegan: Community Ecology Package. R package version 2.4-6. Retrieved February 7, 
2018, from https://cran.r-project.org/package=vegan 
Prince, R. C., Gramain, A., & McGenity, T. J. (2010). Prokaryotic Hydrocarbon Degraders. In 
Handbook of Hydrocarbon and Lipid Microbiology (pp. 1671–1692). Berlin Heidelberg: 
Springer-Verlag. 
Reddy, C. M., & Quinn, J. G. (2001). The North Cape oil spill: hydrocarbons in Rhode Island 
coastal waters and Point Judith Pond. Marine Environmental Research, 52(5), 445–461. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0141-1136(01)00100-3 
Reddy, C. M., Arey, J. S., Seewald, J. S., Sylva, S. P., Lemkau, K. L., Nelson, R. K., … Camilli, R. 
(2012). Composition and fate of gas and oil released to the water column during the Deepwater 
Horizon oil spill. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(50), 20229–20234. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1101242108 
Rungrassamee, W., Klanchui, A., Chaiyapechara, S., Maibunkaew, S., Tangphatsornruang, S., 
Jiravanichpaisal, P., & Karoonuthaisiri, N. (2013). Bacterial Population in Intestines of the 
Black Tiger Shrimp (Penaeus monodon) under Different Growth Stages. PLoS ONE, 8(4), 
e60802. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0060802 
Schmidt, V. (2013). Conference delineates steady effort to open the Arctic. Offshore Engineer, 
38(1). Retrieved from 
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog?utf8= &locale=en&q=Conference+Delineates+Steady+Effort
+to+Open+the+Arctic 
Skovgaard, A., Castro-Mejia, J. L., Hansen, L. H., & Nielsen, D. S. (2015). Host-Specific and pH-
Dependent Microbiomes of Copepods in an Extensive Rearing System. PLoS ONE, 10(7), 1–
==PAGE:39==
39 
 
 
20. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0132516 
Størdal, I. F., Olsen, A. J., Jenssen, B. M., Netzer, R., Hansen, B. H., Altin, D., & Brakstad, O. G. 
(2015). Concentrations of viable oil-degrading microorganisms are increased in feces from 
Calanus finmarchicus feeding in petroleum oil dispersions. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 98(1–2), 
69–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2015.07.011 
Tang, K. W., Turk, V., & Grossart, H.-P. (2010). Linkage between crustacean zooplankton and 
aquatic bacteria. Aquatic Microbial Ecology, 61(3), 261–277. 
https://doi.org/10.3354/ame01424 
Toxværd, K., Pančićb, M., Eidec, H. O., Søreidec, J. E., Lacroixd, C., Flochd, S. Le, … Nielsen, T. 
G. (2018). Effects of oil spill response technologies on the physiological performance of the 
Arctic copepod Calanus glacialis. Unpublished. 
Wang, Q., Garrity, G. M., Tiedje, J. M., & Cole, J. R. (2007). Naive Bayesian Classifier for Rapid 
Assignment of rRNA Sequences into the New Bacterial Taxonomy. Applied and 
Environmental Microbiology, 73(16), 5261–5267. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.00062-07 
Welsh, R., & O’Gorman, K. (2005). High-Stakes National and International Litigation: 
Management Issues. Journal of Petroleum Technology, 57(6), 46–47. 
https://doi.org/10.2118/0605-0046-JPT 
Wolska, L., Mechlińska, A., Rogowska, J., & Namieśnik, J. (2012). Sources and Fate of PAHs and 
PCBs in the Marine Environment. Critical Reviews in Environmental Science and Technology, 
42(11), 1172–1189. https://doi.org/10.1080/10643389.2011.556546 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:40==
APPENDIX 1 
1 
Extreme temperature and oil contamination shape the relative abundance of copepod species 
1 
in the Arctic 
2 
 
3 
Section for Marine Ecology and Oceanography, National Institute of Aquatic Resources, 
4 
Technical University of Denmark 
5 
 
6 
 
7 
*Corresponding author: Khuong V. Dinh  
 
8 
Emails: kvdi@aqua.dtu.dk (K. V. Dinh);  
9 
Tel: 0045.91838857 
10 
 
11 
 
12 
 
 
13 
==PAGE:41==
APPENDIX 1 
2 
Abstract 
14 
The retreat of sea ice in the Arctic under global warming is predicted to intensify oil 
15 
exploitations and shipping in this region, posing the risk of oil contamination. Knowledge on 
16 
how Arctic secondary producers deal with the combined effects of global warming, 
17 
particularly the extreme temperature and oil exposure is limited. To address this, we exposed 
18 
females of two copepods species Calanus glacialis and C. finmarchicus to pyrene at three 
19 
temperatures: 2, 6 and 10°C. Both species co-exist in the Disko Bay, Greenland, but only C. 
20 
glacialis is a true Arctic species while C. finmarchicus is of north Atlantic origin. Pyrene is 
21 
one of the most toxic components of crude oil to marine copepods. The temperatures of 2, 6 
22 
and 10°C represent the mean sea water temperature, the 4°C increase in mean temperature by 
23 
2100 as predicted by IPCC scenario RCP8.5 (2013) and the extreme sea water temperature, 
24 
respectively, in Disko Bay. Four-degree temperature increase did not have an effect on 
25 
grazing rate and survival of both species. However, the extreme temperature (10°C) increased 
26 
the grazing rate and mortality of C. glacialis, but not in C. finmarchicus. Exposure to high 
27 
pyrene (100+ nM) strongly reduced survival and grazing rate in both species and this pattern 
28 
was independent of temperatures. Notably, exposure to high pyrene (100+ nM) resulted in 
29 
than 70% of mortality in C. finmarchicus that was two times higher than the mortality 
30 
observed for C. glacialis. These results suggest that extreme temperature under global 
31 
warming and oil contamination may drastically change the relative abundance of pelagic 
32 
copepod community by changing the species-specific vulnerability to extreme temperature 
33 
and oil exposure.  
34 
Key words: Arctic ecosystem, global warming, grazing rate, marine copepods, oil spill, 
35 
pelagic community, secondary producer 
36 
 
 
37 
==PAGE:42==
APPENDIX 1 
3 
Introduction 
38 
During summer the population takes advantage of the up to 7–8°C in the surface layers 
39 
(Madsen et al., 2001). 
40 
 
41 
Global warming is characterized mainly by the increase of global surface temperature (IPCC, 
42 
2013). The increase in water surface temperature of the seas may increase the risk of 
43 
extinction in many marine taxa (Brierley & Kingsford, 2009) and causes considerable 
44 
reduction in marine secondary production (Steinacher et al., 2010; Chust et al., 2014a; Jones 
45 
et al., 2014). Most of our understanding about the effects of warming on marine organisms 
46 
and production is based on studies of temperate areas (Wernberg et al., 2012). Our 
47 
understanding of Arctic pelagic ecosystems is much poorer, which is a challenge because so 
48 
many species are thermally specialized where the high temperature under global warming 
49 
may cause more severe problem (Wernberg et al., 2012). 
50 
In addition to a warming ocean, organisms in marine ecosystems are simultaneously 
51 
stressed by anthropogenic activities (Halpern et al., 2008). Warming typically magnifies the 
52 
effects of contaminants (Noyes et al., 2009; Moe et al., 2013; Dinh et al., 2013; Grenvald et 
53 
al., 2013; Dinh et al., 2014; Janssens et al., 2014), and it is largely unknown how exposure 
54 
effects of contaminants will be translated to changing marine production in a warmer 
55 
environment. In particular, the exploitation of oil and gas to fulfil the increasing energy 
56 
demand is increasing the exposure to crude oil (National Research Council, 2003), and the 
57 
ecosystem effects of crude oil working in concert with warming likewise remain poorly 
58 
understood. 
59 
Detangling the drivers of global marine secondary production in the face of increased 
60 
sea temperatures and oil exposure is of crucial importance to signal potential problems in 
61 
future marine food webs. Thus, it is timely to determine how combined effects of global 
62 
==PAGE:43==
APPENDIX 1 
4 
warming and oil exposure would impact secondary production mediated by copepods in 
63 
Arctic ecosystems. This is a crucial step to develop better management tools for fisheries 
64 
which contributes for more in 90% income of Greenland (Statistics Greenland, 2012).  
65 
To address the above issues, we tested the sensitivity of two Arctic copepod species 
66 
Calanus finmarchicus and Calanus glacialis to pyrene exposure at three different 
67 
temperatures. In marine ecosystems, copepods are the most abundant marine metazoan and 
68 
have a key role as secondary producers transferring energy up the food web to the fish stock 
69 
(Kiørboe, 1998). Any negative effects of global warming and oil exposure on copepods may 
70 
cascade through the whole marine pelagic food webs with potential huge ecological and 
71 
economic consequences. Copepods are highly susceptible to global warming (Hinder et al., 
72 
2014) and also very susceptible to oil exposure (Barata et al., 2005; Calbet et al., 2007; 
73 
Nørregaard et al., 2014). Pyrene is chosen as it is the toxic component of crude oil on marine 
74 
copepods (Barata et al., 2005, Hjorth & Nielsen, 2011). 
75 
We quantified survival, metabolic rate, grazing rate via fecal production (Berggreen et 
76 
al., 1988), and the population growth based on fecundity.  
77 
Material and methods 
78 
Study species 
79 
Two calanoid species Calanus finmarchicus and Calanus glacialis with the different origins 
80 
are chosen as the study species. Calanus finmarchicus is of north Atlantic origin (Hirche & 
81 
Kosobokova, 2007; Hinder et al., 2014; Reygondeau & Beaugrand, 2011; Wilson et al., 2016) 
82 
and is showing a strong range shift, ca. 8.1 km per decade towards Arctic regions under 
83 
global warming (Reygondeau & Beaugrand, 2011; Chust et al., 2014b; Hinder et al., 2014). 
84 
Calanus glacialis is a true Arctic species, distributing within the Arctic circle (Hirche, 1991; 
85 
Blachowiak-Samolyk et al., 2008). The distributions of C. fimmarchicus and C. glacialis 
86 
overlap with the undiscovered oil reserves in the Arctic (references). Both species have a high 
87 
==PAGE:44==
APPENDIX 1 
5 
lipid content and are keystone species in the North Atlantic and Arctic ecosystems, 
88 
respectively, and play an important role in the transfer of energy from lower to higher trophic 
89 
levels of the Arctic food webs (Word, 2013; Reygondeau & Beaugrand, 2011). 
90 
Experimental design  
91 
To test for the combined effects of global warming and oil exposure on Arctic copepods, we 
92 
conducted a full factorial experiment in which females of two copepod species (Calanus 
93 
finmmarchicus and C. glacialis) were exposed to one of 3 temperatures (2, 6, and 10 °C) × 6 
94 
different exposure solutions (seawater control, acetone solvent control, 1, 10, 100 and 100+ 
95 
nM pyrene) for 6 days. The pyrene concentrations were chosen based on previous studies 
96 
showing negative effects on the performance of marine copepods (Nørregaard et al., 2014, 
97 
Grenvald et al., 2013, Jensen et al., 2008). The concentration of 100+ nM is the saturated 
98 
pyrene concentration in seawater (Nørregaard et al., 2014). These concentrations have been 
99 
measured in natural seawater affected by an oil spill (Reddy & Quinn, 2001, Reddy et al., 
100 
2012, Allan et al., 2012). The acetone control was included to the experiment as it was used 
101 
as a solvent for pyrene. Concentrations of acetone of 50 – 900 µl L-1 have no effects on 
102 
copepod survival and growth (Nørregaard et al., 2014, Grenvald et al., 2013, and Dinh et al., 
103 
in preparation).  Each treatment had 3 replicates (a total of 108 experimental units).  
104 
Pyrene exposure solutions 
105 
Four stock solutions of 0.02 (stock 1), 0.2 (stock 2), 2 (stock 3) and 6 mM (stock 4) were 
106 
made by dissolving pyrene powder (Sigma-Aldrich, purity > 99%) in absolute acetone. Stock 
107 
solutions were kept in amber glasses to avoid of photodegradation of pyrene. Stock solutions 
108 
were kept at temperature of approximately 10°C. The exposure solutions of 1, 10, 100 and 
109 
100+ nM were daily prepared by diluting stock solutions 1-4 with seawater collected at the 
110 
depth of approximately 50 m in the Disko Bay. The nominal pyrene concentrations were 
111 
measured by an independent research group (Lovap, Belgium). As the degradation of pyrene 
112 
==PAGE:45==
APPENDIX 1 
6 
in water is independent of temperature (Grenvald et al., 2013), we only analyzed the pyrene 
113 
concentrations in exposure solutions at 10°C. The concentration of acetone in the acetone 
114 
control was 50 µl l-1 which was equal to the acetone concentration in pyrene exposure 
115 
solutions. The laboratory was kept dark during the experiment as the toxicity of pyrene 
116 
substantially increases when exposed to sunlight (Pelletier et al., 1997). 
117 
Exposure experiment  
118 
To start the experiment, ten females of C. finmarchicus or five females of C. glacialis were 
119 
assigned randomly to an experimental bottle (volume of 1.12 litter) with filled with the 
120 
exposure solutions and an algal concentration of approximately 75,000 cells of microalga 
121 
Rhodomonas salina mL-1 equivalent to 400 µg C L-1 (Berggreen et al., 1988). All bottles were 
122 
filled up and closed with a red cap to avoid air bubbles inside. They were then mounted on 
123 
two plankton wheels (0.5 r min-1) placed in two temperature-controlled climate rooms (2 and 
124 
6°C for the first batch of 54 experimental bottles: 36 at 2°C and 18 at 6°C). The second batch 
125 
of experimental bottles was conducted in the same way at 6 and 10°C (total of 54 bottles: 18 
126 
bottles at 6°C and 36 bottles at 10°C). Temperature in each climate room was monitored using 
127 
two thermos-loggers. Throughout experiment, the exposure solutions and algal concentrations 
128 
were renewed daily. 
129 
Response variables 
130 
We daily checked for mortality when refreshing the medium. Mortality was calculated by the 
131 
number of death females at the end of the exposure period/total number of females in each 
132 
bottle. At the end of the exposure experiment, the number of fecal pellets and eggs in each 
133 
bottle were filtered and counted under microscopes. The specific fecal pellet and egg 
134 
productions per female per day were calculated and used for statistical analyses.  
135 
Statistical analyses 
136 
==PAGE:46==
APPENDIX 1 
7 
We used general linear models to test for the effects of the temperature and pyrene treatments 
137 
and their interactions on mortality, fecal pellet production and egg production of both two 
138 
copepod species: C. finmarchicus and C. glacialis. In these models, temperature, pyrene 
139 
exposure and species were included as fixed factors. All analyses were run in Statistica v.12 
140 
(StatSoft Inc., Tulsa, OK, USA). Whenever we detected a potential synergistic interaction 
141 
between stressors, we calculated the interaction effect size (estimated as Hedges'd) with its 
142 
95% confidence interval following Jackson et al. (2016). An interaction effect size larger than 
143 
zero indicates a synergistic interaction among stressors. 
144 
Results 
145 
Mortality of C. finmarchicus did not differ among temperature treatments (2, 6 and 10°C). 
146 
This pattern was similar in C. glacialis between 2 and 6°C but mortality of C. glacialis 
147 
increased 5 times higher at 10°C (mortality = 7.7% at 2 and 6°C vs. 36.7% at 10°C, the 
148 
extreme temperature) (Tempreature × Species, F4, 142 = 6.94, P < 0.001, Table 1, Fig. 1). 
149 
Pyrene exposure only caused mortality at the concentration of 100+ nM (the saturated 
150 
concentration of pyrene in seawater). Mortality did not differ between controls and pyrene 
151 
concentrations 1-100 nM. The pyrene-induced mortality was stronger at 10°C (Temperature × 
152 
Pyrene, F20, 142 = 1.72, P = 0.037) and was two times higher in C. finmarchicus (mortality = 
153 
73%) than in C. glacialis (mortality = 35%) (Pyrene × Species, F10, 142 = 4.51, P < 0.001). 
154 
Overall, feacal pellet production did not differ between temperatures (P = 0.20). While 
155 
C. finmarchicus decreased feacal pellet production at higher temperatures, the pattern was 
156 
reserved for C. glacialis (Temperature × Species interaction, Table 1, Fig. 2). Exposure to 
157 
high pyrene concentrations (100 and 100+ nM) reduced the fecal pellet production and this 
158 
was stronger in C. finmarchicus at 100 nM than in C. glacialis (Pyrene × Temperature 
159 
interaction, Table 1, Fig. 2). The number of fecal pellet production was marginally higher in 
160 
C. finmarchicus than in C. glacialis (P = 0.050). 
161 
==PAGE:47==
APPENDIX 1 
8 
Egg production tended to increase at 6°C in C. glacialis while it did not differ among 
162 
temperatures in C. finmarchicus (Temperature × Species, P = 0.066). Exposure to pyrene did 
163 
not affect egg production and this pattern was similar in both two species. There was no 
164 
interaction of pyrene exposure and temperature on egg production of both C. finmarchicus 
165 
and C. glacialis. 
166 
Discussions 
167 
Survival 
168 
Our findings revealed a strong difference in survival of Calanus finmarchicus and C. glacialis exposed 
169 
to 100+ nM pyrene. The PAH-induced mortality has been observed in many marine organisms, e.g. 
170 
scyphozoans and ctenophores (Almeda et al., 2013), fishes (Heintz et al., 1999; Hicken et al., 2011; 
171 
Incardona et al., 2012) and also copepods (Bellas & Thor, 2007; Grenvald et al., 2013). It has been 
172 
known that pyrene has a narcotic effect (Jager et al., 2010) which reduced feeding, and can ultimately 
173 
lead to death of exposed animals (Jensen et al., 2008). Our results supported this suggestion, as the 
174 
fecal pellet production was lower in both copepod species exposed to 100+ nM than in the controls. 
175 
Importantly, we found very high mortality of C. finmarchicus, approximately two times higher than 
176 
the mortality of C. glacialis.  
177 
Previous study has shown that C. finmarchicus is more sensitive to crude oil than C. glacialis (Hansen 
178 
et al., 2013). 
179 
This result was interesting because previous studies have shown that most of the PAH uptake to 
180 
copepods will be stored in inactive form in the lipids,  implying that the narcotic effects would occur 
181 
faster in organisms with low lipid content (Jensen et al., 2008). Copepods with high lipid content can 
182 
survived longer than the ones with low lipid content when exposed to oil (Hansen et al., 2013). 
183 
 
184 
reserve and the toxicity of pyrene only exhibits when the lipid is used for biological process. 
185 
Obviously, C. glacialis has much more lipid storage than C. finmarchicus.  
186 
 
187 
 
188 
==PAGE:48==
APPENDIX 1 
9 
Acknowledgements 
189 
This study is financially funded by Ørsted fellowship to Khuong Van Dinh and by the 
190 
Norwegian Research Council under project no.243923/E40 to Torkel Gissel Nielsen. We 
191 
thank Casper Tai Christiansen for technical assistance during the experiment. 
192 
References 
193 
Allan SE, Smith BW, Anderson KA (2012) Impact of the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill on 
194 
bioavailable polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in Gulf of Mexico coastal waters. 
195 
Environmental Science & Technology, 46, 2033-2039. 
196 
Almeda R, Wambaugh Z, Chai C, Wang Z, Liu Z, Buskey EJ (2013) Effects of crude oil 
197 
exposure on bioaccumulation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and survival of 
198 
adult and larval stages of gelatinous zooplankton. Plos One, 8. 
199 
Barata C, Calbet A, Saiz E, Ortiz L, Bayona JM (2005) Predicting single and mixture toxicity 
200 
of petrogenic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons to the copepod Oithona davisae. 
201 
Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry, 24, 2992-2999. 
202 
Bellas J, Thor P (2007) Effects of selected PAHs on reproduction and survival of the calanoid 
203 
copepod Acartia tonsa. Ecotoxicology, 16, 465-474. 
204 
Berggreen U, Hansen B, Kiørboe T (1988) Food size spectra, ingestion and growth of the 
205 
copepod Acartia tonsa during development: implications for the determination of 
206 
copepod production. Marine Biology, 99, 341-352. 
207 
Blachowiak-Samolyk K, Soreide JE, Kwasniewski S, Sundfjord A, Hop H, Falk-Petersen S, 
208 
Hegseth EN (2008) Hydrodynamic control of mesozooplankton abundance and 
209 
biomass in northern Svalbard waters (79-81 degrees N). Deep-Sea Research Part Ii-
210 
Topical Studies in Oceanography, 55, 2210-2224. 
211 
Brierley AS, Kingsford MJ (2009) Impacts of climate change on marine organisms and 
212 
ecosystems. Current Biology, 19, R602-R614. 
213 
==PAGE:49==
APPENDIX 1 
10 
Calbet A, Saiz E, Barata C (2007) Lethal and sublethal effects of naphthalene and 1,2-
214 
dimethylnaphthalene on the marine copepod Paracartia grani. Marine Biology, 151, 
215 
195-204. 
216 
Chust G, Allen JI, Bopp L, Schrum C, Holt J, Tsiaras K, Zavatarelli M, Chifflet M, Cannaby 
217 
H, Dadou I, Daewel U, Wakelin SL, Machu E, Pushpadas D, Butenschon M, Artioli 
218 
Y, Petihakis G, Smith C, Garçon V, Goubanova K, Le Vu B, Fach BA, Salihoglu B, 
219 
Clementi E, Irigoien X (2014a) Biomass changes and trophic amplification of 
220 
plankton in a warmer ocean. Global Change Biology, 20, 2124-2139. 
221 
Chust G, Castellani C, Licandro P, Ibaibarriaga L, Sagarminaga Y, Irigoien X (2014b) Are 
222 
Calanus spp. shifting poleward in the North Atlantic? A habitat modelling approach. 
223 
Ices Journal of Marine Science, 71, 241-253. 
224 
Dinh KV, Janssens L, Debecker S, De Jonge M, Lambret P, Nilsson-Örtman V, Bervoets L, 
225 
Stoks R (2013) Susceptibility to a metal under global warming is shaped by thermal 
226 
adaptation along a latitudinal gradient. Global Change Biology, 19, 2625–2633. 
227 
Dinh KV, Janssens L, Debecker S, Stoks R (2014) Temperature- and latitude-specific 
228 
individual growth rates shape the vulnerability of damselfly larvae to a widespread 
229 
pesticide. Journal of Applied Ecology, 51, 919-928. 
230 
Grenvald JC, Nielsen TG, Hjorth M (2013) Effects of pyrene exposure and temperature on 
231 
early development of two co-existing Arctic copepods. Ecotoxicology, 22, 184-198. 
232 
Halpern BS, Walbridge S, Selkoe KA, Kappel CV, Micheli F, D'agrosa C, Bruno JF, Casey 
233 
KS, Ebert C, Fox HE, Fujita R, Heinemann D, Lenihan HS, Madin EMP, Perry MT, 
234 
Selig ER, Spalding M, Steneck R, Watson R (2008) A global map of human impact on 
235 
marine ecosystems. Science, 319, 948-952. 
236 
Hansen BH, Altin D, Øverjordet IB, Jager T, Nordtug T (2013) Acute exposure of water 
237 
soluble fractions of marine diesel on Arctic Calanus glacialis and boreal Calanus 
238 
==PAGE:50==
APPENDIX 1 
11 
finmarchicus: effects on survival and biomarker response. Science of the Total 
239 
Environment, 449, 276-284. 
240 
Heintz RA, Short JW, Rice SD (1999) Sensitivity of fish embryos to weathered crude oil: Part 
241 
II. Increased mortality of pink salmon (Oncorhynchus gorbuscha) embryos incubating 
242 
downstream from weathered Exxon Valdez crude oil. Environmental Toxicology and 
243 
Chemistry, 18, 494-503. 
244 
Hicken CE, Linbo TL, Baldwin DH, Willis ML, Myers MS, Holland L, Larsen M, Stekoll 
245 
MS, Rice SD, Collier TK, Scholz NL, Incardona JP (2011) Sublethal exposure to 
246 
crude oil during embryonic development alters cardiac morphology and reduces 
247 
aerobic capacity in adult fish. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
248 
United States of America, 108, 7086-7090. 
249 
Hinder SL, Gravenor MB, Edwards M, Ostle C, Bodger OG, Lee PLM, Walne AW, Hays GC 
250 
(2014) Multi-decadal range changes vs. thermal adaptation for north east Atlantic 
251 
oceanic copepods in the face of climate change. Global Change Biology, 20, 140-146. 
252 
Hirche HJ (1991) Ditribution of dominant calanoid copepod species in the Greenland sea 
253 
during late fall. Polar Biology, 11, 351-362. 
254 
Hirche HJ, Kosobokova K (2007) Distribution of Calanus finmarchicus in the northern North 
255 
Atlantic and Arctic Ocean - expatriation and potential colonization. Deep-Sea 
256 
Research Part Ii-Topical Studies in Oceanography, 54, 2729-2747. 
257 
Hjorth M, Nielsen TG (2011) Oil exposure in a warmer Arctic: potential impacts on key 
258 
zooplankton species. Marine Biology, 158, 1339-1347. 
259 
Incardona JP, Vines CA, Anulacion BF, Baldwin DH, Day HL, French BL, Labenia JS, Linbo 
260 
TL, Myers MS, Olson OP, Sloan CA, Sol S, Griffin FJ, Menard K, Morgan SG, West 
261 
JE, Collier TK, Ylitalo GM, Cherr GN, Scholz NL (2012) Unexpectedly high 
262 
mortality in Pacific herring embryos exposed to the 2007 Cosco Busan oil spill in San 
263 
==PAGE:51==
APPENDIX 1 
12 
Francisco Bay. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States 
264 
of America, 109, E51-E58. 
265 
Ipcc (2013) Climate change 2013: The physical science basis: Contribution of Working 
266 
Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
267 
Change, Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University Press. 
268 
Jackson MC, Loewen CJG, Vinebrooke RD, Chimimba CT (2016) Net effects of multiple 
269 
stressors in freshwater ecosystems: a meta-analysis. Global Change Biology, 22, 180-
270 
189. 
271 
Jager T, Vandenbrouck T, Baas J, De Coen WM, Kooijman S (2010) A biology-based 
272 
approach for mixture toxicity of multiple endpoints over the life cycle. Ecotoxicology, 
273 
19, 351-361. 
274 
Janssens L, Dinh KV, Debecker S, Bervoets L, Stoks R (2014) Local adaptation and the 
275 
potential effects of a contaminant on predator avoidance and antipredator responses 
276 
under global warming: a space-for-time substitution approach. Evolutionary 
277 
Applications, 7, 421-430. 
278 
Jensen MH, Nielsen TG, Dahlloef I (2008) Effects of pyrene on grazing and reproduction of 
279 
Calanus finmarchicus and Calanus glacialis from Disko Bay, West Greenland. 
280 
Aquatic Toxicology, 87, 99-107. 
281 
Jones DOB, Yool A, Wei C-L, Henson SA, Ruhl HA, Watson RA, Gehlen M (2014) Global 
282 
reductions in seafloor biomass in response to climate change. Global Change Biology, 
283 
20, 1861-1872. 
284 
Kiørboe T (1998) Population regulation and role of mesozooplankton in shaping marine 
285 
pelagic food webs. Hydrobiologia, 363, 13-27. 
286 
==PAGE:52==
APPENDIX 1 
13 
Madsen SD, Nielsen TG, Hansen BW (2001) Annual population development and production 
287 
by Calanus finmarchicus, C. glacialis and C. hyperboreus in Disko Bay, western 
288 
Greenland. Marine Biology, 139, 75-93. 
289 
Moe SJ, De Schamphelaere K, Clements WH, Sorensen MT, Van Den Brink PJ, Liess M 
290 
(2013) Combined and interactive effects of global climate change and toxicants on 
291 
populations and communities. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry, 32, 49-61. 
292 
National Research Council (2003) Oil in the sea III: Inputs, fates and effects.  pp Page, 
293 
Washington, DC, National Academy Press. 
294 
Nørregaard RD, Nielsen TG, Moller EF, Strand J, Espersen L, Mohl M (2014) Evaluating 
295 
pyrene toxicity on Arctic key copepod species Calanus hyperboreus. Ecotoxicology, 
296 
23, 163-174. 
297 
Noyes PD, Mcelwee MK, Miller HD, Clark BW, Van Tiem LA, Walcott KC, Erwin KN, 
298 
Levin ED (2009) The toxicology of climate change: Environmental contaminants in a 
299 
warming world. Environment International, 35, 971-986. 
300 
Pelletier MC, Burgess RM, Ho KT, Kuhn A, Mckinney RA, Ryba SA (1997) Phototoxicity of 
301 
individual polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and petroleum to marine invertebrate 
302 
larvae and juveniles. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry, 16, 2190-2199. 
303 
Reddy CM, Arey JS, Seewald JS, Sylva SP, Lemkau KL, Nelson RK, Carmichael CA, 
304 
Mcintyre CP, Fenwick J, Ventura GT, Van Mooy BaS, Camilli R (2012) Composition 
305 
and fate of gas and oil released to the water column during the Deepwater Horizon oil 
306 
spill. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
307 
America, 109, 20229-20234. 
308 
Reddy CM, Quinn JG (2001) The North Cape oil spill: hydrocarbons in Rhode Island coastal 
309 
waters and Point Judith Pond. Marine Environmental Research, 52, 445-461. 
310 
==PAGE:53==
APPENDIX 1 
14 
Reygondeau G, Beaugrand G (2011) Future climate-driven shifts in distribution of Calanus 
311 
finmarchicus. Global Change Biology, 17, 756-766. 
312 
Statistics Greenland (2012) Grønlands Udenrigshandel 2011.  pp Page, Nuuk, 
313 
Udenrigshandel. 
314 
Steinacher M, Joos F, Frölicher TL, Bopp L, Cadule P, Cocco V, Doney SC, Gehlen M, 
315 
Lindsay K, Moore JK, Schneider B, Segschneider J (2010) Projected 21st century 
316 
decrease in marine productivity: a multi-model analysis. Biogeosciences, 7, 979-1005. 
317 
Wernberg T, Smale DA, Thomsen MS (2012) A decade of climate change experiments on 
318 
marine organisms: procedures, patterns and problems. Global Change Biology, 18, 
319 
1491-1498. 
320 
Wilson RJ, Banas NS, Heath MR, Speirs DC (2016) Projected impacts of 21st century climate 
321 
change on diapause in Calanus finmarchicus. Global Change Biology, 22, 3332-3340. 
322 
Word JQ (2013) Environmental impacts of Arctic oil spills and Arctic spill response 
323 
technologies: Literature review and recommendations. Arcitc Oil Spill Response 
324 
Technology Joint Industry Programme. 
325 
 
326 
 
 
327 
==PAGE:54==
APPENDIX 1 
15 
Table 1. The results of general linear models testing for the effects of temperature and pyrene 
328 
exposure on survival, feacal pellet and egg productions of the Arctic copepod Calanus 
329 
finmarchicus and C. glacialis. Significant P values (P < 0.05) are indicated in bold. 
330 
Effects 
Mortality 
Feacal pellet production 
Egg production 
 
df1, df2 
F 
P 
df1, df2 
F 
P 
df1, df2 
F 
P 
Temperature (Temp) 
2, 72 
10.67 
<0.001 
2, 69 
1.65 
0.20 
2, 69 
5.24 
0.0076 
Pyrene (Pyr) 
5, 72 
21.47 
<0.001 
5, 69 
9.10 
<0.001 
5, 69 
0.31 
0.90 
Species 
1, 72 
4.73 
0.033 
1, 69 
3.96 
0.050 
1, 69 
0.78 
0.38 
Temp × Species 
2, 72 
13.08 
<0.001 
2, 69 
4.35 
0.017 
2, 69 
2.84 
0.066 
Pyr × Temp 
10, 72 
1.46 
0.17 
10, 69 
0.81 
0.62 
10, 69 
1.13 
0.35 
Pyr × Species 
5, 72 
5.62 
<0.001 
5, 69 
2.51 
0.038 
5, 69 
1.64 
0.16 
Pyr × Temp × 
Species 
10, 72 
1.11 
0.37 
10, 69 
0.79 
0.64 
10, 69 
1.03 
0.43 
 
331 
 
 
332 
==PAGE:55==
APPENDIX 1 
16 
Figure legends 
333 
Figure 1. Mortality (%) of Calanus finmarchicus (a) and C. glacialis (b) as a function of the 
334 
temperatures and pyrene exposure. Data are least-squared means + 1 SE.  
335 
Figure 2. Feacal pellet production of Calanus finmarchicus (a) and C. glacialis (b) as a 
336 
function of the temperatures and pyrene exposure. Data are least-squared means + 1 SE. 
337 
Figure 3. Egg production of Calanus finmarchicus (a) and C. glacialis (b) as a function of the 
338 
temperatures and pyrene exposure. Data are least-squared means + 1 SE. 
 
339 
==PAGE:56==
APPENDIX 1 
17 
 
340 
Figure 1 
341 
 
 
342 
==PAGE:57==
APPENDIX 1 
18 
 
343 
Figure 2 
344 
 
 
345 
==PAGE:58==
APPENDIX 1 
19 
 
346 
Figure 3 
347 
 
348 
==PAGE:59==
APPENDIX 2 
1 
Effects of oil spill response technologies on the physiological 
1 
performance of the Arctic copepod Calanus glacialis 
2 
Kirstine Toxværda,b, Marina Pančićb, Helene O. Eidec, Janne E. Søreidec, Camille Lacroixd, 
3 
Stéphane Le Flochd, Morten Hjortha, Torkel Gissel Nielsenb * 
4 
aCowi Denmark, Department of Water & Nature, Parallelvej 2, 2800 Kgs Lyngby, Denmark 
5 
bNational Institute of Aquatic Resources, Technical University of Denmark, Kemitorvet Building 
6 
201, 2800 Kgs Lyngby, Denmark 
7 
cThe University Centre in Svalbard, PO Box 156, 9171 Longyearbyen, Norway 
8 
dCEDRE, 715 rue Alain Colas, CS 41836, 29218 Brest Cedex 2, France 
9 
E-mail addresses: kuto@cowi.dk (K. Toxværd), marpan@aqua.dtu.dk (M. Pančić), 
10 
helene.eide91@gmail.com (H.O. Eide), Janne.Soreide@unis.no (J.E. Søreide), 
11 
Camille.Lacroix@cedre.fr (C. Lacroix), Stephane.Le.Floch@cedre.fr (S. Le Floch), morh@cowi.dk 
12 
(M. Hjorth), tgin@aqua.dtu.dk (T.G. Nielsen),  
13 
*Corresponding author. Address: National Institute of Aquatic Resources, Technical University of 
14 
Denmark, Kemitorvet Building 201, 2800 Kgs Lyngby, Denmark. Tel.: +45 3588349. E-mail 
15 
address: tgin@aqua.dtu.dk (T.G. Nielsen) 
 
16 
==PAGE:60==
APPENDIX 2 
2 
Abstract (max 150 words): Mesocosm field studies with oil in ice was performed in Van 
17 
Mijenfjorden in Svalbard to compare effects of the oil spill responses (OSR) in-situ burning, 
18 
chemical dispersion and natural attenuation on the physiological performance of the Arctic copepod 
19 
Calanus glacialis. Contaminated seawater collected from the mesocosms in early and late spring 
20 
was used in laboratory incubations, and effects on fecal pellet production, egg production and 
21 
hatching success were investigated. Most oil compounds leaked from the chemical dispersion 
22 
treatment in late spring, resulting in low-dose (1.7 µg PAH l-1) exposure of the top 2 cm water 
23 
column. The obtained PAH levels were below known direct effect concentrations, and the 
24 
physiological performance of female C. glacialis was not affected by the tested OSR methods after 
25 
14 days of exposure. However, reduced survival and deformity was observed in nauplii from 
26 
females incubated in water from the chemical dispersion treatment. 
27 
 
28 
Keywords (max 6): Mesocosm; PAH; Dispersant; Fecal pellet production; Egg production; Nauplii  
29 
==PAGE:61==
APPENDIX 2 
3 
1. Introduction 
30 
Climate change is faster and more severe in the Arctic region than in the rest of the world. The 
31 
sensitivity of Arctic marine ecosystems is of growing concern due to the pressure from changing 
32 
environmental conditions (IPCC, 2014; Wassmann, 2011) and contaminant increase from 
33 
anthropogenic activities. Loss of multi-year sea ice, shorter ice-covered periods, increased 
34 
freshwater runoff, ocean stratification and warming of the water masses are among the 
35 
environmental changes that stress existence of many ice-associated Arctic species (Michel et al., 
36 
2012). Meanwhile, the extended ice-free period has made the region more accessible for shipping 
37 
activities and fossil fuel exploration. Polar tourism is accelerating and shorter trans-Arctic shipping 
38 
routes across the Arctic Ocean are opening (Melia et al., 2016). In 2008, the United States 
39 
Geological Survey concluded that about 30% of the world’s undiscovered gas and 13% of the 
40 
world’s undiscovered oil may be found north of the Arctic Circle, mostly offshore under less than 
41 
500 meters of water (Gautier et al., 2009). As accessibility to the Arctic increases, the risk of 
42 
accidental oil spills greatly increases (AMAP, 2010; Nuka Research & Planning Group, 2010).  
43 
In response to an oil spill, urgent decisions on how to minimize impacts must be made 
44 
where environmental advantages and disadvantages of different response measures are compared. 
45 
This process called Spill Mitigation Assessment (SIMA) (Taylor & Cramer, 2017) has been 
46 
developed to support oil spill response planning and decision-making. It includes assessment of the 
47 
potential impact to valued ecosystem components, where acute toxicity data and derived chronic 
48 
effect thresholds are used to model population effects (Olsen et al., 2013a; Vries et al., 2017 
49 
Morten updates paper info). Assessments based on acute toxicity tests may underestimate effects 
50 
from long-term low-dose releases of oil from the sea ice, and lead to inaccurate predictions of 
51 
consequences of a marine oil spill in the Arctic. More chronic exposure data are needed to enable 
52 
more realistic forecasting of the consequences of marine oil spills in the Arctic.  
53 
Marine oil spill clean up involves the use of different oil spill response (OSR) methods, such 
54 
as in-situ burning (ISB), chemical dispersion (DISP) and natural attenuation (NATT). In ice 
55 
covered waters, spilled oil can be encapsulated in growing ice within 24 h (Fingas & Hollebone, 
56 
2003) and remain unweathered until the melting season (Payne et al., 1991). Encapsulated oil is 
57 
slowly released through brine channels to the underlying water during spring ice melt (Brandvik & 
58 
Faksness, 2009), and in the transport through ice it may be subjected to bacterial degradation 
59 
(Brakstadt et al., 2008). Ultimately, different OSR methods can result in different exposure regimes 
60 
to organisms the water column. Crude oil contains a mixture of hydrocarbons such as alkanes, 
61 
==PAGE:62==
APPENDIX 2 
4 
naphthenes and aromatics, of which polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are the most toxic 
62 
(Hylland, 2006). Water-soluble PAHs, such as naphthalenes and phenanthrenes, are bioavailable to 
63 
marine organisms and may potentially cause toxic effects (Dussauze et al., 2016; Faksness & 
64 
Brandvik, 2008). The vulnerability of Arctic ecosystems to marine oil spills is determined by 
65 
extreme seasonal changes with periods of high productivity (Leu et al., 2015), which must be taken 
66 
into account when selecting OSR strategies (AMAP, 2010). While most field studies on OSR 
67 
methods focus on feasibility under various ice conditions (e.g. Brandvik & Faksness, 2009; 
68 
Brandvik et al., 2010; Faksness & Brandvik, 2005; Goncharov et al., 2005; Karlsson et al., 2011; 
69 
Sergy & Blackall, 1987), the knowledge regarding ecosystem effects of OSR methods in the 
70 
presence of sea ice is very limited. 
71 
In 2015, a large-scale field experiment took place in the sea seasonal ice of Van 
72 
Mijenfjorden in Svalbard to assess potential environmental impacts of oil spill response 
73 
technologies. Crude oil was released in special designed mesocosms and treated with ISB, DISP 
74 
and NATT. In an attempt to assess and compare the effects of these OSR technologies on pelagic 
75 
ecosystems in ice-covered Artic oceans, this study uses the calanoid copepod Calanus glacialis 
76 
(Jaschnov 1955) in laboratory incubations with seawater from the mesocosms. C. glacialis is a true 
77 
cold-water species found almost exclusively in Arctic waters and considered an ecologic key 
78 
species in the Arctic seas and shelf areas. It plays a central role in the lipid-based Arctic food web, 
79 
converting low energy carbon and proteins from ice algae and phytoplankton to high-energy lipid 
80 
stores (Falk-Petersen et al., 2009; Lee et al., 2006; Scott et al., 2002). It is adapted to life in 
81 
association with sea ice and distributed along the Arctic shelf areas where it constitutes up to 80 % 
82 
of the zooplankton biomass (Conover & Huntley, 1991; Smetacek et al., 2005; Soreide et al., 2008). 
83 
The accumulated lipids can exceed 70 % of body dry weigh, making it an energy rich food item for 
84 
fish stocks, birds and marine animals in the Arctic (Falk-Petersen et al., 2009). The capacity to store 
85 
lipids is a fundamental adaptation that enables large overwintering populations and the large 
86 
production in the arctic marine ecosystems. In spring, C. glacialis occupies the bottom of the sea ice 
87 
where it feeds on ice algae and produce eggs (Soreide et al., 2010), during the same time as melting 
88 
sea ice would release encapsulated oil from a surface oil spill. Due to their high abundance and 
89 
filtration rates (Meyer et al., 2002), copepods contribute to the degradation of marine oil spills 
90 
(Conover, 1971; Nordtug et al., 2015). Copepods ingest oil compounds during feeding, and 
91 
accumulate it to some extend by diffusion over body surfaces. Ingested oil is metabolised, 
92 
transferred to egg lipids or excreted with fecal pellets (Berrojalbiz et al., 2009; Conover, 1971; 
93 
==PAGE:63==
APPENDIX 2 
5 
Stordal et al., 2015) and may cause toxic effects depending on exposure concentration and duration. 
94 
Exposure of Calanus spp. to crude oil components has recently been shown to reduce feeding 
95 
activity (Hansen et al., 2012; Hansen et al., 2017; Hjorth & Nielsen, 2011; Jensen et al., 2008; 
96 
Nordtug et al., 2015; Nørregaard et al., 2014), egg production (Hansen et al., 2015; Hjorth & 
97 
Nielsen, 2011), egg hatching success (Jensen & Caroll, 2010) and nauplii development (Grenvald et 
98 
al., 2013). Potentially, such sublethal effects would reduce recruitment stock and energy transfer to 
99 
higher trophic levels of the food web. 
100 
The aim of this study was to compare effects of different oil spill responses in ice on the 
101 
physiology of C. glacialis females. Effects of in-situ burning, chemical dispersion and natural 
102 
attenuation of crude oil on fecal pellet production, egg production, hatching success and lipid 
103 
content were investigated. Using in-situ mesocosm field experiments in Arctic sea ice, this study 
104 
reflects real weathering processes, additive effects of chemical mixtures and exposure 
105 
concentrations. Effects are assessed in early and late spring to account for seasonal differences in 
106 
biological sensitivity.  
107 
2. Materials and methods 
108 
2.1 Field site location 
109 
The field experiments were conducted in ien on Svalbard (77.8684oN 16.7540oE, Fig. 1). Van 
110 
Mijenfjorden is a 53 km long glacial fjord divided into two basins with a threshold depth of 45 m, 
111 
and maximum depths of 112 m (outer basin) and 74 m (inner basin). Sea ice formation starts early 
112 
because the inlet is partly blocked by an Island, Akseløya, which limits water exchange to two 
113 
narrow straits of 30 m and 12 m depth. From December to July, the fjord is usually ice-covered 
114 
(Faksness & Brandvik, 2008). The mesocosms used in the field experiments were deployed 
115 
February 17th 2015 and decommissioned in July 2015.  
116 
2.2 Field setup and oil spill treatments 
117 
Eight floating mesocosms were used in this study. Each consisted of a vertical cylinder (diameter 
118 
1.6 m, height 3 m) with open top and bottom to allow exchanges with the atmosphere and water 
119 
column. Holes (3×3 m) were cut in the 0.8 m thick sea ice 800 m from the shore, and mesocosms 
120 
were lowered into the water in 2 rows with 13 m in between mesocosm and 20-25 m between rows. 
121 
Four treatments were applied to replicate mesocosms (Fig. 1); Natural attenuation (NATT), in-situ 
122 
burning (ISB), chemical dispersion (DISP) and control (CNTL). In the NATT treatment 20 l crude 
123 
oil was added to each of two mesocosms, leading to a calculated oil thickness of 0.25 mm, which is 
124 
==PAGE:64==
APPENDIX 2 
6 
representative of a real fresh oil slick. In the DISP treatment 20 l crude oil was mixed with 1 l 
125 
dispersant and then added to each mesocosm without mechanical mixing to reproduce the behaviour 
126 
of an oil slick, which was dispersed several hours before. In the ISB treatment 2 l of residuals of 
127 
burned crude oil was added to each mesocosm, corresponding to the volume of residue from 
128 
burning of 20 l crude oil. Finally, two without oil added served as CNTL. After application, surface 
129 
ice was allowed to form naturally.  
130 
This study was performed on Kobbe crude oil from the Goliat field in the Norweigan 
131 
Barents Sea. It is a light oil with low content of heavy wax and asphalthene compounds, which are 
132 
important to formation of water-in-oil emulsions (Fritt-Rasmussen et al., 2012). When weathering 
133 
in the presence of sea ice, high evaporation loss and pour point result in a semi-solid unstable 
134 
emulsion with low viscosity (Brandvik et al., 2010). Physical and chemical analyses of fresh oil 
135 
were performed by Cedre (Brest Cedex 2, France) and described in Table 1. The Kobbe crude oil 
136 
contained 73 % saturates, 0.3 % asphaltenes, 10.7 % resins and 16 % aromatics. 
137 
Burned oil residue was produced at INERIS (Verneuil-en-Halatte, France) by burning 20 l 
138 
of Kobbe crude oil for 3 min, which was the time needed for the fire to go out, leading to 2 l burned 
139 
residue. 
140 
The dispersant Finasol® OSR 52 (Total Fluides, Paris-La Defense, France) was selected for 
141 
this study. It has an efficiency of 79 ± 3 % measured using the IFP test (NF T 90-345) on viscosity 
142 
oil of 1 300 cSt and a biodegradability of at least 50 % according to tests performed by INERIS (NF 
143 
T 90-346). Finally, the dispersant toxicity of brown shrimps (Crangon crangon) exposed during 
144 
6 hours to 960 mg l-1 causes a mortality of 3.3 % (NF T90-349 method). 
145 
2.3 Sampling mesocosm water 
146 
Mesocosm water was sampled in early spring on March 26 2015 and in late spring on May 14 2015 
147 
few days before the ice break up. Ice cores (diameter 9 cm, length 50-65 cm) were removed from 
148 
each mesocosm using a Kovacs Mark II core system (Kovacs Enterprice, Roseburg, Oregon, United 
149 
States) that was cleaned in between mesocosms. Next day, boreholes were gently cleaned of slush 
150 
ice, and water was pumped from 10 cm above the lower ice edge using a hand-operated vacuum 
151 
pump (Biltema hevertpump, 4.6 l min-1) with a 200 µm filter fitted at the entrance to avoid larger 
152 
zooplankton. On both sampling events, 40 l of water from each mesocosm (34 ppm in March and 
153 
32 ppm in May) was sampled, corresponding to the top 2 cm of the water column.  The water was 
154 
pumped into 23 l insulated glass bottles to prevent freezing and stored dark at 1 °C until returning to 
155 
the laboratory (12-24 h). Each pump cycle lasted 8-10 minutes.  
156 
==PAGE:65==
APPENDIX 2 
7 
2.4 Sampling zooplankton   
157 
Calanus glacialis were collected in Isfjorden, Svalbard (Karlskronadjubet 78.1944oN 14.55.046oE) 
158 
(Fig. 1) on March 21 and May 14 2015. The copepods were sampled from KV Svalbard and RV 
159 
Helmer Hanssen respectively using plankton nets (WP-2, 200 µm mesh in March, WP-3, 1 mm 
160 
mesh in May) with a 1 l non-filtering cod-end. Nets were hauled vertically from depths of 200 m to 
161 
the surface. Cod end content was gently diluted in 3 l surface water (35 ‰, 0 °C) in plastic 
162 
containers and stored dark at 0 °C until returning to the laboratory (< 3 h). Here, samples were 
163 
diluted in 25 l plastic buckets and stored dark at 4 °C (6 days in March, 1 day in May). Mature C. 
164 
glacialis females were then identified based on the criteria in Nielsen et al., 2014, and transferred 
165 
with a Pasteur pipette from ice-chilled petri dishes to 10 ml ice-chilled glass bottles until the 
166 
beginning of the experiment (< 1 h).  
167 
2.5 Phytoplankton culture 
168 
Copepods were fed a culture of the diatom Thalassiosira weissflogii grown in 1 l plastic containers 
169 
at 12 °C with gentle aeration, a 16:8h light:dark cycle  and a light intensity of 50-60 µmol photons 
170 
m-2 s-1. The medium used for was B1 (Hansen, 1989) with silicate based on autoclaved 0.2 µm 
171 
filtered seawater (FSW) with a salinity of 33 ‰. Cell density was estimated on a Sedgewick Rafter 
172 
counting chamber using an inverted microscope (Leica DM IL LED, 100× magnification)  
173 
2.6 Laboratory experiments  
174 
Water from replicate mesocosms were pooled prior to distribution to 15 1 l bottles (acid washed 
175 
Simax glass bottle with red PBTB screw cap) each holding three mature C. glacialis females. 
176 
Exposure took place in a climate room over a period of 14 days at 0 °C and in darkness to prevent 
177 
phototoxicity. The bottles were covered with black plastic to reduce light exposure during handling 
178 
(2 h day-1). Temperature was monitored using HOBO Data Loggers. Every second day, copepods 
179 
were fed T. weissflogii culture at increasing concentrations from 30-110 µg C l–1 to simulate 
180 
developing spring bloom conditions. 
181 
Egg and fecal pellet production  
182 
Mortality and daily production of eggs and fecal pellets was quantified every 24 h by filtering the 
183 
bottle content on a submerged 50 µm filter, and counting it on ice-chilled petri dishes with chilled 
184 
FSW using a stereo microscope (Leica S4E, 20× magnification). Fecal pellets were counted only if 
185 
the length was minimum 3 × width. The water was reused, and live females were immediately 
186 
returned to the bottle using a Pasteur pipette. Copepods were considered dead if they did not react 
187 
==PAGE:66==
APPENDIX 2 
8 
to physical stimuli and were loosing transparency. Length and width of 100 random pellets and all 
188 
eggs were measured every second day using an inverted microscope (Leica DM IL LED, 40× 
189 
magnification). Carbon content and specific fecal pellet and egg production production rates (SPP: 
190 
µg Cpellet (µg Cindividual)-1 day-1 and SEP: µg Cegg (µg Cindividual)-1 day-1 respectively) were calculated 
191 
based on the methodology of Swalethorp et al., 2011. 
192 
Egg hatching 
193 
To study carry-over effects on eggs, hatching success was calculated at the beginning and end of the 
194 
exposure period (day 1 and 13). Eggs were transferred to petri dishes with 10 ml FSW and stored in 
195 
darkness at 0 °C. Up to 46 eggs were incubated in each dish (n = 2-11). Hatching time for C. 
196 
glacialis at 0 °C is around 4 days (Jung-Madsen et al., 2015), but to account for potential treatment 
197 
specific differences hatching was determined after 7 days of incubation. Samples were then fixed 
198 
with a drop of acidic lugol (3 % final concentration) and nauplii and unhatched eggs counted using 
199 
a stereo microscope (Leica S4E, 20× magnification). Samples with less than three eggs were 
200 
removed from the dataset prior to analysis to reduce standard deviation.  
201 
Nauplii survival and deformity 
202 
In late spring, nauplii survival was assessed on eggs produced on day 11, 12 and 13. Eggs were 
203 
transferred to petri dishes with 40 ml FSW and stored in darkness at 0 °C. The number of hatched 
204 
nauplii was counted after 7 days using a stereo microscope (Leica S4E, 20× magnification). Nauplii 
205 
were then incubated for another 21 days, after which the number developed into stage NII was 
206 
counted. Nauplii were counted in a climate-controlled room (5 °C) to reduce heating and petri 
207 
dishes were kept on ice. They were temporarily immobilized prior to counting by adding 2-5 drops 
208 
of mineral water to the petri dish. Survival was estimated as the proportion of hatched nauplii, 
209 
which had developed into stage NII. Only replicates with minimum 5 hatched nauplii were included 
210 
in the assessment. In addition, at the same time the number of hatched nauplii with deformities were 
211 
counted, by classifying nauplii as either morphological healthy or clearly deformed after the criteria 
212 
of Poulet et al. (1995). 
213 
2.7 Carbon, nitrogen and lipid analyses of copepods  
214 
Copepods were analysed for carbon and nitrogen content at the University Centre in Svalbard 
215 
(UNIS, Longyearbyen, Svalbard) and total lipid content at Alfred Wegener Institute (AWI, 
216 
Bremerhaven, Germany). The analyses were performed on an initial reference sample (20-42 
217 
individuals) and on end samples from each treatment after 14 days of exposure (9 individuals). 
218 
==PAGE:67==
APPENDIX 2 
9 
First, prosome length was measured under a stereo microscope (Leica MZ12, 16× magnification). 
219 
Dry weight, carbon and nitrogen content were determined on 1/3 of the length measured copepods. 
220 
The copepods were quickly rinsed in milli-Q water to remove salt, placed individually in tin 
221 
capsules, dried at 60 °C for 24 h, weighed and analysed for carbon and nitrogen content on a Vario 
222 
EL cube CHN analyser (Elementar). Total lipid content was determined on 2/3 of the length 
223 
measured copepods. To obtain enough material, 2-6 copepods were pooled and transferred to glass 
224 
vials with Teflon-lined caps and 8 ml dichloromethane-methanol (2:1 v/v) was added. The vials 
225 
were stored at -80 °C until analysed. Samples were homogenized and lipids extracted according to 
226 
Folch et al. (1957). Methyl esters of fatty acids and free fatty alcohols were prepared by 
227 
transesterification of the lipid extract with 3 % concentrated sulfuric acid in methanol for 4 h at 80 
228 
°C under nitrogen atmosphere. FAME and free alcohols were then simultaneously analysed with a 
229 
gas liquid chromatograph (HP 6890N, Agilent Technologies Deutschland GmbH & Co. KG) on a 
230 
30 m x 0.25 mm i.d. wall-coated open tubular column (film thickness: 0.25 mm; liquid phase: 
231 
DBFFAP), equipped with split/splitless injector (250 1C) and flame ionization detector (280 °C) 
232 
using temperature programming. Fatty acids and fatty alcohols were quantified with an internal 
233 
19:0 fatty acid standard added to the sample before the extraction. Individual components were 
234 
identified by comparisons to standards or, if necessary, by additional GC-mass spectrometry runs. 
235 
The samples were quantified using ChemStation software (Agilent, Agilent Technologies 
236 
Deutschland GmbH & Co. KG). Total lipid composition was calculated as sum of total fatty acids 
237 
and fatty alcohols. 
238 
2.8 Chemical analyses of exposure medium and copepods 
239 
The exposure medium and copepods were analysed for 21 target PAHs (Table 2), including the 16 
240 
priority PAHs listed by the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), using stir bar sorptive 
241 
extraction-thermal desorption-gas chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (SBSE-TD-GC-
242 
MS/MS) (adapted from Lacroix et al, 2014). The analysis was performed by CEDRE (Brest, 
243 
France). Two compounds, benzo(b)fluoranthene and benzo(k)fluoranthene, were quantified as a 
244 
sum, named benzo(b+k)fluoranthene, due to a poor resolution. Limits of quantification (LOQ) were 
245 
calculated by the calibration curve method (Shrivastava et al, 2011) and limit of detection (LOD) 
246 
were estimated by dividing LOQ by 3. 
247 
PAH content in the exposure medium was quantified on samples (100 ml, n = 3) from 
248 
experiment day 0 and 14, collected in 200 ml brown acid washed bottles and stored at -20 °C until 
249 
analysis. Samples were prepared by adding 10 ml of an ethanolic solution containing 10 ng of seven 
250 
==PAGE:68==
APPENDIX 2 
10 
deuterated PAH (internal standards) to 90 ml of seawater sample. Then, analytes were extracted for 
251 
2 hours at 700 rpm using polydimethylsiloxane stir-bars (Twister 20 mm x 0.5 mm, Gerstel). Bars 
252 
were subsequently analysed using a gas chromatography system Agilent 7890A coupled to an 
253 
Agilent 7000 triple quadripole mass spectrometer (Agilent Technologies) and equipped with a 
254 
Thermal Desorption Unit (TDU) combined with a Cooled Injection System (Gerstel). 
255 
Thermodesorption and GC-MS/MS conditions were as previously described (Lacroix et al., 2014). 
256 
Analytes were quantified relatively to deuterated compounds using a calibration curve ranging from 
257 
0.01-30 ng bar-1.  
258 
PAH content in the copepods was quantified on pooled samples containing 5-10 females 
259 
collected individually on experiment day 14 in 4 mL acid washed glass vials and stored at -20 °C 
260 
until analysis. Samples were pooled to obtain enough material for analysis, but as a consequence it 
261 
was not possible to obtain replicates. Samples were prepared by resuspension in 2 ml of an 
262 
ethanolic solution containing 0.05 g ml-1 of hydroxide potassium and digestion for 3 h at 80 °C by 
263 
alkaline digestion. Visual observations indicated this procedure allowed a disruption of copepod 
264 
exoskeleton and a release of the body content. After addition of 20 ml of reverse osmosis water, 
265 
analytes were extracted from digested samples for 2 hours at 700 rpm using polydimethylsiloxane 
266 
stir-bars (Twister 20 mm x 0.5 mm, Gerstel). Bars were subsequently analyzed using a gas 
267 
chromatography system Agilent 7890A coupled to an Agilent 7000 triple quadripole mass 
268 
spectrometer (Agilent Technologies) and equipped with a Thermal Desorption Unit (TDU) 
269 
combined with a Cooled Injection System (Gerstel). Thermodesorption and GC-MS/MS conditions 
270 
were as previously described (Lacroix et al. 2014). Analytes were quantified relatively to deuterated 
271 
compounds using a calibration curve ranging from 0.01 ng to 10 ng per bar. It was not possible to 
272 
quantify PAH content in eggs due to insufficient amounts of raw material.  
273 
To evaluate differences in PAH uptake in C. glacialis for the tested OSR methods, the lipid 
274 
based tissue concentrations (Ca) at the end of the exposure period (14 days) were calculated from 
275 
lipid and PAH measurements, and compared to the average PAH water concentrations (Cw) 
276 
throughout the exposure period (Agersted et al., 2018; Jensen et al., 2012).  
277 
2.9 Data analyses 
278 
Data analyses were performed in R 3.4.0 (R Core Team, R Foundation for Statistical Computing, 
279 
Vienna, Austria, 2017). To compare differences between controls and oil spill response treatments 
280 
one-way ANOVA was performed followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparison test. If variance 
281 
between observations were unequal one-way ANOVA with Welch correction was used. Pearson 
282 
==PAGE:69==
APPENDIX 2 
11 
product-moment correlation coefficients were calculated to assess linear relationships between 
283 
variables. The significance level was set to p ≤ 0.05 in all tests.  
284 
3. Results 
285 
3.1 PAH content in exposure medium and copepods 
286 
In the Kobbe crude oil used in this experiment, the concentration of the 21 PAHs and their alkylated 
287 
congeners was 9 300 µg g-1 and the concentration of n-alkanes was 82 000 µg g-1.  
288 
In the exposure medium, PAH content decreased during the 14 day experiment in all 
289 
treatments except in the CNTL in early spring (Table 3). Initial concentrations ranged from 13 - 95 
290 
ng l-1 in early spring and from 21-1 673 ng l-1 in late spring. In early spring, background PAH 
291 
concentrations of 13 ± 1 and 13 ± 2 ng l-1 was measured in the CNTL and ISB treatments, and 
292 
maximums of 93 ± 11 and 95 ± 5 ng l-1 measured in the NATT and DISP treatments respectively 
293 
(mean ± SE, n = 3), which also differed significantly from the CNTL (Dunnett’s test, p < 0.001 and 
294 
p = 0.002 respectively). In late spring, initial PAH concentrations in the ISB treatment had 
295 
increased by 200 % to 40 ± 6 ng l-1, in the NATT treatment by 282 % to 357 ± 55 ng l-1 and in the 
296 
DISP treatment by 1 658 % to 1 673 ± 386 ng l-1. The DISP treatment differed significantly from 
297 
the CNTL (Dunnett’s test, p < 0.001 and, p = 0.0006). In all treatments, the exposure medium 
298 
contained mostly naphthalene (49-82 %, average 62 %). Biphenyl, flourene and dibenzothiophene 
299 
were present in the NATT and DISP treatments in increasing concentrations from early to late 
300 
spring. Acenaphtene and anthracene were found only in the DISP treatment.  
301 
There was a positive linear correlation (Pearson’s correlation, p = 1.03*10-5, R2 = 0.97) 
302 
between final lipid based tissue concentrations (Ca) of PAH in C. glacialis after 14 days of exposure 
303 
and average PAH concentrations in water (Cw) during the 14 days exposure period (Fig. 2). Ca was 
304 
below 0.01 µg g lipid-1 (n = 1) for all treatments in early spring, when the corresponding Cw was 
305 
below 0.10 µg ml-1 (Fig. 2). In late spring, Cw increased to 0.93 and 0.21 µg ml-1 (n = 3) in the DISP 
306 
and NATT treatments respectively, resulting Ca increase to 0.05 and 0.02 µg g lipid-1 (n = 1) 
307 
respectively.  
308 
3.2 Copepod size and weight 
309 
There was no significant effect of OSR treatments on prosome length, dry weight, carbon, nitrogen 
310 
or total lipid content in early and late spring. Prosome length was 3.28 ± 0.03 and 3.34 ± 0.04 mm 
311 
(mean ± SE, n = 36) in early and late spring respectively (Table 4). There was a significant + 60 % 
312 
increase in body dry weight from 484 ± 38 to 773 ± 89 µg female-1 (mean ± SE, n = 12) from early 
313 
==PAGE:70==
APPENDIX 2 
12 
to late spring (one-way ANOVA, p = 0.01). In early spring, the average female contained 240 ± 23 
314 
µg carbon, 47 ± 3 µg nitrogen, and 83 ± 9 µg total lipid (mean ± SE, n = 12). In late spring, the 
315 
content was 222 ± 25 µg carbon, 48 ± 4 µg nitrogen (mean ± SE, n = 12), and 44 ± 7 µg total lipid 
316 
(mean ± SE, n = 11). The lipid concentrations were low since the females had initiated their egg 
317 
production 
318 
3.3 Fecal pellet and egg size  
319 
There was no relationship between PAH concentration in the exposure medium and fecal pellet or 
320 
egg volume. Pellet length and width in was 692.2 ± 2.6 and 74.7 ± 0.3 µm respectively in early 
321 
spring (mean ± SE, n = 3 600), and 712.7 ± 4.4 µm and 81.7 ± 0.4 µm in late spring (mean ± SE, n 
322 
= 1 399) (Table 4). Egg diameter was 186.3 ± 0.6 µm in early spring (mean ± SE, n = 428) and 
323 
178.9 ± 1.0 µm in late spring (mean ± SE, n = 201).  
324 
3.4 Fecal pellet and egg production  
325 
Carbon specific fecal pellet (SPP) and egg production rates (SEP) were calculated based on the 
326 
carbon content listed in Table 4. There was a significant increase in PP with increasing food 
327 
concentration (Pearson’s correlation, p < 0.05) and no relationship between EP and food 
328 
concentration. During the 14 days of exposure, individual fecal pellet production rates (PP) were in 
329 
the same order of magnitude in early and late spring (Fig. 3). In early spring, there was no 
330 
difference in daily PP or cumulated PP between treatments on any day during the exposure period. 
331 
PP was 31 ± 1 pellets female-1 day-1 corresponding to a SPP of 0.022 ± 0.000 µg C (µg Cfemale)-1 
332 
day-1, and cumulated PP after 14 days was 409 ± 6 pellets female-1 (mean ± SE, n = 60) (Table 5). 
333 
In late spring, PP was significantly higher in the DISP treatment on day 11 compared to the CNTL 
334 
(Dunnett’s test, p = 0.004). PP was 25 ± 0 pellets female-1 day-1 corresponding to a SPP of 0.024 ± 
335 
0.000 µg C (µg Cfemale)-1 day-1 (mean ± SE, n = 60). There was no difference in cumulated PP 
336 
between treatments on any day and cumulated PP after 14 days was 356 ± 7 pellets female-1. 
337 
Individual egg production rates (EP) were higher in late spring than in early spring (Fig. 4). In early 
338 
spring, there was an increase in EP in all treatments over the entire exposure period, while in late 
339 
spring there was a decrease in all except the CNTL treatment (data not shown). In late spring, the 
340 
negative correlation between EP and exposure days in the DISP treatment was statistically 
341 
significant (ANOVA, p = 0.02). In early spring, EP was 2.8 ± 0.2 eggs female-1 day-1 corresponding 
342 
to a SEP of 0.069 ± 0.0.007 µg C (µg Cfemale)-1 day-1, and cumulated EP after 14 days was 36.4 ± 
343 
3.6 eggs female-1 (mean ± SE, n = 60) (Table 5). There was no difference in EP or cumulated EP 
344 
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX 2 
13 
between treatments on any day during the 14 days of exposure. In late spring, EP was 4.8 ± 0.2 eggs 
345 
female-1 day-1 corresponding to a SEP of 0.118 ± 0.0.009 µg C (µg Cfemale)-1 day-1, and cumulated 
346 
SEP after 14 days was 66.7 ± 4.9 eggs female-1 (mean ± SE, n = 60). Due to a high egg production 
347 
in the DISP treatment on day 2, cumulated EP in the DISP treatment was significantly higher 
348 
compared to the CNTL from day 2 until the end of the experiment (+ 42 %) (Dunnett’s test, p = 
349 
0.001).  
350 
3.5 Hatching success  
351 
Hatching ranged from 45-80 %. Most eggs hatched in the in the initial reference experiment, the 
352 
CNTL and the DISP treatments, while a less eggs hatched in the ISB followed by the NATT 
353 
treatments (Fig. 5). Hatching success was not correlated with PAH concentration and did not differ 
354 
significantly between treatments.  
355 
3.6 Nauplii survival and deformity 
356 
Nauplii development and deformity was assessed in late spring. There was a tendency that less of 
357 
the nauplii from the DISP treatment survived and developed into stage NII, but the trend was not 
358 
significant due to high variability between samples (Fig. 6). During the incubation experiment we 
359 
observed that several of the nauplii were hatched with different degrees of deformity (Fig. 7). Most 
360 
deform nauplii were observed in the DISP treatment (Fig. 6), although the difference between 
361 
treatments was not significant. In the control, 0.1 % of nauplii were deform (n = 563), 
362 
corresponding to in situ observations during the same period (0.3 %). Nauplii deformity in the DISP 
363 
treatment was 10 % (n = 815), 3 % (n = 543) in the NATT treatment and 2 % (n = 355) in the ISB 
364 
treatment.  
365 
4. Discussion  
366 
Trough application of a mesocosm setup we compared effects of different oil spill responses (OSR) 
367 
under in-situ conditions, with emphasis on the fate of oil components during the downwards 
368 
transportation through the sea ice. We observed no effect of the OSR methods on physiological 
369 
performance of Calanus glacialis females compared with a control mesocosm. However, there was 
370 
a tendency for reduced development and increased deformity of nauplii produced by females that 
371 
had been exposed to dispersed oil. 
372 
4.1 PAH exposure  
373 
==PAGE:72==
APPENDIX 2 
14 
This study was designed to mimic an oil slick thickness of 1 cm representative to a fresh oil spill 
374 
and to demonstrate the PAH exposure regime in the surface water in early and late spring. We 
375 
found that the PAH concentrations in the ice water interface of exposed mesocosms increased from 
376 
early to late spring, showing that sea ice delays PAH release from oil in ice. This is consistent with 
377 
other studies where oil released under first-year ice is encapsulated within 24 h (Fingas & 
378 
Hollebone, 2003) and released to the surface water the ice deteriorates (Faksness & Brandvik, 
379 
2008).  
380 
Oil treated with NATT and DISP resulted in the highest PAH exposure concentrations in 
381 
early spring. Background concentrations obtained in the CNTL and ISB treatments reflects the 
382 
industrial activities in Van Mijenfjorden. Sampling in late spring was conducted a week before ice 
383 
break up, and here the DISP treatment resulted in a 4.7 times higher PAH exposure compared to the 
384 
NATT treatment, demonstrating a higher mobility of dispersed oil in melting sea ice compared to 
385 
the other OSRs. Oil treated with ISB resulted in the lowest PAH exposure concentrations, which is 
386 
a result of removal of 80 – 90 % crude oil volume during the incineration process. The main PAH 
387 
components released in both early and late spring were naphthalene, biphenyl and phenanthrene. 
388 
Napthalene in particular has a high toxicity to marine organisms compared to other PAHs while the 
389 
toxicity of phenanthrene is about ten times less (Barata et al., 2005). Total PAH concentrations in 
390 
the present study are in the low range compared to other oil spills, e.g. ranged most concentrations 
391 
during the Exxon Valdez oil spill between 0.001 and 10 ug l-1 (Neff et al., 1995). Considering the 
392 
amount of oil spilled in the mesocosms, the low measured concentrations and the fact that sea ice 
393 
most likely encapsulates oil spill before it is diluted indicates that even at the sampling time in late 
394 
spring, most PAHs were still trapped inside the sea ice. With further ice melting, higher PAH 
395 
concentrations would be expected, especially of less mobile oil compounds in the NATT treatment. 
396 
The decrease in PAH concentrations in the experimental bottles during the exposure period is likely 
397 
due to ingestion by copepods (Stordal et al., 2015) and adhesion to glass surfaces (Hansen et al., 
398 
2017). Low levels of PAHs were measured in the CNTL treatment where no oil was added 
399 
illustrates the background levels present in the environment. Overall, an expected difference in 
400 
exposure history between treatments was observed, which documents the relevance of the 
401 
mesocosm set-up as a test tool for our experiment. However, timing of sampling is essential, 
402 
especially close to sea-ice breakup where our findings show a containment effect of the ice with 
403 
resulting low exposure to sea-ice communities, which consists very close to the complete melt of 
404 
ice.  
405 
==PAGE:73==
APPENDIX 2 
15 
Final lipid based tissue concentrations of PAH in C. glacialis corresponded to the observed 
406 
pattern of PAH concentrations in the exposure medium, showing that PAHs accumulated in the 
407 
copepods during the experiment as a result of increasing exposure concentrations. Other studies 
408 
have also documented bioaccumulation of PAHs in Calanus copepods (Agersted et al., 2018; 
409 
Jensen et al., 2012).  
410 
4.2 Effects on feeding activity  
411 
In a parallel study, Pancic et al. (in preparation) showed that in late spring, when the sea ice is 
412 
melting, the DISP and ISB treatments reduce growth of microzooplankton and small phytoplankton, 
413 
while the growth of diatoms was unaffected. Phytoplankton, ice algae and microzooplankton are all 
414 
important dietary components to C. glacialis. Cleary et al. (2007) observed that diatoms were the 
415 
main food source of C. glacialis during spring bloom, while other studies show that 
416 
microzooplankton, including diatoms, is a preferred prey (Campbell et al., 2009 & 2016). If food 
417 
composition and availability is impacted by the OSR treatments, the trophic energy transfer at the 
418 
base of the food web potentially is reduced. We used fecal pellet production as a proxy for grazing, 
419 
as fecal pellet production is a sensitive measure for grazing activity impacted by the amount and 
420 
composition of food (Dünweber et al., 2010). The incubated copepods in this study were provided 
421 
with the same food concentrations and had similar fecal pellet production rates, so grazing activity 
422 
was also unaffected by the OSR. Reduced fecal pellet production rates are documented in previous 
423 
laboratory studies with the PAH pyrene (Hjorth & Nielsen, 2011; Jensen et al., 2008; Nørregaard et 
424 
al., 2014) and crude oil dispersions (Hansen et al., 2012; Nordtug et al., 2015; Stordal et al., 2015). 
425 
Reduced feeding is caused by narcosis (Wezel & Opperhuizen, 1995), clogging of the feeding 
426 
apparatus or alteration of the metabolite concentrations resembling a starvation response (Hansen et 
427 
al., 2017). Studies by Jensen et al. (2008) and Hjorth & Nielsen (2011) have showed that C. 
428 
glacialis is less sensitive to pyrene exposure than the smaller C. finmarchicus, which is attributed to 
429 
the higher lipid content. If PAHs from the exposure medium were indeed accumulated in the lipid 
430 
reserve, we would have expected to see effects on feeding rate towards the end of the experiment. 
431 
However, vulnerability is not linked to lipid reserve alone (Hansen et al., 2016). In the present 
432 
study, even the highest observed PAH concentrations are lower than previous observed effect 
433 
concentrations), so absence of response may be due to low PAH concentrations combined with a 
434 
short exposure time. The copepod gut contains oil degrading bacteria (Stordal et al., 2015), that 
435 
increase biotransformation and excretion with fecal pellets (Jensen et al., 2012; Olsen et al., 2013b; 
436 
Nordtug et al., 2015) acting as a detoxification measure. Therefore, the lack of impact on feeding 
437 
==PAGE:74==
APPENDIX 2 
16 
rate could also be a result of the plasticity of the copepod microbiome, as observed with other 
438 
toxicants in other species (Alberdi et al., 2016; Han et al., 2014). PAH content in female copepods 
439 
and fecal pellets was not determined due to insufficient material for PAH analysis. Fecal pellet size 
440 
was unaffected by exposure to the oil spill treatments. Previous studies by Stordal et al. 2015 found 
441 
a significant reduction in length and width of pellets from oil exposed C. finmarchicus at higher 
442 
PAH concentrations.  
443 
4.3 Effects on reproduction 
444 
Egg production and hatching success were used as indicators for effects of exposure to oil spill 
445 
treatments on C. glacialis reproduction. There was no consistent difference in daily egg production 
446 
between treatments, and consequently no effect of PAH exposure at the concentrations obtained in 
447 
the experiment. Reduced egg production of Calanus spp. has been observed in previous laboratory 
448 
studies with pyrene and Calanus hyperboreus (Nørregaard et al., 2014) and crude oil dispersions 
449 
and Calanus finmarchicus (Hansen et al., 2015; Olsen et al., 2013b) but in both cases at higher 
450 
PAH concentrations than what was obtained in this mesocosm experiment. Egg production rates 
451 
were higher in May as a result of C. glacialis feeding on the phytoplankton bloom (Soreide et al., 
452 
2010) prior to the experiment, which was also reflected in reduced lipid content. However 
453 
production rates in both periods were low compared to previous findings such as Soreide et al., 
454 
2010. According to Daase et al., 2013, the phytoplankton spring bloom peaks in late April or Start 
455 
May in Kongsfjorden, which like Isfjorden is dominated by warm water influx and remains ice free 
456 
during winter. The peak in C. glacialis egg production is timed with the onset of the phytoplankton 
457 
spring bloom, and would therefore occur around start April in Kongsjorden (Daase et al., 2013). In 
458 
this study, the early and late spring sampling of copepods were conducted on March 21 and May 14 
459 
respectively, and lipid concentrations were low upon sampling in late spring. The low egg 
460 
production rates were not a result of food concentrations as observed pellet production was at a 
461 
comparable level to other studies (such as Swalethorp et al., 2011) and remained unaffected by 
462 
PAH exposure. Instead, it is interpreted as a result of the copepods being sampled at the onset of 
463 
and after the peak in egg production, i.e. at the time in early spring when they surface to eat and fuel 
464 
reproduction (Soreide et al., 2010), and at the time in late spring when most lipids have been spend. 
465 
Based on these findings, this study showed no effects of the OSR treatments on egg production on 
466 
either side of the peak in C. glacialis egg production. 
467 
4.4 Effects on offspring 
468 
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIX 2 
17 
PAHs accumulated in the adult females with increasing PAH exposure, but it did not result in 
469 
reduced egg hatching success. This corresponds to other studies by Hjoth & Nielsen (2011) where 
470 
the hatching success of eggs from females exposed to higher concentrations of the PAH pyrene and 
471 
subsequently hatched in seawater remained unaffected. Jensen & Caroll (2010) demonstrated a 
472 
reduced hatching success of eggs from C. glacialis females exposed to water soluble fraction of 
473 
crude oil at 10.4 µg PAH l-1, which still is above the PAH concentrations obtained in this study.  
474 
 
In this study we observed a tendency towards reduced nauplii survival in the non-feeding 
475 
stages (NI/NII) with increasing female bioaccumulation of PAH. Direct exposure of nauplii to 
476 
PAHs has previously been shown to reduce feeding (Utne, 2017) and prolong development time in 
477 
the feeding stages (from NIII) (Grenvald et al., 2013), so it is plausible that PAHs in egg lipids 
478 
could impact development in the non feeding stages too. We additionally observed a tendency 
479 
towards a higher number of deformed nauplii with increasing PAH bioaccumulation in females. 
480 
Increased nauplii deformity as a result of a toxic diet of females has previously been documented in 
481 
Calanus spp. feeding on toxic diatoms (Poulet et al., 1995, Starr et al., 1999), but to our knowledge 
482 
never previously in relation to ingestion of PAHs.  
483 
4.5 Conclusion 
484 
The present study showed that the physiological performance of female C. glacialis was not 
485 
affected by the PAH concentrations obtained with the tested OSR methods from water sampling in 
486 
early and late spring. Our results showed that the PAH release from oil in the ice was delayed and 
487 
that the resulting exposure to Calanus was below known direct effect concentrations. However, we 
488 
observed indirect effects on next generation nauplii development expressed as higher nauplii 
489 
deformation and reduced survival in the dispersed oil treatment. This corresponds to the higher 
490 
exposure concentrations in the dispersant treatment relative to the other OSR methods investigated. 
491 
We suggest removal of oil trapped inside ice before the ice melts and breaks up to reduce potential 
492 
impacts on the marine food web in the Arctic. 
493 
Acknowledgements: This work was supported by COWIfonden, The Innovation Fund Denmark 
494 
(#4135-00045, 2014) and the members of the International Association of Oil and Gas Producers, 
495 
Arctic Oil Spill Response Technology – Joint Industry Programme. The Principals of the JIP are: 
496 
BP Exploration Operating Company, Chevron Canada Limited, ConocoPhillips Corporation, Eni E 
497 
& P, ExxonMobil Joint Research Limited, North Caspian Operating Company, Shell International 
498 
Exploration and Production BV, Statoil Petroleum AS and Total E & P Recherche et 
499 
==PAGE:76==
APPENDIX 2 
18 
Développement. We would in particular like to thank Carl Ballentine for providing vital logistic 
500 
framework for field experiments, and Pil Hagenbøl Hansen and Eva Köhler for their help with the 
501 
experiments. 
 
502 
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX 2 
19 
6. References 
503 
Agersted, M. D., Møller, E. F., & Gustavson, K. (2018). Bioaccumulation of oil compounds in the 
504 
high-Arctic copepod Calanus hyperboreus. Aquatic Toxicology, 195, 8–14. 
505 
doi:10.1016/j.aquatox.2017.12.001 
506 
 Alberdi, A., Aizpurua, O., Bohmann, K., Zepeda-Mendoza, M. L., & Gilbert, M. T. P. (2016). Do 
507 
Vertebrate Gut Metagenomes Confer Rapid Ecological Adaptation? Trends in Ecology and 
508 
Evolution, 31(9), 689–699. doi:10.1016/j.tree.2016.06.008  
509 
AMAP (2010). Assessment 2007: Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic – Effects and Petential 
510 
Effects. Volume 2. Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme (AMAP). Oslo, Norway. 
511 
vii + 277 pp. 
512 
Barata, C., Calbet, A., Saiz, E., Ortiz, L., & Bayona, J. M. (2005). Predicting single and mixture 
513 
toxicity of petrogenic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons to the copepod Oithona davisae. 
514 
Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry, 24(11), 2992–2999. doi:10.1897/05-189R.1 
515 
Berrojalbiz, N., Lacorte, S., Calbet, A., Saiz, E., Barata, C., & Dachs, J. (2009). Accumulation and 
516 
Cycling of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Zooplankton. Environmental Science and 
517 
Technology, 43(7), 2295–2301. doi:10.1021/es8018226 
518 
Brakstad, O. G., Nonstad, I., Faksness, L.-G., & Brandvik, P. J. (2008). Responses of microbial 
519 
communities in Arctic sea ice after contamination by crude petroleum oil. Microbial 
520 
Ecology, 55(3), 540–552. doi:10.1007/s00248-007-9299-x  
521 
Brandvik, P. J., & Faksness, L.-G. (2009). Weathering processes in Arctic oil spills: Meso-scale 
522 
experiments with different ice conditions. Cold Regions Science and Technology, 55(1), 
523 
160–166. doi:10.1016/j.coldregions.2008.06.006 
524 
Brandvik J.P., Resby A. L M., Daling P. S. Leirvik F., Fritt-Rasmussen J. (2010). Meso-Scale 
525 
Weathering of Oil as a Function of Ice Conditions. Oil Properties, Dispersibility, and In Situ 
526 
Burnability of Weathered Oil as a Function of Time (SINTEF A15563). Trondheim, 
527 
Norway:SINTEF 
528 
Campbell, R. G., Sherr, E. B., Ashjian, C. J., Plourde, S., Sherr, B. F., Hill, V., & Stockwell, D. A. 
529 
(2009). Mesozooplankton prey preference and grazing impact in the western Arctic Ocean. 
530 
Deep-Sea Research Part Ii-Topical Studies in Oceanography, 56(17), 1274–1289. 
531 
doi:10.1016/j.dsr2.2008.10.027 
532 
Campbell, R. G., Ashjian, C. J., Sherr, E. B., Sherr, B. F., Lomas, M. W., Ross, C., … Van Keuren, 
533 
D. (2016). Mesozooplankton grazing during spring sea-ice conditions in the eastern Bering 
534 
==PAGE:78==
APPENDIX 2 
20 
Sea. Deep-Sea Research Part Ii-Topical Studies in Oceanography, 134, 157–172. 
535 
doi:10.1016/j.dsr2.2015.11.003 
536 
Cleary, A. C., Soreide, J. E., Freese, D., Niehoff, B., Gabrielsen, T. (2017): Feeding by Calanus 
537 
glacialis in a high arctic fjord: potential seasonal importance of alternative prey. ICES 
538 
Journal of Marine Science, 74(7), 1937–1946. doi:10.1093/icesjms/fsx106 
539 
Conover, R. J. (1971). Some Relations Between Zooplankton and Bunker C Oil in Chedabucto Bay 
540 
Following the Wreck of the TankerArrow. Journal of the Fisheries Research Board of 
541 
Canada, 28(9), 1327–1330. doi:10.1139/f71-202  
542 
Conover, R. J., & Huntley, M. (1991). Copepods in ice-covered seas—Distribution, adaptations to 
543 
seasonally limited food, metabolism, growth patterns and life cycle strategies in polar seas. 
544 
Journal of Marine Systems, 2(1-2), 1–41. doi:10.1016/0924-7963(91)90011-I 
545 
Daase, M., Falk-Petersen, S., Varpe, O., Darnis, G., Soreide, J. E., Wold, A., Leu, E., Berge, J., 
546 
Philippe, B., Fortier, L. (2013). Timing of reproductive events in the marine copepod 
547 
Calanus glacialis: a pan-Arctic perspective. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic 
548 
Sciences, 70(6), 871–884. doi:10.1139/cjfas-2012-0401 
549 
Dünweber, M., Swalethorp, R., Kjellerup, S., Nielsen, T. G., Arendt, K. E., Hjorth, M., Tönneson, 
550 
K., Møller, E. F. (2010). Succession and fate of the spring diatom bloom in Disko Bay, 
551 
western Greenland. Marine Ecology - Progress Series, 419, 11–29. doi:10.3354/meps08813  
552 
Dussauze M., Milinkovitch T., Thomas-Guyon H., Danion M., Lemaire P., Pichavant-Rafini K., 
553 
Theron M. and Le Floch S. 2016. An experimental system to assess the toxicity of 
554 
dispersant use in nearshore areas. Journal of petroleum & Environmental Biotechnology, 7 
555 
(3), 282 
556 
Faksness, L. G., & Brandvik, P. J. (2005). Dissolution of water soluble components from oil spills 
557 
encapsulated in ice. Environment Canada Arctic and Marine Oil Spill Program Technical 
558 
Seminar (Amop) Proceedings, 1, 59–73. 
559 
Faksness, L.-G., & Brandvik, P. J. (2008). Distribution of water soluble components from oil 
560 
encapsulated in Arctic sea ice: Summary of three field seasons. Cold Regions Science and 
561 
Technology, 54(2), 106–114. doi:10.1016/j.coldregions.2008.03.006  
562 
Falk-Petersen, S., Mayzaud, P., Kattner, G., & Sargent, J. R. (2009). Lipids and life strategy of 
563 
Arctic Calanus. Marine Biology Research, 5(1), 18–39. doi:10.1080/17451000802512267 
564 
Folch, J., Lees, M., & Stanley, G. H. S. (1957). A simple method for the isolation and purification 
565 
of total lipides from animal tissues. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 226(1), 497–509 
566 
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX 2 
21 
Fritt-Rasmussen, J., Brandvik, P. J., Villumsen, A., & Stenby, E. H. (2012). Comparing ignitability 
567 
for in situ burning of oil spills for an asphaltenic, a waxy and a light crude oil as a function 
568 
of weathering conditions under arctic conditions. Cold Regions Science and Technology, 72, 
569 
1–6. doi:10.1016/j.coldregions.2011.12.001 
570 
Gautier, D. L., Bird, K. J., Charpentier, R. R., Grantz, A., Houseknecht, D. W., Klett, T. R., Moore, 
571 
T. E., Pitman, J. K., Schenk, C. J., Schuenemeyer, J. H., Sorensen, K., Tennyson, M. E., 
572 
Valin, Z. C., Wandrey, C. J. (2009). Assessment of Undiscovered Oil and Gas in the Arctic, 
573 
Science, 324(5931), 1175–1179. doi:10.1126/science.1169467 
574 
Goncharov, V. K., Ivanov, I. V., & Sokolov, A. N. (2005). Evaluating environmental effects of oil 
575 
spills by simulating the behavior and spreading of oil on the sea surface. Environment 
576 
Canada Arctic and Marine Oil Spill Program Technical Seminar (Amop) Proceedings, 2, 
577 
949–958.  
578 
Grenvald, J. C., Nielsen, T. G., & Hjorth, M. (2013). Effects of pyrene exposure and temperature on 
579 
early development of two co-existing Arctic copepods. Ecotoxicology, 22(1), 184–198. 
580 
doi:10.1007/s10646-012-1016-y 
581 
Han, X., Geller, B., Moniz, K., Das, P., Chippindale, A. K., & Walker, V. K. (2014). Monitoring 
582 
the developmental impact of copper and silver nanoparticle exposure in Drosophila and their 
583 
microbiomes. Science of the Total Environment, 487(1), 822–829. 
584 
doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.12.129  
585 
Hansen, B. H., Altin, D., Olsen, A. J., & Nordtug, T. (2012). Acute toxicity of naturally and 
586 
chemically dispersed oil on the filter-feeding copepod Calanus finmarchicus. Ecotoxicology 
587 
and Environmental Safety, 86, 38–46. doi:10.1016/j.ecoenv.2012.09.009 
588 
Hansen, B. H., Altin, D., Nordtug, T., Overjordet, I. B., Olsen, A. J., Krause, D., Stordal I., 
589 
Storseth, T. R. (2017). Exposure to crude oil micro-droplets causes reduced food uptake in 
590 
copepods associated with alteration in their metabolic profiles. Aquatic Toxicology, 184, 94–
591 
102. doi:10.1016/j.aquatox.2017.01.007 
592 
Hansen, B. H., Jager, T., Altin, D., Overjordet, I. B., Olsen, A. J., Salaberria, I., & Nordtug, T. 
593 
(2016). Acute toxicity of dispersed crude oil on the cold-water copepod Calanus 
594 
finmarchicus: Elusive implications of lipid content. Journal of Toxicology and 
595 
Environmental Health-Part A-Current Issues, 79(13-15), 549–557. 
596 
doi:10.1080/15287394.2016.1171981 
597 
Hansen, B. H., Salaberria, I., Olsen, A. J., Read, K. E., Overjordet, I. B., Hammer, K. M., Altin, D. 
598 
==PAGE:80==
APPENDIX 2 
22 
& Nordtug, T. (2015). Reproduction Dynamics in Copepods Following Exposure to 
599 
Chemically and Mechanically Dispersed Crude Oil. Environmental Science and Technology, 
600 
49(6), 3822–3829. doi:10.1021/es504903k 
601 
Hansen, P. J. (1989). The red tide dinoflagellate Alexandrium tamarense: effects on behaviour and 
602 
growth of a tintinnid ciliate. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 53, 105–116. 
603 
doi:10.3354/meps053105 
604 
Hjorth, M., & Nielsen, T. G. (2011). Oil exposure in a warmer Arctic: potential impacts on key 
605 
zooplankton species. Marine Biology, 158(6), 1339–1347. doi:10.1007/s00227-011-1653-3 
606 
Hylland, K. (2006). Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) ecotoxicology in marine ecosystems. 
607 
Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health-Part A-Current Issues, 69(1-2), 109–123. 
608 
doi:10.1080/15287390500259327 
609 
IPCC (2014). Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III 
610 
to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Core 
611 
Writing Team, R.K. Pachauri and L.A. Meyer (eds.)]. IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland, 151 pp. 
612 
Jensen, L. K., Honkanen, J. O., Jaeger, I., & Carroll, J. L. (2012). Bioaccumulation of phenanthrene 
613 
and benzo[a]pyrene in Calanus finmarchicus. Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety, 78, 
614 
225–231. doi:10.1016/j.ecoenv.2011.11.029 
615 
Jensen, L. K., & Carroll, J. L. (2010). Experimental studies of reproduction and feeding for two 
616 
Arctic-dwelling Calanus species exposed to crude oil. Aquatic Biology, 10(3), 261–271. 
617 
doi:10.3354/ab00286 
618 
Jensen, M. H., Nielsen, T. G., & Dahlloef, I. (2008). Effects of pyrene on grazing and reproduction 
619 
of Calanus finmarchicus and Calanus glacialis from Disko Bay, West Greenland. Aquatic 
620 
Toxicology, 87(2), 99–107. doi:10.1016/j.aquatox.2008.01.005 
621 
Jung-Madsen, S., & Nielsen, T. G. (2015). Early development of Calanus glacialis and C. 
622 
finmarchicus. Limnology and Oceanography, 60(3), 934–946. doi:10.1002/lno.10070 
623 
Karlsson, J., Petrich, C., & Eicken, H. (2011). Oil entrainment and migration in laboratory grown 
624 
saltwater ice. Proceedings of the International Conference on Port and Ocean Engineering 
625 
Under Arctic Conditions, Poac, 1, 88–97. 
626 
Lacroix, C., Le Cuff, N., Receveur, J., Moraga, D., Auffret, M., & Guyomarch, J. (2014). 
627 
Development of an innovative and "green" stir bar sorptive extraction-thermal desorption-
628 
gas chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry method for quantification of polycyclic 
629 
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX 2 
23 
aromatic hydrocarbons in marine biota. Journal of Chromatography a, 1349, 1–10. 
630 
doi:10.1016/j.chroma.2014.04.094 
631 
Lee, R. F., Hagen, W., & Kattner, G. (2006). Lipid storage in marine zooplankton. Marine Ecology 
632 
Progress Series, 307, 273–306. doi:10.3354/meps307273 
633 
Leu, E., Mundy, C. J., Assmy, P., Campbell, K., Gabrielsen, T. M., Gosselin, M., Juul-Pedersen, T., 
634 
Gradinger, R. (2015). Arctic spring awakening - Steering principles behind the phenology of 
635 
vernal ice algal blooms. Progress in Oceanography, 139, 151–170. 
636 
doi:10.1016/j.pocean.2015.07.012 
637 
Meyer, B., Irigoien, X., Graeve, M., Head, R. N., & Harris, R. P. (2002). Feeding rates and 
638 
selectivity among nauplii, copepodites and adult females of Calanus finmarchicus and 
639 
Calanus helgolandicus. Helgoland Marine Research, 56(3), 169–176. doi:10.1007/s10152-
640 
002-0105-3 
641 
Melia, N., Haines, K., & Hawkins, E. (2016). Sea ice decline and 21st century trans-Arctic shipping 
642 
routes. Geophysical Research Letters, 43(18), 9720–9728. doi:10.1002/2016GL069315 
643 
Michel, C., Bluhm, B., Gallucci, V., Gaston, A. J., Gordillo, F. J. L., Gradinger, R., Hopcroft, R., 
644 
Jensen, N., Mustonen, T., Niemi, A., Nielsen, T. G. (2012). Biodiversity of Arctic marine 
645 
ecosystems and responses to climate change. Biodiversity, 13(3-4), 200–214. 
646 
doi:10.1080/14888386.2012.724048 
647 
Neff, J. M., & Stubblefield, W. A. (1995). Chemical and toxicological evaluation of water quality 
648 
following the Exxon Valdez oil spill. Astm Special Technical Publication, 1219, 141–177, 
649 
141–177. 
650 
Nielsen, T. G., Kjellerup, S., Smolina, I., Hoarau, G., & Lindeque, P. (2014). Live discrimination of 
651 
Calanus glacialis and C. finmarchicus females: can we trust phenological differences? 
652 
Marine Biology, 161(6), 1299–1306. doi:10.1007/s00227-014-2419-5 
653 
Nordtug, T., Olsen, A. J., Salaberria, I., Overjordet, I. B., Altin, D., Stordal, I. F., & Hansen, B. H. 
654 
(2015). Oil droplet ingestion and oil fouling in the copepod Calanus finmarchicus exposed 
655 
to mechanically and chemically dispersed crude oil. Environmental Toxicology and 
656 
Chemistry, 34(8), 1899–1906. doi:10.1002/etc.3007  
657 
Nuka Research & Planning Group, LLC. (2010). Oil Spill Prevention and Response in the U.S. 
658 
Arctic Ocean: Unexamined Risks, Unacceptable Consequences. The PEW Environment 
659 
Group, Washington, D.C., 136 p. 
660 
==PAGE:82==
APPENDIX 2 
24 
Nørregaard, R. D., Nielsen, T. G., Friis Møller, E., Strand, J., Espersen, L. S. K., & Møhl, M. 
661 
(2014). Evaluating pyrene toxicity on Arctic key copepod species Calanus hyperboreus. 
662 
Ecotoxicology, 23(2), 163–174. doi:10.1007/s10646-013-1160-z 
663 
Olsen, G. H., Klok, C., Hendriks, A. J., Geraudie, P., De Hoop, L., De Laender, F., Farmen, E., 
664 
Græsvik, B. E., Hansen, B. H., Hjorth, M., Jansen, C. R., Nordtug, T., Ravagnan, E., 
665 
Viaene, K., Carroll, J. (2013a). Toxicity data for modeling impacts of oil components in an 
666 
Arctic ecosystem. Marine Environmental Research, 90, 9–17. 
667 
doi:10.1016/j.marenvres.2013.05.007  
668 
Olsen, A. J., Nordtug, T., Altin, D., Lervik, M., & Hansen, B. H. (2013b). Effects of dispersed oil 
669 
on reproduction in the cold water copepod Calanus finmarchicus (Gunnerus). 
670 
Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry, 32(9), 2045–2055. doi:10.1002/etc.2273 
671 
Pancic et al. (in preparation)  
672 
Payne, J. R., MCNabb, G. D., & Clayton, J. R. (1991). Oil-weathering behaviour in Arctic 
673 
environments. Polar Research, 10(2), 631–662. doi:10.3402/polar.v10i2.6774 
674 
Poulet, S. A., Laabir, M., Ianora, A., & Miralto, A. (1995). Reproductive response of Calanus 
675 
helgolandicus .1. Abnormal embryonic and naupliar development. Marine Ecology Progress 
676 
Series, 129(1-3), 85–95. 
677 
 Sergy, G. A., & Blackall, P. J. (1987). Design and conclusions of the Baffin Island oil spill project. 
678 
Arctic, 40(5), 1–9. doi:10.14430/arctic1797 
679 
Scott, C. L., Kwasniewski, S., Falk-Petersen, S., & Sargent, J. R. (2002). Species differences, 
680 
origins and functions of fatty alcohols and fatty acids in the wax esters and phospholipids of 
681 
Calanus hyperboreus, C-glacialis and C-finmarchicus from Arctic waters. Marine Ecology 
682 
Progress Series, 235, 127–134. doi:10.3354/meps235127 
683 
Shrivastava, A., & Gupta, V. B. (2011). Methods for the determination of limit of detection and 
684 
limit of quantitation of the analytical methods. Chronicles of Young Scientists, 2(1), 21. 
685 
doi:10.4103/2229-5186.79345 
686 
Smetacek, V., & Nicol, S. (2005). Polar ocean ecosystems in a changing world. Nature, 437(7057), 
687 
362–368. doi:10.1038/nature04161 
688 
Soreide, J. E., Falk-Petersen, S., Hegseth, E. N., Hop, H., Carroll, M. L., Hobson, K. A., & 
689 
Blachowiak-Samolyk, K. (2008). Seasonal feeding strategies of Calanus in the high-Arctic 
690 
Svalbard region. Deep-Sea Research Part Ii-Topical Studies in Oceanography, 55(20-21), 
691 
2225–2244. doi:10.1016/j.dsr2.2008.05.024  
692 
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX 2 
25 
Soreide, J. E., Leu, E., Berge, J., Graeve, M., & Falk-Petersen, S. (2010). Timing of blooms, algal 
693 
food quality and Calanus glacialis reproduction and growth in a changing Arctic. Global 
694 
Change Biology, 16(11), 3154–3163. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2486.2010.02175.x 
695 
Starr, M., Runge, J. A., & Therriault, J.-C. (1999). Effects of diatom diets on the reproduction of the 
696 
planktonic copepod Calanus finmarchicus. Sarsia, 84(5-6), 379–389. 
697 
doi:10.1080/00364827.1999.10807345 
698 
Stordal, I. F., Olsen, A. J., Jenssen, B. M., Netzer, R., Hansen, B. H., Altin, D., & Brakstad, O. G. 
699 
(2015). Concentrations of viable oil-degrading microorganisms are increased in feces from 
700 
Calanus finmarchicus feeding in petroleum oil dispersions. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 98(1-
701 
2), 69–77. doi:10.1016/j.marpolbul.2015.07.011  
702 
Swalethorp, R., Kjellerup, S., Dünweber, M., Nielsen, T. G., Møller, E. F., Rysgaard, S., & Hansen, 
703 
B. W. (2011). Grazing, egg production, and biochemical evidence of differences in the life 
704 
strategies of Calanus finmarchicus, C. glacialis and C. hyperboreus in Disko Bay, western 
705 
Greenland. Marine Ecology - Progress Series, 429, 125–144. doi:10.3354/meps09065  
706 
Taylor, P. M. & Cramer, M. A. (2017). A novel methodology for net environmental benefit analysis 
707 
(spill impact mitigation assessment). International Oil Spill Conference Proceedings: May 
708 
2017, Vol. 2017, No. 1, pp. 2454-2474. 
709 
Utne, K. (2017). Effects of produced water components on the early life stages of Calanus 
710 
finmarchicus and Calanus hyperborues reared at different temperatures. NTNU 
711 
Vries, P., Tamis, J., Hjorth, M., Jak, R., Falk-Petersen, S., Heuvel-Greve, M., Klok, C., Hemerik, L. 
712 
(2017). Increasing ecological realism in the effect assessment of oil spills at the population 
713 
level: the application of matrix models for Arctic Calanus species. Morten fills in? 
714 
Wassmann, P. (2011). Arctic marine ecosystems in an era of rapid climate change. Progress in 
715 
Oceanography, 90(1-4), 1–17. doi:10.1016/j.pocean.2011.02.002 
716 
Weydmann, A., Zwolicki, A., Mus, K., & Kwasniewski, S. (2015). The effect of temperature on 
717 
egg development rate and hatching success in Calanus glacialis and C. finmarchicus. Polar 
718 
Research, 34(2015), 23947. doi:10.3402/polar.v34.23947 
719 
Wezel, A. P. van, & Opperhuizen, A. (1995). Narcosis Due to Environmental Pollutants in Aquatic 
720 
Organisms: Residue-Based Toxicity, Mechanisms, and Membrane Burdens. Critical 
721 
Reviews in Toxicology, 25(3), 255–279. doi:10.3109/10408449509089890 
722 
==PAGE:84==
APPENDIX 2 
26 
Table 1  
723 
Composition and properties of Kobbe crude oil. Pour point and density was measured at 2 oC and 
724 
viscosity at 2 oC and a shear rate of 10 s-1 
725 
Oil type 
Categorization 
Pour point  
(oC) 
Density 
(g ml-1) 
Viscosity 
(cP) 
Evaporation loss 
(vol.%) 
Max water uptake 
(%) 
Wax content 
(wt.%) 
Asphaltene content 
(wt.%) 
Kobbe (Barents Sea) 
Light, paraffinic 
-39 
0.816 
6 
50 
77.9 
11 
0.3 
 
 
726 
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIX 2 
27 
Table 2  
727 
Summary of the 21 PAHs analysed for in exposure medium 
728 
Naphthalene 
Phenanthrene  
Benzo[e]pyrene 
Biphenyl  
Anthracene 
Benzo[a]pyrene 
Acenaphtylene 
Fluoranthene 
Indeno[1,2,3,-c,d]pyrene 
Acenaphtene 
Pyrene 
Benzo[a]anthracene 
Fluorene 
Chrysene 
Dibenzo[a,h]anthracene 
Benzothiophene 
Benzo[b]fluoranthene 
Benzo[g,h,i,]perylene 
Dibenzothiophene 
Benzo[k]fluoranthene 
Perylene 
 
729 
 
 
730 
==PAGE:86==
APPENDIX 2 
28 
Table 3  
731 
Polyaromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) concentrations in water (Cw) and in Calanus glacialis females 
732 
(Ca) after 0 and 14 days of exposure to oil contaminated seawater treated with in-situ burning (ISB), 
733 
chemical dispersion (DISP) and natural attenuation (NATT) compared to a control (CNTL). Data 
734 
are mean ± SE and n is the number of replicates. 
735 
Period 
Treatment 
n 
Cw, 0 (µg l-1) 
Cw, 14 (µg l-1) 
 
n 
Females 
Ca 14 (µg g lipid-1) 
Early 
spring 
CNTL 
3 
13 ± 1 
30 ±10 
 
1 
5 
3.1*10-3 
ISB 
3 
13 ± 2 
8  ± 4 
 
1 
5 
3.5*10-3 
DISP 
3 
95 ± 5 
53 ± 20 
 
1 
5 
9.0*10-3 
NATT 
3 
93 ± 11 
74 ± 6 
 
1 
5 
6.7*10-3 
Early 
spring 
CNTL 
3 
21 ± 5 
5 ± 3 
 
1 
10 
3.2*10-3 
ISB 
3 
40  ± 2 
12 ± 4 
 
1 
10 
7.0*10-3 
DISP 
3 
1673 ± 386 
186 ± 75 
 
1 
10 
4.9*10-2 
NATT 
3 
357 ± 55 
205 ± 21 
 
1 
8 
2.0*10-2 
==PAGE:87==
APPENDIX 2 
29 
 
Table 4  
736 
Size and weight measurements of Calanus glacialis females, fecal pellets and eggs. The table presents data for unexposed 
737 
females (reference) and females after 14 days of exposure to oil contaminated seawater treated with the oil spill response (OSR) 
738 
methods in-situ burning, chemical dispersion and natural attenuation compared to a control, and of fecal pellets and eggs 
739 
collected from exposed females during the 14 days of exposure. Data are mean ± SE.  
740 
Period Treatment 
 
 
Copepods 
 
 
 
Fecal pellets 
 
Eggs 
n 
Prosome 
length (mm) 
 n 
Dry weight 
(µg female-1) 
Carbon 
(µg C female-1) 
Nitrogen 
(µg N female-1) 
C:N 
ratio 
 n 
Total lipid  
(µg TL female-1)  
Total lipid  
(% dry weight) 
 
n 
 
Length 
(µm) 
Width 
(µm) 
Carbon 
(µg C pellet-1) 
 
n 
 
Diameter  
(µm) 
Carbon 
(µg C egg-1) 
Early 
spring 
Reference 
42 
3.28 ± 0.04 
 12 
389 ± 31 
198 ± 18 
37 ± 3 
5.3  4 
83 ± 14 
21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OSR  
36 
3.28 ± 0.03 
 12 
484 ± 38 
240 ± 23 
47 ± 3 
5.0  12 
83 ± 9 
17 
 3 600 692.2 ± 2.6 74.7 ± 0.3 
0.14 ± 0.00 
 428 186.3 ± 0.6 0.38 ± 0.00 
Late 
spring 
Reference 
20 
3.23 ± 0.05 
 11 
499 ± 27 
189 ± 16 
46 ± 3 
4.1  3 
44 ± 1 
9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OSR  
36 
3.34 ± 0.04 
 12 
773 ± 89 
222 ± 25 
48 ± 4 
4.6  11 
44 ± 7 
6 
 1 399 712.7± 4.4 81.7 ± 0.4 
0.18 ± 0.00 
 201 178.9 ± 1.0 0.34 ± 0.01 
==PAGE:88==
APPENDIX 2 
30 
Table 5  
741 
Fecal pellet and egg production for Calanus glacialis females during 14 days of exposure to oil 
742 
contaminated seawater treated with in-situ burning (ISB), chemical dispersion (DISP) and natural 
743 
attenuation (NATT) compared to a control (CNTL). Data are mean ±SE. n is the number incubation 
744 
bottles. PP and EP are the daily individual production rates. ΣPP and ΣEP are the total production per 
745 
individual. SPP and SEP are the daily individual production rates in carbon equivalents. ΣSPP and 
746 
ΣSEP are the total productions in carbon equivalents. 
747 
Period 
Treatment 
n 
Fecal pellet production 
 
Egg production 
PP 
(pellets female-1 
day-1) 
ΣPP 
(pellets 
female-1) 
SPP 
(µg Cpellet (µg 
Cfemale)-1 day-1) 
ΣSPP 
(µg Cpellet (µg 
Cfemale)-1) 
 
EP 
(eggs female-1 
day-1) 
ΣEP 
(eggs 
female-1) 
SEP 
(µg Cegg (µg 
Cfemale)-1 day-1) 
ΣSEP 
(µg Cegg (µg 
Cfemale)-1) 
Early 
spring 
Total 
60 
31 ± 1 
409 ± 6 
0.022 ± 0.000 
0.294 ± 0.004 
 
2.8 ± 0.2 
36.4 ± 3.6 
0.069 ± 0.007 
0.074 ± 0.005 
CNTL 
15 
32 ± 1 
417 ± 2 
0.023 ± 0.001 
0.300 ± 0.002 
 
3.0 ± 0.4 
39.5 ± 0.4 
0.006 ± 0.001 
0.075 ± 0.001 
ISB 
15 
32 ± 1 
415 ± 2 
0.023 ± 0.001 
0.298 ± 0.002 
 
2.9 ± 0.3 
37.8 ± 0.3 
0.006 ± 0.001 
0.072 ± 0.001 
DISP 
15 
31 ± 1 
414 ± 2 
0.023 ± 0.001 
0.297 ± 0.002 
 
2.0 ± 0.4 
25.9 ± 0.4 
0.004 ± 0.001 
0.050 ± 0.001 
NATT 
15 
30 ± 1 
392 ± 2 
0.021 ± 0.001 
0.281 ± 0.001 
 
3.2 ± 0.3 
42.2 ± 0.5 
0.006 ± 0.001 
0.081 ± 0.001 
Late 
spring 
Total 
60 
25 ± 0 
356 ± 7 
0.024 ± 0.000 
0.332 ± 0.006 
 
4.8 ± 0.2 
66.7 ± 4.9 
0.118 ± 0.009 
0.118 ± 0.006 
CNTL 
15 
25 ± 1 
352 ± 2 
0.023 ± 0.001 
0.328 ± 0.002 
 
4.0 ± 0.5 
56.7 ± 0.6 
0.007 ± 0.001 
0.101 ± 0.001 
ISB 
15 
25± 1 
354 ± 2 
0.024 ± 0.001 
0.330 ± 0.002 
 
4.6 ± 0.5 
65.0 ± 0.6 
0.008 ± 0.001 
0.115 ± 0.001 
DISP 
15 
25 ± 1 
343 ± 2 
0.023 ± 0.001 
0.320 ± 0.002 
 
5.7 ± 0.6 
80.2 ± 0.6 
0.010 ± 0.001 
0.142 ± 0.001 
NATT 
15 
27 ± 1 
375 ± 2 
0.025 ± 0.001 
0.349 ± 0.002 
 
4.6 ± 0.5 
64.8 ± 0.5 
0.008 ± 0.001 
0.115 ± 0.001 
 
 
748 
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX 2 
31 
 
749 
Fig. 1. Location of field site, Svalbard, and mesocosm setup 
 
750 
==PAGE:90==
APPENDIX 2 
32 
 
751 
Fig. 2. Relation between final lipid based tissue concentrations of PAH in Calanus glacialis (Ca) and 
752 
average concentration of PAH in water (Cw) throughout the 14 days exposure period in early and late 
753 
spring. The exposure medium was oil contaminated seawater treated with in-situ burning (ISB), 
754 
chemical dispersion (DISP) and natural attenuation (NATT) compared to a control (CNTL). Solid line 
755 
indicates linear curve fit (R2 = 0.97).  
 
756 
==PAGE:91==
APPENDIX 2 
33 
 
757 
 
758 
Fig. 3. Fecal pellet production of Calanus glacialis during 14 days of exposure to oil contaminated 
759 
seawater treated with in-situ burning (ISB), chemical dispersion (DISP) and natural attenuation 
760 
(NATT) compared to a control (CNTL). The plots show individual fecal pellet production in early (A) 
761 
and late spring (B), and individual cumulated fecal pellet production in early (C) and late spring (D) 
762 
(mean ± SE, n =15). Food was supplied every 2nd day in increasing concentrations. 
763 
==PAGE:92==
APPENDIX 2 
34 
 
764 
Fig. 4. Egg production of Calanus glacialis during 14 days of exposure to oil contaminated seawater 
765 
treated with in-situ burning (ISB), chemical dispersion (DISP) and natural attenuation (NATT) 
766 
compared to a control (CNTL). The plots show individual egg production in early (A) and late spring 
767 
(B), and individual cumulated egg production in early (C) and late spring (D) (mean ± SE, n =15). 
768 
==PAGE:93==
APPENDIX 2 
35 
 
769 
Fig. 5.  Hatching success of Calanus glacialis eggs after 7 days of incubation in sea water in early and 
770 
late spring (mean ± SE, n = 2-10 (15-200 eggs)). Eggs were collected from an unexposed reference 
771 
sample (REF), and the from females after 13 days of incubation in sea water (CNTL), and oil 
772 
contaminated water treated with in-situ burning (ISB), chemical dispersion (DISP) and natural 
773 
attenuation (NATT).  
774 
 
 
775 
==PAGE:94==
APPENDIX 2 
36 
 
776 
Fig. 6.  (A) Nauplii surviving to stage NII and (B) Nauplii developing deformities after 21 days of 
777 
incubation in seawater from the time of hatching. Data is mean ± SE. Eggs were collected from females 
778 
in early spring after 11, 12 and 13 days of incubation in sea water (CNTL), and oil contaminated water 
779 
treated with in-situ burning (ISB), chemical dispersion (DISP) and natural attenuation (NATT).  
780 
==PAGE:95==
APPENDIX 2 
37 
781 
Fig. 7. Microscope images (20× magnification) of normal (A) and deform (B-C) Calanus glacialis 
782 
nauplii at NI stages.  
 
783 
==PAGE:96==
APPENDIX 2 
38 
Author Contributions 
784 
Kirstine Toxværd: Developed protocols, performed project logistics, conducted the experiments, 
785 
analyzed the biological samples, performed subsampling, performed statistical analysis, wrote the 
786 
manuscript 
787 
Marina Pančić: Sampled mesocosm water, measured food algea density, performed egg and pellet 
788 
measurements 
789 
Helene O. Eide: Performed nauplii development experiment 
790 
Janne Søriede: Sampled experimental organisms, performed analysis of prosome length, carbon and 
791 
nitrogen content, lipid content, revised the manuscript 
792 
Camille Lacroix: Performed the PAH analysis, revised the manuscript. 
793 
Stéphane Le Floch: Performed the PAH analysis, revised the manuscript. 
794 
Morten Hjorth: Developed the project idea, helped with the experiments, discussed the results, revised 
795 
the manuscript. 
796 
Torkel Gissel Nielsen: Developed the project idea, helped with the experiments, discussed the results, 
797 
revised the manuscript. 
798 
 
 
799 
==PAGE:97==
APPENDIX 2 
39 
Author declaration 
800 
We wish to draw the attention of the Editor to the following facts which may be considered as potential 
801 
conflicts of interest and to significant financial contributions to this work:  
802 
• The project co-funded by the International Association of Oil and Gas Producers, Arctic Oil 
803 
Spill Response Technology – Joint Industry Programme. The role of this funding source was in 
804 
study design and in the decision to submit the article for publication. The funding source had no 
805 
involvement in data analysis, interpretation or writing the article.  
806 
• Some of the authors are employed by private consultancies (K. Toxværd and M. Hjorth in 
807 
COWI) and private associations (C. Lacroix and S. Le Floch in CEDRE) 
808 
We confirm that the manuscript has been read and approved by all named authors and that there are no 
809 
other persons who satisfied the criteria for authorship but are not listed. We confirm that the order of 
810 
authors listed in the manuscript has been approved by all of us. 
811 
We confirm that we have given due consideration to the protection of intellectual property 
812 
associated with this work and that there are no impediments to publication, including the timing of 
813 
publication, with respect to intellectual property. In so doing we confirm that we have followed the 
814 
regulations of our institutions concerning intellectual property. 
815 
We further confirm that any aspect of the work covered in this manuscript that has involved 
816 
either experimental animals or human patients has been conducted with the ethical approval of all 
817 
relevant bodies and that such approvals are acknowledged within the manuscript.  
818 
We understand that the Corresponding Author is the sole contact for the Editorial process 
819 
(including Editorial Manager and direct communications with the office). He is responsible for 
820 
communicating with the other authors about progress, submissions of revisions and final approval of 
821 
proofs. We confirm that we have provided a current, correct email address which is accessible by the 
822 
Corresponding Author and which has been configured to accept email from tgin@aqua.dtu.dk. 
823 
 
824 
Signed by all authors as follows: (Signature and date) 
825 
 
826 
==PAGE:98==
APPENDIX 2 
40 
Kirstine Toxværd 
827 
Marina Pančić 
828 
Janne E. Søreide 
829 
Camille Lacroix 
830 
Stéphane Le Floch 
831 
Morten Hjorth 
832 
Torkel Gissel Nielsen 
833 
 
 
834 
==PAGE:99==
APPENDIX 2 
41 
Funding source declaration 
835 
Research grants were provided by COWIfonden and The Innovation Fund Denmark (#4135-00045, 
836 
2014) to K. Toxværd. In addition, funding was provided by the International Association of Oil and 
837 
Gas Producers, Arctic Oil Spill Response Technology – Joint Industry Programme to all authors. 
838 
==PAGE:100==
Kamille Elvstrøm Krause 
 
14-02-2017 
Master student of Biotechnology 
DTU Aqua 
 
 
1 of 1 
Appendix 3: Protocol for sampling copepod fecal pellets 
 
Sampling: 
To isolate the pellets needed for sampling use a larger filter mesh removing the animals from the 
solution and thereafter use a smaller filter mesh catching the pellets, but big enough to let the 
copepod eggs through. Concentrate the density of pellets in a small body of autoclaved, filtered 
seawater in petri dishes by washing them out of the filter with a spray bottle containing autoclaved, 
filtered seawater. Try to minimize the physical handling of the pellets and make sure no animals or 
eggs are mixed in with the pellets. 
 
Petri dishes and samples should be kept on ice during handling. All work should be conducted 
inside a fume hood, wearing gloves and using ethonal for sterilization of hands and equipment to 
minimize the risk of contamination. 
 
Then transfer the pellets from the petri dish to the Eppendorf tubes by sucking them up using a 
Pasteur pipette under a microscope while you count the number of pellets collected. Try to collect 
as little water as possible while collecting the pellets and also be aware that a few of the pellets can 
stick to the side of the pipette (tip) and be difficult to get out into the Eppendorf tube. (You can see 
the pellets sticking to the side) You can make several transfers per sample if necessary, but beware 
of the volume in the Eppendorf tube. 
 
When finished transferring pellets to each sample Eppendorf tube note the final number of pellets 
the sample contains. Centrifuge the samples for 3 min at 10,000 g. Remove as much of the seawater 
as possible without disturbing the pellets. Resuspend in 200 µL filtered, autoclaved seawater. 
Centrifuge the samples for 3 min at 10,000 g. Remove as much of the seawater as possible. 
Resuspend in 200 µL filtered, autoclaved seawater. Centrifuge the samples for 3 min at 10,000 g. 
Remove as much of the seawater as possible. A total of three washing steps should be performed. 
Immediately freeze samples at -80 °C. 
 
Storage: 
- 
In as little autoclaved, filtered seawater as possible 
- 
In 1.5 ml marked Eppendorf tubes 
- 
Frozen at -80 °C 
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX 4                                                           
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Establishing Protocols for Arctic Copepod 
Gut Microbiome Analyses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kamille Elvstrøm Krause (s123384) 
 
 
Special Course, May 26th 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
Supervisors 
DTU BIOINFORMATICS: 
Prof. Thomas Sicheritz-Pontén and Assoc. Prof. Simon Rasmussen 
 
DTU AQUA: 
Prof. Torkel Gissel Nielsen 
 
DTU BIOENGINEERING: 
Senior Researcher Marlene Danner Dalgaard 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:102==
2 
 
Abstract 
While temperatures are rising and polar ice is disappearing, vast amounts of oil resources are 
becoming available for utilization in the Arctic as well as new alternate shipping routes, making it 
important to study the effects of the inevitable future oil pollution in Arctic waters. Copepods 
account for more than 80% of the zooplankton in the ocean and the two investigated 
species Calanus finmarchicus and Calanus glacialis makes up the majority of the copepod 
populations in the Arctic. This makes these two key species in the Artic food web and their success 
extremely important both ecologically and financially, as they make up the food-base for the 
commercial fish stock. Pyrene is a polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) and one of the most 
toxic components in crude oil. In previous studies pyrene has shown to reduce growth and fertility 
and in high concentrations cause mortality in copepods. We know the main intake of pyrene and 
crude oil in copepods happens orally while feeding. Therefore, we find it very interesting to 
investigate the changes in the gut microbiome, to find possible mechanisms leading to the observed 
physiological changes observed on copepods exposed to oil pollution, as these are still completely 
unknown. The aim of this project was to establish protocols for the DNA extraction from and 
sequencing of copepod fecal pellet samples with the future aim of investigating the gut microbiome 
diversity changes of two arctic copepod species from Greenland and Svalbard when exposed to oil 
pollution, oil spill mitigating techniques and increasing water temperatures. The preliminary test 
results concluded that it was possible to extract DNA from down to six pellets with commercial 
DNA extraction kits. The Bacteremia DNA extraction kit from MO BIO was chosen as the best kit 
for extraction with a few alterations and modifications to optimize it to the very small DNA 
quantities. The Sequencing method was chosen to be shotgun metagenomic sequencing on the 
Illumina HiSeq 4000 platform to get the highest resolution.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:103==
3 
 
Contents 
Abstract ......................................................................................................................................................... 2 
Contents ......................................................................................................................................................... 3 
1 Introduction ............................................................................................................................................... 4 
2 Methods ...................................................................................................................................................... 5 
2.1 Samples .............................................................................................................................................................. 5 
2.1.1 Test samples ................................................................................................................................................................... 5 
2.1.2 Investigative samples .................................................................................................................................................. 6 
2.2 Bacterial DNA Extraction ............................................................................................................................. 7 
2.2.1 QIAamp BiOstic® Bacteremia DNA Kit ............................................................................................................ 7 
2.2.2 Easy-DNA™ Kit .......................................................................................................................................................... 8 
2.3 Shotgun metagenomic and 16 ribosomal RNA (rRNA) sequencing .................................................... 8 
3 Results and discussion ............................................................................................................................. 9 
3.1 DNA Extraction protocol .............................................................................................................................. 9 
3.2 Sequencing method ....................................................................................................................................... 10 
3.3. Data handling ................................................................................................................................................ 11 
4 Conclusion ............................................................................................................................................... 12 
5 Bibliography ........................................................................................................................................... 12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:104==
4 
 
1 Introduction 
Oil pollution in the Arctic is a real and pressing concern. Main sources being shipping and oil 
exploitation, it is a major ecotoxicological hazard to the pristine and fragile marine ecosystem 
(Maksoud 2008; Schmidt and Rach 2013). While temperatures are rising and polar ice is 
disappearing, vast amounts of oil resources are becoming available for utilization in Arctic waters 
as well as new alternate shipping routes through the Northwest passage and the Northern sea route 
(Barata et al. 2005; National Research Council 2003; Nørregaard et al. 2014) and the oil industry is 
not moving slow in expanding their drilling efforts to these regions (Maksoud 2008; Schmidt and 
Rach 2013). Therefore, it is important to study the effects of the inevitable future oil pollution in 
Arctic waters, where cleanups are difficult due to the presence of sea ice and the low temperatures 
are causing long degradation times (Welsh and O’Gorman 2005). Larger animals, as mammals and 
birds, show a highly visible direct negative impact of oil pollution, but are also indirectly affected 
over time through the food web (ACIA 2005). 
 
Behind this project are two individual studies, which have produced the samples used. One was 
performed at the University of Copenhagen’s Arctic Station (Qeqertarsuaq, Disko Island, Disko 
Bay, West Greenland) and one at Svalbard University Center (Longyearbyen, Svalbard). The 
project from Greenland investigated the physiological effects of exposure to the PAH pyrene at 
different concentrations and increasing ocean temperatures in adult females of the copepod species 
Calanus finmarchicus and Calanus glacialis. Fecal pellet samples were collected at the end of the 
experiments. The other project from Svalbard investigated the physiological effects of oil spill 
response technologies applied to the sea surface on C. glacialis adult females. Fecal pellet samples 
were sampled at the beginning and end of the experiments. Both studies are at the present time still 
unpublished. 
 
Copepods account for more than 80% of the zooplankton in the ocean (Darnis et al. 2012) and the 
two investigated species C. finmarchicus and C. glacialis makes up the majority of the copepod 
populations in the Arctic (Grenvald, Nielsen, and Hjorth 2012). This makes these two, key species 
in the Artic food web and their success extremely important both ecologically and financially as 
they make up the food-base for the commercial fish stock. C. glacialis is a true Arctic species, 
meaning it has a higher lipid content than the North Atlantic species C. finmarchicus, which has a 
lower lipid content due to it’s more temperate distribution. As the temperature rises in the Artic 
Ocean the distribution of the temperate C. finmarchicus expands further North into the domain of 
the Arctic species C. glacialis (Grenvald, Nielsen, and Hjorth 2012). If the populations of these two 
species collapse in the Arctic the negative effects may cascade through the whole marine pelagic 
food web with enormous ecological and economic consequences. 
 
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are often introduced into the environment through 
shipping activity, oil seepage and offshore oil operations (Wolska et al. 2012), and have shown 
toxicity towards marine animals (Almeda et al. 2013; Barata et al. 2005; Incardona et al. 2015; 
Jensen, Nielsen, and Dahlloef 2008). Past studies have observed that exposure to the PAH pyrene 
caused reduced growth, reduced fecundity and even mortality – especially in early naupliar stages 
of Arctic copepods (Barata et al. 2005; Bellas and Thor 2007; Grenvald, Nielsen, and Hjorth 2012; 
Hjorth and Nielsen 2011; Jensen, Nielsen, and Dahlloef 2008). Coastal waters affected by oil 
pollution have been shown to contain more than 20 different PAHs and pyrene is a very common 
PAH in crude oil (C. M. Reddy and Quinn 2001; Christopher M. Reddy et al. 2012). PAHs in 
mixture have been shown to cause an additive toxic effect (Barata et al. 2005). While the 
concentration of pyrene in the ocean can vary from trace level (Annammala et al. 2013) to 
approximately 2.3 µg L-1 r(C. M. Reddy and Quinn 2001), the total PAH concentration can be as 
==PAGE:105==
5 
 
high as 115 µg L-1. We know from previous studies, that the main intake of pyrene and crude oil in 
copepods happens orally while feeding (Berrojalbiz et al. 2009). Therefore, we find it very 
interesting to investigate the changes in the gut microbiome of these copepod species, to find 
possible mechanisms leading to the observed physiological changes observed on copepods exposed 
to oil pollution and increasing temperatures, as these are still completely unknown. 
 
The aim of this project was to establish protocols for the DNA extraction from and sequencing of 
copepod fecal pellet samples with the future aim of investigating the gut microbiome diversity 
changes of two arctic copepod species from Greenland and Svalbard when exposed to oil pollution, 
oil spill mitigating techniques and increasing water temperatures. The DNA extraction method 
development in this study will loosely be based on a literary study, but will mostly be based on a 
trial and error method performed on test fecal pellet samples supplied by the Materials and 
Chemistry department at the SINTEF/NTNU Sealab in Trondheim, Norway. This was due to the 
literary study finding very little to no material on extracting DNA from copepod fecal pellet 
samples or the like. 
2 Methods 
2.1 Samples 
2.1.1 Test samples 
Test samples were supplied by the Materials and Chemistry department at the SINTEF/NTNU 
Sealab in Trondheim, Norway, and sampled by Research Scientist at BioTrix, Dag Altin from the 
labs ongoing stock culture of C. finmarchicus. By filtration, the approximate amount of pellets 
needed was isolated and then sprayed into a small petri dish with bacteria free seawater using a 
spray bottle, thereby washing the pellets. They were then transferred from the petri dish to 
Eppendorf tubes with a suitable sized pipette. Samples were supplied in sizes of 6, 10, 20, 40 and 
80 pellets per sample to represent the size differences in the Greenland samples which spans from 
6-80 pellets per sample. The samples were frozen at -20 °C immediately after sampling and packed 
in a Styrofoam box with freezing elements and shipped directly by air from Trondheim to 
Copenhagen where the samples were immediately transferred to a -80 °C freezer. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:106==
6 
 
2.1.2 Investigative samples 
 
Table 1 Basic information of the total of 116 samples used for the final project investigation. 
 
==PAGE:107==
7 
 
2.2 Bacterial DNA Extraction 
When the aim is to investigate a microbial community of any type of ecosystem using techniques 
such as next-generation sequencing (NGS), the most important thing is to create a sufficiently 
sensitive and reproducible DNA extraction method. A great challenge will often be to find an 
appropriate lysis protocol for microbial cells, which will not damage their genomes. Microbes 
across ecosystems show highly diverse types of cell walls and membranes enclosing their genomic 
contents (Bag et al. 2016). If a sample is treated to rough it could easily affect DNA quality, but on 
the other side a treatment to mild could cause only partial lysis especially in bacteria with high 
peptidoglycan content cell barriers. It is therefore important to find a DNA extraction method with a 
lysis process that fits as broad a range of microbes as possible (Bag et al. 2016). Due to relatively 
low costs and easy use, commercial kits are now highly popular as a DNA extraction tool and are 
available in great abundance and variety, the majority of which uses silica-based columns, which 
might be a disadvantage when retrieving very low amounts of DNA for environmental samples. The 
extracted genomic DNA should be of high quality and have a high molecular weight (HMW) if 
used for NGS techniques (Bag et al. 2016; King et al. 2012). 
2.2.1 QIAamp BiOstic® Bacteremia DNA Kit 
The BiOstic® Bacteremia DNA Isolation Kit is originally optimized for the total DNA extraction of 
cultured blood tubes. The purity of DNA is quite high and it should therefore be possible to use in 
sensitive detection assays, including Agilent BioAnalyzer assays for multiplex PCR products, and 
real-time PCR. The lysis process combines a mechanical lysis step using 2 ml MicroBead Tubes 
and heat. A silica spin column captures the lysate and it is purified using chaotropic buffers and 
ethanol wash buffers and then eluted (Introductory part of the BiOstic® 
Bacteremia DNA Isolation 
Kit Instruction Manual, MO BIO Catalog No. 12240-50). 
 
Figure 1 Schematic of the Bacteremia Bacteremia DNA Isolation Kit protocol retrieved from the protocol. 
==PAGE:108==
8 
 
2.2.2 Easy-DNA™ Kit 
The Easy-DNATM Kit can be used for the extraction of DNA from a variety of sources such as 
fresh, dried, frozen, or heparinized blood, tissue culture cells, both suspended and trypsinized, 
mammalian tissue, E. coli, yeast cells, plant leaves, hair follicles, mouse tails and baculovirus (viral 
particles). The lysis process combines heat with a chemical lysis, followed by a precipitation step 
removing proteins and lipids, the DNA is precipitated with ethanol, and last it is resuspended. 
Purified DNA can be used for both PCR or restriction digestion (Introductory part of the Easy-
DNATM Kit - For genomic DNA isolation User Guide, Invitrogen Catalog No. K1800-01). 
 
Figure 2 Schematic of the Easy-DNATM Kit protocol retrieved from the protocol. 
2.3 Shotgun metagenomic and 16 ribosomal RNA (rRNA) sequencing 
Shotgun metagenomic sequencing is one of two ways now most popularly used to investigate the 
diversity and abundance of the microbial community in a complex sample through genetics. It is a 
means of sampling all genes from all organisms present in a sample, meaning you can sequence 
thousands of organisms in parallel in contrast to capillary sequencing and PCR-based approaches, 
meaning it can detect very low abundance members of the microbial community. It is also a means 
to study unculturable bacteria, which would otherwise go unnoticed. It is called shotgun 
metagenomics due to the random fragmentation of the sample before sequencing, meaning the data 
becomes primer independent and unbiased (Jovel et al. 2016; Reiskind et al. 2016). 
 
16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) sequencing is the second popular way to investigate the microbial 
community of a complex sample. It is used to identify and compare bacteria present in a sample, so 
the study of phylogeny and taxonomy. The data is however more limited in use compared to the 
shotgun metagenomic sequencing approach (Skovgaard et al. 2017). 
==PAGE:109==
9 
 
3 Results and discussion 
3.1 DNA Extraction protocol 
Although a large-scale study in Nature by Bag et al. (2016) found commercial kits to be insufficient 
for consistent high quality metagenomic DNA extraction from human and environmental samples, 
kits are highly valued by researchers for their cost efficiency and easy application. Studies such as 
Smith et al. (2015), Rungrassamee et al. (2013), King et al. (20129, Novakova et al. (2017) and 
Skovgaard et al. (2017) all used commercial kits of various brands and types to extract bacterial 
genomic DNA used in various sequencing methods. All these studies investigated very small 
samples of similar type as the fecal pellet samples worked with on this project, such as insect or 
small marine invertebrate extracted guts for microbial analysis and had good results. Therefore I 
chose to focus our preliminary tests on using a commercial kit. I had two kits available at the time 
of the initiation of this project, which were both optimized for small sample sizes, which I then 
chose to test. One was the BiOstic® Bacteremia DNA Isolation Kit from MO BIO and the other the 
Easy-DNATM Kit from Invitrogen, both introduced above. These to kits were tested on the test 
samples from Norway of varying number of pellets. 
 
I initially tested the Bacteremia kit extraction protocol on two samples of 80 pellets, and received 
quite high DNA readings on a Qubit HS reader with a total DNA sample content of 8.4 and 14.6 ng 
in 100 µl. I then tested the Easy-DNA kit protocol on samples of 80, 40 and 6 pellets and included a 
test blank. The blank sample and the 6 pellet samples were too low to measure on a Qubit HS test, 
the 80 pellet samples and the 40 pellet sample produced measurable results with a DNA sample 
content of 19.64, 6.08 and 2.56 ng in 20 µl, respectively. These tests show quite varying results 
even for the samples with high fecal content. To check if any DNA was present in the samples of 6 
pellets, a 16S PCR amplification reaction (first part of the 16S Metagenomic Sequencing Library 
Preparation protocol for Preparing 16S Ribosomal RNA Gene Amplicons for the Illumina MiSeq 
System, Illumina support) was run with the following PCR conditions: 95 °C5 min (95 °C30 s + 55 
°C30 s + 72 °C30 s) × 30 cycles + 72 °C5 min and followed by amplification clean up. The amplicons 
were then quality tested with an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer with the 2100 Expert DNA 1000 Assay. 
The bioanalyzer results (Appendix 1) showed amplicons present in all samples (middle peak) 
except the blank sample, meaning the Easy-DNA kit had successfully extracted DNA from only 6 
pellets. 
 
I then retested the Bacteremia kit on 6, 10, 20 and 40 pellet samples. Although I replaced the 
standard kit spin filter column with a Monarch PCR Cleanup Column (New England Biolabs) after 
arguing that I wanted to dilute in a smaller volume of elution buffer due to the very small amount of 
DNA present in the samples with very few pellets and the Monarch PCR Cleanup Column had a 
much smaller filter size, meaning there was a smaller chance of any DNA not being eluted from the 
filter. Therefore I now only eluted with two times 10 µl buffer. A blank sample was also run. When 
tested with Qubit HS only the 40 pellet samples could be measured the others were to low in DNA 
content. The 40 pellet samples showed 3.68 and 2.6 ng in 20 µl, quite similar to the Easy-DNA kit 
40 pellet sample result. I then ran an identical 16S PCR amplification reaction as previously 
described, but with only 25 cycles instead of 30. The amplicon quality was also checked on the 
Bioanalyzer 2100, but with the 2100 Expert High Sensitivity DNA Assay. The results (Appendix 2) 
showed a very small contamination in the PCR products as seen by the PCR blank sample and the 
MO BIO blank sample. They also showed DNA present in all other samples although with quite 
varying results. 
 
==PAGE:110==
10 
 
I then argued that I wanted to try the Bacteremia kit without the bead beading, as I thought it might 
be a too violent mechanical handling of the bacteria and I feared I could loose the DNA from the 
low abundant more sensitive bacteria in the samples. I therefore retested the Bacteremia kit on 6, 10 
and 20 pellet samples without the bead steps, but still with the smaller spin filter column and a two 
times 10 µl elution volume together with a blank sample. The Qubit step was skipped, as I knew the 
small samples I was testing would not hold enough DNA to be measured. I then ran an identical 
16S PCR amplification reaction as the second one, the amplicons were cleaned up and a high 
sensitivity bioanalyzing quality check was performed. Unfortunately the bioanalyzing results have 
been lost, but they showed equally high amounts of DNA as samples with the bead beading steps, 
leading to my conclusion of the beads not being necessary for the lysis process. 
 
Due to the samples from Svalbard being stored in the bead/lysis solution from the DNeasy 
PowerSoil Kit from MO BIO I chose to retest the Easy-DNA kit with the Bacteremia lysis solution 
(similar to that of the PowerSoil kit) instead of the standard kit lysis solution. I tested a blank and 6 
and 10 pellet samples. Again I performed 16S PCR amplification and clean up, followed by a 
bioanalyzer high sensitivity assay. The results (Appendix 3) showed DNA present in all samples, 
but the blanks, but with very high variation in amount. After this final test I decided to use the 
Bacteremia kit for the final sample DNA extraction, with the modification of not using the beads, 
using a smaller spin filter column and only eluting in two times 10 µl buffer. This conclusion was 
due to fear of the PowerSoil lysis buffer not being sufficiently compatible with the other Easy-DNA 
kit reagents. 
 
For a final test I performed a Nextera XT Tagmentation and amplification index addition (first part 
of the DNA Library Prep Kit protocol- Reference Guide, Illumina Support) with a clean up and 
bioanalyzer assay check at the end. Unfortunately the kit reagents turned out to have expired and 
the results did not show any amplicons. Due to time constraints the test was not redone, but the test 
was done with a new kit on samples known to have even lower DNA content than mine in another 
project run simultaneously, which showed good results. 
 
I also performed a qPCR Reaction, where the plate was prepared as described in the protocol in 
Appendix 4, unfortunately this didn’t work either probably due to the TaqMan 16S Assay Mix 
(TaqMan® MicroRNA Cells-to-CT
TM Kit, Thermofisher) not being compatible with the samples as 
it is designed for RNA and not DNA. 
3.2 Sequencing method 
The choice of sequencing method stood between shotgun metagenomic sequencing and 16S rRNA 
sequencing. The 16S rRNA sequencing method is highly popular due to its lower cost and, often, 
easier preparation. It was used by Skovgaard et al. (2017) to investigate the host-specific and pH-
dependent microbiomes of copepods through cultivation in turbot larvae; it was used by Gorokhova 
et al. (2015) to investigate the bacteria-mediated effects of antibiotics on Daphnia nutrition; it was 
used by Sison-Mangus, Mushegian, and Ebert (2015) to investigate how water fleas depend on their 
microbiota for survival, growth and reproduction. If the 16S rRNA sequencing method is chosen it 
will be practical due to the relatively high number of samples in this study, but it will offer limited 
taxonomical and functional resolution. Therefore the shotgun metagenomic sequencing approach 
was chosen due to the higher resolution offering a far more specific taxonomic and functional 
classification of sequences as well as the ability to investigate and find new bacterial genes and 
genomes. In short, 16S rRNA sequencing gives a limited genetic picture of a sample just for 
bacteria, while shotgun metagenomic sequencing gives a very detailed picture of the whole 
microbial community of a sample and have fewer limitations although it is far more expensive 
==PAGE:111==
11 
 
(Jovel et al. 2016; Reiskind et al. 2016). In this case as much information wanted to be extracted 
from the samples so the shotgun metagenomic approach was selected. 
Due to money availability at the University of Copenhagen Centre for GeoGenetics, it was decided 
that the sequencing should be performed at the Sequencing Center at the University of Copenhagen. 
Due to the sequencing center availability of machinery and highly popular use in other studies of 
similar sequencing aim for samples in the same size category, it was decided to use an Illumina 
platform. Of the Illumina platform the sequencing center had MiSeq, HiSeq and NextSeq platforms 
available. The Miseq and NextSeq produces only 25 and 400 million reads per run, which was far to 
low for what we wanted, also baring in mind we have very little DNA per sample, with all samples 
being below the 5 ng, suggested for Illumina sequence standard library preparation. Therefore we 
chose the HiSeq, which can produce up to 5 billion reads per run, generating up to 1500 GB of data. 
For shotgun metagenomic sequencing Illumina suggests the Nextera XT Library Prep kit through 
their website information (https://www.illumina.com/areas-of-interest/microbiology/microbial-
sequenc- ing-methods/shotgun-metagenomic-sequencing.html, date: 25.05.17). This kit is optimal 
for this project due to it being optimized for low DNA input of down to 1 ng, without needing 
library quantification prior to pooling and sequencing and due to the possibility of pooling samples 
with dual indexing (Illumina website information, https://www.illumina.com/ products/by-
type/sequencing-kits/library-prep-kits/nextera-xt-dna.html, date: 25.05.17). To optimize the output 
of the HiSeq sequencing the HiSeq 4000 was chosen over the Hiseq 2500, as the maximum read 
length was higher. The read length was chosen to be the maximum of 150 base pairs with paired 
end reads, all samples pooled with dual indexing and the sequencing to be run on a full flow cell.  
3.3. Data handling 
Data preprocessing will be performed through UNIX on an external server due to the large amount 
of data produced by the sequencing and will be based on the results from a FastQC analysis: 
possible adaptor and primer sequences will be removed from the forward and reverse reads, all 
reads will be quality trimmed from the 3’ to a min quality and all reads under a given minimum 
quality will be removed (Jovel et al. 2016). The first 10 bases will be clipped from the 5’ due to bad 
quality general for Illumina sequencing. Barcodes will be counted and examined for 
representatives. De-multiplexing will also be performed. Denovo assemblies will be created and 
used for annotation of phyla and taxa present in the samples and to evaluate change in gut bacterial 
diversity when copepods are exposed to oil pollution, oil spill mitigating techniques and increasing 
water temperatures. The specific further data handling after preprocessing will be completely 
dependent on the quality and type of data produced by the sequencing, which can therefore not be 
predicted at this time. Although, some sort of result validation will be necessary to make them 
reliable. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:112==
12 
 
4 Conclusion 
The preliminary test results concluded that it was possible to extract DNA from down to six pellets 
with both the Bacteremia kit and the DNA-Easy kit. Due to availability, easy handling, fairly low 
cost, and the Svalbard samples stored in MO BIO lysis buffer the most efficient DNA extraction kit 
was found to be the Bacteremia DNA extraction kit from MO BIO with a few alterations and 
modifications to optimize it to the very small DNA quantities, such as the Monarch PCR Cleanup 
Column with a smaller filter, the smaller elution buffer volume, and the exclusion of the bead 
beating step from the protocol. The Sequencing method was chosen to be shotgun metagenomic 
sequencing, to get the highest resolution offering a far more specific taxonomic and functional 
classification of sequences as well as the ability to investigate and find new bacterial genes and 
genomes. It will be performed on the Illumina Hiseq 4000, with the Illumina Nextera XT Library 
Prep kit, sequenced with a read length of 150 base pairs, paired end reads, dual indexing, pooling 
and run on a full flow cell. Typical preprocessing will be done dependent on the data quality and 
size and after checking data quality a plan for further data handling and analysis will be made. 
5 Bibliography 
 
ACIA. 2005. “Arctic Climate Impact Assessment,” ACIA Overview report, . 
Almeda, Rodrigo, Zoe Wambaugh, Chao Chai, Zucheng Wang, Zhanfei Liu, and Edward J. 
Buskey. 2013. “Effects of Crude Oil Exposure on Bioaccumulation of Polycyclic Aromatic 
Hydrocarbons and Survival of Adult and Larval Stages of Gelatinous Zooplankton.” Edited by 
Howard I. Browman. Plos One 8 (10): e74476. 
Annammala, Kogila Vani, Mohd Harun Abdullah, Mazlin Bin Mokhtar, Collin G. Joseph, and 
Mahyar Sakari. 2013. “Characterization of Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Tropical Coastal Water of 
Sabah, Borneo.” Asian Journal of Chemistry 25 (7): 3773–80. 
Bag, Satyabrata, Bipasa Saha, Ojasvi Mehta, D. Anbumani, Naveen Kumar, Mayanka Dayal, 
Archana Pant, et al. 2016. “An Improved Method for High Quality Metagenomics DNA Extraction 
from Human and Environmental Samples.” Scientific Reports 6 (1): 26775. 
Barata, C, A Calbet, E Saiz, L Ortiz, and JM Bayona. 2005. “Predicting single and mixture toxicity 
of petrogenic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons to the copepod Oithona davisae.” Environmental 
Toxicology and Chemistry 24 (11): 2992–99. 
Bellas, Juan, and Peter Thor. 2007. “Effects of selected PAHs on reproduction and survival of the 
calanoid copepod Acartia tonsa.” Ecotoxicology 16 (1): 465–74. 
Berrojalbiz, Naiara, Silvia Lacorte, Albert Calbet, Enric Saiz, Carlos Barata, and Jordi Dachs. 2009. 
“Accumulation and Cycling of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Zooplankton.” Environmental 
Science and Technology 43 (7): 2295–2301. 
Darnis, Gerald, Dominique Robert, Corinne Pomerleau, Heike Link, Philippe Archambault, R. John 
Nelson, Maxime Geoffroy, et al. 2012. “Current state and trends in Canadian Arctic marine 
ecosystems: II. Heterotrophic food web, pelagic-benthic coupling, and biodiversity.” Climatic 
Change 115 (1): 179–205. 
Gorokhova, Elena, Claudia Rivetti, Sara Furuhagen, Anna Edlund, Karin Ek, and Magnus 
Breitholtz. 2015. “Bacteria-Mediated Effects of Antibiotics on Daphnia Nutrition.” Environmental 
Science and Technology 49 (9): 5779–87. 
==PAGE:113==
13 
 
Grenvald, Julie Cornelius, Torkel Gissel Nielsen, and Morten Hjorth. 2012. “Effects of pyrene 
exposure and temperature on early development of two co-existing Arctic copepods.” 
Ecotoxicology 22 (1): 184–98. 
Hjorth, Morten, and Torkel Gissel Nielsen. 2011. “Oil exposure in a warmer Arctic: potential 
impacts on key zooplankton species.” Marine Biology International Journal on Life in Oceans and 
Coastal Waters 158 (6): 1339–47. 
Incardona, John P., Mark G. Carls, Larry Holland, Tiffany L. Linbo, David H. Baldwin, Mark S. 
Myers, Karen A. Peck, Mark Tagal, Stanley D. Rice, and Nathaniel L. Scholz. 2015. “Very Low 
Embryonic Crude Oil Exposures Cause Lasting Cardiac Defects in Salmon and Herring.” Scientific 
Reports 5 (September): 13499. 
Jensen, Maj Holst, Torkel Gissel Nielsen, and Ingela Dahlloef. 2008. “Effects of pyrene on grazing 
and reproduction of Calanus finmarchicus and Calanus glacialis from Disko Bay, West Greenland.” 
Aquatic Toxicology 87 (2): 99–107. 
Jovel, Juan, Jordan Patterson, Weiwei Wang, Naomi Hotte, Sandra O’Keefe, Troy Mitchel, Troy 
Perry, et al. 2016. “Characterization of the Gut Microbiome Using 16S or Shotgun Metagenomics.” 
Frontiers in Microbiology 7: 459. 
King, Gary M., Craig Judd, Cheryl R. Kuske, and Conor Smith. 2012. “Analysis of Stomach and 
Gut Microbiomes of the Eastern Oyster (Crassostrea Virginica) from Coastal Louisiana, USA.” 
Edited by Josh Neufeld. Plos One 7 (12): e51475. 
Maksoud, Judy. 2008. “R&D Efforts Target Deepwater, Arctic.” E&P 81 (12): 37. 
National Research Council. 2003. “Oil in the Sea III : Inputs, Fates, and Effects.” 
Nørregaard, Rasmus Dyrmose, Torkel Gissel Nielsen, Eva Friis Møller, Jakob Strand, Laila 
Espersen, and Malene Møhl. 2014. “Evaluating pyrene toxicity on Arctic key copepod species 
Calanus hyperboreus.” Ecotoxicology 23 (2): 163–74. 
Novakova, Eva, Douglas C. Woodhams, Sonia M. Rodriguez-Ruano, Robert M. Brucker, Jonathan 
W. Leff, Amin Maharaj, Amnon Amir, Rob Knight, and James Scott. 2017. “Mosquito Microbiome 
Dynamics, a Background for Prevalence and Seasonality of West Nile Virus.” Frontiers in 
Microbiology 8: 526. 
Reddy, C. M., and J. G. Quinn. 2001. “The North Cape Oil Spill: Hydrocarbons in Rhode Island 
Coastal Waters and Point Judith Pond.” Marine Environmental Research 52 (5): 445–61. 
Reddy, Christopher M., J. Samuel Arey, Jeffrey S. Seewald, Sean P. Sylva, Karin L. Lemkau, 
Robert K. Nelson, Catherine A. Carmichael, et al. 2012. “Composition and Fate of Gas and Oil 
Released to the Water Column during the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill.” Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 109 (50): 20229–34. 
Reiskind, M. O. Burford, K. Coyle, H. V. Daniels, P. Labadie, M. H. Reiskind, N. B. Roberts, R. B. 
Roberts, J. Schaff, and E. L. Vargo. 2016. “Development of a Universal Double-Digest RAD 
Sequencing Approach for a Group of Nonmodel, Ecologically and Economically Important Insect 
and Fish Taxa.” Molecular Ecology Resources 16 (6): 1303–14. 
Rungrassamee, Wanilada, Amornpan Klanchui, Sage Chaiyapechara, Sawarot Maibunkaew, 
Sithichoke Tangphatsornruang, Pikul Jiravanichpaisal, and Nitsara Karoonuthaisiri. 2013. 
“Bacterial Population in Intestines of the Black Tiger Shrimp (Penaeus Monodon) under Different 
Growth Stages.” Edited by Stefan Bereswill. Plos One 8 (4): e60802. 
Schmidt, Victor, and Nina Rach. 2013. “Conference Delineates Steady Effort to Open the Arctic.” 
==PAGE:114==
14 
 
Offshore Engineer, Offshore Eng 38 (1): 49–54. 
Sison-Mangus, Marilou P., Alexandra A. Mushegian, and Dieter Ebert. 2015. “Water Fleas Require 
Microbiota for Survival, Growth and Reproduction.” Isme Journal 9 (1): 59–67. 
Skovgaard, Alf, Josue Leonardo Castro-Mejia, Lars Hestbjerg Hansen, and Dennis Sandris Nielsen. 
2017. “Host-Specific and PH-Dependent Microbiomes of Copepods in an Extensive Rearing 
System.” Plos One. 
Smith, Chris C. R., Lisa K. Snowberg, J. Gregory Caporaso, Rob Knight, and Daniel I. Bolnick. 
2015. “Dietary Input of Microbes and Host Genetic Variation Shape Among-Population 
Differences in Stickleback Gut Microbiota.” Isme Journal 9 (11): 2515–26. 
Welsh, Ron, and Kevin O’Gorman. 2005. “High-Stakes National and International Litigation: 
Management Issues.” Journal of Petroleum Technology 57 (6): 46–47. 
Wolska, Lidia, Agata Mechlinska, Justyna Rogowska, and Jacek Namiesnik. 2012. “Sources and 
Fate of PAHs and PCBs in the Marine Environment.” Critical Reviews in Environmental Science 
and Technology 42 (11): 1172–89. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:115==
15 
 
Appendix 1 
 
 
Instrument Name:
DE72901621
Firmware:
Serial#:
Assay Information:
C.01.069
DE72901621
Instrument Information:
Assay Origin Path:
C:\Program Files\Agilent\2100 bioanalyzer\2100
expert\assays\dsDNA\DNA 1000 Series II.xsy
Assay Class:
Version:
Assay Comments:
DNA 1000
2.3
DNA Analysis 25 -1000 bp
 
© Copyright 2003-2009 Agilent Technologies, Inc.
Chip Information:
Chip Comments:
Type:
G2939A
Chip Lot #:
Reagent Kit Lot #:
MOBIO TEST 1
MOBIO TEST 2
EASY TEST 80.1
EASY TEST 80.2
EASY TEST 6.1
EASY TEST 6.2
EASY TEST 40
EASY TEST BLANK
Sample 9
Sample 10
Sample 11
Sample 12
2100 Expert (B.02.08.SI648)
© Copyright 2003 - 2009 Agilent Technologies, Inc.
Printed:
3/9/2017 10:13:39 AM
2100 expert_DNA 1000_DE72901621_2017-03-09_09-16-22.xad
Page
of
1
18
Created:
Modified:
3/9/2017 9:16:22 AM
3/9/2017 9:58:12 AM
Data Path:
DNA 1000
C:\...-09\2100 expert_DNA 1000_DE72901621_2017-03-09_09-16-22.xad
Assay Class:
Electrophoresis File Run Summary
==PAGE:116==
16 
 
Appendix 2 
 
 
 
 
Instrument Name:
DE72901621
Firmware:
Serial#:
Assay Information:
C.01.069
DE72901621
Instrument Information:
Assay Origin Path:
C:\Program Files\Agilent\2100 bioanalyzer\2100
expert\assays\dsDNA\High Sensitivity DNA.xsy
Assay Class:
Version:
Assay Comments:
High Sensitivity DNA Assay
1.03
Copyright © 2003-2010 Agilent Technologies
Chip Information:
Chip Comments:
Type:
G2939A
Chip Lot #:
Reagent Kit Lot #:
PCR TEST BLANK
MOBIO TEST BLANK
MOBIO TEST 6.1
MOBIO TEST 6.2
MOBIO TEST 10.1
MOBIO TEST 10.2
MOBIO TEST 20.1
MOBIO TEST 20.2
sample 9
2100 Expert (B.02.08.SI648)
© Copyright 2003 - 2009 Agilent Technologies, Inc.
Printed:
3/24/2017 2:21:36 PM
2100 expert_High Sensitivity DNA Assay_DE72901621_2017-03-24_13-42-10.xad
Page
of
1
17
Created:
Modified:
3/24/2017 1:42:10 PM
3/24/2017 2:16:53 PM
Data Path:
High Sensitivity DNA Assay
C:\...gh Sensitivity DNA Assay_DE72901621_2017-03-24_13-42-10.xad
Assay Class:
Electrophoresis File Run Summary
==PAGE:117==
17 
 
Appendix 3 
 
 
 
 
Instrument Name:
DE72901621
Firmware:
Serial#:
Assay Information:
C.01.069
DE72901621
Instrument Information:
Assay Origin Path:
C:\Program Files\Agilent\2100 bioanalyzer\2100
expert\assays\dsDNA\High Sensitivity DNA.xsy
Assay Class:
Version:
Assay Comments:
High Sensitivity DNA Assay
1.03
Copyright © 2003-2010 Agilent Technologies
Chip Information:
Chip Comments:
Type:
G2939A
Chip Lot #:
Reagent Kit Lot #:
PCR BLANK
EASY BLANK
EASY 6.1
EASY 6.2
EASY 10.1
EASY 10.2
2100 Expert (B.02.08.SI648)
© Copyright 2003 - 2009 Agilent Technologies, Inc.
Printed:
4/4/2017 2:19:11 PM
2100 expert_High Sensitivity DNA Assay_DE72901621_2017-04-04_11-21-07.xad
Page
of
1
14
Created:
Modified:
4/4/2017 11:21:07 AM
4/4/2017 2:14:11 PM
Data Path:
High Sensitivity DNA Assay
C:\...gh Sensitivity DNA Assay_DE72901621_2017-04-04_11-21-07.xad
Assay Class:
Electrophoresis File Run Summary
==PAGE:118==
18 
 
 
Appendix 4 
 
TaqMan qPCR Reaction Plate preparation 
 
1. The 16S Assay Mix is dissolved if necessary  
 
2. The cDNA samples are thawed on ice and the TaqMan Gene Expression Assay Mix (20X) are 
thawed at room temperature. Both are kept on ice after thawing and vortexed thoroughly 
before use. 
 
3. Master Mix (2X) (ex. TaqMan Fast Gene Expression Master Mix) is in the fridge. 
 
4. Remember to run a Non-Template-Control (NTC) on the Reaction Plate. 
 
Protocol 
1. Make a dilution series of 4 steps of 1 sample 
a. 40.1 pellets: 
i. 5 dilution: 
8 μl of nuclease free water + 2 μl of sample 
= 10 μl 
ii. 15 dilution:  
4 μl of nuclease free water + 2 μl of 5X dilution 
= 6 μl 
iii. 25 dilution: 
4 μl of nuclease free water + 1 μl of 5X dilution 
= 5 μl 
 
2. Mix Assay Mix, RNase-free water and Master Mix in a Eppendorf tube pr. assay type/gene 
measured 
 
”Gene Mix” 
 
Detector 1 (gene) 
Component 
For 1 sample (μl) 
# wells + 5 = 15 
TaqMan 16S Assay Mix (20X) 0.5 
7.5 
RNase-free water 
2.5 
37.5 
Master Mix (2X) 
5.0 
75 
Total Volume 
8.0 
120 
 
1. Add 10 μl nuclease free water to the 2 NFW wells on the MicroAmp Fast Optical 96-well 
Reaction Plate 
 
2. Add 10 μl Gene Mix in the 2 NTC wells on the Reaction Plate 
 
3. Add 8 μl Gene Mix in 2 wells for every sample dilution on the Reaction Plate 
 
4. Add 2 μl sample dilution in the 2 corresponding wells containing the Gene Mix on the 
Reaction Plate 
 
5. Cover the Reaction Plate with MicroAmp Optical Adhesive Film. 
 
6. Centrifuge the Reaction Plate at 1200 g for 2 min 
 
7. Run the Reaction Plate on the 7900HT Fast System (NB: Set sample volume to 10 μl under 
”Instrument”) 
 
 
 
