==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Optimization of an Experimental DLP Platform 
by Construction and Process Studies
Frederik Winther Andersen 
January 2018
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
This thesis has systematically chosen the subsystems of greatest importance of the
DTU DLP v2. This is a platform made for high precision micro additive manufac-
turing. A self peeling vat has been implemented with a new upgraded tightening
mechanism. The design of a motorized adjustable projector mount with a kin-
ematic mounting system is described. The projector height is controlled in order
to set focus for optimal print quality.
A controller box to control the printer via a user interface has been set up to
control the platform and enables the operator to calibrate the buildplate.
The upgrades of the platform did increased print quality such as micrometer sized
features with better uniformity over the whole surface was obtained.
A study of how to ﬁnd focus has been made. As a result of this and the mo-
torized height adjustment an automatized focus system has been developed.
i
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This master thesis is made as a ﬁnal project under the master program Materials
and Manufacturing in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at the Technical
University of Denmark. The work started in September 2017 and was submitted
on January 20th 2018 and is rated at 30 ECTS points. The supervisors was David
Bue Pedersen and Jakob Skov Nielsen.
Thanks to my supervisors David and Jakob for guiding me and helping me to
ﬁnd the right solutions. I also owe a special thanks to Sebastian Aagaard Ander-
sen and Macarena M´endez Rib´o for interesting discussions and friendship.
Also a thank to my girlfriend Julie, my family, and friends for being supportive
and helpful.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Abbreviations
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Scope of project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Current state of DLP
2
2.1
Development of DLP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Performance of the DLP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
System analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Selection of improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Theoretical background
10
4
Methodology
14
4.1
Starting prints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2
Optical equipment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5
Implementation of new vat
20
6
Design
23
6.1
Projector mount . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.2
Projector mounting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.3
Linear guides
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.4
Motor mount
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.5
Filter holder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
7
Electronics and software
33
7.1
Conﬁguring micrcontroller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7.2
Improved initialization of projector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
8
Focus
39
8.1
Initial focus test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
8.2
CMOS holder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
8.3
CMOS setting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
8.4
Focus program
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
8.5
Evaluation of CMOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
9
Prints quality
49
9.1
Gecko structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
9.2
Singe layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
9.3
Eiﬀel Tower . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
9.4
Layer thickness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
10 Source of errors and further work
57
iii
==PAGE:5==
11 Conclusion and discussion
60
References
61
A Technical drawings
63
A.1 Pressure releasing hole . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
A.2 Hinge
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.3 Mounting VAT with threads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
A.4 Projector mount . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
A.5 Motor mount
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
A.6 Filter holder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
A.7 CMOS holder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
A.8 Controller box . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
B Bending of rails
97
C Matlab code
100
C.1 Take n-number of pictures and mean function
. . . . . . . . . . . . 100
C.2 Intensity as function of time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
C.3 Focus program
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
D Creation Workshop set-up
105
D.1 Machine proﬁle in CW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
D.2 Slicing proﬁle in CW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
E Pixel controlled test printer
108
iv
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviation
AM
Additive Manufacturing
CAD
Computer-Aided Design
CLSM
Confocal Laser Scanning Microscopy
CMOS
Complimentary Metal–Oxide–Semiconductor
CW
Creation Workshop
DFM
Design for Manufacture
DLP
Direct Light Processing
DMD
Digital Micromirror Device
FEP
Fluorinated Ethylene Propylene
FTD
Fun to Do
LGS
Logitech Gaming software
ND
Neutral Density
PCB
Printed Circuit Board
RAMPS
RepRap Arduino Mega Pololu Shield
SLA
Stereolithography
SPIP
Scanning Probe Image Processor
UV
Ultraviolet
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
The DLP printer at DTU building 427 is a high precision machine with potential
of printing with precision of single digit micron. The projection unit has high res-
olution with a pixel size of 7.5 µm. The motion system is controlled by high grade
spindles. The combination of these elements results in a highly advanced DLP-
platform which has a great potential to manufacture features in the micrometer
size beyond state of the art. Furthermore, it is an open platform which makes it
very capable of doing innovative research on micro-fabrication.
However, the machine has not proven its full potential yet. There are some major
ﬂaws in the set-up, preventing the whole process from achieving the single digit
resolution. This will be analyzed with a systematic study to identify which sub-
system has the greatest impact of improving print quality. Subsequently, several
hardware and software updates will be designed, implemented, and validated with
the aim of improving its printing resolution and user friendliness.
1.1
Scope of project
The aim of this project is to identify the ﬂaws and sources of error of the DLP in
order to increase print quality and facilitate user-friendliness. In order to get sharp
print quality it is imperative to ﬁnd focus on the projector, which in the current
state of the printer hasn’t been found. The self-peeling vat[1] has a membrane for a
low-force release from the build surface. The membrane installation is an arduous
task, and even gives an uneven membrane tightness. This makes it impossible to
consistently manufacture micro features. Another aspect to take into consideration
is the user friendliness, e.g. the calibration of the buildplate and initializing of the
projector. Hence, the purpose of this thesis is to improve the print quality and
decrease the laborious start-up procedures of the machine. This deﬁnes and leads
up to the following research questions
1.2
Research questions
• With single digit pixel size, can this also be achieved on printed parts of the
DLP-platform?
• What subsystem has the greatest inﬂuence on the process?
• How can focus be deﬁned and projected to the build surface of the DLP?
• How can print resolution be measured?
1
==PAGE:8==
2
Current state of DLP
2.1
Development of DLP
The DLP platform has been developed over several projects. The ﬁrst project
was a Diploma bachelor project ﬁnished in the autum 2013[2]. The DLP v.1 was
manufactured in this project. The DLP platform was a bit primitive and made of
relative cheap components, e.g. window was glass from an IKEA product, but this
was enough to prove the concept. The principle behind this printer was using a
NEC LT25 projector which is a projector made for keynotes to cure the resin. The
lifting system of the buildplate was consisted of two ball screws guide by linear rail.
The movement and guidance was on both sides of the buildplate as seen in Figure 1.
Figure 1: DTU DLP v1 [2].
In the autumn of 2014 the next version DTU DLPv2 was made[3]. The projector
used was the DLP LightCrafter E4500.
The linear guide rail system and ball
screw to control the z-stage was reused in this version. To control the z-stage
a print board Rev B. with an Atmel DFU Bootloader was used. The DLP was
assembled on a mechanical breadboard with aluminium Bosch Rexroth extruded
proﬁles (40 mm × 40 mm). This was done to make is very ﬂexible and open for
modiﬁcation in the future. The buildplate was placed on a very smart calibration
system. A large bearing ball in a ball joint made it possible to align the buildplate
with the vat-window. This was tightened together by also having an upper ball
joint and when these were tightened with a fastening handle the buildplate were
ﬁxed in position. This platform was made with the thoughts of having complicated
lifting proﬁles so horizontal movement of the vat was possible.
Since then the DLP projector LRS-WQ-HY described in section 4.2 was aquired.
A projector mount was made speciﬁcally for this projector. A vat based on a
peeling membrane was also designed and manufactured[1, 4].
2
==PAGE:9==
Figure 2: The current DLP v2[5].
2.2
Performance of the DLP
In earlier studies micrometer sized feature had been achieved[5]. Individual pixels
were seen and measured to be 7.46 µm (less than pixel size). See Figure 3 for visible
pixels. But micro features and visible pixels was not evenly distributed trough the
print. Approximately 32 % of the printed area had micro features (see Figure 4).
Parts with visible pixels could not be replicated again. The pillar height was also
far from constant. The unevenly tightened membrane was blamed for this.
Figure 3: Visible pixels on printed part[5, E2 2 BC].
3
==PAGE:10==
Figure 4: A picture of printed part. The outer yellow line deﬁnes the whole printed
area (187.7). No unit due to uncalibrated image. Inside this another mask is seen.
This deﬁnes the area where micro features were present (60.2). Approximately
32 % of the printed area had micro features.
2.3
System analysis
A mind map is made to investigate the diﬀerent parts which will improve the
printer. This is done in order to have a systematic method to ensure that all
necessary part systems are analysed and thought through. This can be seen in
Figure 5. Thereafter, a systematic selection of which problems the platform has
and which needs to be solved.
DLP
Hardware
Projector
Mount
Focus
Change
of
lens
Filterholder
Vat
Sprout
Vat
frame
Motor
mount
UV-
blocking
Electronic
Heating
Micro-
controller
box
x and
y-axis in
parallel
Endstops
Software
Focus
Protocols
Change
of mem-
brane
Focus
Figure 5: The overall mindmap for the DLP platform.
4
==PAGE:11==
Hardware
A big hardware issue with the current DLP platform is the projector mount. The
mount can be seen in Figure 6 a. This is made of three Bosch Rexroth aluminium
proﬁles holding a 15 mm thick aluminium plate with L-bracket. The major height
adjustment of the projector is made by adjusting the three L-brackets. The alu-
minium plate seems to be very stable and will be called ”the projector frame”.
The alu-proﬁles are not very stable. The projector is fastened to another 15 mm
thick aluminium plate with three micrometer screws. This plate is called ”the
mounting plate” since this is where the projector is mounted to. The three micro-
meter screws are standing on the projector frame (see Figure 6b). The micrometer
screws adjust minor height and the plane of the projector. What should further
be noticed is that the projector is not geometrically constrained. The projector
can freely move in the horizontal plane which it does when the micrometers are
adjusted(see scratches in Figure 6b). The corner where there is no micrometer
screw should only be pushed with a little force to tilt the projector and might
move it since it is unsupported.
This projector mount has major design errors. The major height adjustment is
very diﬃcult to adjust since the two alu-plates with the projector has to be held
under the platform while another person tightens the T-nuts. This is a hard job
since the weight is high and, therefore, the height and tilt of the projector frame
is diﬃcult to control. When major height adjustment is done, the minor height
adjustment and tilt has to be set by the three micrometer screws. While trying
to control both height and tilt, with three micrometer screws which are sliding
around on the non levelled surface of projector frame it is nearly impossible to
ﬁnd focus perfect. What has just been adjusted will simply be ruined by new
adjustments and sliding around.
The projector mount is considered as a very
important subsystem to improve. This machine deserves better.
(a) The current projector mount.
This was
made of three Bosch Rexroth aluminium pro-
ﬁles and two aluminium plates adjusted with
micrometer screws.
(b) Micrometer screw mounted to the mount-
ing plate. See scratches on projector frame.
Figure 6: The current projector mount.
In order to change the lens the projector could be moved down, since the lens
is so long. The lens should either come out thought the hole in the mechanical
breadboard or by disassembling the projector mount. To disassemble the projector
5
==PAGE:12==
mount focus has to be adjusted over again. The buildplate-platform might be in the
way if lens is changed through the hole of the mechanical breadboard. Thus focus
might also have to be adjusted. Therefore it would also be nice to easily move the
projector down to the bottom of the platform motorized on order to change lenses.
Some of the parts on the DLP platform are made of 3D-printed plastic parts.
E.g. are the motor-mounts, vat-frame and ﬁlter-holder. This is probably not the
best material due to stiﬀness and chemical resistance.
The new vat has a new tightening-ring to tighten the membrane. There is no
sprout to pour back unused resin in the vat. It could be necessary to have a sprout
implemented to the tightening-ring so the vat won’t spill when emptying the vat.
The DLP-platform may have a beneﬁt of being shielded from UV-light. This could
be UV-shielding for all lamps and windows, or it could be an enclosure where a
suction also could be implemented. If the DLP platform is decided to be heated
up this enclosure could also keep an heated environment warm.
Software
The current DLP platform has some end-stop hanging in their wires. So they have
no function hanging there. Some small threaded holes made for the endstop are
made on the platform but this is not assembled. So it does look like intention was
there but it was a question of conﬁguring the microcontroller. In order to make
it more user-friendly, then end-stop should be implemented, as a safety precaution.
To ﬁnd propper focus it would be necessary to have an auto focus working. If
the projector mount ends up being motorized, a program working together with
the motor and an image sensor could be automatized.
Electronic
As the endstops are not working they have to be connected correctly in the mi-
crocontroller. Two motors controls the z-stage and thus the buildplate. These
actually have their own respective axis x and y. Their axis is positive vertically
up. The standard says that z should be positive downward for downward build-
ing 3D-printers[6]. Therefore this should be changed and this regards to both the
electronics and the software. The individual x and y-axis was necessary for the
development of DLP v2 since various lifting proﬁles was the scope. These are not
being used and will not be retained.
Currently the microcontroller sits freely on top of the machine seen in Figure 7.
This is not ideal because dust collects and short circuit can easily happen when it
is not protected. Therefore, a box must be made that can contain the electronics.
6
==PAGE:13==
Figure 7: The microcontroller Rev. B sitting free upon the DLP[3].
In order to have the same process parameters for all prints some kind of heating
system would be preferred. This should only be heated up by just a few degrees
over room temperature. This is to ensure that the temperature is always the same.
Both on a warm summer day or a cold winter day.
Protocols
The new vat has an totally diﬀerent design compared to the old vat. This means
that when the vat is being implemented a protocol for changing the membrane
must be made.
The protocol of how the focus is found must be speciﬁed and systematized. Cur-
rently the focus is based on someone’s feeling or sense of it is in focus. This should
rather be documented and determined in a systematized manner.
2.4
Selection of improvements
Which of the previously discussed improvements to be further developed must be
decided. They will be scored using the following three criteria; importance for
print quality, user friendliness and complexity. Every criteria is weighted between
1 to 5.
Importance for print quality and user friendliness is weighed as 1 has
low importance and 5 will have a great impact. Complexity is weighted as low
complexity will get a 5 and high complexity will get a 1. The complexity for an
improvement should not be the conclusive argument if this improvement is chosen
or not. The scoring will be guiding and lead up to a discussion of each improve-
ment and its importance. A table of improvement scoring can be seen in Table 1.
Projector mount
The impact of quality should be weighted very high for the projector mount be-
cause, focus must be good in order to have a good print. A new projector mount
will impact the user friendliness as the task of setting focus should be much easier.
This will be a quite complex improvement to implement, but this is chosen due to
the impact of the improved quality.
7
==PAGE:14==
Motor mounts
The motor mount will probably increase print quality if manufactured in metal
and stiﬀness is increased. This will be fairly simple to design so these will be
designed right away.
Vat frame
The vat frame is evaluated to have no inﬂuence on the prints. However, it could
be nice to have this made in metal for easier cleaning of the platform. This is a
quite complex part so this is not going to be made.
Filter holder
A ﬁlter holder will probably not change the quality but to have them in metal
instead of plastic would still be preferable. This would not be diﬃcult to improve
so this will be implemented.
Pouring sprout
To implement a pouring sprout will have no eﬀect on print quality.
The user
friendliness will be improved, but due to the complex design it has been decided
not to work further with a pouring sprout.
UV-block
UV-blocking might have some impact on the print quality but it is diﬃcult to
judge. The user friendliness and complexity is like wise also diﬃcult to judge as
this improvement is very open. It depends on the solution how these will score.
This is not chosen.
Endstops
Endstop will have no inﬂuence on quality. It will be quite nice to work with a
printer which is limited to move in the safe zone. The user friendliness is rated
high as this can also be a safety issue if the printer has enough power to tear
itself apart. The complexity to implement endstop will not be too high so this will
deﬁnitely be solved.
Focus program
An automated focus program will improve print quality. The program can help
and tell where focus is and document this. This will make the protocol of ﬁnding
focus much easier. The complexity of such a focus program was diﬃcult to estimate
since the author only have basic programming skills. However, the automatic focus
program will be attempted to be made or at least be eased.
Controller box
An enclosure of the microcontroller will not improve prints. However, having a
controller box means that the user does not have to worry about shorten circuit
on the circuit board. So it is prioritized to be solved.
8
==PAGE:15==
Heating
To have a heated up process could be an advantage regarding process stability. It
is evaluated that at the current state it might not make sense to control temperat-
ure. User friendless is rated low as this will make printing more intricate. So this
is not chosen to be solved now. When the process is controlled further this could
be considered again.
As a result of scoring the improvements the following parts has been decided to be
worked with: Projector mount, motor mount, ﬁlter holder, endstops, focus pro-
gram and a controller box. These subsystems are weighted as having the greatest
inﬂuence on the the process.
Table 1: Scoring of improvements
Importance for
User
Complexity
Total
Chosen
print quality
friendliness
Projector mount
5
4
1
10
x
Motor mounts
2
1
5
8
x
Vat frame
1
3
3
7
Filter holder
1
3
5
9
x
Pouring sprout
1
4
4
9
UV-blocking
2
1
3
6
Endstop
1
5
4
10
x
Focus program
5
3
3
11
x
Cotrollerbox
1
3
4
8
x
Heated
2
1
2
5
9
==PAGE:16==
3
Theoretical background
Prior to engaging in the optimization work on the system, the principle of DLP
additive manufacturing must be understood. In this section the principles behind
the DLP process will be described.
Stereolithography (SLA)
Stereolithography (SLA) was originally developed in the mid 1980’s by Chuck Hull
and is the ﬁrst AM process [7]. The enabling technology is photopolymers. This
works by selectively curing the photopolymer with a focussed UV-laser[8].
By
successive curing layer by layer three dimensional parts are manufactured. The
theoretical minimum spot size is, therefore, equal to the wavelength of the laser.
A SLA machine consist of a vat ﬁlled with photopolymer, a buildplate on which
the production will take place, and a scanning laser. Figure 8 shows the schematic
of a top-down and Figure 9 a bottom-up SLA printer.
The scanning pattern is created in a piece of software called a slicer. A slicer
is the software which reads 3-dimensional .stl-ﬁle and plan the route for the
laser for each layer. The slicer writes G-code which is the language that tells the
3D-printer where to move the motors(e.g. the laser scanner or height of the build-
plate). Between every layer the buildplate is moved the distance equal to the layer
height.
Basically there are two set-ups for a SLA machine; the top-down and bottom-
up[5]. The words ”top” and ”bottom” refers to the placement of the laser. ”Up”
and ”down” refers to the movement of the buildplate. These two set-ups will be
described in the following:
Top-down
In the top-down setup seen in Figure 8 the laser scanner sits upon the vat. The
buildplate gets lowered down into the vat and gets submerged in photopolymer.
The vat thereby contains a lot of resin because the resin needs to cover the whole
printed part in order to get the print job done. The total volume of resin needed to
print Vresin is deﬁned by the bottom area of the vat Avat, the height of the printed
part hpart.
Vresin = Avat · hpart
(3.1)
This is a relative large volume compared to bottom-up (Equation 3.2). There-
fore, it is very important to have a high demand with top-down layout since the
amount of the expensive photopolymer is very large. This is most suitable for a
continuous production where there is some usage of the resin. Thus, the value of
the surrounding not used resin in the vat becomes less important if the printed
volume is large.
The buildplate is submerged and lowered into the photopolymer until the build-
plate is covered with a thin layer of resin. The thickness of resin is the ﬁrst layer.
The layer thickness and thereby the resolution in z-direction is thereby deﬁned
by the distance from buildplate to the surface of the resin. All other layers are
10
==PAGE:17==
distance from cured part to surface of the resin. Layer height control is diﬃcult
since the height of surface is deﬁned by the movement of the z-axis. The volume
of buildplatform submerged into the resin and also the volume of cured resin need
to be taken into account to control the layer thickness.
Scanning mirror x and y
z-stage
Laser
Resin
Printed part
Newly printed layer
Figure 8: The basic principle behind a top-down SLA printer.
Bottom-up
The bottom-up layout is based on placing the Projection below the vat and point
the laser through the bottom of the vat. As seen in Figure 9 there is a window
in the bottom of the vat. The ﬁrst layer is deﬁned by the distance between the
vat-window and the buildplate. The layer height is, thereby, very well controlled
since the height is physically deﬁned by the window and the buildplate.
The amount of resin is very little compared to the top-down. The total volume
of resin needed to print Vresin is deﬁned by the volume of the part Vpart and support
Vsupport plus some resin to at least cover the whole bottom of the buildplateVmin resin.
Vresin = Vpart + Vsupport + Vmin resin
(3.2)
A huge advantage of the bottom-up design is that it only require very little amount
of resin in order to print high parts. That is because it is the volume of printed
part and not the height and area of the vat that deﬁnes the required volume.
Bottom-up is, therefore, in very much need for a research platform.
11
==PAGE:18==
Laser
z-stage
Resin
Printed part
Newly printed layer
Scanning mirror x and y
Window
Figure 9: The basic principle of a bottom-up SLA printer.
One drawback is that due to the separation between each layer, a force F occurs
trough the part. This force may only be enough for the part and window to sep-
arate. If that force exceeds the required separation force to separate part from the
buildplate the print is lost. This ratio also depends on the area of the baselayer Abl
versus the area of the printed layer Apl. This relationship can be described by the
following[3]:
F
Abl
< F
Apl
(3.3)
This force can be reduced by having a higher roughness at the buildplate, or by
reducing roughness between window and part. This will reduce the force occurring
at separation.
DLP
Digital Light Processing (DLP®) is an AM process using the principle of SLA. It
Uses UV-light to cure a liquid polymer, but instead of scanning with a laser, a
projected cross sectional images from a projector deﬁnes what is curing. Thus,
you can say DLP is a type of SLA and is sometimes also called SLA-DLP. DLP is
a trademark by Texas Instrument. DLP can just like SLA both have the top-down
and bottom-up layout. A sketch of bottom-up can be seen in Figure 10. This
thesis will use a bottom-up DLP
12
==PAGE:19==
z-stage
Resin
Printed part
Newly printed layer
Window
UV beam
Projector
Figure 10: The principle of a bottom-up DLP printer.
The DLP is more like a masking processing[9, 10]. While the DLP process pro-
jects the whole layer as an image, the images inside the projector, is controlled
by a digital micromirror devices (DMD)[11]. This is the chip created by Texas
Instrument. An UV- source emits the array of micromirrors and depending on
whether the mirror is tilted to on or oﬀstate, the image is created. A DMD is a
highly advanced light control. It assembles an array of highly reﬂective aluminium
mirrors, so every pixel has its own micromirror. It works by every mirror can
either be on- or oﬀ-state as seen in Figure 11. The on-state tilts the mirror as
it reﬂects the UV-light into the projector lens and emits the represented pixel in
the vat. The oﬀ-state will tilt the mirror such that the UV-light is reﬂected away
from the lens. So the mirror is tilted ±12° depending on whether the pixel is on
or oﬀ. While the projector is turned oﬀthe mirror is in parked state. Grey scale
is modulated by switching the mirror on and oﬀvery fast. For an example a pixel
with the greyscale value 200 is on 200
255=78 % of the time of every frame.
Figure 11: The micromirror three positions[11].
13
==PAGE:20==
4
Methodology
In this section the methodology behind the conducted experiments in this thesis
is explained. This includes how prints were started and how they were cleaned
afterwards. The speciﬁc equipment which has been used during the work will also
be presented.
Changing ﬁlm
When a new FEP ﬁlm has to be inserted into the vat ﬁrst of all the ﬁlm has to
be cut to the right size. Then the window was cleaned in 2-Propanol (in the fume
station) and wiped oﬀwith a paper towel. Thereafter, the window and FEP ﬁlm
was blown with compressed air to remove any dust and dry the 2-Propanol from
the window. Then FEP ﬁlm is placed on the lower vat. It is a god point to inspect
if there is dust between window and membrane. If not the upper vat is placed at
the counter holder as seen on Figure 12. The quick release should now be tightened
so lower and upper vat is parallel. The tightening ring should then be inserted
and the three wing-nuts will press the ring down and tighten the FEP-ﬁlm. Then
the vat is inserted on the platform and it is ready to be used.
Figure 12: When ﬁlm is inserted in the lower vat this is how the upper vat is
assembled and tightened with the quick release.
4.1
Starting prints
The projector can be initiated by the three following lines of code in commando
promt on windows[5, 12]:
i2c_cmd.exe init hdmi
i2c_cmd.exe upload test_static.txt 0
i2c_cmd.exe start
This is also where the set-value or intensity of projector is prompted. This is done
by the i2c cmd.exe setamplitude followed by a number between 0 and 2400.
The initiation can also be made by the new startup.bat ﬁle desicribed in section
7.2 on page 36. The new startup.bat ﬁle is the most convenient and is, therefore,
recommended. The set-value is set to 0 in order to reduce UV radiation if any
resin is in the vat. Furthermore, a piece of foam is placed upon the lens to block
light.
14
==PAGE:21==
The resin which has been used through all print in this thesis is the Industrial
Blend resin by ”Fun To Do” (FTD). It is an Acrylic resin suitable for SLA and
DLP printing. The absorption has between 225 nm and 415 nm[13]. This resin is
beeing used in order to compare with previous work[1, 5]. Furthermore this has
a good quality at a good price point. This should be handled with care. Gloves,
coatn and eye protection should be worn while working with this resin[14].
The resin is shaken for about half a minute and followed by another half a minute
on the vortex mixer. This is done to mix the resin well and the minimize bobbles.
It was later realized that it should only be mixed on the vortex mixer since this
will mix it without making too many bubbles. The resin is now poured into the
vat which is then inserted on the platform. The buildplate should now be levelled.
This is done by removing the fastening handle and opening the upper ball joint.
Now the z-axis can be lowered down in order to align the buildplate with the
vat window. By moving the the platform with the bearing-ball while moving the
z-axis up it can clearly be felt when buildplate is carried by the ball joint. Then
the the upper ball joint should be tightened with the fastening handle. Then the
buildplate is calibrated and aligned to the vat-window.
Buildplate calibration
To ensure plane contact between buildplate and FEP ﬁlm/vat window the build-
plate has to be calibrated. This procedure starts by loosening the handle and
opening the upper ball joint. Thereby the the pivot ball can freely move on the
lower ball joint. By manually sending G-code through the creation workshop the
buildplate can be lowered down to the window. When the buildplate reaches the
window the ball will release from the lower ball joint.
Creation Workshop
Creation Workshop (CW) is the software which slice the .stl-ﬁle and control the
sequencing of prints on the DLP platform. The machine proﬁle which has been
used can be seen in appendix D.1 and the slicing proﬁle can be seen in appendix
D.2. The most important settings in the slicing proﬁle can be seen in Table 2.
The work-ﬂow to start a print in CW is described by the following and seen in
Figure 13:
1. Load .stl-ﬁle
2. Place 3D-object correctly in print volume.
3. Open connection to micocontroller controlling z-axis.
4. Slice geometry with the Straight lift Z.slicing.
5. Set set-value to 500 and remove the piece of foam infront of lens.
6. Press play.
7. After two printed layers at a set-value at 500 this was changed to 230 for the
rest of the print.
15
==PAGE:22==
CW does not control the set-value so just before hitting the play bottom the
piece of foam which blocks light should be removed and set-value should be set
in command with the i2 cmd.exe.
To get greater adhesion between part and
buildplate the ﬁrst two layers are exposed with a set-value of 500. Thereafter, this
is set to 230 for the rest of the print.
1
2
3
4 6
7
5
Figure 13: To the left a screenshot of the Creation Workshop is seen. To the right
the code in command prompted to control set-value is seen.
Table 2: Values for the used slicing proﬁle.
Layer height
18 µm
Exposure time
4 s
Base layer exposure time
15 s
No of base layers
5
Cleaning prints
When the print is ﬁnished the z-axis is homed. Then the buildplate can be disas-
sembled. A palette is used to loosen the print. This is a quite rough method but
this is what’s necessary to loosen it. This is also why most prints are printed on a
base. When printed part is separated from buildplate the part should be cleaned
with 2-Propanol. Minor details should carefully be sprayed with 2-Propanol so all
resin can be rinsed of. The squeeze bottle seen i Figure 14 a is used for this. Then
the part is placed in a container submerged in 2-Propanol. This container is then
placed in the micro sound rinser seen in Figure 14 b, and is processed for 8 minutes
at 40°. Last but not least the part should be post cured. This is done to ensure
that all resin is cured and it is safe to touch it. The UV-box seen in Figure 14 c
is set to 45 min. When the curing is done the part is done and safe to touch.
16
==PAGE:23==
(a) Squeeze
bottle
with
2-
Propanol
(b) Micro sound rinser
(c) UV-curing box
Figure 14: The equipment used to clean the part post printing.
4.2
Optical equipment
Projector
The projector which has been used is the Luxbeam Rapid System LRS-WQ-HY.
WQ is for the WQXGA resolution (2560x1600p) and HY is the UV version. The
projector is a dedicated DLP procuct. The wavelength of the projected image is
405 nm[15]. The wave length is within the region where the FTD resin cures and
is just within the visible region. A table with the ranges can be seen in Table 3.
The DMD is the DLP9000 with micrometer-sized mirrors. 9000 is referring to the
diagonally length of 0.9 inches. Thereby, every mirror has a width of 7.5 µm. The
mirror array has orthogonal pixel array layout.
Table 3: Shows wavelength for visible light, the projector, Fun To Do resin and
the sun.
Range [nm]
Visible light
400-700 [16]
Sun
100-1M
Projector
405
FTD resin absorption
225-415
A curve showing the Radiant ﬂux due to set-value is seen in Figure 15. Below the
diﬀerentiated curve is seen Figure 16. The recommended amplitude is in the range
of 400-800. It should be below 800 due to extend lifetime of the projector. Within
the range of 400-800 the slope of slope over range is close to 0 (0.00019 ≈0). This
means that this range set-values will remain constant. It can, thereby, be seen that
the range 0-200 should totally be avoided due to high slope of slope over range
plot. This results in ﬂuctuating intensity[5]. The set-value used in this thesis is
230 with two ND-ﬁlters in order to reduce ﬂux and, thereby, use a higher set-value.
17
==PAGE:24==
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
2200
2400
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
Range and linearity - linear mode
Set-value
Radiant flux [W]
Figure 15: Radiant ﬂux for set-values.
Set-value
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
2200
2400
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
1.05
1.1
1.15
1.2
Slope over range
Set-value
slope
Figure 16: The slope for ﬂux of set-values
A neutral density (ND) ﬁlter reduces the intensity of the wavelength preferably giv-
ing no change in color. The speciﬁc ﬁlter which is being used is the NE2R10B from
Thorlabs[17]. The percentage transmission curve for various wavelength can be
seen in Figure 17. It can be seen that it is far from constant. Diﬀerent wavelengths
have diﬀerent transmissions. For 405 nm the transmission is 7.8 %. As two ND
ﬁlters are used the transmission is 0.0782 · 100 % = 0.61 %
18
==PAGE:25==
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
Wavelength (nm)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Transmission [%]
Transmission NE2R10B
Figure 17: Transmission of the NE2R10B ND ﬁlter. Data from[17].
Lens
The lens which has been used in this thesis is the LRS-10. This has a magni-
ﬁcation at 1.0, which means that the projected pixel in focus has the same size
as the micromirrors 7.5 µm[18]. The LRS-WQ-HY projector has a variety of dif-
ferent lens’s with various maniﬁcations e.g. 0.5, 2, 4.6 and up to 11.7[18]. This
work has only used the single lens with magniﬁcation of 1.0 with a print area of
19.3 mm × 12.1 mm.
19
==PAGE:26==
5
Implementation of new vat
Prior to this study, preparations had been carried out in order to upgrade the vat
of the DLP machine. These preparations included design, CAD modelling and
sending technical drawings to the toolshop. This was designed by the author in a
special course in the spring of 2017[4]. It had been manufactured over the summer
in the toolshop at the DTU building 427. The vat has not tested or implemented
by any means. This section explains the motivation behind designing a new vat.
Some modiﬁcation was necessary in order to use it on the DLP-platform. This is
also documented here.
Current vat
The current vat, which can be seen in Figure 18 was an aluminium frame that
is tensioned on to a plate. Between the frame and the plate there is a piece of
FEP ﬁlm used to lower the deattachment force. This is based on the principle of a
selfpeeling vat[1]. The FEP-ﬁlm is sealed with a rubber gasket of the same shape
as the frame, on both sides of the ﬁlm. The frame was attached with a total of 16
bolts unfortunately asymmetric. Every bolt had to go through the ﬁlm so holes
has to be made in the ﬁlm before it could be assembled. There was no way to
tension the ﬁlm after the bolts were screwed in. Therefore, it was important to be
very careful but also lucky to assemble the vat with a tight ﬁlm. The window was
glued onto the plate. The area of the vat Avat is very large compared to eﬀective
building area. Therefore, an update of this vat was very necessary.
Figure 18: The current vat.
New vat
The new vat was designed with focus on easy change of membrane and a tight
hold. The eﬀective printing area is within a circle measuring 80 mm in diameter.
The general concept of the new vat can be seen in Figure 19. The round window
is tightened with a radial tightened o-ring. The o-ring is inserted in a grove in
the ”lower vat”. At the right hand side a ”counter holder” is assembled to the
lower vat. The shape of the counter holder acts together with the shape of the
”upper vat” like a hinge mechanism. At the bottom of the upper vat another
o-ring is placed. This holds the FEP-ﬁlm which is placed upon the window. The
20
==PAGE:27==
upper vat is tightened with a quick release known from bike equipment. To tighten
the FEP-ﬁlm a ”tightening ring” is screwed down and pressed down around the
window.
Window
Lower VAT
Upper VAT
Tightening ring
FEP-membrane
Quick release
O-ring
Counter holder
Hinge mechanism
Figure 19: Concept of the new vat.
The manufactured vat can be seen in Figure 20. The ﬁt of the window was very
tight to assemble. With help from some soap it was able to be pressed down to its
position. Before mounting it onto the DLP platform it was tested if the sealing
was water tight. Since water has a lower viscosity than the resin the water would
leak before the resin. The assembled vat was left overnight ﬁlled with water. No
leakage was noticed the next day which meant the sealing was tight.
Figure 20: The new vat ready to be assembled to the DLP-platform.
Apparently air was pumped up in between the window and the ﬁlm when the ﬁlm
was tightened. The vat was simply too tight to let air release from the vat when
the enclosed volume was reduced by the tightening mechanism. Therefore, the
lower vat was send to the toolshop to make a little breathing hole. The technical
drawing can be seen in appendix A.1. This hole solved the problem and released
the air when the membrane was tightened.
To mount the vat onto the platform an insert-plate with two pins screwed on was
used. This can be seen in Figure 22 a. In the lower vat two bushings with a gliding
ﬁt to the pins were inserted with a press ﬁt. A ﬁnger screw should press into two
pins and hold the vat down to the insert plate. When the vat was inserted it was
realized that the buildplate was not centred. The hole in the crossbar is simply
21
==PAGE:28==
not in the middle. Thus resulted i a problem where the buildplate was oﬀcentred
and it almost did not ﬁt into the vat. This can be see in Figure 21 a. It was
decided that this should be modiﬁed so buildplate was centred in the vat. This
was relatively simple with a hinge and sliding joint also seen in Figure 21 a. So
by making the hinge little longer, which the sliding joint allows, the buildplate
can then be centred. A 3D-printed prototype was made in order to test the new
dimension. It was not possible to ﬁnd all technical drawings for the z-stage to
theoretically deﬁning the dimension, so the new hinge was made by measuring on
the machine. When the right length was found this was ordered in the toolshop.
The technical drawing for the new hinge can be seen in appendix A.2. The 3D-
printed hinge was used to test the new compensation for the brass hinge while the
new part was manufactured in the toolshop.
(a) Oﬀ-center buildplate.
(b) 3D printed hinge.
Figure 21: Oﬀ-centre buildplate.
Examining the ﬁrst prints it was seen that the force needed to separate the part
form vat window was so high that the z-stage bended the pins/insert-plate. There-
fore, the insert-plate got four holes and the vat got four threaded holed to assemble
the vat tightly with bolts. This can be seen in Figure 22 b and Technical drawing
can be seen in appendix A.3. When the vat and insertion plate was ﬁnished in the
toolshop the new vat was fully implemented and ready to be used. The changing
of ﬁlm can now be done within a few minutes and the membrane will be totally
ﬂat.
(a) Insertion plate and lower vat assembled
with pins into bushing.
(b) Insertion plate and lower vat assembled
with four holes with threads.
Figure 22: Exploded view of inserting plate and vat.
22
==PAGE:29==
6
Design
Based of the system analysis (2.3) and the selection of improvements (2.4) a pro-
jector mount(6.1), and motor mounts(6.4), and ﬁlter holder(6.5) had to be de-
signed. This section will describe the construction and consideration behind these
designs. The controllerbox also had to be designed, but this will be explained in
the same section where the microcontroller is conﬁgured(7.1). The implementa-
tion of endstop in the ﬁrmware will be presented in (7.1) and the developed focus
program i (8.4).
6.1
Projector mount
This new projector mount which will be developed has some requirements. These
will be listed here:
• Height should easily be adjusted
• The plane and height should be adjusted independently
• Position of projector statically deﬁned
• Projector should not tilt
• It should be possible to change to another lens
• Stiﬀconstruction
Regarding height adjusting it does not seem like both adjusting height and fasten-
ing with bolts is a good idea. A spindle can adjust height well and be tightened
afterwards. Adjusting height can be done manually or motorized. A spindle can
not hold the whole projector by itself. Some linear guidance of the projector is
necessary in order to level the projector vertically with high accuracy. The pitch
of a spindle acts like a gear so small adjustments of a spindle will only move the
projector minimally. It was decided to make it motorized in order to minimize the
work of adjusting the spindle. A stepper motor can be controlled pretty precise
with 200 steps per. revolution and 16 micro steps.
The principle of having three micrometer screws to control the plane between
two aluminium plates seem to function well. Very intuitively adjustments can be
made. The three micrometer screws are creating a threesome (see Figure 23). The
screw will make a rotation around the opposing side of the threesome. This placing
should remain but this time statically constrained.
23
==PAGE:30==
x
xy
x
xy
xy
xy
x
x
xy
xy
xy
xy
x
x
x
Figure 23: The projector and micrometerscrews called x, y and xy. The respective
corresponding color show the axis of rotation when screw is adjusted.
In order to make it statically constrained a kinematic mount should be made.
A kinematic mount is very good to ensure the same position for static objects
with high accuracy and the possibility of adjusting the plane. The principle of a
kinematic mount is to have a sphere on each micrometer. If these three spheres are
constrained in exactly six degrees of freedom it will be statically deﬁned. A cone
will constrain 3 degrees of freedom, a V-groove will constrain another 2 degrees
,and ﬁnally a ﬂat surface will constrain the last degree of freedom. A sketch of
this can be seen in Figure 24. It is important that the grove is pointing against
the cone. Otherwise, adjusting the screw at the V-groove will result in a vertical
rotation around the point of the cone. While the V-groove points against the cone
any adjustment will only tilt around the green line.
xy
xy
xy
xy
xy
xy
xy
Cone
V-groove
Flat surface
Figure 24: The kinematic mount has three ﬁxtures for the balls. A cone, V-groove
and a ﬂat surface.
The new projector mount must not let the projector tilt like the current mount
does. If the opposing corner to the cone, with no micrometer screw, is touched
the projector will tilt around the blue line and lift the screw from the cone. This
can be prevented by holding the two aluminium plates together with a spring in
the corner next to the cone ﬁxture.
In order to fulﬁl the requirement of being able to change lens’s while not disas-
sembling the projector from the mount, two solutions are found. The ﬁrst solution
24
==PAGE:31==
is to have a long vertical movement so the projector is lowered enough for the lens
to get out. The second option is to still have some vertical movement, but also
some horizontal pullout movement like a drawer. The pullout seems like the most
convenient in order to change lens, however, you need to make a more complex
design to ensure the same position of the projector and the center of gravity for
the platform changes. When the projector is pulled out the DLP-platform must
not tilt over. Based on this it is decided to make the long vertical movement in
order to change lens. This will be more simple and will provide higher precision
in the positioning of the projector. If the projector is lowered enough it does not
seem to be a problem to work under the platform. In addition, the lens should
not be changed very often. To conclude it is decided that precision and simpler
design is weighed higher than easy change of the lens, so ﬁrst solution is chosen.
All of the previous thoughts and decisions has been put into the following presented
design. Generally the skeleton is based of the Bosch Rexroth aluminium proﬁles
40 mm × 40 mm. This will keep the platform ﬂexible for future projects and
they are very stiﬀ. In Figure 25 at left hand the skeleton assembly is seen at the
platform. At right hand the skeleton is seen without the platform to clearly see
what is called the skeleton of projector mount. The two short horizontal proﬁles
can be adjusted in height which deﬁnes the range. This set-up has a long range
so the projector can be lowered for lens change.
Figure 25: On the left a CAD representation of the DLP with the new skeleton.
To the right the skeleton is seen alone.
6.2
Projector mounting
The projector mounting will include the kinematic mount and the parts holding
the ballnut and the linear bearing. This can be seen in Figure 26. The Mounting
plate
1○is what the projector is mounted to.
It has three threaded holes for
some adapters
7○to the micrometer screws
8○.
The projector frame
2○has
25
==PAGE:32==
the kinematic ﬁxtures, the cone, the V-groove, and the ﬂat surface where the
micrometer screw with ball-end stands. These ﬁxtures can be seen in Figure 27
a-c where the manufactured part is shown. All three ﬁxtures are leveled so that
all the balls will have same height. Figure 27 d shows the two springs which pulls
the two plates together. Each spring has two eyes in which the two bolts tie the
two alu plates together (see Figure 27 d). The projector frame is supported by the
part called ”support” 3○. The support is assembled to the part called ”support to
bearing” 4○. This works as an adapter for the support to the linear bearing 5○.
The height of this mounting system is carried by a ballscrew. The ballnut 6○of
the screw is connected through the projector frame.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Figure 26: Exploded view of the projector mounting.
1○Mounting plate.
2○Pro-
jector frame.
3○Support.
4○Support to bearing.
5○Linear bearing.
6○Ballnut.
7○Micrometerscrew adapter.
8○Micrometerscrew.
26
==PAGE:33==
(a) Cone
(b) V-groove
(c) Flat surface
(d) Micrometerscrew and two springs
Figure 27: Details of kinematic mount, springs which hold alu-plates together, and
micrometerscrews
6.3
Linear guides
The movement of the projector needs some guidance in order to hold the weight.
In addition to guiding it should be stiﬀso too much angular deﬂection can be
prevented. Some 16 rails of steel and closed linear bearings were available from
an old project and could possible be suﬃcient for the purpose. The play in a
closed bearing is very low, but the rail will be unsupported and can thereby lead
to a higher deﬂection of the rail. Supported rails needs an open bearing which
has more play but the rails is much stiﬀer. Therefore, if the unsupported rails are
calculated to be suﬃcient these are preferred.
In this section calculations on the 16 rails are made in order to determine if
the unsupported rails are suﬃcient. The boundary condition for this speciﬁc situ-
ation is ﬁxed in both ends. A moment is applied with the distance a somewhere
between both ends. This load can be seen in Figure 28. The moment M0 is the
weight of the projector m which is approximately 10 kg. The center of mass is
assumed to be in the center of the mounting plate at l
2 = 350
2 .
27
==PAGE:34==
mg
M0
L
a
x
l
2
Figure 28: Load set up.
The range of movement for the projector L is 450 mm. It is assumed that the both
ends of the rail is ﬁxed. The deﬂection as function of x is given by the following
two equations on each side of the load point a[19]:
u (x) = −1
6EI
 3M1x2 −R1x3
for x < a
(6.1)
u (x) = −
1
6EI ((M0 −M1) · (3x2 −6Lx + 3L2) −R1 (3L2x −x3 −2L3)) for x ≥a
(6.2)
The second moments of area for the circular cross section of the two guides is
I = π
4r4 and the modulus E of steel is 210 MPa. The moment M1 is the moment
in the beam at x = 0 and R1 is the reaction force at the same position. These are
described by the following:
R1 = −6M0
L3
 aL −a2
(6.3)
M1 = −M0
L2
 4La −3a2 −L2
(6.4)
An expression of u(x, a) is deduce in order to evaluate all possible scenarios of load
and bending trough the whole rail. All calculations can be seen in Appendix B. A
plot of u(x, a) can be seen in Figure 29. The largest deﬂection which is found to
be 0.043 mm at u(254, 345). This is a minor deﬂection so these guide are going to
be used. As the load is constant this deﬂection will not inﬂuence the distance of
focus while printing.
28
==PAGE:35==
Figure 29: The deﬂection as function of x and placement of moment a. All units
are in in mm.
The linear guides 5○can be seen in Figure 30. The guides are held by the ”rail
holder” 4○. The rail holder is connected to the skeleton through a countersunk
hole to the t-slot nuts. This is highly adjustable. This is optimal for assembling the
linear bearings and guides. By moving the mount back and fourth while tightening
it bolt by bolt it will ensure that the mount will slide perfectly. Two threads is
prepare to fasten the endstops.
Motor
The ball screw has to be powered by a motor. A motor with a worm gear and
another motor with a magnetic brake was considered. The worm gear will auto-
matically brake the rotation of spindle due to the weight of projector. This is built
into this worm gear mechanism. It will simply prevent the spindle to turn the mo-
tor. The motor with brake had the brake natural on which is the best. If any
power failure occurs the brake will turn on and the projector will stay in position
and will not slide down. Turning the brake oﬀ/on will not be done automatically.
Therefore, worm gear would be easier to work with. However, due to delivery time
the motor with worm gear was rejected and the motor with brake was acquired.
This is a Nema 23 stepper 9○in Figure 30 which has a torque T 1.26 Nm and 200
steps. The brake has a torque of 2 Nm. The stepper motor has 16 micro steps and
the spindle has a pitch P of 5 mm/rev. The resolution of the projector movement
(x-axis) is found by the following:
Micro step size =
5 mm
200 steps · 16microsteps
steps
= 1.56
µm
microsteps
(6.5)
A resolution of 1.56
µm
microsteps should be very capable resolution to ﬁnd high level
of focus. In order to ensure that the motor can actually lift the projector the
following calculation was made:
29
==PAGE:36==
m = T2π
Pg = 1.26 Nm · 2π
0.005 m · 10 m
s2
= 158 kg
(6.6)
It was found that it was capable of lifting 158 kg with the current gearing which
is more than suﬃcient as the projector and the mount weights about 10 kg. This
calculation does not take any friction or speed eﬀect loss into account.
Sothe
lift should be expected to be lower but is seems to be suﬃcient. The spindle is
connected and supported by a bearing. The bearing has a tight ﬁt to the bearing
holder 6○. The bearing holder has a ﬂange so the weight of the spindle will not
push the bearing out but keep it in place. The motor is held by the motor holder
8○which is designed after the Nema standard. Both bearing holder and motor
holder is connected to the Rexroth T-slot system. A coupling connects the motor
shaft to the spindle to even out any miss alignment.
1
2
3
6
4
5
9
13
11
8
7
10
12
Figure 30: Skeleton with motion system. The linear guides and ballscrew is as-
sembled.
1○Leg 510 mm.
2○Leg 745 mm.
3○Leg 415 mm.
4○Rail holder.
5○Linear guides. 6○Bearing holder. 7○Bearing.
8○Motor holder.
9○Nema 23
motor with break. 10
○Coupling. 11
○Ballscrew. 12
○L-bracket. 13
○L-bracket large.
The ﬁnal projector mount can bee seen in Figure 31. It ends up as being a very stiﬀ
construction. The position is statically constained by a kinematic mount which
can’t tilt. The range of motion is long enough in order to change lens. In addition
a shelf for the power supply to the projector and microcontroller has been made.
This is made of a 2 mm bended steel plate and can also be seen to the right in
Figure 31. Endstop has also been implemented for this new axis.
30
==PAGE:37==
Figure 31: The new projector mount.
6.4
Motor mount
It was decided to design motor mounts in a stiﬀer material than 3D-printed plastic.
The motors which is used is a Nema 23. The deign is based of trying to make it
as easy as possible to manufacture. It is made of three parts aluminium parts.
A base and two sides. The base has seven holes. The large hole in the middle is
made for the spindle to go through. The two holes in the ends is to fasten the
motor mount to the DLP. The four other holes is the assemble the H-shaped sides.
The H-shape is making the right distance and space for the motor. As seen in
Figure 32 four bolt is screwed in at the top of the sides. This is how the Nema 23
is mounted to the motor mount. Two motor mount is manufactured as the z-axis
is controlled by two motors.
Figure 32: Motor mount.
31
==PAGE:38==
6.5
Filter holder
The ﬁlter holder is made to hold the ND-ﬁlters, be stackable, and be put on the
lens. The thickness is 1.9 mm and the diameter is 50.8 mm. In Figure 33 the
crossection of two stacked ﬁlter holders can be seen.
The dimension 51 and
2.30 leaves space for the ND-ﬁlter. The lens has an external diameter of 50.0 mm
and internal diameter of 46 mm. The ﬁlter holder uses the external dimensions
as ﬁxture in order to not block any of the projected picture. The dimension of
50.2 mm is where the lens ﬁt.
 
51 
 2,30 
 
50,20 
Figure 33: Stacked ﬁlter holders.
32
==PAGE:39==
7
Electronics and software
7.1
Conﬁguring micrcontroller
As a new axis has to be implemented and the current software on the Rev. B
microcontroller was no where to be found, it was decided to start all over. It
was decided to change to the Arduino mega with a Ramps board 1.4 with marlin
ﬁrmware. The Ramps board is a shield for Arduino mega with stepper drivers and
connectors for endstops, LCD-screen and fans. The connections made for the new
electronics set-up can be seen in Figure 34 The ﬁrmware which has been used is
the Marlin 1.1.6. It has a conﬁguration ﬁle (Configuration.h) where the most
common conﬁgurations is conﬁgured.
E0
Y
Z
D9
D10
D8
E1
X
x=0
x =325
z=0
LCD-display
x-axis stepper
with brake
z-axis stepper
Fan
z-axis stepper
Figure 34: The schematic and wiring of the ramps board. Stepper motors, brakes,
a fan, endstops and a LCD-display with a controller dial is connected to the board.
A LCD-display with a dial is connected to the Ramps board. In the marlin soft-
ware an user interface for a 3D-printer is included. So the display can control the
connected motors with the dial.
The stepper motor with brake are controlling the height of motor is connected
to the x-axis. The brake is connected to port D9. This is supposed to be used
for controlling a fan. This port can digitally controlled from a fan at valued from
0 to 255. So when the fan speed is set to 255, 12 V sent to the electromagnet
and the brake is oﬀ. So the brake is turned on and of by adjusting the fan speed.
33
==PAGE:40==
The x-axis has two endstops at x=0 and x=325. It has two endstops since when
the controller is turned oﬀit forgets the position and sets its current position 0.
Then it trust that it can move 325 mm up which it can’t. The endstop will se-
curely stop it before it will move too far. The axis has to be homed before the
absolute position can be set. When it is homed a soft endstop is also set at 325 mm.
The movement of the buildplate is set to be the z-axis because the ramps board is
prepared to have two stepper motors because this is common on some 3D-printers.
This is also the standerd to have the z-axis as build direction[6]. While the build-
plate has to be calibrated every time it makes no sense to have an endstop in
the negative direction. An endstop should be a safe position for the printer to go
to and this is not since the level calibration needs to go lower than what is safe
(The buildplate is lose when it is calibrated and therefore no damage is done.).
Therefore only one endstop is put on the top of the z-axis. This is where zero is
set. A software end stop is made at 67 mm as a safety limit but will hopefully
never to be reached.
A fan to cool the microcontroller is connected to two pins. These two pins is
directly connected to the power input with 12 V. Thus this fan will always be
on when the microcontroller has power. This are perfect so the microcontroller
always are cooled.
Basicly this was all the setting which was conﬁgured in the marlin Configura-
tion.h-ﬁle. But the homing was working a bit weird. The homing of the z-axis
was working as expected but the x was a bit weird when it was homed. When the
x-axis was homed on the controller box ﬁrst the z-axis moved 5 mm and then the
x-axis was homed. After investigating this it was discovered that this is some kind
of part avoidance for a FDM printer. Then the hot end will move upwards from the
printed part to avoid bumping into the part. There after it should be safe to home
the x-axis. To avoid this behaviour this should be suppressed. It would be very un-
desirable eg. the buildplate was just leveled and then for any reason the projector
needed to be homed and the the buildplate would be pushed down against the vat-
window. To In the marlin conﬁguration ﬁle ”# define Z CLEARANCE
BETWEEN
PROBES 0 // Z Clearance between probe points” was set to 0 instead of 5.
This solved to movement 5 mm on the z-axis before homing on the x-axis.
A box to enclose the microcontroller and hold to LCD-display has been designed.
This box is called the controller box. This is 3D-printed in two parts. The ports
for the Arduino and a Ramps board has cut outs. A hole for the fan is made and
a grid for the air ﬂow. The microcontroller, LCD-display, and fan is all fastened
by screws. Threads which is used is some cylindrical brass parts made for ther-
moﬁtting to 3D-printed parts. When these are heated up they can be pressed into
position and when it cool down they stay in position.
The overhang is printed by printing the hole but with a 0.6 mm clearance. When
the part was ﬁnish the hole support could be pressed out. The ﬁnish controller
box can be seen in Figure 35 and a detailed view can be seen in appendix subsec-
tion A.8. The safety stop can also be seen. This cuts the power if pressed. By using
the Ramps board with LCD-display the buildplate calibration has been easier to
34
==PAGE:41==
perform. The user interface can move the motors. Therefore the buildplate can be
calibrated without sending any g-code to the microcontroller but instead turning
on the dial. This is a great improvement due to user friendliness.
Figure 35: The new controllerbox with LCD-display and controller dial.
Calibrating of the axis
All axis have a value for the number of steps per millimetre in the marlin ﬁrmware.
Theoretically this can be found by the following equation:
steps per mm = steps · microsteps
P
(7.1)
The stepper-motors has 200 steps
rev and stepper drivers can modulate 16 micro steps.
The pitch of the x-axis is 5 mm and the z-axis is 2 mm. Steps per mm can be
seen in Table 4.
Table 4: Steps per mm. The precision of the axis reciprocal to the steps per mm.
x-axis
z-axis
Pitch P
5
2
Steps per mm
640
1600
Precision [µm/step]
1.56
0.63
SD
0.017
0.033
Nominal [mm]
200
60
Mean [mm]
199.988
59.992
This value has to be validated. If these are not correctly calibrated the z-axis
will have another layer thickness. To measure distance on the DLP axes a long
calliper has been used. The calliper used is a dial calliper and can be seen in
Figure 36. This calliper has a lower error than regular Vernier callipers. The Long
dial calliper has an error at 0.02 mm.
35
==PAGE:42==
Figure 36: Long calliper. Precision at 0.02 mm.
A movement and measurement of the axis has been repeated 10 times. The result
can be seen in Figure 37. The distribution of repetition of the x-axis seems to be
normal distributed. The tendency is not clearly seen on the z-axis. The standard
deviation of the x-axis (seen in Table 4) is also a bit better than the z-axis but
both shows very high repetition.
1 9 9 , 9 6
1 9 9 , 9 8
2 0 0 , 0 0
2 0 0 , 0 2
0
1
2
3
4
5
 
 
C o u n t
(a) Movement of 200 mm on the x-axis
5 9 , 9 6
5 9 , 9 8
6 0 , 0 0
6 0 , 0 2
6 0 , 0 6
0
1
2
3
4
5
 
 
C o u n t
(b) Movement of 60 mm on the z-axis
Figure 37: Repetition of movement.
7.2
Improved initialization of projector
To turn on the projector and initiate the i2c cmd.exe software is as default a
bit intricately. This section will describe why the initiation is a bit arduous. A
new startup.bat ﬁle is made in order to improve the initiation. There are two
procedure to initiate the projector and is described by the following:
1. Manually type in to Command Prompt prompt
• Open Command Prompt
• Set directory by type in cc and followed by the path to the folder which
contains the i2c cmd.exe ﬁle.
• Thereafter the three lines of code should step by step be sent into Com-
mand Prompt:
i2c_cmd.exe init hdmi
i2c_cmd.exe upload test_static.txt 0
i2c_cmd.exe start
36
==PAGE:43==
• Now the projector is initiated and project light. The amplitude can be
set to 0 by the i2c cmd.exe setamplitude 0 command.
2. Semi atomized turn on
• Open startup.bat ﬁle which automatic runs the following three com-
mands.
Original startup.bat ﬁle:
i2c_cmd.exe init hdmi
i2c_cmd.exe upload test_static.txt 0
i2c_cmd.exe start
pause
• Then the projector is initiated. The pause command leaves the window,
which executed the commands, open. This is nice so the user can see
if the script worked as expected. The window closes when any key is
pressed.
• Because the window did close Commando Prompt should be opened
and directory should be set by cc and the path.
• The projector amplitude can be set to 0 by i2c cmd.exe setamplitude
0.
The ﬁrst way is a arduous way of initiate the projector since the directory has to
be set and some of the commands takes some time before the next command can
be sent. The automation in the second way is nice but a new window has to be
opened and the path still has to be set afterwards.
The projector comes with the startup.bat-ﬁle as shown above. A .bat-ﬁle is
a script ﬁle which send a series of commands to be executed. So by adding a few
line into the script it can improve the user friendliness of the initialization.
New startup.bat ﬁle:
i2c_cmd.exe init hdmi
i2c_cmd.exe upload test_static.txt 0
i2c_cmd.exe start
i2c_cmd.exe setamplitude 0
pause
start cmd
After the ﬁrst three i2c cmd.exe commands the amplitude is set to 0. This en-
sures that if the CW is not open the projector will not radiate any UV-light and
cure any of the resin. CW has a build in function which projects a fully black
image even though CW has no control over intensity. Then the pause is set since
it is still nice to see if the script was executed correct. When any key is pressed
the script continues. The start cmd will open a new command window. The
directory from the .bat script is remembered and then the script window closes.
By using the new startup.bat ﬁle the projector is initiated automatic, amp-
litude set to 0 and a command window will still be open with the directory of
37
==PAGE:44==
the i2c cmd.exe program. This is clearly an improvement of the initiation of the
projector. In order to run the printer only one command is necessary to be re-
membered instead of four.
38
==PAGE:45==
8
Focus
By implementing the new projector mount the focus has to be set and documented.
This will be done by Matlab program developed for this purpose. The principle
is based on the fact that when the projected area is smallest, is where focus of
projector is[20, 21]. But how can a beam be measured while this is not tangibly?
A method of how the smallest waist w0 of the beam is deﬁned will be described in
this section.
As the current platform there is no proper way to prove that the plane of fo-
cus interact with the plane of the resin between buildplate and window (build
surface). How the focus has been calibrated until now is placing a piece of white
paper upon the window. The paper makes the UV-light scatter and thereby visible
for the human eye. By projecting a picture with tiny details to the paper it can
be evaluated if it is in focus visually. This is not easy since the projected ﬁeld
is very tiny and the human eye can get damage to look directly at the UV-light.
Therefore it should be prevented. So another way to properly validate the focus
is necessary.
Electromagnetic waves has ideally Gaussian distribution. In Figure 38 the up-
per image show a Gaussian beam transverse intensity distribution. The dashed
line shows the circumference that is decided to be the beam. The lower image Fig-
ure 38 shows the intensity of the same beam across the upper image. The dashed
line is similarly showing the limits of what is the beam. As it is seen the beam
does not stop at the limit but continuous.
Figure 38: On top, a Gaussian beam transverse intensity distribution. The bottom
shows a plot of the intensity of the beam.
To set the limit there is a couple of way to set the limit of the beam waist w0.
The beam waist is the radius of the beam and is more commonly used than beam
39
==PAGE:46==
diameter. Two beam waist deﬁnitions will be pressented here. The ”Full Width at
Half Maximum width (FWHM) and the ”1/e2” width[20, 21, 22, 23]. The FWHM
set the limit to every intensity above 50 % of the maximum intensity Imax. In
Figure 39 this is show cased.
IFWHM limit = Imax · 1
2
(8.1)
The 1/e2 width deﬁnition include 86,5 % of the beam intensity of a prefetly Gaus-
sian beam[21, 22]. The limit can in Figure 39 be seen.
I1/e2 limit = Imax · 1
e2
(8.2)
Equation 8.1 and 8.2 can be used as a threshold for image processing. So everything
below Ilimit will be sorted away.
Beam waist w
0
0.5
1
Intensity I [ W
m2 ]
FWHW
1
e2
Figure 39: Plot of the intensity of a Gaussian beam with two width deﬁnitions.
The FWHM width and the 1/e2 width.
As earlier mentioned focus is where the smallest diameter with the smallest beam
waist w0. The schematic of a Gaussian beam near focus can be seen in Figure 40.
In the range of b is deﬁned as focus. b is equal to two Rayleigh lengths R.
w(x)
√
2w0
w0
b
R
x
Figure 40: The gaussian beam near focus.
The projected image form the projector is not a Gaussian beam since the DMD
mask the UV beam. The principle of ﬁnding the smallest area with a threshold
is assumed to apply to the DLP projector. This is breiﬂy tested in the following
initial test.
40
==PAGE:47==
8.1
Initial focus test
As an initial test if the CMOS from the webcam C920 can be used to ﬁnd focus
four dots was projected upon the CMOS. This little experiment was made on the
top down DLP. This should not make any diﬀerence and is only done for proof of
concept. By adjusting the distance of the CMOS to the projector with the stepper
it was experienced that it was clearly seen that the dots got smaller and bigger in
some certain areas like a Gaussian beam proﬁle. The projected image can be seen
in Figure 41 a.
The four single pixels is then captured with the Complimentary Metal-Oxide-
-Semiconductor (CMOS) in order to show the variation of distance. Figure 41 b
is very much out of focus. Figure 41 d is the best possible focus found. It is
clearly seen that the diameter of captured image is smallest when it is in focus.
This shows that image processing can be used to ﬁnd the smallest beam waist and
thereby the focus by image processing.
(a) Four projected pixels (1 x 1).
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 41: Shows the test if focus is distinguishable with CMOS.
It seems like there is a lot of aliasing. These pictures was captured before the
custom setting seen in Figure 44 was deﬁned which reduced most of this aliasing.
If no optics is in front of the CMOS and the signal from the sensor is clear and in
focus the CMOS lays in the plane of focus. The Logitech C920 webcam is being
used for experiments and this uses the RGB-color model[16]. This has a CMOS
sensor with a resolution of 1920 × 1080 (2 M-pixel) and is connected to a computer
with an USB cable. The webcam casing and optics are removed. The webcam
is thereby reduced to CMOS sitting on a printed circuit board (PCB). The PCB
41
==PAGE:48==
with CMOS can be seen in Figure 42. In order to use this to measure anything
with this CMOS, this needs to be hold in a ﬁxed position at the image acquisition.
Figure 42: Shows the CMOS on the PCB
8.2
CMOS holder
In order to hold the CMOS for capturing the projected image, a CMOS holder has
been designed. A large ﬂat surface is the base standing on the vat window Two
holes near the CMOS was decided to be used as assembly holes. Two cylinders
are extrude from base to the PCB holes. The CMOS has also got an four sided
box to shield any other light than the UV emitted from projector. A 3D printed
prototype has been produced in order to test the design. This can be seen to the
left in Figure 43.
Figure 43: To the left CMOS mounted to the the prototype. To the right the high
precision CMOS holder in aluminium can be seen.
The oﬀsetting was measured by using a calliper. From base to CMOS could thereby
be measured. A piece of paper was placed upon the CMOS thus the measuring
aggregate could potentially scratch the sensor. The thickness of the paper was
there after added to the measured oﬀset. While knowing the oﬀsetting the CMOS
could then be used to deﬁne focus and thereafter move the projector the found oﬀ-
set down in order to set correct focus for printing. Oﬀset was found to be 12.3 mm.
After using the prototype it was decided to manufacture a high precision ver-
sion of this. The the large ”ﬂat” surface of the 3D-printed part wasn’t that ﬂat as
a machined part. Some of the features were modiﬁed due to design for manufac-
ture (DFM). The CMOS holder manufactured in the toolshop can be seen to the
42
==PAGE:49==
right in Figure 43. Ideally this should be enclosed in order to protect the PCB
from any circuits. But due to the limited space in the vat this was not an option.
8.3
CMOS setting
Through image processing in Matlab the CMOS sensor will be capable to test
intensity and deﬁne focus. The setting can be set in Logitech Gaming software
(LGS). Unfortunately the webcam does not remember the setting when unplugged.
So settings has to be set in LGS every time the webcam is plugged in.
In order to acquire comparable images a custom setting has been made. This
is necessary because the image acquisition deﬁnes the quality of the image used
in the image processing[16]. The LGS has free hand sliders which makes it very
diﬃcult to set settings at the same value except if it is the default, all the way to
the left or to the right.
This custom setting can be seen in Figure 44. The most important settings will
be described by the following. All auto settings is turned oﬀ. The ”Backlight
Compensation” is also turned oﬀsince this probably also has some kind of auto-
mation involved. This is done because all automation settings will slightly change
the image when the light or any other condition changes. The brightness is set
default at 50 %. Intuitively this should be reduced due to the bright light from
projector. But this setting will just lower or increase all pixels values and thereby
pixel might get burned out with out the pixel value has full 255 or 0 value. A pixel
value 240 could potentially be the max value then. So by adjusting the brightness
will reduce the information of the captured image.
When pixel burn out means that any of the three channels RGB in the CMOS
has a value of 255. This means that if even more light is observed by the CMOS
this change will still have the value a 255. This is a loss of information and this is
called burned out. The same regards to the value of 0 and if the light is reduced
even more.
To get an image with as little noise as possible the gain is set to 0 %.
Gain
is like ISO also brightening the picture but introduce noise. The projector is pro-
jecting a very bright image compared to the dynamic range of the CMOS so the
gain should deﬁnitely be set to 0 %. The exposure has to be set free hand for
the best image which is a bit diﬃcult to set. This is unfortunate since this ad-
justment might not be the same every time. Therefore the exposure is set to 0 %
even though it might not be the best setting (see Figure 44 b). The reason why
exposure is set to 0 % will be discussed in section 8.3.
43
==PAGE:50==
(a) Brightness: 0 %, Contrast: 50 %, Satur-
ation: 50 %, Sharpness: 50 %, White Bal-
ance: 50 % (Auto oﬀ), Backlight Compens-
ation: 0 %, Gain: 0 % (Auto oﬀ), NTSC
60Hz.
(b) Pan: 50 %, Tilt: 50 %, Zoom: 0 %,
Exposure: 0 %, Focus: 50 %, Low Light
Compensation oﬀ.
Figure 44: Shows the custom setting in LGS.
Projector intensity program
In order to run the focus program which has been developed it is necessary to test
if the projector is having an constant intensity as time goes. This is important as
the the focus program will be based on intensity measurements. If the intensity
of the projector changes the value of the pixel will also change. Thereby it might
get diﬃcult to ﬁnd a proper threshold value in order to deﬁne the size of projec-
ted geometry. This would be ideal if the intensity was constant since no further
consideration about starting a print is necessary. A
a
b
c
I
t
I
t
I
t
Figure 45: Shows the three hypothesis for the intensity as the projector is turned
on. a)Decreasing and stabilises. b) Increasing and stabilizing. c) Constant intens-
ity
To measure the intensity the CMOS-chip will be used. This is not calibrated to
any unit of intensity and therefore an unitless experiment. It will be relative as
each pixel has values from 0 to 255. This is only done to see how the tendencies
progresses which this should be capable of. In order to be prepared for increase
in intensity the pixel value of the must not be too high. If the value increases to
255 the track of the tendency will get lost as the pixel is burned out. The only
information this gives is that the intensity is over a certain level. Therefore it
is tested before the start of the experiment what the set-value should be. This
applies to all three color channel red, green and blue.
44
==PAGE:51==
The placement of the projector was adjusted with controllerbox with the live image
as feedback till the best focus was found. The right combination of set-value and
setting in LGS-software was a very diﬃcult task since LGS only have free hand
sliders. To help ﬁnding an usable setting the the Mac utility application ”Digital
Color Meter” was used. This program shows the RGB value at the point of cursor
seen in Figure 46. For windows the program Pixie can be used as well. No great
setting has been found. Either the blue channel burned out or the setting is not
repetitively. At some point a good setting has been found which what is shown in
the Digital Color Meter window in Figure 46. The values of all three channels are
relative stable and not burned out. But this was not possible to ﬁnd this setting
again. Therefore it was decided to set the exposure at 0 % for repeatability of
setting.
Figure 46: At left an image with god settings and a set-value at 100. All values
in the Digital Color Meter seen at the right is not bured out. The pixel which is
measure is at the cursor pointer maked with a square around it.
Thereafter a set-value has to be deﬁned. As the blue channel is burned out at an
exposure at 0 % the blue channel is given up to be used for any thing. This is not
fully understood why the blue channel is burned out at an exposure at 0 % while
this is not at 50 %. Then the set-value can with greater freedom be deﬁned. This
set-value is therefore set at 230 in order to get comparable warm-up time.
The Matlab program will now be explained. The used code can be seen in ap-
pendix C.2 page 100. First of all the frames per minute is deﬁned to 2 frames
per minute. and the duration of the experiment is set to 30 min. The projector
projects an image with a rate of 30 frames per second. In order to prevent aliasing
100 images is taken and then mean image is made. This is done with a Matlab
function made for this purpose and can be seen in subsection C.1. This should be
enough to even out aliasing and not inﬂuence the result. The average value of red,
green, and blue channel is calculated and is seen as the intensity. The measured
data and calculated is plotted while running the program so the tendencies can be
followed. The timing of the program is held by sending tic just before to main
loop starts. In the end of the loop an empty while-loop waiting for the toc to
reach the desired time. The toc and all other values is saved to a global data
matrix so data can be saved. In order to cool down the projector, it was turned
oﬀfor one hour before the intensity program was executed. The result can be seen
in Figure 47.
45
==PAGE:52==
The computer used for this program was apparently running another process while
running the intensity program so it could not keep up with the timing of the frames
per minutes. The computer was to slow to process the data so the timing was shif-
ted.
This can be seen as the spacing of the ﬁrst measurements have a longer
distance between the points than the points in the end. After approximately 35
min the other process was stopped and the intensity program began running faster.
Because the toc-value was saved the speciﬁc intensity at the correct time could be
plotted with out inﬂuencing the result. The experiment did just have a constant
frame rate and the experiment was running longer than intended.
0
10
20
30
40
Time [min]
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
Intensity [-]
Intensity(t)
0
10
20
30
40
Time [min]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
SD
Standard deviation
Figure 47: The intensity as function of time and the SD of the measurements.
It is seen that the intensity of the green and red channel decrease by time. So the
intensity is not constant. Hypothesis b Figure 45 was the case. As the intensity
changes it is recommended to wait 10 minutes before starting a print. If the pro-
jector is turned on as the ﬁrst the projector can warm up wile preparing the rest
of the platform. The standard deviation for the green in pretty high. This is is
due the the green signal is is low and is not stable. The red is more stable and
therefore a lower SD. The SD for the blue channel is low due to burned out pixels.
8.4
Focus program
A focus program has been develope during the work of this thesis. The program
will capture an image of a projected circle. The the program evaluate how large
area is exposed. Then the program sends G-code to the microcontroller to move
the projector mount (x-axis). Thereafter another image is capured and evaluated.
The code of the program can be seen in appendix C.3 page 103 The program
works by having serial communication with the arduino and an image from the
webcam. The webcam stream is opened and there the serial communication is
opened by this command open(serial(’/dev/cu.usbmodem1421’, ’BaudRate’,
115200));. Then a pause of 15 seconds is made in order to ensure the webcam and
serial port is opened. When the program is running the user is prompted to tell
the position of the projector. This is used to keep track of absolute position in the
program and set the starting point. The range of beam proﬁling and resolution is
46
==PAGE:53==
also set. By having these informations a vector is created of all points in absolute
coordinates. This vector has the route of where focus is going to be evaluated.
Ideally a beam width deﬁnition should be used but this was not possible due to
the limitations of the CMOS. Therefore a static threshold at 90 was chosen. The
main for loop can be described by the following seudo code:
define position
define resolution
define range
for
Turn off brake
Move projector to next absolute coordinate
Turn on brake
Take 100 images and return a mean image
Threshold is applied
Counting pixels which has a value over threshold
Save position and number of pixels
end
The brake is turned oﬀin order to move the x-axis. When projector is moved
to desired absolute coordinate the brake is turned on again. Then 100 images is
captured and a mean picture is returned in order to reduce aliasing. For this ex-
periment the custom setting was used but the exposure was at approximately 5 %.
The blue channel at this setting was chosen to be the value the beam width/area
should be based on. The threshold is applied by using the imquantize(img b,90)
which has the blue image and threshold as input. The output is an image where all
pixels with a blue value below the threshold of 90 will get 1 as value and everything
above 90 will get 2. Then the number of pixels with the value of 2 is counted. This
number of pixels with a blue channel value over 90 is some kind of unit less area.
If this area is assumed to be a circle the area this can be translated into beam
width by r =
q
A
π . This will give a graph like Figure 40 shaped like a Gaussian
beam near focus. Because this is unitless area this is not translated into beam
width. When the main loop is done running the serial port is closed. If it is not
closed the Matlab and microcontroller has to be restarted in order to connect again.
The Matlab focus program was executed with a resolution of 10 µm. The pro-
jected test image was a circle with a diameter of 28 projected pixels. The number
of capture pixels by the CMOS can be seen in Figure 48. The red data points is
selected to be in the non linear range. A regression on these data points is made.
The data points is assumed to have the shape of a second order polynomial and
thereby the function is found to be the following:
focus (x) 45.2 · 103 · x2 −28.12 · 106 · x + 4.394 · 109
(8.3)
The peak of the function is found to be at 311.73 mm.
The focus (311.73)=
25,975 pixels. By looking in the data series the area is doubled from 25,975 to
51,950 at x=310.42 and x=313.05. This result theoretically in a range of focus b
at 2,63 mm and a Rayleigh length R of 1,32 mm. But this range should not be
47
==PAGE:54==
seen as the range where good quality prints is manufactured. The experience from
doing print tells that the quality of prints is very sensitive the the focus.
311
311.5
312
312.5
Position x-axis [mm]
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
Area [number of pixel]
#104
Data points
Selected data points
Regression
Figure 48: Data point from the Matlab focus program with a resolution of 10 µm.
A regression is made of the red points. focus(x) = 45224.5564 · x2 −28195868.4 ·
x + 4394800950
It can be concluded that the shape found from the data points in the Matlab
focus program has great similarities to the Gaussian beam near focus as seen in
Figure 39. The point of focus could be found from these data points captured
by the CMOS. This was done by ﬁnding the peak of the regression made from
the data of the non linear region. The linear ranges could also be recognized and
the Rayleigh length was found. This method shows how focus can be found and
documented in the pursuit of sharp print quality.
8.5
Evaluation of CMOS
The work done with the CMOS from the C920 webcam has been very intricately
to work with and the result is still not perfect. The webcam dynamic range is too
limited and settings is not repeatable . Before the right oﬀset has been found it
is diﬃcult to conclude if this webcam is good enough to validate the focus by the
live feed from webcam. An automated focus program with a dynamic threshold
based on width deﬁnitions was evaluated not to make any sense. This CMOS is
simply not the right tool.
A C-mount camera has been ordered. C-mount cameras has a ﬂange focal dis-
tance of 17.526 mm. This is an industrial camera so settings should be able to be
set in a proper way generally have a petter image quality. This will hopefully be
very useful for ﬁnding focus in the future.
48
==PAGE:55==
9
Prints quality
9.1
Gecko structure
In order to test the achieved print quality with a earlier study, the bio-inspired
gecko structure from Macarena M´edez Rib´os master thesis was printed[5]. A macro
image can be seen in Figure 49 a and a micro image can be seen in Figure 50. It
is seen that it has great uniformity over the whole area. This is probably due the
the nicely ﬂat tightening of the FEP membrane.
Due to this great uniformity it was decided to measure and compare with earlier
study[5]. To measure microfeatures on the part the Olympus LEXT OLS4100-
SAF in lab 1 building 427 was used. This microsope can be seen in Figure 49 b.
The LEXT is a 3D measuring laser microscope and enables high accuracy meas-
urements with near ”nm resolution”[24]. The speciﬁc type is a Confocal Laser
Scanning Microscopy (CLSM) and it uses optical sectioning to combine the pic-
tures into one 3D ﬁle[25]. The pinhole infront of the CMOS ensures that only the
signal from the laser which is in focus, is registered in each plane. By capturing
what is in focus over several heights a 3D scan can be merged together. The res-
olution in xy-plane is 0.12 µm and 0.01 µm in the z-axis (height). In order to
acquire accurate measurements it is recommended that this microscope has to be
turned on for one hour before any scanning[24].
(a) Macro image of the bio-inspiered sur-
face.
(b) LEXT microscope placed on granite
table in lab 1.
Figure 49: Shows the part and measuring equipment.
49
==PAGE:56==
Figure 50: Merged micro picture captured with the LEXT microscope.
Five measurements in each corner and ﬁve in the center of the part was made.
Some of the tips were broken when it was inspected under the microscope. These
were chosen not to be measured as these defects perhaps occurred due to bad
handling.
A
D
B
E
C
A1
A2 A3
A4 A5
D1
D2
D4 D3
D5
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
E1
E2
E3
E4
E5
Figure 51: The scheme of where measurements were made.
The measured tips were evaluated in SPIP by a particle analysis. The tip height,
tip diameter, and roundness was exported.
The dimension of height htip and
diameter Dtip of the printed part can be seen in Figure 52. The result is presented
in box plots. The ﬁve regions is plotted but also all of them combined in the
orange box plot. This is done in order to get a total overwiev and to compare
with the earlier study[5]. The earlier study was measured with the Alicona so the
captured images will not be the same. The combined box plot has the data of ﬁve
measurements in ﬁve region with nine tips. In total 225 measurements.
50
==PAGE:57==
Dtip
110 µm
100 µm
htip
Figure 52: Dimensions of desired tips geometry.
The results of the measured diameter can be seen in Figure 53 a. The diameter
is much smaller than the desired dimension but variation is small. This smaller
diameter is probably due to undercuring of the part. So this print do not has as
good quality as initially thought. The consistency of micro feature is therefore
probably due to the much more evenly tighten FEP-membrane. Why the part is
so under cured is diﬃcult to tell but it seems like further process study is necessary
in order to control the process.
A
B
C
D
E
C o m
b i n e d
5 0
1 0 0
1 5 0
D i a m
e t e r  [ µ m
]
 R e g i o n  d a t a
 C o m
b i n e d  d a t a
1 1 0
(a) Diameter of tips.
(b) [5]
Figure 53: Box plot of the diameter of tips compared to earlier study.
Tip height can be seen in Figure 54. The measured height seems to be a pit low
compared to the desired dimension. A hypothesis was made that the undercuring
had an accumulative eﬀect on the micro details which resulted in these reduced
heights. However the variation shows great results. The variation is much smaller
than the earlier study and this is due to the even membrane.
A
B
C
D
E
C o m
b i n e d
0
5 0
1 0 0
1 5 0
H e i g h t  t i p s  [ µ m
]
 R e g i o n  d a t a
 C o m
b i n e d  d a t a
1 0 0
(a) Height of tips.
(b) [5]
Figure 54: Box plot of the height of tips compared to earlier study.
51
==PAGE:58==
The roundness of the tips can be seen in Figure 55. As discovered in [5] tips had the
various diameters of 14 or 15. With their respective roundness of 0.8561 and 0.9015
these values is marked on the bar plot. This actually have very comparable result
to earlier study. It seems like the tightening of the membrane do not inﬂuence the
roundness. However the found roundness has more outliers than earlier study. As
it is not known either the radius is 14 or 15 pixels better result of roundness can
not be expected.
A
B
C
D
E
C o m
b i n e d
0 . 5
1 . 0
R o u n d n e s s  [ - ]
 R e g i o n  d a t a
 C o m
b i n e d  d a t a
0 . 9 0 1 5
0 . 9 0 1 5
0 . 8 5 6 1
(a) Roundness of tips.
(b) [5]
Figure 55: Box plot of the roundness of tips compared to earlier study.
Instead of using a slicer it makes much better sense to print with control of every
pixel. A scrip in the software Processing has been initiated. Processing can send a
picture to a screen and send G-code via serial communication to a microcontroller.
So this should be capable of project an image to be cured in the vat and control
the height of buildplate. The functionality of the script was displaying circles and
squares with various sizes. This geometry was repeated in x and y. In x the
shapes had diﬀerent values on the grey scale. This should modulate the intensity
of the projected UV-light. In the y direction the geometry was shown for diﬀerent
time. So this program would be very capable of doing process study of time and
intensity while having full control over every pixel. The initial code can be seen in
Appendix E. To control projection on pixel level it will eliminate uncertainties as
how the slicer translate a certain geometry. E.g. the tip diameter being printed
as 14 and 15 pixels.
Figure 56: Screen shot of the pixel controlling screen output. Circles and squared
are replicated in various sizes at various grey scales.
52
==PAGE:59==
This Processing script was not ﬁnished due to some programming complexities
and priority was placed elsewhere. But the thought behind the reason of having
such control over the prints has some valuable points which should be considered
to be developed further in the future.
In the attempt to measure pixels on the top of the tips it was realised that this
part did not have as distinguishable pixels as seen in earlier work. See Figure 3
where pixel was clearly seen. In Figure 57 a measurement of pixels can be seen. In
order to measure the pixel size two vertical lines has been drawn parallel with pixel
patterns. A horizontal crosssection is made and valleys where the line is shown.
The pixel size is measured to be 6.8 µm in the valleys. This is less than mirror
size. The measurement is only one single measurement at one point. But it is so
close to mirror size so this pattern must be the pixels which is seen.
Figure 57: Pixel measurements in SPIP at tip B1. Upper left window shows the
measurement of one pixel. Upper right shows the whole tip. The lower window
shows the cross sectional curvature where valleys can be seen.
A hypothesis was made that the part printed in this study did have better align-
ment of plane of focus and plane of printed area than the earlier study. Before
the new projector mount designed in this thesis it was very diﬃcult to adjust the
focus well. Maybe the alignment of focus and printed area was not parallel and
therefore these two planes intersected in an area of the part. If two planes are
parallel the will not intersect. However this means that if the plane of focus and
plane of printed area is aligned they have to be very close to each other in order
to get perfect focus. If the two planes is not parallel they will easier intersect and
at least in the intersection perfect focus will appear.
53
==PAGE:60==
9.2
Singe layer
After printing the ﬁrst bioinspirede surface it was not possible to print without the
part deattached from buildplate. The oﬀset of the CMOS was therefore suspected
to be incorrect. So it was decided to investigate and validate the oﬀset. First
the focus was manually found with the CMOS. Thereafter a single layer print
experiment was setup ±0.5 mm the manually found focus in increments of 0.1 mm.
By only placing the lower vat with a microscope glass upon (see Figure 58) and
then put a drop of resin and printing a single layer the focus could be validated.
The last projected image was the last layer of the bioinspired surface. By printing
these single layer prints at various height of the projector, it was assumed that by
looking at the minor circles they could tell where the actual focus was. This could
validate or correct the measured oﬀset of the CMOS. The oﬀset of the microscope
glass was taken into account. The plan was to leave the prints on the microscope
glass for easier handling. This experiment was not successfully because it rolled
together when cleaned. However this did not validate the focus or correct CMOS
oﬀset this needs to be validated in some other way in the future.
(a) Microscope glass upon to lower vat.
(b) Microscope glass with coiled single layer
print.
Figure 58: Experimental setup of single layer experiment.
The problem of losing parts while printing is still present. This is resonated to
be a phenomena occurring when the membrane is too tight. The new method of
tightening the membrane will make it very smooth which improves print quality
but also suppress some of the peeling eﬀect.
9.3
Eiﬀel Tower
The Eiﬀel Tower is a very commonly printed part by SLA and DLP printer. This
is probably due to the complex shape and grid like structure. Therefore it was
decided also to print an Eiﬀel Tower. The Eiﬀel Tower was printed twice but both
times the one leg was broke at the reattachment of the part from the buildplate.
Since this is not a manufacturing error but a post treatment problem one of the
non broken leg will be inspected.
The printed Eiﬀel Tower shows very impressive details. Notice the grid in Fig-
ure 59 a. This grid is present up until second platform of the tower. Over second
54
==PAGE:61==
platform the features is merged together probably due to capillary forces. In Fig-
ure 59 b the minor grid features can be seen. The diameter of the grid is measured
to be less than 100 µm.
(a) Eiﬀel Tower.
(b) Leg of Eiﬀel Tower
Figure 59: Eiﬀel Tower.
9.4
Layer thickness
In order to answer the research question of how to measure print resolution fully
the layer thickness has to be measured. This has been done on the Eiﬀel Tower
with the SPIP measuring tool. In Figure 60 a the layer thickness has been meas-
ured at the base of the tower. By making a cross section the valleys was identiﬁed
and layer thickness was measured to be 18.2 µm. Another measurement has been
performed. This time the layer thickness of the grid was measured to be 16.3 µm.
The measurement can be seen in Figure 60 b. This is two measurements of the
layer thickness. Both result are relatively close to nominal value of 18 µm. These
are measured at diﬀerent place of the part which might has an inﬂuence.
During this section and the previous section measuring have been documented
in order to verify the resolution of the printer. The pixel size and layer thickness
was recognized. In combination with a pixel control of the projector it seems to
be very reasonable to print with single pixel resolution control.
55
==PAGE:62==
(a) Eiﬀel Tower.
(b) Leg of Eiﬀel Tower
Figure 60: Measurements of layer thickness.
56
==PAGE:63==
10
Source of errors and further work
In this section source of error will by discussed. These errors will therefore be of
interest for future work. In the end, suggestions for further work, which are not
related to any source of errors, will be listed.
Light in fume station
While cleaning the part post print the light in the fume station has to be turned
on in order to perform the cleaning. This might result in some resin cured before
the parts was fully cleaned. Therefore it was investigated how to reduce the UV
light by a various solutions.
One approach is to block the UV from the existing ﬂuorescent light tube with the
G13 Socket. A company called durXtreme has the product Lithoprotect which is
a UV-blocking ﬁlm. They sell it in tubes for ﬂuorescent light tubes. An Trans-
mission curve for the Lithoprotect ﬁlm can be seen i Figure 61. This is seen that
less than 0.001 % in the resin curing region will radiate from the ﬂuorescent tube.
This is a quite satisfying solution since it ﬁt into the light tube socket.
Figure 61:
Percentag transmission of various wavelength of the UV-blocking
ﬁlm[26].
Another approach is to use a bulb with no/low UV radiation. E.g. a yellow ﬂuor-
escent light tube. Since the light is yellow has a wavelength (570-590 nm) far away
from FTD absorption (225-415 nm) so this should not cure any resin.
The Sodium-vapor lamp produce light at two peaks at 589.0 nm and 589.6 nm
and can not be distinguished[27]. So this will deﬁnitely not radiate any UV-light.
Light emitting diodes (LED) has a low UV radiation.
LED bulb is currently
also made in the shape of ﬂuorescent light tubes. So these could be inserted into
the current socket.
The documentation from the LED and yellow light bulb suppliers were quite poor.
The Sodium-vapor lamp was still an option but since it has another socket it was
decided to order the UV-blocking tubes. Furthermore the light tubes will blow
57
==PAGE:64==
some day. Then the light tubes can be replaced with regular light tubes without
any special light bulb.
Due to long delivery times, most of the experiments was executed without the
UV ﬁlters. The top of light box was left oﬀin order to get more non UV-light
to see better while working in the laboratory. See Figure 62 for the new lighting
situation in the fume station.
Figure 62: The fume station with UV blocking tubes installed in the fume stations
light box.
FEP ﬁlm
By working with this ﬁlm it is clearly seen that some error could occur with the
ﬁlm. First of all even though the change of ﬁlm has been made much easier than
with the old vat, this is still diﬃcult to lay out perfect. The ﬁlm attracts dust
since the ﬁlm is electrostatic. If any dust is in between ﬁlm and window small air
bobbles is seen. This can be blown away with high pressure air. Another way is to
rinse with 2-Propanol, another either blow dry or wipe with a paper towel. Wiping
with paper towel is not recommenced since scratches is introduced. It was diﬃcult
to distinguish which method was best. The blowing with air is probably the best
way to remove dust. If any air bobbles is present it will be seen in the print. By
putting a bit of liquid in between ﬁlm and window the air bubbles could probably
be removed. This should be investigated in the future. But this will might change
the peeling eﬀect. It is suspected to have some importance.
During the work unfortunately there are diﬀerent types of ﬁlms from diﬀerent
suppliers and diﬀerent thickness’s. This has been out of control due to problems
with ordering systems and switching of supplier. This have probably various creep
properties due to the diﬀerent thickness’s.
Another unknown variable is that it is not known how long the ﬁlm should be
used. The ﬁlm changes optical properties after a certain exposure time. A way to
test this would be to measure the intensity with the CMOS for every 100 printed
layer (400 s). This could perhaps show what the lifetime is and when the ﬁlm
should be changed or if it have any inﬂuence of the measure intensity. Actually a
whole study regarding optical properties and creep of the ﬁlm is recommended to
58
==PAGE:65==
be done so unknown parameters can be eliminated.
Regarding the ﬁlm the peeling in the new vat should be investigate. As the ﬁlm is
tightened until it is smooth it might get to tight so peeling is reduced. This was
suspected as a lot of prints was lost before print was ﬁnished.
Buildplate
The deattachment of buildplate is done by rotating the plate and thereby un-
threading it. Because the plate was submerged into the resin while printing you
can’t remove the buildplate without touching the resin with the gloves. A method
of deattaching the buildplate without touching the resin should be made for safety
reasons. A workﬂow where the gloves don’t touching the resin should be chased
as the aﬀects of contact with the resin is unknown.
Regarding losing the print before print job is done some kind of signal telling
if the part is still connected would be great. If a strain gauge was applied to the
threaded rod for the buildplate this will give a signal relative to the cross section
area of printed part. If the measured force suddenly was deviating it could be a
sign of the part would soon drop or it has been dropped
Focus
Printing with consistent good focus was diﬃcult to achieve. The mounting sys-
tem of the insertion plate is blamed for this. The three micrometer pushing the
mounting plate down to the spring loaded pins was not eﬃcient. The pins started
so the micrometers had to be tightened every time This gave some uncertainties in
height. So it was diﬃcult to set the height of vat the same way every time. This
inconsistent height makes it diﬃcult to print without setting focus every time a
print is started. This is arduous so if the placement could be statically deﬁned
this could be prevented.
In order to ﬁnd focus with the CMOS it had a lot of sources of error. The settings
was diﬃcult to set so a not optimum setting was unfortunate chosen. The dynamic
range was not as wide as it could be wished. The performance will hopefully be
improved when the new C-mount camera is implemented. This could be the right
tool to make the Matlab focus program more advanced. As an example the dy-
namic beam width and a correction of the plane. The new camera has ﬂange focal
distance of 17.525 mm has to be validated or corrected some how.
When print is started it can easily be forgotten to remove the piece of foam which
blocks the UV-light. Instead some mechanical shutter could be implemented. If
the moving mechanism is connected to the microcontroller this could be work to-
gether with the CW. The slicing proﬁle just need a line of code to open when print
is started and to close it again when print job is done. The shutter should also
be adjustable alone by the controllerbox if the focus needs to be calibrated by the
Matlab focus program. This addition will improve the userfriendliness as you will
never forget to remove it again and absolute no UV-light will be projected to the
vat.
59
==PAGE:66==
11
Conclusion and discussion
It can be concluded that during the work of this thesis some great improvements in
order to reach the goal of a high precision micro manufacturing DLP-platform have
been reached. A in depth study of which part system had the greatest importance
of print quality and user friendliness. The focus system and implementation of vat
with peeling membrane are subsytems of major inﬂuence on the process.
The projector mount did get a huge upgrade in order to achieve better print
quality. This has a stiﬀmotorized lifting system of the projector to set focus. The
placement of projector is controlled by a kinematic mount with micrometerscrew
for setting plane of focus precise. A new vat was implemented. This enabled the
user to tighten the FEP-ﬁlm for having a smooth membrane. This has resulted
in prints with high uniformity over the whole surface regarding height of micro
features and appearance. The pixel size resolution of projector and slicing proﬁle
has been measured and recognized on the printed parts with the use of CLSM
microscope.
A new microcontroller has been conﬁgured with a LCD-disply for the user to
control the DLP-platform. The new axis was calibrated and endstops has been
implemented on all axes.
Regarding user friendliness some great improvements has been made especially
for new users. Startup of the projector has become much easier with the help
of the new startup.bat-ﬁle. This initialize the projector, sets the directory for
following the commands and sets the set-value to 0 for no resin to cure before the
print was started. The task of levelling the plate has also made more conveni-
ent. This can now be set with the dial of the new controllerbox without knowing
anything about G-code. The implementation of the new vat has also improved
the user friendliness. It is an much faster and less complicated process which can
be changed within a few minutes. As the projector height is now motorized with
micrometer precision the focus can be found more precise. This was simply not
possible with out moving all the micrometer screw on the old mount. All these
improvements has made the overall user-friendliness a lot better. This is still not a
plug and play machine but barriers to start a print for new users has been reduced.
A study of how to set focus has resulted in the Matlab focus program.
This
captures a projected image and translate this into a unitless area. The program
moves the projector between every shot in order to obtain a full beam proﬁling.
The processed data can tell where the smallest projected area is and thereby where
the position of the projector needs to be in order to place the plane of focus at the
building area.
To conclude on this thesis improvements of print quality and user friendliness
design have been made and documented on the DLP-platform during this pro-
ject.
60
==PAGE:67==
References
[1] David Bue Pedersen, Yang zhang, Jakob Skov Nielsen, Hans Nørgaard
Hansen. A self-peeling vat for improved release capabilities during DLP ma-
terials processing. Pro-AM, 2016.
[2] Karl-Emil Nielsen. Development, construction and testing of an additiv man-
ufacturing platform based upon uv-initiated photopolymerization, 2014.
[3] Anders Ravn Jorgensen. Design and development of an improved Direct Light
Processing (DLP) platform for precision additive manufacturing, 2015.
[4] Frederik Winther Andersen. Optimering af en fotopolymeriserings-platform
til additiv fremstilling, June 2017.
[5] Macarena Mendez Ribo. 3D printing of bio-inspired surfaces, 3D printing af
bio-inspirerede overﬂader, 2017.
[6] Dansk standard. Standardterminologi for additive frem- stillingsmetoder –
koordinatsystemer og prøvningsmetodikker. Standard 2016.
[7] C.W. Hull. Apparatus for production of three-dimensional objects by stereo-
lithography. Availeble at:http://www.google.com/patents/US4575330. US
Patent 4,575,330 1986.
[8] Joseph Borrello and Peter Backeris. Rapid prototyping technologies. Rapid
Prototyping in Cardiac Disease, pages 41–49, 2017.
[9] Felip Esteve, Djamila Olivier, Qin Hu, and Martin Baumers. Micro-additive
manufacturing technology. Micro-manufacturing Technologies and Their Ap-
plications, pages 67–95 Chapter 3, 2017.
[10] C Sun, N Fang, DM Wu, and X Zhang. Projection micro-stereolithography
using digital micro-mirror dynamic mask. Sensors and Actuators A-physical,
121(1):113–120, 2005.
[11] Texas Instrument. DLP9000 Family of 0.9 WQXGA Type A DMDs data-
sheet(Rev. B). Availeble at:http://www.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/dlp9000.
pdf. Visited: December 2017.
[12] VISITECH. UG (User Guide) Luxbeam rapid system – LRS wq. September
2015.
[13] FUN TO DO. Resin properties. http://funtodo.net/properties.html.
Visited: December 2017.
[14] FUN TO DO. Safety data sheet fun to do industrial blend. http://funtodo.
net/_media/msds-ftd-ib-uk.zip. Visited: December 2017.
[15] VISITECH.
LRS
light
engine
conﬁgurations.
https:
//visitech.no/en/dlp-platforms/dlp9500-1080p-wuxga/
lrs-light-engine-configurations. Visited: December 2017.
61
==PAGE:68==
[16] Neetha Udayakumar. Visible light imaging. Imaging With Electromagnetic
Spectrum: Applications in Food and Agriculture, pages 67–86, 2014.
[17] Thor Labs. NE2R10B ND ﬁlter. https://www.thorlabs.com/thorproduct.
cfm?partnumber=NE2R10B. Visited: December 2017.
[18] VISITECH. Speciﬁcations reference lenses. Mail correspondence with Vis-
itech.
[19] W.C. Young. Roark’s formulas for stress and strain. 1989.
[20] A. E. Siegman. Lasers. University Science Books, 1986.
[21] Eugene Hecht. Optics. Addison-Wesley, 2002.
[22] Zemax.
How to convert fwhm measurements to 1/e-squared halfwidths.
http://customers.zemax.com/os/resources/learn/knowledgebase/
how-to-convert-fwhm-measurements-to-1-e-squared-ha.aspx.
[23] Frank Tr¨ager. Springer handbook of lasers and optics. Springer, 2007.
[24] Olympus.
Safety guide OLS4100 3D Measuring Laser Microscope. august
2014.
[25] JS Park and KD Kihm. Use of confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) for
depthwise resolved microscale-particle image velocimetry (mu-PIV). Optics
and Lasers in Engineering, 44(3-4):208–223, 2006.
[26] Lithoprotect. UV-ﬁlter tube for ﬂuorecent tubes of size t8. TECHNICAL
DATASHEET Availeble at:https://durxtreme.com/media/pdf/e1/89/20/
Technical-Data-Sheet-DX-Y520E212-T8-EN.pdf.
[27] CB Luginbuhl. Why astronomy needs low-pressure sodium lighting. 2001.
62
==PAGE:69==
A
Technical drawings
All technical drawings made in the context of this thesis.
A.1
Pressure releasing hole
63
==PAGE:70==
A
A
 90 
 2,25 
 
3 
SECTION A-A
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
Aluminium
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
Frederik W. A s123593
DTU september 2017
40575712
Antal: 1
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:2
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
nedre_vat
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only
Page64
==PAGE:71==
A.2
Hinge
65
==PAGE:72==
 
5 
+
-
0,10
0,15 
 16 
 21 
 
5 
+
-
0,10
0,15 
 5 
 15 
 15 
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
Messing
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
Frederik W. A. s123593
DTU september 2017
40575712
Anta: 2
DWG NO.
SCALE:5:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
heangsel
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only
Page66
==PAGE:73==
A.3
Mounting VAT with threads
67
==PAGE:74==
 4 x M5 x 10 
 50 
 50 
 50 
 50 
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
Frederik W. A. s123593
40575712
DTU oktober 2017
Antal: 1
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:2
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
nedre_vat_monterings gevind
Page68
==PAGE:75==
 50 
 50 
 50 
 50 
 4 x 
5,50 
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
Frederik W. A. s123593
40575712
DTU oktober 2017
Antal: 1
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:5
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
indsatsplade
Page69
==PAGE:76==
A.4
Projector mount
70
==PAGE:77==
 319,1 
 320 
 124,6 
 124,6 
 125 
 125 
 129,6 
 136,5 
 6 
 R3 
 40,64 
 58,1 
 6 
 R3 
 145 
 145 
 4 x R10 
 4 x R10 
 99,56 
 145 
 129,6 
 133 
 145 
A
Samme dimensioner
som DETAIL A
 15 
B
 30 
 M5 
 
10 x 12 
 
5,5 
 
8,9 
 5 
DETAIL A
SCALE 1 : 1
 4,50 
 6 
 4,50 
 10 
 10 
Ukendt gevind
Se prøve
DETAIL B
SCALE 1 : 1
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
Alumeco EN AW-5083 Cast Milled 15 mm
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
Frederik W. A. s123593
40575712
DTU Oktober 2017
Antal: 1
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:5
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
mounting_plate
Page71
==PAGE:78==
 6 x 
6 
 R10 
 70 
 45 
 378 
 5,5 
 R10 
 R10 
 173,50 
 143,50 
 58,50 
 28,50 
 56,50 
 86,50 
 114 
 135 
 137,50 
 152,50 
 100 
 135 
 151 
 109 
 121 
 145 
 163 
 
25 
 
38 
 45° 
 166 
 167,50 
A
A
B
B
E
G
 350 
 15 
C
SECTION A-A
SCALE 1 : 3
 90° 
 
1,62
1,57 
DETAIL C
SCALE 1 : 1
 
1,20
1,15 
D
 90° 
 
1,62
1,57 
DETAIL D
SCALE 2 : 1
 
8,90 
 5,01 
 
5,50 
 M5 
 25 
 10 
 
9 x 12 
DETAIL E
SCALE 1 : 1
 
8,90 
 
5,50 
 M5 
 5 
 30 
 15 
 
9 x 12 
DETAIL G
SCALE 1 : 1
SECTION B-B
SCALE 1:5
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
Alumeco EN AW-5083 Cast Milled 15 mm
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
Frederik W. A. s123593
40575712
DTU oktober 2017
Antal: 1
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:5
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
projector_frame
Page72
==PAGE:79==
 310 
 85 
 15 
 15 
R10
 3 x 
6 x 12 
 8,50 
 42,50 
 76,50 
 15 
 3 x 
5 x 20 
 187 
 72 
 302 
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
Aluminium
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
Frederik W. A. s123593
40575712
DTU oktober 2017
Antal: 2
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:2
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
stoette
Page73
==PAGE:80==
 50 
 85 
 30 
 34 
 18 
 4 x 
5,80 
 
13 
 
6,60 
 
9,50 
 R5 
 15 
 8 
 5 
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
Aluminium
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
Frederik W. A. s123593
40575712
DTU oktober 2017
Antal: 2
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
stoette til leje
Page74
==PAGE:81==
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
ITEM NO.
PART NUMBER
DESCRIPTION
QTY.
1
mounting_plate
Made in toolshop
1
2
projector_frame
Made in toolshop
1
3
stoette
Made in toolshop
2
4
stoette til leje
Made in toolshop
2
5
1605-3
Part from old project
1
6
SC16LUU
Part from old project
2
7
micrometer_placehol
der_2
Part from old project
3
8
micrometer_placehol
der_3
Part from old project
3
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE1:3
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
Assem_Projector_mount
Page75
==PAGE:82==
 48 
 30 
 
5,50 
 
10 
 1 
 20 
 2 x M2 x 3 
 12 
 
16 
 60 
 M5 
 1,50 
 6 
 21 
 21 
 14 
 4,75 
 18,50 
 
5,50 
 
9 
 20 
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
Aluminium
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
Frederik W. A. s123593
40575712
DTU oktober 2017
Antal: 4
DWG NO.
SCALE:2:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
rail_holder
Page76
==PAGE:83==
 57.50 
 97 
 2 x 
6.50 
 
35 til leje pasning 
 
31 
 19.75 
 26.50 
 41.50 
 28.50 
 18.75 
 21.75 
 11 
 13 
 5 
 
8.90 
 
5.50 
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
Aluminium
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
Frederik W. A. s123593
40575712
DTU oktober 2017
Antal: 2
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
leje_holder
Page77
==PAGE:84==
 18.8 
 57.5 
 7 x 
5.50 
 38.50 
 4.25 
 19.75 
 
30 
 
3.40 
 
40 
 
30 
 15.5 
 23.6 
 28.50 
 3.82 
 35.25 
 43.32 
 10 
 97 
 3 
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
Aluminium
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
Frederik W. A. s123593
40575712
DTU oktober 2017
Antal: 1
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
motor_holder
Page78
==PAGE:85==
 634 
  
 11 
 
10 pasning til leje 
A
 17 
 28 
 43 
 1,50 
 1 
 
8 
 
10 pasning til leje 
 M12 
DETAIL A
SCALE 2 : 1
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
Spindelstang
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
Frederik W. A. s123593
40575712
DTU oktober
Antal: 1
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:5
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
spindel_placeholder
Page79
==PAGE:86==
 415 
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
Bosh alu profil 40 x 40
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
Frederik W. A. s123593
40575712
DTU oktober 2017
Antal: 2
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:5
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
Leg 415mm
Page80
==PAGE:87==
 510 
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
Bosh alu profil 40 x 40
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
Frederik W. A. s123593
40575712
DTU oktober 2017
Antal: 1
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:5
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
Leg 510mm
Page81
==PAGE:88==
 745 
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
Bosh alu profil 40 x 40
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
Frederik W. A. s123593
40575712
DTU oktober 2017
Antal: 2
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:5
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
Leg 745mm
Page82
==PAGE:89==
 6 
 6 
 40 
 20 
 20 
 
6,60 
 
6,60 
 40 
 15 
 30 
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
Stål S235JR/275JR EN 1025:2-2004
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
Frederik W. A. s123593
40575712
DTU november 2016
Anta:l 12
DWG NO.
SCALE:2:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
Frame_bracket
Page83
==PAGE:90==
 30 
 15 
 60 
 60 
 6 
 28 
 53 
 28 
 53 
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
Stål S235JR/275JR EN 1025:2-2004
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
Frederik W. A. s123593
40575712
DTU oktober 2017
Antal: 4
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
Frame bracket Large
Page84
==PAGE:91==
1
2
3
6
4
5
9
13
11
8
7
10
12
ITEM NO.
PART NUMBER
DESCRIPTION
QTY.
1
Leg 510mm
1
2
Leg 745mm
2
3
Leg 415mm
2
4
rail_holder
4
5
SFC16 Precision Round 
Rail 600 mm
2
6
leje holder
1
7
Leje_placeholder
1
8
motor holder
1
9
Nema 23 m bremse 
place holder
1
10
coupling_placeholder
1
11
spindel_placeholder
1
12
Frame_bracket
8
13
Frame bracket Large
2
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE1:5
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
rail_system_skelleton_Assem
Page85
==PAGE:92==
 110 ±2 
 2 
 94 ±2 
 42 ±2 
 R20 ±10 
 8 ±2 
 172 ±2 
 400 ±2 
 
7 
 
7 
 162,5 
 162,5 
 37,50 ±2 
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
Plade stål
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
Frederik W. A. s123593
40575712
DTU December
Antal: 1
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:2
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
power_shelf
Page86
==PAGE:93==
A.5
Motor mount
87
==PAGE:94==
 100 ±0,10 
 47,14 ±0,05 
 4 x 
5,50 
 
38 
 2 x 
6,50 
 47,14 ±0,05 
 57 
 140 
 6 
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
Aluminium
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
Frederik W. A. s123593
DTU september 2017
Antal 2
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
motor_mount_base
Page88
==PAGE:95==
 10 
 5 
 32 
 13 
 57 
 10 
 4 x M5 
 47,14 ±0,05 
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
Aluminium
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
Frederik W. A. s123593
40575712
DTU september 2017
Antal: 4
DWG NO.
SCALE:2:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
motor_mount_side
Page89
==PAGE:96==
A.6
Filter holder
90
==PAGE:97==
 
55,60 
 5,70 
A
A
 0,90 
 1,70 
 3,20 
 4,20 
 4,70 
 
48,20 
 
51 
 
53,60 
 
50,20 
 
51 
SECTION A-A
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
Aluminium
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
Frederik W. A. s123593
40575712
DTU oktober 2017
Antal: 3
DWG NO.
SCALE:2:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
Filterholder
Page91
==PAGE:98==
A.7
CMOS holder
92
==PAGE:99==
 80 
 3 
 13 ±0.05 
 R1 
 22 
 4.5 
 4.5 
 5.75  5.75 
 4.5 
 4.5 
 5.75 
 5.75 
 8.2 
 8.2 
 R1.9 
 M2 
 M2 
 R1 
 R1 
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
Aluminium
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
Frederik W. A. s123593
40575712
DTU December 2017
Antal: 1
DWG NO.
SCALE:2:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
cmos_holder
Page93
==PAGE:100==
A.8
Controller box
94
==PAGE:101==
A
A
SECTION A-A
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:2
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
controller_box
Page95
==PAGE:102==
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:2
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
lcd_frame
Page96
==PAGE:103==
B
Bending of rails
97
==PAGE:104==
(1)
(1)
(6)
(6)
(5)
(5)
> 
> 
(4)
(4)
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
(7)
(7)
> 
> 
(8)
(8)
> 
> 
(3)
(3)
> 
> 
(2)
(2)
> 
> 
> 
> 
restart:
with(plots):
u:=-1/(6*EI)*(3*M1*x^2-R1*x^3);
U:=1/(6*EI)*((M0-M1)*(3*x^2-6*L*x+3*L^2)-R1*(3*L^2*x-x^3-2*L^3));
u dKKR1 x3C3 M1 x2
6 EI
U d
M0KM1  3 L2K6 L xC3 x2 KR1 K2 L3C3 L2 xKx3
6 EI
R1:=-6*M0/L^3*(a*L-a^2);
R1 dK6 M0 a LKa2
L3
M1:=-M0/L^2*(4*L*a-3*a^2-L^2);
M1 dKM0 KL2C4 a LK3 a2
L2
u:=unapply(u,x,a);
U:=unapply(U,x,a);
u d x, a 1 K
6 M0 a LKa2  x3
L3
K 3 M0 KL2C4 a LK3 a2  x2
L2
6 EI
U d x, a 1
1
6 EI
M0C M0 KL2C4 a LK3 a2
L2
 3 L2K6 L xC3 x2
C 6 M0 L a Ka2  K2 L3C3 L2 xKx3
L3
g:=10;
m:=10;
l:=350/2;
M0:=m*g*l;
g d 10
m d 10
l d 175
M0 d 17500
E:=210e3;
II:=1/4*Pi*R^4;
R:=8;
EI:=2*E*II
E d 210000.
II d π R4
4
R d 8
EI d 1.351136169 109
L:=450;
L d 450
Optimization:-Maximize(u(x,a),x=0..L, a=0..L);
98
==PAGE:105==
(8)
(8)
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
0.0423613349771656406, a = 345.416345665220, x = 254.583654325300
plot1:=plot3d(u(x,a), x=0..a, a=0..L,axes=box,style=patchcontour,
shading=zhue):
plot2:=plot3d(U(x,a), x=a..L, a=0..L,axes=box,style=patchcontour,
shading=zhue):
display(plot1,plot2,orientation=[-135, 60, 0],labels=['x','a','u
(x,a)']);
Bending of rails
99
==PAGE:106==
C
Matlab code
C.1
Take n-number of pictures and mean function
This function is the function that captures n images and return a mean. This func-
tion is used to reduce aliasing for both the intensity program and focus program.
1
function f = p1(cam ,n)
2
%This
function
recives
cam which is a webcam
stream and
takes n number of images in a loop. Thereafter
the images
mean is found i the fourth
dimention.
3
4
%Loopig n times for taking n pictires
5
for i=1:n
6
%Storing
pictures in the fourth
dimension
7
img(:,:,:,i) = double(snapshot(cam));
8
9
end
10
11
%Mean all
pictures
12
f=mean(img ,4);
13
end
C.2
Intensity as function of time
1
% %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
2
%
%
3
%
Intensity(t)
%
4
%
%
5
% %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
6
%Fresh
start
7
clc;
8
close all;
9
clear all;
10
11
cam = webcam (2);% Open
stream to webcam
12
pause (1)%Lets the strem
begin
13
14
%Timing og program
15
fpm
= 2;%input(’FPM:’); %Set frames pr. minute
16
17
time
= 30;%input(’time
running [min]:’); %Set
time the
18
19
no_img
= 100;%Numbers of images to mean
20
21
%Calculations
22
no
= round(fpm*time);%Calculate
the number of
measurements
due to rate and time
23
24
time_plot
= (60/ fpm):(60/ fpm):time *60;%Creates a
vector
which
100
==PAGE:107==
25
26
27
%Initializing
28
I_plot(no ,3)
= 0;
29
STD_plot(no ,3)
= 0;
30
max_I(no)
= 0;
31
data(no ,8)
= 0;
32
33
34
35
36
37
%Predefines
the
intensity(t) plot
38
subplot (1,3,2)
39
hold on
40
set(xlabel(’Time [s]’),’Interpreter ’,’latex ’,’FontSize ’ ,18);
%Set x label
41
set(ylabel(’Intensity [-]’),’Interpreter ’,’latex ’,’FontSize ’
,18); %Set y label
42
xlim ([0 60* time ])%Set scale on x axis
43
set(title(’Intensity($t$) ’),’Interpreter ’,’latex ’,’FontSize
’ ,8);
44
45
%Predefines
the STD(t) plot
46
subplot (1,3,3)
47
hold on
48
set(xlabel(’Time [s]’),’Interpreter ’,’latex ’,’FontSize ’ ,18);
%Set x label
49
set(ylabel(’SD’),’Interpreter ’,’latex ’,’FontSize ’ ,18); %Set
y label
50
xlim ([0 60* time ])%Set scale on x axis
51
set(title(’Standarddeviation ’),’Interpreter ’,’latex ’,’
FontSize ’ ,8);
52
53
%Reminder to set
configuration to webcam and turn on
projector. Does
noting
54
%but
remings
and leaves
time to do it.
55
Reminder = menu(’Correction
picture
has been
taken. Is
Logtch
Gaming
Software
configure? Was the
corretion
pictur on desired
setvalu? Was
projected
image
totally
black? And is th projected
image now totally
white?’,’Yes
’);
56
57
58
tic %Start
timing
59
for i = 1:no;
60
%take
no_img
pictures
and means
61
img = p1(cam ,no_img);
62
63
%Save
picture to file for
documentation
64
filename = [’img_ ’,num2str(i*60/ fpm),’s.png’];%Set
filename "img_5s.png"
101
==PAGE:108==
65
imwrite(img ,filename ,’png’)
66
67
%Shows
current
picture
68
figure (1);
69
subplot (1,3,1);
70
imshow(uint8(img));
71
set(title(’Current
image ’),’Interpreter ’,’latex ’,’
FontSize ’ ,8);
72
73
74
for j=1:3
75
I_plot(i,j)=mean2(img(:,:,j));%Find
meanvalue of all
pixels as an estimate of intensityfor
all three
chanels
76
STD_plot(i,j)=std2(img(:,:,j));%Find std for all
three
chanels
77
end
78
79
%Plot
intensity
80
subplot (1,3,2);
81
hold on
82
plot(time_plot (1:i),I_plot (1:i,1),’ro -’)%Plot
intensity
83
plot(time_plot (1:i),I_plot (1:i,2),’go -’)%Plot
intensity
84
plot(time_plot (1:i),I_plot (1:i,3),’bo -’)%Plot
intensity
85
plot(time_plot (1:i),I_plot (1:i,1) *0.2989+ I_plot (1:i,2)
*0.5870+ I_plot (1:i,3) *0.1140 , ’ko --’)%Plot
intensity
86
plot(time_plot (1:i),I_plot (1:i,1) *1/3+ I_plot (1:i,2) *1/3+
I_plot (1:i,3) *1/3 ,’ko -’)%Plot
intensity
87
88
%Plot STD
89
subplot (1,3,3);
90
hold on
91
plot(time_plot (1:i),STD_plot (1:i,1),’ro -’)%Plot
intensity
92
plot(time_plot (1:i),STD_plot (1:i,2),’go -’)%Plot
intensity
93
plot(time_plot (1:i),STD_plot (1:i,3),’bo -’)%Plot
intensity
94
95
%Keep ti timing
96
while toc <i*60/ fpm
97
98
end
99
toc
100
%Saves
data into
matrix
101
data(i,:)=[ time_plot(i) toc I_plot(i,:)
STD_plot(i,:)];
102
[i no]
103
end
104
105
%Saves the data and
correction
image
106
save(’save_data.mat’,’data ’);
107
save(’save_cor.mat’,’cor’);
102
==PAGE:109==
C.3
Focus program
1
% %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
2
%
%
3
%
Focus(x)
%
4
%
%
5
% %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
6
%Fresh
start
7
clc;
8
close all;
9
clear all;
10
11
12
pos_ini
= input(’Current
position [mm]:’);% The
initial
position
13
14
over
= 2;%How much over the
initial
position
the
focus
should be found [mm]
15
16
resolution
= 0.01;%The value of each step [mm]
17
18
thresh
= 90;%threshold
19
20
no_img
= 100;%Numbers of images to mean
21
22
23
%Initializing
24
coordinates
= [0: resolution:over ];%Coordinates
where a
measurement is being
made
25
no_coordinates
= size(coordinates ,2);%number of
measurements
26
data
= zeros(no_coordinates ,2);%Initialization
first row is position
second is number of pixels
27
28
%Axis of the
projector
for gcode
29
projectoraxis
= ’X’;
30
31
% Open
stream to webcam
32
cam
=webcam(’HD Pro Webcam
C920 ’);
33
34
35
36
%Create
serial
communication
object on port /dev/cu.
usbmodem1421
37
arduino
=serial(’/dev/cu.usbmodem1421 ’,’BaudRate ’
,115200);
38
fopen(arduino); %Initiate
arduino
communication
39
pause (15);%Ensures
that
Arduino had time to restart
40
41
%Set
absolute
movement
42
fprintf(arduino ,’%s\n’,’G90; \n’);
43
103
==PAGE:110==
44
for i=1: no_coordinates
45
46
%Turn
break off
47
cmd =sprintf(’M106 S255 ;\n’);
48
fprintf(arduino ,’%s\n’,cmd);
49
pause (1)
50
51
%Move
projector to coordinates(i)
52
cmd = sprintf(’G1 %s%3.2f; \n’,projectoraxis ,coordinates(i))
;
53
fprintf(arduino ,’%s\n’,cmd);
54
pause (2);
55
56
%Turn
break on
57
cmd = sprintf(’M107 ;\n’);
58
fprintf(arduino ,’%s\n’,cmd);
59
60
%Time for
vibrations to stop
61
pause (3)
62
63
%take
no_img
pictures
and means
64
img = p1(cam ,no_img);
65
66
%Only see on blue
chanel
67
img_b=img (:,:,3);
68
69
%Sort out
threshold
70
img_thresh = imquantize(img_b ,thresh);
71
72
%Counts
number of pixels
over
thresh
73
px = sum(sum(img_thresh (:,:) ==2))
74
75
%Saves
absolute
coordinate
76
data(i,1)=coordinates(i)+pos_ini;
77
78
%Saves no of pixels
79
data(i,2) = px;
80
81
%
82
[i no_coordinates ]
83
84
end
85
86
fclose(arduino); % initiate
arduino
communication
87
slut =1
104
==PAGE:111==
D
Creation Workshop set-up
D.1
Machine proﬁle in CW
The following lines of code is the used as settings for the projector. If the code
is saved as a text ﬁle with the extension .machine and then loaded into CW this
can be used. E.g. New projector.machine.
1
<?xml
version ="1.0"
encoding ="utf -8"?>
2
<MachineConfig
FileVersion ="1">
3
<PlatformXSize >19.97 </ PlatformXSize >
4
<PlatformYSize >12.73 </ PlatformYSize >
5
<PlatformZSize >50 </ PlatformZSize >
6
<MaxXFeedRate >100 </ MaxXFeedRate >
7
<MaxYFeedRate >100 </ MaxYFeedRate >
8
<MaxZFeedRate >100 </ MaxZFeedRate >
9
<XRenderSize >2560 </ XRenderSize >
10
<YRenderSize >1600 </ YRenderSize >
11
<DisplayedControls >XYZTPGD </ DisplayedControls >
12
<MachineType >UV_DLP </ MachineType >
13
<MultiMonType >eVertical </ MultiMonType >
14
<MotorsDriverConfig >
15
<DriverType >eGENERIC </ DriverType >
16
<ComPortSettings >
17
<PortName >COM10 </ PortName >
18
<Speed >115200 </ Speed >
19
<Databits >8</ Databits >
20
<Parity >None </Parity >
21
<Stopbits >One </ Stopbits >
22
<Handshake >None </ Handshake >
23
</ComPortSettings >
24
</MotorsDriverConfig >
25
<MonitorDriverConfig >
26
<DLP_X_Res >2560 </ DLP_X_Res >
27
<DLP_Y_Res >1600 </ DLP_Y_Res >
28
<MonitorID >DISPLAY2 </ MonitorID >
29
<DisplayCommEnabled >False </ DisplayCommEnabled >
30
<ComPortSettings >
31
<PortName >COM10 </ PortName >
32
<Speed >115200 </ Speed >
33
<Databits >8</ Databits >
34
<Parity >None </Parity >
35
<Stopbits >One </ Stopbits >
36
<Handshake >None </ Handshake >
37
</ComPortSettings >
38
<MonitorTop >0</ MonitorTop >
39
<MonitorLeft >0</ MonitorLeft >
40
<MonitorRight >1</ MonitorRight >
41
<MonitorBottom >1</ MonitorBottom >
42
<CorrectionMask >
43
</CorrectionMask >
44
<UseMask >False </ UseMask >
45
</MonitorDriverConfig >
105
==PAGE:112==
46
</MachineConfig >
D.2
Slicing proﬁle in CW
The following lines of code is the used slicing proﬁle. If the code is saved as a text
ﬁle with the extension .slicing and then loaded into CW this can be used. E.g.
Straight lift Z.slicing.
1
<?xml
version ="1.0"
encoding ="utf -8"?>
2
<SliceBuildConfig
FileVersion ="2">
3
<DotsPermmX >102.4 </ DotsPermmX >
4
<DotsPermmY >76.8 </ DotsPermmY >
5
<XResolution >1024 </ XResolution >
6
<YResolution >768 </ YResolution >
7
<BlankTime >7500 </ BlankTime >
8
<PlatformTemp >75 </ PlatformTemp >
9
<ExportSVG >0</ ExportSVG >
10
<Export >False </Export >
11
<ExportPNG >False </ ExportPNG >
12
<XOffset >0</ XOffset >
13
<YOffset >0</ YOffset >
14
<Direction >Bottom_Up </ Direction >
15
<LiftDistance >0</ LiftDistance >
16
<SlideTiltValue >0</ SlideTiltValue >
17
<AntiAliasing >False </ AntiAliasing >
18
<UseMainLiftGCode >False </ UseMainLiftGCode >
19
<AntiAliasingValue >3.5 </ AntiAliasingValue >
20
<LiftFeedRate >150 </ LiftFeedRate >
21
<LiftRetractRate >200 </ LiftRetractRate >
22
<ExportOption >ZIP </ ExportOption >
23
<FlipX >True </FlipX >
24
<FlipY >True </FlipY >
25
<Notes >
26
</Notes >
27
<GCodeHeader >;**********
Header
Start
********
28
;Here you can set any G or M-Code
which
should be executed
BEFORE the build
process
29
G21 ;Set units to be mm
30
G91 ;Relative
Positioning
31
M17 ;Enable
motors
32
;**********
Header End
**********
33
</GCodeHeader >
34
<GCodeFooter >;**********
Footer
Start
********
35
;Here you can set any G or M-Code
which
should be executed
after the last
Layer is Printed
36
G28 Z
37
M18 ;Disable
Motors
38
;&lt;Completed&gt;
39
;**********
Footer End
********
40
</GCodeFooter >
41
<GCodePreslice >;********** Pre -Slice
Start
********
42
;Set up any GCode
here to be executed
before a lift
106
==PAGE:113==
43
;********** Pre -Slice End
**********
44
</GCodePreslice >
45
<GCodeLift >;**********
Lift
Sequence
********
46
; Move z one layer up + buffer
47
G1 Z(( $LayerThickness +6) * -$ZDir) F$ZLiftRate
48
49
; Lower
buildplate by buffer
50
G1 Z(6 * $ZDir) F$ZLiftRate
51
52
; Wait for next mask
53
&lt;Delay&gt; %d$BlankTime
54
55
;**********
Lift
Sequence
********** </ GCodeLift >
56
<SelectedInk >Default </ SelectedInk >
57
<InkConfig >
58
<Name >Default </Name >
59
<SliceHeight >0.0179999992251396 </ SliceHeight >
60
<LayerTime >4000 </ LayerTime >
61
<FirstLayerTime >15000 </ FirstLayerTime >
62
<NumberofBottomLayers >5</ NumberofBottomLayers >
63
<ResinPriceL >347 </ ResinPriceL >
64
</InkConfig >
65
<MinTestExposure >500 </ MinTestExposure >
66
<TestExposureStep >200 </ TestExposureStep >
67
<ExportPreview >None </ ExportPreview >
68
<UserParameters />
69
</SliceBuildConfig >
107
==PAGE:114==
E
Pixel controlled test printer
This is not a ﬁnal code but only initial work to a script which can print part with
pixel control.
1
int
counter
= 0;
2
int
size_ini
= 64;
3
int
no_halfings
= 5;
4
int space
= 35;
5
int
minor_space
= 60; // skal
justeres
alt efter
no_halfings
6
int end_x
=space+size_ini+minor_space;
7
int end_y
= (no_halfings + 1) * space;
8
int size
= size_ini;
9
int
start_y
= space;
10
int rep_x
= 5; // Antal i x-retning
11
int rep_y
= 5; // Antal i y-retning
12
13
14
int[] exposure
={255 , 100, 60, 200, 255};
15
int[] exposure_time
={400 , 300, 100, 200, 100};
16
17
18
19
void
setup () {
20
size (2560 ,1600);
21
// fullScreen (2);
22
noStroke ();
23
ellipseMode(CORNER);
24
rectMode(CORNER);
25
26
for (int m = 0; m < no_halfings; m++) {
27
end_y=end_y+size;
28
size=size /2;
29
};
30
}
31
32
void draw () {
33
34
35
36
37
background (0);
38
39
for (int j = 0; j < rep_x; j++) {
40
for (int k = 0; k < rep_y; k++) {
41
42
fill(exposure[j]);
43
44
if (counter > exposure_time[k]) {
45
fill (0);
46
};
47
108
==PAGE:115==
48
// Resetter
for hver
repetition
49
size
=size_ini;
50
start_y
=space;
51
52
53
for (int i = 0; i < no_halfings; i++) {
54
rect(space+j*end_x , start_y+k*(end_y -space), size ,
size);
55
ellipse(size_ini+minor_space+space+j*end_x , end_y -
start_y+k*(end_y -space), -size , -size);
56
start_y=start_y+space+size;
57
size=size /2;
58
};
59
};
60
};
61
62
63
64
counter ++;
65
66
if(counter ==500){
67
counter =0;
68
};
69
}
109
==PAGE:116==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Manufacturing Engineering
Technical University of Denmark 
Produktionstorvet, Bld. 427A
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Phone (+45) 4525 4763
Fax  (+45) 4593 0190
www.mek.dtu.dk
