==PAGE:1==
Flexibility Proﬁles for EV Users
Master Thesis by
Lea Sass Berthou (s123901)
Supervisors:
Peter Bach Andersen
Tiago Sousa
Technical University of Denmark
February 4, 2018
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
In this project, a method for developing individual user proﬁles, based on charging data
from electric vehicles (EVs), has been proposed. There are several reasons why user pro-
ﬁles for EV drivers are of interest.
By knowing the user, overcharging (and potential
undercharging) can be avoided, which saves time and can reduce battery degradation. As
EVs can have the ability of market participation, understanding the individual user’s be-
haviour, can improve the availability and bidding precision for providing ancillary services.
The data used in this project is collected at Frederiksberg Forsyning in Denmark where a
ﬂeet of 10 EVs has been operating for approximately 1 year and 4 months.
Firstly, an introduction to the integration of EVs in the transportation sector and in
the power system is given. Consequently, the user behaviour is classiﬁed thematically.
Based on the preliminary studies, a deﬁnition of the parameters contained in a user proﬁle
is stated. Furthermore, a method to obtain these parameters from ﬁtted log-normal and
normal distributions is proposed.
Secondly, the data and the preprocessing is described. This includes obtaining and
reshaping of data, for easier assessment of possible trips. Also error detection and the
subsequent handling is described. The methodology behind the whole analysis process
is described in details including how the methodology was derived. The results are in-
troduced with an exploratory analysis of the current behaviour and charging patterns of
the ﬂeet. Afterwards, the distributions are ﬁtted and tested for the overall ﬂeet data to
asses the proposed distributions. The individual cars are also ﬁtted with the respective
distributions for determining the user proﬁles. An estimation of the sample size for a new
study to obtain a certain precision, is also evaluated.
Finally, a method for using the distribution percentiles for obtaining the individual
user proﬁles are carried out. This includes setting a threshold using the geometric mean
for the log-normal distributions and the arithmetic mean for the normal distribution. Two
cars are chosen based on the exploratory analysis and individual user proﬁles are proposed
and compared. The practical application of the user proﬁles is demonstrated with a case
study stating the economic value of using individual user proﬁles. This is compared with
the current overall guess for the entire ﬂeet based on the current charging behaviour and
the beneﬁts and limitations of the discussed methods.
i
==PAGE:3==
Resumé
I dette projekt er en metode til udvikling af individuelle brugerproﬁler baseret på oplad-
ningsdata fra elektriske køretøjer (EK’er) foreslået. Der er ﬂere grunde til, at brugerpro-
ﬁler på EK-førere er af interesse. Ved at kende brugeren kan overladning (og potentiel
underladning) undgås, hvilket sparer tid og kan hjælpe på batteri-livstiden. EK’er har
mulighed for at deltage i el-markedet. Forståelse af den enkelte brugers adfærd er derfor
vigtig, da det kan føre til forbedringer i tilgængeligheden og bud præcisionen når de yder
supplerende tjenester. Dataene i dette projekt er indsamlet hos Frederiksberg Forsyning i
Danmark, hvor en ﬂåde på 10 EK’er har været i drift i ca. 1 år og 4 måneder.
Indledningsvist gives en introduktion til integrationen af EK’er i transportsektoren samt
i elsystemet. Følgeligt er brugerens adfærd klassiﬁceret tematisk. Baseret på de umid-
delbare undersøgelser er en deﬁnition af parametrene indeholdt i en brugerproﬁl angivet.
Ydermere er en fremgangsmåde til opnåelse af disse parametre fra ﬁttede log-normal- og
normal- fordelinger foreslået.
Herefter er data og forberedelse af dataen beskrevet. Dette omfatter indhentning og om-
formning af data, for lettere vurdering af mulige ture. Også fejldetektering og den efterføl-
gende håndtering er beskrevet. Metoden bag hele analyseprocessen er beskrevet i detaljer,
herunder diskuteres ideer til metoden og begundelse for valget af den angivne metode.
Resultaterne introduceres med en eksplorativ analyse af ﬂådens nuværende opførsel og
ladningsmønstre. Derefter ﬁttes fordelingerne til det samlede ﬂådedata, for at vurdere de
foreslåede fordelinger. De enkelte biler er også ﬁtted til deres respektive fordelinger til
bestemmelse af brugerproﬁler. Et overslag af stikprøve størrelsen for en ny undersøgelse
til at opnå en speciﬁk præcision er også foretaget.
Slutteligt anvendes fordelings percentilerne til bestemmelse af de enkelte brugerproﬁler.
Dette inkluderer bestemmelse af en grænseværdi ved hjælp af det geometriske gennem-
snit for de log-normale fordelinger og det aritmetiske gennemsnit for normal-fordelingen.
To biler er valgt ud fra en eksplorativ analyse, og individuelle brugerproﬁler foreslås og
sammenlignes. Den praktiske anvendelse af brugerproﬁlerne er demonstreret ved et case
studie med angivelse af den økonomiske værdi ved individuelle brugerproﬁler. Dette sam-
menlignes med det nuværende overordnede gæt for hele ﬂåden baseret på den nuværende
opladningsadfærd, og fordelene og begrænsningerne af den metode diskuteres.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This project is a master thesis accounting for 30 ECTS points and has been conducted
from from the 28th of August 2017 to the 4th of February 2018. The project work is done
by Lea Sass Berthou and has been carried out at the Technical University of Denmark
(DTU) in the Department of Electrical Engineering. The project is part of the Parker
project portfolio. The project work has been supervised by Senior Researcher Peter Bach
Andersen and Postdoc Tiago Sousa.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation and background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Overview of report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
State of the art
4
2.1
Integration of Electrical Vehicles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
The cars at Frederiksberg Forsyning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
User Proﬁle
8
3.1
Deﬁnition and parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Probability distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Data
12
4.1
Data description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.2
Downloading and reshaping of data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.3
Assessing a possible trip . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.3.1
Error assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.4
Timeshifting of data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5
Analysis and results
19
5.1
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2
Exploratory analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.2.1
Error analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.2.2
Fleet behaviour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.2.3
Fleet Charging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.3
Distribution ﬁtting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.3.1
Estimation of sample size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4
Individual user proﬁles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.4.1
Minimum Energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.4.2
Energy deadline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.4.3
Energy target . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.4.4
Return time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.4.5
Proposed proﬁles and comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.5
Economic assessment of individual user proﬁles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Conclusion
43
6.1
Application and future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
iv
==PAGE:6==
A Project plan
I
A.1 Work packages
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I
A.2 Learning objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
II
A.3 Gantt-chart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
II
A.4 Self evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
V
B Assessment of errors
VI
C Saved parameters
X
D Individual modelling
XII
E Code and explanation
XVIII
E.1
MainEVDataTrips.py
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XIX
E.2
downloadServerData.py
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XX
E.3
updateNreashapeDataframe.py . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXI
E.4
determineTrips.py
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXIII
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation and background
All over the world countries are working hard with ambitious policies to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions. This introduces a challenge related to integrating a larger share of renewable
energy technologies in the power system and solutions to stabilise the grid is needed. As
Electric Vehicles (EVs) are gaining market share as a competitor to traditional Internal
Combustion Engines (ICEs), these are potentially a part of the solution. EVs have the
advantage of being more environmentally friendly than ICEs, due to the zero emissions
when driving. In addition, EVs also have the ability to provide ancillary services. Ancillary
services facilitate and support the continuous ﬂow of electricity to maintain grid stability
and security. An example of an ancillary service could be Frequency Containment Reserve
(FCR). The market participation is often managed by an aggregator entity which controls
the bidding for several ﬂeets. As EVs main purpose is transportation, this will have ﬁrst
priority, if the EV should be able to provide market services. As ancillary services are
paid with an availability payment, it is important to know the user’s driving pattern. This
is only one of the reason for investigating user proﬁles. Other reasons could be to avoid
under and overcharging of the battery which potentially minimises battery degradation
and results in a more eﬃcient use of the battery. The user knowledge can also help to
minimise range anxiety.
This project will therefore investigate how a user proﬁle can
be deﬁned, extracted and used. The project is a part of the Parker project portfolio and
involves a collaboration between Danish Technical University of Denmark (DTU), NUVVE
and Frederiksberg Forsyning. Here NUVVE operates as the aggregator and Frederiksberg
Forsyning owns the cars of the brand Nissan.
The ﬂeet has been operating for approximately 1 year and 4 months and after a four
months period, a study by Soares and Anderson [2017] was initialised. The study showed
that the reached state of charge (SOC) to have suﬃcient energy for the daily trips might
be too high for the ﬂeet. This was due to the fact that the trips were often short and
therefore consumed little energy. It also showed that when the workday ended, the cars
needed to discharge again, to reach a SOC around 50-60%, to be able to oﬀer both up
and down frequency regulation to the grid. To better optimise the charging and market
participation, it is therefore of interest to investigate how the individual user proﬁles might
be helpful.
For the Frederiksberg Forsyning ﬂeet, there are two main stakeholders regarding the usage
of the car and its battery for services. On one hand, the aggregator NUVVE is interested
1
==PAGE:8==
in when the battery is available, and on the other hand, the user of the car wants the
car to have a suﬃcient amount of energy for upcoming trips. The individual user proﬁle
should therefore help to map when the individual car is needed and how much energy is
required for normal trips. This will help to determine the ﬂexibility for the cars and also
the availability for grid services. All the individual proﬁles for the cars can then be used
for optimising the charging pattern and for predicting how much to bid in the market.
This project will focus on how a user proﬁle is deﬁned and obtained based on data from
the Frederiksberg Forsyning EV ﬂeet.
1.2
Problem statement
In this project, the format and method to determine a user proﬁle will be covered. This
includes deﬁning which parameters are important and how a user proﬁle can be created
with data. A user proﬁle should be issued to each user, either based on how the user
intends to use the car or on collected data for the user. If the proﬁle is based on how the
user intends to use the car, collected data should then make the proﬁle more accurate. A
minimum required sample size to get a good estimate will therefore also be determined.
The study will be based on analysis of real data from an operating ﬂeet, collected from 10
cars at Frederiksberg Forsyning from October 1st 2016 to January 2018. Two user proﬁles
for diﬀerent drivers will be suggested and compared. To display the practical application
of the user proﬁles, a simple case study on how the proﬁles can aﬀect the economic beneﬁt
in terms of optimised market participation is carried out. The overall scopes of the project
are:
• Deﬁne and describe parameters contained in a user proﬁle,
• Determine proﬁle parameters for users at Frederiksberg Forsyning,
• Construct and compare proﬁles between users,
• Case study: Economic value of using the user proﬁles to optimise market participa-
tion.
1.3
Overview of report
In addition to the introduction chapter, the remaining project is divided into the following
chapters with a short summary:
Chapter 2 - State of the art: First, an introduction to the current and future
integration of the EV is presented. Then, previous work done within the ﬁeld is outlined
and discussed in relation to this project. Finally, the Frederiksberg Forsyning ﬂeet and
technical parameters are described.
Chapter 3 - User Proﬁles: This chapter will focus on the ﬁrst scope of the project.
It includes the description of what a user proﬁle is and which parameters are important.
Furthermore, the theory on possible distributions for modelling the data for the user pro-
ﬁles are described.
2
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 4 - Data: Description of the data used in the project: This including ori-
gin, downloading and reshaping for the purpose of the analysis. The method for assessing
possible trips with error handling is also described with description of a necessary timeshift.
Chapter 5 - Analysis and results: This chapter will focus on the last three scopes
of the project. First, the methodology is described, followed by an exploratory analysis of
the data. Then, the proposed distributions are ﬁtted to the data and tested with qq-plots.
A future sample size for a 95% conﬁdence is also estimated for each parameter. The per-
centiles for the distributions are then used to determine proﬁle parameters and two cars
are chosen and compared. Finally, an economic case study is assessed
Chapter 6 - Conclusion: The most important results are outlined and an outlook
is given for optimisation in future work.
3
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 2
State of the art
This chapter focusses on the current integration and future of the EV. Other studies
regarding user proﬁling is outlined and ﬁnally the cars at Frederiksberg Forsyning is de-
scribed.
2.1
Integration of Electrical Vehicles
The world is heading towards an exciting and challenging stage of renewable energy inte-
gration into electric power systems. The fast growth of variable renewable energy (VRE),
such as wind and solar power, will put more challenges to the operation and control of the
power system. It is important that the electricity production and consumption is balanced
in real time, to ensure a stable operation of the power systems. Denmark is leading in
electricity generated by VRE with a energy generation of 50% in 2015 followed by Ireland
with around 23%. This means that VRE covers a signiﬁcant share of the production at
certain times which means that stability and systems ability to withstand disturbances
is becoming more relevant and important. An attractive option, which can both lower
the greenhouse gas emissions in the transportation sector and help to stabilise the power
system, when connected to the grid, are Electric Vehicles (EVs) [IEA, 2017a].
The term EV covers battery-electric (BEVs), plug-in hybrid electric (PHEVs) and (de-
pending on the precise deﬁnition) fuel cell electric (FCEVs), where BEVs still account for
the majority of the electric car stock at around 60%. EVs are still relative new in the car
market but have in the last 10 years been growing rapidly. In 2016 the global annual,
public available, charging stations growth were 72% and the EV car stock growth was
60%, reaching over 2 million electric cars. The majority of the growth is in China and the
United States of America, and the growth is mainly due to a large decrease in battery cost
and an increase in energy density. Even though the number of EVs are increasing, the
global market share is still only 0.2% of all passenger light-duty vehicles (PLDVs), where
PLDVs are deﬁned as passenger cars and passenger light trucks and therefore exclude
motorcycles, three-wheelers, and low-speed/low-power four-wheeled vehicles. Despite an
impressive increase in the number of EVs and charging stations the annual growth rates
has declined from 85% in 2014 to 77% in 2015. Despite this, EVs is expected to reach
between 9 million and 20 million by 2020 and between 40 million and 70 million by 2025
globally [IEA, 2017b].
A widespread deployment of EVs would require implementation of smart charging tech-
4
==PAGE:11==
nology, as it could otherwise result in even greater challenges for power system operators
due to charging of EV’s during peak hours. Therefore intelligent charging is crucial when
introducing large numbers of EVs into an electrical power system. When discussing charg-
ing of EVs, most research is based on one-directional charging, ie. the EV can only charge
from the grid, which are mostly the case for private EV owners and public charging sta-
tions [Quirós-Tortós et al., 2015; Robinson et al., 2013; Majidpour et al., 2014]. Special
chargers, introduced by Kempton and Letendre [1997], are capable of bi-directional charg-
ing, which means that the EV can both charge and discharge (ie. feed power back into the
grid). This service is also called V2G. There is great interest in this new feature due to
the potential of frequency regulation and participating in the electricity market with an
EV Fleet. This means that a ﬂeet of EVs would be able to absorb excess power from VRE
and also deliver power when the system is in deﬁcit, and therefore serving as a balancing
load [Thingvad et al., 2016].
Since EV charging is very unpredictable this bi-directional capability and possible mar-
ket participation introduce great risks, as the EV user has the greatest priority. There
have been many studies on how EV ﬂeets behave and since EVs are mainly charged with
electricity from the grid, there has been a lot of research within smart charging and how
time-shifting charging can aﬀect diﬀerent parameters. It is a relative new feature that
data is logged and saved for EVs when charging. If no data is available the normal proce-
dure would be to use statistics and simulated data. Silvestre et al. [2013] made a research
project about optimising EV charging in parking lots, where they used a statistical ap-
proach with Monte Carlo simulations using a log-normal probability distribution to model
the distance travelled and therefore the energy needed. This approach can give a good
idea about charging behaviour if the right parameters are chosen for the simulations, but
it can also give a false idea if not. In the study diﬀerent scenarios were investigated: un-
managed EV charging without remote charging infrastructure, unmanaged EV charging
with remote charging infrastructure and EV charging with price signals. Furthermore,
three diﬀerent types of EVs were investigated, and one of the conclusions was that the
optimisation outcome was very diﬀerent for each case and that the behaviour was not
predictable. This might be due to behavioural diﬀerences between users and one overall
model for all users can be diﬃcult to ﬁt.
Alonso et al. [2014] suggests a smart scheme for EV battery-charging management and
identiﬁes that realistic behaviour of drivers, to obtain the mobility patterns and parking
availability, are important aspects for optimising charging and discharging process.
In the speciﬁc area of creating a user proﬁle for EVs, very little work has been done on
setting these kind of speciﬁc individual deadlines and targets. There are plenty of studies
investigating driving patterns for ﬂeets either based on real data or simulated data [Wu
et al., 2010; Quirós-Tortós et al., 2015]. The usage patterns or driving behaviour is often
related to smart charging, and how ﬂeets behave regarding when, and how much the user
charge the car [Speidel and Braeunl, 2014; Robinson et al., 2013].
Driving an EV needs a bit more planning from the user perspective. This is due to the
shorter possible travel distance and the long ’reﬁll’ process, compared to traditional Inter-
nal Combustion Engines (ICEs). This have led to a new term in the car industry called
range anxiety. Other projects have therefore investigated how range anxiety can be re-
duced, when shifting from an ICE to an EV, and how knowledge helps the user to become
more conﬁdential with the car [Haaren, 2011; Axsen et al., 2015]. Even though many of
the articles have diﬀerent perspectives than this project, they still provide an idea of the
5
==PAGE:12==
importance of knowing the user.
One article by Kempton and Letendre [1997] did suggest an intelligent charge-discharge
control with three settings controlled by the user, which inspired the parameters used in
this project. This will be further described in Chapter 3.
This project will look into some of the same features as mentioned in this chapter, but
will mainly focus on an individual user proﬁle and not how the charging aﬀects the grid.
The main focus is how these individual proﬁles should be created, used and adapted.
2.2
The cars at Frederiksberg Forsyning
(a) Nissan e-NV200 van and the Enel EVSE
(b) The ﬂeet
Figure 2.1: Pictures of the cars at Frederiksberg Forsyning. a) One car with the Enel
Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment (EVSE). b) The entire ﬂeet with their respective charg-
ers. Each car is assigned to a speciﬁc parking spot and corresponding charger.
The data for this project is collected in Denmark at ’Frederiksberg Forsyning’, which is
a company that supplies Frederiksberg Municipality with gas, water, district cooling and
heating, including approving of installations and issuing bills. They also work with cli-
mate adaptation and deliver wind energy [Forsyning, 2018]. Frederiksberg Forsyning owns
a ﬂeet consisting of 10 BEV vans of the brand Nissan e-NV200 which can be seen in Figure
2.1. The cars are used for V2G services, in cooperation with NUVVE, when the cars are
not in use. The cars energy use is 165 Wh/km [Nissan, 2018, p.6].
The cars at Frederiksberg Forsyning have the ability to provide ancillary grid services,
where the service provided is up and down frequency regulation. This is possible due to
10 Enel V2G charging units, which can control the bidirectional power exchange between
the grid and the car’s battery. This makes the cars able to provide up and down-regulation
on demand when the EVs are plugged in. Each of the 10 units has 10 kW capacity (both
up and down), which gives a total available amount of 100 kW for the ﬂeet [Automotive-
world, 2016].
Each car has one speciﬁc driver and one speciﬁc parking spot assigned to it, therefore one
6
==PAGE:13==
charger will only collect data for one car with one driver, which makes this data perfect for
investigating individual user proﬁles. The data collection started in October 2016 and the
cars have therefore collected data for almost one and a half years. The 10 drivers switched
from a normal ICE vehicle to an EV which means that some adaptation is expected, but
as the driving pattern will probably not change much, all data will, however, be used for
this analysis.
The bidirectional power ﬂow between vehicles and chargers are controlled with an intel-
ligent aggregation platform provided by NUVVE. The platform uses a set of algorithms
and models called GIVeTM (Grid Integrated Vehicle) mechanisms that manage the power
ﬂow between vehicles and chargers according to a set of deﬁnitions/requirements. The
GIVe mechanism registers and stores the data and determines when to charge each car to
have suﬃcient energy for the individual driver (which is agreed beforehand). Furthermore,
the GIVe also optimises the available power for the ﬂeet to actively support the grid and
balance the power system.
The GIVe mechanism has three main components: the Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment
(EVSE), the aggregation platform (GIVe) and the Vehicle Smart Link (VSL).
The EVSE is the charging station which registers the grid location, the internet portal,
the power connection and the interconnect permit. A picture of the EVSE can be seen in
Figure 2.1(a). The EVSE is connected directly to the car with a cable which allows for
charging and discharging following instructions from the VSL. The VSL is a communica-
tion software that receives the battery information to make it able to control the charging
and discharging. The VSL also translates the requests from the NUVVE aggregation plat-
form and reports the available capacity to the aggregator, as well as, trying to predicting
travel time and distance for the next trip.
The last component is the aggregation platform, which is a cloud-connected application,
that receives the dynamic capacity information from the ﬂeet in real-time operation. The
platform ensures that each vehicle has enough energy available for the next trip, and cal-
culates how much remaining capacity the aggregator can participate within the market
[NUVVE, 2018].
This project is related to the project by Soares and Anderson [2017] which focussed on
the availability of the ﬂeet for doing V2G. This project will focus on the usage pattern for
each car and how to deﬁne a user proﬁle. The outcome of this project can therefore help
predict when the cars leave and how much the battery should be charged to have enough
energy for the upcoming trips.
7
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 3
User Proﬁle
In Chapter 2 the importance of an individual user proﬁle for V2G performance was estab-
lished. Furthermore, the chapter explained how other projects focusing on the same topic,
and how the cars on Frederiksberg Forsyning works. This chapter deﬁnes the important
factors when deﬁning the proﬁle and how to create it statistically.
3.1
Deﬁnition and parameters
A user proﬁle should be able to provide information about an individual user driving
patterns and usage of a car. The proﬁle can be based on collected data from the user or
on an interview/questionnaire on how the user expects to use the car. The most precise
proﬁle will, of course, be from collected data. The evaluated proﬁle is intended to follow
the individual user, therefore, if a car changes user or have several users, it would be
necessary to make a proﬁle for each individual user. The parameters are mainly inspired
by Kempton and Letendre [1997] who proposed an intelligent charge-discharge control,
where three settings controlled by the user is introduced. The ﬁrst is a minimum limit
for how much the battery can be discharged to reach a certain distance given in miles.
The second is a distance needed for the next trip and the last one is which time the next
trip is. The minimum energy is here deﬁned as being the least amount of energy left in
the battery at all times. The battery state of charge should therefore be above this limit
when the user has completed the trips in the day. Furthermore, if the car participates in
the electricity market the battery is not allowed to discharge below this minimum. The
critical parameters for a user proﬁle are deﬁned therefore deﬁned as:
• Minimum energy,
• Energy deadline,
• Energy target,
where the energy target is the energy required for the upcoming trips and the energy
deadline is the time the car is expected to leave for the ﬁrst trip in a day. With regards to
the leave time, it is of interest to know the earliest possible leave time and how much risk
it will induce if choosing a later deadline. The risk here is that the energy target has not
been reached due to a shorter charging time than expected because the user left earlier
than expected. With regards to the energy target, it is of interest to know the required
energy for the upcoming trips, where the related risk for this parameter is that the user
8
==PAGE:15==
does not have enough energy for the intended trip(s). These two parameters are therefore
closely linked and very dependent on the user.
If the car is expected to perform a market service, such as Frequency Containment Reserve
(FCR), the expected return time is also of interest when deﬁning the user proﬁle. This
parameter is mostly of interest for the aggregator participating in the market and not so
much for the user. The least important parameter for a user proﬁle is therefore deﬁned
as:
• Expected return time.
It can be argued whether the energy deadline and energy target should be stated in kWh,
SOC or distance.Kempton and Letendre [1997] adds a small note to the charged energy
for a certain distance: ’Note: Charge mileage is estimated. It will be less for full loads or
hilly terrain’. As individual users might have diﬀerent preferences and since the energy in
kWh is not dependent on the type of car, terrain, heating or other variables, the energy
in kWh might be more precise. Furthermore, the energy can be translated into SOC or a
distance if that is the preference of the user.
3.2
Probability distributions
In Silvestre et al. [2013] a log-normal function was suggested to model travelled distances,
and since the travelled distance is almost proportional to the energy usage, it is expected
that the energy usage can also be modelled with a log-normal function. For the leave and
return time, Dallinger et al. [2011] illustrates the probability for journeys in Germany on a
typical Monday for full-time employees. The probability for the leave time is shown for the
ﬁrst trip and the arrival time for the last trip. Visually, the leave time has a tendency to be
log-normally distributed, whereas the expected return time is more normally distributed.
The leave time will therefore be ﬁtted and tested to follow a log-normally distribution
and the return time a normal distribution. The test will be done with a q-q plot, where
q stands for quantile. In a qq-plot, the observations, sorted from smallest to largest, are
plotted against the expected quantiles from the expected distribution. If the observations
follow the tested distribution, the observed values will be close to the expected and the
plotted values will be close to a straight line.
The normal distribution is one of the most important and well-known probability distribu-
tions, also known as the Gaussian distribution. It is a continuous probability distribution
of a random variable and is given by:
F(x; µ, σ2) =
1
√
2πσ2 exp
 
−(x −µ)2
2σ2
!
−∞< x < ∞,
(3.1)
where µ is the mean and σ is the standard deviation.
The log-normal distribution is
also a continuous probability distribution of a random variable and takes only positive
real values. The function is positively skewed and therefore has a long tail on the right
side. The normal and log-normal distributions are closely related as seen in Figure 3.1.
This means that if X is distributed log-normally with parameters µ and σ, then log(X) is
distributed normally with mean µ and standard deviation σ.
9
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3.1:
Relation between normal and log-normal distribution.
If Y is normally
distributed, then X ∼eY is log-normally distributed. The of course also applies if X is log-
normally distributed, then Y ∼ln X is normally distributed. Figure made by StijnDeVuyst
[2018].
The log-normal pdf is deﬁned as [Johnson, 2000]:
F(x; µ, σ2) =





1
x
√
2πσ2 exp
 
−(ln(x) −µ)2
2σ2
!
for x > 0, σ > 0,
0
elsewhere,
(3.2)
where µ is the mean and σ is the expected standard deviation of the associated normal
distribution. It is possible to determine the mean and variance for the log-normal distri-
bution by: µlog = exp(µ + σ2/2) and σ2
log = exp(2µ + σ2)(exp(σ2) −1). This mean value
represents the arithmetic mean but as the log-normal distribution is a skewed distribution,
the geometric mean (also denoted GM) will give a better estimate of the central tendency.
The geometric mean uses the product of the values and the nth root of the product for
n samples. It is a type of mean, which indicates the central tendency and for a true log-
normal dataset, the median and the geometric mean are identical. Therefore an estimate
of the geometrical mean is just ﬁnding the median Hewett [1995][Eq. 1]. For a log-normal
distribution the median is given as:
Medianlog = GMlog = exp(µ),
(3.3)
For this project, the estimated percentiles for the log-normal distribution are mainly of
interest. The percentile (p) is a value such where at least (100·p)% of the observations are
at or below this p value and similarly that at least 100(1-p)% are at or above this value.
It is noted in Figure 3.1 that the log-normal distribution has its left tail around 0 and the
corresponding normal function has its left tail below 0. This is due to the properties of
the natural logarithm and it is therefore necessary that the data have the smallest value
close to zero (not equal to zero as x has to be larger than 0, due to ln(0) = −∞) to be
able to model the log-normal function. This means that the leave time would have to
be time-shifted, to the hours after ﬁrst possible leave time, to be able to model it with a
log-normal function, whereas this is not necessary for the energy usage.
10
==PAGE:17==
Sample size
To determine how many samples are required to achieve a good statistical estimate, sample
size formulas can be used. For the normal distribution the one-sample sample size formula
for a conﬁdence level can be used:
n =
z1−α/2 · σ
ME
2
,
(3.4)
where n is the sample size, z1−α/2 is the 1 −α probability for a normal distribution,
ME is the maximum error of the estimate and σ is the standard deviation from the log-
transformed normal distributed data.
If the data is log-normally distributed the sample size for the geometric mean for a log-
normal distribution can be determined by the formulae suggested by Hewett [1995][Eq.
7]:
n =
t2
α/2,n−1 (ln[exp(σ)])2
1
2 ln
1 + f
1 −f
2
,
(3.5)
where n is the sample size, t2
α/2 is the α probability for a t distribution, f is the desired
accuracy in percentage and σ is again the standard deviation from the log-transformed
normal distributed data.
11
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 4
Data
This chapter describes the data structure and the preparation of the data for the analysis.
The data are collected from 10 EVs for approximately 1 year and 4 months. The chapter
includes how the data is obtained and reshaped to ﬁt the purpose of the analysis. Finally,
the error handling and assessment of possible trips, including a necessary timeshift, are
described.
4.1
Data description
The data can be accessed on an online server through the NUVVE website1. All cars
within NUVVE’s portfolio is uploaded to the server and ﬁltering is therefore necessary.
An example of the columns present when downloading data is shown in Figure 4.1. For
ﬁltering of the cars at Frederiksberg Forsyning, the “evse_state” and “CarName” columns
are used, with the parameters stated in Table 4.1. To easier distinguish between the cars
when plotting, they are each given an alias name which is shown in the column “Car” in
the table. Table 4.2 gives a description and possible values for each parameter present in
the original downloaded data. Data is logged every second and one hourly ﬁle consisting
of data from only Frederiksberg Forsyning, will therefore consist of 36,000 rows of data (if
no data is missing).
An important part of understanding the data used for this analysis is the information given
in the “EVSEId” column and the related “ev_state” column. Based on both columns,
information about the plug-in and availability of the EV in the system can be extracted.
The “EVSEId” column speciﬁes the connection state between the vehicle and the charger
and the “ev_state” column speciﬁes the type of state. The possible values stated in Table
4.2 for the “EVSEId” column are therefore described in detail below with the possible
Figure 4.1: Example of the parameters for one car when downloading the original data.
1https://nuvve.dk/logs/
12
==PAGE:19==
Table 4.1: Overview of the parameters used for ﬁltering. The ’Car’ column deﬁnes an
alias name for each car which will be used for plotting in the analysis in Chapter 5.
evse_state
CarName
Car
’Energinet.dk’
MCV2G03160002
FF01
’Energinet.dk’
MCV2G03160012
FF02
’Energinet.dk’
MCV2G04160002
FF03
’Energinet.dk’
MCV2G03160003
FF04
’Energinet.dk’
MCV2G03160004
FF05
’Energinet.dk’
MCV2G03160006
FF06
’Energinet.dk’
MCV2G03160007
FF07
’Energinet.dk’
MCV2G03160008
FF08
’Energinet.dk’
MCV2G03160009
FF09
’Energinet.dk’
MCV2G04160001
FF10
Table 4.2: Description of columns when downloading data from the NUVVE server.
Column name
Description/Value
Time
Timestamp in format ’YEAR-MM-DD HH:MM:SS’.
CarName
Unique ID for each car
PowerCapacityUp
Maximum power capacity up in Watt
PowerCapacityDown
Maximum power capacity down in Watt
PowerRequested
V2G Power requested in Watt
PowerProvided
V2G Power provided in Watt
EnergyCapacity
Maximum energy: 21000 in Wh
EnergyStored
Current energy in the battery in Wh
POP
Prefered Operating point in Watt
PowerFlow
The power ﬂow in Watt
Volts
Voltage in Volts
Amps
Current in Ampere
Available
True or False for V2G
EVSEid
Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment id: CH, GI, NK, NC, OE or VE
ev_state
V2G, nan, 1-62,VMS_COMM, BATT, TRIP, RESP or SWITCH
evse_state
Aggregator id: Energinet.dk
“ev_state” values in the parentheses:
• CH – (BATT or TRIP) Charging the battery (dumb charge),
• GI – (V2G) Grid integrated, i.e. the EV is available/participating in the market,
• NK and NC – (nan) Not communicating, i.e. the EV is not connected to the charging
station
• OE – (Number from 1 to 62) OEM error, i.e. there are problems with the charging
station back-end,
• VE – (SWITCH,RESP,VMS_COMM) VEL problem, i.e. there is a problem with
the charging station back-end.
13
==PAGE:20==
4.2
Downloading and reshaping of data
Previous and current projects using data from the NUVVE server downloaded the data
manually. This is a very time-consuming task, when retrieving data for more than a year
and adding more data to improve the analysis. Therefore, as a part of the process of
learning Python, a batch script for automatically downloading the data was developed.
When the data is downloaded, it is processed using a Python API called Pandas which
uses a data frame that works like a matrix. This means that columns and rows can easily
be removed and used to sort for the data of interest. The data is uploaded in hourly ﬁles,
but to reduce the number of ﬁles, the hourly ﬁles for one day is concatenated into one
data frame and saved as a CSV ﬁle.
If no data is available for a full day the script saves an empty CSV ﬁle to make sure that
all days are included in the analysis. Since downloading takes some time, the data is ﬁrst
downloaded and saved, and then later reshaped. This is to optimise the time used for
each process, and to have backup of the data if something needs to be recalculated. For
a more detailed description of the script see Appendix E.
The daily saved CSV ﬁles are imported into Python using pandas HDFStore system. The
HDFStore system is fast and works very well with large amounts of data and it allows for
quick indexing and organisation of data in Python. To better facilitate the data analysis,
some columns are added to the data frame. These provide additional information extracted
from the existing columns. The new columns are:
• Plugged – returns 1 if the EV is connected. Otherwise, returns 0,
• SOC – Returns the state of charge of the EV in percentage,
• DayOfWeek – Identiﬁes the day of the week with 0 for Monday, 1 for Tuesday,..,
• Season - Identiﬁes the season with 0 for Spring, 1 for Summer, 2 for Fall and 3 for
Winter.
The EV is considered to be plugged into the system when the “EVSEId” state is “CH”,
“GI”, “OE” or “VE” and unplugged when the “EVSEId” state is “NK” or “NC”. The
SOC is simply the “EnergyStored” column divided by the “EnergyCapacity” column. An
important aspect of the data processing is to ﬁnd inconsistencies that may inﬂuence the
data analysis, and consequently, results and ﬁndings. A potential inconsistency may oc-
cur when the EV is not connected to the grid but is actually charging or discharging.
These inconsistencies must be detected and removed from the data. This is done by cross-
checking the added column ’plugged’ and the original column “PowerProvided” to ﬁnd
situations where ’plugged’ is equal to 0 and at the same time ’PowerProvided’ is diﬀerent
from 0. These inconsistencies are removed from the data and saved in a separate CSV ﬁle
to prevent them inﬂuencing the analysis.
To reduce the size of the dataﬁle, columns, which are not used for the analysis, are re-
moved and the columns left are “Time”, “CarName”, “EnergyCapacity”, “EnergyStored”,
“EVSEId” and “ev_state”. An example of the ﬁnal columns is shown in Figure 4.2. When
assessing the data and determining errors it is important to cross check the columns
“EVSEId”, “EnergyStored” and “ev_state”. This cross-checking of the columns allows to
extract a more detailed information about the state of the vehicle. It is important to asses
the state before plug-out and after plug-in, since the EV can be in an error state, which
can inﬂuence the registered state of charge of the battery.
14
==PAGE:21==
4.3
Assessing a possible trip
The main part of preparing the data for the analysis is to determine the trips, which is
facilitated in the script ’determineTrips.py’ (See Appendix E). A ﬂowchart visualising the
checks and outputs can be seen in Figure 4.3.
The ﬁrst main step is an outer loop, looping over the days, and an inner loop, looping
over each car. If the day contains no data (ie. see Section 4.2) the day is classiﬁed with
the error code: ’No data’. The main idea when assessing a possible trip, is to search for
when the car is unplugged, ie. when column ’Plugged’ is 0. An example of such a period
can be seen in Figure 4.2. All trips are assessed assuming that the car returns within the
same day. At ﬁrst, every unplugged period was interpreted as a trip, but due to the fact
that real data contain errors and inconsistent behaviour this method was too simple.
Therefore the unplugged periods and the plugged periods for one day and one car at the
time, are saved in separate vectors.
The initial starting index for the ﬁrst unplugged
period is then set to the ﬁrst element in the unplugged vector and the last ending index to
the last element in the unplugged vector. Before setting the indexes as described above, it
is ﬁrst checked whether either the plugged or unplugged vector is empty. If the unplugged
vector is empty the day is classiﬁed as having 0 trips. If there were no saved trips for a
day and all the errors were classiﬁed as either ’Period <10 min’ or ’SOC used <= 1%’, the
day is also classiﬁed as a 0 trip. If the plugged vector is empty, the given day is classiﬁed
as: ’Not plugged’. A while loop, looping over all unplugged periods in a day, updates the
indexes and assesses every unplugged period until there are no more unplugged periods
for that car on that particular day.
Figure 4.2: Example of an unplugged period in the data. Here the period is shorter than
10 min and will therefore be classiﬁed as an error.
4.3.1
Error assessment
The data is collected in real time with real users, real cars, real hardware and real software,
which makes errors and handling of these an inevitable part of the analysis and data
processing. To be able to determine whether there is a trip or not the energy usage is
essential, and therefore a valid energy state of the battery before and after an unplugged
period needs to be present in the data. If there is no change in energy, the period could
just be a restart or a faulty connection. For a detailed description of the errors Appendix
B can be inspected.
15
==PAGE:22==
Initial checks
The ﬁrst check in the assessment is to check how long the unplugged period is. This is
done by calculating the time diﬀerence between the plug-out timestamp and the plug-in
timestamp. If this time diﬀerence is less than 10 minutes the period is classiﬁed with the
error: ’Period < 10 min’. The 10 minutes is a choice based on how short a trip logically
can be. Also, several periods less than 10 minutes were caused by some sort of error.
Missing data will have an inﬂuence on the results and the next check determines
whether more than one hour of data is missing before the plug-out period or after plug-
in. It is also checked whether there is more than one hour of missing data within the
unplugged period. If one of these checks yields true the period is classiﬁed with the error:
’Missing data > 1 hour’.
Before plug-out checks
The next part of the checks considers data before the plug-out. The ﬁrst check searches
in the ’EVSEId’ column for the error state ’VE’ or ’OE’ in the last two minutes before the
plug-out (these two error states are described in Section 4.1). It also checks whether the
SOC before plug-out is 0 or 1. If the SOC is 0 or 1 the start index is corrected to the last
valid value within the last 15 min before the error occurred. If it is not possible to ﬁnd a
valid value, the period is classiﬁed with the error: ’SOC start missing’. If SOC is not 0 or
1 (but there still was an error), the minimum value within the error period is temporarily
saved and compared with the SOC after value later. If both of these checks are false the
parameters before the plug-out are saved.
After plug-in checks
Next, the algorithm checks for errors after plug-in, following the same procedure as de-
scribed above, but in this section, the error will be: ’SOC end missing’. If there were no
errors, there is also an extra check looking for a change in the SOC value in a two minute
period after plug-in. This check was implemented because the SOC before plug-out was
sometimes repeated after plug-in for a short period, before showing the actual SOC.
Final checks
The next three checks control whether there was a ’VE error’, meaning that due to faulty
communication between charger and car, no decision about a possible trip could be made.
The ﬁrst check is to compare the temporary minimum value from the before plug-out
checks (if existing), with the SOC after plug-in. The second check validates whether the
’ev_state’ showed ’RESP’ during the ’VE’ error state, because this speciﬁc error state
always leads to errors in the output values. The third check validates whether there is an
oscillating behaviour within the next 10 min after plug-in. This oscillating have to include
0 or 1 and another value. If any of these three checks return true the output: ’VE error’,
will be saved for that period. If all are false the ﬁnal check before saving the period as a
trip, is whether the SOC changed more than 1%. If not the error ’SOC used <= 1%’ is
saved.
16
==PAGE:23==
Initial
Before 
plug-out
After 
plug-in
Final
Error code: 1
‘No data’
Initialize 
parameters
Outer loop
Get data for 
the i’th day
Inner loop
Extract relevant 
data for the j’th car
Is data 
empty?
Yes
No
Determine 
unplugged 
vector
Is 
unplugged 
empty
?
Yes
No trips
Is 
plugged 
Empty
?
Yes
Error code: 2 
‘Not plugged’
Last end index: 
plugged[-1]
Is 
unplugged[0]
>plugged[0]
?
Is 
plugged[-1]> 
unplugged[-1]
?
No
No
No
Start index: 
plugged[0]
No
Yes
Determine 
plugged vector
Yes
No
Yes
Are all 
error codes
3 or 7?
While loop
Stopping criteria:
Empty unplugged vector
Determine next 
unplugged period
Error code: 3
‘Period < 10 min’
Yes
Determine 
unplugged length: 
len_period
Is 
len_period <10 
min ?
No
Is 
there >1 hour 
of missing 
data?
Error code: 4
‘Missing data > 
1 hour’
Yes
Is 
EVSEId = 
’VE’ or ‘OE’ up to 
two min before 
plug-out
?
No
Save 
parameters 
before plug-out
No
Is 
SOC = 
0 or 1 before 
plug-out
?
Yes
Look in last 
15 min for a 
valid value 
before error
Is 
SOC still 
0 or 1 before 
plug-out
?
Yes
No
Yes
Error code: 5
‘SOC start 
missing’
Save minimum SOC 
value within the error 
period temporarily.
No
Is 
EVSEId = 
’VE’ or ‘OE’ up to 
two min after 
plug-in
?
Is SOC = 
0 or 1 after 
plug-in?
Yes
No
Look in next 15 
min for a valid 
value after 
error 
Is 
SOC still 
0 or 1 after 
plug-in
?
Yes
Yes
Error code: 6
‘SOC end 
missing’
Save 
parameters 
after plug-in
No
No
Pick next value
No
Is 
min temp value 
= SOC after and 
len_period>1 
hour?
Yes
Update indexes to 
next unplugged 
period
Error code: 7
‘SOC used <= 1 %’
Is 
EVSEId = ’VE’ 
and ev_state 
=‘RESP’?
No
No
Is there 
an oscilating 
behaviour in next 
10 min after
plug-in?
Errorcode: 8
‘VE error’
No
Does 
SOC change 
more than 
1%?
No
Yes
Yes
Does 
SOC change 
in this period
?
Yes
Yes
Start index: 
unplugged[0]
Last end index: 
unplugged[-1]
Figure 4.3: Flowchart visualising checks and saved outputs when assessing an unplugged
period.
17
==PAGE:24==
Additional comments
If a trip is determined, the energy and SOC before leaving and after returning is saved
with the respective timestamp and duration is saved. A counter tracking the number of
trips during a day. For more information about the saved parameters see Appendix C.
An important possible limitation of the algorithm is that it does not take into account
that two unplugged periods could be related. Sometimes when a car goes into an error
state, the system needs to be restarted to return to a normal state again. Therefore two
relatively close unplugged periods with an error in between could be a trip followed by an
error and a restart. This is not taken into account in the code since in theory there could
be several restarts following each other and the restarts often happen several hours after
the faulty plug-in which makes the data unreliable.
4.4
Timeshifting of data
While working with the data, some unexpected behaviour for the leaving time was ob-
served.
Figure 4.4(a) shows a quite clear pattern of the leaving time from the 1st of
October to the 19th of February, but then after the 20th of February, the cars start to
leave one hour earlier than the ’normal’ time. This could be due to changes in work pat-
terns, but then about a month later, the 26th of March, the time shifts with an additional
hour earlier, thus the ’normal’ time has now shifted 2 hours. This means that the cars
are leaving before 5:00 which is very unlikely. Then all of sudden on the 28th of August
the time switches back to ’normal’ again. The one hour extra shift on the 26th of March
is probably due to the daylight saving time shift (or summer time) that have not been
taken into account, but the two hour jump on the 28th of August cannot be explained
rationally and a manual correction in the system is the only explanation that makes sense.
Therefore the data marked with red and yellow in Figure 4.4(a) is time-shifted during the
reshaping of the data with the respective values. The corrected data are shown in Figure
4.4(b) and will be used for the the analysis.
Oct-16
Nov-16
Dec-16
Jan-17
Feb-17
Mar-17
Apr-17
May-17
Jun-17
Jul-17
Aug-17
Sep-17
Oct-17
Nov-17
Dec-17
Jan-18
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
Leave time [h]
-1 h
-2 h
DST period
(a) Observed unexpected behaviour
Oct-16
Nov-16
Dec-16
Jan-17
Feb-17
Mar-17
Apr-17
May-17
Jun-17
Jul-17
Aug-17
Sep-17
Oct-17
Nov-17
Dec-17
Jan-18
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
Leave time [h]
Normal
Corrected Periods
(b) Corrected leave time
Figure 4.4: (a) Observed unexpected behaviour in the leaving time, where daylight saving
time (DST) could explain the extra jump to -2 hours. It is determined that the observed
behaviour is not caused by change in user behaviour. (b) Corrected time shifted data.
18
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 5
Analysis and results
This chapter focusses on the analysis of the data and the results obtained. Firstly the
methodology and thoughts behind the analysis are described. Then, to give an introduc-
tion to the results, an overview of the ﬂeet behaviour including the charging patterns are
described. Next, the proposed distributions for the variables in a user proﬁle, deﬁned in
Chapter 3, are tested. A method for use of the distributions, when proposing a user pro-
ﬁle, is introduced and proﬁles for two relativity diﬀerent cars are proposed and compared.
Finally, a case study assessing the economic beneﬁts of the user proﬁles are evaluated.
5.1
Methodology
This section describes the methodology used, where Figure 5.1 shows the general data
analysis process performed on the EVs data. The data analysis process begins with the
raw data in hourly ﬁles from the NUVVE server as input. The data is downloaded, ﬁltered
and saved in daily CSV ﬁles to have a backup of the data. The errors are then removed
and the dataset is reshaped to ﬁt the purpose of the analysis. These steps are described
in Chapter 4. To give an introduction to the preliminary results, Section 5.2 describes
ﬁndings based on the data, including the current charging behaviour. Next step is ﬁtting
distributions to the data parameters for a user proﬁle, as deﬁned in Chapter 3. There were
Download, filter 
and concatenate 
into daily files
Raw data on 
server in 
hourly files
Remove errors 
and reshape 
dataset
Exploratory 
analysis based 
on data
Fitting 
distributions 
to data
Choose 
percentiles in 
distributions
Results and 
findings
Application
Figure 5.1: Overview of the general data analysis process.
19
==PAGE:26==
several iterations on how to model the data, with diﬀerent distributions such as the χ2,
Weibull and exponential distributions, since they all share a skewed shape. The log-normal
distribution was chosen due to the close relation to the normal distribution. Furthermore,
other researchers have used the log-normal function to model similar data. Alternatively,
the data itself can be used to estimate an uncertainty using the non-parametric bootstrap
method. In this method new samples, ’k’, are simulated based on existing data and for
each ’k’ sample the wanted parameters are calculated (i.e.
mean, standard deviation,
percentile,..) and a conﬁdence interval can then be made on these ’k’ calculated values.
This method was not used as part of the project was also to ﬁnd a method to estimate a
proﬁle when no data is available. To do this statistically, the data is ﬁtted to a distribution,
and then that distribution is used to foresee the behaviour. The distribution ﬁtting is
assessed in Section 5.3.
Based on the ﬁtted distributions the percentiles are used for setting the values for a user
proﬁle.
The percentiles were chosen because not all of the parameters were normally
distributed.
Using the percentiles could therefore be used for the log-normal and the
normal distribution, and this would also introduce a risk variable. The closer to the mean
the higher risk of not reaching energy deadline or having a too low energy target. This
part is assessed in Section 5.4. A result of the data analysis process is using the chosen
percentiles to construct the user proﬁle and an example of the application could be the
economic value of using user proﬁles instead of a mutual overall guess which is assessed in
Section 5.5.
5.2
Exploratory analysis
As an introduction to the results and an overview of the ﬂeet behaviour, an exploratory
analysis for the whole ﬂeet will be conducted ﬁrst. The trip data collected for each car
at Frederiksberg Forsyning using the method described in Chapter 4 is shown in Table
5.1. The data is divided into weekdays and weekends and further separated into numbers
of trips for weekdays. Each count represents the number of trips in one day, i.e. if there
is a count under “2 Trips”, it means that there were two trips on a particular day. It is
Table 5.1: Collected trip data divided into weekday and weekends. Each trip number
represents a day, i.e. if there is a count under ’2 Trips’ it means that one day the car had
two trips. The total days of the assessed period is 480 days.
Car
Weekday Trips
Weekend
Total days
1
2
3+
Total
No Trips
Trips
No Trips
with data
FF10
108
51
6
165
145
0
127
437
FF09
109
15
2
126
179
5
109
419
FF08
52
5
1
58
149
1
83
290
FF07
130
64
5
199
109
0
119
428
FF06
98
72
11
181
143
0
128
452
FF05
59
34
4
97
228
5
124
454
FF04
213
26
0
239
96
0
133
468
FF03
81
21
2
104
197
0
118
419
FF02
130
51
1
182
147
0
131
460
FF01
170
8
1
179
155
0
135
469
20
==PAGE:27==
noted that there is a diﬀerence between the number of determined trips for the diﬀerent
cars in the table. The total period is 480 days which means that car FF08 has very little
data and car FF01 and FF04 have data for almost every day. Furthermore, the amount
of weekend trips is very low, which is due to the fact that Frederiksberg Forsyning is a
company and the cars therefore mainly are used on the weekdays.
5.2.1
Error analysis
Investigating the errors will give insight to whether something could be improved to achieve
more trip data and therefore more reliable user proﬁles. To get an overview of which errors
that are most frequent, every error from every unplugged period over the year is inspected.
Figure 5.2 shows the number of unplugged periods over the 480 days, with the errors from
the weekends on the left, and the errors from the weekdays on the right. In weekends the
major error type is that the cars are not plugged in, and on weekdays that the assessed
period is less than 10 minutes. The weekdays contains a broader span of the error types
since the cars are unplugged more often. The high amount of the ’not plugged’ error in
weekends might be due to maintenance or, possibly, if the car is not properly connected
on Fridays, it takes longer time to correct the error and it may last until Monday.
Figure 5.2: The middle pie plot shows the distribution of trips and errors for all un-
plugged periods over the full period. The left pie plot shows the distribution of the weekend
errors, and the right for weekday errors. The most frequent error on weekends is that the
car is not plugged and for weekdays it is that the period is less than 10 minutes.
If it is not possible to determine a trip during a day as described in Section 4.3, the day
is categorised to be an error day. Figure 5.3(a) shows the number of cars with a full error
day over the whole period. The errors are separated into weekdays and weekends again
and the mean value for both is also shown. The mean number of cars with an error is
a little higher during weekends, but this is mainly due to the 14th and 15th of January,
where there were no data available on the server. In Figure 5.3(b) the errors are plotted
as a function of the cars, where it is noted that car FF08 has a signiﬁcantly higher error
rate than the other cars.
21
==PAGE:28==
Oct-16
Nov-16
Dec-16
Jan-17
Feb-17
Mar-17
Apr-17
May-17
Jun-17
Jul-17
Aug-17
Sep-17
Oct-17
Nov-17
Dec-17
Jan-18
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Cars with full day error
Mean weekend error
Mean weekday error
Weekend error
Weekday error
(a) Errors over time
FF01
FF02
FF03
FF04
FF05
FF06
FF07
FF08
FF09
FF10
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
Error days
Weekend error
Weekday error
(b) Errors per car
Figure 5.3: If it can’t be determined whether there is a trip or not for a day, the day will
be deﬁned as an error. (a) The plot shows how many cars that were deﬁned with an error
day over the full data period for weekdays and weekends separately. There is approximately
1 car with a full day error each day during the period. (b) Weekday and weekend errors
for each car. Car FF08 have signiﬁcant more errors than the other cars.
5.2.2
Fleet behaviour
This section will investigate the behaviour of the individual users and the ﬂeet based on
the data. Based on the regular usage of the cars and the negligible amount of trips during
weekends, only the weekday trips will be assessed in the further analysis. Figure 5.4 shows
the distribution of the data for each car for the 342 weekdays only. In general most of the
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Number of days
FF01
FF02
FF03
FF04
FF05
FF06
FF07
FF08
FF09
FF10
45%
50%
2%2%
43%
38%
15%
4%
58%
24%
6%
12%
28%
62%
8%
2%
67%
17%
10%
5%
42%
29%
21%
3% 5%
32%
38%
19%
10%
44%
15%
39%
52%
32%
4%
11%
42%
32%
15%
2%
9%
No trips
1 trip
2 trips
3+ trips
Errors
Figure 5.4: The distribution of the data for the 342 weekdays only. The percentages are
rounded and percentages below 1% are not shown. Car FF08 have a lot of errors (over
1/3 of the days are errors) and for car FF05 2/3 of the days the car is not used.
22
==PAGE:29==
cars have approximately the same distribution between “No trips” and “trips” (all types),
but there is a diﬀerence especially for car FF08 and FF05. As stated in Figure 5.3(b), car
FF08 has a lot of errors where more than 1/3 of the weekdays are errors. It will therefore
be diﬃcult to determine a reliable proﬁle for this car. Car FF05 does not have many
errors, but approximately 2/3 of the data is no trip days, which also makes it diﬃcult to
determine a reliable user proﬁle for this car.
0
2
4
6
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
Energy usage pr. day [kWh]
FF01
FF02
FF03
FF04
FF05
FF06
FF07
FF08
FF09
FF10
a)
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
Leave time [h]
b)
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
Return Time [h]
c)
Figure 5.5: Three simple boxplots which give an overview of the usage of the individual
cars. The red line in a) deﬁnes the maximum capacity of the battery. The energy usage
in a) and are pretty similar whereas the leave time in b) and return time in c) deviates a
bit more.
Figure 5.5 gives an initial impression and overview of how the usage of the cars is and
how they deviate. For the energy usage per day in Figure 5.5(a), the lowest median is
for car FF08 whereas car FF04 has the highest median. Even though there are a small
deviations in the median value, the interquartile range (IQR) are similar for all cars. The
red line deﬁnes the battery capacity which is noted to very rarely be exceeded in for the
daily energy usage.
For the leave time shown Figure 5.5(b) the cars deviate in behaviour. In general, the
cars leaves in the same time interval, which is within oﬃce hours. Extreme observations
are deﬁned as being outside Q1-1.5·IQR or Q3+1.5·IQR, shown as circles in the boxplot.
Car FF03, FF05, FF08 and FF09 have no extreme observations but very large deviations
whereas car FF01, FF02 and FF04 have quite a few extreme observations. These extreme
observations are mainly due to a very narrow IQR, and these cars therefore have a very
ﬁxed periodic leave time and not that many late trips.
Figure 5.5(c) shows the return time which is very broadly distributed where the earliest
return time is 7:00 and the latest is 7:00. Again Car FF02 and FF04 have a narrow IQR
which makes them easier to predict and introduce low uncertainty.
The boxplot gives a good overview of the cars but Figure 5.6 gives a better insight into
how the variables are distributed. The plot shows the median and mean values, with 6
upper percentiles and 6 lower percentiles, ranging from 99.5% to 0.5%. It is noted that
23
==PAGE:30==
07
09
11
13
15
17
19
Return Time [h]
FF01
FF02
FF03
FF04
FF05
FF06
FF07
FF08
FF09
FF10
05
07
09
11
13
15
Leave Time [h]
(a) Return and leave time separately
FF01
FF02
FF03
FF04
FF05
FF06
FF07
FF08
FF09
FF10
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
Time of usage [h]
Mean
Median
99.5%
97.5%
95.0%
90.0%
80.0%
70.0%
30.0%
20.0%
10.0%
5.0%
2.5%
0.5%
(b) Return and leave time merged
Figure 5.6:
The median and mean leave and return time for each car, plotted with
percentiles ranging from 99.5% to 0.5%. On average car FF01 and FF03 leaves as the
earliest and car FF08 leaves as the latest and car FF07 returns at the earliest and car
FF04 returns as the latest.
FF01
FF02
FF03
FF04
FF05
FF06
FF07
FF08
FF09
FF10
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
Energy usage pr. day [kWh]
Mean
Median
99.5%
97.5%
95.0%
90.0%
80.0%
70.0%
30.0%
20.0%
10.0%
5.0%
2.5%
0.5%
(a) Energy usage per car with percentiles
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13
Trip Duration [h]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Energy usage pr. trip [kWh]
Data 1 trip
Median energy
Median duration
Data 2+ trips
Median energy
Median duration
(b) Energy usage vs. trip duration
Figure 5.7: (a) The median energy usage with the percentiles from 0.5% to 99.5% in-
cluding the mean value. (b) Energy usage as a function of the trip duration. The mean
trip duration and energy usage are often shorter and lower for 1 trips than the 2+ trips.
24
==PAGE:31==
the mean is higher than the median for the leave time, which is the case for a positively
skewed distribution. The intervals around the median deviate in size, e.g. for car FF01,
the interval is very small whereas for car FF09 it is very large. In Figure 5.6(b) the leave
time and return time from Figure 5.6(a) are merged into one, to get a better overview
of the time of usage. Car FF07 and FF08 have a narrow interval between the two mean
values, whereas car FF02 and FF04 have a larger interval. However, here the 99.5% and
0.5% percentiles are also closer to the mean values, i.e. there is a diﬀerence in the spread
and therefore also the uncertainty.
The energy usage is also investigated more thoroughly. In Figure 5.7(a) the median and
mean energy with percentiles ranging from 99.5% to 0.5% are plotted for the individual
cars. Here the mean value is higher than the median and the percentiles also indicate
that the data is positively skewed.
In general, the cars have a similar median energy
usage around 5 kWh, except for car FF04 which is a little higher and car FF08 which is
a little lower. Car FF07 has the largest 99.5% percentile whereas the lowest percentiles
do not diﬀer much between the cars. This daily energy usage is very low compared to the
capacity of 21 kWh, which means that on average only 1/4 of the capacity is used. In
Figure 5.7(b) the energy usage for each trip as a function of the trip duration is plotted
with separation of 1 trip and 2+ trips. Due to the skewness of the distribution, the median
is chosen instead of the mean as this gives a more accurate estimate of central tendency.
The median energy usage for 2+ trips is 2.1 kWh which is about half of the median for
1 trips with 3.99 kWh. With a median duration of 1 hour and 20 minutes, the 2+ trips
are almost 2 hours shorter than 1 trip with a median value of 3 hours and 15 minutes.
This means that if there is a second trip (or more), these are often short and use very
6
8
10
12
14
16
Leave Time [h]
Mon
Tue
Wed
Thu
Fri
0
5
10
15
20
Energy Usage [kWh]
(a) Weekday dependency
6
8
10
12
14
16
Leave Time [h]
Spring
Summer
Autumn
Winter
0
5
10
15
20
Energy Usage [kWh]
(b) Season dependency
Figure 5.8:
The energy usage per day and leave time as a function of weekday and
season. (a) Monday trips have a tendency to be a little earlier and require a little more
energy. The median energy usage is 5 kWh on Mondays compared to around 4.5 kWh for
the other weekdays. (b) The cars leave a little later in the autumn and winter period and
the energy usage is also a bit higher probably due to heating.
25
==PAGE:32==
little energy. To make sure that the user proﬁle will be applicable for all weekdays over a
yearly period, the seasonal dependency and the weekday dependency is investigated with
the plots in Figure 5.8. In Figure 5.8(a) Monday and Friday trips have a tendency to start
earlier and on Fridays there with no trips after 14:00. The median energy usage is a little
higher on Mondays with just above 5 kWh and around 4.4 kWh for the other weekdays.
If the battery capacity is exceed it is also often on a Monday. Figure 5.8(b) shows the
seasonal dependency, where the cars do leave a little later in the autumn and winter period
and use a bit more energy, which is probably mainly due to heating of the cars. These
diﬀerences are, however, not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent, and it is therefore assumed that one
proﬁle will ﬁt all weekdays and seasons.
5.2.3
Fleet Charging
An interesting feature to investigate is how the cars are currently charging. The dumb
charging information is saved during the trip determination (see Appendix C). This dumb
charging is to assure that each car reaches a speciﬁed target at a given time, and therefore
the start time mainly depends on the SOC of the battery and the ampere used when
charging.
Oct-16
Nov-16
Dec-16
Jan-17
Feb-17
Mar-17
Apr-17
May-17
Jun-17
Jul-17
Aug-17
Sep-17
Oct-17
Nov-17
Dec-17
Jan-18
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Charging Duration [h]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Charging start SOC [%]
(a) Charging duration with charging SOC start
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Charging end time [h]
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
Charged energy [kWh]
No Trip
Trip
(b) Charging end time with trips/no trips
Figure 5.9: (a) Charging duration over time for both no trip and trips. The bar on the
right shows the start SOC when the car started to charge. It is noted that the charging
pattern have been optimised from October 2016 to April 2017. (b) Charged energy as a
function of the charging end time for the optimised period separated into trips and no trips.
In Figure 5.9(a) the charging duration over the full period for days both with no trips and
trips are shown. Each duration has been coloured with the respective start SOC following
the values as speciﬁed on the bar to the right.
It is noted that the charging pattern
has been optimised from October 2016 to April 2017. The high charging durations from
October 2016 to January 2017 is mainly due to non-trip days, and the threshold for when
the cars stop to dumb charge, have clearly been lowered. In the optimised section, there
is still some unusually high start SOC that have a long charging duration. Some of the
explanation is found when separating no trips from trips as seen in Figure 5.9(b), where
most of the high charging end times are for no trips. It also noted that most of the cars
stop to charge around 7:00. In Figure 5.10(a) the charging time is plotted as a function
26
==PAGE:33==
of the charged energy. In the plot, each car has been assigned a colour and it is clear
that car FF04 has a diﬀerent charging pattern. This explains the high charging durations
seen in Figure 5.9(a). The plot also shows a clear linear correlation between charging time
and charged energy, which for most of the cars follow the line charged energy = charging
time·10 i.e. the cars charge 10 kWh per hour. In Figure 5.10(b) the charged energy as a
function of the leave time is investigated. Car FF04 does not leave particularly later than
the other cars but is on average charged around 21 kWh (100%), so this car’s charging
pattern could deﬁnitely be optimised. Most of the cars charge around 20 kWh (95%) but
car FF09 also has a diﬀerent charging pattern with a mean around 18 kWh (86%).
0
1
2
Charging time [h]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Charged energy [kWh]
y=x*10
FF01
FF02
FF03
FF04
FF05
FF06
FF07
FF08
FF09
FF10
(a) Charged energy vs. charging time
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Leave time [h]
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
Charged energy [kWh]
Mean
FF01
FF02
FF03
FF04
FF05
FF06
FF07
FF08
FF09
FF10
(b) Charged energy vs. leave time
Figure 5.10: (a)Charged energy as a function of the charging time for the optimised
period from April 2017 to January 2018. As expected there is a linear correlation between
the charged energy and the charging time which is 10 kWh/h. Each car has been assigned
a colour and it is clear that car FF04 have a diﬀerent charging pattern. (b) The charged
energy as a function of the leave time.
5.3
Distribution ﬁtting
In this section, the proposed distributions described in Section 3.2 is ﬁtted to the data
and tested with qq-plots. The leave time and energy usage are tested with the log-normal
distribution where the parameters for the ﬁtting comes from the normal distribution of
the log-transformed data. Therefore, both the log-transformed data is tested to follow a
normal distribution and the ’original’ data is tested to follow a log-normal distribution.
For the return time, the normal distribution is ﬁtted and tested. The tests are done with
qq-plots, where the data should be fairly close to a straight line if the data follows the
tested distribution. The data for all the cars is tested as one big sample in this section.
The individual car’s data are of course also ﬁtted and tested but will not be shown in this
section. The plots are shown in Appendix D.
Leave Time
The ﬁrst ﬁtted and tested parameter is the leave time. For this test, only data from the
ﬁrst trip in a day is modelled due to the fact that the energy deadline should be for the
ﬁrst trip. As mentioned in Section 3.2 the data needs to be close to a natural 0 due to the
27
==PAGE:34==
1
0
1
2
Leave Time [h]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Density
Normal dist
Log-Data (1st trip)
(a) Histogram for the log-transformed data
2
0
2
Theoretical Quantiles
1
0
1
2
Sample Quantiles
(b) Normal qq-plot for the log-transformed data
0
2
4
6
8
10
Leave time after 5:30 [h]
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Density
Log-normal dist
Data (1st trip)
(c) Histogram for the data
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Theoretical Quantiles
0
2
5
8
10
12
Sample Quantiles
(d) Log-normal qq-plot for the data
Figure 5.11: a) Histogram for the log-transformed time-shifted leave time for the ﬁrst
trip in a day. The line shows the ﬁtted normal function with µ = 1.04 and σ = 0.53. b)
qq-plot for a). c) Histogram of the time-shifted leave time for the ﬁrst trip in a day. The
line shows the ﬁtted log-normal function with the parameters found in a). d) Log-normal
qq-plot for the time-shifted leave time.
properties of the natural logarithm. This can be done by taking the earliest leave time in
the data, ﬂoor it to the nearest quarter and shift the data with this number. The actual
leave time is then found by adding this time-shift again after ﬁtting the distribution. For
the whole ﬂeet, the shifted time is 5 hours and 30 minutes.
In Figure 5.11(b) a histogram of the log-transformed time-shifted leave time and the corre-
sponding qq-plot is shown. The qq-plot in Figure 5.11(b) shows that the log-transformed
data can be assumed to follow a normal distribution. There are only 3 values which do not
follow the ﬁtted line. Therefore the mean and standard deviation from the normal ﬁtted
distribution of the log-transformed data can be used to model the log-normal distribution
using Equation (3.2). The ﬁtted log-normal function and corresponding qq-plot are shown
in Figure 5.11. To determine how well the percentiles ﬁt the data, Figure 5.12(a) is in-
spected. Only 10 out of the 1530 trips are not included in the 99% conﬁdence interval.
In Figure 5.12(b) the diﬀerence between the percentiles are plotted for each car. Here the
percentile diﬀerences for all the cars are within 10% for percentiles under 80%. The large
diﬀerences for the high percentiles might be lower with more data points but the data is
assumed to follow the ﬁtted log-normal function and it will therefore be used for setting
the energy deadline.
28
==PAGE:35==
Oct-16
Nov-16
Dec-16
Jan-17
Feb-17
Mar-17
Apr-17
May-17
Jun-17
Jul-17
Aug-17
Sep-17
Oct-17
Nov-17
Dec-17
Jan-18
6
8
10
12
14
16
Leave Time [h]
Data
99.5%
95%
90%
Median
10%
5%
0.5%
(a) Data with percentiles from distribution
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentile [%]
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Percentile difference [%]
FF01
FF02
FF03
FF04
FF05
FF06
FF07
FF08
FF09
FF10
(b) Diﬀerence between percentiles
Figure 5.12: a) Data for all cars with the diﬀerent percentiles from the ﬁtted log-normal
distribution. b) The diﬀerence in percentage between the percentiles from the data and the
ﬁtted log-normal function. The diﬀerence is within 10% for percentiles under 75%.
Energy Usage
The next ﬁtted variable is the energy usage, which is modelled on the cumulated energy
consumption per day. For this ﬂeet most of the cars have only one major trip per day
and, if any, the remaining trips are very short as seen in Figure 5.7(b). Therefore it was
decided to model the energy need for the whole day, as trips after the ﬁrst do not have a
major inﬂuence and the energy rarely exceeds the battery limit (3 trips out of 1534 as seen
in Figure 5.14(b)). Further information can be found in Section 5.2.2. For another ﬂeet,
it might be necessary to model the 2+ trips energy usage separately, but this is outside
the scope of this project.
The energy usage has a natural zero, which means that this data does not have to be
shifted. In Figure 5.13 both the logarithm-transformed data and the original data are
plotted with the respective qq-plots.
In Figure 5.13(d) the data is almost completely
linear for the lower percentiles.
For the highest percentiles, the data and model start
to deviate due to the capacity limit of the battery. The limit of the battery capacity is
21 kWh and this limit corresponds to the 98th percentile which means that only 2% of
the model slightly overshoots. Therefore the percentiles above the limit will be set to the
limit instead of the modelled value. Since the model should correspond to the daily energy
usage it makes sense that the distribution overshoots slightly. In Figure 5.14 the data is
again plotted with the distribution percentiles and the diﬀerence between the percentiles
are plotted. There are some values on the edge of the 0.5th percentile in Figure 5.14(a)
and here the overshoot is also clearly seen. In Figure 5.14(b) the diﬀerence between the
percentiles for the diﬀerent cars is mostly within 20% for percentiles between 5% and 95%.
The data is therefore assumed to follow the ﬁtted log-normal function for the individual
cars as shown in Appendix D and the distribution will therefore be used for setting the
energy target.
29
==PAGE:36==
1
0
1
2
3
Energy usage pr. day [kWh]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Density
Normal dist
Log-data (cum. energy)
(a) Histogram for the log-transformed data
2
0
2
Theoretical Quantiles
1
0
1
2
3
4
Sample Quantiles
(b) Normal qq-plot for the log-transformed data
0
5
10
15
20
Energy usage pr. day [kWh]
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Density
Log-normal dist
Data (cum. energy)
(c) Histogram for the data
0
10
20
30
Theoretical Quantiles
0
10
20
30
Sample Quantiles
(d) Log-normal qq-plot for the data
Figure 5.13: a) Histogram for log-transformed cumulated energy usage per day. The
line shows the ﬁtted normal function with µ = 1.44 and σ = 0.79. b) qq-plot for a). c)
Histogram of the cumulated energy usage. The line shows the ﬁtted log-normal function
with the parameters from a). d) Log-normal qq-plot for the cumulated energy usage.
Oct-16
Nov-16
Dec-16
Jan-17
Feb-17
Mar-17
Apr-17
May-17
Jun-17
Jul-17
Aug-17
Sep-17
Oct-17
Nov-17
Dec-17
Jan-18
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Energy usage pr. day [kWh]
Data
99.5%
Limit
95%
90%
Median
10%
5%
0.5%
(a) Data with percentiles from distribution
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentile [%]
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Percentile difference [%]
FF01
FF02
FF03
FF04
FF05
FF06
FF07
FF08
FF09
FF10
(b) Diﬀerence between percentiles
Figure 5.14: a) Data for all trips and cars with the diﬀerent percentiles from the ﬁtted
log-normal distribution. The mean value is 5.7 kWh and calculated for the log-normal
function. b) The diﬀerence in percentage between the percentiles from the data and the
ﬁtted log-normal. The diﬀerence is mostly within 20% for percentiles between 5% and 95%.
30
==PAGE:37==
Return Time
The last parameter to model is the return time which is modelled with data for the last
trip in a day. This data is a bit more diﬃcult to ﬁt to a distribution. The data is slightly
negatively skewed and have a lower density around 12 but the best approach would be
using a normal distribution. In Figure 5.15 a histogram of the data with the ﬁtted normal
distribution and the corresponding qq-plot is shown. The data is not perfectly normally
distributed but the data is still close to the ﬁtted line in the qq-plot. For the individual
cars in Appendix D, the return time data for car FF04, FF05, FF07, FF08 and FF09
follows the ﬁtted line for a normal distribution in the qq-plot. For car FF01, FF02, FF03,
FF06 and FF10 the ﬁt could better, since they have a lower probability around 12:00.
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
Return Time [h]
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Density
Normal
Data (last trip)
(a) Histogram for the data
2
0
2
Theoretical Quantiles
8
10
12
15
18
Sample Quantiles
(b) Normal qq-plot for the data
Figure 5.15: a) Histogram for the return time for the last trip in a day. The line shows
the ﬁtted normal function with µ = 13.2 and σ = 1.82. b) Normal qq-plot for the logarithm
of the time-shifted leave time.
Oct-16
Nov-16
Dec-16
Jan-17
Feb-17
Mar-17
Apr-17
May-17
Jun-17
Jul-17
Aug-17
Sep-17
Oct-17
Nov-17
Dec-17
Jan-18
8
10
12
14
16
18
Return Time [h]
Data
99.5%
95%
90%
Mean
10%
5%
0.5%
(a) Data with percentiles from distribution
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentile [%]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Percentile difference [%]
FF01
FF02
FF03
FF04
FF05
FF06
FF07
FF08
FF09
FF10
(b) Diﬀerence between percentiles
Figure 5.16: a) Data for the last trip and cars with the diﬀerent percentiles from the
ﬁtted normal distribution. b) The diﬀerence in percentage between the percentiles from the
data and the ﬁtted normal distribution. The diﬀerence is within 8% for percentiles between
5% and 95% and the mean value for all cars and all percentiles are 3%.
If the return time should be modelled more precisely an alternative method, maybe using
31
==PAGE:38==
two distributions, might be more beneﬁcial. In Figure 5.16(b) the diﬀerence between the
data percentiles and distribution percentiles is plotted in percentage. As expected there
is a larger deviation in the middle due to the lower density around 12:00. The diﬀerence
is within 8% for percentiles between 5% and 95% and the mean diﬀerence for all cars and
all percentiles are 3%. Based on these investigations it is assumed that the return time
can modelled with a normal distribution.
5.3.1
Estimation of sample size
An estimation of the sample size can be done for each of the three distributions using
Equation (3.4) and (3.5). The sample size is an estimation of how many trips should be
included in a new study to obtain a certain precision. For the leave time, the desired
accuracy could be the 10% (f=0.1), which was the limit for the lower percentiles in Figure
5.12(b) and with 95% conﬁdence the sample size becomes:
n =
t2
α/2,n−1 (ln[exp(σ)])2
1
2 ln
1 + f
1 −f
2
= 3.847 (ln[exp(0.53)])2
1
2 ln
1 + 0.1
1 −0.1
2
≈107.
(5.1)
The same can be done for the energy where the desired accuracy is set to 20% as in Figure
5.14(b):
n =
t2
α/2,n−1 (ln[exp(σ)])2
1
2 ln
1 + f
1 −f
2
= 3.847 (ln[exp(0.78)])2
1
2 ln
1 + 0.2
1 −0.2
2
≈58.
(5.2)
For the return time, the maximum error of the estimate needs to be evaluated, which is the
maximum error in hours of the mean value. The mean diﬀerence in Figure 5.16(b) for each
car can be used as the uncertainty ranging from 1.3% to 4.7%. These mean diﬀerences is
then multiplied by the respective mean of the car shown in Figure D.1-D.10. This would
give an uncertainty in hours, that can be used as an estimate for the maximum error. The
mean value for all the calculations were 0.4 hours (26 min) and this gives the sample size:
n =
z1−α/2 · σ
ME
2
=
1.96 · 1.82
0.4
2
≈80.
(5.3)
The three diﬀerent distribution estimates give some diﬀerent values for the sample size
and will of course change if another accuracy is wanted, but 58 samples are most likely
just enough for a good estimate. For the data used in this analysis, only about 50% of
the possible weekdays contained a trip (or more). Consequently, for a similar ﬂeet, 116
weekdays corresponding to around 23 weeks of data would probably be a better minimum
estimate of the number of days in the collected data. Depending on how frequent the cars
are used, and how many errors there are, a minimum of 23 weeks (or approximately 6
months) of data is needed to get 20% accuracy on the estimated true mean of the energy
usage and leave time. To get 10% accuracy on the leave time a sample size of 107 trips
(i.e 214 weekdays) corresponding to about a year of data is needed.
32
==PAGE:39==
5.4
Individual user proﬁles
This section will focus on how to create individual user proﬁles for the cars at Frederiksberg
Forsyning. First, it is explained how the minimum energy is set, which is a ﬁxed value
for all the cars. Then the energy deadline, the energy target and lastly the return time
is analysed and explained. The main idea is to use the ﬁtted distribution percentiles for
each car when setting the parameters. The chosen percentile have to be within a certain
area deﬁned by a threshold which is set as the geometric mean (GM) or the arithmetic
mean (AM). Afterwards, for two relatively diﬀerent cars, two user proﬁles are proposed
and compared. Finally, a case study is deducted to show how using the proﬁles instead of
a mutual overall guess have an economic value.
5.4.1
Minimum Energy
The minimum energy is a reserve that should be left in the battery when the trip(s) for the
day is completed. This ensures that the car has enough energy for emergency trips, and
can reach a hospital for example. This value is also a minimum value for how much the car
can discharge if participating in the electricity market. This value can be set individually
for each car or as a ﬁxed value for all cars. As this ﬂeet has very similar energy usage, a
ﬁxed value is chosen for all the cars.
The cars operate mainly in the Copenhagen area and a distance of 15 km is deemed
suﬃcient for an emergency trip. As stated in Section 2.2 the cars use 165 Wh/km which
gives a minimum energy of 165 Wh/km·15 km = 2475 Wh = 2.5 kWh. This value is then
set to the maximum allowed discharging level. Either if the car is participating in the
electricity market or when the car returns from a trip. If the battery energy level is below
this limit the car should start to instant charge when plugged in. Furthermore, this value
is added to the geometric mean for the energy usage to determine the percentile threshold
for the energy target.
5.4.2
Energy deadline
The energy deadline is the ﬁrst time in a day where the car is expected to leave for a trip. At
this speciﬁc time, the car should have reached the speciﬁed energy target to have suﬃcient
energy for an upcoming trip. The energy deadline for each car is determined individually
based on the individual ﬁtted distributions. The parameters used for ﬁtting the log-normal
distribution for the leave time can be found in Appendix D in the description for Figure
D.1(a)-D.10(a). The probability density function (PDF) for each car is plotted in Figure
5.17(a) with the geometric mean calculated with Equation (3.3). Figure 5.17(b) shows the
cumulated distribution function (CDF) also plotted with the geometric mean and Figure
5.17(c) shows a close up of the grey area. The mean value sets the threshold which is the
50th percentile (the median) as expected from Equation (3.3). The distribution percentiles
are used for setting the energy deadline, and it has to be taken into consideration how
much risk the percentiles introduce for each car. One percentile is chosen for all cars and
the corresponding energy deadline is set for each car.
For better comparison of the cars, the intervals are plotted in Figure 5.17(d) with the 1st
percentile and the 50th percentile (median) as the threshold. Choosing a percentile above
the geometric mean value will introduce too much risk and therefore the geometric mean
value is used for setting the threshold percentile. The threshold percentile is therefore
33
==PAGE:40==
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Energy Deadline [h]
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
PDF
FF01
FF02
FF03
FF04
FF05
FF06
FF07
FF08
FF09
FF10
(a) 1st to 99th percentile for the PDF
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Energy Deadline [h]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentile [%]
CDF
GM
Threshold
(b) 1st to 99th percentile for the CDF
06:00
06:30
07:00
07:30
08:00
08:30
09:00
09:30
Energy Deadline [h]
0
10
20
30
40
50
Percentile [%]
FF01
FF02
FF03
FF04
FF05
FF06
FF07
FF08
FF09
FF10
(c) 1st to 50th percentile for the CDF
06:00
06:30
07:00
07:30
08:00
08:30
09:00
09:30
Energy Deadline [h]
FF01
FF02
FF03
FF04
FF05
FF06
FF07
FF08
FF09
FF10
1st percentile
Threshold
(d) Energy deadline span
Figure 5.17: a) The probability density function for each car. The dashed lines show the
geometric mean. b) The cumulated distribution function (CDF). The geometrical mean
deﬁnes the percentile threshold.
c) The percentiles to choose between when setting the
energy deadline. d) Overview of how the cars deviate. The dashed line shows the energy
deadline from the investigations of the charging in Figure 5.9(b).
the upper limit for percentiles that can be chosen, and the valid percentiles are shown in
Figure 5.17(c). A higher percentile gives a higher risk, but also more time for doing market
services. To have something to compare with, the investigations of the ﬂeet charging in
Figure 5.9(b) showed that the cars stop to charge around 7:00. In Figure 5.17(d) this
value is shown with the dashed line and the individual distributions of the energy deadline
can be visually compared. Already when moving from a guess to using the data, this
introduces insight into the users’ behaviour. Actually, 8 out of the 10 cars have their 1st
percentile below 7:00 and this value is therefore already exposed to risk for many of the
cars. It also shows that the cars diﬀer up to an hour for the ﬁrst percentile and using an
individual energy deadline would optimise this ﬂeet. The optimisation would both include
a better charging pattern and more time for market participation.
34
==PAGE:41==
5.4.3
Energy target
The energy target is set in the same way as the energy deadline, besides that the minimum
energy level found in Section 5.4.1 is added to the geometric mean. The energy deadline
and energy target are very closely related. If a high risk is chosen for the energy deadline,
it will impact the energy target. If the deadline is not reached, i.e. if the car leaves earlier
than the deadline, the energy target will not be reached.
The parameters used for ﬁtting the log-normal distribution for the energy usage can be
found in Appendix D in the description for Figure D.1(b)-D.10(b). Figure 5.18(a) gives an
overview of how the individual cars energy target is distributed and the dashed lines show
the geometric mean. The distributions are very similar, except car FF08 which deviates
by having a higher density for lower values and consequently a lower geometric mean.
0
5
10
15
20
Energy Target [kWh]
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
PDF
FF01
FF02
FF03
FF04
FF05
FF06
FF07
FF08
FF09
FF10
(a) 1st to 99th percentile for the PDF
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Energy Target [kWh]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentile [%]
CDF
GM+2.5
Threshold
(b) 1st to 99th percentile for the CDF
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Energy Target [kWh]
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
Percentile [%]
FF01
FF02
FF03
FF04
FF05
FF06
FF07
FF08
FF09
FF10
(c) 50th to 99th percentile for the CDF
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20
Energy Target [kWh]
FF01
FF02
FF03
FF04
FF05
FF06
FF07
FF08
FF09
FF10
Threshold
99th percentile
(d) Energy target span
Figure 5.18: a) The probability density function for each car. The dashed lines show the
geometric mean. b) The cumulated distribution function (CDF). The geometrical mean
added the minimum energy from Section 5.4.1 deﬁnes the percentile threshold. c) The
percentiles to choose between when setting the energy target. d) Overview of how the cars
deviate.
35
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.18(b) shows the cumulated distribution function (CDF) also plotted with the
geometric mean and Figure 5.18(c) shows a close up of the grey area. As the battery have
a 21 kWh capacity limit, the values above this limit from the distribution is set to 21 kWh.
As mentioned earlier, the threshold for the energy target is deﬁned by the geometric mean
added the minimum energy level. This gives individual threshold percentiles for each car
as seen in Figure 5.18(c).
Figure 5.18(d) show the energy target span for the ﬂeet is between 5 and 21 kWh, where
car FF08 have a very small span and a low 99th percentile for the expected energy usage.
As seen in Table 5.1 in the exploratory analysis, car FF08 had 58 samples for weekday
trips, which was the minimum estimated sample size in Equation 5.2. Therefore, more
samples for car FF08 would improve the reliability of this ﬁnding.
From Figure 5.18(b) one percentile is chosen for the ﬂeet and the corresponding energy
target is set for each car. The lower the percentile the more risk of not having enough
energy for the upcoming trips that day.
5.4.4
Return time
The return time parameter is when the car is expected to return for the day, i.e. the
return time of the last trip in a day.
The parameters used for ﬁtting the log-normal
distribution for the return time can be found in Appendix D in the description for Figure
D.1(c)-D.10(c). The return time is mostly of interest for the aggregator to optimise market
participation and not so much for the user. The return time is diﬃcult to model with a
distribution since it is very dependent on when the cars leave, but it will still give insight
into how the cars behave. The probability density functions are plotted in Figure 5.19(a)
and the cumulated distribution function in Figure 5.19(b). In both ﬁgures, the dashed
lines represent the arithmetic mean which is used for setting the threshold value which
corresponds to the 50th percentile. Most of the cars have a large standard deviation except
for cars FF02 and FF04, which means that these two cars have a lower uncertainty. The
mean values are deviating with 2 hours from the earliest to the latest and the cars can be
grouped into three groups. The cars that return earliest are FF07 and FF08 with a mean
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
Return Time [h]
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
PDF
FF01
FF02
FF03
FF04
FF05
FF06
FF07
FF08
FF09
FF10
(a) 1st to 99th percentile for the PDF
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
Return time [h]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentile [%]
CDF
AM
Threshold
(b) 1st to 99th percentile for the CDF
Figure 5.19: a) The probability density function for each car. The dashed lines show the
arithmetic mean. b) The cumulated distribution function (CDF). The arithmetic mean
(AM) deﬁnes the percentile threshold.
36
==PAGE:43==
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
Return time [h]
50
60
70
80
90
100
Percentile [%]
FF01
FF02
FF03
FF04
FF05
FF06
FF07
FF08
FF09
FF10
(a) 50th to 99th percentile for the CDF
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
Return Time [h]
FF01
FF02
FF03
FF04
FF05
FF06
FF07
FF08
FF09
FF10
99th percentile
Threshold
(b) Return time span
Figure 5.20:
a) The percentiles to choose between when setting the return time.
b)
Overview of how the cars deviate.
value around 12:15. The middle group consist of cars FF01, FF03, FF05, FF09 and FF10
with a mean value around 13:00. The last group is the cars that returns the latest which
are FF02, FF04 and FF06 with a mean value around 14:00.
As with the two other parameters one percentile is chosen for the percentiles above the
threshold where the valid values are shown in Figure 5.20(a). Figure 5.20(b) shows an
overview of the diﬀerent cars span for the return time. As the threshold for the return time
is equal to the mean value for the normal distribution, the plot also shows one half of the
98% conﬁdence interval for the mean. Therefore, car FF02 is expected to return before
16:30 with a 98% conﬁdence, cars FF04 and FF07 before approximately 16:00 and the
rest of the cars approximately before 18:00 with the same conﬁdence. Using an individual
return time for each car instead of a ﬁxed one for the whole ﬂeet would optimise the
market participation for cars FF02, FF04 and FF06. The current bidding strategy for the
cars has not been investigated since it is out of the scope of this project.
5.4.5
Proposed proﬁles and comparison
This section will focus on proposing two individual user proﬁles for two cars from the
Frederiksberg Forsyning ﬂeet. Based on the ﬂeet investigations in the previous sections,
the chosen cars for the individual proﬁles are FF04 and FF07. These cars have a good
amount of data and they are relatively diﬀerent.
The threshold percentiles for both car FF04 and FF07 are 50% for the energy deadline as
seen in Figure 5.17(c). For the energy target the threshold percentile is 71% for car FF04
and 70% for car FF07 and seen in Figure 5.18(c). To avoid high risks but still have an
impact, an example of percentiles within the threshold area could be; the 25th percentile
for the energy deadline, the 95th percentile for the energy target and the 99th percentile
for the return time.
The plot in Figure 5.21(a) is the same plot as in Figure 5.17(c) but only with cars FF04
and FF07 plotted. The time span for car FF04 is from 6:49 to 7:40 which gives 1 h and
9 min. Similarly, the time span for car FF07 is from 6:31 to 8:54 which gives 2 h and 23
37
==PAGE:44==
06:30
07:00
07:30
08:00
08:30
09:00
Energy Deadline [h]
0
10
20
30
40
50
Percentile [%]
CDF FF04
Energy Deadline
25th percentile
CDF FF07
Energy Deadline
25th percentile
(a) Energy deadline
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Energy Target [kWh]
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
Percentile [%]
CDF FF04
Energy Target
90th percentile
CDF FF07
Energy Target
90th percentile
(b) Energy target
12:00
13:00
14:00
15:00
16:00
Return time [h]
50
60
70
80
90
100
Percentile [%]
CDF FF04
Energy Deadline
25th percentile
CDF FF07
Energy Deadline
25th percentile
(c) Return time
Figure 5.21: The CDF for the two chosen with the chosen percentiles marked with the
black dashed line a) Energy deadline is 7:18 for car FF04 and 7:54 for car FF07.
b)
Energy target is 16.6 kWh for car FF04 and 18.2 kWh for car FF07 c) Return time is
15:53 for car FF04 and 16:11 for car FF07.
min. For the aggregator, this gives more possible hours of bidding for car FF07 with the
same chosen percentile. However, as the span of car FF07 is around 2 times larger than
the span for car FF04, there is a greater uncertainty for car FF07 than for car FF04. The
horizontal line in Figure 5.21(a) represents the chosen percentile which give the energy
deadline 7:18 for car FF04 and 7:54 for car FF07.
Figure 5.21(b) shows the same plot as in Figure 5.18(c) but again only for cars FF04 and
FF07 and with the chosen percentile of 95% for the energy target. The diﬀerence for the
energy target is very small with a target of 12.9 kWh for car FF04 and 13.1 kWh for FF07.
The energy target span is also very similar, where car FF04 have a span from 7.7 kWh to
21 kWh (13.3 kWh) and car FF07 from 6.6 kWh to 21 kWh (14.4 kWh).
For the user, it can be argued whether the energy in kWh is of interest. The energy target
can therefore be recalculated to kilometres using the 165 Wh/km given for the cars. This
gives a span of 80.6 km for car FF04 and 87.3 km for car FF07. For the aggregator,
the saved energy in kWh is not really of interest but more how many hours saved by not
38
==PAGE:45==
Table 5.2: Individual user proﬁles for car FF04 and FF07 with a diﬀerence between the
variables. Even within the same ﬂeet with the same working hours there is a diﬀerence on
almost 40 min for when the cars leave.
Values
Extra time
Diﬀerence
Parameter
Percentile
FF04
FF07
FF04
FF07
in time
Minimum Energy
2.5 kWh
2.5 kWh
Energy Deadline
25th
07:18
07:54
18 min
54 min
36 min
Energy Target
95th
16.6 kWh
18.2 kWh
26 min
11 min
15 min
(Return Time)
99th
15:53
16:11
18 min
charging the extra kWh. To do this estimation an estimation of the current energy target
is required. The plot in Figure 5.10(b) show the mean value for each car for the current
charging pattern. Car FF04 therefore have a current energy target of 21 kWh, car FF09
have a target of 18 kWh and the rest of the cars have a target of 20 kWh. Furthermore,
the energy needs to be recalculated into saved charging hours this is done by using the
charging pattern in Figure 5.10(a), where a correlation of 10 kWh charged energy per
hour was found. For car FF04 this means that the new energy target of 16.6 kWh gives
21 kWh-16.6 kWh = 4.4 kWh which is 26 min saved on not charging. Similarly, for car
FF07 the new energy target of 18.2 kWh gives 20 kWh-18.2 kWh = 1.8 kWh which is 11
min saved on not charging.
Using the ﬁtted distributions for choosing the energy deadline and the energy target,
compared to the current situations, car FF04 have 44 min more and car FF07 have 1 h
and 5 min more for market participation. The values for the two individual user proﬁles
6
7
8
9 10 11
Leave time [h]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Energy Deadline Percentile [%]
0.3
0.6
0.9
1.2
1.5
1.8
2.1
2.4
2.7
3.0
3.3
3.6
3.9
4.2
4.5
4.8
5.15.4
0
20
40
60
80
100
Energy Target Percentile [%]
0
4
8
12
16
20
Energy [kWh]  
(a) Extra hours for car FF04
6 8 10 12 14 16
Leave time [h]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Energy Deadline Percentile [%]
0.6
1.2
1.8
2.4
3.0
3.6
4.2
4.8
5.4
6.0
6.6
7.2
7.8
8.4
9.0
9.6
10.2
10.8 11.4
0
20
40
60
80
100
Energy Target Percentile [%]
0
4
8
12
16
20
Energy [kWh]  
(b) Extra hours for car FF07
Figure 5.22: Plot of the extra hours for market participation. The dashed lines show
the threshold percentile and the grey area include the valid values. a) Extra hours for car
FF04 where the maximum hours within the threshold are 2 hours (2.0). b) Extra hours
for car FF07 where the maximum hours within the threshold are 3 hours and 14 minutes
(3.24).
39
==PAGE:46==
and the diﬀerence between them can be seen in Table 5.2. As the cars are within the same
ﬂeet a large deviation is not expected. However, there is still almost a 40 min diﬀerence
for when the cars leave, which emphasises the importance of knowing the user.
This outcome of the project can therefore be used directly by the aggregator and the
economic beneﬁts of using the proﬁles instead of guessing how the user behaves will be
covered in Section 5.5. The user proﬁle can therefore be used to optimise the bidding for
the aggregator and at the same time not inﬂuence the users driving needs. If the user
knows how much energy needed for a trip and when the car is readily charged will also
lower a possible range anxiety. Taking into account that the average energy usage was
around 1/4 of the battery capacity (as seen in Figure 5.7(a)) a more risky percentile could
be chosen for the energy target. In Figure 5.22 the extra hours for market participation
are plotted as a function of energy deadline and the energy target. The lower right corner
represents the lower risk and the low amount of extra time and when moving up to the
upper left corner the risk increases but also the extra time for market participation. The
maximum amount of extra hours within the threshold (grey area) are 2 h for car FF04
and 3 h 14 min for car FF07. The implementation of a more risky proﬁle would require
to include the user more and make some sort of agreement, that the user have the ability
to overwrite the deadline or target if needed. This will of course require some planning
from the users perspective, but this is a comprise that each user and aggregator will have
to ﬁnd a solution to.
5.5
Economic assessment of individual user proﬁles
This section focuses on the economic aspect when shifting from an initial guess of the en-
ergy deadline and energy target to using the individual proﬁles to estimate the parameters
instead. The initial guess for the energy deadline, based on the ﬁndings in Section 5.2.3,
is set to 7:00. The initial energy target, based on the mean values in Figure 5.10(b) set to
18 kWh for car FF09, 21 kWh for car FF04 and 20 kWh for the rest of the ﬂeet.
There are several possible market services whereas the cars at Frederiksberg Forsyning are
providing a service called Frequency Containment Reserve (FCR). FCR’s are units that
automatically responds to frequency changes in the network by measuring the frequency
locally. In east Denmark (where the ﬂeet is located) the FCR market is further divided
into FCR-N and FCR-D. Here FCR-N ensures that the balance between production and
consumption is maintained through automatic activation when the frequency deviates
from 49.9 to 50.1 Hz. If the system is below 49.9 Hz the FCR-D responds as an emergency
service to ensure that the production is quickly balanced. As a detailed market analysis
is out of the scope of this report, this short description is to help readers outside this ﬁeld
to get an initial overview of the FCR service.
In Section 5.4.5 it was stated how the extra hours for market participation was found for
two chosen cars. The revenue per extra hour of market participation is based on the values
from Fig. 1 in Thingvad et al. [2016]. In the ﬁgure mean values from for each hour from
2013 to 2015 is plotted including a mean value for the three years. The overall mean value
is chosen and it is assumed that the market participation is before 6:00. The value is then
approximately 33 €/MW/h and since the cars at Frederiksberg Forsyning can provide 10
kW up and down regulation, the revenue per hour becomes 0.33 €/h. As the analysis
and proposed proﬁles are only valid for weekdays the revenue per year is multiplied by 52
weeks ·5 days = 260 days. The yearly revenue per extra hour of market participation is
40
==PAGE:47==
6
7
8
9 10 11
Leave time [h]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Energy Deadline Percentile [%]
0
40
80
120
160
200
240
280
320
360
400
440
0
20
40
60
80
100
Energy Target Percentile [%]
0
4
8
12
16
20
Energy [kWh]  
(a) Extra revenue for car FF04
6 8 10 12 14 16
Leave time [h]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Energy Deadline Percentile [%]
0
60
120
180
240
300
360
420
480
540
600
660
720
780
840
900
960
0
20
40
60
80
100
Energy Target Percentile [%]
0
4
8
12
16
20
Energy [kWh]  
(b) Extra revenue for car FF07
Figure 5.23: Plot of the extra revenue for market participation in €/year. The black
dashed lines show the threshold percentile and the red dashed line the chosen percentiles.
a) Extra possible revenue for car FF04 where the maximum revenue within the threshold
is 63 €/year. b) Extra possible revenue for car FF07 where the maximum revenue within
the threshold 92 €/year.
therefore set to be 85.8 €. Figure 5.23 shows the values from Figure 5.22 multiplied by
85.8 € which yields the yearly revenue. The extra hours for car FF07 consequently yields
a larger possible revenue. The maximum revenue for car FF04 within the threshold is 171
€/year and for car FF07 the revenue is 278 €/year.
This is, of course, a very simple example and it will be much more complex in real market
participation. To get a more accurate estimate of the revenue it would probably require
simulations including the bidding strategy. Furthermore, there will also be a saving on
not charging the car when choosing a lower percentile but this is not taking into in this
example. The example is just to show how the proﬁles can have an economic beneﬁt.
There could also be an economic beneﬁt for the return time but as the current bidding
strategy is not known and is out of the scope of this project this will not be taking into
account.
The percentiles are shown in Table 5.2 used for the individual user proﬁles are also used
for this economic case study. The percentile for the energy deadline is therefore the 25th
and for the energy target, it is the 95th. The percentiles are marked on each plot in Figure
5.23(a) and 5.23(b) and yields a revenue of 63 €/year for car FF04 and 92 €/year for car
FF07. This revenue is, of course, an extra revenue which means that it is added to the
revenue from normal operation.
The same method is used for the whole ﬂeet calculating extra hours and the revenue
compared with the current deadline and target for each car. In Figure 5.24(a) the extra
hours and the revenue are plotted for each car, with the energy deadline and energy target
separated. Car FF08 yields the highest revenue of 182 €/year and FF03 the lowest with
54 €/year. Using the given percentiles instead of the current deadline and target gave a
total of 11 h and 17 min extra time for market participation every weekday which yields
41
==PAGE:48==
a yearly revenue for the whole ﬂeet of 958 €.
In Figure 5.24(b) the energy deadline is plotted as a function of the energy target for each
individual car. The deadlines deviate from 7:00 to almost 8:00 and the targets deviate
from 8 kWh to 18 kWh. This means that the cars are charged between 38% and 86% and
can drive between 54 km and 109 km. Changing from a conservative overall ﬂeet proﬁle to
the individual user proﬁles for Frederiksberg Forsyning using the given energy deadlines
and energy targets shown in Figure 5.24(b) would for this simple example yield a yearly
extra revenue of 958 €. The maximum yearly revenue within the threshold is 2309 € with
27 extra hours each weekday for the ﬂeet. The ﬁndings in Figure 5.24(b) can be used
directly by the aggregator to optimise the bidding for this ﬂeet.
FF01
FF02
FF03
FF04
FF05
FF06
FF07
FF08
FF09
FF10
00:00
00:30
01:00
01:30
02:00
02:30
Extra time [h]
Energy Deadline
Energy Target
0
43
86
129
172
215
Extra revenue [Euro/year]
(a) Revenue for the individual cars
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
Energy Target [kWh]
06:45
07:00
07:15
07:30
07:45
08:00
Energy Deadline [h]
FF01
FF02
FF03
FF04
FF05
FF06
FF07
FF08
FF09
FF10
(b) Energy deadline and energy target
Figure 5.24: a) Revenues for the cars in the whole ﬂeet calculated in the same way as for
car FF04 and FF07 in Figure 5.23(a) and 5.23(b). b) The energy deadline corresponding
to the 25th percentile and the energy target corresponding to the 95th percentile for all cars
in the ﬂeet.
42
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
The continued growth and integration of EVs in the transportation sector will increase the
power demand. However, EVs also have the ability to be ﬂexible through smart charging
and even support the power system with market participation. The user(s) of the EV have
the ﬁrst priority, which empathises that successful integration in the electricity market
implies knowing the user’s behaviour.
This project aims to demonstrate the ﬂexibility of a ﬂeet of EVs, based on individual user
proﬁles instead of an overall general guess for the entire ﬂeet. The ﬁrst main objective
was to deﬁne which parameters should be included in a user proﬁle. The important main
parameters were determined as: a minimum energy level, an energy deadline and an
energy target. The minimum energy is a reserve for emergency trips, the energy deadline
is the ﬁrst time in a day the car leaves, and the energy target is how much energy the
user requires for the upcoming trips in a day. Furthermore, the return time can also be
included in the proﬁle, but this parameter is mainly of interest for the aggregator and not
so much for the user.
The second main objective was to extract these deﬁned user proﬁle parameters from an
existing EV ﬂeet in Frederiksberg Forsyning, with approximately 1 year and 4 months of
data. The data from the ﬂeet have been processed and analysed with focus on determining
when and how the individual cars were used. With excessive error handling it was possible
to determine the individual trips for each user with leaving time, return time and energy
usage for each trip. This trip data was then used to ﬁt log-normal and normal distributions
to get a better foundation for evaluating the user proﬁles.
This leads to the next main objective, constructing and comparing proﬁles between users.
The minimum energy was, based on a 15 km range, manually ﬁxed to 2.5 kWh for all cars.
The energy deadline, energy target and return time were based on the percentiles from
the ﬁtted distributions. An early energy deadline and a high energy target reﬂect a low
risk whereas a late energy deadline and a low energy target would inﬂict a high risk. For
the aggregator, a greater risk will give more hours for bidding in the market but also a
greater risk of the car not being available. For the user the proﬁles can be used to reduce
range anxiety and to become more aware of how much energy the user needs on a daily
basis. Based on the distributions two proﬁles for two diﬀerent users were suggested with
the 25th percentile for the energy deadline and the 95th percentile for the energy target.
Even though the cars operate in the same company and within the same hours, the energy
deadline diﬀered with almost 40 minutes between the two cars. The current deadline was
found to be 7:00 and the target was 21 kWh for car FF04 and 20 kWh for car FF07, based
43
==PAGE:50==
on current charging patterns. Using the percentiles from the distributions instead of these
values gave 1 h and 49 min extra time for market participation for the two cars. The
analysis showed that even though the cars are expected to behave the same within the
ﬂeet, the user have diﬀerent driving patterns.
The last objective was to determine the economic beneﬁt of the user proﬁles. This was
done with a case study comparing how this extra time could yield an economic beneﬁt.
For the same percentiles, compared with the current deadlines and targets, the entire ﬂeet
had 27 extra hours each day. This yielded a yearly revenue of 958 €. The energy deadlines
deviated from 7:00 to 8:00 and the energy target from 8 kWh to 18 kWh, which gives a
driving distance between 54 km and 109 km.
6.1
Application and future work
The application of the ﬁndings in this project can be directly applied to the analysed ﬂeet
but for higher risks the user would have to be involved. This is to ensure that the user
will not be aﬀected negatively and that the user also have the ability to overwrite the
target and deadline if necessary. The data analysis methodology can be repeated on a
similar dataset of EVs in order to extract information similar as for this report. To this
end, the reader is recommended to see Appendix E which contains the explanation of the
code developed in Python. The evaluated sample size for a new study should contain at
least 58 trip samples to get a good estimate.
This project mainly focuses on how to deduct the individual user proﬁles from the data
but not how they should be implemented. Future work could therefore focus on how to
develop a business model to implement the proﬁles in a company. This could include
whether there should be a contract between the user and aggregator and whether there
should be a beneﬁt if the user stays within the agreed deadlines and targets. Since more
data would make the proﬁles less uncertain a method for making the user proﬁle adaptive
to new data would be useful. If the user proﬁles should be implemented on private users
another method might also be necessary, since a diﬀerent pattern is expected compared
to the cars in this project, which are only used for work assignments.
If the return time is of particular interest an alternative method, maybe using two distri-
butions, might be more beneﬁcial. Simulating or modelling the return time as a function
of the energy usage and/or leave time could also be a method worth investigating. In
relation to the return time the energy left in battery when the car returns could also be
of interest for optimising the market participation.
Another interesting feature to investigate could be the beneﬁts of using the proﬁles re-
garding the battery degradation. It might have a positive eﬀect since the battery are not
fully charged every day, i.e. overcharging is avoided, but since battery degradation is very
complex this would have to be investigated further.
44
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
Tiago Soares and Peter B. Anderson. Utility electric vehicle ﬂeet usage patterns – under-
standing and optimizing aggregator participation. Technical report, DTU Department
of Electrical Engineering, May 2017.
International Energy Agency IEA.
Status of power system transformation 2017.
https://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/StatusofPowerSystem
Transformation2017.pdf, 2017a. Chapter 2 and 3.
International Energy Agency IEA. Global ev outlook 2017. Technical report, The Energy
Technology Policy division of the Directorate of Sustainability, Technology and Outlooks
(STO), 2017b.
Jairo Quirós-Tortós, Luis F. Ochoa, and Becky Lees. A statistical analysis of ev charging
behavior in the uk. Ieee Pes Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Latin America, 2015.
A.P. Robinson, P.T. Blythe, M.C. Bell, Y. Hübner, and G.A. Hill. Analysis of electric
vehicle driver recharging demand proﬁles and subsequent impacts on the carbon content
of electric vehicle trips. Energy Policy, pages Pages 337–348, October 2013.
Mostafa Majidpour, Charlie Qiu, Peter Chu, Rajit Gadh, and Hemanshu R. Pota. Modiﬁed
pattern sequence-based forecasting for electric vehicle charging stations. Smart Grid
Communications (SmartGridComm), 2014.
W Kempton and SE Letendre. Electric vehicles as a new power source for electric utilities.
Transportation Research Part D-transport and Environment, 2:157–175, 1997.
Andreas Thingvad, Sergejus Martinenas, Peter Bach Andersen, Mattia Marinelli, Bjørn E.
Christensen, and Ole Jan Olesen. Economic comparison of electric vehicles performing
unidirectional and bidirectional frequency control in denmark with practical validation.
2016 Proceedings of the 51st International Universities Power Engineering Conference,
2016.
Maria Luisa Di Silvestre, Eleonora Riva Sanseverino, Gaetano Zizzo, and Giorgio Graditi.
An optimization approach for eﬃcient management of ev parking lots with batteries
recharging facilities.
Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized Computing, 4:
641–649, February 2013.
Monica Alonso, Hortensia Amaris, Jean Gardy Germain, and Juan Manuel Galan. Optimal
charging scheduling of electric vehicles in smart grids by heuristic algorithms. Energies,
2014.
45
==PAGE:52==
Qiuwei Wu, Arne Hejde Nielsen, Jacob Østergaard, Seung-Tae Cha, Francesco Marra,
Yu Chen, and Chresten Træholt. Driving pattern analysis for electric vehicle (ev) grid
integration study. IEEE Pes Conference on Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Europe,
2010.
Stuart Speidel and Thomas Braeunl. Driving and charging patterns of electric vehicles for
energy usage. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 40, 2014.
Rob van Haaren. Assessment of electric cars’ range requirements and usage patterns based
on driving behavior recorded in the national household travel survey of 2009. Techni-
cal report, Earth and Environmental Engineering Department, Columbia University,
December 2011.
Jonn Axsen, Suzanne Goldberg, and Joseph Bailey. Electrifying vehicles insights from the
canadian plug-in electric vehicle study. Technical report, Sustainable Transportation
Research Team, Simon Fraser University, 2015.
Frederiksberg Forsyning. Om os. https://www.frb-forsyning.dk, 2018. accesed 14/01-2018.
Nissan. Speciﬁkationer. https://www.nissan-cdn.net/content/dam/Nissan/dk/brochures/
cpls/e-nv200_kundeprisliste_van.pdf, 2018. accesed 14/01-2018.
Automotiveworld. Nissan, enel and nuvve operate world’s ﬁrst fully commercial vehicle-
to-grid hub in denmark. http://www.automotiveworld.com/news-releases/nissan-enel-
nuvve-operate-worlds-ﬁrst-fully-commercial-vehicle-grid-hub-denmark/, August 2016.
NUVVE. Nuvve aggregation technology. http://nuvve.com/technology/, 2018. accesed
14/01-2018.
David Dallinger, Daniel Krampe, and Martin Wietschel. Vehicle-to-grid regulation reserves
based on a dynamic simulation of mobility behavior. IEEE Transactions On Smart Grid,
2, June 2011.
StijnDeVuyst. Lognormal distribution.svg. https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?
curid=53714670, 2018.
R.A. Johnson. Miller & Freund’s Probability and Statistics for Engineers. Prentice-Hall,
2000.
Paul Hewett. Sample size and fomulae for estimating the true arithmetic or geometric mean
of lognormal exposure distribution. American Industrial Hygiene Association Journal,
56(3):219–225, 1995.
The Scipy community. scipy.stats.lognorm. https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/
generated/scipy.stats.lognorm.html, October 25 2017.
46
==PAGE:53==
Appendix A
Project plan
A.1
Work packages
Planning
In this work package, the overall planning for the project including making a Gantt chart
is deﬁned. Holidays and other events are included to make an ambitious but realistic plan
for the project.
Problem statement
In this work package, a document with about half a page of text that deﬁnes and outlines
the project is developed. The statement is done in three iterations where the last, is the
ﬁnalised version agreed with the supervisor. The problem statement is reassessed again
in the middle of the project.
Literature review
This work package includes searching, reading and writing about the state of the art within
the ﬁeld and other related work to this project.
Data analysis
This is the main work package for this project since the project is based on data analysis
to develop the user proﬁles. The package includes getting to know the data, analyse it
and plot it.
Report
In this work package, the diﬀerent chapters and subchapters in the report are deﬁned.
This includes when the sections are started and when they should be ﬁnished. Every
chapter ends with a milestone.
I
==PAGE:54==
A.2
Learning objectives
Learning Objective (LO)
Addressed in project
can identify and reﬂect on technical scientiﬁc issues and un-
derstand the interaction between the various components
that make up an issue
The problem statement
reﬂects this LO.
can, on the basis of a clear academic proﬁle, apply elements
of current research at an international level to develop ideas
and solve problems
The state of the art
chapter covers this LO.
masters technical scientiﬁc methodologies, theories and
tools, and has the capacity to take a holistic view of and
delimit a complex, open issue, see it in a broader academic
and societal perspective and, on this basis, propose a variety
of possible actions
The whole report and
how the problem state-
ment is formulated and
solved reﬂects this LO.
can, via analysis and modelling, develop relevant models,
systems and processes for solving technological problems
This LO are reﬂected in
the data analysis chap-
ter.
can communicate and mediate research-based knowledge
both orally and in writing
This is covered by the
report and the midterm
and ﬁnal presentation.
is familiar with and can seek out leading international re-
search within his/her specialist area.
The state of the art
chapter covers this LO.
can work independently and reﬂect on own learning, aca-
demic development and specialization
The project plan and an
evaluation of it covers
this LO.
masters technical problem-solving at a high level through
project work, and has the capacity to work with and manage
all phases of a project – including preparation of timetables,
design, solution and documentation
The project plan with
work packages and a
time schedule in form of
a Gantt-chart including
a ﬁnal evaluation of the
project work covers this
LO.
A.3
Gantt-chart
The ﬁrst Gantt-chart made in the planning phase is shown below. The work packages
described in Section A.1 is shown with some sub packages to get a better overview of
deadlines and milestones. The report package is divided into several packages representing
each chapter, to better illustrate the diﬀerent processes when writing the report.
After the ﬁrst Gantt-chart is the corrected Gantt-chart, showing the actual progress of
the project corrected along the way.
II
==PAGE:55==
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
1
2
3
4
Day: Start
End
Planning
Planning of project
28-Aug
28-Sep
Autumn holiday
16-Oct
22-Oct
Christmas holiday
25-Dec
1-Jan
Winter holiday
22-Jan
28-Jan
Problem statement
1st draft
4-Sep
14-Sep
2nd draft
15-Sep
22-Sep
Finished
23-Sep
1-Oct
Revisited
30-Oct
5-Nov
Literature review
Read given material
4-Sep
24-Sep
Search for material
25-Sep
1-Oct
Read and write notes
2-Oct
8-Oct
Data analysis
Learn Python coding
27-Aug
10-Sep
Getting to know the data
11-Sep
24-Sep
Analyse data
25-Sep
10-Dec
Plot data
20-Oct
10-Dec
Report: Introduktion and conclusion
Motivation
16-Oct
22-Oct
Challenges
23-Oct
29-Oct
Scope
30-Oct
5-Nov
Abstract
13-Dec
15-Dec
Conclusion
16-Dec
19-Dec
Outlook
20-Dec
21-Dec
Overview
21-Dec
22-Dec
Report: State of the art
Previous research
2-Oct
16-Oct
Report: Data Chapter
Data description
18-Sep
24-Sep
Data origin and logging
25-Sep
1-Oct
Data filtering
2-Oct
8-Oct
Report: Analysis and results chapter
Methodology
30-Oct
5-Nov
Individual user profiles
6-Nov
12-Nov
Standard user profiles
13-Nov
19-Nov
Adaptive profiles
20-Nov
26-Nov
Fleet profile
27-Nov
3-Dec
Appendix: Explanation of code
Project plan
25-Sep
1-Oct
Describe finished code
4-Dec
17-Dec
Report: Finish
Final writing and review
1-Jan
28-Jan
September
October
November
December
January
28-Aug
4-Sep
11-Sep
18-Sep
25-Sep
2-Oct
9-Oct
16-Oct
23-Oct
30-Oct
6-Nov
13-Nov
20-Nov
27-Nov
4-Dec
11-Dec
18-Dec
25-Dec
1-Jan
8-Jan
15-Jan
22-Jan
R 
WS 
      Milestones 
R = Report 
WS = Workshop 
Replanning 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
Presentation 
R 
==PAGE:56==
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
1
2
3
4
Day: Start
End
Planning
Planning of project
28-Aug
28-Sep
Autumn holiday
16-Oct
22-Oct
Christmas holiday
25-Dec
1-Jan
Winter holiday
22-Jan
28-Jan
Problem statement
1st draft
4-Sep
14-Sep
2nd draft
15-Sep
22-Sep
Finished
23-Sep
1-Oct
Revisited
30-Oct
12-Nov
Literature review
Read given material
4-Sep
24-Sep
Search for material
25-Sep
20-Oct
Read and write notes
2-Oct
12-Nov
Data analysis
Learn Python coding
28-Aug
10-Sep
Getting to know the data
11-Sep
24-Sep
Analyse data
25-Sep
10-Dec
Plot data
25-Oct
24-Jan
Report: Introduktion and conclusion
Motivation
16-Oct
22-Oct
Challenges
23-Oct
29-Oct
Scope
30-Oct
5-Nov
Abstract
18-Jan
19-Jan
Conclusion
20-Jan
21-Jan
Outlook
22-Jan
23-Jan
Overview
24-Jan
25-Jan
Report: State of the art
Previous research
2-Oct
20-Jan
Report: Data Chapter
Data description
18-Sep
1-Oct
Data origin and logging
2-Oct
15-Oct
Data filtering
16-Oct
29-Oct
Report: Analysis and results chapter
Methodology
30-Nov
5-Dec
Individual user profiles
6-Jan
12-Jan
Standard user profiles
13-Jan
17-Jan
Statistical distribution
18-Jan
21-Jan
Fleet profile
20-Jan
25-Jan
Appendix: Explanation of code
Project plan
25-Sep
1-Oct
Describe finished code
1-Jan
8-Jan
Report: Finish
Final writing and review
14-Jan
28-Jan
September
October
November
December
January
28-Aug
4-Sep
11-Sep
18-Sep
25-Sep
2-Oct
9-Oct
16-Oct
23-Oct
30-Oct
6-Nov
13-Nov
20-Nov
27-Nov
4-Dec
11-Dec
18-Dec
25-Dec
1-Jan
8-Jan
15-Jan
22-Jan
WS
Milestones
R = Report
WS = Workshop
Replanning
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Presentation
R
Replanning
==PAGE:57==
A.4
Self evaluation
The project started very well with a good planning phase and initialising of the report
with expected chapters and sections. Learning Python also went fairly fast and according
to the plan. The data processing and analysis was where the plan didn’t hold and due to
this, the writing of the report got very delayed.
It was very diﬃcult to do the analysis and it took a lot more time and eﬀort than I
expected. It was very hard to shift between writing report and writing code and since the
project was about doing data analysis this was where I had my focus. This, unfortunately,
did that I got started on the real writing of the report quite late compared to what I had
planned.
The Gantt-chart gave me a good overview of my process and what the next step was. In
future projects, I will remember that it is equally important to write the results down.
Good results have to be communicated in a good way else there is not really much value
in them.
V
==PAGE:58==
Appendix B
Assessment of errors
The data used for this analysis is collected in real time with real user, real cars, real
hardware and real software, which makes errors and handling of these an inevitable part
of the analysis and data processing. This section will go through examples of diﬀerent
errors and how they are handled in the script.
In Figure B.1 a period with the communication error ’OE’ in the period after a plug-in
is shown. Here the SOC before plug-out is 100 (shown in green) and after the plug-in
approximately 6 hours later the value still shows 100% and that the car is ready to do
V2G (shown in blue). This state only lasts for 24 seconds before the charger then switches
to an ’OE’ error state (shown in red). It then takes about another 40 seconds before the
SOC has changed to correct value and the state of the charger goes back to normal (shown
in green).
It therefore took a little over a minute after plug-in before the charger and car
Figure B.1: Miscommunication between the charger and car can result in wrong SOC
values and a check for ’OE’ or ’VE’ state in the ’EVSEId’ column was therefore imple-
mented. The search for a communication error is set to 2 minutes after plug-in and for
this case, the error happens 25 seconds after plug-in. The correct SOC after plug-in should
be 64 and not 100.
VI
==PAGE:59==
Figure B.2: Even when an error doesn’t occur it can take some time before the correct
SOC is shown and a check looking for changes in the SOC up to 2 minutes after plug-in
was implemented.
communicated correctly. The error also didn’t happen right after plug-in but 25 seconds
later and therefore the search for a communication error is set to 2 minutes after plug-in.
This error check is also implemented before plug-out, but in general, the errors happen
when the car is plugged in again.
If there were no communication errors, another check searching for changes in the SOC
plug-in, needed to be implemented. Even if an error doesn’t happen, it still takes some
time for the charger to read out the correct values from the car. This is illustrated in
Figure B.2 where the SOC changes without changes in the charger state (the EVSEId and
ev_state column).
The plug-out SOC is 90 (shown in green) and the apparent plug-in SOC after about 7 hours
is still 90 (shown in blue). After 1 minute without changing state in the EVSEId column,
the SOC changes to 50, which is then set to be the correct plug-in value.
Therefore a
Figure B.3: Example of a period where the SOC becomes 0 after plug-in (shown in blue
and red) and the error last for almost 3 hours and 40 minutes until it is plugged out again
(shown in black). Therefore a check looking for the value 0 was implemented.
VII
==PAGE:60==
Figure B.4: Example of a period where the SOC becomes 1 after plug-in (shown in last
two blue and red). Even though the charger state goes into ’CH’ (dumb charging) the value
1 remain for another 40 seconds before showing the correct value 91 (shown in green).
check looking for SOC changes up to 2 minutes after plug-in was implemented. A SOC
value of 0 or 1 is very unlikely since this would mean that the battery is very close to being
completely discharged, so the periods when 0 or 1 occurred was therefore investigated. It
turned out, that the periods were always caused by some sort of error and therefore a
check looking for these two values before and after an unplugged period was implemented.
If one of the two values are present within two min before or after an unplugged period, a
search for a valid value within next (or last) 15 min is performed. An example where the
value 0 is present after a plug-in can be seen in Figure B.3. In this example, the charger
goes into a dumb charging state ’CH’ approximately 1 minute after plug-in, but the SOC
value is showing 0 (shown in blue). After another 40 seconds, the charger goes into an
error state ’VE’ where the SOC is still 0 (shown in red). This error lasts for around 3
hours and 40 min before the charger car is unplugged again (shown in black), which might
be due to a manual restart of the system. Figure B.4 shows an example where the value
1 is present after plug-in. In this example, the plug-out SOC is 100 (shown in green) and
after 6 hours the cars are plugged-in where the state of the charger is ’GI’ and the SOC is
still 100 (shown in blue). It takes about 20 seconds before the charger goes into an ’OE’
error state and other 40 seconds before the charger goes into a ’VE’ error state and shows
the incorrect value 1 (shown in red). The state then changes to ’CH’ (dumb charging)
but the SOC value is still 1 (shown in blue) and it takes another 40 seconds before the
correct value of 91 is shown (shown in green). In total it took around 2 minutes before
the correct SOC value was shown but the search for the value 1 is set to same as for the
value 0 which was 15 min after an error.
In Section 4.3 and Figure 4.3 the last three checks described before saving a trip is to
check for ’VE errors’. One of the checks is whether there is an oscillating behaviour within
the next 10 min, within an ’VE’ error and while the value 0 or 1 is present. This check
was implemented due to periods as the one seen in Figure B.5. Here the charger goes
VIII
==PAGE:61==
Figure B.5: Example of a period where a ’VE Error’ happens. Even before plug-out the
charger is in a ’VE’ error state and around 1 minute after plug-in the charger goes into
an oscillating behaviour where the value changes between two values in intervals of 1-2
minutes. The error last around 4 hours until next plug-out (shown in black).
into a permanent error state where the SOC value oscillates between two values with
approximately 1-2 min between each change (two oscillations shown between the two red
high-lightings). This oscillating behaviour often last for several hours and only ends when
the car is unplugged again, which is probably a restart of the system (shown in black in
the ﬁgure). Often the system is also in an error state before the car is plugged out and
this behaviour is therefore addressed as an error.
An important thing to mention about the unplugged periods and errors, is that sometimes
when a car goes into an error state, the system needs to be restarted to return to a normal
state again. Therefore an unplugged period after an error could be a restart and by a
possible combination of the two unplugged periods, this might lead to an extra trip, but
there is no way of knowing whether it is a restart or not. It is not taking into account in the
code, since there in theory could be several restarts after each other and the restarts often
happens several hours after the faulty plug-in which makes the data unreliable anyway.
IX
==PAGE:62==
Appendix C
Saved parameters
Five data matrices and one list containing the days present in the matrices are saved
when doing the data analysis in determineTrips.py. The ﬁve matrices are called ’Charg-
ing’,’Cartrip_all’, ’Cartrip_errors’, ’Cartrip_day’ and ’InUse_all’ and the list is called
’availids’. In almost each matrix the following parameters are present:
• Day: The day in the format ’yyyy-mm-dd 00:00:00’,
• Car: Abbreviation name for each, eg. FF01, FF02,...,
• CarName: The unique name from the database, eg. ’MCV2G03160002’,
• TripNum: Counter for trips in the same day,
• Season: The season of the day given in: 0 for ’Spring’,1 for ’Summer’,2 for ’Fall’
and 3 for ’Winter’,
• Weekday: The Weekday of the day given in: 0 for Monday, 1 for Tuesday,...,
• Weekend: Binary value, 1 for weekend, 0 for weekday.
Beside these each individual matrix have diﬀerent parameters, which are listed below.
Charging matrix
The ’Charging’ matrix contains all data about how the cars dumb charge. This is done by
looking for ’CH’ in the column ’EVSEId’ and ’TRIP’ in the column ’ev_state’. If there
is a trip, only the charging until the car is unplugged is saved. The parameters saved are:
• ChargeStart/ChargeEnd-Time: Start and end time of charging in the format:
’yyyy-mm-dd hh:mm:ss’. Used for visual inspection,
• ChargeStart/ChargeEnd-Num: Start and end time of charging in seconds,
• ChargeStart/ChargeEnd-Energy/SOC: The start and end energy in kWh or %
of battery capacity,
• ChargeDuration: Duration of the charging time in the seconds,
• Charge-Energy/SOC: Energy used for charging, in kWh or % of battery capacity,
• ChargeMean-Amps/Volts: The mean Amps/Volts used when charging.
Cartrip_all matrix
X
==PAGE:63==
Cartrip_all contains data for all trips, both when there weren’t any trips and when there
were several trips in a day. Each individual trip is contained in one row of date with these
parameters:
• Leave/Return-Time: Leave and return time in the format: ’yyyy-mm-dd hh:mm:ss’.
Used for visual inspection,
• Leave/Return-Num: Leave and return time in seconds,
• Duration: Duration of the trip time in the seconds,
• Energy/SOC-End: Energy at the end of a trip in kWh or % of battery capacity,
• Energy/SOC-Used: Energy used for the trip, in kWh or % of battery capacity,
Cartrip_errors matrix
’Cartrip_errors’ contains information about all the errors as described in Appendix B.
The parameters saved for each error are:
• ErrorNum: An individual number for each error ranging from 1 to 8 (9 is only for
plotting purposes),
• ErrorCode: The code for each error: ’No data’,’Not plugged’,’Period <10 min’,’Missing
>1 hour data’,’SOC start missing’,’SOC end missing’,’SOC used <= 1 %’,’VE er-
ror’,(’0 trip’).
Cartrip_day matrix
’Cartrip_day’ contains the same information as Cartrip_all but only one row for each
day with the concatenated data for the trips (i.e. it does not contain non trip days). It is
noted that the Energy/SOC-Used parameter can be more than the battery capacity (21
kWh/100%) due to charging that can happen between the trips. Therefore a few more
parameters are saved (all in kWh or % of battery capacity):
• Energy/SOC-Used1stTrip: The energy used on the ﬁrst trip,
• Energy/SOC-Change: How much the energy changed during all the trips (end
energy minus start energy),
• Energy/SOC-Charged: How much energy were charged/discharged between the
trips.
InUse_all matrix
InUse_all is mainly used for statistical purposes, as this matrix contains binary data for
when the cars are in use. It contains one row for each car each day (unless it is an error
day) but only data for when the car is used. In this matrix, there are 24 columns, one
for each hour on the day, and if the car is used in that hour it is assigned with the value
1. This makes it easier when plotting but it basically contains the same information as
Cartrip_all. The extra columns saved are:
• Columns 00 to 23: Each column represents an hour and is assigned with the value
1 if the car is in use, else the value is NaN.
XI
==PAGE:64==
Appendix D
Individual modelling
In Python the module/function ’scipy.stats.lognorm.ppf(q, s, loc, scale)’ can be used for
ﬁnding percentiles for a log-normal distribution. The function takes four parameters: q is
the percentiles, s,loc,scale. To get a correct and reliable result, loc is always set to 0 which
means that s corresponds to the variance (σ2) and ln(scale) corresponds to the mean value
(µ). This means that the input to the function should be exp(µ) for the scale parameter
community [2017].
This appendix shows the individual distribution ﬁtting for each car in the ﬂeet. Most
of the cars follow the proposed distributions very well but some of the cars also deviate
from the expected. Car FF06 have a very high probability between 7:00 and 8:00 for the
leave time and therefore the distribution is closer to an exponential function, which means
that the log-normal distribution doesn’t ﬁt very well. Car FF08 almost have a uniform
distribution of the leave time but this car also have very little data as only 58 trips was
determined whereas 190 days were determined as an error (See Section 5.2).
XII
==PAGE:65==
0
2
4
6
Leave time after 6:45 [h]
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
Density
Log-normal
Data
(a) Log-normal leave time
0
5
10
15
Energy usage pr. day [kWh]
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Density
Log-normal
Data
(b) Log-normal energy
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Return Time [h]
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
Density
Normal
Data
(c) Normal return time
1
2
3
4
Theoretical Quantiles
0
2
4
6
Sample Quantiles
(d) qq-plot leave time
5
10
15
Theoretical Quantiles
0
5
10
15
20
Sample Quantiles
(e) qq-plot energy
2
0
2
Theoretical Quantiles
10
12
15
18
Sample Quantiles
(f) qq-plot return time
Figure D.1: Car FF01. a) & d) Log-normal distribution ﬁt for leave time with µ = −0.12
and σ = 0.75. b) & e) Log-normal distribution ﬁt for energy usage with µ = 1.62 and
σ = 0.71. c) & f) Normal distribution ﬁt for return time with µ = 13.3 and σ = 1.87.
0
2
4
6
Leave time after 7:0 [h]
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
Density
Log-normal
Data
(a) Log-normal leave time
0
5
10
15
Energy usage pr. day [kWh]
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Density
Log-normal
Data
(b) Log-normal energy
8
10
12
14
16
Return Time [h]
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
Density
Normal
Data
(c) Normal return time
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
Theoretical Quantiles
0
2
5
8
10
Sample Quantiles
(d) qq-plot leave time
5
10
15
Theoretical Quantiles
0
5
10
15
20
Sample Quantiles
(e) qq-plot energy
2
0
2
Theoretical Quantiles
8
10
12
14
16
Sample Quantiles
(f) qq-plot return time
Figure D.2: Car FF02. a) & d) Log-normal distribution ﬁt for leave time with µ = 0.14
and σ = 0.91. b) & e) Log-normal distribution ﬁt for energy usage with µ = 1.60 and
σ = 0.63. c) & f) Normal distribution ﬁt for return time with µ = 13.9 and σ = 1.78.
XIII
==PAGE:66==
0
2
4
6
8
Leave time after 6:0 [h]
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
Density
Log-normal
Data
(a) Log-normal leave time
0
5
10
15
Energy usage pr. day [kWh]
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Density
Log-normal
Data
(b) Log-normal energy
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Return Time [h]
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
Density
Normal
Data
(c) Normal return time
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
Theoretical Quantiles
0
5
10
Sample Quantiles
(d) qq-plot leave time
5
10
15
Theoretical Quantiles
0
5
10
15
Sample Quantiles
(e) qq-plot energy
2
0
2
Theoretical Quantiles
8
10
12
15
18
Sample Quantiles
(f) qq-plot return time
Figure D.3: Car FF03 with µ = 0.58 and σ = 0.84. a) & d) Log-normal distribution
ﬁt for leave time. b) & e) Log-normal distribution ﬁt for energy usage with µ = 1.41 and
σ = 0.74. c) & f) Normal distribution ﬁt for return time with µ13.1 = and σ = 2.12.
0
2
4
6
8
Leave time after 6:30 [h]
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
Density
Log-normal
Data
(a) Log-normal leave time
0
5
10
15
Energy usage pr. day [kWh]
0.00
0.03
0.05
0.08
0.10
0.12
Density
Log-normal
Data
(b) Log-normal energy
12
14
16
Return Time [h]
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
Density
Normal
Data
(c) Normal return time
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Theoretical Quantiles
0
2
4
6
8
Sample Quantiles
(d) qq-plot leave time
5
10
15
20
Theoretical Quantiles
0
5
10
15
20
Sample Quantiles
(e) qq-plot energy
2
0
2
Theoretical Quantiles
12
14
16
Sample Quantiles
(f) qq-plot return time
Figure D.4: Car FF04 with µ = 0.15 and σ = 0.55. a) & d) Log-normal distribution
ﬁt for leave time. b) & e) Log-normal distribution ﬁt for energy usage with µ = 1.65 and
σ = 0.70. c) & f) Normal distribution ﬁt for return time with µ = 14.0 and σ = 0.79.
XIV
==PAGE:67==
0
2
4
6
8
Leave time after 6:15 [h]
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
Density
Log-normal
Data
(a) Log-normal leave time
0
5
10
15
Energy usage pr. day [kWh]
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Density
Log-normal
Data
(b) Log-normal energy
10
15
Return Time [h]
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Density
Normal
Data
(c) Normal return time
2
4
6
8
Theoretical Quantiles
0
2
5
8
10
Sample Quantiles
(d) qq-plot leave time
0
5
10
15
Theoretical Quantiles
0
5
10
15
Sample Quantiles
(e) qq-plot energy
2
0
2
Theoretical Quantiles
10
15
Sample Quantiles
(f) qq-plot return time
Figure D.5: Car FF05 with µ = 0.96 and σ = 0.71. a) & d) Log-normal distribution
ﬁt for leave time. b) & e) Log-normal distribution ﬁt for energy usage with µ = 1.13 and
σ = 0.84. c) & f) Normal distribution ﬁt for return time with µ = 13.1 and σ = 2.19.
0
2
4
6
8
Leave time after 6:45 [h]
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
Density
Log-normal
Data
(a) Log-normal leave time
0
5
10
15
20
Energy usage pr. day [kWh]
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Density
Log-normal
Data
(b) Log-normal energy
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Return Time [h]
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
Density
Normal
Data
(c) Normal return time
0
50
100
Theoretical Quantiles
0
5
10
15
Sample Quantiles
(d) qq-plot leave time
0
5
10
15
20
Theoretical Quantiles
0
10
20
Sample Quantiles
(e) qq-plot energy
2
0
2
Theoretical Quantiles
8
10
12
15
18
Sample Quantiles
(f) qq-plot return time
Figure D.6: Car FF06 with µ = 0.31 and σ = 0.99. a) & d) Log-normal distribution
ﬁt for leave time. b) & e) Log-normal distribution ﬁt for energy usage with µ = 1.35 and
σ = 0.80. c) & f) Normal distribution ﬁt for return time with µ = 13.7 and σ = 1.67.
XV
==PAGE:68==
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
Leave time after 5:30 [h]
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
Density
Log-normal
Data
(a) Log-normal leave time
0
5
10
15
20
Energy usage pr. day [kWh]
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Density
Log-normal
Data
(b) Log-normal energy
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Return Time [h]
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
Density
Normal
Data
(c) Normal return time
2
4
6
Theoretical Quantiles
0
2
5
8
10
Sample Quantiles
(d) qq-plot leave time
0
10
20
30
Theoretical Quantiles
0
10
20
30
Sample Quantiles
(e) qq-plot energy
2
0
2
Theoretical Quantiles
8
10
12
15
18
Sample Quantiles
(f) qq-plot return time
Figure D.7: Car FF07 with µ = 1.22 and σ = 0.52. a) & d) Log-normal distribution
ﬁt for leave time. b) & e) Log-normal distribution ﬁt for energy usage with µ = 1.42 and
σ = 0.90. c) & f) Normal distribution ﬁt for return time with µ = 12.1 and σ = 1.73.
0
2
4
6
8
Leave time after 6:15 [h]
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Density
Log-normal
Data
(a) Log-normal leave time
0
5
10
Energy usage pr. day [kWh]
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
Density
Log-normal
Data
(b) Log-normal energy
10
15
Return Time [h]
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Density
Normal
Data
(c) Normal return time
0
10
20
Theoretical Quantiles
0
5
10
Sample Quantiles
(d) qq-plot leave time
2
4
6
8
Theoretical Quantiles
0
5
10
Sample Quantiles
(e) qq-plot energy
2
1
0
1
2
Theoretical Quantiles
8
10
12
15
18
Sample Quantiles
(f) qq-plot return time
Figure D.8: Car FF08 with µ = 1.16 and σ = 0.96. a) & d) Log-normal distribution
ﬁt for leave time. b) & e) Log-normal distribution ﬁt for energy usage with µ = 0.86 and
σ = 0.73. c) & f) Normal distribution ﬁt for return time with µ = 12.6 and σ = 2.23.
XVI
==PAGE:69==
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
Leave time after 5:30 [h]
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Density
Log-normal
Data
(a) Log-normal leave time
0
5
10
15
20
Energy usage pr. day [kWh]
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Density
Log-normal
Data
(b) Log-normal energy
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Return Time [h]
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Density
Normal
Data
(c) Normal return time
0
5
10
15
Theoretical Quantiles
0
5
10
15
Sample Quantiles
(d) qq-plot leave time
0
5
10
15
20
Theoretical Quantiles
0
5
10
15
20
Sample Quantiles
(e) qq-plot energy
2
0
2
Theoretical Quantiles
8
10
12
15
18
Sample Quantiles
(f) qq-plot return time
Figure D.9: Car FF09 with µ = 1.15 and σ = 0.81. a) & d) Log-normal distribution
ﬁt for leave time. b) & e) Log-normal distribution ﬁt for energy usage with µ = 1.23 and
σ = 0.85. c) & f) Normal distribution ﬁt for return time with µ = 13.1 and σ = 2.16.
0
2
4
6
8
Leave time after 6:45 [h]
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
Density
Log-normal
Data
(a) Log-normal leave time
0
5
10
15
20
Energy usage pr. day [kWh]
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Density
Log-normal
Data
(b) Log-normal energy
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Return Time [h]
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
Density
Normal
Data
(c) Normal return time
2
4
6
Theoretical Quantiles
0
2
5
8
Sample Quantiles
(d) qq-plot leave time
5
10
15
Theoretical Quantiles
0
5
10
15
20
Sample Quantiles
(e) qq-plot energy
2
0
2
Theoretical Quantiles
10
12
15
18
Sample Quantiles
(f) qq-plot return time
Figure D.10: Car FF10 with µ = 0.44 and σ = 0.74. a) & d) Log-normal distribution
ﬁt for leave time. b) & e) Log-normal distribution ﬁt for energy usage with µ = 1.39 and
σ = 0.70. c) & f) Normal distribution ﬁt for return time with µ = 13.2 and σ = 1.86.
XVII
==PAGE:70==
Appendix E
Code and explanation
The code is build up around a mainscript called ’MainEVDataTrips.py’. First the mod-
ules ’downloadServerData’,’updateNreashapeDataframe’,’determineTrips’ and ’tripsPlot’
are loaded in and then the parameters for the respective ﬂeet are set. A module is the
same as a function. If there is a store with data present (i.e. the code have been run
before), the script will update the start time to be the last day in the present data. It will
then download new data and update the store and trip data. This was done to make the
script ﬂexible to new data as more data will make the user proﬁle more reliable.
downloadServerData
This module downloads data from the speciﬁed ﬂeet in the speciﬁed time interval. The
data is downloaded using a python API called ’requests’. This module can access text from
on-line sources and it also have the advantage that it takes a user name and password as
input, as the NUVVE server requires login.
The data is then automatically downloaded and saved in csv ﬁles with the naming conven-
tion: year_mmm_dd (eg. 2017_Jul_12), and with the folder structure: year/Month/ﬁle
(eg. 2017/July/2017_Jul_12). If the path does not have this folder structure already,
the script will add the needed folders. It takes approximately 1-5 minutes to download,
concatenate and save one day, depending on the internet connection and the amount of
data. A small log ﬁle is also saved in the speciﬁed path. The log ﬁle contains the start
and end time of the download, the duration in seconds, the data range with the number
of downloaded days and for which days and hours any potential error happened. The
naming of the log ﬁle is speciﬁed as: logFile_downloadServerData_year-mm-dd, which
means that when downloading several times in one day will overwrite the existing log ﬁle.
updateNreashapeDataframe
This module reshapes the data by adding and removing columns for the analysis. The
data is then saved into a store which are used for determining the trips. This module is
also described in Section 4.2.
determineTrips
This module determines the trips. The module is described in Section 5.1.
tripsPlot
This module contains the code for the plots. This module is not included in the attached
scripts since it does not give any extra knowledge about the data analysis.
To save some trees, the code is only included in the computer version.
XVIII
==PAGE:71==
E.1
MainEVDataTrips.py
1
# −∗−
coding :
utf −8 −∗−
2
" " "
3
Created
on Mon Dec
4
1 7 : 4 9 : 4 3
2017
4
5
@author :
s123901
6
7
Main
S c r i p t
f o r
running
python
f u n c t i o n s
f o r
EV data
8
" " "
9
10
import
downloadServerData ,
updateNreashapeDataframe ,
determineTrips ,
t r i p s P l o t
11
import
pandas
as
pd
12
import
i m p o r t l i b
13
from
datetime
import
date ,
t i m e d e l t a
14
yesterday = date . today ( ) −
t i m e d e l t a ( 1 )
15
################################### FF FLEET ##################################
16
start_date =
' 2016−10−01 ' #S t a r t
date
needs
to
be
in
' year−mm−dd '
17
end_date
= yesterday . s t r f t i m e ( '%Y−%m−%d ' )#End
date
needs
to
be
in
' year−mm−dd '
18
path =
'D: /PARKER p r o j e c t /EVs Data ' #S p e c i f y
d e s i r e d
saving
path
with
/
as
s e p e r a t o r
19
storeName =
' EV_data_reshaped_simple_noerrors_timeshift '
20
savepath =
'C: / Users / s123901 '
21
saveName =
' FF_trips_noerrors_timeshift '
22
CarIDs =
[ 'MCV2G03160002 ' , 'MCV2G03160012 ' , 'MCV2G04160002 ' , 'MCV2G03160003 ' , 'MCV2G03160004 ' ,
23
'MCV2G03160006 ' , 'MCV2G03160007 ' , 'MCV2G03160008 ' , 'MCV2G03160009 ' , 'MCV2G04160001 ' ] #Car←-
ID ' s
f o r
F F f l e e t
24
f l e e t
=
'FF '
25
folder_path =
'C: / Users / s123901 /Dropbox/PROJ_20170825_MasterProject/ Figures '
26
c o l o r s
=
[ ' RoyalBlue ' , ' F i r e B r i c k ' ,
' Orchid ' ,
' Grey ' ,
' DarkOrange '
, ' OliveDrab ' , ' Pink ' ]
27
nCars = 10
28
c o n f _ l e v e l =
[ 9 0 , 9 9 ]
29
save = 1 #choose
to
save
or
not
save
p l o t s
30
p l o t = 0 #Chose
whether
p l o t t i n g
should
be
done
31
Car =
[ ]
32
f o r
idx
in
range ( 0 ,
nCars ) :
33
Car . append ( ' {}{num: 0 2 d} ' . format ( f l e e t , num=idx +1) )
34
35
################################# CORRECT START ################################
36
#Download
and
update
only
new
data
37
try :
38
s t o r e
= pd . HDFStore ( ' {0}/{1}. h5 ' . format ( path , storeName ) )
39
a v a i l i d s
=
s t o r e [ ' a v a i l i d s ' ]
40
start_date =
a v a i l i d s [ a v a i l i d s . index [ −1]]
41
day = pd . to_datetime ( start_date ,
format =
' y%Y_%B_d%d ' ) . date ( ) + t i m e d e l t a ( 1 )
42
start_date = day . s t r f t i m e ( '%Y−%m−%d ' )
43
s t o r e . c l o s e ( )
44
except :
45
start_date = start_date
46
47
################################# UPDATE STORE ################################
48
49
# Download
new
s e r v e r
data
and
save
to
path
50
downloadServerData . downloadData ( start_date , end_date , path , CarIDs )
51
52
# Update
an
e x i s t i n g
dataframe
or
c r e a t e
a
new
one
with
the
columns
needed
f o r
the
a n a l y s i s
53
#i m p o r t l i b . r e l o a d ( updateNreashapeDataframe )
54
s t o r e _ f u l l
= updateNreashapeDataframe . update ( start_date , end_date , path , storeName , CarIDs )
55
56
############################### DETERMINE TRIPS ###############################
57
# Determine
t r i p s
f o r
s t o r e d
data
58
#i m p o r t l i b . r e l o a d ( determineTrips )
59
determineTrips . t r i p s ( path , storeName , savepath , saveName , f l e e t , CarIDs )
60
61
################################## READ DATA ##################################
62
#I f
data
i s
a l r e a d y
ready
j u s t
load
the
s t o r e :
63
s t o r e _ t r i p = pd . HDFStore ( ' {0}/{1}. h5 ' . format ( savepath , saveName ) )
64
65
########################### PROFILING AND PLOTTING ############################
66
i f
( p l o t == 1) :
67
68
#i m p o r t l i b . r e l o a d ( t r i p s P l o t )
69
s t o r e _ t r i p =
t r i p s P l o t . c a l c u l a t i o n s ( s t o r e _ t r i p , f l e e t , nCars )#C a l c u l a t e
v a r i a b l e s
f o r
←-
p l o t t i n g
70
t r i p s P l o t . charging ( s t o r e _ t r i p , f l e e t , nCars , folder_path , Car , save , i n d i v i d u a l =0)#
71
t r i p s P l o t . SOC_time( s t o r e _ t r i p , f l e e t , folder_path , save )#Plot
soc
s t a r t
and
soc
end
72
t r i p s P l o t . error_time ( s t o r e _ t r i p , f l e e t , nCars , folder_path , save )#Plot
e r r o r s
over
time
73
t r i p s P l o t . error_dist_perc ( s t o r e _ t r i p , f l e e t , folder_path , save )#Plot
d i s t r i b u t i o n
o f
data
74
t r i p s P l o t . unplugged_pie ( s t o r e _ t r i p , f l e e t , folder_path , save )#Plot
p i e
p l o t
o f
unplugged
←-
p e r i o d
d i s t r i b u t i o n
75
t r i p s P l o t . e r r o r _ p i e ( s t o r e _ t r i p , f l e e t , folder_path , save )#Plot
p i e
p l o t
o f
e r r o r
d i s t r i b u t i o n
76
t r i p s P l o t . CDF_day( s t o r e _ t r i p , f l e e t , nCars , folder_path , conf_level , save )#CDF
p l o t
med CI
77
t r i p s P l o t . d i s t r i b u t i o n ( s t o r e _ t r i p , f l e e t , nCars , folder_path , conf_level , i n d i v i d u a l =1, save =1)
78
t r i p s P l o t . d i s t _ v a l i d a t e ( s t o r e _ t r i p , f l e e t , nCars , folder_path , conf_level , i n d i v i d u a l =1, save =1)
79
t r i p s P l o t . P e r c e n t i l e ( s t o r e _ t r i p , f l e e t , nCars , folder_path , save )#Plot
with
the
10
c a r s
and ←-
p e r c e n t i l e r n e
80
t r i p s P l o t . usage ( s t o r e _ t r i p , f l e e t , folder_path , nCars , save )#Plot
usage
o f
c a r s
81
t r i p s P l o t . weekday ( s t o r e _ t r i p , f l e e t , folder_path , save )#Weekday
d e v i a t i o n s
XIX
==PAGE:72==
82
t r i p s P l o t . season ( s t o r e _ t r i p , f l e e t , folder_path , save )#Season
d e v i a t i o n s
83
t r i p s P l o t . boxplot ( s t o r e _ t r i p , f l e e t , folder_path , nCars , save )#boxplot
o f
the
v a r i a b l e s
84
t r i p s P l o t . p r o f i l e ( s t o r e _ t r i p , f l e e t , folder_path , Car , save )#Plot
changes
vs .
r i s k
85
t r i p s P l o t . l e a v e t i m e ( s t o r e _ t r i p , f l e e t , folder_path , nCars , save )#f o r
i n s p e c t i n g
the
p o s s i b l e
←-
t i m e s h i f t
86
t r i p s P l o t . case_study ( s t o r e _ t r i p , f l e e t , folder_path , Car , nCars , save )
87
s t o r e _ t r i p . c l o s e ( )
E.2
downloadServerData.py
1
# −∗−
coding :
utf −8 −∗−
2
" " "
3
Created
on Mon Sep
11
1 0 : 1 3 : 5 1
2017
4
5
D e s c r i p t i o n :
S c r i p t
that
a u t o m a t i c a l l y
downloads
data
from
the NUVVE s e r v e r .
6
For
each
downloaded
hour
o f
one
day
the
hourly
data
i s
merged
and
saved
as
a
csv
f i l e .
7
The
s c r i p t
saves
data
s p e c i f i e d
f o r
the
CarIDs .
8
9
@author :
Lea
Berthou ,
s123901@student . dtu . dk
10
11
" " "
12
def
downloadData ( start_date , end_date , path , CarIDs ) :
13
import
os
14
import
time
15
import
i o
16
import
r e q u e s t s
17
import
pandas
as
pd
18
from
datetime
import
datetime
19
import
c a l e n d a r
20
from
c o l l e c t i o n s
import
OrderedDict
21
22
user = #Username
f o r
l o g i n
23
passwd = #Password
f o r
l o g i n
24
25
p r i n t ( ' Download
s t a r t e d :
{} ' . format ( datetime . today ( ) . s t r f t i m e ( '%Y−%m−%d %H:%M:%S ' ) ) )
26
#l o g F i l e
to
tr ac k
e r r o r s
while
downloading
27
l o g F i l e
= pd . DataFrame ({ ' Time ' :
datetime . today ( ) . s t r f t i m e ( '%Y−%m−%d %H:%M:%S ' ) ,
'Comment ' :
←-
[ ' Download
i n i t i a t e d .
Datarange :
{0}
to
{1}. ' . format ( start_date , end_date ) ] } )
28
29
#Determine
the
d e s i r e d
daterange :
30
daterange = pd . date_range ( start_date ,
end_date )
31
nDays = l e n ( daterange )
32
33
# Loop
to
c r e a t e
f i l e n a m e s
f o r
the
csv
f i l e s :
34
f i l e n a m e s =
[ ]
35
f o r
idx
in
range ( 0 ,
24) :
36
f i l e n a m e s . append ( " log_for_hour_%s . csv " % ( idx ) )
37
38
t = time . time ( )
39
40
base_URL = " https : / / a g g r e g a t o r . nuvve . dk/ l o g s / c a r s "
41
42
#Double
loop
to
c r e a t e
path
and
download
the
r e q u e s t e d
data
f o r
each
day :
43
f o r
idx_date ,
cur_date
in
enumerate ( l i s t ( daterange ) ) :
44
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−# DOWNLOAD DATA #−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−#
45
df = pd . DataFrame ( ) #Reset
dataframe
46
f o r
idx_hour ,
cur_hour
in
enumerate ( l i s t ( f i l e n a m e s ) ) :
47
#D ef ini ng
year ,
month
and
day
f o r
downloading
48
date_str = cur_date . s t r f t i m e ( "%Y−%m−%d " )
49
dt_str = datetime . s t r p t i m e ( date_str , "%Y−%m−%d " )
50
download_link = base_URL+ ' / '+s t r ( dt_str . year )+ ' / '+s t r ( dt_str . month )+' / '+s t r ( dt_str . ←-
day )+ ' / '+cur_hour
51
try :
52
download =
r e q u e s t s . S e s s i o n ( ) . get ( download_link ,
auth=(user ,
passwd ) ) . t e x t
53
tempdf = pd . read_csv ( i o . StringIO ( download ) , dtype={ ' Time ' : f l o a t , 'CarName ' : f l o a t , ←-
' PowerCapacityUp ' : f l o a t ,
54
' PowerCapacityDown ' : f l o a t , '←-
PowerRequested ' : f l o a t , '←-
PowerProvided ' : f l o a t ,
55
' EnergyCapacity ' : f l o a t , '←-
EnergyStored ' : f l o a t , 'POP←-
' : f l o a t , ' PowerFlow ' : bool ←-
,
56
' Volts ' : object , 'Amps ' : object , ←-
' A v a i l a b l e ' : object , '←-
EVSEId ' : object ,
57
' ev_state ' : object , ' evse_state←-
' :
o b j e c t })
58
#Order
the
dataframe
to
match
csv
f i l e
59
cnames = tempdf . columns # Get
the
columns
names
o f
the
f i l e
60
tempdf = tempdf . reset_index ( ) # r e s e t
the
i nd e x es
o f
the
f i l e
61
tempdf = tempdf [ [ c
f o r
c
in
tempdf . columns
i f
c
not
in
cnames [ −3 : ] ] ]#Move
the
←-
columns ,
d e l e t i n g
the
l a s t
3
columns
62
tempdf . columns = cnames # Atribute
the
columns
names
to
new
colums .
Then ,
the
←-
s i z e
o f
t i t l e s
are
equal
to
the
number
o f
column
63
tempdf . evse_state = tempdf . evse_state . astype ( s t r ) #transform
a l l
elements
o f
←-
XX
==PAGE:73==
column
' evse_state '
in
s t r i n g
64
tempdf . CarName = tempdf . CarName . astype ( s t r )# transform
a l l
elements
o f
column
'←-
CarName '
in
s t r i n g
65
tempdf = tempdf . l o c [ tempdf [ 'CarName ' ] . i s i n ( CarIDs ) ]# F i l t e r
f o r
chosen
Car
ID ' s
66
tempdf . Time = pd . to_datetime ( tempdf . Time ,
format =
'%m−%d−%Y %H:%M:%S ' ) # Take ←-
the
f i r s t
column
that
have
i n f o r m a t i o n
about
the
date ,
and
transform
i t
in←-
date / time
type
67
i f
( tempdf . empty==1) :
68
l o g F i l e=l o g F i l e . append ({ ' Time ' :
datetime . today ( ) . s t r f t i m e ( '%Y−%m−%d %H:%M:%←-
S ' ) ,
69
'Comment ' :
'No
data
was
not
found
f o r
{0}
{ 1 } : 0 0 : 0 0 . ' . format (←-
date_str , idx_hour ) } ,
70
ignore_index=True )
71
p r i n t ( 'No
data
was
not
found
f o r
{0}
{ 1 } : 0 0 : 0 0 . ' . format ( date_str , idx_hour ) )
72
df = pd . concat ( ( df ,
tempdf ) ,
ignore_index=True ) #Concatenate
the
dataframe
o f
←-
the
new
f i l e
with
the
p r e v i o u s
one
73
except : #I f
day
i s
not
p r e s e n t
in
s e r v e r
74
tempdf = pd . DataFrame ( OrderedDict ({
75
' Time ' :
[ ] ,
76
'CarName ' :
[ ] ,
77
' PowerCapacityUp ' :
[ ] ,
78
' PowerCapacityDown ' :
[ ] ,
79
' PowerRequested ' :
[ ] ,
80
' PowerProvided ' :
[ ] ,
81
' EnergyCapacity ' :
[ ] ,
82
' EnergyStored ' :
[ ] ,
83
'POP ' :
[ ] ,
84
' PowerFlow ' :
[ ] ,
85
' Volts ' :
[ ] ,
86
'Amps ' :
[ ] ,
87
' A v a i l a b l e ' :
[ ] ,
88
'EVSEId ' :
[ ] ,
89
' ev_state ' :
[ ] ,
90
' evse_state ' :
[ ] } ) )
91
df = pd . concat ( ( df ,
tempdf ) ,
ignore_index=True )
92
l o g F i l e=l o g F i l e . append ({ ' Time ' :
datetime . today ( ) . s t r f t i m e ( '%Y−%m−%d %H:%M:%S ' ) ,
93
'Comment ' :
'No
data
was
not
found
f o r
{0}
{ 1 } : 0 0 : 0 0 . ' . ←-
format ( date_str , idx_hour ) } ,
94
ignore_index=True )
95
p r i n t ( 'No
data
was
not
found
f o r
{0}
{ 1 } : 0 0 : 0 0 . ' . format ( date_str , idx_hour ) )
96
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−# SAVE DATA AS CSV #−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−#
97
p r i n t ( ' Data
downloaded :
{} ' . format ( datetime . today ( ) . s t r f t i m e ( '%Y−%m−%d %H:%M:%S ' ) ) )
98
f o l d e r
=
' /{0}/{1}/ ' . format ( dt_str . year ,
c a l e n d a r . month_name [ dt_str . month ] )
99
dayID =
' {0}_{1}_{2} ' . format ( dt_str . year ,
c a l e n d a r . month_abbr [ dt_str . month ] , dt_str . day )←-
# Creating
the
name
o f
the
f i l e
to
be
s t o r e
100
try :
101
df_csv = df . set_index ( ' Time ' )
102
i f
not
os . path . e x i s t s ( path+f o l d e r ) :#Make
f o l d e r
f o r
the
saved
csv
f i l e s
i f
i t
does
←-
not
e x i s t
103
os . makedirs ( path+f o l d e r )
104
df_csv . to_csv ( ' {0}{1}{2}. csv ' . format ( path , f o l d e r , dayID ) ,
sep=' , ' )#Save
csv
f i l e
to
←-
path
105
p r i n t ( ' Downladed
days :
{0}/{1} ' . format ( idx_date +1,nDays ) )
106
except : #I f
no
data
was
found
f o r
a
f u l l
day
107
p r i n t ( 'No
data
was
found
f o r
the
f u l l
day :
{0}. ' . format ( date_str ) )
108
l o g F i l e
=
l o g F i l e . append ({ ' Time ' :
datetime . today ( ) . s t r f t i m e ( '%Y−%m−%d %H:%M:%S ' ) ,
109
'Comment ' :
'No
data
was
found
f o r
the
f u l l
day :
{0}. ' . ←-
format ( date_str ) } ,
110
ignore_index=True )
111
e l a p s e d = time . time ( ) −t
112
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−# SAVE LOGFILE #−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−#
113
l o g F i l e=l o g F i l e . append ({ ' Time ' :
datetime . today ( ) . s t r f t i m e ( '%Y−%m−%d %H:%M:%S ' ) ,
114
'Comment ' :
' Download
Finished .
Downladed
and
merged
days :
{}.
Used ←-
time :
{ : . 0 f }
seconds . ' . format ( nDays ,
e l a p s e d ) } ,
115
ignore_index=True )
116
l o g F i l e
=
l o g F i l e . set_index ( ' Time ' )
117
l o g F i l e . to_csv ( ' {0}/ logFile_downloadServerData_ {1}. csv ' . format ( path , datetime . today ( ) . ←-
s t r f t i m e ( '%Y−%m−%d ' ) ) )#Save
l o g f i l e
to
csv
in
path
118
p r i n t ( e l a p s e d )
E.3
updateNreashapeDataframe.py
1
" " "
2
D e s c r i p t i o n :
Import
data
from
csv
f i l e s
made
with
downloadData . py .
3
I f
the
data
i s
a l r e a d y
downloaded
with
downloadData . py
t h i s
s c r i p t
can
be
used
4
to
update
an
e x i s t i n g
panda
dataframe
or
c r e a t e
a
new
dataframe .
5
Already
p r e s e n t
days
in
the
dataframe
are
skipped .
6
7
@author :
Lea
Berthou ,
s123901@student . dtu . dk
8
" " "
9
def
update ( start_date , end_date , path , storeName , CarIDs ) :
10
import
os
11
import
time
12
import
pandas
as
pd
13
from
datetime
import
datetime
14
import
c a l e n d a r
XXI
==PAGE:74==
15
import
warnings
16
import
numpy
as
np
17
warnings . f i l t e r w a r n i n g s ( ' i g n o r e ' , category=pd . i o . p y t a b l e s . PerformanceWarning )
18
19
#l o g F i l e
to
tr ac k
e r r o r s
while
downloading
20
l o g F i l e
= pd . DataFrame ({ ' Time ' :
datetime . today ( ) . s t r f t i m e ( '%Y−%m−%d %H:%M:%S ' ) ,
'Comment ' :
←-
[ ' Download
i n i t i a t e d ' ] } )
21
22
#Path
o f
the
h5
data
frame
f i l e
f o r
the
EVs
data
23
s t o r e
= pd . HDFStore ( ' {0}/{1}. h5 ' . format ( path , storeName ) )
24
25
i f
' Data_errors '
in
s t o r e :
26
e r r o r d f
=
s t o r e [ ' Data_errors ' ]#df
to
s t o r e
found
e r r o r s
27
e l s e : #I f
t h i s
i s
the
f i r s t
time
downloading
a l l
v a r i a b l e s
needs
to
i n i t i a l i z e d
28
e r r o r d f
= pd . DataFrame ( )
29
30
try :
31
a v a i l i d s
=
s t o r e [ ' a v a i l i d s ' ] . t o l i s t ( )
32
except
KeyError :
33
a v a i l i d s
=
[ ]
# A v a i l a b l e
days
34
35
#Determine
the
d e s i r e d
daterange :
36
daterange = pd . date_range ( start_date ,
end_date )
37
nDays = l e n ( daterange )
38
39
#Double
loop
to
c r e a t e
path
and
download
the
r e q u e s t e d
data
f o r
each
day :
40
t = time . time ( )
41
42
#
Data
does
not
take
summer/ wintertime
i n t o
account
and
i s
t h e r e f o r e
changed
in
the
←-
dataframe
43
#
summertime = { ' 2 0 1 6 ' :
pd . to_datetime ('2016−03−27T00 : 0 0 : 0 0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 ' ) ,
44
#
' 2 0 1 7 ' :
pd . to_datetime ('2017−03−26T00 : 0 0 : 0 0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 ' ) ,
45
#
' 2 0 1 8 ' :
pd . to_datetime ('2018−03−24T00 : 0 0 : 0 0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 ' ) }
46
#
wintertime = { ' 2 0 1 6 ' :
pd . to_datetime ('2016−10−30T00 : 0 0 : 0 0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 ' ) ,
47
#
' 2 0 1 7 ' :
pd . to_datetime ('2017−10−29T00 : 0 0 : 0 0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 ' ) ,
48
#
' 2 0 1 8 ' :
pd . to_datetime ('2018−10−27T00 : 0 0 : 0 0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 ' ) }
49
t i m e s h i f t
=
[ pd . to_datetime ( ' 2017−02−20T00 : 0 0 : 0 0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 ' ) ,
50
pd . to_datetime ( ' 2017−03−26T00 : 0 0 : 0 0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 ' ) ,
51
pd . to_datetime ( ' 2017−08−28T00 : 0 0 : 0 0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 ' ) ]
52
d f _ t i m e s h i f t = pd . DataFrame ( )
53
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−# LOOP OVER DATES #−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−#
54
f o r
idx_date ,
cur_date
in
enumerate ( l i s t ( daterange ) ) :
55
df = pd . DataFrame ( )
56
#De fi ni ng
year ,
month
and
day
f o r
downloading
57
date_str = cur_date . s t r f t i m e ( "%Y−%m−%d " )
58
dt_str = datetime . s t r p t i m e ( date_str , "%Y−%m−%d " )
59
dayID =
' y{0}_{1}_d{2} ' . format ( dt_str . year , c a l e n d a r . month_name [ dt_str . month ] ,
dt_str . ←-
day ) # Creating
the
name
o f
the
f i l e
to
be
s t o r e
60
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−# IMPORT DATA #−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−#
61
f o l d e r
=
' {0}/{1} ' . format ( dt_str . year , c a l e n d a r . month_name [ dt_str . month ] )
62
f i l e
=
' {0}_{1}_{2}. csv ' . format ( dt_str . year , c a l e n d a r . month_abbr [ dt_str . month ] , dt_str . ←-
day )
63
doy = dt_str . timetuple ( ) . tm_yday
64
# " day
o f
year "
ranges
f o r
the
northern
hemisphere
65
i f
doy
in
range (60 ,
151) :
66
season = 0#Spring
67
e l i f
doy
in
range (152 ,
243) :
68
season = 1#Summer
69
e l i f
doy
in
range (244 ,
335) :
70
season = 2#F a l l
71
e l s e :
72
season = 3#Winter
73
try :
74
#read
in
the
data
downloaded
from
downloadServerData . py :
75
df = pd . read_csv ( ' {0}/{1}/{2} ' . format ( path , f o l d e r , f i l e ) , dtype={ 'CarName ' : object , '←-
PowerCapacityUp ' : f l o a t , ' PowerCapacityDown ' : f l o a t ,
76
' PowerRequested ' : ←-
f l o a t , '←-
PowerProvided ' : ←-
f l o a t , '←-
EnergyCapacity '←-
: f l o a t ,
77
' EnergyStored ' : f l o a t ←-
, 'POP ' : f l o a t , '←-
PowerFlow ' : ←-
f l o a t , ' Volts ' : ←-
f l o a t ,
78
'Amps ' : f l o a t , '←-
A v a i l a b l e ' : bool ←-
, 'EVSEId ' : ←-
object , '←-
ev_state ' : ←-
object ,
79
' evse_state ' :
o b j e c t ←-
})
80
df . Time = pd . to_datetime ( df . Time ,
format =
'%Y−%m−%d %H:%M:%S ' ) # Transform
Time ←-
i n t o
pandas
date / time
type
81
i f
( df . Time . empty==0) :
82
i f ( ( t i m e s h i f t [ 0 ] ) <= ( df . i l o c [ 0 ] . Time ) <= ( t i m e s h i f t [ −1]) ) :
83
#Compensate
f o r
t i m e s h i f t
e r r o r s
84
i f
( ( t i m e s h i f t [ 0 ] ) <= ( df . i l o c [ 0 ] . Time ) < ( t i m e s h i f t [ 1 ] ) ) :
XXII
==PAGE:75==
85
t i m e s h i f t i n g
= pd . to_timedelta ( ' 0
days
0 1 : 0 0 : 0 0 ' )
86
e l i f
( ( t i m e s h i f t [ 1 ] ) <= ( df . i l o c [ 0 ] . Time ) <= ( t i m e s h i f t [ −1]) ) :
87
t i m e s h i f t i n g
= pd . to_timedelta ( ' 0
days
0 2 : 0 0 : 0 0 ' )
88
last_time = df . i l o c [ −1]. Time
89
df . Time = df . Time+t i m e s h i f t i n g
90
df = pd . concat ( ( df_timeshift , df ) , ignore_index=False )
91
i f
( ( last_time ) > ( pd . to_datetime ( ' {0}T22 : 5 9 : 0 0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 ' . format ( date_str ) ) ) )←-
:
92
d f _ t i m e s h i f t = df . l o c [ df . Time>last_time ]
93
df = df . l o c [ df . Time<=last_time ]
94
df = df . set_index ( ' Time ' )
95
df = df . reset_index ( )
96
i f
( ( last_time ) > ( t i m e s h i f t [ −1]) ) :
97
d f _ t i m e s h i f t = pd . DataFrame ( )
98
#p r i n t ( last_time )
99
e l s e :
100
d f _ t i m e s h i f t = pd . DataFrame ( )
101
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−# CREATE NEW COLUMNS FOR ANALYSIS #−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−#
102
# D i s t i n g u i s h i n g
EVs
plugged
in
the
system
or
not
plugged .
Evs
can
be
plugged
but
←-
not
ready
to
provide
the
s e r v i c e
103
df [ ' Plugged ' ]
= np . where ( df [ 'EVSEId ']== 'NK' ,
0 ,
1) & np . where ( df [ 'EVSEId ']== 'NC ' ,
←-
0 ,
1)
104
# D i s t i n g u i s h i n g
EVs
that
are
charging
105
# Determining
the SOC
o f
the EV in
the
moment
in
percentage
106
df [ 'SOC ' ]
= ( df [ ' EnergyStored ' ] / df [ ' EnergyCapacity ' ] ) ∗100
107
# Creating
a
column
i d e n t i f y i n g
the
day
o f
the
week
108
df [ 'DayOfWeek ' ]
= df [ ' Time ' ] . dt . weekday
109
# Creating
a
column
i d e n t i f y i n g
the
season
110
df [ ' Season ' ]
= season
111
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−# DETECT AND REMOVE ERRORS #−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−#
112
# Detecting
p o t e n t i a l
e r r o r s
in
data −Plugged ==0 and
PowerProvided !=0
113
e r r o r s
= df [ ( df [ ' Plugged ' ]==0) & ( df [ ' PowerProvided ' ] ! = 0 ) ]
114
df = df . drop ( e r r o r s . index ) #
I f
e r r o r s
should
be
removed
115
e r r o r s
=
e r r o r s . set_index ( ' Time ' )
116
e r r o r s
=
e r r o r s . l o c [ : , : ' Plugged ' ]
117
e r r o r s
=
e r r o r s . l o c [ : , : ' evse_state ' ]
118
e r r o r d f
=
e r r o r d f . append ( e r r o r s ) # save
removed
e r r o r s
119
120
d e l
df [ ' PowerCapacityUp ' ] ,
df [ ' PowerCapacityDown ' ] ,
df [ ' PowerRequested ' ]
121
d e l
df [ ' PowerProvided ' ] ,
df [ 'POP ' ] ,
df [ ' PowerFlow ' ] ,
df [ ' A v a i l a b l e ' ]
122
d e l
df [ ' evse_state ' ]#, df [ ' Volts ' ] ,
df [ ' Amps ' ]
123
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−# SAVE DATA INTO PANDS DATAFRAME #−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−#
124
s t o r e [ dayID ]
= df
# Store
the
Dataframe
i n f o r m a t i o n
with
the
f i l e
name
o f
dayID
125
a v a i l i d s . append ( dayID ) # Aggregating
a l l
the
new
f i l e n a m e s
to
be
s t o r e d
126
p r i n t ( ' Dataframe
updated :
{0}/{1} ' . format ( idx_date +1,nDays ) )
127
l o g F i l e
=
l o g F i l e . append ({ ' Time ' :
datetime . today ( ) . s t r f t i m e ( '%Y−%m−%d %H:%M:%S ' ) ,
128
'Comment ' :
' Added
to
s t o r e :
{0}. ' . format ( dayID ) } ,
129
ignore_index=True )
130
except :
131
p r i n t ( 'No
data
was
found
f o r
the
f u l l
day :
{0}. ' . format ( date_str ) )
132
l o g F i l e
=
l o g F i l e . append ({ ' Time ' :
datetime . today ( ) . s t r f t i m e ( '%Y−%m−%d %H:%M:%S ' ) ,
133
'Comment ' :
'No
data
was
found
f o r
the
f u l l
day :
{0}. ' . ←-
format ( date_str ) } ,
134
ignore_index=True )
135
e r r o r d f
=
e r r o r d f . sort_index ( ' index ' )
136
s t o r e [ ' Data_errors ' ]
=
e r r o r d f
137
s t o r e [ ' a v a i l i d s ' ]
= pd . S e r i e s ( a v a i l i d s ) # Store
a l l
f i l e n a m e s
138
#w r i t e
e r r o r s
to
csv
f i l e
139
e r r o r d f . to_csv ( os . path . j o i n ( path , ' Data_GIV_errors_all . csv ' ) )
140
s t o r e . c l o s e ( )
141
e l a p s e d = time . time ( ) −t
142
p r i n t ( e l a p s e d )
143
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−# SAVE LOGFILE #−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−#
144
l o g F i l e=l o g F i l e . append ({ ' Time ' :
datetime . today ( ) . s t r f t i m e ( '%Y−%m−%d %H:%M:%S ' ) ,
145
'Comment ' :
' Download
Finished .
Saved
days
in
data
dataframe :
{}.
←-
Used
time :
{ : . 0 f }
seconds . ' . format ( nDays ,
e l a p s e d ) } ,
146
ignore_index=True )
147
l o g F i l e
=
l o g F i l e . set_index ( ' Time ' )
148
l o g F i l e . to_csv ( ' {0}/ logFile_updateDataframe_ {1}. csv ' . format ( path , datetime . today ( ) . s t r f t i m e (←-
'%Y−%m−%d ' ) ) )#Save
csv
f i l e
to
path
149
150
r e t u r n
s t o r e
E.4
determineTrips.py
1
# −∗−
coding :
utf −8 −∗−
2
" " "
3
Created
on Mon Oct
11
0 9 : 2 6 : 3 2
2017
4
5
D e s c r i p t i o n :
S c r i p t
that
f i n d s
which
times
the
c a r s
l e a v e
and
r e t u r n
and
how
6
much
energy
i s
used
on
the
t r i p .
7
8
@author :
Lea
Berthou ,
s123901@student . dtu . dk
9
10
" " "
11
def
t r i p s ( path , storeName , savepath , saveName , f l e e t , CarIDs ) :
XXIII
==PAGE:76==
12
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−# INITIALIZE PARAMETERS #−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−#
13
import
time
14
import
pandas
as
pd
15
import
numpy
as
np
16
from
datetime
import
datetime
17
18
p r i n t ( ' Proces
s t a r t e d :
{} ' . format ( datetime . today ( ) . s t r f t i m e ( '%Y−%m−%d %H:%M:%S ' ) ) )
19
20
s t o r e
= pd . HDFStore ( ' {0}/{1}. h5 ' . format ( path , storeName ) )
21
s t o r e 2
= pd . HDFStore ( ' {0}/{1}. h5 ' . format ( savepath , saveName ) )
22
23
try :
24
a v a i l i d s
=
s t o r e [ ' a v a i l i d s ' ] . t o l i s t ( )
25
except
KeyError :
26
a v a i l i d s
=
[ ]
# A v a i l a b l e
days
27
28
29
try :
30
C a r t r i p _ a l l =
s t o r e 2 [ ' C a r t r i p _ a l l ' ]
31
Cartrip_day =
s t o r e 2 [ ' Cartrip_day ' ]
32
InUse_all =
s t o r e 2 [ ' InUse_all ' ]
33
C a r t r i p _ e r r o r s =
s t o r e 2 [ ' C a r t r i p _ e r r o r s ' ]
34
Charging2 =
s t o r e 2 [ ' Charging ' ]
35
addData = 1
36
except :
37
C a r t r i p _ a l l = pd . DataFrame ( )
38
Cartrip_day = pd . DataFrame ( )
39
InUse_all = pd . DataFrame ( )
40
C a r t r i p _ e r r o r s = pd . DataFrame ( )
41
addData = 0
42
p r i n t ( 'No
e x i s t i n g
f i l e ' )
43
44
i f
( addData==1) :
45
a v a i l i d s 2
=
s t o r e 2 [ ' a v a i l i d s ' ]
46
dates =
s t o r e [ ' a v a i l i d s ' ]
47
i f
( dates . v a l u e s [ −1]!= a v a i l i d s 2 . v a l u e s [ −1]) :
48
dates = dates . l o c [ ~ dates . i s i n ( a v a i l i d s 2 ) ]
49
p r i n t ( ' Trips
are
updated
from :
{}. ' . format ( dates . v a l u e s [ 0 ] ) )
50
e l s e :
51
addData = 0
52
C a r t r i p _ a l l = pd . DataFrame ( )
53
Cartrip_day = pd . DataFrame ( )
54
InUse_all = pd . DataFrame ( )
55
C a r t r i p _ e r r o r s = pd . DataFrame ( )
56
p r i n t ( ' All
t r i p s
w i l l
be
r e c a l c u l a t e d .
Use
stop
button
to
abort . ' )
57
e l s e :
58
dates =
s t o r e [ ' a v a i l i d s ' ]
59
60
61
62
t = time . time ( )
63
#Double
loop
to
c r e a t e
path
and
download
the
r e q u e s t e d
data
f o r
each
day :
64
nDays = l e n ( dates )
65
save_error = 0
66
save_0trip = 0
67
68
#dates =
[ ' y2017_April_d17 ']# For
t e s t i n g
69
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−# LOOP OVER DATES #−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−#
70
f o r
idx_date ,
dayID
in
enumerate ( l i s t ( dates ) ) :
71
df =
s t o r e [ dayID ]
72
73
i f
( df . empty==0) :
74
day = pd . to_datetime ( dayID ,
format =
' y%Y_%B_d%d ' )
75
weekDay = df . DayOfWeek [ df . index [ 0 ] ]
76
season = df . Season [ df . index [ 0 ] ]
77
e l s e :
78
day = pd . to_datetime ( dayID ,
format =
' y%Y_%B_d%d ' )
79
weekDay = day . weekday ( )
80
81
i f
weekDay >
4 :
#0−monday ,
1−tuesday , . . .
6−sunday
82
weekend = 1
83
e l s e :
84
weekend = 0
85
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−# LOOP OVER CARS #−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−#
86
f o r
idx_car ,
cur_car
in
enumerate ( l i s t ( CarIDs ) ) :
87
#idx_car
=6; cur_car = CarIDs [ idx_car ]#For
t e s t i n g
88
charge_start = np . nan ;
charge_start_num = np . nan ;
charge_startSOC = np . nan
89
charge_end = np . nan ;
charge_end_num = np . nan ;
charge_endSOC = np . nan ;
90
charge_startEnergy = np . nan ;
charge_endEnergy = np . nan ;
charge_Energy = np . nan
91
charge_time = np . nan ; charge_SOC = np . nan ; charge_amps = np . nan ; charge_volts = np . nan
92
tripNum = 0
93
Cardf = df . l o c [ ( df [ 'CarName ' ] == cur_car ) ]#choose
data
f o r
one
car
at
the
time
94
Cardf = Cardf . reset_index ( )
95
Unplugged = Cardf . l o c [ ( Cardf [ ' Plugged ' ] == 0) ]
96
Plugged = Cardf . l o c [ ( Cardf [ ' Plugged ' ] == 1) ]
97
Charge = Cardf . l o c [ ( Cardf [ ' ev_state ']== 'TRIP ' ) & ( Cardf [ 'EVSEId ']== 'CH ' ) ]
98
i f
( Charge . empty==0) :#Check
i f
charging
s t a r t e d
b e f o r e
2 am
( e r r o r )
99
i f
( ( Charge . i l o c [ 0 ] [ ' Time ' ]−day )<(pd . to_timedelta ( ' 0
days
0 2 : 0 0 : 0 0 ' ) ) ) :
100
Charge = Charge . l o c [ ( Charge [ ' Time ' ]−day )>(pd . to_timedelta ( ' 0
days
0 2 : 0 0 : 0 0 '←-
) ) ]
101
ch_start = Charge . l o c [ Charge [ 'SOC ']==Charge [ 'SOC ' ] . min ( ) ] [ ' Time ' ] . min ( )
XXIV
==PAGE:77==
102
Charge = Charge . l o c [ Charge [ ' Time ']>=ch_start ]
103
#p r i n t ( ' {} ,
i d x c a r ={},
Charge1 . ' . format ( dayID , idx_car ) )
104
Charge = Charge . reset_index ( )
105
#Check
i f
a l l
i s
unplugged
or
plugged
and
determine
in d ex e s
f o r
d r i v i n g
106
i f
( ( Plugged . empty==0) & ( Unplugged . empty==0)) :
107
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−# CHECK FOR ERRORS IN IDX_START #−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−#
108
#Check
i f
t h e r e
was
an
plugged
e r r o r
in
b e g i n i n g
109
i f
( i n t ( Unplugged . index . v a l u e s [ 0 ] ) ) > ( i n t ( Plugged . index . v a l u e s [ 0 ] ) ) :
110
idx_start =
i n t ( Unplugged . index . v a l u e s [ 0 ] )
111
e l s e :
112
idx_start =
i n t ( Plugged . index . v a l u e s [ 0 ] )
113
Car_inspect = Cardf . i l o c [ idx_start : −1]
114
Unplugged = Car_inspect . l o c [ ( Cardf [ ' Plugged ' ] == 0) ]
115
i f
( Unplugged . empty==0) :
116
idx_start =
i n t ( Unplugged . index . v a l u e s [ 0 ] )
117
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−# CHECK FOR ERRORS IN IDX_END #−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−#
118
#Check
i f
t h e r e
was
an
plugged
e r r o r
in
the
end
119
i f
( Unplugged . empty==0) :
120
i f
( i n t ( Plugged . index . v a l u e s [ −1]) +1) > ( i n t ( Unplugged . index . v a l u e s [ −1]) +1) :
121
i d x _ f i n a l =
i n t ( Unplugged . index . v a l u e s [ −1])+1
122
e l s e :
123
i d x _ f i n a l =
i n t ( Plugged . index . v a l u e s [ −1])+1
124
Car_inspect = Cardf . i l o c [ idx_start : i d x _ f i n a l ]
125
Unplugged = Car_inspect . l o c [ ( Cardf [ ' Plugged ' ] == 0) ]
126
i f
( Unplugged . empty==0) :
127
i d x _ f i n a l =
i n t ( Unplugged . index . v a l u e s [ −1])+1
128
Car_inspect = Cardf . i l o c [ idx_start : i d x _ f i n a l ]
129
Plugged = Car_inspect . l o c [ ( Cardf [ ' Plugged ' ] == 1) ]
130
131
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−# START WHILE LOOP #−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−#
132
i f
( Unplugged . empty==0) :
133
while
( Unplugged . empty==0) :
134
#I n t i a l i z e
saving
v a l u e s
135
SOC_before = np . nan ;
SOC_after = np . nan ;
SOC_used = 0 ;
VE_fail = 0 ;
136
Energy_before = np . nan ;
Energy_after = np . nan ;
Energy_used =
0 ;
137
leaveT = np . nan ;
returnT = np . nan ;
SOC_before_error = np . nan ;
138
missingData =
0 ;
duration = pd . to_timedelta ( ' 0
days
0 0 : 0 0 : 0 0 ' )
139
140
#Search
f o r
e r r o r s
and
determine
t r i p s
i g
the
car
i s
unplugged
141
i f
( Plugged . empty==0) :
142
idx_end =
i n t ( Plugged . index . v a l u e s [ 0 ] )
143
e l s e :
144
idx_end = i d x _ f i n a l
145
len_period = ( Cardf . i l o c [ idx_end ] [ ' Time ' ]−Cardf . i l o c [ idx_start ] [ ' Time '←-
] )
146
i f
( len_period>pd . to_timedelta ( ' 0
days
0 0 : 1 0 : 0 0 ' ) ) :
147
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−# CHECK FOR ERRORS IN SOC BEFORE #−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−#
148
# Check
i f
t h e r e
i s
missing
more
than
1
hour
o f
data
b e f o r e
plug−←-
out
149
i f
( ( Cardf . i l o c [ idx_start ] [ ' Time ' ]−Cardf . i l o c [ idx_start −1][ ' Time ' ] ) ←-
> pd . to_timedelta ( ' 0
days
0 1 : 0 0 : 0 0 ' ) ) :
150
missingData = 1
151
# Check
i f
t h e r e
i s
missing
more
than
1
hour
o f
data
within
the
←-
p e r i o d
152
e l i f
any ( Cardf . i l o c [ idx_start : idx_end ] [ ' index ' ]−Cardf . i l o c [ ←-
idx_start ] [ ' index ' ] >
l e n ( Cardf . i l o c [ idx_start : idx_end ] ) ∗l e n (←-
CarIDs ) +3600∗l e n ( CarIDs ) ) :
153
missingData = 1
154
#check
f o r
OE or VE in
EVSEId
f o r
l a s t
2
minutes
and SOC = 0
or
1
155
e l i f
any ( x
in
{ 'OE ' , 'VE ' }
f o r
x
in
( Cardf . i l o c [ idx_start −120:←-
idx_start ] [ 'EVSEId ' ] ) )
and
\
156
( ( Cardf . i l o c [ idx_start −1][ 'SOC ' ] == 0)
|
( Cardf . i l o c [ idx_start ←-
−1][ 'SOC ' ] == 1) ) :
157
#check
i f
t h e r e
s t i l l
i s
a
plugged
p e r i o d
l e f t
158
i f
( Plugged . empty==0) :
159
temp = Cardf . i l o c [ 1 : idx_start ]
160
#Make
temporarely
plugged
v e c t o r
f o r
assessment
161
Unplugged_temp = temp . l o c [ ( temp [ ' Plugged ' ] == 0) ]
162
#check
i f
the
temporarely
unplugged
v e c t o r
i s
empty
163
i f
( Unplugged_temp . empty==0) :
164
#determine
temporarely
s t a r t
index
165
idx_temp =
i n t ( Unplugged_temp . index . v a l u e s [ −1])+1
166
#Correct
temporarely
plugged
v e c t o r
f o r
assessment
167
temp = Cardf . i l o c [ idx_temp : idx_start ]
168
Plugged_temp = temp . l o c [ ( temp [ ' Plugged ' ] == 1) ]
169
#determine
temporarely
s t a r t
index
170
idx_temp =
i n t ( Plugged_temp . index . v a l u e s [ 0 ] )
171
#Choose
only
rows
with
e r r o r
172
Error_plugged = Plugged_temp . l o c [ ( Plugged_temp [ 'EVSEId ' ] ==←-
'OE ' )
|
( Plugged_temp [ 'EVSEId ' ] ==
'VE ' ) ]
173
#choose
only
v a l u e s
in
the
p r e s e n t
index
174
Error_plugged = Error_plugged [ Error_plugged . i s i n ( Cardf . i l o c ←-
[ idx_start −120: idx_start ] ) . a l l ( 1 ) ]
175
e l s e :
176
Plugged_temp = Cardf . i l o c [ idx_start −120: idx_start ]#2
l a s t
←-
min
177
Error_plugged = Plugged_temp . l o c [ ( Plugged_temp [ 'EVSEId ' ] ==←-
'OE ' )
|
( Plugged_temp [ 'EVSEId ' ] ==
'VE ' ) ]
178
#check
i f
the
temporarely
e r r o r
plugged
v e c t o r
i s
empty
179
i f
( Error_plugged . empty==0) :
180
idx_start =
i n t ( Error_plugged . index . v a l u e s [ 0 ] )#make new ←-
XXV
==PAGE:78==
s t a r t
index
181
#Do
not
go
back
more
than
15
min
(900
s e c )
182
try :
idx_start_max =
i n t ( Cardf . index . v a l u e s [ idx_start −900])
183
#I f
t h e r e
i s
not
15
min
choose
e a r l i e s t
p o s s i b l e
index
184
except :
idx_start_max =
i n t ( Cardf . index . v a l u e s [ 0 ] )
185
# add
one
to
index
each
time SOC
i s
s t i l l
0
or
1 .
186
while
( ( Cardf . i l o c [ idx_start ] [ 'SOC ' ] == 0)
|
( Cardf . i l o c [ ←-
idx_start ] [ 'SOC ' ] == 1) ) & ( idx_start > idx_start_max )←-
:
187
idx_start = idx_start −1
188
#check
f o r
OE or VE in
EVSEId
f o r
l a s t
2
minutes
189
e l i f
any ( x
in
{ 'OE ' , 'VE ' }
f o r
x
in
( Cardf . i l o c [ idx_start −120:←-
idx_start ] [ 'EVSEId ' ] ) ) :
190
Plugged_temp = Cardf . i l o c [ idx_start −120: idx_start ]#2
l a s t
min
191
Error_plugged = Plugged_temp . l o c [ ( Plugged_temp [ 'EVSEId ' ] ==
'OE←-
' )
|
( Plugged_temp [ 'EVSEId ' ] ==
'VE ' ) ]
192
i f
( Error_plugged . empty==0) :
193
SOC_before_error = min ( Error_plugged [ 'SOC ' ] )
194
SOC_before = Cardf . i l o c [ idx_start −1][ 'SOC ' ]
195
Energy_before = Cardf . i l o c [ idx_start −1][ ' EnergyStored ' ]
196
i f
( ( SOC_before == 0)
|
( SOC_before == 1) ) :#i f
i t
was
not
p o s s i b l e
←-
to
f i n d
a
v a l i d
SOC
b e f o r e
s e t
i t
to
nan
197
SOC_before = np . nan
198
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−# CHECK FOR ERRORS IN SOC AFTER #−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−#
199
i f
( ( Cardf . i l o c [ idx_end ] [ ' Time ' ]−Cardf . i l o c [ idx_end −1][ ' Time ' ] ) > ←-
pd . to_timedelta ( ' 0
days
0 1 : 0 0 : 0 0 ' ) ) :
200
missingData = 1
201
e l i f
( ( idx_end +120)>(Cardf . index [ −1]) ) :
202
missingData = 1
203
#check
f o r
OE or VE in
EVSEId
f o r
next
2
minutes
204
e l i f
any ( x
in
{ 'OE ' , 'VE ' }
f o r
x
in
( Cardf . i l o c [ idx_end : idx_end←-
+120][ 'EVSEId ' ] ) ) :
205
i f
( Plugged . empty==0) :
206
Error_plugged = Plugged . l o c [ ( Plugged [ 'EVSEId ' ] ==
'OE ' )
|
(←-
Plugged [ 'EVSEId ' ] ==
'VE ' ) ]
207
#choose
only
v a l u e s
in
the
p r e s e n t
index
208
Error_plugged = Error_plugged [ Error_plugged . i s i n ( Cardf . i l o c ←-
[ idx_end : idx_end +120]) . a l l ( 1 ) ]
209
e l s e :
210
Plugged_temp = Cardf . i l o c [ idx_end : idx_end +120]#2
next
min
211
Error_plugged = Plugged_temp . l o c [ ( Plugged_temp [ 'EVSEId ' ] ==←-
'OE ' )
|
( Plugged_temp [ 'EVSEId ' ] ==
'VE ' ) ]
212
i f
( Error_plugged . empty==0) :
213
idx_end =
i n t ( Error_plugged . index . v a l u e s [ −1]+1)
214
try :
idx_end_max =
i n t ( Cardf . index . v a l u e s [ idx_end +900])#I f
←-
t h e r e
i s
enough
data
215
except :
idx_end_max =
i n t ( Cardf . index . v a l u e s [ −1])#i f
t h e r e
←-
i s
not
enough
data
216
i f
( idx_end > idx_end_max ) :
217
idx_end = idx_end_max
218
#Check
i f
SOC
i s
0
or
1
219
while
( idx_end < idx_end_max )
and\
220
( ( Cardf . i l o c [ idx_end ] [ 'SOC ' ] == 0)
|
( Cardf . i l o c [ ←-
idx_end ] [ 'SOC ' ] == 1) ) :
221
idx_end = idx_end+1 #add
one
to
index
each
time .
222
#I f
no
e r r o r
ocurred
Check
i f
the SOC changes
within
2
minutes
223
e l i f
( ( Cardf . i l o c [ idx_end ] [ 'SOC ' ] )
!=
( Cardf . i l o c [ idx_end +120][ 'SOC←-
' ] ) ) :
224
try :
idx_end_max =
i n t ( Cardf . index . v a l u e s [ idx_end +900])
225
except :
idx_end_max =
i n t ( Cardf . index . v a l u e s [ −1])
226
while
( ( Cardf . i l o c [ idx_end ] [ 'SOC ' ] )
== ( Cardf . i l o c [ idx_end +1][ '←-
SOC ' ] ) ) & ( idx_end < idx_end_max ) : # add
one
to
index
each←-
time .
227
idx_end = idx_end+1 #add
one
to
index
each
time .
228
idx_end = idx_end+1 #add
one
more
to
reach
c o r r e c t
index
229
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−# CHECK FOR ERRORS #−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−#
230
i f
( ( SOC_before_error==Cardf . i l o c [ idx_end ] [ 'SOC ' ] )
& ( len_period<pd←-
. to_timedelta ( ' 0
days
0 1 : 0 0 : 0 0 ' ) ) ) :
231
VE_fail = 1
232
e l i f
( ( Cardf . i l o c [ idx_end ] [ 'EVSEId ']== 'VE ' ) &
( ( Cardf . i l o c [ idx_end←-
] [ ' Time ' ]−day )>(pd . to_timedelta ( ' 0
days
2 0 : 0 0 : 0 0 ' ) ) ) ) :
233
VE_fail = 1
234
#p r i n t ( day , ' : ' , idx_car )
235
e l i f
( ( Cardf . i l o c [ idx_end ] [ 'EVSEId ']== 'VE ' ) & ( Cardf . i l o c [ idx_end ] [ ←-
' ev_state ']== 'RESP ' ) )
or \
236
( ( Cardf . i l o c [ idx_start −1][ 'EVSEId ']== 'VE ' ) & ( Cardf . i l o c [ ←-
idx_start −1][ ' ev_state ']== 'RESP ' ) ) :
237
VE_fail = 1
238
#Check
i f
t h e r e
i s
an VE
e r r o r
and SOC
i s
l e s s
than
98
( need
to
←-
change
more
than 2%
in
SOC)
239
e l i f
( ( not
pd . i s n u l l ( Cardf . i l o c [ idx_end ] [ 'SOC ' ] ) ) & ( Cardf . i l o c [ ←-
idx_end ] [ 'EVSEId ']== 'VE ' ) & ( Cardf . i l o c [ idx_end ] [ 'SOC ' ] <98) ) :
240
try :
check = Cardf . i l o c [ idx_end : idx_end +600][ 'SOC ' ]
241
except :
check = Cardf . i l o c [ idx_end : Cardf . index . v a l u e s [ −1 ] ] [ 'SOC←-
' ]
242
i f
any ( pd . i s n u l l ( check ) ) :
243
check = check . l o c [ ~ pd . i s n u l l ( check ) ]#Remove NaN
v a l u e s
244
#Check
i f
SOC only
changes
two
v a l u e s
and
i n c l u d e
0
245
i f
( ( l e n ( check . unique ( ) )==2) & ( min ( check . unique ( ) )==0) & (max(←-
check . unique ( ) ) >1) ) :
246
VE_fail = 1
XXVI
==PAGE:79==
247
#Check
i f
p e r i o d
i s
l o n g e r
than
180
s e c
and
change
l e s s
than 3%←-
or
i n c l u d e
0
or
1
248
e l i f
( ( ( l e n ( check . unique ( ) ) <3) & ( l e n ( check ) >180) )
or
( any (←-
Cardf . i l o c [ idx_end ] [ 'SOC ' ]==[0 ,1]) ) ) :
249
VE_fail = 1
250
d e l
check
251
252
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−# CHECK IF SOC HAS CHANGED MORE THAN +/−1 #−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−#
253
i f
( ( ( Cardf . i l o c [ idx_end ] [ 'SOC ' ] ) < ( SOC_before −1) ) & ( VE_fail == ←-
0) & ( missingData == 0) ) :
254
SOC_after = Cardf . i l o c [ idx_end ] [ 'SOC ' ]
255
Energy_after = Cardf . i l o c [ idx_end ] [ ' EnergyStored ' ]
256
#SOC_used_temp = SOC_before −SOC_after
257
SOC_used = SOC_before −SOC_after
258
Energy_used_temp = Energy_before −Energy_after
259
#duration_temp = Cardf . i l o c [ idx_end ] [ ' Time '] −Cardf . i l o c [ ←-
idx_start ] [ ' Time ' ]
260
duration = Cardf . i l o c [ idx_end ] [ ' Time ' ]−Cardf . i l o c [ idx_start ] [ '←-
Time ' ]
261
Energy_used = Energy_used + Energy_used_temp
262
#SOC_used = SOC_used + SOC_used_temp
263
#duration = duration + duration_temp
264
tripNum = tripNum + 1
265
leaveT = Cardf . i l o c [ idx_start ] [ ' Time ' ]
266
returnT = Cardf . i l o c [ idx_end ] [ ' Time ' ]
267
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−# SAVE CHARGING INFORMATION #−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−#
268
i f
( tripNum == 1) :
269
i f
( Charge . empty==0) :
270
Charge = Charge . l o c [ Charge [ ' level_0 ' ]< idx_start ]
271
i f
( Charge . empty==0) :
272
charge_start = Charge . i l o c [ 0 ] [ ' Time ' ]−day
273
charge_start_num = charge_start . total_seconds ( )
274
charge_startSOC = Charge . i l o c [ 0 ] [ 'SOC ' ]
275
charge_endSOC = Charge . i l o c [ −1][ 'SOC ' ]
276
charge_startEnergy = Charge . i l o c [ 0 ] [ ' EnergyStored ' ]
277
charge_endEnergy = Charge . i l o c [ −1][ ' EnergyStored ' ]
278
charge_end = Charge . i l o c [ −1][ ' Time ' ]−day
279
charge_end_num = charge_end . total_seconds ( )
280
charge_time = ( charge_end_num−charge_start_num )
281
charge_SOC = charge_endSOC−charge_startSOC
282
charge_Energy = charge_endEnergy−charge_startEnergy
283
#charge_amps = Charge [ ' Amps ' ] . mean ( )
284
#charge_volts = Charge [ ' Volts ' ] . mean ( )
285
#i f
( charge_SOC !=0) :
286
#
charge_minprSOC = charge_time /charge_SOC
287
i f
( Charge . empty==1) :
288
charge_start = np . nan
289
charge_start_num = np . nan
290
charge_startSOC = np . nan
291
charge_end = Cardf . i l o c [ idx_start ] [ ' Time ' ]−day
292
charge_end_num = charge_end . total_seconds ( )
293
charge_endSOC = SOC_before
294
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−# MAKE NEW INDEXES FOR NEXT UNPLUGGED PERIOD #−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−#
295
idx_start = idx_end
296
Car_inspect = Cardf . i l o c [ idx_start : i d x _ f i n a l ]
297
Plugged = Car_inspect . l o c [ Car_inspect [ ' Plugged ' ] == 1 ]
298
Unplugged = Car_inspect . l o c [ Car_inspect [ ' Plugged ' ] == 0 ]
299
300
i f
( Unplugged . empty==0) :
301
idx_start =
i n t ( Unplugged . index . v a l u e s [ 0 ] )
302
Car_inspect = Cardf . i l o c [ idx_start : i d x _ f i n a l ]
303
Plugged = Car_inspect . l o c [ ( Cardf [ ' Plugged ' ] == 1) ]
304
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−# SAVE IN DATAFRAME #−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−#
305
i f
( ( not
pd . i s n u l l ( SOC_after ) ) & ( missingData == 0) & ( VE_fail == 0) ) :
306
c a r t r i p
= pd . DataFrame ({ 'Day ' :
[ day ] ,
307
'CarName ' :
[ cur_car ] ,
308
' Car ' :
[ ' {}{num: 0 2 d} ' . format ( f l e e t , num=idx_car +1) ] ,
309
' LeaveTime ' :
[ leaveT ] ,
310
'LeaveNum ' :
[ ( leaveT−day ) . total_seconds ( ) ] ,
311
' ReturnTime ' :
[ returnT ] ,
312
' ReturnNum ' :
[ ( returnT−day ) . total_seconds ( ) ] ,
313
' Duration ' :
[ duration . total_seconds ( ) ] ,
314
'TripNum ' :
[ tripNum ] ,
315
' EnergyEnd ' :
[ Energy_after / 1 0 0 0 ] ,
316
' EnergyUsed ' :
[ Energy_used / 1 0 0 0 ] ,
317
'SOCEnd ' :
[ SOC_after ] ,
318
'SOCUsed ' :
[ SOC_used ] ,
319
' ChargeDuration ' : [ charge_time ] ,
320
' ChargeSOC ' : [ charge_SOC ] ,
321
' ChargeEnergy ' : [ charge_Energy ] ,
322
' ChargeEndSOC ' : [ charge_endSOC ] ,
323
' ChargeEndEnergy ' : [ charge_endEnergy ] ,
324
' ChargeEndTime ' : [ charge_end ] ,
325
'ChargeEndNum ' : [ charge_end_num ] ,
326
' ChargeStartSOC ' : [ charge_startSOC ] ,
327
' ChargeStartEnergy ' : [ charge_startEnergy ] ,
328
' ChargeStartTime ' : [ charge_start ] ,
329
' ChargeStartNum ' : [ charge_start_num ] ,
330
#' ChargeMeanAmps ' : [ charge_amps ] ,
331
#' ChargeMeanVolts ' : [ charge_volts ] ,
332
'WeekDay ' :
[ weekDay ] ,
XXVII
==PAGE:80==
333
' Weekend ' :
[ weekend ] ,
334
' Season ' :
[ season ] } )
335
C a r t r i p _ a l l = pd . concat ( ( Cartrip_all , c a r t r i p ) , ignore_index=False )
336
337
i f
tripNum==1:
338
useStart_day = leaveT
339
useEnd_day = returnT
340
u s e S t a r t =
i n t ( leaveT . s t r f t i m e ( '%H ' ) )
341
useEnd =
i n t ( returnT . s t r f t i m e ( '%H ' ) )
342
SOCEnd_day =
SOC_after
343
SOCStart_day = SOC_before
344
SOCUsed_day = SOC_used
345
EnergyUsed_day = Energy_used
346
SOCCharged_day = 0
347
EnergyUsed1stTrip = Energy_used
348
SOCUsed1stTrip = SOC_used
349
EnergyEnd_day =
Energy_after
350
EnergyStart_day = Energy_before
351
EnergyCharged_day = 0
352
timeRange = np . l i n s p a c e ( useStart , useEnd , useEnd−u s e S t a r t +1) . ←-
astype ( i n t )
353
e l s e :
354
u s e S t a r t =
i n t ( leaveT . s t r f t i m e ( '%H ' ) )
355
useEnd =
i n t ( returnT . s t r f t i m e ( '%H ' ) )
356
useEnd_day = returnT
357
SOCEnd_day =
SOC_after
358
EnergyEnd_day = Energy_after
359
EnergyUsed_day = EnergyUsed_day+Energy_used
360
SOCUsed_day = SOCUsed_day+SOC_used
361
SOCCharged_day = SOCCharged_day+(SOC_before−SOCEnd_day)
362
EnergyCharged_day = EnergyCharged_day+(Energy_before−←-
EnergyEnd_day )
363
timeRange_new = np . l i n s p a c e ( useStart , useEnd , useEnd−u s e S t a r t +1) . ←-
astype ( i n t )
364
timeRange = np . append ( timeRange ,
timeRange_new )
365
366
InUse = pd . DataFrame ({ 'Day ' :
[ day ] ,
367
'CarName ' :
[ cur_car ] ,
368
' Car ' :
[ ' {}{num: 0 2 d} ' . format ( f l e e t , num=idx_car +1) ] ,
369
'TripNum ' :
[ tripNum ] ,
370
'WeekDay ' :
[ weekDay ] ,
371
' Weekend ' :
[ weekend ] ,
372
' Season ' :
[ season ] } )
373
temp = pd . DataFrame ( )
374
f o r
idx_hour
in
range ( 0 ,
24) :
375
temp1 = pd . DataFrame ({ ' {num: 0 2 d} ' . format (num=idx_hour )
:
[ 1
i f
←-
any ( timeRange==idx_hour )
e l s e
np . nan ] } )
376
temp = pd . concat ( [ temp , temp1 ] ,
a x i s =1)
377
378
InUse = pd . concat ( [ InUse , temp ] ,
a x i s =1)
379
i f
tripNum >1:
380
InUse_all . l o c [ ( InUse_all [ ' Car ' ] ==
' {}{num: 0 2 d} ' . format ( f l e e t , ←-
num=idx_car +1) ) & ( InUse_all [ 'Day ' ] == day ) ]
= InUse
381
e l s e :
382
InUse_all = pd . concat ( [ InUse_all , InUse ] )
383
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−# SAVE ERRORS IN DIFFERENT DF #−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−#
384
e l s e :
385
i f
( len_period<pd . to_timedelta ( ' 0
days
0 0 : 1 0 : 0 0 ' ) ) :
386
err_code = 3
387
err_comment =
' Period
<10 min '
388
e l i f
( missingData == 1) :
389
err_code = 4
390
err_comment = " Missing
>1
hour
data "
391
e l i f
pd . i s n u l l ( SOC_before ) :
392
err_code = 5
393
err_comment =
'SOC
s t a r t
missing '
394
e l i f
( ( Cardf . i l o c [ idx_end ] [ 'SOC ' ] ) <= ( SOC_before −1) )
|
( ( Cardf . ←-
i l o c [ idx_end ] [ 'SOC ' ] ) <= ( SOC_before ) ) :
395
err_code = 7
396
err_comment =
'SOC used <= 1 %'
397
e l i f
( VE_fail == 1) :
398
err_code = 8
399
err_comment = "VE
e r r o r "
400
e l i f
pd . i s n u l l ( SOC_after ) :
401
err_code = 6
402
err_comment =
'SOC end
missing '
403
404
#Save
a l l
e r r o r s
in
one
df
405
cars_Leave_NaN = pd . DataFrame ({ 'Day ' :
[ day ] ,
406
'CarName ' :
[ cur_car ] ,
407
' Car ' :
[ ' {}{num: 0 2 d} ' . format ( f l e e t , num=idx_car +1) ] ,
408
' Weekend ' :
[ weekend ] ,
409
'WeekDay ' :
[ weekDay ] ,
410
' Season ' :
[ season ] ,
411
' ErrorNum '
:
[ err_code ] ,
412
' ErrorCode ' :
[ err_comment ] } )
413
C a r t r i p _ e r r o r s = pd . concat ( ( Cartrip_errors , cars_Leave_NaN
) ,←-
ignore_index=False )
414
#Save
one
major
t r i p
f o r
the
whole
day
415
i f
( ( ( Unplugged . empty==1) & ( C a r t r i p _ a l l . empty==0))
and\
416
( not
C a r t r i p _ a l l . l o c [ ( C a r t r i p _ a l l [ 'CarName ']==cur_car ) & ( C a r t r i p _ a l l [ 'Day '←-
XXVIII
==PAGE:81==
]==day ) ] . empty ) ) :
417
#i f
( EnergyUsed_day >21000) :
418
#
EnergyUsed_day = 21000
419
cartrip_day= pd . DataFrame ({ 'Day ' :
[ day ] ,
420
' Car ' :
[ ' {}{num: 0 2 d} ' . format ( f l e e t , num=idx_car +1) ] ,
421
'WeekDay ' :
[ weekDay ] ,
422
' Season ' :
[ season ] ,
423
'LeaveNum ' :
[ ( useStart_day−day ) . total_seconds ( ) ] ,
424
' LeaveTime ' :
[ useStart_day ] ,
425
' ReturnNum ' :
[ ( useEnd_day−day ) . total_seconds ( ) ] ,
426
' ReturnTime ' :
[ useEnd_day ] ,
427
' Duration ' :
[ ( useEnd_day−useStart_day ) . total_seconds ( ) ] ,
428
' SOCStart ' :
[ SOCStart_day ] ,
429
'SOCEnd ' :
[ SOCEnd_day ] ,
430
'SOCChange ' :
[ SOCStart_day−SOCEnd_day ] ,
431
'SOCUsed ' :
[ SOCUsed_day ] ,
432
' SOCUsed1stTrip ' :
[ SOCUsed1stTrip ] ,
433
' SOCCharged ' :
[ SOCCharged_day ] ,
434
' EnergyStart ' :
[ EnergyStart_day ] ,
435
' EnergyEnd ' :
[ EnergyEnd_day ] ,
436
' EnergyChange ' :
[ ( EnergyStart_day−EnergyEnd_day ) / 1 0 0 0 ] ,
437
' EnergyUsed ' :
[ EnergyUsed_day / 1 0 0 0 ] ,
438
' EnergyUsed1stTrip ' :
[ EnergyUsed1stTrip / 1 0 0 0 ] ,
439
' EnergyCharged ' :
[ EnergyCharged_day / 1 0 0 0 ] ,
440
' TripNums ' :
[ tripNum ] } )
441
Cartrip_day = pd . concat ( [ Cartrip_day , cartrip_day ] )
442
#Check
i f
a l l
e r r o r s
where
due
to
a
p e r i o d
s h o r t e r
than
8
min
and
add
a
'0
←-
t r i p '
to
C a r t r i p _ a l l
i f
no
t r i p
was
made
that
day
443
i f
( ( ( Unplugged . empty==1) & ( C a r t r i p _ a l l . empty==0))
and\
444
( a l l ( C a r t r i p _ e r r o r s . l o c [ ( C a r t r i p _ e r r o r s [ 'CarName ']==cur_car ) & (←-
C a r t r i p _ e r r o r s [ 'Day ']==day ) ] [ ' ErrorNum ' ] . i s i n ( [ 3 , 7 ] ) ) ) )
and\
445
( C a r t r i p _ a l l . l o c [ ( C a r t r i p _ a l l [ 'CarName ']==cur_car ) & ( C a r t r i p _ a l l [ 'Day '←-
]==day ) ] . empty ) :
446
save_0trip = 1
447
e l i f
( ( Unplugged . empty==1) & ( C a r t r i p _ a l l . empty==1) and\
448
( a l l ( C a r t r i p _ e r r o r s . l o c [ ( C a r t r i p _ e r r o r s [ 'CarName ']==cur_car ) & (←-
C a r t r i p _ e r r o r s [ 'Day ']==day ) ] [ ' ErrorNum ' ] . i s i n ( [ 3 , 7 ] ) ) ) ) :
449
save_0trip = 1
450
451
e l s e :
452
save_0trip = 1
453
e l s e :
454
i f
( df . empty==1) :
455
save_error = 1
456
err_code = 1
457
err_comment =
'No
data '
458
e l i f
( Plugged . empty==1) :
459
save_error = 1
460
err_code = 2
461
err_comment =
' Not
plugged '
462
e l s e :
463
save_0trip = 1
464
save_error = 1
465
err_code = 9
466
err_comment =
' 0
t r i p '
467
i f
( ( save_0trip==1) & ( Charge . empty==0)) :
468
charge_start = Charge . i l o c [ 0 ] [ ' Time ' ]−day
469
charge_start_num = charge_start . total_seconds ( )
470
charge_startSOC = Charge . i l o c [ 0 ] [ 'SOC ' ]
471
charge_endSOC = Charge . i l o c [ −1][ 'SOC ' ]
472
charge_startEnergy = Charge . i l o c [ 0 ] [ ' EnergyStored ' ]
473
charge_endEnergy = Charge . i l o c [ −1][ ' EnergyStored ' ]
474
charge_end = Charge . i l o c [ −1][ ' Time ' ]−day
475
charge_end_num = charge_end . total_seconds ( )
476
charge_time = ( charge_end_num−charge_start_num )
477
charge_SOC = charge_endSOC−charge_startSOC
478
charge_Energy = charge_endEnergy−charge_startEnergy
479
#charge_amps = Charge [ ' Amps ' ] . mean ( )
480
#charge_volts = Charge [ ' Volts ' ] . mean ( )
481
#i f
( charge_SOC !=0) :
482
#
charge_minprSOC = charge_time /charge_SOC
483
i f
( save_error == 1) :
484
cars_Leave_NaN = pd . DataFrame ({ 'Day ' :
[ day ] ,
485
'CarName ' :
[ cur_car ] ,
486
' Car ' :
[ ' {}{num: 0 2 d} ' . format ( f l e e t , num=idx_car +1) ] ,
487
' Weekend ' :
[ weekend ] ,
488
'WeekDay ' :
[ weekDay ] ,
489
' Season ' :
[ season ] ,
490
' ErrorNum '
:
[ err_code ] ,
491
' ErrorCode ' :
[ err_comment ] } )
492
C a r t r i p _ e r r o r s = pd . concat ( ( Cartrip_errors , cars_Leave_NaN
) , ignore_index=False )
493
save_error = 0
494
i f
( save_0trip == 1) :#Save
i f
t h e r e
was
no
t r i p s
in
a
day
495
c a r t r i p
= pd . DataFrame ({ 'Day ' :
[ day ] ,
496
'CarName ' :
[ cur_car ] ,
497
' Car ' :
[ ' {}{num: 0 2 d} ' . format ( f l e e t , num=idx_car +1) ] ,
498
' LeaveTime ' :
[ np . nan ] ,
499
'LeaveNum ' :
[ np . nan ] ,
500
' ReturnTime ' :
[ np . nan ] ,
501
' ReturnNum ' :
[ np . nan ] ,
502
' Duration ' :
[ np . nan ] ,
XXIX
==PAGE:82==
503
'TripNum ' :
[ tripNum ] ,
504
' EnergyEnd ' :
[ np . nan ] ,
505
' EnergyUsed ' :
[ np . nan ] ,
506
'SOCEnd ' :
[ np . nan ] ,
507
'SOCUsed ' :
[ np . nan ] ,
508
' ChargeDuration ' : [ charge_time ] ,
509
' ChargeSOC ' : [ charge_SOC ] ,
510
' ChargeEnergy ' : [ charge_Energy ] ,
511
' ChargeEndSOC ' : [ charge_endSOC ] ,
512
' ChargeEndEnergy ' : [ charge_endEnergy ] ,
513
' ChargeEndTime ' : [ charge_end ] ,
514
'ChargeEndNum ' : [ charge_end_num ] ,
515
' ChargeStartSOC ' : [ charge_startSOC ] ,
516
' ChargeStartEnergy ' : [ charge_startEnergy ] ,
517
' ChargeStartTime ' : [ charge_start ] ,
518
' ChargeStartNum ' : [ charge_start_num ] ,
519
#' ChargeMeanAmps ' : [ charge_amps ] ,
520
#' ChargeMeanVolts ' : [ charge_volts ] ,
521
'WeekDay ' :
[ weekDay ] ,
522
' Weekend ' :
[ weekend ] ,
523
' Season ' :
[ season ] } )
524
C a r t r i p _ a l l = pd . concat ( ( Cartrip_all , c a r t r i p ) , ignore_index=False )
525
526
InUse = pd . DataFrame ({ 'Day ' :
[ day ] ,
527
' Car ' :
[ ' {}{num: 0 2 d} ' . format ( f l e e t , num=idx_car +1) ] ,
528
'WeekDay ' :
[ weekDay ] ,
529
' Season ' :
[ season ] } )
530
temp = pd . DataFrame ( )
531
f o r
idx_hour
in
range ( 0 ,
24) :
532
temp1 = pd . DataFrame ({ ' {num: 0 2 d} ' . format (num=idx_hour )
:
[ np . nan ] } )
533
temp = pd . concat ( [ temp , temp1 ] ,
a x i s =1)
534
535
InUse = pd . concat ( [ InUse , temp ] ,
a x i s =1)
536
InUse_all = pd . concat ( [ InUse_all , InUse ] )
537
save_0trip = 0
538
539
p r i n t ( ' Trip
determined
f o r :
{0}/{1}
days
( { 2 : . 1 f }%) ' . format ( idx_date +1,nDays , ( idx_date←-
+1)/nDays ∗100) )
540
s t o r e . c l o s e ( )
541
#−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−# SAVE DATA INTO PANDAS DATAFRAME #−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−#
542
#S p l i t
C a r t r i p _ a l l
i n t o
charging
and
t r i p s
with
t h e s e
f i e l d s :
543
c h a r g i n g _ f i e l d s
=
[ ' ChargeDuration ' , ' ChargeSOC ' , ' ChargeEnergy ' ,
544
' ChargeEndSOC ' , ' ChargeEndEnergy ' , ' ChargeEndTime ' , 'ChargeEndNum ' ,
545
' ChargeStartSOC ' , ' ChargeStartEnergy ' , ' ChargeStartTime ' , ' ChargeStartNum ' ] ←-
#,
546
#' ChargeMeanAmps ' , ' ChargeMeanVolts ' ]
547
Charging = C a r t r i p _ a l l [ [ 'Day ' , ' Car ' ]+ c h a r g i n g _ f i e l d s +[ 'TripNum ' , 'WeekDay ' , ' Weekend ' ] ]
548
Charging = Charging . l o c [ Charging [ 'TripNum ' ]<=1]
549
C a r t r i p _ a l l = C a r t r i p _ a l l . drop ( c h a r g i n g _ f i e l d s ,
a x i s =1)
550
551
i f
( addData==1) :
552
Charging = Charging2 . append ( Charging )
553
554
s t o r e 2 [ ' InUse_all ' ]
= InUse_all
555
s t o r e 2 [ ' Charging ' ]
= Charging
556
s t o r e 2 [ ' C a r t r i p _ a l l ' ]
= C a r t r i p _ a l l
557
s t o r e 2 [ ' Cartrip_day ' ]
= Cartrip_day
558
s t o r e 2 [ ' C a r t r i p _ e r r o r s ' ]
= C a r t r i p _ e r r o r s
559
s t o r e 2 [ ' a v a i l i d s ' ]
= pd . S e r i e s ( a v a i l i d s )
560
561
s t o r e 2 . c l o s e ( )
562
e l a p s e d = time . time ( ) −t
563
p r i n t ( e l a p s e d )
XXX
