==PAGE:1==
Master’s Thesis by
Johannes Novak Hansen
Electrochemical Energy Conversion
on Single and Dimer Atom Catalysts
Supervised by
Jakob Kibsgaard &
Ib Chorkendorff
January 2018
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This thesis is submitted as partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for a Master’s degree in
Physics and Nanotechnology at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The work
presented in this thesis was carried out from August 28, 2017 to January 28, 2018 at
the SurfCat group at DTU Physics under supervision of Jakob Kibsgaard and Ib Chork-
endorﬀ. The investigated single atom palladium samples were provided by Hongyu Sun
from DTU Nanotech. The deposition of nickel single atom via the cluster source, as well
as characterization of samples by ISS and XPS, was performed by Niklas Mørch Secher
and Jakob Ejler Sørensen.
Thesis Structure
Chapter 1 serves as a motivation for why climate change and the need for sustainable en-
ergy are extremely important issues. Some possible alternatives to fossil fuels are brieﬂy
addressed, hinting at the importance of catalysis and surface science. In chapter 2 the
background for this project is presented. In chapter 3 the main methods used for the
experimental work are introduced. The experimental results are presented and discussed
in chapter 4, and the key points are summarized in the conclusion of chapter 5. In chapter
6 an outlook on possible further studies is given. Furthermore, it is a formal requirement
that master students at DTU formulate speciﬁc learning objectives concerning their ﬁnal
project, and that these align with the generic learning objectives for master students at
DTU. In addition a project plan outlining the project milestones must be formulated
and included in the report. Both the generic and speciﬁc learning objectives as well the
project plan are found in appendix C.
Aknowledgements
It has been very educational and enjoyable working on this project and being a part of
the SurfCat group for the past semester. I would like to thank Jakob Kibsgaard and Ib
Chorkendorﬀfor providing with me with this opportunity. I also owe thanks to Niklas
Mørch Secher for his collaboration and good advice throughout the project. I would also
like to thank Søren Scott who trained me in using the complex EC-MS setup. Søren has
also taken a keen interest in my project and given lots of advice along the way. Finally,
a thanks to the rest of the SurfCat group for their good advice and helpfulness.
i
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
There are interesting prospects in going to the extreme limit of using single atoms and
dimers as catalysts. Both in terms of catalytic properties and by limiting the used amount
of catalyst. These are key factors for making various sustainable energy technologies fea-
sible.
Polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells are anticipated to play a central role in future
energy applications. In the process of reaching this goal the catalysis of the oxygen reduc-
tion reaction (ORR) is a major challenge. In this study palladium single atom catalysts on
four types of carbon support were electrochemically tested performing the ORR. Half wave
potentials in the range of 0.86 to 0.98 VRHE were obtained. Furthermore, CO-stripping
and Hupd was used to estimate the electrochemically active surface area (ECSA). By nor-
malizing to ECSA, the kinetic current densities at 0.9 VRHE were found to be 1.89-3.57
mA/cm2. Despite possible contaminations, the tested samples do appear to show ORR
activity, which calls for further studies.
Another scheme for energy conversion and storage is the CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR).
Ideally, CO2 can be directly reduced to a valuable product like methane. When burning
methane to produce energy, the CO2 can be captured and reduced to methane again,
resulting in a closed carbon cycle. The CO2RR is a complex process, and splitting the
process into two steps might be the practical solution. Since CO is an intermediate in
CO2RR, the reduction of CO (CORR) into methane is of interest. In this study, nickel
single atoms are electrochemically tested as a candidate for the CORR. The main chal-
lenge encountered is the stability of nickel under operating conditions. It has been shown
that Ni atoms are moderately stable in a pH=11 carbonate buﬀer when potential of the
working electrode does not exceed 0.2 VRHE at any time. These testing conditions can
act as a foothold for further studying and improving the Ni atom stability in order to
make CORR viable.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Resum´e
Der er spændende perspektiver i at bruge enkeltatomer og dimerer som katalysatorer,
b˚ade i forhold til katalytiske egenskaber og i forhold til at minimere mængden af anvendt
katalysator.
Polymer-elektrolyt-membran brændselsceller (PEMFC) er sp˚aet at skulle spille en central
rolle i fremtidens energisystemer. I forhold til at n˚a dette m˚al er oxygens reduktions-
reaktion (ORR) en stor udfordring. I dette studie blev palladium enkeltatomkatalysatorer
p˚a ﬁre forskellige kulstofsubstrater testet elektrokemisk ved at lave ORR. Der blev opn˚aet
halvpotentialer p˚a 0.86 to 0.98 VRHE. Ydermere blev CO-stripping og Hupd brugt til at
estimere det elektrokemisk aktive overﬂadeareal (ECSA). Ved at normalisere i forhold
til ECSA blev de kinetiske strømtætheder ved 0.9 VRHE fundet til at være i intervallet
1.89-3.57 mA/cm2. Til trods for mulige urenheder lader de testede katalysatorer til at
være aktive for ORR, hvilket lægger op til yderligere undersøgelser.
En anden m˚ade at omdanne og lagre energi er ved CO2 reduktions-reaktionen (CO2RR).
Ideelt set kan CO2 blive direkte omdannet til et brugbart produkt som methan. N˚ar
methan afbrændes for at producere energi, kan CO2 opfanges og reduceres til methan
igen, s˚aledes at kulstofcyklussen lukkes. CO2RR er en kompleks proces, og derfor er det
muligvis mest praktisk at dele den i to trin. Da CO er et mellemtrin for CO2RR er
reduktionen af CO (CORR) til methan værd at undersøge. I dette studie blev nikkel
enkeltatomer elektrokemisk testet som mulige kandidater til at udføre CORR. Umiddel-
bart er den største udfordring stabiliteten af nikkelatomerne under forsøgene. Det blev
demonstreret, at Ni-atomer i nogen grad er stabile i en carbonatbuﬀer ved pH=11, n˚ar ar-
bejdselektrodens potentiale ikke overstiger 0.2 VRHE p˚a noget tidspunkt. Disse betingelser
kan være et startpunkt for videre forsøg p˚a at stabilisere Ni-atomer, s˚aledes at CORR
bliver muligt.
iii
==PAGE:5==
List of Abbreviations
CE
Counter Electrode
CO
Carbon Monoxide
CORR
Carbon Monoxide Reduction Reaction
CP
Chronopotentiometry
CV
Cyclic Voltammetry
DFT
Density Functional Theory
ECSA
Electrochemically Active Surface Area
EC-MS
Electrochemical-Mass Spectrometry
GC
Glassy Carbon
GCE
Glassy Carbon Electrode
HER
Hydrogen Evolution Reaction
HOR
Hydrogen Oxidation Reaction
ISS
Ion Scattering Spectroscopy
LCoE
Levelized Cost of Energy
OCV
Open Circuit Voltage
OER
Oxygen Evolution Reaction
ORR
Oxygen Reduction Reaction
PEMFC
Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cell
QMS
Quadrupole Mass Spectrometer
RHE
Reversible Hydrogen Electrode
SEM
Secondary Electron Multiplier
SHE
Standard Hydrogen Electrode
UPD
Under Potential Desorption
WE
Working Electrode
XPS
X-ray Photo-electron Spectrocopy
iv
==PAGE:6==
List of Symbols
Symbol
Description
Unit (and value)
A
Area
m2
e
Elementary charge
1.6021766208 ×10−19 C
E
Potential
V
E0
Standard Potential
V
η
Overpotential
V
F
Force
N
F
Faradays Constant
96485.33289 C mol−1
I
Current
A
J
Current Density
A m−2
m
Mass
kg
NA
Avogadros Number
6.022140857 × 1023 mol −1
ν
Scan Speed
V s−1
ω
Rotational Speed
s−1 or rpm
Q,q
Charge
C
R
Resistance
Ω
σ
Charge density
C m−2
t
Time
s
U
Potential
V
v
Velocity
m s−1
Z
Impedance
Ω

Diameter
m
∗
Surface Site
-
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
ii
Resume
iii
List of Abbreviations
iv
List of Symbols
v
1
Introduction
2
1.1
The Challenge: Climate & Sustainable Energy Sources
. . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Possible Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.2.1
Electrochemistry & Catalysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.3
Project Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2
Background
14
2.1
Oxygen Reduction Reaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2
Carbon Monoxide Reduction Reaction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
Nickel Carbonyl, a Possible Contaminant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Methods
19
3.1
Electrochemical Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.1
Rotating Disk Electrode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.2
Cyclic Voltammetry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.3
Estimating the Electrochemically Active Surface Area . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.4
Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.5
Reference Electrodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
Combining Electrochemistry and Mass Spectrometry
. . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.1
Mass Spectrometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.2
The Sniﬀer Chip
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.3
The EC-MS setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.4
EC-MS Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3
Experimental Preparations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3.1
Single Atom Samples Produced By Cluster Source . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3.2
Cleaning Procedures, Electrolytes &
Sample Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.4
Other Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.4.1
Ion Scattering Spectroscopy (ISS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
vi
==PAGE:8==
3.4.2
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4
Results & Discussion
37
4.1
Pd Single Atoms On Various Carbon Supports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.1.1
Data Presentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.1.2
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2
Ni Single Atoms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2.1
Data Presentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2.2
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5
Conclusion
57
6
Outlook
59
List of Figures
63
List of Tables
65
Appendices
67
A Ni Single Atom Experiments
68
B Polycrystalline Platinum CV’s
73
C Learning Objectives & Project Plan
74
1
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Due to increasing emission of greenhouse gases over the last few decades, the atmospheric
level of CO2 has increased drastically. Consequently the atmospheric temperature has
increased which leads to climate change on a global scale. The emission of CO2 can be
minimized by using sustainable energy sources like wind and solar. These energy sources
are, however, intermittent by nature, and thus the need for storing energy arises. In this
project, the possibility for electrochemical energy conversion using atomic catalysts will
be investigated. The energy conversion is relevant for the storage of surplus energy from
sustainable source and the usage of energy in times of demand.
2
==PAGE:10==
1.1
The Challenge: Climate & Sustainable Energy
Sources
Ensuring a sustainable future for generations to come is perhaps one of the most important
challenges of our time. Climate change is not only an ominous dark cloud in the distance,
but a reality already aﬀecting the world. Human activities, namely the emission of green-
house gases (e.g. CO2), is the main culprit. This is, however, not news, but the message is
more important than ever. In the seminal paper from 1967 Manabe and Wetherald point
out that their computational climate model predicts that an increase in the atmospheric
CO2 level leads to an increasing temperature in the atmosphere [21]. Much research has
since then investigated both causes and eﬀects of climate change underscoring that the
present situation is unsustainable.
Figure 1.1: Atmospheric CO2 content measured at Mauna Loa Observatory (orange curve)
and derived from Law Dome Antarctica ice cores (blue curve, smoothed). Data from [33]
and [8] respectively
1000
1100
1200
1300
1400
1500
1600
1700
1800
1900
2000
300
350
400
year
CO2 level (ppm)
The atmospheric CO2 levels are historically high. As seen in ﬁgure (1.1) the carbon diox-
ide level has sky-rocketed since the industrial revolution, and the trend seems to continue.
In fact, the level is signiﬁcantly higher than it has ever been in the past several hundred
thousand years [8]. One of the measurable eﬀects of emitting large amounts of green-
house gases is the increasing temperature. In ﬁgure (1.2) the temperature anomaly since
1880 is plotted. Even the smoothed curve oscillates somewhat between years, but seen
on a larger time scale the temperature has risen signiﬁcantly, especially in the last 30 years.
3
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.2: Temperature anomaly compared to the 1951-1980 average: Annual mean (blue
points) and LOWESS-smoothed curve (orange). Data from NASA [26]
1880
1900
1920
1940
1960
1980
2000
2020
−0.5
0
0.5
1
year
temperature anomaly (◦C)
Although the full extend of the eﬀects of CO2 emission may not be known, several are well
documented. For example, the intensity and frequency of hurricanes, drought and more
frequent wildﬁres, and the melting of glacial ice, which contributes to the rising sea levels
[24]. The global mean sea level since 1993 can be seen in ﬁgure (1.3).The trend is quite
clear: sea levels are rising, inevitably leading to coastal ﬂooding and aﬀecting millions of
people.
Figure 1.3: Global mean sea level compared to the level in 1993.
Data from NASA
[25](Global Isostatic Adjustment applied, smoothed)
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
0
20
40
60
80
year
sea level variation (mm)
4
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.4: US carbon emission ﬂowchart (2014) from [2]
5
==PAGE:13==
Several emitted greenhouse gases i.e. CO2, methane, ﬂourinated gasses and nitrous ox-
ide are aﬀecting the climate. According to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
carbon dioxide, however, accounted for 82% of the total U.S. greenhouse gas emission in
2015 (measured on a CO2 equivalent scale) [7]. Put in another way, even accounting for a
higher so called global warming potential of other gases, emission of carbon dioxide is by
far the biggest sinner. Consequently, the generation of carbon dioxide is the core problem
leading to climate change.
The emission of carbon dioxide is due to the use of fossil fuels. A carbon emission ﬂow
chart for the U.S. is seen in ﬁgure (1.4), where the energy sources responsible for the
emission are linked to the sectors where the energy is used. Evidently, transportation
and the generation of electricity are the main contributors, but also the industrial sector
is responsible for a large CO2 emission. This is symptomatic for a unsustainable energy
system. Taking a look at the global energy consumption in ﬁgure (1.5), it is clear that
the burning of fossil fuels is an escalating global problem, which has accelerated during
the past century with no sign of slowing down. Note how the fossil fuels account for
nearly the entire energy consumption while sustainable energy sources only contribute a
negligible fraction.
Figure 1.5: Global primary energy consumption by source from 1800-2017. Data from
[32]
1800
1820
1840
1860
1880
1900
1920
1940
1960
1980
2000
year
0
5
10
15
energy consumption (TWh)
×104
traditional biofuels
coal
crude oil
natural gas
nuclear
hydropower
solar
wind
other renewables
6
==PAGE:14==
The increase of energy consumption may partly be explained by a general increase in
the average standard of living, but certainly also by an increase in population. Figure
(1.6) shows the global population in the same timespan as the energy consumption seen in
ﬁgure (1.5). The global population has more than tripled in the past 100 years. Supplying
generations to come with energy will be a challenge in its own right, but doing so with
the current energy scheme will be disastrous to the climate.
Figure 1.6: Estimated world population. Data from [27].
1800 1820 1840 1860 1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000
0
2
4
6
8
year
population (billion)
The need for a global move towards sustainable energy is urgent. As the prospect of
catastrophic climate change may not be incentive enough, another driving force is also
relied upon - the monetary incentive. A key ﬁgure for describing the strict economic sanity
of investing in some energy technology is its levelized cost of energy (LCoE). This ﬁgure
accounts for investment expenditure, expected lifetime, energy produced, maintenance
cost et cetera resulting in an energy per money ratio.
In ﬁgure (1.7) the LCoE (in
$/kWh) for various energy technologies are given in year 2010 and 2016 values (actually
the ﬁgures displays levelized cost of electricity, but the same concept applies). In order to
compete with the conventional fossil fuels, the alternative energy technology must have
a LCoE equal to or lower than that of the fossil fuels, marked as the gray band in the
ﬁgure. It appears that the LCoE for most of the displayed technologies have already been
lowered suﬃciently to compete with fossil fuels in terms of price. It begs the question of
why sustainable energy sources are not already widely implemented. This can to a large
extent be explained by the intermittent nature of the energy sources, for instance wind
and solar. In order to make these energy sources viable, not only for the electrical grid
but for transportation as well, the energy supply must be stable. Simply put, the excess
energy generated on sunny and windy days needs to be stored for later use when the
energy production is lower than the demand. The possible solution for this is complex
and multifaceted, but some possible solutions will be discussed in the following section.
7
==PAGE:15==
Figure 1.7: Levelized Cost of Energy. Figure from [14]
8
==PAGE:16==
1.2
Possible Solutions
As hinted in the previous section, the eﬃcient storage of energy from renewable sources
is one of the key issues to be solved in order to combat climate change. One promising
technology is the fuel cell - an electrochemical device that converts energy stored in the
fuel into electricity. Several types of fuel cells exist. For instance the polymer electrolyte
membrane fuel cell (PEMFC) will be used as an example. A schematic of a PEMFC can
be seen in ﬁgure (1.8).
Figure 1.8: Working principle of a PEMFC. Figure from [10]
In principle the fuel cell operates by supplying hydrogen and oxygen gas, that react and
form water as a byproduct. The electrochemical reaction releases energy in the form of
an electrical current. Such fuel cells could be used as a sustainable energy technology in
the automotive sector or as stationary device. In order to be truly sustainable, the fuel
for the cell should come from a renewable source. For instance, the hydrogen and oxygen
could come from water splitting, the electrolysis of water. This reaction is in principle the
reverse of what happens in a fuel cell, namely an electric potential must now be supplied
in order to drive the two half reactions that split water into hydrogen and oxygen. When
electricity generated by, for instance, a wind farm exceeds the demand, surplus electricity
could then be used to drive water splitting. The electrochemically stored energy could
then be released in a fuel cell at a later time.
Other fuels than hydrogen can also be envisioned as sustainable energy sources. Consid-
ering the emission ﬂow chart (1.4) previously mentioned, it can be seen that while coal is
the main energy source for electricity generation, natural gas accounts for approximately
22%. The main constituent of natural gas is methane (CH4). Apart from energy, the
burning of methane produces water and carbon dioxide as seen in the chemical equation
(1.1).
CH4 + 2O2 →CO2 + 2H2O
(1.1)
9
==PAGE:17==
This seems to defeat the very purpose of sustainable energy, but if the CO2 may in fact
be collected and electrochemically transformed into methane again, the cycle is closed
and the energy is in fact sustainable (providing that the electrochemical transformation
is sustainable). Since the electricity plants running on natural gas are point sources of
CO2, it might in fact be feasible to collect the emitted CO2 for reuse. Furthermore, the
infrastructure is already in place, easing the transition.
Common for these aforementioned possible solutions is the need for catalysis to drive
the electrochemical reactions eﬃciently. A brief discussion of the key concepts follows.
The reader is referred to [42] and [15] for a more thorough treatment of electrochemical
concepts and to [4] for more insight into catalysis.
1.2.1
Electrochemistry & Catalysis
Some arbitrary redox reaction can be written as equation (1.2), where O and R are the
oxidized and reduced species respectively and n is the number of electrons involved in the
reaction.
O + ne−→R
(1.2)
The Gibbs free energy of the system (∆G) is given by (1.3) where R is the gas contant
and T is temperature. In the case where the concentration of the species R and O are
equal, the free energy is equal to ∆G0, the standard free energy.
∆G = ∆G0 + RT ln [R]
[O]
(1.3)
These free energies can be rewritten in terms of the electric potential E and Faradays
constant F, so that ∆G = −nFE and ∆G0 = −nFE0. This can be used to rewrite (1.3)
into the so called Nernst equation (1.4).
E = E0 + RT
nF ln [O]
[R]
(1.4)
It is readily seen that when O and R are present in equal concentrations the potential is
equal to the standard potential, E = E0. This also means that if it is desired to push the
reaction towards forming more of a product, the potential E must be changed. Further-
more, an electrochemical cell consisting of two electrodes (anode and cathode) where two
half reactions take place (one at each electrode) will thereby have the standard potential
E0
cell = E0
cathode −E0
anode.
Consider for instance the PEMFC which was brieﬂy mentioned. At the anode the hydro-
gen oxidation reaction (HOR) takes place: molecular hydrogen is split into protons and
the electrons ﬂow through the circuit towards the cathode. At the cathode the oxygen
reduction reaction (ORR) takes place: electrons are supplied from the anode through the
circuit and protons have traveled through the electrolyte. The oxygen is thereby reduced
to water. The two half reactions are given in table (1.1), where the standard potential
(E0) of each half reaction is also stated. Ideally, a fuel cell can then provide 1.229 V.
10
==PAGE:18==
Table 1.1: Half reactions in a PEMFC
Half Reaction
E0[V]
Name
H2 −→2 H+ + 2e−
0
Hydrogen Oxidation Reaction
O2+ 4 H++ 4 e−−→2H2O
1.229
Oxygen Reduction Reaction
In order to produce hydrogen and oxygen from water, the reverse reactions of this must
take place, namely hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction
(OER). The reactions can be seen in table (1.2). The HER happens at the cathode and
the OER happens at the cathode and as such E0
cell=-1.229 V, meaning a potential must
be applied to drive the reaction.
Table 1.2: Half reactions of water splitting
Half Reaction
E0[V]
Name
2H+ + 2 e−−→H2
0
Hydrogen Evolution Reaction
2H2O −→O2+ 4 H++ 4 e−
1.229
Oxygen Evolution Reaction
In a real cell the half reaction takes place at the interface between electrode and elec-
trolyte.
This heterogeneous reaction is dependent on kinetics, surface eﬀects like ad-
sorption/desorption and so forth. Therefore, the electrode potential needed to drive a
half reaction can be greater than the thermodynamically predicted potential. For some
equilibrium potential Eeq of a cell, the overpotential η is given by equation (1.5).
η = E −Eeq
(1.5)
Since η has direct impact on the potential that can be gained from a fuel cell or the
potential needed to reduce CO2 electrochemically, minimizing the overpotential for a half
reaction is of major importance. To this end a suitable catalyst is used to drive the reaction
with as low overpotential as possible. The conceptual representation of a catalyst is given
in ﬁgure (1.9). The catalyst lowers the energy barrier that reactants must overcome in
order to form a product, symbolized with the stipulated line. This could for instance be
the ORR happening at the cathode of a fuel cell. There are other ﬁgures of merit than
η to describe a catalyst, for instance activity (in terms of current density). These will
mentioned when relevant.
11
==PAGE:19==
Figure 1.9: Catalytic energy diagram: reactants must overcome an energy barrier, indi-
cated by the solid line, to form a product. By employing a catalyst, the energy barrier
can be lowered signiﬁcantly, as indicated by the stipulated line
In the case of PEM Fuel cells, a very good catalyst (platinum) is already used, but plat-
inum is almost as expensive as gold, and not very abundant.
In fact nearly half the
PEMFC price is directly related to the catalyst [29]. In the case of CO2 reduction (to
CO), the most active metal catalysts are gold and silver [13]. The catalyst are not viable
on a large scale, and developing alternative catalyst from cheap and abundant materials
is a necessity if the technology is to be widely implemented. Another parallel track worth
pursuing is using less of the catalyst material. This is already done using nanoparticles
dispersed on high surface area materials, but it might be worth taking it a step further,
i.e. to the atomic regime. One obvious reason is to ”get more out of less” in terms of
surface area and activity per mass of catalyst used. Another reason is that going to the
extreme limit of single atoms might give fundamentally diﬀerent catalytic behavior than
e.g. nanoparticles. For example a DFT study has shown that ﬁnite-size eﬀect dominates
adsorption energies on gold nanoparticles smaller than 2.7 nm in diameter, whereas larger
nanoparticles behave like a solid [18].
Attempting to test single atom catalysis has been the core of this project, and mainly
two reactions have been investigated, namely CO reduction reaction (CORR) and oxygen
reduction reaction (ORR). The CORR is relevant for the overall prospect of reducing
CO2 into methane. Since the CO2 reduction reaction is a complex multistep process, it
might be advantageous to split up the process in two. For instance by going from CO2
to CO and then from CO to CH4, the last part being the CORR investigated here. Of
the two half reactions in a PEM fuel cell, the ORR process is the one needing the most
optimization in order to be cost competitive[29], which makes it interesting to test with
single atomic catalysts.
12
==PAGE:20==
1.3
Project Goals
The aim of this project is to test two types of single atom catalysts for two reactions
relevant for developing sustainable energy technologies.
The ﬁrst type of catalyst is palladium single atoms on various carbon supports. This type
of catalyst may be relevant for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), one of the two half
reactions taking place in a polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell (PEMFC’s)
The other catalyst is nickel single atoms, which is going to be tested for the carbon
monoxide reduction reaction (CORR), where CO is reduced to methane. This could be a
relevant sub-step in the overall scheme of the CO2 reduction reaction.
The idea of single atom catalysts is to use less material and still have favorable catalytic
properties, thus making the technology scalable. The aim of the next chapter is to give
some background information on the two studied reactions, in order to have a frame of
reference when later discussing the experimental results obtained.
13
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2
Background
2.1
Oxygen Reduction Reaction
As given in table (1.1) the oxygen reaction has a standard potential of 1.229 V, however
the sluggish kinetics of the reaction means that an overpotential of several hundred mV
is common in order to drive the reaction.
At DTU Nanotech, samples of palladium
single atoms on various support materials have been made, and it was decided to test
these as potential ORR catalyst.
Although palladium is similar to platinum in price
(and low abundance) the prospect of single atom catalyst still might have some merit if
suﬃciently active. Palladium is known as a catalyst for the ORR reaction [9], and it has
also been tested in a core-shell structure with platinum, showing enhanced activity and
stability[37]. Some eﬀort has also been devoted to investigating single atomic non precious
metals supported on metal-organic frameworks or nitrogen carbon supports[41, 40, 3].The
samples from DTU Nanotech all include ∼0.3 wt. % Pd, supposedly dispersed as single
atoms, where the support material varies between samples. For sample 1 the support is
simply reduced graphene oxide and for sample 2 it is amorphous carbon. Sample 3 and 4
allegedly have Pd single atoms conﬁned in the hollow walls of double shelled nanosphere
of amorphous carbon. Furthermore, the nanospheres of sample 4 are nitrogen doped.
For both sample 3 and 4 the nanospheres are dispersed on reduced graphene oxide. An
overview of samples is given in table (2.1)
Table 2.1: palladium single atom sample description
sample
speciﬁcations
1
Pd single atoms on reduced graphene oxide
2
Pd single atoms on amorphous carbon
3
Pd single atoms on amorphous carbon double shelled
nano-spheres on reduced graphene oxide
4
Pd single atoms on N-doped amorphous carbon double shelled
nano-spheres on reduced graphene oxide
14
==PAGE:22==
2.2
Carbon Monoxide Reduction Reaction
The part of this project concerned with studying the reduction of CO with a nickel single
atom catalyst was to a large extent inspired by density functional theory (DFT) calcu-
lations from a collaborating Stanford group [17]. They show theoretical suggestions that
some single atom sites may be promising for the reduction of CO into methane (CH4).
Key points from their work will therefore be summarized in the following section in order
to set the stage for motivating as well as discussing the experimental work presented in
this report.
A theoretical study of electrochemical CORR on single atom transition metal catalysts
was conducted on the basis of DFT calculations. The modelled system was metal atoms
(M) embedded in single vacancies (SV) of graphene, denoted by M@SV adopting the
used notation.
It was found that the ﬁrst proton transfer (CO →CHO ) is a crit-
cal step for the electrochemical CORR, and thus a suitable descriptor of the system.
Figure 2.1: Activation energy versus binding energy:
comparing single sites with metal surfaces. The black
stipulated line is the scaling trend for single atom sites
while the blue and green are for metal surface sites.
Figure from [17]
The study showed that the scal-
ing relation between the transi-
tion state energy (for the step
∗CO →∗CHO) and the binding
energy of CO∗was signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent for M@SV and the pure
metals surfaces.
As it can be
seen in ﬁgure (2.1) some of the
M@SV atoms have signiﬁcantly
lower transition state activation
energy compared to the metal sur-
faces, notably Pd, Ni and a few
others.
These atoms also have
a CO∗adsorption energy (shown
on the x-axis) which is in the fa-
vorable intermediate region, i.e.
close to 0 eV. This indicates that
for instance nickel atoms in sin-
gle graphene vacancies may show
higher catalytic activity for the
CORR than the metal surface
sites. Apart from the activity, the
selectivity towards the CORR is
naturally an important parame-
ter for the potential M@SV cat-
alysts.
The Stanford group also
compared the highest activation
energy barriers for CORR with HER for the M@SV, and found that for all the metal
single atoms, the barrier for CO reduction was lower than that of hydrogen evolution,
indicating selectivity toward the CORR. Furthermore, the stability of the metal atoms at
single vacancies were evaluated by the formation energy of the sites as given by equation
(2.1).
Eformation = EM@SV −ESV −EM(bulk)
(2.1)
15
==PAGE:23==
An overview of the resulting formation energies for M@SV are shown in ﬁgure (2.2), reveal-
ing
that
all
the
investigated
M@SV
sites
have
negative
formation
energies.
Figure 2.2: Formation energy. Figure from [17]
Notably nickel has one of the
most negative formation energies
(∼-2.4 eV), indicating stabil-
ity. The computations for some
of the metals included the pres-
ence of nitrogen doping in the
graphene, revealing that the scal-
ing relations with N-doping fol-
lowed the same trends as the
M@SV without nitrogen. All to-
gether the work reported in [17]
indicates that several transition
metals are potential candidates
for eﬃcient single atom catalysts
of the CORR→CH4 reaction.
The activity, selectivity and sta-
bility for some of these M@SV
sites seem promising. One of these materials is nickel, which is a relatively cheap non-
precious metal, making it all the more interesting for energy applications on a large scale.
Considering this, the idea of using Ni single atoms for CORR was investigated, however
the model system available for experimentation was diﬀerent in some regards. This aspect
will be discussed later.
2.3
Nickel Carbonyl, a Possible Contaminant
Tetracarbonylnickel or simply nickel carbonyl is an extremely toxic organometallic com-
pound [19]. It has a boiling point of 43 ◦C and vapor pressure of 0.41 bar. As indicated
by the name, the compound, Ni(CO)4, has four carbonyl (CO) groups arranged in a
tetrahedral structure around a nickle atom, as shown in ﬁgure 2.3. Nickel carbonyl is an
intermediate in the Mond process, which is used for purifying nickel. The Mond process
makes use of the fact, that nickel carbonyl is formed readily even at relatively low temper-
atures, when nickel is exposed to CO gas. This is a cause for concern, when conducting
experiments involving CO and a possible source of nickel, e.g. stainless steel or a sample
containing nickel. Since the formation of nickel carbonyl implies both an increased safety
hazard and possibly undesirable eﬀects on experiments, some considerations are described
in this section.
A Brief Historical Perspective
In the late 1800’s Ludwig Mond was involved in improving the Solvay process (production
of sodium carbonate) and other related processes. One of the challenges of this work was
to design valves and vessels able to withstand the vapor of NH4Cl. It turned out that one
of the most suitable materials for the valves was nickel. However, by chance Mond found
out that CO passing over nickel at several hundred degrees resulted in a conversion of CO
to CO2 and C in the form of amorphous carbon powder. This prompted him to conduct
an elaborate study of the eﬀect of CO on nickel [23, 22].
16
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.3: Structural representation of Ni(CO)4
Ni
C
O
C
O
C
O
C
O
Formation of Nickel Carbonyl
Among other things Monds study showed that at lower temperatures (50-80 ◦C) CO
passing over nickel powder forms nickel carbonyl according to the chemical equation (2.2).
Furthermore, he found that nickel carbonyl can be thermally decomposed by heating it
to 150 ◦C, forming solid nickel and CO gas as seen in chemical equation (2.3)[23]. These
two reactions are at the heart of the Mond process, where a source of impure nickel is
exposed to CO forming nickel carbonyl, which in turn can be thermally decomposed into
pure nickel and CO.
Ni(s) + 4 CO(g)
50-80◦C
−−−−→Ni(CO)4(g)
(2.2)
Ni(CO)4(g)
150◦C
−−−−→Ni(s) + 4 CO(g)
(2.3)
Although the Mond process is an elegant scheme for separating nickel from contaminants,
the two processes (2.2 and 2.3) are, however, unwanted in the present study. The risk
of producing nickel carbonyls when conducting experiments sets extra requirements for
lab safety. The experiments where nickel carbonyl could potentially be formed are always
conducted in a ventilated system, i.e. a three electrode cell placed in a fumehood or in a
sniﬀer chip installed in the EC-MS setup. This minimizes the risk of exposure to the user
in case nickel carbonyl is formed. Preventing the formation of nickel carbonyl all together
is, however, more cumbersome. Since nickel carbonyl may not be detectable in the used
system, it may be diﬃcult to rule out its presence and in turn its inﬂuence. It is therefore
important to be aware of the potential presence of nickel carbonyl. For instance if a = 5
mm sample is prepared with 10 % coverage of nickel single atoms it holds in the order of
1013 Ni atoms, i.e. ∼10−11 mol. Thus even a small amount of Ni(CO)4 decomposing and
leaving additional Ni on the sample can lead to a huge relative increase in nickel loading
and change of surface morphology etc. Also for samples of other catalysts, deposited
nickel may have an eﬀect on the catalytic properties, distorting the analysis intended for
the sample.
In order to address this issue one must therefore monitor the formation of Ni(CO)4,
conduct experiments under conditions where it is unlikely that Ni(CO)4 is formed or
preferably both. Among many others, Goldberger and Othmer studied the formation of
nickel carbonyl by passing CO over ﬁnely divided nickel powder at varying pressure (1-4
17
==PAGE:25==
atm) and temperature (26-115 ◦C). Although they report a maximal reaction rate at
75 ◦C for all pressures, formation of nickel carbonyl is observed already at 26 ◦C [12].
Finely divided nickel powder directly reacting with CO gas is the common way to form
nickel carbonyl [23, 5, 12], but also a less dispersed nickel source e.g. a nickel wire works
as well [6]. Nickel is also a component in stainless steel which is used for a lot of ex-
perimental equipment e.g. gas pipes, interface blocks, valves and so on. For example
the very common types of stainless steel 304 L and 316 L contain 8-12% and 10-14%
nickel respectively. The pressure in the CO gas line leading to the EC-MS setup is 2 bar,
whereas it is 14-16 bar for the CO line in the electro chemistry lab where the standard
EC experiments are conducted. Although the temperature in the gas pipes in general is
not above room temperature, it is still conceivable that nickel carbonyl is formed to some
extend. This is especially true if the CO has had a long residence time in the gas line or
some local heating is present which increases the formation rate of Ni(CO)4. It has also
been shown that ﬁne powder of stainless steel type 316 L forms nickel carbonyl, albeit it
was demonstrated under higher pressure and temperature[34].
Several other metal carbonyls exist, including carbonyls of the metals Ti, V, Cr, Fe and
Co. It is, however, only Ni(CO)4, Fe(CO)5 and Co2(CO)8 which can be formed directly
from the interaction of CO gas and metal. Since iron is a major component of stainless
steel, one might suspect the formation of Fe(CO)5. It has been shown that even at 100
atm CO and 200◦C the rate of formation is considerably higher for Ni(CO)4 than for
Fe(CO)5[34]. Furthermore, among the three metal carbonyls that can form by a direct
reaction, Ni(CO)4 is the only compound formed at moderate conditions, i.e. near room
temperature and 1 atm pressure [5]. Under the conditions in the present study, nickel
carbonyl is thus the only metal carbonyl likely to be formed due to the interaction of CO
and steel.
18
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 3
Methods
3.1
Electrochemical Methods
The rotating disk electrode (RDE) setup and the 3-electrode cell are the basis for the
electrochemical experiments conducted in the work presented in this report. The experi-
mental setup and the typical experiments performed are described in some detail below,
but for a more comprehensive treatment including relevant derivations, the reader is re-
ferred to [15].
The 3-electrode cell is an electrochemical glass cell containing electrodes and electrolytes.
The schematic of this system can be seen in ﬁgure (3.1). The glass cell has ﬁve openings,
allowing up to four electrodes at a time to contact the electrolyte in the cell. Into the
ﬁfth opening a gas bubbler is ﬁtted to which a gas inlet tube can be connected. The
reference electrode (RE) is mounted in a Luggin capillary which in turn is ﬁtted into one
of the ﬁve cell openings. Opposite to this the counter electrode (CE) is placed (typically
a platinum wire). In between the counter and reference electrode, the working electrode
(WE) is placed. The working electrode is integrated in the rotating disk electrode (RDE)
system which will be described below. A fourth electrode may be used for controlling
the working electrode potential when immersing it in the electrolyte. This is simply a
dummy electrode which is insigniﬁcant in all other matters.
The 3-electrode cell can
also be heated by ﬂowing hot water through the hollow wall encapsulating the electrolyte
basin - a so called jacket. This convenient feature has not been used in this project and
thus will not be discussed further. All electrodes are connected to a potentiostat which
is controlled via the Bio-Logic EC-lab software on a desktop. The RDE shaft onto which
the working electrode is placed can be rotated by a separate motor.
19
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.1: Schematic of 3-electrode setup. Figure courtesy of Taus Holtug
Inlet 
(heating medium)
Gas
Electrolyte
Dummy 
electrode
Counter
electrode
Jacket
Outlet
(heating medium)
Luggin
capillary
Reference
electrode
Rotating 
disk electrode
3.1.1
Rotating Disk Electrode
When studying the catalytic performance of a sample in the 3-electrode cell it is of great
interest to distinguish between the kinetic current arising from the studied process and the
total current measured. This can be done by controlling the mass-transport of reactants
from bulk solution to the working electrode. This is the very purpose of the rotating disk
electrode. By mounting the sample in a RDE setup and rotating it at some frequency
ω while submersed in the 3-electrode cell, a steady ﬂow of electrolyte is forced onto the
WE by convection. By controlling the rotational frequency, the magnitude of the mass
transfer limited current (IMT) can be controlled. The Kouteck´y-Levich equation (3.1)
gives the relation between the measured current I, the kinetic current IK and the mass
transport limited current IMT
1
I = 1
IK
+
1
IMT
(3.1)
As a result, the kinetic current of the catalytic reaction can be investigated.
3.1.2
Cyclic Voltammetry
Cyclic voltammetry (CV) is a method where the potential of the working electrode (with
respect to the reference electrode) is scanned in a desired potential range and the current
between the working electrode and counter electrode is measured. Figure (3.2) shows
how the potential is linearly ramped to an upper limit and back again to a lower limit,
completing one cycle. This is repeated for as many cycles as desired, with the possibility
of adjusting the settings on the run e.g. the potential limits or potential scan speed.
The current is measured simultaneously with scanning the potential. For each cycle the
20
==PAGE:28==
current can be plotted versus the potential. This plot is often referred to as ’the CV’
and can convey useful information of electrochemical processes. An example of how such
a CV may look in the case of polycrystalline platinum as working electrode is given in
ﬁgure (3.3). More attention to the signiﬁcance of these CV features will be given later.
Figure 3.2: Working electrode potential
vs. time for several cycles
time
potential
Figure 3.3: Current measured during one
cycle
potential
current
3.1.3
Estimating the Electrochemically Active Surface Area
An important parameter for electro-catalysts is the electrochemically active surface area
(ECSA). There are several ways to estimate ECSA, for instance by analyzing hydrogen
adsorption or by performing CO-stripping. These two particular methods will be brieﬂy
described.
CO stripping is a method for estimating ECSA by the amount of CO oxidized or stripped
oﬀan electrode surface. The surface of interest, typically the catalyst, may bind CO to
active sites. This is in general an unwanted eﬀect killing the catalytic property, hence
the term ”CO poisoning”. The CO can, however, be oxidized by setting the electrode
potential suﬃciently high. Thus, the chemical reaction (3.2) will occur when scanning
the potential anodic, and an increase in current is expected. As the amount of CO left on
the surface decreases, so will the oxidation current until all CO is stripped. The observed
current peak area is then an indication of the amount of CO that was adsorbed prior to
stripping.
CO + H2O →CO2 + 2H+ + 2e−
(3.2)
AECSA =
1
ν σ
Z
Istrip −Ibackground dU
(3.3)
The standard procedure for CO striping in this project is as follows: A few CV scans are
done in a Ar or N2 saturated electrolyte. The electrolyte is then saturated with CO by
ﬂowing CO through the bubbler and into the electrolyte for 10 minutes while the working
electrode is held at minimum potential, i.e. within 0.1 V vs RHE. Subsequently, the gas
ﬂow is switched back to Ar or N2 for 15 minutes to ensure that all CO in the electrolyte
is purged, leaving only adsorbed CO. The potential scan is then continued resulting in
oxidation peak for the ﬁrst scan. Several scans are taken afterwards to ensure the CV
looks the same as prior to CO stripping.
21
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.4: Typical CO stripping CV
potential
current
Peak
Background cycle
CO cycle
A typical CO strip can be seen in ﬁgure (3.4) where the stipulated CV is the CO-stripping
scan and the blue CV is the background scan. The red area is proportional to the total
charge involved in the oxidation. Thereby, the ECSA can be estimated in accordance
with equation (3.3), where ν is the potential scan speed during the CO stripping (typi-
cally ν=10 mV/s) and σ is a reference charge density for CO on the sample. For instance,
σ=420 µC/cm2 is used for CO stripping on polycrystalline platinum. When performing
CO stripping with the RDE setup the rotational speed is commonly set to ω=200 rpm.
Another method for estimating the ESCA is by hydrogen underpotential deposition
(Hupd). In a potential range less cathodic than the HER regime, hydrogen may adsorb
to the catalyst surface as describe by chemical equation (3.4), where ∗denotes a surface
site.
∗+ H+ + e−←→H∗
(3.4)
For instance, a CV of polycrystalline platinum shows Hupd features as seen in ﬁgure (3.5).
The red area in the ﬁgure represents hydrogen adsorption on Pt sites when scanning
cathodic whereas the blue area represents the desorption when scanning anodic. The Hupd
”peaks” are due to diﬀerent binding sites on polycrystalline Pt, but an integration of the
entire red (or blue region) yields the charge involved in the adsorption (or desorption) of
hydrogen. Better yet, one can average over both integrals. The exact integration range
is not clearly deﬁned, but the region where the absolute value of the current exceeds the
current of the double layer region and down to 30-50 mV vs RHE is often reasonable.
In a manner similar to that of CO stripping, the ECSA can then be estimated by equation
(3.5). Here Idl is the double layer current background and Uonset and Uoﬀset are the onset
and oﬀset potentials for the Hupd region. Once again ν is the scan speed and σ is the charge
density, which for instance is around 240 µC/cm2 for Hupd on polycrystalline platinum .
AECSA =
1
2 ν σ
Z U=30 mV
Uonset
I −Idl dU +
Z Uoﬀset
U=30 mV
I −Idl dU

(3.5)
22
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.5: Hupd on polycrystalline Pt
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
−3
−2
−1
0
1
·10−2
U (V vs. RHE)
I (mA)
3.1.4
Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is another technique which is useful for
studying electrochemical systems. Several parameters may be estimated from the mea-
surements, however, in present work EIS is only used to estimate the ohmic resistance
(RΩ) between the working and counter electrode. The 3-electrode cell may be modeled by
Randles equivalent circuit as shown in ﬁgure (3.6) where RΩstems from the electrolyte
resistance, Cd is the double layer capacitance and Zf is a generalized impedance describing
the Faradaic processes. Furthermore, Zf may be divided into a charge transfer resistance
Rct and the Warburg impedance Zw which is related to the mass transfer.
Figure 3.6: Randles equivalent circuit
RΩ
Cd
Zf
Zf
=
Rct
Zw
The equivalent circuit is not purely resistive, but has a frequency dependent, complex
impedance (Z). While perturbing the 3-electrode cell with a signal oscillating at some
frequency, the real and imaginary part of the impedance can be measured. This can be
done over a range of frequencies and represented in a Nyquist plot where the horizontal
axis represents the real part of the impedance and the vertical axis is the imaginary
part of the impedance. It can be shown analytically that the Nyquist plot for the ideal
Randles equivalent circuit has a circular shape in the high frequency regime and a linear
shape in the low frequency regime as seen in ﬁgures (3.7) and (3.8), respectively. The
intersections with the horizontal axis holds information of the circuit components in both
cases. For instance, the left intersection point in the high frequency regime gives ZRe = RΩ.
23
==PAGE:31==
Oftentimes the system analyzed with EIS does not display ideal circuit behavior, and
consequently the Nyquist plot becomes a distorted combination of the circular and linear
shape when scanning from a high to a low frequency. Nonetheless this technique gives a
fair estimate of the ohmic resistance of the electrolyte.
Figure 3.7: High frequency limit
RΩ
RΩ+Rct
ZRe
ZIm
Figure 3.8: Low frequency limit
RΩ+Rct-2σ2Cd
ZRe
ZIm
Typically EIS measurements are done using a small sinusoidal pertubation around the
open circuit voltage. The frequency is scanned from 200 kHz down to 10 Hz sampling 50
measurements per decade drop in frequency. In ﬁgure (3.9) a Nyquist plot from such a
typical EIS measurement is shown. The combination of the circular and linear tendencies
is evident, and it is noted that the imaginary part of the impedance doesn’t quite drop to
zero in the high frequency (circular) limit. The plot however serves to estimate the ohmic
resistance, in this case RΩ≈13 Ω.
Figure 3.9: Nyquist plot of typical EIS measurement
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0
10
20
ZRe(Ω)
ZIm(Ω)
3.1.5
Reference Electrodes
The reference electrode (RE) acts as a setpoint for the potential scale in the experiment
and therefore it is important that the potential of the RE is invariant to the experimental
conditions. There exists a number of such reference electrodes and for both the experi-
ments in the 3-electrode cell and the EC-MS setup, a mercury/mercurous sulfate reference
electrode was used. In order to minimize the impact of having a RE present, it is not
put directly into the electrolyte, but placed in a Luggin capillary ﬁlled with electrolyte,
which is then ﬁtted into the 3-electrode cell. Through the narrow opening of the Luggin
24
==PAGE:32==
capillary, electrical contact to the bulk electrolyte is ensured.
In order to make diﬀerent experiments comparable, it is necessary so have an absolute scale
for measuring potential. By convention, it is customary to refer to the normal hydrogen
electrode (NHE) also known as standard hydrogen electrode (SHE). The NHE is deﬁned
as a platinum electrode in a pH=0 solution where gaseous and dissolved hydrogen of unit
activity is in chemical equilibrium as in (3.6) [15].
Pt/H2(a−−1)/ H+ (a−−1) equilibrated by: 2 H+ + 2 e ⇆H2
(3.6)
The NHE is deﬁned as having the standard potential E0= 0 V. In other words the potential
where hydrogen evolution and oxidation (HER and HOR) happen at the same rate is
set as the zero potential.
However, often measurements are not conducted at pH=0
and a reference electrode accounting for this is needed, namely the reversible hydrogen
electrode(RHE). The RHE is deﬁned by (3.7).
ERHE = ENHE + 0.0591 pH
(3.7)
By the RE potential with respect to NHE (in this work EHg/HgSO4 vs. ENHE) and the pH,
the potential versus RHE is then given via (3.7).
Rather than calculating what Eref vs. ERHE is under standard conditions, it is also useful
to calibrate the reference electrode directly under the actual experimental conditions. This
can for instance be done by using a platinum wire as the WE directly in the 3-electrode
setup and bubbling hydrogen into the electrolyte. When running a CV, the point in the
HER/HOR regime where the measured current is zero is the equivalence point, and thus
the potential measured versus the RE must be equivalent to 0 V vs. RHE. This can be
seen in ﬁgure (3.11). In general, the point E(I=0) will be slightly diﬀerent for the forward
and backward scan in one cycle, in which case the average of these is used, in the shown
example Eref ≈ERHE −1.215 V. Another way to calibrate is by chronopotentiometry
(CP) where the WE potential is monitored over time whilst setting the current to zero
and bubbling hydrogen as in ﬁgure (3.10).
Figure 3.10: calibration by CP
0
20
40
60
−1.23
−1.22
−1.21
−1.2
−1.19
time (s)
Ewe vs. Eref (V)
Figure 3.11: calibration by CV
−1.23 −1.22 −1.21 −1.2
−0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
Ewe vs. Eref (V)
I (mA)
25
==PAGE:33==
3.2
Combining Electrochemistry and Mass Spectrom-
etry
Combining electrochemical measurements with simultaneous mass spectrometry adds
valuable information to experiments, since electrochemical features e.g. redox peaks in
a CV, may be directly linked to consumption and production of species in a reaction,
for instance hydrogen evolution. The challenge is, however to couple an electrochemical
setup operating at atmospheric pressure with a mass spectrometer operating at vacuum.
The electrochemistry-mass spectrometry (EC-MS) setup achieves this with a so called
sniﬀer chip. The basics of mass spectrometry and the sniﬀer chip will be described below.
The electrochemical concepts discussed in the section Electrochemical Methods transfer
directly to the EC-MS setup, however the 3-electrode cell is of a diﬀerent design.
3.2.1
Mass Spectrometry
The fundamental diﬀerence between the EC-MS setup and the 3-electrode cell is the
ability to detect products via a quadrupole mass spectrometer (QMS). How the electro-
chemical part of the setup is interfaced to the QMS will be described in the following
sections, but for now the principle of a QMS will brieﬂy be described.
A ﬂow of gas molecules is led into the ﬁrst part of the QMS where the molecules will be
ionized by electron bombardment and subsequently focused. The molecules will then be
led through the region of mass ﬁltering, comprised of four rods as seen in ﬁgure (3.13).
Figure 3.12: DC and AC po-
tential on rods
Figure 3.13: QMS rods: only molecules with a certain
mass/charge ratio pass through
The electric potential of the four rods is controlled pairwise, where two diametrically
opposite rods have a positive DC bias and the two other rods have a negative DC bias,
and an AC bias is superimposed on this. This serves to perturb the movement of the
charged particles passing by. Since the acceleration (and in turn the displacement) of
charged particles in an electric ﬁeld depend on the charge to mass ratio (m/z) of the
particle and ﬁeld strength, controlling the DC and AC potentials is a means to ﬁlter
particles with certain m/z ratios. More speciﬁcally, one set of rods acts as a high pass
ﬁlter while the other set acts as a low pass ﬁlter for m/z. By adjusting the DC and
AC amplitudes and AC frequency, ideally only particles of a single m/z ratio will have
a stable trajectory between the rods, while other will be neutralized on the rods or in
the chamber. The particles of the m/z chosen will continue and impinge on a secondary
electron multiplier (SEM), knocking its electrons loose, which are then accelerated and
26
==PAGE:34==
knock loose more electrons in the SEM leading to a cascade eﬀect, resulting in a detectable
current signal. In this manner, the QMS scans through the m/z ratios of interest and the
detected currents are plotted versus time. Assuming the majority of particles are singly
ionized, i.e. only one electron was knocked out in the ionization zone, a plot of mass versus
time is eﬀectively obtained. Thereby, the gas phase products from the electrochemical
experiment are monitored in situ.
3.2.2
The Sniﬀer Chip
The so called sniﬀer chip is the heart of the EC-MS setup, since it allows the electrochem-
ical reactions to be interfaced with the QMS operating under vacuum. The sniﬀer chip
(or simply the chip), seen in ﬁgure (3.15), is a microfabricated silicon device with a gas
permeable membrane connected to several gas inlets and outlets. Figure (3.14) shows a
schematic of the gas channels connected to the membrane: The blue channel transports
carrier gas from inlet to outlet, and this channel branches oﬀ(green channel) supplying
the membrane with carrier gas. From the membrane a micro capillary is connected to
the mass spectrometer ensuring a pressure drop from the atmospheric pressure down to
the QMS operating pressure (less than 10−6 mbar) while still transporting product and
carrier gas.
Figure 3.14: sniﬀer chip membrane and gas
ﬂow schematic from [35]
Figure 3.15: front and back of sniﬀer
chip from [35]
3.2.3
The EC-MS setup
When installed in the EC-MS setup, the chip membrane acts as the bottom of the 3-
electrode cell. By placing a ring shaped Teﬂon spacer over the membrane and furthermore
placing the Teﬂon cell on top, a small resevoir is created as seen in the bottom right part
of ﬁgure (3.16). This stagnant thin layer cell acts as the 3-electrode cell in the EC-MS
setup. As it is also depicted in the ﬁgure, the micro porous holes in the membrane allow
carrier gas to diﬀuse into the electrolyte without the electrolyte ﬂowing out. In the same
way gaseous products may diﬀuse out through the membrane and be detected by the
QMS. The working electrode is centered over the membrane. It is mounted in the cell by
a spring-loaded pin and a U-cup similar to what is used in a RDE setup. The current EC-
MS setup is thus compatible with =5 mm samples. Bridge tubes ﬁlled with electrolyte
are placed in the openings marked RE and CE in the ﬁgure. By inserting the counter
and reference electrodes into their respective bridge tubes, the 3-electrode cell is realized.
Electrolyte is ﬂown into the cavity by virtue of the inlet and outlet canals. In ﬁgure (3.17)
27
==PAGE:35==
the cell mounted on top of the chip can be seen - including bridge tubes with reference
and counter electrodes marked RE and CE respectively.
Figure 3.16: Assembly of the cell (from [35])
Throughout the experiments on the EC-MS setup a gold sheet CE has been used and a
mercury/mercurous sulfate electrode as RE. Similar to the regular electrochemical setup,
the electrodes are connected to a potentiostat and controlled via a desktop computer
using EC-labs software.
Figure 3.17: Overview of cell installed on top of sniﬀer chip. Picture from [35].
Figure (3.18) shows the schematic layout of the EC-MS setup with the chip installed on
28
==PAGE:36==
the steel plate in the center. Starting from the left: Four mass ﬂow controllers (MFC)
regulate the ﬂow of gas from up to four diﬀerent sources. The 6-way valve allows the
ﬁlling of a separate tube with a diﬀerent gas than the used carrier gas for subsequently
injecting the gas into the system as a pulse. On the right is a buﬀer volume which is a
practical means for pumping down the system before opening to the mass spectrometer
(MS). The mass ﬂow controllers, valves and pressure controllers of the setup are controlled
from a LabView program and the QMS datalogging is initiated from a Python script.
Figure 3.18: Schematic of the EC-MS setup, modiﬁed from [35]
3.2.4
EC-MS Experiments
When starting an EC-MS experiment, typically a new chip must be installed. This is done
by placing a chip on the steel block interface as seen in ﬁgure (3.18). The buﬀer volume is
initially evacuated and has a volume roughly 1000 times larger than the tubing between
the chip and valve 5, hence opening valves (1,5) will almost instantaneously pump the
chip to 1 mbar. The valves (3,2) are open and continuously pump the system. When the
chip and buﬀer volume are pumped below 0.3 mbar the gate valve (4) is opened. The
tubing between valve (4) and the turbo pump has a much larger cross section than the
tubing between (3,2) and the turbo pump, hence additional pumping speed is achieved
when opening (4). On the other hand opening valve (4) already at 1 mbar would strain
the turbo pump, hence the intermediate pumping through (3,2) is needed. When the
pressure gauge (PG) on the buﬀer volume reaches its lower detection limit (readout is 0
mbar) then valve (13) to the mass spectrometer (MS) is opened and the valves (4,5) are
closed.
The valves (9-12, not numbered on the ﬁgure) at the mass ﬂow controllers can be opened,
and a ﬂow of carrier gas can be directed to the chip through the 6-way valve. Typically
1-2 mL/min ﬂow is used in experiments. The Teﬂon spacer and the cell may now be
mounted on top of the chip. The cell is fastened together with the mounting block using
nuts and bolts. Once the cell is in place, electrolyte can be introduced through the inlet
hole and the bridge tube with electrodes may be inserted into the cell.
When performing experiments the QMS continuously runs and the data is plotted live
on a PC screen at the setup. From another PC the EC-software is used to control the
29
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.19: Typical EC-MS experiment
potentiostat and run experiments. A typical ”EC-MS-plot” is shown in ﬁgure (3.19). In
the bottom panel the current and potential is plotted versus time. The top panel displays
the SEM current signal of the QMS for the chosen masses versus the same time scale.
In some cases the measurement of the mass spec is not straightforward, for instance when
wanting to detect CH4 (m=16 u), since the mass coincides with that of O+ (O2 that has
been split up in the ionization zone). Luckily a large fraction of methane will have a
single proton knocked of, making it appear at m/z= 15. The same consideration goes
for detection of ethylene, C2H4, which has same mass as CO, which is naturally used
when investigating CORR. A considerable amount of ethylene however has one or two
hydrogen atoms removed in the ionization zone, making it detectable at m/z= 27 and 26
respectively.
3.3
Experimental Preparations
3.3.1
Single Atom Samples Produced By Cluster Source
In order to have well deﬁned single atom samples to study, the cluster source has been the
go-to method for sample preparation. The cluster source oﬀers a range of diﬀerent mate-
rials to be deposited with a high control of coverage and size distribution. Furthermore,
ISS and XPS methods are integrated with the setup which allows for characterization
directly before and after preparation. The general concept of the cluster source will be
discussed in this section, however, since ISS and XPS are not only relevant for the prepa-
ration but also for post-experiment characterization, they will be discussed in a section
30
==PAGE:38==
seperate from this one. For more details on the cluster source setup the reader is referred
to [30, 1].
The sample preparation with the cluster source can be divided into three stages as seen
in ﬁgure (3.20): Firstly sputtering of and aggregation whereupon a mixture of ions, single
atoms and nanoparticles are generated. Secondly the particles of desired mass (or in this
case single atoms) are seperated from the mixture by a time of ﬂight mass ﬁlter. Finally
the selected particles or atoms are deposited onto the sample.
Figure 3.20: Working principle of the cluster source. Figure courtesy of Jakob Kibsgaard
Sputtering & Aggregation
The particle generation takes place in the aggregation zone, which is a turbo-pumped
chamber connected to the rest of the setup through a small aperture. In this chamber a
magnetron is placed, whereon a sputtering target of the desired material is placed. Argon
is introduced into the chamber through a ﬂow-controller. The target is negatively biased
which leads argon ions to sputter the surface. Permanent magnets in the magnetron create
a magnetic ﬁeld that stabilizes the plasma in the vicinity of the target. The chamber
walls are externally cooled with liquid nitrogen, which allows atoms escaping the plasma
to agglomerate. To promote the agglomeration, He may be introduced along with the Ar
ﬂow. Helium does not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the sputtering, but it acts as a thermal contact
between the cooled walls and the ions and atoms, allowing the agglomeration to take
place.
Acceleration & Focusing
In the chamber next to the aggregation zone, the pressure is signiﬁcantly lower (in the
order of 10−4 mbar), leading the aggregates to be ﬂown through the aperture and be
supersonically expanded into the next chamber which will stop any further aggregation.
After leaving the aggregation zone a portion of the particles and atoms will be charged
and can consequently be controlled by an electric ﬁeld. The stream of particles is then
focused and led to the mass-separation zone where particles or (atoms) of the desired
mass can be picked out.
31
==PAGE:39==
Mass Separation
The mass separation of particles happens when the beam passes through a time of ﬂight
(ToF) mass ﬁlter. The ionized particles passing through the mass ﬁlter will initially only
have a velocity in the horizontal direction, say ¯vx. Introducing an electric ﬁeld ¯E in the
vertical direction will, however, accelerate particles in the vertical direction (¯y) as given
by equation (3.8), q and m being the particles charge and mass respectively.
¯F = q¯E ⇒d¯y
dt2 = q
m
¯E
(3.8)
¯y(0) = 0
,
d¯y
dt

t=0
= 0
(3.9)
Solving (3.8) for ¯vy with respect to t using the initial conditions in (3.9) gives the expres-
sion (3.10) for the particle speed at a time t after turning on a ﬁeld ¯E.
¯vy = q¯Et
m
(3.10)
If the ﬁeld is then switched oﬀ, the particles will travel with diﬀerent velocities depending
on their charge-to-mass ratio. After some time an electric ﬁeld opposite of the initial ﬁeld
may be applied for the same duration of time. This will decelerate the particles, taking out
their velocity component in the vertical direction, but the particles will at this point be
spread out in the vertical direction according to their charge-to-mass ratio. In other words
lighter particles will have traveled further in the vertical direction compared to heavier
particles, assuming they have the same degree of ionization. By repeatedly applying the
appropriate electric pulses, the desired masses can be selected from the beam.
Deposition
The mass selected beam of particles or atoms can now be deposited on the sample by pass-
ing through an aperture (=4.5 mm). Prior to deposition the sample can be Ar-sputtered
as a means of cleaning the surface immediately before deposition. This sputtering may
also create local defects which may serve as anchoring sites for the deposited atoms. Apart
from mass selection, another important parameter is the surface coverage. Using equa-
tion (3.11) the number of deposited atoms can be estimated from the total charge (Q)
deposited, which is found by integrating the deposition current (I) over the deposition
time (t).
Q =
Z
I dt
(3.11)
When the deposition current is constant throughout the deposition, the integral is simply
Q = I · t. Aside from the brief transient current at the beginning and end of the deposition,
this simple scalar relation for Q is a good approximation. The number of deposited atoms
is then approximately #atoms = Q/e where e is the elementary charge. Furthermore, the
surface coverage area can be estimated by using the Coulomb radius, rC, of the deposited
atoms as given by equation (3.12).
Aatoms = π r2
C #atoms
(3.12)
The relative coverage is then simply Aatoms/Asample where Asample is the geometrical area
of the sample. Since the standard glassy carbon stub used as samples have =5 mm,
32
==PAGE:40==
which is slightly larger than the aperture, the estimated coverage may be however be
slightly erroneous.
3.3.2
Cleaning Procedures, Electrolytes &
Sample Preparation
General Procedures
In order to minimize contaminations of samples and measuring equipment, several clean-
ing procedures were employed throughout the project. In general, all equipment in contact
with samples, be it directly or indirectly, has been cleaned. The two main procedures used
for this were piranha cleaning and aqua regia cleaning.
Piranha solution is prepared as a 3:1 mixture of concentrated H2SO4 and H2O2, giving
a strongly oxidizing solution.
The primary purpose of piranha is to clean oﬀorganic
residues. Items to be cleaned are submersed in the solution for at least 12 hours and
subsequently rinsed a minimum of three times in ultrapure water (milli-Q, 18.2 MΩcm).
Piranha has been used as the primary cleaning procedure except for cases where noble
metal contamination has been suspected to be present, namely platinum. In this case
aqua regia has been used instead. All glassware used for storing or mixing liquids e.g.
electrolytes or milli-Q water has been rinsed in piranha. Furthermore, all auxiliary tools
used for experiments have been piranha cleaned.
Aqua regia is a 3:1 mixture of concentrated hydrochloric acid (HCl) and nitric acid
(HNO3). The solution has the ability to dissolve several noble metals including platinum,
hence it was used to clean electrodes, teﬂon equipment etc. where platinum contamination
was suspected. Items cleaned in aqua regia have been submersed in solution for at least 12
hours and subsequently rinsed at least three times in milli-Q water. The only exception
is the glassy carbon electrodes cleaned in aqua regia, which were only submersed for 20
minutes before being rinsed in milli-Q water.
Sample Preparation
All catalyst samples were tested on glassy carbon electrodes (SIGRADUR R⃝, = 5 mm),
the exception being the tests on polycrystalline platinum (Pine Research, = 5 mm).
Prior to deposition of the catalyst, the glassy carbon electrodes (GCE) were cleaned. Ini-
tially, glassy carbon electrodes were cleaned by sonicating for one hour in either ethanol
or isopropanol and then subsequently rinsed at least three times in milli-Q water. After
ﬁnding indications that platinum might be present on the GCE’s, a new cleaning proce-
dure was introduced:
Cleaning procedure for second hand GCE’s:
(i) polish 2 minutes at 250 rpm using micro polish paste (0.3 µm alumina)
(ii) 3 minutes sonication in isopropanol
(iii) 3 minutes sonication in milli-Q water
33
==PAGE:41==
(iv) repeat step (ii)-(iii) two more times
(v) 20 minutes in aqua regia
(vi) rinse a minimum of three times in milli-Q water
This procedure was used for the ”second hand” GCE’s while waiting for the newly pur-
chased GCE’s to arrive. XPS and ISS analysis showed that this cleaning procedure yielded
clean samples in the sense that no trace metals were detected afterwards. The procedure
is however tedious, and once the new GCE samples arrived an alternative procedure was
taken, since no noble metal impurities are expected for these:
Cleaning procedure for new GCE’s:
(i) 10 minutes sonication in isopropanol
(ii) 10 minutes sonication in milli-Q water
(iii) repeat step (i)-(ii) once more
(iv) 1 hour in concentrated Suprapur nitric acid
(v) rinse a minimum of three times in milli-Q water
The nickel single atom samples were deposited onto GCE’s with the cluster source setup
as described in the section Single Atom Samples Produced By Cluster Source.
Four diﬀerent powder samples of palladium on various carbon supports were received from
DTU Nanotech. These powder samples were suspended in an ink following the recipe from
[16].
Catalyst ink for dropcasting
• 5 mg supported catalyst powder
• 1.4 mL milli-Q water
• 3.6 mL isopropanol
• 2.0 mL ethanol
• 2 µL Naﬁon 5 wt. %
The supported catalyst powder were mixed with the solvent and Naﬁon binder and soni-
cated for at least 1.5 hours, giving a well dispersed ink. The amount of catalyst powder
was too small to weigh out on a lab scale, so the weight of added powder is unknown,
however the volumetric ratios of solvents are as described in the recipe.
For experiments conducted in the EC-MS setup, eliminating bubbles in the cell is crucial.
Bubbles in the electrolyte volume interferes with both the QMS data and the electro-
chemical measurements. Bubbles easily occur, for instance when evolving hydrogen, or
when supplying the cell with fresh electrolyte that has been bubbled with argon. The
eﬀect can, however, be mitigated to some extent by making the Teﬂon in contact with the
34
==PAGE:42==
electrolyte volume hydrophilic, namely the cell and the U-cups used to mount samples.
This can be achieved by plasma treating. Therefore, the EC-MS cell and U-cups were
plasma treated for 30 seconds in argon/oxygen plasma after being chemically cleaned with
either piranha or aqua regia.
Electrolytes
Three diﬀerent electrolytes have been used for the experimental work. Perchloric acid
electrolyte was made by mixing concentrated perchloric acid (Suprapur) with milli-Q wa-
ter.
KOH electrolyte (0.1 M) was made from semiconductor grade (99.99 % purity) potassium
hydroxide pellets dissolved in milli-Q. Since strong alkaline solutions may etch glassware,
KOH electrolyte was stored in a plastic ﬂask. The membrane of the EC-MS chip may
also be etched by a strong base, which eventually leads to breaching of the membrane,
distorting the signals in the QMS and ruining the chip.
In order to extend the operation time of sniﬀer chips an alternative electrolyte of lower pH
was also used. In order to maintain a reasonable electrolyte conductivity while lowering
the pH, a carbonate buﬀer was chosen. The carbonate buﬀer was produced by saturating a
portion of 1 M KOH with CO2 and then titrating with 1 M KOH to obtain the desired pH
(typically 10-11). The KOH used for making carbonate buﬀer was made from dissolving
potassium hydroxide hydrate pellets (Suprapur 99.995 % purity) in milli-Q water.
3.4
Other Methods
3.4.1
Ion Scattering Spectroscopy (ISS)
Ion Scattering Spectroscopy, abbreviated ISS, is an extremely surface sensitive detection
method. The working principle is to bombard the sample surface with noble gas ions
using an ion gun. Typically, He ions are used to minimize the sputtering damage. Most
incoming ions will undergo multiple collisions and eventually be neutralized, but a portion
will scatter on the top most layer of atoms while preserving their charged state. After
collision the ions may then be detected. By having the ion gun produce ions of energy
E0 with the mass Mi and with an angle θ between the gun and analyzer, one can ﬁnd the
mass of atoms with which the ions collide. Assuming a simple collision where momentum
and energy is conserved, the expression in equation (3.13) can be found. By detecting the
energy of the ions after collision (E1) the only unknown can then be found, namely the
mass of the surface atom Ms.
E1
E0
=
"p
M2
s −M2
i sin2(θ) + Mi cos(θ)
Ms + Mi
#2
(3.13)
In reality a portion of the detected ions will have experienced a non ideal collision, and
their energy will be slightly lower than for the ideal collision. This tends to shift and
broaden the ISS peaks slightly. Furthermore, the extreme surface sensitivity of ISS means
that measurements will be very dependent on the cleanliness of the sample, since even a
single monolayer of adsorbate will dominate the spectrum.
35
==PAGE:43==
3.4.2
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS)
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, or simply XPS, is a surface sensitive characterization
technique which relies on the photo-electric eﬀect.
A photon impinging on a sample
surface may carry suﬃcient energy to knock out an electron of the sample leaving the
electron with a kinetic energy Ekin. If the energy of the incoming photon is well deﬁned,
say by an X-ray (Mg Kα for instance) with energy hν, then the kinetic energy will be a
measure of the original binding enery (EB) of the electron. By energy conservation we
have equation (3.14) where Φ is the work function of the detector used.
EB = hν −Ekin −Φ
(3.14)
By irradiating the sample with a monochromatic X-ray beam it is thus possible to map
out the binding energies of the sample. By choosing an appropriate X-ray energy, the
kinetic energy of the escaping electrons can be in the regime where the mean free path
of electrons is small. This maximizes surface sensitivity. The number of counts detected
for each energy also gives quantitative information of the species in the sample. If it is
possible to assign peaks to the detected energies, small shifts in these energies can also
reveal change in the bonding state of the species.
36
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 4
Results & Discussion
4.1
Pd Single Atoms On Various Carbon Supports
4.1.1
Data Presentation
Palladium single atom samples on various supports (as seen in table (4.1)) were electro-
chemically characterized in the 3-electrode setup. The main focus was on testing the Pd
samples as catalysts for the ORR reaction. All experiments were conducted in 0.1 M
HClO4 electrolyte using the RDE with the samples deposited on GCE’s. Initially base
CV’s in N2 saturated electrolyte were obtained, and subsequently the ORR reaction was
tested under O2 saturation. In both cases the scan speed and rotational speed were ν=50
mV/s and ω= 1600 rpm respectively. A CO-stripping was also performed on each sample
with ν=10 mV/s and ω=200 rpm. Furthermore, the reference electrode was calibrated
with respect to the RHE, and EIS measurements were performed in order to estimate the
potential drop due to ohmic resistance. Regarding the EIS measurements, the Nyquist
plots rarely exhibit the behavior one would expect from an ideal Randles equivalent cir-
cuit, and therefore the estimation of the ohmic resistance is not clear cut. For the voltage
corrections here, RΩwas estimated as Re(Z) of the measurement point with the lowest
Im(Z) in the high frequency limit.
Table 4.1: palladium single atom sample description with sample numbering and plot
colors
sample
speciﬁcations
1
Pd single atoms on reduced graphene oxide
2
Pd single atoms on amorphous carbon
3
Pd single atoms on amorphous carbon double shelled
nano-spheres on reduced graphene oxide
4
Pd single atoms on N-doped amorphous carbon double shelled
nano-spheres on reduced graphene oxide
37
==PAGE:45==
The base CV’s of the four samples are co-plotted in ﬁgure (4.1) for comparison. The HER
region is slightly cut oﬀin order to focus on the more subtle details of the CV’s. Starting
with the Hupd region signiﬁcant diﬀerences between samples are noted. In terms of area
enclosed by the curves samples 3 and 4 are quite alike but samples 2 has a notably larger
Hupd region and that of sample 1 is even bigger yet. Sample 1 and to some degree sample
4 seem to have a bit more features in the Hupd region than the two others, namely the
broadened peaks.
Figure 4.1: base CV of Pd single atom samples 1-4 (N2 saturated)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
−8
−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
·10−2
U-RI vs. RHE (V)
I (mA)
sample 1
sample 2
sample 3
sample 4
In the ﬂat double layer region (approximately 4-6 V vs. RHE) the measured current is
also larger for samples 1 and 2, indicating a larger double layer capacitance. In the anodic
limit the features of the curves are quite similar albeit with diﬀerent current magnitude.
It is noted that the curves, in particular that of sample 1, show some resemblance of a
polycrystalline platinum CV. This observation will be discussed later.
The recorded CV’s for ORR tests are plotted in ﬁgure (4.2). The onset for the ORR is
observed around 0.95 V vs. RHE, and the S-shaped curve typical for the sluggish ORR
kinetics is seen as well. Going more cathodic from 0.7 V the CV’s have ﬂattened out
indicating mass transport limitation. The mass transport limited current IMT is roughly
the same for samples 2, 3 and 4 (IMT ≈-1.05 mA), whereas sample 1 was found to have
IMT ≈-1.2 mA. The reason for the decrease in the (absolute) current at the cathodic
potential vertex may be due to other processes than the 4-electron path for ORR. For
instance, formation of H2O2 by the 2-electron pathway.
38
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.2: ORR with Pd single atom samples 1-4 (O2 saturated)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
−1
−0.5
0
U-RI vs. RHE (V)
I (mA)
sample 1
sample 2
sample 3
sample 4
An overview of the CO-stripping CV’s is given in ﬁgure (4.3) and a zoom in on the actual
stripping peaks in ﬁgure (4.4). The overview plot mainly serves to show the broad feature
for sample 1, which is somewhat unexpected for a CO strip. The ”bottom” part of the
overview plot, i.e. negative currents, were recorded in argon saturation before holding the
potential and switching to CO and this region is therefore omitted here. Cycles in argon
before and after the CO-stripping were, however, compared to ensure stable features.
Figure 4.3: CO-stripping on Pd single atom sam-
ples 1-4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5 ·10−2
U-RI vs. RHE (V)
I (mA)
sample 1
sample 2
sample 3
sample 4
Figure 4.4:
zoom in on CO-
stripping peaks
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5 ·10−2
U-RI vs. RHE (V)
I (mA)
From both plots it is apparent that both the peak placement and magnitude are quite
diﬀerent. The zoom-in on the peaks shown in ﬁgure (4.4) elucidates the peak placement
further. The peak of sample 3 is somewhat broad and its top is almost plateau like com-
pared to other peaks. Since the sampling conditions were the same, the potential at which
the peaks are located and their magnitude must pertain to the nature of the samples to
some extent.
The CO-stripping measurements as well as the Hupd region were used to estimate ECSA,
as described in the section Estimating the Electrochemically Active Surface Area. From
39
==PAGE:47==
the atom per area density of close packed Pd, the charge density of a monolayer hydro-
gen adsorbed on Pd is 244 µC/cm2 [31]. This value was used for σH when calculating
ECSA from the Hupd integral. Under the assumption that CO-stripping happens via the
2-electron process described in equation (3.2) and that the CO coverage is one mono-
layer, the charge density σCO=488 µC/cm2 is used to evaluate ECSA via CO-stripping.
The calculated ECSA’s for each sample can be seen in table (4.2). The values are also
compared in ﬁgure (4.5) to visualize the tendency: The area estimated from hydrogen ad-
sorption/desorption is larger than the estimate from CO-stripping. The exception being
sample 1, where the estimates are roughly equal.
Figure 4.5:
ECSA comparison for
samples 1-4
1
2
3
4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
sample
AECSA (cm2)
Hupd
CO −stripping
Table 4.2:
electrochemically active sur-
face area estimated with CO-stripping and
Hupd for samples 1-4
sample
ECSA (cm2)
Hupd
CO stripping
1
0.42
0.41
2
0.36
0.44
3
0.17
0.23
4
0.14
0.22
The kinetic current under the ORR was calculated by the Kouteck´y-Levich equation (3.1),
where the current under mass transport limitation (IMT) is taken as the current at 0.4 V
vs. RHE and I is evaluated at 0.9 V vs. RHE. Thereby, (IK) at 0.9 V is estimated for the
samples 1-4, as can be seen in table (4.3). The kinetic current density JK is estimated
using the AESCA obtained from CO-stripping. Since AESCA,CO was generally found to
be larger than AESCA,H, this will give the most conservative estimate of the real current
density. The half wave potential E1/2 is also given in table (4.3), and is calculated as the
potential at which the current is half of its maximal value. The error of E1/2 is crudely
estimated as the standard deviation of the reference electrode calibration measurements.
Table 4.3: absolute current and half wave potential for samples 1-4
Sample
E1/2 (mV)
IK (mA) at 0.9 V
JK at 0.9 V (mA/cm2)
1
863±1.5
0.9375
2.27
2
893±1.5
0.8274
1.89
3
892±1.5
0.8381
3.57
4
889±1.5
0.7498
3.41
40
==PAGE:48==
4.1.2
Discussion
As seen in table (4.3) the kinetic current is on the same order for all four samples. To
examine the intrinsic properties of the catalyst, the current should however be normal-
ized in a meaningful way, e.g. by catalyst loading or surface area. Perhaps it would be
most obvious to state the activity in current per mass at some given potential, if the
catalyst loadings on the test samples were known. Instead, the kinetic current density
is estimated by normalizing the current to the evaluated electrochemically active surface
area. As evident from ﬁgure (4.5) the area estimate for each sample is fairly similar when
comparing Hupd and CO-stripping methods. The diﬀerence between samples is, however,
signiﬁcant, varying by roughly a factor of 2 for CO-stripping and a factor of 3 for Hupd.
Both methods rely on estimated charge densities calculated under the assumption of a
full monolayer coverage, which may be inaccurate. The very notion of a monolayer of
hydrogen or CO on Pd may even be ill deﬁned if the palladium is in fact dispersed as
single atoms and hasn’t agglomerated. On the other hand, if in fact the palladium has
agglomerated into nanoparticles, it could aﬀect the ECSA calculations based on the Hupd,
since palladium may absorb large amounts of hydrogen[9]. If ”bulk” Pd is present (in the
form of nanoparticles) it is conceivable that some portion of the hydrogen adsorbed will
be absorbed and thereby leave vacant sites for more hydrogen to adsorb through under
potential deposition. This would lead to an increase in the ESCA estimated from Hupd.
In this case the CO-stripping would yield a more reliable result. On the other hand,
observing that the calculated ESCA is higher for CO-stripping in general may in fact
indicate that Hupd is not grossly aﬀected by absorption of large amounts of hydrogen.
Either way, the large variation in observed areas translates directly to a large diﬀerence
in current densities.
If the catalyst loadings were equal for the four samples the current densities would then
clearly indicate that samples 3 and 4 are notably more active than 1 and 2. The reasons
for this could be many and this study does not give any convincing explanation. If one
however indulges into speculations, several possibilities seem plausible: It could be a mat-
ter of stability in that samples 1 and 2 may simply degrade faster either by agglomeration
of Pd atoms into nanoparticles or by dissolution of Pd into the electrolyte. Be that as it
may, the formation of nanoparticles would be expected to result in a lower ECSA, which
is the opposite of the observed. Both for Hudp and CO-stripping, samples 1 and 2 have
signiﬁcantly higher surface areas. If on the other hand palladium is dissolving during
experiments, it is expected to observe unstable features on the CV’s. For both the base
CV’s and ORR experiments no signiﬁcant changes were apparent between cycles for any
of the samples. There is thus no clear indication of neither agglomeration nor dissolution
of Pd and the stable currents measured under ORR suggests that some catalytic eﬀect is
present.
Several other studies report ORR activity of single atomic catalysts on carbon based sup-
ports, for instance Fe [41], Co [3] and Pt [20]. Common for these studies is nitrogen doping
of the carbon support, proposedly creating anchoring sites for the single atoms. As a re-
sult of doping, various site conﬁgurations may form, for instance pyridin-like, pyrrole-like,
graphitic or oxidized nitrogen. These carbon-nitrogen conﬁgurations may play a role in
aiding the ORR, for instance, pyrridine-like N is thought to enhance oxygen adsorption.
Apart from these auxillary eﬀects Liu et al. ﬁnd Pt-N sites to be the catalytic site. They
report a half wave potential E1/2=0.76 V vs. RHE for the single atom Pt on N-doped
41
==PAGE:49==
carbon support (BP2000). This was measured by RDE in O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4 at
ω=1600 rpm and ν=5 mV/s. Apart from the markedly lower scan rate, these conditions
are similar to those under which the Pd samples in the present study were conducted.
Comparing the E1/2,Pt with the half wave potentials in table (4.3), the Pd samples all
have higher E1/2. With respect to this the palladium samples 1-4 all seem superior to the
Pt single atom catalyst. The comparison is, however, incomplete without knowledge of
sample loading.
Sample 4 is to some degree comparable with the Pt-study, since the catalyst support is
a nitrogen doped carbon based material. This could lead to the same anchoring mecha-
nism for Pd single atoms as reported for other atoms in the literature mentioned above.
Apart from the N-doping of sample 4, the double shelled hollow nanospheres consisting of
amorphous carbon could also act as anchoring sites for Pd atoms. The same nanospheres
are present in sample 3 but without N-doping. One might speculate that this could also
supply suﬃcient anchoring for single atoms. At least the samples 3 and 4 are found to
be quite similar in both ECSA and kinetic current density. There could of course be
numerous other reasons for this. It is perhaps slightly more surprising that sample 1 and
2 show similar stability, albeit lower kinetic current density. It could be an indication
that the support materials of samples 1 and 2 (reduced graphene oxide and amorphous
carbon respectively) also anchor single atoms as strongly.
Another possible explanation looms: sample contamination. The cleaning procedure for
the glassy carbon electrodes used in these early experiments have primarily focused on
cleaning oﬀorganic residue. It cannot be ruled out that the GCE’s have previously been
used for experiments that might have altered or contaminated them. In the unfortunate
case of a contaminant that is active for ORR, one might be led to falsely draw conclusions,
when observing catalytic activity. It was found that some of the GCE’s in the lab similar
to those used for testing the Pd samples seemed to be contaminated, most likely by plat-
inum. As brieﬂy noted when presenting the base CV’s for samples 1-4, the shape of these
CV’s are quite similar to the base CV of platinum. It should, however, be mentioned that
the base CV of palladium might look largely the same as platinum [11]. As a reference,
a polycrystalline Pt =5 mm sample was characterized under conditions similar to the
palladium test. The base CV as well as the ORR CV are found in the appendix, ﬁgures
(B.1) and (B.2) respectively. Although omitted in the plots, the HER peak current are
very much alike for samples 1-4 and the Pt sample, and also the onset for HER is alike.
Although palladium can also catalyze HER, it is not possible to rule out that the eﬀect
stems from platinum contamination. The Pt ORR data was used to ﬁnd E1/2= 853 mV
and IK= 0.3097 mA. The ECSA of the Pt sample was also evaluated by Hupd, giving
AHupd=0.209 cm2, which is quite close to the geometrical area of the =5 mm sample,
namely Ageo= 0.196 cm2. Using either area puts the estimated current density at ∼1.5
mA/cm2, which is somewhat lower than what is observed for sample 1 and 2 and less
than half the current density of samples 3 and 4. This is in no way solid evidence that
single atomic Pd is intrinsically superior to Pt with regards to ORR, nor that single Pd
atoms were in fact measured upon in this study.
Another open question is whether or not the CO gas used was contaminated with nickel-
carbonyl. As discussed previously it is a compound that readily forms even at moderate
conditions. If present it is however unlikely that it would aﬀect the measurements much.
42
==PAGE:50==
It is conceivable that small amounts of nickel might be electrodeposited on the samples,
but for the ORR metals like palladium and platinum are expected to dominate the activ-
ity. From that viewpoint the prospect of platinum contaminating the palladium samples
is worse than if it were nickel.
In order to truly gain insight into single atomic Pd catalysis, it is necessary to deconvolute
some of the eﬀects encountered in the present study. Especially eliminating contamination
on working electrodes is a must. It might also be fruitful to take a step back and do more
fundamental studies on a more well deﬁned model system, for instance by using a cluster
source to deposit single atoms on a support material less complex than the ones in samples
3 and 4. Either way the samples should be characterized thoroughly both before and
after electrochemical testing, for instance by XANES/EXAFS and XRD to elucidate the
structural composition and assure that the catalyst is in fact dispersed as single atoms.
It may also be favorable to conduct a more systematic study of area evaluation via CO-
stripping and hydrogen sorption on single atoms, to learn to what extent these methods
can be trusted for evaluating ECSA of single atomic catalysts.
4.2
Ni Single Atoms
In the following section the experiments on Ni single atom samples will be presented and
the data discussed. It will be done in the same chronological order as the experiments to
better communicate the insight obtained from each iteration of experiment and how it was
used subsequently. The samples presented are numerated after the order in which they
were prepared in the cluster source and/or characterized by ISS/XPS. Several samples
were investigated by ISS/XPS to study the contamination of the glassy carbon electrodes
without having Ni single atoms deposited afterwards.
These samples are included in
the numeration, but not all were tested experimentally - hence the gaps in the sample
numerations presented here. Each sample will be described in more detail when presented
but an overview is presented in table (4.4). The main focus was on testing Ni single atoms
for CORR but due to the explorative nature of the study, it was chosen to test some
samples for other reactions too.
Table 4.4: Sample Description
name
sample
electrolyte
Jo01
Ni single atoms on glassy carbon
perchloric acid
Jo02
Ni single atoms on glassy carbon
potassium hydroxide
JoBlank1
blank glassy carbon
potassium hydroxide
JoBlank2
blank glassy carbon
carbonate buﬀer
Jo06
Ni single atoms on glassy carbon
carbonate buﬀer
Jo07
Ni single atoms on glassy carbon
carbonate buﬀer
Jo08
Ni single atoms on ammonia sputtered glassy carbon
carbonate buﬀer
Jo10
ammonia sputtered blank glassy carbon
carbonate buﬀer
43
==PAGE:51==
4.2.1
Data Presentation
EC-MS data is presented in double panel ﬁgures in this section. The lower panel contains
the EC data e.g. current, potential or both and the top panel contains the mass spectrom-
etry (MS) data. Each plot color used in the MS plots consitently refer to a speciﬁc species
- the color coding can be seen in table (4.5). The purely electrochemical experiments as
well as ISS and XPS data will have legends of their own.
Table 4.5: Color coding of mass spec signals
He
H2
CH4
O2
CO
Ni Single Atoms on GCE in Acidic Electrolyte: Jo01
Sample Jo01 is Ni single atoms on a GCE with a projected coverage of 10%. This early
experiment was conducted before the aqua regia cleaning procedure had been implemented
and thus the GCE was cleaned only in organic solvents and milli-Q. The GCE was however
argon sputtered prior to deposition. The electrolyte used was 1 M perchloric acid. The
sample was tested in the EC-MS setup. In ﬁgure (4.6) an overview of the base experiment
is seen. He carrier gas (1 mL/min) is used and cyclic voltammetry is performed. The
bottom panel shows the potential cycling where the cathodic limit is gradually set more
negative, and the corresponding current is co-plotted. The top panel shows the evolution
of hydrogen for each cycle (blue curve). Notably, the ﬁrst cycles having a cathodic limit
at 0 V versus RHE do not result in HER, however, as the cathodic limit is set to -0.1 V
hydrogen is evolved, and even more so when scanning to -0.2 V.
Figure 4.6: Jo01 cycling in 1 M HClO4


















   








  


  
	  



44
==PAGE:52==
In a similar manner CV’s were made while CO was used as carrier gas, without any
indication of CORR judging by the methane signal. Also chronoamperommetry (CA)
was performed while CO-saturating the cell. In ﬁgure (4.7) the bottom panels show the
potential set and the resulting current. The top panel shows that hydrogen (blue) is
evolved at each step. The gray curve shows that the CO gas signal is stable, with the
exception of a small dip coinciding with evolution of hydrogen. This dip is attributed
as a measuring artifact owing to the relatively large increase in hydrogen level. Also no
indication of other reactions involving CO are observed, including CORR.
Figure 4.7: Jo01 CA in CO


















   	








  


  
  


	
CA in He was performed where the hydrogen signal from the QMS was roughly four times
higher at EW=-0.2 V vs. RHE indicating some CO poisoning. The CA plot may be found
in appendix A, ﬁgure (A.2). Here an ISS spectrum , ﬁgure (A.1), is also found indicating
that the sample was in fact contaminated, most likely by platinum. After not seeing any
indication of CORR it was decided to try the same approach using a similar Ni single
atom sample (Jo02) but using an alkaline electrolyte. After learning the glassy carbon
electrodes could not be trusted to be clean, the aqua regia cleaning procedure was also
implemented.
Ni Single Atoms on GCE in Alkaline Electrolyte: Jo02
The sample Jo02 is 10% Ni single atom coverage on a GCE. This time the GCE was
cleaned by the aqua regia procedure and argon sputtered before deposition. In order to
use an electrolyte, which was alkaline but not too harsh on the sniﬀer chip membrane, a
0.1 M solution KOH was settled for.
An ISS spectrum was obtained right after deposition of Ni and again after the EC-MS
experiments, both can be seen in ﬁgure (4.8). The blue curve has a peak matching the
expected presence of nickel (778 eV). The orange curve has no such peak, which indicates
45
==PAGE:53==
that no nickel is left after the experiment. A direct quantitative comparison of the two
spectra is not possible, but assuming the broad hill (50-300 eV) should match for the
sample before and after the experiment, the other peaks can be assumed to scale with the
same relative factor. Going with this argument it seems that the broad peak(s) around
670 eV is/are also diminished after the experiment. Possibly the feature is a convolution
of multiple peaks, but the presence of the argon peak (691 eV) seems quite likely since the
GCE was argon sputtered before deposition of Ni atoms. Possibly also Cl (659 eV) could
be present as a result of the aqua regia cleaning, even though the sample was rinsed several
times in milli-Q. After exposure to KOH it also seem likely that K would be present. Due
to imperfect ISS collision the peaks are expected to trend towards slightly lower kinetic
energies, explaining why an argon and chlorine peak would be shifted more towards 660
eV. The peak slightly below 400 eV is most likely due to oxygen and the peak around 440
eV (only seen in blue curve) might be ﬂuor which is expected at 455 eV and below.
Figure 4.8: ISS on Jo02: after depositing Ni atoms versus post experiment
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
K
Ni
Ar
Cl
O
Pt
F
kinetic energy (eV)
counts per second
as deposited
after experiment
For the ISS spectra, platinum would be expected around 927 eV if present. Virtually no
signal is seen in this region. Comparing this to the large signal obtained for just 10% Ni
atoms, it clearly indicates that no detectable amount of platinum is present on the sample.
The EC-MS experiments for Jo02 follow the same approach as for Jo01. Qualitatively
the results are also quite similar. In ﬁgures (4.9) and (4.10) CV’s can be seen for He and
He/CO (50/50) respectively. It should be noted that the maximal hydrogen signal (blue)
is not coinciding with the maximal current owing to a time delay between the potentiostat
and mass spec.
46
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.9: Jo02 with He








   




  
	  



Figure 4.10: Jo02 with He/CO (50/50 %)







   



  	  




Notice that the QMS signal for HER in He/CO mixture is actually higher than for the
cycles in He. This is attributed to the slightly higher cathodic limit set during He/CO
cycles ( ≈100 mV). The anodic limit is also lower during He/CO cycles meaning the time
between HER peaks is smaller, leading to a larger buildup of hydrogen. The reason for
the noisy hydrogen signal is most likely due to hydrogen bubbles being formed. Judging
by the completely stable methane signal, no CORR is happening despite going to almost
-1 V vs. RHE. Also no redox features on the CV’s are noted apart from the charateristic
HER current. Since the post-experiment ISS reveals that no nickel is left after testing,
the EC-MS data is inconclusive. Not knowing when or how the Ni atoms are lost make
the CV’s and mass spec signals ambiguous. A degrading HER current was observed for
the ﬁrst few cycles in He indicating a possible loss of Ni could have taken place this
early. Either way a reference measurement was needed, and a blank GCE was tested for
comparison.
Blank Glassy Carbon Electrode in Alkaline Electrolyte: JoBlank1
An aqua regia cleaned GCE recieved the same argon sputtering as other test samples, but
no Ni was deposited. It was tested in the EC-MS setup using 0.1 M KOH as electrolyte.
Prior to this ISS and XPS spectra were obtained. As expected the XPS spectrum shown
in ﬁgure (4.11) indicates the presence of carbon as well as some oxygen. Also molybdenum
was detected, which originates from the sample holder. Peaks consistent with argon are
also observed, which is most likely due to the argon sputtering. This also aligns with
the ISS spectrum on Jo02, which had a peak matching the energy of argon. The peaks
were found using the CasaXPS software, and a spectrum with the peak annotations can
be found in the appendix, ﬁgure (A.3). A spectrum where the platinum peak lines are
plotted too is also available there, ﬁgure (A.4). This serves to indicate that the XPS
spectrum is not consistent with the presence of platinum contamination.
47
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.11: XPS spectrum of JoBlank1 GCE cleaned in aqua regia
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5 ·104
Mo
Ar
C
Ar
N,Mo
Ar
O
C
Ar
kinetic energy (eV)
counts per second
All together the XPS spectrum indicates the blank glassy carbon (JoBlank1) can be
assumed to be clean.
This is also backed by the ISS spectrum seen in ﬁgure (4.12).
The general signal is quite low and thus the signal to noise ratio is also low. The most
prominent peak is the one roughly spanning 600-700 eV, which is most likey due to argon
and perhaps left over chlorine. Some small ﬂat signal is observed at 700-850 eV just as
for Jo02. Whether this is simply noise or some real eﬀect is undetermined. Slightly above
900 eV there is a faint bump, but nothing to indicate that platinum is present in any
considerable amount.
Figure 4.12: ISS spectrum of blank GCE cleaned in aqua regia
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
0
200
400
600
800
Ar
Cl
O
Pt
kinetic energy (eV)
counts per second
The blank GCE was tested in the EC-MS setup using both He and CO. The CV’s can
be seen in ﬁgures (4.13) and (4.14) respectively. The potential was scanned all the way
up to ∼1.7 V vs. RHE where an increasing anodic current is obtained. The oxygen
signal (black curve) also indictes OER takes place both in the case of He and CO carrier
gas. In the cathodic region HER is also observed when going to ∼-0.6 V vs. RHE.
Both the reduction current and the (blue) hydrogen signal are however lower when CO
is used, indicating some CO poisoning. Since XPS and ISS spectra don’t indicate any
48
==PAGE:56==
contamination of catalytically active species, it seems that OER and HER can take place
on a blank glassy carbon electrode, albeit with large overpotentials. Another possibility
is that the KOH electrolyte might have contained small amounts of contaminants that
could be electrodeposited during the cycling. For instance if some metallic cation could
be reduced onto the GCE. This, however, does not explain the OER activity, since such
cation would presumably be oxidized again when going to the high anodic limit.
Figure 4.13: blank GCE with He









   





  
	  




Figure 4.14: blank GCE with CO









   





  
	  



A comparison of the CV’s obtained for the blank GCE and Jo02 indicated that the onset
potentials for HER were similar. There are two possible explanations for this, the ﬁrst
being that nickel single atoms do not catalyze HER at all and thus the glassy carbon
electrode in itself facilitates the hydrogen evolution. Another, perhaps more plausible
reason is that the Ni single atoms on Jo02 were not stable on the GCE and were lost
almost instantly. This could for instance be caused by scanning too anodic or due to the
electrolyte, or perhaps the combination of the two.
To investigate the matter, the Pourbaix diagram for nickel was consulted. A Pourbaix
diagram describes the phase equilibrium of some species as a function of applied potential
and pH value, based on thermodynamic calculations. It can thus serve to predict whether
some species, say nickel, will be stable or corrode at a given potential and pH. Such
diagram is slightly idealized, and for instance assumes that nickel is present in bulk at
standard pressure and temperature. Comparing this with the single nickel atoms tested
in the EC-MS setup is a far stretch, but the concept is perhaps somewhat justiﬁed. In
appendix A the Pourbaix diagram for nickel is shown in ﬁgure (A.7). The main point
extracted from the diagram is that in the potential region of interest Ni corrodes for
almost all pH values, however in the pH range from ∼9 to ∼12 nickel is alledgedly stable
for the entire potential range. With this in mind it was decided to move forward using a
carbonate buﬀer, maintaining good conductivity, but a pH in the range of 9-12.
Ni Single Atoms on GCE in Carbonate Buﬀer: Jo06
Jo06 is a aqua regia cleaned GCE, argon sputtered and deposited with a 10% Ni single
atom coverage. A carbonate buﬀer with pH ∼11 was used as electrolyte. To increase
the chance of the nickel atoms staying on the glassy carbon, it was decided to immerse
49
==PAGE:57==
the working electrode into the electrolyte under potential control. Since this is straight
forward in the RDE/3-electrode cell and cumbersome in the EC-MS setup, the measure-
ments on Jo06 were conducted in the 3-electrode cell.
An ISS spectrum both before and after the electrochemical experiment was obtained, as
seen in ﬁgure (4.15). Note that the counts per second on the vertical axis cannot be relied
upon for quantiﬁcation. The main observation to be made is that a peak consistent with
nickel (778 eV) is still present after the experiment. Furthermore, the peak seems to be
split in two, indicative of another species. Possibly iron is responsible for the leftmost
peak (768 eV), and nickel for the right one. The post-experiment spectrum also has a
peak that is not observable in the other scan, namely the feature roughly centered at 375
eV. This is thought to be due to oxygen. What seems to be the ”argon peak” is also
present in both scans, although their centers do not align. This could possibly mean that
two (or more) peaks are in fact overlapping.
Figure 4.15: ISS on Jo06 after depositing Ni atoms versus post experiment
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
K
Fe
Ni
Ar
Cl
O
Pt
kinetic energy (eV)
counts per second
as deposited
after experiment
The XPS spectrum in ﬁgure (4.16) shows an oxygen peak after the experiment on Jo06.
This is consistent with the ISS spectrum, possibly indicating oxidation. In fact there are
two peaks. This could be a chemical shift indicating two diﬀerent oxidation states. In the
spectrum before the experiment a small nickel peak is visible, but not afterwards. This
indicates loss of Ni, but the more surface sensitive ISS methods can still detect nickel.
The XPS spectra with peak annotations can be found in the appended ﬁgures (A.6 and
A.5)
50
==PAGE:58==
Figure 4.16: XPS on Jo06 after depositing Ni atoms versus post experiment
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1,000 1,100 1,200
0
1
2
3
4 ·104
Mo
C
Ar
N,Mo
O
N Ni
O
C
Ar
kinetic energy (eV)
counts per second
as deposited
after experiment
The sample Jo06 was put in the 3-electrode cell under potential control (at 0 V vs.
RHE) and never scanned more anodic than 0.2 V vs. RHE. Another blank glassy carbon
electrode (JoBlank2) was also tested under the same conditions in order to have a reference
experiment.
The blank was also cleaned by the aqua regia procedure, but not argon
sputtered since it never went into the cluster source setup. The resulting CV’s are seen in
ﬁgure (4.17) where the full lines are in Ar saturated electrolyte and the stipulated lines are
under CO saturation. Both the blank glassy carbon (red) and the sample with Ni (black)
are aﬀected by the CO in the direction of a lower current. The lack of redox features and a
cathodic current that decreases when CO is present indicate that both samples are simply
performing HER. There is however a big diﬀerence in the overpotential, indicating that
the nickel atoms do to some extent catalyze the HER. This is interesting in its own right,
but as a HER catalyst Ni single atoms don’t seem promising when having an overpotential
of roughly half a volt.
Figure 4.17: CV for Ni single atoms (Jo06) and blank GCE (JoBlank2): Eﬀect of CO
−1.8
−1.6
−1.4
−1.2
−1
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
−1.5
−1
−0.5
0
U-RI vs. RHE (V)
I (mA)
Jo06, Ar
Jo06, CO
JoBlank2, Ar
JoBlank2, CO
A curious detail of the plot is that the JoBlank2 CV in argon saturated electrolyte is almost
linear when a cathodic current is drawn. This resembles the feature of uncompensated
ohmic resistance, however, EIS measurements were made to get RΩand compensate the
potential accordingly.
51
==PAGE:59==
Ni Single Atoms on GCE in Carbonate Buﬀer: Jo07
Another sample (Jo07) similar to Jo06 was tested in pH=11 carbonate buﬀer, but this
time in the EC-MS setup. The sample was therefore not put in under potential control,
but the anodic potential limit was set to 0.2 V vs. RHE as for Jo06. In ﬁgures (4.18)
and (4.19) the EC-MS plots are seen with He and CO gas respectively. It is evident that
hydrogen is evolved in both cases but no methane (red curve) is evolved. By the lower
current and hydrogen signal under CO saturation it is veriﬁed that Jo07 is poisoned by
cycling in CO. Both CV’s also match those of Jo06 fairly well.
Figure 4.18: Jo07 He








   





  
	  



Figure 4.19: Jo07 CO









   





  
	  



As cited in the discussion of the results of the Pd single atom study, several research groups
investigating single atom catalysts use carbon structures with porphyrine-like sites created
by nitrogen doping. Supposedly this anchors the active single atoms and perhaps even
enhances activity. In order to mimic this approach, a step of ammonia sputtering was
added in the sample preparation in hope of potentially creating such sites.
Ni Single Atoms on NH3 Sputtered GCE in Carbonate Buﬀer:
Jo08
At this stage new GCE’s were available, and these were used henceforth. These new
GCE’s were cleaned by sonication in organic solvent and immersion in Suprapur nitric
acid. The samples were found to have small amounts of iron and calcium present from
ISS and XPS measurements. A pH ∼10 carbonate buﬀer was used for testing Jo08 in
the 3-electrode cell, using potential control when commencing experiments.
52
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.20: Comparing Jo06 and Jo08 in Ar and CO saturation
−1.4
−1.2
−1
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
U-RI vs. RHE (V)
I (mA)
Jo08, Ar
Jo08, CO
Jo06, Ar
Jo06, CO
The CV’s in Ar and CO saturated electrolyte is displayed in ﬁgure (4.20), where similar
CV’s for Jo06 is co-plotted. Remarkably, Jo08 has a higher overpotential than Jo06. In
other words the ammonia sputtered GCE with Ni atoms is less active, or perhaps has
somehow lost its Ni atoms meaning it is less stable. Either way the eﬀect is unexpected.
Both samples seem equally prone to CO poisoning, and thus no evidence is seen to support
that the CO can be reduced. Even though Jo08 is less active than Jo06 for the HER,
the sample is in fact slightly more active than a blank sample (JoBlank2). This naturally
leads to the question of which eﬀects can be ascribed to the ammonia sputtering and
which eﬀects are simply due to nickel atoms. In an attempt to clarify this, an experiment
was made with an ammonia sputtered blank. Furthermore, Jo08 was tested for ORR and
OER, which will also be described in the next section.
NH3 Sputtered Glassy Carbon Electrode in Carbonate Buﬀer:
Jo10
A new GCE cleaned by the nitric acid procedure was argon sputtered and then ammo-
nia sputtered. It was tested in the 3-electrode setup in a pH∼10 carbonate buﬀer. To
replicate the procedure of Jo08, this sample was also put in under potential control. The
measurement of Jo10 in Ar and CO saturated electrolyte turned out to be aﬀected by
bad electrical contact, rendering the data useless. The measurement in oxygen saturated
electrolyte did however succeed, and the results are plotted with those of Jo08.
Firstly the ORR was explored, as can be seen in ﬁgure (4.21). Despite having ω=1600
rpm, there is hardly any ORR activity, and the overpotential is so large that the CV
almost transitions straight into the HER region. A slight diﬀerence is observe in the HER
region, where Jo08 containing nickel has the highest current.
53
==PAGE:61==
Figure 4.21: ORR investigation for Jo08 and Jo10, oxygen saturated carbonate buﬀer
−1.4−1.2 −1 −0.8−0.6−0.4−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
U-RI vs. RHE (V)
I (mA)
Jo08
Jo10
In ﬁgure (4.22) the CV’s in the OER regime is shown. Both Jo08 and Jo10 have huge over-
potential for OER. Jo10 (the ammonia sputtered blank) displayed the same CV through-
out the experiment. Jo08 on the other hand was stable for 5 cycles at 2.4 V vs. RHE, but
then suddenly increased in current for 10 consecutive cycles until reaching the maximal
detection limit of 2.5 mA. This cannot be explained presently but both sample Jo08 and
Jo10 are awaiting ISS and XPS characterization.
Figure 4.22: Jo08 Jo10 OER
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
0
1
2
3
U-RI vs. RHE (V)
I (mA)
Jo08
Jo10
54
==PAGE:62==
4.2.2
Discussion
Due to what appeared to be platinum contamination, the EC-MS test of Jo01 is some-
what inconclusive. To which extent the HER activity was caused by platinum, nickel
atoms or perhaps the GCE is unclear. A CO-poisoning eﬀect was observed, but again it
is inconclusive which catalytic sites were actually blocked. Since no CORR activity was
observed, it was decided to go forward using an alkaline electrolyte. It cannot be ruled
out that CORR could take place in the acidic media providing that the glassy carbon was
rid of platinum contaminations and perhaps that the anodic potential limit was set lower.
The ISS spectra taken before and after the experiment on Jo02 revealed that the nickel
atoms were lost during experimentation. HER was observed, but wether it was due to Ni
atoms or the GCE is uncertain. The absence of methane indicates that the sought after
CORR is not taking place, but it could be due to the fact that the nickel is lost almost
instantaneously.
A blank glassy carbon electrode (JoBlank1) was by ISS and XPS veriﬁed to be free of
platinum contamination. Still the blank GCE was able to perform HER and OER, al-
though at large overpotentials. Furthermore, CO poisoning in terms of reduced HER
activity was observed.
In an attempt to improve the stability of Ni atoms during experimental conditions, the
electrolyte was changed for Jo06 and the following samples. By a hand waving argument
based on the Pourbaix diagram for Ni, a pH of 9-12 was hypothesized to be optimal. The
after-experiment ISS spectrum conﬁrms that some Ni is still present. This could be due
to the change of electrolyte. On the other hand the sample was also introduced under
potential control and a low anodic limit was set. This could also be essential for the Ni
atom stability. The electrochemical test of Jo06 shows little activity, but since the exper-
iment was conducted in the regular 3-electrode setup, no product detection was available.
Therefore, it cannot be ruled out that CORR was in fact going on. The current, how-
ever, becomes lower when saturating the electrolyte with CO, indicating CO-poisoning.
Another blank GCE (JoBlank2) was tested under the same conditions, and was seen to
have an overpotential which was signiﬁcantly more negative. The eﬀect of CO poisoning
was also observed for this blank.
Using the same carbonate buﬀer, Jo07 was tested in the EC-MS setup showing no sign of
CORR. The sample was never scanned higher than +0.2 V vs. RHE. On the other hand
it was not put in under potential control, meaning the Ni atoms could still have been re-
moved from the sample. Therefore, the experiment is also inconclusive in determining the
possibility for CORR on Ni single atoms. Assuming that it is in fact possible to do CORR
on Ni atoms on a GCE, it seems that the reason it has not been demonstrated so far must
either be due to unstable Ni atoms or low selectivity/activity. It was hypothesized that
using ammonia sputtering might create porphyrine like sites on the GCE which could rem-
edy this. As mentioned when discussing the palladium samples this is a well known tactic.
An ammonia sputtered GCE with Ni atoms (Jo08) was tested in the 3-electrode setup in
carbonate buﬀer and with initial potential control. It turned out that the onset potential
was almost 0.4 V more negative than for Jo06 which had no N-doping. Since no product
detection could be made, it cannot be determined what the reaction was, but judging from
55
==PAGE:63==
the CO poisoning it is not likely to be CORR, but rather HER. It was then decided to
test Jo08 for the ORR and OER reaction. This was also done for a blank glassy carbon
which received ammonia sputtering (Jo10). Both samples displayed virtually no ORR
activity. The onset for the subsequent OER was around 2 V vs. RHE, but more activity
than for the ORR was observed. Furthermore, the anodic current of Jo08 increased over
time while Jo10 remained stable, which cannot readily be explained.
In summary no observation of CORR has been made. The reason is not completely clear,
but most likely the stability of Ni single atoms is a key factor. Only in one instance was it
possible to preserve some portion of the originally deposited Ni, namely on Jo06. This is
presumably because the sample was immersed in the electrolyte under potential control
and the low anodic scan limit and possibly also due to the ﬁnal choice of electrolyte pH.
It is also a key point that the experimental samples studied diﬀer from the model sys-
tem of the DFT calculation in [17]. In particular the DFT calculation is based on nickel
atoms that are embedded in single vacancies of a graphene sheet. Glassy carbon cannot
be expected to behave like graphene, and how the Ni atoms bind to the glassy carbon is
also unknown. Whether the Ni atoms agglomerate or stay well dispersed is also an open
question. Although mentioned brieﬂy in the article, the aspect of N-doping was not a
part of the DFT model, so the expected eﬀect was also simply based on observations from
other catalyst systems.
Since this series of experiments has relied heavily on the use of the CO gas line both for
the EC-MS setup and 3-electrode cell, it is quite likely that nickel carbonyl has entered
either setup at some stage. Since the concentration might be extremely low, the QMS
cannot be relied upon for detection. However, since no positive result of CORR on nickel
atoms has been observed there isn’t any chance of a false positive result caused by nickel
deposited from nickel carbonyl.
56
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
Palladium single atoms on four diﬀerenct carbon based supports have been tested in a
3-electrode cell for the ORR reaction. Hydrogen underpotential deposition and CO strip-
ping was also used to estimate the electrochemically active surface area. It was found
that the two techniques generally give the same trend, but the CO stripping gives slightly
larger estimates in general. The estimates for ECSA’s are within the range of 0.14-0.44
cm2, whereas the geometric sample area was 0.2 cm2. The ECSA is, however, based on
an estimate of charge density, which may not apply in the case of single atoms. The two
samples (3 and 4) where palladium atoms were supposedly anchored in nanospheres had
the smallest areas whereas the samples having Pd atoms on reduced graphene oxide and
amorphous carbon had the largest.
The kinetic current at 0.9 V vs. RHE was found using the Kouteck´y-Levich relation. By
normalizing to the AECSA,CO the kinetic current densities at 0.9 V vs. RHE were found.
The samples 3 and 4 have the highest values of 3.57 and 3.41 mA/cm2 respectively. Since
the catalyst loading is not known, the intrinsic activity is undetermined. The half wave
potentials measured range from 0.86 to 0.89 V vs. RHE, which in every case is superior
to the E1/2=0.76 V vs. RHE reported by [20].
It is also likely that the samples may have been contaminated with platinum. Further-
more, the catalysts have not been characterized neither before nor after electrochemical
testing to ensure the presence of single atoms. In light of this, the possible anchoring
mechanisms of the carbon supports cannot be elucidated. In order to gain insight into
the anchoring mechanism, a more detailed study is needed in addition to the electro-
chemical tests. In summary, the Pd single atoms on these various carbon supports may
be potential candidates for the ORR reaction, but more evidence is needed to support
the claim.
Nickel single atoms have been tested for the CORR reaction. Stability of the Ni atoms
on the GCE have proven to be a challenge. It was been demonstrated that some nickel
remained on a GCE after electrochemical tests in the case where the electrode was im-
mersed using potential control and never scanned more anodic than 0.2 V vs.
RHE.
Furthermore the electrolyte in this case was carbonate buﬀer with pH=11. In this in-
stance the experiment was performed in the 3-electrode cell, meaning no QMS data was
available. In principle, it cannot be ruled out that CORR did take place, but qualitatively
57
==PAGE:65==
the CV looks the same as for the other samples that only evolved hydrogen. The sample
with remaining nickel (Jo06) had a notably lower overpotential (∼0.6 diﬀerence) than
the blank sample (assuming that both were doing HER). If this is not due to the argon
sputtering of Jo06, then some catalytic behavior is noted for the nickel atoms, although
it seems to be towards HER.
It was also observed that an ammonia sputtered sample with Ni atoms had a higher over-
potential than a Ni atom sample (again assuming both did HER). CO poisoning has also
been observed to be a general trend for all samples. In addition, a blank glassy carbon
sample was found capable of performing both HER and OER with large overpotentials
(η ∼0.7 V and η ∼0.5 V respectively).
It has not been possible to demonstrate CORR on Ni single atoms, as proposed in [17].
There is, however, a discrepancy between the assumptions behind the theoretic prediction
and the samples tested in practice. It will thus require more research to determine if a Ni
single atom catalyst truly is a candidate for CO reduction to methane.
58
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 6
Outlook
For both the palladium and nickel single atom catalyst there are some interesting aspects
that could be explored. A few suggestions are made here.
Going from single atom catalysts to a dimer may change reaction kinetics and selectivity.
It could be interesting to explore the diﬀerence between single atoms and dimers of some
catalysts. One example is ORR. Here the 4-electron pathway might be suppressed on a
single atom, giving way to the 2-electron mechanism leading to hydrogen peroxide. This
is exactly what Yang et al. claim to have observed for their Pt single atoms on titanium
nitride nanoparticles [38]. In order to estimate whether H2O2 is in fact formed prefer-
entially on some single atom catalyst, a rotating ring disk electrode can be used instead
of an RDE, which is an easy modiﬁcation. The EC-MS setup might also be useful for
detection of the products.
Also, in the case of CORR on nickel it would be interesting to compare single atoms
and dimers. Furthermore, it would be worth while investigating Ni atoms deposited on
a substrate which better resembles a graphene sheet. For instance pyrolytic graphite. In
this regard it would also be relevant to investigate which sites are created when ammonia
is sputtered onto for instance pyrolytic graphite, and at which site Ni might anchor itself.
Perhaps an annealing step is needed after depositing Ni onto an N-doped substrate in
order to facilitate the desired bonding.
As a twist to the idea of dimers, it might be interesting to investigate the prospect of dual
site catalysts. For instance Wang et al. show that a N-doped Fe-Co dual site is very active
and stable for ORR[36]. Their catalyst system is built on a metal-organic framework, but
perhaps dimers of two diﬀerent atoms produced by the cluster source could be equally
interesting.
If the EC-MS setup continuously will be used to study processes that are sensitive to nickel
contamination, it might be fruitful to ensure that nickel carbonyl is eliminated. In order to
counteract the formation of nickel carbonyl, several plays can be made. If the gas system
is rid of all possible sources of nickel from CO supply to outlet, no Ni(CO)4 is formed.
This could be accomplished by having copper or aluminum tubes instead of stainless steel
tubes. This inevitably comes with a larger cost and perhaps other technical challenges
such as tube ﬁtting or welding. Furthermore, valves without nickel are needed. A less
comprehensive alternative is eliminating Ni(CO)4 right at the interface between the CO
59
==PAGE:67==
supply and the experimental setup, for example by use of carbonyl ﬁlters. Alternatively,
the CO could be led through a heated copper tube and subsequently through a cold trap
as suggested by Yates [39].
60
==PAGE:68==
References
[1]
Anders Bodin. “Synthesis of Nanoparticle Model Systems for Sustainable Catalysis
by Gas Aggregation”. PhD thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2017.
[2]
Carbon Flow Chart, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. 2014. url: https:
//flowcharts.llnl.gov/commodities/carbon.
[3]
Qingqing Cheng et al. “Single cobalt atom and N codoped carbon nanoﬁbers as
highly durable electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction reaction”. In: ACS Catalysis
7.10 (2017), pp. 6864–6871. issn: 21555435. doi: 10.1021/acscatal.7b02326.
[4]
Ib Chorkendorﬀand J.W. Niemantsverdriet. Concepts of Modern Catalysis and
Kinetics. Second Edi. Wiley, 2007. isbn: 978-3-527-31672-4.
[5]
Robert H. Crabtree. Metal Carbonyls. 2014, pp. 98–102. isbn: 9780128038956. doi:
10.1016/B978-0-12-803895-6.00008-2.
[6]
Jakob Engbæk et al. “CO dissociation on Ni: The eﬀect of steps and of nickel
carbonyl”. In: Surface Science 602.3 (2008), pp. 733–743. issn: 00396028. doi: 10.
1016/j.susc.2007.12.008.
[7]
EPA. Overview of greeenhouse gasses. url: https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/
overview-greenhouse-gases (visited on 01/28/2018).
[8]
D.M. Etheridge et al. Historical CO2 record from the Law Dome. 1998. url: http:
//cdiac.ess- dive.lbl.gov/trends/co2/lawdome- data.html (visited on
01/21/2018).
[9]
Lan Lan Fang et al. “Determination of the real surface area of palladium electrode”.
In: Chinese Journal of Chemical Physics 23.5 (2010), pp. 543–548. issn: 16740068.
doi: 10.1088/1674-0068/23/05/543-548.
[10]
Fuel cell today. url: http://www.fuelcelltoday.com/technologies/pemfc.
[11]
C. Gabrielli et al. “Investigation of Hydrogen Adsorption and Absorption in Palla-
dium Thin Films”. In: Journal of The Electrochemical Society 151.11 (2004), A1937.
issn: 00134651. doi: 10.1149/1.1797035. url: http://jes.ecsdl.org/cgi/doi/
10.1149/1.1797035.
[12]
W. M. Goldberger and D. F. Othmer. “The kinetics of nickel carbonyl forma-
tion”. In: Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Process Design and Development
2.3 (1963), pp. 202–209. issn: 01964305. doi: 10.1021/i260007a006.
[13]
Yoshio Hori et al. “Electrocatalytic process of CO selectivity in electrochemical
reduction of CO2 at metal electrodes in aqueous media”. In: Electrochimica Acta
39.11-12 (1994), pp. 1833–1839. issn: 00134686. doi: 10.1016/0013- 4686(94)
85172-7.
61
==PAGE:69==
[14]
IRENA. “2010-2016 LCoE by International Renewable Energy Agency”. In: (). url:
http://resourceirena.irena.org/gateway/dashboard/?topic=3%7B%5C&
%7DsubTopic=1057.
[15]
Allen J. Bard and Larry R. Faulkner. Electrochemical Methods. Second edi. John
Wiley & Sons, inc., 2001.
[16]
Kim Degn Jensen. “Electrochemical Insights into Platinum Catalysts for Fuel Cells”.
PhD thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2017.
[17]
Charlotte Kirk et al. “Theoretical Investigations of the Electrochemical Reduction
of CO on Single Metal Atoms Embedded in Graphene”. In: (2017). issn: 2374-7943.
doi: 10.1021/acscentsci.7b00442. url: http://pubs.acs.org/doi/pdf/10.
1021/acscentsci.7b00442.
[18]
J. Kleis et al. “Finite size eﬀects in chemical bonding: From small clusters to solids”.
In: Catalysis Letters 141.8 (2011), pp. 1067–1071. issn: 1011372X. doi: 10.1007/
s10562-011-0632-0.
[19]
Keith Lascelles et al. “Nickel Compounds”. In: Ullmann’s Encyclopedia of Industrial
Chemistry 1754.1 (2005), p. 16. issn: 01410229. doi: 10.1002/14356007.a17_235.
pub2. arXiv: 0471238961.0609122019220118.a01 [10.1002].
[20]
Jing Liu et al. “High performance platinum single atom electrocatalyst for oxy-
gen reduction reaction”. In: Nature Communications 8.May (2017), pp. 1–9. issn:
20411723. doi: 10.1038/ncomms15938. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
ncomms15938.
[21]
Syukuro Manabe and Richard T. Wetherald. Thermal Equilibrium of the Atmo-
sphere with a Given Distribution of Relative Humidity. 1967. doi: 10.1175/1520-
0469(1967)024<0241:TEOTAW>2.0.CO;2. url: http://journals.ametsoc.org/
doi/abs/10.1175/1520- 0469%7B%5C%%7D281967%7B%5C%%7D29024%7B%5C%
%7D3C0241%7B%5C%%7D3ATEOTAW%7B%5C%%7D3E2.0.CO%7B%5C%%7D3B2.
[22]
Ludwig Mond. “The History of My Process of Nickel Extraction”. In: J.Soc.Chem
(1895), pp. 945–946.
[23]
Ludwig Mond, Carl Langer, and Friedrich Quincke. “Action of carbon Monoxide on
Nickel”. In: J.Chem.Soc.Trans 2 (1890), pp. 749–753.
[24]
NASA. Eﬀects of Climate change. url: https://climate.nasa.gov/effects/
(visited on 01/28/2018).
[25]
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. Global Mean Sea Level Trend from Integrated
Multi-Mission Ocean Altimeters TOPEX/Poseidon, Jason-1, OSTM/Jason-2 Ver-
sion 4.2 Ver. 4.2 PO.DAAC, CA, USA. (Visited on 01/21/2018).
[26]
NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies. Global Land-Ocean Temperature In-
dex. url: https://climate.nasa.gov/vital- signs/global- temperature/
(visited on 01/21/2018).
[27]
Ourworldindata.org. Estimated World Population. url: https://ourworldindata.
org/world-population-growth%7B%5C#%7Ddata-sources (visited on 01/22/2018).
[28]
Marcel Pourbaix. Atlas of Electrochemical Equilibria in Aqueous Solutions Version
2. 1974.
62
==PAGE:70==
[29]
Annett Rabis, Paramaconi Rodriguez, and Thomas J. Schmidt. “Electrocatalysis
for polymer electrolyte fuel cells: Recent achievements and future challenges”. In:
ACS Catalysis 2.5 (2012), pp. 864–890. issn: 21555435. doi: 10.1021/cs3000864.
[30]
Bela Sebok. “Creating model systems for catalysis with mass-selected nanoparti-
cles”. PhD thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2017.
[31]
Shan Shi, J¨urgen Markmann, and J¨org Weissm¨uller. “Actuation by hydrogen elec-
trosorption in hierarchical nanoporous palladium”. In: Philosophical Magazine 97.19
(2017), pp. 1571–1587. issn: 14786443. doi: 10.1080/14786435.2017.1311428.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14786435.2017.1311428.
[32]
Vaclav Smil. Ourworldindata.org. url: https://ourworldindata.org/energy-
production-and-changing-energy-sources (visited on 01/22/2018).
[33]
Pieter Tans and Ralph Keeling. Earth System Research Laboratory, NOAA. 2018.
url: https://www.esrl.noaa.gov/gmd/ccgg/trends/data.html (visited on
01/21/2018).
[34]
Reha K. Tepe, David Vassallo, and Tracey Jacksier. “Synthesis of iron and nickel
carbonyl as calibration materials for spectroscopic systems”. In: Spectrochimica acta,
Part B: Atomic spectroscopy 55.2 (2000), pp. 165–175. issn: 05848547. doi: 10.
1016/S0584-8547(99)00174-3.
[35]
Daniel Bøndergaard Trimarco. “Real-time detection of sub-monolayer desorption
phenomena during electrochemical reactions: Instrument development and applica-
tions”. PhD thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2017.
[36]
Jing Wang et al. “Design of N-coordinated dual-metal sites: A stable and active
Pt-free catalyst for acidic ORR”. In: Journal of the American Chemical Society
(2017), jacs.7b10385. issn: 0002-7863. doi: 10.1021/jacs.7b10385. url: http:
//pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/jacs.7b10385.
[37]
Xue Wang et al. “Palladium-platinum core-shell icosahedra with substantially en-
hanced activity and durability towards oxygen reduction”. In: Nature Communica-
tions 6.May (2015), pp. 1–8. issn: 20411723. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8594.
[38]
Sungeun Yang et al. “Single-atom catalyst of platinum supported on titanium nitride
for selective electrochemical reactions”. In: Angewandte Chemie - International Edi-
tion 55.6 (2016), pp. 2058–2062. issn: 15213773. doi: 10.1002/anie.201509241.
[39]
John T. Yates. Experimental Innovations in Surface Science. Second Edi. Vol. 211.
Part 1. Springer, 1998. isbn: 978-1-4612-2304-7. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-17668-
0.
[40]
Yifan Ye et al. “Two-Dimensional Mesoporous Carbon Doped with Fe-N Active
Sites for Eﬃcient Oxygen Reduction”. In: ACS Catalysis 7.11 (2017), pp. 7638–
7646. issn: 21555435. doi: 10.1021/acscatal.7b02101.
[41]
Hanguang Zhang et al. “Single Atomic Iron Catalysts for Oxygen Reduction in
Acidic Media: Particle Size Control and Thermal Activation”. In: Journal of the
American Chemical Society 139.40 (2017), pp. 14143–14149. issn: 15205126. doi:
10.1021/jacs.7b06514.
[42]
Cynthia G. Zoski. Handbook of Electrochemistry. First Edit. Elsevier, 2007. isbn:
9780444519580.
63
==PAGE:71==
List of Figures
1.1
Atmospheric CO2 content measured at Mauna Loa Observatory (orange
curve) and derived from Law Dome Antarctica ice cores (blue curve, smoothed).
Data from [33] and [8] respectively
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Temperature anomaly compared to the 1951-1980 average: Annual mean
(blue points) and LOWESS-smoothed curve (orange). Data from NASA [26]
4
1.3
Global mean sea level compared to the level in 1993. Data from NASA
[25](Global Isostatic Adjustment applied, smoothed) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
US carbon emission ﬂowchart (2014) from [2] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Global primary energy consumption by source from 1800-2017. Data from
[32] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.6
Estimated world population. Data from [27]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.7
Levelized Cost of Energy. Figure from [14] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.8
Working principle of a PEMFC. Figure from [10] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.9
Catalytic energy diagram: reactants must overcome an energy barrier, in-
dicated by the solid line, to form a product. By employing a catalyst, the
energy barrier can be lowered signiﬁcantly, as indicated by the stipulated
line . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.1
Activation energy versus binding energy: comparing single sites with metal
surfaces. The black stipulated line is the scaling trend for single atom sites
while the blue and green are for metal surface sites. Figure from [17]
. . .
15
2.2
Formation energy. Figure from [17] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3
Structural representation of Ni(CO)4
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1
Schematic of 3-electrode setup. Figure courtesy of Taus Holtug . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Working electrode potential vs. time for several cycles . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Current measured during one cycle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
Typical CO stripping CV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.5
Hupd on polycrystalline Pt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.6
Randles equivalent circuit
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.7
High frequency limit
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.8
Low frequency limit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.9
Nyquist plot of typical EIS measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.10 calibration by CP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.11 calibration by CV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.12 DC and AC potential on rods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.13 QMS rods: only molecules with a certain mass/charge ratio pass through .
26
3.14 sniﬀer chip membrane and gas ﬂow schematic from [35] . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.15 front and back of sniﬀer chip from [35]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
64
==PAGE:72==
3.16 Assembly of the cell (from [35]) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.17 Overview of cell installed on top of sniﬀer chip [35]
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.18 Schematic of the EC-MS setup, modiﬁed from [35]
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.19 Typical EC-MS experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.20 Working principle of the cluster source. Figure courtesy of Jakob Kibsgaard 31
4.1
base CV of Pd single atom samples 1-4 (N2 saturated)
. . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2
ORR with Pd single atom samples 1-4 (O2 saturated) . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3
CO-stripping on Pd single atom samples 1-4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.4
zoom in on CO-stripping peaks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.5
ECSA comparison for samples 1-4
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.6
Jo01 cycling in 1 M HClO4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.7
Jo01 CA in CO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.8
ISS on Jo02: after depositing Ni atoms versus post experiment . . . . . . .
46
4.9
Jo02 with He
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.10 Jo02 with He/CO (50/50 %) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.11 XPS spectrum of JoBlank1 GCE cleaned in aqua regia
. . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.12 ISS spectrum of blank GCE cleaned in aqua regia . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.13 blank GCE with He . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.14 blank GCE with CO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.15 ISS on Jo06 after depositing Ni atoms versus post experiment
. . . . . . .
50
4.16 XPS on Jo06 after depositing Ni atoms versus post experiment . . . . . . .
51
4.17 CV for Ni single atoms (Jo06) and blank GCE (JoBlank2): Eﬀect of CO
.
51
4.18 Jo07 He . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.19 Jo07 CO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.20 Comparing Jo06 and Jo08 in Ar and CO saturation . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.21 ORR investigation for Jo08 and Jo10, oxygen saturated carbonate buﬀer
.
54
4.22 Jo08 Jo10 OER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
A.1 Jo01 pre dep ISS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
A.2 Jo01 CA in He
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
A.3 JoBlank1 with peaks found in CASA XPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
A.4 JoBlank1 compared to Pt peaks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
A.5 XPS: Jo06 as deposited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
A.6 XPS: Jo06 post experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
A.7 Colored version of nickels Pourbaix diagram. In the green regions nickel is
immune or passivated, in the red regions nickel is corroded. Original ﬁgure
from[28] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
B.1 base CV of Pt
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
B.2 Pt ORR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
65
==PAGE:73==
List of Tables
1.1
Half reactions in a PEMFC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.2
Half reactions of water splitting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1
palladium single atom sample description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.1
palladium single atom sample description with sample numbering and plot
colors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
electrochemically active surface area estimated with CO-stripping and Hupd
for samples 1-4
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3
absolute current and half wave potential for samples 1-4
. . . . . . . . . .
40
4.4
Sample Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.5
Color coding of mass spec signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
C.1 Project Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
66
==PAGE:74==
Appendices
67
==PAGE:75==
Appendix A
Ni Single Atom Experiments
Figure A.1: Jo01 pre dep ISS
68
==PAGE:76==
Figure A.2: Jo01 CA in He
















   	






  


  
  


	
Figure A.3: JoBlank1 with peaks found in CASA XPS
69
==PAGE:77==
Figure A.4: JoBlank1 compared to Pt peaks
70
==PAGE:78==
Figure A.5: XPS: Jo06 as deposited
Figure A.6: XPS: Jo06 post experiment
71
==PAGE:79==
Figure A.7: Colored version of nickels Pourbaix diagram. In the green regions nickel is
immune or passivated, in the red regions nickel is corroded. Original ﬁgure from[28]
72
==PAGE:80==
Appendix B
Polycrystalline Platinum CV’s
IK= - 0.3097 mA, IMT=-1.2216 mA, I=-0.2476 mA, E1/2= 0.8527 V
Figure B.1: base CV of Pt
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
−8
−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
·10−2
U-RI vs. RHE (V)
I (mA)
Figure B.2: Pt ORR
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
−1
−0.5
0
U-RI vs. RHE (V)
I (mA)
73
==PAGE:81==
Appendix C
Learning Objectives & Project Plan
Speciﬁc Learning Objectives
• Identify and work analytically towards solving technical problems and gain scientiﬁc
knowledge
• Address the overall issue of climate change and the need for sustainable energy by
working as an engineer on a delimited project
• Perform project management in order to reach goals and ensure academic develop-
ment
• Expand knowledge base relevant for the project by consulting literature, supervisors
and peers
• Communicate obtained results at weekly meetings and implement feedback to adjust
the ongoing work
Generic Learning Objectives
A graduate of the MSc Eng programme from DTU:
• can identify and reﬂect on technical scientiﬁc issues and understand the interaction
between the various components that make up an issue
• can, on the basis of a clear academic proﬁle, apply elements of current research at
international level to develop ideas and solve problems
• masters technical scientiﬁc methodologies, theories and tools, and has the capacity
to take a holistic view of and delimit a complex, open issue, see it in a broader
academic and societal perspective and, on this basis, propose a variety of possible
actions
• can, via analysis and modelling, develop relevant models, systems and processes for
solving technological problems
• can communicate and mediate research-based knowledge both orally and in writing
• is familiar with and can seek out leading international research within his/her spe-
cialist area.
74
==PAGE:82==
• can work independently and reﬂect on own learning, academic development and
specialization
• masters technical problem-solving at a high level through project work, and has the
capacity to work with and manage all phases of a project – including preparation
of timetables, design, solution and documentation
Project Plan
Table C.1: Project Plan
Timeline
Planned Activities
September 2017
Introduction and lab safety course
Learning to use the RDE/electrochemical setup
Studying relevant literature on electrochemistry, catalysis etc.
Synthesis of Pd single atom ink and electrochemical sample testing
October 2017
Further testing of Pd single atom samples
Learning to use the EC-MS setup
Testing of Ni single atom samples
Writing MATLAB programs for data processing
November 2017
Further testing of Ni single atom samples
Study literature
December 2017
Possibly redoing some experiments
Start writing thesis
January 2018
Writing thesis
28/1/2018
Hand in thesis
75
