==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
SYNTHESIS OF METHYL METHACRYLATE 
FROM METHYL PROPIONATE 
master thesis 
Clemens Erik Panning, s123792 
January 27, 2018 
 
Superisor: 
Professor Anders Riisager 
==PAGE:2==
1 
 
Preface 
All experiments described in this thesis were conducted under the supervision of Professor 
Anders Riisager at the center for Catalysis and Sustainable Chemistry at DTU in the period 
from September 2017 to January 2018 for the purpose of a master thesis that accounts for 30 
ECTS points. 
The aim of this thesis was to synthesize methyl methacrylate by conducting an aldol 
condensation of formaldehyde on methyl propionate on the basic sites of a zirconia catalyst. 
The base experiment containing only reactants, the catalyst and the solvent were alternated 
in various ways in order to promote the reaction. 
Acknowledgements 
I would like to express my gratitude to my fellow students, both candidate and Ph.d. for the 
pleasant working environment and assistance with practical issues. 
I would like to thank Kristoffer Hauberg Rasmussen, David Benjamin Christensen and Amalie 
Elise Modvig for their help when I had difficulties in the laboratory, and to Søren Kramer and 
Irene Tosi for helping me when familiarizing myself with the available equipment. 
Lastly, I would like to thank CSC and its members for the opportunity to use the available 
facilities and learn. 
I truly appreciate it. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
2 
 
Abstract 
This thesis attempts the synthesis of methyl methacrylate by ways of a carbon-carbon coupling 
between formaldehyde and methyl propionate.  
The main catalyst used for these experiments was monoclinic zirconia, whose basic sites on 
the surface of the crystal structure would temporarily bind to the reactants and initiate an aldol 
condensation. Additionally, a Sn-beta catalyst was used in order to promote the reaction. 
A fundamental experiment with only the reactants, catalysts and the solvent was used as a 
basis, and several alterations of the experiments were conducted. Alterations included: 
addition of sodium methoxide, calcium oxide or barium hydroxide to act as a base, alterations 
of temperature in order to explore reactant stability, use of acetaldehyde instead of 
formaldehyde and use of Sn-beta instead of the zirconia catalyst. 
None of the experiments attempted produced any methyl methacrylate, but the attempts have 
given insight into factors that might be preventing the aldol condensation. The most prominent 
factors were formaldehyde decomposition and inactivity of methyl propionate, leaving no 
temperature range that allowed the reaction between the two substances. 
Additionally, the stability of the product, methyl methacrylate, was examined in order to further 
investigate the viability of converting methyl propionate in solution. While methyl methacrylate 
remained stable in the reaction liquid when a metal surface known to promote hydrogenation 
was present, some of the methyl methacrylate was reduced, and when an additional base is 
added, all of the methyl methacrylate would be reduced.  
 
 
==PAGE:4==
3 
 
1 Contents 
2 
Introduction .................................................................................................................... 5 
2.1 
Current technologies ............................................................................................... 5 
2.2 
The objective .......................................................................................................... 6 
3 
Theoretic background .................................................................................................... 7 
3.1 
Notable chemicals................................................................................................... 7 
3.2 
Dehydroxylation/hydrogenolysis .............................................................................. 9 
3.3 
Aldol condensation................................................................................................ 10 
3.4 
Catalysis ............................................................................................................... 12 
3.5 
Heterogeneous catalysis, metal catalysts and nickel-iron particles ....................... 13 
3.6 
Support materials and zirconia .............................................................................. 14 
3.7 
Characterization methods ..................................................................................... 16 
4 
Experimental ................................................................................................................ 26 
4.1 
Catalyst preparation .............................................................................................. 26 
4.2 
Equipment ............................................................................................................ 32 
4.3 
Reaction procedure ............................................................................................... 35 
4.4 
Summary of experiments ...................................................................................... 40 
5 
Results and discussion ................................................................................................ 41 
5.2 
Experiment 3 – sodium methoxide ........................................................................ 42 
5.3 
Reducing reaction temperatures ........................................................................... 55 
5.4 
Use of Acetaldehyde ............................................................................................. 59 
5.5 
MeP activity .......................................................................................................... 64 
5.6 
MMA stability ........................................................................................................ 68 
5.7 
Additional considerations and future perspectives................................................. 70 
6 
Conclusion ................................................................................................................... 71 
7 
Appendix ...................................................................................................................... 72 
7.1 
Appendix A – additional SEM images ................................................................... 72 
7.2 
Appendix B – additional XRPD images ................................................................. 74 
7.3 
Appendix C – proposed reaction mechanisms for c-c coupling on Sn-beta ........... 76 
==PAGE:5==
4 
 
7.4 
Appendix D – Raw weighing data and MeP conversion ........................................ 77 
8 
References .................................................................................................................. 79 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
5 
 
2 Introduction 
Due to recent developments in global climate and the finite amount of raw material, there has 
been a market pull for renewable technologies that can replace the products that are produced 
using fossil fuels as a starting substance1. The term “renewable” (aka. sustainable) includes 
any technology where resources can be replenished as fast as they are consumed, and which 
is replenished by natural ecological cycles. Renewable resources include wind, solar and 
geothermal energy, as well as biological material like sugars and plant oils. Renewable 
technologies are not restricted to the production of energy; materials originating from a 
renewable source can replace many materials commonly produced from fossil materials. One 
plastic that could potentially be produced through a sustainable process is poly methyl 
methacrylate, more commonly known as Plexiglas. It is produced using a process called the 
alpha process, which uses ethylene, methanol and CO as its starting material2, but recent 
developments have opened up for the possibility of using cellulose as the starting reagent. 
2.1 Current technologies 
2.1.1 Converting cellulose to methyl lactate 
The viability of MMA production from cellulose originates from the ability to catalytically convert 
cellulose to methyl lactate3,4. One of the possible reaction ways involves the use of Gd-doped 
Zn particles on H-nanozeolite Y. This catalyst, when mixed with the cellulose in supercritical 
methanol will split the chains and convert the material into one of three products, one of which 
is methyl lactate. With the catalyst, MeL yields of roughly 50% have been achieved. 
 
 
Figure 1: Reaction pathway from cellulose to methyl lactate3 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
6 
 
2.1.2 Converting methyl lactate to methyl propionate 
The source of methyl lactate can now be used for the production of methyl propionate. The 
method that results in the highest yield relies on a zirconia catalyst that has been impregnated 
with Ni-Fe nanoparticles. Using this catalyst with MeL yields around 70% MeP5. For the 
project, this reaction will be referred to as the first step. 
2.1.3 Converting methyl propionate to methyl methacrylate 
The last step in the procedure is the conversion of MeP to MMA. Currently, this is done by 
leading a gas mixture including MeP and formic acid through a fixed bed reactor. The reaction 
is best catalyzed with a base, so any basic substance could theoretically catalyze this reaction. 
Recent experiments6 have shown that pure zirconia is also able to function as the catalyst, 
starting at a 15% conversion at 290ºC, and reaching its maximum yield of 50% MMA at 380ºC. 
In this project, this reaction will be referred to as the second step. 
2.2 The objective 
So far, there is no novelty in the mentioned steps of turning methyl lactate into methyl 
methacrylate. And even though a path from cellulose to methyl methacrylate already exists, a 
significant breakthrough for improving the technology would be to combine the two last steps 
into a single procedure. Theoretically, the iron-nickel catalyst on the zirconia should be able 
to catalyze the first step due to the metal embedded in the ceramic particles as well as the 
second step, catalyzed by the basicity of the zirconia. 
For the initial appraisal, finding optimal reaction conditions seemed to be the biggest obstacle, 
as the first step is usually conducted in a batch reactor at around 220ºC, while the second step 
has to reach a temperature of 290ºC before a significant conversion can be observed. Ideally 
there will be a window of reaction conditions, which allows both step 1 and step 2 to take place 
simultaneously. Alternatively, small separations of the reaction steps are an acceptable 
possibility. For example, the hydrogen from step 1 may react with the formaldehyde to form 
waste products, so an intermediate step where the hydrogen is vented and the addition of 
formaldehyde is added might be necessary. 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
7 
 
3 Theoretic background 
3.1 Notable chemicals 
Methyl lactate (MeL) – It is the methyl ester derived from lactic acid, which has an alcohol 
group in its alpha position. The alpha position is a stereocenter, and for this experiment, L-
lactate is used, though in theory it should not have an impact on the project which stereoisomer 
is used. An important property of this molecule is the elevated acidity of the alpha-carbon of 
the ester group: it is prone to deprotonate, leaving it with a very reactive carbon anion, which 
enables it to be dehydrated. 
Methyl propionate (MeP) – It is a derivative of the propionic acid with a methoxy group instead 
of the acids hydroxyl group. Much like MeL, its alpha-carbon is also acidic, which makes it a 
possible candidate for carbon-carbon coupling reactions. 
Methyl methacrylate (MMA) – The final desired product of the process, methyl methacrylate 
(MMA) is the basic building block of poly-MMA (or PMMA), also known as Plexiglas. Its 
structure is almost identical to MeP, save for a double bond at the alpha-carbon. This double 
bond is the center of the polymerization process. MMA before and after the polymerization 
can be seen in Figure 3. 
While the physical durability of PMMA is lower compared to other plastic materials, it has an 
excellent chemical resistance, and it is transparent for most of the light in the visible spectrum, 
and is thus often used as a glass substitute. 
 
 
 
  
 
Figure 2: from left to right: Methyl lactate, methyl propionate, methyl methacrylate 
 
==PAGE:9==
8 
 
 
Figure 3 MMA before (left) and after (right) polymerization 
 
Formaldehyde7 (FA) – It is the simplest possible aldehyde; it is a single carbon atom with two 
hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom. It is a two-dimensional molecule, which allows it to 
react as a nucleophile with its oxygen atom or as an electrophile with its carbon atom. 
From a practical point of view, it is perhaps the most difficult molecule to work with: its 
monomeric form is unstable at room temperature. It is usually either dissolved in a water-
methanol mixture (stabilized FA), or in the form of its polymer, known as paraformaldehyde. 
Due to water being problematic in most of the used procedures, paraformaldehyde is the form 
of formaldehyde used in all experiments. However, this is problematic, as paraformaldehyde 
is very stable in its polymerized form, and it does not dissolve easily in pure methanol. The 
use of FA is justified under the assumption that its polymeric form fractures into its monomeric 
form when heated. Formaldehyde has been found to be “relatively stable at 80-100ºC, but 
slowly polymerizes at lower temperatures”, and since all reactions are run at temperatures 
above  100ºC, its availability in its monomeric form should be no issue. FA is also known to 
decompose to CO and H2, although this decomposition has been described as “very slow 
below 300ºC”, so it is assumed to be stable for the duration of all experiments, though some 
of the catalysts used may promote the decomposition. A notable issue with previous 
conductions of the second step is that they take place at temperatures above 300ºC, which in 
theory is an environment where FA is unstable, but the reaction most likely still works, as the 
retention time in the reactor is so low that FA does not have time to decompose before it reacts 
with MeP. Finally, FA in solution is known to be unstable, slowly producing acetic acid at an 
increasing rate with increasing temperatures, which is why acetic acid may be expected to 
make an appearance in some, if not all experiments involving FA.  
Sodium methoxide (NaOMe) – It is a derivative of methanol, where the hydroxy group has 
been replaced with -ONa. It is a strong base, which dissolves in a liquid in the form of CH3O- 
ions. Not only will it not alter the original reactant (for even if methoxy ions attack the ester 
groups, they would merely replace the already present methoxy group), but they will also react 
with water to form methanol and OH- ions, thus chemically drying the solution. 
==PAGE:10==
9 
 
3.2 Dehydroxylation/hydrogenolysis 
The first step of the MMA production process is the hydrogenation of MeL. Hydrogenolysis is 
a very broad term, as it refers to any reaction, where a bond between a carbon atom and 
another atom (a second carbon atom, oxygen, etc.) is cleaved using hydrogen, often used in 
industrial processes such as the removal of sulfur from crude oil or propylene glycol8,9. For 
this experiment, it is the alcohol group of MeL that is removed using gaseous hydrogen. It is 
a slightly sensitive reaction, as the ester group next to the alcohol may be subjected to 
hydrogenolysis as well if the catalyst is too aggressive. 
Additionally, it is important to consider if the hydrogenolysis is direct or indirect. The indirect 
hydrogenolysis is a two-step process, the first step being the dehydration MeL, where the 
alcohol group and the neighboring carbon atom form a double bond and a water molecule. 
 
Figure 4: dehydration of an alcohol group 
This alkene group then interacts with the metal surface of the catalyst and is reduced through 
a hydrogenation process. 
 
 
Figure 5: hydrogenation of the double bond 
 
Alternatively, it is possible that the alcohol group is removed directly, as the metal interacts 
directly with the C-O bond. 
 
 
Figure 6: direct reduction of an alcohol group on a metal surface 
==PAGE:11==
10 
 
3.3 Aldol condensation 
The second step is an aldol condensation, where formaldehyde and MeP react with each other 
to form MMA. The reaction requires a catalyst with basic and acidic sites in order to activate 
both reactants for the reaction. MeP is activated on the basic site, while the carbon atom that 
will be subjected to the addition splits off one of its hydrogen atoms: 
 
Figure 7: carbon anion on MeP 
It is this carbon-anion that reacts with a formaldehyde atom in order to proceed with the aldol 
condensation. 
 
Figure 8: carbon coupling between MeP and FA 
Later in the process, sodium methoxide (MeONa) is added in order to promote the reaction. 
However, this introduces a rivaling reaction to the second step, which is the condensation of 
two MeP molecules. In the presence of MeONa, the following reaction might take place: 
 
 
Figure 9: deprotonation of MeP in the presence of NaOMe 
 
With the deprotonized MeP present in the reaction mixture, the following condensation might 
take place: 
==PAGE:12==
11 
 
 
Figure 10: reaction between deprotonized and regular MeP 
The reaction type is known as a claisen condensation, and involves two ester molecules and 
a sodium alkoxide in order to produce a beta-keto-ester. In this case, the product is methyl 2-
methyl-3-oxopentanoate, which for the purpose of this project would be a useless byproduct, 
and the reaction irreversible, so reaction conditions should aim to produce as little of the 
wasteproduct as possible. It is noteworthy that the methoxide is not consumed in the 
condensation reaction so that even small amounts might function as a catalyst and initiate this 
reaction10. 
 
 
==PAGE:13==
12 
 
3.4 Catalysis 
When dealing with chemical reactions, the approach of simply mixing reactants and having 
the majority react to the desired product is often not possible. The effects that may block a 
reaction vary, such as slow reaction speeds, dominating side-reactions leading to different 
products and conditions that cause desired products to react further to waste products. A 
common tool to solve these issues is a catalyst, whose unifying property is that while it 
chemically binds to molecules participating in the reaction, it is not consumed as the reactant 
is converted, and can thus be separated from the final product and reused11.  
The effect of a catalyst is defined by its ability to temporarily bind to reactants, adding 
additional intermediates to the reaction process. And while the overall change in entropy 
remains the same for the reaction, the activation energy of the reaction aka. the energy barrier 
that participating molecules have to overcome is lowered by offering an alternative reaction 
pathway, as shown in Figure 11. 
 
 
Figure 11: Lowering reaction energy barrier by use of catalyst12 
 
Catalysts exist in all forms and complexities, ranging in complexity from the catalytic properties 
of an acidic solution able to catalyze a wide variety of reactions to enormous proteins built to 
assist in a single reaction. But generally speaking, catalysts appear in three different forms; 
as a biocatalyst, which is a microorganism engineered to conduct a specific reaction process, 
as a homogeneous catalyst, such as the mentioned proteins and acids, as well as transition 
metals in solution, and it can be a heterogeneous catalyst, where the chemicals relevant for 
the reaction and the catalyst are in different phases. 
==PAGE:14==
13 
 
3.5 Heterogeneous catalysis, metal catalysts and nickel-iron particles 
Heterogeneous catalysis is the technology relevant for this project. When dealing with 
heterogeneous catalysts, it usually involves a solid catalyst, which assists with a reaction that 
is taking place in the gas or liquid phase surrounding the particles. A reaction that is taking 
place in the presence of a heterogeneous catalyst can be generalized in three steps: First, all 
relevant reactants are adsorbed on the material. With all the chemicals adhering to the 
surface, the second step takes place: The actual reaction of the chemicals. Here, all desired 
(or undesired) products are created. The last step is the desorption of all products, which 
makes the active sites of the catalyst available for a new set of reactants13. 
Heterogeneous catalysts are available in many forms and functions, the material used in this 
experiment is the surface of a metal. Metals can provide a uniform surface, which a molecule 
may adsorb to. An example of such a process is the hydrogenation of a double bond using 
hydrogen gas, shown in Figure 12, which may be relevant for the hydrogenolysis. 
 
 
Figure 12: classic example of heterogeneous catalysis. First, reactants adsorb to the surface (1,2), chemical bonds 
are broken (3), the new product ethane forms on the surface (4) and finally desorbs (5)14 
As an initial step, both the hydrogen and the double bond is adsorbed to the metal surface. 
The adsorption is a relatively weak bond, which results in some degree of mobility of the 
substances adsorbed to the metal surface. Occasionally, a hydrogen and carbon atom on the 
surface of the metal will be in a position favorable for a reaction, and the carbon and hydrogen 
atom will form a bond. When the same process happens to the second carbon atom, the 
hydrogenation of the double bond is complete, and the molecule can desorb from the surface. 
When dealing with heterogeneous metal catalysts there is the issue of how to optimize the 
interaction. A very straightforward approach is to implement the metal in the form of a metal 
plate or wire, which is a useful method in processes where a specific (and very low) exposure 
time is necessary. However, using the metal in the form of nanoparticles is preferential in this 
case. The most obvious advantage of using nanoparticles is that decreasing the average 
diameter of a collection of particles will increase the surface-to-volume ratio.  
 
==PAGE:15==
14 
 
3.6 Support materials and zirconia   
When dealing with metallic nanoparticles, using a support is usually unavoidable, for even 
though a catalyst can theoretically last an indefinite amount of time, they still have a limited 
lifespan depending on their surroundings and operating conditions. Merely adding the 
nanoparticles to the solution would result in the metal particles agglomerating (or even 
sintering when operating at high temperatures), thus decreasing their effective surface area 
and their overall activity. Additionally, while mixing the substances may be easy, the 
separation of nanoparticles and a liquid phase can be difficult. To counteract these problems, 
a support material can be used.  
Ceramic materials are a common choice as catalytic support materials, as they are chemically 
and thermally stable and easy to handle solids. Additionally, the ceramic material itself can 
have chemical properties that are beneficial to the reaction. This is the case with the zirconia 
ceramic, which is slightly basic. Its basicity originates from exposed zirconia atoms, which can 
accept an electron pair and thus act as a lewis base15. 
At temperatures below 1100ºC, the atoms arrange themselves in a monoclinic crystal, while 
the energetically favored structure at temperatures from 1100 to 2400ºC is tetragonal. And 
although the optimal structure shifts from tetragonal to monoclinic when the material is cooled, 
the ceramic can stay in its tetragonal form in a metastable state16. When dealing with a 
polycrystalline material, additional steps need to be taken in order to keep the material in its 
tetragonal phase, since a single crystal shifting to its monoclinic form will give its neighboring 
crystals the energy to shift, causing a phase-transition wave to ripple through the material, 
eventually causing it to crack and crumble. But while it is necessary to take additional steps to 
stabilize the polycrystalline material (for example by adding yttria), when the material is in 
powdered form, a single crystal shifting to its monoclinic phase will not affect its neighboring 
particles, as the stress produced by the phase transition is not transferred. This allows the 
tetragonal zirconia powder to stay stable for a long time.  
It is important to consider that the phase of zirconia at any given reaction condition might have 
an impact on the reaction. Khokarale used an “activated zirconia” catalyst, which was a 
nanopowder of tetragonal zirconia5. In his work, it was discovered that the catalyst activity 
increased when the zirconia was heated to 500ºC prior to the reaction. A likely outcome of the 
activation was the conversion of particles from tetragonal to monoclinic, so that a larger 
fraction of zirconia was in its monoclinic form compared to the zirconia particles that had not 
been activated. This is because even though the tetragonal powder is stable at room 
temperature, heating the particles provides them with kinetic energy that accelerates the rate 
with which the particles transition from one phase to another.  
==PAGE:16==
15 
 
Fortunately, the more active monoclinic phase of zirconia is also the stable phase at the 
temperature condition of all experiments conducted. So as opposed to acquiring tetragonal 
zirconia powder and activating it with a heat treatment procedure, it was sufficient (as well as 
simpler and faster) to use monoclinic zirconia powder, which is available for purchase. 
3.6.1 Acidity in zirconia 
An acid or a base can catalyze many reactions (including the reaction that produces MMA), 
but while a Brønsted acid or base can perform sufficiently, it might be beneficial to use a solid 
Lewis acid-base material. Zirconia falls into this category, as it is a solid material that can 
accept and donate an electron pair. A noteworthy property of zirconia is that it features more 
basic sites than acidic (84μmol/g basic sites to 22μmol/g acidic sites). Acidic sites of zirconia 
can be either a vacant O2- site or an –OH group. When exposed to CO2, the molecule may 
bind in ways such as shown in Figure 13.17,18 
 
Figure 13: possible ways CO2 can bind to the basic sites of zirconia 
 
 
==PAGE:17==
16 
 
3.7 Characterization methods 
After an experimental run, the resulting substance needs to be identified. This includes 
determining the structural properties of the support material and catalyst, as well as the 
chemical composition of substances in solution after an experimental run. 
3.7.1 XRD 
The first of the three characterization methods used for the catalyst is x-ray diffraction (XRD), 
which is a method used to determine the structure of a solid and crystalline material. It is 
important that the structure is crystalline, as XRD takes advantage of the periodicity of atoms 
arranged in lattices19. The concept of this analytical method is, that when an atom or a 
molecule is hit by an X-ray, some of the photons are refracted. When dealing with a crystal 
lattice with a large number of atoms with regular intervals, the material will refract the x-ray 
beam at a specific angle based on the wavelength of the beam and the distance between 
atoms on the lattice (Figure 14). 
 
 
Figure 14: principles of XRD20 
It is then possible to change the angle between the ray and the surface of a material in order 
to determine all possible refraction angles, which provides the information necessary to 
determine the lattice distance and packing type of the crystal. Since every crystal has its own 
unique combination of crystal structure and lattice distance, the results of an XRD test can be 
used as a fingerprint to identify the material that has been tested. 
An intuitive assumption would be, that this characterization method requires a single crystal. 
That is not the case. However, a method that allows characterization of a powder (referred to 
as powder-XRD) has been developed. The characterization concept remains the same, but 
when dealing with a fine powder, powder-XRD can measure all refraction angles at the same 
time, which gives an angle-intensity spectrum that can be used to determine the packing type, 
lattice constants and chemical composition. 
==PAGE:18==
17 
 
3.7.2 Physisorption and BET 
Having confirmed the structure of the material, the surface properties of the material can be 
characterized. These properties include the amount of surface area per gram of material and 
the pore volume per gram of material. All of these can be determined by examining the amount 
and binding strength of gases that adsorb on the surface of the material. 
The surface area of the sample is determined through nitrogen physisorption. It is based on 
the langmuir adsorption model21, which states that the amount of gas adsorbed on the surface 
(in this case nitrogen) is proportional to the partial pressure of the gas in the atmosphere 
surrounding the surface. Langmuirs adsorption theory initially only applies to the first 
monolayer of gas adsorbed on the surface, but this theory has been extended to what is now 
known as the Brunauer-Emmett-Teller theory (BET). BET theory involves the adsorption of a 
second bi-layer, followed by several additional layers (multilayers) of gas-molecules on the 
surface, as seen in Figure 1522. 
 
Figure 15: Adsorption of molecules on a solid surface, distributed randomly according to Brunauers model22. 
Analyzing the amount of gas added to the material and comparing it to the gas pressure the 
material is currently experiencing, the surface area as well as the pore volume of the material 
can be deduced. The shape of the adsorption curve can also help identify the tested substance 
as one of several characteristic porous materials, as seen in Figure 16. 
==PAGE:19==
18 
 
 
Figure 16: Characteristic adsorption-desorption isotherms23 
Notable isotherms in Figure 16 are isotherm I, which describes a microporous structure, 
isotherm III, which describes a macroporous marerial with a weak adsorbate (such as 
nitrogen), and IV and V show an adsorption-desorption loop from capillaries in the material.23 
In practice, the material to be tested is placed in a vacuum chamber and cooled to 77K. When 
the temperature and a high vacuum has been reached, controlled amounts of nitrogen are 
added to the chamber, and the resulting change in pressure change is recorded. With this 
data, the surface area and pore volume can be deduced, and the shape of the curve can even 
give some insight on what kind of pores are present in the material. 
 
 
==PAGE:20==
19 
 
3.7.3  TEM and SEM 
It may be beneficial to examine the structure of the catalyst in order to closely examine the 
particles and possibly even spot some of the metal deposits. One method of obtaining such 
data is the use of electron microscopy24. The concept of electron microscopy is much like 
using an optical microscope, but instead of using photons to reflect off the surface or light 
through the sample, an electron microscope uses electrons. The main issue with optical 
microscopy is the fact that photons have a high position uncertainty when working on a 
molecular scale. Even high-energy photons have a diffraction limit, which limits their resolution 
due to their wavelength. Electrons, being many times more massive than a photon, do not 
have that problem, which allows an electron beam to produce an image that has a resolution 
that can produce image resolutions as low as 50pm25.  
The electron beam starts at an electron emitter. This can be as simple as a wire under a 
current, although modern electron microscopes use a field emission gun, which is a tungsten 
tip with a zirconia coat. The advantage of using this device is the lower operation temperature 
that is required for the device to emit electrons, which significantly lowers the energy range of 
emitted electrons. The electron beam will be disturbed by any gas that it is passing through; it 
is therefore crucial that the whole microscope process takes place in a vacuum. On the way 
from the emitter to the sample, the electron ray needs to be focused. This is done using 
multiple steps, starting with a Wehnelt cap. This device is a cup with a tiny hole at the bottom. 
Any electron hitting the cup is absorbed, while electrons with the right trajectory will pass 
through the hole and continue through the focusing process. Next are a series of 
electromagnetic lenses that narrows the electron beam used to measure the sample. It is here 
that the electron energy variance comes into play. Being a charged particle, an electron is 
affected by a magnetic field, but the magnitude of the effect is dictated by the energy of the 
electron. Thus, different energy electrons will be affected differently by the magnetic field. An 
electron beam with a narrow energy band will thus produce a clearer picture than a wide 
energy band beam will. The electron beam will now enter the chamber with the sample. Here 
there are multiple options of how to scan the sample based on what is happening to the 
electron. There is the method called scanning electron microscopy (SEM), where an electron 
hitting the surface is reflected as secondary electrons, which will produce a topographical 
image. Alternatively it is possible to use the electrons passing through the sample for imaging 
purposes. This will produce a transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image, where the 
electrons pass through the samples, indicating the density of the material. 
A last spectroscopic method available with electron microscopy that might be relevant for this 
catalyst is EDX and AE spectroscopy, which can give some insight to the atomic composition 
==PAGE:21==
20 
 
of the sample26. The working principles of EDX are the x-rays emitted by excitations of 
elements in the sample, where every element has a specific energy signature that allows for 
an analysis of the elemental composition in the sample.  
3.7.4  Gas chromatography 
After an experimental run, it is necessary to quantitatively determining the amount of different 
chemical components in solution. Separating them manually through a distillation process 
would be difficult, time consuming and inaccurate. Instead, gas chromatography (GC) offers 
a quick and easy way to determine the concentration of different substances in a solution27. 
Equipment that allows a GC device to separate different substances is a long and thin tube, 
usually referred to as a column, which contains a special coating. In the case of gas 
chromatography, this coating is a thin film of an inert liquid, which functions as the stationary 
phase of the column. A continuous stream of inert gas, functioning as the mobile phase is led 
through the column. If this gas contains different substances the contents of the gas will be in 
equilibrium between being dissolved in the gas and carried along with the stream, or adhering 
to the liquid coat of the column and staying immobile (hence the name mobile and stationary 
phase). The key property of the stationary phase is that some substances adsorb stronger 
than others, and thus pass through the column at a slower speed. This allows an effective 
separation of the substances injected into the column. 
The separation process starts with the injection of the sample. Though there are several 
injection methods, GC requires the sample to be in its gaseous form before it can be injected 
into the column. The injected liquid is therefore heated, which forces a small amount of each 
substance into the gas phase. At this stage, the temperature is what dictates which molecule 
types enter the column. Some molecules will have a vapor pressure that is too low, which 
leads to very little of it entering the gas phase, resulting in a weak signal. Alternatively, if the 
temperature is too high, then too much of a substance will enter the mobile phase, which may 
result in overlapping peaks and inaccurate readings due to a high signal count. 
Data from the gas chromatograph is retrieved in the form of a time-intensity curve. The 
intensity in this case is the signal strength measured in the detector at a given time after the 
injection. Figure 17 shows a summary of a GC setup from the carrier gas inlet to the injector, 
where the carrier gas is exposed to the sample, through the GC column to the detector. 
==PAGE:22==
21 
 
 
Figure 17: Gas chromatography setup28 
The signal strength is proportional to the amount of substance exiting the column, so the 
integral over a signal peak corresponds to the total amount of a given substance in the sample. 
The units for this peak are arbitrary, as different substances will evaporate at different amounts 
and may produce different signal strengths (depending on the type of detector used). It is 
therefore necessary to create a standard curve. The standard curve is created using several 
solutions (usually 4 to 5 are sufficient) of a substance with different concentrations. It is then 
possible to plot the signal strength of the known concentration to the signal integral in order to 
receive a concentration-integral curve that can be used to determine unknown concentrations 
of that specific substance in a sample. However, during experimental runs, the amount of 
solvents may vary, resulting in different concentrations. Using only the substance integral may 
therefore result in incorrect predictions of the total amount of substance in solution. It is 
therefore common practice to use an internal standard in order to ensure a correct reading. 
The internal standard is an inert substance that is used as a reference for GC measurements. 
For these experiments, decane was used, as it is highly hydrophobic, and thus there will be a 
large separation of the decane peak and other peaks in order to ensure minimal signal 
interference. For the standard curve and the experimental measurements, instead of using 
the absolute signal, the ratio between a given substance and the internal standard is used. 
This will result in a measurement returning the amount of a given substance per amount of 
internal standard. Since the total amount of internal standard is always known, it can be used 
to determine the total amount of all other substances in the solution. 
==PAGE:23==
22 
 
3.7.5  GC-MS 
GC can only determine amounts of substance in solution if it is known. However, it is 
sometimes necessary to qualitatively determine an unknown substance in the solution. This 
is where mass spectrometry (MS) becomes useful.  
The working principle of MS revolves around the ionization and shattering of molecules. In the 
first stage of MS, the molecule is shot into an ionization chamber, where the molecule is 
forcefully charged. The MS apparatus in this project uses an electron beam. The results of 
this treatment is either an ionized molecule or ionized fractions of the molecule exiting the 
ionization chamber. Not only the type of fragments, but also the amounts of a specific fragment 
that is created are unique for every molecule, which allows the structure of the tested molecule 
to be deduced from the fragments. Next, the molecules will enter a chamber with a strong 
magnetic field. The force of the magnetic field will change the trajectory of all ionized 
fragments. This is where the key property of MS is exploited: the force acting on a particle with 
a single charge is constant, but the mass of the particle determines the acceleration of the 
fragment. In short: molecule fragments are sorted after size, and the position of the impact on 
the detector allows the calculation of the mass-to-charge ratio. The output of a gas 
chromatograph will be a bar graph of the frequency of particles with different mass-charge 
ratios (it is important that m/q is used, as fragments can carry multiple charges). The resulting 
spectrum can then be entered into a database in order to predict the molecule that most likely 
resulted in the measured spectrum10. 
It is possible to work with a mixture containing two molecules if one of them is known, but two 
unknown molecules is extremely difficult if not impossible to identify. It is therefore crucial that 
only one type of molecule enters the MS process at a time. This is where GC and MS 
technologies complement each other. GC can separate the different substances, and its 
measurement methods are non-destructive. The exhaust gas can then be used for a MS 
analysis, as only a single substance will exit the column at a time (if two or more substances 
exit at the same time, then neither GC nor MS will be accurate, and it may be necessary to 
choose another column), which will result in a molecule suggestion for the most likely molecule 
for each peak in the GC spectrum, allowing easy identification of all unknown substances 
dissolved in a solution. The only thing to consider is that the carrier gas of GC will also enter 
the MS process along with the substance to be tested, and will produce a peak that needs to 
be ignored (in the case of N2 it is the peak at 28 q/m that needs to be disregarded). 
==PAGE:24==
23 
 
3.7.6  NMR 
An analytical method that was briefly used was nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), which 
can give some insight to the contents in a solution, much like GC-MS. The practical difference 
between GC-MS and NMR is that the former can separate substances but works best with 
volatile gases while the latter can work with any substances as long as it’s in solution, though 
the resulting data will be a spectrum containing signals from all substances, which can make 
it difficult to distinguish them. In order to tell the substances apart, it is possible to produce 
standard solutions, consisting of only one substance in the NMR solvent. The peaks found in 
the sample can then be compared to peaks from the standard in order to determine the 
presence of a specific substance. 
NMR functions by exposing a spin-active atom (with odd numbers of neutrons and/or protons) 
to electromagnetic radiation, where the active nucleus resonates with the radiation at a given 
frequency depending on the atoms surrounding. This can help identify a substance, as the 
chemical shift of a nucleus is constant if the same solvent is used, and it can help determine 
the ratio of nuclei in that molecule, as the integral over a signal is proportional to the number 
of atoms producing that signal11. 
Consider Figure 18. It depicts an NMR spectrum of ethanol. The leftmost peak originates from 
the alcohol group, which has the highest chemical shift, and it is a single peak, as it is not 
coupled with any other hydrogen atom. The center group of peaks are due to the CH2-group, 
which is a quartet as the hydrogen atoms are coupled with the neighboring CH3-group. Finally, 
the rightmost peak is the signal of the CH3 group, a triplet due to the neighboring two hydrogen 
atoms. When integrated, the area ratio of the three groups, from left to right are 1:2:3, reflecting 
the number of hydrogen atoms involved in the production of the signal. 
==PAGE:25==
24 
 
 
Figure 18: NMR spectrum of ethanol.29 
 
 
==PAGE:26==
25 
 
3.7.7  IR 
Another method to determine the structure of a substance is an infrared method called 
attenuated total reflectance (ATR). Much like NMR, it can be a useful tool for confirming 
several types of bonds between carbon, oxygen and hydrogen atoms. Like NMR, it is possible 
to compare the sample with a standard or to compare signals to a reference table in order to 
determine which types of bonds are present. The key practical difference between ATR and 
NMR is that ATR can work with solids. 
The working principle of ATR revolves around measuring the changes in an infrared beam as 
it is reflected. The beam bounces back and forth in a crystal, and the resulting evanescent 
wave interacts with the sample. At wavelengths where parts of the sample interacts with the 
wave a measurable signal will be produced, resulting in a wavelength-signal strength 
spectrum30. 
 
Figure 19: working principle of ATR30 
Functional groups of organic molecules each have their own absorption frequency. For 
example, a free -OH group has an adsorption frequency between 3700 and 3584 cm^-1, the 
C=O bond of an alpha,beta unsaturated ester has a frequency from 1715 to 1730 cm^-1, and 
a C=C bond of a cyclic alkene has a frequency from 1566 to 1650 cm^-131. This can help 
identify the molecule present in the tested material, and even if the desired product does not 
appear to be present, the spectrum can help determine the substance that has been produced 
instead. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:27==
26 
 
4 Experimental 
The preparation of this catalyst took inspiration from the work of Khokarale5, and was prepared 
one batch of 0.500g at a time. The catalyst was then characterized through the use of XRD 
and TEM, as well as a characterization of its surface and pore properties through a BET and 
TPD analysis. The catalytic performance was tested in a 50ml autoclave for the MeL to MeP 
conversion as well as some attempts of converting MeP to MMA. 
4.1 Catalyst preparation 
The preparation of the catalyst had slight variations compared to that of Khokarale5. An 
incipient wetness impregnation was still the method used to prepare the powder, however, 
instead of mixing the powder with relatively large amounts of liquid and metal salts and letting 
it evaporate, the method used aimed at minimizing the amount of liquid that was mixed with 
the zirconia powder. 
An initial solution of impregnation liquid was prepared by mixing an amount of metal salts that 
would be enough to prepare 100g of the catalyst in a container and adding 10ml of water in 
order to dissolve the salt. The weight of the total amount of precursor was determined by 
measuring the weight difference of the container before and after the addition of the precursor. 
In order to prepare 1.5g of catalyst, it was possible to add 1/200 of the liquid to the correct 
amount of zirconia (1.455g for 3wt% metal) in order to produce the correct catalyst. In order 
to minimize the loss of material when transferring it to and from several containers, the zirconia 
powder and precursor liquid was mixed in a ceramic bowl suitable for the calcination. Using a 
pestle, the material was thoroughly mixed. After 2 minutes of mixing, the powder and liquid is 
transformed into a bright green slime, which was worked with the pestle for a total of 20 
minutes in order to ensure that the mixture was homogeneous. Once the material was 
thoroughly mixed, the last of the catalyst was scraped off of the pestle into the ceramic bowl, 
which was then covered with aluminium foil and placed in an oven in order to calcinate the 
catalyst. The calcination occurred by heating the catalyst at a ramp of 3ºC a minute and 
holding it at 450ºC for 4 hours. The process turned the catalyst powder from bright green to 
brown. 
At that point, the catalyst was not yet suitable for the process, as the metals were still present 
in the form of their oxides (hence the brown color). In order to convert the metal on the catalyst 
to its active form, it was reduced in a tube oven with hydrogen gas. For the process, the tube 
oven was set to ramp the temperature at 3 degrees a minute, until it reached a temperature 
of 300ºC, which was then held for 3 hours before the catalyst was cooled back to room 
temperature. At that point the catalyst was ready for use (which could be observed by its 
==PAGE:28==
27 
 
change in color from brown to black), although it was important to consider its interaction with 
atmospheric air. When exposed to oxygen, the surface of the metal will be oxidized very 
quickly. In order to minimize this degradation of the catalyst, the powder had to quickly be 
transferred to the autoclave, which was then flushed as soon as possible to remove remaining 
oxygen. 
4.1.1 Characterization 
The metal impregnated zirconia was characterized using BET, SEM and the resulting element 
mapping*, as well as XRPD. As mentioned, the pure metal catalyst is very unstable in the 
atmosphere, as the metals are quickly oxidized to their oxides. All characterizations have 
therefore been conducted with the catalyst that has been calcined, but not yet reduced. 
4.1.1.1 BET 
Physisorption/BET measurements have been conducted on the pure, unimpregnated zirconia 
catalyst as well as the zirconia impregnated with Fe/Ni particles in order to compare the impact 
the metal impregnation has on surface area and pore volume. The program “MicroActive 
version 3.00” has been used to process the data provided by a Micromeritics ASAP 2020 
Surface area and porosity analyzer. The isotherm of the pure catalyst can be seen in Figure 
20. 
The pore volume of the pure zirconia has been determined to be 0.066cm3/g, while the 
micropore volume has been found to be 0.00117cm3/g. The surface area of the material is 
29.69m2/g, which includes a micropore area of 3.099m2/g. After the material is impregnated, 
the pore volume has been measured to be 0.062cm3/g, with a micropore volume of 
0.00101cm3/g. The surface area measured is 27.88cm2/g with a micropore area of 2.970cm2/g. 
This kind of reduction in pore volume and surface area can be expected, if the impregnated 
metal has clogged some of the pores of the material. 
Consulting the chart of generalized isotherms (Figure 16, page 18), the isotherm for the 
zirconia best fits isotherm V, where the hysteresis loop is the result of capillaries running 
through the material.  
                                               
* SEM and EDS analysis has kindly been performed by Jacob Maximilian Marinkovic 
==PAGE:29==
28 
 
 
Figure 20: adsorption-desorption isoterm of the pure zirconia. 
 
4.1.1.2 SEM and EDS 
Figure 21 shows one of the SEM images, alongside the Nickel-iron EDS image. The images 
were taken by pouring some of the catalytic powder onto a holder with conductive adhesive 
tape in order to allow the material to conduct any electrons more easily. The image shows 
several zirconia flakes, which have agglomerated into large clusters ranging in size from less 
than 1 μm to over 100 μm. EDS mapping might have revealed clusters of iron and nickel on 
the sample, but this does not appear to be the case. Signals of both iron and nickel were 
distributed evenly across the image, which suggests that the two metals have been spread 
across the ceramic material in a homogeneous fashion. More images see Appendix A.  
==PAGE:30==
29 
 
Figure 22 shows the element signals found when examining the sample. Zirconia and Oxygen 
display the strongest signal, since most of the catalyst is zirconia. When iron and nickel 
contents are examined, the test shows that only small amounts of the two metals are present. 
This is to be expected, as only 3% of the catalysts weight comes from the impregnated nickel 
and iron. Additionally, since the iron/nickel ratio of the catalyst is 2, it is to be expected that 
the iron signal will be stronger.  
Figure 21: SEM image of the zirconia powder (left), alongside the SEM image with EDS overlay (right) 
==PAGE:31==
30 
 
 
4.1.1.3 XRPD 
Two samples were examined using XRPD: the pure, unprocessed and the impregnated 
catalyst. The substance was identified as baddeleyite, a zirconia mineral in its monoclinic form, 
thus confirming the monoclinic structure. The impregnated zirconia yielded an identical 
structure, showing that the impregnation process left the structure unchanged. The metal 
particles make no appearance in the spectrum, which either implies that none of the metal is 
present, which is unlikely as the color of the material has changed from white to the rust brown 
characteristic for iron oxides, or that the particles are so small and rare that the signal has not 
been picked up by the XRPD machine. Figure 23 Shows a comparison between the pure and 
impregnated material. Additional images can be found in Appendix B. 
Figure 22: EDS spectrum of elements found on the sample 
==PAGE:32==
31 
 
 
Figure 23: XRPD pattern of the pure, unimpregnated zirconia (black) and the impregnated catalyst (orange) 
 
 
==PAGE:33==
32 
 
4.2 Equipment 
For the reduction of the catalyst, a tube oven as seen in Figure 24 has been used. In this 
setup, the hydrogen gas enters the tube from the right. It passes over a small glass boat 
containing the powder, where the reduction occurs. After exiting the tube oven, the gas is led 
through a soap solution, which is used as an improvised flow control and prevents atmospheric 
air from diffusing through the tube to the catalyst. 
 
Figure 24: Tube oven used for catalyst reduction 
Experiments that do not require high pressures took place in the autoclave seen in Figure 25. 
It is a setup that uses a magnetic stirring plate, where a magnet inside the autoclave stirs the 
liquid. This autoclave has a pressure safety valve that opens when a pressure of 60 bar is 
reached, thus only making this autoclave suitable for low pressure experiments. The 
temperature inside is controlled with the blue thermocouple that has been attached to the cap. 
When heating is initiated, the thermal plate heats an aluminium cylinder, which in turn heats 
the autoclave. The cylinder is insulated, and the autoclave is wrapped in a cloth in order to 
minimize heat loss and assist the thermocouple in maintaining the correct temperature in the 
autoclave. 
==PAGE:34==
33 
 
 
Figure 25: Low P autoclave 
All other experiments took place in the autoclave seen in Figure 26. This autoclave is used for 
high pressure experiments, where pressures can peak up to 90 bar. Instead of a heating plate, 
it uses a heating mantle, where the heating elements surround the cup of the autoclave. Due 
to the absence of a magnetic stirring plate, mixing the solution is done by a stirring rod entering 
the autoclave from the top. Due to low heat transfer rates, temperatures are maintained by 
two control units. The first unit (sitting on top) controls the heating mantle, while the second 
unit (seen on the bottom) checks the temperature inside the autoclave. The temperature of 
the mantle thus needs to be set and adjusted manually at a temperature higher than what is 
needed in the autoclave. High heat loss through the exposed part of the autoclave required 
additional insulation. Without taking additional steps, the heating unit would not be able to 
bring the reaction temperature to the desired level, as the heating mantles maximum 
temperature would prevent further heating. This problem was solved by wrapping the head of 
the autoclave in a cloth. It significantly decreased the heat that the heating mantle needed to 
provide, while it still reliably heated the reaction mixture to the correct temperature at a single 
heating set point. The rubber pipes supply the pressure reader and the stirring unit with cooling 
liquid in order to protect them from being damaged by the heat. 
==PAGE:35==
34 
 
    
 
Figure 26: high P autoclave during pressurizaton (left) and during the experiment (right) 
For the GC-MS setup, an Agilent technologies 6850 Network GC System alongside an Agilent 
technologies 5975C VL MSD were used. For the quantifying GC analysis, an agilent 
technologies 6890N Network GC system was used. Both GC units used a 5% phenyl methyl 
siloxane column. The MS unit used the electron beam ionization method in order to ionize the 
molecules passing through. 
 
 
==PAGE:36==
35 
 
4.3 Reaction procedure 
All experiments were conducted using the following procedure. First, the catalyst was 
prepared by reducing it in a tube-oven under hydrogen flow with a 3 degree temperature ramp 
and held at 300ºC for 3 hours (the total process, including warm-up and cool-down time lasted 
roughly 6 hours). 
While the catalyst reduction process was nearing its end, the reaction mixture was prepared: 
A 20 ml beaker containing 10ml methanol (measured with a 10ml glass pipette) was placed 
on a scale. All liquid reagents (MeP, decane, acetaldehyde) were now added using a 1ml 
plastic syringe, where the liquid was added dropwise, until the desired mass was reached. 
Once all liquids were mixed, it was poured into the autoclave cup, and a GC-sample was taken 
(~0.1ml). All solid reagents (NaOMe, FA, etc.) were weighed on the scale and added to the 
autoclave. Finally, the catalyst (at that point a black powder) was quickly added to the 
autoclave, which was flushed with nitrogen gas as soon as possible in order to minimize the 
exposure to atmospheric oxygen. Once the autoclave had been flushed, it was pressurized to 
15 bars of nitrogen, heated to the reaction temperature and held there for 12 hours. Once the 
reaction has finished and the autoclave was depressurized, two samples of the resulting liquid 
were analyzed using GC and MS units, as well as a third sample, on which an NMR analysis 
was performed (for both hydrogen and carbon). 
 
 
==PAGE:37==
36 
 
4.3.1 Measurement errors and uncertainties 
For the project, two GC units were available in order to determine concentrations of 
substances in solution. Both types used hydrophobic columns, where hydrophilic substances 
such as the solvent methanol would pass through the column quickly, while hydrophobic 
substances, such as the internal standard decane would remain in the column for a much 
longer period. The main difference between the two columns was the magnitude of the 
retention time. In one GC device, decane would have a retention time of 4 minutes, while in 
the other it was around 10 minutes. As the MS equipment was attached to the long retention 
GC. The two machines will thus be referred to as the GC and GC-MS respectively. 
The first choice of these two instruments was the GC, because it was the machine of choice 
for the predecessor of this project, as well as familiarity with the software when extracting 
quantitative data. However, an issue with separating substances arose during the course of 
the project, as the small, unidentified peak first found in experiment 3 did not appear in the GC 
while it did make an appearance in the GC-MS. As an example, Figure 27 shows a result from 
an experiment, where the unidentified peak is properly separated in the GC-MS, while it cannot 
be seen in the GC. As a result, it was planned to use the GC-MS in order to determine the 
amount of MeP left in the sample as well as identifying the substances in the solution. 
 
Figure 27: GC (top) and GC-MS (bottom). Substances from left to right are a big methanol column, a small,
unidentified peak (not seen in GC), methyl propionate, reduced MMA and decane to the far right. 
==PAGE:38==
37 
 
The GC-MS was not without its own issues as there were significant measurement errors 
when quantifying results. Figure 28 compares standard curves for each GC unit. In order to 
create the standard curves, 5 solutions of 10 ml of 5 different known MeP/decane ratios were 
created. From each 10 ml solution, 2 GC vials were filled, with each GC unit running one of 
the vials. This process should ensure that results were identical. However, while the GC 
produced points on a straight line, there was quite a bit of variance in the GC-MS, which would 
make the GC the machine of choice, if it were not for the peak overlap. 
The uncertainty in the GC-MS could be traced back to its baseline, seen in Figure 29, which 
shows a retention section slightly before the appearance of decane. The auto integration of 
the software detected these two “peaks” (along with many others) and calculated their area. It 
turned out that the area of these two “peaks” compared to the area of decane were roughly 
5,3% for the left and 3,2% for the right. These were attributed to measurement errors, but they 
occurred frequently over the course of the measured retention, most likely including the peaks 
of substances that were present in the sample. This resulted in significant measurement errors 
of the measured peak. 
 
y = 3.2127x + 0.1266
R² = 0.9952
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
MeP/decane concentration ratio
MeP/decane GC signal ratio
GC standard curve
y = 4.5392x - 0.6712
R² = 0.9584
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
MeP/decane concentration ratio
MeP/decane signal ratio
GC-MS standard curve
Figure 28: standard curve comparison of GC (left) and GC-MS (right) 
Figure 29: Section of the baseline of a GC-MS analysis 
==PAGE:39==
38 
 
Fortunately, both machines used the same retention column, which allowed the injection 
method to be copied from the GC-MS to the GC, which resulted in the proper separation of 
the substances. As a result, it remained necessary to use both machines: GC for quantitative 
and GC-MS for qualitative results. 
An additional factor that influenced results was the remnants of substances from previous 
experiments. In earlier experiments, the autoclave was washed with water and dried with high 
pressure air, but a reaction following experiment 2 (where toluene was used as the solvent) 
revealed the continued presence of toluene in the reaction mixture, although none was added 
prior to the reaction. The only way the substance could have gotten into the mixture was thus 
due to the piping of the head of the autoclave retaining some of the liquid of previous 
experiments, most likely the pipes that lead to the pressure sensor or hold the stirrer inside 
the autoclave, as they are dead ends that are difficult to flush. Washing with ethanol and 
leaving the autoclave head to dry overnight did not solve the problem, as the pockets of the 
autoclave very diligently held on to liquids, as can be seen in Figure 30. 
 
Figure 30: GC analysis of an experiment after washing the piping of the autoclave with ethanol and leaving it to dry 
overnight. The notable detection is the peak with a retention time slightly below 4.50, which is remaining ethanol 
from the washing process. 
In order to prevent this, the new washing liquid of choice was methanol, and between 
experiments, the autoclave was heated to 200ºC in order to force any remaining liquids to 
evaporate. 
An important consideration to keep in mind is that a stainless steel autoclave has been used, 
which provides ample surface for chemicals to adsorb to and undergo reactions on. A plan to 
exclude this experimental factor involved the use of a Teflon cup. This cup would separate the 
reaction liquid and the iron autoclave cup, thus preventing any interference of the iron cup. 
However, not only is this an incomplete solution due to the iron stirrer that mixes the catalyst 
and liquid, but the reaction liquid would evaporate, and condense along the cap and outer 
walls. After an experimental trial that attempted the Teflon cup solution, only half the reaction 
liquid remained in contact with the catalyst, while the other half occupied the space beneath 
and around the teflon cup. As this kind of separation of the reaction liquid is unacceptable, as 
==PAGE:40==
39 
 
it interferes with the reactant-to-catalyst ratio by isolating half the reaction liquid from the 
catalyst, all reactions had to be conducted without the cup. One critical situation that would 
reveal the involvement of the metal surface was the mixture of hydrogen and a carbon-carbon 
double bond (discussed in section 5.6). In the relevant experiments, a double bond was 
hydrogenated using an iron/nickel catalyst, though the reaction might also be catalyzed by the 
iron walls of the autoclave. Fortunately, when none of the intended catalyst was present, the 
alkene remained intact, which showed that, at least concerning alkene hydrogenation, the 
autoclave was chemically inert.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:41==
40 
 
4.4 Summary of experiments 
The following tables are summaries of experiments performed over the course of the project. 
Details about the experiments can be found in the following sections. Unless otherwise 
specified, all experiments were conducted in 10 ml batches for 12 hours at 220ºC with 
methanol used as the solvent and contained 0.52mmol (0.05ml) decane, alongside 0.100g of 
the Ni/Fe on ZrO2 catalyst and 2mmol MeP. Exact weighing data can be found in Appendix D. 
 
Table 1: List of experiments conducted for this project. 
                                               
* The Sn-beta has kindly been provided by Irene Tosi 
† This experiment used the low P autoclave, though the overall experimental procedure is identical to 
that of the high P autoclave 
Experiment 
no. 
MeP 
(mmol) 
FA 
(mmol) 
Temperature 
(ºC) 
NaOMe 
(mmol) 
Other factors 
1 
2 
10 
220 
 
 
2 
2 
10 
220 
 
Toluene solvent 
3 
2 
10 
220 
3 
 
4 
2 
- 
220 
 
 
5 
- 
10 
220 
3 
 
6 
2 
10 
220 
0.3 
 
7 
 
10 
220 
 
Pure MeP, no solvent used 
8 
2 
10 
220 
 
MgO 
9 
2 
10 
220 
 
Ba(OH)2 
10 
2 
10 
120 
 
 
11 
2 
10 
120 
3 
 
12 
2 
10 
150 
 
 
13 
2 
 
220 
 
10mmol acetaldehyde 
14 
2 
 
220 
3 
10mmol acetaldehyde 
15† 
2.4 
7.2 
160 
 
Sn-beta catalyst* 
16† 
2.4 
7.2 
160 
 
Sn-beta catalyst*, dioxane solvent 
17 
2.4 
7.2 
220 
 
Sn-beta catalyst* 
18 
2.4 
7.2 
220 
 
Sn-beta catalyst*, dioxane solvent 
19 
 
 
220 
3 
0.5mmol MMA 
20 
 
 
220 
 
0.5mmol MMA 
21 
 
 
180 
3 
0.5mmol MMA 
22 
 
 
220 
 
0.5mmol MMA, pure zirconia 
==PAGE:42==
41 
 
5 Results and discussion 
5.1.1 Experiment 0 – catalytic performance 
Before any new experiments are conducted, it is necessary to ensure that the prepared 
catalyst lives up to previously observed performances. This is done by repeating the 
experiments conducted by Khokarale5: 
A reaction mixture containing 10ml methanol, the internal standard, and 2mmol MeL was 
pressurized with 50 bars of hydrogen. The autoclave was heated to 220ºC for 12 hours. The 
result of the experiment showed a 66% yield of MeP, which was slightly below previously 
observed yields of 70%. 
Once it was confirmed that the performance of the catalyst matched the expected performance 
of the first step, The catalyst would have to perform the second step as well. As mentioned, 
the second step was so far only effectively performed in the gas phase at temperatures above 
300ºC. As there were no previous experiments attempting a similar process, the following 
procedures were attempts at translating the gaseous addition reaction to a process that could 
work at conditions suitable for the first step. With that goal in mind, it was merely a matter of 
deciding how to alter reaction conditions to promote the second step. 
5.1.2 Experiment 1- no alterations 
An initial trial was run in order to test if the second step could be run as a simple extension of 
the first step. The reaction mixture contained MeP, decane, 10ml methanol and 0.3002g of FA 
(formaldehyde). The gas was changed to 15 bars of N2 (in order to avoid interference of the 
hydrogen gas for initial experiments). The autoclave was heated to 220ºC for 12 hours. 
Though 1.1% of the MeP was converted, no MMA was produced. 
5.1.3 Experiment 2- toluene 
This method was used due to a possible reaction between FA and methanol. The GC-MS 
results from the first experiment showed the presence of dimethoxymethane, the production 
of which might have used up all available FA, and prevented it from forming the desired MMA. 
The use of toluene was supposed to prevent that, as there would be no interaction between 
FA and the new solvent. Yet the experiment yielded no MMA, and only 1.6% of MeP was 
converted. 
==PAGE:43==
42 
 
5.2 Experiment 3 – sodium methoxide 
Next was the attempt of adding sodium methoxide in order to increase the basicity of the 
solution and to remove any water present in the reaction mixture. 
When the experiment was finished, the resulting liquid was an extremely dark brown liquid. 
Even after filtration, it was near impossible to see through the liquid (when placed in a 
container with an inner diameter of 0.2cm); though a backlight could reveal that the substance 
that gave the liquid its color was completely dissolved (Figure 31). 
 
Figure 31: starting solution (left) and resulting liquid (right) of Experiment 3 
5.2.1 GC-MS results 
GC results revealed that no significant portion of MeP (0.9%) was consumed during the 
reaction. However, apart from the remaining MeP and the internal standard, the substance 
that colored the solution could not be seen in the GC-MS spectrum.  
Two possible substances only appeared in a relatively weak signal, which might make an 
impact on the accuracy of MS results, but the top suggestions by the MS auto fit function were 
1-hydroxy-2-propanone (acetone alcohol) and the acetic acid methyl ester, seen in Figure 32. 
And though acetone alcohol would not produce a signal at 59, both substances fit the mass 
spectrum. 
==PAGE:44==
43 
 
Both methyl acetate and acetone alcohol are colorless liquids and thus cannot be the 
substances that gave the liquid its brown color, but they might give some insight into the origin 
of the new substance. 
5.2.2 NMR results 
While GC-MS was not able to identify the brown substance, NMR might have helped with the 
identification. NMR spectra of all possible substances (MeP, MMA, decane) were taken, using 
deuterium methanol (CD3OD) as solvents. These spectra were then compared to a sample of 
the experiment. Figure 34 shows the NMR spectrum of the experiment. All the peaks found in 
the NMR analysis can be assigned to either MeP or decane, with the exception of the leftmost 
peak of MeP, belonging to the carbon atom bonding to two oxygen atoms, which cannot be 
detected in the NMR spectrum. When comparing the spectrum of experiment 3 to that of MMA 
(Figure 34), none of the substances could be connected to it. Perhaps a notable absence is 
any other kind of peak that can be assigned to any single molecule, which suggests that the 
brown substance is a mixture of diverse molecular structures, though it is likely that 
substances with low concentrations cannot be seen due to a very broad baseline. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 32: MS spectrum of the new peak in Experiment 3, shown in red. Peaks expected of acetone alcohol (top)
and methyl acetate (bottom) are shown in blue. 
==PAGE:45==
44 
 
 
Figure 34: top: NMR spectrum of experiment 3 (blue) with decane (red) and MeP (green)  
Bottom: NMR spectrum of experiment 3 (red) alongside MMA (blue)           . 
Figure 34:  
==PAGE:46==
45 
 
H-NMR returns similar results, where the major peaks of the reactants can be identified, while 
there is no evidence of MMA. However, unlike the C-NMR spectrum, some unidentified peaks 
could be seen, which cannot be assigned to any of the possible substances in the solution. 
The main suspects for these peaks are of course methyl acetate and acetone alcohol, as they 
have made an appearance in the GC spectrum, but their signals are extremely weak, only a 
fraction of the area of decane, while their NMR signal are about the same strength, which may 
imply that the signal comes from the brown substance. The H-NMR spectrum of experiment 3 
alongside the MeP and decane signals can be seen in Figure 35. 
 
Figure 35: H-NMR spectrum of MeP (green), decane (red) and experiment 3 (blue) 
Of the several new peaks that have appeared, 3 are located at a shift between 5.5 and 8 ppm, 
seen in Figure 36. Some more new peaks can be detected at shifts between 1 and 2 ppm, 
seen in Figure 37. Zooming further in reveals 5 additional signals, shown in Figure 38 and 
Figure 39. This totals to 9 peaks that cannot be assigned to any of the substances expected 
to make an appearance. All peaks have been integrated and normalized to the peak with a 
shift of 8.55ppm. The relative integrals of the five peaks are as follows: 
Table 2: nmr signals and their integral 
Peak shift 
(ppm) 
8.55 
8.1 
5.5 
2.04 
1.91 
1.03 
0.92 
0.85 
0.81 
area 
1 
0.5733 
0.3254 
12.4637 3.9420 
3.7024 
19.6417 2.5314 
1.1913 
==PAGE:47==
46 
 
 
 
Figure 37: cutout from Experiment 3 (blue) compared to MeP spectrum (red). The single peak at 1.3ppm and the 
belongs to decane 
Figure 36: 3 peaks with the highest chemical shift. 
==PAGE:48==
47 
 
 
Figure 38: two new peaks of Experiment 3, with a shift around 2ppm 
 
Figure 39: 4 additional signals of Experiment 3, with shifts between 0.8 and 1 ppm 
The peak at 0.92 has to be disregarded, for even though it displays an interesting multiplet, it 
overlaps with a triplet of decane as well as a triplet of MeP, which happen to overlap at the 
same position. The peaks at the higher shifts (around 8ppm, Figure 36) can be assigned to 
aldehydes, or perhaps even a carboxylic acid, and the lower shift peaks (1ppm, Figure 39) 
might have originated from some hydrocarbon chain with some neighboring CH2 groups11 that 
might have formed during some polymerization process of FA. The magnitude of the peak 
areas are roughly similar, which suggests similar concentrations if multiple molecules are 
involved in the measured peaks. No clear area ratios can be seen between the new signals 
that would suggest one or two molecules responsible for all the unknown signals, but the signal 
strength of the peaks are so low that a significant variance in peak areas can be expected.  
When examining the coupling constants, it can be seen that almost all coupled signals are 
separated by a constant of 7Hz, an example of which can be seen in Figure 40. The two 
overlapping triplets do display separate coupling constants, with the larger triplet having a 
constant of 7Hz between the three peaks, while the smaller of the two peaks displays a 
constant of 6.5Hz.  
==PAGE:49==
48 
 
 
Figure 40: Coupling constants of section from Figure 39 
Lastly, there is the quartet-like signal of Figure 38. Examining the coupling constant reveals, 
that the four signals are not in any way related (Figure 41). 
 
Figure 41: Distance between peaks of the signal seen in Figure 38, revealing that they are not a single signal. 
 
 
==PAGE:50==
49 
 
5.2.3 ATR results 
In order to more closely analyze the brown substance, the solvent along with all other volatile 
substances have been removed from the experiment by evaporation. With the volatile 
components gone, all that was left was a dry brown almost resin-like substance, that was 
suitable for ATR testing. The resulting spectra can be seen in Figure 42. 
 
Figure 42: ATR results of experiment 3. The top spectra was obtained from an air-dried sample, the bottom spectra 
has been obtained after drying the solid in a vacuum oven at 50oC for roughly 24 hours. 
==PAGE:51==
50 
 
 
Due to signal strength, the air-dried sample will be analyzed. The leftmost peak, with a 
wavenumber of 3304 cm-1 can be assigned to water, which will inevitably be present due to 
the exposure to atmospheric air. Peaks 2968 cm-1 and 2933 cm-1 are most likely due to some 
C-H bond stretching of alkane groups.1728 would most likely belong to some C=O bond, while 
the 1643 cm-1 peak could be assigned to a C=C bond. The 1462 cm-1, 1366 cm-1 and 1297 
cm-1 peaks fit a bending C-H alkene bond, while the 1075 cm-1 peak may be assigned to some 
C-O alcohol bond. The biggest peak of the spectrum lies at a wavenumber of 1561 cm-1, which 
most likely originates from some COO- antisymmetric stretching32. The attempt to dry the 
sample had the purpose of removing the water peaks, one of which was located at around 
3300 cm-1, while another one would be found at around 1600 cm-1, which would interfere with 
the results. Drying the sample reduced the interference of water, but the overall spectrum 
remained the same. 
These spectra can be compared to a reference IR spectra of PMMA, seen in Figure 43.  
 
Figure 43: Reference IR spectra33 
The crucial question is: has some PMMA been formed? Judging from the comparison of 
peaks, the answer is no, as many of the characteristic peaks of PMMA do not match the 
measured spectrum. The C-H bonds measured at 2900 cm-1 to 3000 cm-1 are slightly higher 
for the reference than what was measured. And while there was a peak at 1730 cm-1 that 
would fit PMMA well, there was a notable valley at the measured spectrum at 1444 cm-1, where 
a PMMA signal should have been detected. Finally, several strong peaks should have been 
seen at 1192 cm-1 and 1151 cm-1 if PMMA was present, but even though there was a shoulder 
==PAGE:52==
51 
 
to the measured peak at 1364 cm-1 which could hide several smaller signals, the second 
strongest peak of PMMA, placed at 1151 cm-1 would not be hidden. 
5.2.4 Additional observations 
 
After experiments where no color change was observed, the remaining solid was 
exclusively the catalyst, which remained a fine black powder. When the brown 
substance was created, some of the brown substance had precipitated, already 
leaving a mixed layer of catalyst and black slime at the bottom. Its ATR analysis was 
identical to that of the dried liquid. 
 
After the liquid has been dried, 0.23g of the dark brown slime remains.  
 
Once the substance had precipitated, it is no longer possible to dissolve it with common 
solvents such as methanol, water, dichloromethane or DMSO. It is once again 
highlighted that prior to the removal of the solvent, the brown substance was 
completely dissolved. It could pass through a nylon filter used for the removal of 
particles to prepare the liquid for GC-MS (though significantly more force than usual 
was necessary to push the liquid through the filter), and when using a backlight, the 
liquid was transparent, even though it was very dark. 
 
The brown substance had a very pungent odor, even after it has been dried for an 
extended period of time in a vacuum oven at 50ºC 
 
After experiments, the pressure inside the autoclave was significantly higher compared 
to starting conditions. Experiments including FA and NaOMe would start at 15 bar N2 
at room temperature, but would usually end up at a 35 bar pressure, even after being 
cooled to room temperature. GC-MS analysis of the gas did not reveal substances 
other than methanol and MeP, which suggested that the gas was a mixture that might 
include large amounts of CO, CO2 and H2 from diverse decomposition processes. 
5.2.5 Reference experiments 
Before any conclusion can be drawn from Experiment 3, two reference experiments needed 
to be conducted with the purpose of determining if the same results can be observed when a 
FA with NaOMe experiment and a MeP experiment are run separately. Experiment 4 
contained only methanol as solvent, the internal standard and MeP (without any FA or 
NaOMe). The experiment showed a conversion of 1.3%, which does not differ significantly 
from previous conversions. Experiment 5 contained methanol as the solvent, the internal 
standard and the usual amounts of FA (10mmol) and NaOMe (3mmol). The resulting liquid 
was just as dark and brown as the liquid of Experiment 3. 
==PAGE:53==
52 
 
In order to test the involvement of NaOMe, Experiment 6 was conducted containing 10mmol 
FA and 0.3mmol NaOMe, but the outcome was identical to the previous experiment, which 
suggests that NaOMe merely acted as a catalyst. 
The claisen condensation that MeP could undergo is initiated when MeP and NaOMe are 
mixed in an experimental setup without the use of a solvent34. Perhaps The concentration of 
MeP plays a major factor when dealing with the desired aldol condensation. Experiment 7 
contained 10 ml MeP alongside the same amount of FA and catalyst used previously. The 
experiment produced no MMA. 
5.2.6 Other bases 
Finally, the production of the brown slime might be caused by some unexpected chemical 
involvement of NaOMe that goes beyond its basicity. In order to examine if eventual additional 
effects of NaOMe are the cause of the production of the brown slime, two other bases were 
tested. 
The first was MgO, which was used in Experiment 8 instead of NaOMe, and while no MMA 
was produced, the final liquid had a slight brownish hue and contained the acetone 
alcohol/methyl acetate peak seen in Figure 32, Experiment 3. 
The second base, used in Experiment 9 instead of NaOMe was Barium hydroxide, which is 
known to be both a strong base and a strong drying substance. And while it is commercially 
available in its octahydrate form, drying it in a vacuum oven at 50ºC for an extended period of 
time will remove a large portion of water from the complex and give the substance its drying 
abilities. The result was identical to the results of Experiment 3; a dark brown liquid that was 
clear and homogeneous, though it produced a dark brown slime when dried, and no MMA was 
been produced. 
5.2.7 Outcome 
Experiment 3 yielded no MMA, but the brown substance was unexpected. In spite of thorough 
examination, it was not possible to determine which substances the brown ooze was 
composed of, although MMA could be excluded.   
As for the production of the solid, it seemed that it was a product of FA and a strong base, 
which in the case of this project was NaOMe, Ba(OH)2, and to some extent MgO, although the 
zirconia was not strong enough to form the brown substance. As the substance was formed 
even without NaOMe, it is likely that it is the product of FA molecules reacting with each other 
at random. It is known that FA can not only polymerize to form the polyether known as 
paraformaldehyde, but it can also undergo a reaction with other FA molecules to create even 
==PAGE:54==
53 
 
longer carbon chains in a process called the formose reaction35,36. In a controlled environment 
and in the presence of a base, these polymers can lead to pentose and hexose sugars (as 
formaldehyde has the same C:O:H ratio as sugar), an example of which can be seen in Figure 
44. The inside of the autoclave is far from a controlled environment concerning this kind of 
polymerization, and thus, FA can polymerize randomly, perhaps even with aldose-ketose 
isomerization which would allow some branching of the polymers. Additionally, these long 
poly-alcohol chains would be in the presence of some amount of hydrogen alongside metal 
particles known to reduce alcohols, which might further diversify the polymers, making it 
impossible to detect a recurring state of carbon with NMR. 
 
GC-MS could not reveal the composition of brown substance, but a mass spectrum signal that 
can be found in any experiment where the liquid has turned brown was the appearance of 
acetone alcohol and the acetic acid methyl ester. Though there is no clear reaction path of 
how one or both of these two molecules have somehow been produced during the experiment, 
they are the substances that best fits the mass spectrum. Following the possible 
polymerization of FA of Figure 44, the dimer (after the first step) could almost fit the mass 
spectrum, but it would not have a maximum mass signal of 59, and would thus not fit into the 
mass spectrum of Figure 32. 
It is not clear how these substances could have been synthesized. Methyl acetate is a 
molecule whose longest carbon chain is 2 carbon atoms long. However, the possible reactants 
(FA, NaOMe and methanol) all contain only a single carbon atom. An aldol condensation does 
result in a carbon-carbon coupling, but it requires an acidic carbon site – a carbon anion that 
can initiate a nucleophile reaction cannot occur when there are no molecules with two or more 
carbon atoms in a chain. 
In an industrial process used today, methyl acetate is produced by methanol carbonylation, 
where the net reaction involves methanol and carbon monoxide. But even though some CO 
was formed in the same process that produces hydrogen from methanol (a reaction that will 
be discussed in section 5.6) in the reaction solution, the carbonylation is a complicated 
process. It requires both iodine and a rhodium complex in solution in order to conduct the 
reaction with a reasonable yield37, which makes it highly unlikely that this reaction takes place 
Figure 44: first part of possible FA chain, achieved through the formose reaction 
==PAGE:55==
54 
 
inside the autoclave. Instead, it is much more likely that the two molecules are fragments of 
the long FA chains that might have formed during the reaction, as high temperatures might 
have caused them to split off the main polymer chain. 
A last consideration is the possible appearance of a carboxylic acid. In the NMR spectrum, 
hydrogen atoms on carboxylic acids have a very high chemical shift, and the highest signals 
found in Figure 35 might be an acid group on the unknown brown polymer. The reason for 
why it specifically might be a carboxylic acid and not just an aldehyde (which also have high 
chemical shifts) is due to the appearance of what seems to be a carboxylate in the ATR 
spectrum (Figure 42). If the carboxylic acid is not in solution, but a part of the unknown 
polymer, then it would not make an appearance in any GC spectrum. While still in solution, it 
might give off a signal when conducting an H-NMR test. When the substance is dried, it might 
be deprotonized by NaOMe, leaving a sodium carboxylate group that gives off the highest 
peak measured in the ATR spectrum.  
 
 
==PAGE:56==
55 
 
5.3 Reducing reaction temperatures 
One major concern was the stability of FA in the reaction mixture. None of the 220ºC 
experiments showed the presence of FA after a 12 hour run. If FA decomposes shortly after 
the reaction temperature is reached, no MMA will be produced due to one of the necessary 
reactants being absent. In order to explore the stability of FA in the reaction mixture and the 
presence of the catalyst, a number of experiments were conducted at reduced reaction 
temperatures. The information that can be gained from these experiments are whether the 
temperature used thus far is too high to expect the presence of FA in the reaction mixture, and 
if that is the case, will the prolonged interaction between FA and MeP eventually lead to some 
detectable amount of MMA? 
5.3.1 Experiment 10 - 120ºC 
The first and lowest temperature chosen was 120ºC, as it is slightly above the temperature 
where gaseous FA starts to polymerize. Ideally, the temperature will be high enough for the 
paraFA chains to break. 
When the resulting mixture was analyzed using GC-MS, no MMA was present, but a new peak 
appeared. Relatively large in size, the substances that fit the mass spectrum best (according 
to the auto fit function of the MS software) were FA monomers, as well as trioxane, a molecule 
that is the result of 3 FA molecules reacting to form a ring. The comparison between the 
measure peaks and reference peaks can be seen in Figure 45. 
The main issue concerning the suggestions provided for the MS spectrum was that none 
properly fit the measured signals. It cannot be pure monomeric FA, as there were significant 
Figure 45: MS spectrum (red lines) along with reference spectrum (blue lines) for FA (top) and trioxane (bottom) 
==PAGE:57==
56 
 
peaks past the maximum weight of FA (which is 30). It cannot be trioxane, for even though it 
matches the peak at 61, the maximum molecular weight signal expected from trioxane (of 90, 
89 after ionization) was absent. A last possibility to consider would be the dimer of FA, but that 
molecule would have a maximum mass of 60, and thus had to be excluded from the 
possibilities.  
The presence of the FA in the GC spectrum shows that at 120ºC, the MeP is exposed to the 
FA for 12 hours, eliminating the possibility that the absence of MMA is due to the lack of 
contact between the two reactants. 
5.3.2 Experiment 11 - 120ºC with NaOMe 
Experiment 10 was repeated with the addition of NaOMe. The thought process behind this 
experiment was that perhaps the lack of product in Experiment 3 was not due to NaOMe 
aggressively consuming all available FA, but instead NaOMe merely converted the residue of 
the decomposition products of FA. As there is FA present in Experiment 10, perhaps doing a 
rerun of Experiment 3 at 120ºC will yield some MMA, as there might be some new interaction 
between MeP, FA and NaOMe, now that FA was stable, at least in terms of the reaction 
temperature. 
The result of the experiment was the same same as that of Experiment 3: all traces of FA had 
disappeared (including both the FA/trioxane peak as well as the dimethoxymethane peak), 
while the acetone alcohol/methyl acetate peak was visible. No MMA could be detected. 
5.3.3 Experiment 12 - 150ºC 
Experiment 10 showed that no MMA was produced even though the two reactants was in 
contact. If MeP and FA cannot react due to the energy barrier being to large to overcome, a 
slight increase in temperature might solve that problem by increasing the kinetic energy of the 
molecules involved without compromising the presence of FA. Experiment 10 was repeated 
with a reaction temperature of 150ºC. 
==PAGE:58==
57 
 
No MMA could be found, while the new FA peaks still were present. Its size had been 
significantly reduced, and had become so small that the auto fit function of the MS software 
had difficulty identifying the substance. The position of the peak was the same as the one of 
the previous experiments, which indicated the presence of FA for the whole duration of the 
experiment, but at a much lower amount. Though the amount of FA in the solution could be 
determined, the peaks of the two experiments can be compared. Figure 46 shows a 
comparison between this experiment and Experiment 10. 
A noteworthy trend is the increase in dimethoxymethane. In experiment 1, the GC peak for 
dimethoxymethane was big enough to allow the auto fit function of the MS to identify it, but its 
area was only a fraction of that of MeP. In Experiment 10, the dimethoxymethane peak was 
only slightly bigger than that of Experiment 1, but when the reaction mixture was heated to 
150ºC, the amount of free FA was reduced, while the amount of FA bound in 
dimethoxymethane had increased to be larger than that of Experiment 10, and almost as large 
as that of Experiment 1. 
5.3.4 Outcome 
At room temperature, only minimal amounts of FA are dissolved, while most of it stays in its 
polymeric form. As mentioned, heating FA will eventually result in the polymeric chains being 
split into their monomeric or possibly trioxane form. However, at temperatures of 220ºC no 
more FA and only slight amounts of dimethoxymethane could be found in the solution. The 
issue with this observation was the possibility that FA decomposes before it reacted with MeP. 
When temperatures were reduced, FA was observed in the final reaction mixture, while no 
Figure 46: GC-MS peak comparison. Experiment 10(top) and Experiment 12 (bottom). Peaks from left to right: 
dimethoxymethane, FA, MeP 
==PAGE:59==
58 
 
MMA was found. While it is still unclear if and how much of the FA peak was monomeric FA 
or if it was purely trioxane. Experiment 10 and Experiment 12 show that even if FA and MeP 
were in contact with each other for the whole duration of a 12 hour experiment, no reaction 
would happen. There was simply not sufficient kinetic energy, or the catalyst was unfit to 
conduct the carbon-carbon coupling. Heating the reaction mixture to 150ºC significantly 
reduced the size of the FA/trioxane peak, but its presence still confirmed that FA was present 
in some form during the experiment. The problem presented by Experiment 10 and 
Experiment 12 was that even though MeP was in contact with FA, it simply remained inactive 
for the duration of the experiment. 
As for the dimethoxymethane, either it seemed like it was in equilibrium with FA, which was 
produced when concentrations of FA were high and consumed as concentrations decreased, 
or it is an intermediate of the FA decomposition process. And with FA making an appearance 
in the reaction liquid, the presence of dimethoxymethane will not be relevant until there are 
traces of MMA in the reaction.  
 
 
==PAGE:60==
59 
 
5.4 Use of Acetaldehyde 
A significant concern regarding the reaction was the availability of FA over the course of the 
12 hours reaction time. Since the FA was added in its powdered polymer phase, and no FA 
could be detected after the reaction, it might not have been present for the duration of the 
experiment, as it could have decomposed directly from its polymeric form. In order to explore 
if the lack of reaction was due to a fast decomposition of FA, the second-smallest aldehyde, 
acetaldehyde, was used instead. Unlike FA, acetaldehyde is a liquid at room temperature, as 
well as being miscible with methanol, making it more readily available, and although 
acetaldehyde is one carbon atom bigger than FA, the reaction mechanism for the carbon-
carbon coupling may be similar. The result of the reaction can be seen in Figure 48. 
As a sidenote, it can be mentioned that, unlike FA, acetaldehyde has the potential to perform 
the aldol condensation on its own, as the aldehyde has an alpha carbon that can be 
deprotonated. Theoretically (and assuming that MeP remains uninvolved), the acetaldehyde 
might then react with itself with the same mechanism expected from the formation of MMA in 
order to form but-2-enal (aka. Crotonaldehyde, Figure 48)38. 
 
5.4.1 Experiment 13 - acetaldehyde 
The first experiment conducted used only acetaldehyde and MeP as its reactant, as 
acetaldehyde being more readily available than FA may already initiate the carbon-carbon 
coupling. 
The result of the experiment was a colorless liquid where all acetaldehyde had disappeared 
and which did not show the occurrence of the carbon-carbon coupling reaction. 
5.4.2 Experiment 14 - acetaldehyde with NaOMe 
For a follow up experiment, Experiment 13 was repeated with the addition NaOMe. After the 
experiment, the liquid turned bright yellow (Figure 49), and though all acetaldehyde had 
Figure 48: result of carbon-carbon coupling 
between MeP and acetaldehyde 
Figure 48: possible formation of crotonaldehyde 
==PAGE:61==
60 
 
been consumed, the substance that would give the liquid its color could not be seen in the 
GC-MS analysis. 
 
Figure 49 left: liquid before reaction, center: color expected of experiments including FA and NaOMe, right: color 
of Experiment 14. 
In the GC spectrum, no more acetaldehyde could be seen, but 3 new peaks had appeared, 
which can be seen in Figure 50. 
 
Figure 50: 3 new peaks after Experiment 14, found between the methanol and MeP signals. 
The MS of the largest peak, with a retention time of 4.5 minutes can be seen in Figure 51, 
alongside the top suggestion of the MS auto-fit function. 
==PAGE:62==
61 
 
 
Figure 51: MS of the largest of the new peaks of Experiment 14 (red) alongside the spectrum expected of 2-methyl 
propanal (blue). 
The other two peaks that can be seen are shown in Figure 52. The auto-fit function of the GC 
software was unable to assign a molecule that fit the measured mass spectrum. 
 
 
Figure 52: mass spectrum of two unidentified peaks that have been observed in Experiment 14. The top 
spectrum belongs to the peak with a retention time of 4.4 minutes, the bottom spectrum comes from the peak at 
4.7 minutes retention (Figure 50). 
==PAGE:63==
62 
 
5.4.3 Outcome 
With the use of acetaldehyde, it can now be said for certain that there has been extended 
contact between MeP and an aldehyde capable of forming the carbon-carbon bond, as it is a 
liquid at room temperature (without any danger of polymerization of any sort). And yet, though 
it would stay in contact with MeP for the duration of the experiment, no interaction between 
the two substances or the self-condensate of acetaldehyde could be seen. This suggests that 
the issue with the proposed MMA reaction is not the preservation of the reactants until the 
reaction can take place, but the energy barrier the two molecules have to overcome in order 
to combine. 
As for the new peaks discovered in Experiment 14, it is most likely the result of some 
interaction between NaOMe and acetaldehyde, much like the new peaks in Experiment 3 were 
an interaction between NaOMe and FA. The production of 2-methyl propanal is not quite clear, 
for even though it contains 4 carbon atoms which would correspond to some condensation 
reaction between two acetaldehyde molecules, the branching of a resulting molecule would 
be rather unlikely, and is in today’s industry produced by using propene as a starting point39. 
However, the 2-methyl propanal is merely the top suggestion of the auto-fit function of the GC 
software, and as the peak was relatively small, the suggestion might not be accurate. Instead, 
it might just be possible that the peak is the result of the self-condensation of acetaldehyde 
shown in Figure 48. Crotonaldehyde would have a maximum m/z peak at 70, which would not 
fit the spectrum, but the molecule is in the presence of hydrogen and a catalyst that promotes 
double bond hydrogenation (which will be discussed further in section 5.6). If reduced, the 
crotonaldehyde would turn into butanal, which would fit the maximum m/z peak of 72. When 
searching through the results of the auto-fit function, the comparison to butanal can be found 
some ways down the suggestions list, as seen in Figure 53. Butanal is most likely one of the 
lower suggestions because some of the peak ratios seen in the spectrum do not fit the butanal 
spectrum very well. For example the measured peak ratio of the signal at 72 and 44 is roughly 
2, while the reference ratio is roughly 0.75. And yet, butanal seems like the more likely 
outcome of the reaction, simply because its formation is much simpler and straight-forward 
than the formation of 2-methyl propanal. This would suggest that an aldehyde is able to 
undergo the aldol condensation, but that an ester is not reactive enough to undergo the 
reaction under the current conditions. 
==PAGE:64==
63 
 
 
Figure 53: comparison of MS spectrum to butanal reference 
As for the two other peaks on either side of the possible butanal (Figure 52), the signal is not 
strong enough to determine what molecule could possibly fit the mass spectrum. The 
measurement with the maximum peak of 88 is most likely a measurement error originating 
from an overlap with MeP, as m/z values of 88 and 59 would fit MeP. The peak at an m/z of 
74 could possibly fit butanol, if somehow, some of the aldehyde got reduced, and the m/z of 
75 is most likely a fragment of a substance that is to dilute to produce a m/z signal of the whole 
molecule. 
 
 
==PAGE:65==
64 
 
5.5 MeP activity 
It might be beneficial to explore the process and outcome of similar reactions that have taken 
place and compare them to the MMA reaction. The reactions conducted in the papers 
discussed in this section might give some insight to the reactivity of the alpha-carbon of the 
MeP ester group. 
The following experiment took inspiration from two articles regarding the aldol condensations 
with an acidic Sn-beta catalyst. The first paper40 describes an aldol condensation between 
formaldehyde and an aldehyde, which results in a carbon-carbon double bond positioned 
much like the double bond in MMA. The second paper41 explores a reaction that also promotes 
an aldol condensation, even using para-formaldehyde as their reagent. Figure 54 shows the 
main reaction from each paper as catalyzed by Sn-beta. The original images can be found in 
Appendix C. 
The goal of this experiment was to attempt the addition reaction of formaldehyde using an 
acidic route. For although the reactions mentioned are only tangentially related, the 
mechanism for the carbon-carbon coupling that produces MMA from MeP and FA might look 
like Figure 55.  
The experimental procedure of Van der Vyver was repeated once more: 2.5 mmol of MeP, 
7.2mmol FA and 8ml solvent was mixed in an autoclave. The container was pressurized with 
15 bar N2, and was held at a reaction temperature of 160ºC. 
 
==PAGE:66==
65 
 
 
 
Figure 55: possible reaction mechanism for carbon-carbon coupling, inspired by Van der Vyver41 
 
Figure 54: proposed reaction of carbon-carbon coupling from Jennifer D. 
Lewis (top)40 and Stijn Van de Vyver (bottom)41 
==PAGE:67==
66 
 
5.5.1 Experiment 15 - Sn-beta in methanol 
One main property of these procedures was the use of different solvents, and methanol had 
turned out to work rather poorly. Still, ideally, this reaction may take place in methanol, which 
would be preferable, considering that the solvent of choice for step 1 is methanol. This means 
that for this first experiment, the Van der Vyver procedure was conducted with methanol as 
solvent. No MMA was produced. 
5.5.2 Experiment 16 - Sn-beta in dioxane 
Next, a different solvent was used in order to initiate the condensation. A solvent that has been 
proven to promote the reaction was 1,4-dioxane, which resulted in a C-C coupling reaction 
yield of 60%41. 8ml of 1,4-dioxane was used for the second part of the test. 
Regarding the self-condensation of methyl propionate, the two types of experiments are very 
similar. The MS spectrum of Experiment 16 can be seen in Figure 56. 
A possible product for this experiment could have been the Claisen self-condensate, the 
product seen in Figure 10. However, that is not the top suggestion for the molecule, for while 
some of the peaks and peak ratios fit to the alpha-keto ester, the mass for the ion of the whole 
molecule  (with a mass/charge ratio of 116) was not present, while the mass for the methyl 
propionate ion (at 88) was. Besides the fact that a Claisen condensation would have produced 
a beta-keto ester, this suggests that methyl propionate was still the main substance 
represented in the peak, though there might have been some interference from a different 
substance that resulted in the wrong suggestion. As for the reactions between MeP and FA, 
no production of MMA can be detected. 
5.5.3 Increasing reaction temperatures to 220ºC  
While it is still a possibility that the Sn-beta catalyst is able to conduct the reaction, perhaps a 
higher temperature is necessary in order to initiate the reaction. Even if FA is decomposing 
quickly after the reaction temperature is reached, if the kinetic energy available to MeP is high 
Figure 56: top 6 suggestions from MS software of the peak usually attributed to MeP. The MS spectrum of the 
substance (red lines) and the fingerprint MS spectrum for the top suggestion (blue lines) can be seen below the 
top suggestions. 
==PAGE:68==
67 
 
enough for MeP to react, a slight amount of MMA might be detected. Experiment 17 and 
Experiment 18 are repetitions of the previous experiments, but with reaction temperatues 
increased to 220ºC, though the results were almost identical: while all traces of FA have 
disappeared, no MMA has been produced.  
5.5.4 Outcome 
One of the main issues regarding the lack of reaction might be the inactivity of MeP. 
Experiment 15 and Experiment 16 were conducted in order to compare MeP to similar 
molecules with similar reactions, seen in Figure 54, page 65. Previous works have shown that 
reactions such as the desired aldol condensation could occur at relatively mild conditions of 
160ºC. When using the same catalyst, MMA should have been produced, as all the same 
molecular elements were present: An oxo group that binds to the catalytically active metal, a 
carbon-oxygen double bond, where the acidic alpha-carbon atom was available for a reaction, 
and both of these two groups were brought into close contact, as everything interacts with the 
same tin atom. But even when experiments have been repeated at higher temperatures in 
order to promote MeP activity, no MMA could be seen at all. 
As the formaldehyde has been demonstrated to readily react with acidic carbon atoms41 (any 
carbon atom able to form some version of the keto-enol tautomer), the only difference between 
the successful experiments and the ones conducted in Experiment 15 and Experiment 16 was 
the use of MeP. Perhaps the MeP molecule is simply not acidic enough. The alpha-carbon in 
experiments where the carbon-carbon coupling was successful used a ketone (either 
acetone40 or 1,3-dihydroxyacetone33), which would have increased the reactivity of the alpha-
carbon, while MeP might be less reactive due to being an ester. 
 
 
==PAGE:69==
68 
 
5.6 MMA stability 
A last concern is the stability of MMA under the reaction conditions. If MMA had been 
produced, would it be stable in the solution? Or would it continue to react to something else? 
Or would it be incorporated into the brown substance when a reaction is run with MeONa? 
This was tested by running experiment 3 with some added MMA. One of three possible 
outcomes were expected from this experiment: The first is that MMA is stable in the solution 
and remains untouched by any of the substances it is exposed to. The second is that it is 
integrated into the brown slime that remains when all solvent has been evaporated, which 
would open for the possibility that slight amounts of MMA have been produced, but have 
immediately been consumed by the brown substance. The last possibility is that MMA will 
react with the hydrogen produced during the reaction. It is known that with the Fe/Ni on ZrO2 
catalyst, some amount of methanol will decompose and produce hydrogen5. This hydrogen 
may then react with MMA and reduce the carbon-carbon double bond. 
5.6.1 Experiment 19 - 220ºC with MMA 
Experiment 3 was repeated with some added MMA. Once the reaction was finished, the 
reaction solution showed no trace of MMA, but in its stead, a large GC-MS signal of the 
hydrogenated MMA had appeared. 
5.6.2 Experiment 20 – 220ºC with MMA, without NaOMe 
With NaOMe being extremely aggressive when it comes to FA conversion, it might also have 
an impact on any MMA formed. Experiment 19 was thus repeated, but without the addition of 
NaOMe. As a result, 75% of MMA had converted, but the other 25% of the MMA remained 
intact.  
5.6.3 Experiment 21 - 180ºC with MMA 
The hydrogen production may be suppressed by reducing reaction temperatures. For that 
purpose, the previous reaction was repeated at a temperature of 180ºC. The experiment 
resulted once again in the complete reduction of MMA, which suggests that NaOMe had a 
greater influence on the reduction of MMA than the hydrogen generation from methanol. 
5.6.4 Experiment 22 - 220ºC with MMA, no catalyst 
A final experiment concerning the stability of MMA was conducted. How much MMA, if any, 
would disappear if hydrogen was the only additional chemicals present? This experiment thus 
included the pure, unimpregnated zirconia, MMA, and the methanol solvent, with the intention 
of exposing MMA to the hydrogen that is produced during the methanol decomposition in the 
==PAGE:70==
69 
 
presence of the zirconia catalyst. Once the experiment had been conducted, no MMA had 
been converted. The double bond had been completely preserved when no metal or NaOMe 
was present. 
5.6.5 Outcome 
The final results that discourage the methods attempted to produce MMA were the result of 
Experiment 19 and Experiment 21. They have shown that even if MMA was produced in one 
of the attempted processes, the double bond that gives MMA its polymerizing properties would 
be reduced, thus defeating the purpose of the synthesis. Even if only trace amounts of 
hydrogen is produced in the autoclave, it would be sufficient to destroy much of the produced 
MMA. Thus, additional steps have to be taken in order to prevent the formation of hydrogen. 
The production of hydrogen can be traced back to the following reaction, which converts 
MeOH to hydrogen, CO, methane and water: 
2𝐶𝐻3𝑂𝐻→𝐶𝐻3𝑂𝐶𝐻3 + 𝐻2𝑂 
𝐶𝐻3𝑂𝐶𝐻3 + 3𝐻2𝑂→6𝐻2 + 2𝐶𝑂2 
𝐶𝐻3𝑂𝐻+ 𝐻2𝑂→3𝐻2 + 𝐶𝑂2 
𝐶𝐻3𝑂𝐶𝐻3 →𝐻2 + 𝐶𝑂+ 𝐶𝐻4 
𝐶𝐻3𝑂𝐻→2𝐻2 + 𝐶𝑂 
Equation 1: hydrogen production from methanol decomposition in the presence of acidic sites5 
It is an acidic support catalyst such as zirconia that was responsible for the decomposition of 
MeOH, which is unfortunate, as it is necessary to have such a catalyst present in order to 
initiate the carbon-carbon coupling between MeP and FA. It might therefore be necessary to 
switch to a solvent that does not undergo such a decomposition, though that same solvent 
should be used for the first step in the procedure that converts MeL to MeP if the whole MeL 
to MMA procedure is to be conducted in a single batch. Alternatively, it is the metal catalyst 
that is responsible for the double bond hydrogenation, and it might thus be necessary to 
remove the metallic catalyst before the addition of FA in order to prevent any produced 
hydrogen from reducing MMA. 
As for the effect of NaOMe: Due to the promotion of the double bond hydrogenation in addition 
to its aggressive consumption of FA, it seems unlikely that NaOMe will be of any use for the 
production of MMA.  
 
 
==PAGE:71==
70 
 
5.7 Additional considerations and future perspectives 
The aldol condensation between FA and MeP has been shown to work without any additional 
chemicals, and that it is even possible while using the same catalyst used in this project6. Thus 
there might be a possibility to reproduce the results of previous experiments if it is somehow 
possible to compensate for the changes made. A starting point is to highlight the differences 
between Experiment 1 and previously successful experiment, which is the significantly 
increased temperature of 350ºC, while the reaction time is relatively small (residence time of 
12 seconds). The initial attempt to compensate for the reduced temperature is increased 
reaction time (as even an extremely slow reaction speed will yield the product if given enough 
time), but that did not seem to work. Even after the decomposition of FA had been considered 
and countered, it seems as if the energy barrier of the reaction is too high to achieve a reaction 
speed that is detectable, much less usable. This creates a temperature range, for which an 
unaltered reaction with only the reactants and a regular catalyst are not suited. At 
temperatures of 150ºC and above, FA stability becomes an issue, as it rapidly decomposes, 
and at temperatures of at least 220ºC and lower, MeP is too stable to participate in the desired 
aldol condensation. The only likely solution to this dilemma would appear to be the use of 
additional chemicals that promote the reaction, such as a catalyst that more aggressively 
promotes the condensation, a base that is strong enough to promote the reaction but not 
strong enough to turn FA into the brown polymer or the creation of some intermediate that is 
more easily turned into MMA. None of the substances used in these experiments have been 
able to promote the reaction, so if this path were to be pursued further, then a project testing 
a wide variety of catalysts and bases would be necessary in order to find a possible reaction 
liquid composition that allows the aldol condensation while reactants are dissolved in a liquid. 
At the very least it seems like the preservation of MMA will not be an issue, for even though 
hydrogen will be generated if a catalyst with acid and base sites is used, the MMA will not be 
reduced unless a metal able to conduct the hydrogenation process is available.  
 
 
==PAGE:72==
71 
 
6 Conclusion 
In this study, the conversion of MeP to FA to MMA was attempted in an autoclave by means 
of an Fe/Ni on zirconia catalyst, as well as a range of procedure alterations: the addition of 
NaOMe, MgO, Ba(OH)2, the reduction of reaction temperatures, use of acetaldehyde instead 
of FA and imitation of previous experiments that used molecules similar to MeP, in the hopes 
of achieving similar results. Additionally, the stability of MMA in the new reaction conditions 
was examined. 
No methods attempted have yielded any MMA, and the conversion of MeP in all experiments 
is negligible. Overall, it seems like it may be the inactivity of MeP that is the cause for the lack 
of conversion. MeP was brought in contact with FA at high temperatures to increase the kinetic 
energy available (though exposure time is reduced due to FA decomposition), and it was 
brought in contact with FA at lower temperatures in order to assure the stability of FA. NaOMe 
and other bases were added to promote the aldol condensation, although once the base is 
too strong, FA is consumed in a self-condensation reaction, resulting in a dark brown liquid 
containing an unknown mixture of polymers. The aldol condensation has been attempted 
using acetaldehyde and MeP, though without any base added, no reaction took place, and 
with an added base, the acetaldehyde was consumed to produce a substance that colored 
the reaction liquid yellow, as well as small amounts of propanal, the result of an aldol 
condensation between two acetaldehyde molecules. Even when experiments that are known 
to work with similar reaction mechanisms have been repeated with FA as one of the reactants, 
when MeP is used, there is no trace of any aldol condensation taking place.  
MMA stability was explored by exposing MMA to three different environments: an experiment 
with the catalyst, with the catalyst and NaOMe, and with no catalysts or NaOMe. MMA remains 
completely untouched when dissolved in methanol, even at temperatures of 220ºC, though 
once the catalyst is added, a large portion of MMA is reduced at 220ºC, effectively destroying 
the material. If a base such as NaOMe is added as well, MMA will be completely reduced, 
even at lower temperatures. 
The reaction conditions attempted in this study were not suited for the aldol condensation 
between MeP and FA. And though it is difficult to point out a single reason for the lack of 
reaction, one or more of the following conditions might be responsible: too low reaction 
temperatures, FA instability, too low α-carbon acidity of MeP, or unfit adsorption strength of 
the catalyst. The difference in reactivity between MeP and FA seem too large at a temperature 
range from 150ºC to 200ºC. 
 
 
==PAGE:73==
72 
 
7 Appendix 
7.1 Appendix A – additional SEM images 
The following are images of the impregnated zirconia, including some EDS analyses of the 
material.  
==PAGE:74==
73 
 
 
==PAGE:75==
74 
 
7.2 Appendix B – additional XRPD images 
 
Figure 57: The top spectrum shows the measured sample of the pure zirconia alongside the strongest peaks 
expected from monoclinic zirconia. The bottom spectrum shows the reference of monoclinic zirconia 
==PAGE:76==
75 
 
 
Figure 58: XRPD image of impregnated catalyst. The top spectrum shows the pure sample alongside the largest 
peaks expected of monoclinic zirconia. The bottom spectrum shows the zirconia reference (green) alongside a 
nickel-iron signal that could be expected (black) 
==PAGE:77==
76 
 
7.3 Appendix C – proposed reaction mechanisms for c-c coupling on 
Sn-beta 
 
 
Figure 59: reaction mechanisms as seen in the works of Jennifer D. Lewis (top)40 and Stijn Van de Vyver (bottom)41
==PAGE:78==
77 
 
7.4 Appendix D – Raw weighing data and MeP conversion 
MeP experiments 
Table D1: Experiments attempting the direct conversion from MeP to MMA using only the 
Ni/Fe on zirconia catalyst 
Experiment 
No. 
MeP 
(g) 
Decane 
(g) 
FA (g) 
NaOMe (g) 
Temperature 
(ºC) 
MeP 
conversion (%) 
1 
0.1831 0.0351 
0.3122  
220 
1.1 
2 
0.1762 0.0358 
0.3012  
220 
1.6 
3 
0.1781 0.0381 
0.3112 0.1512 
220 
0.9 
4 
0.1766 0.0366 
0.3087  
220 
1.3 
5 
- 
0.0402 
0.3161 0.1507 
220 
 
6 
0.1788 0.0369 
0.3213 0.0149 
220 
1.4 
7a 
10ml 
 
0.3216  
220 
 
8b 
0.1798 0.0350 
0.3229  
220 
2.2 
9c 
0.1752 0.0362 
0.3295  
220 
1.8 
10 
0.1777 0.0388 
0.3193  
120 
1.1 
11 
0.1803 0.0374 
0.3126 0.1533 
120 
0.8 
12 
0.1768 0.0362 
0.3029  
150 
1.1 
a) Pure MeP, no solvent or decane was used 
b) Contained 0.100g MgO instead of the regular catalyst 
c) Also contained 0.05g Ba(OH)2 
 
Table D3: Acetaldehyde experiments used acetaldehyde instead of FA. 
Experiment 
No. 
MeP 
(g) 
Decane 
(g) 
NaOMe 
(g) 
Acetaldehyde 
(g) 
Temperature 
(ºC) 
MeP 
conversion (%) 
13 
0.1755 0.0378 
 
0.4421 
220 
1.0 
14 
0.1793 0.0381 
0.1504 
0.4418 
220 
0.9 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:79==
78 
 
Table D2: Sn-beta catalyst experiments used Sn-beta instead of the regular catalyst and took 
place in the low-P autoclave. 0.1556g Sn-beta contains the same amount of catalytically active 
metal as the Fe/Ni catalyst. 
 
 
Table D4: MMA experiments contained MMA. 
Experiment 
No. 
MMA 
(g) 
NaOMe 
(g) 
Decane 
(g) 
Temperature 
(ºC) 
MMA 
conversion (%) 
19 
0.0402 
0.1508 
0.0358 
220 
100 
20 
0.0412 
 
0.0381 
220 
74.6 
21 
0.0397 
0.1553 
0.0366 
180 
100 
22a 
0.0388 
 
0.0402 
220 
0 
a) Contained pure zirconia instead of impregnated catalyst 
 
 
 
 
 
Experiment 
No. 
MeP 
(g) 
Decane 
(g) 
FA (g) 
Temperature 
(ºC) 
MeP 
conversion (%) 
Sn-beta 
(g) 
Solvent 
15 
0.2106 
0.0421 
0.2305 
160 
1.3 
0.1556 
Methanol 
16 
0.2112 
0.0432 
0.2298 
160 
0.8 
0.1556 
dioxane 
17 
0.2109 
0.0428 
0.2300 
220 
1.4 
0.1556 
Methanol 
18 
0.2097 
0.0422 
0.2301 
220 
1.9 
0.1556 
dioxane 
==PAGE:80==
79 
 
8 References 
1 Investopedia, ”renewable ressource”, investopedia.com 
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/r/renewable_resource.asp  
2 ICIS, ”Methyl Methacrylate (MMA) Production and Manufacturing Process”, icis.com, 
https://www.icis.com/resources/news/2007/11/05/9076050/methyl-methacrylate-mma-
production-and-manufacturing-process/  
3 Verma, Deepak et al. “Direct Conversion of Cellulose to High-Yield Methyl Lactate over Ga-
Doped Zn/H-Nanozeolite Y Catalysts in Supercritical Methanol.” Green Chemistry 19.8 (2017): 
1969–1982. Web. 
4 Deng, Weiping, Qinghong Zhang, and Ye Wang. “Catalytic Transformations of Cellulose and 
Its Derived Carbohydrates into 5-Hydroxymethylfurfural, Levulinic Acid, and Lactic Acid.” 
Science China-chemistry 58.1 (2015): 29–46. Web. 
5 Santosh G. Khokarale, “New catalytic routes for methyl propionate synthesis” Thesis, centre 
for catalysis and sustainable chemistry DTU, 2015 
6 Lapychak, Nazariy et al. “Synthesis of Acrylates from Methyl Propionate, Propionic Acid and 
Formaldehyde in the Gas Phase on Solid Catalysts.” Eastern-european Journal of Enterprise 
Technologies 5.6 (83) (2016): 44–48. Web. 
7 Encyclopedia of chemical technology, Kirk-Othmer. Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical 
Technology. Wiley-interscience, 2004. Print. 
8 Rana, M. S. et al. “Hydrotreating of Maya Crude Oil: II. Generalized Relationship between 
Hydrogenolysis and HDAs.” Petroleum Science and Technology 25.1-2 (2007): 201–213. 
Web. 
9 Zhen Fang, Richard L. Smith, Jr., Xinhua Qi, “Production of Platform Chemicals From 
Sustainable Resources.” Springer, 2017. Print. 
10 Carey, F.A. Organic Chemistry (third edition). McGraw-Hill, 1995. Print. 
11 Atkins, Peter., and Julio. De Paula. “Atkins' Physical Chemistry”. Oxford University Press, 
2010. Print. 
12 National Programme on Technology Enhanced Learning, “Bioorganic chemistry” 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104103018/module3/lec1/3.html 
                                               
==PAGE:81==
80 
 
                                                                                                                                                  
13 Schlögl, R. “Heterogeneous Catalysis”. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 54: 3465–3520. 
doi:10.1002/anie.201410738 
14 “Hydrogenation of alkenes”, docbrown.info, 
http://www.docbrown.info/page06/OrgMechs1e.htm 
15 “Zirconia (Third Edition)”. Elsevier, 1992. Print. 
16 Stevens, R. “An introduction to zirconia”. Magnesium Elektron Ltd. 1986 
17 Viinikainen, Tiia et al. “Acidic and Basic Surface Sites of Zirconia-Based Biomass 
Gasification Gas Clean-up Catalysts.” Applied Catalysis A-general 362.1-2 (2009): 169–177. 
Web. 
18 Kouva, Sonja et al. “Review: Monoclinic Zirconia, Its Surface Sites and Their Interaction with 
Carbon Monoxide.” Catalysis Science and Technology 5.7 (2015): 3473–3490. Web. 
19 Cullity, B. D. “Elements of X-Ray Diffraction, 2nd Edition”. Addison-Wesley, 1978. Print. 
20 “X-ray diffraction (XRD)”, wiki.anton-paar.com, https://wiki.anton-paar.com/x-ray-diffraction-
xrd/ 
21 Condon, James B. “Surface Area and Porosity Determinations by Physisorption.” Surface 
Area and Porosity Determinations by Physisorption (2006): n. pag. Web. 
22 Howard Shelton, “Equilibrium Adsorption”, retrieved from slideplayer.com on 7.12.2017,  
http://slideplayer.com/slide/11469805/ 
23 Donohue, MD, and GL Aranovich. “Classification of Gibbs Adsorption Isotherms.” Advances 
in Colloid and Interface Science 76 (1998): 137–152. Web. 
24 Goldstein, Joseph I. et al. “Scanning Electron Microscopy and X-Ray Microanalysis”. 
Springer, 2003. Print. 
25 Emma stoyle, “Super-resolution light microscopy wins chemistry Nobel”, Chemistry world, 
October 
2014, 
https://www.chemistryworld.com/news/super-resolution-light-microscopy-
wins-chemistry-nobel/7837.article 
26 Goldstein, Joseph I. et al. Scanning Electron Microscopy and X-Ray Microanalysis. 
Springer, 2003. Print. 
27 Pavia, Donald L., Gary M. Lampman, George S. Kritz, Randall G. Engel (2006). “Introduction 
to Organic Laboratory Techniques (4th Ed.”). Thomson Brooks/Cole 
==PAGE:82==
81 
 
                                                                                                                                                  
28 ”Gas chromatography”, BBC science, BBC.co.uk, 
http://www.bbc.co.uk/schools/gcsebitesize/science/triple_ocr_21c/further_chemistry/chromat
ography/revision/5/ 
29 “One Dimensional NMR Spectroscopy”, School of crystallography, Birbeck university of 
London, http://www.cryst.bbk.ac.uk/PPS2/projects/schirra/html/1dnmr.htm  
30 ”FT-IR spectroscopy Attenuated Total Reflection (ATR), PerkinElmer, 
https://shop.perkinelmer.com/content/TechnicalInfo/TCH_FTIRATR.pdf 
31 “Infrared Spectroscopy Absorption Table”, Chemistry LibreTexts, 
https://chem.libretexts.org/Reference/Reference_Tables/Spectroscopic_Parameters/Infrared
_Spectroscopy_Absorption_Table 
32 C.B. Anfinsen, John T. Edsall, Frederic M. Richards, “Advances in Protein Chemistry, 
Volume 38”, Academic Press, 1986, 
https://books.google.dk/books?id=0rke7tuwUysC&pg=PA255&lpg=PA255&dq=ir+spectrum+
1561cm-
1&source=bl&ots=uNQbub9nHG&sig=vc8pkhGL2MZoufXWgEVTqdwx8P8&hl=da&sa=X&ve
d=0ahUKEwirqtiM3rvXAhXKA5oKHZSTA8cQ6AEIRzAJ#v=onepage&q=ir%20spectrum%20
1561cm-1&f=false 
33 Li, Aimei et al. “Preparation and Characterization of Mesoporous Zirconia Made by Using a 
Poly (Methyl Methacrylate) Template.” (2013): n. pag. Web. 
34 ROYALS, EE. “CLAISEN CONDENSATION OF METHYL ESTERS.” Journal of the 
American Chemical Society 70.2 (1948): 489–491. Web. 
35 BRESLOW, R. “ON THE MECHANISM OF THE FORMOSE REACTION.” Tetrahedron 
Letters 1.21 (1959): 22–26. Web. 
36 Socha, F., R., H. Weiss A., and M. Sakharov M. “Autocatalysis in the Formose Reaction.” 
Reaction Kinetics and Catalysis Letters 14.2 (1980): 119–128. Web. 
37 Li, Fengbo et al. “Sustainable Catalysts for Methanol Carbonylation.” Green Chemistry 15.6 
(2013): 1600–1607. Web. 
38 Shim-pol, “Applications – Aldol condensation”, shim-pol.pl, 
http://www.shim-pol.pl/1,16,332,333,334-0-0-_Applications___Aldol_Condensation.html 
39 Boy Cornils, Richard W. Fischer, Christian Kohlpaintner "Butanals" in Ullmann's 
Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, 2000, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim. 
doi:10.1002/14356007.a04_447 
==PAGE:83==
82 
 
                                                                                                                                                  
40 Lewis, Jennifer D., Stijn Van de Vyver, and Yuriy Román-Leshkov. “Acid-Base Pairs in Lewis 
Acidic Zeolites Promote Direct Aldol Reactions by Soft Enolization.” Angewandte Chemie 
127.34 (2015): 9973–9976. Web. 
41 Van de Vyver, Stijn et al. “Solid Lewis Acids Catalyze the Carbon-Carbon Coupling between 
Carbohydrates and Formaldehyde.” Acs Catalysis 5.2 (2015): 972–977. Web. 
